The Dolmens of Ireland, Vol. 3
William Copeland Borlase, 1897
========================================================================

PROVENANCE NOTE (Tower of Babel staging): Volume 3 of Borlase's 1897 three-volume corpus of Irish dolmens — completing the megalithic canon's great descriptive catalogue. Source: Internet Archive (https://archive.org/details/dolmensofireland03borl). This 1897 publication is in the public domain in the United States.

========================================================================

'/t 

/■€ 

\    ■    ■ 

\  '               '       '     - 

/„ 

•  / 

r 

w 
\  \\ 

Mx^^ 


\ \  '   ••/*/• 


V<  -::, 


WILLIAM    C.  BORLASE 


Krj^iiiurtr.ttwtiwrjH^fHiJ'jiij; ' ; 


55?^^' 


:W«*4. 


:■•  i'tri^ 


,■•■>■:.  >^- 


■■%•;■:■ 


.•^»: 


•>  J--' 


r-XA 


^# 


►V>      —  -<„ 


\/xjum  &.CUjJjim^-     Bu^^-^l^^^ 


THE    DOLMENS    OF    IRELAND. 


III. 


IRISH    LADY    ON    HORSEBACK. 


IRISH    CORACH. 


(",ir    (".inl.rensis,  Topograpliia  Mibernia.',  MS.,  Sacc.  xiii ;    Lib.  Brit.  Mus.,  13,  B,  viii. 

See  page  1044. 


THE 

DOLMENS    OF    IRELAND, 

THEIR   DISTRIBUTION,    STRUCTURAL    CHARACTERISTICS. 

AND  AFFINITIES  IN  OTHER  COUNTRIES  ; 

TOGETHER  WITH   THE    FOLK-LORE   ATTACHING 

TO  THEM  ;  SUPPLEMENTED  BY  CONSIDERATIONS  ON  THE 

ANTHROPOLOGY,  ETHNOLOGY,  AND  TRADITIONS 

OF   THE    IRISH    PEOPLE. 


WITH    FOUR    MAPS,    AND    EIGHT    HUNDRED    ILLUSTRATIONS, 
INCLUDING   TWO   COLOURED   PLATES. 


WILLIAM    COPELAND    BORLASE,   M.A, 

LATE    PRESIDENT   OF   THE   ROYAL    INSTITUTION    OF    CORNWALL, 
AND   ONE   OF   THE   VICE-PRESIDENTS   OF   THE    SOCIETY    OF   ANTIQUARIES   OF   LONDON 

EARRISTER-AT-LA\V  ; 

AutJior  of  ^' NcEiiia  Cortuibiu- :"  ''  Historical  Sketch  of  the  Tin-Trade  in  Coj-mvall ;'''' 
'■'■  Snnways,   a   Record  of  Rambles   in   Many  Lands:''    '■'■  Niphon   and  its   Antiquities 
"  The  Age  of  the  Saints''  etc. 


IN   THREE    VOLUMES. 
VOL  III. 


LONDON:    CHAPMAN    &    HALL.    ld. 

1897. 


THE   DOLMENS  OF    IRELAND. 


PART   11. 


THE  DOLMENS  AND  CHAMBERED  TUMULI. 

( Cofitinued. ) 


North  Africa. 

The  dolmens  of  North  Africa  have  next  to  be  considered.  In 
1872,  General  Faidherbef  published  his  plans  of  the  dolmen- 
fields — cemeteries,  as  he  termed  them — in  Algeria.  Each  of  these 
groups  comprises  a  vast  collection  of  dolmens.  The  first,  that 
of  Roknia,  is  estimated  to  contain  no  fewer  than  three  thousand 
of  these  monuments ;  the  second,  that  of  Ain-Bou-Merzong, 
two  thousand  ;  the  third,  that  of  Oued  Berda,  two  thousand  ; 
and  the  fourth,  that  of  Tebessa,  about  five  hundred.  The 
writer  of  the  communication  speaks  of  having  examined  personally 
no  less  than  five  or  six  thousand  examples  in  all. 

The  native  Mahommedans  know  them  by  the  name  of 
the  "  Tombs  of  the  Djouhala,"  that  is  to  say,  in  Arabic,  of 
the  "  Ignorant,"  or  the  *'  Idolaters."  The  bodies  found  in  them 
are  not  burnt.  Vessels  of  very  coarse  pottery  are  found  with 
them,  and  in  rare  cases  bracelets  or  rings  of  bronze  wire.  M. 
Bourguignat  discovered  some  small  objects  in  silver.  In  those 
at  Guiotville,  near  Algiers,  M.  Berbrugger  discovered  some 
worked  flints.  As  a  general  rule,  the  number  of  vessels  is  found 
to  correspond  with  that  of  the  human  bodies,  whether  of  men, 
women,  or  children,  which  the  dolmen  contains. 

One  circumstance  with    respect   to    the    interments    in  these 
structures,    General    Faidherbe  finds  it    difficult    to   explain.      It 

t  "  Comptes-rendus  du  Congres  prehistorique." 
VOL.  HI.  B 


2CG2'?''i2 


714  The  Dolmens  of  Ireland. 

is  that  so  great  are  the  numbers  of  bodies,  the  remains  of  which 
are  found  in  one  single  vault,  that,  had  those  bodies  been  placed 
in  it  whole  and  entire,  the  space  would  have  been  too  small  to 
have  contained  them.  The  inference  seems  to  be  either  that  the 
bodies  were  cut  to  pieces  and  compressed  into  a  small  space,  as 
was  the  custom  of  the  Iberes  in  the  Balearic  Isles,  and  in  South- 
Eastern  Spain,  where  they  were  so  treated  and  placed  in  jars,  or 
that,  at  the  time  of  interment,  the  flesh,  either  by  process  of  time, 
or  in  accordance  with  some  prevalent  custom,  had  been  separated 
from  the  bones.  With  regard  to  the  skulls  taken  from  these 
dolmens.  It  is  stated  that  out  of  eighteen  which  were  perfect 
enough  to  admit  of  being  measured,  the  maximum  cephalic  index 
was  85  and  the  minimum  75.  Ten  out  of  the  number  were 
dolichocephalic,  that  is,  below  75  ;  four  were  sub-dolichocephalic, 
ranging  from  75  to  ']']  \  two  were  mesaticephalic,  from  77  to  79; 
two  sub-brachycephalic,  from  80  to  84  ;  and  not  one  extremely 
brachycephalic,  exceeding,  that  is  to  say,  85.  The  mesaticephalic 
and  sub-brachycephalic  skulls  were  those  of  women. 

From  the  facts  before  him.  General  Faidherba  came  to  the 
conclusion  that  the  dolmens  of  Roknia  belonged  to  a  race  "  tres 
grande  et  franchement  dolichocephale."  He  adds  his  impression 
that  the  practice  of  dolmen-building  in  Africa  was  an  importation 
from  the  north,  and  not  vice  versa.  It  is  to  be  remarked  that  the 
bodies  were  not  burnt,  and  that  large  numbers  of  them  were 
contained  in  a  single  structure,  points  in  which  they  are  comparable 
to  examples  in  Portugal  (as  at  Monte  Abrahao),  in  Western 
France  (as  at  Bougon),  and  in  Scandinavia,  as  in  Vestergotland. 

The  results  of  the  explorations  made  by  the  eminent  Frenchman 
who  explored  them  tended  to  place  the  earliest  erection  of  these 
dolmens  at  the  close  of  the  Neolithic  Age,  when  bronze  was  only 
being  introduced  as  a  rarity  for  ornamental  purposes,  during 
a  period  and  condition  of  culture  very  similar  to  that  in  which 
those  people  lived  who  erected  the  Swedish  examples. 

This  would  have  been  the  period  when  the  brachycephali 
were  making  their  way  westward  towards  the  Atlantic  through 
Central  Europe,  driving  before  them,  as  we  may  not  unreasonably 
suggest,  the  earlier  and  dolichocephalic  inhabitants  who,  from  the 
southern  and  south-western  coasts,  would  have  taken  refuse  in 
Africa,  and  from  the  northern  and  north-western  shores,  would 
have  made  for  the    British  Isles,    Holland,  Germany,  and  such 


North  Africa.  715 


portions  of  the  Baltic  sea-board  as  were  advantageous  for  settle- 
ment, and  not  previously  occupied  by  allophylian  foes. 

We  have  previously  noticed  that  sub-historic  tradition  may 
possibly  carry  us  back  to  the  later  periods  of  the  intermingling  of 
races  in  Southern  France  and  Spain,  as  evidenced  by  such  names 
as  "  Ligures  and  Iberes  mixed  "  (/xtyaSes),  "  Celto-Ligures,"  and 
"  Celtiberi,"  The  presence  of  pronounced  brachycephalic  female 
skulls  in  the  African  dolmens  may  perhaps  indicate  also  an  earlier 
stage  in  this  process  of  race-fusion.  A  passage  in  Diodorus 
Siculus  relating  to  the  Baleares,  who  were  an  Iberian  people, 
proves  to  us  that  the  introduction  amongst  them  of  foreign 
women,  and  the  consequent  commingling  of  races,  was  a  promi- 
nent feature  in  their  social  system.  "  They  love  women,"  we 
are  told,  **  exceedingly,  and  value  them  at  so  high  a  rate 
that  when  pirates  bring  any  women  they  have  captured  thither, 
they  will  exchange  three  or  four  men  for  one  woman."  They 
used  no  money,  but,  when  serving  as  mercenaries  to  the 
Carthaginians,  preferred  to  receive  their  pay  in  women. 

From  this  it  would  appear  that  a  woman  was  actually  among 
these  savages  the  recognized  standard  of  value.  There  is  reason 
to  believe  that  the  same  may  have  been  the  case  in  ancient 
Ireland,  where  the  standard  of  value  was  the  ctimal,  meaning  a 
young  girl,  and  where  female  slavery  prevailed.f 

Whether,  as  has  been  thought  by  some,  a  real  linguistic 
affinity  exists  between  the  language  of  the  Berbers  of  North 
Africa  and  that  of  the  Basques,  which  would  place  the  former, 
like  the  latter,  in  relation  to  the  ancient  Iberian  speech,  is  a 
question  upon  which  I  can  express  no  opinion.  M.  Geze,  after 
comparing  a  long  list  of  words  in  the  respective  languages,  came 
to  the  conclusion  that  the  evidence  pointed  to  a  close  connection 
having  existed  between  the  ancestors  of  the  Berbers  and  the 
Basques  ;  that  the  relations  between  them  had  been  of  long 
duration,  but  that  they  belonged  to  an  epoch  excessively  remote.^ 
The  Berbers  are  classified,  according  to  their  cephalic  index,  with 
the  Basques  of  the  Spanish  provinces  and  with  the  Corsicans. 

t  In  process  of  time  this  word  cuvtal  acquired  the  sense  of  a  certain  number  of  cows,  and  there 
are  probably  those  who  would  see  in  this,  as  in  the  Latin  pecunia,  the  first  meaning  of  a  term 
afterwards  transferred  to  a  general  standard  of  value.  The  radical  sense  of  cumal,  if  it  =  humal, 
jumal,  would  be  "  young,"  and  I  think  it  very  possible  that,  as  among  the  Iberes,  the  young  slave 
girl  was  first  intended. 

X  For  the  arguments  on  this  point  see  a  communication,  "De  quelques  rapports  entre  les 
langues  berberes  et  basques,"  in  Mem.  de  la  Societe  archeol.  du  midi  de  la  France,  vol.  xiii. 


7i6  The  Dolmens  of  Ireland. 


They  are  held  to  be  related  to  the  Atlantic  or  Iberian  race  of 
Western  Europe  and  the  Mediterranean,  and  to  be  the  repre- 
sentatives of  the  Libyans  who,  according  to  Pausanias,  inhabited 
Sardinia ; — Sicily  having  been  inhabited  by  Iberians,  Corsica  by 
Ligurians  and  Iberians,  and  the  Baleares  by  the  latter. 

The  six  illustrations  which  General  Faidherbe  gives  of  the 
dolmens  of  North  Africa  show  them  to  be  such  as  might  be 
found  in  almost  any  other  district.  On  the  whole,  they  appear 
to  me  to  be  more  directly  comparable  with  those  found  in  the 
Eastern  Pyrenees  than  with  any  others.  In  their  present  con- 
dition they  are  large  cists,  some  built  squarely  and  with  care  ; 
others  of  more  rugged  design  and  material.  In  height  they 
average  only  from  4  to  5  feet.  General  Faidherbe  did  not  think 
that  those  he  examined  had  been  covered  by  tumuli,  and  he 
adduces  reasons  for  concluding  that  in  some  cases  they  could 
not  have  been  so. 

In  some  examples  in  the  province  of  Constantine  which  have 
been  thought  to  resemble  the  so-called  trilithons  of  Galicia.f  the 
vault  was  partially  filled  with  earth,  the  interment  resting  on  the 
floor,  and  being  covered  over,  while  the  upper  portion  of 
the  structure  was  exposed,  and  presented  the  appearance  of 
standing  on  a  mound  or  on  the  level  surface,  surrounded  (in  many 
cases)  by  a  circle,  or  concentric  circles  like  those  which  either  do 
stand,  or  appear  to  stand  on  the  tops  of  encircled  tumuli  in 
Aveyron,  and  Denmark  and  Sweden. 

Dolmens  are  found  also  in  Kabylia  in  Morocco,  and  to  the 
south  of  Tlemecen  in  Algiers,  near  Zebdon,  and  in  Tunis,  near 
Thala.  It  is  said,  indeed,  that  they  occur  throughout  all  the 
country  between  Mount  Atlas  and  the  Syrtes — "  not  near  the  sites 
of  any  great  cities  or  known  centres  of  population,  but  in  valleys 
and  remote  corners."  Many  of  these  are  of  the  type  surrounded 
by  concentric  circles,  and  which  stand  on  a  tumulus,  or  on  a  stone 
base  or  platform,  in  which  latter  respect  they  resemble  some  of 
those  in  the  Jaulan,  described  by  M.  Schumacher.J 

Fergusson,§  arguing  in  favour  of  the  view  that  the  African 
dolmens  are  of  comparatively  modern  origin,  quotes  M.  Feraud 
for  the  discovery  of  a  Latin  inscription  on  the  roofing-stone  of  one 


t  See  "Magazine  Pittoresque,"  1864,  pp.  79,  80,  with  picture  of  the  dolmen  of  rOued-Bou- 
Mcrzong.  See  also  "  Recueil  des  notices  ct  memoires  de  la  Soc.  archeol.  de  la  Prov.  de  Con- 
stantine," 1863. 

t  See  fig.  680,  i/i/ra.  §  R.S.M.,  p.  405. 


North  Africa. 


717 


of  them  near  Sidi  Kacem.  M.  Alex.  Bertrand,  summing  up  the 
results  of  the  discoveries  of  the  latter  explorer,  says  of  the  dolmens 
of  the  province  of  Constantine,  that,  to  judge  by  the  objects  found 


Fig.  671. 


-African  dolmens  from  Gen.  Faidherbe.     From  rough  plates  in  the  Proceedings  of  the 
Intern.  Congres,  Brussels,  1S72. 


in  them,  they  cannot,  as  a  rule,  be  placed  very  much  anterior  ta 
the  Christian  era,  while  some  would  be  even  posterior  to  it.  It 
appears  to  me  that,  putting  the  whole  of  the  evidence  together, 
and   remembering  especially  the  vast  number  of  dolmens  which 


7i8  The  Dolmens  of  Ireland. 


occur  in  the  several  groups,  it  is  most  probable  that  the  practice  of 
dolmen-building  continued  uninterruptedly  from  the  latter  portion 
of  the  Neolithic  Age  down  to  the  early  centuries  of  the  Christian 
era  among  a  race  of  dolichocephalic  inhabitants,  either  originally 
driven  southward  from  south-western  Europe,  and  whose  de- 
scendants may  possibly  be  looked  for  in  some  of  the  existing 
peoples  still  on  the  spot,  or  who  made  a  long  sojourn  here  on 
their  journey  from  the  east  and  south. 

We  cannot  pass  from  the  subject  of  African  dolmens  without 
noticing  a  statement  of  Commandant  Bernard,  that,  at  Fiaret,  in  the 
province  of  Oran,  a  hundred  miles  from  the  sea,  there  was  one  in 
existence,  the  cap-stone  of  which  measured  65  feet  [! !]  long  by  26 
feet  broad,  and  9  feet  6  ins.  thick.  It  was  raised  on  rocks  to  a 
height  of  30  or  40  feet  from  the  ground.  That  such  a  stupendous 
erection  could  have  been  other  than  natural  is  scarcely  credible. 
What  follows,  however,  is  of  interest.  M.  Bernard  says  that 
steps  were  cut  for  the  purpose  of  ascending  it,  and  that  three 
square  troughs  were  hewn  out  of  its  upper  surface,  the  largest 
measuring  3  feet  square,  and  the  three  communicating  with  each 
other  by  grooves  4  inches  broad,  and  of  less  depth  than  the 
troughs.  This  description  closely  corresponds  with  that  of  the 
sacrificial  rock-altars  of  Pannoyas  in  Portugal,  in  the  sides  and 
surfaces  of  which,  as  we  may  see,  by  referring  to  the  illustrations 
and  descriptions  previously  quoted,"}"  steps  have  similarly  been 
hewn,  and  troughs  and  trenches  excavated.  Like  these  natural 
altars  near  Villa  Real,  the  supposed  dolmen  at  Fiaret  was,  doubt- 
less, an  object  of  veneration  ;  and  it  is  of  no  little  interest  to  find 
what  seems  to  be  proof  of  a  coincidence  of  ceremonial  observances 
in  districts,  the  inhabitants  of  which  may  once  have  been  related. 

In  addition  to  dolmens.  North  Africa  affords  examples  of  rude 
pillars  of  unhewn  stone,  and  also  of  circles  of  standing-stones,  at 
various  places,  as  at  Oran,  near  Djelfa,  in  Zenzer.  At  the  latter 
place  is  also  a  trilithon,  10  feet  high.  Near  Tangiers  is  a  stone- 
circle. 

During  the  mission  of  Sir  Charles  Evan-Smith  to  the  Court 
of  Morocco,  in  1892,  a  correspondent  of  the  Daily  Graphic  ^  sent 
to  that  journal  a  description,  accompanied  by  a  drawing,  of  some 
interesting  prehistoric  remains,  a  little  south  of  the  port  of  Azila, 

t  See  p.  663,  sjtfira,  and  for  other  illustrations,  see  "  Argote,"  Lisbon,  1732,  book  iv.  cap.  7. 
X  May  2ist,  1892. 


North  Africa.  719 


and  about  twelve  miles  inland.  "  The  site,"  he  writes,  "  exhibits 
a  partly  artificial  mound,  encircled  by  a  ring  of  stones  some  sixty 
yards  in  diameter.  For  the  most  part  the  stones  are  of  small  size, 
but  to  the  west  the  uniformity  of  the  ring  is  broken  by  a  single 
monolith,  of  great  size,  carefully  hewn,  which  forms  a  conspicuous 
landmark  for  some  distance.  The  shaft  is  18  feet  in  height,  and 
tapers  gracefully  towards  the  top ;  its  circumference,  2  feet  from 
the  ground,  being  12  feet  6  ins.  About  a  hundred  yards  west  of 
this  monolith  lie  prone  other  large  stones,  which  are  evidently  of 
the  same  nature  as  that  now  standing,"  which  latter,  it  is  added, 
**  is  undoubtedly  of  phallic  origin." 

At  Djidjeli,  in  Algeria,  are  some  little  stone-circles,  said  to  be 
sepulchral.  Upon  a  pillar-stone  in  one  of  them  rests  another 
stone,  in  form  like  an  egg,  and  surrounded  by  bands  or  twists, 
which  give  it  the  appearance  of  a  turban,  whence  it  derives  its  name, 
"  The  Turban  Stone."  f 

On  the  island  of  Iniskill,  near  Port  Noo,  in  Donegal,  I  saw  a 
very  similar  stone,  placed  with  many  others  on  the  upper  surface 
of  a  large  square  natural  block,  much  reverenced  by  the  pilgrims 
who  periodically  visit  the  place  in  the  summer  months.  It  was  a 
boulder,  about  18  inches  long,  which  had  been  rolled  into  its 
present  shape  (that  of  a  long  egg,  pointed  at  either  end)  by  the 
action  of  the  sea ;  the  material  being  dark  slate,  traversed  by  four 
bands  of  white  quartz.  The  pilgrims,  lifting  it  off  the  rock,  pass 
it  round  their  bodies,  repeating  prayers  or  curses,  just  such  a 
practice  as  Strabo  mentions  in  the  case  of  the  stones  at  Cape  Saint 
Vincent — the  Sacred  Promontory,  in  Portugal  above  mentioned.  J 
Mounted,  however,  on  the  top  of  a  pillar-stone,  the  Algerian  Turban 
Stone  may  most  fitly  be  compared  to  the  so-called  ^litre-Stones 
of  Ireland.  A  rough,  unhewn  stone  of  this  class  was  poised  on  the 
summit  of  a  menhir  (inscribed  with  an  ogam),  and  called  Olan's 
Stone,  close  to  the  Well  and  Bile  (or  old  sacred  tree)  of  that  saint 
in  the  county  of  Cork.§  It  was  used  by  the  superstitious  as  a  cure 
for  headache,  being  lifted  from  its  position  and  placed  on  the  heads. 
Carved  "  Mitre-Stones,"  all  regarded  with  superstitious  reverence, 
were  placed  on  some  of  the  beautifully  carved  crosses  of  much  later 
date.  Representations  of  several  will  be  found  in  Mr.  O'Neill's 
exquisitely  illustrated  work.jl 

t  See  Fergusson,  R.S.M.,  p.  404.  J  p.  666. 

§  In  the  MSS.  of  J.  Windele  are  several  illustrations  of  this. 

II  See  the  "  Crosses  of  Ireland,"  by  Henry  O'Neill,  especially  the  examples  at  Kilklispeen  and 
Clonmacnoise. 


720  The  Dolmens  of  Ireland. 

Italy  and  Greece. 

The  interest  attaching  to  the  prehistoric  antiquities  of  Italy  has 
of  late  years  been  wonderfully  enhanced  by  the  discovery  that  the 
northern  nations  of  Europe  owe  their  earliest  bronze  weapons  to 
the  artificers  in  that  country,  from  whom  they  not  only  received 
the  originals,  but  from  whom  they  borrowed  also  the  knowledge 
of  casting  them  for  themselves,  on  the  model  of  those  they  had 
imported.  The  implements  were  the  simple  imitations  of  the  stone 
axe,  known  as  the  bronze  celt,  either  flat,  or  Avith  slightly 
raised  edge.  The  weapons  consisted  of  daggers,  provided  with 
holes  and  rivets  by  which  to  attach  their  triangular  blades  to 
handles  of  horn  or  metal  ;  and  of  those  so-called  halbert-heads, 
also  provided  with  rivets,  and  having  a  slight  scythe-like  curve 
of  which  illustrations  have  been  given  (Figs.  630,  631).  The 
ornaments  comprised  simple  smooth  rings  for  the  neck,  with 
graduated  ends,  or  broad-fluted  armlets,  or  spiral  finger-rings. 
The  decoration  was  confined  to  arrang-ements  of  straight  lines. 

The  bodies  of  the  dead,  in  conjunction  with  which  in  Italy 
these  earliest  evidences  of  the  Bronze  Age  are  found,  were  stone 
cists,  which  had  survived  from  the  Neolithic  Period. 

To  the  Bronze  Age  inhabitants  of  Northern  Italy  belong  also 
groups  of  stone-circles  surrounding  tombs,  together  with  parallel 
lines  of  stones  terminating  in  circles,  such  as  those  at  Golusecca,  in 
the  Province  of  Milan,  and  which  recall  similar  stone-settings  on 
Dartmoor  in  Devon,  and  in  Achill  in  Mayo.  This  northern 
portion  of  the  Italian  Peninsula  is  even  in  modern  times,  as  it 
certainly  was  in  the  ancient  Ligurian  period,  "  overwhelmingly 
brachycephalic,"  to  use  Canon  Taylor's  expression.  Southern  Italy, 
on  the  other  hand,  which  probably  shared  with  Sicily  the  type  of  the 
Atlantic  and  Mediterranean  race,  which  historic  tradition  almost 
permits  to  call  Iberian,  is  as  distinctly  dolichocephalic,  though 
sepulchral  caves  there  have  produced  extreme  examples  of  both 
types. 

Turning  to  the  coast  of  Etruria,  we  find  at  a  place  called 
Saturnia  a  group  of  dolmens,  which  is  stated  by  Mr.  Dennis  to  be 
unique  in  that  country .f  "  They  are,"  he  says,  "  very  numerous, 
each  consisting  generally  of  a  quadrangular  chamber,  sunk  a  few 
feet  below  the  surface,  lined  with  rough  slabs  of  rock  set  upright, 

t  Dennis,  "Elruria,"  edit.  1878,  vol.  ii.,  p.  282,  et  scqq. 


Italy  and  Greece. 


'21 


one  on  each  side,  and  roofed  over  with  two  large  slabs  resting 
against  each  other,  so  as  to  form  a  pent-house,  or  else  spanned 
by  a  single  block  of  enormous  size,  covering  the  whole,  and  laid 
with  a  slight  slope,  apparently  for  the  purpose  of  carrying  off  the 
rain.  Not  a  chisel  has  touched  these  rugged  masses,"  which 
measure  from  about  i6  feet  square  to  half  that  size.  Some  of  the 
structures  "are  divided  into  two  chambers,  i8  feet  across.  To 
most  of  them  a  passage  leads,  lo  to  12  feet  long  and  3  feet  wide." 
They  "  all  are  sunk  a  little  below  the  surface,  because  each  had  a 
tumulus  of  earth  piled  around  it,  so  as  to  cover  all  but  the 
cap-stone.     One  had  a  circle  of  small  stones  set  round  it." 

The  architectural  feature  of  the  pent-house  roof,  especially 
when  found  in  this  district,  seems  to  be  an  improvement  on  the  flat 
slab  of  the  dolmens,  and  a  step  forward  towards  the  formation  of 
the  splendidly  constructed  cyclopean  tombs,  the  type  of  which  is 
represented  in  that  known  as  the  Regulini  Galeassi  at  Coere,  and 
that  in  the  tumulus  of  Cocumella  at  Vulci. 

The  structures  at  Saturnia,  in  respect  of  their  double 
chambers  and  pent-house  roofs,  may  be  compared  to  a  form  of 


Fig.  672.— Megalithic  monument  at  Karvathi  (Mycene)  in  the  Morea.     From  Baa: 


naveta  which  I  have  not  yet  mentioned,  but  which  occurs  in 
Minorca.  Describing  one  at  San  Merce  de  Baix,f  Signor 
Sanpere  y  Miquel  states  that  the  chamber  is  divided  into  two 
aisles  iiiefs)  by  a  row  of  three  colunms,  each  formed  of  five  or  six 

t  "  Revista  de  Ciencias  historicas,"  Barcelona,  vol.  ii.  p.  452,  et  scqq. 


722 


The  Dolmens  of  Ireland. 


blocks  of  unequal  size  set  one  on  another.  These  support  flags 
placed  longitudinally  upon  them,  upon  the  edges  of  which  on 
either  side  rest  lateral  and  transverse  slabs,  placed  in  a  slanting 
position  so  that  their  outer  and  lower  edges  rest  on  the  strong 
outer  wall  of  the  building.  The  length  of  the  example  given  is 
1 1  m.,  and  the  breadth  between  the  pillars  and  the  wall 
respectively  2*90  m.,  370  m.,  and  4"8  m.  The  width  at  the 
entrance  is  3*10  m.,  and  there  is  an  antechamber.  These 
structures  seem  to  occupy  an  intermediate  place  between  the 
great  dolmen  of  Antequera  and  the  "  pent-house  "  type  of  Etruria. 
With  all  these  we  may  compare  the  construction  of  the  dolmen  of 
Abrahao  in  Portugal,!  and  that  near  Louisburgh  in  Mayo.J 


Fig.  673. — Dolmen  in  the  Crimea.    From  Dubois  de 
Moiitperettx . 


Fig.  674. — Anta  do  Crato,  Portugal.     From 
Sigttor  Percira  De  Costa.% 


That  In  Greece  stone  monuments  of  the  dolmen  class  exist  has 
long  been  recognized.  Such  a  megalithic  tomb  has  been  figured 
by  Baer  and  others  at  Karvathi  (Mycene)  in  the  Morea  (Fig.  672). 


Tpie  Crimea  and  the  Caucasus. 

The  inhabitants  of  the  northern  and  north-eastern  coasts  of 
the  Black  Sea  were  dolmen-builders.  From  the  work  of  M. 
Dubois  de  Montpereux,||  I  take  the  example  from  the  Crimea. 
The  cleft  in  the  terminal  stone  of  the  vault  seems  to  represent 
the  usual  means  of  ingress,  while  from  the  open  side  the  approach 
to  the  structure  has  been  removed.  In  its  present  condition  it  is 
as  nearly  as  possible  a  facsimile  of  the  Anta  do  Crato  between 
Lisbon  and  Elvas,  which  I  place  beside  it  for  comparison 
(Figs.  673,  674). 

t  p.  669.  supra.  \  p.  124,  supra. 

§  Signer  Pereira  da  Costa,  op.  cit.  pi.  ii.,  fig.  2a.,  p.  79.  The  height  is  1*90  m.,  so  that  it  is  of 
almost  the  same  size  as  the  Corsican  example,  see  p.  711,  which  measures  1-65  m.  under  the 
cap-stone.  |1  «'  Voyage  autour  du  Caucase,"  Paris,  1839-43. 


The  Crimea  and  the  Caucasus. 


7^2> 


For  the  Caucasian  dolmens,  our  principal  authority  is  M. 
Ernest  Chantre,  whose  descriptions  and  illustrations  of  them  will 
be  found  in  Materiaux  pour  V Histoire  de  rHomme,\  and  in  his 
great  work,  "  Le  Caucase."    They  are  distributed,  it  appears,  into 


Fig,  675. — Dolmen  in  the  Gorge  de  Djouba,  Caucasus. 


From  '^Mat.  pour  VHist.  de  V Homme.'" 


two  principal  groups,  the  one  to  the  S.E.  and  the  other  to  the 
S.W.  of  the  town  of  Ekaterinodar.  The  former  of  these  groups 
is  close  to  the  Black  Sea.     Among  the  most  typical  and  interest- 


FlG.  676. — Valley  of  Pehada,  Caucasus.     From  ''''Alat. pour  VHist.  de  T Homme.'''' 

ing  are  those  of  the  Gorge  of  Djouba,  the  valley  of  Pehada,  that 
at  Tzarskaya,  already  given,  and  that  at  Dakhovsk.  The  first  of 
these  (Fig.  675)  bears  a  remarkable  likeness  to  some  of  those  in  the 
County  of  Clare,  and  also  to  Indian  examples,  among  which  it  will 
be  mentioned  again.  The  second,  that  in  the  valley  of  Pehada 
(Fig.  676),  with  a  round  hole  in  the  terminal  stone,  has  its  counter- 
parts in  both  Syria  and  India,  while  the  presence  of  this  feature  of 
an  orifice  recalls  the  same  characteristic,  though  rarely  met  with, 
in  every  dolmen-bearing  district  in  Europe.  The  third,  that  at 
Tzarskaya,  has  been  already  mentioned  %  for  comparison  with  the 


t  1885,  p.  545,  et  seqq. 


X  p.  708,  supra. 


724  The  Dolmens  of  Ireland. 

various  holed  dolmens  and  terminal  stones  of  tombs  in  which  the 
hole  or  creep  is  placed  in  a  similar  position  to  this  one,  namely,  in 
the  centre  of  the  lower  end  of  the  slab.  The  ends  of  the  side- 
slabs  seem  also  in  this  case  to  protrude  so  as  to  form  a  sort  of 
antechamber  at  the  end  of  the  structure.     The  fourth  variety,  that 


Fig.  677. — Dolmen  of  Dakhovsk  (Caucasus).     Fioin  '^ Mat.  four  T Hist,  dc  I'l/omme." 

at  Dakhovst  (Fig.  677),  is,  to  all  appearance,  just  such  a  regularly 
formed,  low-lying  structure  as  that  called  Grannas  Bed  at  Brough 
Derg,  in  the  county  of  Tyrone.f 

In  a  publication  called  "  Recueil  d'Antiquites  de  la  Scythie," 
published  by  the  Imperial  Archaeological  Commission,  at  St. 
Petersburg,  in  1866,  are  some  interesting  descriptions  of  the 
results  of  explorations  made  in  the  district  of  Ekaterinoslaf,  near 
Alexandropol.  One  of  these  was  a  tumulus  called  the  Lougvaia 
Moguila  "Tomb  of  the  Prairie."  Its  base  was  surrounded  by  a 
fosse  with  two  entrances,  one  on  the  E.  side,  the  other  on  the 
W.,  and  also  by  a  circle  of  large  stones,  as  at  New  Grange. 

The  writer  of  the  article  expresses  his  belief  that  it  was  the 
tomb  of  a  Scythian  king,  in  the  fourth  or  third  century  B.C.  A 
statue  of  a  baba  or  old  woman  had  at  one  time  stood  on  its  summit. 

Five  skulls  were  found  in  it,  one  being  in  a  central  chamber. 
Gold  ornaments  were  also  found  of  a  type  called  Scythian  by 
Russian  antiquaries.  Some  of  them  were  ornamented  with  con- 
centric semicircles,  with  lozenge-shaped  tassel  patterns  between, 
and  chevron  or  dentated  bands  with  dots.  Spirals  were  also 
used.  A  glass  bead  figured  in  the  communication  J  is  exactly 
similar  to  some  remarkable  ones  with  knobs  or  excrescences  found 


t  p.  212,  supra.  \  Part  II.  (pL  xxxvi.). 


The  Crimea  and  the  Caucasus.  725 

in  Ireland.f  Figure  of  crolden  boars  were  also  discovered,  one 
of  which  is  strikingly  similar  to  those  on  helmets  represented  on 
a  plaque  found  in  Oland  (Figs.  699  and  700,  pp.  856  and  872 
infra).  Two  of  the  skulls  were  markedly  dolichocephalic,  the  mien 
cephalic  index  being  71.  The  three  others  were  brachycephalic, 
the  average  index  being  about  81,  that  of  the  broadest  84. 

M.  Baer  thinks  the  large  round  skulls  are  those  of  the  Scyths. 
All  three  are  skulls  of  men,  while  one  of  the  two  long  ones  is 
masculine,  the  other  feminine — that  of  a  young  woman,  "  perhaps 
the  king's  wife."  "  All  we  know  of  the  history  of  the  Scyths,"  adds 
M.  Baer,  "  at  this  period  accords  better  with  the  habits  of  a  short- 
headed  than  a  long-headed  people.  Can  these  short  skulls,  one 
of  which  was  that  of  an  old  man — the  others  young — be  the  skulls 
of  the  Scyths,  while  the  long  skulls  are  those  of  the  Cimmerians  ? 
Tradition  handed  down  by  Posidonius  and  Plutarch  identified 
these  Cimmerii  of  the  Palus,  who  were  dispossessed  by  the  Scyths, 
with  the  Cimbri  of  Denmark.  The  heads  of  the  ancient  inha- 
bitants of  Denmark  are  long — markedly  so  indeed."  Between 
these  latter  and  the  ones  he  describes  M.  Baer  notices  points 
of  difference,  but  adds  that  the  Academy  at  St.  Petersburg 
possesses  examples  of  very  long  skulls  found  in  the  provinces 
of  Middle  Russia,  between  which  and  the  long  skulls  of  Western 
Europe  a  great  analogy  exists.  Strabo  speaks  of  Scyths  and 
Celto-Scyths,  so  that  it  was  clearly  believed  that  an  intermingling 
of  these  peoples  had  taken  place  in  these  lands. 

Scythia,  in  the  sense  in  which  the  word  is  used  by  ancient 
writers,  had  no  ethnological  significance.  Native  Scyths,  however, 
there  must  have  been  originally,  and  M.  Baer  proceeds  to  ask  to 
what  group  of  natives  do  the  skulls  he  proposes  to  call  Scythian 
belong.  To  judge  by  their  breadth,  it  seems,  at  first  sight,  possible 
to  take  them  for  those  of  Mongolian  tribes,  but  the  conformation 
of  the  face  does  not  favour  this  view.  The  nose  of  the  Mongol 
is  large  and  flat.  Consequently,  in  the  skull  the  opening  is 
broad  in  contrast  with  a  height  which  is  proportionately  insig- 
nificant. In  some  Bouriat  skulls  this  opening  is  broader  than 
it  is  high.  In  these  broad  skulls  from  the  tumulus,  however,  it 
is  high  and  narrow. 

He  concludes    by  preferring   to  compare    these   "  Scythian " 

t  Many  of  these  have  been  figured  at  various  times  in  the  Journal  of  the  R.H.A.A.  of  Ireland, 
now  the  Society  of  Antiquaries  of  Ireland.  See  Part  III.,  p.  872  infra,  where  the  boar  and  bead 
are  figured.     The  beads  are  comparable  to  Egyptian  "  knobbed  "  examples. 


726  The  Dolmens  of  Ireland. 

skulls  with  those  of  the  Tschoudes,  Bashkirs,  and  Kalmucks,  which 
give  the  following  averages  : — 

Tschoudes           ...          ...  ...  ...  ...  814*0 

Scyths  (?)  from  tumulus  ...  ...  ...  812-5 

Bashkirs...          ...  •■.  .•  817*4 

Kalmucks           ...          ...  .•  .••  .•  8i6'o 

Another  tumulus  in  this  district,  called  the  Dolgaia  Moguila, 
was  higher  at  one  end  than  the  other,  and  covered  a  long  stone 
tomb  containing  a  skeleton,  the  remains  of  a  wooden  coffin,  an 
arrow-head  of  pure  copper,  and  an  urn  of  globular  form  orna- 
mented with  a  chevron  pattern  round  the  neck. 

Syria. 

In  his  work  on  Heth  and  Moab,  Captain  Conder  has  devoted 
considerable  space  to  the  three  kindred  subjects  of  the  "  Rude 
Stone  Monuments  "  in  general,  the  dolmens  in  particular,!  and  the 
ancient  superstitions  of  Syria.  One  of  the  illustrations  he  gives 
— that  of  a  dolmen  near  Heshbon — represents  a  structure  wonder- 
fully like  the  "  Giant's  Load "  at  Ballymascanlan,  in  Louth. 
Judaea  possesses  no  dolmen.  In  Samaria  there  is  only  one,  and 
that  doubtful.  In  Lower  Galilee,  one;  in  Upper  Galilee,  four,  of 
moderate  dimensions.  West  of  Tiberias  there  is  a  circle,  and 
between  Tyre  and  Sidon  an  enclosure  of  menhirs.  At  Tell  el 
Kady,  one  of  the  sources  of  the  Jordan,  a  centre  of  basalt  dolmens 
exists,  and  another  centre  is  Kefr  Wal,  north  of  Stif,  in  Gilead. 
At  Ammdn  are  several  fine  dolmens  and  menhirs,  and  east  of  the 
Danieh  ford  is  a  considerable  group. 

It  is  remarked,  however,  that  it  is  doubtful  whether,  if  all 
these  examples  were  added  together,  the  number  of  dolmens 
would  equal  those  in  the  great  fields  of  rude  stone  monuments 
to  be  found  in  Moab,  for  it  has  been  calculated  that  seven  hundred 
examples  were  noted  by  the  surveyors  in  1881,  and,  of  these,  two 
hundred  were  measured,  sketched,  and  described. 

M.  Chantre,  in  illustrating  the  portion  of  his  **  Recherches 
dans  le  Caucase,J  which  deals  with  dolmens  of  that  district, 
adduces  a  Syrian  example,  to  which  I  have  already  referred,  on 
account  of  the  important  points    of  comparison    it  affords  with 

t  For  other  notices  of  these  monuments   see    the    works  of   Irby  and   Mangles,  Tristram, 
Palgrave  (for  those  of  Arabia),  and  Lieut.  Welstead  for  those  near  the  Red  Sea. 
+  Vol.  i.  p.  61. 


Syria. 


727 


structures  everywhere  found  in  the  west  of  Europe.  It  consists 
of  a  square  vault  or  cell,  open  on  one  side,  but  having  on  that  side 
a  double  line  of  stones — five  on  one  side  and  four  on  the  other — 
forming  an  uncovered  passage-way  up  to  the  covered  portion, 
and  diminishing  in  size  and  height  as  they  recede  from  it.  There 
can  be  little  doubt  that  this  passage  was  also  once  covered  by 


Fig.  678. — Dolmen  in  Syria.     From  Chantre's  '■^  Recherches  dans  le  Caucase.''^ 

flags,  so  that  this  monument,  and  those  like  it  elsewhere,  are  in 
reality  identical  with  the  passage-dolmens,  and  galerias,  and 
alUes  cotcvertes,  and  gang-grifter^  only  that  they  have  been 
deprived  of  the  roofing-stones  of  the  approach,  and  perhaps 
also  stripped  of  the  envelope  of  stones  or  earth  which  covered 
them  to  the  height,  at  least,  of  the  edges  of  the  roofing-stone.  In 
this  Syrian  example  there  is  a  hole,  not,  as  is  usual,  in  the 
terminal-stone,  but  in  one  of  the  side-stones  of  the  vault,  which, 
since  it  was  probably  made  for  the  reception  of  offerings,  shows 
that  this  part  of  the  exterior  was  left  uncovered.  Two  dolmens 
in  the  county  of  Clare  f  are  provided  each  with  a  hole  in  one  of  the 
side-stones  of  its  vault,  which,  although  they  may  be  natural 
orifices  in  the  limestone,  point  to  their  intentional  selection  on 
account  of  their  possessing  this  feature. 

To  the  south-west  of  Rabbath  Ammon  is  a  dolmen,  which 
Captain  Conder  assigns  to  the  semi-dolmen  class  of  French 
archaeologists.  The  top-stone  measures  13  feet  long  by  11  feet 
broad,  and  slopes  slightly  to  the  E.  Its  W.  edge  is  supported 
by  a  stone  6  feet  high  and  5  feet  wide,  there  being  another  side- 
stone  on  the  N.  In  the  centre  of  the  tabular-stone  is  a  hollow, 
about  2  feet  in  diameter,  and  a  few  inches  deep,  to  which  a 
regular  network  of  channels  leads  from  the  higher  and  W.  end 


t  pp.  68,  75. 


728  The  Dolmens  of  Ireland. 


of  the  table.  There  are  two  other  large  hollows  and  nine  smaller 
ones  in  different  parts  of  the  stone,  several  having  little  channels 
leading  to  them.  There  are  two  similar  hollows  on  a  flat  rock 
just  E.  of  the  stone. 

Near  Heshbon,  too,  are  "  cairns  with  circles  round  them," 
"  rocks  filled  with  small  holes,"  and  "  a  circle  having  a  diameter  of 
200  feet,"  while  "the slopes  beneath  are  sown  with  dolmens,  some 
being  the  finest  found  in  all  Moab." 

Most  singular  and  interesting  is  it  to  find  that  not  only  are 
these  structural  resemblances  to  the  rude  stone  monuments  of 
Western  Europe  so  close,  but  that  the  superstitions  which  prevail 
in  the  dolmen-bearing  districts  of  Syria  and  Moab  are  identical 
with  those  of  the  dolmen-bearing  districts  of  the  West.  Captain 
Conder,  whose  work  I  have  been  quoting,  states  that  in  Moab 
the  practice  prevails  among  the  superstitious  of  "  passing  between 
stones,"  and  that  veneration  is  paid  to  "sacred  footprints"  in 
rocks.  Stones  were  heaped  up  around  menhirs,  to  form  memorial 
cairns.  Heaps  of  stones  are  placed  by  Moslems  at  spots  where 
shrines  come  in  view.  Just  as  the  Cille,  or  Leaba,  that  is,  the 
Christian  saint's  tomb,  has  succeeded  the  dolmen  in  Ireland,  so 
the  Kubbeh^  that  is,  the  Moslem  saint's  tomb,  has  succeeded  the 
dolmen  in  Syria.  Inside  the  Kubbeh  representations  are  found 
of  "  the  spiral,  the  palm-leaf,  and  badly  drawn  concentric  circles," 
all  which  are  found  in  connection  with  the  later  sepulchral  vaults 
and  chambers  of  the  West,  at  New  Grange,  for  example,  only 
carved  in  stone. 

Captain  Conder  does  not  hesitate  to  affirm  his  belief  that  the 
Syrian  dolmens  served  the  purpose  of  "  sacrificial  altars,"  and 
that  some  natural  rocks  were  so  used  also.  "  I  found,"  he  says, 
"  in  1882,  that  the  Sacred  Rock  on  Gerizim  had  a  well-marked 
hollow  near  its  centre,  evidently  artificial.  This  rock  has  a  flat 
surface,  dipping  down  westwards,  on  which  side  a  cave,  or  trench, 
has  been  scooped  beneath  its  surface." 

Here  we  have  coincidences,  which  can  scarcely  be  accidental, 
with  the  great  North-African  rock-altar  mentioned  above,  with 
tlie  altar-rocks  at  Pannoyas  in  Portugal,  with  the  covering-stones 
of  dolmens  in  Corsica,  France,  the  British  Isles,  etc.,  etc. 

"  In  Moab,"  proceeds  the  explorer,  "the  hollows  are  sometimes 
found,  not  on  the  dolmen  itself,  but  on  a  flat  stone  beside  it,"  for 
parallels  to   which  phenomenon  we  may  turn  to  the  instances  (in 


Syria.  729 

Cornwall)  of  the  "  Three  Brothers  of  Grugith,"  f  and  in  Clare  at 
the  dolmen  at  Newgrove,  near  TulIa.J 

At  the  shrines  which  succeeded  the  dolmens  in  Syria,  as  at 
the  dolmen  of  Maul-na-holtora,  in  Kerry,  and  at  hundreds  of 
the  little  cills  which  succeeded  those  monuments  in  Ireland,  the 
superstitious  custom  prevailed,  and  in  many  cases  still  prevails,  of 
hanging  up  rags. 

Captain  Conder  says  "  a  little  shrine,  now  ruined,  appears 
to  have  existed  below  the  dam,  on  the  right  bank  of  the  Orontes. 
Here  we  found  five  shafts  of  basalt,  2  feet  6  ins.  in  diameter,  and 
a  stone  cut  out  into  an  arch,  3  feet  in  diameter,  now  forming  a 
Mihrab  facing-stone.  Close  beside  it  is  a  modern-looking  tomb 
of  mud  and  stone,  Jmng  with  votive  rags  on  stakes  stuck  into  the 
top.  Around  it  are  little  piles  of  stones,  which  Moslem  pilgrims 
erect."  It  is  said  to  be  the  tomb  of  a  slave  of  an  early  convert 
of  the  Prophet.  All  this  is  identical  with  Irish  custom  and 
tradition — the  votive  rags  hung  on  stakes,  the  little  piles  of  stones 
which  pilgrims  form,  as  on  the  summit  of  Slieve  Liag,  by  the 
venerated  rock  and  shrine  of  Aedh  Brecain,  even  to  the  devotion 
rendered  at  the  tombs  oi  servants  of  saint s.\ 

If  once  we  are  disposed  to  grant  that  such  striking  coincidences 
are  not  accidental,  but  point  to  primitive  connection,  involving  the 
derivation  of  these  superstitions  from  one  original  source,  we  may 
look  to  the  deserts  of  these  eastern  lands  for  an  explanation  of 
other  customs  and  beliefs,  for  the  causes  of  which  we  may  search 
in  vain  in  the  western  districts  in  which  we  find  them  rooted. 
I  take,  for  example,  the  veneration  of  wells,  and  the  horror  with 
which  their  pollution  was  regarded.  No  indignity  should  be 
offered  them,  nor  any  offence  given  to  the  spirit  who  dwelt  In 
them,  represented  by  a  White  Lady  or  a  Sacred  Trout.  The  early 
saints  sat  in  conclave  around  them.  They  possessed  marvellous 
healing  powers,  especially  on  Midsummer  Eve  night,  when  that  at 
Strule  was  believed  to  pour  forth  a  miraculous  overflow  of  water, 
while  some  which  were  regarded  as  intermittent  were  special 
objects  of  veneration.  Votive  rags  were  hung  around  every  sacred 
well.  Lastly,  It  was  by  passing  under  the  waters  of  a  well  that 
the  Sidh,  that  is,  the  abode  of  the  spirits  called  Sidlie,  in  the 
tumulus  or  natural  hill,  as  the  case  might  be,  was  reached. 

Now,  in  no  country  was  such  a  devotion  so  likely  to  have 

t  p.  483,  supra.  \  p.  89,  supra.  §  Maol-Brigde,  etc.,  etc 

VOL.  III.  C 


730  The  Dolmens  of  Ireland. 

originated  as  in  a  parched  and  desert  district  where  wells 
were  few  and  far  between,  and  where  to  have  dug  one  was  to 
cause  the  name  of  the  chieftain  or  patriarch  who  conferred  so 
great  a  blessing  on  the  community  to  be  sainted  and  held  in 
perpetual  veneration.  It  is  hard  to  see  how  a  saint  in  Ireland,  a 
country  alive  with  springs,  could  confer  any  particular  blessing  on 
a  tribe  by  causing,  as  we  are  told  in  the  legends  he  often  did,  a 
well  to  spring  up  miraculously ;  but  it  is  not  difficult  to  see  what 
a  benefactor  he  would  have  been  had  he  caused  one  to  be  dug  in 
the  deserts  of  Syria. 

It  is  rather  curious  to  add  that  the  idea  of  springs  overflowing, 
and  of  intermittent  springs,  might  well  have  been  derived  from 
natural  phenomena  observable  in  Syria.  The  source  of  the  old 
Sabbatic  river  is  a  well  rising  in  a  cave,  about  6  yards  long  and 
2  yards  wide.  At  intervals  of  from  four  to  seven  days  a  rumbling 
sound  is  heard  in  the  mountain,  and  torrents  of  water  flow  from 
the  cave  and  from  the  rocks  around,  and  continue  for  five  or  six 
hours  to  pour  down  the  valley.  The  Bor- 
deaux Pilgrim,  in  a.d.  2)33y  stated  that  the 
Jerusalem  spring  ran  for  six  days  in  the 
week,  and  that  it  rested  on  the  seventh. 
^      ^       ,^  ,        ^  ,,  A    remarkable   dolmen    at   Ala-Safat,    in 

Fig.  679. — Dolmen  of  Ala- 
Safat  (Palestine).     4/?^     Palestine,   formed   of  rugged,    unhewn    side- 

Lartet  et  De  Lnynes.  .       , 

Stones  and  cover,  with  a  termmal  stone 
having  a  square-panelled  orifice  sculptured  in  the  centre,  has  been 
figured  by  MM.  Louis  Lartet  and  De  Luynes.f 

The  dolmens  of  the  Jaulan  \  have  been  described  in  detail  by 
Herr  Schumacher.  We  learn  that  in  this  stony  district  they  are 
to  be  found  in  very  large  numbers,  often  covering  thousands  of 
square  yards  in  a  country  in  which  basalt  occurs  in  slabs.  The 
section  and  elevation  of  an  example  which  he  gives  from  Jisr-er- 
Rukkad  shows  that,  like  many  of  those  in  North  Africa,  some  are 
built  on  two  terraces  of  stone  (Fig.  680).  As  a  general  rule,  the 
roofing-stone  of  these  dolmens  measures  about  9  feet  long  by 
6  feet  6  ins.  broad,  and  14  ins.  thick. 

"  The  W.  end  of  the  chamber  is  broader  than  the  E. — the 
former  being  4  feet  6  ins.  and  the  latter  3  feet  6  ins.  wide.  It 
narrows,  therefore,  from  W.  to  E." — a  circumstance  which   Herr 


t  M.  Mortillet,  "  Musee  Prehistorique,"  pi.  Ivii. 
X  "The  Jaulan,"  by  G.  Schumacher,  1888. 


Syria. 


73^ 


Schumacher  would  account  for  by  the  vaults  having  been  each 
the  receptacle  of  a  body,  the  broader  end,  that  is,  the  shoulders,  of 


Fig.  680. — Elevation  and  plan  of  dolmen  at  Jisr-er-Rukkad.     From  Schumacher, 

which  was  so  placed  that  the  face  should  be  turned,  according  to 
old  custom,  to  the  rising  sun.  This  form  is,  I  think,  attributable 
to  some  other  cause.  We 
have  seen  that  it  is  preva- 
lent everywhere,  and  fre- 
quently in  the  case  of  very  East 
large  structures,  the  length 
and  width  of  which  precludes 
the  idea  that  they  were  made 
to  receive  single  bodies. 

The  floor  of  each  dolmen 
is  covered  with  earth,  and 
under  this  is  a  slab,  beneath 
which  are  "  the  remains  of 
bones  and  small  pieces  of 
charcoal."  In  one  single 
instance  two  copper  rings, 
2|  inches  in  diameter,  were 
found.  They  were  made  of 
smooth  wire,  0*09  of  an 
inch  thick,  and  had  scarcely 
any  perceptible  ornamenta- 
tion. 

Dolmens  vary  somewhat  in  construction  in  different  districts. 
At  Tell-esh-Sheban  and  er-Rawiyeh  they  are  numerous,  but  are 
of  different  shape  to  those  at  Jisr-er-Rukkad — the  difference  being 


—Dolmen  at  Tell-esh-Sheban. 
From  Schumacher, 


732  The  Dolmens  of  Ireland. 

attributable  to  the  formation  of  the  basaltic  rock  of  the  country. 
A  huge  block,  7  feet  6  ins.  high,  and  6  feet  wide,  raised  upon 
small  stones,  forms  the  roof.  One  example,  which  is  figured  in 
Herr  Schumacher's  work,f  is  surrounded  by  a  circle  of  blocks  rudely 
set,  the  diameter  of  which  is  9  feet  6  ins.,  and  the  height  of  the 
stones  2  feet  32-  ins. 

The  chamber  is  1 2  feet  long  by  4  feet  6  ins.  broad,  and  is  not 
narrowed  towards  the  E.,  but  it  faces  in  that  direction.  Some 
very  interesting  comparisons  are  made  by  the  author  I  am  quoting 
between  the  dolmens  of  this  district  and  the  Bedawin  tombs.  He 
regards  the  date  of  orisfin  of  the  dolmens  as  the  same  as  that  at 
which  the  earliest  buildings  in  the  Hauran — subterranean  structures 
roofed  with  basaltic  slabs — were  constructed,  and  his  reason  for 
doing  so  Is  the  striking  7^esemblaiice  zvhich  the  present  Bedawin 
tombs  bear  to  the  dolmens.  "  They  seem  to  be  imitations  of  those 
burial-places  erected  by  the  predecessors  of  the  modern  Bedawin 
in  this  country,  only  the  tombs  of  the  latter  are  much  smaller  and 
more  insignificant." 

An  illustration  is  given  %  (Fig.  661)  of  a  characteristic  example 
of  a  Bedawin  tomb  on  the  Dhahr  el-Ahmar  of  the  Kiilat  el-Husn. 
A  circle  of  slabs  runs  round  It.  The  entrance  Into  this  circle 
is  on  the  N.  side,  and  consists  of  a  trillthon — two  upright  stones 
each  2  feet  i?,  in.  high  forming  the  jambs,  and  supporting  a 
basaltic  lintel  slab.  On  the  S.  side  of  the  circle,  opposite  the 
entrance,  stands  a  remarkably  large  stone.  The  tomb  itself  Is 
constructed  of  rude  layers  of  stones,  and  In  shape  is  not  unlike  the 
inverted-ship-shaped  structures  we  have  described  in  Sardinia, 
and  the  little  so-called  oratories  or  cells  of  Kilmalkedar  and 
Gallerus  in  Kerry.  Surmounting  the  gable  at  either  end  of  the 
ridgeway  of  the  roof  is  a  stone  higher  than  the  rest.  Stones  in 
similar  position  and  of  singular  form,  intended  apparently  to 
represent  horned  heads,  formed  a  characteristic  feature  in  the 
little  Irish  structures. § 

The  Bedawin  tombs  are  turned  towards  the  S.,  in  accordance 

t  Fig.  681. 

X  op.  cit.  fig.  37;  "  Zeistschrift  des  dcutschen  ralcstina-Verelns,"  1886,  pp.  167-368;  also 
Kevtie  ArcIUologuiue^  January  to  June,  1888,  p.  95.     See  fig.  682. 

§  See  Journ.  Kilk.  Archseol.  Soc,  1888,  p.  252,  paper  by  Mr.  Atkinson  on  these  terminal  stones. 
Three  examples  are  figured  :  {a)  'J"ober-na-Dru  ;  (l>)  Teampulgeal ;  [c)  Kilmalkedar.  See  also  one 
drawn  by  Mr.  Windele  among  his  MSS.  in  the  R.I.A. ,  from  Loughadrine.  It  was  a  much-venerated 
stone,  and  was  said  to  cure  diseases.  In  front  of  the  Rountl  Tower  at  Clones  is  a  tomb,  the  form 
of  which  presents  in  survival  that  of  the  earlier  structures.  It  has  a  projecting  stone  at  either  end  of 
the  ridgeway  of  the  roof.     See  Wakeman,  in  Journ.  Kilk.  Archaeol.  Soc,  vol.  iii.,  1874-75,  p.  336. 


Syria. 


72>2> 


with  the  injunction  in  the  Koran  that  the  dead  should  face  the 
Caaba  in  peace.  Whilst,  then,  the  general  character  of  the 
dolmen  has  been  preserved,  this  alteration  in  position  is  attribu- 
table to  later  religious  notions.  The  Romans  would  seem  to 
have  treated  the  dolmens  with  care,  and  Roman  buildings  often  lie 
near  them. 

In   his  work  called  "  Across   the  Jordan,"   Herr   Schumacher 
mentions   many  megalithic  remains.     So  thickly  are  the  dolmens 
of  the  Ain    Dakkar  dis- 
trict    grouped      together         ^^*-''''  '      '"^ 
that,  standing  on  one    of 
them,  he  could  count  one 
hundred  and  sixty  others. 
They  are    called    by    the 
Arabs  Kubur  Beni  Israel, 
that   is,    "  Graves   of   the 
Children  of  Israel."  "They 
are  always  built  on  circular 
terraces     which      elevate 
them    about     three     feet 
above  ground,"  in  which 
respect      they      resemble 
some  of  the  North- African 
examples.     They  are  distant  from   each  other  about  ten  yards. 
"In   most  cases   they  are  formed  of  six   upright  slabs  and  two 


Wt!slei-n   side. 


Fig.  682. — Dolmen  near  Ain  Dakkar  ("showing  head- 
ings ").     Fro/n  Schumacher. 


Fig.  683. — Terminal  ornaments  on  gables  of  Irish  cilics.     After  Atkinson.     (l)  Kilmalkedar. 
(2)  Teampulgeal.     (3)  Tobar-na-Dru. 

covering-slabs    of   irregular    shape    laid    close    together.      Their 
greater  axis  is  E.   and  W."     The  western  end  is   broader  than 


734 


The  Dolmens  of  Ireland. 


the  eastern,  and  its  cap-stone  has  high  ends  or  headings  which 
recall  the  high  ends  of  Bedawin  tombs,  and  the  horned  head  on 
Irish  oratories.  These  dolmens  vary  from  7  to  13  feet  in  length. 
So  systematically  are  they  constructed  that  Herr  Schumacher 
is  able  to  record  the  observation  that  in  cases  where  the  chamber 
exceeds  eight  feet  in  length  a  second  covering-slab  is  employed. 
This  remark  would  hold  good,   I  think,   in  the  case  of  most  of 


Fig.  684. — Dolmen  of  Tsil.     From  Schtimacher. 

the  dolmens  of  Western    Europe,    and  of  those   of   Ireland  in 
particular. 

In  the  case  of  one  or  two  dolmens  there  is  an  aperture  "about 
2  feet  in  diameter,  large  enough  to  crawl  through,  and  of 
roundish  shape,  pierced  in  the  eastern  slab."  The  terrace  is  not 
always  circular,  but  occasionally  the  dolmen  is  surrounded  by  a 
rectangular     peristyle.       There    are    also    "sacred"    rectangular 

enclosures.  Bones  of  animals 
have  been  found  in  some,  which 
are  attributed  to  feasts  of  jackals. 
Another  variety  of  dolmen 
seems  to  approach  more  closely 
to  the  type  of  some  German 
Hiinebedden.\  These  occur  at 
Tsil.  "  They  are  long  areas 
running  E.  and  W.,  but  there  is 
never  more  than  one  covering- 
stone,  and  that  over  the  W.  end." 
In  the  same  district  are  circles,, 
avenues,  and  alignments  formed 
of  huge  basaltic  blocks.  A 
monolith  of  basalt,  7  feet  high  and  4  feet  broad,  but  probably 
at  one  time  larger,  is  called  the  "  Rock  of  Job."  It  is  split  into 
two  portions,  and  there  is  a  small  depression  on  its  upper  surface. 

t  See  also  fig.  678,  sttpra. 


Fig.  685. — Ground-plan  of  a  dolmen  with 
headings,     from  Schumacher. 


Syria. 


735 


Passing  from  dolmens  to  architectural  structures,  Herr  Schu- 
macher observes  that  towers  are  found  here,  and  he  describes  a 
rectangular  building  called  the  Wely  en  Neby  Sam,  at  the  S.  end 
of  which  is  a  tomb,  and  at  the  same  place,  which  is  held  sacred 
dolk  by  Christians  and  Moslems,  is  a  terebinth  tree  and  a  well, 
the  whole  presenting  an  exact  parallel  to  the  leaba  or  cille — that 
is  to  say,  the  little  building  containing  the  grave,  with  its  bild  or 
venerated  tree,  generally  an  ash,  and  its  tober-na-naomh,  or  saints' 
well,  so  often  found  associated  in  Ireland. 

In  a  third  work,f  Herr  Schumacher  describes  several  dolmen- 
fields.  In  that  of  Ard-el-Mahajjeh  there  are  twelve  dolmens. 
They  He  due  E.  and  W.  In  one  example,  the  two  side-stones 
measure  respectively  1 1  feet  5  ins.  and  1 1  feet  9  ins.  long,  and 
from  2  feet  7  ins.  to  3  feet  high.  At  the  W.  end  there  is  a 
terminal  stone,  but  the  E. 
end  is  open.  The  cover 
ing-slab,  in  typical 
amples,  measures  1 1 
9  ins.  long,  from  5 
8  ins.  to  9  feet  9 
broad,  and  about  i 
2  ins,  thick.  The  interior 
of  the  vault  is  3  feet 
wide  at  the  W.  end,  and 
narrows  to  2  feet  6  ins.  at 
the  E.  end.  In  the  centre 
of  the  covering-slab  is  a 
circular  depression  or  hole, 
measuring  10  inches  in  diameter,  and  4  inches  deep.  I  know 
no  description  of  dolmens  which  recalls  so  precisely  the  more 
compact  ones  of  Clare  as  does  that  of  the  ones  in  this  group. 

Near  Kefr  Yuba  the  dolmens  stand  on  terraces,  consisting 
either  of  a  single  platform  of  large  stones,  or  of  two  or  three 
layers  built  up  like  steps  one  above  the  other.  The  environment 
is  circular,  but,  as  a  rule,  the  dolmen  does  not  stand  in  the  centre. 
The  enclosed  area  surrounding  it  extends  to  the  S.  and  W.  of 
the  dolmen,  so  that  it  includes  an  area  about  double  that  of  the 
portion  which  encloses  the  structure  itself.  This  is  an  arrange- 
ment commonly  to  be  observed  in  the  German  Hiinebedden. 


Fig.  686.— Dolmen  at  Ard-el-Mahajjeh  (El  Ekla'a  El 
Mutrakibat).     Froin  Schujuacher. 


t  "Northern  'Ajlun,  within  the  Decapolis,"  pp.  131  and  165. 


736 


The  Dolmens  of  Ireland. 


This  eccentric  position  for  the  dolmen  is  characteristic  of  all 
this  group.  The  covering-stones  are  described  as  of  immense 
size.      In   the  upper  surfaces  of  some   of  them  depressions   are 


Fig.  687.  — Dolmen  from  Scluimacher,  showing  the  basins  and  ducts  in  the  covering-stone. 

observed;   but   it   is   impossible,  adds   Herr  Schumacher,  to  say 
whether  they  are  naturally  or  artificially  produced. 


Fig.  688.— rian  of  the  dolmen  El  Ekla'a  El  Mutrakil)at.     From  Schtiniacher. 

As   is  the  case  with  all  the  dolmens  of  these  districts,  the 
cast  end  is  narrower  than  the  west.     Some  few  of  this  group  lie 


Syria. 


1Z1 


N.W.  and  S.E.  In  some  there  is  only  one  end-stone,  and  that  is 
at  the  west,  the  east  end  being  left  open.  These  dolmens  stand 
about  24  to  30  feet  apart,  and  the  intermediate  spaces  are 
occupied  by  lines  of  large  blocks  arranged  in  two  parallel  rows 
3  feet  3  ins.  apart. 

In  the  interior  of  the  dolmens,  14  inches  under  the  earth, 
is  found  a  mass  consistino-  of  ashes  mixed  with  small  fraements 
of  charcoal,  and  remnants  of  decayed  bone.  Among  the  charred 
remains  copper  rings  are  found,  measuring  3  inches  in  diameter. 
Upon  these,  round  a  portion  of  the  outer  side,  a  primitive  form 
of  decoration,  consisting  of  a  zigzag  pattern,  is  engraved.     A  slab 


Fig.  689.— Specimen  of  architecture  at  Kherbet-Hass,  Syrie  Centrale.     Etched  by  the  author 
from  an  engraving  in  De  Vogue's  work. 

of  Stone  was  always  found  under  the  charred  mass.  Such  were 
the  results  of  Herr  Schumacher's  exploration  of  more  than  one 
hundred  out  of  the  eight  hundred  to  a  thousand  dolmens  which 
compose  this  Kefr  Yuba  group. 

The    resemblances    between    Irish    antiquities   and    those    of 
Syria  by  no  means  stops  short  at  the  dolmen  epoch. 

With  regard  to  the  buildings  of  the  Roman  period  in  Central 


72>^ 


The  Dolmens  of  Ireland. 


Syria,  I  will  merely  say,  in  parenthesis,  that  their  architecture 
stands  in  closer  relation  to  that  of  the  early  ecclesiastical  structures 
of  Ireland  than  does  any  other  style  in  existence.  To  convince 
ourselves  of  the  truth  of  this  statement,  we  have  only  to  glance 
through  the  plates  of  M.  de  Vogue's  magnificent  work,  "  Syrie 
Centrale,"  and  then,  taking  up  Petrie's  "  Ecclesiastical  Architecture 
of  Ireland,"  turn  to  such  examples  as  Kilmacduagh  on  the  coast 
of  Connemara,  or  the  interior  of  Trinity  Church,  Glendalough.  In 
Syria,  too,  may  be  found  structures  seemingly  analogous  to  the 
much-debated  "Round  Tower"  of  Ireland  on  the  one  hand,  and 
to  the  minaret  of  the  Mosque  (borrowed  also  from  a  pre-Christian 
prototype)  on  the  other. 

So  struck,  indeed,  have  I  often  been  with  these  resemblances, 

and  with  those  of  the  concurrent 
superstitions  (to  which  I  have 
alluded)  which  accompanied  them, 
that  I  have  sometimes  thought 
that  a  chapter  must  have  been 
lost  to  history,  and  that  a  time 
there  must  have  been  —  com- 
mencing none  can  say  when,  but 
not  terminating  before  the  fifth 
century,  a.d. — when  a  mighty 
superstition  —  a  vast  and  far- 
reaching  system  of  Death-Cultus, 
which  had  made  its  way  west- 
FiG.690.-windowintheeastendofSt.Mac  ward  from  Central  Asia  perhaps 

Dara^  church  on  the  island  called   Cruach    settled    down     On     thcse     lands, 

Mic  Dara  (Connemara).     Afier  Peine. 

and  was  thence  diffused  nortli- 
ivards  through  Scythia  to  the  Baltic  and  the  Elbe,  first  by 
pagans,  then  by  Christians,  each  of  whom  absorbed  and  assimilated 
its  fetichism  and  its  ceremonial  forms,  and  southwards,  again,  to 
Arabia  and  Africa,  where  the  followers  of  Mahomet  preserve 
the  traces  of  it  to-day  in  their  tomb-worship  and  well-worship 
and  rag-offerings,  just  as,  in  the  furthest  island  of  North-Western 
Europe,  do  the  followers  of  Christ. 

Granted  the  existence  of  such  a  centre  in  these  parts,  and  we 
know  not  how  much  of  our  folk-lore,  and  how  many  of  those 
superstitions,  the  origin  of  which  is  so  obscure,  may  not  be 
attributable  to  it.     With  the  dessil,  that  is  to  say,  the  moving  sun- 


Syria. 


739 


ways,  or  right-hand  ways,  round  some  venerated  spot.f  we  might 
connect  the  dance  of  the  dervishes  who,  eight  in  number,  move 
round  in  an  orbit,  though  in  a  contrary  direction,  perhaps  in 
accordance  with  a  Mahommedan  precept.  In  these  dervishes 
and  their  dance,  Captain  Conder  thinks  we  may  see  a  survival  of 
the  mystic  Cabiri,  "the  Seven  Great  Ones,  or  planetary  gods, 
revolving  round  the  green  centre  of  the  terrestrial  globe."  With 
the  Midsummer  fires,  again,  why  should  we  not  connect  the 
worship  of  Tammuz  at  the  summer  solstice  by  the  Phoenicians  in 
their  holy  city  of  Byblos  ? 

That  the  merchant  cruises  of  this  latter  people  could  have,  as 


^.^y\a»-»—  - 


Fig.  691.— Trinity  Church  at  Glendalough.     After  Pclric. 

some  have  asserted,  borne  any  appreciable  part  in  the  implanting 
in  all  the  Western  and  North-western  lands  of  so  widespread  and 
deeply  rooted  a  system  of  mythos  is  inconceivable.  It  follows 
that,  if  it  started  from  Syria,  it  went  overland  into  the  countries 
where  it  is  found. 

It  is,  however,  rather  to  Persia  than  to  Syria  that  we  would 
look  for  the  oriorinal  centre  whence  fire-worship  went  westward. 
The  name  of  the  present  desert  of  Mogon,  where  the  surface  is 
ablaze   with    flames    naturally  produced,    recalls   the    Baron  von 

t  This  was  the  "  paganus  cursus  "  so  especially  prohibited  in  the  Capitularies  of  Charlemagne. 
Irish  bishops,  as  they  called  themselves,  on  their  travels,  were  popularly  supposed  to  be  iniectea 
with  this  demonstrative  form  of  heresy.  Poor  Saint  Rudbert,  although  of  royal  Frankish  stock, 
mixed  with  the  blood  of  Irish  chieltains,  had  to  put  up  with  derision  from  the  vulgar  crowds  wno, 
not  content  with  laughing  at  his  ignorance  of  their  language,  were  accustomed  to  look  upo'jj" 
Scotic  pilgrims  as  "  deceptores,  gyrovagi,  et  cursores "  (see  "Hist.  S.  Rudberti ;  Cavisius,  ines. 
Mon.  III.,"  pt.  ii.  p.  319). 


740  The  Dolmens  of  Ireland. 


Haxthauson's  f  account  of  the  Holy-Land  of  Mugon,  the  country 
of  the  Median  Magi,  the  cradle-land  of  the  worship  of  Ormuzd,  in 
the  midst  of  the  land  of  heroes,  Iran  proper,  where  burned  the 
eternal  and  sacred  fires  of  Baku. 

The  course  of  historic  immigrations,  as  pointed  out  by  tradition, 
was,  we  feel  sure,  that  o{  prehistoric  immigrations  as  well.  Thus 
when  we  find  EustathiusJ  and  Theophylact  speaking  of  the 
Unni  (Huns)  as  a  Scythian  race  on  the  Caspian,  possessing  vast 
treasures  of  gold,  and  tributaries,  first  of  the  Medes  and  then  of 
the  Babylonians,  migrating  into  Europe  by  way  of  the  Palus 
Meeotis,  we  may  see  reason  to  think  that  elder  nations,  too,  had 
passed  along  that  route. 

We  have  already  spoken  of  trade-routes  by  which  amber  was 
transmitted  to  the  south.  Professor  Virchow  thinks  that  the 
earliest  route  by  which  bronze  arrived  in  Europe  went  north- 
wards from  the  Black  Sea,  his  opinion  being  based  on  the  fact  that 
the  bronze  implement  so  common  in  Northern  Europe,  namely, 
the  celt,  was  not  found  in  Greece,  Asia  Minor,  or  the  Caucasus. 
He  considered  that  the  original  inventors  of  bronze  were  to  be 
sought  for  in  Central  Asia,  in  the  Hindu  Koosh,§  and  the  Altai. 
Some  archaeologists  have  thought  that  the  origination  of  this  com- 
pound metal  is  to  be  looked  for  among  the  Semitic  peoples  of 
Western  Asia,  and  others  among  the  Turanian  aborigines  of  the 
lower  Euphrates.  Worsaae  considered  that  India  was  the  cradle- 
land  of  the  bronze  industry,  and  that  thence  it  spread  to  China  and 
Siberia,  and  so  over  the  Urals  to  the  N.E.  of  Europe.  Sophus 
Miiller  especially  remarked  the  resemblance  (implying  relationship) 
of  the  forms  of  the  old  North  and  Middle  European  bronzes  to 
the  Siberian  ones,  and  the  difference  between  them  and  those  of 
Greece,  and  from  this  concluded  that  the  bronze  culture  came 
from  Asia  to  Northern  and  Middle  Europe  northwards  from 
the  Black  Sea,  but  that  Greece  received  it  by  a  southern  route. 

All  these  authorities  were  acjreed  that  it  ori<^inated  in  Asia,  and 
most  of  them  that  it  came  into  being  among  a  Turanian  people.  || 

t  "  Tribes  of  the  Caucasus,"  transl.  Taylor,  p.  22.  When  Pliny  calls  the  Druids  Magi,  he  and 
the  Christians  who  followed  him,  may  not  have  been  far  wrong. 

X  "  Comment.  Dion.  Perieg."  730. 

§  Speaking  of  the  people  on  cither  side  these  mountains,  Uifalvy  says : — "  Ce  peuple  irano- 
hintlou  ctait  avant  sa  separation  une  race  melangee  ile  deux  types  bien  distincts  ;  un  type  chatain, 
petit  (ou  moyen)  et  brachycephaliquc,  et  un  type  brun,  grand,  et  dolichocephalique."  See  his 
"Travels  in  Northern  Persia." 

II  The  similarity  observable  between  no  less  than  four  types  of  copper  cells  from  Gungeria  (India) 
and  Irish  examples  is  very  noteworthy  (Proc.  Asiatic  Soc.  of  Bengal,  May,  1870,  pi.  ii.).  It  is  as 
striking  a  proof  of  community  of  origin  as  is  the  Aryan  language  itself. 


Syria. 


741 


Doubtless,  many  of  the  bronzes  reached  the  North  directly 
from  the  South,  and  several  archaeologists,  including  Lindensmidt, 
Hostmann,  and  Genthe,  lay  the  weight  of  their  opinion  into 
the  scale  of  an  Etruscan  origin.  Nevertheless,  it  cannot  be 
doubted  that  more  eastern  routes  were  in  existence,  and  the  way 
for  them  had  already  been  paved  in  the  Neolithic  Age,  for  we 
find  the  great  stone  cists,  which  Kohn  and  Mehlis  call  dolmens, 
as  far  south  as  Kociubinsce,  E.S.E.  of  Lemborg,  in  Galicia. 
The  contents  of  the  tomb  at  this  place  were  Neolithic,  but  amono- 
them  was  a  roundish  piece  of  amber. 

Most  remarkable  among  the  evidences  of  actual  connection  in 
commerce  between  the  Levant  and  the  Baltic  is  the  appearance  in 
the  stone  cists  on  the  left  bank  of  the  Vistula,  and  so  northward 
even  to  Cornwall, f  of  the  little  shell,  Cyprcsa  moneta,  called  the 
money-cowrie,  to  which  I  have  alluded,  the  home  of  which  is  the 
Red  Sea  and  the  Indian  Ocean.  In  the  stone  cists  in  Germany 
and  on  the  Vistula  these  little  shells  are  found  in  what  are  called 
"  face  urns,"  which,  although  they  have  not  so  high  an  antiquity  as 
the  "  Owl-eyed  Athene"  vases  from  Hissarlik,  reproduce  the  latter 
marvellously.  The  distribution  of  these  "  face  urns,"  on  which 
a  rude  face,  and  sometimes  the  breasts  of  a  woman,  are  formed 
in  clay,  extends  southward  from  Pomerania.  The  Vistula  limits 
their  range  on  the  east,  and  the  Rega  on  the  west,  but  they 
extend  S.  to  Gonsow  (S.  of  Posen),  and  to  several  sites  in 
Silesia  near  the  Oder.  They  are  found  in  Hungary,  where,  as 
in  some  examples  at  Hissarlik,  the  face  is  in  general  on  the 
cover. 

During  the  so-called  Hallstadt  period, J  namely,  the  period  of 
bronze  which  succeeded  the  Neolithic  epoch  in  West  Prussia,  the 
practice  of  cremation  was  introduced  among  the  inhabitants  of  the 
Vistula  district. 

Since  the  Syrian  dolmens  containing  incinerated  remains  are 
seen  to  belong  to  the  close  of  the  Neolithic  period  in  that  district, 
we  may  take  this  opportunity  of  saying  something  as  to  the  intro- 
duction of  the  practice  of  cremation  into  Western  Europe. 
'•  During  the  Neolithic  period,"  says  Dr.  Lissauer,  "the  burial  oi 
the  corpse  was  the  rule  among  the  inhabitants  of  the  district  of  the 
Vistula.    Through  contact  with  the  southern  people,  among  whom 


t  See  p.  523,  supra. 

X  See  *'  Das  Grabfeld  von  Hallstatt  in  Oberosterreich,"  by  Uaron  E,  von  Sackcn. 


742  The  Dolmens  of  Ireland. 


Incineration  was  earlier  in  vogue,  the  new  custom  spread  north- 
wards, and  the  dwellers  by  the  shores  of  the  Baltic  and  the  German 
Ocean  were  made  acquainted  with,  and  adopted  it.  In  what  is 
known  as  the  Hallstadt  epoch  (so  called  from  the  type  of  bronze 
objects  found  in  that  district),  the  new  practice  prevailed 
exclusively  in  West  Prussia,  a  fact  which  shows  more  than 
anything  else  the  influence  of  trade  connections  with  the  south 
upon  the  ideas  of  the  more  primitive  population  of  that  country, 
and  of  those  more  northern  peninsulas  and  islands,  Denmark, 
Scandinavia,  and  the  Britannic  Isles,  to  which  it  spread." 

Dr.  Lissauer,  and  before  him  Jacob  Grimm,  have  remarked 
upon  the  revolution  in  ideas  which  must  have  been  brought 
about  during  this  period  of  **the  bringing  of  the  bronze."  With 
the  passing  away  of  the  custom  of  inhumation,  "a  step  forward 
was  taken  in  spiritual  development."  The  pride  that  comes 
with  knowledge  spurns  decay.  Man  saw  in  himself  an  imperish- 
able something,  and,  elated  with  the  idea,  pictured  his  future  in 
the  gilded  throne-rooms  of  Paradise,  in  accordance  with  eastern 
taste  in  lands  where  the  notion  was  born,  or  by  the  drinking 
board  of  Valhalla  in  those  northern  lands  to  which  it  spread. 
Fire  consumed  the  earthly  shell,  in  order  to  set  free  the  soul 
purified  by  the  divine  heat,  to  ascend  with  the  smoke  of  the  pile 
to  its  home  among  eternal  gods  beyond  the  clouds.  It  is  with 
this  new  epoch  of  culture  that  the  idea  of  immortality,  accord- 
ing to  those  writers,  commenced.  Some  trace  of  a  tradition  that 
burning  and  a  new  religion  came  hand-in-hand  to  the  Baltic 
shores  has  been  thought  by  some  to  underlie  the  statement  in 
the  Helmskringla,  that  the  "Age  of  Incineration  first  began 
with  the  law-giving  of  Odin." 

The  source  to  which  we  must  look  for  this  complete  trans- 
formation was  the  South.  The  aboriginal  inhabitants  of  the  North 
and  West  were  dolichocephalic  savages.  Those  who  were  the 
heralds  of  culture  were  brachycephalic  immigrants,  among  whom 
two  divisions  may  be  noticed,  those  who  burled  their  dead  con- 
tracted in  cists,  with  a  vase  for  food  or  drink,  and  those  who  burned 
the  body  and  placed  the  ashes  in  a  vault  on  the  floor-slab,  upon 
which  the  corpse  may  sometimes  have  been  consumed,  or  in  an 
urn.  The  former  of  these  divisions  of  immigrants  were,  when 
they  appeared,  still  in  their  Neolithic  Age ;  the  latter  were  the 
introducers  of  metal,  and  with  or  in  the  urn  containing  their  ashes 


Syria.  743 

have  not  infrequently  been  found  those  riveted  dagger-blades 
which  were  actual  importations  from  the  South' before  the  natives 
of  the  North  commenced  to  cast  imitations  of  them  for  them- 
selves. It  follows  that  the  introduction  of  Southern  culture 
and  the  metals  was  no  mere  question  of  trade  and  commerce 
passing  to  and  fro  between  two  allophylian  races.  It  involved 
the  passing  of  the  people  themselves, — a  vast  and  long-continued 
movement  of  race  from  south-east  to  north-west,  as  over  a 
wide  heraldic  bend,  across  the  face  of  the  several  countries  of 
Western  Europe.  It  is  curious  to  observe  how  constant  this 
direction  is ; — from  the  Black  Sea  to  the  Baltic ; — from  the 
western  passes  of  the  Alps  to  Brittany  ; — from  Malaga  to  Galicia, 
will  be  found  the  traces  of  the  earliest  brachycephali,  and  the 
subsequent  bringers  of  the  bronze,  mingled  with  those  of  the 
dolmen-building  aborigines  (just  emerging  from  their  cavern- 
epoch),  whose  more  megalithic  structures  the  new-comers  often 
utilized,!  or  sometimes  joined  them  in  erecting,  or  even  erected 
for  themselves.J 

Although  fire  has  destroyed  so  many  hundred  thousand  traces 
of  these  people,  as  far  as  anthropological  evidence  goes,  there  is 
much  to  show  that  to  them,  and  to  the  sacrificial  practices  they 
introduced,  belong  the  stone-circles,  which,  dating  back  to  the 
Neolithic  period,  were  still  in  use  in  Scandinavia  for  the  slaughter 
of  captives,  in  times  which  are  not  beyond  reach  of  reliable 
historic  tradition.  To  them,  too,  belong  the  menhirs  and  the 
cisted  cairns. 

As  to  their  relation  to  the  dolmens,  the  evidence  goes  to  show, 
as  I  have  said  before,  that  the  earliest  forms  of  the  latter,  the 
structures  in  the  Long  Barrows  of  Britain,  for  example,  were 
the  work  of  the  pure  dolichocephalic  aborigines  of  Atlantic, 
Iberian,  or  Mediterranean  stock,  call  it  which  we  will ;  and  this 
fact  leads  up  to  a  further  point,  namely,  that  independently  of  the 
influence  of  the  brachycephalic  peoples,  the  native  stock  who 
buried  their  dead  unburnt  (the  bodies  being  either  entire  or  cut  in 
pieces)  were  not  devoid  of  superstition  in  the  form  of  a  cultus 
of  the  dead,  since  on  no  other  ground  can  the  structural 
phenomena  presented  by  the  earliest  dolmens  be  explained. 
The  transformation,  therefore,    which    would   have   taken  place 

t  As  in  cases  where  food-vessels  and  contracted  burials  have  been  found  in  dolmens, 
i  As  in  some  southern  provinces  of  France,  where  only  brachycephalic  skulls  are  found. 


744  The  Dolmens  of  Ireland. 

when  incineration  was  introduced  on  the  later  wave  of  immigra- 
tion from  the  south,  would  not  have  been  from  a  condition 
of  no  religion  to  one  of  religious  belief,  but  from  a  cult  which 
was  probably  filthy  and  material  in  the  fetich  sense  (instance 
the  worship  of  clay  from  graveyards),  to  one  which  was  purist 
and  spiritual  (instance  the  appearance  of  the  spirit  of  a  divine 
hero,  once  believed  to  have  been  a  living  man,  to  help  his 
descendants  when  pressed  in  battle). 

It  will  not  be  amiss  here  to  trace  the  tradition  and  practice  of 
incineration  in  Northern  Europe  in  the  later  ages.  According  to 
the  Norse  sagas,  it  was  Odin,  the  leader  of  the  Asa-Men  into 
Scandinavia,  who,  re-enacting  in  the  latter  country  the  laws  of  that 
from  which  he  had  come,  that  is  to  say  of  Asgard  on  the  Palus 
Moetis,  commanded  that  the  dead  should  be  burned.  Their 
property  should  be  placed  on  the  pyre  and  burned  with  them,  in 
which  case  it  would  be  theirs  in  Valhalla — that  heaven  of  feasting 
and  fighting,  of  fair  women  and  debauch,  the  notion  of  which  was 
evidently  likewise  of  Southern  and  Eastern  origin — a  curious  con- 
ception, indeed,  in  which  were  commingled  the  luxurious  repose  of 
the  land  of  the  Houris  and  the  love  of  war  and  restless  longing  for 
chancre  without  which  no  life  would  have  been  worth  livinof  in  the 
eyes  of  the  ubiquitous  clansmen  who  were  scouring  the  Scythian 
plains. 

The  ashes  of  the  dead  were  to  be  thrown  into  the  sea  or 
buried  in  the  earth.  Over  great  men  mounds  were  to  be  raised, 
and  over  "  manful  men  "  batita-stones,  that  is,  in  Irish  dalldns. 
"The  First  Age,"  we  read  in  the  Heimskringla,  "was  that  of 
Burnine.     Men  were  burned  and  baitia-stones  raised." 

The  bodies  of  Sigurd,  called  "the  Hunnish  one,"  and  Brynhild 
were  burned,  and  their  mound  was  reddened  with  the  blood  of 
those  who  perished  with  them  on  the  pyre.  The  body  of  Baldr  was 
carried  out,  for  the  burning  voyage,  on  a  ship.  His  wife  Nanna, 
daughter  of  Nep,  died  of  grief.  She  was  laid  on  the  pyre,  and  it 
was  set  on  fire.  Thor  pushed  a  Dverg  named  Lit  into  the  fire, 
and  he  was  burned.  A  body  was  sometimes  buried  first  and 
burned  afterwards. f 

To  the  Age  of  Burning  succeeded  that  of  raising  cairns,  but 

t  Du  Chnillu,  "  Vikinp  Age,"  pp.  320,  325,  332.  "Special  places  were  built  for  burning  the 
dead."  On  the  island  of  Fyen,  not  far  from  liroholm,  was  one.  Near  it  were  numerous  sites  of 
graves.  The  pavement  was  made  of  cobble-stones,  the  size  of  a  man's  foot,  etc.,  id.  p.  322.  See 
also  "The  Heimskringla,"  by  Sam.  Laing,  edit.  R.  B.  Anderson,  p.  264. 


Syria. 


745 


the  burning  of  the  body  continued  long  after  among  the  Swedes 
and  Northmen. 

In  the  Anglo-Saxon  poem  of  Beowulf  the  body  of  the  chief 
is  burned  on  a  funeral  pyre,  into  which  precious  things  are  thrown, 
and  a  mound  is  raised  "high  on  Hrones-naesse"  that  his  kindred 
rovers  may  behold  it, 

"  When  the  Brentings, 
Over  the  dark  sea-flood, 
Come  floating  from  far."  f 

Among  the  Herulians  the  custom  of  burning  the  dead  existed 
in  the  days  of  Procopius,  who  described  the  ceremony,  which  was 
accompanied  by  the  Indian  practice  of  i-?///^^,  the  wife  being  bound 
in  honour,  under  the  penalty  of  being  held  in  contempt  ever  after 
if  she  declined,  to  strangle  herself  on  the  funeral  pile.| 

Othere  §  describes  the  custom  of  burning  the  dead  among  the 
Esthonians.  When  a  person  died,  the  body  lay  unburnt  with  his 
relations  and  friends  for  a  month,  sometimes  two,  and  that  of  a 
king  or  other  great  man  even  a  longer  time,  sometimes  as  long  as 
half  a  year,  according  to  the  extent  of  his  wealth,  the  corpse  all 
the  time  lying  above  ground  in  the  house.  During  all  this  time 
drinking  and  sports  were  carried  on,  until  the  day  of  the  burning 
arrived.  In  this  carouse  a  large  portion  of  the  property  of  the 
deceased  was  expended,  and  for  the  remainder,  which  was  placed 
in  piles  at  stated  distances  asunder,  races  were  run  on  horseback. 
So  particular  were  they  that  the  body  should  be  wholly  consumed 
by  fire,  that  if  any  one  found  a  whole  bone  remaining  the  relatives 
were  mulcted  in  a  heavy  fine. 

In  the  Capitularies  of  Charlemagne ||  "de  partibus  Saxonise," 
in  the  year  790,  are  two  ordinances  levelled  respectively  against 
burning  the  bodies  of  the  dead  according  to  the  pagan  rite,  and  so 
reducing  the  bones  to  ashes,  and  against  sacrificing  a  human  being 
to  the  devil,  and  making  offerings  to  demons  upon  the  victim. 

Writing  of  the  Prussians,  the  Archdeacon  Jacobus  Leodiensis^ 
tells  us  that  they  (the  Prussi)  promised  him,  for  themselves  and 
their  heirs,  that  in  future  they  would  bury  their  dead  in  cemeteries 
after   the   manner   of    Christians,    and    would    neither   burn   the 

t  Beowulf,  11.  5610-5612.  :  "  De  Bell.  Goth.,"  lib.  ii.  c.  14. 

§  King  Alfred's  "  Orosius  ;  "  edit.  Bohn,  p.  255. 
11  Karoli   Magni    "Capital."  See  Soc.  Archeol,   du  Depart,  d'llle  et  Vilaine,  Rennes,    1862, 
p.  71,  paper  by  M.  A.  Andre. 

^  "  Neues  Lautsitzishes  Mag.,"  Gorlitz,  vol.  v.  p.  202. 

VOL.    III.  D 


746  The  Dolmens  of  Ireland. 

bodies  nor  bury  them  underground  together  with  their  horses, 
arms,  clothes,  and  other  vahiables,  as  had  been  their  custom,  nor 
in  any  other  particular  continue  to  practise  pagan  rites. 

Many  other  passages  might  be  quoted  to  the  same  effect.  It 
is  sufficient  that  we  have  seen  that  at  one  time  incineration  was 
practised  by  every  nation  bordering  on  the  Baltic  Lake. 

I  am  not  aware  that  any  reference  to  incineration  exists  in  the 
ancient  literature  of  Ireland.  Several  passages  which  at  one  time 
were  supposed  to  have  reference  to  it  have  been  shown  to  bear  a 
totally  different  meaning,  f 

In  an  Irish  collection  of  Canons  there  is,  however,  a  notice 
both  of  incineration  and  of  cairn-burial  as  practised  previous  to 
the  introduction  of  Christian  customs  into  that  island.  After 
stating  that  kings  only  in  early  times  used  to  be  buried  in 
basilicas,  it  adds  the  reason  : — "  For  the  bodies  of  the  rest  of  the 
community  were  either  consumed  by  fire  or  buried  in  a  heap  of 
stones."  \ 

Unfortunately,  the  practice  of  incineration  leaves  us  absolutely 
in  the  dark  with  respect  to  what  manner  of  men  they  were  who 
raised  the  dolmens  of  Syria  and  those  of  the  adjoining  districts. 
Geographically,  as  well  as  in  some  of  their  structural  details,  they 
occupy  a  position  intermediate  between  the  Caucasian  and  the 
Indian  groups,  although  it  is  perhaps  the  safer  course  to  connect 
them  rather  with  the  North-African  examples. 

With  respect,  on  the  one  hand,  to  the  view  entertained  by  the 
eminent  ethnologist,  Professor  Virchow,  that  the  first  inventors  of 
bronze  were  to  be  sought  in  the  Hindu  Koosh  and  in  the  Altai — 
the  hifjh  lands  of  Central  Asia — and  on  the  other  to  that  of 
archaeologists  in  Western  Europe  who  have  found  evidences  of  a 
brachycephalic  people  in  connection  with  stone-circles,  menhirs, 
and  cairns,  it  is  interesting  to  notice  the  description  of  a  group  of 
megalithic  remains,  and  the  legends  and  customs  attached  to 
them  given  us  by  M.  Ferdinand  De  Lanoye,  in  i865.§  It  is 
situated  in  the  gorge  of  Kora,  in  the  country  of  the  Kirghis, 
nine  hundred  miles    due   E.  of  the  Sea  of  Aral,   and  about  two 

+  Suilivan's  Introd.  to  O'Curry's  M.  and  C,  cccxxii.,  n. 

\  "Die  Irishe  Kanonensammlung,"  2  Auflage,  Leipzig,  18S5,  edit.  Wasserchleben,  lib.  xliv. 
cap.  20,  p.  206.  The  passage  is  as  follows  : — *'  Smodtts  llibernensis :  Basilion  Grtuce,  rex  Latine, 
hinc  et  basilia  regalis,  quia  in  primis  temporibus  reges  tantum  sepeliebantur  in  ea,  nomen  sortita 
est ;  nam  ceteri  homines  sive  igne,  sive  acervo  lapidum  conditi  sunt." 

§  "La  Siberie,"  Paris,  pp.  376-382. 


Syria. 


747 


hundred  miles  W.N.W.  of  Kuldja.  The  monuments  stand  by 
the  side  of  a  stream  which  runs  through  a  narrow  gully  shut 
in  by  towering  cliffs.  Five  enormous  monoliths,  the  highest 
of  which  the  author  compares  to 
a  church-steeple,  stand  erect,  while 
other  prostrate  ones  lie  near  by. 
"  The  tallest  still  standing "  mea- 
sured, according  to  M.  Lauoye,  60 
feet  in  height,  24  feet  in  breadth 
at  the  base,  and  19  feet  thick,  in- 
clining 8  feet  out  of  its  perpendicular 
in  the  direction  of  the  river.  The 
other  four  blocks  vary  from  45  to 
50  feet  high.  One  of  them  is  5  feet 
broad,  the  others  less.  Two  are 
exactly  perpendicular,  and  the  re- 
maining two  are  leaning,  one  of 
them  to  such  an  extent  as  to  make 
it  appear  as  if  it  had  nearly  lost  its 
balance.  West  of  these,  at  a 
distance  of  200  m.,  are  three  other 
blocks  of  stone,  under  one  of 
which  is  a  cavity  used  as  a  cabin. 
Not  far  from  these  is  a  cairn  composed  of  quartz  and  other 
stone.  It  is  circular  and  dome-shaped,  measuring  42  feet  in 
diameter,  and  28  feet  in  height.  Around  its  base,  at  a  distance 
of  6  feet  from  it,  blocks  of  quartz  are  placed  in  a  circle. 

Among  the  native  Kirghis  this  tomb  is  regarded  with  venera- 
tion, and  approached  tremblingly.  Each  one  who  comes  to  it 
ties  up  tJiej'e,  according  to  cttstom,  a  shred  of  cloth,  as  an  offering  to 
"  the  Spirit  of  the  Dead." 

There  is  a  legend  with  regard  to  this  glen,  that  once  upon  a 
time  it  was  the  abode  of  powerful  Genii,  who  were  continually  at 
war  with  others  of  kindred  race,  who  had  selected  for  their 
dwelling-place  regions  adjacent.  To  its  occupants,  after  their  raids 
and  pillagings,  the  glen  offered  a  safe  retreat,  and  their  sentinels 
were  stationed  on  the  tops  of  the  cliffs  which  shut  the  valley  in. 
At  length  the  audacity  of  the  robber  genii  of  the  glen  became 
insufferable.  Innumerable  other  Genii  from  the  country  round 
attacked  them.       The    Devil    himself  came    to    the   aid    of  the 


Fig.  692. — Menhirs  in  the  Kora  Valley 
(Siberia).    After  M.  F.  De  Lanoye. 


748  The  Dolmens  of  Ireland. 


assailants,  and  after  a  terrific  conflict,  in  which  the  elements  bore 
their  part,  the  Genii  of  the  glen  were  worsted. 

On  a  subsequent  occasion,  a  bold  chieftain  ventured  into  the 
valley,  upon  which  a  gigantic  man  of  the  Genii  appeared,  and 
severing  the  rocks  with  his  flaming  sword,  slew  the  intruder  and 
all  his  followers,  except  a  very  few  who  survived  to  carry  the  tale 
of  sorrow  to  the  women  of  the  tribe.  These,  on  hearing  the  news, 
set  up  a  great  lamentation,  until  at  length  a  spirit,  called  the 
"White  Lady,"  took  pity  on  them,  and,  through  her  instru- 
mentality, the  remnant  of  the  tribe  were  permitted  at  last  to  go 
into  the  fatal  valley,  and  raise  a  tomb  over  their  chieftain,  since 
which  no  Kirghis  shepherd  has  brought  his  flocks  to  pasture  there. 

The  Evil  Spirit  himself  had  his  dwelling  not  far  off  in  a  valley 
high  up  in  the  portion  of  the  mountains  of  Alatan,  in  the  Bolor 
range,  called  Bascan,  where  a  natural  cave  is  still  pointed  out  as 
his  abode. 

Here,  in  the  very  heart  of  Asia,  in  the  centre  of  a  district 
where  brachycephali  still,  as  from  time  immemorial,  hold  their 
own,  we  have  a  version  of  the  story  of  the  Titans,  side  by  side 
with  that  of  a  White  Lady  corresponding  to  the  one  who  presides 
over  the  tombs  of  the  heroes  of  the  West ;  side  by  side,  too,  with 
the  practice  of  hanging  up  rags  at  a  venerated  sepulchral  site ; 
and  with  an  assemblage  of  venerated  rocks,  possibly  menhirs,  near 
by,  and  a  ring-encircled  cairn.f 

In  Pallas's  "Travels  in  Siberia," J  he  describes  some  tombs 
which  he  had  met  with  near  the  Usuk,  as  well  as  on  the  moun- 
tainous steppes  of  the  Yius  and  the  Jenisei,  and  in  the  Altai  range. 
They  resemble,  he  says,  almost  exactly,  the  Giants'  and  Heroes' 
Beds  of  some  parts  of  Germany,  those  especially  in  Brandenburg. 
They  are  elongated  in  shape,  and  consist  of  slender  stones  set 
up  around  an  area  which  is  sometimes  flat  and  sometimes  occupied 
by  a  mound.  They  are  almost  always  situated  on  the  bank  of  a 
stream,  a  lake,  or  a  river,  the  most  beautiful  sites  being  selected 
for  them,  sometimes  on  an  elevation,  sometimes  at  the  foot  of  a 
mountain,  in  a  smooth  and  pleasant  valley. 

t  All  this  may  be  mere  coincidence,  as  also  maybe  the  circumstance  that,  according  to  Ptolemy, 
this  very  region  was  the  abode  of  the  tribe  called  Tectosaccs,  a  mere  coincidence  also  with  the 
name  of  the  European  people  Tcctosages  near  Toulouse,  and  on  the  borders  of  the  Hercynian 
forest.  See  Ptol.  "Geog.  VL,"  14,  9.  The  Tectosaces  dwelt  on  this  side  Mount  Imaus,  i.e.  the 
Bolor  range,  the  chain  which  divided  Northern  Asia,  according  to  the  ancient  writers,  into  Scythia 
intra  Imaum,  and  Scythia  extra  Jmaum. 

t  "  Voyages  en  Siberie,  Extraits  des  Journeaux  de  divers  savans  voyageurs ;"  vol.  i.  pp.  176-7 
("  Voyage  de  Tomsk  a  Krasnojarsk  "). 


Syria.  749 

The  Tartars  do  not  account  those  who  erected  them  as  their 
own  ancestors.  There  is  an  old  tradition  preserved  among  the 
natives  that  this  country  was  once  the  abode  of  two  brothers, 
representing  alHed  races,  Pallas  thinks,  one  of  whom,  with  the 
assistance  of  his  people,  had  extracted  much  gold  and  silver  from 
the  heart  of  the  mountains,  while  the  other  was  rich  in  servants 
and  cattle.  The  latter  had  so  frequently  plundered  the  former 
of  the  treasure  he  had  acquired,  and  caused  him  such  continual 
vexation,  that  he  had  recourse  to  the  Emperor  of  China,  who 
gave  him  and  his  people  a  country  further  east.  In  the  tombs 
which  are  assigned  to  this  people  are  found  arms  and  imple- 
ments of  copper,  and  in  the  better  ones,  ornaments  of  gold  and 
silver.  The  peasants  brought  to  Pallas  copper  lance-heads,  lumps 
of  silver  of  light  weight,  daggers  often  of  fine  workmanship, 
knife-blades,  little  whetstones,  arrow-heads  of  bone  and  copper  of 
shapes  still  in  use  in  Siberia,  all  sorts  of  figures  cast  in  bas-relief 
of  reindeer,  stags,  etc.,  quantities  of  trifling  objects  (babioles),  and 
quantities  of  thin  copper  bands.  It  was  also  said  that  the  remains 
of  the  wooden  stretchers  on  which  the  corpses  had  been  laid  had 
been  found  in  some  tombs.  Among  other  articles  found  were 
little  white  stones  cut  in  the  form  of  the  shells  called  Monnaye  de 
Guinde  {cyprcea  nodosa),  and  which  served  for  attachment  to 
something,  perhaps  to  the  bridles  of  horses,  a  purpose  to  which 
the  Hungarian  Hussards  still  put  these  very  shells.  We  may 
compare  with  interest  these  facts  with  the  discovery  of  the  money- 
cowries  in  prehistoric  tombs  in  Germany  and  Cornwall,  to  which 
allusion  has  been  made. 

In  another  place  Pallas  speaks  f  of  an  immense  group  of 
similar  tombs  near  the  Abakansk.  It  seems  that  gold  had  been 
found  in  these.J 

Before  passing  from  Siberia,  I  may  mention  the  existence  of 
a  lake  legend  which  has  its  exact  parallel  in  those  of  Western 
Europe,  as  at  Lough  Neagh,  namely,  that  a  city  lies  submerged 
beneath  the  water,  and  that  the  sound  of  bells  is  heard.  The 
passage  which  contains  the  account  is  in  Gerard  Mercator,§  to 
whom  John  Balak,  who  had  taken  up  his  residence  at  Duisburgh, 

t  op.  cit.,  p.  197. 
%  For 

1733-43" 
by  Mueller 
pp.  195-208. 

§  See  Ulster,  "  Journ.  of  Archseol.,"  vol.  iii.  p.  348. 


750 


The  Dolmens  of  Ireland. 


on  the  Osella,  wrote  a  particular  account  of  that  river.  He 
mentions  another  river,  said  to  be  a  tributary  of  the  Obi,  but 
which,  from  other  circumstances,  seems  to  have  been  a  tributary 
of  the  Yenisei,  down  which  came  "  great  vessels  laden  with 
rich  and  precious  merchandize  brought  by  a  black  and  swart 
people."  In  ascending  this  river,  men  came  to  the  great  lake  of 
Kittay,  supposed  to  be  Baikal,  on  whose  banks  were  the  Kara 
Kalmucks,  who,  he  asserts,  were  the  very  people  of  Cathay.  It 
is  added  that,  "  on  the  shores  of  this  lake  had  been  heard  sweet 
hannony  of  bells,  and  that  stately  and  large  bicildmgs  had  been  seen 
therein^ 


India. 

We  now  turn  to  the  dolmens  of  India.  In  the  Transactions 
of  the  Roy.  Irish  Academy  f  will  be  found  a  paper  by  Col. 
Meadows-Taylor  on  those  of  the  Dekkan.  They  are  called  by 
the  people  Mori-Mttnni,  that  is,  "  Mories'  Houses,"  a  people  about 


J  at®  ji.'" 


Fig.  693. — Dolmen-group  in  the  Dekkan.     From  Coi.  Meadows-Taylor. 

whom  tradition   relates   that   they  were  a   dwarf  race   of  o-reat 
strenorth  who  lived  here  in  remote  aees. 

The  monuments  occur  in  considerable  groups,  accompanied 
by  cairns  and  barrows.  Of  two  groups  described,  the  larger 
contained  a  hundred  cairns  and  dolmens  coverine  about  five 
acres. 


t  Vol.  xxiv.  pp.  329-367. 


India. 


751 


Some  were  open  ;  some  closed.  In  the  latter,  when  explored, 
it  was  usual  to  find  a  little  black  mould  on  the  surface  a  few 
inches  thick,  and  underneath  this  a  layer  of  greyish-white  earth 
having  an  antiseptic  quality,  brought  from  another  locality. 
Intermingled  with  this  earth,  human  ashes  and  portions  of  bone 
and  charcoal  were  found,  and  also  pieces  of  broken  pottery,  red 
and  black — never  an  entire  urn,  or  any  other  objects. 

Many  of  the  closed  dolmens  had  round  holes  in  the  centre 


n 


6  .6 


Lj 


u 


Fig.  694. — Examples  of  the  ground-plans  of  dolmens.     From  Col.  Meadcaus-Taylor. 
Two  are  closed,  the  third  open. 

of  the  slab  on  the  S.  side,  never  measuring  more  than  9  or  less 
than  4  inches  in  diameter. 

Col.  Meadows-Taylor  divides  the  structures  into  two  classes, 
which  he  calls  kistvacns  and  cromlechs  ;  the  former  are  small  and 
closed,  the  latter  large  and  three-sided,  being  open  at  one  end. 
The  small  ones  or  cists  are  only  2  feet  long  in  the  interior  by 
10  inches  wide,  so  that  they  correspond  to  the  closed  cists  of 
Europe.  The  larger  ones  have  interiors  measuring  from  8  to  10 
feet  long,  and  from  6  to  8  feet  broad,  so  that  they  correspond  to 
the  dolmens  of  the  West. 

Between  the  dolmens  of  Europe  and  those  of  Asia  may  be 
said  to  stand  the  Caucasian  series,  some  examples  of  which,  in  the 
details  of  their  construction,  bear  a  very  close  resemblance  to 
Dekkan  examples  on  the  one  hand  and  North-Western  European 
ones  on  the  other.  To  illustrate  my  meaning,  we  may  compare  the 
fine  dolmen  in  the  gorge  of  Djouba  in  the  Caucasus f  (Fig.  675) 


t  "  Mat.  pour  I'Histoire  de  THomme,"  1884,  p.  547. 


752 


The  Dolmens  of  Ireland. 


with  (i)  Col.  Meadows-Taylor's  illustration  of  that  at  Rajun- 
koloorf  (Fig.  695),  (2)  with  the  French  example,  near  Tours 
(Fig.  563),  mentioned  previously,  and  (3)  with  Irish  examples 
from  the  County  of  Clare,  as,  for  instance,  that  at  Ballyganner. 
(Fig.  67). 

The  Dekkan  example  has  a  slab  on  either  side  measuring  15 
feet  3  ins.  long,  9  feet  broad  {i.e.  high),  and  i  foot  9  ins.  to  i  foot 
thick.  Its  covering  slab  is  15  feet  9  ins.  long,  10  feet  9  ins.  broad, 
and  2  feet  9  ins.  to  i  foot  thick.  The  vault  thus  enclosed 
measures  8  feet  long  by  6  feet  6  ins.  wide,  and  it  is  open  at  the  S. 


Fig.  695. — Dolmens  at  Rajunkolor.     From  Col.  Meadoivs-Taylor. 

end,  there  being  no  slab  at  all  there  ;  whereas  in  the  Caucasian  and 
West  European  structures  there  is  a  slab  with  an  entrance  space 
left  open  between  one  of  its  edges  and  the  slab  forming  the  side. 
The  feature  of  a  hole  in  one  of  the  side-slabs,  rare  in  European 
dolmens,  is  found  in  very  numerous  examples  in  the  Caucasus, 
Syria,  and  India. 

It  seems  to  me  to  be  probable  that  where  the  end  was  open 
the  intention  was  to  allow  the  entrance  of  the  entire  body  of  the 
devotee   who    came  to    worship   and    to    make    offerings  to   the 

t  Trans.  R.LA.,  vol.  xxiv. ;  pp.  329,  et  seqq. 


India.  753 

dead,  while  the  purpose  of  the  hole  was  for  the  hand  alone  to 
pass  through  and  deposit  within  the  tomb  the  votive  gifts. 

A  dolmen    at  Coorg   (Fig.   696),  which   is   a  double  one,   is 
provided    with    two    cavities    side    by    side,    one    for    each   cell, 
hollowed  out  of  the   tops  of  the    terminal    stones.      It   bears    a 
singularly   close   resemblance    to    the 
cavities  at  the  entrance  of  the  struc- 
ture in  the  tumulus  at  Plas  Newydd 
in  Anglesey."!" 

Another  Dekkan  group  is  that  at 
Huggeritgi.  The  dolmens  here  are 
constructed  of  limestone  slabs  restins:     Fig.  696.— Double  dolmen  of  Coorg 

•^    India.     From  a  draivt7ig  by  Ljeiit.  Frccth. 

upon  solid  granite  rock  as  a  founda- 
tion.    The  limestone  in  this  district  lies  naturally  in  lainincc  so 
that  no  surface  dressing  is  required,  and  it  is  easily  quarried. 

The  largest  example  is  a  closed  dolmen,  the  side-slabs 
measuring  15  feet  6  ins.  long,  and  the  end  ones  6  feet  each.  The 
covering-stone  is  11  feet  3  ins.  long,  by  7  feet  4  ins.  broad,  so 
that  it  slightly  overlaps  the  side-stones.  In  the  front  slab  is 
a  round  hole,  5J  inches  in  diameter. 

In  one  of  these  vaults  seven  large  urns  were  found,  one 
of  them  3  feet  9  ins.  high,  and  2  feet  3  ins.  in  diameter,  but 
none  perfect.  They  contained  ashes,  charcoal,  and  fragments  of 
bones.  One  of  the  five  ground-plans  of  these  dolmens  shows 
that  there  were  two  upright  slabs  forming  the  sides  of  an  entrance 
or  antechamber  to  the  side  in  which  was  the  hole.  This  feature 
occurs,  as  we  have  seen,  in  Swedish  examples.  \ 

Another  group  comprised  sixty-five  dolmens.  Four  of  the 
larger  of  these  were  surrounded  by  double  concentric  stone-circles. 
The  largest  dolmen  measured  9  feet  long  by  6  feet  5  ins.  broad. 
The  covering-stone  was  7  feet  broad  by  9  feet  long,  and  from 
I  to  2  feet  thick. 

In  one  of  the  cairns  were  two  regular  and  complete  cists. 
The  eastern  cist  contained  one  perfect  skeleton  ;  the  western  one 
two  skeletons,  of  which,  however,  the  skull  of  only  one  was  in  the 
cist.  In  the  case  of  the  perfect  skeleton  the  head  was  turned 
the  wrong  way  to  the  body,  showing  that  it  had  been  beheaded. 
Both  these  skeletons  were  those  of  females.     Amongst  the  earth 


t  Proc.  Asiat.  See.  of  Bengal,  iS68,  p.  152,  pi.  2. 
X  Figs.  463  and  466,  stipra. 


754 


The  Dolmens  of  Ireland. 


above  the  cist  the  remains  of  several  other  bodies  were  found. 
They  had  been  pitched  down  anyhow,  and  no  skull  lay  near  a 
skeleton.  Col.  Meadows-Taylor  naturally  concludes  that  human 
sacrifices  took  place  here,  and  refers  to  the  account  in  Herodotus 
of  the  funeral  of  a  Scythian,  f 

At  the  N.  end  of  one  of  the  cists  an  iron  lamp  was  discovered, 
and  bones  of  an  iguana.     Skulls  of  dogs  were  also  found. 

In  the  ninth  volume  of  the  "  Archaeological  Survey  of  India,"  J 


« 


i5'.  6 


c7| 


hh 


c 


a 


a 


-u 


Section  across  A  B. 


Fio.  697. — Ground-plan,  section  and  details  of  a  dolmen  in  the  Dekkan.  a  a  a,  floor  slabs  ;  d  i>, 
side  wall  slabs;  c,  round  hole  in  centre  slab;  d cf,  upright  slabs  for  entrance:  Contents, 
broken  pottery,  calcined  bones,  ashes  (human),  and  charcoal  mixed  with  grey  earth. 

an  account  will  be  found  of  dolmens  in  Keljhar.  A  tradition 
exists  that  these  were  raised  by  the  Kurumbar  shepherds.  A 
large  one  at  Muhl  was  undoubtedly  a  place  of  worship,  as  a 
goat  had  been  sacrificed  in  front  of  it  only  half  an  hour  before  the 
author  of  the  account  arrived  on  the  spot.  This  temple,  as  he 
calls  it,  was  6  feet  long,  4  feet  broad,  and  4  feet  high.  It  was 
closed  on  three  sides,  but  open  towards  the  east.  At  the  back 
tliere  was  a  raised  terrace  of  earth  on  which  were  set  up  a  number 
of  stones  smeared  with  vermilion,  each  said  to  be  a  Kurmar  Devi 
—the  Gondi  name  for  the  deity  of  the  Kurumbar  shepherds. 

These  "  temples  "  are  called  Malldna  by  the  shepherds  them- 
selves, and  they  are  generally  built  in  pairs,  one  dedicated  to 
Mallana  Deva,  and  the  other  to  Mallana  Devi.  There  was 
a  second  small  "cromlech"  at  Muhl  close  beside  the  larger  one. 
The  Kurumbars  sacrifice  a  goat  to  the  Mallanas  to  save  their 
flocks  from  tigers  and  murrain.  The  shrines  are  generally  open 
to  the  east,  but  sometimes  completely  closed  for  the  purpose  of 
keeping  the  sacred  stones  which  represent  the  Mallana  deities 
quite  safe.     Wooden  figures  are  offered  by  sick  people  to  avert 


t  "  Hist.,"  lib,  iv.  c.  71.     See  note  by  Rawlinson,  "  Herod."  vol.  iii.  pp.  58-62,  and  a  section 
of  a  Scythian  tomb,  with  the  construction  of  the  roof  of  which  compare  New  Grange. 
X  Cunningham,  1879,  P'-  ^^v.  p.  140. 


India. 


755 


death.  Men  killed  by  tigers  and  snakes  are  buried  under 
similar  dolmens  raised  on  low  mounds  on  which  relatives  place 
rude  representations  of  horses. 

Fifteen  villaores  have  two  dolmens  each.     It  is  added   that 


Fig.  698. — Dolmen  in  the  Province  of  I\Iadras.     From  Mr.  0^ Hara' s paper  in  Proc.  R.I.A. 

Colonel    Meadows-Taylor   considered   them   as  temples  and  not 
tombs,  and  that  he  found  no  human  remains  in  them. 

A  dolmen  of  a  different  form  to  those  we  have  been  con- 
sidering has  been  figured  and  described  by  Mr.  O'Hara  in  the 
Proceedings  of  the  Royal  Irish  Academy.f  It  is  in  the  province 
of  Madras  (Fig.  698).  In  outline  it  bears  a  great  resemblance 
to  that  at  Knockatotaun  in  Sligo.  \ 


t  Vol.  ix.,  1864-1866,  p.  190. 


X  Fig.  169,  supra. 


756  The  Dolmens  of  Ireland. 


PART    HI. 

NAMES.  LEGENDS,  AND  SUPERSTITIONS  ASSOCI- 
ATED WITH  DOLMENS  AND  OTHER  MEGA- 
LITHIC  REMAINS  AND  VENERATED  SITES  IN 
IRELAND. 

The  names  borne  by  dolmens  in  Ireland  may  be  divided  into  two 
classes  :  (a)  those  which  are  simply  descriptive  ;  (d)  those  which 
are  derived  from  some  current  opinion  as  to  their  origin  and 
purpose,  which  may  be  referable,  either  (i)  to  imagination  pure 
and  simple,  or  (2)  to  false  etymological  conceits,  or  (3)  to  anti- 
quarian speculations  dating  from  the  last  century,  or  (4)  to 
endeavours  to  connect  them  with  events  set  down  in  the  medieval 
MSS.,  or  (5)  to  genuinely  ancient  oral  tradition. 

With  regard  to  the  latter  category,  to  imagine  for  a  moment 
that  any,  even  the  faintest,  echo  of  a  tradition  as  to  the />erso7is  by 
whom  the  earlier  examples  were  erected,  could  have  survived  from 
the  Neolithic  or  the  Bronze  Age,  when  they  were  built,  until  the 
present  day,  may  be  dismissed  as  an  absurdity.  On  the  other 
hand,  a  ctiltiis  dies  a  very  lingering  death,  and  Folk-lore,  the  sybil 
who  keeps  its  record,  was  already  an  old  woman  when,  race  com- 
mingling with  race,  and  language  supplanting  language,  and  a  new 
religion  assimilating  the  earlier  forms,  History  was  moulded  from  the 
rude  materials  of  the  prehistoric  past.  Traces,  then,  of  the  p^irpose 
for  luhich  these  structures  were  erected  may,  although  in  cases  few 
and  far  between,  have  reached  our  times,  either  in  the  form  in 
which  they  were  committed  to  writing  by  scribes  in  the  eleventh 
and  following  centuries,  or  in  some  faint  orally  transmitted  story 
still  hanging  round  the  once  venerated  and  still  awe-inspiring  spot. 

{<£)  As  examples  of  names  simply  descriptive,  we  may  take 
the  word  "  Bord  "  =  a  table,  the  equivalent  of  "  Dol "  (whence 
Dol-men  =  table-stone)  in  Brittany,  found  especially  in  Kerry  and 
Cork  ;  as  Boardeen,\  supposed  by  Mr.  Windele  to  be  Board-Fionn\ 

t  pp.  5. 18. 

J  I  do  not  commit  myself  to  this  etymology,  but  I  think  it  right  to  state  the  opinion  of  others 
where  I  find  it. 


Names  and  Legends.  757 


("  Finn's  Table  "),  and  which  he  compares  with  Leaba-na-Feinne, 
e.g.  "  the  Bed  of  the  Fene,"  found  elsewhere ;  Boardree,\  or 
Bordaree,  from  Bord,  "a  table,"  and  Rf,  "a  king,"  "King's 
Table,"  and  Board-a-T/iienia,  from  Bord  =  a  table,  and  Tio-erna  = 
"a  lord,"  "Lord's  Table,"  both  also  found  in  Cork. J  Instances 
also  occur  where  this  name  "  Table  "  is  applied  to  purely  natural 
rocks,  as  the  Giant's  Table,  near  Macroom  ;  Fmn  Mac  Cumhail's 
Table  (and  Chair),  on  Caher-Conry,  near  Camp,  in  Kerry  ;  and 
Conrys  Table,  on  the  same  mountain,  "  reported  to  be  notched 
with  the  skeifis  of  his  guests."  There  is  a  dolmen,  called  the 
Giant's  Table,  in  Sligo,  and  instances  might  be  multiplied. 

Another  descriptive  name  applied  to  dolmens  in  Munster  is 
Bealick.  In  his  "  History  of  the  Catholics,"  Philip  O'Sullivan 
Beare§  translates  this  into  Latin  by  Os Rtipis,  "the  Rock's  Mouth." 
"  In  Kerry,"  says  Windele,  "  they  call  rocks  which  form  a  kind  of 
cave  under  them,  '  beal-lic,'  that  is,  as  I  understand  them,  *  a  stone 
with  a  mouth.' "  It  is  clearly  derived  from  bdid  or  bU,  "  a  mouth," 
and  leac,  "  a  stone,"  and  is  applied  not  only  to  artificial  structures, 
such  as  the  Bealick,  near  Newbridge,  Macroom,  and  the  Bealick  at 
Carrigdangan,  also  in  Cork,||  but  to  natural  caves  hollowed  out 
by  the  sea  around  the  coast,  and  even  to  narrow  fissures  and 
caverns  in  mountain  gorges. 

Another  name  for  the  Bealick  at  Carrigdangan  is  Bordree,  and 
yet  another  name,  Lackacruacha,^  which  latter  term  is  also  simply 
descriptive,  meaning  the  "  Flagstone  of  the  Heap,"  or  cairn.  To 
the  same  category  belong  the  names.  Lack-par k-na-licka,^  i.e.  "  the 
Flagstone  of  the  Flagstone  Field  ;  "  Peakecn  Cnoc  Dromin,XX  i.e. 
"tbe  little  pointed  elevation  on  Cnoc  Dromin;"  Carrig~a-gullane,W 
i.e.  "  Rock  of  the  Pillar-Stone"  {galldn,  ox golldn,  is  the  equivalent 
in  Munster  of  dalldn  in  other  parts  of  Ireland,  e.g.  "  Gollan  Crom,|||| 
the  leaning  or  slanting  gollan,  in  Cork,"  etc.)  ;  and  many  more 
which  it  is  unnecessary  to  quote. 

An  allusion  to  the  feature  of  a  hole,  or  passage — -foramen — 
is  by  no  means  uncommon  in  connection  with  dolmens  and  some 
other  monuments  of  the  megalithic  series. 

In  Cornish  tol  signifies  a  hole.     The  Men-an-tol  in  the  Parish 

t  pp.  25,  30. 

J  Windele  thinks  Board-a-Thierna  may  be  the  same  monument  as  the  Board-a-Ree.  See  his 
jNISS.  in  Lib.  R.I. A.,  "Jar  Muman,"  p.  347. 

§  "  Historic  Catholics  Ibernia;  Compendium,"  by  Phillipus  Osullevamis  Bearrus,  Lisbon,  1621, 
p.  136  :  Bellikia  castellum.  Beat  liki,  i.e.  os  rupis. 

11  supra,  pp.  22,  30.  \  p.  30.  tt  P-  33-  tt  P-  43-  §§  P-  40- 

nil  At  Knocknakilla,  where  there  is  also  a  circle. 


758  The  Dolmens  of  Ireland. 

of  Madron  f  in  that  county  consists  of  three  stones  placed  in  line, 
the  centre  one  having  an  artificial  aperture  large  enough  for  the 
passage  of  the  human  body  through  it.  Superstition  connected  it 
with  children  who  were  passed  through  it  to  cure  the  rickets.  A 
fine  obelisk  in  the  Parish  of  Constantine,  also  in  Cornwall,^ 
possesses  a  similar  perforation,  and  was  used  for  like  superstitious 
purposes,  while  a  cist  in  a  tumulus  near  it  was  called  "The 
Cradle."  Another  rock  in  the  same  district  of  great  size,  and 
simply  a  natural  block  of  granite  in  situ,  bore  the  name  Tolmen, 
from  the  circumstance  that  there  was  a  creep,  or  hole,  beneath  it. 
It  is  figured  by  Dr.  Borlase.§ 

The  superstition  regarding  children  may  account  for  the 
name  of  a  dolmen  enclosed  in  a  tumulus  in  the  county  of  Cork, 
and  called  Cuthoge  or  Acuthoge  (p.  12),  which  would  seem  to 
mQ2iV\  foraiizen  infantittm,  the  Children's  Hole,  from  cttthe,  "a  pit" 
{L^t. ptiiens),  and  og,  "  a  child."  We  can  scarcely  derive  it  from  act 
or  gut,  or  gat  or  cat,  for  that  is  not  a  Gaedhelic,  but  a  Teutonic 
word,  and  yet  it  seems  to  be  applied  to  dolmens  and  stones  with 
holes  or  clefts  in  them  in  Ireland  and  Cornwall,  just  as  it  is  in 
Holland,  the  Channel  Isles,  and  Kent.  The  meaning  to  be 
attributed  to  it  reaches  us  from  Drenthe  in  Holland,  where  the 
Duyvel's  Kut  was  traditionally  regarded,  as  we  have  seen,  as  the 
foramen  or  passage-way  under  the  covering-stones,  through  which 
victims  were  forced  to  creep  previous  to  their  being  sacrificed. 
In  Cornwall,  instead  of  the  "Duyvel's  Kut,"  we  have,  as  a 
general  name  for  dolmens,  the  "Giant's  Quoit,"  evidently  the 
same  word,  although,  the  original  meaning  being  lost,  the  idea  of 
a  game  of  quoits  played  by  the  giants  took  its  place.  In  Kent 
we  have  Kit's  Coity  or  Cotty  House,  and  in  the  Channel  Isles  is 
a  dolmen  at  Catioroque. 

In  Ireland,  at  Castlemary  in  Cork  is  a  dolmen,  called  variously 
Cot's  Rock,  Carrig  Cotta,  and  the  Catta  or  Cotta  Stones. ||  At 
Carriganaffrin^  in  the  same  county  is  a  dolmen  called  Carrignagat, 
usually  interpreted  Cat's  Rock.  A  natural  rock  with  a  cleft  or 
split  in  it  at  Carriganinane,  also  in  Cork,  bears  the  same  name 
Carrignagat.  The  word  clearly,  therefore,  possessed  this  meaning. 
The  most  striking  instance  of  its  occurrence  is  at  Ushnagh  in 


t  Borlase,  W.,  "  Antt.  Corn.,"  edit.  1754,  pi.  xii.  p,  168. 
X  "  Prehist.  Mon.  of  Cornwall,"  W.  Lukis  and  W.  C.  Borlase. 
§  Op.  cit.,  pi.  xi.  pp.  l66,  167. 
II  p.  15-  t  P-  27. 


Names  and  Legends.  759 


Meath,  where  a  perfectly  natural  rock,  from  which  a  piece  having 
fallen,  a  creep  or  passage-way  has  been  formed  beneath  it,  is  called 
Carrig-na-Chait,  or  Cat's  Rock.  Another  name  for  this  was  Ail- 
na-7nireann,  that  is,  "  stone  of  the  portions  or  pieces,"  which 
exactly  describes  it,  although  the  meaning  has  been  twisted  into 
a  legend  which  makes  it  the  centre  of  Ireland,  and  the  meeting- 
place  of  the  four  "portions"  or  "provinces."  It  was  evidently  a 
venerated  object,  and,  under  still  yet  another  name,  that  of 
"■  Coitrighe,"  it  is  mentioned  in  the  book  of  Armagh,  this  word 
being  interpreted  Cotrigian,  or  Catrigian,  Rock  from  the  tribe  of 
the  Cothrige  or  Cothraighe,  to  whom  the  district  around  Ushnagh 
belonged. 

Other  allusions  to  the  foramen  of  the  dolmens  are  found  in 
the  use  of  the  word  gag  (pronounced  gawg),  "  a  cleft,"  as,  for 
example,  in  the  case  of  a  dolmen  called  Carricknagaiug\  in 
Kilkenny.  In  the  same  county  is  the  hill  of  Cloghmanty,  on  the 
top  of  which  was  a  cairn  called  Snidhe  Fimi,  which  the  late  Rev. 
James  Graves  \  explored,  and  in  which  he  found  a  vault  and  two 
skeletons.  The  name  of  the  hill  is  derived  from  clock  =  a  stone, 
and  mantach,  "  gapped."  Whether  the  dolmen  near  Lough  Arrow 
in  Sligo,  called  Carricknagrip  §  (or  Carricknagriop),  derives  its 
name  from  the  English  "creep,"  I  cannot  say.  It  seems,  how- 
ever, to  be  the  same  word  used  in  the  expression  the  "  Gripe  of 
the  Pig,"  meaning  a  furrow,  trench,  or  creep. 

A  good  illustration  of  the  practice  of  creeping  through y2?r^w/;^^ 
under  rocks  is  afforded  by  the  practices  which,  down  to  the 
middle  of  the  present  century,  used  to  take  place  on  the  23rd 
of  December  every  year  at  the  festival  of  St.  Declan,  at  Ardmore 
in  Waterford. 

It  was  the  custom  for  several  thousands  of  persons  of  all  ages, 
and  both  sexes,  to  assemble  on  the  strand  which  forms  the  western 
portion  of  Ardmore  Bay.  The  devotional  exercises  were  com- 
menced at  an  early  hour  by  passing  under  the  holy  rock  of  St. 
Declan.  This  rock,  which  is  on  the  seashore,  is  of  the  same 
quality  as  the  neighbouring  rocks,  and  weighs  two  or  three  tons. 
It  is  said  to  have  been  wafted  from  Rome  upon  the  surface  of  the 
ocean,  and  to  have  borne  on  the  top  of  it  nine  bells,  which  came 
opportunely,  as  Declan  was  in  want  of  one  to  celebrate  Mass. 
Since  that  time  it  has  been  highly  venerated  for  its  miraculous 

t  p.  408.  X  See  "  Trans.  Kilk.  Archreol.  Soc,"  vol.  i.  pp.  27  and  2S9.  §  p.  190. 


760  The  Dolmens  of  Ireland. 

cures.  Stretched  at  full  length  on  the  ground,  on  the  face  and 
stomach,  each  devotee  moved  forward,  as  if  in  the  act  of  swimming, 
and  thus  they  squeezed  or  dragged  themselves  through  the  hole 
beneath  it. 

It  was  only  at  low  water  that  people  could  go  under  the 
stone,  so  that  advantage  had  to  be  taken  of  the  tide.  On  the 
saint's  day  it  was  always  necessary  to  remove  some  of  the  sand 
which  had  accumulated  under  the  stone  to  make  a  sufficient 
passage  for  a  large  man  or  woman,  as  the  little  rocks  on  which 
the  stone  rests  form  irregular  pillars,  so  that  it  was  necessary  to 
have  the  surface  under  the  stone  lower  than  the  front  and  rear. 
The  men  took  off"  hats,  coats,  shoes,  and  stockings,  .  .  .  turned  up 
their  breeches  above  the  knee,  and  then,  lying  flat  on  the  ground, 
put  in  hands,  arms,  and  head,  one  shoulder  being  thrown  more 
forward  than  the  other,  in  order  to  work  their  way  through  the 
more  easily,  and  coming  out  from  under  the  stone  at  the  other 
end — the  length  of  the  passage  is  about  four  feet — they  rose  on  their 
knees,  and  struck  their  backs  three  times  against  the  stone,  telling 
beads  and  repeating  aves  the  while.  They  then  proceeded  on  bare 
knees  over  a  number  of  little  rocks  to  the  place  where  they  again 
entered  under  the  stone,  and  thus  proceeded  three  times,  which 
done,  they  washed  their  knees,  dressed,  and  proceeded  to  the  well, 
within  the  precincts  of  the  ruined  chapel  of  the  saint.f  It  cannot, 
I  think,  be  questioned  that  in  such  a  practice  as  this  we  have  a 
direct  survival  from  pagan  times,  when  not  only  natural  rocks,  but 
half-artificial  structures,  such  as  the  "  Three  Brothers  of  Grugith  " 
in  Cornwall  (see  p.  482),  and  wholly  artificial  structures,  such  as 
the  dolmens,  with  \k\€\x  foramina  between  the  portico  and  the  cella 
within,  afforded,  as  tradition  says  the  Duyvel's  Kut  at  Drenthe 
did,  means  of  access  for  the  human  body  in  connection  with 
devotional,  necromantic  or  sacrificial  rites. 

Among  descriptive  names  of  cairns  and  dolmens  we  might 
think  ourselves  justified  in  placing  those  of  Cnoc-Buidhe  \  (Knock- 
boy),  "Yellow  Low,"  in  Cork;  Cloch-Brack,§  "Speckled  Stone" 
[brcac],  in  Tipperary  ;  Cloich-Leithe  ||  {i.e.  Clock  LiatJi),  "  Grey 
Stone,"  in  Kilkenny ;  Carnlea,*[[  in  Antrim  ;  and  Corlealackagh,  in 
Monaghan  ;  ff  Carriglass  JJ  {i.e.  Carrig  Glas),  riipes  glattca,  "  Sea- 
green   Rock,"  in  Tyrone  ;  Carn  Dubh,  "  Black  Cairn,"  in  Antrim  ; 

t  See  "The  Holy  Wells  of  Ireland,"  by  Philip  Dixon  Hardy  (1836),  p.  33,  et  segq. 

X  p.  14-  §  P-  53-  I!  P-  410.  IT  p.  268,  ha  =  liath,  "grey." 

tt  p-  295.  XX  p-  214. 


Names  and  Legends.  761 


Lackafinna  {i.e.  Leacha  Flonna),  "  White  Flagstones,"  In   Mayo ; 
Knockanbaun  {i.e.  Cnocan  Ban),  "  Little  White  Low,"  in  Sligo  ; 
Carnanbane,  in    Derry  ;  Dumrabaun,  in  Donegal ;  Knockanbaun 
{i.e.  the  Trunk-na-Callighe),  in  Mayo;f  Carnbane,  in  Armagh  \\ 
another  Carnbane,  in  Tyrone ;  and  the  "  White  Stones,"  a  circle 
in  Monaghan,  etc.    We  must  be  careful,  however,  how  we  proceed, 
for  in  the  case  of  all  the  above-mentioned  colours,  reference  may 
be  intended  to  one  or  other  of  the  enchanted  beings  which  people 
the  Folk-lore  of  the  Irish.     Thus,  buidJie,  yellow,  was  applied  to 
giants,    as    in   the   case   of   Para   Biudhe    Mor    MacScoidin,   the 
Scottish  giant,  whose  grave  is  the  dolmen  at  Proleek,  in   Louth, 
and  who  came  to  challenge  Finn  Mac  Cumhail.§     In  Antrim  we 
have   Yellow  Jack's    Cairn.      We   have  an  example,   too,  of  an 
anomalous  monument  in  Sligo,  bearing  the  name  Keelogeboy  {i.e. 
Ceall  Oge  Buidhe),  "  Burying-place  of  Yellow  Child,"  in  a  cist  in 
which  the  bones  of  a  child  were  actually  found. ||     Brack,  or  Breac, 
usually  translated  "  speckled,"   is  a  term  which,  in  one  form  and 
another  {e.g.    the    Bracked    Stones    in    Sligo),    is   so    frequently 
associated   with   megalithic    remains   and    venerated    rocks,    that 
we  cannot  believe   it  has  really  this  meaning,  and  must  treat  it 
separately  in  the  sequel.     The  adjective  liatk,  grey,  is  constantly 
connected  with  death,  ghosts,  and  the  sidhe^  or  "elf-mounds,"  as 
Dr.  Whitley  Stokes^  translates  that  word,  and  their  inhabitants, 
also  called  sidhe,  who,  in  the  Book  of  Armagh,  are  dei  terreni,  and 
of  whom   O' Flaherty  says  that  the  Irish  call  them  so  (that  is, 
sidhe),  "  because  they  are  seen  to  come  out  of  pleasant  hills,  where 
the  common  people  imagine  they  reside,  which  fictitious  habitations 
are  called  by  us  sid/ie  or  siod/ia."     "  On  Erin's  folk  lay  darkness," 
we  read  in  Fiacc's  hymn,  "the  tribes  worshipped  elves"  {tuatha 
adortais  side).    Among  the  ancient  Scandinavians  the  belief  existed 
that  their  relatives  died  into  the  hill  near  which  they  lived.     Mider, 
the  King  of  the  Sidhe,  lived  in  Bri Leilk,  that  is,  the  "  Gray-Hill," 
in  Longford,  and  out  of  this  name  the  author  of  the  Dindshenchas 
concocted  a  story,  in  which  Liath  appears  as  a  hero,  in  love  with 
Bri,  daughter  of  Mider,  who  dies  by  her  father's  mound.ff     In  the 
adjective  lial/i,  when  applied  to   dolmens  or  tumuli,  a  mythical 
meaning  may,  therefore,  underlie  that  of  the  simple  adjective. 

In  the   adjective  glas  or  glass,   sea-green,   when  applied   to 

t  p.  III.  t  p.  299.  §  p.  305.  II  p.  133. 

1  "Trip.  Life  of  Patrick,"  p.  lOO.  ft  Rev.  Celt.,  vol.  xvi.  p.  7S. 

VOL.  III.  !£ 


762  The  Dolmens  of  Ireland. 

dolmens,  we  may  feel  sure  we  have  no  reference  to  the  colour  of 
the  monument,  but  to  that  of  the  enchanted  cow,  the  "  Glas  "  of 
Gavida  the  Smith,  about  which,  and  her  travels  over  Ireland,  a 
volume  of  stories  might  be  written.  At  Slieve-na-Glaise,j  in 
Clare,  is  a  dolmen,  to  which  an  old  woman  gave  the  name  of 
Carrig-na-Glaise,  that  is,  the  Rock  of  the  Sea-Green  (Cow) — the 
word  bo,  "a  cow,"  being  understood,  as  it  is  in  the  name  of  the 
ancient  MS.,  Leabhar  na  h-Uidhri,  that  is,  "  Book  of  the  Dun 
(Cow)."  After  she  had  told  me  the  story  of  how  the  poor 
enchanted  cow,  from  whose  udders  used  to  flow  all  the  rivers  on 
the  mountain-side,  had  been  tricked  by  an  impious  old  hag,  who, 
in  place  of  a  milk-pail,  had  milked  her  into  a  sieve,  and  how,  in 
consequence,  she  had  either  died  of  grief  or  deserted  that  locality 
for  ever,  I  ventured  to  ask  her  the  question  whether  there  were 
any  cows  of  that  colour  to  be  seen  nowadays — whether,  that  is 
to  say,  she  applied  the  term  glas  to  the  colour  of  any  of 
the  cows  we  saw  on  the  mountain.  She  replied  by  a  decided 
negative,  and  added  that  the  enchanted  cow  was  the  only  one  of 
that  colour  ever  known,  and  that  she  travelled  through  Ireland 
from  end  to  end  in  the  space  of  a  single  day.  The  name  of  the 
Smith  Gavida,  the  cow's  owner,  in  the  tale,  as  still  related  in 
Donegal,  was  not  remembered  by  my  informant,  although  the 
name  of  one  of  the  hills  near  by,  on  which  were  several  dolmens, 
Glasgiviieach,  proved  that  it  was  once  current  there. 

The  tale  of  Diarmid  and  Grainne  had  also  been  forgotten. 
All  that  was  remembered  was  that  Grainne  had  carried  the 
stones  to  build  one  of  the  dolmens  in  her  apron,  and  thrown 
them  down  there  to  make  a  sleeping-place.  Between  the  legend 
of  Grainne,  who  was  making  the  tour  of  Ireland  in  a  year  and  a 
day,  and  that  of  the  Enchanted  Sea-Green  Cow,  who  was  making 
it  in  a  single  day,  there  is  evidently  a  connection.  In  both  we 
have  a  personification  of  the  Sun,  who,  as  in  Japan  and  among  the 
Finns,  is  a  Goddess,  not  a  God,  and  in  the  Cow  we  have,  in  addition 
to  this,  the  Ceres,  or  the  Cornucopia  of  Ireland.  To  another  of 
the  dolmens  in  the  same  vicinity  the  old  woman  gave  the  name 
Lacka-na-lea  \  {liath — grey),  meaning,  apparently,  the  Flag-stones- 
of  the  Grey — so  that  there  may  have  been  another  cow  of  that 
colour  in  the  current  folk-lore  of  the  mountain  in  years  gone  by. 

Dolmens  and   cairns  bearing  the  name  diibh^  black,  may,  or 

t  i.e.  Slievenaglasha,  p.  74.  J  i.e.  Lackaleagh,  p.  72. 


Names  and  Legends.  763 

may  not,  belong  to  the  descriptive  category.  In  common  with 
the  trenches  and  some  tumuli,  they  may  derive  their  name  from 
the  legend  of  the  Black  Pig.  Those  which  are  termed  "  white  " 
{fionn,  or  bdii),  sometimes  most  certainly  derive  their  name  from 
the  legend  which  connects  them,  as  in  Holland,  with  "  White 
Women."  Sometimes  the  adjective  seems  to  be  understood,  as, 
perhaps,  in  the  name  Lachtnamna  ^  (?  for  Lachtnamnafinna)  = 
"  Monument  of  the  (White)  Woman."  To  the  N.E.  of  Maolan, 
also  in  Cork,  is  a  cairn  called  Sighean-na-uma'^-Jinne,^  or,  more 
properly,  Sithazm-na-mna-Jiima,  meaning  the  "Little  Sidk  (elf- 
mound)  of  the  White  Woman."  At  Leap,  by  the  way,  in  the  same 
county,  was  the  place  where  the  Mud  Sidlie,  that  is,  the  Women  of 
the  Si'dh,  had  a  famous  cow,  which  took  the  monstrous  leap  from 
which  the  place  is  called,  and  the  print  of  whose  hoof  is  seen  in 
the  rock  to-day. 

The  other  word  for  white,  ban,  is  found  in  the  dolmen-name  of 
Lackabaun*  (Leac-a-ban  ^),  "  Flag-stone  of  the  White,"  also  in 
Cork.  It  is  possible  that  this  may  refer  to  a  legendary  Horse, 
the  "  Gearran  Ban,"  or  White  Horse,  whose  name  is  connected 
with  a  venerated  rock  near  D unman wy. 

Passing  from  the  names  derived  from  colours,  which,  as  I  have 
shown,  are  very  uncertain,  we  may  notice  the  following  among 
other  descriptive  names.  Cloch-7ia-tri-posta^  "  Rock  of  the  three 
pillars,"  is  that  of  a  dolmen  in  the  Lough  Arrow  group  ;  the 
Griddle '  is  a  name  found  in  Sligo  and  Down,  and  refers  to  the 
appearance  of  the  roofing-stones  lying  like  bars  across  the  two- 
supporting  ranges.  ClochtogaP  in  Fermanagh,  ClochthogbaiP  in 
Down,  and  others  of  the  same  name  in  various  forms  (?  Clochoyle,^* 
in  Londonderry),  is  a  name  derived  from  Clock,  a  stone,  and 
togbhaim,  to  lift  up,  whence  logbkail,  a  thing  lifted  up.  It  is, 
therefore,  the  exact  equivalent  of  Pierre  Levde,  a  term  commonly 
used  for  megaliths  in  France. 

The  Crawtee  Stone,  near  Kilkeel,  in  Down/^  is,  perhaps,  refer- 
able to  cruit,  a  "  hump  on  the  back,"  conveying  the  same  idea  as 
the  Giant's  Load,  not  far  off,  in  Louth.  Names,  such  as  Clochmore, 
*'  Great  Stone  ;  "  Clochfadha,  "  Long-Stone  ;  "  "  The  Broadstone ;'" 
Carndn—''  hillock,"  or  "  heap  ; "  Cloghan  canieen,  "  Stone-house  of 

1  Ord.  Surv.  Map,  Cork,  sheet  47. 
-  Bett  =  a  woman  ;  in  composition  ban  ;  gen.  sing,  mnd  ;  num.  pi.  vuid  ;  gen.  pi.  ban. 


p.  13-  P-  39 


*  Ban  =  white. 


p.  I»&.  ■  pp.  177,  286.  '  p.  225.  "  p.  284. 

10  p.  254.  "  P-  290- 


764  The  Dolmens  of  Ireland. 

the  little  earn,"  etc.,  etc.,  need  no  comment.  '  The  Clash-\  {i.e. 
Trench)  Field  indicates  the  presence  of  monuments  of  the  dolmen 
class  in  the  Queen's  County ;  L achat huoma,\  the  Flag-stone  of  the 
Tomb,  is  the  name  of  one  in  Cork  ;  Criickeen-na-ctirragh,  "Hillock 
of  the  heath,"  is  a  tumulus  in  Sligo  ;  Cloch-na-tara,  Stone  of  the 
Prospect  (?), — so  Mr.  Kinahan  explains  it, — is  a  dolmen  in 
Donegal  ;  §  and  Clochan-na-stooca,  "  Stone-house  of  the  pointed- 
stones,"  is  a  monument  of  the  dolmen  class  in  Achill.|| 

We  now  pass  on  to  the  second  category  of  dolmen-names, 
those  which  are  derived  from  some  current  opinion  as  to  their 
origin  and  purpose.  From  these  we  may  dismiss,  firstly,  those 
which  are  attributable  to  the  speculations  of  antiquaries  of  the 
Stukeley  school,  who  from  the  middle  of  the  last  century  to  the 
middle  of  the  present  one,  associated  the  name  of  the  Druids  with 
these  and  other  megalithic  remains,  and  caused  their  views  to  find 
such  credence  that  the  name  "  Druids'  Altar"  was  adopted  in  many 
parts  of  the  country  by  the  Ordnance  Surveyors  as  the  distinguish- 
ing name  for  a  dolmen.  Drid  and  Draoi  (sometimes  drilidJi)  was 
the  Irish  name  for  an  augur  and  a  magician,  and  the  practice  of 
his  divination  was  druidecht.^  The  name  of  Tullydruid,  Englished 
into  "  Druids'  Hill,"  in  Tyrone,  where  a  cist  and  skeleton  were 
found  in  1852,  is  probably  derived  from  drud,  "an  enclosure," 
while  the  names,  "  Mount  Druid,"  in  Antrim,  and  also  in  Water- 
ford,  and  "  Glen  Druid,"  in  Dublin,  are  quite  modern,  and  emanate 
from  the  same  taste  for  the  classics  which  caused  the  owner  of 
the  Mount  Venus  dolmen  to  confer  upon  his  dwelling  so  ridiculous 
a  name,  and  to  surround  the  ancient  monument  itself  with  a  wall 
and  grove,  on  the  gateway  leading  into  which  he  caused  the 
words  "  Druids'  Hall "  to  be  inscribed. 

It  is  more  difficult  to  dismiss  off-hand  the  word  altar,  in  Irish 
altoi}',^  applied  as  it  so  often  is  to  dolmens.  The  popular  view, 
and,  doubtless,  in  some  cases  it  may  be  a  true  view,  is  that, 
during  the  Irish  "  Reign  of  Terror,"  that  is  to  say,  during  the 
period  when  the  Penal  Code  was  in  force,  these  ancient  monuments 
were  used  by  the  hunted-down  Catholic  priests,  being  as  places 
fitted  both  by  their  general  remoteness  from  the  beaten  track,  and 
by  their  tabular  form,  as  altars  for  the  celebration  of  the  Mass. 

The  name  Mass  Hill,  at  Larachril,  in  Inish-Owen  in  Donegal, 

t  p.  374-  X  P-  33.  §  p.  234. 

II  p.  121.  ^  Windisch.,  "  Worterb.,"  in  voc.  ft  Gen.  altora,  alioirc,  and  altorach. 


Names  and  Legends.  765 

where  there  is  a  fine  circle  of  stones,  undoubtedly  pointed  to  the 
site  having  been  used  in  those  days  of  persecution  as  a  meeting- 
place.  Not  far  from  Cushendall  I  saw  another,  not  a  prehistoric 
monument,  however,  but  a  structure  built  for  the  purpose  in  a 
wood.  When  searching  for  dolmens  in  Clare,  I  was  informed  that 
near  Broadford,  far  up  in  the  moors, f  there  was  one  which  was 
known  to  have  been  used  as  a  Christian  meeting-place  at  the  same 
period.  The  name  it  bore  meant  the  "  Stone  of  the  Mass,"J  and 
yet,  as  I  was  assured,  it  was  a  genuine  dolmen.  With  regard  to 
the  numerous  "  altars  "  so  marked  in  the  Ordnance  Survey  Map 
near  Dunfanaghy,  in  Donegal,  Mr.  Doherty  assured  me  that  they 
also  were  dolmens.  On  the  coast  of  Derrynane  Bay,  in  Kerry, 
there  is  a  hill  called  "  Altar  Hill,"  and  close  to  it  a  monument 
marked  Cromlech,  in  the  Ord.  Surv.  Map,  No.  45.  On  the  same 
map  is  marked  Tobernahaltora,  the  Well  of  the  Altar,  the  Altar 
itself,  Penitential  Stations,  Cuclmllin' s  House,  and  not  far  off  on  the 
Map  44  (besides  three  cairns  and  numerous  pillar-stones),  a  second 
CucJmlliji  s  Ho2ise,  Cuclmlliii s  Bed,  Ctichullin  s  Grave,  Toberren- 
doney,  the  Well  of  the  King  of  Sunday,  as  it  is  interpreted, 
Tobernacrnsha  and  Lisnakilla.  Evidently  here  was  a  great  centre 
of  primitive  cultus,  the  Christian  succeeding  the  pagan  ;  a  condition 
of  things  nowhere  so  manifest  as  in  Kerry.  The  stone-circle  at 
Harbour- View,  near  Bearhaven  in  Cork,  is  locally  called  the 
"  Altar."  § 

In  the  County  of  Kerry  is  Maulnaholtora,  the  "Knoll  of  the 
Altar,"  which  is  unquestionably  a  dolmen  of  the  usual  type,  but 
which  was  treated  to  the  very  same  ritual  as  that  accorded  to  any 
of  the  Christian  holy  places,  and  that  quite  independently  of  its 
having  been  used  (which,  indeed,  it  is  not  said  to  have  been)  as 
an  "altar"  in  the  penal  days.  "Within  this  dolmen,"  says  Mr. 
Windele,  "  was  said  to  be  a  well  out  of  which  a  woman  took  water 
and  with  it  a  fish.  She  endeavoured  to  boil  the  fish,  but  it  would 
not  boil.  The  well  has  been  dry  ever  since  ;  it  stands  on  a  small 
knoll.  Stations  are  held,"  he  adds,  "at  this  monument  every 
Saturday.  The  brambles  within  are  tied  with  rags,  and  there  is  a 
deposit  of  pins  as  offerings.  This,"  concludes  the  writer,  "  is  the 
only  monument  of  the  kind  which  I  have  found  associated  with 
religious  practices,  a  combination  of  the  sepulchral  altar,  and  the 
well   with    its   sacred   fish."  ||      Lady   Chatterton    mentions    that 

t  Knockshanvo,  p.  98.  %  Carrig-an-Affrioinn.  §  See  p.  504.  II  p.  3- 


766  The  Dolmens  of  Ireland. 

*'  rounds  were  given,"  that  is  to  say,  the  prescribed  circuits  per- 
formed, at  a  "  pagan  altar  "  on  Mount  Brendan,f  in  Kerry. 

An  undoubted  dohnen  is  the  "grave  called  Altoir  Olltach,  or 
the  Ultonian  altar,"  at  Ballycroum,  in  Clare. |  O'Donovan  states 
that  it  was  said  to  derive  its  name  from  the  fact  that  a  priest  from 
Ulster  celebrated  '*  Mountain  Masses"  there  during  the  period  of 
the  Penal  Code.  He  thinks,  however,  that  "  it  had  lost  its  original 
name  long  before  that  time." 

The  name  Patrick's  Altar  is  applied  to  a  limestone  rock  in  the 
Townland  of  Cloonmucduff,  in  Sligo.  It  was  evidently  an  object 
of  veneration,  for  it  is  surrounded,  says  Col.  Wood-Martin, §  by  a 
circular  fort-like  elevation  about  5  feet  in  height  and  50  paces  in 
diameter,  the  periphery  of  which  appears  to  have  been  formed 
with  flagstones.  The  block,  which  is  quadrangular,  measures 
5  feet  8  ins.  by  5  feet  4  ins.  superficially,  and  2  feet  4  ins.  vertically. 
On  the  top  is  a  circular  aperture  with  a  cleft  passing  outwards, 
which  may  be  the  result  of  natural  weathering.  The  same  name, 
Altoir  Phar7'aig,  is  given  to  "  a  small  fixture  "  on  the  southern  of 
"  two  sacred  heaps  of  stones  called  Leachta  Phadruig^  or  Patrick's 
Monuments  at  Ballygaddy,||  in  Galway."  It  is  said  to  have  been 
higher  and  more  perfect  some  years  before  the  Survey.  As  in  the 
case  of  several  megalithic  monuments,  a  spot  was  left  untilled 
around  the  cairns,  as  it  is  considered  unlucky  to  touch  the  "  Theatre 
of  the  Pilgrims."  ^ 

Square  stone  erections  such  as  this  are  usually  themselves 
called  Icachts.  A  much-venerated  one  is  the  Leacht  Benain,  the 
stones  of  which  are  covered  with  cup-marks  and  concentric  circles, 
at  the  foot  of  Croagh  Patrick,  four  and  a  half  miles  E.S.E.  of  the 
summit.  The  structure  is  also  called  Toghcr  Patrick,  Patrick's 
Chair,  jj  The  great  altar-like  stone  called  the  Hag's  Chair,  on  the 
side  of  one  of  the  chambered  cairns  at  Loughcrew,  and  which  is 
also  covered  with  cups  and  sculpturings,  may  be  compared  with 
the  one  at  Ballygaddy.  When  placed  on  the  side  of  a  tumulus, 
these  leachts  resemble  exactly  the  Jiorgs  of  the  ancient  Scandina- 
vians.    "The  /lorg"  says  Mr.   Du  Chaillu,  "was  a  sacred  altar, 

t  p.  4.         J  p.  95.         §  R.S.M.  Ir.,  p.  201,         II  Bcul-atha-ho,  "  Mouth  of  the  Cow's  Ford." 

14 
U  Ord.  Surv.  Letters,  Co.  Galway,  :r — ,  pp.  15,  90. 

14 
tt  Ord.  Surv.  Letters,  Co.  Galway,  .       ,  p.  11.     See  an  account  of  this,  with  drawings  of  the 

monument,  and  of  the  cup-markings  on  the  stones  composing  it,  by  Mr.  Kinahan  {Proc.  R.I. A., 
vol,  ii.,  1879-88,  p.  \^). , 


Names  and  Legends.  767 


built  of  stones — often  mentioned  in  the  Eddas  and  Saeas,  but 
never  described.  Perhaps  it  was  an  enclosed  structure,  or  was 
built  over  a  sacrificing  mound,  or  upon  some  elevation.  Freyja 
says  :  '  Ottar  made  me  a  horg  reared  of  stones  ;  now  have  these 
stones  become  gler  (amber)  ;  he  reddened  it  in  fresh  ox-blood.'  "  f 

I  cannot  say  that  there  are  any  traditions  worthy  of  notice 
connecting  dolmens  in  Ireland  with  human  or  other  sacrifices. 
The  discovery  of  the  bones  of  oxen  and  other  animals  in  them, 
mingled,  in  some  cases,  with  those  of  human  beings  in  disorder,  is 
the  best  evidence  that  such  may  have  been  the  case.  There  are, 
however,  two  dolmens  in  Cork  :  the  one  on  the  lands  called  after  it 
Oltore,  or  Altoir,  near  Tourmore  Strand,  and  the  other  the  Carrig 
Cotta  at  Castlemary,  J  to  which  such  stories  have  become  attached. 
At  the  former  it  is  popularly  believed  that  "  men  were  executed  or 
sacrificed."  This  idea  may  be  due  in  the  former  case  to  the  name 
of  the  monument,  and  to  the  fact  that  in  the  covering-stone 
which  rests  diagonally  against  the  ruined  structure  there  is  a  deep 
semicircular  indentation,  like  the  place  for  the  thumb  in  a  painter's 
palette,  which  perhaps  gave  rise  to  the  notion  that  in  this  rested  the 
victim's  head  previous  to  decapitation.  At  Castlemary,  too,  there 
are  two  stones  beside  the  monument  which  are  said  to  have 
formed  the  block  at  which  the  executions  by  decapitation  took 
place.  There  is  a  tradition  current  in  Cork  that  "  nothing  will  grow 
under  these  altars."  I  do  not,  as  I  said,  attach  much  weight  to 
such  tales,  but  it  is  singular  to  find  an  identical  story  told  of  a 
dolmen  called  Cot's  Rock,  in  Cork,  and  of  one  where  the  tale  is 
seemingly  authentic,  called  Duyvel's  Kut,  in  Holland. 

Instances  might,  I  believe,  be  gathered  from  Irish  folk-lore  in 
confirmation  of  the  view  that  the  sacrifice  of  certain  animals  at 
particular  times,  and  for  particular  purposes,  is  still  recognized 
in  the  code  of  current  superstition.  A  labourer  having  found 
an  urn  at  Columbkill  in  Kilkenny,  filled  with  ashes  and  small 
fragments  of  burnt  bones,  was  overjoyed  at  the  discovery,  sup- 
posing it  to  be  "a  crock  of  gold,"  which  metal  the  fairies  had 
changed  into  dust  and  ashes.  "  Without  waiting  to  make  the  cir- 
cumstance known  to  any  one,  he  watched  over  the  urn  during  the 
night,  sacrificing  a  black  cat,  according  to  the  ritual  recommended 
by  the    most    esteemed    'fairy-doctors,'    to  propitiate    the    spirit 

t  "  The  Viking  Age,"  p.  356.     See  also  Vigfusson's  "Corp.  Poet.  Boreal,"  vol.  i.  p.  407. 

X  PP-  15.  44- 


'/68  The  Dolmens  of  Ireland. 

supposed  to  guard  the  treasure.  When  the  cock  crew,  without 
the  expected  transmutation  of  the  ashes  into  gold  having  taken 
place,  the  finder,  in  his  disappointment,  broke  the  urn  to  pieces, 
and  scattered  its  contents."  f 

My  view,  then,  with  regard  to  the  word  altar  as  applied  to 
dolmens  is  that  in  some  cases  it  may  be  genuinely  ancient,  as 
ancient,  that  is  to  say,  as  the  days  of  those  scmi-pagani,  as  they 
might  well  be,  and  indeed  were,  called,  who,  while  professedly 
introducing  Christianity,  used  Latin  terms  such  as  temphmiy 
sacerdos,  altai^e,  etc.,  which  appertained  to  the  cultus  of  the  Roman 
gods,  showing  thereby  how  closely  they  trod  in  the  footprints  of 
the  paganism  of  the  south  on  the  one  hand,  while  on  the  other,  in 
their  relations  with  the  native  pagans  of  the  north,  of  whose  kith 
and  kin  they  were,  they  adopted  the  long-venerated  sites,  transferred 
the  veneratio  lapidum  to  their  own  account,  and,  not  doubtless 
without  some  knowledge  of  a  previous  purpose  to  which  the 
dolmens  had  been  put,  termed  them,  in  some  cases,  altars.  I  see 
no  other  way  in  which  we  can  account  for  the  name  altar  being 
applied  to  a  dolmen  or  circle,  as  it  seems  to  have  been  in  certain 
instances,  prior  to  the  date  of  the  Penal  Code. 

The  three  names  for  dolmens  most  in  vogue  were  (i)  leaba  or 
Icabadh,  found  also  in  the  forms  liabad,  labby,  labba,  meaning  a 
bed ;  (2)  leackt,  properly  "  a  pile  of  stones  in  memory  of  the 
dead,"  and  applied  to  the  dolmen  rather  in  respect  of  the  cairn 
around  it  than  to  the  structure  itself,  found  also  in  the  forms 
lac/it,  lag/it,  slaght,  and  (?)  tlaght ;  (3)  taaim,  a  grave,  a  tomb, 
also  to??tba,  with  a  similar  meaning,  and  tomban.  There  are  some 
reasons  for  thinking  that,  in  addition  to  these  terms,  the  word  cille 
or  kit,  independently  altogether  of  the  Latin  loan  word  cella,  may 
have  once  been  applied  to  dolmens  and  cists  (see  below,  p.  787). 

Leaba  was  used  also  to  designate  those  little  buildino-s  so  like 
in  plan  to  the  dolmens  on  the  one  hand  and  the  Greek  and  Roman 
temples  on  the  other,  being,  like  the  latter,  possessed  of  the  pro- 
jecting antce  and  interior  cella,  which  contained,  or  were  supposed 
to  contain,  the  tomb  of  some  saint,  as,  for  example,  the  Labba 
Mologa  in  Cork. 

This  latter  name,  meaning  Mologa's  Bed,  was  applied  both  to 
some  upright  stones  in  a  field  called  Park-a-liagatm,  and  also  to 
a  little  building  within   the  enclosure  of  a  cemetery  adjoining. 

t  Journ.  "Kilk.  Archaeol.  Soc."  vol.  v.  {1864-66),  p.  328 ;  Ibid.,  vol.  ii.  p.  367. 


Names  and  Legends.  769 

Within  the  little  structure  was  a  flasfstone  said  to  cover  the  Bed 
of  the  Saint.  Windele  quotes  an  observation  made  by  Mr. 
Hackett,  a  landed  proprietor  in  the  vicinity,  and  one  well 
acquainted  with  the  ancient  superstitions  of  the  county  of  Cork, 
to  the  effect  that  "he  imagined  that  St.  Molosfa  must  have  been 
the  successor  of  some  heathen  personage,  since  Leaba  sounded 
very  unchristian  to  the  ears  of  one  accustomed  to  hear  of  Leaba- 
na-bo-ban,  Leaba  Diarmuid,  Leaba  Cailli  (i.e.  Callighe),  Leaba  na 
Limma,  Leaba  na  Feinne,  etc." 

I  would  go  a  step  further  than  Mr.  Hackett,  and  express  my 
doubts  as  to  whether  in  the  name  Mo-Loga  we  have  that  of  a 
Christian  personage  at  all.  Mo  is  a  prefix  implying  veneration, 
and  Logha  is  the  genitive  case  of  the  name  of  the  divinity  Lug,f 
so  that  Leaba  Mologa  would  mean  *  Bed  of  the  holy  Lug,'  the 
Tuatha  De  Danann  hero,  the  slayer  of  his  grandfather  Balor, 
the  equivalent  of  the  Norse  Loke,  of  the  German  Lug,  whose 
pillar  was  in  the  Wetterau,  and  of  the  deity  who  gave  name  to  the 
several  places  called  Lugdunum  on  the  Continent,  and  in  Britain. 

Certainly  the  word  Leaba  was  most  frequently,  as  it  was  also 
originally,  applied  to  the  Beds  in  which  reposed  the  men  and 
beasts  of  heathen  mythology. 

The  following  superstitions  and  legends  are  connected  with 
the  Leaba  Mologa  :  (i)  That  to  get  under  the  covering-stone  of 
the  Leaba  in  the  little  building  is  a  cure  for  rheumatism.  Windele 
describes  it  as  "a  kind  of  cist  consisting  of  a  large  flagstone 
resting  on  low  side-stones,  so  as  to  leave  an  open  space  beneath, 
which  is  said  to  have  constituted  the  Bed  of  the  Saint.  This  space 
is  merely  wide  enough  to  permit  a  person  to  stretch  on  the 
ground  in  immediate  contact  with  the  flagstone  above."  In  this 
use  made  of  the  so-called  Christian  Leaba  by  the  superstitious  I 
venture  to  think  we  have  a  direct  survival  of  the  practice  for 
which  the  Pagan  Leaba  was  constructed  :  (2)  That  there  was 
formerly  a  beautiful  well  of  clear  water  here,  but  that  one  day  an 
old  woman  profanely  washed  her  clothes  in  it,  and  that  on  that 
night  the  well  disappeared,  and  was  seen  never  more  :  (3)  That 
certain  stones  which  rest  on  a  flat  brown-stone  slab  about  the 
centre  of  the  burial-ground  were  once  a  weaver's  kertleens.  The 
story  of  these  petrified  "  spools  "  is  that  on  a  certain  occasion  a 
dishonest  weaver  was  charged  by  a  woman,  who  had  employed 

t  A.  4  M.,  vol.  i.  p.  20. 


770  The  Dolmens  of  Ireland. 

him,  with  having  cribbed  some  of  the  thread  which  she  had  given 
him  to  weave  an  article  of  cloth  for  her.  He  indignantly  denied 
the  accusation,  and  to  prove  his  innocence,  volunteered  to  attest 
it  before  St.  Mologa,  and  kneeling  upon  this  identical  flag,  was 
about  to  kiss  the  Gospels,  when,  lo !  the  "  kertleens "  which  he 
had  concealed  under  his  arm,  inside  his  garment,  dropped  down, 
and  having  been  converted  into  stone,  remain  there  to  this  day, 
as  a  monument  of  his  gfuilt. 

With  regard  to  the  story  of  the  well,  we  have  seen  that  a 
similar  lecrend  of  a  well  havingr  once  existed  beneath  an  ancient 
monument  occurs  in  the  case  of  the  dolmen  of  Maulnaholtora 
in  Kerry.  The  association  of  w^ater  with  a  grave  is  most 
common  in  Irish  lecrend.  When  the  heroes  of  the  Partholan 
saga  are  buried,  springs  of  water  arise  from  their  graves,  and 
lakes  are  sometimes  formed  by  the  water  flowing  from  them. 
The  way  into  a  sidh  or  palace  of  the  dead  within  a  tumulus  or  hill 
was  by  passing  under  the  waters  of  a  well.  To  illustrate  this 
association  of  ideas  I  may  here  quote  the  account  of  the  well  at 
Findmag,  called  Slan,  in  which,  as  recorded  in  the  "Tripartite  Life 
of  Patrick,"  a  magus  (that  is,  a  driii)  was  buried.  The  following  is 
the  translation  of  the  passage  by  Dr.  W' hitley  Stokes  f  :  "  They 
told  Patrick  that  the  heathen  honoured  the  well  as  if  it  were  a 
god.  Now,  the  well  w^as  four-cornered,  and  there  was  a  four- 
cornered  stone  above  it.  Now,  the  foolish  folk  believed  that  a 
certain  dead  prophet  had  made  a  bibliothcca  (sic)  \J  a.TToQr\Ky]\  for 
himself  under  the  stone  in  the  water,  that  it  might  wash  his  bones 
always,  because  he  feared  the  fire.  And  Patrick  was  jealous  for 
the  living  God,  and  said,  '  Ye  say  untruly  that  this  fountain  was 
King  of  Waters'  (Rex  Aquarum),  for  he  did  not,  as  they  did,  hold 
it  to  be  King  of  Waters.  And  Patrick  bade  them  lift  up  the 
stone,  and  they  were  unable  to  do  so.  But  Patrick  .  .  .  lifted 
it,"  etc.  This  prophet,  it  is  observed  (Colgan,  "  Tr.  Th.,"  p.  139), 
was  a  "  magus  qui  aquam  ut  numen  propitium  colebat,  et  ignem 
habebat  ut  infestum,"  so  that  "curaverit  moriens  sua  ossa  sub  illo 
saxo  in  fonte  recondi." 

In  another  account,  in  the  Book  of  Armagh,  it  is  stated  that  the 
magi,  that  is,  the  wizards  or  druids,  used  to  reverence  this  well 
Sldji,  or  King  of  the  Waters,  and  offer  gifts  to  it,  as  if  it  were  a 
L^od,   and  also  that  it  was  completely  covered  overhead  with  a 

t  "  Trip.  Life,"  pp.  122  and  323. 


Names  and  Legends.  771 

large  square  flag,  excepting  in  one  place,  where  there  was  a  split 
(or  slit),  through  which  people  were  wont  to  drop  into  the  well 
their  offerings  of  gold  and  silver. 

The  crevice  or  slit  here  mentioned  will  recall  at  once  the 
several  examples  in  Ireland  (see  Ballyganner-South  in  Clare),  and 
the  numerous  instances  in  foreign  lands,  where  a  small  crevice, 
aperture,  or  hole  occurs  in  the  side,  end,  or  top  of  a  dolmen. 

O'Donovan  justly  compares  this  well  at  Findmag,  supposed  to 
have  been  at  Finvoy  {i.e.  Moy-Fin  or  Find-moy ;  moy=:mag) 
near  Lough  Ree  in  Roscommon,  with  that  called  "Tober  Ghraine" 
at  Ballycroum  in  Clare.f  In  this  latter  instance  the  well  had 
been  covered  over  by  the  erection  of  a  four-square  structure, 
which  was,  in  fact,  a  dolmen  of  the  iarge-cist  type  found  in  that 
county,  and  at  the  west  end  of  the  roofing-stone  of  which  was  a 
small  hole  or  aperture. 

The  name  "  King  of  the  Waters,"  which  in  Irish  may  likely 
enough  have  been  Tober  Righ  in  Domuin  (or  in  Domain),\  that 
is,  "  Well  of  the  King  of  the  Deep,"  calls  for  special  comment.  In 
Ireland,  and  the  West  especially,  are  to  be  found  scores  of  wells 
bearing  the  name  Tobereendoney,  explained  to  mean  Tober  Righ 
an  Domnach,  "Well  of  the  King  of  Sunday,"  for  the  word  Domnach, 
taken  as  a  loan-word,  stands  for  the  Dies  Dominica,  or  Sunday,  as 
well  as  the  ^des  Dominica,  or  Church.  The  name  of  wells  so 
called  is  generally  supposed  to  have  originated  with  Patrick, 
and  the  special  day  in  the  year  set  apart  for  their  veneration  was 
"  Garland  Sunday."  The  ancient  Irish,  however,  independently 
of  any  loan-word,  had  their  own  word  domuin,  "  the  deep,"  with 
which  word,  again,  may  be  associated  the  name  of  a  god  Domnu, 
belonging  in  a  special  manner  to  the  traditionary  people  called 
Fir  Domnann.  This  name  appears  in  that  of  Slieve  Donnart 
(Doman-,  or  Domnan-gard)  in  Down,  and  may  be  traced  around 
the  Baltic  in  the  ancient  name  of  the  Gulf  of  Bothnia,  Dumn's 
Haaf,  as  w^ell  as  in  that  of  Dumns  Nses  in  Finland,  and  of 
another,  Domns  Nees  in  the  Gulf  of  Riga.  The  "  Dumnonion 
Akron"  in  Cornwall,  and  the  name  of  the  Dumnonii  in  that 
peninsula,  may  mark  an  early  settlement  of  the  people  who  bore 
this  sea-god's  name  on  the  coasts  of  Britain.  To  this  question 
I  shall  return  in  the  sequel. 

It  is  plain  that  the  well-worship  practised  on  Garland  Sunday 

t  p.  95.  t  Windisch.,  "  Worterb.,"  in  voc. 


772  The  Dolmens  of  Ireland. 

was  attributed  to  a  pagan  origin,  for  it  was  associated  with  the 
ancient  deity  whom  Patrick,  having  expelled  from  Croagh  Patrick, 
was  said  to  have  converted.  This  was  Crom  Dubh,  and  from 
him  this  Sunday,  when  the  wells  were  worshipped,  was  called 
also  "  Crom  Dubh's  Day." 

It  is  not  in  Ireland  alone  that  dolmens  are  associated  with  the 
notion  of  wells  and  water-springs.  The  Portuguese  names,  Anta 
do  Fontao,  Fonte  Coberta,  Anta  do  Fonte-de-Mouratao,  and  the 
French  names,  Fonte  de  Rourre  and  Fonte  nay  le  Marmion,  show 
this  to  be  the  case. 

In  the  Diocese  of  Lyons,  as  we  find  in  the  "  Anecdota  "  of 
Etienne  de  Bourbon,  the  "  Holy  Dog  "  Guinefort  was  buried  in  a 
well  over  which  a  cairn  was  raised.f 

Superstitions  about  water  issuing  from  the  burial-mounds  of 
ancient  Danish  and  Scandinavian  gods  and  heroes  are  to  be 
found  scattered  through  the  sagas.  The  "  sepulchral  waters " 
which  the  tombs,  if  opened,  were  supposed  to  discharge,  were 
believed  to  emanate  from  the  Gioll,  which  was  the  Styx  of  Norse 
mythology.  J 

To  return  to  the  Leaba,  or  "  Bed."  That  of  St.  Molaisse 
was  on  Devenish  Island,  in  Lough  Erne.  It  was,  says  Mr. 
Wakeman,  a  small  quadrangular  work  of  earth  enclosing  a  stone 
coffin,  greatly  broken.  "In  connection,"  he  adds,  "with  a  con- 
siderable number  of  the  primitive  churches  of  Ireland,  may  be 
seen  a  small  detached  enclosure  called  in  the  native  lan^uasfe  the 
Aker/a,  bed,  or  tomb  of  the  founder."  In  many  instances  which 
have  come  under  my  notice  it  was  the  custom  of  the  superstitious 
to  lie  in  these  "  beds  "  at  night,  for  the  cure  of  ailments. 

Sometimes,  as  at  Lough  Derg,  the  object  of  the  pilgrimages  to 
such  places  was  penitential.  The  so-called  Purgatory,  or,  rather, 
Passage  to  Purgatory  there,  was  originally  a  cave  in  St.  Aveog's 
Island,  in  which  he  was  said  to  have  been  buried.  The  cultus  was 
afterwards  removed  to  Station  Island,  where  it  is  still  kept  up. 
The  penitential  beds  of  seven  "  Saints  "  were  shown  there,  con- 
sisting of  circles  enclosed  by  walls  about  2  feet  high,  each  one 
having  a  small  gap  by  way  of  entrance.  It  is  believed  that  the 
saints  lay  several  nights  upon  these  beds,  by  way  of  penance  for 

t  The  extremely  interesting  notice  of  the  superstition  practised  at  this  place  is  contained  in 
"Anecdotes  historiques,  legendes  et  apologues,  tires  du  recueil  inedit  d'Etienne  de  Bourbon, 
dominicain  du  xiii'^  siecle,"  par  A.  Lecoy  de  la  ^Iarche  (P.tiis,  1877),  p.  325. 

+  See  T.  Bartholinus,  "De  Contempts  Mortis  apud  Danos,"  Haf.  1689,  p.  276,  et seqq. 


Names  and  Legends.  "j'j-x, 


their  sins  and  those  of  the  people.  Such  enclosures  are  termed 
Ullas, — that  is,  tUadh, — stone  tombs. f 

The  most  important  part  of  the  pilgrimage,  however,  is  that 
which  used  to  take  place  in  a  cave  capable  of  holdino-  six  or  eio-ht 
persons,  where  it  was  believed  the  pains  and  torments  which 
await  the  wicked  in  another  world  might  be  experienced  by  those 
who  entered  it.  ...  In  this  cave  the  devotees  had  to  remain  all 
night,  and  sleep  was  denied  them.  In  1630  the  practice  was  put 
a  stop  to  owing  to  many  persons  losing  their  lives  by  it,  but  in  the 
reign  of  James  II.  a  new  cave  was  hollowed  out,  and  kept  open 
till  I  781,  when  the  priests  closed  it  as  dangerous,  and  a  darkened 
building,  still  called  the  "  prison,"  was  substituted. 

Such  were  the  practices  observed  down  to  our  own  times  in 
the  Beds  or  Leabas  of  the  Saints,  which  I  believe  to  be  only  a 
survival  of  the  cultus  once  performed  in  the  cells  of  the  orio-inal 
Leabas,  that  is,  the  dolmens. 

The  term  was  long  retained  by  the  Irish  in  the  sense  of  a 
sepulchre.  MacFirbis  speaks  of  the  Leaba-an-Eich  Bhuidhe,  the 
Bed  of  the  Chesnut  Horse,  erected  by  Sen  Brian  O'Dowd,  at 
Longford,  early  in  the  14th  century,  and  at  about  the  close  of  the 
same  century,  or  beginning  of  the  next,  the  tomb  of  a  kino-  of  the 
Hy-Maine  is  so  designated  in  an  inscription  in  the  Abbey  of 
Knockmoy  in  Galway.J 

FeINNE   and    HiJNEN. 

Leaba  Feine,  or  Feinne,  was,  according  to  many  authorities, 
though  now  it  is  fallen  greatly  out  of  use,  the  name  given  by  the 
Irish  to  the  tombs  of  their  chiefs,  and  its  application  to  dolmens 
proves  the  existence  of  the  belief  that  the  purpose  of  their  erection 
was  sepulchral  and  commemorative. 

Similar  monuments  in  Scandinavia  and  Denmark  were  at- 
tributed to  the  Jsette,  lotuns  or  lotnar.  In  North  Germany  and 
Holland  they  were  ascribed  to  the  H linen,  or  Huns.  Both  the 
Jaette  and  the  Hiinen  were  held  to  have  been  giants,  and  so  were 
the  Feinne  in  Ireland,  for  synonyms  for  Leaba-na-Feinne  were 
Leaba-na-bhfer  m6r,  meaning  Bed  of  the  Big  Men,  or  Giants,  and 
Tuaim-an-fhir  m6r,  whence  the  common  name,  "  The  Giant's 
Grave."     Wherever  found  they  are  attributed  to  giants  or  dwarfs. 

To  discover,   then,  the  true  meaning  of  Feinne  is  of  equal 

t  See  "  Sanas  Chormaic,"  in  voc.  \  Wood-Martin,  R.S.M.,  p.  197. 


774  The  Dolmens  of  Ireland. 

interest  and  importance.  The  conclusion  I  have  arrived  at,  for 
reasons  which  I  will  state,  is  that  it  reached  Ireland  from  a  very 
ancient  germ-land  on  the  shores  of  the  Southern  Baltic,  that  it  is 
referable  to  the  same  root  as  the  name  Fenni  in  Tacitus,  Phinni 
in  Ptolemy,  Finni  and  Finnaithse  in  Jordanes,  and  that  it  means 
"  Hounds."  It  would  thus  be  equivalent  in  meaning  to  cu  in 
Celtic,  and  to  Jmnd  in  German,  terms  which  were  regarded  as 
honourable  distinctions  among  the  northern  peoples  of  Europe, 
while  among  the  southern  they  were  held  to  be  marks  of  contempt. 

The  connection  of  hounds  with  the  legendary  tales  of  Finn 
Mac  Cumhail  is  a  circumstance  which  runs  parallel  with  the  con- 
nection of  that  chieftain  with  his  Fians  or  Fi'anna.f  "  Bran,"  for 
example,  is  a  man,  a  hero,  who  speaks  and  acts  as  a  human  being. 
To  the  Celtic  cil  there  is  attached  a  precisely  similar  meaning,  that 
of  a  hero  as  well  as  a  hound — a  dog-of-war,  in  short.  To  bear  out 
this  view,  Leaba-na-Con,  the  Hounds'  Bed,  is  a  synonym  for 
Leaba-na-Feinne.  The  idea  of  hunting  is  inseparable  from  the 
word  Fian.  "In  composition,"  says  Mr.  Standish  Hayes  O'Grady, 
"it  means  'relating  to  the  Fenians,'  hence  'adapted  for  or  be- 
longing to  hunting,  which  was  their  chief  employment  and 
pastime.' "J  The  Fiann,§  or  Fianna,  were  Finn  Mac  Cumhail's 
standing  army ;  Fi'an  means  a  hero,  and  Fene  is  one  of  the 
names  for  the  ancient  people  of  Ireland.  The  earliest  example 
of  the  occurrence  of  the  word  Fian  is  in  the  Book  of  Armaofh,l| 
the  only  really  Old  Irish  ^  MS.  preserved  in  the  island,  and 
which  dates  from  the  beginning  of  the  ninth  century.  The 
passage  runs  :  "  jugulavit  me  Fian  maicc  Maicc  Con,"  Fian  son  of 
Maccon  killed  me  ;  or,  to  render  it  teutonic^,  Finn  Hundeson's  son 
killed  me. 

We  have  the  authority  of  Dr.  Whitley  Stokes  for  referring 

the  words   fiann  and   fene  to  one  and  the  same  root.     I  quote 

his  words  as  follows  :    "  The  etymology  of  fiann  [y^^x^nzo.  ftannas, 

/dnnid)  seems  clear.      As  siaim,  '  chain,'  comes  from  the  root  si, 

'  to   bind,'  so  fiann   is   derived   (by    the  7m-suffix,   as    the  masc- 

t  See  much  of  interest  on  this  point  in  Mr.  J.  F.  Campbell's  "Leabhar  na  Feinne,"  ^._f.  the 
mythical  hound  Bran,  whom  the  sea-rovers  demand  (p.  33) ;  "the  whelp,"  ?'.<?.  son  "of  Conn," 
(xi.  No.  22)  ;  "  the  cry  of  hounds  the  best  music  "  (id.,  No.  23) ;  the  death  of  Bran,  and  the  great 
dog-fight  (p.  148,  ei  scqq.).    See  also  his  "  Tales  of  the  West  Highlands,"  Ixxxv. 

J  "Toruigheacht  Dhiarmuda  agus  Ghrainne,"  Trans.  Ossian.  Soc,  1854,    p.  IIO. 

§  Fian  is  a  collective  noun  meaning  a  body  of  men. 

II  14.  a  2. 

II  1  use  this  term  technically,  and  to  distinguish  it  from  the  "  Middle  Iri>h  MS."  which  begins 
with  the  1 2th  century. 


Names  and  Legends.  775 

/tan,]  '  a  hero,'  by  the  no-suffix)  from  the  root  vei  or  z>i,  *  to 
drive,'  '  to  hunt.'  This  root  is  inferred  from  the  Lithuanian 
z^eju,  vijau,  vyti,  'to  hunt,'  the  Church-Slavonic  voj,  'warrior,' 
the  Old  Norse  vei'^r,  '  hunting,'  and  possibly  the  Latin  ve-nari. 
From  the  same  root  comes  the  Old  \x\^fc'ne,  Irishman,  an  Old 
Celtic  veinio-s,  the  genitive  plural  of  which  occurs  in  the  so-called 
Fiacc's  Hymn.  This  poem  is  certainly  not  later  than  the 
beginning  of  the  ninth  century,  and  there  is  no  reason  for  regard- 
ing it  as  interpolated."  J 

The  hypothesis  that  fine  meant  a  hound  would  in  no  wise 
detract  from,  but  rather  tend  to  support,  the  view  that  this 
etymology  is  the  correct  one.  It  is  not  found,  however,  used 
in  this  sense  in  Ireland,  but  when  we  turn  to  the  shores  of  the 
Baltic  we  find  that  it  was  so,  and  apparently  among  Finns  and 
Germans  alike.  If,  in  the  case  of  the  Esthonian  Finns,  it  be 
objected  that  the  root  is  Aryan,  we  would  answer  that  in  the 
case  of  their  country  least  of  all,  hard  on  the  borderland  of  the 
two  great  families  of  language,  should  it  be  attempted  to  set 
bounds  and  limits  to  this  or  that  root  word,  especially  since 
modern  research,  if  it  has  not  absolutely  established  the  truth  of 
the  so-called  "  Finnic  hypothesis,"  which  would  see  "  in  the  Finnic 
languages  the  survival  of  the  primitive  form  of  speech  out  of 
which  the  Aryan  languages  were  developed,"  §  has  at  all  events 

+  Gen.  fein  ?  t  *'  The  Academy,"  Feb,  28,  1891. 

§  Isaac  Taylor,  "  Origin  of  the  Aryans,"  p.  295.  Canon  Taylor  has  been  the  popular  exponent  of 
this  theory  in  England.  In  a  paper  read  before  the  Anthropological  Institute  in  1888  (Journ.  p.  248), 
he  had  expressed  his  belief  "  that  the  Finnic  languages  exhibit  a  survival  of  the  primitive  form  of 
speech  out  of  which  the  Aryan  languages  were  developed,"  or  to  quote  his  view  more  fully,  "I 
believe,"  he  says  in  another  place,  "  that  in  the  Finns  of  Finland,  and  the  Esthonians  and  Liefs  of 
Courland  and  Livonia,  we  discover  iji  situ  a  people  who  can  be  shown  anthropologically  and 
linguistically,  to  be  the  survivors  of  the  race  from  which  the  Aryans  were  evolved."  We  seem  to 
catch  the  echo  of  a  sigh  rather  than  of  a  deprecatory  murmur  in  the  words  with  which  the 
indefatigable  Schrader  criticises  the  data  on  which  this  bold  hypothesis  is  based,  which,  were 
it,  indeed,  at  present  capable  of  proof,  would  set  at  rest  so  much  that  many  a  life-work  has 
failed  to  elucidate.  "  Unfortunately,"  he  says,  "  the  celebrated  anthropologist  conceives  the  com- 
parison of  two  families  of  language  as  being  much  easier  and  simpler  than  it  really  is  "  ("Sprachver- 
gleichung  und  Urgeschichte,"  transl.  Jevons,  p.  105).  i-  j  r 

This  theory  had  been  entertained  by  various  scholars  of  eminence  abroad,  and  studied  from 


_.^...w...„ - ..- prehi ,  . 

intimate  contact  with  the  original  Aryan  people,  and  at  showing  that  it  was  from  a  region  closely 
touching  those  languages  that  the  germ  of  the  Aryan  social  organism  was  put  forth.  In  1888,  Dr. 
Leopold  von  Schroeder  of  Dorpat  followed  up  this  with  a  comparison  of  the  marriage  customs  of  the 
Esthonian  Finns  with  those  of  the  peoples  who  spoke  the  Indo-Germanic  languages,  in  a  work 
entitled,  "Die  Hochzeitsbrauche  der  Esten  und  eineger  anderer  finnisch-ugrischer  Volkerschaften 
in  Vergleichung  mit  denen  indogermanischen  Volker." 

A  comparison  of  the  Folk-lore  and  customs  of  the  Feinne  in  Ireland,  of  lake  legends, 
for  example,  of  Finn  himself  with  Kallewe  Poeg.  of  the  custom  of  taking  sweat-baths  before 
hunting,  with  those  of  the  Esthonians,  ancient  and  modern,  tends  not  a  little  to  strengthen  the 
theory.  For  vapour-baths  among  the  Finns,  see  Pref.  to  Crawford's  "  Kalevala,  vi.  ;  for  the  same 
practice  among  the  Scythians,  see  Herod,  iv.  c.  75  ;  for  the  same  among  the  1-  ianna,  see  U  Mahony  s 
"  Keating,"  p.  346  ;  it  is  my  opinion  that  the  Fualacta-na-Fiann  were  formed  for  this  purpose  ; 
there  is  a  sweat-house  at  Inishmurray. 


776  The  Dolmens  of  Ireland. 

proved  the  existence  of  points  of  identity  which  cannot  be  ex- 
plained, except  on  the  ground  of  one  common  origin  in  one  com- 
mon primeval  home,  where  the  respective  races  dwelt  side  by  side. 

The  word  for  dog  among  the  Esthonian  Finns  was  peni,  and 
among  the  Finns  of  Finland  pcnikka,\  from  whom,  according  to 
Ihre,  the  Lapps  borrowed  it.  Other  forms  were  Penni,  Pin,  and 
PiJig,  in  the  Esthonian  of  Dorpat,  the  Augernsche  Liben,  and 
Livonian  near  Salis,  respectively,  while  in  the  Lettish,  near  Libau, 
a  dosf  was  Funs.  In  the  latter  lang^uao-e,  Pinnis  signified  the 
Finns,  and  in  Lithuanian  Pumas.  "  The  Finns,"  says  Schrader, 
"  on  reaching  the  Baltic,  were  acquainted  with  the  dog  {peni), 
among  whom  it  was  domesticated."  J  Now,  it  was  from  German 
sources  that  Tacitus  must  have  received  his  account  of  the 
Fenni,  and  also  the  form  of  their  name,  which,  with  the  change 
usual  in  German  from  "  p  "  into  "  f,"  would  be  their  own  word  peni, 
by  which  it  is  possible  that  they  called  themselves,  while  the  more 
northern  branch  of  their  race,  to  whom  the  name  Finn  was  also 
applied,  though  by  others,  and  not  themselves,  called  themselves 
Suouti,  which,  I  think,  signifies  Bears,  or  Bear-men. § 

That  another  division  of  the  Finns  bore  the  name  of  the  dog 
is,  I  think,  not  improbable.  These  were  the  Cwen  Finns,  of 
whom  Othere  speaks, j|  and  whom  Miillenhoff  places  north  of  the 
Malar  lake.  In  Samoyedish,  the  language  which  retains  the 
ancient  Turanian  elements  in  their  purist  form,  wueno  is  a  dog, 
with  a  diminutive  wueniko,  perhaps  not  unrelated  to  peiii  and 
penikkOy  and  with  this  word  I  venture  to  think  Cwen  may  be 
associated.  This  name  may  have  given  rise  to  a  legend  as  old,  at 
least,  as  the  time  of  Tacitus,  who  speaks  of  the  Sitones  as  tribes 
who  were  under  the  rule  of  a  wotnan.^     The  position  of  these 

t  Schrader,  trans.  Jevons,  p.  360;  see  also  Ahlqvist,  "Die  Kulturwcitter  in  den  Westfinnischen 
Sprachen,"  cap.  i. 

\  Miillenhoff,  K.  ("Deutsche  Altertumskunde,"  ii.  p.  53),  while  he  holds  that  the  customary 
derivation  of  Fenni,  Finni  from  the  Goth./aw/,  O.N.  jfen,  etc.,  "  a  maish,"  is  quite  inadmissible, 
derives  it  from  a  root  which  gives  the  Latin  pinna,  with  the  sense  of  a  wing,  and  swiftness. 

§  An  analogous  case  of  a  change  from  "p"  to  "f  "  in  primitive  Finnic  on  the  one  hand,  and 
German  and  Irish  on  the  other,  perhaps  occurs  in  the  word  palo,  the  Finnic  for  "fire"  (whence 
"  bal,"  the  Norse  for  a  funeral  pyre),  and  the  German  Pliol,  a  fire,  or  sun-god,  worshipped  under 
the  image  of  a  burning  wheel,  and  Fal,  also  a  sun-god,  connected  with  a  wheel  in  Irish  mythology. 
It  is  curious  to  notice  that  the  Germans  themselves  anciently  possessed  the  word_/I'««  in  the  sense 
of  a  dog.  Grimm  explains  it  by  ra«/j  _/Ijw/«rt,  connecting  it  with  the  words  phan  asid  phano  in 
the  Lex  Salica  [compare  the  possible  Phainiomc,  or  Fanoncs  of  Ptolemy],  meaning  "  catulus,"  as 
well  as  with  all  the  Indo-Germanic  names  for  dog,  as  the  Rig-Vedic  t^van,  Zend  spd,  Armenian  "sun, 
Greek  kvuiv  {kwos),  Latin  cants,  Gothic  hund,  Lithuanian  szji,  and  Gaedhelic  cil  [cini,  con).  One  old 
German  lexicographer,  Johannes  Frisius,  of  Tiguer  (edit.  1568),  gives  '*  Canis  =  ein  hund  odcr 
hiindtm  ;  ein  Fann.'"  Another,  Joshua  Maaler,  of  Zurich  (edit.  1561),  gives  '■^  Fann  odcr  hiind.'s- 
bratit  =  canis  fezf/ii/ia." 

II  King  Alfred's  Orosius,  trans,  Bosworth,  edit.  1859,  pp.  20,  21. 

^  Germ.  c.  45;  see  also  H.  Vegelius,  "  De  antiqua  genie  Quenorum." 


Names  and  Legends.  ']']'] 


Sitones  appears  to  be  identical  with  that  of  the  Cwens.  Of  this 
very  country,  Adam  of  Bremen  f  speaks  as  the  terra  feminarum, 
the  "land  of  the  women,"  that  is,  as  he  adds,  "  of  the  Amazons," 
or,  as  the  Sagas  have  it,  "  the  giant  maids  of  lotunheim,"  "  the 
Valkyrias  who  come  and  destroy  the  happy  time  of  the  gods." 
The  Sagas  and  Saxo  speak  of  Keenugardhr,  Conogardia,  as 
situated  near  Gardhariki  and  Holgardhr.;  Next  to  these 
Amazons  of  the  North,  Adam  of  Bremen  places  another  mytho- 
logical people  called  the  Cynecephali,  or  Dog-Heads,  who  are 
also  referred  to  by  Paulus  Diaconus,  as  being  falsely  stated  by 
the  Lombard  leaders  to  be  in  their  camp,  in  order  to  strike  terror 
into  their  enemies.  Under  the  Gaedhelic  form  Conchend  {Con- 
ceann),  the  name  of  a  people  called  Dogs'- Heads,  seemingly  piratical 
hordes,  occurs  in  ancient  Irish  tradition.  They  fight  with  the 
Curroid,  and  being  defeated  by  the  latter,  are  driven  off  the  sea.§ 
Another  reason  for  associating  the  name  Cwen  with  "  dog  "  is  that, 
besides  bearing  the  names  lotunheim,  and  Riesenland,  the  country 
of  the  Cwen  Finns  was  called  by  the  Teutonic  people  Hunaland, 
or  Hundinginland,  that  is,  Houndland,  or  Land  of  the  Hundings, 
or  Hound-men. 

The  legend  of  the  women  may  indeed  be  attributable  to  a 
mistaken  notion  that  Cwen  meant  a  woman,  as  indeed  it,  or 
something  very  like  it,  does  in  so  many  Aryan  languages,  for 
example,  the  Greek  yvvr\,  the  Gothic  qino,  the  Old  High  German 
chiona,  the  Irish  cuiniu,  the  Anglo-Saxon  even,  the  English  queeuy 
the  Scottish  quean,  the  Old  Norse  kvcean,  and  the  Swedish 
quinna,  whence  the  district  of  the  Cwens  was  called  Ouinnaland. 
The  nearer  we  approach  to  the  Old  High  German  forms,  chiona, 
chona,  cimena,  qnena,  the  more  close  does  the  resemblance  to  cwen 
become.  The  consequence  of  this  may  well  have  been,  that 
when  the  Aryan-speaking  people  heard  that  among  the  allophylian 
people  to  the  north  of  them,  there  was  a  race  of  Cwens,  they 
interpreted  it  "  Women." 

One  is  tempted  to  inquire  whether  there  is  not  something 
more  than  a  mere  coincidence  between  these  Scandinavian  Amazons 
and  the  Scythian  Amazons  of  the  Caucasus.  "  The  mythological 
literature  of  the  North,"  says  Mr.  Du  Chaillu,  "bears  evidence 
of   a   belief   prevalent    among    the   people    that    their    ancestors 

t  "  De  situ  Daniae,"  cap.  222,  224,  and  228. 

X  Fornald.  sog.  2,  294  ;  3,  362  Form,  sog.  5,  271,  297  ;  and  Saxo-Gramm. 

§  O'Curry,  M.  and  C,  vol.  ii.  p.  31 1. 

VOL.  III.  F 


778  The  Dolmens  of  Ireland. 

migrated  at  a  remote  period  from  the  shores  of  the  Black  Sea, 
through  South-west  Russia,  to  the  shores  of  the  Baltic."  f 

Recent  researches  in  comparative  archaeology  have  proved 
that  "in  the  neighbourhood  of  the  Black  Sea,  near  to  the  old 
Greek  settlement,  graves  similar  to  those  of  the  North "  are 
found,  "  containing  ornaments  and  relics  remarkably  like  those 
found  in  the  ancient  orraves  of  Scandinavia.  ...  If  we  follow 
the  river  Dnieper  upwards  from  its  mouth  in  the  Black  Sea,  we 
see  in  the  museums  of  Kief  and  Smolensk  many  objects  of  types 
exactly  similar  to  those  found  in  the  graves  of  the  North." 

The  southern  lotunheim  was  the  country  between  the  Dnieper 
and  the  Volga  and  Don,  south  of  which  was  Asgard,  on  the 
shores  of  the  Palus  Mseotis.  The  chief  town  of  lotunheim  was 
Utgard  (.'*  lot-Iut-gard).  Now  here,  curiously  enough,  dwelt  in  the 
time  of  the  invasion  of  the  Huns  a  tribe  called  Utigures,  who 
also  seem  to  have  borne  the  name  Unugures,  and  to  have  been 
accounted  as  Hunni  and  Bulgars,  of  which  latter  people  it  was 
said  that  they  were  toto  orbc  terribiles.\  Associated  also  with  the 
Utigures,§  were  the  Cutrigures,  or  Cotragi,  a  tribe  of  whom  it  will  be 
necessary  to  speak  later  on  in  connection  with  an  Irish  people 
of  similar  name.  At  present  it  will  be  sufficient  to  point  out  firstly 
the  resemblance  between  67gard  and  ^/igures  ;  and,  secondly, 
the  coincidence  between  the  facts  that  the  latter  people  were 
classed  as  Hunni,  and  so  were  the  lotr  of  the  northern  lotunheim. 
Olaus  Magnus,||  Bishop  of  Upsala,  states  that  in  the  Province  of 
Middelpsed  (the  southern  portion  of  West  Bothnia,  the  old  Ouinna- 
or  Cwen-land),  "  the  majority  of  the  population  are  called  by  the 
name  of  Hunni."  In  old  Gothic  poetry,  says  Rudbeck,^  the 
entire  cavalry  came  under  the  designation  Hunni,  which  reminds 
us  that  Procopius  ff  speaks  of  the  splendid  horsemanship  of  the 
Huns,  who,  in  Scythian  fashion,  shot  their  arrows  from  the  saddle. 
"  Joutte  "  in  Swedish  means  a  bow,  whence  possibly  lot.  Jute,  etc. 

From  the  country  about  the  Caucasus  came  the  Amazons,  who, 
following  a  custom  similar  to  that  said  to  have  been  introduced 
into  the  North  by  Odin,  burned  their  dead,  and  raised  over  them 
immense  tumuli. 

It  appears  from  Strabo  that  the  precise  district  assigned  by 
geographers  for  the  abode  of  the  Amazons  lay  in  the  mountains 

t  "The  Viking  Age,"  p.  25.  %  Cassiodorus,  Var.,  8,  So. 

§  See  Procopius,  Agathias,  Menander,  Leo  Diaconus,  and  Jordanes  for  these  peoples. 

II  Lib.  2,  cap.  18,  pi.  61.  1  Atlantis,  ii.  533.  ft  Hist.  Goth.,  i.  i. 


Names  and  Legends.  779 


to  the  north  of  Albania.  According  to  Diodoms  Siculus,  the 
Amazons  invaded  Thrace,  Asia  Minor,  the  ^gean  Islands,  Syria, 
Arabia,  Egypt,  and  Libya.  They  fought  with  the  Phrygians 
and  Trojans.  The  language  they  spoke  is  stated  to  have  been 
Scythian.  That  they  made  their  way  into  Thessaly  appears  from 
Plutarch's  statement  that  their  tumuli  existed  in  his  day  near 
Scotussaf  and  the  Cynocephalus,  or  Dog-Head  Mountain. 

With  regard  to  the  presence  of  actual  Huns,  in  the  sense  of  any 
Mongolian  followers  of  Attila  in  Sweden,  the  old  writer  Torfaeus 
expressly  states  that  "  at  various  times  Hunni  obtained  settlements 
there."  Ammianus  Marcellinus  says  that  the  Huns  extended  from 
the  Sea  of  Asov  to  the  Icy  Sea.  Priscus  was  informed  by  the 
western  ambassadors  that  Attila  had  penetrated  even  to  the  isles  of 
the  ocean.  Mr.  Hodgkin  thinks  that  this  statement  may  be  more 
nearly  true  than  one  is  disposed  at  first  to  think  possible,  and 
that  the  king  of  the  Huns  may  really  have  annexed  Norway  and 
Sweden  to  his  dominions. J  It  is  a  circumstance  which  must  not  be 
passed  over  that  both  in  Germany  and  Scandinavia  traditions  of 
Attila  not  only  existed  but  formed  the  staple  of  popular  national 
epic,  and  saga.  In  the  Niebelungen  Lied  he  is  Etzel ;  in  the 
Sagas  of  the  North  he  is  Atli ;  he  dwells  on  the  Danube,  in 
Hunland,  and,  as  Mr.  Hodgkin  and  others  have  pointed  out,  he 
is  by  no  means  the  terrible  person  represented  in  the  ecclesiastical 
legends — the  horror  of  the  Roman,  and  the  abomination  of  the 
Christian,  but  rather  a  mild  and  insignificant  person  correspond- 
ing to  Ailill,  the  husband  of  Medb,  in  the  Irish  romance  of  the 
Tain-bo-Cuailgne,  in  which  saga  I  should  not  be  surprised  if 
future  criticism  recognized,  as  its  far-away  historic  basis,  the 
greatest  tain  or  raid  known  to  history,  namely,  that  of  the  Hunnish 
Confederation  on  the  Roman  Empire,  an  event  which  on  the 
dispersal  of  the  tribes  who  took  part  in  it, — many  of  whom,  doubt- 
less, took  refuge  in  the  North, — must  have  left  an  indelible  im- 
pression on  the  mind  of  the  barbarians,  to  be  reproduced  in  prose 
saga,  and  in  song. 

The  existence  of  a  short,  dark,  fierce  race  of  rovers  in  the 
Baltic  countries,  which  might  actually  have  been  a  Mongolian 
remnant,  some  centuries  later,  is  proved  by  the  appearance  of  the 

t  It  has  often  struck  me  that  this  name  may  be  remotely,  but  not  impossibly,  connected  with 
that  of  Scuti  (see  Adam  of  Bremen)  and  Scoti. 

X  "  Italy  and  her  Invaders,"  vol.  it.  (1892),  p.  177. 


780  The  Dolmens  of  Ireland. 

Black  Danes  or  Danars — the  Dubh  Gaill — on  the  coasts  of  Ireland, 
in  the  year  795,  whose  skulls  present  closer  affinities  to  those  of 
Tartar  peoples  than  to  the  old  Turanian  or  Lappish  brachy- 
cephalic  type.  Independently,  however,  of  this  extreme  type 
introduced  into  Ireland  at  this  comparatively  late  date,  we  have 
to  take  into  account  the  presence  at  an  earlier  date  of  tribes  in. 
Ireland,  who,  while  they  were  not  Mongolian,  may  yet  have  had 
Tscudish  or  Kalmuck  affinities,  and  been  engaged  in  the  Hunnish 
wars  as  allies  of  Attila. 

The  tribal  names  Bolcraighe,  Bolg  Tuath  of  Baghna,  etc., 
give  us  reason  to  believe  that  a  people,  called  the  Fir-Bolg  or 
Bolg-men,  which  would  be  the  exact  equivalent  of  the  Norse 
Bolgr,  Greek  BovXyape<s,  Latin  Bulgari  and  Vulgares,  and  Arabian 
Bolgar,  had  formed  considerable  settlements  in  the  island.  The 
manners  and  customs  of  these  tribes,  as  I  intend  to  show,  were 
precisely  similar  to  those  of  the  Bulgars,  whom  Zeuss  and  others 
have  recognized  as  the  Hunnish  tribes  in  retreat,  not  necessarily- 
Mongolian — if,  indeed,  any  of  them  were  so — but  Germanic, 
Sclavonic,  Sclavo-Germanic,  Celto-Scythic — all,  indeed,  who  had 
allied  themselves  to  the  leader  of  the  Hunnish  Confederation, 
among  whom  we  may  specially  note  Heruli  and  Cotragi. 

The  sudden  break-up  of  this  loosely  constituted  alliance,  in- 
cluding Rugians,  Herulians,  Pannonians,  Vandals,  Sclavs,  Alans, 
and  Avars,  and  the  disappearance  of  the  more  distinctly 
Mongolic  or  Tartar  element,  is  one  of  the  most  singular  facts 
of  history.  May  not  some  of  those  who  took  part  in  it  have 
found  their  way,  under  the  name  of  the  Huns  and  the  lotuns,  the 
Bolg,  and  the  Cotragi,  into  the  islands  and  peninsulas  of  the 
remote  North  ? 

It  has  been  said  that  the  Hunnish  invasion, — the  pressure 
westward  of  tribes  from  the  Volga  and  the  Black  Sea, — caused 
the  wholesale  migration  of  the  Anglo-Saxons  into  Britain.  The 
result  would  have  been  that  the  lands  vacated  would  have  been 
occupied  by  the  new-comers,  while  Scotland  and  Ireland  would 
have  alone  been  open  to  the  latter  when  they  in  turn  set  sail  for 
the  North.f 

Two  points  which  strike  us  in  connection  with  the  history  of 
this  period  are,  first,  the  astonishing  ubiquity  of  the  various  tribes, 

+  The  old  German  writers  are  unanimously  of  opinion   that  the  Picts  and  Scots  came  from. 
Scythia  to  Germany,  and  from  Germany  to  the  British  Isles. 


Names  and  Legends.  781 

and,  second,  the  speed  with  which  they  must  have  accomplished 
their  journeys  from  place  to  place.  The  Heruli  are  an  instance 
in  point.  Now  on  the  Palus  Moeotis ;  now  on  the  Danube  and 
in  Pannonia  ;  now  on  the  southern  shores  of  the  Baltic,  on  the 
Pene  River  ;  now  in  Thule,  and  in  the  islands  of  the  North 
M'here,  to  judge  by  their  journey  thither  to  procure  a  king  from 
the  ancient  royal  stock,  their  original  home  lay  ;  at  one  time  in 
Italy,  at  another  in  Spain,  their  history  affords  an  illustration  of 
what  the  condition  of  Europe  was,  when  not  the  Scythian  plains 
alone,  but  the  whole  of  the  North  and  West  were  liable  at  any 
time  to  be  scoured  by  mixed  races  (as  these  Heruli  probably 
were),  who  on  land  were  as  proficient  in  the  saddle  and  with  the 
bow,  as  at  sea  they  were  in  their  "  beak-carved  "  galleys  with 
the  oar.  The  story  of  this  people  shows  us,  too,  that  it  is  not 
necessary  to  suppose  that,  although  we  find  this  or  that  tribe  on 
the  confines  of  Asia,  they  were  otherwise  than  at  home  in  the 
islands  and  peninsulas  of  the  North. 

It  appears  to  me  that  in  the  name  Hun  we  have  to  distinguish 
four  meanings,  all  developed  from  one  single  root  of  Finno- 
Aryan  origin,  />Z7i,  Jin,  Iiiuy  Jmn^  bearing  the  sense  of  swiftness, 
whence  "dog,"  "arrow,"  etc.  The  first  meaning  reaches  back  to 
prehistoric  times,  and  designates,  I  venture  to  think,  the  Finnic 
stock  in  Europe.  The  Germanic  people  applied  it  in  this  sense  to 
those  of  allophylian  race.  To  them  it  became  what  the  term 
"barbarian"  was  to  the  Latins  ;  hence,  possibly,  the  word  Hilnschaft 
for  peasantry  in  the  Freiburg  dialect. 

Later  on,  however,  as  the  power  and  presence  of  the  allophylian 
made  itself  increasingly  felt,  it  became  associated  with  warriors  and 
honourable  deeds.  "  Hun,"  says  Dederich,  "  is  the  mdh.  hiune,  a 
giant,  a  hero  of  old  time  sprung  from  a  very  ancient  stock."  It 
is  plain  that  it  does  not  mean  the  Huns  of  history.  This  Hun 
was  here  in  name  long  before  the  appearance  of  the  Huns  in 
Europe,  and  the  rise  of  the  dominion  of  Attila.  In  the  Wanderers- 
liede,  the  name  Hun  appears  as  that  of  the  leader  of  the  Hatvere,f 
a  name  supposed  to  be  a  survival  of  that  of  the  Chattuarii,  the 
reputed  ancestors  of  the  Franks.  The  Hunaland  of  the  Edda 
is,  according  to  Dederich,  none  other  than  the  country  of  the 
Hugones,  or  Franks,  hiigon  being  Iiun  with  the  g  dropped. J    Again, 

t  Comp.  Hetwars  in  Beowulf,  supposed  to  be  the  Chatti,  or  Chattuarii. 

X   "  Hist,  und  Geograph.  Studien,"  Hermann  Dederich,  1877,  p.  iSo.     In  the  "  Quedlinburg 


782  The  Dolmens  of  Ireland. 

Hunlafing  is  the  name  of  an  Eoten  warrior  who  kills  Hengist. 
Grimm  gives  us  the  following  additional  proper  names  into 
which  Him  enters  in  composition  :  H6nolt,  Hunrat,  Althun,  and 
Folchun.  Finn,  as  a  proper  name,  which,  I  think,  is  allied  to  it, 
similarly  enters  into  the  composition  of  many  personal  names  in 
Ireland,!  on  the  one  hand,  and  Scandinavian  on  the  other.  Its 
appearance  in  Ireland  in  the  form  Fin7i  would  indicate  that  it 
had  passed  through  a  German  medium. 

Not  less  was  the  term  Hun  held  in  honour  in  the  North. 
Rudbeck,  after  identifying  it  with  huna,  a  hound,  and  deriving  it 
from  the  Gothic  hinna  =  "  assequi,"  "  celerlter  perficere,"  whence, 
he  says,  in  relation  to  the  chase,  it  means  "  feram  consequi,"  adds 
that  any  person,  therefore,  who  either  by  sea  or  land  excelled 
ia  the  chase  was  termed  by  the  Goths  a  Hun.  So  far  from  the 
term  "hound"  being  one  of  reproach,  it  was  considered  an 
honourable  distinction,  acquired  in  the  hunting-field,  or  on  the 
wave,  by  those  who  displayed  swiftness  in  pursuing  and  dexterity 
in  securing  their  prey.§  Sigurd  himself  is  described  as  the 
"  Hunnish  one."  This  is  precisely  the  sense  of  the  Irish  /m7i, 
and  its  Celtic  equivalent  in  meaning  C2c,  a  warrior. 

The  second  meaning  was  that  of  "  giant."  "  Lower  Germany," 
says  Jacob  Grimm — "  Westphalia  above  all — uses  /lime  in  the 
sense  of  *  giant.'  The  word  prevails  in  all  the  popular  traditions 
of  the  Weser  region,  and  extends  as  far  as  the  Groningen  country. 
A  form  of  it,  /i^7ie,  also  meaning  'giant,'  occurs  in  Wolfdietrich.'^ 
We  find  it  used  in  this  sense  in  the  case  of  the  dolmens  or 
hilnenbedde7i,  in  that  of  the  tumuli  or  hiinengrdber,  and  in  that  of 
any  object  of  prehistoric  antiquity  not  known  to  belong  to  any 
existing  people.  We  have  a  recognition  of  this  meaning  in  the 
"Glossary  of  Scherz,"  ||  who  gives  us:  "  Heune,  Hunnus, 
Hungarus,  item  Gigas,  hinc  Hunenloecher,  cavernse  antiquorum 
gigantum  :  hew7te,  Jmi7te  gigas,"  and  again,  "  Hunengraeber, 
sepulchra  gigantum  proprie  Hunnorum." 

Dr.  Paul  Wigand  speaks  of  "  Sorbold's  Grab  "  as  an  immense 

Chronicle '^  (Pertz  v.,  31)  we  read,  "  Glim  omnes  Fraiici  Hugones  vocabantur,  a  suo  quodam  duce 
Jlugone."  With  this  ' '  Hugon  "  I  am  much  tempted  to  identify  the  Hugaine  Mor  of  Irish  tradition, 
said  to  have  possessed  great  power  in  the  Western  Isles  of  Europe,  to  have  married  Cresarea, 
daughter  of  the  King  of  Gaul,  and  to  have  been  the  ancestor  of  an  Heremonian  dynasty.  See 
Kelly's  remarks  on  this  personage,  in  his  notes  on  "Cambrensis  Eversus,"  pp.  444,  504. 

t  See  the  index  to  the  "  Four  Masters,"  edit.  O'Donovan. 

X  See  Rask,  "  Samlede  tiklels  forhen  utrikte  Afhandlinger,"  1834,  i.  p.  107. 

§  The  work  of  gathering  together  and  mobilizing  the  army  of  the  Huns  was  spoken  of  as 
"hunting." 

II  Tom.  i.,  666  and  711. 


Names  and  Legends.  783 

dolmen  in  the  Borgerwald,  in  the  northern  part  of  the  Hum- 
meHnck,  in  the  diocese  of  Munster,  as  a  great  Jiiinenhaus .  About 
this  a  stanza  of  verse  is  current  which  runs  as  follows  : — 

"  De  Hunen  Konig  Sorwold 
Lig  begraven  in  Borgerwold 
In  een  golden  Husolt." 

As  early  as  the  thirteenth  century,  according  to  Lisch,  the 
names  reisen-dette7t  and  hilnengrdber  were  in  use  in  Mecklenburg 
and  Pomerania.  In  a  deed  of  the  monastery  of  Colbaz  in 
Dreger,f  in  1234,  occur  the  words,  via,  quce  dticit  in  timmlum 
gigantis.  In  1235  the  limits  of  the  same  monastery  are  stated  to 
run,  a  Unbus  lapidibtts  super  tres  trtimdos  paganorum,  whence  the 
"  allophylian,"  "  pagan,"  or  "  peasant  "  sense  appears.  In  the 
country  called  Circipene,  in  the  district  of  Demmin,  in  a  deed 
of  1 1 74,  mention  is  made  of  certain  tumuli  qui  Slavice  dicuntur 
'' trigorke"  aiitiquomm  sepiUchra.  In  a  rent-book  of  Freiburg 
iiiinengrdber  are  mentioned  in  1320  and  1344. 

The  notion  that  they  were  Giants'  Graves,  and  that  hilne 
meant  "giant"  at  all,  reached  Germany,  perhaps,  from  the  North, 
"  where,"  says  Grimm,  "  the  term  appears  to  have  been  applied  to  a 
primitive  mythic  race  supposed  to  inhabit  some  uncertain  region, 
much  the  same  as  the  lotens."  lotun  and  Finn  are  convertible 
terms  in  the  sagas,  and  their  country  is  Riesenland,  the  Giants' 
Land.  Himar,  however,  in  Old  Norse,  cannot  be  said  to  be 
actually  convertible  with  lotnar,  as  in  the  Badder  Saga  J  the 
Heunen  are  placed  after  the  Giants  as  a  younger  race.  The 
infiltration  of  Scandinavian  mythology  into  Germany  has  been 
shown  by  Grimm  and  others  to  be  an  unquestionable  fact,  and 
to  this,  and  not  to  any  independent  cause,  I  think  we  may  not 
be  wrong  in  assigning  its  meaning  of  "giant"  when  applied  to 
the  hilnenbedden,  which  are  exact  counterparts  of  the  jcettestue 
(literally  hunenkause7i),  "  Giants'  Abodes  "  in  the  North. 

A  third  meaning  of  H un  ( H  unen )  was  Sclaves.  As  the  Germans 
applied  the  term  in  general  to  all  allophylian  races,  so  in  especial 
they  applied  it  to  those  peoples  on  the  eastern  coast  of  the 
southern  Baltic,  who,  when  the  main  strength  of  the  German 
stock  had  gone  south  into  the  Danubian  provinces,  Pannonia  and 
Italy,  threw  themselves    into  the  vacant  districts,  and    extended 


t  "Cod.  Dipl.  Pomm.,"  p.  164.  X  No.  387. 


784  The  Dolmens  of  Ireland. 

their  settlements  to  the  Elbe.  Adam  of  Bremen  calls  Meshnoi,  a 
Sclavic  chief,  "  a  dosf."  Helmhold  savs  :  "  Saxonum  voce  Slavi 
canes  vocantur," — both  which  statements  imply  that  they  called 
them  Huni,  Hundi,  i.e.  Hunden,  "dogs."  The  absence  of  the  d  is 
immaterial.  In  Norse  mythology,  Hunaland,  the  fabulous  country 
which  was  equated  with  lotunheim,  the  land  of  the  Giants,  was 
stated  to  have  been  so  called  from  the  howling  of  dogs,  i.e.  it  was 
Hundaland.  That  Huni  meant  Sclaves  to  the  writers  of  Bede's 
time  is  clear,  from  a  passage  in  which  he  enumerates  the  peoples 
converted  by  Egbert.  To  the  German  scribes  of  the  twelfth  and 
thirteenth  centuries  above  quoted,  the  antiqiii  of  Pomerania  would 
have  signified  the  Sclaves.  All  that  was  ancient  would  have  been 
referred  to  them,  and  hence  it  is  open  to  question  whether  the 
name  Sepiilchra  Hiinnorum^  or  Hihie^tgrdbcr,  may  not  possibly 
have  arisen. 

With  respect  to  the  fourth  meaning  of  Hun,  namely,  the 
historic  Hunni,  or  Chuni,  of  Attila,  I  cannot  agree  with  Dederic 
and  those  who  think  that  no  connection  exists  between  this  name 
and  that  of  the  Hun  of  Germany  and  the  North.  Ptolemy  places 
Chuni  below  the  Sarmates  and  above  the  Pontus,  and  Dionysius 
Periegetes  locates  Hunni  on  the  Caspian.  From  these  small 
beginnings  it  appears  to  me  to  have  become  the  widely  extended 
name  for  the  race  to  which  the  Huns  of  Attila  belonged,  and  that, 
therefore,  the  fact  that  they  possessed  it  need  be  no  coincidence, 
but  a  genuine  survival  of  ancient  terms.  As  time  went  on,  it 
embraced  all  those  who  had  accepted  the  Hunnish  alliance,  and 
come  under  their  dominion.  "  Any  descendant,"  says  Mr.  Hodgkin, 
"  of  Gepidae,  Ostrogoths,  Rugians,  or  Herulians,  whose  fathers  had 
accepted  Hunnish  rule, would  be  called  Huns,"  ScottaandOnegesh,j 
whoever  they  were  (?  Scythian  Picts,  i.e.  lotuns),  were  Hunnish 
magnates.     Even  a  Roman  is  spoken  of  as  having  turned  Hun. 

Inseparable  from  his  Fians  and  from  the  Fdiie,  Feinne,  or 
Fenians,  the  people  to  whom  Patrick  is  said  to  have  preached, 
is  their  chieftain,  mortal  or  immortal,  human  or  superhuman, 
normal  in  size  or  abnormal,  Finn  or  Find  Mac  Cumhail.| 

t  OnegeS'ius  or  Ilunugusus.  Compare  Oengus,  Oingus,  Ungust,  Aengus,  gen.  Aengusa — names 
common  in  Pictish  and  Irish  tradition.  Possibly  the  A.S.  Hengist  is  the  same  name  which 
assumed  that  form  from  being  confused  with  the  German  hengst  =  a  stallion.  Unuguri  was  another 
name  for  the  Utiguri,  who  were  allies  of  Attila  near  the  Palus  Mxotis. 

\  To  the  question  of  the  ethnic  place  of  Finn  and  his  Feinne,  I  return  in  the  Ethnological 
portion  of  this  work. 


Names  and  Legends.  7^5 

As  a  general  rule,  we  find  his  name  in  connection  with 
natural  phenomena.  Finn's  Table,  Finn's  Chair,  Finn's  Finger, 
Finn's  Thumb,  are  in  nine  cases  out  of  ten  found  to  be  natural 
rocks,  the  names  of  which  have  often  led  me  astray  in  searching  for 
dolmens.  Occasionally,  however,  his  name  is  given  to  a  dolmen, 
as  in  the  case  of  Finn's  Finger  in  Down,f  and,  if  Mr.  Windele 
be  right,  the  "  Boardeen,"  or  Finn's  Table,  in  Cork.  Finn  Mac 
Cumhail's  Table  in  Tipperary  is  a  natural  rock.J  The  stones  of 
the  Rathkenny  dolmen  in  Meath  were  said  to  have  been  thrown 
together  by  Finn  Mac  CumhaiL  Lackaneen,  a  circle  in  the  latter 
county,  is  perhaps  Lacka  7ia  bh-Fian,  "  Flagstones  of  the  Fians," 
and  Duneen,  the  name  of  another,  may  possibly  be  similarly 
derived.  A  hill  is  pointed  out  in  Tipperary,  where  he  first 
acquired  his  great  knowledge  by  sucking  his  thumb.  In  the 
folk-lore  relating  to  Finn,  there  are  clear  and  evident  traces  that 
the  Scandinavian  practice  of  the  old  men  sitting  on  mounds,  each 
near  his  own  habitation,  and  conversing,  once  prevailed  among 
those  from  whom  these  stories  have  been  handed  down.§  There  is 
a  Suidhe  Finn,  popularly  said  to  mean  Finn's  Seat  in  Cork,  Kerry, 
Limerick,  Tipperary,  Waterford,  Clare,  Galvva}^,  and  Derry,  and 
in  Kilkenny  there  are  two.  That  in  Derry  is  a  natural  venerated 
rock,  and  sometimes  they  are  lofty  cairns.  As  a  rule,  however,  they 
are  insiofnificant  little  mounds  of  earth  and  stone.  At  Dundalk 
was  a  natural  rock  called  Dealg  Finn,  said  to  mean  Finn's 
brooch.  In  the  cases  of  Leacht  Finn,  Foran  Finn,  and  several 
other  names,  the  word  jinn,  find,  fionn,  white,  is  more  probably 
intended,  but,  apart  from  these,  the  Ordnance  Survey  is  said  to 
contain  no  fewer  than  sixty  references  to  persons  connected  with 
the  legendary  tales  of  Finn. 

Of  Ossian's  Graves  there  are  several.  One  of  them  is  near 
Cushendall,  and  is  a  ruined  dolmen-cairn.  Labba-Iscur,  which 
has  been  popularly  called  Oscar's  Grave,  but  which  really  means 
Champion's  Bed,  from  Scor,  "a  champion,"  is  a  dolmen  near 
Charleville,  in  a  glen  on  the  borders  of  Cork  and  Limerick.  With 
this  may  be  compared  the  name  Achad  an  Sc6ir\  the  "  Field  of 
the  Champion,"  the  name  of  a  dolmen  in  Leitrim,  and  Kiloscar,  = 
Cill-a-Scoir,  a  name  in  Inishowen  in  Donegal.  Several  other 
dolmens  are  popularly  held  to  be  the  resting-places  of  heroes  who 

t  p.  284.  t  p.  55-        „ 

§  See  Vigfusson,  "Corp.  Poet.  Boreal.,'   vol.  i.  p.  416,  II  p.  I94- 


786  The  Dolmens  of  Ireland. 

are  anonymous,  as,  for  example,  the  Leackt-an-Scdil\  (from 
Seal,  "a  hero")  in  Kerry,  and  another  with  a  similar  name  in 
Kilkenny.^  At  the  dolmen  at  Ceimcorravooly,  in  Cork,  a 
" gaiskeeach,"  properly ^^j-^^^^^r//,  "a  hero  or  warrior"  {(r om. gasced, 
gaisced,  "  a  weapon,  or  valour  "),  was  thought  to  be  buried,  though, 
Windele  adds,  "  the  people  would  not  call  it  a  leacht''  §  At  the 
dolmen  of  Derryvacorneen,||  also  in  Cork,  an  old  woman  assured 
me  that  an  "  Oc  "  was  buried.  I  made  her  repeat  the  word, 
thinking  she  might  mean  at/iack,  a  giant,  or  dac,  dc,  dg,  "a  young 
man,  a  warrior,"  but  she  repeated  occ  (as  in  Latin  hoc)  so  distinctly 
that  I  am  puzzled  to  know  her  meaning,  unless  it  be  oc,  a  poet, 
found  in  O'Donovan's  O'Reilly.  Uaigh  an  Saigheadoira,^  the 
Soldier's  Cave,  or  Tomb,  is  the  name  of  a  dolmen-like  structure  at 
Kilberehert  in  Cork.  Bordaree  {Bord-a-rig)  King's  Table  is  found, 
as  we  have  seen,  in  the  same  county,  as  also  are  Bordathierna 
(Boi'd-a-Tigerna),  Lord's  Table,  and  Carn-Thierna,  Lord's  Carn. 
Giants  are  represented  by  a  Tuaiin-an-fJiir  moir,  a  dolmen  at 
Cappanahannagh,ff  in  Limerick,  and  a  cairn  in  the  same  county 
at  Meentulla,  said  to  have  been  thrown  together  over  a  high- 
wayman who  was  killed  there,  bears  the  same  name.  Near 
Florencecourt  the  name  Cloonatumpher  probably  marked  the  site 
of  a  dolmen. II  The  same  words  are  distorted  into  Tumper,  or 
Thoomper,  the  moir  being  dropped,  and  the  tiiaim-an-fJiir  trans- 
mogrified into  a  proper  name  in  the  case  of  the  exceedingly  curious 
name,  Tumper's  Grave,  called  also  the  "  Giant's  Grave,"  and 
"Thoomper's  Cill,"  near  Kilmihil,  in  Clare.  "One  Thoomper, 
a  giant,"  we  are  told,  "  had  been  buried  there,"  the  oral  tradition 
being  that  the  Dalcassians  were  opposed  to  a  people  called  the 
Danes,  and  that  Thoomper  was  a  chieftain  of  the  latter,  who  was 
pursued  and  killed  by  the  former,  and  buried  in  this  monument 
which  retains  his  name.  The  Dalcassians,  according  to  the 
traditions  handed  on  by  the  Mac  Firbis  family,  and  contained  in 
the  Book  of  Lecan,  were  a  Firbolg  colony,  a  tribe  of  whom  came 
to  Ireland  at  the  time  when  "  Oilioll  and  Meave"  §§  reigned  in 
Connaught,  and  settled  in  Thomond.  It  may  be  noted  that  the 
opposition  which  oral  tradition  states  to  have  existed  between  the 
Dalcassians  and  the  Danes  seems  to  correspond  with  that  which 

t  p.  4.  X  P-  405.  §  p.  23,  "Toir-Dh.,"  by  S.  H.  O'Grady,  p.  84. 

II  p.  25.  t  p.  34.  tt  p.  46.  XX  p-  226. 

§§  Ailill  and  Medb. 


Names  and  Legends.  787 

the  written  legends  of  the  Middle  Ages  state  to  have  existed 
between  the  Feinne  and  the  Danes,  and  between  the  Tuatha  De 
Danann  and  the  Firbolg.  In  the  same  Townland  as  Tumper's  Cill, 
or  Grave,  is  a  well  called  Tober  Righ-an-Domhnaigh,  i.e.  "  Well 
of  the  King  of  Sunday,"  or,  if  the  view  I  have  before  expressed 
be  right,  "  Well  of  the  King  of  the  Deep."  f 

Leacht-an-fhir-in6ir,  or  Giant's  Monument,  is  the  name  of  a 
dolmen  near  Lough  Arrow  in  Sligo.J  Tomban-7ia-wor\  and 
Labbyftawark  ||  are  corruptions  of  titaiui  bdn  na  bfej'  mor,  and 
leaba-na  bfer  mor,  meaning  "  white  grave  of  the  giants  "  and  "  bed 
of  the  giants  "  respectively,  in  the  same  county,  in  which,  too,  at 
Carrowmore,  is  the  dolmen  Leaba  na  bJiFimi,  and  Tober  na  bJi 
Fian^  "bed  and  well  of  the  Fian,  or  heroes."  The  English 
•'  Giants'  Grave  "  seems  to  be  the  term  most  commonly  in  use  in 
Sligo  at  present. 

I  now  propose  to  ask  the  question  whether  the  word  Cill,  Cille, 
or  Kil,  ever  in  itself  was  used  for  a  dolmen  ? 

The  fact  that  dolmens,  without  number,  exist  in  localities  the 
names  of  which  contain  the  word  kil,  proves  nothing.  So  common 
is  the  use  of  the  word  that  Dr.  Joyce  ff  has  counted  no  fewer  than 
3400  place-names  which  commence  with  this  word,  to  say  nothing 
of  others  into  which  it  enters  either  in  the  middle,  as  at  Ballykilbeg, 
or  as  a  termination,  as  in  Caolkil,  Ballynakil,  etc. 

That  in  the  form  cille  it  was  a  loan  word  from  the  Latin  cella 
there  can  be  no  manner  of  doubt.  How  it  was,  however,  that  it 
came  to  mean  a  church,  as  it  is  equally  undoubted  that  it  did,  it 
is  difficult  to  explain  with  certainty.  I  remember  the  late  Dr. 
Reeves,  Bishop  of  Down  and  Connor,  telling  me  that  he  regarded 
it  as  a  striking  illustration  of  the  widespread  monastic  element 
essential  to  early  Christianity  in  Ireland. 

Cella,  in  the  phraseology  of  Latin  Christianity,  was  the 
equivalent  of  the  Greek  dTTo0y]K7),  a  monk's  cell,  from  which  sense 
it  expanded  so  as  to  mean  a  foundation  of  monks'  cells,  a 
monastery,  as  in  the  case  of  Cella,  the  Latin  for  Zelle,  and  many 
other  monastic  sites. 

But  the  Irish  cille  was  not  the  monastic  site,  nor  was  it  the 


t  Compare  the  name  of  Righ  an  Domhain  Mor,  the  remotest  ancestor  of  Finn  Mac  Cumhail 
in  Dr.  Irvine's  Scottish  pedigree.  His  remotest  ancestor  in  Shearman's  pedigree,  from  various 
documents,  is  Nuada  Necht,  the  Sea-God.     See  Campbell's  Leabhar-na-Feinne. 

i  p.  189.  §  p.  127.  II  p.  140.  1  P-  147- 

ft  "Irish  Names  of  Places,"  2nd  Ser.,  p.  302. 


yS8  The  Dolmens  of  Ireland. 

dwelling  of  the  founder,  whose  "  house  "  is  pointed  out  by  tradition 
as  an  independent  building.  It  was  a  little  sacred  edifice,  and 
was  in  some  cases,  at  all  events,  synonymous  with  the  Icaba,  or 
bed,  that  is,  the  burial-place  of  the  saint — not,  however,  of  the 
saint  alone,  for,  as  O' Donovan  continually  hints  in  his  letters,  and 
as  the  writer  of  the  introduction  to  the  "  Transactions  of  the 
Ossianic  Society  "  points  out  in  plain  words,  *'  there  are  numerous 
Cills,  or  places  of  burial,  which  were  never  dedicated  to  Christian 
purposes  "  at  all. 

One  cille  in  the  county  of  Sligo  bears  the  name  Killaracht, 
commonly  supposed  to  mean  the  church  of  (Saint)  Athracta. 
Oral  tradition  connects  this  saint  with  Lough  Gara,  across  which 
she  tried  to  build  a  causeway,  carrying  huge  stones  in  her 
petticoat,  but  was  prevented  by  modesty.  Another  story, 
however,  was  that  she  was  a  witch  who  lived  at  the  bottom 
of  the  lake  from  which,  once  in  seven  years,  she  was  allowed 
to  emerge  and  visit  her  sister  Ke.  On  her  way  she  once  cured 
a  poor  woman  who  was  sick.  She  was  called  Athrad  ni 
Manannain,  that  Is,  daughter  of  Manannan  Mac  Lir,  the  Sea-God.f 
Colgan  prints  an  anonymous  Life  of  her,J  in  which  a  fabulous 
beast  with  the  head  of  a  dragon  and  the  roar  of  a  lion  comes  out 
of  the  sludge  and  is  destroyed  by  the  Holy  Virgin.  But  all  this 
is  apocryphal.  Arracht  §  is  an  image,  an  idol,  of  which  the  little 
cille  was  the  abode.  Several  of  these  little  Irish  ccllo"  contained 
each  its  wooden  image, ||  as  in  the  case  of  that  of  St.  Molaise  at 
Inishmurray,  where  a  medieval  wooden  image  is  still  extant, 
replacing,  doubtless,  one  of  more  ancient  date.  Such  images  were 
said  to  be  those  of  the  persons  by  whose  names  the  cellce  were 
respectively  called. 

In  a  letter  from  Pope  Gregory  the  Great  to  the  Abbot  Millitus, 
reference  is  made  to  the  religious  practices  for  which  this  island 
on  the  Sligo  coast  was  famous.  On  certain  festivals  the  people 
flocked  to  the  little  shrines  there,  and  must  have  remained  some 
time  engaged  in  their  tribute  of  veneration,  since  they  erected 
huts  of  boughs  around  them.  Distinct  directions  are  given  in  the 
same  letter  for  converting  the  natives  "from  the  worship  of 
demons"  to  that  of  Christ.     The  small  dimensions  of  the  idol- 

t  O.S.L.,  Co.  Sligo,  -^,  pp.  233,  238,  419.  %  AA.SS.  Ilib.  p.  278. 

1  .  14 
§  Whitley  Stokes,  "  Irish  Life,"  pp.  34,  258. 
II  Cf.  '*  imagines  lignei,"  13k.  of  Armagh,  fol.  13,  a,  i. 


Names  and  Legends.  789 


temples,  or  shrines,  among  the  Saxons  in  Britain  is  noticed  by 
Godselinus,  in  the  case  of  the  one  in  which  "  Ethelbertus  idolum 
suum  coluit"  at  Canterbury.  It  was  an  "opus  exiguum  structum 
tamen  de  more  veterum  Britannorum."  Both  in  Britain  and  Ireland 
the  little  oratories  and  churches,  into  which  the  devotees — to  judge 
by  customs  surviving,  as  at  Ardmore,  into  the  present  century 
— crept  on  hands  and  knees  over  sharp  stones  to  worship  the 
skull  of  the  saint,  and  to  carry  away  some  of  his  sacred  clay,  were 
built  over  spots  where  interments  had  taken  place  in  pagan  time. 
Under  the  floor  of  the  little  church  at  Monasterboice  in  Louth,  a 
cist  was  discovered  containing  fragments  of  pottery  of  the  usual 
sepulchral  type,  together  with  a  celt  of  polished  stone. f 

We  may  infer,  I  think,  from  what  has  been  said,  that  the 
primitive  idea  of  the  Irish  cille  was  inseparably  connected  with 
that  of  sepulture.  The  cell  was  a  sepulchral  cell  before  it  was 
connected  with  the  monks,  who  arrived  from  the  East  and  South. 
The  same  may  be  said  of  the  cella  of  the  Roman  pagan  shrine, 
which,  as  we  have  seen,  was  the  term  known  in  architecture  for 
the  inner  portion,  just  as  antce  was  for  the  portico,  of  the  structure. 
Remarkable  would  it  be,  could  it  be  shown  that  while,  as  we  have 
seen,  the  dolmens  of  Portugal  bore  the  name  of  the  outer  portion 
or  portico,  namely,  Aulas,  those  of  Ireland  bore  the  name  of  the 
Cella  or  inner  shrine. 

Among  the  Latins,  the  pagan  practice  of  building  cellcs  was 
continued  well  within  Christian  times,  by  Christians  themselves. 
These  little  edifices  were  sepulchral,  or,  rather,  memorial,  in 
character.  The  cella  memoria:,  as  it  was  called, 'was  erected  within 
a  walled  area,  similar  to  the  casJiel,  or  enclosing  wall,  which  sur- 
rounded the  cille  in  Ireland.  "  At  stated  periods,  especially  at  the 
anniversary  of  his  decease,  the  friends  and  dependants  of  the  de- 
parted assembled  to  celebrate  an  agape,  and  to  partake  of  a  banquet 
in  his  honour  .  .  .  Christianity,"  says  Canon  Venables,  who  writes 
the  account  of  the  cellcB  meviorice  in  Smith's  "  Dictionary  of 
Christian  Antiquities,"  "simply  inherited  existing  customs,"  and 
"  thus  heathen  and  Christian  monuments  throw  light  on  one 
another."  A  Christian  inscription,  recording  the  formation  of  sucb 
an  area  and  the  construction  of  a  cella  at  Ccesarea  in  JMauretania, 
is  given  by  De  Rossi.     A  very  curious  will,  also  printed  by  De 

t  A  sepulchral  urn  was  found  in  the  mound  on  which  a  little  cell  at  St.  Levan  in  Cornwall 
was  built.  On  the  great  cairn  at  Chapel  Cam  Brea,  also  in  Cornwall,  stood  a  Christian  cell,  and 
in  the  centre  of  the  tumulus  I  found  a  pagan  sepulchral  chamber. 


790  The  Dolmens  of  Ireland. 


Rossi,  provides  for  the  erection  of  such  a  cella,  in  the  case  of 
a  o-entleman  of  Langres,  who  was  not  a  Christian.  It  was  to 
contain  two  statues  of  the  testator,  and  in  front  of  it  an  altar  of 
marble  was  to  be  erected  in  which  his  ashes  were  to  be  deposited. 

In  the  Musee  de  Lorraine  at  Nancy  are  a  number  of  little 
sepulchral  monuments  of  the  Roman  period — models,  in  fact,  of 
larger  cellcc — some  of  them  exactly  similar  in  shape  to  Irish 
examples,  such  as  that  at  Kilmalkedar.  Each  is  carved  out  of  a 
single  stone;  their  dimensions  are  from  2  to  2\  feet  long,  by  i  to 
I  \  foot  broad,  and  i  to  2I  feet  high ;  and  each  is  provided  with  a 
little  arched  cavity  scooped  out  in  the  base  at  one  end  to  represent 
the  door,  and  for  the  reception  of  burnt  deposits. 

But  entirely  beside  these  meanings  of  cella,  which  would  point 
to  the  Irish  cille  being  a  Latin  loan-word  either  pagan  or 
Christian  In  origin,  there  appears  to  have  been  a  word  cille 
or  kil  in  use  among  the  ancient  inhabitants  of  Ireland, 
which  meant  in  itself  a  burial-place  or  grave.  O'Brien,  in  his 
Dictionary,  gives  kil,  a  "grave";  and  Ledwich  enlarges  on  the 
subject  thus  :  "  Kil  at  first  was,  in  Irish,  a  grave ;  but  when  relics 
were  introduced,  then  it  expressed  the  tomb  of  a  particular  saint, 
and  in  this  our  missionaries  adapted  themselves  to  the  Druidic 
practice,  and  this  kil,  or  tomb,  succeeded  the  secretiim  illud, 
that  holy  spot,  the  object  of  veneration."  I  am  inclined  to 
think  that  this  writer,  though  at  times  in  error,  is,  in  this  case, 
not  far  from  the  truth.  The  word,  however,  would  be  of  Teutonic, 
not  of  Celtic  origin ;  but  for  all  that,  it  may  have  preceded  in 
Ireland  the  Latin  loan-word  cella,  for  Teutonic  influences  were 
present,  I  feel  sure,  in  the  island  in  pre-Christian  times,  and,  if  it 
indicated  sites  and  structures  at  which  the  religious  rites  of  the 
native  spirit-cultus  were  performed,  the  adoption  of  it  by  the 
missionaries  may  have  afforded  them  the  opportunity  of  giving  to 
their  own  churches  a  name  which,  while  it  bore  a  sufficiently  close 
resemblance  to  that  of  the  monk's  cella,  or  the  Christian  cella 
memorice,  would  be  familiar  to  the  native  population  whom  they 
wished  to  convert.  I  have  already  expressed  my  views  that  the 
word  Domnach,  which  appears  on  the  face  of  it  to  be  the  Christian 
Latin  loan-word  Dominicus,  was  similarly  made  to  do  duty  under 
the  new  religion  for  the  name  of  doinuin,  or  Domnu,  in  the  older 
pagan  system.  A  like  policy  of  absorption  or  assimilation  caused 
the  dolmens  and  menhirs  to  be  inscribed  with  crosses.     The  new 


Names  and  Legends.  791 


rdgime  took  the  place  of  the  old  in  Ireland  without  much  friction, 
the  consequence  being  that  Ireland  possesses  no  native  Christian 
martyrs  among  the  "  Orders  "  of  her  Saints. 

The  word  kiel  or  kiul  in  Teutonic  is  a  term  carrying  with  it 
the  sense  of  hollowness.  The  Dutch  kiul  means  a  hole,  a  hollow 
place,  a  pit,  a  grave,  a  gap,  cavity,  cave,  or  den.  The  Ballerkuile,  or 
Ballerkoele,  in  Drenthe  seems  to  have  been  a  circular  earthwork, 
set  apart,  we  are  told,  by  Picardt  for  some  strange  solemnities,  as 
well  as  for  assemblies  of  the  people,  for  whom  earthen  seats  were 
provided  around  the  central  kuyl,  or  hollow.  With  this  may  be 
justly  compared  the  earthworks  in  Ireland  called  by  the  very  same 
name  keals,  or  killuraghs,  or  cealluras,  the  two  latter  terms  meaning 
earthen  keals. 

Cognate  with  this  word  seems  to  be  kid,\  a  ship,  A.S. 
ce61,  ciol ;  Middle  Lat.  ceolse,  ciulse,  cyulse;  M.H.D.  kiel; 
M.N.D.  kel ;  O.N.  kioll  (or  kjoll)  ;  whence  Kiolen,  the  keel-like 
range  of  mountains  between  Norway  and  Sweden ;  Kjolr,  and 
Kjalarr,  a  name  of  Odin.  In  English  it  is  keel,  but  the  name 
refers  to  the  hollowness  within,  not,  as  we  use  it,  to  the  frame- 
work without. 

Several  words  for  "  well "  in  Teutonic  languages  may  have  the 
same  origin,  in  the  sense  of  well-pit,  from  which  the  spring  flows. 
In  "  Sarepta,"  by  John  Mathesius,J  kiele  signifies  the  source  of  a 
river,  also  a  lake,  or  a  drinking-trough. 

In  Ireland  the  terms  kyle,  killeen,  cealluragh,  cealluna,  ceal- 
drach,  and  caltragh,  are  all  applied  to  burial-places,  mostly  for 
unbaptized  children,  as  if  by  this  tradition  to  signify  to  us  their 
pagan  origin.  In  Cork  I  feel  sure  that  the  term  kyla,  kila,  or  kill, 
was  applied  to  circles  of  standing-stone,  and  in  support  of  my 
view  I  may  instance  the  names  Kila  and  Caol-Kill,  at  both 
of  which  are  circles.  Cill-Tumper  in  Clare  may  be  an  instance 
of  its  application  to  a  Giant's  Grave.  That  it  was  applied  to 
cemeteries  of  stone  cists,  or  to  stone  cists  individually,  might 
perhaps  be  inferred  from  its  occurrence  at  the  following  places 
where  they  have  been  discovered  :  Drumnaktlly  (Fermanagh) ; 
BaWy kealy  and  Knockna.ki/la  (Cork) ;  BaWygkeely  (Clare)  ;  and 
BaWykale  in  Wexford. 

In  the  Townland  of  Ballykeely  in  Carlow  is  the  famous  Ballon 
Hill,  upon  which  entrenchments  formerly  existed,  "locally  known 

t  See  Adelung,  in  voc.  %  Niimberg,  157 1,  fol.  Ixviii.  b.,  and  vol.  cxviii. 


792  The  Dolmens  of  Ireland. 


as  the  walls  of  Troy,"  enclosing  a  great  sepulchral  area  from  which 
a  very  large  number  of  urns  have  been  taken.  Immediately 
over  Bally keely  House  was  an  immense  block  of  granite  on 
the  hillside,  19  feet  long  by  12  feet  broad,  and  3  feet  thick, 
resting  at  either  end  on  granite  blocks.  Under  this  were  three 
unburnt  skeletons,  and,  deeper  down,  a  bed  of  charcoal  with  three 
broken  urns.  The  rock  was  called  Cloghan-na-Marabhan,f  that  is. 
Great  Rock,  or  Stone- House  of  the  dead.  Kil-na-Marabhan  is  the 
name  of  a  site  in  Cork. 

It  is  true  that  in  some  cases  kill  may  stand  for  coill,  a  wood  ; 
but,  where  it  is  associated  with  ancient  prehistoric  burial-sites,  we 
are  inclined  to  refer  it  to  its  undoubted  sense  as  a  sepulchral  site 
or  monument,  a  cemetery  enclosed  by  an  earthen  rampart,  a  stone- 
circle,  or  a  dolmen. 

Several  instances  can  be  cited  where  the  descriptive  name  of 
this  or  that  megalithic  monument  has,  as  the  natives  have 
gradually  lost  their  language,  come  to  be  used  as  if  it  were  the 
name  of  the  warrior  or  giant  supposed  to  be  there  interred.  Thus, 
in  Sligo,  there  is  a  place  called  Fearsat  reanna  an  Liagain,  the 
Pass  of  the  Point  of  the  Flagstone.^  "  Liagan,"  it  is  said,  "  was  a 
famous  warrior  slain  there  by  Lugh  the  Long-handed,  as  he  was 
on  the  way  to  the  battle  of  Moy-Turey."  At  Loughnascaul,§  in 
Fermanagh,  near  the  little  lake,  and  also  near  a  dolmen,  are  two 
cairns.  The  popular  tale  about  them  is  that  they  were  gathered 
together  by  two  contending  giants.  "  One  of  these  had  a  wife 
whose  name  is  remembered  as  somethinof  like  Maitranein,'' 
perhaps  Morrigan,  "and  it  was  on  her  account  that  jealousy 
grew  up  between  them,  and  that  they  collected  ammunition  for 
the  contest."  The  lady,  conscious  of  her  innocence,  prevailed  on 
the  giants  to  leave  their  case  to  the  arbitration  of  the  first  traveller 
who  might  come  that  way.  "It  so  happened  that  a  man  well- 
reputed  as  the  possessor  of  unusual  wisdom,  who  lived  near  Lough 
Eyes  (some  two  miles  to  the  S.S.E.),  was  smoking  2i  gearrait  (horse) 
which  had  strayed,  and  was  the  first  to  appear.  After  listening 
to  all  the  parties  had  to  say,  and  swearing  them  to  abide  by  his 
decision,  he  led  the  husband  to  the  claddagk,  or  brink  of  the  lock, 
and  desired  him  to  look  into  the  water,  and  inform  him  what  he 


t  Marbaim  =  I  die ;  mard/idn  =  a  dead  body. 

14 

X  MS.  Letters,  Ord.  Surv.,  Co.  Sligo, ,  p. 

r.  14 
§  Jouni.  R.n.A.A.L,  4lh  Ser.,  vol.  iii.  p.  529. 


Names  and  Legends.  79; 


saw  there.  He  replied,  'I  see  only  my  own  shadow.'  'Grasp 
it,  then,'  cried  the  judge.  'I  have  done  so,'  said  the  other,  'and 
it  has  no  substance.'  '  As  much  substance  as  there  is  occasion 
for  your  jealousy.  Go  home  and  make  friends,  and  be  no  longer 
an  ass,'  said  the  peacemaker.  And  so  there  was  an  end  to  the 
strife,  and  the  lake  was  called  Loughascaul,  that  is,  Lake  of  the 
Shadow."  t  I  should  have  thought  it  more  probable  that  it  was 
derived  from  the  ^^(i/ or  the  champions  who  collected  each  his  cairn 
of  stones.  Latnambard,  the  name  of  a  dolmen  in  Monaghan.J 
is,  according  to  O'Donovan,  the  Monument  of  the  Poets.  Caini- 
na-vanaghan,  or  Vicar's  Carn,  in  Armagh,  is  so  called,  so  Dr. 
Leslie  Riggs  supposes,  from  the  spot  on  which  it  stands  having 
belonged  to  the  old  abbey  of  St.  Peter  and  Paul  at  Armagh.§ 
"  This  cairn,"  says  Mr.  Young,  "  is  held  in  great  veneration  by 
many  of  those  who  live  near  it,  who  account  it  impious  to  carry 
off  any  of  the  stones.  If  it  ever  was  frequented  on  any  particular 
day  for  the  purposes  of  worship,  the  record  of  it  is  lost,"  but  "  the 
very  zealous  Roman  Catholics  never  pass  or  repass  without 
bringing  a  stone  and  throwing  it  on  the  cairn." 

It  is  more  difficult  to  say  what  can  be  the  origin  of  the  name 
TtLoma-an-Viiiisb'c,  the  Minister's  Grave,  applied  to  the  dolmen 
of  Gortafloodig  in  Cork,j|  Tighe  mentioned  that  the  dolmen  of 
Garryduff,  in  Kilkenny,  was  called  the  "  Priest's  Grave."  ^ 

Sometimes  a  dolmen  bears  the  name  of  some  notable  person 
in  quite  modern  times.  Take,  for  example,  Leacht  Neil  on 
Mossgrove  Mountain  in  Cork.jf  Tradition  points  to  this  monu- 
ment as  the  last  resting-place  of  an  Ulster  commander  in  the 
seventeenth  century.  This  Neil,  as  he  was  returning  from  Bandon 
during  the  wars  of  the  reign  of  James  II.,  was  slain  by  a  shot 
fired  by  his  pursuers  from  the  hill  of  Gurtacloonlig  further  to  the 
south.  He  was  buried,  so  it  is  said,  in  this  monument,  whilst 
his  horse,  also  killed,  was  buried  beneath  the  huge  "gullawn" 
(pillar)  at  its  side.  Windele,  quoting  O'Mahony's  manuscript, 
says  :  "  Daniel  O'Neil's  men,  part  of  Lord  Clancarty's  regiment, 
were  treacherously  killed  at  Bandon  on  Monday,  February  28th, 
1689,  and  the  piper  played  Beir  chughat  do  feallaidh,  and  O'Neil 
himself  was  slain  at  Leacht  Neil  on  Mossgrove  Mountain  by  a 
party  coming  from  Macroom." 

t  Scail  =  a  shadow.     O'Don.  Gram.,  p.  15.  I4_ 

j  MS.  Letters,  Ord.  Surv.,  Cos.  Armagh  and  Monaghan,  31^"  P*  '32- 
§  p.  297.  II  p.  25.  1  p.  407,  otherwise  called  Leaba-na-Con.  tt  P-  29. 

VOL.  in.  G 


794  The  Dolmens  of  Ireland. 

It  is  really  not  impossible  that  the  dolmen  was  extemporized 
as  a  tomb  for  this  officer,  but  the  tradition  that  a  warrior  was 
buried  there  probably  dated  from  prehistoric  times.! 

Another  instance  of  an  apparently  modern  name  attached  to  a 
dolmen  is  that  of  Lcaba  Thoniais  mac  Caba  at  Mathewstown  in 
Water  ford.  J 

A  grave  in  the  Townland  of  Curraheen  §  (I  have  not  been  able 
to  ascertain  if  it  was  a  dolmen)  and  County  of  Tipperary  bore 
the  name  of  Eamonu-a-Cmiic,  that  is,  "  Edmund  of  the  Knoll," 
of  whom  O'Donovan  says  :  "He  was  a  celebrated  traditionary 
character  of  the  mountains  of  Tipperary,  who  flourished  a  few 
half-centuries  ago."  ||  Near  Dunfanaghy  in  Donegal,  is  a  place 
called  Raymonamoney,^  and  a  monument  called  Raymonamoney  s 
Grave.  Such  instances  of  modern  names  replacing  older  ones 
occur  in  England  and  Scotland.  Near  the  stone  circles  at 
Stanton  Drew  in  Somersetshire  I  remember  once  seeing  a  rock 
called  Sir  John  de  Hauteville's  Quoit,  and  said  to  have  been 
thrown  by  that  gallant  old  crusading  knight  whose  effigy  is  in 
Chew  Magna  Church.  Campbell,  in  his  "  Tales  of  the  West 
Highlands,"  ff  mentions  a  rock  at  Bunawe  of  many  tons  weight 
thrown  by  Rob  Roy ! 

Traditions  as  to  dolmens  and  other  megaliths  having  been 
the  sites  where  two  giants,  or  two  kings,  fought,  and  upon  one  of 
them  being  slain,  the  monument  having  been  the  place  of  his 
interment,  are  not  unusual.  At  Cloncorick  in  Leitrim,  "  a  grave  is 
shown  in  which  a  king  is  said  to  have  been  interred.  He  was 
slain  in  a  combat  with  one  of  the  same  rank  at  IMulIach-an-Da- 
Righ,  that  is,  the  Hill  of  the  Two  Kings,  and  the  Townland 
Cluain  Chomraic,  or  Cluan  Comhraic,  that  is,  hillside  of  the 
combat,  was  so  called  from  the  circumstance."  || 

Of  a  dolmen  between  Enniskillen  and  Ballyshannon,§§  in 
Fermanagh,  it  was  said  that  a  giant  was  interred  there,  while 
the  tomb  of  his  armour-bearer  was  situated  at  the  top  of  an 
eminence  not  far  distant.  It  was  also  said  that  on  one  occasion, 
when  stones  were  broken  from  one  of  the  flags  composing  it,  and 
were  placed  in  a  lime-kiln,  "  no  power  on  earth  could  burn  them," 

t  In  one  place  Windele  calls  this  dolmen  Leacht  A^eit,  which  would  be  a  name  of  extreme 
interest  in  connection  with  an  ogam  inscription  at  Cahir  Conree,  in  Kerry,  which  Prof.  Rhys  reads 
Cii'Niit  mac  Con  Ri.     Windele  may,  however,  have  inadvertently  crossed  the  final  /. 

\  p.  60.  §  p.  54.  Suppl.  O'Reilly's  Diet,  in  voc. 

1  p.  230.  tt  P-  99- 

*;  O.S.L.,Co.  Leitrim,     - -,  p.  207.  §§  p.  222. 


Names  and  Legends.  795 

a  superstition  akin  to  that  according  to  which  no  water  would  ever 
boil  the  sacred  fish  taken  from  a  holy  well.  Two  men  who 
had  once  tried  to  open  this  dolmen  had  their  feet  miraculously 
fastened  to  their  spade-shafts.f 

The  fine  dolmen  near  Dundonald  in  Down,J  bears  locally  the 
interesting  name  of  the  Kempe  Stones,  pronounced  Camp-Stones, 
apparently  a  Teutonic  word,§  meaning  a  combat,  or  a  soldier,  or 
giant.  The  name  of  Green's  Graves  is  that  of  the  adjoining 
Townland,  and,  although  this  is  probably  a  mere  corruption  of 
Graznne,  a  story  is  current  that  two  giants  fought  here,  one  of 
them,  called  Green,  was  slain  and  buried  under  the  dolmen. 
Upon  my  asking  a  peasant  for  local  stories  about  this  monument, 
he  told  me  that,  had  it  been  in  the  western  parts  of  Ireland, 
there  would  have  been  plenty,  but  as  it  was  "  in  a  civilized  part " 
there  were  none,  A  less  "  up-to-date  "  but  infinitely  preferable 
native  told  me  that  he  had  heard  a  tale  that  two  giants  had 
fought  here,  one  of  whom  was  Finn  Mac  Cumhail,  who  was, 
of  course,  the  victor. 

At  Caherard,§  in  Kerry,  a  dolmen  is  named  Leabba  ati  Irwceny, 
Labbaniriueeny,  or,  as  Windele  spells  it  in  more  recognizable 
orm,  Leaba-an-fhir-MIiuimhnig  (Mumhain  =  Munster),|j  Bed  of  the 
Munsterman,  "believed  to  be  the  grave  of  a  warrior  killed  at  the 
Battle  of  Ventry."  At  Ballygheely,  in  Clare,  is  a  cairn  called  Cant 
Connachtack,  or  the  Carn  of  the  Connaughtmen.  The  tradition  in 
the  neighbourhood  is  that  a  multitude  of  Connaughtmen  on  one 
occasion  followed  a  large  serpent  from  their  own  country  to  this 
place,  where  they  succeeded  in  killing  it,  and  each  one  havino- 
carried  a  stone  in  his  hand  in  pursuit,  heaped  them  up  here  on 
the  death  of  their  prey.^ 

Occasionally  tradition  supplies  us  with  the  names  of  the 
giants  who  fought.  In  the  district  of  Moycullen,  in  Galway,  a 
pillar-stone  stood  on  the  spot  where  a  battle  was  said  to  have 
been  fought  between  two  giants,  the  one  being  Orbsen  (from 
whom  Lough  Corrib  is  said  to  derive  its  name),  and  whose  alias 
was  MaJtamian  mac  Lir,  and  the  other  called  Uillin.ff 


t  Dublin  Fenny  Joit)-nal,  1834-35.  P-  237. 

X  P-  271.  §  E.g.  A'aiiipf,  in  German.  ||  p.  i. 

1  O.S.L.,  Co.  Clare,  —       '  p.  309. 
B.  23 

tt  MS.  Ord,  Surv.  Letters,  Co.  Galway, ,   pp.    152,    157,   164.      O'Flaherty   calls   Orbsen 

J^.  3 
Mac  Alloid  one  of  the  Danann  nation." 


796  The  Dolmens  of  Ireland. 

The  name  Orbsen  occurs  in  the  pedigree  of  Mac  Rannal, 
now  Reynolds,  chief  of  IMuintir  Eolais,  in  Leitrim.  The  first 
name  in  the  same  pedigree  is  that  of  Fergus  Mac  Roe,  the 
exiled  king  of  Ulster  in  the  Tain-Bo-C^iailgnc.  The  fourteenth 
name  is  "  Orbsen  Mor^  who  left  his  name  on  Lough  Orbsen,  now 
Lough  Corrib.  The  site  of  his  house,"  adds  Mac  Firbis,t  "  is  to 
be  seen  on  the  west  side  of  the  lake ;  the  lake  came  over  it ;  it  is 
now  called  y?/^^/^  tighc  diocairr 

The  dolmen,  of  the  same  type  as  the  Leacht  Neil,  on  the 
mountain  called  Slieve  Owen  [Sliabk  Edgain),  in  Cork  is  called 
the  Liabig  [=  Leabaidh)  Owen  [=  Edgain).  A  few  fields  to  the 
N.W.  of  it  stood  a  venerated  rock — a  larg^e  boulder  with  three 
hollows  on  its  upper  surface,  5  inches  or  6  inches  deep  and  the 
same  in  diameter,  called  the  Clock  na  dlri pleur,  "Stone  of  the 
Three  Shots.'' | 

Besides  being  called  Carrig  Cotta,  Carrig-a-cotta,  and  Cot's 
Rock,  the  dolmen  at  Castle-Mary  §  bears  the  name  Carrig-Grioth, 
or  Croith,  which  Mr.  Crofton  Croker  interprets  "  Rock  of  the  Sun." 
O'Reilly  gives  the  word  grioth,  the  sun,  but  cj'oil  would  mean 
"a  small  eminence." 

The  dolmen-cairn  in  the  Townland  of  Corran,||  also  in  Cork,, 
was  associated,  according  to  one  local  legend,  with  a  giant  called 
Carbery,  who,  when  seated  upon  it,  was  wont  to  lave  his  feet  in 
the  lake  which  lies  far  below.  According  to  a  second  story,  the 
cairn  was  the  burial-place  of  a  "  big  giant "  called  Maw  Gun,  in 
whom  Mr.  Windele  would  recognize  the  legendary  king  Mac 
Con.  This  Maw  Gun  had  two  oriaantic  brothers,  one  of  whom 
was  buried  on  the  summit  of  Knockmeldown,  in  Waterford,  the 
other  in  Scotland. 

The  following  account  of  the  discovery  of  an  urn  in  this  cairn 
illustrates  the  belief  that  it  was  in  the  power  of  malevolent  fairies 
to  change  the  contents  of  urns  from  gold  to  dust  and  ashes.  "It 
was  discovered  by  two  brothers  named  Norris,  Another  man 
worked  with  them,  but  when  they  got  a  glimpse  of  the  crock, 
they  sent  him  off  to  some  distance  and  then  uncovered  it.  A 
fourth  fellow  came  up  at  the  moment,  and,  before  they  could  do 
so,  snatched  up  the  crock,  and  ran  off  with  it.  They  pursued  him, 
however,  so  closely  that  he  laid  it  down  in  a  ditch,  and  thrusting 
in  his  hand,  took  out  a  handful  of  its  contents,  with  which  he  raa 

t  Geneal.  p.  537.  t  P-  3i-  §  P-  i5-  II  P-  43- 


Names  and  Legends.  797 

away  with  the  utmost  speed,  leaving  the  urn  to  his  pursuers. 
When  he  thought  himself  at  a  sufficiently  safe  distance,  he  drew  up, 
and,  opening  his  hand,  found  to  his  dismay,  instead  of  its  being  full 
of  golden  guineas,  a  quantity  of  ashes  and  fragments  of  bone — the 
effect,  as  he  afterwards  declared,  of  fairy  malevolence,  the  gold 
havinof  changed  to  dust  in  his  hand.  The  Norrises  were  much 
inclined  to  fancy  a  similar  metamorphosis,  as  to  what  they  found 
in  the  crock,  and  it  was  probably  to  a  fear  of  the  invisible  powers, 
who  had  effected  it,  that  the  urn  was  preserved  entire."  f 

Three  sites  at  least  bear  the  name  of  Conan  ;  namely, 
"  Conan's  Stone,"  in  Waterford,  J  "  Leaba  Conain "  on  Mount 
Callan  in  Clare,  and  Leaba  Liabadoir,  also  called  the  "  Grave 
of  Conan,"  in  Mayo.§  Of  these  the  second  consists  of  two  slabs 
now  laid  side  by  side,  though  formerly  one  upon  the  other,  one  of 
them  inscribed  with  ogam  lettering,  the  genuineness  of  which 
has  been  the  subject  of  much  controversy.  A  curious  tradition 
prevailed  in  the  vicinity  regarding  this  latter  monument.  It  was 
said  that,  should  the  grave  which  the  stones  were  supposed  to 
have  formed  or  covered  be  opened,  "  the  wild,  inhospitable  moun- 
tain would  at  once  become  a  fertile  plain  ;  that  a  beautiful  city, 
which  lay  enchanted  in  the  little  lake  called  Lochbooleynagreine 
close  by,  would  be  opened  by  a  key  which  was  buried  with  Conan 
in  the  tomb,  and  that  a  great  mass  of  golden  treasure  would  be 
then  acquired." 

The  second  of  the  above-named  sites  connected  with  Conan's 
name  is  near  the  ancient  church  and  well  at  Kilmore  in  Mayo. 
It  is  called  by  tradition  "  Leaba  Liabadoir,"  the  latter  word 
seeming  in  part  a  repetition  of  the  former,  and  meaning  "  Bed 
of  Gold,"  from  leabadh  and  6ir,  genitive  of  or,  gold.  It  is  believed 
to  be  the  grave  of  the  giant  Conan. 

An  attempt  has  been  made  to  identify  this  monument,  which 
is  a  mixed  dolmen,  with  the  tomb  of  Echtra  mentioned  in  the 
Legend  of  Patrick. ||  Colgan  refers  to  it  as  being  so,  for  he  speaks 
of  the  Feart  Echtra,  which  was  to  be  seen  in  a  field  at  a  little 
distance  to  the  east  of  the  old  church  of  Kilmore-Moy,  and 
opposite  a  holy  well  called  Tober  Patrick.     Echtra  was,  according 

t  Windele,  J.,  MS.  "Cork,  West  and  North-East,"  pp.  666,  667. 
X  Ord,  Surv.  Map,  Co.  Waterford,  sheet  17. 

§  O.S.L,,  Co.  Mayo,- -,  pp.  56,  70,  seqq. 

II  "  Les  Dolmens  d'Irlande,"  by  Miss  M.  Stokes,  in  "  Revue  Archeol.,"  July.  1882. 


79S  The  Dolmens  of  Ireland. 


to  the  story,  the  wife  of  Eochaid  Breac,  the  son  of  Dathi,  or 
Nathi,  the  son  of  Fiachra.  Having  baptized  Eochaid,  Patrick 
performed  the  miraculous  feat  of  raising  Echtra  his  wife  from  the 
dead,  "at  Ath  Echtra  over  the  Httle  stream  which  runs  right  by 
the  doorway  of  Cill-Mor."  **  And  Echtra's  tomb  ('grave-mound') 
is  on  the  brink  of  the  ford.  The  story  of  the  miracle  is  for  them 
(the  people  of  the  district)  a  token  of  their  knowledge  of  their 
country's  history."  Patrick,  it  is  added,  sent  Bishop  Olcan  to 
build  the  church  there.  This  individual  had  himself,  when  an 
infant,  been  taken  by  Patrick  out  of  the  tomb  in  a  cairn  where 
his  mother  had  been  buried,  and  in  which,  having  been  born  after 
her  death,  he  had  lived  seven  days.  Other  forms  of  Olcan's 
name  are  Bolgan  and  Volcan  ;  but,  like  other  personages  in  this 
romance,  his  existence  must  be  regarded  as  wholly  mythical. 
The  connection  of  a  woman  Echtra  with  a  dolmen  (if,  indeed,  the 
term  "feart"  could  ever  have  been  applied  to  the  monument  in 
question,  which  I  doubt),  would  be  probably  referable  to  the  class 
of  myth  which  associates  witches  with  the  vaults  under  tumuli, 
and  with  dolmens  in  general.  A  pagan  miraculous  episode  would 
have  furnished  material  for  the  Christian  legend,  which  though 
extant  in  Colgan's  time,  has  entirely  died  out. 

In  the  Townland  of  Aghyglinna,  in  Clare,f  is  a  cairn  called 
Dobhach  Bhrainin,  the  true  name  of  which,  according  to  the 
writer  of  the  Ord.  Survey  Letters,  was  Dumbach  Bhrainin,  that 
is,  the  "  Heap  of  the  Little  Bran." 

On  the  venerated  height  called  KnockmaaJ  Hill  in  Galway 
were  three  cairns,  "two  of  which  were  said  to  have  been  erected 
by  one  MacHugh,  who  was  servant  to  old  John  Kirwan,  of 
Castle  Hackett."  "He"  (Kirwan),  says  O'Donovan,  "was  a 
particular  friend  of  Finnbheara,  of  Cnoc  Meadha,  a  celebrated 
fairy-chief,  and  repaired  his  cashcls  for  him."  The  same  writer 
adds  §  that  the  cairn  is  like  Mioscan  IMeidhbhe,  near  Sligo,  and 
that  beside  it  were  "  two  chimerical  modern  buildings,  erected 
about  the  year  1828,  to  please  the  taste  of  old  Mrs.  Kirwan,  who 
was  also  a  great  friend  of  Finnbheara  the  fairy." 


t  O.S.L.,  Co.  Clare,  -^,  p.  205. 
IJ.  23 

%  "Cnoc  Meadha  Siuil,"  O.S.L.,  Co.  Galway,     "*    ,  p.  127. 

§  O.S.L.,  Co.  Galway,  ^'*-,  p.  10. 
1).  1 


Names  and  Legends.  799 


This  great  cairn  on  Knockmaa  was  called  Cnoc  Meadhcl  SiiiiL 
According  to  the  popular  tradition,  it  was  celebrated  as  the 
principal  residence  of  the  fairies  of  this  part  of  Connaught,  and 
in  particular  of  their  chief  Finnbheara.  O'Flahertyf  speaks  of 
"Knockmea"  as  a  hill  in  the  Barony  of  Clare,  thought  to  be 
Carn  Ceasrach,  near  which,  he  adds,  is  Cuil-Ceasrach.J  Carn 
Ceasrach,  is  the  name  of  a  cairn  which  Giraldus  Cambrensis 
mentions  as  being  in  his  time  still  pointed  out  in  Connaught  as 
that  which  had  been  raised  over  the  body  of  Ceasair,  a  female 
who,  just  before  the  Deluge,  led  a  colony  consisting  of  fifty 
women  and  three  men,  one  of  whom  was  her  husband  Bith,  or 
Bioth,  into  Ireland. 

Why  is  it,  then,  that,  in  modern  oral  tradition,  it  is 
Finnbheara  and  not  Ceasair  who  commands  the  fairies  of  this 
hill  ?  This  can  only  be  explained,  if  we  find  reason  to  think  that 
the  names  were  interchangeable.  In  the  C/iromcum  Scotorum 
we  find  a  triplet  of  divine  females,  Eriu,  Ceasair,  and  Berbha. 
If  Beara,  then,  is  the  name  here  spelt  Berbha,  we  have  the 
required  identity.  It  is  true  that  Finnbheara,  or  Finvarra,  is 
a  male  fairy,  but  gender  in  mythology  makes  little  difference,  as 
can  be  abundantly  shown.  Berbha's  name  was  that  of  the  river 
Barrow. 

Beara  had  her  well  just  as  though  she  were  a  Christian  saint, 
as  instance  the  name  Tobernacallybeara,  the  "  Well  of  Beara  the 
Witch."  In  Galway,  too,  is  Killeenavarra,  a  name  which  O'Dono- 
van  says  puzzled  him  much,  but  which  he  connects  with  that  of 
Rinn  Beara  in  the  southern  extremity  of  the  Barony  of  Leitrim. 
It  is  worthy  of  remark  that  the  cultus  of  the  Christian  saint 
Barra,  Barry  (Barricus),  took  its  rise  in  the  district  of  the  Bolg- 
Tuath  of  Baghna  (Slieve  Baan,  in  Roscommon),  the  country  of 
the  darkest  people  in  Ireland,  over  which  the  popular  divinity 
Finvarra  presided,  A  wild  legend  of  Barry  chasing  a  huge 
Serpent,  Ollphiast,  or  Worm  from  Kilbarry  into  Lough  Lagan, 
has  so  pagan  a  complexion  that,  taking  also  into  consideration 
the  identity  of  the  names  Varra  and  Barra,  we  may  well  see 
reason  to  suppose  that,  on  the  deposition  of  the  native  divinity, 
the  Christian  saint  who  happened  to  possess  the  name  most 
nearly  approaching  his  own,  was  set  up  in  his  stead.     In  Norse 

t  Ogygia,  pt.  iii.  c.  i.  +  Criil  =  "a  couch,  a  corner,  a  closet,"  O'Reilly. 


8oo  The  Dolmens  of  Ireland. 

mythology  we  similarly  find  snakes  imprisoned  at  the  bottoms  of 
lakes. f 

An  oral  tradition  has  been  preserved  with  regard  to  the 
erection  of  two  tumuli  in  Mayo,  the  one  on  the  seashore  at 
Beal  Dorcha,  the  other,  called  Leacht-air-Iojn'ais,  signifying 
"  Monument  of  the  Slaughter  of  Irrus,"  three  quarters  of  a  mile 
to  the  E.N.E. 

The  mound  at  Beal  Dorcha  was  said  to  be  the  burial-place 
of  a  Munster  prince,  who  contended  here  on  the  shore  with 
O'Conor  Sligo,  and  who  was  slain  in  the  battle  commemorated 
by  the  great  cairn  called  Leacht-air-Iorrais.  When  Dr.  Lyons 
found  a  skeleton  in  the  tumulus,  it  was  popularly  supposed  to  be 
that  of  the  Munster  chieftain.  It  was  also  said  traditionally  that, 
being  a  Christian,  he  had  been  interred  here  apart  from  his 
enemies  who  were  pagans,  and  who  were  buried  in  the  larger 
cairn.  When  the  "Sheannachies"  of  the  district  observed  that 
the  mound  was  triangular,  and  was  composed  of  three  different 
kinds  of  soil,  they  held  that  the  tradition  as  to  Its  being  Christian 
was  confirmed,  since  In  these  points  it  was  emblematic  of  the 
Trinity.  This  modern  instance  of  the  tendency  of  the  Irish  to 
discover  mystical  interpretations,  even  for  the  most  ordinary 
phenomena,  Is  perfectly  in  keeping  with  what  meets  us  in  their 
medieval  writings,  especially  in  the  manner  in  which  their  fancy 
runs  riot  in  the  domain  of  etymology,  as  in  the  DIndshenchas. 

The  body  in  this  mound  had  been  placed  "  in  a  sort  of  chair 
formed  of  stones,"  in  a  sitting  posture.  Mr.  Du  Chaillu  mentions 
that  in  a  large  burial-chamber  at  Lower  Aure  in  Norway,  were 
found  the  remains  of  a  chair,  "  confirming  the  accounts  In  the 
Sagas  about  men  being  placed  on  their  chair  In  the  grave.  .  .  . 
Aran,  a  foster-brother  of  Asmund,  sat  on  a  chair  in  all  his 
armour,  with  his  accoutrements,  his  horse  and  his  dog,  and  his 
hawk." 

The  great  monument  In  the  Deer  Park  near  Sligo  is  called 
Leacht  Con-mlc-RuIs,  "  Monument  of  Cu,J  son  of  Rus."  § 

A  dolmen  at  Trianmore,  one  of  the  Lough  Arrow  Group  in 
Sligo,  is  called  Lommincach.\  Mr.  O'Conor,  in  the  Ord.  Surv. 
Letters,  supposed    it    to    be    the  name   of  a   Giant.     Another,  a 

t  See  R.  B.  Anderson,  Norse  mythology,  p.  99. 

X  Cf.  "  Cu  meic  Cais  Clothmin,"  Whitley  Stokes,  Re%'.  Celt.,  vol.  xv.  p.  301. 
§  Cf.  "  Rus  Mac  Fiachach,"  Windisch,  "  Trische  Texte,"  p.  258. 

II  Lorn  =  slim,  spare.     Lommon  and  Loman  arc  personal  names.     The  word  also  enters  into 
composition  as  Lovimghiinech.     Lontna  was  Finn  Mac  Cumhail's  jester. 


Names  and  Legends.  8oi 

quarter  of  a  mile  off,  in  the  Townland  of  Carricknagrip,  is  called 
Cliopach  Mor,  also,  as  he  thinks,  from  a  Giant's  name,  but  which 
seems  to  belong  to  the  category  of  animal  names  for  these 
monuments,  and  to  mean  Great  Wolf,  or  Fox  {cliabhacJi).\  A 
huge  natural  rock  in  the  same  vicinity,  which  stands  on  end,  is 
called  Eigleoin,  "  from  a  Giant  of  that  name  said  to  be  buried 
under  it.  It  is  said  to  have  been  thrown  by  him  from  the  Hill  of 
Doon,  near  Bo^de.  It  was  his  intention,  however,  to  have  thrown 
it  as  far  as  Carn  Hill  in  Carrownadargny,  but,  failing  to  do  this 
(for  it  was  in  rivalry  that  he  threw  it),  he  died  of  grief  The  track 
of  his  fingers  are  still  pointed  out  on  the  stone."  |  This  and  other 
stories  of  Giants  throwing  rocks  in  rivalry,  and  leaving  their  finger- 
prints in  them,  have  their  counterpart  in  the  tales  of  the  Esthonian 
Finns.§  For  the  meaning  of  Eigleoin,  or  Eglone,  I  can  offer  no 
explanation.  II 

A  great  cairn  at  Heapstown,  also  one  of  the  Lough  Arrow 
series,  situated  three  quarters  of  a  mile  west  of  the  dolmen  at 
Carrickglass,  is  "  generally  believed,"  says  Col.  Wood-Martin,  to 
have  been  erected  "  over  Olioll,  son  of  Eochy  Moyvane,  ai^d-righ 
(over-king)  of  Ireland."  A  circle  of  large  blocks  of  stone  encom- 
passes it ;  the  outer  circumference  measures  62  statute  perches,  and 
it  resembles  as  closely  as  possible  the  Vicar's  Cairn,  near  Armagh. 
The  country-people  say  it  was  collected  in  one  night.  This 
Olioll,  Ailill,  whence  (Ellil)  Erril,  was  the  eponymous  of  Tirrerrill, 
a  district  which  includes  the  whole  of  the  Lough-Arrow  group  of 
monuments.  This  cairn  would  be  an  appropriate  site  for  legend 
to  assign  for  the  burial-place  of  the  chieftain  of  those  who  dwelt 
there,  who  were  called  the  children  of  Ailill,  and  their  land  Tir 
Ailella.^  Olioll  was  the  third  son  of  Eochaidh  Moghmedon,ff  by 
his  "married  queen"  Mongfinn,  a  princess  of  South  Munster. 
He  died  without  issue.  His  brothers  were  Brian,  ancestor  of  the 
Hy-Briuin-Ai,  the  Hy-Briuin-Breifne,  and  the  Hy-Briuin-Seola, 
the  three  families  who  gave  kings  to  Connaught ;  Fiachra, 
ancestor   of  the    Hy-Fiachra,    and    Fergus.     The    famous    Nial, 


14 

t  O.S.L.  Co.  Sligo,  — ,  p.  171,  ^/  seqq. 

r .   14 

X  id.  p.  241. 

§  See  the  story  of  Kallewe  Poeg  and  his  two  giant  brothers,  "  Ur-Geschichte  des  Esthnischen 
Volkstammes,"  von  F.  Kruse,  p.  175.     See  p.  513,  supra. 

II    O'Reilly  gives  eagldn  =  "  a  biting." 

\  Analogy  with  Tir-Amalgaidh  (Tirawley)  would  lead  us  to  look  for  a  Teutonic  origin  for  the 
name  Ailill.  Rhys,  however,  connects  it  with  the  Welsh  ellyl,  a  dwarf,  "Celtic  Heathendom," 
p.  138. 

tt  Muighmheadhoin,  pron.  IMoyvane. 


8o2  The  Dolmens  of  Ireland. 

ancestor  of  the  Hy-Niall,  was  Olioll's  half-brother,  fifth  son  of 
Eochaidh  Moghmedon,  by  a  wife  called  Cairen  or  Carenna,  called 
by  Tighernach  a  "  Saxon  woman,"  by  others  a  "  daughter  of  the 
King  of  Saxony,"  and  in  a  poem  published  in  the  Ordnance  Survey 
account  of  the  Parish  of  Templemore.f  "  a  Pict."  On  the  subject 
of  marriages  with  foreign  women,  Kelly,  in  his  notes  on  Lynch, J 
observes  that  it  is  remarkable  that  "  the  greatest  names  in  Pagan 
Ireland  are  connected  with  foreigners."  Ugaine  M6r,§  whose 
name  is  translated  into  Latin  as  Hugo,  or  Hugonius,  and  which  I 
think  we  may  compare  with  that  of  Hugo  or  Hugon,  the  eponymous 
ancestor  of  the  Franks,  married  Ceasair,  daughter  of  the  King  of 
the  Franks.  Tuathal  Teachtmar's  wife  was  a  "  Fomorian  Finn- 
lander  "  11  (to  use  the  words  of  O'Flaherty),  Bania,  daughter 
of  Seal  Balb ;  his  (Tuathal's)  mother  was  Ethnea,  daughter  of 
Imgheal,  King  of  the  Picts;  Conn  Cetchathach  was  the  son  of  a 
Danish  woman  (ex  una  Danica),  says  O'Flaherty. 

Another  cairn  in  the  Lough-Arrow  group,  on  the  highest 
point  of  a  hill  called  Farmaoil-na-bh-Fian,  Round  hill  (?)  of  the 
Fi'ans,  in  the  Townland  of  Moytirra  West,  and  Moytirra 
Chonlainn,  measuring  about  loo  paces  in  circumference,  and  in 
which  bones  have  been  found,  is  called  Seelewey,  supposed  to  be 
Suidhe  Lughaidh,  or  Lug's  Seat,  just  as  Suidhe  Finn  means 
Finn's  Seat.  Local  tradition  regards  it  as  a  spot  where  "  giants 
congregated  of  old." 

Now,  the  occurrence  of  the  name  of  the  mythical  hero,  Lug,  in 
connection  with  a  sepulchral  cairn  at  a  place  called  Moytirra,  is  of 
no  little  interest  since  it  bears  upon  the  question  whether  local 
oral  tradition  still  current,  or  which  is  known  to  have  been  until 
recently  current,  can  be  shown  to  coincide  in  any  points  of  detail 
with  the  legendary  lore  committed  to  writing  in  the  medieval 
books,  and  which,  since  it  mentions  place-names,  seems  to  have 
been  intended  to  indicate  certain  localities,  well  known  at  the 
time,  in  this  or  that  part  of  Ireland. 

Magh-Tuire,  or  -Tuired,  was  the  name  given  in  these  written 
legends  to  a  plain  on  which  took  place  a   mighty  conflict,   or, 


t  p.  229.  %  "  Canib.  Eversus,"  p.  493. 

§  Said  to  have  been  the  ancestor  of  all  the  Eremonian  families  in  Ulster,  Leinster,  and 
Connaught. 

II  *'  Scalius  Balbus  rex  Fomoire,  i.  Finnlaind,"  Ogygia,  1685,  p.  303.  We  meet  with  the  name 
Seal  Balb  (dumb  champion),  as  that  of  the  father  of  Lug,  foster  son  of  Tailte.  See  Whitley 
Mokes,  "  Dindshenchas,"  Rev.  Celt.  vol.  xv.  p.  318,  voh  xvi.  p.  51.  With  the  Irish  scd/,  a  hero, 
compare  the  name  of  the  Scalovitre  at  the  mouth  of  the  Mcmcl.     "  Zeuss,"  p.  674. 


Names  and  Legends.  8o 


o 


perhaps,  two  conflicts,  between  a  people  called  the  Tuatha  Dc 
Danann  on  the  one  hand,  and  peoples  called  Fir  Bolg  and 
Fomoraigh,  or  Fomore,  on  the  other.  The  Tuatha  De  Danann 
were  successful  in  both  cases,  and  most  instrumental  in  bringing 
about  their  victory  was  the  evidently  divine  hero  Lug,  whose 
name  this  cairn  appears  to  bear.  The  question,  then,  is  :  Was 
this  the  site  which  the  medieval  scribes  had  in  mind  when  they 
wrote  down  the  legend  of  the  battle  ;  was  such  a  legend  told  and 
believed  on  the  spot ;  and  were  the  very  numerous  dolmens, 
cairns,  and  cashels  which  exist  there  pointed  out  as  monuments  of 
the  battle,  and  sepulchres  of  the  slain  ? 

Recent  and  scholarly  attempts  to  master  the  details  of  this 
battle-leeend  have  tended  rather  to  countenance  a  view  that  the 
two  stories  relate  to  one  and  the  same  event,  the  first  part 
of  the  fight,  namely,  that  between  the  Tuatha  De  Danann  and 
the  Fir  Bolg,  having  for  its  sequel  the  second  part,  in  which 
the  former  people  engaged  the  Fomorian  allies  of  the  latter,  the 
ground  which  legend  assigned  in  either  case  being  one  and  the 
same,  Mag  Tuired.  Of  this  latter  view  M,  H.  d'Arbois  de  Jubain- 
ville  has  been  the  exponent. 

The  elder  school  of  Irish  writers  divided  the  battle,  as,  indeed, 
the  old  forms  of  the  romance  divide  them,  into  two  parts.  They 
held  that  the  first  battle  was  fought  at  Nymphsfield,  near  Cong,  in 
Mayo,  where  circles  and  a  cathair  existed,  mainly  on  the  ground 
that  the  name  was  written  Mag  Tuire  Cunga,  and  the  latter  word 
they  took  for  Cong,  although  it  is  a  term  applicable  to  any 
isthmus,  or  narrow  piece  of  land  between  two  lakes.  This  view 
was  held  by  O' Donovan,  Petrie,  O'Curry,  and  others.  As  to  the 
site  of  the  northern  battle,  Petrie  held  that  it  was  Carrowmore 
where  such  an  immense  group  of  dolmen-circles  exist. 

During  the  progress  of  the  Ordnance  Survey,  however,  Mr. 
Thomas  O'Conor  pointed  out  the  existence,  on  the  northern  shore 
of  Lough  Arrow,  of  a  considerable  extent  of  country  bearing 
(which  neither  of  the  other  localities,  nor,  indeed,  any  other  Town- 
lands  in  Ireland  did)  this  very  name  Motuire,  Moytuire,  or 
Moytirra.  The  district  so  called,  so  the  natives  told  him,  once 
included  a  circuit  of  five  or  six  miles.  Upon  his  reporting  this, 
O' Donovan  at  once  and  unhesitatingly  accepted  the  fact  as  a 
genuine  discovery.     "  The  Magh  Tuireadh,"  he  writes.f  "  which 

14 

t  O.S.L.,  Y^  -^,  Y>.  205. 


8o4  The  Dolmens  of  Ireland. 

you  have  discovered,"  in  Kilmactranny,  is  "  certainly  the  Northern 
Magh  Tuireadh  of  the  Irish  writers.  I  never  beHeved,"  he  adds, 
"  that  it  meant  '  the  plain  of  the  towers.' " 

The  same  view  as  to  there  having  been  only  one  battle 
intended  by  the  earlier  story-tellers,  although  later  ones  expanded 
it  into  two,  evidently  presented  itself  also  to  Col.  Wood-Martin, 
for,  after  a  careful  inspection  of  the  ground,  he  says  :  "  Could  both 
battles  have  been  fought  on  the  Moy  or  plain  {i.e.  Moytirra)  in 
Sligo?"  Bearing  on  this  point,  he  quotes  a  passage  from  the 
writings  of  Gilla  Isa  More  Mac  Firbis,  in  1416,  which  shows  that 
that  famous  old  Irish  antiquary  "considered  the  first  battle  of 
Moytirra  to  have  been  fought,  not  in  the  neighbourhood  of  Cong, 
but  to  the  north  of  Lough  Ce,  for  he  represents  Ce,  a  druid  of 
King  Nuada,  as  .  .  .  fleeing  from  the  field  in  a  south-easterly 
direction  to  the  plain  near  Boyle,  subsequently  covered  by  the 
waters  of  Lough  Key,  which  burst  forth  and  drowned  him  as  he 
lay  asleep  on  a  cairn."  This  would  point  to  the  very  district 
called  Moytirra,  only  ten  miles  distant  from  that  lake. 

The  following  passage  in  the  Dindshenchas  ought  to  show 
us  where  the  medieval  writers  placed  Moytuire,  but  although 
Lusmag  is  supposed  to  have  been  identified  as  in  the  King's 
County,  Achad  Abla  has  not.  "Tis  thence,"  from  Lusmag, 
"  that  Diancecht  brought  every  herb  of  healing,  and  grated  them 
on  Slainge's  well  in  Achad  Abla,  to  the  north-west  of  Magh 
Tuiredh,  when  the  great  battle  was  fought  between  the  Tuatha 
Dea  (Danann)  and  the  Fomoire."  f 

For  the  most  part,  the  district  of  Moytirra  is  low  ground 
covered  over  with  a  great  number  of  large  stones  and  detached 
rocks — ^just  such  a  site  as  the  old-world  story-tellers  were  wont 
to  select  for  the  scene  of  a  contest  in  which  the  contending  parties 
were  superhuman  and  their  weapons  the  rugged  rocks — ^just  such 
another  spot,  indeed,  as  that  rock-strewn  tract  at  the  mouth  of 
the  Rhone,  where,  as  the  legend  handed  down  by  Mela  has  it, 
Hercules  contended  with  the  giants  Albion  and  Dercyon  (or 
Bergion),  each  side  using  for  their  missiles  the  huge  natural 
fragments  which  cover  the  plain  in  witness  of  the  truth  of  the  tale. 
Indeed,  a  very  counterpart  of  this  legend  is  still  in  existence  at 
Moytirra,  as  may  be  seen  in  the  case  of  the  rock  called  Eigleoin, 
pitched  by  a  giant  into  the  position  in  which  it  still  remains. 

t  Whitley  Stokes,  "  Rev.  Celt.,"  vol.  xvi.  p.  59. 


Names  and  Legends.  805 

Mr.  Thomas  O'Conor  found  that  a  battle-legend  actually  was 
extant  among  the  natives.  The  very  field  in  which  it  was  fought 
was  pointed  out  to  him.  The  warriors  on  either  side  were  Giants 
and  Fians  ;  they  would  have  been  lotuns  or  Eotens,  and  Finns 
in  Teutonic  romance.  The  grave  of  one  of  the  former  is  still 
known  as  Leacht-an-fJiir-in6ir,  while  the  entire  hill  was  called 
after  the  latter — Fannaoil  na  bh-Fian.  All  the  megalithic 
remains,  and  cairns,  and  fantastic  natural  boulders  in  the  district 
were  assigned  to  these  giants,  and  in  some  cases  the  names  they 
bore  were  those  of  the  combatants  interred  in  them.  Mr. 
O'Conor  was  informed  that  at  one  time  there  existed  "  a  o-reater 

o 

number  of  these  'Giants'  Graves'  than  any  one  person  there 
residing  could  tell  the  names  of;  they  were  to  be  found  on  every 
side  of  Moytirra  Chonlainn  village  within  the  distance  of  five 
miles  of  it." 

The  battle-legend  extended,  according  to  Mr.  O'Keefe,  who 
was  also  connected  with  the  Ordnance  Survey,  into  the  Townland 
of  Moytirra  Mac  Donagh,  where  there  was  a  hill  called  Crtic-a- 
catha,  or  Battle-Knoll,  and  here  it  was,  according  to  local  report, 
that  the  great  fight  began. 

In  the  written  legend  of  the  "  second  battle "  it  was  the 
Fomoire  who  contended  with  the  Tuatha  De  Danann.  As  the 
scope  of  this  work  does  not  permit  of  my  entering  into  the  details 
of  the  romance,  I  will  only  mention  that  from  the  Fomoire  the 
site  was  said  to  have  received  the  name  Maeh-Tuireadh  na  bh- 
Fomorach,  or  Magh  Tuired  of  the  Fomoraighe  or  Fomorians,  and 
that  Balor,  king  of  the  latter  people,  who  were  invaders,  on  the  one 
side,  and  Lug  on  that  of  the  Tuatha  De  Danann,  on  the  other, 
were  two  of  the  principal  combatants.  We  have  seen  that  Lug's 
name  is  supposed  to  exist  still  in  the  name  of  the  cairn  Seelewey. 
Indeed,  both  his  name  and  that  of  Balor  were  remembered  still 
in  connection  with  the  place  when  Messrs.  O'Conor  and  O'Keefe 
collected  the  traditions  on  the  spot  in  1837.  "It  is  well  re- 
membered," says  the  former,  "that  Looee  of  the  Long-Hands 
{i.e.  Lugaidh  Lamfhada  of  the  written  romance)  was  one  of  the 
heroes  of  this  battle,  and  Balor  is  also  mentioned." 

The  story,  however,  which  is  told  of  these  personages  is,  with 
some  local  variations,  common  to  the  whole  north  and  west 
of  Ireland.  I  myself  heard  it  repeated  at  length  by  a  very  aged 
man  in  the  Gweedore  district  of  Donegal,  more    than  fifty  years 


8o6  The  Dolmens  of  Ireland. 

after  INIr.  O'Conor  had  heard  it  at  Moytirra.  In  other  places 
where  it  is  told  no  mention  is  made  of  Moytirra,  but  it  is 
localized  in  each  case  on  the  spot.  "  Balor  used  to  carry  about 
with  him  a  glass,  through  which,  when  he  wished  to  destroy  any 
person,  he  looked  with  his  death-dealing  eye.  Whilst  he 
remained  about  Moituire,"  proceeds  Mr.  O'Conor,  "he  looked 
through  his  glass  at  the  tops  of  the  heath,  and  of  the  rushes, 
and  of  the  sallows,  which  is  the  reason  why  they  appear  always 
withered.  He  began  to  boast  of  this  act  in  the  presence  of 
some  great  hero  whose  name  tradition  keeps  in  silence.  This 
hero  [doubtless  Lug]  asked  him  "  with  what  did  he  give 
so  destructive  a  look?"  "With  that  eye,"  said  he,  taking  off 
the  glass,  and  pointing  to  his  eye.  Meanwhile,  as  he  did  so, 
the  hero  took  the  opportunity  to  put  out  his  eye,  and  the  blood 
that  gushed  forth  from  it  [or,  as  another  version  says,  'a  tear' 
from  it  which  Balor  dropped]  went  into  {i.e.  formed)  a  little  lake 
(called  Suil  Balra,  or  Balor's  eye)  which,"  as  far  as  Mr.  O'Conor 
could  learn,  "  was  in  the  Townland  of  Polnanailtog,  not  far  from 
Moituire  to  the  north."  Another  name  for  the  lake  was  Lochan- 
na-Suil,  the  Lakelet  of  the  Eye. 

Balor,  it  was  said  by  the  people,  "  was  perfectly  skilled  in  the 
magic  art,  and  always  kept  a  cover  on  his  eye,  except  when, 
in  order  to  do  an  injury  by  his  look,  he  intentionally  removed  it." 
Several  other  scattered  fragments  of  legends  about  him  were 
obtainable.  "  There  was  a  '  caiseal '  (cashel)  at  Mullaghmore 
in  the  parish  of  Ahamlish,  near  the  seashore,  which  was  almost 
covered  with  sand,  but  yet  traceable,  which  was  called  Diin 
Balra,  or  Balor's  diin,  where  it  was  said  he  had  resided  for  some 
time." 

In  the  much  fuller  story  told  in  Donegal,  where  Lug  is 
represented  as  using  tricks  and  artifices  in  order  to  overcome  his 
adversary  Balor,  whom  he  finally  slays,  we  seem  to  recognize 
in  him  a  great  likeness  to  the  Loke  of  the  Scandinavian  Sagas. 
If,  as  there  is  good  reason  to  suppose,  Lug  and  Loke  are  to 
be  identified,  Balor  takes  the  place  of  Baldr,  slain  through  the 
instrumentality  of  Loke,  although  in  place  of  the  beneficent  deity 
which  Baldr  is,  we  have  in  Balor  a  hateful  and  piratical  tyrant. 
It  is,  indeed,  as  if  we  had  before  us  the  same  myth  told  from  the 
point  of  view  of  the  opponents  of  those  whose  divinities  were  the 
gods  of  the  Norse  Sagas.      Have  we  the  lotun  or  Pictish  version, 


Names  and  Legends.  807 

while  the  Norse  version  is  that  of  their  foes,  the  Asa  people  ?  If 
so,  the  gods  of  the  former  would  be  the  demons  of  the  latter,  and 
vice  versa, 

Mr.  O'Keefe  corroborates  Mr.  O'Conor  in  the  statement  that 
the  battle  was  still  remembered  traditionally  among  the  people. 
"  Some  say  that  Cath  Muighe  Tuire  was  fought  in  Mweetuire, 
Mweethiira,  or  Meetra  (so  they  pronounce  it)  Mac  Donough ; 
others,  and  the  greater  portion,  say  they  are  not  sure.  The 
principal  opponents  remembered  are  Lugaidh  Lamhfhada  and 
Goll  Mac  Moirne,  the  latter  of  whom,"  they  say,  "was  on  this 
occasion  blinded  of  one  eye  by  the  former,  from  which  circum- 
stance he  was  called  Goll  Clock  f  {?  Caock,  blind,  blasted,  empty). 
It  was  Goll,  however,  who,  so  they  say,  gained  the  battle."  Goll 
was  brother  of  Cumal  (?  Humal),  the  father  of  Finn,  and  he  had 
an  alias  lodhlan,  i.e.  lotland.  One  of  the  natives  stated  that  he 
had  heard  the  battle  called  "  Catha  na  bporonach,  '  because,'  he 
said,  *  it  was  fought  in  reaping-time.' "  I  find  no  such  word  for 
"harvest"  as  that  which  Mr.  O'Keefe  here  gives,  but  I  do  find 
that  if  the  peasant  had  used  the  word  for  harvest,  or  for  the  last 
month  in  the  autumn,  which  is  fogJimhar — in  its  adjectival  form 
foghmharach,  autumnal — he  would  have  used  a  word  which  is 
letter  for  letter  identical  with  Foghmharach,  O'Reilly's  spelling  of 
Fomorian.  This  renders  it  certain  that  this  place  was  called 
Magh  Tuired-na-bh-Fojuorach,  and  that  it  is  therefore  the  site  so 
called  in  the  written  tale. 

Col.  Wood-Martin  tells  us  %  that  an  incident  concerning  a  well 
which  antiquaries  had  associated  with  a  spot  near  Cong  in  Mayo, 
"  is  still  told  by  the  peasantry  in  connection  with  Moytirra  in 
Sligo."  He  mentions  also  that  an  old  native  of  Moytirra  recounted 
a  legend  according  to  which  "  one  of  the  'Giants'  was,  after  the 
battle,  killed  at  Magherow,  a  place  north  of  Sligo."  In  the  "  Annals 
of  the  Four  Masters,"  there  is  a  reference  to  a  famous  Fomorian 
warrior  slain  by  Lug,  as  he  was  on  his  way  to  the  battle,  at  a  ford 
on  the  Sligo  river,  where  there  must  have  been  a  liagdji,  or  pillar- 
stone. 

The  Four  Masters  thus  allude  to  the  battle  itself:  "A.M. 
3330.    Nuadhad  Airgeadlamh  (silver-hand),  after  a  reign  of  twenty 

t  "  A  woman's  breast,"  O'R.,  which  cannot  be  the  meaning.  Goll,  according  to  O'Donovan 
(G'R.,  Suppl.)  also  means  "  blind."  He  quotes  the  pedigree  of  Mac  Morough  for  the  name  Eoo/ian 
caoch,  i.e.  goll,  so  given  by  Dalian  Forguill,  said  to  have  lived  in  the  6th  century,  and  to  have  written 
the  "Amhra  Coluim  Cille." 

:  R.S.M.,  p.  163. 


8o8  The  Dolmens  of  Ireland. 

years  as  monarch  of  Ireland,  was  slain  at  the  battle  of  Magh 
Tuireadh-na-bh-Fomorach  by  Balor  Bailc  Bheimionach,  one  of  the 
Fomorians." 

In  support  of  the  view  which  M.  d'Arbois  de  Jubainville  has 
laboured  to  overthrow,  namely,  that  the  site  indicated  in  the  tale 
of  what  is  called  the  first  battle,  was  really  at  Cong  in  Mayo,  and 
that  two  battles,  and  not  one  single  one,  were  intended  by  the 
original  tellers  of  the  tales,  I  will  here  quote  what  O'Donovan  says 
with  regard  to  such  traditions  as  existed  near  Cong  sixty  years 
ago.  It  was  at  Nymphsfield,  in  the  parish  of  Cong,  "  where  there 
are  still  remaining  monuments  of  great  interest  to  the  antiquarian  " 
{j.e.  three  circles  of  stones),  that,  so  it  was  said,  a  battle  had 
been  fought.  "It  was  commenced  at  Cathair  Mhic  Toirc,'' 
Castle  of  the  son  of  Tore  (=  Boar),  "a  magnificent  cyclopean 
cahir,  which  was  destroyed  about  eighteen  years  since  f  by 
Mr.  Crampton,  who  erected  Nymphsfield  House  on  its  site, 
and  it  ended  ...  at  Turloch-a-tsallain  in  the  Townland  of 
Drumsheel,  within  a  mile  of  Cong.  The  only  names  remem- 
bered in  connection  with  the  battle  are  Balra  (Balor), 
Dergin  (?  Dergo),  and  Righ  Mhada  Conchin  (Tall  King  Dog's 
Head),  and  there  is  no  one  now  living  who  could  describe 
the  manner  in  which  it  was  fought,  nor  name  the  monuments 
raised  over  the  fallen  chiefs,  but  it  is  asserted  that  the  grandfathers 
of  the  present  generation  were  accustomed  to  recite  the  story  of 
the  Battle  of  Magh  Tuireadh  at  their  firesides,  and  to  astonish  the 
rising  generation  by  descriptions  of  the  valor  of  Balor,  and  the 
dreadful  property  of  his  eye  by  which  he  metamorphosed  a  line  of 
warriors  drawn  up  in  a  circle  into  stones,  where  they  remain  to 
this  day.  .  .  .  The  whole  amount  of  what  is  now  remembered  by 
tradition  is  that  as  Balor  stood  on  the  walls  of  Cathair  Mhic  Toirc 
he  saw  the  battalions  of  the  enemy  committing  ereat  slaughter  in 
the  adjacent  field  lying  to  the  east,  and  fearing  for  the  fate  of  his 
party,  he  removed  the  cover  from  the  eye  which  he  had  in  the 
middle  of  his  forehead  (for  Balor  had  three  eyes),  and,  looking 
over  fiercely  at  his  enemies,  he  converted  them  into  stones,  and 
they  are  to  be  seen  to  this  day  in  the  field  opposite  Nymphsfield 
House.  Righ  Mhada  Conchin  was  killed  in  this  battle,  and 
buried  under  the  'Long  Stone'  at  the  Neal.  Other  chieftains, 
whose  names  are  now  forgotten,  were  also  slain  in  this  battle,  and 

t  i.e.  before  the  date  of  the  survey. 


Names  and  Legends.  809 

interred  in  the  Neal,  where  their  monuments  were  pointed  out 
within  the  demesne  by  the  old  men  who  lived  fifty  years  ago,  but 
no  one  living  could  now  name  them,  and  they  are  nearly  all 
effaced." 

O'Donovan  thinks  that  "a  battle  was  really  fought  at  this 
place  at  a  remote  period."  The  presence  of  the  circles  of  standing- 
stones,  in  my  opinion,  confirms  this  view.  This  class  of  monument 
I  do  not  regard  as  so  ancient  as  the  earliest  dolmens,  and  so 
persistent  is  the  tradition  that  battles  were  fought  where  they 
exist  that  I  feel  bound  to  admit  it  may  have  truth  in  it,  more 
especially  as  we  know  that  similar  rings  of  stone  in  Scandinavia 
were  the  appointed  places  in  which,  after  a  battle,  the  backs  of  the 
captives  were  broken,  and  the  victims  thus  sacrificed  to  the  war- 
god.  In  Ireland  I  have  collected  five  examples,  in  addition  to 
this  one,  of  battle  traditions  being  connected  with  circles,  namely, 
at  Lough  Gur  in  Limerick,  at  Parkagullane  in  Kerry,  at  Kippagh 
in  Clare,  at  Creganaonaigh  in  Clare,  and  at  Caah  Hill  in  Derry. 
I  may  add  one  from  Cornwall,  that  of  Rosemoddress  in  the  Parish 
of  Buryan.  The  evidence  derivable  from  the  exploration  of  barrows 
and  cairns  adjoining  circles  of  this  class,  and  within  the  circles 
themselves,  has  been  to  show  that  they  belong  to  an  age  when 
incineration  and  urn  burial  were  in  use,  and  when  riveted  bronze 
daggers  had  been  certainly  introduced.  That  a  vague  tradition 
of  battle  in  connection  with  them  may  have  survived  I  am  bound 
to  admit,  but  that  any  names  of  persons  or  details  of  the  action 
could  have  been  handed  down  from  a  period  of  such  vast 
antiquity  I  cannot  suppose  to  be  conceivable. 

What,  then,  are  the  conclusions  at  which  we  should  arrive, 
firstly,  as  regards  the  identity  of  the  places  named  in  the  written 
legends  with  the  sites  on  Loughs  Arrow  and  Corrib  ;  secondly,  as 
to  any  relation  in  which  those  legends  stand  to  the  megalithic 
monuments,  the  dolmens,  circles,  and  cairns  ? 

Firstly,  I  think  it  is  proved  that  when  the  writers  of  the  tale 
which  recounts  the  second  battle  called  its  site  Magh  Tuireadth 
na  bh-Fomorach,  they  distinctly  had  in  their  minds  Moytirra  on 
Lough  Arrow. 

Secondly,  that,  whether  or  not  the  separate  tales  of  the  two 
conflicts  are  referable  to  one  and  the  same  original  version,  the 
story  of  the  Battle  of  Magh  Tuireadh  Avas  known  to  the  people 
of  Cong  in  the  Middle  Ages,  and,  especially  since  they  had  an  oral 

VOL.  III.  H 


8io  The  Dolmens  of  Ireland. 

battle-tradition  of  their  own,  was  probably  widely  told  of  that 
place. 

Thirdly,  that  since  in  the  written  legends  the  combatants  are 
for  the  most  part  beings  superhumanly  divine  or  monstrous,  the 
battles,  in  so  far  as  the  introduction  of  their  names  is  concerned, 
never  occurred,  and  are  mythological. 

Fourthly,  that  since  the  dolmens  pointed  out  as  the  "  Graves 
of  the  Giants  "  must  be  assigned  to  a  period  too  remote  for  tradi- 
tion to  reach,  no  proper  name  attached  to  them  can  be  regarded 
as  that  of  an  individual  over  whom  the  monument  was  set  up. 

Unlike  "  rolling  stones  which  gather  no  moss,"  it  is  the  property 
alike  of  oral  traditions  and  legends,  when  retold  or  rewritten,  to 
pick  up  new  material  among  the  events  current  as  time  goes  on. 
The  peasantry  of  Moytirra  declared  to  Mr.  O'Keefe  that  "  Roger 
O'Neill,  of  Shane's  Castle,  was  one  of  the  combatants  in  the  battle 
there."  Similarly  the  genuine  tradition  of  the  wars  of  Norsemen 
and  Danes  caused  the  medieval  writer  of  the  tale  to  introduce  a 
certain  Aengaba,  King  of  Norway,  as  fighting  beside  the  gods 
Ogma,  Midir,  Bodb  Dearg,  and  Diancecht  on  the  side  of  the 
Tuatha  De  Danann. 

And  this  brings  me  to  my  fifth  and  last  conclusion,  namely, 
that  throughout  Ireland  a  great  orally  transmitted  epic, 
independent  altogether  of  written  medieval  developments, 
existed,  and  that  a  fact  underlay  it  which  was  no  myth, 
but  the  genuine  tradition  of  the  contention  of  two  races,  the 
achievements  of  whose  gods  form  the  staple  of  the  wild  and 
weird  tales  commonly  believed  among  the  peasantry,  as  in  the 
mountains  of  Donegal,  to  this  very  day,  and  which  differ,  both 
in  point  of  rugged  simplicity  and  vastness  of  conception,  since 
mountains  are  riven  and  bridges  formed  across  the  sea,  from  those 
medieval  tales,  long,  fullsome  in  detail,  and  literally  bloated  with 
epithets  which  were  learnt  by  the  educated  sheannachies,  or 
recited  by  travelling  tale-tellers  to  set  audiences  at  fairs  and 
assemblies. 

One  of  these  races  in  contention  was  that  of  Giants,  corre- 
sponding precisely  to  the  lotuns  of  Scandinavian  legend  ;  the 
other  was  that  of  Heroes,  corresponding  to  the  Asa  people,  or  to 
the  inhabitants  of  Mannheim.  To  the  former  of  these  races  were 
attributed  by  general  consent  the  "  Giants'  Graves ; "  to  the  latter, 
as  I  strongly  suspect,  in  Irish  as  in  Norse  tradition,  were  attributed 


Names  and  Legends.  8ii 


those  cairns  which  being  opened  are  found  to  contain  evidences 
of  the  **  Age  of  Burning." 

That  the  legends  had  their  origin  in  actual  conflicts  of  these 
races  in  Ireland  itself  is  not  likely.  They  were  imported  by 
immigrants — pirates  first,  mercenaries  second,  settlers  last — from, 
most  probably,  the  Baltic  coasts  and  those  of  the  German 
Ocean,  notably  the  Batavian  coasts,  and  the  districts  between  the 
Elbe  and  Oder.  It  must  not  be  supposed  that  either  the  Norseman 
or  Dane  of  history  brought  them  in  the  first  place.  Had  this  been 
so,  we  should  have  met  with  Odin  and  Frigg,  Baldr  and  Nanna, 
Loki  and  the  rest,  under  guise  more  directly  recognizable  than  is 
the  case.  As  it  is,  the  resemblances  which  unquestionably  do 
exist  between  Odinic  and  Irish  Mythology,  while  they  are 
too  close,  on  the  one  hand,  to  be  assignable  merely  to  a 
general  and  remote  Aryan  stem,  are  wide  enough  apart  to  show, 
on  the  other  hand,  that  the  period  of  their  separation  was  prior 
to  that  during  which  the  Norse  Sagas,  in  the  guise  in  which  we 
know  them,  were  put  into  shape.  Traces  there  are  of  several 
cognate  mythological  systems  having  been  imported.  At  the 
head  of  one  stood  Ollam  Fodhla,  at  the  head  of  another  "  The 
Daeda."  Each  of  these  ancestral  divinities  had  an  alias  which 
was  the  same — namely,  Eochaid.  Now,  this  word  put  back  into 
an  older  Celtic  form  would  read  luchaid  {Ivocattos,  according  to 
Rhys).  In  Teutonic  it  would  have  been  luthaid.  With  the 
termination  compare  the  aithcB  in  the  name  Finnaithse  in  Jordanes, 
and  we  have  in  Eochaid  an  adjectival  form  of  lut,  lot,  lucht, 
Icht,  that  is,  Pictish,  a  Pict. 

Evidence  can  be  adduced  from  the  "  Book  of  Armagh,"  a  MS. 
transcribed  from  one  which,  "  even  in  the  year  807,  was  becoming 
obscure,"  that  the  legend  of  Diarmaid  and  Grainne  was  in  existence 
before  the  first  appearance  of  the  Norsemen  in  795. 

With  the  cominofof  the  Fin-Gaill  and  the  Dubh-Gaill — the  Nor- 
wegians  and  the  Danes — history  was,  indeed,  only  repeating  itself. 
Throuo^h  the  Straits  of  the  Catteo^at  the  fleets  of  the  Sueones  had, 
doubtless,  long  before  the  time  when  Tacitus  speaks  of  them, 
discharged  their  piratical  crews  around  the  coasts  of  the  British 
Isles.  It  is  not  improbable  that  the  Veneti  of  Brittany,  whose 
light  cruisers,  called /^zV^^,  swept  the  English  Channel  in  the  days 
of  Caesar,  came  from  the  Southern  Baltic,  where  Tacitus  placed 
the  Venedi,  nor  that  in  the  name  of  the  Galindae  on  the  same 


8i2  The  Dolmens  of  Ireland. 

coast  we  have  that  of  the  Galeoin  (Galiuind)  in  Ireland,  nor  that 
in  that  of  the  Chauci  of  the  Frisian  coasts  we  have  the  Cauci  of 
the  Irish  coasts.  Later  on  came  the  Saxons  and  Franks  from  the 
countries  about  the  Elbe,  or  Labe,  as  the  Sclaves  called  it, 
desolating  the  coasts  of  Belgium  and  Armorica,  by  which  latter 
term  we  may  understand  all  the  sea-board  between  the  Seine  and 
Garonne  ;  harassing  Britain,  and,  as  we  feel  quite  sure,  not  leaving 
Ireland  unvisited. 

Of  certain  immigrations  mentioned  in  the  "  Leabhar  Gabhala  " 
I  mean  to  speak  at  the  close  of  this  work.  Meanwhile  I  feel  sure 
that  in  the  case  of  the  Fir  Bolg — the  race  whom  the  legend  of  the 
Battle  of  Magh  Tuireadh  represents  as  in  possession  of  Temair, 
when  their  foes,  the  Tuatha  De  Danann,  arrived — we  are  dealing 
with  no  merely  mythic  conception,  but  with  a  veritable  people, 
whose  name,  could  we  place  ourselves  in  the  position  of  those 
who  lived,  say,  in  the  seventh  or  eighth  century,  would  have 
conveyed  to  us  a  distinct  and  definite  meaning,  derivable  at  that 
time  from  a  genuine  historic  tradition.  To  this  most  interesting; 
question  I  will  also  subsequently  recur.  On  the  other  hand,  in  the 
Tuatha  De  Danann  we  should,  perhaps,  as  Colgan  thought,f 
recognize  the  Picts  of  history,  or  rather  their  divinities.  All 
attempts,  however,  to  reconcile  the  native  insular  traditions  of 
invaders,  whether  in  Britain  or  Ireland,  with  the  historic  peoples 
of  the  Continent,  are  full  of  complications,  and  it  is  only  by  taking 
them  one  by  one,  and  weighing  the  evidence  with  the  utmost 
care,  that  we  can  hope  to  place  ourselves  in  a  position  to  make 
any  comparison  possible.  I  believe,  however,  that  such  a  line 
of  study,  if  undertaken  with  a  thorough  knowledge  of  the  works 
of  the  later  Roman  and  earlier  Byzantine  historians,  would  bear 
rich  fruit,  and  that  even  in  the  strangest  traditions  of  the  ancient 
Irish,  however  much  medieval  romancers  may  have  distorted 
them,  as  is  the  case  in  the  Dindshenchas,  some  light  might  be 
forthcoming  illustrative  of  the  part  taken  by  the  barbarians  of 
the  North  in  the  raids  which  were  perpetually  being  made  upon 
the  Roman  empire. 

The  name  "Giant's  Grave,"  as  applied  to  megalithic  monu- 
ments in  Ireland,  was  of  considerable  antiquity.     This  is  shown 

t  Vit.  S.  Cadroe,  AA.  SS.  Hib.  p.  502,  note  on  the  Pictanei  of  Cruachan  Ele  (Croagh  Patrick) : 
' '  Gens  quam  ibi  reperierunt  in  patriis  historiis  vocatur  Tuatha  Di  Danann  quae,  an  vel  quomodo 
potuerit  dici  gens  Pictaneorum  alibi  conabimur  explicare," — a  promise  of  which  I  cannot  find  the 
fulfilment. 


Names  and  Legends. 


by  the  fact  that  the  writer  of  the  Legend  of  Patrick,  called  the 
"  Tripartite  Life,"  in  the  tenth  century,  believed  it  to  have  been 
in  use  in  the  fifth.  This,  I  think,  we  may  gather  from  the 
following  passage :  "  Once,  as  Patrick  was  travelling  in  the 
plains  of  the  son  of  Ere,  namely,  in  Dichuil  and  Erchuil,  he 
beheld  therein  a  huge  grave,  to  wit,  120  feet  in  length.  The 
brethren  asking  ut  sicscitaretur  {i.e.  that  its  occupant  might  be 
raised  from  the  dead),  Patrick  then  brought  to  life  the  dead  man 
who  was  biding  in  the  grave,  and  asked  tidings  of  him,  namely, 
when  and  how  [he  got  there],  and  of  what  race  and  of  what  name 
he  was.  He  answered  Patrick,  saying,  '  I  am  Cass,  son  of  Glass, 
and  I  was  swineherd  to  Lugar,  King  of  Iruata  \i^egis  Norwegice, 
Col.  Tr.  Thaum.,  139],  and  Mace  Con's  soldiery  slew  me  in  the 
reign  of  Coirpre  Niafer.  A  hundred  years  have  I  been  here 
to-day.'  Patrick  baptized  him,  and  he  went  again  into  his 
grave."  f 

The  name  of  Lug,  besides  being  found  in  that  of  the  cairn 
Seelewey,  occurs  in  that  of  Dunlewey,  under  Errigal,  in  Donegal, 
where  the  Balor  legend  is  still  remembered.  In  the  Townland 
of  Carney,  in  Sligo,  is  a  fort  called  Rath-Lugaidh,  which  tradition 
assigned  to  Lug.J  The  town  of  Louth  was  said  to  derive  its 
name  from  this  divine  hero,  and  near  it  was  a  site  known  as  that 
of  the  "grave  of  Lug  Lampfhada,  slain  by  Goll  Mac  Moirne." 
Whether  this  was  a  dolmen  I  do  not  know. 

At  Beltra,  near  Ballysadare,  in  Sligo,  is  an  encircled  cairn, 
to  which  Gabriel  Berangar,  evidently  from  local  information,  gave 
the  name  Cuchullin  s  To77tb.  This,  so  Col.  Wood-Martin  states, 
was  in  existence  until  1S58.  The  site  of  it,  he  adds,  is  known 
"to  this  day"  as  that  of  the  "monument  of  Traigh-Eothaile,"  that 
being  a  former  name  of  the  portion  of  the  strand  now  generally 
called  Beltra.  It  was  in  the  district  called  Cuil  Cnam  (O///  or 
Coin  Cndim),  or  the  "Corner"  or  "Wood  of  Bones,"  a  name 
retained  at  the  time  of  the  Survey  in  that  of  a  little  lake,  Lochaii 
Cuil  Cndm. 

No  trace  of  a  Cuchullain  legend  seems  to  have  been  preserved 
here ;  but  Mr.  O'Conor  gives  so  singular  a  legend  with  respect  to 
two  cairns  on  the  "  Traigh  Eothuile,"  that  it  will  be  well  to  repeat 


t  Trans.  Whitley  Stokes,  "Triple  Life,"  vol.  i.  p.  123. 

X  O.S.L.,  Co.  Sligo,  -—  -,  p.  105. 
F.  14 


8 14  The  Dolmens  of  Ireland. 

it  here.  Hele  was  a  woman  of  the  Fianna,  who,  having  set  out  in 
search  of  her  own  people,  who  had  gone  on  an  expedition  to 
some  foreign  country,  came  to  this  strand.  As  she  advanced 
in  crossing  it,  she  was  met  by  a  man,  of  whom  she  asked  where 
her  people  were.  "  There  they  are  above,"  said  he,  "  lying 
under  the  trees,"  pointing  to  Cuilte  Luighne.  She  was  astonished 
and  said,  "  Alas,  I'll  follow  thee  no  farther  ;  I  now  lay  all  hopes 
aside  of  ever  meeting  them  again.  They  cannot  be  my  people, 
for  if  they  were,  each  of  them  lying  would  reach  from  the  trees  to 
where  I  stand."  Thus  despairing,  she  dropped  dead.  There 
were  two  cairns  raised  over  her,  the  larger  of  which  rests  over 
her  head,  and  is  called  Carraigin  Ohele  ;  the  other  resting  over 
her  feet  is  called  Carraiofin  BeaQf. 

"  Others  say  it  was  an  engagement  that  took  place  between 
two  heroes  on  this  strand,  of  whom  Goll  was  one,  and  that  Hele, 
looking  on,  and  seeing  her  dearest  fall,  herself  fell  dead  through 
excess  of  grief.  The  two  cairns  are  opposite  Cuilte  Luighne  in 
the  strand.  The  people  say  that  the  large  one  is  covered  at  high 
water  only  every  seven  years,f  and  the  small  one  at  every  spring 
tide."  One  of  them  was  erected  over  Hele  herself,  and  the  other 
over  her  lover.  As  the  cairns  are  200  yards  apart,  it  is  clear  that 
the  first  tradition  represented  Hele  as  a  mythological  being,  the 
death-goddess,  it  may  be  assumed,  of  the  defeated  Fianna. 

Irish  mythology  affording  no  such  name  as  Hele,  we  naturally 
turn  to  that  of  the  Norse  death-goddess  Helle,  Hella,  Hel,  Hille.J 
whose  very  name  we  seem  to  have  here,  and  that  in  connection 
with  the  Fene  or  Fianna. 

The  medieval  written  legend  of  the  Battle  of  Moytirra  relates 
that  the  vanquished  party,  together  with  their  king  Eochaid  Mac 
Ere,  were  pursued  to  this  strand,  and  there  were  overtaken  by 
the  three  sons  of  Nemed.  The  latter  were  slain,  and  buried, 
according  to  the  story,  at  the  west  end  of  the  strand,  where  their 
grave-stones  were  set  up,  and  in  after  times  bore  the  name  Leca 
Mic  Ncmcdii.  Eochaid  was  also  slain,  and  interred  on  the  spot 
where  he  fell,  which  is  known,  says  Col.  Wood-Martin,  "as  the 
site  of  the  monument  of  Traigh-Eothaile,"  which  he  identifies 
with  the  encircled  cairn  seen  by  Beranger.  A  tradition  of  a 
battle  exists  among  the  natives  at  this  place. 

t  Contrariwise,  there  is  an  island  off  the  coast  of  the  Isle  of  Man  which  has  been  submerged 
ever  since  the  days  of  Finn  Mac  Cumhail,  but  which  rises  for  half  an  hour  every  seven  years. 
(Campbell's  "Tales  of  the  West  Highlands,'  p.  xl.) 

X  Zeuss,  "Die  Dculschen,"  p.  44. 


Names  and  Legends.  815 


The  oral  traditions  of  Cuchullain  are  few  and  far  between.  In 
Kerry  his  ** house"  and  his  "bed"  and  "grave"  are  shown  in  the 
Ordnance  Survey  Map,  and  the  rock  upon  which  he  leapt  to  escape 
the  pursuit  of  his  mistress,  and  then  springing  back  again,  left  her 
to  jump  into  the  sea,  is  to  be  seen  on  the  coast  of  Clare.  It  is  in 
the  County  of  Louth  that  he  is  best  remembered,  where  the 
stories  regarding  him  are,  however,  as  we  shall  presently  see, 
intermingled  with  those  of  Finn. 

In  the  Townland  of  Cloonker  in  Longford  is  a  dolmen  called 
'*  The  Giants'  Grave."  The  giant,  so  O'Donovan  was  informed, 
was  called  Kerr,  and  he  throws  out  a  suggestion  that  he  may  be 
identified  with  Kiardha,  the  ancestor  of  O'Kiary,  the  ancient  lord 
of  Carbury  O'Kiary.f 

Of  the  two  dolmens  in  one  field  at  Ballymascanlan  in  Louth  a 
legend  exists  that  while  two  giants  set  up  the  taller  one,  called  the 
Giants'  Load,  one  of  them  lies  buried  in  the  other.  "  They  say," 
says  Mr.  O'Conor,  "that  this  is  the  grave  of  Para  Buidhe  Mor 
Mac  Scoidin,  a  Scotch  giant  who  came  to  challenge  Finn  Mac 
Cumhail,  and  of  whom  they  tell  a  story  similar  to  that  of  Ferdiad. 
Para  Buidhe  Mor  (Para  being  a  local  diminutive  of  Patrick,  the 
whole  name  means  Big  Yellow  Paddy)  asked  Finn's  wife  what  he 
(Finn)  used  to  eat.  Finn,  she  told  him,  when  he  was  hungry,  would 
kill  one  of  those  bullocks  (pointing  to  them),  and  eat  him.  Para 
went  and  did  the  same,  and  the  spot  on  which  he  killed,  roasted, 
and  ate  it  is  pointed  out  yet.  It  is  a  hollow  in  a  green  field  a 
little  to  the  south  of  the  grave.  When  he  had  eaten  the  bullock, 
he  went  to  the  river  which  runs  near  the  spot  to  satisfy  his  thirst, 
but  Finn  threw  poison  into  the  water,  and  by  that  means  des- 
patched him.  Finn  and  he  together  had  set  up  the  taller 
monument. 

The  story  of  Ferdiad,  above  referred  to,  is  told  of  a  ford  and  a 
tumulus  near  Ardee.J  It  is  called  in  Irish  Baile  Atha  F/nrdkiadh,^ 
and  the  name  is  accounted  for  by  the  people  thus :  "  Finn  Mac 
Cumhail  kept  his  castle  at  Hacklim  (Mullach  Ailim).  The  Fear- 
Dhiadh,  hearing  of  Finn's  fame,  came  to  challenge  him  to  single 
combat.     Finn  was  aware  of  this  by  chewing  his  thumb  to  the 

t  O.S.L.,  Co.  Longford,  -^^ p.  312. 

E.  14, 

X  O.S.L.,  Co.  Louth, -q ,  p.  117,  et  seqq.,  and  p.  321. 

§  I  spell  these  names  as  they  are  set  down  in  the  Ordnance  Survey  Letters. 


8i6  The  Dolmens  of  Ireland. 

marrow,  his  usual  way  of  knowing  what  was  going  on,  and  what 
was  to  happen. 

At  the  Fear-Dhiadh's  approach,  therefore,  having  previously 
acquainted  his  wife  with  the  whole  matter,  he  got  into  the  cradle, 
in  order  that  the  Fear-Dhiadh,  supposing  him  to  be  only  a  child, 
might  be  deterred  from  encountering  his  father,  to  whom  his 
imagination  would  give  a  size  proportionate  to  the  father  of  such 
an  offspring.  The  day  was  very  stormy,  the  wind  blowing  against 
the  door  of  the  house.  The  Fear-Dhiadh  approached,  and  inquired 
whether  any  of  the  men  were  at  home.  "  No,"  says  Finn's  wife, 
"  for  if  they  were,  I  would  not  suffer  so  much  from  the  storm,  as 
one  of  them  would  turn  the  house  round,  and  prevent  the  wind 
from  blowing  in  upon  us.  This  made  the  Fear-Dhiadh  cool  upon 
his  business.  He  asked  for  something  to  eat,  and  she  made  a 
cake  with  the  griddle  enclosed  in  it.  He  ate  hard,  as  he  was 
very  hungry,  after  which  he  called  for  a  drink.  The  woman  told 
him  that  her  men  would  not  be  content  with  any  quantity  of  water 
that  could  be  conveyed  to  the  house,  but  went  themselves  to  the 
dth  there  below  and  satisfied  themselves.  The  Fcai'-Dhiadh 
accordingly  went,  but  as  he  was  drinking,  Finn's  wife,  by  preter- 
natural means,  sent  an  enchanted  poisoned  dart,  ga  biiilg,^  after 
him,  which  despatched  him  on  the  spot.  From  this  circumstance 
the  dth  ('ford')  was  ever  after  called  Ath  Fhir-Dhiadh,  or  the 
'  Ford  of  Ferdiad.' " 

It  will  be  seen  that,  according  to  this  account,  Finn's  wife  takes 
the  place  of  Cuchullain,  in  the  piece  called  the  Comrac  Fhirdead, 
or  Fight  of  Ferdiad,  in  the  Bk.  of  Leinster  (fol.  57,  a,  a),  and  kills 
her  foe  with  the  identical  weapon  there  mentioned. J 

"  James  Dolan,  a  native  of  Ardee,"  continue  the  writers  of  the 
Ord.  Surv.  Letters,  "went  with  us  to  the  ford,  and  pointed  out 
where  Feardhiadh  was  killed,  and  also  his  grave,  which  is  about 
fourteen  yards  long,  and  about  9  or  10  feet  broad.  About  two 
yards  of  the  tumulus  in  the  middle  is  cut  away,  so  as  to  be  level 
with  the  ground.  It  lies  immediately  to  the  W.  of  the  river  Dee 
at  a  distance  of  about  eighty  paces." 

Dolan's  account  was  much  more  in  accordance  with  that  in  the 
Book  of  Leinster.     Finn  and  his  wife  disappear,  and  Cuchullain 

t  red.  gai :  gai  builg  =  Bolg's  spear  (see  O'Curry,  M.  and  C,  ii.  p.  311)  ;  and  Belly  spear  (see 
id.  iii.  451. 

X  See  Sullivan's  transl.  of  this  episode  in  the  Tain  bo  Chuailgne,  O'C,  M.  and  C,  vol.  iii., 
App.  L,  p.  413. 


Names  and  Legends.  817 

takes  their  place.  It  was  as  follows,  and  was  doubtless  derived 
from  MS.  authority  dating  back  through  copy  after  copy  from  the 
J 9th  century  to  the  nth  at  least. 

"When  the  Feardhiadh  flourished,  Conchobhar f  was  King  of 
Ulster.  He  lived  near  Armagh,  his  territory  extending  to  near 
Drogheda.  Conall  CearnachJ  was  his  'Grand  Master,'  or 
defender  of  his  territory,  and  Cuchullain  his  '  Lieutenant  Grand- 
Master.'  Cuchullain's  residence  was  at  Castletown  near  Dundalk 
(called  in  Irish  Dun-Dealgain).  He  (Cuchullain)  encroached  upon, 
or  did  some  injury  to  the  territory  of  the  Queen  of  Connaught, 
Meadhbha-an-Chruachain,  who  employed  Feardiadh,  though  an 
intimate  friend  of  Cuchullain's,  to  revenge  the  injury  on  him. 
They  met  at  the  place  called  Ath  Fir  DJiiadh,\  within  80 
perches  of  Ardee  to  the  West,  where  an  engagement  took  place 
between  them,  in  which  the  Feardhiadh  was  overcoming  Cu- 
chullain ;  but  Cuchullain  had  with  him  a  dart  called  ga-builg, 
with  which  he  was  accustomed  to  make  an  unerring  aim, 
when  standing  7ip  to  his  middle  in  water.  His  page,  who  was 
brother  to  Feardhiadh's  page,  was  now  busily  employed  in  stop- 
ping the  ford,  so  as  to  raise  as  much  water  in  it  as  would  cover 
Cuchullain  to  the  waist,  but  not  having  done  it  speedily  enough 
to  avert  the  danger  in  which  his  master  was,  Cuchullain  cut  off 
his  head,  and  with  it  dammed  the  water  so  as  to  suit  his  purpose. 
He  then  gave  Feardhiadh  a  mortal  wound  with  the  ga-builg  of 
which  he  immediately  died  ;  whence  the  ford  is  q.2}\q.A  Ath-a-F Jiir- 
Dhiadh,  and  the  townland  Baile-Atk-a-Fhir-Dhiadk"  With  this 
we  may  compare  the  Esthonian  saga  of  Kallewe  Poeg,  where 
that  hero,  standing  tip  to  his  middle  in  the  water  of  the  Peipus, 
slays  a  wizard  with  his  sword.  ||  There  are  many  points  in  this 
saga  singularly  like  those  in  the  legends  of  Irish  giants.     The 

t  This  name  Conchobhar,  Concubar  (now  Conor),  is  one  of  great  interest,  if  my  interpretation 
of  it  is  correct.  It  was  the  name  of  the  eponymous  of  a  tribe  called  Conchuburnenses  in  the  Book 
of  Armagh,  and  Conchubairne  by  Mac  Firbis.  Now,  between  the  Ubii  and  Batavi,  among  the 
peoples  whom  Pliny  terms  German  dwelling  on  the  Rhine,  were  the  Guberni,  called  by  Tacitus 
Gugerni,  or  Cugerni.  In  the  case  of  another  tribal  name,  that  of  the  Suanetes  in  Rhcetia,  we  have 
the  compound  form  Con-Suanetes  for  one  of  the  four  divisions  of  the  Vindelici.  Similarly  would 
be  formed  Con-Guberni,  the  con  probably  implying  an  association  of  tribes.  For  this  name,  see 
Zeuss,  1 133;  Gliick,  66  ;  Whitley  Stokes,  "Medieval  Tract  on  Latin  Declension,"  p.  78.  For 
the  Guberni,  see  Zeuss,  "Die  Deutschen,"  p.  85  ;  and  for  the  Suanetes  and  Consuanetes,  Gliick, 
28,  54. 

X  This  name  Cearnach,  Cernech,  is  identified  with  Bernicia,  the  Anglo-Saxon  Kingdom  in 
Northumberland,  in  Nennius  Ixv. ; — indeed,  the  names  may  be  the  same,  Bernicia  =  Pernicia  ;  hence 
the  foreign/  becoming  in  Celtic  r,  Cernicia,  Cernech.    See  Diefenbach,  "  Celtica,"  i.  pp.  155,  180. 

§  The  townland  yet  retains  the  name.     It  is  called  in  the  '  name-book  '  Area. 

II  See  "  Ur-Geschichte  des  Esthnischen  Volkstammes'  von  F.  Kruse,"  "The  Saga  of  Kallews's 
Son,"  p.  175,  etc. 


The  Dolmens  of  Ireland. 


combatants  hurl  rocks  at  each  other,  and  imprint  their  fingers  in 
them. J 

It  is  to  be  observed  that  a  corresponding  historical  incident 
actually  took  place  at  this  very  same  ford,  the  combatants  being 
respectively  a  Dane,  who  was  the  victor,  and  a  North-Irish 
chieftain  was  the  vanquished.  In  the  "Annals  of  the  Four 
Masters,"  under  date  a.d.  941,  the  event  is  recorded  as  follows  : — 

"  Muircheantach  of  the  mantles  of  skins  (or  hides),  the  son  of 
Niall  Glundubh  ('Black  Knee')  Lord  of  Oileach,  the  Hector 
(hero)  of  Western  Europe  in  his  time,  was  killed  at  Athfirdiadh  by 
Blacaire,  the  son  of  Gofradha,  Lord  of  the  Danes,  on  the  26th  day 
of  May." 

At  a  subsequent  page  in  the  volume  of  letters  relating  to  the 
Co.  Meath,  the  writers  (Messrs.  O'Conor  and  O'Keefe)  insert  the 
following  translation  of  an  "old  Irish  legend"  relating  to  Cuchullain 
which  relates  to  this  part  of  the  country,  and  had  been  seemingly 
preserved  in  it. 

"  On  a  day  that  the  brave  Cuchullain  was  on  the  lawn  before 
his  palace,  the  royal  and  populous  Dun  Dealgain,  which  was  his 
dwelling,  he  looked  towards  the  four  quarters  of  the  globe,  the 
west,  the  east,  the  north,  and  the  south,  and  he  sav/  the  beautiful 
country  of  Cuailgne,  which  of  all  countries  in  the  world  was  best 
beloved  by  Cuchullain.  It  is  thus  situated,  viz.  the  murmuring 
ocean  on  the  one  side,  and  the  mountains  abounding  in  sweet 
crystal  streams,  in  beautiful  green-sided  valleys,  fringed  with 
smooth  woods  of  equal  height  on  the  other  side.  And  numerous 
were  the  long-horned  wild  cows,  badgers,  wild  boars,  and  other 
herds  which  inhabited  that  country,  and  abundant  was  the  salmon 
and  every  species  of  hunting  and  fishing. 

"  And  as  Cuchullain  [spelt  Cuclmllen  in  this  tale]  was  viewing 
the  ocean,  he  perceived  a  small  curragh  with  a  lady  alone  in  it 
approaching  the  shore,  and  when  the  lady  landed  he  saw  a  large 
ship  also  approaching  the  shore  in  the  same  direction,  and  when 
he  expected  to  see  her  filled  with  a  numerous  company,  he  saw 
only  a  black  man  of  monstrous  size  rising  on  the  deck,  armed  with 
a  huge  iron  mace,  to  which  were  attached  fifty  massive  balls  of 
iron,  each  the  size  of  the  stoutest  hero.  And  on  coming  close  to 
the  shore  the  ship  struck  on  a  rock,  whereupon  the  monstrous  man 
raised  his  club  and  dealt  with  it  a  terrible  blow  to  the  lofty  rock 

t  Is  it  a  mere  coincidence  that  Kukulin  is  the  name  of  a  place  on  this  same  Esthonian  coast? 
See  Kruse's  paper  last  quoted. 


Names  and  Legends.  819 

that  obstructed  him,  by  which  he  moved  it  from  its  place,  and, 
opening  a  passage  for  his  ship,  formed  the  harbour  which  is  now 
known  by  the  name  of  the  Harbour  of  Carlingford.  [Here  the 
thread  of  the  tale  is  broken.]  And  while  Cuchullain  was  observing 
the  extraordinary  scene  before  him,  his  charioteer  Laoi  McRoin 
Ghabhra  was  in  search  of  him  through  Sliabh  Fidhit,  and  Sliabh 
Feadih  in  Cuailgne. 

*'  And  Cuchullain  having  gone  over  sea  was  mortally  f  wounded 
in  battle  by  a  giant  of  great  strength  and  deep  knowledge  in 
necromancy,  and  on  this  occasion  he  received  friendship  and 
assistance  from  a  source  quite  unexpected  at  that  time,  namely, 
from  the  Sithchuire  or  Fairy- Bands  of  Ireland,  for  there  was  not 
a  fairy,  or  a  fairy  congregation  in  Ireland,  and  particularly  in  Ulster, 
that  was  not  his  friend  and  his  companion,  because  they  all  gave 
him  their  friendship  on  account  of  his  knowledge  of  necromancy  and 
arms,  his  fidelity,  and  liberality  in  bestowing  gold  and  wealth,  and, 
for  that  reason,  they  usually  gave  him  their  assistance  in  time  of 
ofreat  need  and  trouble,  and  he  advised  and  consulted  with 
them,{  as  is  evident  in  that  true  history  named  Seisreac  Breisligh 
air  TJidin-B6-CJmailgne,  where  Cuchullain  was,  from  the  Thursday 
before  the  feast  of  Samhain  till  the  Wednesday  before  the  festival 
of  Saint  Bridget  {i.e.  from  November  ist  to  February  ist) 
fighting  against  the  men  of  Ireland,  without  taking  any  sleep  but 
what  he  got  by  placing  his  face  on  his  hand,  and  resting  his  hand 
on  his  knee,  until  one  of  his  fairy  friends  interposed,  and  stopped 
the  hosts  for  three  days  and  three  nights,  until  he  had  slept 
enough  during  that  time. 

"  And  also  Dolbh  and  londolbh,  two  of  the  fairies,  were  assist- 
ing him  against  Ferdiadh  at  the  battle  of  the  Ford,  until  Ferdiadh 
killed  them  by  a  cast  of  his  javelin,  over  the  shoulder  of  Cuchul- 
lain, and  also  the  fairy  that  assisted  Ferdiadh  wound  himself 
around  Cuchullain's  legs  in  the  shape  of  an  eel,  in  the  ford,  so  that, 
while  he  was  extricating  himself  from  him,  Ferdiadh  gave  him 
three  dreadful  wounds  ;  so  that,  if  they  gave  him  their  assistance 
then,  when  at  home,  they  were  more  imperatively  called  upon  now 
to  assist  him  in  his  trouble  in  a  foreign  land. 

"As  for  the  following  fairies,  namely,   Sithonball  of  Muidh. 

t  i.e.,  the  wound  would  have  been  mortal  had  it  not  been  for  what  followed. 

X  It  is  to  be  observed  that  in  the  piece  called  "  The  Battle  of  Ventry  Harbour,"  where  Finn  Mac 
Cumhail  fought  the  "Emperor  of  the  World,"  the  Tuatha  De  Danann,  or  fairy-gods,  came  to  his 
assistance. 


820  The  Dolmens  of  Ireland. 

Cartrann  Casdubh  of  Cnoc  Meadha  in  Laoghis,  Gaire  Greine  of 
Dun-an-Aine  between  Emania  and  Abhan  Mor,  lollan  and 
lollanach  of  Dun-Lir,  Cuirin  Cosluadh  from  Sliabh  Fuaidh, 
Dimhall  of  Sliabh  Truim,  Saoileanach  of  Loch  Saoilean,  Sgalgh- 
ruaigh  of  Sliabh  Mis,  and  Eibhlin  Biorra  of  Sliabh  Cuillion,f — 
when  they  learned,  through  necromantic  knowledge,  that  Cuchul- 
lain  was  in  this  great  danger,  they  gathered  from  all  parts  and 
met  at  Fionncharn-na-Forfhaire  {i.e.  White  Cairn  of  the  Watching) 
on  Sliabh  Fuaidh  (Fews  Mountain  in  the  Co.  of  Armagh),  where 
they  were  joined  by  Fingin  Faidliagh,  the  wise  physician, 
Cuchullain's  old  physician,  and  the  most  distinguished  in  his 
profession  in  the  world  ;  such,  indeed,  was  his  skill  that  he  knew, 
on  view  of  any  wound,  by  what  sort  of  weapon  it  was  inflicted,  and 
whether  the  person  who  inflicted  it  was  young,  or  old,  or  brave." 
So  ends  this  disjointed  tale,  or  fragments  of  several  tales. 

The  writer  of  a  subsequent  letter  in  the  Ordnance  Survey 
series  infers  from  this  legend  that  the  composer  of  it  understood 
that  the  ancient  Cuailgne  extended  from  Carlingford  Bay  to  near 
Faughart.  In  the  "Annals  of  the  Four  Masters"  (a.m.  3500) 
Cuailgne  appears  as  a  personal  name.  "  Cuailgne,  one  of  the 
Milesian  chiefs,  was  killed  by  the  Tuatha  D6  Danann  on  a  moun- 
tain in  Ulster,  which  was  called  Sliabh  Cuailgne  from  him."  His 
cairn  is  on  the  mountain. 

The  geographical  Cuailgne  has  been  Anglicized  and  disguised 
as  Cooley,  which  is  the  name  of  the  district  immediately  west  of 
Carlingford  Bay.  In  Irish  this  Cooley  is  Cuailghe,  but,  remarks 
the  writer,  "  throughout  this  county  the  sound  ng  is  changed  to 
gk,  as,  for  example,  seangan  to  seagkan,  *  a  pismire  ; '  sreangan  to 
si'-cagJian,  'a  string,'  and  thus  Ctiailgne  to  Ciiailge,  i.e.  (in  English) 
'  Cooley,'  the  name  of  a  small  district  in  the  southern  half  of  the 
parish  of  Carlingford."  That  the  name  once  had  a  far  wider 
application  is  proved  by  the  fact  that  in  Norden's  map  all  the 
district  from  Dundalk  to  Newry  is  called  "  Cooley."  % 

The  writers  of  the  Ord.  Surv.  Letters  add  that  they  have 
inserted  these  stories,  both  oral  and  written,  about  Cuchullain  in 
order  to  show  that  he  is  well  remembered  "even  in  this  part  of 

t  This  is  Evlin  or  Bera,  She  is,  as  we  read  in  a  note,  \veU  remembered  by  the  people.  Her 
house  [  ?  if  a  dohnen]  is  pointed  out  at  the  foot  of  Sliabh  Gullion.  It  is  a  heap  of  stones,  rudely 
piled  together  without  any  appearance  of  a  mansion. 

X  Mr.  Kennedy  stated  that  near  Sliabh  Guillin  was  a  place  called  Tain-b6  Chuailgne,  which 
Mr.  O'Keefe  says  he  has  yet  to  ascertain. 


Names  and  Legends.  821 


the  country."  "We  always  hear,"  they  add,  "that  the  entire 
story  is  to  be  had  of  some,  but  we  have  met  none  yet  who  could 
give  it."     This  was  in  the  year  1835. 

It  is  curious  to  notice  that  while  what  is  known  of  Conchobhar, 
Cuchullain,  and  the  Knights  of  Emania,  is  either  directly  referable 
to  MS.  sources,  copies  of  which  were  made  as  late  as  the  last 
century,  oral  tradition  (although  often  doubtless  assisted  by 
written  Ossianic  tales)  has  retained  with  far  greater  independence 
of  written  media  the  tradition  of  Finn  Mac  Cumhail.  In  several 
instances,  indeed,  such  as  the  ownership  of  the  royal  residence  at 
Dun  Dealgain  (now  Dimdalk),  and  in  the  fight  with  Ferdiad,  Finn 
actually  takes  the  place  of  Cuchullain,  although  in  other  traditions, 
such  as  that  relating  to  the  Droichet  Atha-na-bh-Fianaibh  on 
the  Fayne  River,  it  is  Cuchullain  who  contends  against  the 
Fianna,  that  is  to  say,  against  Finn's  own  warriors,  and,  as  in 
the  Comrac  Fhirdead,  against  "the  men  of  Ireland,"  the  Fir 
n-hErenn. 

Mr.  O'Keefe  gives  the  following  local  legends  about  Cuchul- 
lain current  in  Louth. f  "  He  (Cuchullain)  lived  at  Donaghmore, 
where  he  kept  a  stable  for  his  two  horses,  whence  the  place 
received  the  name  Duji  na  n-each  mdr. 

He  was  killed  at  Loch-a-tonnad  by  Lughaidh  Mac  Irca  (Erca). 
This  lake  is  below  Dundalk,  and  received  its  name  from  Cuchul- 
lain's  blood  being  mingled  with  its  waters,  after  he,  having 
received  the  mortal  wound,  had  swam  it  over.  He  (Cuchullain) 
saw  a  dog  licking  the  blood  on  the  water,  and  inquired  what  the 
dog  was  drinking.  It  was  answered  him  that  it  was  his  own 
blood,  upon  which  he  said  that  it  was  prophesied  that  he  should 
gain  his  fame  by  a  dog,  and  that,  a  dog  should  be  connected  with 
his  exit  (that  is,  his  death.) 

On  Sliabh  Beatha  in  Tyrone  is  a  cairn  called  Carn-Mor,  of 
which  O' Donovan  writes  as  follows  :  "  I  have  had  the  honour  of 
being  the  first  who,  in  modern  times,  has  discovered  the  situation 
of  the  mountain  of  antediluvian  celebrity,  on  the  top  of  which 
Bioth  is  said  to  have  been  interred  by  the  seraglio  which  attended 
him.  I  have  been  much  disappointed  at  finding  that,  instead  of 
Bioth,  Dalach  is  the  commander-in-chief  of  its  fairies.  Dalach 
now  resides  in  Carn-Mor,  the  very  cairn  in  which  Bith  or  Bioth 

t  O.S.L.,  -^,  pp.  162,  164. 

ill.  14 


82  2  The  Dolmens  of  Ireland. 


was  interred,  and  his  (Dalach's)  castle  is  sometimes  seen  in  the 
lake  beneath  it." 

Bith,  according  to  the  written  legend,  was  the  father  of  Ceasair, 
of  whose  supposed  burial-place  Giraldus  f  speaks,  and  which 
O'Donovan  endeavoured  to  identify  in  Galway  as  we  have  seen. 
Upon  the  approach  of  Noah's  flood,  Bith  applied  for  an  apartment 
in  the  ark.  This  being  denied  him,  Ceasair  recommended  that  he, 
together  with  herself,  Finntan  her  husband,  and  Ladru  her 
brother,  should  consult  an  idol  as  to  how  they  should  save  them- 
selves. The  oracle  recommended  that  they  should  fit  out  a  ship, 
which  they  did,  and  went  on  board,  and,  after  seven  years  at  sea, 
landed  at  Dun  net  mbai'c,  in  the  west  of  Ireland. 

The  Dindshenchas  of  Sliabh  Beatha  is  as  follows :  "  Bith 
Mac  Nae,  forty  days  before  the  deluge,  came  with  his  daughter 
Ceasair  to  Erin  to  avoid  the  flood,  as  is  told  in  the  "  Capturse 
Hiberniee."  J  After  the  first  division  (of  the  fifty  women  who  had 
come  to  Ireland  with  him  and  Ceasair,  Ladru,  and  Finntan),  Bith 
went  (to  Sliabh  Betha)  with  his  seventeen  wives — or  (if  it  was) 
after  Ladru's  death,  his  twenty-five  wives — and  there  an  acute 
ao-ue  attacked  him,  whereof  he  perished.  And  the  wives  buried 
him  in  the  great  cairn  of  Sliabh  Betha."  § 

Bith  (gen.  Baha,  or  Beatha)  was  a  personal  name  in  Ireland 
and  Scotland.  It  appears  in  Mac  Beth  in  the  latter,  and  Mac 
Veagh,  the  Anglicized  form  of  Beatha,  in  the  former. 

The  name  of  the  Mound  of  Ash  in  Louth  is  puzzling,  and  I 
cannot  attempt  to  explain  it. 

The  name  of  the  mountain  Sliabh  Gallion,  or  Gullion,  in 
Derry,  on  the  north  side  of  the  summit  of  which,  called  Carnan- 
bane,  is  a  fine  dolmen  called  "The  Giants'  Grave,||  is  said  by 
tradition  to  have  received  its  name  from  Callan  Mor,  a  giant, 
whose  sister  lived  in  the  county  of  Antrim.  A  friend  of  hers 
had  a  castle  at  a  place  called  Lougharee,  in  the  county  of 
Tyrone,  and  she  could  have  seen  it  had  it  not  been  for  Sliabh 
Gallion  intervening.  She  therefore  employed  men  to  remove  the 
mountain,  but  they  all  '  took  a  sore'  in  the  fingers,  which  made  her 
discharge  them,"  and  "...  she  abandoned  the  project.     A  red 

t  Top.  Hib.  Dist.  iii.  cap.  i. 

X  This  lost  work  ("Gabhala  Herenn")  corresponded  in  substance,  says  Whitley  Stokes,  with  the 
"  Leabhar  Gabhala  "  of  the  O'Clerys. 

§  Transl.  Whitley  Stokes,  "  Rev.  Celt.,"  vol.  xvi.  p.  155. 
II  p.  256. 


Names  and  Legends.  823 


bank  is  yet  shown,"  adds  O'Donovan,  "  where  they  commenced 
to  cut  away  the  mountain." 

"  Lough-na-Gun,  i.e.  the  Lake  of  the  Greyhounds  (now  Lough 
Fea,  i.e.  Loch  Feadha,  '  The  Rushy  Lake '),  is  said  to  derive  its 
earher  name  from  Finn  Mac  Cumhail's  dogs." 

The  following  quatrain  was  still  repeated  there  when  the 
Ordnance  Survey  were  engaged  in  their  work  in  the  district : — 

"  Callan,  son  of  the  King  of  Tir-Suthain, 
Is  interred  at  the  north  side  of  the  mountain, 
His  head  (pointing)  down  to  Lough-na-Gun, 
And  his  feet  up  towards  the  mountain." 

This  is  the  situation  of  the  Giant's  Grave  on  Carnanbane,  which 
is  said  to  be  the  tomb  of  Callan  Mor.  One  end  of  it  points  to  the 
lake  ;  the  other  to  the  mountain  Sliabh  Gallion.  Tir-Suthain 
means  the  Eternal  Land,  or,  rather,  the  Land  of  the  Immortals,  as 
in  the  Dindshenchas  of  Fuag  Inber,  where  the  words  Tir  Ban 
thshiitJiain,  "  Land  of  the  Immortal  Women,"  occur.  The  King 
of  Tir-Suthain  was  probably  Mider,  or  perhaps  here  Manannan 
Mac  Lir. 

In  the  Dindshenchas  of  Sliabh  Callaun,  Callaun,  in  place  of 
being  a  giant  is  a  cu-buachail,  rendered  "  herd-hound  "  by  Whitley 
Stokes.  The  legend  connects  him  with  the  Tain  bo  Cuailgne 
tale,  for  he  fought  the  Donn  Cuailgni,  that  is,  the  "  Brown  (bull) 
of  Cualgne,"  for  the  cows  on  the  mountain,  and  was  there  killed. 

In  addition  to  this  Sliabh  Callaun,  or  Gallion,  there  is  Sliabh 
Callan,  or  Collan  in  Clare,  where  there  is  also  a  dolmen  and  a 
venerated  lake.  Another  Sliabh  Gullion  is  in  Meath,  and  yet 
another  in  Armagh. 

In  the  county  of  Derry,  also,  is  the  dolmen  at  Drumaderg,  in 
which  name  there  seems  no  necessity  for  any  other  explanation 

than  "  Ridge  of  the  Red ."     O'Donovan  tells  us,  however, 

that  it  is  explained  "Ridge  of  Dergo,"  "a  mighty  warrior  who 
came  over  from  Loughlin  to  conquer  all  the  Fingallians  himself, 
alone  and  unassisted.  The  story,"  he  adds,  "  is  very  faintly 
remembered  in  this  locality,  but  it  is  preserved  in  many  MSS. 
that  I  (O'Donovan)  have  seen  ;  but  Howth  and  Tara,  not  Glen- 
conkeine,  are  made  the  scenes  of  his  battles  in  these  written 
accounts.  Dergo  was  cut  off  by  Gaul  (Goll)  Mac  Morna,  after 
they  had  fought  for  eight  days  and  eight  nights  without  resting."f 

t  O.S.L.,  Co.  Londonderry, -T ,  p.  183. 


824  The  Dolmens  of  Ireland. 

O'Donovan  here  explains  "  Loughlin  "  as  Finland,  but  Whitley 
Stokes  has  pronounced  it  to  be  Norway.  Popular  tradition 
associates  it  with  Danes.  Professor  Zimmer  considered  Lochlann 
as  the  island  of  Laland,  but  Whitley  Stokes  has  pointed  out  that 
"  Lothlind  (or  Laithlind)  and  Lochland  cannot  be  borrowed  from 
the  name  of  the  Danish  island,  because  this  would  leave  the  th 
and  ck  unaccounted  for.  Lothlind,"  he  adds,  "  seems  cognate 
with  the  Welsh  Lledlyn,  which  Pugh  says  means  the  Baltic,  and 
Lochlann  is  certainly  cognate  with  or  borrowed  from  the  Welsh 
Llychlyn,  Norway."  The  oldest  form  seems  to  be  Lothlind. 
We  cannot  equate  it  with  the  name  of  Liothida  in  Norway,  found 
in  Jordanes,  because  that  is  Lio-thiod  (Goth.  Liuthiuda)  ;  but  in 
that  of  the  Lotihali,  an  old  name  of  the  Letgalli  on  the  coast  of 
East  Prussia,!  we  seem  to  approach  it  more  closely.  \ 

Lcacht. — The  word  leacht,  a  monument,  becomes,  as  we  have 
said,  slaght  in  Derry.  Four  examples  of  its  use  are  known  to  me, 
Slaghtmanus,  Slaghtaverty,  Slaghtfreeden,  and  Cloch-na-Slaghta. 
The  two  first  of  these,  and  probably  the  third,  are  dolmens.  The 
fourth  is  a  group  of  pillar-stones. 

In  the  name  Slachtmanus,§  the  reciters  of  the  popular  traditions 
had  in  view  none  other  than  Magnus,  or  "  Manus,"  son  of  the  King 
of  Denmark,  the  subject  of  whose  defeat  was  that  of  one  of  the  most 
popular  of  the  current  *'  Tales."  Since,  however,  this  Manus  had 
acquired  his  name  from  that  of  Carolus  Magnus,  or  Charlemagne, 
the  lateness  of  the  application  of  it  to  this  monument  is  obvious. 

Possibly  it  may  have  borne  in  more  ancient  times  some  name 
resembling  Manus,  such  as  Maine,  or  Maen,  which — the  older  hero 
or  divinity  having  been  long  forgotten,  except  in  name — would  have 
readily  passed  into  that  of  the  Danish  prince.  This  may  or  may 
not  have  been.  It  was  sufficient  that  the  dolmen  had  been  known 
as  the  grave  of  some  hero.  The  tendency  of  the  itinerant  story- 
teller was  ever  to  localise  his  events,  so  as  to  add  plausibility  to 
the  narrative,  and  excite  interest,  as  by  an  object-lesson,  in  the 
hearers.  Hence  the  Giant's  Grave  would  become  the  LeacJit  of 
Magnus.jl 

t  Zeuss,  p.  674. 

j  For  the  eponymous  of  these  people  or  peoples,  Lot,  Loth,  Lothus,  Lud,  Lliid  (Lodens),  see 
Rhys,  "  Celtic  Heathendom,"  p.  125. 

§  p.  253. 

14 
II  O.S.L.,  Co.  Londonderry,  ^     „,  p.  30. 


Names  and  Legends.  825 

Slaghtaverty,f  like  Slaghtmanus,  is  the  name  of  a  dolmen.  Dr. 
Joyce,  in  his  "  Names  of  Places,"  tells  us  that  he  heard  the  legend 
which  is  current  about  it,  told  on  the  spot.  Singularly  enough,  it 
is  connected,  not  with  a  giant,  as  is  usual,  but  with  a  dwarf,  a  fact 
which  reminds  us  that  Finn,  in  the  oral  Scandinavian  stories, 
appears  at  one  time  as  a  giant,  at  another  as  a  dwarf. 

The  monument,  says  Dr.  Joyce,  is  called  Laghtaverty,  that  is, 
the  laght  of  the  abhartach,  or  dwarf.  J  "It  is  said  to  derive  this 
name  from  a  magician  of  impish  proportions,  who  tyrannized  the 
district  until  slain  by  some  heroic  enemy,  sometimes  said  to  be 
Finn  Mac  Cumhail.  He  (the  dwarf)  was  buried  in  this  leacht,  in 
an  upright  position,  but  would  not  remain  in  his  grave  until,  being 
killed  a  third  time,  his  body  was  placed  head  downwards." 

O'Donovan  gives  the  following  account:  "Averty  was  a  re- 
markable enchanter,  and  a  great  enemy  of  Finn  Mac  Cool.  He 
was  vulnerable  only  in  one  spot  of  his  body.  Finn,  by  the 
prophecy  derived  from  his  thumb,  discovered  where  this  spot 
was  situated,  aimed  at  him  there  with  his  spear,  and  killed  him. 
He  then  buried  him  with  his  head  downwards,  lest  he  might 
effect  a  resurrection,  where  the  monument  of  Slaghtaverty  is  now 
seen." 

With  this  Averty  is  connected  the  famous  Manannan  Mac  Lir, 
who,  says  O'Donovan,  "  is  another  celebrated  fairy  of  the  north 
part  of  this  parish  of  Dungiven.  Manannan  is  represented  as 
very  anxious  to  support  the  character  of  the  Irish,  and  one  day, 
when  an  Englishman  made  a  challenge  that  he  would  run  a 
celebrated  racehorse  against  any  of  the  steeds  of  O'Neill, 
Manannan — who  well  knew  that  O'Neill  had  no  horse  that 
could  at  all  be  a  match  for  the  English  racer — appeared  in 
the  shape  of  a  beggar-man,  and  made  a  challenge  that  he 
himself  would  run  against  the  horse  from  Shane's  Castle  (on 
Lough  Neagh)  to  Dublin.  He  did  so,  and  by  his  enchant- 
ments humbugged  the  Englishman,  won  his  wager,  and  supported 
the  character  of  O'Neill's  horses." 

With  this  story  we  may  compare  the  more  ancient  and  strange 


t  p.  252. 

j  I  do  not  find  this  word  for  dwarf  in  any  dictionary.  Abhach  -  a  dwarf,  a  pigmy,  a  sprite  ; 
perhaps,  however,  it  is  connected  with  the  Latin  abortus,  aboriio,  a  monster,  hence  a  dwarf.  I 
should  the  rather  connect  it  with  abairt  =  speech,  education,  politeness,  in  reference  to  the 
powers  possessed  by  Abhartach  as  a  musician.  Abhartach  was  the  son  of  Aithirne,  the  famous  and 
tyrannical  satirist,  and  this  dolmen  may  have  borne  his  name.  See  O'Curry,  M.  and  C.  iii.  p.  373. 
Abhartach  was  killed  by  order  of  King  Conchobhar. 

VOL.  III.  I 


826  The  Dolmens  of  Ireland. 

one  of  Macha,  wife  of  Crund.f  son  of  Agnomon,  and  daughter  of 
Mider  of  Bri  Leith,  called  also  Gri'an  Banchure,  "  Sun  of  Woman- 
folk,"  who  ran  against  the  horses  of  Conchobar,  and  won — after 
her  victory,  however,  pronouncing  a  curse  on  the  Ulaid  or  Ulster 
men.  With  this  strange,  mythological  story,  we  may  bring  into 
comparison  the  horse-races  in  honour  of  Neptune,  which  took 
place  during  the  Saturnalia  at  Rome. 

In  the  Book  of  Lecan,  Abhorthach  and  Manannan  are  repre- 
sented as  two  celebrated  chiefs  of  the  Tuatha  De  Danann,  the 
former  a  great  musician — the  Orpheus  of  the  Irish  poets — the 
latter  a  great  navigator,  who,  on  account  of  his  great  nautical 
skill,  was  styled  by  the  Irish  and  Welsh  Mac  Lir,  explained  in 
the  glossary,  which  bears  the  name  of  Cormac,  Films  Afaris — Son 
of  the  Sea, 

"  It  is  strange,"  adds  O'Donovan,  "  to  find  this  celebrated 
merchant  taking  up  his  residence  in  a  very  wild  parish  in  O' Kane's 
territory.  I  should  rather  have  expected  him  to  be  taking  delight 
in  ships  than  in  running  races  on  dry  land,  and  to  find  him  living 
in  some  celebrated  harbour  in  a  magical  ship  than  among  rocks 
and  heath."  We  might  similarly  express  surprise  to  find  horse- 
racing  at  Rome  presided  over  by  Neptune,  the  Sea-god. 

With  the  name  Slaghtaverty  we  may  distinctly  connect  that 
of  Dunaverty  on  the  Scottish  coast.  From  an  extract  from  the 
"  Chronicon  Hyense"|  I  take  the  following:  Obsessio  Aberte 
aptid  Selbachum.  Traces,  says  Dr.  Reeves,  of  the  old  castle  of 
Dunaverty,  standing  on  a  precipitous  rock  nearly  surrounded  by 
the  sea,  are  to  be  seen  on  Dunaverty  Bay,  at  the  south-eastern 
extremity  of  Cantyre,  opposite  Sanda. 

Ler,  the  sea,  is  one  of  those  words  which  the  Goidelic  language 
and  mythology  share  with  the  Norse.§  It  is  found  in  the  form 
Hler  in  the  Sagas.  The  same  name  stands  second  in  a  triplet  of 
nature  divinities,  Loge,  Hler,  and  Kare  =  Fire,  Sea,  Wind, — the 
three  sons  of  Forniot,  Old  Giant  (iotun,  iotr).||  Hler,  in  his 
capacity  of  Sea-god,  presided  over  and  gave  name  to  the  island 
of  Hloe,  in  the  Cattegat.     Such  a  fact  as  this  brings   Irish  and 

t  See  also  Macha,  wife  of  Nemed,  son  of  Agnomon,  W.  Stokes,  "Rev.  Celt.,"  vol.  xvi.  p.  45. 
A  third  Macha  was  queen  of  Erin  and  wife  of  Cimbaoith,  who  may  be  another  alias  of  Nemed, 
since  a  rath  built  l)y  the  latter  was  called  Rath  Cimbaoith.     Of  Crund  I  shall  speak  later  on. 

X  See  Reeves,  Add.  Notes  to  "  Adamnan's  Vita  Columbse,"  p.  380. 

§  Vid,  Fid,  =  Wood,  Tree,  is  another. 

11  With  Forn-Iol,  compare  Allot  or  Alloid  (?  All-lot)  =  Great  Giant,  father  of  Manannan. 
See  Keating,  O'Mahony,  p.  141. 


Names  and  Legends.  827 


Scandinavian  mythology  into  close  connection,  and  we  do  not 
wonder  to  find  that  Finn  Mac  Cumhail  himself  used  to  "go 
a-courting  to  Norway." 

In  Antrim  are  several  curious  names  which  have  received  no 
explanation,  such  as  Ceanortlis,  Was,  and  Gig-ma-gog s  Grave,  for 
dolmens,  and  Yclloiv  yacJis  Cam,  Cam  Maccail,  and  Cam 
Lothran,  for  cairns. 

A  cairn  in  Kilkenny,  at  Rathbay,  is  called  Leaclit  Dubhluing, 
that  is,  "  Dubhlinn's  Monument."  O'Curry,  in  the  Ord.  Survey 
Letters,  says  that  nothing  further  is  known  of  it,  but  another 
writer  states  it  to  be  the  burial-place  of  Dubhluing  O'Brenan, 
third  prince  of  Idough,f  who  died  in  a.d.  954,  mentioned  in  the 
"Annals  of  the  Four  Masters,"  in  a.d.  951. 

At  Glaskenny  in  Wicklow  is  a  dolmen  called  Donnchadh  \ 
Dearg,  that  is,  says  O'Curry,  "The  Red  Donogh,"  but  why  so 
called  no  one  knows. 

Names  of  Women. — Perhaps  the  most  curious  and  seemingly 
the  most  genuinely  ancient  names  and  legends  attaching  to  mega- 
lithic  remains  in  Ireland  are  those  which  connect  them  with 
women  ;  ancient  divinities,  now  witches  and  hags,  who  were  re- 
garded as  robed  in  white. 

Sometimes  three  of  them  hold  joint  possession  of  a  venerated 
site,  as  in  the  case  of  an  immense  and  most  conspicuous  cairn  on 
the  summit  of  Topped  Mountain,  one  of  the  chief  hills  in 
Fermanagh.  It  commands  a  view  over  seven  counties,  and  the 
cairn  measures  200  yards  in  circumference,  and  about  18  feet  in 
height.  The  local  tradition  is  that  three  Danish  Princesses,  by 
which  Mr.  Wakeman  would  understand,  "  Three  De  Danann 
Princesses,"  are  buried  in  this  cairn. 

Ireland  does  not  possess  a  monopoly  of  *'  three-lady  monu- 
ments," nor,  indeed,  of  the  stories  so  universal  there  that  megalithic 
remains  and  cairns  were  built  in  a  single  night,  that  if  any  portion 
of  them  be  removed  it  will  return  to  its  place  by  night,  and  that 
to  injure  them  will  bring  death  within  the  year.  In  proof  of  this, 
we  may  take  the  legend  relating  to  the  Grotte  des  Fees,  the 
"  Feenschloss,"  as  Dr.  Heinrich  Schreiber  calls  it,  near  Tours,  a 
dolmen  20  feet  long,  10  feet  wide,  and  provided  with  an  ante- 
chamber just  as  in  many  Irish  examples.     "  The  peasants,"  we 

t  Ui-Duach.  %  A  certain  Donnchad  Mac  Fland  was  over-king  of  Ireland  in  a.d.  918. 


828  The  Dolmens  of  Ireland. 

read,  "  believe  that  three  girls  built  this  in  a  single  night,  that  you 
would  die  in  the  year  if  you  destroyed  it,  and  that  if  you  removed 
the  stones  they  would  be  brought  back  in  the  night."  f 

As  a  rule,  however,  each  dolmen  or  cairn  had  its  own  peculiar 
patroness,  and  the  name  by  which  she  was  known  was  the  caillech, 
callech,  or  Witch.  This  word  is  derived  from  caille,  a  veil,  and 
properly  signifies  simply  imtlier  velata  pallio,\  "  a  woman  wearing 
a  cloak  over  her  head,"  hence  "an  old  woman."  Used  in  a 
Christian  sense,  cailleach  came  to  signify  a  woman  who  had  taken 
the  veil,  a  nun.  The  sense  of  "hag"  or  "witch"  was,  however, 
preserved,  although  it  had  received  it  in  respect  of  its  connection 
with  a  pre-existing  pagan  cultus,  according  to  the  customs  of 
which  inspired  women  banded  themselves  together  and  veiled 
themselves,  just  as  the  drui  or  sorcerer  had  his  own  peculiar 
tonsure,  called  opprobriously  the  tonsure  of  Simon  Magus,  in 
the  manner  of  the  Christian  priest  or  hermit.  That  there  were 
Magce  as  well  as  Magi,  that  is,  female  as  well  as  male  druids,  we 
learn  from  the  Life  of  Saint  Berach,§  and  there  are  instances  of 
women  placing  themselves  under  drnidect,  or  training  in  sorcery. 

Other  names  for  a  witch,  noted  by  Whitley  Stokes  in  the 
Dindshenchas,  are  Ban-Tuath,  and  Ttmthach,  a  name  seemingly 
derived  from  ttlath,  meaning  "  left,  sinister,"  and  also  "  northern." 
It  was  three  crones,H  timth  chaecha,  "  blind  of  the  left  eye,"  who 
met  Cuchullain  on  the  way  to  his  last  fight,  and  tempted  him  to 
eat  the  flesh  of  a  hound. 

We  have  already  noticed  the  association  of  witches  with 
dolmens  and  cairns  in  the  Iberian  peninsula  and  in  Holland,  and 
the  figures  of  women  called  ancient  mothers,  which  surmount  the 
tombs  on  the  Steppes.^  The  association  of  women  with  the  cultus 
of  the  dead  seems,  indeed,  to  have  been  almost  universal.  It  was 
a  priestess  who  conducted  the  rites  of  the  Saturnalia  at  Rome. 

The  position  held  by  certain  venerated  women  in  the  social 
systems,  as  well  as  in  the  mythology  of  the  northern  nations,  is  a 
subject  too  wide  to  be  entered  upon  here.  Of  the  establishment 
of  priestesses  on  the  island  in  the  Seine,  of  the  venerated  women, 

t  See  yohannean  on  the  "Grottes  des  Fees,"  Mem.  de  I'Acad.  Celt.  v.  p.  396,  et  seqq.  Also 
"Die  Feen  in  Europa,"  by  Dr.  Heinrich  Schreiber,  Freiburg  in  Breisgau,  1842,  containing  illus- 
tration and  plan  of  the  dolmen. 

X  See  note  by  Ebel,  in  Zeuss  "Gramm.  Celt.,"  p.  961. 

§  See  Colgan  AA.  SS.,  p.  431. 

II  Animiti,  "  inopportune  ones  "  (?). 

11  Mr.  Garnett  connects  the  Sclavonic  baba,  the  name  of  these  figures,  witii  the  Irish  badhblt 
(Pritchard,  "  Celtic  Nations"),  edit.  Latham,  p.  368. 


Names  and  Legends.  829 


such  as  Veleda  f  Aurinia,  Ganna,  who  exercised  such  immense 
influence  over  the  German  tribes,  and  of  the  druidesses  who, 
from  the  hilltops  of  Wales,  opposed  the  forces  of  Rome, 
accounts  will  be  found  in  the  classical  writers.  Meanwhile,  it  is 
of  interest  to  compare  the  references  to  venerated  women  which 
are  contained  in  Finnish,  Langobardic  and  Irish  legend.  We  shall 
find  that  ancestral  heroes,  progenitors  of  tribes,  and  giants  were 
usually  accompanied  by  their  mother^  who  was,  doubtless,  the 
tutelary  goddess  of  their  race. 

The  three  giants  who  attacked  Kallewe  Poeg  at  Ludendorf 
dwelt  with  their  mother  in  the  forest ;  Ibor  and  Aio,  the  ancestors 
of  the  Langobardi,  had  with  them  their  mother  Gambara,  to  whom 
they  looked  for  advice  and  assistance  in  achieving  their  conquests ; 
Cicul  or  Ciocall,  who,  according  to  one  account,  contended  with 
Partholan,  and  according  to  another,  with  the  sons  of  Mil  or 
Miledh,  and  whose  three  hundred  followers  had  only  the  use  of 
one  leg  and  one  hand  and  one  eye,  had  always  his  mother  Lot 
Luamnach  along  with  him  ;  similarly,  the  three  sons  of  Diban, 
namely,  Dian,  and  Dubh,  and  Dothur,  who  came  from  Athens  to 
Wexford,  had  their  mother  Carman  with  them,  who,  by  "  charms 
and  spells  and  incantations,  blighted  every  place."  Many  other 
instances  might  be  added  from  the  ancient  tales. 

The  following  sites  of  monuments  bear  the  name  of  Cailleac 
used  without  reference  to  any  particular  witch,  although  her  name 
may  appear  in  a  local  tradition  :  Leaba  Caillighe  (dolmen)  in 
Cork, J  Bally7iagallach\  (dolmens,  etc.)  in  Limerick  (although  this 
is  explained  by  the  existence  of  a  nunnery  there,  but  ?),  Labba-na- 
Calle  11  and  Cnoc-a-Ghallaigh  ^  in  Waterford  (dolmens),  Trunk- 
na-Caillighe  (dolmen)  in  Mayo,ff  Cariiecallie%X  (three  cairns)  in 
Longford,  Sliabh-na-CalligheW  (chambered  cairns)  in  Meath,  and 
many  other  names  of  places,  where,  although  no  dolmen  or 
cairn  may  now  exist,  it  is  probable  that  one  did  exist  in  former 
times. 

The  names  of  witches  or  queens  of  the  wee-people,  attached  to 
them,  are  those  of  Medb,  Aine,  Dirra  or  Bera,  or  Eiblenn,  and, 
above  all  (for  she  must  be  included  among  them),  the  widely  cele- 
brated Grainne.     These  names  oral  tradition  has  preserved,  but 

t  Whitley  Stokes  has  compared  this  name  with  the  Irish  Filidh.     "  Tr.  Tract  on  Lat.  Declen- 
sion," p.  147. 

:  p.  8.  §  p.  47.  II  p.  57.  \  P-58.  tt  p.  III. 

%%  O.S.L.,  Co.  Longford,  -^,  p.  31.  §§  p.  313- 

h,.  13 


830  The  Dolmens  of  Ireland. 

in  addition  to  them  there  are  a  considerable  number  to  be  found 
scattered  throuQ^hout  the  written  le2:ends  of  the  Middle  Asfes. 
Besides  these,  we  meet  with  some  more  or  less  distinctive  names 
of  witches  and  venerated  females  which  may  be  in  some  cases 
alternative  designations  of  those  just  mentioned.  For  example, 
the  Cailleac  na  Sioghbhruigheaht\  connected  with  a  menhir  in 
Tipperary,  who,  "  having  directed  her  unlucky  eyes  towards  a 
party  of  saints  who  were  beginning  to  build  seven  churches  on  the 
island  of  Illaanmore,  caused  them  to  relinquish  their  purpose." 
Her  name  appears  to  mean  "Witch  of  the  People  of  the  Sidh," 
or  "  Sidh-colony."  The  saints  having  sought  another  site,  namely, 
in  Iniscealtra,  an  island  in  Lough  Derg,  "  the  craft  of  the  same 
malignant  old  woman  pursued  them  thither,  and  prevented  them 
from  raising  the  *  Round  Tower '  to  its  intended  height.  The 
architect  was  so  Irritated  by  her  that  he  leaped  off  the  top  of 
the  tower  to  the  ground,  and  struck  her  on  the  head  with  his 
hammer,  by  which  blow  she  underwent  a  metamorphosis.  The 
people  show  her  '  done  In  stone '  lying  close  to  the  tower  on  the 
west  side,  and  retaining  still  the  track  of  the  hammer."  Legend 
connects  a  menhir  called  the  Cloch-an-Uabhair  in  the  parish  of 
Cargins  in  Galway,|  with  a  witch  called  Cailleac  Uabhair,  who 
is  said  to  have  cast  It  to  the  spot  where  It  stands,  from  a  distant 
hill.  The  Yew  Tree  (iubar,  or  ibar)  was  looked  upon  as  the 
special  property  and  abode  of  witches,  as  we  learn  from  the 
story  of  Scathach,  Cuchullaln's  tutress  In  arms,  who  lived  In 
the  branches  of  one.§  The  venerated  rock  called  the  Garrane 
Ban,  in  the  parish  of  D  unman  way  |1  in  Cork,  was  reported  to 
have  been  cast  by  Finn  Mac  Cumhail  from  the  Yew-Tree  Hill. 
Cailleac  Uabhair  Impressed  the  marks  of  her  finger  and  thumb 
upon  the  Cloch-an-Uabhair. 

In  the  Townland  of  Dunally  and  parish  of  Kiltomas  in  Galway 
is  the  Caislean-na-g-cailleachadh  Dtibha,^  but  perhaps  this  refers  to 
an  establishment  of  Black  Nuns.  Real  pagan  witches  are  certainly, 
as  a  rule,  white;  Domino;  Albce,  In  fact.  To  this  attribute  of 
whiteness  are  attributable  such  names  as  Labbynaman  ff  (Leaba 

14  14 

t  O.S.L.,  Co.  Galway,  —  ^,  pp.  535,  539.  %  O.S.L.,  Co.  Galway,  £^,  p.  1S7. 

§  O'Curry's  M.  and  C,  vol.  ii.  p.  370. 

II  Windele  MS.,  "  Cork  W.  and  N.E.,"  p.  851  ;  also  "  Cork  Topog.,"  p.  607. 

t  O.S.L.,  Co,  Galway,  -^^,  p.  626. 

tt  A  slone  circle  is  given  in  the  map  (O.S.  54)  in  which  this  fort  is. 


Names  and  Legends.  8 


o 


na  m-ban),  a  "  fort "  in  Kerry,  where  probably  there  was,  or  is, 
a  dohnen  ;  Slievenaman  f  in  Tipperary  (SHabh-na-mban),  where 
there  is  a  cairn,  a  dolmen,  and  a  venerated  rock  called  "  Finn  Mac 
Cumhail's  Table,"  and  where  a  legend  exists,  that  the  spot  was 
the  burial-place  of  one  of  the  sons  of  Ugaine  Mor.  Cruc-na- 
m-ban,  where  there  is  a  curious  altar-like  rock  covered  with 
sculptured  concentric  circles,  crosses,  and  other  figures  in  the 
promontory  of  Ross-Guill  in  Mevagh,  Donegal,^  may  be  cited  as 
another  instance  of  the  occurrence  of  the  name.  A  direct  con- 
nection with  the  Witches  and  the  White  Women  is  afforded  by 
the  dolmen-name  Trunk-na-Callighe,  which  is  in  the  Townland 
of  Knockanban,  or  Knockban,  in  Mayo, — the  genitive  plural  ban, 
"women,"  being  in  each  case  understood. § 

The  dolmen  in  the  Townland  of  Ahaglaslin  ||  in  Cork  is  marked 
on  the  Ord.  Surv.  Map  Callaheencladdig.  Windele  calls  it  Colle- 
hee7i  a  chladdig,  and  quotes  a  refrain  about  it : — 

"  CoUaheen  a  chlodig 
A  screddig  agus  a  bheacig,"  ^ 

by  which  seems  to  be  meant — 

"  A  little  maiden  of  the  shore 
Lamenting  loud  and  waiting  sore." 

Another  interpretation  of  the  name  is  that  it  means  Cailleichin  an 
chladaig,  "  Little  hag  of  the  seashore."  ff  This  lady,  it  was  said, 
used  to  lament  here  when  any  one  died  in  the  neighbourhood. 
We  may,  I  think,  identify  her  with  tolerable  certainty  with 
Cliodhna,  Cliona,  or  Clidna,  whose  "  house "  on  the  flat  stony 
seashore,  consisting  of  a  great  squarish  natural  rock,  was  pointed  out 
to  me  at  a  turn  in  the  road  just  beyond  the  dolmen.  Stories  were 
current  of  her  inveigling  young  fellows  to  the  rock  whence  they 
never  returned.  Another  and  similar  lewnd  of  Cliona  is  told  about 
a  venerated  site  on  the  summit  of  a  rising  ground  half  a  mile  from 
Athadallan  JJ  in  the  same  neighbourhood.  The  place  is  formed  in 
part  by  nature  and  in  part  artificially.      It  is  described  as  "  very 

14 

t  O.S.L.,  Co.  Tipperary,— Yg.  P-  I54- 

X  Kinahan,  Journ.  R.H.A.a'.I.  (i888),  p.  429;  W.  C.  B.,  Note-Book,  1890. 
§  See  Windisch,  Worterbuch,  ban-m-bdn. 

II  P-  36- 

t  Cailleheen,  or  collaheen,  is  a  diminutive  of  caik,  "a  girl"  ;  hence  cailin,  "  a  little  girl"  ; 
chlodig  =  a  flat  stony  shore ;  screddig,  horn  v.  s£readaim,  "  I  scream  "  ;  bheacig,  from  v.  beictfn,  "  I 
cry  out." 

tt  Letter  from  the  Rev.  Mr.  Lyons  of  Macroom  to  Mr.  Denham  Franklin,  Hon.  Sec.  Cork 
Archteol.  Soc,  kindly  communicated  to  me. 

XX  MS.  Windele,  "  Cork  Topog.,"  p.  44. 


832  The  Dolmens  of  Ireland. 

remarkable,"  and  consists  of  a  large  piece  of  rude  ground  covering 
from  four  to  five  acres.  "  A  kind  of  area  of  nearly  circular  form 
is  partly  faced  in  with  piles  of  rock  generally  rising  over  twenty 
feet  above  the  level  of  the  field,  and  forming  perpendicular  faces  to 
the  area,  while  they  slope  on  the  outside.  The  rocks  form  separate 
and  distinct  groups  divided  by  considerable  intervals  of  space.  .  .  . 
The  interval  or  gap  at  the  S.  side  is  called  the  'door,'  one  of  the 
portions  of  the  rock  having  a  square  form  and  standing  upright, 
so  as  to  resemble  a  door.  The  area  is  nearly  equally  divided  by 
a  rude  range  or  line  of  large  stones  standing  on  end,  sometimes 
together,  at  others  with  considerable  gaps  between  them,  and 
some  prostrate,  varying  from  3  to  5  feet  in  height.  The  range 
runs  N.  and  S.  At  either  extremity  of  the  line  is  a  gap  in  the 
rock.  Near  the  rock  at  the  N.W.  end  is  a  lisheen,  a  *  small  round 
fort,'  with  a  single  rampart.  In  the  centre  is  an  opening  leading 
into  a  cave.  .  .  .  There  is  another  lisheen,  or  small  round  lios  in 
a  field  adjoining  on  the  N.W.,  from  which  the  peasants  say  a 
passage  leads  into  the  enclosed  space." 

This  site  is  known  as  Carrick  Cliona,  and  a  legend  is  attached 
to  it.  Cliona  is  represented  as  a  female  whose  **  moral  character," 
says  Windele,  "appears  to  be  doubtful."  "  A  fair  was  sometimes 
held  in  the  neighbourhood,  and,  on  these  occasions,  she  came  out 
at  her  leisure,  and  carried  off  every  well-looking  young  man  at  the 
fair  who  pleased  her."  About  twenty  years  before  Windele  wrote, 
"some  people  made  an  attempt  to  cultivate  the  ground  with 
potatoes,  but  Cliona  was  heard  within  piteously  zuailing,  as  if  at 
the  desecration,  and  the  men  desisted.  It  was  also  told  how  a 
man  on  the  road  in  the  evening  had  seen  the  whole  space  brilliantly 
lighted  up,  the  door  open  and  streaming  with  light,  and  a  fair  lady 
standing  near." 

This  same  female,  who,  as  I  was  informed  on  the  spot,  was 
regarded  in  oral  tradition  as  Queen  of  the  Fairies  of  West  Munster, 
is  to  be  heard  of  in  the  Dindshenchas,  under  the  heading  Tond 
Clidna,  or  "  Clidna's  Wave."  The  cause  why  her  spirit  wails,  and 
the  reason  perhaps,  also,  of  her  treatment  of  young  men,  is  there 
set  out.  I  borrow  the  translation  from  Whitley  Stokes  :  "  Clidna, 
daughter  of  Genann,  son  of  Tren,  went  out  of  Tulach  da  Roth 
('  Hill  of  two  Wheels'),  out  of  the  Pleasant  Plain  [Mag  MellJ  of 
the  Land  of  Promise,  with  luchna  Curly-Locks  [CiabfaindechJ 
to  get  to  the  Mac  ind  Oc  [i.e.  Oingus,  son  of  the   Dagda  and 


Names  and  Legends.  833 

Boann,  that  is,  of  the  '  Two  Young  Ones,'  so  Prof.  Rhys  translates 
the  dual  Ind  Oc].  luchna  practised  guile  upon  her.  He  played 
music  to  her  in  the  boat  of  bronze  wherein  she  lay,  so  that  she 
slept  thereat,  and  then  he  turned  her  course  back,  so  that  she 
rounded  Ireland  southwards  till  she  came  to  Clidna. 

"  This  is  the  time  at  which  the  illimitable  seaburst  arose  and 
spread  throughout  the  regions  of  the  present  world.  Because 
there  were  at  that  season  Erin's  three  great  floods,  namely, 
Clidna's  flood,  and  Ladru's,  and  Baile's ;  but  not  in  the  same 
hour  did  they  arise ;  Ladru's  flood  was  the  middle  one.  The 
flood  pressed  on  aloft,  and  divided  throughout  the  land  of  Erin 
till  it  caught  yon  boat  and  the  damsel  asleep  in  it  on  the  beach. 
So  there  she  was  drowned,  Clidna  the  Shapely,  Genann's  daughter, 
from  whom  Tonn  Clidna  is  named,"  f  which  was  a  term  used  by 
poets  to  designate  a  loud  surge  in  the  Bay  of  Glandore.  I 
suspect  that,  according  to  the  right  legend,  the  rock  on  the 
strand  called  Cliodhna's  House,  should  be  Cliodhna's  Boat,  like 
Declan's  Boat  in  Waterford,  Bodan's  Boat  in  Donegal,  the  Vela 
de  la  Barca  de  la  Virgin  in  Galicia,  and  other  venerated  rocks 
on  the  coast  of  Western  Europe.  Whitley  Stokes  quotes  an- 
other instance  of  a  bronze  boat  in  the  Dindshenchas  of  Ess  Ruaid, 
and  compares  them  both  with  a  "  copper  boat  created  by  magical 
singing"  in  the  Esthonian  Finnish  poem  called  the  Kalevala. 
The  boats  of  the  fairies  who  skim  the  lakes  of  Overt  and 
Omer,  fleeing  from  the  waves  raised,  according  to  the  legend 
cited  by  M.  Alex,  du  Mege,J  by  the  gigantic  witch  Herodiade, 
for  their  destruction,  are  of  gold. 

With  regard  to  the  dolmen  which  bears  this  curious  name, 
there  is  told  the  not  uncommon  story  that  the  great  covering-stone, 
havinof  been  carried  off  and  thrown  into  the  stream  below,  was 
mysteriously  set  back  in  its  place  during  the  next  night.  This 
vicinity  is  full  of  curiosities,  as  Windele  has  remarked.  There  is 
the  venerated  rock  called  Ceim-na-bricka,§  which  owed  its  peculiar 
appearance — being  split  in  three  pieces — to  an  encounter  between 
giants  ;  there  are  the  marks  of  the  footprints  of  the  famous  cow 
which  the  "  Mna  Sidhe,"  Women  of  the  Sidh,  used  to  have,  in  a 
rock  on  to  which  she  leaped,  at  Leap  ;  ||  there  is  the  little  lake 
called  Lochan-a-Muckadee,  a  mile  away,  with  its    legend  of  the 

t  "Rev.  Celt,"  vol.  xv.  pp.  437-8.  J  "Archeologie  pyreneeune,"  vol.  ii.,  xxvii. 

§  Windele,  MS.,  "  Cork  West  and  Norlh-East,"  p.  768,  with  drawing.  |1  Id. 


834  The  Dolmens  of  Ireland. 

mythic  pig;  there  is,  just  across  the  valley,  the  well  near  the 
ruined  church  of  St.  Fiachtna,  in  the  water  of  which  I  found,  only 
last  year,  pieces  of  bread  thrown  in  as  offerings  ;  not  far  off  is  a 
stone  circle ;  and,  lastly,  there  are  ghost-stories  and  tales  of 
haunted  houses  all  the  country  round. 

The  name  of  Medb,  the  Mab  of  Spencer,  Queen  of  Connaught, 
half  sorceress,  half  Amazon,  whose  attributes  cannot  fail  to  remind 
us  of  those  of  Medea,  is  preserved  in  oral  tradition  in  that  of  the 
great  cairn  on  Knocknarea  in  Sligo,f  overlooking  the  sea  on  one 
side,  and  the  great  cemetery  of  Carrowmore  on  the  other.  It 
is  called  Misgaun,  or  Miosgan  Meave,  Medb's  Butter-Dish,  a 
name  which  is  repeated  in  the  case  of  a  cairn  in  Donegal,  and 
in  that  of  a  large  venerated  block  of  stone  near  Rath  Crogan 
in  Roscommon. 

In  the  county  of  Waterford  is  a  dolmen  at  a  place  called 
Carrick-a-Dhirra,J  which  is  probably  the  name  of  the  dolmen  itself. 
The  fine  dolmen  at  Monasterboice,  §  called  the  Hag's  House,  is 
also  called  Calliagh  Dirra's  House.  The  witch  in  this  latter  case, 
Mr.  Du  Noyer  thinks,  is  the  same  as  Cailleac  Bheartha  (Bera,  or 
Vera),  whose  name  is  connected  with  the  tumuli  at  Slieve-na- 
Calliehe.  The  witch  at  Monasterboice,  whoever  she  was,  was 
said  to  have  been  buried  in  the  parish  of  Diamor,  in  a  field  called 
Cul-a-Mota,  explained  to  mean  "  Back  of  the  Moat,"  but,  as  I 
think,  the  "  Corner,"  or  "  Enclosure  of  the  Moat,"  alluding  to 
some  tumulus  there.  It  is  to  be  observed  that  tradition  does 
not  regard  the  dolmen  as  her  sepulchre,  although  it  bears  her 
name. 

The  name  of  Aine,  called  also  Aynia,  meets  us  in  the  following: 
Knockainy  in  Limerick, [j  Knockninny  ^  in  Fermanagh,  Aynia's 
Cove  in  Tyrone, ff  and  possibly  in  Legananny  in  Down. JJ  On  the 
top  of  the  eastern  part  of  the  hill  of  Knockainy  in  Limerick  §§  are 
two  small  moats,  or  tumuli,  which  the  writer  of  the  Ord.  Surv. 
Letters  considered  to  be  of  sepulchral  origin,  and  thought  the  name. 
Aine, — "  that  of  one  of  those  mythological  females  so  frequently 
connected  with  primitive  places  of  sepulture," — was  probably  that 
of  the  cailleac  of  the  Baile-na-g-cailliagh  dolmen  near  Lough  Gur. 

14 

t  O.S.L.,  -z, ,  p.  r  ;  Wood-Martin,  pp.  10S-113. 

r.  14 

+  p.  63.  §  p.  310. 

II  p.  47.  t  p.  227.  tt  p.  215.  XX  p.  282. 

§§  O.S.L.,  Co.  Limerick,  ~  ,  p.  229, 


Names  and  Legends.  835 


At  Knockninny  in  Fermanagh  are  several  dolmens,  and  the  ety- 
mology Cnocin  Ainc\  the  little  knoll  of  Aine,  has  been  suggested. 
In  the  case  of  the  Clochtogal  dolmen  in  the  same  county,  the 
same  story  is  told  which  meets  us  in  the  case  of  the  cairns  of 
Slieve-na-Callighe,  in  that  of  a  dolmen  in  Wales,  and  in  that  of 
the  Pierre  Levee  at  Vieux  in  France,  namely,  that  the  stones 
composing  it  fell  out  of  the  girdle  of  a  giantess,  who  in  this 
instance  was  in  pursuit  of  a  faithless  lover,  who  may  either  have 
been  Diarmaid,  who,  according  to  one  version  of  his  story,  proved 
unfaithful  to  Grainne,  or  Cuchullain  pursued  by  his  mistress  Aife. 

Knockmany  in  Tyrone  may  be  fairly  supposed  to  bear  the 
name  of  Aine,  since  the  dolmen  on  its  summit  bears  the  name  of 
Aynia's  Cove,  Aynia  being,  so  we  are  informed,  "  according  to  the 
folk-lore  of  the  locality,  a  famous  Witch  and  Queen  of  the  Wee 
People." 

Legananny,  where  there  is  a  fine  dolmen,  in  the  county  of 
Down,  has  been  explained  to  mean  Legdn  Aind^  Aine's  Dell,  and, 
if  so,  like  the  Val  Jorguina,  the  Witch's  Valley  in  the  Pyrenees, 
would  apply  to  a  physical  feature  of  the  country,  and  not  to  the 
dolmen  itself,  although  the  association  of  the  name  of  the  Witch 
with  it  probably  pointed  to  her  special  connection  with  the  monu- 
ment. There  is  a  Witch's  Hollow  near  the  Horseman's  Stone, 
at  Clonmacnoise,  and  others  in  various  parts  of  Ireland.f 

In  the  Dindshenchas  of  Benn  Etair,  Aine  is  mentioned  thus  : 
"  Etar  son  of  Eteath  .  .  .  Manannan  Mac  Lir's  son-in-law  .  .  . 
died  of  love  for  Aine,  and  his  grave  was  dug  on  yonder  peak  "  % 
{i.e.  Benn  Etair,  or  Howth). 

The  name  Aine  occurs  also  in  the  strange  story  of  the  "  Yew 
Tree  of  Mac  Aingis,"  of  which  O'Curry  §  gives  a  summary.  She 
there  appears  as  one  of  the  Tuatha  De  Danann  race  who  lived  in 
the  hill  of  Cnoc  Aine  (Knockainy  in  Limerick),  which  took  its  name 
from  her.  Speaking  of  the  name  of  the  Parish  of  Knockainy  in 
Limerick,  O'Donovan  ||  says  it  is  not  of  ecclesiastical  origin.  It 
is  derived  from  Caoc  Aine,  or  Aines  Hill,  from  the  Lady  Aine, 
the  daughter  of  Eogabhail,  who  is  still  believed  to  haunt  the  hill 
in  the  shape  of  a  Banshee.  She  is  the  next  most  distinguished 
Banshee  of  Munster,  next  after  Eevil  of  Craglea  in   Thomond, 

t  Mentioned  by  the  Rev.  Jas.  Graves  in  his  account  of  this  stone  in  the  "  Journ.  of  the  Kilk. 
Archseol.  Soc." 

X  Transl.  Whitley  Stokes,  Rev.  CeU.,  July,  1894,  p.  331.  §  M.  and  C.,  vol.  iii.  p.  259. 

14 
II  O.S.L.,  Co.  Limerick,  =t — ,  P-  229. 
E.  9 


8^6  The  Dolmens  of  Ireland. 

and  is  very  frequently  alluded  to  in  their  elegies  by  the  Munster 
bards  of  the  last  century.  She  is  mentionei  in  Cormac's  Glossary 
as  the  person  from  whom  the  highest  gro::nd  in  the  territory  of 
Cliach  took  its  name  of  Cnoc  Aine.  Other  accounts  relate  that 
Aine  was  abused,  and  finally,  together  with  her  brother,  slain 
in  a  fit  of  passion  by  the  King  Oilioll  f  Olum,  in  revenge  for 
which  deed  a  little  Tuatha  De  Danann  musician,  called  Fer-fi, 
raised  up  a  phantom  yew-tree,  which  became  the  occasion  of  a 
contest  between  Oilioll  and  his  seven  sons  on  the  one  side  and 
Mac  Con  on  the  other,  and  ended  in  the  battle  of  Magh  Muc- 
ruimhe,  in  which  Mac  Con,  with  a  band  of  foreign  adventurers, 
routed  and  slew  Oilioll  himself  and  all  his  sons. 

There  was  another  Aine,  who,  according  to  the  legends,  was 
one  of  the  three  queens,  wives  of  the  lords  of  Ireland,  who  being 
with  child  at  the  time  when  their  husbands  were  slain  in  the 
revolt  of  the  Aitheach-Tuatha,  preserved  the  royal  line  by  giving 
birth  to  a  son.  She  is  described  as  being  the  daughter  of  Caindi, 
the  great  King  of  the  South  Saxons,  and  the  wife  of  Breasal  Mac 
Firb,  King  of  Ulster,  to  whom  her  son,  the  posthumous  Tiprait 
Tireach,  succeeded  in  the  government  of  that  province.^ 

The  Aine  of  the  dolmens  and  tumuli  is  the  unfortunate  lady 
of  Knockainy,  and  possibly  also  the  beloved  of  Etar. 

We  have  seen  that  the  dolmen  near  Monasterboice  was 
supposed  by  Mr.  Du  Noyer  to  have  received  its  name  of  Hag's 
House,  which  in  Irish  would  have  been  Tegh-na-Callighe,  from  the 
same  caillcac  who  is  still  orally  remembered  at  Slieve-na-Callighe 
in  Meath,  that  is,  Bheartha,  or  Bera.  There  is  at  least  one  other 
locality  with  which  we  may  connect  her.  This  is  the  highest 
point  of  the  Cairbre  Heights  in  the  county  of  Longford. §  Sir 
William  Petty  calls  this  place  in  his  map  Carne-callie,  that  is, 
Carn-na-Callighe,  or  Hag's  Carn.  On  this  elevation  there  are 
three  cairns  with  which  a  legend  is  connected,  namely,  that  a 
certain  hag  took  three  jumps  on  the  summit  and  dropped  the 
three  cairns  upon  it.  The  fact  that  the  same  story  obtains  at 
Slieve-na-Callighe  near  Oldcastle,  where  the  particular  hag  who 
performs  this  exploit  is  Bhearra  or  Berre,  makes  it  probable  that 

t  A  form  of  Ailill,  as  Oingus  is  of  Aengus,  etc.  \  O'Curry,  M.  and  C,  vol.  i.  xxiv. 

14. 

§  O.S.L.,  Co.  Longford,    j^     -,  p.  31. 


Names  and  Legends.  8^y 


it  Is  the  same  lady  who  now  anonymously  presides  at  Carn  (as 
the  place  is  now  called)  in  Longford. 

To  his  translation  of  the  Aislinge  Meic  Coitglmne  Mr.  Kuno 
Meyer  appends  an  interesting  note  on  Caillech  Berre,  "  the  nun  of 
Beare,"  as  he  oddly  terms  her,  although,  as  he  adds,  "she  still 
figures  in  Irish  legend  as  a  hag  or  witch  of  fabulous  age." 

O' Donovan  gives  her  name  in  full  as  Eibhlin  Bheurtha  inghiit 
Ghuilhin,  and  cites  a  quatrain  of  her  poetic  composition  "  yet 
repeated,"  he  says,  "  at  Carnbane  (in  Meath)  "  : — • 

"  Mise  Cailleach  Bhdurtha  bhocht, 
lomdha  iongnadh  amharcas  riamb, 
Chonnarcas  Carn  bdn  'na  loch, 
Cidh  go  bhfuil  s^  'nois  'na  shliabh." 

Which  he  translates  : — 

"  I  am  poor  Cailleach  Bera,f 
Many  a  wonder  have  I  ever  seen  ; 
I  have  seen  Carn-Bane  a  lake, 
'Though  it  is  now  a  mountain." 

The  local  legend  about  the  cairns  at  Slieve-na-Callighe,  as  given 
by  Mr.  Conwell,  in  1864,  is  "that  an  old  hag  (name  and  date  not 
given)  with  her  apron  filled  with  stones,  jumped  from  one  peak  to 
another,  scattering  a  few  on  each  peak,  and  leaving  her  chair  on 
the  middle  one."  0'Donovan,J  writing  from  Kells  (July  30th, 
1836),  gives  a  more  lengthy  version  of  the  legend  as  follows  : 
"  There  are  three  hills  about  a  mile  asunder  in  this  parish,§ 
having  three  heaps  of  stones  on  their  summits,  with  which  the 
following  legend  is  connected  :  A  famous  old  hag  of  antiquity, 
called  Cailleach  Bheartha  (Calliagh  Vera),  came  one  time  from  the 
North  to  perform  a  magical  feat  in  this  neighbourhood,  by  which 
she  was  to  obtain  great  power  if  she  succeeded.  She  took  an 
apronful  of  stones,  and  dropped  a  carn  on  Carnbane.  From  this 
she  jumped  to  the  summit  of  Slieve-na-Cally,  a  mile  distant,  and 
dropped  a  second  carn  there.  From  this  hill  she  made  a  second 
jump,  and  dropped  a  carn  on  another  hill  about  a  mile  distant.  If 
she  could  have  made  another  leap,  and  dropped  the  fourth  carn,  it 
appears  that  the  magical  feat  would  have  been  accomplished,  but 
in   giving   the  jump   she    slipped  and   fell   In    the   Townland  of 

t  Mr.  Kuno  Meyer  translates  this:  "I  am  the  poor  old  woman  of  Beare."  He  says  that 
another  quatrain  ascribed  to  her  is  found  in  L.  Br.,  p.  89,  marg.  hif.,  and  in  the  Stowe  MS.  992, 
p.  47a,  marg.  sup. 

X  O.S.L.,  Co.  Meath,  ^-— ,  p.  96.  §  Longhcrew. 


838  The  Dolmens  of  Ireland. 

Patrickstown,  in  the  parish  of  Diamor,  where  she  broke  her  neck. 
Here  she  was  buried,  and  her  grave  was  to  be  seen,  not  many 
years  ago,  in  the  field  called  Cul  a'  mhota  {i.e.  back  of  the  moat), 
about  200  perches  to  the  east  of  the  moat  in  that  Townland ;  but 
it  is  now  destroyed. 

"  This,"  continues  O'Donovan,  "  is  the  very  old  lady  whose 
shade  still  haunts  the  lake  and  earn  of  Slieve  GuIUion  in  the 
county  of  Armagh.  Her  name  was  Evlin,  and  it  would  appear, 
from  some  legends  about  her,  that  she  was  of  De  Danann  origin. 
She  is  now  a  Banshee  in  some  parts  of  Ireland,  and  is  represented 
in  some  elegies  as  appearing  before  the  deaths  of  some  persons. 
I  know  nothinof  more  about  her  but  that  on  one  occasion  she 
turned  the  celebrated  Finn  Mac  Cumhail  into  a  grey  old  man  ;  but 
his  soldiers  due  through  the  mountain  of  Slieve  Guillion  in 
Armagh  until  they  drove  her  out  of  her  cave,  and  forced  her  to 
restore  Finn  to  his  former  beauty  and  symmetry."  This,  I  may 
say  in  parenthesis,  is  as  pure  and  beautiful  a  version  of  the  Sun- 
myth  as  is  known  to  me.  Finn  Mac  Cumhail,  the  Sky,  is  turned 
grey  by  the  departing  Sun — call  her  Bera,  or  Grainne,  as  we  will — 
who  is  driven  out  of  her  cave  again,  according  to  the  usual  myth 
current  throughout  the  whole  northern  portion  of  the  Europeo- 
Asiatic  continent. 

"  There  is  an  eminence  in  the  Townland  of  Knocklough  called 
Slieve  Guillion,  and  a  rude  stone  chair  on  the  summit  of  Slieve 
Nacally  called  Cathaoir*na-Callighe-Beurtha,  that  is,  Calliagh 
Bej'cHs  Chair.  It  is  a  large  stone  about  two  tons  in  weight, 
ornamented  with  a  sunk  cross  (cut)  into  the  seat  of  the  chair  in 
which  three  might  sit  together.  This  hollow  seems  to  have  been 
made  in  the  stone  with  a  hammer  .  .  .  The  back  of  the  chair 
was  broken  by  some  human  enemy  to  old  Evlin." 

Mr.  Conwell  narrates  that,  on  one  occasion,  Mr.  Winslow,  a 
gentleman  of  antiquarian  tastes,  living  in  the  early  part  of  the 
1 8th  century  near  Fore,  invited  Dean  Swift  to  accompany  him  to 
Slieve-na-Cailliofhe  in  order  to  collect  the  fables  related  about  the 
place,  and  the  monster  woman  Garvogue  [?  Garbh  Ogh  =  Uncouth 
Maiden  :  Compare  the  Giant  Maids  of  lotunheim],  who  formerly 
reio-ned  there.  Thomas  Sheridan  of  Ouilca,  with  whom  Swift  was 
staying,  knew  Irish,  and  acted  as  interpreter,  and  the  Dean  turned 
into  verse  the  legends  collected  on  the  ground.  The  gardener  at 
Quilca  took  a  copy  of  these  verses,  from  whose  MS.  Mr.  Conwell 
quotes  as  much  as  was  decipherable. 


Names  and  Legends.  839 

In  this  we  read  of  Garvogue  being  drawn  in  a  car  by  twelve 
giant  elks  from  Bengore,  where  a  war  was  raging.  She  leaves 
her  heather  bed  in  the  morning,  and  makes  an  ample  meal  from 
fish  caught  in  the  neighbouring  lakes  together  with  twelve 
haunches  of  venison,  and  a  like  number  of  measures  of  milk  and 
breasts  of  eagles. 

This  giantess  held  sway  before  "  Finn  and  Gall  had  raised  the 
spear,"  or  "  Caolta  chased  the  mountain  deer."  Her  pack,  the 
fleetest  ever  known,  numbered  threescore  and  ten,  among  which 
the  names  are  mentioned  of  "  Red-Spidogue  "  \_Spideog-dea7'g=rQ.d 
slender-one  :  Spideog-Mhuire  =  Robin  Red  Breast]  ;  and  Isogue 
[_Uiseog  =  \2ir\^\  so  that  they  were  called  Robin  and  Lark  respec- 
tively].    The  following  are  a  few  of  Swift's  lines  : — 

"  Determined  now  her  tomb  to  build, 

Her  ample  skirt  with  stones  she  filled, 

And  dropped  a  heap  on  Carn-more;t 

Then  stepped  one  thousand  yards  to  Loar, 

And  dropped  another  goodly  heap ; 

And  then  with  one  prodigious  leap 

Gained  Cam-beg ;  %  and  on  its  height 

Displayed  the  wonders  of  her  might. 
***** 

"  And  then  approached  death's  awful  doom, 
Her  chair  was  placed  within  the  womb 
Of  hills  whose  tops  with  heather  bloom." 

Mr.  Kuno  Meyer  obtained  from  Father  O'Growney,  who 
obtained  them  from  a  friend  residing  near  Slyne  Head,  the 
following  sayings  and  stories  of  Bheara  : 

"  Three  great  ages  :  the  age  of  the  Yew  Tree  ;  the  age  of  the 
Eagle  ;  the  age  of  Cailleach  Bheara." 

"  The  habits  of  Cailleach  Bheara  ;  she  did  not  carry  the  mud 
of  one  pool  beyond  the  next  pool ;  she  did  not  eat  when  she 
was  hungry  ;  she  did  not  go  to  sleep  until  she  was  sleepy  ;  she 
did  not  throw  away  dirty  water  until  she  had  clean  water  in  the 
house." 

"  Her  advice:  One  night  she  was  on  the  sea  with  her  children  ; 
the  night  was  still  and  dark,  and  it  was  freezing ;  the  cold  went 
to  their  very  marrow.  She  told  them  to  make  themselves  warm. 
'  We  cannot,'  they  said.  *  Bale  the  sea  out  and  in,'  said  she. 
'  Take  the  scoop,  fill  the   boat,    and  bale    it    out  again.'     They 

t  Pronounced  Carron.  X  Id. 


840  The  Dolmens  of  Ireland. 

did    so,    and    made   themselves  warm    until   the    morning,  when 
they  found  opportunity  to  go  ashore." 

"  She  had  a  bull  called  Tarbh  Conraidh.  There  was  no  cow 
that  heard  him  bellow,  and  had  not  a  calf  at  the  end  of  the  year. 
Wherever  the  grass  was  best  and  sweetest,  there  she  would  drive 
her  cows  and  the  bull.  One  day  the  bull  heard  the  lowing  of 
a  cow.  He  ran  from  the  cailleach  until  he  reached  the  cow,  and 
the  cailleach  after  him.  She  followed  him  until  she  came  to 
Mainin.  He  swam  across  a  small  creek  that  lay  in  his  way. 
When  he  reached  the  dry  land,  the  cailleach  had  leaped  across 
the  creek,  struck  him  with  her  druid's  rod,  and  turned  him  into 
stone.     The  bull-shaped  stone  is  to  be  seen  to  this  very  day." 

The  name  Bera,  which  is  common  to  Norse  mythology,  is 
found  also  in  Irish  legendary  tales.  Ingcel,  the  banished  British 
Prince  who  leads  a  piratical  expedition  in  a  tale  called  the 
Brudin  Da  Derga,  seems,  says  Dr.  Sullivan,  to  have  been  the  son 
of  the  Connaught  Fir-Domhnann  Cuscrach,  by  a  British  Princess, 
namely  Bei-a,  daughter  of  "the  King  of  Britain  of  Manand."  f 

When  lookinof  for  mes^alithic  remains  and  leo-ends  at  Castle- 
town  Berehaven,  I  was  informed  by  a  boatman  that  the  place 
derived  its  name  from  Bera,  an  ancient  queen  of  Ireland  who 
came  from  Spain,  and  was  buried  at  Slieve  Mis  in  Kerry, 
to  which  mountain  he  pointed.  It  was  in  the  Glen  Scoithin 
that  the  venerated  rock  called  Fert  Scota,J  that  is,  Scota's 
Grave,  was,  at  the  time  of  the  Ordnance  Survey,  pointed  out  as 
such  by  the  natives.  Scota  was,  according  to  the  written  legend, 
the  mother  of  the  Milesian  brothers,  and,  with  them,  came  from 
Spain  to  Ireland,  where,  having  encountered,  at  the  foot  of  Slieve 
Mis,  the  magical  army  devised  as  a  delusion  to  the  sons  of  Mil 
by  the  three  De  Danann  queens,  Fodla,  Banba,  and  Eriu,  she  was 
killed  in  the  battle  which  ensued.  The  fight  took  place  in 
a  neighbouring  glen  called  Glen  Fais,  from  Fas,  another  Milesian 
lady,    who   had   been    killed   there.  §      It   is  just   possible    that, 

t  Introd.  to  O'Curry's  M.  and  C,  i.,xx. 

X  O'Donovan  (O.S.L.,  Co.  Kerry,  rr ,  p.  69)  describes  this  as  a  long  flag,  to  all  appearance 

a  natural  object ;  length  35  feet,  breadth  at  one  end  11  feet,  at  the  other  6  feet,  inclining  to  the  E. 
"It  is  mentioned,"  he  adds,  "in  all  the  ancient  Irish  MSS.  which  treat  of  the  Milesian  colony. 
The  mountain  stream  I'ionnghlaise  (so  called  by  Keating  in  the  story  of  Curoi)  runs  through  the 
glen  and  close  to  this  rock."     (See  O'Curry,  "  Materials,"  p.  448.) 

§  There  are  two  menhirs,  one  1 1  feet  high,  the  other  prostrate,  and  bearing  ogam  characters, 
with  a  series  of  cists  or  flagstone-graves  between  them,  in  this  glen.  They  lie  two  or  three  feet  below 
the  surface.  Ten  or  twelve  of  them  were  exposed  in  the  bank  or  fence  of  the  road,  the  making 
of  which  led  to  their  discovery.     They  were  formed  of  the  common  clay-slate  flags  of  the  country. 


Names  and  Legends.  841 

mythologlcally,  Scota  and  Bera  are  identical,  each  a  queen 
hailing  from  Spain,  and  each  buried  in  Slieve  Mis. 

As  has  been  shown  above,  Caillech  Bheara  had  her  well,  and 
its  attendant  sanctity  and  cultus — a  fact  which  may  be  held  as 
some  extenuation  for  O' Donovan's  pun  that  the  myths  of  these 
ancient  ladies  may  certainly  be  regarded  as  a  part  of  //ag-'iology  ! 
It  was  called  Tober  na-cally-bheara,  i.e.  Tobar-na-Callighe- 
Bheartha,  and  was  in  the  Parish  of  Oranmore  in  Galway.f  Of 
the  possible  identity  of  the  name  with  that  of  Finnbheara  in 
Galway,  and,  through  that  medium,  with  the  worship  of  the 
Christian  saint  Barry,  which  extended  to  the  Hebrides,  whither 
the  Fir  Bolg  tribes  were  said  to  have  been  driven,  I  have  already 
spoken.  Wherever  found,  Bheara  appears  to  belong  to  the  dark 
tribes — to  the  Fir-Bolg,J  that  is  to  say,  as  opposed  to  the  Tuatha 
De  Danann,  the  light  people. 

The  legendary  lady  whose  name  above  all  others  has  become 
attached  to  the  dolmens  of  Ireland  is  Grainne,  the  false  fiancde, 
or,  according  to  other  stories,  the  wife  of  Finn  Mac  Cumhail. 
Her  elopement  with  Diarmait  hua  Duibni,  and  the  pursuit  of  the 
fugitive  pair  by  Finn,  was  once  probably  the  best  known  and 
most  popular  of  all  the  written  romances  or  oral  traditions  of  the 
island.  Their  flight  lasted  a  year  and  a  day,  and  as  each 
night  they  are  reported  to  have  set  up  a  dolmen  for  their 
bedstead  or  shelter,  there  should  be  366  of  these  monuments 
in  all. 

So  general  was  the  name  Leaba  Diarmada  agus  Grainne 
for  dolmens  in  some  districts  that,  as  in  Clare,  for  example,  the 
Ordnance  Surveyors  adopted  it  universally.  When  travelling 
in  that  county,  I  had  only  to  mention  the  name  Labba  Yeruiuddy, 
or  Labba  Ve^nnudda  agus  Granya,  as  it  is  pronounced,  to  make 
my  meaning  fully  understood,  and  to  find  a  guide  ready  to 
conduct  me  to  those  in  the  vicinity. 

In  Kerry  and  Cork,  the  name  is  very  generally,  but  not  so 
universally  applied  to  them,  some  simply  bearing  the  name  Hag's 

and  were  placed  in  regular  lines,  each  grave  being  some  feet  distant  from  the  other,  with  an  interval 
between  each  row.  The  adjacent  fields  above  and  below  the  road  were  said  to  be  full  of  them. 
Those  that  were  opened  all  contained  human  remains  in  more  or  less  perfect  condition.  There  was 
no  ruined  church  near.  (See  O'Curry,  "  Materials,"  p.  448.  For  the  ogam  stone  and  the  graves, 
see  "  Proc.  R.I. A.,"  vol.  viii.  p.  102.) 
14 
t  O.S.L.,  Co.  Galway,  ^— ,  p.  310. 

X  Not  all  the  Fir-Bolg  were  dark,  however ;  some  were  fair-haired,  but  we  never  find  in  the 
traditions  a  dark-haired  member  of  the  Tuatha  De  Danann. 

VOL.  III.  K 


842  The  Dolmens  of  Ireland. 


Bed — the  Hag,  however,  turning  out  to  be  Grainne,  as  at  Labba- 
callee.  The  same  may  be  said  of  those  in  Limerick  and  Tip- 
perary.  In  Waterford,  however,  it  almost  entirely  disappears, 
which  causes  the  writer  of  the  Ordnance  Letters  for  that  county 
to  remark  that  "  it  is  curious  to  notice  that  these  monuments  which 
in  Connaught  and  North  Munster  are  invariably  called  by  the 
name  Leaba  Diarmada  agus  Ghraine,  are  here  called  *  Giants' 
Beds,'  or  '  Giants'  Graves.' " 

In  Gal  way  the  name  was  pretty  universal ;  in  Mayo  and  Sligo 
less  so,  but  still  often  found.  In  Leitrim  and  Roscommon  it  is 
also  found,  and  becomes  pretty  general  again  in  some  parts  of 
Donegal.  In  Tyrone  and  Fermanagh  are  examples  of  its  use, 
but  in  Derry  it  gives  place  to  names  of  other  origin,  appearing 
again,  however,  in  several  instances  in  Antrim.  In  Down  and 
Louth  it  dies  out,  and  from  the  dolmen-bearing  portions  of  the 
province  of  Leinster  it  is  absent  also.  Roughly  speaking,  it  has 
lingered  the  longest  in  those  portions  of  the  island  where  the  old 
population,  represented  at  the  present  by  the  greatest  proportion 
of  nigrescence,  are  found. 

It  is  to  be  noticed  that  it  is  not  to  dolmens  only  that  it  was 
applied,  but  also  sometimes  to  caves,  natural  or  artificial,  and  to 
natural  rocks.  Each  district,  in  which  the  travelling  story-teller 
told  his  tale,  was  requisitioned  to  provide  the  sites  incidental  to  it 
in  order  to  its  localization.  In  Scotland,  too,  the  stories  of  the 
Finn  series  are  localized,  says  Mr.  Campbell,  at  the  nearest  place 
which  answers  the  description.!  As  told  in  Donegal,  the  story 
of  the  "Pursuit"  of  Diarmait  and  Grainne  by  Finn  required  that 
two  spots  should  be  pointed  out,  the  one  in  the  mountains,  the 
other  by  the  seashore,  for  by  day  the  pair  were  wont  to  carry 
sand  to  the  mountains  to  strew  for  their  resting-place,  while  by 
night  they  brought  heather  from  the  mountains  down  to  the  shore 
for  the  same  purpose,  an  idea  perhaps  traceable  to  the  custom  of 
the  people  on  that  wild  coast,  who  had  two  habitations,  the  one  in 
the  mountains  in  the  summer-time  where  their  herds  were  grazing; 
the  other  by  the  seashore,  in  the  winter-time,  when  they  lived  by 
fishing,  and  housed  their  cattle.  Thus,  on  the  side  of  Mount 
Errigal,  above  Dunlewy,  to  the  right  of  the  road  leading  to 
Gweedore,  is  a  natural  cave  called  Dermot  and  Grany's  Bed, 
which  was  their  summer  or  daytime  place  of  retreat,  while  down 

t  "  Leabhar  na  Feinne,"  iii.  29. 


Names  and  Legends.  843 

by  the  sea  near  Bunbeg  a  cavity  formed  by  one  huge  natural  rock 
resting  against  the  side  of  a  perpendicular  cliff  bears  the  same 
name,  and  was  their  winter  or  night-time  abode.  On  Owey 
island,  off  the  same  coast,  a  natural  hollow  place  bears  the  same 
name,  and  the  Dermot  and  Grany's  Bed  on  Tory  island  is  a 
purely  natural  cave. 

Near  Black  Head,  in  the  north-west  of  the  Burren  of  Clare,  I 
was  shown  a  hollow  place  beneath  a  rock  which  bore  this  name, 
and  about  which  a  story  was  told  of  a  young  runaway  couple 
having  lived  there  for  a  month  in  quite  recent  times.  At  Gleniff 
in  Sligo  is  a  natural  cave  called  Dermot  and  Grany's  Bed.  The 
legend  about  this  cave,  however,  differs  from  the  generality,  in 
that  it  was  regarded  as  the  permanent  residence  of  Finn  Mac 
Cumhail.  Here,  too,  lived  his  beautiful  wife  (not  merely  his 
betrothed,  as  in  some  versions)  Grainne.  "  The  latter,"  says  Col. 
Wood-Martin,  "possessed  the  gift  of  witchcraft,  and  at  such  times 
as  she  desired  to  enjoy  the  society  of  Dermot  she  could,  by  .  .  . 
crossing  her  thumbs,  lay  a  spell  upon  her  husband,  compelling 
him  at  one  time  to  gather  sea-weed  and  burn  kelp  on  the 
seashore,  at  another  to  cut  rushes  in  the  valley  to  make  mats, 
and,  again,  to  send  him  to  distant  mountains  after  supposititious 
strayed  cattle."  "  Our  peasant  guide,"  adds  Col.  Wood-Martin, 
"  expressed  himself  uncertain  as  to  the  final  result  of  the  intrigue. 
He  only  knew  that  it  ended  in  there  being  '  a  terrible  row 
entirely '  in  this  mountain  cavern." 

The  written  tale  called  the  "  Pursuit  of  Dermot  and  Grania," 
makes  the  pair  take  up  their  abode  in  a  cave  overlooking  Dingle 
Bay. 

In  Banduff,  a  few  miles  east  of  the  hill  of  Ceimabricka  in  Cork,, 
is  a  Leaba  Diarimiid.  '*  It  consists,"  says  Windele,  of  a  cave 
running  some  20  yards  in  through  the  solid  rock,  evidently  formed 
by  art,  its  rather  pointed  arching  roof  having  the  marks  of  tooling. 
It  is  about  4  feet  wide,  and  from  3  to  4  feet  high,  and  terminates 
by  narrowing  to  a  small  excavation  nearly  filled  with  earth.  Near 
the  entrance,  about  5  feet  in,  there  is  a  hole  in  the  roof."  On  the 
coast  of  Clare,  an  island  is  named  Dermot  and  Granids  Bed.  At 
Moragh,  on  the  Bandon  River,  in  Cork,  a  tumulus  of  the  Long- 
Barrow  form  is  called  the  Leaba  Diarmuid.  The  tradition  about 
this  latter  mound  is  different  to  those  about  the  dolmens  and  other 
places  which  are  called  Dermot  and  Grany's  Beds,  and  where  the 


$44  The  Dolmens  of  Ireland. 

fugitives  are  supposed  to  have  halted.  This  is  the  burial-place  of 
Diarmaid,  after  his  encounter  with  the  boar,  and  subsequent  death. 
The  whole  story  is  localized  here  in  Cork  just  as  it  is  in  Sligo, 
with  slight  variations  in  the  details  of  the  story,  according  to  which 
the  enchanted  boar  was  hunted  from  the  Hill  of  Howth  through 
the  plains  of  Ulster  and  Munster,  until  he  reached  the  southern 
shore  of  the  Bandon  River,  in  springing  across  which,  and  on  to 
the  bank,  the  hero  Diarmaid  received  the  wound  from  the  bristle 
which  caused  his  death. f  Windele  speaks  of  the  tumulus  as  "  of 
the  Ship- Barrow  class." 

In  Scotland,  too,  as  far  as  the  Ord  of  Caithness,  and  in  the 
Isles  as  well,  spots  are  pointed  out,  says  Mr.  Campbell,J  which 
legend  connects  with  the  tale  of  this  "  Pursuit."  "In  short,  the 
story  of  Diarmaid  is  traced  in  topography,  genealogy,  and 
Gselic  mythology  throughout  every  region  where  Gaelic  was 
spoken." 

GraidJmes  Bed  is  in  the  island  of  Tiree ;  the  well  and  knoll 
where  the  tragedy  ended  are  near  Oban,  near  Loch  Carron,  in 
Skye,  and  somewhere  in  Sutherland.  Beinn  Gulban  is  in  Skye, 
as  well  as  in  Sligo,  and  somewhere  in  the  middle  of  Scotland, 
where  also  is  Gleann  Sith,  where  the  mythical  Boar  abode,  with 
his  mythical  owner  Mala  Lith.  The  Campbell  tribe  are  said  to 
descend  from  Diarmaid,  and  their  crest  to  commemorate  the  slaying 
of  the  mythical  Boar. 

To  judge  by  the  names  of  some  of  the  dolmens  the  pair  had 
sometimes  separate  resting-places.  In  Irishovven§  in  Donegal 
there  is  a  "  Darby's  Bed  "  and  a  "  Grania's  Bed  "  not  far  off.  The 
same  is  the  case  with  the  Leaba  Diarmuid  and  the  Leaba  Granu 
between  Gort  and  Feakle,  in  the  Townland  of  Dromandora  || 
in  Clare.  Sometimes  we  have  a  Diarmaid' s  Bed  by  itself  as  at 
Knock-Hoena^  in  Cork,  Skregg  ff  in  Roscommon,  Knockbrack 
in  Sellerna  Bay,  and  Marble  Hill  in  Galway.JJ  Quite  as  often 
Grania  has  a  resting-place  for  herself,  as,  for  example,  Grannas 
Bed  at  Brough  Derg  §§  in  Tyrone,  where  an  adjacent  one  perhaps 
bore  Dermot's  name,  Cam  Grainy  in  Antrim,  ||||  and  an  example 
near   Broadford    in  Clare,^^  where,  when   I   was    planning  the 

t  J.  Windele,  "Cork  W.  and  N.E.,"  MS.,  pp.  527,  602.       %  "  Leabhar  na  Feinne,"  p.  152. 
§  "T.L.  of  Tullynabratilly,"  p.  229.  |1  p.  95. 

^  J.  Windele,  "  Cork  W.  and  N.E.,"  MS.,  p.  855.     I  cannot  identify  the  site  of  this, 
tt  Journ  R.H.A.A.L  (1883-4),  4th  Ser.,  vol.  vi.  p.  19  ;  p.  196,  sitj>ra. 

XX  pp.  103,  107.  §§  p.  211.  nil  p.  269. 

%%  "T.L.  Ballykelly,"  p.  97. 


Names  and  Legends.  845. 

dolmen,  a  farmer's  wife  came  up,  and,  laughing  heartily,  said, 
"  Well,  I  never  thought  to  live  to  see  Old  Granya  measured  ! " 

O'Donovan  considered,  I  know  not  on  what  ground,  that  the 
legend  connecting  the  dolmens  with  the  flight  of  Dermot  and 
Grainne  was  not  older  than  that  which  attributed  the  raths  and 
cahers  to  the  Danes. 

Whether  this  is  so  or  not,  there  appears  to  be  a  tradition 
that  some  kind  of  aphrodisiac  cultus  was  connected  with  dolmens. 
Marriage  contracts,  as  we  know,  or  rather  arrangements  for 
concubinage  for  the  coming  year,  were  entered  upon  at  the  annual 
fairs  and  assemblies.  These  were  held  at  well-known  sepulchral 
centres,  such  as  Temair,  Tailten,  and  others.  I  have  little  doubt 
that  the  Giants'  Ring  in  the  County  Down,f  though  the  tradition 
has  been  lost,  was  one  of  these  centres  of  assembly.  The  tomb  in 
that  case  consists  of  a  dolmen  placed  within  the  ring.  In  Estorff's 
account  of  the  Hunenbedden  of  Hanover,  we  have  an  example 
in  that  country  of  one  of  these  monuments  occurring  at  a  place 
where  assemblies  are  held.  The  Brut  Camp,  a  dolmen  in 
Ditmarsh,  is  said  to  derive  its  name  "  Bride  Field "  from  the 
circumstance  that  in  old  times  marriages  were  made  there.  In 
Ireland  one  dolmen  at  least  retains  the  tradition  of  its  having  been 
a  place  of  assembly.  This  is  the  *'  Broadstone "  at  Craigs  in 
Antrim. J  This  monument  was  formerly  resorted  to  as  a  place  for 
games  and  picnics,  a  custom  in  which  we  may  recognize  the 
survival  of  the  celebration  of  games  and  the  holding  of  an  Oenack 
or  fair,  at  venerated  places  of  sepulture.  The  dolmen  in  this  case 
was  said  to  be  the  grave  of  a  giant,  while  three  pillar-stones  to  the 
North  were  those  of  his  three  friends. 

The  introduction  of  Christian  marriage  would  cause  the  pagan 
practice  to  be  held  in  abomination,  and  it  is  quite  conceivable  that 
in  order  to  discredit  it  and  bring  it  into  ridicule,  the  tale  of 
Grainne's  elopement  was  fostered  in  connection  with  those  monu- 
ments at  which  it  had  been  observed.  Certain  it  is  that  at  the 
present  day  the  Dermot  and  Crania's  Beds  are  associated  with 
runaway  couples,  and  illicit  unions  in  general.  This  is  well 
illustrated  by  the  following  account  of  Mr.  Dutton's  experiences 
when  in  search  of  the  Ballycasheen  dolmen  in  Clare.§  "  On 
inquiring  from  some  country  girls  near    Ballygannor  where   this 

t  p.  275.  I  p.  264. 

§  p.  78,  supra;  and  Dutton's  "  Surv.  of  Clare,"  p.  78. 


846  The  Dolmens  of  Ireland. 

celebrated  cromlech  was,  I  was  heartily  laughed  at  for  asking-  one 
of  them,  about  sixteen  years  of  age,  to  show  me  the  way  to  it. 
After  a  long  consultation  with  one  somewhat  older  than  herself — 
sometimes  with  very  serious  countenances,  often  with  smiling  ones, 
and  the  elder  using  a  good  deal  of  persuasion — she  agreed  to  go 
with  me,  if  she  zuas  certain  I  ivas  a  stranger,  and  she  knew  my 
name.  As  the  conversation  between  them  was  in  Irish,  which  I 
did  not  understand,  and  the  evening  was  growing  late,  I  became 
impatient,  and  very  ungallantly  rode  away.  When  I  had  ridden 
a  mile  farther,  I  made  the  same  inquiry  from  a  herd's  wife, 
and  at  the  same  time  told  her  how  I  had  been  laughed  at 
by  the  girls.  She  said,  No  wonder  for  them,  for  it  was  the 
custom  that  if  she  went  with  a  stranger  to  Darby  and  Grane's 
Bed,  she  was  certainly  to  grant  him  everything  he  asked."  From 
anecdotes  I  have  myself  heard,  as  well  as  from  covert  jokes  which 
I  have  noticed  passing  in  Irish  between  persons  who  have 
accompanied  me  to  dolmens,  I  am  sure  that  a  like  reputation 
attaches  to  these  monuments  still. 

From  pagan  times  comes,  however,  no  doubt,  the  widely  spread 
notion  that  dolmens  are  efficacious  in  cases  of  barrenness.  "  If 
a  woman,"  says  Mr.  Dutton,  "  proves  barren,  a  visit  with  her 
husband  to  Darby  and  Grane's  Bed  certainly  cures  her."  A 
similar  superstition  prevails  in  the  case  of  some  Welsh  dolmens,  in 
which  country  they  also  are  associated  with  illicit  and  clandestine 
meetings.  In  Brittany,  in  the  Pyrenees,  and  in  Spain,  megalithic 
monuments,  menhirs  especially,  are  resorted  to  by  lovers  in  order 
to  plight  their  troth. 

The  story  of  Dermot  and  Grainne,  or  Darby  and  Grace,  or 
Darby  and  Joan,  as  they  are  now  called,  is  so  like  that  of  Tammuz 
and  Astarte,  Adonis  and  Venus — Diarmaid,  like  Adonis,  being 
actually  killed  by  a  boar — and  other  recognized  Sun-Myths  of 
antiquity,  that  we  are  tempted  to  ask  whether,  in  the  name  of 
Grainne  herself,  we  have  not  an  allusion  to  Grian  (gen.  grene, 
grei'ne),  a  noun  substantive  feminine,  meaning  the  Sun. 

That  the  chief  luminary  was  worshipped  by  the  ancient  Irish 
there  can  be  no  doubt,  and  Mr.  Campbell  says  that  there  are 
many  Highland  customs  which  point  to  Solar  worship. f  The 
adoration  of  the  sun  is  referred  to  by  Patrick,^  according  to  the 


t  "Talcs  of  the  West  Highlands,"  xcvii. 

X  See  Whitley  Stokes,  "  Trip.  Life,"  vol.  ii.  p.  374. 


Names  and  Legends.  847 

writer  of  the  "  Tripartite  Life."  In  the  Sanas  Chormaic  f  the  word 
indelba  is  explained  to  mean  *'  the  names  of  the  altars  of  idols, 
because  they  were  wont  to  carve  on  them  the  forms  {delbd)  of  the 
elements  they  adored  there,  verbi  gratia,  figtirct  solis,  \.^.  figuir  na 
grdincr  It  seems  not  improbable  that  these  "  figures  of  the  Sun  " 
are  none  other  than  those  concentric  circles  which  appear  on  the 
stones  of  Aynia's  Cove,  at  Knocknaban  in  Donegal  and  elsewhere, 
but  which  are  to  be  differentiated  from  the  spiral  carvings,  as  at 
New  Grange,  which  are  more  probably  referable  to  Bronze  Age 
Art,  borrowed  from  southern  patterns,  and  are  purely  ornamental. 
Of  the  three  fabulous  kings  of  the  Tuatha  De  Danann,  in  the 
written  legends,  the  one  whose  wife  was  Eri,  was  called  Ceathoir 
or  Cethor,  and  also  Mac  Grene,  the  reason  of  the  latter  name  being 
that  he  chose  Grian  the  Sun  for  his  god. J  The  rather  clever 
notion  of  O'Brien  that  New  Grange  itself  bore  the  name  "  Cave 
of  the  Sun"  {^An  tlamh  GrHne)  is,§  I  believe,  unsupported  by 
documentary  evidence,  but  in  the  name  Carngrainy  ||  we  have  a 
distinct  association,  if  Dr.  Reeves  is  right,  of  the  name  of  the 
sun  with  a  dolmen.  "  The  name  of  the  Parish  of  Carngrany,"  he 
says,  "  is  derived  from  this  pagan  monument,  which  is  situated 
in  a  field  about  30  perches  N.  of  the  Rough  Fort,  a  rath  or 
tumulus,  giving  name  to  a  hamlet  in  Craigarogan,  to  the  W.  of 
which  is  the  old  graveyard  of  Carngrany  containing  a  portion 
of  v/hat  remains  of  the  old  church."  Dubourdieu  also  understood 
Carngrany  to  mean  "  Heap  of  the  Sun."  At  the  same  time  Dr. 
Reeves  also  says  that  *'  the  earn  is  commonly  called  Granny's 
Grave,  from  an  idea  that  some  giant  lies  buried  beneath  it."  It 
also  bears  the  names  "  Grany's  Bed"  and  "  Graine  Beacht." 

I  now  turn  to  other  examples  of  the  appearance  of  the  word 
grdine  (gen.  oi griaii)  in  connection  with  megaliths  and  venerated 
sites.  I  find  it  applied  to  the  centre  stone  of  a  circle,  to  a 
rocking-stone,  to  a  well  and  circle,  to  a  well  over  which  a  dolmen- 
like structure  has  been  built,  to  more  than  one  Cille  or  Kil,  to  a 
venerated  lake,  and  to  a  mountain. 

The  name  Clock  Griine,  "  Sun-stone,"  is  the  special  name 
given  locally  to  a  stone  measuring  3  feet  high  in  the  centre  of  a 
circle  at  Foherish  near  Macroom  in  Cork.    This  circle  is  mentioned 

+  Edit.  O'Donovan  and  W.  Stokes,  p.  94. 

t  Keating,  "Trans.  O'Mahony,"  p.  144. 

§  He  calls  it  Greiti-Uagh.     See  transl.  of  Villaneuva's  "  Phcenician  Ireland,"  p.  55,  note. 

11  p.  269,  supra,  and  Reeves'  "Antiqq.  of  Down  and  Connor,"  pp.  66,  3S3. 


848  The  Dolmens  of  Ireland. 

in  Smith's  "  History  of  Cork."  Windele  saysf  it  is  eight  paces  in 
diameter,  but  his  ground-plan  shows  it  to  be  rather  oval  than 
circular.  The  ring  is  formed  of  five  stones,  and  a  space  where 
probably  there  was  another.  The  clock  grdine  is  not  absolutely 
in  the  centre,  but  about  6  feet  from  one  end  of  the  oval.  One  stone 
of  the  ring  has  fallen.  The  heights  of  the  others  are  respectively 
I  foot,  6  feet,  i  foot  6  ins.  and  2  feet.  Windele  rather  destroys 
the  view  that  gi'Hne  necessarily  means  the  "  sun  "  by  remarking 
that  "in  Irish  clock  greine  is  the  name  of  any  quartz  rock."  He 
employs  this  word,  however,  to  designate  the  central  stone  in 
every  other  circle  in  Cork  \  in  which  this  feature  occurs,  as  in 
those  at  Knockcappanabowl,  Templebrian,§  etc. 

At  Byrrings  in  the  same  county  ||  is  a  rocking-stone  called 
Carrig-a-gkraiiie.  It  is  a  natural  rock,  13  feet  long,  7  feet  6  ins. 
broad,  and  3  feet  thick,  resting  upon  another.  A  sectional  sketch 
of  it  by  Windele  shows  it  to  be  very  similar  to  the  Cloch  Morhit 
in  SHgo,  of  which  Gabriel  Beranger  made  a  drawing.  Here  the 
name  seems  to  mean  "  Rock  of  the  Sun." 

At  Kilnagreina,  Cille  of  the  Sun,  also  in  Cork,  is  a  well,  a 
circle,  and  a  legend,  all  of  which  are  worthy  of  attention.  The 
late  Lady  Wilde  thus  describes  the  place  :  "  The  land  was  a 
desolate  marsh ;  no  one  built  on  it,  and  nothing  grew  on  it  or  near 
it.  But  a  large  grey  stone  lay  there,  with  a  natural  hollow  in  the 
centre  that  would  hold  about  a  gallon  of  water,  and  close  by  were 
the  ruins  of  an  old  pagan  fort.  One  day,  the  farmer  who  owned 
this  land  carried  off  the  great  stone  for  a  drinking-trough  for  his 
cattle.  The  cattle  grew  sick,  so  he  carried  it  back.  Thinking 
there  was  something  mysterious  about  the  place,  he  drained  the 
marsh,  and  found  an  ancient  stone-circle,  and  in  the  midst  was  a 
well  of  beautiful  fresh  water."  This  discovery  was  made  early  in 
the  present  century,  but  the  well  appears  to  have  been  known 
previously. 

A  tradition  existed  that  a  woman  called  Ban-na-Naomk, 
"  Woman  of  the  Saints,"  had  once  lived  there.  Saint  Patrick 
had  cursed  the  place  and  turned  it  into  a  marsh.  The  ritual 
observed  by  the  pilgrims  was  to  drink  three  draughts  of  water — 
three  drinks  at  a  draught — and   make  three   "  rounds "  on  their 

t  MS.,  "Cork  Topography,"  p.  375.  J  Id.,  p.  987. 

§  Windele,  MS.,  "Cork  W.  and  N.E.,"  pp.  608,  730,  with  drawings;  C.  Smith,  "History  of 
Cork,"  vol.  ii.,  p.  418. 

II  J.  Windele,  MS.,  "  Cork  Topography,"  p.  28. 


Names  and  Legends.  849 

knees.  They  thus  made  out  that  *'  the  circuit  of  the  well  was 
made  nine  times,"  although  how  I  do  not  see.  After  each  circuit 
the  pilgrim  laid  a  stone  on  the  rock  in  the  circle  (the  one  I 
suppose  which  the  farmer  removed),  called  "  The  Well  of  the  Sun." 
Such  stones  placed  by  devotees  are,  so  we  are  told,  named  in 
Irish  "Stones  of  the  Sun,"f  are  generally  pure  white,  and 
about  the  size  of  a  pigeon's  egg.  At  last,  the  revelry  which 
accompanied  this  pilgrimage  gave  rise  to  scandal,  and  Patrick's 
curse  being  remembered,  \hQ.  pattern  fell  into  disuse.  The  Ban-na 
Naomh  used  to  manifest  herself  in  the  form  of  a  trout. 

At  Ballycroum  J  in  the  County  of  Clare  is  the  Tober  Ghraine, 
before  mentioned,  200  yards  E.  of  the  dolmen  called  Altoir 
Olltach.  "Although,"  says  O'Donovan,  "not  named  after  any 
saint,  this  well  was  much  resorted  to  for  the  cure  of  sore  eyes." 
"  There  can  be  little  doubt,"  he  adds,  "  that  this  was  a  pagan  well, 
worshipped  by  the  hydrolaters  of  ancient  Ireland,  and  it  is  strange 
to  find  it  so  near  Lough  Greine,  which  seems  to  have  derived  its 
name  from  heliolatry"  Well-worship  and  sun-worship,  however, 
were  closely  allied,  as  we  might  bring  many  an  instance  from 
northern  folk-lore  to  show.  A  description  of  the  dolmen-like 
structure  of  this  Tober  Gkrame,  or  Sun-well,  has  been  previously 
given. 

At  a  place  called  Kilcreene  (?  Cille  Greine),  near  Kilkenny,  a 
cist  containing  calcined  bones  was  found. § 

The  name  Altoir-na-Greine,  "  Altar  of  the  Sun,"  at  Knocka- 
lassa,||  on  Mount  Callan  in  Clare,  cannot  be  received  as  genuinely 
ancient.  That  of  the  lake,  however,  near  it,  and  a  little  higher 
up  the  mountain,  namely,  Loughbooley-na-Greine  undoubtedly  is 
so.  A  beautiful  city  lies  "enchanted"  in  this  lake.  Mr.  Comyn 
mentions  that  the  natives  assembled  on  Mount  Callan  on  the 
first  of  May  every  year,  and  held  a  festival.  I  was  informed  that 
on  Midstimmer  Eve  parties  resorted  to  the  summit,  and  danced 
and  lighted  a  bonfire.  In  either  case  the  custom  would  be  derived 
from  a  primitive  solar  cultus. 

We  must  be  careful  not  to  confuse  either  the  name  of  Grainne 
wife  of  Finn,  or  that  of  Grian  the  sun,  with  the  word  grania 
found    in    the    place-names  Ballygrania,  Graniamore,   Graniaroe, 

t  See  dock  greine,  supra,  meaning  quartz.  Quartz  pebbles  are  often  found  with  interments  in 
Ireland.  In  the  King's  County  they  are  invariably  called  "god-stones."  ("  Journ.  R.H.A.A.  Ir.," 
4th  Ser,  vol.  i.  p.  27,  et  seqq.) 

X  p.  95-  §  "Proc.  Kilk.  Archseol.  Soc,"  vol.  iii.  p.  139.  1|  p.  79. 


S50  The  Dolmens  of  Ireland. 

etc.,  in  Sligo  and  elsewhere.f  A  hill  in  Wexford  called  Knock- 
Grdiiie  may  perhaps  only  mean  "  Sunny  Knoll." 

Mr.  Denham  Franklin  of  Cork  informs  me  that  the  witch  who 
presides  at  the  Leaba-na-Callighe  at  Glanworth,  was  the  wife  of 
a  chief-druid  and  mother  of  Cliodhna,  and  also  of  Kevin  (Evlin) 
her  sister,  whom,  according  to  the  legend  of  the  "  Carrig-Cleena  " 
(the  rock  on  the  shore  before  mentioned),  Cliodhna  threw  into 
a  trance,  in  order  that  she  might  marry  a  young  chieftain  who 
preferred  Kevin  to  her.  Another  legend  of  the  Leaba-na- 
Callighe,  however,  connects  it  with  Grainne,  and  it  bore  the  alias 
of  Diarmaid  and  Grainnes  bed.  The  story  differed  from  the 
common  version.  "  The  cave  formed  the  bed  of  the  pair.  One 
night  Grainne  awoke  and  missed  Diarmaid.  Filled  with  jealousy, 
she  looked  about,  and  raised  her  head  off  the  flag  to  the  west 
which  was  her  pillow/' — it  was  the  idea  here,  as  at  Drenthe,  that 
the  top  of  the  dolmen  was  the  bed  and  not  the  interior. 
"  Imagining  she  saw  Diarmaid  slipping  off,  she  took  her  sword 
which  lay  at  her  side,  and  aimed  a  blow  at  the  imagined  traitor, 
which,  proving  to  be  the  upright  stone  to  the  west,  left  an 
incision  in  it,  which  still  remains  to  testify  to  the  nerve  of  her 
arm.  She  returned  to  her  bed,  but  seeing  Diarmaid  running 
down  the  field,  she  took  a  large  stone,  and  threw  it  after  him,  and 
it  lies  in  the  rivulet  at  the  foot  of  the  hill.  The  fourteen  outer 
stones  are  supposed  to  be  Diarmaid  and  Grainne's  children."  J 

It  is  to  be  noticed  that,  in  telling  this  story,  the  peasantry  do 
not  call  Grainne  s  lover  Diarmaid,  but  Shearla  {i.e.  Charles),  and 
it  is  further  stated  that  a  proverb  arose  from  the  words  uttered 
by  Grainne,  when  she  found  that  he  had  escaped  the  quoit  she 
threw  after  him,  namely,  "Well,  bad  as  Shearla  is,  I  might  be 
worse  without  him,"  a  saying  which,  as  I  have  been  told,  the 
Irish  applied  to  Charles  the  First.  In  noticing  the  legends  of 
animals,  and  among  them  those  of  the  Black  Pig,  I  shall  have  again 
to  recur  to  the  story  of  the  Pursuit  of  Diarmaid  and  Grainne. 

Before  taking  leave  of  witches,  the  belief  in  which  and  in 
their  night-riding  around  the  raths  and  over  the  hedges  and 
housetops  is  still  far  from  extinct  in  Ireland,  I  may  mention  the 
survival  into  the  thirteenth  century  of  customs  connected  with  the 
ancient  worship  of  rural  female  divinities  in  the  neighbourhood  of 

t  See  Wood-Martin,  "  Rude  Stone  Monuments,"  p.  203. 
X  Windele,  J.,  "Topog.  of  Desmond,"  p.  17. 


Names  and  Legends.  851 

Lyons,  which  will  be  found  in  the  Anecdotes  of  Etienne  de 
Bourbon,  a  dominican  preacher,  published  by  M.  A.  Lecoy  de  la 
Marche.f  We  there  read  that  in  one  parish  it  was  the  custom  for 
boys  to  celebrate  the  vigil  of  the  parish  feast-day,  by  mounting  on 
the  back  of  a  wooden  horse,  and  "  larvati  et  parati," — painted 
and  equipped — to  lead  the  dance,  both  in  the  church  and  through 
the  burying-ground.  Old  hags  (vetulae)  painted  and  ornamented 
their  faces  as  if  they  were  idols,  in  order  that  they  might  appear 
like  the  masqueraders. 

The  preacher  found  some  difficulty  in  combating  these  ancient 
extravagances.  In  one  place  the  mayoress  (majorissa)  of  the 
town,  not  approving  of  the  dances  being  done  away  with,  led  the 
girls  of  the  place  herself  in  a  dance  at  the  church  door.  We  read 
that  in  the  diocese  of  Bisumptina  certain  lewd  fellows  (quidam 
ribaldi)  dressed  themselves  up  as  women,  and  entering  at  night 
the  house  of  a  peasant  with  torches  and  dances  sang  :  "  Unum 
accipe,  centum  redde."  They  then  cleared  the  house  of  every- 
thing removable,  saying  to  the  wife  as  they  went  out : — "  Tace,  et 
claude  oculos  ;  divites  erimus,  quia  bonce  res  sunt,  et  centuplicabunt 
bona  nostra,"  Stephen  connects  these  customs  directly  with  the 
"  error  illarum  mulierum  quae  dicunt  se  nocturnis  horis  cum  Diana 
et  Herodiade  et  aliis  personis,  quas  bo7ias  res  vocant,  ambulare,  et 
super  quasdam  bestias  equitare,  et  multa  terrarum  spatia  pertran- 
sire,  et  certis  noctibus  ad  dearum  servitium  evocari."  One  woman 
much  vexed  a  priest  by  telling  him  that  she  had  entered  his 
chamber  at  night  with  torches,  "  et  cum  bonis  rebics."  This  term 
bones  res  is  merely  the  Latin  for  the  French  "  bonnes  ckoses,"  a 
name  which  the  people  gave  to  witches  of  a  certain  class,  and 
which  is  said  to  be  a  corruption  of  Benesoze,  Bonesoze,  or 
Bensozia,  whose  alias  was  Herodiade. 

This  superstition  about  women  accompanying  a  goddess  or 
hag  through  the  night,  and  traversing  immense  spaces  on  animals, 
is  found  on  the  one  hand  in  Germany  and  Scandinavia,  and  on 
the  other  hand  in  Portugal,  It  seems  exactly  to  follow  the 
dolmens.  The  name  Diana  (whatever  it  really  was)  takes  the  place 
of  that  of  Trollkona,  the  protectress  and  companion  of  the  aerial 
flights  of  the  Scandinavian  witches.  To  the  weird  females  of 
the  Portuguese,  which  are  a  counterpart  of  these,  I  have  already 
alluded. 

t  "Societe  de  I'Histoire  de  France,"  "Stephanus  de  Borbone,"  1877,  op.  cit.  supra. 


852  The  Dolmens  of  Ireland. 

M.  A.  du  Mege  mentions  a  fragment  of  a  sepulchral  urn  found 
in  the  Pyrenees,  on  which  is  represented  the  figure  of  a  woman 
borne  on  a  horse  at  full  gallop,  the  lower  part  of  her  body  being 
bovine,  and  the  extremity  a  fish's  tail,  and  conjectures  that  it  is  a 
representation  of  one  of  these  divinities. 

The  terrible  instance  of  a  similar  superstition  prevailing  in 
Tipperary,  and  the  evidence  adduced  of  a  belief  in  witches  riding 
at  night  round  a  rath,  which  was  brought  to  light  only  two  years 
ago,  I  need  scarcely  cite,  since  it  made  a  deep  impression  at  the 
time,  and  is  fresh  in  the  memory  of  all  students  of  folk-lore. 

After  witches  we  naturally  turn  to  fairies.  These  are  either 
SidJie  or  Leprahaun ;  the  former,  the  little  divinities  of  mother 
earth,  the  dei  terreni,  of  the  natural  caves  in  the  hills,  and  the 
artificial  tombs  within  the  mounds,  the  spirits  of  the  dead  who 
were  let  loose  on  All- Hallow  E'en  or  Samhain ;  the  latter, 
little  fellows  inhabiting  natural  caves,  not  of  a  serious  but  a 
sportive  turn,  belonging  rather  to  light  comedy  than  to  a 
bygone  cultus  of  the  dead.  To  them  belonged  the  Carrig- 
na-Loo/ie2icaun,  the  Fairy  Rock  near  Loughnameenslaun  f  in 
Kerry,  said  by  Smith,  in  his  *'  History  of  Kerry,"  to  be 
"marked  with  tiny  footprints."  Their  name  it  is,  too,  which 
is  associated  with  a  small  artificial  cave  at  Ballinascarte  in 
Cork.J  Here  they  are  called  Luheragauns^  and  on  a  summer's 
evening  a  numerous  train  of  them  is  said  to  be  seen  to  enter 
the  cave  which  they  frequent,  and  which  Smith  thought  was 
probably  a  sepulchre.  Two  fields  above  Shanonvale  in  the  same 
county,  and  near  the  Templebrian  circle,§  is  another  of  their  caves 
from  which  they  have  been  seen  to  issue.  Bottle  Hill,  also  in 
Cork,  is  sacred  to  the  fairies,  too,  and  the  May- Fire  was  first 
kindled  on  it,  a  signal  to  other  hills. ||  They  may  be  compared 
with  the  fairies  called  Loupgarou,^  who  haunt  the  little  circles  in 
the  Pyrenees. 

They  had  their  kings  and  queens,  as  Finvarra,  Dalach,  and 
Medb,  and  probably  all  the  witches  were  royal  personages.  In 
Limerick,  local  legend  associates  a  venerated  hill,  Knock-Firine,ff 
with  Don  Firine,  "  a  benevolent  fairy,"  whose  palace  is  believed 
to  be  in  the  interior  of   it,  and  who    is    therefore  rather  to    be 

t  Windele,  J.,  MS.,  "  Jar  Muman,"  p.  328.     Compare  a  rock  in  Brandenburg  in  Bekmann. 
X  Chas.  Smith,  "Hist,  of  Cork,"  vol.  ii.  p.  419;  Windele,  J.,  MS.,  "Cork  W.  and  N.E.," 
P-  739- 

§  Id.,  pp.  608,  730,  II  Windele,  J.,  MS.,  vol.  marked  "  7,  Horgan  Papers,"  p.  449. 

Tf  p.  582.  tt  Brash,  *'  Ogam  Inscriptions,"  p.  23. 


Names  and  Legends.  853 

regarded  as  one  of  the  Tuatha  De  Danann  people  than  as  a 
Luprahaun,  or  Lucorpan,  or  Luheragaun,  although  the  two  are 
very  closely  allied. 

In  Galway,  at  Cranna,  is  a  stone  with  water-worn  hollows, 
and  also  with  crosses,  daggers,  and  V-shaped  marks  cut  into  it, 
which  the  peasantry  call  Cloch-a-sig-toraidheach,  explained  by 
Mr.  James  Graves,  "  Stone  of  the  Fruitful  Fairy."  f  In  Sligo, 
the  name  Sidhean  occurs  twice  at  least,  as  in  the  case  of  a  mound 
of  sugar-loaf  shape,  near  Ballymote,  called  Sidhean-a-Ghaire, 
which  Colonel  Wood- Martin  translates,  "  Fairy  Mound  of 
Laughter,"  but  which  may  mean  also,  "  of  the  Fortune-teller,"  or 
"  of  the  Reparation  ; "  and  again  in  that  of  the  Sheeawn  {sidhean) 
Hill,  near  Rathbarran,  where  a  cist  with  two  urns  was  found. J 
In  Wicklow,  the  dolmen  at  Mongnacool  §  is  called  Labba-na-sigha 
(Leaba-na-sigha),  Bed  of  the  Sidh,  called  in  English,  "  Fairy's 
Bed,"  and  the  same  name  is  repeated  at  Moylisha  in  the  same 
county. II 

What  the  Sidh,  or  Fairy  Palace  was,  as  distinct  from  the 
inhabitants,  who  also  bore  this  name,  we  can  gather  from  several 
of  the  ancient  tales.  The  following  will  be  sufficient.  It  is  from 
the  Echtra  Nerai,  which  seems,  says  M.  d'Arbois  de  Jubainville, 
to  be  an  episode  in  a  piece  called  the  Tain  Bo  Aingen,  the  fifth 
prefatory  tale  to  that  of  the  Tdin  Bo  Cuailnge. 

Ailell  and  Medb  were  celebrating  the  feast  of  Samain  in  their 
palace  of  Cruachan.  Two  culprits  had  been  executed  the  day 
previous,  and  their  bodies  were  left  suspended  upon  a  tree  till 
the  night  of  Samain  should  have  passed  off — for,  on  that  night, 
all  the  Sidhe  of  Erin  were  left  open  for  ingress  and  egress  for 
all.  It  was  held  to  be  a  wicked  and  dangerous  act  to  meddle 
with  the  remains  of  the  dead  on  the  night  of  Samain,  as  the 
demons  and  the  people  of  the  Sidh  were  at  large  over  the 
world,  and  were  supposed  to  pay  particular  attention  to  the 
bodies  of  the  dead,  and  to  surround  the  places  where  they  were 
deposited. 

To  test  the  courage  of  his  household,  Ailell  offered  his  own 
gold-hilted  sword  to  any  young  warrior  who  would  go  and  tie  a 
gad  (coil  of  twisted  twigs)  upon  the  leg  of  one  of  the  culprits 
hanging  on  the  tree.     Several  tried,  but  were  disheartened  by  the 

t  "Trans.  Kilk.  Archaeol.  Soc,"  vol.  v.  (1864-5).     Paper  by  the  Rev.  Jas.  Graves. 
X  "  R.S.M.I.,"  pp.  207,  211.  §  p.  413.  jl  p.  414. 


854  The  Dolmens  of  Ireland. 

legions   of  demons,    and   men   of  the    Sidh.       At   leneth    Nera 
performed  the  feat,  and  then  his  "  Echtra,"  i.e.  adventures,  began. 

He  follows  a  strange  host  of  men,  and  enters  the  cave  of 
Cruachan,  and  goes  into  the  "  Sidh  of  the  Cave," — by  which  it 
would  seem  that  an  allusion  to  the  chamber  of  a  chambered 
tumulus  is  to  be  implied. 

Nera  was  seized  and  taken  before  the  king  and  the  chief 
persons  of  the  Sidh,  in  the  palace  of  the  Tuatha  De  Danann, 
which  was  supposed  to  exist  within  the  cave.  He  is  sentenced  to 
serve  the  people  of  the  Sidh,  and  marries  one  of  them,  who  tells 
him  about  a  well  near  the  mansion,  wherein  was  kept  the  barr  or 
mind,  i.e.  diadem  of  gold,  which  the  king  wore  on  his  head. 
Finally  he  escapes,  and  brings  to  Ailell  and  Medb  such  glowing 
accounts  of  the  Sidh  and  its  treasures,  as  induce  them,  in  company 
with  an  Ulster  champion,  on  the  following  November  Eve,  to 
plunder  the  cave,  and  possess  themselves  of  all  its  treasures, 
including  the  three  prime  jewels  of  Erin,  namely,  the  CHach 
Loegaire,  the  Eineack  Du7tlaing,  and  the  Barr  Briuinn.\ 

Other  tales  represent  the  bright  lights,  the  decorations  and 
the  treasures  which  adorned  the  interiors  of  these  fairy  mansions 
— the  abodes  of  either  the  spirits  or  the  divinities  of  the  dead. 

The  resemblance  between  the  Feast  of  Samain  when  the  dead 
returned  to  visit  their  friends,  and  were  entertained  by  them,  and 
the  great  festivals  formerly  held  in  the  Sinto  temples  of  Japan,  as, 
for  example,  at  Nikko,  where  thousands  of  lanterns  were  lighted, 
each  one  representing  the  spirit  of  an  ancestor,  and  where 
masquerading  and  revelry  took  place  for  the  diversion  of  the 
spirits  then  visiting  the  world,  is  very  remarkable  and  significant 
of  a  primitive  unity  of  cultus.  An  account  of  such  festivals,  and 
of  the  splendid  ritual  accompanying  them,  will  be  found  in  verse 
in  the  "Ancient  Book  of  China"  called  the  "  She  King."  J  It  is 
in  that  country  and  in  Japan  that  the  worship  of  the  dead,  once 
practised  throughout  the  entire  northern  and  western  portion  of 
the  Europeo-Asiatic  continent,  attained  its  highest  developments, 
and  has  survived  the  longest. 

I  next  pass  to  such  legends  as  connect  megalithic  remains 
with  animals,  real  and  mythical,  commencing  with — 

t  For  this  tale  see  MS.,  T.C.D.,  H,  2,  6,  col.  658,  662  (the  Yellow  Book  of  Lecain) ;  see  also 
O'Curry,  M.  and  C,  iii.,  199  ;  and  M.M.  App.  586  n. ;  also  "  Proc.  R.I. A.,"  1879  (Pol.  Lit.  and 
Antiqq.),  p.  222. 

X  Legge's  translation,  "She  King,"  Prologotnena,  c.  iv.  (vol.  i.  p.  162),  and  the  odes  there 
referred  to. 


Names  and  Legends.  855 

The  Pig. 

No  legends  are  more  widely  diffused  throughout  Ireland, 
and  none  seem  to  have  at  their  root  a  more  definite  far-away 
historic  allusion,  than  those  which  relate  to  the  race  of  enchanted 
pigs,  with  whom  heroes  and  dogs  were  for  ever  contending. 
One  of  the  most  remarkable  examples  of  such  tales  is  that 
which  was  connected  with  '*  a  large  megalithic  monument "  at 
Kilamucky — the  Cille  of  the  Pig — near  Castle  Martyr  in  Cork. 
Col.  Wood-Martin  cites  it  as  follows  :  "  Long  ages  ago  the  race  of 
pigs  increased  throughout  Erin  to  such  an  extent  that  at  length 
the  people  assembled  and  destroyed  them  all  except  a  boar  and 
two  sows  that  lived  at  Imokily,  a  barony  in  Cork,  stretching  from 
Cork  Harbour  to  Youghal  Harbour.  These,  being  magical  pigs, 
escaped  all  snares  laid  for  them,  and  kept  the  surrounding 
country  in  terror  by  their  depredations.  When  the  first  of  the 
Geraldines  came  to  Ireland,  he  determined  to  kill  the  monster, 
and  he  succeeded  in  his  attempt,  but,  unfortunately,  left  the 
animal  uninterred,  and  the  decay  of  the  carcase  occasioned  a 
pestilence  which  swept  away  the  people  by  thousands.  The 
remains  of  the  boar  were  then  buried,  and  the  large  megalithic 
monument — destroyed  in  1844 — erected  over  it."f 

At  Kilfadamore,  near  Bantry,  in  the  same  county,  is  a  remark- 
able natural  fissure,  or  trench,  called  Clash-na-mucky  {Clais-na- 
mtiice),  "  Furrow  of  the  Pig,"  evidently  deriving  its  name,  says 
Windele,J  from  the  common  legend  of  the  Pursuit  of  the 
Black  Pig. 

Not  far  from  the  dolmen  called  Collaheen-a-chladdig,  also  in 
Cork,  is  a  little  lake  only  about  30  yards  in  diameter,  called 
Lochaim-a-Mucka-dee  (lochan-na-muice-duibh),  "  Lakelet  of  the 
Black  Pig."  § 

Within  about  a  mile  from  Macroom,  not  far  from  the  Mill- 
street  Road,  is  another  Clash-na-Mucka'Dhee,  with  a  legend 
relating  to  an  animal  of  supernatural  power.  The  tale,  as  given 
in  this  locality,  is  thus  told  by  Windele  :  ||  "  Whilst  Diarmaid  was 
sojourning  with  Grainne,  the  fugitive  wife  of  Finn,  at  a  Labba 
DiarmuidyWQdiV  Carriganimmy  (which  I  heard  was  a  natural  cave), 

t  '*  Rude  Stone  Monuments,"  pp.  231,  232,  quoting  Mr.  W.  Hackett. 
X  MS.,  "Jar  Muman,"  p.  347. 
§  J.  Windele,  MS.,  "  Cork  W.  and  N.E.,"  p.  76S. 

II  MS.,  "Cork  Topog.,"  p.  557.     The  trench  here  also  is  natural,  running  partly  between  rocks 
for  some  distance. 


856 


The  Dolmens  of  Ireland. 


the  potent  Black  Boar  passed  his  retreat,  and  Diarmaid's  hunting 
propensity  being  aroused,  he  sallied  forth  and  gave  chase.  The 
colloch  f  gallantly  led  for  some  miles,  but  could  see  from  time 
to  time  that  Diarmaid,  who  was  remarkably  swift  of  foot,  was 
pressing  closer  upon  his  track.  Rage,  however,  urged  the 
ferocious  animal  onward,  and,  as  he  went  along,  with  his  tusks 
he  ploughed  the  ground,  rocks  and  earth  alike.  At  length  Diar- 
maid overtook  him  near  Gurteenard.  The  bristles  of  the  animal 
were  poisonous,  and,  as  Diarmaid  caught  him,  he  was  wounded  in 
the  hand,  whereupon  he  sucked  his  thumb,  which  inspired  him 
with   knowledge,    and    he   learned  that,   if  he  drank   three   cups 


Fig.  699. — Bronze  plaques,  found  in  Oland  ;  three-fourths  real  size.     From  Da  Chaillu. 
See  p.  725,  sttpra,  and  Fig.  yoOjJ  infra. 

of  water  of  a  well  which  was  near,  he  could  be  cured.  He  there- 
upon repaired  to  the  well,  and  had  taken  two  of  the  cups,  when 
his  long-pursuing  enemy,  Finn,  came  up,  with  his  Fenians,  and 
discovered  him.  Conan  then  said  tauntingly  to  Finn,  '  Give  him 
the  third  cup  ;  you  owe  him  this  kindness  for  many  a  kiss  he 
has  given  your  wife.'  Finn  was  about  complying,  but  his  hand 
trembled  so  violently  that  the  water  fell  from  it,  and  Diarmaid 
died."  We  have  already  noticed  the  tumulus  §  at  Moragh,  where 
the  hero  was  said  to  have  been  buried. || 

The  whole  of  the  south-western  portion  of  Ireland  is  indeed 
full  of  the  legend  of  this  pursuit.  A  place  called  Caislaneen 
Sidhe  Feen,  a  heap  of  stones  on  the  top  of  Maulanimirish,^  is 


t  Cullach  =  "  a  boar,"  but  also  the  male  of  other  animals,  as  ech-cullach,  "  a  stallion,"  and 
cullach,  alone,  with  the  same  meaning  as  ^^ cullach,  i.e.  ech  bretnach,"  British  horse.  (See  Cormac 
and  O'Davoren.) 

X  Note  the  remarkable  likeness  between  the  pigs  on  the  helmets  in  the  first  of  these  plaques 
and  the  lower  one  from  the  Scythian  tomb.  Fig.  700,  infra  ;  note  also  the  likeness  of  the  mask  in 
the  second  plaque  to  one  found  in  Banffshire,  "Proc.  Soc.  Ant.  Scot.,"  vol.  vii. 

§  87  feet  long  and  12  feet  high. 

II  Windele,  J.,  MS.,  "  Cork  W.  and  N.E.,"pp.  527,  602.  f  Id.,  p.  854. 


Names  and  Legends.  857 

pointed  out  as  a  spot  where  Finn  stopped.  To  an  earlier 
part  of  the  romance  belongs  the  tale  told  to  Windele  about 
a  ford  in  the  Glounteen  Assig,  or  Glen  of  the  Waterfall,  in  Kerry, 
where  Grainne  made  her  celebrated  answer  to  the  modest  Diar- 
maid,  who  had  remarked  that  the  water  had  splashed  her.f  At 
a  convenient  distance  one  of  their  leabas  is  pointed  out. 

An  artificial  trench,  called  the  Cldidhe  Rtiadk,  "  Red  Ditch," 
seemingly  an  ancient  boundary,  runs  from  Cahir  Carbree,  near 
Kerry  Head,  towards  the  Cashin  River.J  Thence  it  passes 
across  Knock-Kanure,  and  enters  the  County  of  Limerick.  It 
apparently  enclosed  a  piece  of  sea-coast,  and  passed  a  town  called 
Ballyduff.  It  was  probably  connected,  as  trenches  in  other 
districts  are,  with  the  story  of  the  Black  Pig.  It  would  be  of 
some  ethnological  importance  to  carefully  trace  in  the  map  these 
ancient  boundaries  wherever  they  occur.  It  would  not  be 
improbable  that  the  result  would  be  the  discovery  that  they 
formed  the  boundaries  of  those  tribes  which  legend  represents 
by  the  race  of  the  Black  Pigs.  There  is  another  of  these  trenches 
called  Cloidhe  Dubh  (Clee-Duff)  in  Waterford.§  Doubtless  the 
pig  story  once  obtained  there,  but,  as  it  is  told  of  a  cow,  I  reserve 
it  for  the  present. 

A  dolmen  in  the  Townland  of  Carriganaffrin  in  Cork  bore  the 
name,  according  to  one  of  Windele's  informants,  Leaba  na  Muicce, 
"  Bed  of  the  Pig."  ||  The  name  of  the  place  seems  to  be  Carrig- 
an-Afrionn,  "  Rock  of  the  Mass,"  ^  perhaps  from  a  story  that 
Mass  was  celebrated  at  the  dolmen  during  the  days  of  the  Penal 
Code. 

We  have  already  noticed  the  name  Cathair  Mliic  Toirc,  the 
scene  of  a  traditionary  battle  at  Nymphsfield,  near  Cong — Tore, 
meaning  a  boar,  and  indicating,  perhaps,  rather  a  tribal  divinity 
or  totem  than  a  personal  name. 

In  Clare,  although  the  name  Leaba  Diarmada  agus  Grainne 
has  been  so  generally  retained,  the  legend  is  almost  forgotten. 
The  county  of  Sligo,  on  the  other  hand,  is  as  full  of  stories  of  the 
Pursuit  and  the  incident  of  the  Black  Pig  as  is  Cork.  The 
dolmen  at  Carrownagh  was  said  to  have  been  the  grave  of  a  man 


t  Windele,  J.,  MS.,  "Jar  Miiman,"  p.  io6. 

i  "Chas.  Smith,  "  Hist,  of  Kerry,"  p.  219. 

§  Chas.  Smith,  "Hist,  of  Waterford,"  p.  355. 

II  J.  Windele,  MS.,  "  Topog.  of  Kerry,"  p  523. 

i  See  what  has  previously  been  said  about  dolmens  and  altars,  p.  761,  nipra. 

VOL.  in.  L 


858  The  Dolmens  of  Ireland. 

called  Darby.  Others  said  that  two  people  lived  here,  namely, 
Dermot  and  Grainne,  but  the  lady  was  not  Dermot's  wife. 
Dermot  was  a  very  strong  man — a  giant,  in  fact, — for  one  day, 
when  his  horses  went  up  the  adjacent  mountain-side,  and  got 
sunk  in  the  bog,  he  pulled  them  out,  and  carried  them  home,  one 
under  each  arm.  The  dolmen  at  Castlecarragh  was  said  to  have 
been  the  burial-place  of  the  same  pair,  who  had  lived  on  the 
shores  of  Lough  Talt.f 

I  have  already  noticed  the  curious  enclosure  called  Patrick's 
Altar,  at  Cloonmucduff.  The  name  of  this  place,  according  to 
Col.  Wood-Martin,  means  "  Holm  of  the  Black  Pig,"  "  whose 
deeds  and  death,"  he  adds,  "form  a  fruitful  subject  for  the 
Shanachies  not  only  in  this  locality,  but  in  several  other  places 
in  Sligo."  The  pig  was  killed  close  to  Collooney.  In  the  west 
part  of  Muckdufif  townland  is  a  mound  called  "  The  Grave  of  the 
Black  Pig,"  which  was  raised  over  it  after  it  had  been  killed. J 

O'Donovan  thus  gives  the  story  of  the  chase  as  told  by  the 
people  in  Sligo  :  "  On  the  day  that  Finn  Mac  Cumhail,  the  King 
of  the  Fians,  was  married  to  Grainne,  the  wedding-dinner  was 
prepared  by  the  celebrated  Diarmaid.  This  Diarmaid  had  on  his 
breast  a  mold,  which  had  the  enchanted  power  of  causing  any 
woman  who  saw  it  to  fall  in  love  with  him.  Diarmaid,  becoming 
heated  at  his  work,  threw  off  his  clothes  and  exposed  the  mold, 
which  Grainne  seeing,  fell  so  desperately  in  love  with  him  that 
she  followed  him  whithersoever  he  went.  He  and  Grainne  ran 
off  no  one  knew  where. 

"  Finn  pursued  them  in  vain  for  twelve  months  through 
mountains,  etc.  He  at  length  discovered  by  his  prophetic 
powers  that  the  only  means  by  which  he  could  find  out  where 
they  were,  was  by  the  Seilg  a  Ttiirc,  or  Chase  of  the  Pig.  This 
he  knew  would  succeed,  as  Diarmaid  always  joined  a  hunt  when- 
ever he  heard  the  noise  of  hounds. 

"  Finn  Mac  Cumhail  went  to  a  nephew  of  his  in  the  County 
Clare,  and  got  from  him  a  wild-boar,  which  he  put  into  a  pit  in 
the  ground,  placing  over  him  a  large  flag  (rock),  and  giving  orders 
that  he  should  not  be  let  out  until  he  himself  (the  boarj  should 
by  his  rage  break  through  all  incumbrances.     Finn  left  several 

t  Wood-Martin,  R.S.M.,  pp.  202,  214. 

X  O.S.L.,  ,  pp.  272  and  402.     This  tumulus  measures  125  feet  in  circumference,  8  feet  in 

height,  39  feet  in  diameter  N.  and  S.,  and  35  feet  E.  and  W. 


Names  and  Legends.  859 

hounds  in  different  places,  some  at  Killabo,  others  at  Portumna  in 
the  county  Galway,  at  Jamestown,  and  all  along  the  Shannon,  so 
that  the  pig  might  not  escape.  The  boar  removed  the  flag,  and 
got  out  of  the  pit.  Finn  pursued  him  with  his  hounds  until  they 
came  to  the  place  where  Diarmaid  was.  Diarmaid  heard  the 
hounds  and  joined  the  hunt,  though  warned  by  Grainne  to  remain 
at  home. 

"This  was  at  a  place  called  Beal  Ath-Grainne  (*  entrance,'  lit. 
*  mouth  of  the  ford  of  Grainne  '),  less  than  half  a  mile  E.  of 
Collooney.  Diarmaid  ran  out.  The  pig  ran  under  and  between 
his  legs,  and  brought  him  to  a  well  called  Tober-na-Bostel,  near 
Ben  Bulben,  where  he  fell  off  the  pig's  back,  and  was  severely 
hurt.  Finn  came  up  and  asked  him,  *  Could  anything  give  him 
relief?'  Diarmaid  told  him  there  was  a  thing  which  could  cure 
liim,  but  which  he  could  not  get.  He  bade  Finn  go  to  a  certain 
place  and  draw  a  bunch  of  rushes,  saying,  *  A  spring-well  will 
arise,  three  drinks  of  which  will  cure  me.'  While  Finn  was 
away,  Diarmaid  pulled  the  pig  in  two  by  the  hind  legs,  and  the 
pig  ripped  him  up  in  the  middle.  Both  died,  and  Finn,  having 
b)rought  the  water  of  the  well  in  his  hand,  and  being,  agreeably  to 
himself,  too  late,  let  the  water  slip  through  his  fingers,  whence  the 
name  of  the  well,  Tobar-na-bostel.  He  then  cut  off  the  head  of 
Diarmaid  from  his  trunk,  and  brought  it  to  Grainne,  to  Beal- 
Ath-Grainner 

There  is  another  version  which  represents  Finn  as  according 
to  his  runaway  spouse  a  "  pretended  forgiveness,"  and  granting 
to  her  lover  and  herself  a  piece  of  land.  The  episode  of  the  boar 
follows  this. 

There  are  also  one  or  two  traditional  stories  which  bear  on  the 
romance  of  Diarmaid  and  Finn.  "  It  is  said  that  Diarmaid's  son, 
by  Grainne,  was  at  nurse  with  a  pig-boy  in  an  island  in  the  lake  at 
Templeavanny.  Diarmaid  went  to  visit  his  child,  and  perceiving 
that  the  pig-boy's  child  was  as  true  a  child  as  his  own,  squeezed 
his  brains  out.  The  pig  -  herd  then  took  a  little  pig,  and, 
throwing  it  outside  the  door,  prayed  that  Diarmaid  might  not 
live  longer  than  the  pig,  which  came  to  pass  in  his  being  killed 
soon  after  by  the  pig  in  the  Chase." 

The  special  legend  still  current  about  the  tumulus  at  Mucduff 
is  given  by  Col.  Wood-Martin  as  follows  :  "  There  was  many 
years  ago  in   the   North  of  Ireland  an  enormous  magical  boar. 


86o  The  Dolmens  of  Ireland. 

which  committed  great  devastations  throughout  the  country,  so 
much  so  that  all  the  hunters  in  the  kingdom  assembled  with  the 
determination  to  pursue  the  animal  until  they  had  succeeded  in 
killing  it.  The  chase  was  sustained  until  the  boar,  finding  the 
province  of  Ulster  to  be  uncomfortable  quarters,  made  off  from  it, 
but  was  overtaken  in  the  Valley  of  the  Black  Pig,  a  little  vale 
in  the  County  of  Sligo,  situated  partly  in  the  Townland  of 
Mucduff,  and  partly  in  the  neighbouring  denomination.  Here 
the  boar  turned  at  bay,  and  was  slain  on  the  spot,  where 
he  was  subsequently  buried.  His  pursuers  stood  around  leaning 
on  their  spears,  and  viewing  with  amazement  the  vast  pro- 
portions, and  the  length  and  strength  of  the  bristles  with 
which  he  was  covered.  One  of  the  hunters  incautiously  stroked 
the  skin  the  wrong  way,  thereby  causing  a  venomous  bristle  to 
prick  his  hand,  and  he  at  once  fell  down  writhing  in  agony,  and 
beseeching  his  companions  to  bring  him  water  from  a  neigh- 
bouring well  to  assuage  his  unbearable  thirst.  None,  however, 
could  succeed  in  conveying  him  the  liquid,  for,  by  some  magical 
property  attached  to  the  spring,  no  human  being  could  carry 
water  from  it  in  the  hollow  of  his  hands,  as  it  always  escaped 
through  the  fingers  ;  and  for  this  cause  the  well  has  ever  since 
borne  the  name  of  Tubber^iawustony  \ 

A  cairn  in  the  Townland  of  Knockadoo  gives  to  it  that  name, 
namely,  Knoll  of  the  Black  (Pig),  in  allusion  to  the  same 
legend.  J 

On  the  Hill  of  Kesh,  in  the  barony  of  Corran,  also  in  Sligo,  is 
a  great  cairn,  1200  feet  above  the  sea-level,  measuring  280  feet 
around  the  base,  and  24  feet  across  the  top.  It  bears  the  name 
Ceis  Coraindy  so  O'Donovan  heard,  from  Cael-Cheis  \i.e.  Caol- 
Ceis  =  small  sow],  a  famous  pig  who  was  chased  and  killed 
there.  The  tale  was  still  told  there  at  the  time  of  the  Survey, 
under  the  title  of  Seilg-na-Chdise,  Pursuit  of  the  Sow.  In  the 
Dindshenchas  Cdol-Ceis  is  the  name  of  the  fifth  of  Derbrenn's 
Swine  who,  when  the  herd  were  dispersed,  got  to  Ceis  Coroinn, 
and  there  died.§  These  swine  of  Derbrenn  were  six  in  number, 
and  were  foster-children,  "  when  they  were  human  beings,"  of 
Derbrenn,  daughter  of  Eochaid  Fedlech.  Three  of  them  were 
boars,  and  three  were  sows,  and  their  names,  both  previous  and 

t  R.S.M.,  p.  230.  X  Id.,  p.  212. 

§  Whitley  Stokes,  "  Rev.  Celt,''  vol.  xv.  p.  477. 


Names  and  Legends.  86  i 

subsequent  to  their  magical  transformation,  will  be  found  in  the 
Dindshenchas  of  Dumae  Selga,  "  The  Mound  of  Hunting."  f 

In  the  Valley  of  Glanturk  near  Oranmore,  in  Galway,  is 
a  well  called  Tobar  -  na  -  m  -  bosdtibh,  or  Tobar-na-m-bostabhan, 
or  Tobar-na-nmrtabhdn.X  "  According  to  local  tradition,"  says 
O'Conor,  *'  this  well  is  so  designated  [we/l  of  the  black  palms 
or  Jingers),  from  the  following  occurrence :  There  was  formerly 
in  Gleanntuirc  (Boar's  Valley)  a  wild  boar,  which  threatened 
all  the  neighbouring  people  with  destruction.  This  animal 
ferociously  attacked  every  other  one  that  came  in  his  way, 
and,  by  tearing  up  the  earth,  excavated  the  valley,  or  rather 
hollow,  now  named  after  him.  He  was  encountered  by  one 
of  the  giants  who  flourished  formerly  in  Ireland,  and,  in  the 
heat  of  the  conflict,  darting  his  tusk  through  the  finger  of 
the  antagonist's  hand,  wounded  him  severely,  in  consequence 
of  which  the  giant  desisted  from  the  conflict,  and,  being  in 
great  agony,  sought  to  procure,  as  a  remedy  for  the  wound, 
some  water  from  the  well.  Some  persons  who  were  about  the 
place  where  he  lay  under  his  sufferings  went  to  this  well,  and 
having  no  kind  of  vessel  in  which  they  could  convey  the  water, 
they  contrived  to  carry  a  little  of  it  in  the  palms  of  their 
hands,  from  which  circumstance  the  well  received  its  name."  § 

It  was  at  Doonard  in  the  County  of  Galway, ||  among  other 
places,  that  Finn  Mac  Cumhail  was  traditionally  said  to  have  been 
buried.  In  Crossboyne  Parish  in  Mayo,  at  the  ruined  church  of 
Cloonmore,  is  the  Geata-na-Sgread, — the  "  Gate  of  the  Screams," — 
said  to  be  so  called  from  a  battle  fought  there  between  Danes  and 
Irish.  Near  it  was  the  entrance  to  a  cave  said  to  run  underground 
to  Doonard,  the  place  of  Finn's  burial. 

The  legend  of  Diarmaid  and  Grainne  was  remembered  in 
connection  with  the  dolmen  at  Mohar  in  Aran.^  Diarmaid,  they 
said,  was  the  handsomest  man  in  Ireland,  and  when  he  eloped 
with  Grainne,  the  daughter  of  Cormac  Mac  Art  and  Finn's  wife, 
the  pair  were  away  for  a  year  and  a  day  before  Finn  could  find 
them.  During  this  period  the  couple  never  slept  the  second 
night   under   the   same  roof,  but  constantly  moved  about   from 

t  Whitley  Stokes,  "  Rev.  Celt,"  vol.  xv.  p.  471.  %  bos  =  the  palm  of  the  hand  ;  meiir  =  a  finger. 

14 
§  MS.,  O.S.L.,  Co.  Galway,  =t — ,  p.  312. 

14 
II  O.S.L.,  Co.  Mayo,  ^^-,  p.  454.  t  p.  108. 


862  The  Dolmens  of  Ireland. 

territory  to  territory,  and  every  night  Diarmaid  erected  one 
of  these  beds  of  stone  to  shelter  Grainne  from  the  inclemency 
of  the  weather. 

At  Athleague  in  Roscommon  there  was  a  legend  that  a  large 
stone  in  the  ford  (whence  the  name  al/i-\i3.g)  had  been  flung 
thither  by  Finn  from  Slieve  Murray.f  In  the  same  county,  near 
Granard,  is  the  Valley  of  the  Black  Pig,  locally  called  the 
"  Duncla," — "  Duncladh,"  says  O'Donovan,  meaning  "a  rampart 
of  earth."  J 

In  the  very  centre  of  the  town  of  Elphin  was  a  great  stone 
which,  about  four  years  before  the  date  of  the  Survey,  had  been 
broken  to  pieces,  O'Donovan  tells  us,  "by  a  booby  of  a  shop- 
keeper." According  to  Keogh,  who  wrote  in  1683,  it  had  been 
thrown  thither  by  Finn  Mac  Cumhail.  There  was  an  old 
superstition  regarding  this  rock  that  if  it  were  removed  from  its 
place  water  would  issue  from  the  spot  and  inundate  the  town.§ 
An  identical  superstition  with  regard  to  Toulouse  attached  to  a 
rock  called  the  Pierre  Blanche  in  the  Pyrenees. (|  It  is  very 
remarkable  to  observe  that  Ail-Fionn  (Elphin)  means  Pierre 
Blanche  in  Irish.  O'Flaherty  states  that  the  stone,  which  fell  in 
his  time,  stood  over  the  Well  of  Elphin. 

The  Pig  legends  of  the  eastern  parts  of  Ireland  differ  some- 
what from  those  of  the  west.  Finn  was  supposed  to  have  had 
his  home  in  Glen  Smoil  in  the  County  of  Dublin,^  and  Diarmaid 
O'Duibhne  was  held  to  have  been  a  native  of  Westmeath. 
O'Conor,  in  his  notes  on  the  latter  county,  states  his  opinion 
that  it  is  probable  that  this  is  the  locality  which  was  mentioned 
in  the  original  version  of  the  legend  about  him,  and  that  in  other 
parts  of  Ireland  the  story-tellers  have  distorted  names  in  order 
to  make  their  neighbourhood  in  each  case  the  theatre  of  his 
adventures. 

On  Sliabh-na-maoile,  a  remarkable  hill  and  rocky  precipice 
in  Westmeath,  is  a  "  Dermot  and  Grainne's  Bed."  In  the  Parish 
of  Castlepollard  ff  is   a   pool   called   Pollgeir,  over  which    is   an 

t  MS.  O.S.L.,  Co.  Roscommon,        -,  p.  28.  J  Id.,  p.  215. 

F.    8 

§  IJ-._      -■,  P-  2.  II  See  account  from  "Alex,  du  Mcge,"  p.  587,  supra. 

t  O.S.L.,  Co.  Dublin,  „ ,  p.  45. 

U.  23 

14 
tt  O.S.L.,  Co.  Westmeath,  .,      ^,  pp.  192,  193,  285,  290. 
L..  Ij 


Names  and  Legends.  865 

excavation  called  also  "Dermot  and  Grainne's  Bed."  The  country- 
people  point  out  where  Diarmaid's  arms  were  deposited  near 
his  bed,  and  a  cave  at  Raheen  is  said  to  terminate  in  it. 

In  the  lawn  opposite  Mr.  Pollard's  hall-door  was  the  "  Well 
of  Kinturk"  mentioned  in  the  written  story,  the  legend  here 
being  that  it  was  from  tJiis  well  that  Finn  carried  the  water 
between  his  hands  to  Diarmaid,  which  was  the  cause  of 
Diarmaid's  praying  that  henceforth  no  man  should  ever  be  able 
to  carry  water  between  his  hands. 

It  is  as  well  to  note  also  that  this  is  the  country  of  a  holy 
Diarmaid.  There  was  in  Westmeath  in  ancient  days  a  saint  as 
well  as  a  sinner  of  the  name.  In  the  Parish  of  Faughallstown 
there  is  a  well  called  Tobar-Naoimh-Diarmada,  "St.  Dermot's 
Well,"  and  there  are  other  wells  in  the  same  vicinity  bearing  the 
same  name.f 

In  Louth  we  have,  again,  the  story  of  a  Black  Pig  in  con- 
nection with  a  trench,  here  called  Mota-7ia-Mtiicce  Diiibh.X  It  is 
told  as  follows :  "  Several  centuries  ago  at  least  a  schoolmaster 
in  Drogheda,  whose  name  is  not  remembered,  having  metamor- 
phosed two  of  his  pupils  into  dogs,  set  them  to  fight,  in  which 
engagement  one  of  them  was  killed.  The  father  of  the  boy 
who  was  killed,  impatient  because  his  son  did  not  return  from 
school  at  the  usual  hour,  went  to  look  for  him,  and  having  first 
questioned  the  schoolmaster  concerning  him,  and  meeting  with 
no  satisfactory  account,  except  some  pedantic  reproaches  and 
menaces  of  being  treated  as  his  son  had  been,  he  being  enraged, 
changed  the  schoolmaster  into  a  Black  Pig. 

"  The  Pig,  pursued  by  the  metamorphoser  and  his  hounds, 
directed  his  course  to  Monalty  near  Kells  in  the  County  Meath, 
and  thence  to  Afaighin-a-BkradamnQ2iV  Castle- Bellingham,  where, 
having  changed  himself  into  a  trout,  he  crossed  the  river  Mayne, 
which  empties  itself  into  the  sea  at  Anagasson.  After  crossing 
the  river,  he  resumed  his  former  shape,  that  of  a  Pig,  and  ran 
as  far  as  Mayne  Townland,  where  he  was  overtaken  and  killed, 
and  a  moat  raised  over  him,  hence  the  name  Maighin-na-Muicce 
for  the  townland,  and  Mota-na-Muicce  for  the  tumulus.  The 
course  taken  by  the   Pig  is  called  the  Valley  of  the    Black   Pig, 

H 

t  O.S.L.,  Co.  Westmeath, ,  p.  296. 

G.  13    *^ 

X  O.S.L.,  Co.  Louth,  "  '   ,  p.  88. 
*  '  E.  14'  ' 


864  '^"^  Dolmens  of  Ireland. 

over   which    it   is    prophesied    that    a    great    slaughter   will    be 
perpetrated,  but  that  it  will  end  where  the  Pig  was  killed." 

In  Armagh  and  Monaghan,  again,  we  fall  in  with  the  Glenna- 
na-Muicce-Diiibh.^  The  story  here  is  like  that  in  Louth,  namely, 
that  a  schoolmaster  lived  in  Drogheda  a  long  time  ago  who  used 
to  work  the  magic  art  and  turn  his  scholars  into  pigs.  One  day, 
when  they  were  playing  in  a  field,  O'Neill  set  his  hounds  on 
them.  The  swine  ran  in  various  directions  through  the  country, 
and  formed  these  ditches  which  are  to  be  seen  in  various  parts 
of  the  south  of  Ulster.  One  made  its  way  towards  Lough 
Neagh — another  faced  the  West,  and  a  third,  that  was  very 
hotly  pursued,  swam  across  Lough  Mucsnamha  (Muckno)  at 
Castle  Blayney  (whence  the  name),  and  then  proceeded  in  the 
direction  of  Meath.  In  this  we  seem  to  have  the  oral  version  of 
the  dispersing  of  the  pigs  of  Derbrenn  found  in  the  Dindshenchas. 
Another  legend  of  Lough  Mucsnamha  gives  the  Pig  who  swam 
across  the  lake  a  pious  intention,  for,  proceeding  thence  to  the 
hill  of  Armagh,  it  indicated  to  Patrick  the  place  where  he  should 
build  his  cathedral. 

In  the  Parish  of  Currin  in  Monaghan,  the  usual  tradition 
that  it  was  a  "  Huge  Boar  "  that  rooted  up  the  Valley  of  the 
Black  Pig  is  changed  into  a  more  rational  one  which  may 
possibly  afford  us  a  clue  as  to  who  the  **  Pig  People"  really  were. 
It  is  that  it  was  a  boundary  between  the  Provincial  Kings.  At 
Scarva,  in  the  County  of  Down,  it  is  known  as  the  "  Danes' 
Cast,"  and  near  Cootehill  in  that  of  Cavan  as  the  "  Worm 
Track,"  or  "Worm  Ditch,"  in  Irish  Cladh-7ia-Peiste.  O'Donovan 
does  not  think  that  it  can  be  the  boundary  of  the  mensal 
lands  of  Tuathal,  that  is  to  say,  Meath  ;  but  he  considers  it 
"highly  probable  that  the  '  Danes'  Cast,'  or  'Valley  of  the  Black 
Pig,'  will  answer  to  the  boundaries  of  Oriel  {i.e.  Oirgialla)." 
"  First,"  he  says,  "  the  Danes'  Cast  keeps  so  close  to  Glennree 
that  it  was,  in  all  probability,  the  *  Great  Wall  of  Tartary ' 
between  the  Oriels  and  their  enemies  the  ancient  Ulidians  or 
Clanna  Rughraidhe.  We  find  it  again  running  through  the  Parish 
of  Creggan  in  the  south  of  the  County  of  Armagh,  and  we  find 
a  tradition  there  that  it  anciently  extended  in  the  direction  of 
Carrickmacross   (in    the    County  of   Monaghan).     We   next  find 

14 

t  O.S.L.,  Cos.  Armagh  and  Monaghan,  ^^ — ,  pp.  84,  97,  120,  123. 


Names  and  Legends.  865 


it  running  through  the  Farney  in  the  same  county,  not  far  from 
the  frontiers  of  Meath  ;  and,  lastly,  we  find  it  continued  through 
the  Parish  of  Currin  in  the  south  of  the  Dartree  (in  Monaghan) 
not  far  from  Fermanagh.  If  all  the  fragments  of  this  ancient 
rampart  could  be  traced  and  connected,  I  (O' Donovan)  think  it 
would  be  found  to  enclose  all  the  south  and  east  sides  of  the 
country  of  the  Oriels." 

In  the  Townland  of  Dorsyf  and  Parish  of  Creggan  is  a  very 
curious  and  very  extensive  rampart  said  to  give  name  to  the  Town- 
land,  and  to  mean  "  the  Gates  "  (doruis  or  dorsiu).  "  Some  of  the 
peasantry  say  that  this  was  the  work  of  the  Danes."  O' Donovan 
speaks  of  it  as  resembling  the  "  Danes'  Cast,"  except  that  instead 
of  running  directly  across  the  country,  it  is  a  figure  of  spheroidal 
form,  consisting  of  a  lofty  rampart  and  two  deep  ditches.  It  is 
levelled  in  many  places,  but  the  peasantry  point  out  how  the 
ring  was  connected.  It  was  about  a  mile  and  a  quarter  in  its 
greatest  diameter,  and  about  two  miles  and  a  half  in  circum- 
ference. In  the  low  and  boggy  parts  of  the  Townland  the 
rampart  was  connected  by  means  of  causeways  formed  of  pieces 
of  timber  mortised  and  connected  by  tenons.  The  ancient  road 
to  Armagh  passed  through  it.  In  O'Donovan's  opinion  it  was 
erected  by  the  chieftains  of  the  territory  to  hold  cattle.  It  was 
used  in  later  times  by  O'Neill,  and  leaden  balls  shot  off  the 
ramparts  have  been  found  by  the  farmer." 

It  was  probably  the  work  of  the  same  people  who  raised  the 
"  Danes'  Cast,"  "  Worm  Ditch,"  "  Trench  of  the  Black  Pig,"  or  by 
whatever  name  that  rampart  is  known.  All  such  divisional  works 
are  referable  to  the  same  custom  possessed  by  those  who  raised 
the  rampart  which  bears  the  significant  name  of  "  Picts-Wark  "  or 
"Cat- Rail,"  in  Roxboroughshire,  the  "Opus  Danorum,"J  or 
"  Danes'-Work,"  which  stretches  from  sea-to-sea  across  the  Cimbric 
Chersonese  (on  which  there  are  enclosures  precisely  similar  to 
that  at  Dorsa),  the  "  Limes  Saxonicus,"  or  "  Saxon  Boundary,"  and 
whatever  other  boundary  trenches  were  raised  by  the  northern 
tribes  in  imitation  of  the  Roman  limites  by  which  it  was  usual 
to  separate  provincials  from  barbarians  from  the  Danube  on  the 
one  hand  to  the  "  Roman  Wall  "  in  North  Britain  on  the  other. 

t  O.S.L.,  Cos.  Armagh  and  Monaghan,^ ',  p.  2. 

X  For  this  "  Dannewerke,"  see  Blaeu's  map  of  the  district  of  Gottorp,  "  Le  Grand  Atlas,"  Amster- 
dam, 1667,  vol.  i.  It  is  said  to  have  been  raised  by  Godefroy,  King  of  the  Danes,  against 
Charlemagne,  but  is  almost  certainly  of  older  date. 


866  The  Dolmens  of  Ireland. 

In  the  County  of  Longford  the  legend  of  the  Black  Pig 
occurs  again,  "  Ballinamuck,"  says  O'Donovan,  "  the  mouth 
of  the  ford  of  the  Pig."  "What  Pig?"  he  adds,— "  The  Black 
Pig  who  rooted  up  the  '  Danes'  Cast,'  in  the  County  of  Armagh. 
This  trench  begins  at  Lough  Kineel,  and  extends  N.W.  through 
the  Townlands  of  Springtown,  Cartronbore,  Toberfelim,  Bally- 
nulty,  and  on  to  the  island  of  Saint  Columbkille  in  Lough  Gawna, 
which  it  crosses.  It  is  said  to  extend  further,  but  the  people  who 
informed  me  (O'Donovan)  have  no  further  acquaintance  with 
it.  It  would  be  curious  to  show  it  on  the  map.  The  greatest 
height  is  1 6  feet,  but  it  is  levelled  in  many  places,  and  in  other 
parts  reduced  to  7  feet  or  8  feet.  Ancient  Meath  comprised 
all  this  country,  and  it  would  be  hard  to  deny  that  this  was 
its  boundary  with  Ulster.  The  belief  here  is  that  it  was  the 
boundary  between  Annaly  and  Breifny."  f  The  tradition  has 
it  that  "  she  "  (it  is  a  sow,  apparently,  here,  but  where  the  word 
mticc  is  used  it  always  must  be  so,  since  it  is  feminine)  "  cut 
the  trench  all  alone  to  this  ford  where  she  was  knocked  on 
the  head  with  a  stone  by  a  blind  man  who  was  predestined  to 
kill  her."  Here  in  Longford,  also,  the  Valley  of  the  Black  Pig 
is  called  DiLucladJi,  that  is,  the  Barrier. 

Another  centre  of  the  Pig  legend  is  the  Curragh  of  Kildare.J 
It  is  there  connected  with  the  track  of  an  ancient  road  leadingf 
across  the  Curragh  in  the  direction  of  the  great  rath  of  Ailleann. 
It  runs  through  a  vale  in  the  plain,  called  Gle7tn-na-muicce-duib/i, 
or  "  the  Black  Pig's  Walk,"  and  extends  from  a  small  tumulus  called 
Rathm-an-aodhaire  §  to  a  moat  called  Moitin-an-eabha\  and  into  the 
County  of  Wicklow.  It  would  be  difficult,  says  O'Donovan,  to 
form  an  idea  of  its  original  breadth,  as  the  rains  have  much 
altered  the  surface  by  washing  down  the  banks  and  disfiguring  it 
by  their  deposits.  That  writer  regards  it  as  one  of  the  royal  roads 
mentioned  in  the  Dindshenchas  leadino-  to  the  ereat  rath  and 
palace  of  Ailleann.  He  quotes  the  words  Ailleand  aenach  diar 
n-6gaib,^  Raith  Airt  co  7ia  righrodaibh,  rendered  in  Latin 
Aillenda  ntmdina  jttveittim,  Arx  A^-tiiri  cum  viis  regalibus. 

t  M.S.,  O.S.L.,  Co.  Lcngford,   ~- ,  pp.  23  and  28. 

L.  13 

+  O.S.L.,  Co.  Kildare,— — -,  pp.  180,  184,  cl  seqq,  No.  10. 

§  The  shepherd's  little  rath. 

II  Eabha  is  a  woman's  name,  "  Eve  ; "  inoilin  is  a  "  little  moat." 

1  Whitley  Stokes  reads  n-ocaib,  and  translates  it  "  warriors."     He  does  not  give  the  second  line 
beginning  Raith. 


Names  and  Legends.  867 

The  true  legend  of  the  hunting  of  the  Pig  is  supposed  to  be 
contained  in  the  wild  myth  called  the  Dindshenchas  of  Dumae 
Selga,  to  which  I  have  previously  referred. f 

Here  six  Pigs  are  mentioned,  and  called  the  Swine  of 
Derbrenn,  daughter  of  Eochaidh  Fedlech.  They  were  only 
foster-children  of  hers,  however, — their  mother  being  called 
Dalb  Garb,  "Uncouth  {garbJi)  Visage"  {dcalbk),  who  changed 
them  by  a  spell  into  Pigs.  Three  were  males,  Cond,  Find,  and 
Fland,  and  three  were  females,  Mel,  and  Tregh,  and  Treis. 
As  boars,  the  three  men  were  called  Froechan,  Banban,  and 
Brogarban,  and  as  sows  the  three  women  were  named  Crainchrin, 
Coelcheis,  and  Treilech.  We  find  them  hunted  out  of  Leinster, 
but  received  kindly  by  Oengus  Mac  ind  Oc,  that  is  Oengus,  son 
of  the  Dagda,  the  God  of  the  Tuatha  De  Danann.  After  that  they 
went  to  Glascarn,  and  remained  in  hiding  with  Derbrenn.  Next 
they  went  to  Inver  Umaill,  probably  in  Owles  in  Mayo.  They 
are  then  attacked  by  Medb,  and  Dubh  Innis  is  taken  from  them. 
They  all  fell  save  one,  and  their  five  heads  were  brought  to 
Dumae  Selga,  the  Mound  of  Hunting. 

In  this  story  I  do  not  think  there  can  be  a  doubt  that  we  may 
recognize  another  version  of  that  of  the  Firbolg,  who  having  first 
of  all  been  favourably  received  by  a  king  of  Leinster,  Cairbre 
Niafer,  and  granted  lands  by  him,  were  subsequently  driven  out 
by  the  oppressive  tribute  levied  upon  them,  and  forced  to  flee 
before  Cairbre,  and  take  refuge  with  Medb  in  Connaught,  who 
gave  them  lands  for  their  support,  though  they  were  finally 
driven  to  the  islands  of  the  sea.  The  Firbolg  are  described  as 
the  sons  of  Umor  (?  ua-mh6ir  =  descendant  of  the  sea)  who 
"  made  a  flitting  over  the  sea "  from  the  borders  (or  district) 
of  the  Cruithne,  into  the  plain  of  Meath. 

The  Black  Pig,  then,  turns  out  to  be  the  people  of  Umor, 
that  is  to  say,  the  Fir-bolg,  metamorphosed  by  popular  legend. 

Wherever  pigs  occur  in  the  Irish  legends,  I  suspect  that 
this  same  race  of  people  is  intended,  who  must  have  been,  at 
one  time,  the  terror  of  the  inhabitants,  as,  indeed,  their  name- 
sakes, the  Bolgar,  or  Bulgares — in  whom,  as  the  allies  of  the 
Huns  in  retreat,  I  believe  we  have  the  historical  basis  of  the 
name   Bolg,J  were  in    Europe   in  the    fifth    century.§       Thus,  a 

t  "  Rev.  Celt.,"  vol.  xv.  pp.  470-2. 

X  To  this  question  I  shall  return  at  the  close  of  this  work. 

§  "Bulgares  toto  orbe  tenibiles,"  Cassiod.,  Var.  8,  10. 


868  The  Dolmens  of  Ireland. 

herd  of  magical  swine  came  out  of  the  Cave  of  Cruachu,  and 
used  to  blight  corn  and  milk  until  they  were  hunted  down  by 
Ailill  and  Medb,f  and  numbered,  which  they  never  had  been 
before.  Again,  had  not  Manannan  Mac  Lir's  pack  of  hounds  and 
the  pack  of  Mod  prevented  it,  a  Pig  would  have  laid  waste  the 
whole  country  as  far  as  Alba.  As  it  was.  Mod  was  killed  in  the 
pursuit  on  an  island  in  Loch  Con  (Hounds'  Lake),  called  Muccinis. 
Here  it  is  to  be  noticed  that  the  Pigs,  in  common  with  the  Fir- 
Bolg,  are  opposed  to  the  Tuatha  De  Danann,  of  whom  Manannan 
was  one.  From  other  sources  it  can  be  shown  that  the  Fir-Bolg 
were  also  opposed  to  Cuchullain,  just  as  the  Pigs  were  to  Finn 
Mac  Cumhail.  Niall,  son  of  Enna  Aignech,  was  one  of  those  who 
hunted  Derbrenn's  swine,  and  was  drowned  with  his  hounds  in 
Loch  Neill.  Glas,  again,  "  when  his  brothers  went  a-reaving  to 
Ingcel,  proceeded  with  his  hounds  into  the  plain  of  Temair,  and 
there  met  with  a  wild  Pig,  which  went  away  before  him  southwards 
as  far  as  Baltinglass,  and  there  fell  the  Pig  and  the  hounds,  and 
Glas  himself."  From  another  version  of  the  tale,  it  appears  that 
this  Pig  was  one  of  several  "  fashioned  by  magic,  and  that  they 
were,  in  fact,  the  Red  Swine  of  Derbrenn."  J  Once  more,  in  the 
Dindshenchas  of  Belach  Gabrain,  we  read  of  "  Gabran,  a  hound 
of  Failbe  Flann's,  which  went  on  the  track  of  Lurgan,  a  pig  that 
haunted  Druim  Almaine,  and  it  had  no  place  (of  rest)  from  the 
hound  until  it  went  underground  in  the  Bog  of  Allen."  §  "This 
pig  was  grey,  and  blind  of  an  eye."  In  the  Dindshenchas  of 
Mag  Lena  is  an  account  of  how  Mac  Da-tho's  Pig  rooted  up  a 
trench  over  Lena  while  he  was  asleep,  called,  as  it  appears,  the 
Dubclais,  or  Black  Trench.  || 

Lastly,  the  Black  Pig  is  mentioned  in  the  prophecies  of  St. 
Columbkille.  "  It  is  curious,"  says  O'Donovan,^  "  to  consider  with 
what  confidence  the  people  refer  to  the  book  of  Columbkille  for  a 
corroboration  of  wild  stories  of  this  description.  Giraldus 
Cambrensis  ff  states  that  the  prophecies  of  Columbkille  were 
preserved  in  books  in  his  time,  and  that  the  Irish  people  believed 
in  them  with  the  most  implicit  faith.     There  is  a  perfect  collection 

t  Dind.  of  Mag  Mucraime,  "Rev.  Celt.,"  vol.  xv.  p.  470. 

X  Whitley  Stokes,  "  Rev.  Celt.,"  vol.  xv,  p.  422,  to  whose  translation  of  the  DinJshenchas  1 
am  indebted  for  all  references  to  it. 

§  Id.,  p.  426.  II  Id.,  vol.  xvi.,  p.  64. 

1  O.S.L.,  Co.  Kildare,  „      f.'  P-  I95' 

ft  Expug.  Hib.  lib.  ii.,  cc.  xvii.,  xxxiv.     O'Curry  regarded  them  as  forgeries  of  the  English, 
Ma/.,  p.  433. 


Names  and  Legends.  869 

of  his  prophetic  poems,  many  of  which  are  decidedly  ancient,  in  the 
hbrary  at  Trinity  College,  Dublin."  Of  the  Black  Pig  it  is  fore- 
told that  "  towards  the  end  of  the  world  it  will  run  over  its  track 
(on  the  Curragh),  and  destroy  all  before  it.  It  is  to  be  the  scene 
of  dreadful  slaughter." 

It  is  not  unlikely  that  the  custom  of  killing  a  pig  on  the  Eve 
of  Martinmas  was  a  survival  of  a  pagan  sacrificial  custom.  The 
story  was  that  in  requital  for  Martin's  having  conferred  a  monk's 
tonsure  on  Patrick,  the  latter  gave  a  pig  "for  every  monk  and 
every  nun  to  Martin,  killing  it  in  his  honour,  and  giving  it  to  his 
community  should  they  come  for  it."  f 

The  cultus  of  the  Boar,  including  the  sacrifice  of  that  animal, 
belongs  to  the  whole  of  the  Baltic  coasts.  It  is  not  unlikely  that 
it  is  not  so  much  of  Aryan  as  of  Finnish  origin  ;  that  it  is,  in  fact, 
the  cultus  of  the  Bear  practised  by  all  the  northern  peoples  from 
Lapland  to  Yesso,  which  had  travelled  south  into  lands  beyond 
the  range  of  that  sacred  beast,  and  where  his  place  as  the  fierce 
and  powerful  monarch  of  mountain  and  glen  and  forest  was  taken 
by  the  wild  boar.  The  tribes  of  the  ^stii,  who  dwelt  on  the 
right  shore  of  the  Suevic  Sea,  that  is,  on  the  south  and  south-east 
of  the  Baltic,  and  who  were  a  Germanic  people,  with  Finnish 
affinities,  carried  about  with  them  the  figures  of  wild  boars,  as 
symbols  of  their  religion,  which  consisted  of  the  worship  of  the 
**  Mother  of  the  Gods."  Mallet  J  would  identify  her  with  Frea,  or 
Fricca,  the  wife  of  Odin,  and  Mother  of  the  Gods  of  the  Norse 
people,  in  whose  honour  a  boar  was  sacrificed,  and  of  whose 
cultus,  in  Sweden,  many  vestiges  yet  remain,  as,  for  example,  the 
practice  by  the  peasants,  in  the  month  of  February,  the  season 
sacred  to  Fricca,  of  making  little  images  of  boars  in  paste,  which 
they  applied  to  superstitious  uses.  She  may  also  correspond  with 
Ana,  Dana,  or  Danu,  "mater  deorum  Hibernensium,"  that  is,  of 
"  Brian,  Juchar,  and  Jucharba,  the  three  chieftains  of  the  Tuatha 
De  Danann,  accounted  gods  for  their  feats  of  necromancy,"  § 
although  I  do  not  find  any  special  connection  between  her  cultus 
and  that  of  the  Pig. 

More  closely  allied  to  the  ^stian  divinity  is  the  Cybele  of  the 
Romans,  whom  and  whose  boar  Tacitus  cannot  but  have 
remembered  when  he  noticed  the  superstition  on  the  Baltic.     The 

t  "Trip.  Life  of  Patrick,"  p.  559,  edit.  Whitley  Stokes. 

X  "Northern  Antiquities,"  edit.  Percy,  p.  93. 

§  "  Sanas  Chonnaic,"  trans.  Whitley  Stokes,  in  voc.  A>!a. 


870  The  Dolmens  of  Ireland. 

practice  of  offering  a  gold  or  silver  boar  to  Ceres  we  find  in 
Festus  Pompeius.f  A  figure  of  this  mater  dSiLjn,  with  her 
attendant  boar,  was  found  carved  on  a  stone  at  the  Roman 
station,  at  Netherby  in  Cumberland,  and  an  illustration  of  it  is 
given  by  Pennant  in  his  "Tour  in  Scotland."  J  Her  worship,  it 
must  be  borne  in  mind,  was  not  even  claimed  by  the  Romans  as 
their  own,  but  admittedly  belonged  to  that  older  system  which 
was  ascribed  to  aborigines  in  Italy.  That  the  Esthonians,  or  yEstii, 
or  that  the  ancient  people  of  Sweden  could  have  obtained  this 
form  of  worship  from  the  Romans  is  out  of  the  question,  nor  is 
there  any  evidence  to  show  that  it  is  essentially  of  Aryan  origin. 

As  to  the  mater  deum,  there  existed  an  ancient  Siberian  Saga, 
mentioned  first  by  the  old  traveller  Herberstein,  and  afterwards 
by  other  writers,  that  far  to  north,  in  the  territory  of  Obdora,  not 
far  from  the  mouth  of  the  Obi,  on  the  coast  of  the  Arctic  Ocean, 
was  the  statue  of  the  Stara  Baba,  that  is  the  Ancient  Mother,  held 
sacred  and  worshipped  by  all  the  Siberian  peoples.  Her  image 
was  said  to  be  of  gold,  representing  an  old  woman  seated  ;  her  son 
in  her  lap,  and  in  his,  again,  a  little  child,  her  grandson  ;  while 
from  the  interior  of  the  figure  issued  a  continual  sound  of  trumpets 
and  trombones.  Her  worship,  covering  the  same  regions  as  that 
of  the  Bear,  may  not  improbably  have  been  connected  with  it. 

The  Boars  worn  by  the  yEstii  were  regarded  as  charms  or 
fetiches.  They  served  them  in  place  of  armour  and  every  other 
defence,  rendering  the  votary  of  the  goddess  invulnerable. 

In  the  Museum  of  the  Royal  Irish  Academy  is  the  figure  of  a 
bronze  Boar,  about  3  ins.  long.  Cows'  heads  and  pigs'  heads  in 
bronze  have  also  been  found  on  several  occasions  in  Ireland.  A 
pig's  head,  8J  ins.  long,  was  found  in  Banffshire,§  and  Mr. 
Kemble  ||  has  figured  one  on  a  bronze  shield  found  in  the  river 
Witham.  Cairns  said  to  have  been  raised  over  Boars  are  still 
shown,  says  Mr.  Campbell,^  in  many  parts  of  Scotland.  The 
Feinne  are  always  represented  in  that  country,  as  in  Ireland,  as 
hunting  Boars.  In  the  Highlands  there  exists  a  prejudice 
against  eating  Boars'  flesh.  Among  the  Gauls,  Boars  were  held 
sacred,  and  fed  on  acorns  in  the  sacred  woods  of  the  Druids. 
In  the  Norse  sagas  priests  maintain  sacred  beasts,  horses  and 
boars. jf 

t  See  Vossius  (fe  Theologid  Gentili,  edit.  1668,  vol.  ii.,  p.  260;  Festus  in  Pracidanea. 
X  p.  268.  §  "Proc.  Soc.  Ant.  Scot.,"  vol.  vii.  ||  "  More  Ferales,"  p.  190. 

\  "Tales  of  the  West  Highlands,"  xcii.  ft  Grimm,  "  Teut.  Myth."  transl.,  p.  1315. 


Names  and  Legends.  871 

It  is  to  be  observed  that  it  was  specially  a  symbol  in  use 
among  Celtic-speaking  peoples.  Col.  Wood-Martin,  quoting  M. 
de  la  Saussaye,  states  that  it  is  found  on  coins  in  Gaul,  Britain, 
Spain,  Illyria,  and  Galatia.  We  have  seen  reason  to  conclude 
that  Irish  tradition  connects  Pigs  with  the  people  called  Fir-Bolg, 
with  regard  to  whom  it  is  stated  that  they  spoke  not  the  German 
language  as  the  Tuatha  De  Danann  did,  but  the  British  language 
— that  is,  Celtic.  Of  the  ^stii,  Tacitus  f  tells  us  that  while  in  dress 
and  customs  they  resembled  the  Suevi,  their  language  more 
resembled  the  British.  Down  to  the  time  of  Adam  of  Bremen, 
these  people  practised  cremation,  and  held  orgies,  like  Irish 
"wakes,"  over  the  dead.  Passing  across  the  Baltic  into  Sweden 
and  Norway,  we  find  the  figure  of  a  pig  on  the  helmets  of  figures 
of  armed  men,  raised  in  relief  on  a  bronze  plaque  found  in  Oland. 
(See  Fig.  699.)  This  may  be  regarded  as  Prey's  Boar.  It  was 
customary  for  each  warrior  to  wear  on  the  front  of  his  helmet  a 
herkumbly  or  war-crest.  These  were  often  made  in  the  shape  of 
animals.  King  Adil's  helmet  was  called  Hildigoltr,  "  War-Boar." 
In  Irish,  caikbarr  is  a  helmet,  that  is,  a  battle-crest. 

Prey's  Boar  was  named  Gullinbusti,  or  Golden-Bristled,  "  who 
lighted  up  the  night  like  day,  and,  running  with  the  speed  of  a 
horse,  drew  the  car  of  the  deity."  It  is  in  Prey's  worship,  there- 
fore, which,  while  it  is  part  of  the  Odinic  system,  has  been  regarded 
as  of  Scythian  origin,  that  the  Atonement  Boar  is  sacrificed. 
Mr.  Phillimore  has  called  my  attention  to  the  curious  fact  that 
a  Golden-Bristled  Boar  occurs  in  the  folk-lore  of  the  Snowden 
Mountains  in  North  Wales.  Grimm  mentions  a  "clean  ofold 
hog  "  as  bearing  a  part  in  some  popular  customs  of  the  Wetterau 
and  Thuringia. 

A  custom  corresponding  exactly  to  the  ^stian  one  of  wearing 
boar-badges  seems  to  have  obtained  in  Germany  in  the  Middle 
Ages.  Grimm  quotes  a  poem  in  which  a  knight  says,  "  I  hold 
you  dearer  than  a  boar-swine,  all  were  it  of  fine  gold  y-wrought." 
A  little  further  on  Grimm  adds  the  pertinent  remark,  "  Those 
Aestyans  may  prove  a  link  of  fellowship  between  the  Germanic 
nations  and  the  Finnish  and  Asiatic  ;  it  is  well  worth  noticing 
that  the  Tcherkass — Circassians — worship  a  god  of  woods  and 
hunting,  Mesitch  by  name,  who  rides  with  a  boar  zuii/i  golden 
bristles.''     This  makes  the  discovery  of  figures  of  golden  Boars 

t  Germ.,  c.  45. 


872 


The  Dolmens  of  Ireland. 


in  a  sepulchral  tumulus  in  Scythia,  mentioned  previously  at  p.  723, 
one  of  remarkable  interest.     As  will  be  seen  by  reference  to  the 

accompanying  illustration, 
the  lower  of  the  two  figures 
is  very  closely  similar  to 
those  on  the  helmets  of  the 
armed  men  on  the  plaque 
found  in  Oland.  With  the 
beads  found  in  the  same 
tumulus  may  be  compared 
examples  from  Egypt  and 
Ireland.f 

In  Sclavonic  legend  a 
huge  boar  with  white  tusks 
rises  out  of  a  lake.  We 
have  noted  also  the  connec- 
tion of  the  Chase  of  the  Pig 


Fig.  700. — Gold  figures  of  pigs  and  bead,  from  a 
Scythian  tomb.  From  Recueil  cT Antiquith  de  la 
Scythie,  S.  Petersburg,  1866. 


in  Ireland  with  lakes. 
The  numbers  in  which  pigs'  teeth  perforated  for  suspension 
or  otherwise  have  occurred   in  sepulchral   chambers  in   Ireland, 
Germany,  and  elsewhere,  is  also  to  be  noted. 


The  Cat. 

Only  one  dolmen  in  Ireland  bears  the  name  of  the  Cat,  and 
that  as  an  alternate  name  with  that  of  Leaba-na-MuIcce — Bed  of 
the  Pig — at  Carrignaffrin  in  Cork,J  where  one  old  woman  informed 
Windele  that  the  monument  was  called  Carrior-na-Gat.  As 
I  have  previously  said,  however,  I  believe  that  this  word  is 
applied  to  the  gap  or  passage  leading  into  the  cell.  At  the  same 
time,  it  is  not  impossible  that  originally  it  implied  the  name 
of  a  people  conveyed  in  that  of  their  eponymous,  variously  spelt 
Catt,  Cat  (as  in  Su-Cat  =  deus  belli),  Catta,  Cet.  Get,  Keat, 
whence  the  name  of  the  Catti  or  Chatti.  In  Scotland  it  enters 
into  the  name  Cathenesia,  or  Caithness,  and  in  Ireland  into 
that  of  the  Catraighe.  O'Donovan  notes  the  name  Ros  Cait,  a 
promontory  in  Fermanagh,§  and  says  that  "  several  places  are 
named  from  wild  cats."      On  the  summit  of  Benbo  in   Leitrim 

t  See  Messrs.  Knowles,  Nesbitt  and  Hasse  on  Irish  beads,  "  Proc.  H.A.A.   Ir.,"  vol.  v.  pp. 
579'  592  ;  vol.  viii.  p.  384 ;  and  "  Proc.  R.S.A.  Ir.,"  vol.  i.  p.  352. 

\  p.  27.  §  O.S.L.,  Co.  Fermanagh,  p.  45 ;  Leitrim,  p.  259;  Donegal,  p.  124. 


Names  and  Legends.  87; 


was  said  to  be  a  treasure  guarded  by  a  Cat.  The  old  church  at 
Letterkenny  in  Donegal  was  said  to  have  been  burned  by  a  Cat. 
There  was  the  Cat's  Cave — Umhaid-na-gcat,  "because  wild  cats 
used  to  hunt  rabbits  in  it " — at  Croghan,  or  Cruachan,  the  same 
cave,  I  suppose,  as  that  out  of  which  the  "  magical  pigs  "  pro- 
ceeded, as  we  have  seen.  In  fact,  Pig-legends — that  is,  Fir-Bolg 
legends — and  Cat  legends — that  is,  Catrigian  legends — appear  to 
go  side  by  side,  just  as  the  Bolg-Tuatha  and  the  Cathrigians  do. 
In  the  case  of  a  dyke  in  Roxboroughshire,  called  Picts  Wark, 
or  Cat-Rail,  Cat  seems  equated  with  Pict  in  popular  tradition. 
In  the  poem,  or  saga,  called  "  Find  and  the  Phantoms  "  we  have 
the  place-name  Moin  Cet.  Again,  Carraig-na-Chait  is  the  name 
traditionally  given  to  the  great  natural  rock  at  Ushnagh  in  West- 
meath,  where  the  four  provinces  of  Ireland  were  said  to  meet, 
and  which  is  called  in  the  Book  of  Armagh  "  Carraig  Choitrigi " 
(=  Cothrige  =  Cathraighe),  that  is  to  say,  the  Rock  of  Cathraighe, 
or  "  Men  of  Cat."  f 

In  Roscommon,  near  Cruachan,  is  a  tumulus  called  Carn  Ceit,J 
raised,  it  is  said,  over  "  Keat  Mac  Morna,"  or  "  Umoire,  a  Giant." 
With  the  name  of  this  cairn  we  may  compare  that  of  one  called 
the  Cairn  of  Get  near  Bruan  in  Caithness.  It  is  of  the  double- 
horned  type,  and  was  explored  by  Professor  Anderson. §  Doubt- 
less this  latter  is  the  Get,  Cet,  Cait,  or  Got,  one  of  the  seven 
sons  of  Cruitne,  according  to  the  Pictish  genealogies,  ||  in  whom 
Caithness,  one  of  the  seven  provinces  of  Alban,  recognizes  her 
eponymous,  and  from  whom  the  Duchess  of  Sutherland  takes  her 
name,  "  Banna-mhorar  Chat." 

In  the  Senchas  Mor^  we  find  a  strange  notice  of  "the  Black 
and  White  Cat — that  is,  the  bairc-nia,  that  is,  the  great  champion 
which  was  taken." 

Patrick's  name,  Sucat.f f  explained  deus  belli,  seems  on  the  face 
of  it  to  show  that  by  Cat  the  Irish  word  for  "battle"  was  here 
intended.  Dr.  Whitley  Stokes  considers  it  as  "  the  appellation  of 
a  Cymric  war-god."  He  connects  it  with  the  modern  Welsh 
kygad  =  warlike,  and  regards  it  as  borrowed  by  the  Irish.  Miliuc, 
we   may   remember,   looked   on    Patrick  as  Cotrighe — that  is,  a 

14 

t  p.  372.  %  O.S.L.,  Co.  Roscommon,  —  g,  p.  191,  '?/  ^<:'I']->  No.   12. 

§  "  Scotland  in  Pagan  Times  :  Br.  Age,"  p.  248. 
II  "Chronicles  of  the  Picts  and  Scots,"  p.  4,  loc.  cit.  \  p.  153- 

tt  "Trip.  Life,"  part  i.  p.  17. 

VOL.  in.  M 


874  The  Dolmens  of  Ireland. 

Catrio-ian.  The  name  Sucat  occurs  again  in  the  piece  called 
the  "  Fair  of  Carman,"  f  where  Gunnat,  son  of  Sttccat^  is  men- 
tioned, and  also  in  the  Dindshenchas  of  Mag  Leige,  as  cited  by 
0'Donovan,J  where  Sucad,  son  of  Starn,  figures  as  one  of  the 
ancestors  of  a  heroine  of  Fomorian  stock. 

As  a  proper  name  we  find  Ceat,  son  of  Scathach  the  Amazon, § 
to  whom  Cuchullain  went  to  learn  feats  of  arms.  In  the  same 
mythical  tale  Cuchullain  slays  another  Ceat,  a  champion  of  Aife. 
On  the  Tuatha  De  Danann  side  at  the  battle  of  Moytura  fought 
three  sons  of  Telle,  son  of  Kat.  In  the  piece  called  the  "  Court- 
ship of  Emer "  three  brothers  of  that  lady  are  named  Scibor, 
Ibor,  and  Catt,  sons  of  Forgall  the  Red.  Cairbre-Cincait,  or 
Caitceann,  was  a  king  of  the  Aitheach-Tuatha — that  is,  of  certain 
tribes  of  the  Fir-Bolg  race — "  descended  from  the  Cathraighe  in 
the  countries  of  the  Cruitne."  Again,  the  ancestor  of  the  Cath- 
raiehe  was  Aonsfus  Catta,  so  called  because  he  had  been  fostered 
by  Catta-Cumhal,  a  name  which  (if  Prof.  Rhys  is  right  in  equating 
Cumhal  with  Camulos)  would  read  into  Old  Gaulish  as  Cata- 
Camulos.  A  certain  Catt  Cototchenn  was  the  ancestor  of  the 
man  who  built  the  great  house  called  Midhchuardda  in  Temair.|| 

Of  the  Cat's  Cave  at  Croghan  several  stories  were  told,  one 
beine  that  it  was  the  "  Bank  of  Ireland  in  the  time  of  Oueen 
Medb  ; "  ^  another  that  a  rebel  had  hidden  in  it,  and  by  so  doing 
had  saved  his  life ;  a  third  that  it  was  the  "  Hell-Mouth  Door  of 
Ireland " ;  and  a  fourth  that  a  woman  of  the  County  of 
Roscommon,  holding  on  by  the  tail  of  a  refractory  calf,  was 
dragged  through  it,  and  arrived  at  the  further  end,  Keshcorran 
Mountain  in  Sligo,  the  following  morning.  That  the  animal 
called  the  Cat  ever  entered  into  Irish  mythology  as  the  Pig, 
Dog,  and  Cow  did,  there  is  nothing  to  show. 

The  Dog. 

In  the  Barony  of  Iverk  and  County  of  Kilkenny,  near  the 
top  of  the  hill  of  Garryduff,  is  a  dolmen  called  Leaba-na-Con, 
or    Bed  of  the    Hounds.      Tighe  says  that  this  name  "  Leibe- 

t  O'C,  M,  and  C,  vol.  iii.,  Appendix. 

X  O.S.L.,  Queen's  County,  ^  •,  p-  163. 

§  O'Curry,  I\L  and  C,  vol.  ii.,  p.  371,  n.  ||  Quoted  by  Petrie,  in  his  "  History  of  Tara." 

14 
^  O.S.L.,  Co.  Roscommon,  — ~^;,  p.  191,  et  seqq.  ;  "  Troc.  R.I.A.,    vol.  x.  p.  103. 


Names  and  Legends.  875 


na-cuhn "  was  interpreted  the  Dog's  Grave,  but  that  it  seems 
originally  to  have  signified  (he  does  not  say  why)  the  "  Priest's 
Grave."  f 

O'Curry  remarks,  with  regard  to  the  dolmen  at  Ballybrack  J  in 
Dublin,  that  he  had  met  with  an  old  man  who,  when  a  boy,  had 
heard  it  called  Leaba-na-SaigJi  [SagJi,  O'R.,  Saith,  Foley  =  canis 
femind),  "  Bed  of  the  Greyhound."  He  adds  that  the  name  "must 
have  originated  in  one  of  those  popular  fireside  stories,  about 
spirits  appearing  in  the  shape  of  greyhounds."  The  same  name 
Leaba-na-Sdighe  {lectus  canis  venaticcB)  is  applied  to  a  "  pagan 
grave,"  or  dolmen,  in  the  Parish  of  Moyacomb  in  Wicklow.§  It 
was  there  supposed  to  be  the  place  where  a  famous  huntsman  of 
old  interred  a  favourite  greyhound.  || 

On  Glencullen  Mountain  (Co.  Dublin),^  is  a  large  natural  rock, 
called  Clochnagon,  "  Stone  of  the  Hounds,"  about  which  O'Curry 
observes  that,  if  the  legend  regarding  it  were  still  alive,  the  name 
would  be  found  to  relate  to  Finn  Mac  Cumhail  and  his  dogs. 

It  is  stated  in  the  A^xhccologia  that  Finn  kept  his  dog  in  the 
dolmen  called  Lachtnascail  in  Kilkenny.ff 

It  appears  to  me  that,  as  a  rule,  these  legends  of  hounds 
belong  rather  to  the  east  and  north  of  Ireland  than  to  the  west. 
There  is  a  notable  exception,  however,  in  the  case  of  a  mound 
called  the  "  Greyhound's  Grave,"  at  Legaun  {Liaghdn  CoTcidJi) 
Corkee  in  Maree,  on  the  coast  near  Stradbally  in  the  County  of 
Galway.JJ  The  tumulus  to  which  the  name  is  attached  seems, 
indeed,  of  very  uncertain  age,  but  a  description  of  it  must  not  be 
omitted  since,  of  whatever  antiquity  it  may  be,  it  illustrates  the 
fact,  "  proved,"  as  O'Donovan  says,  "  by  many  passages  in  the 
'  Book  of  Lecan,'  that  the  ancient  Irish  erected  monuments  over 
favourite  does." 

About  the  year  18 15,  John  Kennedy  wrote  a  description  of 
this  mound  which,  together  with  a  ground-plan  of  it,  is  preserved 
in  his  original  MS.  in  the  Ordnance  Survey  Letters  :  "  I  could 
trace,"  he  says,  "  the  form  of  the  grave  perfectly,  but  it  shows  the 
form  of  the  hind  and  fore  leg  only.     The  grave  is  only  a  little 

t  p.  407.  X  p-  387-  §  P-  414. 

11  O.S.L.,  Co.  Wicklow,  -^  ,  p.  no. 
G.  21 
14 
1  O.S.L,,  Co.  Dublin,  -     - ,  p.  9.  tf  vol.  xvi.,  p.  405. 

c  23 

14 

Xt  O.S.L.,  Co.  Gal  way, -^r-^,  p.  107. 


.'876  The  Dolmens  of  Ireland. 

■elevated  above  the  surface  of  the  ground  around  it,  a  circumstance 
which  renders  it  the  more  curious  that  the  grass  exhibits  its 
perfect  form.  .  .  .  The  following  are  the  dimensions  of  the  grey- 
hound. They  are  nearly  as  distinct  as  if  the  animal  was  exposed 
to  view.  From  neck  to  tail  10  feet  long;  the  hind  leg  3  feet 
•9  ins.  ;  the  fore  leg  3  feet  3  ins.  ;  the  length  of  the  tail  5  feet 
3  ins.  ;  the  breadth  across  the  body  3  feet  6  ins.  ;  the  breadth 
across  the  flanks  2  feet." 

The  tradition  is  that  the  animal  here  interred  belonged  to  one 
Aedh  Mac  Garraidh,  a  name  which  may,  of  course,  be  compara- 
tively modern,  although  the  coincidence  is  curious  between  it  and 
that  of  Garraidh  Dubh,  which  is  the  Townland  on  which,  in 
Kilkenny,  is  the  dolmen  called  Leaba-na-Con,  near  which  stands  a 
menhir  called  Clock  Fhada  Ghm'aidh  Dtiibh,  the  Long-stone  of 
Garraidh  Dubh,  or  Garryduff.  Garad,  we  may  add,  was  the 
name  of  one  of  the  chieftains  who  commanded  the  Fianna  under 
Finn  Mac  Cumhail  at  the  battle  of  Cnamhros.  He  came  from 
Askeaton  in  Limerick. 

"  The  tide  ebbs  and  flows  up  to  this  grave,"  and  "  what 
renders  it  more  curious  is  that,  in  spite  of  all  the  depredations 
committed  by  swine  and  treading  of  cows  and  horses,  it  renews  its 
form  every  succeeding  summer,  which,"  adds  Mr.  Kennedy,  "  I 
have  found  to  be  manifest  truth." 

The  position  of  this  grave  reminds  me  of  the  name  of  a  penin- 
sula in  the  Gweedore  district  of  Donegal,  called  Madradh-Gallom, 
after  a  inadradk,  that  is,  a  "  dog,"  said  to  have  come  ashore  upon 
a  rock,  still  pointed  out,  from  a  Danish  ship  which  was  wrecked. 
The  dog  was  white. 

The  name  of  the  seaside  place  Dunfanaghy,  in  the  same 
•county,  is  in  Irish  Dun-fionn-chon,  the  "  dun  "  of  the  white  dog ;  so 
called,  it  is  said,  from  a  dosf  which  was  handed  there  in  old 
times.f  The  County  of  Londonderry  possesses  some  curious  dog 
legends.  Lough-na-Gun,  under  Slieve  Gullion,  is  said  to  derive 
its  name  from  the  Hounds  of  Finn.  Loiizh  Bran,  the  lake  beneath 
the  hill  called  Seefin,  is  so  called,  it  is  said,  from  Finn's  "  celebrated 
and  invulnerable  greyhound  Bran,  which  tore  up  the  ground 
where  it  stands  in  pursuit  of  an  enchanted  doe,J  which  was  nearly 

t  O.S.L.,  Co.  Donegal,  ^  ^—,  p.  69. 

%  Compare  the  story  of  the  magic  doe  who  sinks  into  the  earth  after  leading  the  Cotragi  into 
Europe  (I'roc.  de  Bell.  Goth.  4,  5). 


Names  and  Legends.  877 

overtaken  by  Bran  when  she  suddenly  sank  into  the  earth  by  the 
power  of  magic.  Bran  was  in  such  a  rage  that  he  tore  up  the 
ground  with  his  paws,  just  as  dogs  do  nowadays  root  up  the 
ground  for  rats  and  rabbits.  The  lake  immediately  sprang  up  in 
the  place  thus  made  by  Bran's  gigantic  paws,  for  at  this  time  all 
sorts  of  wonders  happened,  '  a  leaf  of  ivy  was  as  large  as  a  griddle,, 
a  blackbird's  leg  as  large  as  that  of  an  ox,  and  a  deer  as  large  as 
an  elephant.'  "f 

O'Donovan,  writing  from  Draperstown,  recounts  *'  a  strange 
legend"  of  a  youth  called  Cadhan  O'Hineirghe,  who  finds  a 
greyhound  pup  in  the  place  of  some  nuts  he  had  gathered  and 
hidden.  The  pup  grows  to  be  a  monster,  and  eats  first  oxen 
and  sheep,  then  men  and  women.  People  fled  from  it  across- 
the  Bann.  The  Carrach  O'Neill,  in  whose  territory  this, 
happened,  offered  a  reward  for  its  capture  or  death.  Cadhan 
had  taken  notice  of  a  weak  spot  in  its  belly,  where  it  could  be 
wounded. 

The  monster  always  slept  at  the  "fort,"  in  the  Townland  of 
Doon.  There  the  youth  found  the  huge  monster  sleeping,  "  with 
its  enormous  and  bloated  belly  turned  up  before  the  sun.  Cadhan 
observed  the  spot  on  Its  belly,  now  a  large  red  fleshy  excrescence, 
and,  leaving  his  horse  at  some  distance  from  the  fort,  he  walked 
over,  and  plunged  his  spear  into  the  vulnerable  spot.  He  then 
sprang  from  the  fort  to  where  his  horse  stood,  a  distance  of  a  mile, 
and  mounting,  rode  away  with  the  velocity  of  lightning.  The 
space  between  the  fort  and  where  his  horse  stood  is  to  this  day 
called  Leim-an-fhb\  the  Man's  Leap.  The  monster  howled,  and 
made  two  springs  after  Cadhan.  By  the  first  it  advanced  from  the 
fort  to  Magh  Chaorthaim,  where  it  tore  a  rowan-tree  from  the 
roots,  and  gave  name  to  the  place  (Plain  of  the  Rowan  Tree).  By 
the  second,  it  landed  itself  at  Magh  Ckaoldin,  where  its  small  guts 
fell  out  upon  a  stone,  and  the  monster  expired. 

•'  And  the  stone  upon  which  the  small  entrails  of  this  enormous 
hound  fell  retains  their  form  to  this  day,  and  the  place  where  they 
fell  out  bears  the  name  of  Magh  Chaolain,  that  is,  the  '  Plain  of 
the  Small  Guts,'  and  the  capital  of  the  district  bore  the  same 
name  until  the  Drapers  honoured  it  with  the  civilized  name  of 
their  company,  and  called  it  Draperstown." 

14 

t  O.S.L.,  Co.  Londonderry,  -       ,  p.  159. 


SyS  The  Dolmens  of  Ireland. 

Cadhan  had  been  promised  as  much  land  as  he  could  see 
around  him,  as  a  reward  for  killing  the  hound.  O'Neill,  who  had 
promised  this,  played  him,  however,  a  wicked  trick,  for  he 
conveyed  him  to  a  hollow  not  far  from  the  foot  of  Slieve  Gallon 
(Gullion),  called  Fallach  (rect.  /o/ac/i)  Eireann,  that  is,  the  "  Hiding 
(or  Covering)  of  Ireland,"  and  ordered  him  to  stand  in  the  very 
bottom  of  it.  Gk7i  Co7t  Cadhain  (Glenconkeine),  the  name  of 
this  hollow,  signifies  the  "Valley  of  Cadhan's  Hound."  Tintagh 
was  so  called  from  the  fires  which  were  lighted  on  the  hills  to 
commemorate  the  victory  over  the  monstrous  dog.f 

In  the  Townland  of  Monneyneeny,  said  to  mean  the  "  Bog  of 
Wonders,"  in  this  same  Glenconkeine,  among  the  mirabilia,  is  a 
well,  the  waters  of  which  would  curdle  new  milk,  and  to  which, 
if  pursued,  all  the  mad  dogs  in  the  country  make  their  way,  their 
bite  becoming  doubly  dangerous  when  they  have  drunk  of  it.  It 
is  called  Tobar  an  7JiJiadaid  Iditk,  "Well  of  the  Grey  Dog."  It  lies 
between  two  forts,  curiously  enough  associated  with  a  legend  of 
King  Arthur,  who  is  said  to  have  resided  there.  Another  name 
for  it  was  Tobar  an  mhadaidh  mhaoil,  "  Well  of  the  Cropped  Dog," 
which  Colgan  latinizes  molossits  sine  aicjnbus.  A  legend  respect- 
ing it  exists  to  the  effect  that  it  received  that  name  from  a  king's 
son,  who  was  transformed  into  a  dog  by  witchcraft,  and  chained  to 
the  well  until  King  Arthur's  nephew  released  him.  J 

In  the  County  of  Fermanagh  is  a  mountain  called  in  Irish 
Sliabk-da-chon,  "  Mountain  of  the  Two  Hounds."  "  The  wild 
tradition  of  the  country  connects  them,"  says  O'Donovan,  "with 
Finn's  two  greyhounds,  Sgeolan  and  Bran,  who  were  meta- 
morphosed into  mountains  by  a  witch,  who  appeared  to  them  in 
the  form  of  a  doe."  § 

In  the  Townland  of  Drakestown  in  Louth  is  a  hill  called  in 
Irish  Cnoc-Gartha-Con,  which  O'Conor  latinizes  '' coilis  claman- 
tium  canum,  a  name  it  is  said  to  retain  from  the  time  of  the 
Fians."  II 

On  the  Hill  of  Rathbran  in  Meath  is  a  small  artificial  cave 
called  "  The  Granary,"  and  a  great  stone,  about  which  latter  there 
is  a  legend  that  under  its  shelter  Finn  Mac  Cumhail  and  his  dog 
Bran  rested  when  in  pursuit  of  a  giant.^ 

14 

t  O.S.L.,  Co.  Londonderry,  j7  ~,  pp.  163,  193,  235,  %  Id.,  pp.  181,  194,  204. 

§  O.S.L.,  Co.  Fermanagh, ,  p.  100.  H  O.S.L.,  Co.  Louth,  ,-^ ,  p.  176. 

C.  21;  '  L.  14   '      ' 

^  E.  A.  Conwell,  "  Discovery  of  the  Tomb  of  Ollamh,  Fodhla,"  p.  3,  n. 


Names  and  Legends.  879 

In  Carlow  is  a  district  anciently  called  Magh-Da-Con,  **  Plain 
of  Two  Hounds,"  for  the  same  reason,  we  may  suppose,  as  the 
lake  in  Derry,  and  the  mountain  in  Fermanagh.! 

In  Mayo  occurs  a  very  curious  name,  that  of  Kilconduff  (f///^ 
chon  diiibh),  meaning,  apparently,  the  Cill  of  the  Black  Dog,  which 
causes  O'Conor  to  express  wonder  if  there  was  a  saint  called 
Cil-Dtibh.  Near  Saroo  in  Cork,  on  the  summit  of  the  hill,  is  a 
cairn  measuring  100  paces  in  circumference,  the  centre  of  which 
has  been  considerably  opened  in  search  of  treasure.  It  is  said 
that  two  boys  of  the  Brians  were  exploring  it  for  this  purpose 
when  they  were  stopped  in  their  work  by  the  appearance  of  a 
little  dog,  and  so  terrified  that  they  were  taken  ill  and  died.J 
Lower  down  the  hill  there  is  a  cavern  called  Poll  a  Vandera,  that 
is,  the  *'  Dog's  Hole,"  in  which  were  said  to  be  valuables  con- 
cealed. The  treasure  is  recounted  in  a  poem,  a  snatch  of  which 
preserved  in  memory,  and  translated  from  the  Irish,  runs  :  "  One 
hundred  and  twenty  musical  instruments,  a  vat  of  gold,  a  basket 
and  dish  of  silver  between  the  lake  and  mountain  on  its  face  to 
the  North." 

On  the  mountain  of  Black  Stairs,  on  the  borders  of  Carlow 
and  Wexford,  are  three  peaks,  about  which  there  is  a  legend  that 
they  were  the  three  alighting  places  of  Oisin's  greyhounds,  when 
they  sprang  from  hilltop  to  hilltop. § 

There  is  reason  to  suppose  that  in  prehistoric  times  the 
roving  tribes  of  Northern  Europe  bore,  like  the  Red  Indians  of 
to-day,  the  names  of  animals,  figures  of  which  they  wore  or  carried 
about  them,  2ls  fetiches  potent  to  protect  from  harm.  To  eat  the 
flesh  of  their  tutelary  beast  would  have  been  in  the  highest 
degree  an  abomination,  and  to  this  idea  may  be  ascribed  the 
abstinence  of  certain  peoples  from  the  fiesh  of  some  particular 
animal,  as,  for  example,  the  swine,  the  hare,  and  others.  Among 
the  Irish,  a  form  of  superstition  called  the  geis,  or,  as  we  should 
say,  the  ladoo,  was  very  prevalent.  Each  man  appears  to  have 
been  trammeled  in  his  liberty  of  action  by  certain  geisa  or  re. 
strictions,  which  he  w^as  bound  to  obey.  Where  we  find  that  it 
was  a  gets  to  eat  the  flesh  of  a  particular  animal,  we  may  not 
improbably  conclude  that  that  animal  was  the  lotein  of  the  tribe. 


t  O.S.L.,  Co.  Carlow,  -^,  p.  425.  +  J.  Windele,  "  Cork  W.  and  N.E.,"  p.  636. 

a,  14 

§  See  Eraser's  "Stat.  Account  of  Wexford,"  1S07,  p.  2. 


88o  The  Dolmens  of  Ireland. 


It  is  very  curious  to  observe  that,  both  to  Patrick  and  to 
Cuchullain,  it  was  distinctly  a  gdis  to  eat  the  flesh  of  a  hotmd.  In 
the  case  of  the  latter,  it  is  distinctly  so  stated  in  the  saga  of  his 
death,  where  on  his  way  to  his  last  battle  he  partakes  of  the 
fatal  meat  offered  him  by  three  crones  or  hags.  That  it  was 
so  also  to  Patrick  we  may  gather  from  the  following  very  re- 
markable story.  May  we  infer  that  both  the  saint  and  the 
mythical  and  divine  hero  were  regarded  as  of  the  same  race  or 
nation  or  tribe,  distinguished  as  "  Hounds,"  from  others,  who 
were,  let  us  say,  "  Pigs,"  and  that  it  was  forbidden  them  to  eat 
the  flesh  of  their  totem? 

At  Connawee  in  the  Townland  of  Davidstown,  and  Parish  of 
Kilcolumb  in  Kilkenny,  is  a  monument  consisting  of  a  blind  well 
and  a  heap  of  stones,  on  which  is  placed  a  larger  stone,  with  two 
hollows  in  it.  The  whole  is  called  Gliln  Phadruig  {Genu  Patricii)^ 
"  Patrick's  Knee,"  from  the  belief  that  the  holes  are  impressions 
of  the  knees  of  the  saint.  The  legend  which  is  told  to  account 
for  them  I  give  in  the  words  of  O'Donovan :  "  When  Saint 
Patrick  was  traversing  Ossory  for  the  purpose  of  building  churches, 
congbdil,  f  and  cities,  he  came  to  the  beautiful  elevation  called 
Con7ia  Bhiiidhe,  and  intended  to  build  a  cathedral  there,  which  he 
afterwards  built  at  Waterford.  He  employed  labourers  to  dig  the 
foundations.  At  last  a  pagan  woman  out  of  Ballinchrea  (whose 
name  is  fortunately  forgotten,  but  it  is  supposed  that  she  was  the 
ancestress  of  Nicholas  Bacach,  the  Garsun  Balbh,  and  Sawney 
Ribby  ! ! ),  came  to  him  with  an  offering  of  a  dish  of  roasted  meat 
for  his  dinner,  which  Patrick  received  with  many  grazagams.X 
When,  however,  he  uncovered  the  dish,  he  did  not  like  the  aspect 
of  the  meat,  but  thought  that  he  perceived  the  paw  of  an  unclean 
animal.  He  was  immediately  struck  with  nausea,  and  kneeling 
upon  the  next  stone  to  him,  he  laid  his  two  hands  over  the  roasted 
animal  in  the  dish  in  the  form  of  a  cross,  and  prayed  to  God  tO' 
restore  whatever  animal  it  was  to  its  original  life  and  shape. 

**  And  lo !  he  had  no  sooner  finished  his  prayer  than  a  yellow 
hound  {Ctl  Bhuidhe)  started  into  life,  and,  leaping  out  of  the  dish, 
ran  in  the  direction  of  Waterford. 

"  Patrick  was  struck  with  disgust  and  horror  at  the  sight,  and 
turning  to  the  working  men,  he  said,  in  a  solemn  voice,  '  Pursue 
and  kill  that  hound,  for  she  will  kill  every  man  and  beast  which 

t  e.g.  habitations.  %  e.g.  thanks. 


Names  and  Legends.  88  i 

she  will  meet  in  her  course.'  The  men  pursued  her  with  their 
spades,  shovels,  and  pickaxes,  and,  overtaking  her  on  the  lands 
of  Treanaree,  about  a  mile  E.  of  the  place  whence  she  started, 
succeeded  in  killing  her  there.  There  they  buried  her,  and  over 
her  grave  a  small,  stunted  whitethorn  bush  is  now  to  be  seen 
called  Sgeithin-na-Chon,  the  '  Little  Thorn-bush  of  the  Hound.' 
The  stones  near  this  bush  are  impressed  with  the  marks  of  a 
greyhound's  feet,  and  one  of  them  exhibits  the  figure  of  a  grey- 
hound in  miniature. 

"In  consequence  of  this  ominous  occurrence,  Saint  Patrick 
abandoned  his  project,  but  erected  this  heap  of  stones  as  a 
memorial  of  his  intentions,  on  the  top  of  which  he  placed  the 
stone  on  which  he  knelt  while  he  prayed,  which  was  stamped  with 
the  impressions  of  his  two  knees.  He  called  the  place  Connawee,^ 
in  memorial  of  the  resuscitation  of  the  hound,  and  pronounced  an 
awful  malediction  on  the  woman,  who  had  thus  profanely  insulted 
him,  and  on  her  descendants,  and  place  of  abode.  The  curse  was 
given  in  verse,  and  it  is  believed  that  it  still  rests  on  the  country. 
The  inhabitants  of  Ballincrea  are  remarkable  for  blasphemy,  and 
it  has  not,  since  the  memory  of  tradition,  been  without  a  lame, 
dumb,  or  wry-mouthed  man."  J 

In  the  case  of  Cuchullain,  he  unfortunately  partook  of  the 
hound's  flesh  offered  him  by  the  three  crones,  and,  having  broken 
his  g^is,  proceeded  onward  to  his  death,  the  story  of  which  is 
one  of  the  few  really  sublime  episodes  in  Irish  romance. 

In  Scottish  romance  mystical  hounds  often  appear.  The 
spectral  dog,  too,  in  the  Isle  of  Man,  is  well  known,  as  is  the  Welsh 
story  to  account  for  the  name  Bethgellert.  A  very  singular  parallel 
to  this  latter  tale  is  to  be  found  in  the  writings  of  Etienne  de 
Bourbon,  a  dominican  living  in  the  thirteenth  century,  and  which 
is  located  in  the  canton  of  Villars  and  diocese  of  Lyons,  near 
Villeneuve.  Etienne  was  engaged  in  preaching  against  witch- 
craft, when  he  found  a  practice  existing  among  the  people  of  this 
place  in  accordance  with  which  mothers  carried  their  male  infants 
to  a  certain  saint  called  Gumefort.  On  making  inquiries  as  to 
who  this  saint  might  be,  he  was  told  it  was  no  human  being  at 
all,  but  a  greyhound  {canis  qindam  leporarius),  about  which  the 
following  tale  was  told. 

14 

t  tvee,  i.e.  bhuidhe.  X  O.S.L.,  Co.  Kilkenny,  j;     ,  p.  i8o, 

rL.  I 


882  The  Dolmens  of  Ireland. 

A  child  having  been  left  in  its  cradle  in  its  father's  castle,  an 
immense  serpent  entered,  and  was  making  for  it,  when  the  hound 
who  was  in  charge  attacked  it,  and  after  a  fierce  encounter,  in 
which  he  was  wounded,  succeeded  in  killing  it,  but,  in  doing  so, 
overturned  the  cradle,  and  threw  the  child  some  distance  from  it. 
When  the  nurse  came  in,  and  saw  the  cradle  upset,  and  blood- 
stains around,  thinkino-  the  doe  had  killed  the  child,  she  called  in 
a  soldier,  who  drew  his  sword  and  slew  the  dog.  The  truth 
becoming  known,  great  sorrow  was  expressed  for  the  death  of  the 
faithful  animal.  The  dead  body  was  put  into  a  well  near  the 
castle  gate,  and  a  great  pile  of  stones  raised  over  the  place,  and 
trees  planted  in  memory  of  the  event. 

As  time  went  on,  the  castle  was  razed  to  the  ground,  but  the 
peasantry  continued  to  pay  visits  to  the  spot.  The  dog  was 
honoured  as  a  martyr,  and  prayers  were  offered  to  it  in  times  of 
sickness  and  necessity.  Women,  in  especial,  carried  thither 
weakly  children,  an  old  hag  going  with  them  to  show  the  way, 
and  instruct  them  in  the  ritual  of  the  devotion.  When  they 
arrived  there,  they  offered  salt  and  other  things,  and  hung  up  the 
child's  swathing-bands  {panniculi)  on  the  thorns  which  grew 
around.  They  stuck  a  needle  into  the  bark  of  the  tree  which 
grew  over  the  place,  and  passed  the  naked  body  of  the  boy 
through  a  hole  {foramen)  which  there  was  between  the  trunks  of 
two  of  the  trees,  the  mother  standing  on  the  one  side  and  holding 
out  the  child  to  the  hag  {vetula)  who  stood  on  the  other  ready  to 
receive  it.  They  then  adjured  the  faims  who  dwelt  in  a  wood 
called  Rimis,  with  demoniacal  invocations,  that  they  would  take 
to  themselves  that  weak  and  sickly  infant,  which  they  said  was 
none  of  theirs,  but  belonged  to  the  fauns,  and  give  them  back 
their  own  child,  which  they  {the  fauns)  were  unjustly  keeping 
from  them,  namely,  a  sleek  and  fat  one,  the  picture  of  life  and 
health. 

This  done,  the  "  matricides  "  (as  Etienne  calls  them)  took  the 
infant,  and  laid  it  naked  at  the  foot  of  a  tree  on  the  straw  of  the 
cradle,  and  lighting  two  candles  with  fire  brought  for  the  purpose 
(each  as  long  as  a  thumb),  at  both  ends,  fixed  them  to  the  trunk 
of  the  tree  overhead,  and  went  away  during  the  time  they  were 
burning,  to  such  a  distance  as  would  allow  of  their  neither  hearing 
nor  seeing  what  happened  to  the  squalling  little  victim.  In  this 
way  many  children  were  burned  to  death,  so  Etienne  heard,  and 


Names  and  Legends.  883 


one  woman,  had  not  her  motherly  feeling  come  to  the  rescue  of 
her  offspring,  would  have  found  it  devoured  by  a  wolf  which  came 
out  of  the  wood. 

If,  on  their  return,  they  find  the  child  alive,  they  take  him  to 
the  river  Chalaronne,  a  swiftly  flowing  stream  near  by,  and  plunge 
him  nine  times  in  its  waters.  The  dominican  adds  that  he  called 
the  people  together,  had  the  dog  exhumed,  and  his  bones  burned. 
The  grove  was  cut  down,  and  an  edict  proclaimed  for  the  imposi- 
tion of  penalties  on  those  who  should  use  the  place  for  like 
purposes  again. f 

A  similar  cultus  existed  further  south  at  Romans  in  Drome. J 
The  points  of  similarity  between  these  practices  and  those  we 
have  noticed  in  Ireland  and  elsewhere  are  worthy  of  remark.  We 
have  the  burial  in  a  well,  the  presence  of  a  zuitch  or  hag,  the  cairn 
raised  over  the  well,  the  foramen  for  passing  the  body  throtcgh,  and 
the  pannicnli,  answering  to  the  shreds  hung  on  thorns.  Lastly,  the 
name  of  the  saint,  namely,  Guinefort,  if  we  might  write  it  Ctme- 
feart,  would  literally  signify  in  Irish,  "  Grave  of  the  Dog."  The 
example  which  the  story  affords  of  the  factitious  process  of  saint- 
making,  common  in  the  Middle  Ages,  is  an  excellent  one. 


The  Cow. 

At  Shallee§  in  the  Barony  of  Inchiquin,  and  Parish  of  Kilna- 
mona  in  Clare,  was  a  monument,  presumably  a  dolmen,  at  which 
human  remains  had  been  found,  bearing  the  name  of  Leaba-na- 
glaise,  or  the  Bed  of  the  Cerulean  Cow,  the  property  of  a  certain 
smith,  whose  name,  according  to  the  varied  tradition  of  the  re- 
spective parts  of  the  country  in  which  the  story  is  extant,  was 
Mac  Kineely,  or  Lon  Mac  Liomhtha. 

Slieve-na-glaise,  or  Knock-na-glaise  in  the  same  county,  takes 
its  name  traditionally  from  the  same  fabulous  animal,  and,  accord- 
ing to  a  legend  told  me  at  Castletown,  one  of  the  dolmens  on  that 
elevated  limestone  plateau  bears  the  name  Carrick-na-glaise,||  or 
the  Green  Cow's  Rock.  O'Curry,  however,  in  the  Ord.  Surv. 
Letters,  attributes  this  name  to  a  spot  on  the  mountain-side, 
under  the  dolmen,  and  adds  that  the  smith,  Lon  Mac  Liomhtha, 

t  "Anecdotes  historiques,"  par  A.  Lecoy  de  la   Marche,   p.  325;  also  Quetif  and  Echard, 
"  Scriptores  Ord.  PrKdic,"  i.  193. 

X  "  Topographic  historique  de  I'Ain,"  par  M.  Guigne. 

§  p.  81,  supia.  II  Carrick-na-glasha,  p.  73. 


884  The  Dolmens  of  Ireland. 

was  reported  to  have  lived  on  this  mountain  in  a  cave.f  He  was 
represented  as  a  dwarf,  and  as  the  first  who  ever  made  edged 
weapons  in  Ireland. 

O'Donovan  J  thus  writes  of  him  :  "  He  was  of  the  Tuatha  De 
Danann  by  nation,  and  lived  in  his  cave  in  this  mountain,  unknown 
to  all  the  Scoti  except  the  few  who  lived  in  this  immediate  vicinity. 
He  was  a  most  extraordinary  being,  having  three  hands,  and  only 
one  leg.  Two  of  the  hands  were  in  the  usual  position,  and  the 
third,  with  which  he  turned  the  iron  of  the  anvil,  while  he 
hammered  with  the  other  two,  grew  from  the  middle  of  his 
breast. 

"  He  never  walked  after  the  usual  manner  of  men,  as  is 
obvious  from  his  construction,  but  bounded  from  his  pedestal  by 
the  elastic  power  of  his  waist  and  ham  ;  and  whenever  he  ventured 
abroad,  which  was  very  seldom,  he  was  observed  flying  over  the 
valleys,  and  bounding  over  the  hills.  He  had  lived  a  long  time 
in  Ireland  before  his  art  was  in  requisition,  for  before  his  time 
the  Irish  used  no  iron  or  steel  implements  of  war,  but  fought  with 
sticks  having  stone,  flint,  and  bronze  heads. 

"  Lon  was  for  many  years  supported  by  his  invaluable  cow, 
called  Glas  Gaibhneach,  which  used  to  graze  not  far  from  his 
forofe  on  the  mountain  of  Sliabh-na-Glaise,  which  abounds  in  most 
beautiful  rills  and  luxuriant  pasturage.  This  cow  he  stole  from 
Spain  ;  but  after  having  settled  with  her  in  various  parts,  he  came 
at  length  to  the  resolution  of  spending  his  life  here,  as  being  secure 
from  enemies  by  the  remoteness  and  natural  fastness,  and  the 
then  inaccessible  situation  of  the  place,  and  as  he  had  found  no 
other  retired  spot  in  Ireland  sufficiently  fertile  to  feed  the  Glas 
but  this. 

"  This  cow  would  fill  with  her  milk  any  vessel,  be  it  never 
so  large,  into  which  she  was  milked,  and  it  became  a  saying  in 
the  neighbourhood  that  no  vessel  could  be  found  which  the  Glas 
would  not  fill  at  one  milking.  At  last,  two  women  laid  a  wager 
on  this  point,  one  insisting  that  no  vessel,  be  it  never  so  large, 
could  be  found  in  Ireland  which  the  smith's  cow  would  not  fill, 
and  the  other  that  there  could.     The    '  beats '    being  placed    in 

t  Compare  Weyland  Smith's  Cave,  and  see  the  whole  subject  of  the  "  Smiths  of  Mythology" 
in  O.  Schrader's  "  Sprachvergleichung  und  Urgeschichte."  Like  the  tales  of  giants  hurling  rocks 
and  leaving  their  finger-prints  in  them,  and  of  lakes  which  migrate,  it  is  a  portion  of  the  folk- 
lore which  Ireland  shares  especially  with  the  Finnish  peoples. 

X  O.S.L.,  Co.  Clare,  ^   .  p-  68. 
s>.  23 


Names  and  Legends.  885 

secure  hands,  the  latter  lady  went  to  her  barn,  and  took  out  a 
sieve,  which  she  took  to  Slieve-na-Glaise,  and  into  which,  by- 
consent  of  Lon  Mac  Liomhtha,  she  milked  the  cow.  And, 
behold,  the  milk  passing  through  the  bottom  of  the  sieve,  and 
even  overflowing  it,  fell  to  the  ground,  and  divided  into  seven 
rivulets  {seacht  srotha  na  taescaigke),^  the  seven  streams  of  the 
overflowing.  Taescach  (Teeskagh),  that  is,  the  'overflowing,'  or 
*  irrigation,'  is  now  the  name  of  a  Townland  lying  to  the  W. 
of  Slieve-na-Glaise. 

"  Clear  streams  of  water  now  run  through  the  channels  then 
formed  by  the  copious  floods  of  the  milk  of  the  Glas,  and  one 
of  them  forms  in  winter  a  beautiful  waterfall.  On  the  east  side  of 
Slieve-na-Glaise  is  a  small  valley,  in  which  is  shown  a  spot, 
called  Leaba-na-Glaise,  in  which  the  cow  is  said  to  have  slept 
every  night,  and  near  it  another  spot,  called  the  '  Bed  of  her 
Calf.' 

"  The  hoofs  of  this  cow  were  reversed,  by  which  her  pursuers 
— for  many  sought  to  take  her  away  by  force — were  always 
deceived  in  the  course  which  she  took ;  and  the  impressions  of 
her  feet  are  shown  to  this  day  in  the  rocks  in  many  parts  of  the 
country  around  Slieve-na-Glaise. 

"In  the  same  valley,  in  a  field  called  Garraidh-na-Ceartan,  is 
shown  a  cave  in  a  rock,  called  Cdarta  \  Loinn  Mhic  Liomhtha,  the 
'  Forge  of  Lon,  son  of  Liomhtha,'  and  within  it  the  cinders  and 
dust  of  the  forge.  This  smith  had  seven  sons — one  for  every 
day  of  the  week — who  took  care  of  this  cow,  each  for  a  day  in  his 
turn.  They  held  her  by  the  tail,  and  durst  not  turn  her  about, 
but  let  her  go  wherever  she  wished  to  graze  during  the  day  till 
sunset,  when  they  turned  her  face  towards  her  bed,  and  then  she 
returned  home  directly.  No  blade  of  grass  ever  grew,  or  could 
be  made  to  grow,  on  the  spot  called  her  '  Bed.' 

"  Over  Leaba-na-Glaise,  on  the  summit  of  the  mountain,  there 
is  a  remarkable  cromlech,  under  which  many  poor  families  have 
lived.  It  is,  like  all  the  monuments  of  similar  construction,  called 
by  the  peasantry,  Leaba  Diarmada  agus  Ghraine.  § 

"  To  return  to  the  smith,  Lon  Mac  Liomhtha.  He  resided  for 
a  long  time  in  Slieve-na-Glaise  in  obscurity,  and  totally  unknown 
to  the  Scotic  warriors,  by  means  of  whom  only  he  could  turn  his 
art  to  any  account,  as  his  own  Dedanite  tribe  were  conquered  and 

t  taisighim  —  I  moisten.  %  Usually  cearda.  §  p.  74,  supra. 


886  The  Dolmens  of  Ireland. 

compelled  to  live  in  the  shees  (sidhe),  as  wizards  and  witches,  or 
in  caves  and  fastnesses  as  robbers,  tories,  and  ex-artisans.  At 
length  he  was  determined  to  offer  his  services  to  some  Irish  lord 
of  warlike  fame,  and  hearing  of  the  fame  of  Finn  Mac  Cumhail, 
who  was  then  stationed  with  his  warriors  at  Binn  Edaiii  Mic 
GJiannlaoigh,  now  called  the  Hill  of  Howth,  he  set  out  one  fine 
morning  to  confer  with  him. 

"  It  did  not  take  him  long  to  perform  the  journey,  for 
he  bounded  over  every  hill  and  sprang  over  every  valley,  until  he 
reached  the  far-famed  promontory  of  Bin  Hedar,  and  when  he 
arrived  in  the  presence  of  the  Fenian  chief,  he  was,  as  usual, 
interrogated  as  to  his  name,  country,  profession,  and  business  on 
the  occasion,  to  which  interrogatories  he  thus  replied  :  '  I  am  Lon, 
the  son  of  Leefha.  I  am  acquainted  with  the  intricacies  of  every 
art,  but  my  particular  art  is  that  of  the  smith,  in  which  capacity 
I  am  at  present  in  the  service  of  the  King  of  Lochlin.  I  came 
to  lay  2.  gdsa\  {i.e.  an  injunction  which  every  warrior  was  bound  by 
the  most  solemn  obligations  of  his  order  to  perform)  on  you,  to 
overtake  me  before  I  reach  my  forge.' 

"  He  then  took  to  his  heel,  agus  do  tJmg  s6  cnoc  do  IHm  agics 
gleann  do  tJmsloig,  and  passed  a  hill  in  every  bound  and  a  valley 
in  every  spring,  and  he  delayed  not  until  he  arrived  at  Slieve-na- 
Glaise,  confident  that  none  of  the  Fenians  would  be  able  to 
pursue ;  but  in  this  he  was  mistaken,  for  he  was  pursued  by  the 
swiftest  of  the  Fenians,  by  name  Caoilte,  '  of  the  slender  hard 
legs,'  who,  coming  up  with  the  smith  at  Leaba-na-Glaise,  just  as 
he  was  on  the  point  of  entering  his  forge,  struck  him  slightly 
with  the  palm  of  his  hand  on  the  back  of  his  head,  saying,  '  Foil  a 
ghabha  na  teirghe  sa  pholl  ad  t-amhain' — 'Avast,  smith,  do  not 
go  into  the  cave  alone.'  '  Success,  and  welcome,  oh,  true  soldier 
of  the  illustrious  Fians,'  said  Lon,  '  for  my  visit  to  you  was  not 
for  the  purpose  of  witchcraft  or  incantation,  of  which  you  are 
accustomed  to  accuse  my  people,  the  Dedanites,  but  to  induce 
you  to  come  to  my  forge,  that  I  might  make  for  you  swords 
of  valour  and  edged  weapons,  by  which  you  may  the  more  easily 
destroy  your  enemies  and  extend  your  fame.' 

"  Caoilt^  and  the  smith  remained  together  working  in  the 
forge,  and  at  the  end  of  three  days  Finn  and  seven  other  of  his 
warriors  joined  them,  and  the  smith  sold  them  eight  iron  swords 

t  i.e.  a  giist  see  p.  879. 


Names  and  Legends.  8S7 

well  tempered  and  steeled.  On  this  occasion  GoU  and  Conan 
the  son  of  Moirne  broke  the  smith's  anvil ; — they  were  so  powerful 
in  striking  with  the  sledge,  but  not  until  they  had  had  several 
swords  made  for  themselves. 

"  After  this  Finn  and  his  seven  warriors  proceeded  to  the 
summit  of  Ceann  Sleibne,  where  a  party  of  the  Tuatha  De  Danann 
were  stationed,  having  guards  posted  on  the  principal  corras,  or 
causeways  on  the  pass  leading  to  that  conspicuous,  green,  and 
beautiful  hill.  These  were  the  causeways  of  Cor^a  Mhic  Buirrin, 
near  the  Castle  of  Ballyportry ;  of  Corofin,  one  mile  to  the  west 
of  it ;  of  Cora  Mhic  Eogain,  one  mile  to  the  west  of  Corofin  ;  and 
of  Cora  na  maididhe,  further  to  the  west. 

"  Finn  and  his  seven  warriors  here  attacked  the  party  of  the 
Dedanites  who  were  there  located,  and  cut  them  to  pieces  with 
the  swords  which  the  smith  had  made  for  them.  There  is  a 
spot  on  the  summit  of  the  hill  of  Ceanntsleibhe  {sic)  still  called 
Suidhe  Finn,  i.e.  '  Sessio  Finni,'  and  the  bones  of  the  Dedanites 
are  daily  dug  out  of  the  graves  in  which  they  were  interred. 

"  It  is  not  told  what  finally  happened  to  Lon  the  smith  and 
his  cow,  but  it  is  believed  that  the  cow  was  shortly  afterwards 
stolen  from  him  by  a  man  from  Ulster,  and  that  he  was  obliged 
to  depend  on  his  trade  only  for  support."  f 

O' Donovan  notices  both  here  and  elsewhere  that  it  is  strange 
that,  famous  as  this  cow  is  in  Irish  oral  romance,  he  "  never  yet 
found  any  written  notice  of  her  in  any  document  historical, 
fabulous,  or  mixed,  although  the  smith  to  whom  she  belonged  is 
frequently  referred  to."  She  was  evidently  the  Cornucopia  of 
Irish  mythology,  and  the  fact  that  the  people  held  in  honor 
a  lactiferous  cow  as  their  horn  of  abundance  proves  their  pastoral 
origin.  **  A  cow,"  adds  the  same  authority,  "  called  Glas 
Teamhrach,  is  referred  to  by  the  writers  on  the  ancient  topo- 
graphy of  Tara,  and  it  would  appear  that  a  mound  was  erected 
in  honor  of  her  on  that  hill,  but  no  legend  about  her  has 
descended  to  our  times,  as  far  as  I  know." 

When  I  was  at  Slieve-na-Glaise,  in  1895,  I  heard  nothing 
about  the  dwarf  Lon,  but  the  story  of  the  cow  having  been 
milked  into  a  sieve  was  distinctly  remembered.  It  was  a  spiteful 
old  hag,  however,  who   played   this  trick.     The  cow  in  disgust 

t  "The  above  story,"  so  O'Curry  adds,  "  was  very  correctly  taken  down  by  Mr.  O'Donovan, 
from  the  lips  of  the  most  illustrious  Seanchaidhe  of  the  Kenel  Owen  now  living,  namely,  John 
Reagh  O'Cahane,  tailor,  of  Corofin." 


888  The  Dolmens  of  Ireland. 

either  died  or  quitted  the  vicinity,  and,  ever  since,  the  rills  which 
previously  ran  milk  have  ran  water  only. 

The  cow-story,  as  I  heard  it  told  by  a  man  aged  a  hundred 
in  1888,  near  Bunbeg  in  Donegal,  differed  entirely  from  the 
Clare  one,  and  seems  to  have  related  to  the  animal  after  she 
was  stolen  by  the  Ulster  man.  I  here  give  it  as  I  took  it 
down  : — 

"  Balor  was  a  giant  who  lived  in  Tory.  He  had  one  eye, 
and  over  it  nine  covers.  It  was  foretold  to  him  that  his  own 
grandson  would  have  his  life.  He  had  only  one  daughter,  whom 
he  kept  in  confinement  in  a  gaol.  He  kept  twelve  waiting-maids 
to  look  after  her.  Every  night  he  would  sit  up  and  shake 
flour  over  the  sea  between  him  and  the  mainland,  so  as  to  be 
able  to  track  any  boat  which  crossed. 

"  There  was  a  man  who  lived  on  the  mainland  called  Gavigan,f 
who  had  a  cow  called  Glas  Gavigain.  It  was  the  milk  of  ten 
cows  she  would  give ;  and  Balor  was  after  the  man  to  get  the 
cow.  In  the  morning  her  master  would  let  her  out,  and  she 
would  feed  on  '  The  Rosses,'  and  it  was  twenty-four  hours  that 
it  would  be  before  she  would  go  back.  One  morning,  after  he 
had  let  her  out,  Balor  was  waiting  for  her  with  a  halter  and 
a  boat.  When  the  cow  was  passing,  he  pulled  her  down  by 
the  tail,  so  that  the  track  would  be  up  from  the  shore. 

"  Next  day  her  master  went  out  to  look  for  her,  and 
scoured  all  the  country  round.  While  searching,  he  saw 
Manannan,  a  fairy-man.  Manannan  told  him  that  Balor  had 
taken  her  to  Tory.  Manannan  threw  a  stick  on  the  sea,  and  there 
came  a  corach.%  *  Will  you  go  with  me  to  Tory  ? '  says  Manannan. 
They  went.  When  Gavigan  got  to  Tory,  says  Manannan  :  '  Go 
and  ask  the  cow  from  Balor.'     He  went,  and  asked  it. 

"  Balor  said  he  would  never  give  it  until  Gavigan  should  go 
back  to  his  own  byre  again  on  the  mainland,  and  put  the  halter 
round  the  cow's  horns  from  thence.  Balor  supposed  he  could 
not  do  it,  but  the  fairy-man  brought  it  about.  Then  Manannan 
told  Gavigan  to  go  and  ask  the  cow  again.  Balor  said  he  would 
never  give  it  until  Gavigan  should  eat  seven  crocks  full  of  butter, 
and  seven  cows'  hides  that  should  have  been  hung  up  on  the 
beam  of  the  house,  and  covered  with  soot  for  seven  years.     Balor 

t  Gavida,  in  O'Donovan's  version  of  the  tale.  "  A  smith"  \s  gab/ia. 
X  Or  curach,  a  boat  made  of  hide  stretched  on  a  wooden  frame,  still  used  on  that  coast. 


Names  and  Legends.  889 


supposed  he  could  not  do  it,  but  the  fairy-man  brought  this  about 
also. 

"  Then  Balor  said  he  would  never  give  the  cow.  *  Go  to  him/ 
said  Manannan  to  Gavigan,  '  and  tell  him  you  will  make  trees 
to  grow  on  Tory ; '  for  trees  had  never  grown  there,  and  Balor 
much  wished  for  them.  Balor  said  he  would  give  the  cow  for 
the  trees.  The  trees  grew,  and  he  let  the  cow  go  then.  The 
next  morning  there  were  no  trees,  but  the  cow  was  safe  at  home 
with  her  master." 

The  story-teller  then  proceeded  to  relate  how,  with  Manannan's 
help,  Gavigan  introduced  himself  to  Balor's  daughter,  and  how 
Lug  was  born  who  finally  killed  his  grandfather  Balor. 

O' Donovan's  version  of  this  tale  differs,  as  we  shall  see, 
from  the  above. f  The  owner  of  the  cow  is  not  Gavigan,  but 
Mac  Kineely,  who  has  two  brothers,  Gavida  a  smith,  and 
Mac  Samthainn.  Balor  covets  the  Glas  Gaibneen  of  Mac 
Kineely,  and  "  in  order  to  obtain  her,  puts  forth  all  his  powers 
of  strength  and  stratagem.  One  day  Mac  Kineely  had  repaired 
to  his  brother's  forge  to  get  some  swords  made,  and  took  with 
him  his  famous  cow  by  a  halter  which  he  constantly  held  in  his 
hand  by  day,  and  by  which  she  was  secured  at  night. 

"  Arrived  at  the  forge,  he  entrusted  her  to  the  care  of  Mac 
Samthainn,  who  was  there  also.  Balor,  assuming  the  form  of  a 
red-headed  little  boy,  came  to  Mac  Samthainn,  and  told  him  that 
he  heard  his  brothers  (Gavida  and  Mac  Kineely)  saying  within  at 
the  furnace  that  they  would  use  all  his  (Mac  Samthainn's)  steel  in 
making  Mac  Kineely's  swords,  and  would  make  his  of  iron.  While 
Mac  Samthainn  hurries  off  to  prevent  this  wrong,  Balor  holds  the 
cow,  and  dragging  her  down  the  beach  by  the  tail,  put  off  from 
Port-na-Glaise,  that  is,  the  '  Harbour  of  the  Glas,'  or  '  Green  Cow.' 
Mac  Kineely,  after  discovering  what  had  happened,  and  after 
venting  his  rage  on  his  brother,  went  to  consult  a  druid  in  a  lonely 
habitation,  who  told  him  that  he  would  never  recover  the  cow  so- 
long  as  Balor  was  alive,  for  he  (Balor)  would  never  close  the 
basilisk  eye,  which  was  in  the  middle  of  his  forehead,  but  would 
petrify  with  it  all  who  came  to  Tory  to  take  her  back." 

A  familiar  spirit,  or  fairy,  called  Biroge  of  the  Mountain,  how- 
ever, puts  Mac  Kineely  into  the  position  of  an  agent  to  kill  Balor 
by  causing  him  to  bring  about  the  fulfilment  of  a  prophecy  that 

t  A.  4  M.,  vol.  i.  p.  iS,  11. 
VOL.  III.  N 


Sgo  The  Dolmens  of  Ireland. 

Balor  should  die  by  the  hand  of  his  own  grandson.  Ethnea  was 
the  name  of  Balor's  daughter  whom,  in  fear  of  her  marrying,  he 
kept  in  seclusion  in  Tory,  but  Mac  Kineely,  dressed  as  a  woman, 
goes  thither,  and  becomes  the  father  of  the  boy  Lug,  by  whom 
Balor  is  finally  slain. 

Glen  Gavlen,  in  the  County  of  Cavan,  also  derived  its  name 
from  this  enchanted  cow.  "  I  find  it  chronicled  by  tradition,"  says 
0'Donovan,f  "  that  this  immortal  glen  derived  its  name  from  the 
famous  cow,  Glas  Gaibhlen,  who  belonged  to  a  celebrated  Tuatha 
De  Danann  smith,  called  Gaibhlen,  who,  according  to  the  tradi- 
tion that  still  lingers  here,  kept  his  furnace  in  the  Townland  of 
Doire-na-tuan,  near  the  source  of  the  Shannon,  where  he  melted 
the  ore  of  the  mountain  Sliabh-an-iarainn,  and  where  there  has 
been  a  forge  ever  since.  The  cow  supplied  all  the  glen  with  milk, 
and,  when  passing  out  of  it,  her  udder,  which  was  so  vastly  large, 
formed  the  gap  between  the  two  mountains  called  Beul-a-Bhealaigh, 
that  is,  the  '  Mouth  of  the  Pass.'  What  caused  her  to  forsake  the 
glen  is  no  longer  remembered  by  tradition." 

At  Ballynascreen  in  Derry,  where  Sampson  notes  the  ex- 
istence of  encircled  dolmens,  O' Donovan  states  that  the  legend 
of  this  cow  also  exists. 

In  the  Townland  of  Labby  in  Glenconkeine,  in  the  same 
county,  she  was  also  vividly  remembered.  "The  smith,"  in  this 
case,  "  had  his  forge  in  this  Townland.  This  place  where  she  lay," 
says  0'Donovan,J  "is  called  to  this  day,  LeabaidJi-na-Glaiser 
In  the  story,  as  told  here,  she  is  lost,  and  three  youths  go  forth  to 
find  her,  and  here  "begins  that  part  of  the  story  which  is  called 
T6i7^eacht-na-Glaise,  that  is,  the  '  Search  of  the  Glas,'  which  would 
take  up  as  many  volumes  as  the  '  History  of  a  Pair  of  Tongs.' 

"  They  (the  youths)  go  from  place  to  place,  consulting  a 
variety  of  seers  and  druids,  until  they  find  her  at  Bacan-na-bo,§ 
a  black  road  on  the  sea-coast  not  far  from  Downhill,  and  her 
halter  was  tied  to  the  rock  by  means  of  a  hole  drilled  through  it, 
which  is  to  be  seen  to  this  day.  The  O'Cantys  (that  is,  the  name 
of  the  three  youths)  seized  on  her,  and,  after  various  adventures, 
resembling  those  of  the  *  Seven  Champions  of  Christendom,' 
brought  her  back  to  Gaibhlen. 


14 

t  O.  S.L.,  Co.  Cavan,  - — ^,  p.  16. 
B.  16   ' 

t  O.S.L.,  Co.  Londonderry,  -  - — >  p.  265.  §  Bacdn  is  a  stake  to  tic  cattle  to. 


Names  and  Legends.  891 

"  In  this  story  it  is  a  Tuatha  De  Danann  boy,  who  beguiled 
one  of  the  O'Cantys  into  running  into  the  forge  to  see  that  his 
sword  was  being  properly  made,  and  so  leaving  the  cow  un- 
minded." 

It  is  noticeable  that  the  name  Knockalassa  (?  for  Knock-na- 
glassa,  or  glaise)  is  that  of  the  Townland  in  which  is  the  dolmen 
on  Mount  Callan  in  Clare,  and  that  the  same  name  occurs  else- 
where, f 

The  dolmen  near  Lough  Arrow,  called  the  Labby,  is  in  the 
Townland  of  Carrickglass,  in  Sligo  ;  and  another  near  the  Barr  of 
Fintona,  in  Tyrone,  is  also  on  a  Townland  bearing  a  similar  name. 

In  Clare  there  is  a  Townland  called  Kil-bo-glaise,  so  that  this 
Enchanted  Cow  had  her  cille,  which  can  scarcely  here  mean  a 
"church."  In  Sligo  there  is,  in  the  Townland  of  Maghera- 
lackagh,  a  Tobar-na-Glaisc,  so  that  she  had  also  her  well  from 
which,  according  to  local  tradition,  she  used  to  drink.  J 

The  legend  about  her  appears  to  me  to  xwvi  pari  passu  with 
that  of  Grainne.  The  latter  is  stolen  from  her  owner,  that  is,  her 
betrothed  husband,  who  pursues  her  all  over  Ireland.  Grainne 
takes  a  year  about  it ;  the  Cow  takes  a  day  and  a  night.  Grainne's 
captor,  Diarmaid,  is  killed  by  the  point  of  a  boar's  bristle  ;  the 
Cow's  captor  by  a  red-hot  iron  bar  thrust  into  his  eye  by  Lug. 

Whether  this  be  so  or  not,  Scandinavian  mythology  affords  us 
a  close  parallel  for  the  Enchanted  Cow  in  the  cow  called  Aud- 
humbla,  formed  by  the  giant  Ymer  out  of  the  frozen  vapour 
melting  into  drops,  called  by  the  frost-giants  Aurgelmer.  From 
her  udders  ran  four  rivers  of  milk,  which  fed  Ymer.  When  she 
licked  the  salt  rime,  a  man  was  produced  called  Bure,  who  begat 
a  son  called  Bor,  who  married  Bestla,  daughter  of  the  lotun,  or 
Giant,  Bolthorn,  and  had  three  sons,  Odin,  Vile,  and  Ve.§  Another 
version  of  this  myth  gives  the  names  of  this  triplet,  namely,  the 
sons  of  the  lotun  Bor,  as  Odin,  Haenir,  and  Lodur,  or  Lothur, 
who,  in  this  case,  are  the  three  /Esir,  or  gods,  who  create  the  first 
man  and  woman,  Ask  and  Embla,  the  Ash  and  the  Elm. 

It  appears  to  me  that  a  version  of  this  myth  is  to  be  found 
amoncr  the  Irish  legends.  It  is  as  follows:  Eochaidh  Fedlech, 
son  of  Finn,  son  of  Finnlocha,  begat  by  Crofinna,  daughter  of  Art 

t  See  p.  79   supra.  t  O.S.L.,  Co.  Sligo,  ^.    q  p.  243. 

§  Anderson,  R.  B.,  "Norse  Mythology,"  Chicago,  1S75,  p.  173. 


892  The  Dolmens  of  Ireland. 

Uchtlethan,  three  sons  and  six  daughters,  namely,  Bres  (also  called 
Eochaid),  Nar,  and  Lothar,  the  sons,  and  Muman,  Hele,  Medb, 
Derbrenn,  Clothru,  and  Ethne,  the  daughters. 

Bres,  Nair,  and  Lothar  correspond  to  Odin,  Hcenir,  and 
Lodur,  in  the  Scandinavian  legend.  In  Ireland  they  were  known 
as  the  Three  Find-Emna,  or  Finns  of  Emain,  or,  according  to 
another  authority,  the  Three  Fidhs,  that  is,  Woods — of  Emain. 
The  first  name  in  the  Irish  list,  Bres,  is  merely  an  epithet,  mean- 
ing "  handsome,"  or  perhaps  substantively,  "  a  prince."  As  an 
epithet  it  sometimes  stands  by  itself,  and  indicates  a  personage 
called  Eochaid,  so  that  we  have  this  latter  name  in  the  Irish 
version,  in  the  place  of  Odin  in  the  Scandinavian.  The  Tuatha 
De  Danann  king,  or  deity  called  *'  The  Dagda,"  was  also  named 
Eochaid,  and  so  also  was  Ollamh  Fodla,t  descended  from  Ir, 
the  celebrated  founder  of  the  Feast  of  Temair,  and  the  ancestor 
of  the  clan  Rudraighe,  in  each  and  all  of  whom  we  have  probably 
the  Gaedhelic  equivalent  of  the  great  Scandinavian  deity,  Woden, 
or  Odin,  among  whose  ancestors,  as  among  those  of  Bres,  we 
discover  the  name  Finn.;]; 

The  second  name  in  the  Irish  triplet  is  Nar,  and  in  the  Norse 
one  Haenir,  or  Hsener.  In  the  Norse  Sagas,  however,  we  have 
this  identical  name  Nar  occurring  as  that  of  the  second  of  three 
sons  of  Loke.§  The  third  name  in  the  Irish  triplet,  namely, 
Lothur,  is  identical  with  the  third  name  in  the  Norse  one,  namely, 
Lodur  or  LoSer.  The  latter  personage  is  identified  with  Loke, 
who  seems  to  bear  a  mythological  affinity  to  the  Lug  of  the 
Irish  romances.     Both  are  represented  as  tricky  divinities.     Loke 

t  Fodla  and  Vuoden  (Wodan)  appeared  to  Mone  to  be  identical.  "F6d"  in  Irish,  "gwydd" 
in  Welsh,  means  "art,  skill,  sense,  knowledge."  A  deity  bearing  this  name  would  correspond 
with  the  ^Ie^cury  of  the  Romans,  whom  the  German  tribes  were  said  to  worship. 

X  In Gunn's edition  of  "Nennius"  we  have  : —  The  Irish  pedigree  runs: — 

Unn  Finnlocha 


Fredulf 
1 

Finn 

Freolaf 
,,    1 

Eochaidh  Fedlech  =Crofinna. 
1 

Vuoden. 

I 

1                        1 

The  Icelandic  genealogy  runs  : — 

Bres 
(Eochaidh) 
Bare. 

1 
Bor  =  Bestla 

1 

Nar                Lothar. 

1 

Odin 

{i.e.  Woden, 

1                        1 
Hoenir             Lodu 

r. 

Vuoden.) 
§  Anderson,  "Norse  Mytholog)',"  p.  400. 

Names  and  Legends.  893 


being  the  indirect  cause  of  the  death  of  Baldr  by  means  of  a 
statagem,  and  Lug  also  slaying  his  grandfather  Balor  in  like 
fashion. 

The  field  of  comparison  between  Norse  and  Irish  and  German 
mythology  is,  however,  far  too  wide  to  be  entered  upon  here, 
where  we  are  simply  considering  the  resemblance  between  the 
enchanted  cows  Glas  Gavlen  and  Audhumbla.  The  name  of 
the  latter  is,  according  to  Mullenhoff,  obscure.f  He  is  inclined, 
however,  to  connect  it  etymologically  with  that  of  Humbli, 
Humelus,  or  Humblus,  from  whose  son,  Lother,  brother  of 
Dan  or  Danus,  Saxo,J  in  his  fabulous  genealogy,  derives  the 
Danish  royal  line.  Johannes  Magnus,§  in  like  manner,  speaks  of 
Humelus  as  the  father  of  Danus  and  Anglus,  a  most  powerful 
monarch,  and  the  ruler  of  many  nations.  Among  the  places 
worthy  of  mention  in  and  near  the  old  and  sacred  site  of 
Lederun,||  or  Lethra,  in  the  island  of  Selande,  Wormius  alludes 
to  the  tomb  of  Humble,  while  his  name  is  traditionally  said  to 
enter  into  those  of  several  places  ^  in  Denmark. 

Jordanesff  places  at  the  head  of  his  Gothic  genealogy  Gapt 
(Norse  "  Gaut  "),  whose  son,  the  ancestor  of  the  Gothic  royal  line, 
is  Humal.     From  these  names  we  cannot  dissever  that  of  Humber, 

t  "Germanias,  Mon.  Hist.,"  vol.  v.  Jordanes,  "Getica,"  edit,  Mommsen,  note  by  Mullenhofif, 
p.  143,  on  "  Hulmul,  alias  Humal." 

X  Saxo.  Gramm.,  "  Hist.  Dan.,"  lib.  i.  ;  see  Velschow's  note  in  Miiller's  edit.  "  Havnice,"  1858, 
Part  ii.,  p.  38,  who  connects  Humble  with  Amalus,  and  hence  with  the  Amali.  The  name 
Amali,  he  says,  is  easily  changed  by  a  Dane  into  Humble.  For  the  interchange  of  a  and  zi  in  the 
Celtic  names  Camulos  and  Camalodunum,  see  Gllick,  "Kelt,  namen,"  p.  50,  n.,  which  would  bring 
the  Lusitanian  Camalus,  found  by  Sr.  Sarmento  in  inscriptions  at  Briteiros,  also  into  the  question 
.(see  Cartailhac,  "Ages  prehist.  de  I'Espagne"  (fig.  416)).  For  Rhys's  proposed  identification 
of  Cumal  and  Camulos,  see  "Celtic  Heathendom,"  p.  29,  where  he  owns  that  there  is  "a 
.scarcity  of  Celtic  words  to  explain  it,"  and  connects  it  with  the  O.S.  /u'mi/,  and  German  himmel. 
The  name  of  the  Cornish  river  Camal,  famous  in  Arthurian  romance,  should  also  be  noted.  Ireland 
possesses  the  form  Amal  in  the  name  Amhalgaid,  the  great  eponymous  of  the  Hua-n-Amalgaidh, 
to  whom  appertained  the  territory  of  Tirawley  ( =  Tir-Amalgaidh).  Amal,  according  to  Miillenhoff. 
signifies  "strong,  industrious,  indefatigable."  The  form  and  composition  of  the  name  corre- 
sponds with  that  of  Vidhelgeat  (  =  Vindelgaut),  a  proper  name  in  Anglo-Saxon  (Zeuss,  "Die 
Deutschen,"  p,  57,  n.).  According  to  his  Irish  pedigree,  Amalgaidh's  father  was  Algaidh,  also  a 
Teutonic  name,  but  his  mother  bore  a  Celtic  name  (Ruadh),  and  so  did  her  father,  who  was 
Art  Uichtleathan  (=  Victo-litanus),  with  which  compare  the  name  of  the  ^Eduan  chief,  Con- Victo- 
llitanis  in  Caesar  (De  B.  G.  vii.  37).  Ruadh's  sister  was  Crofinna,  mother  of  the  triplets  Bres, 
Nar,  and  Lothar,  which  is  comparable  with  that  of  Odin,  Hsenir,  and  LoSer,  as  we  have  seen. 
Amalgaidh,  we  are  specially  told,  was  of  the  GaedJielic  race,  a  name  which  is  itself  Teutonic 
an  form  and  etymology,  Gaed  equalling  Geat.  The  intermixture  of  Celtic  names  with  Teutonic 
in  Irish  pedigrees,  however  fabulous,  appears  to  me  to  point  to  a  truth,  namely,  that  the  Gaedhels, 
•or  Goidels,  or  Gael  were  of  Germano-Gallic  origin,  coming  from  the  borderlands  on  the  Rhine, 
and  further  east,  where  the  two  languages  were  once  settled  side  by  side. 

§  "  Hist.  Goth.,"  lib.  2,  3.  The  Chronicle  of  King  Eric  says  that  Dan,  son  of  Humble,  came 
from  Suecia,  which  induces  the  idea  that  Humble  himself  came  from  that  country  (see  "  Script. 
Rer.  Suec,"  i.  p.  240). 

II  Wormius,  "  Mon.  Dan.,"  p.  114. 

^  e.g.  Humbleore,  Humbleba'k,  Humblebye,  Humblehavn,  etc. 

tt  Jordanes,  "  Getica"  («/  supra),  note  by  Miillenhoff,  p.  143,  where  Gapt  is  stated  to  be  the 
ifirst  of  the  heroes  called  Anses,  the  same  as  the  Norse  Gaut,  and  the  Anglo-Saxon  Geat,  accordmg 
ito  Grimm,  although  Miillenhoff  expresses  a  doubt. 


894  The  Dolmens  of  Ireland. 

called  in  the  letter  of  King  Edward  to  Pope  Boniface,  "rex 
Hynorum,"  f  the  traditional  ancestor  and  leader  of  Picts,  who 
came,  it  was  said,  from  ScythiaJ  to  Britain,  and  from  whom, 
since  he  was  drowned  in  it,  the  river  Humber  took  its  name.§ 

While,  then,  there  is  no  need  that  we  should  give  credence  to 
the  factitious  genealogies — nor  did  their  authors  intend  we  should 
— in  respect  to  the  persons  therein  recorded  having  at  any  time 
been  living  men,  they  agree  in  disclosing  to  us  the  fact  that,  in 
this  name  "  Humel,"  we  have  that  of  a  Baltic  deity,  in  whom  the 
several  peoples  of  Teutonic  stock,  who  dwelt  around  that  inland 
sea,  recognized  a  mighty  progenitor  of  their  race  who  may,  as 
in  the  case  of  the  Chinese  Tien,  have  been  Himmel  or  Heaven 
itself.  A  southern  extension  of  the  name,  applied  to  a  tribe  and 
a  district,  is  found  in  that  of  the  Hummelinck  and  the  Humelings 
who  occupied  it — a  tract  of  moor  and  morass  on  the  right  bank 
of  the  Ems,  north  of  Osenbruck  (Osnabruck).||  This  was  a 
part  of  the  country  of  the  Chauci — (Hugas,  as  their  name  became) 
— who,  as  Virchow  has  shown,  were  closely  connected  with  the 
Frisians.^ 

Now,  over  the  Frisians  there  reigned,  at  a  period  which  Leo 
equates  with  the  early  portion  of  the  sixth  century,  Finn,  son  of 
Folcwalda.ff  We  have,  therefore,  a  more  or  less  direct  connec- 
tion between  the  name  Finn  and  that  of  Hummelinof.  The 
name  Humal  may  well  be  the  same  as  Cumal,  the  name  of  the 
father  of  Finn  Mac  Cumhail ;  and  this  name,  again,  we  may, 
if  Rhys  is  right  in  his  etymology,  extend  into  Gaul  and  Britain,, 
and  discover  in  the  name  of  the  war-god  Camulos,  just  as  Lug, 
under  various  forms  of  his  name,  appears  in  Germany,JJ  Scan- 

t  Cnyghton,  IL,  "  De  Event.  Anglia',"  iii. ;  see  "Sher.,"  p.  129. 

X  According  to  Bede,  the  Picts  came  from  Scythia. 

§  This  myth  al>out  rivers  taking  name  from  eponymous  heroes,  or  heroines,  having  been  drowned 
in  them  is  the  common  property  of  the  Germanic  coasts  and  the  British  Isles,  John  Picardt,  in 
his  curious  little  work,  previously  ([uoted,  on  the  antiquities  of  the  Netherlands  and  Drenthe,  tells 
us  that  the  Vechta  took  its  name  from  Vechtan,  one  of  the  llilde-Gasten,  or  Heylige-Gasten,  the 
ancient  pagan  high-priests  of  the  Tubantes,  men  of  old  family  and  high  in  authority,  to  whom  the 
people  did  reverence,  who  was  drowned  in  that  river.  Vecta,  or  Wecta,  is,  according  to  the  Anglo- 
Saxon  Chronicle,  the  son  of  Woden  (Voden)  or  Odin.  In  the  Elder  Edda,  Wecta,  or  Vecta,  is 
equated  with  Odin  himself. 

II    Caspar  Schneider,  "  Saxonia  Vetus,"  Dresden,  1727,  p.  361. 

1  "  Abland.  zu  Berlin,"  1876  (publ.  1877). 

tt  Folcwalda  is  simply  a  title,  meaning  "ruler,"  or  "chief."  It  appears  also  as  the  name  of 
the  father  of  the  Finn  in  Anglo-Saxon  genealogies.  The  authority  for  Finn  having  been  king  of 
the  Frisians  is  the  poem  of  Beowulf,  the  historical  basis  of  which  Leo  has  shown  to  belong  to  the 
years  512-520,  since  Ilygelac,  King  of  the  Geata',  who  marches  against  the  P'risians,  is  the  same 
as  Chochilaich  mentioned  by  Gregory  of  Tours,  and  whose  date  is  known. 

tX  There  was  an  idol,  of  the  same  class  as  the  Irminsul  apparently,  in  the  Wetteran,  which 
stood  60  cubits  high,  and  was  called  Lug,  or  Ilcillug.  It  is  mentioned  by  Ph.  Dieffenbach,  p.  291. 
Grimm  ("  Teut.  Myth."  transl.  p.  1322)  suggests  liciligcr  loh,  as  the  explanation  of  the  word.     la 


Names  and  Legends.  895 


dinaviaj  Britain,J  Ireland,§  France,||  Holland,^  and  Northern 
Spain. ft  In  the  Irish  pedigrees  of  Finn,  his  father  Cumhal  has 
a  brother  lodhlan,  a  name  which  is  clearly  geographical,  and 
points  to  Jutland,  or  lot-land,  the  country  of  the  lotuns,  or 
Eotenas,  a  tradition  which  causes  us  to  note  the  fact  that  in 
the  poem  of  Beowulf,  Finn  of  Finnsberg  is  the  leader  of  the  Eotens 
as  well  as  of  the  Fresnas. 

There  can  be  no  pretence  whatever  for  regarding  Finn  Mac 
Cumhail  as  an  historic  personage,  any  more  than  there  is  for  so 
regarding  Odin  ;  nor  is  there  anything  Celtic  about  him  except- 
ing the  language  of  the  sagas,  in  which  his  exploits  are  narrated. 
Many  of  these  exploits,  however,  may  be  genuine  traditions  of 
those  of  chieftains  who  at  various  times  served  as  mercenaries  in 
Ireland,  or  fought  for  the  national  cause.  If  we  take  into  con- 
sideration the  folk-lore  attaching  to  Finn's  name,  and  his  saga  and 
genealogy  together,  the  whole  may  be  termed  Finno-Teutonic. 
If  we  separate  them,  the  folk-lore  has  its  special  affinities  in  Estho- 
nian  Finland,  while  the  saga  finds  its  place  among  those  of  the 
North  and  of  Germany,  and  in  the  system  of  forming  allegorical 
pedigrees  to  illustrate  ethnic  traditions  which  was  current  in  the 
time  of  Tacitus,  and  continued  in  the  Middle  Ages.  In  the  name 
of  the  Feinne  we  seem  to  have  that  of  the  Finns,  who  are  almost 
equated  with  the  lotuns  in  the  Norse  sagas,  while  the  latter,  again, 
stand  in  an  equally  close  relation  to  the  Huns,  that  is,  the  H linen 
and  Hyni.  It  has  sometimes  occurred  to  me  that  the  name  of 
the  Peene,JJ  Pene,  or  Peine  river,  whence  the  name  "  Circipeni," 
for  those  who  dwelt  on  its  banks,  was  derived,  may  mark  a 
settlement  of  these  people.  They  were,  it  seems  possible,  a 
western  extension  of  the  Phinni  of  Ptolemy,  and  of  the  Fenni 
against  whom  the  Emperor  Volusian  (a.d.  250)  waged  war,  as,  to 
judge  also  by  his  coins,  he  did  perhaps  against  the  Galindse  also. 
If  Finns  were  not  already  there,  it  is  not  unlikely  that  an  early 


old  German,  log  signifies  "  fire."  In  the  north  of  Scotland,  loge  has  still  that  meaning,  and  lo7ijey 
meaning  a  "  blaze  of  fire,"  is  in  general  use.  In  Walter  Scott's  "Guy  Mannering,"  a  light  loe  is 
a  "  bright  fire"  (see  "  Heimskringla,"  edit.  Laing,  revised  by  Anderson,  note,  p.  289) . 

t  Loke,  Lo^er,  etc. 

X  Luguballium,  Old  Carlisle  ;  Dinlleu,  in  Wales. 

§  Lug  and  Lugaidh,  personal  names  in  romance  and  history ;  Lugnassed,  the  Lammas  fair  and 
festival  at  Tailten  ;  Dunlewey  in  Donegal ;  Lugh's  Grave  in  Louth,  etc.,  etc. 

II  Lugudunum,  Lyons  ;  Lugdunum  Convenarum,  in  the  Pyrenees. 

^  Lugdunum  Batavorum,  Leyden. 

tt  The  Lugoves,  to  whom  a  temple  was  built  and  presented  to  a  "  college  of  cobblers,"  upon 
which  Rhys  remarks  that  in  Welsh  romance,  "  Gwydion  and  his  son  Lieu  assume  the  guise  of  shoe- 
makers "  ("  Celtic  Heathendom,-'  p.  424). 

XX   Zedler,  in  voc. 


Sg6  The  Dolmens  of  Ireland. 

migration  of  the  Baltic  peoples  westward  to  the  north  of  France 
and  the  British  Isles  took  place  when  the  Cimbri  and  Teutones 
went  south  in  the  second  century  B.C.  If  we  may  suppose  so, 
history  only  repeated  itself  when,  in  the  third  century  a.d.,  upon  the 
Goths,  Suevi  and  Vandals  vacating  their  northern  seas,  the  Sclaves, 
called  by  the  Germans  "  H  linen,"  entered  upon  their  lands,  and  pene- 
trated west  of  the  Elbe.f  Among  these  new-comers  it  is  reasonable 
to  suppose  there  were  contingents  from  beyond  the  Vistula.J 

Near  the  mouth  of  the  Peene  on  the  coast,  was  Hinnesberg.§ 
an  alternate  name  for  Julin,  and  there  too  had  stood  Wineta, 
swallowed  up  by  the  sea.  The  district  which  adjoined  the  river 
was  called  Dimine,  or  Demmin,  and  an  alias  for  Finn  Mac 
Cumhail  was  Demni.  The  name  of  the  Pinnou  river  in  Holstein, 
upon  which  was  the  town  of  Pinneberg,  not  improbably  the 
Finnsberg,  or  stronghold  of  Finn,  in  the  episode  attached  to 
Beow7i// caWtd  the  "  Fight  of  Finnsberg,"  ||  may  mark  an  extension 
of  the  name  of  this  people  across  the  isthmus  which  separates  the 
Baltic  from  the  German  Ocean.  The  whole  district  may  be  said 
to  be  full  of  Finn  and  Finni.^ 

Between  the  Odinic  genealogies  and  that  of  Finn  there  are 
certainly  points  of  contact.  Finn  himself  has  often  the  attributes 
of  Odin  himself, ff  but  in  his  son  Oisin  they  are  seen  in  greater 
clearness.     Odin,  for  example,  never  spoke  but  in  verse.JJ 

t  See  Pritchard,  "  Phys.  Hist.,"  vol.  iii.  p.  418. 

X  For  the  coin-legends  of  Volusian,  see  Miillenhoff,  "  Die  Deutsche  Alterthiimer,"  vol.  ii. 
p.  100,  n. 

§  See  Thunmann,  who  quotes  Sveno  Aggonis.  For  a  venerated  column  at  Julin,  see  Vit.  S. 
Otton.,  "Boll."  Jul.  I,  433,  439.  It  is  interesting  to  observe  that  the  south-western  corner  of 
the  Baltic,  which  some  have  held  to  be  the  ancient  Lagnum  sinus,  contains  many  topographical 
names  which  occur  also  in  Ireland.  The  island  of  Fimbria,  or  Femeren,  called  by  Blaeu  "  Pequena 
Cimbria,"  from  a  supposed  survival  of  the  name  of  the  Cimbri,  contains  the  names  Sarendorp 
{Saran  is  a  Pictish  proper  name),  Gamandorp  (Gamanraidhe  on  the  Suck),  Momendorp  (Muman),  etc. 
On  the  coast  of  the  mainland  are  the  rivers  Trawe  and  Warnou,  corresponding  to  the  Drawes 
<Draobhais)  and  Erne.  This  had  been  the  country  of  the  Heruli,  between  whose  history,  as  recorded 
by  Procopius,  and  that  of  the  Fir-Bolg  and  Aitheach  Tuatha  of  the  Irish  traditions,  some  striking 
parallels  exist,  to  which  I  will  revert  at  the  close  of  this  work.  They  were  succeeded  by  the 
Sclavonic  Obotritse,  at  what  date  we  do  not  know,  but  the  name  of  this  latter  people,  with  a  trans- 
position of  syllables,  by  no  means  fatal  to  the  comparison,  appears  in  Irish  pedigrees  of  the  Fir-Bolg 
as  Triobhuaith,  a  name  connected  perhaps  with  that  of  the  river  Draobhais. 

II  See  "  Beowulf,"  transl.  by  Jas.  M.  Garnett,  Boston,  1SS2. 

%  Micrtelius,  in  his  '•  Antiquitates  Pomeraniac,"  gives  the  name  Wenoi  as  an  alternative  for  that 
of  Heruli,  and  that  of  Winus  as  the  name  of  an  ancient  Vandal  prince,  who,  in  the  first  century, 
joined  the  Danes  against  the  Livonians. 

tt  Like  Finn,  Odin  possessed  the  power  of  endowing  himself  with  second  sight  and  the  gift 
of  prophecy.  He  kne\y  where  stolen  property  was  hidden  (Du  Chaillu,  "Viking  Age,"  p.  61). 
Like  Finn,  he  had  a  high  seat  from  which  he  looked  out  upon  the  world  (Anderson,  "Norse 
IVIylhology,"  p.  185).  Like  Finn,  who  holds  conversation  with  the  enchanted  head  of  Lomna, 
his  decapitated  fool,  Odin  talks  to  the  decapitated  head  of  Mimer  (Du  Chaillu,  p.  41).  Like 
Ftfitan,  a  mythical  being  whose  name  shows  his  origin,  Odin  could  assume  what  form  he  pleased  ; 
and,  like  Fenitis  Farsaidh,  an  Irish  eponymous,  he  was  reputed  to  have  introduced  written 
language. 

XX  Odin  understood  songs  by  which  the  earth,  the  hills,  the  stones,  and  mounds  were  opened  to 
him  (Anderson,  p.  278). 


Names  and  Legends.  897 

In  the  pedigree  of  Hengist  in  Nennius.f  Finn  stands  in  the 
position  of  great-grandfather  to  Odin,  but  Grimm  sees  reason  to 
dismiss  the  two  intervening  Hnks,  so  that  in  point  of  fact  Finn  is 
Odin's  father.  In  Hke  manner,  Finn  is  father  of  Oisin  ;  and  Odin  or 
Othin  and  Oisin  are  names  not  phonetically  irreconcilable.  Again, 
in  the  Anglo-Saxon  Chronicle,J  the  genealogical  tree  is  traced  up 
to  Geat,  who  answers  to  the  Gapt  (or  Gaut)  in  the  Gothic  list 
of  Jordanes.§  Geat's  son  is  Godwulf  (called  in  other  pedigrees 
Folcwalda,  as  he  is  also  called  in  Beowulf), ||  and  Godwulf's  son  is 
Finn.  Gaut's  son,  in  the  Gothic  tree,  is  Humal,^  who  therefore 
stands  in  the  place  of  Godwulf,  while  the  Irish  Humal,  if  I  am 
right  in  so  calling  Cumhal,  has  also  Finn  for  his  son. 

Surely  such  identities  as  these  can  be  due  to  no  mere  accident. 

The  geographical  proximity  of  the  Finnic  to  the  Teutonic 
peoples  necessarily  resulted  in  the  infiltration  of  words  from  one 
language  into  the  other,  and  the  mutual  interchange  of  ideas 
especially  in  relation  to  the  supernatural.  The  Teutonic  races 
\>€mg  physically  superior,  the  terms  they  used  were  naturally  to  a 
great  extent  forced  upon  the  weaker  race.  There  is  no  proof, 
however,  that  they  were  mentally  superior  to  their  shorter  neigh- 
bours, and  in  matters  relating  to  mythology,  the  cultus  of  the  dead, 
necromancy,  and  the  like,  there  is  reason  to  believe  that  Turanian, 
or  Finno-Ugric  influence  impressed  its  stamp  most  deeply  on  the 
modes  of  thought  and  social  customs  of  the  tall  strangers  from 
the  south,  as  did  also  their  knowledge  of  mining  and  metallurgy  ff 
upon  their  art. 

Thomsen  has  given  us  a  very  valuable  list  of  words  infused 
from  the  German  into  the  Finno- Lappish  speech.  We  would 
wish,  on  the  other  hand,  to  see  an  equally  careful  treatise  upon 
the  infusion  not  of  words  alone,  of  which,  however,  there  would 
be  not  a  few,  but  of  spiritual  beliefs,  and  the  cultus  which  accom- 
panies them,  as  well  as  of  customs,  and  of  works  of  skill,  from  the 
Finno-Ugric  peoples  of  the  East  and  North,  among  the  Aryan- 
speaking  population  of  the  West.  It  is  surprising  that  while 
students  of  Aryan  mythology  may  be  numbered   by  thousands, 

t  "Hist.  Brit.,"  cap,  32.  X  Edit.  Thorpe,  vol.  ii.  p.  1$. 

§  "Getica,"  cap.  13.  ||  Edit.  Thorpe,  1.  2183. 

^  Thomsen,  VV.,  "  Einfltiss  der  germ.  Sprachen  auf  die  Finnisch-Lappischen,"  Halle,  1870, 
in  voc, 

tt  The  smiths  in  Irish  legend  are  small  people  renowned  for  their  swiftness  of  foot,  who  practised 
their  art  in  caves.  It  was  considered,  as  was  also  the  case  in  Finland  where  the  smith  occupied  a 
most  prominent  position  in  mythology,  that  there  was  something  mystic  and  divine  about  his  craft. 
The  Finnaithje  were  the  miners  of  Sweden. 


898  The  Dolmens  of  Ireland. 

the  field  of  comparison  between  the  fetich-worship  and  spirit- 
cultus  of  North  and  East  Asia,  and  North  and  West  Europe, 
remains  practically  unexplored. 

Now,  as  the  name  of  the  great  ancestor  of  the  Baltic  nations, 
Humal  stands  in  this  curious  position  : — On  the  one  hand  we  may 
regard  it  as  the  German  '*  Himmel,"  that  is,  Heaven  ;  and  on  the 
other  we  cannot  but  compare  it  to  a  name  which  is  as  nearly  as 
possible  identical  with  it,  that  is  to  say,  Jumala,f  the  sky-god  of 
the  Esthonians,  after  whom  the  oak-tree  was  called  Pun  Jumalan,| 
and  worshipped,  we  may  presume,  as  it  was  also  among  the 
Germans.  Into  the  meaning  of  this  word,  which  became,  and  still 
is,  the  name  of  the  supreme  God  from  Hungary  to  Lapland,  I  do 
not  mean  to  go  further  than  to  express  my  opinion  that  if  we 
looked  into  its  etymology  thoroughly,  we  should  find  that  it  does 
not  mean  the  "  thunder-home,"  as  has  been  suggested,  but  that 
it  is  referable  to  the  name  of  some  animal  reverenced  by  the 
people  of  the  north,  probably  the  Bear.§ 

At  all  events,  we  have  the  sense  of  the  sky-god  ;  so  that  if, 
as  Mullenhoff  suggests,  the  name  Audhumbla  was  connected  with 
Humal  and  Humbli,  and  derived  from  the  same  source,  we  have 
the  curious  fact  before  us  that  the  Scandinavian  cow  was  a  sky- 
goddess,  like  the  Glas  Gavlen,  the  sky-coloured  cow  of  the  Irish, 
who  performed  her  round  of  the  island  once  in  every  four  and 
twenty  hours. 

The  legend  of  the  Cow  and  the  Thief,  exemplified  in  the  tale  of 
Balor  and  Mac  Kineely,  in  Donegal,  evidently  once  obtained  also  in 
other  parts  of  Ireland.  At  Gallerus,  on  the  Kerry  coast,  near  the 
so-called  oratory  of  Gallerus,  are  two  stones  which  respectively 
bear  the  names  of  the  Cow's  Stone  and  the  Thief's  Stone.|| 

Sometimes  it  is  a  bull,  not  a  cow,  which  is  purloined,  which 
reminds  us  that  it  was  on  account  of  a  bull  that  the  Tain-Bo- 
Cilailnge,  or  Cattle  Driving  of  Cuailnge — the  subject  of  the 
most  perfect  of  the  ancient  Irish  epics,  or  sagas — was  undertaken. 

At  Slogadoil,  near  "  The  Paps  "  in  Kerry,  there  is  a  venerated 

t  Jubmel,  or  Jumbel,  among  the  Lapps,  was  the  author  of  life  ;  Parkel  of  death.  Parkel  has  a 
son  *'  made  on  a  rock,"  just  as  famous  heroes  and  saints  in  the  Irish  legends  were  born  each  on  a 
rock.  Jumbel  found  him,  and  brought  him  up.  His  name  was  Tiermes,  i.e.  "  Thunder."  Rhys 
finds  a  difficulty  in  explaining  the  name  Uiarmaid  in  Celtic.  Can  it  be  aGaedhelic  form  of  Tiermes 
(PDiermet)?  The  sense  of  "  thunder  "  would  accord  with  Diarmad's  r6le  in  the  myth,  and  the 
boar's  bristle  by  which  he  was  slain  would  be  the  lightning. 

X  Compare  the  passage  in  Maximus  Tyrius  (second  century)  :  Ke\To!  ai&ovcfi  niv  Aia,  &ya\fia 
6«  Ai^s  K(\TtKhv  v\pri\ij  Spvs. 

§  See  my  "  Niphon  and  its  Antiquities,"  Plymouth,  1S76,  p.  20,  for  the  account  of  the  spread 
of  the  cultus  of  the  Bear  in  the  islands  of  Japan, 

II  Ord.  Surv.  Maps,  Kerry,  No.  42. 


Names  and  Legends.  899 

rock  about  which  Windele  tells  the  following  legend  :  f  "  A  thief 
was  driving  off  a  bull,  but  when  the  animal  arrived  at  this  rock 
he  resolved  to  escape  from  the  fellow,  and  was  commencing  to 
sink  down  through  the  rock,  when  the  man  caught  him  stoutly 
by  the  tail,  and,  being  powerfully  strong,  prevented  him  from 
sinking.  In  the  course  of  the  struggle  a  supernatural  voice  was 
heard  above  them  calling  out,  "  Eeocher,  eeocher,"  that  is,  "he 
would  not  suffer  the  act." 

In  the  island  of  Inchidony  in  Cork,  there  is  a  curious  legend 
that  an  old  church  is  haunted  by  a  bull.  Some  young  men, 
"affecting  incredulity  as  to  its  existence,"  says  Windele,  "came 
there  one  fine  moonlight  night,  and  had  to  take  to  their  heels 
with  extraordinary  precipitation  by  reason  of  the  sudden  appear- 
ance of  the  mysterious  animal  who  made  his  presence  known  by 
certain  supernatural  bellowings,  snorting  fire,  pawing  the  ground^ 
and  other  unmistakable  manifestations." 

A  mythic  bull  dwells  in  Lough-a-Tarriv  in  the  same  county. 
"  One  of  Mr.  Hawke's  tenants  saw  him  come  out  of  the  lake  and 
meet  a  cow.  This  lake  forms,"  adds  Windele,  "a  sort  of  com- 
panion to  Lough-na-Bo-Finne,  near  Bantry,  the  latter  being  the 
abode  of  the  White  Cow." 

Amonor  the  lake-les^ends  of  Galicia,  as  we  have  seen,  men- 
tioned  by  Don  Jose  Villa-Amil  y  Castro,  is  one  respecting  a  lake, 
"  from  the  depths  of  which  the  lowing  of  cattle  was  heard."  J 

The  Lough-Bo-Finna  just  mentioned  is  north  of  Ross,  as  is 
also  Lough-a-Tarriv.  According  to  the  legend  of  the  latter  lake, 
"  a  Piast,  or  Worm,"  was  killed  there.  The  description  of  this 
monster  resembles  that  of  a  dragon.  "  One  lake,"  according  to 
Windele,  "  is  said  to  have  the  Piast  in  it  still,  which  clearly  must 
have  been  not  a  serpent  but  a  bull,  since  he  had  been  seen  to 
come  out  and  consort  with  cows  on  the  bank."  § 

**  Near  the  Bandon  Mountain  is  a  little  lake  called  Loch-Bo- 
booirha,  that  is,  '  Lake  of  the  Lowing  Cow.'  The  Bandon  Moun- 
tain itself  is  called  Sliabh-Bo-booirha,  from  the  same  enchanted 
animal  that  once  lived  there."  (| 

Dunderrow,  on  the  Bandon  river,  is  an  ancient  fortification, 
once  encompassed  with  five  circumvallations,  of  which  three 
remain.       Within    its    area    Mr.    Sullivan    found    several    caves. 

t  MS.  "Jar  Muman,"  p.  347. 

X  "  Antiguedades  prehistoricas  y  celticas  de  Galicia,"  Lugo,  1873,  p.  71- 

§  MS.  "  Cork  W.  and  N.E.,"  p.  529.  1!  MS.  "  Corli  W.  and  N.E.,"  p.  792, 


900  The  Dolmens  of  Ireland. 

"  The  country-people  tried  to  deter  the  explorer,  as  the  dooti  was 
under  the  protection  of  the  '  Good  People.'  At  length  it  was 
announced  to  him  that  the  supernatural  bull  who  guarded  the 
doon  had  been  heard  roaring  over  at  Ballinadee.  .  .  .  The  death 
of  his  mother  was  attributed  to  the  anger  of  the  Sidhe  and  of  the 
Bull."t  Such  superstitions,  it  is  to  be  noted,  belong  rather  to 
earthen  raths  or  duns,  attributed  to  these  "  Good  People,"  or 
Tuatha  De  Danann,  than  to  the  stone  cathairs  attributed  to  the 
Fir  Bolg. 

The  narrow  glen  in  which  are  the  dolmens  of  Knockane  in 
Cork  retains,  says  Windele,  "  a  faint  vestige  of  a  cow  legend. 
There  was  a  cow,  a  bo-i'iiadh  (red  cow)  without  a  skin.  It  used 
to  come  every  morning  to  be  milked,  and  then  go  off  into  Cusduff 
Lios.  Another  cow  had  two  fine  calves  accompanying  her  in  a 
daily  expedition  from  the  Lee.  These  calves  were  entrapped 
from  her  by  one  of  the  neighbours,  who  turned  them  into  his 
bazvn,  where  they  grew  almost  to  maturity.  One  day  the  bo-rttadh 
found  them  at  liberty  in  a  field,  and  enticed  them  away,  since 
which  they  have  never  made  their  appearance. 

"  A  bo-vatin  (white  cow)  fled  to  Gaorha,  the  island  forest  in 
the  Lee,  and  with  her  went  two  calves.  The  owner,  after  a  two 
years'  search,  found  her,  and  catching  her  by  the  tail — the  proper 
means  of  obtaining  control  over  such  animals — was  led  by  her 
to  a  bog,  where  he  found  the  calves,  which  he  drove  home."  % 

Near  Knockane  was  a  venerated  rock  havingr  a  few  insiofnifi- 
cant  hollows  in  its  surface,  to  which  the  strong  imagination  of  the 
l^eople  gave  certain  distinguishing  characteristics.  It  was  said  to 
bear  the  marks  of  a  cow's  hoof,  of  a  horse's  hoof,  of  a  man's  knee, 
of  the  feet  of  a  hare,  and  of  the  staff  of  the  man  who  hunted  her.§ 

Bekmann,jj  in  his  account  of  the  venerated  rocks  in  Branden- 
burgh,  figures  one  rock,  and  describes  others,  in  the  surfaces  of 
which  hollows,  supposed  to  be  the  prints  of  feet  of  animals,  were 
pointed  out. 

One  common  form  of  cow-lesfend  is  that  which  is  associated 
with  a  road  along  which  the  mythic  animal  is  fabled  to  have 
passed.  Windele  states  that  the  portion  of  the  old  road  from 
Cork  by  Ballyhoura,  and  near  Kilcolman,  was  pointed  out  as  the 
actual  boherbuee,  that  is,  the  "  road  of  the  (mythic)  cow."     It  led 

t  MS.  "Topography  of  Desmond,"  pp.  477  and  479. 

X  MS.  "Cork  Topography,"  pp.351  and  359. 

§  MS.  "  Cork  Topography  "  (Windele),  p.  359.  |1  See  p.  536,  supra. 


Names  and  Legends.  901 

westward  from  Shanacloon,  through  Gurtnatubrid,  a  distance  of 
over  four  miles.  It  was  called  in  full  bohtir-bo-ruadh,  "  road  of 
the  red  cow,"  who  used  to  proceed  to  the  west  of  Bardinoha  to 
feed,  and  return  to  sleep  at  Shanacloon.  The  Townland  of 
Lackaroe  (flag-stone  of  the  red  [cow]),  in  which  is  the  hill  near 
Kilcolman  Castle,  was  perhaps  named  after  her. 

Windele  adds  that  there  are  "  many  such  bohurs "  in  the 
Counties  of  Cork  and  Limerick,  one  near  Kanturk,  and  another  in 
Fermoy. 

The  peasantry  near  Garryadeen,  sixteen  miles  from  Cork,  had 
a  vivid  knowledge  of  the  existence  of  a  boher  boruach  in  their 
neighbourhood.  Its  course  is  described  as  passing  throuo-h 
Bleinagoul  and  Dononghmore,  and  thence  leading  by  Bohereen- 
an-affrin  to  Fournaught  Chapel.  The  legend  about  it  was  as 
follows  :  •*  A  bull  and  cow  herded  together,  making  this  their  way. 
The  cow  drank  at  the  Lee  in  the  morning,  and  depastured  on  an 
'  inch  '  (island)  in  the  Blackwater.  The  people  used  to  milk  her, 
and  her  milk  was  a  great  cure.  One  woman  filled  several  reelees 
every  day  with  her  milk.  She  brought  out  a  dildarn,  that  is,  some 
kind  of  sieve,  so  that  the  milk  passed  through.  When  the  cow 
saw  that,  she  was  fretted,  and  gave  no  more  milk." 

At  Leap,  a  rock  was  shown  upon  which  this  mythic  cow 
leaped,  leaving  the  prints  of  her  hoofs  in  it.  She  belonged  to  the 
Mna  Sidhe,  Women  of  the  Sidh.f 

At  Ballyhooly  there  is  a  place  called  Glenna  Bo,  to  which  a 
cow-legend  is  attached. J 

In  the  County  of  Waterford  the  legend  of  the  cow  track  is 
associated  with  Patrick.  In  the  Barony  of  Coshmore  and  Cosh- 
bride  is  a  large  double  trench  called  by  the  natives  Rian-bo- 
Padrhcc,  or  Trench  of  Patrick's  Cow.  It  commences  to  the  E.  of 
Knockmeldown,  runs  in  a  direct  line  towards  Ardmore,  passing 
through  the  deer-park  of  Lismore,  and  crossing  the  Blackwater 
near  Tourin.  The  southern  part  of  its  course  is  through  the 
Barony  of  Decies-within-Drum.  It  is  stated  that  it  runs  a  course 
of  sixteen  to  eighteen  miles.  Probably  the  place  called  Clashmore 
(=  Great  Trench),  between  Aglish  and  Ardmore,  takes  its  name 
from  it.  Charles  Smith  regarded  it  as  a  roadway  from  Cashel  to 
Ardmore.     The  country-people  affirm  that  it  could  be  traced  from 

t  MSS.  (Windele),  "  Cork  W.  and  N.E.,"  pp.  169,  306,  352. 
X  MSS.  (Windele),  "  Topog.  of  Desmond,"  p.  151. 


go2  The  Dolmens  of  Ireland. 


Its  entrance  into  the  County  of  Waterford,  northwards  into  Tip- 
perary  as  far  as  Cashel,  but  the  lands  having  been  cultivated  in 
most  parts  of  its  course  through  that  country,  it  is  not  to  be 
traced  at  present. 

The  legend  regarding  it  is  that  when  Saint  Patrick  was  at 
Cashel,  a  cow  belonging  to  him  had  her  calf  stolen  and  carried  off 
towards  Ardmore.  She  pursued  it,  and  with  her  horns  made  this 
double  trench  the  whole  way.  Others  say  it  was  the  cow  which 
was  stolen,  and  that  she  returned  home  of  herself,  and,  in  the 
same  manner,  ploughed  up  the  ground  with  her  horns. f 

Many  of  the  old  legends  of  Munster  are  connected  with  cow- 
keeping,  and  prove  the  originally  pastoral  character  and  pursuits 
of  the  population  amongst  whom  they  were  perpetuated.  On  the 
hillside  opposite  Tempuleen  Fiachna,  in  one  of  the  glens  through 
which  the  "  Priest's  Leap"  flows,  in  the  County  of  Cork,  stands 
a  menhir,  6  feet  high,  and  5  feet  broad.  A  legend  attaches 
to  this  dalldn  that  it  is  a  woman  turned  into  stone  by  Saint 
Fiachna.  She  lived  here  not  respecting  the  commandment 
ao-ainst  thieving  at  night,  milking  the  cows  of  her  neighbours, 
and  carrying  the  milk  and  butter  to  her  dairy.  At  length  the 
"Hue  and  Cry"  was  raised  against  her,  and  the  saint,  who  led 
a  holy  life  at  his  little  church  hard  by,  resolved  to  chastise  her. 
He  mounted  his  horse  to  visit  her,  but  she  fled.  As  he  passed 
her  dairy  he  turned  it  into  stone,  and  then  descended  the  hill 
towards  the  river  in  pursuit  of  her.  In  crossing  the  stream,  his 
horse  left  his  footmarks  on  a  stone  in  the  centre  of  it.  He  then 
rode  up  the  opposite  hill,  where,  about  midway,  he  overtook  the 
criminal,  and  instantly  turned  her  into  stone.  There  is  an  aged 
hawthorn  inside  the  stone  which  grew  out  of  the  kippin  of  the 
spancel  she  carried,  with  which  she  used  to  tie  the  cows'  legs  at 
milking.  The  stone  is  said  to  resemble  the  form  of  the  lady,  who 
was  at  the  time  enceinte. 

Outside  the  burial-ground  of  the  little  church  iteinpiilceii)  of 
Saint  Fiachna,  around  which  latter  it  was  customary  to  make  the 
circuits  called  tnrascs,  is  the  rock  called  "  the  petrified  dairy."  It 
is  a  natural  rock  of  tabular  form,  with  five  basin-like  hollows  in 
the  surface,  each  cavity  measuring  4  or  5  ins.  deep,  and  about 
I  foot  in  diameter.      In  each  of  them  is  a  stone  of  long  oval  form, 

t  Charles  Smith,  "  Survey  of  the  County  of  Waterford,"  p.  355  ;  Ryland's  "  Hist,  of  Water- 
ford,"  p.  355. 


Names  and  Legends.  90- 


fitting  the  space  fully.  The  whole,  adds  Windele,  is  a  perfect 
natural  curiosity,  and,  according  to  the  legend,  the  basins  are  the 
keelei's,  and  the  oval  stones  the  rolls  of  butter.  Windele  sent  a 
drawing  of  the  dalldu,  and  also  of  the  rock-basins,  to  Mr.  and  Mrs. 
Hall,  who  published  them  in  their  work  on  "  Ireland."  f 

North  of  Killachluig,  also  in  Cork,  Windele  heard  a  legend  of 
a  woman  persecuted  by  the  "Good  People." J  Whenever  she 
milked  her  cow,  stones  were  thrown  by  invisible  hands  into  her 
pail.  A  watch  was  set  in  a  circle  at  a  distance  round  about  the 
field,  and  still  the  stones  were  thrown.  The  persecution  con- 
tinued until  the  priest  read  mass  over  her  and  her  cow.  This 
happened  as  recently  as  the  year  i842.§ 

Very  numerous  places  in  Ireland  are  named  after  cows, 
generally  speaking,  either  red  or  white,  as,  for  example,  Lough- 
Bo-Derg,  Lake  of  the  Red  Cow  in  Roscommon,||  Inish-Bo-Fin, 
on  the  coast  of  Donegal  and  elsewhere. 

In  the  cliffs  near  Dunfanaghy  in  Donegal  Is  a  chasm  about 
which  a  story  of  two  bulls,  probably  mythic  bulls,  Is  told.  It  is 
called  "  The  Bull's  Hole,"  a  name  said  to  have  been  given  to  it 
from  the  circumstance  that  it  swallowed  up  two  bulls  which  fought 
on  the  Meena  above  it.  The  one  forced  the  other  to  the  brink 
of  the  precipice,  and  finally  succeeded  in  horning  him  in,  but  in 
the  effort  he  lost  his  own  equilibrium,  and  was  forced  to  fall  into 
the  same  bottomless  plt.^ 

At  Gleann  Finne,  through  which  the  Finne  River  flows,  and 
which,  in  common  with  the  lake  Lough  Finne,  Is  consecrated 
ground  in  the  estimation  of  the  Sheannachles,  a  legend  existed  of 
a  contest  between  some  of  the  Flans  on  the  one  side,  and  first  a 
bull  and  then  a  pig  on  the  other.  It  may  be  epitomized  as 
follows  :  Once  on  a  time  Finn  Mac  Cumhail,  chieftain  of  the 
Flans,  was  preparing  a  great  feast  In  Glenn  Finne.  He 
despatched  Goll  Mac  Morna  to  fetch  him  a  furious  bull  which 
pastured  In  a  deep  valley  to  the  south.  Goll  came  face  to  face 
with  the  beast,  and  wrestled  with  him,  but  finding  himself  no 
match  for  the  bull's  strength,  sprang  away  from  him,  and  left  him 
to    wreak    his    vengeance   by   tearing  up  the    earth    and    stones 

+  MSS.  (Windele),  "Jar  IMuman,"  p.  335. 

X  According   to   Miillenhoff,  this  is  the  meaning  of  the   name   of  the  /Estians— the  Gothic 
"  Aiste,"  Jiist.  (Deutsche  Alterthums,  vol.  ii.  p.  30. 
§  MSS.  (Windele),  "  Corl<  Topography,"  p.  388. 

14  14 

II  O.S.L.,  Co.  Roscommon,  ^ -~,  p.  141.  1  O.S.L.,  Co.  Donegal,  „       ,  p.  66. 


904  The  Dolmens  of  Ireland. 

around.  None  could  vie  with  Goll  in  swiftness  of  foot,  and  he 
soon  reached  Finn's  camp,  where  Ergoman  (or  Fergoman  f ) 
voKinteered  to  return  with  him  and  assist  in  the  struggle. 
Reaching  the  bull,  the  two  heroes  take  the  brute  by  the  horns, 
and  by  main  force  rend  him  in  twain  from  head  to  tail.  They 
then  set  out  to  bear  his  carcase  back.  It  had  so  happened,  how- 
ever, that  on  their  way  to  the  valley  in  which  the  bull  pastured, 
they  had  fallen  in  with  a  litter  of  six  snow-white  pigs.  The  sow 
being  absent,  they  were  left  unguarded,  and  the  heroes,  killing 
them,  left  their  carcases  until  their  return. 

Now,  Finn  Mac  Cumhail,  who  had  remained  in  the  camp,  had 
a  presentiment  that  all  was  not  right  with  the  heroes,  so  he 
chewed  his  thumb,  and  by  that  means  discovered  what  they  had 
done,  and  the  danger  that  awaited  them  from  the  mother  of  the 
pigs,  who  was  savagely  expecting  their  return  in  order  to  avenge 
her  offspring.  Standing  on  a  hill,  Finn  accordingly  shouted  to 
Goll  and  Ergoman  to  return  another  way,  and,  as  with  every  breath 
his  voice  filled  a  space  of  nine  miles,  they  heard  him  distinctly. 
Goll  obeyed  the  advice  and  took  another  route,  but  Ergoman 
continued  his  course  fearlessly,  resolved  to  bring  home  the  litter 
he  had  slaughtered.  Over  the  latter,  when  he  reached  the  spot, 
stood  the  sow  with  bristles  erect,  and,  as  soon  as  she  saw  Ergoman, 
rushed  at  him,  and  ripped  him  open  with  her  tusk.  Ergoman 
cried  out  so  loudly  that  the  hills  and  valleys  rang  again,  so  that 
the  echo  conveyed  the  sound  to  his  sister  Finne,  who  was  on  the 
southern  and  opposite  side  of  the  lake.  Recognizing  her  brother's 
cry  of  pain,  the  bright  heroic  damsel  sprang  into  the  lake  in  order 
to  swim  over  to  his  assistance.  Before  she  reached  the  middle, 
however,  she  sank  exhausted,  and  was  drowned.  Her  snow-white 
body  was  subsequently  washed  ashore,  and  buried  on  the  spot ; 
but  none  know  where.  The  echo,  it  appears,  had  deceived  her 
in  the  direction  she  should  have  taken,  and  thus  allured  her  to 
her  doom.  Ever  after  Echo  was  called  a  deceiver,  and  the  lake, 
which  had  been  dark  before,  received  the  name  of  Finne,  the  fair 
lady  who  had  met  her  death  beneath  its  waters. 

The  names  Min-an-Ail  (Field  of  the  Litter)  and  Loch  Mucc 
(Pig  Lake)  are  explained  by  the  peasantry  in  accordance  with  the 
story  of  Ergoman  and  the  Sow. J 

t  With  Fergus,  gen.  Fergusa  (like  Aengus,  Aengusa),  compare  the  name  of  the  Sclavonic  deity 
Perkunos,  one  of  the  three  divinities  worshipped  at  Romow  on  the  Memel. 

X  See  O.S.L.,  Co.  Donegal,  -  '"^   ,  p.  173. 
C.  19 


Names  and_  Legends.  905 


The  Horse  and  Horseman. 

Although  I  cannot  refer  to  any  existing  dolmen  which  is 
connected  with  a  legend  of  the  horse,  it  is  clear,  from  the  fact 
that  we  find  horse-legends  attached  to  venerated  rocks,  that  a 
mythical  animal  of  equine  stock  belonged  to  the  same  mytho- 
logical category  which  includes  the  dog,  the  pig,  and  the  cow. 
At  Dunmanway  in  the  County  of  Cork,  north  of  Ballyhalwick,  and 
six  miles  from  Coolmountain,  Windele  describes  a  huge  mass  of 
rock,  seemingly  detached  and  resting  on  the  ground,  to  which 
the  natives  gave  the  name  of  the  Garrane  Ban,  or  White  Mare. 
The  rock  was,  he  says,  rather  ship-like  in  its  under  part,  and 
may,  he  thinks,  have  been  once  a  rocking-stone. 

It  is  to  be  noticed  that  in  the  same  field  with  it  was  a  cairn 
which,  when  it  was  opened  in  1840,  was  found  to  contain  two 
cists,  one  over  the  other,  containing  ashes  and  fragments  of 
human  bones. 

Old  women  were  in  the  habit  of  quieting  children  by  saying 
that  they  would  put  a  saddle  on  the  "  Garrane  Ban,"  and  give  them 
a  ride.  Windele  preserves  the  exact  formula  used  to  intimidate 
them  :  Eist  a  laogk,  agus  cuiramag  diotal  air  an  Garran  Ban 
d/mil.  According  to  the  local  legend,  the  rock  had  been  cast  by 
Finn  Mac  Cumhail  from  the  Yew-Tree  Hill  in  the  neighbour- 
hood.! 

Such  venerated  rocks  often,  I  think,  formed  sepulchral  centres. 
The  dolmen-circle  at  Parknagullane  on  the  lands  of  Reenagoppal — 
that  is,  the  "  Field  of  the  Standing-Stones  "  on  the  lands  of  the 
"  Horse's  Promontory  " — is  similarly  in  proximity  to  a  venerated 
rock. 

A  menhir,  described  as  a  remarkable  stone,  7  feet  high,  4  feet 
broad,  and  i  foot  thick,  in  the  Townland  of  Ballyea  and  County 
of  Limerick,  bears  the  same  name — that  is  to  say,  the  "  Gearan 
Ban,"  or  White  (?  Grey)  Mare. J  Whether  this  White  Horse  is 
the  same  as  that  more  famous  one  whose  figure,  cut  in  the 
chalk,  lies  on  the  Berkshire  Hills,  I  cannot  say.  The  "  Gearran 
Ban  "  appears  once  more  as  the  name  of  a  venerated  rock  in  the 
Parish  of  Rathpatrick  and  County  of  Kilkenny. 

In  the  County  of  Mayo  is  a  mountain  called  Nephin,  on  the 

t  MSS.  (Windele),  "Cork  W.  and  N.E.,"  p.  851  ;  also  "  Cork  Topography,"  p.  607. 
X  O.S.L.,  Co.  Limerick. 

VOL.  in.  o 


9o6  The  Dolmens  of  Ireland. 

summit  of  which  is  a  cairn  called  Leacht  Fhinn,  popularly  under- 
stood to  mean  the  Monument  of  Finn.  Immediately  under  it,  on 
the  inaccessible  side  of  the  mountain,  is  a  hollow  called  Lag-an- 
Ghearrain-Bhain,  that  is,  the  "  Hollow  of  the  White  Horse" — a 
name  corresponding  exactly  to  the  English  "Vale  of  White  Horse." 

That  the  cairn  was  a  centre  of  sepulture  and  pilgrimage  is 
indicated  by  the  presence  "  in  various  places  on  the  mountain,  as 
one  approaches  the  cairn,  of  little  circles  very  contiguous  to  one 
another,  generally  not  exceeding  three  feet  in  diameter,  and 
formed  with  very  small  stones  set  in  the  surface  of  the  ground. 
The  centres  are  filled  with  small  stones  in  little  heaps,  and  these 
are  very  numerous  near  the  cairn."  f 

I  am  inclined  to  regard  circles,  when  so  small  as  these,  neither 
as  sepulchral,  like  the  circles  on  the  south  coast  of  the  Baltic,  nor 
as  domestic,  like  the  Lapp  rings  of  Northern  Scandinavia,  which 
were  the  bases  of  huts,  but  as  erections  left  behind  by  pilgrims  in 
commemoration  of  their  visits  to  a  consecrated  spot.  At  a  place 
called  Creg-an-aonaigh — that  is,  the  "  Knoll  of  the  Fair,"  on  the 
summit  of  a  mountain  over  Aehawinnaan  in  Clare — are  numerous 
little  circles  of  like  kind.  Others  may  be  found  close  to  the  base 
of  the  great  cairn  called  Misgaun  Meave  on  Knocknarea  in  Sligo. 
On  the  summit  of  Slieve  Liag  in  Donegal,  near  the  venerated 
rock  of  Aedh  Brecan,  I  have  myself  seen  numerous  little  piles  of 
stones,  many  arranged  in  circular  form,  which  are  known  to  have 
been  set  up  by  pilgrims  who  had  climbed  the  holy  height  to 
worship  the  spirit  of  the  dead  there  supposed  to  dwell.  By  the 
side  of  the  paths  used  by  the  pilgrims  who  ascend  the  sacred 
mountains  in  Japan,  notably  at  Nikko,  I  have  met  with  similar 
little  commemorative  piles  of  stones. 

Horses  and  their  foals,  if  of  the  mystic  breed,  left  the  marks  of 
their  hoofs  in  rocks,  which  were  venerated  accordingly.  The 
name  of  Castleterra  in  Cavan  is  a  corruption  of  Cois-an-t- 
siorraigh,  that  is,  the  Foal's  Foot.  The  origin  of  it  is  attributed 
by  tradition  to  the  patron  saint  having  found  the  impression  of  a 
foal's  foot  in  some  remarkable  rock,  near  which  he  built  his 
church,  but  this  impression  is  not  now  visible.^ 

t  O.S.L.,  Co.  Mayo.  Mr.  O'Conor,  in  these  letters,  expresses  his  opinion  that  this  cairn,  and 
not  Mullach  Chairn,  was  the  cairn  of  Amalgaidh,  where  he  was  buried,  and  where  a  fair  was  held. 
If  so,  it  was  one  of  the  two  cairns  on  which  the  O'Dowd  was  inaugurated.  From  it  is  a  clear  view 
of  the  sea  to  the  S.W.  and  N.,  and  all  Tirawley  (Tir  Amalgaidh)  lies  below. 

i  O.S  I .,  Co.  Cavan,  ,  n.  eg. 

li.  i6 


Names  and  Legends.  907 


Near  the  dolmen  at  Brough  Derg  in  the  County  of  Tyrone, 
called  Granna's  Bed,  is  a  cairn  called  the  "  Grey  Mare's  Load." 
The  story  about  it  is  that  Patrick  brought  the  stones  from  a  dis- 
tance for  church-building  purposes,  but,  owing  to  misconduct  on 
the  part  of  the  conductors,  they  had  to  be  dropped  where  they  are 
now.  f 

It  is  not  out  of  place,  perhaps,  to  mention  here  that  horse- 
races were  formerly  held  in  the  space  around  the  dolmen  in  the 
Giants'  Ring,  at  Ballylessan,  in  the  County  Down,  and  between 
that  monument  and  the  surrounding  vallum. 

In  the  Dindshenchas  of  Carman  will  be  found  a  notice  of  the 
horse-racing  at  the  fair  at  that  place.  That  of  Ard-Macha  contains 
the  extraordinary  episode  of  the  racing  of  Macha,  wife  of  Crund, 
against  the  horses  of  Cormac  at  the  fair,  afterwards  called  Oenach 
Macha.J  With  such  races,  it  is  possible  we  may  be  justified  in 
comparing  those  held  by  the  Romans  in  honour  of  Neptune. 

The  name  of  the  Townland  of  Knockagh,  in  the  Count}^  of 
Louth,  is  said  to  be  derived  from  the  Irish  Cnoc  Each,  that  is, 
"  Horse's  Knoll."  It  is  said  that  "  a  man  wearing  a  three-cocked 
hat  was  seen  riding  a  white  horse,  which,  when  he  came  to  this 
place,  leaped  on  the  hill  and  sank  into  the  ground,  leaving  behind 
him  the  three-cocked  hat,  which  is  visible  to  this  day  on  the  sur- 
face of  the  hill.  The  object  pointed  out  as  the  hat  consists  of  three 
sods,  resembling  in  form,  to  an  imaginative  mind,  a  hat  so  shaped."  § 

This  silly  story  is  a  good  example  of  the  way  in  which  any 
object,  no  matter  how  trivial  in  form  or  recent  in  origin,  is  adduced 
by  the  peasantry  in  evidence  of  the  truth  of  some  genuinely 
ancient  local  legend. 

At  Clonfinlough,  in  the  Parish  of  Clonmacnoise  and  County  of 
King's  County,  is  a  boulder  measuring  9  feet  9  ins.  long  by  8  feet 
3  ins.  broad,  into  the  surface  of  which  many  curious  figures  have 
been  cut.  It  bears  the  name  of  the  "  Horseman's  Stone,"  but  is 
also  known  as  the  "  Fairy's  Stone,"  and  is  termed  Una  More  by 
Mr.  Cooke.  Some  of  the  figures  bear  a  striking  and  unmistakable 
resemblance  to  those  on  a  rock  in  Galicia  in  Spain,  previously 
noticed. II 

"No  Christian  tradition,"  says   Mr.  James  Graves,^  "exists 

t  Journ.  R.H.A.A.I.,  4th  Ser.,  vol.  v.  p.  740. 

X  See  Whitley  Stokes,  "  The  Rennes  Dindshenchas,"  in  "  Rev.  Celt."  Nos.  18  and  94. 

§  O.S.L.,  Co.  Louth,  -^^,  p.  308.  11  p.  696,  supra, 

E.  14 
1  "Kilk.  Archjeol.  Soc,"  vol.  v.,  New  Series,  1864,  1866. 


9o8  The  Dolmens  of  Ireland. 

regarding    it,    but    there    is   a   legend    that  at    certain    times   a 
horseman  gallops  round  it." 

A  similar  tradition,  namely,  that  a  horseman  gallops  around  it 
and  then  vanishes  into  it,  is  told  of  a  sepulchral  cairn  near  Slieve 
Kielta  in  Wexford.  Shortly  before  the  year  1866,  this  cairn  was 
opened,  and  a  chamber  containing  two  skeletons  was  found 
enclosed  in  it.  The  legend  of  the  horseman,  however,  was  told 
of  the  cairn  long  before  it  was  known  to  contain  the  interment. 

At  Belanaskaddan,  in  the  Parish  of  Kilmacrenan  and  County  of 
Donegal,  is  a  tumulus  known  as  "The  Marcach's  Knowe  and 
Stable."  This  marcack,  literally  "  horseman,"  is  a  famous  chief  of 
the  "  wee-folk,"  or  fairies,  "  who,"  says  O'Donovan,  "was  begotten 
by  one  of  the  O'Donnells  on  the  aerial  body  of  a  banshee.  The 
story,"  he  adds,  "  is  a  wonderful  one,  but  too  foolish  to  be 
preserved.  It  appears  that  O'Donnell  was  invited  by  Eveny 
O'Kane,  of  Bin  Eveny,  to  a  large  fairy  feast,  and  that  during  his 
stay  at  this  debauch,  he  was  introduced  to  a  beautiful  banshee, 
who,  at  the  expiration  of  nine  months,  appeared  at  his  bedside 
declaring  that  she  had  brought  forth  for  him  a  son.  '  Let  me  see 
him,'  says  O'Donnell,  that  I  may  recognize  in  him  the  countenance 
of  a  chief  and  the  germs  of  a  man  of  prowess.'  *  Never  shalt  thou 
see  his  face,'  said  the  lovely  spirit,  '  but  he  will  at  all  times  rescue 
thee  from  danger.'  "  f 

Among  the  drawings  of  Gabriel  Beranger  there  is  one  of  an 
apparently  natural  rock  set  upon  another  in  the  manner  of  a 
rocking-stone,  somewhere  in  the  County  of  Sligo,  and  which  bears 
the  name  "  Cloch  an  Marcach,"  or  the  "  Horseman's  Stone." 

The  Ass. 

One  or  two  examples  may  be  cited  of  the  connection  of  this 
animal  with  venerated  stones  and  a  dolmen.  Near  Crosspatrick 
in  Mayo,  to  the  left  of  the  road  leading  through  that  place  from 
Killala  to  Ballina,  is  a  stone  called  Lewi  an  Asail,  that  is,  the 
Ass's  Leap.  It  is  at  a  well,  and  in  its  surface  are  shown  marks 
said  to  be  the  impressions  of  the  knees  of  the  ass  upon  which 
Patrick  rode.  We  may  compare  with  this,  as  the  writer  of  the 
Ordnance  Survey  Letters  observes,  the  footprints  of  Mahomet's 
camel  shown  in  the  Moorish  country  in  North  Africa.^ 

t  U.S.L.,  Co.  Donegal,    ,     -,  p.  121.  %  O.S.L.,  Co.  Mayo,  — ^,  p.  229. 

C.  19  "^     E.  19^ 


Names  and  Legends.  909 


One  of  the  two  dolmens  at  Ballynasleigh,  near  Durrow,  in  the 
county  of  Kilkenny,  is  called  Mainsair  Asal,\  that  is,  "  The  Ass's 
Manger,"  which  Tighe,  however,  regards  as  either  a  modern  or  a 
corrupted  name.  A  dolmen  at  Manger  in  the  Queen's  County 
bore  the  same  narne.^ 

The  Goat. 

The  dolmen  at  Ballylowra,  in  Kilkenny,  bears  the  name  of 
Clock  7ia  Gobkar,  explained  by  Mr.  Graves  as  "  The  Goats' 
Stone."  § 

The  Serpent. 

In  the  Townland  of  Ballygheely,  Parish  of  Kilshanny,  and 
County  of  Clare,  is  a  large  cairn,  measuring  100  paces  in 
circumference,  and  about  25  feet  high,  tapering  at  the  top.  It 
is  called  Carn  Connachtach,  that  is,  "  Carn  of  the  Connaught 
Men."  "  The  tradition  in  the  neighbourhood  is  that  a  multitude 
of  Connaughtmen  on  one  occasion  followed  a  large  serpent  from 
their  own  country  to  this  place,  where  they  succeeded  in  killing 
it,  and  each  one  having  carried  a  stone  in  his  hand  in  pursuit, 
heaped  them  up  here  on  the  death  of  their  prey."  || 

We  have  already  seen  that  another  name  for  "  Danes'  Cast," 
or  "Furrow  of  the  Black  Pig,"  was  the  "Worm  Track,"  or 
"Worm  Ditch,"  in  Irish  Cladh-na-Peiste. 

The  connection  of  a  Piast,  that  is,  a  "worm"  or  "serpent," 
with  legends  of  lakes  and  wells,  is  of  common  occurrence,  and 
belongs  also  to  Scandinavian  folk-lore. 

The  Deer. 

I  am  not  aware  that  the  deer  is  connected  in  Irish  mythology 
with  megalithic  remains.  It  appears,  however,  in  early  Christian 
fables,  and  plays  the  part  of  a  leader  and  guide.  The  name 
Croaghballaghdown  in  Donegal,  is  in  Irish  CrucBealach  Damhain, 
that  is,  the  Peak  of  the  Stag's  Path  {semita  cervi),  the  fable 
about  which  occurs  in  Manus  O'Donnell's  "  Life  of  Columba." 

Again,  the  name  of  the  village  of  Monea  in  Fermanagh  is 

t  p.  402,  supra.  X  p.  374'  ^'ip''^. 

§  "  Trans.  Kilk.  and  S.E.  Ir.  Archteol.  Soc,"  vol.  i.,  1850,  p.  130 ;  see  p.  403,  mpra. 

II  O.S.L.,  Co.  Clare,  ^^,  p.  309. 


9IO  The  Dolmens  of  Ireland. 

Ahdne  Fhiadh,  "  Hill  of  the  Deer."  The  virgin  St.  Feber  first 
attempted  to  build  her  church  at  Kildrum,  at  a  place  where  the 
holy-well,  now  called  Tobar  Feber,  is  to  be  seen  ;  but  (as  was 
the  case  with  so  many  churches,  in  Derry  especially)  what  had 
been  built  in  the  course  of  the  day  was  destroyed  in  the  night 
by  some  invisible  being.  At  last  a  deer  was  pleased  to  point 
out  a  site  where  Feber  might  erect  her  church  without  interrup- 
tion. He  carried  Feber's  books  on  his  horns  to  Monea,  and 
there  she  finished  her  work  without  hindrance.f 

A  similar  myth  relating  to  the  guidance  of  a  deer  is  told  by 
Procopius  and  others,  of  the  crossing  of  the  Palus  Maeotis  by 
the  Hunno-Scythic  tribes,  Cotrigures  and  Utrigures,  otherwise 
Cotragi  and  Utragi.  The  doe  (or  stag,  in  other  accounts)  having 
led  these  "Cimmerians"  across  the  water,  vanished,  upon  which 
they  proceeded  to  occupy  the  seats  vacated  by  Vandals  and 
Visigoths,  and  thence  to  devastate  the  Roman  Empire.  With 
these  Cotragi  were  intimately  associated  the  Bulgari  or  Bolgar. 

The  Phooca  or  Pooka. 

"The  Pooka's  Grave,"  is  the  name  popularly  given  to  a  dolmen 
in  the  Townland  of  Ballymartin  in  Kilkenny.  It  was  considered 
to  be  a  "  favourite  haunt  of  the  '  Good  People.'  "  In  the  Town- 
land  of  Carrigaphooca  in  Cork  there  were  the  remains  of  a 
dolmen  surrounded  by  a  circle,  and  near  it  a  menhir.  Smith,  in 
his  "History,"  states  that  the  name  "  Carickafouky "  means 
"  P^airy  Rock."  The  name  was  applied  to  the  pillar-stone,  and 
not  the  dolmen. 

The  presence  of  this  mythical  animal  is  also  attested  by  the 
fact  that  its  name  is  attached  to  venerated  rocks  in  various  parts 
of  Ireland.  A  stone  on  Mount  Eagle,  in  Kerry,  near  the  old 
building  called  the  Clochdn  an  Martinig,  is  known  as  Clock  rian 
cois  an  Phooca,  that  is,  "Stone  with  the  mark  of  the  Phooca's 
foot."  J 

In  the  Barony  of  Stradbally  and  Parish  of  Tullomoy,  in  the 
Queen's  County,  is  the  "  Dun  of  Clopoke,"  and  in  the  middle  of 
a  field  about  half  a  mile  from  it  is  a  pillar-stone,  a  figure  of  which 
has  been  engraved  in  Cough's  edition  of  Camden.  It  now  bears 
the  name  simply  of  "  The  Liagan,"  but  it  was  called  formerly 

t  See  also  a  legend  at  p.  S76,  siipia.  %  MSS.  { Windele),  "  Jar  Muman,"  p.  477. 


Names  and  Legends.  9 1 1 


Clock  Lcachdain,  and  Cloch-a-Phnca,  or  the  "  Phooca's  Stone," 
from  which  latter  name  the  Townland  of  Clopook,  as  well  as  the 
"dun,"  derived  their  appellation. f 

In  the  County  of  Kilkenny  is  the  Parish  of  Fartagh,  correctly 
Ferta,  which  is  the  short  for  Ferta-na-cCaireck,  meaning  "  Tombs 
of  the  Sheep."  "  The  graveyard  here  is  held  in  much  esteem.  A 
little  to  the  north  of  it  is  a  well  called  Tobar-a-Phuicin,  that  is,  the 
'  Litde  Puka's  (or  Pooka's)  Well.'  At  this  well,  so  the  story  goes. 
Saint  Kieran  was  in  the  habit  of  watering  his  cow.  The  site, 
also,  is  shown  of  an  old  road  which  they  call  Bothar  CJiiarain,  and 
say  it  is  known  all  the  way  to  Callan."  J 

In  the  same  county  is  a  modern  castle  called  Cuirt-a-Phuca, 
meaning  the  Pooka's  Court.  "  Probably  a  more  ancient  fortifica- 
tion stood  on  this  site,  and  that  from  it  the  name  was  transmitted 
to  the  castle."  It  is  amusing  to  observe  that  Tighe,  in  his 
"  Survey "  of  the  county,  supposes  the  name  to  be  that  of  an 
ancient  Irish  family  who  possessed  the  place.§ 

According  to  the  best  authorities,  the  Pooka  was  a  goblin, 
whose  "  usual  appearance  was  that  of  a  sturdy  pony,"  who,  lying 
beside  the  road  crouched  like  a  cat,  amused  himself  by  playing 
tricks  on  belated  travellers,  running  between  their  legs,  lifting 
them  on  his  back,  and  thus  conveying  them  over  mountain  and 
dell  until  he  precipitated  them  over  some  precipice,  or  into  some 
thorn-brake  or  bog.  In  this  he  resembled  the  night-steed  of 
Pyrenean,  and  the  bi^nxa  of  Lusitanian  folk-lore. 

He  was  especially  connected,  however,  with  marshes  and 
water,  and  is  represented  as  shaking  the  dripping  ooze  from  his 
hairy  hide.  In  this  he  resembles  the  sea-horse  of  the  islands  of 
the  Hebrides,  and  in  his  amphibious  attributes  a  rash  etymo- 
logist might  be  led  to  identify  him  with  his  namesake  the  Latin 
Phoca,  a  sea-calf.     A  water-bull  belongs  to  Scottish  folk-lore.  || 

In  a  review  of  Crofton  Croker's  "  Fairy  Legends  of  the 
South  of  Ireland,"  Jacob  Grimm  writes  thus :  "  The  Pouke  (as 
Spencer  calls  him)  or  Phooka,  as  the  word  is  pronounced,  means, 
in  plain  terms,  the  Evil  One.  '  Playing  the  puck,'  a  common 
Anglo-Irish  phrase,  is  equivalent  to  'playing  the  devil.'     Much 


t  Camden's    "Britannia,"   edit.    Gough ;    "Trans.    Kilk.    Archceol.    Soc,"  vol.  i.  (1849-50), 
p.  298. 

:  O.S.L.,Co  Kilkenny,  ^^,  p.  134.  §  O.S.L.,  Co.  Kilkenny,  -  ^^,  p.  149. 

II  Campbell,  "  Tales  of  the  Highlands,"  Introd.  xcvii. 


912  The  Dolmens  of  Ireland. 


learning  has  been  displayed  in  tracing  the  word  through  various 
languages.!  The  commentators  on  Shakespeare  derive  the 
beautiful  and  frolicsome  '  Puck  of  the  Midsummer  Night's  Dream,' 
from  the  mischievous  Pouke.J 

"The  Irish  Phooka,  in  its  nature  perfectly  resembles  the  German 
Mahr.  The  Germans  have  a  legend  also  of  a  spirit,  which  sits 
among  reeds  and  alder  bushes  ;  and  which,  like  the  Phooka,  leaps 
upon  the  back  of  those  who  pass  by  in  the  night,  and  does  not 
leave  them  till  they  faint  and  fall  to  the  earth."  § 

For  myself,  I  have  my  doubts  whether,  in  their  origin,  how- 
ever much  they  may  have  been  subsequently  confounded  together. 
Puck  and  Phooka  are  traceable  to  the  same  source.  Puck  is  a 
dwarf,  a  mischievous  little  fellow, — diminutive  proportions  being  his 
first  and  essential  characteristic.  In  Cornwall  he  is  called  bncca, 
and  is  a  mine-dwarf  answering  to  the  Jiammerling  of  the  Germans. 
Another  form  of  the  same  word  in  Cornwall  is  pisky,  pisgy,  and 
picksy,  a  tricky  little  fairy  who  plays  havoc  with  the  milk  in  those 
farmhouses  on  the  ridgeway  of  the  roofs  of  which  an  earthenware 
ball  has  not  been  placed,  called  a  pisgy-pozv,  that  is,  pisky  s  foot, 
upon  which  he  can  dance  by  night.  It  is  curious  to  notice 
that  in  one  dialect  of  Basque,  namely,  Guipuscoan,  piska  means 
"little."  In  others,  namely,  Biscayan,  Libourdin,  and  that  of  Bas 
Navarre,  the  same  word  takes  the  forms  puska,  and  puchka  ;  thus 
piskapichka,  or  piichka-bat,  means  a  little  man,  a  dwarf. j| 

There  was  nothing  particularly  small  about  the  Irish  Phooka, 
whose  characteristics  seem  to  be  those  of  another  class  of  fabulous 
beings. 

Fir  Breagach. 

A  term  constantly  connected  with  venerated  rocks,  cairns, 
and  megalithic  remains  in  Ireland,  and  which  has  long  puzzled 
etymologists,  is  "  Fir  Breagach,"  written  also  "  Firbrega,"  "  Feara 
Breighe,"  and  *'  Firbreighe."  "  A  whole  chapter,"  says  Windele, 
"  might  be  written  on  these  Far  Breagachs."  The  usual  explana- 
tion, he  adds,  is  "deceptive  men,"  "pseudo-men,"  "phantoms." 

Whatever  breag,  breg,  or  bj'eigh  may  mean,  it  would  seem  at 
first  sight  that  it  is  the  same  word  which  occurs  in  the  forms 
brick,  bj'ack,  brcac,  and  brcagk,  in  the  following  names  : — Ceim- 
na-bricka  (Cork),  Drmjtbrick  (Donegal),  Clock-brack  (Tipperary), 

t  See  Quarterly  Rtviav,  vol.  xxii.  J  See  Drayton's  "  Nympliidia." 

§  Dublin  Penny  Journal,  Nos.  125  and  157.  ||  See  Van-Eys's  Basque  Dictionary. 


Names  and  Legends.  913 

Knockbrack  (Sligo),  Lag-breac  (Tipperary),  Clock  brcac  (Galway), 
Fal  na  g-clocha  brcaca  (Mayo),  Clocha  breacJia  (Sligo),  another 
Clocha-breacka,  also  called  ''The  Bi'ackcd  Stones''  (ditto),  Cloch- 
breac,  also  called  Clock  Lia  (ditto).  Clock  na  Brcacaib  (Cork), 
and  Breagkwy  (Sligo),  at  all  which  places  (and  many  others 
might  be  added  to  the  list)  venerated  rocks  or  megalithic 
remains  occur.  This  word  breac  has  usually  been  translated 
''speckled!' 

Beginning  with  Cork,  the  Far  Breagack,  near  Kilcolman,  is 
described  as  a  vast  pile  of  stone,  apparently  a  cairn. "j* 

The  Ceim-na-bricka,  which  gives  name  to  a  hill,  is  a  natural 
rock  of  very  peculiar  appearance.  It  is  a  large  mass  of 
sandstone,  7  feet  high  and  9  to  10  feet  broad,  separated  into 
three  upright  portions,  standing  three  feet  apart,  the  whole 
appearing  to  be  detached  from  the  ground  and  merely  resting 
on  it.  At  about  the  height  of  4  feet,  a  slight  natural  indentation 
runs  round  the  whole  mass,  marking  a  layer  or  stratum  in  the 
stone.  Legend  says  that  two  giants,  one  of  whom  was  Oisin, 
were  throwinsf  rocks  at  each  other  when  two  masses  met  in  mid 
air,  and  were  shattered  into  three  pieces,  thus  producing  the 
phenomenon.  The  natural  indentation  is  the  mark  of  the  hoop 
placed  round  the  fragments  to  tie  them  together.  According 
to  another  story,  a  profane  old  woman  swore  falsely  upon  this 
stone,  whereupon  it  burst  with  indignation  at  the  sacrilegious 
profanation.  This  latter  tale,  says  Windele,  attests  the  sacred- 
ness  in  which  the  "  Ceim-a-bricca"  was  held. J 

Near  Kilgrave  Church,  also  in  Cork,  is  a  holed-stone,  pierced 
through  one  of  its  angles.  It  is  called  Clock-na-breacaibk,  which 
Windele  here  explains  "  The  Sinners'  Stone."  Women  used  to 
draw  clothes  through  the  hole.§ 

In  Tipperary,  in  the  Townland  of  Loughbrack,  or  Lagbreac, 
and  Parish  of  Templebeg,  there  is  a  dolmen  which,  besides 
bearine  the  name  Dermot  and  Crania's  Bed,  seems  to  have  been 
called  also  Clock-brack.\ 

A  rough  circle  of  six  stones  shown  in  the  Ordnance  Survey 
Map  (Tipperary  No.  32),  near  Slieve  Kimalta,  is  called  Bir- 
brega.^ 

In    Galway,    in    the    Townland  of   "  Baile-an-bhothair,"    says 

t  MSS.  (Windele),  "  Cork  W.  and  N.E.,"  p.  172.  X  I^-,  P-  768. 

§  MSS.  (Windele),  "Topog.  of  Desmond,"  p.  565. 

11  Id.    p.  53.  1  Miss  Stokes's  MS.  Notes  on  Dolmens. 


914  The  Dolmens  of  Ireland. 


O'Donovan,  is  a  remarkable  pillar-stone  which  bears  the  name  of 
Cloch-brcac.\ 

Some  stones  on  Monument  Hill,  near  Loughrea,  in  the  same 
county,  which  Button  describes  as  set  in  a  circular  mound  of 
earth,  must  be  the  same  as  those  mentioned  in  the  "  Name 
Book  "  of  the  Ordnance  Survey,  as  being  locally  known  as  Feara 
Brcige^  or  Breighe.  The  mound  was  in  the  Townland  of 
Moenmore.  It  was  similar  to  a  fort,  and  seven  large  stones 
were  sticking  in  the  banks  all  round  it.  It  appears  to  have  been 
a  work  of  the  same  kind  as  that  at  "  Mullach  Chairn  "  in  Mayo, 
and  the  **  Mound  of  Ash,'*  in  Down. 

In  the  County  of  Mayo,  on  the  Townland  of  Ballybeg,  I  find 
a  site  marked  Cloghabracka,  and  according  to  the  Ordnance 
Survey  Letters,  there  was  on  the  Townland  of  Creeves  (v/hich 
I  cannot  identify),  a  field  called  in  Irish  Fal  na  g-clocha  breaca.\ 
In  the  latter  was  "a  so-called  rath,  the  circle  of  which  was 
composed  of  earth  and  stones,  the  stones  being  of  the  size  usual 
in  the  megalithic  series.  The  diameter  inside  the  circle  was 
ten  yards,  and  there  were  one  or  two  sepulchral  monuments 
attached  to  the  west  side."  From  the  description,  this  appears 
to  have  been  a  similar  work  to  that  at  Moenmore  in  Galway. 

In  Sligo,  in  the  Townland  of  Streedagh,  and  Parish  of 
Ahamlish,  a  dismantled  dolmen  bears  the  name  Clocha-breaca.% 
Another  dolmen  at  Belville,  in  the  same  county,  is  similarly 
designated,  and  the  name  Englished  by  "  The  Bracked  Stones."  || 

Among  the  Christian  antiquities  at  the  religious  establishment 
of  St.  Molaise,  on  the  island  of  Inishmurray,  off  the  coast  of 
Sligo,  is  a  pile  of  stones  arranged  in  the  shape  of  a  cube  so  as  to 
form  an  altar,  called  Cloch-Breac.  There  is  a  superstition  that  no 
one  can  count  the  number  of  the  stones  placed  on  the  top  of  it. 
These  stones,  in  common  with  the  altar  on  which  they  rest, 
appear  to  bear  collectively  the  name  Clocha-Breaca.  Wherever 
found  in  like  positions,  as  they  are  in  Scotland  as  well  as  Ireland, 
such  stones  are  believed  to  possess  miraculous  properties  for 
healing  sicknesses.  They  are  also  used  for  swearing  on,  and 
especially  for  purposes  of  malediction.     They  are  common  to  the 

14 

T  Ord.  Surv.  Letters,  Co.  Galway,  ^z — ,  p.  157. 

14 
X  Ord.  Surv.  Letters,  Co.  Mayo,  ^ —  ,  p.  276. 

§  Wood-Martin,  R.S.M.L,  pp.  147-48.  |1  Id.,  p.  206. 


Names  and  Legends.  915 


western  islands  of  Scotland.  Petrie  states  that  there  are  "two 
of  them  in  the  Paris  Museum,  which  bear  inscriptions  as  well  as 
crosses."  Pennant,  in  his  account  of  lona,  says  that  similar 
stones  are  there  to  be  seen  placed  on  the  pedestal  of  a  cross.  It 
is  the  custom  there  to  turn  them  thrice,  accordinc:  to  the  course  of 
the  sun,  with  which  practice  may  be  compared  that  mentioned 
by  Strabo  at  Cape  St.  Vincent.f 

The  name  they  bear  in  lona  is  Clacha-Brath,  which  is 
popularly  connected  with  a  word  Brdth,  meaning  "  Judgment 
Day,"  that  is,  the  "  end  of  the  world." 

Sacheverel,  writing  also  of  lona,  says  that  originally  "  there 
were  three  noble  globes  of  thick  marble  placed  on  three  stone 
basins,  and  these  were  turned  round,  but  the  Synod  ordered  them 
and  sixty  crosses  to  be  thrown  into  the  sea."  \ 

In  Sligo  there  is  a  Parish  named  Knockbrack,  after  a  hill  so 
called.  There  is  also  a  Townland  called  Breaghwy,\  where  there 
are  two  sepulchral  cairns. 

In  Donegal  there  is  a  dolmen  at  Drumbi'ick. 

In  Monaghan,  in  the  Townland  of  Latnamard  (Latnambard), 
in  addition  to  a  dolmen,  are  some  "standing-stones,"  "called  by 
the  country-people  Fir  Bhrdige','  says  O'Donovan,  and  explained 
by  him  "Pseudo-Men." II 

In  Tyrone,  near  the  dolmen  of  Carriglass,  is  a  spot  marked 
Cnoc-na-fear-Breagach. 

In  Wicklow,  in  the  Parish  of  Moyne,  is  the  Townland  of 
Farbrdaza,  said  to  derive  its  name  from  standing-stones,  which 
look,  at  a  distance,  like  men. 

Looking  at  the  various  explanations  which  these  names  have 
received,  I  think  that,  while  O'Donovan  is  right  in  translating 
those  in  which  yfr  occurs  as  "pseudo-men"  in  allusion  to  the 
common  story  that  groups  of  pillars,  natural  or  artificial,  were 
men  or  women  turned  into  stone,^  the  other  names  in  which 
clock  occurs  may  be  explained  in  accordance  with  the  meaning 

t  Geogr.  edit.  C.  Miiller,  p.  114. 

X  Journ.  Roy.  A. A. I.,  4th  Ser.,  vol.  vii.,  1S85-56,  p.  175. 

§  ?  From  Breagh,  and  oiv^y,  as  it  is  locally  pronounced,  "a  grave." 

II  O.S.L.,  Cos.  Armagh  and  Monaghan,  — ^   p.  132. 

B.  12'  1  1,    1 

1  Two  other  explanations  are,  however,  possible.  In  Bohemia  the  name  for  a  sepulchral 
tumulus  is  either  Homolka  or  Wulfshiigel,  and  in  some  parts  of  Germany  the  name  of  the  ''"(/ '^ 
associated  with  cairns  and  megalithic  remains,  and  Breagh  in  Irish  means  a  Wolf.  _  Agam,  BreacU 
(=  Breath)  may  possibly  be  the  name  of  a  race  of  people  to  whom  such  remams  and  natural 
curiosities  might  have  been  popularly  ascribed.  See  Brych,  Brictones,  Brittones,  Diefenbach, 
"Celtica,"  i.  pp.  58-61,  109,  116. 


91 6  The  Dolmens  of  Ireland. 


preserved  at  lona,  not  in  the  sense  of  the  Judgment  Day, 
however,  but  in  that  of  the  Irish  word  bretha,  "judgments,"  in 
allusion  to  the  superstitious  purposes  to  which  they  were  put 
in  reference  to  swearing,  augury,  and  divination.  The  Scotch 
Gaelic  clocha  brath,  in  lona,  is  evidently  the  same  term  as  the 
Gaedhelic  clocha  breaca,  in  Inishmurray,  the  th  and  ch  being  readily 
interchangeable,  even  within  the  limits  of  Gaedhelic  itself,  as  in 
brath  =  malt,  which  is  also  spelt  brack. 


(     917     ) 


PART   IV. 

ANTHROPOLOGY   AND    ETHNOLOGY. 

The  evidence  of  the  presence  of  Man  in  Ireland  under  the 
conditions  of  life  attained  by  savages  in  other  parts  of  Europe  in 
what  is  known  as  their  Palaeolithic  Age,  when  the  influences 
of  climate,  the  contour  of  the  land,  and  the  fauna  and  flora  by 
which  he  was  environed,  were  all  other  than  they  are  to-day, 
rests  upon  such  data  as  may  be  obtained  from  the  bones  and 
implements  discovered  in  natural  caverns  and  river-beds. 

Such  evidence,  however,  has  to  be  checked  by  various  considera- 
tions, prominent  among  which  is  that  of  the  relative  position  occu- 
pied by  such  bones  or  relics  with  respect  to  remains  of  ancient  fauna 
with  which  they  may  seem  to  be  in  association  ;  and,  further,  by  the 
question  whether  the  particular  fauna,  seemingly  so  associated, 
were  in  existence  solely  during  the  Palaeolithic  period,  or  whether 
there  may  not  be  reasons  for  supposing  that  they  survived  into 
the  Neolithic,  or  even  into  the  later  ages  which  supervened. 

In  a  cave,  for  example,  at  Ballynamintra,f  on  the  estuary  of  the 
Blackwater,  in  Dungarvan  Bay — a  locality,  by  the  way,  which 
geologists  have  proved  to  have  been  a  resort  of  the  huge 
mammalia  which  existed  in  the  post-Pliocene  epoch — the  bones 
and  relics  of  Man  have  unquestionably  been  found  in  strata  which 
contained,  in  close  contact  with  them,  the  remains  of  the  Ursjis 
Ferox  (race  spelmis),  a  beast  which  Mr.  Busk  and  others  have 
identified  with  the  grisly  bear  of  the  Rocky  Mountains,  and  with 
those  of  the  Megaceros  Hibeiniiciis,  that  magnificent  elk,  more  than 
lo  feet  in  height,  with  antlers  measuring  ii  feet  from  tip  to  tip, 
which  derived  its  name  from  the  country  in  which  its  remains  have 
been  found  most  abundantly,  but  which  ranged  also  over  Britain, 
Sweden,  Germany,  France  to  the  Pyrenees,  and  Italy. J 

t  "  Scientific  Transactions  of  the  Uoyal  Dublin  Society,"'  April,  1881,  vol.  i.  Ser.  iii.  :  Paper  by 
Prof.  A.  Leith-Adams,  G.  H.  Kinahan,  and  R.  J.  Ussher,  on  "  Explorations  in  the  Bone-cave  of 
Ballynamintra,"  with  plates. 

X  "  Prehistoric  Times,"  by  Sir  John  Lubbock  ;   5th  edit.,  1890,  p.  29b. 


9i8  The  Dolmens  of  Ireland. 

Now,  with  respect  to  both  these  animals,  Sir  John  Lubbock 
would  deny  that  they  survived  even  into  Neolithic  times.  With 
regard  to  the  Irish  elk,  he  gives  it  a  slightly  longer  span  of 
existence  in  Europe  than  the  hippopotamus,  but  immediately 
after  stating  this  he  adds,  "  No  remains  of  this  animal  have  yet 
been  found  in  association  with  bronze,  nor  indeed  am  I  aware  of 
any  which  can  be  referred  to  the  later  Stone  or  Neolithic  Age."f 

According  to  this,  then,  if  we  grant  that  the  remains  in  the 
cave  in  question  were  contemporaneously  deposited,  the  human 
remains  must  be  those  of  Palaeolithic  man. 

But  careful  examination  of  the  details  of  the  exploration  of  the 
cavern,  which  have  been  given  us  with  the  greatest  accuracy  and 
precision  by  the  three  scientific  experts  engaged  in  the  work,  will 
lead  us,  I  think,  rather  to  traverse  Sir  John  Lubbock's  conclusion, 
than  to  relegate  the  remains  to  an  antiquity  so  remote. 

The  contents  of  the  rock  cavity  which  had  been  formed  by 
aqueous  agency  proved  themselves  divisible  into  five  strata.  Of 
these  the  lowest  consisted  of  gravel,  barren  of  animal  remains, — the 
original  deposit  upon  the  limestone  lloor.  The  second  in 
ascending  order  was  formed  of  crystalline  stalagmite  deposited  on 
the  o-ravel  floor.  It  occurred  either  in  the  form  of  a  continuous 
floor,  or  in  broken  cuboidal  masses,  and  in  it  were  bones  and  teeth 
of  bears  and  deer,  pointing  to  its  probable  occupation  by  the 
former.  The  next  stratum  above  this  comprised  pale  sandy  earth, 
with  pebbles,  bones,  and  some  charcoal,  and  represented  a  period 
during  which  the  stalagmite  floor  had  been  in  part  broken  up  and 
the  earth  introduced  upon  it.  The  stratum  next  above  this  was  the 
most  interesting.  It  was  from  14  to  20  inches  deep,  and  was 
composed  of  grey  material  consisting  of  earth  and  calcareous  tufa. 
In  this  mass  were  bones  in  large  quantities,  clustered  together 
often  under  the  walls  and  in  crevices.  They  were  blackened  and 
•covered  with  pale  dentritic  marks.  A  large  proportion  of  them 
belonged  to  the  Megaceros  Hibe7'nicics.  The  ends  of  the  marrow 
bones  were  always  broken  off,  and  the  shafts  generally  split 
lengthways.  Rude  stone  implements,  which  were  of  shapes 
convenient  to  the  hand,  were  plentiful.  These  showed  unmis- 
takable marks  of  having  been  used  for  striking  and  cleaving. 
Indeed,  they  might  well  have  been  used  for  extracting  the  marrow 
from  the  bones  of  the  great  elks.     Several  bones  of  the  bear  were 

t  loc.  cii. 


Anthropology  and  Ethnology. 


919 


found  in  this  stratum,  and  numerous  human  bones,  some  blackened, 
others  of  a  straw  colour  encrusted  in  calcareous  tufa,  with  which 
latter  were  associated  remains  of  the  hare,  ox,  red-deer,  pig,  a 
vertebra  of  the  Megaceros,  shells  of  Helix,  lumps  of  charcoal,  a 
marine  mussel  shell,  a  limpet,  and  two  chipped  hammerstones. 
Bones  of  the  rabbit,  goat,  fox,  badger,  and  marten  were  also  found 
in  this  stratum.      The  charcoal  formed  a  seam  in  the  grey  earth, 


Fig.  701.— Objects  Neolithic  and  Recent,  found  in  the  natural  cavern  at  Ballynaminlra. 

like  an  old  floor  or  hearth  resting  on  a  white  calcareous  seam. 
There  was  also  found  a  pointed  implement  made  from  the  bone  of 
a  goat.  In  the  crevices  were  a  bone-chisel,  a  knife-handle  and  a 
stone  celt. 

Here,  in  this  stratum  next  to  the  top  one,  we  have  evidence  of 
the  deposition  of  calc  tufa,  and  of  the  occupation  of  the  cavern  by 
men  who  were  contemporaneous  with  the  Irish  elk  and  the  bear. 
It  would  appear  that  domestic  animals  had  already  been  introduced, 


920  The  Dolmens  of  Ireland. 


but  the  objects  found  in  the  crevices  might  have  been  washed 
down  from  above. 

The  last  and  topmost  stratum  was  composed  of  brown  earth, 
with  rounded  sandstones,  limestone  fragments,  charcoal,  bones, 
and  implements.  Here  were  found  bones  of  the  rabbit,  hare, 
goat,  ox,  pig,  fox,  red  deer,  dog,  marten,  horse,  hedgehog,  and  of 
several  birds,  one  metatarsal  of  the  bear,  darker  than  the  former 
bones,  a  number  of  broken  bones  of  the  Megaccj'os,  and  fragments 
of  a  human  skull.  Close  outside  the  cave's  mouth,  in  dark  surface 
loam,  with  bones  of  the  hare  and  goat,  was  a  polished  stone  celt. 
Further  outside  the  entrance  -was  found  a  large  flat  amber  bead. 
Within  the  cave  were  a  long  slender  implement  of  carved  bone,  a 
carved  and  perforated  bone,  a  small,  pointed  bone  instrument,  two 
fragments  of  a  vessel  of  rude,  hand-made  pottery  with  indenta- 
tions on  the  lip,  and  charred  internally  by  fire,  a  bone  chisel,  a 
knife-handle  ornamented  with  concentric  circles  (modern),  several 
sandstones  exhibiting  marks  of  human  use,  and  striking-stones  of 
sandstone  with  chipped  edges  (see  Fig.  701). 

Before  the  time  when  this  stratum  had  been  deposited, 
calcareous  deposits  had  ceased.  The  cave  was  occupied  by  Man, 
now  using  objects  of  unquestionably  Neolithic  and  later  (post- 
Neolithic)  date.  Domesticated  animals  were  supplying  his  wants, 
and  yet,  at  the  commencement,  at  all  events  of  the  deposition  of 
the  stratum,  the  Irish  elk  had  not  disappeared. 

On  the  whole,  then,  what  are  we  to  conclude  ?  Surely  not 
that  the  human  bones  are  those  of  Palseolithic  man  because  of 
their  association  with  those  of  the  Irish  elk  ?  Palceolithic  man, 
so  we  are  taught,  had  not  domesticated  animals,  yet  the  remains  of 
such  are  common  to  both  strata  in  which  human  remains  are  here 
found.  Had  human  remains  or  implements  of  the  recognized 
Palceolithic  types  been  found  in  the  stratum  composed  of  crystalline 
stalagmite,  in  company  with  those  of  the  bear,  at  the  bottom  of 
the  cave,  the  case  would  have  been  wholly  different.  As  it  is,  the 
evidence  appears  to  warrant  the  conclusions — (i)  that  the  human 
remains  in  both  these  topmost  strata  are  referable  to  the  Neolithic 
Age — it  may  be  to  two  separate  epochs  of  it  ; — (2)  that  the 
Megaceros  Hibernicus  was  still  ranging  the  glens  and  mountains 
during  the  first  occupation  of  the  cave  by  Man,  and  that  perhaps 
he  was  not  quite  extinct  during  the  second  ; — (3)  that  the  cave  con- 
tains no  evidence  of  the  presence  of  Man  in  the  Palaeolithic  Age. 


Anthropology  and  Ethnology.  921 

Unfortunately,  of  the  thirty-seven  human  bone-fragments 
which  have  been  determined,  those  which  can  with  certainty  be 
ascribed  to  the  lower  of  the  two  strata  are  few,  and,  taking  the 
whole  series  together,  none  are  sufficiently  distinctive  to  allow  of 
a  conclusion  being  drawn  as  to  the  particular  type  of  prehistoric 
man  to  which  the  individuals  should  be  assigned.  Some  dozen  or 
more  portions  of  the  skull  are  named,  all  of  them  supposed  to  be 
referable  to  the  upper  stratum,  but  nevertheless  found  with  the 
broken  bones  of  the  Megaceros.  Among  these  the  most  charac- 
teristic are  the  right  and  left  supra-orbital  portion  of  a  frontal, 
possibly  belonging  to  one  person,  and  of  which,  according  to  the 
evidence,  the  supra-orbital  ridges  are  prominent. 

Prominence  in  these  supraciliary  ridges  is  so  marked  a  feature 
in  a  type  of  Irish  skull  which,  although  doubtless  prevalent  in 
prehistoric  times,  is  known  to  craniologists,  as  far  as  Ireland  is 
concerned  (with  the  possible  exception  of  the  so-called  river-bed 
skull  from  the  Nore,  to  be  mentioned  presently),  only  in  survivals 
from  the  early  Middle  Ages  onwards,  that  I  am  tempted,  before 
proceeding  further,  to  introduce  a  notice  of  it  at  once,  more 
especially  as,  by  many  most  eminent  anthropologists,  it  has  been 
classed  with  forms  which  once  excited  world-wide  interest  on 
account  of  their  supposed  Simian  affinities,  and  referred  by  some 
of  them  with,  as  we  shall  see,  no  little  show  of  reason,  to  a  type 
which  has  been  found  to  distinguish  the  most  primitive  crania  of 
Europe.  Whether  the  skull  in  the  Ballynaminta  cave,  the  vast 
age  of  which  cannot  be  questioned,  was  flattened,  that  is  to  say 
in  craniological  language,  whether  it  was  platycephalic,  as  the 
type  of  which  we  are  about  to  speak  pre-eminently  is ;  whether, 
again,  it  was  elongated  or  round,  that  is  to  say,  doliclwcephalic  or 
brachycephalic  (the  divisions  under  which  Anders  Retzius  taught 
us  to  classify  our  skulls),  we  have  not  sufficient  evidence  to  show. 
The  prominence  of  the  supraciliary  ridges  is  the  one  point  in 
common. f  With  regard  to  the  other  points,  be  that  as  it  may, 
it  will  not  be  amiss  to  commence  our  inquiry  into  Irish  crania 
by  describing  a  form  in  survival,  the  prototype  of  which,  if  we 
rightly  identify  it,  carries  us  back  to  the  period  of  antiquity  most 
remote  in  the  history  of  the  human  race  in  Europe. 

t  This  feature,  although  marked  in  the  case  of  Mansuy's  skull  {vide  infra),  is  not  so  marked  in 
it  as  it  is  in  other  examples  to  be  noticed. 

VOL.  in.  P 


922 


The  Dolmens  of  Ireland. 


I. — The    DOLICHO-PLATYCEPHALIC    TvPE.f 

The  individual  whose  skull  this  is  was  an  Irishman,  who  in  the 
fourth  or  fifth  century  found  his  way  to  Toul.     In  the  "legend  " 


Fig.  702. — Skull  said  10  be  that  of  Saint  Mansuy. 

regarding  him,  written  by  one  Adso  in  the  tenth  century,  he  is 
placed  much  earlier,  and  stated  to  have  been  a  disciple  of  the 
Apostle  Peter  sent  to  convert  the  Leuci,  that  is,  the  people  of 

t  The  cephalic  index,  or  breitcn-index,  is  arrived  at  by  taking  the  greatest  breadth  of  the  skull, 
and  its  greatest  length,  multiplying  the  former  by  100,  and  dividing  by  the  latter. 

The  point  of  separation   between   dolichoccphaly  and  brachycephaly  was  originally  fixed  by 


Anthropology  and  Ethnology.  92, 


Tullum  Leucorum  (Toul).  In  common  with  almost  all  the 
venerated  missionaries  of  his  age  and  type,  he  is  described  as 
of  noble  birth,  "  nobih  Scottorum  sanguine  oriundus,"  "  Scotorum 
clara  progenie  genitus,"  and,  like  most  of  them  also,  he  was  an  exile 
from  his  native  land.  All  this  must  be  taken  for  what  it  is  worth. 
Certain  it  is  that  portions  of  a  body  said  to  be  his  had  been 
objects  of  veneration  time  out  of  mind  in  the  churches  of  Toul, 
and  that  his  shrine  was  a  centre  of  pilgrimage  to  innumerable 
devotees,  when  M.  Godron  f  was  requested  by  the  bishop  of  the 
diocese  to  make  an  examination  of  the  skull.  He  found  the  in- 
scription, Cap7it  Sancti  Mausticti  aim  qiiatnor  dentibiis^  visit.,  amio 
Dni  1614,  and  was  able  to  identify  it  with  certainty.  M.  Godron 
was  himself  a  practised  anthropologist,  and  communicated  a  full 
account  of  the  skull  to  the  "  Academie  de  Stanislas,"  at  Nancy, 
in  1864.  He  describes  it  as  extremely  remarkable  in  its  confor- 
mation, and  considers  that  he  detects  analogies  in  it  to  the  typical 
Swedish  skulls  of  A.  Retzius  J  on  the  one  hand,  and  on  the  other 
to  the  skull  found  by  Smerling  in  the  Engis  cave  near  Liege.§ 

Retzius  at  79,  all  skulls  reaching  that  index  (inclusive)  being  considered  dolichocephalic,  and  all 
reaching  80  (inclusive)  and  above  it  counting  as  brachycephalic. 

Other  subdivisions  followed.  Welcker  gives  the  following  ("  Archiv.  fiir  Anthropologic,"  1866, 
pp.  135,  154)— 

Dolichocephalic,  67-71.  (No  modern   European   types,  but  many  ancient  examples  from 

caves,  river-beds,  and  megaliths.) 
Subdolichocephalic,  72,  73.     (Among  which  he  places  the  Irish,  but  no  other  Europeans.) 
Orthocephalic,  74-78.  (Among  these  he  gives  the  ancient  Romans,  the  Spaniards,  the 

ancient    Greeks,  the  Swedes,  the  Esthonians,  the   Hollanders 
(including  those  of  Urk  and  Marken),  the  English,  the  Danes, 
the  Scotch,  the  Portuguese,  the  Netherlanders,  and  the  modern 
Greeks.) 
Subbrachycephalic,  79,  80.      (Among  these  he  includes  the  French,  the  Italians,  the  Serbs,  the 

Poles,  the  Russians,  the  Finns,  the  High  German  people,  and 
the  Roumanians.) 
Brachycephalic,  Si-85.  (Among  these  are  the  Swiss,  the  Czechs,  the  Croats,  the  Lapps, 

etc.) 
In  a  table  which  combines  the  '''■  breiten  index,"  with  the  " hoketi^^  {ox  altitudinal)  index,  the 
same  writer  gives  the  Irish  skull  a  proportional  height  of  70*6 ;  to  the  Hollanders  (Frisians)  of  Urk 
and  Mark,  69'8  ;  to  other  Hollanders,  "JVI  ;  to  the  Icelander,  71 'i  ;  to  the  Holsteiner,  71*2  ;  to 
the  Dane,  71*3  ;  to  the  Swede,  7i"5  ;  to  the  Hanoverian,  717  ;  to  the  Letts,  72*3  ;  to  the  Scots, 
72*5  ;   to  the  people  of  Bonn  and  Koln,  72'6  ;   and  to  the  English,  73" I. 

According  to  this  author,  therefore,  the  Irish  have  on  the  one  hand  the  most  dolichocephalic 
skull  in  Europe,  and  on  the  other  the  most  platycephalic,  with  one  exception.  More  recent  and 
extensive  measurements  have  tended  to  modify  these  views.  One  type  in  survival  justifies  the 
extreme  platycephaly.  Many  of  the  prehistoric  crania  possess  a  very  marked  dolichocephaly,  but 
no  skulls  of  at  all  recent  date  justify  the  retention  of  an  index  of  72  and  73  which,  as  it  has  been 
based  on  skull  measurements  from  river-beds  and  dolmens,  must  be  regarded,  as  in  Britain,  as 
distinguishing  the  inhabitants  of  these  islands  only  during  the  most  primitive  period. 

t  "Memoires  de  I'Academie  de  Stanislas,"  Nancy  (1864),  pp.  50,  61  :  Paper  by  M.  D.  A. 
Godron,  entitled,  "  Examen  ethnologiquc  des  tctcs  de  .Saint  Mansuy  et  de  Saint  Gerard." 

X  A.  Retzius,  "Om  formen  af  Nordboernes  Crania,"  Stockholm  (1S43),  P*  3>  ^"'^  "  Ethnolo- 
gische  Schriften  von  Anders  Retzius,"  p.  4,  and  pi.  I.,  fig.  I. 

§  "  Rccherches  sur  les  ossements  fossiles  decouverts  dans  les  cavernes  de  la  Province  de  Liege," 
Liege  (1843),  vol.  i.  p.  60  ;  Tab.  I.,  figs,  i  and  2  ;  see  also  "  Crania  Ethnica"  ("  De  Quatrefages 
and  Hamy,"  p.  73)  ;  Sir  C.  Lyell's  "Antiquity  of  Man"  (French  edit.),  p.  88,  ft  seqq. ;  Ilaniy, 
*' Precis  de  Palcontologie  llumaine,"  vol.  ii.  p.  281,  et  seqq.  ;  W.  Turner,  in  the  Quarterly 
Journal  of  .Science,  vol.  i.  (April,  1864),  p.  250,  et  seqq.  ;   etc. 


924  The  Dolmens  of  Ireland. 


The  characteristics  of  the  cranium  are  extreme  platycephaly 
in  unison  with  marked  doHchocephaly.  The  forehead  is  retreat- 
ing, the  supraciHary  arches  are  large  and  protuberant,  and  the 
nose  prominent.     The  cephahc  index  is  6g'^i.     The  cranial  vault 


Fig.  703. — The  Neanderthal  Skull.     Fro/u  the  "  Cra7na  Ethnica"  p.  123. 

of  this  skull  is  even  more  depressed  than  that  of  the  famous 
Neanderthal  f  skull,  which  was  looked  upon  by  some  to  be  so 
abnormal  that  it  must  have  belonged  to  an  idiot,  or  so  little 
human  that  it  must  have  belonged  to  an  ape.  As  a  matter  of 
fact,  the  form  is  as  essentially  human  as  it  is  ancient  in  date, 
widely  dispersed,  and  recurrent  in  survival.  It  is  a  typical 
cranium  of  the  Canstadt  group,  so  called  from  an  example  found 
in  1 700,  associated  with  bones  of  the  mammoth  at  Canstadt,  J  near 
Stuttgard,  and  now  in  the  Natural  History  Museum  at  the  latter 
place.  To  the  same  type  belongs  a  skull  from  Eguisheim,  near 
Colmar,§  also  found  in  connection  with  the  remains  of  the 
mammoth.  For  the  occurrence  of  the  type,  still  in  connection 
with  a  very  remote  epoch,  in  Sweden,  we  may  turn  to  Nilsson.j| 
In  1843,  he  tells  us,  two  human  skulls  were  discovered  lying  about 
three  feet  below  the  surface  of  a  shell-bed,  the  shells  in  which, 
including  those  above  the  skeletons,  were  found  in  horizontal 
layers,  in  a  perfectly  undisturbed  state.  The  bed  was  loo  feet 
above  the  level  of  the  sea  at  Stangenas,  in  Bohuslan.  The 
crania  are  at  the  Museum  at  Lund.  The  lareer  of  the  two,  a 
drawing  of  which  (but  very  inadequate)  Nilsson  appends,  is 
described  as  unusually  large.     The  great  Swedish  archaeologist 

t  "Cran.  Ethn.,"  Figs.  5-7,  ;  Hamy,  "Precis"  [ul  supr.),  p.  204. 
X  "Cran.  Ethn.,"  pi.  i.  fig.  i  ;  Hamy,  "Precis,"  vol.  i.  p.  91. 
§  "Cran  Ethn.,"  pi.  i.  fig.  2  ;  Hamy,  "  Precis,"  p.  205. 

II  "Primitive  Inhabitants  of  Scandinavia"  (Eng.  transl.  edit.  Lubbock),  p.  116,  et  seqq. ;  and 
pi.  XV.  figs.  253-255  ;  see  also  "  Cran.  Ethn.,"  p.  16. 


Anthropology  and  Ethnology.  925 

then  proceeds  to  make  a  remark  with  regard  to  it  which  has  a  special 
interest  in  connection  with  our  comparison  of  Saint  Mansuy's  skull 
with  the  Canstadt  series,  namely,  that  it  appeared  to  him  to 
resemble  most  nearly,  though  not  perfectly,  a  plaster  cast  of 
a  cranium  sent  by  Sir  R.  W.  Wilde  to  Retzius,  and  said  to  be 
that  of  O'Connor,  who  was  called  the  last  King  of  Ireland.  The 
Stangenas  man  was  remarkable  for  his  height,  and  also  for  the 
size  and  elongation  of  his  cranium,  the  cephalic  index  of  which, 
to  judge  by  the  drawings,  must  be  72  or  73.  It  is  remarkable 
that  this  type  of  skull,  though  we  can  trace  it  back  to  a  fossil 
state,  is  still  sporadically  represented  in  Scandinavia.  The 
authors  of  **  Crania  Ethnica"  state  the  fact  that  the  Stangenas 
form  still  impresses  itself  now  and  then  on  the  characteristics  of 
the  skulls  of  the  North,f  and  the  skull  of  Stora-Aby  (CEster- 
gcethland),  described  and  figured  by  Retzius,{  which  was  taken 
from  an  ancient  grave,  and  that  also  of  Kai  Lykke,§  an  historical 
individual  in  Denmark,  which  is  in  the  Copenhagen  Museum,  are 
examples  in  point. 

Before  citing  other  Irish  examples  and  further  instances  of 
survival  of  the  type,  we  may  pause  to  inquire  what  manner  of 
man  this  ancestral  savage  of  the  Quaternary  epoch  was,  and  what 
the  extent  of  his  range. 

He  must  have  been,  then,  a  man  of  rugged  mould  and  massive 
frame,  standing  five  feet  ten  or  thereabouts  in  height — a  giant, 
therefore,  among  the  pigmies  with  whom  in  other  regions  he  was 
contemporary.  As  to  his  head,  the  supraciliary  ridges  were,  in  any 
case,  greatly  developed, — in  that  of  the  Neanderthal  skull  to,  pro- 
bably, an  abnormal  degree.  This  gives  rise  to  the  circumstance 
that,  in  some  cases,  the  forehead  seems  more  depressed  than  is 
in  reality  the  case.  The  cranial  vault,  however,  was  markedly 
depressed,  and  considerably  elongated  behind.  The  eye-orbits  were 
enormous,  and  nearly  circular  ;  the  nose  prominent,  and  the  nostrils 
extended.  The  traces  of  him  which  reach  us  from  the  most 
archaic,  that  is,  from  the  Quaternary  epoch,  cause  those  who 
describe  him  to  speak  of  his  skull  as  "  un  crane  bestial."  His 
implements  were  of  flint  or  bone.  Round  his  neck  he  wore  a 
string  of  shells,  or  little  fossil  polypes,  naturally  or  artificially 
perforated.       He  was    the  earliest  human  inhabitant  of  Europe 

j-  p,  35.  X  "  Ethnologische  Schrifien,"  Stockholm  (1864),  p.  92,  and  pi.  v,  fig.  2. 

§  *'  Hommes  Fossiles,"  by  ^L  Annand  de  C^uatrefatjes  de  Breau,  Fans  (18S4),  pp.  63,  64. 


926 


The  Dolmens  of  Ireland. 


of  whom  we  have  cognizance  ;  but  his  type,  even  in  all  its  rug- 
gedness,  was  not  confined  to  geologic  times.  Explorers  have  met 
with  his  remains,  sometimes  in  a  form  remarkably  pure,  sometimes 
in  one  more  or  less  altered  and  modified,  in  the  dolmens  of  the 
Neolithic  Age,  in  Gallo-Roman  cemeteries,  and  in  the  tombs 
of  the  Middle  Ages  ;  notably  in  districts  such  as  the  valleys  of 
the  Rhine  and  the  Seine,  where  evidences  of  his  existence  in 
Palaeolithic  times  are  by  no  means  wanting. 

One  only  example  can  be  pointed  out  of  the  appearance  of 
this  Canstadt  or  Neanderthaloid  type  in  the  West  of  France,  and 
that  not  In  connection  with  dolichocephaly,  but  with  modified 
brachycephaly.     The  circumstance  of  Its   discovery   Is,  however, 


Fig.  704. — Skull  from  the  dolmen  of  Bougon.     froni  tlic  "  Crania  EtlnticaJ'  p.  31. 

so  singular  and  suggestive  that  It  must  not  be  passed  by.  The 
cranium  occurred,  among  a  vast  number  of  other  skulls  of  totally 
different  type.  In  the  magnificent  dolmen  of  Bougon,  In  the 
Department  of  Deux-Sevres.f 

This  dolmen  is  described  as  an  Irregular  parallelogram,  the 
sides  of  which  were  formed  of  enormous  blocks,  bearing  on  their 
summits  a  gigantic  roofing-slab  nearly  one  metre  thick.  Three 
slabs  formed  the  S.  side  of  the  chamber,  and  a  like  number 
the  N,  side,  while  the  E.  and  \V.  sides  were  composed  of  two 

_  t  For  an  account  of  the  explorations  made  in  the  group  of  tumuli  at  this  place,  in  one  of  which 
this  megalithic  chamber  was  found,  see  the  "  Memoires  de  la  Societe  de  Statistique  du  Depart,  des 
Deux.  Sevres,  Niort,"  vols.  v.  p.  52,  viii.  p.  179,  ix.  p.  87,  and  M.  Alex,  Bertrand,  "Carte  de 
la  Gaule"  (1867),  in  voc.  "Bougon,"  p.  180.  A  drawing  of  the  interior  of  the  chamber  occurs 
in  "  Seminario  Pintoresco  Espanol  "  (1850),  p.  393. 


Anthropology  and  Ethnology. 


927 


From  the 


each.  Two  others  were  placed  across  the  centre  of  the  vault, 
dividing  it  into  two  compartments.  Between  these  supports 
there  was  a  counter-wall  of  dry  masonry.  A  gallery,  or  passage, 
1*50  m.  broad,  and  i  m.  high,  formed  by  four  side-stones,  with 
two  on  the  top,  entered 
the  tomb  at  right  angles 
to  the  S.  side,  thus  ren- 
dering the  plan  of  the 
structure  comparable  to 
the  Drenthe  and  Scandi- 
navian examples.  The 
chamber  itself  measured 
7-48  m.  from  E.  to  W.  by 
5"  10  m.  from  N.  to  S., 
and  the  height  of  the  in- 
terior was  2*25  m.  It  was 
estimated  that  the  vault 
contained  no  less  than 
sixty  human  bodies,  in 
three  layers,  divided  by 
pavements  of  flags.  With 
these  were  found  four  urns  entire,  together  with  a  large  number 
of  fragments  of  pottery,  two  flint  axes,  not  polished,  a  stone 
hammer,  pierced,  and  of  excellent  workmanship — several  pointed 
bone  implements  (such  as  are  found  in  caves),  a  bear's  tooth 
perforated  at  the  end,  several  boar's  tusks,  two  beads  of  a  mother- 
of-pearl  necklace,  a  perforated  bone,  several  knives,  and  a  saw  of 
flint,  the  remains  of  a  necklace  of  shells,  perforated  by  friction, 
and  of  another  formed  of  rings  of  pottery  (such  as  those  generally 
called  spindle  whorls  ?),  and,  lastly,  a  fossil  echinus. 

Amonor  the  characteristics  of  the  sinMe  skull  of  the  Canstadt 
type  which  found  its  place,  as  that  of  an  allophylian  among  those 
of  so  many  men,  women,  and  children  of  weaker  physique,  may 
be  noticed  the  rapid  falling  back  of  the  low  and  relatively  narrow 
forehead,  the  marked  prominence  of  the  supraciliary  ridges  and 
the  glabella,  the  height  of  the  orbits  in  proportion  to  their  length, 
and  their  tendency  to  roundness,  the  excessive  prognathism  of 
the  face,  and  the  strength  of  the  teeth  with  which  the  greatly 
projecting  upper  jaw  is  furnished. 

Great   interest   arises  from  the  circumstance  that  a  cranium 


Fig.  705. — Skull  from  the  dolmen  of  Bougon. 
"  Crania  Ethnica^''  p.  31. 


928  The  Dolmens  of  Ireland. 


reproducing  so  markedly  the  platycephalic  features  of  those  of 
Stangenas,  Canstadt,  Neanderthal,  and  others  of,  as  is  justly 
supposed,  the  Quaternary  epoch,  was  found  in  a  dolmen,  which 
in  turn  reproduces — both  in  the  plan  of  the  structure  and  in 
its  evidently  Neolithic  contents — the  structures  of  this  class  in 
Sweden,  the  Cimbric  peninsula,  the  Baltic  islands,  Drenthe  in 
Holland,  Hanover,  Mecklenburg,  and  Brandenburg.  The  fact 
that  its  cephalic  index  is  8o,f  which  differentiates  it  from  the 
other  platycephalic  examples,  is  indicative  of  the  mixed  descent 
of  the  individual,  and  of  the  presence  of  the  brachycephalic  race 
already  in  the  Neolithic  Age. 

MM.  Quatrefages  and  Hamy  compare  with  it  the  rugged 
skull  known  as  the  Forbes  Quarry  skull,  from  Gibraltar,!  and 
consider  that  the  type,  in  modified  and  softened  form,  entered 
into  the  crania  from  the  Cueva  de  la  Mujer  and  the  Cabeco 
d'Arruda  in  the  Spanish  peninsula.§ 

Extending  their  comparisons  into  the  Mediterranean,  they 
point  to  the  presence  in  Italy,  in  the  Quaternary  epoch,  of  a 
race  represented  by  a  skull  from  Olmo,  and  which,  while  markedly 
platycephalic,  had  the  exceedingly  low  cephalic  index  of  68. || 

It  has  been  stated  that  no  other  skull  of  the  markedly  platy- 
cephalic type  but  that  in  the  dolmen  of  Bougon  has  occurred  in 
the  "ivest  of  France.  In  the  north,  however,  an  exceedingly 
good  example  of  it  in  survival  was  discovered  in  a  Gallo- Roman 
cemetery  at  Boulogne.^  In  the  east,  also,  examples  have  been 
found  in  Lorraine,  especially  in  the  district  of  the  Moselle. ff 
Above  all,  in  the  basin  of  the  Seine,  the  only  part  of  central 
France  which  has  furnished  examples  of  this  type  from  the  most 
ancient  river-beds,J|  it  is  said  to  have  been  found  in  no  less  than 
seven  instances  of  atavistic  survival  in  Christian  burial-irrounds 
in  the  vicinity  of  Paris. §§ 

As  this  type  has  been  discovered  in  the  valley-basins  of  the 

t  Prof.  Boyd  Dawkins  ("Cave  Hunting,"  p.  199)  gives  the  measurement  of  one  skull  from 
"  tumulus,  Bougon,"  as  O'So,  by  which,  I  suppose,  he  refers  to  this  one. 

\  *'  Cran  Ethn.,"  pp.  21,  31, 

§  "Cran.  Ethnica,"  p.  33;  "La  Cueva  de  la  Mujer,  G.  MacPherson,  Cadix  (1870),  pi.  x. ; 
"  Commissao  Geologica  de  Portugal,  communication  by  Signer  Pereira  da  Costa,  Lisbonne  (1S65) ; 
"  Ages  Prehistoriques  de  I'Espagne,"  by  M.  E.  Cartailhac,  Paris  (1886),  pp.  322,  323. 

II  "Cran.  Ethnica,"  pp.  17-19;  "  L'uomo  fossile  nell'  Italia  centrale.  Studi  paleoetnologici," 
Milan,  1867. 

t  "Cran.  Ethnica,"  p.  32.        _  ft  Ibid. 

W  "  Crane  et  ossements  .trouves  dans  une  carriere  de  I'avenue  de  Clichy,  Bull.  Soc.  Anthrop. 
de  Paris,  2nd  Ser.,  vol.  iii.,  1868,  pp.  329-332.  For  comparison  with  the  Olmo  skull,  see  "Cran. 
Ethnica,"  p.  17  ;  and  for  comparison  with  the  Stangenas  one,  see  the  same,  p.  18. 

§§  "Cran.  Ethnica,"  \).  32. 


Anthropology  and  Ethnology. 


929 


Seine  and  Rhine,  and  in  Wurtemburg,f  it  is  interesting  to  note  its 
occurrence  in  Quaternary  gravels  at  Brux  in  Bohemia,  just  south 
of  the  Erz  Geberge,  and  close  to  the  valley  of  the  Upper  Elbe.J 
Indeed,  this  most  prehistoric,  as  well  as  most  forbidding  of  the 
savages  of  early  Europe,  whencesoever  he  had  come,  and  whither- 
soever he  was  directing  his  course,  appears  to  have  been  familiar 
with  the  coasts  and  rivers  of  the  whole  of  the  western  portion  of 
the  continent. 

Examples  of  his  type  are  quoted  also  from  the  canton  of 
Vaud,§  from  Basle,  ||  from  Hohberg,^  and  from  the  lake  Bienne  in 
Switzerland, If  a  curious 
theory  of  Prof.  Vogt, 
with  regard  to  which 
I  will  presently  notice. 
Instances  do  not  seem 
to  be  rare  of  its  occur- 
rence in  the  valley  of  "\/w 
the  Danube,:|:J  and  Mr. 
Barnard  Davis  cites  one 
from  the  Crimea. §§ 

«  .  /-     iM  Fig.  706. — Skull  from  Minsk. 

A  cranmm  ot  like 
type  has  been  cited  from  Minsk,  the  district  in  which  are  the 
marshes  of  the  Pripet,  the  country  of  the  blue-eyed  and  auburn- 
haired  Budini  of  Herodotus, ||||  in  whom,  according  to  Schrader, 
we  may  recognize  the  ancestors  of  the  Sclaves.  It  has  been 
described  by  Dr.  Kutorga,^^  and  certainly  seems  to  have  "  une 


t  "  Beitrage  zur  Ethnographic  von  Wiirtemberg,"  by  Hermann  Holder,  in  the  "  Archiv.  fiir 
Anthropologie,"  3  Heft,  Brunswick,  1867,  from  the  chapel  of  St.  Vitalis,  pp.  63,  64;  classed  under 
"  German  type." 

X  •'  Revue  d' Anthropologie,"  vol.  i.  1S72,  pp.  667-682. 

§  "  Le9ons  sur  Thomme,"  by  C.  Vogt,  p.  497.  |1  Ibid.  %  Ibid,  ft  Ibid. 

Jt  "Cran.  Ethn.,"  p.  38. 

§§  "  Thesaurus  Craniorum,"  by  J.  Barnard  Davis,  London,  1867,  p.  120  :  "A  very  large  platy- 
cephalic skull,  having  a  frontal  suture." 

III!  Book  iv.  chap.  108.  "  The  Budini,"  he  says,  "are  a  nation  great  and  strong.  They  have  all 
deep-blue  eyes,  and  their  hair  is  auburn  (or  perhaps  rather  bi  ight  red,  TrvppSv).  They  had  a  city  in  the 
country  called  Gelonus  surrounded  with  a  high  wall,  thirty  furlongs  each  way,  built  entirely  of  wood. 
All  the  houses  in  the  place,  and  all  the  temples  were  of  the  same  material.  Here  are  temples  built 
in  honour  of  Grecian  gods,  and  adorned  after  the  Greek  fashion  with  images,  altars,  and  shrines, 
all  in  wood.  They  hold  every  third  year  a  festival  in  honour  of  Bacchus,  at  which  the  natives  give 
vent  to  Bacchic  fury.  .  .  .  The  Budini  are  the  abori<iinal  people  of  the  country,  and  are  nomads, 
and  eat  vermin.  .  .  .  Their  country  is  thickly  planted  with  all  manner  of  trees.  In  the  very  woodiest 
part  is  a  broad  deep  lake,  surrounded  by  marshy  ground  with  reeds  growing  on  it.  Here  otters 
are  caught,  and  beavers,"  etc.  This  topographical  description  accords  exactly  with  the  marshes  of 
the  Pripet.  Rawlinson  (Herod,  vol.  iii.  p.  92  n.)  regards  the  Budini  as  the  ancestors  of  the  Germans, 
while  Schofarik,  like  Schrader,  looks  upon  them  as  a  Sclavonic  people  ("  SlavischeAlterth  I.," 
vol.  X.  pp.  185-195).  See  Jevon's  transl.  of  Schrader,  "  Prehist.  Antiquities  of  the  Aryan 
Peoples,"  p.  426. 

^^  Dr.  Kutorga's  paper  on  this  and  another  skull  will  be  found  in  the  "  Verhandlungen  der 
Russisch-Kaiserlichen  Mineralogischen  Gesellschaft  zu  St.  Petersburg,"  for  the  year  1S42,  pp.  35-39. 


930 


The  Dolmens  of  Ireland. 


grande  analogic  avec  le  crane  du  Neanderthal."  Passing 
further  east  to  the  north  of  the  Caspian,  in  the  Government 
of  Orembourg,  MM.  Ouatrefages  and  Hamy  think  they  detect, 
in  the  short  description  furnished  by  Vrolik  of  a  Baskir  skull, 
indications  of  the  same  type.  The  skulls  of  these  people  are, 
however,  as  a  rule,  brachycephalic,  although  some  are  meso- 
cephalic,  with  an  index  of  79.  They  appear  to  occupy  a  middle 
position  between  those  of  the  Tures  and  Mongols.  Here,  on 
account  of  paucity  of  evidence,  the  links  of  the  chain,  in  its  seeming 
process  to  the  S.E.,  are  broken,  but  the  editors  of  the  "Crania 
Ethnica "  do  not  hesitate  to  suggest  that,  were  it  not  for  the 
infinite  mixture  of  races,  it  might  be  again  taken  up  in  Persia, 
Afghanistan,  Candahar,  and  so  into  the  Indian  penlnsula.f 

Returning  to  the  Baltic  and  its  southern  coast,  we  find  that 


Fig.  707. — "Old  Pomeranian"  skull.     Fro))t  Krissait,  near  Daiitzi:;;. 

Dr.  Lissauer  has  described  and  given  photographs  of  a  skull 
found  at  Krissau,  two  miles  and  a  half  from  Dantzig.  He  was 
led  to  discover  it  by  observing  that  about  twenty  little  stone- 
circles  were  cropping  up  through  the  sand,  and  that  hillocks  were 
crowned  with  oblong  settings  of  stones  about  half  a  foot  to  a  foot 

■^'  P-  37  he  gives  two  outlines  of  the  skull.  It  is  also  mentioned  in  a  paper  by  Mr.  Busk,  in  the 
Natural  History  Kevinv  for  l86l,  p.  i68,  and  in  the  "  Verhandlungen  des  naturh.  Vereins  des 
preuss.  Rheinl.  u.  Westphal.,"  for  1857  (July  9th),  and  in  the  "  Crania  Ethnica,"  p.  38.  It  was 
found  near  liohruysk,  in  the  sandy  bottom  of  a  hollow,  apparently  an  ancient  river-bed,  in  a  ])lace 
where  human  bones  had  so  often  been  met  with  that  it  was  called  "the  old  burying-ground,"  and 
tradition  added  that  a  town  named  Ray^rod  had  formerly  stood  there,  which  had  been  destroyed  by 
an  inundation. 

t  "  Crania  Ethnica,"  p.  39. 


Anthropology  and  Ethnology. 


931 


above  ground,  and  three  feet  below  it.  Urns  and  articles  of  bronze 
had  been  found  in  the  vicinity.  Human  bones  were  found  in  all 
the  circles  at  a  depth  of  several  feet,  under  layers  of  sand,  char- 
coal, and  broken  stones.  With  this  "  Old  Pomeranian  skull,"  as 
he  calls  it,  was  an  implement 
of  iron.  The  skull  itself  was 
dolicho  -  platycephalic,  with  a 
cephalic  index  of  70*0,  and  an 
altitudinal  index  of  75 '8,  which 
he  compares  with  the  average 
indicesof  the  Row-Grave  skulls. j 
Another  "  Old  Pomeranian 
cranium,"  also  from  a  grave  of 
the  Iron  Age,  showed  a  cephalic 
index  of  702.  The  conclusion 
Dr.  Lissauer  arrives  at  is  that 
the  Baltic  -  Prussian  type  is 
identical  with  the  Frank-Ale- 
mannic  type  of  Ecker.  "  Ecker's 
view  that  the  Franks  and  Ale- 
manni,  whose  skulls  we  find 
represented  in  the  Row-Graves 
from  the  fifth  century  b.c.  on- 
wards, were  originally  settled  on  the  shores  of  the  Baltic,  is 
confirmed  by  the  discovery  of  the  same  skull-type  in  the  heathen 
graves  of  the  Prussian  Baltic  coast.  We  may  now,  in  short, 
accept  the  conclusion  that  an  original  stock,  of  quite  similar  skull 
form,  and  therefore  related  to  these  Franks  and  Alemanni  of  the 
Row-Graves  were  living,  before  the  historic  period,  on  the 
Pomeranian  amber  coast." 

Indications  of  this  type  are  said  to  extend  round  the  eastern 
coast  of  the  Baltic  as  far  as  the  Neva  and  the  Lake  Ladoga. J 
It  is  remarkable  that  the  skull  measurements  of  the  Greenlander 
(cephalic  index  71-8,  altitudinal  index  74"o)  approach  very  closely 
those  we  have  been  considering. 

t  "Schriften  der  Natur.  Forgeschende  Gesellschaft."  Neue  Folge,  Bd.  3,  Danzig,  1875  (the 
paper  is  dated  1872),  pp.  1-24.  This  paper  also  contains  a  brief  account  of  skulls  in  the  Kbnigs- 
burg  Museum  found  in  hiimn^rabs,  tumuli,  and  stone-settings  on  the  coast,  and  in  tlie  islands  of 
Old  Prussia,  sometimes  in  conjunction  with  urns  with  burnt  bones,  as  also  with  articles  of  bronze 
and  iron  and  coins.  Of  these,  ten  were  true  dolichocephalic  (see  ante,  n.,  pp.  922,  923),  three  ortho- 
cephalic,  and  two  brachycephalic.  In  one  instance  all  three  forms  were  found  together,  and  in 
one  instance  also  a  dolicephalic  skull  was  found  with  a  brachycephalic.  This  coast  was  clearly  a 
meeting-ground  of  races  during  succeeding  ages. 

{  "  Origin  of  the  Aryans,"  by  Isaac  Taylor,  p.  104,  and  "Crania  Ethnica,"  p.  496. 


Fig.  70S. 


— "  Old  Pomeranian  "  skull. 
Krissait,  near  Dantzig. 


From 


932  The  Dolmens  of  Ireland. 

Virchow,  in  his  description  of  the  Old  Norse  skulls  in  the 
Copenhagen  Museum,  gives  the  average  cephalic  index  for  the 
Iron  Age  (Period  I.),  as  65*5,  and  (Period  II.)  as  6g'i,  that  of 
the  Bronze  Age  as  66'6,  indices  which  it  appears  to  me  are 
distinctly  comparable  with  those  of  the  markedly  dolichocephalic 
skulls  which  Professor  Rolleston  saw  reason  to  differentiate 
altogether  from  those  of  the  Long  Barrow  dolichocephali,  and 
which  he  compares  with  the  Hohberg  type.  Examples  of  these 
are,  as  we  shall  presently  see,f  found  in  "  Round  Barrows  "  of  the 
Bronze  Age  in  Britain,  which,  as  a  rule,  contain  a  modified  type 
of  brachycephalic  skull.  The  average  cephalic  index  which 
Virchow  gives  for  the  Stone  Age,  obtained  from  forty-one  skulls, 
is  as  high  as  77'S-  He  adds  that  of  the  Finns  at  80*3,  and  that 
of  the  Lapps  as  83*2  to  85'!.  Upon  the  subject  as  a  whole,  as 
regards  Scandinavia  and  the  North,  he  makes  the  following  im- 
portant remark  : — "  The  Lapps  and  Finns  are,"  he  says,  "  brachy- 
cephalic ;  the  Greenlanders  dolichocephalic  ;  the  people  of  the 
Stone  Age  mesocephalic  (i.e.  orthocephalic)  with  a  tendency  to 
brachycephaly ;  the  skulls,  again,  of  the  Bronze  and  Iron  Ages 
are  dolichocephalic,  with  tendency  to  hypsocephaly."| 

With  regard  to  skulls  found  in  "long  built-up  stone  cists  of 
North  Britain  and  the  islands,"  and  of  which  Mr.  Turner  supplied 
Professor  Huxley  with  measurements  of  ten  examples,  I  consider 
that  they  may  represent  an  intermixture  of  the  dolicho-platycephalic 
type  with  that  of  the  western  dolichocephali  of  the  "  Long  Barrows." 
It  is  to  be  observed  that  the  cists  which  contain  them  are  neither 
capable  of  classification  with  the  dolmens  proper,  nor  with  the 
cists  which  usually  contain  brachycephalic  skulls  with  skeletons  in 
contracted  positions.  They  are  formed  of  stone  slabs,  those 
constituting  the  ends  and  sides  being  placed  on  their  edges,  whilst 
those  which  form  the  roof  and  floor  of  the  cist  are  laid 
flat,  and  rest  upon  the  upper  edges  of  the  end  and  side  slabs. 
The  skeletons  are  in  extended  position.  The  extreme  cephalic 
indices  are  078  and  072. § 

In  illustration  of  the  type  of  which  I  am  speaking,  I  may 
adduce  the  skull  from  the  cist  of  Muckle-Heog,  in  the  island  of 
Uist  in  Shetland  (Fig.  709). || 

t    VtJe  infra,  pp.  953-4. 

X  "  Archiv.  fiir  Anthropologic,"  Brunswick,  Bd.  4,  1S70,  pp.  63  and  71 ;  "British  Barrows," 
p.  604. 

§  "  I'rehist.  Remains  of  Caithness,"  pp.  115,  116.  ||  "Crania  Ethnica,"  p.  494. 


Anthropology  and  Ethnology. 


The   cephalic    indices  of   seven    individuals    taken   from    the 
tumuli  at  Keiss,  Caithness,  were  077  for  men,  and  0744  for  women,f 


Fig,  709. — Skull  from  the  cist  of  Muckle-Heog,  in  the  island  of  Uist,  Shetland.  Frotn  De  Quatrcfages. 

but  the  chambers   in  which  they  were  found  belonged  to  a  type 
other  than  that  of  the  so-called  "long  built-up  stone-cists."  J 

The  district  of  all  others  in  Europe  where  extreme  platycephaly, 


Fig.  710. — Skull  of  Batavits  gemtinus  of  Blumenbach.     From  "  Decas"  pi.  Ixiii. 

and  that  in  combination  with  dolichocephaly,  still  holds  its  ground 
most  firmly,  and,  historically  speaking,  can  be  traced  back  farthest 
— since  the  same  population  was  dwelling  there  in  B.C.  12,  when 


t  "Prehist.  Remains  of  Caithness,"  pp.  lOO,  loi. 

X  Id.  p.  23.    Comp.  the  Irish  example  at  Newbliss  (INfonaghan),  p.  291,  supra. 


934 


The  Dolmens  of  Ireland. 


Drusus  came  among  them,  as  dwells  there  now  f — is  the  out-of- 
the-way  corner  of  the  German  ocean,  to  which,  with  its  islands,  we 
give  the  name  of  Friesland,  or  Frisia. 

In  ancient  times  these  people  dwelt  on  and  around  part  of  the 
basin  which,  in  the  Middle  Ages,  was  enlarged  by  storm-tides  into 
the  Zuyder  Zee.  From  the  island  of  Marken,  within  these  waters, 
Blumenbach  long  ago  obtained  a  skull  which  he  named  Batavtt,^ 
^enmmcs  (Fig.  7io).J  M.  Sasse  has  shown  that  the  same  type  still 
exists  in  Holland,  very  rarely,  however,  since  out  of  eighty  skulls 
from  Northern  Holland,  he  only  found  one  example.§  With  regard 
to  the  Frisian  type.  Professor  Virchow  has  followed  the  line  of 
argument  indicated  by  the  name  given  by  Blumenbach,  and  in  his 
admirable  essay  on  the  Anthropology  of  the  Germans,  with  special 
reference  to  the  Frisian  type,  has  demonstrated  the  curious  fact  that 
the  Frisian  skull  is  not  merely  the  most  platycephalic  in  Europe, 
but  that  its  altitudinal  index  is  lower  even  than  that  of  the  Hotten- 
tots, or  of  the  Tungusians  of  Siberia.  Average  measurements  for 
the  inhabitants  of  jNIarken  and  Urk  give  altitudinal  indices  of  69*8 — 
{in  the  case  of  one  skull  which  he  figures,  it  is  as  low  as  67) — while 
those  of  the  Hottentots  are  70*2,  and  those  of  the  Tungusians  70*6.  || 


Fig.  711. — Frisian  skull.     Ffow  Firc/iO'c; 


Fig.  712.  —  Frisian  skull,     /''row  Viirliow. 


"  Nowhere,"  says  Mr.  Isaac  Taylor,  "  are  skulls  of  the  Neanderthal 
type  so  numerous  as  in  the  islands  in  the  Zuyder  Zee."^ 


t  On  the  subject  of  the  continuity  of  the  old  Frisian  race  on  these  islands,  see  the  exhaustive 
and  admirable  paper  by  Professor  Virchow  in  the  "  Abhandlungen  der  Konig,  Akad.  der 
Wissensch,  zu  Berlin,"  1876,  entitled,  "Beitnige  zur  physischen  Anthropologic  der  Deutschen  niit 
besonderer  Beriicksichtigung  der  Friesen." 

X  "Decas  prima  collectionis  suic  cranionim  diversarum  gentium  illustrata,"  J-  F.  Blumenbach, 
•Gottinga',  1790,  pi.  Ixiii. 

§  '*  Bull.  .Soc.  Anthrop.  de  Paris,"  vol.  iv.  (1863),  p.  491. 

II  See  Professor  Virchow's  paper  above  quoted.  ^  "  Origin  of  the  Aryans,"  p.  104. 


Anthropology  and  Ethnology.  935 


And  now  I  reach  a  fact  which  is  most  of  all  to  my  purpose, 
namely,  that  it  is  with  these  skulls  that  the  particular  Irish  type  to 
which  I  have  devoted  so  much  space  is  specially  comparable. 
The  altitudinal  index  of  Irish  crania 
which  Welcker  f  adduces  to  set 
beside  his  Frisian  type  is  70*6, 
almost  identical  with  the  Frisian 
index,  and,  like  it,  below  those  of 
the  Hottentot  and  Tuneusian. 

Mr.  Barnard  Davis  and  Mr. 
Carter  Blake,J  and  others,  have 
collected    evidence   anatomical    and 

,      ,        .       ,  ,  ,  Fk;.  713.  —  Frisian  skull.    From  Virchoxv. 

pathological  to  show  that  such  ex- 
amples as  the  Neanderthal  skull  could  have  been  produced 
abnormally.  Let  them,  however,  say  what  they  will,  it  is  im- 
possible that  they  can  deny  to  these  Frisian  crania  their  proper 
place  among  the  ancient  racial  types  of  Europe.  It  cannot  be 
supposed  that  chronic  synostosis,  that  a  chronic  closing-up,  that 
is  to  say,  of  the  sutures  producing  such  an  appai'ently  abnormal 
conformation,  could  have  been  truly  speaking  abnormal  when  it 
prevailed  in  the  case  of  the  entire  population  of  these  islands 
whose  skulls  have  afforded  to  M.  Virchow  the  low  indices  he  cites. 
It  follows  that  it  is  an  uncontrovertible  fact  that  in  them  we  pos- 
sess a  genuine  and  veritably  ancient  form  of  skull  which  has  been 
handed  down  in  unbroken  survival  from  the  remotest  aees  to 
which  human  palaeontology  carries  us  back,  since,  with  modifi- 
cations which  have  rendered  it  less  rugged,  it  reproduces  the 
characteristics  of  the  skulls  of  Stangeniis,  and  Canstadt,  of  the 
Neanderthal  and  Eguisheim,  as  well  as  of  those  taken  from 
the  valley  of  the  Seine,  the  Upper  Elbe,  and  the  other  more 
distant  places  above  mentioned.  That  it  existed  in  Ireland  in 
remote  periods  we  have  no  proof,  unless  a  skull  from  the  Nore 
at  Borris  may  possess  so  great  an  antiquity.§  In  survival  \\\&xq., 
however,  we  find  it  in  numerous  instances,  whether  imported  or 
indigenous,  and  then  it  is  found  specially  to  resemble  the  Frisian 
type  just  mentioned.  The  probable  inference  is  that,  at  some 
period    or  another,  the    portion  of  the   coast   of   the    Continent 

t  "  Kraniologische  Mittheilungen,"  by  Hermann  Welcker,  in  "  Archiv.  fiir  Anthrop.,"  Bruns- 
wick, vol.  i.  (1866),  p.  154. 

X  "Memoirs  of  the  Anthropological  Society  of  London,"  vol.  i.  p.  2S1,  and  vol.  ii.  p.  74. 
§  See  tig.  715,  p.  943. 


936  The  Dolmens  of  Ireland. 

where  it  prev^ailed  contributed  its  quota  to  the  population  of 
the  island  in  the  North  West.  That  such  immigrations  took 
place  at  periods  very  much  before  the  dawn  of  history  is  a  theory 
which  at  present  there  is  not  sufficient  evidence  to  establish. 
The  great  inundations,  however,  caused  by  the  storm-tides,  to 
which  the  population  of  the  inner  recesses  of  the  Frisian  Gulf 
were  subjected,  must,  from  prehistoric  times  onwards,  have  been 
periodically  forcing  an  alternative  on  the  people,  either  to  go 
further  inland,  in  which  case  they  would  have  to  confront 
enemies  of  no  mean  power  in  the  other  Germanic  tribes  who 
possessed  the  country,  or  to  go  seaward  in  search  of  new 
abodes.  As  to  the  Frisians  themselves  their  fidelity  to  the 
Roman  alliance  secured  them  the  possession  of  their  native  shore 
in  perpetuity,  but  with  kindred  tribes  around  them  it  was  not  so. 
and  the  pressure  of  the  Roman  arms,  added  to  an  inborn  love  of 
piracy  and  adventure,  must  have  tempted  the  German  tribesmen 
over  and  over  again  to  commit  their  fortunes  to  the  waves. 
The  discovery  of  a  cranical  type  so  strikingly  similar  to  an  Irish 
type  on  these  coasts  between  the  Elbe  and  the  Rhine,  seems  to 
force  on  us  the  reconsideration  of  what  we  had  come  to  regard  as 
a  mere  coincidence  or  geographer's  blunder,  namely,  the  fact  that 
Ptolemy  places  the  tribe  called  Cauci  f  somewhere  on  the  eastern 
coast  of  Ireland  between  Dublin  and  Wexford,  and  mentions 
Manapia  as  a  town-name  somewhere  thereabouts  also,  while  the 
Chatici  were  living  in  close  contact  with  the  Frisians,  if  they  were 
not  themselves  a  portion  of  that  people,  and  the  Menapii  dwelt 
about  the  mouths  of  the  Rhine. 

From  this  coast  it  was,  too,  that  Agricola,  in  the  year  a.d.  84,^ 
gathered  those  Batavian  cohorts  which  he  led  into  Britain.  Hence, 
too,  it  may  naturally  be  supposed  that  Carausius§  in  the  third 
century,  and  Gratian  and  Valentinian  in  the  fourth,  derived  his 
bands  of  mercenary  Franks  in  the  first  place,  and  Picts  in  the 
second,  whom  those  commanders  are  respectively  said  to  have 
settled  on  the  British  coasts.  There  is  something  even  to  be 
said  for  the  view  that  episodes  in  the  disjointed  Scottish  and 
Irish  Sagas  of  Finn  Mac  Cumhail  and  his  band  of  trained  mer- 

t  For  the  relation  of  the  Chauci  to  the  Frisians,  see  Prof.  Virchow's  paper  above  quoted. 

X  "Tac.  Vit.  Agric,"  c.  36. 

§  Carausius  may  have  derived  his  name,  it  appears  to  me,  from  the  pagus  Carouuascus, 
otherwise  called  Caroascus,  Charos,  Carasco,  and  Carosco.  Orellius  (5921)  gives  an  inscription 
relating  to  the  Condrusi  from  the  same  country,  a  cohort  quartered  in  North  Britain.  See  Zeuss, 
"Die  Deutschen,"  and  Miillenhoff,  vol.  ii.  197. 


Anthropology  and  Ethnology.  937 

cenaries  may  be  traced  to  the  Frisian  coast  either  during  the 
periods  just  mentioned  or  in  the  beginning  of  the  sixth  century 
when  his  namesake  Finn  of  Finnsberg  was  engaged  in  fighting 
the  Danes. 

The  name  of  the  Fresicum  Maref  (Firth  of  Forth),  in  which 
was  the  Urbs  Guidi  mentioned  by  Bede,J  points  to  a  like 
conclusion  which,  together  with  other  facts,  causes  Mr.  (now  Sir 
Henry)  Howorth  §  to  regard  it  as  certain  that  Scotland  and  the 
North  of  Ireland  were  overrun  in  the  fourth  century  by  invaders 
whom  we  identify  as  Frisians  or  Jutes, — the  so-called  Scytho- 
Gothic  people,  perhaps,  whom  Giraldus  tells  us  were  brought 
over  by  Gratian  and  Valentinian,|l 

The  frequency  with  which  Continental  anthropologists  have 
turned  to  Ireland  for  comparisons  with  this  dolicho-platycephalic 
type,  and  the  frequency  with  which  Irish  anthropologists  have 
turned  to  this  type  on  the  Continent  for  comparisons  with  their  own, 
is  remarkable.  Nilsson,  as  we  have  seen,  compared  the  Stangenas 
skull  with  that  of  O'Connor,  the  last  Irish  king.^  Pruner  Bey 
compared  with  two  Irish  skulls  in  his  possession  the  Neanderthal 
skull  on  the  one  hand,  and  Helvetian  skulls  iyAllobrogia7i  he  calls 
them)  on  the  other.ff  Professor  William  King,  of  Queen's  College. 
Galway,  compared  the  Neanderthal  skull  to  one  in  his  possession 
from  Corcomroo  Abbey,  in  the  Burren  Mountains,  in  Clare.JJ 
Mr.  Carter  Blake  compared  the  Neanderthal  skull  to  one  in  his 
possession  from  Louth  Abbey. §§  MM.  De  Ouatrefages  and  Hamy 
set  side  by  side  for  comparison  under  their  Canstadt  group  the 
skulls  of  O'Connor,  St.  Mansuy,  the  two  Irish  skulls  of  Pruner 
Bey,  the  Borris  skull  figured  by  Prof.  Huxley,  and  an  Irish  skull 
described  by  Mr.  Barnard  Davis.||||  Prof.  Huxley  compared  the 
skull  from  Borris,  found  in  the  river-bed  of  the  Nore  with  the 
Bataviis  ^emiimts  of  Blumenbach,  with  a  South-German  skull 
figured  by  Ecker,  and  with  another,  "  No.  3,"  of  Friederichs — (his 
remarks  as  to  the  connection  of  this  type  with  the  Scandinavian 
on  the  one  hand,  and  the  Swiss  on  the  other,   I  reserve  for  the 

t  Nennius,  38. 

X  Hist.  Eccl.  cap.  xii.,  Howorth,  in  "  Anthrop.  Journ.,"  vol.  x.  p.  199:  see  Skene,  "Celtic 
.Scotland,"  p.  192. 

§  "  Anthrop.  Journ.,"  vol.  x.  p.  199. 

II  De  Princip.  Instruct.  Dist.  I.,  edit.  Warner,    vol.  viii.  p.  95. 
^  loc.  cit.     "  Stone  Age,"  edit.  Lubbock,  pp.  116,  117. 

tt  "Journ.  Anthrop.  Soc.  of  London,"  vol.  ii.  (1864),  cli. 

\X  "  Quarterly  Journ.  of  Science,"  No.  i,  January,  1864,  p.  90. 

§§  "  Memoirs  (jf  the  Anthrop.  Soc.  of  London,"  vol.  ii.  (1866),  p.  76. 

III  "Crania  Elhnica,"p.  31. 

VOL.  HL  Q 


938  The  Dolmens  of  Ireland. 

moment);!  and,  finally,  Welcker  and  Virchow  compare  this  Irish 
platycephalic  type  with  the  recent  crania  of  Urk  and  Marken.J 

The  curious  theory  of  Prof.  Vogt  of  Geneva  §  to  account  for 
the  presence  of  skulls  of  Irish  type  among  the  Swiss  series, 
although  I  cannot  entirely  agree  with  it,  must  not  be  passed 
over.  Placing  the  tombs  in  which  these  were  found  at  the  end  of 
the  fourth  and  beginning  of  the  fifth  centuries,  he  recalls  the  fact 
that  this  was  the  period  when  Irish  missionaries,  according  to 
tradition,  arrived  in  that  district,  their  advent  coming  simul- 
taneously with  the  decline  of  the  Roman  empire.  He,  therefore, 
proposes  to  call  these  crania,  which  he  looks  upon  as  so  abnormal 
as  to  be  most  specially  Simian,  the  *'  Tetes  d'Apotres."  Firstly, 
however,  we  believe  it  can  be  shown  that  this  type  existed  in 
Switzerland  previous  to  this  date ;  and,  secondly,  even,  could  we 
not  do  this,  the  relations  existing  between  Ireland  and  Switzerland 
might  be  the  result  of  migrations,  to  and  fro,  at  a  comparatively 
late  period,  in  which  movements  the  missionaries  would  certainly 
have  taken  part.  Early  traditions  still  extant  in  Irish  literature, 
and  some  of  which  refer  to  the  period  indicated  by  Prof.  Vogt, 
point  to  not  Infrequent  raids  undertaken  by  native  chieftains 
from  the  North  into  the  Provinces  south  of  the  Danube.  The 
value  of  the  Professor's  theory  consists,  therefore,  not  in  the 
conclusion  at  which  he  arrives,  but  In  the  testimony  which  It 
affords  to  the  truth  of  the  opinion  on  which  he  based  It,  namely, 
the  unmistakable  similarity  between  the  respective  cranial  types. 

I  have  mentioned  above  the  comparisons  of  Irish  skulls  with 
those  of  dolicho-platycephalic  type  made  by  Pruner  Bey,  Prof. 
King,  Mr.  Carter  Blake,  and  Prof.  Huxley.  It  will  be  well 
to  refer  to  these  more  fully. 

It  was  in  1864,  when  the  discussion  as  to  the  possible  Simian 
affinities  of  the  Neanderthal  skull  was  at  Its  height,  that  Pruner 
Bey  called  attention  to  the  resemblance  which  that  cranium 
seemed  to  bear  to  the  skulls  of  existing  Irishmen.  He  produced 
four  skulls  side  by  side,  and  gave  their  respective  measurements 
in  centimetres  as  follows  : — 


Circumference  at 

Circumference  above 

Lengtli. 

Breadth. 

level 

of  supra- 

the  supra- 

ciliary  ridges. 

ciliary  ridges. 

Neanderthal 

...      20-5 

150 

59 

56 

Helvetian  ... 

...      19-5 

14-5 

57 

55 

Irish  (No.  I) 

...      200 

15-0 

58 

57 

Irish  (No.  2) 

...      20"5 

14-3 

57 

56 

t  "  Prehist.  Remains  of  Caithness,"  by  S.  Laing  and  T.  H.  Huxley  (1866),  p.  128. 
X  locc.citt.  §  ••  Le9ons  sur  I'Homme,"  p.  499. 


Anthropology  and  Ethnology.  939 

He  then  proceeded  to  ask  the  question  whether  the  first  of 
these  was  representative  of  a  lost  race,  or  whether  it  belonged  to 
any  of  the  stocks  known  to  us.  He  advocated  the  latter  alterna- 
tive, and  compared  the  characteristics  of  the  type  with  those  of 
what  he  terms  "  Celtic  and  Scandinavian "  skulls.  Into  the 
question  as  to  whether  a  skull,  found  under  the  conditions  in 
which  the  Neanderthal  skull  was  found,  could  possibly  by  any  vast 
stretch  of  human  credulity  be  called,  as  he  calls  this,  the  "  skull 
of  a  Celt,"  I  must  decline  to  follow  him,  although  I  admit,  of 
course,  that  among  some  portion  of  the  survivals  of  the  type  the 
language  to  which  philologists  have  assigned  the  name  of  "  Celtic  " 
may  have  been  spoken.  The  observations  he  makes  appear  to 
me  to  be  chiefly  valuable  for  the  conclusion  at  which  he  arrives, 
namely,  that,  "in  the  most  remote  antiquity  we  find  ourselves 
in  the  presence  of  two  distinct  races,  of  which  the  descendants 
survive  to  the  present  day,"  firstly,  the  race  which,  exemplified 
by  the  skulls  from  Marken,  exhibits  most  strongly  platycephalic 
characteristics  in  conjunction  with  dolichocephaly ;  secondly,  that 
which,  exemplified  by  his  second  Irish  skull,  while  possessing 
Neanderthaloid  analogies,  has  for  its  prototype  the  Engis  skull  of 
Schmerling  of  doubtful  palseological  antiquity.  I  shall  presently 
return  to  this  subject  when  presenting  the  views  of  Prof.  Huxley. 

To  the  "Quarterly  Journal  of  Science"  for  1864  Professor 
William  King  contributed  a  paper  on  the  "  Reputed  Fossil  Man  of 
the  Neanderthal,"  and  cited  for  comparison  with  it  a  cranium  from 
his  native  country.  "I  possess,"  he  says,  "a  very  remarkable 
skull,  probably  about  five  hundred  years  old  or  more,  taken  last 
summer  (1863)  out  of  the  beautiful  ruins  of  Corcomroo  Abbey, 
situated  among  the  Burren  Mountains  in  the  County  Clare,  which 
offers  a  close  resemblance  to  the  Neanderthal  skull,  in  the 
depressed  form  of  the  forehead.  Although  not  altogether  so 
abnormal  in  this  respect  as  the  Neanderthal  skull,  it  has  the 
appearance  of  a  better  development,  in  consequence  of  the  median 
part  of  the  frontal  being  a  little  more  rounded.  There  is  no 
reason  to  believe  that  it  belonged  to  an  idiot,  as  it  happens  that 
most  of  the  skulls  lying  about  the  ruins  have  a  low  frontal  region. 
It  is  singular  that  the  inhabitants  of  Burren,  a  few  hundred  years 
ago,  should  have  been  characterized  by  a  remarkably  depressed 
forehead,  while  those  now  living  have  a  well-developed  cranial 
physiognomy." 


940 


The   Dolmens  of  Ireland. 


In  view  of  the  supposition  that  skulls  of  the  Neanderthal 
type  were  those  of  idiots,  it  may  be  mentioned  that  M.  Broca 
has  declared  himself  able  to  demonstrate  that  such  was  not  the 
case.j 

In  the  memoirs  of  the  Anthropological  Society  of  London  J 
will  be  found  a  paper   by  Mr.   C.    Carter    Blake,    "On    certain 


Fig.  714. — Skull  from  Louth.     From  '■^  Mem,  of  the  Antliropol.  Soc."  1S65  (vol.  ii.  p.  75)- 

'  Simious  '  skulls,  with  reference  to  a  skull  from  Louth  in  Ireland." 
This  paper,  while  giving  an  accurate  description  of  the  Irish  skull, 
is  written  with  the  object  of  supporting  the  view  advocated  also 
by  Barnard  Davis,  that  the  peculiarities  of  the  Neanderthal  skull 
were   attributable    to    the  premature   ossification  of  the  sutures. 


t  "Journ.  of  the  Amhrop.  Soc.  of  London,"  vol.  ii.  (1864),  p.  cliii. 
X  "  Memoirs  of  Anthrop.  Soc.  of  London,"  vol.  ii.  (1865-6),  p.  74. 


Anthropology  and  Ethnology.  941 

The  skull  from  Louth  is  regarded  as  only  another  instance  of 
the  abnormal  conditions  produced  or  producible  from  this  cause  ; 
but  it  is  to  be  remarked  that  Mr.  Blake  excludes  from  the  category 
of  these  supposed  abnormal  forms,  the  skulls  from  the  river-beds 
of  the  Blackwater  (in  Armagh),  and  of  Borris  (on  the  Nore),  to  be 
presently  noticed. 

In  describing  the  Louth  skull,  Mr.  Blake  states  that  it  is 
"  ovately  dolichocephalic,  that  the  brow-ridges  are  large,  and  the 
points  of  muscular  attachment  well  marked.  These  brow-ridges, 
he  adds,  are  exceedingly  peculiar.  Enormous  frontal  sinuses  have 
developed  a  bony  bridge,  which  extends  above  the  eyes  throughout 
the  whole  length  of  the  supraciliaries,  and  is  thickest  and  most 
pronounced  immediately  above  the  glabella.  The  supraorbital 
canal  on  the  right  side  is  higher  than  on  the  left.  Proportionately 
to  the  size  of  the  ridge,  the  supranasal  notch  does  not  appear 
deep.  The  forehead  is  rather  low  and  retrocedent,  apparently 
rendered  more  so  by  the  great  size  of  the  supraciliary  ridges. 
The  curve  of  the  frontal  bone,  backwards  and  upwards,  is  equable 
and  smooth.  .  .  .  The  mastoids  are  rather  large.  .  .  .  The 
postcondyloid  foramen  on  the  left  side  has  been  large.  The 
frontal  suture  has  been  early  obliterated.  The  length  of  the 
sagittal  suture  is  11 '4  centimetres.  .  .  .  The  lambdoidal  suture 
is  present  on  each  side  in  an  upward  direction  for  about 
two  inches  from  its  junction  with  the  additamentum  mastoidalis. 
.  .  .  The  coronal  suture  offers  some  points  of  interest.  It 
exhibits  peculiarities,  and  traces  of  partial  obliteration,  as  do  also 
the  sutures  around  the  alisphenoid  bone.  The  squamous  suture 
exhibits  no  peculiarities,  but  the  connection  between  the  mastoid 
and  squamosal  bones  is  obliterated  to  a  great  extent,  but  not 
more  so  than  is  usually  observed  in  aged  individuals." 

We  may  remark  that  at  the  conclusion  of  a  paper  on  the 
Neanderthal  skull,  read  the  year  previously  before  the  Anthro- 
pological Society,  Mr.  Blake  remarked  that  Blumenbach's  i5^/^2^W5 
genuimis  skull  from  the  island  of  Marken  offered  a  great  resem- 
blance also  to  the  Neanderthal  skull.  It  appears  to  me  difficult 
to  think  that  had  Mr.  Blake  seen  also  the  remarks  of  Virchow  on 
other  skulls  from  the  same  locality,  he  could  any  longer  have 
denied  that  the  type,  although  theoretically  producible  by 
synostosis,  was  in  reality,  as  I  have  said  before,  a  genuinely 
racial,  normal,  and  characteristic  form.     As  to  the  great  antiquity 


942  The  Dolmens  of  Ireland. 

of  the  Neanderthal  skull  Dr.  Lucae  expresses  no  doubt.  "  I 
consider,"  he  says,  "that  the  remains  are  probably  the  most  ancient 
vestiges  of  the  inhabitants  of  Europe."  f 

We  have  seen  that  M.  Pruner  Bey  was  inclined  to  divide  the 
types  of  dolichocephalic  skulls  into  two  classes,  at  the  head  of  one 
of  which  stood  the  Engis  skull,  and  at  the  head  of  the  other  a 
skull  of  more  markedly  platycephalic  form.  It  is  to  be  noticed 
that  MM.  Ouatrefages  and  Hamy  place  the  Engis  skull,  both  in 
regard  to  its  form  and  proportions,  under  their  Cro-Magnon 
group,  a  type  to  be  presently  noticed. 

In  the  case  of  Ireland,  a  similar  division  appears  to  suggest 
itself,  a  skull  from  the  Blackwater  in  the  County  Armagh,  to 
which  we  may  add  one  very  like  it  from  the  Trent  at  Muskham 
in  England,  seeming  to  represent  the  Engis  form,  while  one  from 
the  bed  of  the  Nore  at  Borris  answers  to  that  of  the  Batavus 
gcmnnus.  Professor  Huxley's  remarks  on  two  or  more  extremes 
of  type  in  Ireland  appear  to  me  to  be  of  such  great  value  that, 
with  slight  transposition,  I  shall  quote  them  at  length,  prefacing 
them  by  his  opinion,  very  decidedly  expressed,  that  the  Engis 
skull  "  is  so  extremely  different  in  appearance  from  the  Neander- 
thal that  it  might  well  be  supposed  to  belong  to  a  distinct  race  of 
mankind."  J 

'*  Of  the  skulls,"  he  says,§  "  from  the  bed  of  the  Nore  at  Borris, 
one,  with  a  general  similarity  to  the  Blackwater  and  Muskham 
skulls,  has  a  strongly  developed  probole  and  a  cephalic  Index  of 
only  0738.  The  larger  skull  from  the  same  locality,  of  which 
two  views  are  given  (see  Fig.  715),  Is  one  of  the  most  remarkable 
European  skulls  I  have  met  with. 

*'  This  skull  measures  8  ins.  long  and  5*9  Ins.  broad,  whence  its 
cephalic  Index  is  0737.  The  height  from  the  front  margin  of  the 
occipital  foramen  to  the  vertex  Is  only  5*45  Ins.,  or  o*68  of  the 
length,  so  that  the  skull  is  greatly  depressed.  The  supracillary 
ridges  are  prominent,  the  forehead  retreating,  the  probole  large, 
and  the  superior  curved  line  and  occipital  spine  well  marked. 
The  supra-auditory  ridges  are  strong,  the  mastoid  processes  well 
developed,  and  that  on  the  left  side  somewhat  recurved  at  its  apex. 


+  "Journal  of  the  Anthrop.  Soc.  of  London,"  vol.  ii.  (1864).  p.  cli.  For  the  Neanderthal 
skull,  see  D.  Schaafifhausen,  "  7X\x  Kentniss  der  celtesten  Rassenschdreel  "  (Archiv.  fiir  Anatomie, 
von  Miiller  (1858),  pp.  453-477,  and  pi.  xvii.).  For  an  English  trans.,  see  "  Nat.  Hist.  Review," 
(1861),  pp.  155-172  ;  see  also  "Bull.  Soc.  d'Anthrop.  de  Paris,"  vol.  iv.  p.  314. 

X  "Antiquity  of  Man,"  Sir  C.  Lyell,  p.  88. 

§  "Trehist.  Remains  at  Caithness,"  i)p.  125,  126. 


Anthropology  and  Ethnology. 


94: 


The  axis  of  the  occipital  foramen  inclines,  if  anything,  a  Httle 
backwards.  The  lower  jaw  is  wanting,  as  well  as  the  right  upper 
maxilla,  and  all  the  alveolar  part  of  the  left.  But  the  left  jugal 
arch  and  orbit,  and  the  upper  part  of  the  nasal  bones,  are  pre- 
served. The  strength  of  the  zygoma  is  notable,  but  its  projection 
is  more  forward  than  lateral,  so  that  it  is  hardly  seen  in  the  norma 


WW 
Fig.  715. — The  Borris  skull.     From  Ihixhy. 

verticalis.  The  face  must  have  been  very  prognathous.  So  far  as 
I  can  judge  from  the  cast,  neither  the  coronal,  sagittal,  nor 
lambdoidal  sutures  are  completely  closed  in  this  skull."  There- 
fore, we  may  add  in  parenthesis,  its  form  could  not  be  attributed 
to  synostosis.  "  A  strong  depression  or  groove  follows  the  course 
of  the  sagittal  suture." 

A  few  pages  further  on,  Professor  Huxley  recurs  to  this  skull.f 
He  regards  it  as  one  extreme  in  the  category  of  elongated  skulls, 

t  "  Prehist.  Remains  at  Caithness,"  pp.  128,  129.  Mr.  ]5usk  has  described  a  cranium  from 
a  cave  at  Cefn,  near  St.  Asaph,  which,  as  seen  from  the  side  view  {nonita  lateralis),  bears  a  striking 
likeness  to  the  Borris  skull.  It  has  a  cephalic  index,  however,  of  0770,  but  an  altitudinal  index 
of  0702.     (See  Boyd  Dawkins,  "Cave  Hunting,"  pp.  184-87.) 


944  The  Dolmens  of  Ireland. 

observed  in  Britain  and  Ireland,  and  differentiates  it  not  only  from 
one  or  two  other  extreme  forms,  but  also  from  a  form  inter- 
mediate between  them,  which  "middle  form"  he  finds  in  the 
"  Long-Barrow  and  River-Bed  skulls,"  exemplified  by  examples 
from  Muskham  on  the  Trent,  from  Towyn-y-Capel  by  the  ruined 
chapel  of  St.  Bride  on  the  west  coast  of  Holyhead  Island 
(possibly  an  Irish  skull,  since  a  tradition  exists  there  of  a  battle 
between  Welsh  and  Irish),  and  from  the  Blackwater  (Armagh). 

Of  the  Borris  skull,  he  continues  that,  "  singular  as  it  is,  it  by 
no  means  stands  alone,  but  has  its  analogues  in  the  Southern- 
German  Alt-Lussheim  skull  of  Ecker,  and  the  skull  *  No.  3 ' 
of  Friederichs."  Here  comes  in  also  the  Batavtis  genuinus  of 
Blumenbach,  to  which  we  have  referred,  and  the  Urk  and 
Marken  skulls  of  Virchow ;  the  examples,  that  is  to  say,  of 
extreme  platycephaly,  as  instanced  in  survival.  To  these  are  to 
be  added: — (i)  a  cranium  discovered  in  a  submarine,  or  rather 
subterranean  peat  bog,  or  forest,  thirty  feet  below  the  present 
level  of  the  sea  at  Sennen,  close  to  the  Land's  End  in  Cornwall,f 

which  perhaps,  however,  occupies  a 
middle  place  between  this  type  and 
that  of  the  Engis  skull,  which  it  much 
resembles ;  (2)  a  cranium  figured  by 
Mr.  Turner  in  the  "Quarterly  Journal 
of  Science  ;  "  \  and  seemingly  also 
oi::;::;;^^  \Q^^^^  (2)  the  skull  of  Robert  Bruce,§  which 
^^^■^  may  be  regarded  as  a  Norman  ex- 

FiG.  716. — The  Sennen  skull.  i  r       i  •  r        i         i 

ample  01  the  retreatmg  lorehead, 
combined  with  a  large  and  capacious  cranium.  The  place  among 
skulls  of  this  type,  of  that  of  St.  Mansuy,  of  those  from  Corcomroo 
Abbey,  from  Louth  Abbey,  and  others,  has  already  been  noticed. 
If  we  may  venture  to  bridge  over  the  gulf  which  separates  the 
Quaternary  and  Palaeolithic  period  from  that  in  which  the  first 
survivals  present  themselves  to  us,  we  should  look  for  materials 
to  the  Neanderthal  skull,  which  is  the  prototype,  and  to  the  Borris 
and  Sennen  skulls,  which  are  the  earliest  Irish  and  British 
representations  we  have  of  the  extreme  which  I  have  designated 
the  dolicho-platycephalic  type. 

t  See  "  Remarks  by  Mr.  G.  Busk  on  Schaaffhausen's  Account  of  the  Neanderthal  Skull,"  in  the 
"  Nat.  Hist.  Review,"  vol.  i.  (1861),  p.  174,  and  pi.  v.,  fig.  9. 

X  "  Quart.  Journal  of  Science,"  No.  H.  (April,  1864),  p.  258,  and  pi.  ii.  llg.  i. 

§  Id.,  same  page.  See  also  a  skull  from  Blackfriars  Monastery,  Aberdeen.  Id.  (October,  1864), 
pp.  758,  760. 


Anthropology  and  Ethnology. 


945 


Dolichocephalic  Type,   No.   I.  (the  Scando-Germanic). 

Still  following  Professor  Huxley,  we  find  that  he  regards  as 
the  representatives  of  another  extreme  a  skull  from  Kinaldie,| 
figured  by  Thurnam  and  Davis,  and  the  Scottish  skulls  to  which 


Fig.  717. — Skull  from  Nether-Urquhart.     From  D.  JVilsoii. 

Daniel  Wilson  gave  the  name  "  Kumbecephalic,"  and  of  which 
those  from  Nether-Urquhart,  and  the  Cockenzie  Cist  in  his 
Prehistoric  Annals  of  Scotland,  are  examples.^  It  is  in  stone 
cists,  or  "cromlechs"  in  cairns,  that  these  "Kumbecephalic" 
heads  are  found.  Flint  flakes,  bones 
of  dog  or  ox,  beads  of  shale,  small 
urns,  etc.,  are  found  in  the  chambers 

which   contain   them.     These  latter  _^.      ■'^■^  m  k 

types,  found  in  Scotland,  I  am  myself  /g^-' .  "'-m  S    r 

inclined  to  place  between  the  dolicho-  B^^,;  •  v  >-  -vi^il^l^Z     t' 
platycephalic  type  on  the  one  hand,    ^Bl^fe:*  '  *^\^^"'  M 
and  that  of  the  skulls  of  the  Long- 
Barrows  of  Britain,  and  the  Caverne  p^^.  718.— "Oid  Swedish  "  skuii.   From 
de  I'Homme  Mort,  to  be  presently  A^^ders A'eizms. 

considered  under  the  "middle"  type  of  Huxley,§  on  the  other. 
With  skulls  of  this  type,  we  should  apparently  place  the  "  Old- 
Swedish  "  skull  of  Retzius,||  a  type  found  in  the  southern  parts 
of  Sweden  and  in  Oland,  and  other  islands,  in  company  with 
bronze    articles.      It    appears    to    occupy   an    intermediate   place 

t  "  Crania  Britannica,"  pi.  v. 

t  "  Prehist.  Annals  of  Scotland,"  vol.  i.  pp.  256,  267. 
§  "Prehist.  Remains  of  Caithness,"  p.  128. 

II  "  Ethnologische  Schriften,"  von  Anders  Retzius,  edit.  G.  Retzius,  Stockholm  (1S64),  pi.  i. 
fig.  2. 


946 


The  Dolmens  of  Ireland. 


between  the  typical  Swedish  skull  of  Retzius,  and  the  Stangenas 
skull  of  Nilsson. 

Huxley.f  however,  goes  further  than  this,  and  says  that  the 
Kinaldie  and  Kumbecephalic  types  are  "  repeated  over  and  over 
again  in   the   Hohberg  and   Grave-row  series  of  the  Swiss  and 


Fig.  719. — Ancient  Scandinavian  skull.     From  Xilsson. 

South-West  German  skulls,  which  are  of  one  and  the  same  class  as 

the  Scandinavian  skull." 

Nilsson,  in  his  "Primitive  Inhabitants  of  Scandinavia,"  J  has 

figured  and  carefully  described  a  skull  which,  according  to  him, 

"  represents  the  true  type  of  the  so-called  Germano-Gothic  race." 
Retzius  also  describes  and   figures  a   typical  Swedish  skull  § 

which  agrees  with  that  of  Nilsson.    At  the  close  of  his  description 

he  remarks  that  he  had  received  from 
Sir  William  Wilde  the  cast  of  a  skull 
of  Alexander  O'Connor,  called  the  last 
king  of  Ireland.  Wilde  sent  the  skull 
as  a  specimen  of  what  he  considered 
the  typical  Irish  skull  form.  Retzius 
sent  him  in  return  the  cast  of  an  ancient 
Swedish  skull,  which  he  had  received 
from  Professor  Liedbeck.  Retzius  and 
Wilde  exchano^ed  the  remark  that  these 
skulls  were  so  similar  that  they  could 
detect    no    difference    between    them. 

In    like   manner    Eckcr,    after   studying   and    fully    defining    the 


Fig.  720. — Swedish  skull. 
Anders  Retzius. 


From 


t  loc.  cit.  \  PI.  xii.,  figs.  227,  228,  229. 

§  loc.  cie.,  pi.  i.  fig.  I.     That  great  clifTerences  c\i>l  between  Anthropologists  as  to  the  indices  of 
the  Swedish  types  may  be  gathered  from  Welcker,  "  Archiv.  fiir  Anthrop  "  (1866),  p.  138. 


Anthropology  and  Ethnology.  947 

Hohberg  and  Row-grave  skull-forms,  side  by  side  with  the  typical 
Swedish  skull- type,  recognized,  just  as  Wilde  had  done,  an 
unquestionable  likeness  between  them. 

It  appears  to  me  that,  it  is  rather  with  the  Old-Swedish,  by 
which  I  mean  with  the  Bronze-Age  dolichocephalic  type  in 
Sweden,  leading  back  to  the  Stangenas  skull  under  the  shell 
strata,  that  the  Irish  type,  represented  by  O'Connor's  skull,  is 
comparable,  than  with  the  more  modern  examples  represented  by 
the  typical  Swedish  skulls  of  Nilsson  and  Retzius.  It  will  be 
remembered  that  Nilsson  compared  O'Connor's  skull  with  that 
from  Stangenas.  Thus,  then,  we  have  arrived  at  the  fact  that  a 
type  of  skull  (to  which  I  venture  to  assign  a  place  in  the  cranial 
genealogy  of  Europe,  under  the  designation  "  Dolichocephalic, 
No.  1  "),  which  lifts  itself,  literally  speaking,  out  of  the  platycephaly 
of  which  we  have  already  spoken,  is  traceable  alike  in  Scandinavia, 
Switzerland,  and  Ireland.  In  the  latter  island,  Professor  Huxley 
thinks  (although  in  this  I  do  not  agree  with  him,  for  reasons 
presently  to  be  mentioned)  "  that  it  predominated  to  the  exclusion 
of  all  others,"  while  "  in  Britain  and  Gaul  it  coexisted  with  a  broad- 
headed  stock."  It  is  noticeable  that  the  crania  of  the  so-called 
Anglo-Saxons  in  Britain  present  no  characteristics  by  which  we  can 
distinguish  them  from  those  of  Scandinavians.  The  Anglo-Saxon 
type,  however,  is  in  many  cases  prognathous,  a  characteristic  which 
is  strongly  and  widely  developed  in  Ireland,  while  the  typical 
Swede  of  Retzius  is  orthoornathous.  We  have  seen  that  the  Borris 
skull  was  very  prognathous,  and  this  feature  in  the  case  of  the  Irish 
is  probably,  therefore,  the  atavistic  survival  of  an  archaic  form 
in  which  dolicho-platycephaly  and  prognathism  were  combined. 

The  presence  of  the  Scandinavian  type  in  Switzerland  recalls  to 
us  the  fact  that,  although  at  present  Scandinavia  is,  to  use  the 
words  of  Huxley,  "an  ethnological  island,  its  inhabitants  were,  in 
ancient  times,  an  encroaching  race,  extending,  as  Saxons  and 
Frisians,  to  the  right  bank  of  the  Rhine,  and  stretching  far  south 
and  west  as  Alemanni,  Franks,  and  Normans,  while  southwards 
and  eastwards  they  overlapped  the  Slavonians."  t 

The  tradition  of  the  Middle  Ages,  then,  that  Scandinavia 
was  the  officina gentium,  the  vagina  nalio n? wi,  ^  3iccidcntn\\y  recorded 
a  very  far-reaching  truth  which  is  actually  borne  out  by  the 
revelations   of  craniology.      It  was  a  dictum,   it  would  appear, 

t  /oc.  «■/.,  p.  12.  +  Jordanes,  "  Getica,"  cap.  iv.  edit.  Mommsen,  p.  60. 


94^  The  Dolmens  of  Ireland. 

which  held  good  in  ages  altogether  prehistoric,  as  well  as  in  those 
sub-historic  times  which  tradition  might  have  reached,  and  when 
migration  was  being  directed  along  the  same  course  as  that  pursued 
in  earlier  days.  The  low  type  of  the  Burgundian  and  Row-grave 
skulls  may  have  been  derived  from  a  Stangenas  original,  just  as 
the  tall  stature  of  the  individual  Burgundians  may  have  been  also. 
Midway  between  the  Stangenas  skull  and  the  typical  Swedish  skull 
stands  the  Bronze  Age  skull, — the  "  Old  Swedish,"  or,  rather,  let 
us  sa}^  the  "  Old  Scandian "  skull.  The  typical  Swedish  skull 
survives  in  the  modern  Swede.  Between  the  Swede  and  the  brachy- 
cephalic  Lapp,  however,  there  lay  another  people  who  have  to 
be  accounted  for,  and  who,  if  we  may  trust  tradition,  though 
allophylian  to  the  race  of  the  Saga  heroes,  often  intermarried 
with  them.  This  race  was  that  of  the  lotuns,  or  Mountain  Finns, 
by  which  latter  name  it  is  not  by  any  means  necessary  that 
we  should  understand  solely  the  brachycephalous  Turanian 
population  known  by  that  name.  They  were  regarded  as  a  race 
of  giants,  ferocious  and  terrible,  yet  often  reputed  for  their 
wisdom  and  their  skill  in  wizardry — characteristics  which  might 
well  be  compatible  with  the  race  that  owned  the  skulls  of 
Stangenas  and  Oland.  They  had  not  yet  been  exterminated, 
perhaps,  even  when  Adam  of  Bremen,  in  the  eleventh  century, 
speaks  of  the  "  lotungi,"  whom  he  describes  as  "  the  most  ancient 
population  of  Scandinavia  dwelling  in  mountains  and  forests,  clad 
in  skins  of  animals,  and  uttering  sounds  more  like  the  cries  of 
wild  beasts  than  human  speech." 

The  question  which  naturally  occurs  to  us  is  whether  the 
so-called  "  Old  Swedish  "  skulls  are  not  the  skulls  of  this  people, 
while  the  "Swedish  X.^^^^''  par  excellence  oi  Retzius  and  Nilsson 
might  be  that  of  invaders  who  found  the  older  type,  side  by  side 
with  a  short  Turanian  brachycephalic  people,  already  in  possession, 
and,  since  they  could  not  exterminate  them  wholly,  either  inter- 
married with  them,  thus  assimilating  the  cranial  types,  or  left 
them  alone  in  their  mountain  recesses,  where  Othere  heard  of 
them  as  the  Cwens  who  periodically  descended  to  ravage  the 
lower  settlements  on  the  sea-coast  of  the  western  side  of  the 
peninsula,  or  made  perpetual  war  with  the  Swedes  on  the  east  and 
south  as  they  were  still  doing  in  the  time  of  Adam  of  Bremen. 

Whether  it  would  be  allowable  to  trace  for  them  a  southern 
route,  and  see  in  their  name  lotungi,  as  the  Danish  chronicler  spells 


Anthropology  and  Ethnology, 


949 


it,  that  of  the  luthungif  whom,  in  conjunction  with  Burgundians 
and  Alamanni,  we  read  of  as  being  in  Rhsetia  in  the  time  of  Con- 
stantius,  is  a  question  of  great  interest.  Were  it  so,  it  would  not 
be  so  very  difficult  to  discover  the  possibilities  of  a  direct  connec- 
tion between  them  and  the  dominant  tribes  of  Ireland,  who,  as  can 
be  shown  both  from  their  own  sub-historic  traditions  and  from  the 
corroborative  testimony  of  the  Roman  and  Byzantine  historians, 
were  engaged,  with  the  tribes  of  the  lower  Rhine,  and  of  the 
southern  Baltic  coast,  in  perpetual  inroads  on  the  Roman  border, 
maintaining  at  once  settlements  in  the  south  which,  in  common 
with  other  tribes  of  northern  origin,  they  had  probably  entered 
upon  at  a  much  earlier  period,  and  their  ancient  fastnesses  in  the 
islands  and  promontories  of  the  North,  in  which  quarter  they 
acknowledged,  as  did  the  Heruli,  their  original  homes  to  have 
been,  whither  they  could  retire  beyond  reach  of  their  enemies  in 
the  event  of  defeat. 

With  this  dolichocephalic  series  must  be  ranged  the  skulls  of 
the  Norsemen  or  Vikings  of  much  later  date.     Of  one  of  these  we 


Fig.  721.— Skull  from  the  Lame  grave.     From  the  "  Crania  Britannica." 

have  an  excellent  example  in  that  from  a  grave  at  Larne  in  the 
county  of  Antrim,  a  district  inhabited  by  Norsemen  from  the  ninth 

t  Also  called  Vithungi :  Ammian.  Marcell.  xvii.,  6;  Sidon.  Apoll.  Carm.  vii.,  233. 


950  The  Dolmens  of  Ireland. 

to  the  thirteenth  century.f  It  was  discovered  in  1840,  at  a 
distance  of  70  yards  from  the  sea,  and  5  feet  above  high-water 
mark.  The  skeleton  lay  not  more  than  2  feet  below  the  surface 
in  a  sandy  soil,  and  had  probably  been  interred  at  a  greater 
depth.  The  head  pointed  N.W.  Across  the  breast  was  laid  an 
iron  double-edged  sword,  its  hilt  disposed  towards  the  right 
hand.  On  the  right  side,  and  beneath  the  sword,  was  an  iron 
lance-head.  A  small  bronze  ring-pin,  covered  with  cBrtigo,  and 
four  fragments  of  bone,  were  found  by  the  body. 

The  sword  is  comparable  with  one  found  in  the  Dun- 
shaughlin  crannoge  in  the  county  Meath.  It  differs  from  the 
swords  of  the  Anglo-Saxons,  but  agrees  so  closely  with  Scandi- 
navian examples  that  "  they  might  be  believed  to  have  been 
made  by  the  same  hands."  A  characteristic  feature  of  these 
weapons  is  a  heavy  iron  pommel.  Messrs.  Thurnam  and  Davis 
mention  the  occurrence  of  examples  of  these  iron  swords,  re- 
garded as  later  than  the  fifth  century,  in  Lincolnshire  and  those 
parts  of  England  frequented  by  the  Northmen.  They  are  strictly 
Scandinavian,  and  discovered  both  in  Sweden  and  Denmark. 
There  is  a  very  perfect  example  in  the  National  Museum  of 
Antiquities  at  Stockholm,  '^']  inches  long,  and  two  others  in  the 
King's  Armoury  at  Ulriksdal. 

Worsaae  has  oriven  Qrood  reason  to  think  that  the  Icelandic  his- 
torian  Snorre  Sturleson  actually  mentions  the  battle  in  which  this 
Norseman  was  slain.  "In  the  beginning  of  the  eleventh  century  a 
desperate  naval  battle  was  fought  between  the  Orkney  Jarl  Einar 
and  the  Irish  King  'Konofogr'  in  Ulfrek's  (or  Ulfkel's)  Fiord 
on  the  coast  of  Ireland."  The  situation  of  this  fiord  was  entirely 
unknown  until  it  was  discovered  that  in  a  document,  issued  by  the 
English  King  John,  in  12 10,  the  firth  of  Lough  Larne  was  called 
Wulvricheford,  which  agrees  most  accurately  with  the  Icelandic 
name  UlfreksfjorSr.  It  is  not  a  little  important  to  observe 
that  precisely  similar  iron  swords  of  this  heavy  pommel  type 
have  been  found  in  the  ancient  camp-fortress  of  Ascheraden,  in 
Livland  on  the  Duna. 

The  skull  is  small  and  regular,  has  a  long,  slender,  elevated 
aquiline  nose,  closely  corresponding  with  such  as  prevail  in  the 
northern    counties    of  England ;    a    narrow,  long,  orthognathous 

t  "Proc.  R.LA.,"    1840,  vol.   ii.  p.  40;    "  U.J.A.,"  vol.  i.  p.    19S  ;    ''Crania   Lritannica," 
vol.  ii.,  "Ancient  Norse  Skull." 


Anthropology  and  Ethnology 


951 


face  ;  an  upright,  square  forehead,  yet  neither  decidedly  broad  nor 
high,  having  a  frontal  suture  ;  a  long  oval  outline  in  the  vertical 
aspect,  with  distinct  parietal  tubers  ;  a  globose  tumidness  in  the 
supra-occipital  region,  and  a  \7ix<gQ.  foramen  magnum.  It  is  pro- 
bable that  it  belonged  to  a  tall  man,  perhaps  about  30  years  of  age. 
The  measurements  are  as  follows  : — 

...     4*8  ins. 

...  4-5  » 
...  4-1  „ 
...  142   „ 

77  ozs. 
...  4*8  ins. 
•••     5°   ,, 

Before  passing  on  to  Prof.  Huxley's  "  Middle  type,"  a  very 
important  one  to  our  inquiry,  since  it  includes  the  crania  of  the 
"  Long  Barrows  "  of  Britain,  which  in  their  structure  are  comparable 
to  a  large  class  of  Irish  megalithic  structures,  it  is  well  to  notice  that 
both  the  type  we  have  been  last  considering  and  this  "Middle" 
type,  which  I  shall  venture  to  call  the  Dolichocephalic  Type,  No.  II., 


Horizontal  circumference .. 
Longitudinal  diameter 

...     207  ins. 
•••       7"3    » 

Occipital  region — Length 
Breadth 

Frontal  region — Length    .. 
Breadth  ,. 

•  ••      47   „ 

•  ••      47   ., 

Height 
Intermastoid  arch    ... 

Height   .. 

Parietal  region — Length   .. 

Breadth  .. 

...      4-4   „ 
■  ••      4*9   „ 
...       5'2   „ 

Internal  capacity 

Face     Length 

Breadth 

Height   .. 

...      4-6   „ 

Fig.  722. — The  Engis  skull.     From  the  "  Crania  Ethmca.'" 

may  not  without  reason  be  regarded  as  referable,  in  archaic  times, 
to  the  type  found  at  Engis,  near  Liege  in  Belgium. f  The 
latter  was  embedded  in  a  matrix  containing  also  the  remains  of  the 
mammoth,  rhinoceros,  cave-bear,  hysena,  etc.,  but  there  appears 
also  to  have  been  a  piece  of  pottery  in  juxtaposition,  rendering 


t  "  Crania  Ethnica,"  p.  73. 


952 


The  Dolmens  of  Ireland. 


the  age  doubtful.  Huxley,  as  we  have  seen,  regarded  it  as 
so  entirely  distinct  from  the  Neanderthal  skull  as  to  warrant 
a  surmise  that  it  belonged  to  a  totally  distinct  race.  MM.  De 
Ouatrefages  and  Hamy  place  it  not  under  their  Canstadt,  but 
under  their  Cro-Magnon  group,f  and  Mr.  William  Turner 
demonstrates  its  intimate  resemblance  to  a  skull  from  St. 
Acheuil,  near  Amiens,J  referable,  most  probably,  to  the  Gallo- 
Roman  period.  The  ratio  of  length  to  breadth  in  the  former  he 
states  to  be  too  to  70,  and  in  the  latter  100  to  71.  Finally, 
Virchow,  in  a  passage  quoted  by  Mr.  Isaac  Taylor,§  says  with 
regard  to  it : — "  It  is  so  absolutely  dolichocephalic  that  if  we  were 
justified  in  constituting  our  ethnic  groups  solely  with  reference  to 
the  shape  of  the  skull,  this  Engis  skull  would,  without  hesitation, 
be  classed  as  belonging  to  the  primitive  Teutonic  race,  and  we 
should  arrive  at  the  conclusion  that  a  Germanic  population  dwelt 
on  the  banks  of  the  Meuse  prior  to  the  earliest  irruption  of  a 
Mongolian  race." 

We  have  here  also  to  notice  that  in  the   "  Remarks  upon  the 
Series  of  Prehistoric  Crania,"  which  Prof.  Rolleston  appends  to 


Fig.  723. — .Skull  from  Weaverthorpe.     From  GreemuelPs  "  Brii.  Banoius.'" 

Canon  Greenwell's  "  British  Barrows,"  ||  he  compares  a  skull  from  a 
low  "  Round  Barrow"  at  Weaverthorpe  in  Yorkshire  with  this  Engis 
cranium.  The  cephalic  index  in  that  case  is  69.  "  The  calvaria 
and  lower  jaw,"  he  says,  "may  firstly  be  taken  to  illustrate  the 
fact  that  a  type  existed  in  the  Bronze  period  which  is  recognizable 


Crania  Ethnica,"  p.  73.  J  "Quarterly  Journal  of  Science,"  vol.  i.  (1864),  p.  250. 

§  "  Origin  of  the  Aryans,"  p.  106.  ||  pp.  619-621. 


Anthropology  and  Ethnology. 


953 


amongst  modern  Celtic  [speaking]  populations  ;  and,  secondly,  may 
throw  some  light  upon  the  various  questions  which  have  been 
raised  as  to  the  famous  skull  from  the  cave  of  Engis,  as  it  resembles 
that  skull  in  many  important  particulars."  It  is  the  type  of  skull 
which  Daniel  Wilson  called  "pear-shaped,"  or  "  coffin-shaped,"  and 
in  which  he  thought  he  recognized  that  of  the  "  Insular  Celt." 
"  Skulls,"  continues  Professor  RoUeston,  "  very  closely  similar  to 
this  skull  and  to  the  Engis  skull,  have,  like  it,  been  found  in  caves — 
three  strikingly  like  them ;  one  from  the  mountain-limestone  cave 
at  Llanebie  in  Caermarthenshire  f  filled  with  stalagmite ;  a  second 
from  a  cave  at  Cheddar,  and  a  third  from  a  small  cave  at  Uphill 
near  Weston-Super-Mare."  J 

It  seems  to  be  important  to  notice  also  the  fact  that  where  in 
the  case  of  Britain  extremely  dolichocephalic  skulls  are  found,  as 
very  occasionally  is  the  case,  in  the  "  Round  Barrows  "  (seemingly  in 
contravention  of  the  adage  of  archaeologists,  "  Long  Barrows,  long 
skulls,  Round  Barrows,  round  skulls  "),  they  prove  to  be  referable 
not   to   the  usual   "  Ancient   British "   or    "  Long   Barrow "    type 


Fig.  724. — vSkuU  from  Langton  Wold.     From  CreemvelCs  '■'■Brit.  Barrows.^'' 

(the  Middle  type  of  Huxley,  to  be  next  considered),  but  to  a 
type  which  is  comparable  to  the  Hohberg  type  of  His  and 
Rutimeyer,  as  figured  and  described  in  the  "Crania  Helvetica."  We 
may   instance  the   cranium  from  Langton  Wold,§  orthognathous, 

t  Buckland,  "  Reliquire  DiluvianiE,"  p.  166. 
X  Rolleston,  loc.  cit.  §  Id.,  pp.  602-611. 

VOL.  in.  R 


954 


The  Dolmens  of  Ireland. 


and  dolichocephalic,  the  index  being  68.  With  this  interment 
bronze  instruments  were  also  found.  Whether  we  are  to  infer 
from  this  that  people  with  this  peculiar  skull  formation  entered 
Britain  simultaneously  with  the  usual  brachycephali  of  the  Round 
Barrows  or  not,  certain  it  is  from  examples  such  as  this  that  the 


Fig.  725. — Skull  from  Langton  Wold.     From  GreemveWs  '■'■Brit,  Barrows." 

Scando-Germanic  form  was  already  domiciled  in  the  island,  ages 
before  the  date  at  which  the  later  Scandinavian  skulls  appear. 


Dolichocephalic  Type,  No.   Il.f 

This  type  has  been  found  in  caves,  river-beds,  and  megalithic 
remains,  notably  those  of  the  elongated  class,  but  also  in  closed 
cists,  in  the  British  Isles,  France,  Spain,  and  the  coasts  of  the 
Mediterranean. 

The  examples  of  it  with  which  Huxley  presents  us  are  three 
in  number — (i)  from  the  Blackwater  river-bed  in  the  county 
of  Armagh ;  (2)  from  Muskham  in  the  valley  of  the  Trent ; 
(3)  from  Tewyn-y-Capel  in  Anglesey,  the  last  possibly  an  Irish 
skull.  He  also  states  his  belief  in  its  identity  with  that  of 
the  crania  of  the  "  Long  Barrows "  in  Britain,  and  of  the 
"  Kumbecephalic "  skulls  of  Wilson,  in  which  latter  he  sees, 
however,    an    extreme    form    of  the   type.      We    will    presently 


t  Variously  called  the  "Middle  Type,"  the  "  Long-Barrow  Type,"  the  "Cro-Magnon  Type," 
the  "  Mediterranean  and  Atlantic  Type,"  and  the  "  Iberian  Type." 


Anthropology  and  Ethnology.  955 

consider  the  Irish  skulls  of  this  type  seriatim.  Meanwhile  we 
cannot  shirk  the  vexed  and  difficult  question,  "  Does  a  close 
craniological  affinity,"  such  as  Huxley  supposes,  *'  unite  this 
Hiberno-British  type  with  the  Scandinavian  and  Scando-Germanic 
type  we  have  been  considering  ?  " 

Between  the  Blackwater  skull  (Fig.  742)  and  that  of  Engis,  near 
Liege,  on  the  Meuse,  there  appears  to  me  an  unmistakable  similarity. 
Following  the  course  of  the  Meuse  westward,  we  arrive  at  the 
Neolithic  sepulchral  cave  of  Chauvaux,  explored  by  Dr.  Spring  in 
1842,1  and  by  M.  SoreilJ  about  thirty  years  later.  Two  skulls 
were  found  here,  attached  to  skeletons,  buried  in  holes  in  crouching 
positions,  and  associated  with  flint  flakes,  pottery,  a  barbed  arrow- 
head, and  many  scattered  human  and  animal  bones,  the  long 
bones  of  the  latter  having  been  broken  for  the  marrow.  The 
most  perfect  of  these  skulls  has  a  cephalic  index  of  0*7 18,  and  they 
are  classified  by  Professor  Boyd  Dawkins  "  with  the  long  skulls  from 
the  caves  and  chambered  tumuli  of  France,  Britain,  and  Spain." 

Passing  westward  from  the  Meuse  to  the  Somme,  we  come  to 
Amiens,  where  (at  St.  Acheuil),  as  we  have  previously  noted,  a 
skull  resembling  the  Engis  skull  has  been  discovered.  Passing 
southward  again,  we  find  from  the  work  of  Baron  de  Baye  that  in 
the  very  remarkable  caves  explored  by  him  in  the  Valley  of  the 
Marne,  skulls  were  found  with  indices  ranging  as  low  as  7i'69.§ 
Going  westward  into  the  valleys  of  the  Seine  and  Oise,  we  have 
in  the  "grotto"  of  Nogent  Les  Vierges  (Oise),  and  in  the  dolmen 
of  Chamant  (in  the  same  Department),  examples  as  low  as  71,  while 
the  same  ratio  is  recorded  from  a  "  tomb  "  at  Maintenon  (Eure  et 
Loire),  and  one  as  low  as  70  from  the  department  of  Vaucleuse.|l 
Skulls  of  this  type  are  stated  to  have  been  discovered  in  the 
gravels  of  the  Seine  in  deposits  posterior  to  those  containing 
skulls  of  the  Canstadt  type,  but  underlying  brachycephalic  skulls 
of  the  type  so  frequently  found  in  association  with  them  in  caves 
and  megalithic  structures  in  the  districts  last  noticed.^  It  is  at 
Grenelle,  on  a  bend  of  the  Seine,  that  this  curious  superposition  ff 
has  been  most  distinctly  brought  to  light. 

t  "  Bull.  Acad.  Roy.  de  Belgique,"  ser.  i.  1.  xx.  ii,  p.  427  ;  ser.  t.  xviii.  p.  479 ;  t.  xxii.  p.  187. 

X  "  Congres  Intern.  d'Anthr.  et  d'Archeol.  Prehist.,"  p.  381,  Brussels,  1872.  Traces  of  this  race 
seem  to  have  been  found  at  Engihoul  also  on  the  Meuse.  See  C.  Malaise,  in  "  Bull.  Acad.  Royale 
de  Belgique,"  ser.  ii.  t.  x.  (i860),  p.  546. 

§  "  L'Archeologie  Prehistorique,"  par  le  Baron  J.  De  Baye,  Paris,  18S0,  pp.  192,  I93- 

II  For  these  data,  see  table  in  Prof.  Boyd  Dawkins's  "Cave  Hunting  "  (London,  1S74),  p.  199. 

^  "Origin  of  the  Aryans,"  pp.  115,  116. 

tt  A.  De  Quatrefages,  "  Hommes  Fossiles,"  p.  65. 


956  The  Dolmens  of  Ireland. 

The  more  remote  the  antiquity  of  a  cranium  the  more  simple  is 
its  classification.  With  the  platycephalic  long-head  of  Canstadt 
we  have  had  comparatively  little  difficulty.  With  the  type  now 
before  us,  overlapping  in  some  districts  the  Canstadt  type,  with 
which,  as  some  anthropologists  affirm,  its  sole  point  in  common  was 
its  cephalic  index, f  and,  in  turn,  overlapped  in  others  by  a  markedly 
brachycephalic  type,  it  is  far  otherwise.  The  French  writers  on 
the  subject  who  have  specially  studied  it  in  the  vicinity  of  the 
Garonne  Valley,  in  the  Maritime  Alps,  and  in  the  Cevennes 
(Lozere) — the  districts  where  it  had  its  most  ancient  home,  and 
perhaps  survived  the  longest — have  subdivided  it  into  several  types. 
Into  the  particulars  of  these  we  have  no  need  to  go.  Suffice  it  to 
say  that  if  the  cephalic  index  of  the  man  of  the  Cro-Magnon  cave 
in  Perigord,  and  a  peculiar  flatness  of  his  leg  bone  are  to  be  taken 
as  proofs  of  his  having  been  the  ancestor  of  the  cave  and  dolmen 
people  of  the  British  Isles,  he  had  no  reason  to  be  proud  of  his 
insular  descendants. 

The  dolichocephalic  man  of  the  British  "  Long  Barrow  "  was 
short  in  stature,  feeble  in  build  and  physique,  with  ill-filled  skull, 
and  orthognathous.  His  height  averaged  5  feet  4 J  ins.,  taking 
men  and  women  together.  The  tallest  man  was  5  feet  6  ins., 
and  the  shortest  woman  4  feet  8  ins.  With  this  we  may  contrast 
the  account  given  by  M.  de  Quatrefages  of  the  Cro-lNIagnon  race. 
From  him  we  learn  that  they  were  tall,  of  athletic  constitution  and 
build,  with  well-filled  skull,  and  eminently  prognathous.  The 
average  height,  as  taken  by  M.  Hamy,  from  the  bones  of  five 
subjects,  was  178  m.  The  skeleton  from  Menton,  which  was 
preserved  entire,  showed  a  stature  of  i'85  m.  The  Cro-Magnon 
woman  measured  i*66  in  height.J  If,  therefore,  the  insular  race  in 
Neolithic  times  owed  its  cranial  type  to  this  palaeolithic  inhabitant 
of  Perigord,  he  must  have  terribly  degenerated  during  the  long 
ages  that  intervened.  It  is  possible,  indeed,  that  such  was  the  case, 
for  reasons  which  will  be  obvious,  when  we  consider  firstly  that  he 
long  dwelt  in  complete  isolation,  cut  off  from  all  contact  with  any 
but  those  of  his  own  race,  that  is,  if  we  may  trust  the  conclusions 
arrived  at  by  Canon  Greenwell,  who  finds  in  the  earliest  "  Long 
Barrows "  his  skulls  and  his  alone ;  and,  secondly,  that  his  race 
only  scantily  peopled  these  British  Isles.  In-breeding  would  have 
followed,  and  physical  degeneration  would  have  been  the  result. 

t  "  Crania  Ethnica,"  p.  46,  +  "  Hommes  Fossiles,"  pp.  65,  66. 


Anthropology  and  Ethnology. 


957 


May  there  not,  however,  have  been,  among  the  various 
divisions  of  this  type  in  France,  one  which  would  reproduce  more 
nearly,  not  in  the  cephalic  index  alone,  but  in  other  respects  also, 
the  "  Lone-Barrow  "  man  of  Britain,  and  the  ancient  Irish  dolicho- 
cephali  who  were  akin  to  him  ? 

We  turn  to  the  crania  from  the  Caverne  de  I'Homme  Mort  in 


Fig.  726.  —Examples  of  crania  from  the  Caverne  de  I'Homme  Mort.     From  the  "  Revue 
d'Andirop."  vol.  ii.  (1873),/.  53- 

the  Commune  of  Saint-Pierre-des-Tripies  in  the  Department  of 
Lozere.     Its   contents   date,    according   to    M.    Broca,    from   the 


Fig.  727. — Examples  of  crania  from  the  Caverne  de  I'Homme  Mort.     From  the  '^  Revue 
d'Authrop.,"  vol.  ii.  (1873),  /.  53. 

earlier  portion  of  the  Neolithic  epoch,f  and  were  first  brought 
into  notice  by  M.  Prunieres  in  1872.      Before   the  mouth  of  the 


t  "  Revue  d'anthropologie,"  1st  ser.,  vol.  ii.  (1873),  pp.  1-53;  "  Sur  les  cranes  de  la  caverne 
d'Homme  Mort,"  by  Paul  Broca. 


958 


The  Dolmens  of  Ireland. 


cave  was  an  arrangement  of  large  stones,  which  in  my  own  opinion 
deserves  very  particular  attention,  since  it  formed,  as  it  were, 
an  artificial  antechamber  to  the  natural  cave  within.  There  were 
two  on  either  side  placed  in  parallel  courses,  2*20  m.  apart.  One 
larger  slab  was  placed  at  right  angles  to  the  end  of  the  slab 
on  the  right,  and  if  we  might  suppose  that  a  similar  one  originally 
had  been  set  on  the  left,  we  should  have  the  ground-plan  of  a 


Fig.  728. — Examples  of  crania  from  the  Caverne  de  THomme  Mort. 

megalithic  chamber  entered  between  two  stones,  in  the  centre  of 
the  inner  side  of  which  would  be  the  natural  entrance  to  the  cave, 
measuring  1*50  m.  In  and  around  this  arrangement  of  stones  was 
what  is  described  as  a  platform  outside  the  cave's  mouth,  in  which 
were  seven  flat  stones  described  as  hearthstones.  The  material 
of  this  platform  included  a  thick  layer  of  charcoal,  from  which 
were  taken  a  quantity  of  worked  flints,  flakes,  scrapers,  and  lance- 
heads,  one  of  the  latter  formed  from  a  stone  which  had  previously 
served  as  a  polished  celt.  Fragments  of  coarse  pottery  accom- 
panied these,  and  in  addition  there  were  very  numerous  bones  of 
animals,  namely,  of  the  hare,  which  were  particularly  plentiful, 
the  deer,  the  roe,  and  the  pig.  Outside  this  platform,  which 
extended  about  i  m.  beyond  the  front  slab  of  the  stone  enclosure, 
was  a  talus,  sloping  at  an  angle  of  45  degrees. 

At  the  point  where  the  natural  mouth  of  the  cave  commenced, 
the  heap  of  animal  bones,  etc.,  definitely  terminated,  and  was 
succeeded  within  the  cave,  for  a  distance  of  6  m.,  by  a  stratum  of 
sand  completely  filled  with  human  bones  jumbled  together  in  utter 
confusion.  Remains  were  found  of  some  fifty  bodies  at  least, 
among  which  were  nineteen  skulls,   comprising  seven  masculine 


Anthropology  and  Ethnology.  959 

and  six  feminine,  together  with  three  of  uncertain  sex,  and  three 
of  immature  age.  The  cave  ran  due  E.  and  W.,  and  beyond  the 
point  up  to  which  the  human  remains  extended,  it  was  divided 
into  two  branches,  both  of  which  debouched  by  narrow  apertures 
on  the  western  side  of  the  limestone  rock. 

A  study  of  the  bones  showed  M.  Broca  that  the  persons  whose 
sepulchre  this  was  were  of  small  stature,  very  much  shorter  than 
the  Cro-Magnon  people,  the  tallest  being  about  5  feet  5  ins.,  and 
the  medium  height  about  i^  inch  less. 

With  regard  to  other  osteological  points,  three  out  of  the  nine 
femurs  obtained  in  the  cave  were  distinguished  by  the  peculiar 
characteristic  known  as  linea  aspera,  found  not  only  in  examples  of 
the  Cro-Magnon  type,  but  in  several  other  bone  deposits  of  the 
Neolithic  Age,  and  among  them  in  those  of  Perthi-Chwaren  in 
Wales. 

The  peculiar  flattening  of  the  tibics  to  which  the  eminent 
anthropologist,  just  quoted,  gave  the  name  of  aplatissement  en 
lame  de  sabre,  on  account  of  a  resemblance  to  broadsword  blades, 
and  which  among  English  authorities  is  known  as  "  the  platycnemic 
form,"  observed  on  the  one  hand  in  the  Cro-Magnon  examples,  and 
on  the  other  in  the  Welsh  case  just  quoted,  and  survivals  of  which 
Dr.  Frazer  has  pointed  out  in  Ireland,  occurs  in  three  distinctly 
marked  instances  in  the  Caverne  de  I'Homme  Mort.  In  a  fourth 
the  peculiarity  is  only  slightly  discernible,  and  in  a  fifth  the  con- 
formation is  that  found  in  the  modern  and  normal  form  of  that  bone. 
M.  Broca  is  of  opinion,  however,  that  it  is  not  to  be  regarded 
as  a  racial  characteristic. 

The  skulls  of  this  cave  were  orthognathous  to  a  remarkable 
degree.  The  orbits  were  small,  especially  vertically.  The  nose  was 
slender,  well  formed,  and  of  medium  length  ;  the  nasal  index  only 
45*46.  The  jawbones  were  small,  and  the  teeth  good.  The  profile 
was  orthognathous,  in  which  point  the  type  agrees  with  that  of  the 
"  Long-Barrow  "  men  of  Britain,  and  with  the  "  Ancient  Hibernian  " 
of  Thurnam  and  Davis,  as  illustrated  by  the  Knockmaraide  skulls. 
It  does  not  agree,  however,  with  the  Borris  skull,  or  with  the 
prevalent  type  of  the  modern  Irishmen. 

Like  the  "  Long-Barrow  "  people,  too,  the  men  of  the  Lozere 
cave  were  of  slender  mould  and  weak  physique.  The  shape  of 
their  skull  was  tres-dolichoc^pkale,  a  fact  which  is  remarkable  when 
we  consider  that  the  very  district  in  which  they  lived  has,  since 


960  The  Dolmens  of  Ireland. 

their  epoch,  been  inhabited  by   the  Auvergnats  with  a  brachy- 
cephaHc  index  of  84*07. 

The  mean  index  of  the  skulls  of  the  Caverne  de  1' Homme 
Mort  is  73'22,  with  which  M.  Broca  compares  that  of  three  Cro- 
Maenon  skulls,  and  three  skulls  from  the  red  alluvial  stratum  of 
the  Seine  at  Crenelle,  the  former  giving  as  their  index  73 '44,  and 
the  latter  73 '24,  or,  taking  the  six  together,  73*34. 

The  altitudinal  index  is  68*89  foJ^  the  men  of  the  Lozere  cave, 
and  73 '02  for  the  women. 

It  is  to  be  observed  that  M.  Broca  differentiates  this  type  from 
that  found  in  the  dolmens  of  France  in  general,  and  of  Southern 
France  in  particular.  It  is,  he  says,  far  more  dolichocephalic  than 
that  observed  in  the  examples  from  the  dolmens  of  the  Lozere, 
and  even  more  so  than  that  of  those  in  the  greater  number  of  the 
dolmens  of  Northern  France.  In  the  long  sepulchral  chambers, 
which  are  really  dolmens,  i.e.  dolmens  allojtgdes,  contained  in  some 
of  the  Long  Barrows,  the  case  is  different.  The  mean  cephalic 
index  obtained  by  Thurnam  from  48  male  skulls  from  British 
Long  Barrows  was  o"ji^,  and  from  19  females  from  the  same  0*7  lo 
(the  mean  altitudinal  index  being  0*730). 

It  follows  that  this  form  of  tomb  was  specially  connected  in 
the  British  Isles,  as  to  some  extent  it  was  also  in  some  parts  of 
France  (e.g.  the  dolmen  of  Chamant  (Oise),  and  the  "  Tomb  "  of 
Maintenon  (Eure  et  Loire),  where  the  indices  reach  as  low  as  7i),t 
with  the  racial  type  which  these  low  figures  denote. 

Now,  the  Caverne  de  I'Homme  Mort  appears  to  me  to  be  a 
link  between  the  purely  natural  cave  in  which  Palaeolithic  Man,  as 
represented  perhaps  by  the  Cro-Magnon  skeletons,  both  lived  and 
interred  his  dead,  and  the  cave  used  solely  for  purposes  of 
sepulture  and  subsequent  veneration,  fashioned  artificially  and 
covered  by  a  mound,  which  belonged  to  his  Neolithic  descendant 
and  successor.  A  ruined  megalithic  structure  had  been  con- 
structed, as  we  have  seen,  before  the  cave's  mouth,  in  and  around 
which  were  traces  of  what  I  take  to  be  offerings  to  the  dead 
within,  and  the  ddbris  of  the  feast  which  followed  the  sacrifice  of 
animals  offered  in  propitiation  to  the  ancestralspirits. 

The  junction  of  the  artificial  with  the  natural,  that  is,  of  the 
cave  within,  and  the  dolmen  without,  serving  as  an  antechamber  to 

t  These  meaburements  are  taken  from  a  table  in  Professor  Boyd  Dawkins's  "Cave  Hunting," 
p.  199. 


Anthropology  and  Ethnology.  961 

it,  is  not  without  precedent  in  France.  M.  Maule-Pl  has  described 
a  monument  which  he  calls  the  megalithic  tomb  "  Des  Mauduits," 
near  Mantes  (Seine  et  Oise),!  the  inner  part  of  which  is  a  cavern 
in  the  rock,  and  the  outer  part  a  long  antechamber  formed  of 
slabs  of  chalk,  and  covered  in  with  two  blocks  of  the  same,  exactly 
in  the  manner  of  the  usual  alldes  couvertes  (Fig.  566).  What  is  very 
remarkable  is  that  at  the  outer  end  the  side  walls  extend  like  a 
portico  covered  by  the  overlap  of  the  roofing-stone,  while  the  two 
slabs  which  close  the  end  of  the  chamber  have  each  a  semi- 
circular piece  cut  out  of  them,  the  cavities  being  placed  opposite 
each  other,  and  thus  serving  as  a  means  of  access  to  the  chamber 
within.  In  the  whole  arrangement  a  resemblance  may  be  traced 
to  the  antce  and  cella,  which  constituted  a  Roman  temple — 
originally  a  shrine  for  offerings  to  the  dead — placed  within. 
Human  remains  were  found  within  this  semi-natural  dolmen,  the 
skulls  of  which  are  described,  in  common  with  those  found  in 
another  megalith  at  Dennemont,  in  the  same  vicinity  as  "  dolicho- 
cephalic." Polished-stone  axes  were  found  here  in  great  number, 
as  also  a  stag's  horn  perforated,  and  a  bronze  arrow-head.  Some 
of  the  stones  showed  sculpturing  something  after  the  manner  of 
that  at  New  Grange,  and  the  whole  is  referable  to  the  early 
Bronze  Age. 

If,  however,  we  are  disposed  to  regard  the  Caverne  de 
I'Homme  Mort,  in  respect  both  of  the  people  there  interred,  and 
the  superstitions  there  practised,  as  intermediate  in  age  between 
that  of  the  Cro-Magnon  man  with  his  purely  natural  cave,  and  that 
of  the  man  of  the  dolmens  with  his  as  purely  artificial  tomb,  we 
are  justified  in  arriving  at  this  exceedingly  important  conclusion, 
namely,  that  it  is  to  the  district  in  which  these  remains  are  found 
that  we  may  look  for  the  origin  and  earliest  developments  of  the 
dolmens,  and  for  the  centre  whence  they  were  first  disseminated. 

Professor  Huxley,  who,  as  we  have  seen,  believes  that  close 
affinities  exist  between  the  Hiberno-British  dolichocephali  and 
the  Scandinavians^  in  which  view  he  is  supported  by  authorities 
of  no  less  weight  than  Retzius,§  Nilsson,||  Virchow,^  Ecker,ff  and 
Schaaffhausen,|J    is    equally   prepared    to    recognize   their   close 

t  "  Nouveaux  Documents  Archeologiques  par,"  M.  L.  De  Maule-Pl.,  Paris  (1872),  p.  15,  ct  seqq. 

X  "  Preh,  Remains  of  Caithness,"  p.  129. 

§  "  Ethnologische  Schriften  von  Anders  Retzius,"  p.  8. 

II    "Anc.  Inhab.  of  Scandinavia,"  edit.  Lubbock,  p.  117. 

i  '•  Archiv.  fiir  Anthrop.,"  vi.  (1873),  p.  114  ;  and  Abhandlungen  des  Berl.  Akad.  (1876).  p.  3. 

tt  '*  Archiv.  fiir  Anthrop.,"  iii.  155.  XX  "  Die  Urform  des  Menschlichen  Schadels,"  p.  5. 


962  The  Dolmens  of  Ireland. 

affinity  with  a  Southern  type,  and  that  not  merely  the  type  we 
have  first  cited  in  France,  but  its  extension  into  Spain,  the 
Mediterranean,  Africa,  including  Egypt,  and  the  East,  embracing 
Southern  Hindustan,  and  not  even  stopping  short  of  Australasia 
itself.f  Into  the  world-wide  problem  thus  opened  up  we  do  not 
intend  to  follow  him,  but,  as  far  as  the  shores  of  Europe  and  N.W. 
Africa  are  concerned,  we  may  do  so,  and  in  doing  so  we  shall  meet 
with  the  approval  of  Dr.  Thurnam,J  M.  Broca,§  and  the  editors 
of  the  "Crania  Ethnica,"||  Messrs.  De  Ouatrefages  and  Hamy,  the 
latter  three  of  whom,  however,  together  with  Professor  Rolleston,^ 
are  strongly  opposed  to  the  theory  which  would  connect  the 
Long-Barrow  race  with  that  whose  remains  are  found  in  the 
Scandinavian  megaliths,  despite  the  two  facts  that  the  Baron  von 
Duben  finds  that  dolichocephalic  skulls,  with  an  average  index  of 
74*3,  predominate  in  the  tombs  of  the  elongated  or  "  Giant-Grave  " 
class  in  Sweden,  over  the  brachycephalic  ones  in  a  proportion  of 
9  to  every  10,  and  that  these  "  Giants'  Graves  "  are,  in  plan  and 
construction,  and  notably  in  some  characteristic  details,  identical 
with  types  general  and  particular  in  the  British  Isles,  as  well  as 
with  others  in  Northern  Germany,  Holland,  France,  and  the 
Spanish  peninsula.  On  the  question  of  the  possible  connection 
of  French  skulls  of  the  Cro-Magnon  type  with  German,  and  so 
with  Scandinavian  skulls  through  the  medium  of  comparison 
between  the  skulls  of  Solutre,  near  Macon  on  the  Saone,  and 
those  of  Crenelle  on  the  Seine  on  the  one  side,  and  the  Engis 
skull  from  the  Lozere  on  the  other,  the  remarks  of  the  editors 
of  the  "  Crania  Ethnica  "  are  most  valuable. ff 

Proceeding  now  to  Spain  and  Portugal,  we  find  that  two  skulls 
from  the  caves  of  Casa  da  Moura  give  cephalic  indices  of  71*65 
and  74*07  respectively, — one  of  these  at  the  same  time  presenting 
an  example  of  posthumous  trepanation  uncompleted.  From  the 
"kitchen-middens"  of  Mugem,JJ  also  in  Portugal,  where  brachy- 
cephalic skulls  also  occur,  we  obtain  an  average  dolichocephalic 
index  of  73'8o.  Many  other  examples  may  be  added,  and  among 
them  a  skull  from  the  dolmen  of  Liceia  presenting  the  same  type 

+  "  Preh.  Remains  of  Caithness,"  pp.  lya,  et  seqq .  %  Cited  ib.,  p.  130. 

§   "  Revue  d'Anthropolo^Me,"  vol.  ii.  (1873),  P-  5^- 

.    "  Crania  Ethnica,"  p.  95,  et  scqq.  II  GreenweU's  "  British  Barrows,"  p.  646,  n. 

tt  "Crania  Ethnica,"  pp.  66  and  70.  At  p.  66,  M.  Broca's  recognition  of  the  likeness  of  the 
Solutre  skulls  to  those  of  the  Cro-Magnon  type  will  be  found,  and  at  p.  70,  Messrs.  De  Quatrefages, 
and  Hamy's  comparison  of  the  former  with  the  Engis  skull. 

X\  "As  Racas  dos  kjcekenma-ddings  dc  Mugem,"  Lisboa  (iSSJi). 


Anthropology  and  Ethnology.  963 

and  justifying  the  remark  of  Sr.  F.  de  Paula  e  01iveira,f  that 
the  doHchocephalic  type  which  marks  the  great  majority  of  the 
skulls  from  these  shell-mounds  is  the  predominant  type  also,  as  is 
the  case  in  Sweden,  in  the  skulls  from  caves  and  tombs  of  the 
Neolithic  Age.  The  differences,  adds  this  writer,  which  are  more 
specially  marked  between  the  more  modern  crania,  that  is,  the 
Neolithic,  and  the  more  ancient,  that  is,  the  Shell-mound  type, 
consist  in  the  greater  capacity  of  the  former,  and  in  the  softening 
down  in  their  case  of  certain  characteristic  features  of  the  latter, 
such  as  their  prognathism,  and  the  excessive  prominence  of  the 
supraciliary  ridges.  It  may  here  be  remarked  that  when  Dr. 
Thurnam  was  shown  in  Paris  a  collection  of  (Spanish)  Basque 
skulls,  he  was  at  once  struck  with  their  great  resemblance  to  those 
from  the  British  Long  Barrows.J 

Turning  to  the  S.E.  portion  of  the  Iberian  peninsula,  which, 
by  the  way,  contains  the  most  magnificent  dolmen  in  Europe, 
the  cave  of  Antiquera,  we  find  that  the  MM.  Siret§  obtained 
the  following  results  from  the  interments  in  jars  and  cists 
examined  by  them.  Out  of  61  skulls  examined,  8  male  and  12 
female  showed  a  cephalic  index  below  75*00;  8  male  and  11 
female,  one  ranging  from  75  up  to  7777  ;  7  male  and  7  female, 
one  ranging  from  80  to  8 ^•2,3  ;  and  one  male  and  one  female, 
one  above  83*34.  The  interments,  however,  from  which  these 
skulls  were  taken  belonged  to  the  Bronze  Age,  and  here,  as 
in  Southern  France,  the  skull  index  becomes  broader  owing, 
doubtless,  to  intermixture  with  the  strongly  marked  brachycephali 
whose  skulls  are  found  beside  them. 

Crossing  into  North  Africa,  we  find  that  General  Faidherbe  || 
found  in  the  skulls  of  the  great  dolmen-fields  there,  among  the 
relics  of  which  he  made  explorations,  a  minimum  dolichocephalic 
index  of  0*705.  He  considers  them,  indeed,  as  dolichocephalic 
as  a  whole,  the  mean  index  being  0*750  in  18  skulls  which  he 
measured.  The  maximum,  however,  was  as  high  as  0*853.  Of 
the  18,  10  were  under  0*750  ;  4  from  0*750  to  0*776  ;  2  from  0*777 
to  0*776  ;  and  2  from  o'8oo  to  0*849. 

Between  the  skulls  of  the  Berbers  on  the  same  northern  coast 
of  Africa,  whose  average  cephalic  index  is  74*63,  as  well  as  those 

t  "Ages  Prehist.   de  I'Espagne  et  du  Portugal,"  by  M.  Emile  Cartailhac,  4me  Partie,  by  M. 
Fr.  de  Paula  e  Oliveira,  p.  316. 

X  "  Prehist.  Remains  of  Caithness,"  p.  130. 

§  "  Les  premieres  ages  du  metal  clans  le  sud-est  de  I'Espagne,"  Anvers,  1887. 

il  "  Congres  Internat.  d'Anthrop.  et  d'Archeol.,"  Brussels,  1872,  pp.  406  sa/y. 


964  The  Dolmens  of  Ireland. 

of  the  Basques  of  Guipuzcoa,  whose  present  cephalic  index  is 
about  76,  and  those  of  the  race  of  the  Caverne  de  THomme 
Mort,  M.  Brocaf  detects  a  great  resemblance,  not  alone  in 
general  features,  but  also  in  various  special  craniometric  charac- 
teristics. He  boldly  expresses  his  opinion  that  it  is  probable 
that  these  characteristics  noticeable  in  the  Spanish  Basques  link 
them  rather  to  the  peoples  of  North  Africa  than  to  those  of 
Europe  itself.  He  thinks  that  the  real  and  original  Basque  type 
is  that  which  has  been  discovered  by  Mr.  Busk  in  the  caves  of 
Gibraltar.  He  is  prepared  to  regard  with  favour  an  hypothesis 
which,  based  on  the  geological  assumption  that  Northern  Africa 
was  once  in  continuity  with  Spain  and  Italy — hence  the  presence 
of  tropical  species  in  the  quaternary  fauna  of  Europe — would 
call  upon  us  to  accept  the  view  that  a  race  of  human  beings 
followed  the  same  track,  and  that,  having  spread  itself  over 
Western  Europe,  it  has  there  preserved,  despite  the  gradual 
modifications  of  climate,  characteristics  which  are  referable  to  its 
original  type.  Between  the  skull  of  the  old  man  of  Cro-Magnon 
and  those  of  the  Guanche  mummies  of  the  Canaries  special  points 
of  resemblance  are  noted. 

With  respect  to  evidences  of  early  dolichocephali  on  the 
shores  of  the  Mediterranean  and  the  Levant,  it  may  be  mentioned 
that  in  a  cave  described  as  occupied  in  Neolithic  times  at  Monte 
Tignoso  near  Leghorn,  a  skull  was  found  giving  a  cranial  index 
of  71*0.  A  second  one  from  beside  it  in  the  same  cave  showed 
the  excessive  brachycephalic  index  of  9 2. J  The  Caverne  della 
Matta  in  the  same  country  also  produced  two  skeletons,  the  one 
with  an  index  as  low  as  o'68,  the  other  with  one  of  0*84.  It  is 
observable  that  while  in  its  survivals  Southern  Italy  is  largely 
dolichocephalic,  Northern  Italy  is  markedly  brachycephalic.  If, 
then,  we  may  regard  the  dolichocephali  as  having  been  the  earlier- 
known  inhabitants  of  the  shores  of  the  great  Mediterranean  basin, 
the  products  of  these  caves  show  that  the  brachycephali  who 
were  traversing  Central  Europe  from  East  to  West,  had  already 
appeared  in  the  Italian  peninsula,  and  met  the  earlier  inhabitants 
there  in  the  Neolithic  Aee. 

Of  the  ancient  Sicilians,  Corsicans,  Sardinians,  and  Baleares, 
I  have  no  data  before  me  which  enable  me  to  judge  of  their  skull 

t  "Revue  d'Anthrop.,"  vol.  ii.  (1873),  P-  S'- 

t  Isaac  Taylor,  "  Origin  of  the  Aryans,"  p.  90.     We  have  previously  seen  that  at  Olmo  a  skull 
of  the  Canstadt  type  was  found  under  circumstances  tending  to  show  it  was  Paleolithic. 


Anthropology  and  Ethnology.  965 

measurements.  That  these  islands  were  inhabited,  however,  by 
the  same  race  as  that  which  peopled  Southern  Italy,  mixed  in 
some  cases,  as  in  Corsica,  with  brachycephalic  intruders,  there 
can  be  little  doubt. 

In  turning  to  the  skulls  which  are  stated  to  have  been  found 
at  Hissartik  we  have  the  advantage  of  the  measurements  and 
drawings  made  for  Herr  Schliemann  by  Professor  Virchow.f 
Both  dolichocephalic  and  brachycephalic  skulls  were  found.  Of 
the  former,  with  which  type  alone  we  are  now  dealing,  we  may 
advert  to  three.  The  first  of  these  is  that  of  a  young  man,  with 
a  cephalic  index  of  68-6;  the  forehead  is  broad,  the  eyebrow 
projections  strongly  developed,  and  the  maxillary  bones  orthog- 
nathous.  The  second,  probably  also  that  of  a  young  man,  is 
distinguished  by  a  continuous  frontal  suture ;  it  is  narrow  and 
high ;  in  the  norma  temporalis  it  appears  high  and  long ;  the 
cephalic  index  is  73 "8  ;  it  is  prognathous,  the  lower  jaw  very 
strong,  and  the  chin  broad  and  projecting.  A  female  brachy- 
cephalic skull  (ceph.  ind.  82*5)  is  also  prognathous.  The  third 
dolichocephalic  skull  is  that  of  a  young  woman  ;  the  bones  are 
fine  and  the  form  pleasing ;  the  7iorina  verticalis  is  long  and  oval ; 
the  norma  temporalis  extended,  with  a  long  and  somewhat  flat 
vertex  curve ;  the  forehead  is  low.  It  forms  a  great  contrast 
to  the  female  brachycephalic  skull,  but  approaches  so  closely  those 
of  the  two  males  that  it  forms  one  group  with  them.  Professor 
Virchow  concludes  with  the  following  remark  :  "  The  bones  of 
these  skulls  give  one  the  impression  of  a  delicate,  civilized,  settled 
population.  If  this  population  were  pre-eminently  a  dolicJio- 
cephalic  one,  then  we  have  the  choice  between  Aryan,  Semitic, 
and  perhaps  Hamitic  races.  A  definite  decision  on  this  point 
cannot  yet  be  made  from  a  purely  anthropological  point  of  view, 
but  I  may  say  that  the  last  skull  {i.e.  that  of  the  girl,  ceph.  index 
71*3,  which,  by  the  way,  was  found  in  a  jar  together  with  ashes 
of  animal  matter,  probably  human  ashes,  at  a  depth  of  23  feet, 
in  the  '  burnt  city,'  as  the  others  were)  ca7t  hardly  be  distinguished 
in  the  m,idst  of  ancient  Greek  skulls. ^^ 

We  have  now  found  this  race  girdling  the  shores  of  Europe 
from  Belgium,  at  least,  if  not  from  Scandinavia  and  the  Baltic  to 
the  Levant,  in  the  form  of  a  horseshoe,  the  open  side  towards  the 
east,  and  the  centre  almost  filled  up  with  brachycephalic  people 

t  "  Ilios  "  (London,  iS8o),  pp.  508-512. 


966  The  Dolmens  of  Ireland. 

apparently  moving  westward.  We  shall  find  by  a  reference  to 
the  map  of  M.  Bertrand,  showing  the  distribution  of  dolmens  in 
Europe,  that  monuments  of  that  type  cover  precisely  the  same 
ground. f  We  have  been  able  to  cross  to  the  coast  of  Africa,  and 
show  reasons  for  tracing  the  type  thither  also.  To  all  this  we 
may  add  that  the  skull  measurements  of  the  ancient  Egyptians 
give  an  index  of  75*58. J  What  was  then  the  type  of  those  tribes 
who  raised  the  dolmens  of  the  Jaulan,§  which  show  correspondences 
on  the  one  hand  with  those  of  the  African  groups,  and  on  the 
other  with  those  of  North  Western  Europe,  I  should  be  curious 
to  ascertain.  In  the  Caucasus,  M.  Chantre  ||  found  a  decidedly 
dolichocephalic  people  settled  there,  in  their  Iron  Age.  In  the 
cemetery  of  Samthavo,  the  cephalic  index  reached  as  low  as  65*34, 
and  67*51.  Other  skulls  showed  70*96,  7r8i,  72*64,  and  the 
highest,  a  woman's,  77*84.  In  that  of  Koban,  the  lowest  was 
72*50,  and  the  highest  79*57  (a  woman's).  At  Kislovodsk  the 
index  was  73*79;  at  IMarienfeld  the  lowest  was  68*81,  and  the 
highest  76*24  ;  at  Redkine-Lages  it  was  "]']"]'].  All,  therefore, 
were  dolichocephalic.  This,  it  must  be  remembered,  was  a 
dolmen  centre,  some  of  the  monuments  being  survivals  of  the 
megalithic  types.^  Subterranean  villages  *)"f  and  like  dwellings  ;|:J 
have  also  been  discovered  here. 

It  is  naturally  upon  the  coasts  immediately  opposite  Ireland, 
that  is  to  say,  in  the  western  portions  of  Britain,  that  we  should 
look  for  the  most  intimate  resemblances  between  the  racial  types 
in  the  two  islands.  In  the  result,  as  far  as  the  primitive  dolicho- 
cephalic type  we  are  now  considering  is  concerned,  we  shall  not 
be  disappointed.  In  the  limestone  hills  of  Denbighshire  are  the 
natural  caves  of  Perthi-Chwaren,  described  by  Prof.  Boyd 
Dawkins  §§  as  clustering  round  refuse-heaps,  containing  animal 
remains,  amongst  which  are  bones  of  the  shorthorn  ox  (Bos 
longifrons),  the  sheep  or  goat,  the  young  pig  (very  abundant),  the 
dog  (bones  of  puppies  very  abundant),  and,  more  rarely,  those  of 

t  "  Revue  d'Anthrop.,"  vol.  ii.  (1873) ;  "  Celtes,  Gaulois  et  Francs  ;  "  Letters  by  M.  Alex. 
Bertrand  to  M.  Broca  "  (Zeme-lettre),  p.  630,  et  seqq.  ;  plate  opp.  p.  631  ;  and  "  Archeologieceltique 
et  gauloise,"  by  the  same,  Paris,  1876,  plates  iv.  and  v. 

X  Isaac  Taylor,  "  Origin  of  the  Aryans,"  p.  97. 

§  "  The  Jaulan,"  by  G.  Schumaker,  18S8,  p.  123,  etc.  See  also  "  Across  the  Jordan,"  by  the 
same,  p.  62,  etc.     Incineration  having  prevailed,  all  clue  to  type  is  lost. 

II  "Recherches  dans  la  Caucase,"  by  Ernest  Chantre,  vol.  ii.,  Paris,  1SS6,  pp.  38,  116,  157, 
163,  181,  and  conclusion,  p.  184.     See  vol.  ii.  pp.  168,  169. 

1  Id.,  vol.  i.  pp.  51-65. 

tt  Id.,  pp.  66-68.  \\  Id.,  pp.  69-72, 

§§  "Cave  Hunting,"  p.  \^(),et  seqq. 


Anthropology  and  Ethnology.  967 

the  stag  and  roe,  the  hare,  and  the  horse.  Besides  these  are 
noticed  those  of  the  fox,  the  badger,  the  rabbit,  the  water-rat,  and 
the  eagle.  It  is  specially  stated  that  nearly  all  the  bones  were 
broken,  and  belonged  to  young  animals. 

No  less  than  five  natural  caverns  were  discovered  and 
explored.  At  the  mouth  of  the  first  opened  were  found  bones  of 
animals  similar  to  those  in  the  refuse-heaps,  together  with  some 
of  large  birds.  As  in  the  case  of  the  Caverne  de  1' Homme  Mort, 
as  these  were  cleared  away,  beyond  the  threshold,  and  under  the 
roof  of  the  cave,  human  remains  of  no  fewer  than  five  individuals 
were  found.  More  appeared  as  the  work  proceeded.  Five  skulls 
were  found  between  10  and  15  feet  from  the  mouth.  Horses' 
teeth,  shells,  a  broken  flint-flake,  charcoal,  pebbles,  a  boar's  tusk, 
and  two  bones  of  the  Bos  longi/rons  were  found  near  the  skulls. 
The  entrance  to  the  cave  had  been  blocked  up  with  stones, 
seemingly  placed  artificially  "  as  a  barrier."  "  For  the  most  part 
the  human  remains  belonged  to  very  young  individuals,  from  the 
small  infant  to  youths  of  twenty-one.  Some,  however,  belonged  to 
men  in  the  prime  of  life.  All  the  teeth  that  had  been  used  were 
ground  perfectly  flat.  The  skulls  belonged  to  that  type  which  Prof. 
Huxley  calls  the  '  Long-Barrow  and  River-Bed  Skull.'  Some  of 
the  tidied  presented  the  peculiar  flattening,  parallel  to  the  median 
line,  which  Prof.  Busk  denotes  by  the  term  platycnemic,  and  some 
of  the  femora  were  traversed  by  a  largely  developed  and 
prominent  liuea  aspera ;  but  these  peculiarities  were  not  seen  on 
all  the  femora  and  tibicBl'  neither,  we  may  add,  were  they  obser- 
vable on  all  the  examples  from  the  Caverne  de  1' Homme  Mort. 

With  regard  to  the  platycnemic  tibiae,  the  feature  which  they 
present  has  been  observed  in  the  case  of  human  remains  in  caves 
at  Gibraltar,  by  Prof.  Busk  and  Dr.  Falconer  ;  in  those  of  Cro- 
Magnon,  and,  less  markedly,  in  the  Caverne  de  THomme  Mort, 
as  also  in  those  from  some  French  dolmens,  by  M.  Broca.  To  go 
far  afield.  Prof.  Boyd  Dawkins  detected  it  in  a  fragment  of  human 
bone  from  a  deposit,  containing  stone  implements,  obtained  by 
Mr.  Foote  from  the  east  coast  of  Southern  India.f  We  shall 
presently  see  that  Dr.  Frazer  of  Dublin  has  observed  it,  in 
survival,  in  the  case  of  human  bones  from  a  tumulus  of  mediaeval 
date,  near  Dublin. 

The  bodies.  Prof.  Dawkins  thinks,  had  been  buried  entire  in 

t  "  Congres  Internal.  d'Anth.  et  d'Archxol.  Prehist."  (Norwich,  iS68),  p.  224. 


968 


The  Dolmens  of  Ireland. 


these  caves,  and  in  a  crouching  posture.  A  polished  celt  of  green- 
stone was  obtained  from  one,  with  numerous  flint-flakes,  and 
fragments  of  pottery,  rude,  black  inside,  hand-made,  and  containing 
in  their  composition  small  fragments  of  limestone.  Bones  and 
teeth  of  the  brown  bear,  the  lower  jaw  of  a  wolf,  and  fractured  bones 
of  the  dog  accompanied  these  evidences  of  the  Neolithic  Age. 

Unfortunately  Prof.  Dawkins  does  not  give  illustrations  of  the 
pottery,  but  he  makes  a  comparison,  which  is  well  worthy  of 
attention,  in  connection  with  the  possible  traces  of  this  dolicho- 
cephalic race  in  Germany.  He  compares  these  potsherds  with 
those  found  in  the  caves  of  Gailenruth,  on  the  Weissent,  and  of 
Kiihloch,  near  Rabenstein,  in  the  gorge  of  Esbach,f  found  with 
remains  of  the  cave  bear,  the  mammoth,  the  Irish  elk,  and  the 
reindeer. 

In  1833,  Mr.  Edward  Lloyd  J  discovered,  in  a  cave  at  Cefn, 
near  St.  Asaph,  a  human  skull  and  lower  jaw,  together  with 
platycnemic  tibics,  flint-flakes,  and  bones  of  animals,  similar  to 
those  in  the  caves  of  Perthi-Chwaren. 

Near  this  latter  place,  in  the  cairn  of  Tyddyn  Bleiddyn, 
two  sepulchral  chambers  were  discovered 
in  1869  and  1871.  The  ground-plan  of  the 
first  and  smaller  one  shows  that  it  was 
divided  into  two  portions :  an  outer  portion 
(B)  consisting  of  a  gallery  or  passage,  and  an 
inner  portion  (A)  consisting  of  the  chamber 
to  which  the  passage  led,  ingress  into  which 
was  obtained  through  a  narrow  aperture  (C) 
between  two  transverse  slabs.  With  this 
arrangement  of  passage  and  chambers  I 
have  dealt  fully  when  comparing  megalithic 
structures  in  various  countries.  Suffice  it 
to  say  that,  in  passage  and  chamber  alike, 
the  remains  of  numerous  human  bodies  were 
found,  at  least  twelve  in  all,  and  varying 
in  age  from  infancy  to  full  prime.  No 
animal    remains   were    found,    and   only   a 

tLVol'Z<i^Dtt!ns\    ^"^^^''  ^^'^^^^^^y  shipped  flint  pebble.     Prof. 
Boyd  Dawkins  compares    the   chamber   to 
those  found  in  the  Long  Barrows  of  Britain  and  the  Ganggraben 


rr^^O 


Fig.    729.— Chamber    in    the 


t  These  specimens  are  in  the  Museum  at  Oxford. 

*  "  Edinburgh  New  Phil.  Soc."  (1833),  No.  27,  p.  40  ;  "  Cave  Hunting,"  p.  159. 


Anthropology  and  Ethnology. 


969 


of  Scandinavia  in  general,  and  to  those  of  West  Kennet  and  Le 
Creux  des  Fees  in  Guernsey  in  particular. 

The  second  and  larger  chamber  was  of  rudely  triangular  form, 
like  the  first,  and,  like  that  also,  provided  with  a  passage,  traversed 
by  a  partition  of  slabs.  Both  chamber  and  passage  were,  here 
also,  filled  with  human  bones.     In  the  chamber  were  the  broken 


Fig.  730. — Skull  from  cave  at  Perthi-Chwaren.     From  Boyd  Daivkins. 

jaw  of  a  roe-buck,  bones  of  a  goat,  a  broken  flint,  and  quartz 
pebbles.     In  the  passage  were  teeth  and  bones  of  the  dog  and  pig. 

The  skulls  from  none  of  these  sepulchres  were  excessively 
dolichocephalic,  the  lowest  cephalic  index  from  Perthi-Chwaren 
being  0743.  One  reached  o'Soo.  The  lowest  altitudinal  measure- 
ment was  o'7io,  in  a  skull  with  a  cephalic  index  of  0750.  The 
mean  cephalic-index  average  was  0765.  The  Cefn  cave  skull  had 
a  cephalic  index  of  0770,  with  an  altitudinal  index  of  only  0702, 
which  might  cause  us  to  place  it  the  rather  among  those  of  the 
dolicho-platycephalic  type.  Lastly,  the  skull  from  the  chambered- 
cairn  showed  a  cephalic  index  of  0765,  equalizing  the  mean 
average  from  Perthi-Chwaren. 

"Some  of  the  tibice  from  both  the  chambers  of  the  Cefn 
tumulus  were  platycnemic.  .  .  .  The  skulls,"  says  Prof.  Dawkins, 
in  conclusion,  "  from  the  second  of  the  two  chambers  agree  exactly 
VOL.  in.  s 


970 


The  Dolmens  of  Ireland. 


with  those  from  the  caves."  The  inference  is  that  the  same  race 
who  used  the  natural  caves  as  sepulchres,  constructed  also, 
probably  at  a  slightly  advanced  period  in  their  culture-history, 
the  artificial  caves  in  the  cairn. 

Between  the  men  of  the  natural  caves,  and  those  of  the 
artificial  ones  in  the  tumuli,  the  Cefn  cave  and  tumulus  form 
a  necessary  link.  Those,  however,  who  used  the  natural  caves 
as  sepulchres  need  not  be  regarded  for  that  reason  as  belonging 
to  an  epoch  anterior  to  that  in  which  the  artificial  ones  were 
constructed.  When  a  man  died,  he  died  into  the  kill,^  to  use 
an  expression  previously  quoted,  and  common  among  the  Scandi- 
navians. Where  the  geological  features  of  a  country,  as  in  a  lime- 
stone district,  for  example,  offered  natural  caves  for  interment,  the 
bodies  of  the  dead  would  be  placed  in  them  generation  after  gene- 
ration. On  the  other  hand,  when  people,  practising  the  same 
cultus,  found  themselves  settled  in  a  district  where  either  no 
natural  caves  existed,  or  where  those  which  did  exist  had  been 
previously  utilized  and  filled,  they  constructed  artificial  caves,  that 
is,  gallery  graves^  alldes  coiivertes,  ganggraber — call  them  as  we  will,. 
— and  covered  them  with  a  mound,  to  represent  the  hill  into  which 
the  dead  should  die. 

As  age  succeeded  age,  and  race  intermingled  with  race,  the 


Fig.  731. — Skull  from  the  Long-Barrow  at  Rudstone.    Frotn  Greaiwell. 

cephalic    index   expanded.      It    stood,  as  we    have  just  seen,  at 

t  Vigfusson,  Corp.  Boreal.     See  remarks  on  the  Caverne  de  rHomme  Mort,  p.  951  supra. 


Anthropology  and  Ethnology. 


971 


an   average  of  0765 — that    is    to    say,  it  was  orthocephalic— in 
the   caves    of   Perthi-Chwaren.     And    yet  in   the  Long- Barrows 


Fig.  732. — Skull  from  the  Long-Barrow  at  Rudstone.     From  Greenwell. 

of  Britain  it  was  considerably  less.  The  example  from  Rudstone, 
described  by  Professor  Rolleston,  had  a  cephalic  index  of  072.f 
It  is  stated  to  be  "eminently  long  and  lofty."  The  mean  cephalic 
index  for  forty-eight  Long-Barrow  men  appears,  however,  to  be 
even  lower  than  this,  namely,  0715,  and  for  nineteen  women  0703, 


Fig.  733. — Skull  from  Long-Lowe  Barrow,  near  Wetton,  Staffordshire. 
From  the  "  Crania  BriiannicaJ" 

with  a  mean  altitudinal  index  for  both  of  0730.t     Of  the  skulls 
figured   by  the  editors  of  the    "  Crania    Britannica,"   the  norma 

t  Greenwell,  "British  Barrows,"  p.  613. 

X  This  is  Dr.  Thurnam's  estimate,  see  "  Cave  Hunting"  by  Boyd  Dawkins,  p.  197. 


972 


The  Dolmens  of  Ireland. 


verticalis  of  one  of  those  from  Long-Lowe  Barrow,  near  Wetton  in 
Staffordshire  (Figs,  'jn,  734),t  seems  to  have  an  unusual  length 


Fig.  734. — Skull  from  Long-Lowe  Barrow,  Staffordshire.     Froin  TInirnayti  and  Davis. 


/ 


■m^ 


Fig.  735. —Skull  from  West  Kennet,  Wiltshire.     From  Tliurnain  and  Davis. 

in  proportion  to  breadth,  as  have  also  those  from  West  Kennet 


+  "Cran.  Brit.,"  33,  i  (Text). 


Anthropology  and  Ethnology. 


973 


in  Wiltshire  (Fig.   735),  and   from    Littleton  Drew  in  the  same 
county    (Fig.    736).        To    these   we    may    add   examples    from 


Fig.  736. — Skull  from  Littleton  Drew.     Thurnam  and  Davis. 


Fig.  737.  — Skull  from  Rodmarton.     Thurnam  and  Davis. 

Rodmarton    (Fig.    Ji'j),    and    from     Uley    (Fig.    738),    both    in 


974 


The  Dolmens  of  Ireland. 


Gloucestershire.      I  append  the  normcB  laterales  of  these  five  \  for 


Fig.  738. — Skull  from  Uley  Barrow,  Gloucestershire.     From  Thiriia??i  and  Davis. 

comparison  with  the  skull,  so-called  "Ancient  Hibernian,"  from 
the  Knockmaraidhe  tumulus  in  the  Phoenix  Park, 
Dublin,  to  be  given  presently  (Figs.  740,  741). 
Messrs.  Thurnam  and  Davis  give  plans  of 
the  cists  at  Minning  Lowe  (Derbyshire),  and 
at  West  Kennet,J  as  typical  examples  of  the 
chambers  met  with  in  the  Long  Barrows.§ 
It  is  to  be  remarked  that  in  the  case  of  the 
Uley  Long  Barrow  Roman  remains  were  found 
in  one  of  the  side  chambers,  and  since  among 
them  was  a  lachrymatory,  the  idea  presents 
itself  that  the  cultus  of  the  dead,  and  the 
devotions  paid  to  them  at  this  sepulchre,  had 
not  died  out  in  the  age  to  which  such  relics 
belong. 

I    now    proceed    to   describe   seriatim   the 
examples  which  Ireland  affords  of  this  second 

dolichocephalic    type.      Although    it    is    beyond   question    that 


Fig.  739.— Plan  of  the 
structure  in  Minning 
Lowe.  From  the  "  Cra- 
nia Brila7inica.'^ 


t  Id.,  plates  33,  50,  24,  5,  and  59.  The  cephalic  indices  of  these  five  skulls  respectively  are 
0650,  0'679,  0"698,  0730,  and  0727. 

X  For  West  Kennet  Cist,  see  Fig.  425  supra. 

§  The  absolute  identity  of  the  Long  Barrows,  West  Kennet  for  example,  with  the  Hiinebedden 
of  Brandenburg,  Mecklenburg,  and  Hanover,  will  have  been  observed  in  the  examples  of  the  latter 
given  in  Part  II.     Presumably  the  race  by  whom  they  were  erected  was  one  and  the  same. 


Anthropology  and  Ethnology.  975 

hundreds  of  them  have  been  unearthed  within  the  memory 
even  of  those  now  living,  unfortunately  those  which  are  available 
for  description  are  few  and  far  between. 

First  in  order  come  the  two  crania  from  the  Knockmaraidhe 
or  Knockmary  tumulus  in  the  Phoenix  Park,  the  details  of  the 
discovery  of  which  will  be  found  in  their  place  in  the  descriptive 
catalogue  of  Irish  dolmens.f  Suffice  it  to  say  that  the  tumulus 
appears  to  have  been  a  round  one,  and  composed  of  earth ;  that 
in  the  outer  part  of  it,  four  small  urns  enclosed  in  little  cists,  and 
containing  calcined  bones,  were  found  ;  that  in  the  centre  of  the 
mound  a  rough  megalithic  chamber  was  discovered,  so  rudely  con- 
structed as  scarcely  to  be  admissible  under  the  category  of  the  well- 
formed  cists  often  found  in  Round  Barrows,  and  yet  seemingly  not 
connected  by  any  passage  with  the  edge  of  the  mound,  like  the 
rugged  dolmen-chambers  undoubtedly  were ;  that  within  this 
vault  lay  the  skeletons  of  two  men,  and  the  tops  of  the  thigh- 
bones of  a  third  ;  that  with  these  was  a  bone  supposed  to  be 
that  of  a  dog ;  a  number  of  small  perforated  shells  which  had 
formed  a  necklace ;  a  small  double-headed  bone  fibula ;  and  a 
flint  knife  or  arrow-point. 

Of  the  two  skulls,  Mr.  Davis  says  that  in  his  opinion  we 
have  in  them  "the  most  faithful  and  the  most  intimate  re- 
presentatives of  aborigines  that  can  be  revealed  to  the  light 
of  modern  days."  The  presence  of  the  three  bodies  in  the 
vault  gives  rise,  as  he  says,  to  the  conjecture  that  they  did  not 
all  come  there  "in  submission  to  the  laws  of  nature," — a  view 
which  is  supported  by  the  evidence  educible  from  many  another 
sepulchral  mound,  and  which  forces  itself  on  the  consideration 
of  every  explorer  of  ancient  pagan  sepulchral  sites  in  remote 
ages. 

The  following  description  is  from  the  "Crania  Britannica."| 
"  Both  skulls  belonged  to  men.  The  one  of  which  illustrations 
are  here  given  pertained  to  the  younger  of  the  two.  The  one 
was  about  40 ;  the  other  about  50.  There  is  a  considerable 
resemblance  between  the  two.  The  face  shows  a  slight  eversion 
of  the  angles  of  the  lower  jaw,  which  would  afford  an  element 
of  squareness  of  countenance ;  but  the  obliquity  of  the  base  of 
the  jaw,  which  slopes  from  the  angle  to  the  chin,  as  seen  in  the 
profile,    would    take   off  from    this    expression.     The   skull,    not 

t  Part  I.,  p.  379.  X  Loc.  cit. 


976 


The  Dolmens  of  Ireland. 


represented,    wants   its   lower    jaw,    but   some    of    its    teeth    are 
preserved   and    are   much    more  worn  than  those  of  the  other. 


Fig.  740.— "  Ancient  Hibernian"  skull.     From  T/itinmtn  and  Davis. 


Fig.  741.— Skull  from  Knockmaraidhe,  in  the  Phoenix  Park.     From  Thufnam  and  Davis. 


Anthropology  and  Ethnology.  977 

The  cheek-bones  are  rather  prominent ;  still  the  tendency  of 
their  plane  surfaces  is  decidedly  lateral.  The  cranium  of  the 
older  man  is  remarkable  for  having  an  elevated  ridge  running 
obliquely  down  the  middle  of  each  malar  bone,  in  the  situation 
of  the  origins  of  the  zygomatic  muscles,  which  we  may  regard 
as  having  been  strongly  developed  in  this  individual — a  circum- 
stance that  would  render  his  countenance  somewhat  more  savage 
and  forbidding.  Both  crania  are  tolerably  orthognathous,  but 
the  superior  maxillary  bones  themselves  are  robust.  The  cheek 
depressions  are  shallow,  the  orbits  wide,  the  nasal  orifices  rather 
narrow.  The  nasal  bones  are  prominent,  yet  not  elegantly  so  ; 
they  rise  out  of  rather  deep  supra-nasal  depressions.  The  bosses 
over  the  frontal  sinuses  project  decidedly.  The  frontal  bones 
are  tolerably  wide  and  of  moderate  elevation,  not  lofty  ;  that 
of  the  skull  without  the  lower  jaw  being  narrower  and  more 
recedent.  The  sides  of  the  skulls  are  rather  flat,  especially  in  the 
perfect  example,  the  semicircular  line  of  which  extends  a  great 
way  upwards.  The  vertical  region  is  moderately  elevated  in  the 
perfect  cranium  ;  in  the  other  it  is  more  lofty.  The  bases  of  both 
skulls  are  rugged  ;  the  mastoids  of  good  size ;  t\i&  foramina  magn.i 
large,  and  of  regular  oval  form.  In  a  vertical  view,  the  perfect 
skull  is  seen  to  form  a  long  outline,  tolerably  oval ;  the  other 
being  more  elevated  at  the  vertex,  is  somewhat  shorter,  and 
describes  an  oval  more  round — all  this  being  manifested  by  the 
measurements  which  exhibit  a  difference  of  0*4  of  an  inch  in 
antero-posterior  diameter.  In  reference  to  the  question  of 
dolichocephalic  and  brachycephalic  skulls,  the  specimen  illustrated, 
though  not  remarkably  long,  is  somewhat  dolichocephalic  ;  and 
the  other,  though  not  remarkably  short,  is  somewhat  so — yet, 
it  must  be  recollected,  we  know  both  are  derived  from  one 
tumulus,  both  belonged  without  question  to  one  people,  and  both 
were  interred  at  a  very  remote  period  of  time." 

In  conclusion,  Mr.  Davis  says,  "There  cannot  be  said  to  be 
any  very  remarkable  peculiarities  in  these  skulls,  unless  we  refer 
to  slight  ones  pointed  out  by  Dr.  Pritchard.  At  the  same  time, 
the  reader  will  at  once  recognize  in  them  those  features  so  often 
dwelt  upon  in  the  '  Crania  Britannica,'  as  characterizing  the 
crania  of  the  ancient  Britons.  Indeed,  to  these  crania  we  consider 
they  present  a  striking  resemblance. f      They  are  tolerably  full, 

t  See  the  "  Long-Barrow  "  skulls  above  figured. 


978 


The  Dolmens  of  Ireland. 


capacious   skulls,    and,  when  gauged,   are   of  moderate   capacity, 


as  the  followino-  table  will  show  : — 


A 

Horizontal  circumference  21 'o  ins. 

Longitudinal  diameter  ...  7*4   ,, 

Frontal  region — Length  5'i  ,, 

Breadth  4*6  ., 

Height  47  ,, 

Panetal  region — Length  5*0  ,, 

Breadth  5  "4  ,, 

Height  4-8  ,, 


B 

■I  ins. 

o  ,, 

o  ,, 

5  ,. 

6  „ 
o  ,, 
4  „ 


Occipital  region- 


Intermastoid  arch 
Internal  capacity 
Face — Length    ... 
Breadth  ... 
Length  of  a  femur 


Length 
Breadth 
Height 


A 

4'6  ins. 

4'4   ,. 

4*3   ,. 

14-8   „ 

75 '5  ozs. 
5-1  ins. 
5-4 


18 


B 

4*5  ins. 

4-5       M 

39  M 

147  .. 

74'o  ozs. 

5*4  ins. 
•3  ins. 


My  own  measurement,  taken  a  few  years  since,  gave  to  the 
longer  of  these  skulls  a  cephalic  index  of  0733,  and  to  the  shorter 
one  one  of  0785.  It  is  to  be  remarked  (i)  that  the  tumulus  in 
which  they  were  found  was  a  Round  Barrow,  and  did  not  contain 
the  class  of  chamber  in  which  are  found  in  Britain  the  characteristic 
skulls  of  the  Long-Barrow  type  ;  (2)  that  while  the  cephalic  index 
of  the  longer  skull  accords  sufficiently  nearly  with  those  of 
the  latter  type,  that  of  the  other  skull  is  on  the  verge  between 
orthocephaly  and  sub-brachycephaly,  a  circumstance  which  might 
induce  a  belief  that  a  mixture  of  race  was  here  discernible  ;  (3) 
that  Dr.  Pritchard  f  observed,  especially  in  the  shorter  skull,  a 
considerable  approximation  to  the  form  of  his  so-called  Turanian 
(brachycephalic)  type,  "the  face  being  somewhat  of  a  lozenge 
form,  a  pyramidal  elevation,  with  laterally  eminent  zygomata," — 
characteristics  which,  as  Dr.  Davis  admits,  exist  also  in  the  longer 
skull.  For  these  three  reasons  I  am  inclined  to  think  that  in 
one  of  these  skulls,  if  not  in  both,  we  have  not  the  pure  Long- 
Barrow  type  of  Britain,  but  an  admixture  with  it  of  the 
characteristics  of  a  broader  and  brachycephalic  type.  J 

At  the  close  of  his  remarks.  Dr.  Davis  adverts  to  the  difficult 
question  as  to  the  similarity  of  this  cranial  type  to  or  its  deviation 
from  that  of  the  ancient  crania  discovered  in  the  barrows  of 
Denmark  and  Sweden.  My  own  view  would  be  that  just  as  a 
skull  from  Borreby,  to  which  we  shall  hereafter  refer,  is  the  result 
of  an  intermixture  of  intrusive  brachycephaly  with  the  older 
Scandinavian  {i.e.  the  Stangenas)  type,  so  these  two  skulls  are  the 
result  of  an  intermixture  of  the  same  brachycephalic  type  with  the 
type  of  the  Long-Barrow  men  of  Britain,  and  of  the  Caverne  de 
r Homme  Mort  in  France. 


t  "Researches"  (1841),  vol.  iii.  p.  200. 

X  Approximating  to  the  type  of  those  who  buried  in  cists,  not  in  dolmens. 


Anthropology  and  Ethnology. 


979 


The  next  skull  which  must  find  a  place  in  the  same  category 
as  the  Long-Barrow  skulls  is  one,  previously  adverted  to,  from 


Fig.  742.— Skull  from  the  Blackwater.     Huxley. 

the  river-bed  of  the  Blackwater  in  the  county  of  Armagh.  This 
skull  has  been  described  and  figured  by  Prof.  Huxley,f  who  has 
compared  it  to  a  skull,  also  from  a  river-bed,  found  at  Muskham 
in  the  valley  of  the  Trent.  It  was  found  with  another  having 
very  similar  characteristics.     The  cephalic  index  is  0*79. 

The  measurements  of  the  Trent  and  Blackwater  examples  are 
given  as  follows  : — 

Maximum  length 

Length  of  glabello-occipital  line  

Greatest  vertical  height  from  centre  of  auditory  foramen, 
the  glabello-occipital  line  being  horizontal 

Distance  of  auditory  foramen  below  glabello-occipital 
line 

Greatest  transverse  diameter 

Transverse  diameter  at  the  lower  ends  of  the  coronal 
suture... 

Horizontal  circumference 

Transverse  arc  from  one  auditory  foramen  to  the  other 

Antero-posterior  arc  from  glabella  to  occipital  pro- 
tuberance 

Antero-posterior  arc  from  glabella  to  posterior  edge  of 
occipital  bone  

The  next  skull,  which  in  point  of  its  great  dolichocephaly,  if 
we  considered  that  alone,  should  be  placed  at  the  head  of  the 
Irish  series  of  "  Long-Barrow"  skulls,  was  found  by  Mr.  Wakeman 
in  the  year  1871,  in  a  "earn"  near  Trillick  in  Tyrone.  This 
mound  was  composed  of  stones,  and  was  circular,  having  a 
diameter  of  40  feet  and  a  height  of  8  feet. 


Muskham. 

Blackwater. 

7-0 

ins. 

7-25  ins. 

67 

7'o     „ 

4-8 

.. 

47     „ 

0-8 

,, 

07   „ 

5-4 

" 

575   .. 

4-4 

,, 

475   M 

20-5 

,, 

20-75    - 

13-25 

" 

13-0     ,, 

12-5 

>i 

12-5     „ 

14-25 

ji 

I4'4     .. 

t  "  Prehist.  Remains  of  Caithness,"  pp.  123-128. 


980  The  Dolmens  of  Ireland. 

"  Resting  upon  the  ground,  just  barely  within  the  outer  edge, 
were  eight  cists,  each  of  which  had  the  appearance  of  a  cromleac." 
They  were  about  eight  feet  apart.  Four  of  them  enclosed  portions 
of  human  skeletons  ;  and  in  two,  in  addition  to  the  human  remains, 
was  a  vase  of  baked  clay.  In  one  of  these  latter,  three  vertebrEe, 
believed  to  be  of  a  dog,  were  found.  The  covering-slab  of  this 
cist  measured  4  feet  6  ins.  by  4  feet. 

In  another  cist,  which  had  two  covering-stones,  one  laid  above 
the  other,  portions  of  skeletons  of  two  human  beings  were  found. 
Both  skulls  were  minus  the  lower  jaws,f  and  no  teeth  were  found, 
a  circumstance  which  also  presented  itself  in  the  case  of  one  of 
the  skulls  at  Knockmaraidhe  just  mentioned.  "  From  the  narrow 
dimensions  of  the  cist  (2  feet  4  ins.  by  3  feet  6  ins.),  it  was  quite 
manifest  that  no  two  perfect  human  bodies,  even  those  of  very 
young  people,  could  have  been  here  deposited."  There  was  no 
trace  of  the  action  of  fire.  IMr.  Wakeman  naturally  came  to  the 
conclusion  that  the  bodies  had  been  dissevered  and  packed,  a 
mode  of  burial  which  was  prevalent  in  South-Eastern  Spain  in  the 
Bronze  Age,  and  among  the  inhabitants  of  the  Balearic  Isles  in 
the  time  of  Diodorus  Siculus.  A  similar  practice  prevailed  also 
among  the  savages  of  Queensland,  who  first  skinned  the  body 
with  the  aid  of  the  fire  applied  to  it,  and  then  dissevered  it  limb 
from  limb,  and  removed  the  flesh  from  the  bones.J  With  the 
exception  of  the  lower  jaws,  the  crania  were  fairly  perfect,  but 
almost  the  whole  of  the  remainder  of  the  skeletons  were  missino- 
only  a  few  detached  bones  being  present.  Osseous  matter  was, 
however,  found  mingled  with  dust,  a  fact  which  we  think  may 
possibly  indicate  that  the  flesh  was  boiled  from  the  bones,  the 
latter  by  excessive  boiling  being  partly  reduced  to  pulp.  Another 
of  the  cists  was  empty.  In  another,  again,  rifled  during  Mr. 
Wakeman's  absence,  a  second  decorated  urn  was  found  and  a  flint 
knife.  The  last  cist  explored  contained  bones  of  adults  in  a  soft 
and  decomposed  condition,  like  mortar  or  putty.  The  mound 
contained  no  central  cist. 

The  following  description  of  the  bones  which  we  think  right 
to  subjoin  in  full  is  by  Mr.  Mahood,  a  medical  man  who  accom- 
panied the  exploring  party. 


t  See  p.  470  supra. 

t  See  "Journ.  of  the  Anthropological  Institute,"  vol.  i.,  "  iMode  of  preparing  the  Dead  amone 
the  Natives  of  the  Upper  Mary  River."  r    j         &  t. 


Anthropology  and  Ethnology.  o8i 


"  In  the  first  grave  were  found  portions  of  two  lumbar  vertebra 
and  one  dorsal  one  ;  about  the  anterior  two-thirds  of  the  bodies  of 
each  being  completely  decayed  ;  the  sacrum,  which  was  perfect  as 
far  as  the  third  foramen  ;  also  both  ossa  innominata  in  an  excellent 
state  of  preservation — in  fact,  stronger  than  any  of  the  other  bones, 
all  of  which  broke  down  on  the  slightest  pressure.     The  superior 
maxillary  bone  of  the  left  side  was  represented  by  a  small  portion 
of  the  facial  and  naso-palatine  surfaces,  together  with  the  alveolus, 
which  contained  the  bicuspid  and  canine  teeth.     The  same  bone 
of  the  right  side  was  of  very  small  extent,  merely  that  portion 
which  constitutes  the  incisive,  or  myrtiform  fossa.     The  inferior 
maxilla,  which  was  of  more  than  ordinary  thickness,  was  complete, 
with  the  exception  of  both  condyles  and  a  small  portion  of  the 
ascending  ramus  of  either  side.     The  teeth  were  all  perfect.     The 
whole,  or  at  least  the  greater  part  of  the  skull,  would  have  been 
preserved,  but  for  the  zeal  of  some  members  of  the  '  Royal  Irish 
Constabulary,'    who,    having    heard    of  the    discovery  of  human 
remains,  thought  it  their  duty  to  proceed  to  the  spot  and  make  an 
investigation.     On  their  arrival  at  the   *  earn '  they  caused  this 
grave  to  be  reopened  during  the  absence  of  Mr.  Wakeman,  and^ 
owing  to  the  treatment  the  skull  received  at  the  hands  of  the  law, 
it,  as  one  of  the  natives  informed  me,  'crumbled  into  dust.'     A 
right  and  a  left  femur,  a  left  tibia,  and  the  head  and  about  two 
inches  of  the  shaft  of  the  left  fibula  complete  the  list  of  remains 
found  in  this  grave.     Judging  from  the  shape  of  the  pelvis,  the 
obliquity  of  the  angle  formed  by  the  junction  of  the  neck  and 
shaft  of  the  femur,  and  the  perfect  state  of  the  teeth,  it  would 
appear  that  the  bones  belonged  to  a  male  of  about  five  feet  ten 
inches  in  height,  and  not  very  far  advanced  in  years.     Neither  in 
this  nor  in  any  of  the  other  graves   did  the  bones  present  the 
slightest  appearance  of  having  been  submitted  to  the  influence 
of  fire. 

"  The  second  grave  contained  a  portion  of  the  vault  and  base 
of  the  cranium,  about  the  inferior  three-fourths  of  the  humerus  of 
the  right  side,  several  fragments  of  ribs,  the  olecranoid  process, 
and  a  small  portion  of  the  shaft  of  the  left  ulna ;  also  the  femur, 
ilium,  and  ischium  of  the  left  side.  The  head  of  the  femur  had 
separated  from  the  remainder  of  the  bone,  at  that  part  known  as 
the  anatomical  neck.  The  ilium  was  found  lying  at  a  distance  of 
fully  two  feet  from  the  ischium.     This  would  very  naturally  lead 


982 


The  Dolmens  of  Ireland. 


to  the  conclusion  that  the  bones  contained  in  this  grave  were 
placed  there  subsequent  to  the  removal  of  the  flesh  and  other 
investing  media,  whether  by  a  process  of  nature  or  by  artificial 
means  it  is  impossible  to  say.  The  dry  state  in  which  the  bones, 
and  also  an  urn,  were  found,  and  that  after  long-continued  rain, 
entirely  precludes  the  supposition  that  these  two  parts  of  the 
same  bone  could  have  been  separated  by  the  drainage  of  water 
from  the  upper  part  of  the  mound.  These  bones  appear  to  have 
belonged  to  a  person  of  about  fifteen  or  sixteen  years  of  age,  but 
it  would  be  very  difficult  to  form  a  correct  opinion  as  to  whether 
they  are  the  remains  of  a  male  or  female. 

"The  next  grave  examined  contained  portions  of  two  skulls, 
one  of  which  was  considerably  above  the  average  size,  and  of 
great  length  in  the  antero-posterior  diameter.  The  greatest 
amount  of  development  was  situated  posterior  to  the  coronal 
suture,  the  frontal  region  being  disproportionately  small.  The 
other  skull  was  of  smaller  size,  and  less  perfect.  In  this,  as  well 
as  in  the  former  case,  the  facial  bones  were  all  absent.  Some 
other  pieces  of  bone  were  found,  but  so  small  that  it  is  impossible 
to  say  with  certainty  to  what  part  they  belonged." 

Mr.  Wakeman  has  given  us  four  careful  drawings  of  the  long 


Fig.  743.— Skull  from  cairn  at  Trillick      PlG.  744.— Skull  from  cairn  at  Trillick  Barr  (another 
Barr      From   sketch   by  Mr.    IV.   F.  view).     By  the  same. 

Wakeman. 

skull  just  mentioned,  of  which  I  reproduce  three  from  the  Journal 
of  the  Royal  Hist,  and  Archseol.  Association  of  Ireland.  Its 
dimensions  are :  length,  8  ins. ;  breadth,  5|  ins.  ;  girth,  231 
ins.  From  the  first  two  measurements  it  would  appear  that  its 
cephalic  index  is  about  70,  the  lowest  yet  discovered  in 
connection  with  primeval  tombs  in  Ireland.  There  can  hardly 
be  a  doubt  that  we  have  in  the  above  account  evidence  of  savao-e 


Anthropology  and  Ethnology. 


98. 


Fig.  745. — Skull  from  Trillick  Barr  (another  view). 
By  the  saiTie. 


practices  in  regard  to  the  disposal  of  the  dead  in  Ireland.  It 
is  unfortunate  that  the 
measurements  of  the  other 
skull  found  with  it  are 
unattainable.  In  private 
conversation  Mr.  Wake- 
man  informed  me  that  it 
was  a  "  round  one ; "  and, 
if  so,  it  was  probably  the 
head  of  one  of  those,  the 
intermixture  of  whom 
with  the  long-heads caused 
the  broadening  out  which 
is  observable  in  such  examples  as  the  second  Knockmaraidhe  skull. 

It  will  be  in  place  here  to  mention,  with  an  illustration  from 
the  "Crania  Ethnica,"f  an  Irish  skull  from  the  bog  of  Tily  Hole, 
which  was  acquired  by  Mr.  Mahon  of  Dublin. 
Its  cephalic  index  is  72*87  (Fig.  746). 

In  his  "Beauties  of  the  Boyne,"J  Sir 
William  Wilde  mentions  that  the  three  skulls 
found  in  the  lake-dwellings  at  Dunshaughlin 
in  Meath  "  partake  of  the  characters  of  the 
long-headed  race,"  although  the  antiquities 
there  are  referable,  he  thinks,  to  the  tenth 
century.  Again,  among  a  collection  of  bones 
and  antiquities,  of  a  much  later  date  still, 
found  near   Navan,    a  skull    was    dug    up,  _         .    .,       , 

.  ,         ,  ,  ,'  -      ,  ,  c  Fig.   746.-SkuU    from  Tily 

"  evidently   partakmg    of  the    character    01     Hole,  Ireland.    From  the 

,  -     ,        ,  111  »)    1  1  •  "  Crania  Ethnica." 

those  01  the  long-headed  race,  but  showing 
traces  of  intermixture.  At  the  ford  of  Kinnafad,  where  bronze 
and  iron  weapons  were  found  together,§  there  were  skulls  and 
skeletons  of  the  long-headed  as  well  as  of  the  short-headed  race. 
"  The  fragments  of  heads  found  in  the  great  cairn  of  Dowth 
belonged,"  adds  Sir  William,  "  to  the  long-headed  race."  A  skull 
— one  of  four — found  above  Redbay,  near  Cushendall,  "par- 
takes of  most  of  the  characters  of  the  long-headed  race,  but  it  is 
somewhat  greater  in  capacity,  and  approaches  the  globular  form 
more  than  those  found  in  the  ancient  sepulchres  of  pagan 
times."     Unfortunately  to  these  vague  notices  of  the  occurrence  of 


t  p.  495,  and  plate  xcvii. 


X  pp.  238,  239. 


§  "Beauties  of  the  Boyne,"  p.  39. 


984 


The  Dolmens  of  Ireland. 


doHchocephaHc  crania,  Sir  William  appends  neither  measurements 
nor  illustrations. 

His  view  that  those  of  the  dolichocephalic  type  belonged  to 
one  of  two  hostile  peoples,  whose  wars  are  recorded  in  the  Gaedhelic 
languaee  in  the  old  collections  of  lefjends  and  tales,  and  the 
brachycephalic  type  to  the  other,  is  a  mere  hypothesis,  resting  on 
no  solid  ground  whatever,  and  utterly  unworthy  of  serious 
attention.  There  is  reason  to  think  that  the  traditions  of  these 
peoples  were  imported  en  bloc,  and  where  they  retain  any  genuine 
historic  tradition,  the  sources  of  it  should  be  sought  rather  on  the 
Continent  than  in  Ireland,  a  point  to  which  I  will  return  in  the 
sequel. 

To  come  back  to  authentic  examples  of  the  discovery  of  dolicho- 
cephalic skulls.  An  account  of  the  results  of  the  exploration  of  a 
very  singular  sepulchral  chamber  of  circular  form,  having  especial 
interest  owing  to  the  fact  that  it  was  close  to  the  great  earthwork, 


L  N  i  R.ANCK 
Fig.  747.  — Rallynahatty.     From  "  Ulster  Journal  of  Archinolog)'.''' 

with  its  dolmen,  called  the  "  Giant's  Ring,"  in  the  county  Down, 
will  be  found  under  the  name  Ballynahatty,|  in  the  catalogue  of 

t  p.  278  supra. 


Anthropology  and  Ethnology.  985 

monuments  which  follows.f  We  need  only  say  here  that  the 
chamber  was  underground,  that  it  was  7  feet  in  diameter,  with  an 
entrance  facing  the  east,  and  that  the  area  within  was  divided  into 
six  compartments  of  various  sizes,  surrounding  a  central  space. 
Two  of  these  compartments  contained  urns  filled  with  burnt  bones, 


Fig.  748. — Two  skulls  from  the  chamber  at  Ballynahatty. 

and  in  three  others  burnt  and  unburnt  bones  were  also  found,  one 
of  the  three  containing,  in  addition  to  the  burnt  bones,  portions  of 
five  skulls  unburnt.  The  circular  structure  had  been  roofed  in 
with  overlapping  stones  in  the  manner  of  a  beehive-hut,  but  the 
height  in  the  centre  was  only  3  feet. 

With  the  human  bones,  those  of  a  small  cow  and  of  a  sheep  or 
goat,  unburnt,  were  also  found.  Only  two  crania  were  available 
for  measurement,  and  of  these  Mr.  Grattan  gives  careful 
particulars. 

"  Both  skulls  are  apparently  those  of  females,  from  twenty  to 
twenty-five  years  of  age.  They  are  exceedingly  small,  long,  low, 
and  narrow.  Their  greatest  circumference  is  only  20  ins.,  and 
their  measurements  by  the  craniometer  much  below  any  that 
have  previously  come  under  the  writer's  (Mr.  Grattan's)  ob- 
servation. 

"  Though  so  excessively  low,  the  coronal  region  is,  nevertheless, 
pretty  full  and  rounded,  and,  in  the  shorter  of  the  two,  well  and 
gracefully  arched.  In  both  the  anterior  portion  is  proportionately 
short,  and  the  posterior  long ;  the  preponderating  volume  being 
posterior  to  the  opening  of  the  ears.  .  .  .  The  nasal  bones  are 
defective,  but  would  appear  to  have  been  somewhat  prominent. 
The  cheek-bones  are  large,  prominent,  projecting  outwards  below  ; 
the  cavities  for  the  eyes  large,  with  an  outward  and  downward 
inclination.  In  the  longer  skull  the  jaws  are  rather  prominent ; 
the  under  one  long,  very  slight  and  shallow.  At  death  the  teeth 
must  have  been  complete,  but  many  had  dropped  out  of  their 
sockets.     Such  as  remain  are  remarkably  sound,  somewhat  worn 

t  U.J. A,,  vol.  iii.  1855,  p.  358,  ct  seqq. 
VOL.  in.  T 


986  The  Dolmens  of  Ireland. 

down  in  the  longer  skull,  especially  in  the  lower  jaw,  but  scarcely 
any  in  the  other.  In  each  the  wisdom  teeth  have  not  quite 
attained  the  elevation  of  the  molars.  The  sutures  are  strongly 
marked ;  the  zygomatic  arches,  as  far  as  can  be  inferred, 
moderately  prominent ;  and  the  mastoid  processes  small  and 
feebly  developed.  The  longer  skull  appears  to  have  had  a  large 
frontal  sinus,  to  which  is  due  its  excess  of  prominence  over  the 
shorter  skull  ;  whereas  the  latter  progressively  ascends  from  that 
point,  ranging  considerably  above  it  throughout  the  whole  coronal 
region,  exhibiting,  in  every  respect,  a  finer  and  more  elevated 
specimen  of  the  same  type."  Mr.  Grattan  f  gives  to  these  two 
skulls  the  cranial  indices  074  and  075. 

"The  remaining  cranial  fragments  were — a  large,  massive, 
powerful  male  jaw,  the  teeth  considerably  worn  down,  but  not 
more  than  would  indicate  middle  age  ;  the  upper  and  portion  of 
the  lower  jaw  of  an  adult  male,  younger  than  the  preceding ;  and 
the  greater  portion  of  a  large  lower  jaw  of  a  middle-aged  female  ; 
these,  with  two  more  perfect  crania,  making  up  the  full  number  of 
five,  already  stated  to  have  been  either  wholly  or  in  part  deposited 
in  this  sepulchral  chamber." 

Mr.  Grattan  considers  that  the  proximity  of  this  sepulchral  site 
to  the  Giant's  Ring,  with  its  ruined  dolmen,  is  indicative  of  their 
contemporaneity.  He  places  them  in  the  first  of  his  groups, 
which  he  terms  primeval,  but  which  he  does  not  arrange  according 
to  the  cephalic  index,  since  he  places  in  it  a  skull  from  Donagh- 
more,  with  an  index  of  0'83,  and  one  from  a  cist  in  the  Phoenix 
Park,  which  is  079.  It  is  curious,  however,  to  add  that  he  gives 
as  the  average  for  his  primeval  period  the  same  figure  which 
Virchow  does  for  the  Stone  Age  in  the  North,  namely,  077.  This 
figure  is,  however,  arrived  at  by  too  high  averages  for  the  two 
Knockmaraide  skulls,  and,  we  believe,  for  the  Ballynahatty  ones, 
as  well  as  by  the  omission  of  the  Trillick  skull  described  above, 
which  had  not,  at  that  time,  been  discovered.  A  reconsideration 
of  the  question  would  cause  us,  I  think,  to  come  to  the  conclusion 
that  skulls  which  are  attributable  to  the  Stone  Age,  and  which 
have  been  taken  from  the  ruder  megalithic  structures  in  Ireland, 
would  exhibit  a  cephalic  index  of  probably  about  0743,  the  very 
same  as  that  at  which  Baron  Von  Diiben  arrived  in  the  case  of 

t  U.J.  A,,  vol.  vi.,  p.  38,  where  Mr.  Grattan  compares  eight  skulls  from  Mount  Wilson  with 
the  Ballynahatty  ones.  My  own  measurements  of  the  norvia  vcrticalis  of  these  two  skulls  respec- 
tively give  me  the  indices  0733  ^^^^1  0725. 


Anthropology  and  Ethnology.  987 

those  from  the  Swedish  Giants'  Graves.  We  must  bear  in  mind 
that  not  one  single  skull  has  yet  been  measured  which  has  actually 
been  taken  from  an  Irish  "Giant's  Grave,"  that  is  to  say,  from  one  of 
those  huge,  elongated  megalithic  structures  which  are  so  frequently 
found,  both  in  their  entirety  and  shorn  of  their  gallery  or  passage, 
in  which  latter  form  they  are  known  to  early  archaeologists  as 
cromlechs,  and  to  later  ones  as  dolmens. 

In  a  great  sepulchral  mound  near  Donnybrook  in  the  county 
of  Dublin,  Dr.  Frazer  discovered  and  has  described  a  vast  number 
of  skulls,  some  of  which  are  attributable  to  survival  of  the  type  of 
which  we  are  speaking,  among  the  native  Irish  who  were  living  at 
the  time  of  the  Danish  invasions  in  the  ninth  century.  There 
was  every  appearance  that  a  massacre  had  taken  place  around 
the  body  of  a  chief  of  the  invaders,  a  brachycephalic  Dane  (ceph. 
index  833),  who  had  been  interred,  as  Dr.  Frazer  found  reason  to 
suppose,  with  his  iron  sword  and  spear  beside  him.  The  bones 
of  some  six  or  seven  hundred  human  beings  lay  around  him,  and 
there  were  evidences  that  their  deaths  had  been  the  result  of 
violence,  a  feast  having  also  taken  place  on  the  spot.  The  remains 
included  those  of  males  and  females,  young,  old,  and  middle-aged 
— those  of  children  being  especially  plentiful — even  the  child 
unborn  being  represented — the  strong  and  the  weak,  the  diseased 
and  the  healthy,  the  abnormal  and  the  normal,  the  idiot  and  the 
sound  in  mind. 

In  some  of  the  various  cranial  types  Dr.  Frazer  recognizes  the 
survival  of  the  Long-Barrow  type.  "  Cranium  No.  44,"  he  says, 
""  affords  us  an  index  as  low  as  704.  This  is  an  exceptionally  low 
result,  for  the  skull  of  the  average  Australian  savage  reaches  71*49, 
and  even  the  Hottentot  amounts  to  72*42.  This  cranium  will 
agree  in  measurement  and  shape  with  those  long  and  narrow  skulls 
that  are  found  in  Long  Barrows."  "No.  21,"  he  proceeds,  "a 
mesaticephalic  skull,  is  found  to  possess  an  index  of  0*754,  corre- 
sponding with  the  skulls  of  the  '  dolmen-builders '  and  that  of  the 
Ancient  Egyptians.  It  also  corresponds  exactly  with  the  index 
ascribed  by  Drs.  Thurnam  and  Davis  to  the  ancient  Irish  skull." 
Dr.  Frazer  believes  that  this  is  a  typical  Irish  cranium.  Speaking 
of  the  brachycephalic  skull,  which  he  believes  to  be  that  of  the 
slain  chieftain,  he  says :  "  It  is  a  good  specimen  of  a  brachy- 
cephalic skull,  and  it  corresponds  in  its  measurements  with  the 
skulls  belonging  to  the  Croat,  to  different  German  tribes,  and  to 


988  The  Dolmens  of  Ireland. 

the  Finlander.  I  believe  its  original  possessor  was  one  of  the 
mixed  people  who  originally  came  from  the  shores  of  the  Baltic, 
and  whom  we  know  in  Irish  history  as  Pirate  or  Black 
Danes." 

"  So  far  as  the  general  facies  is  concerned,  I  think  we  may 
safely  recognize  two  different  and  distinct  types.  One  of  these  is 
straight-faced  or  orthognathous  ;  the  other  possesses  a  projecting 
jaw,  which  produces  a  prognathous  appearance.  .  .  .  Some  have 
intermediate  features,  .  .  .  Amongst  those  skulls  I  think  we  can 
recognize  some  which  fall  under  the  Scandinavian  type  of 
Thurnam  and  Davis,  and  that,  therefore,  will  correspond  with 
numerous  examples  of  people  still  existing  in  our  land,  in  Scotland, 
and  in  the  maritime  districts  of  the  East  of  England,  where  Danish 
settlers  planted  their  numerous  colonies.  *  The  skull,'  they  tell  us, 
'  is  small  and  regular,  has  a  long,  slender,  elevated  aquiline  nose, 
closely  corresponding  with  a  form  which  prevails  in  the  northern 
counties  of  England,  where  Scandinavian  blood  predominates.  A 
narrow,  long,  orthognathous  face,  an  upright  square  forehead,  yet 
neither  decidedly  broad  nor  high,  having  a  frontal  suture,  a  long 
oval  outline  in  the  vertical  aspect,  with  distinct  parietal  tubers,  a 
globose  tumidness  in  the  supra-occipital  region,  and  a  large  foramen 
magnum.' 

"  The  lower  jaw  belonging  to  this  class  of  skull  is  distinguished 
by  its  massive  structure,  square  outline,  and  strong,  everted 
angles.  The  lines  for  muscular  attachment  are  always  promi- 
nently developed ;  the  chin  square-shaped,  projecting,  and 
forming  a  predominating  feature,  whilst  the  glossal  tubercles  are 
unusually  developed,  becoming  in  some  even  long  bony  growths. 

"  The  second  variety  of  skull  is  small,  of  mesaticephalic  form, 
and  of  neat  outline  ;  but  it  presents  a  prominent,  prognathous 
upper  jaw,  which  gives  it  a  very  peculiar  and  distinctive  appear- 
ance. The  nose  is  short,  wide,  and  often  turned  up,  with 
depressed  bridge.  The  lower  jaw  is  softer  in  outline,  less 
massive,  rounded,  and  does  not  possess  the  harsh  shape  and 
strong  markings  of  the  Scandinavian  type.  The  chin  is  little, 
if  at  all,  prominent,  and  the  appearance  of  the  face  is  such  as 
we  have  numerous  examples  of  still  in  the  South  and  West  of 
Ireland,  especially  in  inland  districts,  where  the  type  may  be 
supposed  to  have  remained  free  from  intermixture  with  Danish 
blood."     "  I  believe,"  concludes  Dr.  Frazer,  "  this  form  of  skull 


Anthropology  and  Ethnology.  989 

represents  a  race  that  inhabited  this  country  from  a  much  earher 
date  than  our  Danish  colonists." 

We  have,  therefore,  three  racial  types  represented  in  this 
mound  :  (i)  that  of  the  brachycephalic  Dane  ;  (2)  that  of  the 
dolichocephalic  Scandinavian  ;  (3)  that  of  the  native  popula.ion 
already  on  the  spot — a  mixture,  perhaps,  since  its  cephalic  index 
was  075,  or  over,  between  an  earlier  race  of  brachycephalic 
colonists,  and  an  original  race  of  dolichocephali  represented  by 
the  Trillick  skull  and  its  survival  in  No.  44  above  mentioned. 

It  is  very  interesting  to  notice  that  from  this  Donnybrook 
mound  other  possible  evidences  are  producible  which  may  connect 
one  of  the  races  there  represented  with  the  Long-Barrow,  Caverne 
de  r Homme  Mort  and  Cro-Magnon  type.  "  Platycnemic  tibiae 
were  found  to  be  very  numerous.  Tibiae  of  this  character," 
observes  Dr.  Frazer,  "  are  ascertained  to  be  of  frequent  occur- 
rence in  French  and  English  graveyards,  referable  to  dates  from 
the  fourth  to  the  tenth  century.  Their  presence  and  frequency  in 
the  Donnybrook  find  affords  us  strong  additional  corroboration  as 
to  the  early  date  to  which  they  must  be  ascribed."  First  observed 
at  Cro-Magnon,  "  they  are  noticed  extending  through  the  ages 
when  polished-stone  weapons  were  employed,  and  out  of  two 
hundred  tibiae  collected  near  Paris,  at  St.  Marcel  and  St.  Germain 
des  Pres,  in  cemeteries  belonging  to  dates  anterior  to  the  tenth 
century,  5*25  per  cent,  were  of  this  platycnemic  form. 

"With  the  platycnemic  tibiae  were  found  'channelled  fibulae,' 
having  inordinately  large  longitudinal  grooves  for  the  insertion  of 
the  muscles.  Another  osseous  peculiarity  of  primitive  type,  the 
femur  a  colonne,  was  of  rather  common  occurrence.  .  .  .  Such 
femurs  are  also  found  in  the  Cro-Magnon  cave-dwellers ;  and  in 
the  cemeteries  near  Paris  already  mentioned,  it  was  ascertained 
that  out  of  two  hundred  femurs,  in  6*5  per  cent.,  the  column  was 
very  obvious,  and  in  36  per  cent,  was  slightly  seen.  M.  Topinard 
says  :  '  It  seems  that  these  peculiarities  of  the  tibae,  femora,  and 
fibulae  belonged  to  one  and  the  same  race  in  Western  Europe. 
The  thirty  subjects  from  the  cave  at  Sordes  in  the  Basque 
territory  all  exhibit  them.'  " 

It  appears  from  the  vertebrae  and  other  bones  of  one  of  the 
persons  whose  remains  were  found  in  this  mound  that  great  size, 
though  probably  rare,  was  not  unknown.f 

t  Proc.  R.I.A.,  paper  by  Dr.  Frazer,  read  Nov.  loth,  1879 ;  see  also  Proc.  R.LA.,  and 
ser.,  vol.  ii.  ("  Pol.  Lit.  and  Antiq."),  No.  4,  April,  1882  ;  also  "  Description  of  Different  Varieties 
ot  Human  Remains  found  near  Donnybrook,"  London  (1880),  by  Dr.  Frazer. 


990 


The  Dolmens  of  Ireland. 


Another  instance  of  the  occurrence  of  the  peculiarities  known 
as  \kiQ:  platycnemic  tibia,  2^\AfemiLr  a  coloujic,  can  be  quoted  from 
the  analysis  made  by  Dr.  A.  W.  Foot  of  osseous  remains  taken 
from  a  monument  of  the  megalithic  class,  which  may  be  described 
as  a  cluster  of  "  Giants'  Graves,"  in  the  Deer  Park,  near  Sligo. 
An  excavation  made  among  these  stones  revealed,  among  a 
quantity  of  osseous  matter,  "  a  portion  of  an  adult  (male)  sacrum, 
some  bones  of  a  child,  evidences  of  two  other  individuals  besides 
the  child,  probably  of  different  sexes,  a  fragment  of  a  platycneinic 
tibia,  and  of  2i  pilasteric  femur — in  other  words,"  says  Dr.  Foot, 
"pieces  of  very  strong  bones  of  an  ancient  race."  With  these 
occurred  also  remains  of  deer  and  shells  from  the  seashore. f 

In  a  table  of  measurements  of  crania  given  by  Mr.  Grattan,J 
eight  skulls  from  a  large  sepulchral  site  at  Mount  Wilson  in  the 
King's  County,  are  compared  with  the  two  above  described  from 
Ballynahatty.  The  cephalic  indices  of  the  Mount  Wilson 
examples  are:  two,  075;  five,  077;  and  one,  o-8i.  Of  one 
of  the  latter,  however,  we  are  told  that  it  so  closely  approaches  in 
type  a  skull  from  Donaghmore  Round  Tower  (with  a  cephalic  index 
of  o"83)  as  to  lead  to  the  conclusion  that,  at  the  date  of  the  Mount 
Wilson  interments,  the  race  to  which  the  latter  belonged  had  not 


Fig.  749.— Skull  from  Mount  Wilson  (No.  2).     Fiom  the  ''Ulster  Joitrnal  of  Archeology.'' 

become  extinct  altogether,  but  continued  to  linger  amongst,  and 
perhaps  to  modify,  the  more  numerous  population  which  sur- 
rounded it.  In  this  Mount  Wilson  Mound  at  least  forty  persons 
had  been  buried.  The  graves  lay  parallel  to  each  other,  and  the 
feet  were  towards  the  east.  The  diameter  of  the  mound  was 
90  feet.     Nothing  was  found  by  which  to  identify  its  date.     The 


t  See  p.  138  supra. 


\  UJ.A.,  vol.  vi.  pp.  38,  39  (1858). 


Anthropology  and  Ethnology.  99 1 


individuals  were  of  both  sexes,  and  of  ages  varying  from  six  or 
eight  years  up  to  seventy  or  eighty.  Three  fragments  of  javvs 
of  the  lower  animals  were  found — those,  namely,  of  a  small  ox, 
a  boar,  and  a  goat.f  One  of  the  skulls  which  Mr.  Grattan  has 
designated  "  truly  a  noble  skull,"  is  figured  by  him  in  the  "  Ulster 
Journal  of  Archaeology."  J     Its  cephalic  index  is  077. 

Among  the  group  of  crania  which  he  calls  "  primeval,"  Mr. 
Grattan  mentions  a  skull  from  a  "railway  cutting  "—(locality 
not  stated) — with  a  cephalic  index  of  075.  Another,  with  the 
same  index,  is  that  from  Clones,  which  he  places  in  the  same 
group  with  the  Mount  Wilson  skulls.  The  circumstances  under 
which  this  was  found  are  worthy  of  note. 

One  of  the  many  theories  put  forward  to  account  for  the  Round 
Towers  of  Ireland  was  that  they  were  monumental.  Examina- 
tions with  a  view  to  test  this  hypothesis  were  set  on  foot  by  the 
South  Munster  Antiquarian  Society,  and  the  towers  of  Ardmore, 
Cashel,  Cloyne,  Kinneigh,  Roscrea,  and  Brechin  in  Scotland, 
were  explored.  In  some  of  these  human  remains  were  found, 
but  no  crania  preserved,  and  no  certainty  arrived  at  as  to  whether 
the  remains  had  been  deposited  prior  or  subsequent  to  the 
erection  of  the  tower. 

Mr.  Edmund  Getty,  accompanied  by  Mr.  Grattan,  determined, 
in  1841,  to  set  this  question  at  rest,  if  possible,  by  exploring 
certain  towers  as  yet  unexamined,  and,  commencing  with  that  of 
Drumbo,§  in  the  county  of  Down,  discovered  a  brachycephalic 
cranium,  to  which  I  will  subsequently  allude.  The  number  of 
tolerably  perfect  skulls  derived  from  these  researches  was  seven  ; 
namely,  one  from  Drumbo,  four  from  Clones,  one  from  Drumlane, 
and  one  from  Armoy.  Three  other  skulls  are  to  be  added  to 
this  list :  one  from  St.  Molaise's  house,  or  chapel,  at  Devenish ;  a 
second  from  within  the  old  cathedral  walls  of  Downpatrick,  and 
a  third,  that  of  Donatus,  or  Dunan,  the  first  Danish  Bishop  of 
Dublin,  who  died  in  1074.  Of  these,  those  from  Drumbo, 
Devenish,  Downpatrick,  and  that  of  Donatus  are  markedly 
brachycephalic  (respectively  0-83,  0-83,  0*83,  and  0-84),  while  that 
from  Drumlane  is  even  more  markedly  dolichocephalic,  giving  an 
index  of  0-67.  The  indices  from  Clones  and  Armoy  are  respec- 
tively 075  (extremes  077  and  074)  and  077.  Of  the  examples 
from  Clones  "  Round  Tower  "  there  were  six  in  all,  and  they  lay 

t  U.J.A.,  vol.  i.  p.  276,  €t  seqq.  %  Id.,  vol.  vi.  pi.  i.,  No.  2.  §  Id.,  vol.  iii.  p.  113. 


992 


The  Dolmens  of  Ireland. 


within  the  circular  area  formed  by  the  walls  of  the  tower,  on  a 
level  with  the  lowest  offset  of  its  foundations,  beneath  two  artificial 


Fig.  750. — Plan  and  section  of  Clones  Round  Tower.     From  the  "  Ulster  Journal  of  Archaology.'' 

floors,  the  upper  one  formed  of  puddled  clay,  and  the  under  one 


Fig.  751. — Skull  from  the  Round  Tower  at  Clones.     Fi-oni  the  *'  Ulster  Journal  of  Archa:oIogy.  " 

of  a  thin  coat  of  lime.     One  skull  was  that  of  a  child  ;  the  others 
those  of  adults.     Four  skulls  without  bodies  lay  near  together,  and 


Anthropology  and  Ethnology. 


99, 


only  in  one  case  did  it  appear  that  a  body  had  been  buried  entire. 
The  position  in  which  some  of  the  bones  were  found  indicated 
that  they  had  been  placed  there  during  the  building  of  the  founda- 
tion outsets.  With  the  four  skulls,  and  interred  contempo- 
raneously, was  a  portion  of  the  jaw  of  a  pig.  The  question 
naturally  arises  as  to  the  date  of  the  tower.  According  to  the 
"Annals  of  Ulster,"  a  monastery  was  founded  here  by  St.  Tigher- 
nach,  who  died  in  548.  The  building  presents  architectural 
features — such  as  spawled  masonry,  with  large  hammered  stones, 
and  a  rectangular  doorway,  covered  with  a  flat  lintel,  formed  by  a 
single  large  stone — which  are  considered  indicative  of  an  early 
stage  of  Round-Tower  building.  Mr.  Grattan  proposes  to  date  it 
from  the  close  of  the  fifth  to  the  commencement  of  the  sixth 
century,  in  which  case  the  skulls  present  to  us  those  of  Christians 
in  Ireland  at  that  date.     To  the  Drumbo  tower  a  like  antiquity  is 


Fig.  752. — Skull  from  Armoy,     From  the  "  Ulster  Journal  of  Arcluvology.^'' 

accorded  by  Mr.  Grattan,  the  difference  in  skull-measurement, 
however,  being  sufficiently  great  to  indicate  a  total  difference 
in  racial  type. 

The  skull  from  the  Round  Tower  at  Armoy,  near  Ballycastle, 
county  Antrim,  also  dolichocephalic  (index  077),  was  found 
embedded  in  stiff  clay,  and  was  contained  in  a  hollow  space  or 
niche  in  the  wall  of  the  structure  near  the  foundation.  Only  the 
skull  and  three  cervical  vertebrae  had  been  deposited  here,  so 
that  the  idea  was  formed  that  the  body  had  been  decapitated. 

The  Round -Tower  skull  with  the  lowest  cephalic  index  was 
that  from  Drumlune,  which  Mr.  Grattan  gives  as  0-675,  a  measure- 
ment which  we  may  compare  with  that  of  the  old  Norse  skulls  of 
the  Iron  Age  in  the  Copenhagen  Museum  described  by  Virchow, 
as  well  as  those  few  very  markedly  dolichocephalic  skulls  found 
occasionally  in  barrows  of  round  form  and  of  the  late  Bronze  or 
Iron  Age  in  Britain,  which  Rolleston  compares  with  examples  of 
the  Hohberg  type. 


994 


The  Dolmens  of  Ireland. 


As  to  other  dolichocephalic  skulls  mentioned  in  Mr.  Grattan's 
list,  the  following  are  the  cephalic  indices  : — 


From  Euttevant  ... 

From  Old  Castle,  Belfast 
Reputed  to  be  that  of  Carolan 

From  Aghadoe 

F"rom  the  County  Wicklow 
From  Arran 
From  Armagh    ... 
From  Belfast 
From  Buttevant 
From  Cashel 
From  Arran 
From  Aghadoe  ... 
From  Iniskeen  ... 
From  Iniskeen  ... 
From  Buttevant 
From  Iniskeen    ... 


0"69  (lowest  out  of  50;  highest,  o'8i) 

072 

072 

072  (lowest  of  3  ;  highest,  076) 

073 

074 

074  (lowest  of  5  ;  highest,  O'Si) 

074 

074  (lowest  of  7  ;  highest,  078) 

075 

07s 

076 

076  (lowest  of  3  ;  highest,  079) 

077 

078 

079 


The  average  index  of  eight  skulls  from  Mount  Wilson  was,  as 
we  have  seen,  077,  ranging  from  0*81  to  073.  Dr.  Frazer  has 
placed  on  record  the  discovery  of  a  skeleton  remarkable  for  its 
height,  namely,  6  feet  4  ins.,  which  had  a  cephalic  index  of  0775, 
and  was  contained  in  one  of  several  graves,  the  age  of  which  is, 
he  tells  us,  uncertain.  Their  sides  were  formed  of  boulders  ;  they 
were  covered  by  flat  slabs  in  the  shape  of  coffins,  and  measured 
from  4  feet  9  ins.  to  7  feet  long. 

It  is  clearly  the  dolichocephalic  element  w^hich,  from  the 
remotest  periods  onwards,  has  been  that  which  has  characterized 
Irish  crania,  whether  that  element  be  derivable  from  the  one  class 
of  dolichocephaly  we  have  been  considering,  or  from  the  other,  or 
from  the  intermingling  of  the  two,  with  a  certain  broadening  as 
the  result  of  brachycephalic  intrusion  on  the  types. 

We  must  not  press  this  side  of  the  question  further  into  modern 
times,  or  consider  the  opinions  of  Dr.  Beddoe,  or  Prof.  Huxley, 
or  Dr.  Barnard  Davis  on  the  subject  of  the  modern  Irish  type, 
without  first  going  back  to  remote  ages,  and  bringing  up  to  date 
that  evidence  we  possess  of  the  presence  of  brachycephaly  in  the 
island. 

"As  the  evidence  at  present  stands,"  says  Huxley,  "  I  am  dis- 
posed to  identify  the  ancient  population  of  Ireland  with  the  '  Long- 
Barrow  '  and  *  River-Bed'  elements  of  the  population  of  England, 
and  with  the  long-headed  or  '  cumbe-cephalic '  inhabitants  of 
Scotland,  and  to  believe  that  the  '  Round- Barrow,'  or  Belgic 
element  of  the  Britannic  people  never  colonized  Ireland  in  sufficient 
numbers  to  make  its  presence  ethnically  felt."  f 

t  "Prehist.  Remains  of  Caithness,"  p.  128. 


Anthropology  and  Ethnology.  995 

Brachycephalic  Type. 

In  order  to  understand  the  bearing  of  the  last  remark,  and  to 
judge  of  the  amount  of  truth  it  contains,  it  is  necessary  to  retrace 
our  steps  to  the  NeoHthic  Age  on  the  continent  of  Europe.  We 
have  seen  that  the  doHchocephali  surrounded  the  coasts  of  Europe 
on  the  south,  west,  and  north  somewhat  in  horseshoe  form.  On  the 
east  lay  the  open  side  of  the  figure,  and  from  that  quarter  a  race  of 
distinctly  different  type,  namely,  a  markedly  brachycephalic  type, 
seems  to  have  poured  itself  into  the  very  heart  of  France,  leaving 
its  representatives  in  caves  natural  and  artificial,  and  in  dolmens, 
and  again  in  survival  in  the  short,  dark,  and  equally  marked 
brachycephalic  type  of  the  Auvergnats,  whose  skull-measurement 
actually  equals  that  of  the  Lapps  beyond  the  Scandinavian 
doHchocephali  in  the  extreme  north  of  Europe.  It  was  at  one 
time  held  by  anthropologists  that  this  brachycephalic  race 
preceded  the  doHchocephali  of  the  Cro-Magnon  type  throughout 
Western  Europe  in  general,  but  that  view  was  abandoned 
owing  to  the  discovery  that  that  infallible  ethnic  gauge,  the 
river-bed  stratification  of  the  Seine,  showed  that  these  brachy- 
cephalic skulls  were  contained  in  beds  superimposed  on  those 
containing  skulls  of  the  Cro-Magnon  type,  just  as  the  latter  had 
been  found  in  a  stratum  superimposed  upon  that  containing  skulls 
of  the  Canstadt  type. 

The  skulls  of  this  brachycephalic  type  from  Crenelle  show 
cephalic  indices  of  83"53  for  men, 
and  of  83*68  for  women.f  This, 
however,  by  no  means  represents 
the  highest  index  to  which  brachy- 
cephaly  in  its  purity,  whether  con- 
sidered in  archaic  times  or  in  sur- 
vival, attained.  A  skull  from  the 
Trou-Rosette  in  the  Valley  of  the 
Lesse  in  Belgium  gives  an  index 
of  o"86.|  This  index  represents 
the  mean  averap-e  index  or  there-    F'g.  753.— The  Disemis  skuii.   from  the 

"=>  .  ^' Crania  Helvetica." 

abouts     of    the    Rhoetian     skulls, 

known    to    anthropologists    as    the    Disentis    type.§       Retzius, 

t  "Crania  Ethnica,"  p.  125. 

X  M.  Ed.  Dupont,  "  I'Ethnographie  de  THomme  de  I'Age  du  Renne  dans  la  Vallee  de  la  Lesse  " 
(Congres.  internal,  de  Anth.  et  d'Archeol.  Brussels,  1872),  pp.  559,  560. 
§  "Crania  Helvetica,"  His  and  Ruetimaer,  p.  29,  and  plate  E.  1. 


996 


The  Dolmens  of  Ireland. 


comparing  these  skulls  with  those  of  the  brachycephalic  Basques 
on  the  one  hand,  and  of  the  Finns  or,  rather,  Lapps  on  the 
other,  regarded  them  en  masse  as  the  aboriginal  European  type 
before   the   entrance   of  a   dolichocephalic   race    at    all,    a   view 


Fig.  754. — The  Disentis  skull.     From  the  "  Crania  Helvetica." 

which,  as  we  have  pointed  out,  was  overthrown  by  the  discovery 
of  the  brachycephalic  crania  in  the  Crenelle  beds,  A  point,  with 
regard  to  the  Rhoetian  skulls,  which  we  consider  of  far  greater 
importance  to  our  present  inquiry,  is  that,  although  Retzius  was 
not  in  the  right  in  considering  the  Etruscan  type  as  brachycephalic, 
yet  ]\I.  von  Baerf  has  pointed  out  that  between  the  skulls  of 
these  brachycephalic  Rhoetians  and  the  Etruscan  ones  there  are 
resemblances  which  cannot  be  ignored.  These  resemblances 
become  of  very  great  interest  when  we  supplement  them  by 
comparisons  derived  from  archaeology.  Nowhere  is  sepulchral 
pottery  found  which  both  in  texture  and  pattern  bears  so  marked 
a  resemblance  to  the  British  and  Irish  sepulchral  pottery,  the 
drinking-cups  and  bowls  found  in  cists  with  brachycephalic 
skeletons,  as  that  found  in  cists  in  the  Alps.J  Again,  to  the 
brachycephalic   people  of  the   British   Round  Barrows  has   been 

t  ''Melanges  biologiques  du  Bulletin  de  I'Acad.  imp.  de  St.  Petersbourg,"  vol.  iii.  p.  272. 
%  See  "La  France  Prchistorique,"  by  M.  Fmile  Cartailhac,  Paris,  1889,  pp.  261,  262,   from 
which  a  specimen  is  hgured  above  (Fig.  622). 


Anthropology  and  Ethnology 


997 


attributed  the  "  bringing  of  the  bronze,"  and  it  is  to  Etruria  that 
M.  MonteHus  would  have  us  look  for  its  earliest  source  in  the 
riveted  daggers,  fibulae,  etc.,  which  bear  so  evident  a  likeness, 
implying  affinity,  to  those  found  in  Northern  Germany,  Scandi- 
navia, and  the  British  Isles. 

It  is  remarkable  that  in  Germany  there  are  cists,  the  con- 
struction of  which,  even  in  peculiarities  of  detail,  as  well  as  in  the 
mode  of  burial — in  a  crouching  posture,  with  a  vase  beside  the 
corpse, — have  their  counterpart,  as  we  have  seen,  in  Ireland.  It  is 
in  Wurtemburg,  too,  be  it  remembered,  that  Dr.  Holder  finds  in 
modern  times  his  so-called  Ligurian  type,f  which  is  more  or  less 


Fig.  755. — Skull  from  Altensteig,  Schwarzwald.     From  '^  A7xhives  fiir  Anthropologie,^' 

Bruiisivick,  1867. 

mixed  with   German  elements,  and  in  which   the  indices   range 
between  0*84  and  0*90  ;  mean,  o"86  (Fig.  755). 

I  may  here  mention,  however,  that  as  far  as  the  insular 
brachycephali  of  Great  Britain  and  Ireland  are  concerned,  I  believe 
we  should  differentiate  those  of  purer  stock  and  earlier  arrival 
from  those  of  stock  less  pure  and  later  arrival.  To  the  latter 
belong,  as  it  seems  to  me,  such  skulls  as  resemble  the  Borreby 
one,  and  those  of  the  Hohberg  type,  and  to  the  former  certain 
very  brachycephalic  skulls,  examples  of  which  have  been  found  in 
cists  in  Ireland  exactly  resembling  the  German  ones  of  which  I 
have  spoken.  My  view  on  this  point  may  receive  some  little 
encouragement  from  the  fact  that  the  sepulchral  vessels  which 
accompany  the  Irish  interments  are  not  of  the  same  class  as  those 
which  are  found  in  the  cists  of  British  Round  Barrows,  except  in 
very  rare  instances.     They  are  bowls,  not  cups. 

t  "  Archiv.  fiir  Anthrop. ,"  vol.  ii.  p.  55,  1867,  and  illustrations,  p.  54.  He  refers  to  Nicolucci, 
"  Le  Stirpe  Ligure  in  Italia,"  Napoli,  1864.  See  also  "Alii  della  R.  Accademia  delle  Scienze  fisiche 
e  matematiche "  (G.  Nicolucci,  "  Anthropologia  dell'  Italia"),  vol.  ii.  ser.  ii.,  No.  9,  1888,  p.  4. 


998  The  Dolmens  of  Ireland. 

In  fact,  the  British  brachycephaH  resemble,  as  Prof.  Buskf 
has  pointed  out,  the  NeoHthic  inhabitants  of  Denmark  ;  and  this 
resemblance  is  closer  than  that  which  they  bear  either  to  the 
ancient  Rhoetians  or  the  modern  European  brachycephali  in  the 
Grisons,  or  in  Auvergne,  or  in  the  Pyrenees,  or  in  Lapland,J 
while  in  Ireland  it  seems  just  possible  that  we  can  gather  up 
traces  of  a  race  which  recalls  rather  the  characteristics  of  the 
latter  than  of  the  former  type. 

How  far  we  should  be  justified  in  tracing  the  intrusive 
Mongolic  type  into  its  far-off  home  in  Asia  is  a  question  which  is 
beyond  our  scope.  M.  Pruner  Bey  has  compared  an  archaic  and 
peculiar  type  of  brachycephalic  skull  found  in  the  bank  of  the 
Seille  at  La  Trachere  in  Saone  et  Loire  with  a  type  of  which 
the  ancient  Tchoudis  were  the  representatives,  but  the  justice  of 
the  comparison  has  been  disputed,  and  the  French  example  seems 
to  be  unique  in  type.§  With  the  skulls  from  Crenelle  the  editors 
of  the  "Crania  Ethnica"  compare  an  example  from  Nagy-Sap  in 
Hungary  with  a  cephalic  index  of  84*72. || 

In  the  Valley  of  the  Lesse  in  Belgium,  which  furnished  us 
with  the  high  index  from  the  Trou-Rosette,  we  mark  the  meeting 
of  the  races  as  they  converge  towards  the  west.  At  Furfooz  the 
indices  are  registered  as  81 '39  and  79*31  ;  at  Solutre  at  80*89,  and 
83*23  for  men,  and  at  79*44  for  a  woman. ^  In  the  dolmens  of 
France,  the  south  especially,  the  type  is  frequent,  both  with  a 
high  average  in  itself,  and  in  company  with  dolichocephalic  and 
orthocephalic  skulls,  the  latter  of  which  it  probably  assisted  in 
forming.  Examples  are  adduced  in  the  "Crania  Ethnica"  from 
the  Allde  couverte  of  Marly-le-Roi,  from  the  megalith  called  the 
Pierre  qui  tottrne  in  the  Forct  de  Compicgne,^  and  elsewhere. 
Examples  of  the  occurrence  side  by  side  of  dolichocephalic  with 
brachycephalic  crania  occurred  in  the  dolmen  of  Meudon — the 
round  one  that  of  a  man — the  long  one  that  of  a  woman.  JJ 

With  the  examples  from  Marly-le-Roi  and  La  Pierre-qui- 
tourne  are  to  be  compared  the  skulls  given  by  Retzius  from  the 
island  of  Moen,  with  one  of  which  latter  that  of  Marly-le-Roi 
agrees  exactly  in  measurement,§§  proving  that  at  one  time,  alike 

t  "Journ.  Ethnological  Society,"  1871,  p.  46S. 
+  Prof.  Rolleston,  in  Grecnwell's  "  British  Harrows,"  pp.  5SS,  589. 
§  "  Crania  Ethnica,"  pp.  127,  128,  145,  146. 

11  Id.,  p.  125.  ^  Id.,  p.  119.  tt  Id.,  p.  145- 

XX  "Crania  Ethnica,"  p.  135  ;  "Acad,  des  Sciences,"  Compt.  rend.,  vol.  xxi.,  1845,  p.  618. 
§§  A.  Retzius,   "  Ucber  Schadel  der  iiltesten   Bewohner   Frankreichs "    ("Ethnol.  Schrift.," 
pp.  62-64). 


Anthropology  and  Ethnology. 


999 


in  France  and  in  Denmark,  the  race  was  present  in  its  most 
marked  development.  Of  the  Danish  examples  may  be  cited 
those  from  the  steenkammcr  of  Oroe  Grydehoi,  and  from  Stege  in 
Moen,  which  latter  MM.  Steenstrup,  Eschricht,  and  Van  der 
Hoeven  regarded  as  Lappish,  while  M.  Worsaae  differed.f 
Lastly,  turning  to  Britain,  we  reproduce  the  profile  and  the  norma 
verticalis  of  a  skull  from  a  Round  Barrow  at  Stonehenee,  which  is 


Fig.  756. — Skull  from  Stonehenge.     Front  the  "  Crania  Ethnica." 

one  of  those  examples  in  Britain  which  recalls  the  Disentis  rather 
than  the  Hohberg  type. 

By  far  the  most  remarkable  of  all  the  instances  of  the  juxta- 
position and  intermingling  of  the  two  diverse  types  in  the  Neolithic 
Age  is  that  with  which  the  explorations  of  the  Baron  de  Baye  J 
have  furnished  us  from  the  artificial  cases  in  the  Valley  of  the 
Marne.  To  these  singular  sepulchres  hewn  out  of  the  rock  I 
have  already  referred  at  length  when  tracing  the  various  stages  of 
culture  through  which  those  people  passed  who  eventually  raised 
the  surface  structures  known  as  the  dolmens.  Suffice  it  here  to 
say  that  while,  out  of  44  skulls  there  disinterred,  the  brachycephalic 
index  reaches  a  maximum  of  8571,  the  dolichocephalic  index  on 
the  other  reaches  a  minimum  of  71 '69.  They  were  distributed  as 
follows,  according  to  the  classification  adopted  by  Baron  de 
Baye : — 

Brachycephalic,  ?>y^T,  and  over 
Sub-brachycephalic,  83"32  to  80 
Mesaticephalic,  79'99  to  7777 

Sub-dolichocephalic,  7776  to  o'75      12 

Dolichocephalic,  075  and  below  10 

44 

t  Eschricht,  "Danske  Folkeblad,"  1S37  ;  Van  der  Hoeven,  "Cat.  Craniorum  divers,  gentium,"' 
Lug.  Bat.,  i860,  p.  63;  Lubbock,  "  Prehist.  Times,"  1865,  p.  117. 
X  "Crania  Ethnica,"  p.  144. 


looo  The  Dolmens  of  Ireland. 

Here  there  is  no  room  to  doubt  that  the  two  races  were  living 
tosj'ether,  as  they  had  been  for  some  time,  as  we  may  judge  by  the 
large  proportion  of  mixed  indices,  intermingling  also  such  primitive 
systems  of  culture  as  they  had  respectively  acquired,  as  evidenced 
in  their  modes  of  burial,  and  in  the  articles,  such  as  polished-stone 
axes,  flint  and  bone  implements,  rude  pottery,  etc.,  which  accom- 
panied their  remains,  and  which  indicate  incontestibly  the  epoch 
to  which  they  belong,  which  was  the  Neolithic,  midway  between 
that  of  the  men  of  the  Caverne  de  I'Homme  Mort  and  that  of  the 
dolmen-builders.  Unlike  the  type  which  seems  to  have  resulted 
from  an  intermixture  of  the  brachycephali  with  the  tall  Scan- 
dinavians, and  to  which  we  shall  next  proceed  to  allude,  the  men 
of  the  Marne  caves  seem  to  have  been  short  in  stature,  a  cha- 
racteristic which  might  be  expected  from  a  coalition  between  the 
short  brachycephali  and  the  scarcely  taller  race  of  the  Caverne  de 
I'Homme  Mort. 

For  if  we  are  justified  in  supposing  that  this  brachycephalic 
race — call  it  Mongolian,  Turanian,  or  what  not — according  to  the 
authorities  we  follow — entered  Western  Europe  from  the  east 
and  north  at  a  period  subsequent  to  the  presence  there  of  the 
Canstadt,  Neanderthal,  Stangenas  type  on  the  one  hand,  and  the 
Cro-Magnon,  Caverne  de  I'Homme  Mort,  Long-Barrow  type  on 
the  other,  then  it  must  follow  that,  as  it  came  in  contact  with  each 
of  these  races  separately,  or  with  a  mixed  race,  which  may  already 
have  been  formed  by  their  coalition,  we  may  expect  to  find  new 
types  stamped,  on  the  one  hand,  by  the  influence  of  the  new- 
comers upon  those  already  on  the  spot,  and,  on  the  other  hand,  by 
that  which  the  native  element  would  impart  to  those  who  came 
among  them,  whether  in  war  or  peace.  Thus  the  tall  Canstadt 
race  would  give  height  and  strength  to  the  new-comer,  and  in  turn 
receive  from  him  a  broadening  of  the  skull  and  a  heightening  and 
developing  of  the  forehead.  The  men,  again,  of  the  Caverne  de 
I'Homme  Mort  and  their  weaker  insular  relatives  in  Britain  would 
have  their  crania  moulded  into  what  has  been  called  the  "  Dolmen- 
builders'  type,"  with  a  medium  index  of  about  075,  while  several 
of  their  characteristics,  such  as  have  been  noticed  in  the  tibia;  and 
femora,  would  be  gradually  modified  in  process  of  time,  though 
prone  to  recur  for  long  ages  after.  Finally,  there  might  be  examples 
where  the  two  primitive  dolichocephalic  races,  that  is  to  say,  the  tall 
Canstadt  man  and  the  Cro-Magnon  man,  having  already  combined, 


Anthropologv  and  Ethnology. 


ICO  I 


as  I  think  it  not  improbable  that  they  did  in  the  Orcadian 
islands,  for  example,  and  along  the  west  coast  of  Europe,  a  tall 
platycephalic  type  might  have  been  evolved,  such  as  was  that  of 
the  individual  whose  remains  were  found  among  those  of  the 
pigmies  in  the  dolmen  of  Bougon,  with  a  breadth  of  skull  (o'So), 
which  he  owed  to  an  intrusive  element,  already  present,  as  can  be 
shown,  early  in  the  Neolithic  Age  on  the  shores  of  the  Baltic. 

I  advert  to  a  cranial   type  in   Denmark,  which  we  may  well 
attribute    to    an    intermixture    of    intrusive    brachycephali    with 


Fig.  757. — Skull  associated  with  ground-flint  implements,  from  a  tumulus  at  Borreby,  in  Denmark, 
drawn  by  Mr.  G.  Busk,  F.R.S.  The  dark  line,  a,  b,  c,  d,  indicates  so  much  of  the  skull  as 
corresponds  with  the  fragment  of  the  Neanderthal  skull. 

the  platy-dolichocephalic  type  of  Stangenas,  Canstadt,  and 
Neanderthal.  In  a  memorandum  on  the  latter  skull,  most  famous 
from  the  controversies  to  which  it  gave  rise,  incorporated  in  Sir 
Charles  Lyell's  "Antiquity  of  Man,"  Prof.  Huxley  states  that  Mr. 
Busk  had  called  his  attention  to  a  cranium  taken  from  a  dolmen- 
tumulus  of  the  Neolithic  Age  at  Borreby,  in  the  island  of  Falster, 
in  Denmark.  Like  the  Neanderthal  skull,  it  possesses  "  remark- 
ably projecting  supraciliary  ridges,  a  retreating  forehead,  a  low, 
flattened  vertex,  and  an  occiput  which  shelves  upward  and  forward. 
VOL.   in.  u 


I002  The  Dolmens  of  Ireland. 

But  the  skull  is  relatively  higher  and  broader,  or  more  brachy- 
cephalic,  the  sagittal  suture  longer,  and  the  supraciliary  ridges 
less  projecting  than  in  the  Neanderthal  skull."  In  short,  it  is 
brachy-platycephalic.  "  Nevertheless,"  he  adds,  "  there  is  much 
resemblance  in  character  between  the  two  skulls,"  and  in  proof  of 
this  assertion  he  adds  a  profile,  which  we  reproduce,  the  dark  line 
in  which  shows  so  much  of  the  skull  as  corresponds  with  that  of 
Neanderthal. f  Differentiating  this  type,  as  Prof.  Huxley  does 
absolutely  from  that  of  the  Engis  skull,  it  remains  that  it  may  not 
unreasonably  be  looked  upon  as  a  mixed  form  between  that  of 
the  Canstadt  giant,  allied  to  the  Neanderthal  man,  and  whose 
Scandinavian  representative  is  the  Stangenas  individual,  and  a 
race  of  brachycephali  present  contemporaneously  with  him  on  the 
Baltic  shores  and  islands  in  the  Neolithic  Age. 

Another   skull    which,    as    it   seems,    we    may    place    in    this 
category,  was  found  by  Dr.  Lisch  at  Plau,  in  Mecklenburg,J  with 


-.,.>j-T-.'«-K-t;" 


-  -<,/' 


Fig.  758. — Skull  from  Plau,  Mccklcnbuii,^     J'lom  Professor  D,  Schaaffhaiise^is  paper, 
"  Ziir  Kenntniss  der  iiltesten  Rassettschiidel." 

a  cephalic  index  of  82*i4,§  and  was  regarded  by  him  as  indicating 
the  type  which  pertained  to  the  aborigines  of  that  country — prior 
even  to  the  constructors  of  the  Hlinenbedden,  the  huge  long 
megalithic  cists  or  dolmens,  of  which  there  are  so  many  examples 

t  "Antiquity  of  Man,"  by  Sir  C.  Lyell,  p.  91. 

+  "Jahrbiicher  des  Vereins  fiir  Mecklenburgische   Geschichtc  unci   Alterthumskunde,"    edit. 
G.  C.  F.  Lisch,  13d.  XIL,  Schwerin,  1847,  pp.  400,  401. 

§  According  to  the  computation  in  the  "  Crania  Ethnica,"  p.  143,  n. 


Anthropology  and  Ethnology. 


1003 


on  record  in  that  district.  The  skeleton  to  which  this  skull 
pertained  had  been  buried  in  the  ground  without  any  stone-setting 
around  it,  but  accompanied  by  broken  flints.  As  Mr.  Busk  had 
remarked  on  the  similarity  between  the  Borreby  and  Neanderthal 
skulls,  so  Prof.  Schaafhausen  compares  this  Plau  skull  with  the 
latter,  in  a  paper  to  which  he  appends  a  plate,  in  which  they  are 
set  side  by  side.f  The  likeness  in  profile  of  this  skull  to  the 
Neanderthal  is  striking,  although  it  is  shorter  in  comparison  to 
its  breadth.  He  instances  also  for  comparison  skulls  from 
Schwaan,  and  from  a  lower  stratum  in  the  Herberg,  both  in 
Mecklenburg,  and  one  from  Fehrbellin,  in  Brandenburg.     In  the 


Fig.  759. — The  Borreby  skull,     from  the  "  Crania  Ethnica." 

same  group  he  also  places  the  brachycephalic  skulls  from  the 
island  of  Moen,  which,  however,  as  we  have  seen,  the  editors  of 
the  "  Crania  Ethnica  "  prefer  to  compare  with  the  skulls  from  the 
valley  of  the  Seine,  at  Crenelle.  In  either  case,  with  whichever 
of  the  dolichocephalic  races  they  intermingled,  the  brachycephali 

t  "  Archiv  fur  Anatomic,"  etc.,  edit.  Dr.  Joh.  Miiller,  Berlin,  1858,  No.  S,  pp.  453-478,  and 
])1.  xvii. 


I004  Tpie  Dolmens  of  Ireland. 

in  their  purity  seem  to  have  been  originally  one  and  the  same  race 
from  Lapland  to  Italy,  and  from  Upper  Asia  to  the  Pyrenees.f 

To  return,  however,  to  the  Borreby  type,  from  which  the  pure 
type  vastly  differs,  I  may  mention  that,  while  some  of  the  skulls 
from  the  Round  Barrows  of  Britain,  as,  for  example,  that  from 
Stonehenge  J  (p.  999),  are  comparable  with  the  pure  type,  the 
Round- Barrow    type    proper,    as    exemplified    by   a   skull    from 


1 


M 


Fig.  760.— The  Borreby  Skull.     From  the  "  Crania  Ethnica." 

Ilderton  (Fig.  761),  is,  as  nearly  as  possible,  identical  with  that 
from  Borreby.  We  set  the  two  side  by  side.§  The  Borreby 
skull  was  found  in  a  dolmen-tumulus  with  flint  implements,  and 
its  cephalic  index  was  0*8 1  (?).||  The  Ilderton  skull  was  found 
in  a  stone  cist,  3  feet  long,  by  i  foot  10  ins.  wide,  and  18  ins. 
deep,  with  a  skeleton  doubled  up,  but  without  urn,  implement, 
or  weapon.     Its  cephalic  index  was  0*82  (Fig.  761). 

We  have  now  to  consider  how  far  any  of  these  types — that  is 

t  For  skulls  of  the  Auvergnats  and  Bas-Bretons,  see  M.  Broca,  "Revue  d'Anthropologie," 
vol,  ii.  plate  opposite  p.  628.  For  skulls  of  brachycephali,  orthognathous  as  the  Lapps,  Finns, 
Turks,  etc.,  and  prognathous  as  the  Chinese  Tartars— see  pi.  iii,  and  iv.  in  Anders  Retzius's 
"  Ethnologische  Schriften." 

X  "  Crania  Ethnica,"  p.  144. 

§  "Crania  Ethnica,"  pi.  Ixxx.,  Nos.  iii.  and  iv. 

II  I  am  not  quite  sure  of  this.  The  seven  widest  Borreby  skulls  measured  from  80-2  to  82-6,  and 
possibly  this  example  was  the  widest.     See  Vogt,  "  Lectures  on  Man,"  edit.  Hunt,  p.  385. 


Anthropology  and  Ethnology.  1005 

to  say,  the  more  purely  brachycephalic  (as  In  the  Ligurian),  the 
brachycephahc    in    conjunction    with    the    Candstadt    (as    in    the 


Fig.  761. — Skull  from  Ilderton.     From  GreemveU,  '■'■Nat.  Hist.  Soc.  NortJntinb,,  and Dur/iam 
and  Tyneside  Nat.  Field  Club,"  vol.  i.  1867,  pi.  xiii. 

Borreby),  or,  lastly,  the  brachycephalic  in  conjunction  with  the 
Western  dolichocephalic,  or  Long- Barrow  type — may  be  repre- 
sented in  the  crania  of  Ireland. 

We  will  take  first  of  all  four  examples  from  stone  cists.  In 
1852,  Mr.  Bell,  of  Dungannon,  exhibited  before  the  British 
Association,  at  their  meeting  at  Belfast,  a  skull  found  in  a  stone- 
cist  in  the  side  of  a  fort  or  "  mount,"  called  Shane-Maghery,  near 
Donaghmore.  The  chamber  is  described  as  small,  and  of  rectan- 
gular form,  and  was  covered  over  by  a  large  stone.  The  skeleton 
was  "in  a  sitting  posture,  with  the  head  leaning  to  one  side." 
An  ornamental  urn  lay  by  the  side  of  it,  but  there  were  no  imple- 
ments of  stone,  bone,  or  metal.  The  cephalic  index  was  0*83. 
It  is  important  to  find  that  Mr.  Grattan  differentiates  this  skull 
entirely  from  those  markedly  brachycephalic  ones,  usually  ascribed 
to  the  Danars,  or  Black  Danes,  of  the  historic  epoch.  He  finds 
in  it,  therefore,  the  evidence  of  the  presence  in  Ireland  of  another 
brachycephalic  race,  possessing  an  index  as  high  as  that  of  these 
Danars,  but  which  was  certainly  on  the  spot  ages  before  the 
Danars  arrived.     The  difference  in  the  skull  types  he  points  out 


ioo6 


The  Dolmens  of  Ireland. 


as  follows:  "Instead,"  he  says,  "of  the  temporal  region  being 
protuberant,"  as  was  the  case  with  the  Black  Danes,  "  the  parietal 
walls  of  the  Donaghmore  skull  are  flattened  and  perpendicular, 
whilst  its  vertical  elevation  is  very  considerable,  being  0*71  at 
90  degrees — the  average  being  only  about  0"66 — this  superiority, 

moreover,  being  maintained 
throughout,  from  20  to  120 
degrees.  It  is  to  be  noticed 
that  he  places  it  in  his  "  pri- 
meval "  group.  From  the 
M  skulls  he  terms  Celtic,  with 
"^  an  average  cubic  capacity  of 
89 "6,  and  an  average  cephalic 
index  of  0*76,  he  shows  that 
this  type  is  also  widely  dif- 
ferent. "  From  its  compact 
form,"  he  says,  "  it  may  ap- 
pear small  to  the  eye,  but  it 
exceeds  the  Celtic  average  by 
^       ^      „,  „  ,        .        ^  r.  4  cubic   inches,   its  cubic  ca- 

FlG.  762. — .Skull  from  cist  at   Dunamase.     prom  a     '       ^ 

rough   drawing  in   Wilde's  '' Boy?ie  and  Black-    pacity   being   93.        ItS    length, 

too,  is  TO  of  an  inch  below 
the  Celtic  average,  and  its  breadth  is  the  same  amount  above 
it.  Unfortunately,  Mr.  Grattan  gives  neither  an  illustration  of 
this  skull  itself,  nor  of  a  cast  he  made  of  it.  I  do  not  think, 
however,  that  the  description  accords  with  that  of  the  Round- 
Barrow  type  in  Britain,  as  exemplified  by  the  Ilderton-Borreby 
form,  a  view  which  I  feel  to  be  strengthened  by  the  comparison 
which  Mr.  Grattan  makes  between  it  and  a  skull  from  Dunamase, 
in  the  Queen's  County,  figured  by  Sir  William  Wilde.f  (Fig.  762.) 
The  record  of  the  discovery  of  this  latter  is  precisely  similar 
to  that  of  the  Donaghmore  skull.  It  was  made  within  150  yards 
of  the  rock  Dun-Masg,  or  Dunamase.  The  skeleton  of  which  it 
formed  the  head  was  found  in  a  small  stone  chamber,  situated  in 
the  outer  circle,  or  breastwork,  of  a  rath.  Close  by  the  side  of 
the  skeleton  was  a  "  beautifully  ornamented  urn."  The  cephalic 
index  is  not  recorded,   but  the  skull  is  clearly  markedly  brachy- 


t  "  Beauties  of  the  Boyne  and  the  Blackwater,"  p.  232.  The  drawing  of  this  skull,  which  is 
clearly  not  the  work  of  an  expert  in  craniological  delineation,  is  the  only  representation  of  it 
available. 


Anthropology  and  Ethnology. 


1007 


cephalic,  and,  as  it  appears  to  me,  to  judge  by  the  drawing  given 
by  Wilde,   is  as  essentially  different  from  skulls  of  the  Borreby 


Fig.  763. — Skull  of  "Ancient  Hibernian,"  from  cist  in  the  Phcenix  Park. 
From  the  "  Crania  Britaiinica^^ 

type,  as  it  is  closely  akin  to  the  more  purely  brachycephalic  type 
of  the  Rhcetian  skulls,  and  to  such  British  examples  as  that  from 


Fig.  764. —  "Ancient  Hibernian"  skull  from  a  cist  in  the  Phoenix  Park,  Dublin. 
Fro>n  tlic  "  Crania  Britannica." 


Stonehenge  (Figs.  753,  755,  756).  Its  similarity  to  the  Donagh- 
more  example,  pointed  out  by  Mr.  Grattan,  enables  us  to  judge 
of  the  appearance  of  the  latter.     Here,  as  at  Donaghmore,  the 


icx)8  The  Dolmens  of  Ireland. 

interment  had  been  by  inhumation,  and  the  body  must  have  been 
contracted.  Here,  as  there,  the  cist  was  in  the  side  of  a  fortifica- 
tion ;  in  each  case  an  urn,  peculiar  for  its  ornamentation,  had 
been  placed  beside  the  body  ;  and,  lastly,  the  skulls  were  similar. 
There  can  be  little  doubt,  therefore,  that  the  individuals  interred 
belonged  to  the  same  race  and  period. 

The  third  example  I  adduce,  not  so  markedly  brachycephalic, 
nor,  indeed,  quite  attaining  the  requisite  standard,  was  also  found 
in  a  cist,  and  Mr.  Grattan  compares  it  also  with  those  of 
Donaorhmore  and  Dunamase.  The  skeleton  was  contained  in  a 
small  cist  in  the  Phoenix  Park,  not  far  from  the  Knockmaraidhe 
tumulus,  and  near  a  small  square  cist,  which  has  been  re-erected 
in  the  Zoological  Gardens  in  Dublin.  The  latter  was  some  3  feet 
below  the  surface,  and  contained  an  imperfect  skeleton,  the  skull 
and  bones  of  which  appeared  to  have  been  broken  before  inter- 
ment, and  presented  the  appearance  of  having  been  "  collected 
from  some  other  quarter,  and  stowed  away  "  in  the  cist. 

The  other  small  cist,  of  which  I  am  here  speaking,  was 
dome-shaped,  and  constructed  of  small  stones,  closed  at  the  top 
with  a  larger  one,  resembling,  therefore,  that  found  in  Parsley 
Hay  Barrow,  Derbyshire,  discovered  by  Mr.  Bateman,  rather 
than  the  ordinary  type  formed  entirely  of  slabs,  as  is  the  case 
in  Germany,  Lesmurdie  (Banffshire),  and  in  Ireland  very  fre- 
quently. Its  construction  is  described  as  of  a  "dome  shape," 
formed  of  small  stones,  closed  at  the  top  with  a  larger  one.  It 
contained  a  skeleton,  the  major  part  of  which  was  placed  at  the 
bottom  of  the  cist,  with  the  long-bones  crossed  and  the  calvarium 
at  the  top,  the  lower  jaw  upon  it.  A  similar  arrangement  was 
found  by  Mr.  Bateman  in  Bee  Low,  Derbyshire.  It  appears  to 
be  the  skull  of  a  young  man  of  about  thirty,  says  Barnard  Davis. 
"  The  teeth  have  all  been  present,  and  are  in  good  condition. 
The  features  are  those  usual  among  the  aboriginal  inhabitants 
of  the  British  Isles.  The  jaws  are  slightly  prognathous,  the  chin 
prominent,  the  nasal  bones  projecting,  the  supranasal  and  supra- 
ciliary  protuberances  very  marked,  the  forehead  not  narrow  but 
rather  low,  the  vertical  region  elevated,  the  parietal  centres  distinct, 
yet  not  prominent,  so  that  the  no7'mci  verticalis  is  a  pretty  regular 
though  short  ovoid.  In  this  aspect  a  very  slight  want  of  sym- 
metry of  outline  is  perceived.  The  right  parieto-occipital  region 
is  a  little  less  elevated  than   the  left,   and,   conversely,  the  left 


Anthropology  and  Ethnology.  1009 

frontal  region  does  not  bulge  out  to  the  same  degree  as  the  right. 
And,  in  conjunction  with  this  appreciable  departure  from  the 
symmetry  of  the  two  sides,  is  seen  an  extensive  parieto-occipital 
flattening,  having  its  centre  near  the  point  of  juncture,  of  the 
sagittal  with  the  lambdoidal  suture.  This  plain  surface  or  steep- 
ness in  the  region  covering  the  posterior  lobes  of  the  cerebrum 
is  distinctly  observable  in  the  profile  view.  These  appearances 
are  to  be  attributed  to  the  mode  of  nursing  in  infancy,  probably 
a  cradle-board,  and  are  not  to  be  confounded  with  the  intentional 
distortions  practised  by  many  tribes.  The  cranium  has  been 
rendered  somewhat  shorter  by  this  accidental  result  of  nursing, 
but  would,  without  doubt,  have  approached  closely  to  the  brachy- 
cephalic  series,  had  its  natural  development  not  been  at  all  inter- 
fered with."     As  it  is,  its  cephalic  index  is  0794  (Figs.  763,  764). 

Retzius  figures  and  describes  this  skull.f  It  is  noticeable 
that  he  includes  it  in  his  "  Turanic  form,"  by  which,  says  Barnard 
Davis,  "  the  distinguished  Stockholm  Professor  means  nothing 
more  than  brachycephalic,  except  what  is  hypothetic,"  In  a  paper 
which  he  (Prof.  Retzius)  contributed  to  the  British  Association 
at  Birmingham,  he  adduces  this  very  skull  in  illustration  of  his 
view  that  there  was  a  race  in  Britain  of  "  Turanic  "  origin,  of  a 
type,  that  is  to  say,  which  preceded,  and  was  utterly  different  to, 
that  which  he  calls  the  "  Celtic  "  type.  Of  this  Turanian  type,  he 
held  that  the  Lapps  and  brachycephalic  Finns  were  the  living 
representatives.  Mr.  Grattan,  who,  as  we  have  seen,  differentiates 
this  skull,  both  from  his  "  Celtic "  type  and  from  the  brachy- 
cephalic type,  which  he  attributes  to  the  Black  Danes,  says  of 
this  one  that  "  in  almost  every  particular  it  agrees  with  that  from 
Donaghmore,"  although  the  index  of  the  latter  was,  as  we  said, 
o'83.  Evidently  this  skull  leans  more  to  the  brachycephalic  than 
to  the  dolichocephalic  side. 

In  my  opinion  it  bears  a  very  close  resemblance  indeed  to  a 
skull  from  Lesmurdie  in  Banffshire,  figured  in  the  "  Crania  Britan- 
nica"J  (Figs.  765,  766).  The  norma  verticalis  of  this  latter,  again, 
bears  a  considerable  resemblance  to  crania  of  the  Disentis  type. 
It  was  contained  in  a  cist  of  which  I  give  the  plan  and  section, 
and  was  accompanied  by  an  urn  of  the  British  drinking-cup  type. 
With  pottery  of  this  sort,  as  I  have  said  before,  examples  from 

t  "Ofversigt  af  Kongl.   Vetenskaps-Akademiens   Forhandlingar "  (1849),    p.    I18;    see  also 
Von  Baer,  "  Ueber  den  Schadelban  der  Rhatischen  Romanen,"  p.  268. 
X  No.  iv.,  plate  16. 


lOIO 


The  Dolmens  of  Ireland. 


tlie    Alps  most  closely  assimilate.       Short  cists,  similar  to  this. 


-^  •  rm^ 


Fig.  765. — Skull  from  the  Lesmurdie  cist,  Banffshire.     Frotn  the  '"  Crania  Britafinica. 


Fig.  766. — Skull  from  the  Lesmurdie  cist,  Banffshire.     From  the  "  Crania  Britannica.' 

are  found,  with  or  without  superincumbent  cairns,  in  many  parts 
of  Ireland,  in  Scotland,  and  in  North  Britain.  Sometimes  they 
are  single,  not  infrequently  double.     In  Germany,  precisely  similar 


Anthropology  and  Ethnology. 


lOI  I 


cists  are  found  with  urns  and  contracted  bodies,  as  we  may  see 
from  the  section  of  a  double  one  in  Klemm's  "  Alterthiimer,"  and 


Fig.  767. — Plan  and  section  of  cist  at  Lesmurdie.     From  the  "  Crania  Britamiica.^' 

from  the  plans  and  sections  of  the  single  one  near  Halle,  given 
above  from  Kruse. 

The  precise  measurements  of  the  skull  from  the  cist  in  the 
Phoenix  Park,  as  given  by  Barnard  Davis,  are  as  follows : — 


Horizontal  circumference 

..     20*3  ins 

Longitudinal  diameter 

..      6-9   „ 

Frontal  region — Length 

..       4-«   „ 

Breadth 

-•       47   „ 

Height 

••       47   ,, 

Parietal  region — Length 

••       51    >. 

Breadth 

••       4'9   ., 

Height 

••       47   >, 

Occipital  region — Length     ... 
Breadth    ... 

...       4-5  ins 
...       4-4   ,, 

Height     ... 
Intermastoid  arch      

...       2-8   ,. 
•••     151    .» 

Face — Length            

Breadth           

-       4-6   „ 

...       5-2    ,, 

Femur— Length         

Tibia — Length            

...     i8-o   ,, 
...     150   „ 

A  fourth  brachycephalic  skull  f  was  found  in  a  cist  near  the 
Knockadoon  group  of  circles  at  Lough  Gur.  Prof.  Harkness, 
who  discovered  it  "  in  a  burial-ground "  near  the  lake,  thus 
describes  it :  "It  was  the  skull  of  a  young  person  from  six  to 
eight  years  of  age,  and  was  of  a  very  curious  type — a  broad  head 
with  a  very  low  upright  forehead,  and  a  very  much  flattened 
crown.  The  upper  jaw  was  very  oblique,  and  the  lower  jaw  had 
the  molar  angle  much  more  obtuse  than  usually  happens  with 
individuals  of  that  age.  Judging  from  the  character  of  the  skull, 
it  seemed  to  have  belonged  to  a  member  of  a  race  approximating 
most  nearly  to  the  modern  Finn  or  Lapp."  The  remains  in  this 
■cist  are  preserved  in  the  Museum  at  Queen's  College,  Cork, 
where  I  examined  them  two  years  ago.  The  skull  was  much 
shattered,  but  from  a  measurement  I  was  able  to  take  must  have 
had  a  cephalic  index  of  85  or  86.  There  were  two  lower  jaws  in 
the  cist,  one  very  heavy  and  seemingly  petrified. 

From  Inch,  in  the  county  Derry,  Dr.  Frazer  adduces  the  de- 
scription of  a  skeleton,  which,  though  not  found  in  conjunction  with 
any  cist  or  urn,  presents  in  its  cranium  a  markedly  brachycephalic 
index,  and  under  circumstances  which  lead  to  the  supposition  that 
it  might  have  belonged  to  this  earlier  of  the  two  brachycephalic 


t  See  "  Journ.  Cork  Hist,  and  Archreol.  Soc,"  2  ser.,  vol.  i.  p.  291 


IOI2  The  Dolmens  of  Ireland. 


forms.  "It  was  discovered,"  he  says,  "interred  in  a  prone 
position,  disposed  in  a  direction  E.  and  W.,  lying  about  four  feet 
beneath  the  surface,  in  a  dry  soil  composed  of  decomposed  mica- 
schist.  Many  years  previously  cists  had  been  opened  in  this 
locality,  when  portions  of  an  inclined  part  of  the  land  were  being 
levelled.  Probably  the  site  was  that  of  an  old  tumulus.  Some 
stone  implements  were  procured  at  the  time."  "  The  absence," 
continues  Dr.  Frazer,  "  of  all  ornaments  and  implements  what- 
ever, renders  it  impossible  to  decide,  even  approximately,  the  age 
of  the  interment,  but,  in  my  opinion,  it  must  be  attributed  to  a 
remote  period.  The  skull  is  that  of  a  female,  beyond  the  period 
of  mature  adult  age.  The  frontal  sinuses  are  of  large  size  and 
prominent.  The  nasal  opening  is  broad,  approaching  to  platyrine. 
The  upper  jaw  approximates  to  the  prognathous  form.  The 
forehead  is  low  and  defective  ;  the  bones  of  the  skull  thin,  and 
the  teeth  worn  down  by  continued  attrition.  The  cephalic  index 
is  0*848,  and  its  most  remarkable  characteristic  is  the  small  size  of 
the  brain,  which  measures  only  1250  centimetres." 

Leaving  this  last  example  to  stand  by  itself,  I  have  been  able 
to  bring  forward  four  well-established  instances  of  the  presence 
of  a  brachycephalic  race  in  Ireland,  in  connection  with  a  class  of 
sepulchres  and  pottery,  which  induce  me  to  trace  the  type  south- 
ward through  Germany  f  to  the  Alps,  where,  if  I  am  right  in  my 
diagnosis,  we  may  join  them  on  to  the  Rhcetian  brachycephali, 
to  the  Ligurian  type,  and  to  those  short,  dark  people  of  the 
Auvergne,  extending  in  a  band  or  belt  across  France,  like  the 
bend  on  an  heraldic  shield,  in  whom  M.  Broca  has  recognized 
the  only  true  Celts  of  ethnology,  namely,  the  Celts  of  Csesar. 

Returning  to  the  doubt  expressed  by  Professor  Huxley,  with 
which  I  set  out,  as  to  whether  the  Round-Barrow  people  of 
Great  Britain  were  present  also  in  Ireland,  I  think  it  would  be 
hard  to  say  that  they  were  not.  I  am  inclined,  however,  to 
divide  these  brachycephali  into  two  classes :  the  purer,  allied  to 
the  Rhcetian  and  Disentis  type,  such  as  the  Round- Barrow  man  of 
Stonehenge,  and  perhaps  of  the  Lesmurdie  cist,  and  the  less  pure 
or  mixed  type  evidenced  in  such  skulls  as  that  from  Ilderton. 
The  former  of  these  I  think  we  discover  in  the  small  square 
Irish  slab-cists,  together  with  pottery  of  a  form  other  than  that 
which   accompanies  the  British  Round-Barrow  men  ;   the  latter, 

t  e.g.  Fig.  755. 


Anthropology  and  Ethnology.  1013 

I  agree  with  Professor  Huxley  in  believing-  to  be  practically 
absent  from  Ireland,  as  is  also  the  drinking-cup  type  of  vessel  which 
accompanies  their  remains  in  Britain.f  That  the  people  of  the 
Irish  cists  with  their  bowl-shaped  vases  were  however  derivable 
from  one  stock  of  brachycephali,  and  that,  with  slight  variations 
in  detail,  they  possessed  identical  customs  in  relation  to  sepulture 
is,  I  think,  evident,  while  it  is  observable  also  that  the  short 
cists  which  are  distinctive  of  these  customs,  are  found  to  prevail, 
with  or  without  tumuli,J  in  the  north  of  Britain,  Scotland,  and 
Ireland,  while  Barrows,  with  or  without  cists,  are  the  rule  in  the 
southern  portions  of  Britain.§ 

Two  considerations  of  the  first  importance  xxxxs.  pari passtt  with 
the  view  that  the  brachycephali  of  some  parts  of  Ireland  and 
Britain  can  be  attached  ethnologically  to  those  of  the  Alps,  and 
to  the  Ligurian  type  in  Italy.  The  theory  of  Montelius  that 
the  earliest  bronze  articles  in  Northern  Europe,  whether  they  be 
of  original  manufacture  among  a  cultured  people,  or  secondary 
imitations  by  barbarians,  have  their  source  in  Northern  Italy, 
requires  either  a  common  meeting-ground  for  races  bordering 
on  each  other,  or  a  definite  commercial  route  involving  intimate 
relations  between  the  extremes.  Such  a  border-land  they  would 
have  found  north  of  the  Alpine  passes,  and  such  a  system  of 
commerce  might  more  readily  have  passed  northwards  through 
tribes  related  by  language  and  custom  than  through  ones  not  so 
related.  The  bronze  riveted-daggers,  whether  in  original  form, 
with  detached  rivets,  or  in  native  copies,  in  which  blade  and 
handle  were  cast  together,  are  found  in  such  small  stone  cists 
as  we  are  describing,  with  human  remains  burnt  or  unburnt, 
and  with  pottery  which  frequently  seems  to  attest  a  rude  en- 
deavour to  copy  Etruscan  forms  and  patterns. 

Again,  the  most  eminent  philologists  of  the  present  day, 
among  whom  I  may  mention  Professors  Schrader  and  Sayce, 
are  of  opinion  that,  after  the  Aryan  dispersion,  whencesoever  it 
may  have  taken  its  rise,  those  who  spoke  the  languages  of  Italy 
remained  long  side  by  side  with  those  who  spoke  Celtic.  In 
these  brachycephali  we  seemingly  have  an  ethnic  stock  identical 
in  Italy  and  in  Britain  in  cranial  type,  in  primitive  culture, 
and  in  sepulchral  customs.      Have  we  in  them  the  far-off  point 

t  Some  three  or  four  examples  of  it  are  all  which  can  be  cited. 

X  Some  of  the  cists  being  sunk  in  the  ground,  without  trace  of  a  mound  on  the  surface. 

§  "  Crania  Britannica,"  text  l6,  2,  note. 


IOI4  The  Dolmens  of  Ireland. 

of  junction  which  philologists  and  linguistic  palaeontologists  re- 
quire ?  Did  the  brachycephali,  in  short,  give  Latin  to  Italy, 
and  Celtic  to  the  West  and  North  ?  Were  they  not  only  the 
bringers  of  the  bronze,  but  of  the  Celtic  language  as  well,  to 
the  islands  which  lay  "  opposite  Celtica  ?  " 

If  so,  however,  these  people  would  have  been  of  short  stature 
and  dark  haired,  of  as  different  a  type  as  could  well  be  imagined 
from  that  of  the  Germans,  or  the  Caledonians,  or  the  Boadicea 
type  in  Britain.  Yet  Barnard  Davis  would  accept  the  Lesmurdie 
man  as  a  Caledonian,  and  the  tendency  of  British  anthropologists 
has  been  to  recognize  Boadicea's  ancestors  in  the  Round- Barrow 
people.  For  myself,  no  question  has  caused  me  so  much  thought, 
and  involved  my  researches  in  so  much  perplexity  as  this.  My 
conclusion  is  that  neither  does  the  Lesmurdie  cist  contain  the 
Caledonian  of  Tacitus,  nor  the  British  cists  the  ancestors  of  those 
with  whom  the  Roman  contended  in  Britain.  The  Bronze  Agfe 
and  its  people  lived  then  only  in  survival.  Compared  to  them,  the 
people  known  to  Caesar,  to  Tacitus,  to  Dio  Cassius,  to  Ptolemy,  to 
Ammianus,  were,  though  giants  in  stature,  mere  infants  in  British 
ethnology.  They  were  "  comers-from-abroad,"  from  the  coast  of 
Belgic  Gaul,  from  the  Netherlands,  from  the  Elbe,  from  Sclesvic 
and  Holstein,  from  Jutland,  from  Sweden  and  Norway,  and  last, 
but  not  least,  from  the  further  recesses  of  the  Baltic  Coast. 
Doubtless,  they  followed  in  the  wake  of  others  who  had  gone 
before.  The  mixed  type  of  Borreby  belonged  to  the  Neolithic 
Age,  and  early  in  the  Bronze  Age  had  imparted  itself  to  Britain. 
It  seems  to  be  probable,  however,  that  the  purer  brachycephalic 
type  was  there  before  it,  and  to  this  fact  I  would  attribute  the 
markedly  brachycephalic  crania  from  the  cists. 

Of  such  materials,  then,  were  the  aboriginal  inhabitants  of  the 
British  isles  made  up.  Firstly,  in  the  Neolithic  Age  there  were 
present  there  the  Dolichocephali  of  the  Long  Barrows  ;  secondly, 
in  the  end  of  the  Neolithic  Age  and  beginning  of  the  Bronze 
Age,  the  purer  brachycephali  of  a  type  comparable  with  that  known 
as  the  Disentis ;  thirdly — also  in  the  Bronze  Age — a  taller  type 
than  either  of  the  above,  represented  in  the  Round  Barrows  of 
Britain,  and  which  may  have  owed  its  origin  to  an  intermixture 
of  the  purer  brachycephali,  with  a  tall  platycephalic  man  who 
may  have  already  existed  in  Britain,  as  he  certainly  did  on  the 
Continent  and  in  Scandinavia  at  a  period  more  remote  than  that 


Anthropology  and  Ethnology.  1015 

of  either  of  the  above,  or  whose  type,  represented  by  the  Borreby 
skull,  may  have  been  wholly  imported.  To  these  succeeded  the 
dolichocephalic  type,  to  which  I  gave  the  name  Scando-Germanic, 
with  light  hair  and  tall  stature,  from  an  outlyer  of  which  (which 
had  crossed  the  Rhine)  the  Belgse  of  Caesar  (originally  coming 
from  North  Germany,  though  Celtic  in  speech)  probably  derived 
their  origin,  and  to  which  also  belonged  the  Teutonic  stock  of 
the  Baltic  coast,  the  tall  light  Swedes,  the  Germans  of  Tacitus, 
the  Caledonians,  and  the  men  of  the  Row  Graves. 

As  to  Ireland,  as  we  shall  presently  see,  the  reign  of  the 
brachycephali  cannot  have  been  long,  and  has  not  proved  to  be 
lasting  in  its  effects  on  the  race. 
Before,  however,  we  turn  to 
Ireland  of  the  present  day,  and 
inquire  into  this  or  that  type  in 
survival,  it  is  necessary  to  note 
the  existence  of  a  brachycephalic 
type,  most  marked  in  character, 
and  to  be  differentiated  abso- 
lutely, according  to  Mr.  G rattan, 
from    that    of    which    the    Do-      „       ,„    ^,,  ,,   ,^  ^      „,.,, 

Fig.  768. — Skull  of  Donatus.    From  Wilde. 

naghmore  skull  is  an  example. 

The  first  of  this  type  to  which  I  will  refer  is  the  skull  of 
Dunan  or  Donatus,  who,  according  to  D'Alton's  "  Archbishops 
of  Dublin,"  \  was  the  first  among  the  Ostmen  who  was  Bishop 
of  Dublin.  He  died  in  1074, J  and  was  buried  in  the  upper  part 
of  the  chancel  upon  the  right-hand  side  in  his  own  cathedral, 
which  he  had  built  by  the  aid  of  King  Sitric.  The  spot  where  he 
was  buried  was  identified,  and  so  was  the  body,  for  fragments  of 
the  mitre  adhered  to  the  skull.  It  is  interesting  to  add  that  portions 
of  a  pewter  chalice  and  platten  were  found  in  the  grave,  and  also 
a  block  of  stone  so  hollowed  out  and  situated  as  evidently  to 
have  been  intended  for  a  support  to  the  neck.  There  were  no 
traces  of  a  cofhn,  but  the  body  had  been  laid  in  a  grave  lined  with 
flags,  and  covered  with  the  same  material. 

"  One  of  the  striking  peculiarities  of  this  skull  is  its  immense 
lateral,  or  transversal  diameter,  as  compared  with  its  longitu- 
dinal." §     Compared  with  the  skull  of  the  Scandinavian  invader 

t  p.  26.  X  Worsaae,  "Danes  and  Norwegians  in  Ireland,"  pp.  343,  344. 

§  Mr.  Grattan,   U.J.A.,  vol.  i.  p.   203.      Here  again  I  have  to  be  contented  with  Wilde's, 
illustration,  which  is  very  indifferent.     See  "  Beauties  of  the  Boyne  and  the  Blackwater,"  p.  236. 


ioi6 


The  Dolmens  of  Ireland. 


found  at  Larne,  and  described  above,  this  skull  is  broader, 
shorter,  and  lower,  and  the  whole  contour  is  less  spherical. 
The  crania,  in  short,  belong  to  two  widely  different  tj^pes.  The 
cephalic  index  of  that  of  Donatus  is  0*84. 

Each  of  these  skulls,  nevertheless,  was  found  under  circum- 
stances which  justify  us  in  attributing  them  both  to  Scandinavians. 

All  we  can  say  is,  that  between 


the  Dubh  Gall,  or  Black  Dane, 
and  the  Norwegian  or  Fin-Gall, 
the  difference  in  type  must  have 
been  great.  The  sword  found 
by  Dr.  Frazer  in  the  Donny- 
brook  tumulus  was  very  similar 
to  that  found  at  Larne,  and  yet 
the  skull  which  accompanied  it 
was  as  far  removed,  craniologi- 
cally,  as  well  could  be,  from  the 
other. 

The  Round  Tower  at 
Drumbo,f  explored  by  Mr. 
Getty,  afforded  a  skull  which 
must  be  assio-ned  to  the  same 
category  as  that  of  Donatus. 
The  skeleton  to  which  it  be- 
longed lay  at  a  depth  of  7  feet 
from  the  surface  of  the  material 
which  filled  up  the  base  of  the 
tower.  It  was  embedded  in  the 
natural  soil  upon  which  the  tower 
stood.  There  seemed  no  doubt 
that  the  body  had  been  deposited 
there  while  the  building  was  in 
course  of  erection.  The  skeleton 
lay  E.  and  W.  The  bones  of 
the  riofht  arm  and  the  lower 
extremities  were  absent,  a  fact 
which,  considering  the  condi- 
tion of  the  other  bones,  was  not  to  be  attributed  to  decay.  The 
skeleton   was  that  of  a  large  and  powerful    man,  probably   from 


Fig.  769.— Skull  from  Dnimbo. 


t  U.J,  A.,  vol.  iii.  p.  113;  id.,  vol.  vi.  pp.  221,  et  seqq. 


Anthropology  and  Ethnology.  1017 

6  feet  to  6  feet  2  inches  hiofh.  The  femur  was  i  foot  10  inches 
long.  The  age  of  the  subject  was  probably  about  70  ;  the 
cephalic  index  0*83.     The  other  principal  measurements  were — 

Cubic  capacity  ...         ...         ...         ...         ...         ...  96  ins. 

Greatest  length  from  10  degrees        75  ,, 

Greatest  breadth  from  10  degrees     ...         ...         ...  6*2  ,, 

Circumference  ...         ...         ...         ...         ...         ...  2i'6  ,, 

Frontal  arch     5*5  ,, 

Parietal 5"i  ,, 

Occipital           4"9  ,, 

Sum  of  Occipital,  or  Occipito-frontal           I5'5  ,, 

Mastoidal           l6*o  ,, 

The  skull  is  of  very  considerable  size.  Its  length  is  remark- 
able, and  its  breadth  very  great.  It  is  scarcely  of  average  height. 
The  temporal  bones,  however,  are  remarkably  prominent,  the 
whole  temporal  bone  projecting  far  beyond  the  juxta  temporal,  so 
as  to  give  to  the  entire  head  a  well-marked  globular  form. 

It  may  be  mentioned  that  Petrie,  in  his  "  Round  Towers,"  cites 
this  tower  of  Drumbo,  in  the  County  Down,  as  an  example  of  the 
older  type  of  construction,  which  he  considers  may  date  back  to 
the  fifth  century. 

Barnard  Davis  places  this  large  brachycephalic  skull  at  the 
head  of  his  Irish  series,  but  adds  the  remark  that  "he  is 
persuaded  that  it  is  not  the  skull  of  an  Irishman,"  but  that  "  it 
doubtless  belonged  to  an  ecclesiastic,  and  one  foreign  to  the  soil 

of  Hibernia."t 

There  are  yet  two  other  skulls  to  be  mentioned  which  were 
taken  from  ecclesiastical  structures  of  different  character,  but  of 
similar  antiquity  to  the  Round  Towers,  the  one  from  a  stone- 
roofed  chapel  at  Devenish,J  the  other  from  the  cathedral  of 
Downpatrick.§  The  island  of  Devenish,  in  Lough  Erne,  about 
two  miles  below  Enniskillen,  possesses,  among  other  ecclesiastical 
ruins,  a  Round  Tower  and  the  chapel  in  question,  which  is  called 
St.  Molaise's  House, ||  after  a  saint  whose  death,  according  to  the 
"  Annals  of  Ulster,"  occurred  either  in  563  or  570.  The  chapel  was 
a  small  rectangular  building,  having  an  entrance  in  the  west  end. 
It  was  constructed  of  very  large  blocks  so  carefully  shaped  as  to 
fit  on  one  another  without  any  filling.  The  roof  was  arched  in 
very  peculiar  fashion — with  a  Moorish  curve  [sic  \^\ )— and  the 

t  "  Thesaurus  Craniorum  "  (1867),  p.  64. 

X  U.J.A.,  vol.  iv.  pp.  178-191  ;  id.,  vol.  vi.  pp.  235,  et  seqq. 

§  U.J. A.,  vol.  vi.  pp.  235,  et  seqq. 

11  Molaissi  =  t/io  Laisrean,  ;«^  being  a  prefix  expressive  of  veneration,  and  Laisrcan,  in  Latin 
Laserius,  the  name  of  several  famous  saints  of  whom  this  one  is  described  as  "son  of  Nadfraich,  of 
the  race  of  Irial,  son  of  Connal  Cearnaigh,  seventh  in  descent  from  Crunn  Badhraighe,  son  of 
Eochaidh  Cobha,  son  of  Fiacha  Araidhe."  See  U.J. A.,  vol.  iv.  p.  183,  and  Dr.  Reeves,  "Ann.  of 
Ulster,"  p.  28. 

VOL.   HL  X 


ioi8  The  Dolmens  of  Ireland. 

exterior  was  formed  of  larsfe  flaofs.  A  stone  hollowed  out  to  form 
a  coffin,  into  the  hollow  of  which  superstitious  people  fitted  their 
shapes,  was  supposed  to  have  stood  at  the  west  end  of  the  interior 
of  the  building.  In  opening  the  ground  along  the  wall  at  this 
point,  some  human  bones  were  found,  and  the  skull  in  question 
at  the  south-east  corner.  Mr.  Getty,  who  made  the  discovery, 
noticed  that  the  skull  showed  that  the  individual  had  been  partially 
deformed,  perhaps  wry-necked.  This  fact  he  imparted  to  O'Curry, 
who  discovered  in  a  life  of  the  saint  that  his  mother  had,  on  the 
advice  of  a  wise  man,  procrastinated  his  birth.  Such  an  unnatural 
proceeding  was  supposed  to  cause  in  the  offspring  some  such 
deformity  as  that  which  this  skull  presented, — so  at  least  Irish 
legends  averred.  Therefore,  argued  O'Curry,  this  skull  is,  "  to 
my  mind,"  the  skull  of  Molaise. 

Into  such  a  delicate  question  of  physiology  I  need  not  go 
further.  Suffice  it  that  the  skull  v/as  found  within  the  precincts 
of  one  of  those  exceedingly  ancient  chapels  erected  for  the  re- 
ception and  veneration  of  the  early  Christian,  or  more  properly, 
perhaps,  of  the  semi-pagan  dead. 

Mr.  Grattan  describes  it  as  scarcely  of  average  dimensions, 
its  cubic  capacity  being  only  86  inches,  its  length  7  inches,  and  its 
breadth  5-85  inches.  Its  cephalic  index  was  o'835.  The  writer 
thinks  he  detects  indications  of  a  remarkably  active  brain,  and 
of  a  character  more  refined  than  vigorous,  the  bones  of  the 
cranium  being  thin,  dense,  of  very  close  texture,  and  in  places 
translucent.  The  sutures,  including  even  the  frontal  one,  are 
perfect,  delicate,  free  from  coarseness,  and  exhibit  no  vestiges  of 
triquetral  bones.  Its  measurements  ally  it  closely  with  the  Drumbo 
skull,  which  exhibits  the  same  protuberant  temporal  zone,  but 
counterpoised  by  a  far  superior  frontal  development.  It  appears 
to  have  belonged  to  an  individual  past  the  prime  of  life.  Mr. 
Grattan  then  describes  a  *'  bony  projection "  which,  he  adds, 
"  must  have  occasioned,  during  life,  some  lateral  displacement  of 
the  head,"  such  as  Mr.  Getty  had  observed. 

The  skull  from  Downpatrick  was  taken  from  a  grave  within 
the  ancient  portion  of  the  present  cathedral.  The  grave  lay 
below  the  level  of  the  foundation  of  the  walls,  under  the  floor. 
It  was  about  6  feet  long,  and  12  inches  deep,  and  had  been  ex- 
cavated entirely  out  of  the  original  and  undisturbed  soil,  upon  which 
the  foundation  of  the  cathedral  (attributed  to  St.  Patrick)  rested. 


Anthropology  and  Ethnology.  1019 

Its  sides  and  ends  were  lined  with  coarse  flag-stones,  from  two  to 
three  inches  thick,  placed  on  edge.  It  lay  due  E.  and  W.  in  the 
southern  aisle,  and  within  it  were  two  blocks  of  chiselled  red 
sandstone,  one  at  either  end,  upon  the  western  one  of  which  the 
head  rested.  The  whole  had  been  covered  over  with  flat  stones 
similar  to  those  with  which  the  grave  was  lined.  Much  of  the 
skeleton  was  in  good  preservation,  and  in  Mr.  Grattan's  opinion 
it  must  certainly  have  been  above  nine  hundred  years  old,  at 
which  time  the  Danes  plundered  the  church,  and  might  possibly 
have  been  two  or  three  hundred  years  older. 

The  skull  is  similar  in  type  to  those  from  Drumbo  and 
Devenish.  It  is  very  small,  its  capacity  being  only  ']']  cubic 
inches,  its  length  6"]  inches,  and  its  breadth  5-6  inches.  The 
cephalic  index  is  exactly  that  of  the  Devenish  skull,  namely,  o'835 
inches.  The  bones  are  of  moderate  thickness.  The  teeth  are 
sound,  the  sutures  well  defined  and  perfect,  showing  that  the  age 
of  the  individual  could  scarcely  have  exceeded  35  or  40.  The 
temporal  regions  are  very  prominent,  the  frontal  one  rather 
narrow,  the  occipital  large  and  unsymmetrical. 

The  general  coincidence  of  the  measurements  of  the  four 
skulls,  namely,  that  of  Donatus,  and  the  three  from  Drumbo, 
Devenish,  and  Downpatrick  respectively,  is,  concludes  Mr. 
Grattan,  quite  remarkable.  The  correspondence  is  indeed  so 
marked  as  to  render  it  more  than  probable  that  they  belong 
to  one  common  type.  But  we  may  well  ask  to  what  people  are 
we  to  assign  this  type  ?  According  to  Barnard  Davis,  they  are 
allophylian  — "  foreign  ecclesiastics."  According  to  Dr.  Frazer 
and  others,  Donatus  would,  in  common  with  the  "  chieftain  "  of 
the  Donnybrook  tumulus,  be  a  Black  Dane;  and  yet  (i)  Donatus 
bore  a  Celtic  name,  Dunan ;  and  (2)  the  Black  Danes  of  history 
did  not  arrive  until  the  ninth  century,  and  were  then  unconverted 
barbarians,  whereas  the  men  of  Drumbo,  Devenish,  and  Down- 
patrick may  surely  be  placed  with  reason  at  a  far  earlier  date, 
and  were  certainly  Christians,  if  not  ecclesiastics.  According  to 
Mr.  Grattan,  they  are  not  to  be  identified  with  or  derived  from 
the  other  and  far  more  ancient  brachycephalic  type  found  in 
the  cists  at  Donaghmore,  Dunamase,  and  Phoenix  Park.  Who, 
then,  are  they }  We  may  perhaps  see  some  reason  to  form  a 
conjecture  when  we  come  to  the  more  strictly  ethnological  portion 
of  our  subject. 


I020  The  Dolmens  of  Ireland. 

We  have  said  that  the  brachycephalic  element  in  Irish  crania 
did  not  prove  enduring.  Dr.  Beddoe  gives  the  following  general 
description  of  what  in  his  estimation  constitutes  the  typical  Irish 
skull.  It  "  inclines,"  he  says,  "  to  be  long,  low,  and  narrow,  but 
little  more  so  than  the  English  or  Welsh  skull.  The  average 
latitudinal  {i.e.  cephalic)  index  is  about  075.  The  size  and  capacity 
are  good.  The  point  of  maximum  breadth  is  usually  placed  far 
back.  In  profile,  the  prominence  of  the  upper  occipital  region 
and  the  flattening  about  the  after  part  of  the  sagittal  suture  are 
the  most  notable  points ;  in  a  vertical  view,  the  flattening  of  the 
tempero-sphenoidal  region,  and  the  somewhat  angular  salience  of 
the  part  abaft  the  ear,  noticed  by  Daniel  Wilson  and  Massy  as 
belonging  to  their  '  Celtic '  type.  The  cheek-bones  are  prominent 
in  the  face,  but  the  zygomata  not  much  expanded." 

"  This  form,"  he  adds,  "  prevails  extensively  in  most  other 
parts  of  Ireland  as  well  as  in  the  West,  and  is  identical  with  that 
exhibited  by  most  of  the  few  primeval  skulls  I  have  had  the 
opportunity  of  examining.  .  .  .  Of  forty-one  skulls  in  the  Barnard 
Davis  collection,  only  two  were  brachycephalic,  and  of  thirty-eight 
heads  measured  by  us  in  Kerry,  only  one  would  have  been 
brachycephalic  in  the  skull.  Yet,  the  average  Irish  skull  is  not 
very  much  narrower  than  the  average  skull  of  Great  Britain. 
The  Irish  are  more  homogeneous,  and  extremes  in  the  form  of 
head  are  rare." 

Amonor  the  islands  and  alono-  the  coast  of  the  west-central 
district — in  Galway  and  Mayo — there  appear  to  be  two  types 
often  easily  distinguishable,  often  also  blended.  The  islanders  of 
North  and  South  Inishkea,  for  example,  differ  from  the  main- 
landers,  as  Professor  Haddon  and  Dr.  Browne  have  pointed  out, 
in  having  fairer  hair  and  complexions  as  well  as  in  their  different 
cast  of  features  and  their  dress.  "  The  men  of  the  district  around 
Portacloy  are  darker  in  hair,  and  seem  to  be  of  a  different  type, 
many  of  them  being  exceedingly  fine,  well-built  fellows." 

The  mean  cephalic  index  of  living  subjects  in  the  district  of 
the  Mullet,  Inishkea,  and  Portacloy  (county  of  Mayo),  brought 
down  to  the  cranial  standard,  is  77-4.  As  a  rule,  the  heads  proved 
to  be  mesaticephalic— out  of  sixty-two  measured  by  Dr.  Brown, 
eleven  only  being  dolichocephalic,  and  ten  brachycephalic.  The 
extreme  in  the  former  example  was  72-3,  and  in  the  latter  86-2. 
Two  other  brachycephals  reached  85-1  and  83-4. 


Anthropology  and  Ethnology.  1021 

Of  the  living  inhabitants  of  Inishbofin  and  Inishbark,  in 
Galway,  the  mean  cephah'c  index  (also  reduced  to  the  cranial 
standard)  of  forty  subjects  examined  was  78 '4.  Here,  again, 
mesaticephaly  was  the  rule,  but  there  were  ten  brachycephals  and 
seven  dolichocephals.  The  extreme  brachycephal  here,  as  in  the 
Mayo  group,  reached  86,  and  the  extreme  dolichocephal  72*9. 
The  hair  of  these  people  is  dark  brown,  sometimes,  but  seldom 
black,  although  in  many  cases  it  is  so  dark  as  to  be  hardly 
distinguishable  from  black.  The  eyes  are  blue  or  grey,  and  where 
the  hair  is  actually  black,  they  are  dark  or  light  hazel. 

Professor  Haddon  has  described  thirteen  crania,  also  from 
Inishbofin.  Five  of  these  are  males,  with  cephalic  indices  ranging 
from  75"3  to  77*i.  They  are,  therefore,  mesaticephalic,  with  an 
average  of  76*3.  "  The  eight  female  calvaria  fall  into  two  groups. 
Two  of  themi,  with  cephalic  indices  of  77*4,  are  more  distinctly 
mesaticephalic  than  any  of  the  male  ones.  The  remaining  six  are 
all  dolichocephalic,  ranging  from  72*5  to  73'9,  the  average 
being  73"o." 

Eleven  crania  of  both  sexes,  found  in  the  church  at  Tempull 
Colman,  yielded  an  average  cephalic  index  of  77*0. 

From  the  same  authorities  I  venture  to  borrow  the  following 
account  of  the  general  physical  characteristics  of  the  Aran  islanders. 

"  The  men  are  mostly  of  a  slight  but  athletic  build,  and, 
though  tall  men  are  occasionally  to  be  met  with  among  them, 
they  are,  as  a  rule,  considerably  below  the  average  Irish  stature — 
their  average  height  being  5  feet  4 J  ins.,  while  that  of  277 
Irishmen  is  5  feet  8.^  ins.  The  span  of  the  limbs  is  less  than  the 
stature  in  a  quarter  of  the  cases  measured,  a  rather  unusual  feature 
in  adult  males.  The  hands  are  rather  small,  but  the  forearm  is 
often  unusually  long.  The  head  is  well  shapen,  rather  long  and 
narrow,  but,  viewed  from  above,  the  sides  arc  not  parallel,  there 
being  a  slight  parietal  bulging.  The  mean  cephalic  index,  when 
reduced  to  the  cranial  standard,  is  75' i,  consequently  the  average 
head  is,  to  a  slight  extent,  mesaticephalic ;  although,  as  a  matter 
of  fact,  the  number  measured  is  nearly  evenly  divided  between 
mesaticephalic  and  dolichocephalic.  The  top  of  the  head  is  well 
vaulted,  so  that  the  height  above  the  ears  is  considerable. 

The  forehead  is  broad,  upright,  and  very  rarely  receding  ;  not 
very  high  in  most  cases.  The  superciliary  ridges  are  not 
prominent.     The  face  is  long  and  oval,  with  well-marked  features. 


I02  2  The  Dolmens  of  Ireland. 

The  eyes  are  rather  small,  and  close  together.  They  are  marked 
at  the  outer  corners  by  transverse  wrinkles.  The  irises  are  in 
the  great  majority  of  cases  blue  or  grey-blue. 

The  nose  is  sharp,  narrow  at  the  base,  and  slightly  sinuous  or 
aquiline  in  profile.  The  lower  lip  is,  in  many  cases,  large  and 
full.  The  chin  is  well  developed  ;  the  cheek-bones  are  not 
prominent  ;  in  a  large  proportion  of  cases  the  ears,  though  not 
large,  stand  well  out  from  the  head.  In  many  men  the  length 
between  the  nose  and  the  chin  appears  decidedly  great  ;  the 
complexion  is  clear  and  ruddy,  seldom  freckled  ;  the  hair  is  brown, 
in  most  cases  of  a  light  shade,  and  accompanied  by  a  light  and 
often  reddish  beard. 

Of  twenty-seven  heads  of  Aran  islanders  which  were  measured, 
thirteen  were  dolichocephalic,  eleven  mesaticephalic,  one  hyper- 
dolichocephalic  {69-6),  and  two  brachycephalic  (83" i  and  80*3). 
Both  the  latter  came  from  the  middle  island  called  Inishmaan,  the 
inhabitants  of  which  have  been  less  exposed  to  influence  from 
the  mainland  than  those  of  the  others. 

"  To  what  race  or  races,"  says  Messrs.  Haddon  and  Browne, 
in  conclusion,  "  the  Aranites  belong  we  do  not  pretend  to  say,  but 
it  is  pretty  evident  that  they  cannot  be  Firbolgs,  if  the  latter  are 
correctly  described  as  '  small,  dark-haired,  and  swarthy.'  " 

In  the  "Proceedings  of  the  Royal  Irish  Academy"  for  1893 
and  1894  some  other  measurements  of  Irish  crania  will  be  found, 
for  which  we  are  indebted  also  to  the  same  Q^entlemen  who  have 
so  carefully  described  the  inhabitants  of  the  western  coasts. 

Twelve  skulls  from  Tipperary,  in  the  Anatomical  Museum  at 
Dublin,  show  a  mean  cephalic  index  of  76*2,  or,  if  the  single 
brachycephalic  one  be  excluded,  757.  The  highest  index  is 
8i*2  ;  the  lowest  72*5.     Eight  out  of  the  twelve  are  mesaticephalic. 

Three  skulls  from  a  pagan  sepulchral  mound  at  Old  Connaught, 
near  Bray,  in  the  county  of  Dublin,  showed  cephalic  indices  of 
74*2,  79-4,  and  78*2  respectively. 

It  is  a  question  which  it  is  extremely  difficult  to  answer  how 
far  the  characteristic  dolichocephaly  of  the  typical  Irish  skull  can 
be  said  to  be  attributable  to  the  dolichocephali  (No.  I.)  of  the 
Neolithic  Age.  That  in  the  extreme  form  which  belonged  to 
the  primeval  type  it  has  for  ages  ceased  to  exist  is  certain.  Dr. 
Beddoe's  lowest  index-measure  in  the  Isle  of  Aran  was  074, 
whereas    that   of  the    man    of  the    Trillick   tumulus    was    070. 


Anthropology  and  Ethnology.  1023 

Nevertheless,  that  in  Ireland,  as  in  England  also,  it  formed  the 
basis  far  down  out  of  sight  in  the  strata  of  the  past,  upon  which 
the  broader  but  still  dolichocephalic  type  has  been  built  up,  I 
think  there  can  be  no  doubt. 

On  the  general  question  of  the  survival  of  this  race  in  England 
we  may  quote  Professor  Rolleston  as  follows  :   "  We  have  in  this 
country,"  he  says,  "  dolichocephaly  combined  with  low  stature  and 
dark  complexion  in  a  very  considerable  number  of  our  population 
even  in  the  midland  counties.     The  fact  of  the  existence  of  this 
stock,    or,    as   we    may,    perhaps,    say,    of    its    survival    and    its 
reassertion    of  its  own    distinctive  character  in    the   districts    of 
Derby,  Stamford,  Leicester,  and  Loughborough,  was  pointed  out 
in    the   year    1848,   by   Professor    Phillips,  at  a  meeting   of  the 
British    Association  at  Swansea."      Dr.   Beddoe  found  that  five 
skulls  from  Micheldean,  in  the  country  of  the  Silures — the  people 
about  whom  Tacitus,  or  rather  Agricola,  remarked  that  they  were 
like   the    Iberians — gave   an    average    index   of   74'8.     "  It  is  a 
matter  of  familiar  knowledge,"  says  Mr.   Elton,   "  that,  in  many 
parts  of  England  and  Wales,  the  people  are  short  and  swarthy, 
with  black  hair  and  eyes,  and  with  heads  of  a  long  and  narrow 
shape.     This  is  to  be  found  not  only  in  ancient  Siluria.  comprising 
the    modern    counties    of    Glamorgan,    Brecknock,    Monmouth, 
Radnor,  and  Hereford,  but  in  several  districts  in  the  eastern  fen 
country,  and  in  the  south-western  counties  of  Cornwall  and  Devon, 
with  parts  of  Gloucestershire,   Wilts,   and   Somerset.     It  is  the 
knowledge  of  these  facts,  too^ether  with  the  skull  measurements 
derived   from  the   chambered   tumuli,  which  induces  so  good  an 
authority  as  Dr.  Beddoe  to  come  to  the  conclusion  that  at  the 
period  of  the  Roman  conquest,  the  natives,  encountered  by  the 
Romans  (who  were  Belgic  tribes  from  the  Continent),  "  were  super- 
imposed on  a  foundation  principally  composed  of  the  long-headed 
dark  races  of  the  Mediterranean  [i.e.  of  the  Long-Barrow]  stock." 
There  is  a  type,  said  to  be  now  rare  in  the  Highlands,  but  not 
so  in  the  Hebrides,  which  Dr.  Beddoe  is  bold  enough  to  regard  as 
the  survival  of  this  same  most  primitive  race.    It  is  stated,  he  says, 
1-0  be  common  in  Spain,  and  Mr.  Maclean  cites  the  ideal  Sancho 
Panza  as  an  example  of  it.     "  The  stature  is  short,  the  head  large, 
the  face  shorter  and  squarer  than  the  ordinary  West  Highland 
type,  the  features  coarse,  and  the  nose  cocked."     If  we  add  to  this 
that  the  hair  is   dark,  and  so  coarse  in  its  stiff  curliness  that  the 


I024  The  Dolmens  of   Ireland. 

process  of  combing  is  painful,  that  the  eyes  are  in  general  ,u:rey, 
the  eyebrows  shaggy,  the  nose  broad  and  indented  as  well  as 
upturned,  the  nostrils  widely  splayed,  the  cheek-bones  prominent, 
the  forehead  low,  the  jaw  prognathous,  the  chin  tapering,  the 
complexion  swarthy,  the  teeth  bad,  and  the  whole  head  having  the 
appearance  of  broadness  which,  in  proportion  to  its  length,  it  does 
not  really  possess,  we  think  we  know  the  type  in  Ireland  perfectly 
well.  "  The  intelligence,"  continues  Mr.  Maclean,  speaking  of  his 
Hebridian,  "  is  low,  and  there  is  a  great  deal  of  cunning  and 
suspicion."  Obstinacy  is  characteristic  of  the  type,  in  proof  of 
which  he  tells  us  that  the  best  examples  of  it  would  never  submit 
their  heads  to  him  for  measurement. 

Cunning  and  obstinacy  —  the  result  in  a  great  degree  of 
oppression  and  superstition — there  undoubtedly  is  in  the  Irish 
type  we  have  in  mind  ;  but  the  intelligence  is  by  no  means  "  low," 
if  by  low  Mr.  Maclean  means  "wanting."  Cleverness,  shrewd- 
ness, quickness,  wit,  are  in  Ireland  its  most  prominent  cha- 
racteristics. Take  Charles  Lever's  description  of  Billy  Traynor : 
"  A  short,  square-built,  almost  uncouth  figure,"  his  "  features  con- 
tributing a  share"  to  "the  grotesqueness  of  his  dress."  "It  is, 
indeed,  a  strange  physiognomy,  to  which  Celt  and  Calmuck  seem 
equally  to  contribute.  The  low,  overhanging  forehead,  the 
intensely  keen  eye,  sparkling  with  an  almost  imp-like  drollery, 
are  contrasted  by  a  firmly  compressed  mouth,  and  a  far-projecting 
under-jaw,  that  imply  sternness  even  to  cruelty  ;  a  mass  of  waving 
black  hair,  that  covers  neck  and  shoulders,  adds  a  species  of 
savagery  to  a  head  which  assuredly  has  no  need  of  such  aid." 
It  is  evident  that  in  this  type  this  keen  observer  of  his  country- 
men recognizes  the  descendants  of  the  primitive  race  in  Erin, 
a  people  poor  in  the  midst  often  of  fertility,  who  when  conquered 
never  gave  way,  whose  very  conquerors,  in  point  of  keenness 
of  intellect,  felt  themselves  ''  in/arior''  to  those  they  ruled  over  ; 
a  subtle  race,  too,  quicksighted  and  suspicious,  distrustful  of  all 
save  the  skill  of  each  individual  in  a  moment  of  difficulty.f 
When  subjected  to  the  refining  processes  of  education  and  culture, 
this  type  has  given  to  Ireland  some  of  her  most  shrewd,  states- 
manlike, eloquent,  and  witty  sons,  as  witness  such  an  example 
as  John  Philpot  Curran. 


1    "  The    Fortunes   of    Glencore,"   by   Charles    Lever,   chap,    xxiii.  ;    see    also    chaps,    xiv. 
and  xxix.     The  Italics  CeU  and  Calmuck  are  mine. 


i\NTHROPOLOGY    AND    EtIINOLOGY.  IO25 


I  have  measured  several  heads  of  the  type  in  question,  all,  so 
far  as  I  could  ascertain,  genuine  natives  in  name  and  pedigree. 


Fig.  770.     The  Right  Ilun.  John  Philiiot  Curran.     />,;«  a  pai)itiiis;  by  Sir  Thomas  Laiui-eiice, 
oigraved  by  J olin  Raphael  Smith,  July,  iSoi. 

My  average  index  shows  me  that  the  type  possesses  a  somewhat 
broader  skull  than  the  average  for  all  Ireland,  namely,  076  or  0*77. 
Of  the  subjects  which  have  come  under  my  notice,  I  may  remark 
that  one  characteristic  of  them  is  constitutional  laziness,  a  habit 
which  may  be  traced  to  a  deep-rooted  fatalism,  which  makes  them 
trust  all  to  chance.  They  often  indulge  in  the  pride  of  self- 
depreciation,  and  rather  like  than  otherwise  to  be  regarded  as 
a  down-trodden  people ;  but  this  has  no  effect  on  their  spirits, 
which  are  high  and  often  boisterous.  When  once  they  know  and 
trust  you,  their  seeming  "  suspicion  "  is  changed  to  ardent  affec- 
tion, and  they  would  serve  you  to  the  death — one  reason  why 
they  make  such  excellent  soldiers,  the  main  reason,  however, 
being  their  innate  love  of  fighting,  a  quality  which  they  have 
displayed  to  advantage  from  the  time — may  we  not  say  so  ? — 
when,  as  Silures,  one  of  their  tribes  in  Britain  gave  such  trouble 
to  the  Roman  armies,  down  to  the  days  of  the  Irish  Brigade. 


I026  The  Dolmens  of  Ireland. 

As  a  rule,  they  are  met  with  more  frequently  in  the  western 
and  north-western  portions  of  the  island  than  in  the  east,  and  they 
belong-  to  the  rural  districts  rather  than  to  towns.  Munster, 
Connaught,  and  Donegal  are  the  localities  in  which  they  chiefly 
abound,  and,  as  if  the  fair  races  had  pushed  them  west,  without 
intermingling  with  them,  their  presence  is  accompanied  in  these 
districts,  as  also  in  the  West  of  Scotland  and  the  Cornish  pro- 
montory, by  the  maximum  of  nigrescence  recorded  in  the  British 
Isles.f  When  they  come  to  the  towns  of  the  west,  it  is  usually  in 
the  capacity  of  serv-ants. 

They  are  Irish  of  the  Irish — the  survival,  possibly,  of  the 
dolichocephalic  man  of  the  Knockmaraidhe  tumulus,  whose 
relation  to  the  Long-Barrow  aboriginal  race  of  Britain  is  estab- 
lished— their  head,  however,  broadened,  and  their  physiognomy 
otherwise  differentiated  by  a  strongly  marked  brachycephalic 
strain,  possibly  derived  from  the  brachycephali  of  the  cists,  as 
above  described.  Lever's  recoo^nition  in  them  of  a  likeness  to  the 
Calmuck  is  not  to  be  passed  over  as  by  any  means  fanciful.  Before 
I  had  read  the  passage  from  his  novel,  the  likeness  had  struck  me 
over  and  over  again.  If  we  seek  for  such  a  physiognomy  among 
the  living  descendants  of  the  ancient  Lapps  on  the  one  hand,  or 
of  the  Celts  of  Caesar  in  the  Auversfne  on  the  other,  we  find 
ourselves  at  fault.  If,  however,  we  penetrate  the  Scythian  East, 
we  come  across  a  type  so  similar  that  original  identity  forces 
itself  upon  us  almost  as  a  conviction.  The  type  of  Attila,  as 
contrasted  with  that  of  Odoacer,  asserts  itself,  and  the  link  indicated 
by  the  "  Sarmatian  hypothesis,"  as  set  forth  by  Pritchard,  offers 
itself  in  explanation. | 

Dr.  Beddoe  fully  recognizes  the  necessity  of  introducing  even 
a  Mongoloid  type  to  account  for  characteristics  which  he  met  with 
in  the  West  of  England  and  in  Wales.  "  The  most  notable 
indication,"  he  says,  "  is  the  oblique,  or  Chinese,  eye.  I  have 
notes  of  thirty-four  persons  with  oblique  eyes.  Their  heads 
include  a  wide  range  of  relative  breadth,"  and  "  in  other  points 
the  type  stands  out  distinctively.  The  cheek-bones  are  almost 
always  broad ;  the  brows  oblique,  in  the  same  direction  as  the 
eyes ;  the  chin,  as  a  rule,  narrow  or  angular ;  the  nose  often  con- 
cave and  flat,"  and  "  the  mouth  rather  inclined  to  be  prominent." 


t  See  the  map,  based  on  the  Military  Schedules  in  Beddoe's  "  Races  of  Britain,"  opp.  p.  192. 
t  See  note,  infra,  p.  1 174. 


Anthropology  and  Ethnology.  1027 

The  same  authority  noticed  that  this  type  was  common  in 
Wales,  West  Somerset,  and  especially  in  Cornwall.  In  the  latter 
county  there  may  frequently  be  seen  in  the  fishing  villages, 
especially  on  the  west  side  of  Mount's  Bay,  examples  of  a  small, 
black-haired,  black-eyed,  swarthy  type.  In  many  instances  I 
have  observed  eyes  decidedly  oblique.  In  Ireland,  too,  and 
especially  in  Donegal,  I  have  seen  this  characteristic  so  marked 
in  the  case  of  an  individual,  that  I  compared  the  face  with  ones  I 
have  seen  in  Japan,  a  country  the  ethnology  of  which  presents 
an  analogy  with  that  of  primitive  Western  Europe,  and  the  British 
Isles  in  especial,  since  it  exhibits  the  intermixture  of  a  pure 
Mongolic  type  with  that  of  the  dolichocephali  of  the  island  of 
Yesso,  whose  skulls  have,  by  more  than  one  anthropologist  of 
eminence,  been  compared  with  those  of  one  or  other  of  the  primi- 
tive long-heads  of  Europe. 

The  introduction  of  these  Mongolian  elements  into  the  British 
Isles  Dr.  Beddoe  would  carry  back  to  the  Neolithic  Age,  and 
would  use  them  to  account  for  the  comparative  breadth  observable 
in  the  skulls  found  in  the  cave  of  Perth-y-Chwaren,  in  Wales, 
to  which  we  have  alluded,  and  in  those  found  in  Caithness  by 
Mr.  Laing.  Possibly  in  the  skulls  in  the  Welsh  caves  we  have 
those  of  the  ancestors  of  the  Silures,  whose  swarthy  faces  and 
stiff,  curly  locks  caused  Agricola  to  compare  them  with  the 
equally  dark  Iberians,  whom  Strabo  again  compares  with  the 
inhabitants  of  Aquitania. 

To  return,  however,  to  the  type  in  Ireland.  It  can  scarcely 
be  doubted  that  MacFirbis  had  it  present  to  his  mind,  when,  "  on 
the  authority  of  old  sayings  of  people  learned  in  history,"  he 
assigned  it  to  a  race  pointed  out,  like  the  Heruli  on  the  Continent, 
for  the  obloquy  and  detestation  of  the  fair,  tall,  conquering 
Gaedhels.  "  The  dark,  the  loud-voiced,  the  contumelious,  the 
talkative,  the  vociferous,  the  fierce,  the  unteachable,  the  slave, 
the  /a^7'o,  the  churlish,  and  all  who  listen  not  to  music  or  melody, 
the  violators  of  covenants  and  laws,  and  the  accusers  of  all, 
are  the  descendants  of  the  Fir-Bolg,  the  Gailians,  the  Liogmuine, 
and  the  Fir-Domnan  ;  but  mostly  of  the  Fir-Bolg,  2i^  di'chpn." 
And  yet,  as  we  learn  from  the  episode  in  the  epic  called  the  Tain- 
bo-Chuailgne,  which  relates  to  the  fight  between  CuchuUain  and 
Ferdiad — these  same  Fir-Bolg,  and  not  either  the  Tuatha-De- 
Danann,  or  the  Gaedhelic  sons  of  Miledh,  were  the  true  "  Men 
of  Erin." 


I028  The  Dolmens  of  Ireland, 


The  contrast  between  the  people  of  Erin  (Fir  nHerenn), 
indicated  by  this  name  Fir-Bolg  (to  whom  even  Professor  Rhys 
and  M.  d'Arbois  de  Jubainville,  in  the  midst  of  their  relegation 
of  all  things  traditional  to  Aryan  ]Mythology,  permit  us  to  assign 
some  semblance  of  reality  and  a  habitation  in  Erin),  and  the  race 
by  whom  they  were  superseded,  namely,  the  Scots,  or  Gaedhels — 
the  Milesians,  as  they  proudly  call  themselves,  and  whose  heroes 
are  exemplified  in  O'Donnells,  O'Connells,  etc.,  is  perpetuated 
and  recognized  even  at  the  present  day.  As  an  instance  in  point, 
I  take  the  following  passage  from  Mrs.  O'Connell's  "  Last  Colonel 
of  the  Irish  Brigade,"  j  in  which  the  respective  types  are  unmis- 
takably present  :  "  His  Kitty,  Miss  Catherine  O'Mullane,  of 
Whitechurch,  County  Cork,  was  a  charming,  bright  little  woman, 
clever,  capable,  and  lady-like.  She  was  not  a  bit  pretty,  and  the 
sin  is  laid  to  her  charge  that  she  introduced  cocked  noses,  bad 
teeth,  bad  hair,  and  common  sense  into  the  family." 

The  contrast  between  the  type  of  this  lady  and  that  of  the 
"Milesian"  O'Connells  will  be  seen  on  referring  to  the  pictures 
in  this  same  work  of  "Hunting-Cap"  and  Count  O'Connell. 
These  show  lonof,  oval  faces  and  lonsf,  strai^rht  features.  Three 
brothers  are  described  as  tall,  powerful,  blue-eyed,  dark-haired 
men.  Their  height,  their  physique,  and  the  colour  of  their  eyes, 
we  may  take  it,  they  inherited  from  the  Caledonian  Germanic  type 
of  Tacitus,  my  Scando-Germanic  type,  as  well  as  the  preponder- 
ance of  the  dolichocephalic  element  which  will  be  found  in  the 
skull-measurements  of  their  class.  The  colour  of  their  hair,  and 
the  proportional  breadth  of  the  head,  modifying  the  dolicho- 
cephaly,  and  which  is  specially  observed  in  the  broadness  of  the 
forehead,  combined  with  a  certain  lowness  and  flatness  of  the 
top  of  the  head,  often  seen  in  the  counties  of  Cork  and  Kerry, 
they  owe  to  racial  intermixture  with  a  primitive  dark-haired 
brachycephalic  type,  in  so  far  as  the  latter  manifested  the  soft, 
fine,  black  straight  hair  which,  in  common  with  the  majority 
of  the  brachycephalic  races,  we  believe  it  originally  possessed, 
uncontaminated  by  mixture  with  the  coarse,  dark  curly  hair  which 
may  reasonably  be  referred  to  the  primitive  doHchocephali,  whose 
affinities  were,  as  we  have  seen,  most  probably  to  be  found  in 
Africa  and  the  South. 

I  have  spoken  of  nigrescence  as  a  prevailing  characteristic  of  the 

t  Vol.  i.  p.  158. 


Anthropology  and  Ethnology.  1029 

inhabitants  of  those  districts  in  Ireland  in  which  the  type  I  have 
been  describing  is  most  prevalent.  Speaking  of  the  Connemara 
people,  Dr.  Beddoe  found  them  "generally  short,  and  departing 
in  some  respects  from  the  common  type,  having  less  angularity  of 
cheek-bones  and  chin,  and  less  prominence  of  mouth.  The  fore- 
head looks  broad  and  low,  and  the  greatest  breadth  of  the  face  is 
at  the  level  of  the  eyes.  Light  eyes  predominate,  as  usual ;  the 
combination  of  dark-grey  eyes  with  black  hair  is  very  common  ; 
and  dark  hair  and  complexion  attain  their  maximum.  In  Conne- 
mara there  are  clans  considered  as  of  servile  origin — the  Kinealys, 
for  example.  One  of  these,  pointed  out  to  me  as  a  specimen,  was 
short,  with  a  broad  round  face,  shortish  head,  and  oblique  eye- 
brows— altogether  a  Turanian  aspect." 

It  was,  however,  in  the  mountains  between  Sligo  and  Ros- 
common that  Dr.  Beddoe  met  with  the  "  swarthiest  people  he  had 
ever  seen."  "  Seven  out  of  thirty-three  had  quite  black  hair,  and 
many  had  dark  eyes.  A  few  had  handsome  features — rather  short 
heads,  spade  faces,  and  aquiline  noses,  and  reminded  me  (Dr. 
Beddoe)  more  of  South  Wales — the  country  of  the  Silures — than 
anywhere  in  Ireland." 

It  will  be  noticed  that  this  acute  observer  does  not  refer  these 
very  black-haired  and,  I  think,  straight-haired  people  to  his 
Africanoid  type,  but  describes  their  heads  as  short,  and  evidently 
inclines  to  his  Mongoloide  hypothesis  regarding  them.  These  are 
clearly  the  same  people  noticed  by  O'Donovan  in  his  letters  to 
the  Ordnance  Department.  He  regarded  them  as  the  repre- 
sentatives of  the  Fir-Bolg  of  the  old  traditional  stories — the 
Bolg-Tuath-Baghna,  that  is,  the  Bolg  Tribes  of  Sliabh  Baan, 
whom  Mac  Firbis  in  his  account  of  the  Fir-Bolg  had  located 
there,  in  a  mountainous  district  of  Roscommon,  south  of  Strokes- 
town.  Of  these  people  O'Donovan  speaks  as  being  "  black  as 
a  raven's  wing,"  and  again  he  remarks,  "  Never  did  I  see  such 
profusion  of  black  hair  as  in  Slieve  Baan,"  for  which  name  he 
proposes  a  derivation  not  from  ban,  "  white,"  but  from  *'  '  Baghna,' 
probably  the  name  of  some  Fir-Bolg  chief."  He  notices,  too, 
that  "  it  is  curious  to  remark  that  Mac  Firbis  quotes  from 
a  very  ancient  poem  which  describes  the  Fir-Bolg  as  '  black- 
haired.'  " 

It  will  not  perhaps  be  out  of  place  here  to  add  a  few  notes 
regarding  the  antiquities  and   legends  of  this   district.     Keogh, 


1030  The  Dolmens  of  Ireland. 

^vho  wrote  in  1683,  says  that  at  Strokestown  "was  not  long 
ago  to  be  seen  a  round  fort  of  stone,  the  wall  whereof  was  10 
feet  in  thickness."  This  was  evidently  one  of  those  cathairs, 
such  as  are  found  in  the  West  of  Ireland,  from  Kerry  to  Derry, 
in  the  country  of  the  great  nigrescence,  be  it  observed,  the  best 
examples  of  which,  those,  namely,  in  the  islands  of  Aran  in 
Galway  Bay,  are  assigned  by  the  same  traditional  authorities  to 
the  Fir-Bolg.  They  have  their  affinities  in  Scotland,  Wales, 
and  in  Cornwall,  where  evidences  of  nigrescence  also  are  present. 

This,  too,  is  the  district  over  which  the  Christians  selected 
their  Saint  Barry  to  preside — the  same  to  whom  they  gave  the 
charge  of  the  island  of  Barra  in  the  Hebrides — the  simple  reason 
being  that  the  name  Barry  approached  in  sound  that  of  the  native 
pagan  deity  whose  cultus  they  sought  to  supplant  by  a  process  of 
assimilation,  where  force  could  not  avail. 

In  the  Irish  district  of  which  we  are  speaking,  the  name  of 
Barry  appears  in  Kilbarry,  where  stood  the  kil,  Latinized  cella, 
which  was  the  centre  of  his  worship.  From  the  wild  legend 
about  him  we  can  detect  his  non-Christian  origin,  and  his  name 
scarcely  veils  his  identity  with  the  deity  who,  as  King  of  the 
Fairies,  still  presides  over  this  land  of  the  dark  race.  The  oral 
legend  tells  us  that  "  when  he  was  engaged  in  blessing  this  country, 
and  the  Hanlys,  there  was  a  huge  serpent — an  Ollphiast,  or  Large 
Worm — which  used  to  infest  Slieve  Baan.  Barry  chased  this 
monster  from  Kilbarry  to  the  brink  of  Loch  Lagan,  where  it 
jumped  into  the  water  from  him,  but  he  made  a  thrust  of  his 
bachall  at  it,  and  with  the  vehemence  of  the  thrust  he  fell  back 
on  one  knee,  at  the  brink  of  the  lough.  He  pierced  the  worm 
through,  and  the  blood  gushed  from  the  hole  made  by  the  top 
of  the  bachall  in  such  copious  streams  that  the  whole  lake  was 
coloured  red,  and  from  the  spot  touched  by  his  (Barry's)  left  knee, 
where  he  fell,  a  clear  spring  well  issued,  which  he  blessed."  For 
Barry,  or  Barra,  read  Varra,  and  the  reason  the  Christians  adopted 
St.  Barry  for  this  district  is  clear.  A  whole  chapter  might  be 
written  on  the  legends  extant  about  Finvarra — all  belonging  to 
these  very  districts.  The  pagan  hero,  or  heroine — it  is  doubtful 
which — who  probably  had  his  scat  on  Slieve  Baan — was  none 
other  than  the  White  Varra,  and  the  coincidence  which  discovers 
him  in  the  Hebrides  is  rendered  unusually  singular  by  the  quasi- 
historical  stories  which  locate  the  Fir-Bolg  in  these  islands  after 


Anthropology  and  Ethnology.  1031 


they  had  been  driven  from  Ireland,  and  also  by  the  fact  that 
there  exists  there  at  the  present  day — -as  also  in  the  neighbouring 
Highland  districts,  a  race  noted  for  "the  shortness  of  its  stature 
and  the  blackness  of  its  hair."  Mr.  Campbell  speaks  thus  of  an 
example  he  met  with  :  "  Behind  the  fire  sat  a  girl,  with  one  of 
those  strange,  foreign  faces  which  are  occasionally  to  be  seen  in 
the  Western  Isles,  a  face  which  reminded  me  of  the  Nineveh 
sculptures,  and  of  faces  seen  in  St.  Sebastian.  Her  hair  was  as 
black  as  night,  and  her  clear,  dark  eyes  glittered  through  the  peat 
smoke.  Her  complexion  was  dark,  and  her  features  so  unlike 
those  who  sat  about  her  that  I  asked  if  she  were  a  native  of  the 
island,  and  learned  that  she  was  a  Highland  girl," — that  is,  from 
the  coast  immediately  opposite. 

I  have  myself  seen  faces  in  the  Gweedore  district  of  Donegal, 
and  especially  among  the  inhabitants  of  the  islands  of  that  coast, 
which  so  closely  correspond  to  this  description  that  I  might  use 
the  same  words  in  describing  them.  I  think,  however,  that  we 
may  distinguish,  both  in  North-Western  Ireland  and  in  the 
Hebrides,  the  types  in  survival  of  two  dark  races.  The  one 
is  the  type  described  by  Mr.  Maclean  in  his  account  of  the 
Highlanders  as  the  "  brachycephalous  Celt."  It  is  frequent 
in  the  eastern  and  northern  parts  of  the  Highlands.  "  The 
head  is  broad  (comparatively),  the  profile  straight,  the  cheek- 
bones broad  and  large,  the  nose  generally  sinuous,  the  face 
tapering  rapidly  to  the  chin,  which  is  often  prominent  and  angular, 
the  skin  dark,  the  eyes  deep  set,  often  small,  dark  grey,  or  dark 
brown,  the  hair  reddish-brown,  red,  or  raven  black,  the  lips 
seldom  prominent,  the  hand  square,  large  jointed,  the  chest 
square  and  broad,  the  calf  large,  and  the  foot  well  formed,  the 
gait  easy  and  shuffling."  "These  people,"  he  adds,  "have 
strong  attachments  and  feelings,  but  much  forethought  and 
self-control ;  they  are  (by  turns)  gloomy,  fervent,  and  humorous." 
Dr.  Beddoe  remarks  that  he  has  seen  many  examples  of  this 
type,  but  that  he  does  not  think  it  anywhere  very  numerous. 
He  adds  that  he  would  assign  it  to  a  Finnish  origin.  The  other 
type  appears  to  me  to  be  one  which  possesses  a  longer  head, 
has  a  dark  complexion,  eyes  occasionally  of  that  peculiar  dark 
reddish-brown  which  we  are  accustomed  to  associate  with  pictures 
of  Moors ;  hair  the  black  of  which  is  rather  a  very  deep  brown- 
black   than    one  that  could  be  compared  to  that  of  the  raven's 


1032  The  Dolmens  of  Ireland. 

wing,  coarse    in    texture   and    inclined    to  curl   instead  of  being 
straight  as  in  the  other  type  ;  the  jaw  prognathous. 

In  the  wilds  of  Donegal  I  have  seen  both  these  types.  The 
first  is  rare  in  that  district,  but  it  is,  I  think,  that  of  the  Sliabh 
Baan  people,  and  is  Mongoloid,  if  not  Finnish — to  be  dis- 
tinguished, however,  from  a  lighter  Finnish  type — that  of  the 
Finns  near  Obo,  of  which  I  will  presently  speak.  The  second  is 
comparatively  common,  and  to  borrow  a  type-name  from  Dr. 
Beddoe,  I  should  call  it  Africanoid.  Some  of  those  who  belonged 
to  it  were,  however,  so  well  knit,  large  framed,  tall,  strong,  lusty, 
and  prognathous,  that  while  I  should  hesitate  very  much  before 
adopting  it  as  the  representative  of  so  poor  a  creature  physically 
as  the  LonQf-Barrow  man  of  Britain,  I  would  make  bold  to 
ascend  further  in  the  genealogy  of  the  type,  and  compare  it  with 
the  powerful,  tall,  prognathous  man  of  Cro-Magnon. 

I  feel  it  necessary,  before  passing  from  the  dark  types  in  Irish 
ethnology,  to  advert  to  one  which  Captain  Thomas  has  called 
"The  Spanish  Celt."  Its  characteristics  are  black  hair,  straight, 
and  of  good  texture,  and  good  features.  In  some  of  its  leading 
points,  "such  as  the  formation  of  the  brows,  and  of  the  lower 
jaw,"  it  is  "extremely  prevalent,"  says  Dr.  Beddoe,  "throughout 
Ireland,  and  wherever  the  Gaelic  tongue  is  known  to  have 
existed."  Not  being  aware  that  it  was  a  Highland  type,  and 
that  in  Ireland  its  distribution  was  so  general,  and  having  met 
with  it  in  the  Claddagh,  or  old  fishermen's  quarter  in  the  town 
of  Galway,  I  had  believed  it  to  be  in  reality  a  Spanish  type 
dating  from  the  commercial  connection  which  existed  in  the  late 
Middle  Ages  between  Spain  and  Galway.  The  type  was  also 
well  known  to  me  in  the  fishing-villages  of  Mounts  Bay  in  Cornwall, 
where  it  exists  side  by  side  with  another  dark  type  of  which 
I  have  spoken,  and  which,  in  contrast  with  it,  is  as  coarse  and 
ugly  as  it  is  delicate  and  handsome.  It  is  there  accounted  for 
by  the  wreck  of  a  Spanish  ship  in  ages  gone  by,  and  the 
intermarriages  of  the  sailors  with  the  fisher-people — a  story 
evidently  put  together  to  account  for  the  observed  resemblance. 
Indeed,  both  here  and  at  the  Claddagh,  the  Spanish  theory,  in 
any  modern  sense,  at  least,  must  be  abandoned  in  face  of  the 
prevalence  of  the  type  throughout  the  north  and  north-west  of 
Ireland,  Scotland,  and  the  Isles. 

The  fishing  population  of  the  Claddagh  are  mentioned  in  the 


Anthropology  and  Ethnology.  1033 

"  Life  of  St.  Endeus,"  whose  legend  relegates  him  to  the  fifth 
century,  but  which  was  not  compiled  from  the  "ancient  authorities" 
until  the  end  of  the  fourteenth.  The  place  was  then  called  Med- 
raighe,  a  name  retained  in  that  of  Maaree.  The  author  of  a  paper 
on  the  inhabitants  in  the  Ulster  Jo2irnal  of  Archeology  sees  no 
reason  to  suppose  that  "  this  singular  colony  has  undergone 
any  change  in  language  or  manners  since  the  days  of  the  saint." 
The  physique  of  the  people  is,  he  says,  exactly  the  same  as  that 
of  the  peasantry  in  Connemara  and  Clare.  Their  present  names 
are  nearly  all  Irish,  but  there  are  so  many  of  the  same  name  that 
they  have  a  custom  of  nicknaming  each  other  after  fishes,  as 
for  example  :  Jack  the  hake,  Bill  the  cod,  Joe  the  eel,  Pat  the 
trout,  Mat  the  ttirbot,  etc.  ;  or  Jack  the  trout,  Jack  the  salmon, 
Jack  the  whale,  Jack  the  sprat,  etc.  Speaking  of  the  peasantry 
of  the  country  round,  this  writer  says,  "  The  men  in  this  part 
of  Connaught  are  among  the  finest  in  Ireland.  Many  are 
strikingly  handsome.  The  girls,  and  children  especially,  have 
a  sweet  expression  of  countenance."  The  peasantry  in  general 
are  dark-haired,  tall,  muscular  men,  with  aquiline  nose,  and 
in  general  a  slight  protrusion  of  the  mouth.  The  Claddagh  men 
themselves  are  lounging  and  phlegmatic ;  not  pugnacious  like 
their  neighbours,  but,  when  one  is  injured,  will  combine  to  beat 
the  offending  "  stranger."  They  are  highly  superstitious,  but 
a  crow  flying  over  a  boat  and  croaking  is  an  omen  not  of  bad 
luck  as  in  most  places,  but  of  good.  There  are  clearly  two  types, 
both  here  and  in  the  Aran  Isles,  the  one  the  dark  and  handsome 
type  to  which  we  are  alluding ;  the  other  remarkably  plain 
and  ill-looking,  with  long  head,  nose  of  great  vertical  length, 
prominent  cheek-bones,  and  overhanging  brows,  forehead  square, 
lower  jaw  very  prominent,  mouth  wide  and  straight,  eyes  in 
general  grey,  and  hair  brown  or  black.  There  are  also  the 
evident  intermixtures  between  this  latter  type  which  is  most 
common  in  Aran  and  the  dark  handsome  Claddagh  type. 

The  aspect  of  the  Aran  individuals  just  described  is  sullen 
and  evil,  but  one  is  often  agreeably  surprised  to  find  that  their 
looks  belie  them,  especially  where,  being  islanders,  they  have 
not  been  contaminated  by  either  the  "  mountain  men "  of  the 
mainland,  or  the  loafers  in  towns.  To  one  of  their  race  probably 
belongs  the  dolichocephalic  skull  found  by  Dr.  Beddoe  in  Aran 
with  a  cephalic  index  of  074.       To  the  Aran  crania  described 

VOL.  HI.  Y 


I034  The  Dolmens  of  Ireland. 

by  Professor  Haddon  and  Dr.  Browne  we  have  previously 
alluded.  If  I  might  venture  to  assign  a  place  for  this  type 
among  those  we  have  been  considering,  I  should  say  it  would  be 
an  intermediate  one  between  the  primitive  Africanoid  type  and  a 
Finnish  one  to  which  I  will  next  advert. 

West  of  Lough  Swilly,  in  the  eastern  portions  of  the  county 
of  Donegal,  is  to  be  found  a  type  so  remarkably  like  a  well-known 
Finnish  one  that  I  feel  no  hesitation  in  calling  it  so,  although 
I  differentiate  it  from  the  dark  type  which  Dr.  Beddoe  considers 
to  be  Finnish  also,  mentioned  above,  and  which  may  be  taken 
to  represent  the  other  or  dark  Finnish  type. 

If  we  turn  to  the  Finska  Kranicr  of  Gustaf  Retzius  we  shall 
find  there  a  series  of  excellent  portraits  of  the  Tavastland  Finns, 
of  those,  that  is  to  say,  who  live  near  Abo.  The  likeness  between 
some  of  these  people  and  some  of  those  in  North  Donegal  is,  I  do 
not  hesitate  to  say,  unmistakable. 

The  following  description  of  the  Finnish  type,  taken  from 
Retzius,j  applies  equally  to  the  Irish  one  :  "  They  are  strong, 
thick-set,  broad-shouldered,  and  plump,  of  middle  height  in  general, 
their  skin  white ;  their  heads  generally  large,  short  in  proportion, 
and  broad  (their  cephalic  index  76  or  ']']),  often  squarish,  with  the 
parietal  bosses  well  developed ;  their  face  large  and  long,  but 
broad  across  the  jaws ;  the  lower  jaw  strongly  developed,  with 
large  posterior  angles  well  marked,  and  a  considerable  breadth 
between  the  angles ;  the  nose  small,  wide,  and  obtuse,  very 
frequently  with  the  point  cocked;  the  nostrils  very  wide;  the  mouth 
also  very  broad ;  the  eyes  small  and  narrow,  sometimes  slightly 
oblique ;  the  iris  light,  grey,  blue,  or  more  frequently  between 
bluish-grey  and  grey ;  the  eyebrows,  which  are  faintly  marked, 
light ;  the  hair  light,  often  the  colour  of  flax,  also  ashy  grey, 
straight,  never  curled,  and  very  soft ;  the  beard  of  feeble  growth  as 
a  rule  ;  the  countenance  morose  and  unsympathetic  ;  the  character 
serious,  melancholy,  thoughtful,  and  taciturn,  jealous  and  vindictive, 
husbanding  revenge  ;  honest ;  neither  fond  of  music  nor  poetry  ; 
given  in  general  to  fatalism." 

It  would  not  be  possible  for  me  to  improve  on  this  account  in 
describing  the  Donegal  type  of  which  I  have  spoken.  Read 
"  urbane  "  for  "morose,"  and  there  stands  before  us  the  well-known 

t  "  Finska  Kranier,"  by  Gustaf  Retzius,  Stockholm,  1S78;  see  also  "  Congics  Internat.  d'Antlu 
et  d'Archeol.  prehist."  (1874),  pp.  757,  767-769. 


Anthropology  and  Ethnology. 


1035 


Father  Mac  Fadden,  of  Gweedore,  whose  ancestral  abode  was 
immediately  west  of  Lough  Swilly.  I  asked  a  very  aged  man 
named  Boyle,  living  at  Bunbeg  on  the  Gweedore  coast,  who  were 
traditionally  the  most  ancient  inhabitants  of  the  rugged  country  in 


Fig.  771.— a  Tavastland  Finn.     Frovi  G.  Retzhis. 

which  he  lived.  Without  hesitation  he  said,  "The  Fomorians,"f 
a  statement  which  he  derived  rather,  I  think,  from  the  old  written 
authorities  than  from  oral  tradition.  Who  the  Fomorians  really 
were  I  hope  in  the  sequel  to  show.  A  foolish  story,  the  invention 
of  Christians,  brought  them  from  Africa,  the  reason  being  probably 
that  since  they  were  staunch  pagans  they  were  looked  on  as 
barbarians,  and  children  of  Ham,  who  was  domiciled  in  Africa. 
Being  non-Germanic,  they  would  come  under  the  appellation  of 
iotuns,  or  giants — that  is  to  say,  allophylians  or  outer-barbarians, 
whence  legends  ascribe  to  them  monstrous  forms.  Fomor  in 
Scotland  actually  came  to  be  the  generic  term  for  a  giant,  although 
it   was  originally  the  name  of  a  people   inhabiting  a    particular 

t  A  characteristic  of  the  Fomorians  was  obstinacy.    To  act  "  with  Fomorian  obstinacy  "  was 
a  proverb.     I  know  no  trait  more  characteristic  of  the  Gweedore  people  than  this. 


1036  The  Dolmens  of  Ireland. 

country,  just  as  the  Assassins  of  Arabia  gave  name  to  murderers 
of  a  particular  class.  O'Flaherty,  with  more  reason,  allocates 
them,  on  the  strength  of  a  tradition,  to  one  particular  district  which 
he  names  Finland.  He  finds,  he  says,  that  one  Seal  Balb,  father- 
in-law  of  King  Tuathal,  was  called  "rex  Fomoire  i.  Finnlaind."  f 
Tradition,  however,  points  to  this  type  in  Donegal  as  aboriginal, 
havinsf  neither  arrived  with  emig-rants  from  Scotland  nor  with 
criminal  refugees  from  Mayo,  of  which  two  ingredients  the 
population  is  sometimes  said  to  consist. 

As  I  believe  that  a  very  extensive  portion  of  the  population 
of  Ireland  is  a  survival  from  the  admixture  of  the  Finnish  types 
with  the  primitive  native  dolichocephali,  I  may  here  mention  that 
O'Donovan,  in  his  "  letters,"  more  than  once  refers  to  the  **  long- 
headed "  people  in  the  mountains  of  Donegal.  In  describing  the 
romantic  Glcann  Finne,  "  in  the  very  heart,"  as  he  says,  "  of  the 
pure  Irish  country,"  he  writes  :  "  We  found  ourselves  surrounded 
by  a  crowd  of  the  old  and  long-headed  natives,  the  remnants  of 
the  men  of  JNIoy  Itha  or  Iha,  who  were  driven  to  the  mountains 
by  the  dominant  party  of  James  the  First."  I  observe  that  he 
uses  these  same  words,  when  describing  the  natives  of  the  district 
near  Mohill  in  Leitrim — of  whom  he  says  that  they  were  "  long- 
headed men,  nearly  all  called  INIoran."  The  name  of  the  river 
Finn,  to  which,  since  it  is  about  the  darkest  stream  in  Ireland, 
both  in  respect  of  the  shadowy  gorges  through  which  it  flows  and 
the  peat  which  discolours  it,  the  Celtic  term ^ojm,  white,  or  bright 
could  never  have  been  applied,  tempts  us  to  go  a  step  further  and 
connect  it  with  the  Finnish  name  Dwina,  otherwise  called  Vina, 
which  flows  into  the  Cwen  Sea,  and  also  with  that  of  the  Duna,J 
which  is  etymologically  identical,  in  the  land  of  the  Esthonian 
Finns  in  the  gulf  of  Riga.    The  signification  of  this  word  is  "  swift." 

Unfortunately  O'Donovan's  descriptions  of  the  character  and 
physical  traits  of  the  inhabitants  he  met  with  in  his  travels  are 
very  few  and  far  between.  From  Dunglow  in  Donegal,  however, 
he  writes  :  "  The  ancient  Irish  families  here  may  yet  be  dis- 
tinguished by  their  forms  and  features.  The  O'Donnells  are 
corpulent  and  heavy,  with  manly  face  and  aquiline  nose ;  the 
O'Boyles  are  ruddy  and  stout,  pictures  of  health  when  well  fed; 
the  Mac  Devils  are  tall  and  slender,  with  reao-A  visacres.  The 
O'Doghertys  are  stout  and  chieftain-like,  stiff,  stubborn,  unbending, 

t  "Ogygia,"  p.  303.  I  See  Bielenstein,  <y>.  at.  supr. 


Anthropology  and  Ethnology.  1037 

much  degenerated  in  their  present  state,  but  have  all  good  faces  ; 
the  Mac-Swynes  are  spirited  and  tall,  but  of  pale  or  reagh  colour. 
Among  them  all  the  O'Boyles  and  O'Doghertys  are  by  far  the 
finest  human  animals." 

At  Dunglow  I  found  a  curious  tradition,  according  to  which 
the  population  was  divided  into  two  ethnic  groups.  It  was  pointed 
out  to  me  that  a  soft,  light-haired  type  existed  by  the  side  of  a 
dark  one.  The  features  of  the  former  were  more  delicate  and  the 
physique  less  stalwart  than  was  the  case  with  the  Finnish  type  I 
have  described.  The  hair  was  generally  lightish-brown,  fine,  and 
straight.  The  top  of  the  head  was  flatter  and  broader  than  in  the 
dark  types.  The  height  was  rather  below  the  medium  than 
otherwise,  the  eyes  were  hazel  or  blue,  and  the  countenance  was 
mild  and  amiable.  The  examples  pointed  out  to  me  were, 
however,  females,  and  I  am,  therefore,  by  no  means  sure  that  I 
am  not  describinsf  a  female  variation  of  the  ligfhter  Finnish 
type, — a  type,  by  the  way,  which  is  singularly  like  that  of  the 
yellow-haired  variety  of  the  Esthonians.f  At  all  events,  such  is 
the  type  pointed  out  in  Donegal  tradition  as  that  of  the  "  gentle 
people,"  who  in  modern  times  represent  the  "good  people,"  or 
fairies,  and  in  the  old  legends  are  the  Tuatha  De  Danann,  that 
is,  if  I  translate  it  aright,  "  The  Tribes  of  Gods  of  Dana  (or 
Danu),  that  is,  whom  Dana  or  Danu  worshipped.  The  dark 
type,  which  was  pointed  out  to  me  as  the  very  opposite  of  this,, 
were  represented  by  all  the  tall,  dark,  lithe-limbed,  swarthy- 
section  of  the  community,  proverbial,  I  was  told,  for  their  quick 
temper  and  irascibility,  men  ready  to  draw  the  knife  on  occasion, 
and  who  were  constantly  figuring  in  the  police-sheets  for  assault 
and  battery,  in  contrast  to  their  well-behaving  and  peaceable 
neighbours  of  the  light  hair.  These  dark  people  were  called 
Francas — a  curious  fact,  considering  that  we  usually  associate  the 
Franks  with  light,  flaxen  hair. 

For  myself — ignoring  for  a  moment  the  colour  of  the  hair — I 
am  inclined  to  associate  these  black  Francas  of  the  Donegal  oral 
tradition  with  the  tall,  dark,  handsome  men  of  the  Galway  coast, 
whose  presence  we  have  noticed  in  Aran,  Connemara,  and  Galway, 
and  which  extend,  I  think,  into  Tipperary,  where  the  impetuous 
nature  of  just  such  a  type  has  long  been  matter  of  history. 

There  certainly  was  a  period  in  history  during  which  Ireland 

t  See  Kruse's  Necrolivonica. 


The  Dolmens  of  Ireland. 


was  brought  into  direct  contact  with  those  known  to  history  as 
Franks,  that  is,  Francas. 

Carausius,  Charausio,  or  Corausius,  the  piratical  tyrant  of 
Britain,  was  himself  a  Menapian,  or,  as  we  might  say,  a  Batavian 
Frank.f  Those  serving  under  him  as  mercenaries  might  easily, 
therefore,  have  gained  the  designation  of  Franks,  although  the 
southern  parts  of  Germany  as  well  as  the  north,  ay,  and  the 
western  coasts  of  Europe,  not  excluding  even  Spain,  might  have 
provided  material  for  his  levies  and  manned  the  fleet  he  captured 
at  Boulogne.  There  might  well,  then,  have  been  dark  Franks  in 
this  sense  among  his  miscellaneous  followers  as  well  as  light. 
Franca,  like  Gall,  would  come  to  be  used  in  the  sense  of 
"  foreigner,"  having  lost  its  ethnic  value,  just  as  there  were  black 
Galls  and  white.  Now,  at  the  close  of  the  third  century,  Carausius 
settled  large  bodies  of  Frankish  mercenaries  in  Britain,  and  it  is 
not  unreasonable  to  suppose  that  he  did  so  in  Ireland  too. 

In  the  "Annals  of  the  Four  Masters,"  under  the  year  a.d.  195 
(or,  according  to  the  attempt  at  chronology  made  by  O'Flaherty  J 
in  his  "  Ogygia,"  in  a.d.  250 — that  is,  some  forty  years  before  the 
revolt  of  Carausius),  we  are  made  acquainted  with  a  personage 
who  singularly  resembles  him.  This  was  one  Lughaidh  Maccon, 
who  slew  Art,  son  of  Con,  in  battle  at  Magh-Mucruimhe.  He  is 
represented  as  an  exile  of  the  race  of  Ith,  who,  returning  from 
abroad,  landed,  according  to  Tighernach,  on  a  Thursday  in  Galway 
Bay.  His  forces  consisted  of  bands  of  foreign  auxiliaries,  whom 
we  learn  from  other  sources  consisted  of  Frankish  and  Saxon 
adventurers.  Seven  days  after  his  arrival  his  mercenaries  won 
for  him  the  battle  we  have  mentioned — an  ingens  clades,  as 
O' Flaherty  terms  it,  near  Athenry,  eight  miles  from  Galway.  I 
cannot  say  that  I  think  that  there  is  sufficient  evidence  to  associate 
the  traditional  Maccon  with  Carausius,  but  it  is  certainly  singular 
that  in  the  third  century  two  tyrant  sea-rovers  should  be  landing 
Frankish  mercenaries  on  the  coasts  of  the  British  Isles.  In 
addition  to  this,  the  Irish  traditions  of  Maccon  and  the  Roman 
traditions  of  Carausius  are  identical  in  two  respects — namely,  as 
to  their  tyrannical  usurpation  and  the  vileness  of  their  birth.  Of 
Carausius  §  Eutropius  says  that  he  was  vilissime  natns,  and 
Orosius   that   he   was  geiiere   infimus.     Now,    the    tyranny   and 

t  '*  Aurelius  Victor,"  Cres.  Epit.  xxxix.  3.     See  also  note  in  Valpy's  Delph.,  edit.  vol.  i.  p.  427. 
\  "Ogygia,"  p.  148. 

§  "  History   of  Carausius,  an   examination  of  what   has   been  advanced   by   Genebrier   and 
Stukeley,"  Anon.,  London  (1762),  410,  p.  4, 


Anthropology  and  Ethnology.  1039 

meanness  of  Maccon  form  the  staple  of  tales  written  down  from 
the  Middle  Ages  in  Ireland  until  the  last  century,  and  still  repeated, 
as  I  heard  them  myself,  orally,  in  the  very  part  of  Donegal  where 
the  name  Franca  is  perpetuated.  As  to  the  vileness  of  his  birth, 
that  portion  of  the  old  tradition  is  not  fit  for  repetition.  Suffice 
it  to  say  that  the  legend  makes  him,  although  half-brother  of 
Cormac,  literally  the  son  of  a  dog  [mac-coji),  as  a  proof  of  which 
it  was  said  that  every  night  before  going  to  sleep  he  used  to  turn 
himself  round  in  a  circle  in  the  way  that  dogs  do.  That  Carausius 
is  sometimes  spoken  of  as  an  ex7il  Romanus  (not  inappropriately, 
considering  that  an  order  had  gone  forth  for  him  to  be  put  to 
death)  coincides  also  with  the  fact  that  prior  to  his  attack  on 
Galway  Bay,  Lughaidh  Maccon  is  also  described  as  an  exile. 

Let  these  resemblances  be  v/orth  what  they  may,  the  tradition 
of  Franks  having  landed  in  this  district  seems  undoubtedly  based 
on  a  genuine  historical  occurrence.  There  is  another  very  small 
point  which,  if  it  be  worth  anything,  is  corroborative  of  the  con- 
nection of  Francas  with  Galway  Bay.  There  is  a  tradition  that 
on  the  Isles  of  Aran  no  rat  could  ever  land.  By  7'at  I  am  con- 
vinced that  some  race  of  pirates  or  plunderers  is  intended,  who, 
after  making  descents  on  the  coast  of  Ireland,  and  ravaging  them, 
attempted  to  make  fixed  settlements  in  the  country.  We  hear 
of  them  also  in  Leinster,  from  which  province  Ibor,  who  is  also 
connected  with  the  Aran  Isles,  and  represented  as  a  Christian 
bishop  before  Patrick,  is  said  to  have  driven  them  out.  Now,  rat 
in  Irish  is  hicha  Frajica — Frankish  mouse — a  desiofnation  which 
that  animal  also  bears  in  Wales.  In  Aran,  which  in  Maccon's 
time  was  perhaps  held  by  a  division  of  a  native  tribe  on  the 
mainland  called  Eoganacht,  there  were  exceedingly  strong  for- 
tresses which  may  have  been  held  successfully  against  the  Frankish 
marauders,  who,  as  time  went  on,  and  true  history  passed  into 
allegory,  might  well  have  been  called  Frankish  rats,  both  because 
the  habits  of  the  animal  were  piratical,  and  the  country  whence  it 
was  supposed  to  have  come  was  the  land  of  the  Franca,  f 

With  regard  to  the  Franca  people  in  Donegal — tall,  dark, 
impetuous,  and  easily  provoked — it  is  curious  to  observe  how  great 
an  influence  can  be  gained  over  them  by  the  more  prudent  and 
calculating  men  of  what  we  have  termed  the  lighter  Finnish  type. 

t  I  have  elsewhere  compared  the  name  of  the  Irish  mythical  ancestor,  Hugaine  M6r,  with  that 
of  Hugon,  the  eponymous  of  the  Hugones  or  Franks. 


I040  The  Dolmens  of  Ireland. 

From  the  old  Irish  districts  of  the  extreme  north-west,  I  now 
turn  to  the  extreme  south-west,  where  the  proportion  of  nigrescence 
is  equally  great,  and  where  genuine  old  native  types  may  also  be 
expected.  The  following  description  by  Dr.  Beddoe  of  the  people 
near  Ventry  and  Cahirciveen,  in  the  far  west  of  Kerry,  will  serve 
to  show  how  great  is  the  variety  which  may  be  expected  even  in 
a  district  where  extraneous  influences  in  historic  times  would  have 
been  least  felt.  It  goes  to  show  how  impossible  it  is  to  reduce 
the  ethnic  question  in  Ireland  into  its  simple  elements,  and  that 
from  the  most  remote  period  to  which  we  can  ascend,  not  one 
or  two,  but  many  and  diverse  ethnic  types  had  been  already 
brought  together  to  form  that  one  distinct  picture  of  a  man,  so 
easy  to  describe,  yet  so  complicated  in  his  composition,  and  so 
hard  to  account  for,  the  typical  Irishman.  "  The  men,"  says  Dr. 
Beddoe,  "are  of  good  stature,  and  many  of  them  approach  six 
feet ;  they  have  square,  but  not  very  broad,  shoulders.  Their 
heads  are  long ;  they  project  about  the  occiput,  but  are  not  large 
in  the  cerebellar  region."  In  respect  of  head-breadth,  the  near 
resemblance  of  the  Munstermen  in  o-eneral  to  the  averao^e  Hiorh- 
lander  is  to  be  observed.  "  The  nasal  notch  is  deep ;  the  brows 
are  prominent  and  square  ;  but  the  frontal  sinuses  apparently  not 
large,  the  glabella  being  inconspicuous.  The  forehead  is  flat,  of 
good  breadth,  apparently ;  it  recedes  somewhat,  and  the  hair, 
which  is  profuse  and  wavy,  but  seldom  strongly  curled,  grows  low 
upon  it.  The  upper  part  of  the  head  presents  a  regular,  gentle 
curve.  The  nose  is  generally  long  and  sinuous,  except  in  those 
who  are  notably  prognathous,  in  whom  it  is  generally  of  moderate 
length  and  somewhat  concave  ;  in  either  case  it  is  pointed,  and 
has  the  true  Gaelic  nostril,  which  is  long  and  narrow,  and  often 
conspicuously  visible.  Quite  a  due  proportion,  perhaps  more,  of 
the  fairer  people  belong  to  the  prognathous  class.  This  is  a  little 
strange,  as  in  the  West  of  England  prognathousness  goes  with 
dark  hair.  The  eyes  are  light  grey,  bluish-grey,  ash-grey,  dark 
sea-grey  {bleu,  de  mer  foncd  of  De  Belloguet),  often  with  a  dark 
rim  round  the  iris,  or  brown  ;  hazel  is  rare,  and  so  is  clear  China 
blue ;  they  are  narrow  in  men,  and  wrinkles  appear  about  them 
early.  The  common  colour  of  the  hair  is  a  dark  brown,  approach- 
ing black;  but  coal  black  is  very  frequent.  Red  and  a  sort  of 
sandy  flaxen  hue  also  occur  pretty  often  ;  medium  brown  is 
(comparatively)  rather  uncommon."    On  the  relation  of  hair-colour 


Anthropology  and  Ethnology.  104  i 

to  head-breadth,  Dr.  Beddoe  observes  in  another  place  that  it 
surprised  him  to  find  that  "  eight  black-haired  Kerrymen  had  heads 
broader  by  a  half  per  cent,  than  twenty-four  others  "  with  hair 
of  other  hue.  "  The  cheek-bones  and  zygomata  are  rather  broad, 
the  mouth  coarse,  often  open,  the  lips  thick,  the  teeth  good,  the 
chin  rather  narrow,  with  little  depressions  between  it  and  the  lip. 
The  lower  jaw  is  narrow,  and  ascends  steeply  from  near  the  chin 
to  the  ear,  and  there  is  often  but  a  slight  fold  between  this  and 
the  stemomastoid  muscle."  Intermixed  with  this  type,  which  is 
evidently  closely  related  to  the  one  which  dominates  in  the  West 
Highlands  of  Scotland,  occurs  in  smaller  proportion  the  Sancho 
Panza  type  of  Mr.  Maclean,  which  we  have  noted  above. 

From  the  dark-haired  peoples,  short  or  tall,  long-headed  or 
broad-headed,  we  pass  at  length  to  the  ''  long-headed  xantkockroi,'' 
as  Professor  Huxley  termed  them,  who  peopled  Northern,  or 
Baltic,  Europe — our  Scando-Germanic  type — to  whom  the  Cale- 
donians were  akin.  Mr.  Hector  Maclean  thus  describes  the 
long-headed  Highlander  :  "  He  is  of  various  sizes,  but  often  tall ; 
he  is  of  various  complexion,  the  colour  of  the  skin  ranging  from  a 
ruddy  white  to  a  swarthy  hue  ;  the  shape  of  the  body  often 
graceful ;  the  head  high  and  long,  and  the  profile  more  or  less 
convex  ;  the  lips  usually  full,  often  thick,  and  more  or  less  pro- 
jecting ;  the  chin  and  lower  jaw  obliquely  placed,  and  the  contour 
of  the  lower  jaw,  taken  from  its  junction  with  the  neck,  but 
slightly  curved,  often  appearing  to  the  eye  as  if  it  were  a  straight 
line ;  the  chin  seldom  round,  and  generally  somewhat  trape- 
zoidal ;  the  forehead,  viewed  in  profile,  generally  increasing  in 
prominence  from  the  coronal  region  towards  the  eyebrows  ;  the 
face,  from  the  external  orbital  angles  to  the  point  of  the  chin,  long 
— a  characteristic,"  adds  the  writer,  "  of  which  the  old  Gael, 
Feinn,  or  Scots,  seem  to  have  felt  rather  proud,  as  see  the  *  Lay 
of  Diarmaid,'  in  Campbell's  'West  Highland  Tales'  ;  the  nose  is 
frequently  large  and  prominent ;  the  eyebrows  prominent,  long, 
slightly  arched,  sometimes  closely  approaching  a  straight  line  ; 
the  cheek-bones  large  and  prominent ;  the  eyes  mostly  grey  or 
bluish-grey,  sometimes  dark  grey  and  dark  brown  ;  the  hair 
reddish-yellow,  yellowish-red,  but  more  frequently  of  various 
shades  of  brown,  of  which  yellow  (or  rather  '  red,  or  reddish 
yellow,'  adds  Dr.  Beddoe)  is  the  ground-colour  ;  sometimes,  when 
it  appears  altogether  black,  a  yellow   tinge  is  discovered  when 


1042  The  Dolmens  of  Ireland. 

it  is  closely  examined.  When  mixed  with  other  types,  the  hair 
is  coal-black,  but  hardly  ever  so  when  pure.  The  leg  and  foot 
are  usually  well  developed,  though  long  in  proportion  ;  instep 
hio-h ;  ankle  well  shapen  and  of  moderate  size ;  step  very  elastic, 
and  rather  springing,  the  heel  being  well  raised  and  the  knee  well 
bent.  They  are  quick  in  temper  and  very  emotional,  seldom 
speaking  without  being  influenced  by  one  feeling  or  another ; 
more  quick  than  accurate  in  observation ;  clear  thinkers,  but 
wanting  in  deliberation.  They  have  a  fertile  and  vivid  imagina- 
tion ;  love  the  absolute  in  thought  and  principle ;  dislike  ex- 
pediency and  doubt ;  sympathetic  with  the  weak  ;  patriotic  ; 
chivalrous  ;  disposed  to  a  sentimental  melancholy,  but  hopeful  and 
sanguine ;  very  witty  and  eloquent ;  lovers  of  the  animal  king- 
dom ;  sometimes  excel  in  zoological  science." 

Dr.  Beddoe  remarks  of  the  Scottish  Highlanders  :  "  The 
longer  I  have  known^them  the  more  diversity  I  have  seen.  Never- 
theless, there  is  a  certain  central  type  round  which  the  subordinate 
ones  cluster."  As  far  as  their  head-breadth  is  concerned,  the 
indices  show  great  homogeneity.  "  The  ratios  vary  only  between 
69  and  82  as  extremes,  and  culminate  very  distinctly  at  76.  The 
average  is  j6'2j,  so  that  in  the  skull  it  will  hardly  exceed  74. 
In  forty  West  Highlandmen  he  found  it  to  be  only  75*87.  In 
sixteen  from  the  eastern  districts  it  rose  to  y6'g.  The  head  and 
face  are  long  and  rather  narrow ;  the  skull-base  rather  narrow  ; 
the  brows  and  occiput  prominent ;  the  eyes  generally  light ;  of 
the  55  examples  whose  heads  were  measured,  they  were  blue  or 
bluish-grey  in  30,  grey  in  19,  light  brown  or  dark  brown  in  8, 
of  which  only  one  was  true  hazel.  The  hair  in  48  examples  was 
thus  divided:  5  red,  4  fair,  3  lightish  brown,  11  brown,  17  dark 
brown,  5  brown-black,  3  coal-black.  These  proportions  are  very 
nearly  those  which  prevail  throughout  the  Highlands." 

When  considering  the  question  of  type-survival  in  the  High- 
lands, we  can  never  forget  that  Tacitus,  recording  the  observa- 
tions of  Agricola,  gives,  in  one  brief  but  graphic  sentence,  a 
glimpse  of  them  as  they  appeared  in  his  time  :  "  The  red  hair 
and  large  limbs  of  the  Caledonians  point  clearly  to  a  German 
origin."  For  myself  I  am  inclined  to  set  a  high  value  on 
this  as  on  other  ethnological  observations  emanating  from  a 
highly  cultivated  Roman  commander,  the  expression  of  whose 
thoughts  on  these  subjects  was  the  result  of  personal  experience 


Anthropology  and  Ethnology.  1043 


among  the  various  peoples  of  whom  he  speaks.  I  believe  that  in 
the  instance  here  before  us  we  have  no  mere  chance  resemblance, 
but  the  clue  to  an  ethnological  fact  of  the  first  importance,  namely, 
that  in  sub-historic  times  the  relations  of  Scotland  and  Ireland  with 
the  Continent  point  to  Germany  and  the   Baltic  coasts,  just  as 


Fig.  772. — Irish,  armed  with  skeans.     From  the  Harleian  MSS. 

those  of  South  Britain,  in  and  previous  to  the  first  century  of  our 
era,  point  to  Belgic  Gaul.  In  the  former  case  it  was  dolicho- 
cephaly  that  was  represented,  pure  and  simple,  of  the  Scando- 
Germanic  type  ;  in  the  latter  it  was  dolichocephaly  in  modified 
form,  the  result  of  admixture  between  Germans  who  had  crossed 
the  Rhine  into  Belgium,  with  the  brachycephali  who  were  more 
anciently  settled  in  that  country.  With  regard  to  the  colour  of 
the  hair,  it  was,  to  use  once  more  Professor  Huxley's  terms,  the 
long-headed  xanthochroi,  who  inhabited  Scotland  and  the  best 
portions  of  Northern  and  Eastern  Ireland,  and  it  was  the  short- 
headed  xanthochroi  who  peopled  South  Britain  from  Belgium,  and 
gave  them  the  type  of  Queen  Bondicca. 

In  Ireland  I  think  we  have  two  types  of  xanthochroi,  which  I 
know  not  how  to  differentiate,  except  as  the  Plebeian  and  the 
Aristocratic.  In  the  case  of  the  former,  their  countenances  betray, 
I  think,  a  Finnish  intermixture  such  as  we  have  noticed  in  Aran. 
This  is  probably  the  type  of  which  Giraldus  Cambrensis  speaks 


I044  The  Dolmens  of  Ireland. 

as  being  typical  and  essentially  Irish.  It  is  the  type  of  the  two 
wild  Irish  from  Connaught,  naked  but  for  girdles  of  raw  hide, 
whom  he  describes  as  being  picked  up  at  sea  in  their  corach,  and 
whose  hair  he  describes  as  follows  :  "  Habebant  etiam,  Hiberniico 
more,  comas  perlongas  et  flavas  trans  humeros  deorsum  corpus  ex 
magna  parte  tegentes."  It  is  the  type  also  of  the  wild  Irishman 
on  the  right  of  the  picture  which  forms  the  frontispiece  to  this 
work,f  of  the  warriors  with  skeans  in  the  accompanying  figure,^ 
which  I  reproduce  from  the  Harleian  MSS.,  and  of  the  lady 
riding  hibernico  ino7'e  astraddle,  and  the  two  men  in  a  corach 
which  I  take  from  a  MS.  of  Giraldus  Cambrensis  in  the  British 
Museum. § 

The  second,  or  aristocratic  type,  is  that  of  the  so-called 
Gaedhelic  clans,  tall,  handsome,  powerfully  made,  with  long  faces, 
straight  noses,  reddish  or  yellowish  hair,  proud  of  their  clanship 
and  descent,  and  of  whose  kinship,  almost  pure,  with  the  Germans 
as  seen  by  Csesar,  and  described  by  so  many  others,  I  make  not 
the  slightest  doubt.  As  an  example  of  this  I  give  the  accom- 
panying portrait  of  Owen  Roe  O'Neil,  and  refer  to  the  figure 
on  the  left  in  the  frontispiece. 

For  the  purpose  of  carrying  our  ethnological  problem  across 
the  channel  from  North  Britain  into  Ireland,  it  is  of  the  utmost 
importance  to  note  that  it  is  impossible  to  separate  the 
Caledonians  from  the  Picts.  The  Panegyrist  of  Constantius 
speaks,  for  example,  of  the  "  Caledonians  and  other  Picts."  The 
Cruithne  of  Ireland  were  Picts,  and  of  them  I  shall  have  much 
more  to  say.  Meanwhile  we  will  remark  the  great  stature  and 
bulk  of  the  ancient  Irish,||  and  compare  it  with  examples  from 
Gaul  and  Britain.  To  begin  with  exaggeration  before  passing 
to  observed  fact,  we  find  that  according  to  his  legend,  Patrick 
resuscitated  a  giant,  Glas  son  of  Cas,  who  was  120  feet  high  !  A 
monarch  of  Ireland  in  the  sixth  century,  Muirchertach  More  Mac 
Erca,  was  15  feet  high!  The  head  of  another,  Eochy  Mac 
Luchta,  was  as  big  as  a  large  cauldron ;  the  largest  goose  might 
easily  pass  through  the  two  holes  of  his  eyes  in  his  skull,  and 


t  Corte  Beschryvinghe  van  England,  Scotlande  ende  Irlond,  MS.  i6th  cent.,  Lib.  Brit.  Mus. 
(P-  34)- 

X  Fig.  772  ;  from  O'Donovan  in  U.J. A. 

§  Topog.  Ilibern.  MS.,  13th  cent.,  Lib.  Brit.  Mus. 

II  For  mucii  of  the  following  I  am  indebted  to  O'Donovan's  most  interesting  paper  on  the 
"  Physical  Characteristics  of  the  Ancient  Irish,"  U.J.A.,  vol.  vi.  pp.  191-202. 


Anthropology  and  Ethnology. 


1045 


through  a  hole  in  the  spinal  marrow  !  Size,  then,  was  tradi- 
tionally associated  with  chieftainship  and  power  in  the  minds  of 
those  who  recited  and  listened  to  the  romances. 


Fig.  773. — Owen  Roe  O'Neil.f 

To  have  done  with  fable,  Jerome,  in  his  "  Demonstratio  quod 
Christus  sit  Deus,"  describes  two  Scottish  ecclesiastics,  Celestius 
and  Albinus,    who  were  in   Rome  about  the  year   387,   in  terms 

t  See  U.J.  A.,  vol.  iv.  pp.  25  and  39.     The  original  is  painted  on  wood  by  Van  Brugens.     The 
colour  of  the  hair  is  light  with  a  tinge  of  red. 


1046  The  Dolmens  of  Ireland. 


which,  however  disgusting  as  applied  to  adversaries,  plainly  in- 
dicate their  stature  and  bulk.  Of  Celestius  he  says  that  he  was 
"  Scotorum  pultibus  prsegravatus,"  that  is,  "  bloated  with  Scotch 
porridge  ;"  and  of  Albinus  that  he  was  "  canem  grandis  et  cor- 
pulentus,  et  qui  calcibus  ('kicks')  magis  possit  ssvire  quam 
dentibus  ;  habet  enim  progeniem  Scoticae  gentis  de  Britannorum 
vicinia."  Jerome,  as  we  have  seen,  had  no  love  for  the  Scoti,  of 
whom  he  tells  us  Pelagius  was  one.  O' Donovan,  however,  who  can 
brook  no  slight  on  the  Irish  name,  and  no  blemish  to  the  Scotic 
honour,  dismisses  the  culminator  by  the  remark  that  his  statements 
in  reo-ard  to  these  matters  are  "  good  enough  for  an  old  gentleman 
who  was  flogged,  as  he  says,  by  an  angel  for  reading  Cicero ! " 

More  interesting  are  the  statements  respecting  the  gigantic 
structure  of  the  Irish  at  the  time  of  the  English  invasion,  before 
admixture  with  Norman  blood.  Giraldus  Cambrensis,  who  visited 
Ireland  at  the  close  of  the  twelfth  century,  states  that  while 
animals  in  the  island  were  smaller  than  he  had  seen  elsewhere, 
man  alone  retained  his  majesty  of  stature,  "solis  hominibus  suam 
retinentibus  majestatem."  f 

Again,  he  makes  the  following  statement  which  is  of  special 
interest  to  the  anthropologist,  and  which  I  shall  give  as  it  stands  : 
"  Non  in  cunabulis  aptantur.  Non  fasciis  alligantur.  Non 
frequentibus  in  balneis  tenera  membra  vel  foventur  vel  artis 
juvamine  componuntur  .  .  .  Sed  sola  natura,  quos  edidit  artus, 
prseter  artis  cujuslibet  adminicula  pro  sui  arbitrio  et  componit  et 
disponit.  Tanquam  itaque  probans  quid  per  se  valeat  fingere, 
non  cessat  et  figurare  quousque  in  robur  perfectum,  pulcherrimis 
et  proceris  corporibus,  et  coloratissimis  vultibus  homines  istos 
provehat  et  producat."  | 

Although,  then,  no  special  arts  of  nursing  were  employed,  the 
Irish  grew  up  to  be  exceedingly  tall  and  handsome,  strongly  and 
symmetrically  formed,  the  colour  of  their  faces  indicating  the 
healthy  condition  of  their  general  physique. 

Speaking  of  Dermot  Mac  Murrough,  Giraldus  says:  "  Erat 
autem  Dermitius  vir  staturse  grandis  et  corpore  peramplo  :  vir  belli- 
cosus  et  audax  in  gente  sua :  ex  crebro  continuoque  belli  clamore 
voce  raucisona.  Timeri  a  cunctis  quam  diligi  malens ;  nobilium 
oppressor,  humilium  erector,  infestus  suis,  exosus  alienis."  § 


t  "Topog.  Hib.,"  Dist.  i.  c.  xix.         %  Id.,  Dist.  iii.  c.  x.        §  "  Hib.  Expug."  lib.  i.  c.  vi. 


Anthropology  and  Ethnology.  1047 


In  a  metrical  "  Histoire  du  Roy  d'Angleterre  Richard,"  that  is, 
Richard  II.,  the  author,  a  French  gentleman,  describes  a  visit 
paid  by  him,  in  company  with  the  Earl  of  Gloucester,  to  Art 
Mac  Murrough,  seventh  in  descent  from  this  Dermot  of  Giraldus. 
He  portrays  him  as — 

"  asselz  bel 
Grans  homs  estoit,  a  marveillez  ysnel 
A  vous  dueil  sembloit  fort  fier  et  fel 
Et  homs  de  fait."  f 

A  picture  shows  him  riding  swiftly  down  a  pass,  between  two 
woods  from  a  mountain.  He  is  helmeted,  but  has  naked  feet. 
In  the  sequel  the  remarkable  swiftness  of  the  Irish,  who  were  as 
nimble  and  swift  of  foot  as  stags,  is  specially  noticed,  as  later  on  it 
was  by  an  informant  of  Froissart. 

In  the  sixteenth  century  many  passages  may  be  quoted  from 
the  State  Papers  and  other  sources  in  proof  of  the  great  services 
rendered  by  the  Irish  in  war,  notably  at  the  siege  of  Boulogne.  In 
1567,  Campion,  in  his  "  History  of  Ireland,"  J  says  of  the  people, 
"  Cleare  men  they  are  of  skinn  and  hue,  but  of  themselves  careless 
and  bestiall.  Their  women  are  well  favoured,  clear-coloured,  fair- 
handed,  bigge  and  large,  suffered  from  their  infancy  to  grow  at 
will  ...  It  is  counted  a  beauty  in  them  to  be  tall,  round, 
and  fat." 

Spenser,  in  his  "View  of  the  State  of  Ireland  "§  (1596),  says, 
"  I  have  heard  some  great  warriors  say  that  in  all  the  services 
which  they  had  seen  abroade  in  foreigne  countreyes,  they  never 
saw  a  more  comely  man  than  the  Irish  man,  nor  that  cometh  on 
more  bravely  to  his  charge ;  neither  is  his  manner  of  mounting 
unseemly,  though  he  lacke  stirruppes,  but  more  ready  than  with 
stirruppes,  for  in  his  getting  up  his  horse  is  still  going."  And 
again,  jj  "Yet  sure  they  are  very  valiant  and  hardie,  for  the  most 
part  great  indurers  of  colde,  labours,  hunger,  and  all  hardnesse  ; 
very  active  and  strong  of  hand ;  very  swift  of  foot ;  very  vigilant 
and  circumspect  in  their  enterprises,  very  present  in  perils,  very 
ofreat  scorners  of  death." 

Fynes  Moryson,  in  his  "  Description  of  the  State  of  Ireland," 
says,  "  By  the  abundance  of  cattle,  the  Irish  have  a  frequent 
though  somewhat  poor  traffick  for  their  hides,  the  cattle  being  in 

t  "  Archaeologia,"  vol.  xx.  p.  40.  t  Chap.  vi. 

§  "Edit.  Dub.,"  p.  116.  II  Id.,  p.  119. 


1048  The  Dolmens  of  Ireland. 

general  very  little,  and  only  the  men  and  the  grey-hoimds  are  of 
great  stature!' 

John  Dymoke.f  in  the  end  of  the  sixteenth  century,  says,  "  Of 
complexion  they  (the  Irish)  are  cleaj^e  and  luell-favoured,  both  men 
and  iuo?nen  ;  tall  and  corptdant  bodies^ 

O' Donovan  gives  the  following  curious  instances  of  Irishmen, 
who  have  been  described  by  their  contemporaries  as  of  gigantic 
frame.  The  first  is  "  Florence  Mac  Carthy,  born  in  1554,  who 
is  described  by  Sir  George  Carew  as  taller  by  the  head  and 
shoulders  than  his  followers."  The  second  is  "  Morgan  Kavanagh, 
governor  of  Prague  in  1766,  described  as  the  largest  man  in 
Europe,  some  of  whose  relatives  are  still  extant  in  Germany,  and 
were  described  by  Professor  Neimann  of  Vienna,  in  1844,  as  the 
tallest  men  in  Germany ;  they  are  the  descendants  of  Brian  na- 
stroice  Kavanagh,  who  was  the  largest  man  in  King  James  the 
II.'s  army."  The  third  is  "Big  Magrath,  whose  skeleton  is 
preserved  in  the  anatomical  museum  of  Trinity  College,  Dublin." 
The  fourth  is  "John  O'Neill  of  Banville,  in  the  county  Down, 
who  is  described  by  Dr.  Stuart,  in  his  'History  of  Armagh 'J 
as  *a  man  most  remarkable  for  prodigious  strength,  majestic 
form,  princely  deportment,  affable  manners,  and  unbounded 
benevolence.' " 

Sir  Richard  Musgrave,  in  describing  the  family  of  O'Dowda 
in  Lower  Connaught,  says,  in  his  "  Memoirs  of  the  Different 
Rebellions  in  Ireland,"  "This  family  counted  twenty-four  castles 
on  their  extensive  estate,  many  of  which  are  still  in  existence,  and 
they  have  a  burying-place  appropriated  to  them  in  the  Abbey  of 
Moyne,  where  may  be  seen  the  gigantic  bones  of  some  of  them 
who  have  been  remarkable  for  their  great  stature,  one  of  them 
having  exceeded  seven  feet  in  height y 

In  185 1  there  died  at  Plymouth  The  O'Driscoll  described  by 
O'Donovan  as  a  "  magnificent  specimen  of  the  old  Milesian 
■race,"  and  by  his  own  son  as  "  mighty  of  limb,  and  strong  of 
sinew,  very  tall  and  broad  in  proportion  ;  of  noble  countenance, 
and  in  pitch  of  body  like  a  giant."  Another  O'Driscoll  is 
described  as  "  in  appearance  far  beyond  the  ordinary  run  of  men, 
being  remarkably  handsome,  tall  and  athletic,  appearing  like  the 
son  of  a  giant','  and  his  son,  again,  was  a  "  remarkably  fine-looking 

+  See  "Tracts  relating  to  Ireland,  printed  for  the  Irish  Archreological  Society,"  vol.  ii.  p.  6. 
X  pp-  130,  630. 


Anthropology  and  Ethnology.  1049 


man  ;  he  looked  like  a  prince  ;  hunted  well,  rode  well,  drank  well ; 
his  hospitality  was  boundless  to  all."  Lastly,  O'Donovan  mentions 
a  "very  remarkable  man  of  the  old  Irish  race,  Mr.  William 
Gaffrey  (O'Gamhna)  of  Glenmore  in  the  barony  of  Ida,  County 
Kilkenny.  He  stood  six  feet  four  inches  in  height,  and  was  robust, 
strong,  and  athletic  in  proportion.  He  was  so  dexterous  a 
swimmer  that  it  was  believed  he  could  *  walk  on  the  water '  from 
New  Ross  to  Waterford." 

In  order  to  realize  the  ideal  type  of  beauty  which  commended 
Itself  to  the  Irish  In  the  early  Middle  Ages,  and  which  we  may 
therefore  take  for  granted  was  descriptive  of  their  chieftains, 
'  we  will  take  the  following  examples :  "  Eladha,  king  of  the 
Fomorians,  had  golden  hair  down  to  his  two  shoulders.  He 
wore  a  cloak  braided  with  golden  thread,  a  shirt  interwoven  with 
threads  of  gold,  and  a  brooch  of  gold  at  his  breast,  emblazoned 
with  brilliant  precious  stones.  He  carried  two  bright  silver 
spears,  with  fine  bronze  handles  in  his  hand  ;  a  shield  of  gold 
over  his  shoulder,  and  a  gold-hllted  sword,  with  veins  of  silver 
and  with  paps  of  gold."  f  With  the  description  of  this  gorgeous 
dress,  and  the  chieftain  with  the  yellow  locks  who  wore  it,  it  may 
not  be  irrelevant  to  compare  the  figure  of  the  Esthonian  warrior, 
restored  from  the  ornaments  found  in  graves  in  that  country,  and 
represented  In  colours  in  Kruse's  "  Necrolivonlca."  J 

The  following  is  the  description  of  the  hair  of  Edain, 
daughter  of  Etar,  a  chief  of  the  Tuatha  De  Danann  :  "  Two 
golden-yellow  tresses  upon  her  head,  each  of  them  plaited  with 
four  locks  or  strands,  and  a  ball  of  gold  upon  the  point  of  each 
tress.  The  colour  of  that  hair  was  like  the  flowers  of  the  boe 
firs  in  summer,  or  like  red  gold  immediately  after  receiving  its 
colouring."  § 

Under  the  Fir-Bolg,  and  most  important  of  their  tribes,  the 
Irish  authorities  place  the  Fir-Domnan.  Prominent  among  them 
stands  out  the  figure  of  the  hero  Ferdlad,  over  whom  his 
victorious  antagonist  Cuchulaind  thus  mourns  :  "  Dear  to  me 
with  thy  beautiful  ruddiness,  thy  comely  perfect  form,  thy  grey, 
clear  blue  eye,  thy  wisdom  and  thine  eloquence."  As  Dr. 
W.  K.  Sullivan  remarks,  the  description  of  his  hair  might  equally 

t  Egerton  MSS.,  5280,  Brit.  Mus.,  f.  52,  el  sccjcj.  ;  transl.  O'Curry,  M.  and  C,  iii.  pp.  155, 156. 
X  Plate  78.     See  note  on  hair-colour,  p.  1052,  infra. 

§  MS.  T.C.D.H.,  2,   16,  col.  716;  transl.  by  Curry,  M.  and  C,  iii.  pp.   1S9,  190.     Compare 
the  auricomi  Batavi  of  Silius  Italicus,  5,  608. 

VOL.  in.  z 


1050  The  Dolmens  of  Ireland. 

well  apply  to  a  Prankish  chief:    "Thy   yellow  flowing  hair,  the 
curled  the  beautiful  jewel."  f 

The  same  writer,  Dr.  Sullivan,  considers  that  the  hair  of 
the  ancient  nobility  of  Erin  was  rather  golden  than  flaxen.  He 
instances  Ere,  the  brother  of  Dathi  (in  the  latter  of  whom  we  shall 
have  reason  for  recognizing  a  Rugian),  as  being  called  "  Ctclbuidkc, 
because  smelted  gold  was  not  yellower  than  his  hair."  J  Again,  it  is 
to  the  blossom  of  the  sobarche,  or  St.  John's-wort,  or  to  the  ailesUr, 
or  yellow  iris  that  the  hair  of  Edain,  as  mentioned  above,  is 
likened.  To  the  colour  of  the  former  of  these  flowers  was 
compared  also  the  hair  of  King  Niall  "of  the  Nine  Hostages." 
"Yellow  as  the  sobarche  was  the  yellow  hair  which  was  upon 
the  head  of  the  son  of  Cairen."  §  Cuchulaind  himself  had  golden 
hair,  blue  eyes,  and  noble  stature. || 

These  comparisons  show  that  the  hair  of  all  these  traditional 
saga  people — Fomorians,  Fir-Bolg,  Tuatha  De  Danann  and 
Milesians — were  believed,  when  the  tales  were  recited,  to  have 
possessed  the  colour  of  the  hair  most  admired,  namely,  "  a  rich 
golden,  passing  almost  to  a  red  hue." 

Medb,  Queen  of  Connacht,  is  thus  described  in  the  tale  called 
the  Tain  Bo  Cttailgne :  "A  beautiful,  pale,  long-faced  woman, 
with  long-flowing  golden-yellow  hair  upon  her,  a  crimson  cloak 
fastened  with  a  brooch  of  gold  over  her  breast ;  a  straight-ridged 
sle^^/i,  or  light  spear,  blazing  red  in  her  hand."  ^  With  this  description 
we  may  set  side  by  side  that  of  Boudicca,  queen  of  the  Iceni,  a 
people  in  East  Britain,  north  of  the  Stour,  as  given  by  Dion 
Cassius.  "  She  was  of  large  size,  terrible  of  aspect,  savage  of 
countenance,  harsh  of  voice,  and  a  profusion  of  flowing  yellow 
hair,  which  fell  down  to  her  hips,  a  large  golden  collar  on  her 
neck,  a  variegated  flowing  vest  drawn  close  about  her  bosom, 
and  a  thick  mantle  fastened  by  a  clasp  or  brooch,  and  a  spear  in 
her  hand." 

The  most  graphic  description  of  Irish  chieftains  by  a  romance 
writer  is  that  which,  in  the  "  Tale  of  the  Tdin  Bo  Cuailgne,''  is 
put  into  the  mouth  of  Mac  Roth,  who  gives  an  account  to  Queen 

t  See  this  poem  translated,  with  the  original,  in  the  App.  to  O'Curry's  M.  and  C.  (vol.  iii.), 
P-  413- 

\  See  Introd.  to  O'Curry's  M.  and  C.  (vol.  i.),  Ixxii.,  and  "The  Genealogies,  Tribes,  and 
Customs  of  High  Fiachrach,"  edit.  O'Donovan,  "  Irish  Archruol.  Soc,"  1844,  p.  5. 

§  Loc.  cit.,  p.  Ixxiii.  1|  lb.,  p.  Ixxii. 

^  Loc.  cit.,  p.  Ixxiv.  With  the  name  Medb  I  am  inclined  to  associate  the  female  name  Medea, 
which  we  meet  with  in  Pomerania.  We  find  it  as  late  as  the  tenth  century  as  that  of  a  heathea 
c|ueen  married  to  Bilung.     See  MicrKlius,  "  Anlt.  Pom.,"  Geneal.  Table. 


Anthropology  and  Ethnology.  105  i 

Medb  of  the  appearance  of  the  Uhonians  as  they  trooped,  com- 
pany by  company,  past  the  mound  which  had  been  raised  for  the 
King  ConcJiobtw  to  sit  upon.  The  king  himself  was  tall  and 
graceful.  He  wore  a  mass  of  fair,  yellow,  curling,  drooping  hair. 
He  had  a  pleasing,  ruddy  countenance.  He  had  a  deep- blue, 
sparkling,  piercing,  terrific  eye,  and  a  two-branching  beard,  yellow 
and  curling  upon  his  chin.  His  son,  Caiiscraid  Mend  MacJLa,\  had 
fair,  yellow  hair,  and  a  glossy,  curling  beard.  Sencha,  the  prime 
minister,  had  a  broad  head,  with  long,  flowing,  brown-yellow  hair, 
a  sharp,  black-blue  eye,  and  a  divided,  two-branching,  curling,. 
narrow  beard.  Egan  Mac  Dtirthachta  was  a  fair,  tall,  great  man, 
of  a  florid,  noble  countenance,  with  soft,  brown  hair,  falling  in 
thin,  smooth  locks  upon  his  forehead.  Loegaire%  Buadach  was 
a  large-headed  man,  of  hound-like,  hateful  face.  He  had  light, 
grisly  hair,  and  large,  yellow  eyes  in  his  head.  Munreimir  was  a 
thick-necked,  corpulent  man,  with  black,  short,  bushy  hair,  a 
scarred,  crimson  face,  and  grey,  sparkling  eyes.  Connud,  son  of 
Morna,  from  Callaind,  in  Ulster,  was  broad-faced  and  thickset, 
irritable ;  had  prominent,  dull,  and  squinting  eyes,  and  yellow, 
close-curling  hair.  Reochaid,  son  of  Fatheman,  had  a  head  of 
bushy,  red-yellow  hair,  a  face  broad  above  and  narrow  below 
("  the  true  Celtic  head  of  Ireland,"  says  O'Curry),  a  deep,  grey,, 
flashing,  flaming,  brilliant  eye,  and  pearly-white  teeth  (evidently 
an  ideal  type).  Ainargin,  son  of  Ecelsalach  the  smith,  was  a 
beautiful,  active  man.  Feradach  Fin  Fechtnach  was  entirely 
fair  in  hair,  eyes,  beard,  eyebrows,  and  dress.  Celtchair  Mac 
Uthair  was  an  angry,  terrific,  hideous  man,  long-nosed,  large- 
eared,  apple-eyed,  with  coarse,  dark-grey  hair.  Eirrge  Echbel 
had  one  eye  black  and  the  other  white  ;  he  was  firm  and  furious, 
hideous  and  terrible,  a  wry-necked  man  with  long  hands,  and 
with  brown,  thick,  curling  hair.  Mend,  son  of  Salcholgan,  was  a 
fine  man,  with  foxy-red  hair,  and  foxy-red,  large  eyes.  Fergna, 
son  of  Findconna,  was  a  long-cheeked,  swarthy  man,  long-limbed, 
and  with  black  hair.  Lastly,  the  men  of  Muirteimne,  that  is 
to  say,  Cuchulaind's,  are  described  as  three  thousand  blood-red, 
furious  warriors,  white,  clean,  dignified,  crimson-faced  men. 
They  had  long,  fair,  yellow  hair,  splendid  bright  countenances, 
and  sparkling,  kingly  eyes.§  

t  Macka  in  old  Sclavonic  signified  "royal,"  or  a  jirince  or  ruler  ;  a  more  likely  derivation,  per- 
haps, than  that  from  the  Irish  inacha,  a  "  scald-crow." 
X  This  name  is  the  Irish  form  of  Lothair. 
§  See  O'Curry,  who  gives  all  these  descriptions  in  the  original,  M.  and  C,  iii.  pp.  92-97- 


1052  The  Dolmens  of  Ireland. 

It  will  be  orathered  from  this  that  there  were  black-haired 
chieftains,  as  well  as  yellow  or  fair-haired  ones,  in  the  mind  of  the 
composer  of  the  tale,  the  details  of  which,  of  however  little  value 
as  containing  historic  truth — for  the  whole  story  is  rather  a  legend 
than  a  historic  tradition — nevertheless  were  doubtless  taken  from 
life,  and  probably  represented  well-known  characters  living  at  the 
date  of  the  recital.  "  There  were  evidently,"  says  Dr.  Sullivan, 
"two  distinct  types  of  people — one  a  high-statured,  golden- 
coloured,  or  red-haired,  fair-skinned,  and  blue  or  grey-blue  eyed 
race ;  the  other  a  dark-haired,  dark-eyed,  pale-skinned,  small  or 
medium  statured,  lithe-limbed  race.  The  two  types,"  he  con- 
tinues, "may  still  be  traced  in  the  country,  and  are  curiously 
contrasted  in  their  blushes  :  the  fair-haired  type  has  a  pinkish 
tinge,  the  other  a  full  red,  with  scarcely  a  trace  of  pink  in  their 
blush.  The  same,  or  an  analogous  type,"  he  adds,  "  forms  the 
basis  of  the  Welsh  population,  and  to  a  varying,  but  often  con- 
siderable, extent  of  that  part  of  England  west  and  north-west  of  a 
line  from  Dorsetshire  to  the  Tees,  a  part,  that  is  to  say,  of  non- 
Saxon  England."  f 

As  a  rule,  the  nobility  are  the  fair-haired, J  and  the  servile  class 
the  dark,  although  this,  as  we  have  seen  in  the  above  list  of  chiefs, 
is  not  invariably  the  case.  King  Conaire  Mor  is  described  as 
a  tall,  illustrious  chief,  with  cheeks  dazzling  white,  and  with  a 
tinge  like  that  of  the  dawn  upon  stainless  snow,  sparkling  black 
pupils  in  blue  eyes  glancing,  and  curling,  yellow  locks  ;  but  his 
swine-herds,  Dub,  Dond,  and  Dorcha,  bear  names  which  denote 
the  black,  brown,  and  dark  men  they  were. 

Dr.  Sullivan  suggests,  and  with  reason,  as  we  may  judge  by 

t  M.  and  C,  Introd.,  vol.  i.,  p.  Ixxiv. 

j  Three  colours  for  the  hair  are  recognized  by  the  Greek  and  Roman  writers  as  distinguishing 
barbarian  tribes  in  the  North.  These  are  E,av6hs,  i.e.  Jlavus  —  yellow  ;  Trv^^hs,  i.e.  rufus,  rutilus  = 
red,  between  which  zxv^  Jlavus  stands  aiiricomus  ;  AiVKbs,  i.e.  caiididus  —  flaxen.  Celts,  i.e.  Galli, 
are  called  ia.vQo\  by  Diodorus  (5.  28)  ;  riitili  by  Livy  (38.  17)  ;  flavi  by  Claudian,  in  Rutin.  (2.  1 10)  ; 
"less  red  than  the  Germans"  by  Manilius  ("Astron.,"  4.  713).  Germans  are  called  riitili  by 
Tacitus  ("  Germ.,"  4)  ;  rufi  by  Seneca  ("  De  Ira,"  c.  26) ;  flavi  by  Juvenal  (13.  164) ;  ^a.v%o\  by 
Herodian  (4.  7)  ;  rutili  by  Calpurnius  Flaccus  (decl.  2),  la.vQo\,  like  the  Celts,  by  Strabo  (7,  p. 
290) ;  irv^pol  by  Galen  on  Hippocrates  ("  Opera,"  edit.  Basle,  1538,  v.  p.  31).  Batavi  are  aiiricoiiii 
and  rufi  ("  Sil.  Ital.,"  5.  608)  ;  Usipii  tire,  flavi,  according  to  Martial  (6.  60) ;  Sicanibri  ^.xt  flavi  in 
Claudian  ("  B.  Get.,"  419),  and  in  several  other  authors  ;  so  are  Suevi  ("  Lucan.,"  2.  51)  ;  Bissula, 
a  Suebish  girl,  has  blue  eyes  and  yellow  (flavtis)  hair  (Auson.,  "  Idyll.,"  7).  Procopius  ("  B.  V.," 
I.  2)  makes  the  Goths  ^avdoL  Jerome  calls  the  Getre  (Goths)  ru^i/i  et flavi.  Priscus  makes  the 
son  of  a  Prankish  king  \avQos.  Heruli  have  blue  eyes  ("  Sidon.  Apoll.,"  8.  9) ;  Calidonians  are 
rutili  (Tac.  "  Agric,"  li).  Of  the  Sclaves,  i.e.  Wends,  Procopius  says  that  as  to  the  colour  of 
their  skin  and  hair,  they  are  neither  XivKoX  nor  i,a.vQa\,  nor  does  the  hair  run  to  black  ;  but  they  may 
be  called  inrepvOpoi,  i.e.  stibrufi  —  yellowish  red.  htxiKcis  is  more  properly  applied  to  fairness  of 
skin  than  to  lightness  of  hair-colour.  To  judge  by  the  coloured  plates  in  Kruse's  "  Nccrolivonica," 
light-ycllow  hair  largely  prevails  among  the  modern  Esthonians  and  Letts  of  the  Gulf  of  Riga  and 
the  islands  of  Monc,  Dagde,  and  Oesel.  For  the  great  stature  of  Gauls,  Germans,  and  Sclaves, 
see  Zeuss,  "  Die  Deutschen,"  pp.  49,  50. 


Ethnology  and  Tradition.  1053 

Mac  Firbis's  description  of  the  darkness  of  Fir  Bolg,  whom  he 
proceeds  to  viHfy,  that  the  fair  ruHng  classes  in  Ireland  had  a 
prejudice  against  black  hair.  Among  the  Norsemen  there  was  the 
same  prejudice,  in  support  of  which  fact  he  quotes  the  curious 
story  of  Hagny,  wife  of  King  Hior  Halfson,  in  the  Hdlfs  saga,'^ 
who  bore  her  husband  black  and  ugly  twins.  After  having  in 
vain  attempted  to  conceal  and  exchange  them,  she  discovers  them 
to  her  husband,  who  "  would  not  have  the  heljai'skinn  '  hellskins/ 
and  they  were  allowed  to  grow  up  in  bondage." 

The  Bearing  of  certain  Written  Traditions  of  Immigra- 
tions UPON  THE  Question  of  the  Ethnic  Affinities  of 
the  Irish. 

There   still   remains   a  question   to   be    asked    and    answered 
before  we  bring  to  a  close  these  pages  on  Irish  ethnology. 

The  entire  field  of  European  literature  does  not  present  the 
student  with  a  phenomenon  more  singular  nor  with  a  problem  the 
solution  of  which  seems  at  first  sight  more  hopelessly  unattainable 
than  that  which  is  to  be  found  in  the  subject-matter  of  the 
Ancient  Irish  Books.  The  great  length  to  which  my  work  has 
already  run  precludes  me  from  treating  this  subject  with  the 
detail  I  should  desire.  For  information  as  to  the  whereabouts 
of  such  of  these  ponderous  "  Scrap  Books,"  as  they  have  well 
been  called,  as  are  still  extant,  we  may  refer  to  O'Curry's 
"  Materials  for  Irish  History," J  and  to  M.  H.  d'Arbois  de  Jubain- 
viile's  "Catalogue."  §  As  to  their  date,  with  the  single  exception 
of  the  "  Book  of  Armagh,"  an  ecclesiastical  MS.  reaching  back 
to  the  beginning  of  the  ninth  century,  they  belong  to  the  period 
known  to  philologists  as  the  "  Middle  Irish  "  period,  dating  from 
the  beginning  of  the  twelfth  to  the  fifteenth  century.  Closely 
written  in  double  or  treble  columns  in  the  pointed  character  which 
was  the  Irish  development  of  the  Roman  half-uncial  in  which 
Lanofobardic  scribes  wrote  the  Latin  lanofuao-e  in  the  fifth  and 
sixth  centuries  ;  ||  often  loaded,  as  time  went  on,  with  contractions 


f  Chap.  17;  Landnamabok,  ii.  19. 

X  "  Lectures  on  the  Manuscript  Materials  of  Ancient  Irish  History,  delivered  at  the  Catholic 
University  of  Ireland  in  1855  and  1856  '  (Dublin,  i86i),  by  Eugene  O'Curry,  Professor  of  Irish 
History. 

§  "  Essai  d'un  Catalogue  de  la  litterature  epique  de  I'lrlande,"  Paris,  1SS3. 

II  See  '•  Handbook  of  Greek  and  Latin  Palaeography,"  by  E.  ^L  Thompson,  Princ.  Lib.  of  the 
Brit.  Mus.,  1893,  PP-  236,  seqt]. 


I054  The  Dolmens  of  Ireland. 

most  arbitrary,  and  occasionally  with  whimsical  substitutions  of 
like-sounding  Latin  words,  these  volumes  are  filled  with  matter, 
sacred  and  profane  alike,  the  heritage  of  the  Gaedhel,  and  written 
in  the  language  which  bears  that  people's  name. 

With  one  class  of  the  sagas  which  they  contain  alone  am  I 
going  to  deal,  and  that  in  answer  to  the  question,  "What  light,  if 
any,  can  be  derived  from  a  collection  of  quasi-historic  episodes 
called  the  Leabhar  Gabhala,  or  Book  of  Immigrations,  on  the 
questions  relating  to  the  ethnic  affinities  of  the  Irish  People  ? " 
If,  as  I  feel  it  does,  the  answer  to  this  question  throws  light  on 
the  true  place  which  Irish  tradition  should  occupy  in  the  history 
of  the  Continent  of  Europe  in  the  early  centuries  of  the  Christian 
■era,  the  short  space  I  propose  to  give  to  it  will  not  be 
wasted. 

The  Leabhar  Gabhala  is  concerned  with  certain  immigrations, 
inroads,  or  incursions  into  a  country  called  Erin,  firstly  at  a  date 
preceding  a  flood  which  is  identified  by  the  writers  with  Noah's 
Flood,  and  secondly  subsequently  to  that  event.  The  principal 
ante-diluvian  immigrant  was  a  female  called  Ceasair  with  her 
father  Bith.  The  post-diluvian  incomers  consisted  successively 
of  Partholan,  Nemed,  the  Firbolg,  the  Tuatha  De  Danann,  and 
the  sons  of  Miledh,  the  accounts  of  whom  are  contained  in  a 
series  of  sao-as. 

Two  very  opposite  schools  of  critics  have  exercised  their 
ingenuity  in  the  explanation  of  these  stories.  The  one  school 
is  native  and  full  of  the  faith  in  its  archives  which  patriotism 
inspires  ;  the  other  is  foreign,  sceptical,  and  destructive. 
The  first  school  brings  each  event  into  chronological  sequence, 
synchronizes  It  with  occurrences  in  the  Bible  or  the  Classics,  and 
finds  for  it  a  locale  in  Ireland  itself.  The  second  takes  the  whole 
of  the  tales  together,  and,  regardless  of  all  other  considerations, 
flings  them  bodily  into  what  I  will  venture  to  term  the  vortex  of 
Aryan  Mythology,  a  region  from  whence  no  native  Orpheus  has 
as  yet  attempted  to  effect  their  recovery.  Thus,  according  to 
the  first  school,  Partholan  came  to  Ireland  in  the  Year  of  the 
World  1978,  landed  at  the  mouth  of  the  Erne,  and  was  buried 
at  Tamlaght.  So,  too,  with  Nemed  and  the  rest,  a  date  is 
assigned  to  each  and  the  places  of  their  exploits  are  pointed 
out  within  the  four  corners  of  the  island  of  Ireland.f     According 

t  These  are  the  opinions  of  O'Donovan,  O'Currie,  etc. 


Ethnology  and  Tradition.  1055 

to  the  second  school,  however,  we  have  in  these  successive 
immigrations  nothing  but  a  reflex  of  the  "Ages"  of  Hesiod.  In 
the  Tuatha  De  Danann  we  are  to  recognize  the  Golden  Race ; 
in  the  family  of  Partholan  that  of  Silver ;  in  the  people  of  Nemed 
that  of  Iron.  The  Fomore,  who  in  turn  fight  Partholan,  Nemed, 
and  the  Tuatha  De  Danann,  are  the  Titans  of  the  Greeks,  the 
Asura  of  India,  the  gods  of  storm  and  night  and  darkness.  The 
Dagda  is  Zeus,  and  his  subjects  the  gods  of  day  and  light  and 
life.  Nuada,  we  read,  is  the  "Mars-Jupiter  of  the  Celts;"  the 
■  Fir-Bolg  are  a  mythic  people ;  and  so  on  ad  iiifinitiLin.\ 

Now,  with  all  deference  to  patriotism  and  comparative  mytho- 
logy, and  admitting  that  each  school  may  have  brought  its 
quantum  of  truth  to  the  elucidation  of  these  tales,  I  must  own 
that  I  am  satisfied  neither  with  the  method  pursued  by  the  critics 
to  whom  I  allude,  nor  with  the  general  conclusions  at  which  they 
arrive. 

As  to  the  method,  we  know  pretty  well  when  these  quasi- 
historic  productions  were  promulgated.  The  materials  out  of 
which  they  are  formed  belong  to  precisely  the  same  class  as  those 
with  which  Saxo,  or  Jordanes,  or  Paul  son  of  Warnefrid,  com- 
mence their  chronicles.  In  Ireland  I  think  we  may  take  it  for 
granted  that  they  were  extant  in  the  eighth  century,  since  in 
an  Irish  incantation  in  a  codex  at  St.  Gall, J  dating  from  that  or 
the  following  century,  mention  is  made  of  Dian  Cecht,  the 
physician  of  the  Tuatha  De  Danann. 

The  right  method,  then,  clearly  is  to  place  ourselves  back  in 
(say)  the  eighth  or  seventh  or  sixth  century,  and  ask  ourselves 
the  question  what  would  the  names  Partholan,  Nemed,  Bolg, 
De  Danann  have  signified  then.  Partholan  would  have  meant 
the  Bardlander,  the  Man  of  the  Bard-land;  Nemed  or  Nimech, 
by  which  latter  name  he  appears  in  Nennius,§  would  have 
signified    the   German ;    Bolg  would   have    been    the    equivalent 


t  The  opinion  with  regard  to  the  Ages  of  Hesiod  is  that  of  M.  d'Arbois  de  Jiibaiaville  in  his 
"  Cycle  Mythologique  Irlandais,"  Paris,  1884,  pp.  6,  etseqq.  ;  the  opinion  with  regard  to  the  Titans, 
€tc.,  is  that  of  the  same  writer,  worked  out  in  great  detail  by  Prof.  Rhys  in  his  "  Hibbert 
Lectures"  (1886),  "on  the  origin  and  growth  of  religion  as  illustrated  by  Celtic  Heathendom," 
London,  1888,  passim. 

X  Z.  926.  See  index  of  names  of  the  Tuatha  De  Danann  in  "Rev.  Celt.,"  vol.  xii.  p.  126. 
See  also  "  Sanas  Chormaic,"  edit.  O'Donovan  and  Whitley  Stokes.  The  passage  in  which  Dian 
Cecht  is  mentioned  is  as  follows  :  "  Adimiinnr  in  slanicidforacab  Dian  Caht  lia  miiintir."  Cecht 
is  explained  "  power  "  by  Cormac.  Compare  the  nnme  Mac-Cecht,  a  Tuatha  De  Danann  king, 
and  Mac  Cecht,  one  of  Patrick's  smiths.  Rhys  thinks  ("  Rhind  Lectt.,"  No.  vlyScottisk  Rcvieiv,  July, 
1891,  pp.  126,  seqq.)  that  Cecht  stands  for  Pecht  {i.e.  the  Peohtas,  or  Picts),  and  explains  Dian 
Cecht,  "  Swift  one  of  Cecht." 

§  Codex  at  Corpus  Christi  Coll.,  Cambr.,  cap.  13. 


1056  The  Dolmens  of  Ireland. 

of  Bolgar  or  /SovXydpes,  the  name  given  to  those  tribes,  either 
singly  or  collectively,  who  were  the  remnants  of  the  Hunnish 
Confederation  in  retreat,  whether  in  the  mountainous  countries 
bordering  on  the  Danube  or  on  the  coasts  and  islands  of  the 
North ;  in  the  Tuatha  De  Danann  we  should  have  probably 
the  Picts  presented  to  us  in  their  divinities,  and  representing 
a  Teutonic,  or  possibly  Finno-Teutonic,  element  largely  distributed 
throughout  Europe,  whose  wars  with  the  Bolg  would  be  wars 
with  the  Hunnish  tribes  in  retreat,  and  whose  wars  with  the 
Fomore  or  Fomorians  would  be  wars  with  the  Sclaves  on  the 
southern  Baltic  called  Pomorjani  by  Nestor,  between  whom  and 
the  Germans  there  was  ceaseless  enmity. 

In  short,  a  careful  course  of  study,  pursued  wholly  without 
bias,  and  without  the  faintest  notion  of  whither  it  would  lead  me, 
extending  over  many  years,  and  covering  the  whole  range  of  the 
Irish  sa£-as  which  are  accessible,  and  for  the  right  understanding 
of  which  I  owe  a  debt  of  gratitude,  such  as  every  student  will  be 
proud  to  acknowledge,  to  O'Donovan,  O'Curry,  Sullivan,  Hen- 
nessey, Whitley  Stokes,  Windisch,  Atkinson,  Kuno  Meyer, 
Standish  Hayes  O'Grady,  and  others,  pursued,  I  may  add, 
coincidently  with  the  reading  of  the  late  Roman  and  the 
Byzantine  historians  on  the  one  hand,  and  of  the  native  annalists 
of  the  Teutonic  peoples,  Goths,  Danes,  Lombards,  Saxons,  and 
Franks,  together  with  the  sag-as  of  the  Norsemen,  Saxons,  and 
Germans  on  the  other,  has  convinced  me  that  in  the  case  of  at 
least  a  large  proportion  of  the  Irish  tales,  a  third  point  of  view, 
besides  the  two  above  mentioned,  may  be  profitably  approached, 
which  will  be  found  to  introduce  a  new  and  unlooked-for  element 
of  infinite  value  to  the  historian  of  the  darkest  age  of  European 
history  (the  period,  namely,  which  includes  the  third  to  the 
sixth  century),  since  it  may  prove  to  be  in  many  particulars 
the  barbarian  tradition,  in  contrast  with  the  Roman  and  Byzantine 
accounts,  of  the  events  which  were  taking  place, —  the  tribal  move- 
ments which  were  in  progress,  that  is  to  say, — as  horde  after  horde 
of  northern  warriors,  Rugii,  Heruli,  Langobardi,  lotungi,  Cotragi, — 
as  swift  in  their  movements  as  they  were  ubiquitous  in  their 
destination, — coming  southwards  from  the  shores  of  the  Baltic,  and 
the  imi  oceani  recessus,  of  which  Ireland  may  well  have  been  one, 
and  westward  from  the  Palus  Moeotis  whither  the  love  of  plundering 
the  Greeks  had  previously  led  them,  hurled  themselves,  sometimes 


Ethnology  and  Tradition.  1057 

singly,  sometimes  with  an  allied  tribe,  against  the  Provinces  of  the 
Roman  Empire,  or  returned  after  a  reverse,  accompanied  some- 
times with  a  temporary  submission,  the  bonds  of  which  they  had 
broken,  to  contest  with  allophylian  intruders,  Sclaves,  perhaps, 
or  Finno-Teutonic  yEstians,  the  ancient  stem-lands,  whence  they 
had  poured  forth. 

We  will  commence  with  the  story  of  Partholan  and  see  how 
the  method  I  propose  works  out.  M.  d'Arbois  de  Jubainville,  in 
his  "  Cycle  Mythologique,"  f  adopts  a  derivation  of  this  name 
from  ba7'  =  mer,  the  sea,  and  ^o/aii  =  a  wave,  so  that  it  signifies,  he 
supposes,  "one  who  is  connected  with  the  waves  of  the  sea," 
presumably  a  sea-god.  Another  explanation  is  that  it  comes 
from  bar  =  top,  and  tolan,  i.e.  "crest  of  the  wave."  |  A  third 
explanation  by  Rhys  §  is  that  it  is  merely  a  name  borrowed  from 
Bartholomew,  in  which  form  it  appears  in  Giraldus  Cambrensis 
(Bartolanus),||  and  for  which  name  it  is  now  the  Irish  equivalent. 
To  the  author  of  the  "  Historia  Britonum,"  ^  whose  date,  however 
difficult  to  fix,  precedes  that  of  the  earliest  Middle-Irish  MSS. 
by  two  centuries  at  least,  it  was  known  as  Partholomaeus  or 
Partholomus,  and  to  Geoffrey  of  Monmouth  as  Partholoim,ff 
whose  followers  he  terms  Bcwcleiises.  Camden  calls  him  Barto- 
lanus  a  Scythian. JJ 

Now  we  will  turn  to  the  eighth  century,  and  take  up  a  very 
interesting  contemporary  document,  published  in  Graff's  Dmtiska,^^ 
called  the  Weissobrlinner  Codex,  which  contains  a  list  of  the 
names  of  countries  as  they  were  designated  at  that  date.  Here 
we  find  the  name  Lancpartolant  [i.e.  Lombardy)  explained  by 
Ausonia,  i.e.  Italy.  From  this  word  take  away  the  first  syllable 
and  there  remains  Partolant,  the  equivalent  of  Partolan,  which 
would  by  itself  signify  Bart-land,  that  is.  Land  of  the  Barti, 
Barthi,  or  Bardi.  That  it  is  perfectly  allowable  to  dissever  the 
syllable  Lane,  Lang,  Long,  or  Lorn  from  the  proper  name  Bardi, 
and  with  it  to  reject  the  ancient  but  silly  story,  a  version  of  which 
is  given  by  Paul  son  of  Warnefrid,  which  refers  the  etymology  to 
"  long-beards,"  the  following  considerations  will  suffice  to  show. 

Firstly,  in  the  Anglo-Saxon  poem,  Beowulf,  we  meet  with 
the  name   Heathobards,   i.e.  Battle-Bards  applied  to  "a  tribe  of 


f  p.  25,  n.  X  See  Whitley  Stokes,  "  Sanas  Chormair,"  p.  28. 

§  "Hibbert  Lectures,"  p.  5S0.  1|  "Top.  Hib.,"  Dist.  iii.  c.  ii.  t  cap.  13. 

tt  lib.  iii.  12.  \%  Brit.,  966. 

§§  Vol.  ii.  pt.  i.  p.  370  :   "■'Italia  Lancparto  Lant,  Ausonia  auh  Lancparto  Lant.' 


1058  The  Dolmens  of  Ireland. 

Lombards,"  says  Mr.  Garnett,  but,  as  he  might  have  stated  more 
exactly,  to  a  tribe  of  Bardi,  without  the  Loin  or  Lang.  Secondly, 
Saint  Patrick's  nephew  (sister's  son),  Restitutus,  is  called  some- 
times Langobardus,  but  sometimes  also  Htmbaird,  correctly 
translated  by  O'Flaherty,  "  progenie  Bardi."  From  both  these 
instances  it  may  be  inferred  that  there  were  Bardi,  who  were  not 
differentiated  as  Lango-Bardi.  To  suppose,  however,  that  a 
people,  haughty,  war-like,  and  noble,  as  Tacitus  describes  the 
Langobardi,  would  call  themselves  Bardi,  if  that  name  meant 
"  beards  "  without  even  a  distinctive  epithet,  as  to  the  sort  of 
beard,  is  absurd.  Etymology  must  go  hand-in-hand  with  reason- 
able likelihood  and  common  sense.  Far  more  probably  they 
derived  their  name,  as  their  neighbours  the  Saxons  may  have 
done  (from  the  O.H.G.  sahs,  A.S.  seax,  a  sword),  or  as  the 
Franks  may  have  done  (from  frakki  or  frakka,  a  spear),  from  a 
weapon  which  may  have  been  characteristic  of  them,  and  which 
would  have  been  the  bard,  a  Teutonic  word  for  an  axe,  found  in 
bardisan,  hellebard,  and  other  terms.  Thirdly,  I  think  we  may 
discover  a  very  reasonable  explanation  of  the  word  Lane  or  Lang 
prefixed  to  the  name  of  a  certain  and  most  important  group  of 
Bardi.  In  the  time  of  the  Emperor  Augustus,  the  Langobardi 
dwelt  on  the  left  bank  of  the  Albis  (Elbe)  next  to  the  Chauci,  and 
east  of  the  Catti  and  Menapii.  Their  country  lay  between 
Luneburgh  and  Magathaburgh,  or  Magdeburg.  Here  Ptolemy 
places  them,  and  thence  it  was  that  Claudius  drove  them  to  the 
banks  of  and  over  the  Elbe,  where  they  subsequently  occupied 
part  of  the  district  about  Prignitz,  Ruppin,  and  the  Middle  March. 
It  is  more  than  likely  that,  as  time  went  on,  they  returned  to  their 
more  ancient  seats,  since  the  name  of  the  Bardi  or  Bardenses 
remains  there  to  this  day  west  of  the  Elbe,  in  the  district-name 
Bardengowe,  and  in  that  of  the  town  Bardouwic,  now  Bardewik, 
near  Luneburg.  But  this  very  district  bore  the  name  Lainga, 
or  Lainca,\  in  the  Middle  Ages,  derived,  as  may  be  supposed, 
from  the  river  Lagina,  Legine,  Lagne — now  the  Lein — which 
joins  the  Alara — now  the  Aller — in  the  centre  of  the  district.  It 
is  not  unreasonable,  then,  to  suppose  that  by  a  Langobard  was 
originally  meant  a  man  of  the  Bardi  who,  if  not  dwelling  in, 
derived  his  origin  from  the  district  of  Lainca  and  the  parts 
about  the  river  Lagina  or  Lein. 

t  i^'ee  Hist.  Handatlas,  Spruner-Mcnke,  No.  37. 


Ethnology  and  Tradition.  1059 

This  being  so,  we  cannot  fail  to  observe  that  between  the  names 
of  the  populations  on  the  western  coast  of  Ireland  and  those  of 
the  peoples  between  the  Elbe  and  Rhine  we  have  a  series  of 
three  coincidences  which  can  scarcely  be  accidental.  Ptolemy 
places  the  Cauci  on  the  west  coast  of  southern  Ireland,  and  the 
Chauci  were,  on  one  side,  next  neighbours  to  the  Bardi  of  Lainca. 
South  of  the  Cauci  in  Ireland  he  places  the  town  Manapia,  and 
next  to  the  Chauci  to  the  west  lay  the  Menapii.  East  of  the 
Chauci  lay  the  Bardi  of  Lainca,  and  it  was  a  people  called 
Laighin,  who  gave  name  to  the  Province  of  Laighin,  Lein  or 
Leinster.  Irish  tradition,  too,  informs  us  that  the  eponymous 
Partholan,  that  is,  the  Bardlander,  was  specially  connected  with 
Leinster  since  he  and  his  people  died  at  Howth  and  were  buried 
at  Tamlaght.  We  can  now  understand  why  it  was  that  the 
people  of  Partholan  were  called  by  the  authorities,  whom  Geoffrey 
of  Monmouth  followed,  Barclenses — that  word  being  the  most 
natural  scribal  error  for  Bardenses,f  the  eponymous  of  whom 
Partholan  would  have  been. 

If  we  might  dare  to  carry  a  tradition  back  to  the  time  of 
Tiberius,  we  should  feel  inclined  to  associate  the  dispersal  of  the 
Langobardi  by  Claudius  with  the  appearance  of  Partholan  in 
Ireland.  Driven  to  seek  new  homes,  some  of  them  would  not 
unnaturally  have  shaped  their  course  down  the  Elbe  into  the 
German  Ocean,  and  thence  to  the  Britannic  Islands.  Britain, 
however,  afforded  no  secure  refuge,  for  it  would  only  have 
afforded  them  another  meeting-ground  with  their  former  foes. 
Ireland,  however,  which  was  probably  thinly  populated,  lay  be- 
yond it,  and  after  an  easy  conquest  they  may  well  have  taken 
possession  of  portions  of  its  coast,  in  company  possibly  with 
contingents  from  the  Chauci  and  Menapii  who  had  arrived  there 
at  all  events  in  time  for  location  in  the  Geography  of  Ptolemy 
more  than  a  century  later. 

Paulus  son  of  Warnefrid,  who  in  the  words  of  HildricJ  was 
"  eximio  dudum  Bardorum  stemmate  gentis,"  and  who  wrote  his 
"  History  of  the  Langobardi"  in  the  middle  or  latter  end  of  the 
eighth  century,  follows  Prosper  of  Aquitaine,  whose  date  was  the 
close  of  the  fifth  century,  in  the  statement  that  these  people  came 
from  Scandia,  to  which  country  the  respective  historians  of  Goth 

t  No  scribal  error  is  more  natural  in  MSS.  ancient  or  modern  than  that  which  separates  d 

into  cl. 

X  See  note  to  Pauli,  "  Hist.  Lanjob.,"  edit.  Bethmann  and  Waitz. 


io6o  The  Dolmens  of  Ireland. 

and  Dane,  Gepid  and  Herulian,  Burgundian  and  Frank,  not  to 
speak  of  the  historic  Norseman,  in  turn  traced  the  ancestors  of 
the  peoples  whose  exploits  they  undertook  to  record.  They 
came  from  Thule  under  the  leadership  of  Ibor,  Hibor,  or  Ebor, 
and  Aio  or  Agio  (Aggo  and  Ebbo  in  Saxo),  bringing  with  them 
their  mother  Gambara,  Gabara  or  Gambaruc.f  The  name  of  this 
lady  in  the  allegorical  genealogy  is  comparable  with  that  of  the 
Gambrivii  (ra/xa/3/Dtovtot  of  Strabo  J),  one  of  the  four  most  ancient 
nations  of  Germany,  who,  together  with  the  Marsi,  Suevi,  and 
Vandali,  were  believed  to  be  descended,  according  to  Tacitus, 
from  the  four  sons  of  Mannus,  son  of  the  earth-beeotten  Tuisco. 
The  name  Gambara  is  akin,  too,  to  that  of  the  Sicambri  or 
Sucambri  (from  cambai'  ■=  ga77ibar,  "vigorous,"  "manful  ").§  With 
these  latter  people  Venantius  Fortunatus,  and  other  writers, 
identified  the  Franks.  || 

Paulus  states  of  the  Langobardi  that,  coming  from  Scandia, 
they  landed  in  a  country  called  Scoringa,  which  Mtillenhoff 
identifies  with  Uferland,  and  which  (although  of  course  the  word 
may  be  applied  to  any  shore  country)  I  venture  to  compare  with 
the  name  of  Scoriath  in  Irish  tradition,  who  is  represented  as 
the  father  of  Murias,  Morias  or  Moriath — the  Moor  country — 
(compare  the  Murizzi  lake  country  in  Uferland) — who  was 
married  to  an  exiled  prince,  Labraidh  Loingseach,  of  whom  more 
anon. 

According  to  Saxo,  the  island  of  Rugia,  or  Verania,  on  the 
northern  point  of  which  was  the  famous  temple  and  cliff-castle  of 
Arcona,  and  in  which  some  writers  have  not  unreasonably  located 
the  sacred  precincts  of  Hertha  or  Nerthus,  was  once  in  possession 
of  the  Langobardi,  from  whom  Sclavonic  tribes  must  have  wrested 
it.  A  town,  called  Bardt,^  occupies  a  site  on  the  coast  of  the 
continent  opposite  to  it,  the  name  of  which  Micrselius  attributes  to 
the  Langobardi. 

The  scope  of  my  work  does  not  permit  of  my  following  the 
course  taken  by  the  Langobardi  as  detailed  by  Paulus,  a  subject 
as  intricate  as  it  is  interesting.     After  fighting  the  Vandals,  they 


t  Pauli,  "Hist.  Langob.,"  edit  Bethmann  and  Waitz,  cap.  3. 

X  vii.,  edit.  Firmin  Didot,  p.  291.  §  Zeuss,  "Die  Deutschen,"  p.  83,  n. 

II  Carmina,  lib.  vi.  cap.  4,  "  De  Chariberto."  See  note  to  the  edition  of  the  works  of 
Fortunatus,  Rome,  17S6,  p.  198  ;  also  Greg.  Turon.,  "Hist.,"  lib.  ii.  c.  9.  Gregory  says  that  the 
Franks  came  from  Fannonia,  and  first  settled  on  the  banks  of  the  Rhine,  and  afterwards  crossed 
that  river  and  planted  themselves  in  Thuringia. 

1  Micraelius,  "Anlh.  romerania.-,"  i.  pp.  52,  64,  etc. 


Ethnology  and  Tradition.  io6i 

are  impeded  in  their  progress  towards  Mauringa  f  by  the  Assipitti, 
a  name  which  seems  to  re-appear  in  the  work  of  Dr.  Bielenstein, 
■on  Lettish  etymology,  in  that  of  Asenputten  or  Asseboten.J  On 
the  shore  of  the  southern  Baltic  coast,  the  name  of  a  branch  of 
the  Bardi,  perhaps,  survives  in  that  of  the  district  of  Old  Prussia, 
called  Barthia,  or  Bartha,  on  the  Bartau  river,  inhabited  by  the 
Barthi  or  Barthenses,  to  whom,  for  an  eponymous,  the  Saga  of 
Widewut§  gives  Bartho.||  In  the  course  of  their  subsequent 
history,  the  Langobardi  are  brought  into  contact  with  the 
Bulgares,  or  Vulgares,  whom  their  King  Tato  (comp.  Datho 
King  of  Laighin,  in  Irish  legend)  utterly  destroys. 

It  is  possible  that  the  faint  echo  of  a  tradition  of  Bardi,  in  the 
Northern  Baltic,  reaches  us  through  Verelius,  when  he  quotes  a 
saga,  in  which  one  Giestur,  son  of  Bardus,  is  mentioned,  who, 
choosing  to  dwell  in  the  North,  sailed  beyond  Halogia  and 
Finmarchia,  and  made  conquests  in  the  Dumbshaf,  or  Mare 
Dumnium,  which  was  the  ancient  name  of  the  Gulf  of  Bothnia. 
In  another  place  the  same  writer  speaks  of  the  Bardar-Saau,  so 
named  from  Barder  (Barderus),  son  of  Dumbus,  or  Dumnus, 
the  giant  who  gave  name  to  the  Dumbshaf,  by  his  wife  Miolla, 
daughter  of  the  Kino^  of  Oueenland.  Dumnus  was  himself  slain 
by  giants,  and  his  death  avenged  by  Barder,  by  whom  many  of 
his  father's  foes  were  burned  in  a  common  holocaust.  It  is  in 
this  country  of  West  Bothnia  that  we  find  seemingly  a  name 
identical  with  that  of  the  Picts — Pithea,  Pitha  Elf,  Paicto,  and 
Lapponia  Pithensis. 

Krantz  says  that  at  a  date  which  he  places  as  late  as  476, 
Langobardi,  leaving  Rugia,  or  Verania,  where  they  had  been 
settled,  proceeded  in  a  body  [magno  agmme)  to  Bavaria.  May 
not  the  pressure  of  the  Sclaves  into  the  Pomorjane,  or  sea-board, 
as  Pomerania  was  anciently  called,  have  had  a  direct  influence  in 
determining  them  to  leave  the  North,  and  seek  their  fortunes  in 
the  South  upon  the  Danube,  and  beyond  it,  while  others  may 
have  eone  northwards  into  more  distant  islands  where  settle- 
ments  of  their  race  may  have  been  made  in  earlier  times  } 
In    Irish    tradition,   Partholan's  adversaries  are  the   Fomoraighe 

t  The  position  of  Mauringa  is  undetermined. 

X  Die  Grenzen  des  Lettischen  Volksstammes,  S.  Petersbourg,  1892 ;  list  of  names  of  places. 
See,  however,  Micraelius  (i.  52)  on  the  Usipetern  in  Westfalia. 

§  Zeuss,  "  Die  Deutschen,"  p.  677,  n. 

li  There  were  Bardores,  together  with  Bitugures,  Cotrigurcs,  etc.,  in  the  army  of  Dinzio,  son  of 
Attila.  Jordan.,  "  Getica,"  c.  53. 


io62  The  Dolmens  of  Ireland. 

(latinized  Fomoriani),  the  exact  counterpart  of  the  Sclavonic 
Pomoriani,  supposing-  that  word  to  have  passed  through  the 
German  medium,  which  would  have  converted/  into/!  In  Gaed- 
helic,  fo  means  "under,"  but  in  Sclavonic  po  means  "  upon,"  as  in 
Polabe,  the  name  given  to  those  who  dwelt  on  the  Labe,  or  Elbe. 
The  term  has  its  counterpart  in  the  Celtic  name  Aremorica,  which 
signified  the  entire  coast  of  Gaul,  from  the  Seine  to  the  Garonne. 

Partholan's  battles  with  the  Fomorians  would,  then,  be  the 
battles  of  the  Bardi,  or  Bardlanders  with  the  Sclaves.  This  view 
is  supported  by  the  name  of  the  chieftain  of  the  people  opposed 
to  Partholan.  He  is  called  Ciocal,  or  Cicul,  son  of  Tuathmar, 
his  mother  being  Lot  Laimnach.  He  was  called  Crionchosach, 
signifying  club-footed,  or  "with  withered,  shrivelled  feet."  He 
had  a  blind  daughter,  Dacaech,  and  he  came  from  Slieve  Admoir, 
Amhoir,  or  Ughmoir,  which  O'Curry  states — on  what  authority  I 
know  not — to  have  been  the  Gaedhelic  name  for  the  Caucasus. f 
He  had  the  characteristics,  clearly,  of  an  idol  and  a  demon.  In 
short,  he  was  a  pagan  deity. 

Now,  in  the  country  of  Lethovia,  that  is,  of  the  Lotihali  \ 
(Lot-men,  or  Loth-men),  Letgalli§  or  Lethones,  Lettgalls,  was  a 
"sacer  campus,"  at  a  place  called  Romow,  over  the  temple  in 
which  a  High- Priest,  held  in  great  reverence  by  all  the  tribes, 
presided,  called  Criwe,||  in  whom  the  Christians  thought  they 
recognized  a  travesty  of  their  Pope  in  Rome.  At  this  Romow, 
or  Romene,  in  Lethovia  (possibly  the  original  of  the  "  Rome  of 
Letha"  in  Irish  tradition),  a  trinity  of  divinities  were  the  objects 
of  devotion,  called  respectively  Perkunos,  Potrimpus,  and  Pikullus. 
The  last  of  these  was  the  god  of  the  infernal  regions  and  of 
corruption.^ 

His  name,  Pikullus,  or  Pikollus,  with  the  mutation  of/  to  c  (the 
occurrence  of  which  in  Gaedhelic,  in  the  case  of  certain  extraneous 
words,  has  been  fully  recognized  by  Rhys  and  others),  is  literally 
Cicul,  in  the  blindness  of  whose  child,  who  drowns  herself  in  a 
lake,  we  recognize  the  connection  of  the  parent  with  darkness  and 
death,  while,  in  his  progenitor,  Tuathmar,  we  possibly  detect  the 
mar,  that  is,  the  horrific  visitants  of  the  night,  common  to  the 
folk-lore  of   Europe,  from  Spain   to  the  Baltic,  to  whose  tiiath, 


t  M.  and  C,  ii.  p.  232.  \  "  Chronica  Polonorum,"  Cracoviii;,  1521,  p.  40. 

§  See  "  Chron.  Lyvonice,"  by  Ileinrich  de  Ymera. 

II   I'etrus  de  Duisburg,  "Chron.  Pruss.,"  iii.  c.  5  (1679),  p.  78. 

1  Zeuss,  "  Die  Deulschen,"  p.  41. 


Ethnology  and  Tradition.  io6' 


or  tribe,  he  belonged,  and  in  whose  mother,  Lot  or  Loth,  we 
discover  the  very  country  in  which  his  worship  was  predominant, 
namely,  that  of  the  Lotihali  or  Loth-men. f 

Etymological  indications  are  not  wanting  of  the  presence  of 
the  Bardi  in  Ireland — some  of  whom  must,  if  my  view  be  right, 
have  carried  these  traditions  with  them.  In  the  parish  of  Killala, 
Barony  of  Tirawley  (Tir  Amalgaidh),  and  County  of  Mayo,  at  the 
mouth  of  the  Moy,  is  the  island  of  Bartha,  or  Bartrach  (Bartraighe) 
"  Bartmensland."  In  the  same  district,  again,  we  have  the  Partry 
Mountains,  west  of  Lough  Mask,  the  name  of  which  range  is  a 
standing  proof  of  the  fact  that,  at  one  time,  the  entire  country 
around  bore  the  name  Partraighe  (latinized  Partrigia),  or,  as  it 
might  be  teutonized,  Partholand,  or  Partolant — the  tribe-land  of 
the  Bards,  or  Barden,  the  Bardengau.  A  dolmen  in  the  County 
of  Monaghan  was  called  Latnambard,J  i.e.  Leacht  na  mBaird,. 
"tomb  of  the  Bards."  The  bell  of  Saint  Kieran  was  called 
Bardan,§  which  reminds  us  that,  among  the  Germans,  a  custom,, 
described  by  Tacitus,  prevailed,  called  barditus,\  consisting  of  the 
recitation  of  verses,  accompanied  by  cries  in  turn,  piercing  and 
sonorous,  those  of  the  latter  kind  being  produced  by  shouting  into 
the  hollow  of  the  shield — a  custom,  by  the  way,  which  is  said  to 
have  existed  in  Scotland  as  late  as  the  battle  of  Killicrankie.*[[ 

The  Irish  Annals  contain  several  allusions  to  the  Lanofobardi 
by  name.  A  certain  king  called  Aongus  or  Oengus  Ollmuchadh,. 
explained  "Great  Destroyer,"  fought  against  them.  Keating^ 
who  explains  his  name  "  Great  Swine,"  does  not  mention  Lango- 
bardi  by  name  in  his  account  of  the  conquests  of  this  king,ff  but 
states  that  he  gained  fifty  victories  against  the  Picts,  the  Fir- 
Bolg,  and  the  inhabitants  of  the  Orcades.  Perhaps  he  would 
have  included  Langobardi  under  Picts,  and  in  the  genealogy  of 
the  Pictish  kings  given  by  Skene  in  his  Chronicles  of  the  Picts 
and  Scots,  it  is  to  be  observed  that  the  name  of  Partalan  is 
included. JJ  The  Four  Masters,  however,  make  him  triumph  over 
Martini,  Ernai,  Fomori,  the  Cruithnean-Tuath,  Fir-Bolg,  Long- 
bardi,  and  Colaisti.§§  O' Flaherty  also  distinguishes  Picts  from 
Langobards  in  his  account  of  the  same  events.    This  king,  he  says, 

t  ?  Loth,  and  hale  =  a  man.     See  Lye's  "  Diet.  Saxon,  et  Goth.,"  hrele  =  vir,  heros. 
X  p.  291,  supra.  §  Colgan,  AA.SS.  Hib.,  p.  458.  Il  Germania,  c.  3. 

\  See  note  to  Bohn's  translation  ot  Tacitus,  ft  6ee  O'Mahony's  transl.,  p.  228. 

%X  pp.  23,  24,  323.     He  is  also  called  Parthai.     His  father  is  in  one  place  Historeth,  in  another 
Agnoin  ;  comp.  Agnomon,  father  of  Nemedh. 
§§  Vol.  i.,  p.  49. 


1064  The  Dolmens  of  Ireland. 


triumphed  over  the  IMartinei  in  Corkobaskinn,  over  the  Heberii, 
Ernai,  and  Fomorii,  and,  crossing  the  sea,  defeated  the  Picti  and 
Belgre  (by  which  he  means  Fir-Bolg)  five  times,  the  Longbardi 
twelve  times,  and  the  Colastii  four  times.f 

Again,  among  the  foreigners  who  sought  Cormac  Mac  Airt 
were  Galls,  Romans,  Franks,  Frisians,  Longbards,  Albanians, 
Saxons,  and  Cruithneans  {i.e.  Picts).J  By  "seeking  Cormac"  I 
feel  sure  that  visits  to  some  famous  pagan  temple  such  as  Temair  or 
Temor(z>.  Tech-Mor  =  "Great  House,"  i.e.  Temple)  is  intended, 
such  visits  or  periodical  pilgrimages  being  undertaken  for  the 
purpose  of  consulting  the  oracle,  honouring  the  god,  and,  in  the 
case  of  subject  tribes,  bringing  tribute.  Among  other  striking 
particulars  in  the  description  given  by  Saxo  of  the  temple-worship 
at  Arcona,  which  coincides,  as  we  shall  presently  see,  in  several 
important  points  with  the  account  given  in  Irish  tradition  of 
Cormac's  House  at  Temair,  is  that  of  the  visits  of  devotees 
from  many  surrounding  peoples. 

Continental  Langobardi  are  mentioned  in  the  tale  called  Tain- 
bo-Fraich.  "  Conall,"  says  Midir,  "has  killed  Fraech  among  the 
Longbards  of  Letha  while  going  to  the  Alps"  (co-h-Elpa).§ 

St.  Patrick  had,  as  we  have  seen,  relatives  among  the  Longo- 
bardi.||  Coincidences  have  also  been  pointed  out  between  the 
Lombard  laws  respecting  the  class  called  Arimannen,  and  the 
Irish  laws  regarding  the  Aires,  and  instances  of  resemblances  in 
manners  and  dress  are  not  wanting.^ 

The  influence,  too,  of  Langobardic  upon  Irish  art  is  not,  I 
think,  to  be  questioned,  and  it  is  a  striking  instance  of  how  art 
influence  may  repeat  itself,  and  is  prone  to  travel  in  the  same 
direction,  when  routes  long  closed  are  again  opened  up,  that  in 
the  early  Christian  Ages,  just  as  during  the  first  epoch  of  the 
Bronze  Age,  Ireland  was  indebted  to  North  Italy,  as  indeed  in 
both  periods  she  was  also  to  lands  further  east,  with  which 
she  was  also  in  communication,  for  the  initiative  of  systems  of 
decorative  design  which  her  braziers,  her  stonemasons,  and,  in 
the  Christian  Ages,  her  illuminators  on  vellum  afterwards  brought 

t  "0g)-gia,"  1685,  p.  206.  t  Book  of  Leinster,  fol.  15  ;  O'C,  M.  and  C,  iii.  7. 

§  It  is  clear  that  the  Letha  here  intended  is  not,  as  the  Christian  interpreters  would  have  defined 
it  and  used  it,  Latium,  that  is,  Italy,  nor  Letavia,  meaning  Brittany,  for  in  the  same  story  we  read 
that  Conall  proceeded  "  over  sea,  over  Saxony  of  the  North,  over  tlie  Muir-n-Icht,  to  the  north  of 
the  Longbards,  until  they  reached  the  mountains  of  Elpa."  The  route  here  indicated  equally  puts 
out  of  the  question  the  eastern  Lethovia.  There  was  a  river  Leda  in  East  Frisia,  which  possibly 
^lay  indicate  the  position  of  the  Langobardic  Letha. 

II   "Trip.  Life,"  edit.  Whitley  Stokes,  vol.  ii.  p.  506. 

1  Sullivan  Pref.  O'C,  M.  and  C,  i.  cvi.,  cccxcviii. 


Ethnology  and  Tradition.  1065 

to  such  exquisite  perfection.  To  exemplify  my  meaning,  I  in- 
stance a  cross  and  other  objects  having  rope-twist  decorations 
precisely  in  the  Irish  manner  from  the  Dalmatian  Tirol  which 
are  figured  in  Much's  "  Kunshistorischer  Atlas  of  Austro-Hun- 
gary."  These  he  compares  with  the  gold  crosses  bearing  what  he 
speaks  of  as  the  recognized  Langobardish  plaited  ornament  {Zop- 
fornamente),  one  of  which  is  preserved  at  Cividade,  the  ancient 
capital  of  the  Lombard  kingdom  at  Friaul  (Forum  Julii). 

At  two  periods  of  her  history — the  first  unwritten — the  second 
little  understood — during  the  Bronze  Age,  that  is  to  say,  in  the 
first  place,  and  in  the  seventh  century  in  the  second — the  natives  of 
Ireland  showed  themselves  capable  of  developing,  to  a  marvellous 
degree,  the  art  of  which  the  continent  supplied  the  models,  and 
for  the  germs  of  which  we  must  look  to  the  shores  of  the  Mediter- 
ranean and  the  Levant.  The  cause  which,  in  each  case,  gave 
scope  for  these  developments  was  the  complete  isolation  of  the 
country.  It  cannot  be  supposed  that  the  use  of  iron  for  weapons 
reached  these  remote  shores  of  the  north  at  so  early  a  date  as 
it  did  the  more  southern  portions  of  Europe.  The  result  would 
have  been  that,  for  the  time,  the  bronze-users  of  the  north,  unable 
to  cope  with  the  southern  powers,  and  as  yet  unconquered  by 
them,  would  have  been  left  alone  to  develop  independently  the 
resources  they  possessed.  That  they  possessed  both  genius  to 
invent  and  skill  to  carry  out  their  ideas  is  evident,  and  hence  the 
individuality  and  perfection  observable  in  the  specimens  of  pre- 
historic metallurgic  art.     So  it  was  in  days  far  less  remote. 

At  the  time  of  the  Saxon  invasion  of  Britain  this  chapter  of 
culture-history,  in  a  way,  repeated  itself,  and  proof  was  given  that 
the  native  genius  had  survived.  Ireland  was  then  completely  cut 
off  from  the  rest  of  Europe,  and  left  to  develop  a  system  of 
Christian  ritual  and  observance  entirely  distinct  from  that  of  the 
continent,  as  is  shown  in  Adamnan's  "  Vita  Columbae,"  and 
elsewhere.  Then  it  was  that  her  skilled  penmen  produced  those 
masterpieces  of  ornamental  palaeography  which  (like  the  book  of 
Kells,  a  seventh-century  MS.)  have  been  the  pride  of  Ireland^ 
and  the  wonder  of  the  world,  from  the  days  when  Giraldus  saw 
them  until  our  own  times. 

Such  influences  as,  prior  to  this  isolation,  Ireland  received 
from  the  continent  were  principally  Langobardic,  Prankish,  Mero- 
vingian, in  proof  of  which  may  be  cited  the  many  objects  of  art 

VOL.  III.  2    A 


io66  The  Dolmens  of  Ireland. 

which  occur  In  the  Museum  of  the  R.  I.  Academy,  comparable 
to  those  of  the  Merovingian  period  from  the  fifth  to  the  eighth 
century,  instanced  by  Lindensmidtj  in  his  "  Handbuch."  With 
Northern  Germany  and  France,  the  Irish  wandering  monks  kept 
up  a  perpetual  connection — not  always  in  very  good  odour,  for 
they  were  nicknamed  Egyptians,  and  looked  upon  as  semi-pagani 
"  circle-goers,"  and  wonder-workers,  but  carrying,  nevertheless,  the 
beauties  of  their  island-born  art  to  and  over  the  Alps,  and  down 
the  old  Danubian  route,  whither  their  predecessors  in  ages  gone 
by  had  gone  before.  Even  Asia  and  Africa  knew  them,  for 
specimens  of  old  Nestorian  art  are  best  explained  by  Irish 
influence,  and  real  Egyptian  hermits  actually  found  their  way 
to  the  Island  of  the  Saints. 

Those  who  had  originally  introduced  the  system  of  caligraphy 
— the  Roman  uncial,  that  is  to  say — which  the  Irish  developed  into 
the  pointed  hand  in  which  their  traditions  are  written,  are  largely 
responsible  also,  I  more  than  suspect,  for  the  introduction  of  the 
germs  of  those  traditions  themselves  which,  surviving  orally  from 
the  early  centuries  of  our  era  down  to  the  ninth  century,  were 
then  committed  to  writing,  interspersed  with  matter  wholly  native 
and  insular. 

That  a  Langobardic  tradition  survived  in  Ireland  even  in  the 
Middle  Ages  may  possibly  be  the  explanation  of  the  fact  that  the 
"  Stair  na  Lumbardac,"  i.e.  "  History  of  the  Lombards,"  was  one  of 
the  favourite  treatises  among  the  Irish  of  that  period.  Side  by 
side  with  it,  however,  we  find  the  "History  of  Troy,"  the  "History 
of  the  Three  Sons  of  the  King  of  Norway,"  etc. 

Such  a  tradition,  if  it  did  exist,  would  have  been  wholly  un- 
conscious of  its  origin  in  those  Bardic  settlers,  of  whom  Partholan 
was  the  eponymous,  who  at  various  times  from  the  first  century, 
perhaps,  to  the  fifth,  when  stress  was  laid  upon  the  German  tribes 
either  in  the  earlier  period  by  the  Romans,  or  in  the  later  period 
by  the  Sclaves,  made  descents  and  effected  settlements  on  the 
Irish  coast. 

The  places  in  Ireland  where  portions  of  the  saga  of  Partholan 
have  been  located  are  Inbher  Sceine  in  West  Munster,  where  he 
landed  ;  Inish  Samer  in  the  Erne  at  Ballyshannon,  where  he 
resided ;  the  Hill  of  Etar,  i.e.  Howth  near  Dublin,  where  he  died  ; 
and  Tamlaght,  where  he  and  his  people  were  buried.     The  valley 

t  "  Die  alterthiimer  der  Merov.  Zeit,"  Brunswick,  iSSo,  pp.  62,  d  seqq. 


Ethnology  and  Tradition.  1067 

is  also  pointed  out  where  he  was  hunting  when  his  wife,  of  whom 
we  will  presently  speak,  proved  untrue  to  him.  It  is  needless  to 
add  that  the  identification  of  these  localities  has  been  wholly- 
factitious.  I  have  myself  visited  Inish  Samer,  where  he  is  said  to 
have  resided.  It  is  a  tiny  knoll,  an  islet  in  the  tideway,  barely 
large  enough  to  support  the  foundations  of  a  single  little  building, 
and  the  idea  that  it  could  ever  have  formed  a  place  of  settlement 
for  any  important  band  of  immigrants  is,  on  the  face  of  it,  absurd. 

Partholan  comes  to  Ireland  from  middle  Greece,  Migdonia,  or 
Macedonia,  by  way  of  the  Torrian  Sea,  Sicily,  and  Spain.  The 
writer  of  the  "  Historia  Britonum"  states  that  "long  after  the 
cominof  of  the  Picts  to  Britain,  the  Scots  arrived  in  Ireland  from 
Spain,  the  first  of  whom  was  Partholomus."  Geoffrey  of  Mon- 
mouth adds  that  he  was  "  driven  out  of  Spain." 

Professor  Rhys  and  M.  d'Arbois  de  Jubainville  treat  this  as  a 
myth.  Spain,  according  to  them,  is,  in  common  with  Britain,  the 
land  of  the  spirits  of  the  dead.  Doubtless  a  halo  of  legend  crept 
round  these  stories,  but  before  we  dismiss  them  on  this  account 
by  a  method  more  sweeping  than  is  obviously  justified,  it  is  due 
to  the  subject-matter  they  contain,  and  to  the  distance  of  time 
from  which  they  reach  us,  that  we  should  ascertain  whether  there 
were  not  historical  occurrences  taking  place  in  a  period  not 
distantly  preceding  that  from  which  the  traditions  reach  us,  which 
might  have  served  as  the  material  for  the  events  which  those  who 
have  transmitted  these  tales  record. 

I  will  here  repeat  an  observation  I  have  made  before,  namely, 
that  in  scanning  the  surface  of  Europe  in  the  third  and  succeeding 
centuries  four  prominent  facts  strike  us  with  regard  to  the  move- 
ments of  the  barbarian  tribes  :  these  are,  first,  their  ubiquity ; 
second,  the  wide  tracts  of  country  which  they  covered  in  their 
marches ;  third,  the  swiftness  with  which  those  marches  were 
accomplished  ;  and  fourth,  the  ease  with  which  they  adapted  them- 
selves to  warfare  by  sea  or  by  land,  as  the  objective  of  their  predatory 
excursions  required.  Now  they  were  on  the  Palus  Mseotis,  now 
in  Spain ;  now  plundering  in  Greece  or  in  captivity  there ;  now 
ploughing  the  waves  around  the  islands  and  capes  of  the  oceans 
of  the  North ;  now  in  Scandinavia ;  now  on  the  shores  of  the 
Adriatic.  These  are  precisely  the  conditions  under  which  the 
several  peoples  are  represented  to  us  whose  invasions  or 
immigrations  form  the  subject  of  the  Irish  sagas. 


io68  The  Dolmens  of  Ireland. 

Partholanj  as  we  have  seen,  was  in  Macedonia  (properly  called 
"  Middle  Greece,"  since  it  lay  between  Thrace,  Epirus,  and 
Greece  proper),  in  the  Mare  Tyrrhenum  on  the  coast  of  Italy, 
in  Sicily,  and  in  Spain.  Nemed,  a  relative  of  Partholan,  started 
from  the  Black  Sea,  and  came  through  Scythia  by  the  Riphcean 
Mountains — as  to  the  position  of  which  the  Scandinavian  and 
Irish  writers  had  probably  as  vague  a  notion  as  we  have  at  the 
present  time.  Finally,  unable  to  resist  the  oppression  of  the  Fo- 
morians,  the  descendants  of  Nemed  set  out  from  Erin  for  Greece, 
whence  they  returned  to  Erin  as  the  Fir-Bolg,  who  become  the 
subject  of  the  third  saga,  of  migrations.  The  fourth  band  of 
settlers,  the  Tuatha  De  Danann,  also  descendants  of  Nemed,  and 
also  driven  out  by  the  Fomorians,  made  likewise  for  Greece, 
where  they  settled  in  Bseotia  or  Achaia,  and  after  vainly  assisting 
the  Athenians  against  an  enemy  called  the  Assyrians  (by  whom 
perhaps  the  Acatziri  or  Agazziri,;];  a  Bulgar  or  Sclavic,  or  possibly 
a  Celto-Scythic  tribe  on  the  lower  Danube  are  meant),  quitted  the 
country,  and  came  northwards  again  to  Norway  and  Denmark, 
settling  for  some  time  in  four  cities, — Falias,  Gorias,  Murias,  and 
Finnias,  and  thence  proceeding  first  to  Scotland  and  then  to 
Ireland.  In  these  Tuatha  De  Denann,  or  tribes  of  Dana's  gods, 
Colgan  thought  he  recognized  the  Picts.  The  account  of  them 
has,  however,  in  it  more  of  the  mythological  element  than  is  the 
case  with  that  of  any  of  the  other  settlers,  and  for  this  and  other 
reasons  I  am  the  rather  disposed  to  regard  them  as  the  gods  of  a 
race  which  was  in  great  probability  Pictish. 

Fifthly,  and  lastly,  the  travels  of  the  Gaedhel  exhibit,  when  the 
work  of  the  synchronists,  and  the  biblical  portions  of  the  gene- 
alogies have  been  expunged,  what  appears  to  be  a  rtfchaiiffc^  in 
a  mixed  and  jumbled  form,  of  the  several  travel-sagas  we  have 
just  cited.  The  origin  of  the  Gaedhel  is  traced  to  Scythia,  under 
which  name,  irrespective  of  its  inhabitants,  all  the  country  between 
the  Euxine  and  the  Baltic  was  included,  where,  we  are  informed, 
their  eponymous  Gadelas,  son  of  Niul,  son  of  Fenius  Farsa,  King 
of  Scythia,  was  born.  On  the  authority  of  an  ancient  and  lost 
MS.,  the  Leabhar  Dhroma  Sneachta,  it  is  stated  by  Keating  that 
•'  the  Firbolg,  the  Tuatha  De  Danann,  the  Longobards,  the 
Hunns,    the    Goths,    and    many   other   nations    descended    from 


t  I  base  my  account  mainly  on  Keating,  edit.  O'Mahony,  New  York,  1S57. 
X  See  Zeuss,  "  Die  Deutschen,"  p.  714. 


Ethnology  and  Tradition.  1069 


Magog,  and  originally  came  out  of  Scythia."  Much  follows, 
which  may  be  passed  over,  about  the  Tower  of  Babel,  and  the 
voyage  of  Niul  into  Egypt,  where  he  marries  Scota,  daughter  of 
Pharaoh,  and  falls  in  with  the  Israelites.  Gadelas  dying  in 
Egypt,  and  his  grandson  Sru  being  expelled  from  that  country, 
the  latter  lands  in  Crete,  where  he,  in  due  time  dying,  is  succeeded 
in  the  chieftainship  by  Heber  Scot,  who,  on  quitting  Crete,  led  his 
people  over  the  /Egean  Sea  into  the  Euxine,  and  up  the  Tanais 
into  the  heart  of  Scythia. 

His  advent  in  the  latter  country  excited  the  jealous  fears  of 
his  cousins,  the  posterity  of  Fenius  Farsa ;  and  Riffleoir,  King 
of  Scythia,  was  killed  in  single  combat  by  Agnon,  son  of  Tait, 
son  of  Heber  Scot.  Unable,  however,  to  make  head  against 
the  Scythian  forces,  the  Gaedhel  retired  to  the  country  of  the 
Amazons,  and  there  remained  one  year.  The  names  Heber  and 
Tait,  the  episode  of  the  single  combat,  and  the  introduction  of  the 
Amazons,  remind  us  of  names  and  incidents  in  Paulus's  History 
of  the  Lombards,  where  Heber  stands  at  the  head  of  the  gene- 
alogy, where  Tato  defeats  the  Heruli,  where  a  Langobard  fights 
an  Assiput  in  single  combat,  and  where  the  Amazons  are  also 
introduced.  It  is  to  be  noticed  that  Fredegarius,  who  brings 
the  Langobards  from  Schatanavia  between  the  Danube  and  the 
Ocean,  states  that  they  gained  a  victory  over  the  Chuni  or  Huns. 
The  marked  opposition  of  the  Tuatha  De  Danann  to  the  Bolg, 
of  the  Lan^obardi  to  the  Heruli  and  the  Bulbars,  and  of  the 
Gaedhel  to  the  Scythians  and  Amazons  by  whom  non-Germanic 
tribes  are  certainly  indicated,  reminds  us  of  the  position  occupied 
by  the  Goths  to  whom  they  may  not  have  been  ethnically  un- 
related, while  other  considerations,  again,  as  we  shall  presently 
see,  induce  comparisons  between  them  and  the  Heruli  and  the 
Franks. 

From  the  country  of  the  Amazons  the  Gaedhel  set  sail  in 
three  ships  and  proceeded  "  till  they  came  into  the  narrow  sea 
which  flows  from  the  Northern  Ocean,"  whence  they  were  driven 
by  a  storm  to  an  island  in  the  Pontic  Sea  (Euxine),  where  they 
remained  one  year.  They  encountered  great  difficulties  at  this 
time,  partly  owing  to  storms,  and  partly  to  rocks  concealed  under 
water  which  made  sailing  dangerous.  They  proceeded,  however, 
to  Gothland  (explained  to  mean  Sicily),  where  they  remained  for 
a  considerable  time,  and  where  Heber  Glunfionn  was  born,  whose 


1070  The  Dolmens  of  Ireland. 

descendant  Bratha  led  them  from  Gothland  to  Spain  in  four 
transports.  This  Bratha  had  a  son  called  Breogan,  who  fought 
so  successfully  against  the  Spaniards  that  he  conquered  almost 
the  whole  country.  He  had  ten  sons,  among  whom  was  Bile, 
father  of  Mile,  Miledh,  Miles,  Milesius,  or  in  Irish  Golamh,  that 
is,  the  Warrior,  and  of  which  Milesius  appears  to  be  merely  the 
Latin  equivalent. 

With  Miles  the  whole  story  begins  over  again,  except  that  the 
Egyptian  and  Scythian  episodes  appear  in  inverse  order,  and  that 
the  hero  of  the  tale  starts  from  Spain.  He  fits  out  thirty  ships, 
sails  northward  through  the  ^gean  into  the  Euxine,  and  so  into 
and  up  the  Tanais,  just  as  Heber  Scot  had  done  in  the  previous 
version.  Here  he  meets  with  Reffleoir,  who  is  described  as 
grandson  of  the  former  king  of  that  name,  and,  after  having  been 
well  received  at  first,  becomes  so  popular  as  to  excite  his  jealousy. 
Reffleoir  plots  the  death  of  Golamh  or  Milesius,  upon  which  the 
Gaedhel  attack  the  palace  of  their  treacherous  host,  and,  after 
putting  him  to  death,  take  shipping  on  the  Tanais,  sail  through 
the  Euxine  and  y^gean  Seas,  and,  crossing  the  Levant,  land 
in  Egypt. 

Here  Golamh  assists  the  Egyptians  against  the  Ethiopians, 
and,  as  a  reward,  the  Pharaoh  of  the  day  gives  him  his  daughter 
Scota  in  marriage,  so  that  he  is  the  counterpart  of  Niul,  and 
undoubtedly  the  traditions  are  identical — the  first  having  been 
synchronized  with  biblical  events  to  suit  the  humour  of  Christian 
auditors. 

From  Egypt  Golamh  or  Miles,  or  Niul,  as  we  may  also  fairly 
call  him,  sailed  into  the  Mediterranean,  and  landed  in  Thrace, 
and  crossing  many  countries,  came  to  another  island  called 
Gothiana,  "  which  lies  in  the  narrow  sea  that  divides  the  Baltic 
from  the  ocean  northwards."  By  this  island  that  on  the  Swedish 
coast  called  Gotland  seems  to  be  intended.  Thence  he  went 
on  a  plundering  expedition,  landing  in  the  kingdom  of  the  Picts, 
"  formerly  called  Albania,  now  Scotland."  Thence  sailing  down 
the  English  Channel  and  across  the  Bay  of  Biscay,  he  landed 
in  Northern  Spain.  Here,  finding  the  Spaniards  overrun  by  the 
Goths  and  other  plundering  foreigners,  he  resolved  to  prevent  the 
further  incursions  of  these  barbarians,  and  defeating  them  in  fifty- 
four  several  battles,  drove  them  out  of  the  kingdom,  and  became 
master  of  the  whole  of  Spain. 


Ethnology  and  Tradition.  107 i 

Scarcity  of  corn,  however,  and  the  continued  attacks  of  the 
Goths  and  their  auxiHary  foreigners,  determine  the  Gaedhel  to 
attempt  the  conquest  of  some  other  country.  They  select 
Ireland,  and  despatch  Ith  to  reconnoitre,  who  is  treacherously 
slain  by  the  Tuatha  De  Danann,  upon  which  a  fully  equipped 
expedition  follows  to  avenge  his  death  under  the  command  of  the 
sons  of  Miles,  for  the  latter,  meanwhile,  had  died  in  Spain. 

Now,  in  all  this — granting  the  traditions  had  become  mixed 
in  narration — we  have  nothing  that  may  not  have  possessed  a 
true  historic  basis.  On  the  contrary,  in  almost  each  episode,  we 
can  point  to  some  parallel  event  in  the  history  of  Europe  during 
the  3rd,  4th,  and  5th  centuries  a.d. 

In  the  time  of  the  Emperor  Gallienus  (254-278),  certain  barba- 
rians of  northern  extraction,  called  Heruli  by  Georgius  Syncellus,f 
and  Scythes  by  Zosimus,J  sailed  through  the  Palus  Mceotis  into 
the  Pontus,  and  captured  Byzantium  and  Chrysopolis.  Troops 
having  been  collected  there,  they  were  forced  to  retreat  a  little 
way,  as  far  as  the  Straits  of  the  Euxine,  called  Hieron.  On  the 
day  following,  when  the  wind  was  favourable,  they  proceeded  to 
the  bay  called  the  Bay  of  Cyzicus,  from  the  noted  town  of  that 
name  in  Bithynia.  Next  they  plundered  the  islands  of  Lemnos 
and  Scyra,  and  thence  invaded  the  coast  of  Attica,  and  plundered 
and  burned  Athens,  Corinth,  Sparta,  Argos,  and  laid  waste  the 
whole  of  Achaia.  Ambuscades  were  laid,  however,  to  entrap  these 
pirates  at  such  points  as  presented  difficulties  to  them,  and  help 
having  been  sent  by  Gallienus,  the  Athenians  succeeded  in  killing 
a  large  number  of  them,  and  at  Nessus  in  particular  three  thousand 
were  said  to  have  been  slain. 

The  commander  of  the  Heruli  was  called  Naulobatus  (NavXo- 
/SctTo?)  by  the  Greek  historians,  a  name  which  tempts  comparison 
with  that  of  Neul  Ua  (O')  Baath,  i.e.  Niul  or  Neul,  or  Niall  or 
Neal,  grandson  of  Baath,  which  was  actually  the  very  name  of  the 
commander  of  the  Gaedhel,  his  father  being  Fenius  Farsa,  and 
his  grandfather  Baath, §  when  he  was  fighting  his  way  in  these 
very  same  waters.  In  the  Greek  account,  Naulobatus  submits 
himself  to  Gallienus,  but  how  small  the  victory,  if  any,  which  the 
Romans  had  gained  in  reality  was,  may  be  judged  from  the  fact 
that  he  was  honoured   by  the  Emperor  by  immediate  promotion 

t  AipovAoi,  "  Chronogr.,"  ed.  Par.,  p.  382.  %  i.  39. 

§  "Niul  mac  Feniusa  farsaidh  nihic  Baath."     Ilaliday's  "Keating,"  p.  220. 


1072  The  Dolmens  of  Ireland. 

to  the  rank  of  Consul.  So  close  is  the  likeness  between  the 
names  Neul  O'Baath  and  Naulobatus,  and  the  conclusion  in- 
volved in  the  identification  of  the  persons  indicated,  could  it  be 
established,  would  be  of  such  immense  importance  as  illustrating 
the  origin  and  sources  of  Gaedhelic  tradition,  that  it  is  with  the 
utmost  hesitation  that  I  venture  even  to  place  the  names  in  juxta- 
position. Taking  the  fact,  however,  in  relation  to  other  points  of 
comparison,  I  feel  that  it  would  be  unreasonable  to  omit  a  recogni- 
tion of  the  resemblance,  although  this  portion  of  my  subject  must 
be  regarded  as  purely  tentative. 

In  the  time  of  Claudius  (263)  we  hear  again  of  Heruli 
equipping  a  fleet,  but,  if  we  may  credit  Syncellus,  their  expeditions 
into  various  parts  of  the  Roman  dominions  were  at  this  time 
attended  by  ill  fortune,  until  worn  out  by  sea-fights,  harassed  by 
storms,  and  reduced  by  famine,  they  completely  disappeared. 
Zosimus,  who  mentions  the  sack  of  Athens  by  these  Scythes,  as  he 
calls  them,  speaks  also  of  the  Heruli  by  name,  together  with  Peuci 
and  Gothi,  as  being  (also  in  the  time  of  Claudius)  repulsed  from 
Tomi,  whence  they  proceeded  to  Moesia,  but  were  subsequently 
wrecked  at  the  Hellespont. 

Not  merely,  however,  have  we  evidence  that  in  the  third  century 
northern  tribes  from  the  Baltic  coasts  or  the  Elbe  had  penetrated 
into  Greece,  but  we  have  an  instance  also  of  some  of  them  making 
their  way  through  the  Mediterranean  and  the  Straits  of  Gibraltar, 
by  way  of  Sicily,  the  same  route  which  Irish  tradition  assigns  to 
Partholan,  to  the  Nemedians  under  the  name  of  Fir-Bolg,  and  to 
the  Gaedhel. 

In  the  time  of  Probus  (276-282),  as  we  learn  from  Eumenius, 
a  handful  of  captive  Franks,  having  seized  on  some  shipping  on 
the  Pontus,  devastated  Greece  and  Asia  Minor,  and  having  landed 
without  hindrance  at  several  points  on  the  African  coast,  actually 
took  Syracuse  in  Sicily  .  .  .  and  then  accomplished  a  very  long 
voyage  through  the  Straits  into  the  ocean,  thereby  showing  that 
*'  wherever  ships  can  sail  no  passage  is  closed  to  pirates  in  des- 
peration."! Zosimus  tells  the  story  as  follows: — "Probus  permitted 
the  Bastarna:,',  a  Scythian  race,  who  had  submitted  themselves  to 
him,  to  settle  in  certain  districts  in  Thrace  which  he  allotted  to 
them,  and  from  thenceforth  these  people  always  lived  under  the 
laws  and  institutions  of  Rome.     And  there  were  certain  Franks 


+  Zosimus,  "  De  Probo,"  i.  71. 


Ethnology  and  Tradition.  1073 

who  had  come  to  the  Emperor,  and  had  asked  for  land  on  which 
to  settle.  A  portion  of  them,  however,  revolted,  and  having 
obtained  a  large  number  of  ships,  caused  disturbances  throughout 
the  whole  of  Greece,  and  having  landed  in  Sicily,  and  made  an 
assault  on  Syracuse,  they  caused  much  slaughter  there.  They 
also  landed  in  Libya,  but  were  repulsed  on  the  approach  of  the 
Carthaginian  forces.  Nevertheless,  they  managed  to  get  back  to 
their  homes  unscathed." 

Now,  side  by  side  with  this  account  in  Zosimus,  I  will  place  an 
episode  in  the  Irish  tradition  relating  to  the  Nemedians,  premising 
the  fact  that  Zosimus  himself  might  have  called  these  Franks  by  a 
name  equivalent  to  Nemedian,  namely,  Nemitzi,  which  (borrowed 
from  Sclavonic)  was  the  name  by  which  Byzantine  historians 
knew  the  Germans.  The  Nemedians,  then,  having  been  driven 
out  of  their  settlements  in  the  north  by  the  Fomorians,  and  having 
come  to  take  up  their  abode  in  Greece,  just  as  Zosimus's  Franks 
had  done,  were  returning  to  Ireland  under  the  name  of  Fir-Bolg. 
The  manner  of  their  departure  from  Greece  was  as  follows  : — 
"  The  Greeks,  out  of  fear  that  the  Nemedians  should  make  attempts 
on  the  Government,  and  occasion  disorders  in  the  state,  resolved 
to  use  them  like  slaves  rather  than  subjects."  Here  we  note 
that  Eumenius  speaks  of  "  the  captive  Franks."  "  The  Nemedians, 
therefore,  groaning  under  the  weight  of  this  servitude,  came  to 
a  resolution  to  shake  off  the  yoke  and  to  quit  the  country. 
This  design  was  kept  so  secret  that  the  chief  of  the  Nemedians 
seized  upon  some  of  the  Grecian  shipping,  as  the  Book  called 
*  Drom  Sneachta '  gives  the  account,  and  with  five  thousand 
that  followed  him,  set  to  sea,  and  sailed  till  they  arrived  upon  the 
coast  of  Ireland."  Naturally,  in  order  to  accomplish  this  voyage, 
they  must  have  passed  through  the  Mediterranean,  and  if  we  add 
from  the  story  of  the  travels  of  the  Gaedhel  the  episode  of  the 
sojourn  of  that  people  in  Sicily,  we  bring  the  Greek  and  Irish 
stories  into  a  relation  seemingly  too  close  to  be  accidental.  The 
association,  I  may  add,  of  the  Nemedians  and  the  Fir-Bolg  in 
the  Irish  tradition,  and  of  the  Franci  and  Heruli  in  the  Greek 
history,  in  the  relative  positions  in  which  they  stood  to  the 
Greeks,  seems  to  be  somewhat  analogous,  a  point  which  will  be 
seen  to  have  a  more  curious  bearing  when  I  proceed  to  compare 
the  Heruli  as  described  by  Procopius  with  the  Fir-Bolg  of  Irish 
tradition. 


I074  The  Dolmens  of  Ireland. 


I  return  now  to  the  allegorical  saga  of  Partholan.  By  the 
woman  in  such  tales  to  whom  the  eponymous  is  wedded,  it  was 
orio-inally  intended  that  the  land  over  which  he  exercised  the  rights 
of  lawful  possession  should  be  understood,  just  as  in  the  names 
of  his  offspring,  who  in  this  case  were  Rughraidhe,  Slainge,  and 
Laiolinne,  the  several  tribes  or  tribe  lands  are  indicated  over 
whom  his  rule  extended. 

The  country,  then,  which  represented  the  spouse  of  Partholan, 
or  Bardland,  was  Dealgnaid,  otherwise  written  Dealgnat,  Dealbnat, 
and  Delbnat,  variations  in  form  which  are  examples  of  the  fact 
that  g  and  b  were  interchangeable  according  to  the  linguistic  or 
dialectic  media  through  which  the  word  reaches  us ;  in  short,  that 
Alo-a  and  Elofa  are  the  same  as  Alba  or  Elba. 

On  the  Continent  the  river  Elbe  was  called  Albis,  in  O.H.G. 
Albja,  and  later  Elba,  in  O.N.  Elf  and  Elfa,  and  in  Sclavonic 
Labe,  whence  dwellers  on  its  banks  were  called  Polabe,  that  is,  "  by 
the  Elbe,"  just  as  Pomorjane  meant  "by  the  sea." 

The  De  before  Albnat  or  Ealgnat  would,  in  cases  where  it  occurs 
in  Irish  or  Scottish  names,  such  as  Delvin,  Delginross,  etc.,  be 
thought  capable  of  explanation  by  the  circumstance  that  it  is  a  not 
uncommon  prefix  in  Pictish  lists.f  It  occurs,  however,  in  the  very 
centre  of  the  Elbe  country.  The  Delvunda  is  the  name  of  a  river 
running  into  the  Elbe  on  its  right  or  eastern  bank,  dividing  the 
Limes  Saxonicus,  west  of  which  are  the  Transalbani,from  the  Polabi, 
or  Elbe-people  on  the  East.  It  rises  not  far  from  the  Travena  or 
Trawe,  which  divided  the  Waigri  from  the  Obotriti.J 

In  Ireland  the  prefix  De,  united  to  Alba,  occurs  in  personal 
names  (allegorical  or  mythological)  and  in  place-names.  Besides 
Dealbnat,  wife  of  Partholan,  we  have  Dealbaoith,  son  of  Ealathan 
(or  Allot),  son  of  Neid  (or  Neit),  whose  daughter  Dana  or  Danu, 
synonymous  with  Ana,  the  "  mater  deorum  Hybernise,"  is  the 
supposed  eponymous  of  the  Tuatha  De  Danann.  Dealbaoith 
himself  is  represented  as  brother  of  the  Dagda,  the  divine  king 
and  chieftain  of  the  Tuatha  De  Danann,  one  of  the  reflexes  of 
Odin  in  Irish  mythology. 

In    Irish    topography   we    meet  with    the   name    frequently.§ 

t  See  Rhys  on  this  Pictish  prefix  in  the  Rhind  Lectures,  published  in  the  Scottish  Review. 
X  See  Spruner-Menke,  "Hist.  Handatlas,"  No.  33. 

§  For  a  list  of  the  Delvins,  see  O'Donovan,  O.S.L.,  Co.  Galway,  -^  ,  p.  406;  also  Joyce, 
"  Names  of  I'laces,"  p.  127.  D,  l 


Ethnology  and  Tradition.  1075 


Dealbhna-mor  is  now  the  Barony  of  Delvin  in  the  east  of  Meath  ; 
Dealbhna-beg  is,  perhaps,  the  Barony  of  Demifore  in  the  same 
county.  Within  the  ancient  boundaries  of  Meath  was  Dealbhna 
Eathra,  now  the  Barony  of  Garrycastle.  Dealbhna  Nuadhat  is 
now  the  Barony  of  Athlone.  In  addition  to  these  there  were 
Dealbhna  Cuile  Fabhair,  called  also  Dealbhna-tire-da-loch,  since  it 
lay  between  the  two  lochs,  Orbsen  (Corrib)  and  Lurgan  or  the  Bay 
of  Galway  ;  Dealbhna  Feada,  exactly  co-extensive  with  the  present 
Barony  of  Moycullen,  Avest  of  Galway  ;  and  Dealbhna  Teanmuighe. 
Seven  settlements  in  Leinster  and  Connaught  bore,  therefore,  the 
name  of  divisions  or  tribes  of  the  people  who  professed  to  derive 
their  name  Dealbhna,  that  is,  the  descendants  of  Dealbhaeth, 
traditionally  from  Lugaid  f  Dealbhaeth,  son  of  Gas  Mac  Tail, 
descended  from  Olioll  Olum,  ancestor  of  the  Dalcassians. 

Proof  that  the  territorial  name  Dealbhna  is  the  same  as  Alba, 
Albene,  Ailbene,  etc.,  is  furnished  by  the  late  Bishop  Reeves  in 
his  note  on  a  passage  in  Adamnan's  "  Life  of  Columba,"  %  which 
reads,  Ailbene  tisqtte  ad  Vadiim  Cliad.  "Ailbene,"  he  says,  "is 
now  corrupted  into  Delvin.  The  Delvin  is  a  river  in  Meath, 
the  boundary  between  Meath  and  Dublin.  In  the  'Annals  of  the 
Four  Masters'  (a.d.  1032)  we  read,  'a  foray  was  made  on  Fine- 
Gall,  and  all  the  country  from  Ath-Cliath  (Dublin)  to  Albene  was 
burned.'  "    There  is  a  plain  which^was  called  Moy-Ailbhe  in  Carlow. 

Partholan's  marriage  with  Dealbnat,  then,  is  an  allegorical  way 
of  presenting  a  tradition  that  the  Bardoland  included  the  Alba 
country,  wherever  that  was.  This  marriage,  it  is  to  be  observed, 
took  place,  according  to  the  story,  before  he  arrived  in  Erin.  It 
may  be,  then,  the  Elbe  country,  and  the  district  of  its  namesake 
and  affluent  the  Delvunda  in  especial,  which  is  intended.  If  so,  it 
is  the  very  district  which  the  Bardi  of  Lainca  would  have  possessed 
when  Claudius  drove  them  across  the  Elbe. 

This  view  of  the  real  meaning  of  this  Irish  saga,  bold  as  it 
may  seem,  does  not  lose  in  interest  as  we  follow  it  further. 
Dealbhnat  bore  three  sons  to  Partholan,  Rughraighe,  Slainge, 
and  Laiglinne.  In  the  last  of  these  we  may  recognize  a  form  of 
Laighin,  and  in  Lainca  on  the  Lagina,  Legina,  now  the  Lein,  was 
the  Bardingau.      In  the  countries  east  of  the  Elbe  the  traditions 

t  This  name  is  a  patronymic  formed  from  Lug,  with  which  god-name  it  is  sometimes  convertible. 
The  genitive  is  Lugdach.  Compare  the  name  of  the  Lugii,  and  the  proper  name  Lugius,  that  of  a 
Cimbric  chief.     Zeuss,  "  Die  Deutschen,"  143,  n. 

%  p.  108. 


10/6  The  Dolmens  of  Ireland. 

of  the  Langobardi  handed  down  by  Paulus  connect  them  with 
Ruguland  or  the  land  of  the  Rugii,  of  which  they  are  said  to  have 
possessed  themselves.  Rughraidhe  in  Irish  is  literally  a  "  Rugian," 
"a  man  of  the  Rugii,"  or  "the  tribeland  "  (for  raighe  or  raidhe 
means  both)  of  the  Rugii.  Again,  in  the  third  and  fourth 
centuries,  dwelling  near  the  Semnones  and  east  of  the  Elbe,f  near 
its  southward  bend  lay  the  old  German  people  called  the  Silingi. 
a  name  which  was  still  preserved  in  the  fifth  century  in  that  of 
the  Vandali  Silingi  in  Spain.  In  place  of  the  long  second  i  in  the 
name  of  these  people  the  Gaedhelic  language  would  substitute  ai, 
as  in  Patraicc  for  Patricius,  so  that  Silingi  would  become  Silaingi, 
which,  dropping  the  short  z,  would  become  Slainge,  the  name  of 
Partholan's  remaining  son.  J 

While  Partholan  was  from  home  on  a  hunting  expedition, 
Dealbnat  proved  unfaithful,  and,  weary  of  her  husband's  absence, 
transferred  her  allegiance  to  Todgha  or  Togha,  a  slave.  When, 
on  his  return,  her  lord  accused  her  of  her  want  of  constancy,  his 
wife  made  him  an  impudent  answer,  treating  the  matter  of  her 
infidelity  as  a  matter  of  course,  the  result  simply  of  his  absence. 
In  anger  he  slays  her  hound,  called  Samer,  in  whom  we  perhaps 
recog^nize  ToQ^ha  under  another  name. 

Now,  as  the  German  peoples,  one  by  one,  went  south  to  Bavaria 
and  the  Danube,  so  the  Sclavonic  and  East  Prussian  tribes, 
among-  whom  might  well  have  been  Samgalli  or  Samlanders 
(comp.  Samer  §),  passing  along  the  southern  shores  of  the  Baltic, 
entered  upon  their  lands,  coming  as  far  west  as  the  Elbe  itself,  and 
occupying  those  very  districts  east  of  Elbe,  of  which  we  have  just 
spoken.  It  is  a  hound  which  Partholan  kills  on  his  return  ;  and  it 
was  by  that  name  Hunden,  or  Hunen,  that,  as  we  have  seen,  the 
Germanic  tribes  designated  their  foes  the  Sclaves.  Put  all  these 
scraps  of  evidence  together,  and  may  not  the  saga  of  Partholan 

t  For  the  Semnonenwalt,  see  Zeuss,  "  Die  Deutschen,"  p.  8,  n.  Compare  this  name  with  that 
of  the  Tuath  Semonn  in  the  west  part  of  the  County  of  Waterford,  and  with  the  name  Semeon  or 
Simeon  Brec  or  Brec,  who  led  the  Nemedians  to  Thrace. 

\  The  Vandali  Silingi  had  possessed  themselves  of  the  country  about  the  river  Bstis,  where 
their  principal  town  would  have  been  Carmen,  a  place  which,  as  we  tind  in  "  Espaiia  Sacrada,"  had 
retained  its  name  from  the  times  of  the  old  Greek  colony.  The  driving  out  of  the  Silingi  by 
Wallia,  King  of  the  Goths,  happened  in  about  416.  They  would  naturally  have  gone  north,  and, 
their  old  lands  in  Germany  no  longer  being  open  to  them,  they  might  well  have  sought  new  abodes 
in  Ireland.  It  is,  therefore,  not  a  little  remarkable  that  a  tradition  exists  that  a  certain  Slainge 
entered  the  Bay  of  Wexford,  which  latter  place  acquired  the  name  Carman.  Three  men  from  Athens, 
with  their  mother,  Carman,  were  also  said  to  have  attempted  to  form  a  settlement  here,  and,  although 
repulsed,  it  was  their  mother's  name  which  the  place  bore.  In  a  poem  called  the  "  Fair  of 
Carman,"  Greek  merchants  are  said  to  have  traded  there. 

§  Samer  was  the  ancient  name  applied  in  the  North  to  the  Finns  and  Lapps.  In  Icelandic  Jrtj,'aJ 
wc  tind  it  used  as  the  proper  name  of  a  favourite  dog. 


ETHlSiOLOGY   AND    TRADITION.  IO77 

have  a  basis  of  truth  in  the  history  of  those  ages,  not  too  remote 
for  tradition  in  the  eighth  century  to  have  reached,  when  German 
and  Sclave,  or  Finno-Sclave  or  yEstian,  were  contending  for  the 
occupation  of  the  lands  which  lay  between  the  Vistula  and  the 
lower  Elbe  ?  May  not  the  result  of  such  conflicts  have  been 
the  departure  of  Bardic  tribes  from  the  Elbe  country  into 
Erin,  who  would  have  carried  with  them  the  traditions  of 
their  race,  to  be  reproduced  later  on  in  the  form  of  allegorical 
romance  ? 

The  second  invader  or  colonist  of  Erin  was  Nemed,  in  whose 
sa£-a  some  writers  see  only  another  version  of  that  of  Partholan — 
a  view  which  is,  I  think,  true  only  in  a  sense. 

The  meaninor  of  the  word  Nemed  in  the  sixth  and  followino- 
centuries  has  to  be  sought  in  the  dictionaries  of  ancient  Sclavonic, 
and  in  the  literature  of  Byzantium.  If  the  question  be  asked, 
"  How  came  it  into  the  traditions  of  the  Irish  ?"  we  may  in  a  manner 
reply  by  asking,  "  How  came  it  to  be  used  in  the  sense  of  the 
Germans  by  the  Byzantine  historians  ? "  The  answer  in  each 
case  must  be  the  same :  "  It  was  Sclavonic  influence  which 
brought  it." 

In  the  "  Historia  Britonum  "  it  appears  in  the  form  Nimech  or 
Nemec,  the  which  form  is  found  letter  for  letter  in  the  old 
Bohemian  glossary  of  Hanka,  where  its  meaning  is  given  as 
barbarus.  It  was  the  name,  in  fact,  applied  by  those  who  spoke 
Sclavonic  to  those  who  did  not,  and  as  the  Germans  were  the 
people  with  whom  they  were  most  widely  and  directly  brought  into 
contact,  in  a  special  manner  to  them. 

Among  the  early  peoples  of  Europe  it  was  customary  to  dis- 
tinguish by  a  term  signifying  dumb,  speechless,  stuttering  or  half- 
speakers,  those  whose  language  differed  from  their  own  to  such  a 
degree  as  to  render  them  either  wholly  unintelligible,  or  partially 
so.  Among  Greeks  and  Latins  ^dpl^apo^  (barbarus)  simply  meant 
this.  The  term  valk,  walah,  wal,  which  became  the  desiornation  of 
the  Romans  both  in  Italy  and  the  Provinces,  as  well  as  of  the 
entire  Celtic-speaking  stock,  is  said  to  have  possessed  this  sense. 
The  existence  of  the  same  practice  may  be  traced  also  perhaps 
among  the  Gaedhel  in  the  name  Seal  Balb,  explained,  "  Dumb 
Champion,"  from  seal,  a  champion,  and  balb,  a  loan-word  from  the 
Latin    balbtis^    "  stuttering."      Seal    Balb   is    called   the   King  of 


1078  The  Dolmens  of  Ireland. 


Fomoire,  which  O'Flaherty  explains  by  Finland,f  and  curiously 
enouo-h,  since  if  by  Finland  he  meant  Esthonian  Finland,  and  the 
more  southern  and  western  districts  of  the  ^Flstians,  in  Old 
Prussia,  he  would  unknowingly  have  included  the  ScalowitcE,  whose 
name  means  the  Descendants  or  People  of  Seal,  and  whose 
territory  lay  next  that  of  the  Barthenses  and  Galindae  among 
the  sea-board — or  Pomorian — peoples  of  the  Southern  Baltic. 

In  the  name  Nemed,  then,  or  Nemid,  or  Nimech,  of  the  Irish 
and  British  traditions  we  have  a  name  derived  from  the  Sclavonic 
neni,  njem,  and  the  termination  ets,  in  Old  Bohemian  ec,  the  whole 
word  signifying  a  dumb-person,  one  who  spoke  in  a  tongue  which 
was  not  understood.  Among  the  Wends  Njemetz  was  the  peculiar 
designation  of  the  neighbouring  tribes  to  the  west  of  them. 
In  ordinary  Sclavonic,  Njemci  was  the  name  for  the  Germans. 
As  a  place-name  Nemitz  occurs  several  times  in  Pomerania — near 
Colburg  for  example,  and  near  Cummerou,  and  on  a  river  of  the 
Rugewalde — in  each  instance  marking  perhaps  the  site  of  a 
German  settlement  among  the  Sclaves.  Galeotus  Martins  \  says, 
"  Nemet  Orzag  est  Germanorum  regnum."  This  meaning  it 
possessed  among  the  Byzantine  writers.  Sophocles,  in  his 
Dictionary  of  the  Greek  of  this  period,  explains  Nemitzi  by 
"Austrians  or  Germans."  In  the  "  Life  of  Saint  Clement,"  the 
Bulgarian  bishop  of  that  name,  who  died  in  916,  and  which, 
though  wrongly  attributed  to  Theophylact  of  Bulgaria,  was 
evidently  written  by  a  contemporary  of  Clement,  we  read  of 
"  homines  barbari  (nempe  Nemitzi)  jam  natura  sua,  nunc  etiam 
mandato,  immites." 

They  (the  Nemitzi)  are  not  the  Hungarians  to  whom  by  this 
same  writer  the  term  Scythian  is  applied,  since,  in  a  passage  where 
he  refers  to  the  Hungarians  who  in  the  middle  of  the  tenth  century 
attacked  Byzantium  and  laid  waste  Bulgaria,  he  says :  "  Cum 
Scythicus  gladius  Bulgarico  sanguine  inebriatus  est."  The  term 
"  Scythian  "  was  never,  from  Herodotus  onwards,  applied  either 
ethnologically  or  philologically.  The  Scythians,  whencesoever 
they  might  have  come,  or  whosoever  they  might  have  been,  were 
merely  the  inhabitants  of  Scythia,  that  is  to  say,  of  the  entire 
portion  of  Europe  which  lies  north  of  the  Black  Sea,  embracing 
the   countries   around    the    Baltic     Lake — Finland,    Scandinavia, 

t  "  Bania  filia  Scalii  Balbi  Finlandia;  regis,  Tuathalii  regiiia,"  "  Ogygia,"  p.  303. 
+  "  De  Dictis  et  Factis  Matthix,"  cap.  xxviii. 


Ethnology  and  Tradition.  1079 


Denmark,  and  Northern  Prussia.  To  cosmographers  living  in 
the  time  of  the  anonymous  geographer  of  Ravenna — that  is,  in  the 
seventh  century — the  "  Island  "  of  Scanza  was  known  as  "  Scythia 
Antiqua." 

Bede  states  that  the  Picts  came  from  Scythia,  and  in  so  doing 
he  means  Scythia  Citerior,  that  is,  the  districts  around  the  Baltic. 
In  Layamon's  "  Brut,"  what  was  an  old  tradition  is  clearly  perpetu- 
ated, when  we  read  that  "over  the  sea-flood  .  .  .  came  out  of 
Scythia,  ...  a  king  called  Rodrich,  and  with  him  he  brought 
the  Peohtes — men  of  much  might."  This  Rodrich  is  in  Irish 
Rudhraighe,  or  Rughraidhe,  and  this  is  equivalent  to  "the  Rugian." 

When  Zonaras  speaks  of  the  Heruli  as  a  "  gens  Scythica  et 
Gotthica,"  he  almost  certainly  means  that  these  people  were 
regarded,  when  looked  back  upon  from  his  time,  as  an  inter- 
mixture of  Sclaves  and  Goths.  Although  even  the  Goths  them- 
selves are  occasionally  called  Scythians  in  respect  of  their  place  of 
habitation  in  Scythia,  no  Scythians,  even  by  habitation,  are  ever 
called  Nemitzi.  Both  by  Sclaves  and  Byzantines  the  latter  term 
is  reserved  for  the  purer  Germanic  races  of  the  West.  It  includes 
Norsemen  from  Scandinavia.  Thus  Anna  Comnena  calls  the 
Varangian  guard  Nemitzi :  "  Barangos  Thule  oriundos  barbaros 
securibus  armatos,  alibi  Nemitzos."  These  mercenaries  are 
variously  termed  by  Byzantine  chroniclers,  Scandinavians,  Ger- 
mans, English,  and  even  Celts.  This  latter  name  is  applied 
to  them  by  Pachymeres  and  by  Zonaras,  and  it  possesses  a  curious 
interest,  since  it  shows  an  unconscious  restoration  of  the  term 
"  Celtic  "  to  its  primitive  sense,  in  which  were  originally  embraced 
by  Herodotus  all  the  inhabitants  of  North-Western  Europe,  just 
as  by  the  term  Scythian  were  embraced  all  the  inhabitants  of 
North-Eastern  Europe,  simply  from  a  geographical  point  of  view, 
irrespective  alike  of  race  or  language. 

We  observe,  then,  from  what  I  have  said,  that  a  great  distinc- 
tion was  drawn  by  Byzantine  writers  between  the  Nemitzi  on  the 
one  hand,  and  the  Sclaves,  and  mixed  peoples,  such  as  the  Heruli 
had  become  in  the  East,  on  the  other.  After  the  Hunnish 
invasion,  the  name  Bulgares  was  applied,  not  alone  to  actual 
Huns  in  retreat,  but  to  those  tribes,  whether  Sclavonic,  Germanic, 
or  mixed,  who  continued  to  attack  the  Roman  Empire.  Tribes 
originally  German,  such  as  the  Heruli,  who  had  mingled  them- 
selves in  blood  alliance  with   Scythians,  and  participated  in  the 


io8o  The  Dolmens  of  Ireland. 

Hunnish  raids,f  would,  supposing  them  to  have  returned  to  their 
earlier  seats  in  the  North,  have  come  back  as  Bulgares  in  the  eyes 
of  contemporary  writers — no  longer  as  Nemitzi.  This  appears  to 
me  to  be  precisely  what  is  intended  by  the  tradition  preserved  in 
Ireland  that  the  Nemedians,  having  gone  into  Greece  under  that 
name,  returned  to  their  old  haunts  as  the  Bolg.  I  intend  presently 
to  place  side  by  side  the  traditions  of  the  Heruli,  as  detailed  by 
Procopius,  and  those  of  the  Fir-Bolg,  as  found  in  Irish  authorities. 
It  will  not  be  without  interest  to  note  how  close  the  correspon- 
dences are.     Meanwhile,  I  return  to  the  saga  of  Nemed. 

The  enemies  of  the  Nemedians,  as  they  had  been  of  the 
Bardenses  (or  Partholan's  people),  were  the  Fomorians,  and  in 
the  account  which  the  Irish  traditions  give  us  of  their  wars  there 
is  nothing  whatever  that  we  need  call  romantic.  The  state- 
ments seem  to  be  as  plain  matters  of  fact  as  passages  in  Csesar. 
The  only  difficulty  is  to  reconcile  the  localities  described  with 
those  to  which  tradition  points  in  Ireland  itself.  The  Irish 
tradition,  told  briefly,  is  as  follows : — The  Fomorians  having 
attacked  the  Nemedians,  the  latter  defeat  them  in  three  battles  ; 
in  the  second  of  which,  we  are  told,  that  Gann  and  Gennan,  two 
Fomorian  chiefs,  are  killed.  The  name  of  the  third  battle  was 
Murbolg. 

After  the  death  of  Nemed,  however,  the  Fomorians  were  in  a 
position  to  exercise  great  tyranny  towards  the  Nemedians.  Off 
the  extreme  northern  coast  of  Erin  was  a  fortress  called  Tor 
Conaing  (or  Conaing's  or  Conan's  Tower).  It  was  so  called  after 
Conaing,  or  Conan,  son  of  Faebar,  who  kept  a  fleet,  and  resided 
there,  with  More  the  son  of  Dela.  From  thence  they  exacted 
the  tribute  of  Erin  from  the  Nemedians.  The  amount  of  this 
tribute  was  two-thirds  of  their  children,  corn,  and  cattle,  which 
had  to  be  presented  to  them  on  the  Eve  of  Samhain,  upon  the 
field  of  Magh  Kedni,  between  the  rivers  Drobaeis  and  Erni.  .  .  . 
The  Fomorians  imposed  yet  another  tyrannical  exaction  on  the 
children  of  Nemed,  namely,  three  measures  of  cream  and  flour 
and  butter,  which  were  to  be  sent  from  every  hearth  to  More  and 
Conaing  at  Tor-Inis.  This  tax  was  levied  throughout  Erin  by  a 
female  steward  called  Liag.J 

t  "  Heruli,  Turcilingi  sive  Rugii,"  are  mentioned  by  Jordanes  as  serving  in  the  army  of  Attila. 
Later  on,  it  was  to  these  same  peoples  that  Odoacer  belonged,  and  over  whom  he  ruled.  W  ith 
Turcilingi  compare  the  "  Sons  of  Tore  "  in  the  Irish  battle-tradition  at  Cong  in  Mayo. 

X  Liag  means  a  calf,  and  therefore  corresponds  to  vein/a,  which  is  both  a  call  and  a  hag. 


Ethnology  and  Tradition.  io8i 

At  length  the  men  of  Erin  rebelled.  The  clans  of  Nemed 
were  led  by  Beothach,  son  of  larban^l  the  prophet,  son  of  Nemed  ; 
by  Fergus  Leth-Derg,  son  of  Nemed,  and  by  Erglan,  son  of  Beoan 
son  of  Starn,  son  of  Nemed,  with  whom  were  his  two  brothers 
Manntan  and  larthact.  Their  forces  numbered  30,000  on  land, 
and  a  like  number  on  sea.  They  demolished  the  tower  and 
fortress  upon  Tor-Inis,  and  there  Conaing  fell  with  his  children 
and  kindred.  More,  son  of  Dela,  however,  arrived  soon  after  from 
Africa  with  sixty  ships,  upon  which  the  Nemedians  and  Fomorians 
fell  to  fighting  again.  In  this  last  battle  a  mutual  destruction 
took  place.  Nearly  all  the  combatants  fell,  either  by  each  other's 
hands,  or  were  drowned  in  the  sea,  for  so  fiercely  did  they  fight 
that  they  never  perceived  that  the  tide  was  coming  in  upon  them. 
More  escaped  with  a  small  remnant  of  his  people,  and  with  them 
took  possession  of  the  island.  Only  one  ship  of  the  Nemedians 
escaped,  in  which  was  Simeon  Brec,  Ibath,  son  of  Beothach,  and 
Britan  Mael,  son  of  Fergus  Leth-Derg. 

They  escaped  in  three  ships,  after  seven  years'  preparation, 
but  some  still  remained  in  Erin,  and  ten  warriors  were  left  to 
govern  them.  Here  they  continued  until  the  return  of  the 
descendants  of  Simeon  Brec,  who,  having  been  enslaved  in 
Greece,  came  back  as  the  Fir-Bolg. 

Now,  not  only  is  there  nothing  extravagant  in  this  account, 
but  I  venture  to  think  that  if  we  will  allow  the  field  of  our  inquiry 
to  extend  beyond  the  limits  of  the  country  we  know  as  Ireland,  we 
may  fix  the  localities  mentioned,  and  identify  the  combatants, 
premising  that  no  trace  of  any  such  tower  or  fortress,  nor  of  the 
name  of  Conan,  exists  on  Tory  island,  that  the  features  of  the 
coast  there  do  not  afford  a  spot  fitted  to  have  been  the  site  of 
the  episode  of  the  tide  coming  in  upon  fighters,  and  that  the  tale  is 
not  confined  to  that  one  spot  in  Ireland  alone,  but  told  of  several 
— all  which  considerations  point  to  the  fact  that  it  was  imported 
by  incomers,  of  the  heritage  of  whose  traditions  it  formed  a 
part. 

On  the  coast  of  Northern  Germany  lies  the  island  of  Rugen, 
or,  as  it  was  also  called,  Verania,  occupied  at  an  early  date  by 
the  Langobardi,  according  to  Saxo,  and,  at  all  events,  by  Germans, 
until  it  fell  into  the  hands  of  the  Sclaves  as  they  made  their  way 
westward  along  the  Pomeranian  coast.  Opposite  to  it  was  the 
estuary  of  the  Peni  or  Peene  river,  the  great  emporium  of 
VOL.  in.  2  B 


io82  The  Dolmens  of  Ireland. 

Wineta,f  sunk  beneath  the  sea  ;  the  town  of  Usna,J  the  town  of 
JuHn,§  also  called  Hinnisburg ;  ||  and  the  district  of  Dimine  or 
Demmin.  West  of  these  upon  the  coast  was  the  country  occupied 
by  the  Sclavonic  Obotritae,  and  previously  to  them  by  the  Heruli, 
who  were  said  to  have  left  their  name  in  that  of  the  town  of  Werla, 
or  Herula,  as  it  was  called  in  Latin. ^  Here,  too,  between  Lilbeck 
and  Rostock  were  the  rivers  Trave  and  Warnau,  the  latter  bearing 
the  name  of  an  ancient  German  people  mentioned  by  Pliny, 
Tacitus,  Cassiodorus,  Procopius,  Agathias,  and  others.  Pliny 
and  Tacitus  call  them  Varini ;  Ptolemy  Avarni,  or  Viruni ; 
Cassiodorus  Guarni ;  Jordanes  Warni ;  Procopius  Varni.  At  the 
heading  of  a  short  code  of  laws  they  are  called  Werini,  and  are 
joined  with  Anglii.  In  the  Anglo-Saxon  "Traveller's  Song"  they 
appear  as  Verne.  They  were  associated  with  the  Thuringians 
which  carries  their  position  southwards,  but  they  were  not  identical 
with  that  people,  as  we  find  from  the  fact  that  Theodoric,  in  a 
communication  to  the  kings  of  the  tribes  settled  in  these  parts, 
addresses  the  kings  of  the  Heruli,  Guarni,  and  Thoringi  respec- 
tively. Pliny  had  placed  them  under  the  Vindili,  and  Tacitus 
under  the  Suevi.  Jordanes  speaks  of  them  as  a  people  far 
inferior  to  the  Goths  in  the  nobility  of  birth.  With  their  name 
etymologists  have  not  hesitated  to  associate  the  name  of  the 
town  Virunum  and  of  the  Viruni  west  of  the  Elbe,  and  to  identify 
with  it  the  name  Uuyrun,  Wirun,  the  modern  Werne  in 
Westfalia.  Muller,  in  his  notes  on  Ptolemy,  naturally  compares 
this  Virunum  with  the  Virunum  in  Noricum,  and  comments  on 
its  apparently  Celtic  form.ff 

Now,  with  this  name  in  its  several  forms,  may  we  not  compare 
also  that  of  a  people  and  river  in  Ireland,  and,  indeed,  with  that 
of  the  island  itself  ?  The  Latin  Hidcrnia  is  in  Greek  Ivernia,  and 
the  name  of  the  people  and  of  a  town,  as  given  by  Ptolemy,  are 
respectively  Iverni  and  Ivernis.  Other  forms  are  lerne,  lernis, 
Juverna,  Vernia,  etc.  In  the  Vita  Columbae  we  have  the 
adjectival   form   Evernilis,   which   gives   us   Evernis   or   Everne, 

t  See  Ilelmold,  "Chron.  Slav.,"  i.  2;  Crantz,  "  Vand.,"  cc.  19  and  20;  Micra.'lius,  "Pom. 
Anth.,"  i.  97. 

X  Called  Usnan  in  Micia-lius's  map  ;  called  also  Usedoni,  Usnoini,  etc. 

S  Comp.  Ulaid  (Lit.  Ulidia) ;  Uillin,  a  giant  who  lights  Manannan,  etc.  Julin  was  famous  for 
a  pillar  which  was  an  object  of  worship.     hJee  Caspar  Abel,  "Teutsche  Alterthiim,"  i.  208. 

II  Thunmann. 

t  Micrcelius  in  his  map  places  the  "Heruli,  seu  Werli,  seu  Wenoi,"  .south  of  the  Varini,  whom 
he  locates  east  of  the  Warnau. 

tt  Carentz  in  Kiigen  appears  also  to  bear  a  Celtic  name.  Compare  Carentomagus,  Carantomum. 
See  Zeuss,  "Die  Deutschen,"  p.  618,  n. 


Ethnology  and  Tradition.  1083 

which  is  practically  identical  with  Avarni  Ptolemy's  name  for  the 
Werini — the  a  equalling  the  e,  as  in  Arminius,  Erminius,  etc. 
The  river-name  Erne  corresponds  with  that  of  the  Warnau,  while 
the  town-names  Werin  and  Werne  correspond  with  that  of  lerne 
or  lernis.  The  tribe  name  Ernai  (of  Munster)  similarly  corre- 
sponds with  that  of  the  Iverni  on  the  one  hand,  and  of  the  Werini 
on  the  other.  In  Irish  tradition  the  Ernai,  Erna,  or  Earna  were 
inseparably  connected  with  the  Fir-Bolg.  Mac  Firbis,  in  his 
account  of  the  latter,  says  that  "some  of  the  Fir-Bolg  were  called 
Ernaans,  yet  the  name  of  Fir-Bolg  was  not  confined  to  them.  .  .  . 
The  name  Ernaan  was  generally  given  to  the  descendants  of  Olioll 
Earann,  the  ancestor  of  the  Clann-Deaeii.  But  there  were 
Ernaans  before  Olioll  Earann,  for  he  received  the  cognomen 
Earann  from  his  having  been  possessed  of  the  territory  called 
Erna,  which  name  his  posterity  retained  as  well  as  the  old  Ernaans 
from  whom  Olioll  borrowed  it." 

Of  the  Erna  we  read  in  brief  notices  of  several  battles. 
Conmael,  son  of  Eber,  King  of  Erin,  gained  the  battle  of  Loch 
Lein  (Killarney)  against  Erna,  Martine,  and  Mogruth,  the  son  of 
Mofebis,  all  of  the  Fir-Bolg.  Tighernmas,  of  the  race  of  Erem  or 
Heremon,  fights  the  battle  of  Deabh-na-Cuil-Fobhair,  east  of 
Lough  Corrib,  against  the  Ernai,  or  Earna,  as  well  as  three 
battles  against  the  Fir-Bolg.  The  battles  of  this  king  are  described 
as  against  the  race  of  Emer  (=  Eber)  and  others  of  the  Erenn. 
people,  and  foreigners  besides.  Fiacha  Labhruinne,  King  of  Erin,, 
fought  three  battles  against  the  Erna,  one  of  the  Fir-Bolg  tribes,, 
on  the  plain  which  Lough  Erne  now  covers,  and  after  the  fighting 
was  over.  Lough  Erne  burst  forth,  and  for  that  reason  was  so- 
called,  being  the  lake  which  sprang  up  over  Erna.f  Aengus 
Olmucadha,  King  of  Erin,  fought  against  the  Martine,  and  also  the 
battle  of  Sliabh  Cua  against  the  Ernai.  Mac  Firbis  says  he 
gained  fifty  battles  against  Cruithne  and  Fir-Bolg. 

Siorna  (or  Sirna)  Saeghlach,  son  of  Dian  (Mac  Den)  King  of 
Erin,  gained  the  battle  of  Moin  Fiachna  (Fiacha's  Bog)  in  Offaly 
(Hy-Failge)  over  Martine  and  Ernai.  The  following  account  of 
further  exploits  of  his,  in  the  "  Annals  of  the  Four  Masters,"  is 
interesting.  "  An  attack  was  made  by  him  on  the  Fomorians  in 
the  territory  of  Meath.     He  gained  a  battle  over  the  Ultonians. 

t  These  stories  of  lakes  bursting  forth  seem  to  point  to  the  traditions  having  been  derived  from 
a  country  subject  to  inundations,  as  indeed  was  the  entire  North-German  coast. 


1084  The  Dolmens  of  Ireland. 

He  fought  the  battle  of  JMoin-Trogaidhe  in  Ciannachta  when 
Lughair,  son  of  Lughaidh,  of  the  race  of  Emer,  had  brought  a  force 
•of  Fomorians  into  Erin  with  their  king  Ceasarn.  As  the  battle 
was  being  fought  a  plague  was  sent  upon  them,  of  which  Lughair 
and  Ceasarn  perished  with  their  people,  and  a  countless  number 
•of  the  Fir  Ereann  with  them." 

Lastly,  we  find  a  certain  Neimhidh,  son  of  Scroibchenn,  King 
of  the  Ernai  of  Munster,  in  the  time  of  Art,  son  of  Conn  of  the 
hundred  fights. 

That  there  must  have  been  a  continental  Erin  appears  on  the 
face  of  one  of  the  Irish  tales  where  the  Fomorians  are  represented 
as  "riding  into  Erin."  If  this  continental  Erin  was  the  country 
of  the  Werini,  and  if  the  Fomorians  were  the  Pomorjani,  their 
next  neighbours  on  the  east,  the  difficulty  is  solved.  Off  the 
coast,  too,  of  the  Sclavonic  Gulf,  east  of  the  mouth  of  the  Warnau, 
lay  the  island  of  Verania  which,  since  ver  and  her  or  er  are  inter- 
changeable {e.g.  the  Rugian  god-name  Herovitus  or  Verovitus) 
might  even  be  called  the  island  of  Eran,  and  its  people  the  men 
of  Eran,!  or  Heran. 

There  is,  of  course,  the  proper  Celtic  nominative  of  this  name 
found  in  native  writings  as  Eriu  (personified  as  a  goddess  and 
queen  of  the  Tuatha  De  Danann),  gen.  Erenn ;  dat.  Erann,  with 
its  varieties  Eri  and  Eire,  and  appearing  in  foreign  authorities  as 
Iris  ;  J  Iren  porrexit ;  §  Iri  and  Irenses  for  the  people  ;  ||  Ireo,^  with 
which  we  may  compare  the  name  of  Herio,  an  island  on  the  west 
coast  of  France  ;  HeruSjff  and  Irland  and  Iraland,  with  which  forms 
we  may  perhaps  compare  Iruath,  the  name  of  an  uncertain 
country  mentioned  in  Irish  and  Anglo-Saxon  writings,  which  some 
suppose  to  be  Norway. JJ  From  these  shorter  forms  have  been 
manufactured  an  eponymous  Ir,§§  a  son  of  Milesius,  and  the 
founder  of  a  line  of  kings  who  reigned  at  Emain  Macha.  He 
was  said  to  have  been  born  in  Irene  near  the  Thracian  shore,  and 
to  have  died  in  Ireland,  which  received  the  name  Ireo,  explained 


t  Comp.  Tuath  Sen-Erann  in  Mac  Firbis's  list ;  O'C,  "  M.  and  C,"  i.  p.  27,  n. 
X  Diod,  Siculus,  V.  32.  §  Gildas,  c.  6. 

II  Aelnoth,  Vit.  Canuti  Cant.,  c.  10 ;  Oid.  Vit.  ii.,  eccl.  i,  10. 

I  Keating,  edit.  CMahony,  p.  83.  ft  Vita  Walce,  in  Pertz,  2,  558,  559. 

II  On  the  word  Ivernia  and  its  relation  to  Erin,  or  Herinn,  Whitley  Stokes  ("Med.  Tract  on 
Lat.  Declension,"  p.  159)  speaks  thus  :  "  For  my  part,  I  believe  that  Ilerinn  is  nothing  but  Ivernya 
{lovepvia),  the  z;  having  passed  into  a  spiritus  as/>er,  which  has  been  shifted,  the  ^  standing  for  /, 
the  "«  for  ny.  .  .  .  Thus  Ivernia,  hiernna  {'lepv-t)),  thence,  by  metathesis,  hirenn,  herenn. 

|§  The  same  authority  quotes  Pictet,  who,  citing  the  Teutonic  names  for  the  Irish— Norse  irar, 
A.  Sax.  ira,  ne,  asserts  that  Eirinn  is  derived  "ohne  Zweifel  aus  dem  altesten  Volksnamen  der 
Iren,  der  elwa  Er  oder  Eir  gelautet  haben." 


Ethnology  and  Tradition.  1085, 

"Grave  of  Ir"  from  him.  His  posterity  were  the  Rughraidhe  or 
Rudrician  hne  of  king^s.  The  name  Ir  seems  to  enter  into  twO' 
other  names  of  Irish  kings  who  may  be  considered  as  eponymi, 
namely,  Irial  or  Irel,  called  the  Prophet,  and  lered  or  laran  or 
Irereo,  to  whom  Lynch  j  assigns  the  exceedingly  interesting 
alias  of  lerugleus,  a  name  which  is  clearly  Heruleus,  or  the 
Herulean,  which  brings  us  back  to  the  very  coast  on  which  dwelt 
the  Werini,  and  at  an  earlier  date  the  Heruli,  and  tempts  us  to  ask 
whether,  after  all,  the  old  German  antiquary  Lazius  J  was  not  right 
when  he  propounded  the  theory  that  Ireland  bore  the  name  of 
the  Heruli,  and  that  it  and  not  Scandinavia  was  the  island  in  the 
north  which  Procopius  therefore  mis-called  Thule,  and  whither 
they  sent  an  embassy  to  obtain  in  the  ancient  home  of  their  race 
a  scion  of  the  royal  house  for  king.  To  this  question  I  shall  also 
return  when  I  proceed  to  compare  the  native  accounts  of  the  Fir- 
Bolg,  with  the  descriptions  of  the  Heruli  in  Procopius  and 
elsewhere. 

As  the  names  Erin  and  Erna  are  referable  to  the  same  root, 
so  are  Werini  and  Heruli.  For  the  latter,  heriL,  "a  sword,"  has- 
been  suggested  by  Zeuss.  If  we  may  suppose  that  the  Rugian 
war-god  Verovitus  (Herovitus)  was  a  divinity  adopted  by  the 
Sclaves  from  the  Germans,  this  meaning  would  well  accord  with 
the  description  of  the  idol  which  represented  him.  Heruvitus 
would  mean  "son  of  the  sword,"  and  the  oaken  statue  of  the  god, 
which  had  seven  faces,  was  girt  with  a  like  number  of  swords  in 
their  sheaths,  while  in  his  hand  he  held  an  eighth  one,  drawn.§: 
His  equation,  however,  with  Mars  reminds  us  that  Er  ||  among  the 
Saxons,  and  Ero  among  the  Bavarians,  was  an  ancient  war-god,, 
whose  name  is  found  in  Eresberg,  now  Merseberg  in  Westfalia,. 
near  which  was  the  Irminsul,  the  columnar  idol  destroyed  by 
Charlemagne,  and  also  in  Eritag,  or  Erctag,  that  is,  Dies  Martis. 

If,  indeed,  a  connection,  such  as  I  am  hinting  at,  existed 
between  the  peoples  of  the  south-western  bays  and  islands  of  the 
Baltic  and  Ireland,  the  origin  of  it  must,  it  is  clear,  be  sought, 
in  the  first  instance,  in  times  precedent  to  the  Christian  era. 
Such  a  connection  might  well  have  been  kept  up,  however,, 
for  centuries  after  it  was  formed,  and  would  have  paved  the 
way    for   those   raids  made  by   the    Fir   n-hErenn,   or    Men  of 

t  Cambr.  Evers.  fol.  edit.  p.  299  ;  and  eJit.  Kelly,  i.  448. 

X  "  De  Gentium  Migrationibus,"  Basle,  1557.  §  Vit.  S.  otto,  lioll.  Jul.  i,  409. 

II  Zeuss,  "  Die  Deutschen,"  p.  23,  n. 


io86  The  Dolmens  of  Ireland. 

Ireland,  to  the  Alps  of  which  native  tradition  tells  us.  Names 
upon  the  coasts  and  islands  of  Mecklenburg  and  Pomerania 
Citerior,  as  well  as  plans  of  fortifications  of  peculiar  construction, 
tend  to  strengthen  this  view.  With  the  name  Usna  we  may- 
compare  that  of  Uisneach  in  the  Tale  of  the  Children  of 
Uisneach,  and  also  that  of  Ushnagh  in  Westmeath,  and,  remem- 
bering the  frequent  descents  made  by  the  tribes  along  this  coast 
into  southern  lands,  which  give  us  a  second  Virunum,  we  may  add 
to  these  Usnach  on  Lake  Zurich.  With  Julin,  we  may  compare 
Ulidh,  or  Uillin,  and  with  the  Peene  or  Peni  river,  the  name 
Feinne  and  Fene.  In  the  name  of  the  Wenoi,f  and  in  that 
of  Wineta,  we  have  similar  resemblances  to  that  of  the  Fene, 
and,  what  is  more,  we  have  here  too,  as  in  Ireland,  a  name 
of  this  form  side  by  side  with  one  derived  from  er.  Peene 
and  Wenoi  answer  to  Fene,  and  Werini  to  Erni,  and  the 
tribes  who  bear  these  names  are  in  juxtaposition.  Again,  with 
Dimine  or  Demmin,  we  may  compare  Demni,  another  name  for 
Finn  Mac  Cumhail ;  and  also  the  name  Wx^r-Teimne  on  the  coast 
of  Ireland,  the  scene  of  the  exploits,  both  of  Finn  and  of  Cuchullain. 
With  the  name  of  the  Silingi  we  have  already  compared  that 
of  Slainge  ;  with  that  of  the  Semnones  we  may  compare  that  of 
Magh  Seimhne,  the  Plain  of  Seimhne,  where  Nemidh  built  a 
rath  by  Fomorian  labour ;  also  the  name  of  Rinn  Seimhne  or 
Island  Magee,  as  well  as  that  of  the  Tuath-Semonn,  a  Fir-Bolg 
tribe,  and  perhaps  that  of  the  eponymous  Semeon  Brec,  who  led 
the  Nemedians  to  Thrace  :  with  the  name  of  the  Rugii,  too,  that  of 
the  Rughraidhe;  and,  turning  to  the  islands,  the  name  of  Fimbria, 
if  it  really  be  Cimbria,  or  Little  Cimbria,  as  old  German  writers 
say,J  with  that  of  Cimbaoith,  King  of  Erin,  a  second  name 
apparently  for  Nemidh,  since  the  latter  built  a  rath  called  Rath 
Cimbaoith,  and  both  alike  had  wives  named  Macha.  Places 
on  that  island  certainly  bear  names  which  are  familiar  to  us  in 
Ireland,  as  Gamandorp,  which  recalls  that  of  the  Gamanraighe,  a 
Fir-Bolg  tribe;  Sarrandorp,  which  recalls  Saran,  a  Pictish  proper 
name;  Boiendorp  the  Buanraighe ;  Mumandorf  the  name 
Muman,§  which  was  Munster,  and  others. 

It  was,   however,  the  difficulty  of  reconciling  the  locality  of 
Nemidh's  attack  on  Tor  Conan  with  any  spot  in  Ireland  which 

t  See  note,  p.  1082.  J  See  Bleau's  Atlas. 

§  There  is  a  Mummendorf  also  cast  of  the  Trawc,  and  between  that  river  and  Grevismiillen. 


Ethnology  and  Tradition.  1087 

caused  this  digression,  and  which  now  brings  me  back  to  what  I 
think  may  have  been  the  real  scene  of  action,  namely,  the  Island  of 
Verania  or  Riigen,  where,  as  we  know,  Germanic  peoples,  possibly 
some  of  them  at  one  time  Celtic  in  speech,  must  have  been  in 
conflict  with  tribes  from  the  Pomeranian  coast,  of  Sclavic  and 
Finno-Sclavic,  or  Sarmatian  descent,  who  were  making  their  way 
westward,  as  the  Goths  and  Langobards  and  other  German 
peoples  went  southward. 

The  island  of  Riigen,  or  Veran,  is  of  singular  form.  The 
northern  portion  being  only  attached  to  the  southern  by  a  narrow 
strip  of  sand,  to  the  east  of  which  is  a  broad  sandbank  covered  at 
high  water,  and  forming  a  semicircular  bay  notoriously  dangerous 
to  shipping.  Upon  the  summit  of  the  chalk  cliff  which  forms  the 
north-western  extremity  of  this  northern  island,  which  is  called 
Wittou,  stand  the  remains  of  an  ancient  cliff-castle,  just  such  an 
one  as  are  those  on  the  coasts  of  Scotland,  Ireland,  Cornwall,  and 
Brittany.  Within  the  lines  of  this  stood  a  venerated  temple, 
the  presiding  deity  of  which  the  Sclaves  called  Suantevit,  a 
word  which  Zeussf  derives  from  siujat,  "light,"  and  ewit,  a 
Sclavonic  patronymic  termination.  The  name  of  this  sacred 
fortified  height  was  Arcona,  which  is  neither  a  Teutonic  nor  a 
Sclavonic  word,  but  Celtic.  In  its  composition  it  may  be  com- 
parable to  Arcunia,  Orcynia,  Hercynia,  in  which  case  the  natural 
features  of  the  place  explain  it,  or  it  may  contain  the  name  of  a 
person  as  Ard  Nemidh,  Ard  Macha,  Ard  Ladron,  Ardgonnell,  in 
Irish  tradition.  In  the  latter  case  the  name  would  be  that  of  Con, 
or  its  expansion  Conan,  or  Conang,  as  in  Dun  Conaing  in  Fenagh, 
and  the  Tor-Conaing,  or  Conain  of  the  Nemedian  tradition. 

In  popular  oral  tradition  in  Ireland,  Balor,  the  Fomorian, 
takes  the  place  of  Conan  at  Tory  Island,  and  inhabits  a  fortress 
with  walls  of  bronze,  though  he  is  finally  slain  by  Lug,  the  god  of 
light.  The  name  of  Conan  belongs  to  the  tales  written  down  in 
the  Middle  Ages.  The  question  is,  "  Have  we  in  Arcona  the 
original  Tor-Conain  ?  and  does  the  stretch  of  sand  beneath  it 
represent  the  site  of  the  battle  where  the  incoming  tide  completed 
the  destruction  of  the  combatants  ? "  In  any  case,  we  cannot  doubt 
that  the  spot  was  a  sacred  one  in  times  preceding  the  occupation 
of  Riigen  by  Sclaves.  It  survived  to  be  the  last  bulwark  of 
paganism   in   the   Baltic,   just  as  the   name   it  still    retains    may 


t  "  Die  Deutschen,"  p.  35,  n. 


ioS8  The  Dolmens  of  Ireland. 

perhaps  be  truly  regarded  as  the  last  remnant  left  of  the  Celtic 
laneuaore  in  a  Suevo-Sclavic  sea,  the  south-western  bay  of  which 
was  once,  if  some  expositors  of  Pliny  be  right,  the  (Celtic) 
Laofnum  Sinus. 

Strange  as  it  may  seem  to  us  that  a  pagan  temple,  endowed 
with  all  the  ritual  observances  of  antiquity,  should  have  existed  in 
Northern  Germany  as  late  as  the  reign  of  our  Henry  II.,  it  is 
nevertheless  true  that  the  fane  of  Arcona  was  not  suppressed  until 
the  year  1167,  when  Waldemar  and  the  Danes  destroyed  it — 
Saxo,  the  historian,  being  present  at  its  fall.  In  Ireland,  Druidism, 
in  pagan  hands,  had  been  dead  for  four  centuries  and  more, 
although  Christian  wonder-workers  kept  its  forms  alive.  The 
temple-worship  at  Temair  had  been  abolished  in  the  sixth 
century,  if  a  Christian  tradition  can  be  trusted,  although  so 
distinct  and  elaborate  an  account  of  the  "  house,"  that  is,  un- 
doubtedly the  ^des,  or  temple,  of  Cormac  Mac  Art,  and  its 
furniture,  is  found  in  the  mediaeval  books,  that  we  are  almost 
tempted  to  think  it  lasted  longer.  So  similar,  indeed,  is  that 
account  to  Saxo's  description  of  the  temple  of  Suantevit  that  I 
shall  venture  here  to  compare  the  two,  more  especially  since 
points  will  appear,  such  as  the  bringing  of  propitiatory  gifts  to 
the  god  at  Arcona,  which  recall  the  tribute  levied  by  the 
Fomorian  pirates  upon  the  people  of  Nemidh. 

The  temple  stood  on  the  summit  of  a  beetling  precipice,!  175 
feet  in  height,  which  served  as  an  impregnable  wall,  and 
rendered  the  situation  invulnerable  on  the  east,  south,  and  north- 
east sides.  The  artificial  defences  were  confined  to  a  rampart 
drawn  across  the  neck  of  the  promontory  on  the  north  and 
north-west  side,  where  the  entrance  was,  and  where  there  "was 
also  a  fortified  pathway  leading  to  a  well.  The  wall  was  formed 
of  earth  and  sods,  the  latter  being  interspersed  with  wood  in  the 
upper  portion,  a  mode  of  construction — stones  being  used  in 
place  of  sods — which  is  found  at  the  cliff-castle  of  Burgh  Head 
in  Scotland,  as  well  as  in  vitrified  forts  in  general.  In  the  centre 
of  the  arx  alta  thus  formed  was  a  flat  plot  of  ground  on  which 
stood  the  temple.  The  building,  which  was  of  wood,  and 
fashioned  most  choicely,  was  an  object  of  veneration  to  the 
people,  not  alone  by  reason  of  the  grandeur  of  the  ceremonies 
performed    there,    but   from    the    superstition    which    led    to   the 

t  "Saxo.  Gramm.  Hist.  Dan.,"  lib.  xiv. ;  edit.  IMiiUer  and  Velschow,  vol.  i.  pp.  822,  seqq. 


Ethnology  and  Tradition.  1089 

popular  belief  that  Deity  dwelt  in  the  image  which  was  therein 
set  up.  The  exterior  avibitiis,  or  circuit  around  the  temple — by 
which  we  are  perhaps  to  understand  that  it  was  circular  f — ■ 
was  brightened  by  an  elaborate  roof  {celameii),  the  decoration 
of  which  embraced  a  variety  of  subjects  depicted  in  rude  and 
uncultured  fashion. 

There  was  only  one  entrance  through  which  worshippers 
could  pass  into  the  Interior,  and  two  enclosures  concentrically 
arranged  {duplex  septorum  ordo)  shut  in  the  shrine  itself.  The 
outer  of  these,  intersected  with  partition  walls,  was  covered  In 
with  a  scarlet  roof  {^puniceinii  culmeii).  The  inner  one,  which 
was  raised  on  four  posts,  had,  in  place  of  walls,  bright  curtains 
hung  around  It,  and,  except  in  respect  of  its  roof,  and  the 
ornamental  canopy  work  {Jaquearid),  had  nothing  in  common 
with  the  outer  court.  Within  this  shrine  stood  a  huge  image, 
wondrous  to  see,  surpassing  In  size  the  normal  average  of  the 
human  body.  It  had  four  heads  (as  also  had  Perun,  another 
Sclavic  divinity,  and  as  also  had  a  certain  Cimbe  Ceithirchennach, 
i.e.  "  Cimbe  with  the  Four-heads,"  one  of  the  sons  of  Umor,  in 
Irish  legend,  who  must  have  been  an  idol)  and  as  many  necks, 
two  of  the  heads  facing  frontways  and  two  backways.  Of  the 
two  heads  on  either  side  one  looked  to  the  right,  the  other  to 
the  left.  Each  face  was  represented  as  clean-shaven  and  with 
the  hair  cut  close  {crincs  attonsi),  so  that  the  fashion  of  the 
Rugians,  so  Saxo  observes,  was  that  also  of  their  God.  In  the 
right  hand  of  the  Image  was  a  horn  formed  (exciiltuni)  out  of 
various  kinds  of  metal.  This  the  priest,  Vv^ell  versed  in  the  ritual, 
filled  once  In  every  year  with  wine  for  purposes  of  divination, 
for  from  the  condition  of  the  liquid  he  foretold  the  measure  of 
plenty  the  coming  year  would  bring.  In  the  left  hand  of  the 
idol  was  a  bow,  and  the  arm  was  drawn  back  to  the  side.  The 
tunic,  which  was  formed  of  a  different  kind  of  wood,  reached 
the  shins,  and  was  so  deftly  gathered  in  at  the  knees  with  a 
hidden  fastening  that  the  place  of  the  joint  could  only  be  dis- 
covered on  the  closest  scrutiny. 

The  feet  appeared  to  touch  the  ground,  the  base  on  which 
they  rested  being  hidden  In  It.  Not  far  from  the  Image,  the 
bridle-bit  and  saddle  of  the  god  were  to  be  seen,  and  many  other 

t  I  have  seen  one  old  map  (17th  century)  in  whicli,  liowever,  an  <;z'a/area  is  indicated  within  the 
rampart. 


logo  The  Dolmens  of  Ireland. 


insignia  of  his  divinity.  Among-  these  was  his  sword,  which  from 
its  immense  proportions  excited  special  admiration.  An  outer 
coating  of  silver  set  off  the  sheath  and  hilt  to  advantage,  in 
addition  to  the  beauty  of  the  weapon  itself. 

The  ceremonial  observed  in  the  worship  of  this  idol  was  as 
follows :  Once  a  year,  when  the  harvest  had  been  gathered  in, 
a  promiscuous  assembly  of  the  entire  population  of  the  island  was 
held  before  the  temple.  Victims  from  the  flocks  and  herds  were 
offered  in  sacrifice,  and  a  solemn  feast  was  proclaimed  in  the  name 
of  religion.  The  priest,  who,  contrary  to  the  fashion  in  vogue  in 
the  island,  wore  his  hair  and  beard  long,  on  the  day  preceding 
that  on  which  he  had  to  conduct  the  divine  offices,  cleaned  out 
the  shrine  (sacelluni)  with  the  utmost  care.  He  alone  might 
enter  this,  and  no  broom  was  permitted  to  be  used  in  it.  While 
he  was  within  this  sanctum,  he  might  not  even  breathe,  so  that, 
as  often  as  he  had  to  do  so,  he  was  obliged  to  rush  to  the 
door,  lest  the  presence  of  the  god  should  have  been  polluted  by 
the  breath  of  a  mortal. 

The  next  day,  while  the  people  were  watching  without  before 
the  door,  he  took  the  cup  from  (the  hand  of)  the  image,  and 
examined  it  most  carefully.  If  aught  had  been  diminished  from 
the  quantity  of  the  liquid  placed  in  it,  he  held  it  to  be  an  omen 
that  the  coming  year  would  be  one  of  scarcity.  If  it  still  was  full, 
he  prophesied  a  plentiful  harvest,  and,  according  to  what  he  found, 
he  advised  the  people  for  their  good.  He  then  replenished  the 
cup,  and  placed  it  again  In  the  right  hand  of  the  Image.  A  great 
banquet  ensued,  with  feasting  and  revel  for  the  whole  assembly, 
and  in  taking  part  In  this,  drunkenness  was  held  to  be  a  pious  act, 
and  sobriety  a  vile  one  {in  quo  epiilo  sobrietatem  violare  pium 
existimatum  est,  servare  nefas  habititin). 

For  the  support  of  this  temple  a  pole-tax  was  levied  upon 
every  inhabitant  of  the  Island,  and  a  share  of  all  booty  taken  in 
piracy  or  war  was  set  apart  for  the  god,  who  was  at  the  same  time 
the  god  of  war,  and  the  supreme  deity.  For  the  service  of  this 
god  three  hundred  horses  were  set  apart,  with  which  statement  we 
may  compare  that  of  Tacitus, t  who  describes  the  "  milk-white 
steeds,  unbroken  to  an  earthly  yoke,  which  the  Germans  pastured 
In  the  forests  and  groves  at  the  public  expense."  Three  hundred 
guards  {satellites)  were  also  in  attendance,  who  formed  the  house- 

t  Germ.,  cap.  x. 


Ethnology  and  Tradition.  1091 


hold  cavalry  of  the  god.  With  the  numbers  of  these  horses  and 
guards  we  may  compare  the  multiples  of  three  times  fifty,  who 
lived,  as  we  shall  presently  see,  in  the  "  House  of  Cormac,"  at 
Temair.  All  the  spoil  accumulated  by  these  mercenaries  or 
retainers  (who  remind  us  somewhat  of  the  Fenian  militia  who 
formed  Cormac's  guard),  whether  obtained  in  open  war  or  private 
pillage — for  Rugia,  in  common  with  its  sister  island  Fembre,  was, 
according  to  Adam  of  Bremen,f  full  of  pirates  and  most  blood- 
thirsty robbers — was  placed  in  the  custody  of  the  god  their 
master,  who,  out  of  the  booty  so  derived,  caused  insignia  of  various 
kinds,  as  well  as  diverse  ornaments  for  the  temple,  to  be  made. 
These  treasures  were  stored  in  strong  closets  in  which,  in  addi- 
tion to  specie,  there  was  laid  up  a  quantity  of  scarlet  fabric  which 
the  Danes  found  to  have  been  eaten  away  with  age. 

To  this  idol,  supported  as  it  was  by  the  tribute  paid  by  all 
Sclavonia,  outlying  kings  also,  oblivious  of  the  act  of  sacrilege, 
which,  as  Christians,  they  were  committing,  contributed  (pro- 
pitiatory) gifts.  Even  Sweyn,  King  of  Denmark,  with  a  view  to 
obtaining  the  favour  of  this  god,  did  him  reverence  with  the 
offering  of  a  cup  of  rare  and  beautiful  workmanship.  With  this 
statement  we  may  compare  that,  in  the  Irish  tradition,  of  foreign 
kings  coming  to  the  "  House  of  Cormac."  Other  temples,  too, 
Suantevit  possessed  in  other  places,  ministered  to  by  priests  almost 
equal  in  honour  to  the  priest  of  Arcona,  but  possessed  of  less 
potent  influence. 

The  high  priest  of  Arcona  had,  too,  the  care,  in  right  of  his 
office,  of  the  god's  own  peculiar  horse,  which  was  a  pure  white 
one,  to  pull  the  hairs  in  the  mane  and  tail  of  which  was  accounted 
sinful.  The  priest  alone  might  feed  this  animal  and  mount  upon 
his  back.  On  this  horse  it  was,  so  the  people  of  Riigen  believed, 
that  Suantevit  went  forth  to  fight  those  who  were  hostile  to  his 
worship.  In  proof  of  this,  it  was  said  of  this  sacred  steed,  who 
evidently  shared  with  his  master  the  veneration  of  the  islanders, 
that,  although  left  standing  in  his  stable  at  night,  he  was 
generally  found  in  the  morning  covered  with  mire  and  sweat,  in 
just  such  a  condition  as  would  indicate  that  he  had  taken  long 
journeys  at  a  rapid  pace.  His  services  were  also  put  into 
requisition  for  purposes  of  divination. 

In  regard   to   the   comparison  I  am  drawing  between  Arcona 

t  "Ecc.  Hist.,"  c.  226. 


1092  The  Dolmens  of  Ireland. 

and  Tor  Conain,  it  may  not  be  without  significance  to  remark  that 
the  proper  name  More,  or  Margg,  who  shares  with  Conan  the 
tribute  brought  to  Tor  Conain,  means  a  stalHon.f  Conan  and 
More  might  literally  mean  "  Great  Con  and  his  Horse."  In 
Irish,  Conn  Cedchathach,  i.e.  the  Hundred-Fighter,  possesses  the 
attributes  of  a  war-god.  It  was  to  him  that  the  northern  part  of 
the  island  of  Erin  belonged,  which  was  called  Leath  Cuinn,  or 
Conn's  Half.J  Ardaiinn  (Arcona  ?)  would  have  been  Conn's 
Height.  He  was  killed  by  a  king  of  Uladh,  when  unattended  by 
his  guards  in  Temair,  and  his  cairn  was  at  the  Brug,  together 
with  the  tombs  of  the  Dagda  and  many  another  god,  and,  among 
the  rest,  the  carcar  (lit.  prison  (?)  death-stable)  of  the  hero 
Ciichullain's  Liath  Machae,  i.e.  Grey  Horse  of  Macha.  With  the 
superstition  of  the  night-riding  of  the  Horse  of  Arcona,  we  may 
compare  the  stories  of  Herodiade,  etc.,  which  have  been  given 
above.  For  legends  of  a  White  Horse  we  may  turn  to  the 
Garran  Ban,  and  we  may  remember  that  it  is  the  O'Donoghue's 
milk-white  horse  which,  every  May  morning,  carries  that  hero 
over  the  waters  of  Loch  Lein  (Killarney). 

That  between  the  temple  and  its  worship  just  described,  and 
that  at  Temair,  there  exists  a  relation  which  is  more  than 
coincidental,  I  feel  sure.  It  is,  however,  Cormac  Mac  Airt,  the 
grandson  of  Con,  who  is  there  the  presiding  deity.  He  is  a  god, 
and  the  son  of  a  god,  for  Art  means  a  god.  His  connection  with 
Temair  is  that  of  a  god  with  his  temple.  The  kings  of  the  earth 
pay  him  tribute.  To  him  all  people  resort  for  judgment.  He  is 
the  fountain  whence  laws  emanate.  In  the  days  when  he  reigned 
"  the  world  was  full  of  goodness ;  there  was  fruit  and  fatness  in 
the  land,  and  abundant  produce  of  the  sea,  with  peace  and  ease 
and  happiness  ;  there  were  no  killings  nor  plunderings  ;  every  one 
occupied  his  lands  in  happiness.  .  .  .  His  (Cormac's)  hair  was 
slightly  curled,  and  of  golden  colour  ;  a  scarlet  shield,  with 
engraved  devices,  and  golden  hooks,  and  clasps  of  silver  ;  a  wide- 
folding  purple  cloak  on  him ;  with  a  gem-set  gold  brooch  over  his 
breast ;  a  gold  torque  around  his  neck ;  a  white-collared  shirt, 
embroidered  with  gold  upon  him  ;  a  girdle,  with  golden  buckles, 

t  Compare  Plengst,  with  which  some  connect  Hengist.  A  cliff  castle  in  Riigen  bears  the  name 
of  "The  Hengst,"  i.e.  "stallion." 

X  The  other  half  was  Mogh's  Half.  As  far  as  Ireland  is  concerned  this  division  is  quite 
mythical.  Mogh,  as  in  Mogh-Ruith,  is  explained  to  mean  a  "servant."  In  Sclavonic,  however,  it 
is  an  honorific  title  borne  by  kings,  and  I  much  suspect  that  the  division  between  Conn's  Half 
and  Mogh's  Half  was  really  one  between  Sclaves  and  a  Germanic  people  on  the  Continent. 


Ethnology  and  Tradition.  1093 


and  studded  with  precious  stones  around  him  ;  two  golden  network 
sandals,  with  golden  buckles  upon  him  ;  two  spears,  with  golden 
sockets,  and  many  red-bronze  rivets,  in  his  hand,  while  he  stood 
in  the  full  glow  of  beauty,  without  defect  or  blemish."  There  is 
much  more  to  the  same  effect.f 

Clearly  the  mediceval  scribes  looked  on  Cormac  as  more  than 
mortal.  The  whole  description  is  such  as  one  would  expect  in  a 
description  of  the  presiding  idol  in  a  temple  of  Mars-Apollo.  The 
same  idea  which  strikes  us  with  regard  to  the  person  of  Cormac  is 
present  also,  when  we  come  to  read  the  description  of  his  house  at 
Temair.  "  The  particular  palace  of  Cormac  stood,"  we  are  told, 
"  within  the  Rath-na-Righ,  or  Fort  of  the  Kings."  It  was  called 
par  excellence  the  Tigh-Temrach,  or  the  House  of  Temair,  and 
also  more  specifically  the  Tech  mor  milib  amus,  that  is,  "  Great 
House  of  the  Thousand  Soldiers." 

"In  the  middle  of  it  were  seven  candelabras.  There  were 
nine  mounds  around  it.  There  were  three  times  fifty  compart- 
ments {inidadJi)  in  the  house,  and  three  times  fifty  men  in  each 
compartment,  and  three  times  fifty  continuations  of  compartments 
[airel),  and  fifty  men  in  each  of  these  continuations."  |  It  is 
added  : — "  Three  thousand  persons  each  day  is  what  Cormac  used 
to  maintain  in  pay,  besides  poets  and  satirists,  and  all  the 
strangers  who  sought  the  king  —  Galls,  and  Romans,  and 
Franks,  and  Frisians,  and  Longbards,  and  Albanians,  and  Saxons, 
and  Cruithneans,  for  all  these  used  to  seek  him,  and  with  gold, 
and  with  silver,  and  with  steeds,  and  with  chariots,  he  paid 
them  off.§  They  used  all  to  come  to  Cormac,  because  there 
was  not,  in  his  time,  nor  before  him,  any  one  more  celebrated 
in  honour,  and  in  dignity,  and  in  wisdom,  except  only  Solomon, 
the  son  of  David."  Perhaps  it  is  an  indication  that  the  writer 
of  this  account  had  some  knowledge  of  the  real  character  of 
Cormac's  house,  that  he  places  in  its  centre  seven  candlesticks, 
the  notion  of  which,  as  appropriate  to  a  temple,  would  have  been 
familiar  to  him  from  the  account  of  that  at  Jerusalem. 

In  the  situation  of  the  House  of  the  Thousand  Soldiers,  the 
author  of  "  The  Remarkable  Places  of  Temair  "  in  the  Dindsenchas 
differs  from  the  authority  just  quoted.      He  places  it  outside  of, 

t  See  "Book  of  Ballymote,"  fol.  142  bb  ;  also  "  Yellow  Book  of  Lecan  ;  "  MS.  T.C.D.,  H,  2, 
16,  fol.  886  ;  and  O'Curry,  MS.  Mat.,  pp.  44,  45,  and  510,  511. 

%  "  B.  of  Leinster,"  fol.  15. 

§  The  sense  here  seems  doubtful.  It  is  more  probable  that  these  were  the  offerings  with  which 
the  devotees  approached  the  oracle. 


I094  The  Dolmens  of  Ireland. 

and  altogether  away  from,  the  Rath-na-Righ,  and  gives  it  three 
names,  the  Long  na  inBdn,  or  House  of  the  Women ;  the  Tech 
MidcJmarta ;  and  the  Tech  Mor  milib  amus,  as  before.  From 
the  description  given  by  this  latter  writer,  Petrie  is  induced  to 
assign  as  its  site  a  double  range  of  parallel  mounds,  seven  on 
either  side,  to  the  north  of  the  large  enclosure,  which  he  identi- 
fies with  the  Rath-na-Righ,  containing  the  House  of  Cormac. 
The  description  of  the  House  of  the  Thousand  Soldiers  in  the 
Dindshenchas,  as  translated  by  Whitley  Stokes,  is  as  follows  : — 
"  The  lower  part  was  to  the  north,  and  the  high  part  to  the  south, 
and  the  erection  of  a  wall  about  it  to  the  east  and  west.  The 
northern  side  of  it  is  a  little  bent  ;  north  and  south  it  ought 
to  be.  It  has  the  form  of  a  long  house  with  twelve  doors,  or  with 
fourteen,  that  is,  seven  to  the  west  and  seven  to  the  east.  And 
men  say  that  there  the  Feast  of  Temair  was  consumed.  That  was 
reasonable,  for  the  choice  of  the  men  of  Erin  (Fer  nErenn)  would 
fit  therein." 

I  have  said  that  I  feel  sure  that  the  coincidences  between  the 
account  of  this  great  Irish  House  (Tigh,-Teach-,  Tech- Mor  = 
Temur,  or  Teamor  =  Tara),  and  that  of  Arcona,  are  more  than 
accidental.  The  position  of  the  temple,  on  high  ground  and  in  a 
fortress,  the  number  of  chambers  it  contained  corresponding  with 
that  of  the  guards  at  Arcona,  the  attraction  it  afforded  to  foreigners, 
the  treasure-hoard  accumulated,  are  all  points  in  common.  But 
more  than  this,  there  are  special  points  besides.  The  buildings 
in  either  case  must  have  been  of  wood,  probably  richly  carved  and 
coloured  and  clamped  with  bronze.  The  temple  of  Arcona  had  a 
scarlet  roof.  That  of  Credhe,t  another  of  the  Irish  "  houses,"  was 
covered  with  the  wings  of  scarlet  birds.  In  the  Irish  accounts 
treasures  innumerable,  especially  of  precious  metal,  are  mentioned 
wherever  there  is  a  description  of  such  a  house.  But  Cormac's 
own  peculiar  cup  of  divination  corresponding  to  that  of  the  Arcona 
god,  forms  the  subject  of  a  special  episode,^  in  which  It  is  related 
how  he,  Cormac,  received  it  in  the  Palace  of  Manannan  Mac  Lir, 
the  which  Palace  stood  in  a  fortress,  on  an  island  with  pre- 
cipitous sides,  and  was  of  white  silver,  half-thatched  with  wings 
of  white  birds.  **  The  cup,  called  Cormac's  cup,  used  to  dis- 
tinofuish  between  truth  and  falsehood  with  the  Gael."     "  Three 

t  See  O'C,  M.  and  C,  iii.  12,  13,  14. 

\  See  "  Irische  Textc,"  3rd  Ser.,  pt.  i. ;  translation  by  Whitley  Stokes. 


Ethnology  and  Tradition.  1095 


words  of  falsehood  spoken  under  it  would  break  it ;  three  words 
of  truth  would  join  it."  The  best  treasures  of  Erin  were  this 
cup,  a  musical  branch,  and  a  sword.  This  sword  was  that  of  the 
^q-od  {ai't)  Cuchullain,  and  it  forms  the  subject  of  another  piece. 
In  short,  the  whole  of  these  accounts  are  part  and  parcel  of  the 
tradition  of  a  religious  cultus  which  Ireland  shared  with  the 
peoples  of  the  Sclavonic  Gulf. 

I  have  already  expressed  my  view  that  Pikullos,  the  Pome- 
ranian divinity,  was  identical  with  Cicull,  the  Fomorian  chief.  I 
think  that  another  god  worshipped  near  Kiel,  where  stood  his 
sacred  grove,  and  the  oak  tree  which  represented  him  finds  also 
his  reflex  in  the  pantheon  of  Erin.  This  is  Prono,  in  whom  we 
recognize  also  the  four-headed  Sclavonic  god  Perun,  or  Peranut, 
reducible  to  Prun  and  Pronut.  Old  Bohemian  glossaries  equate 
him  with  Jupiter,j  and  he  was  the  third  in  a  trinity  of  divinities 
worshipped  at  Carenz  in  Rtigen,  the  other  two  being  Rujewit  and 
Porewit.|  In  Irish  mythology  we  have  a  Crunn,  Cruin,  Crund,  or 
Cronn,§  who,  being,  like  Nemed,  both  the  son  of  Agnomon  and 
husband  of  Macha,  we  may  identify  with  Nemed  himself.  But 
Nemed  we  have  already  identified  with  a  certain  Cimbaoith,  also 
husband  of  a  lady  named  Macha,  queen  of  Erin.  Cimbaeith  is 
merely  an  adjectival  or  patronymic  form  of  Cimbe ;  and  Cimbe,|| 
as  we  have  seen,  like  Perun,  had  four  heads. 

The  third  immigration  into  Erin  was  that  of  the  Fir-Bolg,  who, 
as  we  have  seen,  were  the  descendants  of  Nemedh  returning  under 
another  name.  The  name  Fir-Bolg  was  used  both  in  a  general 
sense  as  including  several  tribes,  the  Fir  Domnann,  the  Galeoin, 
or  Gaileoin,  and  the  Ligmuine,  and  in  a  special  one  as  applied  to  a 
tribe  or  tribes  called  Bolg.  Their  first  king  was  called  Slainge, 
who  had  a  brother  called  Rugraidhe,  a  repetition  of  the  names  of 
Partholan's  sons.  Slainge's  general  is  called  Labraid  Loingseach, 
that  is,  Labraid  the  Exile.  Long  ages  after  this,  according  to 
Irish  chronology,  lived  another  Labraid  Loingseach.  The  two, 
however,  are  clearly  one  and  the  same.  Slainge  had  landed  in 
the  Bay  of  Wexford,  with  his  general,  we  may  suppose.     It  was 

t  Zeuss,  "  Die  Deutschen,"  pp.  36,  37.  \  Saxo-Gramm.  ap.  Zeuss,  ib. 

§  Dindshenchas  of  Ath  Luain,  and  of  Ard  Macha,  "  Rev.  Celt.,"  vol.  xv.  p.  464,  and  vol.  xvi. 
p.  44. 

II  He  is  mentioned  as  a  son  of  Umor  in  Dind.  of  Carn  Conoill,  "  Rev.  Celt.,"  vol.  xv.  p.  478. 


1096  The  Dolmens  of  Ireland. 

here,  too,  that  the  second  Labraid  Loingsach  landed.  Slainge 
brought  with  him  his  followers  called  Galeoin  ;  and  so  did  the 
second  Labraid  Loingseach. 

Of  the  latter  we  read  :  "  Two  thousand  and  two  hundred  was 
the  complement  of  the  Black  Foreigners  (na  Dub-gaill)  from  the 
lands  of  the  Galls  (a  tirib  Gall)  who  came  '  along  with  Labraid  the 
Exile,  that  is,  Moen  son  of  Ailill  of  Aine  .  .  .  when  he  and 
Ernolb,  son  of  the  King  of  Denmark  (Danmarg),  came  and 
destroyed  the  kings  round  Cobthach  Coelbreg  in  Dind  Rig.' " 

"  Three  names  had  the  Leinstermen,  Fir  Domnann,  Gaileoin, 
and  Laigin,  and  it  was  the  Gaileoin  that  nourished  Labraid  during 
his  exile  in  the  lands  of  the  Gall." 

These  passages  are  from  Whitley  Stokes's  translation  of 
the  "  Dindshenchas  of  Laigen,"  and  they  contain,  when  taken 
together,  two  important  points  :  first,  that  the  Gaileoin  were  the 
same  as  the  Gaill  or  Galls  ;  and,  secondly,  that  it  was  among  the 
Gaileoin  or  Galls,  not  the  Gauls  of  the  Latin  Gallia,  that  Labraidh 
was  in  exile.  Now,  from  other  writings,  we  learn  that  the  place  of 
Labraidh's  exile  was  the  land  of  Scoriath,  King  of  Fir-Morcha  or 
of  the  Fer  Morc.f  Scoriath  may  well  be  the  Scoringa  in  which 
Mtillenhoff  J  finds  the  shore-countries  of  the  southern  Baltic,  the 
district  which,  according  to  Paulus,  the  Langobardi  invaded — the 
land  of  Pomoriani  ;  and  Moriath,  the  daughter  of  Scoriath,  may 
well  be,  also,  the  Murizzi  lake-country,  the  Murias,  perhaps,  of 
the  saga  of  the  Tuatha  De  Danann,  as  I  have  hinted  above. 

The  name  of  the  Galeoin  to  whom  Labraidh  first  applied  for 
help  to  restore  him  to  his  kingdom,  put  back  into  older  form  would, 
as  has  been  also  pointed  out,  be  Galiuin,  Galiuind,  that  is,  Galindae. 
The  Galindce  were  during  long  ages  one  of  the  most  prominent  of 
the  peoples  of  whom  we  have  any  record  on  the  southern  Baltic 
coast.  Ptolemy  mentions  the  Galindce  as  next  to  the  Sudini.§  In 
early  times  the  Aiste  or  Esthones — the  Just  or  Good  People,(|  as 

t  O'C,  M.  and  C,  iii.  242  ;  Keating,  "  O'Mahony,"  252  ;  O'Flaherty,  "Ogygia,"  262. 

X  "Deutsche  Alterthumskunde,"  vol.  ii.  p.  97,  and  map  iii.  He  includes  under  Scoringa  the 
entire  Pomeranian  coast  from  the  Peene  to  the  Vistula. 

§  Miillenhoff,  "Deutsche  Alterthums.,"  ii.  p.  18. 

II  This  name  strikes  me  as  remarkable.  It  is  the  name  by  which  the  fairies,  who  are  the  si'd/ie, 
and  also  the  Tuatha  De  Danann,  are  known  in  Ireland.  Another  name  they  bear  is,  "The 
Gentry."  They  are  supposed  to  be  a  short  race,  with  golden-yellow  hair,  and  red  caps,  and  live 
in  the  raths,  but  not  in  the  stone  cathairs.  Adam  of  Bremen  calls  the  Sembi  and  Pruzzi  "  homines 
humanissimi  ;"  Jordanes  speaks  of  Finni  in  Scandinavia  as  "  mitissimi."  The  Aestii,  according 
to  Tacitus,  had  learned  German  manners  and  customs.  The  Tuatha  De  Danann,  while  the  folk- 
lore about  them  corresponds  with  the  Finnish,  are  associated  with  deities  almost  identical  with  the 
Teutonic.  Can  the  tradition  of  the  Tuatha  De  Danann  be  that  of  Aestii  who  passed  westward  ? 
Another  people  famed  for  their  goodness  were  the  Geta;,  whom  Herodotus  calls  Si/cairfraToi  among 
the  Thracians  (Hist.  iv.  98). 


Ethnology  and  Tradition.  1097 

Miillenhoff  explains  their  name — extended  around  this  coast  west- 
ward as  far  as  the  Vistula.  Originally,  perhaps,  the  Galindce, 
passing  northwards  from  the  Sarmatian  morasses,  may  have 
settled  on  this  coast.  The  district  they  occupied  lay  between 
that  of  the  Pomeranians  and  (south  of  the  latter)  the  Poles  on 
the  west,  and  the  Lithuanians  and  Curs  on  the  east.  It  has 
been  supposed  that  their  name  appears  in  the  letters  GAL  on 
some  of  the  coins  of  Volusian.f  together  with  that  of  the  Finni, 
as  those  of  tribes  over  whom  he  gained  victories.  The  name 
of  that  emperor,  Veldumnianus,  may  similarly  point  to  a  suc- 
cessful campaign  against  a  people  called  Veldumni,  indications  of 
whose  presence  are  not  wanting  on  the  Lithuanian  coast,  as  in 
the  names  Dumnaw  near  Konigsberg  on  the  Pregel ;  Dommesnes, 
the  northern  promontory  of  Curland,  close  to  which  is  Domdangan, 
and  others. 

The  name  Galindo  is  found  in  Spanish  archives,  a  survival, 
perhaps,  of  the  Vandal  invasion,  in  which  contingents  of  them 
may  have  taken  part.  Duisburg  knows  the  Galindse  as  the 
Galinditse,  and  their  country  bore  the  names  Galanda,  Galandia, 
Galendia.J  corresponding  precisely  (with  the  mutation  of  d  to 
g)  to  the  place-names  Galenga  §  in  Ireland,  all  of  which  are 
assio^ned  to  the  Gaileoin.ji  The  old  German  historian  I  have 
named  praised  those  of  them  who  still  inhabited  their  ancient 
seats,  as  a  "  noble  and  stalwart  race."  In  Irish  tradition  the 
Galeoin  were  the  backbone  of  the  forces  of  Ailill  and  Medb  \xi 
the  famous  raid  called  the  Tain  Bo  Cuailgne.^  In  the  Chronicle 
of  Christian,  first  Prussian  bishop,  the  Galindae  on  the  Baltic  are 
accorded  an  eponymous,  Galindo,ff  and  in  the  eleven  divisions  into 
which  Prussia  was  divided,  Galindia  occupied  the  tenth  place,  the 
first  being  the  "  Terra  Culmensis,";|;J  and  the  eleventh  the  "  Plica 

t  Miillenhoff,  "Deutsche  Alterthums.,"  ii.  p.  loo,  n. 

X  Voight,  "Cod.  Dip.  Pruss.,"  i,  pp.  93,  etc. 

§  Tuath  Ligmaine  in  Galenga  =  the  Barony  of  Mor  Gallion  in  Meath  ;  Galenga  in  Connauglit 
was  the  Barony  of  Gallen  in  Mayo. 

II  In  West  Meath  near  the  Lififey  was  Galenga  Beg,  whose  chiefs  took  the  name  of  O'h- 
Aengusa,  now  Hennessy.  Galenga  Mor  was  the  territory  of  the  O'Lothchains,  who  descended 
from  Cormac  Gaileng. 

\  O'Curry,  M.  and  C.,  ii.  p.  260. 

it  "  Voight,"  i.  621. 

XX  I  scarcely  like  to  venture  to  express  an  opinion  that  in  this  ijame  we  have  that  of  the  Cuilmcnn, 
the  "great  book"  of  profane  history,  as  distinct  from  the  Books  of  Moses,  M'hich  was  in  "the 
East,"  "in  the  land  of  Letha."  The  passage  in  the  Book  of  Leinster  which  refers  to  it  is  as 
follows  (the  translation  is  O'Curry's)  :  "The  Files  of  Erin  were  now  called  together  by  Senchan 
Torpeist,  to  know  if  they  remembered  the  Tain  Bo  Chuailgne  in  full ;  and  they  said  that  they  knew 
of  it  but  fragments  only.  Senchan  then  spoke  to  his  pupils  to  know  which  of  them  would  go  into 
the  countries  of  Letha  to  learn  the  Tain,  which  the  Saoi  (or  professor)  had  taken  eastwards  after 
the  Cuilmenn."     As  they  were  going,  they  came  to  the  grave  of  a  famous  chieftain,  Fergus  Mac 

VOL.  III.  2  C 


109S  The  Dolmens  of  Ireland. 


Bartha,"  called  greater  and  smaller  Bartha,  in  which  dwelt  the 
Barthi,  or  Barthenses.f 

In  the  Dindshenchas  J  of  Druimn  Dairbrech  we  read  of  the 
Aitheachtuatha  Herenn  (the  Peasant  tribes  of  Erin),  side  by  side 
with  a  remnant  of  a  people  called  Ligmuine,  who,  together  with 
Fir-Bolg  and  Fir-Domnann,  are  about  to  give  battle  to  Tuathal 
Techtmar  at  Comur,  or  Commar.  The  name  occurs  by  the  side 
of  those  of  the  Bolg  and  Domnann,  in  the  place  usually  assigned 
to  the  Galeoin  ;  and  in  a  list  of  tribes  given  by  Mac  Firbis,  the 
Ligmuine  are  placed  in  Galenga.  Now,  in  the  country  about 
Stolpe,  Dantzig,  and  Lauenberg,  east  of  the  Rugii,  and  in  the  very 
district  in  which  Ptolemy  places  the  Galind^e,  and  later  writers  the 
Galenditse,  Tacitus  §  had  located  the  Lemovii  or  Lemonii,  a  name 
which,  with  an  admissible  suppression  of  the ^  in  the  Irish  name, 
is  identical  with  Ligmuine. 

It  will  have  been  noticed  that  to  the  allies  whom  Lab  raid  led 
into  Erin  the  term  Dubh-Gaill  is  applied — the  same  as  that  given 
to  the  Black  Danes  in  the  ninth  century.  There  is  nothing  to 
associate  this  name  with  that  of  the  ancient  Galli,  or  Gauls,  of 
France.  Its  habitat  must  be  sought  for  further  east,  and  in  the 
t^rm gall,  meaning  "  tribesman"  or  "-lander,"  or  the  tribe-land  he 
occupied,  corresponding  exactly  in  meaning  to  the  Irish  raigke,  in 
use  among  the  inhabitants  of  the  yE^stian  coast,  we  seem  to  have 
it.  The  Lettgalli,  or  Lettgalls,  the  Semgalli,  or  Semegalls,  bear 
names  which,  both  in  form  and  in  the  identity  of  the  latter  portion, 
answer  exactly  to  the  form  Finegall,  the  name  of  a  district 
north  of  Dublin.  The  word  gall,  which  to  an  inhabitant  of  the 
Gulf  of  Riga  had  meant  simply  "  man,"  meant  "  foreigner," 
when  adopted  into  the  vocabulary  of  another  people.  That  on 
the  south-east  Baltic  coast,  among  the  tribes  occupying  Old 
Prussia,  where  the  word  gal,  or  gall,  prevailed,  there  were  two 
types — a  tall  type  and  a  short  type,  a  dark  and  a  light,  we  may 
feel  sure  from  the  observations  of  the  old  traveller  Baron  Herber- 
stein,  as  well  as  from  other  considerations,  of  which  the  following, 
which  has  regard  to  the  Chorwati,  or  Croats,  a  people  to  the  south 
of  them,  is  one.     These  people,  to  whom,  together  with  the  Serbs, 

Roigh,  and,  as  one  of  them  was  composing  a  lay  in  his  praise,  his  ghost  appeared  to  him,  and  told 
him  the  whole  tale.  I  have  already  compared  this  to  the  Esthonian  story  of  going  to  a  grave  to 
receive  the  words  of  the  Master.  (See  p.  514,  s/t^ra;^ee  "Mat.  for  Irish  Histor}-,"  pp.  8  and  30.) 
Cuilnienn  is,  on  the  other  hand,  glossed  a  "  skin  "  (id.  p.  32,  n.). 

t  Duisburg,  "  Chron.,"  iii.  3.  J  "  Rev.  Celt.,'"  vol.  xv.  p.  298. 

§  "Germ.,"  c.  43. 


Ethnology  and  Tradition.  1099 

must  be  assigned  a  north-eastern  origin,  not  far  from  the  Baltic, 
and  on  the  confines  of  the  Finns,  but  who,  passing  southwards  to 
the  districts  north  of  the  Black  Sea,  had  mingled  with  the  darker 
races  of  the  east,  migrated,  on  the  departure  of  the  Germanic 
tribes,  into  the  seats  occupied  by  the  latter  north  of  the  Carpa- 
tians  ;  while,  at  a  later  date,  a  contingent  of  them,  called  White 
Croats,  passed  into  Illyria,  and  occupying  the  districts  of  the 
Celtic-speaking  tribes,  were  known  to  Nestor  f  as  the  Chorutane. 
That  there  must  have  been  black  Croats  is  clear  from  the  distinc- 
tion ot  "  white  "  applied  to  some  of  them,  and  their  presence 
north  of  the  Carpatians  is  an  indication  of  the  westward  tendency 
of  dark  peoples,  who  were  not  of  Mongolian  origin,  but  probably 
a  mixture  of  Sclave,  whence  their  Aryan  speech,  and  Tschud,|; 
or  Kalmuck  (whence  the  dark  element  among  them),  at  the  close 
of  the  Hunnish  invasion. 

Their  name,  indeed,  Chorwati,  deserves  our  attention,  since  it 
is  probably  ascribable  to  the  same  stem  as  that  which  gives  us 
Cruithne,  Cruithneach,  Cruithen,  Cruith-tuath — the  name  by 
which  Irish  Picts  were  known.  In  Lithuanian  >^^r//^  means  "to^ 
cut";  in  old  Bulgarian  chrtUati  has  a  similar  sense.§  In  Polish 
karzuat,  in  Latin  croatus  is  a  short  sword  described  as  "  knife- 
shaped."  [|  Referable  to  the  same  stem-word  in  its  extension  to  the 
west  was  not  only  Cruithne  but  also  the  name  Chortonicum,  which 
Pott  and  Rhys  have  identified  with  it,  and  which,  in  the  Weisso- 
briinner  list  of  countries,  is  applied  to  Walholant,  which  elsewhere 
in  the  same  list  means  "  France."  In  the  ages  of  chivalry  in  the 
latter  country,  swords  had  often  proper  names,  among  which  were 
Corto  and  Curtana,  the  form  of  which  in  old  heraldic  devices  is 
shown  to  be  that  of  a  sickle  or  scimetar.  In  Irish  Cruithneach 
meant  the  harvest,  that  is,  that  which  was  reaped.  I  take  it, 
then,  that  the  meaning  of  Cruithne,  as  also  of  Chorutane,  was 
"  swordsmen." 

Professor  Rhys  is  responsible  for  the  bold  view  that  the  name 
Cruithne  is  identical  with  Britanni^ — that  it  was  from  them,  in  short 
— a  race  whom  he  holds  to  be  not  only  non-Celtic  but  non-Aryan — 
that  the  Britannic  Isles  received  their  name.     Miiller  had  observed 

+  "  Russ.  Chron.  Schlozer."     See  Zeuss,  p.  597. 

X  These  people,  who  were  Sclavo-Finnic,  are  contrasted  with  the  Njemzen  or  Germans.  They 
were  also  called  Czud.  Adam  of  Bremen  calls  them  SctUi,  which  must  not  be  confused  with  the 
Scythce,  and  is  a  name  more  nearly  approaching  that  of  Scoti  than  any  other  known  to  me.  (See. 
"De  Situ  Danire,"  c.  222.) 

§  Rhys,  Scott.  Review,  July,  1S91,  p.  131. 

II  Zeuss,  p.  608.  1  Scott.  Review,  ut  supra. 


iioo  The  Dolmens  of  Ireland. 

that  the  best  reading  of  Ptolemy's  name  for  these  islands  was 
at  UpeTTavLKoi  vrjcroi,  upon  which  Professor  Rhys  observes  that 
Prettanic  is  approximately  the  Gallo-Brythonic  equivalent  of  the 
Gaedhelic  (he  calls  it  Goidelic)  adjective  Cruithnech.  "  Prutanic," 
he  adds,  "  is  the  genuine  form,  as  is  to  be  gathered  from  the  dative 
Bpvreo-o-t,  which  implies  a  stem  Brutten  or  Pruten." 

Evidences  of  the  existence  in  ancient  times  of  the  name  of  the 
Britanni  along  the  southern  coasts  of  the  English  Channel  and  the 
German  Ocean,  such  as  the  tribe-name  Britanni  on  the  French 
coast,f  near  Boulogne  ;  the  ruins  of  the  fortification  at  the  mouth 
of  the  Rhine  near  Catwick-op-Zee,J  called  in  the  "  Annals  of 
Holland,"  Brittenburg,  and  by  the  inhabitants  in  the  seventeenth 
century  T'huys  te  Britten;  the  marshy  tract  near  the  Ems  called 
the  Britannische  Heide,§  and  by  Lipsius  in  Latin  Britannise 
Uligines  ;  the  herba  quae  vocatur  Britannica  which  the  Frisii 
pointed  out  to  the  soldiers  of  Germanicus ;  ||  the  inscription 
Matribus  Brittis*|[  in  the  Duchy  of  Clives  ;  the  curious  allusion 
in  a  copy  of  verses  in  Ouintillian  to  one  Annius  Cimber,  who 
in  irony  is  termed  the  British  Thucydides ;  ff  the  opinion  of 
Werlauff,  JJ  not  wholly  to  be  discarded,  that  by  the  island  of  Brittia 
in  Procopius  the  Cimbric  Chersonese,  or  rather,  the  northern  part 
of  it,  was  intended.  These  and  more  besides  §§  have  been  collected 
by  various  students,  German  and  English  alike,  to  support  the 
view  that  (what  indeed  it  was  most  natural  to  suppose  was  the 
case,  since  islands  receive  their  populations  from  the  continent 
immediately  opposite  them)  the  British  Isles  received  their  name, 
and  those  inhabitants  who  gave  it,  direct  from  the  countries  of  the 
Rhine  and  Elbe. 

May  we  not  look  for  the  name  also  even  further  to  the  East  .'* 

With   the  above  instances   before    us,   and    the   authority   of 

Professor  Rhys  for  the  stem  Brutten  or  Pruten,  it  seems  hard  to 

stop  short  of  the  supposition  that  a  connection  may  be  looked  for 

t  "Pliny,"  iv.  c.  17. 

X  Ph.  Cuverius,  *' De  Rheni  Alveis,"  p.  no;  Pet.  Scriverius,  "Tab.  Anl.  Batavicarum," 
p.  177;  Iladr.  Jun.,  "  Batavia,"  p.  107;  Hen.  Cannegieterus,  Diss,  de  Brittenburgo,  Matribus 
Brittis,  etc.,  The  Hague,  1734. 

§  Lipsius  note  on  Tacitus'  Ann. 

II  Batavia,  "  Hadrianus  Junior,"  1588,  p.  216. 

1  See  Schiern,  "  De  Orig,  Cimbrorum,"  p.  38. 

+t  Quintillian,  "Inst.  Or.,"  viii.  3,  28,  29. 

XX  "  Bidrag  til  den  nordiske  Ravhandels  Historie,"  p.  95,  setjq.  The  same  view  was  held  by 
Lelewel,  "  Die  Entdeckungen  der  Carthager  und  Griechen  auf  dem  Atlantischen  Ocean,"  Berlin, 
1831,  p.  43. 

§§  See  Guest,  "  Origines  Celtica:,"  vol,  ii.  ;  also  Schiern,  c/.  aV.,  p.  37. 


Ethnology  and  Tradition.  nor 

also  on  the  southern  shores  of  the  Baltic,  more  especially  since  the 
names  of  the  tribes  settled  there  are  so  markedly  repeated,  as  we 
have  seen,  along  the  coast  of  France.  I  refer  to  the  name  of  the 
Prutheni,  and  to  that  of  their  eponymous  Bruteno,  after  whom^ 
the  PriUhenici  tractus  were  named,  an  area  in  which  were  included 
several  tribes  east  of  the  Vistula,  and  to  the  inhabitants  of  which 
the  Prussians  owe  their  designation  to  this  day.f 

These  Pruthen  districts,  with  those  of  the  Sembi  or  Samlanders, 
or  Semgalli  (compare  the  Bolg  tribe-name  Samraighe  in  Ireland)' 
lay  side  by  side  of,  if  they  were  not  once  included  in,  the  territory 
of  the  Galindce,  which  gives  interest  to  the  following  considera- 
tion, namely,  that  the  Prutheni  would  bear  to  the  Galindse  a 
relation  analogous  to  that  which  in  the  Pictish  allegorical  genealogy 
the  eponymous  "  Cruitne  "  bears  to  Geleoin,  by  which  latter  name 
the  eponymous  of  the  Gaileoin,  or  Galeoin,  seems  to  be  intended. 

"  The  Cruithne,"  we  read,  "  came  from  Thrace ;  they  were 
the  Clanna  Geleoin  MacErcoil;  they  were  called  Agathyrsi."  It 
must  be  borne  in  mind  that  to  the  writer  of  this  passage  the 
classics  were  well  known,  and,  among  other  statements  in  them, 
he  doubtless  knew  that  Gelonus  was  the  father  of  Hercules,, 
whence  the  introduction  of  the  name  of  that  hero ;  and  that  "picti 
GelonI "  and  Agathyrsi  were  Scythian  peoples.  Gelonos,  too,, 
was  the  name  of  the  city  of  the  fair-haired  Budini,  the  site  of 
which  was  probably  in  the  marshlands  of  the  Pripet.  This 
application  of  the  classical  allusions  to  the  Pictish  genealogies  is 
well  exemplified  in  the  "  Life  of  Saint  Vodoal,"  written  in  the  end 
of  the  ninth  or  beginning  of  the  tenth  century.  He  is  stated  to 
be  "  ex  sagittifera  Gelonum  ortus  natione,  qui  originem  generis 
de  Scythiae  populis  ducere  peribentur.  De  quibus  et  Poeta  ait 
Pictosque  Gelonos,  unde  et  nunc  usque  Picti  vulgo  vocantur." 
Bede  had  expressly  stated  that  the  Picts  came  from  Scythia. 

The  curious  point  is  that  modern  research,  as  applied  by  Du 
Chaillu  and  others  to  the  Norse  sagas,  and  by  Dr.  Pritchard  to 
the  Irish  traditions,  seems  to  add  weight  to  the  hypothesis  that  Picts 
emerging  from  the  countries  north  of  the  Black  Sea  proceeded 
both  to  Scandinavia  and  to  Ireland.  For  the  Picts  were  the 
lotuns,  and  there  were  three  lotunheims — two  generally  held  to  be 
fabulous,  and  one  historical.     The  first  was  the  country  between 

t  Dobrovvski  and  Zeuss  give  the  name  Pruzzi  or  Prutheni  a  Sclavonic  origin  from/rwj,  whence 
prisnyg  —  neighbouring. 


II02  The  Dolmens  of  Ireland. 

the  Dnieper  and  the  Volga  and  Don.  The  second  was  north  of 
the  Malar  Lake  in  West  Bothnia.  The  third  and  historical  one, 
which  would  have  been  the  stepping-stone  for  these  peoples  on 
their  way  from  the  Baltic  to  the  British  Isles  and  the  western 
coast  of  Europe,  was  called  Judland,  and  was  the  portion  of  the 
Cimbric  Chersonese  which  lay  north  of  the  Mcsnia  Daiioyiun. 

Now,  Dr.  Pritchard,  in  the  chapter  in  his  work  on  the  "Eastern 
Origin  of  the  Celtic  nations,"  which  is  headed,  "  The  Sarmatian 
hypothesis,"  states  his  conclusion,  which  had  been  that  of  Prof. 
Graves  before  him,  that  the  Cruithneach  were  the  Prtithneach, 
Pruthenians  or  Prussians. j  If  this  be  so — since  the  Cruithne 
were  Picts — that  is,  lotuns,  we  may  connect  them  with  the  eastern 
or  south-eastern  lotunheim  of  the  Norse  sagas,  which,  if  it  be 
where  Du  Chaillu  places  it,  would  be  the  very  country  which 
may  be  assigned  to  the  Agathyrsi  and  Geloni,  who  we  should  be 
inclined  to  regard  as  referable  to  those  mixed  tribes — Sarmathian, 
Cimmerian,  or  Celto-Scythic,  who  from  the  times  of  Herodotus 
onwards,  now  on  the  Black  Sea,  now  in  Thrace,  now  in  the  more 
northern  parts  of  Scythia,  were  at  one  time  the  ravagers  of  Greece 
and  her  colonies,  and  at  another  serving  her  as  mercenaries. 
The  Geloni  may  indeed  have  been  not  unrelated  to  the  GalindEc, 
and  a  deep  ethnic  truth  may  have  lain  beneath  the  story  of  Geleon, 
the  eponymous  of  the  Cruithne,  while  the  latter  people  and  the 
Prutheni  may  have  been  identical,  and  the  Prussian  coast  the 
point  of  departure  for  the  lotuns  for  other  and  more  northern 
shores. 

In  regard  to  the  Agathyrsi,  the  name  of  that  people  was 
known  in  these  regions  of  Scythia  to  Herodotus,  to  Ptolemy, 
and  to  Stephen  of  Byzantium,  located  sometimes  on  the  Danube, 
sometimes  in  more  northern  Scythia.  The  latter  writer  assigns 
to  them  the  town  of  Trausi,  and  calls  them  a  Celtic  people. 
Diefenbach  J  thinks  their  name  may  be  found  in  that  of  the 
Acatziri,  Acatiri,  or  Agazirri,  whom  Jordanes  places  between  the 
y^stii  and   the    Bulgares.       In   the  wars    of  Attila,   the    Acatziri 

t  The  view  of  this  writer  is  expressed  fully  as  follows: — "Separating  the  Picts  from  the 
Cruithneach,  we  have  found  reasons  in  favour  of  the  former  having  been  Scandinavians  ;  i.e. 
Norwegians,  Swedes,  or  Danes.  Separating  the  Cruithneach  from  the  Picts,  we  have  found  reasons 
in  favour  of  the  Cruithneach  having  been  Pruthneach,  Pruthenians  or  Prussians.  Prof.  Graves 
connects  the  Cruithneach  with  the  Prussians,  and  the  Fomorians  with  the  Pomeranians.  If  this 
be  the  case,  as  I  believe  it  is,  the  northern  elements  in  Great  Britain  and  Ireland  are  as  follows:  — 
.( I )  Scandinavian :  =  Danish,  Norwegian,  (2)  Sarmatian:  (a)  Slavonic  =  Pomeranian  ;  (li)  Lithuania 
=  Prussian.     I  am  inclined  to  add  I'in  and  Ugrian  elements  as  well."— Edit.  "  Latham,"  p.  158. 

X  "  Celtica,"  ii.  227. 


Ethnology  and  Tradition.  iio' 


seem  to  have  been  associated  with  the  Bolgars,  Cotragi,  and  other 
tribes.  In  respect  to  the  language  they  spoke,  their  chieftain 
Curidach  certainly  bore  a  name  which  would  not  have  surprised 
us,  had  we  found  it  in  Gaedhelic.  In  form  it  is  comparable  with 
Feradach, — the  last  syllable  of  which  is  supposed  to  mean  "  swift." 

I  have  spoken  of  the  Gaileoin  and  the  Ligmuine.  Another, 
and  the  most  important  division  of  the  Fir-Bolg,  according  to 
Irish  tradition,  was  that  of  the  Fir  Domnann.  It  appears  to  be 
Celtic,  and  to  signify  "  Men  of  Domnu,"  domain  meaning  "  deep." 
Domnu  murib,  in  Broccan's  Hymn,  is  explained  fudumnu  qiiam 
mare,  and  fiLdoinna  mai'a  in  Patrick's  Hymn,  the  depths  of  the 
sea. J  In  Irish  tradition  the  stem  domn  enters  into  the  tribal 
name  Domnann,  and  in  Irish  history  into  the  personal  name 
Domhnall. 

In  the  Parish  of  Kilcolman  and  County  of  Mayo  is  a  place 
•called  Dum  Domhnaill  (Dundonnell).  It  is  "  a  fortified  hillock, 
and  is  believed  by  the  natives  to  have  been  in  ancient  times  the 
residence  of  a  giant  named  Domhnall  Dual-Buidhe,  or  Donnell  of 
the  Yellow-Hair,  who  here  closed  nightly  the  gates  of  Erros 
against  all  intruders,  and  made  every  passenger  pay  turnpike. 
Here  are  also  shown  his  corn-stack,  and  at  the  base  of  the  hillock 
a  stone  which  marks  the  foot  of  his  grave,  but  the  headstone  has 
been  removed."  % 

The  country  called  Erros  or  lorras-Domhnann  is  characterized 
by  O'Donovan  as  "  the  wildest  part  of  Ireland  he  had  visited.  In 
•extent  it  is  greater  than  the  Counties  of  Dublin  and  Louth.  It 
can  be  proved,"  he  adds,  "  that  this  Dun  Domhnaill  is  none  other 
than  the  Dun  Domhnainn  mentioned  in  the  '  Annals  of  the  Four 
Masters,'  at  the  year  1386.  As  to  the  termination  of  the  name,  it 
is  frequently  remarked  that  names  which  anciently  ended  in  nn  are 
.more  recently  made  to  terminate  in  //,  as,  for  example.  Lough 
Ainninn  in  Westmeath,  which  is  now  Lough  Ennell."  § 

The  conclusion  derivable  from  the  identity  which  O'Donovan 
here  points  out  is  that  in  the  modern  name  Donnell,  O'Donnell, 
Mac  Donald,  Dundonald,  we  have  that  of  the  traditional  Fir 
Domnann.      Such  a  proposed  identification,  presented,  however,  as 

t  See  Windisch,  Ir.  Texte,  and  Worterbuch,  in  voce. 

X  O'Donovan:    O.S.L.,  Co.  Mayo, -^^,  p.  158. 

E.  18 
§  Cf.  Brennan  (Brendan)  =  Biennal ;  in  the  Dumnonia  of  S.W.  Britain  it  has  become  Brannal, 

Branwell,  etc. 


II04  The  Dolmens  of  Ireland. 

O'Doiiovan  saw,  a  great  difficulty  to  Irish  antiquaries,  since  the 
O'Donnells,  wherever  found,  were  regarded  as  Milesians,  while 
the  Fir  Domnann  were  Bolg.  He  therefore  qualifies  his  con- 
clusion with  the  remark  that  it  was  "  the  constant  habit  with  the 
Irish  to  substitute  for  any  ancient  name,  which  had  ceased  to  be 
familiar  to  them,  one  with  which  they  were  familiar,  which  ap- 
proached it  in  sound.  In  this  manner  Domhnann  would  at  once 
have  been  changed  into  Domhnall,  which  is  Donnell."  It  will  be 
seen,  however,  that — leaving  out  of  the  question  the  terminal 
syllable  which  may  be  only  patronymic — the  stem  domn  in  the 
Milesian,  and  Fir-Bolg  genealogies  alike,  has  still  to  be  accounted 
for.  My  own  view  is  that  the  introduction  of  "  Milesians  "  into 
the  question  at  all  is  superfluous.  Under  the  names  of  the 
respective  sons  of  Mile,  Miledh,  or  Milesius — Eremon,  Eber,  Ir, 
and  the  rest,  are  arranged,  as  it  appears  to  me,  all  the  several 
peoples,  under  their  eponymi,  who,  in  the  opinion  of  the  writer  of 
the  saga,  constituted  the  inhabitants  of  Ireland.  Miledh  himself 
can  be  shown  to  be,  according  to  some  genealogies,  the  same  as 
Cruitne,  the  eponymous  and  mythical  ancestor  of  the  Cruithneach 
or  Picts,  so  that  in  each  of  his  sons  we  may  recognize  the  tradition 
of  one  or  other  of  those  bands  of  settlers  who  planted  themselves 
on  Irish  soil  at  a  date  not  so  remote  that  it  had  wholly  passed  out 
of  mind  in  the  seventh  or  eighth  century,  to  which  date  the 
Milesian  saga  may  probably  be  assigned.  The  name  Pict  had  a 
wide  range  as  far  as  we  can  see,  outside  of  and  beyond  its  applica- 
tion to  the  Cruithneach.  Some  tribes  of  the  latter  people  are, 
on  the  other  hand,  included  by  Mac  Firbis  under  the  general 
designation  Fir-Bolg.f 

The  Domhnall  of  Dun  Domnann  was  regarded  as  a  giant.  His 
"  remarkable  conical  hill,  which  commanded  the  pass  into  Western 
Erros,  was  originally  crowned  with  a  cyclopean  fort,  never  a  large 
one,  which  was  erected,"  says  O'Donovan,  "  by  one  of  the  chiefs 
of  the  Damnonii,  who  held  sway  in  this  part  of  Connaught  to  a 
comparatively  late  period,  and  whose  name  it  bore.  This 
Domhnann  was  a  giant  whom  tradition  remembers  as  vividly 
here  as  it  does  Balor  Dayman  {bdimend  '  of  the  battle ' ;  or 
bdimnech  =  vulnifer),  at  Tory  Island,  and  whose  grave  is  shown  at 

t  For  the  identity  of  Cruitne  with  Miledh,  see  the  "Irish  Nennius,"  pp.  41,  155,  and  Kelly's 
notes  on  Lynch,  "Cambr.  Eversus,"  p.  430.  For  the  identity  of  the  Cruithneach  tribes  with  the 
Fir-Bolg,  see  Mac  Firbis's  "  Hist,  of  the  Fir-Bolg,"  MS.,  and  translation  in  the  Lib.  R.LA.  For 
a  supposed  identity  of  the  Picts  with  the  Tuatha  De  Danann,  see  Colgan,  "  Vit.  S.  Cadroe,  AA. 
SS.  llib.,"  p.  502. 


Ethnology  and  Tradition.  1105 

the  base  of  his  tower."  Followincr  O' Donovan's  conjecture,  "  this 
Domhnann  was  succeeded  in  this  fortress  of  Erros  by  the 
Milesian  ancestor  of  the  O'Caithniadh,  who  became  chiefs  of 
Erros  after  the  expulsion  of  the  Damnonii "  (Domnanns). 
"Shortly  before  the  Anglo-Norman  invasion,  these  O'Caithniadhs 
still  held  the  chief  command  of  Erros,  when  Domhnall-Erros 
O'Conor,  who  is  believed  to  have  left  a  numerous  progeny  in 
Erros,  conquered  them,  and  erected  a  house  in  Dun  Domhnainn, 
which,  thence,  began  to  be  called  from  his  name  Dun  Domhnaill, 
a  name  which  it  retained  among  the  peasants,"  until  the  day  when 
O'Donovan  visited  it. 

In  Patrick  Knight's  "  Irish  Highlands,"  a  story  will  be  found 
of  Donnell  (Domhnall),  in  which  he  is  represented  as  one  of  the 
Gamanradii  f  (Gamanraidhe),  a  tiHbe  of  the  Fir-Bolg  of  Erros,  and 
as  a  fair-haired  man.  In  common  with  Partholan  and  Finn  Mac 
Cumhail,  the  giant  or  hero  Domhnall  has  a  faithless  wife,  as  we 
learn  from  the  plot  of  another  old  saga  related  in  Miss  Knight's 
"  Tales." 

Domnann  is,  properly  speaking,  the  genitive  of  Domnu,  who, 
as  we  shall  presently  see,  was  a  god,  apparently  of  the  Fomorians, 
who  are  traditionally  regarded  as  of  the  race  of  the  giants.  In 
connection,  therefore,  with  the  conception  of  Domnann,  i.e.  Domnu 
— as  a  giant  in  Erros — it  is  interesting  to  find  that  one  Domn,  or 
Dumn,  was  a  famous  giant  also  on  the  coasts  of  the  Baltic.  In  the 
legends  of  Eastern  Scandinavia  he  appears  as  the  ruler  of  the 
quasi-mythic  inhabitants  of  Northern  lotunheim,  or  Risaland, 
popularly  located  in  West  Bothnia.  Various  place-names  in  the 
district  of  Pithen,  such  as  Risnaeset,  Jettskatan,  Jetgrubben,  as 
well  as  the  presence  of  uninscribed  menhirs,  and  of  tumuli,  are 
pointed  out  by  Stecksenius  as  monuments  of  the  ancient  people 
about  whom  the  legends  were  told.J  The  giant  Ymir  was  fabled 
to  have  been  an  inhabitant  of  ancient  Jutland,  by  which  the 
Northern  lotunheim  is  supposed  to  be  meant,§  and  in  the  same 
region,  that  is  to  say,  in  the  ancient  Ouenland,  are  placed  the 
pristine  seats  of  the  Amazons,   or  Giant-Maids  of   lotunheim,!] 

t  The  name  Gaman  is  one  of  those  which  comparative  etymology  leads  us  to  associate  with  the 
SAY.  gulf  of  the  Baltic.  Gamendorp  is,  as  has  been  said,  a  place-name  in  the  island  of  Femeren, 
Fimbria,  or  Little  Cimbria,  lying  off  the  coast  of  the  Cimbric  chersonese,  and  supposed  to  have 
retained  the  name  of  the  Cimbri.  See  Blaeu,  "Atlas  Major,"  vol.  i.  xlix.  :  "Fimbria  vulgo 
Femeren  ;  La  isla  de  Femeren,  o  Fimbria,  a  que  algunos  dixeron  Pequeiia  Cimbria,  como  que  la 
denominacion  se  derivasse  de  los  Cimbros." 

X  "Dissert.  Gradual,  de  Westro-Hotnia,"  Upsala,  1731,  p.  12.  §  Id. 

II  See  Sundius,  "  Disp.  Acad,  de  Patria  Amaz.,"  p.  29;  Kudbeck,  "  Atlant.,"  iii.  pp.  371, 
498.     For  the  word  gy^,  meaning  an  lotun  woman,  see  Du  Chaillu,  "  Viking  Age,"  vol  i.  p.  36. 


I  io6  The  Dolmens  of  Ireland. 

called  Gyg  in  Norse,  a  reflex  of  whom  is  found  in  the  mythology 
of  Ireland  in  the  bands  of  women  who  accompany  the  lady  Cesair 
and  the  sea-god  Bith  to  the  shores  of  that  island. 

West  Bothnia  itself  was  the  particular  province  of  the  giant 
Dumb,  Dumbo,  or  Dumbus.  It  was  said  to  have  been  called  after 
him  Dumbslandj  with  which  name  Scandinavian  antiquaries  have 
sought  to  associate  the  Diunna  Insula,  which  Pliny  mentions, 
together  with  Scandia,  Bergos,  Nerigo,  and  Thule.  "  Dumna," 
says  Verelius,J  "sic  dicta  a  gigante  et  rege  Dumbone,  a  quo  etiam 
Sinui  Bothnico  nomen  Dumbshaf."  Jonsson,  speaking  of  Barder, 
says :  "  Patrem  habuit  Dumbum  extremse  Scandinavice  veteribus 
appellatc-e  regem,  qua  se  a  meridie  ex  mare  Baltico  Sinus  Boddicus, 
et  a  septentrione  opposite  fere  alius  ex  Oceano  occidentale  notabilis 
sinus  infundit."  §  In  his  notes  on  the  Hervor  saga,  Verelius  says  :  || 
"  Dumbus  rex  praefuit  finibus  maris,  qui  ex  adverso  terrse  Risaland 
continentem  ad  meridiem  stringunt.  Ad  meridiem  quippe  mare 
est  quod  jam  Dumnicum  appellatur  a  rege  scilicet  Dumbone  sic 
denominatum,  in  quo  multce  parvae  terrae  et  insulae  jacent."  "Ab 
hoc  Dumno,"  according  to  Jonsson,^  "Sinus  Boddicus  olim 
Dumbshaf,  Dumbi  mare  vel  aequor  dictum  est :  Sinum  vero 
Boddicum  D.  Cytheraeus  Bothnicum  appellat,  et  terram  a 
septentrione  huic  sinui  adjacentem,  Norbothniam  (hanc  statuo 
fuisse  Dumbi  provinciam  seu  ditionem),  eamque  dividit  in  Vest- 
bothniam  et  Ostbothniam."  jf 

^lessenius  makes  Dumbus  a  very  recent  individual  indeed,  an 
error  which  Rudbeck  corrects.  In  West  Bothnia,  in  the  year 
868  A.D.,  says  the  former,  reigned  a  chieftain  Dumbus,  from  whom, 
in  early  times,  the  gulf  was  called  Mare  Dumbi;  and,  again,  he  says 
that  there  ruled  over  North  Bothnia  a  certain  petty  king  called 
Dumbus,  who  was  contemporary  with  Haldan.  He  proceeds  to 
relate  that  Dumbus  married  Miolla,  daughter  of  the  King  of 
Ouenland,  and  that  he  was  slain  by  eighteen  giants,  and  avenged 
by  his  son  Barderus,  who  burned  a  number  of  his  father's  foes. 
After  mentioning  Verelius's  Mare  Dumbium  or  Dumboshaaf, 
Rudbeck  says  that  the  Norsemen  thousfht  that  this  name  was 
that  of  a  certain  king  Dumbus  who  lived  in  the  days  of  Harold, 

+  Stecksenius,  op.  at.,  p.  14;  Rudbeck,  op.  cit.,  i.  p.  482. 

X  *'  Hist.  Rer.  Norv."  i.,  lib.  iii.  cap.  24,  p.  100. 

§  "  CiymogKa,"  by  Arngrime  Jona  (Jonsson),  1610,  p.  113. 

i;   Op.  cit.,  p.  27. 

1   Op.  cit.,  pp.  113,  114. 

tt  "Scond.  Illusl.,"  X.  11.  4. 


Ethnology  and  Tradition.  1107 


the  Fair-haired,  but  "  our  scalds,"  he  adds,  show  us  that  the  name 
had  been  in  use  long  before  Harold's  time.f 

Proofs  of  the  existence  of  the  name  Dumn  in  these  regions  is 
by  no  means  wanting  in  topography,  and  its  claim  to  antiquity 
cannot  be  disputed.  In  the  Atlas  of  Loonius  we  have  (in  lat.  or. 
70),  Dummes  Naes,  explained  Promontorium  Dumnium,  and  in 
Rudbeck's  Atlantica  (in  long.  gr.  50),  Dumns  Eja,  which  he 
Latinizes  "  Dumni  Insula,"  an  island  which  in  all  probability  was 
held  sacred  to  this  sea-god,  just  as  the  island  Hloe  in  the  Cattegat 
was  to  the  sea-god  Hler. 

The  Gulf  of  Bothnia,  then,  being  called  the  Dumbian  or 
Dumnian  Sea,  and  the  coast  on  the  north-west  side  of  it  Dumbs- 
land,  there  is  another  point  to  be  noticed  in  conjunction  w^ith  it, 
namely,  that  a  name  for  the  very  same  district  was  Pithea  or  Petia. 
A  town,  a  river,  and  an  island  bear  this  name,  in  the  forms  Pithea, 
Paicto,  or  Paiktona,  Pitha  Elf,  and  Pitholm.J  This  must  have 
been  regarded  as  a  name  of  some  importance,  for  it  became  the 
appellation  of  the  entire  country  beyond  North  Bothnia  in  the 
direction  of  the  Arctic  shores,  namely,  Lapponia  Pithensis.  But 
Petia  elsewhere  is  Pictland,  so  termed,  not  by  native  British 
historians  alone,  but  by  Saxo  the  Dane.  The  occurrence  of  this 
name,  therefore,  side  by  side  with  that  of  Dumbus  or  Dumnus, 
and  even  inclusive  of  Dumbsland,  cannot  fail  to  recall  the  position 
of  the  Dumnonii  full  in  the  very  heart  of  the  Pictish  country  of 
central  Scotland,  nor  that  of  the  Fir  Domnann  in  Erros,  whose 
district  was  that,  also,  of  the  Pictanei  mentioned,  as  we  have  seen, 
in  the  Life  of  Saint  Cadroe,  as  occupying  the  country  around 
Croagh  Patrick,  over  which  the  giant  Domnann  or  Domnu  ruled, 
and  who  was  probably  also  the  same  deity  as  Crom  Dubh,  the 
Righ  an  Damain,  ancestor  of  Finn  Mac  Cumhail,  and  the  Righ 
an  Domnaigh  or  Rex  Aquarum  (vulgarly  "King  of  Sunday") 
worshipped  at  wells  on  Crom  Dubh's  Day.  To  these  coinci- 
dences I  would  add  the  great  similarity  above  noticed  between 
the  Tavastrian  Finns  and  the  Irish  of  the  Donegal  coast. 

Saxo,  as  has  just  been  said,  terms  the  Scottish  Pictland  Petia. 
The  name,  too,  by  which  the  Norsemen  knew  the  portion 
of    sea    which    washes    the    northern    shores   of    Caithness    and 


t  "Atlant.  II.,"  pt.  ii.,  p.  50.  Rudbeck  quotes  another  passage  from  Verelius,  in  which  the 
Dumbshaf  is  mentioned  :  "Giestur,  Bardi  filius,  septentrionalia  littora  legit,  et  supra  Halogiam  et 
Finmarchiam  Mare  Bothnicum  sulcavit,  superatoque  Dumbshaf,"  e:c. 

X  Stecksenius,  "Dissert.,"  p.  29. 


iio8  The  Dolmens  of  Ireland. 

Sutherlandshire  was  PettalancT s  Fiorth.  Before,  however,  we 
proceed  to  notice  the  Dumnonii  in  the  British  Isles,  we  must  return 
to  the  Baltic.  It  is  not  to  the  southern  point  of  Finland  alone 
that  the  name  Dummes  Naes  was  applied.  On  the  opposite 
coast,  to  the  south,  the  extreme  northern  point  of  Curland,  as 
has  been  before  pointed  out,  bore  the  same  name,  Dommesnes, 
while  on  the  Preofal  was  Dumnaw,  in  Pomerania  was  Dameshagren, 
and  on  the  west  coast  of  North  Jutland  Dams-gaard.  Lastly, 
somewhere  on  the  German  coast  were  probably  Veldumnii,  while 
a  tribe  called  Geidumni  lay  near  the  Menapii,  and  on  the  Frisian 
island  of  Zeland  was  Dombourg,  where  was  the  shrine  of  the  sea- 
goddess  Nehalennia,  in  the  precincts  of  which  inscriptions  have 
been  found  proving  commercial  contact  with  the  shores  of  Britain. 
An  immigration  of  a  people  bearing  a  name  which  it  is  im- 
possible to  dissociate  from  that  of  Domnu  and  Domn  had  taken 
place  into  the  south-western  promontory  of  Britain  at  a  date 
sufficiently  early  for  their  presence  there  under  the  name  Dumnonii 
or  Damnonii,  and  their  possession  of  an  important  town,  Isca 
Damnoniorum,  to  be  recognized  by  Ptolemy.  If  it  was  from 
the  Baltic  they  came,  their  migration  may  possibly  have  been 
coincident  with  that  of  another  people,  the  Veneti,  whose  name 
also  occurs  on  the  southern  Baltic  as  the  Veneti  or  Venedi,  and 
who,  when  Csesar  found  them  settled  on  the  coast  of  Brittany,  were 
engaged  in  commerce  with  the  opposite  coast  of  Britain,  the 
inhabitants  of  which  would  have  been  the  Domnonii.  It  is 
curious  that,  in  no  other  part  of  England,  are  tales  of  Giants  so 
prevalent  as  in  Cornwall  and  Devon.  Here,  too,  as  in  Finland 
and  Curland,  a  promontory,  the  Aaixvovtov  aKpov,  the  Lizard,  bore 
their  name,  or  rather  that  of  their  god,  for  it  was  the  custom  of 
the  ancients,  both  in  barbarian  and  classic  lands,  to  call  promon- 
tories by  the  name  of  their  deities.  Whether  the  extreme  south- 
eastern point  of  Britain  also  bore  this  name,  now  corrupted  into 
Dungeness,  I  cannot  say.  The  etymology  of  Dunes-Na;s,  the 
Bill  or  Point  of  the  sand-dunes,  suits  it  too  well  to  be  hastily  laid 
aside.  The  peninsula  of  Brittany  received  its  name,  as  is  well 
known,  of  Domnonia  from  the  Dumnonians  of  Britain,  who,  as 
fugitives  from  the  Saxons,  crossed  into  the  country  of  the  not 
perhaps  unrelated  Veneti,  whose  swiftly  sailing  boats,  called /z'«f/^, 
had  scoured  the  Channel  in  the  days  of  Csesar. 

In    Scotland,    according  to   Skene,  "  the  great  nation  of  the 


Ethnology  and  Tradition.  1109 

Damnonii,"  as  he  terms  them,  "  lay  north  of  the  Selgovc-e  and 
Novantee,  separated  from  them  by  the  chain  of  hills  which 
divides  the  northern  rivers  from  the  waters  which  flow  into  the 
Solway,  extending  as  far  north  as  the  Tay.  South  of  the  Forth 
of  Clyde  they  possessed  the  modern  counties  of  Ayr,  Lanark,  and 
Renfrew,  and,  north  of  these  estuaries,  the  counties  of  Dumbarton 
and  Stirling,  and  the  districts  of  Menteith,  Stratherne,  and  Foth- 
reve,  or  the  western  half  of  the  Peninsula  of  Fife.  They  thus 
lay  in  the  centre  of  Scotland,  and  were  the  novce  gentes  whose 
territory  Agricola  ravaged.f 

In  Ireland,  as  now  generally  recognized,  we  have  their  name 
in  that  of  the  Fir  Domnann,  or  Men  of  Domnu  or  Domna.  "  Put 
this  word  Domnu,"  says  Professor  Rhys,  "back  into  that  which 
must  have  been  its  early  form,  and  you  will  have  a  nominative 
'  Dumnu,'  and  a  genitive  '  Dumnonos,'  implying  a  stem,  *  Dum- 
non '  ;  form  from  the  latter  an  adjective  *  Dumnonios,'  and  you 
will  then  have  as  its  plural  '  Dumnonii,'  the  attested  name  of  two 
peoples  of  Roman  Britain,  situated  respectively  by  the  Severne 
Sea  and  the  Firth  of  Forth."  J  Two  estuaries,  one  on  either  side 
of  Ireland,  bore  their  name;  that  on  the  east  the  Bay  of  Mala- 
hide,  that  on  the  west  in  Irrus-  or  Erros-Domnann,  in  which 
district  lay  Dun  Domhnaill.  Each  of  these  was  called  after  them 
"  Inver  Domnann."  In  the  form  doney  their  name  was  also  said 
to  be  found  in  that  of  Knockmuldoney  in  Sligo  ;  perhaps,  also,  in 
that  of  Inchidoney  in  Cork,  although  the  latter  is  explained  the 
Island  of  Our  Lady,  I  suppose  from  an  etymology  connecting  it 
with  the  Latin  domina,  domna.  From  these  Fir  Domnann  it  was 
that,  according  to  the  traditions  written  down  in  the  Middle 
Ages,  the  kings  of  Connaught  were  descended,  and  the  royal  line 
of  Temair,  of  which  palace,  or  temple,  they  were  said  to  be  the 
founders. 

According  to  tradition,  a  colony  of  the  Fir  Domhnannach,  as 
Mac  Firbis  calls  them,  landed  at  Broadhaven  in  Erros,§  and 
established  themselves,  after  which  event  the  district  was  called 
lorras  Domhnann,  and  this  name  it  bore  in  the  time  of  O'Flaherty, 
for  the  forms  lorras  Duin  Domhnaill,  as  the  peasantry  call  it,  and 
as  it  appears  in  a  map  in  the  reign  of  Henry  VIII.,  and  Arras 
Dundonald,  are  alike  corruptions  of  lorras  Duin  Domhnainn. 

O'Flaherty  ||  speaks  of  the   Damnonii  under  Gann,   Ganann, 

t  "  Celtic  Scotland,"  vol.  i.  pp.  73,  74.  %  "  Lectt.  on  Celtic  Heathendom,"  p,  597. 

§  This  name  is  lar-Ros,  i.e.  "  Western  Seaboard.'  |1  "Ogygia,"  p.  171. 


I  no  The  Dolmens  of  Ireland. 


and  Sengann,  as  first  trying  to  effect  a  landing  in  East  Leinster, 
at  Arklow,  at  a  spot  which,  even  though  they  were  repulsed,  bore 
their  name,  and  was  called  Inver  Domnann.  Their  subsequent 
attempt,  he  says,  on  the  extreme  west  coast,  being  more  successful, 
the  district  naturally  received  their  name.  As  to  the  exact 
extent  of  the  territory  occupied  by  them,  the  authorities  differ. 
O' Flaherty  states  that  Eochaid  Allot  f  possessed  Irrosdamnonia, 
which  stretched  from  the  Galvia  (Galway)  river  to  the  Dubius 
(the  Duff,  near  Bundoran),  and  the  Drobisius  (the  Drawes  J) — both 
in  Leitrim,  rivers  on  the  borders  of  Ultonia.  The  Mac  Firbises, 
however,  describe  the  Fir  Domhnannach  as  located  in  the  territories 
of  Ceara,  Tirawley,  and  Tireragh,  and  in  the  whole  extent  of 
country  from  the  river  Robe,  running  into  Loch  Mask  on  the 
east,  to  the  river  formerly  called  the  Cowney,  now  the  Drumcliff 
river,  running  into  the  sea  in  Drumcliff  Bay,  four  miles  north  of 
Sligo. 

To  return  for  a  moment  to  Domhnall  and  Dun  Domhnalll. 
"  I  have  heard,"  says  0'Donovan,§  "all  the  versions  of  the  story 
about  Domhnall  Dualbuidhe  and  his  wife  Muinchinn,  or  Mun- 
chaoin,  the  daughter  of  Maonghal,  and  I  think  that  Domhnall  was 
none  other  than  Daman,  the  father  of  Ferdia — the  Ferdia  (Fer- 
dlad)  who  was  killed  in  single  combat  by  Cuchullaln.  All  the 
sheannachies,"  he  adds,  "agree  that  Domhnall  was  slain  by  Fergus 
Mac  Roigh  (Scroigh),  king  of  Ulster,  and  that  Munchaoin  lived 
in  the  castle  of  Doonah.  I  "  (O'Donovan)  "  suppose  Munchaoin 
is  the  Black,  or  Dark,  Lady  of  Doonah,  the  heroine  of  Maxwell's 
leg-end.  It  is  said  that  she  was  drowned  In  the  river  Munchinn 
near  Dun  Domhnaill,  on  which  she  left  her  name,"  as,  we  may 
add.  It  was  usual  for  ladies  to  do  when  drowned  in  rivers,  from 
the  Vistula  ||  to  Erros-Domhnann. 

I  now  pass  to  such  proofs  as  are  to  be  obtained  of  the  occurrence 

t  I  have  previously  pointed  out  the  identity  of  this  name  with  that  of  Forniot. 

X  O'Donovan  thinks  Ptolemy's  Ravius  is  the  Saverus  (=  Samer),  or  Erne;  but  does  not  the 
Ravius  still  possess  its  ancient  name,  with  the  addition  of  an  initial  </,  in  that  of  the  D{iavius),  or 
Drawes  ?  With  this  latter  name,  Draobhais,  or  Drawes,  compare  that  of  the  Trawe  in  Ilolstein, 
west  of  the  Warnou  (?  Erne),  and  that  of  the  Dravus  in  Pannonia. 

§  O.S.L.,  Co.  Mayo,  —-,  P-  397- 
£.  lo 

II  See  "  Dhigoss,"  lib.  i.  p.  57;  also  the  "Neues  Lausitzischen  Mag.,"  vol.  xxxvii.  p.  235. 
Vanda  was  the  lady  in  question,  and  the  river  the  Vandalicus  amnis.  She  was  fabled  to  be  the 
daughter  of  Gracchus,  a  Latinized  form  possibly  of  Crocco,  the  chief  god  of  the  ancient  Bohemians, 
who  had  three  daughters,  "  pythonesses,"  in  honour  of  whom  tumuli  were  raised  and  castles  named. 
See  Dobrowski,  "  Rev.  Bohem.  Scriptores,"  vol.  i.  8, — from  Cosmas  Pragensis.  The  river  Bann 
takes  its  name  from  Banbha,  a  queen  of  Erin,  who  gave  her  name  also  to  the  island.  Wilh  a 
change  of  d  to  b,  admissible  between  German  and  Irish  names,  cf.  Ernold  and  Ernolb,  Banda 
(=  Vanda)  would  be  Banbha  in  Irish. 


Ethnology  and  Tradition.  i ii i 

of  the  word  "  Domnu,"  or  "  Dumnus,"  in  Ireland  and  elsewhere. 
Domnu,  or  Domna,  whether  male  or  female  is  uncertain,  but  more 
usually  represented  as  a  giant  of  the  former  sex,  was  the  De 
Domnand,  that  is,  "  the  Domnann  God."  He  had  a  son  Indech, 
who  was  one  of  the  chieftains  of  the  Fomorians  ensfaeed  at  the 
battle  of  Moytirra,  and  it  was  at  Inver  Domnann,  or  Domnu's 
estuary,  that  he  with  his  Fomorians  landed.  Domnu,  however, 
did  not  himself  fight  for  the  Fomorians,  and,  indeed,  as  M. 
D'Arbois  de  Jubainville  f  has  pointed  out,  he  appears  in  another 
place  as  belonging  to  a  class  of  gods  opposed  to  them. 

Great  pains  have  been  taken  by  Glilck,  Diefenbach,  Roget  de 
Belloguet,  H.  d'Arbois  de  Jubainville,  Rhj's,  and  others,  to  collect 
instances  of  the  occurrence  of  the  name  Dumnus  and  to  explain 
its  meaning.  In  the  "Table  of  Peutinger"  a  Roman  station 
called  Dumnus  is  placed  on  the  road  from  Treves  to  Mayence, 
which  it  is  suggested  must  be  explained  by  some  term  for  "  the 

property  of "  understood.^     The  cognomen  Dubna  is  known 

to  us  in  three  inscriptions  in  Stiria  or  Noricum.§  Gliick  cites 
the  name  Dubnus  on  a  coin.||  He  refers  also  in  his  works  to 
Welsh  forms,  in  "  Lives  of  Saints,"  in  the  "  Ancient  Laws  of 
Wales,"  and  in  the  "  Book  of  Llandaff " — namely,  Dubn,  Dumn. 
Duun,  Domu,  Dwfn,  and  Dwfin,  equivalent  to  Dubnus  and 
Dumnus.  In  spite  of  the  attempts  we  noticed,  made  by  Northern 
antiquaries,  to  find  for  Ptolemy's  Aovfj-va  vrjcros^  a  situation  in 
Bothnia,  the  site  of  that  island  remains  uncertain.  As  derivatives, 
Glilck  gives  us  the  Gaulish  Dubnissus,  Dumnissus,  Domnitius, 
Dumnacus,  the  old  British  Aov/^i^oVtot,  the  Cymric  Dyfnau  =  Dum- 
nanus,  and  Dyfnawc  or  Dyfnawg  =  Dumnacus,  to  which  I  believe 
we  may  add  the  Gaedhelic  Domnach,  in  some  cases  where  it  has 
been,  perhaps  not  unintentionally,  confused  by  a  process  of  false 
etymology  with  the  Latin  dominictis,  and  also  the  name  Donnacht 
or  Domhnannacht,  applied  first  to  the  pagan  divinity  and  then  to 
the  saint  who,  as  we  shall  presently  see,  was  venerated  on  the 
mountain  of  Sliabh  Domhangart  or  Domhnangart,  in  the  County 
of  Down. 

In  compounds  we  have  the  Gaulish  Dubnoreix,  Dubnorex, 
Dumnorix,  Dubnotalus,   Domnotonus,  Aov/xfoVXeio?,  Verjugodum- 

t  "  Cours  de  Litt.  Celt.,"  vol.  v. ;  see  the  index  to  that  work  for  other  references. 

%  Desjardins,  "Geog.  de  la  Gaule,"  pp.  Ii6,  117. 

§  Corp.  Inscrip.  Lat.  III.,  5265,  5360,  etc. 

II  "Revue  Numismatique,"  12,  75,  n.  i.  \  Geogr.  II.  2. 


1 1 12  The  Dolmens  of  Ireland. 

nus,  Conconnetodumnus,  Vercondaridubnus,  Togldumnus,  Vel- 
dumnianus,  and  Geidumni,  to  which  we  may  add  the  old 
British  Cogidumnus,  Dumnobellannus,  Dagodubnus,  and  the 
Cymric  Domnguaret  =  Domnovaretus  (cf.  Ambivareti),  Dyfnwal  = 
Dumnovalus,  Dofngarth  =  Domnogartus,  Guordubn,  Guordumn, 
Gurdumn,  Guordomn,  Gordwfyn  =  Verdubnus,  Verdumnus.  In 
Ireland,  besides  the  names  we  have  mentioned,  we  have  that  of 
Domnanchick,  applied  to  a  certain  person  called  Crimthann 
Sciatbel,  who,  being  made  Governor  of  Laighen  (Leinster)  by 
Heremon,  received  hospitably,  and  entered  into  alliance  with  the 
Cruithne  or  Picts,  who,  under  the  command  of  Gud  and  Cathluan, 
arrived  in  that  province  at  that  time.  As  his  name  implies,  he 
was  one  of  the  Fir-Domnann  stock.  To  Irish  examples  I  have 
added  above  the  name  Donnacht,  which  is  the  Gaulish  Domnacus,f 
and  Domhnangart  or  Domongart,  which  is  the  Gaulish  Domno- 
gartus. There  are  probably  others,  among  which  Domuit  may 
be  the  Gaulish  Domitius.  Colgan  gives  the  interesting  form 
Domangenus  which  was  that  of  two  bishops,  the  one  a  son  of 
Senach,  the  other  a  disciple  of  St.  Barry.J 

As  to  the  meaning,  the  word  dubmis,  duimms  is,  says  Gluck, 
the  modern  Cymric  divfUy  which,  like  our  word  "  deep,"  is  both 
substantive  and  adjective,  and,  like  the  Latin  "  Oceanus,"  was 
used  both  in  the  material  sense  of  the  "  Waters  of  the  Great 
Deep  "  and  in  the  mythical  sense  of  the  "  Ruler  of  the  Sea  " — the 
"  Rex  Aquarum."  With  the  Cymric  dwfu  —  depth,  deep, 
correspond  the  Cornish  doun,  doiun  =  deep,  high  ;  the  Armoric 
don  or  donn^  deep  =  dumn ;  the  Gaedhelic  domun,  modern 
domham^  doimhiiiy  deep  ;  doinnu,  glossed  "  profunditas,"  §  modern 
doimhne  =  deep,  depth,  and  in  Scottish  Gaedhelic  "  Oceanus,"  or 
"The  Deep."  Indeed,  the  English  word  "  deep  "  and  the  form 
diibno-s,  with  the  aid  of  the  no  suffix,  are  equally  derived  from  a 
reduced  root  dhub,  says  M.  H.  d'Arbois  de  Jubainville,  the 
complete  form  of  which  we  find  in  the  Gothic  diups  =  deupa-s, 
German  tief\ 

\  This  proper  name  Dumnacus,  formed  from  Dumnu,  existed  altogether  independently  of  the 
Laiin  loan-word  dominicus.  This  is  plain  from  the  occurrence  in  "Cccsar"  (De  B.  G.,  viii.  cc. 
26,  27,  29)  of  the  name  Dumnacus,  who,  according  to  Ilirtius,  commanded  the  Andecavi. 
])ubnacus  occurs  in  an  inscription  at  Vienne  in  Isere  (Corp.  Inscrip.  Lat.,  XIL,  2356).  For 
1  )y(nawg,  see  "  Lives  of  Welsh  Saints,"  p.  270  ;  Gliick,  "  Kelt.  Nameu  ;  "  and  "  Rev.  Aicheol.," 
1891,  p.  27. 

X  ''  AA.  SS.  Hib.,"  pp.  305,  306,  631.  One  Domangenus  in  Colgan  was  the  son  of  Sarranus, 
a  Pictish  proper  name  ,  with  which  I  have  compared  the  place-name  in  Sarendorp  Fimbria. 

§  Zeuss,  ed.  Ebel,  p.  272. 

II  "  Gothic  diiip,  from  ditp;  O.H.G.  tie/,  profundus,"  says  Gliick. 


Ethnology  and  Tradition.  hi 3 

This  induces  me  to  think  it  possible  that  some  connection  may 
exist  between  the  Irish  and  Scottish  Gaedhelic  dubh,  "  black  "  ; 
Cymric  and  Armoric  dti ;  Cornish  dtcv;  and  the  name  for  "  the 
Deep."  The  ideas  of  dark  waters  and  depth  are  correlative,  as  in 
the  poetry  of  the  Hebrews  :  "  Thou  shalt  hide  me  in  the  Great 
Waters,  in  a  place  of  Darkness,  and  in  the  Deep."  In  Gaedhelic, 
as  Gllick  has  pointed  out,  domun,  modern  domhan,  is  met  with 
also  in  the  sense  of  "  mundus,"  and  in  Scottish  Gaedhelic  it  means 
both  "  mundus "  and  "  oceanus."  Hence  the  word  conveys  an 
idea  of  greatness — "  far  to  the  bottom "  (weit  zu  Grunde),  a 
meaning  which,  in  compounds  where  an  intensitive  force  has  to 
be  introduced,  diibh  shares  with  dicmn.  Used  thus,  it  corresponds 
exactly  with  the  Greek  ySa^u?,  as  is  seen  in  the  compound 
Aou/xvo/cX.€to9,  when  compared  with  /3a0vK\eTJs,  l3a9vSo^o<;. 

Of  the  cultus  of  the  god  Domnu  there  are,  I  feel  sure,  many 
traces  remaining  in  various  parts  of  Ireland.  One  important  site 
still  retains  his  name.  This  is  the  mountain  called  Slieve  Doman- 
gard,  Domhangaird,  Downart  or  Donard,  on  the  coast  of  the  county 
of  Down.  The  summit  of  the  mountain  was  a  very  sacred  spot, 
and  the  cultus  was  connected  with  wells.  The  god  is  represented 
as  a  fierce  pagan  tyrant,  who  finally  succumbs  to  the  superior 
power  of  Patrick.  I  note  these  points  because  he  appears  to  be 
the  counterpart,  on  the  east  coast  of  Ireland,  of  Crom  Dubh,  the 
Righ-an-Domhain,  or  -Domnaigh,  on  Cruachan  Eile,  or  Croagh 
Patrick  on  the  west.  The  legend  about  him  is  very  similar  to 
that  of  Crom  Dubh,  and  both  are  connected  with  mountain-tops 
and  wells. 

The  name  Domangart  is  spelt  also,  and  more  correctly, 
Domhnangart  by  O'Donovanf  and  by  O'Conor  in  the  "Annals  of 
Tigernach."  It  has  its  equivalent  in  the  Welsh  Dofngarth,J  and 
the  Latin  Domno-gartus.§  These  two  latter  are,  however,  per- 
sonal names,  while  Slieve  Domangart  is  that  of  a  place.  In  the 
terminal  syllable  ^^r^  we  may  find  comparisons  in  Eoten-guard  in 
the  Anglo-Saxon  poem  of  Beowulf;  in  Rugyard  (z>.  Rugegart),  the 
site  on  a  hill  of  the  fortified  palace  of  the  chiefs  of  Rugen,  as  also 
in  Asgard  and  Utgard  (?  lot-gard)  of  the  Norse  sagas,  etc.  Its 
meaning  appears  to  be  that  of  the  Greek  TefjLevo<;,  the  area  enclosed 

t  O.S.L.,  Co.  Down,  ;  "Ann.  of  Tigernach,  '  O'Conor,  2,  136,  160,  etc. 

X  "Lib.  Landav.,"  p.  160.  §  Kelt.  Namen,  /oc.  cit. 

VOL.   III.  2    D 


1 1 14  The  Dolmens  of  Ireland. 

in  the  fence  which  surrounded  a  venerated  site,  city  or  temple — 
such,  for  example,  as  that  of  Arcona,  previously  described.  From 
the  place-name  Domnu's  gard,  the  name  of  the  god,  and  subse- 
quently that  of  the  saint  who  took  his  place,  were  formed,  an 
etymological  freak  commonly  practised  in  the  course  of  the 
transmission  of  traditions.  In  the  "Ordnance  Survey  Letters," 
O'Donovanf  supplies  full  and  interesting  details  of  the  legends 
attaching  to  Donnart's,  or  Donnacht's,  name,  especially  those 
relating  to  his  conversion  by  Patrick,  such  as  that  of  a  bull 
miraculously  restored  to  life.  Here  we  find  also  an  account  of 
the  multitudes  of  pilgrims  who,  as  at  Croagh  Patrick,  climbed  the 
holy  mountain  *'  overhanging  the  eastern  sea,"  and  sought  on  its 
summit  the  cairns  with  their  wells,  the  chapel  of  the  saint,  and 
the  altar  where  every  Sunday  {dies  dominicd)  he  was  supposed  to 
celebrate  Mass.  The  means  of  access  for  Saint  Donnacht  from 
the  shore  to  the  summit  was  a  secret  cave,  through  which  he 
will  pass,  until  the  Day  of  Judgment,  from  his  second  church  in 
a  fort  called  Rath  Murbuilg  (?  Bolg's  Mur),  seated  on  the  sea- 
shore. From  all  this  it  is  evident  that  the  cultus  here  centred 
was  commenced  in  pagan  times,  assimilated  by  Christians,  and 
perpetuated  under  the  ausjoices  of  the  latter.  The  connection  of 
the  Fir-Bolg  with  Slieve  Donnard  is  indicated  by  the  fact  that 
the  mountain  was  also  called  Slieve  Slainghe,  that  being  the 
name  of  the  first  Fir-Bolg  king. 

In  the  name  of  a  female  saint,  Damhnaid,  Damnata,  Davnat, 
or  Dimna,  daughter  of  Damen,J  described  as  of  Slieve  Beatha, 
the  mountain  of  the  sea-god  Bith,  from  whom  Tech-Damhnait 
(Tedavnat)  in  Monaghan  received  its  name,  and  who  was  the 
patroness  of  Kildavnat  in  Mayo,  we  may  possibly  also  recognize 
that  of  Domnu,  Domna,  or  Damna.  The  late  Bishop  Reeves 
called  my  attention  to  the  fact  that  this  saint  was  also  the  patroness 
of  Gheel  of  Holland. 

One  other  place  in  Ireland,  although  not  hitherto  attributed  to 
this  latter  divinity,  was,  I  am  inclined  to  think,  a  celebrated  centre 
of  her  worship.     This  was  Ballyvourney  §  in  Cork,  where,  however, 

c 

t  Co.  Down,  14  — ,  pp.  92,  seqq. 

14 
\  See  O.S.L.,  Armagh  and  Monaghan,  ~ ,  pp.  39,  68,  etc.     See  also  id.  p.  93,  for  a  legend 

of  a  chief  called  Damhain  Damhargait,  ancestor  of  the  Orghilla,  and  also  for  a  tradition  that 
Patrick  spoke  bad  Irish. 

§  Windele,  MS.,  "  Cork  W.  and  N.E.,"  pp.  289,  seqq. 


Ethnology  and  Tradition.  1115 

she  was  known,  not  as  Davnat,  but  as  Gobnet,  which  is  practically 
the  same  word,  since  in  West  Munster^  stands  for  d,  and  0  for  a, 
as  in  golldn  for  dalldny  etc.  From  the  fragments  of  her  Legenda, 
given  by  Colgan,  we  learn  that  she  was  said  to  be  of  the  race  of 
Conaire  Mor,  and  that  she  was  "  de  Ernaidhe,"  of  the  Ernaids  of 
Muscraighe.  The  cultus  of  this  divinity  or  saint  is  well  worthy 
of  note.  The  site  of  it  is  near  the  bank  of  the  Sullane  river.  Here 
there  stood  in  a  green  mound  of  slight  elevation  "  Gobnatt's  Stone." 
Windele  regarded  it  as  a  pagan  monument.  It  was  five  feet  high, 
and  there  were  hollows  or  basins  on  its  upper  side.  A  cross  had 
been  carved  upon  it.  To  the  west  of  it  were  some  remains  at  a 
site  called  Kilabban,  from  Abban,  Gobnatt's  brother,  which  were 
included  in  the  "venerated  area"  assigned  to  the  cultus.  "  Here," 
says  Windele,  "  is  neither  church  nor  cell,  but  the  remains  are  as 
pagan  in  their  aspect  and  character  as  can  well  be  conceived. 
The  monument  consists  of  a  low  agger  or  mound  composed  of 
earth  and  stones,  enclosed  by  three  upright  pillar-stones,  with  spaces 
between  each.  The  heap,  which  is  sixty  feet  in  circumference,  is 
surmounted  by  a  rock-basin,  or  bullan-stone,  the  cavity  in  which  is 
eleven  inches  in  diameter,  usually  containing  water.  The  bushes 
on  the  mound  were  garnished  with  rags  tied  on  by  devotees,  as  is 
usual  at  sacred  fountains.  Two  of  the  golldns  were  inscribed  with 
ogams.  Near  the  cairn  was  the  Holy  Well,  the  brambles  over 
which  were  covered  with  rags.  The  ritual  customary  for  the 
devotees  consisted  in  going  four  times  round  the  cairn  and  saying 
seven  prayers  at  each  round.  The  Pattern,  or  festival-day  of 
Saint  Gobnatt,  was  June  5th.  The  Boccoghs,  or  beggars  (par- 
ticularly lame  beggars),  then  assembled  in  great  strength,  and 
exhibited  a  sheela,^  that  is  to  say,  the  image  of  a  woman.  Sheela 
was  the  patroness  of  women.  In  the  drawer  of  the  sacristy  at 
Ballyvourney  was  preserved  a  wooden  image  of  Gobnatt,  or 
Abigail,  as  she  was  also  called.  The  Boccoghs,  whom  Windele 
terms  "  Irish  Fakirs,"  were  styled  at  Ballyvourney  "  Gobnatt's 
Clergy."  It  was  said  that  they  kept  the  image  concealed,  and 
only  exhibited  it  on  this  occasion. 

A    curious    piece    of  antiquity    in    connection  with  Gobnatt's 
cultus  was  an  object  of  yellow  brass  (prass  btddhe)  broad  at  the 

t  Sheelanagyg  (?  Sheela  na  Gyg)  was  a  name  popularly  applied  to  stone  figures  of  females,  often 
indecent  and  hideous,  which  are  found  built  into  the  walls  of  castles  and  other  medieval  buildings. 
Gyg  is  the  name  in  Norse  for  a  female  lotun  or  Giantess.  It  seems  to  be  the  same  word,  and  the 
meaning,  therefore,  would  be  "  Image  of  the  Giantess."     (For  gyg  in  this  sense,  see  Du  Chaillu.) 


iii6  The  Dolmens  of  Ireland. 

bottom,  narrow  at  the  top,  having-  three  edges,  and  perforated  all 
over.  It  was  called  Gobnatt's  ^/^^//r^ — that  is,  "beehive" — and 
appears  to  have  been  a  shrine.  On  one  occasion,  when  a  neigh- 
bouring clan  made  a  raid  on  Ballyvourney,  Gobnatt  "  came  out  of 
the  field  before  them  "  as  they  were  driving  the  cattle  away,  and 
opening  her  biachra,  which  she  held  in  her  hand,  let  fly  a  swarm 
of  bees,  who  forthwith  became  armed  men,  attacked  the  rievers, 
and  recovered  the  stolen  property. 

The  place  where  the  Pattern  was  held  on  Gobnatt's  Day  was 
called  Ballyvourney  Ulla,  a  word  which,  according  to  O'Reilly, 
means  "a  place  of  devotion,  a  burying-place,  and  the  cross  of 
Calvery  in  a  church."  The  mythical  serpent  who  lies  at  the 
bottoms  of  lakes  is  called  the  Ulla  Piast.  There  were  three  peni- 
tential stations — the  Ulla  Uachtrach  (Upper  Ulla)  ;  the  Ulla  Ldr ; 
and  the  Tri  Ulla.  The  penitents  went  round  them  sunways. 
The  following  is  Windele's  description  of  one  :  "  The  monument 
consists  of  an  enclosing  wall  of  earth,  partly  faced  with  uncemented 
stones,  and  about  4  feet  high.  The  entrance  is  by  an  opening 
3  feet  wide  at  the  S.E.  side,  between  two  pillar-stones,  rude  and 
unchiselled,  the  one  4  feet  high,  and  the  other  6.  The  enclosed 
area  is  25  feet  in  diameter.  In  the  centre  grows  a  solitary  tree. 
Crosses  were  scratched  on  a  stone  embedded  in  the  low  wall." 
Windele  concludes  by  comparing  this  monument  with  that  called 
St.  Bridget's  Stone  in  Louth,  and  with  one  near  the  Righfeart 
Church  at  Glendalough.  I  have  previously  compared  them  with 
the  sepulchral  keels  and  the  more  ancient  circles. 

From  the  Gaileoin  and  Ligmuine  and  Fir  Domnann  I  now 
return  to  the  Fir-Bolg,  under  which  general  designation  these 
tribes  in  Irish  tradition  are  all  included,  together  with  many  others 
mentioned  as  Firbolgic  by  Mac  Firbis. 

The  question  here  meets  us  again,  as  it  did  in  the  case  of 
Partholan  and  Nemed,  "What  would  the  term  Bolg  have  signified 
in  the  sixth  and  following  centuries  .^ "  It  is  evident  to  me  that  it 
is  the  same  name  as  that  of  the  BouXya'/De?  in  Greek,  the  Bulgari 
in  Latin,  the  Bolgr  (whence  Bolgaraland  in  the  Norse  sagas),  and, 
later  on,  the  Arabic  Bolgar.f  Who,  then,  were  these  people  ? 
The  answer  which  Zeuss  gives  to  this  question  is  that  the 
I^ulgares  were  the  Huns  in  retreat.      But  this  involves  the  further 


t  Frahn,  "  De  Cliasaris  excerpt,  ex  script,  arab.  Ibn.  Haukale,"  Petropol.  1822,  p.  27. 


Ethnology  and  Tradition.  hi 7 

question,  "What  is  meant  by  the  Huns?"  and  the  answer  to  that 
is,  that  under  the  term  Hun  was  included  not  merely  the  element 
in  Attila's  army  which  some  suppose  to  have  been  Mongol  and 
to  have  come  from  Asia,  but  the  whole  of  his  European  allies, 
whether  Germanic,  Sclavonic,  Sclavo-Finnic,  Sarmatian,  and,  if  I 
may  venture  to  use  the  terms,  Celto-Sclavic  and  Celto-Scythic. 
Such,  as  I  have  shown  before,  was  the  general  sense  in  which  the 
term  Hunnish  (Hunnicus)  was  applied,  and  such  was  the  meaning 
which  that  of  Bulgares  or  Vulgares  acquired  during  the  period 
immediately  succeeding  the  dispersal  of  the  barbarian  confedera- 
tion. They  became,  in  the  words  of  Cassiodorus,  "  Bulgares  toto 
orbe  terribiles."t  What  was  the  origin  of  the  name,  whether 
from  the  river  BouXya,  as  the  Turks  called  the  Volga,J  as  a  late 
Byzantine  writer,  Nicephorus  Gregora,§  supposes,  or  from  the 
term  Vole,  applied  to  the  old  Celtic  stock  of  Central  Europe,  or 
from  a  source  independent  of  both  these,  is  matter  of  question. 
Several  passages  may  be  pointed  out  from  which  it  appears  that, 
although  the  Bulgares  would  be  described  as  Hunnic,  they  were 
differentiated  from  the  actual  Huns.  Thus,  in  517,  under  Vita- 
lianus,  we  read  of  Huns  and  Bulgarians  serving  in  the  Roman 
army.  They  seem,  also,  to  have  been  distinguished  from  the 
Sclaves,  for  in  the  year  514,  when  the  Getae  re-emerge  in  the 
history  of  Europe,  the  name  of  these  latter  people  stands  for 
Sclaves  and  Bulgarians — the  infantry  of  Vitalianus  being  com- 
posed of  the  former,  and  his  "  Getse  equites  "  of  the  latter.|| 

There  may  also  have  been  special  senses  in  which  the  name 
Bulgares  would  have  been  applied  to  particular  tribes.  It  may 
not  improbably  have  been  so  with  the  Heruli.  Several  considera- 
tions tend  to  this  view.  In  the  first  place,  the  Heruli  pass  out  of 
history  at  the  time — within  half  a  century,  at  least — at  which  the 
Bulgares  enter  it.  Secondly,  the  Heruli  occupied  the  seats  on  the 
Palus  Mseotis,  where  we  subsequently  find  the  Bulgares.  Thirdly, 
neither  Procopius,  nor  Agathias  his  continuator,  nor  Menander  the 
continuator  of  Agathias,  mention  the  Bulgares,  although  each  of 
these  writers  has  plenty  to  say  about  the  Heruli  or  Eruli,  and  the 
Cutriguri,  Cuturguri,  or  Cotragi,  which  latter  people  formed  one 
division  of  the  Bulgares  on  the  Palus  Mseotis.     Further  than  this, 

+  Var.,  viii.  lo. 

%  Theophanes,  edit.  Par.  296,  calls  the  Volga  Atalis  ;  other  varieties  were  Ate/,  Attilas,  Etel, 

nil. 

§  "  Byz.  Hist.,"  saec.  xiv.,  edit.  Niebuhr,  1830,  p.  26. 

II  Upon  this  subject  see  Miillenhoff,  "  Deutsch.  Alter.,"  ii.  pp.  381,  seqq. 


iii8  The  Dolmens  of  Ireland. 

it  is  to  be  observed  that  when  Justinian  desired  to  reward  the  non- 
Cotragian  portion  of  the  Bulgari  from  the  Palus,  namely,  the 
Utriguri  and  Unuguri,  for  the  joint  services  rendered  by  them- 
selves and  the  Avars  against  the  other  or  Cotragian  portion  of 
the  Bulgares,  it  was  the  seats  which  had  been  occupied  by  the 
Heruli  which  he  gave  them.  Lastly,  among  the  Herulians  we 
find  the  proper  name  Fulcar  {<i>ovXKapL<;),  which  is  only  Bulgar 
in  another  form.  At  all  events,  the  Heruli,  as  having  served  in 
the  army  of  Attila,  would  have  come  under  the  term  Bulgares, 
or  Bulgari,  as  soon  as  the  constituents  of  that  army  were  dis- 
persed. 

To  the  name  Fir-Bolg,  in  Irish  tradition,  there  is  similarly 
attached  a  general  and  a  special  meaning,  the  former  including,  as 
has  been  pointed  out,  a  large  number  of  tribes,  the  latter  restricted 
to  one  particular  people.  In  the  sequel  I  am  about  to  show  how 
closely  allied  are  the  traditions  of  the  Heruli  with  those  of  the 
Fir-Bolg.  Meanwhile,  I  pause  to  notice  an  equally  close  relation 
existing  between  the  names  Cotragi  and  Bulgari,  on  the  Palus 
and  the  Danube,  and  those  of  the  Cothraighe  and  Bolg  in  Irish 
tradition. 

According  to  Procopius,  the  Cuturguri,  as  he  calls  them,  were 
Cimmerii,  or  Cimmerian  Huns,  who  dwelt  on  the  further  side  of 
the  Palus  Mseotis,]"  the  waters  of  which  they  thought  it  impossible 
to  cross,  until  some  youths  in  pursuit  of  a  magic  deer,  which 
vanished  upon  their  having  reached  the  western  shore,  showed 
them  the  way  into  a  district  whence  the  Vandals  had  departed  for 
Africa,  and  the  Visigoths  for  Spain.  Thence  they  made  periodical 
incursions  into  the  Roman  provinces,  passing  over  the  Danube 
sometimes  as  enemies  to  the  Romans,  at  others  as  their  allies. 
As  ravagers  of  the  Roman  border  they  were  indeed,  in  the  fourth 
century  a.d.,  what  the  Celts  had  been  in  the  fourth  century  B.C., 
when  the  latter  were  the  scourge  of  the  Hellenistic  world. J 
A  kindred  tribe,  the  Uturguri,  finally  made  common  cause  with 
the  Romans  in  the  reign  of  Justinian,  and  defeated  the  Cuturguri 
with  great  slaughter.  Some  of  those  who  escaped  captivity  be- 
took themselves  to  the  Romans,  and  were  allowed  to  settle  in 
Thrace.  Finally,  however,  having  joined  the  fugitives  of  their 
own  people,  they  v;ere  slain  or  put  to  flight. 

t  "Corp.  Byz.  Hist.,"  Procop.,  vol.  ii.  p.  474. 

X  For  the  first  mention  of  Celts  in  this  quarter,  see  "Greek  Life  and  Thought,"  by  J.  P. 
Mahaffy,  1896,  p.  167,  n. 


Ethnology  and  Tradition.  hi 9 

Agathias  calls  these  people  Cotriguri,f  and  the  Uturguri 
Utriguri.  Menander  calls  them  Cotriguri  or  Cotraguri,  and 
mentions  a  certain  Cotragenus  {i.e.  Cotragian),  as  an  intimate 
adviser  of  the  Avars. J  Leo  Diaconus  (tenth  century)  calls  them 
Cotragi,  and  the  Bulgares  "  Cotragorum  coloni."  § 

These  latter  forms  represent  precisely  those  of  the  name  of  a 
people  in  Ireland  who  are  as  intimately  associated  with  the  Bolg 
there  as  are  the  Cotragi,  or  Cotriguri,  with  the  Bulgari.  They  are 
called  Cothraighe,  or,  in  Latin,  Cotrigii  or  Catrigii.  The  Barony 
of  Cary  (Cathraighe),  in  Antrim,  derives  its  name  from  them.  Dr. 
Reeves  has  pointed  out  that  in  the  "  Tripartite  Life  of  Patrick  " 
this  Barony  is  called  Cathrigia — the  "  regio  Cathrigiae,  in  regione 
Dalriediae."  In  a  document  of  the  year  1279  this  territory  is  called 
Catherich,||  a  name  which  seemingly  is  repeated  in  that  of  Catterick 
in  Yorkshire.  This  has  been  supposed  to  be  the  Caturactonion  ^ 
of  Ptolemy,  in  which  case,  if  it  be  connected  with  the  Cath- 
raighe, the  presence  of  a  people  of  that  name  in  Britain 
must  be  placed  as  early  as  the  first  century.  Among  the 
*' enslaved  tribes"  of  Hy-Many  are  the  Cathraighe  of  the  Suca.ff 
Some  dolmens,  or  rather  flag-stone  tombs  at  Barnes  Lower,  in 
Donegal,  are  called  Carhy's  Graves, JJ  perhaps  from  a  tradition 
associating  them  with  the  Cathraighe.  St.  Patrick  was  named 
Cothrige  or  Cothraige  by  Milchu,§§  a  chieftain  to  whom  he 
was  in  bondage,  on  the  pretence,  which  seemed  to  involve 
contempt,  that  he  was  a  Catrigian.  We  have  seen  that  a  cleft- 
rock  at  Ushnagh,  in  Westmeath,  is  called  the  Carraig  Choitrigi, 
or  Cotrigian  rock,  and  that  it  was  regarded  as  the  centre  of 
Ireland.  II II  The  district  around  Ushnagh  was  one  of  the  possessions 
of  the  Irians,  or  descendants  of  an  eponymous  Ir,  in  whom,  as  has 
been  hinted,  may  perhaps  be  discovered  the  allegorical  ancestor  of 
the  Heruli.  The  territories  which  bear  the  name  of  the  Cathraighe 
seem  to  tally  throughout  with  those  of  the  Irians.  A  great  part 
of  the  north  of  the  island  seems  certainly  to  have  belonged  to  the 
Cathraighe.     The  following  notices  of  their  name  I  derive  from 


t  *'  Corp.  Hist.  Byz.,"  Agath.,  pp.  300,  301. 
%  "  Corp.  Hist.  Byz.,"  Excerp.  ex  Menand.,  p.  284. 
§  "  Corp.  Hist.  Byz.,"  Leo,  p.  103. 
II  See  Reeve's  "  Ecc.  Hist.  Down  and  Connor,"  p.  282. 
^  I  think  this  is  very  uncertain. 

ft  "Mac   Firbis's   Tract   on   the   Fir-Bolg.,"   transl.   Lib.   R.LA.,  p.  47,  and  O'Donovan's 
Hy-Many." 
XX  P-  232,  supra.  §§  "Trip.  Life,"  transl.  W.S.,  pt.  i.,  p.  17. 

nil  See  p.  372,  supra. 


II20  The  Dolmens  of  Ireland. 

Mac  Firbis's  account  of  the  Fir-Bolg.f  In  Southern  Hy-Maine, 
among  the  Fir-Bolg  tribes,  is  the  Tuath  Cathruighe.  In  the 
countries  of  the  Cruithne  are  Cathraighe,  from  whom  Cairbre 
Cinn-Cait,  king  of  the  rebelhous  Aitheach  Tuatha,  was  descended. 
The  Gabraidhe  of  the  Suck  and  the  Tuath  Cathruighe  were,  we  are 
told,  of  the  race  of  Oidhbehin.  Amonor  the  descendants  of  Geannan 
the  Cathraighe  are  placed,  together  with  the  Cruithne  of  Croghan, 
the  Bolg-Tuath  of  Baghna,  and  others.  When  a  dispute  about 
the  succession  to  the  throne  of  Connaught  occurs,  we  find  the 
Cathraighe  taking  the  part  of  Maine,  the  son  of  Ailill  and  Medb. 
This  will  be  sufficient  to  show  how  widely  this  people  were 
dispersed  throughout  Erin,  and  how  important  was  the  place  they 
occupied  in  the  traditions  of  that  country. 

The  date  at  which  their  namesakes,  the  Cotragi,  first 
appeared  on  the  Palus  Mseotis  is  involved  in  total  obscurity  ;  but 
it  is  remarkable  that  the  only  legend  recorded  of  them,  that  of  the 
tribe  being  led  to  new  settlements  by  a  deer,  is  one  which  is  well 
known  among  the  legends  of  Erin.  It  occurs,  for  example,  in  the 
case  of  Bealach  Damhain,  i.e.  "  The  Path  of  the  Deer  "  {Seinita 
Cervi)  in  Donegal,  which  O'Donovan  says  is  inserted  in  the  "  Life 
of  St.  Columba  "  by  Manus  O'Donnell.J 

With  this  double  coincidence  of  Bolg  and  Cotragi  before  us, 
would  there,  let  us  ask,  be  anything  necessarily  improbable  in 
drawing  the  conclusion  that  they  were  one  and  the  same  people  .'* 
The  ubiquity  of  the  Heruli  and  other  tribes  who  were  scouring  the 
face  of  Europe,  and  the  swiftness  with  which  it  was  their  boast 
that  their  journeys  were  made,  cause  us  to  look  on  time  and  space 
as  almost  secondary  considerations,  when  we  are  dealing  with 
them  and  their  kindred  tribes.  The  Huns  are  first  heard  of  in 
Europe  in  the  year  375,  but  the  restless  tribes  who  were,  as  it 
were,  waiting  for  a  leader  to  unite  them  and  direct  their  course, 
were  on  the  move  long  before.  The  great  movement  of  the 
Anglo-Saxons  into  South  Britain  (although  settlements  on  the 
coast  called  the  Saxon  Shore  had  probably  taken  place  much 
earlier),  was  preceded  by  that  of  the  Picts  into  North  Britain  and 
Ireland  by  about  a  century.  The  first  mention  of  these  peoples 
is  found  in  Ammianus  at  a  date  which  precedes  the  first  mention 
of  the  Huns  in  Europe  by  about  fifteen  years  only.  It  seems 
probable  that  it  was  from  the  Baltic  and   the    Elbe  they  came, 

t  See  note,  p.  1119,  supra.  X  I  cannot  identify  this  passage  in  Colgan's  Latin  version. 


Ethnology  and  Tradition.  1121 

and  their  coming,  although  history  has  not  lifted  her  veil  upon 
that  event,  must  have  been  one  of  as  great  importance,  ethno- 
logically  speaking,  to  North  Britain  and  Ireland  (which  latter 
island  had  been,  to  judge  by  what  the  Irish  regiilus  told  Agricola, 
namely,  that  a  single  legion  could  conquer  it,f  till  then,  but 
sparsely  populated),  as  was  the  Saxon  invasion  to  Britain.  It 
was  from  Scythia  that  they  came,  and  we  may  depend  upon  it 
that,  after  the  break-up  of  the  Hunnish  confederation,  and  the 
events  which  followed  the  battle  of  Chalons,  multitudes  of  the  allies 
in  retreat  were  only  too  glad  to  find  themselves  safely  at  sea,  on 
their  way  to  the  island  of  the  north,  where,  if  I  am  right  in  my 
view  of  the  Heruli,  some  of  them  would  not  have  found  themselves 
otherwise  than  at  home.  Among  these  there  may  well  have  been 
Cotragian  Bulgars,  who  in  Irish  tradition  would  appear  as  the 
Tuatha  Cothraighe,  tribes  of  the  Fir-Bolg. 

Another  point,  however,  in  regard  to  the  antiquity  of  these 
people  in  Britain  is  raised  when  we  consider  their  name  as 
comparable,  as  Whitley  Stokes  has  done  with  respect  to  Patrick's 
name  Cothraighe,  to  the  old  Celtic  Caturlgos,  of  which  he  hints  it 
may  be  "the  Irish  reflex."  J  This  associates  it  at  once  with  the  tribal 
name  Caturiges,  for  notices  of  whom  we  may  turn  to  Caesar  and 
Pliny,  Strabo  and  Ptolemy,  as  well  as  to  an  inscription  in  Orellius. 
The  Caturiges  were  an  important  sept  located  near  Embrun,  with 
ramifications  extending — to  judge  by  a  passage  in  Pliny — across 
the  Alps.  Their  chief  town  is  marked  in  the  "  Table  "  Catorimagus, 
and  there  are  at  that  place  two  inscriptions,  "  Cat  "  and  "  Cathirig," 
still  retaining  vestiges  of  their  name.  In  the  singular  number  we 
find  Caturix  applied  both  to  the  god  Mars,  "  Marti  Caturigi,"  and 
to  a  Roman  soldier,  an  inscription  to  whom  has  been  found  near 
Mostar  in  Herzegovina,  which  reads  domo  Cahtrix,\  that  is,  a 
Caturigian  by  birth,  Caturix  corresponding  exactly  to  Cathraighe, 
— the  terminal  rix  and  raighc,  respectively,  simply  meaning 
"  tribesman,"  and  not  "  king,"  ||  as  it  has  been  so  frequently,  but  so 
unnecessarily,  explained.  We  have  seen  that  it  is  not  impossible 
that  there  were   Cothraighe   in  Yorkshire  ;  we   know  that  there 


t  Tac.  Agric,  c.  24.  J  "Trip.  Life,"  Introd.  cxxxvii. 

§  Caturix  would  be  literally  the  Cattan,  man  of  the  Catti,  which  induces  a  surmise  as  to  an 
original  identity  between  Catti  and  Caturiges,  from  the  Celtic  cath  =  war,  or  battle. 

II  M.  H.  d'Arbois  de  Jubainville  has  written  a  whole  essay  in  support  of  this  view  (see  '*  Rev. 
Archeol.,"  1891).  How  is  it,  however,  that  women  share  it  with  men,  as  in  Nantiorix  ?  The  fact  is 
that  the  termination  answers  exactly  to  the  Irish  raig/ie,  explained  iStjs  by  O' Donovan,  and 
applicable  either  to  a  man  or  a  woman,  as  in  Ciarraighe,  a  Kerry-man,  or  a  Kerry-woman. 
"I5oiorix"  is  the  Boian,  "Dumnorix"  ///tf  Dumnan,  etc.,  etc. 


1 122  The  Dolmens  of  Ireland. 

were  Cothraicrhe  in  the  north  of  Ireland  ;  and  we  have  seen  that 
there  were  Caturiges  near  Briancon.  It  is,  therefore,  not  a  little 
curious  to  note  that  in  each  of  these  three  instances  a  people 
called  Brigantes  were  their  near  neighbours — for  example,  the 
Brigantes  on  the  east  coast  of  Britain,  the  Brigantes  on  the  west 
coast  of  Ireland,  and  the  Brigantes  who  we  may  suppose  gave 
name  to  Brigantium,  that  is,  Brian9on. 

A  bold  view  of  this  whole  question  can  alone  reconcile  these 
three  facts,  namely,  that  in  the  Alps,  and  in  Italy,  and  in  Britain,  we 
have  in  the  first  century  a  people  bearing  the  same  name  as  is 
borne  by  a  people  passing  westward  from  the  Palus  Mseotis  in  the 
fourth  century.  That  view  is  this  :  An  original  tribe  of  Caturiges, 
Celtic  in  speech,  occupied  a  position  on  the  Rhine,  or  further  west 
in  Gaul,  at  a  very  remote  period.  One  branch  of  it  passed  into 
Italy,  and  one  went  northwards  into  Britain  ;  a  third  portion,  in 
about  the  fourth  century  B.C.,  perhaps,  at  the  time  when  a  migra- 
tion of  Celtic-speaking  people  from  Gaul  was  tending  eastwards 
down  the  Danube,  took  the  same  course  in  that  direction  as 
their  kindred  tribes,  and  passing  along  the  district  north  of  the 
Euxine,  remained  there  until  tempted  westwards  again  by  the 
comparative  freedom  from  opposition  offered  by  the  departure 
of  the  Goths  and  Vandals  for  the  further  west,  and  by  the  hope 
of  spoil  in  the  Danubian  countries.  To  judge  by  their  name, 
a  parallel  case  may  have  been  that  of  the  Biturgures, 
the  form  of  whose  name  bears  the  same  relation  to  that  of  the 
Bituriges,  who,  as  we  know,  came  east  from  western  Gaul  to  Italy, 
as  does  that  of  the  Cuturgures  to  that  of  the  Caturiges,  or 
Cotrigures,  or  Cothraighe.  The  Danube,  that  river  of  the  Celts, 
which  rose  in  the  Celtic  Mountains,!  would  have  been  their  water- 
way, along  which,  indeed,  they  may  have  been  passing  to  and  fro 
long  before  the  date  I  have  mentioned.  The  highlands  once 
reached,  the  Elbe  or  the  Rhine  would  have  led  them  to  the  shores 
of  the  German  Ocean,  and  the  isles  of  their  kindred  in  the  North. 
For  six  centuries  and  more  this  oscillation  of  tribes  from  the 
German  Ocean  to  the  Palus  Mseotis  may  have  been  going  on, 
only  stopped  by  the  wedge  which  the  appearance  of  the  Goths 
on  the  Danube  temporarily  interposed,  so  that,  in  point  of  fact, 
the  Cotraighe,  who  ravaged  the  Roman  borders  at  the  time  of  the 

t  ^4  opiwv  rSiv  KtKTiKSif,  "  Proc.  Corp.  Byz.  Hist.,"  ii.  p.  4S1.     The  same  author  says  of  the 
Rhine  that  it  rises  in  the  Cellic  mountains. 


Ethnology  and  Tradition.  1123 

Hunnish  invasion,  may  have  been  the  descendants  in  blood, 
as  they  were  the  successors  in  the  terror  they  created  of  those 
Celts  with  regard  to  whom  Ephippus  (circa  340  B.C.)  warns 
the  ruler  of  Macedonia  that  his  best  policy  is  to  "  damp  them 
down,  not  set  them  ablaze."  f  Considering  the  old  tradition  that 
the  Cimmerii  on  the  Euxine  were  the  same  people  as  the  Cimbri 
who  invaded  Italy  with  the  Teutons,J  it  is  curious  to  find 
Procopius  calling  the  Cotragi  "  Cimmerians."  § 

The  camps  along  the  Danube  offer  comparisonswith  the  works  of 
the  fort-builders  in  Ireland,  which  are  due  to  no  mere  coincidences. 
They  have  arrested  the  attention  of  Virchow,  who  has  compared 
them  to  British  and  Scottish  examples,  being  unaware,  possibly, 
since  few  of  the  Irish  examples  have  been  planned,  of  the  still 
more  striking  resemblances  which  the  latter  bear  to  them.  These 
forts,  indeed,  may  be  regarded  as  landmarks  of  unwritten  history 
— evidences  of  the  most  striking  fact  which  meets  us  in  our  study 
of  the  antiquities  of  Europe— namely,  the  ubiquity  of  tribes  (I 
am  speaking  here  more  especially  of  those  who  spoke  the  Celtic 
language,  but  the  fact  is  equally  true  of  Teutonic  and  Sclavonic 
peoples  also)  who,  seemingly  from  the  best  period  of  the  Bronze 
Age  down  to  the  dispersal  of  the  miscellaneous  elements,  rudely 
amalgamated  in  the  Hunnish  confederacy — traversed  the  conti- 
nent from  the  Palus  Maeotis  to  Ireland,  along  lines  of  march 
which  were  little  varied, — ever  ready  to  retraverse  the  route  when- 
ever the  restless  energy  of  their  nature  chafed  at  the  narrow 
limits  of  their  sea-girt  home,  or  hope  of  plunder  on  the  Danube, 
over  the  Alps,  or  in  Spain,  pointed  out  new  fields  for  its  display. 

Archaeology  enables  us  to  take  up  the  story  at  the  more  remote 
end  of  the  chain,  and  the  sagas  of  the  North,  whether  they  have 
reached  us  in  the  Gaedhelic  of  Ireland,  in  the  Cymric  of  Wales,  in 
the  Anglo-Saxon  of  Beowulf,  in  the  German  of  the  Niebelungen- 
Lied,  in  the  Norse  of  Iceland,  or  in  the  Latin  of  Saxo,  Jordanes, 
or  Paul  son  of  Warnefrid,  when  read  by  the  sidelights  derivable 
from  the  later  Roman  writers,  and,  above  all,  from  the  Byzan- 
tine historians  from  Procopius  onwards,  afford  us  the  links  at 
the  nearer  end,  when  the  Huns  and  their  allies  in  retreat,  that 
is,  the  Bolgar,  among  whom  were  ranged  Rugii,  Heruli,  lotungi, 
Alani,    Bitugures,    Bardores,    Cotrigures    or    Cotragi,   and    many 

t  Geryones,  edit.  A.  Meineke,  Frag.  Com.  Grsec,  p.  658. 

%  PlutBrch,  Marius, — for  Celtx-  and  Celto-Scythas  ;  also  "  Strabo.  Geogr.,"  lib.  vii.  cap.  2. 

§  De  B.  Goth.,  lib.  iv.  cc.  4,  5. 


II24 


The  Dolmens  of  Ireland. 


more,  were  being  pressed  northwards  to  those  coast-lands, 
peninsulas,  and  islands — those  ivii  Oceani  recessus — whence  in 
some  cases,  as  in  those  of  the  Heruli  and  Cotragi,  they  may  have 
originally  come,  and  where  native  annalists  record  their  presence 
under  the  names  Eotenas,  or  lotuns,  Hunen,  Bolg,  and — in  the 
case  of  one  particular  tribe  of  whom  I  have  spoken — under 
that  of  the  Cothraighe. 

To  return  for  a  moment  to  the  earlier  ages,  and  to  the  forts  in 
the  Danubian  and  Hercynian  districts,  the  particular  tribal  migra- 
tions and  military  movements  indicated  by  the  presence  of  these 
works  took  place  in  a  broad  district,  which  lies,  like  an  heraldic  band, 
across  the  field  of  Central  Europe,  from  south-east  to  north-west. 
A  connection  between  north-western  Europe  and  the  yEgean  had 
already  been  established,  as  we  have  seen,  in  the  best  part  of 
the  early  Bronze  Age — perhaps  about  1250  b.c.     Proofs  of  this  fact 


Fig.   774. — Urn   from   Knocknacoura,   Co.    Carlow   (see 
Wilde's  "Catalogue,"  p.  179,  in  the  Museum  R.LA.). 


Fig.  775. — Urns  in  the  Museum  at  Buda 
Pesth  ;  from  Hungarian  cemeteries, 
for  comparison  with  that  in  the 
R.LA.,  Fig.  774. 


I  have  already  adduced,  and  I  here  add  one  more  example  from 
Hungary,  showing  that  in  form  and  ornament  the  fictilia  of  this 
epoch  was  reproduced  in  Ireland.  I  have  already  expressed  my 
belief  that  it  was  to  this  early  period  that  the  introduction  of  the 
Celtic  language  into  Gaul  and  the  British  Isles  is  to  be  attributed. 
It  is  certain  that  that  language  was  spoken  by  those  Gauls  who, 
in  the  fourth  and  third  centuries  B.C.,  were  descending  into  Italy, 
Macedonia,  Greece,  and  Asia  Minor ;  and  nine  hundred  or  a 
thousand  years  prior  to  that  date  is  not  too  long  a  period  to  allow 
for  the  introduction  and  development  of  a  language  at  once  so 


Ethnology  and  Tradition. 


1125 


homogeneous  in  its  archaic  forms,  and  so  widely  distributed 
through  Gaul,  Spain,  and  Britain.  This  view  reconciles  the 
archaeological  conclusions  of  IMontelius  with  the  philological 
conclusions  of  Schrader,  and  while  it  does  not  point  to  a  Celtic- 
speaking  people  as  the  actual  bringers  of  the  bronze  to  the  West, 
whose  descendants  are  more  probably  the  brachycephalic  popula- 
tion of  central  France,  the  Ligurians  and  the  Auvergnats,  yet  may 
leave  to  Celtic-speaking  tribes  the  honour  of  having  been  the  im- 
porters of  those  decorative  designs  and  rude  architectural  efforts 
which  distinguish  the  second  and  best  period  of  the  Bronze  Age. 
In  the  time  of  Alexander 
the  Great,  and,  probably, 
also  in  that  of  Herodotus, 
the  country  represented  by 
the  modern  kingdom  of  Hun- 
gary was  a  great  stronghold 


'^■*//////(lliiiiiiiiiiilili|ilW»wtf' 


-Plan  of  Dundermot  Fort, 
to  one  inch. 


Scale  100  feet 


of  Celtic-speaking  peoples, 
which  causes  us  to  regard 
with  a  special  interest  the 
likeness  between  the  forts  of 
that  district  and  those  of 
North  Ireland.  The  same  fig.  776. 
resemblance  meets  us  in  the 
case  of  examples  in  the  vicinity  of  Gorlitz,  in  Bohemia,  and  in 
Bosnia.  To  illustrate  this,  I  may  refer  to  the  typical  plan  of  Dun- 
dermot, in  Mason's  account  of  Dunaghy  in  Antrim  f  (Fig.  776), 
and  compare  it  with  the  Schlossberg,  near  Benau-Friedersdorf,  in 
the  district  of  Sorau,  where  such  earthworks  are  known  as  HUnen- 
schlossen  (Fig.  777).  In  the  Oberlausitz  district  (Fig.  778)  is  a 
vitrified  fort,  of  which  Virchow  has  given  a  description.  Passing 
south  into  Bohemia  we  have,  near  Bilin,  a  circular  stone  fort, 
called  the  Radelstein  (Fig.  779),  singularly  like  those  in  Aran 
and  Clare,  and  it  is  to  be  observed  that  the  curious  archi- 
tectural detail  of  constructing  the  wall  in  sections,  each  terminating 
vertically  at  the  point  where  it  abuts  on  the  section  next  it,  is  a 
feature  in  the  fort-builders'  work  at  Tiryns,J  just  as  it  is  at 
Dun-Conchobhair§  in  Aran,  at  Cahercommane  in  Northern 
Clare,  and  elsewhere  in  the  West  of  Ireland. 11 


t  Stat.  Survey,  vol.  i.  p.  251.  %  Schliemann's  "  MycenK,"  pi.  i. 

§  Notes  on  Irish  Architecture,  Lord  Dunraven,  vol.  i.  pi.  4. 
11   "  Proc.  Roy.  Soc.  Antt.  Ir.,"  vol.  vi.,  5th  sec,  July,  1896,  p.  155. 


1 126 


The  Dolmens  of  Ireland. 


It  was,  perhaps,  to  earth-forts  of  the  class  of  Dundermot  that 


Fig.  777. — The  Schlossberg,  near  Benau-Friedersdorf,  Kr.  Sorau.     Frojii  "  N'ctics  Lausitzisches 
Mag."  vol.  Ivii.  p.  228,  et  seqq. 

Tacitus  alluded  when  he  described  some  of  the  German  camps  as 


Fig.  77S. — Vitrified  fort  in  the  Oberlausitz.     F)-ot::  Virch(nv. 

"castra  ac  spatia."f     This  exactly  represents  such  fortifications 


Fig.  779.— The  Radelstein,  near  Bilin,  Bohemia.     From  Much.  "  rmkis/.  Atlas,"  pi.  86. 

as  that  at  Sandal-Mount,  near  Coleraine,  at  one  end  of  which  is 

t  Germ.,  c.  37.     It  was  to  the  ancient  Cimbri  that  those  works  were  assigned. 


Ethnology  and  Tradition. 


1127 


a  mound  forming,  as  it  were,  the  little  citadel  to  the  ramparted 
enclosure  which  adjoins  it.  The  type  was  well  known  in  later 
times,  both  in  eastern  Germany  and  in  Britain — the  enclosure 
being  termed  in  the  former  country  the  hagel,  or  hook.  Much, 
in  his  "  Prehistoric  Atlas  of  East  Austria  and  Hungary,"  gives 
plans  of   two  structures  of  this  type,  the   Hausberg  at  Stonegg 


Fig.  780. — Hausberg  of  Stonegg.     Fror/i 
Micch,  ^'PrcEhtst.  Atlas,"  pi.  84. 


,tllllilillUl,\\;\\^ 


Fig.  781.— Hausberg  of  St.  Ullrich.    Much, 
'•  Pnehist.  At  las, ^^  pi.  84. 


(Fig.  780),  and  another  at  St.  Ulrich  (Fig.  781),  which  reproduce 
those  at  Dundermot  (Fig.  776),  Sandal- Mount,  and  other  Irish 
examples  exactly.  The  latter  appear  to  me  to  be  unquestionably 
military  works,  although  Virchow  considers  the  Hungarian  ex- 
amples too  small  in  area  to  have  been  so,  and  looks  upon  them 
as  bases  of  Celtic  temples. 

Radimsky,  in  his  "  Prahistorischen  Fundstatten,"  gives,  also, 
some  plans  and  elevations  of  forts  in  Bosnia  and  Herzegovina,  one 
of  which  in  especial — that  called  the  Hausberg,  near  Geiselberg 
(Fig.  782) — is  strikingly  similar  to  the  typical  Irish  example  given 
by  Molyneux  and  Harris. f  Fortifications  of  this  class  consist 
of  a  central  conical  hill,   generally  a  natural  one  cut  down,  and 


t  See  Essay  on  Danish  Forts  in  Molyneux's  "Boate;"  see   also   Harris's  "Ware,"  vol.  li. 
pi.  I,  No.  7,  and  p.  139. 


II28 


The  Dolmens  of  Ireland. 


surrounded  by  two  or  more  steep  ramparts,  with  deep  moats 
between.  It  is  to  be  noticed  that  the  Celtic  word  dim  appears  in 
Hungary  in  the  form  of  duna,  as  the  name  by  which  these  forts 
are    known.y     The  various   types,  as    in    Ireland,  were  of  long- 


FiG.  782. — Hausberg  of  Geiselberg.     Radimsky,  "  Prcchist.  Fundstatfen"  pi.  135. 

standing.  In  some  cases  they  date  back  to  the  Bronze  Age  in 
both  countries,  as  is  inferred  from  bronze  celts  having  been  found 
in  them.     More  frequently,  however,  it  is  to  the  Iron  Age  that 


Fig.  783. — Bronze  mace  in  Mus.  R.LA. 


Fic.  784. — Bronze  mace  in  Mus.  R.LA. 


they  must  be  attributed.  To  a  transition  period  between  the 
Bronze  and  Iron  Ages  belong  the  earliest  examples  we  possess 
of  a  peculiar  form  of  bronze  weapon,  found  in  like  shape  in  the 

t  In  Ireland  the  term  dun  was  applied  to  earthen  concentric  circumvallations,  also  called 
ralhs,  as  well  as  to  stone  forts  such  as  Dun-Aengusa  in  Aran.  The  latter  were,  however,  more 
properly  termed  cathairs,  and  to  these  latter  the  word  ralh  is  never  applied.  With  rath  compare 
the  Sclavonic  hrad  or  arad,  e.g.  Stary  Arad,  i.e.  Old  Arad,  a  fortress  on  the  Maros  in  Austro- 
Hungary. 


Ethnology  and  Tradition.  1129 

Caucasus  and  in  Ireland,  in  the  Danubian  districts,  at  Baiern,  in 
Italy,  in  Mecklenburg,  Hanover,  etc.f 

I  adduce  here  two  Irish  examples.  The  type,  as  there  is 
reason  to  believe,  was  still  in  use  in  the  eleventh  century.  It 
must  be  understood  that  in  this  passing  notice  of  Irish  forts,  and 
the  points  for  comparison  with  those  on  the  Continent  which 
they  present,  I  am  merely  touching  the  fringe  of  a  wide  and 
deeply  interesting  subject, — one,  I  may  add,  which  is  being  at 
the  present  moment  worked  out  in  detail,  as  far  as  those  of  the 
County  of  Clare  are  concerned,  by  an  able  antiquary  of  the  younger 
Irish  school,  my  friend  Mr.  T.  J.  Westropp.  In  a  communication 
to  the  Royal  Society  of  Antiquaries  of  Ireland,  printed  in  their 
Journal  for  July,  1896,!  a  series  of  excellent  plans  of  stone  forts 
in  Clare  and  the  neighbouring  counties  will  be  found,  and,  side 
by  side  with  them  for  comparison,  examples  from  Scotland, 
Wales,  Cornwall,  France,  Hungary,  Bosnia,  and  Bohemia.  The 
name  of  one  in  Bohemia,  Katovic,  is  noteworthy  in  connection 
with  that  of  the  Roman  station  at  Catwick-o'^-Z^^,^  at  the 
mouth  of  the  Rhine,  and  with  other  etymologies  from  Cat,  as  for 
instance  the  Cat- Rail  in  Roxboroughshire.  Mr.  Westropp  is  of 
opinion  that  both  in  Ireland  and  elsewhere  such  fortifications 
belong  "to  every  period  from  the  Flint  Age  to  the  Roman 
Conquest,  while  in  Scotland  they  undoubtedly  date  to  the 
legendary  period  of  the  sons  of  Huamor."  He  mentions  that 
"flint  weapons  have  been  found  in  Dun  Aengus,"  where  a  bronze 
hook  and  a  bronze  celt  also,  I  believe,  have  been  discovered. 
With  regard  to  the  name  Dun  Aengus  (rect.  Dun  Aengusa),  it  is 
to  be  observed  that  a  place  of  apparently  similar  name,  Enchusa,j| 
occupies  a  site  on  the  coast  of  Holland,  the  description  of  which 
accords  with  that  of  the  Irish  fort,  since  it  is  "  natura  loci  munitum, 
maris  furore  objectum,  quem  in  extremo  terrae  margine  situm 
despicit."  A  proper  name,  Ancheusanus,^  found  in  an  inscription 
at  Mayence,  is  attributed  by  Ortelius  to  a  native  of  this  place. 

Not  even  when  we  reach  the  early  centuries  of  the  Christian 
era  was  the  connection  of  Ireland  with  the  Danubian  districts 
broken.     Indeed,  it  seems  to  have  been  closer  than  ever,  evidence 

t  For  Irish  examples,  see  figs.  783,  784,  infra.  For  Caucasian,  see  "  Chautre,"  vol.  iii.  ; 
"Epoch  Scytho- Byzantine,"  pi.  iii.  fig.  14.  For  other  districts,  see  Lindenschmidt,  "Mus. 
Maintz,"  vi.,  pi.  ii.  ;  Lisch  and  Schroter,  "  Fred.  Francisceum,"  tab.  xxv.,  etc. 

%  p.  142,  et  seqq.  ;  to  be  continued. 

§  Cattovicum  maritimum  (Ph.  Cuyverius  de  Rheni  alveis),  p.  no. 

II  "  Hadriani  Junii,"  Batavia,  p.  277. 

^  Ortelius,  "  Thes.  Geogr.,"  in  voc.  ;  Lazius,  R.P.R.,  iv.  cap.  5. 

VOL.  HI.  2    E 


II30 


The  Dolmens  of  Ireland. 


of  which  I  shall  presently  adduce  from  the  "  Life  of  St.  Severinus." 
Meanwhile,  we  may  here  take  from  Much's  work  on  the  antiquities 
of   Hungary   the    plan  of  what   in    Ireland   would    be  termed  a 


feivtft  Outer 


Fig.  785.— Plan  of  St.  Leonard's,  Hungary. 
From  Much. 


Fig.  7S6. —  Plan  of  Irishmurray  on  llie  coast  of 
Sligo.     From  Wood-Marrfin . 


cathair  or  cashel,  that  is,  a  stone-wall  enclosure  surrounding  an 
ancient  church.  The  whole  is  well  worthy  of  comparison  with  the 
arrancrement  observable  in  the  cathair  2X  Inishmurray,  an  island  off 
the  coast  of  Sligo.  In  each  case  the  great  stone  enclosure  is  an 
imperfect  circle,  divided  into  two  parts  by  an  irregular  stone  wall 

or  rampart,  the  presence  of  which 
is  a  distinoruishinor  feature  not 
easily  accounted  for.  On  the  one 
side  of  this  are  the  religious 
buildings,  and  on  the  other  an 
almost  vacant  plot. 

Since  I  am  here  speaking  of 
fortified  sites,  I  may  as  well 
glance  at  some  of  those  types 
which  are  found  on  the  Southern 
Baltic  coast,  the  German  Ocean, 
and  in  Scandinavia.  Kruse,  in 
his  "  Kecrolivonica,"  gives  an 
example  of  a  fortified  enclosure 
called  the  Bauerberge,  on  the  island  of  Mohne  near  Oesel,  which 
resembles  as  closely  as  possible,  as  Mr.  T.  J.  Westropp,  M.R.I. A., 


Fig.  787. — Enclosure  called  Bauerberge 
on  the  island  of  Mohne. 


Ethnology  and  Tradition, 


1131 


has  pointed  out  to  me,  one  planned  by  him  at  Ballykinvaga  in 
Clare.  It  is  in  this  district,  in  Livonia  that  is,  that  the  name 
Dangan  or  Daingen  occurs,  a  term  identical  with  that  so  fre- 
quently applied  to  a  fortress  in  Ireland.  Fortified  sites  of  this 
type  may  be  attributed  to  an  Esthonian  or  Finnic  element  in 
Irish  ethnology,  running  parallel  to  coincidences  in  folk-lore  and 
physiology,  to  which  allusion  has  been  made,  and  for  the  discovery 
of  which  the  indefatio^able  author,  and  the  far-seeine  editor  of  the 
"  Eastern  Origin  of  the  Celtic  nations," — Drs.  Pritchard  and 
Latham, — long  since  prepared  us  in  the  portion  of  their  work 
which  deals  with  the  Eastern  Baltic,  and  the  "  Sarmatian  Hypo- 
thesis." Passino;  westward  alono^  the  Prussian  and  Pomeranian 
coast,  Lissauer  has  given  us  plans  and  sections  of  so-called  biirg- 
walls,  one  on  the  Silinsee,  another  on  the  Geserichsee,  which, 
though  built  of  stones  and  earth,  recall,  both  in  shape  and  in  their 
position  on  the  shore,  the  dwis  and  cliff-castles  of  the  west  coast 
of  Ireland   (Fig.    'j'^^').       The  building  of  such  forts,   it   may  be 


Fig.  78S. — Plans  and  sections  of  "  burgwalls  ''  on  the  Silinsee,  and  the  Geserichsee  in  West 

Prussia.     From  Lissauer. 

remembered,  is  attributed  by  Irish  tradition  to  the  Fomorians 
{}  to  the  Pomojani).  Lake-dwellings  built  on  piles  in  the  lagoons 
are  also  a  feature  in  West-Prussian  archaeology. 

Passing  westward  to  the  German  Ocean,  we  find  that  the  type 
of  camp  is  that  of  the  ordinary  Irish  rath  (Sclavonic  arad)  or  dun.f 


t  See  note,  supra,  p.  iioi. 


11^2 


The  Dolmens  of  Ireland. 


with  its  double,  sometimes  triple,  circumvallation,  and,  where  water 
was  obtainable,  its  moats.  A  good  example  of  this  type  in  the 
Netherlands  is  the  Hune-Schans  on  the  Udeler-Meer,  in  the 
Province  of  Gelderland   and  district  of  Arnhem,  a  plan  of  which, 


Fig.  789. — Plan  of  the  Hune-Schans  on  the  Udeler-Meer. 


given  by  Janssen  in  Nijhoff's  "  Bijdragen,"  I  reproduce.  To  the 
same  class  belong  the  so-called  Pipinsburg,  and  the  Heidenstatt 
near  Sievern,  in  the  district  of  Bederkesa  on  the  Weser,  near 
which  are  the  dolmens  called  respectively  the  Billzenbette  and 
the  Sieven  Steinhausen,  which  have  been  previously  described. 

Sweden  possesses  forts  called  ringmurs,  which  resemble  the 
cliff-cathairs  of  North  Wales,  Cornwall,  and  Ireland,  as  may  be 
seen  by  a  plan  of  one  in  Sodermanland  given  by  Hildebrand, 
who  compares  them  with  those  in  Bohemia,  Scotland,  and 
Brittany.  The  typical  caskels  of  Ireland  are  represented  also  in 
Scandinavia,  and  there,  too,  they  have  come  to  be  used  as 
cemeteries.  Sjoborg,  in  his  "  Samlingar  for  Nordens  Fornalskare," 
gives  a  drawing  of  one  in  Oland,  showing  the  graves  within.  It 
is  called  Ismanstorpsborgen. 

In  the  course  of  this  digression  it  has  been  shown  that  the 
camps  and  forts  in  Ireland  are  divisible  into  several  classes  or 
types,  which   vary  according   to  the    methods  employed  by   the 


Ethnology  and  Tradition. 


1133 


different  peoples  by  whom  they  were  buih.  These  types  are 
referable  severally  to  those  ethnic  elements  from  which,  according 
to    Pritchard,  the  population  of  North   Britain  and  Ireland  was 


Fig.  790. — "  Ringmur,"  Sodermanland.     From  Hildcbrand,  '■'■  Die  Forhistonka 
Folkeii  i  Furopa"  p.  131. 

derived.  Thus  we  have  a  Finnish  or  Esthonian  type,  a  Sclavonic 
type,  a  German  type,  a  Scandinavian  type ;  and,  besides  these,. 
we  have  the  type  with  which  I  commenced  these  remarks,  which. 


Fig.  791. — Ismanstorpsborgen  in  Oland.     Sjoborg,  '■'  Saml.  for  Nordens  Forndlskare,'" 

vol.  i.,  pi.  33. 

considering  that  it  is  not  that  of  any  of  those  just  mentioned, 
we  come  by  an  exhaustive  process  to  regard  as  a  Celtic  type — 
constructed,   that  is  to  say,  by  a  people  who,  when  history  and 


1 134  The  Dolmens  of  Ireland. 

philology  throw  light  upon  them,  were  speaking  a  Celtic 
language,  and  passing  to  and  fro  through  the  Danubian  districts, 
from  a  period  which  is  prehistoric  down  to  one  well  within  the 
early  centuries  of  the  Christian  era. 

There  seems  to  be  good  reason  for  thinking  that  tribes  of  these 
Celtic-speaking  people,  whose  precise  ethnic  position  philology 
avails  not  to  fix,  had  settlements  on  the  north-eastern  shores  of 
the  Black  Sea,  and  on  the  Palus  Mceotis.  Apart  from  the  surmises 
handed  down  by  Posidonius  and  Plutarch  which  connected  the 
Cimmerii,  who  dwelt  in  these  countries  as  early  as  the  time  of 
Herodotus  with  the  Cimbri  of  the  North,  Plutarch  uses  the  term 
"  Celto-^Scythee "  for  certain  tribes  on  the  Pontus.  That  the 
Cimmerii — by  which  name,  as  we  have  seen,  Procopius  desig- 
nates the  youths  of  the  Cotragi  who  were  the  first  to  cross 
the  Palus  Afeotis — spoke  at  any  time  a  Celtic  language  is  not 
capable  of  proof.  That  the  Cimbri  with  whom  Posidonius 
identifies  them  once  did  so  is  a  matter  greatly  disputed  ;  although, 
if  they  did  not  themselves  do  so,  that  they  were  in  close  con- 
nection with  those  who  did,  is,  I  think,  to  be  unmistakably  inferred 
from  the  names  of  their  chieftains  Lugius,  Boiorix,  Claodicus,  and 
Cesorix.f  That  Celtic,  too,  entered  into  the  languages  of  those 
tribes  generally  called  Sclavonic,  who,  upon  the  departure  of  the 
Goths,  coming  westward  from  Scythia,  entered  into  their  seats, 
may  not,  I  think,  be  a  subject  unworthy  of  consideration.  The 
name  Curidach  among  the  Acatziri,  may,  as  I  have  hinted,  be 
a  case  in  point,  while  many  old  Polish  names  have  a  peculiarly 
Celtic  appearance,  and  bear  a  resemblance  rather  to  Celtic  in  its 
mixed  Gaedhelic  form  than  to  the  purer  Celtic  of  ancient  Gaul. 
Thus  we  have  Cathomar,  a  "  regulus  Polonise  ;"  Colmannus,  "rex 
Hungarian  ;  Cadolach,  Cadolochus  ;  "  "  dux  Dalmatise  in  the  ninth 
century  (=  Cathlaoch)."  Bulco  (compare  Bolg,  Bulg,  Bolgan, 
Bolcan)  was  also  a  Polish  name.  With  Lork,J  a  Bohemian  name, 
compare  that  of  Laoghaire  Lork,  in  Irish  tradition. 

Up  to  how  late  a  date  Celtic  was  spoken  on  the  Rhine  or  Elbe 
it  is  hard  indeed  to  say.  The  passage  in  Jerome  in  which  he 
states  that  the  Galatae  in  Asia  Minor  spoke  their  own  language, 
and  that  that  language  was  almost  the  same  as  that  spoken  at 
Treves,  has  been  adduced   in  evidence  that  Celtic  was  spoken  at 

t  See  Stein,  "De  Cimbr.  Oiig.,"  p,  29;  also  Orosius,  5,  16,  and  Zeuss,   "Die  Deutschen," 
p.  143.  "• 

J  See  DoLrowski,  Rer.  Bohem.  Scriptores. 


Ethnology  and  Tradition.  1135 

the  latter  place  at  the  time  he  wrote.  Again,  when  the  Irish 
chieftains  were  plundering  as  far  south  as  the  Alps  in  the  fifth 
century,  they  must  have  spoken  their  own  form  of  Celtic,  and  it 
does  not  seem  likely  that,  when  they  came  among  the  remnants  of 
the  old  Celtic-speaking  tribes  in  those  districts,  the  tongue  which 
had  once  been  common  to  both  had  been  quite  forgotten.  Accord- 
ing to  the  Saxon  tradition,  the  Picts  learned  "  Irlondes  speache  " 
from  the  Irish  women  they  married. f  Earlier  colonists,  however, 
even  from  the  east  of  the  Weser,  probably  spoke  the  same 
language  as  the  islanders.  My  contention  that  so  much  of  Irish 
tradition  came  from  the  Baltic  countries  may,  as  I  am  aware,  be 
held  by  some  to  be  vitiated  by  the  fact  that  the  language  in  which 
we  have  received  those  traditions  is  a  recognized  division  of  the 
Celtic  speech.  Without  contending  that  Celtic  was  ever  spoken 
in  these  countries — for  even  if  it  was,  these  traditions  do  not 
carry  us  back  to  a  date  so  early  as  that  at  which  such  might 
have  been  the  case — I  will  give  three  reasons  in  support  of  my 
view  that  some  at  least  of  these  traditions  reach  us  in  trans- 
lated form.  The  first  is  the  power  of  absorption  which  Ireland 
and  her  language  has  ever  possessed  over  strangers  to  her  shores. 
The  English  became  "  Hibernis  Hiberniores,"  to  such  an  extent 
that  they  learned  to  speak  the  Irish  language  to  the  exclusion 
of  their  own,  so  that  their  rulers  in  England  actually  imposed 
punishments  on  the  English  of  the  Pale  for  so  doing.  The 
English  Ulysses  had  learned  to  sing  the  siren's  song,  and  had 
forgotten  that  of  his  native  land.  English  lords  of  the  soil 
became,  too,  the  greatest  lovers  and  guardians  of  those  ancient 
books  in  which  the  archives  of  the  Irish  language  were  stored. 
The  second  reason  is  that  the  settlements  made  in  Ireland  by 
peoples  from  the  Baltic  and  German  coasts  differed  from  those 
made  by  the  Saxons  in  Britain  in  the  fact  that  in  the  former  case 
the  wives  and  families  of  the  colonists  did  not  accompany  the 
men.  The  result  would  have  been  that  the  mothers  of  the  suc- 
ceeding generations  would  have  been  natives  of  the  island,  and 
the  children  would  have  learned  the  mothers'  tongue.  Evidence 
of   this  process    actually   taking  place,   and  the   efforts  made   to 

t  Layamon's  "Brut.,"  edit.  Madden,  vol.  i.  p.  429.  See  also  Skene's  excerpt  from  the 
■*' Scalacronica,"  where  the  Irish  women  make  a  condition  that  the  children  shall  speak  Irish. 
How  yreatly  new  settlers  in  those  barbarous  times  felt  the  inconvenience  of  their  children  learning 
the  tongue  of  the  captive  or  enslaved  mothers  is  shown  by  a  story  in  "'  Nennius,"  where  Britons 
settling  in  Armorica,  cut  out  the  tongues  of  the  women  they  married  for  fear  the  children  should 
learn  their  language  instead  of  the  paternal  speech. 


1 136  The  Dolmens  of  Ireland. 


prevent  it,  are  not  wanting  in  early  chronicles  and  romances.f 
The  third  reason  is  to  be  found  in  a  study  of  certain  words,  and 
of  proper  names  especially,  which  do  not  appear  to  be  Celtic, 
but  some  of  which  are  certainly  of  Germanic  J  and  others  perhaps 
of  Sclavonic  origin. §  In  some  cases,  too,  I  suspect  that  a  process 
of  translation  was  employed,  as  in  the  case  of  Maccon  =  Hundeson  ; 
and  INIac  Cumhail  ""  Hummeling.|| 

I  now  return  to  the  Fir-Bolg,  and  to  the  grounds  for  com- 
parison to  which  I  have  more  than  once  alluded  between  that 
people  and  the  Heruli. 

The  story  of  them  after  their  return  to  Erin  in  the  ships  they 
stole  from  the  Greeks  is  soon  told.  After  a  period  covered  by 
seven  reigns  of  their  kings,  Eochaid  Mac  Ere,  son  of  Riondal,^ 
son  of  Geannan,  succeeded  to  the  throne.  He  married  Tailtiu, 
daughter  of  Magmar,  King  of  Spain,  and  finally  sustained  a  signal 
defeat  at  Maeh-Tuiredth — beino-  afterwards  slain  while  retreatino^ 
from  the  field  by  the  three  sons  of  Nemed,  son  of  Badhraoi,  whose 
names  were  Cesarb,  Luacro,  and  Luaim.  The  opponents  of  the 
Bolg  were  the  Tuatha  De  Danann,  under  their  king  Nuada- 
Arteatlam,  that  is,  "  Nuada  with  the  Silver  Hand."  Those  of 
the  Fir-Bolg  who  escaped  the  defeat  retired  to  the  islands  of 
the  north  and  west  for  safety,  and  there  they  remained  until  the 
times  of  the  Provincials  {CdigeadJioch),  when  every  one  of  the 
Provinces  of  Erin  was  governed  by  its  own  king.  About  that 
time  the  Cruithne  expelled  them  out  of  these  places,  and  they 
were  obliged  to  apply  to  Carbry  Niaser  (or  Niafer),  King  of 
Laigen  (Lagenia,  Leinster),  who  received  them  and  gave  them 
lands  to  cultivate  as  tenants  under  him.  This  Cairbry  is  described 
as  King  of  Temair,  to  whom  the  Fir-Bolg  came  across  the  sea  ta 
the  plain  of  Meath.  He  is  represented  as  granting  their  request 
to  be  permitted  to  settle,  on  the  condition  that  they  should  serve 
Temair  with  the  same  regularity  as  the  natives — a  passage  which 
clearly  implies  that  Temair  was  the  centre  of  a  cultus,  that  is, 
that  it  was  a  temple.     At  this  time,  according  to  Mac  Firbis,  they^ 

t  See  footnote,  p.  1135. 

X  e.g.  Amalgaidh  ;  Laoghaire  —  Lothair  ;  Rcdg,  Medb's  "  Satirist,"  etc.,  etc. 

§  e.g.  names  beginning  with  mesJi,  or  vies,  as  Mesgegra,  etc.  ;  comp.  Sclav.  Meslmoj,  etc. 

II  In  the  middle  of  the  fifth  century  (Jordancs,  cap.  44)  we  find  a  Weriner  in  Spain  called 
Achiulf.  In  Irish  tradition  the  name  Eochaid  Breac  occurs.  If /^r^ar  here  is  a  "  wulf,"  which  is 
one  of  its  meanings,  the  one  name  is  apparently  a  translation  of  the  other. 

1[  This  is  a  Teutonic  name. 


Ethnology  and  Tradition.  1137 

the  Fir-Bolg,  were  known  by  the  name  of  the  Clann  Umoir,  or 
"  Sept  of  the  Sons  of  the  Sea."  Aongus  son  of  Nuadmor  {^Nuad- 
Mor,  a  Sea-God)  was  their  chief.  When  they  came  to  Carbry, 
the  land  they  asked  of  him  was  the  best  land  in  Meath,  namely, 
Rath  Cealtchair,  Rath  Comair,  Cnodhba,  Brughmna,  Elcmair, 
Tailte,  Cearmna  or  Cearna,  Tlachtga,  etc. 

The  Fir-Bolg  gave  Carbry  four  champions  as  guarantees  for 
the  observance  of  the  injunction  that  they  should  serve  Temair, 
namely,  Keat  son  of  Magach,  Ross  son  of  Dagius,  Conallf  the 
Victorious,  and  Cuchullain.  By  this  is  meant,  I  suppose,  that  they 
swore  by  the  gods  who  were  worshipped  at  Temair,  of  whom  we 
have  proof  that  Cuchullain,  who  is  actually  called  a  god, J  was  one. 
Subsequently,  however,  Carbry  exacted  from  them  such  heavy 
rents,  and  was  so  oppressive  in  the  revenues  he  demanded,  that 
they  were  obliged  to  give  up  their  lands  and  move  westwards 
to  Connaught.  Here  they  desired  the  protection  of  Medb,  queen 
of  that  province,  who  induced  her  husband  Oilioll  (Ailill)  to  give 
them  lands  for  their  support.  Those  lands,  which  are  enumerated, 
for  the  most  part  bordered  on  the  Ocean.  Here  they  dwelt  in 
fortresses  and  islands  of  the  sea  until  Cuchullain  extirpated  them 
on  account  of  their  having  proved  faithless  to  their  pledges  to 
Carbry,  so  that  satisfaction  was  demanded,  and  four  Fir-Bolg 
champions — Cing,  Cime  Cetherceann  (i.e.  "  Cime  with  the  Four 
Heads  "),  lorgus,  and  Conall  son  of  Aengus,  were  set  up  to  fight 
the  four  champions  of  Carbry,  and  by  them  were  slain. 

Before  I  proceed  to  compare  an  episode  in  the  history  of  the 
Fir-Bole,  called  the  Aitheach-Tuatha  Rebellion,  with  the  account 
of  the  Rebellion  of  the  Heruli,  as  recounted  by  Procopius,  it  may 
be  well  to  observe  that  the  first  and  only  author  whom,  so  far  as  I 
am  aware,  the  possible  connection  between  Irish  and  HeruHan 
history  appears  to  have  struck,  was  the  Austrian  historian,  Wolff- 
eanof  Lazius — whom  I  have  mentioned  above — a  physician  at 
Vienna,  who,  in  1557,  published  at  Basle  his  work,  "  De  Migra- 
tionibus  Gentium,"  §  his  views  on  this  point  having  been  previously 
expressed  in  a  little  work  entitled,  "  Des  Khunigreichs  Hungern."|l 
So  satisfied  was  he  with  the  conclusion  at  which  he  arrived  that 


t  This  name  Conall  agrees  with  the  Bavarian  Kunl,  which  is  Conrad.  See  Miss  Yonge, 
"Christ.  Names,"  vol.  ii.  p.  41S. 

X  "Sanas  Chormaic,"  edit.  O'Donovan,  p.  3,  "  Ciichulainn  post  mortem  dixisse  perhibetur 
dometnaid  art  nasal,  a  noble  art,  i.e.  a  noble  god,  was  put  to  death." 

§  p.  785,  et  seqq. 

II  Wienn,  1556,  p.  53. 


II38 


The  Dolmens  of  Ireland. 


he  headed  his  chapter  on  the  Heruli  with  an  engraving  of  a 
contemporary  Irish  soldier,  clean-shaved,  barefooted,  and  carry- 
ing a  sword  and  bow,  in  contrast  with  another  long-bearded 
Herulian  of  the  continent  who  is   provided  with   sandals.     The 

contention  of  this  writer  is  that 
Ireland  is  the  Thule  in  which, 
according  to  Procopius,  the  old 
royal  stock  of  the  Heruli  resided, 
and  he  supports  his  view  by  a 
comparison  of  Irish  with  Herulian 
customs. 

This  view  was  noticed  by 
Lynch  in  his  "  Cambrensis  Ever- 
sus,"  published  under  the  pseudo- 
nym of  "Gratianus  Lucius,"  in 
i662,f  who  speaks  of  Dathes  and 
Aordus,  kings  of  the  Heruli,  as 
"genere  Hiberni."  Apart  from 
a  point  I  have  previously  noticed, 
namely,  the  existence  of  an  epony- 
mous Ir  or  Er  in  Irish  tradition 
from  whom  were  descended  a  line 
of  kings  at  Emain,  we  have 
other  proper  names,  such  as  that 
of  I  rial,  which  seem  closely  allied 
to  the  name  Heruli,      One  king, 

Fig.   792. — Lazius's  notion  of  an  Irish  Heru-  ,  .  ,  .'. 

lian;   I'Herulus   alter,   nostro  seculo   supra    aS       above       mentioned,       actually 

bears  the  name  itself.  In  the 
"  Annals  of  the  Four  Masters "  he  is  called  Irereo ;  by  Lynch 
he  is  termed  lered,  with  an  alias,  however,  "  qui  et  IcriiglcMS 
vocabatur."  This  lerugleus  is  represented  as  one  of  the  Here- 
monian  line  of  kings,  who,  in  order  to  obtain  the  throne,  had 
slain  Aengus  Ollamh,  one  of  the  Heberian  line,  and  who  was 
in  turn  slain  by  Fercorb.  Keating  gives  this  lerugleus  (that  is, 
Heruleus)  another  and  an  interesting  alias,  namely,  larann.  In 
the  letter  purporting  to  be  from  Saint  Patrick,  "  ad  Corotici 
subditos,"  \  the  words  "  filii  Scottorum  ac  filise  Regulorum  "  occur. 
Between  Scotti  and  Reguli,  however,  there  does  not  appear  to 
lie  the  requisite  and  implied  antithesis,  such  as  there  is  between 


t  p.  299. 


%  Edit.  Haddan  and  Stubbs,  "  Councils,"  vol.  ii.  p.  317. 


Ethnology  and  Tradition.  it 39 

""  Scotti  atque  Picii"  in  a  preceding  passage.  It  seems  not 
improbable  that  Regidontni  has  crept  into  the  text  in  place  of 
Hcridonivi. 

We  will  now  see  whether,  by  a  comparison  of  the  Fir-Bolg 
with  the  Heruli,  we  may  not  do  something  to  add  weight  to  the 
views  of  Lazius. 

Prominent  in  the  history  of  the  Fir-Bolg  is  a  rebellion  raised 
by  certain  tribes  called  Aitheach  Tuatha.f  that  is,  the  rent-paying 
or  subject  tribes.  Curiously,  Tigernach,  in  his  Annals,  ignores 
this  episode  altogether,  as  if,  in  his  opinion,  it  formed  no  part  of  the 
history  of  what  occurred  in  Ireland  itself.  The  story  is  that  these 
tribes,  finding  themselves  oppressed  and  enslaved  by  their  king 
and  his  nobles,  determined  on  revenge,  and,  having  plotted  in 
secret  for  three  years,  prepared  a  great  feast,  to  which  they  invited 
their  tyrants,  and  which  was  held  at  a  place  called  Magh  Cru,  said 
to  mean  the  Plain  of  Blood.  "  Thither,"  says  O'Curry,  "  came 
the  monarch,  kings,  and  chiefs,  in  full  flow  of  unreserved  security 
-  -a  security,  as  it  befell,  of  the  falsest  kind  ;  for,  when  the  nobles 
were  deep  in  their  cups,  and  plunged  in  the  enjoyment  of  the 
delicious  strains  of  the  harp,  treacherous  hosts  surrounded  the 
banquet-hall,  with  men  in  armour,  and  slew  without  pity  or 
remorse  Fiacha  Finnolaith,  the  provincial  kings,  and  all  the 
assembled  chiefs,  as  well  as  all  their  train. 

The  revolutionary  party  having  thus,  at  one  blow,  got  rid  of  all 
their  old  taskmasters,  but  still  wishing  to  live  under  a  monarchical 
form  of  government,  proceeded  to  select  a  king.  Their  choice  fell 
on  Cairbre  Cinn-Cait — descended  from  the  Cathrais^he — an  exiled 
son  of  the  King  of  Lochlann,  who  had  taken  a  leading  part  in 
the  plan  and  completion  of  the  revolution.  Cairbre  died,  however, 
in  the  fifth  year  of  an  unprosperous  reign,  and  Fiacha  Finnolaith, 
of  the  royal  Eremonian  line,  succeeded  to  the  sovereignty." 

Now,  since  this  was  the  name  of  the  kino-  murdered  at  Mao^h 
Cru,  it  is  plain  that  the  tale  had  become  confused  in  repetition, 
and  that  a  second  version  of  it  had  been  incorporated  with  the 
first,  as  is  not  uncommonly  the  case  with  the  Irish  sagas.     Against 

t  See  Sullivan's  Pref.  to  O'Cuiry's  M.  and  C,  vol.  i.,  xxiii.-xxvii.  ;  "  Keating,"  edit.  O'Mahony, 
p.  291.  The  word  Aitheach-Tuatha  has  been  equated  by  some  with  the  name  of  the  Attecotti,  but 
without  any  good  reason.  As  to  the  latter  name,  at  a  previous  page  of  this  work,  I  have  suggested 
the  possibility  of  its  connection  with  athach,  "  a  giant."  Ammianus  speaks  of  them  (Anno  368) 
after  the  two  divisions  of  the  Picts,  and  before  the  Scots,  and  also  with  Picts,  Scots,  and  Saxons. 
Jerome  brought  them  from  Ireland.  Pancirolus,  in  his  Commentary  on  the  "  Notitia  Dignitatum," 
calls  them  a  German  people.  Can  their  name  be  the  same  as  that  of  tiie  Assipitti  of  Paulus,  with 
whom  the  Langobardi  came  in  contact?  Dr.  Bielenstein  {op.  cil.)  gives  us  a  very  similar  mme 
in  East  Prussia  to  that  of  the  latter  people,  namely,  Asseputen. 


1 140  The  Dolmens  of  Ireland. 

Fiacha,  we  are  told,  another  revolt  of  the  Provinces  took  place, 
and  he  was  surprised  and  murdered  at  Magh  Bolg  in  Ulster. 
Elim  Mac  Conrach,  King  of  Ulster,  of  the  Rudrician  race  of 
Ulster,  was  elected  by  the  revolutionists  in  his  place.  The  reign 
of  Elim,  however,  proved  unfortunate,  for  not  only  did  discord 
and  discontent  prevail  throughout  the  land,  but  the  gifts  of  Heaven 
itself  were  denied  it,  and  the  soil  seemed  to  have  been  struck  with 
sterility,  and  the  air  of  heaven  charged  with  pestilence  and  death 
during  these  years. 

The  old  loyalists  and  friends  of  the  former  dynasties  took 
advantage  at  once  of  the  confusion  and  o-eneral  consternation 
which  had  seized  on  the  minds  of  the  people,  and  proposed  to 
them  to  invite  home  Tuathal,  the  son  of  the  murdered  monarch, 
whose  mother  had  fled  from  the  slaughter  to  the  house  of  her 
father,  the  King  of  Alba,  v/hile  Tuathal,  as  some  writers  say,  was 
yet  unborn.  This  proposal  was  very  generally  listened  to,  and  a 
great  number  of  the  Aitheach-Tuatha  agreed  in  council  to  bring 
over  the  young  prince,  who  was  now  in  his  twenty-fifth  year. 
Tuathal  answered  the  call,  and  soon  after  landed  in  Meath 
(Bregia),  where  he  was  immediately  joined  by  several  native 
chiefs,  with  all  their  followers.  From  this  he  marched  upon 
Temair,  but  was  met  at  Achaill,  near  that  place,  by  the  reigning 
monarch  Elim.  A  fierce  battle  was  fought,  in  which  Elim  was 
slain,  and  a  great  slaughter  made  of  his  adherents. 

Another  version  of  the  story  is  as  follows  :  On  the  death  of 
Cairbre,  the  Aitheach-Tuatha  endeavoured  to  place  his  son 
Moran  j  on  the  throne.  But  Moran,  who  was  eminent  both  for 
prudence  and  learning,  sternly  refused  to  accept  a  dignity  to  which 
he  had  no  hereditary  and,  therefore,  no  just  claim.  "  There  will 
be  no  end,"  he  said,  "  to  this  famine  which  devours  you,  until  you 
recall  the  royal  youths  from  exile  and  re-establish  them  in  their 
hereditary  rights."  This  good  advice  was  obeyed  to  avert  the 
horrible  evils  under  which  the  people  groaned.  They  sent  an 
embassy  to  the  royal  youths,  namely,  Feradhach  Fachtnich,  son  of 
Bainia,  daughter  of  the  King  of  Alba,  Corb  Oluim,  son  of  Cruifia, 
daughter  of  the  King  of  Britain,  and  Tibrad  Tirach,  son  of  Ainia, 
daughter  of  the  King  of  Saxony,  who  had  all  been  born  to  these 
three  queen-mothers  in  exile — their  fathers  having  been  slain 
by   the  rebels — and  conjured   them   in   the  most   respectful  and 

t  In  Old  Bohemian  the  name  of  the  god  of  death  was  Morana,  or  Moranu. 


Ethnology  and  Tradition.  1141 

imploring  terms  to  come  home  to  the  land  and  inheritance  of 
their  fathers.  They  swore  by  the  sun  and  moon  that  devoted 
loyalty  and  inviolable  fidelity  should  be  theirs  for  ever. 

The  youths  yielded  to  this  spontaneous  offer  of  submission 
from  the  Aitheach-Tuatha,  and  joyfully  returned  to  the  land  and 
the  hereditary  rights  of  their  fathers.  Immediately  an  end  was 
made  to  all  the  exterminatinof  calamities  of  the  land,  and  the  earth 
recovered  its  pristine  fertility.  The  kingdom  was  accordingly 
given  to  Feradach  Fiondfectnach,  during  whose  reign  injustice  of 
all  kinds  was  checked,  and  justice  and  equity  generally  prevailed. 
.  .  .  Feradach  died  at  Temair,  and  Fiach  Finfolaidh,  according 
to  Tigernach  (who,  however,  says  not  a  word  about  the  rebellion), 
succeeded  him.  "  Inflamed  with  inveterate  hatred  of  the  Aitheach- 
Tuatha,  on  account  of  their  former  cruelties  to  the  nobility,  this 
king,"  says  Lynch,  "  imposed  many  galling  tributes,  and  exacted 
them  with  such  severity  that  the  Aitheach-Tuatha  burned  with 
indignation,  and  resolved  to  compass  his  ruin  by  secret  machina- 
tions. Fully  aware  that  the  Provincial  kings — namely,  Elim  son 
of  Conrach,y  King  of  Ulster,  Sanbh  son  of  Keat,  King  of  Con- 
naught,  Forbri  son  of  Fin,  King  of  Munster,  and  Eochaidh 
x'\ngchenn,  King  of  Leinster,  were  violently  disaffected  to  the 
king,  the  Aitheach-Tuatha  drew  them  into  a  conspiracy,  and, 
combining  their  forces,  slew  Fiach  at  Magh  Bolg. 

At  the  time  of  King  Fiach's  death,  his  wife  Ethnea  Imgile, 
daughter  of  the  King  of  Alba,  was  pregnant.  Contriving  to 
escape,  she  fled  to  her  father's  court,  and  brought  forth  a  son — the 
sole  surviving  issue  of  Fiach — who  was  called  Tuathal  Techtmar.J 
He  was  educated  in  Alba,  as  became  an  heir  to  a  kingdom,  and 
eventually  recovered  the  crown  of  his  fathers.  Elim,  son  of 
Conrach,  who  was  of  the  race  of  Ir,  being  raised  to  the  vacant 
throne,  a  most  calamitous  period  for  the  country  supervened,  as 
all  the  woes  inflicted  by  Heaven  on  the  Aitheach  Tuatha  for  their 
extermination  of  the  nobility  were  now  poured  out  on  Elim  and 
his  associates  for  the  murder  of  Fiach.  At  last  Tuathal  Techtmar 
closed  the  fatal  reign  and  the  life  of  Elim  in  the  battle  of  Athle 
near  Temair,  and  seized  the  helm  of  the  state. 

In  a  previous  account  we  have  seen  that  the  site  of  the  battle 

t  An  Irish  form  of  Conrad,  see  note,  p.  1 137. 

X  The  name  Techtmar,  Latinized  by  O'Flaherty  "  Bonaventura,"  is  the  equivalent  in  meaning,  as 
Father  Matthew  Kelly  happily  points  out,  of  "  Le  Desire,"  the  name  given  to  Louis  XVIII.  of  France 
on  his  restoration. 


1142  The  Dolmens  of  Ireland. 

was  a  place  called  Achaill.  In  the  Dindshenchas  of  Drum  Dair- 
brech  the  scene  of  the  great  fight  between  Tuathal  and  the  Peasant 
Tribes  is  called  Comur  or  Commar,  meaning  "  meeting,"  a  term 
often  applied  to  places  where  rivers  met,  as,  for  example,  Commar 
tri  n-uiscc,  "  meeting  of  three  waters,"  Tuathal's  opponents  are 
there  stated  to  be  "  Dairbre  Derg  son  of  Lulach,  son  of  Lig- 
muine,  with  a  remnant  of  Ligmuine,  and  the  Fir-Bolg  and  the 
Fir  Domnann,  and  also  Eochaid  Oilech."  On  his  side  were  Fiacha 
Cassan,  and  Findmall  his  brother.  As  soon  as  Tuathal  was  firmly- 
seated  on  the  throne,  he  resolved  to  execute  summary  vengeance 
on  the  Aitheach-Tuatha.  The  death  of  his  father  in  the  battle 
of  Maeh-Bolsf,  and  the  extermination  of  the  nobles  in  the  massacre 
of  Magh  Cro,  rankled  in  his  breast,  and  whetted  his  appetite  for 
vengeance.  Taking  the  field,  he  fought  many  battles,  so  that 
he  almost  blotted  out  the  race  of  the  Aitheach-Tuatha.  Having 
received  hostages  for  the  fidelity  of  those  whom  his  sword  had 
spared,  he  appointed  kings  for  the  Four  Provinces.  He  also 
established  the  Convention  of  Temair,  which  was  attended  by  all 
the  provincial  kings  and  other  great  nobles,  who  swore  by  the 
pagan  oath,  the  Sun,  Moon,  and  Stars,  and  all  the  Elements, 
that  they  would  never  revolt  from  his  sceptre,  but  would  bear 
true  homaofe  to  him  and  his  descendants  for  ever.  Moreover, 
they  promised  that  they  would  assist  him  and  his  against  all 
enemies. 

Tuathal  took  from  each  of  the  Provinces  of  Erin  a  con- 
siderable territory,  which  he  added  to  Meath  (Mide,  Media),  thus 
extending  its  name  and  limits  far  beyond  the  original  small 
district  of  Usneach  or  Ushnagh.  The  new  Province  was  decreed 
to  be  for  all  time  the  appanage  of  the  monarch  of  Erin,  for  the 
support  of  his  table  and  palace  at  Temair. 

He  it  was  also  who  first  imposed  the  famous  tribute  called 
the  Boroimhe,  or  Boromean,  as  a  penalty  for  the  murder  of  his 
daughters  Daringa  and  Fethara.  His  wife  was  Bania,  daughter 
of  Seal  Balb,  King  of  Fomoire,  who  was  the  mother  of  his  son 
and  successor  Fedlimidh,  called  Reachtmar,  famous  as  a  lawgiver, 
and  especially  as  the  introducer  of  a  Lex  Talioms. 

Asking  my  readers  to  bear  in  mind  the  principal  points  in  the 
tradition  of  this  rebellion,  I  now  pass  to  the  history  of  the  Heruli, 
as  recorded  by  Procopius  and  others,  with  which  I  wish  to  offer 


Ethnology  and  Tradition.  1143 

comparisons  with  that  of  the  Fir-Bolg,  and  the  Aitheach-Tuatha 
as  a  part  of   them.     "  In    former  times,"  says    Procopius,    "  the 
Heruh  dwelt  on  the  further  side  of  the    Danube,"   by  which   he 
indicates  the  district  up  to  the   shores  of  the  Baltic,  as  is  clear 
from  a  similar  statement   he   makes   with   regard  to  the  Warni, 
Yarini,  or    Weriner.       Indeed,  when  they  went  northward  from 
Illyria,  as  described   by   this  historian,!  into  that  district  which, 
according  to  Jordanes,  constituted  their  propj^icc  secies,  and  from 
whence  they  were  finally  expelled  by  their  next  neighbours  the 
Danes,    who    had    come    from     Scandinavia    into    the     Cimbrian 
Chersonese,  they  must  have  actually  dwelt  in  the  country  assigned 
to  the  Varini,  to  whom,  therefore,  they  were  probably  related  if 
they  were  not  identical  with  them.      As  to  their  cradle-land,  they 
are  associated  with  some  remote  island  in  the  north,  which  Pro- 
copius thought  was  Thule,  and  who,  in  describing  it,  gives  us  an 
account  of  Scandinavia,     Jordanes  brings  them  from  Scandinavia 
also,  that  vagina  nationwn  et  officina  gentimu,  to  which  it  was  the 
fashion  among  the  early  historians  of  all  the  Teutonic  nations  to 
refer  each  in  turn.      They  were  on  the  Palus  Mseotis,  however, 
at  an  early  date,  and  thence  also  Jordanes,  in  another  passage, 
brings  them.     Zeuss  regards  them  as  the  Suardones  of  Tacitus 
under  a  new  name,  and  places  them  between  the  Trave  and  the 
Oder,  in  the  westernmost  peninsula  of  the  southern  Baltic,  where 
Ptolemy  places    the    Pharadeini,  whose    name  (?  Spharadeini)  is, 
perhaps,  Suardones  in  a  slightly  altered  form. J 

With  the  old  name  Suardones,  and  suert  (=  suart),  we  may 
not  be  wrong  in  comparing  that  of  Suartua,  an  Herulian  prince, 
of  whom  we  shall  presently  hear  more. 

"  As  time  went  on,"  proceeds  Procopius,  "  the  Heruli  on  the 
further  side  of  the  Danube  became  more  populous  and  powerful 
than  any  of  the  barbarians  around  them,  vanquishing  them,  one 
by  one  in  fight,  and  living  upon  the  produce  of  the  lands  they 
subdued.  At  length  they  overpowered  the  Langobardi,  who 
were  Christians,  and  forced  them  and  other  peoples  beside 
them  to  pay  tribute,  being  prompted  to  impose  these  levies  by 
covetousness  and  pride,  since  it  was  not  the  usual  custom  of 
the  barbarians  dwelling  at  that  time  in  those  parts  so  to  do." 

t  "B.  Goth.,"  2,  15. 

X  The  name  of  the  Suardones  has  been  derived  from  the  O.H.G.  suert,  a  sword.  To  the 
obsolete  word  em,  also  meaning  a  sword,  the  name  of  the  Heruli  has  been  referred.  See  Zeus, 
"  Die  Deutschen,"  p.  154. 


1 144  The  Dolmens  of  Ireland. 


The  conflicts  between  the  Heruli  and  the  Langobardi,  when 
considered  side  by  side  with  the  fact  that  the  former  occupied,  in 
their  north-western  seats,  a  district  intermediate  between  Ger- 
mans and  Sclaves,  raise  the  question  of  the  ethnic  affinities  of  the 
HeruH.  Miillenhofff  has  referred,  though  with  scant  approval, 
to  the  view  that  they  were  connected  with  Sclavonic  peoples. 
There  seems,  however,  to  be  something  to  be  said  in  favour  of 
this  theory.  In  common  with  the  Sclaves,  they  are  represented 
as  adhering  to  paganism  after  their  neighbours  had  become 
Christians.  In  common  with  them,  also,  their  customs  required 
that  the  wife  should  strangle  herself  at  her  husband's  obsequies. 
Like  the  Sclaves,  too,  they  fought  naked,  with  merely  a  coarse 
covering  around  the  hips,  and  with  shield  and  spear  alone.  The 
treatment  of  their  kings,  to  which  I  shall  presently  allude,  recalls 
the  fact  that  we  have  examples  of  Sclaves  killing  their  princes  at 
the  banquet  or  on  the  march.  Certain  customs,  again,  seem  to 
connect  them  with  Scandinavia,  and  yet  others,  although  their 
language,  as  far  as  we  know  them  in  history,  was  not  Celtic,  with 
the  remote  shores  of  Ireland.  Whether  or  not  the  Heruli  in  the 
west  had  Sclavonic  affinities,  there  is,  I  think,  reason  to  presume 
that  those  who  were  settled  on  the  Palus  Maeotis,  the  Danube,  and 
about  the  Carpathians,  did  not  leave  those  districts  on  their  return 
to  the  north-west,  without  carrying  with  them  the  results  of  inter- 
course with  those  nations  of  Scythia,  or,  rather,  the  Sarmatian 
portion  of  that  almost  limitless  country — Sclaves  on  the  west  and 
north,  and  Tscoudes  or  Tscudi,  Bashkirs,  and  Kalmucks  on  the 
east — with  whom  they  must  have  been  brought  into  close  contact. 
The  characteristics  of  these  latter  peoples  were  carried  westwards 
into  the  Carpathian  and  Danubian  countries  by  contact  with 
Sclaves  and  Germanic  peoples.  The  likeness  between  a  certain 
well-known  type  of  Irishman  and  certain  Wallachian,  Bohemian, 
and  Bulgarian  types  has  often  been  noticed  by  travellers,  and  if 
we  can  show  a  reasonable  probability  that  the  Heruli  were  in  a 
special  manner  the  Bolg  of  Irish  tradition,  that  likeness  may  be 
due  to  no  mere  coincidence,  and  Charles  Lever's  description  of 
Billy  Traynor,  as  resembling  a  Kalmuck,  may  actually  be  due  to 
an  ethnological  fact  not  hitherto  recognized,  but  which  may  be 
dated  back  to  the  end  of  the  fourth,  or  to  the  fifth  century,  when, 
on  their  dispersal  by  the  Goths,  contingents  of  the  mixed  peoples 
called  Bolgar  made  their  way  to  the  islands  of  the  north. 

t  "  Deutsche  Altertumskunde,"  vol.  ii.  p.  78,  n. 


Ethnology  and  Tradition.  1145 

To  proceed,  however,  with  the  story  of  the  Herull.  Towards 
the  close  of  the  fifth  century — I  quote  Procopius  again — when 
Anastasius  became  Emperor — since  there  were  no  more  districts 
left  for  them  to  invade — the  Heruli  laid  down  their  arms,  and 
remained  for  three  years  at  peace.  This  period  of  tranquillity,  so 
unnatural  to  them,  ended,  they  became  restless  and  irritated,  and 
began  to  cover  their  king  Rodolf  with  impudent  reproaches 
and  scornful  abuse,  speaking  of  him  in  his  presence  as  weak 
and  effeminate,  and  throwing  such-like  opprobrious  epithets  in 
his  face. 

Here  Procopius  brings  out  a  remarkable  point  of  similarity 
between  Irish  and  Herulian  customs — the  practice,  that  is  to  say, 
of  contumelious  taunting  or  satire.  In  many  Irish  tales  we  find 
that  this  base  species  of  terrorism  was  actually  the  prerogative  of 
a  certain  class  of  persons,  named  xki^Jil'e  or  poets,  and  that  kings 
were  especially  made  the  butts  for  their  venomous  shafts.  In 
Ireland  it  was  made  use  of  to  irritate  into  action,  as  was  the 
case  with  Rodolf,  or  to  extort  largess.  The  satire,  which  was  in 
verse,  was  believed  to  possess  a  magical  power,  and  there  are 
cases  mentioned  where  its  effect  was  madness,  disease,  or  even 
death  itself.  A  tale  connected  with  the  name  of  a  satirist  called 
Athirne  or  Athairne,  surnamed  Ailgosach,  or  the  Importunate, 
shows  the  awe  in  which  the  professors  of  this  vile  art  were  held, 
and  the  unlimited  power  they  exercised  of  possessing  themselves 
of  all  that  was  most  treasured  by  their  victims — a  power  to  which 
no  priestly  tyranny  on  record  can  be  compared,  since  it  was  an 
organized  system  of  extorting  blackmail,  authorized  and  enforced 
by  a  firm  belief  in  the  power  of  demons  whose  agent  the  satirist 
was.  An  instance  is  given  in  the  Glossary  attributed  to  Cormac,f 
which,  while  it  involves  the  fate  of  a  king,  proves  the  existence 
of  a  belief  in  the  baneful  effect  which  satire  was  capable  of  pro- 
ducing physically. 

The  poet  Nedi,  we  are  told,  son  of  Adnae,  son  of  Othar, 
composed  a  satire  upon  his  uncle  Caier,  King  of  Connaught,  which 
produced  a  blemish  on  him,  rendering  him  unfit  to  reign,  upon 
which  the  scoundrel,  who  had  thus  persecuted  him,  assumed  the 
sovereignty. 

Among  the  Scandinavians,  also,  derision  was  practised,  and 
the  process  was  divided  into  two  kinds,  the  first  called  "  tungunid  " 

t   Edit.  O'Donovan,  p.  87. 
VOL.  III.  2    F 


1 146  The  Dolmens  of  Ireland. 

or  "  nidvisLir,"  consisting  of  mocking  words,  delivered  in  songs  or 
lampoons,  thought  to  possess  magical  power,  thus  scaring  away 
guardian  spirits  and  bringing  misfortune ;  the  second,  called 
"  trenid "  or  wooden  derision,  that  is,  derisive  images  carved 
or  traced  on  wood.  Kings  were  here  also  specially  made  the 
subject  of  it,  and  we  read  of  Harold  Gormson,  King  of  Denmark, 
intending  to  go  to  Iceland  to  take  revenge  for  one  made  on  him.f 

To  return  to  Rodolph.  Stung  by  the  satire,  he  organized  an 
expedition  against  the  Langobardi,  although  the  latter  had  given 
his  people  no  cause  of  offence,  nor  broken  treaties,  nor  refused 
them  tribute.^  Three  times  did  the  Langobardi  send  embassies 
to  the  Heruli  to  demand  from  Rodolf  himself  the  cause  of  so 
unjust  a  war  ;  but  being  unable  to  obtain  an  answer,  they  warned 
them  that  their  God  (for  they  were  Christians)  would  defend  the 
right,  and  prepared  for  battle.  When  the  lines  were  drawn  up 
opposite  each  other,  a  portent  was  observed.  Over  the  spot 
where  the  Langobardi  stood  hung  a  dark  cloud  of  great  density, 
while,  over  that  where  the  Heruli  stood,  the  sky  was  marvel- 
lously clear.  From  this  omen  it  might  be  understood  that  the 
Heruli  would  enter  the  battle  to  their  own  destruction,  as,  indeed, 
the  sequel  proved.  They  were  utterly  routed,  and  many,  among 
whom  was  their  king,  were  slain.  Of  those  that  survived  the 
battle  the  greater  number  were  cut  to  pieces  in  their  flight. 

There  are  points  in  this  story  which  remind  us  of  the  battle 
of  Magh  Tuireadh — the  conflict  between  the  Tuatha  De  Danann 
on  the  one  side,  and  the  Fir-Bolg  on  the  other.  The  Tuatha  De 
Danann,  who  in  the  result  were  victorious,  formed,  we  are  told, 
**  by  their  magic  skill,  a  mist  about  them  for  three  days  and  three 
nights,"  previous  to  the  commencement  of  the  contest.  The  Fir- 
Bolg  were,  like  the  Heruli,  utterly  routed  ;  the  greater  number 
were  slain  in  their  flight,  and  among  them  their  king  was  killed. 
The  cause  of  the  battle  was  about  the  division  of  Erin. 

"  A  remnant  of  the  Heruli  still  remained,"  says  Procopius,  and 
this  became  divided  into  two  sections,  each  of  which  departed 

t  Du  Chaillu,  "  Viking  Age,"  vol.  i.  p.  580.  Another  institution,  if  it  may  be  so  called,  which 
the  Scandinavians  shared  with  the  ancient  Irish,  was  that  of  professed  warriors  called  Champions 
or  Athletes.  They  were,  perhaps,  the  leaders  of  hired  or  mercenary  bands.  They  were  expected 
to  excel  in  all  kinds  of  athletic  and  intellectual  games,  called  idrotlir  in  Scandinavia.  These  were 
taught  by  the  Asa  Odin  and  the  Diar,  and  also  by  priestesses.  Cuchullain  in  Irish  tradition  was  a 
champion  of  this  sort.  See  the  story  of  his  sojourn  with  the  Amazon  Scathach,  a  priestess  doubtless 
who  taught  the  art.     See  O'Curry's  ".Manners  and  Customs,"  for  this  curious  romance. 

X  This  practice  of  exacting  tribute,  in  which  the  Heruli  differed  from  other  barbarians,  recalls 
the  treatment  of  the  Nemedians  (?  Germans)  by  the  Fomorians  (?  Sclaves),  between  which  latter 
people  and  the  Fir-Bolg  (?  Heruli)  there  was  close  intimacy  and  alliance. 


Ethnology  and  Tradition.  1147 

from  the  lands  in  which  they  had  been  settled,  but  in  opposite 
directions,  the  one  going-  south  beyond  the  Danube,  the  other 
*'  into  the  uttermost  parts  of  the  habitable  world,"  by  which  the 
extreme  north  is  meant.  Similarly,  in  Irish  tradition,  after  the 
battle  of  Magh  Tuireadh,  those  of  the  Fir-Bolg  who  escaped 
defeat  retired  to  the  islands  of  the  north  and  west,  while  others 
settled  temporarily  in  Meath,  where  lands  were  granted  to  them 
as  tenants,  whence  they  finally  removed  into  Connaught. 

The  first  section  of  the  Heruli,  on  leaving  their  country, 
traversed,  with  their  wives  and  children,  the  entire  district  beyond 
the  Danube,  and  entered  into  the  localities  formerly  occupied  by 
the  Rugii,  who,  having  accompanied  the  Goths  into  Italy,  had 
formed  new  settlements  there.  Finding,  however,  that  these 
lands,  from  which  the  inhabitants  had  departed,  were  reduced 
to  the  condition  of  a  sterile  waste,  and  that  famine  was  imminent, 
the  Heruli  removed  from  them,  and  came  into  a  district  next  the 
Gepidae.  Since  they  came  as  suppliants,  the  latter  people  at 
first  permitted  them  to  settle  in  their  neighbourhood,  but  in  the 
capacity  only  of  tenants  {Iiiquzlmi,  in  the  Latin  translation),  or 
Rent-payers.  Subsequently,  however,  the  Gepidae  began  to 
harass  them,  taking  their  women  from  them  by  force,  despoiling 
them  of  their  cattle  and  effects,  and,  finally,  filling  up  the  measure 
of  their  ill  treatment  by  making  war  upon  them  without  just  cause. 
Unable  to  bear  such  oppression  any  longer,  this  section  of  the 
Heruli  crossed  the  Danube,  and  seated  themselves  down  beside 
the  territory  which  was  under  the  Roman  dominion.  The  Emperor 
Anastasius  received  them  kindly,  and  allowed  them  to  form  fixed 
settlements.  Some  little  time  afterwards,  however,  the  crimes 
that  these  barbarians  perpetrated  against  the  Roman  settlers 
caused  him  to  change  his  policy,  and,  his  anger  being  aroused,  he 
despatched  an  army  against  them.  A  battle  ensued,  in  which  the 
Romans  killed  the  greater  portion  of  them.  Those  who  survived 
came  as  suppliants  to  the  generals,  begging  to  be  permitted  to 
live  under  the  Roman  alliance,  and  to  be  allowed  to  prove  them- 
selves faithful  servants  to  the  Emperor.  On  these  conditions, 
with  the  approval  of  Anastasius,  the  remnant  of  the  Heruli  were 
allowed  to  live.  They  neither  proved  themselves,  however,  allies 
of  the  Romans,  nor  did  they  requite  them  with  any  service  per- 
formed. From  a  subsequent  passage  we  learn  that  it  was  in 
Illyria  that  they  were  settled. 


1 148  The  Dolmens  of  Ireland. 

Now,  in  the  above  account,  it  is  to  be  observed  that  the  word 
Aitheach-Tuatha  is,  as  near  as  can  be,  the  equivalent  in  meaning 
of  what  is  intended  to  be  conveyed  by  Procopius,  and  which 
the  translator  expresses  by  Inqtiilini.  It  is  a  term  contrasted 
with  Free  Provincials,  just  as  the  Irish  word  Coigeadhoch, 
"  Provincials,"  is  contrasted  with  Aitheach-Ttiatha,  that  is,  "  Rent- 
payers."  By  the  district  from  which  the  Rugii  had  departed  must 
be  intended  the  highlands  of  Bohemia. 

It  is  evident  that  the  stories  of  the  wanderings  of  the  Fir-Bolg 
and  of  the  Heruli  are  curiously  alike.  The  Fir-Bolg  are  expelled 
— it  is  not  very  clear  from  what  district — by  the  Cruithne.  The 
latter  would  answer  to  the  Gepidse.  In  the  name  Cruithne,  I 
have  previously  pointed  out  a  resemblance  in  that  of  the  Chorwati 
and  Chorutane — first  on  the  north  side  of  the  Carpathians,  and 
later  on  in  Illyria.f  The  Gepidae  were  said  to  have  been  of 
Gothic  origin,  and  on  the  break-up  of  the  Hunnish  confederacy 
they  entered  into  possession  of  Dacia.  The  Fir-Bolg  went  as 
suppliants  to  Cairbre  Niafer  just  as  the  Heruli  did  to  Anastasius, 
and  were  granted  lands.  Finally  we  find  them  in  the  fastnesses 
of  the  coast  of  Connaught,  just  as  we  find  the  Heruli  in  those 
of  Illyria.  Whether  in  these  coincidences  we  have  an  insular 
localization  of  a  continental  tradition  is  a  proposition  which,  with- 
out the  backing  of  more  weighty  corroborative  evidence,  it  would 
be  unsafe  to  entertain.     The  points,  however,  are  worth  noting. 

In  the  appearance  of  the  Heruli  on  the  southern  side  of  the 
Danube,  history  was  repeating  itself  since,  in  the  reign  of 
Gallienus,  they  had  invaded  Thrace,  and,  under  Naulobates,  as 
we  have  seen,  had  penetrated  into  Greece.  If  in  the  Heruli  we 
may,  as  I  think  possible,  recognize  the  Fir-Bolg,  the  tradition  of 
the  oppressions  undergone  by  the  latter,  when  under  the  Greeks, 
might  apply  to  either  of  the  periods  during  which  the  Heruli 
were  living  in  servitude  under  the  Empire,  although  I  prefer  to 
attribute  it  to  the  earlier  of  the  two. 

"  Upon  Justinian  becoming  Emperor,"  continues  Procopius, 
"he  gave  the  Heruli,  who,  having  crossed  the  Danube,  had  come 
to  settle  by  the  side  of  the  Romans,  good  lands,  and  would  have 
extended  to  them  the  advantages  of  alliance  with  the  Romans, 
and   made   Christians  of  them,   had  they  not  continued   in  that 

t  Cruithne  being  in  Irish  synonymous  with  Peohta,  Petta,  Pict,  in  Teutonic  and  Latin,  it  is 
noteworthy  that  the  name  Piti  occurs  in  the  Table  of  Peulinger,  seemingly  in  place  of  Gepidai  or 
Sigipedes,  in  which  latter  forms  Gc  and  Sigc  may  have  been  distinctive  prefixes  to  Pidcc  or  Pui. 


Ethnology  and  Tradition.  1149 

course  of  life  for  which  they  had  become  notorious  before  they 
crossed  the  Danube,  proving  themselves  false  and  covetous, 
plundering  their  neighbours,  and  leading  lives  which  were  dis- 
graced by  the  habitual  commission  of  unnatural  offences.  Some 
few  of  those  who  had  entered  into  the  Roman  leaeue  continued 
faithful  to  it,  and  the  rest  revolted  on  account  of  the  following 
circumstance,"  which  is  that  which  I  wish  to  offer  specially  for 
comparison  with  the  story  of  the  Aitheach-Tuatha. 

"  Impelled  by  the  ferocity  of  their  nature,  they  all  of  a  sudden 
slew  their  King  Ochon  ("O^wj'),  not  that  they  had  any  fault  to  find 
with  him,  but  solely  for  the  reason  that  they  desired  in  future  to 
put  an  end  to  regal  supremacy.  And,  in  truth,  before  this 
happened,  their  king  had  been  king  in  nothing  more  than  in  name, 
being  regarded  as  entitled  to  no  more  respect  than  a  private 
person,  nor  even  so  much.  All  sat  and  ate  with  him,  and  each 
one,  as  the  thought  struck  him,  made  him  the  object  of  shameless 
and  scornful  satire,  for  there  exists  no  people  who,  in  point  of  mad 
humour  and  levity,  can  surpass  an  Herulian."  f 

I  here  pause  to  insert,  from  the  "  Dindshenchas,"  as  translated 
by  Dr.  Whitley  Stokes,  a  passage  which,  while  it  illustrates  the 
shameless  contempt  in  which  the  person  of  the  king  was  held 
among  the  Irish,  points  also  to  the  presence  on  the  continent  of 
Europe,  and,  in  the  central  portions  of  it,  of  an  Irish  monarch. 
It  is  as  follows:  "The  Dindshenchas  of  Ochonn  Midi:  When 
Niall  of  the  Nine  Hostages,  son  of  Eochaid  (Muidmedon),  went 
over  the  Ictian  Sea  (explained  by  O'Donovan  to  mean  the  English 
Channel  and  the  German  Ocean),  then  was  Eochaid,  son  of  Enna 
Censelach  in  the  East,  in  exile,  after  killing  Laidgenn,  son  of 
Boirchid  (Niall's  wizard).  So  he  (Eochaid  son  of  Enna)  advised 
the  women  to  ask  that  the  King  of  the  World's  J  form  might  be 
shown  to  them.  Wherefore,  after  undressing,  Niall  displayed 
himself  to  them.  Now,  Eochaid,  like  any  woman  in  their  crowd, 
was  there  with  his  javelin  under  his  garment.  So  with  it  he 
transfixed  the  King  Niall  from  one  armpit  to  the  other.  And 
Niall  said  (when  dying)  that  his  hostages  should  be  released 
where  his  monument  should  be  made,  and  so  that  the  strength  of 
every  power  should  be  gained  by  him. 

"So  Niall's  body  was  brought  from  the  East,  and  his  troops 


t  Procopius  had  never  met  the  insular  Herulian  of  Lazius. 

X  Rii^  in  Doinoiii,  applied  to  Niall  in  respect  of  his  foreign  conquests. 


1 150  The  Dolmens  of  Ireland. 

routed  their  foes  in  seven  battles,  and  took  him  to  Ochan,  and 
there  he  was  buried.  And  the  great  lamentation  {pchdn)  of  Niall's. 
household  was  where  each  parted  from  the  other,  and  where  the 
hostages  of  Erin  were  released.  Whence  '  Ochonn  of  Meath '  is. 
said." 

It  is  singular,  but  it  may  be  a  mere  coincidence,  that  the  name 
which  Procopius  heard  applied  to  a  murdered  Herulian  king, 
namely  Ochon,  was  precisely  that  of  the  customary  '  great  lamenta- 
tion '  made  by  the  people  on  such,  not  unusual,  occasions. 

The  scene  of  Niall's  murder  has  been  stated  to  have  been  in, 
France,  on  the  Loire.  That,  however,  must  be  a  mistake,  some 
other  river  being  intended,  and  France  probably  confused  with 
the  land  of  the  Franks,  that  is,  of  the  Sigambri,  by  which  name 
the  latter  people,  east  of  the  Rhine,  are  designated  as  late  as  the 
middle  of  the  seventh  century.f  The  tradition,  as  in  the  above 
extract,  clearly  sends  Niall  "  to  the  East,"  and  brings  his  dead 
body  "from  the  East" — a  term  which  could  not  be  applied  by 
Irish  writers  to  the  Loire.  His  mother  was  Carenna,  daughter  of 
the  King  of  Saxony.  It  is  in  that  direction  that  his  conquests  lie. 
His  hostages,  according  to  a  metrical  version  of  the  "Dindshenchas," 
are  Saxons,  Franks,  and  Romans.  Keating,  indeed,  tells  us  that 
five  were  from  Erin,  and  four  from  Alba.  The  question  is — •"  Can 
these  two  statements  be  reconciled  ?  "  Only  in  one  way,  and  that 
is  by  supposing  that  the  Saxon  and  Frankish  hostages  were  drawn 
from  Thuringia,  and  the  lands  bordering  on  it — the  country  of  the 
Werini — which,  as  I  have  ventured  to  hint,  may  have  been  a 
continental  Erin  ;  and  by  recognizing  also  in  the  name  Alba  some 
portion  of  the  Roman  dominions — in  the  region,  perhaps,  of  the 
Ealpa  or  Alps,  whither  we  know  the  Heruli  had  made  their  way. 
Niall  himself  was  styled  King  of  Erin  and  Alba,  and  was  esteemed 
a  great  conqueror  entirely  outside  the  borders  of  the  insular  Erin 
and  Alba.  He  was  succeeded  by  his  nephew  Dathi,  of  whom  we 
shall  presently  hear. 

The  story  of  the  murder  of  Niall  is  not  that  of  the  murder  of 
the  Ochon  of  Procopius,  although  I  am  about  to  point  to  another 
murder  of  a  monarch  in  Irish  tradition,  which  may,  I  think,  be 
actually  referable  to  that  event.  We  may  remember  that,  in  the 
story  of  the  Aitheach-Tuatha,  no  sooner  had  the  rebels  killed 
Fiacha  than  they  found  themselves  wishing  for  a  king.      "No 

t  See  Vita  S.  Arnulphi,  who  died  in  640,  Acta  SS.,  Boll,  Jul.  4. 


Ethnology  and  Tradition.  115  i 


sooner,"  says  Procopius,  "had  the  HeruH  murdered  Ochon  than 
they  repented  having  done  so,  finding  it  impossible  to  get  on 
without  a  king  or  some  one  to  command  them." 

In  selecting  a  new  king,  the  choice  of  the  Aitheach-Tuatha 
fell  upon  "the  exiled  son  of  the  King  of  Lochlainn,  that  is 
Scandinavia,  or  some  part  of  it,"  so  that  they  may  be  said  to  have 
had  recourse  to  that  country  for  a  king.  So,  too,  with  the  Heruli. 
"  After  frequent  councils,  they  determined  to  send  to  the  island  of 
Thule,  and  obtain  from  thence  one  of  the  royal  line  to  fill  the 
vacant  throne." 

The  reason  why  the  Heruli  sent  to  Scandinavia  for  a  king 
involves  an  account  of  the  second  section  of  this  people  who,  after 
the  battle  with  the  Langobardi,  went  northwards,  and  dwelt,  as  has 
been  said,  in  the  outermost  parts  of  the  habitable  world.  Many 
of  the  blood-royal  were  their  leaders,  and  by  them  they  were  con- 
ducted through  all  the  lands  occupied  by  the  Sclaveni.y  Thence, 
after  crossing  an  extensive  desert,  they  arrived  in  the  territory  of 
the  Varni,  and  passing  through  it,  traversed  the  country  of  the 
Dani — the  peoples  of  those  parts  offering  them  no  violence.  At 
length,  when  they  had  reached  the  shores  of  the  ocean,  they  took 
ship,  and  made  for  the  island  of  Thule,  where  they  continued  to 
reside.  "  When,  therefore,  the  other  section  of  them,  who  had 
gone  to  live  on  the  confines  of  the  Roman  Empire,  having  killed 
their  king,  were  desirous  of  obtaining  one  of  the  royal  blood  in  his 
place,  it  was  to  Thule  that  they  despatched  a  deputation  of  nobles 
to  select  one.  This  deputation,  on  reaching  the  island,  found 
many  of  the  royal  stock  still  there,  and,  making  choice  of  the  one 
of  them  that  pleased  them  best,  proceeded  to  take  him  back  with 
them.  When  their  journey  w^as  nearing  its  end,  however,  he 
died." 

We  have  seen  that  Cairbre,  son  of  the  King  of  Lochlainn, 
whom  the  Aitheach-Tuatha  had  chosen  for  their  king,  died  shortly 
afterwards. 

"  In  consequence,"  proceeds  Procopius,  "of  the  death  of  the 
king  they  had  chosen,  the  ambassadors  of  the  Heruli  returned  to 
the  island,  and,  nominating  a  second  one  called  Todasius,  or,  as 
his  name  is  given  in  another  codex,  Datius,  set  out  for  the  south 
again.  The  occurrence  of  this  name  Datius  here  merits  comment. 
According  to  the  second  version  of  the  Aitheach-Tuatha  story, 

t  This  shows  that  the  battle  with  the  Langobardi  must  have  been  pretty  far  south. 


1152  The  Dolmens  of  Ireland. 


given  above,  the  name  of  Cairbre's  successor  was  a  royal  youth 
called  Feradach.  Now,  the  name  Feradach,  occurring  in  another 
Irish  ti-adition,  and  applied  to  another  individual,  is  there  found 
to  be  synonymous  with  the  name  Dathi — the  latter  portion  of 
the  former  name  being,  seemingly,  identical  with  the  latter. 
Thus  Dathi,  a  king  who  was  killed  by  lightning  near  the  Alps, 
possessed  the  alias  of  Feradach.  The  word  dack,  with  the  usual 
mutation  of  ch  and  th,  would  be  dath.  According  to  native  Irish 
etymologists,  it  is  the  adjective  daith,  '  swift,'  so  that  fer  daith 
would  mean  '  swift  man,'  a  name  of  particular  appropriateness 
when  applied  to  an  Herulian,  since  Jordanes,  quoting  Ablavius, 
mentions  that  the  Heruli,  dwelling  near  the  Palus,  were  cele- 
brated for  their  swiftnesSy  a  characteristic  which  is  contrasted  with 
the  stolidity  and  tardiness  of  the  Goths.  The  swiftness  of  foot 
of  the  ancient  Irish,  and  indeed  of  the  modern  Irish  peasants, 
is  proverbial. 

*'  The  Heruli,  having  selected  their  king,  for  the  second  time 
set  out  (as  we  have  seen)  for  home.  The  man  of  their  second 
choice  was  accompanied  by  his  brother  Aordus,  possibly  the 
Norse  name  HodSar,  and  two  hundred  youths  chosen  from  among 
the  Heruli  who  dwelt  in  Thule.  Much  time,  however,  had  been 
expended  in  this  journey,  and,  meanwhile,  the  Heruli  settled  near 
Singidona  (Singidunum,  that  is  Belgrad,)  having  come  to  the 
conclusion  that  difficulties  might  arise  if  they  introduced  a  king 
from  Thule  without  the  Emperor  Justinian's  consent,  had  sent  to 
Byzantium  to  request  him  to  send  them  as  their  king  the  man 
he  thought  best  suited  for  the  post.  He  forthwith  sent  them 
Suartua,  or  Suartuas,  who,  although  one  of  the  royal  stock,  had 
been  educated  at  Byzantium.  The  Heruli  at  first  received  him 
joyfully,  did  reverence  to  him  as  their  king,  and  accorded  him  the 
customary  obedience.  But,  a  few  days  afterwards,  a  messenger 
arrived  to  apprise  them  of  the  approach  of  those  who  had  been 
sent  to  Thule.  Thereupon  Suartuas  called  upon  his  soldiers  to 
march  out  and  destroy  them,  and,  with  seeming  approbation,  they 
obeyed  his  command  and  followed  him.  When,  at  last,  however, 
they  came  to  a  place  where  only  a  few  days'  journey  separated 
them  from  the  party  advancing  from  the  north,  the  entire  band  of 
his  followers,  deserting  Suartuas  in  the  night,  crossed  over  to  the 
new-comers.  Suartuas,  left  alone,  escaped  by  flight,  and  returned 
to  Byzantium.     The  Emperor,  on  his  part,  put  in  motion  all  the 


Ethnology  and  Tradition.  1153 

forces  at  his  disposal  to  effect  the  restoration  of  the  fugitive, 
upon  which  the  HeruH,  in  dread  of  the  power  of  the  Roman 
arms,  betook  themselves  to  the  Gepidae.  And  such,"  concludes 
Procopius,  "  was  the  cause  of  the  revolt  of  the  Heruli." 

The  points  for  comparison  in  these  two  stories,  the  Revolt 
of  the  Aitheach-Tuatha,  and  the  Revolt  of  the  Heruli,  are,  indeed, 
as  close — supposing  they  may  refer  to  one  and  the  same  event 
— as  could  be  expected  considering  the  diverse  media  through 
which  they  have  reached  us.  In  the  first  place  we  have  in  the 
Irish  tale  the  very  distinction  we  find  among  the  Heruli.  On 
the  one  hand,  there  are  the  Provincials,  those,  that  is  to  say,  who 
have  embraced  an  alliance  which  in  the  Herulian  story  is  the 
Roman  alliance ;  and,  on  the  other  hand,  there  are  the  Villain 
Tribes  who  had  not.  Secondly,  we  have  the  murder  of  a  king 
— in  the  one  case  Fiacha,  in  the  other  Ochon,  without  any 
sufficient  reason.  Thirdly,  we  have  the  dispersal  of  the  royal 
youths  in  various  countries.  Fourthly,  we  have  a  king  of  Scan- 
dinavian origin,  sought  out  and  placed  by  the  rebels  on  the  throne, 
unnamed  in  the  Herulian  story  ;  in  the  Irish  one  called  Cairbre. 
Fifthly,  upon  his  death,  we  have  another  royal  youth  sought  out — 
in  the  one  case  Feradach,  in  the  other  Datius,  names  which  we 
have  a  precedent  for  considering  identical.  Sixthly,  we  have  the 
restoration  of  a  prince — Tuathal  on  the  one  hand,  Suartuas  on 
the  other,  who  had  been  living  in  exile,  in  the  one  case  in  Alba, 
in  the  other  in  the  Roman  dominions. 

Indeed,  in  what  we  know  of  Tuathal  subsequently,  we  seem 
to  recognize  an  external  power  like  that  of  Rome  at  his  back. 
He  rearranges  the  Provincial  districts,  and  insists  on  an  oath  of 
fidelity.  He  builds  four  chief-residences  or  capitals,  called 
respectively  Tlachtga,  Uisnech  (Ushnagh),  Taltiu  (Teltown),  and 
Temair,  the  three  last  of  which  bear  names  which  seem  repeated 
in  those  of  Usna,f  Usnoim,  or  Usedom  (on  the  coast  opposite 
Rilgen) ;  of  Teltou,  Teltow,  or  Teltau  in  Brandenburg,  two  miles 
from  Berlin,  called  Cron-Teltou,  a  fortified  site  of  considerable 
antiquity,  where,  in  a  place  called  the  Stollen-Berg,  about  thirty 
sepulchral  urns  were  found  in  1728  ;  and  of  Themar  (Lat.  The- 
maria)  in  Thuringia,  for  which  Mone  J  found  a  namesake  in  the 

t  Compare  also,  as  we  have  done  before,  Uznagh  on  Lake  Zurich. 

X  Celtische  Forschungen  zur  Geschichte  Mitteleuropas,  1857,  in  the  list  of  Irish  and  German 
names  :  "  Ir.  Uar/i  ;  the  town  Themar,  in  archives  Theimar,  Theymar  ('  Schultes  Beschr,  von 
Themar,'  p.  113),  bears  the  same  name  as  Temora,  pra/  house,'" 


1 1 54  The  Dolmens  of  Ireland. 

Irish  Temair.  In  addition  to  this,  Tuathal  imposed  a  tribute  on 
the  Province  of  Laighen  (?  Lagena,  Lainca),  which  was  called 
by  the  curious  name  Boroma.  O'Donovan  calls  it  the  "  Cow- 
Tribute,"f  but,  although  bo  means  "a  cow,"  roimhd  does  not 
mean  "  tribute."  Dr.  Whitley  Stokes,  dismissing  the  "  cow  "  part 
of  the  etymology,  derives  it  from  a  pre-Celtic  stem  cognate 
with  the  Greek  <f)6po<;,  "  that  which  is  brought."  J  The  plain  sense 
of  the  name,  however,  since  the  o  in  do  is  long,  and  Roma  is 
the  genitive  of  Rom  (Rome),  is  the  "Cows  of  Rome,"  that  is, 
a  cattle  tribute,  such  as  the  Romans  had  been  accustomed  to 
levy  on  the  Germans  and  other  barbarian  tribes.  Such  a  power 
of  levying  tribute  would  naturally  have  been  exercised  by  the 
Herulian  nominee  of  the  Roman  Empire,  and  would  have  borne 
the  name  "  Roman,"  whether  levied  directly  by  a  Roman  Emperor 
or  by  a  native  prince  who  had  learned  his  lesson  in  governing  at 
the  court  of  Justinian.  Hence  it  would  have  come  to  mean 
"  tribute  "  in  general.  The  son  and  successor  of  Tuathal  is  repre- 
sented as  a  law^giver,  and  as  instituting  the  Lex  Talionis,  carrying 
out,  therefore,  additional  reforms  in  just  such  a  direction  as  might 
be  expected  from  a  pupil  in  the  schools  of  Byzantium.  From  this 
circumstance  he  was  called  Reachtmar  (from  reacht  =  ^^\Qy:."). 
His  first  and  proper  name  was  Feidhlimidh,  which  I  think  we 
shall  not  be  wrong  in  associating  with  the  Herulian  proper-name 
<t>tXtju,ov^,  Philimuth,  which  Procopius  gives  us  as  that  of  one  of 
the  princes  of  that  people. 

The  place  where  Tuathal  fought  the  rebel  Aitheach-Tuatha 
was  Ath  Comair,  "  ford  where  the  rivers  meet,"  while  Comorn,  the 
meeting-point  of  the  Danube  and  the  Waag,  was  perhaps  the 
most  likely  place  at  which  the  rebel  Heruli  would  have  confronted 
Suartuas  and  his  Roman  allies. 

Speaking  generally,  the  account  which  Procopius  gives  us  of 
the  characteristics  of  the  Heruli,  and  that  which  Mac  Firbis  gives 
us  as  the  tradition  of  what  the  P^ir-Bolg  were  like,  are  so  wonder- 
fully similar,  that,  even  was  there  no  reason  to  think  that  these 
peoples  might  have  been  identical,  the  Heruli  might  be  termed 
the  Fir-Bolg  of  continental  history  in  the  fifth  century.  If  we 
turn  to  p.  1027  of  this  work,  we  shall  find  the  description  of  the 
P'ir-Bolg  to  which  I  allude.  Of  the  Aitheach-Tuatha  Mac  Firbis 
states    that  they   were    deemed    ignoble    because    of   their    evil 

t  A.  4  M.,  n.  vol.  i.  p.  100.  X  See  Rev.  Celt.,  Jan.,  1892,  p.  32. 


Ethnology  and  Tradition.  1155 


deeds.  With  these  accounts  let  us  compare  Procopius,  who  styles 
the  Heruli  "the  most  evilly  disposed  of  all  human  beings"— 
"covetous,"  "vain-glorious,"  "  restless,"  "  plunderers,"  "seducers 
of  women,"  "men  who  picked  quarrels  unjustly,"  "false,'* 
"holding  it  no  shame  to  wrong  their  neighbours,"  "breakers 
of  treaties,"  "contumelious,"  "surpassing  all  other  peoples 
in  levity  and  mad  folly,"  and  lastly,  guilty  of  the  same  class 
of  offences  with  which  Jerome  charges  the  Scoti  (that  is,  the 
Irish)  and  the  Attacotti.  They  worshipped  many  gods,  whom 
they  held  it  their  duty  to  appease  with  human  sacrifices,  and  when 
a  man  grew  old  he  was  despatched  with  a  straight  sword  upon 
the  top  of  a  funeral  pile  on  which  the  body  was  then  burned,  and 
if  a  dead  man  left  a  widow,  and  she  failed  to  strangle  herself,  she 
was  covered  with  lastlns:  disQfrace. 

Both  the  Fir-Bolg  and  the  Heruli  may  be  and  probably  are 
unfortunate  in  their  historians,  a  fact  for  which  I  think  we  may 
in  great  measure  account  if  we  suppose  them  both  to  be  Bui- 
gares  or  Bolgr,  that  is,  people  who  had  sided  with  the  Huns. 
In  the  first  place,  all  that  was  barbarian,  and  was  not  Gothic,, 
was  held  by  the  haughty  Goths  to  be  "  vile  and  ignoble,"  terms 
which  Jordanesf  applies  to  the  Werini,  or  Warni,  for  instance. 
Secondly,  they  were  enemies  of  the  Goths,  and  the  latter  proved 
victorious.  Thirdly,  they  were  pagans  long  after  the  Goths  had 
been  converted  to  Christianity ;  and,  fourthly,  when  they  did 
become  Christians,  they  were  heretics,  and  for  such  no  vilification 
on  the  part  of  the  orthodox  was  base  and  rank  enough. 

As  to  their  appearance,  it  is  probable  that  there  were  light 
and  dark  Heruli  or  Bulgari,  as  Irish  tradition  describes  to  us 
fair-haired  as  well  as  dark  Fir-Bolg.  The  last  we  hear  of  the 
Heruli  is  when — the  Danes  coming  south — they  were,  as  Jordanes 
tells  us,  expelled  from  their  own  proper  settlements.  As  to  the 
country  to  which  they  went,  history  is  silent.  Those  prop7'ia;- 
secies  of  theirs  must  have  been  next  those  of  the  Danes, 
that  is,  the  coast-land  by  the  Trave,  the  Warnou,  and  the  Peene 
Rivers.  Now,  many  Irish  authorities  have  been  puzzled  to 
account  for  the  fact  that,  although  the  Danes  of  history  did 
not  arrive  in  the  island  of  Erin  until  the  close  of  the  eighth 
century,  Finn  Mac  Cumhaii,  who  is  placed  centuries  prior  to. 
this   date,   and  whose   saga  can  be   shown    to    have   existed  in 

t  Cap.  44. 


ii::6  The  Dolmens  of  Ireland. 


o 


Ireland  prior  to  the  coming-  of  these  Danes,f  is  ever  engaged,  with 
his  Fianna,  or  Fene,  in  fighting  with  Danes.  Let  us  see  whether 
the  scene  of  conflict  may  be  looked  for  on  the  Baltic  coast. 
Here  —  to  repeat  what  has  been  previously  pointed  out  J — 
immediately  opposite  Rugen,  we  have  the  Peene  or  Pene 
River,  east  of  the  Warnou,  giving  name  to  the  Circipene,  the 
people  who  dwelt  on  its  banks,  to  Peenemtinde  (the  estuary),  and 
to  the  Cylipenus  Sinus,§  the  strait  between  the  island  of  Usedom, 
Usenoim,  or  Usna  and  Rugen.  Here  we  have  the  district  of 
Demmin,  Demin,  Dimin,  Dimine,  or  Dammin  (Lat.  Demminum),|| 
which  reminds  us  that  Finn's  proper  name  was  Demni.  We  have 
also  a  saint's  name  Dimma  or  Dimmanus,  and  one  of  those  w^ho 
bore  it  bore  also  the  alias  Ernin,  or  Ernenus,  or  Erenaeus,^  meaning 
an  Irishman.  Just  outside  the  mouth  of  the  Peene  stood  the  town 
of  Wineta,  now  covered  by  the  sea,  but  which  at  one  time  is  said  to 
have  been  one  of  the  principal  marts  of  Europe.  It  is  mentioned 
as  an  important  Wendish  town,  and  a  centre  of  the  religion  of  the 
pagan  Wends  together  with  lulin,  Arckonand  Carentz,ff  the  two 
latter  in  Riigen.  In  another  name  for  lulin  or  lulinum,  which 
■was  on  the  coast  of  Pomerania  Citerior,  we  seem  to  recognize  the 
presence  of  the  Hyni  or  Hiinen,  for  it  was  called  Hinnisberg. 
In  the  word  lulin  itself  we  have  names  very  closely  approximating 
to  Uillin,  Ullin,  Ulidh,  and  Ulidia. 

Finn  itself,  as  a  proper  name,  was  by  no  means  unknown  in 
the  districts  borderino-  on  those  of  the  Danes.  In  the  Anoflo- 
Saxon  poem  of  Beowulf  and  the  episode  called  the  Fight  of 
Finnsberg,  which  belongs  to  it,  we  have  a  Finn  of  Finnsberg,  who 
is  a  chieftain  commanding  Eotens  and  Frisians,  his  enemies  being 
Geatas,  and  Deni  or  Danes. 

This  war  has  been  shown  by  Leo  to  have  taken  place  between 
the  years  512  and  520.  Pinneburg  in  Holstein,  on  the  Pinnou 
River,  has  been  supposed  by  some  to  have  been  Finnsberg,  but 
that  is  uncertain.  It  is  remarkable  that  Finn  should  command 
the  Eotens  (that  is,  the  lutuns),  since  in  Irish  tradition  the 
brother  of  Cumhal,  Finn's  father,  is  lodhlan,  that  is,  lut,  or  lot-land 
— the  land  of  the  lotuns — the  part  of  the  Cimbric  Chersonese 
north  of  the  rampart  called  the  Msenia  Danorum,  the  northern 

t  See  Mr.  Alfred  Nutt's  note  on  a  gloss  to  the  Amra  Choluim  Chille,  "  Waifs  and  Strays," 
vol.  ii.  p.  403. 

X  See  pp.  894,  896,  supra.  §  Johnson's  "  Atlas  of  Classical  Geography." 

II  Zedler,  in  voc.  1  Colgan,  AA.  SS.  Hib.  ;  Smith's  "  Diet.  Christ.  Biog." 

tt  Micr.xilius,  "  Ant.  Pom."  i.  97  ;  Abel,  "  Sachsische  Alterthiim,"  ii.  305. 


Ethnology  and  Tradition.  1157 

extremity  of  which  is  the  present  Jutland.  An  alias  of  lodhlan 
was  Goll  Mac  Morna,  head  of  the  Clanna-Morna,  who  were 
at  blood-feud  with  the  Clanna  Bascaoin,  to  which  Finn 
belonged.  Goll  is  represented  in  oral  traditions  in  Donegal  as 
having  been  driven  into  a  wild,  rocky  peninsula  in  the  north, 
and  there  either  slain  or  starved  to  death.  The  name  lotun 
opens  the  immense  question  as  to  who  were  the  Picts,  after 
whom  was  named  the  Muir-an-Icht,  i.e.  the  English  Channel 
and  North  Sea,  because  it  was  on  the  further  shore  of  it  that 
these  peoples  dwelt,  just  as  we  now  speak,  for  like  reason, 
of  the  German  Ocean.  It  was  in  the  year  360,  or  more  than  a 
century  and  a  half  before  the  events  to  which  the  historical 
element  in  Beowulf  belongs,  that  Picts — together  with  Scots  and 
Attacotts — are  first  mentioned  in  Britain.  The  old  German 
writers  always  took  for  granted  that  it  was  from  the  German 
coasts  that  they  sailed  for  Britain, f  and  Sir  Henry  Howorth  and 
others  have  pointed  to  the  name  Fresonicum  Mare  \  on  the  coast 
of  Scotland  as  an  indication  that  it  was  from  the  Frisian  districts 
that  some  at  least  of  them  came. 

In  Cumhal's  name  we  appear  to  have  that  of  Humal,  Humel, 
or  Humbli,  in  which  case  Finn  Mac  Cumhal  would  be  Finn 
Hummeling,  a  district  bearing  which  name  lay  on  the  Ems  and 
Hase,  and  consisted  of  forest,  moor,  and  morass.  In  Osnabruck, 
which  either  included  it  or  was  adjacent  to  it,  Paul  Wislicenus 
places  Ptolemy's  tribe,  the  Danduti.  The  country  of  the  latter, 
again,  was  next  to  that  of  the  Chassuarii,  who  appear  later  as 
the  Hatvere,  the  name  of  a  chieftain  of  whom  was  Hun.  In  the 
Hummelingk  was,  as  we  have  seen,  the  HUnebed  called  Sorbold's 
Grave. 

Populations,  then,  bearing  the  name  Hyni — that  of  the  people 
whom  Humber  led  to  Britain — and  Peene,  with  which  Feinne 
may  certainly  be  compared,  and  Eotens  or  lotuns,  or  luchts,  that 
is,  Picts — with  chieftains  bearing  the  names  of  Finn  and  Hun — 
occupied  the  country  between  the  Ems  and  the  Oder.  These 
tribes  are  not  to  be  identified  with  the  Heruli — although  both 
alike  may  at  successive  periods  have  found  a  common  enemy 
in  the  Danes — any  more  than  are  the  Feinne  of  Erin  to  be 
identified  with  the  Fir-Bolgf.      On   the   one  hand,  however,  we 


t  See  Pomponius   Lcetus,   "  Hauris.  Script.   Hist.   Rom.,"  vol.  iii.  p.  600:    "  Picti  et  Scoti, 
Germanise  Gentes."     See  also  J.  Aventinus  (Thunmair)  Annal  Boiorum,  lib.  vii.  p.  9. 
X  See  above. 


iis8  The  Dolmens  of  Ireland. 


need  not,  I  think,  dissociate  their  names  from  those  of  Hunen,  or 
Hunni,  of  Fenni  or  Phinni,  who  may  well  have  passed  westward 
along  the  shores  of  the  southern  Baltic,  while  on  the  other  a 
decidedly  Germanic  element  among  them  may  give  us  reason  to 
associate  them  with  Finno-Germanic  or  ^stian  stock.f 

We  now  turn  to  the  fourth  immigration  saga,  that  of  the 
Tuatha  De  Danann,J  with  whom,  as  we  have  seen,  Colgan 
connects  with  the  Picts.  These  tribes,  as  they  are  represented, 
are  not  only  not  in  general  inimical  to  Finn  Mac  Cumhail,  but  when 
he  and  his  Fianna  were  about  to  fight  Daire  Dornmor,  Emperor 
of  the  World,  at  a  strand  called  Fionntraighe  or  Ventry,  we 
are  told  that  a  remnant  of  them  came  to  his  aid  as  allies.  That 
they  appear  to  have  been  the  divinities  of  a  people,  rather  than 
the  people  themselves,  I  have  previously  expressed  my  opinion, 
and,  in  the  mythological  system  they  represent,  a  clear  affinity 
with  that  of  Scandinavia  is  perceptible.  In  common  with  the 
Fir-Bolg,  however,  whom  they  subsequently  conquer  and  expel,  as 
the  Langobardi  in  the  south,  and  afterwards  the  Danes  in  the 
north,  did  the  Heruli,  the  traditional  genealogies  represent  them 
as  descendants  of  Nemed,  who,  under  the  command  of  larbhainel 
Faidh,  a  son  of  Nemed,  fled  from  the  oppressions  of  the 
Fomorians.  Some  accounts  lead  them  to  Bceotia ;  others  to 
Achaia  and  Athens,  and  place  them  on  the  borders  of  Bceotia, 
near  Thebes.  Stories  of  wizardry  follow,  in  the  practice  of  which 
they  are  finally  worsted,  and,  in  fear  of  falling  into  the  hands  ot 
their  enemies,  they  set  out  for  the  north  and  reach  Scandinavia, 
their  principal  chieftain  being  Nuada  Argatlamh,  or  Nuada  of  the 
Silver- Hand. 

The  assistance  which  they  are  said  to  have  rendered  to  the 
Greeks  reminds  us  of  the  help  given  by  the  more  purely 
Germanic,  principally  Gothic  settlers  on  the  Danube,  to  the 
Byzantine  Empire. 

We  then  find  them  located  by  tradition  among  the  Danes,  to 
whom  they  act  as  tutors  in  four  cities,  or  states :  Falias,  Finnias, 
Gorias,  and  Murias.  Four  of  their  "  professors  "  taught  in  the 
schools — namely,  Moirfhias,  Arias,  Erus,  and  Semias. 

From  these  places  they  removed  to  the  north  of  Scotland,  near 
Dobhar  and  lardobhar,  where  they  remained  seven  years.     They 

t  See  above,  p.  773,  et  seqq. 

\  It  is  not  impossible  that  in  the  name  of  the  Danduti  [?  Dan-liiit,  i.e.  Tuath  (De)  Danann],  in 
Osnabriick,  we  have  one  elymologically  identical  with  that  of  these  peoiile. 


Ethnology  and  Tradition.  1159 

carried  with  them  from  FaHas  the  Lia  Fail,  from  which  the  city 
had  received  its  name.  It  possessed  a  remarkable  quality,  that  of 
emitting  a  sound.  It  gave  name  also  to  Inis-Fail,  the  Tuatha- 
De-Danann  name  for  Ireland.     Some  called  it  the  Fatal  Stone. 

From  Gorias  the  Tuatha  De  Danann  brought  away  the  Sword 
of  Lug.  From  Finnias  they  brought  the  Spear  of  the  same 
divinity.  From  Murias  they  brought  a  Cauldron  called  Coirean 
Daghdha,  the  Cauldron  of  Dagda.f  Their  power  of  forming  a 
magical  mist  about  them,  and  their  victory  over  the  Fir-Bolg  have 
been  previously  noticed. 

The  termination  of  the  place-names,  -ias,  signifies  a  country 
or  district,  and  stands  for  -iath,  as  in  Scoriath  or  Scorias,  or  for 
-atk,  as  in  Hiruath.  With  these  may  be  compared  the  name  of 
the  city  in  which  Fenius  Farsaidh  is  said  to  have  taught  in  the 
East,  namely,  Eothona,  or  Eothena,J  (?  for  Eothon^i;^,  Eothen^^)  — 
that  is  to  say,  the  city  or  country  of  the  Euthiones,  lotuns, 
Yuchts,  or  Picts. 

Falias  would  signify  the  country  of  Fal,  that  is,  Fala,  Falia,  or 
Phalia,  as  in  West-Phalia,  East-Phalia,  Asfala.  Just  north  of  this 
district,  and  included  in  it,  was  the  Hummelingk  of  which  I  have 
spoken.  If  Falias,  then,  be  Falia,  Finnias  may  be  Pinneberg,  or 
wherever  else  the  Finnsberg  of  the  Beowulf  episode  may  be 
looked  for.  In  Gorias  we  may  have  Goritz  on  the  Oder,  and  in 
Murias  the  marsh-lands  of  Murizzi,  so  that  the  district  of  the 
Tuatha  De  Danann  would  have  extended,  at  one  time,  from  the 
Ems  to  the  Oder,  covering,  indeed,  the  Elbe  country,  on  both 
•sides  of  the  river — much  the  same  district  as  that  which  we  have 
previously  allotted  to  the  Langobardi. 

The  mythical  beings,  or  divinities,  who  constitute  the  Tuatha 
De  Danann,  or  "  Tribes  of  Gods  of  Danu,"  took  their  name  from 
Danu  or  Dana,  who  was  the  daughter  of  Dealbhaoth,  whose  name 
brings  us  back  to  the  river  Delvunda  and  the  Elbe  country,  of 
which  I  have  spoken  when  referring  to  Dealbnata,  Partholan's 
wife.  Lia  Fail,  that  is,  Fal's  Stone,  was  the  name  of  the  most 
precious  possession  which  these  people  brought  with  them  to  Erin. 
To  Erin  they  gave  the  name  Inis  Fail  or  Peal's  Island,  and  Mag 
P""ail,  Fal's  Plain.  The  word  occurs  in  two  place-names  at  least, 
Ath  Finnfail,  "White  Fal's  Ford"— Finnfal  was  another  name  for 

t  Compare  the  cauldron  of  the  Cimbri. 

X  See  O'Curry,  Mat.,  p.  15.      Kothena  seems  to  be  the  correct  reading.     It  appears  also  as 
Eoterea  civitas  (Bk.  of  Lecan,  fol.  152a). 


ii6o  The  Dolmens  of  Ireland. 


the  god — and  in  that  of  another  Inis  Fail,  which  was  the  name  of 
Beo-  Eri  or  Little  Erin  in  Wexford  harbour,  associated  with  the 
cultus  of  Saint  Ibor,  one  of  those  Christians  of  whom  tradition 
averred  that  they  preceded  Patrick  in  Ireland  and  opposed  him. 
Ibor  was  the  name  of  one  of  the  two  primitive  Langobardic  leaders. 
There  can  be  no  doubt  that  Fal  was  a  sun-god. j  He  was 
connected  with  water  as  well,  from  the  fact,  perhaps,  that  nightly 
he  sank  into  the  sea.  One  form  of  his  name  was  Nuada  Finnfail, 
and  Nuada  was  a  sea-god.  In  this,  and  other  points,  Fal  ap- 
proaches closely  to  Manannan  Mac  Lir.  Just  as  the  latter  rolls 
over  the  sea  with  his  three  legs,  so  Fal's  Wheel,  the  Roth  Fal 
or  Roth  Ramach,  said  to  mean  the  Wheel  with  Paddles,  moves 
through  the  air.  Fal  belongs  also  to  the  worship  at  Temair, 
and  there  his  stone  was  located.  One  of  the  three  mythical 
kings  of  the  Tuatha  De  Danann,  called  Ceathoir,  son  of  Cearmna 
son  of  the  Dagda,  was  also  called  Mac  Greine,  because,  so  it  is 
explained,  he  chose  for  his  god  Grian,  that  is,  the  Sun. 

Fal,  in  Ireland,  is  the  German  god  Phol,  whom  Grimm  identifies, 
on  the  one  hand,  with  Beal,  and,  on  the  other,  with  Baldr.  In 
Anglo-Saxon  bael  is  "  a  funeral  pile,"  and  bdl  in  Old  Norse  has 
the  same  meaning.  He  seems,  also,  to  recognize  the  possibility 
of  the  origin  of  this  word  having  to  be  looked  for  outside  the 
limits  of  Aryan  speech  itself,  since  in  Finnish /^/i?  is  "  fire."  Olaus 
Magnus  speaks  of  the  practice  of  lighting  Midsummer  Fires  in 
Scandinavia.  There  is  no  reason,  however,  to  consider  this  a 
custom  of  Aryan  origin,  for  Leems,  in  his  account  of  the 
Laplanders,  tells  us  that  they  held  their  sacrifices  to  a  sun-god 
on  Midsummer  Eve. 

Dykes,  called  in  Ireland  "  Danes'  Casts,"  "  Furrows  of  the 
Black  Pig,"  etc.  ;  in  England  *'  Worms'  Dykes "  and  "  Devil's 
Dykes ; "  and  which  in  Scotland  are  attributed  to  the  Picts  under 
such  names  as  "  Picts'  Wark,"  or  "  Cat-Rail,"  are  in  Germany 
called  Pholgraben,  Phalhecke,  etc.  Sometimes  in  Germany  Phol 
appears  in  the  form  Pholc,  as  in  the  case  of  an  alternative 
spelling  Phulsborn  and  Pfolczborn.  In  the  cultus  of  Phol,  near 
Trier,  the  Wheel  bears  a  prominent  part.  On  a  certain  Sunday 
in  each  year  a  wheel  set  on  fire  was  rolled  down  the  side  of  a  hill 
called  Pulsberg,  into  the  Moselle,  and  a  similar  custom  prevailed 
elsewhere.     On  the  top  of  the  Stromberg,  on  Midsummer  Night, 

t  Professor  Rhys  connects  his  name  with  the  Welsh  gwawl,  "radiance." 


Ethnology  and  Tradition.  ii6i 


men  and  youths  assembled,  and  each  house  deHvered  its  truss 
of  straw — the  women  and  girls  being  stationed  at  a  spring  of 
water  near  by.  A  huge  wheel  was  then  wrapped  round  in  the 
straw,  a  strong  pole  passed  through  the  middle,  and,  being  lighted, 
and  guided  on  either  side  by  those  who  ran  with  the  pole,  was 
rolled  down  the  steep  into  the  river,  its  course  being  accompanied 
by  great  rejoicing,  and  an  abundant  harvest  predicted  in  case  it 
reached  the  water  while  still  alight. 

But  Phol  or  Ful  had  another  meaning.  It  signified  a  "Boar," 
the  cultus  of  which  animal  obtained,  as  we  know,  both  among  the 
^stians  and  the  Scandinavians,  and  probably  in  Ireland,  too,  to 
judge  by  the  numberless  legends  of  the  Black  Pig,  of  enchanted 
pigs,  and  last,  but  not  least,  of  the  pig  that  was  killed  in  honour 
of  Martin — a  survival  of  the  practice  of  sacrificing  this  animal  to 
the  war-god,  for  between  "  sacrificing  to  "  and  "  killing  in  honour 
of"  this  or  that  divinity  or  saint  is  a  mere  matter  of  the  terms 
used.  In  the  names  Pholespiunt  and  Eburespiunt,  in  either  case 
signifying  the  enclosure  of  the  (sacred)  Boar,  we  have  examples  of 
places  specially  set  apart  for  his  worship. 

Another  name  for  a  sacred  spot  was  auc,  in  connection  with 
which  the  name  of  Phol  also  occurs,  as  Pfalsau  in  Bavaria,  the  old 
name  for  which  was  Pholesauwa,  "its  composition  with  aue,"  says 
Grimm,  "  quite  fitting  in  with  the  supposition  of  an  old  heathen 
worship.  The  gods,"  he  adds,  "were  worshipped  on  eas,  islets 
inclosed  by  brooks  and  rivers,  where  fertile  meadows  yielded 
pasture,  and  forests  shade."  Such  was  the  "  castum  nemus "  of 
Nerthus  (or  Hertha)  in  an  insula  Oceani ;  such,  too,  was  Foseteland, 
with  its  willows  and  well-springs.  .  .  .f  Baldershagi  (Balderi  pas- 
cuum),  mentioned  in  the  FriS}>iofssaga,  was  an  enclosed  sanctuary, 
which  none  might  damage.  Convents,  also,  for  which  time- 
hallowed  sites  were  preferred,  were  often  situated  in  eas,  and 
of  one  nunnery  the  very  word  is  used  "  in  der  megde  ouwe^' 
that  is,  "  in  the  maids'  m."  From  these  establishments  of  Christian 
women  on  islands  there  seems  no  necessity  for  dissociating  the 
establishments  of  pagan  women  on  islands  which  preceded  them. 
Of  these  latter  in  Gaul  we  meet  with  two  notable  examples,  the 
one  that  of  the  virgins  of  the  Island  of  Sena,  called  Gallicenae, 


t  For  examples  of  Well-Worship,  in  Scandinavia,  precisely  similar  to  that  practised  in  Ireland, 
see  Oedman's  "  Bahus-Lans  Beshrifning,"  p.  169,  where  we  read  that  multitudes  of  pilgrims 
visited  St.  Olafskialla  and  dropped  offerings  in,  and  Bexell's  "Hallands  llistoria,"  iii.  69,  for 
springs  rising  near  tombs  of  saints. 

VOL.  III.  2    G 


ii62  The  Dolmens  of  Ireland. 

on  the  coast  of  Brittany,  opposite  the  Osismii ;  f  the  other  that 
of  the  priestesses  on  an  island  opposite  the  mouth  of  the  Loire, 
called  by  Strabo  that  of  the  Samnites.;J;  In  Ireland,  where,  as 
we  have  seen,  the  term  cailleac  was  applied  to  a  nun  and  to 
a  witch,  establishments  of  women  are  pointed  out  as  having 
existed  in  certain  islands,  such,  for  example,  as  Inish  Clothra, 
in  Loch-Ree,  and  Inish-Murray,  on  the  coast  of  Sligo.  The 
settlement  of  Christian  monks,  again,  on  islands  such  as  those  of 
Scellig-Michael,  on  the  coast  of  Kerry,  and  Ardoilen  on  that  of 
Galway,  and  the  sanctity  attached  to  Inish-INIac-Duach,  on  the  same 
coast,  all  bear  testimony  to  the  survival  of  a  veneration  commenced 
in  days  of  heathendom,  and  which  finds  its  counterpart  in  Scan- 
dinavia, where  Odensee  is  Odin's  Island,  or  Oe ;  Thorsey  Thor's 
Oe  ;  Lassoe  Hler's  Oe  ;  and  many  more.  In  Ireland,  the  name 
of  the  sacred  Tefxevo^s,  or  enclosure,  was  the  loan-word  casJiel,  or,  for 
smaller  venerated  sites  not  enclosing  a  building,  ulla.  Gobnat  had, 
as  we  have  seen,  her  idla,  and  Briget  had  her  sacred  fence.  In 
Germany  the  enclosed  space  was  called  piiint,  and  in  Norse  it 
\i2iS,  gri^asta'^r.  Ouwa,  Awe,  or  Oe,  meant  an  island.  Inish  Fail, 
therefore,  is  identical  in  meaning  with  Pholesouwa. 

With  respect  to  the  identity  of  Phol,  Phal,  or  Fal  with  the  Beal 
or  Bel  of  more  western  mythology,  Grimm  remarks  that  "  the 
Old  High  German  ph  seems  to  be  an  aspirate  answering  to 
the  Saxon  tenuis  p,  representing  the  Old  Aryan  ^."  Inclining  to 
this  hypothesis,  he  "  connects  Phol  and  Pol  (the  o  in  which  latter 
may  very  well  have  sprung  from  the  a)  with  the  Celtic  Beal,  Beul, 
Bel,  Belenus,  a  divinity  of  light  and  fire  " — the  Gaulish  equivalent 
of  Apollo. 

Now,  in  relation  to  this  idea,  I  may  point  out  a  curious  passage 
which,  through  the  medium  of  a  significant  epithet,  may  link  the 
Irish  Fal  with  the  Kymric  Beli  or  Bel,  and  both  with  the  supreme 
deity  and  war-god  (the  First  Lord  of  the  Treasury,  whether  in 
Olympus  or  Valhalla,  always  took  to  himself  the  portfolio  of 
^Minister  of  War)  of  Norse  mythology.  The  Lia  Fail  which 
the  Tuatha  De  Danann  brought  from  Falias  was  called  the  Saxuni 

o 

Fatah.  In  a  commentary  on  the  Poem  of  Merlin  by  Johannes 
Cornubiensis,§  we  have  the  name  Caer-Beli,  as  that  of  a  place 
somewhere  in  Cornwall,  and,  appended  to  it,  the  gloss  Castr2im 

t  "  Mela,"  iii.  6. 

X   "Geogr.,"  edit.  Firm.  Didot,  p.  165  ;  see  also  Dionys.,  "  Perig.,"  571. 

§  "  Spicilegium  Vaticanum,"  C.  Greilh,  p.  104,  n. 


Ethnology  and  Tradition.  1163 

FatalCy  with  the  curious  remark  in  addition  that  the  equivalent  of 
Caer-BeH  among  the  Anglo-Saxons  was  Ashbiri.  Birl,  that  is, 
buri,  bury,  burg,  is  evidently  equated  with  caer,  and  there  remains 
the  name  Ask  to  equate  with  Beli — this  very  word  Ash,  or  Asch, 
being  a  frequent  name  for  Odin.  Between  this  name  for  Odin 
and  the  ash-tree  there  was  an  acknowledged  connection.  Odin 
was  not  only  the  Ash,  but  the  son  of  the  Ash.  From  Ash  and 
Embla  in  the  Voluspa  Saga  sprung  the  human  race,  the  first  of 
whom  formed  the  triplet,  Odin,  Vile,  and  Ve.  With  Vile  is  it 
possible  to  equate  the  Irish  Bile,  which  is  the  term  used  for  the 
old  and  venerated  tree,  generally  an  ash,  which  grows  over  cills 
or  wells,  or  in  churchyards,  or  in  any  other  holy  place  ? 
So,  at  least,  it  seems,  and  Bile  also  signifies  "an  idol,"  which  in 
that  case  would  be  the  simulacrum,  either  the  tree  itself  or  the 
lignea  effigies  hewn  from  its  trunk,  of  Odin  alias  Beli. 

In  Westphalia  is  a  place  called  Aschburg,  and  in  Tacitus  we 
have  Asciburgium  on  the  Rhine,  a  place  which  he  associates  with 
the  travels  of  Ulysses,  and  with  an  altar  to  that  hero,  said  to  have 
existed  there — a  tradition  possibly  based  on  the  story  of  the  travels 
of  Odin,  recited  by  natives  to  some  intelligent  Roman. 

The  undoubted  presence  of  the  mythology,  which  we 
generally  know  as  Norse,  in  Germany,  is  a  very  remarkable 
fact.  In  the  "  Description  of  Ancient  Saxony,"  by  Caspar 
Schneider,  an  interesting  account  will  be  found  of  Eresburg, 
Marsburg,  or  Merseberg,  on  the  Dymel,  once  the  principal 
stronghold  of  the  Saxons.  Somewhere  near  it  was  the  Irmensul, 
the  pillar-idol,  destroyed  by  Charlemagne,  and  here  too  was  a 
miraculous  well,  bearing  the  alternative  names  of  the  Polter- 
Brunn  and  the  Buller-Born,  in  each  of  which  we  recognize 
a  form  of  the  name  Balder.  To  go  northwards,  we  have  in 
Drenthe  a  venerated  enclosure,  described  by  Picardt  and  others, 
called  the  Baller-koele,!  or  -kuile,  referable,  I  think,  to  the  same 
name  and  cuitus.  For  evidence  that  Phol  and  Balder,  in  the 
Merseberg  Lays,  indicate  one  and  the  same  divinity,  we  have  only 
to  turn  to  Grimm's  "  Teutonic  Mythology."  "  From  the  valuable 
revelations  of  the  Merseberg  discovery,"  he  says,  "we  are  now 
fully  assured  of  a  divine  Balder  in  Germany,  but  there  emerges 
again  a  long- forgotten  mythus,  and  with  it  a  new  name  (Phol), 
unknown  even  to  the  North."     Phol  is  represented  as  riding  with 

t  op.  cit,,  supra. 


1 164  The  Dolmens  of  Ireland. 

Wodan,  when  his  horse  is  lamed.  "  Phol  and  Paltar  {i.e.  Balder) 
are  in  their  beginning  one,  but  reveal  to  us  two  divergent 
developments  of  the  same  word,  and  a  not  unimportant  difference 
in  the  mythology  of  the  several  Teutonic  races.  So  far  as  we 
can  see,  the  god  was  worshipped,  under  the  name  of  Phol,  chiefly 
by  the  Thuringians  and  Bavarians,  that  is,  according  to  ancient 
nomenclature,  the  Hermunduri  and  Marcomanni,  yet  they  seem 
to  have  also  known  his  other  name,  Paltar  or  Baldar  ;  while  Baldag, 
Baeldag,  the  name  of  Wodan's  son,  prevailed  among  the  Saxons 
and  Westphalians,  and  the  Anglo-Saxon  bealdor,  baldor,  passed 
into  a  common  noun,  meaning:  '  lord.'  "  In  the  Rhine  districts, 
Phol's  day  was  called  Pfultag,  or  Pulletag,  and  fell  on  the  2nd  of 
May.  The  Rhinelanders,  in  fact,  kept  their  Beltaine  just  as  the 
Irish  did,  worshipping  at  that  season  the  same  god  Bel,  or  Beal, 
or  Fal,  with  the  fiery  ritual  proper  to  him,  and  which  may  be 
perhaps  traced  back  to  an  aboriginal  niltus,  independent  altogether 
of  considerations  solely  affecting  the  question  of  an  Aryan  race. 

To  Ireland,  with  certain  differences,  the  same  remark  with 
regard  to  the  presence  of  the  several  names  of  the  divinity  there, 
may  be  made,  as  Grimm  made  in  the  case  of  Germany,  namely, 
that  they  reached  the  island  at  different  periods,  some  at  an  earlier, 
some  at  a  later  date,  some  in  one  portion  of  the  country,  some  in 
another,  some  given  by  those  who  were  friendly  to  the  god,  some 
by  his  enemies,  yet  all  tracing  back  to  one  stock,  though  without 
the  slightest  knowledge  on  the  part  of  those  who  used  them  that 
such  was  the  case.  For  instance,  those  who  danced  through  the 
fires  at  Beltaine  may  have  regarded  Balor  of  Tory  as  the  tyrant 
and  one-eyed  ogre  of  the  extant  traditions  regarding  him. 

The  form  of  the  name  which  presumably  is  the  most  ancient, 
is  the  Celticized  one,  namely,  Bel,  Bell,  Bil  or  Bial,  and  Beall,  as 
in  Bell-taine,f  or  Bealltaine,  or  Biltene,  meaning  "  May-day," 
and  explained  the  "  Fire  of  Bel "  or  the  "  Lucky  Fire,"  with  which 
word  "  Lucky  "  we  may  compare  the  epithet  fatalis,  and  with  Bel 
the  bilc%  that  is,  the  idol,  and  the  venerated  tree.  A  second  form 
would  be  the  Germanized  one  Fal,  brought  traditionally  by  the 
Tuatha  De  Danann,  and  which  gives  us  the  Fail  in  Inish  Fail,  etc. 
A  third  form  would  be  of  Scandinavian  origin,  slightly  modified  in 
Ireland  from  Baldr  into  Balor,  (genitive  Balra)  traditions  regarding 
whom  represent  him  as  a  piratical  tyrant  hailing  from  the  North, 

t  See  "Sanas  Chormaic,"  edit.  O'Donovan,  p.  19. 


Ethnology  and  Tradition.  1165 

and  coming,  therefore,  as  an  enemy  to  the  settled  population.  It 
is  to  be  noticed  that  it  is  the  Tuatha  De  Danann  divinity- 
Lug  who  killed  Balor,  while  Baldr  met  his  death  through  the 
devices  of  Loke. 

The  name  Tuatha  De  Danann  sicjnifies  '*  Tribes  of  the  Gods 
of  Danu."  Danu  is  identical  with  Anu,  just  as  Athi  is  with  Dathi, 
a  statement  which  is  confirmed  by  a  passage  in  Cormac's  Glossary 
compared  with  one  in  Keating,  the  former  giving  to  the  mountains, 
commonly  called  **  The  Paps "  in  Kerry,  the  name  Da  Chich 
Anainne,  that  is,  "  The  Two  Paps  of  Ana,"  and  the  latter  that 
of  "Da  Chidh  Danan,"  i.e.  "The  Two  Paps  of  Dana  or  Danu." 
Ana,  says  Cormac,|  was  the  Mater  Deo  rum  Hibernensiwn.  She 
was  also  called  Buannan,  which  latter  name  connects  her  with 
Euan,  who  was  the  wife  of  the  Dagda,  otherwise  called  Eochaid 
Ollathair. 

In  Welsh  legends  Danu's  name  takes  the  form  of  Don,  and 
this  Don  is  the  wife  of  Beli.  This  Beli  Professor  Rhys  equates 
with  Balor.  Each  of  them,  at  all  events,  has  a  grandson  called 
respectively  Llew  (in  Welsh)  and  Lug  (in  Gaedhelic).  But  Lug, 
who  kills  Balor,  is  equivalent  (mythologically)  to  Loke,  who  kills 
Baldr, — Beli,  Balor,  and  Baldr  being,  as  we  have  seen,  names 
attributable  to  a  common  origin. 

Now,  Baldr's  wife  is  Nanna,  and  the  same  mutation  which 
gives  to  Athi  alias  Dathi  the  further  alias  Nathi,J  would  give  to 
Ana  and  Dana  the  further  alias  of  Nanna. 

The  process  by  which  the  "mother  of  the  gods,"  and  the 
"  nurse  of  heroes "  §  came  to  be  variously  apportioned  in 
mythology,  first  as  wife  to  one  chief  deity  and  then  to  another, 
first  to  the  father  and  then  to  the  son,  it  is  not  difficult  to 
comprehend.  Odin's  wife,  again,  is  called  Frigg,  which  (the  f 
being  exchanged  for  b,  as  see  above)  is  identical  with  the  name 
of  Brigg,  the  Dagda's  daughter.  As  these  names  appear  before 
us  then,  Odin,  the  Allfather,  divine  ancestor  of  the  Teutonic 
peoples,  has  for  wife  Frigg,  who  is  equivalent  to  Brigg,  daughter 
of  the  Dagda  the  Allfather,  divine  ancestor  of  the  Tuatha  De 
Danann.  Odin  and  Frigg  have  a  son  called  Baldr,  killed  by 
means  of  Loke,  the  light-god,  and  whose  wife  is  Nanna,  which 
equals  Ana  or  Dana,  mother   of  the  gods    of  the    Tuatha    De 

t  "  Sanas,"  p.  4.  X  See  below,  p.  1170. 

§  Buannan  is  so  called  in  Cormac's  Glossary. 


1 1 66  The  Dolmens  of  Ireland. 

Danann,  who,  again,  is  Don,  the  wife  of  Beli  (an  older  form  of 
Baldr)  in  Welsh  mythology.  Or,  by  the  contrary  process,  we  have 
the  Dagda,  called  also  Eochaid  the  Allfather,  whose  wife  is  Buan, 
or  Ana,  or  Dana,  equal  to  Nanna,  wife  of  Baldr,  son  of  Odin  the 
Allfather,  and  his  wife  Frigg,  whose  name,  as  we  have  seen,  is 
identical  with  that  of  Brigg,  daughter  of  the  Dagda  the  All- 
father,  and  Buan,  Ana  or  Dana,  or  Nanna,  his  wife.  This  is  a 
mythological  jumble  indeed,  but  it  can  be  no  mere  accident,  and 
would  in  itself  go  a  long  way  to  prove,  were  there  no  other  evi- 
dence, that  the  Irish  and  Norse  systems  are  one,  not  in  the  sense 
of  having  been  evolved  independently  from  one  common  Aryan 
source  in  ages  of  remote  antiquity,  but  in  that  of  having  been 
identical  in  comparative  recent  times. 

The  very  scheme  of  the  mythological  systems  of  Ireland  and 
Scandinavia  are  identical.  Take,  for  example,  the  triplets  of 
correlative  divinities.  In  one  case  the  individuals  appear  to  be 
the  same.  In  the  Norse  version  we  have  Bor  and  Bestla ;  in  the 
Irish,  Eochaid  Fedlech,  and  Crofinna  ; — in  each  case  two  pairs  of 
mythical  beings,  from  the  former  of  whom  descend  the  triplet 
Odin,  Hcenir,  and  LoSur ;  and  from  the  latter  Bres  (=  Eochaid), 
Nar,  and  Lothar.  Lobur  and  Lothar  are  identical  ;  Nar  and 
Hxmr  (there  is  also  a  Nar  in  Norse  mythology)  may  be  so  also, 
while  Bres  is  merely  an  adjective,  meaning  "  great."  For  myself, 
I  think  that  while  Irish  and  Icelandic  mythology  are  clearly 
closely  related,  the  latter,  in  the  form  in  which  we  receive  it, 
is  the  younger  of  the  two.  Odin  or  Othin,  and  Oisin,  each 
regarded  as  the  Orpheus  of  northern  peoples,  were  probably  once 
the  same,  but  it  is  sufficient  for  the  Scandinavian  system  to  ascend 
to  Odin,  whereas  the  Irish  version  carries  us  up  to  Finn  his 
father,  and  to  Cumhal  (or  Humal  ?),  beyond  him  again.  Loke,  too, 
with  his  tricky  ways,  has  degenerated  from  the  far  more  serious 
personage  Lug,  the  Tuatha  De  Danann  god,  who  kills  his  grand- 
father Balor,  and  whose  divinity  asserted  itself  so  markedly  in 
Gaul.  In  the  name  Cermad  or  Cearmna,  son  of  the  Dagda,  and 
father  of  a  triplet  of  Tuatha  Dc  Danann  kings,  we  may  have 
the  Norse  HermoSr,  son  of  Odin. 

One  of  the  principal  of  the  Tuatha  De  Danann  pantheon  was 
Dian  Cecht,  whose  attributes  were  those  of  yl^Csculapius  or 
Mercury,  a  circumstance  which  reminds  us  that  a  god  whom  the 
Romans  called  Mercury  is  mentioned  as  having  been  the  principal 


Ethnology  and  Tradition.  1167 

deity  of  the  Germans.  In  the  word  Cecht,  with  the  p  and  c 
mutation,  Professor  Rhys  would  allow  us  to  see  the  name  of  the 
PIcts,  so  that  "  Di  an  Cecht"  would  signify  God  of  the  Picts. 
Ceat,  Ceath,  Ceathoir,  Cethar  would  similarly  be  explained  by 
reference  to  the  name  of  this  people,  as  in  Dun  Cethern 
in  Londonderr}'. 

In  the  Tuatha  De  Danann,  then,  we  appear  to  have  the 
deities  of  a  people  or  peoples  coming  from  Germany,  with  Scando- 
Germanic  affinities,  represented  to  us  through  their  gods.  In 
some  of  the  customs  attributed  to  them,  as  in  the  possession  of 
a  sacred  cauldron,  they  remind  us  of  the  Cimbri  ;  f  in  others,  of 
the  Langobardi.  The  presence  among  them  of  venerated  women 
recalls  to  mind  Velleda,  Aurinia,  and  Ganna.  At  all  events,  they 
were  Germanic,  and  O'FIaherty  recounts  a  tradition  that  they 
spoke  Ge^nnanicd.vA^A^  the  Fir-Bolg  spoke  the  British  language — 
statements  which  must  count  for  little.  They  apparently  occupied 
an  extensive  tract  upon  and  around  the  Elbe,  and  may  have 
included  several  tribes.  The  one  fact  we  know  of  them  which 
seems  most  like  true  history  is  that  of  the  relation  of  hostility  in 
which  they  stood  towards  the  Fir-Bolg,  corresponding  to  that  of 
the  Chatti  to  the  Cherusci,  or  of  the  Langobardi,  or  (later  on)  the 
Dani,  to  the  Heruli.  That  the  people  who  worshipped  these 
divinities  were  ranged  on  the  side  of  the  people  of  Partholan,  of 
Nemed,  and  of  Finn  and  his  Feinne,  as  distinct  from  the  Fir- 
Bolg  (with  whom,  however,  tradition  remotely  connected  them), 
and  from  the  Fomore,  makes  me  regard  them  as  representing 
German  tribes  who  were  distinct  from  Heruli  and  Sclaves.  That 
they  would  have  been  included  under  the  general  term  "  Picts  " 
is  likely,  for,  when  we  carry  that  term  over  to  the  Continent, 
we  find  that  it  bore  a  far  more  extended  sense  than  it  did  in 
Ireland  when  simply  equated  with  the  Cruithne.  The  coming 
of  the  Picts  of  history  to  the  shores  of  the  British  Isles  is  a 
mere  modern  event  compared  to  the  remote  association  of  the 
Tuatha  De  Danann  with  ancient  sites  of  ancestor-worship,  as  at 
the  Brugh-na-Boinne,  to  which  the  traditions  point.  For  the 
structural  details  and  decoration  at  New  Grange,  we  have  to 
look   to   Scythia   and   Greece   in   the  Bronze  Age.     This  would 

t  Schiader  (transl.  Jevons,  p.  231)  notices  that  "white  shields  were  carried  by  the  Cimbrian 
cavalry  (Plut.,  '  Mar.,'  15) :  in  the  '  Hildehrandslied,'  father  and  son  have  hvitte  sciiti  :  finden,  an 
Irish  name  for  shield  (Windisch.,  '  Fr.  Texte,'  p.  550),  is  obviously  derived  from  findy  white  '^ 
Among  the  Cimbri  women  and  dogs  fought  in  battle  ;  so  tliey  did  among  the  ancient  Irish. 


ii68  The  Dolmens  of  Ireland. 

point  to  the  Tuatha  De  Danann  tradition  being  that  of  deities  of 
a  most  primitive  people,  who,  while  their  Sacred  Island,  where 
were  the  tombs  of  their  ancient  kings,  lay  far  away  in  the  north- 
west, kept  up,  nevertheless,  relations  with  it  which  were  periodi- 
cally resumed  as  time  went  on.  That  a  great  movement  westward 
from  Sarmatian  Scythia  had  taken  place  in  prehistoric  times  can 
scarcely  be  questioned — New  Grange  is  architecturally  and  in  point 
of  ornament  a  barbarian  copy  of  a  Grseco-Scythian  tomb — and  that 
history  was  therefore  but  repeating  itself  in  the  fourth  and  fifth 
centuries,  when  so-called  Scythian  hordes  arrived  in  the  British 
Isles  from  the  coasts  of  Germany  and  the  Baltic,  after  having 
penetrated  beyond  the  Palusf  and  invaded  the  dominions  of  Rome, 
seems  equally  true.  Whoever  the  Picts  and  Scots  were,  they 
were  a  vastly  different  people  to  the  Anglo-Saxons  who  peopled 
southern  and  eastern  Britain.  Their  arrival  in  Ireland  was  an 
event,  however,  of  no  less  importance  to  Ireland — "Scotia,"  as  it 
was  henceforth  to  be — ethnologically  speaking,  than  was  that  of 
the  coming  of  the  Saxons  to  the  island  adjoining.  Why  is  it  that, 
after  living  in  Ireland,  we  can  distinguish  a  native  of  Ireland 
of  a  certain  type,  as  such,  when  we  pass  him  in  an  English 
street  ?  It  is  because  his  stem-land  on  the  continent  of  Europe 
and  that  of  the  Saxon  were  not  the  same.  It  is  because  he  brings 
with  him  characteristics,  physical,  moral,  social,  alike,  which  his 
ancestors  derived  in  countries  of  Europe  further  east  and  south, 
where  men  of  his  type,  among  the  Croats,  for  example,  and  the 
Poles,  are  still  to  be  found  in  plenty.  The  tall  stature  of  the  type 
I  mean,  and  the  eye  "blue  as  the  ocean,"  he  derives  from  the 
German  element  in  the  lierulian,  or  from  a  purer  and  Tuatha-De- 
Danann  source.  From  the  Herulian  also  comes  his  restless  energy 
and  his  mad  love  of  fun.  On  the  other  hand,  his  straight  black 
hair,  his  square  forehead,  his  chronic  reddish  blush,  his  high  cheek- 
bones and  broad  nose,  with  open  nostrils  in  evidence  and  upturned 
point,  his  prognathous  facial  line,  his  shaggy  eyebrows  which  give 
a  fierce  expression  not  intentional,  his  keenness  of  perception  and 
discrimination, — all  these  he  brings  from  the  Scythian  plains,  where 
the  Sarmatian  or  Kalmuck  or  Tscudic  type,  which  this  latter  really 
is,  met  the  blue-eyed  Budini,  the  ancestors  of  the  Sclaves  perhaps, 
the  Bastarnse,  in  whom  have  been  recosfnized  the  first  Germans 
known  to  history,  as  well  as  the  Celts  coming  eastward  down  the 

t  See  what  has  been  said  above  as  to  the  Cotragi  and  Bolgar. 


Ethnology  and  Tradition.  1169 


Danube,  who,  intermingling  with  the  populations,  became  known 
as  Celto-Scyths,  but  of  whose  ethnic  affinities  it  is  difficult  to  form 
an  opinion.  Such  being  the  elements  out  of  which  this  type  of 
Irishman  has  been  formed,  he  differs  from  the  Saxon  in  almost 
every  conceivable  point.  The  restless  energy  of  which  I  have 
spoken,  which  recalls  the  swiftness  in  action  of  the  ubiquitous 
Herulian,  chafes  at  the  narrow  bounds  of  his  island  home,  and 
finds  vent  for  its  yearnings,  wherever  new  fields  for  exertion  and 
fresh  chances  of  engaging  in  daring  exploits  offer  themselves — 
whether  the  role  be  that  of  the  soldier,  the  pioneer  of  civilization, 
or  the  diplomatist.  From  this  race,  wherever  their  continental 
settlements  were  in  the  fourth  century,  Attila  obtained  his 
trusty  statesmen,  Onegesius  (Oengus)  and  Scotta,  as  their  names 
imply ;  to  this  race — whether  we  are  to  call  their  leader  Odoacer 
a  Goth,  or  a  Rugian,  or  an  Herulian,  or  a  Scyrian — that  splendid 
barbarian  owed,  to  no  small  extent,  the  materials  of  that  army 
with  which  he  invaded  Italy.f  Long  ages  have  passed  away 
since  then,  and  yet  History  was  only  repeating  herself  when 
recently  Austria  mourned  the  loss  of  one  of  this  selfsame  race, 
in  that  of  her  distinguished  Prime  Minister,  one  of  the  wisest 
of  European  diplomatists,  an  Irishman,  Count  Taafe. 

In  conclusion,  in  proof  that  a  germ  of  truth  may  lie  unsus- 
pected in  the  native  Irish  stories  contained  in  the  ancient  books, 
I  give  an  example  which  receives  its  confirmation  in  a  continental 
work  contemporary  with  the  event. 

In  Irish  tradition  the  lines  of  the  eponymi  Ir  and  Rudhraighe 
are  closely  associated.  Similarly  on  the  Danube,  in  the 
fifth  century,  the  Heruli  and  the  Rugii  often  meet  us  in 
juxtaposition.  That  Irish  chieftains  and  their  followers  were 
among  those  who  were  perpetually  engaged  in  attacking  the 
Roman  Empire  and  in  plundering  the  provinces,  is  directly  stated 
in  native  tradition.  Crimthann  was  a  kine  of  whom  we  are  told 
that  he  made  successful  predatory  descents  on  Gaul,  Saxony, 
and  Alba,  by  which  latter,  as  I  have  already  said,  I  think  that 
not  always  Scotland  or  more  southern  Britain,  but  the  Roman 
Empire,  is  sometimes  meant.  Niall,  his  successor,  a  descendant 
of  the  Eremonian  line,  was  styled  King  of  Erin  and  Alba,  and 
his  conquests  in  the  East  have  been  already  alluded  to.  Dathi, 
whose   proper    name,   we   are    told,    was    Feradach,   the   son    of 

t  See  note  below,  p.  1174. 


1 170  The  Dolmens  of  Ireland. 

Niall's  brother.  Fiachra,  pillaged  Gaul  and  carried  his  arms  even 
to  the  Alps.  In  the  Tain  Bo  Fraech  we  have  an  account  of  an 
expedition  to  the  same  district.  The  chief  Irian  city  in  Ireland, 
which  was  the  centre  of  the  power  of  the  Clanna  Rudraighe,  was 
Emain  Macha.  "  Every  ferocious  king,"  we  read,  "  fought  for  the 
possession  of  Emain."  f  This  name  strikes  us  as  very  remarkable, 
when  we  compare  this  statement  with  the  fact  that  a  city  bearing 
the  same  name,  Emona  or  Eman,  was  the  very  place  for  which 
every  barbarian  chief  would  have  been  contending,  since  it  was 
the  key  to  the  Alps — occupying  the  site  of  the  modern  Laibach. 

In  illustration  of  the  connection  of  Irish  tradition  with 
continental  history  in  the  fifth  century,  then,  I  will  here  offer 
for  comparison  an  account  of  an  exploit  of  Feradach  or  Dathi, 
with  an  episode  in  the  life  of  Saint  Severinus,  The  Irish  story 
in  the  Lebor-na-hUidhre  runs  as  follows :  "  Nathi  (=  Dathi), 
son  of  Fiachra,  took  (reigned  over)  Erin,  and  invaded  to  the 
Elp  mountains  {co  sliab  nelpa).  Formenus,  King  of  Thrace 
{tracia),  came  on  pilgrimage  to  the  Elp  mountains  at  that  time. 
There  was  made  by  him  a  castle  tower,  and  60  feet  its  height, 
and  1 1  feet  outwards  from  him  to  the  light,  and  he  was  him- 
self in  the  middle  of  the  tower,  and  perceived  not  a  ray  of  the 
light.  Then  came  Nathi  to  the  tower.  Then  the  followers 
of  Nathi  demolished  the  tower.  And  Formenus  perceived  the 
wind  (outer  air)  about  him.  Then  Formenus  was  snatched  from 
them  in  a  flame  of  fire  a  thousand  paces  from  the  tower  {i.e.  a 
thousand  paces  downwards  from  the  mountain  is  Formenus). 
And  Formenus  prayed  to  the  co-Godhead  that  the  reign  of  Dathi 
might  not  be  of  long  continuance,  and  that  his  grave  might  not  be 
conspicuous.  The  king  enjoyed  life  only  while  he  was  destroying 
the  castle,  when  a  flash  of  lightning  came  from  heaven  on  him,  so 
that  he  died. 

"  Amalgaid  (there  were  two  Amalgaids,  one  the  son  of  Fiachra, 
and  the  other,  this  one,  the  son  of  Dathi)  then  took  the  command 
of  the  men  of  Erin,  and  carried  away  the  body  of  his  father  with 
him.  Nine  battles  were  routed  before  him  in  the  East.  In  the 
Decies  of  Temair  there  Amalgaid  died.  Then  the  body  of  Dathi 
was  carried  to  the  West,  and  he  was  buried  at  Cruachan.  A 
company  of  four  men  of  noble  rank  brought  the  body  with  them, 
namely,  Dungalach,  and  Flangus,  Tomaltach,  and  Tuathal,  so  that 

t  Gillemodud,  "O'Conor,"  Piolegom.,  pars.  i.  p.  clxxx.     See  Kelly's  notes  on  Lynch.  Cambr. 
Evers.,  vol.  i.  p.  62. 


Ethnology  and  Tradition.  1171 

he  is  in  the  mid-floor  of  Aenach-Cruachain,  even  as  Torna  Eces 
manifested,  *  Thou  concealest  from  all,  oh !  Cruacha  Crovderg, 
the  comely  King  of  Erin,  Dathi  son  of  Fiachra,  true  King,  by  sea, 
by  land.*  It  has  been  testified  by  all  that  it  was  in  royal  land  the 
King  died." 

Again  :  "  The  saint,  upon  the  demolition  of  his  wall,  said  to 
him,  in  prophetic  strain,  that  neither  his  grave  nor  his  gravestone 
should  be  conspicuous,  oh  !  Cruacho."  f 

The  nine  battles  fought  in  bringing  home  the  body  were, 
according  to  ]\Iac  Firbis  :  (i)  Corpar ;  (2)  Cime,  or  Cinge  ;  (3) 
Colum  ;  (4)  Fale  ;  {5)  Miscal  ;  (6)  Lundun  ;  (7)  Corte  ;  (8)  Moli  ; 
(9)  Grenis  ;  (10)  Fermer.  It  will  be  observed  that  there  are  ten 
— a  discrepancy  which  Sir  Samuel  Ferguson  explains  by  supposing 
the  first  to  be  a  heading,  viz.  :  Corpar,  for  Corporis — the  Battles- 
of  the  body.% 

Mac  Firbis  goes  on :  "  When  the  men  of  Erin  perceived 
Dathi's  death,  they  put  a  lighted  sponc  in  the  king's  mouth,  in 
order  that  all  might  suppose  that  he  was  living,  and  that  it  was 
his  breath  that  was  coming  out  of  his  mouth.  .  .  .  Amalgaid,  the 
son  of  Dathi,  then  took  command  of  the  men  of  Erin,  and  he 
carried  the  body  of  his  father  with  him,  and  he  gained  nine  battles 
by  sea,  and  ten  battles  by  land,  by  means  of  the  corpse,  for  when 
his  people  exhibited  the  body  of  the  king,  they  used  to  route  the 
forces  that  opposed  them." 

The  tower,  we  learn,  was  built  of  sods  and  stones. 

From  the  "  Book  of  Lecan  "  I  may  still  quote  another  account, 
which  differs  slightly  from  the  above  :  "  Dathi,  son  of  Fiachra, 
son  of  Eochaid  Mughmedhon,  took  the  kingship  of  Erin  for  twenty- 
seven  years,  and  exacted  the  Boroimhe  {i.e.  the  tribute  imposed 
on  the  Laighin,  i.e.  Leinster)  without  contest.  He  ventured  east- 
ward on  the  track  of  Niall,  till  he  came  to  the  Alp  mountain,  and 
reached  there  a  tower,  wherein  was  Formenius,  King  of  Thracia, 
who  had  left  his  kingdom,  and  chosen  a  holy  life  in  that  tower, 

t  Proc.  R.I. A.,  2nd  sen,  vol.  ii.  ("Pol.  Lit,  and  Antt."J  p.  173.  Sir  S.  Ferguson,  "On  the 
Legend  of  Dathi. " 

X  The  names  of  the  battles  said  to  have  been  fought  on  the  homeward  march  it  would  be 
hopeless  to  attempt  to  identify.  Twenty-five  miles  N.  of  Vienna,  on  the  left  bank  of  the  Danube, 
is  Fellabrunn,  which  might  possibly  contain  the  name  Fale  or  Faile.  North,  again,  of  Fellabrunn 
is  Mistelbach,  in  which,  with  the  change  of  c  to  /,  we  might  recognize  Miscal.  Next  on  the  list  to 
these  two  comes  Lundun,  and  to  the  N.E.  of  Fellabrunn  and  Mistelbach  there  certainly  is  a 
Lundunberg.  Colom  looks  like  the  Culm  Pagus  in  Thuringia,  but,  if  so,  it  is  out  of  place.  I  am 
inclined,  however,  to  think  that  a  group  of  these  localities,  if  not  all  of  them,  should  be  looked 
for  south  of  Bremen,  on  the  Weser,  the  Alter  and  the  Lein,  where  Corte  would  be  found  in 
Cortenhoven,  Moli  in  Mollenbeck,  Grenis  in  Grena  on  the  Lein,  and  Fermer  in  Wermersdorp  in 
Hoya  in  Hanover.     For  Lundun  another  reading  is  Larrand,  ant!  for  Fermer  Fornar. 


1 172  The  Dolmens  of  Ireland. 


where  it  was  seventeen  cubits  to  the  Hght  from  him,  whereupon 
the  people  of  Dathi  demolish  the  tower  about  him,  so  that  he  saw 
the  lig-ht  in  the  aperture  of  the  breach.  Whereupon  Formenius 
demanded  who  made  that  demolition,  and  it  was  answered  that  it 
was  Dathi  with  his  people  that  made  it.  Then  Formenius  prayed 
the  One-God  that  the  reign  of  Dathi  might  endure  no  longer,  and 
there  came  an  arrow  of  lightning  from  heaven,  through  the  prayer 
of  the  holy  person,  so  that  it  killed  the  king  in  the  presence  of 
the  host.  The  learned  say  that  it  was  Formenius  himself  that 
discharged  the  arrow  from  his  bow,  and  that  it  was  by  it  the  king 
was  slain,  and  they  say  it  was  by  this  same  arrow  that  Niall,  son 
of  Eochaid,  was  slain.  However,  the  men  of  Erin  took  the  king's 
corpse  with  them  to  Erin,  and  four  of  his  own  men  of  trust 
bearing,  that  is,  Dungus,  and  Flangus,  and  Tuathal,  and  Tomal- 
tach,  so  that  he  broke  ten  battles  from  the  Alp  mountains  to  Erin, 
and  he  dead  without  life." 

Between  this  curious  tale  and  that  which  follows,  taken  from 
the  "  Life  of  Saint  Severinus,"  f  there  is  so  much  in  common  that 
the  only  difficulty  in  identifying  them  appears  to  lie  in  the  name  of 
the  saint.  The  Irish  story  gives  the  name  variously  as  Formenius, 
Firmenius,  and  Parmenius,  a  circumstance  which  induced  Sir 
Samuel  Ferguson  to  look  for  him  in  the  Firmin  of  the  Church  of 
Pfeffers,  which  stands,  conveniently  for  the  story,  at  a  distance  of 
about  1000  feet  below  the  village  and  height  of  Saint  Perminsberg. 
The  Saint  Permin  of  Swiss  history  lived,  however,  in  the  eighth 
century,  far  too  late  for  Dathi,  and  we  can  only  suppose  that  the 
legend-reciters  mixed  up  the  two  names,  and  told  of  the  Permins- 
berg and  Saint  Firmin  what  really  belonged  to  the  Khalenberg 
and  Saint  Severin. 

At  the  foot,  then,  of  the  Mons  Cetius,  now  called  the  Khalen- 
berg,J  is  a  place  which,  according  to  Waitz,  in  his  notes  to  the 
"  History  of  the  Lombards,"  by  Paulus  Diaconus,  bore  the  name 
Fiferingen.  It  is  four  or  five  miles  from  Vienna,  and  in  the  seven- 
teenth century  traces  were  observable  there  of  a  monastery  founded 
by  Saint  Severinus,  of  whom  a  life  is  extant,  written  by  one  of  his 
monks,  who  was  himself  a  contemporary  with,  and  an  eye-witness 
(avTOTTTT;?)  of,  the  events  he  relates. 

t  Cap.  viii.,  et  seqq.,  edit.  Kerschbaunier,  p.  24. 

I  Lazius  (Vienna  Aus/ri(c)  says:  "  Fabiana  (Vienna)  sub  Comageno  monte  quern  posteriores 
Cetium,  et  a  Galatis  Celtis  Gallenburgum  dixere."  There  is  a  GoUenberg  on  the  Pomeranian  coast 
in  the  Rugewalde,  the  ancient  tenitory  of  the  Rugii.  See  Micr.-elius,  map  of  I'omerania.  Compare 
Slieve  GuUion,  or  Siieve  Callan,  and  the  grave  of  the  giant  Callen  in  Ireland. 


Ethnology  and  Tradition.  i  i  73 

The  time  was  that  of  the  death  of  Attila,  and  Pannonia  was 
the  hotbed  of  the  disturbances  caused  by  the  nations  who  were 
pressing  forward   to    the   passes    of  the   Alps,   when   Severinus, 
coming  from  eastern  parts  (not  at  all  improbably  from  Thrace), 
took  up   his  abode  here,   arriving,   as   it  would  appear,   first  at 
Comaofense,  a  town  on  the  Danube  on  the  side  of  Mount  Cetius 
remote  from  Vienna,  and  then  forming  for  himself  a  little  cell  at  a 
place  called  Ad  Vineas.     Giving  up  for  a  while  his  seclusion,  he 
founded   a  monastery  at  the  spot  above  indicated,  and  near  it 
apparently,   being  unable  to  prevail  upon  himself  to  forego  the 
lonely  life  he  longed  for,  he  formed  for  himself  a  place  of  abode 
apart  {secretum  habit acuhtni)  one  mile  (or  five,  for  the  authorities 
differ)  from  Fabiana,  or  Castra  Fabiana,  which,  as  we  find  in  the 
foundation  charter  of  the  Csenobium  Scotensef  in  Vienna,  was 
once  the   name   of  that   city  itself.      This   solitary   retreat    the 
neighbouring   inhabitants  knew  by  the  name  of  the  Btirgtim,  a 
term  which  clearly  indicates  that  the  structure  was  of  the  nature 
of  a  tower,  being  the  same  which  was  applied  to  the  towers  placed 
at  fixed  intervals,  either  upon,  or  slightly  within  the  borders  of, 
those  lines  of  rampart  and  bank  called  limites,  which  were  raised 
to  mark  the  lines  of  separation  between  the  Roman  Empire  and 
the  districts  held  by  the  barbarians.      I  may  here  remark  that  the 
constant  tradition  that  one  "fort,"  such  an  one,  for  instance,  as 
the  Sandal  J  Mount,  on  the  Bann  in  Ireland,  is  always  in  view  of 
another  is  probably  due  to  the  fact  that  in  the  case  of  these  towers 
along  the  limes,  they  were  so  placed  as  to  be  visible  each  one  to 
the  next  all  along  the  line.      In  parenthesis  I  would  repeat  also, 
with  regard  to  the  forts  in  Ulster  especially,  that  in  design  and 
structure  they  are  counterparts  of  forts  in  Hungary  and  Bohemia. 
The  btirginn,  built  of  masonry,  stood  on  the  top  of  a  knoll,  either 
wholly  or  partially  artificial,  and  attached  to  it  on  one  side  was  an 
enclosed  piece  of  ground  of  squarish  or  triangular  form,  surrounded 
by  a  rampart.     Many  of  these  "forts"  in    Ireland,  which  now 
appear  as  simply  green  tumuli,  are  found  when  opened  to  contain, 
a  solid  mass  of  stonework,  the  better  to  support  the  little  structure 
or  burgum  which  stood  at  the  top.     From  this  same  early  medieval 
Latin  term  the  Scottish  burghs  or  stone  towers,  hollow  within, 
probably  received  their  name. 

t  This  monastery  was  founded  in  the  year  1158  by  Scots  going  to  the  Holy  Land.  The 
document  speaks  of  its  site  as  "in  territorio  Favus  vel  Faviance,  quce  a  modernis  Vuienna 
noncupatur." 

X  Compare  the  name  of  the  Herulian  chief  Sindual. 


1 174  The  Dolmens  of  Ireland. 


To  proceed,  however.  Here  in  his  burguin  Severinus  lived, 
and,  equally  on  account  of  the  wisdom  of  his  advice,  which  was 
often  prophetic,  and  of  the  cures,  sometimes  miraculous,  which  he 
wrought,  he  was  much  sought  after,  and  his  "  burgum  "  resorted 
to,  not  only  by  the  Rugians,  who  regarded  him  with  gratitude  and 
esteem,  but  by  the  members  and  chieftains  of  other  tribes  who, 
passing  through  the  country  on  their  way  to  Italy,  stopped  to  pay 
him  a  visit.  Among  these  latter  was  Odoacer  f  (Odovakar)  him- 
self, to  whom  the  saint  promised  great  things,  and  who  was  so 
tall  that  he  was  compelled  to  stoop  in  order  to  enter  the  cell 
door. 

Flaccithaeus,  King  of  the  Rugians,  who  at  this  time  occupied 
this  part  of  the  country,  had  his  chief  seat  at  Vienna,  and  with 
him  Severinus  was  on  the  best  of  terms.  The  saint  was,  in  fact, 
consulted  by  this  king  with  regard  to  the  steps  to  be  taken  against 
the  Goths,  who,  in  large  numbers,  were  infesting  his  territory  from 
the  side  of  Lower  Pannonia.  On  the  death  of  this  chieftain, 
however,  Severinus's  relations  with  the  royal  family  became 
strained. 

Feletheus.J  otherwise  called  Feva,§  son  of  Flaccithaeus, 
succeeded  to  the  throne,  and  he,  indeed,  seems  at  first  to  have 
taken  counsel  with  Severinus,  as  his  father  had  done.  He  had, 
however,  a  wife  called  Gisa  or  Giso,  described  as  a  woman  "  of 
deadly  bane  "  (feralis  et  noxia),  one  who  laid  hard  tasks  upon  the 
Romans  who  were  then  in  servitude  under  these  barbarians,  and 
(what  must  have  been  especially  galling  to  the  saint)  who  wanted 
herself  to  rebaptize  the  Christians,  she  herself  being,  as  may  be 
inferred  from  this,  a  Manichean.  Severinus  admonished  her  and 
her  husband,  and,  this  proving  of  no  avail,  finally  prophesied  the 
overthrow  and  destruction  of  the  Rugian  king  by  Odoacer. 

Before  this  happened,  however,  the  story  introduces  us  to 
another  member  of  the  Rugian  royal  family,  namely,  Federuchus,|| 
brother  of  Feletheus,  who  had  been  placed  by  the  latter  in  command 

t  Odoacer  is  described  as  "  a  young  man  with  thick  yellow  moustache,  in  sordid  garb,  but  of  un- 
common height."  The  Annalists  and  Jordanes  call  him  a  Goth  ;  other  authorities  term  him  a  Rugian 
and  a  Scyrian.  He  is  also  described  as  kin^  of  the  Eruli  by  one  writer,  and  of  the  Turcilingi  by 
another.  The  contrast  between  his  physical  characteristics  and  those  of  Attila,  with  his  "swarthy 
skin,  small,  bead-like  eyes,  snub  nose,  and  short  stature,"  is  remarkable,  and  reminds  us  that 
from  one  or  other  of  those  leading  types,  or  the  intermingling  of  them,  were  derived  the  individual 
members  of  those  barbarian  hordes  who,  having  ramifications  extending  far  north  and  east,  whence 
<:ontinually  fresh  relays  were  obtained,  were  harassing  the  Roman  border,  and  penetrating  far 
Ijeyond  it. 

X  Other  readings  give  the  forms  Fletheus  and  Felccteus. 

§  Otherwise  Favaand  Feba.  11  Other  reading,  Fridcrichus. 


Ethnology  and  Tradition.  1175 


of  a  fortified  town  adjacent  to  the  spot  where  Severinus  lived  in 
his  "  burgum." 

Shortly  before  the  death  of  the  saint,  Federuch  met  him,  and 
a  conversation  between  them  took  place,  and  the  fact  having  been 
revealed  to  Severinus  that  this  chieftain,  as  soon  as  he  was 
dead,  would  despoil  his  habitation,  asked  him  what  motive  would 
prompt  him  to  commit  such  an  act.  Federuch  disclaimed  any 
such  intention,  but  no  sooner  was  the  saint  dead  than,  seized  with 
the  lust  of  the  barbarian  for  spoil,  he  carried  off  first  of  all  the 
raiment  set  apart  for  the  poor,  and  then,  adding  sacrilege  to  felony, 
bade  a  peasant  secure  the  silver  chalice  and  the  appurtenances  of 
the  altar. 

The  man  having  refused,  Federuch  deputed  a  soldier  to  the 
task,  named  Avinianus.  No  sooner  had  the  latter  done  the  deed 
than,  vexed  with  a  devil,  a  ceaseless  trembling  of  the  limbs  seized 
him,  until  finally,  having  repented  his  sin,  he  assumed  a  hermit's 
garb,  and  went  to  end  his  days  on  a  lonely  island.  Federuch, 
meanwhile,  possessed  himself  of  everything  the  monastery  of 
Severinus  contained,  leaving  nothing  but  the  walls,  which  he  could 
not  carry  off  over  the  Danube,  behind.  Vengeance,  however,  was 
not  far  off,  for,  within  the  space  of  a  month,  the  despoiler  of  the 
sanctuary  was  slain  in  battle  by  his  brother's  son,  and  lost  at 
once  his  booty  and  his  life.  In  addition  to  this  Odoacer,  or 
Otachar,  as  Cassiodorus  calls  him,  between  whom  and  Feletheus 
a  violent  animosity  had  arisen,  marched  against  the  Rugii  and 
defeated  them,  carrying  Feletheus  and  Gisa  captives  into  Italy. 
The  son  of  Feletheus  regained  for  a  short  time  possession  of  his 
father's  territories,  but  Odoacer  sent  Onulphus  his  brother  against 
him,  and  his  defeat  having  been  accomplished,  a  decree  was  pro- 
mulgated that  all  the  Romans  in  those  parts  should  return  to  Italy. 
In  expectation  of  the  fulfilment  of  a  prophecy  to  this  effect  made 
by  Severinus,  his  disciples  had  made  a  locelhtm  ligncimi,  in  which 
they  placed  his  body,  which  when  taken  from  the  tomb  was  found 
to  have  been  miraculously  preserved,  and  so  sweet  was  the  odour 
which  the  sepulchre  gave  forth  that  those  who  stood  around 
prostrated  themselves  with  joy  and  wonder. 

In  comparing  the  Irish  story  of  Dathi  and  the  monkish  one  of 
Federuch,  I  will  in  the  first  place  refer  to  the  names  of  persons. 
Dathi  had,  as  we  have  seen,  another  name  or  form  of  his  name,  i.e. 
Ferodach.     Datius,  as  we  have  also  seen,  is  the  name  i^iven  in  the 


1 1 76  The  Dolmens  of  Ireland. 

Vatican  Codex  of  Procopius  to  an  Herulian  king  whose  place  in 
history  is  comparable  to  that  occupied  by  another  Ferodach,  or 
Feradach,  in  Irish  tradition.  A  presumption  is  therefore  raised 
that  the  name  Datius,  or  Dathi,  and  Ferodach  were  interchange- 
able, or  rather  that  the  former  was  the  short  for  the  latter — dach 
equalling  daith,  swift,  andy^r  signifying  "  man." 

Now,  Federuch  and  Ferodach,  with  a  slight  change  in  the 
positions  of  letters,  are  identical,  Federuch  or  Ferderuch  being 
forms  intermediate  between  the  true  name  Ferodach  and  the 
totally  distinct  name  Frideric,  as  found  in  Cassiodorus. 

Federuch's  father  was  Flaccithaeus,  and  Ferodach's  father  was 
Fiacha  or  Fiachra.  Between  Fiach,  or  Fiacc  in  older  form,  and 
Flacc  the  only  difference  is  that  most  common  of  all  changes,  in 
which  the  /  gives  place  to  the  soft  vowel  i,  as  in  the  place-name 
Flanona,  later  Fianona  in  Dalmatia.  It  is  curious  to  think  that 
between  the  Roman  name  Flaccus  and  the  Gaedhelic  Fiach,  there 
may  be  traceable  an  original  affinity.  The  form  Flaccithaeus  would 
be  in  Gaedhelic  Fiachadh,  which  is  positively  the  very  form  of 
Fiacha's  name  given  by  Keating. 

In  the  name  of  Feletheus,  Ferodach's  brother,  we  have  a  name 
very  closely  corresponding  indeed  to  the  Irish  Filedh,  a  poet, 
while  his  alias  Feva  or  Feba  is,  as  it  stands,  an  ancient  Irish 
personal  name.  For  example,  the  name  of  a  tale  now  lost — the 
title  only  of  which  is  extant,!  is  "  the  slaughter  of  Magh  Cegala 
by  the  son  of  Feba"  {inic  Febai). 

To  proceed  to  other  points  :  Severinus  comes  from  "  the  East ; " 
Formenius  from  Thrace.  Severinus  lives  in  seclusion  in  a  bur- 
p'tnn,  which  he  builds ;  Formenius  lives  in  a  tower  which  he 
similarly  builds.  Severinus's  abode  is  destroyed  and  despoiled  by 
Federuch  ;  Formenius's  is  similarly  treated  by  Ferodach.  In  the 
Latin  story,  Federuch  does  not  kill  the  hermit,  for  he  was  dead 
already.  Similarly,  in  the  Irish  story,  Ferodach  does  not  kill 
Formenius,  and  we  are  at  a  loss  to  know  what  becomes  of  him,  the 
explanation  being  supplied  by  the  Latin  account.  But  Ferodach 
is  struck  by  lightning  and  killed  on  the  spot,  whereas  Federuch  is 
slain  in  battle.  Two  circumstances  may,  however,  be  noticed  here. 
Firstly,  upon  the  commission  of  the  sacrilegious  act,  swift  punish- 
ment of  a  miraculous  nature  descends  upon  the  soldier  who  was 
the  instrument  of  Federuch.     Secondly,  a  chieftain  called  Rougias, 

t  O'Curry,  "  Manuscript  Materials,"  p.  590. 


Ethnology  and  Tradition.  ii 77 

who  may  well  have  been  a  Rugian  ally  of  the  Huns,  was,  as  we 
learn  from  Socrates,  actually  killed  by  lightning  in  the  year  425. 
From  these  two  occurrences  the  death  of  Dathi  by  lightning  on 
the  occasion  of  the  sacrilege  may  readily  have  been  manufactured. 

The  conclusion,  then,  at  which  I  have  arrived,  with  regard  to 
the  subject-matter  of  the  sagas  and  fragments  of  sagas  contained 
in  the  ancient  Irish  books,  is  that  for  the  most  part  it  is  referable 
neither  to  pristine  ages  of  Aryan  mythology,  nor  to  traditions  of 
events  which  occurred  in  Ireland  itself,  but  that  it  is  largely 
made  up  of  genuine  traditions  of  events  which  occurred  on  the 
Continent  from  the  third  to  the  sixth  century  a.d.,  with  some  more 
distant  lights,  perhaps  reaching  back  to  the  first  and  second 
centuries,  handed  down  in  the  form  of  allegorical  genealogies  re- 
presenting current  beliefs  with  regard  to  questions  ethnical  and 
topographical.  Such  traditions  would  have  been  carried  to  Ireland 
partly  by  contingents  of  Gaedhelic-speaking  people  crossing  and 
recrossing  the  Ictian  Sea,  who,  in  conjunction  with  not  unrelated 
tribes  on  either  side  the  Elbe,  were  participating  in  the  barbarian 
raids  upon  the  Roman  Empire,  and  partly  by  Teutonic-speaking 
immigrants,  to  be  translated  on  arrival  into  the  Gaedhelic  tongue. 
Had  it  not  been  for  the  isolation  of  Ireland  consequent  on  the  Saxon 
invasion  of  Britain,  Latin  would  have  been  the  language  in  which 
these  traditions  would  have  reached  us,  and  some  native  monk, 
educated  perhaps  in  Italy,  would  have  given  us  an  Historia 
Scotortim,  the  opening  chapters  of  which  would  have  contained 
just  such  material  as  that  with  which  Jordanes  and  Saxo  and 
Paulus  open  their  histories  of  Goths  and  Danes  and  Lombards. 

The  saga  of  Partholan  is  Bardic,  brought  by  Bardi,  who,  like 
Chauci  and  Menapii,  had  settlements  in  Ireland,  where  they  recited 
the  traditions  of  their  origin.  The  saga  of  Nemed  is  also  German, 
and  relates  to  wars  of  Sclaves  and  Germans  on  the  south-western 
shores  of  the  Baltic.  The  Fomorians  are  the  Pomeranian  Sclaves  ; 
the  Fir-Bolg  are  (speaking  generally)  any  of  those  people,  to 
whom  the  term  Hunnish  or  Bulgar  would  have  been  applied  in 
the  fourth  and  fifth  centuries  ;  (speaking  specially)  they  are  the 
Heruli ;  in  the  Tuatha  De  Danann  we  have  Scando-Germanic 
tribes,  in  particular,  perhaps,  the  Bardi,  represented  to  us  through 
their  gods  which  prove  to  be  closely  related  to  those  of  the 
Norse   Pantheon.       That   they    come    under   the   general    term 

VOL.    III.  2    H 


1178  The  Dolmens  of  Ireland. 

"Picts"  seems  likely  enough,  but  that  term  included  an 
originally  non-Aryan  element,  represented  by  the  lotuns  of 
Norse  legend,  which,  intermingled  with  a  Germanic  element, 
retained  its  name  in  that  of  the  Jutes  and  the  lutungi,  in  whom 
a  Teutonic  form  of  speech  was  present  on  the  one  hand,  and 
in  that  of  those  Ichts,  Picts,  or  Cruithne  (?  Prutheni  and  Britanni), 
among  some  of  whom  I  venture  to  think  a  Celtic  form  of  speech 
may  have  been  present,  on  the  other.  Lastly,  for  the  Feinne  I 
Avould  venture  to  suggest  affinities  among  the  peoples  of  Finno- 
■Germanic  origin  around  the  Gulf  of  Riga  and  in  East  Prussia, 
whose  representatives  in  history  are  the  yEstians,  contingents  of 
whom  may  have  pressed  westwards  with  the  Sclaves  to  the 
Elbe  and  beyond  it  on  the  departure  of  the  Teutonic  tribes  for 
the  south,  but  whose  ancestors  on  the  Finnic  side  may  once  have 
surrounded  the  entire  Baltic  Lake  from  which  the  British  Islands, 
from  the  remotest  prehistoric  ages  to  the  Norman  Conquest, 
have  ever  been  receiving  fresh  instalments  of  population. 


INDEX. 


Abakansk,  749 
Abban,  11 15 
Abbasante,  705,  706 
Abbey-quarter,  139 
Abeken,  706,  n. 

,  1156,  n. 

Abel,  Caspar,  10S2,  n. 

Aberdeen,  944,  n. 

Aberte,  826 

Abhan  Mur,  S20 

Abhartach,  825,  n. 

Abhorthach,  826 

Abigail,  1 1 15 

Abington,  46,  52 

Ablavius,  1152 

Abo,  513,  1032,  1034 

Abra,  the  Virgin  del-,  652 

Abra,  Dolmen  del-,  652 

Abury,  278,  351 

Albis,  the,  1058 

Acatiri,  1102 

Acatziri,  1068,  1102.  1134 

Acaun,  or  Accaun  Bridge,  396 

Achad  Abla,  804 

-; an  Scoir,  785 

Achadh-Aldai,  the  cave  of,  349, 

n. 

,  350,  n. 

Achaia,  1068,  107 1,  1 158 
Achaill,  1 140,  1 142 
Acheuil,  St.,  952,  955 
Achill,  irg,  157,  162,  182,  459, 

585,  656,  720,  764 

Island,  425 

Achiulf,  1136,  n. 
Achnacree,  464 
Achnacree-Beg.  468 
Achonry,  181,  182 
Acuthoge,  ir,  758 
Adam  (Bremen),  777,  779,  784, 

871,  948,  1091,  1096,  1099 
Adamnan,  356,  816,  n.,  1065 
Adam's  Dance,  533 
Addergoole,  1 18 
Adnre,  1 145 
Adonis,  846 

,  the  gardens  of,  710,  n. 

Adrianople,  510 

Adriatic,  the,  362,  519,  1067 

Adrigole  Imade,  39 

Adso.  922 

Ad  Vineas,  117; 

Adze-goddess,  579 

Adze- head,  579 

Adze^  son  of  the,  579 


Aed,     Luirgnech,    son     of    the 

Dagda,  348 

,  son  of  Dagda,  349 

ALdes  Dominica,  11  \ 

Aedh  Brecain,  5S8,  725,  906 

Mac  Garraidti,  876 

.■Kdicicli,  147 

-Edipus,  640 

-Edui,  893,  n. 

^Egean,    the,    462,    492,    1070, 

1 1 24 

Islands,  the,  779 

Sea,  522,  1069 

Aelnoth,  1084,  n. 
Aenach-Cruachain,  I171 
Aengaba,  810 
Aenghus-an-Bhrogha,  347 
Aengus,  784,  n.,  836,  n.,  904,  n. 
,  Mac  Oc,  347,  n. 

— .  Og-,  347.  "• 

,  Mac  Ind  Oc-,  347,  n. 

Ollamh,  1 138 

Olmucadha,  1083 

,  son  of  Crunnmael,  349,  n. 

,  son  of  the  Dagda,  347,  n. 

^349.  n. 
.Eschylus,  603 
-Esculapius,  1166 
-Escylus,  700,  n. 
.Esir,  the,  891 
.-Estiaiis,   903,    n.,    1057,    1077, 

1078,1178.     6V6' -Estii 
-Estii,  the,  869,  870,   1096,  n., 

1102,  1158,  1161 

, language  of  the,  871 

Afghanistan,  930 

Africa,  704,  n.,  738,  1035,  11 18 

,    North,    403,     491,    612, 

713-19,  966 
African  coast,  the,  1072 
Africaiioid  type,  1029,  1032 
Agate,  German,  562 
Agathensis,  Pagus,  567,  n. 
Agathias,  778,   n.,   10S2,   11 17, 

1119 
Agathyrsi,  iioi,  1102 

,  called  a  Celtic  people,  1 102 

Agazzirri,     or    Agazirri,     1068, 

1 102 
Aggo,  1060 
Aghabog,  291 
Aghabulloge,  33,  34 
Aghade  Lodge,  400 
Aghadoe,  994 
Aghadowey,  252 


Aghadrumgovvna,  207 

Aghanagh,  191,  192 

Aghanamullen,  295 

Aghanunshin,  234 

Aghavallen,  I 

Aghaviller,  404 

Aghawinaan,  906 

Aghavvy,  206,  207 

Aghinagh,  35 

Aghintass,  195 

Aghnagar,  209 

Aghyglinna,  79S 

Agio,  1060 

Aglish,  901 

Agnoin,  1063,  n. 

Agnomon,  826 

,  826,  1^63,  n.,  1095 

Agnon,  1069 

Agricola,  608,   609,   936,    1023, 
1027,  1042,  1 109,  1 121 

Ahaglaslin,  36,  38,  831 

Ahaglasnin,  37 

Ahamlish,   126,   129,   130,   8o5, 
914 

A  her  la,  an,  772 

Ahlqvist,  776,  n. 

Ahlun,  531 

,  or  Ahluni,  532 

Aife,  835 
Ail-na-riiireann,  372,  759 

Ailbene,  1075 

Aileach,  Grianan  of,  235 

Ailell.  S53,  854 

Ailill,   135,  779,  801,  836,  868, 

1097.  1 120 
Ailleann,  Rath  of,  866 
Aillemore,  124,  125 
Ain-Bou-Merzong,  713 
Ain  Dakkar,  733 
Aine,  834-836 

Aine  (place-name),  1096,  836 
Ainia,  1140 
Ainos,  the,  149,  n. 
Aio,  829,  1060 
Aires,  the,  1064 
Aisne,  department  of,  570,  571 
Aiste,  the.  1096 
Aiste  =  Just,  903,  n. 
Aitheach-Tuatha,  the,    167,    n., 
836,870,  896,  n.,  1 1 20,  113:), 
1140-1143,1148,  1 149,   1 150, 
II51,  1153,  I154 

Herenn,  1098 

Rebellion,  1137 

Aithirne,  825,  n. 


iiSo 


Index. 


Aitz,  606 

'Ajliin,  Northern,  735 
Alani,  1 123 
Alans,  7S0 
Ala  Safat,  730 
Alatan,  74S 
Alatskiwwi,  512 
Alava,  74,  105S 

,  Province  of,  646,  647 

Alba,    86S,    1074,    1075,    ii+o, 

II41,  I150.  1153,  1169 
Alban,  597,  873 
Albania,  779 

Albanians,  1064,  1070,  1055 
Albanus,  349 
Albene,  1075 
Albeniz,  613 
Albersdorf,  495,  496 
Albienses,  597 
Albinus,  1045,  l°46 
Albion,  603 

,  the  giant,  804 

Albis,  1074 

Albja,  1074 

Albrecht,  Margrave,  530 

Alcala  la  Real,  68S 

Alcudia,  699 

Aldai,  349,  350,  n. 

Aleenaun,  Lake,  70,  71 

Alemanni,  947,  949 

Alemtejo,    634,    644,    650,    n., 

659,  660,  664,  670,  673,  674 
Alet,  597 

Alexander  the  Great,  1 125 
Alexandropol,  724 
Alfred,  King,  149,  n.,  174,  n., 

745,  n,,  776,  n. 
Alfriston,  68 1 
Alga,  1074 
Algaidh,  893,  n. 
Algarve,  668,  670 
Algeria,  713,  719 
Algiers,  713,  716 
Ahi^nment  (of  stones),  an,  17 
Alijo,  664,  665 
Ah- Hallow- Ecu,  580,  852 
Allee  couverte,  424,  585 
Alices  couvertes,  567,  690,  727 
Allen,  the  Bog  of,  868 
Aller,  547,  1058,  1 171,  n. 
Allfather,  Odin  the,  1165,  1 166 
Allobrogian  skull,  937 
Alloid,  826,  n. 

,  Orbsen  Mac,  795,  n. 

Allot,  826,  n.,  1074 

All-Saints,  235 

Almada,  670 

Almedinilla,  684 

Alnwick    Castle,    museum    at, 

173.  >74. 
Alpes-maiitimes,  599 

Alpian  mountains,  348 

Alps,  the,   525,  680,  743,  1064, 

1 1 50,  1 170,  1 1 73 

,  maritime,  569 

,    urns    from    cists    in    the, 

678,  996,  1009,  1010 
Alsace,  681,  706-8 
Altai,  522,  740,  746 
Altamount,  east  of,  123 
Altar,  103,  537,  591,  764 
,  townland  of,  44,  45 


Altar  hill,  250,  765 

of  St.  James,  652 

Altar-stone  in  circle,  503 
in  Riigen,  498 

(Bulgaria),  510 

Altar-stones  in  Eslhonia,  512 
Altars  of  idols,  847 

,  pagan,  653 

,  rock,  728 

,  stone,  504,  554,  651 

Altensteig,  997 
Althun,  782 
Altlinster,  565 
Alt-Lussheim  skull,  944 
Altmark,  the,  528,  529,  536 
Alt-Medingen,  538 
Altoir,  767 

Pharraig,  766 

Ultach,'95 

Altoir-na-Greine,  79,  849 
Altoir-Olltach,  95,  766,  849 
Amador  de  los  Rios,  Sr.  |.,  647 
Amalgaidh,    893,    n.,  906,   n., 

1 136,  n.,  1 1 70,  1 171 
Amali,  893,  n. 
Amalus,  893 
Amargin,    son    of    Ecelsalach, 

105 1 
Amasen,  552 
Amazons,     777-9,     834,     874, 

1069,  1 105 

,  Scandniavian,  777 

,  Scythian,  777 

Amber,  444,  508,  516,  740,  767 

from    North    Sea,    Brit. 

Islands,    Spain,    Italy,    Rou- 
mania,  Austria,  521 

from   Prussia  and  Frisia, 

521 

beads,  320 

coast,  the  Pomeranian,  931 

routes,  521 

Ambivareti,  11 12 

Amhlaeibh,  349,  365,  n. 

Amhlaim,  349 

Amhra  Coluim  Cille,  the,  807 

Amiens,  952,  955 

Amman,  726 

Ammianus  Marcellinus,  608,  n. 

1014,  1 120,  1 139,  n. 
Ampt-Bodenteich,  540,  542 
Amsterdam,  552 
Ana,  869,  1074,  1 165,  n66 
Anagasson,  863 
Anastasius,  1 145,  1 147,  1 1 48 
Ancestors,    looTship  of,   149,  n., 

346,  455 
Ancheusanus,  11 29 
Ancora,  659,  600 
Ancresse,  623 
Andalucia,  613,  632,  634,  644, 

675,  686,  691,  693,  70S 
Andecavi,  11 12,  n. 
Anderedon,  590,  n. 
Anderida,  590 
Anderidum,  590,  n. 
Andeiitum,  590,  n. 
Anderson,  Prof.,  138,  403,  460, 

463,  464,  466,  468,  573,  578, 

n. 
,  R.  B.  (Norse  myth.),  473, 

744,  n.,  800,  n.,  891,  n.,  892 


Andouque,  597 
Andre,  M.A  ,  745,  n. 
Andrenunes,  666 
Andrews,  St.,  Dublin,  385 
Angel  de  los  Rios,  Sr.,  649 
Anglesey,  11,  452,  753,  954 
Anglii,  1082 
Anglo-Saxon  skull,  the,  947 

swords,  950 

Anglo-Saxons,  780,  1 1 2D,  11 68 
Anglus,  893 
Anhalt,  530 
Anhalt-Zerbst,  537 
Anna  Comnena,  1079 
Annacloghmullen,  89,  137,  138, 

301-303,  419,  425,  459,  461, 

465,  467,  491,  528,669,  69-', 

707 
Annadorn,  286 
Annagh,  3-5,  116 
Annaghmore  Glebe,  227 
Annaly,  866 
Annan  Street,  614 
,  sculpturings  at.  467, 

468 
Annius  Cimber,  iioo 
Andes,  893,  n. 
Aula,    antiC,    ante-,    147,     637, 

642 
Anta    da    Casa-dos-Galhardos, 

666,  n. 

de  Carapichana,  666,  n. 

do  Aljao,  666,  n. 

d'Arrayolos,  666,  n. 

de  Barrocal,  666,  n. 

de  Bellas,  671 

de  Candiera,665 

do  Carvalhal  de  Gouveias, 

666,  n. 

de  Corleiros,  666,  n. 

de  Cousinera,  666,  n. 

do  Crato,  666,  n.,  722 

d'Estria,  671,  677,  680 

do  Fontao,  665,  666,  n., 

772 

do     Fonte-de-Mouratao, 

772 

de  Freixo,  666 

do   Fundo    de    Nave-do- 

Grou,  666,  n. 

de  Guilalfonso,  666,  n. 

de  Larinha,  666,  n. 

de  Matanca,  666,  n. 

de  Melri9o,  659 

de  Monte  Abrahao,  666, 

n. 

de  Monte  Branco,  664 

de  Mont  d'Esguerra,  666, 

n. 
de  Monte-do-Onteiro,  666, 

n. 
de  Murteia-de-Baixo,  664 

de    Pa90   de   Vinha   (the 

smaller  one),  661 

de    Pa^o    de    Vinha    (the 

larger  one),  662 

■ ■  de  Panasqueira,  666,  n. 

de  Paredes,  660,  661 

de  Pombaes,  666,  n. 

do  Porto   des    Pinheiros, 

666,  n. 

-de-Rioconejos,  641 


Index. 


1181 


Anta  de  Serranheira,  659,  666, 

n. 
da  Tapada,  664 

da     Tapada     de     Pedro 

Alvaro,  666,  n. 

da  Tapada  dos  Olheiros, 

666,  n. 

de  Tisnada,  666,  n. 

da    Torre  -  da  -  Contada 

d'Alcogulo,  666,  n. 

de  Valle  de  Moura,  666, 

n. 

da    Varzea-dos-MouroCs, 

666,  n. 

AntK,  68,   392,  432,  493,  627, 

642,  701,  702,  768,  789,  961 
Antas,  610,  658,  659,  660,  664 
Antas     de     Milhar-do-Cabe90, 

666,  n. 

de-Penadono,  641 

de-Penalvas,  641 

Ante,  642 

Afitcihamber  or  portico,  feature 

of,  41,180,  392,  445.492,  958. 

961,  968 
Antequera,    613,   628,    632,  n., 

691,  692,  722,  963 
Antei,  626 
Anti-grotte,  572 
Antrim,    438,    619,    621,    659, 

675,  676 

,  coast  of,  496 

,  county   of,    31,   258-272, 

450 

,  flint  found  in,  148 

,  Lower,  265 

,  Upper,  270 

Anu,  1 165 

An  uamh  Greine,  847 

Aongus,  1 137.     .Sf^  Aengus 

Catta,  874 

,  or  Oengus,  Ollmuchadh, 

1063 
Aordus,  1 138 

,  1 152 

Aperture    between    antechanib.  r 

mid  cell,  128 
Aphrodisiac  customs  at  dolmens, 

845 
Aphuca,  Lake,  296 
Appius  Claudius,  471 
Apulia,  470 
Aquitaine,  609 
Aquitani,  604,  607-9 
Aquitania,  1027 
Aquitanian  language,  602,  607 
Arabia,  726,  n.,  738,  779,  1036 
Arabs,  733 

,  tents  of  the,  704,  n. 

Arad,  1 128,  n.,  II31 

Aral,  sea  of,  746 

Aran,     439,    800,    861,     1125, 

1 128,  n. 
(Barony  of),  108 

Islands,  414,    994,    1030, 

1033,  1039,  1043 

Islanders,  the,  102 1,  1022, 

1037 

Aranmore,  108,  109 
Ararat,  472,  n. 
Area,  635,  636 
Area  de  Montonto,  655 


Area  de  Ogas,  655 

de  Padorno,  655 

de  la  Piosa,  655 

de  Sinas,  655 

de  Sobereira,  655 

de  la  Vimianzo,  655 

Arckon,  1156 

Arcona,  277,  349,  n.,  1060,  1064, 

1087,  1088,  1091,  1094 
Arctic  Ocean,  149,  870 
Arcunia,  1087 
Ard-el-Mahaj-jeh,  735 
Ard  Ladron,  1087 

Luain,  1095,  n. 

Macha,  907,  1087,  1095,  n. 

Nemidh,  1087 

Ardaclugg,  51 
Ardaghlougher,  49 
Ardanreagh,  47 
Ardaragh,  40,  41,  246,  432,  440, 

660,  n. 
Ardataggle,  loi 
Ardbear,  105 
Ardcuinn,  1092 
Ardeche,  567,  567,  n.,  568,  599, 

600 
Ardee,  815-817 
Ardgonnell,  10S7 
Ardmore,   515,   654,   759,    789, 

901 

,  round  tower  at,  991 

Ardnaglass,  130 

Ardoilen,  1162 

Ardoyne,  400 

Ardrahan,  106 

Ards  Lower,  281 

Ardskeagh,  97 

Ardstraw,  208 

Ardtermon  Strand,  130 

Arduslough.  45 

Arecomici,  601 

Aremorica,  1062 

Aremys,  643 

Arendorf,  535 

Argeles,  587 

Argelia,  655 

Argentomagos,  260 

Argentoratum,  260 

Arget,  Plain  of,  260 

Argos,  107 1 

Argote,   D.   Jer.  Contador  el-, 

653,  n.,  663,  n. 
Argyllshire,  138,  157,  226,  293, 

451,  460,  464,  466,  467,  568, 

Arias,  II58 

Ariege,  department  of,  596 

Arimannen,  the,  1064 

Aristotle,  644 

Arklow,  414.  mo 

Aries,  673,  685,  699 

sur.  Tech.,  597,  598 

Armagh,    469,    460,    528,    669, 

707,  793.  ^11.  817.  i^l7,  11. 

,  Barony  of,  299 

,  the  Book  of,  759,  761, 

770,  774.  1053 

,  City  of,  297,  994 

,  County  of,  297-304,  452 

Arminius,  10S3 
Armlet,  i^ohl,  679 
Armorica,  812,  1135,  n. 


Armour-bearer,  tomb  of  the,  223 

Armoy,  round- tower  at,  991,  992 

Armstrong,  R.,  196 

Arnasbrack,  145,  182 

Arnaud,  C.  I\L,  613,  n. 

Arnberg,  531 

Arnhem,  1132 

Arnkiel,  529,  537 

Arnswalde,  537 

Arra,  52 

Arracht,  788 

Arranyagals,  645 

Arras  Dundonald,  1109 

Arreche,  646 

Arrechiuaga,  hermitage  of  St. 

Michael  of,  648,  651 
Art,  1084 

,  son  of  Conn,  347,  1038 

Mac  Murrough,  1047 

Uchtlethan,  891,  892,893, 

n. 
Artemis,  temple  of,  638 
Arthur,  King,  595,  878 
Arthur's  Quoit,  449 

Round  Table,  277 

Aryan  language,  602,  603,  775 

Asa-men,  744 

Asa  people,  the,  807,  810 

Ascencias,  Dolmen  de  las,  690 

Aschburg,  1163 

Ascheraden,  950 

Asciburgium,  1163 

Asenputten,  1061 

Asgard,  467,  n.,  744,  778,  11 13 

Ash,  or  Asch,  11 63 

,  the  mound  of,  822,  914 

Ashbiri,  1 162 

Ashfield,  78 

Asia,  Central,  138,  522,  740 

,  Eastern,  138 

Minor,  620,  740,  779,  1072, 

1 124,  1 134 
Ask,  891 
Askeaton,  876 
Asmund,  800 
Asov,  Sea  of,  779 
Aspalria  (Cumberland),  221 
Ass,  the,  908,  909 
Assas,  Sr.  M.  de,  649,  650,  652, 

693. 
Assassins,  1036 
Assche,  566 
Asseboten,  106 1 
Assemblies  held  at  a  cairn,  13 
held  at  dolmen  in  Germany, 

540 

at  sites  of  dolmens  in  Ire- 
land, Germany,  Pyrenees,  584 

at  rocks,  651 

Assembly-fairs  in  Ireland,  in 
Germany,  541 

Assento,  the,  653 

Asseputen,  1 139,  n. 

Ass's  manger,  374 

Asses'  manger,  374,  402 

Assipitti,  1061,  1 139,  n. 

Assiput,  1069 

Assyria,  616 

Assyrian  vessels,  617 

Assyrians,  1068 

Astarte,  846 

Asturias,  652,  696 


Il82 


Index. 


Asura,  the,  1055 

Atacini,  597 

Atalaya,  704 

Atalis,  1 117,  n. 

Atal  Siirazin,  623,  n. 

Atax,  597 

Atel,  1 1 17 

Ateria,  474 

Athach,  475 

Athadallan,  S31 

Ath  Cliath  (Dublin),  1075 

Comair,  11 54 

Echtra,  79S 

Fhir-Dhiadh,  816 

Finnfail,  1 159 

Athenians,  106S 

Athenry,  105,  103S 

Athens,  624,  892,   1071,   1072, 

1076,  1 158 

,  Acropolis  at,  700,  n. 

Athfirdiadh,  818 

Athi,  1 165 

Athirne,  or  Athairne,  1 145 

Athle,  1 141 

Athleague,  S62 

Athletes  c'lez  les  Alleinands,  497 

Athlone,  198,  199,  1075 

Athracta,  St.,  7S8 

Athract  ni  Manannain,  7S8 

Atkinson,    Mr.,    732,    n.,    733, 

1056 
Atlantic,  567 

type,  568 

Atlas,  Mount,  716 

Alii,  779 

Atonement  Boar,  the,  87 1 

Atreus,  tomb  of,  362,  426 

Attacotti,  475,  1 155 

Attacotts,  1 1 57 

Attecotti,  1 139,  n. 

Attica,  624,  625,  107 1 

Atticotti,  475 

Attila,  779-81,  784.  1026,  1061, 

n.,  1080,  n.,  1 102,  1 1 17,  1 1 18, 

1169,  II73,  I174,  n- 
Attila's     army,     elements     in, 

Germanic,  Sclavonic,  Sclavo- 

Finnic,      Sarmatian,      Celto- 

Scythic,  Celto-Sclavic,  11 17 
Attilas,  1 1 17,  11. 
Attymas,  122,  123 
Aubrey,  457,  458 
Aude,  department  of  the,  596, 

597 
Audhumbla,  891,  893,  89S 
Aue,  1 161 
Aughnagurgan,  299 
Aughnavallog,  283 
Aughnish,  233 
Aughrim,  413 
Augustus,  555,  n. 

,  the  Emperor,  105S 

Auisle,  349 
Aultnacaha,  133 
Aunen,  555 
Aurelian  Way,  600 
Aurelius  Victor,  1038,  n. 
Aures,  M.,  569 
Aurgelmer,  891 
Auribal,  599 
Aurinia,  829,  1 167 
Ausonia,  1057 


Australasia,  962 
Australians,  987 
Austria,  520,  590,  n. 
Austro- Hungary,  1 128,  n. 
Autel  des  A'ardes,  623 

du  Grand  Sarrazin,  623 

Auvergnats,  605,  960,  995, 1004, 

n.,  1125 
Auvergne,  998,  1012,  1026 
Avarni,  1082,  1083 
Avars,  the,  mS,  11 19 
Aveling,  627 
Aventinus  J.  (Thunmair),  I157, 

n. 
Avenue,  stone,  in  Galizia,  509 
Avenues,  668 

,  stone  in  Brandenburg,  531. 

Aveog,  St.,  772 

Averty,  825 

Aveyron,    567,    565,  600,  605, 

716 
Avezac,  587 
Avienus,  604,  n. 

,  Festus,  603 

Avinianus,  1 175 
Awna  Hinch,  37 
Axe,  the,  577,  578,  579 
Axe-goddess,  579 
Axe-hanuncr,  443 
Axevalla,  488 

Heath,  487 

Aynia,  834-83, 

Aynia's  Cove,  215,  S34,  S47 

Ayr,  1 109 

Ayrshire,  445 

Azevo,  680 

Baath,  107 1 

Baba,  351,  724,  828,  n. 

Babas,  667 

Babel,  tower  of,  1069 

Babylonians,  the,  740 

Bacan-na-bo,  890 

Bacchus,  festival  of,  929,  n. 

Baccum,  54.8 

Bachado,  656 

Backofen,  545 

Badder  Saga,  783 

Badhbh, 828,  n. 

Badhraoi,  1136 

Bael,  1 1 60 

Baena,  688 

Baer,  507,  508,   721,   725,  996, 

1009,  n. 
Baetica,  601 
Bcetis,  1076,  n. 
Baghna,  7S0,  799,  11 20 
Bagneux,  630 
Baiern,  1129 
Baikal,  750 
Baile,  833 

Atha  Fhirdhiadh,  815,  817 

Baile-an-bhothair,  913 
Baile-an-Cheadaich,  409 
Baile-na-gcailleach,  48,  S34 
Bainia,  11 40 
Bakerhill,  46S,  662,  712 
Baku,  fires  of,  740 
Bal,  776,  1 160 
Balak,  John,  749 
Balandraii,  587 
Baldag,  11 64 


Balder,  1163,  1 164 

Baldershagi,  1161 

Baldr,  744,806,  81 1,  S93,  1160, 

1 165,  1 166 
Baleares,  715,  716,  964 
Balearic    Isles,    455,    574,   657, 

692,  694,  698,  704,  711,   714, 

980 
Balladooan,  1 16 
Ballanard,  304 
Ballard,  250 
Bailee,  286 
Balleelaghan,  229 
Ballerkoele,  562,  ;9i,  1163 
Baller-kuile,  562,  791 
Ballerstjitt,  530.  531 
Bailer  Wood,  562 
Ballina,  117,  177,  908 
Ballinacor  South,  413 
Ballinadee,  900 
Ballinahatty,  407 
Ballinamore,  193,  194 
Ballinamuck,  866 
Ballinascarte,  85  2 
Ballinascorney,  382 
Ballinchrea,  880,  881 
Ballindoon,  1S5 
Ballindud,  62,  63 
Ballingany,  50 
Ballinliss,  303 
Ballinlough,  49 
Ballinphunta,  86,  87 
Ballinrobe,  125 
Ballintober,  125 
Ballintombay.  L'pper,  413 
Ballintoy,  25S-260 
Ballinvicar,  2 
Ballinvoker,  2 
Ballkill  Cottage,  376 
Ballnagelly,  213 
Ballon  Hill,  517.  791 
Ballowal,  145,  462 

,  lights  seen  at  cairn  at,  149 

Ballyaghran,  252 
Ballyallaban,  65 
Ballyalton,  2S7 
Ballyannan,  230 
Ballybay,  295,  296 
Ballybeg,  116,  914 
Ballybit,  396 
Ballyboe,  230 
Ballyboley  Mountain,  165 
Ballybooley  Hill,  267 
Ballybortagh,  14 
Ballybrack.  6,  393,  875 

>  I-j  3871  38S 

,  II.  (Shanganagh),  392 

Ballybreest,  213 
Ballybroder,  373 
Ballybrone,  105 
Ballybuninabber,  233 
Ballycahill,  65 
Ballycarngrainey,  269 
Ballycasheen,  78,  845 
Ballycasheen  House,  78 
Ballycastle,  112,  260.  993 
Ballyclochtogall,  273 
Ballyconry,  105 
Ballycroum,  95,  665,  766,  771, 

849 
Ballydague,  13 
Ballydaly,  17 


Index. 


ii8 


B.illydermody,  59 

li  illyderragh,  Rock-scorings  at, 

20 
B  lUydoolagh,  223 

Lake,  22^ 

Hallyduff,  S57  '^ 
Hallyea,  905 

BallyedmondufF,  38^-387 
liallyferriter,  3 
Ballyfroota,  50 
Hallygaddy,  766 
Kallygallach,  51 
Ballyganner,  752,  845 

Castle,  66 

■ — —  North,  67 

■   South,  66,  67,  70,  75,  cO, 

431,  486 
JJ-illygheely,  791,  795,  909 
Jiallygilbert  Hill,  263,  264 
Ballyglass,   112,    113,   116.   134, 

198,  241,  437.  592 
Ballygowan,  268 
Ballyyunner  Temple,  63 
Ballyhahvick,  905 
Ballyhenebery,  40S 
Ballyhickey,  84 
Ballyhinch,    103 
Ballyhome,  272 
Ballyhooly,  901 
Bally  hoose,  105 
Ballyhoura,  900 
Ballykale,  791 
Ballykealy,  791 
Ballykeel,  303 
Ballykeely,  791,  792 
Ballykelly,  97,  844 
Ballykilbeg,  787 
Ballykine,  413 
Ballykinvarga,  69,  1131 
Ballykisshen,  78 
Ballyknockane,  55 
Ballylessan,  907 

Hallyline  West,  i 
Ballyloughloe,  373 

Ballylowra,  403,  404,  909 
Ballylumford,  269,  270 

Ballymacadoyle,  3 

Ballymacdermot,  3C3 

Ballymacloon,  East,  84 

Ballymaconna,  81 

Ballymactaggart,  218 

Ballymagauran,  472 

Ballymagrorty,  252 

Ballymartin,  405,  910 

Ballymascanlan,  203,   248,  305, 
429,432-434,  450.  726,  815 

Ballymena,  267,  677,  681 

Ballymihil,  6; 

Ballymoat,  58 

Bally  moe,  198 

Ballymote,  853 

Ballymurisheen,  East,  14 

Ballynaclash,  413 

Ballyiiagallach,  47,  829 

Ballynageeragh,  59,  60,  273 

Ballynahattin,  30S 

Ballynahatty,  275,  276,  278,  990 

,  chamber  at,  984-987 

Ballynakil,  787 

Ballynakill  (Gahvay),   103,  104, 
106,  107 

Lake,  106 


Ballynakill  Lough.  104,  105 
Ballynamintra,  917,  918,  921 
Ballynascreen,  255,  890 
Ballynaslee,  402 
Ballynasleigh,  909 
Ballynasreen,  255 
Ballynoe,  400 
Ballynoony  West,  405 
Ballynulty,  865 
Ballyogan,  78 
Ballyphilip  Bridge,  57 

West,  57 

Ballyphunta,  86 
Ballyporty,  Casile  of,  887 
Ballyquiii,  2,  56 
Ballyrashane,  271 
Ballysadare,  135,  139,  183,  S13 

Bay.  140,  177 

Ballyscaddan,  50 
Ballyscanlan  Lake,  60 
Ballyshannon,  222,  794,  1066 
Ballyshaniiy,  69 
Ballysheenbeg.  85 
Ballyslattery,  89,  91 
Ballyspellan,  402 
Ballyumpage,  269 
Ballyvaghan,  65,  66 
Bally vennaght,  260,  261 
Ballyvourney,  17,  18,  11 14,  1116 
Ballywillan,  619,  620 
Ballyvvoolen,  251,  252 
Balma  del  Moro,  596,  597,  667 
Bal  ol  Dookinelly,  119 
Balor,   167,  769,  805,  8o6,  813, 

888-89Q. 893,  898, 1087, 1 104, 

1165,  1166 
Balor  Bailc  Bheimionach,  808 
Balor  of  Tory,  1164 
Balra,  808 
Balteagh,  251,  255 
Baltic,  the,  419,  511,  704.  738' 

742,  743,  746,  778.  824,  965, 

1014,  1056,   1072,  1 120,  1 130, 

1177 
Baltic,  S.E.  corner  of,  508 
Baltic,  amber  coasts  of  the,  363 

coast,  492 

,  Prussian  type  of  skull,  the, 

931 

Baltinglass,  413,  868 

East,  413 

Banagh,  240 

Banagher,  419 

Banba  (Binliha),  840,  mo,  n. 

Banban,  S67 

Banda,  1 1 10,  n. 

Bandon,  51,  793 

Mountain,  592,  899 

River,  843 

Bandufif,  843 

Banffshire,  870,  1008-1011,  ioi| 

Bania,  1078,  n.,  1142 

,  daughter  of  Seal  Balb,  802 

iUnn,  the,  877,  117^ 

,  River,  2^2,  264 

Baitna-mhorar  Chat,  873 
Ban-na-Naomh,  848,  849 
Bannmouth,  West,  251 
Banshee,  a,  835 
Bantry,  43,  855,  899 

,  barony  of  (Wexford),  416 

Ban-Tualh,  828 


Banville,  1048 

Barangi,  1079 

Barbary,  Western,  704,  n. 

Barbaius,  St.,  472,  n. 

Bare,  348 

Barca    ae  Nuestra  Sefiora,  La, 

651 

,  Rock  of  the  Virgin  de  In, 

653 

Barcelona,  632,  642,  643,  695 
Barclenses,  1057,  1059 
Bardan, 1063 
Bardar-Saau,  106 1 
Bardengowe,  or  Bardingau,  538, 

540,  1058,  1075 
Bardenses,  105S,  1059,  1080 
Barder,  1061,  1106 
Bardewik,  1058 
Bardi,    1057-1059,    1061-1063, 

1177 
Bardinoha,  901 
Bardi  of  Lainca,  1075 
Barditus,  1063 
Bardlander,  the,  1055 
Bardores,  1061,  n. 
Bardouwic,  1058 
Bardt,  I060 
Bardus,  1061 
Barendorf,  502 
Barmouth,  449,  450 
Barna,  51 
Barnanely,  616,  n. 
Barnasilloge,  412 
Barnasrahy,  143,  171-175,  183 
Barnes,  Lower,  232,  11 19 
Bar  of  P'intona,  213,  891 
Barousse,  588 
Barr  Briuinn,  the,  854 
Barra,  799,  1030 
Barranco,  the,  644 

de  los  Pilones,  the,  690 

Barrenness     cured    at    dolmens, 

846 
Barros  Sivelo,  Sr.  R.,  632,  n. 
Barry,  799,  841 

,  Saint,  1030,  II 12 

Barrymore,  12 
Barryroe,  39 
Bartau,  River,  106 1 
Bartha,  1061,  1063 

,  Plica,  1098 

Barthenses,  ic6i,  1078,  1098 

Barthi,  1057,  lo5i,  1098 

Barthia,  1061 

Bartho,  1 06 1 

Bartholomew,  1057 

Barti,  1057 

Bartolanus,  1057 

Bartolinus,  T.,  772,  n. 

Bartrach,  1063 

Bas-Bretons,  the,  1004,  n. 

Bascan,  74S 

Baschkirs,  726,  1 144 

Basin,  in  cover-stone,  567,  n. 

,  stone,  318,  326,  347,  351, 

367,  662 
Basins,  artificial  rock,  90 
Baskir  skull,  a,  930 
Basle,  929 

Bas-Navarre,  dialect  o',  912 
Basque,  607,  912 
language,  602 


ii84 


Index. 


Basque  provinces,  560,  579,  645 

,  Spanish,  skulls  of  the,  963 

Basques,  the,  606,  612,  613,  634, 

710,  715.  996 

,  the  mound  of  the,  647 

Basses  Pyrenees,  department  of, 

581 

Pyrtfnees,  582,  583,  5S6 

Bassum,  549 

Bastarna-,  the,  1072,  1 168 
Batavi,  Si 7,  n.,  1049,  n. 
Batavia,  524,  811 
Batavian  cohorts,  936 

Frank,  a,  1038 

Bataviisgeiniinus,  933,  934,  937, 

941,  942,  944 
Bateman,  '1  homas,  IO08 
Battle  Hill,  419 

legend,  587,  599,  805 

Bauerberge,  1130 

Baulieu,  M.,  700,  n. 

Bauraglanna,  52 

Baurnadomeeny,  52 

Bavaria,    1061,  1076,    1137,  n., 

1161 
Bavarians,  1085,  1164 
Bawnatemple,  35 
Bawnatouniple,  422,  423 
Bawnboy,  182 
Baye,  M.  le  Barcn  de,  572,576, 

955.  999 
Bayona,  653 
Beads,  725 
,     Egyptian,     Irish,      and 

Scythian,  872 

,  glass  and  amber,  367 

Beagh,  106 
Beal,  1 160,  1 162 

Ath-Grainne,  859 

Dorcha,  112,  800 

Bealach  Damhain,  1120 
Bealamhain,  14 
Bealanageary,  7\ 
Bealick,    the,    2j,    27,   30,    35, 

591,  757 
Beall,  1 164 
Bealltaine,  11 64 
Bealock,  27 
Bear,  39,  898 

,  the  cultus  of  the,  869 

,  worship  of  the,  149 

Bear  Island,  40,  246,  432,  440, 

660 
Bear-gcd,  149,  n. 
Bear-worship  in  Japan,  898,  n. 
Beara,  799 
Ikardiville,  272 
Beare,  837 

,  Philip  O'Sullivan,  757 

Bearhaven,  circle  at,  504,  505, 

765 
Bearmen,  149,  n.,  776 
Beam,  581,  593 
Bears,  776 
Becerro,  Sr.,  647 
Beckmann.     See  Bekmann. 
Bed  of  the  Munsterman,  795 
Bedawin  tombs,  703,  704,  732, 

734 
Beddoe,  Dr.,  994,   1020,   1022, 

1023,  1026,  1027,  I029,  1031- 

1033,  1040,  1042 


Bede,   784,   894,   n.,  937,    1079, 

IIOI 

Bedel,  Mr.,  280 
Bederkesa,  547,  1 132 

,  Amte,  547 

Beehive-huts,  mining  population 

of  the,  448 
Beeldag,  1 164 
Bee  Low,  1008 
Beenalaght,  16 
Been  Dermot,  2 
Beg  Eri,  1160 
Behrden,  537 
Beinn  Gulban,  844 
Beira,  633,  664 

Atta,  the,  673,  n. 

Bekmann,    518,    527-537,   5|2, 

852,  n.,  900 
Bel,  I162,  I164 
Belach  Gabrain,  868 
Belanaskaddan,  908 
Belcastel,  597 
Bekiimite,  159 
Belenus,  1 162 
Belfast,  273,  6S1.  994 

,  Lower,  268 

,  Old  Castle,  994 

BelgK,    601,    604,    608,     1015, 

1064 
Belgic  element  in  Britain,  the, 

994 

Gaid,  1 2 14 

tribes  in  Britain,  1023 

Belgium,     552,     564-566,    611, 

623,  n.,   812,  951,  965,  995, 

1043 
Belgrad,  1 152 

Beli,  1162,  I163,  I165,  Iif6 
Belinac,  599 
Bell,  1164 
,  Mr.,  256,   299.  301,  425, 

1005 
Bcilahaye,  57S 
Belleek,  117,  301 

Abbey,  117 

Belleisle,  Mr.,  Porter  of,  224 

Belleninagh,  213 

Bellikia  Castellum,  757,  n. 

Bellingen,  530 

]5ellmount.  Upper,  35 

Bellmullet,  112 

Belloch,  Sr.  Conde  de,  643 

Belloguet,    M.   Roget   de,   601, 

n.,  609,  1040,  I  III 
Bell-taine,  1164 
Belmaco,  468 
Belmore,  226 
Belmount,  51 
Beltaine,  1 164 
Beltany,  208 
beltra,  813 
Beltraw  Strand,  179 
Belturbet,  228,  n. 
Belville,  177,  914 
Ben  Bulben,  859 
Benau-Friederadorf,  1 125,   1126 
Benbo,  872 

Bendubh  Mountain,  617 
Benesoze,  851 
Bengour,  39 
Benmore,  260 
Bcijn,  349 


Benn  Etair,  835 

Bennaghn,  226 

Bensozia,  581,  851 

Beoan,  1081 

Beoihacb,  1081 

lieowulf,  745,   781,  n.,  894,  n., 

895-S97,    io57>    II 13,    >I23. 

1156,  1157,  1159 
Bera,  820,  n.,  829,  836,  841 
Berach,  St.,  828 
Beranger,    G.,    123,    176,     179, 

384,  394,  656,  n.,  813,   S14, 

848,  908 
Berbers,  612,  715,  963 
Berbha,  799 
Berbrugger,  M.,  713 
Berehaven,  840 
Beremijany,  509 
Berenguer,  Count,  695 
Bereslord,  Rev.  Mr.,  194 
Bergion,  603,  804 
Bergner,  Herr,  445 
Bergos,  1106 
Berkshire,  452,  459,  611 
Bernard,  Commandant,  718 
Berneens,  65,  66,  95 
Bernicia,  817,  n, 
Berre,  836,  837 
Berthelot,  M.  S.,  468 
Bertikow,  532 
Bertrand,    566,    583-585,    578, 

596,  599,  612-614,  966 

,  M.  A.,  708,  n.,  717,  926,  n. 

,  St.,  584 

Besewege,  528 
Bessborough,  409 
Bestla,  472,  n.,  891,  1166 
Betham,  Sir  W.,  303 
Bethgellert,  8S1 
Beul,  1 162 

Beul-a-Bhealaigb,  890 
Bexell,  116 1 
Bheara,  839,  841 
Bhearra,  836 

Bheartha,  Cailleac,  834,  836 
Bielenstein,     1036,     n,     1061, 

"39,  n- 
Bielle,  583 
Bienne,  929 
Bil,  or  Bial,  1164 
Bilboa,  648 

Biie,  the,  719,  735,  1070,    1 163 
Bilin,  1125,  II26 
Biltene,  1164 
Bilung,  1050,  n. 
Binche,  565 
Bin  Eveny,  90S 
Bin  Hedar,  886 
Binn  Edain  Mic  Ghannlaoigh, 

886 
Biorma=,  149,  n. 
Bioth,  821 
Birds,   regarded    as    divinities, 

695 
Biroge  of  the  Mountain,  889 
Biscay,  Bay  of,  1070 
Biscayen  tlialect,  912 
Bischopsburg,  549 
Bishop's  Cairn,  621 
Bisumptina,  851 
]5ith,  or  Biotli,    799,  821,  822, 

1054,  1 106,  II 14 


Index. 


1185 


Bithynia,  1071 
Bitugurcs,  363,  1 122 
Bituriges,    363,    609,    106 1,  n., 

1122,  1123 
Blacaire,  818 
Blackcastle,  48 
Black    Danes,    7S0,  988,   1005, 

1006,  1009,  1016,  1019,  1098 
Blacker,  Alderman,  385 
Blackfriars  Monastery,  944,  n. 
Black  Head,  the,  843 
Black  Lake,  the,  497 
Blacklion,  42,  206,  701 

(Cavan),  269 

Black  Pig,  the,  850,  S65,  II61 
,  the,  i'urrowa  ot  the, 

900 

,  the  grave  of  the,  858 

,  legend  of  the,  763 

,  the  pursuit  of  the,  855 

Black  Sea,  the,  426,  519,  522, 

604,  723,  740,  743,  778,  780, 

iioi,  1102,  1134 
Black  Stairs,  Mountain  of,  879 
Blackwater  River,  57,212,  901, 

917,  941,  942,  944,  954,  955 

,  skull  from  the,  9,  9 

Blaeu,  497,  865,  n. 

Blake,    Mr.    Carter,  935,  937, 

938,  940,  941 
Blancard,  563,  n. 
Bleinagoul,  toi 
Blois,  585 

Blomsholm,  504,  505 
Blumenbach,  933,  934,  937,  944 
Blunderbore,  475 
Blutgrapen,  498 
Boadan,  348,  350,  365,  n. 
Boadicea,  1014 
Boann,  833 
Boar,  the  mythical,  844 

,  tusks  of  the,  50S 

,  the  worship  ot  the,  S69 

,  bronze,  870 

,  cultus  of  the,  1 161 

,  a  golden-bristled,  871 

,  cairns  raised  over,  870 

,  figure  of  golden,  725 

,  figures  of,  869 

teeth    (per(orated),    444. 

See  rigs'  teeth. 
Boardaree,  32 
Board-a-Thierna,  757 
Boardeen,  4,  5,  18,  756,  785 
Board ree,  757 
Boat,  sculpture  of,  295 
Boate,  Gerald,  290,  345 
Boats,  rocks  so-called,  ^2)7) 
Bocan,  229 
Boccoghs,  the,  11 15 
Bodan,  365,  n. 
Bodan,    the   cave  of  the  grave 

of,  349 

,  St.,  833 

Bodan's  Boat,  654 

Bodbh  Derg,  346,  347,  810 

Bodentech,  540,  542 

,  Amt,  544 

Bod  Fergusa,  355,  451 
Boeotia,  625,  1068,  1158 
Bogdonawo,  508 
Bohan,  592 


Bohanagh,  39 

Bohemia,  614,  616,  915,  n.,  929, 

1125,  1126,  1129,  I132,  1134, 

1 140,  n.,  1 144,  1 148,  1173 
Bohemian  Glossary,  I077,  1095 
Bohemians,  iiic,  n. 
Bohereen-an-affrin,  901 
Boho,  222 
Bohusliin,   479,    4S0,  491,  493, 

504,  505,  507-509,  924 
B61,  370,  n. 
Buiendorp,  10S6 
Boii,  602 

Boinn,  wife  of  Nechtan,  34S 
Boiorix,  1121,  n.,  1134 
Boirchid,  1 149 
Bois  de  Belene,  597 
Boitin,  stone  circle  at,  502,  503 
Bolcan.  11 34 
Bolcraighe,  780 
Boleit,  148 
Bolgan,  1 1 34 

,  Bishop,  798 

Bolgar,    780,    867,    910,    1056, 

1116,  I123,  1144 
Bolgaraland,  11 16 
Bolgars,  363,  1 103 
Bolgr,  780,  1 1 16,  1 155 
Bolg  tribes,  1029 
Tuath,     780,     799,    873, 

1 120 

,  Tuath-Baghna,  1029 

Bolliglas,  407 

Bologna,  521 

Bolor  range,  the,  748,  n. 

Bolthorn,  891 

Boiicc  res,  851 

Bonaventura,  1 141,  n. 

Bonesoze,  851 

Boniface,   Pope,   554,   555i    "•» 

894 
Bonnes  chases,  851 
Boogeragh  Mountains,  17 
Boolyglass,  407 
Bor,  891,  892,  1 1 66 
Bordaree,  25,  786 
Burd-a-Tigerna,  786 
Bordeaux,  609 

Pilgrim,  the,  730 

Bordree,  30,  757 
Borgar,  560 
Borger,  559,  562 
Borgerwald,  55c,  n.,  783 
Borgwall,  49S 

,  the,  497 

Borlase,  Dr.,  440,  758 

,  W.C,  643,  n.,  758 

Boroimhe,  the,  1 142,  1171 
Boroma,  1 154 
Boromean  tribute,  167 
Borore,  706,  707 
Borow  Wood,  the,  498 
Borreby,  978,  997,  100 1,  1003- 

1007,  1015 
Borris,  935,  937,  941-944,  959 
Bosnia,   524,   525,    1125,   1127, 

I129 

,  camps  in,  511 

Bossen,  536 
Bosworth,  574,  n. 
Bothar  Chiarain,  91 1 
Bothnia,  East,  1106 


Bothnia,  gulf  of,  477,  1061,  Iic6, 

1007,  1107 
,  West,    476,    1061,    1 102, 

1 105,  1 106 
Bottle  Hill,  852 
Boudicca,  (\)ueen,   1043,  1050 
Bougon,  613,  714,  looi 
,    skull    from    dolmen    at, 

926-928 
Bouie,  Mr.  Sam.,  353 
Boulogne,, 928,  1038,  1047,  1 100 
Bourbon,  Etienne  de,  772,  831 
Bourg,  578 
Bourg-de-Viza,  589 
Bourgplatze,  546 
Bourguignat,  M.,  713 
Bouriats,  725 
Boveagh,  25b,  709 
Boyesen  (quoted),  152 
Boylagh,  238 
Boyle,  196,  19S,  801,  804,  1035 

•  River,  196,  197 

Boyne    River,    345,    347.    348, 

357,  364 
Brabant,  555,  566 

,  North,  682 

, ,  fictilia  from,  164,  n. 

,  ,  Grafneuvels  of,  464 

Bra^al,  633 

Brachycepha  'ic   types,  995-1019 

"Bracked    stones,"    the,     177, 

761,  913,  914 
Brade,  249 
Braga,  668 

Brain  balls,  supposed,  328 
Brak,  541 
Bran,  774,  876-878 
Brandenburg,  206,  n  ,  302,  490, 

516,   517,   527-537,  74^,   852, 

n.,  900,  974,  n.,  1003,  1 153 
Brandenburg,  Mark  of,  473 

,  stone-circles  in,  533 

Brandomil,  633 

Brandon  Hiil,  2,  4 

Brane  (Cornwall),  42S,  441 

Branhugel,  545 

Brannal,  1 103,  n. 

Bran  well,  1103,  n. 

Brash,  3,  4,   10,  14,   17,  23,  43, 

354 
Brath,  915,  1070 
Brautstein,  545 
Bray,  565,  1022 
Brea,  416,  417 
Breach,  915,  n. 
Breagh  =  a  wolf,  915 
Breaghwy  129,  913,  915 
Breaghwy  River,  116,  117 
Breasal  Mac  Firb,  836 
Breastagh,  114,  115 
Brechin,  round  tower  at,  991 
Brecknock,  1023 
Bree,  416,  417 
Breeoge,  140 
Bregia,  1 140 
Breifny,  866 
Bremen,  551,  1171,  n. 
Brendan,  Mount,  766 
Brenanstown,      397,     430-434, 

440,  479,  644,  660,  6go 
Brenau'^town  (Glen  Druid),  3:jo 
Brendan,  1103,  n. 


ii86 


Index. 


Brennal,  1103,  n.  | 

Brennan,  1103,  n. 

Brentings,  745 

Breogan,  1070 

Bres,    472,    n.,    892,    S93,    n., 

1 166 
Bresciani,  Ant.,  700,  n.,  710 
Bretana,  595 
Bretons,  the,  5S8 
Bretschen,  530 
Brian,  Soi,  869 

Boruma,  23 

O'Dowd,  sell.,  773 

Briancon,  1122 
Brickhill,  87 
Brictones,  915,  n. 
Bride,  St.,  944 
Bride's  Bed,  the,  537 

Plain,  the,  496 

Brideswell,  116,  117 
Bridget,  St.,  819,  1162 
Bridget's,  St.,  Holy  Well,  409 

Stone,  St.,  1 1 16 

Brigantes,  1 122 
Brigantium,  1122 
Brigg,  1 165,  1 166 
Bri  Leith,  761,  826 
Bristol  Channel,  449 
Britain,  474,  491,  567,  56S,  628, 
n.,  II22 

,  coinage  of,  362 

,  King  of,  1 140 

,  North,  936,  n. 

of  Manand,  S40 

Britan  Mael,  loSi 
Britanni,  1099,  1 100.  117S 
Britannia^  Uligines,  1 1 00 
Britannic  Gulf,  363 
Britannica  herba,  iioo 
Britannische  Heide,  iioo 
Briteiros,  the   Citania  of,  70S, 

893.  n. 
British   Isles,   always  receiving 
populations  from  the   Baltic, 
1178 
Isles,     structural      com- 
parisons in  the,  439,  469 

language,  871 

Britons,  475 

in  Armorica,  1135,  "• 

of  Iris,  447 

,  221,  355,  467,  491,  525, 

567,  568,  578,  609,  612,  619, 
622,  624,  627,  680,  685,  689, 
694.    743,    811,    846,     1064, 
1108,  1132,  1162 
Brittany,  dolmens  of,  428 

,  long  covered  dolmens  in, 

450 
Brittas,  414 
Brittenburg,  iioo 
Brittia,  1 100 
Brittones,  915,  n. 
Bro  Park,  Bro  Farm,  Bro  Mill, 

Bro  Cottage,  346 
]5  road  ford,  96-99,  765,  844 
Broadstone,  the,   264,  659,  763, 

845 
Broca,  M.,  612,  940,  957,  959, 
960,  962,  964,  966,  n.,  967, 
1004,  n.,  1012 
Broe  House,  346,  348 


Brogan,  Mr.  (quoted),  96 
Brogarban,  867 
Broholm,  744,  n. 
Bronze,  origin  of,  740 

pin,  found  in  urn,  154 

pin,  found  at  I^owth,  366 

Bronze  A^e,  419,  438,  569 
,  ancient  routes  in  the, 

519 

,  first  period  of  the,  523 

in  \V.    Prussia,  516, 

517 
ornamentation  in  the, 

466 
industry,  the  development 

of  the,  522 
Brooke's,  Sir  A.  Ue  C,  487 
Broshane,  346 
Broughderg,  211-213,  5^4'  724- 

844,  907 
Brown,  546,  n. 
Browne,   Dr.,  297,    1020,    1022, 

1034 
Browne's   Hill,   305,   376,    3S2, 

3S3.  385.390,39s.  4^.3 
Browneshill  House,  31,8 
Brownstown,  40-),  410 
Browra,  circle  at,  33 
Bruan,  463,  873 
Bruce,  Dr.  Collingwood,  354 

,  Robert,  944 

Brudin,  Da  Derga,  840 
Brugh,  346-350,  365,  371,  1092 

,  ccnetery  of,  347-349 

of  Mac.  Ind.  Oc,  349 

Mnd  Elcmair,  350 

Brughmna,  1137 
Brugh-na-Hoinne,   346,  n.,  347- 

349,  "67 
Brui,'hshane,  346 
Bruighion  Chaorlhainn,  347 
Bruja,  the,  695 
Brunefort,  565 
Brunehault,  565 
Brunevoorde,  548,  565 
Brunhild's  little  beii,  550 
Brunius,  480 
Brunswick,  LUneburgh,  551  ' 

,  Wolfenbiittel,  550 

Britt  (the  word),  496 

camp,  the,  494-496,  845 

Bruteno,  iioi 

Brutten,  HOC 

Brutus,  349 

Brux,  929 

Bruxa,  the,  695-696,  911 

Brych,  915,  n. 

Bryn  Cefn,  449 

Brynhild,  550 

Stone,  565 

Bualc  Bee,  348 

Buan,  1 165,  1 166 

Buanraighe,  1086 

Bucca,  a,  912 

Buckland,  953,  n. 

Buda     Pesth,    urns     from    the 
Museum  at,  11 24 

Budini,  the,  929,  iioi,  1168 

Biielcke,  496 

P.uelcken,  494 

Buidi,  the  pillar-stone  of,  34S 

Bui  in  Broga,  371,  n. 


Bujalance,  6SS 
Biilcke,  494 
Buico,  1 134 
Bulg,  1 1 34 
Bulga,  H17 
Bulgar,  1 177 

Bulgares,  867,  106 1,  1079,  loSo, 
1102,1116,  1117,  1119,  1155. 
See  Bulgati 
Bulgari,   780,  910,  1 1 16,  iiiS 
Bulgaria,  508,  509, 6S7,  708,  107S 
Bulgarian?-,  1 144 
Bulgars,  7  78,  1069 
Bulian,  437,  590,  663 
Bullans,  34 
Bullan-stone,  a,  90 
Buller-Born,  1163 
Hull's  Hole,  the,  903 
Bulzenbette,  545,  547,  1132 
Bunatrahir  Bay,  112 
Bunawe,  794 

Bunbeg,  400,  S43,  S8S,  1035 
Buncrana  Bay,  230 
Bundoran,  236,  mo 
Bunduff,  126 
Bunlin  Bridge,  232 
Bunratty  Lower,  85 

Upper,  81 

Buolick,  56 
Bure,  891,  892 
Burgh  Head,  10S8 
Burgum,  1173 

Burgundians,  948,  949,  1060 
Btirg-icalls,  1131 
Burke,  Sir  Thomas,  107 
Burning,  Age  of,  744,  8 1 1 
Burning-places,  375 

Burray,  465 

Burren  (Cavan),  42,  12S,  201, 
203-206,  305,  387,  432,  701. 
708 

(Clare),  65,  68,  69,  71,  74, 

80,  437,  439.  448,  843.  937- 
939 

Burriihoole,  1 19 

Burrisnoe,  617 

Buryan,  395,  447,  809 

Busk,  Mr.,  930,  n.,  943,  n.,  944, 
964,  967,  998,  looi,  1003 

Bussching,  550,  n. 

Buttevant,  994 

Buttoti,  steatite,  145 

Buttons,  Portuguese,  Cornish, 
Irish,   165,  n. 

Butzow,  500 

Buxtehude,   547 

Buzenhagen,  535 

Buzy,  583 

Bweeng,  17 

Bweeng-na-Leacht,    17 

Byblos,  739 

Byrne,  Mr.  D.,  374 

,  Francis,  189 

Byrrmg  Mountain,  y^ 

Byrrings,  848 

Byzantium,  107 1,  1 152 

Caaba,  the,  733 

Caah  Hill,  419,809.    .StvCaugh 

Hill 
Cabana  Arqueta,  644 
Cabei^o  d'Arruda,  92S 


Index. 


1187 


Cabiri,   739 

Cabragh,  180 

Cadhan  O'Hineirghe,  S77,  878 

Cadolach,  11 34 

Cadolochus,  11 34 

Cadroe,  St.,  812,  n.,    1 104,  n., 

I107 
Cadurci,  the,  597 
Cael-Cheis,  860 
Ca;nobium  Scotense,  11 73 
Cs^pio,  593 
Caer,  448 

Caer-Beli,  1 162,  1163 
Caer-Bran,  441 
Crere,  721 

Caermarthenshire,  953 
CcXjsar,  472,  474,  601,  602,  604, 
605,    60S,    811,    1014,    1080, 
iioS,  1112,  n.,  1121 
Ciesarea,  782,  n. 

,  in  Africa,  789 

Caher,  6 

Caheraphuca,  81,  82 

Caherard,  i,  795 

Caherbirrane,  18 

Cahercommane,  1 1 25 

Caher  Conree,  3.  4,  757,  794,  n. 

Caher-Crovdearg,      or     Caher- 

crovdarrig,  5 
Caherdoona,  103 
Caherglasha,  80 
Caherlogan,  83 
Cahermaclanchy,  80 
Cahermacrusheen,  80 

Caher  Point,  2 
Cahersiveen,  5,  6 
Cahirbarool,  33,  34 

Cahirbirrane,  19 

("ahirbrane,  19 

Cahir  Carbree,  857 

Cahirciveen,   1040 

Caier,  1 145 

Caillaou  de  I'Araye,  580,  587 

Cailleac,  579,  646,  828,  1162 

Cailleach  Beara,  837-841 

Bheara,  841 

na  Sioghbhruigheaht,  830 

Cailleac  Uabhair,  830 

Caillou  dera  Encantado,  587 

Caindi,  836 

Cairbre-Cincait,  874 

Cairbre,  Cinn-Cait,  1120,  1139, 
I140,  I151,  1153 

Heights,  the,  836 

Cairbre  Niafer,  350,  370,  n., 
867,  1 148 

Cairen,  802,  1050 

Cairnbane,  303 

Cairn  Connachtacli,  795 

of  Get,  707 

•  Thierna,  686 

Caisiol  Aluin,  192 

Caislaneen,  856 

Caislean-na-g-cailleachadh  Dub- 
ha,  830 

Caisses,  567,  56S 

Gait,  873 

Gaitceann,  874 

Gaite,  370,  n. 

Caithness,  115,  157,  226,  293, 
451,  460,  464,  466,  491,  568, 
707,  872,873,933,  1027,  1107 


Galdas,  Sr.  J.,  635,  n. 
Caledonian  Germanic  tvpc,  tlic, 

1028 
Caledonians,    1014,  1015,  1041, 

1042,  1044 
Galetes,  603,  n. 
Galigraphy,  1066 
Callaheencladdig,  36,  39,  831 
Callaind,  105 1 
Callan,  823,  911 

Mor,  256,  822,823,  1172,  n. 

,  Mount,  79,  849,  8^1 

,  the  bed  of,  117,  385 

Callan-Mor,  grave  of,  194,  256 

Callaun,  823 

Cal!iao/t,  291,  579 

Calliagh    Dirra's     House,    31 1, 

646,  834 
Galmuck{Kahiiuck),  1024,  1026 
Cah-y,  134 
Caltragh,    i.e.    sepulchral    rath, 

142,  149,  162,  171,  174,  791 

,  the,  182 

,  townland  of,  176,  177 

Caliraghs,  174 

Cama  de  Santa  Christina,  591, 

592 
Cainal,  893,  n. 
Gamalodunum,  8;3 
Camalus,  803,  n. 
Gambry,  584,  622 
Camden,  910,  91 1,  n.,  1057 
Gamp,  2,  3,  4,  496,  757 
Campbel,  Mr.  Chas.,  350 
Campbell,  787,  n,  794,  814,  n., 

842,  846,870,  911,  n.,  1031, 

1041 

,  J.  F.,  774,  n. 

— — ,  the  clan,  844 
Camper,  Professor,  555 
Campion,  1047 
Campo  das  Antas,  664 
Camp-stone,  the,  273 
Cavips  in  Bosnia,  511 

on  the  Danube,  1 123 

Gamster,  463,  464 

Gamulos,  874,  893,  n.,  894 

Camus,  208 

Gaiiada     del     Herradero,    686, 

688 

del  Hoyon,  688 

Canaries,  the,  964 

Canary  Islands,    sculpturing  in 

the,  467,  468 
Candahar,  930 
Gandeil,  mountain  of,  589 
Candieira,  666 

Cangas  de  Onis,  651,  662,  663 
Gannance,  252 
Cannaway,  35 
Gannegieterus,  H.,  iioo,  n. 
Cannibalism,  469,  476 
Cannibals,  553 
Ganrooska,  40 
Ganstadt,  924,  passim.  937,  952, 

955.  956,  964,  i'-.995.   1000. 

looi,  1005 
Canterbury,  789 
Canton,  709 
Gantra,  i 
Cantyre,  826 
Gaoilte,  886 


Gaolkil,  7S7,  791 

Caolkill,  circle  at,  419,  420 

Caolta,  839 

Gaom  Curra  Voulla,  23 

Gape  Cornwall,  149 

St.  Vincent,  915 

Gappagh,  17,  103,  208 
Cappaghbaun  Mountain,  94 
Gappaghkennedy,  72,  74 
Cappaleigh,  39 
Gappanaboul,  43 
Cappanahannagh,  46,  lOi,  786 
Cappeen  East,  36 
Gapsehten,  511,  512 

Captime  HibeniicE,  822 
Caranda,  570,  571 
Carantomum,  1082,  n. 
Carasco,  936,  n. 
Carausius,  936,  1038,  1039 
Carbad,  114,  115 

Carbery,  23 

Carbery  East,  35 

Carbery  West,  43 
,  the  giant,  796 

Carbry,  1137 

Lifechar,  348 

Niaser,  or  Xiafer,  1 136 

Garbur>',  126 

O'Kiary,  815 

Cairar,  34S 

Carcassone,  597 

Cardeden,  643 

Garenna,  802,  1 150 

Garentomagus,  1082,  n. 

Carentz,  10S2,  n.,  11 56 

Carenz,  1095 

Garew,  Sir  G.,  1048 

Gargins,  830 

Carhy's  graves,  232,  III9 

Garickafouky,  21.  910 

Garissima,  St.,  580 

Carlingford,  819,  820 

Lough,  285 

Carlisle,  584 

Garlow,  652,  712 

,  Barony  of,  398 

,  County  of,  396-400,  439 

Carman,  541,  829,  907,  1076,  n. 

,  the  fair  of,  875 

Carmen,  1076,  n. 

Garn,  13,  ill,  125,  291 

(Wexfortl),  417 

Garnac,  450,  631,  656 

Garnacally,  301 

Garn-ail,  34S 

Carnan,  123,  763 

Garnanbant,  761,  822,  823 

Garnanmore,  261 

Carnarvon,  450 

Carnarvonshire,  448,  48 1,  661 

Garnavanaghan,  297 

Garnhane,   299,  300,    315,  425, 

837 

(Meath),  313 

_ East,  313 

West,  313 

Garn  Beg,  308,  839 

Ceasrach,  799 

Ceit,  873 

Gonaill,  350 

- — • ,  Dind,  of,  370 

Gonnachtach,  909 


ii88 


Index. 


Carn  Conoill,  1095,  "• 

Dubh,  760 

Grainy,  844,  S47 

Hill.  801 

Lothran,  827 

Maccail,  26S,  827 

More,  30S,  839 

Carndoo,  267 
Carnecallie,  S29,  836 
Carnegy,  Mr.,  175,  179 
Carney,  S13 
Carugal,  348 
Carn-Graney,  269,  847 
Garni,  602 
Carninard,  26S 
Carnlea,  261,  268,  760 
Carnloujjherin,  271 
Carn-Mor,  821 
Carn-na-Gallighe,  836 
Garn-na-Vanaghan,  793 
Garnonbane,  256 
Garns  Hill,  167 
Garnsore,  417 
Garn-Thierna,  12,  13 
Garnwath  (Scotland),  221 

,  sculpturing  at,  467,  468 

Garoascus,  936,  n. 
Garolan,  skull  of,  994 
Garosco,  936,  n. 
Garouiiascus,  pagus,  936,  n. 
Garpathians,  the,  1 144,  II48 
Garpatians,  IC99 
Garpre,  son  of  Etan,  348 
Garra,  125 
Garrabeha,  505 

Garrach  (J'A'eill,  the,  877,  878 
Garraig  Choitrigi,  873 
Garraigin  Beag,  814 
Garraigin  Ohele,  814 
Garraig-na-Chait,  873 
Garran,  66,  71,  72 
Garranroe,  252 
Carrazedo,  634 
Garrick,  240,  254 

Cliona,  832 

East,  254 

Carrickabansha,  58 
Carrick-a-Dhirra,  64,  834 
Carrickaglasha,  73 
Garrickard,  190 
Carrickaroirk,  58 
Carrickbrack,  329 
Carrickbrcaga,  107 
Carrickglass,  184,  185,  369,  801, 
891 

(Tyrone),  401 

Carrickinare,  295 
Garrick macross,  296,  864 
Garrickmines,  390 
Garrick-na-gawg,  40S,  409,  759 
Garrick-na-grip,  190,  759,  801 
Garricknahoo,  312 
Garricknahorna,  191 
Carricktriss,  407 
Carrickyscanlan,  234 
Carrig-a-Chait,  585 
Carrig-a-Ghoppecn,  656 
Garrig-a-cotla,  15 
Carrigaghraine,  848 
Garrigagrenane,  36 
Garrigagulla,  32 
Garrig-a-gullane,  39,  757 


Carrigal,  593 
Carrigallen,  195 
Carriganaffrin,  75S,  857 
Carrig-an-Affrioinn,  765,  n. 
Garriganimmy,  18,  855 
Carriganinane,  758 
Garrigaphooca,  21,  910 
Garrig-Cleena,  850 
Garrig  Gotta,  758,  767,  706 

Groith,  or  Grioth,  796 

Carrigdangan,    25,   27,    30,    35, 

591.  757 

Carriggalla  Fort,  48 

Garrig-Gollane,  393,  394 

Carriglass,  432,  433,  434,  760 

Garrig-na-Ghait,  759 

Carrignaffrin,  872 

Carrignagafifrin,  27.  See  Carri- 
ganaffrin 

Carrig-na-Gat,  27,  758,  872 

Carrig-na-Glaise,  762 

Garrig-na-Looheucaun,  852 

Carrignamuck,  31 

Carrigon,  597 

Carrigully,  33 

Carroillasses,  599 

Carrowcuilleen,  1 15 

Carrowkeel,  191,  229 

Carrowlisheen,  108 

Garrowmore,  48,  113,  114,  135, 
141,  427,  428,  438,  447,  479, 
4S2.  496,  568,  787,  803,  834 

(Donegal),  229 

(Sligo),  142,  174,  259 

(als.  'lanrego  East),  178 

Mountain,  292 

Carrownadargny,  801 

Carrownagh,  138,  145,  182,  857 

Garrowreagh,  229,  231 

Carryglass,  209,  213,  214 

Cartailhac,  M.  E.  43,  165,  n., 
246,  492,  593,  600,  626,  631, 
b32,  n.,  657-659,  660-662,  665, 
666,  668,  670-676,  678-681, 
684,  691-693,  698-700,  702, 
928,  n.,  963,  n.,  996,  n. 

Carter,  Rev.  J.,  213 

Carthagena,  601 

Carthaginians,  715 

Cartrann  Casdubh,  820 

Cartronbore,  866 

Cartronplank,  127,  70S 

Gary,  2^8 

,  Barony  of,  11 19 

ki^er,  261 

Gas,  1044 

Gasa  da  Moura,  6;  i,  680,  683, 
962 

Cashel,  240,  241,  242,  249,  251- 
252,  901,  902,  994 

,  round  tower  at,  991 

(the  Cloghan),  437 

Oir,  182 

Cashelgal,  133 

Cashelore,  182 

Cashels,  1132 

Cashin  River,  857 

Cashleen,  103 

Gashty,  208 

Cas  Mac  Tail,  1075 

Caspian,  the,  667,  740,  784 

Cass,  813 


Cassan,  M.,  623,  626,  n. 
Cassidorus,  778,  n.,  ic82,  11 17, 

"75 

Castellet,  570 
Castello  de  Ibros,  691 

de  Paiva,  668 

de  S.  Romao,  664 

Castera,  586 

Casteradon,  586 

Castle   Archdall,   90,  218,   221, 

4S3,  663 
Castlebar,  118 
Castle-Bellingham,  863 
Castle  Blayrey,  295,  864 
Castlecarragh,  181,  250,  858 
Gastleconnor,  175 
Castlederg,  208,  209 
Gastlegal,  133 
Castle  Gregory,  3 
Castle  Hackett,  798 
Castlehaven,  43 
Gastlelyons,  13 
Castlemartyr,  14,  8^5 
Castle-Mary,   15,  16,  758,  767, 

796 
Gastlemorris,  404 
Castlenock,  379 
Castlepollard,  862 
Gastlereagh  Lower,  273 

Upper,  275 

Castlerock,  181 
Gastleterra,  906 
Castletimon,  414 
Castletown,  72,  74-77,  817,  883 

Berehaven,  840 

Castleventry,  36,  39 

Castlewellan,  2S3 

Castra  ac  Spatia,  546,  1 1 26 

Gastra  Fabiana,  1173 

Gastrelo,  633 

Gastres,  599 

Castro  Grande,  655 

Castros,  586,  633 

Castruiii  Fatate,  1 162,  1 163 

Cat,  the,  872-874 

Catalonia,  601 

Cathach,  419 

Cathair,  448,  1128,  n. 

Crohnn,  220,  472,  n. 

Mhic  Toirc,  808,  857 

Cat  hairs,  1 096,  n. 

Cathal,  349 

Cathay,  750 

Cathban-y  871 

Cathenesia,  872 

Catherick,  11 19 

Cathirig,  1121 

Cathluan,  11 12 

Gathoir  -  na  -  Gallighe  -  Beurtha, 

838 
Cathomar,  1134 
Cathraighe,     873,    874,     III9- 

II 20,  I I 39 
Cathrigia,  11 19 
Catioroc,  623,  758 
Catorimagus,  I121 
Catraighe,  872 
Cat-Rail,  the,   865,  873,   11 29, 

1 160 
Catrigian  Rock,  759 
Catiigians,  873,  874 
Catrigii,  11 19 


Index. 


1 189 


Cat's  Cave,  the,  874 

Rock,  372,  373,  585,  759 

Cat-stone,  372 
Catt,  872,  S74 
Catta,  872 
Catta-Cumhal,  874 
Catta-stones,  758 
Catt-Cototchenn,  874 
Cattegat,  363,  81 1,  826,  1107 
Catterick,  11 19 
Catti,  872,  105S,  1 121,  n. 
Cattovicum,  1129,  n. 
Caturactonion,  11 19 
Caturiges,  363,  1121,  1122 
Caturix,  1121 

Catwick-op-Zee,  iico,  11 29 
« 'aucasian  districts,  363 
Caucasus,  67,  522,  557,628,11., 

708,    722-726,   740,   751-752, 

777.  77S,  966,  1062,  112^ 
Cauci,  812,  036,  1059 
Caugh  Hill,  circle  at,  419.     St-e 

Caah 
Causcraid  Mend  Macha,  105 1 
Causeway,  259 

water,  285 

Cavan,    Co.    of,    42,    201-207, 

472,  682,  701,  708 
Cafe  at  Lough  Derg,  devotions 

in,  773 
,  natural,  at    Ballynaminta, 

917-921 
Caveaiix,  567 
Caverne     de    I'llomme    j\Iort, 

568,  612,  945,  957-961,  964, 

967,  978,  989,  lOOO 

della  Malta,  964 

Caves,  burial  in,  477 

,    venerated    in    Esthonia, 

Cavities   in    covermg-sioiie,   the 

feature  of,  711,  728,  735-736 

in  surfaces  of  rocks,  652 

Cazalis  de  Fondouce,   566,  567, 

n-,  570,  599,  600,  605,  606,  n. 
Cealdrach,  791 
Cealluna,  "gi 
Ccalliira,  149 
Cca/luragh,  791 
Ceann  Sleibne,  S87 
Ceannorth's  VVa's,  268,  827 
Ceara,  mo 

Cearmna  or  Cearna,  1137,  1160 
Ceasair,    or    Cesair,    799,    S02, 

822,  1054,  1 106 
Ceasarn,  10S4 
Ceat,  874,  1 167 
Ceath,  1 167 

Ceathoir,   847,  I160,  1 167 
Cecht,  1055,  n.,  1167 
Cefn,  943,  n.,  968,  969,  970 
Ceimabricka,  843 
Ceimcorravooly,  78  S 
Ciim-na-bricka,  833,  912,  913 
Ceis  Coraind,  860 
Celestius,  1045,  1046 
Celia,  68,   147,  431,  432,  493, 

639,  640,  701,  787,  789,  961 
Cellach,  3^8 
Ccllcc  meinoriir,  147,  638,  640, 

641,  789 
Celle,  540 


Celt,  the  Spanish,  1032 
CeltK,  605,  608,  1026,  1 123,  n. 
Celtchair  Mac  Uthair,  1051 
Celtiberi,  605,  715 
Celtic,  the  word,  604,  n. 
Celtic  language,  1 1 34 
,  arrival  of,  in  Britain 

and  Ireland,  525 

■  ■ -,  dispersal  of  the,  1014 

E.  of  Weser,  525 

,  spread  of,  602 

Celtic  mountains,  605,  n.,  11 22, 

and  n. 

temples,  1127 

Celtica,  604,   10 14 
Celtici,  the,  651 
Celto-Ligues,  605 
Celto-Ligures,  715 
Celto-Scythce,    602,    725,    1102, 

1123,  I134,  I169 
Celts,  474,  556,  604,  605,  1079, 

1118,  1123 

of  Ccesar,  the,  1012 

Celts,  bronze,  618,  619 

,  copper  (Indian),  740,  n. 

lighting  bonfires  on  tombs 

in  Spain,  74 

,  stone,  placed  against  styles 

in  India,  451 
Cemeteries    of   Ireland     before 

"  The  Faith,''  347 
Cenn  Cruaich,  472,  n. 
CeSl,  ceolic,  ciuUr,  cyuUc,  791 
Cepaes,  668 
Cephalic  index,    the,    922,    n. , 

923,  n. 
Ceres,  762,  870 
Cermad,  or  Cearmna,  1166 
Cermaid,  348,  349 
Cermait,  son  of  the  Dagda,  348 
Cernech,  817,  n. 
Cerro  del  Sol,  344,  n. 
Cesarb,  1 136 
Cesareda,  469,  671 
Cesorix,  1 134 
Cet,  872,  873 
Cetach  Loegaire,  the,  854 
Cethar,  1167 
Cethor,  847 

Cetius,  Mons,  1 1 72,  1173 
Cevennes,  the,   590,   600,  670, 

671,  6S3,  956 
Chaffpool,  1 82 
Chair,  burial  in  a,  800 

,  Hag's,  331,  332 

of  stones  in  tumulus,  112 

,  stone,  838 

Chalaronne  River,  8S3 
ChalciJice,  522 
Chalons,  battle  of,  II21 
Chamant,  960 
Chambered  cairns,  669 

,     Loughcrew,    313- 

343 
tumuli,  418 

,     classification    of — 

construction    of,    distribution 
of,  424-439 

in  Scotland,  Ireland,   and 

Pomerania,  519 
Chambers,  Mr.,  159 
Champagne,  the,  630 


Champions  or  athletes,  II46,  n. 

among  the  Germans,  497 

bed,  785 

field,  785 

Channel  Inlands,  568,  623,  758 
Chantre,  M.  E.  (quoted),  75, 644. 

723.  724,  726,  727,  966,  1 129, 

n. 
Chapel  Cam  Brea,  789,  n. 
Chapelizod,  379 
Charausio,  1038 
Charens,  M. ,  587 
Chariots,  sculptured    figures  of, 

483-485 
Charlemagne,  550,  739,  n.,  7^)5, 

824,  865,  n.,  10S5,  1 163 
,  Capitularies   of,  594,    n., 

595 
Charles  the  First,  King,  S50 
Charleville,  785 
Charos,  936 
Chartres,  585 
Char  vet,  M.,  601 
Chasari,  11 16,  n. 
Chassuarii,  1 157 
Chateau  du  Rocher,  584 
Chatterton,  Lady,  4,  765 
Chatti,  7S1,  n.,  S72,  1167 
Chattuarii,  781 
Chauci,    812,    894,  936,    1058, 

1059,  1 177 
Chauseuque,    M.    V.    de,    587, 

588.  596 
Chauvaux,  955 
Cheddar,  953 
Cheese-wring,  the,  656 
Cherusci,  1167 
Cheviots,  rocks — markings  from 

the,  354 
Chew  ISlagna,  794 
Chierici,  M.  I'Abbe,  470 
Children  of  the  Mermaid,  17;, 

497.  n- 
China,  740 

,  the  Emperor  of,  749 

,  mortuaria  in,  574 

,  ritual  at    the   festivals  of 

the  dead  in,  854 
,    superstition     about     the 

moon  in,  596 
Chinese  eye,  the,  1026 

,  spirit-festivals  of  the,  278 

Tartars,  1004,  n. 

Chink,  rock  of  the,  409 
Chochilaich,  894,  n. 
Chortonicum,  1099 
Chorutane,  1099,  114S 
Chorwati,  109S,  1099,  114S 
Christian,  Bishop,  1097 
Christmas  night,  584 
Chrysopolis,  1071 
Chuni,  784,  1069 
Churchacres,  196 
Churchtown,  208,  209 
Chywoone,  448 
Ciannachta,  IC84 
Ciarraighe,  1121,  n. 
Cibournics,  375,  599 
Cicero,  474,  601,  1046 
Cicul,  829,  1062,  1095 
Cid,  the,  695 
Cierge,  570 


1 190 


Index. 


10S9, 


.9-^ 


I  iiS, 


34S 


Cies,  653 

Cill-a-Scoir,  7S5 

Cille,  728,  735.  76S,  787 

of  the  pig.  the.  855 

of  the  sun,  848 

Cill-M6r,  798 
Cill-Tiimper,  791 
Cimbaoith,  1086,  1095 

,  Rath,  826,  n. 

Cimbe,  1095 

Ceithirchennach, 

"37 

Cimbri,  725.  896,896,11.,  1123, 

1 134,  1 167 

,  camps  of  the,  1126,  n. 

,  cauldron  of  the,  1159,  n. 

,  dogs  and  wonien  fight  in 

tlie  ranks  of  the,  1 167,  n. 
Cimbria,  10S6 

,  Little,  1 105 

Cimbrian  cavalry,  white  shields 

of  the,  1 167 
Cimbric  Chersonese,  865,  iioo, 

1 102,  1 143,  1 156 

peninsula,  526 

Cimbrishavn,  4S5,  579 
Cinie   Cetherceann,   1137. 

Cimbe 
Cime,  or  Cinge,  1171 
Cimmerian  Huns,  1118 
Cimmerians,  910 
Cimmerii,     725,      1102, 

II23,  II34 
Cinaed,  the  steed  of,  348 
Cinaeth  O'Hartagain,  547> 
Cing,  1 137 
Cinge,  1 171 
Cintra,  Serra  de,  666 
Ciocal.    \    e^,  r":^.,i 
Ciocall.  j 
Ci'r,  348 

Circassians,  the,  871 
Circipene,  783,  895,  11 56 
Circk,  5S4 

at  Browra,  33 

,  a  buried,  179 

at  Templebrian,  852 

,    battle   legend   connected 

with,  419 

,  stone  (Galizia),  509 

CvcL's,  419-421,  581,  597,  656 
circles  carved  on  dolmen, 

437 

,  central  stone  in,  505,  847 

,  concentric,  617 

,  Danish,  507 

erected  by  the  Iberes,  644 

haunted  at  night,  626 

in  Brandenburg,  533,  534 

in  Riigen,  498 

of  stone-,  718-720 

,  places  of  human  sacrifice, 

505 

,  small,  906 

,    stone    basins    connected 

with,  662-664 

,  stone,  in  Esthonia,  512 

, ,    in    Mecklenburg, 

502,  503 
, ,  places  where  battles 

have  been  fought,  809 
, ,  in  West  Prussia,  516 


CircJiits,  the  practice  of  making, 

505,  n. 
Cist  under  i/inri/t,  789 
Cisls,  great  s'one,  741 
Citatiias,  632,  n. 
Ciudad-Keal,  6S2 
Cividade,  644,  1065 
Clacha-Brath,  915 
Claddagh,  the,   1032 
,  nicknames  in  use  in  the, 

1033 
Cladh-na-Peis!e,  864,  909 
Claggan,  232 
Clanawley,  226 
Clancarty,  Lord,  793 
Clangil)bon,  8 
Clankee,  207 
Clanmahon,  207 
Clann  Deagii,  10S3 

Umoir,  II 36 

Clanna  Bascaoin,  1157 

Rudraighe  or  Kugiiraidhe, 

864,  1 1 70 
Clanna-Morna,  1157 
Claodicus,  1 134 
Clare,  440,  568,   586,  628,  660, 

663,  665,  670,  723,   727,  729, 

735.  752 

(in  Galway),  105 

,  Co.  of,  65-102,  593 

,  dolmens  of;  discoveries  in 

the,  71 

,  forts  in,  1 125,  1129 

Clark,  Mr.  R.,  356 
Clash  Field,  374 
Clashmore,  901 
Clash-na-Mucka-Dhee,  S55 
Claudius,  1058,  1075 

(GuthicLis),  1072 

Clava,  457,  466 

Cleenish,  223,  225,  226 

Cleft,  rock  of  the,  409 

Cleggan  Bay,  103,  104 

Clegnagh,  25S 

Cleland,  Mr.,  274 

Cletech,  371,  n. 

Cleveland   (Yorkshire),  221 

Cliach,  836 

Cliad,  Vadum,  1075 

Clidna,  831,  833.    See  Cliodhna 

and  Cliona 
Clidna's  Wave,  832 
Clifden,  105 

Cliff-castles,  1087,  1131,  1132 
Cliodhna,  831,  S50 
Cliona,  831 

Cliopach  M6r,  190,  801 
Clives,  Duchy  of,  iioo 
Clocha-hracka,  116 
Clocha-brack  Hill,  175 
Clocha-hreaca,    1 16,     128,     174, 

913,  914,  916 
Cloch  an  Marcach,  908 
Clochan  an  Martini;^,  910 
Clochan-na-stooca,  121,  764 
Clochanunker,  the,  260 
Clochanaphuca,  108 
Clochanramer,  300 
Clochaphoill,  400 
Cloch-a-Phuca,  91 1 
Cloch-a-sig-toraidheach,  853 
Cloch-an-Uabhair,  830 


CIoch-Bannagh,  402 
Cloch-bhreac,  174 
Clochboley,  130 
Clochboola,  31 
Clochbrack,  53,  760,  912 
Cloch    Breac,     174,    196,    913, 

914 
Clochcor,  130 
Clocher  More,  182 
Clocherney,  209 
Clochbadda,  14 
Clochfadha,  763 
Cloch  Fhada  Gharaidh  Duibh, 

876 
Clochglass,  231,  262 
Cloch  Greine,  S47,  849,  n. 
Cloch  Leachdain,  911 
Clochlia,  174,  913 
Cloch-Mor,  182 
Clochmore,   192,  240,  283,  285, 

763 
Cloch  Morhit,  656,  848 
Cloch-na-Breacaib,  913 
Cloch-na-dtri-pleur,  796 
Cloch-na-Gobhar,  404,  909 
Clochnagon,  875 
Clochnakilcoillagh,  192 
Cloch-na-Slaghta,  824 
Cloch-na-tara,  764 
Cloch-na-tri-posta,     186,     187, 

763 
Cloch-rian-cois-an-Phooca,  910 
Clochogle,    the,   117,  118,  208, 

209 
Clochogle  stone,  the,  198 
Clochoyle,  the,  254,  763 
Clochree  Hill,  105 
Clochthogbail,  284 
ClochtogaJ,  763,  835 
Clochtoghil,  167 
Clochtogle,  229,  230 
Cloghabracka,  177,  914 
Cloghalea,  370 
Cloghan,   the,    113,     134,    137, 

240,  244,  437 
Cloghan-carneen,  402,  763 
Cloghane,  2 
Cloghanmore,  236,  240 
Cloghan-na-Marabhan,  792 
Cioghanunker,  261 
Clogher,  35,  55,  213,  215 
Cloghfin  River,  209 
Cloghglass,  229 
Cloghinny,  299 
Cloghmanty,  759 
Cloghmine,  190 
Cloghna  Point,  37 
Cloghna  Rock,  37 
Cloghnaboghil,  258 
Cloghoolia,  loi 
Cloghs,  262 
Cloghtogle,  225 
Cloiche  leithe,  404,  760 
Cloidhe  Dubh,  857 
Cloidhe  Lochlannach,  the,  120 
Cloidhe  Ruadh,  857 
Clonakelty,  37 
Clonca,  or  Cloncha,  229 
Cloncorick,  794 
Clondahorky,  231 
Clondavaddog,  231 
Clonderalaw,  loi 


Index. 


1 191 


Clondermot,  253 

Clondons  and  Clangibbon,  S 

Clondiohid,  17-20,  32 

Clonduff,  284 

Cloneen,  70,  72,  80,  81,  175 

Clonegam,  56 

Clones,  291,  732,  n. 

Clones,    round   tower    at,    991, 

992 
Clonfadda,  58 
Clonfert,  105 
Clonfinlougi>,  907 
Clonlea,  loi 
Clonleigh,  235 
Clonlonan,  373 
Clonlum,  304 
Clonmacnoise,  554,  n.,  615,  641, 

644,  697,  698,  835,  907 
Clonmany,  229 
Clonmore,  416 
Clonoulty,  55 
Clontead,  39 
Clontibret,  295 
Clontygora,  304 
Cloomore,  861 
Cloonatumpher,  226,  786 
Clooncorick,  195 

Castle,  195 

Cloone,  255 
Clooneen,  55 
Clooney,  82,  83 
Cloonfinnan,  195 

Lough,  195 

Cloon  Hill,  159 

Cloonker,  312,  815 

Cloonmucduff,  766,  858 

Cloonyconrymore,  99,  lOO,  loi 

Clopook,  911 

Close,   Rev.  M.   H.,    393-39 5 » 

433 
Clotk  hting  on  bushes  near  well, 

469.     See  Rags 
Clothru,  892 
Cloughglass,  252 
Cloughmore,  the,  284 
Cloughogan,  263,  264 
Cloughtogel,  256 
Cioverhill,    141,    143,   171,  220, 

243>  438,  525-  647 
Cloyne,  round  tower  at,  991 
Cloyragh,  130 
Cioyravver,  116,  117 
Clyde,  the,  292 

,  the  Forth  of,  1 109 

Clynnog  Fawr,  482,  484,  661 
Cnamhros,  876 
Cnoc-a-Ghallaigh,  829 
Cnoc  Aine,  835,  836 
Cnocbua,  370,  n. 
Cnoc-Buidhe,  760 
Cnoc  Corrabhuaile,  53 
Cnoc  Dabilla,  348 
Cnoc-Gariha-Con,  878 
Cnocin  Aine,  835 
Cnoc  Meadha,  798,  820 
Cnoc  Meadha  Siuil,  799 
Cnodhba,  350,  370,  n.,  1137 
Cnogba,  350,  3701  n.,  371,  n. 
Cnoghbhai,  370,  n. 
Cnoghbai,  the  cave  of,  349 
Cno-guba,  371,  n. 
Cnucside-in-broga,  349 


Cnyghton,  H.,  894,  n. 

Coan  West,  403 

Cobarruvias,  Sr.,  635 

Cobhthacli  Coelbregh,  347 

Cobler's  Box,  the,  55 

Cobthach  Coelbreg,  1096 

Cockenzie,  cist,  945 

Cocumella,  721 

Coelcheis,  867 

Coevordia,  555,  n. 

Coffey,    Mr.    C,    378,    n.,    578, 

et  seqq.,  620,  621,  676 
Cogaula,  125 
Cogidumnus,  11 12 
Coigeadhoch,  1136,  1148 
Coins,     Danish     or     Hiberno- 

Danish,  275 
Coirpre  Niafer,  S13 
Cois-an-t-siorraigh,  906 
Coitrighe,  759 

Coizanl,  or  Coizart,  571,  576 
Colaisti,  or  Colastii,  IOO3,  1064 
Colbaz,  783 
Colbinstown,  401 
Colburg,  1078 
Colby,  Col.,  253 
Coleraine,  251,  1126 
,    North-east    Liberties  of, 

252 
Colgan,  78?,  797,  798,  812,  878, 

1068,   1 104,    n.,    1112,    1 1 15, 

1156,  n.,  1158 
Collaheen-a-chladdig,  S55 
CoUoch,  856 
Collooney,  858,  859 
Colloquy  of  the  ancients,  the,  346 
Collorgues,  576,  577 
Colmannus,  1 134 
Colmar,  924 
ColsabadcU,  643 
Colum,  1171 
Columba,  356,  909,  11 23 
Columbkill  (Kilkenny),  767 
Columbkille,  403 

Glen,  246 

Lough,  232 

Columbkille's  chair,  232 

,    St.,    the  Prophecies   of, 

868 

,  St  ,  relic  of,  419 

Comagenie,  11 73 
Comagenus,  Mens.,  1172,  n. 
Commar,  1098,  1142 
Coinminges,  584,  593 
Commons-North,  76 
Comorn,  11 54 
Comparisons,  structural,  in  the 

British  Isles,  439,  469 
Comfhot,  348 

Compiegne,  Foret  de,  998 
Coiiirac  Fhirdead,  the,  bl6,  821 
Comur,  1098,  1 142 
Comyn,  Mr.  (quoted),  79,  849 
Con,  1038,  1087 

,  son  of  Rus,  137 

Conaill,  Cam,  370,  n. 
Conaing,  loSo,  1081,  10S7 
Conaire  Mor,  1115 
Conall,  1064,  1 137 

,  son  of  Aengus,  1 137 

,  Cearnach,  817,  1017,  n. 

Conan,  856,  1081,  1087,  1092 


Cunan,  the  giant,  797 

,  son  of  Morna,  887 

Conan's  Bed,  593 
Grave,  797 

Stone    (Co.     Waterford), 

593.  n-,  797 

Tower,  loSo 

Conang,  349 

Concentric  circles,  525,  535,  847 

Conchend,  777 

Conchin,  Righ  Mhada,  808 

Conchobhar,  817,  821,  825,  n., 
826,  105 1 

Conchubairne,  817,  n. 

Conchuburnenses,  817,  n. 

Conconnetodumnus,  1 1 1 2 

Concubar,  817,  n.  See  Con- 
chobhar 

Cond,  867 

Conder,  Captain,  726-729,  739 

Condum  Beg,  229 

Coneen,  M.,  76 

Cong,  125,  603,  807--S09,  857, 
1080,  n. 

Coji-Guberni,  817,  n. 

Conmael,  son  of  Eber,  1083 

Conn,  348,  1084 

Conna  Bhiiidhe,  880 

Connaught,  591 

,  coast  of,  1 148 

,  kings  of,  1 109 

men,  909 

,  province  of,  103-200 

,  queen  of,  135 

Connawee,  880,  88 1 

Conn  Cetchathach,  802,  1092 

Connemara,  738,  1029,  1037 

Connor,  267,  675 

Conn's  Half,  1092 

Connshingann,  lake  of,  595 

Connud,  son  of  Morna,  105 1 

Conogardia,  777 

Conor,  817 

Conrach,  1 140 

Conrad,  1141,  n. 

Conringh,  550,  n.,  551 

Conroogh  (Cowrugti),  loS 

Conry,  372 

Conry's  lable,  757 

Conserans,  581 

,  diocese  of,  695,  696 

Constans-Sainte-Honorine,  626, 
627 

Constantine,  363 

,  African  province  of,  634, 

n.,  655 

,  province  of,  716,  717,  758 

Constantius  II.,  154,  949,  1044 

Con-Suanetes,  817,  n. 

Contracted  interments,  574 

Convenae,  the,  584 

Con-Victolitanis,  893,  n. 

Conwal,  234 

Conwell,  Mr.  E.  A.,  313,  n.,  et 
si'M-,  837.  S38,  87S,  n. 

Cooke,  Mr.,  907 

Cookstown,  211,  212 

Coolaclevane,  27 

Coolaclevine,  487 

Coolavin,  192 

Coolbuck,  223-225 

Coole,  227 


1 19: 


Index. 


Coolea,  17 

Cooleamore,  65 

Cooley,  S20 

Coolkill  Lake,  293 

Cool  More,  236 

Coolmountain,  905 

Coolmurly,  1S5 

Coolnaney,  179 

Coolrus,  or  Coolrush,  374,  447) 

451 
Coomachesta,  5 
Coomatloukarif,  4-6 
Coomleagh,  43 
CooTg,  753 
Coote,  Sir  C,  300 
Cootehill,  296,  S64 
Copenhagen,  618,  619 
Cope's  Mountain,  131 
Copper  lelts,  670 

(Indian),  740,  n. 

Coraih,  a,  888 

,  two  Irishmen  in  a,  1044 

Cora  Mhic  Buirrin,  887 

Eogain,  887 

na  maididhe,  887 

Corausius,  1038.     .S"^^  Carausius 

Corb  Oluim,  1140 

Corcomroe,  So 

Corcomroo  Abbey,  937,  944 

Cordes,  570 

Corglass,  207 

Corinth,  525,  616,  620,  1071 

Cork,  33,  628,  638,  653,  n.,  654, 

656,  660,  662,  663,  681,  719 
,  Co.  of,  8-45,  51,  505,  567, 

591,  594 
, ,  Circles  in,  420-422, 

504 

harbour,  16 

,  Lake  Legends  in,  595 

Corkagiiiney,  I,  4 
Corkobaskinn,  1064 
Corlealackagh,  295,  760 
Corniac,  348,  696,  S26,  836,  907 

,  glossary  of,  1145,  1165 

,  the  house  of,  109 1 

Mac  Airt,  347,  861,   1064, 

1088,  1092,  1093 
Cormac's  cup,  1094 

grave,  34S 

Corme,  653 
Cornaville  North,  313 
Cornery,  31 
Cornish,  the,  588 

cairns,  chambers  in,  461 

dolmens,  439,  443 

Comouaille,  69 
Cornucopia,  762,  887 
Cornwall,   395,    513,    523,   568, 

623,  643,  650,  654,  661-663, 

666,  671,  673,  674,  680,  690, 

729,  741,  749, 758,  1023, 1027, 

1032,  1 108,  1 129 

,  hut-circles  in,  448 

,  West,  446,  562,  586,  679 

,  ,    glass    found    in    a 

cairn  in,  152 
, ,  stone  enclosures  or 

hut-clusters  in,  243,  244 
Corofin,  887 
Corpar,  1171 
Corpo,  512 


Corpre,  347 
Corracloon  Beg,  94 
Corralejos,  the,  691 
Corran,  13,  43,  796,  860 

Lake,  43 

Corran-a-iiiuck,  25 

Corrotin,  65,  66 

Corsica,  615,  652,667,  711,  712, 

716,  728 
Corsicans,  612,  715,  964,  965 
Corstown,  313 
Corte,  1 171 
Cortenhoven,   1171,  n. 
Corto,  1099 
Coruiia,  633 
Corzan,  656 
Cosgrave,  Rev.  C,  191 
Coshbride,  57 
Coshlea,  49 
Coshma,  48 
Coshmore  and    Coshbiide,    57, 

901 
Cosmas  Pragensis,  11 10,  n. 
Costa,  Sr.  J.,  651,  653,  694 
Coteen,  76 

Cotes  du  Nord,  612,  631,  682 
Cothraighe,   11 18,    11 19,    1121, 

1 1 22,  1 1 24 
Cothrige,  873,  1 119 
Cotragenus,  11 19 
Cotragi,    363,    778,    780,    910, 

1056,  1 103, 1117-1120,  1123, 

I 124,  I 134 
Cotragian  Bulgars,  1121 
Cotraguri,  11 19 
Cotrigian  Rock,  759 
Cotrigii,  1 119 
Cotrigures,  910,  1061,  n.,  1 122, 

I123 
Cotriguri,  11 19 
Cot's  Rock,  758,  767 
Cottage  Island,  139 
Cotta  stones,  758 
Cotteswold  Hills,  460 
Couloirs  cT  accis,  567,  568 
Counties,  Irish ,  ivitli  mwibas  of 

dolmens  7«  each,  418 
Couraze  de  Laa,  M.  F.,  583 
Courjeonnet,  571,  572,  576 
Courland,  775,  n. 
Couse-ma-Keal,  62 
Coverim^'-sione,  channeling,  and 

cups  on,  437 

,  cup-marks  on,  449 

Covering-stones,  cavities  in,  615 
,   weights     of,    433  ;    how 

transported  and  raised,  433- 

436 
Covers,  urns  with,  619,  620 
Cove  stones,  the,  254 
Cow,  the,  883-904 

legend,  762 

Cowney  (river),  131,  ilio 
Coiurie,  money,  522,  523 
Cowrugh,  108 
Colons  foot,  print  of,  536 

heads,  bronze,  870 

roaas,  900,  901 

stone,  the,  89S 

Cradle,  the,  531,  758 
Cragballyconoal,  65,  66,  72 
Ciaggagh,  65 


Craglea,  835 

Craig-an-arifF  Fort,  252 

Craigarogan,  268,  269,  847 

Craignacally,  229 

Craigs,  264,  265,  845 

Crainchrin,  867 

Crampton,  Mr.,  808 

Cranford.  231 

Cranna,  853 

Crannagh,  106 

Crantz  (or  Krantz),  1082,  n. 

Crasto  de  Medeiro,  673 

Cratlagh,  232 

Crawford,  Mr.,  7715,  n. 

Crawtee  stone,  the,  290,  763 

Crayats  de  Sarrasins,  623,  n. 

Creadon  head,  63,  64 

Credhe,  1094 

Creep,  the  feature  of  a,  in  dol- 
mens, 440,  482,  483.  See 
Foramen 

Creeping,  the  Mountain  of,  515 

under  rocks,  the   practice 

of,  5I4>  515 
Creevagh,  116 
Creeveoughter,  231 
Creeves,  116,  914 
Creevykeel,  126,  127 
Creganaonaigh,  809,  906 
Creggan,  864,  865 
Cremation,  741,  778,  871 
,    evidence   of,    in    Roman 

period,  445 
Crematoria,     in     Cornwall,    in 

Japan,  446-448 
Cremoriie,  295 
Cremthann,  349 

Niadh  Nar,  347 

Crete,  1069 

Creux  des  Fees,  623 

,  Le,  969 

Crevary  Upper,  233 
Crimea,  667,  722 
Crimthann,  347,  1169 

Nia  Nair,  348 

Sciatbel,  11 12 

Crin,  472,  n. 
Crineamh,  472,  n. 
Criomthan,   591 
Criona,  472,  n. 
Crionchosach,  1062 
Criwe,  1 06  2 
Croa,  633 
Croaghane,  86 
Croaghballaghdown,  909 
Croagh    Patrick,   124,  472,  n., 

653,  n.,  766,  772,  812,  1 107, 

1113,  1114 
Croats,  the,  1098,  1099,  1168 

,  skulls  of  the,  9S7 

Crocam,  239 
Crocco,  I  no,  n. 
Crochmore,  233,  255 
Crockbrack,  296 
Crockglass,  229 
Crocknafarbrague,  2og,  213 
Crofinna,  472,  n.,  891-S93,  1166 
Crogan,  873 

,  Rath,  834 

Croghan,  iiS,  1 1 20 
Croghan  in  Glen  Malin,  221 
Crohey  Head,  145 


Index. 


1193 


Croker,  T.  Crofton,  15,  911 
Crom,  472,  n.,  594,  653,  n. 

(=  slanting),  421 

Croich,  472,  473 

Dubh,  472,  n.,  772,   1 107, 

1113 

Cro-Magnon,  612,  942,  952,  954, 
n.,  956,  959,  960,  961,  964, 
967,  9S9,  995,  1000,  1032 

Crom  lack,  112 

Cromlacka,  472,  n. 

Cromleacs,  424 

Cromlech,  429,  and  passim 

Cromm  Cn'iaich,  472,  n. 

Cromwell,  49 

Cionn,  1095 

Cronos,  471 

Cron-Teltou,  1153 

Crookhaven,  45 

Crookstown,  29 

Cross,  112,  260 

on  dolmen,  666 

Crossboyne,  861 

Crosses  cut  on  rocks,  651 

Crossmolina,  118 

Crosspatrick,  416,  908 

Crossreagh  West,  252 

Cross-shaped  iiionitiiicnf,  535 

Crovdearg,  472,  n. 

Cruach,  472,  n. 

Cruacha  Crovderg,  1171 

Cruachan,  347,  853,  873,  1170 

,  cemetery  ol,  348 

■  Eile,  1 1 13 

Ele,  812,  n. 

Cruach  Mic  Uara,  738 

Cruachu,  347 

,  the  cave  of,  868 

Cruagh,  382 

Cruc-a-catha,  805 

Cruc  Bealach,  Damhain,  909 

Cruchancornia,  175 

Cruciform  chambers,   157,   3^6- 

Cruckan-a-Ciirragh,  172 
Cruckeen-na-Curragh,  764 
Cruc-na-m-ban,  831 
Crughan  or  Croaghane,  86 
Cruifia,  1140 
Cruim,  472,  n.,  1095 
Cruithne,    349,    356,    370,    n., 
514,    867,    1044,   1083,  1099, 
iioi,  1 112,  1 120,  1 136,  1 148, 
1167,  1 178 
Cruithneach,  1102,  1104 
Cruithneans,  1064,  1093 
Cruithnean-Tuath,  the,  1063 
Cruithnech,  iioo 
Cruil  =  hump,  290 
Cruitne,  873,  874,  iioi,  1 104 
Crund     or     Crunn,    826,    907, 

1095 
Crunn  Badhraighe,  1017,  n. 

Crusheen,  81 

Cruz-del-tio-Cogollero,  the  dol- 
men of  the,  689 

Crj'pl  of  church,  dolmen  used 
as,  631 

Cu,  774 

Cii,  son  of  Rus,  800 

Cualgne,  818-820 

Cu  Bhuidhe,  880 

VOL.   111. 


Cuchullain,  348,  349,  815,  828, 
830,  835,  868,  874,  880,  8S1, 
1027,  1049-1056,  1086,  1092, 
1095,  mo,  1137,  1146 

,  tale  of  the  phantom  cliariot 

of,  349 
Cuchuliain's  bed,   2,  765,  81 S- 
S21 

grave,  2,  765 

house,  765,  815 

leap,  102 

tomb,  179,  813 

Cueva  de  Castillejo  de  Guzman, 

691 
Cueva  de  la  Mujer,  928 

de  la  I'astora,  691,  692 

Menga,  691,  692,  694 

Cugerni,  817,  n. 
Cuil-Ceasrach,  799 
Cuil  Cnam,  81  ^ 
Cuil-irra,  142,  148,  172 
Cicilmciui,  the,  1097,  n. 
Cuilte  Luighne,  814 
Cuirin  Cosluadh,  820 
Cuirrcill,  348 
Cuirt-a-Phuca,  91 1 
Cujavia,  516 

,  long-barrows  in,  520 

Ci'd-a-Mota,  834,  838 
Culdaff,  229,  230 
Culfeightrin,  260,  261 
Cullenagh,  43 
Cullion,  256 

Culmensis,  terra,  1097 

Culm  Pagus,  1171,  n. 

Cumal,  715  and  n. 

Cu?nat,  348 

Cumberland,  174,  277,  711 

Cumber  Lower,  253 

Cu  meic  Cais  Clothmin,  800,  n. 
Cumhal,  807,  893,  n.,  894,  895, 
897,  1 156,  1 157,  1 166 

CummerdulT,  416 

Cummerou,  1078 

Cu-Neit  mac  Con  Ri,  794,  n. 

Cunelees  du  Diable,  563 

Cunningham,  754,  n. 

Cup-hollows,  204 

Cup-markings,     5,    6,    25,    68, 
481-484,  557,  661,  666,  766 

,  purpose  of,  513 

Cup-marks  on  covering-stone  of 
Portuguese  dolmen,  449 

Cups,  natural,  437 

,  sacrificial,  498 

Curach,  a,  888,  n. 

Curi,  603 

Curidach,  1 103,  1134 

Curi-Osolites,  603,  n. 

Curland,  1097,  1108 

Curoi,  840,  n. 

Currabeha,    rock    scorings    on 
circle  at,  20 

Curragh,  the,  of  Kildare,  866, 
869 

Curraheen,  54,  794 

Curran,    John    Philpot,     1024, 
1025 

Curreen,  Gannew  and,  249 

Curreeny  Commons,  52 

Currin,  864,  865 

Curroid,  the,  777 


Curs,  1097 

Cursores,  739,  n. 

Curtana,  1099 

Cuscrach,  840 

CusduiT  Lios,  900 

Cushendall,  262,  765,  785,  983 

Custodes,     302,    528,    531,    542, 

707  _ 

Customs  of  savages  less  simple 

than  those  of  civilized  men, 

455 
Cuthoge,  II,  7s8 
Cutrigures,  778,  H22 
Cutriguri,  363,  11 17,  1118 
Cuverius,  Ph.,  ilOO,  n. 
Cuypers,  Prosper,  464 
Cuyverius,  Ph.,  1129,  n. 
Cwen  Finns,  the,  776 

Sea,  the,  1036 

Cwen-land,  778 

Cwens,  777,  948 

Cwm  Park,  456,  457 

Cybele,  869 

Cyclopes,  474 

Cylipenus  Sinu«,  1156 

Cymric  war-god,  a,  873 

Cynecephali,  777 

Cynocephalus,  779 

Cyprcea  moneta,  741.  6i?t' Cowrie 

nodosa,  749 

Cyprus,  624,  701 
Cytherreus,  D.,  1106 
Cyzicus,  Bay  of,  107 1 
Czud,  1099,  n.     See  Tschoudes 

Dabilla,  348 

Dacaech,  1062 

Da  Chich  Anainne,  1165 

Da  Chidh  Danan,  I165 

Dacia,  522,  1148 

Da  Cich  (two  paps).  348 

Uagda,  the,  346,  348,  349,  811, 
812,  867,  892,  1055,  1074, 
1092,  1 160,  1 165,  1166 

,  the  cauldron  of  the,  11 59 

Mor,  the,  349 

Dagde,  1052,  n. 

Dagger-blades,  bronze,  523 

,  riveted,  743 

Dagger  oi  whale's  bone,  152 

Dagius,  1 137 

Dagodubnus,  11 12 

Daingen,  1131 

Dairbre  Derg,  1 142 

Daire  Dornmor,  1158 

Dairy,  a  stone,  902 

Daith,  I152,  I176 

Dakhovsk,  723,  724 

Dalach,  821,  822,  852 

Dalb  Garb,  S67 

Dalcassians,  786,  1075 

Dalian,  757 

Dallan-crom-na-thittim,  42 r 

Dalian  P'orguill,  807 

Dallans,  422,  423,  585,  744 

Dalmatia,  1 1 34,  H76 

Dalmatian  Tirol,  1 065 

Dalriedia,  11 19 

Dalslande,  486,  493 

D' Alton,  1015 

Daman,  I  no 

Damen,  11 14 

2     I 


1 194 


Index. 


Dameshagen,  iioS 

Damhain,  1114,  n. 

Damhargait,  1114,11. 

Damhnaid,  1114 

Dammin,  1156 

Damna,   11 14 

Damnata,  11 14 

Damnonii,  1104,  lioS,  1109 

Damnonium,  iioS 

Dampsniesnil,  57S 

Dams-gaard,  1108 

Dan,  893 

Dana,  869,  1037,  1074,  1166 

Danars,  7S0,  1005 

Dance  of  the  Geeks,  535 

Danduti,  1157,  1158,  n. 

Dane,  a ;  the  mother  of  Con, 
802 

,  skull  of  a,  987 

Danes,  the,  22,  23,  351,  356, 
370,  n.,  786,  787,  896,  n., 
1060,  1088,  1 143,  1 1 55,  1557 

,  wars  of  the,  810 

Danes'  Cast,  the,  864-866,  909, 
1 160 

houses,  233 

Danesfort,  617,  619,  620,  686 

Dangan,  403,  1131 

Dani,  1151,  1167 

Danieh,  726 

Danish  bronze  celt,  677 

ditch,  119,  120,  122 

islands,  the,  438 

princesses,  827 

Danmarg,  1096 

Dannevverke,  the,  S65,  n. 

Dantzig,  50S,  930,  1098 

Danu,  869,  1037,  1074,  1 1 59, 
1 165 

Danube,  the,  363, 526,  602,  604, 
779,  781,  865,  1056,  1066, 
1076,  1102,  1118,  1122-1124, 
1129,  1 134,  1 143,  1 144,  1147. 
1148,    I154,    1169,    1171,    n., 

"73,  1175 
Danus,  893 
Darby,  858 

and  Grace,  846 

and  Joan,  846 

Darby's  Bed,  229,  844 

Daringa,  1142 

Darmstjit,  536 

Darrynane,  5 

Dartmoor,  488,  656,  720 

Dartree,  291,  865 

Da  Silva,  Sr.  J.  P.,  673,  n. 

Dathes,  1 138 

Dathi,    348,    798,    1050,    1 150, 

1152,  1165,  1169,  1171,  1172, 

1175.  1177 
Datho,  King  of  Laighin,  1061 
Datius,  I151,  1153,  1175,  1176 
Daulineii,  588,  n. 
Dauphine,  593 
Da  Veiga,  Sr.  E.,  668 
Davidstown,  401,  &80 
Davis,  Barnard,  457,  <)2(), passim 

in  Part  III. 
Davnat,  11 14,  11 15 
Dawkins,  Prof.   Boyd,  928,    n., 

943.  955.  960,   n.,  966,  9S7, 

968,  969,  971,  n. 


De;  a  Pictish  prefix,  1074 
Dead,  the  cultus  of  the,  439,  694, 

695,  700 
,  Finns  ask  advice  of  the, 

514 
Dcalbaoith,  1074 
Dealbhaoth,  11 59 
Dealbhna  Cuile  Fabhair,   1075, 

1083 

Eathra,  1075 

Feada,  1075 

Mor,  1075 

Beg,  1075 

Nuadhat,  1075 

Teanmuighe,  1075 

Dealbhna-tire-da-loch,  1075 

Dealbnat,  1076 

Dealg  Finn,  785 

Dealgnaid,  Dealgnat,  Dealbnat, 

Delbnat,  1074 
Deane,  ISIr.  (now  Sir  Thomas), 

241,  244,  245,  357,  359 
Death-goddess,  the,  628,  n. 
De  Bast,  565,  n. 
De  Baye,  M.  le  Baron,  570 
Decapolis,  the,  735,  n. 
Decies  of  Temair,  the,  1 170 
Decies-within-Drum,  901 
Declan,  St.,  515,  709,  759,  833 
Declan's  Stone,  654 
Decoration,  419 
Dedelow,  531 
Dederich,  781 
De  Domnand,  iiii 
Dee,  the,  816 
Deer,  the,  909 

,  a  magic,  11 18,  1120 

Deer     Park,     Castle     Archdall 

(Fermanagh),  90,  218 

(Clare),  70,  586 

(Limerick),  49,  50 

(Sligo),  134,  Soo,  990 

De  Iloudas,  582 
Dei  terreni,  852 
Deiwel's  Altar,  the,  564 
Dekhan,  67,  68 

,  750,  751.  753.754 

De  la  Mandre,  5S9 

De  Lanoye,  M.  F.,  746,  747 

Delbaith,  349 

Delgado,  Sr.,  469 

Delginross,  1074 

De  Luynes,  M.,  730 

Delvin,  1074 

,  Barony  of,  1075 

River,  the,  1075 

Delvins,  the,  1074,  n. 
Delvunda,  the,  1074,  1075,  1159 
Demifore,  Barony  of,  1075 
Deiiiin,  11 56 
Demmin,  783,  896,  10S2,  1086, 

1156 
Demminum,  1 156 
Demni,  S96,  1086,  1 156 
Denbighshire,  966 
Deni,  11 56 
Denmark,  671,  680,    716,   725, 

773.  469,  479.  491,  523,  526, 

664 

,  circles  in,  508 

,  fictilia  from,  164,  n. 

,  II. M.  the  King  of,  435 


Denmark,  structural  comparisons 

in,  476,  et  seqq. 
Dennemont,  961 
Dennis,  720 
Denver,  613 
Derbrenn,   860,   864,   867,  868, 

892 
Derby,  1023 
Derbyshire,  974,  1008 
Derc,  348 
Derc,  371,  n. 

Dercyon,  a  giant,  603,  804 
Dergin,  808 
Dergo,  823 
Dermot  and  Grainne,  846 

and  Giainne's  Bed,  passim. 

and  Crania's  Cave,  312 

and  Crania's  Rock,  102 

s'  Bed,  211 

Dermot  Mac  Murrnugh,  1 046 
Derreen  River,  396 
Derrybrusk,  222 
Denycallan  iNorih,  106 
Derrycool,  39 
Derryloran,  211 
Derrylossary,  413 
Derrymore  West,  3 
Derrynaflan,  55 
Derrynahinch,  404 
Derrynane,  6 

Bay,  765 

Derryriordane  South,  32 
Derryvacorneen,  25,  26,  786 
DerryvuUen,  218 
Dervishes,  the  dance  of  the,  739 
Desartmartin,  256 
Desertegny,  230 

Deshure  Hill,  28 

Desjardins,  M.,  IIII,  n. 

Des  Maudits,  or  Mauduits,  570, 

613,  6S7,  961 
Desmond,  592 
Dessil,  the,  696,  738,  739 
Deux    ]Menhirs,    Tumulus    des, 

585,  586 

Sevres,  613,  642,  926 

De  Veiga,  Sr.  E.,  670 
Devenish,  222,  991,  1017,  1019 

,  Island,  772 

Devil's  Bit,  the,  616,  n. 
Church,  the,  564 

Dyke,  1 160 

De  Vogiie,  M.,  737,  738 
Devon,    673,    674,    720,    1023, 

1 108 
Devotio,  608 
De  Vuursclie,  558 
Dhahr  el-Ahmar,  732 
Diable,  La  Pierre  du,  565,  566 
Diamor,  313,  834,  83S 
Dian,  S29,  1083 
Diana,  581,  851 

Diancecht,  S04,  810,  1055,  1166 
Diaimaid,  Diarmid,  or  Uermot, 

762,  Si  I,  835,  855-857,859, 

891,  1041 

,  the  name,  898,  n. 

O'Diiibhne,  832 

Diarmait  liua  Duibni,  84I 
Diarmuid,  347 
Diban,  829 
Dichuil,  S13 


Index. 


1195 


Diefelselter,  565 

Diefenbach,  1102,  nil 

Diekirch,  564 

Dies  Dominica,  771 

Diestorf,  531 

Dilar,  613,  687,  708 

Dillon,  Hon.  L.  G.,  198-200 

Dimhall,  820 

Dimin,  1156 

Dimine,  896,  1082,  1086,  1156 

Dimitri    de    Gallitzin,    Prince, 

555 
Dimma,  1156 
Dimmanus,  1156 
Dimna,  1 114 
Dimo,  593 
Dind  Rig,  1096 
Dindshenchas,    472,   800,    804, 

812,  S22,  823,  828,  832,  833, 

835,  860,861.  864,  808,  874, 

907,    1093-1096,   1098,   1 142, 

1 149,  1 1 50 
Dingle,  2,  3 

Bay,  843 

Dinlleu,  584,  895,  n. 

Dinzio,  1 06 1,  n. 

Dio  Cassius,  1014,  1050 

Diodorus,  476 

Diodorus  Siculus,  455,  474,  698, 

715'  779,  780,  1084,  n. 
Dionysius    Halicarnassus,    471, 

n.,  474 

Periegetes,  784 

Dirk  Bergar,  564,  n. 

Dirra,  829 

Dis,  471,  474 

Disc-stone^  145 

Disentis  skull,  ihe,  996 

type,  the,  995,  999,  1009, 

1012,  1014 
Dis-Pater,  474 
Dithmarschen,  496 
Ditmarsh,  845 
Djelfa,  718 
Djidjeli,  719 
Djouba,  751 

,  the  Gorge  de,  723 

Djouhala,  the  tombs  of  the,  713 

Dlugoss,  1 1 10,  n. 

Dnieper,  476,  n.,  778,  1102 

Dniester,  508 

Doagh  Isle,  229 

Dobhach  Bhraimn,  798 

Dobhar,  1 158 

Dobrowski,   iioi,  n.,  mo,  n., 

1 134,  n. 
Dodder  River,  3S2 
Dodona,  Oracle  of,  470 
Doe,  an  enchanted,  876 

,  witch  in  form  of  a,  878 

Dofngarth,  11 12,  11 13 
Dos,  the,  874-883 

,  bones  of,  146 

,  the  holy,  772 

Dog-Heads,  777 

Dog's  Grave,  408 

Dogs,  skulls  of,  754 

Doherty,  Mr.  J.   W.,  229,  231, 

654.  765 
Doire-na-tuan,  890 
Dolan,  James,  816 
Dolbh,  819 


Dolchow  Mountain,  531 
Dolgaia  Monguila,  726 
Dolichocephah,  in  Britain,  452, 
469 

— :,  714 

Dohchocephahc  type  of  skull, 
No.  1.,  Scando  -  Germanic, 
945-954 

type,  No.  II.,  951,  954-994 

Dolichoplatycephalic  type,  the, 
992-944 

Dolla,  52 

Dolls'  Well,  the,  589 

Dolmen,  the  type  of,  438 

Dolnieji  allongce,  424 

Dobncn-hiiilders,  France  the 
cradle-land  of  the,  631 

Doliiien-biiilder's  slaiU,  605,  606 

Dolmen-builders''  type,  lOOO 

Dolmen-cairns,  438,  493 

Dolmen  carree,  424 

Dolmen-circle,  or  cairn,  448,  493 

Dolmen-circles  and  cairns  hug 
the  coast,  440 

Dolmen-comp'icado,  650 

Dolmen,  Danish,  481,  482 

,  definition  of  a,  424,  425 

de  la  Justice,  626 

de  la  Roque,  the,  596 

de  las  hazas  de  la  Coscoja, 

the,  689 

Dolmen-mounds  in  Japan,  446 

Dolmen,  Swedish,  480 

,  a  temple,  754 

,  unfinished,  57,  436 

Dolmens,  classification  of,  con- 
struction of,  distribution  of, 
424-439 

considered   as   models   of 

ships,  493 

,  total  number  of,  in  Ire- 
land, 418 

,  two  together,  438 

,  two  together  in  N.  Wales, 

450 

Domangart,  11 13 

Domangenus,  1 1 1 2 

Dombourg,  537,  1 108 

Domdangan,  1097 

Dome,  construction  of,  at  New 
Grange,  362 

Domhnall,  1103-1105 

Dual   Buidhe,   112,   1103, 

mo 

Domhnall-Erros  O'Conor,  1105 

Domhnall's  Grave,  112 

Domhnangart,  1112,  1113 

Doniince  Alike,  S30 

Dominicus,  790 

Domitian  Way,  600 

Domitius,  1112 

Dr.mmesnes,  1097,  1108 

Domn,  1 104,  1108 

Domna,  mi,  1114 

Domnach,  790 

Domnacus,  1112 

Domnanchick,  1112 

Domnann,  1 107 

Domnguaret,  11 12 
Domnitius,  mi 

Domnogartus,  1112 
Domnonia,  1 108 


Domnotonus,  mi 

Domnovaretus,  1112 

Domnu,  771,   790,   1103,   1 105, 

1107,  iioS,  mi,  1113,  1114 
Domongart,  11 12 
Dom-ring,  a,  504,  505 
Domrings,  421,  476,  n. 
Domu,  mi 
Domuin,  790 
Domuit,  III 2 
Don,  476,  n.,  77S,  1102 
Don,  1 165,  1 166 
Donacavey,  213 
Donaghadee,  315 
Donaghcloney,  290 
Donaghenry,  209 
Donaghmore,     35,    S21,    1005- 

1009,  1015,  IQ19 
Donaghmoyne,  296 
Donald's  Hill,  255 
Donatus,  991,  1015,  1016,  1019 
Dond,  1052 
Donegal,    317,    584,   588,   654, 

660,  719,  1157 

,  Bay  of,  236 

,  Co.  of,  43,  229-250,  450, 

,  Finnish  type  in,  1034 

Donegore,  270 

Doney,  1109 

Don  Firiiie,  852 

Donnacht,  St.,  mi,  1112,  1114 

Donnart,  11 14 

Donnchadh  Dearg,  412,  827 

Donnchad  Mac  Fland,  827,  n. 

Donn  Cuailgni,  the,  823 

Donnell,  1103 

Donnell  of    the    Yellow    Hair, 

112 
Donner-Steine,  the,  511 
Donnybrook,  987-989,  1016 
Donogh,  the  Red,  412,  827 
Donoughmore,  901 

,  round  tower  at,  990 

Doocrook,  209 
Doogort,  120 

West,  1 19 

Doohalty,  296 
Doohat,  226,  459,  707 
Dookinallia,  120 
Dookinelly,  Bay  of,  119 
Doon,  3,  192,  877 

,  Tipperary,  53,  54 

,  Hill  of,  Sox 

Rock,  233 

Well,  233 

Doonah,  mo 
Doonan,  263 

Fort,  263 

Doonanaroo,  Upper,  116 
Doonard,  861 
Doonaveeragh,  191,  192 
Dooncarton,  no 
Doondragon,  1 16 
Dooneen,  85 
Doonfeeny,  112,  423 
Doora,  84,  85 
Dorcha,  1052 
Dormte,  538 
Dorsetshire,  1052 
Dorsy,  303,  865 
Dos,  Dbsar,  478 


1  ic6 


Index. 


Dothur,  S29 

Douce  or  Doush  Mountain,  32 

Douio,  the,  496,  664 

Down,  287 

,  Co.  of,  267,  273-290,  496, 

556 

,  flint  found  in,  148 

Downes,  G.,  Mr.,  495,  496 

Downhill,  {f90 

Downpatrick,    2S6,     287,    991, 

1017,  1018 
Dowth,  157,  220,  314,  317,  348- 

35O'  356,  357.  401.  419.  467. 
525,  614,  624 
,  jilan  of,  365-369 

Demesne,  370 

House,  369 

,  stone  button  from,  165 

Dragon,  legend  of,  652,  n.,  653 

and  n. 
Dragon's  Grave,  116,  878 
Draobhais,  the,  896,  n.,  IIIO,  n. 
Draoi,  764 
Draperstown,  877 
Dravius,  mo,  n. 
Dravus,  mo,  n. 
Drawes,  896,  n.,  11 10 
Drayton,  912 
Dreger,  783 
Drenta,  555,  n. 
Drenthe,  206,  n.,  458,460,  532, 

537,  545.  549.  552-565.  567. 

579,  522,   628,   n.,   635,   642, 

646,  661,  758,  791,  874,  927, 

1 163 
■,  giants  and  dwarfs  building 

the  dolmens  of,  424 
Drewsteignton,  449 
Drinkiiiiy-cups,  686 
Drishane,  17 
Drobaeis,  1080 
Drobisius,  mo 
Drochat-atha  (Drogheda),  349 
Drogheda,  349,  350,  817,  863, 

864 
Droichet   Atha-na-bh-Fianaibh, 

821 
Dromandora,  95,  844 
Dromara,  282 
Dromard,  177,  179 
Dromavally,  2 
Dromiskin,  42I 
Dromod,  6 
Dromore,  78,  209.  284 

West,  179 

Drowes  River,  236 
Drouuning  in  rivers,  894 
Drui,  764 
Drtiidecitt,  764 
Druii/csscs,  829 
Dru'dical  Court,  17 

King,  287 

Drtiidism,  1088 

Dniids,  472,  n.,  474.   587,  740, 

n.,  870 
Druid's  altar,    11,   14,   15,  21. 

39,  104,   105,   196,   197,  233, 

259,  269,  271,  408,  764 

circle,  223,  295 

grave,  233 

hall,  764 

stone,  259 


Pntid's  temple,  227 
Druimaderg,  255 
Druim  Almaine,  868 

Dairbrech,  109S 

Drum,  132 
Drumaderg,  823 
Drumagorgan,  270 
Drumanone,  196,  197 
Drumanoo,  250 
Drumballyroney,  283 
Drumbarity,  250 
Drumbo,  275,  1018,  1019 
,  round  tower  at,  991,  593 

1016,  1017 
Drumbrick,  233,  912,  915 
Drumclift",  130-132,  134.  427 

North,  130 

(river),  131,  mo 

Drumcreehy,  65,  66 
Drum  Dairbrech,  1 142 

East,  131 

Drumderg,  255 
Drumerkiller,  207 
Drumgaroe,  105.  107 
Drumgath,  283 
Drunigollagh,  1 12 
Drumgoolan,  or  Drumgooland, 

2S2,  2S3 
Drumgreeu,  2S3 
Drumgreenagh,  283 
Drumhallagli  Upper,  231 
Drumhawnagh,  207 
Drumhome,  236 
Drumkeeran,  218 
Drumkilsellagh,  132,  134 
Drumlane,  round  tower  at,  991, 

993 
Drumlish,  315 
Drumlumman,  207 
Drummin,  97 
Drummully,  227 
Drumnakilly,  154,  791 
Drumnaskibbole,  139 
Drumsallagh,  207 
Drumsheel,  808 
Drunisurn  Upper,  255 
Drumullan,  85 
Drusus,  legend  of,  537 

.  555.  n.,  934 

Dua  I'eimin,  579 

Dub,  1052 

Dubadh,  349 

Dubclais,  868 

Diiben,  Baron  von,  962,  986 

Dubh,  829 

Gain,  780,  811,  1098 

Gall,  ioi6,  1096 

Innis,  867 

Dubhath,  348,  349,  350.  365 
Dubius,  the,  1 1 10 
Dublin,  644,  660 

,  Barony  of,  381 

,  County  of,  376,  690 

,  Danish  Bishop  of,  10 15 

mountains,  the,  44S 

,  suburbs  of,  381 

Dubn,  im 
Dubna,  mi 
Dubnacus,  1112,  n 
Dubnissus,  i  m 
Dubnoreix,  iii  t 
Dubnorex,  mi 


Dubnotalus,  im 
Dubnus,  mi 

,  1 1 12 

Dubois  de  Montpereux,  M.,  722 
Dubourdieu,  S47 
Ducange,  635,  657,  704,  n. 
Du  Chaillu,  Mr.,  4S4-489,  504, 

505,    525,   n.,   579,    n.,   652, 

744,  n.,  766,   777,   8co,  856, 

iioi,  1102 
Duff,  the  river,  li  10 
Duhallow,  16 
Duisburgh,  749 
Duisburg,  P.  de,  1097 
Duma,  348 

Dumae  Selga,  S61,  867 
Dumas,  577 
Dumb,  1 106 
Dumbarton,  1 109 
Dumbian  Sea,  1107 
Dumbo,  Iic6 
Dumbshaf,    1061,  1106 
DumbslanH,  1106,  1 107 
Dumbus,  106 1,  1 106 
Du  Mege,  Alex.,  5^0 
Dummes-Naes,  1107 
Dumha  Dergluachra,  347 
Dumn,  1105,  1 107,  I  III 
Dumna,    nil 

•  Insula,  1 106 

Dumnacus,  1012,  n.,  11 11 
Dumnanus,  11 1 1 
Dumnaw,  1097,  1108 
Dumnian  Sea,  1 107 
Dumnissus,  i  m 
Dumnium,  Mare,  1061 
Dumnobellaunus,  in 2 
Dumnokleios,  iili,  1113 
Dumnonia,    1103,  n. 
Dumnonian  Peninsula,  448 
Dumnonii,  771,  1 107.  1108,  mi 
,  the   name,    how   formed, 

1 109 
Dumnonion-Akron,  771 
Dumnorix,  mi,  1121,  n. 
Dumnovalus,  1112 
Dumn's  Eja,  1 107 

Haef,  771 

Naes,  771 

Dumnu,  1109,  1112 
Dumnus,  1061,  im,  11 12 
Dumrabaun,  761 
Dun  of  Clopoke,  the,  910 

,  1 128 

Duna,  511,  950 
Diina,  1036 

,  1128 

Dunadry,  159 

Dun-Aengusa,    1128,  n.,  1 129 

Dunaghy,  1125 

Dunally,  830 

Dunamase,  IC06,  1008,  1019 

,  Rock  of,  374 

Dunan,  991,  1015,  1019 
Dun-an-Aine,  820 
Dunaverty,  826 
Dun  Balra,  8c6 
Dunboe,  251 
Dunbulloge,  14 
Dun  Cethern,  1167 
Duncla,  S62 
Duncladh,  866 


Index. 


1197 


Dun  Conaing,  1087 
Dun-Conchobhair,  1125 
Dundalk,  308,  310,  429,  785 

Bay,  305 

,  Lower,  305 

.  Upper,  308 

Dun  Dealgain,  818,  821 
Dundermot,  1127 

Fort,  1 1 25 

Dunderrow,  899 

Dun  Domhnaili,  112, 1103,  1105 

Domhnainn,  1103,  1105 

Domnann,  1104 

Dundonald,  273.  795,  1 103 
Dundonnell,  1103 
Dun-Druing,  229 
Dundrum,  159,  2S8,  393 

Bay,  2S9 

Duneen,  785 
Dunes-N?es,  1 108 
Dunlanaghy,  230,  231,  765,  794, 

876,  903 
Dungalach,  11 70 
Dungannon  Middle,  209 

Upper,  210 

Dunganstown,  414 
Dungarvaii  Bay,  917 
Dungiven,  825 
Dunglow,  1036,  1037 
Dungus,  1172 
Duiihill,  59 
Dunkellin,  105 
Dunkerron  South,  5 
Dunlewey,  584,  813,  842,  895,  n. 
Dun-Lir,  820 
Jninloy,  265 
Dunluce  Lower,  271 
Dunmanwy,  763,  830,  905 
Dun-Masg,  1000 
Dunniore  East,  63,  64 

(Galway),  103 

Dunn,  Mr.,  407 
Dunnaman,  289 
Dun-na-mbarc.  S22 
Dunnamore,  213 
Dun-na-n-each  nior,  821 
Dunneill  River,  177 

Du  Noyer,  G.,  20,  57-62,  288. 

314.  359»  416,  417,  436,  505. 

836 
Duponey,  yi.  C,  586 
Dupont,  yi.  Ed.,  995,  n. 
Dunquin,  2 

Dunraven,  Earl  of,  702,  1125,  n. 
Dunshaughlin,  367,  950,  983 
Duntryleague,  49 
Dunurlin,  2,  3 
Durrow,  373,  402,  909 
Dutton,  74,  78,  79,  81,  107,  S45, 

846,  914 
Duun,  nil 
Duvels  Kut,  554,  555,  n.,  565, 

758,  767 
Duvernagh,  299 
Dverg,   744 
Divarf,  a,  825 

,  a,  a  smith,  884 

Divarjs,  552,  75° 
Dwfin,  II 1 1 
Dwfn,  nil 
Dwina,  the.  1036 
Dyfnan,  1 1  n 


Dyfnawg,   11  n,  1112,  n. 
Dyfnwal,  11 12 
Dying  into  a  hill,  761 
Dymel,  1 163 
Dymoke,  John,  1048 
Dysart,  403 
Dysartenos,  374 

Eagle  Rock,  212 
Eaiathan,  1074 
Ealpa,  1150 

Eamonn-a-Cruic,  55,  794 
Earna,  1083 
Eartii-Jasl  Dolmen^  288 
Earth-Moiher,  the,  634 
Easky,  175 

,  river,  175 

East  Muskerry,  33 
Eastphalia,  206,  n,,  551 
East  Torr,  261 
Ebbo,  1060 
Eber,  1083,  1104 
Ebor,  1060 
Eburespiunt,  1161 
Eccart,  494 
Ecelsalach,  105 1 
Echard,  8S3,  n. 
Echtra,  797 

Nerai,  346,  853 

Ecker,  931,  944,  946,  961 

Ecks,  Lake  of,  512 

Eclipse   of  moon,   references    to 

writers  on  the,  595,  596,  n. 
Edain,  1049 
Edencarna,  234 
Edendorf,  537,  538 
Edenreagh  Beg,  253 
Edergole,  293 
Edmund-of-the-Knoll,  794 
Edward,  King,  894 
Eevil,  835 
Eevin,  850 
Eext,  556,  560 
Egan  Mac  Durthachta,  105 1 
Egbert,  784 
Eguilaz,  74,  560,  613,  645,  646, 

647,  650,  695 
Eguisheim,  924,  935 
i^gypu  779'  1069,  1070 

,  pyramids,  of,  434,  436 

Egyptian  beads,  725 

hermits,  1066 

Egyptians,  the  ancient,  966,  987, 

1066 
Ehrengang,  545     .        . 
Eibhlin-Bheurtha-inghin-Ghui- 

linn,  837 
Eibhlin  Biorra,  S20 
Eiblenn,  829 
Eidin,  Saint.  197 
Eigleoin,  801,  804 
Einar,  the  Orkney  Jarl,  950 
Eire,  1084 
Eirinn,  1084,  n. 
Eirrge  Echbel,  1051 
Ekaterinodar,  723 
Ekaterinoslaf,  724 
Eladan,  349 
Eladha,  1049 
El  Algar,  675 
Elba,  1074 
Elbe,  the,  491,    525,    738,   784, 


812,  896,  936,  1014,  1058, 
1062,  1072,  1075,  1076,  1 120, 
II22,  1159,  1177,  1178 

Elbe,  the  Upper,  929,  935 

Elcmair,  1137 

,  de  Burgo,  350 

Eicmaire,  371,  n. 

Elcmar,  349,  365,  n. 

Elcmhair-an-Bhrogha,  350 

El  Ekla'a  El  Mutrakibat,  735, 
736 

Eleusis,  638 

Elfa,  1074 

El/sien,  488 

Elga,  1074 

Elim  Mac  Conrach,  1140,  1141 

Elmhill,  96 

Elpa,  mountains  of,  1064,  11 70 

Elphin,  862 

Elton,  Mr.,  1023 

Elvas,  722 

Elves,  149 

Emain,  892,  1138 

i\Iacha,  10S4,  1170 

Eman,  11 70 

Emania,  820.  821 

Ematris,  293 

Embia,  891,  I163 

Embrun,  112 1 

Emeach  Dunlaing,  854 

Emer,  874 

,  race  of,  1084 

Eniilie,  469 

Emiagh  (river),  2 

Emmen,  556,  558,  559,  560 

Emmendorf,  543 

Emmius,  Ubbo,  554 

Emona,  11 70 

Emonaknock's  grave,  54 

Emperor  of  the  World,  the,  819, 
n. 

Emporiae,  601,  603 

Ems,  548 

,  the,  894,  1157,  1 159 

Emse,  552,  n. 

Emsieck,  550 

Etuhantresses,  635,  642,  667 

Enchantress's  Boulder,  587 

Enchusa,   1 129 

Endeus,  St.,  1033 

Lngelhardt,  677 

Engihoul,  955,  n. 

Engis,  923,  1002 

skull,   the,  939,  942,  944, 

951-953.  955.  962 
England,  North  of,  449 
Englic,  371,  n. 

English  Channel,  419,  449,  1070 
— ^  of  the  Pale,  the,  1 135 
En-Loch,  591 
Enna  Aignech,  S68 

Censelach,  1149 

Ennis,  79,  81 

Ennisccjrthy,  417 

Ennishowen,  139 

Enniskerry,  412 

Enniskillen,  222,  452,  794,  1017 

Entzelt,  530 

Eochaid,     472,     n.,    811,    1 166, 


1172 


son  of   Enna  Censelach, 


1 149 


iiqS 


Index. 


Eochaid,  Allot,  iiio 

Angchenn,  1141 

Breac,  or  Brec,  798,  11 36, 

n. 

(Hres),  892 

Cobha,   1017,  n. 

Fedlech,  860,    S67,    891, 

S92,  1 1 66 

Mac  Ere,  814,  1136 

Mughmedhon,  1171 

Muidmedun,  Moghmedon, 

or    Moyvane,   801,    801,    n., 

802,  1 149 

O'Flannagan,  347 

• Oilech,  1 142 

Ollathair,  349,  1 165 

Eochu  Garb,  579 
Eochy  Mac  Luchta,  1044 

Moyvane,  801.    See  Eochaid 

Eogabhail,  835 

Eogan,  487 

Eoganacht,  1039 

Eoghan  Caoch,  S07,  n. 

Eoten,  475 

Eotenas,  895,  11 24 

Eoten-guard,  11 13 

Eolens,    782,    805,    S95,    1 156, 

I157 
Eoterea  Civitas,  II59,  n. 
Eothona,  or  Eothena,  1 159,  n. 
Ephippus,  1 123 
Epones,  623,  626 
EpO(]tie  act  Utile,  569 
Er,  1084,  11.,  1085,  1 138 
Erbant,  565 
Erbellido,  655 
Ere,  813,  1050 
Erchuil,  Si 3 
Eretag,  1085 
Erem,  1083 
Eremon,  1104 
Eremonian  or  Ileremonian  line, 

1169 
Eremonians,    or    Heremonians, 

802,  n. 
Erenreus,  1 156 
Eresberg,  1085 

,  "63 

Erglan,  1081 

Ergoman,  904 

Eri,  847,  1084 

Erin,  a  continental,   10S4,  1150 

,  kingdom  of,  349 

Eritag,  1085 

Eriu,  799,  840,  IC84,  1084,  n. 

Erminius,  1083 

Erna,   1083 

Ernaans,  the,  1083 

Ernai,  1063,  1064,  10S3,    1084 

Ernaidhe,  1 115 

Ernaids,  the,  11 15 

Erne,  Lord,  163 

,  the,  896,  n.,   1054,  1066, 

1083,  IIIO,  n. 
Ernenus,  11 56 
Erni,  the,  1080,  1086 
Ernin,  11 56 
Emmas,  695 
Ernolb,  1096,  ilio,  n. 
Ernold,  I  no,  n. 
Ero,  1085 
Erotic  superstitions,  689 


Er-Rawiyeh,  731 

Errigal  (Londonderry),  252,  813 

,  Mount  (Donegal),  842 

Erril,  801 
Erris,  Iio,  114 
Errity,  235 

Erros,  1103-1105,  1107 
Eru,ii43,  n. 
Eruli.     Sec  Heruli. 
Erus,  1 1 58 

Erz  Geberge,  the,  929 
Esbach,  968 
Eschricht,  M.,  999 
Esclam,  348,  349 
Esgos,  654,  668 
Eskal,  647 
Eskalniendi,  647 
Esker,  213 
Eskin  River,  195 
Eskuara,  607,  609 
Espolla,  644-645 
Esse,  630 
Ess  Ruaid,  833 
Esthland,  513 
Esthones,  1096 
Esthonia,  51 1,  595,  606 

,  funeral  customs  in,  514 

Esthonian  Finland,  895,  1078 
Finns,  514,   588,  775,  801, 

833.  I03t>^ 

saga,  817 

Esthonians,  the,  512,  574,  745, 

870,  896,  1037,  1049,  1 131 

of  Courland,  775,  n. 

Eston  Nab,  221 

Estorff,  G.  O.  C.  von,  525,  537, 

546,  845 
Estrada,  656,  n. 
Estrella,  the,  664 

,  Serra  da,  632,  n. 

Estremadura,  679,  681,  691 
Estridge,  Rev.  H.,  354 
Etan,  347,  348 
Etar,  835,  836,  1049 

,  Hill  of,  1066 

Etel,  1 117,  n. 
Etgath,  835 
Ethaman,  371,  n. 
Ethelbert,  789 
Ethiopians,  1070    • 
Ethne,  892 
Ethnea,  802,  89a 

-; Imgile,   1 141 

Etienne  de  Bourbon,  881 
Etruria,    426,    603,   720,     722, 

997 
Etruscan  art,  1013 

■  bronze,  524,  741 

cists,  522 

influence,  521 

skulls,  996 

Ettester,  533 

Etzel,  779 

Eugenius,  31;  3 

Eumenius,  1072 

Eure,  Department  of,  57S 

Eustathius,  740 

Euthiones,  1 159 

Euxine,  the,  1068-1070,  1123 

Evan-Smith,  Sir  C,  718 

Evans,  Sir  J.,  67";,  676,  n.,  677, 

680,  681,  n.,  682-684 


Everne,  1082 
Evernilis,  10S2 
Evernis,  1082 
Evish,  208 

Hill,  208 

Evlin,  820,  838,  850 

Evora,    43,    68,    246,   632,    n., 

658,  660,  662 
Eyre,  Sir  V.,  581-5S3 

Faber,  B.,  637 
Fabiana,  1172,  11 73 
FaliriCiV,  641 
Fabricius,  Pope,  641 
Face-terns,  741 
Faebar,  1080 
Fagh-an-aighe,  309,  310 
Fahan  Lower,  230 

Upper,  230 

Faidherbe,   General,  61 1,   713- 

718,  963 
Failbe  Flann,  868 
Fade,  II 71,  n. 
Fair- Head,   260 
Fairies,  580,  581,  587,  582 
Fairs  at  do/tiicn',  845 
Fairy  Bands,  819 
P'airy's  Bed,  the,  413 

Castle,  5S6 

Stone,  the,  907 

Fal,  654,   776,    n.,    1159-1160, 

1 162 

,  the  Plain  of,  348 

Falconer,  Dr.,  967 

Fale,  1 171 

Falias,  1068,  1158,  1 159,  I162 

Falkophig,  493 

Fallach  Eireann,  S;8 

Fallingbostel,  544.,  546,  547 

Fal  na  g-cloclta-brcaca,  1 16,  913, 

914 
Falster,  looi 
Fal's  Wheel,  11 60 
Fiinn,  776,  n. 
Fanones,  776,  n. 
Fantel,  668 
Fanygalvan,  7 1 
Farbreaga,  250,  915 
Far  Breagach,  913 
Farbrega,  71,  98,  loi 
Fardenreogh,  445 
Farmaoil-na-bh-Fian,  802,  805 
Farney,  296,  S65 
Farranmacbride,  250 
Farrenstadt,  445 
Farrnacurka    (i'earann  -  a  -  cho- 

irce),  108 
Fartagh,  911 
Fas,  840 

Fasmarup,  482,  483,  661 
Fassadinin,  403 
^'Fasting upon, "  the  practice  of, 

346 
Fatheman,  105 1 
Faughallstown,  863 
Faughanvale,  253 
Faughart,  820 
Faunarooska,  65 
Fauns,  the,  882 
Fava,  II 74 

Faviie  territorium,  II73,  n. 
Favila,  651 


Index. 


1 199 


Faxildre,  656 

Fayne,  the  river,  821 

Faytilleros,  580 

Feakle,  94-96,  844 

Feara  Breighe,  912,  914 

Fearann-a-choirce,  108 

Fear-Dhiadh,  815-819 

Fearsat-reanna-an-Liagain,  792 

Feart  (  =  a  grave),  263 

Feart  Echtra,  797 

Feba,  1174,  n.,  1176 

Feber,  St.,  910 

Fecha,  655,  656 

Fedamore,  46 

Federuch,  11 75-1 177 

Federuchus,  1 1 74 

Fedlimid,  348 

Fedlimid  Reachtmar,  1 142 

Fees,  580 

Fehrbellin,  1003 

Feidhlimidh,  or  Fidhlimidh, 
Reachtmar,  1154.  See  Fed- 
limid 

Feinburg,  544,  n. 

Feinne,  544,  n.,  773,  7S4,  787, 
895,  1086,  1 157,  1 167,  117S 

Feinne,  folklore  of  the,  775,  n. 

Feiticiras,  696 

Feiliciro,  696 

Feldberg,  550 

Felecteus,  1174 

Feletheus,  11 74- 11 76 

Felimy,  348 

Fellabrunn,  1171,  n. 

Female  divi7iity,  Jigitre  of  a, 
sculptured  in  caves  and  dol- 
mens, 576,  577 

Female  slave,  the  standard  of 
value,  715 

Fembre,  1091 

Femeren,  896,  n.,  1105,  n. 

Femur,  pilasterk,  134 

Fenagh,  193,  194,  1087 

Beg,  193 

Lough,  193 

Fene,  774,  775,  784,  814,  1086, 
1156 

Fenian  militia,  109 1 

Fenians,  856 

Fenius  Farsa,  1068,  1069,  107 1 

Farsaidh,  896,  n.,  II59 

Fenii,  776,  n. 

Fenni,  774,  776,  895 

Fenoagh,  56 

Feradach,  1 103,  1152,  1153, 
1 169,  1 1 70 

Feradach  Fin  Fechtnach,  105 1, 

1 141 
Feradhach  Fachtnich,  1140 
Feraghs,  310 
Feraud,  M.,  716 
Fercorb,  11 38 
Ferderuch,  11 76 
Ferdia,  11 10 
Ferdiad,  815-819,   1027 
Fer-fi,  836 
Fergna,     son     of     Findconna, 

1051 
Fergoman,  904 
Fergus,  801,  904,  n. 

Leth-Derg,  loSi 

Mac  Roe,  796 


Fergus  MacRoigh,  1078,  n.,  mo 
Ferguson,  Sir  S.,  79,  241,  242, 

343.401,  593.  641,  1171.  1 172 
Fergusson,    James,    244,    354, 

457;    157.  4S2,  563,  n.,  716, 

719.  n- 
Fermanagh,  90,  452,  459,  663, 

707,  S65 

,  County  of,  218-228 

Fermer,  1 171 

Fer  More,  King  of  the,  1096 

Fermoy,  8,  11,  13,  38,391,  556, 

646,  701,  901 
Ferodach,  or   Feradach,    1175, 

1 1 76 
Ferrard,  310 
Ferreira  d'Aves,  673,  n. 
Ferreiro  de  la  Marmora,  M.  le 

Cte,  704,  n.,  705,  707 
Ferrer,  Sr.  M.  R.,  647,  648 
Ferrero  della   Marmora,  NI.    le 

Cte.,  701,  n. 
Ferrieres-Saint-Martin,  565 
Fert,  definition  of,  135,  n.,  149, 

348 
Fertagh,  402 
Fert-Boadan,  the  cave  of,  349, 

350 
Fert  Edit?  a,  117 
Ferta-na-cClairech,  911 
Fert  Patric,    or    Feita  Patraic, 

348 

Scota,  840 

Festus,  637,  870 
Fethara,  1142 
Fetiches,  879 
Feuerberg,  the,  524 
Feva,  1 1 74 
Fews,  Lower,  297 

Mountain,  820 

Fiacc's  Hymn,  761,  775 
Fiach,  or  Fiacc,  1 141,  1 176 

Finfolaidh,  1141 

Fiacha  Araidhe,  1017,  n. 
Cassan,  1142 

Finnolaith,     1139,     1140, 

1150.  I153 

Labhruinne,  10S3 

Sraifline,  348 

Fiachadb,  1 176 

Fiachna,  St.,  902 

Fiachra,  798,  801,   11 70,   1171, 

1176 
Fiachtna,  St.,  834 
Fiad-in-Broga,  371,  11. 
Fian,  774,  787 

son  of  Maccon,  774 

,782 

Fianna,  774,814,821,876,  1156 

,  vapour  baths  oj  the,  775,  n. 

Fianona,  1 176 

Fians,  the,  774,  785,  805,  886, 

903 
Fiaret,  718 
FibiiltC,  524 
Fictitia,   in  forj/i  of  skull-caps, 

from  Denmark,  Brabant,  N., 

Orkney,     Portugal,     Ireland, 

Morbihan,  164,  n. 
Fiddangarrode,  175 
Fiddown,  405,  407,  409 
Fidhs,  The  Three,  892 


Fife,  1 109 

Fiferingen,  11 72 

File,  the,  1145 

Filedh,  11 76 

Fimbria,  896,  n.,  1086,  1 105,  n. 

1112,  n. 
Fincarn,  296 
Find,  867 

Find-Emna,  the  three,  892 
Findeii,  1 167,  n. 
Findmag,  95,  770,  771 
Findmall,  1142 
Fine-Gall,  1016,  1075,  1098 
Fin,  father  of  Forbri,  1141 
Fin-Gaill,  811 
Fingin  Faidliagh,  820 
Finiha,  river,  7 
Finisterre,  221,  569,  612,  614, 

615,  619,  621,  698,  712 
Finland,  149,  n.,  477,  478,  513, 

524,   536,  771,  824,  897,  n., 

1036,  1078 
Finlandeis,  988 
Fin  MacCool's  Chair,  290 

Fmgers,  207 

Grave,  124 

Monument,  194 

Pan,  236 

Table,  296 

Finmarchia,  1061 

Finn,  783,  892 

(proper  name),  782,  1156, 

"57 

,  a  dwarf  in  Scandinavia, 

825 

-,  son  of  Finnlocha,  891,  892 

of  FinnsI.erg,    895,    937, 

1156 

and  the  Phantoms,  513 

,  son  of  Folcwalda,  894 

•,  son  of  Godwulf,  897 

Finnaiths;,  774,  81 1 

,  miners  in  Sweden,  897 

Finnbarr,  Saint,  595 

Finnbheara,  798,  799,  841 

Finne,  the  river,  903 

■ ,  sister  of  Ergoman,  904 

Finner,  237,  238 

Finnfal,  1 1 59 

Finn  Hundeson,  774 

Humnieling,  1 157 

Finni,  774,  896,  1097 

mitissimi,  1096,  n. 

Finnias,  1068,  1158,  1159 

Finnic  Hypothesis,  the,  775 

Finnis,  282 

Finnish  type,  1034,  1037,  IO43 

Finnleascach,  372 

Finnlocha,  891,  892 

Fmn  MacCumhail,  347,  513, 
536,  652,  761,  774,  784,  785, 
787,  795,  800,  807,  814,  815, 
819,  821,  823,  825,  827,  830, 
838,  839,  841,  843,  855,  856, 
858,  861,  868,  875,  878,  b86, 
887,  894-896,  903,  905,  936, 
10S6,  1 105,  1 107,  1 155,  1 156, 
1157,  1158,  1164,  1166,  1167 

Cumhail's  table,  55,  831 

and  chair,  757 

Finno-Germanic  tribes,  1158, 
1178 


I200 


Index, 


Finno-Sclaves,  1077,  1087 
Finno-Teutonic  peoples,  1057 
Finno-Ugrians,  149,  n.,  897 
Finn  River,  236,  1036 
Finn's    broocl),     chair,      finger, 
seat,  table,  thumb,  785.     Sed 
Fin's   finger,  and    Finn    Mac 
Cunihail. 
Finns,   149,  n.,   762,  805,  S84, 
897.   932,    996,    1004,    1009- 
loil,  1031,  1032,  1076,  1099, 

,  Esthonian,  512,  514 

, ,  their  word  for  dog, 

776 

•  of  Finland,  775,  n. 

■ Mountain,  948 

,  vapour  baths  of,  775,  n. 

,  the  ivar-god  oj  the,  505,  n. 

■ ,  -worship  of  stones    among 

the,  514 

Finnsberg,  896,  1156,  1159 

Finntan,  822,  896 

Fin's  finger,  2^4 

Fintan's  (St.)  church,  376 

Fintany's  house,  112 

Finlona,  Jiar  of,  213 

Fintragh  Bay,  209 

Finvarra,  799,  852,  1030 

Finvoy,  264,  265,  771 

Fionncharn-ua-  Forfhaire,  820 

Fionnghlaise,  840 

Fionntraighe,  or  Ventry,  1 158 

Fir  Bhreige,  291,  915 

Fir  Bolg,  348,  349,  370,  n.,  780, 
786,  787,  ^o3,  812,  841,  867, 
868,  871,  873,  874,  896,  900, 
1022,  1028,  1029,  1049,  1050, 
1053,  1054,  1063,  1064,  1068, 
1069,  1072,  1073,  io8o,  108 1, 
1083,  1085,  1086,  1095-1158, 
1167,  1177 

,   Mac   Firbis's   description 

of  the,  1027 


52,    912.      See    Far 


Firbret: 

^r  ^ 
Fir    Bregach,    912.      See    Far 

Breagach 
Kirbreighe,  912 
Fir  Domhnann,  the,  840 

Doninan,  1027,  1049 

Doninann,       771,     1095, 

1096,  1098,  1 103- 1 1 16 

Donihnnannach,  U09 

Freann,  1084 

J'ires  lighted  on  dolmens,  74 
Firmenius,  11 72 
Firmin,  590  n. 

,  St.,  1172 

Fir  Morcha,  king  of,  1096 

I'ir  n-h  Erenn,  821,  1028,  1085 

Firth  of  Forth,  937,  1109 

Fishes,  I/oy,  591,  765 

J-'itzgerald,  48 

Flacc,  1 1 76 

I'laccithaus,  1 174,  11 76 

Flaccus,  1176 

Fland,  867 

Flandre-Occidentale,  566 

Flangus,  1170,  1172 

Flann,  349 

of  Monasterl)oice,  347 


Flanona,  1176 

Flint,  where  found,  148 

implements  in    Branden- 

berg,  535 

— ■ —  lanee-head,  167 

Floods,  833 

Florence-Court,  226,  786 

Fodla,  840 

Foghmharacb,  807 

Foherish,  847 

Foiladuaneinch,  6 

Foilge  Berraide,  473 

Foilmahonmore,  53,  54 

Foilnamuck,  52 

Foilycleary,  54 

Folchiin,  782 

Kolcwalda,  894  and  n.,  897 

Folk-lore,  Irish  and  Finnic,  com- 
pared, 149,  n. 

in  the  Pyrenees  and  Ire- 
land, compared,  588 

Follach,  472 

Fomoire,  805,  1078,  1142 

Fomor,  1035 

Fomoraigh,  803,  1061 

Fomore,  803,  1167 

Fomori,  1063 

Fomorian,  a,  167,  n. 

Fomorian  Finlander,  Bania,  a, 
802 

Fomoriani,  1062 

Komorian  kings,  194 

Fomorians,  874,  1035,  1049, 
1050,  1056,  1068,  1073,  1080, 
1081,  io»3,  1084,  io86-io8<, 
1095,  1 102,  nil,  1 131,  1 146, 
1158,1177 

Fomorii,  1064 

Fondouce,  M.  Cazalis  de,  601, 
604 

Fons  Amewenia,  697 

SaginK,  697 

Fontaines  Solaires,  588 

Font  de  Roure,  La,  645 

Fonte  Coberta,  664,  665,  772 

Fonte-de-Mouratao,  665 

Fonte  de  Roure,  La,  645,  665 

Fonteine  de  la  Reine,  589 

Fonte  nay  le  Marmion,  772 

I'ontvielle,  570 

Foot,  Dr.  A.  W.,  134,  165,  990 

Foole,  Mr.,  967 

Footprint,  Fookas,  the,  405 

Footprints,  852,  881,  900,  906, 
qo8,  910 

-,  in  rocks,  667 

,  sacred,  728 

in  stones,  536 

Foramen,  feature  of  a,  492,  554, 
555,  n.,    586,  613,  626,  628, 
687,     701,     707,     709,    753, 
757-9.  77i.«82,  883 
Foran  Fin,  223,  785 
Forann,  the  daughter  of,  348 
Forbes-(^)uariy  skull,  the,  928 
Forbri,  son  of  Fin,  II41 
Fore,  313,  838 
Forenaghts,  423 
l"'orester,    Thomas,    704,     710, 

711 
Forgall,  874 
Forkill,  303.  304 


Formenus,  1 1 70,  1 171,  1172, 
I176 

Formoylebeg,  98 

Formoylemorc,  95,  98,  loi 

Fornar,  1171,  n. 

Fornella,  651 

Forniot,  826,  mo,  n. 

Fort  Ancient,  278 

Fortaventure,  468 

Forth,  400,  417 

Fortland,  175 

Fort  of  the  Rowan  tree,  347 

Forts,  types  of,  Finnish  or 
Esthonian,  Sclavonic,  Ger- 
man, Scandinavian,  Celtic, 
1132-1134 

Foseteland,  1161 

Fosleac,  i.e.  flag-grave,  235 

Fothreve,  1109 

Four  A/asters,  the,  1 1 38 

Fournaught,  901 

Fraech,  1064 

Fragras,  the,  664 

Frahn,  1116,  n. 

Fraiture,  565 

Francas,  the,  1037-1039 

France,  491,  524-526,  566-631, 
1 129 

Franci,  782,  n. 

Frank  Alemanic   type    of  skull, 

931 

Frankentlial,  524 

Frankfort,  407,  534,  535 

Franklort  East,  407 

University,  528,  533 

Frankish  influence  on  Irish  art, 
1065 

mercenaries,  103S 

Franklin,  Mr.  D.,  831,  850 

Franklyn,   Mr.  D.,  quoted,    15 

Franks,  781,  802,  812,  947, 
1037,  1038,  1050,  1060, 1064, 
1069,  1073,  1093,  1 150 

,  captive,  1072 

,  mercenary,  936 

Frazer,  Dr.,  133,  139,  143,  159, 
168,  315,  959,  967,  987,  9&9, 
994,  loii,  1012,  1016,  1019 

Frea,  869 

Fredegarius,  1069 

Fredulf,  892 

P'reeth,  Lieutenant,  753 

Freiburg,  781 

Freienwalde,  537 

Freixo,  671 

Frenchpark,  198 

Freolaf,  892 

Fresicum  Mare,  937 

Fresnas,  895 

Fresno,  649 

Fresonicum  Mare,  1 157.  See 
Fresicum 

Frey's  Boar,  871 

Friar's  Cell,  229 

Friar's  Grave,  230 

Friarstown  North,  46 

Friaul,  1065 

Fricca,  869 

Frideric,  11 76 

Fridcrichus,  1 174,  n. 

Friedrichs,  937,  944 

Friesland,  934 


Index. 


1 20 1 


Friesland,  East,  550 
Frigg,  811,1165 
Frisia,  934,  11 57 

,  East,  1064,  n. 

Frisian  Gulf,  the,  936 
Frisians,    the,    554,    812,    894, 

936,   937,    947,   1064,    1093, 

1156 
Frisii,  555,  n.     See  Frisians 
Frisius,  J.,  776,  n. 
Froechan,  867 
Froissart,  1047 
Frost,  Mr.,  71 
Fuag  Inber,  823 
Fualacta-na-Fiann,  775,  n. 
Fuerty,  198 
Ful,  1161 
Fulcar,  11 18 
/•ullait,  348 
Fiinen,  524 
Funeral  customs,  745 

in  Esthonia,  514 

feasts,  520 

Funs,  Tjb 

Furfooz,  998 

Furnace,  422,  423 

Furnas,  668,  691 

Furrow  of  Black  pig,  1160 

Furtwaengler,  624,  625 

Fuschini,  Sr.,  667 

Future  state,  Beiief  in  a,  520 

Fyen,  744,  n. 

Gabali,  the,  590 

Gabara,  1060 

Gabraidhe,  11 20 

Gabran,  868 

Gabriel,  Mount,  626 

Gadelas,  1068,  1069 

Gades,  698 

Gaed,  893,  n. 

Gaedels,  371,  n. 

Gaedhel,  the,  1027,  1028,  1054, 

1068,   1069,  1071,  1072,  1077 

,  Etymology  of^  893,  n. 

Gaels,  371,  n. 

Gaftrey,  William,  1049 

<^ag,  759 

Gaibhlen,  890 

Gai-Builg,  816,  n. 

Gaidel,  371,  n. 

Gailenruth,  968 

Gaileoin,  1097 

Gailhabaud,  M.,  62S-630 

Gailians,  1027 

Gaire  Greine,  820 

Gal,  1097 

Galanda,  1097 

Galatae,  1 134 

Galati  Celtn;,  11 72,  n. 

Galbally,  49,  5 1 

Galendia,  1097 

Galenditiie,  1098 

Galenga,  1097,  1098 

Galeoin,  or  Gaileoin,  812,  1095, 

1096,  1098,  IIOI 
Galeolus  ^lartins,  1078 
Galerias,    568,    610,    612,    659, 

661,  668,  686,  690,  691,  727 
Galesloot,  M.,  566,  n. 
Galicia,  586,  591,  592,  595,  615, 

632,  n.,  633,  634,  636,  644. 


650,   n.,  651-657,   668,  697, 

698,  716,  741,  743,  899,  907 
Galilee,  Lower,  726 

,  Upper,  726 

GalindK,    603,    n.,    811,    895, 

1076,  1096-1098,  IIOI,  1 102 
Galindia,  1097 
Galinditie,  1097 
Galindo,  1097 
Galiuin,  1096 
Galiuind,  812,  1096 
Galizia,  508,  509 
Gall,  1098 

.     See  GoU  and  Gaul,  S39 

,  Lands  of  the,  1096 

Gallan  Crom,  472,  n. 
Gallans,  585 
Gallegos,  the,  651 
Gallen,  122,  1097 
Gallenburgum,  .\L,  I172,  n. 
Gallerus,  702,  703,  732,  898 
Galli,  604,  1098 
Gallia,  1096 
— •—  Aquitanica,  589 

Lugdunensis,  584 

Narbonensis,  589 

Gallicenre,  1161 
Gallic  Provinces,  474 
(iallienus,   the  Emperor,   107 1, 

1 148 
Gallitzin,    Prince     Dimitri    de, 

555 

Gallo-Roman  cemetery,  570 
Galls,  1064,  1093,  i°96 
Galmoy,  374  (in  Kilkenny),  402 
Galtee  Mountains,  8,  594 
Galvia,  11 10 
Galway,  1020,  1 032,  1037 

Bay,  1038,  1039,  1075 

,  county  of,  103-109 

Gamandorp,  896,  n.,  1086 
Gamanraidhe,  or  Gamanraighe, 

896,  n.,  1086,  1 105 
Gambara,  829,  1060 
Gambaruc,  1060 
(iambrivii,  1060 
Gamendorp,  1105,  n. 
Gamora,  641 
Ganann,  mo 
Gang-grab,  a  Danish,  518 
Ganggraben,  968 
Glnggrifter,  478,  567,  690,  727 
Gann,  1080,  1109 
Ganna,  829,  1167 
Gannew-and-Gurreen,  249 
Gansau,  540,  541 
Gaorha,  900 
Gapt,  893,  and  n.,  897 
Garad,  876 
Gard,  567,  568 
,  department  of,  569,   577, 

599,  600 
Garde,  Mr.,  quoted,  15 
(jardhariki,  777 
Garitas,  691 

Garland  Sunday,  198,  771 
Garliep,  528 

(zarnaholowey  Lough,  232 
Garnett,  Mr.,  828,  n.,  896,  n., 

1058 
Garonne,    567,    583,    584,   609, 

612,  812,  956,  1062 


Garraidh  Dubh,  876 

Garraidh-na-Ceartan,  885 

Garran,  291 

Garranard,  116,  117 

Garran  Ban,  the,  656,  n.,  830, 

905,  1092 
(jarraun  North,  35 
Garriduff,  408 
Garrison,  221 
Garryadeen,  9CI 
(^arrycastle,  1075 
Garryduff,  407,  408,   793,   874, 

876 
Garrygort,  232 
Garrywhin,  463,  707 
Garumni,  the,  5S4 
Garvogue,  838,  839 
Gascedach,  786 
Gate  Stojies,  542 
Gaul  (Goll),  628,  n.,  823,  1 122, 

1169,  1 1 70 
Gaulish  cemetery,  570 
Gauls,  474,  1098 

Hill,  58 

Gaulstown,  57,  58 

Gaultiere,  60 

Gaut,  893,  897 

Gave  d'Ossau,  the,  582 

Gavida  the  smith,  762,  88S,  889, 

n. 
Gavigan,  888,  889 
Gavr  Inis,   613,  614,  616,  624, 

708,  n. 
Gavr-Inis,    chambered    tumulus 

at,  449,  450 
Gavr  Innis,  221 
Geannan,  I120,  1136 
( iearan  Ban,  905   /  See  Garran 
( iearran  Ban,  763  i      Ban 
(ieat,  893,  n.,  897 
Geatie,  894,  n. 
Geata-na-Sqread,  861 
Geatas,  11 56 
Geeks,  dance  of,  535 
Geidumni,  1108,  1112 
Geis  (gesa),  the,  879-881,  886 
Geiselberg,  the  Hausbeig  near, 

1127,  1128 
Geldeiland,  11 32 
Geleoin  MacErcoil,  the  Clanna, 

IIOI 

Geleon,  1102 

Geloni,  iioi,  1 102 

Gelonos,  1 101 

Gelonus,  929,  n.,  Iioi 

Gembrie,  58S 

Genann,  832,  833 

Genebrier,  1038,  n. 

Genii,  747 

Gennan,  1080 

Genoa,  Gulf  of,  603 

Genthe,  522,  74I 

Gentle  Peopie,  the,  1 03  7 

Gentry,  the,  1096,  n. 

Geoffrey   of  Monmouth,    1057, 

1059,  1067 
Georgins  Syncellus,  1071,  1072 
Gepidx,  or  Gepides,  784,  1060, 

1 147,  "53       ^ 

Geraldines,  the,  855 
Gerard  Mercator,  749 
Gerdeme,  509 


I202 


Index. 


Gerippten  Cist  en,  522 
Gerizim,  Sacred  rock  at,  72S 
German  assembyheld  at  dolmen, 

540 
Germanic  peoples,  564 
Germanicus,  1100 
German  Ocean,  419,  520 
Germano-Gothic  race,  the,  946 
Germans,  the,  353,  1177 
Germany,   561,   616,  748,  749, 

780 
and    the   Eastern    Baltic, 

497-537 

,  bronze  celts  from,  523 

,  cists  in,  loii 

,  North,  523,  567,  578 

,  North-West,  537-552 

Gerona,    596,    632,    642,    643, 

645 
Geserichsee,  the,  1131 
Get,  872,  873 

,  the  cairn  of,  463,  S73 

Geta,  354,  355 

Getre,  1096,  n.,  11 17 

Getty,  Mr.  Edm.,  991,  1018 

Geze,  M.,  715 

Gheel,  11 14 

Ghlin,  565 

Ghost  Lough,  294 

Giant,  Danish  legend  of  a,  513 

Giant  Hills,  534 

•  raised  from  his  grave,  813 

maids  of  Jotunheim,  838 

Giantess,  a,  1 1 15,  n. 

,  children  of  a,  497 

Giantess's  Apron-fuL,  580,  n. 
Giants,  687,  805,  810 

throwing  rocks,  Soi 

and  dwarfs,  553 

building  dolmens,  552 

Giatifs  bed,  233,  252,  748 

barrow,   the,   704 

den,  208,  230 

finger-marks,  562 

footsteps,  512 

grave,  424,  429,  430,  534, 

^^704,  775.  78? 

" Grave,"  in  Riigen,  497, 

498 

griddle,  175,  176 

Hill,  the,  106 

leap,  201 

load,  the,  248,   305,  306, 

726,  763 

quoit,  the,  758 

■  ring,  the,  desc,  275  et  seq. 

,  purpose  of,  277,  278, 

281,  407,  845,  907,  984,  986 

rock,  235 

— ; —  table,  the,  32,  757 
Gibraltar,    the    Straits  of,  609, 

928,  964,  967,  1072 
Giestur,   1061 

Gig-nia-Gog's  grave,  272,  827 
Gildas,  1084,  n. 
Gilead,  726 

Gilla  Isa  More  MacFirbis,  S04 
GioU,  the,  772 
Giraldus  Cambrensis,  799,  822, 

868,  937,    1043,  1044.  1046, 

1047,   io;7 
Gironde,  5S4,  589,  675 


Gisa,  or  Giso,  1 174,  11 75 
Glaise,  79 
Glamorgan,  1023 
Glandore,  833 
Glanturk,  86i 
Glanworth,  8,  11,  S50 
Glas,  761 

,  the,  762,  868,  1044 

Glasacaoran,  253 
Glas-a-Cooran,  253 
Glasakeeran,  253 
Glascarn,  867 
Glas  Gaibhlen,  890 

Gaibhneach,  884 

Gavigain,  888 

Gavlen,  893,  898 

Glasgeivnagh  Hill,   74 
Glasgeivneagh,  72 
Glasha,  79 

Fort,  80 

Glashamore,  80 
Glaskenny,  412,  827 
Glaskernan,  253 
Glass,  813 

beads,  etc.,  320 

,  found  at  Carrowmore,  152 

Glas  Teamhrach,  887 
Gleann  Finne,  900,  IC36 
Gleann-na-cloiche-leithe,  410 
— —  Sith,  844 
Glenachreen,  T,b 
Glenahiry,  57 
Glenalla,  233 
Glenarm,  260 

,  Lower,  262 

,  Upper,  267 

Glenarought,  7 
Glencar  Scotch,  234 
Glencastle,  112 
Glencloghlea,  404,  410 
Glen  Colloo,  52 
Glencolumbkille  (Donegal),  240, 

244,  249,  250,  426 
Glenconkeine,  823,  878,  890 
Glencree  River,  412 
Glencullen,  448,  875 

House,  385,  387 

Glendalough,    150,     738,     739, 

II16 
Glen  Druid  (Brenanstown),  390, 

764 
Glenfais,  4,  S40 
Glengad,  no 
Glengariff,  40 
Glen  Gavlen,  890 
Glengeen,  209 
Gleniff,  843 
Glenknock,  208 
Glenmalin,   43,    1 13,    134,    137, 

221,  240,  243,  244,  246,   249, 

250,  437,  438 
Glenmore,  1049 
Glenna  Bo,  901 
Glennngalliagh,  loi 
Glennaloche,  33 
Glenna-na-Muicce-Duibh,  864 

,  866 

Glen  Nephin,  118 

Scoithin,  840 

Smoil,  862 

Glenn  Finne,  903 
Glennree,  864 


Glensouthwell,  393,  394 
Glenties,  239 
Glenwherry,  621 
Glisas,  472,  n. 
Gloghvalley,  Lower,  296 
Gloucester,  the  Earl  of,  1047 
Gloucestershire,  452,  454,  460, 

611,  626,  627,  974.  1023 
Glounteen  Assig,  3,  857 
Glowacki,  509 
Gliick,  893,  n.,  nil,  11 12 
Gliin  Phadruig,  880 
Gmelin,  J.  G.,  749,  n. 
Goat,  the,  909 
Gobban  Saer's  Grave,  55 
Gobhann,  the  cave  of  the  wife 

of,  349 
Gobnat's  Well,  1 7 
Gobnatt,  St.,  1115,  1162 
Gobnatt's  beehive,  11 16 

Clergy,  1115 

Stone,  1 1 15 

Gobnet,  1 1 15 
Goddess  of  the  Axe,  577 
Godelroy,   865,  n. 
Godenhuizen,  547 
Godron,  AL,  923 
Godselinus,  789 
God-stones,  849,  n. 
Godwulf,  897 
Goesius,  W^,  635,  n. 
Gofradha,  818,  n. 
Gohlan,  544 
Golam,  349,  1070 
Golard,  236 
Gold,  bars  of,  370,  n. 

cap,  616 

ornaments,  616-618 

,  tradition   of  bars   of,    in 

moats,  346 
Golden  Ball,  3S8 
Goldrum,  232 
Goll,  814.     See  Gall  and  Gaul 

,  son  of  Morna,  887 

Cioch,  807 

Mac  Moirne,  807,  813 

Mac  Morna,  823,  903,  904, 

"57 
Gollan,  Crom,  757 
Gollenberg,  1 1 72,  n. 
Golusecca,  720 
Gondi,  754 
Gondomil,  651 
Gongora  y  Martinez,  Sr.,  344, 

n.,  631,  n.,  644,  n.,  686-691 
Gonnebek,  621,  n.,  622 
Gonsalvez,  And.,  653,  n. 
Gonsow,  741 
Good  People,  the,  405,  900,  903, 

910,     1037.     See    the    Gentle 

People 
,  traditions  of,  1096, 

and  n. 
Gordwfyn,  11 12 
Gore,  Col.,  117 
Gorey,  416 

Gorge  de  la  Valle,  596 
Gorias,  1068,  1158,  1159 
Goritz,  1 159 
Gorlitz,  1 125 
Gorszewice,  522 
Gort,  91,  96,  844 


Index. 


120' 


Gortafloodig,  25,  793 
Gortagammon,  209 
Gortagullane,  30,  40 
Gortakeeran,  179,  180,  432 
Gortaleen,  36 
Gortbrack  North,  no 
Gortlecka,  78 
Gortnacull,  235 
Gortnagane,  5 
Gortnagole,  235 
Gortnalaragh,  233 
Gortnalour,  27 
Gortnavern,  23 1 
Got,  873 
Gothi,  1072 
Gothiana,  1070 
Gothland,  562,  1069,  1070 
Goths,    the,    896,    1059,    1068- 

1071,  1082,  1087,  1 122.  1 134, 

1144,  1147,  1152,  1155,  1169, 

1174 
Gothus,  349 
Gotland,   1070 
Gottorp,  865,  n. 
Gougann  Barra,  23,  26 

Lake,  25,  595 

Gough,  10,  48 

Goward,  284 

Gower,  Peninsula  of,  449,  451, 

456 
Gowran,  403 
Gracchus,  11 10,  n. 
Graff,   1057 
Graffa,  I 
Graf k elders,  560 
Graidhne's  Bed,  844 
Graigue,  143,  160,  n.,  175 
Graine  Beacht,  847 
Grainne,  345,  n.,  762,  795,  8ll, 

S29,  835,  838,  841-850,  855, 

857,  861,  891 
Gramont,  626,  628,  708 

,  Dolmen  tie,  638 

Granada,  675,  687 
Granard,  312,  862 

,  the  moat  of,  312 

Granary,  the,  878 
Grandolo,  673 
Grand  Pressigny,  575 
Graney,  Lake,  94 

(river),  94 

Grangagnage,  M.,  565 
Grange,  49,  345,  n.,  374,  375 

of  Nilteen,  271 

Grangebeg,  177 

Grania,  Ould,  97 

Grania's    Bed,    2c8,    229,   231, 

232,  844 
Graniera,  53 
Grannagh,  106 
Granna's    Bed,   211,    212,    724, 

844,  907 
Granny's  Grave,  268,  847 
Grany's  Bed,  847 
Gransha,  230 
Grasse,  569 
Grassyard,  312 
Gratian,  353,  936,  937 
Grattan,    Mr.,    279,    985,    986, 

990,    991,    994,     1005-1009, 

1015,  1018,  1019 
Grave-altars^  537 


Grave-cellars,  560 
Grave  of  the  Black  Pig,  858 
Graves,  Mr.  A.,  5,  6,  1102 
,  the  Rev.  James,  13S,  158, 

170,  404,  697,    759,  835,  853, 

909 
"Graves  of  the    Giants,"    the, 

194 
Gray,  Mr.  W.,  258,  ct  seqq. 
Graystown,  55 
Greagh,  193 
Greaghnaglogh,  196 
(irecian  gods,  images  of,  929 
Greece,  363,  520,  521,  616,  620, 

622,  722,  740,  1068,  1072, 
1102,  1124,  1148,  1167 

,  middle,  1067 

Greek  coins,  522 

graves,  520 

merchants,  1076,  n. 

siirine,  530,  n. 

shrines,  631 

skull';,  965 

temple,  631,  n. 

temples,  520 

vases,  patterns  on,  624,  625 

Greeks,  1136 
Greengraves,  273 
Greenlander,  the,  931,  932 
Greenland  'vhalc,  152 
Green's  graves,  795 
Greenwell,    Canon,    452,    455, 

465,  475>  578,  952,  953>  956, 

970,  971,  1005 
Gregory  of  Tours,  590,  S94,  n., 

1060,  n. 

the  Great,  788 

Grein-Uagh,  847,  n. 

Greith,  C.,  1162,  n. 

Grena,  1171,  n. 

Grenagh,  35 

Grenelle,    955,   960,    995,    996, 

998,  1003 
Grenis,  1171 

Grevismiihlen,  502,  1686,  n. 
Grey  Abbey,  281 

Carn,  the,  968 

Horse  of  Macha,  1092 

Mare,  St.  Patrick's,  584 

•  Mare's  load,  the,  907 

Stone,  the,  260 

Stones,  the,  299 

Greyhound's  grave,  the,  S75 
Grian,  847,  1160 

Banchure,  826 

Grianan,   a  fort  in   VVestmeath, 

373 

of  Aileach,  235 

Gridastadr,  1 1 62 
Griddle,  a,  179,  763 

,  Giant's,  175,  176 

— ■ — ,  name  for  dolmen,  74,  175 
Griddle-beg-na-vean,  176 
Griddle-more-na-vean,   176,  177 
Gnlla,  47,  51 
Grimm,    J.,    472,    n.,    505,    n  , 

623,  n.,  742,  776,  n.,  782, 
870,  n.,  871,  893,  n.,  894,  n., 
911,  1161-1163 

Grisons,  the,  998 
Groningen,  552,  n.,  556,  n.,  560, 
782 


Grooved  stone,  401 

at  Carryglass,  214 

Grose,  197,  396,  397,  496,  n. 
Grossin,  534 
Gross  Prezier,  541,  544 
Grotte  aux  Fees,  629,  630 

d'Esse,  629 

Grottes  des  fees,  610,  827 

de  Menton,  569 

Gruenstein,  the,  564 

Grugith,  the  Three  Brothers  of, 

90,  482,  483,  661,  790 
Griimbke,  497,  498 
Griineberg,  533 
Gruta  de  las  Hadas,  581,  650 
Gruter,  474 

Guadalquiber,  the,  69 1,  693 
Guanches,  tlie,  964 
Guarni,  1082 
Guberni,  817,  n. 
Gud,  1112 
Gudehausen,  547 
Guernsey,  623,  969 
Guerreiro,P.A.-da-iM.-de-D.,658 
Guest,  1 100,  n. 
Gugerni,  817,  n. 
Guidi,  Urbs,  937 
Guigne,  AL,  883,  n. 
Guimaracs,  650,  n.,  668 
Guinefort,  772,  881,  883 
Guiotville,  713 
Guipuscoan  dialect,  912 
Guipuzcoa,    the     Basques     of, 

964 
GuUinbusti,  871 
Gungeria,  740,  n. 
Gunnat,  874 
Guordubn,  1 1 1 2 
Guordomn,  11 12 
Guordumn,  III2 
Gurdumn,  11 12 
Gurtacloontig,  793 
Gurteenard,  856 
Gurteen,  Lower,  56 
Gurtnatubrid,  901 
Gutina,  644 
Guts-Thore,  the,  540 
Gweedore,  805,  842,  876,  103 1, 

1035 
Gwydion,  895,  n. 
Gyg,  1 105,  n.,  1 106,  1 1 15,  n. 
Gyrovagi,  739,  n. 

Haarburg,  547 

Irlaassel,  541 

Hackett,     Mr.    W.,     14,    769, 

855>  n- 
Hacklim,  815 
Haddon,  Professor,   1020,  1022, 

1034 
Hados,  580 

Hadrianus  Junius,  IIOO,  1129,  n. 
ILisnir,  472,  n.,  89 1- 893,  n.,  1 166 
Ha.>rtches-ley,  565 
Hafang,  481 

Hag,  642,  643.     See  Witch 
hagcl,  1 127 
Ilagetmann,  5SS 
Hagny,  1050 
Hag's  bed,  the,  310 

chair,  331,  766 

house,  579,  646 


1204 


Index. 


Haigokl,  J.  J.,  749,  n. 

Hdillas,  5S9 

Ilaiiiault,  565 

Hair-coloiir  of  the  Celts,  or 
Galli,  Germans,  Batavi,  Usipii, 
SicambrijSuevi,  Getae  (Goths), 
Franks,  Sclaves  (Wends), 
Heruli,  Caledonians,  Estho- 
nians,  Letts,  1052,  n. 

Halberstad,  550 

IJalbcrt-bladcs,  680 

Halhert-hcads,  523 

Ilaldan,  1106 

Hall,  Mr.  and  i\Irs.,  903 

Halland,  472,  n.,  482,  487,  493 

Hallaux,  565 

Halle,  wedge-shaped  vault  at, 
221,  443-445.  492,  508,  ion 

Halliule,  585 

Hallkistor,  478,  490,  495,  496, 

515.  634 
Ilallontide,  472 
Hallow-E'en,  371,  n. 
Hallstadt  Period,  221,  519,  741, 

742 
Halogia,  1061 
Ham,  Children  of,  1035 
Haniinerling,  912 
Hampel,  525,  n. 
Hamy,  923,  el  seqq.,   937,  942, 

952,  956,  962,  998 
Hand,  imprint  of,  53^ 
Hanka,  1077 
Hanlys,  the,  1030 
Hanover,    458,  490,    516,    517, 

525,  526,  535,  537-546,  1 129, 

I171,  n. 
Harald  Hildetand,  490 
Harbour  View,  505,  765 
Hardman,  Mr.  E.  T.,  131,  135, 

137 
Hardy,  P.  D.,  654,  n.,  760,  n. 
Harkness,  Professor,  loil 
Harold  the  Fairhaired,  1107 

Gormson,  1145 

Hildetand,  45S 

Haroldstovvn,  396-398, 430-432, 

452,712 
Harris,  696 

,  W.,  525,  n.,  1127 

Harristown,  63 
Hartz  mountains,  551 
Ilatz,  implement  of,  498 
Hase,  the,  1157 
Haseniikkern,  530 
Hasse,  Mr.,  872,  n. 
Haklict,  stojie,  509 
Hiitvere,  781,  1157 
Hatzberg,  543 
Hausberg,  the,  1127 
Haute  Garonne,  the,  681 
Hautes    Pyrenees,    71,    73,    n., 

585,  675,  685 
Hautcville,  Sir  J.  de,  794. 
Hautmann,  Herr,  443 
Havekosl,  539 
Hawke,  Mr.,  S99 
Haxthauson,  Paron  von,  740 
Hay,  Sir  J.  Drummond,  704,  n. 
Hazelwood  House,  84 
Head  wood,  267 
Heating-Stone  of  St .  Conall,  280 


Heapstown,  Soi 
Heas,  588 
Heathobards,  1057 
Heber,  349 

Gluntionn,  1069 

Heberian  line,  11 38 
Heberii,  1064 
Heber  Scot,  1069,  1070 
Hebrides,  the,  91 1,  1023,  1024. 

1030,  I 03 I 
Hecatrcus,  603 
llechizero,  the,  635,  n. 
Hector,  818 
Heidenbette,  529 
Heidcn-Griiher,  533 
Heidenstatt,  the,  547,  1132 
Heiden-Thoren,  533 
Heillug,  834,  n. 
I  leimskringla,  742,  744 
Heinrich  de  Vmera,  1062,  n. 
lieitbrack,  541,  545 
Hel,  Hella,  Helle,  Hille,  814 
Helanus,590 
Helbig,  521 
Hcldenhettc,  530 
Hele,  814,  892 
Helisyci,  603 
Heljarskinn,  1053 
Hellespont,  1072 
Hdlrwumt,  472,  n. 
Helmhold,  784,  1082,  n. 
Helmstadt,  206,  n.,  550,  551 
Helsjo,  472,  n. 
Ilelston,  674 
Helvetian  skull,  937,  93S 
Helvetii,  602 
Hengist,     782,     784,     n.,     S97, 

1092 
Hengst,  the,  784,  n.,  1092  n. 
Hennessey,  193,  1056 
Henry  the  Lett,  512 
Ilerault,  567,  598-601,  605,  626, 

628,  638,  708 
Ilerberg,  the,  1003 
Herberstein,  Baron,  870,  1098 
Hercules,  603,  640,  804,  iioi 
Herculis  columiia.',  555,  n. 

delubrum,  698,  n. 

Hercynia,    551,  601,   602,    748, 

n.,  1087,  1 1 24 
Hereford,  1023 
Herefordshire,  677,  680 
Heremon,  347,  349,  1083,  III2 
Heremonian  or  Eremonian  line, 

1138.  "39 

Heremonians,  782 

Herinn,  1084,  n. 

Herio,  1084 

Hcrkuinbl,  871 

Hermes,  710,  n. 

Hermo<5r,  1166 

Hermunduri,  1 164 

Herodiade,  581,  833,  851,  1092 

Herodotus,   603,  604,    709,    n., 

754,  929,    1079,    1096,    1 102. 

I125,  1134 
Heroes'  Beds,  748 
1  lerovitus,  1084 
llerrestrup     in    Zeeland,     221, 

479.  481,  483 
Hertha,  628,  n.,  1060,  1161 
Hcrthaberg,  497 


Heru,  1085 

Herula,  10S2 

Heruleus,  1085 

Heruli,  745,  780,  781,  784, 
896,  n.,  949,  1027,  1056, 
1069,  1071-1073,  1079,  1080, 
n.,  1082,  1085,  1117-1120, 
1123,  1124,  1136-1139,  1142- 
II55,  1157,  1158,  I167-1169, 
II76,  II77 

llerulian  prince,  an,  34S 

Herulians,  1060 

Herus,  108  \. 

Hervas,  607,  n. 

Herzegovina,  II21.   1127 

,  camps  in,  511 

Heshbon,  726,  728 

Hesiod,  1055 

Hesse,  550,  565 

Heth,  726 

lletwars,  the,  781,  n. 

Heune,  782 

Heunen,  783 

llewht,  Mr.  T.,  618 

Heycetle,  588 

llibernia,  1082 

Hibernian,  ancient  skull  of,  959, 
974,  976,  1007 

Hiberno-British  skull-type,  955 

Hibor,  1060 

Hieron,  Straits  of,  1071 

Highlanders,  1040-1042 

Ilighwood,  182,  1S7,  189,  191 

Hilary  of  Poitiers,  Saint,  590 

Hildebrand,  481,  482,  488,  505, 
506,  1132,  1133 

Hilde-Gasten,  894,  n. 

Hildetand,  Ilarokl,  458 

llildigiiltr,  871 

llildric,  1059 

Hill,  Rev.  G.,  260 

IIillerod,489 

//ills  of  t lie  Dead,  534 

Ililltown,  271,  284 

Ilimil,  893,  n. 

llimmel,  893,  n.,  894 

Hindu  Koosh,  522,  746 

Hinna,  782 

1  linnesberg,  or  Hinnisburg,  896, 
1082,  1156 

llior  Half-on,  King,  I053 

Hirtius,  1112,  n. 

Hiruath,  1159.     ^'^.v  Iruath 

His,  953,  995,  n. 

Hissarlik,  456,  578,  741,  965 

Historeth,  1063,  n. 

Hler,  826 

Hler,  1 107 

Hler's  Oe,  1162 

I  Hoc,  826,  1107 

lloare.  Sir  R.  C.,  354 

Hobisch,  529 

llodgkin,  779 

llohberg,  929,  946,  947 

Hohberg    type,    the,    932,   993, 

997,  999 
llohenziass,  537 
I  loin,  550 
Holder,  Dr.,  997 

,  H.,  929,  n. 

Hole  in  top  of  dolmen,  95 
I/oled  Stone,  1 74 


Index. 


120: 


Holed  Stones,  649 

Holes  in  dolmens,  68-75 

Holgardhr,  777 

Holgina,  the,  635 

Hollain,  565 

Holland,     552-56^.,    611,     758, 

763,  934.  1 1 14 
Holmberg,  A.  E.,  488 
Holstein,    494,    496,    524,   537, 

896,  1014 

,  cist  in,  280 

,  structural  comparisons  in, 

476,  et  seqq. 
Holyhead  Island,  944 
Homolka,  915,  n. 
Ho7idaas  de  las  Hadas,  581 
Hor<5ar,  iii;2 
Horg,  the,  766 
Horgan,  Rev.  M.,  17,  t^i,  292 

Papers,  the,  852,  n. 

Ho}-ned  cairn,  226 

cairns,  452,  453 

Horns,  the  feature  ol,  706 

,  in  cairns,  460 

Horse,  Bones  of,  156 

Horse  and  chariot  in  sculpturings 

at  Castle  Archdall,  219,  220 
Horse  and  Horseman,  the,  005- 

90S 
Horseman's    .Stone,    615,    644, 

656,  697,  698,  835,  907,  908 
Horses  hoof,  print  of,  536 
Horse's  Knoll,  the,  907 
Hostmann,  741 
Hottentot,  934,  935 
Hottentots,  987 
Houn  de  las  Poupettes,  589 
Hounds'  Bed,  774 
Houris,  the,  744 
Houses,  Alodels  of,  487 
Howorth,  Sir  H.,  937,  1157 
Howth,  305,  317,  343,  376,  377, 

383.  385,  390,  432-434,  823, 

835,  844,  886,  1059,  1066 
Hoya,  1 171,  n. 
Hoyo  de  las  Cuevas  del  Conquil, 

690 
Hrad,  1 128,  n. 
Hrones-naesse,  745 
Huabaird,  1058 
Huamor,  Sons  of,  11 29 
Huder,  Margrave,  1^30 
Huen,  497 
Huenella,  497 

Hugaine  Mor,  782,  n.,  1039,  n. 
Hugas,  the,  894 
Hugelgraber,  517,  634 
Huggeritgi,  753 
Hugo,  802 

Hugon,  782,  n,,  1039,  n. 
Hugones,  781,  7S2,  1039 
Hugonius,  802 
Hugs,  S79 
Hui  Failge,  473 

Falge,  473 

Foilge,  473 

Hul,  472,  n. 

Hulmul,  893,  n. 

Humal,     807,    893,     897,    898, 

I157,  I166 
Hntnan  Sacrifice,  469-476 
,  circles,  places  of,  505 


Humber,  893,  894,  1157 
Humble,  893 
Humblebrek,  893,  n, 
Humblebye,  893,  n. 
Huniblehavn,  S93,  n. 
Humbleiire,  893,  n. 
Humbli,  893,  898,  1 157 
Humblus,  S93 

Humboldt,  W.  von,  607,  651,  n. 
Humel,  894,  H57 
Humelings,  the,  894 
Humelus,  893 
Humlings,  550,  n. 
Hummelinck,  783,  894 
Hummeling,  894,  1136 
Hummelingk,  the,  1157 
Hummelingwoud,  550,  551 
Hun,  475  ' 

Hun  (propername),78i,n.,  1157 
Hunaland,  476,  777,  784 
Hunaland,  781 
Hunar,  783 
Hund,  774 
Hundaland,  784 
Hunden,  784,  1076 
Hundeson,  1136 
Hundesrukken,  530 
Hundingiidand,  777 
Hiinebed,  1157.     See  Hiinenbed 
Hiinebedden,  498,  51 1,  567,  734, 

735.     See  Hii7tenbedaen,  Hii- 

nenbetten 

in  Riigen,  497 

Hiinebeds,  or  Huncnbedden,  520 
Hunen,  1076,  1124 
Hiinen,  773-784,  895,  896,  11 56 
Hiinenbed,    definition    of,    538, 

545 
Hiinenbedden,     707,    782,    845, 

974,  n.,  1002 
Hihienbetten,  528,  534 
Hiinenbriikken,  534 
Hiinengrab,  502 

,  definition  of,  538 

Hiinengraber,     498,    499,    500, 

533.  545.  7S2 
Hiineiigtaber  in  Finland,  478 
Hiinengrabs,    Skulls    found    in, 

93i,n- 
Hiitienhaus,  783 
Hiinenkelter,  545 
Hiinenla'cher,  782 
HihienscJi  lossen ,  1 1 2  5 
Iliinenstein,  537,  548 
Hiinen-lhorcn,  533 
Hune-Schans,  the,  1132 
Hungarian  forts,  1127 

Hussards,  749 

Hungarians,  1078 

Hungarus,  782 

Hungary,  522,   525,    741,    998, 

1124,  1 125,   1128-1130,  1 134, 

-!*^,  Bronze  celts  from,  523 

Hill,  39 

Hunlafing,  782 

Hunland,  779 

Hnnnen-Bed,  555 

Hunni,  778-784 

Hunnish  Confederation,  1056 

Hunnish  One,  the,  744,  782 

Hunno-Scythic  tribes,  910 


Hunolt,  782 
Hunrat,  782 
Huns,  363,  476,  740,  778-784. 

867,   1068,  1069,   1079,   1 1 16, 

1117,  1120,  1123,  1148,  1155, 

1177 
HiinscJiaft,  781 
Hunting-Cap,  1028 

Cam,  the,  267,  268 

Hunugusus,  784,  n. 
Htit-towns    in    Carnarvonshire, 

Cornwall,  Kerry,  448 
Huxley,  932,  937-939.  942,  943, 

945.  947.  951-955,  961,967. 

979.  994.  1001-1003,  1041, 

1043 
Hy-Briuin-Ai,  801 
Hy-Briuin-Breifne,  801 
Hy-Briuin-Seola,  801 
Hy-Fiachra,  801 
Hygelac,  894,  n. 
Hygenus,  635,  n. 
Hy-Maine,  773 

,  Southern,  11 20 

Hy-J\Iany,  the,  1 1 19 
Hyni,  895,  1156,  1157 
Hy-Niall,  802 
Hynorum  Rex,  894 

lago.  Saint,  652,  653,  n. 

laran,  1085 

larann,  1138 

larbanel,  or  larljhainel   Faidli,, 

1081,  1 158 
lardobhar,  11 58 
larthact,  1081 
Ibane  and  Barryroe,  39 
Ibath,  1081 
Ibec,  370,  n. 
Iberes,  603,  604,  606-608,  610,. 

644,  651,  667,  714.  715 
Iberia,  589,  603 
Iberian  Peninsula,  523-524,  586, 

631-698 
,  intercourse  with  in 

Copper  —  or  early   Bronze — 

Age,  165 
,  Wedge-shaped   dol- 
mens in,  438 

Question,  the,  607 

race,  606 

type,  568 

Iberians,    455,    574,    602,    683,, 

720,  1023,  1027 
Ibn  Haukale,  11 16,  n. 
Ibor,  829,  874,  1039,  1060 

,  St.,  I160 

Iburg,  550 

Iceland,  473,  1146 

Iceni,  1050 

Icht,  811 

Ichts,  1 1 78 

Ictian  Sea,  the,  1149,  "77 

Icy  Sea,  the,  779 

Ida,  1049 

,  Barony  of,  409 

Idol,  an  (the  Mata),  349,  n. 
Idolaters,  Cemeteries  of,  348  . 
Idolo  dei  Mori,  667,  712 
Idough,  827 
Idrottir,  1 146,  n. 
lered,  10S5,  1138 


I206 


Index. 


lerne,  1082,  1083 

lernis,  10S2,  10S3 

lerugleus,  10S5,  113S 

Iffa  and  Ofla  East,  55 

Jiliiana,  an,  754 

Ilderton,  1004-1006 

He  Pianosa,  569,  672,  698 

Illaanmoie,  830 

lUicinus,  Mons,  653 

Illora,  688 

Illyria,  1099,  1 143,  1147,  114S 

Ilmenau,  River,  537,  540,  543 

Imaus,  Mount,  748,  n. 

Imdad,  34S 

Imgheal,  802 

Imhar,  349,  365 

Immigratiotis,     Tradittoin     of, 

1053,  et  seqq. 
Imokilly,  14,  855 
Inagh,  79 

Inbher  Sceine,  1066 
Inch,  loii 

Inchauspe,  M.  I'Abbe,  606 
Inchicronan,  Si 
Inchidoney,  S99,  1 109 
Inchigeelagh,  25,  27,  31,  35 
Inchiquin,  72,  73 
Imineratioii,  517,  520,  526,  575, 

742 

in  Esthonia,  514 

in  Livonia,  512 

In  Cromm  Crin,  472,  n. 

Indech,  nil 

ludelba,  847 

India,  459,  490>  628,    n.,    740, 

740-755>  930 

,  Bronze  celts  from,  523 

Ocean,  522,  741 

Indo-Europeans,  604 

Injant  sacrifice,  472 

Ingcel,  840,  868 

Inghiceelagh,  23 

Inhumation,  516,  517,  523,  524, 

573-575 
Inis,  Fail,  1159 

(Beg  Eri),  1 160 

Iniscealtra,  830 
Inishbark,   102 1 
Inish-Bo-Fin,  903,  1021 
Inish  Clothra,  1162 
ILnishhullion,  140 
Inishkea,  North,  1020 

,  South,  1020 

Inishkeel,  239 
Inish  MacUuach,  1162 
Inishmacsaint,  221,  236,  238 
Inishmore,  108,  140 
Inishmurray,  196,  650,  788,  914, 

1 130,  1 162 

,  Sweat-house  at,  775,  n. 

Inishowen,  654,  764,  785,  844 

(land-mark),  139 

East,  229 

West,  230 

Inish  Samer,  1066,  1067 

Iniskeen,  994 

Iniskil,  719 

Inistioge,  409 

Jnquilini,  II 47,  1 148 

Inver,  the,  or  Inver-Water,  260 

Invcr  Domnann,  II09-IIII 

Inverness,  466 


Inver  Umaill,  867 

lodhlan,  807,  895,  1156,  1157 

lollan,  820 

lollanach,  820 

lona,  915,  916 

londolbh,  iSig 

lorgus,  1 137 

lorras  Domhnann,  1 100,  1 109 

lorras  Duin  Domhnaill,  1109 

lot,  475,  811 

lotland,  807,  895,  1 156 

lotnar,  773,  783 

lotr,  475,  778 

lotun,   167,  475,  783,  826,  891. 

See  Eotens 

,  a  female,  11 15  n. 

lotungi,  948,    1056,    1 1 23.     Sec 

also  luthungi  and  lutungi 
lotunheim,  476,   777,  784,  83S, 

iioi,  1102 

,    the   northern,    778,    1105 

,  the  southern,  778 

lotuns,  77;,  780,  784,  S05,  810, 

895,   94S,    1035,   nor,   1102, 

1124,  1156,  1157,  1159,  1178. 

See  Eotens 
Ir,  349,  892,  1084,   1 104,   1 1 19, 

1138,  1141,  1169 
Ira,  1084,  n. 
Iraghticonnor,  i 
Iraland,  1084 
Irar,  1084,  n. 
Irby,  726,  n. 
Ire,  1084,  n, 
Irel,  1085 
Ireland,   once   a  well -timbered 

countiy,  436 
,  isolation    of,     in     Bronze 

Age    and    in    sixth    century, 

1065 
Irelary,  36 
Iren,  1084 
Irene,  1084 
Irenses,  1084 
Ireo,  10S4 
Irereo,  1085,  1138 
Irgalach,  348 
Iri,  1084 

Irial,  1017,  n.,  10S5,  11 38 
Irians,  the,  1119 
Iris,  474,  1084 
Irish  Briiiade,  the,  1025 

Channel,  419 

lady  on  horseback,  1044 

Stonehenge,  the,  134 

Irland,  1084 
Irlonde's  speache,  1 135 
Irminsul,  894,  n.,  1085,  I163 
Iron  Age,  419 

objects  in  cairns  at  Lough- 
crew,  321 
Irrosdamnonia,  I  no 
Irrus  Domnann,  1 109 
Iruata,  the  king  of,  813 
Iruath,  1084.     See  llirualh 
Irvine,  Dr.,  787,  n. 
Isca  Damnoniorum,  1 108 
Island  Magee,  269,  270,  10S6 
Islands,  floating,  594 
Isle  de  la  Parma,  468 
Islets,  floating,  591 
Ismanstorpsbbrgen,  1132,  1133 


Isogue,  S39 

Israelites,  1069 

Itali,  555,  n. 

Italy,  470,  474,  491,   520,  600, 

603,     616,      720-722,     1057, 

1 124,  1 129 

,  North,  521,  622 

,  North,  urn  from,  620 

,  South,  469 

Ith,  1071 

Itil,  1117,  n. 

luchaid,  811 

luchar,  869 

luchna  Ciabfaindech,  862,  S33 

lucht,  811 

luchti,  603,  n. 

luchts,  1 157 

lulin,  1 156 

lulinum,  1156 

lut,  Si  I 

luthaid,  Sn 

luthungi,  949 

lutungi,  1 1 78 

Iveagh,  Lower,  290 

,  Up]5er.  282 

Iveragh,  6 
Iverk,  407,  409 
Iverk,  Barony  of,  874 
Iverni,  1082,  1083 
Ivernia,  1082 
Ivernis,  1082 
Ivernya,  1084,  n. 
Ivocattos,  811 

Jack,  the  Giant-killer,  475 

[acobus  Leodiensis,  745 

Jade,  561 

Jcegersborg,  618 

laen,  prov.  of,  689 

Jicettc-Stue,  489,  706,  783 

Jcctte,  476,  773 

Jallas  de  Porqueira,  656 

James,  St.,  652 

,  Sir  Henry,  282,  283,  285, 

288 
Jamestown,  859 
Janikow,  534 
Janishchewek,  5^7 
Jansson,  563,  n.,  1 132 
Japan,  149,  439,  469,  471,   762, 

S54,  906,  1027 

,  bear-worsliip  in,  898,  n. 

,  dolmen  mounds  in,  446 

,  superstition  about  sun  in, 

596 
Japanese  emperors,  349 

,  spirit  festivals  of  the,  27S 

Jastorf,  544 

Jattestugor,  47S 

"jaulan,  the,  70^,  716,  730,  966 

yaiv,  ahsencc  of  the  Id-ucr,  279, 

471,  980 
Jawbones,  670 

,  unburnt,  470 

Je/d-endanz,  535 

Jenisei,  748 

Jerome,   474,   475,   1134,    11 39, 

"55 

Jerpomt,  403 
Jersey,  Isle  of,  309 
Jerusalem  spring,  the,  730 
Jetgrnhbeu,  1105 


Index. 


1207 


Jettefiat,  512 
yeiiskaiatt,  1105 
Jews,  623,  n. 
Jilica  Jilando,  688,  n. 

Jisr-er-Rukkad,  730,  731 
Job,  Rock  of,  734 
Johannean,  828,  n. 
Johannes  Cornubiensis,  1162 

Magnus,  893 

Johnstown  Lake,  30,  591 
Jones,  Mr.  C.  B.,  135-137,  172 

,  Mr.  Robert,  179 

Jonsson,  1106 

Jordan,  the,  726 

Jordanes,    774,  77S,   811,    824, 

893.   897,    947,    105s,     1080, 

1096,  1 102,  1 123,  1 136,  1 143, 

1152,  1174,  1177 
Jorge,  Saint,  643 
Jorgm,  643,  667 
Jorgina,  635 
Jorguin,  646 
Jorgiiina,  579 
Joutte,  778 
Joyce,     Dr.,     149,     167,     787, 

825 
Jubainville,     M.    \\.    d'Arbois 

de,  62S,  803,  808,  853,  1028, 

1053,  1055,  1057,  iob7,  nil, 

1112,  1121 
Jubmel,  898 
Jucharba,  869 
Judsea,  726 
Judland,  1102 
JuHn,  896, 1082,  10S6 
Jumala,  898 
Jumbel,  898,  n. 
Jupiter,  1095 
Justinian,      iilS,     1148,     11 52, 

1154 
Jutes,  937,  1 1 78 
Jutknd,    524,    526,    537,    895, 

1014,  1082,  1105,  1 157 

Kaallew's  Son,  513 

Kabylia,  716 

Kai  Lykke,  925 

Kalevala,  775,  n. 

Kallewe  Poeg,   512,    536,   775, 

801,  817,  829 
,   compared    to   Finn    Mac 

Cumhail,  513 

,  stone  thrown  by,   513 

Tool,  512 

Kalmucks,     726,     780,      1024, 

1026,  1099,  1 144 
Kalmuck  type,  1 168 
Kami,  149,  and  n. 
Kamscadal  promontory,  149 
Kanturk,  901 
Kanzelstein,  504 
Kara  Kalmucks,  750 
Kare,  826 

Karleby,  488,  489,  fii 
KarlsgSrden,  491,  708 
Karvathi,  721,  722 
Kat,  874 

Katelbogen,  499,  500 
Katovic,  1 1 29 

Kavanagh,  Brian-nastroice,  1048 
,  Morgan,  1048 


Kazmierz,  522 

Ke,  788 

Kea,  Saint,  654 

Ready,  299 

Keal,  Kiel,  Kiul,  Kiiyl,  791 

Keamcorravooly,  or  Keamcorra- 

voulla,  23,  24,  25,  26,  95,  487 
Keat,  872,  1 137,  1 141 
Keat  Mac  Morna,  873 
Keating,  G.,  525,  n.j  616,  775, 

I138,  1176 
Keel,  120,  149 

Lough,  119 

Keel  -  Oge  -  Buidhe,    133.      Sec 

Keelogeboy 
Keeleast,  119 
Keelogeboy,  761 
Keenaght,  254 
Keenugardhr,  777 
Keeper  Hill,  52 
Keerglen,  116 
Keerglen  river,  1 16 
Kefr  Wal,  726 

Yuba,  735,  736 

Keiss,  933 
Keljhar,  754 
Kells,  407,  863 

,  Barony  of,  409 

,  Book  of,  1065 

,  Lower,  313 

Kelly,  M.,  802,   1104,  n.,  1141, 

n. 
Kelly  brook,  372 
Kelpius,  546,  547 
Kemble,  Mr. ,  870 
Kempe   Stone,    the,    273,   284, 

496,  795 
Kcnel  Owen,  the,  887,  n. 
Kenmare,  7 
Kennedy,  J.,  875,  876 
— — ,  Mr.,  820  n. 
Kent,  16.  611.  758 
Keogh,  862,  1029 
Kercado,  450,  613 
Kerkhem,  566 
Kerlescant,  612,  627,  687 
Kernanstown,     376,    378,    379, 

3S2,  390,   398-400,  433.  434, 

496 
Kerroch,  623 
Kerry,  Co.  of,  1-7 
Kerry,   628,  665,  696,  702,  703, 

729,  732 
Kerry  Head,  857 

,  stone  enclosures  in,  243 

Kerryman's  Table,  17 
Ker's  Grave,  site  of,  312 
Kertch,  68i 
Kesh,  Hill  of,  860 
Keshcorran,  874 
Keshlin,  Lake  of,  292 
Keysler,  550,  551,  555,  564 
Khalenberg,  the,  1172 
Klierbet-Hass,  737 
Kiardha,  815 
Kief,  778 
Kiel,  496,  562,  1095 

museum,  621,  n. 

Kieran,  St.,  911,  1063 
Kil,  768 
Kilarnes,  473 
Kila,  791 


Kilabban,  11 15 
Kilamucky,  14,  855 
Kilaspugbrone,  142 
Kilballylahifif,  2 
Kilbane,  99,  10 1 
Kilbarron,  236 
Kilbarry,  62,  63,  799,  1030 
Kilbeacon,  405 
Kilberrihert,  33,  34,  478,  7S5 
Kil-bo-glaise,  S91 
Kilboglashy,  183 
Kilbrogan,  39 
Kilbroney,  285 
Kilburne,  61 
Kilburrin,  61 
Kilcaskan,  39,  40 
Kilchoan,  465 
Kilcloony,  297 

More,  239,  240,  501 

Kilcockan,  57 

Kilcolagh,  198 

Kilcolman,  900,  901,  913,  iioj 

Kilcolumb,  880 

Kilcommon,  no,  112 

Kilconduff,  879 

Kilconly  South,  i 

Kilconway,  264 

Kilcornan,  85 

Kilcorney,  65,  72 

Kilcrea  Castle,  681 

Kilcreene,  849 

Kilcrohane,  5 

Kilcummer,  13 

Kilcummin,  5 

Kildare,  439,  866 

Kildare,  co.  of,  401,  422,  423 

Kildavnat,  11 14 

Kildoney  I'oint,  236 

Kildress,  213 

Kildrum,  910 

Kildrumsherdan,  207 

Kilfadamore,  855 

Kilfeaghan,  285 

Kilfenora,  66,  69,  %o 

Kilfian,  116,  117 

Kilfintinan,  86,  87 

Kil  free,  192 

Kilgarvan,  17 

Kilgeever,  124,  125 

Kilgobban,  2,  3 

Kilgobbin,  385,  387 

Kilgrave,  913 

Kilhoyle,  255 

Kilkeel,  285,  289,  290,  763 

Kilkenny,  467,  619,  849 

,  CO.  ot,  402-411 

Kill,  231 
Killabo,  859 
Killachlug,  32,  234,  478 
Killachluig,  133,  903 
Killaconenagh,  40 
Killadoon,  184,  185 
Killaha,  6 

Killala,  1 14,  iiS,  908,  1063 
Killamery,  407 
Killamucky,  14 
Killaneer,  39 
Killannin,  105 
Killaracht,  788 
Killarney,  18,  1083,  1092 
Killaspugbrone,  140 
Killcumin,  1 1 5 


I208 


Index. 


Killeany,  65,  loS 
Ki Heavy,  303 
Killeely,  106 
Killeen,  309,  791 

Cormaic,  215,  369,  401 

Hill,  310 

River,  1 17 

Killeenavana,  799 

Killeenconnack  graveyard,  401 

Killcens,  149 

Killelagh,  255 

Killerry,  182 

Killcsher,  226 

KiUevy,  299,301,  303.  304 

Xillgarrylander,  3 

Killibegs,  or  Killybegs,  250 

Killicrankie,  1063 

Killilagli,  80 

KillinHill,  310 

Killinaboy,  73-75,  78 

Killinagh,  201,  206 

Killiney,  2,  392 

Killing,  309 

Killinvoy,  19S 

Killion  Hill,  310 

Killoe,  312 

Killogilleen,  105 

Killokennedy,  98-IOI 

Killonaghan,  65 

Killonerry,  408,  409 

Killoran,  179,  180 

Killoscuily,  52 

Killowen  Mountain,  285 

Killuran,  96 

Killy-Bcg,  221 

Killybegs,  Upper,  249,  250 

Killyclug,  234 

Kdlygarvan,  231,  233 

Kilmacduagh,  738 

Kilmachael,  27,  28,  30,  31 

Kilmackabea,  43 

Kilmaclenine,  II,  12 

Kilniacoliver,  404 

Kilmacomb,  63 

Kilmacowen,   140-142,  174,  175 

Kilmacrenan,  230-234,  908 

Kilniactrany,  185,  187,  189,  190, 

804 
Kilmaine,  125 
Kilmalkedar,  702,  703,  732,  733, 

790 
Kilmartin,  578 

Kilmasciialgan,  175,  177,  179 
Kilmashoge,  394 
Kilmeena,  119 
Kilinegan,  283,  288 
Kil-Michael,  594 
Kdmihil,  101,  786 
Kilmocomoge,  43 
Kilmoe,  44,  45 
Kilmogue,  405-407 
Kilmore,  11,  ill,  117 
Kilmoremoy,  117,  123,  797 
Kilmoylan,  46 
Kilmurrey,  29,  85,  108 
Kilmurvy,  420 
Kilnaboy,  76 
Kilnagreina,  848 
Kilnamanagh,  Lower,  55 
— — ,  Upper,  53 
Kilnamona,  81,  883 
Kil-na-Marabhan,  792 


Kiloscar,  785 

Kilpeacon,  46,  47 

Kilquan,  56 

Kilraghtis,  81 

Kilronan,  196 

Kilseily,  97,  98 

Kilsellagh,  132 

Kilshandra,  314 

Kilshanning,  16,  17 

Kilshanny,  909 

Kilsheelan,  56 

Kiltartan,  106 

Kilteevogue,  236 

Kiltennen,  69 

Killiernan,  388,  389,  432-434, 

.450 
Kiliomas,  830 
Kiitubbrid,  194 
Kiltumper,  loi,  225 
Kiltyfergal,  236 
Kilvoydan,  South,  8i 
Kilwarry,  232 
Kilwaughter,  267 
Kilvveen,  36 
Kinahan,   Mr.  G.  H.,   103-105, 

107,  109,  124,  413,  414,  410, 

764,  766,  831,  917,  n. 
Kinaldie,  945,  946 
Kinalmeaky,  39 
Kinawley,  227 
Kinealys,  the,  1029 
Kinelarty,  286 
King,  Prof.  W.,  937-939 
King- Idol  of  Erin,  the,  472 
A'ing  oj  Sunday,    Well  of  the, 

771,  787 
Ring  of  the  Deep,  the,  787 
King  of  the    IVaters,  the,  770, 

771 
King's  County,  the,  439 

Fort,  255 

Grave,  195 

Well,  195 

Kingston,  Mr.,  653,  695,  696 
Kinnafad,  983 
Kinnagoe,  230 
Kinneigh,  36 

,  Round  Tower  at,  991 

Kinsale,  39 

Kinsey,  Mr.,  666 

Kinturk,  the  Well  of,  863 

Kiolen,  791 

Kippagh,  663,  809 

Kippoch,  17 

Kirghis,  746-748 

Kirikee  Mountain,  413 

Kirwan,  John,  798 

Kislovodsk,  966 

Kissing-Stone,  the,  147 

Kits  Coity  House,  16,  431,  758 

Kittay,  750 

Kivik,  4S3,  485,  579 

Kjalarr,  791 

Kjdlr,  791 

Klauensteine,  51 1,  512 

Klein  I'rezier,  542 

Klemm,  565,  lou 

Kldden,  529,  530,  532 

Kloppenburg,  549 

Knees,  a  Saint\<:,  590 

Knight,  Patrick,  112,  1105 

,  Miss,  1 105 


Knockadoo,  860 
Knockadoon,  27,  loii 
Knockagh,  907 
Knockaghallaigh,  58 
Knock-Aine,  256 
Knockainy,  47,  834,  836 
Knockalappa,  85,  86 
Knockalassa  (Wat.),  57 
Knockalassa    (Clare),    79,    593, 

849,  891 
Kiiockalough,  57 
Knockane,  27,  28,  311,  900 
Knockanban,  or  Knockanbauu, 

III,  112,  179,  761,  831 
Knockann  Corran,  13 
Knockanna  Corrin,  12 
Knockannavea,  382 
Knockanroe,  52 
Knockanvinidee,  382 
Knockaphunta,  98 
Knockatotaun,  181,  755 
Knockatudor,  207 
Knockaun  P"ort,  73,  74 
Knockaunboy  Holy  Well,  94 
Knockaunnafinnoge,  97 
Knockaunnagall,  107 
Knockavullig,  35 
Knockban,  831 
Knockbane  (Tipp.),  55 
Knockboy,  14,  760 
Knockbrack,  loi,  103,  104,844, 

913.915 
Knoekbriitas,  54 
Knockcappanabowl,  84S 
Knockcorraboy,  53 
Knockcurraghbola,  53 
Knockduff,  53 
Knockeen,  61 
Knockfarnaght,  118 
Knockfin,  123 
Knock-Firine,  852 
Knockglass,  34 
Knock-Greine,  850 
Knock-Hoena,  844 
Knock-Kanure,  857 
Knocklough,  838 
Knockmaa  HUl,  79S,  799 
Knockmany,  215,  216,  220,  835 
Knockmaraidf,  or  Knockmara- 

idhe,  446,  959,  974-976,  9S0, 

986,  1008,  1026.    See  Knock- 

mary 
Knockmary,  379-381,  975.    See 

Knockniaraide 
Knockmealdown,  57 
Knockmeldown,  796,  901 
Knockmore,  222 
Knockmoy,  773 
Knockmuldoney,  183,  1109 
Knockmullin,  194 
Knockmunion,  443 
Knocknaban,  847 
Knocknabansha,  53 
Knocknacoura,  11 24 
Knock-na-glaise,  883 
Knocknakilla,  421,  757,  791 
Knocknancen,  295 
Knocknarea,  or  Knocknareagh, - 

135,  140,  150,  166,  834,  906 
Knocknashammer,  141 
Knockninny,  227,  834,  835 
Knockraheen,  19,  21 


Index. 


1209 


Knockrath,  413 
Knockroe,  107 
Knockshanbrittas,  53,  54 
Knockshanoo,  98,  765,  n. 
Knocksink  Moat,  412 
Knocktopher,  403 
Knopoke,  84,  85 
Knowles,  J.  W.,  Mr.,  167,  872, 

n. 
Knowth,    345,    349,    350,    370, 

,371 

Knuck-na-Nyrk,  420 

Knyttkiirr,  486,  487 

Koban,  966 

Kociubinsce,  508,  509,  741 

Kohn,  508,  509,  741 

Kohrberg,  532 

Koln,  518 

Kommelyn,  564,  n. 

Konisgsberg,  1097 

Konigstat,  537 

Konofogr,  950 

Konopath,  527 

Kopeinicki,  Dr.,  509 

Kopfing,  509 

Kora,  746,  747 

Koran,  the,  733 

Krakow,  498 

Krantz,  1061 

Krapperup  in  Scania,  221 

Kraszewski,  509 

Krissan,  930,  931 

Krukenno,  622 

Krummenschlag,  530 

Krummensee,  534 

Knise,  511-513,  678,  801,  n., 
817,  11.,  81S,  n.,  loii,  1037, 
n.,  1049,  1052,  n.,  1 130 

Kubbecele,  512 

Kubbeh,  728 

Kubur  Eeni  Israel,  733 

Kiihloch,  968 

Kuhtrafpe,  536 

Kuikul,  512 

Kukulin  in  Esthonia,  512,  818, 
n. 

Kulat  el-Husn,  704,  732 

Kuklja,  747 

Kitmbcchaplk  skulls,  945,   946, 

954,  994 
Kunl,  1 137,  n. 
Kurckshee,  285 
Kurmar  Devi,  754 
Kurumbar,  754 
Kict,  555,  n. 
Kutorga,  Dr.,  929 
Kuvl,  562 
Kyle,  791 
Kylemore,  105 
Castle,    105 

Labadiarmad,  107 
Labaun  (Cork),  373 

(Westmeath),  373 

Labba  {Leaba,  Lappa),  85,  231 

,  the  West,  82 

Labbacalle,  425,  427,  432,  433, 

492 
Labbacallee,  8,  11,  57,  305,486, 

487,  556,  567,  646,  701 
Labba  Callighe,  693 
Labbadermot,  35,  104,  107 

VOL. in. 


184,  432,  891       — 


Labbadermody,  17 
Labba  Diannuid,  855 

Dhiarmada  Mountain,  10 1 

Iscur,  785 

Mologa,  768-770 

Labbamologa  (Middle),  8 
Labba-na-Calle,  829 
Labba  na  Callighe,  38 
Labba-na-leagh,  72 
Labbanasigha,  413,  414,  853 
Labbanasighe,  415 
Labbanirweeny,  I 
Labba  Rocks,  234 
Labby,  31,  122,  iT  .     ._ 

(T.  L.  of  in  Derry),  890 

Labbynaman,  830 
Labbynawark,  140,  787 
Labbyowen,  6 
Labe,  the,  812,  1062,  1074 
Labraidh      Loingseach,     1060, 

1095,  1096,  1098 
Labra  Lork's  Castle,  233 
Lac  de  Tabe,  595 
Lach  an  Scahl,  405 
Lachmann,  635 
Lacht,  the,  iii 
Lacht-an-lorrais,  iii 
Lachtnamna,  17,  763 
Lachtnascail,  875 
Lacht-Niall,  487 
Lachtseefin,  55 
Lackabaun,  35,  36,  763 
Lackacruacha,  30,  757 
Lackadarra,  650,  n. 
Lackaduv,  19-21,  487 
Lackafinna,  125,  761 
Lackagh,  Lake  of,  295 
Lackaleagh,  72,  762 
Lackan,  115 
Lacka-na-lea,  762 
Lackaneen,  785 
Lackanhill,  115 
Lackareaghmore,  loi 
Lackaroe,  901 
Lackathuoma,  33,  764 
Lacken,  115 
Lackendarragh,  412 
Lackglass,  80 
Lackmore,  405 
Lackparknalicka,  33,  757 
La  Coumbo  of  Auribal,  599 
Ladoga,  Lake,  931 
Ladru,  822,  833 
La  Gandara,  the  Padre,  592 
Lag-an-Ghearrain-Bhainn,  906 
Lagan  Lake,  295 

River,  271,  275,  277,  310 

Lagbreac,  53,  913 
Lager-platze,  546 
Laght,  87 
Laghtareal,  142 

Hill,  141 

Laghtargid,  31 

Laghtgall,  106 

Laghtnagat,  97 

Laghtneill,  29,  35 

Lagina,  1058,  1075 

Lagne,  1058 

Lagnum  Sinus,  896,  n.,  1088 

Laibach,  11 70 

Laidgenn,  1 149 

Laigen,  1 136 


Laighen,  11 12,  1154 

Laighin,  1059,  1075,  1171 

Laigin,  1096 

Laiglinne,  1074,  1075 

Lainca,  1038,  1059,  1075 

Laing,  S.,  744,  n.,  938,  n., 
1027 

Lainga,  1058 

Laisrean,  1017,  n. 

Laithlind,  824 

Lake  dwellings 

(Caucasus),  966 

(West  Prussia),  1 131 
(Switzerland),  525 

legends,    512,    586,    587, 

590,  591,  592-596,  749,  775, 
797,  ^05,  872,  899,  909 

Lake  of  Limia,  595 

,  magic,  in  Halland,  fre- 
quented by  pilgrims,  472,  n. 

Venern,  487 

Lakes  bursting Jortli,  1083,  n. 

,  dolmens  close  to,  195 

,  insults  to,  514 

,  worship  of,  588 

La  Lamas  de  Gua,  592 

Lambiez,  565,  n. 

Laifiia,  348 

Lammas  Fair,  the,  895,  n. 

Lammas-tide,  583 

Lanark,  i 109 

Lance-heads,  684 

Lancpartolant,  1057,  and  n. 

Landais,  M.,  671,  n. 

Landes,  Dep.  of,  5S4 

Land's  End,  the,  449,  523,  611, 
654,  680,  n.,  944 

district,  440,  448 

Landtag,  first  held  at  aolmcn, 
540 

Laney  (river),  22 

Langdysse,  489,  612 

Langeland,  483,  484 

Langendorf,  Herr,  445 

Langen-Salza,  523 

Langobard,  a,  1069 

Langobardi,  472,  n.,  537,  829, 
1056,  1060.  1061,  1063,  1064, 
1076,  1081,  1087,  1096, 
1 139,  n.,  1 143,  1 144,  1146, 
I151,  I159,  1167,  1177 

Langobardic  art,  1064 

influence  on  Irish  art,  1065 

ornament,  1065 

scribes,  1053 

tradition,  1066 

Langobardus,  1058 
Langoiran,  675 
Langres,  790 
Langton  Wold,  953,  954 
Languedoc,  601 
Laoghaire,  1136,  n. 
Libhan,  591 

Lork,  1 134 

Laoghis,  S20 

Laoi  Mac  Roin-Ghabra,  819 

Lapa  dos  Mouros,  658,  659 

Furada,  672 

La  Pierre  Turquaise,  568,  n. 
Lapland,  439,  998 
Laplanders,  515,  1160 
Lapp  Hero  "  made  on  ivck,"  515 

2     K 


I2IO 


Index. 


Lapp,  Norwegian,  a,  487 
Lapponia-Pithensis,  476,  106 1, 

1 107 
Lapps,  149,  476,  477,  575,  590, 
n.,  709,  11.,  780,  898,  n.,932, 
995,996,  1004,  n.,  1009,  lOII, 

1026,  1076,  n. 
La  I'uebla,  654,  655 
Laiachril,  764 
Larah,  206,  207 
Laraghirril,  229 
Larch  Hill,  394 
Larcom,  Sir  T.,  143 
Largie,  465 
Largynagreana,  250 
Lame,  263,  267,  1016 

,  skull  from,  949 

La  Roche  a  Fresne,  565 

Larrand,  1171,  n. 

Lartet,  M.,  730 

Lartiijue  de  Salabre,  588 

Lai~v,  588,  n. 

Laserius,  ioi7»  n. 

Las  Naou  Peyros  (circle),  584 

Lassalles,  586 

Lassoe,  1162 

Las  Virgenes,  688 

Latbirget,  303 

Latham,  Dr.,  1131 

Latium,  1064,  n. 

Latnamard  or  Latnambard,  291, 

793,  915,  1063 
Latone,  590 
La  Tourelle,  pottery  from,  619, 

621 
La  Trachere,  998 
Lattonfasky,  295 
Lauenberg,  109S 
Laval  ly,  106 

Layamon's  Brut,  1079,  1 135,  n. 
Layd,  262 
Lazius,   1085,    1 129,  11.,   1137- 

"39.  "72 
Leaba,    31,  628,  n.,    638,    702, 

728,  735,  768,  772,  773,  788. 

See  Labba 
Leaba-an-Eich-Bhuidhe,  773 
Leaba  an  fhir  Mhuimhnig,   i, 

795 

Cailli,  769 

Callighc  (Cork),  8,  9,  276, 

391.  829 

Conain,  593,  797 

,  devotee  lying  in  the,  138 

Dhiarmada  agus  Grainne, 

213,    841-850,    857,    885,    ct 
passim 

Diarmada     is     Ghraine, 

404 
,    or    Leabadh    Diarmuid, 

96 
Leaba  Diarmuid,  104,  769,  843 

agiis  Graine,  17 

Leabadh  Feinne,  773 

Granu,  96,  844 

Leabaidh-na-Glaise,  890 
Leaba  Liabadoir,  117,  797 

,  Mologa,  347,  638,  702 

Owen,  487 

Thomais  Mac   Caba,  60, 

794 
Leaba-na-bhfer  mor,  773 


Leaba-na-bh-Fian,      147,     479, 

482,  787 
Leaba-na-bo-ban,  769 
Leaba-na-Callighe,     170,     646, 

850 
Leaba-na-Con,   407,   408,    774, 

713,  n.,  874,  876 
Leaba-na-Fear  ^Iore,  174 
Leaba-na-Feinne,  757,  767,  773, 

774 
Leaba-na-Fian,  174 
Leaba-na-glaise,  81-883,  885 
Leaba-na-Limma,  769 
Leaba-na-Muicce,  27,  857.  872 
Leaba-na-Saigh,  or  Saighe,  415, 

875 
Leabba  an  Irweenig,  i,  795 
Leabba  Mologa,  8 
Leabhar     Dhroma      Sneachta, 

the,  1068 
— —     Gabhala,    812,   822,    n., 

1054 
Leabhar  na  h-Uidhri,  762 
Leac,  181 
Leacabawn,  36 
Leac-an-Scail,  405 
Leac-an-Sgail,  405-407 
Leacht,  768,  824 
Leacht-an-fhir-more,  189 
Leacht-an-fhir  moir,  7S7,  805 
Leach t-an-Iorrais,  in,  800 
Leacht-an-Scail,  4,  278,  786 
Leachtareel  Hill,  159,  160 
Leacht  Benain,  766 

Con  Mic  Ruis,  134,  800 

Dubhluing,  827 

Finn,  785,  906 

Mahon,  22,  23 

Neil,  793,  794,  n.,  796 

,  the,  III 

Leachts,  766.     See  Lecht 
Leaf-shaped  spear-heads,  525 
Leake,  W.  M.,  639,  640 
Leana,  or  Leanna,  74,  75,  426, 

441 
Leanna  group,  77 
Leap,  43'.  833,  9^1 
Leath  Cuinn,  1092 
Lebor-na-huidhre,  1 170 
Lecale  Lower,  286 

Upper,  287 

Leca  Mic  Nemedh,  814 

Lecan,  Book  of,  786,  875 

Lecht,  348,  579 

Leek,  235 

Leckafinna,  125 

Lecoy   de  la   Marche,    M.  A., 

772,  n.,  851,  883,  n. 
Lectiihis  Brjinehilde,  550 
Leda,  1064,  n. 
Ledaig  Hill,  468 
Lederun,  893 
Ledwich,  790 
Lee,  the,  900,  901 
Leems,  515,  1160 
Lefroy,  General,  354 
Legalough,  203,  206 
Legananny,  282,  834,  835 
Leganeney,  282 
Legaun  Corkee,  875 
Le^e7ids  and  traditions,  iiiiporled 

by  i7ninigrants,  81 1 


Legge,  Dr.,  854,  n. 

Leghorn,  964 

Legina,  1075 

Legine,  1058 

Lehmke,  541 

Leibe-na-cuhn,  408 

Leibnitz,  607,  n. 

Leicester,  1023 

Leim-an-Asail,  908 

Leim-an-fhir,  877 

Lein,  1058,  1059,  1075,  1171,  n. 

Leinster,  1059 

,  province  of,  305 

Leith-Adams,  Professor  A.,  917, 

n. 
Leitrim,  Barony  of,  193 

,  Co.  of,  193-195 

(Galw.),  106 

Leland,  711 
Lelewel,  iioo,  n. 
Lemborg,  508,  509,  741 
Lemeneagh,  70,  586 

Castle,  78 

Lemnaghbeg,  258,  259 

Lemnos,  1071 

Lemonii,  1098 

Lemovici,  603,  n. 

Lemovii,  603,  n.,  1098 

Lena,  868 

Lennan,  209,  294 

Leo,  894,  1 156 

Leo  Diaconus,  778,  n.,  11 19 

Lepraliaiin,  582,  852 

Ler,  826 

Lerida,  642 

Lesau,  519 

Les  Landes,  566 

Leslie,  Colonel  Forbes,  354 

Lesmurdie,  1008-1010,  1012 

Lesse,  606,  n. 

,  Valley   of  the,   577,  995^ 

998 
Letavia,  1064,  n. 
Letgalli,  824,  1062 
Letha,  1064 

,  the  Land  of,  1097,  n. 

Lethones,  1062 

Lethovia,  1062,  1064,  n. 

Lethra,  458,  490,  893 

Letter,  36,  234 

Letteran,  255 

Letterhne,  als.  Letterfyan,  194 

Letterfyan,  194 

Lettergorman,  420 

Letterkenny,  234,  873 

Lettershendoney,  253 

Lettgalli,  1098 

Leubingen,  523 

Leuchenstein,  545 

Leuci,  the,  922 

Levan,  St.,  789,  n. 

Levant,    the,    523,     741,     965, 

1070 
Lever,  Charles,  1024,  1026, 1444 
Lewis,  Bunnell,  692 
Lewis,  Island  of,  696 
I^ex  Talionis,  1 142,  1 1 54 
Leyden,  584 
Leyney,  179 

Lhwyd,  Edward,  350,  353-355 
Liabeg,  31 
Liabig  Owen,  796 


Index. 


121  I 


Lia   Fail,   the,    472,    n.,    1159, 

1 162 
Liag,  loSo 
Liagan,  792,  910 
Liagaun,  the,  120 
IJat/t,  761 
Liath  Macha,  or   Machre,  348, 

1092 
Libourdin  dialect,  912 
Libya,  779,  1073 
Libyans,  the,  716 
Liceia,  962 
Lichaven,  583 
Lickerstown,  409 
Licketstown,  409 
Licbenthal,  51S 
Liedbeck,  Professor,  946 
Liefs  of  Livonia,  775,  n. 
Liege,  923,  951,955 

,  province  of,  565,  566 

Liffey,  381 
Liger,  604 
Ligmaine,  Tuath,  1097,  n.     See 

Ligmuine 
Ligmuine,  1095,  1098, 1142.    See 

Liogmuine 
Ligures,    603,    604,    610,    667, 

715,  720 
Ligurian  type,  997.  1005,  1012 
Ligurians,  605,  716,  1125 
Ligj-es,  603 
Liljegren,  479,  480 
Limerick,  Co.  of,  4*1-51 
Limes  Saxoiiicns,  865,  1074 
Lincolnshire,  950 
Lindenbiog,  710,  n. 
Lindensmiclt,    524,    616,     741, 

1066,  1 129,  n. 
Lingen,  548 
Linken,  518 
Liogmuine,  1027 
Lios  Tuathail,  167 
Liothida,  824 
Lippe,  552,  n. 
Lipsius,  1 100 
Lir  (or  Ler),  788 
Lir,  Mac-,  826 
Lis,  167,  n. 

Lisbon,  666,  673,  69S,  722 
Lisch,  458,  499,  502,  503,  7S3, 

1002,  1 129,  n. 
Lisfannon,  230 
Lisfaughtna,  37 
Lisgall,  296 
Lisgarriff,  West,  52 
Lislanly,  295 
Lismeehan,  94 
Lismore  (Wat.),  57,  901 
Lisnadarragh,  295 
Lisnakill,  58 
Lisnakilla,  765 
Lisnanees  Upper,  234 
Lisnascragh,  149 
Lissacresig,  21 
Lissan,  211,  212,  223,  255 
Lissauer,  165,  505,  506,  515,  n., 

516-518,  521,  523,    527,   578, 

n.,  620,  n.,  741,  742, 930,  931, 
1131 
Lissguaire,  46 
Listerlin,  405,  409 
Listoghil,  142,  166-169 


Lit,  744 

Lithuanian  language,  775 

Lithuanians,  the,  1097 

Litter,  8 

Little  people,  the,  149 

Littleton  Drew,  973 

Litwani,  682 

Livenhohle,  the,  512 

Livland,  950 

Livonia,  511,  512,  775,  n.,  1131 

Livonians,  896,  n. 

Lizard,  the,  1 108 

Llanebie,  953 

Llando  de  Gorafe,  690 

Lledlyn,  824 

Lieu,  895,  n. 

Llew,  1 1 65 

Lloyd,  Mr.  Edward,  968 

Llud,  824,  n. 

Llychlyn,  S94 

Loar,  839 

Lobios,  654 

Lobishome,  695.  696 

Lochan  Cuil  Cnam,  813 

Lochan-na-Suil,  806 

Loch-a-tonnad,  821 

Lochaun-a-Muckadee,  37,  833, 

855 
Loch-Bo-booirha,  592,  899 
Lochbooleynagreine,  593,  797 
Locii  Carron,  844 
Loch  Con,  868 
Loch-Etive,  468 
Loch  Lagan,  1030 
Lochlainn,  King  of,  1151.      See 

Lochlin 
Lochland,  824 
Lochlann,  824 
Loch  Lein,  1083 
Lochlin,  King  of,  886 
Loch  Mask,  mo 

Mucc,  904 

Loch  na  Seal,  or  Loch  na  Scaul, 

294 
Loch  Neill,  868 
Loch-Ree,  1162 
Loch  Saoilean,  820 
Locmariaker,  450,  578,  613 
Loder,  472,  n.    6't':' Lodher,  and 

Lodur 
Lodher,  S93,  n.,  895,  n. 
Lodtman,  550,  n. 
Lodur.  891,  892,  1 166 
Loegaire  Buadach,  105 1,  n. 
Loeghaire,  King.  349 
Loeghaire,  son  of  Niall,  347 
Loescheke,  624.  625 
Loestrygones,  474 
Log,  loge,  loii'e,  895,  n. 
Logan  Rock,  the,  654 
Loge,  826 
Logha^  769 
Logrosa,  653 
Lohart,  7 
Loher,  5,  6 
Lohert,  7 
Loire,  the,  567,  604,  612,  1150, 

1 162 
Loiret,  612 
Loke,  584,  7P9,  S06,  S92,  985, 

n.,  1 165,  1 166 
Loki,  811 


Loman,  800,  n, 
Lombard,  577 
Lombard  laws,  1064 
Lombards,    1058.      See  Lango- 

bardi,  Longobards,  etc. 
Lombardy,  1057 
Lommineach,  1S9,  800 
Lommon,  800,  n. 
Lomna,  800,  n. 
Lomna,  enchanted  head  of,  896, 

n. 
Londonderry,  709 
Londonderry,  Co.  of,  251-257, 

419 

,  flint  found  in,  148 

,  North-West-Liberiies   of, 

252  _ 

,  the  Marquis  of,  274 

Long,  348 
Longbardi,  1064 
Longobards,  1068,  IC93 
Long  Barrow,  a,  \\ 
Long-Bar 7-o'u-men,  568,  574 
Lon-:^  Barrows,   115,  460,  469, 

475.  567.  611,  612,  706,  743, 

1005,  1023,  1026,  1032 
— ,    452,   definition  of; 

construction  of;  purpose  of; 

mode  of  burial  in  ;  452-455  ; 

in  Yorkshire,  id.  ;  discoveries 

in,  id. 

in  Cujavia,  520 

Long-Ban-ow  skulls,  932,    944, 

945>  95I'  953.  954.  95^,  957, 

959.  960,  962,  963,  967,  968, 

970,  971.  974,  976,  n.,  978, 

979,  9S7,  9S9,  994,  1000 
Longford,  1S3,  773 

,  Barony  of,  312 

,  county  of,  312 

■,  (Galw.),  105 

Long-Lowe-Barrow.  971,  972 

Long  na  niBan,  1094 

Long  Stone,  the,  422,  808 

Longstones,  194 

Lon  MacLiomhtha,  8S3-S87 

Loonius,  1107 

Loop-Head,  102 

Lorcan,  349,  365,  n. 

Lork,  1 1 34 

Lorraine,  92S 

Los  Arcos,  649 

Los  Eriales,  689 

Lot,  824,  n.,  1023 

,  dep.  of,  612 

Loth,  824,  n.,  1063 

Lothair,  1051,  n. 

Lothar,  472,  n.,   892,    and   n., 

1 166 
Lother,  893 
Lothlind,  824 
Lothur,  or  Lodur,  891,  892 
Lothus,  824,  n. 
Lotihali,  824,  1062,  1063 
Lot    Laimnach,  or   Lot  Luam- 

nach,  829, 1062 
Lo  Troulierro,  598 
Lough  Acummeen,  2 
Loughadrine,  591,  732,  n. 
Lough  Ainninn,  II03 

Allen,  196 

Ardanmore,  105 


I2I2 


Index. 


Lougharee,  S22 

Louijh  Arrow,  122,  184,  1S5, 
192,425,  432,  4S7,  585,  759, 
763,  787,  Soo-803,  809,  891 

Lough-a-scaul,  224 

Lough-a-tarriv,  592.  S99 

Lough-bo-derg,  903 

Loiigh-bo-finna,  592 

Lough -bo- finne,  899 

Loughbooley-na-Greinc,  849 

Loughborough,  1023 

Lough  Boyle,  236 

Loughbrack,  53,  913 

Lough  Bran,  876 

Carrignamuck,  31 

Ce,  804 

CoUog,  199 

Conn,  118 

Corrib,    795,    S09,   1075, 

1083 

Corrigan,  135 

Loughcrew,   157,  221,  313,  n., 

347.  451.  459,  467,  483,  525. 

614,  615,  619,  t)24,  766 
Lough  Uargen.  1S2 

Derg,  138,  347,  772,  830 

Dermot,  290 

Doon,  97 

Eglish,  295 

Ennell,  1103 

Erne,  772,  1083 

,  Upper,  219 

Fea,  212,  255,  823 

Finn,  239 

Finne,  903 

Foyle,  229,  252 

Funshinnagh,  198 

Gara,  197,  788 

Gavvna,  866 

Gill,  134,  139,  167 

Gur,  47,  51,  809,  loii 

Loughinisland,  286 

Lough     Keel-Hanna,     or     Kil 

Hanna,  30,  574,  591 

Kineel,  866 

Lagan,  799 

Larne,  950 

Lein,  1092 

Loughlin,  823,  824 
Loughlinsholin,  255,  257 
Loughlinstown,  393 
Lough  Lurgan,  1075 

Mask,  139,  1003 

Meelagh,  196 

Melvin,  222 

Loughmoney,  267,  286,  287 
Lough  Muck,  239 

Mucsnamha,  864 

Mulshane,  222 

Nacreaght,  232 

Nagor,  226 

Lough-na-Gun,    2^5,  2?6,  82^, 

876 
Loughnahaltora,  125 
Loughnakey,  233 
Loughnameenslaun,  852 
Loughnascaul,  2,  792,  793 
Lough  Neagh,   271,   587,   591, 

749,  825,  864 

Orbsen,  1075 

Patrick,  198 

Loughrea,  106,  914 


Lough  Ree,  95,  771 
Loughry,  209-211,  644,  686 
Lough  Saloch,  193,  194 

Scale,  223,  224 

Loughscur,  194 

Lough  Swilly,  230,  1034,  1035 

Talt,  858 

Lougvaia  Moguila,  724 

Louisburgh,  124,  125,  669,  722 

Loupgaraic,  582,  S52 

Lourdes,  586,  587 

Lou  Sent  Kouoc,  598,  599 

Louth,  309,  584,  726 

Abbey,  309,  310,  937,  940, 

941,  94  ^ 

,  county  of,  305-311,  421 

Louveigne,  566 

Lovios,  651 

Lower  Aure,  Soo 

Lozere,  567,  568,  591,  593,  600, 

605,  656,  657,  659,  962 
Luachair  Ailbe,  347 
Luacro,  1136 
Luaim,  11 36 
Luan,  day  of,  594,  595 
Lubach,  Dr.,  557-561,  563 
Lubbenstein.  206,  n.,  551 
Lubbock,     Sir     J.,    451,    458, 

917.  n.,  918,  937,  999,  n. 
Liibeck,  1082 
Lubitavish,  262 
Lucae,  Dr.,  942 
Lucan,  473 
Lucas,  690,  n. 
Liicha  Franca,  1039 
Luchaire,  ^L,  607,  635,  n. 
Liichow,  544 
Lucorpan,  853 
Lud,  824,  n. 
Ludendorf,  829 
Lug,  or  Lugh,  Lamfhada,  167, 

"•,  309.  348,  370,  n.,  371.  n., 

579.  583.  584.  769,  792,  805, 

806,  813,  889-891,  893,  894, 

and    n.,    895,     n.,    1075,    ■^•> 

1087,  1 165,  1 166 

,  grave  of,  309 

,  the  sword  and  spear  of, 

1159 
Lug's  Games,  583 

Grave,  895,  n. 

Seat,  802 

Lugaid,  584 

Dealbhaeth,  1075 

— • —  Menn,  346 

Lugaidh,  347,  895,  n.,  1084 

Lamfhada,  807 

Maccon,  1038,  1039 

Lugar,  813 
Lugdunum,  769 

Batavorum,  584,  895,  n. 

Celtarum    (Lyons;,    584, 

895,  n. 
Convenarum,     5S3,    584, 

895 
Lughaidh  Mac  Irca  (Erca),  821 
Lughair,  1084 
Lughnasad,  or  Lugnassed,  371, 

n-.  583.  895.  n. 
Lugii,  1075,  n. 
Lugius,  1075,  n.,  1 134 
Lugnafulla,  1 10 


Lugoves,  584,  651,  n.,  895 
Luguballium,  895,  n. 
Luguvallium,  584 
LiiheragauHSy  852,  855 
Lukis,  Captain,  450,  451 
,    Rev.    \V.    C,  426,  482, 

483,  612,  613,  623,  758 
Lulach,  1 142 
Licmc  Defcctio,  595 
Lundun,  11 71 
Lundunberg,  1171,  n. 
Liineburgh,  540,  547,  1058 
Lunula fotiiid  near Loii^^liArroiVy 

189 
LunuliE,  271,  678,  679 
Luprahantt,  853 
Luque,  688 
Lurg,  218 
Lurgan,  868 
Lurgaw,  125 
Lurgoe,  55 

Luscas,  i.e.  artificial  caves,  234 
Lusitania,  911 
Lusitanians,  653 
Lusmag,  804 
Lutevensis,  Fagus,  567 
Luthra,  483 

Luxembourg,  552,  564,  565 
Lyell,  Sir  C,  942,  n.,  looi 
"  Lying-in  Woman,"  the,  531 
Lynch,  48,  49,  802,  11 38,  1141 
Lyons,  584,  851,  895,  n. 

,  Diocese  of,  772,  881 

,  Dr.,  112,  800,  831 

,  M.,  626 

Lyradane,  35 

Maaler,  Jos.,  776,  n. 
Maaree,  1033 
Mab,  834.     See  Medb. 
MacAdam,    Mr.   Robert,    274, 

275 
Mac  Aingis,  835 
MacBeth,  822 
M 'Carrol,  John,  298 
MacCarthy,  Florence,  1048 
MacCecht,  1055,  n. 
MacCloy's  larm,  263 
Mac  Con,  796,  8(3,  S36,  1038, 

1039,   1 136 
McCool's  bed,  229 
MacCumhail,  1136 
MacDara,  St.,  738 
MacDa-tho,  868 
MacDevils,  the,  1036 
MacDonald,  1103 
MacDowel,  Dr.  E.,  167,  187, 189 
MacFadden,  the  Rev.  Jas.,  1035 
MacFirbis  (1417),   115 
— ,  D.,   350,  773,  786,  796, 

817,    n.,    1027,    1029,     1053, 

1083,  1098,  1044,  1 109,  HID, 

1116,    1119,  n.,   II20,    1136, 

1154,  1171 
MacGreine,  847,  1 160 
Mac  Hugh,  798 
Mac  ind  Oc,  the,  832 
MacKee's  farm,  42,   244,  249, 

438,  660 
MacKineely,  883,  889,  890,  898 
MacParlan,  125,  193 
MacPherson,  G.,  928,  n. 


Index. 


121 


MacRannal,  796 
MacRoth,  1050 
IMacSamthainn,  8S9 
MacSwynes,  the,  1037 
MacSwyne's  Bay,  249 
MacTal,  579 
MacVeagn,  822 
Macedon,  staters  of,  362 
Macedonia,    522,    1067,     1068, 

I 123,  1124 
jMaccs,  Bronze,  1128,  11 29 
Macha,   695,   696,  826,  and  n., 

1086,  1095 
Macha  (Sclavonic),  105 1 
Macha,  Queen  of  Erin,  1095 

,  wife  of  Crund,  907 

Maclean,  Mr.,  1023,  1024,  103 1. 

1041 

,  Sir  John,  460 

Macon,  962 
Macosquin,  251 
Macrobius,  471,  n.,  474 
Macroom.   iS,  22,  32,  757,  793. 

831,  n.,  847,  855 
Madradh-Gallom,  876 
Madras,  755 
Madron,  758 

Madsen,  488,  671,  683,  n. 
Maelcobha,  348 
Maen,  824 

ALcnia  Daiiomm,  1102.  1156 
Maes-Howe,  157,  459,  568 
Msesia,  522 
Mag.     See  Magh 
Mag  Leige,  874 
Mag  Lena,  868 
Mag  Mell,  832 
Mag  Mucraime,  868.  n. 
Mag  Slecht,  472,  473 
Magach,  1137 
Magi€,  828 
Magalias,  692 
Magathaburgh,  105S 
Magdeburg,  537,  550,  1058 
iSIagh  Ai,  591 

Arghaidh,  260 

Bolg,  1 140,  1 142 

Cegala,  1 176 

Chaolain,  877 

Chaorthaim,  877 

Cro,  1 142 

Cru,  1 139 

Magh-Da-Chon,  879 
Maghera,  257 

Magheraboy,  221,  222,  259 
Magheracar,  236 
Magheracross,  223 
Magheraghanrush,  113, 134-137. 

241-244,  437 
Magheralackagh,  891 
Magheramesk,  271 
Magheranaul,  229 
Magheross,  296 
Magherow,  807 
Magh  Fail,  11 59 

Kedni,  1080 

Mucmimhe,  836,  1038 

Seimhne,  1086 

Magh-Tuire,    or    Tuired,    802. 

See  also 
Magh-Tuireadh,     1146,    1147. 

See  also 


Mag    Tuire    Cunga,    803.     Sec 

also 
Magh-Tuiredh,  1136.     See  also 
Magh-Tuired-na-bh-Fomorach, 

807,  808 
Mag',  597,  740,  n.,  828 

,  Median,  740 

Magmar,  or  Magnior,  579,  11 36 
Magnus,  824 
Magog,  1069 
Magrath,  Big,  1048 
Maguire,  Mr.,  346 
Magunihy,  5 
Magus,  665 

,  buried  in  water,  95,  770 

Mahafty,  J.  P.,  11 18 

Mahomet,  738 

Mahomet's  camel,  908 

Mahon,  Mr.  (of  Dublin),  983 

Mahood,  Mr.,  980 

Mahr,  the,  912 

Maiden  Castle,  711 

Maighin-a-Bhradain,  S63 

Maighin-na-Muicce,  863 

Maine,  824,  11 20 

Mainsair  Asail,  374,  402,  909 

Maintenon,  955,  960 

Maintz,  524 

Majadas  del  Conejo,  6S9 

Herradero,  688 

Major,  494,  496 

Majorca,  569 

Malafossa,  L.  de,  567,  n. 

Malaga,  691,  743 

Malahide,  Bay  of,  1 109 

Malaise,  C.,  955,  n. 

Mala  Lith,  844 

Malar  Lake,  the,  476,  611,  776, 

1 102 
Malcolmson,  Mr.,  396 
Malempre,  565 
Malin,  229 

Malin-More,  240,  244,  246 
Mallana,  754 

Deva,  754 

Devi,  754 

Mallet,  869 

Mallow,  II 

Malsto,  River,  535 

Malves,  597 

Mawalter,  633,  634 

Manielons,  586 

Mamoa,    586,    633,    634,    651, 

657 
Mannnnha,  633 
Matfwla,  633 
Mamonela,  633 
Mamu,  634 
Matniia,  633,  635 
Mamtila,  633 
Mamunha,  633,  634 
Man,  a^itiquily  oj,  in  Ireland, 

9^1,etseqq. 
Man,  Isle  of,  814,  n.,  bbi 
Manannan  Mac  Lir,   788,  795, 

823,  825,  826,  835,  868,  888, 

889,  1082,  1094,  "60 
Manand,  the  King  of  the  Britons, 

840 
Manapia,  936,  1059 
Mane  Lud,  221,  355,  45^'  ^^12, 

613,  700 


Manger,  374,  402,  909 
Mangles,  726,  n. 
Mannheim,  810 
Manntan,  1081 
Mannus,  1060 
Mansuy,  St.,  925,  937,  944 

,  skull  of,  922,  923 

Manternach  Mountain,  564 
Mantes,  570,  613,  626,  027 
Manus,  824 
Maolan,  763 

Mountain,  13 

Maonghal,  mo 
Mapalia,  692,  704,  n. 
Mapleton,  Rev.  R.  K.,  465 
Mar,  348,  667 
Marble  Hill,  106,  107,  844 

House,  106 

Marcach's  Knowe,  234,  908 

Stable,  234,  906 

Marcella,    La     Sepultura     de, 

668 
Marcellinus,  Ammianus,  779 
Marcellus,  609,  n. 
Marcomaimi,  1164 
Margg,  1092 
Marienfeld,  966 
Maritime  Alps,  956 
Marken,    934,    938,    939,    941. 

944 
Marly-le-Roi,  998 
Marmora,    Le  Marquis  Ferrero 

de  la,  344,  n.,578,  n. 
Marne,  the,  600,  628,  n.,  647, 

669,  672 

,  caves  in  the,  575-577,  955 

,  Dep.  of  the,  569,  570 

,  Valley  of  the,  999,  looo 

Maros,  the  river,  1128,  n. 

Marrast,  651,  n. 

Marriage  customs  of  Esthonian 

Fitins,  775,  n. 
Marriages  cetebrated  at  dolmens, 

496,  845 
Mars,  505,  n. 
Mars-Apollo,  1093 
Mars-Jupiter,  1055 
Marsburg,  1163 
Marschal,  Dr.,  518 
Marseilles,  603 
Marsi,  1060 
Marti  Caturigi,  1 121 
Martignac,  597 
Martin,   Col.    Wood-,    1 26-192, 

427,  650,   651,    766,    773,  n., 

801,  804,  807,  813,  814,  8^4, 

n.,    843,    850,    n.,   853,    855, 

858,  859,  871,  II 30 

,  St.,  869,  1 161 

Marline,  1083 

Martinei,  1064.     See  Martini 

Martinez  de  Padin,  586,  632,  n., 

633,  653 
Martini,  1063 
Martinmas,  Eve  of,  869 
Martorell   y    Pena,    Signor   F., 

t98,  n.,  701,  n. 
Mary  fort,  94 
Marymount,  410 
Mas  Gamier,  589 
Maschdorf,  534 
Mason,  II 25 


I2I4 


Index. 


Mass  Hill,  230,  764 
Massareene  Upper,  271 
Massy,  1020 
Mala,  the,  34S,  349 

,  the  Glen  of,  348 

Mater  Deorum,  Hibernensiuin, 

S69,  870 
Mathesius,  J.,  791 
IMathewstown,  59,  60,  794 
JNIatozinhos,  696 
Matribtis  Brit t is,  1 1 00 
Matthews,  Mr.  T.,C.E.,  433,  n. 
Maudits,  Des,  626-628 
Maulanimirish,  S56 
Maulatanvally,  36 
Maule-Pl.,  M.  L.  De,  570,  626- 

62S,  961 
IMaulnahaltora,    or    Maulnahol- 

tora,    or   Maumnal;altora,    2, 

3,  125,  477,  645,  665,  696,  n., 

729,  765-  770 
IMauranein,  792 
Maiiretania,  789 
Mauringa,  1061 
Maw-Gun,  796 
Maximus  Tyrius,  898,  n. 
Maxwell,  mo 
May- Day,  849,  1092 
May -Eve,  591 
May  festivals   in  the  Pyrenees, 

581 
May-Fire,  the,  852 
May,  the  First  of;  festival  to 

the  sun,  79 
Mayence,  iiii,  1129 
Mayne,  the  river,  863 
Mayo,  423,  452,   586,   653,  n., 
669,  720,  722,  1020,  102 1 

,  Co.  of,  1 10-125 

]Meadhbha-an-Chruachain,  8 1 7 
Meadows-Taylor,  Col.,  750-755 
Meaghy,  208 
Mealagh  (river),  43 
Mearogafin,  35 

Meath,  439,  655,  759,  864,  866, 
867,  1 142 

,  Co.  of,  313-471 

Mecklenburg,     206,     n.,    458, 
490,  497,  499-503,  516,  517, 
523,  7^3,  974,  n.,  1002,  IQ03, 
1086,  1 1 29 
IMecklenburg-Schwerin,  502.  524 
Medb,  135, '779,  829,  834,  852- 
854,  867,  868,  874,  892,  1050, 
1051,    1097,   i'2o,   1136,    n., 
1137 
Medea,  834,  1050,  n. 
IMedes,  the,  740 
Media,  1142 
Median  Magi,  740 
Medingen,  545 

,  Amt.,  543,  544 

Mediterranean,  419,  426,  491, 
492,  519,  523,  5(^6,  567,  569, 
600 

,    contact  of  Ireland    with 

the,  356 

,  islands  of  the   Western, 

698-712 
Medraighe,  1033 
Meena,  the,  903 
Meenacarragh,  236 


Meentulla,  786 

Megaceros  Hibernietis,  the,  917- 

921 
Megalithgjiib,  a,  509 
Mei^alithic  tombs,  508 
]Mege,  M.  A.  du,  584,  588,  n., 
589,   593,  596,  bo9,  n.,  833, 
852,  S62 
Mehlis,  508,  509,  518,  741 
Mel,  S67 
Mela,   Pomponius,  603,  608,  n., 

804,  1 162,  n. 
Melkagh,  312 
Meilifont  Abbey,  357 
Melsow,  535 
Memel,  802,  n.,  904 
Memoa-Negra,  635 
Menander,  778,  n.,  II 17,  1119 
Men-an-tol,  the,  586,  757 
jMenapii,   the,  936,   1058,    1059, 

1 108,  1 1 77 
Mend,  105 1 
Mende,  590 

Mendouca-de-Pina,  Sr.,  637,  658 
Meneage,  662 
Menga  Mengal,  688,  n. 
Mengitc,  691,  n. 
JMenhir,  688,  719,  795 
Alenhirs,  597,  649,  654 
Mensinga,  563,  n. 
Menteith,  1109 
Menton,  956 

cave,  570 

Merchant's  table,  the,  578 
Mercury,    473,    892,    n.,    1106, 

1107 
Merimee,   M.  P.,  652,   n.,  667, 

711,  712 
Merlin,  poem  of,  1162 
Mermaid,  Children  of  the,  497 
Merovingian  Art,  1066 

cemetery,  570 

influence  ou  Irish  .\rt,  1065 

Mersebourg,  523,  1085,  1163 
J\Ies,  II 36,  n. 
Mesenthin,  531 

Mesgegra,  11 36,  n. 
Mesh,  1 136,  n. 

Meshnoi,  784,  1136,  n. 

Mesitch,  871 

Messenius,  1106 

Mestorf,  495,  496,  619,  n.,  620, 
621 

Mettray,  628,  630 

Meudon,  998 

Meuse,  the,  952,  955 

Mevagh,  831 

Meyer,  Kuno,  837,  839,  1056 

Michael,  Saint,  649 

Micheldean,  1023 

Micraalius,  S96,  n.,  1050,  n., 
1060,  ic6i,  n.,  1082,  n., 
1 156,  n.,  1 172,  n. 

Middelpa-d,  778 

Middle-GtTinan  tombs,  500 

Middle-March,  1058 

Middlemark,  537 

Aliddle,  the,  superstitions  about, 

584 
Middlethird,  55,  58 
INIiddletown,  207 
Mide,  1 142 


Mider,  349,  761,  810,  823,  826, 

1064 
Midchuardda,  the,  874 
Midlaren,  556 

Midsummer  Eve,  586,  729,  849, 
1 160 

,    dances    on    Slieve 

Callan,  79 

festival,  589 

fires,  739,  1160 

Migdonia,  1067 
Miguel,  St.,  648 
Jlfihrab,  facing  stone,  729 
Mil,  829,  840 
Milan,  province  of,  720 
Milchu,  1 1 19 
Mile,  1070,  1 104 
Miledh,  829,  1070,  1 104 

,  sons  of,  1027.     See  Miles, 

Milesius,  Milesians 
Miles,  1070 

,  sons  of,  107 1 

Milesian  princes  of  Temair,  349 

race,  the,  1048 

story,  the,  349 

Milesians,  the,  1028,  1050,  1104 
Milesius,  349,  1070,  1084,  1104 
Miliuc,  873 
Millford,  232 
Milligan,  Mr.,  138 
Millitus,  the  Abbot,  788 
Millstreet,  17,  855 
Milltown,  90-92 

Casile,  92 

Malbay,  79 

Mimatum  Gabalorum,  590 
Mimer,  896,  n. 

Min-an-Ail,  904 
Minarets,  738 
Mind,  854 
Mine  fairies,  623,  n. 

Minho,   the,  632,  n.,  659,   667, 
668,  708 

Minning  Lowe,  974 

Minorca,    493,    569,   672,    698, 
700,  701,  703,  711,  721 

Minsk,  929 

Miolla,  1061,  1106 

Mioscan    Meidhbhe,    798.       See 
Misgawn 

Miracle  Plays,  278 

Miremont,  587 

Miscal,  II 71 

Misgaun  Meave,  834,  906 

Misgaxvn  Meave,  135,  140 

Mistelbach,  1171,  n. 

Mitchelstown,  39 

Mitjana  y  Ardison,  Sr.  R.,  632, 
n.,  692,  694 

J\Iitre-stones,  719 

Mizzen  Head,  45 

Mild     Sidhe,     the,     763,     S33, 
901 

Mo,  769 

Moab,  726,  728 

Moanmore  East,  107 

Moats,  tradition  oj,  346 

Mobuy,  255,  256 

Mocollop,  57 

Mod,  868 

Modorra,  633,  635 

Moelmuiri,  348 


Index. 


1215 


Moelmuiri  of  Clonmacnoise,  347 
Moen,  458,  490,  998,  999,  X003, 

1096 
Moenmore,  914 
Moesia,  1072 
Mofebis,  1083 
Mogeely,  14 

Mogh,  /ncaiiing  of,  1092,  n. 
Mogh-Ruith,  1092,  n.     See  Mo- 

gruth 
Mogh's  Half,  1092,  n. 
Mogon,  739 
Mogruth,  10S3 
Mohar,  85 1 
Mohermoylan,  71,  72 
Mohill,  193,  195,  1036 
Mohne,  11 30 
Mohrin,  536 
Moin  Cet,  873 

Fiachna,  1083 

Moin-Trogaidhe,  1 084 
Moirfhias,  1 158 
Moirne,  887 
Moitin-aii-eabka ,  866 
Molaise,     St.,    788,    914,    991, 

1018.     See  jMolaisse 
Molaise's  (St.)  house,  1017 

bed,  772 

Mole,  the,  13 

Moli,  1171 

Molina  de  Malaga,  592 

Mollen,  533 

Mollenbeck,  1 171,  n. 

Mologa,  638 

,  St.,  769 

Mologa's  bed,  768 

Molyiieux,  345,  352,  353,  1 127 

,  T.,  290,  352 

Mommsen,  60S,  n. 
Monaghan,  292,  295,  452,  707 

,  barony  of,  294 

,  county  of,  291-296 

,  town,  291 

Monalty,  863 

Monamanry,  374 

Monanimy,  13 

Monanoe,  84 

Monasteranenagh,  49 

Monasterboice,    310,   31 1,   646, 
789,  834,  836 

,  Flann  of,  347 

Mondonedo,  591,  655 

Mondoney  Upper,  235 

Mone,  892,  n.,  1052,  n.,  1153 

Monea,  909,  910 

Moneen,  1 1 

Money-coiui-ie,  74 1 

Money,  placed  on  rock,  5 1 3 

Moneystown  Hill,  413 

Moneyvolen,  Lake  of,  295 

Monfau^on,  Aunger  de,  581 

Mongfinn,  801 

Mongnacool,  413,  853 

Mongolian  race,  the,  952,  loco 

tombs,  138 

type,  998,  1027.    See  Mon- 
goloid type 

Mongoloid    type,     1026,    1029, 
1032 

Mongols,  the,  7 10,  725,  779,  780, 
930,  II 17 

Monknewtovvn,  344,  345 


Alonks,  Wandering,  1066 
Monmouth,  1023 
Alonnaye  de  Giiinee,  749 
Monneyneeny,  878 
Montalegre,  673,  674 
Mont  d'Algeda.  90,  650,  662 
Monte  Abrahao,  669,  671,  714, 
722 

,  button  from,  164 

Monte  da  Polvoreria,  691 

das  Fachas,  656 

Fidalgo,  668 

Tignoso,  964 

Montelius,  165,  M.O.,  478, 
480,  481,  483.  486,  487,  489- 
5i9>  523.  525.  526,  578,  n., 
661,  675,  997,  1013 

,  classification  of  Swedish 

dolmens,  chambers  and  cists 
Montmort,  canton  of,  571 
Monument  Hill,  914 
Moon,  eclipse  of,  595 
Moonveen,  409 

Moore,  Mr.,  R.,  230,  244-247, 
249,  250 

,  Rev.  P.,  405 

,  Thomas,  16 

Moors,  the,  667,  1031 
Moraes,  Sr.,  637 

Moragh,  843,  856 
Morales,  Sr.  Amb.  de,  651 
Moran,  the  name,  1036,  1140 
Morana,  1140,  n. 

Marancez,  5S5 

Moranu,  1 140,  n. 

Morbihan,  612,  617 

ficticia  from,  164,  n. 

More,  son  of  Dela,  1080,  1081, 
1092 

Morea,  the,  721,  722 

Moreau,  M.,  570,  571 

Mor  Gallion,  1097,  n. 

Mori,  Idolo  dei,  667,  712 

• ,  Munni,  750 

Morias,  1060 

Moriath,  1060,  1096 

Mories'  Houses,  750 

Moro,  667 

jNIorocco,  716,  718 

Morrigain,  348,  667 

Morse,  Mr.,  469 

Mortero  Coriado,  688 

Mortillet,  566-569,  605,  622, 
626,  730 

Morvah  Hill,  154 

Moryson,  Fynes,  1047 

Moselle,  the,  928,  11 60 

Moser,  550,  n. 

Moslem  saints,  728 

Mossgrove  mountain,  29,  793 

Mostar,  1121 

Mota-na-Muicce-Duil)h,  863 

Mothers,  le-ends  of,  829 

Mould  for  celt,  677 

Alonnd-bitilders,  278 

Mound  of  Ash,  the,  914 

of  the  Basques,  the,  647 

Mounds,  practice  of  sitciiig  on. 

Mountain  Masses,  23 1,  766 
Mount  Aout,  571 
Ash,  309 


Mount  Brendan,  766 

Browne,  398,  432 

Callan,  797,  849,  89 1 

Druid,  63,  764 

Eagle,  448 

Gabriel,  626 

Stewart,  281 

■ Venus  (Woodtown),  305, 

343.  376,  382,  385.  390,  432, 
433,  764 

Wilson,  986,  n.,  990,  994 

Mount's  Bay,  1027,  1032 
Mourne,  289 

Mountains,  315,  357,  361 

Mousny,  565 

Moussaye,  682 

Moveelan,  105 

Moviddy,  14,  35 

Moville,  Upper,  229 

Moy,  river,  117,  1063 

Moyacomb,  414,  415,  875 

Moyadam,  271 

Moy-Ailbhe,  1075 

Moyarget    or    Aloyarghed,    31, 

260 
Moyarta,  102 
Moycashel,  373 
Moycullen,  105,  795 

,  Bar.  of,  1075 

Moydow,  312 

,  Par.  of,  312 

i\Ioy  Itha,  or  iha,  1036 
Moylehid,  226 
Moylisha,  414,  853 
Moymore,  'i^,  92 
Moynalty,  313 
Moyne,  236 

,  the  Abbey  of,  1048 

Moynoe,  94 
Moyrus,  105 

Moytirra,  157,  167,  804-812, 
814,  iiii.  See  Magh-Tuir- 
eadh 

,  battle  of,  194 

Chonlainn(Conlainn),  189, 

802 

East,  or  South,  189 

,  MacDonagh,  186,  805 

West,  or  North,  186,  187, 

802 
Moy  Tuire,  190 
Moytura,  874 
Moy-Turey,  or  Magh-Tuireadh, 

792 
Muccinis,  868 
Muccramma,  battle  of,  348 
Mucduff,  859,  860 
Much,  1065,  1 1 26,  1 127,  1 130 
Muckduff,  858 
Muckle-Heog,  932,  933 
Muckno,  295 
Muck  Rock,  376,  434 
Mugem,  962 

Mughdhorna-Breagh,  350 
Mughdhorna-Maighen,  50,  349 
Mugia,  653,  654 
Mugon,  the  Holy  Land  of,  740 
Muhl,  754 
Muidh,  819 
Muinchinn,  mo 
Muintir  Eolais,  796 
Muir-an-lcht,  1064,  n.,  1 157 


12l6 


Index. 


Muircheantach.  SiS 
Muirchertach  More,  Mac  Erca, 

1044 
Muiredh,  349 
Muirteimne,  105 1,  10S6 
Mukrahn,  497 
Mulkea,  river,  52 
Mullach-an-Da-Righ,  794 
Mullach  Chairn,  iiS,  906,  914 

Ruadha,  179 

MuUacross,  114.     Sec  Mullagh- 

nacroise 
Mullaghawny,  122 
Mullagh  Lough,  179 
Mullaghmore,  126,  806 
Mullaghnacroise,  114,  115 
MuUaghnameely,  194 
Mullaghorn  Fort,  118 
Mullaghroe,  179 
Mullenbeg,  407 
Miillenbek,  536 
Miillenhof,  521,  525,  602 
MiillenhofT,  477, 776, 893, 896, n., 

898,  903,   n.,  936,   n.,    1060, 

1096,  III7,  n.,  II44 
Miiller,  Sophus,  740 
Mullet,  the,  1020 
Mulroy  Bay,  231,  232 
Muman,  892,  896,  n.,  1086 
Mumandort,  1086,  n. 
Mummendorl,  1086,  n. 
Munchaoin,  mo 
Munchinn,  the  river,  mo 
Munremur,  105 1 
Minister  (Germany),  diocese  of, 

552.  783 

Munster,  I'rov.  of,  1-102 

Munstermen,  1040 

Mur,  348 

Murbolg,  1080 

Murguia,  Sr.,  M.,  592,  615, 
632,  n.,  644,  n.,  653-656,  697, 
698 

Murias,  1060,  1068,  1096,  1158, 
"59 

Murizzi,  1060,  1096,  1159 

Miirow,  532,  545 

Murphy,  Mr.  I).,  40 

Murragh,  39 

Murrick,  123 

Mur-Teimne,  1086.  See  Muir- 
teimne 

Murtra,  645 

Muscraighe,  1115 

Musgrave,  Sir  R.,  1048 

Mushery  Mountain,  17 

Muskerry  East,  14 

West,  17 

Muskham,  942,  944,  954,  979 

Mycenae,  520,  521,  620,  624, 
721,  722 

Mythology,  Christian,  580 

Naas,  370,  n. 

Nacloyduff,    natural    cave    at, 

221 
Nadfraich,  1017,  n. 
Nagle's  Mountains,  13 
Nagy-Sap,  998 
Nancy,  641,  790 
Nanna,  744,811,  1165,  n66 
Nantiorix,  1121,  n. 


Nao  dels  Tudons,  493,  699,  700, 

702 
NoJj,  432,  493,  639,  699,  701 
Naper,  Mr.  j.  L.  W.,  315 
Xapfchensteine,  535 
Nar,  or  Nair,  347,  349,  472,  n., 

492,  493,  n.,  1 166 
Narbonaise,  the,  601 
Narbonensis,  Pagus,  567 
Narbonne,  603 
Narragh,  401 
Nas,  370,  n. 
Nasamonians,  709,  n. 
Naschendorf,     Hiinengrab     of, 

458,  502 
Nathi,  798,  1 165,  1 1 70 
Natural  cave,    urns   and  flint 

i>nplei?tents     fonnd     in,     at 

Knockninny,  227 
Nau,  657,  n.,  694 
Nau  des  Tudons,  493.     See  Nao 
N'aufo,  657,  n. 
Naupis,  657 

Xaulobatus,  1071,  1072,  1148 
N'aus,  699 

Navan,  co.  Meath,  443 
Navarre,  prov.  of,  649 
Naveta,  699,  701,  703,  711 
Navita,  657,  694 
Neal,  107 1 

,  the,  808,  8og 

Neanderthal,  1001-IG03 
skull,  the,  924 

— .  937-942,  944.  952, 

1000 
Nechtan,  348 
A'ccroniancy,  709,  n. 
,    among   Finns,    Cruithne 

and  Tuatha  de  Danann,  514 
Nedfri,  710,  n. 
Nedi,  1 145 
Negreira,  653 
Nehalennia,  iioS 
Neid,  1074 

Neiden,  sacred  mountain  of,  515 
Neil,  Daniel  O',  793 
Neil's  Farm,  40 
Neimann,  Prof.,  1048 
Neimhidh,  1084 
Neit,  1074 
Nelis,  565,  n. 
Nemausus,  600 
Nemec,  1077.     ^'tr^  Nimech 
Nemed,  or  Nemid,  349,826,  n., 

1055,    1056,    1063,    n.,    1068, 

1136,  I158,  1167,  1177 

,  the  Saga  of,  1081-1095 

,  sons  of,  814, 

Nemedians,    the,    1072.     1073, 

1076,  1080,  1086,  1 146,  n. 
Nemic,  604,  n. 
Nemitz,  604,  n.,  1078 
Nemitzi,  1073,  1078-1080 
Nennius,  349,  n.,  897,  937,  1055, 

"35.  n- 

,  Irish,  1104,  n. 

A'eolithic  Ai^e  in  West  Prussia, 

516 
Nep,  744 

Nephin  Mountain,  118 
Neptune,  826,  907 
Nera,  347 


Nerac,  Chateau,  590 

Nerigo,  1 106 

Nerike,  493 

Nerthus,  1060,  1 16 1 

Nesbitt,  Mr.,  872,  n. 

Nessus,  107 1 

Nestor,  1056,  1099 

Nestorian  Art,  1066 

Netherby,  870 

Netherlands,  the,  552,  558,  561, 

1014,  1132 
Nether-Urquhart,  945 
Neuhof,  550,  n. 
Neul  0'Baath,or  Neul  Ua  Baath, 

1071,  1072 
Neumark,  531,  533.534,537 
Neunheilingen,  523 
Neva,  the,  931 

Nevil,  Mr.  Francis,  228,  and  n. 
Neville,  Mr.,  410 
Newbliss,   226,   291,   292,    419, 

459,  463.  767,  707,  933.  »• 
Newbridge,  22,  23,  757 
Newcastle,  289,  290,  413 
Newcombe,  Dr.,  297 
New  Grange,  138,  157,221,  344, 

345,  419,  448,  451.  457.  459. 
461,  463,  464,  467,  508,  483, 
496,  525,  568,  578,  613-015, 
622,  624,  076,  691-693,  724, 
728,  754.  n.,  847,  961,  1 167, 
1 168 

,  date  of  tumulus,  356 

,  sculptured  stones  at,  356, 

tt  seqq. 

,    site     and     structure     of 

tumulus,  365,  ct  seqq. 

— —,    various    monuments    of, 

364,  365 

Newgrove,  89,  90,  663,  729 

Newquay,  76 

(Cornwall),  445,  446 

New  Ross,  1049 

Newry,  226,  2S3,  304,  820 

Canal,  299 

,  river,  299 

Newtown,  313,  400 

Stewart,  208 

Newtownards,  273,  274 

Niackkan-Karg,  515 

Nial,  801 

Niall,  347,  348,  1071 

,  King,  1050 

,  son  of  Enna  Aignech,  86S 

Glundubh,  818 

of    the    Nine    Hostages, 

1 149,  1 150,  1 169,  1 171,   1 172 

Niall  s  Grave,  29 
I   Nice,  569 

Nicephorus  Gregora,  1 1 17 
j   Nicolucci,  G.,  997,  n. 

Niebeitingcn     I.ieti,     the,     55°, 
I       779,  I 123 

Niedleben,  443 

Nigrescence,  1028-1032,  1040 

Nikko,  349,  854,906 

Nilsson,  942,  et  seqq.,  937.  949- 
948,  961 

Nimech,  1055,  1077,  1078 

Nineveh,  103 1 

Nismes,  601 

Niul,  1068-107 1 


Index. 


1217 


Njemci,   1078 

Njemzen,  1099,  n. 

Nobbin,  497 

Nofftis,  657 

Nogent  Les  Vierges,  955 

Nogent-sur-Seine,  54S 

Noon's  Cave,  222 

Noordlaren,  560 

Norden,  820 

Nordlaren,  555 

Nore,  the,  935,  941,  942 

,  river,  403 

,  skull  from  the,  921 

Norici,  602 
Noricum,  1082,  nil 
Norman  Conquest,  the,  1178 
Normans,  947 
Norris,  796,  797 
Norsemen,  1060 

,  wars  of  the,  810 

Norse  Sagas,  the,  81 1 

skulls,  Old,  932,  949 

North  Africa,  713-719 

Riding,  453 

Sea,  the,  520,  537 

,  amber  from,  521 

Northumberland,  817,  n. 

,  Duke  of,  173 

Norway,  523,   S13,   824,    1014, 

1084 
,  Three  sons  of  the  King  of, 

1066 
Norwegian  Lapp,  house  of,  487 
Norwegians,  1016 
None,  657,  n. 
Noughaval,  66,  69,  70 
Novie  gentes,  1 109 
Novantse,  1109 
Noya,  656 
Nuada,  King,  S04 

Argatlam,  1136,  1158 

Finnfail,  1 160 

Necht,  7S7,  n. 

Nuadhad  Airgeadlamh,8o7.  See 

Nuada  Argatlam 
Nuadmor,  i  [37 
Numida;,  704,  n. 
Nunningh,  550 
Nun's  Hole,  222 
Nuns'  Town,  48 
Niiraghes,  711 
Nuraght  Imberti,  the,  706 
Nutt,  Mr.  Alfred,  1156,  n. 
Nymphsfield,  803,  808,  857 

Oak,  the  Celts  nwship  the,  89S 

Oban,  844 

Obdora,  870 

Oberlausitz,  1125,  1126 

Obi,  750,  870 

Obotritas,  or  Obotriti,   896,  n., 

1074,  1082 
O'Boughalla's  Bed,  36 

Grave,  36 

O'Boyles,  the,  1036,  n. 
O'Brenan  Dubhluing,  827 
O'Brian,  345 
O'Brien,  790 

,  Michael,   108 

O'Brien's  Bridge,  loi 

Oc,  786 

O'Cahane,  John  Reagh,  887,  n. 


O'Caithniadh,  1 105 
O'Cantys,  the,  890 
Ocariz,  647 
Ochan,  348 

(in  Meath),  1150 

Ochon,  King,  1149,  1151,  1153 
Ochonn,  348 

Midi,  1149,  1 150 

O'Connell,  Count,  1028 
O'Connells,  the,  1028 
O'Connor,  616 

,  C,  525,  n. 

,  King  of  Ireland,  925,  937, 

946,  947 

Sligo,  800 

,   Thomas,   803,   805,   806, 

813,  815,  818,  862,  878,  S79, 

906 
O'Curry,  E.,  58-60,  62,  63,  414, 

777.  803,  875.  883,  887,  1018, 
105 1,  1053.  1054,  1056,  1062 

Odensee,  1162 

Oder,   508,  525,  526,   534,   741, 

811,  1143,  1157,  1159 
Oderberg,  534,  535 
Odin,  472,    n.,    473,    742,    744, 

778,  791,  811,   869,  891-896, 
1074,  1 163,  1 165,  1 166 

and  P'inn  compared,  896, 

n.,897 
Odinic  mythology,  871 
Odoacer     (or      Odovakar,     or 

Otachar),    1026,   1080,    1169, 

1174,  1175 
called    a    Goth,    Rugian, 

Scyrian,   King  of  the  Eruli, 

King  of  the  Turcilingi,  1174, 

n. 

,  description  of,  11 74,  n. 

O'Doghertys,  the,  1036,  n. 
O'Donnell,  the,  908,  1103 

,  Manus,  909,  1120 

O'Donnells,  the,  1028,  1036 
O'Donoghue's  horse,  1092 
O'Donovan,  J.,  756-916,  1029, 

1044,  n.,  1046,    1048,    1054, 

1056,  1 103,  mo,  1 120,  1 121, 

1 154  et  passim 
Odoorn,  560 
O'Dowd,  the,  906 
O'Dowda,  the  family  of,  1048 
O'Driscoll,  the,  1048 
Odry,  Royal  Forest  of,   circles 

in,  506-508,  516 
Oe,  son  ol  Ollamh,  347,  348 
Oednian,  n6i 
Oen,  or  Oenn,  349 
oenach,  579,  845 
Oenach  Ailbe,  347 

Colmain,  347 

Cruachan,  347 

Culi,  347 

Macha,  907 

Oenachs,   541 

Oengus,    784,    n.,     1169.     See 

Aengus,  Oingus 

,  Mac  ind  Oc,  371,  n.,  867 

,  son  of  the  Dagda,  348 

Oesel,  1052,  n.,  1130 
CEstergoethland,  925 
Offa,  55 
Offaly,  10S3 


Offering-bo'ivls,  498 
O'Flaherty,  761,  799,  862,  1036, 

1038,  1058,  1063,  1078,  1 109, 

mo,  1141,  1167 
O'Flanagan,  Theophilus,  79 
Ogam,  supposed,  297,  29S,  401 
Ogants,  patte7-7is  reseiiibliiig,  in 

German  tomb,  444 
Ogma,  347,  348,  810 
O'Grady,  Mrs.,  44 

,  Standish  H.,  346 

O'Growney,  Rev.  Mr.,  839 

O'Hara,  Mr.,  755 

O'Hartagan,  Cinaeth,  350 

O'Hartigan,  365,  n. 

Ohio,  278 

Oidhbghin,  1 1 20 

Oileach,  818 

Oilioll,   801,    1 137.       See  Ailill 

and  OlioU 
— —    and    Meave    (Ailill    and 

Medb),  786 

Olum,  King,  836 

Oingus,   784,   n.,    832,   836,   n. 

See  Aengus,  Oengus 
Oise,  569,  626,  628,  955 

Department  of,  578 

Oisin,  879,  896,  897,  1 166 
O'Kane,  826 

,  Eveny,  908 

O'Keefe,  805,  810,  818,  821 

O'Kiary,  815 

Olafskialla,  1161 

Oland,  493,  725,  856,  945,  948, 

1 132 
,  bronze  plaque  found  in, 

871,  872 
Olan's  Stone,  719 

Well,  35 

Olaus  Magnus,  778,  11 60 
O'Laverty,  Mr.,  346 
Olcan,  Bishop,  798 
Old-Barr,  222 
Oldbury  Hill,  677,  680 
Oldcastle,  314,  836 

,  rock  near,  344,  n. 

Old   Connaught  (Co.    Dublin), 

1022 
Olden,  Mr.,  11,  12 
Oldenstadt,  538,  540,  543-545» 

549 
Oholl,    802.       See    AiiiU    and 

Oilioll 

Earann,  1083 

■  Olum,  1075 

Oliver,  Captain,  623 
011am,  347,  348 

Fodhla,  811,  892 

,    supposed    tomb   of, 

315.  335 
Ollphiast,  an,  1030 
Olmo,  928,  664,  n. 
O'Looney,  Professor,  349 
Oloron,  583 
Olot,  642 
Oltore,  767 
Om,  489 
Omagh  East,  209 

,  West,  208 

O'Mahonies  of  Carbery,  23 
O'Mahony,  775,  n.,  793 
Omer,  833 


I2l8 


Index. 


Omey,  104 

O'Mullane,  Miss  Catherine, 
1028 

Onegesh,  784 

Onegesius,  784,  n.,  1169 

O'Neill,  S25,  864,  865 

,  Henry,  719 

, John,  1048 

,  Owen  Roe,  1 044,  1045 

,  Roger,  810 

Onulphus,  1 1 75 

Oosterholie,  547 

Oosterwoede,  562 

Opferstein,  504 

Oppenheim,  524 

Opus  Danoritin,  865 

Oran,  province  of,  718 

Oranmore,  841,  861 

Orbsen,  795,  796 

Orcades,  the,  or  Orcadian  Is- 
lands, looi,  1063 

Orcynia,  1087 

Orders  of  Irish  Saints,  "jgi 

Ord  of  Caithness,  the,  844 

O'Reilly,  T.,  quoted,  194 

Orellius,  936,  n.,  1121 

Orembourg,  930 

Orghilla,  11 14,  n. 

Oriel,  350,  864 

Orifice,  or  /ora/noi,  the  feature 
of  a,  708,  723,  734,  75 1 

Orincles,  587 

Orior  Upper,  299 

Orkney,  459,  464,  466,  568,  950 

,  fictiha  froni,  164,  n. 

Ormond  Lower,  55 

Upper,  52 

Ormuzd,  740 

Oriiaineiitat  dctai  's  in  chambered 
cairns,  419 

Oroe  Grydehoi,  999 

Orontes,  729 

Orosius,  574,  n.,  745,  n.,  776, 
n.,  1038,  1 134,  n. 

Oroust,  Island  of,  480 

Orrery  and  Kilmore,  1 1 

Ortelius,  11 29,  n. 

Orvin,  the,  628,  630 

Oscar's  Grave,  194,  785 

Oschen,  518 

Oseila,  750 

Osenbruck,  894 

Osii,  603,  n. 

<  )sili,  603 

Osismii,  603,  n.,  1162 

Osnabruck,  894,  1157,  115S,  n. 

Osnaburgh,  550 

Os  rupis,  "iZ^i 

Ossian's  Grave,  262,  263,  785 

Ossory,  880 

Ossun,  673 

Ostherrn,  536 

Osthoff,  Dr.,  549 

Ostmans  or  Ostmen,  the,  351, 
I015 

Ostrogoths,  784 

Othar,  1 145 

Othere    149,  n.,  574,  776,  948 

Othm,  897,  1 166 

Ottagardeii,  487,  661 

Ottenburg,  547 

Otway,  C,  110,  113,  114,  122 


Oued  ]]erda,  713 
Oued-Bou-Merzong,  716,  n. 
Oughaval,  123 
Oughterlin,  232 
Oughtmania,  65,  66 
Ouhi  Grania,  97 
Ovals f  stone,  533 
Overt,  833 

Owenagurteen  river,  7 
Oweneybeg,  46 
Owenkille  river,  211 
Owennafeana,  2 
Owenykeevan  river,  176 
Owey  Island,  843  '' 
Owles,  867 
Owney  and  Arra,  52 
Owning,  407,  408 
Ox  Mountains,  179 

Faalstabs,    523,    673-676,    680, 

686 
Pachymeres,  604,  n.,  1079 
Pa9o  de  Vinha,  Antas  of,  449, 

660 
Paddock,  310,  344,  n. 
Padorno,  Area  de,  636 
Padron,  652 
Paganus   cursits,    the,    594)    n., 

739,  n. 
Pages,  M.,  588,  n. 
Pagus  Agathensis,  599 

Lutevensis,  599 

Magalonensis,  599 

Narbonensis,  599 

Paicto,  1 06 1,  1107 

Paiktona,  1107 

Palacetown,  39 

PaLadru,  503 

PaiuWi^raphy,  ornamental,  1065 

Palestine,    490,    615,    628,    n., 

730 
Palet  de  Notre  Dame,  597 

de  Roland,  597,  59S 

du  Diable,  597 

Palgrave,  726,  n. 

Pallas,  748,  749 

Palmella,    466,     569,    671-673, 

685,  698 
Palmer,  Mr.,  114 
Palmerstown  river,  113,  118 
Palo,  776,  n.,  1 160 
Paltar,  1164 
Palus    McEotis,    725,    476,    740, 

744,   778,   781,    784   n.,    910, 

1056,  1067,  1071,  1117,  1118, 

1 120,  1 122,  1 123,  1 134,  1 143, 

1 144,  1 152 
Pancirolus,  1 139  n. 
Pannonia,    781,   783,    1060,   n., 

iiio,  n  ,  1173 

,  Lower,  1 1 74 

Pannonians,  7S0 

Pannoyas,   653,  663,  667,  71S, 

728 
Papa  Westra,  the  Ibjhn  of,  371, 

465,  467 
Paps  of  Kerry,  a  well  near,  472, 

n. 
Mountain,    the,    5,    898, 

1 165 
Para-Buidhc-Mor-Mac-Scoidin, 

761,  815 


Paradise,  742 

napatrraSes,  432,  493,  530,  639 

Paredes,  Anta  de,  43,  68,  246, 
482,  660 

Paris,  567 

ParkaguUane,  809 

Park-a-liagawn,  8,  768 

Parkel,  898,  n. 

Parkmore,  413 

Parknabinnia,  77,  92 

Parknagullane,  6,  7,  905 

Parknasillage,  412 

Parmenius,  1 1 72 

Parsley  Hay  ]>arrow,  1008 

Parsonless  Church,  the,  562 

Partalan,  1063 

Parthai,  1063,  n. 

Partholan,  349,  770,  892,  1054, 
1055,  1095,  1105,  1 167,  1 177 

,  Saga  of,  1 05  7- 1 07  7 

Partholoun,  1057 

PartholomKus,  1057 

Partholomus,   1057,  1067 

Partolant,  1057 

Partraighe,  1063 

Partrigia,  1063 

Partry  mountains,  the,  1 063 

Passage-dolmens ,  690 

of  Denmark,  4S6 

Passage  tombs,  493 

Patrick,  St.,  472,  473,  579,  584, 
594,  652,  653,  n.,  654,  772, 
7^4,  797,  79^,  813,  846,  848, 
873,  880,  881,  901,  902,  907, 
1019,  IC39,  1044,  1058,  IC64, 
1113,  1114,  1121,  1138,   1160 

,  Life  of,  quoted,  95 

spoke  bad  Irish,  HI4 

Patrick's  altar,  766,  858 

(Saint)  bed,  198,  372,  373 

chair,  287,  766 

purgatory,  347 

smiths,  1055,  n. 

stone,  103 

Patrickstown,  313,  340,  341,  838 

,  moat  of,  342 

Pattern,  a,  849 

day,  591 

Patterson,  Mr.,  280 

Patzig  Wood,  the,  498 

Pau,  581 

Paula  e  Oliveira,  Sr.  F.  de,  963 

Pauli-Latino,  706-708 

Pauli-Zegota,  Mr.,  509 

Paulus,  son  of  Warnefrid,  777, 
1055,  1057,  1059,  1060,  1069, 
1076,  1096,  1123,  1 139,  1 172 

Pausanias,  472,  n.,  640,  716 

Pa  via,  671 

Pawton,  449,  643 

Peakeen  Cnoc  Dromin,  43,  787 

Pecht,  1055,  n. 

Pedra  Area,  643 

Balonyante  de  Boariza,  652 

Pedro  a  Moya,  642 

Peene  River,  the,  895,  S96, 
loSi,  1086,  1096,  n.,  1155- 
II 77.     See  Pene  and  Peni 

Peenemiinde,  1 1 56 

Pehada,  Valley  of,  723 

Peine,  the,  895.     See  Pene 

Peipus,  Lake  of,  512 


Index. 


1219 


Peipus,  the,  817 
Peist,  472,  n. 
Pelagius,  475,  1046 
Pelasgi,  470,471,  474 
Pembrokestown,  59 
Pena  Avaladoira,  653 

da  Croa,  653,  655 

Cabalada,  656 

Caballeirada,  656,  n. 

Pena-larga,  La,  649 

Penal  Code,  the,  764,  85  7 

Penas  de  los  Castillejos,  690 

Pene,  the,  781,  895,  1156 

Penella,  679 

Peni,  776 

Penikka,  776 

Peni  River,  the,  loSi,  1086 

Penitendal  beds  of  Seven  Saints, 

the,  772 

stations,  198,  765 

Pennant,  Thomas,  870,  915 

Penni,  776 

Peiiona  de  Izara,  649 

/'ent-i-oof,  the  feature  of  the,  721 

Penvores,  673,  674 

Peolita,  1 148,  n. 

Peohtas,  1055,  n. 

Peohtes,  1079 

Peranut,  1095 

Perda-Fitta,  710 

Perda  Lunga,  710 

Pereira  de  Costa,  Sr.,  632,  n., 

633,  642,  n.,  662,  664,  666, 

722,  658,  92S,  n. 
Periera,  Sr.  G. ,  632,  n.,  666 
Perigord,  698,  n.,  956 
Peristyle,  69,  132,  214,  531,  538 
,  the  feature  of  a,  131,  427- 

429,  431,  438,  440,  441 
Perkuhn's  Steine,  511 
Perkunos,  904,  n.,  1062 
Permin,  St.,  11 72 
Perminsberg,  St.,  1 172 
Perran  Round  (Cornwall),  27S 
Persia,  739,  930 
Perthi-Chwarcn,  959,  966,  968, 

969,  971,  1027 
Perun,  1089,  1095 
Peter,  St.,  922 
Petersberg,  the,  536 
Petia,  1 107 
Petit  Morin,  571 
Petra  Coithrigi,  372 
Petrcc  NofcB,  657 
Petrie,    G.,    quoted,    105,    142 

174,  186,  187,  354,  419,  703, 

709,  738,  739,  803,915,1017, 

1094 
Petrus  de  Duisburg,  1062,  )i. 
Petta,  1 148,  n. 
Pettaland's  Fiorth,  iioS 
Petty,  Sir  W.,  836 
Peuci,  1072 

Peutinger,  table  of,  nil 
Peyro  Trancado,  527 

de  Miech  Aran,  5S4 

Peyroles,  597 
Peyros  d'Antix,  597 
Pfalsau,   1 161 
Pfeffers,  590,  n.,  11 72 
Pfennin^^skasten,      ilolmen       so 

called,  498 


Pfolczborn,  1 160 

Pfultag,  1 164 

Phalhecke,  11 60 

Phallic  eniblcins,  710 

Phannona;,  776,  n. 

Pharadeini,  1 143 

Pharaoh,  1069,  1070 

Ph  Haste  ric  femur,  134 

Philimuth,  348,  1154 

Phillimore,  Mr.,  871 

Phillips,  Prof.,  1023 

Phinni,  774,  895 

Phocffians,  60? 

Phcebus,  470' 

Phoenician  characters,  344,  n. 

mythology,  710,  n. 

Phoenicians,  521,  523,  600,  603, 

739 

Phoenix  Park,  379,381,  446,  974, 
975,  1007,  1008,  loil,  1019 

Phol,  776.  n,  1160,  I161,  I163 

Pholc,  1 1 60 

Pholesauwa,  1161,  11 62 

Pholespiunt,   1161 

Pholgraben,  1160 

Phooca,  the,  592,  910-912.  See 
Phooka,  Pniica,  Poiike 

Phooka,  the,  911,  912 

Phrygians,  779 

Phuca,  592 

Phulsborn,  1 160 

Piast,  a,  592-595,  899,  909 

Picardt,  J.,  424,  552,  553,  791, 
894,  1 163 

Pict,  811,  114S,  n. 

Carenna,  a,  802 

Pictce,  811,  iioS 

Pictanei,  812,  n.,  1107 

Picti,  1 138 

Pictish  genealogies,  IIOI 

Pictland,  1107 

Pictones,  603,  n. 

Plot's  house,  371,  467 

Picts,  the  general  term,  1 167 

,  349.  356,  780,  n.,  812, 

936,  1044,  1055,  n.,  ic6i, 
1063,  1064,  1067, 1070,  IIOI, 
1 102,  1 104,  1 1 12,  1 120,  1 1 39, 
n.,  1157-1159,  1167,  1 168, 
1178 

,  the  forerunners  of  the,  363 

,  language  spoken  by  the, 

1135 

,  the  province  of  the,  350 

from  Scythia,  894,  and  n, 

Picts-Wark,  the,  865,  873,  1 160 
Fiedra  de  Aviso,  655 

de  Concha,  652 

de  los  Enamorados,  689 

Fita,  654 

Formosa,  708 

Hita,  5S4,  649 

Iloradada,  La,  649 

Nofta,  657 

del  Paraguas,  655 

con  Pila,  652 

Piedras  Mormas,  Las,  649 
Pierre  Blanche,  587,  S62 

de  Crechet>,  584 

Fita,  584 

Levee,  580,  763,  835 

de  Lios,  588 


Pierre  Martine,  599 

de  Minuit,  5S4 

qui  tourne,  585,  99S 

de  Ton,  588 

Tronee  de  Moelan,  597 

Turquaise,    La,  627,   631, 

'639 

Pierres  fiches,  les,  585,  586 
Pietra,  710 
Pig,  bones  of,  146 

,  figures  of,  on  helmets,  871 

,  jaw  of,  993 

,  legends  of  the,   855-872, 

904 

,  teeth  of  the,  S72 

,  tooth  of,  148 

Pigs,  bones  of,  567,  n. 

,  remains  of,  516,  520 

,  skulls  of,  145 

Pigs''  heads,  bronze,  S70 

teeth    (perloiated),   snout, 

445.  n- 
Pikollus,   1062,  T095 
Pilgrimages,  588 
Pilgrims,  Scotic,  739.  ri- 
— — ,   Christian,  perpetuate  the 

pagan  cultus,  138 

,  Moslem,  729 

Pm,  776 

Pin,  bronze,  333 

Pineda,  Sr.,  635 

Ping,  776 

Pinhao,  664 

Pinheiro,  634 

Pinnas,  776 

Pinneberg,  896,  1156,  1159 

Pinnis,  776 

Pinnou  river,  the,  896,  1 1 56 

Pinnow,  533,  535 

Pionis,  640 

Piper's  Hill,  1 17 

Pipinsberg,  the.  547,  1 132 

Pirala,  Sr.  A.,  647,  n.,  695 

Piran,  Saint,  654 

Pisgy-poiu,  912 

Piska-pichka,  912 

Pisky,  a,  912 

Pitha  Elf,  1061,  1107 

Pithea,  1061,  1 107 

Pithen,  I105 

Pitholm.  1107 

Piihou,  F.,  657,  n. 

Piti,  II48 

Piiint,  II 62 

Pla  da  Gibrella,  642 

Pla  Marsell,  643 

Plaine  des  Jambes,  566 

Plaque,  bronze,  678 

,  from  Oland,  725 

,  ornamented,  677 

Plaques,  680 

,  l^ronze,  856 

Plas  Newydd,  11,  452,  457,  753 
Platjorm,  feature  of  a,  442 
Platycneviic  tdiiu,  129,  134,  155, 

517 
Plan,  1002,  1003 
Pliny,   473-476,    555.    608,    n., 

697,  740,  n.,  817,  n.,  1082, 

1106,  1121 
Plock,  508 
Plouaret,  631 


I220 


Index. 


Plouliarnel,  622 

Plouneour  Tiez,  623 

Pluckanes,  35 

riunkett,  Mr.  T.,  227,  452 

Plutarch,  602,  608,  n.,  725,  779, 
1 123,  n.,  1 134 

Plymouth,  104S 

Po,  the  river,  521,  523 

Pococke,  546 

Poitiers,  525,  616,  619 

Poitou,  581 

Polabe,  1062,  1074 

Poles,  the,  1097,  116S 

Polish  names,  1 134 

Poll  a  Vandera,  879 

PoUgeir,  S62 

Polier-Brunn,  1163 

Polvoreira,  668 

Polybius,  601 

Pomerania,  505,508,515,1-/ 5^(/^., 
518,  519,  523,  526,  527,  535, 
536,  578,  n.,  741,  783,  784, 
1050,  n.,  1078,  ic8i,  1086, 
1096,  n.,  1108,  1131,  1172,  n. 

Pomeranian  Sclaves,  1177 

skull.  Old,  930,  931 

Pomeranians,  the,  1097,  1 102 

Ponioriani  or  Pomorjani,  1056, 
1061,  1062,  1074,  1084,  1096, 
1131 

Pomponius  Lretus,  1157,  n. 

Pont  Leroy,  584 

Pontus,  the,  362,  602,  784, 
1069,  1071,  1072 

Pontyferre,  586 

Pooka's  grave,  the,  405,  910 

footprint,  405 

Porch,     See  Portico 

,  feature  of,  573 

Porch-hke  entraiict:  to  dohiwii- 
cairns,  i^j 

Porewit,  1095 

Portacloy,  1020 

Fortella  Rosario,  La,  692 

Porter,  Mr.  J.  G.  V.,  224 

Portico  or  antecliaviber,  leature 

'^f.  431,  432,  440,  443.  445. 

566-567,  570,  627,  631,  666, 

672,  789 
Portimao,  666,  n.,  670 
Portlough,  235 
Port-na-Glaise,  889 
Portnascully,  409 
Port  Noo,  719 
Portugal,  43,  68,   80,  90,  246, 

466,  369,  657,  etseqq. ,']22,  728 

,  tictilia  Irom,  164,  n. 

passage-dolmens  of,  451 

,  Southern,  600 

Portuguese  dolmens,  428,  492, 

496 
Portumna,  859 

Posen,  508,  519,  521,  522,  741 
Posidonius,  725 
Potrimpus,  1062 
Pott,  1099 

Poujoo  Houradaat,  587 
Pouke,  the,  911,  912 
Poulaphuca,  66 
Poulnabrone,  72 
Poulnamucka,  97 
Poulnapeasta,  102 


Powerscourt,  412 

Pownall,  Thomas,  353,  354 

Prague,  1048 

Pregel,  the,  1097 

Prem,  472,  n. 

Prenzlow,  532 

Presles,  626 

TipiTTaviKQLi  vy\(Toi.,  1 100 

Pribislas,  535 

Pribslaf,  534 

Priene,  638 

Priesfs  chair,  the,  25 1 

grave,  the,  793,  875 

leap,  the,  902 

Prignitz,    528,    531,     533.    537, 

1058 
Primarsch,  531 
Primrose  Grange,  140 
Priorstate,  309 
Pripet,  the,  929,  lioi 
Priscus,  779 

Pritchard,   896,    n.,    977,    978, 
1026,  IIOI,  n.,  I131,  I133 

,  on  the  elements  composing 

the  i^opulation  of  North  Brit- 
ain and  Ireland,  1 102,  n. 
Probus,  1072 

Procopius,  604,  n.,  745,  778, 
1073,  1080,  1082,1085,  1 100, 
II17,  II18,  I123,  II37,  II38, 
1 142,  1 143,  1 145,  1 146,  1 148, 
I150,  I151,  1153-1155.  "76 
Proleek,  305-308,  429,  433,  761 

River,  305 

ProJiaos,  639,  640 
Prone,  1095 
Pronut,  1095 
Prophetic  7i'oma)i,  553 
Prosper  of  Aquitaine,  1059 
Protection  0/  ancient  vionuiiients. 

Act  for  the,  359 
Proz'iiicials,  the,  1 1 36 
Prun,  1095 

Pruner  Bey,  937,  938,  942,  99S 
Prunieres,  M.,  957 
Prussi,  745 
Prussia,  1131 

,   East,   508,  515,  et  seqq., 

824,  1 1 78 

,  Old,  1061,  1078 

»   West,  508,    515,   et  seqq., 

741,  742 

,    ,  lake-dwellings    in, 

1131 
Prussians,  745,  1102 
Pruten,  iioo 
Prutheni,  IIOI,  I178 
Pruthenians,  1102 
Pruthenici  tractus,  I  loi 
Pruthneach,  1 102 
Pruzzi,  1096.  n.,  Iioi,  n. 
Ptolemy,  748,  n.,  774,  784,936, 
1014,  1059, 1083, 1096,  1098, 
1 102,    1 108,   mo,   n.,    nil, 
1119,  L121,  1143,  1157 
Puchka-bat,  912 
iiick,  912 
Pugh,  824 

Puig  de  la  devesa  de  Torrent ,  64  5 
Puig  sas  Llosas,  642 
Pvjolcts,  586 
Pujoo-Lardou,  587 


Pujoo-de-Lestaque,  5S7 

Pujoos,  586 

Pill le  tag,  1164 

Piilpit-stone  in  circles,  504 

Pulsberg,  the,  1 160 

Punic  'war.  Second,  60 1 

Pun  Jumalan,  898 

Puppis,  700 

Purgatory,  Patrick'' s,  "J"]! 

Pursuitaf  Diarniadand  Grainne, 

347 
Puska,  912 
Puy  Espy,  585 
Puyo-Mayou,  585,  586 
Pyramide  de  Barros,  662 
Pyrenees,  567,  580,  581,  584,  588, 

591,  606,  607,  626,  632,  644, 

645,   676,  716,  846,  852,  911, 

998 
Pyrenees   Orientales,    Dep.   of, 

568,  596,  597,  667 

Quaker's  Hut,  the,  416 
Quartertary  epoch,  569 
Quartz,  hydrated  or  opal,   ring 

cut  out  of,  159 

pebbles,  849,  n. 

,  pendant  of,  144 

Quatrefages,   M.   de,    577,  632, 

925,  n.,  et  passim,  998 
Quebe  de  Barelhole,  583 
Queenland,  1061 
Queen's  County,  the,  439,  447 

,  county  of,  374-375 

Queensland,  980 

Queni,  776,  n. 

(^uenlancl,  1105 

Quetif,  -M.,  S83,  n. 

Quilca,  838 

Quin,  84 

Quinnaland,  777,  77S 

Quintillian,  noo 

Quoit,  Sir  John  de  Hauteville's, 

794 
Quoits  (Pyrenean),  597 
Quoltitz,  498 

Rabbath  Amnion,  727 
Rabenstein,  96S 
Radegonde,  St.,  590 
Radelstein,  the,  1125,  1126 
Radimsky,  510,  511,524,  525,  n., 

1127,  1128 
Radnor,  1023 
Rafran  or  Rathfran,  115 
Pags,  offerings  oj,  591,  729,  748, 

765,  II15 

on  thorns,  477 

or  shreds,  883 

Rah,  56 

Raheen,  a,  149,  409,  863 

Raheendhu,  382 

Raiglie,  meaning  of,  1 121,  and  n. 

Raith  Airt,  866 

Rajunkoloor,  752 

Raloo,  268 

Kamis  y  Ramis,  Dr.  Juan,  701  n. 

Kamoan,  260 

Ramondens,  chateau  de,  589 

Raneany  Barr,  236 

Rannagh, 66 

Rannal,  Mac,  796 


Index. 


I22I 


Raphoe,  North,  234 

,  South,  236 

Rashenny,  229 
Rath,  56 

,  Hill  of,  517 

Rath,  1 128,  n.,  1131 
Rathbarran,  145,  853 
Rathbay,  827 
Rath  Bhrannuib,  1 1 5 
Rathborney,  65 
Rathbran,  878 
Rathcarrick,  143,  171 
Rath  Cealtchair,  1137 

Cimbaoith,  1086 

Comair,  1137 

Rathconrath,  372 
Rathcormack,  12,  13 
Rath-Ciogan,  or    Rathcroghan, 

347,  834 
Rathdown,  385,  412 
Rathfarnham,  394 
Rathfran,  113,  114 

Bay,  113 

group,  1 14.     See  Rafran 

Rathfrannaigh,  115 
Rathfranpark,  114,  118 
Rathfryland,  283,  284 
Rathin-an-aodhaire,  866 
Rathkenny,  343,  655,  785 

,  scorings  on  dolmen  at,  20 

Rath-Lugaidh,  813 
Rathmichael,  392 
RathmuUan,  233 
Rath  Murbuilg,  11 14 
Rath-na  -  Righ,    or    Rath  -  na  - 

Riogh,  278,  1093,  1094 
Rathnew,  372 
Rathpatrick,  905 
Rathreagh,  116 
Rath  Riogh,  220 
RatJis,  1096,  n. 
Rathscanlan,  181 
Rathvilly,  396 
Rats,  legends  of,  1039 
Ravenna,  Geographer  of,  1079 
Ravius,  the,  11 10 
Rawlinson,  H.,  754,  n.,  929,  n. 
Ravvson,  T.,  423 
Raygrod,  930,  n. 
Raymoghy,  235 
Raymonamoney's    Grave,    230, 

231,  794 
Raymond,  M.  Paul,  582 
Raymunterdoney,  230,  231 
Razet,  571 
Reabhacan,  or  Reabhachan,  75, 

76 
Reade,  Rev.  G.,  63,  64 
Reban  East,  401 
Recadieira,  653,  655 
Redbay,  983 
Redg,  1 136,  n. 
Red  Hill,  179 

. Fort,  179 

Redhills,  228 
Redkine-Lages,  966 
Red  Sea,  the,  522,  726,  n.,  741 
Reenagoppul,  7,  656,  905 
Reeves,  Bishop,  269,  298,  356, 

787,  847,  1075,  1 1 14,  1 1 19 
Reez,  536 
Reffleoir,  1070.     See  Riffleoir 


Rega,  the,  741 

ReggiOj  prov.  of,  469 

Regnoli,  M.,  470 

Regnoul,  548 

Regit li,  1 138 

Regulini  Galeassi,  721 

Reidenitz,  536 

Reindeer  Period,  the,  612 

Reinosa,  649 

Reise,  476 

Reisk,  60 

Reksheim,  549 

Releg  =  reWcinix,  149 

Renfrew,  11 09 

Renny,  13 

Renougat,  614,  615,  69S 

Reochaid,  105 1 

Restitutus,  1058 

Retzius,  A.,  921,  923,  945-948, 
961,996,  998,  1004,  n.,  1009 

,  G.,  491,  1034,  1035 

Retzlingen,  541 

Reuvens,  552,  n.,  563,  n.,  566,  n. 

Revallagh,  271 

Rex  Aquantin,  707 

Reynolds,  796 

Rhretia,  604,  n.,  817,  n.,  949 

Rhoetians,  998 

RliCEtiau  skulls,  995,  996,  1007 

type,  1012 

Rheinbayern,  524 

Rhine,  the,  525,  526,  564,  601, 
604,  n.,  929,  936,  949,  1015, 
1043,  1060,  n.,  1 122,  1 150, 
1 163 

Rhode,  C.  D.,  494,  496 

Rhodians,  603 

Rhone,  the,  521,  523,  566,  567, 
578,  599>  601,  603,  804 

Rhynavie,  138 

Rhys,  Prof.,  3,  4,  135,  794,  n., 
801,  n.,  811,  824,  n.,  894, 
895,  n.,  898,  n.,  1028,  1055, 
n.,  1057,  1062,  1067,  1074, 
n.,  1099,  1 100,  1 109,  I II I, 
1165,  1 167 

Rian  -  bo-Padruic,  90 1 

Ribeiro,  Sr.,  671 

Richard  H.,  1047 

Richtenberg,  527 

Riefield,  14 

Riesenland,  777,  7S3 

Riestadt,  or  Reistedt,  541,  544, 

545 
Rietzig,  536 
Riffleoir,  1069 
Rig  in  Domoin,  1 149,  n. 
Riga,  Gulf  of,  771,   1037,  1052, 

n.,  1178 
Rigaltius,  635,  n. 
Riggs,  Dr.  Leslie,  298,  793 
Righ  an  Damain,  1107,  11 13 

Domhain  Mor,  787,  n. 

— Domnaigh,  1 107,  1 1 13 

Righfeart,  the,  11 16 

Righ  Mhada  Conchin,  808 

Ring,  gold,  679 

Ringinurs,  1132,  1133 

AVw^j' of  hydrated  quartz,  lignite, 

and  glass,  159 
Rinn  Beara,  799 
Rinn  Seimhne,  1086 


Riondal,  1136 

Riphaan  Mountains,  the,  1068 

Risaland,  476,  1 105 

Risco,  695,  n. 

Risnaeset,  1105 

River-bed  skull,  967 

skulls,  944,  994 

River  of  Rushes,  the,  267 

Riviere,  M.  E.,  569 

Rix,  meanmg  of,  1121,  and  n. 

Robe,  the,  mo 

Rob  Roy,  794 

Roca  del  Enjambre,  688 

Encantada,  642 

Rocking  stone,  a,  191,  641;,  667, 

668,847 

(Galizia),  509 

stones,  599,  651 

Rocks,   heroes   and   saints  born 

on,  898,  n. 
Rod,  491 

Rock-scorings  on  dolmen,  20 
Rodmarton,  613,  626,  627,  6S7, 

973 
Rodolf,  1 145,  1 146 
Rodondo,  665 
Rodrich,  1079 
Roelden,  555,  n. 
Rosti,  602 
Roinn-na-bpoll,  198 
Roknia,  713,  714 
Rolleston,  Prof.,  452,  453,  932, 

952,  953.  962,  971,  993,  998, 

n.,  1023 
Rom,  1 154 
Roman  Empire,  363 

graves,  500 

uncial  letters,  io66 

Wall,  the,  865 

Romans,  the,  1064,  1093,  1150 

in  Britain,  1014,  102  j 

Rome,  474,  475,  1 154 

Romene,  1062 

Romovv,  904,  n.,   1062 

Romsee,  566 

Roosky,  235 

Rory's  Carn,  251 

Rosbeg,  119 

Rosbercon,  409 

Ros  Gait,  872 

Roschach,  609,  n. 

Roscommon,  19S,  501,  598,  643, 

1029 

,  County  of,  196-200 

Roscrea,  991 
Rosemoddress,  148,  S09 
Roshin,  249 
Rosnaree,  348 

House,  346,  n. 

Ros-na-Righ,   or  Ros-na-rioch, 

348  ^ 

Rosnascalp,  35 
Ross  (Cork  CO.),  36,  y],  592 
Ross,  II 37 
Rosses,  the,  888 

Bay,  252 

Ross  Guili,  831 

Rossi,  De,  789-790 

Rosslara,  93,  94 

Rossmore,  218 

Ross-shire,  468,  662,  671,  712 

Rosstrevor,  289 


1222 


Index. 


Rosstrevor,  Upper,  285 
Rostellan,  16 
Rostock,  10S2 
Roth  Fal,  1 160 

Ramach,  1 1 60 

Roiigias,  1 1 77 

Roulin,  M.,  637,  638 

Round  Barrows,  953,  954,  975, 

978,  994.  996,  997.  999.  1004. 

1012,  1014 

skulls  from,  932 

Roun(U,  591,  594 

Round  Tower,  554,  n.,  738,  991 

Rousset,  577 

Jiout  sii/a  Midir,  349 

Rowan,  Archdeacon,  4 

Row-Grave,      or      Grave-Row, 

skulls,  931,  946-94S 

Graves,  1015 

Rowlands,  Henry,  351 

Roxboroughshire,  873,  1 129 

Royon,  J.,  271 

Ruadh,  893,  n. 

Ruadri,  370,  n. 

Ruan,  78 

Rud,  137 

Rudbeck,  478,  479,  534,   535. 

778,  782,  1 106,  1 107,  n. 
Rudbert,  St.,  739,  n. 
Rudenbeck,  499 
Rudhraighe,      Rughraidhe,     or 

Rudraighe,  892,    1074,    1075, 

1076,  1079,  1085,  1086,  1095, 

1 169 
Rudrician  Kings,  1085 
race,     1140.       See   Rudh- 

raighe 
Rudstone,  453,  970,  971 
Ruehs,  477,  478,  n. 
Riigen,  277,  349,  n.,  497,  498, 

500,   527,   loSi,    1087,   1095, 

1113,  1153,  1156 
Rugewalde,  107S,  1172,  n. 
Rughraidhe.     See  Rudhraighe 
Rugia,  1060,  106 1 
Rugian,  a,  1050 
Rugians,  780,  1169,  1174 
Rugii,    785,    1056,    1076,   1080, 

n.,    1086,    1089,    1098,    1123, 

1 147-1148,  1172,  n.,  1175 
Ruguland,  1076 
Rugyard,  11 13 
Rujewit,  1095 
Rumen,  560 
Rump,  550 
Runddysse,  489 
Runnaboll,  198 
Ruppin,  1058 
Rus,  137 

Mac  Fiachach,  800,  n. 

Russia,  512 

Ruth,  137 

Rutheni,  598 

Rlitimeyer,  953,  995,  n. 

Ryder,  Rev.  J.  B.,  13 

Ryefield,  14,  314 

Rye  Fort,  the,  167 

Ryland,  J.  (Wat.),  quoted,  61- 

63 
Rylanc,  34,  82-84 
Rynvyle,  103 


Saarbold's  huis,  550.  See  Sor- 
vvold  and  Sorbold 

SalDbatic  River,  the,  730 

Saeeilum,  474 

Sacer,  Mons,  653,  n. 

Sacken,  Baron  E.  F.  von,  509, 
741,  n. 

Sacnfice,  869 

,  human,  743 

of  a  black  cat,  767 

Sacrifices  at  tombs,  651 

before  ploughing  and  mar- 
riage, at  dolmen,  496 

,  human,  554.  767 

Sacrificial  cave  (Italy),  470 

circle,  505 

cups,  498 

rock,  663 

Sacrificia  iiiortuoriiin,  641 

Sadejerw  Lake,  513 

Sadler,  Mr.  A.,  556,  558,  561, 
562 

Saggart,  382 

Saint  Andeol,  593 

Saint  Asaph,  943,  n.,  968 

Bertrand   de  Comminges, 

Circ,  5S4 

Columbkille,    Island    of, 

866 

Denis,  623,  n. 

Dermot's  Well,  863 

Eidin's  Grave,  197 

Everan's  Well,  194 

Gall's  Codex,  1055 

George's  Channel,  449 

Germain  des  Fres,  989 

John,  Church  of,  589 

-John's,  139,  142 

John's  Eve,  694,  710 

John's    Eve,    fire   lighted 

on  dolmen,  74 

John's  night,  586 

John's  Well,  65 

Just-in-Penvvith,  441,  447 

Leonards,  1 130 

Levan,  789,  n. 

Marcel,  989 

Michael's  Mount,  475 

Miguel    de   Arrechiuaga, 

648 

Patrick's  Bed,  198 

Pau,  584 

Pierre  des  Triples,  957 

Vincent,  Cape,  719,  915 

in  Minorca,  698,  699 

,  Promontory  of,  668 

Saint-iuorship,  (i(j(i 
Saints,  Beds  ofi  the,  773 

born  on  rocks,  515 

,  Moslem,  728 

Peter  and  Paul,  Abbey  of, 

793 

,    Servants   of,    in  Moslem 

and  Irish  tradition,  729 

SakarPlanina,  509,  510;  dolmen 
and  circle  and  altar  stone,  5 1 1 , 
687,  70S 

Salcholgan,  1051 

Salentin,  531 

Sails,  512 

Salisbury,  68 1 


Sallust,  704 
Salm-Chateau,  565 
Sal  Srotha  Derg,  117 
Salters-Town,  256 
Saltzwedal,  537 
Salvatierra,  613,  646,  647 
Samaria,  726 
Same,  476 
Same  ciiltus,  149,  n. 
Samelat,  149,  n. 
Samer,  1076 

,  the  river,  mo 

Samgalli,  1076 

Samhain,  149,  n.,  27S,  852,853 

,  Eve  of,  1080 

,  the  feast  of,  854 

Samlande,  cairn  in,  515 

Samlanders,  1076,  iioi 

Samnites,  1162 

Samoyedes,  149,  n. 

Samoyedish  language,  776 

Sampson,  890 

Samraighe,  lioi 

Samson's  Stone,  287 

Samthavo,  966 

Sanas  Chormaic,  S47 

Sanbh,  1141 

Sancho  Panza,  1023,  1041 

Sancred,  428 

Sanda,  826 

Sandal,  Mount,  1126,  1127, 

1173 

Sandeman,  Lieut. -Colonel  J.  G., 

664 
San  Merce  de  Baix,  721 
Sanpere  y  Miguel,  Signer,  632, 

642,  643,  721 
Santa  Cruz  de  Cangas  de  Onis, 

650 
Santander,  649,  651,  652 
Sant  Cesaine,  569 
Santiago,  656 

d'Antas,  642 

Sant  Jonan,  589 

Pedro  de  Valdenogueiras, 

653 
Saoi,  tJie,  1097,  n. 
Saoileanach,  820 
Saone,  the,  578,  962 
Saracens,  623,  n. 
Saran,  896,  n.,  1086 
Sardinia,  293,  344,  n,,  460,  578, 

701,  704-707,  710,  711,  716, 

732 
— — ,  Tombeaux  des  Geants,  138 
Sardinians,  964 
Sarendorp,  896,  n.,  Iii2,  n. 
Sarmates,  784 
Sarmatia,  1144 
Sarniatian  Hypothesis,  the,  1026, 

II02,  1131 

morasses,  the,  1097 

Scythia,  1168 

type,  1 168 

Sarmatians,  1087 

Sarmento,    Signor   F.  Martins, 

632,    n.,    633,    650,    n.,    657, 

658,    666,    n.,   677,    680,  n., 

708,  893,  n. 
Saroo,  879 
Sarrandorp,  1086 
Sarranus,  11 12,  n. 


Index. 


122 


Sarrasins,  623,  n. 
Sarrazin,  Autel  du  Grand,  623 
Sasse,  M.,  934 
Satire^  fractice  of,  114^ 
Saturn,  628,  n. 
Saturnales,  471 
Saturnalia,  826,  828 
Saturnia,  470,  721 
Saturnius,  471,  474 
Saul,  267 
Saumur,  620,  630 
Saussaye,  M.  de  la,  871 
Saverus,  the,  11 10 
Savoy,  561 

Saxo   Grammaticus,    277,    51 3) 
553.    777.    893,    1055,    1060, 
1064,  loSi,  1088,  1089,  1095, 
n.,  1107,  1123,  1177 
Saxon  Boundary,  865 
Saxones,  784 
Saxons,    789,    812,    947,    1064, 

1085,  1093,  1139,  n.,  1150 
Saxon  Shore,  the,  1120 
Saxons  in  Britain,  1135 

,  the  South,  836 

Saxony,  523,  1064,  1169 

,  King  of,  802,  1 140,  1 1 50 

Saxiiiii  Fatale,  1 162 

Lubbonis,  551 

Sayce,  Prof.,  1013 
Seal,  786.  793,  802,  n. 

Balb,  370,  n.,   579,  802, 

1036,  1077,  1078,  n.,  1 142 
Scalo\-itae,   or    Scalowitae,   802, 

n.,  1078 
Scandia,  1059,  1060,  1 106 
Scandian,  Old,  skull,  948.     Sec 

Scandinavian 
Scandinavia,  149,  n.,  421,  491, 
500,  513,  523,  525,  526,  584, 
683,     704,     773,    965,    1067, 
1143,  1151,  1153,  I161 

,  ship-graves  in,  137 

,  structural  comparisons  in, 

476,  seqq. 
Scandinavian     skull,      ancient, 
946.     Sec  Scandian 

swords,  950 

Scando-Germnnic  tribes,  1 1 77 
Scania,  221,  481-483,  485,  479, 

493,  578,  628,  n.,  b6i 
Scanza,  1079 
Scarva,  864 

Scathach,  830,  874,  1 146,  n. 
Scelig,  Michel,  1162 
Schaaffhausen,    942,    n.,     944, 

961,  1002,  1003 
Schapovv,  532 
Schatanavia,  1069 
Schaterius,  550,  551 
Schayes,  552,  564,  566,  n. 
Scheffer,  477 
Schiappe,  ^I.,  668 
Schiern,  iioo 
Schievelbein,  535 
Schleswig,  495,  537,  10S4 
Schleswig  Holstein,  496 
Schliemann,    Dr.,   456,    476   et 
seqq.,  520,  578,  632,  n.,  965, 
1 125,  n. 
Schlonnewitz,  535 
Schlossberg,  the,  535,  1125 


Schlossberg,  near    Benau-Frie- 

dersdorf,  1126 
Schmerling,  939 
Schneider,  C,  894,  n.,  1163 
Schofarik,  929,  n. 
Schonen,  523,  524,  526,  537 
Schonermark,  534 
Schonhovius,  554,  555,  n. 
Schooten  Wood,  the,  540 
Schrader,  603,  n.,  775,  n.,  776, 

884  n.,  929,  1013,  1125,  1167, 

n. 
Schreiber,  Dr.  H.,  827 
Schroeder,  L.  von,  775,  n. 
Schroter,    458,    499,    502,   503, 

1 129,  n. 
Schumacher,    Dr.,    703,     704, 

716,  73o-733>  735>  736,  966, 

n. 
Schwaan,  1003 
Schwarzbrack,  536 
Schvvarzwald,  the,  997 
Schvvazwasser,  the,  506,  507 
Scibor,  874 

Scilly,  Isles  of,  440,  441,  446 
Sclaveni,  1151 
Sclaves,  780,  783,  896, 929,  1057, 

1061,  1062,  1076,  1079,  1081, 

1087,  1099,  1 1 17,  1 167,  I16S, 

1 1 77,  1 1 78.     See  Slavi 
,    compared    with    Ileruli, 

1144 
Sclavo-Finnic  race,  a,  1099,  n. 
Sclavonia,  109 1 
Sclavonian';,  947 
Sclavonic  language,  1134 
Sclesvic,  1014 
Scor,  785 
Scorias,   1 1 59 
Scoriath,  1060,  1096,  1159 
Scoringa,  1060,  1096 
Scorings  on  dolmens,  19,  20,  20S, 

209,  344 
Scota,  840,  841,  1069,  1070 
Scoti,  779,  n.,  884,  923,    1046, 

1099,  n.,  1 1 55 
Scotia,  1 168 

Scotland,  519,  669,  1132 
,    scarcity   of    dolmens    in, 

449 
Scots,  780,  1028,  1067,  1139,  n., 

1157,   116S 
Scotta,  784,  1 169 
Scotti,  1 138 
Scottish  chambered  cairns,  138 

tumuli,  707 

Scotussa,  779 

Scrabo,  274 

Scrahanard,  19,  20 

,  rock  scorings  on  dolmens 

at,  id. 
Scregg,  198-200,  501 
Scribings,    rude,    on    dolmens, 

437  . 
Scriverins,  Pet.,  1 100,  n. 
Scroibchenn,  10S4 
Sculptured  si  one,  293,  294 

in  circle,  505 

stones,  309,  310 

at     the    Cloghan, 

Glenmalin,  242 
at  Knockmany,  216 


Sciilp/nred  slonc  (Loughcrew), 
317,  seqq. 

(New  Grange),  356, 

seqq. 
Sculpturings  on  Rathkenny  dol- 
men, 342,  343,  344 

at    Castle   Archdall,  219, 

220 

on   dolmens  at  Garrygort 

(Donegal),  233 
on  stones  in  chambers,  141 

Scurmore,  175 

Scuti,  779,  n.,  1099 

Scylax,  603 

Scyra,  107 1 

Scyrians,  1169 

Scytha%  1099,  n. 

Scythes,  1071, 1072 

Scythia,  604,  738,  780,  n., 
1026,  1068,  1069,  iioi,  1 102, 
1121,  1134,  1144,  1167 

Antiqua,  1079 

Citerior,  1079 

,  Gauls  bordering  on,  474 

,    Gold     figures    of    boars 

from,  872 

extra  Imaum,  748,  n. 

intra  Imaum,  748,  n. 

Scyths,  so-called,  725,  726 

Seafield,  143,  171,  174 

Sea-horse,  the,  91 1 

Seanchan  Torpeist,  514 

Seapoll  Molt,  309 

Scat,  Kalle-tvc  Foe/s,  5 1 2 

Sebastian,  Saint,  103 1 

Secklendorf,  538 

Scefin,  105,  876 

Seehausen,  532 

Seeland,  524 

Seelewey,  802,  813 

Seethaunamnafinna,  13 

.Seilg  a'  Tuirc,  858 

Seilg-na-Cheise,  860 

Seille,  the,  998 

Seine,  the,  628,  630,  812,  928, 
929,  955,  960,  1003,  1062 

,  Valley  of  the,  567 

Seine-et-Marne,  569 

Seine  et  Oise,  627,  639 

Seisrcac  Breistigh  air  Thdin-Bo- 
Clncailgnc,  819 

Selande,  893 

Selbach,  826 

Selburg,  511,  512 

Selgova;,  1109 

Sellerna  Bay,  103,  844 

Sembi,  1096,  n.,  iioi 

Semegalls,  1098 

Semeon  Breac,  1076,  n. 

Brec,  1086,  1098 

Semgalli,  1098,  iioi 

Semias,  1158 

Se7nicircle,  the  fcatnre  of  the,  707 

Semi-pa^ani,  768,  1066 

Semmlerischen  Gate,  518 

Semnonenwalt,  the,  1076,  n. 

Semnones,  473,  1076,  1086 

Sena,  Island  of,  1161 

Senach,  11 12 

Senchan  Torpeist,  1097,  n. 

Sengann,  I  no 

Sennen,  944 


1224 


Index. 


Sepolture  de  is  Gigantes,  704, 

711 
Sept-Sainls,  La   Chapelle    tics, 

631 
Sepultura  de  Marcella,  La,  668 

da  Marcella,  672 

Sepultura  Grande,  La,  690 

,  the,  644 

Sepulturas  de  los  Gentiles,  690 
Serahanard,  505 
Serpent,  the,  909 

,  head  of,  472,  n. 

,  legend  of,  795,  799 

,  the  Great  White,  472,  n. 

Serpents,  -lOorship  of,  472,  n. 
Serra  da  Estrella,  657,  658,  666, 

n.,  677,  680 

de  Castello,  669,  670 

de  Gerez,  654 

de  Morao,  664 

Servia,  522 

Servius,  637 

Seskinan,  57 

.Seven   Daughters,    Church  and 

Well  of  the,  103 

Great  Ones,  the,  739 

Monuments,  107 

Saints,  772 

,  the  Chapel  of  the, 

631 

Steenliausen,  551 

Stone  houses,  547 

Severinus,  590,  n.,  1130,   I172- 

II 76 
Severne  Sea,  449,  611,  1109 
Sgalghruaigh,  820 
Sgeithi'n-na-Chon,  8S1 
Sgeolan,  878 
Shallee,  81,  883 
Shanacloon,  901 
Shanbally,  55 
Shanbogli,  410 
Shandangan,  35 
Shane-Maghery,  1005 
Shane's  Castle,  810,  825 

Hill,  267 

Shanganagh,  392,  393,  660 

Slianid,  46 

Shankill  House  and  Castle,  392 

Shannon,  197,  859,  890 

Shanonvale,  852 

Shanternon,  207 

Shearla,  850 

Shearman,  Rev.  J.,  401,  787,  n. 

Sheeawn  Hill,  853 

Sheebeg,  194 

Sheehinny,  227 

Sheela,  1115 

Sheela-na-Gyg,  1115,  n. 

She  A'lHi^,  the,  854 

Shetland,  932 

Skidd,  golden,  618 

i)hillelagh,4l4 

Shinto,  149,  439.     .5"^^  Smto 

Ship,  moiiel  of,  492 

,  the  form  of  a,  694,  699, 

701,704,  n. 
Ship-grave,  505 
Ship-graves,  664 

of  Scandinavia,  137 

Ships  in  tumuli,  704 

,  models  of,  4S7 


Ships,  models  in  pottery,  492 
,  rock-cut  tombs  so  called, 

657 

,  sculpture  of,  483-485 

Ship-tomb,  Stone,  493 
Shirley,  Mr.  E.  P.,  295 
Shreds  of  cloth,  747.     See  Rags 
Shrine,  Greek,  530,  n. 
Shrines,  design  of,  520 

,  Greek,  493 

Siberia,  740,  747-749,  870,  934 

Sicambri,  1060 

Sicaiii,  603 

Sicanus,  603 

Sicilians,  964 

Sicily,  474,  569,  672,  685,  698, 

716,  720,  1067,  1069,  1072, 

1073 
Sicules,  470 
Sid  in  Broj^a,  37 1,  n.,  349 

of  the  cave,  347 

Sid  Findabrach,  371,  n. 
Sidh,  346,  349,  729,  763,  853 

,  men  of  the,  854 

of  the  cave,  the,  854 

Sidhe,  149,  346,  347,  439,  5^0, 

590,  n.,  729,   761,  852,  886, 

900,  1096,  n. 
Sidhean,  853 
Sidhean-a-Ghaire,  853 
Sidhe  Feen,  856 

of  Erin,  the,  853 

Sidi  Kacem,  717 

Sidobre,  599 

Sidon, 726 

Siebold,  Von,  471,  n. 

Sierra  de  Sejos,  652 

Sieven  Steinhausen,  the,  1 132 

Sievern,  547,  1132 

Sigambri,  1 150 

Sighean-na-mnafinne,    13,    763. 

See  Sithaun 
Sigipedes,  1148,  n. 
Signuin  Vincentii,  the,  641,  650 
Sigurd,  744,  782,  n. 
Silberberg,  472,  n 
Silesia,  521,  522,  741 
Silingi,  1076,  1086 
Silinsee,  the,  1131 
Silius  Italicus,  1049,  n. 
Silures,   608,    609,    1023,   1025, 

1027,  1029 
Siluria,  1023 
Silvitz,  498 

Simeon-Brec,  1076,  108 1 
Simeonsthor,  564 
Simian  affijiitics,  921,  938 
Simoes,  Sr.,  632,  n.,  633,  634, 

646,   647,  650,  n.,  652,  654, 

655,  658,  666,  686,  691,  693 
Simon  Magus,  828 
Simpson,   Sir  J.   T.,  46S,  484, 

578,  n.,  66(,  n. 
Simrisland,  578 
Sinas,  Area  de,  636 
Sines,  Cape  de,  670 
Singidona  or  Singidunum,  1152 
Sinto,  349,  439.     See  Shinto. 

temples,  854 

Siorna  Saeghlach,  1083 

Siret,  the  MM.,  456,  674,  675, 

681-683,  963 


Silhaun-na-fttnafiniia,  763.    See 

Sighean 
Sithchuire,  819 
Sithonball,  819 
Sitones,  477,  n  ,  776,  777 
Sitric,  King,  1015 
Sitsa,  590 

Sitte,  149,  439,  477,  590,  n. 
Siva  temples,  459 
Si  veto,  Sr.,  654 
Six-Mile-Cross,  209 
Six-Mile-Water,  267 
Six  Weeks  Bed,  the,  531 
Sjoborg,  483,  1132,  1 133 
Skaraborg,  prov.  of,  493 
Skeans,  Irish  armed  with,  1043 
Skeleton  seated,  1 1 2 
Skellin;j,  the  Great,  6 
Skene,  Mr.,  1063,  1108,  Ii35,n. 
Skerry,  265,  266 
Skreen,  179 
Skregg,  844 
Skrobelef,  484 
Skye,  671,  844 
Skylax,  604,  n. 
Slaght,  824 
Slaghta,  373 

Slaghtaverty,  252,  824-826 
Slaghtbogy,  257 
Slaghtfreeden,  212,  257,  824 
Slaghtmanus,  253,  254,  257,  824 
Slaghtneill,  255,  257 
Slainge,  1074,  1075,  1076,  1086, 

1095,  1096 
Slainge's  Well,  804 
Slan,  Well  called,  770 
Slane  Upper,  343 
Slaney,  river,  400,  417 
Slavi,  784.     See  Schlaves 
Sleep,  enchanted,  635 
Sliabh-an-iarainn,  890 
Sliabh.     See  also  under  Slieve 
Sliabh  Baan,  1029,  1032 

Beatha,  821,  822 

-Bo-booirha,  592,  899 

Callan  (Clare),  823 

Cua,  1083 

Cuailgne,  820 

Cuillion,  820 

-da-chon,  878 

Domhangart,  II 11,  11 13 

Eogain,  796 

Feadih,  819 

Fidhit,  819 

Fuaidh,  820 

Gallion,  822,  823 

Guillin,  820,  n. 

Gullion,  820,  822 

(Armagh),  823 

(Meath),  823 

• Mis,  820,  840,  841 

-na-Callighe,  829 

na-maoile,  862 

-na-mban-fionn,  55 

Toghail,  382 

Truim,  820 

Slictenhorst,  554,  563,  n.,  564,  n. 

Slidderyford,  288 

Slievardagh,  55 

Slieve.      See  also  under  Sliabh 

Slieve  Admoir,  1062 

Amhoir,  1062 


Index. 


12  2 


Slieve  Baan,  799,  1030 

Beatha,  1114 

Callan,     79,     437,     593, 

1 172,  n. 

in  Deny,  1 1 7 

Callighe,  464,  5S0 

•  Comhailt,  52 

Croob,  2S3 

Damangait,  1113 

Doan,  255 

Domangard,  11 13 

or   Sliabh    Domhangaird, 

Donard,  11 13 

Donnart,  771 

Downart,  11 13 

Elva,  65 

Felim,  46 

Gallion,  255,  256 

Cairn,  256 

Gallon,  878 

Guillion,  838 

Gullion,  194,  303,  304,  3S5, 

838,  876,  1 1 72,  n. 

Kielta,  587,  680,  90S 

Kimalta,  52,  913 

Leathan,  245,  248 

Liag,  245,  58S,  729,  go6 

Mis,  840,  841 

Mish,  3 

Slieveniore,  11 9-1 21 
Caher,  119 

in    Achill,      alignments, 

cathairs,    etc.,    compared    to 
those  on  Dartmoor,  448 

Slieve  Murray,  862 
vSlieve-na-boil-trough,  283 
Slievenaboley,  282 
Slieve-na-Callighe,    314,    scqq., 

419,  834-836 
Slieve-na-Caliy,  837,  S38 
Slieve-na-glaise,  762,  8S3,  884- 

887 
Slievenaglasha,  72.  74,  762,  n. 
Slievenagriddle,  286,  287 
Slievenaman,  55,  831 
Slieve  Owen,  31,  95,  796 

Slainghe,  1 114 

Ughmoir,  1062 

Sligo,  139,  171,   183,  452,  586, 

647,  650,  656,  660,  708,   755, 

1029 

Borough  of,  139 

County  of,  126- [92 

Marquis  of,  123 

Slogadoil,  898 

Slyne  Head,  839 

Smallcounty,  46,  51 

Smerling,  923 

Smerwick,  2 

Smids,  550 

Smith,  Charles,  456,  848,  852,  n. 

901,902,  910 

• , ,  quoted,  1 1,  21, 23, 30 

,  Dr.  Angus,  468 

,  Rev.  G.  Sidney,  215-217 

Smiths,    divine    characters    of, 

among  the  Finns,  897,  n. 
,  held  sacred  in   Esthonia 

and  Ireland,  514 

in  mythology,  884,  n. 

Smith'' s  cuife,  the  cave  of  the, 349 

VOL.  III. 


Smolensk,  778 

Sneem,  5,  6 

Snorre  Sturleson,  950 

Snowden,  871 

.Sobral,  666,  n. 

Socket-celts,  524 

Socrates,  11 77 

Sbdermanland,  1 132,  11 33 

Sodermanlande,  493 

Soldier's  grave,  the,  34 

Soldurii,  608 

Solstice,  Siiininer,  the,  589 

Solutre,  962,  998 

Solway,  1 109 

Som  =  Bear,  149,  n. 

Somerset,  1023 

Somersetshire,    452,    454,   611, 

794 

Somerville,  Mr.,  43 

Somme,  the,  955 

Sonnenwitz,  536 

Sophocles,  1078 

Soran,  1125,  1126 

Sorbold's  Grab,  782.     See  Saar- 

bold  and  Sorwold 

grave,  550,  1157 

house,  550,  n. 

Sordes,  989 
Soreil,  M.,  955 
Soreze,  589 

,  Ecole  de,  676 

So}-gHin,  646 

Sorguineche,  579,  646,  647 
Sorwold,   783.        See    Saarbold 

and  Sorbold 
Sos,  589 

Sotiaies,  the,  584,  609 
South  Sea  Islanders,  561 
Spain,  491,   513,  523,  560,  568, 

579,  584,  600,  628,   n.,  846, 

1067,  1070,  1076,  1 1 18,  1 136, 

and  n. 

and  Portugal,  631-69S 

,  South-Eastern,  456 

Spangenberg,  547,  n. 

Sparta,  1071 

Spata,  624,  625 

Speckseite,  545 

Spectacle  figure,  sculpturing  of, 

220 
Spence,  ^fr.  C.  F.,  239 
Spenser,   Edm.,   13,    834,    911, 

1047 
Speyer,  525,  616,  619 
Spideog-dearg,  839 
Spideog-Mhuire,  839 
Spiral,    absence    of    the    Irish 

bronzes,  524,  525 
Spirals,  622 
Spirits,  worship  of,  346 
Sporthouse,  61 
Spring,  Dr.,  955 
Springfield,  183 
Spring  of  the  Faiiies,  581 
Springs   rising  from    tombs   oj 

Saints,  1 16 1 
Springtown,  866 
Srahwee,  125 
Stafel,  530 

Staffordshire,  971,  972 
Stair-iia-Lumbardac,  the,  1066 
Staken,  547 


Stala,  480 

Stamford,  1023 

Stangenas,  924,  925,  looi 

skull,   937,  946-948,  978, 

1000 

Stanley,  Mr.,  474 

Stanton  Drew,  794 

Star  a  Baba,  870 

Stargardt,  508,  536 

Starkather,  513 

Starn,  874,  lOoi 

Stary  Arad,  1 128,  n. 

Station  du  Cap  Roux  de  Beau- 
lieu,  569 

Station  Island,  772 

'■'■Stations^'  Penitential,  198,  591 

Stature  of  Gauls,  Germans, 
Sclaves,  1052,  n. 

of  the  Irish,  1044 

Stavelot,  365 

Steatite,  144,  145 

Stecksenins,  476,  n.,  1105 

Steenfelder-Holtz,  547 

Steenhausen,  551 

Steenstrup,  M.,  999 

Stege,  999 

Stein,  1 1 34,  n. 

Steinbelte,  530 

Steinfeld,  529,  53c 

Steinfield,  532 

Stein-grab,  509 

Steinhaits,  546 

Steinhaiiscn,  547 

Steinhof,  the,  498 

Steinhofel,  534 

Steinkisten,  499,  500 

Stein-kisten-graber,     5 16-5 18, 
578..  n. 

Steinkisten  ivakkenbetten,  498 

Steinkister,  501 

Steintanz,  the,  502 

Steinthal,  518,  519 

Stendal,  536 

Stendelchen,  534 

Stennis,  466 

Stephanus  de  Borbone,  851,  n. 

Stephen  of  Byzantium,  603,  604, 
1 102 

Stewartstown,  209 

Stiria.     See  Styria 

Stirling,  1 109 

Stokes,  iMiss  M.,  15,  17,  21, 
43-45,  48,  50,  53,  54,  117, 
123,  196,  218,  230,  241,  43S, 
702,  n.,  797,  n. 

,   Dr.    Whitley,    419,    472, 

579,  n.,  761,  770,  774,  800,  n., 
802,  n.,  804,  n.,  813,  n.,  823, 
824,  828,  832,  835,  n.,  846,  n., 
861,  866,  n.,  809,  873,  907, 
1056,  1084,  n.,  1094,  1096, 
I121,  1149,  1154 

Stollan-Berg,  the,  11 53 

Stolpe,  1098 

Stone  Cellar,  the,  533 

Stone  circle  at  Wattle  Bridge, 
227 

coffins,  347 

dance,  the,  533 

Stonegg,  1 127 

Stone-hammer,  507 

Stonehenge,  555 

2    L 


1226 


Index. 


Stonehenge,  the  Irish,  134 
,    skull    from,   999,     1004, 

ICX37,  1012 
Stones  for  r^vcarins;  on,  914,  915 

of  the  sun,  849 

Stone  troughs,  347 

«r;;,  345 

Stoney-Littleton,  452 
Stopford,  Rev.  T.,  292 
Stora-Aby,  925 
Stour,  the,  1050 
Strabane,  20S 

,  Lower,  208 

,  Upper,  208 

Straho,  604,  n.,  608, 668, 69S,  n., 

719,    725,     778,    915,     1027, 

io6o,  1 121,  1 162 
Stradbally,  374,  875,  910 
Straleel,  249 
Strandhill  House,  140 
Strangford  Lough,  274,  281 
Stratherne,  1 109 
Strathnairn,  466 
Strathnavar,  13S 
Streamstown,  105,  107 

House,  107 

Streedagh,  128,  428,  914 

Stridagh,  128 

Strokestown,  1029,  1030 

Stroniberg,  1160 

Structural  comparisotts    in    the 

British  Isles,  439,  469 
in  Scandinavia,  Den- 
mark,    Schleswig  -  Holstein, 

476-496 
Struell,  287 
Strule,  729 

,  river,  208 

Strypa,  river,  509 

Stuart,  Dr.,  1048 

Stubnitz,  497 

Stukeley,  764,  1038 

•Stuttgard,  924 

Styles  in  India,  451 

Styria,  472,  n.,  mi 

Styx,  the,  772 

Suanetes,  817,  n. 

Suantevit,  349,  n.,  10S8,  1091 

,  description  of  the  Temple 

of,  1087-1092 
Suardones,  1 143 
Suartua,    or     Suartuas,     1143, 

1152-1154 
Suca,  the,  11 19 
Sucad,  874 
Sucambri,  1060 
Succat,  872-874 
Suck,  the,  896,  n.,  11 20 
Sudini,  1096 
Suecia,  893,  n. 
Sueones,  492,  8i  i 
Suert,  1 143,  n. 
Suevi,  473,  537,  871,  896,  1060, 

1082 
Suevic  Gulf,  363 

Sea,  the,  869 

Siif,  726 

Sugarloaf  Hill  (Wat.),  61 

Suhni,  550 

Suidhc  Finn,  759,  785,  887 

Lu,^]iaidh,  802 

Suil  Balra,  806 


vSuir,  river,  56,  409 

Sullane,  the,  11 15 

river,  17,  21 

Sullivan,  Dr.  W.  K.,  540,  746, 
n.,  1049,  1050,  1052,  1056 

— ,  Mr.,  899 

Summerhill,  115 

House,  113 

Sunday  I  Fell,  50 

Sundius,  1105,  n. 

Su  Nennere,  710 

Sun-goddess,  762 

Sun,  Stones  of  the,  S49 

,  Well  of  the,  849 

Sun-'oorship,  846 

Suomalaiset,  149 

Suoma-men,  149,  n. 

Suoin  =  Bear,  149,  n. 

Suomi,  776 

Sussex,  681 

Sutherland,  844 

,  Duchess  of,  873 

Sutherlandshire,  iioS 

Suttee,  745 

Svastika,  the,  644 

Sveno  Aggonis,  896,  n. 

Sweariif;^  on  stones,  914,  915 

Sweal-baths,  775,  n.  See  \"a- 
pour  Baths 

Sweden,  438,  492,  493,  496, 
512,  523,  534,  535,  537,  545, 
567,  568,  634,  661,  681,  716, 
753>  779,  8S9,  1014,  1 132 

,  Ovals  in,  505 

Swedes,  1015 

Swedish,  Old,  skull,  945-948 

Sweyn,  King  of  Denmark,  1091 

Swift,  Dean,  838,  839 

Stviftness  of  the  Irish,  1 152 

Switzerland,  561,  678,  680 

Swords,  Bronze,  524 

Synnot,  Sir  Walter,  301 

Syracuse,  1072,  1073 

Syria,  726-750,  752,  779 

Syrian  dolmen,  644 

,  hole  in  side  of,  75 

Syrtes,  the,  716 

Taafe,  Count,  1169 

Tacitus,  473,  477,  n.,  546,  554, 
555,  n.,  608,  774,  776,  811, 
869,  871,  S95,  1014,  1023, 
1028,  1042,  105S,  1063,  1082, 
1090,    1096,    n.,   1098,    1 126, 

ii43>  1 163 
Taescach,  885 
Tafe,  668 
Tagus,  river,  469 
Tailcenn,  579 
Tailltiu,  347 
Tailte,  S02,  n.,  1137 
Tailten,  541,  583,  845,  895 

,  Cemetery  of,  34S 

Tailtiu,     371,     n.,    579,      583, 

1136 
Tain  B6  Aingen,  346,  853 
Tain-B(')-Cuailgne,  347,  514,779. 

796,  816,    n.,    82U,    n.,    823, 

853,  898,  1027,  1050,  1097 
Tain  Ho  Fraech,  1064,  1170 
Tait,  1069 
Talayots,  69 1 ,  704,  7 1 1 


Talbot  de  Malahide,  Lord,  581, 

691,  693,  694 
Talbotstown  Upper,  413 
Tallaght,  382 
Taken,  348.     See  Tailten 
Taltiu,  350,  1 153 
Tamago,  592 
Tamlaght,  256,  257,  1054,  1059, 

1066 
Tamleacht,  304 
Tammuz,  739,  846 
Tamnymore,  251 
Tanais,  1069,  1070 
Tangiers,  718 
Tanrego  East,  178 

West,  177,  178 

Tara,  472,  n.,  1094.    See  Temair 

,  Convention  of,  167 

,  F^east  of,  1094 

,  form   of  mound   at,  220, 

277,  278,  823,  887 

,  Pillar-stone  at,  451 

Tarbes,  675 

Tarbh  Conraidh,  840 

Tarn,  Department  of,  568,  596, 

598,  676 
Tarragona,  643,  691,  692 
Tartars,  the,  749,  780 

,  Chinese,  1004,  n. 

Tasconi,  the,  597 

Tato,  1 06 1,  1069 

Tavaro,  712 

Tavastland  or  Tavastrian  Finns, 

1034,  1035,  1 107 
Tawlmen,  588,  n. 
Tawnagh,  183 
Tawnatruffan,  175,  176 
— • — ,  Fires   lighted  on  dolmen 

at,  74 
Tawnydarragh,  218 
Tay,  1 109 
Taylor,  Canon  Isaac,  720,  775, 

931,  n.,  934,  952,  964,  n. 
Taylor's  Grange,  393 
Tayo  de  los  Castilloues,  689 
Tcherkass,  the,  871 
Tchoudis,  the,  998.  3'^^Tschudes 
Team  or,  1094 
Teampulgeal,  732,  733 
Teampull  Faughtna,  37 

Fochin,  37 

Teampull -na-bhfear,  650 
Teampull-na-mban,  650 
Tebessa,  713 
Tech-Damhnait,  1 1 14 
Tech  Midchuarta,  1094 
mcSr    milib     amus,    1093, 

1094 
Tectosaces,  748,  n. 
Tectosages,  74S,  n. 

,  601 

Tectumaros,  167,  n. 
Tedavnat,  1 1 14 
Tees,  the,  1052 
Teeskagh,  885 
Tegh-na-Callighe,  836 
Telle,  874 
Tell  el  Kady,  726 
Tell-esh-Shelxm,  731 
Teltou,  or   Tellow,   or   Teliau, 

"53 
Teltown,  11 53 


Index. 


1227 


Temair,  347,  349,  355,  541,  S12, 
845,  868,  874,  1064,  10S8, 
1091-1093,  1094,  1109,  1 136, 
1137,  1140-1142,  1153,  1154, 
1160,  1 1 70.     A't'cTara 

Temair  Erann,  347 

Temor,  1064 

Temora,  1153,  n. 

Templeavanny,  859 

Templebeg,  53,  913 

Templeboy,  177 

Templebrian,  84S 

circle,  S52 

Templedouglas,  234 

Templeen,  37 

Temple,  Egyptian,  530,  n. 

Temple- Ktney,  55 

Templemologa,  7 

Templemore,  252,  253 

Templemurr)-,  113,  114 

Templepatrick,  268 

Temples,  Greek,  520 

of  the  Budini,  929,  n. 

,  Roman,  493 

Tempuleen  Fiachna,  902 

Tempull  Colman,  102 1 

Temur,  1094.     See  Temair 

Tenet eri,  555,  n 

Tennison,  Lady  L. ,  185 

Tecs,  638-640 

Tepoulet,  5S6 

Tere-en-Tardenois,  570 

Terra  AJater,  628,  n. 

Terryglass,  55 

Teschendorf,  534 

Tites  cPApotres,  938 

Teutates,  473 

Teutones,  896 

Teutons,  602,  1 1 23 

Teventeri,  555,  n. 

Thala,  716 

Thasos,  522,  523 

Thebans,  472,  n.,  640 

Thebes,  472,  n.,  11 58 

Theimar,  Theymar,  or  Themar, 
1 1 53  and  n. 

Theodoric,  1082 

Theodosiiis,  353,  355 

Theophanes,  11 17,  n. 

Theophylact,  740,  1078 

Thessaly,  779 

Thesiwe,  16 

Thiers  Stone,  the,  898 

ThieiTy,  M.,  601,  602 

Thorn,  616 

Thomas,  Captain,  1032 

Thomastown,  403 

Thomond,  835 

Thompson,  E.  M.,  1053,  n. 

Thorns,  482,  525 

Thomsen,  W.,  897 

Thoomper's     Gill,     loi,      786, 

787 
Thor,  744 
Thoringi,  1082 
Thorn,  508 
Thorpe,  897,  n. 
Thorsey,  1162 
Thorsness,  505 
Thor's  Stone,  505 
Thrace,   522,    523,   779,    1072, 

1076,  n.,    1084,  1086,    iio!, 


1102,  1118,  1148,  1170,1173, 

1 1 76 
Thracian  Chersonese,  522 
Thracians,  1096,  n. 
Three  Brothers  of  Griigilli,  the. 

661,  663,  729,  760 
Three   Kings,    the  tomb  of  the, 

597 
Thucydides,  603 

,  the  British,  iioo 

Thule,  781,    1060,   1079,   1085, 

1106,  1143,  1151,  1152 
Thunmann,  896,  n.,  1082,  n. 
Thtioma-an-  Vinistre,  25 
Thuringia,  871,    1060,  n.,  1150. 

I153,  Ii7i,n. 
Thuringians,  10S2,  1 164 
Thurnam,   331,  457,  475,    945. 

950.  959.  960,962,963,  971, 

"m  973.974,976,987,9^8 
'Phnys  te  Britten,  i  lOO 
Thyr,  505,  n. 
Tiberias,  726,  1059 
llbia,    platycnemic,    129,     134, 

i55>  959,  967-970 
Tibrad  Tirach,  11 40 
Tibradden  Hill,  394 
Tickmacrevan,  263 
Ticloy,  265,  266 
Tien,  894 
Tiermes,  898,  n. 
Tigernmas,  472,  473,  1083 
Tighe,  793,  874,  909,  911 
Tighernach,     802,    993,     1038, 

1139,  1 141 
Tigh-AIhoire,  2 
Tigh-Temrach,  1093 
Tily  Hole,  skull  from,  983 
Tinaarloo,  556,  558,  559 
Tinnakilla,  46 
Tinnakilly,  409 
Tipperary,    581,   616,    n.,    617, 

696,  1022,  1037 

,  County  of,  52-55 

,  Recent  superstition  in,  852 

Tiprait  Tireach,  836 
Tir-Ailella,  801 

Tir-Amalgaidh,  801,  n.,  893,  n. 
Tir-Banthshuthian,  823 
Tir-Suthain,  823 

,  the  King  of,  256 

Tiragarvan,  296 

Tirawley,   112,  801,  n.,  906,  n., 

1063,  I  no 
Tiree,  844 
Tireragh,  175,  11 10 
Tirerrill,  182,  801 
Tirhugh,  236 
Tirkeeran,  253 
Tirkennedy,  222 
Tiryns,  1 125 
Tisnada,  634 
Titans,  74S,  1055 
Tivoria,  2 
Tlachtga,  U37,  ii53 

Ban,  300 

Tlemecen,  716 
Tobar-an-mhadaid-leith,  878 
Tobar-a-Phuicin,  911 
Tobar-na-Uru,  733 
Tobar-na-bh-Fian,  174 
Tobar-na-Glaise,  891 


Tobar-na-m-bosdubh,  861 
Tobar-Naoimh-Diarmada,  863 
Tobar-Righ-an-I)omnaigh,  loi 
Tober,  55 

Tobereendoney,  50,  loi,  771 
Tober  Feber,  910 
Toberfelim,  866 
Tober  Fintany,  112 
Tober-Ghraine,  95,  771,  849 
Toberglasny,  185 
Tobergrania,  95 
Tober  Lasaix,  196 
Tobermacduagh,  106 
Tober  na  bh-Fafn,  787 
Tober-na-Bostel,  859 
Tober-na  -  Callighe  -  Bneartha, 

841 
Tobernacallybeara,  799 
Tobernacrobyneeve,  103 
Tobernacrusha,  765 
Tober-na-Dru,  732,  733 
Tober-na-haltora,  125,  765 
Tober-na-naomh,  735 
Tobernaneagh,  192 
Tobernaslath,  372 
Tobernavean,  174,  175 
Tobernaveen,  143,  174 
Tober  Patrick,  105,  231,  797 
Toberquan,  56 
Toberrendoney,  765 
Tober  Righ-an-Domhnaigh,  50, 

787,  n. 

Righ-an-Domnach,  771 

in-Domuin,  771 

Toberuna,  408 
Tobinstown,  396 
Todasius,  1 151 
Todgha,  1076 
Todtenkampe,  545 
Todtenteich,  545 
Toem,  53,  54 
Togha,  1076 
Toghal,  167 
Togher  Patrick,  766 
Togidumnus,  11 12 
T(')ireacht-na-Glaise,  890 

''ol,  757 
Tollius,  550 

Tolmeit,  the,  588,  n.,  758 
Tomaltach,  1 170-1 172 
Tomaschek,  775,  n. 
Tombannavor,  127 
Tomban-na-\vor,  7S7 
Tombeau  de  la  Geante,  588 
Tombeaux  des  Geants,  460 
TombesdesGeants,  567,  n.,6io, 

701,  705 
Tomb  of  the  three  A'ings,  597 
Tomi,  1072 
Tonnlorcha,  122 
Toneygarrow,  412 
Tonn  Clidna,  833 
Tonygarbh,  412 
Toom  (Cavan),  154 
Toorclogher,  105 
Tooreen,  45 

West,  57 

Toorenbane,  17 
Toormore  Bay,  44 
Topinard,  M.,  989 
Topped  Mountain,  223,  827 
Tore  =  a  IJoar,  80S 


I22< 


Index. 


Tore,  sons  of,  loSo,  n. 
Tor-Conain,  1087,  1092 
Tor  Conaing,  loSo,  10S7 

Conan,  10S6 

Toreen  West,  57 

Torfceus,  779 

Tor-Inis,  1080,  loSi 

Torna  Eces,  1171 

Torrian  Sea,  1067 

Tory    Island,    843,    888,    8S9, 

1081,  1087,  1 104 
Totems,  879 
Toul,  922,  923 
Toulon  Mountain,  571 
Toulouse,   375,    567,   587,    589, 

593,  601,  609,  748,  n.,  862 
Touraine,  694 
Totirl',  58S,  n. 
Tourin,  901 
Tourmore  Strand,  767 
Tournai,  565 
Tours,  628,  630,  752,  827 

,  Gregory  of,  590 

ToiL'cr,  Vakjas,  554,  n. 
Towers  in  Syria,  735 
Towyn-y-Capel,  944,  954 
Toyo  de  las  Viiias,  689 
Traigh  -  Eothaile,      or      Traigh 

Eothuile,  179,  813.  S14 
Tralee,  2 
Tramore,  61,  62 
Transalbani,  1074 
Transitional  Monuments,  34 
Transylvania,  522 
Tras-os-Montes,  634,  664 
Trausi,  1102 

Trave,  the  river,  1082,  1 143,  1 155 
Travena,  the  river,  1074 
Trawbreaga  Bay,  229 
Trawe,  1074,  mo,  n. 
Trawe,  the,  896,  n.,  1086 
Traynor,  Billy,  I024,  1 1 44 
Treanaree,  881 
Treanmore,  189 
Trebnow,  537 
Tree,  the  Sacred,  590 
Trees,  Holy,  in  Esihonia,  512 
Tregaseal,  437,  441,  443,  446 
Tregh,  867 

Jregitifian,  395,  446-448 
Treilech,  867 
Treis,  867 
Tren,  832 

Trench  of  the  Black  Pi-;  865 
Trenkamp,  550 
'I'rent,  the,  942,  944,  979 
Trenta,  555,  n. 
Trentones,  555,  n. 
Treogat,  615,  712 
Trepied,  623 
Treryn  Point,  654 
Tresc,  348 

Trethevy,  440,  441,  666 
Tretze-Pujoos,  587 
Trevelgue,  163 
Treves,  nil,  1135 
Trevet,  347 
Trianmore,  800 
Trier,  564,  1 160 
Triers,  353 
Trilithon,  a,  507 
Trilitho7is,  583 


Trillick  Barr,  979-9S3.  989, 
1022 

,  skull  from,  986 

Trimble's  (Mr.)  farm,  222 

Trimrath,  234 

Triobhuaith,  896,  n. 

Tristram,  726,  n. 

Tri  UUa,  11 16 

Trojans,  779 

TroUesminde,  489 

Trollkona,  851 

Trostan,  262 

Troughs,  stone,  347 

Trou  Rosette,  606,  n.,  995,  998 

Trout,  the  sacred,  729 

Troy,  792 

,  history  of,  1066 

Trughanacmy,  5 

Trunk-na-Caillighe,  ill,  761, 
829,  831 

Trutenstein,  545 

Trzebez,  508 

Tschoudes,  726.   SceKLzwA,  Sculi 

Tschudes,  1099 

Tscoudes  or  Tscudi,  1144 

Tscudic  type,  1168 

Tscuds,  or  Tschudes,  780 

Tsil,  734 

Tuaim-an-fhir,  loi 

Ti'iaim-an-fhir  moir,  773,  786 

Tuamanirvore,  46,  lOl,  226 
1    Tuathach,  828 
!    Tuatha  L)ea,  347,  S04 

'    DeDanann,  346-349,  365, 

n.,  370,  n.,  472,  n.,  514, 
769,  787,  803,  S05,  810,  812, 
819,  n.,  820,  S35,  836,  83S, 
840,  841,  847,  853,  854,  867- 
869,  871,  874,  884-887,  890, 
891,  892,  900,  1027,  1037, 
1049,  1050,  1054,  1055,  1068, 
1069,  1071,  1074,  1084,  1096, 
1 104,  n.,  1 136,  1146,  1158- 
1169,  1177 

Tuathal,  167,  n.,  S02,  864, 
1078,  n.,  1098,  1 140,  1 141, 
1 142,  1153,  1 154,  1 170,  1172 

Tuath  Cathruighe,  or  Coth- 
raighe,  1120,  1121 

Ligmainc,  1097,  n. 

Semonn,  1076,  10S6 

■ Sen-Erann,  1084,  n. 

Tuathmar,  1062 

Tubantes,  894,  n. 

Tubbercurry,  181 

Tubbernawuston,  860 

Tubbrid,  409 

Tubino,  Sr.  F.  M.,  6yi 

Titcoos,  586 

Tuisco,  1060 

Tulach  da  Roth,  832 

Tulla,  83,  87,  89,  90,  93,  94, 
96,  663,  729 

Lower,  96 

^ Upper,  87 

Tullabracky,  51 

Tullomoy,  374,  910 

Tullum  Leucorum,  923 

Tully,  105,  390 

Tullybrick,  255 

Tullycommon,  73 

Tully  Commons,  431 


Tullycorbet,  294 

Tullydruid,  764 

Tullyfern,  231-233 

Tullygarvey,  206 

Tullyglashin,  74 

Tullyhavv,  201 

TuUyhog,  209 

Tullynabratilly,  229,  844,  n. 

Tullynagrow,  295 

Tumban,  139 

Tumna,  197,  643 

Tumper,  loi 

Tamper's  Grave,  loi,  128,  786 

Tungusians,  934,  935 

Tunis,  716 

Tuoma-an-\'inistre,  793 

Tuoma-na-Vranna,  30 

Tuomey,  Mr.,  414 

Tuosist,  7 

Tiiqites,  586 

Turanian  race,  606,  1000 

type,  978,  1009,  1029 

Turanians,  477,   514,   780,  897, 

948 
litras,  505,  n.,  902 
Turban  Stone,  the,  719 
Turcilingi,  1080,  n. 
Tures,  930 

Turks,  1004,  n.,  11 17 
Turloch-a-tsallain,  808 
Turner,  Mr.,  932,  944,  952 
Turning  stones,  the   custom  of, 

915 

Turquaise,  La  Pierre,  631,  639 

Ttirras,  505,  n. 

I'urri,  505,  n. 

Tnrrisas,  505,  n. 

Turrisli,  505,  n. 

Tusques,  58b 

Two-rock   Mountain,   the,   385, 

387,  394 
Tyddyn  Bleiddyn,  968 
Tynagh,  107 
Tyndale,  J.  \V.,  709,  n. 
Tyre,  726 
Tyredagh  Lower.  87 

Upper,  87,  88 

■  Castle,  87 

Tyrone,  255,  5S4,  644,  686,  724 

,  county  of,  208-217,  979 

Tyrrhene  Sea,  the,  362 
Tyrrheni,  603 
Tyrrhenum,  Mare,  1068 
Tzarskaya,  708,  723 

Uaig-an-SicUira,    or    Uaigh-an- 

Saigheadoira,  34,  786 
Uailsi,  349,  365,  n. 
Uamh,  347 

Greine,  345 

Ubi,  or  Uby,  488,  489,  613 

Ubii,  817,  n. 

Udeler-Meer,  the,  1132 

Uelzen,  540,  541 

UferlanJ,  loOo 

Ugaine  Mur,  802,  831 

Ui-Duach,  827,  n. 

Uifalvy,  740 

Uillin,    795,     1082,     n.,    1086, 

I156 
Uisneagh,  Children  of,  1086 
Uisnech,  1153 


Index. 


1229 


Uist,  932 

Ukermark,  52S,  531,  533,  537 

Uladh,   or    Ulaid.     Scd  Ulidh, 

Ulidia,  773,  1082,  n. 

,  King  of,  1092 

,  men  of,  826 

Uley,  452,  457,  973,  974 
Uleybury,  452 
Ulfrek's  Fiord,  950 
Ulidh,  1086,  1 1 56 
Ulidia,  1082,  n.,  11 56 
Ulidians,  S64 
07/a,  1 1 16,  1 162 

Lar,  1 1 16 

Piast,  the,  11 16 

Uachtracii,  11 16 

.  the,  773 

UUin,  1 156.     See  Uillin 
Ullrich,   St.,  the  Hausberg  of, 

1127 
Ulriksdal,  950 
Ulster,   province   of,    201-305, 

817 
Ultonians,  the,  105 1,  1083 
Ulysses,  1163 
UiiUiaid-na-gcat ,  873 
Umoire,    or  Umor,  S73,   1089, 

1095,  n. 
,  tlie  sons  of,  350,  370,  11., 

867 
Una  More,  907 
Unelli,  603,  n. 
Ungust,    784,  n.     Sec  Aengus, 

Oingus,  etc. 
Unna,  240 
Unni,  740 
Unshagh,  240 
Unstan,  466 
Unugures  or  Unuguri,  778,  784, 

n.,  1118 
Uphill,  953 
Upperchurch,  53 
Uppercross,  Bar.  of,  382 
Upper  Iveagh,  283 
Upperthird,  56 
Upsala,  473 
Ural  languages,  775,  n. 

mountains,  the,  740 

Urck,  564 

Urdos,  583 

Urghin,  398 

Urk,  934,  938,  944 

Urn,  discovery  of,  238 

for  fragments  of  body  cut 

up,  456 

from  Ballysadare,  183 

Barnasrahy,  173 

—  Spain,  685,  686 

Tregaseal,  442,  443 

in  cairn  at  Carrovvmore, 

153 
Vrnen-fc-ldcr,  5 1 7 
Urney,  208 
Urns  found  in  co.   Cork,  with 

body  cut  up,  456 
from  Knockmary,  380 

tomb    near    Halle, 

444 

,  how  made,  153,  154 

• ,  stone,  345,  367 

i  'rsus  Fcrox,  91 7 

Usedom,  1082,  n.,  11 53,  11 56 

VOL.   III. 


Usenoim,  1156 

Ushnagh,    585,   758,  759,  873, 
10S6,  1119,  1142,  1153 

— -  Hill,  372,  373 

Usipetes,  1 061,  n. 

Usna,  1082,  1086,  1 153,  1 1 56 

Usnach,  1086 

Usnagh  (Tyrone),  373 

Usnan,  1082,  n. 

Usneach,  1142 

Usnoim,  1082,  n.,  1153 

Ussher,  R.  J.,  917,  n. 

Usuk,  748 

Utgard,  778,  1 1 13 

Uthar,  105 1 

Utigures,  778 

Utiguri,  784,  n. 

Utragi,  910 

Utrecht,  554,  558 

Utrigures  or  Utriguri,  910,  1 1 18, 

1119 
Utuguri,  the,  11 18,  11 19 
Uuyrun,  1082 
Uxania,  584 
Uzes,  577 
Uznagh,  1153,  n. 

Vahl,  1077 
Valcabrere,  583,  584 
\'aldenogueiras,  653,  n. 
Valencia,  6 
Valentinian,  936,  937 

.  gold  coin  of,  351-353,  355 

Vale  of  White  Horse,  906 
Valhalla,  742,  744 
Val  Jorguina,  835 
Valkyrias,  777 
Valle  de  Oro,  655 
Vallee  d'Aran,  584 

d'  Aure,  588 

de  Couria,  or   Cauria,    or 

Gavuria,  652,  711 

d'  Ossau,  582,  583 

Vaiky  of  the  Black  Pig,  860, 

864 
Vail  Gorguina,  642 
Val  Real,  653 
Vamb  Negregarden,  492 
Vanda,  mo,  n. 
Vandali,  537,  1060 
Vandalicus  amnis,  11 10,  n. 
Vandali  Silingi,  1076 
Vandals,    the,    780,    896,   910, 

1097,  1 1 18,  1 122 
Vandalus,  349 
Van  der  Ilreven,  999 
Van  Eys,  590,  n.,  634,  n.,  912 
Vangeois,  566,  n. 
Van  Langen,  549 

Lier,  555,  556,  n. 

Vannes,  673 

Vaour,  597,  59S 

Vapoicr-baths,  among  Irish,  and 

also    Esthonian    Finns,    514, 

775,  n- 
Var,  599 

Varangian  guard,  604,  n.,  1079 
X'ardes,  Autel  des,  623 
\arini,  1082,  1143 
Varni,   1082,  1151 
Varra,  799,  1 030 
Varter,  the,  516 


VarzeiL,  515 

Vaucleuse,  955 

Vaud,  929 

Ve,  891,  1 163 

Vechta,  the  river,  894,  n. 

Vechtan,  894,  n. 

Vecta,  894,  n. 

\'egelius,  H.,  776,  n. 

Veildeheen,  592 

Vela  de  la  Barca  de  la   Virgeii, 

653,  833 
Veldumni,  1097 
Veldumnianus,  1097,  1112 
Veldumnii,  1 108 
Veleda,  554,  829 
Velleda,  1167 
Velschow,  893 
Venables,  Canon,  789 
Venantius  Fortunatus,  1060 
Venden-Kirchoff,  545 
Venedi,  811,  1108 
Veneralio    lapidum,     the,     514, 

535,  580,  645,  768 
Veueti,  603,  n.,  811,  1108 
Ventry,  i,  819,  n.,  1040 

,  battle  of,  795 

Venus,  846 

Verania,  or  Veran,    1060,  106 1, 

1081,  1084,  1087 
Vercondaridubnus,  11 12 
Verdier,  580 
Verdubnus,  1 112 
Verdumnus,  11 12 
Verelius,  1061,  1106 
Verjugodumnus,  mi 
Z  'crmis,  472,  n. 
Vermlande,  493 
Verne,  1082 
Vernia,  1082 
Verovitus,  1084,  1085 
Vestergcitlande,  483,  487,  488, 

490,  491,  493,  505,506,  511, 

661,  708,  714 
J^'stibnle,   or  antechamber,   the 

feature  of,  691,  699-701,  753. 

See  Portico 
Vicar's  Carn,  297,  793,  Soi 
Vicarstown,  2 
Vicdessos,  596 
Victo-liianis,  893,  n. 
Victoria,  647 
Vidhelgeat,  893,  n. 
Vidigueiras,  666 
Vienna,  1171-1174 
Vieux,  580,  597,  835 
Vigfusson,  767,  n.,  785,  n.,  970, 

n. 
Vigors,  Lieut. -Col.,  293 
Vikings'  ship,  492 
Vikings,  skulls  of  the,  949 
Vile,  891,  1 163 
Villa,    Amil    y    Castro,   Sr.  J-, 

591,  593,  595,  632,  n.,  636, 

653,  655-657,  S93,  n.,  899 
Villages,  subterranean,  966 
Villalba  Saserra,  643 
Villaneuva,  847,  n. 
Villa  Real,  718 
ViUars,  881 

Villa-Velha-<le-Rodao,  668 
Villaverde,  592 
Villemaniuc,  5S1 

2     L     ^ 


I230 


Index. 


Villeneuve,  88i 

Vina,  the,  1036 

ll'ficelutia,  595 

Vindelgeut,  893,  n. 

\'indelici,  602,  817,  n. 

V'indili,  1082 

Vinili,  603,  n. 

\'ircho\v,   Prof.,  517,  521,   522, 

740,   746,  894,   932,  et  seqq., 

938,  ct  seqq.,  952,  961,   965, 

986,  993,  1 123,  U25-II27 
Virgil,  555.  n. 

the  Grammarian,   609,  n. 

Virgin  del  Abra,  652 

Mary,  the,  5S0,  581,  588, 

.589..593>  598 
\'irginius,  471 
\'iruni,  10S2 
Virunum    (in    Noricum),    1082, 

10S6 
Visbeck  Bride,  the,  549 
Visigoths,  910,  1 1 18 
Vistula,  491,  508,  515,  518,519, 

521,    611,    741,    896,     1077, 

1906, n.,  1097,  iioi 
Vitalianus,  11 17 
Viterbo,  Sr.,  633,  635,  637 
\'ithungi,  949,  n. 
VHtrified forts,  207,  1 125,  1 126 
Vitruvius,  147,  638,  640 
Vizella,  668 
Vole,  I117 
Voden,  894,  n. 
Vodoal,  Saint,  lioi 
\'ogt,  929,  1004,  n. 
\'ogue's.  Saint,  417 
Vohanda,  a  rivulet,  514 
Voigt,  515 
Volca;,  601 

Tectosages,  593,  597,  609 

Volcan,  Bishop,  798 

Volga,  the,  476,  778,  780,  1102, 

I117 
— ,  the  Middle,  603 
Volusian,  895,  896,  n.,  1097 
Von  der  Hagen,  550 
Vossius,  870,  n. 
Vries,  549,  563,  n. 
Vrolik,  930 
Vulci,  721 

Vulgares,  780,  1061,  1 1 17 
N'uodan,  892,  n. 

Waag,  the,  1154 

Wackelstein,  the,  510 

Waha,  565 

Wahlbeck,  538 

Waigri,  1074 

Waitz,   1 172 

Wakeman,    W.    F.,    106,    141, 

153.  197,  354,  423.  732,  772, 
827,  979-983 
W'akes,  among  the  /Estii,  871 
Wal,  1077 
Walnli,  1077 
Waldbillig,  565 
Waldemar,  1088 
Walenbostel,  544,  551 
Wales,  450,  482,  568,  584,  634, 

661,  846,  1027,  1 129 
— — ,  dolmens  in,  449 
.  North,  1 1 32 


Walholant,  1099 

\Yalker,    R.  C,  71,   143,    144, 

152,  153,  167,  179,  438 
Wallachians,  1 144 
Wallenhorst,  550 
Wallia,    King    of    the    Goths, 

1076 
Walshe,  Mr.,  159-163,  168 
Wandel  Lake,  536 
Wanderersliede,  781 
Ware,  Sir  J.,  525,  n. 
JVar-god,  circles  connected  with 

the  worship  of  the,  505,  n. 
Waring,  614,  616 
Waringstown,  290 
Warni,  1082,  1143,  1155 
Warnou,  or  VVarnau,  the,   896, 

n.,  1082-10S4,  1 1 10,  n.,  1 155, 

1156 
Warrenpoint,  284 
Warthe,  the,  508 
Wasserschleben,  746,  n. 
Water-bull,  the,  911 
Wateresk,  288 
Waterford,  681,  880 

;  City  of,  62,  1049 

,    County   of,   56-64,    273, 

515,  593,  n- 
Water  Horses,  696 

Water  issiiing from  tombs,  II2. 

Water-Serpent,  595 

Waterville,  6 

Wattle  Bridge,  227,  228 

Wayland  Smith's  Cave,  157, 
452 

Weaverthorpe,  952 

Wecta,  894,  n. 

Wedding  party  turned  into  stone, 
502 

Wedge-shape,  the  feature  of  the, 
in  dolmens,  cists,  etc.,  20,  24, 
31,  66,  72-79,  81,  90,  95,  98, 
128,  129,  180,  214,  221,  236, 
427-429,  438,  440,  443,  444, 
448,  460,  492,  496,  501,  509, 

516,  538,  557,  611,  631,  661, 
670,  704,  705 

Weinburg,  the,  544 
Weissenfels,  519 
Weissent,  the,  968 
Weissobriinner      Codex,      the, 

1057,  1099 
Welcker   on   Irish  skulls,  923, 

935,  938,  946,  11. 
Wellmount,  182 
//;■//  of  Beara  the  Witch,  799 

of  the  sun,  849 

,    victims    plunged     in    a, 

473 
worship  of  the,   580,  588, 

and  n.,   589,   651,   665,  697, 

730,  1 1 15,  1 161,  n. 
W^ells  connected  with  dolmens, 

645,  765,  772 

connected  with  sun- 
worship,  849 

connected  with    cultus    of 

the  dead,  770 

,  insults  to,  514 

Welshman,  608 

Welsh  skull,  the,  1020 

Welstead,  Lieut.,  726,  n. 


Weltin,  536 

W^ely  en  Neby  Sum,  735 

Wendish  churchyards,  500,  545 

Wends,  530,  1156 

Wend-slone,  the,  537 

Wenoi,  896,  n.,  1082,  n.,  1086 

Werin,  1083 

Weriner,  a,  1136,  n.,  1143 

Werini,  1082-1086,  11 50,  11 55 

Werla,  1082 

Werlauff,  11 00 

Werli,  1082,  n. 

Wermersdorp,  1171,  n. 

Werne,  1082,  1083 

Weser,  the,  548,  602,  782,  11 32, 

1171,  n. 
West  Bannmouth,  251 

Bothnia,  778 

Buckland,  673,  674 

Westendorp,  54S-550,  passim 
Western     Islands     (Scotland), 

226,  460,  1 03 1 
Westfalia,  1082,  1085 
West   Kennet,   452,    457,    458, 

490,  969,  972,  974 
Westmeath,   Co.   of,  372,   373, 

439 
Weston-Super-Mare,  953 
Westow  Barrow,  453 
Westphalia,  206,  n.,   548,   550, 

551,  561,  565,  782,  1061,  n., 

1 159,  1 163 
Westport,  123,  124 
Westropp,  Mr.  T.  J.,  65-102, 

1129,  1130 
West  Somerset,  1027 

Tump  Barrow,  460 

Wetterau,  the,   584,   769,    871, 

894,  n. 
Wetton,  971,  972 
Wexford,  680 

,  Bay  of,  1076,  1095 

,  Co.  of,  416,  417,  587 

Weyland  Smith,  884,  n. 

Smith's  cave,  458,  459 

White  earn,  the,  268 
Whitechurch,  14,  393,  394,  409> 

1028 
Whitehill,  192 
Wliite  Horses,  1090 

Lady,  a,  729,  748 

White  Lough,  207 

Whitepark  Bay,  259 

White  Sea,  149,  n. 

Stones,  the,  295,  553,  562, 

761,  763,  830,  831 
Whitley  Stokes,  Dr.    5-^v  Stokes 
Wicklow,     Co.     of,     412-415, 

994 

,  town  of,  413 

Widekund,  550 

Widewut,  1061 

Wigand,  P.,  550,  n.,  565,  782 

Wildbaden,  550 

Wilde  Ireshe,  1044,  ^"^  frontis- 
piece, vol.  i. 

Wilde,  Lady,  848 

,  Sir  R.  W.,  143,  354,  438, 

524,  671,  n.,  673,  676,  681, 
682,  925,  946,  947,  983, 
1006,  1007,  1015,  1 124 

Wildhuizen,  549 


Index. 


1231 


Wilkinson,  G.,  8,  11,  197,  357, 
359,  702 

Willenstein,  547 

Wilmersdorf,  531 

Wilson,  Daniel,  46S,  945,  953, 
954,  1020 

Wiltshire,  278,  331,  351,  452, 
454>  611,  973,  1023 

Winclele,  J.,  1-45,  420,  421, 
591,  592,  594,  n.,  638,  650, 
n.,  656,  n.,  663,  n.,  732,  n., 
765,  769,  786,  793,  794,  n., 
797,  n.,  831,  833,  843,  844, 
848,  850,  n.,  852,  S55,  856, 
n.,  857,  872,  879,  n.,  899, 
901,  903,  905,  910,  n.,  913, 
1115,  1116 

Windisch,  764,  n.,  800,  n.,831, 
n.,  1056,  1 103,  n. 

Wineta,  896,  1082,  1086, 
1156 

Winslow,  Air.,  838 

Winterfield,  531 

Winus,  896,  n. 

Wirun,  1082 

Wislicenus,  Paul,  1157 

IVilches,  553,  !;7Q,  635,  642, 
667,  696,  828," 83 1,  883 

Witch's  HoUo'lU,  the,  835 

Witham,  870 

Witten,  554 

Witter,  De,  554 

]Vitte  Wyven,  554 

Wittou,  1087 

Wodan,  or  Woden,  473,  892, 
894,  n.,  1 164.  See  Odin, 
Vuodan,  etc. 

Wolfdietrich,  782 

Wolfsklaueii,  565 

Women,  establishments  of 
pagan,  1161 

,  names  of,  827-852 


Wotnett,    value    of,    among  the 

Iberi,  715 
Wooc/e7i  images,  788 
s/a/'    or  table  in    German 

tomb,  443 
Woodford  River,  228 
Wood-Martin,     Col.,      14,     74, 

I18-122 
Woodtown,  394,  433,  434 
Woodtown  (Alount  Venus),  382- 

385,  390 
Woodville,   174 
Worm,  the,  472,  n.,  594 

Ditch,  the,  864,  865,  909 

WormiuR,  Oiaus,  473,  529,  546, 

n.,  893 
Worm's  Dyke,  the,   11 60.     See 

Wurm 
Worm  Track,  the,  864,  909 
Worsaae,    M.,    469,    473,    481, 

482,  486,  487,  496,  616,  620, 

n.,  740,  950,  999,  1015,  n. 
Worship  oj  stones  among  Finns, 

514 
Wright,  308,  et  seqq. 
Writzig,  533 
\\  roblewo,  518 
Wueniko,  776 
JVzeciio,  776 
Wulfsbriichem,  533 
Wnlfshiigel,  915 
Wulvericheford,  950 
Wunderberg,  the,  535 
IVnrm,  472,  n. 

Dyke,  372,  n.     See  Worm 

Wurtemburg,  550,  929,  997 

Xanas,  697 

Xanthochroi,  long-headed,  1041, 
1043  ;  short-headed,  1043 

Yarhouse,  460,  465,  707 


Yarrow,  467,  468 

YelloTU  Jack's  Cairn,  761,  827 

Y'enisei,  750 

Yesso,  149,  n.,  1027 

Yew  tree,  the,  830,  839 

Hill,  the,  905 

of  Mac  Aingis,  the, 

835 
Yius,  748 

Ymer,  or  Ymir,  891,  1105 
Yonge,  Miss,  1137,  n. 
Yorkshire,  452,  469,  475,  675 
Youghal,  15,  467,  855 
Young,  Rev.  Juhn,  297,  793 
Yrias,  594,  n. 
Vr    Ogof,   355,   42S,   450,    451, 

568,  611,  634,  66 1 
Yssel,  552,  n. 
Vuchts,  1 1 59 

Zabala,     Don     Pedro     Andre, 

74,  646 
Zadorra,  647 
Zebdon,  716 
Zeeland,    221,    458,    479,    481, 

483,  488,  490,  613,  1 108 
Zegota  Pauli,  Sr.,  509 
Zehden,  534,  536 
Zelle,  787 
Zennor-Quoit,  440 
Zenzer,  718 
Zei^a,  the  lords  of,  53c 
Zerbst,  537 
Zeuss,  936,  n.,   1055,    iioi,  n., 

.1143 
Zimmer,  Prof.,  824 
Zonaras,  604,  n.,  1079 
Zosimus,  604,  n.,  1071-1073 
Zschornhugel,  the,  445 
Zurich,  lake,  11 53,  n. 
Zuyderzee,  564,  934 


ADDITIONAL     NOTES. 


Page  211.  "Urn  found  in  Loughry  dolmen."  Mr.  Coftey  informs  me  that  this  urn  was  not 
found  inside  the  dohnen,  but  in  a  cist  a  little  distance  from  it. 

Page  302.  I  regret  that  either  in  place  of,  or  together  with  the  elevalion  and  plan  of  the  Anna- 
clochmullin  chamber,  w'hich  are  taken  from  Sir  William  Betham's  work,  I  did  not  insert  the  plan, 
section,  and  elevations  which  are  to  he  found  in  Yallancey's  "  Collectanea,"  vol.  vi.  pis.  xxii.  and 
xxiii.,  p.  45S.  Judging  by  comparisons  with  a  similar  type  of  structure  in  Scotland,  the  latter  are 
more  probably  correct.  The  overlapping  of  the  stones  forming  the  roof  is  clearly  shown  in  the 
section,  while  the  narrowing  of  the  chambers  as  they  recede  from  the  entrance,  and  the  positions  of 
the  two  mon<;liths  in  the  semicircle,  which  is  composed  of  twenty-four  stones,  are  distinctly  indi- 
cated in  the  ground  plan,  which  is  shown  lo  be  even  more  similar  to  the  Tomheaiix  des  Gcanls  in 
Sardinia  (see  p.  706)  than  is  the  one  I  have  inserted.  The  following  is  the  description  given  by 
Vallancey  ("  Coll.,"  vol.  vi.  p.  462) : — "The  cairn  was  opened  about  23  feet  from  where  the  two 
stones  rose  above  the  rest.  The  labourers  soon  discovered  the  third  chamber  in  the  ground  plan. 
There  appearing  evidently  to  be  small,  low  doors  from  this  into  other  apartments,  it  was  con- 
jectured that  the  two  tall  stones  might  possibly  indicate  the  entrance  into  the  building.  All  rocks 
and  stones  being  cleared  away,  that  were  in  front  of  these  pyramidal  stones,  to  the  base,  to  their 
great  surprise,  the  building  exhibited  a  regular  front,  with  a  low  door  of  entrance,  of  all  which 
Lady  Synnot  made  elegant  drawings  on  a  large  scale,  from  which  pi.  xxiii  is  taken,  describing 
the  view  of  the  cairn,  the  entrance,  and  section.  .  .  .  The  building  consists  of  four  apartments  : 
the  first,  8  feet  wide,  and  9  feet  6  inches  long ;  the  second.  6  feet  6  inches  wide,  and  6  feet  long ; 
the  third,  6  feet  2  inches  wide,  and  6  feet  8  inches  long  ;  the  fourth,  2  feet  wide,  and  6  feet  long. 
In  the  front  is  a  semicircular  porch,  of  rude  stones,  33  feet  in  diameter,  and  8  feet  from  the  door 
of  entrance  are  two  pillars  ...  9  feet  high,  one  on  each  side.  The  chambers  are  arched  with 
dry  corbelling  stones,  as  at  New-Grange,  covered  at  top  with  a  flag,  about  3  feet  broad  ;  the  arch 
springs  about  3  feet  from  the  ground.  The  roof  and  door-cases  in  some  places  are  destroyed." 
Dean  Allot  afterwards  observed  that  the  cave  did  not  extend  to  the  centre  on  the  cairn  ;  and  on  the 
opposite  side  he  observed  two  obelisks  rising  alcove  the  rest,  which  he  thought  might  indicate  the 
entrance  to  a  second  cave.  He  said,  also,  that  in  neighbourhood  of  this  cairn  "  stands  an  altar, 
named  Leac  Barkat^  that  is,  the  altar  of  a  giant  so  named,  as  the  peasants  informed  him." 

With  the  structure  at  Carnbane,  also  in  the  Co.  of  Armagh,  the  account  of  which,  in  my  list,  is 
inserted  at  pp.  299-301,  Vallancey  ("Coll.,"  vol.  vi.  pp.  179,  180)  compares  the  circle  of 
"Anamor,"  at  Wattlebridge,  Co.  Fermanagh.  Of  this  latter  he  gives  a  plan,  which  shows  it 
to  be  an  oval  composed  of  forty-eight  stones,  enclosing  at  one  end  a  small  circle  of  nine  stones. 
(See  my  account  of  the  remains  at  Annaghmore,  supra,  pp.  227,  228.) 

Pages  673  and  674.  The  exact  resemblance  of  the  two-looped  hionze  Jiaalstabs  of  the  western 
coast  of  the  Iberian  Peninsula  with  those  of  Cornwall,  Devon,  and  Ireland,  raises  the  much-debated 
question  as  to  the  sources  from  which,  in  the  Bronze  Age,  the  tin  for  this  bronze  was  obtained.  That, 
during  that  period,  both  paahlabs  and  socket-celts  were  manufactured  in  West  Cornwall  is  rendered 
certain  by  a  discovery,  which  came  under  my  own  observation,  of  lumps  of  smelted  tin  (of  a  kind 
commonly  known  as  Jews'  tin),  and  of  copper,  which  latter  bore  the  form  of  the  stone-bowl 
into  which  it  had  been  run,  side  by  side  with  examples  of  spoiled  paalslabs  and  socket  celts  in 
the  embankment  of  a  cliff-castle  at  Cape  Cornwall,  near  the  Land's  End.  The  existence  of  the 
rare  two-looped  paalslab  in  this  district,  as  well  as  in  North-W^estern  Spain  and  Portugal,  serves  as 
proof  that,  even  in  an  early  period  of  the  Bronze  Age,  communications  were  taking  place  between 
the  two  localities,  in  each  of  which  tin  was  already  being  worked. 

The  more  we  attempt  to  give  the  Cassilerides  a  definite  geographical  position,  the  more  these 
islands  fade  into  the  fabulous  regions  of  the  hazy  sun-down.  I  at  one  time  believed  that  the 
Land's  End  district  and  the  Scilly  Islands  were  in  truth  the  islands  indicated  by  the  ancient 
writers.  Being  unaware  that  tin  had  ever  been  raised  in  any  appreciable  quantities  in  Galicia, 
I  used  the  argument  of  an  exhaustive  process  to  show  that  Cornwall  alone  could  have  supplied  it  to 
the  Phoenicians.  A  study  of  the  mineralogical  features  of  the  estuaries  and  rivers  of  North- 
western Spain  has,  however,  completely  altered  my  view.  The  ancient  tin-workings  of  Galicia 
prove  to  be  of  enormous  extent,  while  the  actual  tin  which  remains  in  situ  and  unworked  is  not 
only  plentiful  in  quantity,  but  in  quality  unrivalled,  and — whatever  Cornwall  may  have  produced 
in  the  past — superior  to  any  examples  of  that  mineral  produced  there  at  present.     'J'hat  it  was  from 


Additional  Notes.  1233 


oo- 


the  bays  and  estuaries  of  Ferrol,  Noya,  Arosa,  Pontevedra,  Vigo,  and  the  Islands  of  Cycas,  Cies, 
or  Bayona,  that  tin  first  found  its  way  to  the  Mediterranean  for  the  purposes  of  bronze,  through 
the  agency  of  the  Phoenician  merchants,  I  feel  no  doubt  ;  and  it  is  ceriain  also  that  these  were  the 
coasts  of  the  Artabri,  where,  according  to  Strabo,  the  women  washed  it  in  wicker  baskets.  That  the 
vaguer  district  over  the  sea,  namely  Cornwall,  was  soon  recognized  as  an  important  held  for  pro- 
duction, may  be  taken  (or  granted  also,  and  that  it  was  from  these  same  coasts  of  the  Peninsula 
that  it  was  reached,  may  be  inferred,  not  merely  from  considerations  of  navigation,  but  from  the 
presence  of  implements,  such  as  the  two-looped  paalstab  of  curious  and  unusual  type.  For  the 
historical  question  of  the  source  of  tin  in  the  Bronze  Age,  I  would  refer  the  reader  to  "  Ilistoria  de 
Galicia,"  por  Manuel  Murguia,  Lugo,  vol.  i.  p.  332,  et  seqq.,  and  vol.  ii.  p.  56,  et  scqq.,  as  also  to 
that  author's  more  recent  work  on  "  Galicia  "  (Barcelona,  1S8S),  in  which  ^\•ill  be  found  much  valuable 
information  on  prehistoric  antiquities  (including  dolmens)  and  folk-lore.  For  the  presence  of  tin  in 
Galicia,  and  the  astonishing  richness  of  the  ore,  specimens  of  which  I  have  seen,  I  would  refer 
to — (i)  "Descripcion  del  Reyno  de  Galicia,"  por  el  Licenciado  Molina,  Madrid,  1551,  foil,  x.xiv. 
and  xlv.  ;  (2)  "  Descripcion  geognostica  del  Reino  de  Galicia,"  por  D.  Guillerno  Sculz,  Madrid, 
1835  ;  also  (3)  by  the  same  author,  "La  Ballesterosita,"  a  Spanish  edition  of  which  is  given  liy 
Signor  Manuel  ^ilurguia,  op.  cii.,  App.  to  vol.  i.  ;  (4)  "  Memoria  sobre  las  minas  de  Galicia,"  por 
D.  Joseph  Cornide,  a  MS,  dated  1783,  in  the  Bib.  de  la  Real  Acad.,  Madrid. 

Page  1080,  line  32.  Magh  Kedni,  or  Ceidne,  was  a  plain  said  to  be  situated  between  the  rivers 
Draobhaios  and  Erne,  where  the  Nemedians  had  to  pay  tribute  to  the  Fomorians.  Near  Rostock  and 
Dimin  x-i  Kessin  or  A'lzin  ;  in  Latin  nrbs  A'yci nor7nii  (litlm.  I,  48).  These  A'yziiti,  Kusini,  or 
Chizzini  and  their  terra  Kicine  are  several  times  mentioned  in  conjunction  or  juxtaposition  with  the 
Circipeiii.  In  Carl  Wolffs  Historical  Atlas  for  the  year  1000  A.  D.,  Kiziin  is  placed  on  the  Warnou, 
and  Kizinia  is  given  as  the  name  of  the  sea-board  opposite  Riigen  and  north  of  Circipania  and 
Dimmine,  If  my  view  be  a  probable  one  that  the  Nemedians  are  the  Germans,  and  the  Fomonians 
the  Pomoriani,  and  that  the  Draobhaois  or  Drawes  is  the  Irish  reflex  of  the  Trave  or  Travena,  and 
the  Erne  that  of  the  Warnou,  the  occurrence  of  the  name  of  a  district  (a  plain  or  flat-countr}*)  and 
of  a  people  called  Kiziiii  on  the  estuaries  of  the  former,  and  of  that  of  the  mag  or  plain  of  A'cdni  or 
Cciane  on  those  of  the  latter,  is  a  fact  of  no  small  importance  to  my  contention.  For  Kedni  or  Ceidne 
is  plainly  the  equivalent  of  A'izini,  the  d  or  t  representing  the  ;  or  J',  as  in  Hassi  and  Chafti,  thus 
giving  the  form  A'itini,  in  which  the  first  /  may  become  e,  as  in  the  name  of  the  neighbouring  town 
Deinmin  or  Dimviin,  and  the  second  z  be  suppressed  as  (if  I  am  right)  it  has  been  in  Demni  (the 
name  of  Finn  Mac  Comhail),  for  Diiuine  or  Demmine.  Helmold  in  one  passage  places  the  Kycini 
next  the  Obotritre,  in  which  case  we  should  be  justified  in  assigning  to  them  a  territory  west  of  the 
Warnou,  and  west  of  the  position  given  them  by  Wolff.  This  would  bring  them  into  the  flat  coast 
district  between  the  Trave  and  the  Warnou,  which,  if,  in  an  Irish  reflex,  these  rivers  are  the 
Draobhaois  and  the  Erne,  would  be  represented  by  the  Magh  Kedni.  That  this  district  in  Ireland 
ever  really  bore  this  name  I  do  not  think  there  is  any  territorial  documentary  evidence  to  show,  nor 
should  1  suspect  there  would  be.  The  river-names  would  have  been  transferred  by  immigrants  from 
the  coast  of  Germany  to  the  island,  and  the  tradition  which  those  immigrants  would  have  brought 
with  them  regarding  the  events  that  had  occurred  in  the  land  they  had  left,  would  have  caused 
subsequent  native  Irish  interpreters  of  the  tradition  to  find  for  it  the  locality  indicated  by  those  river- 
names.  A  like  process  appears  to  me  to  have  been  at  work  in  the  case  of  other  insular  localities 
almost  without  number.  I'he  impossibility  of  identifying  within  the  limits  of  Ireland  itself  places 
named  in  the  traditions  meets  us  perpetually,  and  was  a  continual  source  of  perplexity  to  O' Donovan. 
I  feel  almost  certain  that  in  the  case  of  a  large  proportion  of  names  of  places,  and  still  more  so,  in 
names  of  persons,  the  topographer  should  look  beyond  the  shores  of  Ireland,  and  the  etymologist 
should  not  hesitate  to  go  outside  the  limits  of  a  Celtic  language. 

If,  indeed,  these  traditions  refer  to  that  almost  unknown  chapter  in  history  when  the  Sclaves 
first  pressed  westward  and  contended  with  the  remnants  of  the  German  tribes  for  the  flat-lands  of 
the  Baltic  and  the  German  Ocean — a  chapter  the  loss  of  which  is  greatly  due  to  the  fact  that  the 
stirring  events  on  the  borders  of  the  Roman  dominions  were  at  that  time  engrossing  the  sole 
attention  of  those  who  marked  the  progress  of  history — no  locality  could  be  indicated  with  more 
probability  as  affording  for  a  time  to  the  invaders  and  the  invaded  a  neutral  spot  where  the  former 
would  receive  bribes  from  the  latter  to  stay  their  further  progress,  or  tribute  froni  their  tribes 
when  finally  subjugated,  than  the  sea-board  west  of  Riigen  between  the  Warnou  and  the  Trave. 

It  is,  I  think,  not  impossible  to  trace  the  Kycini  or  Chizzini  to  their  previous  and  more  Eastern 
abodes.  When  we  find  them  on  the  Warnou  they  formed  one  of  four  peoples,  namely,  the  Kyzini, 
the  Circipani,  the  Tholenzi,  and  the  Aedari  or  Aiadiiri,  who  were  all  included  under  the  general 
term  Wiizi  ox  Liitici,  Lintici  or  Luliiii.  Grimm  has  pointed  out  that  the  names  U'ilzi  or  Willi, 
and  Liutici  may  be  identical,  linty;  and  -wilt  having  suffered  the  same  transposition  of  letters  as 
Labe  and  Elbe.  {Die  Deutsehen,  655,  n. )  Now  Adam  of  Bremen  mentions  among  the  Eastern 
Finns,  who  occupied  the  country  between  Old  Prussia  and  Russia,  what  may  be  a  remnant  of  these 
people,  where  he  speaks  of  Wilzi,  together  with  Mirri,  Lanii,  Send,  and  Tnrci.  In  the  name 
Wilzi  found  in  this  district  we  have  seemingly  not  only  the  ubeKTai  of  Ptolemy,  but  also  the 
Litwani  or  Litwa  of  Ne>tor — in  short,  the  Lithuanians.     (A>ie  Detitschen,  679,  and  n.) 

It  follows  that  from  the  districts  around  the  Gulf  of  Riga  were  drawn  coniingents  of  those  people 
who,  having  pas>ed  along  the  Prussian  and  Pomeranian  coasts,  contended  with  the  Germans  for  the 
possession  of  the  lands  around  and  even  considerably  west  of  the  Elbe.  The  name  of  the  Wilti  is 
found  not  only  in  that  of  Wilzburg  in  the  Nordgau,  but,  according  to  the  following  passage  from 
Bede  (5,  12),  in  a  name  of  Utrecht  itself:  "castellam  quod  antiquo  gentium  illajum  vocabulo 
Wiltaburg,  id  est  oppidum  Wiltorum,  lingua  autem  gallica  Trajectum  vocatur." 


1234  Additional  Notes. 


It  will  be  apparent  how  intimately  these  considerations  bear  upon  that  I  have  urged  in  favour  of 
the  eastern  origin  of  certain  Irish  tribes  and  traditions,  and  on  the  westward  passage  of  Esthonian 
Finns  and  Sarmatians — the  Picts  from  Scythia  of  Bade  and  of  Edm.  Spenser's  favourite  hypothesis — 
under  the  general  names  of  Hiinen,  Hyni,  Fene,  Fomore,  etc.,  and  under  the  more  special  names 
P'ir  Bolg,  Fir-Domnaun,  Galeoin,  Rudhraighe,  etc.,  etc. 

With  the  name  of  the  Redari,  Riaduri,  or  Riedere  it  is  tempting  to  compare  that  of  the  Dal 
Riada  described  as  the  tribe  of  Cairbre  Riada,  whose  name  is  also  written  Rieda,  Rioda,  and 
Rcuda,  and  his  tribe-land  Dalrieda  and  Dalredia.  The  Riedere  in  North  Germany  were,  like  the 
Kicini,  included  under  the  Wilti,  just  as  Dal-Rieda  was  included  under  the  Ullta  or  Ulstermen, 
the  name  of  whose  territory  was  Uladh,  originally  applied  to  the  entire  province,  the  term  Ulidia, 
which  I  have  compared  to  the  name  of  Julin,  being  applied  to  the  eastern  or  circumscribed  portion. 
Between  Wilti  and  Ullta  (cf.  Ptolemy's  OJeArai)  the  etymological  difficulties  are  certainly  not 
insunnountable,  and  when  these  names  are  taken  together  with  the  many  other  coincidences  I 
have  pointed  out,  their  occurrence  may  afford  yet  another  clue  to  the  solution  of  the  ethnological 
problem  with  which  in  the  latter  portion  of  my  work  I  have  attempted  to  deal. 

Page  1 130.  The  plan  here  given  of  the  enclosure  of  St.  Leonard's  in  Hungary  with  its 
Christian  remains,  and  the  comparison  I  point  out  between  it  and  that  on  the  island  of 
Inishnnirray,  would  lead  to  the  consideration  of  the  question — far  too  large,  however,  to  be 
entered  upon  in  this  work — of  what  other  remains  which  in  Ireland  were  the  work  of  Christians 
may  be  looked  for  in  East-central  Europe.  We  naturally  turn  to  the  "  Round  Towers,"  the 
Christian  origin  of  which  in  Ireland,  so  far  as  their  construction  is  concerned  in  that  island,  Petrie 
has  placed  beyond  a  doubt,  while  with  quite  as  great  certainty  we  may  aver  that  neither  in  type  nor 
purpose  did  they  bear  any  essential  relation  to  the  Christian  religion,  but  were  adopted  by  its  professors, 
during  a  semi-pagan  period  which  historians  are  too  prone,  or  rather  not  sufficiently  unbiassed,  to 
ignore,  from  peoples  provided  with  an  earlier  and  wholly  distinct  faith  and  ritual,  and  that  the 
countries  whence  the  type  spread  into  Western  Europe  lay  on  the  borders  of  Europe  and  Asia,  and 
still  further  to  the  East,  where,  as  I  have  seen,  for  example,  near  the  Buddhist  monastery  of  Tien 
Dong  in  China,  the  old  pagodas  of  stone  or  brick,  shorn  of  their  wooden  balconies  by  age,  rise 
often  to  a  great  height,  from  within  the  enclosure  of  a  ruined  temple,  or  burying-ground,  and  both 
in  appearance  and  situation  correspond  precisely  to  the  "  Round  Tower"  which  forms  so  often  the 
prominent  feature  of  an  Irish  landscape. 

Turning  then  to  the  eastern  part  of  Europe  we  may  expect  to  find  such  towers  here  and  there 
upon  the  track  of  those  who  were  carrying  the  type  westward.  Among  the  places  visited  by  Pallas 
was  the  village  of  Bolgari  on  the  site  of  the  once  important  city  of  Brjrechinof,  the  ancient  capital 
of  Bulgaria.  He  describes  the  ruins  there,  which  are  situated  80  versts  from  Simbirsk  and  9 
from  the  river  Volga.  A  rampart  and  ditch  in  the  form  of  an  irregular  half-oval  surrounds  the 
buildings,  among  which  are  the  ruins  of  a  convent  in  an  inclosed  area,  and  a  stone-built  church. 
The  most  noteworthy  of  the  old  buildings  is  a  tower,  called  Misgir,  built  of  cut-stone,  and  of 
good  masonry,  about  75  feet  high.  A  circular  staircase  of  72  steps  leads  to  the  top,  which  was 
covered  with  wood,  and  inside  the  tower  was  a  modern  inscription  in  Arabic.  The  tower  stood 
at  the  north-east  corner  of  a  wall,  of  squarish  form  and  of  so  great  thickness  as  to  appear  to  have 
surrounded  a  fortress  or  gi-and  mosque.  On  the  west  side  of  the  tower  were  the  ruins  of  a  Tartar 
oratory,  vaulted  throughout.     It  had  been  repaired  and  turned  into  a  chapel  of  St.  Nicholas. 

Whatever  the  origm  of  this  tower,  which  is  described  and  figured  in  a  work  on  Travels  in  Russia 
and  Persia,  published  at  Bern  in  1777  (vol.  i.  pi.  vii.,  p.  273  ;  and  French  edition,  1779,  vol.  i. 
pi.  vii.,  p.  337),  it  corresponds  precisely,  as  shown  in  the  illustration  there  given,  to  an  Irish  Round 
Tower,  to  which  it  is  almost  impossible  not  to  conclude  that  it  bears  a  true  affinity. 

Page  1 156,  line  10.  The  town  which  Helmold  (i,  2)  calls  "civitas  Dimiiie,''  and  Saxo  (p. 
382)  Diminitm,  is  called  "  Timina  civitas"  by  the  contemporary  author  of  the  Life  of  St.  Otto 
(Boll.  Jul.,  I,  407).  A  similar  name,  attached  to  a  person  named  Eochaidh,  occurs  in  ihQ Leabkar 
na  ,!^-Ceari  (edit,  and  transl.  O'Donovan),  pp.  198-201.  It  is  in  the  piece  called  "The  Will 
of  Cathaeir  Mor,"  where  a  paragraph  commences  with  the  words  "Mo  Eochaidh  Timine,"'  i.e. 
"  My  Eochaidh  Timine." 


ERRATA. 


Page  363,  line  14, /or  "  Cortragi  "  read  "Colragi." 

409  „  i'j,for  "  Baile-au-Cheadaich  "  read  "  Baile-an-Cheadaich. 

441  ,,  \g,  for  " peristalith  "  read  "peristyle." 

449  ,,      ^,  for  "  British  Channel  "  read  "  Bristol  Channel." 

452  ,,      7,  for  "Greenwall"  read  "Greenwell." 

465  ,,      S^  f"^  "  Aunaclochmullin  "  read  "  Annaclochmullin." 

466  ,,  Z7^  fi>'  "  Clawa  "  read  "Clava." 
478  ,,  i^,  for  "Ruchs"  read  "  Riiehs." 
527  ,,  12,  for  "  Kleman  "  read  "Klemm." 

543  'J  33 >  y^''  "  Mendingen  "  read  "  Medingen." 

544  ,,      7,  for  "  Wand  F  "  read  "  W  and  F," 
547  ,,  20,  for  "Elb"  read  "Elbe." 
566  ,,  2j,  for  "  Cartaillac  "  read  "  Cartailhac." 
585  ,,      6,  for  "  Pyranees  "  r^a^  "  Pyrenees." 
5S9  ,,      7,  for  "Rhine"  read  "Rhone." 
603  ,,  38,  for  "  Curio-solites  "  read  "Curi-Osolites." 


f'RINTED    liY   WILLIAM    CLOWES   AND   SONS,    LIMITED, 
LONDON    AND    IJECCLES. 


yc 


■■•■  ^'    '    ^'W'<^'^^ 


m 


.1 


.-.-li*   -'.^VJW,*^- 


,^,^;,f]EGIONAL  LIBRARY  FACILITY 


D     000  245  993 


H-^l^ 


'i:^  ii>iiadi'>:v.v::j'
