Knowledge and Reality: A Criticism of Mr. F. H. Bradley's 'Principles of Logic'
Bernard Bosanquet (1885)
========================================================================

PROVENANCE NOTE (Tower of Babel staging): Bosanquet's Knowledge and Reality (1885) — a criticism of F. H. Bradley's Principles of Logic; the opening shot of the British idealist debates.

========================================================================

CORNELL

UNIVERSITY

LIBRARY


FROM


Date Due


D£C-b I


OHO «U


Bl618.B74°B74"""^^'">"-«'^ary


Cornell University
Library


The original of tliis book is in
tine Cornell University Library.

There are no known copyright restrictions in
the United States on the use of the text.


http://www.archive.org/details/cu31924029046477


KNOWLEDGE AND REALITY


KNOWLEDGE AND REALITY

A CRITICISM OF MR. prk/BRADLEY'S
"PRINCIPLES OF LOGIC"


BERNARD BOSANOUET, M.A.

LATE FELLOW AND TUTOR OF LTNIVERSITY COLLEGE, OXFORD


LONDON
KEGAN PAUL, TRENCH & CO., i, PATERNOSTER SQUARE

iSSs

©


^ylf&


'COR^!ELL


V


LIBRARY ,>


(77/(- r/VA/s of tiamlalicii .iii,l ol i ,-/'rodiiclion ,iu u.'Ci-tX'/ )


PREFACE


The present volume consists of a series of logical
studies, based for the most part upon ideas propounded
in Mr. F. H. Bradley's recent work, " Principles of
Logic.'' I have not attempted an exhaustive criticism
of his views — a larger book than this might be devoted
to the psychology alone — but have aimed at expound-
ing a few definite aspects and results of his position, by
means of free re-statement and illustration.

It may be convenient that I should explain in a
few words my conception of the present philosophical
situation, so far as it affects my attitude towards Mr.
Bradley's speculations. It appears to me that English
logic, under the influence of the idealism on which
science inevitably rests, has almost outgrown the narrow
traditions of its one-sided and, so to speak, pre-scientific
schools ; and that there are signs of a philosophical

«3


vi Preface.

movement in this country which may assimilate what
is really great in European philosophy, without forfeit-
ing the distinctive merits of English thought. But
with this forward tendency in England there coin-
cides in time a philosophical reaction in Germany — a
reaction partly determined by those very influences of
English speculation, which we hope that the present
generation has in some degree outgrown. In the
country of Kant, Fichte, and Hegel, such a reaction
will do much good, and can do little harm. It does not
imply that their work is being undone, but only that
the plan of the great masters is being handed over, to
be carried out piecemeal by the journeymen.

In England, where constructive idealism has never
yet had free play, the prospect is very different. It
would be a misfortune if sympathy with the German
reaction should restore the rule of traditions which we
are just beginning to lay aside. Adherents of common-
place empiricism would in such a case simply imagine
that their German neighbours had regained a sound
mind, and had admitted idealism to be a blunder.

,In such a state of the philosophical world Mr.
Bradley's work has a twofold significance. In essen-
tials, he belongs to the movement in advance, and is
an effective pioneer of that English philosophy which


Preface. vii

we hope for — a philosophy distinct and national, not
from sheer ignorance of foreign thought, but by the
characteristic appropriation of the world's intellectual
inheritance. But in some external matters, and in some
which are more than mere externals, he attaches him-
self, to an extent which perplexes me, to the writers of
the German reaction ; who, in spite of their extra-
ordinary good sense, knowledge, and industry, appear to
me to be fatally deficient in philosophical thoroughness.
It is my object in the following pages to show how
Mr. Bradley's essential and original conceptions might
be disengaged from some peculiarities which he appa-
rently shares with reactionary logic. Whether I may
succeed in this attempt or not, I shall at least have
done what I can to call attention to the leading ideas
of a work which deserves to be epoch-making in English
philosophy.

BERNARD BOSANOUET.

April 1^, 1885.


TABLE OF CONTENTS.


CHAPTER I.

TiiK Distinction between the Categorical and the Hypo-
thetical Judgment ... ... ... ... ... 1-58

1. The Hypothetical Judgment threatens to absorb the Cate-

gorical ... ... ... ... ... ... 1-4

2. The distinction between the two as stated by Mr. Bradley ... 4-7

3. Paradoxical results of this distinction ... ... ... 7-16

4. Mr. Bradley's inclination to Dualism ... ... ... 16-26

5. Which liinds of Judgments affirm the e.xistende of their

contents? ... ... ... ... ... 26-34

6. Argument from the nature of supposal .. . ... ... 34-36

7. That argument not final ... ... ... ... 36-46

8. Distinction of Hypothetical and Categorical Judgments

treated as a matter of degree ... ... ... 46-58


CHAPTER n.

The Judgment of Number and Measurement

1. Introductory. The Judgment has degrees of adequacy

2. Number and Name ...

(i.) Number and Extension

(ii.) Intension of Proper Names ...

3. Number and " Simple Enumuralion " ...


59-113
,. 59-62
.. 62-76
.. 62-68
.. 6S-76
.. 76-87


Table of Contents,


4. Number and Measurement ... ... •.• S7-97

5. Equality, Likeness, and Identiti- ... ... .■■ 97-108

6. Ratio and Series ... ... ... ... ■■■ 108-113

CHAPTER III.

The Nature of Assertion

1. Assertion and Modality

(i. ) Assertion a matter of content
(ii. ) Apodeictic assertion stronger than simple
assertion

2. Fiction and Judgment

(i.) Symbolic Ideas

(ii.) Reference to Reality


114-


155


114-


-140


115-


121


121-


140


140-


155


141-


144


144-


155


CHAPTER IV.

The Judgment AND THE Sentence. Immediate Inference 156-213


1. Illustrations of Judgment apart from language

2. Single-word Predication

3. The Grammatical and the Logical Subject

4. Immediate Inference

(i.) Conversion

(ii.) Contraposition ...

(iii.) Consequent and Ground ...

(iv. ) Antecedent and Consequent


158-164
164-179
179-1S8
I 88-2 I 3
190-203
203-207
207-209
209-213


CHAPTER V.

The Alleged Supjectivity of Negation

1. What does Negation presuppose ? ...

2. The significance of Negation

3. Double Negation ... •

4. Negation approaches Af.a-mation

5. Privation and Affirmation. Privation and Exclusion

6. E.\cluded middle ...

7. The Disjunctive Judgment ...


... ZI4-


-209


.. 221-


-222


222-


-30


.. 230-


--38


-. 23S-


-244


■ -44-


--52


■ 252-


-255


.. 255-


260


Table of Contents.


XI


CHAPTER VI.

SUBSUMPTION AND THE ANALYSIS OF INFERENCE

1. What is Subsumption ?

2. Is Subsumption necessary to Argument?

3. Subsumption in Aristotle ...

4. IVTr. Bradley's "ideal experiment " criticized

5. Number of terms. Synthesis and Analysis

6. Inference in what sense made

7. Premises and data


PAGE

270-322
271-274
274-283
284-287
287-306
306-310
310-314
314-322


CONCLUSION.


The Immediate Prkmise


KNOWLEDGE AND REALITY.


CHAPTER I.

THE DISTINCTION BETWEEN THE CATEGORICAL AND
THE HYPOTHETICAL JUDGMENT.

I. If we ask for a mark by which we may distinguish
judgment from other intellectual acts or states, the first
that occurs to us is this ; that judgment, and judgment
only, can be in the strict sense true or false. And if a
Categorical judgment merely means the thought con-
veyed in any sentence which can be true or false, then
the epithet " categorical " appears to be superfluous, as
meaning no more than the Aristotelian term " apo-
phantic " or " enunciative " — a term coextensive with
assertion or judgment.

It is by contrast with the hypothetical judgment or
conditional proposition that the term categorical has
acquired a distinctive usage unknown to Aristotle, who
did not recognize the hypothetical judgment as a species
of enunciation. It would be interesting, if space and

B


Knowledge and Reality.


knowledge permitted, to trace the steps by which logi-
cians became aware that the obvious distinction of form
between the simple and the conditional proposition did
not indicate an equally obvious distinction of meaning.

The term " simple " suggests that the sentences in
question were primarily distinguished as containing
respectively one proposition, and more than one. But
the unity of the judgment embodied in the conditional
proposition — the hypothetical judgment — was not hard
to discover, and was insisted on by earlier logicians as
by many in this century.

This being so, however, and it being clear that in
both classes of judgments, the categorical and the hypo-
thetical, a single direct assertion was made, it became
necessary, if the distinction was to be maintained, to
look more closely at the nature of this assertion. How
questionable the distinction, as commonly conceived,
really was, may be seen in the following quotation from
so acute a logician as Sir W. Hamilton. ^ " In the pro-
position, B is A, the subject B is unconditionally thought
to exist, and it thus constitutes a categorical propo-
sition. But if we think the subject B existing only
conditionally, and under this conditional existence
enunciate the judgment, we shall have the hypothetical
proposition — If B is, A is ; or, in a concrete example,
Rainy zveatker is wet weather, is a categorical propo-
sition. If it rains, it will be wet, is an hypothetical."

' " Lectures," vol. iii. p. 237.


Categorical and Hypothetical Judgment. 3

Here, judging from the instances, we have a dis-
tinction without a difference. " Rainy weather is wet "
certainly does not allege that the weather is rainy at the
time of speaking ; and if it may be held to affirm that
rainy weather exists in rerum natura, so perhaps, and to
the same degree, does the hypothetical judgment, " If it
rains, it is wet."

But apart from his instances, Hamilton's distinction
is one not to be disregarded. " Propositio conditionalis,"
as his editor quotes from Weiss in a footnote, " nihil ponii
in esse."^ The Hypothetical judgment expresses the
relation of reason and consequent ; the Categorical that
of subject and attribute. Krug, whom Hamilton ^ quotes
at length, insists so emphatically on the essential differ-
ence between the two judgments, that I suspect him of
having felt uneasy about this Kantian distinction. He
had hit on an instance, however, which in those days
would be generally held to fulfil the requirement that the
subject should be unconditionally thought to exist, "A
righteous God punishes the wicked." But there is no
indication that he sees any peculiarity in this judgment
relating to the existence of the subject, which should
.distinguish it from such an affirmation as that " All men
are mortal." His distinction is probably right in the
case he gives, but the case is not typical. He is com-
paring not an abstract or universal categorical judgment
with a hypothetical, but a singular with a hypothetical

' "Lectures,'' vol. iii. p. 239. ' Ibid.


Knowledge atid Reality.


judgment made in appearance about the same subject.
In becoming hypotlieitical the singular subject under-
goes a change, becomes a type, a general idea; but in the
so-called universal categorical, the subject is a general
idea already. In short, Krug, and Hamilton who relies
on him, did not see the real problem. They maintained
that a Hypothetical judgment could not be converted
into a Categorical ; it did not occur to them that a
large class of Categorical judgments, namely, those
with abstract subjects, might perhaps be converted into
Hypotheticals.

We will keep clear for the present of peculiar
instances, and consider merely the Universal affirmative
judgments of ordinary Logic. And it must then appear,
as recent logicians have contended with overwhelming
insistence, that these judgments must elect either to
refer to known individual cases (which their natural
significance, depending on intension, does not permit
them genuinely to do), or to remain abstract, and
without reference to particular instances, and so be
classed as Hypothetical, and translated into propositions
beginning with "if" and going on with " then."

These considerations have been variously applied by
logicians. My present purpose is to discuss the boundary
between Categorical and Hypothetical judgments as
recently laid down by Mr. Bradley, in his important
work, " Principles of Logic."

2. The Universal judgment, if bond fide universal,


Categorical and Hypothetical Judgment. 5

and in no sense singular or collective, cannot, so Mr.
Bradley maintains, be Categorical. A Categorical
judgment affirms the existence of its elements, and
enunciates some matters, conveyed by an idea, as true
directly of Reality. \^ But a universal or abstract judgment
does not affirm the existence of its elements, and may
be true though none of them exist or are even possible
in Reality. It does not, therefore, allege its elements as
such to be true of Reality, which is the same as to affirm
that they are real. Reality is indeed, as Mr. Bradley
has excellently explained, always the ultimate subject in
judgment. But in the singular judgment, or in the so-
called collective, which is only, it is said, a summation
of singulars, the meaning or content which is affirmed is
referred directly to some aspect of reality — of that con-
tinuous existence and activity which we have present
to us at every moment in perception : whereas in the
Hypothetical or abstract judgment this seems im-
possible, for such a reference would affirm the actual
existence of the elements spoken about in the judgment,
and the judgment would in that case become false if —
in one sense or another — they did not exist, j Now the
existence or non-existence in reality of its ideal content
does not affect the truth of an abstract judgment, j
i The result drawn from these considerations is that
universal judgments do not refer directly to reality, but
only illustrate some quality of what actually exists — a
quality that underlies and justifies the supposal whose


Knowledge and Reality.


I consequence the hypothetical judgment affirms. " If you
asked him he would refuse " does not state, it is con-
tended, a real and actual fact about the man, but merely
illiLstrates or reveals a quality in him, e.g. the quality
that he is churlish. And all judgments whose subjects
are not individual realities are affirmed to be reducible
to this type.

Before passing on, it is important to make as clear
as we can the exact limits of this distinction, to which
I shall have to recur.

Individual judgments, as I gather from Mr. Bradley's
account of them, are taken by him to be of three main
classes.^ There are, (i.) Judgments which merely analyze
what is given in present perception. In these the subject
is always the whole or some part of what is present to
our perception. These judgments Mr. Bradley calls
analytic judgments of sense, a title which I presume that
he adopts from Sigwart. Instances are such as, " It is
cold," " I have a toothache," " That bough is broken."
(ii.) Judgments which go beyond present perception,
stating either a fact of space or time, or some quality
of what is present, which is not given in perception.
Such judgments are, " It rained yesterday," "This road
goes to London." (iii.) Judgments which affirm about a
subject which is not an event. Such are judgments
dealing with the history of man or a nation, that is of
an individual related to some given period of time, or

' " Principles of Logic," p. 48, cf. p. 79 and p. 107.


Categorical and Hypothetical Judgment. 7

again judgments about such subjects as the Universe,
God, the self, which are related to no time in particular.'-

In all these singular judgments, and in these only,
" truth expresses fact, there is here no mere adjective and
no hypothesis." f The antithesis between Categorical and
Hypothetical judgment is thus identified with that
between Singular and Universal, or between Individual
and Abstract Judgments.

3. The view thus propounded is of grave importance
in the theory of knowledge. A change of the name by
which a whole region of phenomena is designated is
seldom a serious matter. To say that all judgments are
hypothetical, or again, that all judgments are categorical
— and, in different senses, Mr. Bradley upholds both
these theses — may indicate an advance in the analysis of
judgments as such, but need involve no change of
principle affecting their relative values. It is thus that
a consistent materialist and a thorough idealist hold
positions which are distinguishable only in name. But
to leave a category standing, and yet to transfer the
greater part of its contents to some other place in a
system, is a disturbance of the status quo that must
always demand the most careful scrutiny.

The distinction before us has, I think, paradoxical
results. This is no reason for condemning it, but a
good reason for considering exactly where it leads us.
We have seen that a judgment whose subject is a

' Cf. "Principles of Logic," p. 79.


Knowledge and Reality.


person, or a nation, and also a judgment whose subject
is not in time, as God, the universe, or the soul, counts
under the distinction as an individual judgment. Dis-
regarding for the moment the latter sub-class, we may
compare judgments whose subjects are limited in time
with some which would be, I presume, classed as abstract
and hypothetical.! It seems that an identity which is
related only to a portion of the temporal or spatial
series is the subject of a singular or individual judgment ; |
while one which we take as an essential factor in the/
totality which we are always building up out of these
series, one, therefore, of which we indicate no particular
limitation to any portion of them, forfeits thereby its
claim to be fact, ceases to be a subject of categorical
judgment, and becomes only a more or less arbitrary
illustration of a latent quality of the real. The names
of nations indicate subjects of categorical judgment ;
the names of permanent races of men, or of their cha-
racteristic states, " Aryan," " Mongolian," " savages,"
" civilized men," are abstract and adjectival, in as far as
permanent, but I presume should rank as singular and
individual, if considered with reference to their limi-
tations as identities extending over a portion only of
the history of our globe. Or again, if we turn to the
second sub-class, " Phenomena" ^ (as such) are affirmed

' I am aware that the subject whose real existence is affirmed is not
necessarily taken to be the grammatical subject. But (i.) it is natural to
suppose that an author's own instances are couched in a form which
exactly represents the underlying judgment, and (ii.) judgments analogous


Categorical and Hypothetical Judgment. g

to exist, when, by a judgment, we pronounce upon their
nature ; I really do not know whether space and time
have tlie same good fortune, of which they appear to me
no less worthy. It is clear, I think, that the majority of
judgments which compose the classificatory sciences of
organic life, might claim to be categorical, for no species
endure for ever. And if we appeal to usage, I do not
doubt that when I say, " The Priinida Scotica is a sur-
vival of a very cold period," I am understood to assert
its existence, not indeed now in the mere moment of my
speaking, but in the age or epoch to which the content
of my judgment necessarily refers. But such an affir-
mation as " Gold is an element," supposing that we take
the sixty-four elements to be permanent features of our
universe, will become, I suppose, abstract and hypo-
thetical, merely because the subject's existence is not
affirmed as specially related to any time in partiadar.
Now this is the very reason for which a judgment, e.g.
about the Universe, is pronounced to be categorical.^

I will discuss two objections which seem to me likely
to be made against the above comparisons. It may be
said that I confuse an organic individual unity with
a mere community of attributes, and that I propose

in type might be expected to be capable of analogous transformations,
revealing ultimate subjects of the same class.

' " Principles of Logic," p. 79. It maybe said, and ought in strict-
ness to be said, that the distinction I have drawn is idle, for no element or
characteristic of the sensible world can thus belong to all time alike ; our
globe is related to some limited time. But if so, then d. fortiori all the
judgments in dispute must be categorical.


10 Knowledge and Reality.


to accept completeness in the infinite series, which is
unattainable, as the equivalent of a non-phenomenal
character, the character of an object which does not
enter into that sensible series. In fact, the two objec-
tions resolve themselves into one, which is this ; that
I take an abstract identity distributed through space
and time, whether partially or impartially, for a true
concrete individual complete in itself.

I shall not be sorry if any error of mine leads to
an elucidation of this point. A species, my critic
might I suppose continue, is not an identity in the
same sense as a nation. The actual relations between its
members, as parts of a whole, are wanting. It is not,
therefore, one in acting and suffering as a nation is, and
cannot be treated as concrete and singular. It remains
abstract whether related to a portion of the series of
time, or, what we can never really know and must rather
assume to be false, impartially related to the series in
its whole extent.

To rebut this objection, which is not without force, I
can only say that I do not know where to draw the line.
No nation has its individuality completely realized ; it
is not easy to say what is a nation and what is merely a
nationality or a race ; and from race to species, in the
logical sense of distinct and relatively permanent type,
is no great step. Every species has, of course, in many
respects, an absolute identity, of which predication may
be made as of an individual. We are speaking, indeed,


Categorical and Hypothetical Judgment. ii

it may be said, of the distinction between a whole in
reahty and a whole for knowledge. But is Mr. Bradley,
with his fundamental view that fact is for us an ideal
construction, prepared to treat this as an ultimate and
self-explaining demarcation .-' One might, perhaps, dis-
tinguish between judgments bearing on the history of a
species as such, and judgments which affirm about
indefinite individuals through the specific attributes.
But this distinction would be evanescent, though in
spirit it would, I incline to think, solve the crux before
us. I might compare such a judgment as " The British
• Constitution is the growth of eight hundred years " with
"This genus {Ursus cidtridens) is one of considerable
antiquity in the tertiary formations of Europe " (Lyell).
I think that the latter is concrete and individual if the
former is so. The zoological characters, again, of such
a genus are predicable of the several individuals in a
sense in which the above fact is not, for it is only the
genus, and not all the individuals, that reaches back to
the greatest antiquity. But I suppose the genus as a
whole is also qualified by its zoological character, so that
the demarcation could not be absolute. It might not be
true to say " The genus Ursus cidtridens as a whole has
very broad teeth," but we could hardly be prevented,
even if it were reckoned an equivocation, from saying
" The genus Ursus cidtridens is characterized by the fact
that its members have,'' etc.

Then to take what is really the same objection in its


12 Knowledge and Reality.

deeper and ultimate form. | " Gold," it will be said, " is
in the first place not an individual even if it were limited
in the time during which it exists. But in the second
place, it cannot be taken as a permanent and absolute
feature of the Universe, for that presupposes the com-
pletion of the infinite series of its appearances in space
and time, which is absurd." I ought not, that is, to say
that gold is "not related to any time in particular,"
because there is no time to which it may not be related,
or because it is related impartially to all times. For
we can never have this relation to all time completed for
our knowledge ; and therefore the phrase in question,
when applied to God or to the soul, means something
quite different from this, something which can be known,
because not dependent on the impossible completion
of a series ; it means that in their nature these eternal
subjects are not called upon to enter into the sensible
series at all.

I may observe in considering this, the ultimate form
of the objection, first, that in speaking of the soul as a
non-phenomenal subject, Mr. Bradley adds the reserva-
tion, " If we take the soul to be eternal." This expres-
sion seems to me to point to infinite duration, not to
something different in kind ; if so, I think it is a mistake.

And secondly, I may observe that though reality
appears to us in the series of phenomena, I did not
think we were to look for it as completed in that series.'
" But you are looking for it there." This is a familiar


Categorical and Hypothetical Judgment. 13

and difficult type of puzzle. I say that I am not
looking for it there, because I think that in looking for
it rightly, in the organic relations of knowledge, we
escape from the series. My supposed critic says, that
I am looking for it there, because he identifies with
the series what I allege to be outside the series. Each
of us accuses the other of the same mistake.

I am not concerned at present to make out a view,
but only to display z. prima facie paradox in the results
of Mr. Bradley's distinction between the categorical or
individual and the hypothetical or abstract judgment.
I will now embody the paradox in instances.

a. First, I should like to compare with Mr. Bradley's
" Synthetic Judgments," and with those individual
judgments which deal with the history of a man or a
nation, some judgments drawn from the classificatory
or anthropological sciences, whose subjects are obviously
and definitely taken as limited in time.

As admitted individual judgments, then, I take {a)
" Synthetic," " It rained yesterday " ; " This road leads
to London " ; " To-morrow there will be full moon " ;
and {b) I take also as Individual judgments, but of
the third class and first sub-class (history of man or
nation), " Athens was extinct as a political power after
the fourth century B.C. " ; " The Hellenic colonies
were founded chiefly in the three centuries preceding
500 B.C. " ; " The Hellenic race approached without
attaining a complete national unity."


14 Knowledge and Reality.


Compare with the first set («), " Bronze and not
iron was generally in use when Hesiod wrote " ; " The
mounds of shells, etc., in Massachusetts, were left by the
North American Indians"; "Next century the Danish
shell-mounds will be still further from the sea."

It will be said, " Why, these are collective judgments,
i.e. collections of singular judgments." I persist that they
are not, and that to force them into this category depends
on an unnatural assumption. The subjects are thought
generally, through abstract characteristics, and are not
individually known. Nevertheless, they are fact. They
are universal fact, and to say this is impossible seems to
me a flat denial of the commonest experience. Now
for the second set (U) : "Greek art was worthless after the
fourth century B.C. " ; " The Aryan race originated in
Europe " ; " During the stone age of North Europe the
edible oyster flourished in the Baltic " ; " The oyster is
now dependent on artificial cultivation " ; " The Scotch
Primula is the same plant that grows in the Engadine,
and is sporadic in Britain, having retired into the hills
with the change of climate " ; " The fuchsia belongs to
the same natural order as the common willow-herb " ;
" Organic life is of unknown antiquity, but for physical
reasons may be pronounced far from coeval with the
earth."

I presume, to speak quite candidly, that we pass into
abstraction and hypothesis in these judgments where we
begin to speak of individuals throtigh the specific attri-


Categorical and Hypothetical Judgment. 15

butes, and not of the bond fide history of the species
or genus as a whole. But I absolutely do not know
whether Mr. Bradley would take the last judgment,
" Organic life," etc., to be categorical {qua individual) or
not. Its subject is limited in time, and causally and
essentially related to one part of the temporal series
more than to another.

b. I pass to the second sub-class of individual judg-
ments belonging to Mr. Bradley's third type. His
instances are, " God is a spirit " ; " The soul is a sub-
stance " ; " The self is real " ; " Phenomena are nothing
beyond the appearance of spirit to spirit." Judgments
about the soul are only in point, Mr. Bradley warns us,
if we take the soul to be eternal.

Compare with these — " Gold is an element " ; " Gases
have a spectrum consisting of lines " ; " Heat is a mode
of motion.'' These judgments seem to be impartially
related to the time series ; but of course our elements
at least may not be coeval with the universe. Still, in
and for our knowledge, the subjects are not related to
any time in particular. Compare further, " Space is
externality in co-existence " ; " Time is externality in
succession " ; " The triangle has its angles equal to two
right angles " ; " Phenomena are essentially of a nature
which demands causal explanation." These judg-
ments appear impartially essential to our conception
of reality.

If the judgments mentioned under a pass for cate-


1 6 Knowledge and Reality.

gorical it will be impossible to treat these as hypothetical
merely because they have a more impartial relation to
time. They clearly affirm the existence of their subjects
as aspects of reality, though not necessarily at the time
of predication. No judgment does affirm this, except per
accidens. The difficulty which arises from a strict inter-
pretation of the hypothetical form of sentence will be
dealt with lower down. If this second set, b, are Cate-
gorical, I think we must admit the individual of know-
ledge as an individual for the purpose of the distinction
between hypothetical and categorical judgments. But
if so, the whole point of the new demarcation is blunted.
I shall attempt, at the end of this chapter, to resolve the
distinction into a matter of degree.

tl proceed to give my reasons for thinking that
radley's general views incline him to restrict the
province of actual fact, and therefore of the categorical
judgment, unduly, to the series of sensible phenomena.!
It is true that he is also disposed to speak of qualities
and facts which are altogether latent and non-phe-
nomenal. We have thus two extremes : a sensible but
fugitive series, and a non-phenomenal but permanent
unknown. But our knowledge of the nature, and I pre-
sume of the distribution,! of the things around us, is to

' Distribution would in some cases be fact, and in some not. " There
is gold in California " would be fact, California being the real subject. But
distribution, as science advances, tends to become mcessary, its causes being
ascertained, and thus it ceases to be fact. " Maize will only grow south of
the S2nd parallel."


Categorical and Hypothetical Judgmeiit. 17

him, in the language of EngHsh philosophy, " phenomenal
of the unknown."

Mr. Bradley believes, indeed, that everything, whether
in space or in time, which we know without at the
moment perceiving, is known to us solely as an ideal
construction based on inference. This doctrine naturally
leads up to some form of Monism, nor do I deny that a '
Monistic conception might prove to be the distant goal of
his enquiries. But the most striking feature of these dis-
cussions is — I will not venture to say a confessed dualism,
but — an angry scorn of a " cheap and easy Monism." It
was well done, in my judgment, to invest Perception
with the pre-eminent importance of being the one point
in which we have direct contact with reality, and to give
this contact with reality the decisive position in the
activity of judgment. It is one thing, however, to recog-
nize the actual differences of elements in a whole ;
another to establish two centres for the world of reality.
You cannot at once treat reality as ideal construction,
and demand from it characteristics approaching to those
of presence in the sensible series.

It is my belief that dualistic feeling, aroused by
reaction against the fatal facility of Monistic views,
causes Mr. Bradley to adopt the attitude which I have
thus described, and that this is the real secret of the
distinction which casts all abstract kno.wledge into the
class of the hypothetical judgment as contrasted with the
categorical. This contrast is the essential point, for the

C


1 8 Knowledge Mid Reality.


analysis which shows that a Universal affirmative judg-
ment can always be treated as a Hypothetical, is in my
opinion irrefragable.

I propose to support the above criticism by adducmg
evidence of Mr. Bradley's anti-monistic attihtde, I would
almost say bias, and then to apply the criticism to the
case of the categorical judgment.

I find in " Principles of Logic " several antitheses,
some affecting mere matters of feeling and emphasis,
some concerning important logical conceptions, which
I cannot reconcile with a view of reality as " for us an
ideal construction." ^

Scientific truth, for instance, is "mutilation," "a garbled
extract," " not the facts." These expressions are mainly
ironical, as imputed to popular realism. But I do not
think that they are wholly so. The author has true and
just sympathy for the claims of feeling as contrasted
with intellect, or at least not identical with intellect, and
therefore cherishes a deep discontent with any effort to
resolve reality into an intellectual movement. Only a
rich man may wear a bad coat, and only a philosopher
of Mr. Bradley's force could escape suspicions of a crude
dualistic realism when he writes as follows : — ^

' p. 74. " Events past and future, and all things not perceived, &yC\sXfor
lis only as ideal constructions connected, by an inference through identity
of quality, with the real that appears in perception." This is a statement
which I take to express what all modern thinkers believe. An antithesis,
however, to which I take exception lurks in the words, " all things not
perceived." All perception draws largely on things past and remote.

* "Principles of Logic," p. 533. This extract is fair as illustrating the


Categorical and Hypothetical Judgment. 19

" It may come from a failure in my metaphysics, or
from a weakness of the flesh that continues to blind me,
but the notion that existence could be the same as under-
standing strikes as cold and ghost-like as the dreariest
materialism. That the glory of this world in the end is
appearance, leaves the world more glorious, if we feel it is
a show of some fuller splendour; but the sensuous curtain
is a deception and a cheat if it hides some colourless
movement of atoms, some spectral woof of impalpable
abstractions, or unearthly ballet of bloodless categories.
Though dragged to such conclusions, we cannot embrace
them. Our principles may be true, but they are not
reality. They no more make that whole which com-
mands our devotion than some shredded dissection of
human tatters is that warm and breathing beauty of
flesh which our hearts found delightful."

The dream of the intellectual world as a land of
shadows, now below and now above, now more obscure
and now more brilliant than reality, a dream which the
unwisdom of ages has ascribed to Plato, seems never to
lose its maleficent spell. There have been some who
have hoped that the labour of centuries had in part
overcome this baleful enchantment, and attained the
lesson that reality alike for feeling and for intellect is

point which I am immediately discussing, that of unjustifiable antitheses.
It is not fair as representing the author's entire position, to which the anti-
theses in question are not essential. I may observe in reference to his
entire position that the distinction between reality and the discursive move-
ment of the intellect appears to me to be for us a distinction within tlie
intellectual world.


20 Knowledge atid Reality.


the world in which we live ; a world which is sustained
and transformed by the patient labour of the intellect
and will, but can only be maimed and degraded by the
impatience which splits it into a shadow on the one
hand, and on the other hand a substance more shadowy
still. Surely the more glorious reality is that which
our vision and our will can make of the world in which
we are ; and the certain frustration of all such achieve-
ment is to relax the toilsome grasp which holds real and
ideal in one. I direct these observations rather against
my own probable misunderstanding of Mr. Bradley than
against any view which I can believe him actually to
hold. But I seem to trace in him a similar attitude on
purely logical questions.

Cause,-' for instance, is not the sum of conditions, be-
cause to say that it is so is to say that a reality is a sum
of ideas. (I do not defend the word " sum," but that is
not now in question.) Now, on looking at the excellent
account of Causation near the close of the treatise, we
find that Cause is after all ideal^' given in reality no
doubt, but abstracted, isolated, and known as the
antecedent of a hypothetical judgment. A condition
may be more ideal, as being more abstract ; but if cause »
is real in the absence of effect (and often, if not always,
it is impossible for them to coexist in time), then a
condition may surely be real in the absence of the
elements which make up the totality known as cause.

' " Principles of Logic," p. 195.


Categorical and Hypothetical Judgment. 21


The idea of this antithesis is, I suppose, that cause
exists all at once in present perception, and condition
does not, being completed by a relation to what is at
the moment non-existent. But reality is continuous,
and the atomic "now" and "here" always need and
obtain completion from the non-existent, whether they
are taken as cause or as condition.

Here is another case. To justify the inference by
abstraction which lies at the root of the method of
Difference (a method which as given Mr. Bradley takes
to be fallacious) we need, if I read Mr. Bradley right,
not merely ideal but actual isolation of the suspected
cause or condition. But there is no such thing as actual
isolation. All isolation is ideal, and consists of combi-
nations which are believed to be neutral as regards the
matter in hand. You can only escape from A B C by
substituting A D E ; or if A were so concrete that you
could appear to treat it independently, then the first
step of analytic suspicion would be to break up the
concrete A into a further ABC, and the isolation of A
would again become in form, as it had been all along
in fact, merely ideal. To contrast actual and ideal
isolation is to forget that the value of perception is
derived from knowledge.

Again, Mr. Bradley accepts Sigwart's position, that
there must be unproved premises of proof " All mediate
certainty must stand in the end on immediate know-s
ledge ; the ultimate premises of proof cannot be proved."'


Knowledge and Reality.


I shall examine this conception more fully at a later
part of the present volume (see conclusion). Here I
have only to say that it appears to demand a basis of
fact at once definite and given. Such a basis cannot,
indeed, be identical with Mr. Bradley's fact of sense, or
even fact got by simple perception ;^ if that is, as it
appears to be, opposed to a judgment. But still less can
it be identical with a fact which is an ideal construction.
Whatever this basis of fact may mean, it can only be
taken as immediate in virtue of a rigid dualism.

The distinction which Mr. Bradley adopts, I believe,

from Sigwart, between analytic and synthetic judgments

of sense, bears witness to the same intellectual attitude.

' The analytic judgment of sense is called so from

,' keeping within the limits of perception, which it simply

analyses, or resolves into parts. But no judgment ever

I kept within " present perception," unless present percep-

i tion is taken as including all it owes to the past and

the remote.

So, too, when Mr. Bradley distinguishes a collective
from a true abstract judgment, he appears to treat a
collection of actual cases ^ as a collection of cases
existing at the time to which the judgment refers.
Now, I do not mean to cut the knot of this question
by simply affirming the actual existence of the past ;
but there is no doubt on the other hand, and Mr.
Bradley knows it well, that you cannot get down to an

' " Principles of Logic," p. 365. ° " Principles of Logic," p. 82.


Categorical and Hypothetical Judgment. 23

atomic reality in time by whittling the present thinner
and thinner ; and, as a matter of fact, no judgment, not
even the purest collective or aggregation of singulars
which language can embody, is thus limited, unless a
certain time-relation is of the essence of the judgment.
Present perception is a kind of limit, though less
definite than it seems ; and a set of known individual
cases has a limit ; but there is no tendency even in a
merely plural or collective judgment, to affirm that its
cases exist all at one time. " The two first kings of
England after the Conquest were called William," is a
judgment about individuals as truly as is "The present
members of the House of Lords will outlive it " ; though
there was never a time at which both the kings were
" existing " cases. Existing may indeed mean existing
at the time in which the predicated content was true
of the subject, in which case the term existing adds
nothing to the phrase " individual cases." But as Mr.
Bradley more than once raises the question whether a
judgment becomes false if made when its subject is non-
existent, I am inclined to believe that he considers all
judgments which affirm existence to assert more espe-
cially existence at the time of predication, at least when
the predication is in the present tense. It appears ,
to me, however, that no judgment affirms the existence
of its content at tlie time of predication, except per ,
accidens through the predication of or about a content
essentially bearing reference to present time, as in the


24 Knowledge and Reality.


above judgment, "The present members," etc. The
affirmation of existence in the synthetic judgment of
sense, for instance, is as often as not that of past exist-
ence. Here also, then, as it seems to me, Mr. Bradley
gives an unreal pre-eminence to present time, qua
present in the sensible series.

And even the conception of a present, or rather of
a presentation, which does not exclude lapse of time, ^
though preferable to the " atomic now," appears to me
to share the theoretical tendency which I deprecate.
True, it dispels the fiction of a reality confined to the
now and here, which must reduce itself under examina-
tion to a point without parts or magnitude. But it
effects this at the cost of breaking the continuity
between present and past, and forgetting that, though
the existence of the past for us depends on the present,
yet the interpretation of the present depends on the
past. If we are in earnest with the doctrine of ideal
construction, it is superfluous to assign duration to the
present ; while, by maintaining the duration of the
present, we give rise to the suspicion that we should
not be sorry to select a section of the series, and say,
" This is given, and is the foundation ; it is not artificial,
and is not construction."

One word more, before I return to the main subject
of this chapter. It is plain that explicit Inference is
distinguishable from direct Judgment ; from such a

' " Principles of Logic,'' pp. 50-53 ; cf. Lotze, " Metaphysik," sect. 150.


Categorical and Hypothetical Jtidgment. 25

judgment, for instance, as that which expresses an un-
ambiguous perception. It is less plain that Inference
such as is involved in comparison, abstraction,^ or recog-
nition, when the attributes on which it is founded are
not brought into full light, or stated in definite shape,
does not cover the whole region of judgment. When,
therefore, I am told of ^ " arbitrary synthesis of sug-
gestion with reality," of "mere judgment," founded e.g.
on prominent sensuous suggestion, or on external testi-
mony, I am obliged to doubt whether what we are
discussing corresponds to actual fact. I will illustrate
by the simple case of affirmation based on testimony-
So far as I understand my own experience, it is not
possible simply to re-think as true an allegation fur-
nished ab extra. The endorsement by which one's own
judgment ratifies it is not formal or empty ; it arises
either out of a coherence in the alleged content with
the existing content of our own world of reality, or in
some external mark of credibility, also appealing to
our prior knowledge, which applies not perhaps specifi-
cally to the content in question, but generally to the
conditions under which it is brought before us. No
judgment can be nearer to passive reception than that by
which we re-affirm the death of a friend which we have
learnt from the column of deaths in the Times news-
paper. Yet even here we judge upon grounds. Besides
the specific probabilities which are rarely absent in any

' " Principles of Logic," pp. 405, 406.


26 Knowledge and Reality.


case that interests us, we have a definite ground for
our confidence in these notices, viz. that they are not
" news," but are specially inserted by those most in-
timately concerned. If we find similar intelligence in a
" paragraph," we scrutinize its marks of authenticity with
severity. Here again, then, in the mention of a " mere
judgment," I find a value attached to the given which
seems to me incompatible with an omnipresent activity
of construction.

5. I now return to the question of the demarcation
between the Categorical and the abstract or Hypothetical
judgment. Mr. Bradley's favourite test of Categorical
character seems to be the affirmation or non-affirmation
by a judgment of the existence of its content. I have
already pointed out that, if only for the sake of Mr.
Bradley's synthetic judgments of sense, such as "It
rained yesterday," the affirmation of existence must refer
to the time in the predication, as essentially involved
in the content, not to the time of the predication, i.e. the
time at which the predication is made. Now, in a truly
universal judgment there is not in the predication a
reference to any particular time more than another,
because the content is or claims to be essentially
unaffected by time. And therefore, when, taking an
accidental "now" in the time-series, the time of pre-
dication, we ask, " Does the judgment affirm the existence
of its content now ? " the answer is of course in the
negative, and might conceivably be negative even in the


Categorical and Hypothetical Judgment. 27

most categorical class of judgments which Mr. Bradley
instances as categorical because individual. Suppose,
as has been held, that the soul has intervals of non-
existence;^ then a judgment about the soul may be
made without affirming the existence of its subject at
the moment of predication. At all events, I can see no
theoretical objection to this, unless continuity is held
essential to Identity, and I think Mr. Bradley does not
hold it to be so.^ I have hinted above, that his con-
dition, " If the soul is eternal," is suspect to me. [ I fear
it may mean that, in order to be a subject of categorical
judgment, the soul must exfst at every moment so as to
be existing in every present of predication/

A fortiori, then, when tried by thi^est, the hypo-
thetical and disjunctive judgments fail to be categorical.
The hypothetical or abstract judgment can no doubt
be true though its content is non-existent at the time
of predication. The disjunctive judgment affirms the
existence of its subject, or of a subject in which its
predication is realized ; but the disjunctive predication
itself is incapable of corresponding to fact. You cannot
have " either — or " given as a fact. The true content, in
respect of which the predication is categorical, is, in dis-
junctives and hypotheticals alike, a certain quality
predicated absolutely of an existent subject. This
subject must be existent, I take it, in the case of the
hypothetical as well as in that of the disjunctive, and

L_ ' Lotze, ''Metaphysik," sect. 307. " "Principles of Logic," p. 269.


28 Knowledge and Reality.


the two are therefore more on all-fours than Mr. Bradley
makes plain. Clearly, too, a disjunctive judgment is
also universal, and there is nothing to prevent it from
being explicitly hypothetical. " Whatever is B, is either
C or D."

Now, I do not see that the nature of reality demands
that a content which is real should be existent in every
present, or should be exempt from modification in time
or in space. It seems to me that in the species of a
genus we have an actual coexistent "either — or," and
in a present which has duration (or is continuous with
the past), we have a real presentation of a successive
" either — or." It may be answered, " No, you must
abide by one aspect ; either you include in your reality
a field of coexistence and an extended section of suc-
cession — and then you have both alternatives given as
real — or you reduce reality to a point, and then you have
only one." ^

Now, it must be understood from the very beginning
that time as a pure series, or extension as, so to speak, a
pU7-e coexistent series, cannot be represented in judgment,
and whether as such they could exist is at least a
doubtful question. In judging, it is impossible to avoid
using the elements of continuity in both these series.
" Then within our reality we shall have both alternatives,
and not ' either— or.' " I must persist in denying this
conclusion. The actual series reveals to us identities in

' Cf. Sig\yart, " Logik," p. 253.


Categorical and Hypothetical Judgment. 29

difference of various kinds, bearing various relations to
their differences. I cannot see why in characterizing the
reality we should be bound to omit an essential distinc-
tion in the relation of its elements. An identity in
succession is a disjunction. The reciprocal exclusion
of the successive terms is what tells us of the identity
beneath them ; and if a succession can be real, a dis-
junction can correspond to fact. I am even inclined to
surrender an opinion which I have held about the per-
plexity krising from the substitution of a universal for
an individual as the subject of a disjunction. "This
triangle," '' a triangle," " the triangle," " every triangle,"
all introduce the same statement. It is not true that
" the triangle can be both equilateral and scalene." We
are speaking of a single identical content in relation to its
modifications, not of different individual or particular
subjects. You cannot make a universal judgment about
a number of different subjects taken as different. The
only difficulty is with " all triangles," which might mean
that all triangles are scalene, or again all triangles are
isosceles, or all equilateral, though we do not know
which is true. This only brings out a character inherent
also in the other form of expression ; the fact that they
may stand, when thus abstractly stated, for a disjunction
of ignorance, in which an entire species is the subject to
disjoined genera. In this disjunction you guess that a
species must be determined as belonging to one of two
or more genera, but you cannot, I think, be really sure


30 Knowledge and Reality.

of this, for in order to be sure you want the actual
determination, and with the actual determination the
disjunction is destroyed. The disjunction of doubt is a
spurious disjunction, and should never be expressed in
strict categorical form, but always as problematic.

I maintain, then, that every judgment which predi-
cates a quality crystallizes into an attribute, in doing
so, an identity which in its manifestation for us is
discontinuous, and also includes differences which are
at least liable to exclude each other. To say that
predication which is not falsified in case of disconti-
nuity and disjunction cannot embody reality, and must
actually be reduced to the predication of permanent
though latent qualities, is a step that demands a good
deal of justification.

The result of this assumption is the paradox which
has been pointed out above. Judgments whose subjects
have a more or less limited existence in time, are
made categorical by this limitation, although zuithin
the epoch to which they belong discontinuity is ad-
missible in their existence without falsifying the
judgments that are made concerning them. Judg-
ments just the same in every other respect, but not
essentially limited to one part of the temporal pro-
cess, lose their character of fact by the elimination
of time from their content. And yet the non-existence
of their elements which they permit without becomino-
false, is merely analogous to the non-existence which


Categorical and Hypothetical Judgment. 31

interrupts every discontinuous phenomenon, and which
is not supposed to falsify the judgment that affirms
its existence. Non-existence such as befalls a phe-
nomenon outside the epoch to which it is related, if
true of it within that epoch, wotdd make a judgment
dealing with it false. But of course it is not easy to
find an analogy for such non-existence in the case of
non-temporal judgments, which speak of no epoch in
particular. We may find it, however, in judgments
whose subjects are wholly non-existent ; non-existent,
that is, in the sphere of being in which the predication
requires them to move and act. " Material spheres
of which the earth is the centre carry the heavenly
bodies." " Disembodied spirits love to rap on tables."
" Forces acting at a distance connect all matter.'' ^ " A
combination of light and darkness is the cause of
colour." If we take the subjects of all these judgments
as exploded fictions (I purposely employ some which
are doubtful to give more reality to the illustration),
then their non-existence, i.e. their existence merely as
fictions, falsifies these judgments, and therefore, if the
judgments are true, the subjects exist. Take, again,
" Gravity ■ is the chief attribute of matter." " The ether
is the vehicle of luminous undulations." •''Energy is
the power of doing work." " The perihelion of comets
is their period of greatest velocity." These judgments
would all be falsified by the absolute non-existence
of their subjects, although the last, in which the subject


Knoivkdge and Reality.


is discontinuous in its nature, is not falsified by there
happening to be no comet in perihelion when it is made.
Indeed no judgment, as we have seen, affirms primarily
about the time of predication, unless by means of its
content. The question is, as we shall see, when or how
ids\t]ie predication requires the siihjeet to exist. ')

I think, then, that judgments of the above type,

/( though abstract and therefore hypothetical, are judg-

' i ments about reality and representing fact, and that, in

I the only sense in which any judgments need do so, they

\ affirm the existence of their content — its existence as an

> aspect of reality, whose place and significance is in each

case analyzed in the judgment.

I need not enlarge upon disjunctions, which in my
opinion rank precisely with other universal judgments,
every predication of an attribute being resolvable into
the predication of the forms taken by that attribute
under varying conditions.

How do we stand now ? We have, claiming to be
categorical, first, judgments whose contents have an
j existence essentially limited in time, and therefore
necessarily falsified by the non-existence of those
contents for the time to which they were related, in as
far as their relation demands their existence. And in
strictness it is hardly possible to say of any features
of the sensible universe that they are not of this class.
Who can assure us of the eternity of gravity ?
\ Secondly, judgments whose contents have no essential


Categorical and Hypothetical Judgment. 33'

limitation to one part of the temporal series, and are
therefore treated as existing in no special relation to any-
time in particular. We can hardly deny that there are
judgments of this kind, even if we relegate the present
laws of matter to the last-named category.

I do not think that the claim of these judgments
can be set aside. Neither usage nor analysis appear to
me to support such a course. Partial and abstract of
course they are, and hypothetical, therefore, in the sense
in which every judgment short of the whole truth is
hypothetical. Still I cannot see my way to making
a break between them and individual judgments, and,
though not to be in time is different from beina- for^alL
time, yet considering the nature which reality has for us
as a construction which more and more emancipates us
from space and time, I cannot but think that we must
regard the subjects of these judgments as individual
aspects of reality, and, as I have said, I do not know
where Mr. Bradley himself would draw the line betweeti
his individual judgments and mere abstract ones.

I will restate my conclusions thus far.
V i. A judgment, in order to represent fact, need not /
be true within an indivisible " now '' or " here " ; and inu
reality no judgment can be made under such a restric-
tion. There is, therefore, nothing in the nature of fact
to prevent its being embodied in hypothetical or dis-
junctive judgments, merely because their affirmation is
not confined to a single point of time. I

^ D


34 Knoivledge and Reality.

ii. Abstract universal judgments whose subjects are
essentially limited in time, affirm the existence of these
subjects within the region of time to which they are
limited. These are on all-fours with judgments about
a man or a nation.

iii. Abstract universal judgments whose subjects
are not for us essentially limited in time, nevertheless
may affirm the existence of their subjects as far as
required by the predicated content. It is a paradox
to say that simply because not limited to any portion
of the series which manifests reality they are therefore
not true of reality as a whole.

6. Of what use are suclT' considerations as the above
in face of Mr. Bradley's direct account of judgment
based on supposal,^ which is calculated to sweep
away all distinctions within the region of abstract judg-
ment } His doctrine comes to this : Every abstract
or universal judgment is hypothetical, in the sense that
the elements of the judgment are not asserted to exist
at all. We may sometimes take their existence as
implied ; but this is a mere fancy of our own, arising
partly from the customary application of the same
adjectives which we combine in such judgments to some-
thing existing, partly from our bad habit of beginning
the judgment with "all," which leads us to waver
between the collective and the true universal affirmation.
But when we say " all " we mean " any," " whatever,"

' See especially " Principles of Logic," pp. 47 and 85.


Categorical and Hypothetical Judgment. 35

" whenever," and these involve " if." The abstract judg-
ment is thus hypothetical. Now a hypothetical judg-
ment deals with a mere supposal (the positive side of
nihil ponit in esse ; see sec. i). The nature of supposal
is illustrated by comparison with experiment, a com-
parison which I shall discuss in a later chapter.^ An
experiment consists, so I understand Mr. Bradley's com-
parison, in bringing some realities into contact for the
purpose of observing what happens in consequence. A
supposal or "ideal experiment" is the same process
conducted in the mind. Indeed, I incline to object to
the comparison on the ground that the distinction is
doubtful. Manipulation of the external world is not
of the essence of experiment, which simply consists in
selection and the purpose to observe, usually implying
and resulting in precise knowledge of conditions. How-
ever, for our present purpose the comparison holds
good, depending simply on the fact that the selection
of a content to observe commits us to nothing beyond
the intention to observe it ; and therefore is, apart from
unessential concomitants, free or arbitrary. It does not
matter for this purpose whether the process is percep-
tive as in actual experiment, or reflective as in a judg-
ment which is made on the basis of a supposal. We
have here an intrusion of «:/?(7?Ci?,- -which in science is
chance, into the region of intelligible necessity, which
ought only to be vitalized by a general ivill to know, not
^ See chap. vi.


Knowledge and Reality.


dominated by accidental interests. The beginnings of
science are much at the mercy of chance ; that is why
they move so slowly. The guide of research is the body
of existing knowledge, and it is this that endows the
will to observe, which in ignorance must be the servant
of caprice, with aims properly subordinated to the dis-
covery of truth. I do not mean, therefore, that an
experiment which we " choose " to make cannot be
chosen for good scientific reasons, but I mean that it is
none the less an experiment if our guide in making it
is mere capricious curiosity. Thus the differentia of
supposal which it shares with experiment as such, is
the replacement of intellectual by arbitrary motive.
This consideration should be borne in mind when we
are asked to class all our scientific knowledge among
judgments that deal with supposal.

In discussing the connection of supposal with the
scientific judgment, I must begin with an admission
which formally gives up the game. Supposal as such
excludes the affirmation of what is supposed, in the
sense that an act which is supposal is not, qua supposal,
also affirmation. And the meaning of every abstract
universal judgment can, according to usage, with more
or less straining, be represented, as Mr. Bi'adley con-
tends, by a proposition which says, " Given this, you will
then have that," or " If A, then B."

7. I now proceed to palliate this admission; and shall
end the present chapter by suggesting a compromise.


Categorical aiid Hypothetical Judgment. 37

The question is, how far "truth can state fact." I
am aware that all truths are incomplete, and that not
only as abstract, but also as wrongly abstract, i.e. as _
charged with positive errors of connection, they are in
varying degrees false. The only question between me*
and Mr. Bradley is whether our scjentific principles are
to be taken as explicit analyses of aspects of reahty,")Dr
\s mere hints and illustrations of latent qualities, whose
real nature is, as I understand him, inaccessible to us. -^

i. I begin by calling to mind what I have already
insisted on, that nothing in the nature of fact or reality
is incompatible with their being embodied in the hypo-
thetical or disjunctive form. Mr. Bradley evidently
leans to thinking, that if all animal life could be sus-
pended for an interval, the predication which affirms
mortality of it would not thereby become false. I agree
in this belief, but not in the explanation of what is
believed. That the predication of mortality would in
such a case remain true does not mean that existence
of the content is not affirmed, but that- it is affirmed
independently of time. I do not therefore admit that
" Animals as such are mortal " is on the same level
with " Trespassers will be prosecuted," an instance
given by Mr. Bradley, which I shall discuss directly.

ii. Supposal is more a psychological than a logical
attitude. It excludes affirmation of the matter supposed
only as any mental attitude excludes any other. It does
not exclude ability and readiness to affirm. It can be


Knowledge and Reality.


applied to certainties no less than to possibilities. All
that we have to bear in mind is that it does not ipso
facto involve an affirmation that the matter attended to
in the supposal is real. I am not disposed to acquiesce
in deriving the main logical features of a very various
region of knowledge from an attitude which often is
obviously constrained, and which is always an attitude
no less of the will than of the intellect. In criticising the
quantitative forms of judgment recent logical analysis
has taught us to go behind the external appearance of
a proposition, and we may here apply the instruction.
Take such a judgment as "Gold has a specific gravity of
19-362." It is undoubtedly a paradox to translate this
into " Wherever there is gold, there is a specific gravity
of," etc. ; and then again into, " If there is gold, there
is," etc. When the judgment is thus transformed, the
content is no longer given but taken, and taken by
supererogation, although it is given as a permanent
feature of reality. Such an employment of the hypo-
thetical judgment appears to me abusive, nor am I as a
matter of fact perfectly sure whether Mr. Bradley would
have recourse to it in instances of which the above is
a type. The question is, as I have pointed out above,
what constitutes an individual reality, and whether to be
individually real can be a matter of degree. I will not
reopen it here.

An employment of the hypothetical judgment which
is natural and not abusive is in such a case as the above


Categorical and Hypothetical Judgment. 39

to specify the condition under which the predicate
attaches. " If gold is compared with water in respect of
its density, the ratio between the two densities is repre-
sented by I9'362." TThe propriety of the hypothetical
judgment here arises from the content being artificial
and not a given aspect of reality but an observation
initiated by the willl The substantive and permanent
result is naturally thrown into the form, " Gold and
water have densities whose ratio is represented by
19-362." There is nothing in the adaptability of the
content to the hypothetical form which unfits it to be a
fact. But no doubt, when we envisage it in the hypo-
thetical form, we insist on the connection between the
elements as illustrated in a contact brought about at our
pleasure, and neglect, though we cannot destroy, their
aspect of fact. The assertiveness of an assertion, how-
ever, is, as I shall contend more fully below, in the
content ; and the intrusion of the selective will cannot
deprive a content of its relation to reality.

iii. Supposal, I have conceded, does not involve
affirmation that the content supposed is real. Never-
theless, it must involve some intellectual relation to the
content assumed ; and it is worth while to see what
this is.

First, the connection assumed must be conceivable,
or, as I do not want to profit by any connection between
conceivability and possibility, I will say that it must
be either conceivable or imaginable. Much may be


40 Knowledge and Reality.


imagined which cannot be conceived, if conception is
taken as excluding wilful abstraction ; but also much
may be conceived which cannot be imagined, if imagined
means presented before the mind's eye by help of quasi-
sensuous images. This is a limitation on hypothesis,
though not a very narrow one ; it excludes, I presume,
hypothetical contents which are actually self-contra-
dictory within the limits of that which we select for
attention ; it does not exclude what is really or
materially impossible^

Secondly, a more subtle question presents itself
On the basis of supposal, we judge ; we affirm some-
thing, whatever it may be, to hold true of reality. In
such judgment can we wholly disregard even considera-
tions which are not within the limits of that which we
immediately select for attention } Must we not take
account of matter ab extra, which, though we may not
desire to attend to it, yet claims a right to intrude and
vitiate the judgment based upon our supposal } In
other words, what is a legitimate supposal?

We constantly deprecate the use of supposal as
fallacious. "I dechne to entertain the supposal."
" The hypothesis is too much at variance with fact for
any conclusion to be drawn from it." The meaning of
this is that we have tried to keep out, in framino- the
supposition, considerations which, even if we can con-
ceive or imagine what we suppose, yet cannot be kept
out when we come to affirm anything about reality. It


Categorical and Hypothetical Judgment. 41

will not always do to judge subject to the conditions to
which the supposition is subject, for they may be such
as will destroy the affirmation. Mr. Bradley, in criticising
Mr. Venn,-"^ recognizes a difference between mere abstrac-
tions and impossibilities, but holds that, even where
antecedent and consequent are both impossible, a quality
which is the basis of the hypothetical judgment may
nevertheless be affirmed of reality. In a purely illus-
trative hypothesis this may be the case, and Mr. Bradley
in fact reduces all suppositions to this type, only that
we do not know what they illustrate. But sometimes
I think the affirmation cannot be made, although the
mere matter selected and supposed would justify it.
Not even a latent quality is then asserted of Reality.
I give some instances. " If the Duke of Wellington had
run away at Waterloo, he would have been a coward."
"If Christianity had never appeared, the world would
have been better (or " worse ") than it is." " If there is
space of four dimensions, you can tie a knot in a string
whose ends are held." These are not cases in which the
judgment is directly contradicted by any conditions
neglected in the supposition. The difficulty is merely
that the suppositions go so deep into reality, that we
cannot tell what change they might actually involve.
If the most potent factor in the world's history for
eighteen centuries had been absent, who can tell what
might have happened 1 All suppositions about any

' "Principles of Logic," p. 219.


Knowledge and Reality.


other course of historical events than the actual one, are
purely illustrative, their consequences being neither veri-
fiable nor deducible. Or let us take a stronger instance.
" If one is two, then two are four." Here, I think, we
are beyond the limits of legitimate supposition. I sup-
pose the question is whether the interfering conditions
necessarily urge themselves so as to hinder us from
making the judgment, which the supposition, within its
four corners, would justify us in making. Prima, facie
I cannot at all tell how the system of number might
be dislocated if one were to pass for two. One may be
taken as added to the value of every number, so that
two would become three, or, being also affected by
the alteration in the value of one, two might become
five. Or again, a fundamental change might turn two
into eight, and eight into sixty-four. " But this goes
outside the supposition, and we are to keep within the
four corners of the supposition." If so, however, we
are entitled at least to raise the question whether
from so mysterious a change befalling " one " we can i
affirm any consequence to result in reference to the
units which make up two. And if the supposition is
to be interpreted by saying, "one in all combinations
is to count for two, and no further changes are to be
considered," then we are no longer affirming a conse-
quence, but again supposing one, and the affirmation
tends to disappear. The following is a similar case, " If
sentient beings exist, with perceptions confined within a


Categorical and Hypothetical jfudgment. 43

plane, they see all figures as lines only." The supposition
has certainly been brought before the abstract fancy,
and consequences of some interest have been drawn
from it. Nevertheless, it may reasonably be said, " You
cannot really form any judgment about the supposed
state of things ; if there are sentient beings in no thick-
ness, they are without material organs of sense, and you
cannot apply your conception of sentience in the absence
of material organs.'' And if we are to be strict, this
objection seems unanswerable. If you cut away out
of a supposed reality a central attribute of the actual ■
reality, such as having the properties of matter, you
may lose your right to the consequence which the
actual reality would afford you, and be unable to replace
it by any other. Whether in any special case you do
lose this right is another question. Of course, in the
above instance, the conception is made imaginable by
approximation.

Thus, though I do not take back what I conceded
above, that supposal as such is not affirmation of the
reality which is supposed ; yet I must insist that the
arbitrariness of supposal is more limited by reality than
we are apt to recognize. From the moment that you
have, so to speak, fixed your eye on the spot in the real
world at which your supposal is to be made, you fall
under the dominion of fact. In formulating the hypo-;
thesis you are beginning to draw consequences ; in
carrying your suggested idea into detail and adjusting


44 Knowledge and Reality.


its parts with a view to affirming its consequence, you
judge at every step. It is not merely in the consequence
that flows from the hypothesis, but within the hypothesis
itself, that the compulsion of reality is felt. " If a
railway were laid from Suakin to Berber " ; such a
hypothesis as this sets us at work constructing by means
of judgments, merely in order to realize our own hypo-
thesis. Termini so many miles apart, such and such
gradients, such and such a water supply, so much risk
of interruption, and the like. In supposing, as well as in
affirming on the basis of a supposal, we are always
under the compulsion of reality. And whether the
supposal embodies an aspect of reality or merely
illustrates one is a question of degree. It is not true
that everything which can be couched in the hypo-
thetical form is pure illustrative supposal. The essence
of supposal is abstraction, and if sometimes employed
to express the abstraction of unreality, it is also capable
of being adapted, though with degrees of constraint, to
cases where the abstraction is no more than belongs to
all definite apprehension of reality.

Thus I contend (i.) that supposal is rather the
intrusion of a non-logical feature into cognition than a
logical attitude which excludes affirmation of existence,
and (ii.) that supposition is always in some degree con-
trolled by fact, and is not always merely illustrative of a
latent quality. For these reasons I think it allowable
to scrutinize the material content of even universal


Categorical and Hypothetical Judgment. 45

judgments, whether in categorical or in hypothetical form,
before pronouncing' the categorical or the hypothetical
element predominant in them.

Before passing to such an examination of content, I
wish to say a word on a point of the merest verbal
usage, but one which, on account of the prejudices it in-
vokes, is not unimportant. I think that English custom
has always recognized "fact " as to some extent a middle
term between Thing or reality, and the knowledge which
is in our heads. Fact is always conceived as relative to
knowledge, whereas thing and reality rather imply
independence of knowledge. True, any reality may be
called a fact, but not, I think, simply qz/a reality. Fact
is opposed to thing, as perceived event to indifferent
permanence ; and when, by what we feel to be a license,
a thing is called a fact, it is understood to be designated
as a definite manifestation of reality, of which we must
take account. An " existing fact " is almost a contradic-
tion in terms. We introduce statements of fact by such
phrases as " The fact is that — " " I know for a fact that — "
" What I am about to tell you is absolute fact." Thus
we regard fact as belonging, no doubt, to reality, but
as existing for us by construction and especially by
abstraction, as the embodiment of it in judgments
conclusively shows. I have little doubt that most men
would unhesitatingly afifirm the existence of things apart
from percipient intelligence, but if asked the same
question about facts they would be puzzled and would


Knowledge and Reality.


probably decide in the negative. Unknown facts,
although a simple process of reflection forces the notion
of them on the mind, are felt to be a troublesome
conception. Thus I think that common-sense recognizes
the true nature of that (viz., fact) on which it chiefly
relies, far more correctly than we admit if we confuse
fact with thing and reality, or on the other hand with
the unformed datum of sense.

8. I shall conclude this chapter by suggesting a point
of view in accordance with which it might be desirable to
modify Mr. Bradley's distinction between categorical and
hypothetical judgments. Reality or real, Mr. Bradley
maintains,! cannot be a predicate, because Reality is
the subject in all judgment, and thus the ideal content
of the judgment is ipso facto by judging pronounced
real. This view forms a remarkable contrast with
Lotze's saying,^ " In fact, however, real is an adjectival
or predicative conception," and has, I should imagine,
been formulated partly by way of criticism on the
latter.

We must remember that Mr. Bradley's reality is not
simply presentation, but is the systematic whole with
which we come in contact through presentation. It
appears to follow from this that Reality owes something
to the judgment which analyzes it, besides lending
something to that judgment. It gives a good name, but


" Principles of Logic,'' p. 8i.
Lotze, " Metaphysik," sect. 31.


Categorical ana Hypothetical Judgment. 47

receives solid cash. Reality is for us such as our judg-
ments have made it and maintain it.'- Our conscious-
ness may be regarded as a permanent judgment, which
is constantly, with more or less wakefulness, predicating
the detailed content which is our ideally constructed
world, as an interpretation and extension of the present
perception and general self-feeling in which we from time
to time find our contact with reality.

Thus though the subject may be reality, we must in
every case consult the predication to see what the reality
is. The real world as it exists for us includes many
modes of being,^ and confusion between these modes is
the only form which a false assertion of existence can
take. This being so, it may be held that a judgment is
categorical in as far as it is definitory. The form of
supposal need not arrest us ; we should investigate not
the form merely, but the content of judgments. We
should thus be enabled to account -for the grades of
constraint which unquestionably attend the embodiment
of universal affirmative judgments in hypothetical form.
The shape of a proposition " beginning with ' If ' and
going on with ' Then ' " can indeed be forced upon all
abstract judgments, but is obviously not in the same
degree appropriate to all. This " plain " fact should
make us pause before alleging the analysis of this class

' Cf. " Principles of Logic," p. 8S. " The real which in a variety of
judgments we have already qualified by a certain content."
^ Ibid., p. 41.


48 Ktiowledge and Reality.


of judgments as an analysis valid alike for all. You
may translate "All trespassers will be prosecuted " into
"If there should be any trespassers they will be
prosecuted," and the rendering is adequate. But take
such a judgment as " Planets are cool bodies revolving
round central incandescent ones." The natural trans-
lation of this is not into " If there are planets they
are," etc., but into " If you observe any planet you
find," etc. The hypothesis does not touch the existence
of the planets, but only our contact with it. The supposal
relieves this feature of the case — our contact with the
qualities of planets — from the necessity of being actual
in every arbitrary " now." In doing this it pointedly
embodies one feature of the universal judgment, which
does not refer, as we have repeatedly seen, to the time
c/ predication, but only to the time in predication. The
hypothetical judgment insists on this aspect ; the alleged
content need not, for all it says, be always actual. But
it is a fallacy to infer from this that the universal affir-
mative does not assert its subject to be ever actual at
all. The definitory content shows that the judgment
embodies an analysis of the planet as an aspect of
reality, as the reality in question, independently of time.
Supposal, we saw, is simply intentional selection which
leads to abstraction. But there is always abstraction
in defining any aspect of reality and predicating its
analysis about it. And the difference between arbitrary
selection together with isolation of a content, and the


Categorical and Hypothetical Judgment. 49

unintentional abstraction or isolation which results from
the defining action of thought, is a matter of degree and
not of kind.

Indeed, Mr. Bradley's " individual judgments " fully
bear out the principle I have suggested. Where the
subject goes beyond the "here" or " now," where, for
instance, it is a man or nation, or, again, something
that is not in time, the reference, which indicates the
subject, is effected by ideas, is definite and explicit, and
therefore is formally abstract. Without a demonstrative
pronoun, or some such limitation, ideas, as Mr. Bradley
shows us, must be abstract and general in their reference.
In order to ascertain what sort of position in reality is
held by the subject to which they refer, we must examine
the actual matter and substance of what is predicated
quite apart from its outward form. Or, why should not
" God is eternal " = " If God is. He is eternal " ? I only
propose to extend this analysis to every judgment, in
whatever shape it may meet the eye, and to treat every
affirmation which analyzes a substantial aspect of reality
in a way that maintains and announces its substantive
character, as an explicit embodiment of actual fact.

There is a fallacy to be avoided at this point. It is not
enough to have a predicate which involves, say, sensuous
reality. As Mr. Bradley has insisted, " All trespassers
will be prosecuted " may remain true, though there are
no trespassers. And yet, in order to be prosecuted
a man must actually exist. The difficulty is that the

E


50 Knowledge and Reality.


predication cannot get itself applied apart from the
abstract subject, and the abstract subject is not bound
to appear within any specific limits in the series of space
or time. It must be remembered that the application of
the too familiar notice is by its surroundings limited in
regard to space, and by its tense exclusive in regard to
time. If the judgments were made in a truly universal
sense, e.g. in a treatise on the rights of owners or occu-
piers of land, and it was set forth that " Trespassers are
always prosecuted," I do not think that this judgment
could be true, supposing trespassers not to exist in
reriim naturd. But the matter of the predication, being
an event in time, is such as somewhat to resist the
attempt to elevate it it into a definitory judgment.
Supposing, however, that in advocating the prohibition
of man-traps '^ and spring guns, some one were to say that
" Trespassers, after all, are human beings," I think there
can be no doubt that the general Reality which is ultimate
subject is defined by this predication as actual reality.
In these cases the predication breaks through the limits
of abstraction, which formally confine the grammatical
subject, declares the abstraction to be no more than a

1 Scott's country squire, it will be remembered, had man-traps such that " if
a man gets in, they will break a horse's leg." This hypothetical judgment
is so purely illustrative that it not only sets out to illustrate the quality of
the trap by its effect on any man who should get in, but it substitutes for
the true consequent a different one more forcibly illustrative of the strength
of the trap. This is a case of supposal entering into the affirmation of a
consequent. Here, however, it does not Umit the affirmation, but extends
it. See above, page 42.


Categorical and Hypothetical Judgment. 5 1

means to determinate enunciation, and denies that it is
meant to isolate the subject as an adjectival content.

I must observe that the difference of " extension "
between subject and predicate does not touch the present
question. I do not say that you have trespassers wher-
ever you have human beings, although even this distinc-
tion tends to disappear as we approach the definitory
judgment. But I say that if trespassers are defined
as inter alia, human beings, then reality is ipso facto
pronounced to be actual reality.

Two difficulties occur to me.

(i.) A definition, it is sometimes said, may be
nominal. It may state the meaning of a name as used,
e.g. in a certain science, and may not allege the exist-
ence of any corresponding reality. The vraiseiiiblance
of such a view depends wholly on the comprehensiveness
of Reality, which allows predication to be absolute in
any sphere so long as there is no confusion of spheres.
But, where no sphere of reality is presupposed, a com-
plete definition must furnish a statement of one, and any
definitory judgment that confuses the spheres of Reality
is false. It must always be borne in mind that the
consideration of isolated propositions, which is necessary
in logic, is as far as possible removed from the interpre-
tation of judgments which takes place in living thought.

I do not hesitate to say that a proposition which
neither has a literary context, nor refers to the fixed
standards of science, nor is uttered in answer to any


52 Knowledge and Reality.

question expressed or implied (" implied " as when we
exchange news about a subject that is in our thoughts),
is a proposition that can hardly convey a distinct
judgment at all. How seldom and with what difficulty
do we introduce a subject completely new to the hearer,
and not already possessing a place in his intelligence !
The way has to be paved, and the whole province in
which we are about to move mapped out to him, before
he can really follow what we have to say.

In narrating Greek legends one may truly say, "A
Centaur was a creature combined of man and horse."
But of course the proposition becomes false if trans-
ferred to zoology. As stated, it is simply elliptical, and
does not represent the complete judgment, which, in its
true context, it evokes in our intelligence. It should
run : "A Centaur is a fabulous being, whom the ancient
Greeks imagined as," etc. "A chiliagon is a plane
figure with a thousand equal sides." This, or whatever
the correct definition may be, is a geometrical judgment,
true in geometry, in the science of certain properties of
space. If we take it to mean that there is, or ever has
been, or will be, a chiliagon drawn on paper in black
and white, we commit a confusion of spheres, and make
the definition false, and moreover assign the judgment
a meaning which, in fact, it would never bear. If we
mean that a diagram of a chiliagon has this or that
peculiarity, we should say so, and our judgment would
then be false if no such diagram had existed in rerum


Categorical and Hypothetical Judgment. 5 3

naturd. But, neglecting the diagram and going back to
the figure, we may be asked, " Then how does it exist ?
As a statue in the block of marble before it is carved ?
This is no actual existence ; it is nothing." I do not
think this question at all easy to answer precisely ; and
I will point out the extent of its reference before pro-
ceeding to answer it.

It applies equally to triangles, parallel lines, the
multiplication table and the properties of logarithms, to
all the aspects of space and number. It is not made
easier in the case of triangles or of logarithms by their
existence in books or probably at every moment in the
head of one or another student. We should only delude
ourselves by looking in these existences for that which
the judgments affirm, which deal with geometrical truth.
I suppose that what is affirmed is that certain principles
are rooted in the nature of space, and in that of our
power to count, and that these definite principles result
in distinct properties which govern all manifestations of
space and of number. " Then this is pure hypothesis ;
you mean, if there is a chiliagon, the nature of space will
endow it with such and such properties." But I mean
more than this. I mean that these properties are, thoztgh
not in relation to any time in particular, and exist ybr us
as deducible attributes of space, which in our constructed
Reality, we have qualified by these attributes. It cannot
be demanded of me here that I should say how Space
itself exists ; but in whatever way it \s for the intelligence.


S4 Knozvhdge and Reality.


in the same way these its properties, which cannot
exist for sense-perception, are too, not as ideas in the
head, but as matters judged true of reality. They are
permanent because and in as far as space is permanent,
not because fact must be permanent. It follows that if
we were speaking, say, of the esthetic impression pro-
duced by a chiliagon in black and white filling a certain
area, we could not define the subject truly without
affirming its existence for sense-perception. We might
still predicate universally, but the universality would be
that of a fact whose manifestations though not essentially
related to one part of time, are intermittent. The
statue yet in the marble is a stronger case of the latter
kind ; its properties cannot be exhausted beforehand in
a principle ; and its existence is not for the intellectual
vision but for the sensuous perception of beauty. It
therefore, to exist as we mean existence in its case,
must be given to sensuous perception ; and it is false
that the statue exists in the block of marble. A defi-
nition, then, is never nominal unless it says so. Of
course we may define the use of a word, but we must
explain that we are doing so. Otherwise, all definitions
analyze the reality of their subjects, and all judgments
must be tested by their context for the degree of their
approach to definitory completeness. \The attempt to
assign a place in reality contradicts the isolation of the
subject which is essential to a hypothesis or supposition.
(2.) But may not the place in reality be itself


Categorical and Hypothetical Judgment. 5 5

assigned on a supposition or subject to a condition ?
" A man who has run a mile in three minutes and a half
is an actual existing human being." Here, if anywhere,
the predication has for its content actual existence and
reality. Yet existence is not asserted of the subject ;
the judgment is not false if there is, as there is in fact,
no such man as the man described. We must not be
misled into treating the proposition as a singular
judgment, which of course in one sense it might be.
Then it would be equivalent to " An actual person has
run a mile," etc. But we are pledged to keep to the
abstract, and to avoid the singular judgment. And
keeping to the abstract we must, I think, pronounce the
form of the judgment awkward. We should like to
replace " is " by " would be " or " must be." We do not
see the reason for insisting on an essential attribute like
humanity. The relative clause, which is all but hypo-
thetical in expression, indicates that we are not dealing
with an individual of knowledge, but with a fiction put
together at random. All these awkwardnesses might be
justified by a peculiar context as, for instance, if the
judgment was an answer to such a remark as, " He
looks like a ghost." Disregarding the above indications
of constraint, as, if pressed, we should be forced to
disregard them, we should have to allow that the
judgment is hypothetical, and in spite of the impossi-
bility that its subject should exist, is not false.

But this only shows what is obvious in any such


56 Knowledge and Reality.

inquiry, that you may have judgments made with one
intention which ape the form of those made with
another. The perplexity was caused by the fact that
though merely based on a supposal, the above judgment
mimicked the shape and content of a definitive affirma-
tion. Taken as aiming at completeness or at an analysis
of reality, the judgment would be false. As a matter
of fact, I think that the shape of such a proposition
would seem ambiguous to us, and in the absence of a
special content we should call upon it to make its
election between hypothesis and definition, and should
treat it as true or false accordingly. A definition which
puts a fiction on a par with a fact is false. " The wrath
of the Homeric gods is fearful," is false until you add
" in Homer " ; only in conversation or light literature
we readily understand " in Homer " to be implied in
" Homeric." In fact, we know by a thousand indications
about what sphere of Reality we are talking, but all these
indications belong to the judgment, and must not be
forgotten when we analyze its truth.

I have pointed out before how exceedingly inap-
propriate the hypothetical form becomes when applied
to a genuine definition, and how it throws its doubt not
on what the abstractness of the judgment is intended to
leave open, viz. the time of particular manifestation
within the sensible series, but on the entire existence of
the content which the definition brings into the light
of reality. You can say, " If space is, it is three-


Categorical and Hypothetical Judgment. 57

dimensional"; "If Europeans are, they are civilized";
" If gold is, it is heavy " ; " If the soul is, it is a subject " ;
" If God is, He is eternal." The hypothetical shape
seems to me equally possible and equally constrained in
all of these.

I should therefore, not without hesitation, suggest
that there may be no impassable frontier between the
hypothetical and the categorical judgments. I would
attempt to approach the relation between them in this
way.

Affirmation about the unanalyzed present perception
may be considered as one extreme ; supposal, having
its subject indicated by a mere idea, definite but
fictitious, as the opposite extreme. The forms of pro-
position from which the kinds of judgment have re-
spectively drawn their names, are most precisely adapted
for the expression of these two contrasted activities.
For the true region of human knowledge, which for the
most part lies between the two, neither form of sentence,
neither class of proposition, or even of judgment, is, if
pressed home, absolutely and unrestrictedly appropriate.
Definiteness grows into abstraction ; abstraction passes
into detachment and isolation ; and concurrently with
this transition the element of supposal, of taking or
choosing a content with a view to noting its consequence,
appears within the categorical judgment, in which it is
active long before the judgment has become abstract, and
therefore long before any one would propose to call it


58 Knowledge and Reality.


hypothetical. From the very beginning of judgment we
know, however obscurely, that we take the subject as we
take it, for the sake of a connection which, when so
taken, it has with the content of predication. And, in
a corresponding way, when the judgment has become
abstract in the sense of having a not obviously and
concretely individual subject, the categorical nature
persists beside the hypothetical in the abstract universal
judgment, which can at this point be exhibited as hypo-
thetical only by a good deal of constraint. It is only as
analysis of reality gives way to arbitrary illustration of
the real, that the element of free selection or pure
experiment conquers, and the judgment diverges from
its true development into the type based on pure, sup-
posal. But a deflnitory judgment, qua definitory, is
never hypothetical, consisting as it always does in the
analysis of reality ; of that solid construction neither
wholly sensuous nor purely intellectual, which, however
incomplete, is all that we can save out of the fleeting
sensible series.


( 59 )


CHAPTER II.

THE JUDGMENT OF NUMBER AND MEASUREMENT.

I. I FIND an emphasis — nothing more — which calls
for notice pages 172-173 of Mr. Bradley's work. The
observation that intension and extension are relative to
our knowledge " is fatal to " the " Kantian distinction "
between synthetic and analytic judgments. I do not
feel sure how far this criticism is warranted as against
Kant's precise view. But it seems to me hardly imagin-
able that Kant did not know how knowledge grows.
However this may be, I desired merely to draw atten-
tion to what I should call the psychological tone of Mr.
Bradley's comment. It is not necessary, in order to give
value to the distinction between synthetic and analytic
judgments, that "the meaning of a word" should be
" confined to that attribute or group of attributes from
which it sets out." It is only necessary that in each
epoch of knowledge there should be a fairly fixed value
given to what used to be called essence and accident.
The distinction may be hard to justify on metaphysical
ground. But it is one without which science cannot


6o Knowledge and Reality.


move a step, and not even common sense can easily
think a distinct thought. It is a purely logical distinc-
tion ; I mean a distinction wholly relative to knowledge
as knowledge, and wholly independent of the question
whether I, the individual, happen to be familiar with this
or that attribute of a thing. Surely the question for
logic is never what a name means for you or me, but
always, what it ought to mean. And surely, if Pilate's
question is to have any answer, we cannot set down what
a name ought to mean as wholly unknowable. And this,
which has always a considerable relative fixity, is the
gauge for distinguishing analytic and synthetic judg-
ment.

A more important comment, because it has a logical
bearing, is involved in Mr. Bradley's remark that " a
synthetic judgment, so soon as it is made, is at once
analytic." Taking analytic in the scientific sense above
referred to, I do not admit this to be true. Not every-
thing "which is added to-day is implied to-morrow";
this does not take place unless what is added is also
established, and established as true independent of time,
and as of permanent value in relation to the content
before us. I think, too, that even common practice
draws a distinction between what we put in the meaning
of a word, and what we remember about the thing meant
by the word. This is the rudimentary recognition of a
right or scientific meaning of words.

But Mr. Bradley's observation contains the truth that


The Judgment of Number and Measurement. 6i

every judgment on scrutiny is found to be at once an
analysis and a synthesis. Which of the two characters
is predominant in a given judgment for me is a matter
of chance, of my knowledge ; which is predominant for
the purpose of classifying the judgment in the light of
the theory of knowledge, is a matter of the state of
science at any epoch in the world's history ; and the
same judgment would not shift so lightly from the one
title to the other if it were not simply a question which
of two inseparable features of all judgment is to be
given the greater prominence. One may say with Mr.
Bradley that Kant really meant to ask about the kinds
of synthesis, and the principle of unity in each. I do
not object, but I think it unfair to slur the special
reference to the different degrees in which predicates
"belong" to their subject, as if it were a mere matter of
individual ignorance. " In pure cases, or with conditions
properly assigned," it may be said, " all predicates that
belong at all belong equally." First ; I do not think
this is true ; perfect knowledge would not, we must
suppose, annihilate the structure of things, and, if not,
some predicates would still belong closely to the function
of a thing, while others could only be connected with it
artificially, so to speak, and for the sake of curiosity.
And secondly ; if it were so, still the conditions of im-
perfect knowledge are the conditions of human know-
ledge, and in a sense therefore of knowledge as such ;
and such conditions are a proper subject for logical


62 Knowledge and Reality.

formulation ; while the mere accidental state of igno-
rance of an individual is not so, except in as far as it
may illustrate general conditions of knowledge.

2. Number belongs to meaning in various degrees.
Simple counting relates to Extension ; Measurement,
which is latent in counting, to Intension.

I shall speak in this section of (i.) Number and
Extension ; (ii.) the extensional meaning of Proper
Names.

(i.) Mr. Bradley writes as follows : ^ "It is an ele-
mentary mistake to suppose that number confers par-
ticularity and destroys intension. And the error reveals
a deep foundation of bad metaphysics. Number is
surely nothing but an attribute. And how can the
addition of an universal quality force us to take a judg-
ment merely in extension ? You may say, perhaps, that
nothing is numbered save actual phenomena, but such
an assertion would be incompatible with fact " (comp.
p. 171). " If the intension signifies the meaning of a
word, and the extension is the number of actual objects
of which the meaning can be truly predicated, then both
extension and intension are relative to our knowledo-e
and naturally fluctuate with altering experience."

I do not hold the view which I understand that

Mr. Bradley is arguing against. But I seem to myself

to trace in his argument the influence of the conception

which he is combating ; the conception of extension as

' "Principles of Logic," p. 170.


The Judgment of Number and Measurement. 63

a peculiar and independent kind of meaning. Number,
he says, is an attribute. Certainly. Therefore it does
not destroy intension. Certainly it does not. Therefore
it does not force us to take a judgment merely in
extension. Not " merely." But it does force us to take
a judgment in extension, and it does enable us to dis-
pense with all but a minimum of intension.

If extension refers to " actual " objects (meaning, I
presume, objects existing at the present time only ^)
then every predication of a connection of content must
go beyond extension, must refer to many objects not
irxluded in the extension, and thus cannot submit to
the limitation which would on this view be characteristic
of judging in extension. In this case " to take a judg-
ment merely in extension " has a meaning, and one
opposed to taking the judgment in intension, and it is
intelligible how the addition of a universal quality could
not confine the judgment to extension. But on any
other view of extension,^ I cannot understand how to
take a judgment merely in extension has a meaning ;
nor how, on the other hand, so far as a special promi-
nence of extensional meaning is possible, the addition of
the universal quality of number should not produce such
a prominence.

And thus as I can see no justification for the limita-
tion of extension to actual objects in the sense of objects

' See above, p. 22.

^ Cf. " Principles of Logic," p. 155 note, and p. 16S.


64 Knowledge and Reality.

existing in present time ; as extension seems to me to
be simply an element in intension, the element which
when made precise takes the shape of number, I hold
the phrase "mere" extension in the sense of excluding
all intension to be a contradiction in terms ; and I see
in the hypothetical character of a universal connection of
content no bar to an equally hypothetical reference to
what I am prepared to call the attribute of extension,
I.e. of existence in the shape of units distinguishable
from one another.

The reason why the introduction of number as quali-
fying the whole content of a subject (not merely as
qualifying one of its predicates ; " six men " must be the
form ; not " a man with six fingers ") — why this must
force us to think mainly in extension, mainly of the
particular, and enable us to forget much of the intension,
is not that it is a number, but that we do not know it to
be the right number. It interferes with the rest of the
intension, not because it is not an attribute, but because
it is one. An extension confined to actual objects must
be discrepant with a universal connection of content,
and therefore cannot, in my judgment, be taken as its
meaning ; cannot, that is, affect its meaning by reason of
discrepancy. The general attribute conveyed by an
assignment of number may (or may not) be discrepant
with a connection of content, and therefore can affect
its meaning. Every intension, every connection of con-
tent, has one number, and one only (or, it might be


The Judgment of Number and Measurement. 65

urged, none in cases of recurrence which we have no
reason to limit) which would express its attribute of
extension rightly, and we hardly ever know what that
number is. So, although in judging universally we may
think of the externality of the units to one another, we
cannot, as a rule, give the thought precise expression.
If we knew the number demanded by the intension, it
would harmonize with the intension, and our thought
would be complete in both aspects. Such a number is
" three " in " the three angles of a triangle are equal to
two right angles.'' But in an ordinary numerical judg-
ment " six men came by the last train,'' the number not
being perceptibly essential to the subject as determined
in the judgment, kills the relation of ground and conse-
quent which we anticipate in a judgment, so far as the
intension of the general name man is concerned, and
attracts attention to itself, an attribute indeed, but as
regards that general name contingent and unaccount-
able. And this attribute is extension. Not that the
men are, or are presumed to be, " actual," but simply
because we are instructed to consider them especially
as distinct individuals entering into a certain kind of
whole, not the whole of mankind, but another, framed
ad hoc, and in its most noticeable feature, the externality
to each other of its units, a whole of extension.

I conceive that Mr. Bradley has pointed out in this
work the true nature and limits of subsumption ; and
this I hold to be an epoch-making achievement,

F


66 Knowledge and Reality.


at least in English logic. Where we employ the
unity of an individual subject to establish a relation
between attributes, not being able to allege a ground
of connection between the attributes per se, there, and
there only, as I read Mr. Bradley, we have subsump-
tion. Now when mere external unity, the unity of
units in their distinction from other units, i.e. in their
purely numerable aspect, is the most prominent ground
for our use of a general name, we are said to use it in
extension. Thus it is plain that subsumption and ex-
tension are closely connected ; for in subsumption we
argue from that kind of unity in a subject, which is the
aspect under which units constitute the extension of a
name.

And this same attribute is the root of the system of
number. When we say, " Six times six men are thirty-
six men," and " six times six pounds are thirty-six
pounds,'' we scon to employ in these arguments no
attribute drawn from the intension of man or pound
respectively. The denomination of the result appears
in each case self-evident, and it is only in more com-
plicated cases that we see how some intensions will
resist some processes. I suspect (if I may venture for
a moment quite ultra crepidani) that among mathe-
maticians the sound thinker is he who always clearly
envisages the capacities -of his units, and that the
unsound mathematician (for I seem to have heard that
there are such) is he who does not sufficiently consider


The Judgment of Number and Measurement. 6"/

what units being subjected to what processes will issue
in what denominations. In errors arising by such
neglect (we have all heard of the question whether you
can divide money by money)/ the neglected remainder
of the intension would be avenging itself

The element of intension which is indispensable to
the kind of argument called calculation is the character-
istic of being a unit, i.e. ad hoc an individual, though
in artificial measurement not necessarily a concrete,
separable thing.

Therefore it appears to me that what we accentuate
in number and rely on in calculation is essentially the
attribute which is extension. It is true, however, that
to separate this as mere " extension " from the intension
of a name would be to cut away our employment of the
name from all reference to its meaning, and to argue
as if results in concrete numbers were obtainable by
calculations in abstract number. And the reason why
numerical precision interferes with the intension of a
concept or name, is not that we are using the concept
in question in its mere extension, but that we have
created -what professes to be a new concept differing
from that indicated by the general name solely in
having a different extension ; which necessarily conflicts
with the full intension of the general name, and for
purposes of calculation must prevail over it

If we had in the form of a number the true extension

' Cf. De Morgan, "Budget of Paradoxes," p. 417.


68 Knowledge and Reality.

of the concept as such, we should be able to show-
ground for connecting it with the full intension. Such
a number approaches to a characteristic or essential
number ; " the three angles of a triangle,'' " the twelve
cities of the Ionic league ; " and can even by impli-
cation of context become a general name : " the All
England Eleven ; " "the Three ; " " the Ten ;" ol IvliKa.

I cannot but think, then, that number does draw
attention to particularity, if this means or results from
the externality of units to one another; that it is rooted
in the same characteristic as extension and extensional
argument, and as subsumption ; and tends to oust the
true or full intension of concepts, which in extensional
argument tends to become, and in calculation does
become, the mere denomination of numbers.

I may add, that T do not say that we "get to
Existence" by number. But I find a preconception,
which appears to me erroneous, indicated by Mr. Bradley's
thinking it worth while to deny that we do. \\'hether
we get to existence or not does not seem to me to
depend on whether we employ number or not, but on
our employing it, or any other determination we may
use, in a complete and consistent construction.

The view taken above will be further illustrated
when we discuss the relation between countino- and
Induction.

(ii.) The doctrine, " that proper names have no con-
notation," Mr. Bradley holds to arise from not observ-


The Judgment of Number and Measurement. 69


ing that Extension and Intension are relative to our
knowledge and fluctuate together. In this dispute I am
on the whole with Mr. Bradley, as is obvious from my
taking Extension as an element in and consequence of
Intension. Nevertheless, it appears to me that he treats
the question a great deal too cavalierly.

First, of course, I must protest against taking exten-
sion to fluctuate simply with our knowledge of the actual
objects which bear a certain name. I should have
thought that in putting a meaning to actual objects for
knowledge we could not stop short of all the possible
objects which are indicated by the intension when
thought as realized in individual instances. The exten-
sion of " mammals " does not vary, for me, with the
number of actual mammals I have seen or now see.
Supposing I say that it varies with the number which
I know by inference to be now existing, I really am
not sure if Mr. Bradley would call these " actual " or
" possible " mammals. And moreover, I could not draw
the line there. I could not exclude an extinct species
from the extension of the concept, or deny that it is for
me, as referred to its proper gradation of space and
time, an actual fact. Otherwise I must restrict actuality
to the atomic present ; and that I cannot do, if I hold
facts to be ideal constructions including many elements
drawn from the past.

It might be said that these elements only affect our
vision, that no doubt it was in the past that we learnt to


yo Knowledge and Reality.

see them, but that nevertheless we must actually see
them now if we are to be justified in pronouncing them
existent. But this, though true in part, has a very
limited truth. Many — nwst of the attributes with which
we undoubtingly invest present objects, are not evident
in this moment, and are only ascribed as real to the
present on the faith of a past in which we judged them
real. Thus the solid reality, as it faces us in the present,
involves a judgment which assigned reality in the past,
and a present judgment pronouncing (not explicitly and
in the abstract, but by its inevitable universality^) that
the present reality, perceived under one aspect, is con-
tinuous with that past reality which was judged real
under another aspect. Whether this present judgment
cancels the past reality and substitutes for it that of the
present, thus destroying the ladder by which that present
rose to its place as reality, is a further question. For us,
at all events, the complete reality of the present rests on
the reality of the past, and if that is a now non-existent
reality, as no doubt in one sense it is, still it cannot be
dispensed with in the interpretation of judgments. The
judgment must take us wherever its content belongs ;
nothing can restrict its application in time, except a
time relation implied in the cojitent.

Then I must suppose extension to fluctuate, not
with my special experience of actual objects that
embody the intension, but with the range of objects

' Cf. "Principles of Logic," pp. 6i, 271.


The Judgment of Njimber and Mcasjirement. 71

which my knowledge warrants me in accepting, as, at
whatever time and place, actual embodiments of the
intension.

Then, secondly, does the extension of a proper name
fluctuate with the intension, with the meaning ? and so,
first of all, has a proper name a meaning ?

After what I have said, I need not go into this. Of
course, a proper name has a meaning, in the sense that
it stands for something, enables us to recognize some-
thing, is a current counter both in written and spoken
language. And of course this meaning is, qua mean-
ing, an intension. And although in proper names the
same combination of letters is applicable to different
individuals, not in virtue of the same intension, but in
virtue of different intensions, this is the case also with
the names of Homonymous things (things whose name
is the same but their definition different, the sameness
of name being, therefore, apart from history, a mere
coincidence), and is, therefore, no absolute distinction
between proper and general names.

It must be this feature, I think, which Mr. Bradley
indicates by the words " here [in proper names] as every-
where intension and extension fluctuate together ; " that
is, speaking generally, the meaning of a name regulates
its application, and this is true of proper names as of
others. So far I am with Mr. Bradley.

But if the parallel intended is between all the
individuals designated by a proper name and — not


72 Knowledge and Reality.

homonymous individuals but — the extension of a single
general name belonging to its one meaning or intension,
then I can no longer follow. The extension of Brown
or Jones, Henry or Charles, London or Boston, fluctuates
not in the same way as that of man, vegetable, or tiger,
but in the same way as that of " cricket " as including
the game and the insect, or " plant " as including a
vegetable and the apparatus of a factory. Excepting in
this latter sense, the extension of a proper name does
not fluctuate with our knowledge ; and this is just the
characteristic difference between a proper and a general
name. In so far as general names are made subservient
to pure recognition and then have a fixed extension
independent of their intension, they are degraded towards
the rank of proper names. Such are the Linnaean terms
of classification for plants. In some modern works they
stand as an index, for the mere purpose of " hunting
down " specimens, while the natural system is adopted
in the body of the work as exhibiting the true affinities
and nature of the plants. Here we have the most
graphic illustration of the incipient proper name. In
all the mass of intension it is possible for plants grouped
under the same Linnsean name to be wholly and utterly
different ; but, no doubt, we always find the slight unity
of an abstract mark binding together all objects to which
the name applies. In the true proper name this has
disappeared.

" The meaning," Mr. Bradley says, speaking of proper


The yiidgment of Number and Measurement. 73

names, " is not fixed, and this leads to the idea that no
meaning exists." Now I do not say that no meaning
exists, but I say that the meaning is a means, and not
an end. I am content to put my view thus : A proper
name is strictly a contradiction in terms. The adjective
" proper '' indicates a purpose which a name as a signifi-
cant word can only fiilfil by means that contradict the
adjective. Therefore Mr. Bradley's remarks are, up to a
certain point, incontrovertible. Every name has a mean-
ing, and its meaning governs its application. But a
proper name exists for the sake of the application, a
general name for the sake of the meaning. It is not
true that the two functions are the same, though it is
true that either vanishes if the other is destroyed. The
ideal function of a proper name is recognition ; the
ideal function of a general name, definition. " Name "
contradicts "proper," because name implies meaning,
and under a meaning there can always be subsumption ;
but " proper " has for its purpose to avoid subsumption.
For a proper name we want a mark that shall distinguish,
and no more ; but we find that the vehicle of distinction
will take a value of its own and tend to admit of sub-
sumption. It is originally general, and is always tending
to become general again. I suspect that the conception
of proper names, as we understand them, is not a very
easy or early one. We now actually attach to names,
written and used in a certain way, a mental reservation
that we are to look for no meaning in them. As regards


74 Knowledge and Reality.

the names of men and women this is quite a modern state
of things. The surname still in some cases retains an
intension of family and character, and is always of course
more significant than the Christian name. But the law
now admits no purpose in names but that of distinction ;
and permits any one to have any name which he makes
it clear that he is to be known by, and to change it at
pleasure subject to the same condition. The history of
Roman,! and I suppose still more of savage, names proves
that far more predicative significance attached to the
actual name-word in early times than now. And the
origin of English surnames illustrates the same truth.

I may remark that the most frivolous of all disputes
is that which connects with this question the etymo-
logical meaning of certain name-words. The etymology
of a word almost always indicates something that it does
not mean now. The true cases of proper names which,
acquiring intension, are ceasing to be " proper," are such
as — " a Daniel come to judgment," " the Rupert of
debate," " a Crcesus," " a Solon," etc.

In short, then, when we use a proper name we want

' Vide. Mommsen"Rom. Forschungen." All elements of a Roman
name were more predicative than distinctive. The prEenomina (fore-names)
in use among patricians towards the end of the republic were very few, and
far more characteristic of descent than distinctive of the individual.
Women had at that time as a rule no prasnomina (as if, now, they should
have nothing but a surname). The name of the head of a household added
in the possessive case was very likely in its origin not a distinction of family
but a predication of ownership (Marcus Marci filius. Cf. Ai^^ioaBevris Atj^o-
aSevovs. The fiUus is suspected of being later in origin).


The Judgment of Number and Measurement. 75

to produce recognition of an individual ; and though this
must be done somehow with reference to the individual's
identity, yet we do not think nor care how it is done.
When we use a general name we want to convey a
connection of content, and we let the content take care
of itself as regards the individual it may apply to. A
proper name, then, must have " intension " (hardly " an
intension "), but is most proper when it has least.

Is not, it may be said, " to produce recognition of an
individual " the same thing as " to convey a connection of
content " ? I have admitted that the matter is one of
degree. It is difficult to distinguish such an announce-
ment as " Mr. Fawcett is dead," in respect of its signifi-
cance, from such a sentence as " The Postmaster-General
is dead." But it must be remembered that ordinary
proper names have not the significance that is possessed
by those of eminent men. The question is one of
tendency, and I think that it is fair to say, that by help
of a proper name as such you do not convey a connec-
tion of content, but rather point to an indefinite content,
and omit to select or to connect.

If I have made my view clear, I do not much care
to fight about v/ords. And yet one does not like to
surrender important phrases to a usage one cannot
approve. So I add that I do not at all admit the pro-
priety of applying the words meaning and intension,
which I understand to designate kinds of knowledge, to
mere recognition which has no definite ground or motive.


76 Knowledge and Reality.

I am disposed to stand by the old colours and to main
tain that " no one has knowledge but he who can give
an account " of the matter known. I do not mean i
theoretical account ; I mean an explicit statement of hi;
conception. Mr. Bradley and Stuart Mill — '' strange
-fellowship ! " — admit unconscious functions into know-
ledge to an extent of which I cannot approve, and ol
which in discussing Mr. Bradley's account of inference
I shall have something to say.

3. The analysis of the act of counting is of interest
for it illustrates the effect of extreme abbreviation on ar
act of thought ; and also of importance, for counting is
the process of making number, and lies at the root ol
mathematics.

I said above that it appeared to me to be true that
number favours argument in extension, and tends tc
reduce the intension proper of a general name to the
place of a mere denomination of the objects which we
number. I have now to propound the- suggestion that
this characteristic of number has unduly affected an
argument of Mr. Bradley's relating to the amount oi
inference contained in the common process of counting

I understand Mr. Bradley to deny ^ that there is
such a form of inference as Induction by simple Enume-
ration, if that means simply summing up particulars
From particulars as such, he maintains, there is nc
inference. To get an inference, you must have, m

' " Principles of Logic," pp. 326-330.


The Judgment of Number and Measurement. JJ

however rudimentary a form, a connection of content, a
general result left by the contemplation of the separate
cases or objects. So far I am thoroughly with Mr.
Bradley.

The point on which I wish to offer a suggestion is
his treatment of simple enumeration, considered as the
mere ■ summing of particulars, and as thus obviously
equivalent to counting ; which latter process, it is
assumed, gives a mere collection, without a warrant that
the collection is complete, and without — what is essen-
tial, as I agree, to inference — " a selective perception of
one connection of attributes throughout our whole
subject-matter : " " The counting by itself is not the
induction," etc.

I doubt whether, in theory, the operation of counting
could be made intelligible on this basis. One might
even appeal to page 426 of " Principles of Logic," where,
as I read it, Mr. Bradley rightly maintains that you
cannot have discrete units without a relation to a
common centre. Is not this to say that you cannot
count mere particulars, and that therefore " the discrimi-
native analysis which goes with the counting " is essential
to the counting '>. I do not wish to rely solely on this
abstract argument ; I may have misread page 426. But
let us look at the act of counting. Of course you may
say to me, " Count ten," and I may run over the natural
numbers from one to ten inclusive ; and if I am then
asked, " What have you been counting ? " I might find


78 Knowledge and Reality.

it hard to answer. I suppose in such a case I have been
counting the names of the numbers counted — in fact,
the vehicles of the process of counting. Or it may be
implied that I have counted the intervals of time neces-
sary to pronounce the names of the numbers, at a rate
fixed by habit. In either of these cases it is only just
possible to trace a continuity or common feature in the
series, which would, if each act of counting were a full
judgment, be embodied in a predicate for the sake of
which we are counting, in connection with a unit by
which we are to count. Obviously the limit up to which
we are to count is supplied by the predicate for the sake
of which we count, and the rule for the differences which
we are to enumerate by the unit of which we are inter-
ested in asserting the predicate. I do not think that
any act of enumeration, however rapid or however
abbreviated in thought, is without these elements of
meaning. We "count," indeed, by saying "one," "two,"
" three," and so on ; but what we mean is made clear
if we have to instruct others to count for us. Every one
knows how hard these instructions are to give and to
observe, and how dangerous in consequence is the use of
statistics, which are the records of other people's
counting. I take it that this is because, in counting for
ourselves, we are not in the habit of instructing ourselves
explicitly ; we do not find precision necessary in order to
apply correctly a rule which springs from our immediate
interest, probably bearing on matter which is familiar
to us.


The Judgment of Number and Measurement. 79

But when we count, there is always a limit up to
which we mean to count and no further. If I have a
telescope, and am asked, " How many men are there in
that boat ? " I count aloud, " One, two, three, four, five,
six! There are six men in her." Can it be main-
tained that my answer goes beyond the essential func-
tion of counting ?

First, the privative judgment,^ "No man in the boat
is uncounted," is progressively approached by each
enumerative judgment. I cannot move a step in count-
ing without a judgment closely allied to this, or why
should I not keep counting over and over again ?
Enumeration has no meaning unless it involves dis-
tinguishing what you have counted from what you
have not counted. Unless we do this, one number of
objects cannot be distinguished from another. The
enumerative judgments form a series which exists for
the sake of characterizing a certain totality ; they can-
not fulfil this purpose unless we may convert the last
from " Six men are in that boat," to " The men in that
boat are six.'' It may be said that our interest need not
be in the number of men in the boat. It may be simply
to know if she is carrying more than some given
number ; and in that case we should not count all, but
should stop short. The answer is that then the instruc-
tion for counting runs, " Count the men tip to (the
number required, say) four!' Four is then taken into

' " Principles of Logic," p. 330.


8o Knowledge and Reality.

the limiting or interesting predicate, owing to some
external circumstance ; perhaps the boat is only fit to
carry four. I can also imagine that it may be said, " It
is one thing to say, ' These six men I have counted in
the boat,' and another to say, ' Beyond these six I can
see no more.' " (The possibility of mistake in declaring
an enumeration complete does not bear on the argu-
ment ; I am only speaking of what we wish to do and
believe ourselves to do in counting.) But the line, if
there is one, is very subtle. If there was a seventh
visible you could not but be able to distinguish the six
already counted from him ; or, as pointed out above,
you would be liable to count them over again, and the
process would be futile. And if there is no seventh
visible, to distinguish the six you have counted from
that, i.e. nothing, which is left you, under your instruc-
tions, to count, seems to me to be only a form of the
same perception as to distinguish them from a seventh.
The totality of a certain matter is what you set out to
measure ; your units exist as units only in reference to
; it ; I think that the process becomes idle if held incap-
able of furnishing its own warrant of completeness.

Secondly, "the discriminative analj-sis which goes
with the counting " is to my mind the actual essence of
the enumerative judgment. It consists in the connection
between subject and predicate, which is furnished by the
question asked, or instructions given or implied, and
therefore is the basis and essence of enumeration as


The Judgment of Number and Measurement. 8 1

such. Before I can count you must tell me not only up
to what limits I am to count, but by what units. I
cannot set out to count things in general ; not only is
there no interest in the task, but I do not know what is
to be reckoned as a thing ; I have no principle on which
to perform my analysis of the world around me into
units, nor do I know how long I am to go on counting.

Sigwart has said that in judgments of number, the
number is really a predicate. Undoubtedly this view
has its truth ; especially after the warrant of complete-
ness has been given by pronouncing an enumeration
exhaustive. According to the ordinary reading of the
judgment, the number then becomes a predicate true
of the subject. Formally, considered as an attribute,
number may be alleged either in the subject as a deter-
mination, or (7/the subject as predicated. But perhaps
the fact is that the common distinction of subject and
predicate cannot do justice to the complication of the
enumerative judgment. It may be said that all attributes
are alleged of the subject, only under some condition.
But number tells us so little about its condition (which
I have hitherto called the predicate, or matter of interest)
that we cannot dispense with the explicit declaration of
that condition. And then our interest attaches to the
number for the sake of the condition or determinant
which thus retains an essential feature of a predicate.
Thus I cannot help thinking that number is more
" formal " and less " material " than other attributes. Its

G


Knowledge and Reality.


conditions do not pre-suppose and explain themselves as
do those under which other attributes are ascribed. It
bears the character of a relation, and is not intelligible
without an indication of the whole within which it is a
relation. There is a number for every subject under
every condition. It primarily records the recurrence of
a mental act, of a judgment of perception ; while the
content or application of the perception is entirely for
us to guide or determine. Thus I do not like making
number a predicate, except where by implication in a
content, e.g. in a characteristic measurement, it carries a
definite significance. " The temperature of the patient
is 102° Fahrenheit,'' only means what it does, because
I know the normal temperature and the danger of excess.
And all number is in any case, if a predicate, an element
in a complex predicate ; it cannot stand alone any more
than " in," " to," or " for." In " The number of the names
together was about an hundred and twenty," 120 is not
more independent than "from" or "of" in, "They went
out from us because they were not of us," where also
the predicative emphasis is obviously on the signs of
relation.

Of course I am not denying that number is " objec-
tive," any more than I deny that relations are objective;
I only say that, to tell us anything material to be known,
it needs more strict and explicit statement of conditions
than other attributes — at least, than all other attributes
except complex relations. Therefore, apart from charac-


The Judgment of Number and Measurement. 83

teristic number, which is the result of careful inference,
I should prefer to describe number as such as the ab-
straction of the act of counting and as primarily indi-
cating the number of times we have judged a certain
predicate of identical but distinguishable subjects.
Number is, then, rightly ascribed to things and units of
all kinds ; but, like the meaning of signs of relation, it
is only intelligible when the component parts of the
whole to which it belongs are definitely assigned.

Therefore, while I agree with Mr. Bradley about
induction, I suggest a doubt whether his view of enume-
ration is adequate. I take all enumeration, if fully
analyzed, to consist of judgments like this, " This book
is one of the books on that shelf ; " " This other book is
one," etc. You may, of course, count two or more at
each judgment, but this is simply complex counting
or multiplication ; each two or more is known by its
quality {e.g. the pips on a card by their arrangement),
and counted as a unit, the result being got by reference
to a known series.

The "selective perception of one connection of at-
tributes " is, then, to my mind, of the essence of enume-
ration, and enumeration being essentially relative to a
totality, has a right to the final judgment, " All the
sheep in that fold have been dosed," ^ for enumeration
implies a distinction between counted units within a
certain limit and uncounted units within that limit ; and

' Cf. " Principles of Logic," pp. 330-1.


§4 Knowledge and Reality.

if the uncounted are zero, enumeration must surely be
allowed to warrant that fact. In meaning, indeed, every
enumerative judgment maybe taken to imply something
more, viz. a double counting resulting in a ratio, for
the judgment distinguishes between two factors in the
content, here, " sheep in the fold," and " sheep in the fold
dosed ; " and this, a ratio, is the most complete form
which the numerical relation between the factors can take.
Obviously such a ratio is only a more precise form of the
distinction between counted and uncounted. Instead of
saying, " Fifty have been dosed, and that is not all in the
fold," we could then say, " Fifty have been dosed, and
there are one hundred in the fold." But when you come
to " One hundred have been dosed, and there are no more
in the fold," the two modes of enumeration acquire the
same precision in that one case, as the direct perception
that there are no more takes the place of the second
counting and consequent ratio. I may remark that if
we state the answer as a ratio, then, though we still need .
the content as a denomination for the numbers, we have
swerved from the path of connecting the attributes as
such.

The true distinction between Induction by simple
Enumeration and genuine Inference is not, as it seems
to me, quite where Mr. Bradley puts it. It is really
parallel to the distinction between connections of content
by way of subsumption and the rational perception of
grounded connections of content It is not that the


The Judgment of Number and Measurement. 85

cases supposed to be argued from are mere particulars,
for it is impossible even to enumerate mere particulars. It
is that they are unanalyzed individuals connected by an
indefinite identity, which is, as a rule, suggested to our
minds by some general name which applies to all, and
which, as the appellation of concrete individuals, we
subsume under another predicate. We presume a con-
nection between the predicate under which we subsume
the individuals in enumerating them, and something or
other in the intension of the concepts by help of which
we indicate their concrete nature as individuals. Our
ready-made knowledge thus supplies us with a sort of
rough hypothesis.

I observe, in several cases, that this plant and
others, having leaves which are always under water, also
have them finely divided. Here, I assume that we can
as yet see no rational connection between the complex
concept, "plants with leaves under water," and the
predicate, "with finely cut leaves," under which we sub-
sume it. But the two characters being noticeable, if they
are fairly constant, we are apt to presume a connec-
tion between them ; and it is this presumption which forms
the essence of the argument, though hidden under the
form of subsumption, i.e. of the allegation that the attri- '
butes are together merely as a matter of fact in the same
individuals. If simple enumeration means something
simpler than this, I do not believe that there is such a
process. But it is fairly named, as I have held above


86 Knowledge and Reality.


that a " proper " name is fairly named, from being com-
pletely antagonistic in tendency and purpose to inferences,
as a proper name is to appellations, which rest on pre-
cisely assigned content ; although the significance of con-
tent cannot, in any intelligible assertion, be wholly done
away with. The contrast may be illustrated in the above
instance by suggesting the idea, " Finely divided leaves,
like the gills of a fish, sift the water more effectively to
get at its oxygen." Flere at once we pass out of the
region of presumption, subsumption, and enumeration,
into that of suggested causation.

Finally, I do not think it makes any difference of
principle that in the simplest cases of simple enumera-
tion the number does nothing, and can be dispensed
with. To make the number, as such, significant, it must
be compared with other numbers, which enter into a
ratio as explained above. But even in the simplest cases
the process which makes number is involved, and to
state the number explicitly is always a safeguard, because
it means that each unit has been considered separately
and the uncounted at each moment carefully distin-
guished from the counted. We can, however, and do
establish the empirical " all " by a mere coup d'ceil, as
in the perception that " all those birds flew across the
water." There is a peculiarly negative aspect in this
judgment. What we rely on is obviously that we saw
no bird that did not fly across the water. It corre-
sponds to the judgment " (some, or) none are uncounted,"


The Judgment of Number and Measurement. 87

which we saw to be implied in counting ; while the
positive part of the judgment corresponds to a single
perception of the number of units, only that in this case
we are not able to reduce the quality to quantity.

4. In simple counting we characterize units by their
number. In measurement we characterize a whole by
the number of units which it contains. Measurement is
implied in all counting. We do not speak, indeed, of
" measuring " a crowd when we count the people in it.
The unit, a human being, does not present itself to us
pre-eminently with reference to quantity. But un-
doubtedly in ascertaining the number of units of a
certain description, within a certain space, we are
ascertaining a quantity. In common usage the term
measurement is restricted to the process of counting
units of space, and is distinct from weighing ; but in
science it includes the reference of any quality or its
physical cause to a standard unit ; in this way we
measure time, heat, velocity, quantity of electrical action
of various kinds. Thus the idea of quantitative com-
parison seems bound up with the idea of measurement,
and the idea of measurement, as reference to a unit,
includes the idea of counting.

What Mr. Bradley says on pages 370-1 may very
likely be true as a matter of fact. I wish to point out
that it again is to my mind somewhat too brusquely
put. The mistake is, Mr. Bradley holds, to assume
" that the perception of differences in quantity implies


Knowledge and Reality.


the power of counting units." The real fact he takes
to be that long before number could come into the
world, the perception of more and less, of the whole and
the parts, already existed. They existed in an un-
analyzed qualicative form. The reader should compare
with this what is said on page 370 of the two senses
in which degree may be used.

I am not sure that I can imagine what this qualitative
form is like. It is a tremendous paradox, at least in
words, to speak of perceiving more and less in a quali-
tative form, as "the mere vague sense of a more and
a less, of a rise and a fall, of a swelling and a shrinking." ^
I do not wish to intrude a captious analysis on plain
facts. But I cannot help thinking it worth while to try
and distinguish a sense which is but vaguely a sense
of more and less, and is also, though dimly, a sense of
measurement, from a strictly qualitative sense, such as
should not have in it any traceable element of com-
parison by means of a unit, and should yet be a sense
of more and less. The latter is what Mr. Bradley's
paradox seems to require ; the former is all that I can
well imagine. The beginning of counting, as of measure-
ment and quantity, I take to be the establishment of
the unit ; and I suppose in the first perception of more
and less the les.T is itself the unit, against which the
greater is "that and more." When you have not the
setting off of one against the other I cannot imagine to

' " Principles of Logic," p. 370.


1 he Judgment of Number and Measurement. 89

myself how you should have the vaguest sense of more
and less. And where you have such setting- off, there you
have the essential element of counting and measurement.
But below this there is a different kind of quali-
tative sense that might conceivably come in question,
and I do not feel sure whether Mr. Bradley has
sufficiently attended to this distinction. I think there
can be no doubt that in cases where we ultimately go
on to form a judgment of more and less, we begin, or
we may begin, with a judgment of mere qualitative
difference. I mean a sense of difference which does not,
however vaguely, pass into the direct sense of more
and less. Differences of shape, of musical tone, of colour,
and of pleasure or pain strike us, I think, at first as mere
differences ; as immediate qualitative impressions which
are not the same, but are like or akin, i.e. according to
Mr. Bradley's phrase, have points of identity mingled
with points of difference. What has shape to do with the
matter ? I may be asked. Shape is not size, and cannot
be analyzed into size. I think that shape is a very
good instance of the perception in dispute, just because
it is primarily a qualitative perception, but is in various
degrees referable to quantity. First come perceptions of
difference in shape like those between a highly dissected
pattern and a square, into which no idea or implication
of size is likely to enter, the comparison of areas being
so very intricate an operation, supposing for the sake of
illustration that the area over which the pattern spreads


90 Knowledge and Reality.

is in fact somewhat larger than the square with which
the pattern is compared. The perception of difference
between these shapes is purely qualitative. But now
turn to slightly more comparable objects. Compare
a square and a narrow rectangle no longer than the side
of the square. The one is massive, solid ; the other
slight, slender. If no one has asked us about the
relative areas, we need not think of them at all. Or
compare the column from the Erectheion in the Elgin
Marbles room at the British Museum, with the enormous
drums in the neighbouring room from the pillars of the
Artemision at Ephesus. The one is slender, almost
frail, the other (even if we imagine the whole column)
immensely solid, heavy, and strong. Here, I think, is
the point where our issue must be decided. " Why, you
are saying," Mr. Bradley may reply, "you are actually
saying that you have in these cases a quantitative per-
ception in qualitative form." But I think not. We
have here a qualitative perception which subsequently
can be shown to rest on quantity (or rather on propor-
tion ; but we must go through quantity to get at propor-
tion) ; yet I do not think that in as far as it is qualitative
it is also quantitative. The feelings which arise on
looking at the two objects are different, and their kind of
beauty distinct. This is all that is essential to perception
of their difference, and though analysis may introduce
the perception of quantity, I do not think this is natural
or indispensable. And in all measurements of intensity


The Judgment of Number and Measurement. 91

there is great difficulty in ascertaining what is a change
in kind, and what in degree. Quantities primarily range
themselves as simple diiTerences, and what are quantities
of the same is a late and different investigation. We
are told that pink is a light purple ; but in our quali-
tative perception of the two we were surely not aware
of this " more and less."

Now, I do not think that instances such as the above
justify the paradox of alleging that we can perceive
more and less in a qualitative form. Between a quali-
tative perception and a vague perception of quantity
there is a gulf which I cannot get over. In quantity
there must be sameness, and degrees, however rudi-
mentary, of the attribute which is the same in both
objects of comparison. In quality there may be a
generic sameness, such as that common to all coloured
surfaces ; but this sameness is not the attribute in
respect of which the two qualities are distinguished.

I do not know the authority for Mr. Bradley's alle-
gation about nice perception of quantitative differences
on the part of savages who cannot count. And sup-
posing that the instance he gives is one of true, direct
perception (all suggestions of what has been done being
excluded), I admit that so strong an instance surprises
me. " Take one from a flock of forty sheep, and in a
moment they (the savages) perceive the difference." Nor
do I know, assuming the general correctness of the fact,
how Mr. Bradley would more precisely interpret it. I


92 Knowledge and Reality.


feel that there is something wearisome in detailed analy-
sis, which must be purely hypothetical, of an isolated
fact; but I cannot help thinking that such analysis,
conducted, if possible, in presence of the fact, and so
as to interrogate it, is much wanted in Anthropology.
I will therefore illustrate the difficulty in which the above
statement places me, by suggesting two interpretations.

Of course we are not to suppose that the savages
count one, two, three, up to thirty-nine ; to allege that
would be to accept Mr. Bradley's reductio ad absurdum.

But how am I even to be sure that in the recorded
case there was not simply a perception that the pattern
made by the beasts as they were scattered about was
altered .'' It is no feat to say, " There was a sheep by
that tree, and he is gone ; " or, " There were three sheep
in a row on the left, now there are two." But that is
not saying that the sheep is nowhere in the field, and
the savage can do that. Well ; can he ? But if he can,
it may still be of the nature of what I should call a
" pattern " perception, i.e. a perception of symmetry
and its opposite, or of a definite change. Of course,
any one would see in five seconds if a book was taken
out so as to leave a gap in an orderly bookshelf; one
could review hundreds of volumes in a few seconds for
such a purpose, or to find a book in a known binding.
Or, again, any one would see at once if an angle was
cut off a good-sized tessarakontagon by a straight line
joining the extremities of its containing sides, those two


The Judgment of Number and Measurement. 93

sides being themselves erased ; or if a spoke were
missing in a bicycle wheel. And in all these cases we
should have a pure perception of position or quality
carrying probably consequences known by experience to
relate to quantity ; but not in itself of the nature of
quantitative comparison at all. These are no more
quantitative perceptions in respect of the contents
directly perceived than it is a quantitative perception to
say of one book that it cost \os. 6d., and of another
that it cost a guinea ; or to say, as an expert in tone-
discrimination can of the knives of a steam planing-
machine, " The pitch of the note they make shows them
to be revolving so many times in a second."

But a wholly different interpretation is possible of
the savage's alleged judgment ; and I suspect this is
more nearly what Mr. Bradley would adopt. Let the
sheep be massed in a fold, so that no striking pattern
is possible, and let forty so massed be seen first, and
then thirty-nine of those forty ; if the difference is then
perceived, without inference from an act of removal
observed or suspected, we must suppose that there is a
direct perception of the difference of the two quantities,
one of them being taken as unit and set off against the
other. In this case, again, the detection of the differ-
ence, and still more its being estimated ■*■ at one sheep, is
no doubt remarkable.

' I assume that it is so estimated. What form does the complaint talie —
' ' You have touched my sheep, " or, specifically, ' ' You have taken one of
my sheep " ?


94 Knowledge and Reality.


I compare with these interpretations a hypothetical
case in which each applies to a different part of the
same process. It is, or was, said that the man who
counted the sheets of the Times, in the Times office,
proceeded by tens, as we often do by twos or fours.
Now, in interpreting these processes, there are many
subtleties ; but I do not think that counting and
judging from quality ever merge into one another,
though they may go on together. I think that in
counting by twos or fours we often do see the number
in the lots we count by, i.e. do make the enumerative
judgment of perception about every individual unit,
though we only take the time to put it into words
at certain short intervals. Within every four, e.g. there
would then be a short reckoning, conducted in silence,
but still a set of four enumerative judgments which
then is added on by a separate operation to the former
sum. But in counting by tens, I should yery much
doubt if the single papers are perceived at all. I should
think that they are merely judged to be there from
certain feelings of the operator (assisted, perhaps, by
some symmetrical disposition of their edges), and that the
unit whose recurrence is really counted is the mass of
ten. In such a case the operator employs an empirical
inference from a qualitative judgment (for this purpose a
pattern judgment ranks as a qualitative judgment), with
reference to the single sheets, but actually enumerates,
as the units by which he measures, the masses of ten


The Judgment of Number and Measurement. 95

sheets each. In the former element of the process, if
this account were right (and if it is not right of this
process, it certainly is of some), no unit is applied or
employed, there is no tendency to counting, and no idea
of it. Ten sheets must, indeed, have been often counted
to acquire the power in question, but ex hypothesi they
are not being counted now. In the latter element we
have true counting, a recurrent judgment of perception
about an identical, though distinguishable, unit.

Now, if the savage really perceives a difference of
quantity between the thirty-nine and the forty, then the
thirty-nine are to him as one of the masses of ten are
to the operator in the above instance ; a mass, an unit.
It is not counting by single sheep as units ; it is the
point of first establishment of a unit by direct per-
ception and comparison ; and the unit is the mass of
thirty-nine sheep.

How does this essentially differ from the qualitative
perception of which I spoke as not directly involving
measurement, or more or less .■" In this way : the differ-
ence in quantity which we infer from the directly
qualitative perception is attached to it ab extra, and
refers to units which lie outside the characters directly
attended to in perception. And thus the judgment of
qualitative difference — of a defect in symmetry, or of
a discord in tone — does not in itself tell us which of the
elements compared has the more, and which has the
less. Whereas, when a unit is established, and a com-


g6 Knowledge and Reality.

parison, however rough, made in respect of it, we cannot
but come to a judgment directly and properly involving
more or less. And here, in so far as we have a unit, we
have not only the essentials of measurement, but also of
counting.

I may note that one would like to know whether the
flock of sheep in this instance is the man's own flock,
and whether, consequently, he knows the particular
sheep severally ^ by headmark ; if so, the process, though
still marvellous in its way, becomes again quite different
from either of those which I have suggested, and
analogous to looking round a room full of people for a
person that one knows ; an act not absolutely instan-
taneous, if the numbers are large, but incomparably
quicker than counting, and wholly unconnected with
measurement.

No doubt the perception of a relation between the
whole and its parts, when that relation is of a particular
kind, does take the form of a judgment of qualitative
comparison. And I have no objection to Mr. Bradley's
moral that, " in considering number, we have no right to
strike out the qualitative side." The unit and the limit
which are, as we have seen, involved in counting, are, no
doubt, a survival of the qualitative relation of part and
whole. But in taking the quantitative form, the relation
of part and whole has not so much developed as diverged

' Mr. Sully, "Psychology," p. 357, states the matter thus without
hesitation.


The Judgment of Nutftber and Measurement. 97

from the type in which it gave rise primarily to a per-
ception of qualitative difference. For this latter form
persists by the side of the other — that in which the
parts are homogeneous ; and the perception of quantity
is due, not to the relation of whole and parts as such,
but to the perception of homogeneousness of the parts,
which Is pro tanto a deviation from the ideal of the whole
and its parts ; although, indeed, to make it possible to
count the parts in a whole, so much heterogeneousness
must remain as to distinguish the one part from the
other. But the relation of whole and part in perception
of symm.etry or function is not one of quantity at all,
and does not tend to become such. No one but an
American humourist thinks of a man as diminished in
quantity by the loss of a leg or an arm. The parts are
here not apprehended as units. It is the apprehension
of a part as a unit that indicates the initial point of this
divergence into the judgment of quantitative com-
parison ; and where or in so far as this is absent, there
can be no perception of more and less. The unit may
be but roughly defined, yet there must be an interest in
the process, feeling, or perception as homogeneous, and
for the sake of that in it which is homogeneous, and for
the sake of its modifications qua homogeneous ; and this,
however unanalyzed, I cannot call a perception " in a
qualitative form."

5. We have seen that measurement rests on homo-
geneousness or identity. I shall now consider some

H


98 Knowledge and Reality.


observations of Mr. Bradley's on the relation between
Identity, Likeness, and Equality. Identity is always
abstract.^ The identity of individuals or of indiscern-
ibles implies different contexts or different qualities in
or by which the identicals are made distinguishable.

Therefore, for any exact purpose, it is necessary
to specify the degree of abstraction with which an
identity that we predicate or presuppose is to be under-
stood. As it is not usual to do this in set terms, but
at best to indicate the precise nature of an asserted
identity by the emphasis laid on qualifying phrases, a
demand makes itself felt for distinctive expressions
which indicate the nature of an identity without further
explanation. Such a term is " equal," which is said
to mean "identical in quantity." I shall have to
consider below what is involved in this conception of
equality. But I wish to suggest in the first place that
a somewhat similar justification may be alleged for the
English use of the word " like " and " likeness," or even
" exact likeness," as equivalent to one kind of identity.

I quote from " Principles of Logic," pages 26 1 -2, the
passages which are the occasion of these remarks.
" Likeness and sameness should never be confused, for
the former refers properly to a general impression. Simi-
larity is a perceived relation between two terms which
implies and rests upon a partial identity. If we say
that A and B are alike, we must be taken to assert that

' " Principles of Logic," p. 263.


The Judgment of Number and Measurement. 99

they have something the same. But we do not specify
this point of sameness, and the moment we do that
we have gone beyond mere similarity." . . " In mere
general similarity the identity will be indefinite, where
the likeness is more special it must be at least partly
defined, and where the similarity is called ' exact,' I
understand that there is a definite point or points, in
respect of which the sameness is complete."

I may anticipate the point which really suggested
the following comments, by saying that " like " and
" similar " in the above passage correspond to the
German " ahnlich," of which Mr. Bradley's remarks hold
good beyond question. But it is the practice, and in my
judgment quite unavoidably so, to employ the English
" like " 1 in correspondence with the German " gleich,"
which in some cases it is quite impossible to represent
either by "same" or by "equal." There is room in
modern use for "identisch," "ahnlich," and "gleich,"
which have distinct and well-marked meanings in
German. English has only "same" and "like"^ to
represent these terms. Like, to the best of my belief,
covers two distinct meanings, as we shall see below.

Identity is, for us, a result of abstraction. But it

' If "similar" could be kept out of this use and reserved for
"ahnlich" it would be well. I think that as a latinized and, so to
speak, more artificial form, it has a tendency towards expressing the
perception and not the simple fact.

' -^ I count " identical " as equivalent to "same," and "similar," subject
to my last note, as equivalent to "like." "Gleich," in the sense of
"equal," does not come in question here.


lOO Knowledge and Reality.

is sometimes predicated with a reserve which recognizes
the abstractness of the identity, and sometimes not.
When predicated without such reserve it is individual
identity. It is then, I suppose, based on a partial
identity which claims to be of an essential and dominant
nature ; such an identity as that in virtue of which
notes of the same pitch but of different quality are
called the same note, or in virtue of which the man
is the same individual as the child. (The precise
nature of continued concrete identity is interesting, but
cannot be gone into here.) Individual identity seems,
then, as a rule, to be reached by inference ; it is pre-
dicated of a whole which includes much more than the
partial identities on which the inference is based, and is
compatible with varying degrees of inferential nexus to
the extent of which it gives no clue. Thus it may cause
us momentary surprise to be confronted with things that
are identical without being like. Lotze^ points out
that the same thing in different states need not be
" like " itself (" gleich "), but only " identical " with itself
(" identisch ").

It would be inconvenient if in such a passage we
had no English term at command except "same" and
"identical." We should then require a cumbrous peri-
phrasis in order to avoid an actual contradiction, and by
such a periphrasis we could as easily dispense with the
term " equal." If we are not expected to do this I do

" Lotze, " Metaphysik," sect. 19.


The Judgment of Number and Measurement. loi

not know why we should give up " like," as signifying,
not a perceived relation based on partial identity, but a
special and limited kind of partial identity, viz. such
identity of quality as excludes difference ; or identity,
in some abstract respect, both of quality and of degree.
In other words, if the proper meaning of likeness is a
perceived relation based on a partial identity, it seems
to be applicable, by abstraction out of this meaning, to
mean a perceived or external identity, as distinguished
from an inferred, individual, or essential identity.

When Mill, for instance, is condemned for arguing
from likeness, it is fair to remember this justification.
It is true that an unspecified likeness is no ground
of argument, and it is true that when you specify points
of likeness you really come to partial identity. On the
other hand, it is also impossible to argue from an un-
specified identity. " This is the same flower as that "
does not justify the conclusion that the two flowers are
the same in colour or in certain other details (" same "
meaning here according to usage " of the same speeies)."
You can indeed argue from this sameness on the ground
of a system to which it refers, while in " this flower
is like that" you cannot do so. But I doubt whether
this is a logieal distinction. I think that by any one
but a botanist more legitimate conclusions could be
drawn from "this flower is like," than from "this flower
is the same." From the former we could infer " The
second flower is beautiful, is fit for decorative design, is


I02 Knowledge and Reality.

purple, is double or single." From the latter we could
only infer certain essential matters of the structure of
the flower, which are compatible with all sorts of
variations of colour, size, and perfection of development.
And in the case of Mill in particular, we always find,
or find at least in the crucial places of his doctrine of
inference, that the points of likeness are to be specified.
I therefore complain of a certain harshness in Mr.
Bradley's insistence, against the English school, on the
futility of arguing from likeness, when in interpreting
Maas he construes likeness, as a matter of course, to mean
partial identity. I may add that, to my mind, Mr.
Bradley is more apt to fail in specifying his identity
than Mr. Mill in specifying his likeness, and an unspeci-
fied identity is no better ground of inference — perhaps
worse — than an unspecified likeness.

Even in defence of the term " exact likeness " I have
something to suggest. Exact and incomplete likeness
might, of course, include individual identity ; but from
this fact none of the absurdities would follow, which Mr.
Bradley deduces from the notion of exact likeness beind
equivalent to identity. Exact likeness would naturally
be understood in the sense of likeness measurably exact,
and excluding difference in the respects to which the like-
ness extends. This is the true meaning of " gleichkeit."
Even the use of " gleich" in mathematics, though exactly
corresponding to our use of equal, carries with it, I
strongly suspect, a true shade of meaning which in our


The Judgment of Number and Measurement. 103

" equal " is forgotten. The simplest case of " gleichheit "
is, perhaps, that of a colour-match. Here it has its full
and, as I suspect, really universal meaning, viz. " iden-
tical in quality and in degree.'' In defining "gleich,"^
Lotze calls the two terms so related a and a. We natu-
rally speak of two " equal " terms as a and b. Of course
the common as distinct from the mathematical rendering
of " gleich " is supposed to be " like." ^ It is the usual
word by which a comparison or simile is introduced.

I think that these usages are instructive. Colours
pronounced " gleich," i.e. colours which match,^ are in
the full and proper sense " equal,'' and I regret that we
are debarred by usage from calling them so. They
admit of more or less, but are not more or less, and so
must be considered as having the same number of the
same units, which I take to be the definition of " equal."
In other words, they are measura bly identical in quality.
The phrase "colour-equation" has recently come into
use, but perhaps refers rather to the composition of the
stimuli than to the quality of the colour, although the
act of equation is effected by a comparison of quality.

' Vide Lotze, " Metaphysik, " sect. 268. Cf. note on p. 47 of the
English translation.

^ "Gleichung" means "equation," but " Vergleichung," "compari-
son " in general.

' You may say the colours are " gleich," or, I suppose, that the objects
are " gleich " in colour. You must not say simply that the objects are
" gleich " because of one aspect of them. This would take you into the
loose meaning which Mr. Bradley ascribes to "like," including points of
difference in the basis of the relation of likeness.


104 Knoivledge and Reality.

(The question is, e.g. what mixture of red and green
light is seen as a match to a given yellow.) Our word
" equal," however, is far too degraded to give any such
meaning its full prominence ; we think it enough to say
with Mr. Bradley,'- that "equality is sameness in
quantity." But I do not see how there can possibly be
sameness in quantity without an identical unit, and
therefore without sameness in quality.^ And so I
cannot follow Mr. Bradley when he says,^ " To use
the sign = for qualitative sameness is surely barba-
rous ; " unless he means a generic or specific qualitative
sameness which has not been established by comparison
amounting to measurement, and which is therefore what
I have called individual sameness, and does not amount
to exact likeness. I should be inclined to say that, but
for our abstraction, vicious in theory if convenient in
practice, in the use of " equal," the sign = was the right
sign for absolute qualitative sameness. But as we
cannot use " equal " in the extended sense of " gleich "
which brings out the aspects both of equality and of
likeness, whether it is used for ''equal" or for "like," I

' " Principles of Logic," p. 24.

Vide sect. 3 of this chapter. The places quoted there show that
Mr. Bradley is well aware of the relation \\hich units must bear to their
whole or centre. I may point out for the benefit of others, that in saying
a gallon of water and a gallon of wine are the same in quantity, we ascribe
to both the identical quality of filling space ; when we speak of equal
weights of sugar and flour we ascribe to both the identical quality of
gravity ; when we speak of two objects as equal in value, we ascribe to
both the identical quality of being exchangeable, and, probably, exchange-
able for money. ^ " Principles of Logic," p. 24.


TJie Judgment of Niiviber and Measurement. 105

think that much confusion may be avoided by the use
of " like " and " exactly like."

I will give one or two illustrations. " These two
notes are the same," means that certain sounds, which
from their main feature go by a name indicating their
place in a scale, have the same place in that scale. The
affirmation only concerns the pitch, leaving quality and
loudness out of the question. If we wish to predicate
about them, we must say, " these two notes are exactly
alike." We then retain the word note merely as the
name of the sound in question ; but we say of the
sounds as a whole '^ that they produce the same imme-
diate impression on us, and thus assert much more than
in the former case. By help of the latter assertion we
could infer from the pleasantness or the unpleasantness
of the one to that of the other ; the former would not
enable us to do this. No doubt we might attain the
same result by saying, " These two musical sounds are
identical in pitch, quality, and loudness." And it is a
counsel of perfection always to speak accurately. I only
say that equality is reserved as a short term for one
kind of identity ; I do not see why likeness should not
be reserved for another.

So with the same thing in its different states. If we
mean that it is perceptibly alike in any two states, we
must say so ; for such likeness is not implied in its

^ If " these " creates a difficulty, we might substitute for it a mention
of the different instruments on which the note has different qualities.


io6 Knowledge and Reality.

being the same. The determinants which in common
speech indicate the nature of an identity are very subtle,
and would repay inquiry. If we say, " I have found the
same flower that you found," we mean a flower of the
same species. I suppose this depends on the purpose
which governs the degree of distinction we desire to make.
As a rule, it seems to me, " a flower," " the flower," " that
flower," means a species,^ and not an individual ; and
so does "that Rotifer," "that Polyzoon." This seems
not to be so with the higher animals or with human
beings. The same man never means anything but the
same individual. The same butterfly or beetle seems to
mean the same species. This is, of course, always apart
from special contexts which may confer a special interest
on any object. I do not feel sure if it would be in-
telligible (supposing it to be true) to say, " The Scotch
ptarmigan is the same bird as the Norwegian ptarmigan."
I think we should say, " the same species as." We should
say, "This is the same gentian that grows in the
Engadine." We should not say, " This is the same
horse that runs wild in the prairies." If we say, " These
silks are of the same colour," I think this does mean
that the colours are exactly alike ; it might easily mean
that the colours are of the same class, e.g. both blue,
and not exclude their being of different shades. In
"shades of the same colour" we have this meaning.

' I think it is quite good, or at least quite usual, English to say,
" These are the same flower, but they are not very like."


The Judgment of Number and Measurement. 107

Therefore it seems that we are to judge from custom
and context, i.e. especially from the purpose of a
judgment before us, what kind and degree of identity-
is alleged in any affirmation of sameness. I think it
natural that we should try and help ourselves out by
giving one kind of identity a special name.

It follows further, from the meaning I have given to
likeness, that it refers to the kind of identity, viz. the
identity of indiscernibles in direct comparison, on which,
I should think, all other identities must rest as in-
ferences. And therefore one might say that it is as
true that all identity rests on likeness as that, according '
to Mr. Bradley's view, all likeness rests on identity.

To repeat the main fact to which I wished to draw
attention. The most accurate German writing requires
" gleich " besides " identisch " and " ahnlich," and in a
sense which is not precisely represented either by " equal "
or by "like," but combines, in a way justified and de-
manded by theory, the meanings of both. The defini-
tion ^ of " gleich " in contrast with that of " ahnlich ''
leaves no doubt that it means qualitative identity,
the identity of qualities measured and judged " equal,"
i.e. indiscernible in degree. Inveterate custom prevents
us from giving "equal" the full sense of "gleich," though
I am sure we should gain in precision by doing so.^ I

' Lotze, "Metaphysik," sect. 268.

^ We should not be so much tempted to manipulate numbers per se, and
forget that they are only the vehicle of quantity.


lo8 Knowledge and Reality.

therefore suggest that we may not be so far wrong in
using "like" or "exactly like," for a kind of identity.
This is no doubt immediately perceived identity, ex-
ternal and not inferred (except in the remoter sense in
which all judgment involves inference) ; but for all that
it is not a feeling in us, or perceived relation qua
perceived. It is referred out of our heads to the object
in an abstract aspect, just as are identity, quantity,
causation, or any other relative attributes ; and the
metaphysical question, what becomes of likeness if
we are not there to compare, is not to interfere with
the immediate fact that we refer to it as to any other
objective content. We might conveniently retain
" similar " in a sense corresponding to " ahnlich," for
objects related by having points of identity ("exact
likeness," or '' gleichheit ") mixed up with differences.

6. I add the following remarks before leaving the
subject of Number. It is an interesting question in
the theory of chance whether the ratio which expresses
a chance must express something that actually happens
" in the long run." I do not purpose to discuss the
question at length, but merely to speak of a minor
difficulty which I find in Mr. Bradley's argument.

I agree with Mr. Bradley, who is here in accord
with Lotze, that there is no meaning in asking whether
every chance must be realized " in the long run," or " if
you go on long enough." Every series of experiments
" must stop short at some finite number, however large


The Judgment of Number and Measurement. 109

it be." ^ But in Mr. Bradley's argument I find a puzzle,
which does not occur in Lotze, as I read him. It is
arbitrary, I admit, to break off your experiments just
when the calculated and actual numbers coincide. It
is obvious that if you went on they might diverge
again. But Mr. Bradley urges, herein differing from
Lotze, that not only they might, but they 7nust diverge.
"If^ I toss the coin until the numbers are equal, of
course they will be equal. If I toss it once more, then,
by the hypothesis, they become unequal. I might just
as well say, ' If I only go on long enough, the events
will certainly not answer to the chances.' "

I may begin by pointing out that in the above pas-
sage, the " numbers are equal " means that the number
of observed throws which . come " heads," is equal to the
number of those which come " tails,'' which is what
ought to happen out of any total even number, if the
fraction expressing the chances is one-half for each case.
It may be the merest accident, but bears curiously on
my point, that in the parallel place in Lotze to which
Mr. Bradley refers, the phrase " the two numbers coin-
cide " alludes to the calculated number coinciding with
the observed number. I do not care whether Mr.
Bradley may possibly have misread Lotze or not ; that
does not affect the value of his views. But I very
much doubt whether in the case which Mr. Bradley
gives, the two numbers of which Lotze speaks, i.e. the

' Lotze, " Logik," sect. 286. ^ "Principles of Logic," p. 214.


no Knowledge and Reality.

calculated and the observed number, do cease to coin-
cide. Mr. Bradley's argument goes to saying that no
ratio can ever be realized in a fraction of a cycle.
But (I am no mathematicianj this seems to be a
paradox, and to involve classing together cases which
are wholly distinct. The distinction cannot, indeed,
appear with the ratio one-half, but in another instance
is visible at once. Say I have thrown a single die
thirty times, and each of the six sides has come up
five times ; I then throw twice more, and two different
sides turn up. Surely in this case the numbers, i.e. the
calculated number and the observed number, do continue
to coincide. In one-third of the cycle we have had one-
third of the sides. If, on the other hand, we had thrown
the same side twice for our thirty-first and thirty-second
throw, then we should have had one-third of the cycle
and only one-sixth of the sides, and in that case the
observed and calculated number would not coincide.

The conception of one-third of a cycle may be
objected to as involving an hypothesis, and alluding to
the future. You have not thrown the cycle of six (from
thirty-one to thirty-six inclusive) ; what right have you,
then, to speak of the two throws, thirty-one and thirty-
two, as two out of six? Or in eleven tosses of a coin,
what right have you to call the eleventh, one toss out
of two? If you allude to the future so far, why not
further .? And thus any error might be compensated.
One can only admit the objection. It is well grounded


The Judgment of Number and Measurement. 1 1 1

so far as this, that the hypothesis must not be given out
as a fact. We have not two throws out of six, nor one
toss out of two ; but simply two thi'ows and one toss,
after clearing away all those which enter into equal
cycles.

On the other hand, the rule laid down in the
fraction one-sixth, is itself hypothetical ; and if we will
not admit that its condition applies, we must at least
not allege that the rule is broken. It says, when applied
to a series, of each side of the die, " Once in every six
throws ; " i.e. if there are six throws, any given side
ought to be thrown once. But if there are not six
throws the rule predicts nothing. If so, there are no
calculated numbers for a broken cycle, and you cannot
say that the calculated and observed numbers either
coincide or do not coincide. Considering the nature of
numerical series, I am not satisfied with this result.
It is plain that a numerical series reveals its character
gradually and by approximation. If you throw once
only, and the six turns up, you have formally one
in one. But the throw excludes no series in which
the six occurs once at least. It does not exclude
such series ; it is simply undetermined in respect of
them. Another throw determines it further, and so
on till the limit is reached which we, or the nature of
the case, may fix. As it is possible for a series, without
being completed, to depart from a rule, it is fair, for
the purpose of ascertaining whether this is so, to test


1 1 2 Knowledge and Reality.


it by the rule which we have an interest in judging it
by, and which is in this case furnished by the condition
of the hypothetical judgment expressed in the fraction
one-sixth. In this sense, as a test of compatibiHty,
we should, no doubt, be taking account of the future,
but only as an hypothesis. The strongest objection to
such a treatment is the point which I hinted at above.
Even six consecutive throws of the same side of the
die are reconcilable with the formula one-sixth, if
we look forward to completing thirty-six throws.
So, if we are to apply hypotheses, why not apply such
as this, and make all series correct ? We can only
answer that you may apply any hypothesis as long as
you state clearly what it is that you apply. But the
calculated numbers for any total set of throws, which is
not a complete set of cycles, must be either impossible
to be made out, and then there can be no question of
calculated and observed numbers coinciding, or they
must be such numbers as are compatible with correct-
ness at the completion of the next cycle ; and, if so,
the calculated and the observed numbers do coincide
in some cases of broken cycles, and do not in others ;
and therefore it is not necessary that the series should
depart from the ratio.

I must end with a warning. We are not to take
account of the order of cases within the total number of
actual throws which we are considering. I only sup-
posed a certain order to give clearness to the illustration.


The Judgment of Number and Measurement. 1 1 3

If in estimating chances we take in conditions which
operate differently at different times, that is our affair,
and we must put up with the consequent inaccuracy of
our fraction during the several portions of the time, for
the sake of its accuracy as applied to the total of time.
A sportsman's chance of killing his birds may be greater
in the morning than in the afternoon ; but it may be
difficult to formulate this difference, and we may try to
state the chance in general terms only applying to the
whole day. It is, then, to be expected that the series,
even if correct according to the ratio, will only be so
over the whole day together, and not in morning or
afternoon taken apart. If we want a more accurate
determination for the parts of time, we must state the
conditions of each separately, and obtain a ratio for
each, which we can afterwards, if we like, combine into a
result applicable to the whole day.

I have dwelt long enough on a quite simple point ;
I will conclude with an extreme instance. If there
were fifty possible cases of some occurrence, with equal
chances in favour of each, the fraction for each being
JL. ; if in the first ninety trials each case had occurred
once, and besides this, forty different cases had occurred
a second time, surely it would be pedantic to deny that
such a series was essentially different in respect of con-
formity to the ratio, from one in which the first ninety
trials gave, say, fifty of one case and forty of another.


1 14 Knowledge and Reality.


CHAPTER III.

THE NATURE OF ASSERTION.

I. The striking view which, in substantial agreement
with Sigwart, Mr. Bradley propounds on the relation
of modality to assertion, appears to me to admit and
demand in two respects a different application from that
which he gives it. Let us grant that a modal {i.e.
possible or necessary) judgment is related to a simple
assertion, as a hypothetical to a categorical judgment ;
that the possible and the necessary are signs of inference,
and belong to the content of the judgment, while an
assertion is simply bare affirmation as such, which
formally claims that reality is qualified by the content
of the judgment ; we may still, I think, resist both the
entire irrationality with which the view before us invests
the act of affirmation,^ and the corollary which denies
that apodeictic modality strengthens our assertions.

' Cf. " Principles of Logic," pp. 22 and 14. " Tliis content, we have
seen, is the same both in the assertion and out of it. If you ask instead of
judging, what is asked is precisely the same as what is judged." It is
exceedingly hard to determine such a problem as this by pure intro-
spection ; the accompaniments of judgment are .so easily confused with


The Nature of Assertion. 115

(i.) The relation of assertion to modality depends on
the nature of assertion or judgment. Mr. Bradley-
says, in effect, that judgment consists in alleging a
content to be true of reality, and the real or reality is
what appears in presentation. I recognize the value of
this account of the matter, but have already found
stumbling-blocks in the mode and degree of this pre-
sentation of the real. It seems that till we have it all
we do not have it at all ; ^ and unless we admit degrees
of truth, and more and less of fact, I do not see how we
can escape the latter alternative, viz. that in no aspect
of reality about which, nor in any content which, we
predicate, have we any hold on reality at all. But even
if we were to admit degrees of fact, Mr. Bradley's
account of the act of affirmation would still debar us

its essence. But, so far as I can see, the statement quoted does not repre-
sent my experience, nor can I understand it on theoretical grounds. I
cannot but connect it with the habit of treating the sentence as the exact
counterpart of the judgment (z'/i/i? below, chap. iv. ). 1 1 believe that it would
be worth considering whether every idea that comes before the mind is not
really in some modality, a modality varying with the attachments which
its content furnishes to the world of our knowledge.. I also entertain a
doubt whether a question is a form of knowledge, an act of thought, at all,
and not rather a form of language in which the desire for a certain act on
the part of another moral agent is embodied. A question has, I incline to
think, no more meaning for knowledge than an imperative sentence.
Neither, I suspect, can be addressed to oneself, or have any meaning apart
from the presence of a moral agent external to oneself. I hope to treat
of this subject at greater length elsewhere.

' CoM^rrtrf "Principles of Logic, "p.;5 1. "Nothing .... can imme-
diately encounter me save that which is present . If I have it not here and
now, I do not have it at all. " But of course it turns out that the real cannot
be confined within the limits of the present.


Ii6 Knowledge and Reality.

from expressing those different degrees in the strength
of our assertions. As I understand him, he holds that
in judgment we simply claim for an idea in our mind
that it is true of reality ;^ or that reality is "qualified
by " this idea, " idea " being taken in the sense of a
meaning, which our actual momentary mental image and
processes only symbolize — a view allied to Berkeley's.
We effect the reference of our meaning to reality
by joining it, through some identical quality, with our
consciousness of present perception, which is the only
actual contact that we have with " the real." The claim
based on this reference is not a matter of degree. Belief,
our habitual state of mind in relation to a given judg-
ment, is psychological,^ and has degrees ; judgment is
primarily logical, and has no degrees. There is, then,
I may observe, just a loophole for escaping from the
doctrine of the " Grammar of Assent," which makes assent
or affirmation both absolute and irrational, in this
agreeing only too well, as it seems to me, with Mr.
Bradley's view. He, however, leaves himself belief to
fall back on, though the title of a mere psychological
state is not very appropriate to conviction proportioned
to inference. I am aware that Mr. Bradley is able to
account for qualified assertion in another way, which
follows from his view of modality.

I do not know if I am right in tracing Mr. Bradley's
view of judgment to his practice, which will occupy us

• "Principles of Logic," pp. 73-5. 2 Ibid. p. 21.


The Nature of Assertion. 117

later on, of taking one " point of identity " to be as good
as another for purposes of inference. He habitually, as it
appears to me, neglects all considerations arising out of
the special nature and limits of different identities; and
consequently supposes that where any point of qualita-
tive identity enables us to connect an ideal content (a
" meaning " in the sense explained above) with reality
as given in presentation, we must make this judgment
with a degree of assertion which is always the same.
This is, I imagine, one element in Mr. Bradley's view.
He refuses to entertain the idea of measuring the degree^
and extent of identity by which the content of an idea/
is for us attached to reality.

Another element is a metaphysical doctrine. " If
S — P is fact, it cannot be more than fact ; if it is less
than fact, it is nothing at all." ^ I see no prima facie
ground for this allegation, except on the assumption
that fact is not for us a construction, but is something
given as a sensuous phenomenon, immediate, external
to thought, and simply mirrored in thought. But if the
only fact is ultimate and non-phenomenal,^ it seems to
me that in an xiltimate sense everything which we assert
is less than fact, and that if we wish it to take any
character as fact at all we must measure our claim by
the degree in which the affirmed content, as affirmed, is
capable of entering into the ultimate non-phenomenal
fact. Such a conception is not wholly alien from Mr.

' " Principles of Logic," p. 181. ^ Ibid. p. iSo.


1 1 8 Knowledge and Reality.

Bradley's view, which admits that the real is not summed
up in presentation, but only makes itself felt there by us,
and which also attaches a certain importance to " finding
a place" for an imagined fact in the series of events.
The reason of this importance, on his view, I do not
quite see, for according to it you may have in your
mind an imagined fact, which links itself to present
perception by a qualitative identity, so that you know
that it stands for something in past experience, and this,
as I read Mr. Bradley's theory, would at once justify
you in affirming it qua fact, in the ordinary meaning of
the words which express it. To me such an affirmation
appears unjustifiable. To employ the capital instance
which Mr. Bradley takes, it would constantly have to be
made of the content of a dream, which is recollected with
all the quality and character of reality, and is only
judged to have been dreamed because we can prove
that it was not real, and perhaps that it entered our
consciousness in the sleeping hours. I do not mean that
this phenomenon is normal, but it is quite common.
Normally, I suppose, a dream is distinguished by quality
from a waking reality ; but where it is not, we are by no
means helpless.

Thus I should like to insist less on the element of

arbitrary synthesis and " mere " judgment,^ of which in

; my own experience I am wholly unaware ; to negative

the idea that affirmation is independent of content, and

' See chap, i., sect. 4.


The Nature of Assertion. 119

therefore, as it appears to me, wholly irrational ; and
consequently, not indeed to treat modality as formal
and a case of assertion, but to treat assertion as a matter
of content and as a case of modality. On the question
whether affirmation is independent of content, I must
refer back to note, p. 114, and a dd tha t I believe rnyself
to be wholly unable to judge a suggested content true
of reality, without either analyzing and re-thinking it as
ground and conclusion, or adding a ground ab extra,
by which I modify the content as I give it my assent.
" The arbitrary synthesis of a suggestion with reality "
represents to my mind a contradiction in terms. A
synthesis with reality seems to me to be the act of
recognizing attachments and systematic relations which
we cannot make, but can only find.-"- If space permits,
I shall endeavour to point out later how, to my mind,
Mr. Bradley altogether underrates the complexity of
the act of judgment. For instance, though I have
no objection, on the merits of the question, to admitting
that there are judgments in which one idea is affirmed,
without copula, of present reality, yet I must entirely
decline to find cases of such judgments in the cry of
"Wolf!" or "Fire!" Another instance which is sug-
gested in the same passage — "Miserable!" — comes nearer
to what such a judgment should be. But I cannot
recognize the word spoken aloud as any test at all of

' Cf. "Principles of Logic," p. 87, "Perhaps we need not judge,
but, if we judge, we lose all our liberty."


I20 Knowledge and Reality.

what goes on in the mind. The word of command,
"March ! " is surely not addressed to the environment in
general ; it is a definite symbol with a precise content
and limited reference. "Wolf!" and "Fire!" are, like
" March ! " each of them merely the emphatic word in
a sentence, which being given voice suggests the rest.
And then, what is one idea .' Mr. Bradley knows well
how little the phrase tells us, and by using it in the
place, as a phrase of controversy, surely turns his back on
the faithful reader who has already granted him that no
judgment "contains more than one idea."^

This, then, is my first gloss on Mr. Bradley's theory.
I should have thought that the affirmation of the cate-
gorical or assertorical judgment was a matter of content,
and homogeneous with the possibility and necessity of
the hypothetical, and was therefore capable of infinite
degrees, but that the assertorical is worse off than the
hypothetical judgment, inasmuch as, though really con-
ditioned, it does not state explicitly the condition on
which its truth depends, but leaves us to choose it for
ourselves out of a concrete mass.^ The difference,
indeed, is often simply grammatical ; but this is not,
strictly speaking, a difference between judgments at all.
I am perplexed, however, considering Mr. Bradley's
treatment of the relation between categorical and hypo-
thetical judgments, to find him here, while identifying the
assertorical with the categorical, nevertheless drawino- a

' " Principles of Logic," p. 12. ^ Cf. Ibid. p. 90.


The Nature of Assertion. 12 1

broad line of difference in kind between the assertorical
and the hypotlietical. The only line which I should
care to draw would be that between judgments into the
content of which time enters, and those where time is
indifferent. The former can pass into the latter, but
only with such modifications as would make them prac-
tically unrecognizable.

(ii.) The above considerations naturally lead me to
differ from Mr. Bradley and from Sigwart as to the
relative strength with which we make categorical and
apodeictic assertions. But I must begin with a large
concession, which may appear to leave nothing worth
arguing about. It is true that in '' categorical " judging
we do not as a rule measure the strength with which we
assert, and I should' suppose that uneducated or un-
civilized men cannot do so. You can only actually
measure the strength of one assertion by pitting it
against another. If there is no conflict of assertions, and
no idea of a conflict, there is, as a rule, no consciousness
that the assertion we make has only relative strength.
And it may be said, from Mr. Bradley's point of view,
that he admits and maintains that any judgment becomes
inferential (and therefore necessary, and so modal) when
reasserted against a doubt ; but he holds that this modal
character is not essential to the nature of judgment
as such.

Nevertheless, it appears to me that in the relations
of content which force a judgment upon us, we have


122 Knowledge and Reality.

the standard of measurement of the strength with
which the assertion is made. This is the strength,
though we may not reflect upon it till denial makes us.
I can imagine that it may be replied, " No. Not the
standard of the strength with which you assert ; but the
standard of your right to assert, which is a very different
thing." When you judge, the objector would continue
you commit yourself wholly ; whether you are right to
do so is a question for you before you judge, and for
you and others after. But you cannot modify your
judgment.

I admit, as I have said, that in the assertions of
uneducated or uncivilized persons there is something
which seems to bear out such a notion as this. And yet
I believe that it rests upon a confusion ; and that if,
on being asked how strongly he means to assert, an
ordinary person would say, " Fact is fact, and I can do
no more than say a thing is fact," this is due to the
influence of popular theory, and is not reconcilable with
the practice of common sense. The confusion which
I speak of is this. We are apt not to distinguish what
we aim at expressing from what we succeed in express-
ing. Now, our absolute certainty always refers to the
former, never to the latter. But the former, as Mr.
Bradley has pointed out over and over again, is never
got into any act of thought. What we aim at, what
the form of every judgment claims to predicate (I do
not say that Mr. Bradley backs me up in quite this


The Nature of Assertion. 123

notion), is the whole non-phenomenal fact, the whole
of Reality. -Aiid_Jt_j,s_tojWSj__and_J^^^^ .05lij„that

our dead level _of certainbj^ Jn__the_ ordinary judgment
applies. All actual judgments are provisional, and pro-
visional in different degrees ; and we know this quite
well and admit it in practice, or adrnit it in practice
even if we do not know it in theory. Nothing is more
striking and obvious than this provisional character even
of the most direct judgments of perception. We admit
them as true and certain, but for their purpose only.
Let the purpose be changed, e.g. let legal importance
suddenly attach to a statement made in casual conversa-
tion, like" I saw A. B. in Victoria Station this morning,"
and at once every detail becomes doubtful. Not in the
least that (in the case I wish to put) we doubt the truth
of the statement in an ordinary sense ; rather, the truth
which was fearlessly asserted and accepted meant no
more than this, that some real incident happened which
might be bond fide so described for ordinary purposes.
We do not doubt that something happened, but we do
not in the least pledge ourselves that that something
has been actually or accurately described. And no one
resents cross-examination as to precise details or omis-
sions in a statement, when it is clear that a new
purpose has emerged since the statement was made.
The " something " which is asserted with absolute
certainty, and the definition of which our judgments
try progressively to give, can never be defined accurately


124 Knowledge and Reality.

till it is defined completely. And it would then amount
to the entire ultimate Fact. But in each case we are
content when our purpose is served. This fact, that all
judging is relative to a purpose, and that cross-exami-
nation is not resented, as a rule, if a statement has to
be used for another purpose than that for which it was
originally made, shows that we do not really attach
uniform strength of assertion even to our ordinary
assertorical judgments ; and the absolute assent which
is sometimes ascribed to our judgments does not really
refer to them, but to the ultimate fact which they do
indeed claim to represent, but only ad hoc.

But if absolute certainty only attaches to Reality
as a whole, why should it attach especially to modal
judgments ; and is not Sigwart right in his contention
that the strength of assertion with which a necessary
judgment introduces its thesis, does not really exceed,
but is very apt to be less than, the strength of assertion
with which an ordinary categorical judgment is affirmed t
The "must "which is the sign of apodeictic judgment
does, as Sigwart remarks, often in real life indicate a
very modest degree of confidence in an assertion ; as
when we say, " He must (surely) have arrived by this
time." I alluded above ^ to Sigwart's opinion expressed
in the same passage, that there must be ultimate pre-
mises of proof which are not themselves proved ; a
prejudice of "common sense "by his adoption of which,

' See chap, i,, sect. 4.


TJie Nature of Assertion. 125

if he really adopted it, Aristotle placed himself on a
lower logical standpoint than that of Plato.

Now, I am wholly unable to take Sigwart's point of
view in this matter, and the undoubted fact which he
alleges as to the colloquial use of " must " appears to
me to make against him. You cannot assert anything
without a reason, that is to say, whenever you assert, you
claim to have a reason, or think you have one ; you feel
as if you had one, even if on cross-examination it is not
producible. Therefore, as it seems to me, every judg-
ment rests on the modal " may " or " must " (" may " if it
is a " particular " judgment). The only difference in this
respect between a categorical or " absolute " and a hypo-
thetical or apodeictic judgment is that in the categorical
\ judgment you do not say what your reasons are, and
j they may and often do fall outside the content of the
j judgment as understood by a hearer — this is the case
with a judgment collected from the testimony of others —
while in the hypothetical judgment you explicitly select
and allege the reason or condition, which being granted
the thesis or consequent cannot but follow. But now,
from the very fact that the two forms of judgment, the
categorical and the hypothetical, are not separable by
an absolute line (I really do not know in what sense
Mr. Bradley uses categorical ^ in this chapter, but as
there are in strictness no categoricals, except a class of
which he says but little, I take the word to be here used

' " Principles of Logic," p. 107.


126 Knowledge and Reality.

with reference really to grammatical shape or perhaps
in the sense that "assertions about particular fact are
categorical "), from this very fact it follows that the
reason of a categorical judgment need gain nothing by
being thrown into hypothetical form. Not the form but
the content is what makes the assertion, and a bad reason
is no better for being made explicit ; on the contrary, in
making it explicit we often detect its badness, and it is
this that affects the " must " with an intonation of doubt,
and often loads it with an adverb — "Surely he must
have,'' etc. The idle attempt indicated by the adverb
to superadd a formal assertiveness to our assertion, frus-
trates and betrays itself, because strength of assertion
depends on content, and no hope or interest of our own
can directly affect our vision of the connection of a
content with reality.

But the complementary fact to that which Sigwart
alleges is still more significant. Where you have an
apodeictic judgment with a content at all adequate to
its hypothetical form, then no categorical judgment with
its confused antecedent will present itself with equal and
opposing strength. This is the more remarkable from
the fact that every hypothetical judgment challenges
comparison with the highest scientific ideal of truth,
and so is made with a certain reserve and a sense of its
provisional character. And yet if it is opposed to a
categorical or absolute judgment which includes in its
subject, and so admits, the antecedent of the hypo-


The Nature of Assertion. 127

thetical, no one doubts for a moment that it overthrows
the categorical. Even between judgments of the class
to which Sigwart alludes and apparently assertorical
negations of them, it is quite doubtful which we believe.
" He must have come" and "He has not come" are in
all practical life recognized as judgments of just the
same order, and to which of the two we assent depends
on. the intonation with which they are expressed in lan-
guage, on the evidence which circumstances show us to
underlie one or the other, or on our knowledge of the
speakers.

It may be that Mr. Bradley is using categorical, not
with reference to grammatical shape, but with reference
to one of the meanings which he has provisionally
assigned to the term in his earlier chapters.

No doubt judgments such as these, judgments which
assert the existence of the things which they mention,
and not nierely the basis of a hypothetical connection of
certain elements of content — these judgments have a
strength in their very weakness. They assert a momen-
tary conjunction of content and imply its connection,
instead of asserting the basis of connection and implying
the conjunction. And therefore the universal, i.e. hypo-
thetical or necessary judgment, which asserts imprimis
and explicitly the ground oi connection of content, cannot
get at them to deny them. They rely on no rational
connection at all, or else on one which is sheltered behind
a prominence of mere actual fact. " The lily which I


128 Knowledge and Reality.

copied had a triangular stem." Science can do little
against such a statement— a stem may get out of shape
by being crushed in the corner of a wall ; and the uni-
versal, "The lily, as such, has around stem,'' may destroy
in the above individual judgment any element of ration-
ality that it might claim — may show, that is, that " lily "
has nothing to do with the matter, and the same thing
might have happened with an onion ; but it cannot
annihilate the actual fact that there was this one
particular plant-stem, which was that of a lily, and
was triangular. It is a grave question whether such a
proposition is not a mere summary of two judgments ;
whether " lily," which is a mere superfluous detail, has
a right to be in the subject at all.

Nevertheless, even judgments of this class are theo-
retically accessible to contradiction ; they turn out on
analysis, as Mr. Bradley has most excellently shown, to
be but lower and imperfect phases of hypothetical ^ or
scientific assertion. And as such imperfect phases,
they have lower strength of assertion, as they have less
rationality. This is no doubt a paradox when we apply
it to the simplest assertions, say, about our own feelings,
such judgments as Mr. Bradley, following Sigwart, would
call analytic judgments of sense, like, "That hurts," "I
am hot." Nothing can be greater, it would seem, than
the strength of assertion of these judgments. It is one

' " Principles of Logic," 93 ff. T am unable to reconcile this most
valuable inquiry into the import of judgments with Mr. Bradley's views on
Modality.


The Nature of Assertion. 129

thing to say that they cannot be proved, and another to
deny that they are asserted absolutely. But we must
bear in mind the vagueness of the purpose which such
judgments have to satisfy. It is true that no observer
could or dares to deny them, and we ourselves are not
likely to criticise their rendering of the something which
we feel and wish to express. But we know very well
that under a doctor's cross-questioning our descriptions
have to be altered. jiHere, as elsewhere, our absolute
assertion refers to the real fact, not to the content of our
judgment, which is only relative to a purpose. I admit
that the question becomes thorny when we get into this
region ; for assertions about pleasure and pain are pre-
cisely those which seem to be thrown out at times with
the most emphatic insistence. One might ask whether
this is not an insistence of feeling rather than of asser-
tion, whether the judgment (though significant speech
cannot be a mere interjection) does not in these cases
approach the level of the interjection. I mean that
perhaps we do not in these cases think of or attach
importance to the precise vehicle of assertion ; we do
not especially care what in particular we say, although
no doubt the whole state which we have it in mind to
express is a certainty of the most present kind. I there-
fore venture to doubt whether the intense conviction
which goes with statements of direct personal feelings is
a strength of assertion directed to the content of the
judgment. We should, often at least, not meet a cor-

K


130 Knowledge and Reality.

rection with positive denial, but with absolute indif-
ference ; the description, we should say, was nothing
to us, we had the fact in ourselves. Do I mean to say-
that I assert the law of gravity with a greater strength
of assertion than that I am in pain (when I seem to feel
myself to be so) ? First, if I cannot, it would be because
the second judgment contained absolutely no element
which I could conceive as accessible to denial by a
universal judgment, no connection of content, but simply
a bald assertion that this content is. All categorical
judgments have this tendency, as we have seen. But,
secondly, if a judgment were to embody nothing but this
tendency, it could not remain a judgment. \Xs form, its
claim, at least, is to be rational. Even the judgment that
" I am in pain " carries with it some notion of cause or
of permanence, some implication as to the " I " and the
pain which are thus connected. Hysterical patients will
complain of acute pain and inability to move, and
though the pain is in a sense unreal, it is not illusory.
The physician does not deny that the patient is suffering,
or that movement causes agony; but nevertheless he
knows that the content of the judgment is, as a reference
to the real world, false ; that is, the pain and other
symptoms are not of the inevitable and constant cha-
racter which they appear to the patient to possess. Not
unfrequently moral treatment will succeed against such
symptoms ; a tone of command or of persuasion will
destroy the state which appeared to be phy.sical and


The Nature of Assertion. 131

constant. In a case which turns out thus, the judgment
formed by the physician on indications ab extra, and
therefore hypothetical or scientific, is rightly accepted as
obviously the same in kind as the patient's own judg-
ment of his state, but higher in degree of certainty.

I shall be reminded that I was to speak not of right
to assert, but of strength of assertion ; and I shall be
asked how the patient's certainty of the nature of his
own pain, and still more, in simple and common cases,
his certainty of the fact of it, is affected by the possi-
bility of there being another judgment which may rightly
contradict some element in his.

And my answer is that I did not adduce the case of
" nerve-mimicry " of pain to prove that the patient did
not assert strongly, but to illustrate the conception that
what he wishes to assert strongly is not in fact expressed
within his judgment. By the necessities of knowledge,
what he succeeds in expressing is imperfect and un-
certain ; and his apparent strength of affirmation, where it
exists, is due to the confusion pointed out above, between
what he wants to say and what he does say. Pain, I
may add, disturbs the mind so that the more scientific
judgment by which he might test his primary affirmation
may not be easily framed. I will take another and
very striking instance of analogous confusion. A
preacher exclaims passionately, " T want no evidence ; I
know these things to be true " — these things being a
variety of historical incidents. He means to assert the


132 Knowledge and Reality.

great fact of religious experience which has coloured
his whole life ; but the inability to throw this into
rational form drives him to find the precise content
needed for explicit judgment in doubtful historical
matter, which he asserts with all his force purely by an
intellectual confusion. What he really wants to assert
is only in the smallest degree present in his judgment at
all. " But he does assert most strongly, and you said he
could not do so without a necessary judgment." I reply
that in this case he makes a necessary judgment, though
a false one, and one resting on a confusion. He says,
" If man has religion and a conscience, such and such
historical matters must be true." The extreme strength
of his assertion has against his will and intention taken
him out of the region of the categorical into that of the
inferential judgment.

Thus the principle alleged above applies even to
Categoricals, in the sense of judgments about indi-
viduals which imply the existence of the elements that
enter into them. The absolute strength of their asser-
tion does not apply to their precise content, and we are
as a rule willing to surrender their precise content at the
onslaught of a scientific judgment ; the ultimate fact
which we wish to affirm returning upon us then in some
other form. And thus, as a rule, the more precise we
are in categorical judging, the more are we willing to
doubt our own assertion. If instead of " I am in pain,"
I had said, " I have a toothache," I should not for a


The Nature of Assertion. 133

moment question the judgment of a dentist who should
say, " You have not toothache, but pain arising from caries
of the jawbone." The more precise the less certain ;
well then, I shall be told, necessity and hypothesis, after
all, do fall below absolute assertion. Not so ; when once
our foot is on the ladder of careful judgment, then the
more precision, the more strength of assertion. But
before we are capable of measuring strength of assertion
at all, there is, of course, an apparent dead level of
certainty ; we always mean to speak the truth, and that
is all we know about the matter. The apparent weak-
ness of modal assertion is not a descent from absolute
assertion, but is the effect of measurement. Absolute
assertion is a pure fiction resting on failure to distinguish
intention from performance, and discountenanced by
common sense. The case of the preacher is the same
confusion at a higher grade, after the things confused
have long become distinct and divergent. This is not a
mere failure to distinguish, but an absolute blunder of
identification. He makes his connection of content
quite explicit, but "precise enough — precisely wrong."
Aiming at a categorical judgment of immediate expe-
rience, he uses, in order to get the highest strength of
assertion, the apodeictic form of judgment, but gives it
a content which has no more rational connection than-
there is between triangularity and a round stem. The
fact is, there is in the sense now under discussion no
such thing as a categorical judgment, but there is a


134 Knowledge and Reality.

gradual approach to one, which reaches its goal at the
point where the judgment form disappears and gives
place to the interjection. And unanalyzed strength of
assertion, as opposed to a consciousness which affirms
by virtue of grounds, seems greater as analysis is less,
and is just about to reach its climax, as reference and
therefore assertion altogether disappear.

These considerations have an important bearing on
the nature of historical and legal proof, where we are
but seldom able to employ scientific judgment directly.
I am convinced that the whole realm of history should
be regarded somewhat differently from the way in which
we regard it ; rather as a means of bringing before us
certain well-marked phases and indubitable creations of
the human soul, in an orderly setting, than as an abso-
lute record of thoroughly definite fact. If we straight-
forwardly consider the popular conceptions of prominent
men and current accounts of important facts which
prevail in our own day, we shall see that, whatever the
historian's task may be, its value cannot depend on his
account of characters and motives, or even conversations
and campaigns, being such that, like a theorem in Euclid,
it will stand the hottest critical furnace in every detail.

The conditions of legal proof demand a few words.
Here we have primd facie the highest certainty, a
certainty on which life and death, honour and well-beino-

fa'

are staked at every turn. Yet the conditions of legal
proof exclude, except by an occasional and accidental


The Nature of Assertion. 135

subsumption, any scientific analysis of data ; and science
in court, as I shall show lower down, is really not science,
but mere fact. And I do not think that, apart from the
narrowly limited purposes of law, the facts on which
these issues turn are always or often established in a
scientific sense. The evidence which has been adduced
for clairvoyance or the Lourdes miracles would have
hung a hundred men, but before the tribunal of science it
is as nothing. The reason of this is that the purposes
of law grant a far greater value to testimony than do
those of science ; so far greater, indeed, as to obscure the
whole point and function of testimony. Testimony is
not, as we come to think it, a sort of prop or buttress
added outside a matter supported by it, so that a
hundred such props make it firmer than twenty : it is_
simply a contribution to content ; for all^ proof is by
content. Thus when, in the case of a modern miracle
or a psychical phenomenon, we have established what an
ordinary eye-witness sees in the matter, no further pro-
duction of ordinarj^ eye-witnesses assists the proof,
except by the fortuitous variety of their evidence which
contributes to explanation. Eye-witnesses as such cannot
resolve a contradiction ; this is the task of scientific
aijalysis, and of nothing else.

But common matters of fact are by convention and
for certabi purposes dissociated from the great world of
knowledge in which science has its being. We act
upon them in accordance with rules and customs, which


136 Knowledge and Reality.

exclude analytic transformation of the content alleged,
and prescribe only a few subsumptions under rough
general rules. " Not physically impossible according
to received notions ; " " Having impressed a veracious
eye-witness as an occurrence of such and such a legal
category ; " if we can bring an event within these two
conditions we have about the highest degree of legal
and historical evidence. An advocate's "theory" of his
case is, I believe, technically a work of supererogation,
except in so far as it indicates physical possibility and
saves the credibility of the witnesses. He need not
prove his theory, but only make these two or three
features of it probable. When this is done, we have as
regards the whole occurrence a content of very shadowy
outline, but sufficiently attached to the real world by the
mere elements of content furnished in the above sub-
sumptions. " Sufficiently attached " — that is, for its
purpose. We all know that law takes no account of
morality. I say no account ; for though it demands
intention for certain crimes, it presumes its presence
from certain modes of acting. The real principle, e.g. of
criminal law in determining facts, seems to me to be, that
if appearances are against you up to a certain point, you
must take the consequences for the sake of protecting
society. I believe the principle to be a right one. You
cannot leave practical matters open, to all eternity, as
you can matters of speculative truth. The practical
needs of decision are met by coming to some decision or


The Nature of Assertion. 137


other, and the desire for equity is satisfied by the belief
that judge and jury have decided according to the rules
of the game.

Two objections occur to me which I will mention
shortly. Do I mean that a very improbable content
in science is asserted more strongly than an ordinary
and probable matter of fact ? To answer this we must
bear in mind that even matter of fact depends for its
assertion on connections of content, and these may
conceivably be such as to outweigh an incipient analogy
or a rudimentary hypothesis. But here we must avoid
a snare. The ordinary fact is not proved in any a)id
every way we may choose to interpret it by its ordinary
connection with life. And if we insist on this, and only
take out what the connection of content really carries,
we shall constantly find our ordinary matter of fact
a broken reed for any precise purpose. And, qua
matter of fact, it can rarely conflict with a suggestion of
science. The outlines of concrete facts are so shadowy,
and their possible interpretation so various, that it is
only when transformed into science that they can, as a
rule, conflict with or confirm scientific suggestions. But
in theory the strength of assertions can be compared in
virtue of their connection with reality ; and on this ground
the answer to the question is what I have given.

Again ; what are we to say of an unreconciled con-
tradiction in science, with very good reason shown on
both sides? Such for, example, as the question of


138 Knowledge and Reality.


Biogenesis, before the more conclusive experiments had
been made. The answer is that two hypothetical with
different antecedents cannot contradict each other, and
the grounds alleged for the two conflicting views are
different antecedents. You assert both with the full
strength of the connections of content which they possess;
and the contradiction between them only affects some
concrete element which is differently interpreted in the
two judgments. " Organic matter which generates life
after an exposure to 300° Fahr. does so in virtue of no
existing life germs." " Organic matter which never
generates life after exposure to 300° Fahr. is only
capable of generating life in virtue of existing life germs."
It is only when science is degraded into a net result or
a mere fact that these contradictions become absolute.
That organic matter, apart from supposed characteristics,
both can and cannot produce life without existing life
germs is, no doubt, an absolute contradiction. But it
leaves out the contents which form the essence of the
scientific allegations in question.

The ideal assertion, which alone could have absolute
strength, would be the predication of the whole content
of the Real about itself as subject. " Pure cases " and
apodeictic judgments have their peculiar strength of
assertion because the Real, as we construct it, is a
system, and their pure or necessary form is their ex-
plicit attachment to the system. The categorical
judgment has also its justification and its degree of


The Nature of Assertion. 139

necessity, which in no way depends on its form, and is
mately of just the same order with, and dependent on
the same considerations as, that of the judgments
wtuch are stated as modal. And it often or always
could be so stated, as Mr. Bradley has shown. But the
categorical judgment does not tell us in what element
within or without the explicit content we are to find this
justification. And sometimes, no doubt, for the very
reason which is really its weakness, the assertorical
judgment (taking assertorical to = categorical in Mr.
Bradley's more restricted sense as referred to above,
p. 127) arrogates to itself the absolute assertiveness
which belongs only to the ideal and unattainable judg-
ment, "The whole ultimate Real S has the whole
ultimate real content P."

I may add as a corollary, that strength of assertion,
being a matter of content, rests on knowledge, and can
only be communicated in the medium of knowledge.
Thus in controversy one may see a man of science
unable to convey the strength of his assertion to minds
which do not possess the required knowledge. Too
often he will then have recourse to absolute assertion,
the attempt to replace by emphasis of affirmation the
true ground of assertion which has proved ineffectual.
But emphasis is simply an appeal to feeling ; to the
hearer's confidence in the speaker's good faith or judg-
ment ; and as this has no proper place in science (though
it has in matters of fact), it follows that, qua man of


140 Knowledge and Reality.

science, the speaker has put himself in the wrong.
- Science in law courts, it may be observed, can for the
above reason never be science, except where some simple
construction, say of a machine, goes home to the intellects
of judge and jury. The testimony of experts, e.g. that
this stain is human blood, or that the cause of death
was an alkaloid poison, is properly treated by the law
as evidence or testimony of fact ; and its value rests
almost entirely on the character and reputation of the
witness. This is science brought to a net result, and
therefore degraded from the ranks of science altogether.
Its judgments are not asserted on the strength of rational
grounds, but on the strength of testimony. Of course
the physician's or chemist's mode of forming his opinion
is more or less criticised in court, but only enough to
establish the general possibility of his forming an opinion,
and the fact that he has taken trouble to form it. This
is merely the establishment of authority, and authority
has no place in science.

2. The nature of the reference to Reality, which
constitutes Judgment, may be well illustrated by compar-
ing Judgment with Imagination. The general distinc-
tion is clear; in Mr. Bradley's words, "what is merely
imagined is not held to be true. " ^

Does this apply fully and absolutely 'to the peculiar
case of artistic fiction, which apes the form of direct
judgment, and has sometimes {e.g. in Defoe's works)

' " Principles of Logic," p. 411 ; cf. p. 75.


The Nature of Assertion. 141

been undistinguishable in style from grave historical
narrative ? This question has only one or two points of
contact with Logic ; its interest, as Mr. Bradley points
out, is mainly aesthetic, and from that point of view it
does not concern us now. I suppose that the essence
of assthetic illusion is not the production of belief, not
the intensifying of illusion into hallucination, but the
stimulus of emotion by suggestion.

But it must be of significance for logic to ask, " How
do we re-think, in what mental attitude do we accept,
the direct quasi-historical judgments which make up a
story like 'Esmond' or 'Ivanhoe'?" We are able to dis-
tinguish, within the content of the book, what we are to
take as facts for the purpose of the story, and dreams,
and falsehoods ; we assign to each class of incidents its
appropriate effect. And further, a genuinely historical
personage or event will appear on the stage at intervals,
in a setting fictitious as regards incident, but with a
character sometimes more true than that drawn by grave
historians. This, too, we re-think in judgments, with
appropriate distinctions.

According to Mr. Bradley's view, which in the main
I accept, judgment proper involves two elements, (i.)
the symbolic or logical character of the ideas predicated,
and (ii.) the reference of this ideal content to the Reality
which appears in presentation.

(i.) Of these two characters the first of course goes
with imaginative quasi-judgment ; I suppose, indeed,


142 Knowledge and Reality.

with all the work of consciousness considered as intel-
ligence. I am not absolutely certain, however, how
"symbolic" or "logical" "ideas" are related to mere
" psychical fact." " A content," Mr. Bradley says on
page 'jQ, " may be wholly symbolic, and yet purely imagi-
nary." But he is then speaking of imagination which
does not simulate judgment. On the other hand, in
speaking of what I suppose is simulated judgment, he
seems to contrast it with real judgment as mere psychical
fact with affirmation about things. I quote the whole
passage from page 411, where he is concerned to show
that Imagination can never be inference. " Imagination
is certainly not free from logical processes. Its trains
no doubt, throughout a great part of their length, may
consist of the strictest intellectual sequences. They
may contain few images, and but little save the present
symbolic ideas. Yet somewhere we find a solution of
continuity ; somewhere the identity of the datum is lost ;
at some point we pass from the adjectival content
attributed to our basis, and slide into an image which is
not its predicate. And with this break, wherever it
comes, we have left judgment for fancy, and are not
concerned with truth but with psychical fact."

There is a transition here which puzzles me ; the
transition from a symbolic content which is not predi-
cated of the datum or starting-point, and is therefore
imaginary and not embodied in a judgment, to psychical
fact as contrasted with truth. Are we to understand


The Nature of Assertion. 143

that a symbolic idea can be a mere psychical fact ?
Mr. Bradley cannot mean to identify a symbolic or
logical idea with the idea as a psychical state, a par-
ticular image whose existence is momentary ; he must
mean it to be that element in any particular image which
we fix and use as a symbol ; or more accurately still, the
symbolic idea must be the act or habit which thus uses
elements of particular psychical images with a determinate
reference ; and the meaning of the idea is in this reference.
The ideas which pass before us in dreams are surely
logical and significant in this sense. They have a mean-
ing and reference outside themselves, even if wholly
absurd. Whether such true logical ideas can really exist
apart from judgment in some modality, is a question
which I should like to raise on some other occasion, but
Mr. Bradley has over and over again said that they can.
Therefore, in a disproved judgment, a negatived ideal
content, or an imagination without judgment, when,
following popular usage, he says that we have a mere
" idea " ^ and not a fact, I take him to mean a logical
or symbolic idea, and not a particular image. But if so,
the place quoted above from page 41 1 which actually uses
the word image seems to me misleading. Subject to
this gloss, I take the passage in question to mean
" Imagination cannot be judgment, or lead to judgment
in the sense in which a given starting-point of truth
leads to a new judgment, and therefore cannot be

' " Principles of Logic," pp. 10 and 76.


144 Knowledge and Reality.

inference." I do take it, however, to assert that in
imagination ideas may be employed as symbolic
contents, with a view to their meanings. If so, Mr.
Bradley agrees with me that a fiction may present the
first of the two characters of judgment. A wilful lie
must have this character in a marked sense, for though
it is not, on the part of the speaker, a genuine judg-
ment, yet he must know what " ideas " he wishes to give
out for real to those who believe him.

(ii.) But now we come to the second and more impor-
tant character of judgment, and we have to ask whether
in any possible sense this can apply to fiction. In
judging, we predicate of Reality the meaning of an idea.
Locksley's archery in " Ivanhoe " is the meaning of
certain ideas, or rather consists of certain ideas which
are meanings in our minds. Their meanings are up to a
certain point " objective ; " they refer to or are ideal
contents, belonging to the common world of meanings
by which and in which intelligences communicate with
themselves and with each other. But more than this ;
we seem to think these actions in genuine judgment ;
they do not simply pass before our minds like the alleged
phantasmagoria of imagination ; they are presented to
us in a form undistinguishable from that of ordinary
judgment, and we do not maintain towards them a com-
pletely reserved and resolutely unjudging attitude. It
is true, however, that we do not predicate them of
what I may call real Reality ; and yet to qualify Reality


The Nature of Assertion. 145

by ideal contents is Mr. Bradley's expression for " to
judge."

There is one simple way — rather too simple — out of
the difficulty. We may take account of the various
orders of existence, and predicate these actions of real
reality, but only in their right place as something which
Scott invented, and which we have read.'^ But this does
not quite answer my question, though perhaps it suggests
the right answer. We think of these incidents thus when
we are not reading the book ; but, though I do not think
hallucination necessary for sesthetic effect, I cannot
abandon the idea that in reading " Ivanhoe '' we judge the
judgments of which the story consists, and predicate
Locksley's acts to be real in another sense than as
significant ideas once in Scott's mind, and now aroused
in ours. I feel sure that we in some way satisfy the form
of predication, of narrative assertion.

Is reading and re-thinking artistic fiction the same
logical process as uttering a wilful lie .■' I should say
not ; you cannot think a lie except in some remote
moral sense ; you can only speak one, i.e. attempt to
cause in some one else a judgment which you cannot
yourself make. For judgment is not arbitrary. But
you can and do re-think the judgments in a novel, and
you contrast, as I have said, the imaginary lies and
fancies of the story with its imaginary realities, and all
of them with any grain of historical truth that may

' Cf. " Principles of Logic," p. 41.


146 Knowledge and Reality.

be inserted. For which reason the presence of historical
truth, standing audaciously on its own merits, and not
seeming to need the same justification as truths of
fiction, is objectionable in a work of art. No historical
truth should be embodied in art which would not have
been put in had it been a fiction.

' I think, then, that we judge when reading fiction ;
but I do not think that the judgment consists in a
reference, at least not in a truly conditioned reference,
to real reality. It appears to me that we then judge
in a secondary sense, not of real reality, but of a reality
constructed ad hoc, related to our genuine reality which
is in contact with us through perception, much as the
world of a dream that continues coherently night after
night for months, is to our waking life. The process
might be termed one of secondary judgment, and might
also be illustrated by the discontinuous life of the
diseased mind by which Mr. Bradley illustrates the
qualitative identity which attaches past to present. Or
if we consider the whole content of a fictitious narrative,
in virtue of its coherence, as one idea, then I should
concede that this idea as a whole is not referred to
reality ; but I should add that within it there is room
for the activity of judgment by which it, the imaginative
idea itself, is as a secondary reality characterized by the
various actions and events that take place within it.
In the passage quoted above from page 411, does
Mr. Bradley admit that within the imaginative sequence


The Nature of Assertion. i^y

which is at some point discontinuous with reality, there
can be judgment ? If there can, I do not see how the
fact is reconcilable with judgment as a mere reference
to the reality presented through perception ; and to
deny that there can, seems to me a very strong measure.
To illustrate. " The wrath of the Homeric gods is
fearful." " In Homer it is so," says Mr. Bradley. Or,
■ again, we may ask, " Does Clive marry Ethel Newcome
in ' The Newcomes ' ? " and affirm in answer, " He does."
This is the way in which we judge a fictitious content
when we have real reality in our mind, and are assigning
the fiction its true place in such reality. Though even in
this case there is something noticeable about the present
tense, which I think every one's experience will agree
with mine in showing that we use. " Does " is correlative
to the logical present of science, and we shall hardly be
fanciful if we connect its idiomatic function in these
judgments with the ideal and universal significance of
art. " Did " would indicate a historical fact. It would
strike us as nonsense to ask, " Did Clive marry Ethel .'' "
But further, in reading Homer, or " The Newcomes," we
do not explicitly qualify every judgment as we re-think
it by the indication of secondary existence, "in
Homer," or " in Thackeray : " we judge directly, and
within the content of the fiction we do not use the
present as in referring to it ab extra ; we use tense, and
give the events their proper places in the narrative. In
judging thus I can only suppose that we refer our ideal


148 Knowledge and Reality.


content to a secondary world ; in Homer to the world
of Achilles or Odysseus, in Thackeray to that of Colonel
Esmond or Lady Kew. Now this is possible if the
reference to reality is a matter of content, but not other-
wise. Thus if we wish to disclose the ultimate nature of
our secondary judgment, we have only to make explicit
the connection of content in which it consists, in order
to show the reservation or condition subject to which it is
judged. In short, our secondary judgment in following
artistic fiction is made possible by a comprehensive
act of abstraction.

It follows from these views that in every judgment,
so far as I see, the attachments which constitute its
predication are the connections which prescribe its con-
tent. I am therefore quite unable to understand the
evident inclination of some for whose opinions I have
the highest respect, to treat certain classes of judgments
with especial tenderness. A judgment which is not
necessary, i.e. not determined to be what it is by its
place in a system of judgments, is nothing but a fiction,
or a falsehood, i.e. a secondary judgment, or no judgment
at all. It is a contradiction to make a formal suggestion
about, say, religious mythology, to the effect that, though
not true in the sense in which ordinary facts are true,
it should neverthess be allowed to pass as essential for
certain purposes. You cannot allow a judgment to pass
by wishing to do so ; a judgment is not an arbitrary
act. You can, of course, keep silence, and not criticise


The Nature of Assertion. 149

others in public ; but this is a mere moral precaution,
wholly disconnected with intellectual attitude. If you
attempt in a genuine and intellectual sense to let a
judgment pass, you have at once and ipso facto the half-
conscious abstraction of which I have spoken in reference
to fiction ; and any importance which comes to attach
to judgments so protected must make the abstraction
palpable. Here we have the single root of which super-
stition and rationalism are co-ordinate stems.

I imagine, however, that there is included in the
warnings to which I allude, a material suggestion that,
as a matter of content, certain facts can only be
expressed in some such way as by what we call
mythology.^ This, as a contribution to definition of
content, is at all events a legitimate contention. But
I must protest against a system of judgment being
called mythological, if that only means that, like all
knowledge, it is provisional. It is one thing to be
provisional, as are certain conceptions employed by the
natural sciences, which metaphysicians have sometimes,
not unjustifiably, spoken of as mythological. Such are
matter, force, atom, abstractions of knowledge ^ treated
as subjects endowed with attributes. It is another
thing to be wantonly provisional, and for the actual

■ See " Principles of Logic," p. 318.

^ I do not mean to say that atoms may not be proved to exist as
material particles ; the mere fact of being too small to be seen would not
affect the degree of their existence. But I take it that atom as conceived,
at least in many scientific doctrines, is not fairly identifiable with a material
particle in the ordinary sense of the word.


I so Knowledge and Reality.

professors of a science to neglect to criticise them-
selves ; for students of theology, or of the science of
religion, to encourage themselves and others in accepting
judgments of which the content is not forced upon them
by a scientific context. This is not in the least
analogous to the wise reserve which metaphysic
employs when it abstains from aggression on ideas
found indispensable for certain purposes by physical
science ; it is analogous to a relaxation of vigilance
on the part of those sciences themselves, to the neglect
of that self-criticism which is the essence and growing
point of every science, to the attribution of significance
to the merely convenient and mythological form of
conception, and to the admission of inaccuracy into the
content which is the very centre and fulcrum of the
operation by which we know. In short, the warning
that there must be mythology in religious ideas, as
there is in scientific ideas, is either false and dangerous,
or truistic and superfluous. " False," if it means that
we may or can assert what no necessary system of
judgments compels us to assert or controls us in
asserting, and in this case dangerous too ; for as every
judgment is essentially and inevitably both a conclusion
and a premise, the reason will not be baulked of this
character ; and with every careless phrase, every
" metaphor " which we easily allow to pass, we are
demanding false premises which may carry it as a
conclusion, and forcing on ourselves false conclusions


The Nature of Assertion. 151

which it may carry as their premise. We are building
a fabric of superstition of which no one can foretell,
still less control, the extent, and which cannot but lead,
both directly and indirectly, to the worst moral result.
We are at once in scepticism and in superstition ; for
our judgments are not in the full sense capable of being
made, and knowing this, we have to feign points of
attachment which may enable us to seem to make
them. In short, to interfere directly with the content
of a judgment on grounds of feeling, or with a practical
purpose, is literally impossible ; but to set the intellect
upon weaving a consistent fabric of superstition, of the
fictitious character of which it is morbidly half-conscious,
and by which a certain content obtains the formal
possibility of being approved, this is only too possible,
and is the most terrible cancer of the mind.

If these somewhat extreme criticisms do not apply,
then the warning, that there must be religious myth-
ology, is superfluous. It can then only mean that here,
as elsewhere, we do not know the last word ; that we
make use of conceptions which time will show to be
clumsy in form and inaccurate in matter, and which
already are exposed to differences of opinion. But
this does not say that we do or ought consciously to
adopt a different attitude towards our conceptions from
that adopted by the natural sciences towards them ;
rather we are to imitate the working disciples of these
sciences in ever remodelling our ideas towards the


152 Knowledge and Reality.

most complete and consistent expression of the matter
which they have to convey, in accordance with the
demands of the rational system to which they belong.

But, it may be said, the conceptions of natural science
are modelled with a purpose, to make certain matters
thinkable ; why should not we mould religious ideas
with a purpose — to satisfy certain needs of the human
heart ? I reply that this reasoning has no point beyond
what it gains from an equivocation ; the confusion
between a practical purpose, and the theoretical purpose
— the expression of truth. If I model a judgment in
the way forced on me by other judgments with which
it is connected, I do ipso facto subserve the theoretical
purpose ; and, as I have always repeated, there is at
bottom no choice ; I must do this, or labour with but half
success to deceive myself. But if I mould a judgment
in a way not necessary to my thought, in order to
influence your will, in the first place my judgment is
spurious ; I cannot really think it, i.e. I cannot qualify
real reality by its content ; and secondly, what do you
call my action ? I have spoken that which I am unable
to think, in order to gain a purpose. This is the general
and formal definition of lying, but in fiction, as we have
seen, we to a certain extent relieve the directness of the
lie, and make it thinkable and even predicable in a
secondary sense. And this is the usual case with
superstition ; I do not say that we may not even forget
the reservation or abstraction under which we predicated


The Natiire of Assertion. 153

at first, and then we escape from hypocrisy, rationalism,
and superstition, from the moral and the half moral lie,
at the expense of taking it into our minds and making
the lie into our truth. Whenever we begin making
arbitrary propositions directed by practical purposes,
this is the track on which we have started.

I am not saying that natural science can give us our
judgments about religion, or judgments on which we
can base religion. This is a question of content, of what
the judgments say and of the experience from which they
are drawn. The answer to it depends on what we include
in natural science ; by what ideas we limit its range.
I certainly do not see that we can found religion on the
exact measurement of quantities, or on anything but the
spiritual experience of man. Still the aggressive denial
of jurisdiction even to natural science, much more to
science as such, seems to me to betray the same miscon-
ception as its aggressive assertion. The relation of one
science to the facts dealt with by another presents no
theoretical difficulty whatever. We are, I think, suffi-
ciently warned against the view or prejudice that there
is no science but that of shapes and quantities. What
needs more attention at present is the almost identical
prejudice that intellectual apprehension outside the
region of shapes and quantities, though it may call itself
science, has really no kinship with natural science, no
necessity, no systematic rationality. Now, I will not
here say that there is reliable intellectual apprehension


154 Knowledge and Reality.

of the bases of religion or morality. I will only say that
z/ there is intellectual apprehension, then there are science
and necessity, and contents which are not arbitrary, but
are inevitable. And if there is not all this, there is no
true judgment on the subject at all ; except^ in the sense
in which we judge ab extra, that in " The Newcomes "
Clive finally marries Ethel Newcome. All I contend
for is that, if we go into the matter of religion and make
judgments about it, we must and can be guided by
theoretical necessity and nothing else : and that in so
far as we are guided by anything else, we are saying that
which we do 7iot think.

If we were to speak not about ideas of religion, but
about religious ideas, the result is the same. If they are
mere imaginations, they are on a level with the ideas of
fine art and artistic fiction, and can at most be embodied
in secondary judgments, from which of course they
derive none of their motive power. If they are to be
judgments proper, they must be referred to reality on
some grounds, attached by some points in their content ;
they must be the conclusions of a bond fide inference, or
they are not judgments at all. It is not open to us to
consider the question whether we will for ourselves allow
certain judgments t;p pass or not ; all we can consider is
whether we are to reserve our views as esoteric doemas.

o

' Of course we may also judge as we judge when under the spell of
artistic fiction. For the present purpose these two cases are the same, being
both contrasted with reference of a content directly to real reality.


The Nature of Assertion. 15S

I should be sorry to say anything which could be
taken as implying disbelief in the judgment of value
in art, morals, and religion. I cannot but think that
any doubt of its objectivity which may be abroad is
the penalty we pay for encumbering the conception of
value with matter which is superfluous for its theoretical
purpose.


iS6 Knowledge and Reality.


CHAPTER IV.

THE JUDGMENT AND THE SENTENCE — IMMEDIATE
INFERENCE.

The relation between sentence and judgment is a diffi-
cult subject. I propose to adduce some considerations
tending to show that Mr. Bradley has not in all respects
kept the distinction successfully before him.

But first I shall permit myself to comment in general
terms on Mr. Bradley's attitude towards " hard facts."
There can be no doubt in the mind of any competent
student, that when Mr. Bradley applies himself to the
analysis of data, his work is distinguished by the most
searching subtlety. And hence one is the more bafHed
and annoyed when such a writer seems to swallow a
very hard fact quite whole.

I have already observed on Mr. Bradley's acceptance
without, as I thought, sufficient analysis, of an allegation
as to the extreme nicety with which savages who cannot
count are able to appreciate quantity. I may also call
attention to the sheer affirmation that early soul-life is


The yudgment and the Sentence. ic^y

immersed in practice.^ Referring, as I presume it does,
to human soul-life (zvar being mentioned as a feature of
the life in question), the statement is more than I can
deny, but very much more than I could venture to assert.
I welcome the admission that pure theoretical curiosity
probably appeared before man was developed, and regard
this passage (page 459) as truer than the allusion in
page 32, which tends the reverse way. I cannot get
down to primitive soul-life, and I do not see how any one
can. But in what less advanced soul-life I have observed,
in very young children, in uneducated people, and in
animals, it has always struck me that there do seem to
be perplexities and curiosities, and, having learnt from
the author of " Ethical Studies " that the most obvious
assumptions about early consciousness (e.g: that animals
are pure Hedonists) need not always be true, one would
be glad to see more clearly whether Mr. Bradley is
recording a fact of observation, or propounding a result
of inference.

I have mentioned above, also, a metaphor which
makes me uneasy, that of the "point" of identity, and
shall recur later to Mr. Bradley's use of spatial metaphors
generally. His leading conceptions, even of " experi-
ment " and " construction," appear to me to be primarily
of this metaphorical character.

In all these respects, I seem to myself to observe what
I have drawn attention to in the first of these chapters,

' " Principles of Logic," p. 459.


IS8 Knowledge and Reality.

a strange interpenetration of Mr. Bradley's thought with
the common notions from which he is fundamentally so
far removed, and something capricious in the analysis
which melts some of the ground under our feet into thin
air, while it leaves untouched the adjacent and seemingly
homogeneous soil.

I. I now return to the special subject of this chapter.
Over-reliance on the facts of language, and on the sen-
tence as type of the judgment, is the root of the principal
errors which Mr. Bradley exposes as arising from the
belief in subject, predicate, and copula, or in " two ideas "
(i.e. that the judgment consists in some sort of procedure
with two ideas). And I propose to point out that some
consequences of the practice have crept into Mr. Bradley's
own views.

I am not prepared to say that it is possible to judge
without the use of language, i.e. without the help of
signs which have constant reference. Of course there is
no reason for restricting such signs to spoken or written
words. ^ Nevertheless, a false scheme of the judgment
is primd facie given by the sentence. In treating the
judgment on the basis of the sentence, we tend to dis-
sociate the parts of its single thought, as the words of a
written or spoken sentence are dissociated in space or

> Contrast Lotze, " Logik,'' sect. 6. The German word " Sprache "
tends to confine the meaning of language to speech. I see no logical
ground for this, and therefore would draw no inference from the thinking
processes of the deaf and dumb, until it is ascertained whether they use any
signs, natural or acquired.


The Judgment and the Sentence. 159

in time. We think of its subject primarily by help of
a word or phrase, of its copula in the shape of another
word, of its predicate by means of a word or phrase.^ If
we are to treat the matter thus, we should at all events
do better to take the judgment-sentence as bipartite and
not tripartite, holding to the good old doctrine of ovofia
and prifia. Then we at least see that the content of the
predication is the important thing, and cut away at a
blow the trouble connected with " is " and " exists."

But I distrust this way of looking at the matter
altogether. I would suggest that we should look at
the sentence as merely instrumental to the judgment,^
rather than as the expression, translation, or copy of
the judgment. That the judgment is discursive (Mr.
Bradley), that the mind goes backwards and forwards

' It is a fact not without interest for logic, that the writers who treat,
with a view to elementary instruction, of the "Analysis'' of English sen-
tences, seem desirous, for their own purposes, to get rid of the copula as
distinct from what they call the Enunciation (Predication) in a sentence ;
but they do not venture to interfere with the "logkaV subject copula and
predicate, of which they speak with distant respect. It is curious to see
grammatical analysis becoming logical by application to an uninflected
language and turning out more truly logical than current logic, and thus
transcending in grammar whilst admitting for logic a distinction which
first came from grammar to logic (or rather arose in a rudimentary science
which was neither logic nor grammar as such, and was closely related
to the science of rhetoric). The books I have consulted are Mason's
"English Grammar;'' Jones's "Analysis of English Sentences;" and
Wrightson's " Functional Elements of the Sentence."

^ Cf. " Principles of Logic," p. 50. " The actual fact which appears in
perception is the real subject, to which these phrases serve to direct our
attention.'" The italics are mine. The author is here speaking of sentences
beginning with "this," "here," and "now."


i6o Knozvledge and Reality.


between the terms whose relation it judges (Lotze), that
predication is to refer an idea (a " meaning," of course,
not a psychical image) in my head to the real which
is presented in perception (Mr. Bradley), all this has a
sort of truth, but is to my mind tainted with spatial
metaphor ; I mean, to speak candidly, with the idea of
looking backwards and forwards from beginning to end
of a printed sentence.

There are many kinds of judgment, and perhaps
they are not all to be covered by one illustration.
We might, however, gain something by attempting to
approach the judgment from another side. We all
know that an ambiguous perception, I mean perception
in the full sense of the interpretative judgment which
goes with all the feelings of an entirely conscious man,
is accessible in many cases to argument or suggestion.
A given arrangement of light and shadow ^ on a surface
may mean a prominence or a depression ; when a better
observer than ourselves has pointed out what it really
indicates, we are enabled to see it so, and judge accord-
ingly. I do not think that the instrument of conviction
need be fresh sensuous detail, which we had over-
looked before. It may be merely the reminder that a

' Plato's repeated references to the illusions of <!Kiayf!a.<p'io. (the use of
light and shade on a plane surface to represent solidity) taken in connec-
tion with the stress which he lays on the analysis of confused concretes of
sense into attributes conditioned by relations, seem to me to show how
thoroughly he grasped the modern idea of the perceptive judgment, which
is the root of modem philosophy.


The Judgment and the Sentence. i6i

certain detail in a certain connection can have a sig-
nificance which we had forgotten. But whatever the
instrument of conviction may be, the change in our
interpretative judgment is not limited to a vision of
sensuous detail.^ Now our perceptive state of activity,
after succeeding in such an interpretation, having been
assisted by words, but not consisting in thinking about
a sentence, is an illustration, such as I conceive to be
useful, of what we actually do in judging. Here we
have emphasis, distinction, reference, but no local dis-
sociation. I do not think, again, that it can be denied
that to " follow " a piece of music is an activity identical
with judgment. As the series of sounds, whether com-
plex or single, is developed before us, we characterize
each element in it, each fugitive unit of it, by a relation
definite though hardly nameable, to a whole which is
itself in process of construction pari passu. I am not
now speaking of the effect of music on the soul, qua fine
art ; but merely of the intelligent hearing which, like
the careful study of a great picture, is a condition pre-
cedent of artistic enjoyment. Such instances give us
the judgment, perhaps, in its purest form. We here
see that the distinction and union which characterize
it are intellectual in character, not spatial or temporal ;
and intellectual not as what we call a mental transition
(I spoke of a change above merely to introduce the aid
furnished by words), but rather as an extension of a

' Cf. " PrinciiDles of Logic," p. 490.

M


1 62 Knowledge and Reality.

thought by thought, or of impression by thought.
Nothing, perhaps, in " Principles of Logic " is better cal-
culated to exhibit the radical nature of judgment than
the author's account of the early growth of the function,
when it or its analogous activity consists in the " exten-
sion " of an impression by an idea. Even so, however,
we do not quite get at the point which I am anxious to
make. In a judgment, each part, though distinguished,
is in the other. The notes which we hear intelligently
in a symphony, the stroke of bright colour which we
see appreciatively in a picture, the commonplace phrase
which we find transformed by the handling of a great
poet, have their extended significance within them.
" Referred to," then, is too weak a term.

The content itself is transformed by our judgment.
It is not a datum about which something is said. This
is only the external shape of communication. There
must indeed be a datum, or to what can the modified
content be referred .-' But the datum's old self is seen
in and as contributing to its new self. Change is not
of the essence of the judgment. The distinction is
intellectual, and can be permanent, for it belongs to the
nature of knowledge.

To read the common text-books, and even Lotze (I
do not accuse Mr. Bradley of this worst fault), one
would think that a judgment is in the form, "This book
is that book." Now you cannot say, " This book is that
book ; " you may say, " This book is the same as that


The Judgment and the Sentence. 163

book," but then the two books are the whole concerned
in the judgment, and the judgment consists in distin-
guishing and alleging a certain aspect within this
whole.

"Quorsum haec?" Mr. Bradley may reasonably ask.
" What more can I do than I have done ? I have said
that in Judgment the true subject is Reality not an
idea ; that what we predicate may be merely a single
idea, without a specified aspect of reality as subject ;
that subject, predicate, and copula are a superstition ;
that the grammatical subject is constantly not the
logical subject. What more can I do for you .'' "

What I want in the first place is this, that even these
excellent propositions should not be maintained on the
basis of an appeal to- the written or spoken sentence ;
not, at any rate, without a special inquiry in each case
as to the act which that sentence represents. On this
ground I object to two elements in Mr. Bradley's dis-
cussion.

Firstly, to his argument that because you can make
a judgment with a single word, therefore subject, predi- ,
cate, and copula are superstitions. I should imagine, too,
that he argues on the same ground that judgment can
exist "without any copula and with hit one idea" I
object here merely to the expression, as, according to
"Principles of Logic,'' page 12, every judgment has but
one idea. And secondly, I object to the assumption that
the grammatical subject of a sentence is that about


164 Knowledge and Reality.

which we naturally raise the question whether it is the
logical subject or not.

2. My first objection here may seem trivial. But I
believe it to be worth noticing. If "a single word"
means, as it naturally does, a truly single word in the
language of a civilized people, you cannot make a
judgment with a single word. You can only make it
with a verb, which is a miniature sentence, or with any
word to which context or emphasis lends the force of a
verb. Some languages, we are told, have not the dis-
tinction between noun and verb. They must, however,
have some way of indicating when a word carries a pre-
dication, and this sign, whatever it may be, belongs to
language} It is unjustifiable to confuse a verb, or a
word specially indicated to have the force of a verb,
with a truly single word of civilized speech. I do not
think that this is mere tautology ; I am not saying solely
that you cannot judge with a single word unless you do
judge with it. I am saying that you can utter a single
word without judging (though I will not take upon me
to say that such a word is significant), and that when
you do judge with it you make or presuppose some
special sign that you do so, and that this sign belongs to
language, and the presumption of its presence to the
interpretation of language.

What do I say to "Wolf!" and "Fire!"? I say
that they are not renderings of the articulation of
' See above p. 158.


The Jtidgment and the Sentence. 165

judgments, but signs for judgments, interpreted by the
help of habit, accent, and gesture. We must never
confuse these signs, which are more and more used in
complex civilization, with the real approach to single-
word predication which occurs when we get near the
interjection, and probably in rudimentary language,
though even in this the " single " word is never truly
single. The " Spectator " made a sign of judgment
when he saw the fox go away, and silently stretched out
his arm ; and this signified a judgment in his mind,
though it did not fully convey the judgment even to his
friend who knew him. But surely we must not criticise
this gesture as exhibiting the elements and articulation
of the judgment which it symbolized. I may put a
question ten lines long, and be answered, "Yes." Surely
that is not a single-word predication.^ I am not
guided by a "linguistic prejudice" that the subject must
be understood. I say merely that the particular
instances in question are highly defined judgments, which
are no more exhibited in their structure by the well-
known cry for help or of warning, than the judgment

' "Principles of Logic," p. 56. "A common understanding or tlie
pointing of a finger is all that serves to limit the reference." Pointing the
finger is a sign, and of course makes the word a sentence. As to a
common understanding, the question is how much it supplies in definite
articulate thought beyond what I say aloud. The relation between
explicit language and signals has many degrees. But signals, whose
meaning is quite " dependent on a common understanding " which is
special, and not the common understanding of those who share a language
— such signals m.ust be estimated by their meaning, and not it by them.


1 66 Knowledge and Reality.

that it is noon by Greenwich mean time is exhibited in
the dropping of a ball on a pole over Dent's shop.
" Wolf ! " in another context may mean, " This is a wolf-
skin and not a bear-skin," and " Fire ! " may mean, " I
want a light for my pipe.'' Surely no complete proposi-
tion could be so utterly indeterminate within itself I
am of opinion, indeed, that in these particular cases we
actually think of words which we do not say. The cry
is, in fact, pretty nearly an imperative.

This subject is a very wide and hard one. I have
already said that Mr. Bradley's other instance seems to
me better for his purpose. I quote the whole sentence.^
" In some moment of outward squalor and inward
wretchedness, when we turn to one another with the word
' miserable,' the subject is here the whole given reality."
Here the reference is less specified ; the exclamation
does not fit into a web of custom ; the content belongs
more to immediate feeling, and is more obviously adjec-
tival, and consequently the necessity for a sign of precise
reference is reduced to a minimum, and the sisn is eiven
by look and emphasis. The sign of predication, which
is the true grammatical copula, is always given somehow,
if only by the general postulate of language, that if a
man speaks, he is saying something. This is obvious if
we look at true single-word predication where the words,
whether verb or quasi-verb, habitually and by virtue of
some recognized indication can do duty for the expres-

■ " Principles of Logic,'' p. 56.


The Jicdgnient and the Sentence. 167

sion of a complete judgment. But where there is no
recognized indication, but the word may be described as
in " Wolf! " and " Fire ! " as a sham interjection (I agree
with Mr. Bradley that these are not real interjections),
then because the copula is furnished by accidental and
various means, we are able to pretend that it is not there.
What is the logical copula,-"^ then } The answer
depends on our view of the judgment ; for the copula
has no content in itself, is nothing but the indication
that the act of judgment is performed. It is clearly
not the indication of time, which Aristotle took to
be the distinctive element of the pj)/.(a, or enunciation.
For predication is prior to tense in the history of
language, and, although present in the tense-system
of the finite verb, again expands into the logical or
scientific present, which is independent of time. Aris-
totle was evidently misled by the connection, which the
grammar of European languages would generally tend
to affirm, between finite verb and tense. The form of
judgment which he himself frequently uses, 6 iVTroc
Xtoko'c, indicating the copula by mere position, might
have undeceived him. I do not believe that any word
which is employed to indicate a judgment is free from a
peculiarity,^ whether proper to it or superadded ad hoc,

' "Principles of Logic," p. 22. " If the copula is a connection whicli
couples a pair of ideas, it falls outside judgment ; and if on the other
hand it is the sign of judgment, it does not couple. Or if it botJi joined
and'yuAgeA, then at any rate judgment would not be mere joining."

^ Cf. Sigwart, On the element which makes the predication. "Logik,"

vol. i. p. 93.


1 68 Knowledge and Reality.

which indicates the act of judgment by means that must
be set down as linguistic. No doubt we ought to get rid
of the idea, to whicli Lotze affords only too much coun-
tenance/ that the logical copula is a distinct element of
positive content, needing for its appropriate expression
a special word or words in a sentence. Aristotle has no
such idea, unless it were, as I have said, that he connects
predication with the element of tense which he was
accustomed to observe in a verb. So far as I know,
there is no nam.e for copula in Aristotle.^ But when we
regard the logical copula as the common or formal
element of the act which is a judgment, the act of
reference, and the grammatical or linguistic copula as
the expression or communication of this act, whether by
accent, gesture, word, or reliance on the hearer's expec-
tation, excited by previous means, — then it becomes a
contradiction to say with Mr. Bradley^ that judgment
can exist without a copula. Copula is a name drawn
from analysis — mistaken analysis — of the sentence which
represents a judgment, for that characteristic in it,
always present, but never most aptly marked off as a

• Cf. "Logik," sect. 37, according to which it is the logical copula
that exhibits the particular relation between the object-matters of two
ideas concerned in judgment. But this particular or special relation
obviously belongs to the content of the judgment, to the object-matter
asserted. The same mistake is indicated in sect. 52, where to say that
Socrates has or liberates slaves is treated as a case of enunciating the
concept "slave" of Socrates, the differences between these judgments and
Socrates is a slave falling, as the author must mean, into the copula.
(Tui'Seo'fioy is of course conjunction, not copula.

^ " Principles of Logic," p. 49.


The yudgment and the Sentence. 169

single word, which indicates the act of judgment as
such.

" Very well," Mr. Bradley may say, " let there be a
linguistic sign of judgment. But this is not a copula in
the old sense, not a connection within the content of the
judgment, not a sign that one element therein is to be
taken as true of or belonging to another. If a sign of
connection within the judgment, then not the sign of
judgment ; if the sign of judgment, then not a sign
of relation within the content which is judged." ^

I cannot agree with this view, which I have repre-
sented in my own language, but, to the best of my belief,
correctly. It appears to me that the true subject of a
judgment, that which is qualified by an ideal content,
must be within as well as outside the content which is
referred to it ; and that there is no obstacle on this head
to the sign of judgment being a connection within the
judgment. In the notion that there is a subject, fixed,
so to speak, at one point, and an ideal content brought
up from elsewhere and joined on to it, I again trace
the pernicious influence of the sentence with its disso-
ciated parts, the root of the very errors which Mr.
Bradley combats so successfully. "Judgment is not
mere joln'mg." ^ Certainly not joining as expressed by

' Cf. " Principles of Logic," p. 22, quoted on p. 167, and also p. 14.
" In every judgment there is a subject of which the ideal content is asserted.
But this subject, of course, cannot belong to the content, or fall within it,
for in that case it would be the idea attributed to itself."

^ " Principles of Logic," p. 22.


170 Knowledge and Reality.

the conjunction ; the conjunction is not the copula.
But all judgment is at least a kind of joining. When
we have said that every judgment is at once an analysis
and a synthesis, I do not see how this can be a matter
of dispute. It is obvious that there can be connections
within a judgment which are not 2"//^ judgment ; a relative
sentence, or the condition of a hypothetical judgment,
are cases which prove it. But for all that, the judgment
is a connection, and I think essentially is absolute con-
nection. The connections which are not judgment fail
to be judgment because they are not taken as absolute, as
capable of summing up the reality that is apprehended
in the form of an independent whole. I therefore think
that the sign of judgment is rightly called the copula. It
is nothing apart from the content which is judged, or
rather, which is the judgment on its material side. It is
not a link, or a word. If we must have a metaphor,
let us rather think of the heat which enables the air to
hold vapour in suspension, or of the life of a vegetable
cell, which resides, works, and arranges in and by help of
certain substances, is not locally separable from them,
and yet can pass away and leave them apparently much
the same in actual content as before. Why is absolute
connection the essence of Judgment ? I answer, because
Reality is for us a system, a construction ; and Judgment
claims to exhibit, that is to construct or reconstruct,
Reality. It is thus not true that Reality is the subject
in judgment, if that means that it is not the predicate.


The Judgment and the Sentence. I'ji


And the notion of a subject which is outside the content
that is judged, and therefore not in it, seems to me, as I
have said, to be wholly unreal in the sphere of thought,
and to have a meaning only of a sentence in print, or, as
we hear it unfold itself in speaking, from nominative to
verb. Reality zj/(?r;«a//)' the subject in every judgment ;
but materially the real is assigned its actual grade of
reality by the content of the predication. The character
which is the differentia of judgment is the claim — only
the claim — to define a whole complete in itself The
general scheme of judgment, then, comes to this : " The
Real, when thus conditioned, expresses its totality thus."
The essence of affirmation is not exhausted by the
consciousness that an identical quality binds the ideal
content predicated to the Real, which exists for us
as an ideal structure ; but only in this, together with the
farther and rational apprehension that our Real, an
ideal structure, as thus conditioned, sums itself up thus
and not otherwise.

I will try to explain this in instances. I must,
unfortunately, deprecate Mr. Bradley's instance, " The
sea-serpent exists.'' I do not think it an easily intel-
ligible judgment, and therefore I do not know in what
sense to take it with a view to analysis. And for this
reason. " Exist " is a formal predicate which receives
material interpretation from context. When the context
is unmistakable, the verb receives signification as against
its negative ; but if the context is dubious all signification


172 Knowledge and Reality.

is gone, for in some sense the predication of existence is
always true. " The men for whom the colonel drew pay-
did not exist," i.e. there were no men to whom he had to
pay over the money which he drew in the names of
soldiers alleged to be receiving pay. The purpose and
relations of the existence in question are here supplied
by the test of receiving pay ; and a counter-allegation,
" they did exist," would mean that there were real men
entitled to pay on the books of the regiment, though
not necessarily that the colonel paid them. But all
meaning is cut away from " exist," if no test of the
existence in question is furnished, and if, consequently, it
is uncertain what order of reality is covered under the
formal verb. For, allowing to Mr. Bradley that no one
cares about my private psychical fact, the idea or image
in my head, that its existence is assumed, and is a
matter of no interest ; still there are many grades of
existence which are habitually predicated, and between
which the formal verb does not distinguish. Mr. Bradley
knows this very well,^ and I cannot understand how, in
face of this simple fact, he should give an absolute and
unvarying value to the predication of existence. I do
not think that any one would now naturally take the
judgment that the sea-serpent exists to mean that it is
an animal in the organic world. This is the highest
grade of existence which it could claim, that suggested
by the term serpent, a suggestion of which Mill makes

' " Principles of Logic," p. 41.


The Judgment and the Sentence. 173

great use in his discussion as to the nominal character of
definition. By analyzing " a dragon is a fire-breathing
serpent " into " a dragon is a thing that breathes fire," and
" a dragon is a serpent," he removes from " serpent " the
qualifying adjective which made it obviously imaginary,
and causes it to claim existence in the world of flesh-and-
blood animals ; and consequently he can exhibit a sharp
contradiction when he predicates of it its old adjective
fire-breathing, which claims to depress it again to the
rank of a creature in fiction. It is a simple fallacy a
dicto sectmdtim quid ad dictum simpliciter, and does not
show that to construe a definition as a matter of fact
gives a false conclusion with true premises, but only
that to change the sense of a word and replace it in its
old context, is likely to generate contradiction.

If I were forced to assign a meaning to the judg-
ment, " The sea-serpent exists," I should guess that it
must be understood somewhat in this way, " The real
appearance named as the sea-serpent has the reality
of proceeding from a constant and natural cause ; " i.e.
" The structure of reality in the respect A, is realized in
a constant relation B." Any other connections within
the judgment, which only help to explain or to condition
our thought of reality, are subsidiary to the whole which
is asserted and thus are not judgments. But any such
connection becomes a judgment the moment thought is
confined to it. The judgment is the special way in
which at any moment (I do not say within the moment


174 Knowledge and Reality.

and no more), we precisely think our world. We are
not able, nor do practical life or the conditions of
human knowledge permit us, to be at all times, or ever
perfectly, in possession even of the world which we have
constructed in our intellects. But whatever may be the
stimulus to attention or the ground of interest which
causes us to judge, and however slightly our intellectual
world may respond to the appeal addressed to it, every
judgment appeals to the whole to pass sentence on the
part ; and it is this rational decision, not an isolated and
particular necessity of fact, that forms the assertion and
warrant of every judgment.^ Even in " it hurts," or
" miserable," the speaker sums up all that his intelligence
will do for him under the conditions of the moment ;
we must imagine that when he so judges, a man's whole
being is reduced to the level of quality, has become a
mass of pain or wretchedness. This may seem wildly
exaggerated for most cases ; I may say " it hurts," as
an indication to an observer who is making precise expe-
riments on my sight or touch for the sake of Fechner's
law ; but then " it hurts " does not represent the real
judgment ; I leave much unsaid which is accurately in
my thoughts, because the obsei-ver knows it already.
Complete conception is assertion ; I mean conception
complete as regards the present powers and furniture of
the conceiving intellect. All fancy is abstract ; wilfully
or indolently abstract. All judgment is as concrete

' Cf. below, Conclusion.


The Jitdgment and the Sentence. 175

as the mind, given a certain stimulus or interest, can
make it.

Then why do we not always proceed by definition ?
How can we judge that a triangle has its three angles
equal to two right angles ? No one can say that this is
the entire or adequate specification of a triangle. Now
I believe the intellect, if moving fair and free in a
province of knowledge, always makes for a definition.
But in the current of thought, some other whole, not the
pure scientific whole of which our consciousness has
elements in it, is usually prescribed to us by the guiding
purpose of the moment. And thus the intellect does its
best to sum itself up in an absolute distinction and
connection of such an artificial whole, instead of simply
reconstructing the natural and constant fabric of reality.
I may, for instance, be in doubt about the size of one of
the minor angles of a given right-angled triangle, and at
the first effort to sum up the total bearing of my intellec-
tual world on this angle I may get no nearer than to see
that it is one of three which together = two right angles.
The point which makes this mode of conception into a
judgment is that it is all I have to say at the moment,
that I give it out for the whole reality of the matter. If
I see further, e.g. that the angle in question is one of two
which together = a right angle, the judgment that it is
one of three drops into a premise. But is not a premise
at once itself a judgment, and a part of a judgment, viz.
of the conclusion considered as issuing from the inference


176 Knowledge and Reality.

as a whole? And does not this dispose of any such
notion as that propounded above, that the essence of a
judgment is to be an entire and independent verdict, the
total outcome of a present intellectual world ? It is
clear that a premise is more than a condition. There is
a difference between A, because it is B, is C, and A, if it
is B, is C. "Because" it is B seems to be a separate
judgment as well as a condition ; while " if" it is B is a
mere condition. The former = A is B and therefore it
is C ; the latter only = if A is B, then it is C. In the
former case the judgment A is B must be maintained
along with and in the judgment A is C, for otherwise
the ground for A is C vanishes. In the latter the judg-
ment A is C is not made ; but only the one judgment
A B is C. In both cases we have the nexus A B is C
asserted ; but in the former we have A is B alleged in
addition, either as a fact in time or as a necessary
nexus. Is any relation of A and B asserted in the
hypothesis " If A is B — " ? I think that something is
asserted, viz. such a connection of their contents as
makes the determination of A by B — not really possible,
but — intelligible. In both cases, then, or in the direct
argument at least, for I need not press the second for
my present purpose, we have a judgment within a judg-
ment. Is this possible if the judgment is a totality, a
conception under all available determinations, a percep-
tion of the structure of reality taken as complete pro
tempore ?


The Judgment and the Sentence. 177

I think so, and I will try to make the distinction
plain on which this possibility rests. A premise is of
course asserted in the argument which rests on it. But
it is not asserted as we write it down, as one of a
number of separate sentences. If we begin with it thus
separately, we must count that beginning as an in-
complete stage of insight, in which we have not yet
perceived the nexus of the argument. The argument
as a whole, which is essentially identical with the con-
clusion, carries, when perception has made it a unity,
its own assertiveness in its content. The premises are
there, but their content is transformed and passes
gradually into that of the conclusion. Therefore we do
not, as might be imagined from the formal scheme of
reasoning in text-books, keep two judgments separate
as premises, and transfer their assertive force to a third
distinct from them, leaving them still asserted outside
it. I do not imagine that any one seriously contem-
plates the intellect as engaged on three distinct asser-
tions in and as one and the same act. The point is that
the premise merges in the conclusion, is enlarged or
developed into it. And then the matter before us is
simply the passing of one perception into another, which
other takes up into itself the content and therefore the
assertory character of the first. If the assertion is that
the three angles of a triangle are equal to the two interior
angles made by a straight line cutting two parallels, and
therefore to two right angles, the proof may take the

N


178 Knowledge and Reality.

shape of a perception how two of the angles of a
triangle must always differ from the two interior angles
spoken of, by an amount equal to the third angle of
the triangle, and further how the two interior angles
in question are obviously equivalent to the two adjacent
angles on the same side of a straight line. Thus the
proof does not simply substitute one term for another
and transfer the assertion of the old judgment to a new
one so formed. It rather modifies the contents so that
for certain definite purposes they become identical, and
as regards the identity the assertion of the premises is
transformed into that of the conclusion. I therefore
think that the relation of premise to argument shows
that the judgment always is the total act of thought ;
for as perception or insight into a nexus penetrates
deeper and further, we find that judgment necessarily
follows it and extends itself to the whole which is
perceived to cohere.

The copula, then, is the absolute connection by
which thought treats a content, such as from time to
time fills our intelligence, as the content of that Reality
which we meet with in presentation and extend by
construction. The "schema" of the copula is not the
point of contact between two spheres ; not a formal
meeting-point of unvarying extent or value; it is a
grasp like that of an electro-magnet, varying in extent
of surface, and in the strength which intensity of work
affords.


The Judgment and the Sentence. 179

Mr. Bradley, if I may venture to say so, appears to
me to have erected into a separable element of affirma-
tion — in assertorical judgments the sole element — what
is really but the abstraction of a common feature out of
the concrete assertiveness of all judgments. All judg-
ments without exception claim by their form to be true.
The truth is the whole ; and they thus claim to exhibit
the whole, which they transparently fail to do. This
is formal assertiveness, but is incapable by itself of
constituting the full assertion of any judgment. It is
this that, as an abstract feature, is absolute and identical
in all judgments. In addition to this, or rather as the
concrete nature out of which this is abstracted, every
judgment has its own peculiar degree of grasp or
apprehension which embodies in actual content the
perception that claims to be the truth ; and this con-
stitutes the material strength of assertion.

I think, then, that the copula is the essence of Judg-
ment, and is essentially a connection, or rather the
connection ; ^ though I know that there are connections
within judgments other than those which are the
judgments.

3. The relation of the grammatical to the logical
subject ^ is a curious question, and might repay historical

' Cf. Wundt's " Principle of Duality," and his treatment of the Copula,
" Logik," pp. 54 and 143.

^ "Principles of Logic," p. 23, on two ideas in judgment; p. 50, on
"grammatical show; " p. 271, what subject is the link of connection in
certain inferences.


i8o Knowledge and Reality.

inquiry. I have already indicated that I ascribe the
doctrine treated by Mr. Bradley on page 22 and follow-
ing pages of " Principles of Logic," which makes the
judgment consist of two ideas and a copula, to a
confusion between sentence and judgment. With his
criticism as there stated I have only to agree. But
prima facie, I should say that grammatical stihject is
strictly an incorrect expression, though now warranted
by usage. In uninflected or but slightly inflected
languages like our own it is natural to employ logical ^
expressions in the analysis of sentences ; but if the
analysis goes by external shape and stops short of
interpretation a good deal of confusion may result. I
confess that in grammar, i.e. in the analysis of sentences
with reference to the relations of their component parts
of speech, I had rather talk of nominative case, verb,
and object (as we do not happen to want object in
logic). Then we might reserve subject and predicate,
which cannot be identified by mere inspection of parts
of speech, but are aspects of knowledge, for logic, i.e. for
the analysis of meanings in general, as characteristic of
intelligence and independent of linguistic differences. I
suppose that the " grammatical subject " usually means
the nominative case, whether expressed or supplied, to
the principal verb. I know of course that verb (/an/^o)
is in Aristotle a logical term ; but we now have a dis-
tinction between grammar and logic, and I think it

' Vide p. 159, note on the English works that treat of " Analysis."


The Judgment and the Sentence. i8i

should be maintained. The " verb " of grammar is no
longer co-extensive with f>r\ixa. It would be interesting
to inquire whether the custom of grammar does not on
the whole coincide with the counsels of metaphysics ;
whether the nominative case does not on the whole tend
to stand for the true subject, the true identity in differ-
ences, and the verb or adjective for some one of its more
transitory differences or determinations. I am inclined
to think that this is the case.

But in logic we are dealing with neither extreme.
We cannot accept the relations of the parts of speech as
we find them in a sentence, for a final determination of
subject and predicate ; nor yet are we justified in deny-
ing the relativity of judgment, by which I mean, in this
context, the possibility that we may intend to judge,
and therefore may actually judge, in an order of know-
ledge which diverges indefinitely from the order of
reality. For logical analysis, our meaning is what we
mean or intend to affirm. To elicit this from a given
sentence is a matter of interpretation. And apart from
terms of precision which refer to fixed contexts or to
familiar interests, and in the absence of an actual con-
text, interpretation is scarcely possible. But it is clear
that there is no presumption at all in favour of identify-
ing the logical subject, i.e. that aspect of the real which
presses upon our attention as -containing matter for
synthesis or analysis, with the grammatical subject, i.e.
in a regular sentence the nominative to the principal


1 82 Knowledge and Reality.

verb. In two forms of the skeleton judgment as
Aristotle states it, the predicate B is the nominative
case with which the subject A is connected through a
verb. " B is predicated of the whole of A," " B belongs
to the whole of A." The sentence in all ordinary com-
position, even in scientific treatises, is governed by
rhetorical considerations. There is a strong tendency
to put the natural or metaphysical subject in the place
of grammatical subject or nominative to the principal
verb. Any other structure of an enunciation obviously
demands an effort of thought which this rhetorical
structure avoids, too often in spite of its being necessary.
I open Locke's Essay at random, and find in the chapter
on " Cause and Effect and other Relations : '' " Relations
of Tiine. Time and place are also the foundations of
very large relations, and all finite beings at least are
concerned in them." Here we have three enunciations,
" time " and " place " being the grammatical subjects of
the first two, and " finite beings " of the third. These
are possible judgments, of course ; but they are not the
judgments which Locke makes in this passage. He is
developing the aspect of reality known as the relation ;
we cannot suppose that he hits upon place and time as
independent data, and proceeds to analyze them into
relations, and then jumps to an independent charac-
teristic of finite beings. The common subject is
obviously reality considered in respect of its related-
ness, and this is shown to be capable of taking the forms


The Judgment and the Sentence. 183

of place and time, and also to be in these forms so
comprehensive as to include all finite beings as related
points. The immense proportion of enunciations which
are introduced in the same chapter with the formal
nominative and verb "we call," offer considerable dif-
ficulties to such interpretative analysis. But it is clear,
I think, that as a rule no special judgment is intended
about our mere use of language ; though I will not deny
that in Locke the usage may be characteristic.

Interpretation of this kind is the necessary com-
plement of written language. For speech it is less
necessary, because the emphasis and inflection which
form the life of living speech supply it in great measure.
And therefore I think that to ask whether the gram-
matical corresponds to the logical subject is only to ask
whether we have said what we meant to say.

Perhaps, however, there is a different and more meta-
physical problem involved in Mr. Bradley's suggestion,
of which I have been speaking. Perhaps his question is
not so much, " What judgment did I make .' " i.e. " What
did I intend to say in a certain sentence .' " but rather,
"What judgment ought I to have made.'" i.e. "What
ought I to have intended to say ? " in expressing a certain
fact. Thus on page 23 of " Principles of Logic "
Mr. Bradley says, " Judgment is not inclusion in,
or exclusion from the subject. By the subject I mean
here not the ultimate subject, to which the whole ideal
content is referred, but the subject which lies within


184 Knowledge and Reality.

that content, in other words the grammatical subject.
In 'A is simultaneous with B,' ' C is to east of D,',
' E is equal to F,' it is unnatural to consider A, C,
and E as sole subjects, and the rest as attributive. It is
equally natural to reverse the position, and perhaps
more natural still to do neither, but to say instead, 'A
and B are synchronous,' ' C and D lie east and west,'
' E and F are equal' The ideal complex asserted
or denied, no doubt in most cases will fall into the
arrangement of a subject with adjectival qualities, but in
certain instances, and those not a few, the content takes
the form of two or more subjects with adjectival relations
existing between them."

Let us take the instance, " A is simultaneous with
B." The interpretation of this sentence depends on the
question which it answers, i.e. on the rudimentary dis-
junction which it brings to a conclusion ; in other words,
on the actual relation of datum and synthesis which it is
meant to render. There is not the least presumption
from the mere form of the sentence that A is the logical
subject of the judgment. In considering the enunciation
before us as an instance, we may indeed take the
nominative as the guide to the subject, simply because
we have no context to suggest anything else. But
otherwise, any of the readings which Mr. Bradley
suggests on this page, "A and B are synchronous,"
" Simultaneity exists in the case of A and B," are no
less natural meanings of the sentence as given, than


The Jtidgment and the Sentence. 185

that which makes A the sole subject. To model the
sentence so as to exhibit the intended judgment is a
matter of tact and scholarship only. The rhetorical
investiture, by which speech appeals to feeling or
recognizes common usage, has to be stripped away,
and the logical skeleton duly articulated. The answer
may rhetorically keep the shape of the question, " Who
did it ? I did." This correspondence makes apprehen-
sion easier, and perhaps indicates authorship and re-
sponsibility. But logically " I " must be predicate
here. Take, again, " It was a grievous fault, and
grievously hath Caesar answered it." I can hardly
doubt that the logical subject all through is fault or
ambition ; the saltus from fault to Csesar is unnatural.
The judgment is that if there was a fault, it was no
doubt grievous, but also was expiated. Caesar becomes
subject in grammar because he is a person, but he is
logically a factor in the predicate. So in Mr. Bradley's
instance, " A is simultaneous with B " may clench any
one of half a dozen disjunctions according to context :
"A or C," "with B or with C," "simultaneous or in
succession," " is or is not." And in each of these cases
I should say that the logical judgment or intellectual
synthesis actually performed, had for its subject or datum
the element of reality assumed in the previous dis-
junction, and for the matter of its synthesis the disjoined
member which it affirms as against another possibility.
It is quite a different problem to say what the


1 86 Knowledge and Reality.

judgment ought to be ; what datum and what synthesis
represent the scientific order of thought. This is a
matter of the theory of knowledge, and here is the
problem which Mr. Bradley is mainly discussing, not
the grammatical subject and the logical subject, but
the given or taken, and the true or ideal, logical
subject.

So on pages 49, 50. I quote the passage. " In the
simplest judgment an idea is referred to what is given
in perception, and it is identified therewith as one of its
adjectives. There is no need for an idea to appear as
the subject, and, even when it so appears, we must
distinguish the fact from grammatical show. It is
present reality which is the actual subject, and the
genuine substantive of the ideal content. We shall see
hereafter that when "this," "here," and "now" seem
to stand as subjects, the actual fact which appears in
perception is the real subject, to which these phrases
serve to direct our attention."

I thoroughly agree with this passage, but I can see
no reason for the distinction between fact and gram-
matical show. There is no grammatical show of a
judgment, if we treat the sentence as merely instrumental
to the judgment, and the judgment as essentially
concerned with reality. A name, and the grammatical
subject may be treated as a name, does not suggest an
idea qua idea, but a reality. If we consider the judg-
ment as that which we intend to assert, we shall have


The Judgment and the Sentence. 187

no difficulty on this score. On a different level we may,
indeed, find a difficulty between reality as it is for us,
and our ideas as the means by which we get at it. But
at least in judgment, what we mean is always some
feature of Reality.

As I have already said, I do not understand how
even the true or ultimate subject can fall outside the
content of a judgment. In saying this, I may be
proving that I have not really apprehended Mr.
Bradley's conception. "The real subject to which these
phrases serve to direct our attention." This is to my
mind the character of the subject in all judgments. I
have said that on Mr. Bradley's own principles I can-
not follow the distinction between categorical and
hypothetical judgment. At least, I can only under-
stand it as equivalent to the distinction between the
affirmation of facts in time, and affirmation into which
time does not enter. No more can I grasp the idea of
a subject which falls outside a judgment, except in the
sense of the one ultimate subject, reality or the non-
phenomenal fact, which all judgment is an attempt to
define, and this falls within the judgment in as far as
the latter is true. It appears to me that in stripping
away the accidents of the sentence Mr. Bradley has
torn off" some essentials of the judgment, and has done
so because he has not kept the intellectual act suf-
ficiently distinct from its linguistic instrument. In
getting rid of subject and predicate as two ideas we


Knowledge and Reality.


ought not to tear away the datum of analysis and
synthesis from which the judgment starts.

4. The above considerations have an obvious
bearing on questions of immediate inference. We can
only get at the judgment in a formal way by means of
the sentence ; and now it seems that within certain
limits the same judgment may be conveyed by different
sentences. It may be said that this is ridiculous, for
the judgment is the meaning of the sentence, and if
the difference in the sentence means anything, it must
alter the judgment. We shall be speaking to some
extent of cases in which perhaps the difference in the
sentence does mean nothing ; but I may point out that
the modification of a sentence might affect the content
of the idea, though not the main relation of datum and
synthesis. The grammatical subject is apt to be
thought as a person or at least as an agent, or a thing.
In speaking of immediate inference we are met on the
threshold by the question, " Do such and such changes
in the sentence imply transition to a fresh judgment 1 " ^
There may be transition to, or at least adoption of, a
fresh judgment without inference, but there cannot be
inference from one judgment without transition to
another.

I have spoken above of the effect aimed at by

' Cf. "Principles of Logic,'' p. 387. "If tliey (the immediate inferences)
are mere tautologies, rearrangements of words witiiout alteration of ideas,
they cannot be inferences. "


The Judgment and the Sentence. 189

rhetorical modifications of the sentence which do not
alter the structure of knowledge, though they may affect
the colouring of the ideas. I must add, that in course
of ages the growth of interpretative skill and the per-
petual wear and tear of language have an effect, which
we cannot disregard, in neutralizing differences of
grammatical structure. The process results in a sort
of subsumption, by which certain forms of sentence are
taken as equivalent because we have been told — or have
frequently inferred — that they are equivalent. Standing
where we now stand, I do not think we can refuse to treat
sentences as meaning what they are employed to mean,
even if, as is not impossible, we should find different
forms of words more sharply distinguished in earlier
stages of speech. I mean that if to us now there is no
appreciable difference between " No fine art is manu-
facture," and " No manufacture is fine art," then the
question what difference there may have been before the
disguise had worn so thin, would only have historical
and not logical interest.

It appears to me that in comparison with the
analysis which drags to light the inner nature of so-
called categorical judgments, the treatment* of imme-
diate inference and of negation in " Principles of Logic ''
is guided by too great a respect for given grammatical
forms. I will illustrate what I mean from the account
of conversion that involves the negative judgment, and
from some further questions about negation.


1 90 Knowledge and Reality.

I shall also try to point out that Mr. Bradley is not,
in my opinion, sufficiently careful in handling the
sentence when it is really to stand for the judgment
in inference. His premises, or rather data, are stated
with a negligence of form which I take to be intentional,
and to have the purpose of removing them as far as
possible from the suspicion of implying a major premise.
But the data of a conundrum are not the premises of an
inference. They are at best the material out of which
such premises can be formed.

(i.) I begin by quoting ^ Mr. Bradley's summary of
his view of conversion where the negative is not
employed. " The truth is, that if you keep to categorical
affirmatives, your conversion or opposition is not
rational, but simply grammatical. The one conversion
which is real inference is modal conversion, and that
presupposes a hypothetical character in the original
judgment."

So far I thoroughly agree with Mr. Bradley, subject
to a protest on one point. That point is the consensus
with which logicians, following herein the example of
Aristotle, disregard the convertible affirmative judgment,
and thus reduce all assertion to the type in which a
concrete subject has ascribed to it some casual or
generic attribute, without implication of ground and
consequence. If I say " A. B. has come to town," " One
of C. D.'s pictures is by Turner," no doubt I am content

' " Principles of Logic," p. 390.


The Judgment and the Sentence. 191

to leave the predicate as an attribute which is not
pecuhar or characteristic. But in most serious argu-
ment, in making the observations which are to enter
into a science, or in endeavouring to read the riddles of
social and political causation, we indicate either by
context or by some trait of language, that we hope and
intend that our judgments shall have characteristic
predicates. I am persuaded that the fallacies of "un-
distributed middle " and " illicit process " are hardly
ever committed in actual thinking ; and that apparent
cases of them arise from the captious ignorance of
critics who find it easier to point out that an argu-
ment runs formally from predicate to subject, than
to weigh the assertion that the predicate is character-
istic and therefore, presumably at least, convertible.
Of course such an assertion is hazardous in propor-
tion as its content is deep ; but for the doctrine of
conversion the question is not whether it is true but
whether it is made. We do not habitually invert our
judgments so as to put the characteristic predicate in
the place of subject, and thus bring argument from it
under the common rules. Partly, I suspect, we prefer
not to have an attribute as subject (this is due to the
metaphysical instinct of common language, of which I
spoke above), partly the caution of science prefers to
retain the form of common judgment while implying
a characteristic predication. It is thus that we light
upon arguments which are formally fallacious, but


192 Knowledge and Reality.

materially as good as our classification at any moment
can make them. If a logician condemns such argu-
ments on purely formal grounds, he only condemns his
own ignorance. Per contra, of course such arguments
are hit by objections which are formally irrelevant. It is
almost always, not indeed a flat denial, but a grave
objection to a judgment which claims any high degree
of significance, to allege cases where the predicate is
present without the subject. Such objections show how
far the judgment is from embodying a " pure case,"
which is the ideal of every judgment. If it is affirmed
that " The Scotch crofters are always distressed in a bad
season," it is not at all beside the mark to reply that
many people are distressed in a bad season who are not
Scotch crofters. So far from being irrelevant, this reply
picks out for denial the very core and nerve of the
affirmation, viz. that being a crofter is a or ideally the
specially determining condition of misery in bad years.
If, indeed, the affirmation can then defend itself by
explaining that the more general conditions of misery
in bad years, which the objection shows to exist, are in
some special form involved in and condensed into the
position of being crofters, it can of course rehabilitate its
case.

Even Lotze gives an uncertain sound on this point.
'Mere logic," he says,i "does not justify simple
conversion of a universal affirmative ; " reciprocal
' "Logik,"sect. 80.


The Jiidgmetit and the Sentence. 193

judgments, he continues, are found, but they must be
estabhshed materially. This gives an air of mystery to
the matter which is quite needless. " Mere logic " here
represents nothing in the world but the custom of low-
grade thought. There is no reason in the nature of
things why the reciprocal judgment should not be
recognized in logic, and if recognized, it would be
recognized as simply convertible.

I do not doubt that the quantification of the predi-
cate and the equational logic have been greatly favoured
by the circumstance that they alone seemed to recognize
the true intention of carefully made judgments, viz. to
be characteristic. But their kind of reciprocity is not
what we want ; it is got by levelling down, not by filling
up. What we want is more like definition ; and logic,
indeed, always treats of definitions, and says that they
are simply convertible, but never, so far as I know,
points out how closely the purpose of all judgment is
connected with the definitory form.

Do I want to introduce a fresh class of universal
affirmations, and to alter the rules of conversion and
syllogism where this class is concerned .■" No ; but only
because it is not worth while to tamper with the rules of
formal logic which have now little more than a historical
interest. It is, however, important to bear in mind that
logical technicalities have been formed by reflection on
the most trivial and everyday uses of thought. We
must, therefore, always be ready to re-test them when

O


194 Knowledge and Reality.

we apply them to functions which they did not originally
contemplate.

I have now to speak of some forms of Conversion
in which the Negative is concerned ; and then, pursuing
the subject of Negation, to say something on its alleged
" subjective " character, on Double Negation, Excluded
Middle, and Disjunction.

My purpose in speaking of Negation will be to
insist upon its strictly logical significance ; that is to
say, its function as an element in a system of knowledge
and the character which that function imposes on it. I
shall attempt to point out that Mr. Bradley's account of
conversion where negation is concerned, and of double
negation, is needlessly artificial, and too much tram-
melled by regard for the grammatical sentence ; and
that his treatment of negation as such, of Excluded
Middle, and of Disjunction, betrays a tendency to look
at Negation psychologically and in its origin rather
than logically and in its function. In all this I seem to
myself to trace that desire for plain and immediate
foundations of knowledge on which I have already
commented. I do not believe that such foundations are
to be had.

In entering on questions occasioned by " Immediate
Inference," I must first guard myself by a reference to
page 25, where I have indicated my view of what
may be called true immediate inferences, such as Dis-
tinction, Recognition, and Abstraction. I have no doubt


The Judgment and the Sentence. 19S

of the existence of these inferences, and should wish, as
I have there explained, to classify all judgment as
belonging to one or other of such types of Inference.
But the more I recognize an inferential process as
subsidiary to the making of an ordinary judgment, the
less I am inclined to find a fresh act of this complex
nature in every variation of linguistic embodiment.

Thus I cannot agree with Mr. Bradley that there is
a real passage made by inference from " A is not B " to
"B is not A." "A is not B" means that A has a
quality which excludes B. This is Mr. Bradley's
analysis of significant negation, i.e. negation which is
(and all negation in actual thought is) more than bare
denial. And I have no doubt that this analysis is
substantially right. But, if so, how can we construct
the judgment without a definite perception of the
incompatibility of A and B .■' The quality x ol K
cannot exclude B except by reason of some quality j/ in
B.^ The act of judgment must consist in perceiving

' An interesting point arises here. How is it easier to see tliat x is not
y, or not B, than to see that A is not B ? Is there not a risk of falling into
an infinite series ? Does not x is not y, or not B, come under the same
analysis as the original judgment A is not B (which might be taken as = A
is A and therefore not B) ? And then, why should the latent predication of
1 positive quality be ascribed to every negative judgment? The fact is,
that if the negation " — is not B" remains a bare denial, it cannot be
based on a positive quality ; in order to be capable of connection with u
positive ground, the negation itself must be assigned a determinate mean-
ing, and it is this meaning, not the bare denial as such, which is capable
of being positively asserted on a specific ground. We shall find, however,
'that important consequences follow from the fact of all negation being, in


196 Knowledge and Reality.

these qualities in their antagonistic relations ; whether
antagonistic in the nature of things like a triangle and
a square, or antagonistic on the authority of some rule
which is taken as valid, such as that the attribute of
havinga "superior" corolla excludes the attribute of being
a Ranunculus ; (because a Ranunculus has an "inferior"
corolla ; but we need not, from a logical point of view,
know this reason, supposing that the rule, " No Ranun-
culus has a superior corolla " is, in our opinion, suffi-
ciently authenticated). This, I suppose, is what Mr.
Bradley means by saying that in negation " we experi-
ment with both our terms." But then, he continues,^
" We find that, given A, B cannot be there ; but as to what
will happen when B is supposed, we have no information."
I venture to think that the phrases, " both our
terms," " given," and " experiment," are here fatally
misleading, and betray a tendency to take the sentence
for the judgment. This we are all apt to do ; we are
apt to start from A, and, glancing at only its most
obvious features, to overlook a ground of incompati-
bility with B which may exist in some less striking
point of A, and may not reveal itself to our perception
till we come to scrutinize B. The error is a common
one, and comes from an indolent construction of the
precept contained in the sentence which directs our

the abstract, and so far as concerns its outward form, bare denial. The
relation of ignorance that something is, and knowledge that it is not, i.e.
of the privative to the exclusive judgment, is involved in this question, to
which I shall return. ' Page 392.


The Judgment and the Sentence. 197

judgment. " Treating is not forbidden by the Bribery-
Act." In such a judgment we are inclined to represent
the subject by sharply defined details freshly brought
before the mind, and the elements which are negatived
by hazy recollections. But of course there is nothing
in the nature of the judgment to excuse such indolence.
We are bound to search the Act before we can say what
it does and what it does not forbid. For the purpose of
the judgment, the "two terms" are not capable of separate
consideration. They are not dissociated like the two
ends of the sentence. It is true that they cannot be
amalgamated in a concrete unity as is the content of an
affirmative judgment. Nevertheless, assuming always
that we are dealing with rational and significant nega-
tion, we unquestionably predicate an intelligible idea ;
the phrases, "exclusion," ''repulsion," "rejection," are
among the forcible metaphors to which Mr. Bradley
gives, in my opinion, undue weight. What we predicate
is a limited and specified difference ; an otherness which
we subsume under the generalized form of negation
when we wish to emphasize the distinctness of things
and ideas within the world as we know it.

Mr. Bradley would make the passage from " A is
not B" to " B is not A," an apagogic inference. " There
must be," he says, " a new experiment in which B is
taken as real, A suggested, and exclusion found to
result. No general principle can give the result, for the
principle itself has to be got by the process in question."


198 Knowledge and Reality.

Here, to my mind, we come on the weak side of
Mr. Bradley's doctrine of Inference, a side about which
we shall have much more to say. "An experiment,"
" finds exclusion.'' No doubt, especially in inference,
what a normal mind finds is what we must acquiesce in.
But to say this, is only a psychological account of the
matter, not a logical account. I may be wrong, but I
seem, even in this trifling matter, to trace the influence
of Sigwart and Lotze ; to hear them pronouncing that
knowledge is based on an unaccountable necessity,
found within the limits of isolated judgments, and that
the only reason which can be assigned for ultimate
truths is that the mind cannot help accepting them
when presented. This seems to me not wholly false,
but wholly inverted, and to consist in assigning a uni-
versal psychological feature of judgment as the peculiar
and rational ground for certain determinate judgments.

Let us look at the experiment.'- Suppose B, then
A is excluded, or is possible. First, let it be' possible,
and then A may be B ; or again B may be not-B, for
B can be A, and A is not B. Thus we prove indirectly
that B excludes A, and that the two are incompatible.

It occurs to me, here as elsewhere, that the simple
letters are very bad illustrations. They have no content,
so that the connection of content on which the whole


' If compelled to choose between the processes suggested, I should
prefer "the explicit perception of a new relation got by abstraction from
an implicit whole.''


The Judgment and the Sentence. 199

argument turns, simply does not exist in the skeleton
instances. On the other hand, I admit that I ought not
to take a case in which the reciprocal exclusion springs
to the mind the moment the names are pronounced. I
am, however, in some difficulty on this head, for I
frankly do not believe it possible to go through any
such process as is here described before seeing the con-
verse of a Universal Negative. But I grant that this
consideration is not decisive, because our seeing the
truth might be only apparent, and wrong, and might
really demand the steps which Mr. Bradley alleges to be
formally necessary, even if we were not in the habit of
going through them. I will take an instance which is
only too transparent, but has, perhaps, a thin veil of
unfamiliarity for readers who, like myself, are not
mathematical.

" No parallel of latitude " (taking this phrase not to
include the equator) " can be a great circle." Here the
first thing that strikes me is that we cannot so much as
set about constructing the judgment suggested by the
sentence till we begin to test the parallels of latitude by
the main criterion of a great circle, viz. being in a plane
which passes through the centre of the sphere. Other-
wise we should not know in what aspects to suppose or
conceive the parallels for the purpose of the judgment
in question. But when we perceive the parallels of
latitude as in a series of planes which pass outside the
centre of the sphere, and are continued in both direc-


200 Knowledge and Reality.

tions away from that centre, and thus do not cut the
sphere-surface in " great " circles— ?>. circles having the
full diameter of the sphere — then we hold together as a
systematic idea the characteristic of parallels of latitude
and the discrepant characteristic which we may illus-
trate by the equator and meridians, and judge of the
former that they must always be other than the latter in
this essential feature, the relation to the sphere-centre.
Now, when we have such an intellectual perception, not
as a confused whole, but with its salient points and
distinctions selected by the judgment, and clearly
defined, I cannot conceive what change can be made by
inverting the grammatical order of the terms. In order
to convert on Mr. Bradley's plan, I am, with this judg-
ment in my mind, for it is the premise on which I go,
to suppose B, the great circle, given. (Supposing it
■' given " is, so far as I can see, only the same as simply
supposing it, for this purpose at least ; in order to get
the judgment in question I need only suppose the
content in question, not any other content such as might
connect the great circle with reality.) I am then to
consider the question (for of course I must be told what
judgment is required to be obtained), can B "great
circle " be A '• parallel of latitude " ? or, putting it in
a more correct form, as a question represents no real
intellectual state, I must decide on the disjunction " B
can or cannot be A." But as I try to bring the dis-
junction before me it must decide itself; I cannot really


The Judgment and the Sentence. 201

maintain a disjunctive attitude at all ; A is given as
excluded. If I am asked, as Mr. Bradley seems to ask
me, " Try and suppose A possible, and see what absur-
dities you get into then ; that is the real proof that A
is excluded," I can only answer that I am glad to
claim Mr. Bradley's authority for thinking cumulative
proof by concordant systematic relations a characteristic
of knowledge, and a feature the absence of which must
always throw doubt on any supposed necessary intui-
tion, however apparently competent to stand alone.
But in the case before us I cannot, subject to the given
conditions, suppose that of which the absurdity is
required to be shown, though I can see that supposing
I could suppose it, and yet remain certain of my premise
(a combination inconceivable in detail, and only sup-
posable verbally, as we may say " suppose the universe
were not"), the apagogic argument would then show that
it was impossible.

Would the argument, however, as put by Mr.
Bradley, in any case take us round by easier steps than
that which it would enable us to escape ? " If A is
possible, then A may be B." Here we have a simple
conversion, for B is the subject from which we are to
start, and so " B may be A " is the only form to which we
have an immediate right. " B may be A " is the suppo-
sition. What we know is that " A is not (= cannot be)
B." I do not see how we are to get from this to the
falsehood of " B may be A " without either going round


202 Knowledge and Reality.

by the very converted negative (" B is not, cannot be, A")
which zve are endeavmcriiig to obtain, or else going from
" B may be A," to the simple converse " A may be B,'
which is then contradicted by " A is not (cannot be) B."
Mr. Bradley's other suggestion has not this objection ;
it uses a plain syllogism, with the rule or axiom that of
premises which correctly give a false conclusion we
must treat that one as false which we are not bound
to treat as true. Thus we get " A is not B," and
(supposing that) " B may be A," then " B may be not-
B ; " which being impossible " B may be A " is false,
(the other premise being our primary assumption which
we are bound to take as true), and therefore " B cannot
be (is not) A." This is a fair verbal inference, and does
not presuppose its result ; though whether it does not
presuppose truths just as hard to come by is another
question. The inference, however, is verbal ; it omits
the element of actual material difference from which the
whole judgment derives its import. For, let us put
it in terms which have a meaning, " No parallel of
latitude can be a great circle," and so " No great circle
can be a parallel of latitude," for if it were, then a great
circle might not be a great circle. This argument may
be understood in two ways. As obtained by Mr.
Bradley's process it is a verbal or secondary argument,
and puts the cart before the horse. Why cannot a great
circle be a parallel of latitude } Because if it was, then
owing to what we have just been told, it would not be


The Judgment and the Sentence. 203

a great circle. You thus assign the formal contradiction
as the ground of the material opposition which causes it,
or rather, perhaps, as its own ground. What you want
is to assign the material opposition as the ground of the
formal contradiction. And the above argument might
actually be thus understood, and be appealed to in this
sense : " A great circle cannot be a parallel of latitude,
for it would then be in a plane that does not pass
through the centre of the sphere." Thus, while appeal-
ing to the consequence that in becoming a parallel of
latitude a great circle would surrender its own differen-
tia, we appeal not to this consequence in its formal
aspect, but to the material opposition or contrary
relation directly and in the concrete. Thus, and thus
only, can we obtain a converse truly dependent on and
embodying the content of the original apprehension.
And if that apprehension was complete, such a con-
version does not alter it, and therefore is grammatical
and not logical.

I should like to lay down in opposition to this page
of " Principles of Logic,'' the principle that it is impos-
sible to modify a conclusion without modifying the
systematic content of the material reasoning or percep-
tion that gives it. Any argument which does not effect
this is purely formal and tautologous.

(ii.) The view of contraposition in the passage before
us has the same defects. It makes the process purely
formal and tautologous, and therefore, I should say,


204 Knowledge and Reality.

purely grammatical, while alleging it to constitute an
inference. It does not consider what the judgment "A
is B " is or implies ; and indeed, when framed with
symbolic letters the judgment is and implies almost
nothing. I do not think that " A is B," as it stands,
represents a judgment, I mean an actual judgment with
reference to the letters A and B.

The process of contraposition is explained to be
indirect, and to rest on disjunction, as the process of
conversion did in the last case. Given that A is B, then
as not-B is either A or not-A, and it cannot be A
because it would then be B, nothing remains but for
it to be not-A. " This conclusion removes the alterna-
tive Not-B is A, and since but one possibility remains,
that is therefore actual, and hence not-B is not A."

I admit that "A is B " being given, the perception
" Not-B is not A " follows somewhat less directly than,
given that " A is not B," the perception that " B is not
A." I do not myself believe that this has much to do
with the nature of the judgment from which we start,
and at which we arrive. I ascribe it rather to the non-
natural grammatical form, of which it is not easy, except
for those accustomed to skeleton instances, to make at
once a genuine application. We should scarcely admit
that we were inferring if we said on the ground of "Every
vaccinium has an inferior fruit," that, " If a plant has not
an inferior fruit it is not a vaccinium." Again, we
are perplexed, especially in the symbolic form, by the


The jfiidgment and the Sentence. 205

feeling for the ideal of judgment from which we shoidd
be able to infer that Not-A is not-B. Knowing by
experience that we are not as a rule formally justified
in this inference, we are shaken in our reliance on the
judgment-form altogether.

And if we were to appeal to the process which is
sketched in the passage before us (and I might apply
the same remark to the case of the Universal Negative),
it could not be as a formal consideration that a plant
with a superior fruit could not be a vaccinium, because
then its superior fruit would have to be an inferior fruit.
We have processes not unlike this where the premise
is not distinctly in the mind, or where the quality for
which not-B stands is not certainly known to be not-B,
because we then have to hold the alleged not-B and
B together, and consider whether they really do exclude
each other. In such a case the original judgment is not
fully made, the sentence not fully interpreted into an
intellectual perception, and it is possible that variation
of phrase may assist us in apprehending the full and
distinct content of the judgment required. But when
the judgment symbolized by " A is B '' has been
thoroughly made, when we have a content A affirma-
tively determined in i-espect of a characteristic B, so
that the whole may be symbolized by, not exactly A B,
for that might mean mere juxtaposition, but by some
more complex sign indicating a definite interpenetration
of the elements— then we cannot go back on such a


2o6 Knowledge and Reality.


judgment, while still affirming it, and suggest that what
is not characterized as B may nevertheless be A. We
gain nothing by the formal announcement that if not-B
were A, it would have to be B. This is only saying that
not-B is not A because it is not B. It is, in fact, an
argument in Camestres, A is B ; Not-B is not B ; Not-B
is not A. The question really comes to this ; is it
inference to say. Because A is B,^ therefore A is not
not-B ? I think it is not inference. It is exhibiting
by means of a grammatical form an element of the
connection of content which every judgment as such
affirms. But to complete the transition I need the
simple conversion of A is not not-B, into Not-B is not
A ; this Mr. Bradley denies me unless by an apagogic
inference. I have explained my reasons for differing
from him.

I am inclined to think that if we are to come to any
conclusion on these points which is not purely arbitrary,
depending on the custom of the individual mind, we
must direct our attention to distinguishing the logical
judgment as such from the efforts which lead up to it.
E^orts of inference certainly take place in following
a symbolic or skeleton judgment through contraposited
or converted forms. It would be hypocrisy in me at
least to pretend that I have never faltered at a symbolic
conversion and written A for not-A or the like. But
we must surely distinguish between formal or interpre-
'' Cf. " Principles of Logic," p. 149, on double negation.


The Judgment and the Sentence. 207

tative inference and material modifications of content.
What I contend for is, not that such transitions by
inference are psychologically impossible, but that if they
are made, that is a proof that we have not yet thoroughly
thought the original judgment or premise. We are,
in such cases, simply proceeding to organize and articu-
late the original judgment itself in accordance with
precepts furnished by the formal peculiarities of the
sentence. We cannot pledge ourselves for the grade
of apprehension with which individuals may commit
themselves to an enunciative sentence ; if we go to
extreme cases, where the use of a developed language
is being learnt by an undeveloped mind, the question
becomes a very hard psychological puzzle. But the
logical account of the typical judgment is not to depend
upon these historical data, though of course their bear-
ing, so far as known, must not be neglected. And
I should certainly say that in the intention and usage
of careful speakers or writers in European language, all
the immediate inferences (in the traditional sense) that
can be made from a judgment are present in the definite
structure of the judgment itself.

Mr. Bradley's treatment of the contradictory relation
of B and not-B as a mere case of disjunction I shall
return to later.

(iii.) " Principles of Logic," page 392. " It is by virtue
of the same apagogic process that we are able to argue
from the absence of the consequent to the absence of


2o8 Knowledge and Reality.

the ground." I merely mention this corollary of
Mr. Bradley's view in order to- point out its bearing
upon the question whether a disjunctive judgment can
be reduced to two hypothetical judgments. Obviously
Mr. Bradley will not admit this ; for it is agreed on all
hands that to represent the meaning of the disjunctive
judgment, "A is either B or C," we must be able to
assert four hypothetical judgments.^ To reduce these
to two demands " a process of conversion." The hypo-
theticals required must have negative elements, and
conversion of a negative, according to Mr. Bradley's
view, presupposes a Disjunction. I shall comment on
this latter idea in speaking of Disjunction.

Before passing from this page 392 I must draw atten-
tion to one more point — the relation between the " ex-
periment " and the " general principle." We do not, we
are reminded here as elsewhere, get an inference (in this

' The four hypotheticals are : i.. If A is B it is not C ; ii., If A is C it
is not B ; iii., If A is not B it is C ; iv., If A is not C it is B. Of these,
however, ii. and iv. can be obtained from i. and iii. respectively by
processes analogous to simple conversion and contraposition ; and I should
be disposed to consider each of these pairs (i. and ii. , iii. and iv.) as stand-
ing for one judgment only. Mr. Bradley makes, I think, a slight oversight
on page 121, in selecting the hypothetical judgments i. and ii. as forming
the alleged equivalents to the disjunctive judgment : i. and iii. cannot be
obtained from each other, and are both required to represent the disjunctive
judgment. It is these two, therefore, which would be chosen by those who
speak of reducing it to hypotheticals. So Sigwart, "Logik," L, section 37,
paragraph 10. But owing to Mr. Bradley's view of the nature of conver-
sion as presupposing disjunction, he would require all four hypotheticals to
be given in order to make up the disjunction, though he would not admit
that it could be reduced even to these.


The Judgment and the Sentence. 209

case B is not A from A is not B) by any general
principle, for that principle must itself first be got by
the process in question. Here I confine myself to noting
the antithesis, and simply add that I cannot understand
how any " experiment " or " process " in the way of in-
ference should have any virtue, except as an operation
on our vision, enabling us to see something of a general
principle. Thus in the " got by " I suspect an old con-
fusion ; that, in fact, o{ post hoc a.nd propter hoc. And in
the insistence on this relation of experiment to principle
I seem to see the same curious attitude, partly assumed,
towards the foundations of knowledge, which I observed
upon in chapter I. sect. 4. I shall return to the same
point in speaking of Subsumption.

(iv.) I am puzzled to know what Mr. Bradley is com-
bating when he contends ^ that " the antecedent in
necessity must be universal, but it need not be more
universal than the consequent." " There is no more
need for the consequent to be more concrete than the
antecedent than there is for the effect to be more special
than the cause."

According to the ordinary view, the consequent is
related to the antecedent as predicate to subject, and
effect to cause in the same way. " Deny the consequent
and affirm the antecedent." "The same cause always
has the same effect, but the same effect has not always
the same cause." These popular maxims show that

' p. 220.

P


3IO Knowledge and Reality.

consequent and effect are regarded as more general than
antecedent and cause respectively. Mr. Bradley has
himself recognized the correspondence of consequent
and predicate by his reduction of the categorical
judgment to a connection of antecedent and con-
sequent.^

I do not say that this is more than a popular idea
founded on the conception of the judgment current in
ordinary logic.^ In actual thought and inference I doubt
whether this feature is so common as is presumed. Mr.
Bradley himself takes the popular view elsewhere. " You
cannot reason straight from the attribute to the subject
or from the consequent to the ground." Now, from con-
sequent to ground in a pure case, and from attribute
to subject in a definitory judgment, you can reason
straight ; and I think that the judgments which we
make in arguing constantly, if not universally, claim
these characters.

But this is by the way ; the strange thing to me is,
that the tendency of popular illusion being, for reasons
which would repay inquiry, in the direction of treating
consequence and effect as corresponding to the predicate
of a common judgment, and therefore as more general
than antecedent and cause respectively, Mr. Bradley
should select for censure the view that they are less
general. I should have thought that antecedent and
consequent, as also cause and effect, when adequately
' P- 43. <"/ P- 390- ^ See p. 190.


The Judgment and the Sentence. 21 1

known, must always be convertible. In a certain sense,
indeed, the entire causal process, or nexus of antecedent
and consequent, might be looked at as more concrete
than any element in it ; but this would simply arise from
the fact that when we think of the elements apart from
the process we are apt not to give them the full deter-
minateness which as elements in the process they
possess. But the determinate elerrkent, whether cause or
effect, implies the whole process in relation to which it
is determined, and can be neither more nor less general
than that process.

I can only suppose Mr. Bradley to be alluding to
some idea of Explanation, but I do not precisely know
to what. Mill's account of explanation does not involve
any "more general principle," except in the sense just
alluded to, that it treats the matter to be explained as
a determinate combination of elements, which, qua not
thus determined by combination, are capable severally
of other combinations. But of course, even if such an
element were " naturally more knowable," the particular
consequent which it gives in combination, and therefore
the combination itself which is the antecedent of this
consequent, is always a modification of the element con-
sidered in the abstract. This is, I suppose, what Bacon
calls " Limitatio naturse notions," " a modification of
something which is in the order of nature ■*■ more sus-
ceptible of being known." And no doubt the isolated

' Naturae seems to mean "to Nature," a mistranslation of (^wei.


212 Knowledge and Reality.

elements to which we refer a process must be known
in their relative isolation, or we could not analyze the
process into them ; and in this sense explanation is
always by the more general, which is the same as saying
that it analyzes the unknown into the known. And
again, the better known an element in an explanation
is, or is capable of being, the better we are pleased at
bringing something we did not understand into connec-
tion with it. The order introduced into knowledge is
thereby rendered more complete, and from a number
of little worlds of thought we progress towards one
great world. This is all that I see in the matter, and
it seems to coincide with Mr. Bradley's hint.^ "No
doubt in the cases where you say ' because ' you may
find what we call the principle of the sequence, and
that, of course, must be more abstract than the actual
consequent. But the principle is not the antecedent
itself. It is the base of the general connection, not the
sufficient reason of the particular consequent." Still,
as I observed above, I am perplexed by the following
sentence : " There is no more need for the consequent to
be more concrete than the antecedent, than there is for
the effect to be more special than the cause." There is

no need for . But is it even possible } and has

any one maintained it ? I should have said it was
impossible, and that no one had maintained it, but that
popular views do maintain the very opposite, viz. that

' "Principles of Logic," p. 220.


The Judgmcjit and the Sentence. 213

consequent and cause are more abstract than antecedent
and effect. This view, I think, does require confuting,
in favour of the only possible doctrine, viz. that the
universality of reason and consequent is always exactl}'
the same.


214 Knowledge and Reality.


CHAPTER V.

ALLEGED SUBJECTIVITY OF NEGATION.

I NOW turn to ask how far and in what sense logical
negation is subjective. I begin by referring to what I
said above as to the stage or level at which we must
take the judgment for logical purposes. Keeping, as I
think we ought, to the developed judgment of civiHzed
life, we shall be obliged to assign a high degree of
positive value to negation. The question of stage or
level of judgment is fundamental in this matter. I will
take a single test of this from Sigwart's chapter on
negation. 1 "The primary judgment ought not to be
called affirmative at all ; at the outside it should be
cz^AqA positive ; for the simple enunciation A is B is only
called an affirmation by contrast with the negative judg-
ment and in as far as it rejects the possibility of a
negation ; but it is not a condition of the judgment A
is B that the thought of a possibility of its being denied
should have been entertained."

The correctness of this assertion depends absolutely

' Sigwart, "Logik," sect. 20, par. i.


A lleged Subjectivity of Negation. 2 1 5

on the level at which we take the judgment. The
question is one of those which constantly recur in the
theory of knowledge, or, indeed, in any account of a
continuous growth, and I could wish that a general
formula were laid down to clear out of the way once
for all the ambiguities which such a question involves.
Their interest is not logical, but historical.^ The issue is
merely how far certain features, necessarily implied in a
process, or at least necessarily developed in it by a
contact which is quite inevitable, become explicit and
distinguishable within such a process. The interest of
a judgment, no doubt, is not always expressly to correct
or even to provide against a mistake ; the judgment may
take its rise from the mere positive interest of the content
which it aifirms, not from an interest in exclusion by
means of that content. On the other hand, however,
we must bear in mind that communication is not the
essential of judgment. Therefore we must not go so far
as to say that mere desire to inform another, or to
influence his action, can produce a judgment. Strictly,
these motives can only cause us to speak our judgment
aloud ; the actual making of the affirmation must be
accounted for on purely logical grounds ; and though
these imply an interest, yet it is a definite interest some-

' Cf. " Principles of Logic," p. 30. " Thus with judgment we are sure
that, at a certain stage, it does not exist, and that at a later stage it is found
in operation ; and, without asking where the transition talies place, we may
content ourselves with pointing out the contrast of these stages."


2i6 Knowledge and Reality.

how bound up with the particular content which is
judged, and therefore is itself subject to the observations
I am about to make. In other words, the desire to
influence you may make me speak, but my ability, and
the compulsion I am under in an intellectual sense to
affirm thus and not otherwise, is guided and confined by
a necessity of knowledge, and thus has the side of
exclusion which a mere desire to produce a result would
hardly display.

The interest which makes us judge and the matter
which we affirm in judging, are exclusive from the first.
This no one denies. We have, then, only the impossible
task remaining to say at what grades of judgment, or
how far at any grade, exclusiveness becomes an explicit
purpose. I repeat, exclusion is i7t the purpose from the
first ; it is given in the nature of the world, and the only
question is how far the intricate systematic relation of
object-matters has at any moment an influence on our
judging. Can we really escape from " Omnis determi-
natio est negatio " .' ■'

If I say " Dinner is at 6.45 to-night," I do not, indeed,
imply that you have denied it, or that you will deny it
after I have made the judgment ; but I do imply that
I think you might have come at the wrong time if I had
not told you, i.e. that your intellect was in a negative
state as regarded the content in question. If you already

^ I do not say *' all negation is determination, " because several negations
may rest on the same excluding quality. " Principles of Logic,'' p. Il6.


Alleged Subjectivity of Negation. 217

knew the hour, and knew me to be aware that you knew
it, you would resent being told of it again, because it
would imply that I thought you likely to forget or to
confuse. When our words are less precise, " I am tired,"
"Oh, how hot it is ! " "I have just seen your brother,"
it is of course not necessarily the case that we should be
consciously affirming against a known or anticipated
denial, though we may very well be doing so, e.g. in
saying, "I have just seen," which seems to mean "the
judgment ' I have just seen ' is true." We are, however,
in fact affirming against a possible denial, because, to
repeat what I said more generally above, we are abstract-
ing and selecting, and by doing this we commit ourselves
both to omissions and to connections of content. No
doubt in simply affirming a common fact or feeling we
are not careful to guard against omissions which may
be challenged, or a connection of content which may be
impugned. But every term of precision, every indication
of measurement, every qualification by a condition, is a
danger-signal of actual or possible denial, and in many
cases a record of a denial that has been parried. " Ah !
no," it may be said ; " not a denial, only a mistake."
It is one thing to take care to be correct in a judgment,
to guard against mistakes, and another to maintain an
assertion in face of an actual or possible denial of that
particular assertion. It is this latter attitude, I may be
told, of which Sigwart is speaking, and which he denies
to be a necessary element in judging — ^judging as he


2i8 Knowledge and Reality.

s^.ys positively, without the special colour of affirmation.
Now I do not believe that this attitude of assertion
simply against denial of the same content can really
exist as a logical factor in an act of judgment. I do
not believe that " mere " or ungrounded judgment is
possible. And therefore I do not think that we ever
meet what we understand as a denial by the unmodified
affirmation of the content denied. Either we see a
ground for the denial, or we do not. If we do, we
modify our judgment, or while repeating it, yet add
explanations, so as to evade the shadow of doubt which
the denial seems to us to throw upon it. If we see no
ground for the denial, then it appears to us to be either
nonsense or a lie. In either of these cases it is not a
judgment, and does not count to us as a genuine negation.
If against nonsense or falsehood we think it worth while
to repeat an assertion, we may no doubt do so in
identical words, but the assertion is changed in content.
It is not changed in respect of its rational ground, for
that has not been impugned ; but it has acquired a fresh
bearing which would usually be indicated by manner or
accent. " What I say is unaffected by your denial ; "
" What I say is not wilfully false," are the sort of
bearings which a judgment has attached to it by
emphatic repetition in face of a negation which appears
arbitrary. But this is not the normal attitude of asser-
tion to denial ; the denial in this case is not recognized
as a true denial. Whenever we judge affirmatively in


Alleged Subjectivity of Negation. 219

face of a denial which we recognize to be bond fide and
to have a meaning, then we never simply unsay the
denial, but always modify the content so as to admit Avhat
is true in the ground of negation. This " ground " and
the modification to meet it, are hard to trace in very simple
judgments, but I believe they are always there. And
thus the modification which guards against mistakes is
after all the normal attitude of genuine assertion against
genuine denial. And the presence of this attitude is, as
I have remarked, indicated by every note of precision,
every measurement or proof of careful selection, which
a given judgment exhibits. It is, in short, obviously
implied in all selective abstraction, i.e. in all judgment ;
how far it is consciously operative is a matter of
historical psychology. Here again I note the futility of
the skeleton judgment. " A is B " and " A is not B " are
a scheme of affirmation and negation which corresponds
to nothing actual. To assert or deny thus absolutely is
to accuse the other speaker of nonsense or falsehood.

I should therefore lay it down that in every judgment
which involves measurement or contains conditions, the
thought of the possibility of its being denied has deter-
mined the shape of the judgment at every salient point.
Whether this principle would contradict Sigwart's view
I do not know ; but if it does not, his " primary judg-
ment " cannot be actual as belonging to developed
thought. Of course we must not suppose that the
thought of a possibility is inoperative because we believe


220 Knowledge and Reality.

ourselves to have guarded against it. The precautions,
especially when they are factors in an intellectual act,
are embodiment of the thought of the possibility.

I do not think that I differ from Mr. Bradley in my
view of the actual character which we must ascribe to
the negative judgment as such. His statement is more
careful than that of Sigwart, who appears to lay down
positively ^ that negation necessarily presupposes actual
affirmation. On this point Mr. Bradley is clear, and I
think, obviously right. Negation does not presuppose
affirmation, though it does presuppose the idea or
suggestion of an affirmative relation. I must, therefore,
admit the essence of sect. 13 of Book I. ch. 3, the
chapter on the Negative Judgment, a chapter, I may
say in passing, which appears to me to be a masterpiece
of logical analysis and suggestive criticism. I quote the
first paragraph of sect. 13. "'Logical negation' cannot
be so directly related to fact as is logical assertion. We
might say that, as such and in its own strict character,
it is simply ' subjective ; ' it does not hold good outside
my thinking. The reality repels the suggested alteration ;
but the suggestion is not any movement of the fact,
nor in fact does the given subject maintain itself against
the actual attack of a disparate quality. The process

' His account of double negation (" Logik," i. 25, i) clearly rests on the
idea of an actual affirmation prior to the first negation. In 20, I, he says
only "den Versuch einer Bejahung," which is right, and agrees with llr.
Bradley's view, but is inconsistent with Sigwart's own account of double
negation, as Mr. Bradley in effect points out.


Alleged Subjectivity of Negation. 221

takes place in the unsubstantial region of ideal experi-
ment. And the steps of that experiment are not even
asserted to exist in the world outside our heads. The
result remains, and is true of the real, but its truth, as we
have seen, is something other than its first appearance."

All that I wish to do is to remark upon some points
connected with the uses of negation in knowledge, with
the view of meeting the question "Why, if ' subjective,'
is it natural and indispensable .-' " Or is it not indispen-
sable ? The general doctrine which I wish to uphold is
that negation, though belonging in form to a higher
level of reflection than affirmation, is yet in actual use
not especially subjective or artificial, but tends to become
more and more co-ordinate with the affirmative, not by
careless usage, but as a necessary element in knowledge.

I. We agreed that negation does not presuppose an
existing judgment against which it may be directed.
Need it, however, presuppose even a question ^ in a sense
in which the affirmative need not do so } Mr. Bradley
says that it must ;^ and the simple analysis of the negative
undoubtedly bears him out. Negation proclaims on the
face of it that we do not perceive in the object-matter
observed the feature or aspect with reference to which
we are testing it. And therefore, /rw«i/««>, the predi-
cate which we deny of a subject is related to a criterion

' "DenVersuch einer Bejahung," Sigwart, I.e. supra. I have expressed
above the opinion that a question is not, as such, an intellectual act or state,
but must correspond to some form, however rudimentary, of disjunction.

'^ " Principles of Logic,'' p. no.


222 Knowledge and Reality.

which we bring with us, or which is in some way sug-
gested to us, not by the direct perception of the subject,
but by some interest which less directly concerns the
subject. If we say, " The men A, B, and C are not up
to the standard of height required for the army,'' the
judgment is one which, so to speak, we need not have
made. The idea of a particular standard of height is
brought to bear ab extra on our perception of the men's
height. The subject does not challenge us to try it by
this especial criterion. We must here, not merely as is
possible in affirmation, find the quality or attribute
present, be struck by its presence, and pronounce that it
qualifies that which we perceive ; we must first bring the
external related point up to that which we perceive, and
attempt to unite the two in a whole pronounced to be
real. In short, in order to deny, "we must have the
suggestion of an affirmative relation." ^ In affirming we
may, but do not always, begin by a suggestion before we
proceed to affirm, though in Mr. Bradley's words, "the
primitive basis of affirmation is the coalescence of idea
with perception."

2. But for my present purpose, which is to estimate
the place of negation in developed thinking, the above
admission amounts to very little. In the mature intellect
— we might probably say in the intellect of adult human
beings— the judgment is guided by acquired interests, to
the almost entire neglect of sensuous prominence. I am

' " Principles of Logic," p. no.


Alleged Subjectivity of Negation. 223

inclined to think that if the prominence of a sensuous
stimulus, eg. a loud noise, attracts attention and causes
us to judge, it is rather because some feature of rarity in
the fact of its prominence demands explanation, than
that we yield attention immediately to the sensuous
disturbance. Therefore it appears to me that far the
greater part of our actual judgments in developed
thinking, whether affirmative or negative, are preceded
by the stage of suggestion, in the same sense as is
negation. Suggestions come from our interests, and it
is hard to say that the judgments which these call forth
are artificial or not objective. Let us recur to the in-
stance, " The men A and B are not up to the standard
height ; " and let us turn it into an affirmation. " A and
B are up to the standard height." Surely it is plain
that the stage of reflection and the degree in which
suggestion precedes judgment, are exactly the same in
both these judgments. Where, as in the above case,
the predicate, however important, is not obviously chal-
lenged by the constant nature of the subject, affirma-
tion demands antecedent suggestion no less than does
negation. Where, on the other hand, the predicate is
conditioned by a relation essential to the nature of the
subject, then the work of suggestion is done once for all
in the permanent nature of our world of knowledge and
feeling, and the stage of reflection which denial pre-
supposes is all but absorbed in the direct and natural
reference to a standard which we cannot but apply. If,


224 Knowledge and Reality.

while looking at a college eight, we say of one of the
crew, " That man cannot row," we have been provided
with the required suggestion by the fact of seeing him
in a racing boat.

In fact, at the level of judgment to which I am now
referring, denial is always charged with so much positive
intention (I do not think the positive intention is always
one with the positive ground') that the question rather is,
" Why not express it in positive form ? " This can gene-
rally be done without essential sacrifice of meaning, and
the fact that it can be done shows how slight in the fully
matured judgment is the difference between affirmation
and denial. It would be interesting to consider how far
circumlocutions with "fails to," "is without," etc., can really
be treated as positive. I suppose that it is not fair to do
so except where they really allege a significant contrary —
a quality of defect so to speak — and are not mere meta-
phors without positive content, and degraded into simple
equivalents for the negative. " He has not passed his
examination," undergoes a real change if we substitute
" he has failed in," etc. ; because failed is a definite
contrary which may or may not be concealed under the
contradictory " not passed." But to say, "This triangle
fails to be equal to that," would be a mere grammatical
periphrasis for " is not equal," unless it implied that the
two ought, or might be expected, to be equal.

But in spite of the possible substitution of a positive
predication, the negative maintains its place in language.


Alleged Subjectivity of Negation. 225

One simple reason, or one simple form of the reason for
this, is the extreme convenience of generalizing a set of
contraries, ad hoc, in a particular point of view, as
contradictory to a certain affirmation. Sometimes nega-
tion is the only simple way of effecting this purpose. In
the instance given above, of course we may say, " A and
B are below the military standard ; " but this is hardly
more than a makeshift for the negative. In either form
of expression the essence is that we erect a number of
contraries, the several heights of the men whom we are
inspecting, into the absolute alternative or contradictory
"not as high as." A more complete case of the same
kind is the generalization of the greater and less as not
equal. And when we come to a criticism like '' cannot
row," i.e. fails to row as any one ought who undertakes to
do so, we find that the negative abstraction has reference
to a teleological standard, which may be said to be given
in the object, although not satisfied by it. Here, i.e. where
a thing does not come up to its type, the negative has a
value which can_ hardly be called other than objective.
The affirmative relation is directly suggested, and negated
in as far as it is suggested, in the object of perception.
I am only speaking of the simple teleology of our
everyday world, not of any remote final cause. Thus
if we say, " That ship is not fit to go to sea," there is
nothing artificial, arbitrary, or in a special sense subjec-
tive, in our criticism. " Fit to go to sea " is suggested
affirmatively as an attribute of ship, ipso facto, the

Q


226 Knowledge and Reality.

moment we recognize an object to be a ship ; and in
the case of unfitness the negation is as really given in
the object before us as is the affirmation in the case of
fitness.

It appears to me then, that the question of the sub-
jectivity or artificiality of judgments turns actually and
materially on the value of the standards by which we
judge, and not on the distinction between assertion and
denial. Negation may, no doubt, be trivial and idle.
Perhaps it is capable of being so in one degree further
than affirmation. We can deny that a triangle is an
elephant, and we cannot affirm it. But we may affirm
that a triangle is a triangle, and that an elephant is an
elephant ; and these instances exhibit the vanishing
point of affirmation when it becomes absolutely free
from negation, as does the former the vanishing point
reached by negation as it frees itself from all affirma-
tion. Or, if we go to judgments which have a meaning,
it is true that a number of negations may be founded on
the same positive quality,^ and therefore may convey no
further information about the subject after the first. But
this is as true of affirmations. On the number of angles
of a triangle we may found all the affirmations that the
multiplication table makes about the number three
without thereby learning anything about the qualities
of a triangle as such ; and if it is replied that then we
at least develop the content of an attribute which is an

' " Principles of Logic," p. Ii6.


Alleged Subjectivity of Negation. 227

attribute of a triangle, we must bear in mind that to
deny on this ground that the angles were four, five, six,
or seven, would also be to develop the content of the
attribute three.

I have, indeed, attempted to point out ^ that in de-
veloped thought, as we know it, affirmation displays a
reference to possible negation as distinctly as does
negation to the possibility of affirmation. This view,
however, and my present contention, refer to the
material value of judgments. They in no way detract
from the correctness of the analysis which decides, on
consideration of their formal character, that in the be-
ginning, negation involves a phase of reflection with
which affirmation can dispense. But when a positive
judgment has come to bear traces in its structure of
the repeated phases of suggestion and negation which
have modified it, we can no longer treat it as merely
positive.

It might, indeed, be alleged that even in respect to a
complex predication, denial is always one remove higher
in ideality than affirmation. If an ideal content has
been modified a dozen times to make its assertion
possible in spite of denials, the thirteenth denial has
for its basis the suggested affirmation of the entire
content so modified. And so in respect of this entire
content, a fresh denial presupposes a suggested affir-
mative relation, while the affirmation does not pre-

' See p. 219.


Knowledge and Reality.


suppose any special or definite denial, a ground for
which can hardly, on the hypothesis before us, be taken
as anticipated. I will only remark on this, first, that
though no further special and definite ground of denial
is implied in the affirmation, yet the fact of having
passed through a number of modifications to disarm
denial cannot but endow the affirmation with a strong
general bent and tendency to be asserted as against a
total denial. And secondly, that in proportion to the
complexity and precision of such an elaborated content,
the actual elements of negative determination which
build it up acquire a progressively greater share of its
import, as against the mere formal characteristic of
being, qtia affirmation, on a lower level of reflection than
a further and fresh negation. I mean, to recur to the
rough way of speaking which I employed above, that
an affirmation which consciously and intentionally
denies twelve negations, has a reflective and ideal
character which is but little dwarfed by the fact that
the negation which so to speak corresponds to it,
which might be directed against it in its fully defined
form, would be not on the same level of ideality, but
one remove higher. Considered even from this point
of view, the subjectivity of negation as compared with
affirmation tends to a vanishing point in knowledge.
And as we shall see later on, there is a simpler point
of view which makes them not merely approximate to,
but actually reach the same level. I have argued


Alleged Subjectivity of Negation. 229

above without departing from the ground of external
shape, on which Mr. Bradley's analysis cannot be abso-
lutely rejected. I have assumed that an affirmation,
if it denies, can only deny a negation. But in the con-
crete structure of knowledge this is not the case^
Negation rests, no doubt, as Mr. Bradley maintains, on
the common fact of contrary opposition, which it gene-
ralizes into contradiction. But it does not stop at con-
tradiction. The contradictory negative clothes itself
again with the positive contraries out of which it sprang.
The true and objective place of negation in know-
ledge is to exhibit the contrary as the contradictory ;
i.e. to deny or affirm, for it is all one, under disjunction.
Here, then, we have the affirmative, not merely as the
denial of denial, but as the denial of affirmation. Both
negative and positive judgments become double-edged.
It is obvious that affirmation which carries the intention
of denial as much as of assertion, has, considered as
a judgment, the ideal or "subjective" character of
negation ; while the negation which carries the inten-
tion to affirm has supplemented its "subjectivity" by
a positive allegation of ideal content. It can hardly
be doubted that all actual thought gives some of this
value to negation, and consequently some of the com-
plementary value to assertion. The only negation
which has no such import is the idiotic " infinite
judgment," such as " Virtue is not square." And some
approach to the absence of such import may be as-


-30 Knowledge and Reality.


cribed to the forced reserve of mere records of obser-
vation. "On the 25th, no sunshine;" which, whatever
it may imply, is taken to commit the observer to nothing
but bare denial.

I shall return to this aspect of negation when I
come to speak of Disjunction and Excluded Middle.

3. But I wish first to say a few words on Double
Negation, which Sigwart considers one of the clearest
indications of the gulf which is fixed between negation
and reality. He appears, as I observed above,' to go
further at this point than Mr. Bradley is prepared to
follow him. Mr. Bradley pre-supposes as the indis-
pensable basis of negation, not an actual affirmative
judgment, but only the suggestion of an affirmative
relation. He is therefore precluded from Sigwart's
short method of pronouncing that a second negation
abolishes the first, and leaves the original aifirmative
standing. On Mr. Bradley's view, if the second ne-
gation simply does away with the first, nothing need
be left but a question or suggestion. He therefore
holds that the reason why a double negation affirms, is
that a denial can only be denied on the strength of our
knowledge that the corresponding affirmative is true.
Thus, as " A is x which excludes B " is the true ground
on which we assert " A is not B," so " A is B which
excludes not-B " is the ground on which we assert that
" A is not not-B."

' See note, p. 220.


Alleged Subjectivity of Negation. 231

I will begin by remarking that in civilized speech
the equivalence of double negation and affirmation has
so long been recognized, that when we set about inter-
preting a sentence, either is subsumed under the other
as a matter of course.^ It is therefore exceedingly hard
to construct distinguishable judgments corresponding
to the two propositions in question, with the view of
considering the logical relation between them. Practi-
cally, therefore — I mean, if we are to analyze language
in its rough current usage — I cannot deny that whenever
we say "A is not not-B," we already know and are
prepared to allege that A is B. This follows, to my ^
mind, from the simple fact that the two propositions
are obviously and transparently equivalent. I do not
believe that either is in the usage of civilized thought
prior to the other. We just as often get at the explicit
affirmative by seeing that we cannot do otherwise,^ as
at the explicit double negation by being struck with
the affirmative. I believe these two sides to be in-
volved in every judgment, the distinction between
them to be subtle and difficult, and the idea of an
inference from one to the other wholly unreal.

' It would be worth while to analyze the indications by which we know
a double negative from a merely repeated negative, as it occurs in vulgar
English, or in classical Greek. In Greek the true double negation is
frequently, I will not say usually, represented by throwing one negative
into the form of a positive content, and then denying this, " There was no
one who did not." " No one was so humble that he was not spoken to," etc.

^ Oddly enough, this is the process to which IVIr. Bradley himself, along
with other modern logicians, is apt to refer our cognition of simple truths.
C}. " Principles of Logic," p. 515.


232 Knowledge and Reality.

It may seem captious to add, that to explain our
apprehension of the equivalence of double negation and
affirmation by an inference from the double negation
as consequent to the affirmation as the sole possible
ground, i.e. by an inference that an inference has been
made, seems not only far-fetched, but contrary to the
ordinary tradition which Mr. Bradley accepts, that
inference from assertion of consequent to assertion of
ground is not warrantable.^

Leaving these considerations, which appear to me
extremely artificial, I will ask the simple question, how
we come to use the double negation at all ; why it
answers, as we must suppose it does, to some logical or
psychological requirement .' I see two reasons for the
use in question : one ethical, and one logical with a
psychological corollary.

Ethically, we feel a need to deny in the form con-
secrated to denial. It is comparatively unusual to
apply the double negative in a complete sentence ; but
in face of a previous negative, say in debate, or in a
continuous context, the incisive and rebuking force of
the negative seems more appropriate than a mere
counter-assertion. It has all the associations attached
to "giving the lie." In answer to a personal charge,

' Of course special knowledge may warrant such an inference ; but in
the case before us, the matter to be inferred being a particular course of
inference, I should have thought the special knowledge would have given
the presence of the alleged ground as a fact, and dispensed with the
inference from consequent to ground.


Alleged Stibjectivity of Negation. 233

e.g. " You were not in the House when it was counted
out last night," it is a mere exculpation to reply,
" Indeed I was," but a counter-charge to say, " That is
not the case," or, still more, " That is not true." It
characterizes the negation as a falsehood, instead oL^
merely falling back on the content which is true.

And logically, we have the case of indirect proof, in
which the disproof of the negation is undoubtedly taken
as prior to the proof of the affirmation. I wish that
Mr. Bradley had dealt explicitly with this point, which
no doubt he regards as decided by his remarks ^ to the
effect that you cannot disprove " A is not B " on any
ground but a knowledge that A is B, unless the number
of possibilities with respect to A has been already limited
by a disjunctive judgment, "which is not here the case."

And perhaps the question might be raised whether
an indirect proof can be erected on a pure contradictory
alternative, i.e. without a limiting disjunction. Most
frequently it is not so erected. I mean that it is assumed
that if a certain line does not fall here, it falls somewhere
else ; it is assumed that if a triangle is not equal to
another, it must be either greater or less than it, and
the indirect proofs are set up upon these positive
assumptions. Even so, I should incline to say that
all intelligible negations presuppose some such dis-
junction as these arguments imply. No one assumes
it explicitly ; it is held to be conveyed in the nature of

' " Principles of Logic," p. 150.


234 Knowledge and Reality.


rational speech. And then I should admit the argu-
ment quoted above, but not the fact. I should say that
it is here and everywhere the fact that the content of
negation is limited by a disjunctive judgment. But if
this were not so, I should still say that double negation
shares the fate of indirect proof ; and if the absence of
an explicit disjunction is not fatal to indirect proof, I do
not see why it should be fatal to the priority of drfuble
negation. " It did rain yesterday," to take Mr. Bradley's
instance, may be got at thus. " If it did not rain yester-
day, the ground must be in good order ; " " The ground
is not in good order," "Therefore it is not true that it
did not rain yesterday." Even here, it may be objected,
I am, under cover of a consequence, assigning a positive
value to " it did not rain," i.e. assuming that there was
some kind of weather, and that it had some effect on
the state of the ground. I can only say that I have
fined down the negative as nearly as possible to mere
privation ; but of course it does assume, not only that
no wet fell, but that the world and the ground existed
yesterday. It is just possible, then, I think, genuinely
to approach the affirmative from the side of its negation,
as in indirect proof. The process is, indeed, apt to be
fanciful, or wilfully abstract, the relation between the
two sides of a judgment being so intimate as it is and
so transparent. It is less frequently a true necessity
of thought, than a rhetorical phrase which affects the
content by an intimation of the speaker's mood.


Alleged Sitbjectivity of Negation. 235

It may be worth noting, as a corollary from what
has been said, that we use double negation not only for
insistence and asseveration, as Sigwart has pointed out,
but also in speaking with caution and reserve (judwuig).
In the former we characterize the particular, in the
latter the universal negative as untrue, thus in each case
establishing the contradictory through the ordinary
process of logical opposition.^

The peculiar insistence with which these judgments
are made depends on their affinity with indirect proof
and the negative instance. They allege that a content
has been scrutinized with reference to its limit ; that
attention has been bestowed on the specific question,
whether a certain content can possibly or does always
fail to exhibit a certain attribute, and that the answer
has been negative. The denial of a particular negative
we may illustrate in the case of, " The three angles of a
triangle may be not equal to two right angles," which
we deny by pronouncing that "The three angles of a
triangle cannot be not equal to two right angles." And
the denial of a universal negative by, " In England the
sun never shines in winter," which is denied by saying,
"It is not the case that, in England, the sun never
shines in winter." Of course we have no right to the
universal affirmative all A is B (of which No A is Not-B
is the converted contrapositive) unless we are satisfied

' Thus Sigwart's complaint, that double negation has hitherto found no
place in logic, appears ill-founded.


236 Knozvledge and Reality.

that there are no exceptional cases in which A is not-B ;
nor have we any right to the particular affirmative A
may be B, unless we are sure that there is ground for
assuming exceptions to the negative rule A is never B ;
but there is no doubt that looking for the fact or the
possibility of exceptions to a general rule, is a peculiar
side of inquiry, and marks an advance in method and
ideal of knowledge.

Then, if I will not have it that the denial of " A is
not B " must rest on the knowledge that A is B, and
yields A is B solely by this implication, and as I have
agreed with Mr. Bradley in rejecting Sigwart's view
that the original positive judgment is simply left stand-

-/ ing when the negation is cancelled, how do I ground
the inference from double negation to affirmation ?

a. I should prefer not to call it an inference, being so
transparent as it is, and being provided for in ordinary
logical opposition. But of course it is possible, as the two

/ judgments (or rather the two propositions) are equivalent,
to point out how their equivalence may be justified, if
justification is demanded.'

And then, /3, I should adopt the antiquated view

/ to which Sigwart alludes in passing, that the meaning
of double negation is a consequence of the law of
excluded middle. The essence of negation is the
conception of an absolute alternative or contradictory,
and the law of excluded middle simply expresses this
early generalization. I cannot venture to judge how


Alleged Subjectivity of Negation. 237

thought would get on with mere contrary opposition, in
which the only way of ousting one predicate would be to
affirm another and leave the two to fight it out in the
mind. But it seems to me clear that it must soon be dis-
covered that to fix on or discriminate the content of an
idea, in the way indicated by the Laws of Identity and
Contradiction, implies a dichotomy between the content
of the idea on the one hand and all that is other than it on
the other hand. If anything could be found in knowledge
which was neither the given content nor other than it,
the possibility of having definite ideas and of recognizing
them would be gone. I believe, therefore, that dichot-
omy is involved in true negation, the generalized idea of
otherness, and that we cannot have negation cheaper.
Hence every denial is under a dichotomous disjunction,
the ultimate disjunction between A and not A, in which
to deny the one is to assert the other. This appears to
me to be the full reason, so far as it falls within the
province of logic, for the indispensability of the negative.
The capacity of recognition which is involved in the
possession of significant or symbolic ideas involves a
capacity of rejecting what is alien to the content we
are considering. And it may happen as I pointed out
above,-' that the conimon character of being alien to
some particular content is a character which it is
necessary to predicate with distinctness.

Then I think that Sigvvart's notion of the especial

' See p. 223.


238 Knoivledge and Reality.

subjectivity of double negation is grounded on a gravely-
imperfect view of knowledge. It omits to consider the
element of limit or distinctness, which in science takes
the shape of the negative instance, and which forms a
problem and aspect of knowledge complementary in
practice, although essential in principle, to distinct and
discriminative apprehension. We should see this more
clearly if we might write as the equivalent of A is B,
not only Not-B is not A, but Not-A is not B, which for
reasons mentioned above, common logic does not allow.
In science these complementary negations express the
work of the negative instance ; in that at the point where,
and in as far as, you leave A, you also surrender B, and
at the point where, and in as far as, you surrender B you
ipso facto lose A. To affirm by double negation may be
regarded as an imperfect attempt to render this aspect
of fact.

4. We have seen so far that Negation is necessary to
the structure of reality /(?r us, and that double Negation
is a simple consequence of Negation. I now turn to
look more closely at the positive meaning of negative
judgments.

" If we confine negation to mere denial,' it is the
exclusion of an idea by an unspecified quality ; and if
we confine the denial to its negative side, it is the
mere exclusion of an unsuggested idea.'' " A bare
denial can never be found ; for when A excludes some
relation to B which is offered in idea, there must always


Alleged Subjectivity of Negation. 239

be a ground for that rejection. The base of the denial
must be a positive quality, unspecified but necessary." ^

With these views I thoroughly agree. But I would
subjoin two remarks.

First, it appears to me that the bare denial, which is
never found, is the only kind of denial which is secondary
or subjective. The moment you begin to allege a
positive content you depart from the purely subjective
denial, the denial which is secondary because it only
exists in order to reject an affirmative. Such a denial, as
the author here says, is not found ; or, as I said above,^
an ungrounded denial is not a judgment. The best case
of bare denial is the " infinite judgment " ^ when it
does not imply a rational ground. If it does imply
a rational ground, then I presume it is not a true
case of the infinite judgment. I mean that " the soul is
not a triangle " might be a rhetorical way of saying that
the soul is not in space, and this would be grounded in
the positive quality of the soul as mind, and would not
be an " infinite judgment."

This brings me to my second remark. I wish that
Mr. Bradley was as clear everywhere as he is here, that
an ungrounded judgment (he only says it of a negative
judgment) is no judgment. We should then get rid
of mere judgment and ©f " arbitrary synthesis of sugges-
tion with reality," and have a different light thrown on

' " Principles of Logic," pp. 255, 256. ^ See p. 218.

* See p. 226.


240 Knowledge and Reality.

the position of those Inferences whose centre is not
explicit.-'

I pass on to speak of the positive value of negative
judgments. Mr. Bradley places this in the positive
ground, on which, whether specified or not, they base
the rejection which they pronounce. I doubt, however,
whether the positive ground need exhaust the positive
purport. I incline to think that in the analysis of
every judgment, whether affirmative or negative, three
elements are traceable : the ground, the content actually
employed in judging, and the consequence, i.e. application
or bearing. Can we not, then, it will be asked, simply
say what we mean, without employing a content that
is in excess of the application that we require ? No
doubt we often can do so, especially if the judgment
appeals to feeling. If we say " The sunset is beautiful,"
'■ The Australians have won the match," we seem to
acquiesce in the content affirmed without drawing any
further and precise conclusion out of it. But when we
come upon an enunciation, however carefully expressed,
in its place in an argument or exposition, we cannot
avoid interpreting it by the context. I mean that, besides
what it says, there is something which it more espe-
cially does ; some link of argument which it takes
up, or some salient point of exposition on which it
insists. Without being properly ambiguous, the same
proposition is susceptible of very different significations.

' See ch. I. sect. 4.


Alleged Subjectivity of Negation. 241

In addition to the question what certain words mean, we
ahvays have in our minds the question what the author
means by them, or why he employs them here and now
"Psychology is a theoretic as distinguished from a
practical science." When Mr. Sully uses these words
he is speaking of the relation between Psychology and
other sciences. The content of " theoretic " is of secon-
dary interest, though essential as an instrument of the
distinction required. The author's intention at the
moment is not so much to indicate of what nature
Psychology is, as to bring out the degree in which it is
necessary to certain other sciences. The distinction
might, on the other hand, have been drawn in the
same words as subsidiary to an account of the nature
and belongings of a theoretic science as such. When
the " bearing " of a statement is very precise, it ought
perhaps to be regarded as a suppressed conclusion, after
the fashion of the " enthymeme." " This is the shortest
way (so we had better take it)." " The proposed
Railway under Hyde Park will not pass under any trees,
(so would not risk spoiling any)." " This letter is over
one ounce (so it requires another halfpenny stamp)."
This is not merely a feature of sentences ; it attaches
clearly to the judgments themselves ; we use a content,
symbolic idea, or meaning, which comes to hand, but the
precise bearing and point even of this meaning, i.e. the
meaning within the meaning, is given by context. It is
possible that in Logic, as we deal perforce with isolated

R


242 Knowledge and Reality.

•

judgments, we may have to neglect this feature of all
living thought ; but I am sure we ought not to forget it.
To return to the negative, suppose we are told,
" The ordnance map of Manchester is not recent." The
ground of this statement will be the actual date of publi-
cation of the latest map we can find ; the actual content
employed in judging is this date considered as excluding
recent publication ; but the bearing or application of
the judgment is almost certain to be that the map is not
to be relied on for recent details. Of course the ground
of negation may include or coincide with this conse-
quence ; I only say that I do not think it need. Sup-
posing that it does not, the complete analysis of the
judgment then is "The map. A bears an old date x,
which excludes the quality of being recent B ; and if it is
not recent, it is so far unreliable b." We have here two
hypothetical judgments involved. " If x is, B is not,"
and " If B is not, b is." About neither pair of terms, it
may be observed, do we pronounce the equivalent of a
complete disjunction. We do not say that " If .r is not,
B is," nor that " If B is, b is not." But if the ground and
consequence coincide, we then have given to us the
elements of a complete disjunction. " The signal-light
A is green x, and therefore is not red, the danger-signal B,
but is green, the safety-signal x." Here our two judg-
ments would run, "li x is, B is not, " and "If B is not,
x is." In other words, we here suppose ourselves to
know that green and red have their significance from


Alleged Subjectivity of Negation. 243

being the only two alternatives, and thus green is not
merely the ground which excludes red, but is also the
consequent which we desire to assert through the exclu-
sion of red. Why, then, should we deny red instead of
asserting green ? More than one reason is possible ; I
select the chief It may be because we wish to confirm
green as positive ground by green as consequent. The
perception may be more or less doubtful. It may
be " a colour which I take to be green, but which is
certainly not red ; " in this case the consequence of " not
red" at once ties the colour down to be green. Thus
ground and consequent must be different, to account
for the employment of negation ; slightly different
at least, or in need of mutual corroboration. But we
often like to have corroboration where there is no prac-
tical doubt. And this leads to the other possible reasons
for employing denial. We say more by denying, in such
a case, than by affirming. For in the positive we can
rest, in the negative we cannot. The negative must have
its ground ; the positive is compatible with an indolence
of thought which may never go on to accentuate its
negative and systematic import. " That is a green light,
and means safety," does not force us to realize, though
we may know, that there is only one other light, which
is red and means danger. It does not force us to reflect
that the alternative which we perceive to be fact is one
of only two.

Now, all actual negation owes its significance to


244 Knowledge and Reality.

hypothetical and disjunctive judgments, Hke those con-
sidered above. And in every case, I think, there is a
positive bearing as well as a positive ground, though the
two may coincide, and I presume that Mr. Bradley means
them to do so. The material difference between affir-
mation and negation (for the reasons assigned above for
preferring negative expression become merely rhetorical
ill face of exact and realized knowledge), the material
difference tends to vanish, not merely because negation
has become positive, but because the judgment which
was originally positive has been invested with definite
powers of exclusion.

5. But the formal difference between affirmation and
negation remains, and has consequences as to which I
cannot wholly follow Mr. Bradley. The mere formal Ne-
gation, which represents nothing but my personal failure
to find a certain attribute in a certain object, tempts us
sometimes to say, " This is not visibly impossible, and
therefore it is really possible," and sometimes to say,
■' This is not visibly possible, and therefore it is really
impossible." Mr. Bradley treats these two temptations in
the same way.i I agree with his treatment of the former,
but differ from him as regards the latter.

From the " privative judgment," " So far as I know,
the nature of things does not make x impossible," we
ought not to conclude directly that " In the nature of
things X is possible." Before passing to such a con-

' " Principles of Logic," pp. 198 and 515.


Alleged Subjectivity of Negation. 245

elusion, we ought to show that in the nature of things, as
I think of it for this purpose, there is a basis for the real
conditions, which, if realized, would bring x with them.

In short, to pronounce a thing possible requires a
positive affirmation ; an affirmation that of the conditions
which would bring that thing to pass, some, or some
element, or some yet remoter antecedent, conditions are
real. On the ground of sheer and mere ignorance whether
the thing in question has or has not any basis of hope in
reality, we cannot properly make the material statement
that reality to some extent at least favours it. It is not
enough that reality as we know it should be impartial.
Impartiality in such a case is nothing, and so the nega-
tion carries it, not because privation amounts to exclu-
sion, but because nothing can come of nothing, and so
there is nothing to exclude. We may say in such a case,
" I cannot show it to be impossible ; " but we must not
say, " It is therefore possible." I believe that these
remarks reproduce the essence of Mr. Bradley's conten-
tion, which appears to me to be right, and to dispose of
a very dangerous fallacy. You cannot get something
out of nothing, or knowledge out of ignorance.

But the other case does not seem to me quite parallel.
We have just been comparing Privation with Affirmation.
We are now to compare Privation with Exclusion. Here
we find in common at least the external form of, igno-
rance and failure. However demonstrable an exclusion
may be, yet the ultimate " not " can never be directly de-


246 Knowledge and Reality.

duced from its positive ground. I imagine that this must
have been the meaning of the old saying, that you cannot
prove a negative ; for, a negative premise once granted,
nothing is easier than to prove a negative conclusion.

Thus, when Mr. Bradley lays it down^ that "A
privative judgment can by no handling become an ex-
clusion," I am obliged to rejoin that, though out of a pure
negation (" privation ") you cannot get a positive, yet
except by the instrumentality of a pure negation you
cannot ultimately get an exclusion. In favour of the
most positive rejection that can be pronounced, you can
have in form no warrant but the privative judgment,
which per se, as we saw, amounts to nothing.

The material difference between privation and exclu-
sion, between " I do not know that A is," and " I know
that A is not," is easier to recognize than to explain ;
and I somewhat grudge Mr. Bradley the wealth of
spatial metaphors he expends on it. In a bare privative
judgment, such as has no meaning and cannot affirm a
possibility nor ground an e:iclusion, " the subject is con-
fined to something without the sphere of the predicate.''
To say of ultimate reality " it is without the rejection of
X " is to say of it something which has no meaning, unless,
so to speak, the place left empty by this mere privation is
occupied by a positive attribute. " In the content of the
subject there may be an empty space where the quality
should be," or, again, there may be no such space. I do

' " Principles of Logic,'' p. 515.


Alleged Subjectivity of Negation. 247

not know what this space in a content means. And
though I wish not to be captious, I must advert to Mr.
Bradley's instance (page 112). " In a privative judgment
the predicate red would be denied of the subject simply
on the ground that red was- not there. The subject
might be entirely colourless and dark." But if red were
excluded by green, that would be opposition. Surely
this is a slip. If the subject can be dark (colourless in
that sense), it has surface capable of colour, and the
exclusion of red is exclusion by opposition. /

I suppose Mr. Bradley's meaning comes to this, that
Exclusion rests on opposition. In that case, the space
which the excluded attribute would fill, i.e. its special
relation to the "content, is filled by a different and posi-
tive attribute. Or the space may be empty, i.e. we may
know that the content must have some attribute in the
genus of the doubtful attribute, but we do not know
what. Or there may be no space, i.e. we may know of
no conditions operative on the subject which would
generate any such attributes as that supposed to be in
question.

But the metaphor of a space and what fills it makes
the matter far too easy. The question is really about
just the point which is here slurred. What attributes
are opposed .? What are the limits and shape of the
" space," and how do we know that it would not hold
both the attributes, or which of them it would hold best }
" The dimensions of space are not four " excludes four.


248 Knowledge and Reality.

we may say, on the ground that they are only three ; but
this will hardly do, for in order to prove that they are
only three we must prove that they are not four. And
the only way of getting at this is to say that I do not see
how to construct the dimensions compatibly with their
being four. A number is needed, and I can make it no
number but three. " Not four " expresses my impotence
to make it four.

What I wish to point out is, in the first place, this
formal analogy between the privative and the exclusive
judgment. And the moral I wish to draw is, that here
invincible ignorance ought to go for something, that
where the more we try the less we find a positive result
we should cease to pronounce the matter inquired into
possible or even not impossible, and should at length
be permitted to shift the negative from the position
which it holds in, " I do not say it is so," to that
which it holds in, " I say it is not so." We use in this
sense, " I do not think," " I do not believe," etc. Mr.
Bradley will say, " If you have a positive ground of
exclusion, show it, and make your privative judgment
into one of exclusion ; if not it cannot exclude." But
this seems to me to be veiy hard, because, as the author
points out,-^ we may have a possibility alleged in a region
where our knowledge supplies us, and where the alle-
gation furnishes, no condition or attribute of any sort
bearing on the suggested possibility. And in such a case

' " Principles of Logic," p. 199.


Alleged Subjectivity of Negation. 249

it will be, ex hypothesi, impossible to discover a positive
ground against the suggested fact or possibility. An alle-
gation can only be disproved out of itself; if it alleges
nothing positive, you can find no positive ground against
it. You cannot disprove that of which no proof can be
offered. Then we should only have to be wild and
fantastic enough, and we could at once demand a sus-
pension of judgment. This is no visionary danger. It
is the essential vice of popular superstitions. " This is
my view, and if you are really impartial, you will at least
suspend judgment." I reply, "No. Suspension of
judgment is for a conflict of proofs, not for their absence
on both sides. Nothing can come of nothing, and in
the absence of proof the attitude of judgment is not
suspension but rejection." Of course there is a general
ethical obligation to be open to all proof when alleged ;
and a presumption that proof can or will be had is itself
a degree of proof. My object is merely to effect a
slight rapprochement, an admission of at least generic
identity, for the privative and the exclusive judgment, to
insist on the fact that the ultimate transition from posi-
tive to negative form is always privative ; and therefore
to claim more exclusive force for the mere privative, and
to concede less finality to the exclusive judgment, than
popular usage permits in either case. The true logical
denial, common to both, is, " I see no reason to think,"
which is as strong a negation as knowledge can furnish.
" I see every reason to think — not" has only a rhetorical


250 Knowledge and Reality.

advantage over the former. Both involve a reference to
all the knowledge we can command ; neither is able to
indicate what that may amount to. Thus we should not
regard " I cannot see how two straight lines can enclose
a space " as absolutely different in kind from " I can find
no case in which an unknown language in an unknown
alphabet has been successfully interpreted."

It may be said that the two set of cases which I
have treated as opposite are really on all-fours with
each other. Mr. Bradley has regarded them as being
so. Considering Exclusion as depending on a positive
quality, he treats the inference from Privation to Exclu-
sion, which I wish in some degree to justify, as identical
in principle with the inference from Privation to real
possibility or affirmation, in favour of which I have, as
explained above, nothing to say. Of course, indeed, by
treating impossibility as a positive quality, and the
failure to find it as a Privation, and by regarding real
possibility as the exclusion of exclusion, i.e. as something
negative, we might verbally reverse the above reasoning,
and treat the assertion of impossibility as affirmation
(this Mr. Bradley does ^), and that of real possibility as
exclusion. I have tried to point out that there is a giiu
between the two which cannot be crossed in this way.
If you formulate real possibility as the exclusion of
exclusion, you reduce it from positive knowledge to the

' By saying that "We do not know that S — P is impossible," is or
rests on a privative judgment. " Principles of Logic," p. 188.


Alleged Subjectivity of Negation. 251

necessity of ignorance. If you state it as a positive
condition or attribute, you leap the gulf from ignorance
to knowledge, and make a statement to which the form
of exclusion could never have committed you. In
inferring from true privation to true exclusion you keep
within the form of ignorance, however much you may
weight it with the matter of knowledge.

We do not seem yet to have grasped the material
difference which undoubtedly exists between " Priva-
tion " and " Exclusion." Can our apprehension of a
definite contradiction by which the quality x " repels ''
or "rejects " the quality jf be brought under the head of
ignorance .' If we judge by ordinary usage, it would
be idle to attempt this. The impotence of inevitable
■necessity does not seem to us to be the same as the
impotence of mere seeking without finding. And yet
the inevitable necessity of a contradiction manifests itself
to us as seeking a way of conciliation, and finding
none. Many such contradictions have not been final ;
I do not say that none are, though I incline to think
that in their present form none are. The matter comes
to this : in the judgment of exclusion the negative
embodies a definite distinction warranted and supported
by a classification which must be modified, or perhaps
annihilated, if the distinction is denied. In the judgment
of privation we are in a chaotic unsystematized region ;
the negation is such that it may be reversed without
further modifications of our system of reality. Both


252 Knowledge and Reality.

fall under the common expression, " Conceiving the
matter completely, I cannot conceive it so ; " but the
absolute completeness of conception is different in each,
though in both it is all that we can make it. Does
straight exclude curved ? It is of no avail to say that
straight occupies the place which curved would occupy,
and therefore repels it. This is only a metaphor express-
ing a matter of fact. That which decides is geometrical
classification, and according to the answer it gives we
either can or cannot see how a straight line can be a
curve.

6. I explained above '^ the view which I take of the
principle of Excluded Middle. I have no strong objec-
tion to the expression in which Mr. Bradley follows both
Lotze and Sigwart, when he says that Excluded Middle
is one case of Disjunction. I quote the whole passage
from page 412, partly because of its merits of expres-
sion. " Excluded Middle is one case of Disjunction ; it
cannot be considered as co-extensive with it. Its real
and contradictory alternative rests on the existence of
contrary opposites. The existence of exclusion without
reference to their number is the ground of disjunction ;
and the special case of assertion and denial is developed
from that basis in the way in which contradiction is
developed from exclusion. Common disparate^ disjunc-

' P. 236.

' Mr. Bradley uses " disparate'' as equivalent to " incompatible," or
" contrary,'' and without reference to the meaning " incomparable."


Alleged Subjectivity of Negation. 253

tion is the base, and the dual alternative of b and x\ot-b
rests entirely upon this." ^

I have remarked above, and shall return to, the
small store which the author seems to set by a general
principle. In one sense a general principle rests, no
doubt, on the facts from which we happen to abstract it.
But in laying down a general principle, we do not
consider that we are simply dealing with one among
the facts, though it may and will take the same shape as
cases on which it throws light. This occurs, for instance,
with statements of proportion compared with their appli-
cation in particular cases, and perhaps with the general
explanation of proportion as such compared with state-
ments of proportion. And in the same way Excluded
Middle appears to me to be tlie case, not a case, of
Disjunction. It is not merely that we have two alterna-
tives in the one case and several in the other. It is that
the skeleton disjunction A is either B or not B lays'
down the condition to which predications must conform
in order to be truly alternative. I will not lay stress on
the alleged " reduction " of disjunction to hypothetical
judgments, which Mr. Bradley does not admit. But I
think he would agree that the hypotheticals, though not
in his view sufficing to constitute disjunction, yet repre-
sent elements without which there can be no disjunction.
Now, these elements are a knowledge of the positive

' Cf. " Principles of Logic,'' p. 129. "Disjunction " does not rest on
" Excluded Middle."


2 54 Knowledge and Reality.

ground and consequence of the rejection of a certain
predicate. That "common disparate disjunction is the
base " is true in the sense that the whole matter rests on
the existence of quahties from the presence and absence
of which conclusions can be drawn about the absence
and presence of others. If you have qualities which you
know to be thus related, you have a Disjunction, and the
thing is done. But it is not true in the sense that to
find a number of predicates, each of which claims to be
the predicate, or rather a predicate, in a certain judg-
ment, is enough to make a disjunction. You must
arrive at a certain stage of precise knowledge ; you
must be able to affirm, on grounds which seem to
you valid, that not only the assertion but also the
rejection of any one predicate has consequences as
regard the other or others. The number of alternatives
does not affect this requirement. Out of three alter-
natives, A, B, C, to reject C will not establish either of
the other two ; but it will affect each of them by making
it one out of two and not one out of three. Whereas if
you do not know that the exclusion of C reduces the
field to A and B, you have not got a disjunction at all.
It may be said, as Sigwart has said,^ that when we
know that " If B is not, A is," we already know that
" either B is or A is." This is not true ; no provision is
hereby made for the cases " If B is — " and " if A is — ; "
it is therefore possible that the two, A and B, may be

' " Logik," vol. i. p. 257.


Alleged Subjectivity of Negation. 255

compatible. But waiving this point as trivial, I say that
the fact, if true, makes no difference, for I am not insisting
that the hypothetical is prior to the disjunctive (though it
is prior to the disjunction of A and B simply), but laying
stress on the element of knowledge which is brought to
light as essential to the disjunction ; the knowledge, in
Sigwart's words, " of a Negation as ground of an affir-
mation." This is the material fact in the structure of
our world which makes Disjunction possible, and which
is formally expressed in bare negation and nowhere
else. For " disparate" disjunction conceals this feature
of its positive predicates, which do not contain it in our
rudimentary knowledge of them or exhibit it in their
form, but are endowed with it by our defining thought
in virtue of precise systematic relations. The skeleton
form " either B or not-B " exhibits in its abstract
nakedness this relation of mere exclusion, and thus
forces us to recognize an essential aspect of knowledge.
The Law of Excluded Middle drags to light and holds
up to us in the abstract a principle which, though in
various degrees unrecognized, is at the root of all dis-
crimination, and therefore of all intelligent apprehension.
7. In Mr. Bradley's discussions of the disjunctive
judgment there is much which surprises me. It is only
too probable that I have not succeeded in grasping
his meaning. I think it worth while in the interests of
clearness to put forward my principal difficulties at the
risk of exhibiting a want of comprehension.


256 Knowledge atid Reality.

I have alluded above ^ to Mr. Bradley's analysis of
the categorical element contained in Disjunction. I
only recur to the point in order to express a doubt as
to the exact feature which he takes to be superadded by
the Hypotheticals. I quote from page 124, " Being sure
of our basis, the quality x, upon this universal we erect
hypothesis. We know that b and c are disparate. We
know that A is particularized within b and c, and
therefore as one of b and c. It cannot be both, and it
must be some one. So much is the fact. To complete
the disjunction we add the supposal, " If it is not one, it
must be the other ; if A is not b, it must be c ; and it
must be b, if it is not d' This supposal completes the
" Either— or."

I cannot understand what the supposal adds to what
is taken as fact. I even doubted at first whether the
selection of the supposal with negative antecedent was
or was not a mere slip. That its converse is repeated
as a separate supposal is explained by Mr. Bradley's
view of this conversion as a genuine inference.^ How-
ever this may be, the case " If A is b it is not c " is not
given as a supposal, and as it, A fortiori, cannot be de-
rived from the case which is given, I conclude, though
doubtfully, that it is held to be included in the basis of
fact. But what a narrow line between fact and supposal !
It is fact that A being b excludes c, but supposal that
A being not b accepts c.

' P- 27. "^ "Principles of Logic," p. 392.


Alleged Subjectivity of Negation. 257

I do not rely on the above argument. Mr. Bradley-
may have meant in this place, for the sake of brevity, to
let each hypothetical stand for its converse also, and
may have written down a convertend and converse
instead of two complementary supposals by a slip which
is only too easy with symbolic letters.

But I should have thought that the fact obviously
included the assertion of both, or, in Mr. Bradley's way
of speaking, of all four supposals. We are taken to
know categorically that " A cannot be both B and C,"
i.e. that its being either excludes its being the other, and
"that it must be some one," i.e. that its not being the
one ensures its being the other. What can be gained by
repeating these determinations in a hypothetical form ;
and more especially, if we hold to the obvious interpre-
tation of the passage, what distinction can be drawn
between them according to which " A cannot be both "
(i.e. if it is B it is not C) is fact, and A must be one
{i.e. if it is not B it is C) rests on supposal .'' One might say
that the " ifs " put more clearly the experiment which
must be made in inference ; and perhaps it is more
(though not much more) than a grammatical variation
of phrase. But they only state something of which we
must have been satisfied before we had a right to judge
" Not both but one."

I go on to speak of the Inference involved in Disjunc-
tive Judgment. As I understand Mr. Bradley, there are
three ways in which we may regard Disjunctive Inference.

s


258 Knowledge and Reality.

a. We may think of it ^ as syllogistic, reducing " A
is I) or c '' to " A not-c is d " (which, however, does not
tell us anything of A which Is c), and arguing " A is A
not-c, therefore A is B." But this process, as Mr.
Bradley says, and I agree, tells us nothing of the point
of main interest, which is how we get the explicit state-
ment of alternatives. The inference as here described
is a subsumption under a major premise, which is treated
as given, and is not accounted for.

/3. " Before " the syllogistic argument " in time, and
before it in idea, comes the actual process, and we must
see what this is." This, the actual process, starts, as I
gather from a remark on page 385, with "an explicit
exhaustion of the possibilities of A," though I do not
find this laid down in the account of it. We also know,
to begin with, that A is nothing which excludes a, b, and
c. We then learn successively that A is not b, and that
it is not c, and conclude successively that it falls within
c d, and that it is d. This conclusion is not proved
from the major, " What is not b ox c must be </." On the
contrary, the process which establishes the conclusion
also establishes the major.

I suppose that the process so described is hardly
a definite inference till we come to the last step. You
have three judgments expressing possibilities for A ;
you deny one, and the other two are left standing, still
as possibilities. We seem to have done nothing at all

' " Principles of Logic," p. 384.


Alleged Subjectivity of Negation. 259

to them, and yet I admit that, as pointed out above,
there has been a modification of their relation to
knowledge, and therefore an inference. The chance
of each possibility is now half, whereas before it was
one-third. The inference consists in giving out these
two cases for the whole content of the judgment,
instead of the former three, and the process is like that
of perception or rational analysis by which we remove
the irrelevant matter in a scientific observation, and set
down what remains as the truth.

The last step, however, deserves the special attention
which the author bespeaks for it. By abolition of the
last possibility but one, the survivor changes from
possibility into fact. Mr. Bradley sees in this an
illustration of a principle to which he recurs more than
once, "the principle that a sole possibility is actual fact."
But even this principle is not the premise, but is known
as the result of the argument.

What I wish to point out in this representation of
the disjunctive process, and also in the conception
(page 385) of inference from the mere survival of an idea,
without asking whether all possible ideas have been
suggested, is the stress laid on the fact of survival
without reference to its grounds. An idea is not
accepted as fact because it survives ; it survives because
it is accepted as fact. And why.? Why, for some
material ground which favours it and disfavours other
ideas. So with the "sole possibility." If there is


26o Knowledge and Reality.

ground to pronounce it fact now, after the rejection of
the opposing possibilities, there was ground before, but
for the opposing possibilities. Before, the opposing
possibilities were able to use the evidence which they
shared with it, and thus of course neutralized part of the
evidence for it. But now they are abolished, it, as
sharing in the characteristic which made the whole
disjunction certain, is now certain on the ground of that
characteristic, which could not help it against the others
while they existed.

Thus I confess that I cannot see my way to the
principle that a sole possibility ^ is fact ; except in the
sense that a truly sole possibility must have had such
a fight for its place, that it is pretty certain to have
made good its claim to be judged a fact. If Mr. Bradley
meant that out of a^iy given set of suggestions the
survivor must be taken as fact, I should be in despair
But as long as the sole possibility is something which it
is not certain that we shall ever light upon, I do not so
much mind. And I seem to trace the view which I
prefer in the distinction between two interpretations

' Cf. "Principles of Logic," p. 451. I am almost driven to suppose
that I have failed to understand the nature of this principle. I do not seem
to myself to be aware of its operation. It seems to me quite possible to
doubt all suggestions on a given matter, and I see no reason for accepting
any that is not positively established. If such non-acceptance is treated as
a judgment, and thus as the sole possibihty in question, the principle is
reduced to the formal necessity that consciousness, in relation to any matter
which draws attention, should pronounce a verdict guided by its entire
apprehension of the then real world. But this is no special principle of
inference.


Alleged Subjectivity of Negation. 261

of: "I must because I can not otherwise" — viz. "I must
not otherwise because I do thus, and I know that I do
thus because I cannot do otherwise," and, "I must
do this because I do not perceive that I do aught else."
As we saw above, it comes to this ; you cannot exclude
on the ground of mere privation ; you must not say,
there is no other alternative, simply because you have
not found one. You may exclude on the ground of a
motived privation ; that is, when you can say, " I have
before me a positive quality involved in a positive
systematic construction, which is essential to the subject
A ; it admits of such and such alternatives, but, so far as
I can see (for here comes in the inevitable element of
privation), any other would upset and contradict it."

It seems to me that Mr. Bradley's genuine disjunction
and his principle of the " sole possibility " are so con-
structed as to favour mere privation. He describes the
principle as dealing solely with the form ; he makes
the survivine idea fact because it survives. I would
almost venture to suggest that this is as bad as, indeed
is a case of, the superstition which refers every conclusion
to a major premise. Mr. Bradley himself, following, I
presume, in the track of Hegel,^ has drawn attention to
the error involved in extracting the form of an inference,
and placing, it- as content of a major premise, under
which is subsumed the whole content of the inference ;
the employment of the form as content of a premise

• Hegel, "Wiss. der Logik," ii. p. 151.


262 Knowledge and Reality.

being only possible by help of a further inferential form,
active in the argument so constructed, which might
equally claim in its turn to be exhibited as major
premise, and so on to infinity. Are we not falling into
this error when we say that a surviving idea, one of
several alternatives, is fact because it survives ? Surely
it is fact not because it survives, but because of the
special reasons for which it survives. Why should we
not appeal to the fiindamentum divisionis, and endeavour
to show that all possible values of the predicate in
question are set down as alternatives .' Thus the last
alternative is fact, because it is the only form of the
predicate which is any longer in question, and the
reasons which exclude the other, combined with those
which make such a predicate necessary at all, are positive
proof of this last alternative as fact.

7. This brings us to the third point of view under
which Mr. Bradley regards disjunction. I presume that
the type of disjunctive inference which he mentions on
page 513, but there treats as spurious, is the type to
which the above observations would guide us.

If b, c, and d are the alternative predicates ascribed
to a subject A, then in disjunction of the type now in
question, the rejection of b and c is a result of the
operation of d. In other words, d is not accepted
because it survives, but it survives because, in process of
being accepted, it rejects the others. It certainly seems
to me that this argument, which, I admit to Mr. Bradley,


Alleged Subjectivity of Negation. 263

is not an argument from the mere fact of survival,
nevertheless is the only warrantable form of disjunction.
I do not understand why Mr. Bradley should say that
this is not genuine disjunction, because, among other
reasons, the rejected alternatives were never possible.
Of course, whatever is not actual, we may say in a purist
sense, was never possible. But these alternatives were
thought possible until the actuality of d was brought to
light, and I do not know in what other sense alternatives
could be called possible. If we start from the disjunc-
tion " a given " or " any given triangle is either isosceles,
equilateral, or scalene," we must assume a triangle as
subject if we mean to apply the disjunctive inference,
though it is true that, construed of triangle as such, the
universal judgment has no bias towards one kind more
than another. Thus, though we select a triangle as
subject, we are not to suppose ourselves to take it as
more than given qua triangle. We do iwt yet take it as
determinately known. That its place in the classifi-
cation may appear to us the moment it catches our eye,
is a fault of the simplicity of my illustration, and is not
inherent in the nature of the case. If we take a large
triangle with two sides all but equal, we shall then have
to measure before we know of what kind it is. If the
triangle which we take as subject is really scalene, then
the rejection of the alternatives isosceles and equilateral
will be owing to the fact of its being scalene, which we
have a right to imagine, for the sake of illustration, as


264 Knowledge and Reality.

dawning on us gradually by examination of the given
triangle in the light of those opposite ideal contents.
But before the determination is thus effected the three
alternatives are surely as possible as anything can be.
And a fourth alternative is excluded by the systematic
fundamentum divisionis based on the number of a
triangle's sides.

This disjunction, as I have said, Mr. Bradley con-
siders spurious, the essence of its argument not being
tollendo ponere. It seems to me that the mere argu-
ment tollendo ponere fs always a formal or second-class
argument, and that if disjunction cannot get to deeper,
more material ground, it is worth little. I mean that
in the wake of any first-class proof you can always have
others which simply take its form as justified, and argue
from it by subsumption. Certain matters known in
certain ways have a right to be arranged in a reciprocally
exclusive system. The disjunctive arguments are a
result of this reciprocal exclusiveness. But the real
basis of proof is not in the result, only in its justification.
" You tell me," a pupil may say to his teacher, " that
a triangle must be either isosceles, equilateral, or scalene,
and that of these strange names the two first are not
true of the figure before me ; therefore I conclude that
the last is so." This would be a genuine disjunctive
argument according to Mr. Bradley, as I understand
him ; but to my mind it would miss the whole material
guarantee of the conclusion, which is in the perception of


Alleged Subjectivity of Negation. 265

a principle, and of its application. The conclusion as
the supposed pupil draws it, is certain on the premises,
but is, I think, purely subsumptive. It does not establish
the major ; the major is taken or given, and if it were
not, the conclusion would not follow.

I do not say that even a motived disjunction is
final. But I thoroughly agree with Mr. Bradley's
remarks on pages 516, 517, to the effect that we should
at least face the possibility that some truths may be
final ; that, in other words, the impotence or ignorance
to which we saw above that all exclusion of predica-
tion was reducible, may in some cases be a final and
irremediable impotence, in which case we should no
longer have the right to call it ignorance, or to wish it
were remediable. The old crux at this point is to
distinguish such final necessity of knowledge from
genuine remediable ignorance, and out of this I must
confess I do not see my way. The position is this.
The existence of ignorance is not a matter of dispute ;
the existence of final necessity as regards any judgment
in human knowledge is a matter of dispute ; and we
have no means of distinguishing the one from the other.
For, since Lotze assented to what is in effect Mill's view,
that the test of conceivability is only of temporary
value, and operative solely as summing up our intellec-
tual state at any time, I think that the impossibility of
a practical distinction must be taken as admitted. I
therefore think that Mr. Bradley underrates the force of


266 Knowledge and Reality.

the theoretical argument for the possibility of the modi-
fication of all judgments and every judgment. The real
reason why such a possibility has no weight is answered
by himself in another place. It is that, as we have
seen/ nothing can come of nothing, and an unmotived
abstract possibility applying equally to all knowledge
applies effectively to none. To none, that is, while it
is held as knowledge, for then its .systematic form
shelters its material content under the Kgis of the whole,
and ensures that it shall reappear in whatever trans-
formations the whole may undergo. But as against
isolated, abstracted truths, truths of science taken as rules
of thumb and matters of fact, as against these dead twigs
of knowledge, the sceptical censure has full force. At
any moment they may be broken off, and all that
attaches to them may vanish with them. They are not
kept alive by a connection with the whole, and they
may never grow again. Or, to drop metaphor, I mean
that the moment we lose sight of processes and begin to
plume ourselves on net results, we fall into danger of
fixing what is unessential in a conception as its charac-
teristic, and therefore meeting with a horrible collision
when modifications come, and the essentials, though pre-
served, are transformed, while our unessentials, on which
we had set our hearts, turn out to have been a mere
confusion. Against the principle that the gravity of any
portion of matter is constant, and independent of the

' See p. 249 and " Principles of Logic," p. 520.


Alleged Subjectivity of Negation. 267


shape of objects, I have known it maintained, and by
high scientific authority, that this was not so, because
weight varies with distance from the earth's centre
(weight, at least, as tested by a spring balance), and also
that shape makes a difference to it, because it affects the
distance of part of the object from the earth's centre.
Now, I should have expected that in no scientific mind
would the principle that gravity is a constant property
of matter, for a moment appear to be controverted by
such facts as these. Gravity must be construed as
including variation of weight. But to minds which
thought they had been told that weight was constant, I
can imagine a certain surprise being caused by the
demonstration that it varied under varying conditions
without anything being added to or taken from the
matter weighed. I think, therefore, that in treating
any truth as necessary, we should be careful to indicate
rather that the body of htowledge must have a corre-
sponding function to that which the truth in question
represents, than that any abstract shape in which it may
be familiar to us, with its customary bearings and
applications, is beyond criticism. Such a caution
applies very strongly to the doctrine of cause and effect,
a doctrine which we cannot exactly do without, but
which has wrought much havoc by being taken for
infallible in any form of it that came to hand.

I must make a protest on another point of the dis-
cussion on pages 516, 517. I do not think it fair to say.


268 Knowledge and Reality.

" You can not assert that its opposite (the opposite of a
character believed to be true of a subject) is possible,
until you are able mentally to represent that opposite."
If " mentally represent ''=" imagine " {vorstellen) I object
to this. One may have very good grounds for thinking
there must be an opposite without being able to picture
it in the mind — nay, without being able to remove a
contradiction which forbids any consistent intellectual
grasp of the alleged opposite. I firmly believe that in the
Indian sword-trick there is an opposite, not only possible
but true, to the simple rendering invisible the boy who
is supposed to be killed. But under the conditions of
the incident as told to me, i.e. as taking place in a paved
courtyard with spectators all round, or on a ship's deck
with a similar audience, I am totally barred by con-
tradictions from imagining any such opposite.

I do not know whether Mr. Bradley had in his mind
some remarks of Lotze ^ in the logic. In my judgment
the passage to which I allude is too favourable to the
view which Mr. Bradley adopts. But it is noticeable
that Lotze finds himself compelled to modify his mean-
ing so as to admit suggestions which we can conceive as
possible objects of perception ; i.e. the nature of which
seems to us consistent with their being imaginable, if, so
to speak, we could get at them to imagine them. He
instances invisibly small atoms. Thus, if we are to
lay stress on mental representation, we must limit the

' "Logik," sect. 277.


Alleged Subjectivity of Negation. 269

requirement of it to the degree and mode in which the
nature of the case may make it possible. Can we
mentally represent the soul ?

But there is great weight to my mind in Mill's con-
tention that the attempt to imagine (or better, I should
say, to conceive) is only a test of the then state of our
knowledge (a view which Lotze appears to accept), and
that we should not go to such a psychological test, but
to the actual evidence, or, as I should say, to our system
of knowledge itself, if we wish to know whether an
opposite to a given predicate is possible.


270 Knowledge and Reality.


CHAPTER VI.

SUBSUMPTION AND THE ANALYSIS OF INFERENCE.

I NOW. propose to offer some remarks upon Mr. Bradley's
treatment of Inference. I expressly disclaim the inten-
tion of giving an account of his views. I only mean to
mention what I disagree with, and as much more as is
necessary to make that intelligible. However, it is but
fair to say that I regard his main contention, consisting,
I take it, in his view of the place of subsumption in
inference, as made out ; that of all censures of the tra-
ditional syllogism with which I am acquainted, his alone
shows an apprehension of the characters which form
its strength, and which any new view must preserve ;
and that my own criticism only aims at helping to
analyze and marshal the abundant material which he
furnishes.

It will conduce to clearness if I state at once the
general purpose of the following remarks. It is to
vindicate the old maxim to which I have alluded before,
that only he has knowledge who can give the reason
for what he affirms. I cannot, as at present advised,


Suhsumption and the Analysis of Inference. 271


attach any importance to your telling me that you
have made an intellectual experiment, and you find
you cannot help believing this or that. I am no better
off even if you give me your data, for I do not know-
how you may have used them. What I want to be told
is the ground on which you have gone ; the elements in
the content before your mind and the modus operandi of
your mind upon them, which together have caused your
intellect to determine that it must think thus and cannot
think otherwise. I want, in short, to distinguish true
reasoning from calculation (which of course I accept as
a form of reasoning) from conjecture and from the
operation of instinct ; even from acquired instinct, such
as the skill of a pianist or of a good shot. In the past,
we have generally relied on Subsumption as the guardian
of this frontier. If we are to be deprived of Subsump-
tion, as I am convinced that we must be, we should be
doubly careful with our new account of Inference.

I begin, then, by asking, " What is subsumption } "
It was perhaps unfortunate for the future of Logic that
Aristotle saw, so clearly as he did, the dependence of
what has since been called extension on connections
of content. Fascinated by the details of the quantity of
judgments, but regarding quantity as only an aspect of
necessity, he never dreamed that his successors would
represent quantity as the essence of argument, nor that
he himself was favouring such a conception by his long
and careful analysis of the subsumptive syllogism. It


2 72 Knowledge arid Reality.

was because he was so thoroughly aware that argument
had more in it than subsumption under a rule, that he
never spoke so narrowly as to rouse the challenge,
" Has argument no more in it than the relation of all
to some or to one ? " On the other hand, I should
imagine it to be doubtful (I do not speak as an expert
in Aristotelian logic) whether he himself clearly dis-
tinguished the perception of necessary connection /w;«
its consequence in universality, though he explicitly dis-
tinguished these two sides in scientific predication. It is
doubtful, I should think, if he ever asked himself whether
subsumptive reasoning was always involved in neces-
sary demonstration. Some passages in the Analytics
seem to show that he had fully and fairly made this
separation, but I cannot think that it was always present
to him in his logical writings.

In face, however, of the recent growth of Formal
Logic, issuing in the Quantification of the Predicate and
in the Equational view of reasoning, the above question
could not but be asked, and Mr. Bradley is not the first
to ask it. But he is, so far as I am aware, the first to
meet it with a reasonable answer, and to point out at
once the strength and the weakness of subsumption.

The essence of subsumption is that it only works

\J within the category of subject and attribute. It is,

therefore, in a special sense an argument from what is

given. Not merely that, Hke all arguments, it needs

premises, but more than this ; for in subsumption the


Sulsumption and the Analysis of Inference. 273

subject and predicate of the conclusion need have no
scientific or systematic relation with each other, or with
the unity which brings them together. The nature of
a concrete subject is beyond our powers of construction ;
we cannot see why a certain priest should have had a
neighbouring nobleman for his first penitent/ nor why
that nobleman should have been a murderer. In each
case, the presence of the two attributes in the same
subject is simply given, and we have to take it as it is
given.

I do not mean that subsumption consists in inclusion
within a class. Subsumption, like other kinds of argu-
ment, deals primarily with connections of attributes.
But the connection it deals with is not rational. It
depends on the given nature of a more or less concrete
subject, in which attributes are conjoined, and from
their conjunction in which we argue to their conjunction
with each other. I had better at once clear away an
obvious difficulty in this assertion. All triangles have
their three angles = two right angles, ABC is a triangle ;
Therefore, etc. Is not this a subsumption, and yet a
rational, nay, a demonstrable, connection of content .'
The answer is that where you have a necessary con-

" I cannot resist telling from memory a story which may be found some-
where in Thackeray, and which excellently illustrates the compulsory but
accidental power of subsumption. The abbe ; "Ah, ladies ! what stories an
old priest could tell. Do you know my first penitent was a murderer." The
principal nobleman of the neighbourhood enters the room. "Ah, Monsieur
I'abbe ! Ladies, I was the abbe's first penitent, and I promise you my con-
fession astonished him." The conclusion may be imagined.

T


274 Knoivledge and Reality.

nection of attributes, you can a fo7'tiori\^z.'v& a subsump-
tion, but that the subsumption as such neither requires
nor incorporates in itself, as ground of inference, such a
connection of attributes. If the attributes are together
as differences in a set of subjects taken as identical,
that is enough to justify subsumption, and it represents
nothing more. This is not to say that the arguments
which we practically use in the form " All, — " " There-
fore, this, — " are merely subsumptive in their nature ;
no doubt in many of them the subsumptive form is an
inadequate rendering of what we mean.

But within the category of subject and attribute the
traditional syllogism may be said to represent the true
course of thought. The major premise really contributes
to the argument ; it lays down a rule with a mark, and
whatever has the mark is inferred to come under the
rule.

2. This being the essence of subsumption, is sub-
sumption, as thus defined, necessary to all argument?
Up to this point I have been, I believe, in substantial
agreement with Mr. Bradley. I now begin, though but
slightly in the first instance, to diverge from his view.
Under the present head I admit his main contention,
but subjoin two trivial reservations, and anticipate
another more serious one.

I admit that in inferences of Mr. Bradley's favourite
type, drawn frequently from series in space or time, it
is non-natural to construct a major premise, and put


Subsumption and the Analysis of Inference. 275

it at the head of the argument. Instances are : " A is
to the right of B, B is to the right of C, therefore A
is to the right of C." "A is prior to B [in time], B to
C, therefore A to C." For the first of these the author
constructs, as a reductio ad absurdum of the subsumptive
theory, the portentous major premise, " A body is to
the right of that, which that, which it is to the right of,
is to the right of"-^ It is true, as contended by the
author here, that we do not, in such an argument, employ
any such premise ; it is also true, as contended by him
later,^ that if we did construct such a premise, and wrote
it as a major, we should be doing no good, because we
should have to repeat in the minor all that such a major
contains ; ^ and the minor would suffice by itself to carry
the conclusion. We should have to repeat in the minor
that A is to the right of B, which is to the right of C,
and this is really the process which proves the major
premise. Of course you cannot say as a syllogism, " B
is to the right of C, A to the right of B .•. A to the right
of C." This omits in the major the relation of A to B,
and we get four terms.

The doctrine which Mr. Bradley founds on his re-
jection of the syllogism is briefly and roughly this : ^
Every inference is a process of construction, followed
by a result in the shape of a perception. Logical
demonstration is the union of a construction and an

' " Principles of Logic," p. 227. '' p. 475.

' Cf. Hegel, " Wiss. der Logik," ii. p. 151.
* Cf. " Principles of Logic," p. 235.


2/6 Knowledge and Reality.

intuition, or perception. More generally^ inference
is an ideal experiment upon something which is given
followed by an ascription of the result of this process to
the original datum. And in this experiment construc-
tion may have its place taken by other operations of
the nature of analysis.^ But as Synthesis (construction)
and analysis are ultimately (and rightly) pronounced
to be identical,* the substitution does not gravely affect
the theory.

The only general or " formal " laws which control
the process of construction are laid down at a point where
the author is still allowing it to be assumed that every
inference has at least three terms. This view is modified
at a later stage of the work to admit of inference whose
centre is not explicit, but subsequently again remodified
in the direction of showing that, implicit or explicit, a
centre can be found in every inference. Therefore I
take it that the laws of construction laid down in con-
sidering three-term inferences hold good for all inference
as such. And these laws are : (a) Conditions as to the
genus or category within which the terms employed in
inference must be related, for the construction must
have unity, and to secure this must be made about an
identical point ; and (/3) this postulate itself, that the two
premises must contain an identical point, with its con-
sequence that one premise at least must be universal.
All this seems to me true and clear.

' p- 396- ' " p- 41^. ' p. 433-


Sttbsumption and the Analysis of Inference. 277


I spoke, however, of two trifling reservations. They
are these : There are two kindred ways in which sub-
sumption still haunts us outside the category of subject
and attribute.^

In the first place, the process of interpretation,
whether applied to the symbols of language, or to other
perceptions — e.g. to actual figures in space like the
diagrams of Euclid — is one of subsumption. In looking
at the figure of the first proposition of Euclid, I have
to recognize two circles and a triangle, and to equip
these particular figures in their present position with
the complex of attributes which I have in my mind as
permanent premises about circles and triangles. At
every moment in the course of an intellectual experi-
ment we are subsuming passive or irrelevant details ^
under the thought which is active and essential. And
thus, not only is subsumption the instrument of con-
struction at every point, but the main inference itself,
being separable into an active principle and a passive
detail, assumes the aspect of a subsumptive relation in
the moment in which the mind perceives it. If the
principle will carry one passive matter it will carry
another ; even if its application is unique, we per-

' I am forced to neglect many of Mr. Bradley's most interesting
subtleties, if I would not comment on him in a book longer than his own.
Ultimately, he suggests, it would not be impossible to bring all inference
within the category of subject and attribute. Everything which is in any
way conjoined can be taken as related within some subject.

' " Principles of Logic," p. 473.


2/8 Knowledge and Reality.

force conceive of its being so as per accidens ; and the
potential universality of every principle strikes us as
soon as we detect that there is a principle before us.

And the second reservation follows from this.
Every inference which has once been made by experi-
ment may be made again by subsumption. Though
the major premise mentioned above ^ sounds ridiculous,
yet it is not impossible to employ it ; and in working
by rule of thumb, i.e. under directions which have no
ground for us but authority, we always employ such
a major. " Multiply the second and third together, and
divide by the first." I proceed to do so ; and vay
inference that the result is the answer rests on my
knowledge that I have conformed to a rule which I do
not understand. At the very least, in a case like that of
p. 275, we know that we may substitute any names of
points in space for the letters which are employed in
this instance. And if we apply a principle, not because
we see it to be true in the case before us, but as a rule
which covers every case that has certain marks, then we
are subsuming. I am inclined to think that much
common inference is really of this kind, and might be
called " second-class inference ; " even reaching a stage
of degradation in which we know little more than that
we have heard sounds which we are accustomed to hear,
and in which we let pass a suggested inference because
we are accustomed to let it pass. I therefore think that
' See p. 275.


Sub sumption and the Analysis of Inference. 279

in appealing to practice on the use of major premises
Mr. Bradley invokes not only a good, but also a bad
logical habit. The absence of a major premise often
means, not that we employ construction, but that we
infer without consideration, i.e. by subsumption under
a form of series without criticism of its significance.
We subsume under a principle of which we fancy our-
selves to be reminded, but which we do not call to mind.
I may indicate as a case of spurious subsumption or
secondary inference, the appearance made by scientific
truth in a law-court, where it counts as a mere matter
of fact, and has to be taken on the evidence of witnesses.
Consequently any applications of such truth made b}^
judge and jury, are subsumptive of the matter which
has interest for them under certain marks supplied by
authority in rules furnished ab extra. Science taken on
authority ceases to be science.

The more serious reservation which I have to antici-
pate here, and which I shall recur to, is that indicated
by Mr. Bradley himself on page 479, and based on the
other side of the fact which lay at the root of the two
former reservations. As every inference contains irrele-
vant matter, so it contains an active principle. It is
possible, as Mr. Bradley points out in the place to which
I allude, to extract this principle and state it explicitly.
It does not then become a major premise, but, neverthe-
less, it serves to distinguish what is relevant from what
is irrelevant in the argument, and to exhibit the system-


28o Knowledge and Reality.

atic ground that has compelled our assent. So far as I
follow Mr. Bradley, I cannot agree with him that in
logic the exhibition of the principle on which an argu-
ment rests can be a mere counsel of perfection to be
disregarded at pleasure. When an argument is laid
before us of which the principle is not thus exhibited,
we are simply presented with an enigma. We are told,
" Here are the data ; here is my answer : Nexus or
Ground I have none to show you." The Construction ?
Does not that give the nexus ? On this head I shall
have more to say. No doubt what Mr. Bradley calls
the construction ought to give the nexus ; but if it is a
process apart from the perception or intuition, I do not
see how it can do so, or how it can be more than a
purely accidental aid, by way of suggestion, to the
attainment of the ultimate intuition or perception.
What we want, it seems to me, is an adequate and
articulated statement of the Intuition itself

In answer to the questions, then, " Is Subsumption
the essence of all argument .' and, further, is it indispen-
sable to all argument .? " I should first thoroughly agree
with Mr. Bradley that subsumption is not the essence of
all argument ; both because subsumption cannot be
employed outside the category of subject and attribute,
and because in the syllogism itself the function which
subsumes does not derive its own warrant from sub-
sumption. If this were not so, we should fall into a
progress to infinity, for the principle of any given


Stibsumption and the Analysis of Inference. 281

syllogism would have to be taken out and stated as
the major premise of a prior syllogism, in which the
whole content of the given argument would appear as
minor premise and conclusion.^ The active principle of
a syllogism is simply an apprehension by the intellect
of a particular systematic connection, that of subject
and attribute.

But, secondly, I should point out that subsumption,
though not the essence of argument, is essentially con-
nected with argument, and is constantly emerging.
The process of interpretation, subsidiaiy to all inference
and all construction, is subsumptive. Any argument
whatever may be taken as a " second-class " argument
in a subsumptive sense. As it may then be said to drop
into the category of subject and attribute, this does not
conflict with the above restriction of subsumptive infer-
ence to that category. These second-class subsumptive
arguments are far more common than we are apt to
suppose, comprising all that we think or calculate under
direction, and because of authority ; and much that we
infer owing to habit.

And finally, though not a major premise, yet an
explicit exhibition of ground and principle is indis-

' We may take the common argument, "Every man is mortal ; Socrates
is a man, therefore Socrates is mortal." If we wish to justify the form or
principle of this inference by subsumption, we must appeal to some such
principle as " any rule which has a mark is true of what has the mark,"
and proceed, " ' Every man is mortal ' is a rule which has a mark,"
"Therefore," etc. ; and then we liave to find a warrant for this sub-
sumption.


282 Knowledge and Reality.

pensable to every inference which claims to be called
rational. It may be that such an analysis does not
change the intellectual function, but only gives it
self-consciousness. I am contending, however, for no
ultimate or elaborate analysis, but merely for such
a statement as will tell us beyond question what the
course of the inference before us really is. Inference
so nearly unconscious as to be without assignable
ground, cannot possibly be considered qua inference in
logic, simply because we cannot get at it or say what
it is. In such a case the application of analysis really
changes the inference altogether, because it alters the
ground presented to the intellect. I do not deny that
we may comment on " unconscious inference " in Logic
or in Psychology ; but if the ground of argument is not
merely dim and unnamed, but wholly undistinguishable,
then I think the inferential character has really van-
ished, we have left the sphere of thought, and arrived at
that of habit or instinct. " Unconscious Inference," if
not a contradiction in terms, must mean inference the
ground of which we cannot readily name. The charac-
teristics of this growingly irrational habit are not to be
transferred to the statement in black and white of the
course of intellectual apprehension. By so doing we
omit, instead of dragging to light, the essential element
(always dimly present) of ground or reason, and give
the lie to the actual fact of our own intellectual pro-
cedure. In contending for an explicit statement of


Subswnption and the Analysis of Inference. 283

ground as essential to inference, I am thus only sub-
mitting to a necessity of scientific treatment. I know
very well that the ground or process is often too dim to
be put down in black and white ; but this does not
give the right to represent an inference in black and
white without a ground' at all. Say, if you like, that
many inferences cannot be represented on paper ; I will
agree to this. But do not represent an inference on
paper, and in doing so, omit, because you cannot repre-
sent it, the element which constitutes its essence as
inference. The right course is plain. In logic we must
treat of typical inferences. We must explain and
describe as best we can, how, by the shading off of
thought into feeling, many inferences cannot be brought
under these types without giving their details a degree
of definition which in actual use they do not possess.
We may speak of an "implicit centre" if we bear in
mind that what is implied is somehow indicated to the
intellect in inferences, not merely detected subsequently
by the logician's microscope. We must not allow the
gradations of consciousness in inference to betray us
into erecting so general a type of argument that it
omits all the characters that distinguish thought from
feeling.'-

' Closely allied to the question of unconscious inference is that of the
connection between proof and discovery. I am quite unable to see how,
in essence, the two processes can be separable. Unproved discovery is
discovery of what ? Not of a fact or truth, for ex hypothesi it is not known
to be fact or truth. It is plain that the gradations are merely from sugges-


284 Knowledge and Reality.

3. Before leaving this question of the necessity of
subsumption in inference, I will refer again very briefly
to Aristotle. I trust that I am not one of those whose
interest in the views of an ancient author centres on
denying the originality of a modern one. I say ex-
pressly that if we needed, as I think we did, the modern
writer to show us what there is in Aristotle, then, though
Aristotle might claim priority, our debt to the modern
is not diminished thereby.

It may be — I can hardly form an opinion — that
Aristotle thought the subsumptive syllogism the uni-
versal type of argument. Subsumption, however, does
not express his view of the connection which is estab-
lished by, and which justifies, inference. As I have
pointed out above, his faith in the syllogism was due
rather to an unattainable ideal of the relation between
subject and attribute, than to the treatment of all argu-
ment as a mere combination of the given, by help of
marks. His opinion might be non-natural, or even
wrong if, as I think probable, he really contemplated
that the middle term or ground should always be such
as could be extracted and stated for purposes of reason-

tion and conjecture to reasonable hypothesis and then proof. And if dis-
covery is to be identified with suggestion or guessworlc, then discovery is
not infci-ciuc ; unless we regard (as we ought) the ground of suggestion or
guess as conferring a certain probability however slight. Then, as supported
by this ground, the discovery is inference, but is thus, obviously, also the
lowest grade of proof, and, apart from the element of proof in it, is not
discovery at all.


Substmiption and the Analysis of Inference. 285

ing as the condition of a rule. But as to the act of
Intuition or intellectual Perception which forms, as Mr.
Bradley rightly maintains, the essence of Inference, I do
not think that Aristotle is wanting in clearness ; nor do
I think that any one who had made the best use of the
Posterior Analytics ought to have had much to learn, in
this particular respect, from " Principles of Logic." And
I am inclined to insist on this point, because I think
that in one way Mr. Bradley has gone beyond what is
necessary ; I mean in the demand for a construction,
and in the use of the term "experiment."

Aristotle's view seems to me to be simple, and to
be sufficient. You obtain, he says in effect, scientific
knowledge, when you come to be aware that a certain
principle is present, and forms the connection of con-
tent which is before you. It does not matter, in his
eyes, how you come to be aware of such a principle.
It may be suggested to you by a comparison of
hundreds of instances ; or if you are lucky and wise, a
single instance may give you the required connection.
According to the familiar passage,^ which I paraphrase
freely, if you had the good luck to be standing on the
moon when the earth came between it and the sun, then,
supposing you had your wits about you, you could
hardly fail to learn the cause of the eclipse ; though,
strictly speaking, the knowledge would be got by you
out of your sight of the earth's disc, and your seeing the

' Anal. post. II., p. 90, u. 24. Compare I. p. 87, b. 39.


286 Knowledge and Reality.

disc would not be the same thing as your learning the
cause of the eclipse. And so in the earlier passage (see
note) Aristotle has said, using precisely the same illus-
tration, that, being on the moon, you would nevertheless
not see the cause, but would no doubt find it out if you
saw the eclipse often under such conditions. And when
you thus find out a cause, your act of sight is accom-
panied by a judgment (voay, I think, always means to
apprehend rationally, i.e. in my sense of the word, to
judge), that the connection is universal. It might be
thought that to insist thus on the judgment or intuition,
is to neglect a mark of inference on which Mr. Bradley
insists, " that an inference is viade, not merely given or
seen." I shall recur to this point when I attempt to
show that construction is not really an element in
inference.

I conclude these few words about Aristotle by
recalling the well-known definition of the syllogism as
" discourse in which certain things being given, some-
thing else different from them necessarily follows from
their existence." There is nothing here about sub-
sumption ; nothing that conflicts with Mr. Bradley's
account of inference in general or, at all events, of three-
term inference.

May we not suppose that Aristotle's chief demand
was that you should always say on what ground you
go, whether this was really a given rule, or a principle
perceived de novo in the act of inference ? I may sub-


Subsumption and the Analysis of Inference. 287

join that the apodeictic definition seemed to him the
equivalent of a syllogism, and of course in this there
could be no question of subsumption.

4. I now pass on to the positive part of Mr.
Bradley's account of Inference, which I have stated
in a few words on p. 276, and need not repeat in detail.
The criticism which I wish to urge amounts to this,
that " Construction," "Preparation," "Experiment," the
phrases by which Mr. Bradley indicates the first step in
inference, do not express an element or phase in the
inference as such, but only inchoate and imperfect stages
of the final intuition itself, usually encumbered with false
starts and attempts which have ultimately to be dis-
carded as irrelevant.^

I may state my view as follows. I understand that
as a step of Inference,^ Construction corresponds to
Experiment or Preparation,^ and all these processes are
resolvable into either Synthesis or Analysis or both.
Upon this previous step or stage Intuition or Perception
follows as a result. Now it appears to me that Synthesis
and Analysis are beyond a doubt characteristics of the
Intuitional judgment or perception itself. I do not
think that the chapter on the Final Essence of Reason-
ing which explains that synthesis and analysis are

• Cf. " Principles of Logic," p. 235. " In the first place a process,
and in the second place a result." I suppose the process is separate and
comes first in time, cf. p. 452- "The preparation which precedes the
final intuition."

2 See pp. 397, 398. " Of- P- 412-


288 Knowledge and Reality.

different sides of a single operation, and actually shows
conclusions got by their means, can leave any hesitation
on this point. But if so, what becomes of the distinction
between the preparatory process and the final Intuition ?
It seems to me that this distinction must be rejected, or
at least thoroughly modified, and that we are driven
back upon the Aristotelian view, that the perception of
necessity is the inference, and that you may get it as
you best can. "But," Mr. Bradley may rejoin, "the
process of getting at it, pbts the final perception, is the
Inference." I reply, " Not so, if you mean the historical
or actual process of getting at it. That is psychological
and accidental. My mistakes, the guesses I make and
reject, do not enter into the final inference. The
inference is the true or ideal process by which I get at
the intuition, and by zvhich I had a right to get at it.
This is relevant from beginning to end, and all its steps
are elements which are taken up into the final intuition.
If, as is possible, we have begun with a tentative con-
struction, we have in finally inferring to go back upon it
and reject much as irrelevant. And all that is relevant
has itself been made by the intuition in its progress''

I will try to illustrate my point by commenting on
Mr. Bradley's salient expressions for the prior stage of
inference, " Construction," " Experiment," " Preparation."
I think that the ordinary meaning of these words, more
especially of " Experiment," is misleading, and that Vlx.
Bradley may mislead even if not misled.


Subsiimption and the Analysis of Inference. 289

Construction is popularly, no doubt, distinguished
from proof, and experiment from observation ; as if con-
struction were separable from proof, and experiment
from observation. This impression, which is in strict-
ness wholly false, is confirmed by the existence of
tentative construction and random experiment. We
may make a mistake in a construction and have to go
back and begin over again. The first construction was
then tentative. We may combine certain elements
without a 7'easonable purpose (for even a child in playing
with gunpowder has some desire to see what will
happen, and so some purpose) ; if not, what is done
could not be called experiment, but would count as
mere accident. Such dealing with things might be
called comparatively random experiment. Absolutely
random experiment, like absolutely tentative construc-
tion, is a contradiction in terms ; we cannot experiment
without at least wanting to see what a and b will do if
put together, or construct without knowing what lines
we are to draw.

But the purpose of a construction or experiment
may be vague or erroneous compared with the true
purpose which emerges when we come to appeal to it in
our proof. Therefore construction and experiment
respectively have a fictitious existence apart from proof
and observation. We can imagine ourselves drawing
lines or combining elements for no definite purpose, but
merely to see what will happen, and we forget that no

u


290 Knowledge and Reality.

line or element is of use to an argument which does
not represent a step in the proof or a feature in the
observation required. Construction and experiment are
logically simultaneous with proof and observation, not
prior to them. The priority of constructions in Euclid
is of merely educational convenience, and would be quite
impossible if the proofs had not been made beforehand
by a mathematician who stands to the reader as teacher
to learner. We are directed to draw such and such a
line not in general to see what will happen, but because
we already know (or our teacher already knows) of a
matter in the proof which needs to be pictured in such
a way. You cannot begin your construction till you
know your line of proof It may be said, "The data
or premises of inference supply you with the rule for
putting them together ; that is at least the beginning of
your construction." I answer that if, as in the cases
given in many logic books, the proof is transparent from
the beginning of the whole process, then no doubt you
are safe in putting the data together as they are given,
and the doing so is the initial step of the intuition itself
But if there is a complicated matter to use, some of
which may be irrelevant, your constructions remain
tentative until you have hit off the construction that
brings you to a proof ; it is only this construction that
enters into the Intuition, while what you have drawn
tentatively does not enter into this construction.

The same is true of experiment. The only essential


Subsumption and the Analysis of Inference. 291

of experiment is definite observation ; i.e. observation
under thoroughly known conditions. The fact that we
interfere to produce the conditions of observation does
not in itself distinguish the perception so gained from
any other perception. . Chance may send me a fly on
the leaf of a Sundew, and may furnish me with neater
instances than I could have devised of typhoid fever
pursuing all the ins and outs of a certain milk supply.
One may even hear the exclamation, "There is a
beautiful experiment, and without the trouble of
making it."

The phrase "ideal experiment" appears to me to
have first struck Mr. Bradley as an explanation of the
peculiarity of "supposal," in the passage which deals
with the significance of the hypothetical judgment.-"^
And this is quite consistent with the part subse-
quently assigned to " ideal experiment " in inference,
for it is in the hypothetical judgment that inference
according to Mr. Bradley, first definitely emerges. I
wish to examine the idea conveyed by this comparison
of inference, or of a stage in inference, to experiment.
Supposal is experiment, as I understand, because, (i.) It
is an operation upon the real, (ii.) is not yet judgment,
but preparatory to judgment, (iii.) is voluntary, made
for a purpose.

I take it that these are the main grounds on which
Mr. Bradley subsequently designates the first process of

' " Principles of Logic," pp. 85-6.


292 Knowledge and Reality.

inference, or at times inference as such (for experiment
may be taken to include the perception subsequent on
it), as "ideal experiment."

In my opinion, "ideal experiment" is a contradiction
in terms ; and the difference which makes experiment
distinguishable from observation or judgment does not
exist if you transfer experiment to the medium of
thought ; being, in fact, merely the difference between
construction or operation in the medium of thought, and
construction or operation in the medium of the material
world. Experiment (i.) is no doubt popularly taken as
involving modification of reality. But in this sense it
means especially and distinctively modification of
material things by actual mechanical operation. When
this is excluded by the term " ideal " the differentia of
experiment is gone. It is quite true that we do find
experiment spoken of as a peculiar method of science,
because of the pre-eminent accuracy and plasticity of
the observations which it furnishes. But in this sense
it amounts to a species of observation only, and it
would be well perhaps if logical text-books made this
fact clearer.^ " Instance " is a term which renders the
essence of the matter, and omits the unessential dif-
ferences which we connect with " experiment " and
" observation." Ideal experiment is simply observation,
apprehension, intuition. The essence of the comparison

' Professor Jevons, quoting Herschel, "Principles of Science," p. 400,
is perfectly clear on this point.


Siibsumption and the Analysis of Inference. 293

between inference and experiment is gone when we add
" ideal " to the latter.

And (ii.) with the mechanical operation on material
things disappears the preparatory character. It is a
confusion to compare the initial effort of judgment, the
awakening synthetic intuition itself, with the mechanical
contrivance which in an experiment precedes the per-
ception of a result. For in experiment you have the
mechanical interference and the gradual genesis of the
synthetic perception as well. This intellectual prepara-
tion is as needful where we have arranged a contrivance
to facilitate it, as where we are said to rely on purely
ideal isolation. For all isolation, it cannot be too often
repeated, is ideal, and ideal only ; experiment simply
helps ideal isolation by the introduction of known in
place of unknown elements. We must not compare the
first step of inference with the mechanical preparations
that facilitate observation, for those mechanical prepara-
tions do not correspond to this first intellectual step,
but require it in addition and subsequently to them.
We may if we like compare the awakening and growing
perception which is inference, with the intellectual
apprehension of conditions which guides the perception
in an experiment ; but then we are simply comparing
inference with inference ; the term " ideal " ceases to
indicate a distinction between the two things compared ;
and the illustration which I understand to be implied
by comparing the first step in inference to experiment


294 Knowledge and Reality.

which is preparatory (while incipient judgment is not),
and which is not ideal (while incipient judgment is),
becomes an admitted confusion.

And (iii.) the differentia consisting in "special pur-
pose '' and voluntariness is owing to the same error. All
thought demands will and moral purpose, but is guided
in addition by rational or intellectual necessity. Moral
purpose cannot guide thought, and, if it attempts to do
so, becomes caprice. Thus, assuming the general will
and desire to attain truth, we are as a rule in thinking
not conscious of a specific moral initiative. We are
guided by necessity, and cannot think just as we please.
But as we descend into the province of mere fancy, or
mere rhetoric, special purpose, which is here caprice,
becomes somewhat emancipated from rational necessity,
and emerges as a guide of thought. We may choose
how we will illustrate a familiar doctrine or a favourite
idea. Such choice is pro tanto irrational ; it is only
possible by defect of rational necessity. Now, all
operation on the external world of course involves
choice, initiative. No doubt in arranging an experi-
ment we have postulates of knowledge to conform to,
but our particular acts are freely initiated by the will as
a means to the intellectual perception which we aim at.
It is this free initiation, which is in itself irrational and
of a nature opposed to that of intellectual insight, that
forms the ground of comparison between supposal and
experiment. Capricious supposal is possible, but is at


Suhsumption and the Analysis of Inference. 295

the opposite intellectual pole to complete or rational
thought. And yet it is the element of caprice in sup-
posal which alone enables it to be compared, as " think-
ing for a special purpose,'' with the arrangements of
experiment. It is obvious that we ought not to erect
such a character as this into the differentia of universal
judgments and of inference.

In short, if you take common experiment in the
sense of the definite perception which it renders possible,
then it is wholly ideal, is not preparatory to judgment,
and is not for any special purpose except to think as
intellectual necessity compels. If you take common
experiment to be operation on nature, then it is not ideal,
is preparatory and specially initiated, but in this sense
can have no parallel in the sphere of true thought and
only finds a counterpart in the irrational element of
caprice which prevails in fancy, rhetoric, or in exposition
de haiit en has} You cannot combine the predicates
preparatory and ideal. As you begin to suppose you
begin to judge, and in reaching your supposition you
reach the result pari passu.

Thus, as Construction in an Inference is merely an
accidental aid to proof, so ideal Experiment in Inference

^ The comparison of supposal with experiment lias more meaning tlian
the comparison of inference with experiment, because the arbitrary cha-
racter whicli is a point in tlie comparison has the result that you need not
believe your supposal to be true. As bearing upon the classification of
judgments the point is dealt with in chap. i. supra, where it is discussed
how far judgments imply the existence of their subjects.


296 Knowledge and Reality.


is merely a feature of synthetic intuition ; neither con-
struction nor ideal experiment are possible or significant
except as the initial stages of the systematic perception
or insight itself. It makes, therefore, to my mind, no
difference whether you construct or experiment actually
and materially or not. For, however much you may
construct or experiment materially, you must also
construct and experiment ideally as well. And there-
fore I differ from Mr. Bradley's view as expressed on
page 238, from which I quote as follows : — "A is ten miles
north of B, B is ten miles east of C, D is ten miles north
of C ; what is the relation of A to D .' If I draw the
figure on a piece of paper that relation is not inferred ;
but if I draw the lines in my head, in that case I reason.
In either case we employ demonstration, but only in the
latter do we demonstrate logically.'' In the same way,
on page 236 he contrasts ideal preparation with outward
preparation or experiment.

Surely this distinction is quite groundless. I may
make a futile construction in my head, or I may draw a
relevant one on paper. I may surely get an inference
even by " following " a printed figure which is furnished
to me. " Ah ! " it may be replied, " then you mean that
you reconstruct ideally on the pattern of the given
figure ; in that case you do construct in your head." Of
course I do ; and I therefore maintain that whether the
lines are drawn on paper for me or by me or not at all
makes no possible difference, nor is it even necessary


Subsiimption and the Analysis of Inference. 297

that I should get the required inference if I do put the
lines together in my sensuous imagination. To under-
stand their connection I must more or less represent
them, but I may quite well represent them without
understanding their connection. In both cases, it appears
to me, if there is demonstration of a connection, it is
logical demonstration, and if not, it is not logical. In
the one case there is an additional element, an external
aid to definite representation, which in the other case we
dispense with. But in both cases the inference consists
in the intuition which sees how the lines must go (the
mere drawing them results from this and does not give
it), and therefore how A must be related to D.

A confusion, as I think it, is possible at this point ;
and I mention it because it illustrates the distinction
upon which I desire to insist. I also incline to suspect
that it has affected Mr. Bradley's view. His distinction
might be interpreted thus : " Draw the figure on paper,
and you can then get your result by simple measure-
ment, which is not inference. But draw it in the mind,
and measure in the mind, and such measurement is
inference, because it follows from properties imputed to
a content by an intellectual act." I admit the second
clause of this distinction ; I deny the first. You can
not obtain your conclusion, as the result of the data
before you, by actual drawing ///« simple measurement.
The simple measurement is valueless for inference
except as flowing from known properties of the figure.


298 Knowledge and Reality.

You can get no conclusion by simple measurement of
distances in a geometrical diagram. In elementary
cases this distinction is obscured. But it is always
there. Suppose a question arises as to a projected
building, " Will a wall A B seriously obstruct an ancient
light L } " It is an obvious experiment to put up a
hoarding where the projected wall would stand ; and
then it becomes possible to see directly what amount of
light would be cut off by the wall. Nevertheless, a
conclusion thus obtained cannot be justifiably attached
to the original datum, the projected wall A B, without
our bearing in mind that the wall has been represented
by a hoarding, and allowing for any error which might
conceivably arise from this substitution. And thus,
formally, the conclusion as applicable to the projected
wall is got by inference — by inference from the attri-
butes in virtue of which the hoarding does duty for the
wall. The actual experiment does not dispense with
the ideal nexus.

Now make the case stronger. We may say, "We
will build the wall A B, and let them come upon us
for damages if the light is enough obstructed to make
it worth their while." Here we are on the border line
between the sequence of inference and the sequence of
fact. As a matter of curiosity, we may still regard
what we are doing as an experiment for the sake of
inference, as an experiment to try whether the pro-
jected wall A B will interfere seriously with the light


Subsmnption and the Analysis of Inference. 299

L. But also, at the same time, we are acting so as to
initiate a sequence of fact ; for the wall we are going
to build will subject us to legal liability for any obstruc-
tion which it may cause, whether it ccri-esponds to the
originally projected wall A B or not. Thus we have
here, in one and the same case, the illustration of
inference which gives a result about the datum, and
also of direct perception which gives a result only about
the new state of things which our act brings to pass.
From the ideal point of view of our curiosity, if we
take the built wall a /3 as typical of the original
designed wall A B, the perception or result, " a j3 is a
serious obstruction," may be attached as an inference
or conclusion to the original datum A B in the form,
" A B, our projected wall, was such as to be a serious
obstruction." But from the actual point of view of
our legal position, this original datum has become a
matter of indifference, and the actual resulting liability
depends on the wall which has been built, and not on
its correspondence with that which was projected.
Thus we have here a direct judgment founded on a
new state of the facts, and not applicable as a con-
clusion to any former datum or premise. The judg-
ment of degree of obstruction caused by the built
wall in this instance answers to the judgment which
would be obtained by measuring distances on a dia-
gram in Euclid. In both cases you gain a simple
fact, but you cannot refer it beyond the case in which


300 Knowledge and Reality.

you have obtained it. It is not a conclusion of infer-
ence except in the sense in which all measurenaent or
estimation is so.

Now, applying this distinction to Mr. Bradley's view
in the passage quoted above from page 238, I say that
if you build the wall, or draw the figure, and ascribe a
conclusion read off from them to the datum, by
correspondence with which the building or drawing is
the wall or the figure, then your conclusion is got at by a
complex synthetic judgment, merely aided by a visible
or tangible illustration. There is nothing in such a
case to contrast or to compare with supposal and
inference, for the virtue of the conclusion in it depends
on supposal and inference, and the process is ideal from
beginning to end. The operation on Nature which it
involves does not enter into its ideal character, which
subsists along with and in addition to that operation.
But if, after describing a certain datum, you proceed to
build rtwall or draw a group of lines, and then by simple
inspection or measurement establish relations observable
in reference to that wall or that group of lines — if this
is all, then the back of the inference is broken ; the
result of the process is a simple fact, but is not capable
of being ascribed to the original datum ; for the building
or drawing is itself taken as a fact and not as typical of
the datum.

Here, then, Mr. Bradley's distinction does apply.
Drawing lines on paper in this sense does exclude


Subsumpiion and the Analysis of hiference. 301

inference ; not because the lines are drawn on paper,
but because they are not used as an aid to supposal or
ideal connection. And it is therefore possible to make
a contrast or comparison, and say that inference consists
in, or at least requires, doing in the mind what in the
instance before us is done in brick or on paper. Only
this comparison is not the comparison which the tenour
of the passage and Mr. Bradley's habitual identification
of supposal and inference with ideal experiment, appear
to me to require. It is not a comparison between two
modes of obtaining a result about certain data, or a
result — as implying a starting-point and process — at all.
We must not say, " the figure." What we draw is a
figure. The relations which we may find in such a figure
are not predicable of the original data. One event, the
building or drawing, happens first ; another event, the
inspection or measurement, happens afterwards. The
second gives a result with reference to the first, but not
related to any attributes typified or embodied in the
first. When Mr. Bradley writes, " If I draw the figure
on a piece of paper, the relation is not inferred," I had
thought that he meant, " The relation is got, but not by
inference." But he ought to mean, and perhaps does
mean, that the relation, as a relation between the terms
set out in the data, is not got at all. But then what
becomes of the comparison between supposal or ideal
experiment, and experiment which is not ideal } The
fact is, that all experiment is ideal.


302 Knowledge and Reality.

Now the mere sequence of events, which is not
experiment and does not " demonstrate " anything about
anything in pai'ticular (for the supposed measurement
does not issue necessarily from any known attributes of
the figure), is the only term of comparison which has the
characteristics that Mr. Bradley's identification requires.
In the mere sequence of events you may make a thing,
and then look at it. Superficially, in rational construction
and experiment you seem to make a thing and then look
at it. And therefore Mr. Bradley transfers the relations
of the mere sequence of events to rational construction
and experiment. But I have tried to show, by looking
at the same set of occurrences both as an experiment
and as a mere sequence of events, that in true construc-
tion and experiment you do not make a thing and then
look at it ; but you look all through at your data, and
only in looking at them, help your mind's eye by any
device which will embody them visibly or tangibly.
Therefore the basis of identification between the actual
and the ideal process is wanting, and can only be supplied
by a confusion. We confuse the comparison between an
operation of thought and an operation on Nature with
the comparison between an operation of mere thought
and an operation of thought identically the same when
facilitated by suggestions drawn directly from perception,
it may be by help of operation on Nature. We thus
transfer to an activity of judgment characteristics which
can only belong to isolated and successive acts of will,


Subsimiption and the Analysis of Inference. 303

and so supposal is not illustrated by experiment, for in
experiment things are not combined as in supposal but
only to assist in supposing. Judgment is the essence of
both processes, and it is idle to explain a thing by itself
The comparison is fascinating because it seems to adduce
a simple, almost a spatial analogy, for an act of thought ;
but the simplicity of the analogy is really obtained by
confusing an act which does what supposal does, by
means of supposal, with an act which has indeed no
supposal in it, but then cannot obtain a result analogous
to that which supposal obtains. The former is, to recur
to our instance, the case in which we regard building our
wall as a somewhat hazardous experiment, which will
show us what kind and degree of obstruction makes one
liable in damages. The latter is illustrated by the fact
that the wall, when built, will have its legal conse-
quences, whether we are curious to know them or not,
and whether we consider it as proving something about
degrees of obstruction or not.

In short, the difference between logical demonstra-
tion and any demonstration which is not logical is not
the difference between showing in imagination or con-
ception and showing to perception, but between showing
a definite nexus and showing an isolated, i.e. indefinite
fact. Mr. Bradley opposes the use of " demonstrate " in
the anatomical lecture-room to the logical use. I regret
that I cannot speak with certainty of the technical usage
to which he appeals ; so that I can only say this. If the


304 Knowledge and Reality.


demonstrator says, " The nerve x, as you see, starts from
A, ramifies at B, and supplies C, and therefore is affected
by both D and F, and controls G," he is demonstrating
logicall}-, though every step may appeal to perception.
Demonstration, or showing, only ceases to be logical
when it ceases to aim, by whatever means, at evoking in
the intellect an ideal nexus of attributes.

I should think the demonstrator must often demon-
strate logically, though in difficult dissection it may no
doubt be a sufficient achievement to get a nerve or other
part clearly separated and hold it up to view. But in
virtue of the distinctness of the resulting perception and
the skill and knowledge which have gone to the sepa-
rating activit}', the resulting perception, even when this
is all, will generally have much of the significance of true
logical showing. It is understood that what you are
displaying is the true natural or normal structure of the
part, or else of course an abnormal growth, which is to
be noted and considered. Now, here you are at least
striving after a connection, an establishment of general
knowledge about structure as such. And you can be
right or wrong ; every physical severance that you
effect implies a judgment. And therefore what you
are attempting corresponds in its degree to the logical
demonstration which displays the true connection of
parts in a geometrical diagram ; and not to a mere
measurement which issues from no normal or typical
relation of the figure.


Subsumption and the Analysis of Inference. 305

Thus I cannot consent to treat Ideality as the differ-
entia which separates inference or any step in it from
other processes comparable with it.

The idea of such comparable processes is only obtained
by including inference and ideality in them ; and apart
from these characteristics the processes in question
(" construction," " experiment," " demonstration," as per-
formed by a " demonstrator ") are not comparable with
inference, and do not illustrate any of its properties. I
doubt, indeed, whether, in this sense, such processes
really exist, and I have attempted to explain how they
come to be spoken of as existing.

" Preparation " has something of the same ambiguity
which I noted in Construction and Experiment. Pre-
paration, which, if I may use the phrase, is truly pre-
paratory, takes place according to general rules not
determined at all closely by the nature of the particular
details which are to be shown. Thus I may be pretty
safe in grinding a piece of bone very thin and mounting
it in balsam before looking at it with the microscope.
Such preparation is a detached process previous to in-
spection or intuition, but is not a parallel to anything
that could enter into Inference, for the reason assigned
above, that in Inference the whole process is throughout
relevant to the particular result, and such preparation is
not. Or, if we like, we may call it relevant to the first
rough perception which tells me that this object must
at least be made transparent, and parallel to such an

X


306 Knowledge a7id Reality.


element of inference as the decision that a certain
problem must be dealt with mathematically. This is
a judgment and a beginning of inference, not a prior
and separable process ; it goes to determine the shape
of the ultimate conclusion.

Another kind of Preparation, indeed — say, displaying
a difficult fibre with the needle under the lens — is a good
parallel for what goes on in Inference ; for in this pro-
cess, as we saw to be the case with construction, the
arrangement of material and the discovery of that which
is made visible go hand in hand, and the former is
guided at every step by the progressive revelations of
the latter. If, indeed, the active interference stops before
all is seen, and gives place to mere inspection through
the lens, then the preparation \s pro tanto of the former
class, for it has then been merely tentative as regards
the final result of inspection. However, the needle may
at any moment have to be applied again, just as we
may at any moment have to go back on our construc-
tion. And the illustration I have used makeS the matter
especially clear, for in one important respect, the adjust-
ment of the high-power lens, which enables us to do
consciously and with extreme difficulty what common
seeing does easily and unconsciously — in this respect
intuition and perception are here accompanied to the
very end by the external facilitating activity of con-
struction, experiment, or preparation.

5. The unity which I thus claim for the inferential


Sttbsiimption and the Analysis of Inference, yyj

intuition leads me to differ from Mr. Bradley on a further
point. Mr. Bradley says that the number of terms in
inference is not limited to three, but that you may use
as many as you can ; that, in short, the limit is psycho-
logical, not logical. It is not easy to be sure what "one"
term is any more than to be sure what " one " idea is.
But I think that every step in the construction is a con-
clusion, and that for every conclusion, as for the final
perception, we think of some content having unity as the
ground.

Mr. Bradley's geographical instance above^ alluded to
A

is, no doubt, very neat from his point of view.

By apparently deferring any attempt to draw a conclu-
sion till C D is in position, the construction avoids the
rather awkward determination of the length of the dia-
gonal from A to C. But none the less the determinate
position of C is a conclusion, although, as we mean to
cancel the element which makes it hard to reduce to
figures, we take this conclusion in the form which keeps
separate the element to be cancelled and the element to
be retained. C is ten miles south, and then ten west of
A ; by taking D ten miles north of C, we destroy, for D,
the ten miles south of A, and the ten miles west remain.
This rather proves the unity of the whole process, and
the fact that every step in the construction, as it is finally

• p. 296.


3o8 Knowledge and Reality.

taken up into the proof, is dictated by the nature of the
final Inference, which the author, nevertheless, speaks of
as subsequent to the construction. The " three terms ''
of an inference are, in the last resort, simply the data,
their principle of unity, and the special application of
that principle which a given interest dictates. The
several data of Mr. Bradley's conundrums do not cor-
respond to the terms of an inference as such.

I draw in my own mind confirmation of the above
remarks from the excellent chapters of Mr. Bradley's
work ^ which deal with synthesis and analysis. Here, it
seems to me, we have the entire process of Inference
represented as one, and its elements, synthesis and
analysis, drop into their proper place as complemen-
tary aspects of the same operation. I am aware that
the analysis which appears as elimination in the final
intuition may not be one with the analysis which
accompanies or replaces synthesis in the middle opera-
tion, which is, as a rule, constructive. At the same time,
when we have learnt that analysis and synthesis are
always correlative to each other, and that they appear
both in the middle and in the final operation, and
when we have examined the schemes of synthesis and
analysis respectively, as given on page 433, it is hard to
resist the conclusion that the division into construction
and intuition, together with the importance attached to
such phrases as preparation and ideal experiment, might

> " Principles of Logic," book iii., part i., chaps, iv. and vi.


Stibstimption and the Analysis of Inference. 309

be got rid of, and an account of inference given which
would be clearer ab initio, if the author were to start
again from the point reached in these chapters.

The whole matter seems to me to hinge on what the
author calls (page 237) " the selective action." This, to
my great surprise, he there denies to be of the essence
of inference;^ and I judge from the context that he says
so because elimination may be dispensed with 'in the
final act of intuition. Surely this is no reason. Selec-
tion is not a question of quantity, but of intention ; and
if sometimes, in an extreme case, I choose to take my
whole construction as my conclusion, it is little better
than an equivocation to say that I do not select. The
essence of the matter is purpose in accepting and the
power to reject. And in this choice or " selective con-
nection," it seems to me that we have the ultimate nature
of inference and unity of synthesis and analysis. In
fact, if the final intuition need not be a selection, still the
construction or preparation must. " The dropping of
part " (of the sensuous mass), Mr. Bradley says on page
437, " is the forced selection of the part which remains."
Exactly ; and the selection of part is the enforced
dropping of the part which is left.

Synthesis and analysis seem to me to mean ulti-
mately that you select one thing because you want it,

' Indeed, I doubt if this statement is reconcilable with the context in
which (p. 330) I find the phrase " selective perception of one connection of
attributes throughout our whole subject-matter." I should naturally read
this latter passage as indicating an essential of inference.


3IO Knoivledge and Reality.


and reject another because you do not. The names are,
therefore, after all, names of formal aspects of almost
any operation which deals with things or thoughts. The
essence or root of the matter is in the particular reason
which makes the intellectual apprehension take this and
leave that. Such a reason can only be found, I imagine,
in the perception of a principle or nexus which combines
differences in an identity. Wherever we apprehend
such a principle in its differences as controlling and
dominating them, we have the esssentials of inference.
I iDean, for instance, when we see that under a given
formula and with certain values assigned to the terms
of the formula a curve must be drawn in a certain way.'^
6. Finally, it may be said, as I anticipated above,
that to reduce inference to a perception of principle

^ In the account of Synthesis and Analysis, as elsewhere, I find a certain
difficulty in Mr. Bradley's reliance on unexplained spatial metaphors.
Analysis is distinguished from Sjmthesis by " not travelling beyond the
area which is given it at the beginning." "Analysis is the internal syn-
thesis of a datum." "The whole precedes, and is followed by its
internal relations." I suppose the distinction is to be practically inter-
preted by the author's instances, in which analysis starts from a datum
represented by a single name, synthesis from two names. Then analysis is
to keep within the meaning of the word which indicates its datum, while
synthesis is to find a whole which the two or more data may be "within.''
But suppose the single datum offered to analysis has the character of a
whole in space, and our analysis deepens our conception of it, and reveals
new functions and powers in it, have we then gone " beyond its area " or
not ? In examining a crystal, or an embryo, or fi common plant-cell, we
should be apt to give ground for such a question. The point is, however,
of no practical importance, as ^Ir. Bradley agrees with me, that even if a
function may be analytic or synthetic par excellence, the two characters
imply each other.


Stibsumption _ and the Analysis of Inference. 311

contradicts an important attribute of inference on which
Mr. Bradley insists — that inference is made, not merely
seen ; that it is a process, is something which ive do to
the data. I admit the attribute, but venture to allege a
confusion in Mr. Bradley's account of it. " Made " may
mean " new-made," or simply " not given." I believe
that to require inference to be new-made is a confusion
of psychology with logic, such as is involved in making
familiarity the distinguishing mark of analytic judg-
ments and novelty of synthetic. In that case a judg-
ment by the act of being made must become analytic ;
and so an inference, if the same test were followed, by
the act of being made would cease to be an inference.
In other words, only discovery would be inference, and
proof would not. This, as I have shown above, is an
untenable distinction, and if carried out would extinguish
inference altogether. In our ordinary somewhat care-
less way of distinguishing we should have ill-supported
conjecture left as the only inference, and proof excluded.
It is mere carelessness to make inference co-extensive
with a fresh combination of data, and thereby to assign
a purely psychological differentia which no familiar
proof can possess. A proof which is thoroughly familiar,
and the whole course of which is transparently in the
mind, surely does not thereby cease to be an inference.
It is fnade in the sense of including a felt intellectual
act, an effort by which the unity of differences is
realized ; and I will not deny that in every proof— at


312 Knowledge and Reality.

least in every intricate proof — there may be psycholo-
gically a certain to and fro of the mind's eye within the
steady insight which tracks out the essential nexus.
But it is not essential to inference to be new-made, i.e.
to be discovery ; and it is my conviction that in so far
as it remains discovery, and does not attain to proof, in
so far as it falls short of the character which a familiar
Euclidean proof has for a geometrician, just so far it
fails to be inference at all.

Do I accuse Mr. Bradley of such a confusion as this }
I have no alternative but to express my suspicion that
he does make this confusion. I found the allegation
partly on the antecedence attributed to experiment,
construction, or preparation, as compared with the step
of intuition, partly on the extreme emphasis with which
the attribute of being made, not merely seen, is claimed
for inference. There are two things in question, as I
believe. One is the tentative synthesis or experiment,
which is open to error and irrelevancy, and represents
the first effort to realize and understand the combina-
tion of data which, wluji understood, will form the
premises of proof And there is the ultimate and
successful act itself, the true synthesis which is no doubt
built up by degrees, and usually with error and irrele-
vancy, but which cannot fairly have imputed to it, qua
proof, the errors which were made before we reached it,
as if these were a prior stage of itself When complete,
such an intellectual act is one ; it takes up into itself all


Siibsumption and the A nalysis of Inference. 313

relevant steps, which are simply rudimentary judgments,
early forms of the intuition itself, but it cannot have
imputed to it any tentative processes which do not
ultimately turn out to be relevant elements in the proof
The effort of tentative realization is not essential to
inference, though the effort of continuous realization is.
Thus, while I agree that inference is not merely seen, if
this involves passivity of the percipient (which relatively,
though not absolutely, it does), I do accept the chal-
lenge involved in the comparison, in so far that I would
much rather compare inference to a single act of con-
scious vision than to two separate acts, the one antece-
dent to the other, of which the first is voluntary, like an
operation on external nature, and only the second con-
trolled by natural necessity. If four roads meet, and we
know some marks which distinguish the right one, but
not yet seeing them are left to caprice to go first down
which we will, none of this arbitrary character can be
imputed to the final perception when we have got the
right road. The process of trying all the roads drops
out of the nexus altogether ; the inference does not
begin till we become aware of the marks on the right
road, unless we insist on the slight disjunctive inference,
which, for our present purpose, is no more than every
ascertained error furnishes, in proving that it at least is
not the truth. Going down the wrong roads is the
tentative experiment which is really free and prior ;
seeing the marks of the right one is the inferential


SH Knowledge and Reality.

judgment conditioned in fact by our having come
along the right road (a feHcitous experiment), but draw-
ing its evidence not from this chance, but from rational
necessity, and therefore not made except as being
thought.

Before I conclude these observations, it may be con-
venient that I should point out more definitely how I
regard the problem of stating inference in logical form,
if we are to abandon the major premise. We must then
demand, I think, either an explicit declaration of the
active principle which is present in the argument, as
suggested by Mr. Bradley, or at least a careful state-
ment of the construction employed, so as to exhibit the
actual argument which is in fact taken as carrying the
conclusion.

7. I have always understood the Syllogism, as con-
sidered in logical theory, to be an analysis of inference,
itself subsequent to the inference, and bound to exhibit
the actual nexus of reasoning which we are to take as
having been employed. This function was discharged
by the premises, whose form, together with the con-
ventional position of the middle term, displayed the
actual conclusion drawn as issuing from a certain
specified reason. But in Mr. Bradley's instances of proof,
I do not find the same analysis, or any substitute for it.
I take a case from page 246. " A is due north-west of
C because B is five miles south of A, and again, the
same distance west of C." This is more like a conundrum


Stibsumptioji and the Analysis of Inference. 315

than an inference. If an inference of any complexity
were stated thus, no one could be sure what the in-
ference really was. For here is the point : you may
make sure that the construction can produce the right
answer, and we may try it and find that it does. But,
for all that, such a statement does not tell us what
inference is actually used. It furnishes data, not pre-
mises. The statement of an example in Colenso's
arithmetic is not a statement of premises but of data.
Data are the materials of proof; premises are its
analysis. Here, for instance, by stating the number
five miles you lead one to consider whether it would be
different if the distance were ten miles. The real point
is that the north-west line makes half a right angle with
the meridian and also with the parallel of latitude, and
therefore is the diagonal of a square erected on either.
It is essential to point out that C A halves the angle
between the parallel and the meridian, and therefore
falls on the north-west line, if you are to explain how
" five miles " can have to do with making any line go
north-west. If in a more complex problem we did not
envisage the matter in some such general way, but were
guided, e.g. by the general look of some construction
that we might light upon, our conclusion would be, in
proportion as the ground was inexactly thought, more
of a guess and less of an inference. Any one who thinks
that a "construction" cannot deceive the judgment
should read De Morgan's " Budget of Paradoxes."


3i6 Knozvlcdgc and Reality.

More especially I wish to point out that many of Mr.
Bradley's inferences are taken from what I may describe
as the reading of a series, especially in the case of
inferences from position in space and priority in time.
So, too, he speaks of arithmetical calculation as "the
movement of an ideal experiment which gives a judgment
we had not got before." Now, the reading of a series is
a process that may be carried on at the most various
levels of reflection, and often drops without detection to
a scarcely conscious activity. In calculation itself how
much is done by " rule of thumb ; " from the schoolboy
who multiplies the second and third together and divides
by the first, but sometimes vitiates his inference by a
wrong arrangement of terms, to the computer who carries
out lengthy calculations, the bearing of which he does
not in the least understand ! But in stating the nature
of an inference, the precise degree in which we know the
nature of the series which we employ is, of course, essential
to the inference, for the nature of the series is the very
core of the inference itself I have not thought it worth
while to allege that the position of the observer must be
constant for " A to right of B, B to right of C," etc. But
if we were making such an inference in a series whose
nature was less familiar, we should have to begin by
carefully establishing the character of the series, as one
in which every term might safely be taken to indicate
an advance upon the last in a constant direction. We
should then probably read the series by rule of thumb,


Subsumption and tlie Analysis of Inference. 317

i.e. by accepting each conclusion as following from the
mere observance of the form of the series.

Perhaps it may not be time wasted to insist upon the
veiy different levels of inference which are compatible
with arguing from a series, by help of a somewhat
detailed example. I select for the purpose a process
of measurement, perfectly simple, but such as might
cost a moment's reflection to any one to whom it was
unfamiliar, viz. the process of reading a measurement
with a vernier. The vernier in the case . I propose to
consider is a movable rule nine inches long, and divided
into ten parts of -1% in. each. It is used by applying it
to a larger scale divided into inches. Suppose now that
you have measured an object with the larger scale, and
find it to be between one foot and thirteen inches
long, and you wish to measure the fraction of an inch,
by which it exceeds one foot, more accurately. To do
this you apply the zero point of the vernier to the point
on the larger scale between one foot and thirteen inches,
which the object reaches (the increasing numbers on the
vernier being in the same direction as those on the
larger scale), and then you look up the two scales for
the point at which a division-mark on one is opposite
a division-mark on the other. The number attached to
that division-mark on the vernier will be the number of
tenths of an inch by which the object which is being
measured exceeds one foot. If this excess, for instance,
is TO- in-) the vernier will have its mark 4 opposite to


3i8 Knowledge and Reality.

mark i6 on the larger scale, which is divided into inches.
The reason is that the vernier has each of its divisions
exactly yL in. shorter than a division of the inch-scale
(being -jSy- in. against I in.), and therefore any given
number of tenths of an moh, plus the same number of
divisions of the vernier, will make up a length of as
many inches. Thus, obviously four divisions of the
vernier (being ^V '"• each) pbts ^ in. = 4 in., or 4 in.
minus four divisions of the vernier = y^ in., which is
therefore the measurement of the interval between the
lower end (zero point) of the vernier and the next mark
below on the inch scale, i.e. of the excess length of the
object to be measured above that next mark below.

How far is it necessary to understand this simple
process in order to carry out a measurement by it.'' The
instance is of course purely illustrative, for as a matter
of fact, no doubt every one who has ever used a vernier
understands its principle. But theoretically, and to
illustrate what might happen with more intricate
processes, wc may fairly suppose a child or workman,
who has never seen the instrument before, to be merely
instructed, " Put the mark o of the smaller scale at the
end of the length to be measured ; look along the two
scales till you find marks on each in the same straight
line, and read off the number which belongs to that
mark on the smaller scale." We need not even suppose
that such an agent knows what the answer will indicate.
To measure by help of such an instruction as this


Subsumption and the Analysis of Inference. 319


is clearly a subsumptive act ; it is what I have called
above a second-class inference. We do not understand
the principle of the series which we employ, but we
conclude from a rule with a condition, that what has the
condition comes under the rule ; here, that the number
at the coincident marks is the number we are to record.
I may add, as an illustration of the hazard of this infer-
ence, that if the vernier is loose instead of sliding on the
larger scale, any one who knew nothing of it might apply
it upside down, i.e. with the zero in the right place, but
with the numbers running the wrong way ; and then it
would read the interval between the end of the object
and the next higher division on the inch scale. I do not
say that this error is practically possible, but it is an
illustration of the consequences which are quite con-
ceivable if we do not distinguish reading a series by
rule of thumb (secondary inference), from the inference
which can only be gained by a sound understanding of
the principle on which the series depends. One cannot
be said to use a primary or first-class argument in the
instance I gave, unless one has observed the relation of
one division of the vernier to one of the large scale, and
the consequent equality of any number of divisions of
vernier //z/j- the same number of tenths of an inch to the
same number of divisions of the larger scale. Unless
this principle is consciously active in our inference, and
is seen to be independent of the particular numbers
employed, but dependent on the ratio between the two


320 Knowledge and Reality.

scales, our reading, however warranted by custom, is
theoretically a hazardous conjecture. Our workman
may even have got hold of two scales which have not
the relation needed by his instructions, but some other;
but he will be none the wiser and will take his readings
quite contentedly.

This is the point of view the neglect of which I fear
if we come to state inferences by simply throwing down
the data and saying, " Put them together and you will
find such and such a conclusion to result." I am not
desiderating an antecedent criterion of the Validity of
Inference. Mr. Bradley urges as a cardinal point of his
view, that no such criterion is possible, and that in
attempting to furnish an exhaustive list of forms which
inference must take, traditional logic blunders as
hopelessly as the ethics which claims to guide moral
action. I fully agree with Mr. Bradley on both these
heads, and have always believed that Kant's proof of
the impossibility of a criterion of truth applies no less
to Inference. Nevertheless, I persist in contending that
we have no Inference which logic can consider, if our
statement exhibits no emphatic answer to the question
" Why .' " I know that inference has in fact many
degrees of consciousness, and I especially insist that all
judgment involves inference, and therefore am not at all
disposed to confine inference in fact to judgment which
issues from a distinct and separate reason. But in
taking instances of inference for logic it seems to me


Szibs7tinJ)tioti and the Analysis of Inference. 321

that we must make our reasons explicit, simply because
otherwise we do not know what inference in particular
we are talking about. The reason is the inference ;
and the premises if they arc to be analyses of Inference
must exhibit the reason. From such data as Mr.
Bradley gives we cannot tell whether the argument is
second-class and subsumptive, or first-class and con-
structive, or of a class in which nothing but subsumption
is possible.

Do I, then, deny logic the right to represent the
actual fact of inference, which, as I admit, sometimes
has a very confused and all but latent ground .<" Not at
all ; but I say that in speaking of such an inference, we
must, if we mean to know what it is, analyze it first,
though we may describe it as dim' or indistinct afterwards.
There is no appropriateness in trying to understand an
obscure mental process obscurely. If a friend says, in a
picture gallery, " That picture is a Veronese," of course,
apart from special knowledge, I have absolutely no clue
to the eround of inference. But if I want to make a
logical instance of it, I must not treat it as an inference
without a ground, but must cross-examine my friend,
and elicit what I can of the reasons for the assertion,
must assign them as the ground, but must add, "Of course
cross-examination has made them more distinct ; what
actually operated was perhaps little more than a feeling,
or at best a very indistinct apprehension, of these
peculiarities as characteristic of Paul Veronese."


Knowledge and Reality.


I believe that Mr. Bradley's observations on pages
479, 480, in which he admits that it is well to extract
the active principle of every inference, if only we do not
call it a major premise, place him in substantial agree-
ment with me on this point. But I cannot concede that
such a process is optional, as he seems to think. Only
in as far as there is an apprehended source of necessity
is there, to my mind, an inference at all ; and in as far as
we fail to represent this in black and white when we
state our premises, so far does the inferential character
of the inference escape our analysis.


( 323 )


CONCLUSION.

THE IMMEDIATE PREMISE.

I WILL end with a word on the foundations of knowledge
arising out of the instance of the vernier.

Too much, to my mind, has been said of late years
about the immediate necessity of the ultimate judgments
on which knowledge rests, and about the final depend-
ence of science on the trained perception of the indivi-
dual. I have expressed my dissent from this doctrine
near the beginning of these remarks, and wish to insist
upon it at their close. Trained perception is of course
essential to science. And, though loaded with inference,
yet such perception becomes so rapid and so sure, that
to insist upon its inferential character seems pedantic.
But there is much exaggeration and confusion upon this
subject.

The trained eye is more accurate than the untrained
eye ; but not to a degree which so much as tends to .
account for the value of scientific observation as com-
pared with ordinary looking. In very precise measure-
ment e.<r. with a micrometer, the coincidence of two


324 Knowledge and Reality.

visible marks is the ultimate fact of perception. No
doubt the trained observer will establish a coincidence
more exactly, or will estimate a small discrepancy far
more precisely, than most untrained observers can.
But this advantage is not the measure, is not in most
cases an appreciable part of the measure, of the greater
precision of his observation compared with that of the
layman, if the layman were left to describe his own
observation. If, on the contrary, the layman merely
looks where he is told, and notes the coincidence of marks
which a man of science tells him to note, and the
observation is recorded and interpreted by the latter,
then it is (barring a sheer blunder on the layman's
part, to which, as I have shown, he is very liable if left
to himself), in its main elements of significance, a
scientific observation ; although the trained eye has not
been employed. These elements consist in the know-
ledge to which the perception is relative. It is this that
confers on the observation not only its import but also
its precision.

As for the import, that is acknowledged, and I need
not enlarge on it. A measurement, ultimately the per-
ception that two marks coincide, is valuable of course
solely by what it proves.

But that the accuracy of the perception depends on
knowledge and on systematic relations is a less familiar
fact, and is worth insisting on, for it strikes at the root
of the belief in immediate knowledge. It is only for


The Immediate Pi'emise. 325


convenience, and not from necessity (though convenience
and necessity in these matters run into each other), that
the more delicate instruments are usually made so that
none but highly skilled observers can use them with
effect. Every additional facility is an additional com-
plication in the fabric of an instrument, and increases
both cost and the hazard of inaccuracy. Thus, as a
rule, very accurate instruments require highly skilled
observers. But the accuracy of a result does not arise
directly out of the observer's skill, but indirectly, because
a skilled observer is able to use a very accurate
instrument. The accuracy of the result, like its import,
really depends on knowledge, and, if an instrument is
used, on tlie knowledge embodied in the instrument. A
great observer no doubt has this knowledge as a rule
himself in its intellectual form, as well as embodied in his
instrument, and therefore can control his instruments
and allow for special or unexpected errors as no
common man could, and his perception is a first-class
inference. Whereas to an amateur or beginner the
perception is a second-class inference ; i.e. he obtains
it by subsumption under the rules given him by some
handbook, or possibly by the instrument maker, for the
use of his instrument. Thus the true man of science 1
has an advantage, only not chiefly from his trained eye, |
but from his systematic knowledge. It is this that
guarantees a perception, in itself often no harder than
to read the time on the great dial of the Victoria clock


326 Knowledge and Reality.

tower, to be a measurement of the extremest attainable
delicacy. We cannot get at the microscopic or
telescopic world with the naked hand or eye. The
perception " Such and such is the pattern on the
envelope of this Pleurosigma," comes to us mediated by
a most intricate system of embodied inference which
alone warrants our faith in the simple interpretation of
the image that has been so extraordinarily transformed.
It was only to be expected, that, as has happened of
late }'ears, doubt should be cast on some portion of
such a scheme of inference, and the laws of light
should be invoked to show that all had not been seen
which was believed to have been seen.

Or, to put the case otherwise, if we count the mere
sense perception as the immediate judgment, then all
that makes its accuracy may be treated as part of its
import. That these micrometer divisions just include
that fibre, we see ; that this fact measures the width
of the fibre we infer, from knowledge or from authority.
The mere immediate judgment, thus interpreted, would
approach, as we were more strict in excluding know-
ledge external to it, more nearly to the mute sensation,
and would lose all the determinants which make it a
foundation of science. All accurate perception is :
mediate in virtue of the knowledge which guarantees J
its accuracy; only the dim and indefinite feeling
approaches immediacy.

It has always appeared to me that the element of


The Immediate Premise. 327

knowledge incorporated in our instruments of measure- -
ment and observation has met with insufficient recogni-
tion from logical theory, and that this neglect has
avenged itself in the doctrine of immediate perception.
What right have I to take a variously coloured band
several inches in' apparent length as a representation of
the light admitted by a slit which I can hardly see ?
If we concede that in using the very best reasoning
machine, we must ourselves make the conclusion, i.e.
read it off as a conclusion — and this is Mr. Bradley's
opinion, in which I agree — then I think that a spectro-
scope, or a fine compound microscope with all sorts of
illuminating devices, or even a first-rate chronometer,
is perhaps as truly a reasoning machine as any logical
apparatus that has been devised. The operations of
such an instrument are less typical and general than
those of the reasoning or calculating engine, but they
are more original,, more plastic, more responsive to the
peculiarities of special material. The logical machine
can get a conclusion from any set of typical pre-
mises within the category of subject and attribute ;
but it cannot take a ray of unknown composition that
looks homogeneous, and lay out its components before
the eye, so that their respective places, to any one
furnished with a scheme of the spectrum, even indicate
their names. In this comparison I am glad to say that
I am far from depreciating the work of the late
Professor Jevons ; for if his name is peculiarly identified


o


28 Knowledge and Reality.


with his ingenious logical machine, it is no less true
that he has called special attention to the principles
by help of which our instruments furnish us with exact
measurements.! Thus when Wundt concludes his
treatment of physical measurements by observing that
in all of them the ultimate limit of precision is given
by the power of the eye, aided by optical devices, to
measure a spatial interval, he means much less than
he seems to mean. Under the head of "optical
devices '' we must include every process of inference
by which an accessible ocular perception can be taken
in lieu of an inaccessible one. Of course many
principles besides optical principles are concerned in
such substitutions. When we read the fraction of a
revolution from the graduated head of a micrometer
screw, and infer that the screw has advanced by that
fraction of the distance which a whole revolution would
advance it ; we are really, I should suppose, relying on
the uniformity with which, as we know by practice,
such screws are habitually cut. Theoretically, indeed,
this does not impugn Wundt's statement, which may be
taken as a truism. Of course all measurement must
involve sense-perception ; and of course where no
perception can be obtained, we can no longer substitute
the accessible observation for the inaccessible one. But
the implication which is introduced by speaking of the
optical contrivances as if they were mere accessories to

' "Principles of Science,'' p. 2S2, ft".


The Immediate Premise.


sight, is absolutely false. Science does not rest on •
abnormal acuteness of perception, but on inferences
drawn from perfectly normal perception. The power
of vision for science is not in the least proportioned to
its actual immediate penetration ; the structure of
inference into which it enters is the main thing, and
the acuteness of the observer's eye, though useful, is
a subordinate element.

So it is with our immediate perceptions in the
province of time and space. It is interesting to specu-
late about a natural small unit of time, such as the
pendulum swing of the leg, by which, it may be, we
habitually form for ourselves our lax personal ideas of
duration. But men have always, with a strangely
though justly reliant faith, adopted as the measure of
time such processes as they conjectured or inferred to
be uniform ; the changes which made the day, the
lunation, and the year ; the flow of sand or of water, or
the oscillation of a pendulum. ^Much might be said
about the early history of the time-perception ; animal
life is enough to show that many things which we now
do in obedience to the measure of time would be done
quite adequately without any such measure under the
mere stimulus of appropriate conditions. Seed-time and
harvest might be rightly employed, and the night be
used for sleep, and the day for labour, without raising
the question whether the recurrent intervals were of
uniform duration. But my present point is merely that


330 Knowledge and Reality.

neither now nor in primitive times do men expect per-
ception to estimate duration. The perception of dura-
tion is of interest for psychology, but has no place, and
never had one, in practice. All that perception does is
to compare the phases of the change which we wish to
measure, with the phases {not directly with the duration)
of the change which we select as a standard. The
^uniformity of our standard itself rests on inference, and
inference alone.^

" Ah, yes ! " I shall be told, " Time is a peculiar
case, because its parts are successive ; but what about
space ? Surely measurement of lengths in space is
carried out by comparison with a fixed and constant
standard, and without dependence upon postulates
drawn from science .'' " To illustrate the theoretical error
of such a view, I transcribe Mr. Lockyer's account of
the measurement of a base line for the triangulations of
the British Ordnance Survey. " In the first instance, a
base line was measured on one of the smoothest spots
that could be found. One of those chosen was on
the sandy shore on the east side of Lough Foyle, in
Ireland ; the length of this line was measured with most
consummate care by means of bars of metal, the length,
of which at a given temperature was exactly known,
and was, at the time of observation, corrected for expan-
sion or contraction due to variations of temperature.
The bars were not placed close together, and the

' Cf. Locke, "Essay," 2, 14, 16.


The Immediate Premise.


intervals between them were measured by means of
microscopes. The base line by these means was
measured to within a small fraction of an inch." The
corrections mentioned may be simple ; yet, as it is only
science that enabled them to be made, so it is only
science that guarantees their adequacy.

Thus I hold that the immediate or unproved premise
of proof is not merely unattainable in practice, but a
contradiction in theory. Knowledge is not like a house
built on a foundation which is previously laid, and is ■
able to remain after the house has fallen ; it is more like
a planetary system with no relation to anything outside
itself, and determined in the motion and position of every
element by the conjoint influence of the whole. I cannot
think that we have a right to neglect these truths because
they are so obvious, and were formulated more than two
thousand years ago. They may have been too tediously
reiterated without special constructive interpretation,
and the positive qualities given in normal human per-
ception may have been too much ignored. Thus we are
right to welcome Lotze's account of " first universals,"
by which we are shown how entirely knowledge is
dependent on what might be called the given generalities
of sense. I only contend that the moment we begin to
speak about precision we have quantity, when we have
quantity we have a unit, where we have a unit we have
a standard, and where we have a standard we become
dependent upon a system of knowledge which endows


332 Knowledge and Reality.

this standard with all that constitutes its precision. And
of course in higher forms of knowledge than quantity,
in causation, for instance, or in teleology, we find our
sense-perception still more obviously transfigured in
the making, by a significance beyond itself

We must not confuse psychological and logical -
necessity. It is true that every judgment is made
because we cannot help making it ; but this is not the
logical reason for making the judgment, only a psycho-
logical description of the effect which that reason
pro'duces. Therefore, to say that the ultimate basis of
knowledge is in the necessity which attends each indi-
vidual judgment, is to make a psychological fact into a
logical ground. The logical reason which compels us
in any judgment to judge so and not otherwise must
be not a general and formal, but a special and individual
necessity, relative to the individual judgment in question
and to no other, and can only be found in the systematic
relations of knowledge which at the moment form the
totality of the intellect's world. If I have read Mr.
Bradley right, he joins a thorough understanding of the
ideal of knowledge ■■■ to a peculiar impatience of some-
thing, I do not quite know what, in the ordinary doctrine
of relativity. I seem to remember a furious note" in


' A former work of Mr. Bradley's, " The Presuppositions of History,"
gives the best account known to me of the process by wliicli all the parts
of a whole can be criticised and adjusted on the basis of each other.

' " Ethical Studies," p. 6i.


Tlie Immediate Premise. 333

" Ethical Studies " which asks the common believer in
the Relativity of Knowledge, whether he had a father,
and how he reconciles his answer with his doctrine. I
never quite saw the point of the question, but have
always imagined that it must be in some distinction
between fact and inference. In spite of Mr. Bradley's
absolute judgment that all the past is for us an ideal
construction, I seem to myself to be haunted by a
similar distinction in " Principles of Logic ; " and I
simply cannot understand what it does there, or in any
European philosophy.


THE END.


pRii.TLD LY \^'ILLIA:a CLOWES A.\D SONS, Lir.in ilU, lonuuw and ueccles.


A LIST OF

KEG AN PAUL, TRENCH & CO.'S
PUBLICATIONS.


I J Paternoster Sqttare,

London,


A LIST OF

KEGAN PAUL, TRENCH & CO.'S
PUBLICATIONS.


CONTENTS.


PAGE

General Literature . . 2
Parchment Library . . 19
Pulpit Commentary . . 21
International Scientific
Series , . . .28


5I1LITARY Works. .
Poetry ....
Works of Fiction
Books for the Young


PAGE

• 31

• 32

• 39
. 40


GENERAL LITERATUREr

ADAMSON, H. T., 5.Z>.— The Truth as it is in Jesus. Crown

8vo, 8j. (>d.

The Three Sevens. Crown 8vo, $s. dd.

The Millennium ; or, The Mystery of God Finished. Crown
8vo, 6s.

A. K. H. B. — From a Quiet Place. A Volume of Sermons.

Crown Svo, 5^*
ALLEN, Rev. R., liLA. — Abraham : his Life, Times, and

Travels, 3800 years ago. With Map. Second Edition.

Post 8vo, 6s.

ALLLES, T. W., M.A.—Ver Crucem ad Lucem. The Result of a
Life. 2 vols. Demy Svo, 25J.

A Life's Decision. Crown Svo, ys. td.

AMOS, Professor Sheldon. — The History and Principles of the
Civil Law of Rome. An aid to the Study of Scientific and
Comparative Jurisprudence. Demy Svo. \6s.

ANDERDON, Rev. W. .ST.— Fasti Apostolici ; a Chronology of the
Years between the Ascension of our Lord and the Martyrdom
of SS. Peter and Paul. Second Edition. Enlarged. Square
Svo, 5j.
Evenings with the Saints. Crown Svo, 5^.


Kegan Paul, Trench & Co.'s Publications. 3

ANDERSON, Z>at;«V.— "Scenes" in the Commons. Crown Svo, 5^-.

ARMSTRONG, Richard A., 5.^.— Latter-Day Teachers. Six
Lectures. Small crown Svo, 2,s. 6d.

AUBERTIN, J. J.—K Flight to Mexico. With Seven full-page
Illustrations and a Kailway Map of Mexico. Crown Svo, 7* . bd.

BADGER, George Percy, D.C.L.—Kxv Knglish-Arabic Lexicon.
In which the equivalent for English Words and Idiomatic
Sentences are rendered into literary and colloquial Arabic.
Royal 4to, 8oj.

BAGEBOT, WaUer.—rhe English Constitution. New and
Revised Edition. Crown Svo, Js. 6d.

Lombard Street. A Description of the Money Market. Eighth
Edition. Crown Svo, 7^. 6d.

Essays on Parliamentary Reform. Crown Svo, 51.

Some Articles on the Depreciation of Silver, and Topics
connected ■with it. Demy Svo, 5^-.

BAGENAL, Philip H. — The American-Irish and their In-
fluence on Irish Politics. Crown Svo, ^s.

BAGOT, Alan, C.E. — Accidents in Mines: their Causes and

Prevention. Crown Svo, 6s.
The Principles of Colliery Ventilation. Second Edition,

gi'eatly enlarged. Crown Svo, 5^.
BAKER, Sir Sherston, Bart.—'Vci& Laws relating to Quarantine.

Crown Svo, I2J-. dd.
BALDWIN, Capt. J. /^— The Large and Small Game of

Bengal and the North- Western Provinces of India.

With 20 Illustrations. New and Cheaper Edition. Small 4to,

lOJ. dd.
BALLIN, Ada S. and F. L.—K Hebrew Grammar. With

Exercises selected from the Bible. Crown Svo, 7j. dd.

BARCLAY, £</^ar.— Mountain Life in Algeria. With numerous
Illustrations by Photogravure. Crown 4to, \ts.

BARLOW, James LL.—The Ultimatum of Pessimism. An

Ethical Study. Demy Svo, 6s.
BARNES, William.— Outlines of Redecraft (Logic). With

English Wording. Crown Svo, 3s.

BAUR, Ferdinand, Dr. P7t.—A. Philological Introduction to
Greek and Latin for Students. Translated and adapted
from the German, by C. Kegan Paul, M.A., and E. D.
Stone, M.A. Third Edition. Crown Svo, 6s.

BELLARS, Rev. W.—The Testimony of Conscience to the
Truth and Divine Origin of the Christian Revela-
tion. Burney Prize Essay. Small crown Svo, 3^. 6d.


4 A List of

BELLINGHAM, Henry, iJ/./".— Social Aspects of Catholicism
and Protestantism in their Civil Bearing upon
Nations. Translated and adapted from the French of M. le
Baron de Haulleville. With a preface by His Eminence
Cardinal Manning. Second and Cheaper Edition. Crown
8vo, 3J-. (sd.

BELLINGHAM, H. Belsches Gi-aham.—XSps and Downs of
Spanish Travel. Second Edition. Crown 8vo, 5^.

BENN, Alfred ff^.— The Greek Philosophers. 2 vols. Demy
Svo, z%s.

BENT, J. Theodore.— Genoa.: How the Republic Rose and Fell.
With 18 Illustrations. Demy Svo, iSj-.

BLACKLEY, Rev. W. S. — Essays on Pauperism. i5mo. Cloth,
\s. 6d. ; sewed, is.

BLECKLEY, Henry. — SocraXes and the Athenians: An
Apology. Crown Svo, 2s. 6d.

BLOOMFIELD, The Lady. — Reminiscences of Court and Dip-
lomatic Life. With 3 Portraits and 6 Illustrations. Sixth
Edition. 2 vols., Svo, cloth, 2Sj.

*,* New and Cheaper Edition. With Frontispiece. Crown Svo, 6j>

BLUNT, The Yen. Archdeacon. — The Divine Patriot, and other
Sermons. Preached in Scarborough and in Cannes. New
and Cheaper Edition. Crown Svo, 4?. td.

BLUNT, Wilfred i'.— The Future of Islam. Crown Svo, ds.

BOOLE, yJ/ary.— Symbolical Methods of Study. Crown Svo, 5r.

BOUVERIE-PUSEY, S. E. ^.—Permanence and Kvolution.
An Inquiry into the Supposed Mutability of Animal Types.
Crown Svo, 5^.

BOWEN, H. C., 71/.^.— Studies in English. For the use of Modepi,
Schools. Seventh Thousand. Small crown'Svo, is. dd,

English Graramar for Beginners. Fcap. Svo, is.

BRADLEY, F. H.—Tlie Principles of Logic. Demy Svo, i6s.

BRIDGETT, Rev. T. .£.— History of the Holy Eucharist in
Great Britain. 2 vols. Demy Svo, iSj.

BRODRICK, the Hon. G. C— Political Studies. Demy Svo, 14?.

BROOKE, Rev. S. ^.— Life and Letters of the Late Rev. F. "W.
Robertson, M.A. Edited by.

I. Uniform with Robertson's Sermons. 2 vols. With Steel
Portrait. 7^. dd.
II. Library Edition. With Portrait. Svo, 12s.
III. A Popular Edition. In i vol., Svo, 6^.


Kegait Paul, Trench &■ Co.'s Publications.


BROOKE, Rev. S. A.— Continued.

The Fight of Faith. Sermons preached on various occasions.
Fifth Edition. Crown 8vo, Ts. dd.

The Spirit of the Christian Life. New and Cheaper Edition.
Crown 8vo, 5^-.

Theology in the Knglish Poets.— Cowper, Coleridge, Words-
worth, and Burns. Fifth and Cheaper Edition. Post 8vo, Sj.

Christ in Modern Life. Sixteenth and Cheaper Edition.
Crown 8vo, 5^.

Sermons. First Series. Thirteenth and Cheaper Edition. Crown
8vo, 5j.

Sermons. Second Series. Sixth and Cheaper Edition. Crown
8vo, 5^.

BROWN, Rev. J. Baldwin, B.A.—Tiie Higher Life. Its Reality,
Experience, and Destiny. Sixth Edition. Crown 8vo, 5^.
Doctrine of Annihilation in the Light of the Gospel of
Love. Five Discourses. Fourth Edition. Crown 8vo, 2s. 6d.

The Christian Policy of Life. A Book for Young Men of
Business. Third Edition. Crown 8vo, y. 6d.

BROWN, S. Borton, B.A.—The Fire Baptism of all Flesh;
or. The Coming Spiritual Crisis of the Dispensation. Crown
8vo, 6s.

BROWN, Horatio F. — Life on the Lagoons. With two Illustrations
and Map. Crown 8vo, 6j.

BROWNBILL, >/5«.— Principles of English Canon Law.
Part I. General Introduction. Crown 8vo, 6j.

BROWNE, W. J?.— The Inspiration of the New Testament.
With a Preface by the Rev. J. P. Norkis, D.D. Fcap. 8vo, zs. (>d.

BURDETT, Henry C— Hints in Sickness— "Where to Go and
TSThat to Do. Crown 8vo, \s. 6d.

BURTON, Mrs. Richard.— The Inner Life of Syria, Palestine,
and the Holy Land. Cheaper Edition in one volume.
Large post 8vo. Ts. bd.

SUSBECQ, Ogier Ghiselin (fe.— His Life and Letters. By Charles
Thornton Forster, M.A., and F. H. Blackburne Daniell,
M.A. 2 vols. With Frontispieces. Demy 8vo, 243-.

CARPENTER, W. B., LL.D., M.D., i^.A.?., (rfc— The Principles
of Mental Physiology. With their Applications to the
Training and Discipline of the Mind, and the Study of its Morbid
Conditions. Illustrated. Sixth Edition. 8vo, 12s.

Catholic Dictionary. Containing some account of the Doctrine,
Discipline, Rites, Ceremonies, Councils, and Religious Orders of
the Catholic Church. By William E. Addis and Thomas
Arnold, M.A. Second Edition. Demy Svo, 2ij-,


6 A List of

CERVANTES.— ioViXnej to Parnassus. Spanish Text, with'.Trans-
lation into English Tercets, Preface, and Illustrative Notes, by
James Y. Gibson. Crown 8vo, 12s.

CHEYNE, Rev. T. /sT:— The Prophecies of Isaiah. Translated
with Critical Notes and Dissertations. 2 vols. Third Edition.
Demy 8vo, 25^.

CLAIRAUT.— 'Elements of Geometry. Translated by Dr.
Kaines. With 145 Figures. Crown Svo, 4J. 6d.

CLAYDEN, P. JF:— Kngland under Lord Beaconsfield. The
Political History of the Last Six Years, from the end of 1873 '<>
the beginning of 1880. Second Edition, with Index and con-
tinuation to March, 1880. Demy Svo, 16s.

Samuel Sharpe. Egyptologist and Translator of the Bible.
Crown 8vo, 6s.

CLIFFORD, ^amza/.— What Think Ye of the Christ ? Crown
Svo, ts.

CLODD, Edward, F.R.A.S.— The Childhood of the World : a
Simple Account of Man in Early Times. Seventh Edition.
Crown Svo, 3s.

A Special Edition for Schools, is.

The Childhood of Religions. Including a Simple Account of
the Birth and Growth of Myths and Legends. Eighth Thousand.
Crown Svo, ^s.

A Special Edition for Schools, is. 6d.

Jesus of Nazareth, With a brief sketch of Jewish History to the
Time of His Birth. Small crown Svo, 6s.

COGHLAN, J. Cole, D.D.—i:tie Modern Pharisee and other
Sermons. Edited by the Very Rev. H. H. Dickinson, D.D.,
Dean of Chapel Royal, Dublin. New and Cheaper Edition.
Crown Svo, 7j. 6d.

COLERIDGE, Sara.—Tslleraoiv and Letters of Sara Coleridge.

Edited by her Daughter. With Index. Cheap Edition. With
Portrait. ']s. 6d.

Collects Exemplified. Being Illustrations from the Old and New-
Testaments of the Collects for the Sundays after Trinity. By the
Author of " A Commentary on the Epistles and Gospels." Edited
by the Rev. Joseph Jackson. Cro%vn Svo, 5^.

CORNELL, A. K. — Discontent and Danger in India. Small
crown Svo, 3^-. 6d.

The Economic Revolution of India. Crown Svo, 4^. 6d.

CORY, William. — A Guide to Modern English History. Pait I.
— MDCCCXV.-MDCCCXXX. Demy Svo, qs. Part II.—
MDCCCXXX.-MDCCCXXXV., 151-.

COTTERILL, H. B.—K.-rx Introduction to the Study of Poetry.
Crown Svo, ^s. 6d.


Kegan Paul, Trench & Cols Publications. 7

cox. Rev. Sir George IV., M.A:, Bart.—K History of Greece from
the Earliest Period to the end of the Persian ^War.
New Edition. 2 vols. Demy 8vo, 36^.

The Mythology of the Aryan Nations. New Edition.
Demy 8vo, 16^.

Tales of Ancient Greece. New Edition. Small crown 8vo, bs.

A Manual of Mythology in the form of Question and
Answer. New Edition. Fcap. Svo, 3^.

An Introduction to the Science of Comparative Myth-
ology and Folk-Lore. Second Edition. Crown Svo. 1$. 6d.

COX, Rev. Sir G. W., M.A., Bart., and JONES, Eustace Hinton.—
Popular Romances of the Middle Ages. Third
Edition, in l vol. Crown Svo, ds.

COX, Rev. Samuel, D.D. — Salvator Mundi ; or. Is Christ the Saviour
of all Men ? Eighth Edition. Crown Svo, ^s.
The Genesis of Kvil, and other Sermons, mainly expository.
Third Edition. Crown Svo, ds.

A Commentary on the Book of Job. With a Translation.

Demy Svo, 15^.
The Larger Hope. A Sequel to " Salvator Mundi." i6nio, \s.
CRA VEN, Mj-s.—A. Year's Meditations. Crown Svo, 6s.
CRA WFURD, OjH/a/i/.— Portugal, Old and New. With Illustra-
tions and Maps. New and Cheaper Edition. Crown Svo, 6j.

CROZIER, John Beattie, Af.B.—Th.e Religion of the Future.

Crown 8vOj 6s.
DANIELL, Clarmont. — The Gold Treasure of India. An Inquiry

into its Amount, the Cause of its Accumulation, and the Proper

Means of using it as Money. Crown Svo, 5^.
Darkness and Dawn : the Peaceful Birth of a New Age. Small

crown Svo, 2s. td.
DAVIDSON, Rev. Samuel, D.D., ZZ.Z>.— Canon of the Bible I

Its Formation, History, and Fluctuations. Third and Revised

Edition. Small crown Svo, ^s.
The Doctrine of Last Things contained in the New Testa-
ment compared with the Notions of the Jews and the Statements

of Church Creeds. Small crown Svo, 3^. i>d.
DAVIDSON, Thomas.— Tha Parthenon Frieze, and other Essays.

Crown Svo, 6j.
DAWSON, Geo., M.A. Prayers, with a Discourse on Prayer.

Edited by his Wife. First Series. Eighth Edition. Crown

Svo, ts.
Prayers, with a Discourse on Prayer. Edited by George

St. Clair. Second Series. Crown Svo, 6s.


8 A List of

DAWSON, Geo., M.A.— continued. (

Sermons on Disputed Points and Special Occasions.

Edited by his Wife. Fourth Edition. Crown 8vo, 6^-.

Serraons on Daily Life and Duty. Edited by his Wife,
Fourth Edition. Crown 8vo, 6s.

The Authentic Gospel, - and other Sermons. Edited by
George St. Clair. Third Edition. Crown 8vo, 6s.

Three Books of God : Nature, History, and Scripture.

Sermons edited by George St. Claik. Crown 8vo, 6s.

DE yONCOURT, Madame jlfar/f.— "Wholesome Cookery. Second
Edition. Crown 8vo, 3J-. 6d.

DE LONG, Lieut. Com. G. fK— The Voyage of the Jeannette.
The Ship and Ice Journals of. Edited by his Wife, Emma
De Long. With Portraits, Maps, and many Illustrations on
wood and stone. 2 vols. Demy 8vo, 36^-.

DESPREZ, Philip S., .ff.Z).— Daniel and John ; or. The Apocalypse
of the Old and that of the New Testament. Demy Svo, \2s.

DEVEREUX, W. Cope, R.N., F.R.G.S.—raXv Italy, the Riviera,
and Monte Carlo. Comprising a Tour through North and
South Italy and Sicily, with a short account of Malta. Crown
Svo, 6s.

DOWDEN, Edward, ZZ.Zi.— Shakspere : a Critical Study of his
Mind and Art. Seventh Edition. Post Svo, \2s.

Studies in Literature, 1 789-1 S77. Third Edition. Large
post Svo, 6s.

DUFFIELD,A. J. — Don Quixote: his Critics and Commen-
tators. With a brief account of the minor works of Miguel de
Cervantes Saavedra, and a statement of the aim and end of
the greatest of them all. A handy book for general readers.
Crown Svo, 3^. 6d.

DU MONCEL, Count.— The Telephone, the Microphone, and
the Phonograph. With 74 Illustrations. Second Edition.
Small crown Svo, c^s.

DURUY, Kzrf(;r.— History of Rome and the Roman People.

Edited by Prof. Mahaffy. With nearly 3000 Illustrations. 4to.
Vol. I. in 2 parts, 30j-.

EDGEWORTH, F. K— Mathematical Psychics. An Essay on
the Application of Mathematics to Social Science. Demy Svo,
^s. 6d.

Educational Code of the Prussian Nation, in its Present
Form. In accordance with the Decisions of the Common Pro-
vincial Law, and with those of Recent Legislation. Cro^vn Svo,

2s. 6d.


Kegan Paul, Trench & Co.'s Publications.


Kducation Library. Edited by Philip Magnus :—

An Introduction to the History of Kducational
Theories. By Oscar Browning, M.A. Second Edition.

Old Greek Education. By the Rev. Prof. Mahaffy, M.A.
Second Edition, y. bd.

School Management. Including a general view of the work
of Education, Organization and Discipline. By Josei'h Landon.
Third Edition. 6j.

Eighteenth Century Essays. Selected and Edited by Austin
DOBSON. With a Miniature Frontispiece by R. Caldecott.
Parchment Library Edition, 6^-. ; vellum, •]$. dd.

ELSDALE, Henry. — Studies in Tennyson's Idylls. Cro\vn 8vo, 5^.

ELYOT, Sir Thomas. — The Boke naraed the Gouernour. Edited
from the First Edition of 1531 by Henry Herbert Stephen
Croft, M.A., Barrister-at-Law. With Portraits of Sir Thomas
and Lady Elyot, copied by permission of her Majesty from Hol-
bein's Original Drawings at Windsor Castle. 2 vols. Fcap. 4to,
y,s.

Enoch the Prophet. The Book of. Archbishop Laurence's Trans-
lation, with an Introduction by the Author of " The Evolution of
Christianity." Crown Svo, 5^.

Eranus. A Collection of Exercises in the Alcaic and Sapphic Metres.
Edited by F. W. Cornish, Assistant Master at Eton. Second
Edition. Crown Svo, 2j.

EVANS, Mark.— The Story of Our Father's Love, told to
Children. Sixth and Cheaper Edition. With Four Illustrations.
Fcap. Svo, IS. 6d.

A Book of Common Prayer and 'Worship for House-
hold Use, compiled exclusively from the Holy Scriptures.
Second Edition. Fcap. Svo, is.

The Gospel of Home Life. Crown Svo, 4^. dd.

The King's Story-Book. In Three Parts. Fcap. Svo, is. dd.
each.

*j,* Parts I. and II. with Eight Illustrations and Two Picture Maps,
now ready.

"Fan Kwae" at Canton before Treaty Days 1825-1844.

By an old Resident. With Frontispiece. Crown Svo, 5^.

FLECKER, Rev. Eliezer.—?>CTr^l\rce. Onomatology. Being Critical
Notes on the Septuagint and other Versions. Second Edition.
Crown Svo, 3^. td.

FLOREDICE, W. II. — ^A Month among the Mere Irish. Small
crown Svo, ^s.


10 A List of

FOWLS, Rm. T. W.—Tiie Divine Legation of Christ. Crown
8vo, Ts.

FULLER, Rev. Morris. — The Lord's Day ; or, Christian Sunday.

Its Unity, Histoiy, Philosophy, and Perpetual Obligation.
Sermons. Demy 8vo, \os. 6d.

GARDLNER, Samuel R., and J. BASS MULLINGER, M.A.—
Introduction to the Study of Knglish History. Second
Edition. Large crown 8vo, gj.

GARDNER, Doriey. — Quatre Bras, Ligny, and "Waterloo. A

Narrative of the Campaign in Belgium, 1815. With Maps and
Plans. Demy 8vo, ids.

Genesis in Advance of Present Science. A Critical Investigation
of Chapters I.-IX. By a Septuagenarian Beneficed Presbyter.
Demy 8vo. \os. 6d.

CENNA, E. — Irresponsible Philanthropists. Being some
Chapters on the Employment of Gentlewomen. Small crown
8vo, 2s. (>d.

GEORGE, Henry. — Progress and Poverty : An Inquiry into the
Causes of Industrial Depressions, and of Increase of Want with
Increase of Wealth. The Remedy. Fifth Library Edition.
Post 8vo, 7j. dd. Cabinet Edition. Crown Svo, 2.s. 6d, Also a
Cheap Edition. Limp cloth, is. bd. Paper covers, is.

Social Problems. Fourth Thousand. Crown Svo, 5^, Cheap
Edition. Sewed, is.

GLBSON, James K— Journey to Parnassus. Composed by Miguel
DE Cervantes Saavedea. Spanish Text, with Translation into
English Tercets, Preface, and Illustrative Notes, by. Crown
Svo, 12s.

Glossary of Terms and Phrases. Edited by the Rev. H. Percy
Smith and others. Medium Svo, 12s.

GLOVER, F., Af.^.— Exempla Latina. A First Construing Book,
with Short Notes, Lexicon, and an Introduction to the Analysis
of Sentences. Second Edition. Fcap. Svo, 2s.

GOLDSMID, Sir Francis Henry, Bart., Q.C., Af.F.—MemoiT of.
With Portrait. Second Edition, Revised. Crown Svo, 6s.

GOODENOUGH, Commodore J. G.— Memoir of, with Extracts from
his Letters and Journals. Edited by his Widow. With Steel
Engraved Portrait. Third Edition. Crown Svo, 5^.

GO.SSE, Edmund W. — Studies in the Literature of Northern
Europe. With a Frontispiece designed and etched by Alma
Tadema. New and Cheaper Edition. Large crown Svo, 6^.

Seventeenth Century Studies. A Contribution to the Historj-
of English Poetry. Demy Svo, 10s. dd.

GOULD, Rev. S. Baring, M.A. — Germany, Present and Past.
New and Cheaper Edition. Large crown Svo, "is. 6d.


Kegan Paul, Trench & Co.'s Publications. il

GOWAN, Major Walter E.—K. Ivanoff's Russian Grammar.
(i6th Edition.) Translated, enlarged, and arranged for use of
Students of the Russian Language. Demy 8vo, ds.

GOWER, Lord Ronald. My Reminiscences. Second Edition.
2 vols. With Frontispieces. Demy Svo, 30J.

*«* Also a Cheap Edition. With Portraits. Large crown Svo, 7j. (3d.

GRAHAM, William, iJ/.^.— The Creed of Science, Religious, Moral,
and Social. Second Edition, Revised. Crown Svo, ds.

GRIFFITH, Thomas, A.M.—Tlie Gospel of the Divine Life : a
Study of the Fourth Evangelist. Demy Svo, 14J.

GRIMLEY, Rev. IT. N., iJ/.^.— Tremadoc Sermons, chiefly on
the Spiritual Body, the Unseen "World, and the
Divine Humanity. Fourth Edition. Crown Svo, (>s.

G. S. B,—A Study of the Prologue and Epilogue in English
Literature from Shakespeare to Dryden. Crown
Svo, 5'i'.

GUSTAFSOJV, A.— The Foundation of Death, Crown Svo.

HAECKEL, Prof. Ernst.— The History of Creation. Translation
revised by Professor E. Ray Lankester, M.A., F.R.S. With
Coloured Plates and Genealogical Trees of the various groups
of both Plants and Animals. 2 vols. Third Edition. Post
Svo, 32J.

The History of the Evolution of Man. With numerous
Illustrations. 2 vols. Post Svo, 32^.

A Visit to Ceylon. Post Svo, Is. 6d.

Freedom in Science and Teaching. With a Prefatory Note
by T. H. Huxley, F.R.S. Crown Svo, 5^.

Half-Crown Series : —

A Lost Love. By Anna C. Ogle [Ashford Owen].
Sister Dora : a Biography. By Margaret Lonsdale.

True "Words for Brave Men ; a Book for Soldiers and Sailors.

By the late Charles Kingsley.
Notes of Travel : being Extracts from the Journals of Count Vox

Moltke.
English Sonnets. Collected and Arranged by J. Dennis.
London Lyrics. By F. Locker.

Home Songs for Quiet Hours. By the Rev. Canon R. H.
Baynes.
HARROP, Robert. — Bolingbroke. A PoUtical Study and Criticism.

Demy Svo, 14J.
HART, Rev. J. W. 7:— The Autobiography of Judas Iscariot.
' A Character Study. Crown Svo, y. 6d.


12 A List of

HAWEIS, Rev. H. R., iJ/.^.— Current Coin. Materialism— The
Devil — Crime — Drunkenness — Pauperism — Emotion — Recreation
— The Sabbath. Fifth and Cheaper Edition. Crown 8vo, Sj.

Arro-Bsrs in the Air. Fifth and Cheaper Edition. Crown 8vo, 5^.
Speech in Season. Fifth and Cheaper Edition. Crown 8vo, 5^.
Thoughts for the Times. Thirteenth and Cheaper Edition.
Crown 8vo, $s.

Unsectarian Family Prayers. New and Cheaper Edition.
Fcap. 8vo, IS. 6d.

HAWKINS, Edwards Comerford. — Spirit and Form. Sermons
preached in the Parish Church of Leatherhead. Crown 8vo, 6j.

HAWTHORNE, Nathaniel— "Wov^^. Complete in Twelve Volumes.
Large post 8vo, 7j. td. each volume.

Vol. I. Twice-told Tales.

II. Mosses from an Old Manse.

III. The House of the Seven Gables, and The Snow

Image.

IV. The Wondereook, Tanclewood Tales, and Grand-

father's Chair.
V. The Scarlet Letter, and The Blithedale Romance.
VI. The Marble Faun. [Transformation.]

.yY^J" \ OuE. Old Home, and English Note-Books.

IX. American Note-Books.
X. French and Italian Note-Books.
XI. Septimius Felton, The Dolliver Romance, Fanshavje,
AND, in an Appendix, The Ancestral Footstep.
XII. Tales and Essays, and other Papers, with a Bio-
graphical Sketch of Hawthorne.

HAYES, A. A., Junr.—New Colorado, and the Santa Fe Trail.

With Map and 60 Illustrations. Square 8vo, <^s.

HENNESSY, Sir John Pope.— 'Ralegh in Ireland. With his Letters
on Irish Affairs and some Contemporary Dosuments. Large crown
8vo, printed on hand-made paper, parchment, los. bd.

HENRY, Philip. — Diaries and Letters of. Edited by Matthew
Henry Lee, M.A. Large crown 8vo, •js. 6d.

HIDE, Albert. — The Age to Come. Small crown 8vo, zr. dd.

HIME, Major H. W. L., R.A. — '^A?'agne^ism : A Protest. Crown
8vo, 2s. bd.

HINTON, 7.— Life and Letters. Edited by Ellice Hopkins, with

an Introduction by Sir W. W. GuLL, Bart., and Portrait

engraved on Steel by C. H. Jeens. Fourth Edition. Crown
8vo, %s. 6d.

Philosophy and Religion. Second Edition. Crown Svo, 5^-.
The Law Breaker. Crown 8vo.


Kegan Paul, Trench &■ Co.'s Publications. 13

HINTON, J.— continued.

The Mystery of Pain. New Edition. Fcap. 8vo, \s.

Hodson of Hodson's Horse ; or, Twelve Years of a Soldier's Life
in India. Being extracts from the Letters of the late Major
W. S. R. Hodson. With a Vindication from the Attack of Mr.
Bosworth Smith. Edited by his brother, G. 11. Hodson, M.A.
Fourth Edition. Large crown 8vo, J-f-

HOLTHAM, E. G.— Eight Years in Japan, 1873-1881. Work,
Travel, and Recreation. W^th three Maps. Large crown 8vo, <)s.

HOOPER, Mary. — Little Dinners : Ho-wr to Serve them -with
Elegance and Economy. Eighteenth Edition. Crown
8vo, 2J. (>d.

Cookery for Invalids, Persons of Delicate Digestion,
and Children. Third Edition. Crown 8vo, is. 6d.

Every-Day Meals. Being Economical and Wholesome Recipes
for Breakfast, Luncheon, and Supper. Fifth Edition. Crown
Svo, 2s. dd.

HOPKINS, Ellice. — Life and Letters of James Hinton, with an
Introduction by Sir W. W. Gull, Bart., and Portrait engraved
on Steel by C. H. Jeens. Fourth Edition. Crown 8vo, &. dd.

"SSTork amongst AATorking Men. Fifth Edition. Crown
Svo, y. 6d.

HOSPITALIER, i?.— The Modern Applications of Electricity.
Translated and Enlarged by Julius Maier, Ph.D. 2 vols.
Second Edition, Revised, with many additions and numerous
Illustrations. Demy 8vo, \zs. 6d. each volume.
Vol. I. — Electric Generators, Electric Light.
Vol. II. — Telephone : Various Applications ; Electrical
Transmission of Energy.

Household Readings on Prophecy. By a. Layman. Small
crown Svo, 3^. 60'.

HUGHES, Hetiry.—T'he Redemption of the World. Crown Svo,
3^. 6d.

HUNTINGFORD, Rev. E., D.C.L.—rtie Apocalypse. With a
Commentary and Introductory Essay. Demy Svo, Sj.

HUTTON, Arthur, M.A.—The Anglican Ministry : Its Nature
and Value in relation to the Catholic Priesthood. With a Preface
by His Eminence Cardinal Newman. Demy Svo, 14s.

HUTTON, Rev. C. i^.— Unconscious Testimony ; or, The Silent
Witness of the Hebrew to the Truth of the Historical Scriptures.
Crown Svo, 2s. td,

HYNDMAN, H. M.—rtie Historical Basis of Socialism in
England. Large crown Svo, Sj. 6d,


14 A List of

IM THURN, Everard i^— Among the Indians of Guiana.
Being Sketches, chiefly anthropologic, from the Interior of British
Guiana. With 53 Illustrations and a Map. Demy 8vo, i%s.

Jaunt in a Junk : A Ten Days' Cruise in Indian Seas. Large crown
8vo, "^s, 6d.

JENKINS, E., and RAYMOND, 7.— The Architect's Legal
Handbook. Third Edition, Revised. Crown Svo, (>s.

JENNINGS, Mrs. Van^Aan.—'Ra.h.el : Her Life and Letters. Large
post Svo, ys. 6d.

JERVIS, Rev. W. Henley. — The Galilean Church and the
Revolution. A Sequel to the History of the Church of
France, from the Concordat of Bologna to the Revolution.
Demy 8vo, iZs.

JOEL, L.—A Consul's Manual and Shipo-wner's and Ship-
master's Practical Guide in their Transactions
Abroad. With Definitions of Nautical, Mercantile, and Legal
Terms ; a Glossary of Mercantile Terms in English, French,
German, Italian, and Spanish ; Tables of the Money, Weights,
and Measures of the Principal Commercial Nations and their
Equivalents in British Standards ; and Forms of Consular and
Notarial Acts. Demy Svo, I2s.

JOHNSTONE, C. K, il/.^.— Historical Abstracts: being Outlines
of the History of some of the less kno\ra States of Europe.
Crown Svo, ys. 6d.

JOLLY, William, F.R.S.E., etc — The Life of John Duncan,
Scotch "SATeaver and Botanist. With Sketches of his
Friends and Notices of his Times. Second Edition. Large
crown Svo, with etched portrait, gj.

JONES, C. A.— The Foreign Freaks of Five Friends. With 30
Illustrations. Crown Svo, 6s.

JOYCE, P. W., LL.D., etc.—0\d. Celtic Romances. Translated
from the Gaelic. Crown Svo, ys. 6d.

JOYNES, J. Z.— The Adventures of a Tourist in Ireland.
Second edition. Small crown Svo, 2s. 6d.

KAUFMANN, Rev. M., .5.,4.— Socialism : its Nature, its Dangere,
and its Remedies considered. Crown Svo, "js. 6d.

Utopias ; or. Schemes of Social Improvement, from Sir Thomas
More to Karl Marx. Crown Svo, 5^.

A'AY, David, F.R.G.S. — Education and Educators. Crown Svo,
ys. 6d.

ICAY, Joseph.— Vree Trade in Land. Edited by his Widow. With
Preface by the Right Hon. John Bright, M.P. Seventh
Edition. Crown Svo, ^s.


Kegan Paul, Trench &• Co.'s Publications. 15


KEMPIS, Thomas h.—Oi the Imitation of Christ. Parchment
Library Edition. — Parchment or cloth, 6i. ; vellum, '^s. (>d. The
Red Line Edition, fcap. 8vo, red edges, 2s. 6d. The Cabinet
Edition, small 8vo, cloth limp, is. ; cloth boards, red edges, is. 6d.
The iMiniature Edition, red edges, 32mo, is.
*** All the above Editions may be had in various extra bindings.

KENT, C. — Corona Catholica ad Petri successoris Pedes
Oblata; De Summi Pontiflcis Leonls XIII. As-
sumptione Epigramma. In Quinquaginta Linguis. Fcap.
4to, iSs.

KETTLEWELL, Rev. .S.— Thomas a Kempis and the Brothers
of Common Life. 2 vols. With Frontispieces. Demy Svo,
30J-.

KIDD, Joseph, M.D. — The Laws of Therapeutics ; or, the Science
and Art of Medicine. Second Edition. Crown 8vo, ds.

KINGSFORD, Anna, j1/.Z>.— The Perfect "Way in Diet. A
Treatise advocating a Return to the Natural and Ancient Food of
our Race. Small crown Svo, 2j.

ICINGSLEY, Charles, M.A. — Letters and Memories of his Life-
Edited by his Wife. With two Steel Engraved Portraits, and
Vignettes on Wood. Fourteenth Cabinet Edition. 2 vols. Crown
Svo, 12s.
"^f* Also a People's Edition, in one volume. With Portrait. Crown
Svo, 6s.

All Saints' Day, and other Sermons. Edited by the Rev. W.

Harrison. Third Edition. Crown Svo, ys. 6d.
True Words for Brave Men. A Book for Soldiers' and

Sailors' Libraries. Tenth Edition. Crown Svo, 2s. 6d.

KNOX, Alexander ^.— The New Playground ; or. Wanderings in
Algeria. New and cheaper edition. Large crown Svo, ds.

LANDON, >jf//z.— School Management ; Including a General View

of the Work of Education, Organization, and DiscipUne. Third

Edition. Crown Svo, 6j.
LA VRIE, S. i'.— The Training of Teachers, and other Educational

Papers. Crown Svo, "js. 6d.
LEE, Rev. F. G., Z>.C.Z.— The Other "World; or, Glimpses of the

Supernatural. 2 vols. A New Edition. Crown Svo, 15^.
Letters from a Young Emigrant in Manitoba. Second Edition.

Small crown Svo, 3^. dd.
LEWIS, Edward Dillon.— A Draft Code of Criminal Law and

Procedure. Demy Svo, 21s.
LILLIE, Arthur, M.R.A.S.—'^^e^ Popular Life of Buddha.

Containing an Answer to the Hibbert Lectures of iSSl. With

Illustrations. Crown Svo, ds.


1 6 A List of

LLOYD, JVaUer.—Tiie Hope of the "S?Vorld : An Essay on Universal

Redemption. Crown 8vo, Ss.
LONSDALE, Margaret.— Sister Dora : a Biography. With Portrait.

Twenty-seventh Edition. Crown 8vo, 2s. bd.
LOUNSBURY, Thomas J?.— James Fenimore Cooper. Crown

8vo, Sj.
LOWDER, Charles— K Biography. By the Author of " St. Teresa."

New and Cheaper Edition. Crown 8vo. With Portrait, y. 6d.

L YTTON, Edward Bulwer, Lord. — Life, Letters and Literary
Remains. By his Son, the Earl of Lytton. With Portraits,
Illustrations and Facsimiles. Demy 8vo. Vols. I. and II., 32J.

jMACAULAY, G. C. — Francis Beaumont : A Critical Study. Crown

8vo, 5J-.
MAC CAELUM, M. fK— Studies in Lo-w German and High

German Literature. Crown 8vo, 6s.
MACDONALD, G«ffr^«. — Donal Grant. A New Novel. 3 vols.

Crown 8vo, 3IJ. dd.
MACULA VELLI, Niccolb. — lAfe and Times. By Prof. Villari.

Translated by Linda Villari. 4 vols. Large post, 8vo, 48J.

MACHLAVELLL, Niecolo. — Discourses on the First Decade of
Titus Livius. Translated from the Italian by KiNIAN HiLL
Thomson, M.A. Large crown 8vo, \2s.
The Prince. Translated from the Italian by N. H. T. Small
crown 8vo, printed on hand-made paper, bevelled boards, (>s,

MACKENZIE, Alexander. — Ho"w India is Governed. Being an

Account of England's Work in India. Small crown 8vo, 2s.
MACNAUGHT, Rev. John.-CceinaL Domini : An Essay on the Lord's

Supper, its Primitive Institution, Apostolic Uses, and Subsequent

History. Demy 8vo, 14^.
MACJVALTER, Rev. G. .S".— Life of Antonio Rosmini Serbati

(Founder of the Institute of Charity). 2 vols. Demy 8vo.

[Vol. I. now ready, price I2j,

MAGNUS, Mrs.— Ahont the Jewrs since Bible Times. From the
Babylonian Exile till the English Exodus. Small crown 8vo, 6s,

MAIR, R. S., M.D., E.R.C.S.E.—rhe Medical Guide for Anglo-
Indians. Being a Compendium of Advice to Europeans in
India, relating to the Preservation and Regulation of Health.
AVith a Supplement on the Management of Children in India.
Second Edition. Crown 8vo, limp cloth, 3^. 6d.

MALDEN, Henry Elliot— 'Vienna., 1683. The History and Conse-
quences of the Defeat of the Turks "before Vienna, September
I2th, 1683, by John Sobieski, King of Poland, and Charles
Leopold, Duke of Lorraine. Crown 8vo, 4J. bd.

Many Voices. A volume of Extracts from the Religious Writers of
Christendom from the First to the Sixteenth Century. With
Biographical Sketches. Crown Svo, cloth extra, red edges, 6s.


Kegan Paid, Trench Sf Co.'s Publications. 17

MARKHAM, Capt. Albert Hastings, H.JV.—Th.e Great Frozen Sea :

A Personal Narrative of the Voyage of the A/ert during the Arctic
Expedition of 1875-6. With 6 Full-page Illustrations, 2 Maps,
and 27 Woodcuts. Sixth and Cheaper Edition. Crown 8vo, 6s.

A Polar Reconnaissance : being the Voyage of the Isbjorn
to Novaya Zemlya in 1879. With 10 Illustrations. Demy 8vo, i6j-.

Marriage and Maternity ; or. Scripture Wives and Jlothers. Small
crown 8vo, 4^. dd.

MARTINEAU, Gertrude. — Outline Lessons on Morals. Small
crown 8vo, 3J. bd,

MAUDSLEV, I-L, J/.Z".— Body and "Will. Being an Essay con-
cerning Will, in its Metaphysical, Physiological, and Pathological
Aspects. 8vo, \2s.

McGRATH, Terence. — Pictures from Ireland. New and Cheaper
Edition. Crown 8vo, 2s.

MEREDITH, y)/.^.— Theotokos, the Exanaple for Woman.
Dedicated, by permission, to Lady Agnes Wood. Revised by
the Venerable Archdeacon Denison. 32mo, limp cloth, \s. td.

MILLER, Edward. — The History and Doctrines of Irvingism ;
or. The so-called Catholic and Apostolic Church. 2 vols. Large
post 8vo, 2.y.

The Church in Relation to the State. Large crown Svo,
7f. iid.

MINCHIN, J. C— Bulgaria since the War : Notes of a Tour in
the Autumn of 1879. Small crown Svo, 3^. (>d.

MITCHELL, Lucy M.—A History of Ancient Sculpture. With
numerous Illustrations, including 6 Plates in Phototype. Super
royal Svo, 42s.

Selections from Ancient Sculpture. Being a Portfolio con-
taining Reproductions in Phototype of 36 Masterpieces of Ancient
Art to illustrate Mrs. Mitchell's " Histoiy of Ancient Sculpture."
1 8 J.
MITFORD, .§«-/;-«?«.— Through the Zulu Country. Its Battle-
fields and its People. With five Illustrations. Demy Svo, 14J.

MOCKLER, E.—K Grammar of the Baloochee Language, as
it is spoken in Makran (Ancient Gedrosia), in the Persia- Arabic
and Roman characters. Fcap. Svo, y.

MOLESWORTH, Rev. W. Nassau, >/.^.— History of the Church
of England from 1660. Large crown Svo, ys. (>d.

MORELL, 7. i?.— Euclid Simplified in Method and Language.

Being a Manual of Geometry. Compiled from the most important
French Works, approved by the University of Paris and the
Minister of Public Instruction. Fcap. Svo, 2s. td.


1 8 A List of


MORRIS, George.— T1C1& Duality of all Divine Truth in our
Lord Jesus Christ. For God's Self-manifestation in the Impar-
tation of the Divine Nature to Man. Large crown 8vo, Js. 6d.

MORSE, E. S., Ph.D.—'FlTSt Book of Zoology. With numerous
Illustrations. New and Cheaper Edition. Crown 8vo, 2s. 6d.

MURPHY, John Nicholas.— "ViKi Chair of Peter ; or. The Papacy
considered in its Institution, Development, and Organization, and
in the Benefits which for over Eighteen Centuries it has conferred
on Mankind. Demy Svo, l&s.

My Ducats and My Daughter. A New Novel. 3 vols. Crown
Svo, 3IJ-. bd.

NELSON, y. H., M.A.—R. Prospectus of the Scientific Study
of the Hindu Lawr. Demy Svo, gj-.

NEWMAN', Cardinal. — Characteristics from the 'Writings of.
Being Selections from his various Works. Arranged with the
Author's personal Approval. Sixth Edition. With Portrait.
Crown Svo, 6s.

*»* A Portrait of Cardinal Newman, mounted for framing, can
be had, is. 6d.

NEWMAN, Francis William. — Kssays on Diet. Small crown Svo,

cloth limp, 2s.
'Ne.-w Truth and the Old Faith: Are they Incompatible? By a

Scientific Layman. Demy Svo, ioj-. 6d.
Newr 'Werther. By Loki. Small crown Svo, 2s. 6d.
NICHOLSON, Edward Pyron.—The Gospel according to the

Hebre^ws. Its Fragments Translated and Annotated, with a

Critical Analysis of the External and InteiTial Evidence relating

to it. Demy Svo, gs. 6d.

A Ne-w Commentary on the Gospel according to
Matthe-w. Deiny Svo, 12^.

NICOLS, Arthur, F.G.S., i^..ff.G.6'.— Chapters from the Physical
History of the Earth : an Introduction to Geolog)' and
Palseontology. With numerous Illustrations. Crown Svo, '^s.

NOPS, Marianne. — Class Lessons on Kuclid. Part I. containing
the First Two Books of the Elements. , Crown Svo, 2s. 6d.

Notes on St. Paul's Epistle to the Galatians. For Readers of
the Authorized Version or the Original Greek. Demy Svo, 2s. bd.

Nuces : Exercises on the Syntax of the Public School Latin
Primer. New Edition in Three Parts. Crown Svo, each ij.
*^* The Three Parts can also be had bound together, 3^.

GATES, Frank, F.R.G.S.—M.aXabe\e Land and the Victoria
Falls. A Naturalist's Wanderings in the Interior of South
Africa. Edited by C. G. Dates, B.A. With numerous Illustra-
tions and 4 Maps. Demy Svo, 21s.


Kegan Paul, Trench & Co.'s Publications. 19

OGLE, W., M.D., F.R. C./".— Aristotle on the Parts of Animals.

Translated, with Introduction and Notes. Royal 8vo, 12s. dd.

O' HAG AN, Lord, IC.P. — Occasional Papers and Addresses.
Large crown 8vo, Js. 6d.

OKEN, Lorenz, Life of. By Alexander Ecker. With Explanatory.
Notes, Selections from Oken's Correspondence, and Portrait of the
Professor. From the German by Alfred Tulk. Crown 8vo, 6s.

O'AIEARA, Kathleen. — Frederic Ozanam, Professor of the Sorbonne :
His Life and Work. Second Edition. Crown 8vo, 'js. 6d.

Henri Perreyve and his Counsels to the Sick. Small,
crown 8vo, ^s.

OSBORNE, Rev. W. ^.— The Revised Version of the New Tes-

tanaent. A Critical Commentary, with Notes upon the Text.,

Crown 8vo, 5.^0
OTTLEY, H. Bickersteth.—T'h.& Great Dilemma. Christ His Own,

Witness or His Own Accuser. Six Lectures. Second Edition.

Crown 8vo, 3i. (>d.

Our Public Schools — Kton, Harrow, Winchester, Rugby,
"Westminster, Marlborough, The Charterhouse.;
Crown 8vo, (>s.

OWEN, F. JJ/.— John Keats : a Study. Crown 8vo, (>s.

Across the Hills. Small crown 8vo, is. (>d.

OWEN, Rev. Robert, ^.Z>.— Sanctorale Catholicum ; or, Book of
Saints. With Notes, Critical, Exegetical, and Historical. Demy,
8vo, iSs.

OXENHAM, Rev. F. Nutcombe.—'W'b.aX is the Truth as to Kver-
lasting Punishment. Part II. Being an Historical Inquiryi
into the Witness and Weight of certain Anti-Ongenist Councils.,
Crown 8vo, 2s. 6d.

OXONIENSIS. — Romanism, Protestantism, Anglicanism,
Being a Layman's View of some questions of the Day. Together
with Remarks on Dr. Littledale's "Plain Reasons against join-
ing the Church of Rome." Crown 8vo, y. dd.

PALMER, the late Witltam.— Notes of a Visit to Russia in
1840-1841. Selected and arranged by John H. Cardinal
Newman, with portrait. Crown 8vo, Ss. 6d.
Early Christian Symbolism. A Series of Compositions from
Fresco Paintings, Glasses, and Sculptured Sarcophagi. Edited
by the Rev. Provost NORTHCOTE, D.D., and the Rev. Canon
Brownlow, M.A. In 8 Parts, each with 4 Plates. Folio, Sj.
coloured ; y. plain.

Parchment Library. Choicely Printed on hand-made paper, limp
parchment antique or cloth, 6s. ; vellum, ys. 6d. each volume.
The Book of Psalms. Translated by the Rev. T. K. Cheyne,
M.A.


20 A List of

\

Parchment Library — continued.

The Vicar of 'Wakefield. With Preface and Notes by Austin

DOBSON.

English Comic Dramatists. Edited by Oswald Crawfurd.

English Lyrics.

The Sonnets of John Milton. Edited by Mark Pattison.
Witli Portrait after Vertue.

Poems by Alfred Tennyson. 2 vols. With miniature frontis-
pieces by W. B. Richmond.

French Lyrics. Selected and Annotated by George Saints-
bury. With a miniature frontispiece designed and etched by
H. G. Glindoni.

Fables by Mr. John Gay. With Memoir by Austin Dobson,
and an etched portrait from an unfinished Oil Sl<etch by Sir
Godfrey Kneller.

Select Letters of Percy Bysshe Shelley. Edited, with an
Introduction, by Richard Garnett.

The Christian Year. Thoughts in Verse for the Sundays and
Holy Days throughout the Year. With Miniature Portrait of the
Rev. J. Keble, after a Drawing by G. Richmond, R.A.

Shakspere's AWorks. Complete in Twelve Volumes.

Eighteenth Century Essays. Selected and Edited by Austin
Dobson. With a Miniature Frontispiece by R. Caldecott.

Q. Horati Flacci Opera. Edited by F. A. Cornish, Assistant
Master at Eton. With a Frontispiece after a design by L. Alma
Tadema, etched by Leopold Lowenstam.

Edgar Allan Poe's Poems. With an Essay on his Poetry by
Andrew Lang, and a Frontispiece by Linley Sambourne.

Shakspere's Sonnets. Edited by Edward Dowden. With a
Frontispiece etched by Leopold Lowenstam, after the Death Mask.

English Odes. Selected by Edmund W. Gosse. With Frontis-
piece on India paper by Hamo Thornycroft, A. R.A.

Of the Imitation of Christ. By Thomas a Kempis. A

revised Translation. With Frontispiece on India paper, from a

Design by W. B. Richmond.
Tennyson's The Princess : a Jledley. With a Miniature

Frontispiece by H. M. Paget, and a Tailpiece in Outline by

Gordon Browne.
Poems : Selected from Percy Bysshe Shelley. Dedicated to

Lady Shelley. With a Preface by Richard Garnett and a

Miniature Frontispiece.
Tennyson's In Memoriam. With a Miniature Portrait

in eau-forte by Le Rat, after a Photograplr by the late Mrs.

Cameron.
*,* The above volumes may also be had in a variety of leather bindings.


Kegan Paul, Trench & Co.'s Publications. 21

PAHSI.OE, Josefh.—OviT Railways. Sketches, Historical and
Descriptive. Witlx Practical Information as to Fares and Rates,
etc., and a Chapter on Railway Reform. Crown 8vo, (>s.

PAUL, Alexander. — Short Parliaments. A History of the National
Demand for frequent General Elections. Small crown 8vo, 3^ . bd.

PAUL, C. Kegan. — Biographical Sketches, Printed on hand-made
paper, boupd in buckram. Second Edition. Crown 8vo, "]$. bd.

PEARSON, Rev. i'.— "Week-day Living. A Book for Young Men
and Women. Second Edition. Crown 8vo, ^s.

PESCHEL, Dr. Oj-<;ar.— The Races of Man and their Geo-
graphical Distribution. Second Edition. Large crown
8vo, 9J.

PETERS, F. If.— The Nicomachean Kthics of Aristotle. Trans-
lated by. Crown 8vo, 6s.

PHIPSON, ^.— The Animal Lore of Shakspeare's Time.

Including Quadrupeds, Birds, Reptiles, Fish and Insects. Large
post 8vo, gj.

PIDGEON, Z>.— An Engineer's Holiday ; or. Notes of a Round
Trip from Long. 0° to 0°. New and Cheaper Edition. Large
crown 8vo, 7^. dd.

POPE, J. Buckingham. — Railway Rates and Radical Rule.
Trade Questions as Election Tests. Crown 8vo, is. dd.

PRICE, Prof. Bonamy. — Chapters on Practical Political
Economy. Being the Substance of Lectures delivered before
the University of Oxford. New and Cheaper Edition. Large
post 8vo, 5^-.

Pulpit Commentary, The. (Old Testament Series.) Edited by the
Rev. J. S. EXELL, M.A., and the Rev. Canon H. D. M. Spence.

Genesis. By the Rev. T. Whitelaw, M.A. With Homilies by
the Very Rev. J. F. Montgomery, D.D., Rev. Prof. R. A.
Redford, M.A., LL.B., Rev. F. Hastings, Rev. W.
Roberts, M.A. An Introduction to the Study of the Old
Testament by the Venerable Archdeacon Farrar, D.D., F.R.S.;
and Introductions to the Pentateuch by the Right Rev. H. CoT-
terill, D.D., and Rev. T. Whitelaw, M.A. Eighth Edition.
I vol., 15J.

Exodus. By the Rev. Canon Rawlinson. With Homilies by
Rev. J. Orr, Rev. D. Young, B.A., Rev. C. A. Goodhart,
Rev. J. Urquhart, and the Rev. H. T. Robjohns. Fourth
Edition. 2vols., i8j.

Leviticus. By the Rev. Prebendary Meyrick, M.A. With
Introductions by the Rev. R. Collins, Rev. Professor A. Cave,
and Homilies by Rev. Prof. Redford, LL.B., Rev. J. A.
Macdonald, Rev. W. Clarkson, B.A., Rev. S. R. Aldridge,
LL.B., and Rev. McCheyne Edgar. Fourth Edition. 15^.


122 A List of

Pulpit Commentary, The — continued.

Numbers. By the Rev. R. Winterbotham, LL.B. With
Homilies by the Rev. Professor W. Binnie, D.D., Rev. E. S.
Prout, M.A., Rev. D. Young, Rev. J. Waite, and an Intro-
duction by the Rev. Thomas Whitelaw, M.A. Fourth
Edition. 15^.

Deuteronomy. By the Rev. W. L. Alexander, D.D. With
Homilies by Rev. C. Clemance, D.D., Rev. J. Orr, B.D.,
Rev. R. M. Edgar, M.A., Rev. D. Davies, M.A. Third
edition. 15J.

Joshua. By Rev. J. J. Lias, M.A. With Homilies by Rev.
S. R. Aldridge, LL.B., Rev. R. Glover, Rev. E. de
PRESSENSfi, D.D., Rev. J. Waite, B.A., Rev. W. F. Adeney,
M.A. ; and an Introduction by the Rev. A. Plummer, M.A.
Fifth Edition. I2j. dd.

Judges and Ruth. By the Bishop of Bath and Wells, and
Rev. J. Morrison, D.D. With Homilies by Rev. A. F. MuiR,
M.A., Rev. W. F. Adeney, M.A., Rev. W. M. Statham, and
Rev. Professor J. Thomson, M.A. Fourth Edition. loj. dd.

1 Samuel. By the Very Rev. R. P. Smith, D.D. With Homilies
by Rev. Donald Eraser, D.D., Rev. Prof. Chapman, and
Rev. B. Dale. Sixth Edition. 15^.

1 Kings. By the Rev. Joseph Hammond, LL.B. With Homilies
by the Rev. E. DE PRESSENSfi, D.D., Rev. J. Waite, B.A.,
Rev. A. Rowland, LL.B., Rev. J. A. Macdonald, and Rev.
J. Urquhart. Fourth Edition. 15^.

Kzra, Nehemiah, and Esther. By Rev. Canon G. Rawlinson,
M.A. With Homilies by Rev. Prof. J. R. Thomson, M.A., Rev.
Prof. R. A. Redford, LL.B., M.A., Rev. W. S. Lewis, M.A.,
Rev. J. A. Macdonald, Rev. A. Mackennal, B.A., Rev. W.
Clarkson, B.A., Rev. F. Hastings, Rev. W. Dinwiddie,
LL.B., Rev. Prof. Rowlands, B.A.-, Rev. G. Wood, B.A.,
Rev. Prof. P. C. Barker, M.A., LL.B., and the Rev. J. S.
ExELL, M.A. Sixth Edition, i vol., 12s. (>d.

Jeremiah. By the Rev. T. K. Cheyne, M.A. With Homilies
by the Rev. W. F. Adeney, M.A., Rev. A. F. Mdir, M.A.,
Rev. S. Conway, B.A., Rev. J. Waite, B.A., and Rev. D.
Yoong, B.A. Vol. I., 15s.

Pulpit Commentary, The. (New Testament Series.)

St. Mark. By Veij Rev. E. Bickersteth, D.D., Dean of Lich-
field. With Homilies by Rev. Prof. Thomson, M.A., Rev. Prof.
Given, M.A., Rev. Prof Johnson, M.A., Rev. A. Rowland,
B.A., LL.B., Rev. A. MuiR, and Rev. R. Green. 2 vols.
Fourth Edition. 21s,

The Acts of the Apostles. By the Bishop of Bath and Wells,
With Homilies by Rev. Prof. P. C. Barker, M.A., LL.B., Rev.
Prof. E. Johnson, M.A., Rev. Prof. R. A. Redford, M.A.,
Rev. R. Tdck, B.A., Rev. W. Clarkson, B.A. 2 vols., zis.


Kegan Paul, Trench &■ Co.'s Ptiblications. 23

Pulpit Commentary, The — continued.

1 Corinthians. By the Ven. Archdeacon Farrar, D.D. With

HomiUes by Rev. Ex-Chancellor LirscOMB, LL.D., Rev.

David Thomas, D.D., Rev. D. Fraser, D.D., Rev. Prof.

J. R. Thomson, M.A., Rev. J. Waite, B.A., Rev. R. Tuck,

B.A., Rev. E. Hurndall, M.A., and Rev. H. Bremner, B.D.

Price 15.?.
PUSEY, Dr. — Sermons for the Church's Seasons from

Advent to Trinity. Selected from the Published Sermons

of the late Edward Bouverie Pusey, D.D. Crown 8vo, 5^.

QUILTER, Harry.—" The Academy," 1872-1882. is.

RADCLIFFE, Frank R. K— The New Politicus. Small crown Svo,
2.S. dd.

KANKE, Leopold von. — Universal History. The oldest Historical
Group of Nations and the Greeks. Edited by G. W. Prothero.
Demy Svo, i6s.

Realities of the Future Life. Small crown Svo, is. kd.

RENDELL, J. yl/.— Concise Handbook of the Island of
Madeira. With Plan of Funchal and Map of the Island. Fcap.
Svo, IS. bd.

REYNOLDS, Rev. J. W^.— The Supernatural in Nature. A
Verification by Free Use of Science. Tliird Edition, Revised
and Enlarged. Demy Svo, 14^.
The Mystery of Miracles. Third and Enlarged Edition.

Crown Svo, ts.
The Mystery of the Universe ; Our Common Faith. Demy
Svo, I4.r.
RIBOT, Prof. 77;.— Heredity : A Psychological Study on its Phenoinena,
its Laws, its Cause;., and its Consequences. Second Edition.
Large crown Svo, 9^.
ROBERTSON, The late Rev. F. W., M.A.—T-.\fe and Letters of.
Edited by the Rev. Stopford Brooke, M.A.

I. Two vols., uniform with the Sermons. With Steel Portrait.
Crown Svo, ys. 6d.
II. Library Edition, in Demy Svo, with Portrait. 12s.
III. A Popular Edition, in i vol. Crown Svo, 6s.
Sermons. Four Series. Small crown Svo, 3^. (>d. each.
The Human Race, and other Sermons. Preached at Chelten-
ham, Oxford, and Brighton. New and Cheaper Edition. Small
crown Svo, y. bd.
Notes on Genesis. New and Cheaper Edition. Small crown Svo,

y. 6d.
Expository Lectures on St. Paul's Epistles to the

Corinthians. A New Edition. Small crown Svo, 5^.
Lectures and Addresses, with other Literary Rem.nins. A New
Edition. Small cro\%'n Svo, 5^.


24 A List of

ROBERTSON, The late Rev. F. W., M. A.— continued.

An Analysis of Mr. Tennyson's "In Memoriam."
(Dedicated by Permission to the Poet-Laureate.) Fcap. 8vo, zs.
The Education of the Human Race. Translated from the
German of Gotthold Ephkaim Lessing. Fcap. 8vo, zs. dd.
The above Worlcs can also be had, bound in half morocco.
*** A Portrait of the late Rev. F. W. Robertson, mounted for framing,
can be had, 2S. 6d.
ROMANES, G. J. — Mental Evolution in Animals. With a
Posthumous Essay on Instinct by Charles Darwin, F.R.S.
Demy 8vo, izs.

ROSMINI SERB ATI, A., Founder of the Institute of Charity. Life.
By G. Stuart MacWalter. 2 vols. 8vo.

[Vol. I. now ready, 12s.

Rosmini's Origin of Ideas. Translated from the Fifth . Italian
Edition of the Nuovo Saggio SuW origine delle idee. 3 vols.
Demy 8vo, cloth. [Vols. I. and II. now ready, i6j. each.

Rosmini's Philosophical System. Translated, with a Sketch of
the Author's Life, Bibliography, Introduction, and Notes by
Thomas Davidson. Demy 8vo, ids.

RULE, Martin, AI.A.—The Life and Times of St. Anselm,
Archbishop of Canterbury and Primate of the
Britains. 2 vols. Demy 8vo, 32J.

SAL VA TOR, Archduke Ludzvig. — Levkosia, the Capital of Cyprus.

Crown 4to, \os. 6d.
SAMUEL, Sydney jl/.— Jewish Life in the East. Small crown

8vo, 3^. 6d.
SAYCE, Rev. Archibald Henry. — Introduction to the Science of

Language. 2 vols. Second Edition. Large post 8vo, 21s.

Scientific Layman. The New Truth and the Old Faith : are they
Incompatible ? Demy 8vo, los. dd.

SCOONES, IF. Baptiste.—FovLT Centuries of English Letters :
A Selection of 350 Letters by 150 Writers, from the Period of the
Paston Letters to the Present Time. Third Edition. Large
crown 8vo, 6s.

SHILLITO, Rev. Joseph. — "Womanhood : its Duties, Temptations,
and Privileges. A Book for Young Women. Third Edition.
Crown Svo, 3^'. dd.

SHIPLEY, Rev. Orby, y7/yi.— Principles of the Faith in Rela-
tion to Sin. Topics for Thought in Times of Retreat.
Eleven Addresses delivered during a Retreat of Three Days to-
Persons living in the World. Demy Svo, 12^-.

Sister Augustine, Superior of the Sisters of Charity at the St.
Johannis Hospital at Bonn. Authorised Translation by Hans
Tharau, from the German " Memorials of Amalie VON
Lasaui.x." Cheap Edition. Large crown Svo, 45. dd.


Kegan Paul, Trench & Co.'s Publications. 25


SKINNER, James.— K Memoir. By the Author of "Charles Lowder. "
With a Preface by the Rev. Canon Carter, and Portrait.
Large crown, "Js. dd.

SMITH, Edward, M.D., LL.B., /^.-ff..?.— Tubercular Consump-
tion in its Early and. Remediable Stages. Second
Edition. Crown 8vo, 6s.

SPEDDING, James. — Revie-ws and Discussions, Literary,
Political, and Historical not relating to Bacon. Demy
8vo, 1 2 J. td.

Evenings with a Revie'wer ; or, Bacon and Macaulay.
With a Prefatory Notice by G. S. Venabi.es, Q.C. 2 vols.
Demy 8vo> i8j.

STAFFER, Faul. — Shakspeare and Classical Antiquity :
Greek and Latin Antiquity as presented in Shakspeare's Plays.
Translated by Emily J. Carey. Large post 8vo, izj'.

STEVENSON, Rev. W. i^— Hymns for the Church and Home.
Selected and Edited by the Rev. W. Fleming Stevenson.

The Hymn Book consists of Three Parts : — I. For Public
Worship. — II. For Family and Private Worship. — III.
For Children.
*,* Published in various forms and prices, the latter ranging from %d.
to (>s.

Stray Papers on Education, and Scenes from School Life. By B. H.
Second Edition. Small crown 8vo, 3J-. td.

STREATFEILD, Rev. G. 6'., j?/.^.— Lincolnshire and the Danes.
Large crown Svo, "js. 6d,

STRECKER- IVISLICENUS.—OTgSLTLic Chemistry. Translated and
Edited, with Extensive Additions, by W. R. Hodgkinson,
Ph.D., and A. J. Greenaway, F.I.C. Demy 8vo, 2ls.

Study of the Prologue and Epilogue in English Literature.

From Shakespeare to Dryden. By G. S. B. Crown Svo, 5x.

SULLY, James, M.A. — Pessimism : a History and a Criticism.
Second Edition. Demy 8vo, 14^'.

SWEDENBORG, Eman.—Dei Cultu et Amore Dei ubi Agitur
de Telluris ortu, Paradiso et Vivario, tum de Pri-
mogeniti Seu Adami Nativitate Infantia, et Amore.
Crown Svo, 6^.

SYME, Z>aOT(/.— Representative Government in England. Its

Faults and Failures. Second Edition. Large crown Svo, 6s.

TA YLOR, Rev. Isaac^Tlie Alphabet. An Account of the Origin
and Development of Letters. With numerous Tables and
Facsimiles. 2 vols. Demy Svo, 36^.


26 A List of

TAYLOR, &(//<?)'. — Profit Sharing between Capital and
Labour. To which is added a Memorandum on the Industrial
Partnership at the Whitwood Collieries, by ARCHIBALD and
Henry Briggs, with remarks by Sedley Taylor. Crown 8vo,

Thirty Thousand Thoughts. Edited by the Rev. Canon Spence,
Rev. J. S. ExELL, Rev. Charles Neil, and Rev. Jacob
Stephenson. 5 vols. Super royal 8vo.

[Vols. I. and II. now ready, ids. each.

THOM, J. J7amilton.—l^a.vj^s of Life after the Mind of Christ.

Second Edition. Crown Svo, Ts. dd.

THOMSON,J. Ttirnhdl.— Social Problems ; or, An Inquiry into
the La-ws of Influence. With Diagrams. Demy 8vo, los. bd.

TIDMAN, Paul i?.— Gold and Silver Money. Part I.— A Plain
Statement. Part II. — Objections Answered. Third Edition.
Crown Svo, \s.

TIPPLE, Rev. S. A. — Sunday Mornings at Norwood. Prayers
and Sermons. Crown Svo, ds.

TODHUNTER, Dr. J.— A Study of Shelley. Crown Svo, Is.

TREMENHEERE, Hugh Seymour, C.B.— A Manual of the
Principles of Government, as set forth by the Authorities
of Ancient and Modem Times. New and Enlarged Edition.
Crown Svo, 3^. 6d.

TUICE, Daniel Back, iV.D., i^.i?. C.P.— Chapters in the History
of the Insane in the British Isles. With 4 Illustrations.
Large crown Svo, 12s.

TWINING, Louisa. — "Workhouse Visiting and Management
during Twenty-Five Years. Small cro%vn Svo, 2.s.

TYLER, 7.— The Mystery of Being : or, "What Do "We
Know ? Small crown Svo, 3^. dd.

UPTON, Major R. Z>.— Gleanings from the Desert of Arabia.
Large post Svo, 10s. 6d.

VACUUS VIATOR.— FlYine South. Recollections of France and
its Littoral. Small crown Svo, ^s. 6d.

VAUGHAN, H. Halford. — New Readings and Renderings of
Shakespeare's Tragedies. 2 vols. Demy Svo, 25^.

VILLARI, Professor.— 'Piccolo Machiavelli and his Times.
Translated by Linda Villari. 4 vols. Large post Svo, 48J.

VILLIERS, The Right Hon. C. P.— Free Trade Speeches of.
With Political Memoir. Edited by a Member of the Cobden
Club. 2 vols. With Portrait. Demy Svo, 25^.
*^* People's Edition, i vol. Crown Svo, limp cloth, 2s. 6d.

VOGT, Lieut.-Col. Hei-mann.-'T'he Egyptian "War of 1882.
A translation. With Map and Plans. Large crown Svo, 6^.


Kegan Paul, Trench & Co.'s PiMications. 27

VOLCICXSOM, E. W. ».— Catechism of Klementary Modern

Chemistry. Small crown Svo, 3^.
VYNER, Lady Mary. — Every Day a Portion. Adapted from the

Bible and the Prayer Book, for the Private Devotion of those

living in Widowhood. Collected and Edited by Lady Mary

Vyner, Square crown Svo, Jj.

WALDSTEIN, Charles, Ph.D.— The Balance of Emotion and
Intellect ; an Introductory Essay to the Study of Philosophy.
Crown Svo, 6s.

WALLER, Rev. C. B.—The Apocalypse, reviewed under the Light
of the Doctrine of the Unfolding Ages, and the Restitution of All
Things. Demy Svo, 12s.

WALPOLE, Chas. George. — History of Ireland from the Earliest
Times to the Union -with Great Britain. With 5 Maps
and Appendices. Crown Svo, \os. dd.

WALSHE, Walter Haylc, Tl/.Z).— Dramatic Singing Physiolo-
gically Estimated. Crown Svo, 3^. 6d.

WARD, William George, Ph.D. — Essays on the Philosophy of
Theism. Edited, with an Introduction, by Wilfrid Ward.
2 vols. Demy Svo, 21s.

WEDDERBURN, Sir David, Bart., M.P.—LM& of. Compiled from his
Journals and Writings by his sister, Mrs. E. H. Percival. With
etclied Portrait, and facsimiles of Pencil Sketches. Demy Svo, 14J.

WEDMORE, Frederick.— The Masters of Genre Painting. With
Sixteen Illustrations. Post Svo, 7j. dd.

WHEWELL, William, D.D.—'His Life and Selections from his
Correspondence. By Mrs. Stair Douglas. With a Portrait
from a Painting by Samuel Laurence. Demy Svo, 21s.

WHITNEY, Prof. William Z'H'z^fc — Essentials of English
Grammar, for the Use of Schools. Second Edition. Crown
Svo, 3^. 6d.

WILLIAMS, Rowland, D.D. — Psalms, Litanies, Counsels, and
Collects for Devout Persons. Edited by his Widow. New
and Popular Edition. Crown Svo, 3^. (>d.

Stray Thoughts Collected from the "Writings of the
late Rowland "Williams, D.D. Edited by his Widow.
Crown Svo, 3^-. bd.

WILSON, Sir Erasmus. — The Recent Archaic Discovery of
Egyptian Mummies at Thebes. A Lecture. Crown Svo,
\s. (>d.

WILSON, Lieut.-Col. C. T". — The Duke of Berwick, Marshal
of France, 1702-1734. Demy Svo, 15^.

WILSON, Mrs. R. P.— The Christian Brothers. Their Origin and
Work. With a Sketch of the Life of their Founder, the Ven.
Jean Baptiste, de la Salle. Crown Svo, 6s.


28 A List of

WOLTMANN, Dr. Alfred, and WOERMANN, Dr. A'a?-/.— History
of Painting. Edited by Sidney Colvin. Vol. I. Painting
in Antiquity and the Middle Ages. With numerous Illustrations.
Medium 8vo, 28j. ; bevelled boards, gilt leaves, 30J.

"Word -was Made Flesh. Short Family Readings on the Epistles for
each Sunday of the Christian Year. Demy 8vo, \os. 6d.

WREN, Sir Christopher.— Tiis Family and His Times. With
Original Letters, and a Discourse on Architecture hitherto un-
published. By Lucy Piiillimore. Demy Svo, 10s. 6d.

YOUMANS, Eliza ^.— First Book of Botany. Designed to
Cultivate the Observing Powers of Children. With 300
Engravings. Nevir and Cheaper Edition. Crown Svo, 2x. ()d,

YOUMANS, Edward L., M.D.—K Class Book of Chemistry, on
the Basis of the New System. With 200 Illustrations, Crown
Svo, 5f.


THE INTERNATIONAL SCIENTIFIC SERIES.

I. Fornas of Water : a Familiar Exposition of the Origin and

Phenomena of Glaciers. By J. Tyndall, LL.D., F.R.S. With
25 Illustrations. Eighth Edition. Crown Svo, 5j.

II. Physics and Politics ; or, Thoughts on the Application of the

Principles of "Natural Selection " and " Inheritance " to PoUtical
Society. By Walter Bagehot. Sixth Edition. Crown Svo, 41.

III. Foods. By Edward Smith, M.D., LL.B., F.R.S. With numerous

Illustrations. Eighth Edition. Crown Svo, t,s.

XV. Mind and Body : the Theories of their Relation. By Alexander
Bain, LL.D. With Four Illustrations. Seventh Edition. Crown
Svo, 4J.

V. The Study of Sociology. By Herbert Spencer. Eleventh

Edition. Crown Svo, 5J.

VI. On the Conservation of Energy. By Balfour Stewart, M.A.,

LL.D., F.R.S. With 14 Illustrations. Sixth Edition. Crown
Svo, 5^.

VII. Animal Locomotion ; or Walking, Swimming, and Flying. By

J. B. Pettigrew, M.D., F.R.S., etc. With 130 Illustrations.
Third Edition. Crown Svo, 5^.

VIII. Responsibility in Mental Disease. By Henry Maudsley,

M.D. Fourth Edition. Crown Svo, 5^.

IX. The Ne-ssr Chemistry. By Professor J. P. Cooke. With 31

Illustrations. Seventh Edition. Crown Svo, 5^.


Kegan Paul, Trench & Co.'s Publications. 29

X. The Science of La'w. By Professor Sheldon Amos. Fifth Edition,

Crown 8vo, 5^.

XI. Animal Mechanism : a Treatise on Terrestrial and Aerial Loco-

motion. By Professor E. J. Marey. With 117 Illustrations.
Third Edition. Crown 8vo, 5^.

Jill. The Doctrine of Descent and Darwinism. By Professor
Oscar Schmidt. With 26 Illustrations. Fifth Edition. Crown
8vo, 5j.

XIII. The History of the Conflict between Religion and

Science. By J. W. Draper, M.D., LL.D. Eighteenth Edition.
Crown 8vo, 5J.

XIV. Fungi : their Nature, Influences, Uses, etc. By M. C. Cooke,

M.D., LL.D. Edited by the Rev. M. J. Berkeley, M.A., F.L.S.
With numerous Illustrations. Third Edition. Crown 8vo, 5^.

XV. The Chemical Effects of Light and Photography. By

Dr. Hermann Vogel. Translation thoroughly Revised. With
100 Illustrations. Fourth Edition. Crown 8vo, 5^.

XVI. The Life and Growth of Language. By Professor William

Dwight Whitney. Fourth Edition. Crown 8vo, 5^-.

XVII. Money and the Mechanism of Exchange. By W.

Stanley Jevons, M. A., F.R.S. Sixth Edition. Crown 8vo, 5^.

XVIII. The Nature of Light. With a General Account of Physical
Optics. By Dr. Eugene Lommel. With 1S8 Illustrations and a
Table of Spectra in Chromo-lithography. Third Edition. Crown
8vo, SJ.

XIX. Animal Parasites and Messmates. By Monsieur Van

Beneden. With 83 Illustrations. Third Edition. Crown 8vo, 5^.

XX. Fermentation. By Professor Schiitzenberger. With 28 Illus-

trations. Fourth Edition. Crown 8vo, 5^.

XXI. The Five Senses of Man. By Professor Bernstein. With

91 Illustrations. Fourth Edition. Crown 8vo, 5^.

XXII. The Theory of Sound in its Relation to Music. By Pro-

fessor Pietro Blaserna. With numerous Illustrations. Third
Edition. Crown 8vo, ^s.

XXIII. Studies in Spectrum Analysis. By J. Norman Lockyer,
F.R.S. With six photographic Illustrations of Spectra, and
numerous engravings on Wood. Third Edition. Crown 8vo,
6j. dd.

XXIV. A History of the Growth of the Steam Engine. By

Professor R. H. Thurston. With numerous Illustrations. Third
Edition. Crown 8vo, ds. dd.

XXV. Education as a Science. By Alexander Bain, LL.D. P'ourth

Edition. Crown 8vo, c,s.


30 A List of

XXVI. The Human Species. By Professor A. de Quatrefages. Third

Edition. Crown 8vo, y.

XXVII. Modern Chromatics. With Applications to Art and In-
dustry. By Ogden N. Rood. With 130 original Illustrations.
Second Edition. Crown 8vo, 5^.

XXVIII. The Crayflsh : an Introduction to the Study of Zoology. By
Professor T. H. Huxley. With 82 Illustrations. Third Edition.
Crown 8vo, 5^-

XXIX. The Brain as an Organ of Mind. By H. Charlton Bastian,
M.D. With numerous Illustrations. Third Edition. Crown
8vo, Si-.

XXX. The Atomic Theory. By Prof. Wurtz. Translated by G.

Cleminshaw, F.C.S. Third Edition. Crown 8vo, 5^-.

XXXI. The Natural Conditions of Existence as they affect
Animal Life. By Karl Semper. With 2 Maps and 106
Woodcuts. Third Edition. Crown 8vo, Sf.

XXXII. General Physiology of Muscles and Nerves. By ProL
J. Rosenthal. Third Edition. With Illustrations. Crown 8vo,

XXXIII. Sight : an Exposition of the Principles of Monocular and
Binocular Vision. By Joseph le Conte, LL.D. Second Edition.
With 132 Illustrations. CrowTi Svo, 5^-.

XXXIV. Illusions : a Psychological Study. By James Sully. Second
Edition. Crown Svo, 5^.

XXXV. Volcanoes : what they are and -what they teach.
By Professor J. W. Judd, F.R.S. AVith 92 Illustrations on
Wood. Second Edition. Crown Svo, 5^.

XXXVI. Suicide : an Essay in Comparative Moral Statistics. By Prof.
E. Morselli. Second Edition. With Diagrams. Crown Svo, 5^.

XXXVII. The Brain and its Functions. By J. Luys. With
Illustrations. Second Edition. Crown Svo, ^s.

XXXVIII. Myth and Science : an Essay. By Tito Vignoli. Second
Edition. Crown Svo, ^s.

XXXIX. The Sun. By Professor Young. With Illustrations. Second
Edition. Crown Svo, 5^.

XL. Ants, Bees, and "Wasps : a Record of Observations on the
Habits of the Social Hymenoptera. By Sir John Lubbock, Bart.,
M.P. With 5 Chromo-lithographic Illustrations. Sixth Edition.
Crown Svo, e,s.

XLI. Animal Intelligence. By G. J. Romanes, LL.D,, F.R.?.
Third Edition. Crown Svo, 5^.


Kegan Paid, Trench & Co.'s Publications. 31


XLII. The Concepts and Theories of Modern Physics. By
J. B. Stallo. Second Edition. Crown 8vo, 5^.

XLIII. Diseases of the Memory ; An Essay in the Positive Psycho-
logy. By Prof. Th. Ribot. Second Edition. Crown Svo, Sj-.

XLIV. Man before Metals. By N. Joly, with 14S Illustrations.
Third Edition. Crown Svo, 5^.

XLV. The Science of Politics. By Prof. Sheldon Amos. Second
Edition. Crown Svo, 5^-.

XLVI. Klementary Meteorology. By Robert H. Scott. Second
Edition. With Numerous Illustrations. Crown Svo, 5^.

XLVII. The Organs of Speech and their Application in the
Formation of Articulate Sounds. By Georg Hermann
Von Meyer. With 47 Woodcuts. Crown Svo, ^s.

XLVIII. Fallacies. A View of Logic from the Practical Side. By
Alfred Sidgwick. Crown Svo, $s.


MILITARY WORKS.

BARRINGTON, Capl. J. r.— England on the Defensive ; or, the
Problem of Invasion Critically Examined. Large crown Svo,
with Map, 7^. (>d.

BRACKENBURY, Col. C. B., i?.^. — Military Handbooks for
Regimental Officers.

I. Military Sketching and Reconnaissance. By Col.
F. J. Hutchison and Major H. G. MacGregor. Fourth
Edition. With 15 Plates. Small crown Svo, 4^-.

II. The Elements of Modern Tactics Practically
applied to English Formations. By Lieut.-Col.
Wilkinson Shaw. Fourth Edition. With 25 Plates and
Maps. Small crown Svo, gj.

III. Field Artillery. Its Equipment, Organization and Tactics.

By Major Sisson C. Pratt, R.A. With 12 Plates. Second
Edition. Small crown Svo, 6s.

IV. The Elements of Military Administration. First

Part ; Permanent System of Administration. By Major
J. W. Buxton. Small crown Svo. p. 6cl.

V. Military La^w : Its Procedure and Practice. By Major

Sisson C. Pratt, R.A. Second Edition. Small crown Svo,
4J. 6d.

BROOKE, Major, C. K. — A System of Field Training. Small
crown Svo, cloth limp, 2s.


32 A List of

CLERY, C, Lieut. -Col.— M.inov Tactics. With 26 Maps and Plans.
Sixth and Cheaper Edition, Revised, Crown 8vo, ^s.

COLVILE, Lieut. -Col. C. j^.— Military Tribunals. Sewed, 2s. dd.

CRAUFURD, Lieut. ^. J. —Suggestions for the Military Train-
ing of a Company of Infantry. Crown 8vo, \s. dd.

HARRISON, Lieut.-Col. ;?.— The OfRcer's Memorandum Book
for Peace and War. Third Edition. Oblong 32mo, roan,
with pencil, 3^. bd.

Notes on Cavalry Tactics, Organisation, etc. By a Cavalry
Officer. With Diagrams. Demy 8vo, \is,

PARR, Capt. H. Hallam, C..1/.C— The Dress, Horses, and
Equipment of Infantry and Staff Officers. Crown
8vo, I J.

SCHAW, Col. IL—Th.e Defence and Attack of Positions and
Localities. Second Edition, Revised and Corrected. Crown
8vo, y. 6d.

SHADWELL, Maj.-Gen., C.j5.— Mountain "Warfare. Illustrated
by the Campaign of 1799 in Switzerland. Being a Translation of
the Swiss Narrative compiled from the Works of the Archduke
Charles, Jomini, and others. Also of Notes by General H.
Dufour on the Campaign of the Valtelline in 1635. With Appen-
dix, Maps, and Introductory Remarks. Demy 8vo, i6j.

WILKINSON, H. Spenser, Capt. 20th Lancashire R.V. — Citizen
Soldiers. Essays towards the Improvement of the Volunteer
Force. Crown Svo, 2s. 6d.


POETRY.

ADAM OF ST. VICTOR.— rh.e Liturgical Poetry of Adam of
St. Victor. From the text of Gautier. With Translations into
English in the Original Jletres, and Short Explanatory Notes,
by DiGBY S. Wrangham, JI.A. 3 vols. Cro^vn 8vo, printed
on hand-made paper, boards, 21s.

A UCHMUTY, A. C— Poems of English Heroism : From Branan-
burh to Lucknow ; from Athelstan to -Vlbert. Small cro\vn Svo,
ij-. dd.

A VIA. — The Odyssey of Homer. Done into English Verse by.
Fcap. 4to, 15J.

BANKS, Mrs. G. Z.— Ripples and Breakers : Poems. Square

8vo, 5^.
BARING, T. C, M.A., ^l/./". — The Scheme of Epicurus. A

Rendering into English Verse of the Unfinished Poem of Lucretius,

entitled " De Rerum Natura " ("The Nature of Things").

Fcap. 4to.


Kegan Paul, Trench & Co.'s Publications. 33


BARNES, William.— Poeras of Rural Life, in the Dorset
Dialect. New Edition, complete in one vol. Crown 8vo,
?,s. dd.

BAYNES, Rev. Canon H. j?.— Home Songs for Quiet Hours.
Fourth and Cheaper Edition. Fcap. 8vo, cloth, 2s. bd.
*«* This may also be had handsomely bound in morocco with
gilt edges.

BENDALL, Gerard. — Musa Silvestris. i6mo, l^. iid.

BEVINGTON, L. .S".— Key Notes. Small crown 8vo, Sj-.

BILLSON, C. 7.— The Acharnians of Aristophanes. Crown
8vo, 3^. 6d.

BLUNT, Wilfrid Scawen. — i:\i& Wind and the Whirlwind.
Demy Svo, is. dd.

BOWEN, H. C, jJ/.^.— Simple English Poems. English Literature
for Junior Classes. In Four Parts. Parts I., II., and III., bd.
each, and Part IV., ij-. Complete, 3^.

BRASHER, Alfred.— SiO^'hia.; or, the Viceroy of Valencia. A Comedy
in Five Acts, founded on a Story in Scarron. Small crown 8vo,
2s. 6d.

BRYANT, W. C. — Poems. Cheap Edition, with Frontispiece. Small
crown Svo, 3^^. dd.

BYRNNE, E. Fairfax. — Milicent : a Poem. Small crown Svo, ds.

CAILLARD, Emma Marie. — Charlotte Corday, and other Poems.
Small crown Svo, 3^. dd.

Calderon's Dramas: the Wonder-Working Magician — Life is a
Dream — the Purgatory of St. Patrick. Translated by Denis
Florence MacCarthy. Post Svo, \os.

Camoens Lusiads. — Portuguese Text, with Translation by J. J.
AUBERTIN. Second Edition. 2 vols. Crown Svo, lis.

CAMPBELL, Z^wV.— Sophocles. The Seven Plays in English Verse.
Crown Svo, ^s. dd.

Castilian Brothers (The), Chateaubriant, Waldemar : Three
Tragedies ; and The Rose of Sicily : a Drama. By the
Author of " Ginevra," etc. Crown Svo, ds.

Chronicles of Christopher Columbus. A Poem in 12 Cantos.
By M. D. C. Crovra Svo, 7J-. dd.

CLARKE, Mary Ccnaden. —HoneY from the Weed, Verses.
Crown Svo, Js,

Cosmo de Medici ; The False One ; Agramont and Beau-
mont : Three Tragedies ; and The Deformed : a Dramatic
Sketch. By the Author of " Ginevra," etc., etc. Crown Svo, 5J-.


34 ^ List of

COXHEAD, Ethel.— Bi^As and Babies. Imp. i6mo. With 33

Illustrations. Gilt, 2s. 6d.
David Rizzio, Bothwell, and the AWitch Lady : Tiiree

Tragedies. By the author of ' ' Ginevra, " etc. Crown 8vo, 6s.

DAVIE, G.S., M.n.—The Garden of Fragrance. Being a com-
plete translation of the Bostan of Sadi from the original Persian
into English Verse. Crown 8vo, 7s. 6d.

DAVIES, T. Hart.— CaXwllviS. Translated into English Verse. Crown
8vo, 6s.

DENNIS, y.— English Sonnets. Collected and Arranged by. Small
crown 8vo, 2s. 6d.

DE VERE, ^!(^r<y'.— Poetical 'Works.

I. The Search after Proserpine, etc. 6s.
II. The Legends of St. Patrick, etc. 6s.
III. Alexander the Great, etc. 6^.

The Foray of Queen Meave, and other Legends of Ireland's
Heroic Age. Small crown 8vo, 5^ .

Legends of the Saxon Saints. Small crown Svo, 6^.

DILLON, Arthur. — River Songs and other Poems. With 13
autotype Illustrations from designs by Margery May. Fcap. 4to,
cloth extra, gilt leaves, xos. 6d.

DOBELL, Mrs. Horace. — Ethelstone, Eveline, and other Poems.

Crown Svo, 6s.
DOBSON, Austin.— 0\& "World Idylls and other Poems. Third

Edition. iSmo, cloth extra, gilt tops, 6s.

DOMET, Alfred.— 'R&no\f and Amohia. A Dream of Two Lives.
New Edition, Revised. 2 vols. Crown Svo, 12s.

Dorothy ■- a Country Story in Elegiac Verse. With Preface. Demy
Svo, 5^.

DOWDEN, Edward, ZZ.i?.— Shakspere's Sonnets. With Intro-
duction and Notes. Large post Svo, "js. 6d.

DUTT, Torn.— A. Sheaf Gleaned in French Fields. New Edition.
Demy Svo, los. 6d.

EDMONDS, E. f K— Hesperas, Rhythm and Rhyme. Crown Svo, 4J.

ELDRYTH, Maud.— Margaret, and other Poems. Small crown Svo,

3s. 6d.
All Soul's Eve, " No God," and other Poems. Fcap. Svo, 3^-. 6d.
ELLIOTT, Ebenezer, The Corn La%a Rhymer. — Poems. Edited by his

son, the Rev. Edwin Elliott, of St. Jolin's, Antigua. 2 vols.

Crown Svo, i8j.

English Odes. Selected, with a Critical Introduction by Edmund AV.
GossE, and a miniature frontispiece by Hamo Thomycroft,
A.R.A. Elzevir Svo, limp parchment antique, or cloth, 6s. ;
vellum, 'js. 6d.


Kegan Paul, Trench & Co.'s Publications. 35


English Verse. Edited by W. J. Linton and R. H. Stoddard.
5 vols. Crown 8vo, cloth, 5^. each.
I. Chaucer to Burns.
II. Translations.

III. Lyrics of the Nineteenth Century.

IV. Dramatic Scenes and Characters.
V. Ballads and Romances.

EVANS, Anne. — Poems and Music. With Memorial Preface by
Ann Thackeray Ritchie. Large crown Svo, Ts.

GOSSE, Edmund W. — Ne-«v Poenas. Crown Svo, is. (sd.

GRAHAM, William. Twro Fancies, and other Poems. Crown Svo, 5^.

GRINDROD, Charles. Plays from English History. Crown
Svo, is. 6d.
The Stranger's Story, and his Poem, The Lament of Love : An
Episode of the Malvern Hills. Small crown Svo, 2s. 6d.

GURNEY, Rev. Alfred. — The Vision of the Eucharist, and other
Poems. Crown Svo, 5^.

HELLOiV, H. G. — Daphnis : a Pastoral Poem. Small crown Svo,
is. dd.

HENRY, Daniel, Junr. — Under a Fool's Cap. Songs. Crown Svo,

cloth, bevelled boards, 5^.
Herman "Waldgrave : a Life's Drama. By the Author of " Ginevra,"

etc. Crown Svo, 6s.

HICKEY, E. H. — A Sculptor, and other Poems. Small crown
Svo, 5J-.

HONEYWOOD, Patty.— "PoeXQS,. Dedicated (by permission) to Lord
Wolseley, G. C.B., etc. Small crown Svo, 2.s. bd.

INGHAM, Sarson, C. y.— Csedmon's Vision, and other Poems.
Small crown Svo, 5^.

JENKINS, Rev. Canon. — Alfonso Petruoci, Cardinal and Con-
spirator: an Historical Tragedy in Five Acts. Small crown Svo,
y. dd.

JOHNSON, Ernie S. W. — Ilaria, and other Poems. Small crown Svo,
31. dd.

KEATS, yo/jw.— Poetical 'Works. Edited by W. T. Arnold. Large
crown Svo, choicely printed on hand-made paper, with Portrait
va. cau-forte. Parchment, \2s. ; vellmn, 15^-.

KING, Edward. — Echoes from the Orient. AVith Miscellaneous
Poems. Small crown Svo, 3^. dd.

KING, Mrs. Hamilton. — The Disciples. Sixth Edition, with Portrait
and Notes. Crown Svo, ^s.
A Book of Dreams. Crown Svo, 3^. dd.

KNOX, The Hon. Mrs. O. N. — Four Pictures from a Life, and
other Poems. Small crown Svo, 3^-. dd.


36 A List of

LANG, yi.— XXXII Ballades in Blue China. Elzevir 8vo,

parchment, ^s.
LAWSON, Right Hon. Mr. Justice.— Jiyranx Usitati Latine

Redditi : with other Verses. Small 8vo, parchment, 5^.
Lessings Nathan the "Wise. Translated by Eustace K. Corbett.

Crown 8vo, 6s.
Life Thoughts. Small crown 8vo, 2s. 6d.
Living English Poets MDCCCLXXXII. With Frontispiece by

Walter Crane. Second Edition. Large crown Svo. Printed on

hand-made paper. Parchment, I2s. ; vellum, 15^.

LOCKER, i^— London Lyrics. A New and Cheaper Edition.
Small crown Svo, 2s. (>d.

Love in Idleness. A Volume of Poems. With an etching by W. B.
Scott. Small crown Svo, 5^.

Love Sonnets of Proteus. With Frontispiece by the Author. Elzevir
Svo, 5^.

LUMSDEN, Lieut. -Col. H. U'.— Beowulf : an Old English Poem.
Translated into Modern Rhymes. Second and Revised Edition.
Small crown Svo, 5^.

Lyre and Star. Poems by the Author of " Ginevra," etc. Crown
Svo, 5^-.

MAGNUSSON, Eirikr, M.A., and PALMER, E. H., il/.^.— Johan
Ludvig Runeberg's Lyrical Songs, Idylls, and Epi-
grams. Fcap. Svo, Cjs.

M.D.C. — Chronicles of Christopher Columbus. A Poem in
Twelve Cantos. Crown Svo, 7^. dd.

MEREDLTH, Owen [T/ie Earl of Lytton\~'S-.\xc\\e.. New Edition.
With 32 Illustrations. l6mo, 3^. (id. Cloth extra, gilt edges,
4r. dd.

MORRLS, Lewis. — Poetical Works of. New and Cheaper Editions,
with Portrait. Complete in 3 vols., ^s. each.
Vol. I. contains "Songs of Two Worids." Ninth Edition. Vol. II.
contains "The Epic of Hades." Seventeenth Edition. Vol. III.
contains " Gwen " and " The Ode of Life." Fifth Edition.

The Epic of Hades. With 16 Autotype Illustrations, after the
Drawings of the late George R. Chapman. 4to, cloth extra, gilt
leaves, 2ls.

The Epic of Hades. Presentation Edition. 4to, cloth extra,
gilt leaves, los. (sd.

Songs Unsung. Fourth Edition. Fcap. Svo, ds.

MORSHEAD, E. D. ^. — The House of Atreus. Being the
Agamemnon, Libation-Bearers, and Furies of .lEschylus. Trans-
lated into English Verse. Crown Svo, "js.

The Suppliant Maidens of uEschylus. Crown Svo, 3^. dd.


Kegan Paul, Trench & Co.'s Publications. 37

NADEN, Constance W. — Songs and Sonnets of Spring Time.
vSmall crown 8vo, 5->'-

NEWELL, E. y.— The Sorrows of Simona and, Lyrical
Verses. Small crown 8vo, 3^. bd.

NOEL, The Hon. Roden. — K Little Child's Monument. Tliird
Edition. Small crown 8vo, 3J. bd.

The Red Flag, and other Poems. New Edition. Small crown
8vo, ds.

O'ffAGAN, y<j/iH.— The Song of Roland. Translated into English
Verse. New and Cheaper Edition. Crown Svo, 5-^.

PFELFFER, Emily.— The. Rhyme of the Lady of the Lock,
and How it Grew. Small crown Svo, y. 6d.

Gerard's Monument, and other Poems. Second Edition.

Crown Svo, 6s.
Under the Aspens ". Lyrical and Dramatic. With Portrait.
Crown Svo, 6^".
PLATT, J. y.— Idyls and Lyrics of the Ohio Valley. Crown

Svo, 5^-.
FOE, Edgar Allan. — Poems. With an Essay on his Poetry by Andrew
Lang, and a Frontispiece by Linley Sambourne. Parchment
Library Edition. — Parchment or cloth, ds. ; vellum, 'js. 6d.

RAFF.iLOVICH, Mark A iid>-e. — Cyril and Lionel, and other
Poems. A volume of Sentimental Studies. Small crown Svo,
3^. 6d.

Rare Poems of the 16th and 17th Centuries. Edited W. J.
Linton. Crown Svo, 5^.

RILOADES, James.— The Georgics of Virgil. Translated into
English Verse. Small crown Svo, 5J-.

ROBINSON, A. Mary F.—A Handful of Honeysuckle. Fcap.

Svo, y. dd.
The Crowned Hippolytus. Translated from Euripides. With

New Poems. Small crown Svo, 5^.
Schiller's Mary Stuart. German Text, with English Translation on

opposite page by Leedhaii White. Crown Svo, ds.
SCOTT, George F. £.— Theodora and other Poems. Small

crown Svo, 3^. 6d.
SEAL, W. PL.— lone., and other Poems. Crown Svo, .gilt tops, e,s.
SELKIRK,/. ^.— Poems. Crown Svo, 7j. 6i/.

Shakspere's Sonnets. Edited by Edward Dowden. With a Fron-
tispiece etched by Leopold Lowenstam, after the Death Mask.

Parchment Library Edition. — Parchment or cloth, ds. ; vellum,

"js. dd.


38 A List of

Shakspere's "Works. Complete in 12 Volumes. Parchment Library
Edition.' — Parchment or cloth, 6^. each; vellum, 'js, 6d, each.

SHAJV, W. ^.,yl/.yi.— Juvenal, Persius, Martial, and Catullus.
An Experiment in Translation. Crown 8vo, 5^-.

SHELLEY, Percy Bysshe.— 'Poems, Selected from. Dedicated to
Lady Shelley. With Preface by Richard Garnett. Parchment
Libraiy Edition. — Parchment or cloth, 6j. ; vellum, "js. dd.

Six Ballads about King Arthur. Crown Svo, cloth extra, gilt
' s, 3^. (>d.


SKINNER, H. 7.— The Lily of the Lyn, and other Poems. Small
crown Svo, 3^. dd.

SLADEN, Douglas .S.— Frithjof and Ingebjorg, and other
Poems. Small crown Svo, 5j-.

SMITH, J. W. Gilbart.~r^\e Loves of Vandyck. A Tale of Genoa.
Small crown Svo, 2s. dd.

Sophocles ; The Seven Plays in English Verse. Translated by Lewis
Campbell. Crown Svo, "js. 6d.

SPICER, Henry. — Haska : a Drama in Three Acts (as represented
at the Theatre Royal, Drury Lane, March loth, 1877). Third
Edition. Crown Svo, 3^. i>d.

TAYLOR, Sir .^.— "Works. Complete in Five Volumes. Crown
Svo, 30J-.

Philip Van Artevelde. Fcap. Svo, 3x. dd.

The Virgin 'Wido-w, etc. Fcap. Svo, 3^. dd.

The Statesman. Fcap. Svo, 3^-. dd.

TAYLOR, Augustus. — Poems. Fcap. Svo, 5^.

Tennyson Birthday Book, The. Edited by Emily Siiakespeae.
32mo, limp, IS. ; cloth extra, 3^-.
*** A superior Edition, printed in red and black, on antique paper,
specially prepared. Small crown Svo, extra, gilt leaves, 5J-. :
and in various, calf and morocco bindings.

THORNTON, L. TSf.— The Son of Shelomith. Small crown Svo.
3J. dd.

TODHUNTER, Dr. J.— Laurella, and other Poems, Crown Svo.
ds. dd.

Forest Songs. Small crown Svo, 3^. dd.
The True Tragedy of Rienzi : a Drama. t,s. dd.
Alcestls : a Dramatic Poem. Extra fcap. Svo, 5^-.
WALTERS, Sophia Lydia. — A Dreamer's Sketch Book. With 2r
Illustrations by Percival Skelton, R. P. Leitch, W. H. J. Boot, and
T. R. Pritchett. Engraved byj. D. Cooper. Fcap. 410, 12/. dd.
' WA TTS, Alarie Alfred and Anna Mary Ho-vitt. — Aurora. A Medley
of Verse. Fcap. Svo, bevelled boards, 5^.


Kegan Paul, Trench & Co.'s Publications. 39.


WEBSTER, Atcgusta.—Xn a Day : n Drama. Small crown 8vo, 2s. bd.

Disguises : a Drama. Small crown 8vo, ^s.

"Wet Days. By a Farmer. Small crown 8vo, 6^-.

WILLIAMS, y.—A Story of Three Years, and other Poems. Small
crown Svo, 3^. 6d.

Wordsworth Birthday Book, The. Edited by Adelaide and
Violet Wordsworth. 32mo, limp cloth, is. 6ii. ; cloth extra, 2s.

YOUNGS, Ella Sharpe. — Paphus, and other Poems. Small crown Svo,
3i. (yd.


WORKS OF FICTION IN ONE VOLUME.

BANKS, Mrs. G. Z.— God's Providence House. New Edition.
Crown Svo, y. bd.

INGELOW, Jean.— OS the Skelligs : a Novel. With Frontispiece.
Second Edition. Crown Svo, 6s.

MACDONALD, G.—Castle'Wa.Tlock.. A Novel. New and Cheaper
Edition. Crown Svo, 6s.

Malcolm. With Portrait of the Author engraved on Steel. Sixth
Edition. Crown Svo, 6s.

The Marquis of Lossie. Fifth Edition. With Frontispiece.
Crown Svo, 6s.

St. George and St. Michael. Fourth Edition. With Frontis-
piece, Crown Svo, 6s.

PALGRAVE, W. Gifford.—'HeTman.TX Agha ; an Eastern Narrative.
Third Edition. Crown Svo, 6s.

SUA W, Flora Z.— Castle Blair ; a Story of Youthful Days. New and
Cheaper Edition. Crown Svo, 3J. 6d.

STRETTON, Hesia.—TtiToxi.gh a Needle's Eye : a Story. New
and Cheaper Edition, with Frontispiece. Crown Svo, 6^.

TAYLOR, Col. Meadows, C.S.L, M.R.I A.—Seeta.: a Novel. New
and Cheaper Edition. With Frontispiece. Crown Svo, 6s.

Tippoo Sultaun : a Tale of the IVIysore War. New Edition, with
Frontispiece. Crown Svo, 6s.

Ralph Darnell. New and Cheaper Edition. With Frontispiece.
Crown Svo, 6s.

A Noble Queen. New and Cheaper Edition. With Frontis-
piece. Crown Svo, 6s.

The Confessions of a Thug. Crown Svo, 6s.

Tara : a Mahratta Tale. Crown Svo, 6s.

Within Sound of the Sea. New and Cheaper Edition, with Frontis-
piece. Crown Svo, 6s.


40 A List of Kegan Paid, Trench & Co.'s Publications.


BOOKS FOR THE YOUNG.

Brave Men's Footsteps. A Book of Example and Anecdote for
Young People. By the Editor of "Men who have Risen." With
4 Illustrations by C. Doyle. Eighth Edition. Crovm 8vo, y. 6d.

COXHEAD, £//;«/.— Birds and Babies. Imp. i6mo. With 33
Illustrations. Cloth gilt, 2s. bd.

DAVIES, G. Christopher. — Rambles and Adventures of our
School Field Club. With 4 Illustrations. New and Cheaper
Edition. Crown 8vo, 3^. isd.

EDMONDS, Herbert.— 'SHeW Spent Lives : a Series of Modern Bio-
graphies. New and Cheaper Edition. Crown Svo, 3^. 6d.

EVANS, Mark.—yhe Story of our Father's Love, told to Children.
Sixth and Cheaper Edition of Theology for Children. With 4
Illustrations. Fcap. Svo, is. (>d.

JOHNSON, Virginia W.—T\\e CatskiU Fairies. Illustrated by
Alfred Fredericks, ^s.

MAC KENNA, S. 7.— Plucky FellovfS. A Book for Boys. With
6 Illustrations. Fifth Edition. Crown Svo, 3^. (>d.

REANEY, Mrs. G. .S.— Waking and "Working ; or. From Girlhood
to Womanhood. New and Cheaper Edition. With a Frontis-
piece. Crown Svo, 3j. 6^/.
Blessing and Blessed : a Sketch of Girl Life. New and

Cheaper Edition. Crown Svo, },s. 61/.
Rose Gurney's Discovery. A Book for Girls. Dedicated to

their Mothers. Crown Svo, 3^. (>d.
English Girls : Their Place and Power. With Preface by the

Rev. R. W. Dale. Fourth Edition. Fcap. Svo, is. 6d.
Just Anyone, and other Stories. Tliree Illustrations. Royal

i6mo, ij". (>d.
Sunbeam "Willie, and other Stories. Three Illustrations. Royal

i6mo, IS. 6d.
Sunshine Jenny, and other Stories. Three Illustrations. Royal
i6mo, IJ-. 6d.

STOCKTON, Frank R.—K Jolly Fellov^rship. With 20 Illustra-
tions. Crow"n Svo, 5^.

STORR, Francis, and TURNER, A^rtiw.— Canterbury Chimes;
or, Chaucer Tales re-told to Children. With 6 Illustrations firom
the EUesmere MS. Third Edition. Fcap. Svo, 3^. (>d.

STRETTON, Hesba.—X)a.-S!\A. Lloyd's Last "Will. With 4 Illustra-
tions. New Edition. Royal i6mo, zs. 6d.

Tales from Ariosto Re-told for Children. By a Lady. With 3
Illustrations, Crown Svo, 4j'. 6d.

WHITAKER, Eiorence.— Christy's Inheritance. A London Story.
Illustrated. Royal i6mo, is. 6d.


FEINTED BY WILLIAM CLOWES AND SONS, LIMITED, LONDON AND BECCLES.
