The Value and Destiny of the Individual (Bernard Bosanquet, 1913)
Public domain. Sourced from Internet Archive: pre-1931 edition scan (https://archive.org/details/valuedestinyofin00bosa). Bosanquet's Hibbert Lectures on the destiny of the finite self within the Absolute.
Hosted by the Tower of Babel library, antarctic-labs.com.

==============================================================================

3 1822  01391 0252


LIBRARY

UNIVERSITY  OF
CALIFORNIA

SAN  DIEGO


UNIV 3 1822  01391 0252

UK  JULLA,  UALI^UKNiA


S.^^'"


INDIVIDUALITY AND DESTINY

THE GIFFORD LECTURES FOR 1911-12
SECOND  SERIES


^^


MACMILLAN  AND  CO., Limited

LONDON  •  BOMBAY  •  CALCUTTA
MELBOURNE

THE  MACMILLAN  COMPANY

NEW YORK  •  BOSTON  •  CHICAGO
DALLAS  •  SAN FRANCISCO

THE  MACMILLAN  CO. OF  CANADA, Ltd.

TORONTO


THE  VALUE  AND  DESTINY


OF


THE  INDIVIDUAL


THE  GIFFORD  LECTURES  FOR  1912
DELIVERED  IN  EDINBURGH  UNIVERSITY


BY

B.  BOSANQUET

'll.d.,  d.c.l.

FELLOW OF THE BRITISH ACADEMY


MACMILLAN AND CO.,  LIMITED

ST.  MARTIN'S STREET,  LONDON

I  9  1.3


COPYRIGHT


PREFACE

The  present  course  of  lectures  is  a  continuation  and
application  of  the  argument  contained  in  the  pre-
vious course,  which  was  published  under  the  title
"  The  Principle  of  Individuality  and  Value."  I  hope
that  this  second  series  will  be  found  somewhat  less
abundant  in  controversial  detail  than  the  former,
though  it,  too,  inevitably  contains  many  paragraphs
and  references  which  time  did  not  permit  to  be
included  in  the  lectures  as  delivered.

I  may  observe  that  the  Index  has  been  restricted
as  far  as  possible  to  proper  names  and  special
allusions.  I  do  not  think  that  the  reader  is  assisted
when  subject-headings,  set  out  in  methodical  order
in  a  very  full  Table  of  Contents,  are  repeated  in  an
Alphabetical  Index  which  is  thus  made  incon-
veniently voluminous.

I  have,  as  before,  inserted  the  Abstracts  which
were  furnished  to  the  press  immediately  after  the
Table  of  Contents.

BERNARD  BOSANOUET.

Edinburgh,  November  191 2.


CONTENTS


LECTURE I


INTRODUCTORY THE FINITE, ITS SELF-
TRANSCENDENCE AND STABILITY


PAGE
I


1.  Two  questions  about  the  finite  from  the  previous  Lectures

i. To  regard  finite  mind  as  tiie  focus  of  externality

is  not  dualism  •  •  .  .  r

ii. '■'■  Eve7y  theory of volition must  give victory to

Determinism  "  not  true. Example  of  Science  .  5

2.  The  double  being  of  the  finite ....  9

i. Best  understood  by  approaching  it  from the  side

of  the  continuum  ;  analogies  for  this .  .  10

ii.  The  double  implication  of  the  term  "  appearance."
The  finite,  or  world  of  appearance,  is  just  what
does  exist .  .  .  .  .12

3.  The  three  main  characteristics  of  finite  mind  ;  division  of

the  lectures  accordingly  .  .  .  .15

i.  Finite  Mind  is  shaped  by  the  universe,  but  in
being  shaped,  shapes  itself  Natural  and
Social  Selection  and  the  Miracle  of  Will  .  16

ii. The  life  of  Finite  Mind  is  essentially  an  adventure,
being  torn  between  existence  and  self-transcend-
ence. Shattering  of  the  world  of  claims  ;  con-
flicts of  pleasure  and  pain,  good  and  evil  .  16
iii. Throughout  and  by  means  of  its  shaping  and  its
adventure there is revealed the stability  and
security  of  the  self The  religious  conscious-
ness ;  the  question  of  continuance  after  death  ;
the  earthly  future. In  and  through  these,  the
worth  of  the  finite  self . . .17
4. The open secret of  stability  and  security  is  in  the  self-
recognition  which  these  characteristics  in\o!ve. Is  it
only  experienced  by  means  of  reflective  theory  'i . 20
vii


CONTENTS


i. There  is  kinship  between  religion  and  philosophy.
Example  from  Spinoza's  third  kind  of  cognition.
Its  unquestionable  coincidence  in  content  with
the  self-recognition  which  we  have  observed  as
emerging  through  finite  life
ii. But  the  religious  consciousness  is  coextensive  in
substance with  finite self- consciousness, and
possibly  wider. It is  merely  the  structure  of
the  finite  when  inspired  with  a  high  intensity  in
its  functioning,  i.e.  when  in its  inevitable  self-
transcendence  the  finite  displays  high  devoutness
to  its  good .....
Conclusion  ;  a  passage  of  Spinoza  cited  to  emphasise  the
universality and self-dependent strength of the true
religious  experience  as  contrasted  with  opinions  which
are  founded  on  a  misconceived  tradition


25


LECTURE II

THE VALUE OF PERSONAL FEELING, AND
THE GROUNDS OF THE DISTINCTNESS OF PERSONS

1.  Feeling  as  an  argument  for  the  exclusiveness  of  Personality  32

i. The  distinctness  of  immediate  experiences  .  n

ii. The  "  bodily  "  nature  of  the  ccen^sthesia  .  34

iii. The  alleged  non-distinctness  of  pleasure  not  true

of  the  developed  self  .  .  .  -35

iv. Sentimentalism  of  the  inner  life  .  .  -36

2.  The  fallacies  involved  in  the  above  contention .  .  36

i. The  confusion  of  form  and  content  in  the inter-
pretation of  feeling .  .  .  ■  Zl
ii. The  confusion  of  impersonal  feeling,  as  non-social,

with  exclusive  or  negative  feeling  ,  .  38

3.  Case  of  personal  feeling  at  its  worst  and  best .  .  40

i. "  Personal  Feeling  "  in  the  bad  sense,  as  negative  40

ii. As  transformed  by  a  universal  content  ;  objective

emotion  ;  tragic  fear .  .  .  .41

iii. "  Active "  emotion  covers  the  whole  possibilities

of  "  passive "  emotion  (Spinoza)  .  .  44

4.  The  distinctness  of  persons  .  .  .  .46

i. The formal distinctness is only  a difference  of

quality  of  content .  .  .  .47


CONTENTS


ii. Type  of  the  material  distinctness — individualisa-

tion  in  a  social  whole  .  .  .  .48

a. Supposing  distinct  content  for  each  self,

still  a  thorough  identity  in  difference .  49

/3.  But  this  supposition  untrue  ;  variable
range  and  arbitrary  coincidence  of  self-
contents  ;  do  not  corroborate  formal
distinctness .  .  .  .50

y.  The  finite  selves  comprehend  the  continu-
ous content  of  their  worlds  in  various
degrees,  apparently  according  to  their
power.  .  .  .  -53

5.  The  service  rendered  by  the  existing
arrangement  of  experience  in  spheres
with  distinct  centres,  overlapping  at
random  ;  and  the  signs  that  it  is  pre-
carious and  superficial .  .  .  54


A.  THE  MOULDING  OF  SOULS
LECTURE III

NATURAL AND SOCIAL SELECTION

1.  "  The  Vale  of  Soul-making  " .  .  .  .63

2.  Pre-existence  and  future  existence  not  necessary  to  the

value  of  souls  .  .  .  .  .66

3.  Sketch  of  remaining  Lectures .  .  .  .69

4.  A  simple  phase  of  soul-making,  the  genesis  of  life. Its

line  of  evolution  a  summary  of  its  world,  i.e.  decided
by  Natural  Selection,  not  an  inherent  and  independent
direction .....  7j

5.  Objection,  "  Evolution thus  regarded  gives  no  guarantee

of  progress  or  excellence."  Answer,  "Thus  regarded
and  thus  only,  progress  and  excellence  guarantee
nature  of  whole " •  ....  74

6.  Concentration  of  susceptibilities. Life  passing  into  soul  .  75
7- Formation of intelligent centre, elicited from and by

environment,  in  a  way  parallel  to  emergence  of  living
centres.  Superfluousness  of  pan-psychism.  Instance
from  organisation  of  knowledge  ,  .  -77


CONTENTS


8.  Formation  of  mind,  how  analogous  to  that  of  knowledge  .  8 1

i. Two  preliminary  points  : —  .  .  .82

a. What  Mind  inherits  from  Life  .  .  82

^. The  second  and  third "  nature "  contained

in  the  environment  of  Mind  .  .  83

ii.  Natural  Selection  the  method  by  which  intelligent
centres,  like  living  ones,  are  formed.  Points  of
difference  from  its  action  on  mere  life.  In-
herent severity  of  the  process  .  .  .87

iii. The Individuality of mind tends  to  burst the

envelopes  of  particular  centres  .  .89

9.  How  soul -making  in  society  passes  into  ultra-individual

(also  ultra-social)  experience.  Its  severe  demand  upon
particular  centres .  .  .  .  .90

A.  THE TvlOULDING OF 'SyO'lJ'L'^—Confumcd
LECTURE IV

THE MIRACLE OF WILL

1 .  The  creative  and  plastic  power  of  Volition. What  is  its

special  secret  ?  .  .  .  .94

2.  Seriousness  of  this  difficulty  illustrated  by  : — .  .  98

i. Vacancy  of  intellectualist  and  abstract  accounts  of

Will ......  99

ii. Problem  of  giving  genuine effect  to  doctrine  of

Free  Causality  in  Thought  and  Will .  .100

3.  Solution  of  the  difficulty  in  general  terms. In principle,

there  is  for  every  situation  a  larger  and  more  effective
point  of  view  than  the  given  ;  and,  in  principle,  an  in-
telligent will  always  has  access  to  this.  The  secret  lies
in  what  works  in  the  mind  and  on  the  facts  before  it,
forming  the  clue  to  new  selections  of  fact  and  possi-
bility. The  theory  is  drawn  from,  e.g.,  the  true  inter-
pretation of  Hegel's  dialectic,  and  the  right  view  of  In-
duction and  of  Constructive  Morality,  and  it  vindicates
the  power  of  thinking  will,  which  is  often  meant  when
freedom  is  spoken  of  .  .  .  .  .102

4.  Examples to  confirm  above  doctrine,  arranged  so  as  to

answer  questions  : —  .  .  .  .109

a. What is the  source  of the  concrete  content  of


CONTENTS


will  ? — Examples  : transformation of animal
sounds  into  language  ;  of  animal  "togetherness"
into  society  ;  general  relations  of  natural  facts
to  institutions. Contrast  of  the content and
system  of  will  with  abstract  formulae,  psycho-
logical or  metaphysical  .  .  .109
/i. What  are  the  nature  and  limits  of  the  power  of
character (habitual will) over circumstance  ?
The  word  circumstance  indicates  a  double  point
of  view  which is  in  itself  an  example  of the
above  doctrine. A  "circumstance"  is  currently
taken  as  a  hard  fragment,  but is  really  relative
to  a  living  world  and  centre . . .113
(i) Instances  of  complete transformation  of
circumstance  by  will,  Rochdale  Pioneers
and  others . . . .116
(2) Relation  of  character  to  so-called  physical
impossibility. Wide  relativity  of  physi-
cal  impossibility  ; importance  of  time-
transcendence as a  condition  in the
larger point of  view. Over against
ultimate  case  of  absolute  physical  im-
possibility may  be  set  ultimate  solution
by  resignation  or  sacrifice,  which  may
preserve superiority of  will even in
ultimate cases. Distinction between
sb'ength  and  power  of  will . . 117

5.  Will  and  cognition,  how  respectively  dependent  on  thinking 1 2 1

a. Relation  of  the contrast between them to  the

opinion  of  to-day  .  .  .123

/3. Relation  of  our  theory  to  demand  for  ethical  fact 127

6.  Is Power  of  Will  part  of  subject  "Moulding  of  Souls"?

Yes  ;  Will  not  to  be  ultimately  opposed  either  to  environ-
ment which  selects,  or  to  life  of  Absolute.  It  is  the
relatively  complete  phase  of  the  former,  a  microcosm
as  a  world  reshaping  itself,  and  a  member  of  the  latter,
helping  to  constitute  its  self-maintenance.  Pass  on  to
hazards  and  hardships  involved  in  finite  Individuality,
and  their  connection  with  value  and  destiny  of  finite
beinsfs  .  .  .  .  .  .128


CONTENTS


B. HAZARDS  AND HARDSHIPS OF  FINITE
SELFHOOD

LECTURE V

THE WORLD OF CLAIMS AND COUNTER-CLAIMS

PAGE

1.  The  world  of  finite  beings  in  relations .  .  .131

2.  Theism  involves  such  a  conception. Vatke's  criticism  on

"  Creator  of  Creators "  .  .  .  .134

3.  Morality  (as  duty  for  duty's  sake)  the  central  expression

of  the  contradiction  of  such  a  world .  .  .138

4.  Individualism of idea of Justice as apportionment of

external  goods  according  to  a  standard. Its  incompati-
bility with  an  organic  point  of  view .  .  .143

5.  Nature  of  pessimistic  sense  of  injustice  in  world  of  claims  ;

"justice"  defies the  reality  of spiritual membership

and  is  shattered  by  it  .  .  .  .149

6.  Why  not  have  a  standard  of  justice  according  to  spiritual

membership  ? The  sort  of  standard  we  should  get,  and

its  self-contradiction .  .  .  .  -153

7.  To  make  the  finite  mind,  through  its  claims,  the  judge  of

its  own need  for  discipline  and  hardship,  is  to  make

the  universe  a  farce .  .  .  .  .156


B.  HAZARDS  AND HARDSHIPS OF  FINITE
^Y.Y.YYiOOY^— Continued

LECTURE VI

PLEASURE AND PAIN

,  Failure  of  the  world  of  claims.  What  our  account  of  our
troubles  aspires  to  effect  —  maximise  rather  than
minimise .  .  .  .  .  .160

, Pleasure and pain : their common root in  the  double

nature  of  finite  beings  .  .  .  .162

, Common  character  of pleasure and pain  ;  not opposite

quantities  on  same  scale  .  .  .  .163

. Pleasure  and  pain imply  self-transcendence  ;  in  pleasure,

harmonious;  in  pain,  obstructed  by  contradiction  164


CONTENTS  xiii

PAGE

5.  Any  approach to a  satisfactory  self-transcendence  of  a

finite  being  must  involve  something  which  has been

pain,  a  transcended  obstruction  .  .  .167

6.  Pain  has  no  special  relation  to  evil,  nor  pleasure  to  good,

or only  in a secondary  sense. Pain and  evolution
among  lower  animals  .  .  .  .168

7.  What  should  make  pain  antagonistic  to  theoretical  satis-

faction ? Suppose pain extreme and universal. Its
ground  is  its  limit .  .  .  .  .17^

8.  Above  attitude  distinguished  from  apologetics  of  pain . 176

i. Reject theories of pain as hard opposite of

pleasure,  justified  by  moral  ends  .  . 176

ii.  And  theories  of  future  evanescence  of  pain,  except
as  some  change  which  may  throw  light  on
nature  of  reality  .  .  .  .177

iii.  Though  we  think  probable,  in  later  course  of  any
finite  world,  a  higher  self-consciousness  in  pain  ;
tragedy  replacing  brute  suffering  .  . 180

9.  Organic  standpoint  as  to  pain  in  issue  of  optimism  and
pessimism.  Irrelevant  challenge  "  Would  you  re-live
your  life?" All  repetition  is  unspiritual  .  .182

10.  Rank  assigned  to  pain  in  Christianity.  Involves  a  uni-
versal and  substantial  reconciliation.  The  conception
of  spiritual  induction  .  .  .  .  . \%2,

I  I.  Illustration  by  accident  and  death.  Their  place  in
spiritual  induction.  Why  no  religion  of  pure  pleasure.
The  tribute  of  our  finite  self .  .  .  .187

B. HAZARDS  AND HARDSHIPS OP^  FINITE
SELFHOOD — Contif27ied

LECTURE VII

GOOD AND EVIL

1.  Good and Evil, contrasted with pleasure and pain, as

attitudes  concerning  a  creature's  whole  being.  Good
in  what  sense  definable.  The  contrasts  of  good  and
evil,  with  pleasure  and  pain,  and  with  perfection  and
imperfection  respectively,  compared .  .  .192

2.  Can  any  pleasure  then  be  evil,  or  any  pain  good,  in  se  ?

As  concerns  partial  pleasures  or  pains,  reasons  for
afifirmative .  .  .  .  .  195


CONTENTS


197


3.  The antithesis between moral goodness and good in

genera],  as  that  between  fundamentals  of  life  and
their  corollaries  .....

4.  Difficulty  in  enlarging  goodness  to  include  all  goods. We

are  thus  driven  to  include  in  it  natural  and  historical
gifts  ;  which  are  unquestionably  its  roots.  Fact  is,  the
individual's  roots  stretch  beyond  him  ;  goodness  passes
into  goods,  and  goods  into  gifts  .  .  .200

5.  Yet  apart  from  his  attitude  as  a  whole  we  hardly  have

good  or  evil.  Conception  of  success  and  failure  in
Nature  precarious .  .  .  .  .201

6.  Thus  good  and  evil are rightly  treated as incidents of

finiteness.  But  this  treatment,  in  recognising  their
arduous  and  adventurous  character,  does  not  dissociate
them  ultimately  from  stability,  nor  stability  from  them  201

7.  In  what  sense  good  is  a  hazard,  and  evil  both  a  hazard

and  a  hardship  •  •  .  .  . 20"

i.  Good  is  liable  to  obstruction  ;  contains  a  dualism
(though  not  an  ultimate  one)  ;  is  made  of  the
same  stuff  as  evil  ;  is  relative  to  evil  as  its
opposite.  The  distinction  between  them  is  not
tixed  in  the  content  ;  it  arises  in  the  venture
of  making  the  self  ....  20-:
ii.  What  makes  evil  evil,  and  a  hardship  ?  The
second  contradiction,  not  merely  against  good-
ness (for  goodness  has  the  same  against  evil),
but  against  itself,  and  so  against  the  self  Im-
possibility of  discriminating  good  and  evil
except  through  the  realised  and  organised
world  of  good  with  which  the  good  self  is
identified  .  .  .  .  .206

8.  Why  is evil  essentially  adherent to  good  ? Many  ways

of  stating  the  reason.  Because  of  the  inadequacy  of
finite  good  ;  which  =  because  the  finite  creature  is  not
a  whole,  and  cannot  as  it  stands  be  satisfied  by  any
good  ;  which  =  because  it  is  not  adequate  to  perfection,
and  yet  finite  good  is  not  adequate  to  // ;  which
=  because  evil  is  necessary  to  freedom,  i.e.  the  finite
being's  task  involves  constructing  itself  out  of  itself,
and  so  setting  itself  against  itself ;  which  =  because  the
moral  standpoint,  being  individualistic,  involves  an
insuperable  antithesis,  and  conflict  a^^  z>?/f;;////w  . 209


CONTENTS


Are  these  hazards  and  hardships,  say,  evil,  characters
of  the  Absolute  ?  Evil,  e.g.,  is  a  subordinate  aspect  in
the  experience  of  good,  as  error  in  that  of  truth.  Good
itself  hardly  a  character  of  the  Absolute,  and  nothing  in
evil  which  can  resist  absorption  in  good  by  rearrange-
ment. Thus  evil  and  error  may  be  within  a  perfect
experience,  but  are  not  characters  ^it .  .  . 212

On  the  borderland  of  this  lecture  and  the  previous  one
— a  confused  objection  to  a  suffering  world  which  is
also  contemptible  according  to  our  ideals.  We  do  not
undertake  to  prove  poetic  justice,  but  desire  to  clear
up  the  facts  of  pain  and  value.  The  pessimist  critic
must  choose  his  line.  If  he  argues  from  pain,  he  must
go  to  facts  of  pain,  not  to  his  notions  of  what  ought  to
be  painful.  If  he  argues  from  moral  ideals,  he  must
see  to  it  that  his  ideals  are  adequate  and  recognise
true  value  ;  and  he  must  admit  that  moral  judgment
is  not  the  highest  point  of  view,  for  it  is  determined
by  a  dualism  within  perfection  .  .  . 21S

In  regard  to  the  general  censure  of  the  universe,  we
remember  that  our  criticised  desires  are  the  standard,
and  this  we  can  hardly  possess  but  by  possessing
perfection.  And  we  cannot  place  antecedent  limits,
drawn  from  our  finite  nature,  on  our  nature  as  to
be  communicated  by  the  Absolute.  We  cannot  pick
and  choose  how  much  evil  is  tolerable.  We  should
rule  out  our  best  chances  .  .  .  .-721


C.  THE STABILITY  AND SECURITY  OF
FINITE  SELFHOOD

LECTURE VIII

THE RELIGIOUS CONSCIOUSNESS

I. The Religious Consciousness  as  typical  of  Stability  and

Security  in contrast with the previous  sub-headings 224
Two  special  points —

a. Reconciliation  of  the  third  sub-heading  with the

two  previous .  .  .  .227

/i. Is the religious consciousness only  to be had

through  philosophy  ? .  .  .  . 229-


CONTENTS


2.  Religion in the broadest sense includes all cases of

worship  and  devotion,  e.g:  to  truth  and  beauty.  No
sound  distinction  between  "natural"  and  "ethical"
religions.  Crudest  worship  of  objects  involves  some
social  solidarity  ..... 233

3.  How  is  evil  to  be  thought  of  from  the  religious  point  of

view?  ...... 241

i.  Opposite  attitudes  in  religion  and  sheer  morality.
Evil  recognised  only  to  be  disowned.  This  the
case  in  the  simplest  examples  of  devotion  . 241

ii. As  in  the  highest  experiences  of  religious  genius  . 244
iii. The  paradox  thus  involved  in  religion. Its  double
make-believe  ; the practical and theoretical
aspects,  and  necessity  of  their  fusion .  . 246

4.  Practicality  of  religion,  agrees  with  the  fact  that  its  doctrines

express  God's  nature  imaginatively,  and  not  as  ultimate
reality  or  the  Absolute  .... 249

5.  Then what is relation of Religion to objective truth  ?

Does  it  not  involve  the  existence  of  God  as  a  fact  ?
The  religious  consciousness  neither  depends  upon
demonstrations  of  a  separate  Being's  existence  nor
does  it  corroborate  them.  It  is  self-contained,  being
the  insight  into  the  human-divine  nature  of  the  self,
and  in  this  sense  an  experience  of  God.  Theological
doctrine  recognises  this,  but  externalises  it.  The
stability  and  security  of  the  finite  self  is  in  the  religious
consciousness,  which  extends  over  the  whole  of  life . 251


C.  THE STABILITY  AxND SECURITY  OF
FINITE SEl^FHOOD—Con^mued

LECTURE IX

THE DESTINY OF THE FINITE SELF

1.  The  Idea  of  Transformation  .  .  .  .257

2.  We  hardly  possess  reasons  for  expecting  any  special  degree

of  Transformation ....

3.  What  destiny  we  can  consistently  desire .

a. Subjective  Immortality  and  Causal  Continuance

[3. Metempsychosis

y. Nirvana  and  absorption  in  God


257
260
262
266
270


CONTENTS  xvii


PAGE


4.  The  question  of  3  further  considered .  .  .271

a. Simple  prolongation — reduces  itself  to  chain of

lives  ?..... 272
/?. The  demand  for  a  better  state — conflict  of  identity

and  perfection  .  .  .  .275

y. Discussion  of  Green's  doctrine  of  the  conservation

of  personality  .  .... 277

5. Details  illustrating  transcendence  of  given  person-
ality  ...... 282

e. Argument  from  the  affections .  .  .285

5.  Conclusion  ;  what  is  certainly  preserved  is  the  content  of

the  self,  which  is  secure  in  the  Absolute  .  . 287


C.  THE  STABILITY  AND  SECURITY  OF
FINITE  ^^\J^YiOO'D-~Continued

LECTURE X

THE GATES OF THE FUTURE

1.  Theories  which  make  drafts  upon  the  future  .  . 290

i. The  gates  of  the  future  open. Time  a  reality .  292

ii. The  gates  to  close  one  day. Time  to  cease  .  293

iii. These  views  agree  in  a  facile  reliance  on  future .  294

2.  Our  question  is  the  rank  and  value  of  progress,  according

to  our  theory  .  .  .  .  .295

i. How  a  non-temporal  real  can  express  itself  in  an

infinite  temporal  series  .  .  . 296

ii. In  what  sense  infinite  progress  can  be  contained

in  a  perfect  reality .... 299
iii. If  the  ultimate  real  is  progress  to  infinity  the  gates

are  closed  against  perfection .  .  . 303

iv. Rank  and  value  of  the  attractive  demand  for  real

progress  of  the  universe  .  .  . 304

a. The  one-sided  self-recognition  or  purely  moral
standpoint — progress  conceived  as  an  absolute
demand ..... 305
/?.  The  inclusive  self-recognition  ;  real  perfection

a  condition  of  the  true  value  of  progress  306

3.  What  attitude  to  man's  future  in time  conforms  to  our

argument .  .  .  ,  .  .308

b


CONTENTS


i.  What  sort  of  thing  can  we  hope  ?  A  fair  question.
In  the  main,  an  increasing  sense  of  true  values,
due  to  a  fuller  grasp  of  the  whole  .  . 309

ii.  The  frame  of  mind  which  corresponds  to  the
recognition  of  the  Absolute  whole,  as  beyond
religion.  Our  awareness  of  an  inclusive
totality  .  .  .  .  .310

iii. Distinguish  interest  in  the  future  from  interest  in

the  whole,  to  be  satisfied  in  the  future  .  . 312

iv.  What  really  matters  in  progress  is  the  deeper  and
more  general  self-recognition,  i.e.  the  religious
consciousness.  .  .  .  -313

4.  Illustration, two suggestions  about past and future re-

spectively .  .  .  .  .  .314

i.  The  most  important  changes  in  past  history  have
been  those  affecting  man's  freedom  in  the  widest
sense,  viz.  his  recognition  of  his  full  nature.
Part  played  by  "the  unhappy  consciousness"  .  315
ii.  The  most  important  change  in  the  future  history
of  our  race  will  be  to  learn,  through  experience  of
material  progress,  the  dependence  of  values  on
the  renunciation  involved  in  full  self-recognition.
A  typical  anticipation  of  a  much- improved
society,  and  the  problem  of  its  valuation  . 321

5.  Conclusion  ;  the  reaction  of  a  profound  self-recognition  on

the  apparatus  of  life,  and  the  absoluteness  of  the  security
which  it  ensures.  Identification  with  ultimate  in-
dividuality, which  can  only  be  through  religious  self-
recognition,  constitutes  the  worth  and  destiny  of  finite
beings  .  .  .  .  .  .325


ABSTRACTS OF LECTURES


LECTURE I

INTRODUCTORY FINITENESS AND SELF-
TRANSCENDENCE

The  general title  of  the  two courses  was  "The  Value
and  Destiny  of  the  Individual." The first  course,  "  The
Principle  of  Individuality  and  Value,"  delivered  last  year,
attempted  to  show  how  the  reality  and  value  of  all  things
in  the  universe  depended  on  the  degree  of  their  embodi-
ment of  the  principle  of  individuality — the  completeness,
coherence,  or self-containedness  of  the universe. This
second course,  with  the  title,  "The  Value and Destiny
of  the  Individual,"  is  an attempt  to  apply  the  principle
developed in the  first  course  to  finite  beings,  that  is,  in
effect,  to  human  souls. It  discusses  in  what  way  the  so-
called  "  individual  "  or  human  soul  works  out  its  destiny
and  achieves  its  worth,  by  and  through  its  membership  of
the  universe,  the  only  real  and  ultimate  individual. The
present  lecture,  on  "  Finiteness  and Self-Transcendence,"
was  intended  to  give  an  outline  of  the  course,  showing  how
its  sub-divisions  are  connected  with  different  sides  of  the
nature  of  finite  beings  as  our  principle  requires  us  to  an-
alyse it. The  human  soul  has  sometimes  been  thought  of
as  a  celestial  spark  of  divinity,  sometimes  as  a  crystallisa-
tion out  of  unconscious  Nature,  or  out  of  a  hardly  conscious
tribal  collectivity,  sharing  the  nature  of  a  suffering  deity
who  represents  that  collectivity. This  latter  idea  goes  to
meet  modern philosophy  from the  historical  side ; and
these  two  ideas,  even  apart,  but  better  if  taken  together,


ABSTRACTS OF  LECTURES


illustrate  our  view  of  the  soul  as  a  link  or  focus,  through
which  the  striving  of  the  universe  unites  the  multitude  of
things  and  persons  in  the  absolute  whole.  This  concep-
tion determines  the  treatment  of  the  soul  in  these  lectures.
We  shall  first  consider,  in  the  following  lecture,  how  the
distinctness  of  particular  persons,  though  practically  a  fact,
shows  indications  of  an  underlying  unity  not  generally
recognised.  After  that,  we  shall  consider  the  soul  and  its
destiny  under  three  principal  heads.  First,  the  idea  of
"  soul-making  "  as  the  work  of  the  universe,  borrowed  from
Keats,  will  lead  us  to  speak  of  the  moulding  of  souls  by
natural  and  social  selection,  and  of  their  self- creation
through  the  miracle  of  will.  Secondly,  the  life  of  the
finite  self  in  apparent  self-completeness  and  independence,
will  show  itself  to  be  one  of  suffering  and  adventure.
And,  thirdly,  as  far  as  through  such  adventure  the  soul
is  driven  to  self-recognition,  or  knowledge  of  its  own  true
nature  and  dependence  in  the  religious  consciousness,  the
secret  of  stability  and  security,  even  for  the  finite  self,  will
be  revealed.  This  consciousness  is  closely  akin  to  the
best  things  in  knowledge  ;  but  philosophy  depends  on  it
rather  than  vice  versa,  and  it  is  natural  to  the  healthy
mind,  as  Spinoza  says.


LECTURE II

PERSONAL FEELING AND THE DISTINCTNESS
OF PERSONS

The  aim  of  this  lecture  is  to  prepare  us  for  a  freer  dealing
with  the  distinction  between  different  persons  than  is  com-
monly held  permissible.  No  one  wants  to  deny  it  is  a  fact  ;
but  it  is  important  to  recognise  what  sort  of  fact  it  is,  and  that
it  presents  indications  of  not  being  ultimate  and  irreducible.
The  common  conviction  is  that  the  most  "  personal "  part
of  us  is  the  least  capable  of  being  shared  or  communicated.
I  am  I  and  not  you,  because  you  cannot  have  my  feelings
just  as I have  them,  especially  my  bodily  feelings. We


ABSTRACTS OF  LECTURES


cannot  "  enter  into  "  each  other's  n:iinds  in  their  immediate
quahty — each  other's  sensations,  for  instance.  To  realise
our  personaHty  is  to  absorb  ourselves  in  our  exclusiveness.
This  amounts  to  the  facts  it  relies  on,  and  no  more.  I
cannot  have  your  pleasure  as  you  have  it.  This  is  true.
But,  further,  there  are  all  sorts  of  really  great  things  which
seem  to  belong  to  the  man  himself,  and  to  no  other  man,
e.g.  his  religion,  in  which,  some  say,  he  is  alone  with  God.
These  things  are  called  "personal,"  and  set  to  the  credit
of  what  is  peculiar  and  unsharable  in  the  "  person."  So,
for  example,  with  philosophy  or  art.  But  this  is  just  con-
fusion. What  is  above,  or  includes,  the  social  relation,  is
being  confounded  with  what  is  below,  or  has  not  reached
it.  The  maximum  is  being  confused  with  the  minimum
of  experience.  All  these  great  things  are  above  "  altruism,"
and  rest  on  man's  universal  nature.  They  in  no  way
support  the  exclusiveness  of  personality.  It,  in  fact,  is
"  personality  "  in  the  worst  sense  ;  what  we  try  to  avoid.
The  most  real  personal  feeling  is  the  most  universal,  like
tragic  emotion.  When  we  come  to  consider  the  material,
so  to  speak,  of  persons,  the  objects  of  their  attention  and
achievements,  we  see  how  much  they  have  in  common,
and  how  little,  from  the  point  of  view  of  what  is  great  in
the  world,  their  distinctness  seems  to  matter.  Take  the
development  of  Christianity,  or  of  the  drama,  or  of  the
British  Constitution,  or  of  mechanical  invention.  You
can  distinguish  the  phases  and  values  in  each  ;  you
cannot  distinguish  what  individuals  contributed.  Their
"  contents "  overlap  irregularly ;  the  clear  structure  is
that  of  the  object.  But  yet  it  is  these  objects  which  are
their  life  and  value.  No  doubt  the  relation  of  each  person
to  them  is  different  ;  but  his  achievement  blends  with  that
of  others,  and  his  distinctness  from  them  shows  as  merely
external  and  superficial.  There  is  no  rule  as  to  how  far
"  persons  "  can  overlap  in  their  contents.  Often  a  little
change  of  quality  in  feeling,  it  seems,  would  all  but  bring
them  into  one.  It  is  impotence,  and  no  mysterious  limita-
tion, that  keeps  them  apart.  At  their  strongest  they  become
confluent,  and  we  see  how  they  might  be  wholly  so.


ABSTRACTS OF  LECTURES


A.  THE  MOULDING  OF  SOULS
LECTURE III

NATURAL AND SOCIAL SELECTION

This  lecture  treats,  as  will  also  the  next,  of  "  The
Moulding  of  Souls."  The  expression  "  soul-making  "  is
borrowed  from  a  letter  of  Keats,  in  which  he  condemns
the  phrase  "  a  vale  of  tears,"  and  proposes  rather  to
consider  the  world  as  "  a  vale  of  soul-making,"  in  which
pain  and  trouble  are  essential.  Keats's  suggestion  is
expressed  so  as  to  imply  the  pre-existence  of  something
to  be  developed  into  souls,  and  a  survival  of  souls  in  a
further  life  after  being  moulded  in  this  world.  Accepting
the  conservation  of  all  values  in  the  absolute,  I  do  not
think  these  special  assumptions  necessary.  But  the  view
that  the  moulding  of  souls  is  the  main  work  of  the  universe
as  finite  seems  to  contain  an  unquestionable  truth.  To
begin  with,  I  may  recall  my  account  of  the  development
of  life  under  natural  selection.  Its  line  of  evolution,  we
held,  was  a  summary  of  the  significance  of  the  world,
as  acting  through  and  upon  each  living  centre  under
special  conditions.  It  was  only  as  thus  regarded  that  life
gives  any  clue  to  the  nature  of  the  universe.  The  forma-
tion of  soul  is  in  the  beginning,  for  our  knowledge,
indistinguishable  from  that  of  living  centres,  and  has  been
compared  to  condensation  of,  e.g.,  tribal  peculiarities  of
life  ;  which  as  consciousness  and  intelligence  emerge,  con-
tinues as  an  analogous  process,  guided  by  what  in  the
large  sense  must  be  regarded  as  natural  selection,  i.e.
the  requirement,  in  every  case,  of  being  "  equal  to  the
situation  "  on  pain  of  extinction.  How  such  principles  as
those  of  life  and  mind  can  elicit  special  and  individual
structures  from  special  environments  may  be  illustrated
by  the  case  of  knowledge,  which  is  an  example  of  a  similar


ABSTRACTS OF  LECTURES


process  at  a  higher  level.  It  begins  with  no  detailed
apparatus  of  consciousness,  but  constructs  the  whole
framework  of  logic,  e.g.  laws  of  causation,  etc.,  which  have
no  apparent  place  in  the  environment,  under  pressure  of
the  need  for  interpreting  situations.  Mind  or  soul  take
shape  under  pressure  of  situations,  and  may  be  called
adaptive  variations,  if  we  remember  that  this  does  not
explain  their  ultimate  nature,  but  only,  given  their  nature,
its  particular  shapes.  Mind  or  soul,  of  course,  does  not
start  empty,  but  takes  over  its  content  from  life.  But
this  content,  that  of  life,  has  all  been  elicited  in  this  same
way.  As  a  partial  expression  of  the  world,  formed  by  its
surroundings,  soul  may  be  said  to  be  moulded  by  natural
selection,  although  more  especially  in  the  shape  of  social
selection  ;  for  mind  has  its  main  environment  in  mind,
and  there  is  far  more  room  for  contrivance  and  initiative
than  in  mere  natural  selection.  But  still  the  dominant
law  is  that  of  being  equal  to  the  situation  ;  and  it  models
and  sculptures  the  soul.  And  through  this  pressure  of  the
world  upon  them,  souls  recover  their  primitive  unity  with
each  other,  and  develop  forms  of  life  in  which  the  absolute
begins  to  show  itself,  and  the  particular  soul  to  be  fused
and  recast  through  larger  experiences,  such  as  social  self-
sacrifice,  art  and  science,  or  religion.  And  all  this  has  a
side  of  severity,  but  is  the  revelation  of  value.


A.  THE  MOULDING  OF  ^OV^l."^— Continued
LECTURE IV

THE MIRACLE OF WILL, OR CHARACTER AND
CIRCUMSTANCE

We  spoke  in  the  last  lecture  of  soul-formation  through
natural  and  social  selection.  To-day  we  are  to  consider
the  other  side  of  this  process — the  self-formation  of  the
soul,  or  the  "  Miracle  of  Will." Mind,  in  "  being  moulded,"


ABSTRACTS OF  LECTURES


is  moulding  itself  and  its  environment.  It  just  is  the
focussing  and  adaptation  by  which  a  range  of  surround-
ings, meeting  in  a  single  spirit,  brings  new  facts  and
meanings  out  of  itself  What  is  the  secret  or  miracle
of  will  ?  That  is,  how  or  why  can  a  mind  be  sure  of
remoulding,  modifying,  "  being  equal  to,"  any  situation  in
which  it  finds  itself?  This  is  a  very  difficult  question,
and  it  is  not  answered  merely  by  seeing  that  mind  is  in
some  sense  above  things,  or  a  condition  of  experience.
Again,  it  is  no  use  to  appeal  to  blind  will.  This  might
make  changes,  but  there  could  be  no  occasion  for  expecting
them  to  be  changes  for  the  better.  Why  can  mind  always
in  principle  transform  things  for  the  better  ?  The  secret
lies  in  the  fact  that  mind  has  always  more  in  it  than  is
before  it.  Or,  in  other  words,  the  universe  (as  Plato  urged)
is  all  connected.  So  for  every  given  situation  there  is  a
larger  and  more  effective  point  of  view  than  that  given,
and  because  the  spirit  of  the  whole,  in  the  shape  of  some
special  want  or  question,  is  always  in  the  mind,  it  can
always,  in  principle,  find  clues  to  new  possibilities  in  every
given  situation.  It  is  like  the  expert's  view  of  any  situa-
tion, practical  or  theoretical.  He  has  instincts  and  ideas
which  take  hold  of  points  which  no  one  else  would  see,
and  make  a  new  thing  of  the  problem.  Every  mind  in
its  degree  is  able  to  do  this.  Many  modern  doctrines  of
logic  and  ethics  converge  in  this  view,  which  is  the  essence,
for  instance,  of  real  inductive  theory.  This,  then,  is  the
secret  of  the  power  of  will,  which  people  often  mean  when
they  ask  about  its  freedom.  This  principle  is  simply  and
clearly  illustrated  by  looking  at  the  detail  of  a  human  will,
and  asking  where  it  comes  from,  and  how,  e.g.  language
out  of  animal  sounds,  marriage  and  the  family  out  of
animal  parentage,  the  sacrament  out  of  eating  together.
"Institutions"  come  out  of  natural  facts.  Thinking  Will
has  "  elicited  "  them.  This  shows  the  nature  of  will,  and
the  same  sort  of  thing  shows  its  power.  A  dozen  artisans
want  to  get  groceries  without  a  middleman,  and  found  the
magnificent  co-operative  movement.  The  great  social
need  was  in  their  minds,  though  not  before  them. "  Circum-


ABSTRACTS OF  LECTURES


stance  "  implies  a  centre,  and  the  word  reveals  a  meaning
opposite  to  its  common  use.  Really,  it  is  part  of  a  life,
and  so  transformed  when  understood.  Even  "  physical
impossibility  "  is  highly  relative,  and  if  we  count  in  resigna-
tion and  self-sacrifice,  can  never  resist  will.  Strength  of
will — e.g.  resoluteness — is  not  its  power,  but  may  help  it.
In  developing  these  ideas  a  very  detailed  knowledge  of
moral  and  social  facts  has  been  achieved,  to  which,  and  to
social  improvement,  the  voluntarist  movement  has  contri-
buted but  little,  showing  the  inadequacy  of  its  notion  of
will.  Will,  as  we  said,  is  one  side  of  the  formation  of
souls.


B.  HAZARDS  AND  HARDSHIPS  OF
FINITE  SELFHOOD

LECTURE V

THE WORLD OF CLAIMS AND COUNTER-CLAIMS

With  this  lecture  we  begin  the  consideration  of  the
"  Hazards  and  Hardships  of  Finite  Selfhood."  The  sub-
ject of  the  lecture  is  the  "  World  of  Claims  and  Counter-
claims." Such  a  world  is  what  we  live  in,  as  far  as  we
think  of  ourselves  as  finite  beings,  independent,  yet  con-
nected by  relations  of  right  and  duty  with  God,  and
Nature,  and  our  fellow-men.  We  are,  then,  in  lawyers'
phrase,  "  at  arm's  length  "  with  them.  Life,  so  conceived,
is  full  of  hazard  and  hardship  ;  of  hazard,  because  these
relations  of  right  and  duty  do  not  express  our  real  unity
with  God,  man,  and  Nature,  and  so  have  a  character  of
chance  ;  of  hardship,  because,  being  accidental,  they  are
constantly  breaking  down,  and  we  find  ourselves  always
failing  in  our  "  duty "  (the  source  of  moral  pessimism)
and  not  getting  our  "  rights "  (pessimistic  sense  of  in-
justice). Theism  belongs  in  principle  to  such  a  view  of
the  world,  regarding  God  as  a  creator  and  governor,  under


ABSTRACTS OF  LECTURES


conditions  which  involve  a  future  life  in  order  to  compen-
sation and  moral  improvement.  Such  ideas  involve  in-
superable difficulties,  as  may  be  seen  from  the  conception
of  a  creator  of  free  beings.  Morality,  considered  as  duty
to  a  superior  being,  other  than  ourselves,  is  one  form
taken  by  the  contradictions  of  such  a  world.  Justice,
as  a  rule  of  apportionment  of  goods  to  individuals — a
standard  for  which  is  really  impossible  to  find — is  another.
The  rules  of  morality  and  justice,  thus  understood,  are
perpetually  being  broken  down  by  our  real  nature,  which
is  religious,  not  merely  moral,  and  based  on  the  unity  of
one  with  another,  not  on  apportionment  to  individuals.
Thus  there  is  a  constant  moral  pessimism  and  sense  of
injustice  arising  from  the  non-fulfilment  of  our  mistaken
demands  on  God,  our  fellow-men,  Nature,  and  ourselves.
Our  true  nature  discards  the  notion  of  individual  merit,
and  individual  claims,  and  the  expectation  of  perfectly
realising  the  supreme  will  in  the  individual's  finite  will
(as  "  duty ").  We  can  see  the  total  breakdown  of  the
notion  of  claims  in  any  enterprise  conducted  by  persons
really  unselfish  and  united.  Claims  all  vanish,  and  the
"  best "  people  have  most  to  bear,  and  carry  the  burdens
of  the  rest.  And  this  we  feel  to  be  right ;  but  it  involves
recognising  that  the  rules  of  the  world  of  claims  do  not
represent  our  nature  as  it  is,  and  in  trying  to  live  by  them
we  are  in  a  perpetual  condition  of  hazard  and  hardship.


B.  HAZARDS  AND  HARDSHIPS  OF
FINITE  S^l^YWOOX^— Continued

LECTURE VI

PLEASURE AND PAIN

In  the  last  lecture  we  considered  the  origin  of  moral
pessimism  and  the  sense  of  injustice,  as  depending  on
false  expectations  promoted  by  an  inadequate  view  of  our


ABSTRACTS OF  LECTURES


nature.  To-day  we  are  to  consider  how,  in  a  similar
way,  pleasure  and  pain  are  inevitable  accidents  of  the
limitations  of  our  nature,  along  with  our  impulse  to  trans-
cend them.  It  is  not  our  object  to  make  little  of  pain  ;
rather,  in  a  sense,  to  make  the  most  of  it,  by  showing  its
connection  with  the  worth  of  human  souls.  The  root  of
both  of  them  we  take  to  be  the  mind's  effort  towards
completeness  ;  which  is  attended  by  pleasure  when  so  far
successful,  but  by  pain  when  it  meets  with  friction  and
obstruction.  Two  things  follow  from  this  :  first,  pleasure
and  pain  are  not  opposites,  but  are  the  same  kind  of
experience,  and  its  perfection  must  include  the  essence  of
both — obstruction,  but  overcome.  And  secondly,  it  is
not  true  that  pleasure  corresponds  to  good  and  pain  to
evil,  each  to  each,  throughout  life.  Man  is  so  limited
that  expansion  towards  the  good  is  as  likely  to  bring
pain  as  pleasure.  Yet,  knowing  the  ground  of  pain,  viz.
the  obstructedness  of  activity,  we  know  its  limit,  and  that
it  actually  depends  on  life  and  activity,  the  conditions  of
pleasure.  Thus  our  theory,  while  accepting  pain  as  in-
evitable, would  not  admit  as  possible  total  and  unmitigated
misery.  Still,  in  problems  of  optimism  and  pessimism,
we  should  refuse  to  attempt  judgment  by  quantity.
Pleasure  and  pain  are  only  incidents  in  the  self-develop-
ment of  souls,  and  the  success  or  completeness  of  this  is
the  criterion  of  value.  We  see  this  in  the  place  occupied
by  suffering  in  great  religions,  and  in  the  necessity  of
accident  and  death.  The  rationale  of  it  is  that  it  is  only
in  confronting  the  extreme  of  contradiction  that  the
value  of  souls  is  universally  and  substantially  affirmed.
We  see,  in  this  way  only,  what  values  will  stand  the
supreme  test,  and  what  will  not.


ABSTRACTS OF  LECTURES


B.  HAZARDS  AND  HARDSHIPS  OF
FINITE  SE\.¥HOOX)—Contimied

LECTURE VII

GOOD AND EVIL

This  is  the  third  of  three  lectures  under  the  heading
"  Hazards  and  Hardships  of  Finite  Selfhood,"  and  is  on
the  subject  of  "  Good  and  Evil."  Good  and  evil  are
ventures  of  the  finite  self  in  the  same  way  as  pleasure
and  pain,  but  differ  from  these  by  involving  an  attitude
of  the  self  as  a  whole  in  its  desire  for  satisfaction.  Good
is  an  advance  towards  what  would  really  satisfy  the  self;
evil,  all  that  is,  under  given  conditions,  inconsistent  with
this.  Thinking  of  "  good  "  as  what  we  ought  to  aim  at,
we  tend  to  treat  "  goodness  "  or  virtue  as  the  only  good.
But  this  makes  virtue  seem  too  wide  or  good  too  narrow  ;
and  the  truth  seems  to  be  that  the  recognised  virtues  or
duties  deal  with  the  central  goods,  such  as  the  maintenance
of  life  and  society,  and  so  are  classed  as  morality  par
excellence  ;  but  other  kinds  of  order  in  the  self,  e.g.  know-
ledge and  artistic  power,  are  also  moralities,  though  not
noticed  as  such,  because  more  or  less  unessential  to  life
(less  so  than  we  think).  But  as  morality,  thus  understood,
rests  largely  on  "  gifts,"  we  see  that  the  individual,  though
responsible,  is  yet  dependent  on  the  universe — a  fact
recognised  in  religion.  Moral  good — the  venture  of  a
finite  being  towards  perfection — implies  evil  to  be  over-
come. The  reason  is  that  no  finite  good  can  satisfy  a
creature's  whole  wants  ;  the  creature  therefore  makes,  out
of  the  unsatisfied  wants,  a  secondary  self,  hostile  to  the
central  self  which  agrees  with  humanity  and  society.  This
secondary  or  evil  self  is  only  evil  because  it  confllicts  with
the  good  self,  and  so  with  its  own  self  Its  objects  of
desire  are,  as  it  were,  good  in  the  wrong  place — i.e.  aims


ABSTRACTS OF  LECTURES


which  have  nothing  in  common  but  opposition  to  the
central  good  self,  but  are  not  originally  bad  in  themselves.
Thus  we  can  conceive  that  if  readjusted  in  a  perfect  ex-
perience they  could  cease  to  conflict  with  good,  and  so
could  be  no  longer  evil.  And  thus  good  and  evil  exhibit
the  venture  of  the  finite  spirit,  striving  to  pass  its  limits
towards  perfection.


C. THE  STABILITY  AND  SECURITY  OF
FINITE  SELFHOOD

LECTURE VIII

THE RELIGIOUS CONSCIOUSNESS

The  previous  lectures  of  the  present  course  have  spoken
of  the  finite  individual,  such  as  ourselves,  with  regard  to
his  formation  by  the  world,  and  the  adventure  of  his  life
as  an  apparently  separate  being.  The  present  lecture
begins  to  point  out  how  there  comes  to  him,  in  and
through  those  experiences,  a  feeling  and  conviction  of
belonging  to  a  reality  in  which  all  that  he  really  cares
for  is  permanent  and  secure.  This  conviction  is  the  same
thing  with  recognising  his  own  genuine  nature,  as  a
creature  which  is  an  eternal  spirit  revealing  itself  in  time
and  space,  and  it  is  gained  and  verified  in  the  very  stress
of  hazard  and  hardship,  which  arises  out  of  this  twofold
being.  It  asserts,  therefore,  the  true  structure  of  reality,
and  is  present  so  far  as  this  structure  is  rightly  asserted
through  unselfish  devotion  to  interests  beyond  oneself.  In
this  wide  and  true  sense  the  conviction  in  question  is  the
religious  consciousness,  of  which  devoutness  or  worship  is
the  essence,  and  of  which  what  is  called  "  religion  "  in  the
traditional  sense  is  only  an  intensified  form.  In  it  the
finite  creature  possesses  perfection  by  faith  and  will,
involving  self-surrender. It  is  the  content  of  the  highest


ABSTRACTS OF  LECTURES


philosophy,  but  philosophy  is  not  necessary  to  it  ;  nor
does  it  involve  the  assertion  of  any  facts  or  doctrines
referring  to  a  future  in  this  or  another  world,  or  to  the
"  supernatural "  in  the  popular  sense.  The  stability  or
the  security  of  finite  selfhood  is  in  this  recognition  of  its
own  true  nature,  which  extends  over  the  whole  adventure
of  life,  and  is  reinforced  by  it.


C. THE  STABILITY  AND  SECURITY  OF
FINITE  SELFHOOD— a;z/?W^^^

LECTURE IX

THE DESTINY OF THE FINITE SELF

All  discussion  of  this  subject  presupposes  for  us  the
general  principle  that  our  self,  like  everything  else,  is  here
and  now  an  element  in  the  Absolute,  and  therefore  the
question  of  its  continuance  can  only  be  a  question  of  the
kind  or  degree  of  its  transformation  in  further  temporal
appearance  (if  any).  There  is  little  to  say  of  direct
reasons  for  anticipating  one  kind  or  degree  of  transforma-
tion rather  than  another.  But  there  is  a  good  deal  to
say  in  criticism  of  our  own  supposed  desires  for  continu-
ance, in  the  way  of  pointing  out  the  result  of  attempting
to  reduce  them  to  consistency  with  one  another,  or  in
other  words,  of  ascertaining  what  they  amount  to  if  we
are  clear  what  we  mean.  We  may  find  that  their  mean-
ing, thus  elucidated,  agrees  with  our  general  convictions.

Reviewing,  first,  the  ideas  of  continuance  in  human
memories  and  in  the  effects  of  our  actions,  of  Metem-
psychosis, and  of  Nirwana,  we  note  that  they  are  not
negligible  considerations,  but  yet  that  their  great  influence
is  only  explicable  by  their  acting  as  symbols  of  some
more  profound  conviction  ;  which  we  take  to  be  that  of
the  safeguarding  of  what  we  really  care  about  by  and  in
the  nature  of  the  universe.


ABSTRACTS  OF  LECTURES


Pursuing  the  question  what  destiny  we  can  seriously
and  self-consistently  desire,  we  find  that  simple  prolonga-
tion of  a  life  like  the  present  probably  comes  back  to  the
idea  of  a  c}xle  of  lives  (already  considered)  ;  while  the
demand  for  a  better  state  raises  the  problem  of  a  conflict
between  our  personal  identity  and  transformation  towards
perfection.  An  analysis  of  T,  H.  Green's  insistence  on
personality  results  in  the  suggestion  that  it  is  rather  a
personality  than  our  personality  (what  is  called  by  our
proper  name)  that  is  essential,  and  that  there  is  no
repugnance  against  something  vwre  than,  but  only  against
something  less  than,  personality.  What  matters,  it  seems,
is  the  survival  of  what  we  really  care  for  ;  which,  as  we
know  even  from  common  sense,  may  be  something  beyond
and  different  from  our  present  self  as  it  stands.


C. THE  STABILITY  AND  SECURITY  OF
FINITE SY.\.YWOOX^— Continued

LECTURE X

THE GATES OF THE FUTURE

M.  BergsON  has  said  that  "  the  Gates  of  the  Future  are
wide  open."  Dante  has  alluded  to  the  day  when  they
shall  be  shut.  Both  doctrines  seem  to  make  unwarranted
drafts  upon  the  future.  For  one,  however  bad  the  world
may  be,  there  is  ahead  an  infinite  real  progress  in  which
it  may  grow  better.  For  the  other,  there  is  a  far-off
divine  event  in  which  a  final  good  will  be  realised,
counterbalancing  all  evil.

To  us  it  seems  clear  that  a  comprehensive  philosophy
must  satisfy  both  the  demand  for  progress  in  the  finite,
and  that  for  an  eternally  realised  perfection.  It  seems
clear  that  a  series  may  be  a  necessary  element  of  a  whole
which  can  never  as  such  be  expressed  in  a  series  ;  but  that


ABSTRACTS OF  LECTURES


if  the  whole  is  a  series  and  no  more,  perfection  is  by  the
hypothesis  excluded  ;  and  equally  so,  if  it  is  laid  down
(a  self-contradictory  postulate)  that  at  some  future  time
the  finite  is  in  its  own  right  to  achieve  and  possess
perfection.

In  our  view,  the  demand  for  an  actual  progress  to
infinity  means  that  the  finite  has  only  half  recognised  its
own  nature  ;  while  true  self-recognition  involves  abandon-
ing the  pretension  to  possess  perfection  in  its  own  right.
This  recognition,  which  is  the  religious  attitude,  is,  we
suggest,  what  really  matters  in  the  progress  of  finite
beings,  and  is  the  main  lesson  to  be  learned  from  the
advance  of  mechanical  civilisation,  and  its  failure,  as  such,
to  bring  satisfaction.

The  advance  towards  such  recognition  has  been,  we
may  say  by  way  of  illustration,  the  most  important  change
in  man's  history  in  the  past,  being  one  with  the  achieve-
ment of  true  freedom.  It  has  actually  arisen,  in  a  great
measure,  as  Hegel  has  maintained,  through  what  he  has
called  "  the  unhappy  consciousness,"  or  what  modern
pessimism  has  described  as  "  the  firm  foundation  of  de-
spair." And  in  the  future  a  similar  advance  is  perhaps
the  main  thing  to  hope  for;  and  through  the  transvaluation
of  values  which  it  will  continue  to  bring,  the  increasing
material  resources  of  civilisation  will  become  potent  for
good,  just  in  proportion  to  the  growing  despair  of  finding
satisfaction  in  them  for  their  own  sake  which  will  arise
from  experience  of  their  accumulation.  For  this  despair
is  one  side  of  the  recognition  which  constitutes  the
religious  attitude  in  the  finite  being,  through  which  he
accepts  his  worth  and  destiny  as  lying  solely  in  all  that
promotes  his  identification  by  faith  with  the  greatness  of
the  universe.


The  Value  aftd  Destiny
of  the  Indiz'iduaL


ERRATA

Page  121,  lines  15  and  16, /or  on  read  in.
154,  line  6,  /or  toil  read  work.
,, 167,  sect.  5,  line  2,  /or  sect.  1  read  sect.  3.
223,  line  5  from  bottom,  /or  two  read  three.


LECTURE I

INTRODUCTORY FINITENESS AND SELF-
TRANSCENDENCE

I. In  the  present  course  of  lectures  I  am  to  speak  Two  points
of  the  finite  self,  its  worth,  and  its  destiny. In  this  previous
introductory  lecture  I  will  first  recur  to  two  points  '^'^'"'■^^•
in  the  essence  of  the  finite,  which  were  discussed  in
the  previous  series,  and  having  pushed  each  of  them
a little further, I will then sketch the general
argument  on  which  we  are  entering  to-day.

i. The  finite  individual  soul  seems  naturally  to  Mind  and
present  a  double  aspect. It looks like, on the  our%^ew^'
one  hand,  a  climax,  or  concentration,  of  the  nature  SSlaHsm.
beneath  it  and  the  community  around  it,  and  on  the
other  hand  a  spark  or  fragment  from  what  is  above
and  beyond  it. It  is  crystallised  out  of  the  collect-
ive soul  of  nature  or  society,  or  it  falls  down  from
the  transcendental  soul  of  heaven  or  what  is  above
humanity.^ In both  cases  alike  it  has  its  share  of
divinity — in the one case through the suffering
deity,  in  the  other  through  the  Olympian  deity  or
from  the  stars.

^  I  am  drawing  both  on  Hegel's  psychology  (cf.  Principle^  p.
178)  and  on  such  ideas  as  are  expressed  in  Mr.  Cornford's  Frotn
Religion  to  Philosophy.  The  two  views  are  very  noticeable  in  both
Plato  and  Aristotle.

I  B


2 FINITENESS  AND SELF-TRANSCENDENCE lect.

Both  of  these  conceptions  might  illustrate  our
point  of  view.  We  think  of  the  soul  as,  on  the
one  hand,  a  nisus  towards  unity  on  the  part  of  a
world  on  its  own  level  or  below  it ;  on  the  other
hand  as  an  element  contributing  to  the  absolute,
isolated  only  in  appearance  by  an  impotence  ^  which
constitutes  its  finiteness.

In  conjoining  the  essences  of  these  descriptions
I  do  not  think  that  we  are  liable  to  a  charge  of
dualism.  The  natural  is  necessary  to  the  spiritual,
and  nothing  is  to  be  gained  by  minimising  the  dis-
tinction between  them  so  long  as  it  is  clear  that
their  difference  is  such  as  to  promote  a  complete
identity.  Thus  when  we  maintain  that  conscious-
ness actually  works  in  and  through  the  systematic
adaptation  of  a  certain  type  of  matter,  we  are
not  really  adopting  any  one  of  the  three  dual-
istic  doctrines,  parallelism,  interaction,  epiphenom-
enalism.'"^  It  is  a  different  thing  to  say  that  con-
sciousness, as  the  universal  susceptibility,  appears
within  certain  special  transactions  on  the  part  of
matter,  when  highly  organised  and  systematised  ;  and
to  say  that  it  forms  a  separate  and  isolated  entity,
whether  as  a  parallel  series  or  as  an  interacting
subject,  or  as  an  epiphenomenal  effect  which  has  no
reaction.  The  point,  as  it  appears  to  me,  is  that
in  all  these  theories  consciousness  is  conceived
on  intentionally  dualistic  lines,  as  a  repetition  or
duplication  of  neurosis  in  a  different  medium,  or
within  a  different  attribute.  Neurosis  is  taken  as
in space ; and psychosis  as the  same thing  over

1  Principle,  Lect.  VII.

2  The  phrase  "  akin  to  parallelism "  appeared  in  one  of  the
abstracts  in  Principle  (p.  xxv.),  but  only  by  comparison  with  inter-
action. Cf.  ibid.  p.  175.


DUPLICATION  REJECTED


again,  repeated  without  any  reason,  in  the  form
of  feeling  or  conation  or  cognition.  Then  the
psychosis  may  be  taken  as  an  inert  concomitant,
or  as  in  causal  reaction  with  the  neurosis,  or  as
an  effect  which  has  no  reaction.  But  in  all
these  conceptions  the  central  idea  is  the  same.
The  neurosis  is  there  and  complete  without  the
psychosis.  But  there  is  a  psychosis  also,  in  rela-
tion or  out  of  relation  with  the  neurosis,  and
there  is  a  problem  about  its  supply  of  physical
energy.

Nothing  of  this  kind  applies  to  what  I  was
attempting  to  express  in  the  previous  lectures.^  It
seems  to  me  that  the  fertile  point  of  view  lies  in
taking  some  neuroses — not  all — as  only  complete  in
themselves  by  passing  into  a  degree  of  psychosis.
The  question  of  duplicating  a  neurosis  by  a  psychosis
does  not  arise.  There  can  be  no  problem  of  a
special  supply  of  energy  for  the  psychosis.  It  is
one  thing  to  say  that  a  series  of  psychoses  re-
produces in  conscious  form  the  physical  events
within  the  nervous  system,  raising  the  question  of
relations  or  no  relations  between  the  two  series.  It
seems  to  me  altogether  a  different  thing  to  say  that
e.g.  the  weighing  of  a  situation,  begun  in  a  certain
balance  of  nervous  tensions  or  inhibitions,  has  to
complete  itself  in  a  conscious  form,  before  the  neural
crisis  can  end  in  a  motor  reaction  representing  the
logical  solution.  It  is  not  repeating  in  another
attribute  what  has  happened  in  one ;  it  is  completing
in  a  non-spatial  activity  what,  having  its  source  in
spatial  combinations,  yet  could  not  be  completed  by
their  means pure and simple. The  change  from

^  Principle^  p.  203.


FINITENESS  AND SELF-TRANSCENDENCE lect.


Spatial  to  non-spatial  togetherness  is,  of  course,  inex-
plicable. But  empirical  evidence  seems  to  be  in  its
favour,  and,  after  all,  externality  is  always  for  mind
and  not  self-existent.^  So  the  question  is  merely  how
and  when  an  externality  which  is  the  object  of  mind
becomes  a  focus  in  which  mind  appears.  It  plainly
must  happen  ;  and  the  only  necessary  precaution  is
to  make  no  superfluous  assumptions  in  explaining
it.  On  one  view  what  happens  in  consciousness  is
an  amplification  of  the  neurosis  inherent  in  its
special  nature ;  on  the  other  it  is  something  alien
and  additional.  On  the  former  line  it  is  naturally
taken  as  within  the  physiological  cost  of  the  neurosis  ;
on  the  latter  as  having  an  equivocal  position  out-
side it.^

What  is  certain,  and  what  matters  to  us,  is
that  the  finite  self  is  plainly  a  partial  world,  yet
possesses  within  it  the  principle  of  infinity,  taken
in  the  sense  of  the  nisus  towards  absolute  unity
and  self-completion.  It  is  both  a  concentration  of
externality  and  a  fragment  of  the  Absolute.  It  has
the  lawfulness  and  routine  of  the  logical  spirit,
working  towards  totality  within  a  fragmentary  con-
text. The  essential  for  philosophy  is  to  dismiss  as
self-contradictory  all  attempts  to  set  the  creative-
ness  of mind  in  opposition  to  its  systematic  law-

1  Perhaps  too  little  importance  was  attached  to  this  in  Principle^
p. 2  11.

2  Cf.  Dr.  Lloyd  Morgan's  forthcoming  work  on  Instinct  and
Experience  with  reference  to  the  different  uses  of  the  term
"  mechanical."  It  is  plain  that  highly  organised  matter  a  has  a
routine  of  its  own,  which  is  highly  predictable,  and  ft  is  capable  of
forming  systems  which  modify  in  the  most  elaborate  way  the
response  to  stimuli.  I  do  not  think  that  philosophers  can  be  bound
to  say  whether  physico-chemical  laws  can  explain  these  properties.
But  if  not,  what  seems  to  be  wanted  is  some  conception  of  a  second-
ary mechanism. Cf  "Vitalism,"  by  E.  S.  Russell,  Sciefitia,  ix.  xviii.  2.


"A NATURE  IS  A BONDAGE''


fulness.  The  precise  laws  of  the  externality
which  forms  the  store-house  of  acquisitions  and
adaptations  for  every  centre  of  experience — and
these  things,  as  stored  up,  must  necessarily  take
an  external  and  so  far  non-psychical  shape  ^ — are
not,  as  it  seems  to  me,  a  fundamental  question  for
philosophy."

ii.  The  view  which  we  have  just  reiterated  of  '^ Every
the reasonable  spirit that  works  within  the  finite  voHtion
being is essentially one with our conception of  fstJc '^  not
creative  freedom.^ And  it  will  repay  us  to  pursue  ^'^^^•
this  subject  a  little  further,  so  as  to  throw  light  on
the one really  plausible objection  that  is  brought
against  the  latter.

Any  theory  of  volition,  it  is  urged,  must  give
the  victory  to  determinism.  A  theory,  it  is  said,
involves  an  explanation  or  rationale,  and  this  again
is  enough  to  bring  to  bear  the  hypothetical  neces-
sity which  belongs  to  science.  If  you  can  say
that  freedom  has  this  or  that  modtis  operandi,  or
nature,  or  essential  nisus  or  principle,  then  you
have  set  up  a  necessity  according  to  which  it  must
behave.  If  there  is  anything  that  freedom  is,  then,
in  principle,  for  every  case,  there  is  something  that
it  must  do.  Give  it  any  nature  you  please,  and  that
nature  becomes  its  bondage.  It  does  not  matter
what  theory  you  make  about  it,  unless  it  is  a  theory
that  it  cannot  be  theorised.  If  you  make  any  theory
about  it  at  all,  you  determine  it  by  the  principles  of
that  theory,  and  then  it  is  freedom  no  longer. Its

^  Cf.  Principle,  p.  215.

2  The  pure  mechanical  theory  has  been  criticised,  I  believe
effectively,  on  its  merits,  if  supposed  to  be  more  than  an  illustrative
hypothesis. Cf.  Principle,  p. 109.

2  Priticip/e,  Lect.  IX.


FINITENESS  AND SELF-TRANSCENDENCE lect.


only  nature  is  to  be  new  at  every  point,  to  exclude
repetition/  to  defy  logic.

Now  this  objection  appears  at  first  sight  to  tell
against  our  view  with  peculiar  force.  For  we
certainly  have  ventured  to  say  not  merely  that
mind  is  free  and  creative,  but  kow  it  is  free  and
creative.  We  are  at  a  further  stage  than  the
current  discussion  of  freedom  and  its  opposite.
And  in  saying  how  it  is  free,  no  doubt  we  should
be  accused,  according  to  the  view  just  mentioned,  of
subjecting  it  to  necessity.  It  mtist  pursue  the  logic
of  the  self;  it  must  work  out  its  nisus  to  the  whole  ;
it  must  struggle  in  some  form  towards  self-consist-
ency and  self-realisation.  It  is  the  very  thorough-
ness of  our  view  that  exposes  it  to  this  special
attack.  If  we  had  stopped  at  an  earlier  point,  and
merely  maintained  in  the  abstract  that  mind  is
self-determined,  we  should  have  told  much  less
truth,  but  we  should  have  escaped  this  formidable
difficulty.

Is  there  any  account  of  volition  against  which
this  objection  tells  unanswerably?  I  think  there
is  more  than  one.  Any  account  which  in  affirming
self-determination  unduly  limits  the  self,  does  tie
freedom's  hands  by  the  very  definition  of  its
liberty.  A  psychologically  Hedonist  theory,  an
egoist  theory,  which  considers  the  self  in  part
only,  an  indeterminist  theory,  which  affirms  neces-
sity through  contingency,  and  therefore  external
necessity — all  these  in  explaining  freedom  do  really
explain  it  away.

But the very same objection which we feel

^  On  the  relation  of  intelligence  to  repetition  see  Pfi/ia'pley
p.  141,  with  note  and  reference.


"  THE  MIRE OF  LOGIC


against  these  partial  dogmas,  as  they  seem  to  us,
is  widely  felt  against  the  necessity  of  logic,  which  to
us  is  merely  the  same  as  the  impulse  to  the  whole.
This  hostile  feeling  is  a  remarkable  fact,  and  bears
witness  beyond  a  doubt  to  the  defectiveness  of
logical  theory  as  well  as  to  the  perverseness  of
common  sentiment/  Logical  necessity  is  felt,  and
no  doubt  has  often  been  represented  by  those  who
believe  in  it,  as  a  something  mysteriously  imposed,
which  mind  must  obey  perhaps  unwillingly,-  instead
of  being  the  inmost  life  and  spiritual  order  of  mind
itself.  This  is  merely  because  text-books  and
typical  examples  on  the  one  hand  have  restricted  it
to  very  partial  abstractions  which  no  one  recognises
as  the  natural  working  of  mind,  while  on  the  other
hand  there  are  moods  to  which  all  reason  and
coherence,  even  those  of  great  art,  not  to  speak
of  great  philosophy,  come  as  foreign  and  as  a
bondage.

The  case  against  identifying  freedom  with  the
principle  of  reason  rests  on  this  opposition.  And  it
amounts  to  a  postulate  that  there  can  be  no  theory
of  a  self-determining  spiritual  process.  If  it  can
be  theorised,  it  cannot  be  self-determined  ;  so  the
assumption  must  run.  In  assigning  it  a  nature,
you  have  assigned  it  a  necessity ;  and  in  assigning
it  a  necessity,  you  have  destroyed  its  self-determina-

1  An  able  writer,  speaking  of  Parisian  culture  under  the  influence
of  recent  philosophy,  says,  "  Men  are  everywhere  busy,  consciously
or  unconsciously,  lifting  the  jewel  of  human  vision  out  of  the  mire  of
logic"  {New  Age,  May  ii,  191 1).  It  sounds  like  an  intentional
caricature  of  the  great  passage  in  which  Plato  speaks  of  StaAeKTi/ciy
as  rescuing  the  spiritual  organ  of  vision  from  the  mire  of  sensuous-
ness  and  ignorance. I  do  not  know  whether  it  was  so  meant.

2  I  owe  the  remark  to  Professor  Cook  Wilson.  I  do  not  for  a
moment  suggest  that  he  would  agree  with  my  application  of  it.


8 FINITENESS  AND SELF-TRANSCENDENCE lect.

tion.  Any  nature  is  looked  at  as  a  bondage  by
contrast  to  all  possible  natures.

Now  let  us  consider,  for  example,  the  case  of
science  itself — the  spirit  which  animates  the  body
of  the  exact  and  natural  sciences.  There  has  never
been  a  doubt  that  its  nature  and  procedure  can  be
theoretically  understood.  And  yet  it  is  a  typically
free  or  self-organising  procedure.  I  do  not  re-
member to  have  seen  the  question  raised  whether
or  no  the  future  course  of  science  can  be  predicted  ;
and  if  not,  why  not }  But  plainly  the  answer  is  the
same  as  we  gave  to  the  same  question  in  relation
to  individual  will.^  Its  behaviour  could  only  be
predicted  by  being  achieved  before  it  is  achieved  ;
that  is,  in  so  far  as  a  mind  could  be  possessed
beforehand  of  the  endowment  which  enriches  the
growing  point  of  thought  at  every  crisis,  along  with
the  situations  it  will  have  to  meet.  The  course  of
science  itself,  then,  is  predictable  only  in  the  same
mode  and  degree  as  that  of  conduct.  It  is  the  very
type  and  essence  of  mental  freedom — mind  con-
structing its  totality  with  no  regard  but  for  the
fitness  of  its  materials.

Yet  again  in  every  step  it  determines  itself  in
accordance  with  a  logical  need.  If  any  advance  of
science  is  not  logically  necessary,  it  is  null  and
void  ;  it  is  not  an  advance  of  science  at  all.  Its
structure  is  the  type  of  a  pure  necessity  without
remainder.  It  theorises  itself,  one  might  say,  as  it
goes  along.  It  exists  by  giving  the  reason  for
being  what  it  is.  You  cannot  determine  it  ab  extra
by  bare  logic  ;  that  is  true  ;  but  that  is  only  because
it  is  so  thoroughly  determined  in  itself. It  is  not

^  Principle,  p.  115.


INTEREST  NEEDS CONTINUITY


applied  logic.  But  it  is  the  logical  life  of  which
logic  is  the  theory.  Here  the  postulate  that  there
can  be  no  valid  theory  of  a  self-determining  spiritual
process  is  obviously  false.

So  with  free-will.  We  have  maintained  not
merely  that  there  is  free-will,  but  that  we  know  its
nature  and  the  way  in  which  it  seeks  the  whole.
It  is  this  thoroughness  of  the  theory  that  exposes  it
to  attack.  "If  you  can  predicate  anything  at  all  of
the  will,  it  ceases  to  be  free."  And  we  profess  to
predicate  of  it  the  inherent  nature  of  reason — the
absolute  demand  for  totality  and  consistency.

For  to  us,  on  the  contrary,  it  seems  that  that
of  which  nothing  can  be  predicated  can  have  no
interest.  There  can  be  no  continuity  between  its
beginning  and  its  end.  But  what  we  care  for  is
the  completeness  of  what  we  have  begun,  developed
in  accordance  with  our  own  inherent  demand.
Therefore  freedom  for  us  means  the  nisus  to  the
whole,  the  epw^  or  spirit  of  union,  which  is  at  once
logic  and  love.  And  its  character  as  such  we  drew
out  in  the  previous  lectures  ;  and  its  necessity  is
nothing  but  mind  acting  out  its  own  nature.  This
necessity  is  no  limitation  of  the  self,  but  the  very
force  and  secret  of  its  self-maintenance  and  self-
expansion  ;  and  the  theory  which  identifies  it  with
freedom  lays  on  the  latter  no  necessity  ivhich  is
narrower  or  other  than  itself.

2. We  now  proceed  to  sketch  our  further  doctrine  Double
of  the  finite. The  last  year's  course  of  lectures  was  t^efiiSL
an  attempt  to  familiarise  ourselves  with  the  principle
of  ultimate  reality,  and  to  establish  it  as  the  standard
of  value. The  argument  on  which  we  are  entering
to-day will treat of  finite minds, such beings  as


lo FINITENESS  AND SELF-TRANSCENDENCE lect.

ourselves,  and  endeavour  to  attain  some  connected
survey  of  the  value  and  destiny  that  belongs  to  them
as participants in such a universe as we have
outlined.
Best  under- i. If  any  One  wishes  to-day  to  make  a  study  of

stood  from  ,  , .  ...

continuum  any  human  bemg,  from  a  primitive  savage  to  an
Athenian  citizen,  or  from  a  Northerner  or  Southerner
in  the  American  Civil  War  to  a  London  dock-labourer
on  strike  in  the  twentieth  century,  the  first  thing
he  attempts  is  to  place  himself  in  the  medium  or
atmosphere  of  the  mind  he  is  studying ;  in  the
collectivity  to  which  the  man  belongs,  and  of  which,
in  the  main,  his  consciousness  is  a  function.  The
student  of  philosophy  should  not  be  less  thorough
than  the  student  of  anthropology  or  of  society,  and
indeed  it  is  this  obviously  sound  method  which  has
determined  the  sequence  of  our  discussions.  We
thus  make  short  work  of  a  difficulty  with  which  we
are  apt  to  be  confronted — the  difficulty  of  under-
standing how  the  countless  minds  and  incidents
and  objects  scattered  abroad  in  our  everyday  world
can  ever  be  raised  and  unified  into  a  single  ex-
perience. Who  is  going  to  bring  them  together  ?
Is  there  a  mind  outside  them  that  will  achieve  it  ?
And  if  there  is  a  mind  that  can  understand  them  all
as  an  aggregate,  is  not  this  just  an  experience  of  its
own,  which  will  leave  them  all  in  fact  and  existence
what  they  were  before  }

But  if  we  only  consider  how  any  competent
thinker  will  to-day  discuss  the  soul  of  the  savage  or
of  the  citizen,  we  shall  see  how  much  more  fertile  is
the  idea  of  dissociation  than  that  of  aggregation.
Perhaps,  indeed,  as  a  question  of  exposition  I  have
laid  even  too  much  stress  on  the  idea  of  upward


THE FALSE  ABSOLUTENESS


transformation.^  Dissociation  and  deformation,
rather  than  unification  and  transformation,  are  the
keys  to  the  study  of  the  finite.  Ultimate  reality  is
for  our  argument  what  the  social  collectivity  is  for
the  social  student.  If  the  infinite  has  existence
only  through  the  finite,  the  finite  is  intelligible  only
through  the  infinite.  The  difference,  as  I  have
said,  is  only  one  of  exposition.  The  arguments
which  disclose  the  nature  of  reality  are  the  same
in  essence,  whether  we  start  from  the  imperfect
creature  or  from  the  principle  of  perfection.  But  if
we  retain  throughout  the  former  as  our  point  of
departure,  we  grant  it  by  this  custom  a  position  of
absoluteness  which  hampers  our  reasoning  at  every
step.  It  is  as  if,  after  establishing  the  community
of  will,  tradition,  habits,  and  ideas  throughout  the
social  whole,  we  were  in  a  further  treatment  to
drop  out  all  this  that  we  had  learned,  and  to  accept
the  "  individual  "  wie  er  geht  und  steht  as  if  no
common  spiritual  forces  were  working  within  him,
and  behind  his  self-contained  appearance.

Thus  we  approach  the  study  of  finite  self-
conscious  creatures,  prepared  to  find  in  them  the
fragments  of  a  vast  continuum,  fragments  in  a
great  measure  unaware  of  this  their  inherent  char-
acter, just  as  the  unreflective  citizen  will  believe  in
his  own  absolute  independence  and  self-existence,
as  merely  limited  by  that  of  others  through  a  few
external  contacts.  This  false  claim  to  absoluteness,
with  the  want  of  recognition  which  is  its  cause,
condition  the  whole  character  and  being  of  the
finite  mind.  It  is  able,  as  we  have  seen,  to  con-
centrate in  itself  and  to  represent  only  a  limited

' Cf.,  liowever,  Principle,  pp.  383,  388.


12 FINITENESS  AND SELF-TRANSCENDENCE lect.

range  of  externality,  and  in  this  limited  range  it  is
always  inclined,  just  because  of  the  limitation,  to
suppose  its  being  self-complete.  But  yet,  belonging
as  it  does  to  the  continuum  of  the  whole,  and  un-
consciously inspired  by  its  unity,  it  is  always  passing
beyond  its  given  self  in  the  attempt  to  resolve  the
contradictions  which  infect  its  being  and  obstruct
its  self-satisfaction.  This  double  being  is  the  nature
of  the  finite.  It  is  the  spirit  of  the  whole,  or  of
ultimate  reality,  working  in  and  through  a  limited
external  sphere.  Its  law  is  that  of  the  real ;  its
existence  is  the  existence  of  an  appearance.  The
whole  of  our  argument,  in  attempting  to  exhibit  its
worth  and  destiny,  will  consist  in  nothing  more  than
expanding  the  conception  of  this  double  nature.
Double  im-  ii.  Beforc  we  approach  the  detailed  discussion  of
oftemT  the  finite,  it  will  be  well  to  say  a  word  on  the
'^Appear-  i;neaning  of  contrasting  it  as  relatively  unreal  with
the  absolute  as  real.  The  opposition  of  "appearance
and  reality  "  is  familiar.  I  only  propose  to  explain
our  attitude  to  it  in  order  to  avoid  what  I  think
false  implications.

To  "appear,"  or  "to  be  apparent,"  has  a  curiously
double  significance.  It  means  on  the  one  hand  to
be  obvious  or  self-evident.  "  It  appears  from  the
evidence  "  ;  "  it  was  supposed  to  be  so,  but  it  now
appears  to  have  been  otherwise."  "It  is  plainly
apparent,"  On  the  other  it  contains  the  well-
known  antithesis  to  truth  or  reality.  "  It  appears
to  be  so,  but  the  fact  is  otherwise,"  "  The  sun
appears  to  move  round  the  earth,"  and  so  forth.
Further  examples  are  needless.

The  double  significance  springs  from  this,  that
what  "  appears  "  is  on  the  one  hand,  for  whatever


ance.


REALITY  ''MAKES  ITS  APPEARANCE^'  13


cause  or  reason,  in  fact  selected  so  that  it  stands
out  and  is  clearly  discerned,  or  is  such  as  to  be
clearly  discerned/  But  on  the  other  hand,  in  so
standing  out,  it  is  implied  to  be  partial,  to  corre-
spond to  special  conditions,  falling  within  those  of
some  whole  which  we  accept  as  normal  and  com-
plete. We  find  both  implications  together  in  such
a  phrase  as  "  make  his,  or  its,  appearance,"  which
may  be  said  of  an  actor  or  of  an  epidemic.  The
person  or  thing,  we  imply,  is  somehow  or  some-
where over  and  above  the  appearance,  but  at  some
time  or  place  which  is  noteworthy,  he  or  it  stands
out  and  produces  itself  in  a  special  manner.  Here
we  have  no  implication  whatever  of  error  or  illusion.
What  "makes  its  appearance"  is  really  there  in  its
appearance,  and  what  "  appears  from  the  evidence  "
or  what  "  is  plainly  apparent "  is  as  a  rule  meant  to
be  taken  as  an  outstanding  truth.

But  the  implication  of  illusion  readily  arises  from
the  distinction  which  all  these  phrases  contain,^  the
distinction  between  the  conditions  of  such  a  selected
or  outstanding  reality  and  those  of  reality  as  a
relative  or  ultimate  whole.  The  appearance  is  dis-
tinguished from  the  reality  by  its  selected  or  partial
conditions  contrasted  with  those  which  are  relatively
or  absolutely  complete.  And  if  you  take  the  object
as  it  is  under  partial  conditions  for  the  object  as  it
is  under  the  totality  of  conditions,  you  get  the
general  illusory  character  of  which  all  appearance
as  such  always  goes  in  peril ;  just  as,  if  you  take  an


' For  this  qualification  cf.  Bradley,  Appearance^  p.  485.

-^  "  Appears /row  the  evidetice"  is  after  all  a  special  way  of
standing  forth.  It  may  be  an  introduction  to  saying  "but  the
evidence  is  false,"  judged,  c.g.^  by  the  whole  circumstances.


14 FINITENESS  AND SELF-TRANSCENDENCE lect.

appearance  under  one  partial  set  of  conditions  for
another  appearance  under  another  equally  partial
set  of  conditions,  you  get  the  ordinary  error  of
mistaking  one  everyday  object  for  another.

This  double  nature  of  appearance,  with  the  peril
but  not  the  necessity  of  total  illusion,  is  the  reason
why  the  finite  world  is  the  world  of  appearances,
and  explains  its  character.  It  is  the  world  of
outstanding  and  obvious  realities  as  particularly
conditioned  within  the  whole  ;  while  the  only  un-
conditioned real  is  the  whole  itself  within  which  all
conditions  are  included.  Finite  minds  and  objects,
then,  though  appearances,  are  not  inherently  illu-
sions. But  for  and  as  finite  minds  they  are  always
in  so  far  illusory,  as  it  is  impossible  but  that  they
should  have  ascribed  to  them  and  ascribe  to  them-
selves a  false  character  of  self-existence.  For  no
finite  mind  can  go  far  in  grasping  the  conditions  of
any  piece  of  reality,  and  this  applies  to  itself;  and  yet
all  that  is  finite  has  working  in  it  the  nature  of  the
whole.  And  therefore,  as  we  saw  in  the  previous
course,  both  finite  mind  itself,  and  its  appreciation
of  objects,  are  always  passing  beyond  themselves
and  fluctuating  up  and  down  the  scale  of  reality,
that  is,  in  seeing  and  being  more  or  less  nearly  as
the  whole  demands.

This  seems  to  be  why,  so  far  as  we  can  under-
stand, if  there  is  to  be  a  perfect  system  with  detail
and  differentiation,  there  must  be  finiteness  and
infinity,  and  why  there  can  be  no  infinity  without
finiteness,  and  why  all  finiteness  is  self-contradictory
when  considered  as  self-existent  {i.e.  as  apart  from
infinity).  We  shall  see  how  and  how  far  the  finite
can  remedy  this  its  inherent  vice.


THE  FINITE  JUST  DOES  EXIST  15


Thus  we  can  already  answer  in  general  terms  the
irrepressible  general  question  which  lies  at  the  root
of  the  whole  theoretical  tendency  towards  critical
censure  of  the  universe.  "  If  the  Absolute  is  so
perfect  and  so  excellent,  and  the  finite  is  so  full  of
evil,  surely  the  postulate  of  perfection  would  have
required  that  the  Absolute  experience  should  have
been  real  without  the  finite — the  perfection  without
the  imperfection."  But  the  point  just  is  that  each —
the  perfect  and  the  imperfect — has  its  being  through
and  because  of  the  other.  You.  cannot  have  a  per-
fection which  is  the  perfection  of  nothing ;  nor  a
something,  conditioned  within  a  perfect  system,
which  is  perfect  apart  from  the  inclusive  system
that  conditions  it.

Thus  we  see  the  general  nature  and  position  of
the  finite.  We  see,  a,  why  the  finite  world  is  one
with  the  world  of  appearances  ;  /3,  why  the  finite  has
always  a  double  or  self-transcendent  nature — a  reach
beyond  its  grasp,  or  a  content  leading  beyond  its
existence  ;  7,  what  is  the  difference  between  appear-
ance and  illusion  ;  and  S,  why  we  hold  it  a  blunder  to
say  that  the  existence  of  the  finite  world  is  an  illusion,
or,  in  other  words,  that  the  finite  world  does  not  exist.^
As  regards  this  last  point,  it  should  be  observed
that  it  is  just  the  finite  world  which  does  exist.
Successive  appearance  in  space  and  time  is  what
existence  means.  Reality,  indeed,  that  is  to  say,
the  total  of  stability  or  satisfactoriness,  is  not
merely  existence,  though  it  includes  the  existing
world,  and  without  it  would  not  be  itself.

3. Now  we  are  able  to  explain  the  general  course  The  three
of  our  consideration  of  finite  self-conscious  beings.  Tctirs^'of"

1 On  this  question  I  am  following  Bradley,  Appearance^  377  ^•


Finite
Mind.


i6 FINITENESS  AND SELF-TRANSCENDENCE lect.


Division
of  the
lectures.


Finite  Mind
shaped  by
Universe,
and  yet
shapes
itself.


The  Life
of  Finite
Mind  an
Adventure.


From  what  has  been  said  above  there  follow  three
main  characteristics  of  finite  mind,  which  cover,  as
I  believe,  the  central  paradox  and  interest  attaching
to  the  problem  of  their  value  and  destiny.  And  the
present  course  of  lectures  will  be  subdivided  in
accordance  with  these  three  main  considerations.

i.  After  an  introductory  discussion  of  the  con-
ditions of  finite  personality,  I  shall  speak  of  the
moulding — the  temporal  genesis — of  finite  mind,
and  the  method  of  its  formation  into  a  representative
member  of  the  world.  Soul-making,  it  will  be  sug-
gested, is  the  leading  function  of  the  finite  universe.
Souls  are  cast  and  moulded  by  the  externality  of
nature,  and  of  other  finite  souls.  But  again,  the
soul  which  is  being  moulded  contains  an  active  prin-
ciple, the  spirit  of  the  whole,  and  what  we  call  its
being  moulded  is  but  one  side  of  the  self-determina-
tion by  which  it  transforms  its  partial  world,  eliciting
the  significance  of  externality.  Under  the  heading
of  Soul-formation  we  must  in  the  end  consider  the
miracle  of  will.  And  both  sides  of  the  process  will  be
portrayed  as,  in  principle,  severe.  To  recast  your-
self, or  to  be  recast  by  circumstances,  must  alike
involve  pain  and  conflict.  Even  the  search  for
pleasures  is  a  search  for  burdens.^

ii.  Secondly,  it  will  be  necessary  to  deal  at  some
length  with  what  may  be  summed  up  in  one  word
as  the  adventurousness  of  finite  mind — the  hazards
and  hardships  which  attend  upon  it,  not  incidentally,
but  inherently.  This  essential  character  of  its  life
is  rooted  in  the  double  nature  of  the  finite,  and
reveals  itself  in  its  self-maintenance  as  in  its  forma-
tion. Being  double-natured,  it  is  torn  between  its

^  George  Meredith.


I  nAGEI  MAeos— KTPms  17

existence  and  its  self-transcendence.  For  no  finite
existence  as  such  can  maintain  itself  in  the  whole
without  incurring  contradiction,  and  the  spirit  of  the
whole,  present  in  the  finite  mind,  is  bound  in  its
intolerance  of  all  contradiction  to  contradict  its  own
existence.  Thus  the  self,  in  the  striving  to  com-
plete itself,  will  break  in  pieces  every  partial  form
of  its  own  crystallised  being,  will  welcome  the
chapter  of  accidents,  and  clothe  itself  in  conflict  and
adventure.  It  will  shatter  the  world  of  legal  or
relational  morality,  and  find  its  path  beset  by  the
chances  of  pleasure  and  pain,  and  haunted  by  the
inherent  conflict  between  good  and  evil.  Now  these
conflicting  terms  and  correlatives,  and  their  opposi-
tion, are  essential  to  finiteness,  and  unending.  But
being  imputed  to  ultimate  reality  they  give  rise  to
the  illusory  demand  for  a  real  advance  and  temporal
victory  of  the  good,  in  which  it  shall  annihilate  the
opposite  which  is  necessary  to  its  own  being.

iii. Thirdly, then,  it  will be  our  endeavour  to  stability
explain  the  true  lesson  of  finiteness,  in  the  genuine  security  of
stability  and security  of  the  finite  self  by which  ^^^^^  '
alone  the  vice  of  finiteness  can  be  cured. This  will
be  identified  with  the self-recognition of  the  self
in  the  religious  consciousness,  through  which  the  only
genuine  transcendence  of  the  finite  is  accepted  by
the  finite,  with  a  less  or  greater  degree  of  reflective
awareness. This recognition will  be represented
as  arising  and  maintaining itself  throughout, and
actually  by  means  of,  the  pangs  of  self-formation
and  the adventurousness of finite living, and as
apprehending  the  security  of  the  self  by  union  with
the  whole  actually  in  proportion  to  the  reach  of  self-
transcendence which,  while amplifying it in the

c


1 8 FIN/TENESS  AND SELF-TRANSCENDENCE lect.

direction  of  the  whole,  still  shows  it  the  weakness
and  worthlessness  of  finite  existence  per  se.  We
shall  reject  all  ideas  of  a  future  happiness  and  com-
pensation, here  or  hereafter,  by  mere  overbalancing
of  pain  with  pleasure ;  but  we  shall  endeavour  to
show,  as  a  theoretical  truth,  which  also  to  some
minds  may  be  an  aid  and  inspiration,  that  the
troubles  and  adventures  of  the  finite  arise  from
one  and  the  same  source  as  its  value  ;  that  is,  from
the  impossibility  of  its  finding  peace  otherwise  than
as  offering  itself  to  the  whole.

From  and  throughout  these  three  characteristics,
which  amount  simply  to  a  theoretical  expansion  of
the  nature  of  finiteness,  we  shall  be  able  to  read  off
in  general  terms  what  it  most  interests  us  to  know
of  the  finite  individual  in  his  worth  and  destiny.
Strictly  speaking,  these  two  are  one,  and  one  also
with  his  genesis,  his  adventure,  and  his  security.
For  his  value  lies  in  his  contribution  as  offered
to  the  absolute,  and  his  destiny,  in  its  essential
features,  must  be  the  detail  of  the  self-recognition  on
which  this  offering  depends.  Self- recognition,  as
we  shall  see,  is  another  phrase  for  the  religious
consciousness,  and  to  feel  where  his  value  lies  is
the  same  thing  with  offering  up  his  attainment  to
the  whole  by  faith  and  worship,  supported  by  and
included  within  an  ultimate  sense  of  inviolable
unity, ^  on  which  all  sanity  and  coherence,  say,  in
the  religious  consciousness,  ultimately  reposes.

Now  it  is  plain  that  the  essence  of  the  self-recog-
nition lies  in  grasping  the  nature  of  that  self-trans-

1  The  sense  of  the  absolute,  as  permeating  and  holding  together
opposites  like  good  and  evil,  or  human  and  divine.  See  p.  310,
below.


WHAT  WE GIVE, WE HAVE


19


cendence  which  is  the  source  at  once  of  all  relative
attainment,  and  of  the  perpetual  dissatisfaction  which
shatters  the  given  ;  and  lives  in  self-genesis,  in  pro-
gress, and  in  trouble  and  adventure.  Thus,  as  we
shall  attempt  to  make  clear  throughout  our  dis-
cussion, the  troubles  and  adventures  of  the  finite
creature  have  the  same  root  as  its  value,  for  both
are  inherent  in  the  spirit  that  seeks  the  whole.
And,  moreover,  these  very  troubles  and  adventures
are  instrumental,  through  shattering  the  given,  to
that  very  awareness  or  self-recognition  in  which  the
nature  of  the  self-transcendence  stands  revealed.
Therefore,  while  maintaining  that  positive  attain-
ment in  the  structure  and  coherence  of  finite  life  is
not  by  any  means  indifferent,  as  a  symbol  and  embodi-
ment of  perfection,  we  find  it  hard  to  suppose  that,
as  appears  to  be  the  general  view  even  among  serious
thinkers,  the  destiny  of  the  finite  being  holds  for
him,  as  finite,  here  or  hereafter,  a  release,  complete
in  principle,  from  all  such  trouble  and  adventure.
His  value  lies  in  the  destiny  through  which  he
recognises  his  true  being.

What,  then,  are  we  to  say  of  actual  finite  attain-
ment and  achievement  in  so  far  as  it  implies  no
such  self-recognition  as  we  have  spoken  of,  but  is
claimed  by  the  finite  being  for  itself  in  a  mood  of
false  absoluteness  and  self-satisfaction  }  We  must
make  allowance  for  the  naive  mood  of  implicit
religion  ;  that  is,  of  sincere  and  unselfish  self-trans-
cendence in  the  work  of  life,  in  devotion  to  aims  and
causes  beyond  our  immediate  selves.  And  it  may
well  be  doubted  whether  there  can  be  genuine
attainment  in  which  a  religious  consciousness,  of  this
kind  at  least,  is  not  operative. But, in  principle,


20 FINITENESS  AND SELF-TRANSCENDENCE lect.

and  to  make  provision  for  the  case  as  stated,  we
must  say,  I  think,  that  the  mood  of  false  absolute-
ness and  self-satisfaction  in  finite  attainment  is  of
sin,  and  the  value  of  what  is  so  attained,  though
contributory  to  the  Absolute,  is  not  offered  to  it,
and  therefore  does  not  attach  to  its  author,  just  in
so  far  as  he  claims  it  for  his  own.  The  mood  in
question  corresponds  especially  to-day  to  the  aberra-
tions of  a  mechanical  civilisation,  which  has  lost  in
the  accumulation  of  means  that  recognition  of  the  end
which  is  one  with  the  true  sense  of  the  nature  of  the
finite.  And  it  seems  a  view  in  accordance  with  the
essential  demand  of  finite  destiny  that  the  main
condition  and  result  of  progress  will  be  more  and
more  thoroughly  to  learn  the  lesson  of  the  vanity
of  such  accumulations  ;  except  under  the  condition
of  that  very  controlling  appreciation  of  their  vanity
in  and  for  themselves,  which  the  evils  of  civilisation
will — as  part  of  the  adventure  of  the  finite — continue
to  teach.  And  it  is  obvious  that  such  a  sense  of  the
vanity  of  instruments  in  themselves  must  become
the  condition  of  their  better  direction  and  of  a
higher  spirit  permeating  society — in  a  word,  of  the
very  self-recognition  which  at  first  sight  the  laby-
rinth of  civilisation  seems  calculated  to  destroy,^  but
which  in  truth,  perhaps,  it  alone  can  ultimately
teach.
Does  self-  4.  What  we  have  thus  arrived  at  as  the  essence
demand'°"  of  the  rcHgious  consciousness,  and  the  open  secret
theoryr  ^^  Stability  and  security  in  the  finite  self,  we  have
called by  the intentionally  general name  of  self-

1  "  L'homme  sociable,  toujours  hors  de  lui,  ne  sait  que  vivre  dans
I'opinion  des  autres,"  Rousseau,  Discours  sur  Porigine  de  Pinegalite
parmi  les  hofntnes.  Cf.  Tarde,  Les  Lois  de  rifniiation,  83,  "  L'etat
social,  comme  I'^tat  hypnotique,  n'est  qu'une  forme  de  reve."


I  IVE  DISTRUST  ''INTUITIVE  KNOWLEDGE" 21

recognition.  For  recognition  is  a  word  which  does
not  prejudge  the  question  whether  reflective  theory-
need  or  need  not  be  present.  And  here  there
are  two  considerations  to  be  very  emphatically
insisted  on.

i.  The  first is  that  the  peculiar  nature  of  self- it  is  akin
recognition  as  we  have  here  arrived  at  it,  and  shall  lubject-
expand  it  in  the  later  lectures,  certainly  helps  us  to  JJSIosophy.
appreciate  the  fundamental  importance  which  many  S^°"^p^'^^'^

^  ^  >■  J Spinoza  s

of  the  greatest  minds  have  attached  to  what  they  third  kind

of  cog-

have  considered  as  the  highest  kind  of  knowledge,  nition.
It  is  true,  of  course,  that  in  everyday  moods  what
we  call  knowledge  may  fall  apart  from  what  we  call
practice.  You  may  think  of  a  thing  without  doing
it,  and  you  may  do  it  without  thinking  about  it.  To
think  about  paying  your  debts  is  not  the  same  thing
as  to  pay  them.^  But  all  this  becomes  comparatively
unimportant  when  you  touch  the  higher  grades  of
knowledge,  when  deeper  experience  has  enlarged
the  self,  with  amplified  intellectual  vision  as  an
element  in  the  result.  And  it  is  an  experience  of  this
kind,  however  feebly  I  may  succeed  in  expressing
it,  which  one  must  bring  with  him  if  he  is  to  under-
stand Spinoza's  third  genus  of  cognition,  or  Plato's
knowledge  of  the  good,  or  Hegel's  notion  of  philo-
sophy as  religion  in  a  higher  form.^  Let  us  con-
sider for  a  moment  the  first  of  these  three  doctrines,
which  is  probably,  when  taken  literally  in  its  author's
phraseology,  the  hardest  to  appreciate.  When  we
are  told  that  there  is  a  mode  of  knowledge  named
"  intuitive,"  by  which  we  immediately  perceive  the

1  Green's  Pro  lego  metia^  sect.  150.

2  I  am  not  assenting  to  Hegel's  expressions  in  this  sense.  But
I  think  that  their  meaning  is  more  easy  to  see  and  to  justify  than
some  good  critics  have  admitted.


22 FINITENESS  AND SELF-TRANSCENDENCE LECT.

essential  dependence  of  all  things,  and  especially  of
our  own  minds,  upon  God,  in  the  same  way  as  we
immediately  perceive  that  6  is  the  fourth  propor-
tional to  I,  2,  3,  all  sorts  of  logical  criticisms  spring
into  our  thoughts.  The  notion  suggested  is  un-
familiar, and  may  even  appear  uninteresting.  It
brings  to  mind  demonstrations  which  we  have  read
of,  to  the  effect  that  God  must  exist  as  a  Creator
and  First  Cause.  We  have  probably  thought  them
unconvincing,  and  more  than  that,  in  no  way
directed  to  anything  that  would  interest  us  if  it
were  established  by  a  line  of  proof  No  doubt
proofs  of  that  description  might  endow  us  with  a
fine  orthodoxy  if  we  wanted  to  theorise  about  a
Creator,  or  moral  governor  of  the  world  by  rewards
and  punishments,  or  guarantor  of  poetic  justice  by
his  treatment  of  Dives  and  Lazarus  in  a  future  life.
But  for  our  straightforward  reason  and  humanity
to-day,  the  sheer  existence  of  this  external  person
has  but  little  interest.  What  we  care  for  is  the
religious  consciousness,  and  such  a  proof  has  but
little  to  do  with  it.  And  a  metaphysical  theory
which  warrants  us  in  an  intuition  of  his  existence
we  take  to  mean  some  kind  of  unreasonable  appeal
to  an  uncritical  conviction.  It  seems  clear  that  we
cannot  assert  external  fact  conformable  to  an  idea
in  our  minds,  and  on  the  ground  of  that  idea,  just
as  that  idea  stands.^  And  the  suggestion  \s,  prima
facie  an  intellectual  offence  to  us.

But  when  any  one  has  entered  even  a  little  into

^  See  Bradley,  Appeara7tce^  ed.  2,  p.  394  ff.  We  have  to  remember
that  every  idea  quahfies  reality  in  some  way.  But  to  know  how  it
qualifies  it,  we  must  criticise  the  idea,  i.e.  subject  it  to  the  demand
of  the  whole  system.  And  that  is  fatal  to  asserting  particular
external  existence  merely  because  we  think  of  it.


I  EXPERIENCE  JUSTIFIES SPINOZA  23

Spinoza's  mind/  he  sees  that  here  such  criticism
does  not  apply.  And  this  is  all  the  plainer,  I  hope,
if  we  bring  with  us  some  such  considerations  as  we
are  pursuing  and  mean  to  pursue.

Because  what  we  then  find  is,  that  what  he  tells
us  in  his  curious  formal  idiom,  which  to  my  mind
recalls  always  Dante  in  its  union  of  austerity  and
passion — what  he  is  telling  us  is  what  we  shall  have
been  brought  to  see  when  we  have  made  the  most
complete  analysis  of  experience  in  our  power.  And
perhaps  it  might  be  said  on  the  whole  that  we  can
never  understand  great  writers  at  all,  unless  to  some
extent  we  thus  go  to  meet  them  with  relevant
demands  which  we  have  seriously  felt.  Spinoza  is
telling  us,  then,  what  we  in  our  inarticulate  fashion
have  tried,  and  shall  further  try  to  exhibit,  that  if
we  carefully  consider  our  experience  at  its  fullest,
with  our  relation  to  nature  and  society  (or  rather  in
them),  we  must  come  in  essence  to  what  we  have
set  out  under  the  name  of  self-recognition.  The
reason  is  that  this  amounts  to  nothing  but  a  logical
account  of  what  we  find  that  we  have  actually  done
and  relied  on,  not  by  any  means  in  superstition  and
inward  fantasy,  but,  on  the  contrary,  in  as  far  as  we
have  made  our  own  any  strenuous  endeavour  in
knowledge  or  practice,  and  any  serious  experience  of
life  and  love.  I  am  not  to  argue  the  matter  here
by  anticipation,  but  that  is  what  I  hope  to  exhibit
through  the  whole  scheme  of  our  present  course.
It  is  with  that  object  that  I  shall  draw  out,  as  I  have
outlined our plan, the conditions of  finite self-

1  Fortunately  there  is  now  excellent  help  availal^lc  for  the  English
student  in  the  works  of  Joachim,  Duff,  and  Hales  White  (translation),
and  Sir  F.  Pollock's  well-known  volume.


24 FINITENESS  AND SELF-TRANSCENDENCE lect.

conscious  being,  first  in  its  temporal  formation,
next  in  the  whole  adventure  of  its  life,  and,  lastly,
in  the  security  which  pervades  them  all — what  in
Spinoza's  language  is  "  peace."  It  is  true,  no  doubt,
as  we  are  told  on  good  authority,^  that  "  the  intuitive
knowledge  of  the  human  mind  in  its  essence  and  in
its  individual  dependence  on  God,  if  it  is  to  answer
to  the  ideal  of  intuitive  science  (i.e.  Spinoza's  third
kind  of  cognition),  presupposes  a  complete  appre-
hension of  the  total  nature  of  the  universe,  and  a
complete  scientific  demonstration  of  the  coherence
and  inner  articulation  of  all  its  properties."  But
this  need  not  alarm  us.  We  should  see  the  truth
better  if  we  had  fuller  experience,  but  the  perception
in  question,  if  we  have  eyes  to  see  it,  is  in  all  the
experience  we  possess.  And  to  learn  to  see  it  there
is  not  dispensing  with  logical  proof,  but  presupposes,
as  Spinoza  profoundly  implies,  the  method  of  science
throughout.  And  logic  fully  recognises  that  this  is
so,"  and  therefore  we  can  understand  how  our
experience  of  self-recognition  is  really  what  the
greatest  men  appeal  to  when  they  say  that  the  best
of  all  knowledge  is  a  higher  form  of  the  religious
consciousness.  It  has  been  well  shown  ^  that,  in  the
demonstrations  which  I  referred  to,  the  underlying
consideration  is  the  experience  in  which  the  soul
becomes  aware  of  its  own  full  nature,  an  experience  to
which  the  formal  shape  of  the  argument  does  less  than
justice.  It  is  not  a  proof  of  something  external,  as
that  Csesar  was  murdered  on  the  Ides  of  March. It  is

1  Joachim,  A  Study  of  the  Ethics  of  Spinoza,  p.  185.

2  por  the  conclusion  of  inference  is  always  the  premisses  seen  in
a  new  light  as  a  new  whole.  See  especially  E.  Caird  on  Anselm's
argument  for  the  being  of  God.  Cf.  also  my  Esscfitials,  p.  137,  and
Logic,  ii.  I  fT.  ^  Caird,  (?/.  cit.


religious
conscious-
ness is  co-
extensive


I  YET  THEORY  IS  NOT  ESSENTIAL  25

a  recognition  of  what  we  are,  and  the  fullest  nature
of  proof — of  systematic  necessity — is  present  in  it.

ii. On the other hand,  we shall maintain  with  But
equal  emphasis  that  the  religious  consciousness,  at
least in an implicit form, is necessarily present
throughout  finite  self-conscious  life,  if  not  even  more  ^'^^  ^"'^^

"  '  self-con-

widely. By  an "  implicit "  form  I  mean  a  form  in  sciousness,

which  the  characteristic  structure  can  be  recognised
by  the  observer  and  identified  by  theory,  though
the  subject  of  the  consciousness  in  question  might
never  think  of  himself  as  religious.  The  general
structure  of  finite  mind  is,  as  we  have  maintained
throughout,^  that  of  an  element  which  finds  itself  in
its  other.  We  take  as  an  obvious  instance  the
satisfaction  of  desire.  The  finite  being  transcends
itself  in  the  endeavour  to  fulfil  itself,  and,  in  trans-
cending itself,  relatively,  and  in  some  degree,  reaches
out  towards  the  whole.  This  general  structure
gives  us  the  outline  of  all  finite  consciousness  in
respect  of  its  attitude  to  its  world,  and  we  want
nothing  more  to  furnish  the  general  and  abstract
clue  to  what  we  mean  by  the  religious  consciousness.
For  it  will  appear  that  we  have  the  essence  of
religion  wherever  certain  characteristics  are  ascribed
with  a  certain  intensity  by  the  finite  subject  to  the
object  with  which  in  his  self- transcendence — in
thought  and  will — he  unites  himself.^  Wherever,
in  a  word,  we  have  devoutness,  devotedness,  devo-
tion, we  have  the  primary  feature  of  religion.  When
we  are  told  of  Sir  Andrew  Aguecheek,  "  He  is  a

1  See  Principle,  Lect.  VI.

2  Is  it  necessary  to  quote  the  famous  lines  ? —

Who  sweeps  a  room  as  to  thy  laws
Makes  that,  and  the  action,  fine.

George  Herbert.


26 FINITENESS  AND SELF-TRANSCENDENCE lect.

coward,  a  devout  coward,  religious  in  it,"  it  is,  I
suppose,  the  bitterest  of  bitter  jests.  His  comfort-
able self,  we  are  to  understand,  safe  and  unharmed,
is  the  object  before  which  his  whole  being  is
prostrate,  identified  with  it  in  will  and  hope.  The
same  bitter  irony  has  been  more  seriously  used,^
and  if  we  made  a  catena  of  the  language  of  teachers
and  preachers  in  dealing  with  the  whole  subject  of
"  idols,"  we  should  find  it  hard  to  draw  the  line
between  what  was  not  religion  at  all  and  false
religion,  or  between  false  and  undeveloped  religion.
But  these  matters  of  nomenclature  belong  rather
to  curiosity  than  to  theory.  When  you  come  to  a
serious  and  complete  devoutness  or  devotion,  in
which  the  whole  man  feels  himself  worthless  apart
from  the  object  to  which  he  goes  out  in  will  and
conviction,  it  must  be  something  at  least  capable  of
being  regarded  as  good,  and  the  attitude  towards  it
cannot  be  denied  to  be  religious.  Even  Sir  Andrew
must  have  had  adoration  for  other  things  than  his
own  safety  ;  that  is,  I  suppose,  why  the  bitter  jest  is
only  a  jest  after  all.

Here,  then,  we  find  the  primary  principle  of
religion,  in  devotion  and  worship,  such  that  in  them
the  self  not  merely  as  in  all  action  passes  beyond
itself,  but  consciously  and  intentionally  rejects  itself
as  worthless,  because  of  the  supreme  value  which  it
attaches  to  the  object  with  which  it  desires  and
affirms  its  union.

The point I am desirous to insist on at the

1  "  Whose  god  is  their  belly,  whose  glory  is  in  their  shame,  who
mind  earthly  things."  So  we  hear  of  people  making  money,  ambi-
tion, a  human  being,  the  "  world,"  their  god  or  "  idol."  Idol
implies,  I  suppose,  false  god.  But  the  difference  is  hardly  one  of
kind.


I  THE  NORMAL  MIND  IS  RELIGIOUS  27

present  stage  amounts  then  to  this.  In  religion  in
the  widest  sense,  at  whatever  point  of  intensity
and  conviction  we  hold  that  the  name  may  properly
begin  to  be  applied,  what  we  have  is  just  a  glowing
intensification  of  the  ordinary  attitude  of  the  finite
being  in  inherent  and  normal  self-transcendence.  It
now  not  merely  wants,  as  in  desire,  an  object  which
will  give  it  satisfaction,  but  it  sees  the  essence  of
things  so  entirely  in  this  object  as  to  prostrate
itself  before  its  excellence  and  power  —  spiritual
power  or  lovableness  it  may  well  be,  for  nothing  is
commoner  than  such  prostration  before  what  are  the
weak  things  of  the  world  according  to  any  standard
of  secular  force.

Therefore  I  shall  uphold  the  general  position
that  religion,  so  far  from  being  confined  to  or
dependent  on  the  insight  considered  in  the  previous
section,  is,  as  one  might  say,  the  normal  attitude  of
the  healthy  finite  mind,  and  exists  whenever  its
always  present  structure  is  operative  with  a  certain
degree  of  emphasis  or  intensity — that  is,  when  the
mind  cares  for  anything  else  very  much  more  than  for
its  given  self.  And  this  I  believe  that  it  usually  does.
And  it  is  even  difficult  to  think  that  something  like
the  religious  attitude  may  not  be  predicated  of  some
among  the  lower  animals  in  a  restricted  but  fairly
genuine  sense.^

It  follows  from  this  general  view,  as  we  have
anticipated,  and  as  I  shall  maintain  throughout,  that
the  stability  and  security  of  the  finite  self  is  not
restricted  to  the  higher  orders  of  consciousness,  or
to  the  explicit  apprehension  of  what  is  traditionally
called  religious  truth. But  it  extends  wherever  and

^  See  p.  236,  below.


28 FINITENESS  AND SELF-TRANSCENDENCE lect.

however  a  genuine  devoutness  and  loyalty,  before
which  the  given  self  seems  a  little  thing  and  lightly
to  be  sacrificed  for  the  chosen  transcendent  good,  is
found  to  be  the  ruling  passion  of  a  finite  mind.  The
adventurousness  and  trouble  of  the  finite  self,  so  far
from  being  hostile  to  this  principle,  are,  as  will  be
observed,  its  actual  proof  and  embodiment.  It  is
the  very  fire  of  self-transcendence  for  a  good  whole-
heartedly believed  in  that  in  the  main  brings  these
pains  and  adventures  to  pass.  Stability  and  security
are  begotten  in  the  very  torrent  and  whirlwind  of
passion.  It  is  not  necessary  that  a  mind  so  partici-
pant in  the  greatness  of  life  should  know  the  meaning
of  such  terms  and  formulae  as  we  are  using.  It  is
a  question  of  faith  and  conduct,  not  of  theory  and
explanation.  And  we  should  find  if  we  examined
the  detail  that  the  stability  and  security  here  in
question  belong,  at  the  very  least,  as  frequently  and
as  genuinely  to  the  humble  as  to  those  whose
opportunities  might  entitle  them  to  share  the
aspirations  of  Dante  himself  And  such  an  attitude,
we  shall  further  argue,  must  have  an  immense
reaction  on  society  the  more  it  is  realised,  and  the
winning  of  such  an  attitude  through  the  negative
experiences  of  mechanical  progress  seems  likely  to
be  our  main  hope  for  advance  in  the  future.
conciu-  5. To express the simplicity and potential

spkioza  universality  of  the  attitude  in  question,  which  con-
behaif"  ^^^^^  ^^  ^^^  sincere  devotedness  of  ordinary  people
of  this ^-Q  the  aims  and  affections  which  make  the  world

universality

of  religion,  go  round,  I  will  close  this  introductory  lecture  by
quoting  a  passage  from  Spinoza,  the  manliness  of
which  is  always  a  refreshment  to  my  mind.  Yet,
before  reading  it,  I  would  say  that  in  part  it  has  a


I  THOUGH  APT  TO  MISTAKE  ITSELF  29

certain  malice  of  expression  with  which  I  do  not
sympathise  ;  in  other  words,  it  neglects,  as  I  think,
the  fact  that  utterances  of  popular  religion,  which
appear  to  identify  it  with  very  material  hopes  and
fears,  are  largely  due  to  mere  inarticulateness,  and
fail  to  express  the  spiritual  meaning  which  really
underlies  them.  Though,  on  the  other  hand,  I  feel
sure  that  the  materialism  is  not  without  an  evil
reaction  upon  the  idea  which  it  seeks  to  convey.
The  bearing  of  the  quotation  is,  that  without  the
"  third  kind  of  cognition,"  and  without  supernatural
expectations,  the  essence  of  religion  is  normal  to
finite  mind,  and  runs  through  the  whole  of  life.

"  The  primary  and  sole  foundation  of  virtue  or
of  the  proper  conduct  of  life  is  our  own  profit.^
But  in  order  to  determine  what  reason  prescribes
as  profitable,  we  had  no  regard  to  the  eternity  of
the  mind,  which  we  did  not  recognise  till  we  came
to  the  Fifth  Part.  Therefore,  although  we  were  at
that  time  ignorant  that  the  mind  is  eternal,  we  con-
sidered as  of  primary  importance  those  things  which
we  have  shown  are  related  to  strength  of  mind  and
generosity ;  and  therefore,  even  if  we  were  now
ignorant  of  the  eternity  of  the  mind,  we  shall  con-
sider those  commands  of  reason  as  of  primary
importance."

Scholium — "the  creed  of  the  multitude  seems  to
be  different  from  this ;  for  most  persons  seem  to
believe  that  they  are  free  in  so  far  as  it  is  allowed
them  to  obey  their  lusts,  and  that  they  give  up  a
portion  of  their  rights,  in  so  far  as  they  are  bound

^  Cf.  iv.  2>1-  "The  good  which  every  one  who  follows  after
virtue  seeks  for  himself  he  will  desire  for  other  men  ;  and  his  desire
on  their  behalf  will  be  greater  in  proportion  as  he  has  a  greater
knowledge  of  God."


30 FIN/TENESS  AND SELF-TRANSCENDENCE lect.

to  live  according  to  the  commands  of  divine  law.
Piety,  therefore,  and  religion,  and  absolutely  all
those  things  which  are  related  to  greatness  of  soul,
they  believe  to  be  burdens  which  they  hope  to  be
able  to  lay  aside  after  death  ;  hoping  also  to  receive
some  reward  for  their  bondage,  that  is  to  say,  for
their  piety  and  religion.  It  is  not  merely  this
hope,  however,  but  also  and  chiefly  fear  of  dreadful
punishments  after  death,  by  which  they  are  induced
to  live  according  to  the  commands  of  divine  law,
that  is  to  say,  so  far  as  their  feebleness  and  impotent
minds  will  permit,  and  if  this  hope  and  fear  were
not  present  to  them,  but  if  they,  on  the  contrary,
believed  that  minds  perish  with  the  body,  and
that  there  is  no  prolongation  of  life  for  miserable
creatures  exhausted  with  the  burden  of  their  own
piety,  they  would  return  to  ways  of  their  own  liking  ;
they  would  prefer  to  let  everything  be  controlled
by  their  own  passions,  and  to  obey  fortune  rather
than  themselves."

"  This  seems  to  me  as  absurd  as  if  a  man,  because
he  does  not  believe  that  he  will  be  able  to  feed  his
body  with  good  food  to  all  eternity,  should  desire
to  satiate  himself  with  poisonous  and  deadly  drugs  ;
or  if,  because  he  sees  that  the  mind  is  not  eternal
or  immortal,^  he  should  therefore  prefer  to  be  made
to  live  without  reason — absurdities  so  great  that
they  scarcely  deserve  to  be  repeated."  We  may
read  the  thesis  as  the  conclusion — "  Even  if  we
did  not  know  that  our  mind  is  eternal,  we  should
still consider  as  of  primary  importance  Piety  and

^  Spinoza  does  not  refer  to  a  future  life  in  our  sense,  but  to
oneness  with  God.  There  can  be  religion  without  the  speculative
consciousness  of  this.


IN  TRADITIONAL EXPRESSION  31


Religion,  and  absolutely  everything  which  in  the
4th  Part  we  have  seen  to  be  related  to  strength  of
mind  and  generosity."  ^  Life,  on  the  whole,  we  shall
maintain,  justifies  Spinoza's  own  doctrine  ;  what  he
imputes  to  the  multitude  does  not  represent  them
fairly,  but  is  the  outcome  of  a  false  tradition.

1  Ethics,  V.  41,  Hales  White's  translation.


LECTURE II

PERSONAL FEELING AND THE DISTINCTNESS OF
PERSONS

Feeling I. The  stronghold  of  an  irrational  personalism  is

exclusive- in  the  importance  attached  to  personal  feeling  and

perJon- to pcrsonal initiative, according to a false and

^'''^-  minimising interpretation of these most actual

experiences. In  a  lecture  of  the  previous  course^

we have discussed the true nature  of  personal

initiative,  and  we  will  now  corroborate  our  doctrine

by  pointing  out  what  personal  feeling  means  and

where  its  value  resides,  and  by  discussing  the  nature

and limitations of the distinction between one

person  and  another.

It  is  freely  admitted  that  in  cognition  the  self
is  universal.  It  goes  out  into  a  world  which  is
beyond  its  own  given  being,  and  what  it  meets
there  it  holds  in  common  with  other  selves,  and  in
holding  it  ceases  to  be  a  self-contained  and  repellent
unit.  This  objective  character  is  apt  even  to  be
proclaimed  a  defect  and  a  loss  of  individuality,"
owing  to  a  vicious  logic  of  the  abstract,  and  a
failure  to  apprehend  the  relation  of  immediate  to
mediate  experience. In  conation  and  initiative  the

1  Principle,  Lect.  IX.
2  Ward,  NattiralisDiy  ii.  134,  163,  and  elsewhere.


LECT.  II  WHAT  CANNOT  BE  SHARED  33

same  universal  character,  though  its  presence  is  not
to  be  denied,  is  more  apt  to  be  disregarded  ;  and
though  the  social  and  rational  character  of  the
world  of  purpose  is  constantly  insisted  on,  yet  we
find  that  spontaneity  and  activity  are  emphasised
as  special  features  which  are  needed  to  vindicate
the  personal  self  as  an  exclusive  entity,  simply  living
out  a  nature  of  its  own.  Our  criticism  of  this  atti-
tude was  offered  in  the  chapter  just  referred  to,  and
what  we  now  propose  to  discuss  is  the  strongest
support  of  exclusive  personality,  the  experience  of
personal  feeling.

But  how,  it  may  be  asked  at  starting,  can  such
an  experience  conceivably  be  exploited  in  the  sense
we  deprecate  .f*  Is  it  not  clear,  according  to  the  old
Idealist  doctrine,  that  there  are  two  principal  mani-
festations of  self-consciousness  or  the  self  in  the
other,  love  and  thinking,  and  that  the  essence  of
what  makes  a  finite  being  participate  in  the  universal
is  as  evident  in  either  of  these  forms  as  in  the  other  }

In  the  end  this  question  will  prove  unanswer-
able. Personal  feeling  is  the  last  thing  really  to
furnish  an  argument  in  favour  of  an  exclusive  and
repellent  personality.  But  it  is  currently  held  to
do  so,  and  there  are  reasons  for  the  opinion.

i.  The  main  point,  which  might  be  held  to  settle  xhedis-

1  .  •  1  ^  •  • ^L tinctness  of

the  question  in  a  sense  adverse  to  our  view,  is  the  immediate
de  facto distinctness of immediate experience in  '^'^P'^^ence.
different  finite  centres. I  can  have  your  knowledge;
I  can  take  a  share  in  your  act  or  purpose  ;  but  your
sensation  * or  your  pain,  or  your  love  and  hate,  as

1  I  will  grant  thai  this  is  here  to  me.'in  the  act  of  apprehension,
in  order  to  avoid  the  controversy  about  the  psychical  character  of
sense-data,  which  is  here  irrelevant.

D


the  coenpes-
thesia.


34  PERSONAL FEELING  lect.

the  directly  experienced  quality  of  your  mind,  that
I  can  never  possess  in  my  own.  And  it  is  precisely
this  impossibility,  we  are  told,  in  which  individuality
consists/  We  shall  have  to  return  to  the  value  of
this  distinctness  below.  But  we  are  concerned  at
present  with  the  prima  facie  suggestion  which  it
furnishes  to  the  effect  that  feeling,  which  is  in  form
immediate,  must  be  of  the  nature  of  an  inner  unity,
something  in  which  the  self  is  at  home  with  itself,
and  does  not  issue  out  into  a  content  uniting  it  with
others  and  with  the  world.
The  ii. This conception is confirmed by  the  well-

nature  of  known  analysis  of  the  sense  of  self-identity  into  a
mass  of  feeling  continuous  in  quality,  and  changing
more  slowly  than  the  succession  of  ideas  and  per-
ceptions. Here,  it  may  be  said,  we  have  our  parti-
cular and  distinctive  self  actually  constituted  by  the
peculiar  quality  of  our  feeling.  It  is  this  which  is
essentially  private  to  us,  and  it  is  its  privateness
which  keeps  us  ourselves  and  prevents  us  from
becoming  somebody  else.  Whether  or  no  we
accept  the  somatic  theory  of  emotion,  it  is  plain
that  much  of  the  strength  of  feeling  is  closely  con-
nected with  bodily  "  resonance  "  ;  and  in  this  way
the  distinctness  of  the  body,  as  one  natural  object
among  others,  is  prayed  in  aid  of  the  distinctness
of  the  soul  or  self,  through  the  medium  of  feeling
as  essentially  bodily.  It  is  our  feeling,  it  would
seem,  that  makes  and  keeps  us  what  we  are.  As
purely  cognitive  or  as  effectively  conative,  apart
from  the  peculiar  quality  of  our  conative  interest
which  depends  on  the  privacy  of  feeling,  we  might
be  anybody.

1  Ward,  op.  cit.  ii. 167.


II UNDISTINGUISHED  FEELING  IRRELEVANT 35

iii.  And  against  the  argument  from  the  de  facto  The
community  of  feehng  and  interest,  as  e.g.  from  the  non'^
alleged  acceptance  of  pleasure  and  pain  as  common  ofpieasure!
possessions/  it  would  be  pointed  out  that  in  feeling
as  such  there  can  at  any  rate  be  no  sense  of  this
community.  There  has  been  no  dissociation,  and
there  can  be  no  sense  of  union.  Granting  for  the
sake  of  argument  that  a  child  is  pleased  with  plea-
sure,^ wherever  and  however  it  is  suggested  to  him,
yet  it  cannot  be  said  that  what  he  is  pleased  with
is  the  pleasure  of  others.  The  whole  point  is  that
he  is  at  a  stage  in  which  "  self  and  others "  have
as  yet  acquired  no  meaning  for  him.  It  is  one  thing
to  say  that  the  soul  may  in  a  certain  phase  be  in  a
oneness  of  feeling  with  what  surrounds  it — may  not
distinguish  the  love  and  brightness  or  the  anger
and  gloom  of  its  surroundings  from  what  it  feels
within  itself — and  another  to  say  that  when  the  self
is  fully  formed  it  can  recognise  a  unity  with  the
world  and  with  other  selves,  and  yet  not  transcend
the  limits  of  immediate  feeling.  When  the  unity
of  feeling  is  unbroken  and  continuous,  there  is,
properly  speaking,  no  distinction  of  selves.  The
other  person's  love  or  pleasure,  pain  or  anger,  would
be  one's  own,  just  as  a  brightening  of  the  sunshine
seems  an  immediate  change  within  one's  private
mood.  I  suppose  a  dog's  anger  when  his  master
is  threatened  might  be  something  of  this  kind.  He
does  not  know  that  he  is  unselfish.

This  is  what  would  be urged against denying
the privateness and intimacy of  feeling on the

^  Professor  Taylor  on Cornelius, Problem  of  Conduct^  p.  118;
Bradley  on  Sidgwick,  Ethical  Studies^  p.  117.
'^ Professor  Taylor,  I.e.


36


PERSONAL FEELING


LECT.


Sentiment
alism  of
the  inner
life.


ground  of  its  undistinguishing  unity  in  undeveloped
phases  of  the  self,  or  previous  to  the  self's
emergence.^

iv.  And  thus  the  door  is  opened  to  the  full
pathos  and  bathos  of  sentimentalism.  When  the
self  is  most  itself  it  is  most  alone. "  Not  e'en  the

dearest  heart  and  next  our  own " To  realise

our  individuality  is  to  absorb  ourselves  in  our
exclusiveness.  The  dim  recesses  of  incommunic-
able feeling  are  the  true  shrine  of  our  selfhood.
What  really  matter  are  our  conscious  states  as  states
of  a  conscious  being,"  our  inner  life  as  a  series  of
moods  and  emotions  ;  the  heightened  self-awareness,
the  transparency  of  the  warp  and  woof  of  our  psycho-
physical being,  which  accompanies  the  sensitiveness
of  a  disintegrating  body  and  mind.^  Death  is  for
every  man  a  lonely  agony,  and  life,  it  would  appear,
is  not  much  better."*

2. All  this  sentimental  commonplace,  as  summed
up  in  the  last  paragraph,  is  being  utilised  to-day  in
favour  of  a  very  common  type  of  error,  the  confusion
contention,  q^  {oxvci  with  content,  aggravated  by  a  certain  special
type  of  fallacy.

1  For  illustrations  of  such  a  condition  as  a  fact,  cf.  Cornford,
From  Religion  to  Philosophy^  p.  JT.

2  I  do  not  suggest  that  this  conception  as  employed  by  Dr.
McTaggart  has  the  implication  of  absorption  in  the  exclusive  self
which  I  here  ascribe  to  it.  On  the  other  hand,  I  am  strongly  of
opinion  that  the  stress  laid  on  states  of  consciousness  as  such  (cf.
Principle,  p.  302)  must  logically  go  to  reinforce  a  vicious  individualism
or  even  an  infra-individualism.

^  A^tm^Vs  Journal  Intijiie,  April  28,  1871.

*  James,  Varieties  of  Religious  Experience,  p.  163:  "Every
individual  existence  goes  out  in  a  lonely  spasm  of  helpless  agony  "  ;
and  see  Pragmatism,  p.  28  fif.  :  "A  fine  example  of  revolt  against
the  very  shallow  optimism,"  etc.  Contrast  Haldane,  Pathway  to
Reality,  ii.  2 1 4,  and  R.  L.  Nettleship,  Remains,  Ivi.  :  "  Don't  bother
about  death  ;  it  doesn't  cotmt."


The

fallacies
involved
in  the
above


II  EVERYTHING  IS  FELT  37

We  will  say  a  word  on  each  of  these  two  points,
and  then  consider  the  true  nature  of  personal  feeling
at  its  worst  and  best.

i. It is an old story  that feeling is  immediate  The

1 .  ,  . .  , .  -  confusion

experience,  and,  simply  as  such,  does  not  admit  or  of  form
being  shared  or  communicated,  or  of  referring  to  an  femln"
object  beyond  it. This  is  the  formal  character  of  J^o^'^of^''^"
feeling. It  is  what  a  being  capable  of  experience  feeling.
simply  is  in  his  experience,  and  pi'wia  facie  it  has
no  meaning  or  reference  or  suggestion  beyond  itself.
Such,  for  example,  is  a  very  simple  pleasure  or  pain
or organic sensation. Pleasure may no doubt
produce persistence in a behaviour,  and pain  an
effort  after  relief;  but  these  already  imply  contents
closely  united  with  the  feeling,  while  exhibiting  the
tendency  of  all  contents  to  go  beyond  themselves.
As feeling,  however,  the pleasure or pain simply
are  ;  they  tell  us  nothing  beyond  themselves,  have
no  meaning,  and  suggest  no  object  or  idea.

This  is  the  characteristic  of  feeling  which  the
votary  of  exclusive  personality  transforms  into
ultimate  privateness  and  incommunicability.  It  is
in  principle  the  old  story  of  subjectivism.  Because
a  state  is  my  state,  therefore  it  is  nothing  more.
And  with  feeling  the  conclusion  is  more  plausible
than  with  action  or  perception.  For,  as  we  have
seen,  feeling  may  be  very  blank,  very  empty  of
content.  It  may  approach  very  nearly  to  "pure
being."

But  it  has  to  be  remembered  that  all  the  wealth
of  our  world  has  an  immediate  aspect,  and  both  can
and  must  pass  through  the  form  of  feeling.  We
feel  all  that  makes  a  difference  to  us  ;  and  in
principle,  as  we  have  seen,  there  is nothing  that


38  PERSONAL FEELING  lect.


does  not.^  Thus  the  pure  privacy  and  incommunic-
ability  of  feeling  as  such  is  superseded  in  all
possible  degrees  by  the  self- transcendence  and
universality  of  the  contents  with  which  it  is  unified.
And  as  these  contents  ^  are  constituents  of  our
individuality,  the  conception  that  individuality  or
personality  has  its  centre  in  the  exclusiveness  of
feeling  neglects  the  essential  feature  of  individuality
or  personality  itself.  It  has  an  aspect  of  distinct
unsharable  immediacy  ;  but  in  substance,  in  stuff
and  content,  it  is  universal,  communicable,  expansive.
The  con-  ii. The special fallacy,  which draws in an  im-

fusion  of  ,  •  1 1  • 1  •  r  1 •

impersonal  portant  truth  to  aid  the  prejudice  oi  exclusiveness,
exciufivr  ^^^s  in  a  confusion  between  the  impersonal  and
feeling.  therefore  non  -  altruistic  interest  and  that  which
seems  to  be  exclusive  or  particular ;  between  the
non-social  which  is  supra-social  (in  the  literal  sense
of  the  term  social  in  which  it  implies  direct  belong-
ing to  a  plurality)  and  the  repellently  self-centred
or  particular.^

It  is  true  that  very  much  of  the  content  which
makes  the  stuff  and  solidity  of  our  individual  and
personal  being  is  not  directly  social  in  its  reference.
It  has  nothing  immediately  to  do  with  social  group-
ing, social  welfare,  the  moulding  of  social  relations,
or  the  enjoyment  arising  from  them.  In  religion^
many  have  held  themselves  to  be  alone  with  God  ;
and  in  the  same  way  the  love  of  solitude,  and  the

^ Principle,  p.  300.

-  Cf.  Stout,  Funda7ne7ital  Points  in  Theory  of  Knowledge  (St.
Andrews  Publications),  p.  7.  He  speaks  of  "  objects  as  meant,"  in
term  of  the  distinction  of  Inhalt  and  Gegenstand.  I  had  not  this  in
view. It  is  the  content  of  the  objects  that  determines  their  identity.

•^  See  the  author's  Philosophical  Theory  of  the  State,  Introduction
to  ed.  2.

■^  As  Dr.  McTaggart  rightly  insists.


II ''NON-ALTRUISTIC'  TAKEN  AS  '' UNSHAKABLE''  39

Strongest  repulsion  to  given  social  pluralities  and
arrangements,  often  accompanies  the  deepest  experi-
ence in  the  life  of  nature,  in  science,  art,  speculation.

Now  the  point  is  that  all  these  contents, /rm^
facie  non  -  social,  are  nevertheless  universal,  and
organs  of  self-  transcendence.  They  are  more
universal,  that  is,  they  are  more  deeply  intertwined
and  interfused  with  the  affairs  of  man  and  the  laws
and  meanings  of  nature,  than  the  social  plurality
itself,  so  far  as  it  merely  claims  consideration  on  the
score  of  the  number  of  human  beings  it  includes.
Hence,  as  is  continually  the  case,  there  is  apt  to  be
a  confusion  between  the  maximum  and  the  minimum
of  experience.  The  man  who  has  merged  his  world
in  God  is  mistaken,  and  perhaps  mistakes  himself,
for  one  who  has  never  risen  out  of  himself  to  com-
municate with  the  world  at  all.  The  artist  and  the
philosopher,  whose  enthusiasm  goes  out  to  all  order
and  intelligence,  may,  as  against  a  given  social
group,  rank  as  types  of  the  unsocial  and  the
recluse.

If  we  were  able  to  analyse  the  grounds  on  which
individuality  is  equated  with  exclusive  and  incom-
municable feeling,  we  should  find  that  nearly  all
which  are  plausible  rest  on  this  error  of  identification.
All  feeling  that  is  not  explicitly  altruistic  is  set  down
to  the  credit  of  exclusive  and  unsharable  immediacy.
And  it  is  rightly  seen  that  the  deepest  phases  of
individuality — those  in  which  the  man  is  most  of
what  he  has  the  capacity  for  being — may  fall  in
different  degrees  under  this  category.  And  there-
fore it  seems  plausible  to  say  that  the  shrine  and
centre  of  personality  lies  in  self-contained  unsharable
feeling. And  the  misapprehension  thus  engendered


feeling

at  its  worst

and  best.


40  PERSONAL FEELING  lect.

reacts  detrimentally  on  the  conceptions  of  speculative
thought,  of  beauty/  and  of  religion.
Personal  3. Having  spoken  thus  generally  of  the  sources

of  error,  we  will  go  on  to  consider  some  cases  of
personal  feeling  at  its  worst  and  at  its  best,
inthebad  i.  In  Ordinary  parlance,  "  personal  "  feelings,
negadve.  "  pcrsonal "  interests,  "personalities,"  like  "self-
consciousness,"  indicate  something  bad.  Why  is
this  ?  The  controversialist  in  contrast  with  the
thinker,-  Plato  tells  us,  is  always  talking  about
persons  {nrepl  avOpcoircov).  He  argues  for  victory  and
not  for  truth.  Thus  truth  would  commonly  be
called  an  "  impersonal  "  end,  and  "  personality  "
would  be  taken  in  a  sense  opposed  to  such
"  impersonal  "  ends.  This  is  the  root  of  the  feature
we  are  observing.  A  person  is  his  own  object ;
but  what  he  is  worth  depends  on  what  there  is  in
him.  At  his  minimum  he  is  almost  mere  exclu-
siveness  and  antagonism.  At  his  maximum  he  is
one  with  the  greatest  and  widest  forms  of  life.^
"  Personal  feeling"  and  "personalities,"  in  the  bad
sense,  belong  to  the  person  at  his  minimum,  when
he  is  for  himself  mainly  a  feeling  of  repulsion  against
others — when  his  distinctness,  so  valued  to-day,
may  seem  to  be  at  its  highest  point.  The  same
is  true,  of  course,  about  self-consciousness  in  the
colloquial  sense.  In  order  to  be  thus  negative,  one
must  no  doubt  be  identified  with  something  positive,
and  we  have  seen  the  nature  of  the  self-feeling
which  is  the  condition  sine  qua  non  of  the  aware-
ness of  a  self. It  may  be that  persons  normally

^ Cf.  Tennyson's "  Palace of  Art." Perhaps its conclusion is
intended  to  point  this  moral.  ^  Rep.  500  B.

^ Hegel,  Philosophie  des  Rer/ifs,  sect.  34  ff.


II  ''MERE  PERSONALITIES''  41

attain  to  the  wider  self  through  the  experience  of
antagonism,  Hke  Benedick  and  Beatrice,  or  master
and  slave  in  Hegel's  account  of  recognitive  self-
consciousness.^  But  to  remain  at  this  phase,  or
to  revive  it  in  contrast  with  the  wider  self  when
achieved  in  principle,  is  to  remain  at  or  return  to  a
lower  level.  That  is  why  "  mere  personal  feeling  "
and  "mere  personalities"  are  terms  of  censure,
though  personal  affection,  personal  loyalty,  the
influence  of  personality,  may  indicate  some  of  the
best  things  in  life.  The  criterion  is  our  old  one,
individuality  or  participation  in  the  real.  We
instinctively  judge  by  the  comprehensiveness  and
harmony  of  the  experience  which,  in  making  himself
his  object,  the  person  takes  as  his  object.  This
helps  us  to  understand  how  the  value  of  personal
feeling,  though  it  may  rightly  be  found  in  features
contrasted  with  what  passes  as  altruism,  is  never-
theless opposed  in  principle  to  absorption  in  the
private  self.  The  typical  forms  of  the  sense  of
isolation,  it  has  been  said,'^  are  fear  and  desire,  that
is,  as  I  understand,  unsatisfied  desire  or  discontent.
The  character  of  personal  feeling  in  its  discon-
nectedness or  exclusiveness  inevitably  gravitates
towards  such  negative  attitudes.  This  is  in  principle
the  nature  of  self-absorbed  personality.

ii. We can throw light on the transformation  as  trans-

, . ,  . - . .  ,  .  formed  by

which personal teehng undergoes as its content  a  universal
becomes objective by considering the nature of  objlSve
objective  emotion,  or,  in  other  words,  the  relation  f™°t'o":

J  '  '  '  tragic  fear.

of  feeling  to  expression.

The essential point is that feeling,  being the

1 Encycl.  sect.  430  ff.
2  Nettleship,  Re?nains^  i.  82.


42  PERSONAL  FEELING


difference which experiences make  to us, is not
separable  from  and  prior  to  the  ideal  content  which
as  we say  is its  expression. Though formal  and
immediate  on  one  side,  yet,  through  the  matter  of
which  it  is  the  reaction  upon  our  life,  it  obtains  a
meaning and  a  vehicle. And  with this  meaning
and  vehicle  it,  the  feeling,  the  difference  made  to
us  by  the  content,  the  emotion  towards  or  from  an
object,  the pleasure or  pain, necessarily  takes  on
new  characteristics. The  pleasure  in  the  contempla-
tion or  creation  of  beauty,  for  instance,  we  are  told,
so  far  from  being  like  everyday  pleasures,  private,
casual,  incommunicable,  is  essentially  social,^  neces-
sary, communicable. A feeling which is to be
objectified  in  art  must  take  on  a  certain  permanence
and  determinateness. You  cannot  embody  in  object-
ive  form what has no detail, no  organisation or
articulation, in a word, no universality. I have
illustrated  this  in  a  previous  writing'  by  the  dignity
of  utterance  which  a  great  passion  or  a  great  sorrow-
will  sometimes  confer  upon  a  common  man,  raising
him for the moment to the level of  words and
actions  which  no  one  who  has  witnessed  them  can
forget,  and  from  which  all  that  is  trivial  has  been
refined away  as by fire. The greatest  of  great
feeling  can  only  be  embodied  in  great  constructive
works ; it is not antagonistic but proportional  to
rationality  of  expression. "  In  any  art, the  more
artistic  the  work  is,  the  more  form  is  there,  i.e.  the
more measurable, definable, calculable, is it^the

1  It  must  be  remembered  that  the  attitudes  which  are  supra-
social  are  by  that  fact  social,  and  more.  Beauty  certainly  addresses
the  universal  mind  ;  but  it  is  not  every  man  or  every  group  that  has
enough  of  the  universal  mind  to  care  about  it.

2  Mind,  9,  N.S.  p.  153.


II  OBJECTIVITY  OF  FEELING  43

more  rational  or  intellectual.  Yet,  on  the  other  hand,
everybody  since  the  world  began  has  associated  with
art  strength  of  feeling  and  unconsciousness  of  effort.
A  great  piece  of  music  can  be  taken  to  pieces  like  a
clock  ;  a  great  poem,  compared  with  any  other  piece
of  language,  is  intensely  artificial ;  yet  the  amount
of  feeling  which  they  represent  is  stupendous  when
compared  with  the  song  of  a  bird  or  a  simple  story.
And  this  relation  of  feeling  and  intellect  seems  to
hold  good  both  of  the  artist  and  of  his  public.  Nobody
doubts  that  artists  are  more  emotional  than  ordinary
men  ;  nobody  ought  to  doubt  that  they  apply  more
intellect  than  ordinary  men.  And  as  to  the  audience
...  if  you  go  to  art  to  get  your  own  feeling  repro-
duced, you  find  it  useless  and  flat,  just  because
mere  feeling  cannot  find  expression,  and  your  feel-
ing must  be  at  any  rate  potentially  endowed  with
form  before  you  can  be  emotionally  receptive  of
real  form."^

The  idea  that  for  truth  and  depth  of  emotion
you  must  go  to  the  naive  and  undeveloped  soul
is  a  fallacy  of  the  type  which  opposes  spiritual
depth  to  spiritual  expansion.  Or  it  is  like  thinking
that  for  originality  you  must  go  to  the  ignorant ;
like  the  mother  who,  believing  her  boy  to  have
musical  genius,  forbade  him  to  study  the  great
masters,  for  fear  his  originality  should  be  impaired.

Feeling,  then,  in  order  to  be  capable  of  utterance
in  determinate  form,  must  take  on  an  objective
character.  It  must  cease  to  be  a  blank  intensity  ;  it
must  gather  substance  from  ideas. ^

And  in  thus  acquiring  objectivity  it  must  change

^ Nettleship,  Remains^  i.  61.
- Including,  of  course,  for  this  purpose,  perceptions.


44  PERSONAL  FEELING  lect.

its  reference  to  self,  or  modify  the  self  to  which  it
refers. An  instance  that  has  often  been  worked  out
is  the relation of  tragic fear  to  actual  and  selfish
terror. Tragic  fear  is  mediated  by  a  representation
which  appeals  to  humanity  in  its  heights  and  depths.
It  is  no  longer  personal  terror,  though  akin  to  it.
It has become impersonal, or  if  we like super-
personal,  from  the  sheer  necessity  of  being  uttered
in  a  shape  which  can  make  determinate  and  persist-
ent appeal  to  the  general  mind.^ It  has  passed  from
a  shrinking  before  personal  disaster  to  a  sense  of
what  is  inevitable  but  triumphant  in  the  contradic-
tions  of  human destiny. And  in  all this,  as  we
have  seen,  the  personal  emotion  is  not  minimised
but  maximised. The  attainment  of  individuality  is
not  less,  but  greater. The  self-absorbed  personality,
determined mainly  by negations, is not the true
nor  self-evident, but is only the lower obvious
personality.
Active" iii. It  is  all-important for a right estimate  of
than personal feeling to grasp the full bearing of
Spinoza's  teaching,  that  nothing  can  be  done  as  a
consequence  of  a  "  passive  "  emotion  which  cannot
be  done,  and  better  done,  from  a  desire  arising  out
of  reason,  an emotion in  which  we  are  "active."
The  point  is  this. It  is  the  common  prejudice  to
conceive  that  we  are  in  a  moral  and  emotional  loss
if  we  succeed in  determining  our  personal  feeling
and  desires  by  distinct  and comprehensive  ideas,
instead  of  by  stimuli  impinging  upon  us  casually  and
ab  extra. In  Spinoza's  language  this  is  to  become
active  instead  of  passive  ;  because  to  be  passive  is
to react  to  stimuli,  the nature  and conditions  of

1 Author's  History  of  Aesthetic^  p.  236  ff.


emotion
more
"  passive
emotion


II  WHAT  ''ACTION" MEANS  FOR SPINOZA  45

which  are  for  the  most  part  unknown  and  so
external  to  us  ;  to  act,  or  to  be  guided  by  reason,  is
to  follow  an  idea  in  which  the  occasion  of  our
desire  is  distinctly  exhibited  in  its  total  nature  and
conditions  as  a  fulfilment  of  our  being.  And  what
Spinoza  desires  to  affirm  is  that  in  the  latter  mode
of  our  nature,  contrary  to  popular  prejudice,  we
have  gain  without  loss.  In  such  action,  the  only
"  action  "  proper,  our  temper  is  that  of  high  courage
{fortitudo),  which  takes  the  shape  of  lofty-minded-
ness  (animositas)  in  our  own  affairs,  and  nobility
{generositas)  in  those  of  others.  In  this  "active"
mood  we  are  simply  living  at  a  higher  pitch  ;  and
nothing  that  is  positive  in  our  nature  is  there
omitted  or  fails  to  find  its  completion.^  Spinoza
purposely  insists  on  the  strong  instance  of  pity  or
commiseration,  obviously  in  order  to  challenge
commonplace  ideas  at  a  decisive  point.  Pity  he
takes  as  a  passive  emotion,  that  is  to  say,  as  arising
from  an  external  stimulus  little  understood.  To  be
guided  by  it  is  not  to  act,  that  is,  not  to  let  our  full
being  exercise  its  powers,  but  to  suffer — we  may
say,  to  react  in  contrast  to  acting.  In  such  reaction
we  do  things  of  which  we  subsequently  repent,  and
everything  good  or  positive  in  such  a  feeling,
everything  that  it  can  do,  which  we  should  seriously
wish  to  be  done,  survives  in  the  mood  of  "  nobility  "  ;
that  is  to  say,  in  the  truly  active  emotion  in  which
we  follow  an  adequate  idea  of  the  whole  occasion
which  solicits  our  efforts,  and  therefore  may  be  said
to  exert  owr selves}

^  Ethics^  iii.  i,  59  S.  iv.  59.

'^  Ethics,  iv.  50.  It  follows  from  Spinoza's  doctrine  of  activity
that  every  emotion  is  bad  so  far  as  painful.  Considering  what  he
means  by  activity,  I  cannot  but  think  that  this  view  requires  modifica-


46  PERSONAL FEELING  lect.

Thus  by  the  escape  from  negative  self-absorp-
tion—  from  the  mood  of  fear  and  discontented
desire  —  nothing  is  lost  to  personality;  and  it
becomes  a  verbal  question  whether  personality  is
considered  the  most  appropriate  expression  for  what
survives.  All  that  we  contemplated  was  to  make
it  clear  that  the  nature  of  feeling,  though  it  gives
2i  prima  facie  support  to  the  exclusive  and  repellent
idea  of  personality,  does  not  in  the  end  sustain  it.
In  feeling,  as  in  all  else,  the  increase  and  deepen-
ing of  individuality  is  a  progress  towards  unity
with  the  whole.  Self-distinction,  no  doubt,  becomes
more  marked  ;  but  true  self-distinction  is  hostile  to
self-absorption.  It  is  a  distinction  in  identity,  and
is  the  reverse  of  exclusiveness,  or  of  brooding  over
a  blank  indeterminate  content.
The  4. I will  push  this  argument  further  by  offering

orpSons!  some  suggestions  on  the  nature  of  the  distinction
between  finite  selves  or  persons,  with  the  view  of
helping  to  break  down  the  unreflecting  attitude
which  accepts  them  as  fundamentally  isolated  self-
subsistent  beings,  externally  connected,  but  not  in
any  genuine  sense .  parts  of  the  same  stuff,  or
elements  in  the  same  spirit.  The  question  is  a
difficult  one,  and  I  only  aim  at  paving  the  way  for
a  freer  consideration  of  it  than  appears  to  be
currently  held  permissible.  I  am  not  suggesting
that  our  ordinary  way  of  distinguishing  between
persons  and  between  their  respective  responsibilities
is  practically  wrong.  I  am  suggesting  that  we  are
too  little  alive  to  diversity  within  one  soul  (or  if  we

tion.  I  feel  sure  that  in  the  highest  activity  there  is  a  meeting-point
of  what  we  call  pain  and  pleasure.  The  reason  is  that  this  activity  of
the  whole  involves  a  degree  of  immediate  apparent  loss  by  transmu-
tation of  inferior  states. See  Principle,  p.  389.


II  WHAT  PREVENTS  SELVES COALESCING  47

prefer  another  form  of  speech,  to  diversity  of  souls
within  one  body),  and  to  unity  between  more  than
one.  We  construe  their  nature,  as  it  seems  to  me,
far  too  much  on  the  analogy  of  hard  nuclei,  impene-
trable by  one  another.'

i. No  one  would  attempt  to  overthrow  what  we  Formal
have called the formal distinctness of  selves or  a  difference
souls. This  consists  in  the  impossibility  that  one  o[  content,
finite  centre  of  experience  should  possess,  as  its  own
immediate  experience,  the  immediate  experience  of
another. The  rule  seems  to  be  that  one  self  cannot
get to  the experience of  another  self  except by
communication  through  the  external  world. And  if
it could experience directly the inner states of
another,  still  I  suppose  they  would  come  to  it  either
as  its  own  states,  or  as  states  of  the  other ;  but,
ex  hypotkesi,  not  immediately  as  both.^

It  may  be  that  this  formal  distinctness  depends  on
what  are  at  bottom  unessential  limitations — limita-
tions, I  mean,  not  grounded  on  the  nature  of  mind,
such  as  the  fact  of  differences  of  vital  feeling,  de-
pending as  a  rule  on  the  belonging  of  different
selves  to  different  bodies.  But  none  the  less,  if  the
hindrance  against  two  selves  having  the  same
immediate  experience  could  be  removed,  the  result
involved  would  be  the  coalescence  of  the  two  selves
into  one.^

1  Cf.  Hegel,  Wiss.  dcr  Logik,  iii.  318.  "Atomic  subjectivity"  in
its  highest  form  at  the  same  time  finds  its  own  objectivity  in  another.

-  Of  course  when  we  come  to  speak  of  the  organised  content  of
a  common  self,  all  this  is  different.  But  then  the  experiences  are
primarily  mediate,  though  they  may  have  become  practically  im-
mediate. Take,  e.i^.^  the  common  feeling  between  people  who
sing  together.

3  We  see  this,  I  suppose,  when  what  keeps  selves  apart  is  not
difference  of  bodies  but  bodily  difference,  i.e. in  cases  of  multiple


48  PERSONAL FEELING  lect.

This  inevitable  distinctness  in  immediate  ex-
perience has  been  appealed  to  as  containing  the
essence  of  individuality.  And  it  is,  no  doubt,
inevitable  on  the  assumption  that  there  are  to  be
finite  individuals,  because,  if  the  centres  ceased  to
have  the  different  bases  of  feeling  that  keep  them
from  merging,  they  would  be  one  without  distinction
even  if  in  different  bodies,  and  there  would  be  no
two  experiences  to  blend ;  while  if  the  bases  per-
sist, the  experiences  will  be  formed  round  different
centres  even  if  in  the  same  body,  and  therefore
the  experience  of  the  one  centre  could  not  be
experienced  as  that  of  the  other.  But  this  ground
of  distinction,  though,  as  I  say,  inevitable,  is  a  very
different  thing  from  the  inexplicable  and  funda-
mental foreignness  which  common  opinion  postulates
as  between  different  persons.  It  merely  comes  to
this,  that  they  are  organisations  of  content,  which  a
difference  of  quality,  generally  though  not  strictly  ^
dependent  on  belonging  to  different  bodies,  prevents
from  being  wholly  blended.
Type  of  ii. This formal distinctness of  selves, then, I

distin'c^ness  agree  that  no  one  would  attempt  to  overthrow,
^sSaT '°  although  in  the  light  of  the  considerations  just
whole.  advanced  its  nature  seems  not  wholly  fundamental
nor  irreducible.  But  when  we  come  to  consider
the  principle  of  identity  and  diversity  of  content,
the  inevitable  results  very  seriously  modify  the
view  of  distinctness  which  we  have  founded  on  the
form  of  experience. We  may  analyse  the  cases  of

personality.  The  one  self,  it  would  seem,  may  possess  immediately
the  experiences  of  the  other  {^Dissociation  of  a  Personality)^  but  if  it
ceased  to  possess  them  differently,  I  presume  the  selves  in  question
could  not  but  coalesce.

^ Because  it  can  exist  within  the  same  body.


II  DIVERSITY  OF  MEMBERS  49

individuals  who  are  members  of  the  same  social
whole.  The  results  would  apply  to  individuals
having  any  kind  of  identical  content,  which  must  be
the  case  with  all  finite  beings  as  far  as  in  the  same
world.

a. It  is  natural  to  assume  for  theoretical  purposes  Supposing
that  diversity  of  content  coincides  with  diversity  of  contems,
form,  and  therefore  that  every  finite  mind  is  dis-  fdeLy  in
tinguished  by  the  matter  with  which  it  is  occupied,  ^'^e^e'^^^-
as well as possessed of an experience formally
incommunicable. This  simplification  was  strongly
insisted on by Plato in  the  Republic,  and as an
ideal may perhaps be justified by the ultimate
theory of membership in the universe. Every
separate  mind  was  to  be  distinguished  by  unique-
ness of  function  or  service  no  less  than  by  formal
selfhood  ;  the  ideal  was  for  the  individual  to  render
a  contribution  to  the  whole,  the  content  of  which
could  not  be  precisely  repeated  in  any  other  indi-
vidual. And  this  ideal  seems  naturally  to  follow
from  the  very  conception  of  diversity  in  an  orderly
universe  ;  but  the  application  of  it  in  the  case  of
given  finite  minds  must  be  much  less  simple  than
Plato's  State  suggested.

Taking  it,  however,  as  if  it  were  prima  facie
roughly  true,  that  every  different  finite  individual
has  a  single  and  separate  work  or  function  in
society,  which  corroborates,  so  to  speak,  the  dis-
tinctness of  his  formal  selfhood,  we  are  still  in
presence  of  a  thorough-going  identity  in  diversity.
The  nature  of  a  whole  in  which  an  identity  is
subserved  by  differences  is  a  familiar  topic  ;  and
the  present  writer  has  often  pointed  out  that  in
membership of such a whole a thorough -going

E


50  PERSONAL  FEELING  lect.

connection  and  adaptation  of  different  minds  is
presupposed,  which  is  wholly  hidden  from  us  by
our  tendency  to  construe  minds  as  similar  things,
repeating  one  another  like  human  bodies.  If  minds
were  visible,  as  bodies  are,  the  writer  has  argued
elsewhere,  they  would  not  look  like  similar  repeated
units,  but  rather  each  would  appear  as  a  member  of  a
mechanism  pointing  beyond  itself  and  unintelligible
apart  from  others — one  like  a  wheel,  another  like
a  piston,  and  a  third,  perhaps,  like  steam.  Here,
then,  in  the  simplest  conceivable  case  of  coincidence
between  the  material  and  the  formal  limitation  of
the  self,  we  find  thorough-going  identity  of  diverse
selves  as  parts  of  a  single  whole  ;  and  that  in  rational
beings,  with  more  or  less  thinking  awareness  of  the
whole  to  which  they  contribute.  The  extreme  case
of  matter  coincident  with  form  would  have  been
in  the  mechanical  instinct  which  we  may  perhaps
ascribe  to  a  working  ant  or  bee,  sufficing  for  its
function,  but  devoid  of  all  awareness  of  the  whole
to  which  its  function  is  adapted,  in  short,  of  all  self-
transcendence.^  This  we  must  not  ascribe  to  any
rational  being,  but  obviously  there  are  all  grades  of
self-transcendence,  from  something  analogous  to
blind  instinct,  up  to  a  higher  limit  which  we  can
hardly  venture  to  fix.

yS.  But  when  we  look  at  the  facts  of  individual
range  and  endowment,  we  find  a  more  puzzling  and

1  Some  such  limitation  of  the  self  to  a  single  function,  on  the
analogy  of  the  insect,  Mr.  Wells  seems  to  ascribe  to  his  inhabitants
of  the  moon,  although  he  manages  to  make  a  highly  organised
intelligence  instrumental  to  it.  One  is  led  to  suspect  him  of  a
pessimistic  view  of  progress,  due  to  a  failure  in  appreciating  the
relation  of  individual  to  universal  for  an  intelligent  being — to  treating
it,  that  is,  as  if  the  two  terms  varied  inversely  and  not  directly  as
each  other.


WHAT  CAN  ONE  MIND  INCLUDE?  51


complex  state  of  things. Compared  with  the  logical  Thesuppo-
and  certain lines  of  the  social  structure — and  the  tr
same  is  true  with  any  of  the  fabrics  constituted  by  ^°


true  ;  self-
contents  do
not  corro-

achievements of the human mind — the content  '^°''^*'^

formal  dis-

possessed  by  individuals  is  in  the  highest  degree  tinctness.
arbitrary  and  contingent.  As  we  said  at  the  close
of  the  preceding  paragraph,  so  far  from  being
coincident  with  a  logically  distinguishable  function
or  factor  of  any  structure,  a  finite  mind  may  conjoin
in  itself  an  indefinite  number  of  capacities,  and  may
overlap,  repeat,  or  comprehend,  in  any  degree,  the
material  experiences  of  other  minds.^  Assuming
that  a  single  experience  cannot  have  as  its  organ
more  than  a  single  body — it  is  impossible  to  assume
conversely  that  a  single  body  cannot  be  organic  to
more  than  a  single  experience — there  are  certain
practical  or  de  facto  limitations  on  the  material
range  of  that  experience.  Such  is  the  fact  that  a
single  body  cannot  be  in  two  places  at  once,  or
the  difference  of  the  sexes,  or  fluctuating  physical
disabilities  like  liability  to  fatigue  or  the  shortness
of  life.  But  all  this  is  not,  so  to  speak,  a  matter  of
principle,  but  rather  a  variable  fact.  And  within
these  limitations  the  comprehensiveness  of  content
which  goes  to  form  a  single  mind  may  vary  from
v/hat  just  suffices  for  a  function  like  that  of  an  ant,
to  a  self  which  possesses  the  framework  and  very
much  of  the  detail  of  an  entire  society ;  which
could,  that  is  to  say,  but  for  bodily  limitations,  do
the  whole  work  of  a  large  proportion  of  the  social
whole,  and  indeed,  in  spite  of  bodily  limitations,  in
many  cases  does  a  very  large  share  of  it.  There  can
be  no  doubt  that  it  is  often  literally  true  that  one  man

^ Cf.  Principle^  p.  116,  note.


52


PERSONAL FEELING  lect.


does  the  work  which  it  would  take  a  dozen  other
men  to  do.  His  range  overlaps  and  comprehends
that  of  a  possible  dozen  others,  not  merely  in
general  awareness  of  the  common  plan  and  purpose,
but  in  actual  possession  of  the  stuff  of  detailed
capacity  and  activity.

And  at  our  present  standpoint,  on  the  ground
of  identical  content  and  not  of  formal  exclusiveness,
the  proposition  admitted  above,  that  two  or  more
bodies  cannot  be  organic  to  a  single  centre  of
experience,  again  seems  only  to  state  a  matter  of
fact  and  of  degree.  A  single  thought  and  purpose,
it  is  obvious,  constantly  is  seen  to  animate  a  plurality
of  bodies,  and  although  communication  of  experi-
ence, it  would  seem,  is  always  indirect,  yet  how  far
in  practice  and  by  habituation  the  very  quality  of
the  experience  in  our  body  may  be  identified  with
that  in  another,  so  that  a  self  may  learn  to  rely  on
both  experiences  as  equally  its  own,  seems  again
a  matter  of  degree.  We  learn  to  rely  on  others  as
on  ourselves,^  not  merely  in  faith  and  judgment,  but
in  perception  of  sound  and  colour,  of  heat  and  cold,
of  what  is  right  and  necessary  in  morals,  of  what  is
pleasant  or  unpleasant  in  society,  in  houses  and
furniture,  in  food  and  drink.  I  believe  that  there  is
no  limit  of  principle,  but  only  a  fluctuating  practical
limit,  to  the  unity  of  experience  in  different  bodies,^

1  Cf.  Bradley,  Presuppositioits  of  Critical  History.

2  It  may  be  said,  "  You  are  confusing  reliance  on  judgment  with
identical  quality  of  feeling."  But  surely  the  quality  of  feeling  is  an
important  factor  in  the  basis  of  judgment,  and  can  therefore  in  some
degree  be  inferred  from  it.  If  A  and  B  not  only  like  and  dislike  the
same  things,  but  apply  the  same  critical  epithets  to  them  in  all
scales  and  combinations,  surely  it  is  a  fair  inference  that  the  special
tune  or  flavour  of  their  selves  is  much  the  same.  A  great  deal  of
the  paradox  about  reliance  on  authority  as  opposed  to  reason  vanishes


II MINDS  CONTINUOUS  IN  THEIR  PRODUCTS 53

as  there  seems  to  be  hardly  any  to  the  diversity  of
experience  in  one.

If  this  is  so,  we  have  made  an  important  point.
The  immediate  or  formal  diversity  of  finite  centres
is  not  at  all  thoroughly  sustained  and  reinforced  by
a  coincident  diversity  of  the  matter  of  their  experi-
ence, but,  on  the  contrary,  is  in  some  degree  reacted
on  and  impaired  by  its  identity.  The  convenience
of  the  decentralisation  of  finite  experience,  as  it
actually  exists,  will  be  touched  upon  below.

7. What  we  find,  then,  in  the  social  fabric  or,  as  Seivescom-

....  r 1  • prehendthe

was  said  above,  m  any  ot  the  great  structures  m  continuous
which  spiritual  achievement  takes  shape,  e.g.  know-  tSvodds
ledofe,  fine  art,  historical  continuity  of  the  constitu-  indifferent

o '  '  J  degrees.

tional  system  of  a  country,  forms  a  very  curious
commentary  on  our  ordinary  conception  of  the
isolated  and  exclusive  self.  We  find  a  building,
whose  lines  and  masses  are  plainly,  though  defect-
ively, continuous  and  coherent ;  a  solid  erection,  or,
if  we  prefer  another  metaphor,  a  determinate  organic
structure.  Now  this  structure  is  composed  of,  or,
if  we  prefer  it,  is  the  conjoint  self-expression  of,
finite  selves  or  minds,  but  the  range  of  these  several
components  respectively  does  not,  as  we  are  apt  to
assume,  coincide  with  that  of  any  objectively  dis-
tinguishable features  of  the  fabric.  Their  contents
overlap  in  the  most  irregular  and  fluctuating  way  ;
the  welds  between  them  are  everywhere,  as  their
contributions  fade  indistinguishably  into  one  another,
and  some  of  the  beams,  or  branches,  may  be  com-
posed of  thousands  of  coincident,  or  partially  coin-
in  sight  of  this  principle.  I  accept  another  person's  testimony  or
opinion,  because  I  have,  on  the  whole,  seen  reason  to  accept  the
unity  of  his  mind  with  mine.


54


PERSONAL  FEELING


LECT.


Service
rendered
by  the
existing
arrange-
ment of
experience
in  spheres
with
distinct
centres,
but  over-
lapping.
Signs  of  its
precarious-
ness.


cident,  self-contents  ;  some,  and  these  perhaps  more
important,  of  only  one  or  two.  Thus  the  limitations
of  every  self  bear  no  relation  to  anything  but  its
power  ;  there  is  nothing,  except  the  practical  con-
ditions of  disability,  to  prevent  any  one  self  from
expanding  indefinitely  over  this  content ;  nothing,
again,  to  guarantee  its  self-maintenance  at  the  range
it  has  acquired.  The  continuous  lines  and  articu-
lated framework  of  the  solid  fabric — if  Science  is
suspected  of  wilful  impersonality,  take  the  growth
of  the  Christian  religion,  or  the  development  of
Greek  Tragedy  to  its  maturity^ — are  the  certain,
intelligible,  and  necessary  thing ;  how  far  this  or
that  finite  self  may  extend  along  them  is  not  a
matter  of  principle,"  except  that  it  is  by  this  exten-
sion that  the  self  enters  upon  the  general  life  and
its  own  individuality.

S.  We  may  venture  to  say  then  that  we  see  a
use  and  convenience  in  this  system  of  finite  ex-
periences, arbitrarily,  to  our  thinking,  bounded
and  discriminated,  which  the  facts  exhibit  as  our
world.  But  also  we  are  aware  of  its  precarious
and  superficial  nature ;  and  indications  are  not
wanting  of  something  deeper  and  more  real  which
underlies  it.

As  regards  the  first  point,  two  extreme  cases
will  illustrate  our  meaning.  Suppose  that  in  any
social  whole,  or  in  any  continuous  structure  such  as

1  Which  Aristotle  speaks  of,  and  no  one  surely  has  doubted  the
appropriateness  of  his  language,  as  if  it  were  a  living  being  following
its  law,  "  it  reached  its  maturity,  and  then  stopped  growing.

2  And  is,  de  facto^  almost  always  a  matter  of  extreme  uncertainty.
How  easy  it  is  to  place  a  writing  or  a  picture  in  its  "  school "  ;  how
hard  to  determine  its  authorship  !  Suppose,  what  is  quite  arguable,
that  the  parable  of  the  good  Samaritan  is  not  an  utterance  of  Christ.
WTiat  does  it  matter  so  long  as  it  is  a  part  of  Christianity  ?


II  DUPLICATE  MINDS  WOULD  BE  USELESS 55

knowledge,  or  national  development,  or  morality,
every  single  mind  that  contributed  to  it  was  equally
conversant  with,  and  capable  in,  all  parts  of  its
content ;  just  as,  in  any  actual  group,  there  will  be
some  men  who  could  easily  take  the  place  of  some
others  as  well  as  their  own,  covering  and  compre-
hending their  entire  capacity.^  In  this  we  should
see,  I  suppose,  a  certain  waste  of  power,  as  we  are
inclined  to  see  it  in  the  case  taken  as  an  illustration.
For  it  would  mean  that  there  were  large  numbers
of  consciousnesses  completely  coincident  for  the
greater  proportion  of  their  range,  and  although  the
difference  of  centering  might  convey  a  slight  degree
of  diversity  to  the  common  stuff  as  apprehended  by
each,  we  should  hardly  see  what  was  to  be  gained
by  so  immense  a  multiplication  of  contents  all  but
identical.  We  should  be  inclined  to  say,  "  If  it  is
to  be  possible  for  single  minds  to  cover  practically
the  whole  world  of  experience,  it  would  seem  more
natural  to  strike  out  their  formal  differences,  and
let  them  fall  together  into  one,"  one  single  mind
ranging  through  and  comprising  all  those  varieties
of  bodily  and  mental  experience."  How  far  such
a  single  mind  would  have  to  include  contradictions
wholly  unparalleled  by  anything  which  happens  in
finite  minds  as  we  know  them  would  be  an  instruct-
ive subject  of  speculation.^  How  far  can  a  single
finite mind as we know it include differences of

^  Perhaps  I  ought  to  say  that  I  cannot  suppose  this  to  be  truly
and  ultimately  so,  or  even  quite  precisely  so  in  our  experience.  But
it  is  near  enough  to  the  fact  to  make  a  sound  illustration.

-  If  we  suppose  them  perfected  without  tending  to  fall  into  one,
the  argument  would  point  to  a  plurality  of  absolutes  of  identical
content,  which  seems  absurd.

3  It  has  been  suggested  above  that  it  is  not  certain  that  plurality
of  bodies  is  an  absolulf  bar  to  oneness  of  mind.


56  PERSONAL  FEELING  lect.

coensesthesia,  simultaneous  contrasts  of  pleasure
and  pain,  and  incompatible  sensations  in  different
bodies,  antagonistic  views  and  interests,  without
ruin  to  its  unity  ?

All  these  obstacles  to  unity  the  single  mind
which  we  have  imagined  would  have  to  include  or
to  transform  ;  and  whatever  may  be  the  suggestions
of  speculation,  the  fact  that  under  these  conditions
no  such  single  mind  is  found  to  come  into  being,
seems  to  show  that  in  these  difficulties,  without
further  ultimate  hypothesis,  we  have  a  sufficient
account  of  the  existence  of  finite  centres ;  the
account,  namely,  that  finiteness  lies  in  powerless-
ness,^  and  that  minds  as  we  know  them,  though  they
vary  extraordinarily  in  the  range  of  diversity  they
can  hold  together,  yet  all  find  their  limits  at  some
point  or  other  within  our  world.

Or  we  may  think  of  the  opposite  case  which
seems,  as  we  saw,  to  be  realised  in  some  animal
minds.  Suppose  our  intelligence  were  adequate  to
certain  functions  necessary  to  the  whole,  but  were
limited  by  them,  and  in  no  degree  transcended
them,  nor  overlapped  the  content  of  other  minds.
In  that  case  it  is  plain  that  the  total  groups  would
exist  de  facto  as  working  systems,  identities  in
difference,  just  as  a  commonwealth  of  bees  or  ants
exists,  but  we,  as  finite  beings,  should  not  possess
the  spiritual  unity  which  comes  from  the  overlapping
of  intelligences  ;  that  is, from their  apprehending

1  Why  powerlessness,  it  may  be  asked  ?  We  only  try  to  suggest
that  the  finiteness  of  mind  goes  very  simply  with  all  the  facts  of  its
apparent  conditions  of  manifestation,  of  which  the  expanding  variety
of  its  degree  of  finiteness  is  one.  We  thus  need  no  hypothesis  about
the  ultimate  self-existence  of  minds,  but  only  to  suppose  that  mind
comes  in  degrees  according  to  some  conditions.


II  BUT  INTELLIGENCES  MUST  OVERLAP  57

a  common  purpose  and  extending  ^  over  the  range
of  a  continuous  content  in  all  possible  varieties  of
degree.  In  fact,  the  hypothesis  seems,  strictly
speaking,  self-contradictory  for  an  intelligent  being,
though  its  conditions  are  fulfilled  under  the  reign
of  instinct.  You  cannot  have,  it  would  seem,  an
intelligence  adequate  to  a  function,  which  does  not
in  some  degree  transcend  it.  Every  function  needs
variation  and  adaptation,  and  you  cannot  vary  and
adapt  it,  by  intelligence  as  opposed  to  instinct,
unless  in  some  degree  you  have  an  idea  of  the  lives
you  impinge  upon  and  the  needs  you  have  to
supply.^

So  then,  in  the  condition  of  our  finite  experi-
ence as  determined  by  our  diversity  and  powerless-
ness,  we  seem  to  have  what  is  natural  and  necessary
for  a  world  at  once  varied  and  continuous.  We
have  experiences  differently  centred  and  variously
overlapping,  but  not  completely  repeating  each
other,  kept  apart  by  distinctions  of  quality,  but  con-
tributing, and  knowing  that  they  contribute,  to  the
same  great  structures  and  progressions.  These  are
built  up  out  of  them,  and  live  in  their  life,  but  do
not  coincide,  each  to  each,  in  the  importance  and
articulation  of  their  distinct  components,  with the

1  It  may  be  objected  that  in  thus  harping  on  the  extent  of  the
self  we  are  confusing  direct  and  indirect  experience — what  we  are
and  what  we  know.  But  if  the  objects  of  thought  and  action  deter-
mine our  identity  (see  above,  p.  38),  the  determination  of  many  selves
by  the  same  objects,  involving  kinship  of  direct  experience,  is  enough
to  constitute  the  range  and  overlapping  which  we  describe.

-  Every  one  must  have  noted  the  extraordinary  acuteness  with
which  a  good  railway  porter  or  cabman,  or  indeed  any  capable
tradesman,  divines  the  sort  of  person  you  are  and  the  sort  of  thing
you  want  him  to  do  for  you.  I  do  not  take  instances  from  the
great  professions,  because  these  are  intellectual  (xh  initio.


58  PERSONAL  FEELING  lect.

importance  and  articulation  of  the  minds  which  are
their  constituents.  Minds  have  different  centres,
and  each  extends  to  limits  round  its  own  centre  fixed
apparently  by  chance,  i.e.  by  its  measure  of  power.
And  this  is  all  we  want  for  everyday  life,  and  a
completer  unity  of  finite  minds  in  one  would  bring
us  at  once  to  a  partial  Absolute,  and  necessitate
the  transformation  of  the  differences  which  now
suffice  to  keep  finite  minds  distinct.

But  again  we  are  aware  of  the  precarious  and
superficial  nature  of  their  distinctnesses  ;  and  at
every  point  we  meet  with  indications  that  something
deeper  and  more  real  underlies  them.  Let  us  think
again  of  Hume's  argument  as  applied  by  Sidgwick.^
If  we  are  not  one  with  others,  why  should  we  be
one  with  ourselves  ?  Why, for  example,  if  "conscious
states  as  such  "  are  what  have  ultimate  value,  should
what  we  call  my  past  and  future  self  have  an  interest
for  my  present  self  which  the  other  selves  have  not  ?
No  doubt,  so  far  as  my  self  is  recognised  as  a
unity,  it  is  held  together  at  least  by  a  continuous
ccenaesthesia,  which  does  not  however  exclude,  at
remote  periods  in  the  course  of  its  continuity,
enormous  contrasts  of  quality,  fully  as  great  as  those
which  at  any  moment  separate  me  from  others.  De
facto  bodily  identity,  as  we  have  seen,  is  not  enough
to  guarantee  the  unity  of  a  self,  and  the  continuity
of  feeling,  which  is  its  basis,  may  be  strained  to  any
extent,  and  may  break  down  altogether.  There  is
no  doubt  that  my  past  self,  even  when  recognised
as  continuous  with  my  present,  may  be  alien  and
hostile  to  me,  a  part  of  the  not  self;^  while  the  self

^ Pri7iciple,  p.  308.
^  Appearance  and  Reality^  p.  256.


II SHORTCOMINGS  ARE  NOT  INDIVIDUALITY 59

of  another  may  be  in  all  respects  but  that  of  im-
mediate experience,  a  part  of  myself.

If  now  we  reverse  this  argument,  as  Sidgwick's
application  of  it  suggests,^  and  make  our  interest
in  ourself  as  a  whole  the  premiss  and  datum,  we
shall  find  ourselves  carried  not  merely  up  to  but
beyond  our  distinct  personality.  With  the  one
exception,  of  the  thread  of  ccensesthesia,  com-
patible with  any  degree  of  hostility  and  foreignness,
there  is  no  ground  of  unity  with  our  past  and
future  selves  which  would  not  equally  carry  us  to
unity  and  fellowship  with  others  and  with  the  world.
Our  certainty  of  their  existence  is  in  both  cases
inferential,  and  on  the  same  line  of  inference  ;  both
are  alike  distinct  from  and  incompatible  with  my
present  self;  both  are  cemented  to  it  by  the  same
stuff  and  material  of  unity,  language,  ideas,  pur-
poses, contents  of  communicable  feeling  ;  and,  as
we  have  seen,  the  other  may  in  these  ways  be
far  more  closely  knit  with  me  than  is  my  previous
self.

What  it  comes  to,  then,  is  this — what  we  call
individual  finite  beings  are  kept  apart  by  differences
of  quality  of  feeling,  and  also  by  the  reciprocal
shortcomings  of  the  content  of  which  they  are  com-
posed. These  differences  of  quality,  and  these
shortcomings,  are  often  held  to  be  the  secret  of
individuality,  the  secret  by  which  I  am  myself  and
not  another,  because  I  have  not  his  immediate  feel-
ing, and  do  not  comprehend  his  capacities  within
mine.  But  this  is  plainly  not  so.  On  the  contrary,
when  I  most  fall  short  of  others,  and  am  most  in
discord  of  feeling  quality  with  them,  I  am  also  least

1  Principle^  I.e. Cf.  Appearance  and  Reality  on  solipsism,  p.  254.


6o  PERSONAL  FEELING  lect.

myself.  Yet,  on  the  other  hand,  we  have  seen,  I
cannot  be  fused  with  them,  as  they  are,  in  a  single
mind.  Our  discrepant  bodily  existences  are  seem-
ingly enough  to  prevent  it.  It  would  seem  futile
that  a  plurality  of  minds  should  cover  the  same
ground  ;  and  impossible  for  a  single  mind  to  in-
clude all  the  differences  of  a  multitude  of  bodies —
centres  of  pleasure  and  pain — scattered  in  time  and
space.

And  yet  my  unity  with  myself,  and  with  other
selves  and  the  world,  is  unmistakably  indicated.
Wherever  we  are  strong,  we  come  together.  Our
distinctnesses  are  indifferent  to  the  real  spiritual
unities,  which  transcend  us  at  every  point.

The  solution  is  obvious.  We  do  not  experience
ourselves  as  we  really  are.  So  far  from  being  an
inaccurate  assumption,  this  principle  is  inevitable,
and  is  accepted  and  applied  throughout  life.  No
one  ever  dreams  of  acting  on  the  assumption  that  a
mind  is  for  itself,  especially  at  a  given  moment  of
time,  all  that  it  is  in  itself  If  this  were  the  truth,
we  should  never  argue  nor  persuade.  For  to  argue
or  to  persuade  is  to  rely  on  factors  of  the  mind
which  are  at  the  moment  not  explicit,  and  which  we
desire  to  evoke  into  explicitness.  We  could  never
appeal  from  Philip  drunk  to  Philip  sober,  nor  even
point  out  that  there  and  then  the  man  was  "  not
himself."  It  is  wholly  irrelevant  to  urge  ^  that  the
being  of  a  mind  is  not  affected  by  others'  experience
of  it.  The  point  lies,  as  we  said  to  begin  with,  in
the  difference  between  it  and  itself;  between  what

1  With  Mr.  Rashdall,  Personal  Idealism^  p.  382.  We  always
recognise  that  others  know  us  in  some  ways  better  than  we  do  our-
selves.


II  USE OF  IMPERFECTION  6i

it  is  for  it,  and  what  it  is  for  itself.  A  finite  mind
that  should  possess  itself  completely  is  something
to  which  no  experience  of  ours  at  all  approaches,
and  which  is  ultimately  a  contradiction  in  terms.

Why  we  are  finite,  or,  as  Plato  would  phrase
it,  in  a  great  measure  asleep,  is  the  same  question
as  why  the  finite  world  exists.  And  we  cannot
expect  to  give  a  reason  for  the  scheme  of  the
universe.  But  we  can  dimly  see,  perhaps,  that  the
arrangement  is  connected  with  the  representative
character  which  we  ascribed  to  our  finite  being.
Our  imperfection  enables  us  better  to  stand  for
something  which  is  to  have  its  due  stress  and
emphasis  in  the  whole,  but  no  more  than  its  due.

Is  our  perfection,  the  self-consistent  individuality
which  we  set  before  us,  at  an  opposite  pole,  then,
from  the  function  we  discharge  in  the  universe  }  If
imperfection  is  our  function,  that  we  may  stand  for
the  parts,  is  it  consistent  to  say  that  our  true  nature  is
in  the  coherence  and  perfection  of  the  whole  }  Are
we  not  then  saying,  with  vulgar  mysticism,  that  our
actual  being  is  a  vice,  and  our  perfection  is,  not  to
be  }  The  only  sense  in  which  we  can  assent  to  this
will  appear  when  we  come  to  speak  of  the  religious
consciousness.  Our  grasp  of  perfection  involves
that  as  finite  we  are  nothing  in  our  own  right.  But
we  hold  to  the  conviction,  which  we  too  rarely,  if
at  all,  find  suggested  in  Plato,  that  the  soul's  earthly
investiture  contributes  to  its  perfection,  and  is  not
a  sheer  loss  and  evil.  We  want  him  to  maintain,
what  he  unquestionably  hints,  that  to  a  full  experi-
ence of  the  "  Forms  "  the  terrestrial  world  is
indispensable  no  less  than  the  pre-natal  vision.

Our  answer, then, in general seems  to  lie  in


62  PERSONAL  FEELING  lect.  ii

the  direction  of  regarding  finite  mind  as  the
embodied  tension  between  imperfection  and  perfec-
tion ;  the  effort  by  which  a  complex  or  content  finds
its  place  in  the  Absolute,  and  the  Absolute  trans-
figures, in  embodying,  a  content.  Finite  mind,  we
might  argue,  does  for  the  externality  of  the  uni-
verse what  the  absolute  does  for  finite  mind.  If
we  ask  again,  "  But  why  this  gradation  ?  "  we  could
only  appeal  to  something  like  Leibniz's  principle  of
continuity.  It  would  seem  as  if  the  greatest  variety
or  richness  of  being — the  giving  everything  a
chance — might  result  in  this  way.  But  at  least  we
see  that  separateness  is  not  an  ultimate  character
of  the  individual,  but  is  a  phase  of  being  akin  to
externality,  and  tending  to  disappear  in  so  far  as
true  individuality  prevails.


A.  THE MOULDING OF SOULS
LECTURE III

NATURAL AND SOCIAL SELECTION

I. I  will  begin  with  a  passage^  from  one  of  Keats's  The  "Vaie
letters, as a suitable introduction to the five  mayng."
following  lectures, which  deal  with  the  "  Moulding
of  Souls  "  and  the  consequent  "  Hazards  and  Hard-
ships of  Finite  Selfhood."

"The  whole  appears  to  resolve  into  this — that  man
is  originally  a  poor  forked  creature,  subject  to  the
same  mischances  as  the  beasts  of  the  forest,
destined  to  hardships  and  disquietude  of  some  kind
or  other.  If  he  improves  by  degrees  his  bodily
accommodations  and  comforts,  at  each  stage,  at
each  ascent,  there  are  waiting  for  him  a  fresh  set
of  annoyances — he  is  mortal,  and  there  is  still  a
heaven  with  its  stars  above  his  head.  The  most
interesting  question  that  can  come  before  us  is,
how  far  by  the  persevering  endeavours  of  a  seldom-
appearing  Socrates  mankind  may  be  made  happy  }
I  can  imagine  such  happiness  carried  to  an
extreme,  but  what  must  it  end  in }  Death — and
who  could  in  such  a  case  bear  with  death }  The
whole  troubles  of  life,  which  are  now  frittered  away

1 Cited  from  Professor  A.  C.  Bradley,  Oxford  Lectures,  p.  222.

63


64  NATURAL  AND  SOCIAL  SELECTION lect.

in  a  series  of  years,  would  then  be  accumulated  for
the  last  days  of  a  being  who,  instead  of  hailing
its  approach,  would  leave  this  world  as  Eve  left
Paradise.  But  in  truth  I  do  not  at  all  believe  in
this  sort  of  perfectibility.  The  nature  of  the  world
will  not  admit  of  it — the  inhabitants  of  the  world
will  correspond  to  itself.  Let  the  fish  philosophise
the  ice  away  from  the  rivers  in  winter-time,  and
they  shall  be  at  continual  play  in  the  tepid  delight
of  summer.  Look  at  the  Poles,  and  at  the  sands  of
Africa — whirlpools  and  volcanoes.  Let  men  ex-
terminate them,  and  I  will  say  that  they  may  arrive
at  earthly  happiness.  The  point  at  which  man
may  arrive  is  as  far  as  the  parallel  state  in  inani-
mate nature,  and  no  further.  For  instance,  suppose
a  rose  to  have  sensation  ;  it  blooms  one  beautiful
morning;  it  enjoys  itself;  but  then  comes  a  cold
wind,  a  hot  sun.  It  cannot  escape  it,  it  cannot
destroy  its  annoyances — they  are  as  native  to  the
world  as  itself.  No  more  can  man  be  happy  in
spite  [of]  the  worldly  elements  which  will  prey  upon
his  nature."

"  The  common  cognomen  of  this  world  among  the
misguided  and  superstitious  is  '  a  vale  of  tears,'  from
which  we  are  to  be  redeemed  by  a  certain  arbitrary
interposition  of  God  and  taken  to  Heaven.  What
a  little  circumscribed  straitened  notion  !  Call  the
world  if  you  please  '  The  vale  of  Soul-making.'
Then  you  will  find  out  the  use  of  the  world  (I  am
now  speaking  in  the  highest  terms  for  human
nature,  admitting  it  to  be  immortal,  which  I  will
here  take  for  granted  for  the  purpose  of  showing  a
thought  which  has  struck  me  concerning  it).  I  say
*  Soul  -  making  '  —  Soul as distinguished from an


Ill  A SYSTEM  OF  SPIRIT-CREATION  65

Intelligence.^ There  may  be  intelligences  or  sparks
of  the  divinity  in  millions, but  they  are  not  Souls
till  they  acquire  identities,  till  each  one  is  personally
itself. Intelligences  are  atoms  of  perception — they
know  and they  see  and  they  are pure ;  in  short,
they  are  God. How  then  are  Souls  to  be  made }
How  then  are  these  sparks  which  are  God  to  have
identity  given  them — so  as  even  to  possess  a  bliss
peculiar to each one by individual existence }
How but by  the medium of  a world like this.-^
This point I sincerely wish to consider, because
I think  it  a  grander  system  of  salvation  than  the
Christian  religion — or  rather  it  is  a  system  of  Spirit-
creation. This  is  effected  by  three  grand  materials
acting  thus  one  upon  the  other  for  a  series  of  years.
These three materials are the Intelligence, the
human  heart  (as  distinguished  from  intelligence  or
mind),  and  the  World  or  elemental  space  suited  for
the  proper  action  of  Mind  and  Heart  on  each  other
for  the  purpose  of  forming  the  Soul  or  Intelligence
destined  to  possess the sense of  Identity. I can
scarcely  express  what I but dimly  perceive — and
yet  I think I perceive it. That you may  judge
the  more  clearly I  will  put  it  in  the  most  homely
form possible. I will call the world a School
instituted  for  the  purpose  of  teaching  little  children
to  read. I  will  call  the  human  heart  the  horn-book
read  in  that  school,  and  I  will  call  the  Child  able  to
read  the  Soulra-aA^  from  that  School  and  its  horn-
book. Do  you  not  see  how  necessary  a  world  of
pains  and  troubles  is  to  school  an Intelligence  and
make  it  a  Soul  ? A  place  where the heart must

1 Keats's use of  the  word is  suggested,  probably, by Milton's
"pure  intelligence  of  heaven  "  [Professor  Bradley's  note].

F


66  NATURAL  AND SOCIAL SELECTION lect.

feel  and  suffer  in  a  thousand  diverse  ways.  Not
merely  is  the  Heart  a  horn-book,  it  is  the  Mind's
Bible,  it  is  the  Mind's  experience,  it  is  the  text  from
which  the  Mind  or  Intelligence  sucks  its  identity.
As  various  as  the  lives  of  men  are,  so  various
become  their  Souls  ;  and  thus  does  God  make  in-
dividual beings.  Souls,  identical  Souls,  of  the  sparks
of  his  own  essence.  This  appears  to  me  a  faint
sketch  of  a  system  of  salvation  which  does  not
offend  our  reason  and  humanity."
Pre-  2. It  is  only  on  the  general  spirit  of  this  remark-

and  future  able  passagc  that  1  desire  to  msist.  i  he  idea  or
unnSs^  antecedent  "  sparks  of  intelligence  "  appears  super-
sary.  fluous. We  gain  nothing,  it  seems  to  us,  by  ante-

dating results  which  are  found  to  depend  for  their
revelation  on  conditions  heterogeneous  to  them.
Their  manifestation  in  connection  with  certain
arranorements  of  the  Universe  can  be  understood
just  as  well  apart  from  pre-existence  as  presupposing
it.  If  we  admit  change  and  difference  at  all,  there
is  no  reason  for  cutting  down  their  continuity  into
similarity.

This  is  one  point  in  Keats's  idea  which  we  need
not  emphasise.  And  a  second  is  the  implication
that  terrestrial  life  is  at  any  rate  best  regarded  as  a
state  of  preparation  for  something  quite  different
in  the  future.^  The  only  ground  for  rejecting  this
view  appears  to  me  to  be  that  there  is  no  cogent
reason  for  accepting  it.  If  it  is  urged  as  a  matter
of  principle  or  necessity  (which  I  do  not  gather
to  be  Keats's  position),  that  implies  something  false.

1  Dr.  McTaggart  strongly  suggests  an  analogous  idea  in  arguing
for  his  contention  that  not  society  but  the  individual  is  the  end  of
social  life.  He  also  uses  the  comparison  of  a  school  {^Hegelian
Cosmology^  sect.  195).


Ill  VALUE  IS UNTOUCHED  BY  TIME  67

If  not,  it  merely  amounts  to  an  attractive  imagina-
tion of  something  larger  and  happier  than  what  we
have  ;  something  of  the  same  kind,  but  arbitrarily-
supposed  as  extended.

It  is  important  to  avoid  the  false  implication  of
the  former  view,  viz.  that  the  moulding  of  a  soul  or
self  or  centre  of  experience  which  is  to  pass  away
and  give  place  to  centres  discontinuous  with  it,
cannot  be  conceived  as  worth  while,  as  contributing
to  a  whole  of  value.^  Suppose  that  the  souls  or
centres  are  the  energies  or  elements  of  self-expression
in  which  the  Absolute  consists,  and  which  are  dis-
sociated from  themselves  and  from  each  other  by
the  condition  of  finiteness  ;  by  the  fact,  that  is,  that
in  and  for  finite  experience  they  are  all,  as  Plato
would  say,  more  than  half  asleep,  and  unable  to
grasp  their  unity  with  themselves  or  with  others.
How  can  the  precise  degree  of  their  apparent
completeness  and  duration  be  a  matter  of  prin-
ciple not  merely  affecting,  but  at  a  certain  point
destroying,  their  relation  to  the  value  of  the
whole  }

At  best,  it  is  admitted  and  maintained,  they  are
finite  and  imperfect,  and  we  have  seen  reason  to
think  that  it  is  through  their  imperfection,  through
the  emphasis  and  tension  which  it  confers,  that
the  Absolute  is  enabled  to  affirm  itself  in  all  its
thorough-going  self-utterance.  It  is  plainly  false
to  say  that  we  must  at  least  be  real  and  endur-
ing in  the  light  in  which  we  are  aware  of  our-
selves. We  know  ourselves,  one  is  tempted  to
say, much less than others know  us. The  indi-

1  Cf.  Varisco's  interpretation  of  the  conservation  of  values.  Prin-
ciple, p.  2  I .


68  NATURAL  AND  SOCIAL SELECTION lect.

viduality  which  we  divine  falls  outside  our  actual
experienced  being.^

And  what  about  minds  obviously  so  imperfect  that
few,  though  these  few  great  philosophers,  have
claimed  survival  for  them,  and,  applying  a  method
of  degrees,  it  seems  hardly  possible  to  claim  it
throughout — the  minds,  for  example,  of  the  lower
animals  ?  ^  We  have  already  denied  that  their  tran-
sitoriness,  if  admitted,  destroys  their  contribution  to
value  ;  and  we  insist  on  this  denial.

There  is  no  reason  for  denying  value  to  minds  or
spirits,  such  as  cannot,  as  they  stand,  reasonably
claim  survival.  Perhaps,  indeed,  as  they  stand,  no
spirits  can.^  It  is  enough  that  in  them,  in  their
power  and  impotence,  their  achievements  and  limita-
tions, the  absolute  which  acts  in  them  sustains  and
expresses  its  being  like  the  poet's  mind  in  a  drama.

Perhaps  it  is  just  in  the  making  that  souls  have

1  This  doctrine,  familiar  in  Idealism,  has  also  the  empirical
support  of  M.  Bergson.  "  Nous  ne  nous  tenons  jamais  tout  entiers.
Notre  sentiment  de  la  duree,  je  veux  dire  la  coincidence  de  notre
moi  avec  lui-meme,  admit  des  degres."  E.C.  p.  218.  How  else
should  the  aspiration  have  become  a  commonplace  ? —

"  Oh,  wad  some  power  the  giftie  gie  us
To  see  ourselves  as  others  see  us."

2  The  question  of  the  Feeble-minded,  not  to  speak  of  the  deaths
of  infants,  offers  a  difficulty  to  the  metaphysic  of  orthodoxy.  We  all
wish  them  well,  so  to  speak  ;  we  would  welcome  a  justified  theory
which  should  promise  them  a  perfected  soul  in  the  future  (see  Mr.
Feeble- Mind  in  the  Pilgri))i's  Progress,  and  Jeremy  Taylor's
beautiful  prayer  "  to  be  used  on  behalf  of  Fools  or  Changelings  ").
But  can  we  justify  it  ?  Must  we  not  rather  believe  that,  having
contributed  their  spark  of  conflict  and  struggle  and  dim  feeling  to
the  Absolute,  they  survive  only  in  the  whole,  and  are  not  connected,
each  to  each,  with  any  special  continuance  of  centres  of  experience  ?

3  We  must  understand  clearly  what  we  are  speaking  of  We
must  not  confuse  the  supposed  future  life — a  survival  in  time  of  a
finite  being — with  "  absorption  "  into  the  Absolute.  We  are  in  the
Absolute  now  and  always.  The  question  of  survival  is  merely  one
of  a  certain  mode  of  appearance.


Ill  MIND SHAPES IN  BEING SHAPED  69

their  value.  What  would  be  the  interest  of  a
drama  in  which  the  characters  had  ceased  to  develop?
The  Absolute,  we  believe,  is  a  tension.  And  we
have  seen  how  easy  and  natural  it  is,  only  pre-
supposing the  dissociation  in  which  finiteness  con-
sists, for  its  elements  to  be  shown  in  the  most
various  and  many-sided  dispersion,  isolated  in
appearance  by  way  of  subjective  centering,  by  way
of  extension  and  of  succession.^

3.  We  are  then  to  make  the  attempt  to  show  in  sketch  of
outline  how  the  Absolute,  seen  from  our  side  as  a  [ect'ures"^
world  of  appearances,  keeps  throwing  its  content
into  living  focuses,  vortices,  worlds  ;  and  how  these
again,  each  transmuting  towards  unity  its  realm  of
externality  and  eliciting  its  values,  initiate  and
sustain  the  character  in  which,  under  the  special
emphasis  lent  by  the  special  dissociation  operative
at  that  point,  the  absolute  appears.

We  are  to  speak  of  the  Moulding  of  souls  and
selves.  First,  under  the  present  heading  of  Natural
and  Social  Selection,  we  shall  discuss  the  genesis
and  evolution  of  Life  and  Mind  in  its  general  and,
so  to  speak,  logical  aspect.  Secondly,  we  shall
describe  the  transmutation  of  environment  through
the  focussing  of  its  total  significance,  which  is
actually  the  same  genesis  considered  as  embodying
the  activity  of  the  spiritual  being  in  which  a  sphere
of  externality  "comes  alive."  This  discussion  we
shall  conduct  under  the  title  of  "  The  miracle  of
Will,"  insisting  on  the  true  inwardness  of  circum-
stance and  character.

1  In  the  question  of  the  reality  of  time,  much  hinges  on  the
popular  prejudice  that  the  mind  is  not  dissociated  in  succession.
But,  as  we  have  seen,  the  fact  is  quite  undoubtedly  otherwise.  Plainly
the  mind  as  given  in  time  is  not  itself.


70  NATURAL  AND SOCIAL SELECTION lect.

After  this, it will be natural and necessary  to
speak  of  the  incidents  of  finiteness  which  may  be
called  the  "  Hazards  and Hardships  of  Selfhood,"
comprehending  the  subjects  of  evil  and  failure,  from
physical pain and apparent waste in the lower
creation,  to  the  sense  of  wrong  and  of  despair  which
finds  its  climax  in  the provinces of morality  and
justice. Our  general  view  will  breathe the  spirit
of  the  saying  '^^aXe.ira  ra  KoKd.^ Judging  from  our
highest experience, the whole itself, if it is to
command  our  reverence, must  possess,  though in
due  subordination,  a  quality  analogous  to  what  we
mean  by  austerity  or  sublimity. It  is  not  then  to
be  supposed  that  its  spirit,  as  it  perceives  and  feels
itself  in  the  detail  of  partial  worlds,  should  be  free
from pain and conflict  and  the  sense  of  an  over-
whelming burden. If it  were so free, we know
very well that the heights and depths of the
spiritual nature would remain unsealed and un-
sounded, and  the  Absolute  would  fall  short  of  what
in  fact  the  humblest  Christian  habitually  achieves.^
But  here  we  are  anticipating,  and  must  not  be  led
on  to  deal  with  the  subject.

When  we  have  done  our  best  with  these  incidents
of  selfhood — in  limiting  cases  perhaps  insuperably
difficult,  but  in  principle,  as  we  hold,  not  beyond
being  grasped  as  conditions  of  value  by  the  sense
and  courage  of  men  of  goodwill  —  we  shall  begin
to  draw  to  a  conclusion. It  will  remain  to  gather

1  Schrecklich  ist  es,  deiner  Wahrheit

Sterbliches  Gefiiss  zu  seyn. — Schiller's  Cassa?idra.

2  I  may  appeal  to  Mr.  Bertrand  Russell's  splendid  estimate  of
Tragedy  in  T/ie  Free  Mati's  Worships  which  coincides  in  some
degree  with  what  I  am  attempting  to  express.  Mr.  Russell's
ultimate  position  is,  of  course,  as  far  removed  from  mine  as  possible.


Ill  LIFE  A DIRECTIVE  POWER IN  ITSELF? 71

together  the  results  of  our  argument  as  bearing
upon  the  stability  and  security  of  the  finite  self,
in  a  discussion  of  the  religious  consciousness  by
which  the  finite  recognises  its  own  full  nature,  and
of  the  desire  for  survival  after  death.

And  in  a  closing  lecture,  under  the  same  general
heading,  it  will  seem  appropriate  to  consider  in
what  sense  it  is  true  that  "the  gates  of  the  future
are  wide  open."  What,  we  shall  ask,  does  a  sober
philosophy  really  expect  from  the  future,  rejecting
as  it  must  both  a  progress  in  ultimate  reality  and
a  final  cessation  of  time  ?  How  can  progress  be  all
included  in,  and  belong  to,  a  timeless  reality  ?

4. The  genesis  of  life,  if  not  the  first  step,  is  at  The

1  1  • •  1  • L  -l.- V. genesis  of

least  a  characteristic  phase  in  the  appearances  which  iife. its
belong  to  soul-making. It  has  often  been  treated  e'voimion  a
as a  question  of  ultimate importance  whether  life  of";"'"""^
has  a  primacy  over  the  environment  in  the  deter-  ^orid.
mination  of  the  trend  of evolution,  or  whether  it
is  rather  of  the  nature  of  an  omnipotential  system,
which  accepts  its  development  from beginning to
end  as  dictated  by  its  surroundings  through  reaction
and  natural selection. It  must  be  borne  in  mind
that the nature of  life cannot be found in fact
separate from the nature  of  some particular sub-
stance, and  therefore  is  attached  from  the  beginning
to  a  piece  of  externality  ;  and  its  very  first  reaction
— the  first  move  in  the  game  of  evolution — may  be
taken as a special response in the interplay of
environing  substances, no less  than as  a  primary
exhibition  of  the  inherent  trend  of  life.

To  answer  the  question  is  not  within  the  author's
competence.  But  it  is  worth  while  to  reflect  on  it
for  a  moment,  precisely  in  order  to  deny  that  any


72  NATURAL  AND SOCIAL SELECTION lect.

result  of  philosophical  importance  attaches  to  its
solution  in  either  sense  ;  or  rather  to  point  out  that
what  is  known  of  the  general  character  of  evolution
is  sufficient  to  determine  our  general  attitude,  what-
ever may  be  the  answer  to  the  special  question  as
stated  above.

For  all  views  agree  that,  negatively  at  least,  the
course  of  evolution  is  shaped  by  the  environment.
Nothing  can  persist  which  does  not  satisfy  the  con-
ditions that  form  its  world.  This,  at  any  rate,  is  a
truism.  And  by  its  positive  development  under  this
condition  life  shows  itself  so  nearly  omnipotential,
so  capable  of  positively  producing  the  characteristics
demanded  by  any  form  of  environment,  that  to
suppose  it  in  possession  ab  initio  of  a  further  inde-
pendent and  inherent  direction  of  development,  even
if  in  fact  it  should  prove  true,  throws  no  light  on
evolution  and  has  no  significance  of  general  prin-
ciple. If  it  were  true,  it  would  only  indicate  an
additional  condition  dictated  by  some  prior  environ-
ment, or  present  de  facto  in  the  earliest  matter  in
which  life  may  have  been  embodied.  The  value
and  importance  of  life  in  evolution  depend  on  its
correspondence  with  the  whole,  and  this  is  achieved
in  principle  by  the  sculpturing  process  of  natural
selection.  Whatever  properties  are  indispensable
to  make  this  process  possible  we  must  undoubtedly
attribute  to  living  matter.  We  must  think  of  it  as
capable  of  being  the  vehicle  of  an  omnipotential
principle — of  a  principle,  that  is  to  say,  equal  ab
initio  to  every  situation,  and  capable  of  forming  a
whole  adequate  to  every  environment ;  but  in  every
given  embodiment  particularised  by  its  given  sur-
roundings,  in  which  must  be  included the  special


Ill  LIFE  IS  FREELY  CONSTRUCTIVE  73

characteristics  of  the  substance  to  which  in  that
case  it  is  attached.  It  is  quite  a  different  thing  to
be  capable  of  adaptation  which  resumes  in  itself  the
significance  of  a  world,  and  to  be  equipped  ab  initio
with  an  independent  character  which  imposes  a
special  course  and  a  special  particularisation  upon
the  world  ab  extra.  The  former  idea  is  analogous
to  the  true  conception  of  an  organism  of  experience  ;
the  latter  to  a  rigid  formation  of  a  priori  know-
ledge.

Our  attitude,  then,  is  that  for  the  theory  of  in-
dividuality there  is  no  advantage,  but  rather  the
reverse,  in  a  hypothesis  of  the  primary  or  independ-
ent self-direction  of  living  matter,  such  as  Bergson
has  postulated  in  his  doctrine  of  an  ^lan  vital,  or
such  as  Ward  has  advocated  in  his  conception  of  a
primary  directive  capacity  inherent  in  the  living
being.  If  it  is  capable  of  responding  and  reacting
to  a  world  of  surroundings,  and,  by  accepting  cor-
rection from  it,  of  adjusting  itself  to  that  world's
requirements,  this  is  the  essence  of  what,  philo-
sophically speaking,  we  demand  for  the  genesis  of
individuality.  We  do  not  want  an  independent
directive  power  or  a  special  set  of  organic  characters
brought  in  from  out-of-doors.  If  they  are  there  in
fact — e.g.  a  tendency  to  develop  in  the  direction
of  the  vertebrate  kingdom — they  are  a  simple  fact
like  another  ;  a  circumstance  to  be  utilised  in  that
response  to  circumstances  which  is  the  essence  of
an  individual  centre,  whether  of  life  or  of  conscious
experience.  What  is  needed  in  terms  of  the  logical
postulate  implied  in  the  essence  of  life  is  a  centre
sensitive  to  a  more  concrete  environment  than  that
to which physical matter reacts, and capable of


74  NATURAL  AND SOCIAL SELECTION lect.

maintaining, combining, and transmitting adapta-
tions so  as  to  build  up  a  series  of  adapted  creatures.
In  a  word,  what  is  needed  is  a  centre  of  unification,
differentiated by  the externality  which it unifies ;
nothing more, in principle, than this. The rest
depends  on  the  nature  of  the  environment.
Objection, c It  has  been  urged  aoainst  such  views  as  these
tion  so that  to  depend  on  the  environment  is  no  guarantee
gu?I-amees  of  advance,  even  in  the  mere  sense  of  change. For
knS!^'^^ in fact, we are told, there are  certain organisms
•^Onr'so ^^^^h during ages of geological time have not
regarded advauced. Aud  it  is  sup^P^ested  that  apart  from  the

progress .  .  .

interprets  inherent  forward  impulse  of  life  as  such,  the  whole
organic  evolution  might  at  any  point  have  been
similarly  arrested.  But,  I  imagine,  we  are  here  in
presence  of  a  proof  that,  though  parts  of  the  environ-
ment may  acquiesce  in  the  partial  arrest  of  evolu-
tion, yet  on  the  whole  the  changing  environment
will  not  accept  a  stationary  organic  world.  If  evolu-
tion depended  on  private  properties  of  life,  it  might,
to  speak  brutally,  go  on  or  stop  as  living  matter
chose,  and  nothing  else  would  have  any  say  in  the
decision.  But  if  it  depends  on  a  power  of  response
and  adaptation  which  makes  a  living  being  the
quintessence  and  summary  of  an  externality,  then
its  arrest  or  advance  is  no  private  concern  of  the
living  being,  but  a  characteristic  of  the  whole  world
which  is  its  circumference.  If  that  is  a  world  of
change,  the  change  must  reflect  itself  in  life  ;  as,
on  the  whole,  we  see  that  it  has  done.

A  similar  difficulty  is  propounded  when  we  are
told  that  to  depend  on  adaptation  to  the  environ-
ment is  no  guarantee  of  progress  in  desirable
qualities. The  fittest  need  not  be  the  best ;  evolution


Ill  SELECTION  MODELS THE CENTRE  75

may  mean  deterioration.  But  here  again,  when  we
look  straight  at  the  facts,  the  case  supposed  leads
up  to  a  proof  of  its  contrary.  If  our  attitude  had
been  to  hold  that  life  draws  its  progress  and  its
value  from  characters  internal  to  itself,  conditioned
by  an  arbitrary  environment,  we  should  have
nothing  to  say  against  the  hypothesis  that  the
harmony  of  the  two  was  accidental,  and  might  at
any  point  fatally  break  down.  But  if,  in  the  char-
acter of  life,  we  see  the  abstract  and  brief  chronicle
of  the  external  world,  then  the  fact  of  all  the  sieni-
ficance  and  value  which  it  has  brought  into  existence
mean  not  merely  a  precarious  success  of  living
organisms  within  possibly  hostile  surroundings,  but
a  revelation  of  the  inner  nature  of  the  co-operating
circumstances  themselves.  The  inference  seems  in-
evitable. The  objection  was,  "If  the  environment
is  hostile  or  indifferent,  evolution  by  adaptation  to
it  need  imply  no  excellence."  And  the  obvious
answer  is,  "  Evolution  by  adaptation  to  environment
has  presented  us  with  a  world  of  immeasurable
values,  and  therefore  it  is  not  true  that  the  environ-
ment is  hostile  or  indifferent."  It  is  a  serious  fault
in  the  miraculous  or  self-directive  view  of  life  that
it  deprives  us  of  this  argument,  which  on  any
reasonably  critical  conception  of  the  nature  of  vital
adaptation  is  wholly  irrefragable.

6.  Thus  it  was  not  without  a  philosophical  signi-  Life  pass-
ficance  that  we  insisted,  in  our  own  sense  of  the
terms,  upon  the  all-sufficingness  of  natural  selection.
For  us  natural  selection  means  the  operation  of  a
realm  of  externality  in  modelling  its  responsive
centre,  and  thereby  coming  alive  itself  in  a  partial
individuality  which  represents  it. In  this  centrality


ing  into
soul.


76  NATURAL  AND SOCIAL SELECTION lect.


or  representation  we  have  the  clue  to  the  work  ot
soul-making,  which  begins — belonging,  of  course,  to
the  world  of  appearance  and  succession — with  the
genesis  of  life.  In  all  life  we  find,  as  we  have  seen,
a  certain  relative  individuality — that  is  to  say,  a  self-
maintaining  system,  consistent  and  coherent  in  the
main  when  taken  together  with  the  environment
to  which  it  is  adapted,  and  which,  taking  present
and  past  as  a  single  system,  has  dictated  its  form.
The  creation  of  such  a  system  is  due  to  the  opera-,
tion  of  the  positive  principle  of  non-contradiction
in  a  definite  embodiment  and  environment.  The
self-maintaining  system  of  Life,  under  the  guidance
of  its  surroundings,  has  rejected  whatever  variation
was,  under  all  the  conditions,  out  of  harmony  with
its  end  of  self-maintenance.  Non-contradiction,  as
we  saw,  is  the  principle  of  individuality  ;  and  here
we  observe  it  at  work  in  the  initial  formation  of  the
finite  centre  of  experience.

It  is  impossible  to  determine,  I  suppose,  at  what
point  in  evolution  we  are  first  justified  in  speaking
of  a  soul.  But  the  gradual  concentration  of  forms
of  sensitiveness^  in  a  living  being  is  obviously  its
foundation.  The  concentration  in  question  has  been
represented,  with  striking  verisimilitude,  as  begin-
ning from  susceptibility  to  the  most  general  char-
acteristics under  which  life  has  to  be  carried  on
within  the  solar  system.  "  While  still  a  substance,
i.e.  a  physical  soul,  the  mind  (i)  takes  part  in  the
general  planetary  life,  feels  the  difference  of  climates,
the  character  of  the  seasons,  and  the  periods  of  the

1  I  purposely  use  the  term  sensitiveness  to  indicate  a  suscepti-
bility, evident  through  movement  and  tissue  change,  of  which  we
really  cannot  tell  at  what  point  it  comes  to  be  accompanied  by
sentience.


Ill  SOUL-MAKING WORKS  BY  ADAPTATION  77

day,  etc.  ...  In  recent  times  a  good  deal  has  been
said  of  the  cosmical,  sidereal,  and  telluric  life  of
man.^  In  such  a  sympathy  with  nature  the  animals
essentially  live."^  In  man,  the  writer  goes  on,  these
influences  survive  only  in  faint  changes  of  mood,
and  are  evident  mainly  in  periods  of  illness  or
depression.  Then  further  he  refers  to  the  general
planetary  life  of  the  nature-governed  minds  which
on  the  whole  give  expression  to  the  nature  of  the
geographical  continents,  and  constitute  the  diver-
sities of  races.  "  This  diversity  descends  into  speci-
alities that  may  be  termed  /ocal  minds — shown  in
the  outward  modes  of  life  and  occupation,  bodily
structure,  and  disposition,  but  still  more  in  the  inner
tendency  and  capacity  of  the  intellectual  and  moral
character  of  the  life  of  peoples."  "...  The  soul
is  further  de-universalised  into  the  individualised
subject.  But  this  subjectivity  is  here  only  con-
sidered as  a  differentiation  and  singling-out  of  the
modes  which  nature  gives  ;  we  find  it  as  the  special
temperament,  talent,  character,  physiognomy,  or
other  disposition  or  idiosyncrasy,  of  families  or
single  individuals."

7. I have  cited  this  account  of  the  focussing  of  Formation
qualities  into  souls,  not  as  authoritative  to-day,  but  gent^^"''
as  an  apercu  embodying:  on  the  whole  a  sound  atti-  ^^^'"'^^

^ ^  • o  in  a  way

tude  to  the  problem  of  soul-makingf,  and  one  which  parallel  to
the  subsequent  theory  of  natural  selection,  in  our  Hving
large  sense  of  the  term,  has  in  substance  corroborated.

1  Cf.  Darwin  on  the  significance  of  tidal,  i.e.  lunar  periods  for
animal  and  human  life,  Descent  of  Alan,  i.  212.

2  Yltge.V s  Philosophy  0/ Mind,  SQCii.  392-4.  Wallace's  Transla-
tion. This  "de-universalising"  process  is  curiously  parallel  to  the
genesis  of  the  individual  out  of  the  collective  soul  in  Mr.  Cornford's
From  Religion  to  Philosophy.


78  NATURAL  AND SOCIAL SELECTION lect.

We  are  prepared  in  this  way  for  the  parallelism
of  principle  between  Life  and  Mind. Once  granting
that  an  omnipotential  principle,  the  active  form  of
totality,  can  attach  itself  in  an  unconscious  or  a  con-
scious shape  to  certain  arrangements  of  matter,  the
problem  of  soul-making,  which  in  our  ignorance  we
must  accept  as  stretching  downwards  to  the  begin-
nings of  life,  offers  no  difficulty  nor  mystery. The
important  point  for  us  is  to  know  where  the  content
of  life  and  mind,  beginning  with  the  differentiation
of  organic  bodies,  is  derived  from. And  the  answer
is  plain  ;  it  is  elicited  by  the  bare  principle  of  totality
or non- contradiction, according to the working
rules  of the  universe, from  external  environments
of  which the substances  which  act  as  its  vehicles
themselves form a part. It is all -important to
remember,  as  we  have  urged  before, that in the
immense  domain  of  organic life,  reaction and  re-
sponse, though  different  in  character  from  those  of
the  inorganic  world,  are  no  less  absolutely  "subject
to  law  "  ;  or  rather,  relevant  to  specific  conditions.
The  restitution  of  an  organ  or  of  a  whole  organism
is something more than  a  mere  chemical  reagent
can  carry  out ;  but  it  is  quite  precisely  relevant  to
the  place  of  the  wound  or  nature  of  the  fragment,
combined with the conditions under which the
organism  is  placed.^ And — this  is  perhaps  not  suffi-
ciently noticed — it  cannot  do  everything  ;  it  cannot
freely  contrive. All  it  does  at  most  is  to  restore  the
normal  form  which the  organism has so  far  been
accustomed  to  develop.

There  is  no  more  probability  that  the  growth  and

1  See,  for  the  definition  of  a  routine  which  may  be  called  mechani-
cal, Lloyd  Morgan's  forthcoming  work  on  histinct  and  Experience.


Ill  THE GENESIS OF  STRUCTURE  IN  MIND 79

character  of  soul  is  unconnected  with  relevant  con-
ditions because  it  implies  and  is  on  the  top  of  Life,
than  that  Life  is  so  because  it  implies  and  is  on  the
top  of  physico-chemical  reactions.

One  last  word  at  this  point  must  be  given  to
Pan-psychism.  Why,  it  will  be  asked  of  us,  separate
the  problem  of  soul-making  in  the  organic  world
from  the  similar  problem  which  might  be  raised  for
the  inorganic  world  ?  The  answer  is  plain,  and  has
been  anticipated  in  the  previous  course.^  What  we
want  and  can  use  of  the  inorganic  world  is  only  its
externality.  Without  it  we  cannot  grasp  or  in  any
way  approach  the  problem  of  soul-making.  If  it  has
souls  of  its  own,  they  do  not  help  us,  because  we
cannot  communicate  with  them,  except  by  the  very
process  which  we  are  describing  of  eliciting  our  own
souls  from  their  outsides,  by  which  "  our  own  nature
is  being  communicated  to  us."  And  perhaps  at  this
point  these  divergent  views  might  find  some  common
ground.  But  it  is  enough  to  say,  that  whereas  with
conscious  beings  ^  we  can  use  both  their  bodies  and
their  souls,  with  the  prima  facie  unconscious  world
we  can  only  get  at  their  souls,  if  at  all,  from  their
bodies  pure  and  simple,  or  at  most,  from  what  their
bodies  contribute  to  our  souls.

The  continuity  and  analogy  between  the  con-
ditions of  the  formation  of  Life  and  those  which  rule
the  formation  of  mind,  experience,  knowledge,  in
short,  of  the  conscious  soul passing  upwards into

1  Principle^  p.  362  ff.

2  The  lower  animals  might  be  taken  as  a  half-way  house.  It
might  be  said  that  as  they  share  no  language  with  us  (but  do  they
not  ?)  we  can  only  presume  their  souls,  and  the  nature  of  their  souls,
indirectly,  much  as  we  might  the  soul  of  a  river  or  a  mountain.  But
evidently  this  rapprocheuieni^  though  instructive,  is  exaggerated.


8o  NATURAL  AND SOCIAL SELECTION lect.

the  self,  will  now  be  obvious.  We  may  describe
knowledge,  not  as  the  nearest,  but  as  the  clearest
case.  It  comes  before  us  as  a  definite  structure,  with
an  apparatus  or  skeleton  of  categories,  laws,  and
principles,  which  looks  like  a  determinate  endow-
ment from  some  highly  specialised  source,  perhaps
from  a  fabric  inherent  in  the  nature  of  reason.  Its
individuality,  that  is,  the  constitution  which  em-
bodies its  non-contradictory  self-maintenance,  seems
so  obviously  dependent  on  formations  foreign,^  as
such,  to  the  experience  out  of  which  it  grows,  that
we  are  tempted  to  believe  them  derived  all  of  a
piece  and  in  a  rigid  shape  from  some  source  beyond
what  is  given  in  current  thought  and  perception.

Yet  we  know  that  this  is  not  so.  The  laws,
categories,  and  principles  of  knowledge  recognised
by  logic  are  analogous  not  to  a  rigid  pre-existing
framework,  but  to  the  indispensable  functions  of  a
living  body.^  They  have  all  been  elicited  by  the
active  form  of  totality  from  the  requirements  of
actual  experience ;  and  the  principle  of  non-con-
tradiction, as  we  have  seen,  is  dependent  for  its
significance  and  certainty  on  the  whole  organic
structure  which  it  has  been  instrumental  in  elicit-
ing.^ Such  a  principle,  for  instance,  as  that  of
causality,  is  not  a  dogma  which  can  be  determined
within  its  own  four  corners  as  fixed  in  a  certain
shape  apart  from  the  growth  of  the  body  of  ex-
perience.* It is  an  indispensable  function  of  that

^  Of  course  a  logician  will  try  to  show  that  a  judgment,  as  he
understands  it,  is  a  fact  of  experience.  But  he  will  not  maintain  that
his  technical  terms  and  rules  or  laws  are  present  as  they  stand  in
common  experience.

-  Author's  Logic,  ed.  2,  vol.  ii.  p.  230.

3  Principle,  Lect.  II.  ■*  Logic,  I.e.


Ill  MIND  LIKE KNOWLEDGE  ''ELICITED''  8i

body  ;  but  its  formulation  has  changed  and  is  likely
to  change  as  knowledge  grows  and  alters.  If  this
simple  point  were  rightly  appreciated,  we  should
probably  hear  less  of  a  modifiable  Reality.  A
system,  such  as  that  of  knowledge,  which  is  im-
perfect and  only  partially  individual,  must  necessarily
be  imperfect  and  modifiable  in  all  its  parts.

Our  point,  however,  in  the  comparison  of  the
system  of  knowledge  to  the  living  organism  was
merely  this — to  show  in  this  strongest  case  how  a
highly  articulate  individual  system,  equipped  with
all  sorts  of  special  apparatus  which  are  not  visible
in  its  environment,^  can  be  brought  into  existence
and  maintained  by  a  mere  succession  of  responses
to  surroundings  in  conformity  with  the  principle
of  positive^  non- contradiction.  Such  was  the
process  operative  in  the  genesis  and  evolution  of
Life ;  and  the  further  process  of  soul-making — and
the  genesis  of  cognition  is  a  branch  of  it — will
correspond  to  this  general  type.

8. In  the  previous  section  the  relation  of  know-  Formation
ledge to its  world  was analysed,  not  as the  next  how  ana-
case  in  order  of  evolution,  but  as  the  clearest  case  |hat"oV°
of  a  highly  articulate  individual  whole  arising  out  ^^°^^
of  an  environment  that  contains  no  apparent  trace
of it,  by the operation of  the principle of  non-
contradiction in and upon such  an environment.

^  Cognition,  as  I  understand  it,  is  a  way  of  experiencing  reality.
If  we  are  told  that  there  is  no  knowledge,  but  only  the  mind  and  the
real  objects,  I  say  that  to  any  one  who  understands  what  reality  means,
the  distinction  is  verbal.  The  "  environment "  here  referred  to  is
reality  in  a  primitive  phase  of  being  apprehended.  Of  course  most
people  have  never  heard  of  a  law  of  contradiction  or  of  causation.

'■^  According  to  the  doctrine  of  Principle,  Lect.  II.,  the  word
positive  is  here  superfluous.  But  it  is  retained  in  order  to  recall  that
doctrine  to  the  reader.


82  NATURAL  AND SOCIAL  SELECTION lect.

What  has  thus  been  shown  in  the  cases  of  Life
and  of  Knowledge  applies  a  fortiori  to  all  the
intermediate  phases  of  Mind,  and  it  is  not  necessary
for  our  purpose  to  draw  out  these  in  detail ;  more
especially  as  we  do  not  profess  or  propose  to  deter-
mine at  what  phase  in  particular  it  is  well  to  speak
of  the  emergence  of  soul  par  excellence.  Our  purpose
is  merely  to  make  clear,  in  the  case  of  human  in-
dividuality— the  completest  case  known  to  us  of
finite  intelligence — the  moulding  of  the  soul  through
its  surroundings,  the  communication,  through  these,
of  its  own  nature  to  it,  the  modification  thus  brought
to  these  surroundings,  and  the  results  achieved
through  them.
Two  i. Two preliminary  points must be noted. a.

What'  We  saw  in  the  first  part  of  this  course  how  greatly
h^rktfrom  °"^  ideas  of  Mind,  Soul,  or  Self  must  be  affected  by
Life.  the  recognition  that  all  of  these  in  their  developed

shape  grow  up  on  the  top  of  an  immense  previous
acquisition  of  instincts,  habits,  and  automatic  arrange-
ments, constituting  an  order  in  the  nervous  system
and  a  relevancy  to  the  world  of  stimuli  in  physical
action,  and  implying  some  degree  of  consciousness.
Thus  the  Mind  or  Soul  is  full,  we  may  say,  before  it
exists,  and  probably  as  a  pre-condition  of  its  exist-
ence. It  does  not  first  exist,  and  then  have  to  be
filled  from  experience.^  It  takes  over  its  household
furniture,  or  at  any  rate  enough  to  keep  house  with,
from  Life  ;  and  is  itself  at  first  merely  a  better  order

1  It  might  be  urged  that  this  fact  ought  to  modify  the  account
above  given  of  Knowledge,  in  so  far  that  Hke  all  Mind  it  starts  not
from  a  marked  point  of  departure  but  from  a  full  though  indistinct
experience.  But  the  reason  why  Knowledge  was  a  good  illustration
of  our  point  lay  in  the  very  fact  that  though  full  de  facto  it  has  to
treat  itself  as  empty  till  it  has  justified  its  fulness.


Ill  LIFE THE  FOUNDATION  OF  MIND  83

and  a  clearer  purpose  in  making  use  of  the  same,  or
of  that  portion  of  it  which  specially  demands  order
and  purpose.

The  application  of  this  fact  to  our  present  argu-
ment is  only  to  make  a  warning  necessary.  Mind,
then,  it  might  be  objected,  is  not  elicited  from  en-
vironment by  a  bare  principle  of  non-contradiction.
It  comes  to  the  birth  with  all  sorts  of  tendencies
and  predispositions  and  abilities — as  a  world  in  itself
from  the  beginning.  No  doubt ;  but  then  all  this
world  is  due,  as  we  have  seen,  to  a  prior  operation
of  the  same  principle  in  and  through  an  externality
at  first  purely  external.^  No  conclusion  can  be
suggested  on  this  ground  to  the  effect  that  the
concrete  heritage  of  mind  or  minds,  what  they  take
over  from  the  Life,  so  far  particularised,  on  which
they  are  built  up,  is  other  than  a  detail  elicited  from
and  through  the  external  world  by  a  principle  which
receives  its  entire  filling  from  that  source.

In  the  large  sense  in  which  we  have  spoken
throughout,  Mind  (or  its  inseparable  concomitant
the  nervous  system)  is  an  adaptive  variation  sus-
tained by  natural  selection — an  adaptive  variation
such  as  to  be  the  source  of  untold  consequential
adaptations,  often  different  in  the  mode  of  initiation
from  those  of  mere  life,  but  falling  on  the  whole  within
the  same  pre-eminent  sense  of  natural  selection  as
the  communication  of  the  soul's  nature  through  the
demands  of  the  environment.

/3.  We  all  know  that  the  nature  which  constitutes  The  second

/-  TV  T  • 1 •  1  ^""^  third

the  environment  of  Mmd  is  not  mere  external  nature,  "nature"
It  is  a  "second  nature,"  and  indeed,  if  we  look  for-  J^nlhTen-

vironment
^ Life  itself,  as  we saw,  must begin  with some  matter,  by  the  of  Mind,
qualities  of  which  it  is  bound.


84  NATURAL  AND SOCIAL  SELECTION lect.

ward  to  the  condition  of  the  developed  human
intelHgence,  a  second  nature  including  two  removes.

To  begin  with  Mind  is  the  environment  of  Mind  ;
and  further,  the  spatial  externality  itself  which  sur-
rounds the  developed  intelligent  centre  is  an  ex-
ternality which  itself  is  twice-born  ;  which,  though
still  spatial  and  external,  has  been  modified  by
passing  through  the  mind,  and  has  become,  it  may
almost  be  said,  a  real  though  modest  member  of
the  human  community.  And  indeed,  while  on  this
topic,  we  might  suggest  that  the  second  nature
which  surrounds  the  civilised  intelligence  covers
a  third  remove.  For  after  the  revelation  of  Mind
to  itself  in  the  spiritual  environment,  and  after  the
transformation  of  the  spatial  environment  into  a
practical  servant  of  mind,  comes  the  reflection,
largely  due  to  that  latter  experience,  which  reveals
in  the  unmodified  and  pristine  externality  itself —
the  first  nature  of  all — the  significance  which  we
call  aesthetic  and  scientific  ^ ;  something  new,  and
different  from  its  actual  operation  in  the  task  of
natural  selection.

But  the  main  differentia  of  the  genesis  of  Mind  is
the  pre-eminence  in  it  of  Mind  as  an  environment —
not,  we  may  insist,  with  reference  to  previous  argu-
ments,^ Mind  as  a  naked  inwardness,  but  Mind  dif-
ferentiated and  interpreted  through  a  definite  exter-
nality. In  other  words.  Mind  is  in  man  a  social
characteristic,  and  lives  in  the  medium  of  recognition.^

1  In  these  kinds  of  significance  if  anywhere  we  get  at  the  Soul  of
external  Nature.  *  On  Pan-psychism,

3  In  principle  we  must  insist  that  we  can  have  with  our  past  and
future  self  such  relations  as  connect  us  with  other  selves.  Man  is
certainly  a  society  within  himself.  But  the  main  influence  in  eliciting
this  organisation  within  him  is  an  actual  society  outside  him.


Ill  MIND  LIVES  IN  RECIPROCITY  85

Here  is  a  paradox  which  leads  up  to  an  important
truth.  We  said  that  the  main  thing  in  the  genesis
of  Mind  is  recognition,  or  a  mental  environment.
But  does  not  this  presuppose  Mind  prior  to  its  own
genesis  1  How  is  Mind  to  be  generated  by  contact
with  Mind,  if  Mind  does  not  exist  before  Mind  exists  ?
And  the  answer  is  not  altogether  given  in  the  fact
that  Mind  is  a  matter  of  degree  and  that  in  the
animal  world  we  have  it  in  modes  closely  akin  to
those  which  belong  to  humanity.  This  fact  makes
the  answer  more  possible,  but  it  is  not  the  answer,
and  is  itself  subject  to  something  of  the  same
difficulty  for  which  the  answer  is  required.

But  the  answer  itself  is  that  intelligent  Mind  is
essentially  reciprocal  (and  so  probably  all  the  Mind
of  the  higher^  animals  in  its  degree)  and  lives  in  the
medium  of  recognition  ;  and  therefore,  when  a  certain
de facto  continuity  of  centres,  each  with  itself  and  with
others,  is  attained  in  the  correlation  of  organisms,
the  recognition  of  the  continuity  is  generated  pain
passtt  in  a  plurality  of  centres.  For,  like  the  filling
of  Mind  in  general,  the  continuity  exists  before  the
consciousness  of  it.  What  has  been  called  "con-
sciousness of  kind  "  indeed — an  awareness  of  it
shown  in  action — must  run  right  through  the  animal
world  ;  the  relation  of  the  sexes  is  enough  to  prove
it.  But  in  the  social  being  a  new  variation  of  Mind
arises  from  the  very  fact  of  reciprocity.  As  the  one
relies  upon  the  other,  so  the  other  relies  upon  the
one  ;  and  both  together,  in  this  reliance,  and  in  the
language  and  other  social  utterances  which  embody
it,  become  elements  in  a  universal  consciousness  or

^ Perhaps  the  mind  of  the  quite  lower  organisms  is  conditioned
by  reciprocity  between  the  parts  of  the  organism.


86  NATURAL  AND  SOCIAL SELECTION lect.

social  Mind  within  which  individual  centres  recognise
themselves  and  each  other.  The  recognition  and
the  genesis  are  in  principle  simultaneous,  that  is  to
say,  while  one-sided  it  is  imperfect.^  I  cite  a  fine
illustration  from  Wallace.^

"  The  mother,  already  enriched  with  reason  and
love,  bending  over  her  infant,  does  not  by  her  glance,
her  smile,  her  touch,  give  it  a  soul,  a  spirit,  a  reason  ;
and  yet  in  that  glance,  that  smile,  that  touch,  soul,
spirit,  reason,  are  as  certainly  born  as  the  physio-
logical life  of  the  same  child  is  born,  and  so  far  as
we  know  only  born,  in  the  congress  of  male  and
female.  As  in  that  case  the  elements  of  the  living
being,  the  constituents  which  build  up  structure,  are
older,  far  older  than  the  two  parents,  who  to  popular
apprehension  are  the  authors  of  the  being  of  their
progeny ;  so  in  the  spiritual  world  the  child  and  its
mother  severally  bring  to  their  union  of  soul  a  store
of  powers  and  faculties  prepared  by,  it  may  be,
centuries  of  inherited  tradition.  Yet  it  is  in  the
main  true  that  it  is  the  mother's  and  father's  look
and  touch,  charged  with  the  fruits  of  life,  of  life
both  theirs  and  that  of  myriad  others  which  have
gone  to  make  up  theirs,  which  kindles  into  flame
the  dull  materials  of  humanity,  and  begins  that
second  birth,  that  spiritual  parentship  which,  at
least  not  less  than  the  first,  should  be  the  peculiar
glory  of  human  father-  and  motherhood.  And,  to
prevent  misconception,  the  gift  of  soul  and  spirit,
if  gift  it  be,  is  not  on  one  side  only.  If  the  parent,
in  a  way,  makes  the  child,  it  is  not  less  true  that  the

1  Cf.  the  well-known  doctrine  of  Hegel,  Encyclopedia^  sect.  430  ff.,
of  the  recognition  of  master  and  servant.

2  Lectures  and  Essays,  p.  114,  by  Professor  William  Wallace.


in  ''EQUAL  TO  THE  SITUATION''  87

child  makes  the  parent.  He  kindles  new  lights,  and
pierces  out  new  depths,  in  the  parent  soul ;  builds
his  world  anew,  with  other  features  and  fabrics  than
of  old  ;  brings  him  nearer  heaven  or  nearer  hell ;
but  at  any  rate,  if  the  parent  ever  really  sees  his
child  eye  to  eye  and  approaches  him  touch  to
touch — and  unfortunately  we  dare  not  assume  that
this  always  happens,  so  many  parents  and  children
have  never  seen  each  other's  soul-face — he  is  not
as  he  was  before."

Hoiv,  more  especially,  it  will  be  asked,  does  mind
recognise  mind,  and,  in  recognising,  become  mind  ?
We  are  not,  of  course,  explaining  the  nature  of
consciousness ;  but  the  relevant  condition  of  its
appearance  seems  here  tolerably  clear.  It  must  be
in  response  ;  that  is,  through  participation  in  the
same  situation,  which,  when  recognised,  becomes  a
mental  situation  common  to  two  or  more  centres  of
experience.  We  are  often  told  it  is  in  "  imitation  "  ;
but  imitation  is  too  narrow  an  idea  for  the  response
or  relevancy  of  action  which  is  really  in  question.
I  should  suppose  co-operation,  the  ^(?y^?^/(?  combina-
tion of  different  acts  towards  what  is,  though  not
yet  distinctly  stated,  a  common  purpose,  to  be  the
most  usual  stimulus  to  recognition.  Conflict,  which
Hegel  names  as  the  essential,  is  for  him  really  a
world-phase,  introductory  to  the  reign  of  co-opera-
tion.

ii. Although  "the  environment  of  intelligent  Mind  Natural
is  thus  different  from  that  of  mere  Life,  yet  in  the  ihe  method
main  and  in  large  outline  the  power  which  moulds  it  Jtenigent
is  still  that  of  natural  selection. Like  all  embodi-  f^"^^^.'''^
ments  of  the  omnipotential  principle.  Mind,  Soul,  or
Self,  has  inevitably  for  its  test  and  formative  law  the


88  NATURAL  AND SOCIAL SELECTION lect.

need  of  being  equal  to  the  situation.  Still,  as  always,
it  is  true  that  the  centre  which  is  not  equal  to
the  situation  cannot  persist ;  and  that  the  values
developed  in  and  through  the  several  centres  are  a
safe  indication  of  the  significance  of  their  whole
environment.  Only  it  is  true  that  in  two  main
points  the  working  of  natural  selection  is  modified
when  it  deals  with  an  intelligent  centre.

First,  the  province  of  positive  suggestion  is
greatly  enlarged.  There  is  already  what  might  be
called  suggestion  in  the  relation  of  an  external
environment  to  an  organism  ;  that  is  to  say,  there
are  variations  directly  produced  by  the  surroundings,
which  may  or  may  not  prove  valuable  when  tested
by  natural  selection.  But  in  the  sphere  of  mind  and
society,  after  language  and  institutions  have  been
developed,  the  positive  suggestion  has  a  much
larger  place,  and  the  field  of  mere  trial  and  error  is
correspondingly  diminished.

Secondly,  the  place  of  true  contrivance  is  much
greater.  Bergson  ^  has  remarked  that  the  term
"  response  "  as  often  employed  in  evolutionist  theory
may  mean  anything  from  a  physical  reaction  to
a  well -conceived  contrivance  adapted  to  a  need.
Here,  in  the  case  of  Mind,  we  come  to  true  con-
trivance ;  the  forecast  of  a  situation  and  the  com-
bination of  means  to  meet  it.  But  yet  here,  as  in
the  last  case,  and  as  in  the  case  of  subjective  selection,
the  court  of  ultimate  appeal  is  natural  selection,  or
the  verdict  of  the  environment.^  So  that  although
the  distinctive  field  of  what  we  know  as  trial  and  error

1  Evolution,  p.  63.

2  "  If  this  counsel  or  this  work  be  of  men,"  etc.  This  is  quite
obviously  and  unquestionably  an  appeal  to  natural  selection.


Ill  THE  ABSOLUTE  BEGINS TO  SHOW  89

is  at  this  level  greatly  diminished,  yet  ultimately
and  on  the  large  scale  it  is  trial  and  error  that  gives,
or  rather  embodies,  the  conclusive  and  final  decision.
Will  the  universe  stand  your  experiment,  or  will  it
not  ?  And  this  after  all  is  natural  selection  or
determination  by  the  environment.

In  the  above  senses,  then,  social  selection  might
be  called  relatively  artificial  or  more  than  natural,
in  so  far  as  it  includes  suggestion  and  promotes
teleological  contrivance.  But  on  the  whole  it  is  well
to  regard  it  as  natural,  in  the  sense  in  which  the
whole  activities  of  Society,  as  representing  the
necessities  of  man's  nature  and  surroundings,  are
natural  and  necessary,  and  a  better  standard,  than
any  reflective  theory,  of  what  should  and  should  not
be  encouraged.  In  this  contrasted  sense,  and  apart
from  the  ethical  or  biological  opinions  of  individuals,
Society  carries  on  the  work  of  soul-formation  by  a
severe  and  inevitable  process,^  which  it  is  both
wholesome  and  true  to  regard  as  natural  selection
in  its  social  form."

iii.  At  this  point  of  the  process  of  soul-formation,  The  indi-

.  1  .  .•,,..  , viduality  of

where  the  environment  m  addition  to  pure  external  Mind  tends
nature,  and  the  twice-born  second  nature,  takes  on  enve^iopVs^^

of  par-

^  See,  for  example,  Hegel,  PJiil.  des  RecJits  on  the  Biirgerliche  centres
Gesellschaft,  the  hard  world  of  industry  and  competition,  which
represents  the  demand  that  if  a  man  is  to  be  anything  he  must
make  himself  into  something.  The  common  censure  that  the
"  fittest "  who  survive  are  not  on  the  whole  the  best,  though  it  has  a
considerable  truth  in  the  bad  working  of  social  institutions,  I  believe
in  the  main,  and  in  its  full  bitterness,  to  represent  a  deep-seated
rebellion  against  the  necessary  severity  of  the  soul-forming  process  ;
and  also  to  some  extent  a  confusion  as  to  the  types  of  success
correlative  to  different  natures.  See  Philosophy  of  State,  ed.  2,  or
Hegel,  op.  cit.

2  See  author's  paper  on Selection in Human Society. Cliarity
Organisation  Revieiu,  Dec.  1910.


90  NATURAL  AND SOCIAL SELECTION lect.

the character of spiritual personaHties, we have
already  noted  that  the  development  of  Individuality
begins  to  show  itself  in  a  new  light. Not  only  are
particular  centres  of  experience  moulded  by  natural
selection into a deeper harmony with their sur-
roundings, but  in  so  far  as  the  surroundings  form
a mental or  spiritual  system — a  social mind — the
particular  centres  begin  to  be  adapted  as  members
of  an individuality  transcending their  own. (We
observed long ago that e.g. legal "  personality "
implies  an  individuality  that  extends  far  beyond  the
"  person."  ^) Their  qualities  begin  to  be  reinforced
by  others,  their  deficiencies  supplied,  in  a  word,  their
immanent  contradictions  removed  by  readjustment
and  supplementation,  so  that  the  body  of  particular-
ised centres  begins  to  take  on  a  distinct  resemblance
to  what  we  know  must  be  the  character  of  the  absolute.
From  the  beginning  of  evolution,  the  demands  made
by  the world  upon a  society are  reflected  in  the
demands  made  by  the  society  upon  its  members,
and more  than that, the qualities  of  the several
members  are  not isolated and self-contained, but
overflow  along  the  channels  of  interconnection  and
characterise  the  society  as  a  whole.^ Thus  the  soul
or  self  in  the  process  of  being  made  or  moulded  more
and  more  passes  beyond  its  factual  being  ;  and  we
see  that  not  only  it  has  to  be  made  something  if  it
is  to  be  anything,  but  that  whatever  it  has  realised
in  positive  qualities  can  never  be  enough,  and  there
is  always  a  greater  unity  which  demands  its  further
subordination  and  self-abnegation.

9. From, the beginning, natural selection as
operative  upon  the  individual  soul  through  its  social

1  Prittciple,  p.  284.  "  Cf.  ibid.  Lect.  I.


Ill  THE UNIVERSE  IS THE  SOUL-MAKER  91

environment  has  given  rise  to  creatures  and  institu-  How  soui-
tions  which  have  embodied  the  matter  of  souls  or  society '"
selves in creations transcending their particular  Eurr.^'"'°
existence. Language, morality, fine art, or the  !^"jfj'7iUra'
siofnificance of the social monument or festival,  •'^ociai

°  _  ,  experience.

were  alluded  to  above.  In  these  the  social  mind  its  severity.
anticipates  an  incarnation  which  at  once  is  the
quintessence  of  its  group-relations,  and  altogether
transcends  the  form  of  a  given  plurality  of  persons.
The  smallest  act  of  social  duty,  as  Aristotle  has
taught  us,  opens  out  on  a  wider  horizon,^  so  that
ultimately  the  end  of  the  State,  that  which  is
implied  in  its  whole  structure,  which  is  the  true  end
and  aim  of  its  individual  members,  and  the  standard
by  which  we  can  estimate  the  value  of  its  social  life,
habits,  and  institutions,  is  embodied  in  ^'  its  fitness
to  subserve  the  ends  of  philosophy  and  religion,  or
as  we  should  say  to-day  in  more  modern  language,
of  religion,  of  art  and  poetry,  and  the  higher  life  of
the  intelligence.

This  is  only  the  relative  completion  of  the  process
which  we  saw  beginning  in  the  moulding  of  Life,
and  the  principle  throughout  has  been  the  same.
The  soul  or  self  is  formed  by  the  requirements  of
its  surroundings ;  that  is,  of  the  universe  so  far  as  in
contact  with  it.  The  machinery  of  the  process
varies  in  detail  between  the  phases  of  Life  and  Mind,
but  its  general  conditions  persist.  It  is  not  at  all
implied  that  we  are  fully  capable  of  estimating  the
significance  of  situations  and  of  the  degree  in  which
souls  are  equal  to  them,  or  the  value,  in  each  case,

1  See  Principle^  Appendix  II.  to  Lect.  X.

2  In  a  duly  adjusted  whole  every  element  has  value.  Thus,  a
good  day's  work  in  the  fields  has  value  ;  but  then  it  has  religion,  etc.,
in  it,  as  they  also  have  it  in  them.


92


NATURAL  AND  SOCIAL  SELECTION lect.


of  being  equal  to  this  or  that  situation.  Men  may-
fail,  it  seems  to  us,  in  petty  situations  who  would
have  succeeded  in  greater  ones,  and  so  on  through
the  whole  gamut  of  complaint.  But  all  this  does  not
touch  our  point  at  this  moment.  We  are  merely-
considering  the  general  character  of  "  the  vale  of
soul-making,"  and  noting  that  its  processes  are  a
constant  reiteration  of  demand  on  the  one  hand  and
adaptation  or  failure  on  the  other ;  that  this  is
how  particular  centres  of  experience  achieve  their
peculiar  form  and  content ;  and  that  the  tendency,
on  the  whole,  depends  on  the  principle  of  non-
contradiction, is  towards  individualisation,  and
even  towards  an  individuality  in  which  centres,
formed  and  further  formed  by  such  a  process,
tend  to  be,  as  particular  centres,  transcended  and
absorbed.

One  consequence  seems  clear :  that  adaptation
must  have  a  tendency  to  strain  and  conflict  with  the
first  natural  endowment  and  foundation  of  the  soul
or  self.  For,  as  we  have  seen,  the  fullest  individu-
ality tends  altogether  to  absorb  and  subordinate
the  finite  centre,  giving  it  indeed  an  expansion
which  it  had  not  before,  but  on  the  other  hand
stretching  and  perhaps  tearing  or  snapping^  its
simpler  and  earlier  adaptations,  which  were  not
made  in  view  of  the  environment  which  is  ultim-
ately reached.

Thus  the  higher  value  may  go  on  the  whole,  as
we  have  urged,  with  the  higher  individuality  ;  but
yet,  for  finite  souls,  this  will  not,  though  on  the
whole  the  higher  harmony,  be  attended  with  the
greater freedom  from conflict  or  from destructive

1 "  He  that  loveth  son  or  daughter  more  than  me "


in  0 MH AAPEIS  ANePfin02 93

readaptation  of  the  self.  The  foundation  is  casual,
or  appears  so,  bringing  some  essential  gift,  as  yet
unadapted  ;  and  in  soul-formation  there  is  therefore
a  great  deal  to  be  remade  as  well  as  to  be  made,
and  the  process  is  certain  to  be  more  or  less
severe.


A.  THE  MOULDING  OF  SOlJhS— Continued


LECTURE IV


The

creative
power  of
volition.
Its  secret.


THE MIRACLE OF WILL, OR CHARACTER AND
CIRCUMSTANCE

I.  In  the  previous  Lecture  we  were  engaged  with
the  moulding  of  souls  by  the  world  through  natural
and  social  selection.  It  seemed  to  us  that  the
marvel  of  life  and  mind  lay  not  in  their  possession
of  any  immanent  and  independent  content,  con-
trivance, or  purpose,^  but  rather  in  the  inherent
universality  which  enabled  them,  apparently  from
any  material  starting-point,  to  adjust  themselves  to
a  structure  and  function  relevant  to  the  demands  of
their  environment  at  that  starting-point.  Thus,  we
thought,  the  wisdom  of  the  whole,  though  not
primarily  active  in  any  intelligent  form  (except  in
so  far  as  the  environment  might  itself  be  largely
composed  of  finite  intelligent  organisms),  yet  models
the  incarnations  and  effects  the  adjustment  and  the
discipline-  by  which  life  and  mind  are  driven  to
their  relevant  shapes. In  this  way  it  seemed  as  if

1  Cf.  Principle,  p.  368.

2  Sometimes  amounting  to  what  seems  to  us  wholesale  waste  and
destruction.  This,  we  suggest,  is  only  to  be  understood  as  analogous
to  the  discipline  and  severity  of  soul-making.  In  sculpture  there
must  be  apparent  waste  as  well  as  a  good  deal  of  cutting.

94


LECT.  IV THE CREATURE  ALSO  SELECTS  95

the  whole  wealth  of  finite  life  and  experience  was
brought  to  pass  through  the  operation  of  an  external
system — what  we  finally  differentiate  as  "nature" —
upon  and  in  co-operation  with  an  empty  principle  of
totality  called  life  or  mind.  And  organisms,  souls,
selves,  societies  are  the  outcome.

But  this,  we  now  have  to  see,  was  only  one  side
of  the  matter.  The  living  being  in  its  degree,  and
more  obviously  the  conscious  or  self-conscious
microcosm,  soul  or  self,  begins  from  its  first  appear-
ance to  exercise  the  inherent  logic,  or  tendency
to  form  a  system,  which  constitutes  its  "omni-
potentiality."  ^  Even  in  the  simplest  organisms,  I
suppose,  the  adaptations  which  the  environment  can
exact  are  limited  by  the  necessity  of  being  "  com-
possible  "  in  a  living  creature.  The  environment  can
destroy  the  organism,  but  it  cannot  make  it  at  once
cease  to  be  a  system,  and  remain  alive.  We  need
not,  perhaps,  assume  that  life  implies  initial  impulses
to  special  and  divergent  zoological  types.  But
different  as  its  conditions  may  be  according  to  its
different  embodiments,  it  must,  as  a  principle  of
totality,  generate  some  conditions  of  completeness
in  every  shape  that  it  may  assume.  Now  the  point
for  us  is  this,  that  these  conditions  constitute  a  limit
upon  the  adaptations  which  per  se  might  be  able  to
satisfy  features  of  the  environment,  and  involve,
therefore,  a  reciprocal  selection  from  these  possible
adaptations,  due  to  the  character  of  the  creature
itself.  This  fact  places  us,  as  it  were,  at  the  other
side  of  the  process  of  natural  selection — the  other
side  in  the  sense  of  the  right  side  of  a  carpet  being
woven. The world imposes its plan upon the

^  Prz'ficip/e,  I.e.


96  THE  MIRACLE OF WILL  lect.

incipient  centre  of  life  and  mind,  but  in  proportion
as  that  centre  acquires  a  nature  of  its  own,  this
nature  determines  what  it  can  or  will  accept.
Destruction  may  follow  non-acceptance;  but  at
least  apparent  destruction  is  essential  in  any  self-
shaping  world.  It  is  the  modelling  tool  of  the
universe.  Thus  we  have  a  selection  by  the  organic
or  intelligent  creature  as  well  as  a  selection  ^it,  and
an  adaptation  of  the  environment  as  well  as  to  and
by  it.^  A  limited  externality  has  set  up  its  centre
and  representative  ;  but  its  representative,  being  as
such  an  active  unity,  must  tend  to  become  its  critic
and  its  re-creator.  Here  we  have  the  root  of  Will,
and  are  close  upon  the  secret  of  its  power,  or  the
power  of  character,  to  transfigure  and  so  to  conquer
circumstance. This  point  we  shall  recur  to  later.

But  what  we  have  now  reached  is  the  initial  fact
that  the  representative  centre  of  any  range  of  ex-
ternality can  only  represent  it  in  a  w^ay  of  its  own.
And  this  means  a  selection  and  adaptation  exercised
upon  the  externality  by  the  centre,  in  consequence
of  that  same  special  character  in  the  centre  which  it
is  acquiring  by  satisfying  the  demands  of  the  ex-
ternality.- Its  place  and  function  in  the  environ-
ment rests  upon  this  differentiation,  which  necessarily
involves  its  seeing  and  dealing  with  the  environment
from  a  special  point  of  view.^  When  we  consider
this  relation  in  the  case  of  a  fully  intelligent  centre,
we  are  face  to  face  with  the  problem  of  will. Not

1  Cf.  Ward's  reiterated  insistence  on  the  selected  and  so  adapted
environment  in  which  every  creature  lives.

2  For  an  answer  to  the  criticism  that  Natural  Selection  is  negative,
and  not  a  positive  modelling  agency,  see  Prmciple,  p.  151.

3  In  speaking  of  mere  life  this  is  a  metaphor  ;  with  mind  it  is  a
fact.


IV  WHAT  IS  ''TO  ELICIT"?  97

only  has  the  "  contentless  "  principle  of  mind  em-
bodied itself  in  an  outward  form  and  inward
capacity  relevant  to  the  special  environment  which
has  moulded  it,  but  it  has  augmented  this  environ-
ment— the  primary  natural  externality — by  that
whole  second  nature  which  has  been  brought  into
existence  by  means  of  and  for  the  sake  of  such
differentiated  functions.  The  second  nature  in
question  may  be  indicated  in  two  words  as  society
and  civilisation,  taken  in  the  widest  possible  sense/
The  miracle  which  has  been  achieved  in  this
creation — for  it  is  as  near  a  creation  as  anything  we
shall  find  in  the  universe,  since  even  the  coming  to
be  of  a  new  soul  depends  on  it  more  than  on
physical  origination  ^— is  usually  covered  by  some
such  word  as  "elicited,"  which  we  have  already
applied  in  a  kindred  context.^  The  entire  content
of  the  finite  will  has  been  "  elicited"  by  the  content-
less  principle  of  mind  from  the  primary  externality
(say  the  inorganic  world*),  which  at  first  sight  includes
nothing  in  any  way  relevant  to  it,  much  as  the  whole
multiplicity  of  the  organic  world  has  been  "elicited"
by  the  kindred  principle  of  life  from  the  same
inorganic  background.  "Elicited"  is  a  useful
word,  but  covers,  as  we  said,  an  almost  miraculous
creation,  which  it  does  not  explain.  How  can  will
"elicit"  its  world,  which  indeed  includes  nearly  all
of  itself,  from  what  primarily  appears  as  a  mere
external  nature  ? How, moreover,  can it display

1  I  mean  that  from  a  general  point  of  view  we  must  reckon  all
human  ways  of  living  as  society  and  civilisation  ;  something  built  up
by  the  finite  will  upon  the  foundation  of  primary  nature.  Whether
the  animals  other  than  man  have  anything  corresponding  to  this,  we
need  not  discuss  here.  ^  See  above,  p.  86.

3  Principle,  p.  368.  *  Cf  p.  78,  above.

H


98  THE  MIRACLE OF WILL  lfxt.

the  extraordinary  power,  parallel  to  some  of  the
phenomena  of  natural  selection/  of  "eliciting"  a
fairly  adequate  response  to  pretty  nearly  any  con-
ceivable demand  ?

We  have  here  two  kindred  questions — a,  what
is  the  source  of  the  concrete  content  of  will,  and  /3,
what  is  the  nature  and  what  are  the  limits  of  the
power  of  will  or  character  over  environment  and
circumstance  ?

It  may  be  thought  that  we  are  passing  beyond

the subject which we are professing to discuss,

"  The  Moulding  of  Souls." But  it  is  not  so. We

shall  see  that  in  re-creating  its  world  the  finite  mind

is only carrying forward the process of its own

genesis,  of  having its  nature communicated to it.

In  re-creating  its  world  it  is  continuing  the  work

which began by its own creation ; for its own

nature,  as  well  as  that  of  its  world,  lies  in  all  that

its  world,  as  focussed  in  it,  is  capable  of  becoming.

Serious-  2. Before attempting to answer the questions

dffficuity'*^ which  have  just  been  stated,  we  will  spend  a  few

illustrated jjiomcnts  in  considerinor  how  real  and  arduous  is  the

by  <=•

difficulty  they  involve — the  difficulty  of  what  we
may  venture  to  call  the  creative  power  of  will.  We
may  see  a  proof  of  the  difficulty  in  the  insufficiency
of  certain  attempts  on  the  part  of  ethical  psychology
and  metaphysics  to  bridge  the  gap — the  gap,  I
mean,  between  the  assumed  position  of  an  intelligent
being  confronted  with  an  external  nature  plus  a
number  of  other  intelligent  beings,  and  that  highly
concrete  and  organised  web  of  objects  and  relations

1  Matter,  e.g.^  seems  to  be  able  to  produce  any  quality  which
natural  selection  demands,  e.g.  any  colour,  or  elasticity,  or  rigidity,
or  any  permeability  to  light,  or  any  shape,  e.g.  of  a  lens.


WILL-CONTENT  CANNOT  BE  DEDUCED


99


which in real fact  and experience constitutes the
content  and  support  of  the  civiHsed  will.

i.  When  we  go  for  our  analysis  of  the  will  and  vacancy
its moral world to any form of  naturalism, say  uL'isrand"
Hobbism or  Hedonism,  or  again to any  form of  accounts
abstract Intuitionism, such as that familiar in  of  the  win.
Clarke's  pseudo-mathematical  principles  of  ethics,  it
does  not  so  much  strike  us  that  we  are  being  told
the  wrong  things,  as  that  we  are  being  told  what
amounts  to  nothing  at  all. One  or  two  tautologies
of formal reasoning, one or two abstractions of
superficial  psychology,^  worked  out  with  an  unreal
show  of  deductive  argument,  and  that  is  all. There
is  no  genuine  recognition  of  the  marvellous  creation
which  we  have  been  trying  to  appreciate, the  in-
tricate fulness  of  the  object  in  which  a  human  will
can truly find its counterpart ; all of which has
somehow  come  out  of — been  "elicited"  from — mere
natural  fact,  and  yet  cannot  possibly  be  held  to  have
arisen  by  the  mere  addition  of  new  natural  facts  to
primary  nature.

Now  if  there  is  to  be  an  Intellectualism  in  a  bad
sense,  it  is  here,  I  think,  that  we  should  look  for  it.
For  the  long  and  short  of  these  doctrines  is,  that
they  try  to  deduce  the  content  of  the  will  from
abstract  assumptions — whether  psychological  or
metaphysical  makes  no  difference — generated  by  a
reflective  intelligence  in  face  of  an  external  world  of
nature,  and  of  a  humanity  treated  as  external.  We
may  say  either  that  they  bridge  the  gap  between

1  I  would  not  recur  to  tliesc  ideas,  wliicli  appear  to  me  to  have
lost  all  interest  as  contributions  to  philosophy,  if  it  were  not  that  a
single  error  of  fundamental  principle,  in  which  one  and  all  of  them,
as  I  think,  are  rooted,  seems  to  me  not  to  be  commonly  perceived,
or  stated  in  its  general  nature. I  should  call  it  Intellectualism.


THE  MIRACLE OF WILL  lect.


will  and  nature  by  empty  axioms,  or  rather  that,  not

realising its  existence, they do not actually deal

with  it  at  all. The  actual  moral  and  spiritual  world

in  which  the  will  itself  has  embodied  its  miracle —

deposited  the  hard-earned  treasure of  its content,

and  given  proof  and explanation of  its  power  to

regenerate and conquer circumstance — is simply

left  out  of  sight. Thus  on  the  one  hand  the  true

essence  of  will  is  here,  by  a  formal Intellectualism,

left  unrecognised  ;  and  on  the  other  hand,  because

it  is  left  unrecognised,  an  opening  is  made  for  the

occupation  of  the  ground  by  a  foolishly  mysterious

Voluntarism.

Problem  h. It is possible that by confessing an early

genuine^ perplexity  of  my  own I may  help  some  others  to

effecyo appreciate  the  difficulty  which  now  appears  to  me

of  Free sq  fundamental  and  so  suggestive. At  all  events,  I

Causality

in  Thought  Will  make  the  attempt.  After  1  had  become,  ac-
cording to  the  best  of  my  belief  both  at  the  time
and  to-day,  fairly  versed  in  the  criticism  which
establishes  the  distinction  between  a  thinking  mind
and  a  natural  object,  and  the  impossibility  of  apply-
ing to  the  former  the  categories  relevant  to  the
latter,  I  still  found  myself  in  a  difficulty  when  it  was
a  question  of  making  use  of  any  such  view  in
accounting  for  any  re-creation  of  the  given  either  by
way  of  thought  or  by  way  of  volition.  Thought —
so  much  seemed  clear — was  free  in  the  sense  of
being  at  least  the  apprehending  centre  of  worlds
of  objects  and  relations,  and  not  itself  an  object  or
relation  among  others.  But  in  all  this  formal
freedom  of  thought,  where  was  to  be  found  any  real
power  of  transforming  a  point  of  view,  of  looking
at  any  group  of  facts more significantly  or more


IV  BLIND WILL DOES  NOT  HELP  loi

worthily  than  their  first  appearance  suggested  ?
How  could  the  mind,  so  crudely  did  the  problem
state  itself,  make  a  new  relation  or  a  new  object,  or
generate  any  aspect  or  quality  in  things,  beyond  the
organisation  which  it  apprehended  as  given  in  the
world  of  the  given  ?  Granting  that  in  some  sense
it  could  "  impose "  relations,  that  is,  that  fresh
relations  became  necessary  to  be  recognised  as  it
handled  and  organised  fresh  objects,  yet  there
seemed  no  ground  for  treating  such  imposition  as
anything  like  an  origination — a  new  light,  a  higher
meaning.  How  could  the  thinking  mind  alter  or
re-create  the  aspect  of  a  given  scene  or  situation  or
conjunction  of  circumstance,  except  by  connecting
and  developing  what  further  content  perception
might  chance  to  furnish  or  formal  deduction  to
establish  ?  Was  anything  effective  meant  by  its
being  above  its  world,  exempt  from  the  application
of  the  causal  categories,  a  "  free  cause,"  a  spiritual
principle  ?

Ah,  but — it  may  be  replied — you  should  have
considered  will.  Thought  could  do  no  more  than
build  up  worlds  out  of  fact,  but  will  could  originate,
modify,  produce  facts  and  characters  ;  that  is  where
you  should  have  looked  for  the  new  spiritual  world
that  was  to  supplement  primary  nature,  and  be  the
content  affirmed  in  our  volition.  But  the  circle  in
this  statement  shows  how  little  it  can  help  us.  Will
was  to  create  the  content  of  will.  Well  and  good,
but  what  could  it  create  beyond  what  it  could  con-
ceive ?  and  what  new  thing  was  it  to  conceive,
seeing  that  thought  could  add  nothing  out  of  any
content  of  its  own  to  the  object-world  of  primary
nature. Where were the ideas, the clues, the


I02  THE  MIRACLE OF WILL  lect.

directions  of  experience  to  come  from  that  were  to
Qfuide  towards  satisfaction  the  creative  will?  Was
it  to  create  first,  and  think  its  creations  afterwards  ?
Something  occurs  that  is  analogous  to  this  in  the
contrast  of  practice  and  reflection,  but  it  is  im-
possible to  push  the  contrast  to  the  end.  Really
blind  will,  experimenting  wholly  without  a  clue,
could  not,  except  for  the  wildest  voluntarism,  be  the
power  that  was  to  build  up  the  world  of  satisfaction
for  finite  minds.  What  was  the  secret  I  had  missed  ?
All  these  questions  reinforced  the  impression  of
vacancy  made  by  the  formal  and  naturalist  theories
just  referred  to.  It  seemed  clear  that  something
further  must  be  noted  in  the  nature  of  thought,  and
of  will  so  far  as  dependent  upon  thought,  if  we
were  ever  to  understand  either  the  inventive  and
expansive  side  of  knowledge,  or,  what  is  closely
akin  to  it,  the  creative  aspect  of  will,  and  its
practical  power  over  circumstance.
Solution  in  3-  And  the  solution  of  the  difficulty  seemed  to
ferm^^  me  to  Spring  from  the  careful  and  sympathetic
There  is gtudv, anticipated by  the attitude of  the greatest

always  -''  ^  ^  Tr-i-i

a  larger  thinkers, and developed by post- Kantian phuo-

viewthan  sophy,  of  thought as actually  at  work  in  building

LndwIiT"  up  knowledge,  and  of  the  kindred  side  of  will ;  will,

pdnTpie"  that  is,  as  actually  employed  in  building  up  morality

iTthir""'^  — amplifying  and  further  determining  the  system  in

Secret  lies  which  it  fiuds  its  Satisfaction.

in  what  ,,._,  ii/-itt  j

works  in  The  difficulty  as  really  felt — if  1 may  repeat  and

the  mind,  .  i  i  r  i

and  on  the  summarisc — was  to  see  how  the  treedom  or  cen-
trality,  or  active  originality  of  thought  and  will —
whatever  term  seems  best  to  express  their  difference
from  external  objects  and  their  claim  in  some  way
to  predominate  over  such  objects — to  see  how  any


situation.


IV  TH2 'fTSEQS— STrrENOTS OTSHS  103

such  characteristic  could  practically  help  us,  in  view
of  facts  and  situations  p7nma  facie  given,  to  deeper
points  of  view  and  to  higher  and  wider  possibilities
of  action.

Here,  say,  is  a  limited  group  of  facts,  involving
for  intelligent  apprehension  a  limited  complex  of
relations  ;  there,  again,  or  in  that  same  group  of
facts,  is  a  situation  involving  certain  possibilities  of
action,  and,  apparently,  no  more.  Can  thought  find
characteristics  in  the  one,  or  can  will  find  openings
in  the  other,  beyond  those  which  the  direct  appre-
hension of  the  complex  in  each  case,  as  an  outsider
might  sum  it  up,  renders  necessary  ?  A  solution
depending  on  the  contribution  by  thought  of  a  priori
principles  of  knowledge,  or  by  will  of  a  priori
principles  of  morality,  coming  as  if  made  "  of  whole
cloth  "  qua  additional  gifts  from  "  the  mind,"  we  could
not  find  credible  in  itself;  and  experience  shows,  as
we  noted  above,  that  it  has  really  nothing  to  say.
What  service,  then,  do  we  practically  receive  from
the  pre-eminence  of  mind  or  its  omnipotentiality
and  tendency  to  form  a  whole,  if  its  operation  is
thus  limited  by  presentation,  more  than  if  it  were  a
servile  faculty,  registering  or  copying  external  facts
and  things  ?

In  attempting  to  answer  this  particular  form  of
the  question  of  freedom,  which  seems  to  me  to  be
at  the  root  of  much  of  the  difficulty  found  by
practical  men  in  philosophical  views  of  the  subject,
I  am  doing  nothing  more  than  to  read  in  connection
the  logical  and  ethical  sides  of  familiar  doctrines.
To  begin  with,  I  am  working  with  the  idea  which
I  have  maintained  throughout,  that  the  universe  is
one,  and  each  finite  mind  a  factor  in  the  effort  which


I04  THE  MIRACLE  OF WILL  lect.

sustains  its  unity.  Therefore  in  every  finite  com-
plex or  situation  there  are  openings  into,  connections
with,  fuller  complexes  and  wider  situations,^  inclusion
in  which  by  the  mind  would  transform  the  given.
And  these  larger  visions  and  arrangements — more
determinate,  not  more  superficially  wide — are  in
principle  within  the  capacity  of  mind  as  such,
because  everything  is  so.  But  how  —  and  here
is  the  crux  we  have  been  insisting  on — is  a  mind
to  get  at  them  ?  If  it  does  not  see  them,  you  may
say,  it  does  not.  Ex  hypothesi  it  possesses  no
formal  deductive  principles  covering  the  particulars
of  the  case,  to  take  it  further  by  abstract  argument.
And  even  Inductive  law,  if  it  could  find  one,  would,
according  to  the  common  formula,  only  tell  it  that
if  the  complex  is  repeated — it  is  repeated.

How  then  can  it  move  except  by  a  fortunate
change  in  presentation,  modifying  the  suggestions
of  the  apprehended  complex  ?  I  do  not  say  that  it
can  move  without  a  change  in  presentation  ;  but
the  relevancy  and  direction  of  the  change  need
not  depend  on  chance.  The  point  is  this.  The
mind,  of  course,  has  a  filling  before  it  is  self-
conscious,  or  it  could  never  become  so.  Its  uni-
versality or  nisus  to  the  whole  is  so  far  governed
and  directed  by  its  filling.  Now  when  a  mind,
whose  working  has  thus  identified  itself  with  a
concrete  principle,  scrutinises  a  concrete  complex
or  situation,  the  operation  which  takes  place  is  quite
different  from  formal  Deduction  or  formal  Induc-
tion, though  it  is  prior  to  both,  and  is  the  real  fact
which  they  represent. Formal  Deduction  analyses

1 Plato's Meno, 8l,  rrjs cfi'vcreo}? aTrd(rr]s (xvyyevovi overt]';, kuI


IV  THE  POWER OF  THOUGHT  TO ''ELICIT'' 105

such  a  scrutiny  and  its  results.  Formal  Induction
applies  negative  tests  of  coherence  to  its  result.^
But  the  real  growing  point  is  where  a  mind  possessed
of,  or  rather  by,  a  principle  applies  it  to  the  given
(in  "apperception,"  if  we  like  to  say  so)  so  as  to
make  it  a  clue  which  selects  and  justifies  the  con-
nection of  the  given  with  something  beyond,  different
from  it  but  kindred  with  it.  Then  the  result  is  at
once  a  true  derivative  and  a  genuine  novelty  or
creation."

And  in  this  way  either  thought,  or  thinking
volition,  may  transform  a  complex  or  a  situation,
which  is  unfertile  to  mere  contemplative  appre-
hension or  to  formal  inference.  You  do  not  in
such  a  case  work  a  priori,  without  and  beyond
facts, except in the sense in which all finite

1  Author's  Logic,  ed.  2,  vol.  ii.  p.  174  fif.

2  See  the  latter  part  of  section  308  of  Green's  Prolegomena  to
Ethics.  It  is  on  the  combination  of  such  ideas  as  those  indicated  in
this  passage,  with  logical  analyses  due  to  Green  himself  and  to  others
since  Hegel,  that  the  doctrine  of  the  text  is  founded.  I  quote  one
or  two  sentences  from  the  passage  referred  to  :  "A  proposition  of
geometry,  from  which  by  mere  analysis  no  truth  could  be  derived
which  was  not  already  contained  in  it,  becomes  fertile  of  new  truth
when  applied  by  the  geometer  to  a  new  construction.  A  rule  of
law,  barren  to  mere  analysis,  yields  new  rules  when  interpreted  by
the  judge  in  relation  to  new  cases.  And  thus  a  general  ethical
proposition,  which  by  itself  is  merely  a  record  of  past  moral  judg-
ments, and  from  which  by  mere  analysis  no  rules  of  conduct  could  be
derived  but  such  as  have  been  already  accepted  and  embodied  by  it,
becomes  a  source  of  new  practical  direction  when  applied  by  con-
science, working  under  a  felt  necessity  of  seeking  the  best,  to  circum-
stances previously  not  existent  or  not  considered,  or  to  some  new
lesson  of  experience."  With  this  compare  my  view  of  the  real  nature
of  Induction  {Logic,  ed.  2,  vol.  ii.  p.  174)  and  the  interpretation
of  the  movement  of  Hegel's  Dialectic  given  by  Mr.  Bradley
{Principles  of  Logic,  pp.  381-2)  and  Dr.  McTaggart  {Studies  in
Hegelian  Dialectic,  sect.  9),  the  point  being  that  the  whole,  active
in  the  mind,  operates  upon  what  is  before  the  mind  as  a  criticism  and
a  demand.  The  whole  growth  of  society  and  civilisation,  as  objective
mind  and  will,  is  due  to  a  movement  of  this  kind.


io6  THE  MIRACLE  OF WILL  lrct.

experience  is  always  beyond  itself.  You  work  by
a  light  which  shows  you  relevant  facts,  or  the
relevance  of  facts,  and  the  operation  of  which  is
the  same  thing  which  we  have  described  in
Pj'inciple  as  the  reshaping  of  our  world  by  itself
under  the  influence  of  the  nisus  of  mind  to  the
whole.  The  facts  whose  relevance  you  are  led  to
perceive  do  not  syllogistically  come  under  the
principle  which  is  the  clue,  as  particulars  under
their  major  premiss.  They  are  fresh  applications
or  developments  of  the  principle,  and  you  make  it
their  major  premiss,  if  at  all,  after  you  have  made
the  applications  and  developments.  Work  of  this
kind  is  the  mainspring  and  essence  of  thinking  ^  and
of  will.

For  Logic,  i.e.  when  the  question  is  of  an  exten-
sion of  knowledge,  you  find  the  typical  case  in  any
expert  judgment.  Suppose  a  man,  full  of  the  gold-
seeker's  experience  and  yearning,  meeting  with  a
topography  and  geological  formation  which  he  re-
cognises as  characteristic  of  the  presence  of  gold.
At  once  the  apprehended  complex  becomes  to  him
a  new  thing,  because  an  application  of  an  old  thing.
It  is,  of  course,  not  a  mere  repeat.  It  is  a  new
application  of  a  principle,  which  is  seen  to  be
embodied  in  certain  facts  DuUatis  mutandis ;  and
the  expectation,  again,  is  not  a  repeat,  but  new  and
a  creation.

So  with  a  moral  situation.  Consider  one  in
which  a  complex  of  interests  and  even  duties  seems
in hopeless internal conflict ; seems  so,  that  is  to

^  The  whole  of  the  author's  Logic^  and  not  merely  the  paragraphs
on  Induction  above  referred  to,  is  an  attempt  to  place  the  thought-
function  in  this  lisfht.


IV THERE  IS  ALWAYS  A FRUITFUL COURSE 107

say,  prima  facie,  or  to  the  outsider's  eye.  Let  it
be,  e.g.,  such  as  might  be  used  in  a  text-book  for
an  example  of  the  futihty  of  rational  construction  in
problems  of  conduct.  In  such  a  situation  a  con-
crete scrutiny  by  a  mind  possessed  with  an  unselfish
principle  of  action  ^  must,  we  may  say  fearlessly,
always  raise  the  level  of  rationality  in  the  situation
as  a  whole.  Thereby  ipso  facto  a  fair  solution  is
made  incomparably  more  possible  than  a  formal
enumeration  of  the  prima  facie  alternatives  would
suggest.^  The  situation  is  actually  changed  by  a
clue  that  reveals  in  it  new  factors.

Now  of  course  all  this  reasoning  is  open  to  the
criticism  which  depends  on  supposing  the  best  to
have  been  tried  and  failed — a  supposition  so  easy  to
make  in  a  text-book,  for  who  can  deny  that  our  best
efforts  will  sometimes  fail  ?  But  I  must  persist
that  our  view  is  not  dependent  on  mere  chance,  but
relies  on  forces  which  always  and  necessarily  pro-
duce sorne  effect,  and  if  they  have  failed  on  the
whole,  have  yet  altered  the  situation  before  they
failed.  It  is  easy  to  retort,  "Oh,  yes;  e/"  you  are
really  possessed  by  a  principle,  and  2/"  it  is  a  fruitful
and  relevant  one,  then  you  can  always  promote  a
solution.  That  is  no  news.  But  suppose  you  have
none  ;  or  that  what  you  have  is  proved  unfruitful,
by  the  facts  and  circumstances  remaining  stubborn

1  What  right  have  we  to  say  "  unselfish  "  ?  How  is  that  part  of
its  logical  or  solution-making  quality?  Because  it  corresponds  to  the
organising  or  guiding  quality  of  the  principle  we  have  postulated  in  a
parallel  case  for  knowledge.  The  whole  point  is  that  it  must  be  a
clue  to  a  larger  complex.

2  I  have  heard  it  well  suggested  that  when  causes  of  failure  in
social  help  are  being  set  down,  there  should  always  be  a  heading  for
"  Incompetence  of  the  Helper."  In  principle  there  always  must  be  a
solution for  the  reason  in  the  text.


io8  THE  MIRACLE OF WILL  lect.

and  unresolved  under  your  intensest  and  widest
scrutiny."  We  shall  throw  a  stronger  light  on  the
very  knot  of  this  criticism  directly,  when  we  instance
the  extreme  case  of  overcoming  moral  and  physical
impossibility,  or  what  passes  for  it.  But  here,  before
dealing  with  examples,  I  wish  to  insist  on  the  matter
of  principle.  In  principle,  a  fruitful  thought  and
course  is  always  open  ;  for  the  whole  of  the  universe
is  accessible  by  some  path  or  other  from  every  com-
plex within  it.  In  principle,  again,  you — the  finite
mind — have  always  a  clue  to  a  relatively  fruitful
thought  or  act,  because  every  demand  of  mind,
pressed  thoroughly  home,  must  ultimately  bring
you  to  all  that  mind  can  be.^  Thus  to  fail  of  fruit-
ful thought  or  choice  is  in  the  main  to  fail,  as  we  all
constantly  fail,  in  sincerity  and  thoroughness.  Now
we  have  already  ^  dealt  with  empty  Free  Will,  and
need  not  here  discuss  whether  there  is  sense  in
saying  that  ohne  weiteres  "we  could  have  been"
more  sincere  and  unselfish  —  or,  in  a  scientific
problem,  more  relevantly  inspired,  than  we  were.
But  no  one  need,  or  can,  dispute  that  if  we  had
thoroughly  penetrated  the  necessity  that  vistas  must
be  open  from  every  circumstance  and  situation  to  a
more  satisfactory  complex,  and  that  what  is  neces-
sary is  the  giving  ourselves  wholly  to  our  best
inspiration  in  its  bearing  on  the  concrete  facts,  we
could  all,  under  the  influence  of  such  a  conviction,
have  been  in  some  degree  other  than  we  were
without  it. If  our  doctrine  is  made  out,  this  con-

1  "  It  seems  as  if  any  emotion  [and  we  might  say,  any  line  of
action],  if  sufficiently  thorough-going,  would  take  one  to  heaven "
(R.  L.  Nettleship,  Remains,  i.  96).  Of  course  it  will,  as  we  said,  take
you  faster  if  it  is  unselfish.  Otherwise  it  must  transmute  itself,  and
that  takes  time  and  pain.  ^  Principle,  p.  342.


IV  NATURAL  BASIS  OF  CIVILISATION  109

viction  is  justified  up  to  the  hilt,  and  the  power  of
thought  and  will,  which  is  what  people  constantly-
mean  when  they  speak  of  their  freedom,  is  vindi-
cated in  a  high  degree.  On  the  whole,  and  in
ultimate  doctrine,  it  is  true  that  given  finite  facts
cannot  maintain  their  fixed  narrowness  against
thought,  and  given  finite  circumstance  cannot
stand  against  will  and  character.  And  this  is
not  opposed  to  the  view  we  have  taken  through-
out of  mind's  debt  to  externality  ;  but,  on  the
contrary,  could  not  be  maintained  on  any  other
basis. It  is  the  dialectic  of  externality  itself.

4. In  order  to  attach  the  doctrine  of  the  previous  Examples

1 . . ,  1  1  to  confirm

section  more  explicitly  to  recent  theory,  and,  more-  above
over,  to  insist  on  its  bearing  as  a  more effective  aSngel
account  of  the  creative  power  of  will  than  any  view  ^°  ^^  ^°

A  "'  answer

which  disconnects  it  from  thoue^ht  proper,^  we  will  questions
now  return  to  the  two  questions  of  page  98,  and
arrange the examples we are to offer so as to
indicate  the  answers  to  them.

a.  What  is  the  source  of  the  concrete  content  of
will  ?  and

/3.  What  is  the  nature  and  what  are  the  limits
of  the  power  of  will  over  environment,  or,  in  other
words,  of  character  over  circumstance  ?

a. I take  the  concrete  content  of  will  to  be  all  The

..,.,  .  ......  source

that  IS  included  in  the  terms  society  and  civilisation,  of  the
construed  in  the  widest sense as equivalent  to  a  ^°"^f]"^
definition  of  humanity.^ The  source  of  this con-  Examples,
tent  is  thus  the  environment  of  man,  consisting  of

1  I.e.  as  I  understand,  the  consideration  of  experiences  with
reference  to  their  meanings,  or,  in  other  words,  as  members  of  a
connected  world.

2  I  take  humanity  not  as  probably  all  there  is  of  finite  mind,  but
as  what  we  have  to  deal  with,  and  as  its  typical  case.


no  THE  MIRACLE OF WILL  lect.

organic  and  inorganic  nature,  so  far  as  we  can
conceive  it  apart  from  the  reaction  of  finite  mind
upon  it.  The  creation  or  "  eliciting  "  of  the  content
from  this  source  is  the  work  of  thinking  voHtion,^
operating  in  the  way  which  has  just  been  analysed,
upon  the  various  complexes  and  situations  presented
before  the  mind,  and  also  within  it  in  virtue  of  its
identification  with  an  animal  organism.  In  principle,
every  physical  feature  of  the  external  world,  every
instinct  and  desire  of  the  animal  nature,  is  a  fact,  or
is  in  a  complex,  of  which  it  is  true  to  say  that  an
opening  leads  from  it  to  some  further  complex  in
which  it  is  transformed.  The  thinking  will,  work-
ing always  through  the  tendency  of  thought  to  the
whole,  embodied  in  this  or  that  impulse  or  desire,
upon  the  complexes  relatively  given  to  it,  finds
always  a  path  or  opening  which  leads  to  this
or  that  larger  continuous  complex,  and,  pursuing
it,  makes  and  adopts  the  changes  which  the
newly  presented  facts  and  combination  suggest
and  present.

An  example  of  universal  significance  going  to
the  very  heart  of  all  spiritual  development  is  the
case  of  language.  Without  entering  into  contested
matter,  we  may  safely  state  it  thus,  in  general  terms
of  our  theory  :  The  "  consciousness  of  kind  " — an
animal  instinct — inspired  by  the  nascent  demands
of  thought  for  communication  based  on  a  common
world, and so induced to make the most of  the

1  It  is  unnecessary  from  this  point  forward  to  repeat  the  separate
reference  to  thought.  The  essential  character  of  its  connection  with
will  is  plain  from  what  has  been  said.  But  for  clearness'  sake  we  will
distinguish  below  the  concrete  development  of  the  man  as  a  moral
will  from  morality  conceived  as  a  system  of  personal  virtues — an
imperfect  view,  tending  to  a  dangerous  individualism.


IV  TIME  AND SPACE IN  ETHICS  iii

existent  facts  of  animal  utterance  and  incipient
communication  through  sound,  must  have  set  on
both  scrutiny  and  experiment  to  utilise  and  to  adapt
all  possible  articulations  both  of  sound  and  of  mean-
ing. By  attention  and  experiment  the  thinking  will
— itself,  of  course,  undergoing  development  pari
passu — must  have  thus  found  the  way  from  the
complex  of  natural  sounds  to  the  significant  whole
of  language,  the  very  sounds  and  their  organs
undergoing  transformation  e7i  route.  Thus  was
created,  it  might  be  said,  a  vast  multitude  of  facts
which  were  natural  and  yet  not  natural — not  beyond
or  discontinuous  with  the  organic  processes  of  nature,
but  yet  a  complete  readjustment  and  transformation
as  compared  with  any  facts  which  could  be  given  by
nature  apart  from  thinking  mind.  Just  so  a  house
has  in  it  nothing  but  natural  facts,  and  yet  could  not
be  given  by  nature  apart  from  thought.  What
makes  this  peculiar  relation  possible — the  relation
which  we  called  indifferently  creation  or  "eliciting"
— is  what  we  insisted  on  above.  There  is  a  road
from  every  natural  group  of  facts  to  every  spiritual
reality  in  the  universe  ;  and  the  essential  nature  of
mind  forces  it  always  in  some  degree  to  traverse
this  road,  and  that  in  the  direction  from  less  to
more.^

A  further  and  very  relevant  example,  which  I
have  analysed  in  detail  elsewhere,  is  the  spiritual
significance  taken  on  by  what  2X&  prima  facie  mere
temporal  and  spatial  relations  in  the  moral  develop-
ment of  the  family  and  of  society." The  mere  pro-

^  Except  in  sin  and  error,  of  which  wc  will  speak  by  themselves.
The  progress  in  them  is  indirect.

-  Philosophical  Theory  of  the  State,  ch.  xi.  And  cf.  R.  L.
Nettlcship,  Remahis,  i. 329,  cited  Priiiciplc^  p. 56,  on  the  further


112  THE  MIRACLE OF WILL  LECT.

longation  of  the  period  of  parental  care,  the  very
indifference  of  space,  which  makes  neighbourhood
certain  to  become  a  problem  of  aliens  as  well  as  of
kinsmen,  are  characters  of  relatively  given  com-
plexes of  fact  or  circumstance,  which,  when  attended
to  and  reacted  on  by  the  thinking  will,  "  elicit "
feelings,  attributes,  habits,  institutions,  which  are
morally  and  spiritually  new  things — and,  in  a  sense,
are  new  even  physically.  "  Institutions" — here  we
have  perhaps  the  most  important  keyword  in  this
problem  of  volitional  creation.  Mere  facts,  e.g.  the
eating  of  food  together — i.e.  in  spatial  proximity —
become  "  institutions  "  when  the  thinking  will,  having
noted  their  connections  and  further  implications,  has
reacted  upon  them  so  as  to  stamp  them  as  symbols,
elements  belonging  to  and  indicating  further  and
larger  complexes  than  those  to  which,  as  natural
facts,  they  belong.  It  traces  and  notes  and  practic-
ally relies  on  this  significance,  because  it  is  animated
by  some  desire  or  impulse — say  the  "consciousness
of  kind  " — which  is  one  for  the  moment  with  the
demand  for  unity  and  completeness  possessed  by
will  qua  intelligence  or  thought.  It  operates  there-
fore in  the  way  analysed  above,  and  this  is  the
creative  path  by  which  the  content  of  will — the
second  or  spiritual  world  and  nature — comes  into
finite  form,  as  a  factor  in  the  tension  by  which  the
Absolute  passes  into  and  out  of  its  externality.

The  point  is  familiar,  though  of  vast  importance,
and  need  not  be  laboured  further.  It  is,  in  sub-
stance, the  well-known  doctrine  of  objective  mind
and will. We have only to repeat, what many

determination  of  a  second  of  time,  the  highest  case  mentioned  being
its  place  in  a  moral  action.


IV  ''CIRCUMSTANCE''  IMPLIES  A CENTRE  113

great  men  have  explained  at  length,^  that  in  this
world  of  content,  the  work  of  thinking  will,  we
have  in  an  external  and  factual  form  the  body  and
substance  of  thinking  will  itself.  Here  is  its  con-
crete and  actual  content,  what  it  finds  to  afhrm  in
its  volition  from  moment  to  moment,  and  what
forms  the  steps  and  systematic  connections  by  which
its  self-expression  from  day  to  day  is  linked  with
— enters  into — the  total  world  of  its  satisfaction  in  a
law  which  is  at  once  its  own  nature,  and  a  high
expression  of  the  Absolute.  What  a  contrast  with
the  abstract  formalism  of  Hedonistic  or  Intuitionist
axioms !  We  have  seen  the  process  of  creation  of
this  world,  and  have,  I  hope,  fairly  analysed  the
plain  meaning  of  our  magical  formula,  that  the
spiritual  world  is  "elicited"  from  the  primarily
natural  by  the  activity  of  the  thinking  will.  We
should  note,  further,  that  in  eliciting  this  the  will
is  by  the  same  operation  eliciting  a  definite  and
adapted  shape  of  itself.  Thus  the  creative  process
of  volition  is  the  process  of  moulding  by  natural
selection  as  interpreted  from  the  point  of  view  of
the  soul  which  is  being  moulded.  We  are  finding
our  self  in  the  world  as  the  world  comes  to  life  in
our  self.

This  creation  of  a  world  is  the  fundamental  proof
and  example  of  the  power  of  will.  Every  jot  and
tittle  of  this  world  is  a  volitional  transformation  of  a
relatively  natural  fact.

/3. What  is  called  the  power  of  will  or  character  Nature
over  circumstances  rests  essentially  on  the  relation  o? the"^"^

Flower  of
^ Notably Mr. F. H. Bradley in Ethical  Sitcdies, to a great  character

extent following Vatke's Menschliche Freiheit^ and parallel with  over  cir-

Green's  Prole^omctia. The  whole  position  comes,  of  course,  through  cumstance.

Hegel  from  Plato.  '^^^'^  "'"'"^


114  THE  MIRACLE  OF  WILL  lect.

"circum- explained  above. There are^ always  larger  corn-
indicates plexes  connected  with  any  complex  of  circumstances
potnt^of^ presented  to  finite  mind,  and  thinking  will  is  norm-
vievv. g^ijy.  Qj^  ^^  upward  road to the larger  and more
complete  of  such  complexes. The  whole  formation
of  the  world of  will  by  transfiguration  of  natural
fact  is  the  proof  and  province  of  the  power  of  will.
And  character  is  merely  habitual  will.

The  only  reason  for  devoting  a  special  treatment
to  the  power  of  character  over  circumstance  is  that
our  general  doctrine  might  be  passed  over  as  a
metaphysical  speculation  on  the  large  scale,  hardly
worth  denying  ;  while  its  straightforward  application
to  emergencies  within  present  finite  life  might  still
meet  with  obstinate  opposition,  as  if  asserting  some-
thing magical  and  superstitious.  It  is  therefore
worth  while  to  point  out  the  nature  and  limits  of
its  actual  realisation.

"Circumstance,"  for  this  purpose,  is  not  the
imaginary  world  of  purely  natural  fact  which  we
took  as  the  ideal  terminus  a  quo  in  tracing  the
history  of  spiritual  development.  It  is  circumstance
as  we  know  it  and  constantly  speak  of  it ;  that  is,  as
I  explained  before,-  a  fragment  of  the  world  centred
in  the  self  or  mind  which  it  "stands  round."  It  is
therefore,  if  taken  in  the  full  life  and  context  implied
by  its  name,  no  longer  a  mere  fact,  but  a  self,  or
living  world  concentrated  in  a  consciousness  ;  while,
taken  as  a  mere  fact,  or  mere  "circumstance,"  apart
from  the  centre  which  it  implies,  it  admits  its  own
actual  relativity  and  exposes  its  own  false  absolute-

1  In what sense, in finding the larger outlooks, the will is
"creative"  depends  on  the  doctrine  oi  PriTidpIe^  Lect.  IX.

2  Principle^  Lect.  IX.  p.  325.


IV  THE  POWER OF  THE  LARGER VIEW  115

ness.  Of  such  a  nature  are  what  we  call  a
man's  "  circumstances "  when  externally  observed
and  accepted  as  conditions  common  to  him  and
others.

Thus,  if  we  follow  the  track  of  our  discussion,  it
is  plain  that,  just  as  we  observed  every  experience
to  be  beyond  itself,  so  every  circumstance,  taken  in
the  full  nature  which  the  word  implies,  is  much  more
than  a  "circumstance"  in  the  current  sense.  For
in  the  former  it  is  a  member  in  a  living  world  ;  in
the  latter  it  is  a  fragment,  endowed  with  false
absoluteness  by  the  assumptions  of  external  observa-
tion. Of  course,  it  is  possible  for  a  man's  own
observation  of  his  circumstances  or  situation  to  be
external  in  its  character,  and  for  that  of  an  outsider
to  be  more  concrete  and  vital.

The  very  name  of  "circumstance,"  then,  we  see,
goes  far  to  explain,  in  terms  of  our  theory,  the
power  of  character  over  it.  A  set  of  circumstances
is,  as  currently  taken,  a  fragment  or  collection  of
fragments  of  facts,  hardened  by  external  observa-
tion, while  its  own  immediate  reality,  to  go  no
further,  is  the  world  of  a  self,  relatively  ample
and  complete,  organised,  and  animated  by  a  mind
which  is,  ex  kypotkesi,  charged  with  connections,
and  has  very  much  in  it  beyond  what  it  has  before
it.  This  is  enough  to  explain  how  the  organised
self,  with  the  life  of  thought  in  it,  should  be  able  to
operate  on  any  limited  set  of  conditions  within  its
world  from  a  more  powerful  and  effective  point  of
view  than  that  for  which  they  are  mere  circum-
stances.' There  are  always,  we  remember, open

1  Here  is  Plato's  account  of  what  the  knowledge  of  the  dyadov
can effect as a clue to life {Rep. 434  !?)• I paraphrase  freely,


ii6


THE  MIRACLE OF WILL


LECT.


ings  to  the  larger  horizons,  and  the  thinking  will  is
in  principle  always  in  search  of  them.  And  char-
acter is  just  the  habitual  will,  maintaining  the
vigilance  involved  in  thought,  and  a  relative  eleva-
tion of  look-out  point.^
Instances  I A  Instances are innumerable. Take, for  ex-

oftraasfor-  i  i  i •  r i  y^

mation  of  ample,  the  history  oi  the  Co-operative  movement
stances  i^  Great  Britain.  A  few  working  men,  desiring
Rochdale  ^^  g^^  their  groceries  without  a  middleman,  and
therefore to work in the  consumers'  interest and


Pioneers
and  others


not  to  make  a  trading  profit,  joined  in  setting  up  a
shop,  and  contrived  a  simple  system  of  dividing  the
profit  among  the  consumers.  From  this  simple
act  and  plan  of  co-operation  ^  sprang  the  vast  Co-
operative movement  in  England  and  Scotland,  an
ethical,  educative,  and  economic  force  of  the  highest
importance  in  the  development  of  British  democracy.


giving  what  I  believe  to  be  Plato's  intention.  "A  man  who
knows  the  nature  of  good,  or  even  recognises  anything  as  good,
must  be  able  to  distinguish  in  thought  the  principle  of  the  good,
discerning  it  from  everything  else,  and,  as  if  in  battle,  carrying  it
successfully  through  every  theoretical  and  practical  test,  facing
supreme  problems,  not  mere  whims  and  fancies,  and  coming  through
to  the  end  without  an  inconsistency  in  his  principle."  One  knows,
on  the  other  hand,  too  well,  how,  by  an  abstract  account  of  his
position,  a  man  can  prove  to  another,  who  cannot  possibly  possess
the  means  of  refuting  him,  that  it  ties  him  absolutely  down  to  a
given  course — that  which  he  in  his  heart  prefers.

^  Cf.  Inaugural  Address  at  St.  Andrews,  Blackwood^  1903,  on
the  practical  value  of  a  lofty  standard.  See  also  Lane  Cooper,
Function  of  the  Leader  in  Scholarship  {lXh2iCSi,  191 1)-  I  once  asked
an  able  practical  man,  well  acquainted  with  the  Society  of  Friends,
how  he  accounted  for  their  habitual  success  in  business.  He  answered
primarily  that  the  habit  of  exercising  conscientious  judgment  from  a
high  standpoint  on  all  questions  of  conduct  tended  to  give  them  "  a
right  judgment  in  all  things."

-  This,  as  I  understand,  is  the  history  of  the  Co-operative  move-
ment in  the  sense  now  accepted,  from  the  Rochdale  Pioneers  onwards.
Of  course  in  a  full  history  of  the  kindred  movements  and  influences
many  more  points  would  have  to  be  mentioned.


IV


''CETTE  B^TE  DE  MOT"  117


So  with  Trades  Unionism,  primarily,  I  take  it,  a
scheme  or  combination  to  maintain  or  raise  the  rate
of  wages,  but  at  the  present  day  an  immense  power
representing  in  a  great  measure  the  social  and
political  ideals  of  working  men.^  In  these  and
countless  other  instances  the  eager  and  vigilant
thinking  will,  pressing  hard  upon  the  fundamental
fact  that  all  life  is  connected,  and  following  up  clues
to  fact  and  action  in  the  manner  analysed  above,
has  "elicited"  step  by  step,  apparently  out  of  the
barest  circumstances,  but  really  out  of  the  whole
of  social  life  implied  in  them,  and  in  the  minds
operating  upon  them,  constructions  dealing  with
vast  problems,  far  beyond  the  two  or  three
simple  facts  in  confronting  which  they  took  their
origin.'

(2) A  very  instructive  extreme case is in the  Relation  of
power  of  character  against so-called physical im-  tosocaiied
possibility. Theory  is  here  at  a  great  disadvantage  ^^^'^^^,_
from its habit of  dealing  with hypothetical cases  ^|g^^,^
rather  than  with  actual  facts. There  must  be  situa-  tivityof

physical

tions.  pfroups  of  circumstances,  in  which  will  cannot  impossi-

^  ^  ,  . ,  T-1 . bility.

possibly execute its preconceived purpose. 1  nis  Distinction
inevitable  admission  is  accepted,  and becomes an  X''/!S
unanalysed factor in theory, a hard  barrier,  sup-  J^^^^  ^^
posed  to  exist  at  some  definite  point,  against the  wiii.
power  of  will. We  are  thus  misled  into  failing  to
enquire  how  far  and  to  what  such  impossibility  is
relative ; and how far,  therefore, physical impos-

1  I  speak  of  facts.  I  am  not  entering  into  controversy  about  the
merits  of  labour  ideals  and  methods.

2  It  will  very  likely  be  observed  upon  this  account  that,  e.g.,  the
first  co-operators  had  consciously  very  large  problems  l)cforc  them  m
germ.  But,  so  far  as  it  was  so,  this  was  only  the  beginning  ot  the
very  process  wc  are  describing.


ii8  THE  MIRACLE OF WILL  i,ect.

sibility  is  an  unmodifiable  barrier,  how  far  a  case
of  the  rarity  of  the  adequate  will.^

And  so  two  irrational  attitudes  are  promoted  ;
one  magical  and  superstitious,  demanding  no
rationale  of  the  power  of  will,  and  so  holding  it
to  be  capable  of  vast  physical  and  moral  achieve-
ments by  its  mere  fiat ; "  the  other  fatalistic,  holding
it  as  a  permanent  and  not  an  abnormal  condition  that

"  Things  are  in  the  saddle,
And  ride  mankind."

Now  what  stares  us  in  the  face  is  this.  Physical
impossibility,  to  a  very  great  and  indefinite  extent,
is  relative.  It  is  relative  to  the  agent's  or  agents'
strength,  motive,  ability,  and  time.  "  Oh,  yes,"  the
retort  may  come,  "  but  every  one  knows  the  outer
limits  of  human  strength  and  wits,  and  how  soon
you  come  to  them."  But  none  the  less,  we  must
insist,  the  area  covered  by  the  relativity  is  really
immense.  Our  current  estimates  of  impossibility
do  not  relate  to  the  outer  limit  of  all  human  power,
but  to  a  most  unreliable  judgment  of  average  ability
and  circumstance,  modified  to  suit  particular  cases,
and  varying  as  regards  even  the  same  person
according  to  supposed  motive  and  occasion.  Then
this  varying  and  unreliable  estimate  is  apt  to  be
confused  with  the  ideal  outer  limit  of  human  powers,
and  its  unreliability,  and  the  true  malleability  of
circumstance  to  the  thinking  will,  are  therefore  not
attended  to.

^  It  may  be  objected  that  you  cannot  will  in  face  of  a  recognised
impossibility.  But  then  our  question  would  be  in  what  situations  you
would  be  right  in  recognising  impossibility.

-  Cf.  Mr.  Bradley's  remark  that,  in  consequence  of  extreme
Libertarian  ideas,  people  are  not  careful  enough  in  avoiding  tempta-
tions, which  is  really  a  plain  duty  {Ethical  Studies,  p.  44).


IV  ABSTRACTION  IS THE  ENEMY  119

If  I  am  locked  up  in  a  room  by  accident,  and  the
bell  is  broken,  and  there  is  no  urgency,  I  shall  com-
monly say  that  it  is  "impossible"  for  me  to  get  out
till  some  one  happens  to  come.  But  if  the  building
is  on  fire,  it  becomes  quite  another  matter,  and
dozens  of  possibilities  of  escape  suggest  themselves
which  otherwise  would  not  have  been  held  rele-
vant.^ Stories  like  that  of  Columbus'  t.^^  go  to
this  point.^

Because,  then,  of  the  road  from  limited  to  less
limited  complexes,  which  will  with  thought  is  always
seeking  and  finding,  it  is  impossible  on  any  definite
principle  to  set  a  limit  to  the  power  of  will.  But  it
must  be  understood  that  it  operates  rationally  and
not  magically,  through  transformation  of  circum-
stance conceived  and  carried  out  by  means  of  clues
by  which  new  groups  of  fact  are  brought  to  bear.

And  it  must  be  noted  that  time  is  a  condition  of
the  first  importance.  The  mind's  power  lies  in  its
relation  to  totality,  but  in  finite  life  this  is  subject  to
succession,  and  totality  is  never  actually  achieved  at
all,  and  never  approached  except  through  succes-
sion. Thus  at  and  in  a  given  moment  will  may  be
practically  powerless  against  circumstance,  of  a  kind
that,  given  a  lifetime  of  preparation  and  organisa-
tion,  is easily dealt  with. Here  you have again

1  We  go  always  on  a  rough  estimate  of  relevancy,  which  is  essential
in  practice,  but  may  be  very  misleading.  Cf.  Mr.  Chesterton's  clever
story  in  which  four  sensible  and  honest  watchers  declare  that  "no
one  "  had  entered  a  certain  house  between  certain  hours.  A  postman
had  ;  but  he  "  did  not  count."

•-  So  in  our  novels  of  adventure  we  watch  with  complacency
circumstances  of  physical  impossibility,  say,  of  an  escape,  being
heaped  up.  For  we  know  that  the  invincible  hero  will  dispose  of
them  by  some  simple  contrivance  or  observation.  The  moral  is  in
itself  quite  sound.


THE  MIRACLE OF WILL  lect.


the  abstract  hypothetical  case.  Put  a  sensible  and
determined  man  in  a  canoe  just  above  Niagara,  and
what  can  he  do  ?  But  if  you  give  him  a  day  or  a
week  of  his  life  before  the  time  suggested  for  the
catastrophe,  it  is  very  unlikely  that  it  will  take  place.
Or,  if  a  capable  man  has  no  food  and  no  money  and  no
employment,  how  can  his  character  help  him  at  the
moment  to  feed  his  children  ?  But  you  must  qualify
the  man  by  his  previous  life,  and  not  treat  him  as
if  he  w^as  just  created,  capable,  and  starving,  and
a  father,  at  the  same  moment ;  and  indeed  one
knows  that  some  people  would  manage  to  feed  their
children  in  such  an  emergency,  while  others  would
not.  The  abstract  case,  taken  as  adequate,  is  the
enemy  here  as  throughout.

There  is  a  final  case  which  must  be  mentioned,
and  which  may  be  set  off  against  the  acknowledged
fact  that  some  achievements  are  absolutely  impossible.
For,  on  the  other  hand,  we  may  say,  it  is  iiever  in
principle  impossible  for  an  adequate  solution  to  be
found  by  will  for  any  situation  whatever.  But  the
solution  may  not  solve  the  problem  qua  physical.

In  following  the  road  to  larger  horizons,  the  will
transforms,  not  only  its  problem,  but  itself.  The
physical  impossibility  may  be  shelved  by  a  new  pur-
pose. And  here  undoubtedly  is  a  secondary  sense
of  the  power  of  will,  which  supplements  the  first,  and
while  useless  by  itself,  seems  to  many  the  principal
factor  in  it. I  mean  courage,  resolution,  decision.

The  nexus  is  this.  The  larger  horizon  will  not
in  finite  life  always  include  the  lesser  without  inter-
ference. In  other  words,  the  higher  solution,  which
transforms  the  will  as  well  as  the  circumstances,
may demand a  sacrifice. It may show that the


IV THE  PRODUCT  IN WILL  AND COGNITION 121

desired  good  can  be  achieved,  and  more  perfectly
than  the  situation  seemed  to  admit.  But  the
achievement,  it  may  become  clear,  must  involve
parting  with  something  which  is  dear  to  us.  Courage
and  decision  will  then  have  to  be  prayed  in  aid  of
the  thinking  will.  "  Strength  "  of  will — courage  and
resolution — becomes  a  condition  of  the  power  of
will.  But  mere  courage  or  strength  of  will  cannot
work  the  miracle  by  itself.  We  must  have  the
transfigured  outlook,  before  we  can  grasp  the
sacrifice  that  will  bring  the  longed-for  solution.

5. The  above  view  depends  on  taking  the  power  wm  and
of  will  to  be  essentially  connected  with  the  character  how  re-
of  thought. The  power  of  will,  if  we  are  right,  lies  dependent
in  "  being  equal  to  the  situation,"  or  on  "  seeing  and  ^"'^'"^
dealing  with  things  as  a  whole,"  or  on  "  seeing  life
as  a  whole." And  this  is  the  fundamental  nature
of  thought  and  mind,  viz.  to  grasp  things  as  a  whole.
I fully  recognise  that  in  will  proper  there  is  a  felt
want of  some special  kind, working  in  the  mind,
which  is  the  peculiar  guide  and  clue  of  thought  on
the particular road to totality which may be in
question. The intensity  of  this  want,  along  with
the formal habit of  constancy and resolution in
adhering to the path one has started on, just
because  one  has  started  on  it,  may  be  called  strength
of  will,  or  formal  self-determination,  in  contrast  with
the  power  of  will,  or  its  ability  to  command  success,
as  explained  above.

These  remarks  apply  alike  to  cognition  and  to
volition  proper.  The  difference  between  thought
as  will  and  thought  as  a  cognition  is  really  a  matter
of  degree,  and  lies  not  on  the  side  of  production  or
initiative — for  in  both  cases  something  is  produced


122  THE  MIRACLE OF WILL  LECT.

or  initiated,  and  by  essentially  the  same  psychological
movement — but  on  the  side  of  the  result  produced.
In  cognition  proper  this  is  a  system  of  ideas,  fulfilling
a  general  conation,  a  roving  commission  so  to
speak,  towards  the  introduction  of  ideal  order  ;
though  huge  exertions  of  will  proper,  producing
external  changes  through  external  appliances,  may
be  subsidiary  and  essential  to  this  result.  In  will
proper  it  is  an  external  change  as  such,  fulfilling  a
more  or  less  special  conation  to  a  more  or  less
foreseen  and  definite  end.

In  spite  of  all  that  has  been  said  to  the  contrary,
the  distinction,  though  inherent  in  finite  life — because
of  the  dual  form  of  thought  and  externality — still
seems  to  me  in  the  main  one  of  degree,  and  one  that
becomes  arbitrary  where  the  margins  meet.  When
you  write  a  book,  is  that — I  do  not  mean  the
distribution  of  time  or  the  manual  exertion,  but  the
essential  work  itself,  the  production  of  ideas  in  an
order,  fulfilling  generally  a  previous  idea  and  inten-
tion of  producing  such  an  order  of  ideas — is  that
cognition  or  volition  ?  And  if  we  change  the
example  to  laying  out  a  garden,  the  production  of
an  order  at  once  ideal  and  external,  fulfilling  specially
a  previous  idea  and  intention  of  producing  such  an
order — is  that  cognition  or  volition  ?  Of  course,  if
you  stop  at  the  superficial  distinction  which  makes
cognition  a  copying  of  things  and  will  a  making  of
them,  you  get  an  apparently  simple  and  radical
difference.  But  that  distinction  is  plainly  false.^
The  two  attitudes  are  sub-cases  of  introducing  order
into  experience,  and  either  turns  at  once  into  the
other,  if  it  meets  the  resistance  characteristic  of  the

1 See  author's  Logic,  ed.  2,  vol.  ii.  ch.  ix.


IV  VOLUNTARISM  TRUNCATES WILL  123

Other  ;  cognition  to  volition  if  I  have  to  strike  a
light  to  see  the  time ;  volition  to  cognition  if  I  have
to  ask  my  way  to  Charing  Cross.

There  are  two  points  which  call  for  remark  in
the  relation  of  this  view  of  will  to  the  opinions  of
to-day. They  are

a.  The  difference  between  thinking  will  and  will
as  conceived  by  voluntarism,  and

yS.  The  degree  in  which  our  view,  both  in
principle  and  in  actual  results,  meets  a  demand
which  has  been  made  with  great  emphasis,  for  more
study  of  ethical  fact  and  experience,  in  contra-
distinction to  argument  from  postulated  principles
and  ideals.

a. I  spoke  of  certain  views  of  ethical  principle  as  Relation
deserving  to  be  called  Intellectualism  in  a  disparaging  Seiwe"er'^
sense.^ Their essence  appeared  to  lie  in  arguing  S^^'^'f
out the content of will from selected general  the  win  of

'-'  voluntar-

postulates,  without  analysis  of  the  concrete  ethical  ism  to  the

.... opinion  of

worlds.  To  such  Intellectualism  our  view  is  decis-  to-day.
ively  opposed.  But  if  Intellectualism  were  to  be
the  name  for  every  view  which  refuses  to  divorce
volition  from  the  essential  nature  of  thought,  an
attribution  unwarranted,  we  hold,  by  theory  or
usage,  then,  and  then  only,  we  should  be  found
among  the  ranks  of  the  Intellectualists.

The  differentiation  of  voluntarism  from  our  view  is
the  counterpart  of  this.  If  Intellectualism  relies  on
naked  principle,  Voluntarism  relies  on  blind  impulse.
For  voluntarism,  as  I  understand  it,  the  nature  of
thought,  the  nisus  towards  the  whole,  to  utterance,
that  is,  in  the  form  of  the  concrete  universal,^  is  not
present  in  will. Will  is  for  it  the  blind  underlying

1  Above,  p.  99.  ^  See  Principle^  Lect.  II.


124  THE  MIRACLE OF WILL  lect.

impulse  of  all  change,  life,  and  action.^  Its  unity,  if
any  is  implied  in  it,  is  that  of  an  initial  impulse
which  has  not  attained  self-distinction,  rather  than
that  of  in  immanent  whole ;  and  the  impulse  is
readily  conceived  as  one  tending  to  divergence,  in
which  no  more  than  echoes  of  the  initial  unity — the
only  unity  in  question — survive.  A  final  unity  is,  as
I  gather,  not  excluded,  but  it  is  not  implied.  There
is  no  necessary  return  or  reconciliation  of  elements
to  inclusion  in  a  totality — there  could  not  be,  if  will
is  divorced  from  thought.

Thus  the  theory  naturally  links  itself  with
pluralism  and  with  pessimism  ;  with  pluralism,  for
development  is  primarily  divergent,  effected  through
trial  and  error  in  an  environment  without  unitary
significance;^  with  pessimism,  because  such  a  will,
excluding  the  guidance  of  ideas,  is  ex  hypothesi
debarred  from  satisfaction,  which  is  the  coincidence
between  idea  and  existence.  In  a  word,  if  we  recur
to  the  language  of  the  previous  section,  such  a  will
may  possess  strength  or  intensity,  but  it  cannot
possess  power.  For  power  comes  only  by  the
approach  to  totality  through  thought ;  and  to  the
will  of  voluntarism  such  access  is  interdicted  by  its
very  nature.  It  is  by  its  definition  a  striving  which
excludes  satisfaction.

This  being  so,  it  seems  worth  while  to  draw
attention  to  certain  facts,  which  would  be  paradoxical
if  voluntarism  were  the  true  account  of  will,  but  as

1  Note,  what  I  have  insisted  on  throughout,  the  polar  antithesis
between  the  term  action  as  thus  employed  and  the  sense  which  it
carried  for  Leibniz  and  Spinoza.

2  Where,  therefore,  trial  and  error  cannot  be  superseded  by  the
power  of  will,  because  there  are  no  roads  through  thought  to  the
larger  horizons  which  give  will  its  power.


IV  AND  HAS  NOT  INSPIRED  PRACTICE  125


it  is,  seem  just  what  we  should  expect.  I  would
never  attempt  to  rest  a  philosophical  doctrine  either
on  its  acceptance  by  any  section  of  the  public  or  on
the  success  of  views  akin  to  it  in  the  treatment  of
affairs  ;  philosophy  is  the  judge  of  philosophy,  and
there  is  no  appeal.  But  if  defects  are  alleged,  and
excellences  claimed,  in  which  fitness  or  unfitness  to
do  justice  to  special  sides  of  experience  are  cardinal
points,  then  it  seems  right  and  necessary  to  observe,
in  connection  with  relevant  theoretical  argument,  on
the  de  facto  exhibition  of  such  fitness  or  unfitness.
If  the  side  of  experience  which  is  being  made  into  a
test  is  the  will-to-live,  energy,  activity,  then  it  is
fair  to  observe  that  over  a  familiar  theatre  of  arduous
progress  and  activity  in  important  human  concerns
— concerns  of  social  improvement — the  one  view
has  been  operative  in  all  that  has  been  done,  and
principles  akin  to  it  have  commended  themselves  to
the  doers  ;  the  other  is  remarkable  for  the  fact  that
it  has  never  been  operative  in  any  advance  at  all,
and  has  commended  itself  in  the  main  to  minds  out
of  touch  with  social  energy.

Now  I  have  ventured  to  point  out  elsewhere  ^
how  much  more  deeply  rooted  in  human  nature  and
how  predominant  in  practical  influence  and  inspira-
tion is  such  a  work  as  Green's  Prolegomena,  as
compared  with  anything  that  has  emanated  from
the  voluntarist  movement  —  the  movement  that  is
supposed  to  represent  will,  activity,  practicality.
It  would  not  be  far  wrong,  in  my  judgment,  to  say
both  that  the  great  and  effective  movement  of  social
reform  which  has  permeated  the  civilised  world
during the last fifty years has been directly or

1 I'liilos. 'J'/icoty  0/ Sta/c,  cd.  2,  Introduction.


126  THE  MIRACLE OF WILL  lect.

indirectly  in  a  very  great  measure  inspired  by  ideas
of  the  general  type  which  Green  advocated  ;  and
also,  a  still  more  interesting  and  important  point,  that
the  actual  substance  of  this  movement  as  a  practical
method  of  action — though  I  most  carefully  disclaim
the  idea  of  assigning  it  any  conscious  relation  to  a
philosophical  theory — has  itself  given  rise  to  and
adopted  principles  in  harmony  with  our  above
discussion  of  character  and  thinking  will.  Every
one  who  knows  anything  of  social  work  behind  the
scenes,  knows  that  such  watchwords  as  working
with  a  plan,  of  power  belonging  only  to  the  thought-
ful will,  of  success  attending  only  the  inclusive  point
of  view,  of  the  magic  and  miracle  which  attend  the
attitude  of  considering  life  as  a  whole,  have  during
the  last  half  century,  in  the  English-speaking  world
at  least,  been  the  operative  ferment  of  social  enter-
prise and  advance.^  It  is,  if  I  am  right,  a  noteworthy
phenomenon  that  the  great  works  of  will  in  the
province  of  greatest  practical  advance  have  on  the
whole  proceeded  from  or  in  accordance  with  the
principles  of  thinking  volition  and  not  those  of
voluntarism.^

In  the  sphere  of  art,  I  am  aware,  a  conflicting
claim  might  be  set  up,  though  as  I  hold  on  very
insufficient  grounds.  It  is  in  the  appreciation  of
this  realm  that  Schopenhauer's  very  one-sided  excel-
lence chiefly  lies.  But  here  we  are  no  longer  in  the
strictly  volitional  sphere,  and  Schopenhauer's  merit

1  Green's  philosophy  was  drawn  quite  as  much  from  social
experience  of  life  as  from  post-Kantian  ideas.  And  that  is  why,  in
my  judgment,  it  is  likely  to  prove  of  permanent  value.

2  The  relation  is  anticipated  by  that  of  Hegel  and  Schopenhauer.
Wherever  you  come  upon  their  traces  Hegel  is  fertile  and  Schopen-
hauer is  barren.


IV  SOCIAL STUDY,  ANCIENT  AND  MODERN 127


is  precisely  not  in  his  account  of  volition,  but  in  his
account  of  the  refuge  and  escape  which  art  affords
from  it.

It  remains  to  be  mentioned  that  the  analysis  of
the  actual  moral  world  of  objective  mind  [Sittlick-
keii)  both  is  an  element  of  theoretical  strength
peculiar  to  the  theory  of  thinking  will,  and  has
also,  in  and  through  the  practical  standpoint
referred  to  above,  been  commended  by  that
theory  to  the  actual  and  active  social  conscious-
ness which  it  thus  reinforced  and  brought  to  higher
energy.

/3. It  appears  to  me  also  that  the  demand  of  those  Relation
who  ask  for  a  wider  study  of  actual  ethical  conduct  theory  to

1 •  1 1 1  T_  ^  I-  11 demand  for

and  Its  standards  has  been  met  much  more  largely  etwcai
than  they  recognise  by  the  social  movement  of  the  '^^^^•
last  half  century,  under  the  influence  of  the  view  we
have  been  discussing.  There  is  a  curious  but  quite
genuine  spiritual  heredity  from  Plato's  study  of
class-morality  in  the  Republic  to  Hegel's  analysis
of  the  actual  social  mind  as  an  objective  structure  ;
and  from  Hegel's  analysis  to  Green's  study  of
citizenship,^  under  parallel  influences  to  which,
but  without  conscious  connection,  came  Le  Play's
methods  of  concrete  observation,  and  then  again,
with  full  awareness  of  connection,  the  interest
awakened  by  Toynbee,  Edward  Denison,  and
others,  opening  out  into  the  full  detailed  study  of
social  conduct  which  forms  the  equipment  and  the
instrument of  the sociologist and social worker"

1  No  one  can  here  forget  Mr.  Bradley's  masterly  analysis  of  the
actual  moral  world  in  Ethical  Studies  prior  to  the  publication  of
Green's  Prolegotnena.

2  There  is  a  great  deal  of  bad  investigation  as  well  as  good.
But  the  good  exists,  and  that  is  all  that  concerns  us  here.


128  THE  MIRACLE OF WILL  lect.


of  to-day.  Just  as  a  great  addition  was  made
to  the  foundations  of  ethical  knowledge  when
Hegel  analysed  Sittlichkeit,  so  another  great  step
has  been  made  during  the  last  century  in  the
critical  and  almost  experimental  study  of  social
and  ethical  forces  throughout  the  larger  part  of
society.  We  may  say  now,  I  am  convinced,  without
presumption,  that  we  know  by  critical  experience,
and  not  merely  infer,  such  truths  as  those  we  have
been  discussing  about  the  power  of  will.  We  know
much  of  the  difficult  subject  of  the  morality  of  classes,
and  we  have  been  able  to  rehabilitate  in  our  estima-
tion the  character  of  the  people,  not  in  respect  of
the  conventional  moral  "  virtue,"  but  in  respect  of
the  standards  which  belong  to  our  more  concrete
view — in  respect  of  their  virile  and  human  qualities.
It  is  not  too  much  to  say  that  there  remains  no
unknown  class  from  among  whom  a  revaluation  of
our  ethical  values  could  be  sought  or  found.  A
further  proof  of  this  is  our  attitude  (just  alluded  to)
towards  the  personal  virtues  of  tradition,^  We  are
now  disposed  to  praise  and  blame  not  conventional
qualities,  like  a  kind  of  "accomplishment,"  but
rather  the  whole  energy  or  weakness,  the  love  or
unlovingness,  manliness,  womanliness,  and  their
opposites,  with  which  people  face  the  world.  The
will,  we  feel,  is  the  man,  a  single  energy,  and  not  an
aggregate  of  attributes.
Is  Power  of  6.  With  the  argument  of  this  Lecture  we  complete
ofsubjm  the  two-sided  idea  of  the  moulding  of  the  soul,  and
in^^of'^'^  now  find  ourselves  prepared  to  attempt  some  outline
f^"^^"!",, of  the hazards involved in selfhood, and of  the

Yes  ;  will

not  be  uiti-  destiny  of  the  finite  self.

mately  ''

1 Hegel,  Rec/iis-Philosopkie,  sect.  150.


to  life  of
Absolute.


IV  THE ''INDIVIDUAL'' SOUL  129

It  would  be  an  error  to  suppose  that  in  discussing  opposed
the  miracle  of  will  we  have  transcended  the  con-  environ"
sideration  of  the  world  as  moulding  the  soul.  The  "eStsl'^of
soul — I  use  the  term  in  the  most  general  sense  to
mean  the  centre  of  experience  which  as  a  microcosm
has  acquired  or  is  acquiring  a  character  of  its  own
and  a  relative  persistence — the  soul  is  not  to  be
contrasted  as  a  detached  agent  either  with  its
constituent  externality  on  the  one  hand  or  with  the
life  of  the  absolute  on  the  other.  Our  idea  has  been
throughout,  as  we  have  naively  expressed  it  in
language  which  seemed  the  aptest  we  could  find,
that  the  soul  is  a  range  of  externality  "  come  alive  "
by  centering  in  mind.  And  when  we  speak  of  the
soul  as  a  will  creatively  moulding  circumstance,  this
is  another  expression  for  the  microcosm,  including
the  centre  which  its  circumstances  "stand  round,"
remoulding  and  reshaping  itself.  It  is,  on  the  other
hand,  a  thread  or  fibre  of  the  absolute  life,  or  rather,
as  we  said  before,^  a  stream  or  tide  within  it  of
varying  breadth,  intensity,  and  separateness  from
the  great  flood  within  which  it  moves.  For  the
idea  of  a  persistent  isolated  unity  which  the  term
soul  conveys,  or  any  such  metaphor  as  that  of  a
thread  in  a  tissue  or  a  fibre  in  a  bodily  organ,  must
not  conceal  from  us  the  constant  fluctuation  of
its  range,  the  amplification  and  diminution  of  its
microcosm,  which  is  involved  in  our  whole  concep-
tion of  the  being  of  self  and  the  power  of  will.

Being  moulded,  on  the  one  hand,  and  moulding
circumstance  on  the  other — coming  alive  as  a  world,
but  as  a  world  reshaping  itself  and  transcending
itself  through  striving  towards  the  unity  which is

1 Principle^  pp.  372-3.

K


I30  THE  MIRACLE OF WILL  lect.  iv

completeness — are  the  double  aspect  of  the  soul  or
self  which  is,  as  we  have  seen  throughout,  essentially
a  world.  As  such,  though  fluctuating  in  range  and
energy,  it  has  a  relative  and  finite  individual  nature  ^
— an  apparent  individuality — and  a  certain  seeming
persistence  in  time.  Yet  it  has  no  barrier  of  division
against  the  absolute,  with  which  it  is  continuous,  to
speak  in  spatial  and  temporal  similes,  before  and
after  and  on  every  side  of  its  spatio-temporal  being.'
From  this  point  forward  we  may  consider  the  soul
as  relatively  or  in  appearance  a  finite  individual.
And  we  pass  on  to  make  some  attempt  at  analysing
the  hazards  and  hardships  which  are  inherent  in  any
pretension  to  fill  such  a  place  in  the  universe,  to
point  out  in  what  way  they  are  incidents  of  the  logic
which  determines  its  value,  and  to  examine  what
sort  of  ultimate  destiny  we  can  seriously  or  critically
desire  for  it,  assuming,  as  our  whole  argument
requires,  the  conservation  of  its  value  in  the  absolute,
or,  more  truly,  the  being  of  its  value  solely  in  the
absolute.

1  See  Lect.  II.  of  the  present  volume.

2  See  on  inclusion  Principle^  p.  272  ff.  This  continuity  does
not  bar  private  pre-existence  or  survival.  There  is  no  question  of
being  "  in  the  absolute  "  or  not,  but  only  of  the  mode.


B. HAZARDS  AND  HARDSHIPS  OF
FINITE  SELFHOOD

LECTURE V

THE WORLD OF CLAIMS AND COUNTER-CLAIMS^

I. Finite selfhood, the attitude of  a self  which  The
thinks  of  itself  as  a  finite  thing,  and  considers  the  finite
universe under the aspect of finite terms and  rdatfonT.
relations, may be said to belong to a  world of
claims  and  counter-claims.

It  is  burdened — I  had  almost  written  "op-
pressed " — by  the  sense  of  a  duty  to  a  superior
being,  with  whom  it  is  in  relation,  and  this  duty
constitutes  its  morality,  its  sense  of  good  and  bad.
The  self  makes  on  its  side  a  number  of  demands  upon
the  superior  being  and  upon  the  other  beings  which
are  the  terms  of  its  universe,  and  their  fulfilment
and  non-fulfilment  impress  it  with  a  contradictory
sense  of  justice  and  injustice.  One  remembers  the
heading  of  the  sermon  which  O.  W.  Holmes's
minister  wrote  under  pressure  of  such  a  feeling,
"On  the  Duties  of  an  Infinite  Creator  to  a  Finite
Creature."

Thus  its  life  is  essentially  and  inherently  one  of
hazard  and  hardship. It  is  bound  to the  hazard

1 Cf. Ethical  Studies  {Y . H. Bradley, 1S76), p. 279. I am
even  more  than  usual  indebted  to  Mr.  Bradley  in  this  chapter.

131


132  THE WORLD OF  CLAIMS  lect.

of  attempting  to  live  by  the  command  of  a  superior,
which  is  outside  and  above  it — an  attempt  which
in  the  nature  of  the  case  must  prove  a  continual
failure  ;  as  is  shown  by  the  oscillation  between  the
good  will  and  the  bad,  which  is  all  that,  as  thus
considering  itself,  it  can  realise.  It  is  bound  to
the  hardship  of  constantly  making  demands  for
respect  and  assistance  from  God,  nature,  and  fellow-
men,  which  are  recognised,  as  it  appears,  most
capriciously  and  imperfectly  ;  for,  as  we  have  seen,
the  environment  rather  moulds  the  self  by  a  severe
discipline  than  nourishes  it  without  interference,  and
if  we  look  at  the  miracle  by  which  the  self  trans-
mutes circumstances  to  its  will,  we  see  that  in  this
very  act  it  is  no  less  in  the  furnace,  recasting  itself

For  the  finite  self,  taking  itself  and  the  universe
and — though  not  in  so  many  words — God  himself,
as  parts  of  a  complex  of  finite  beings  in  relation,
is  inherently  a  contradiction.  It  is  a  finite  being
which  is  infinite  without  realising  it,  and  so,  like  all
finite  experience,  is  always  beyond  itself  It  has
working  in  it  the  spirit  of  the  whole,  and  cannot,
though  it  does  not  know  why,  find  satisfaction  in
its  limited  self,  and  in  the  relations  which,  while
they  connect  it  with  other  beings,  yet  exclude  it
from  them.

It  is  this  double  being  which  necessitates  the
atmosphere  of  hazard  and  hardship  which  surrounds
the  finite  self  when  it  tries  to  take  itself  as  such.
It  finds  itself  always  inevitably  discontented  and
on  the  strain,  in  varying  degrees  according  to  its
sensitiveness.  It  never  feels  that  it  does  its  pure
duty,  nor  that  it  gets  its  whole  rights.  It  cannot
make  its  own  claims  good,  nor  satisfy  the  counter-


V  WORLD OF  RIGHTS— INCOMPLETE  133

claims  upon  it.  It  is,  to  borrow  a  lawyer's  phrase
(and  the  aspect  of  things  thus  considered  is  legal),
"at  arm's  length"  with  God,  man,  and  nature.  It
is  over  against  them  in  relation ;  and  claims  and
demands  arise,  as  between  independent  terms  or
subjects,  which  yet  are  forced  into  connection  and
collision.

The  position,  and  the  illusion  that  is  involved
in  it,  may  be  illustrated  by  a  familiar  conception
in  Hegel's  social  philosophy.  He  treats,  it  will  be
remembered,  the  economic  world — the  economic
association  of  citizens  as  distinct  from  the  spiritual
unity  of  the  social  whole — as  a  world  of  units  at
arm's  length  to  each  other,  governed  by  what  may
be  compared  to  natural  laws.  This  world  has  the
peculiar  characteristics  which  belong  to  these  quasi-
natural  worlds  of  isolated  units — severe  natural
selection,  formative  discipline  and  hardship,  a  con-
dition where  every  man  is  for  himself,  subject  to
claims  arising  out  of  relations.  Just  such,  we  might
say,  is  the  world  of  relational  morality  with  its
machinery  of  duties  and  rights,  for  the  finite  being
who  takes  himself  seriously  as  finite — the  world  of
individualistic  morality.

And  an  illusion  of  the  same  type  is  involved  in
both.  There  is  no  such  world  of  isolated  terms
in  relations  as  these  worlds  appear  to  be.  The
economic  world  is  not  really  a  self-complete  world.
It  is  an  appearance,  a  way  of  behaving  and  thinking,
within  the  organic  whole  of  society,  within  which
alone  its  existence  is  possible.  You  could  not  have
a  world  of  the  Stock  Exchange  which  did  not  rest
on  the  family,  on  social  relations,  and  on  the  State.
It  Vv'ould  be  a  rope  of  sand.


134  THE WORLD OF  CLAIMS  ' lect.

So  with  the  apparent  world  of  moral  relations
between  independent  beings.  It  could  not  really
exist,  except  as  an  appearance  within  something
more  single  and  self-complete.  Our  duty  towards
God  and  our  neighbour  (and  our  rights,  which  at
this  stage  we  tend  to  insist  upon,  against  both)  rest
on  relations  that  could  not  spring  up  between  really
independent  terms.  In  envisaging  the  universe  as
an  aggregate  of  such  terms  the  finite  self  has  con-
strued the  infinite  in  the  language  of  finiteness,  and
the  proof  is  that  he  finds  himself  in  a  contradiction
whichever  way  he  turns.
Theism  2. It  is  charactCHStic  of  this  world  of  claims  and

such  a relations  that  to  it  Theism  characteristically  belongs.

concepnion. j^ j^ ^^^^^ j ^j^j^j^^ ^j^^^ ^ T\i€\-.l of tO-day WOuld

criticism deny  that  his  views  involve  in  full  the  attributes  of

on  ■'

"Creator of  such  a  world. He  would  deny  that  he  considers

Creators." /-« j  ,

God  as  merely  a  supreme  ruler,  the  author  of  laws
imposed  ab  extra  on  other  beings  ;  or  merely  as  a
governor  of  the  world  by  rewards  and  punishments  ;
or  merely  as  a  providence  who  compensates  for
apparent  injustice  in  and  by  a  future  life  ;  or  merely
as  a  Creator  of  subordinate  beings,  whose  life  is
thereby  predetermined  (as,  e.g.,  Kant  points  out) ;
or  merely  as  an  ideal  and  superior  will,  which  finite
beings  can  make  their  own  only  through  an  un-
ending approximation  (again  involving  the  future
life) ;  or  merely  as  an  existence  apart  from  the
universe  and  from  created  minds,  so  as  to  become,
in  reality,  himself  a  finite  being.  Yet  these  doctrines,
which  in  their  full  abstractness  would  to-day  be  dis-
owned, nevertheless  must  always  influence  Theism,
because  it  is  an  outgrowth  of  that  mode  of  construing
infinity  in  the  form  of  endless  finiteness  and  related


V  ''CREATES CREATORS" CRITICISED  135

plurality  from  which  all  these  doctrines  in  their
distinctive  forms  are  derived.  Thus  the  modern
Theist  might  disclaim  with  Kant  the  moral  govern-
ment of  the  world  through  rewards  and  punishments,
denying  that  the  adjustment,  which  he  demands,
of  happiness  to  desert  is  to  be  considered  as  a
motive  to  action  ;  but  he  would  insist,  I  think,  as  a
rule,  on  the  necessity  of  a  future  life  with  a  view  to
compensation  for  the  injustices  which  the  eye  of  in-
dividualist ethics  everywhere  detects,  and  probably
also  with  an  idea  of  giving  room  for  the  endless
approximation  ^  to  the  ideal  will.  Guidance  of  the
universe  ab  extra  so  that  ends  are  fulfilled,  separate-
ness  and  independence  of  God  and  man,  need  of
the  future  life,  as  just  observed,  for  compensation
and  ethical  improvement,  and,  we  may  add,  the
direct  and  personal,  and  therefore  miraculous  deal-
ing with  the  individual  soul  through  grace  (social
solidarity  having  no  place  in  the  relational  world "),
continue  on  the  whole  to  be  the  marks  of  the
Theist,  even  though  it  seems  to  him  desirable  to
claim  a  measure  of  immanence,  which  being  made
complete  would  destroy  his  position.

Here  is  a  test  point.  The  modern  Theist  sees
that  God  must  not  be  a  literal  creator  ;  he  must  some-
how not  wholly  make  finite  minds,  but  leave  them  to
make  themselves,  or  their  freedom  is  destroyed.
Now  the  Creator  in  the  natural  sense — if  the  term


^  We  must  always  remember  that  Kant  in  effect  transcended  this
primary  view  of  his,  as  he  did  also  the  idea  of  the  literal  Creator,
and  that  of  rewards  and  punishments  in  a  future  life.

2  The  question  of  the  actual  {e.i^.  social)  character  of  the  means
of  grace,  as  opposed  to  a  magical  and  unintelligible  account  of  them,
is  all-important  for  the  theory  of  freedom  and  the  connection  of  Cod
and  man. See  Creen,  Prolegomena,  sectt.  i  lo-i  i and  V'atke,  p.  459.


136  THE WORLD OF  CLAIMS  lect.

has  a  natural  sense — can  obviously  not  do  this,^  and
in  the  world  of  separate  related  beings,  and  therefore
in  Theism,  this  kind  of  Creator  is  what  we  should
expect  to  find.

Therefore  on  this  point  we  are  confronted  by  an
evasive  modification,  which  takes  us  too  far  and  yet
not  far  enough.  We  are  met  by  such  phrases  as
that  "  God  actuates "  or  "  produces  the  free  as
free,"  -  or  "  God  is  only  a  true  creator  if  he  creates
creators."

Now  on  the  ground  on  which  relational  In-
dtvidttalism  stands — and  this  is  the  pure  and  normal
ground  of  Theism — it  is  futile  to  pretend  that  these
can  be  anything  but  phrases  disguising  a  contra-
diction.^ In  will  the  particulars  are  essential,  and
if  a  separate  personal  God  wills  the  being  of  the
human  will,  that  must  mean  that  the  detail  of  the
human  will  is  absorbed  in  the  divine  will.  It  is
a  contradiction  to  say  that  God,  being  a  person
separate  from  man,  wills  that  man  should  have  a
will ;  but  that  man  can  use  the  will  as  he  pleases.
To  will  a  will  is  to  will  its  detail.

The  contradiction  is  the  same  throughout.  Finite
self  interprets  its  consciousness  of  the  universe  as  a

1  See  Kant's  discussion,  Krit.  d.  Praktischen  Vernu7ift,  p.  234  (R.).

2  Vatke,  Menschliche  Freiheit^  p.  401,  cited  below.

2  Vatke's  profound  and  judicial  discussion  leaves  no  escape,  I
feel  sure,  from  this  conclusion,  so  long  as  we  remain  on  the  ground
of  mere  related  being  and  do  not  advance  to  the  identity  of  the
human-divine  will.  I  cite  a  passage  from  his  argument  to  show  its
carefulness  and  judicious  temper  {Menschliche  Freiheit^  p.  401)  : —

"  Da  nun  aber  die  menschliche  Thatigkeit  erst  mit  dem
wirklichen  Wollen  beginnen  soil,  so  muss  die  durch  Gott  gesetzte
Moglichkeit  der  Freiheit  auch  bis  zu  diesem  Punkte  gefiihrt  werden,
und  man  muss  sagen  :  dass  der  menschliche  Wille  Freiheit  ist,  hat
er  ohne  sein  Zuthun  von  Gott,  wie  er  sich  aber  als  Freiheit  selbst
bestimmt,  hangt  allein  von  ihm  selbst  ab.

"  Hier  zeigt  sich  nun  aber  derselbe  Widerspruch,  den  wir  oben


THE CRY  FOR ULTIMATE  PROGRESS  137


consciousness  of  independent  beings  in  a  world  of
claims  and  counter-claims,  and  views  their  closer
union  as  something  to  be  attained  by  endless
approximation,  the  root-difficulty  of  their  separation
not  being  in  principle  removed.  But  such  a  con-
ception is  self-contradictory,  and  makes  freedom,
morality,  the  channels  of  divine  grace,  the  realisation
of  perfection  in  finite  beings,  contradictory  and  un-
intelligible. The  uneasiness  incident  to  the  position
betrays  itself  in  all  that  concerns  the  problem  of
progress.  Apprehending  no  attitude  but  its  own,
the  self  in  ethical  individualism  clamours for the


schon  bei  der  Formel  bemerkten,  dass  Gott  das  Freie  als  Freies
hervorbringe  [in  other  passages  also  'wirke'].  Alle  Theoneen,
welche  die  concrete  Freiheit  nicht  als  Product  zweier  in  einander
wirkender  Factoren  auffassen,  fuhren  zu  einer  abstracten  Einerleiheit
des  gottlichen  und  menschlichen  Willens,  und  konnen  dieselbe  nur
durch  verschiedene  Arten  der  Selbsttauschung  von  sich  abhalten.
Sagt  man  namlich  :  dass  der  Mensch  ein  wollendes  Ich  ist,  hat  er
von  Gott  Oder  durch  den  Willen  Gottes,  und  zwar  ohne  eigenes
Zuthun,  so  heisst  dies  ja  so  viel  als  :  das  menschliche  Ich  1st  als
Selbstbestimmung  nicht  durch  sich  thatig,  sondern  Gott  allein  1st
darin  thatig,  es  ist  also  bios  Selbstbestimmung  Gottes.  Fiihrt  man
denn  fort  ;  aber  wie  das  Ich  sich  bestimmt,  was  der  Mensch  als
freies  Wesen  ist,  hangt  allein  von  ihm  ab,  so  fallt  dieser  zweite  Satz
schon  durch  den  haltunglosen  Widerspruch  des  ersten  ;  ist  die
Selbstbestimmung  des  Menschen  in  der  That  nur  Selbstbestimmung
Gottes,  so  auch  die  Qualitat  derselben.  Dazu  kommt  nun  aber
noch,  dass  die  Selbstbestimmung  uberhaupt  gar  nicht  ohne  die
Beslimmtheit,  den  Inhalt,  das  Wie  und  Was  gedacht  werden  kann,
da  in  dieser  Besonderung  des  abstracten  Ich  die  Bedingung  liegt,
unter  welchen  dasselbe  Wille  ist.  Obige  Formel  sagt  daher  in  der
That  das  Gegentheil  von  dem  aus,  was  man  eigentlich  meint.  Da
das  Dasein  der  Freiheit  von  ihrer  Thiitigkeit  nicht  verschieden  1st,
so  gewiihrt  es  auch  keine  Hiilfe  gegen  die  abstracte  Identitat  beider
Seiten,  wenn  man  den  Willensact  Gottes,  durch  welchen  er  die
freie  Personlichkeit  der  Creatur  setzt,  als  eine  gottliche  Selbstbeschran-
kung  auffasst.  Denn  da  das  Dasein  der  Freiheit  das  Wollen  selbst
ist,  so  fallt  gar  keine  Grenze  zwischen  das  gottliche  und  menschliche
Wollen  ;  der  gottliche  Wille  kann  daher  auch  seine  Bethatigung
nicht  zuriicknehmen  ohne  damit  zugleich  das  Dasein  der  menschlichen
Freiheit  zu  vernichten."


138


THE WORLD OF  CLAIMS


LECT.


Morality
(as  duty
for  duty's
sake)  the
central
expression
of  the  con-
tradiction
of  such  a
world.


unending  progress,  as  we  observe  both  in  the
fundamental  importance  attached  to  the  future  Hfe,
and  in  the  tendency  to  make  the  standpoint  of
amehoration,  advance,  actual  modification  of  the
whole  reality  by  the  work  of  finite  minds,  applicable
to  the  universe.

3.  The  contradiction  of  this  world  of  claims  and
counter-claims  centres  in  its  morality — the  conflict
of  good  and  bad.  The  finite  self,  construing  its
universe  in  finite  terms,  feels  bound  to  be  what  as  a
finite  term  it  cannot  be — that  is  to  say,  one  with  the
divine  or  ideal  will.  It  feels  this  because,  though
finite,  it  is  not  merely  finite,  and  throws  its  inherent
impulse  to  identity  of  love  and  will  with  the  universe
into  the  shape  of  an  impossible  union  of  two
independent  terms.  The  position  has  often  been
analysed  in  philosophy,  and  here  we  need  only  draw
attention  to  it,  and  to  the  light  it  throws  on  the
finite  individual  when  he  construes  himself  In  terms
of  his  finiteness.

The  essence  of  his  being — the  central  claim
which  the  universe  makes  upon  him,  appears  as
involving  a  contradiction.  He  has  a  finite  will,
which  is  ex  hypothesi  not  the  ideal  will — this  must
be  the  will  of  another  and  independent  being,  the
supreme  Ruler — but  the  ideal  will  is  imperative
upon  him  because  his  nature  is  really,  though  he
does  not  know  it,  more  than  finite,  and  is  that  of
the  whole.  Because  of  this  imperative  set  against
his  finiteness  his  own  actual  will  is  in  opposition
and  is  evil.  The  ideal  will,  again,  is  determined  by
opposition  to  the  actual  will,  and  its  goodness,  as
also  the  badness  of  the  actual  will,  is  in  this
opposition, and they  are  essential  to  each  other.


V  WHAT  IS  "OUR" WILL?  139

Thus — the  point  has  been  made  quite  familiar  by
Mr.  Bradley  and  others — the  sides  of  the  moral
agent's  being,  so  far  as  this  attitude  goes,  are  in
contradiction  to  each  other,  but  their  contradiction
is  necessary  to  the  nature  of  both.  To  be  good
is  to  overcome  the  evil ;  to  be  evil  is  to  be  in
contradiction  with  the  good.  If  the  evil  were  over-
come in  a  man  there  could  for  him  be  no  good  ;
for  the  definition  of  good,  that  it  lies  in  over-
coming the  evil  will,  would  no  longer  be  applicable
to  his  will.  The  paradox  shows  itself  in  the  well-
known  difficulty^  of  finding  a  content  for  the  ideal
will.  The  miracle  of  will  cannot  here  take  place.
It  lay  in  developing  an  identical  world  as  the  object
of  ideal  will — the  true  human  will — out  of  the  sub-
stance and  content  organised  by  the  rational  will
fore-feeling  itself  as  one  with  the  organisation  of
life  in  society  and  institutions.  But  here — if  the
point  of  view  could  be  kept  pure,  which  is  impos-
sible— we  have  no  such  faith  and  outlook  upon
concrete  unity  with  the  whole.  We  are  bound,
by  our  sense  of  being  more  than  we  seem,  to
identify  our  will  with  a  superior  law,  but  as,  to  this
view,  the  universe  contains  no  substantial  whole
which  expresses  in  its  organisation  the  identity  of
finite  wills,  we  cannot  actually  make  the  ascent  out
of  our  finiteness  which  the  relation  to  the  supreme
ruler  binds  us  to  make.

Thus,  so  far  as  we  remain  in  this  point  of  view,
we  are  bound  to  an  impossibility.  This  makes  us
restless  and  uneasy.  We  demand,  in  the  strength
of  our  solitary  finite  mind,  or  of  a  mere  aggregate
of  such  minds,  to  reform  the  universe  and  change  it

1 See  p.  98,  above.


I40  THE WORLD OF  CLAIMS  lect.


from  evil  to  good.  And  all  the  while  we  carry
ex  hypothesi  our  evil  with  us.  It  is  true,  of  course,
as  we  amply  saw  in  the  former  course  of  Lectures,
that  we  are  responsible  for  all  possible  amelioration  ;
the  world  does  rest  on  our  shoulders,  and  our  finite
mind  does  determine  great  issues  by  the  next  step
that  it  takes.  This  is  all  true  and  valuable,  but,  as
we  saw  and  shall  further  see,  it  is  not  the  whole
truth.  In  asserting  it  barely,  we  are  ignoring  the
real  roots  and  complete  nature  of  our  being,  and
though  "our"  responsibility  is  a  true  and  tremendous
fact,  it  changes  its  shape  very  completely  when  we
come  to  analyse  the  meaning  of  "our."

In  this  world  of  finite  morality,  however,  what  we
want  is  to  exchange  our  finite  for  a  better  one.  But
the  better  finite  is  a  finite  still,  and  our  progress
makes  no  change  of  principle.  We  remain,  so  far
as  it  goes,  in  the  world  of  claims  and  counter-claims,
with  the  supreme  ruler  out  of  reach  above  us,  and
our  fellow  finite  beings  of  mind  and  nature  at  arm's
length  around  us.  We  get  no  nearer  to  the  one,
and  no  closer  to  the  others.

All  this,  we  must  remember,  is  on  the  hypothesis
that  we  maintain  the  attitude  of  insisting  on  our
finiteness,  and  of  treating  the  universe  as  an  aggre-
gation of  related  finites.  But  if  so,  we  are  treating
ourselves  as  what  we  are  not,  and  contradiction
must  inevitably  result.

In  the  actual  world,  indeed,  this  illusion  pre-
vails  only  in  part.^ For,  from  the  beginning,  the

1  Bradley's  Ethical  Studies,  p.  279.  "So  we  see  that  the  moral
point  of  view,  which  leaves  man  in  a  stage  with  which  he  is  not
satisfied,  cannot  be  final.  This  or  that  human  being,  this  or  that
passing  stage  of  culture,  may  remain  in  this  region  of  weariness,  of
false  self-approval,  and  no  less  false  self-contempt ;  but  for  the  race,


V  ANTICIPATIONS OF THE  ABSOLUTE  141

miracle  of  will  has  been  enacting  itself,  and  the
common  substance  and  content  which  it  has
"  elicited  "  have  begun  to  form  a  genuine  possession
of  our  self,  precarious  indeed,  but  having  some  degree
of  true  individuality  and  self-completeness,  and
forming  an  earnest  of  a  true  satisfaction  other  than
and  transcending  the  endless  progress.^  The
miracle  of  will,  we  saw,  is  founded  on  our  divination
of  the  whole  as  the  only  true  expression  of  our-
selves, and  proceeds  by  search  and  construction  to
bring  this  whole  into  explicit  being.  So  in  the
realms  of  beauty  and  of  knowledge.  In  all  of  these
we  are  in  some  degree  taken  beyond  the  contradic-
tion of  connection  and  relation  between  isolated
terms.  In  the  case  of  beauty,  for  example,  we  have
made  for  ourselves,  and  are  able  to  possess,  a  reality
which  is  an  expression  of  what  is  deepest  in  each
of  us,  and  yet — this  is  the  essential  point — is  not
finite  in  the  sense  in  which  we  are  severally  finite.
It  is  our  belonging — nothing  could  be  more  so — but
it  has  the  character  of  what  is  much  more  than  we
are.  It  is,  in  short,  an  earnest  and  manifestation  of
the  self-complete  and  thoroughly  individual  nature
of  the  absolute.  In  it  we  see  how  the  limits  which
make  us  finite  and  isolated  are,  and  therefore  can  be,
absorbed."  So  too  in  the  social  whole  and  in  civilisa-
tion, which  we  treated  as  the  special  embodiment  of
the  will,  a  satisfaction  in  which  separate  finite  wills
unite  in  the  possession  of  themselves  and  each  other.

as  a  whole,  this  is  impossible. It  has  not  done  it,  and  while  man  is
man,  it  certainly  never  will  do  it."

1  This  point  is  thoroughly  explained  in  the  well-known chapter
"  My  Station  and  its  Duties,"  in  Bradley's  Ethical  Studies.

2  See  Principle,  p.  375,  on  participation  in  poetry  compared  with
participation  in  the  absolute.


142  THE WORLD OF  CLAIMS  lect.

And  so  too  with  knowledge,  itself  no  doubt  a  system
of  terms  and  relations,  but  implying  and  revealing
a  unitary  reality  which  underlies  this  system  and
in  various  degrees  attains  appropriate  revelation
through  it.^

It  is  the  existence  of  these  realised  anticipa-
tions of  the  absolute  that  makes  life  possible,  in  spite
of  mind's  ignorance  of  its  own  nature.  In  a  world
of  sheer  morality — individualist  ethics — the  abstrac-
tion of  the  necessary  contradiction  and  concomitance
of  good  and  bad,  it  would  be  impossible  to  live.  As
we  said  at  starting,  there  could  not  really  be  such  a
world.  The  solution  is,  that  the  mind  is  only  in
part  aware  of  its  own  nature,  and  it  has  already  in
some  degree  possessed  itself  of  the  substance  of
identity  with  God,  man,  and  nature  before  it
awakens  to  the  reflective  conception  of  an  indivi-
duality and  apartness  in  its  life,  eked  out  by  relations,
connections,  claims.  In  realised  social  morality,
for  example,  we  have  the  beginning  of  that  refuta-
tion of  the  empty  contradiction  and  the  unending
progress  which  will  find  its  consummation  in
religious  faith. ^  But  with  this  relatively  self-com-
plete and  organic  world,  the  substantial  and  real
correlative  of  thinking  will,  we  have  already  trans-
cended the  world  of  claims  and  counter-claims,  and
have  entered  the  sphere  where  relations  are  super-
seded by  a  true identity,  and where  finite beings,

1  Wherever,  e.g.^  in  knowledge  we  meet  with  a  truly  categorical
element,  as  in  the  categorical  basis  of  the  hypothetical  judgment,  or,
what  is  much  the  same  thing,  in  the  categorical  judgment  of  philo-
sophy respecting  the  universe.  As  resting  on  and  developing  them
all  knowledge  becomes  a  revelation  of  unitary  reality.

2  For  the  strength  of  collective  feeling  ab  i7ittio  cf.  Cornford,
From  Religion  to  Philosophy,  p.  77  ff.


ALL CLAIMS  ARE  PRECARIOUS  143


though  Still  in  the  main  finite,  are  no  longer  at  arm's
length,  but  are  "  pulse-beats  of  the  whole  system."  ^

4.  In  the  first  lecture  of  the  earlier  series  I  individuai-
censured,  as  it  might  seem  too  audaciously,  that  of"justice*^^
commonplace  form  of  the  cry  for  iustice  which  fills  f.^  ""pp"'"

^  J  ■>  tionment

our  everyday  fiction  and  our  popular  literature  of  of  external

. .  .  .  . goods

pessimism.  This  is  a  problem  which  is  rooted  in  according
the  contrast  of  the  world  we  are  now  considering,  standard.
the  world  of  claims  and  counter-claims,  with  the
deeper  reality  of  spiritual  membership  of  one  another.
It  deserves  notice  both  as  a  characteristic  revelation
of  the  attitude  which  constitutes  that  world,  and
also  because  this  individualistic  ^  justice,  like  the
individualistic  morality  which  we  have  been  exam-
ining, plays  a  very  great  part  in  a  widely  current
pessimism  and  discontent.

Let  us  remember  once  more  Hegel's  economic
world,  and  the  severity  of  its  discipline,  the  root,  as
he  thinks,  of  so  much  futile  pessimism  which  rebels
at  the  formative  influence  thus  rudely  applied.  To
live  mainly  in  a  world  of  claims  and  counter-claims
is  indeed  a  training  for  pessimism.  It  would  not  be
so,  we  must  observe,  if  such  a  world  was  solidly  and
effectively  what  it  claimed  to  be.  If  we  were  finite
terms  at  arm's  length  towards  each  other,  and  could
live  by  a  scheme  of  relations  dictating  claims  and
counter-claims,  nothing  could  be  simpler  or  more
mechanical.  And  for  a  time  such  an  appearance
may  hold  good,  in  some  stages  of  economic  fixity,  in
some  phases  of  moral  and  social  stagnation.  But,  as
we  have  noted,  these  worlds  of  fixed  relations  are

1  Hegel,  cited  in  Ethical  Studies^  p.  156.

2  The  term  individualistic  is  a  term  coined  to  express  and  insist
on  the  appearance  of  finite  individuality.  For  us,  therefore,  its  sug-
gestions arc  opposed  to  the  truth  of  iuflividuality.


144


THE WORLD OF  CLAIMS  lect.


derivative  and  superficial  and  do  not  exist  in  their
own  right.  Great  world-movements,  even  everyday
social  change  and  progress,  make  our  fixed  scheme
of  relations  crack  and  shiver  round  us  like  ice  on  a
river  in  spring,  and  the  world  of  claims  and  counter-
claims manifests  by  its  flux  and  variation  its
inability  to  express  and  include  the  real  elements  of
human  nature.  The  point  and  the  solution  is  that
no  one  should  or  really  can  live  merely  in  such  a
world,  though  it  is  an  aspect  which  life  under  certain
limitations  assumes  for  the  following  reason.

Comparing  different  persons  as  separate  units,
and  their  fortunes  in  the  same  way,  we  are  struck
by  inequalities.  And  in  face  of  these  inequalities,
standing  on  the  ground  of  separable  and  comparable
terms,  characteristic  of  this  whole  world  of  claims
and  relations,  we  are  led  to  frame  some  sort  oi prima
facie  scheme  of  claims  or  pretensions,  dealing  with
some  kind  of  apportionment  of  external  advantages
to  individual  units — apparent  finite  individuals —
each  to  each.

It  is  very  hard  to  make  out  what  standard  we
instinctively  resort  to  in  the  erection  of  these  claims  ;
the  fact  would  probably  turn  out  to  be,  if  we  took  a
comprehensive  survey  of  current  pessimism  as  it
regards  the  injustice  of  the  world,  that  we  make  use
of  a  great  variety,  whose  results  would  by  no  means
be  compatible.  Thus,  as  we  shall  see,  you  cannot
by  the  same  rule  claim  advantages  for  weakness
and  for  strength,  and  if  in  formulating  claims  you
adhere  to  the  word  "  merit,"  that  is  simply  to  leave  it
open  upon  what  ground  of  claim  you  are  proceeding.^

^  I  quote  at  length  an  interesting  discussion  by  Mr.  Stephen
Reynolds,  because  it  illustrates  strongly  the  natural  claim  for  justice,


V  OUR CLAIMS  PROVE VOID  145

But  this  does  not  alter  the  general  fact  that  when
we  regard  each  other  as  finite  units  in  a  world  of
externality  we  tend  to  frame  schemes  of  apportion-
ment according  to  which,  by  some  rule  or  other,
each  separate  unitary  being  has  some  claim  to  a
separate  unitary  allotment  of  happiness  or  oppor-
tunity or  reward — of  something  which  should  be
added  to  him,  it  seems  to  us,  by  God  or man  or


and  theimpossibilityof  satisfying  it  on  the  ground  of  claims  and  counter-
claims {Seems  So.'  by  Stephen  Reynolds,  pp.  1 1 1  - 1 1 2) :  "You  put  it  like
this,  sir  ;  suppose  you,  being  a  gen'leman,  had  ten  thousand  pounds  ;
an'  me,  being  only  a  working  man,  had  scraped  together  a  hunderd  ;
an'  s'pose  the  interest  on  money  was  four  per  cent.  You'd  hae  four
hunderd  a  year,  wouldn'  ee,  an'  I  should  hae  four  ?  Which  is  all  fair
as  far  as  interest  on  money  goes.  That'd  be  our  incomes  if  we  was
nort  an'  money  was  everything.  But  now,  s'pose  we  lumps  you  an'
me  in  'long  wi'  the  capital  us  got,  an'  reckons  out  the  proper  incomes
us  ought  to  have  then,  not  as  money-boxes,  but  as  men.  'Twouldn't
be  near  so  much  difference.  You  might  hae  a  quarter  or  half  as
much  again  as  me,  but  'tis  a  sure  thing  you  wouldn't  hae  ten  times
as  much.  I  bain't  saying  there's  all  that  difference  really,  but  that's
the  two  ways  of  reckoning  justice — theirs  an'  ours.  They'm  always
pushing  for  to  reckon  up  things  the  first  way,  an'  we  says  the  second
way  is  right.  An'  so  'tis.  A  man  counts  more  than  ort.  lliey
says,  'What's  a  man  worth  .'"  meaning  what's  he  got.  We  sa.ys,
'  What's  a  man  worth  ? '  meaning  hisself  an'  his  money  together.
They  says,  '  What's  just  between  this  rich  man  an'  that  poor  man  ?  '
on  the  supposition  that  they'm  to  stay  as  they  be,  one  rich  an'
t'other  poor.  But  us  says,  '  What's  just  between  this  man  an'  that
man  ?  An'  how  is  it  that  one  o'em  is  rich  an'  t'other  poor  }  '  They
asks,  what  was  a  man  born  to  ?  poverty  or  property  ?  an'  works  out
justice  between  'em  accordingly.  But  us  says  that  us  was  all  born
naked,  wi'  nort  at  all  till  'twas  gived  us.  That's  the  difference,  an'
there  can't  be  no  agreement  till  they  sees  it."  I  am  sure  you  can
get  no  standard  in  this  way.  The  language  reminds  us  of  Aristotle,
Eth.  Nic.  1 133  a  22  ;  but  then  he,  I  take  it,  has  read  economic
demand  for  the  product  (or  cost  of  production)  into  the  shoemaker  or
builder.  But  the  man,  apart  from  a  selected  standard,  gives  you  no
rule.  I  am  sure  the  only  way  is  to  go  to  the  facts  of  membership
and  function,  and  attempt  to  arrange  a  system  which  assigns  what  is
necessary  in  their  light.  The  fundamental  difficulty  is  that  we  want
the  system  to  be  as  nearly  as  possible  automatic,  and  that  is  very
hard  to  contrive.  We  put  up  with  many  abuses  rather  than  risk
complete  new  departures.

L


146  THE WORLD OF  CLAIMS  lect.

nature  or  fortune.  And  when  our  scheme  proves
wholly  and  absolutely  alien  to  facts,  we  foster  a
pessimistic  sense  of  injustice.  We  ask,  "  Why  is  it
not  as  we  so  reasonably  expected  ?  "

Now  before  discussing  any  such  scheme  of
apportionment  as  a  principle  of  justice,  we  are  to
note  in  the  first  instance  that  it  is  an  individualistic
scheme,  in  the  sense  of  starting  from  the  apparent
finite  individual  wie  er geht  und  steht,  and  building
up,  on  and  for  him,  a  claim  to  equal  or  proportional
treatment  according  to  some  rule  or  principle  realised
in  him  as  a  unit.  Such  an  individualistic  scheme,
compared  with  the  actual  texture  of  the  world  of
events,  is  of  course  a  perpetual  source  of  disappoint-
ment, and  for  minds  which  are  apt  to  take  such  schemes
as  ultimate,  passes  into  a  deep  and  abiding  sense  of
injustice  and  injury.  "  What  had  this  man  done  or
his  parents  that  he  was  born  blind  ?  "  Scrutinise
the  unit  as  a  unit — it  is  needless  to  furnish  instances,
the  whole  of  life  is  an  instance.  In  multitudes
of  cases  —  those  common  ones,  e.g.,  of  innocent
sufferers — it  is  obvious,  and  in  all  ultimately  true,
that  you  will  not  find  within  him  what  will  explain
and  justify  his  fortune  by  any  of  your  rules  of
apportionment.  It  is  impossible  in  a  differentiated
universe  that  it  should  be  so,  for  ultimately  he — the
unit  you  are  to  take  as  basis  of  the  arrangement — is
himself  a  case  of  the  apportionment.  His  qualities
are  his  "gifts,"  and  if  you  apportion  fortunes  to
them,  you  are  apportioning  to  a  prior  apportionment.
Thus  your  expectation  is,  as  a  rule,  materially
disappointed,  and  in  any  case  it  never  has  a  really
reliable  basis.  The  world  of  claims  is  a  hard  world,
just  as  Hegel  said,  because  it  takes  you  apart  from


V  LAW  MAY  TAKE EITHER SIDE  147

all  your  deeper  spiritual  supports,  family,  love,  God,
and  demands  apparently  of  the  finite  individual  as
a  unit  to  fight  for  his  own  hand ;  and,  secondly,
because  your  deeper  spiritual  supports  are  not
really  gone,  but  inconveniently  reassert  themselves
through  the  full  reality  of  life,  shattering  the  world
of  claims  and  counter-claims  erected  with  such  pains
and  labour,  like  the  warm  floods  of  spring  shattering
an  ice-bound  river.

I  may  venture  perhaps  to  explain  the  light  in
which  this  contrast  of  worlds  appears  to  me  by
referring  once  more  to  a  phase  in  my  own  experi-
ence. When  critical  ideas  directed  against  current
orthodox  Christianity  first  made  an  impression  on
my  mind,  it  was  more  than  anything  else  the
doctrine  of  vicarious  atonement,  literally  construed,
that  seemed  shocking  and  unjust.  And  it  was  with
some  interest,  and  not  without  surprise,  that,  taking
stock  of  one's  convictions  after  a  long  development,
one  found  that  what  was  obviously  the  intention  of
the  doctrine  in  question,  so  far  from  remaining  the
great  stumbling-block  in  Christianity,  had  become
pretty  nearly  its  sole  attractive  feature.  One  had
passed,  I  suppose,  from  an  individualistic  rationalism
to  an  appreciation  of  the  world  of  spiritual  member-
ship.

That  a  law  shall  accept  an  innocent  man's  death  or
suffering  in  lieu  of  that  due  by  this  law  from  another
man  who  was  guilty  under  it,  is  a  thing  conceivable
according  to  some  ideas  of  law,  e.g.  if  its  object  is  pure
deterrence,  or  if  it  is  construed,  as  in  the  world  of
claims,  on  the  strict  analogy  of  the  exaction  of  a  debt.
But  yet,  in  this  same  world,  it  is  opposed  by  the  sharp
contradiction  that  the  person  who  suffers,  taken  as


148  THE WORLD OF  CLAIMS  lect.

a  sharply  separate  individual,  was  never  guilty  at
all,  and  had  nothing  at  all  to  do  with  that,  whatever
it  was,  that  caused  the  law  to  apply.  On  the  other
hand,  upon  the  same  quasi-legal  basis  of  separate
individuality,  you  may  urge  that  a  person — a  subject
in  the  world  of  claims — can  consent  to  what  he
pleases  {volenti  non  Jit  injuria).  And  thus  indi-
vidualistic rationalism  may  take,  as  it  does  take,
either  view  at  its  choice  :  that  vicarious  punishment
is  made  justifiable  by  consent,  and  becomes  in  this
case  a  true  satisfaction  of  the  law  (as  might  be  more
or  less  the  case  with  a  pure  debt  or  for  pure  deter-
rence) ;  or  that  it  is  irrational  and  contrary  to  the
purpose  of  law,  which  is,  at  least,  to  connect  a
consequence  with  an  act,  and  so  a  horrible  injustice.
In  taking  either  of  these  views,  I  imagine,  whether
with  rationalistic  orthodoxy  or  with  critical  ration-
alism, one  is  in  the  same  world  of  persons  in  relation,
"  at  arm's  length  "  to  each  other.

But  on  the  assumption  of  any  spiritual  identity
or  solidarity,  whether  social  or  of  a  deeper  kind  such
as  we  have  in  religion,  all  suffering  of  any  member,
we  see  at  once,  must  in  principle  be  borne  by  all ;
and,  owing  to  the  nature  of  the  power  to  endure,
will  continually  be  borne  in  chief  measure  by  "  the
best  " — the  completest,  most  capable,  least  obviously
guilty  members  of  the  whole.  This  is  an  obvious
and  primary  truth,  and,  on  the  whole,  no  decent
man  could  wish  it  to  be  otherwise,  for  it  is  the
principal  characteristic  which  ennobles  life  and  gives
greatness  to  suffering.

In  spiritual  membership  you  have  the  root  of  the
hazards  of  selfhood,  which  display  themselves  by
shattering  the  relations  of  the  world  of  claims,  itself


V ''THE  BEST" SHATTERS  ABSTRACT  JUSTICE 149

a  hazard,  as  we  have  suggested,  like  an  ice-floe  on  a
warm  ocean.  "  Mea  virtute  me  involvo  "  is  no  phrase
for  the  member  of  a  spiritual  whole.  He  is  one
with  the  child,  the  beggar,  the  criminal,  the  revolu-
tionist. They  may  throw  horrible  burdens  on
him,  and  he  has  to  shoulder  them  ;  nay  rather,  in
his  nature  and  spirit,  he  has  implicitly  shouldered
them  ad  initio.

This,  I  take  it,  is  the  fundamental  truth  which
the  doctrine  of  vicarious  atonement  was  intended  to
express.  It  is  quite  familiar  to  us  as  a  great
doctrine  of  Plato  and  St.  Paul,  and  of  later  masters
of  philosophy.  It  is  the  doctrine  "die  to  live,"  the
only  idea  that  makes  life  worth  living.  The  differ-
ence lies  in  having  passed  from  regarding  the  finite
individual  as  the  unit,  in  a  network  of  claims  and
counter-claims,  to  grasping  the  identity  of  a  life  of
membership  "  one  of  another."

5. Following  up  this  distinction  we  may  finally  Nature  of

^^  Pessimistic

explain the nature of that pessimistic sense of  sense  of
injustice  which,  as  we  have  seen,  attends  upon  the  ,35  of '"
world of claims and counter-claims. The point  ^''''™^-
clears  itself  up  in  this  way. The  common  basis  of
the  notion  of  justice  is  to  treat  every  one  by  the
same  law — insisting  on  the  point  that  this  law  is  a
general  rule — to  make  no  distinctions  which  have  a
source  outside  the  law  on  which  you  profess  to  go  ;
in  short,  to  observe  equality  before  your  principle.
But  the  Greek  theorists  saw,  and  it  is  an  all-important
truth,  that  the  idea  of  an  organic  whole  may  take
you  out  of  the  range  of  any  practical  application  of
such  a  principle,  because  of  the  spring  of  differentia-
tion which  it  contains. If  your  principle  of  justice
is  "  the  best  for  each,  consisting  in  the  fullest  service


I50  THE WORLD OF  CLAIMS  lect.

to  allwhich  his  peculiarities  allow,"  the  apportionment
of  advantages  which  commonplace  justice  contem-
plates is  thrust  out  of  the  scheme,  and  a  development
of  the  differentiated  structure  of  the  totality — society
or  spiritual  kingdom— takes  its  place.  Individualistic
justice — the  apportionment  of  advantages  to  units
by  a  general  rule  or  scale — would  be  absorbed  in
"the  best,"  and  there  would  be  nothing  separate  to
count  as  "justice"  over  against  the  realisation  of
the  completest  development  of  each  that  its  nature
permitted.^  There  could  not  be,  beside  and  outside
this  realisation,  a  scheme  of  equal  or  proportionate
claims  of  individual  units  depending  on  some  scale
of  a  selected  characteristic  belonging  to  them  as
isolated  beings.  Concrete  justice  as  above  is  the
organised  righteousness  of  Plato's  Republic  or  the
mood  of  religion.  Separate  units,  qua  separate
with  their  respective  claims  according  to  general
rules,  do  not  survive  at  this  level.

But  this  attitude  is  not  wholly  possible  for  a
finite  society  in  space  and  time,  composed  of  finite
individuals  having  many  characters  of  isolation  and
distinctness — material  characters  such  as  a  body,
and  its  accessories  in  the  way  of  property.  Here
the  principle  of  the  unit  as  such  must  receive  some
sort  of  recognition  and  protection.  You  must
provide  not  only,  so  far  as  you  can,  that  the  unit
shall  have  open  to  him  the  best  that  his  nature  in
relation  to  the  whole  allows  him,  but  that  the  simple

1  It  is  the  old  story  of  Cyrus  and  the  boy  whose  coat  fitted  another
boy  better.  Cyrus,  the  story  says,  judged  wrong  in  giving  the  coat
to  the  boy  it  fitted  best.  He  should  have  thought  whom  it  belonged
to.  But  from  the  standpoint  of  membership  and  function  the
best  for  each  when  admitted  must  supersede  justice  as  equal  treat-
ment, whether  by  the  general  rule  of  ownership  or  any  other  general
rule.


V  THERE  MUST  BE  ''CLAIMS'' IN  SOCIETY 151

material  conditions  on  which  as  finite  he  depends
shall  be  in  some  way  and  degree  accessible  to  him,
and  that  he  shall  be  furnished  with  some  apportion-
ment of  a  limited  and  separate  degree  of  self-
maintenance.  You  cannot  allow  an  omnipotent
principle  like  that  of  spiritual  membership  to  be
used  and  abused  at  the  discretion  of  finite  societies.
The  rule,  in  itself  perfectly  sound,  "  It  is  expedient
that  one  man  should  die  [or  starve  or  lose  his  goods
or  his  health]  for  the  people,"  is  apt  to  be  applied
inexpediently  in  the  practical  government  of  terres-
trial communities.  And  so  it  comes  about  that
our  distinctive  sense  of  justice  is  divorced  from
our  sense  of  the  best,  and  is  hardened  into  what
might  be  called  a  protective  or  conservative  rule,  or
rule  for  ensuring  the  minimum,  by  which  units  are
to  be  conserved  in  some  simple  degree  and  propor-
tion to  their  mere  existence  and  presence  as  numer-
able factors  of  the  community.  This  is  the  justice
which  the  courts  maintain,  rooted  in  the  fact  that
every  finite  unit  as  such  has  (rightly  or  wrongly
from  an  ultimate  point  of  view)  claims  and  accessories
belonging  to  his  separate  existence,  in  which,  if
there  is  to  be  a  visible  social  order,  he  must  be
guaranteed  security.  There  must  be  in  finite  life
a  justice  which  maintains  some  apportionment  of
externals  to  individuals.  This  is  what  gives  us  our
current  idea  of  justice  ;  this  individualistic  apportion-
ment is  what,  as  a  rule,  we  mean  by  it.

Now  this  conception  of  justice  throws  us  back  on
the  world  of  claims  and  counter-claims,  the  world
of  individualistic  justice,  with,  as  we  saw,  most
insufficient  data  for  establishing  schemes  of  propor-
tion. But yet, following  the analogy  of  a  finite


152  THE WORLD OF  CLAIMS  lect.

community,  we  adhere  to  the  conviction  that  there
is  something  definite  and  anticipable,  some  appor-
tionment of  fortunes,  some  routine  in  the  ordering
of  externals  and  incidents  and  the  trend  of  events,
which  is  what  we  call  "just,"  i.e.  suitable  to  our
unitary  finite  existence,  in  virtue  of  whatsoever
feature  of  it  we  may  happen  to  choose.  This,  as  we
hold,  we  have  a  right  to  expect  and  demand  from
God,  Man,  and  Nature  as  our  counter-claim  to  the
claims  which  we  acknowledge  that,  as  terms  in
certain  relations,  they  have  upon  us.

Here,  then,  is  the  crux.  The  great  world  of
spiritual  membership,  to  which  really  and  in  the  end
we  belong,  takes  no  account  at  all  of  any  such  finite
claims,  for  reasons  to  be  stated  directly.  Therefore
our  "  individual  "  fortunes  betray  no  approximation
to  any  single  standard  of  individualistic  justice,  to
any  claim  for  apportionment  of  external  advantages
either  by  equality  qua  human  beings,  or  by  any
other  standard.  The  real  principle  of  things  is  quite
other,  and  dashes  our  world  of  individualistic  justice
to  shivers  wherever  for  a  moment  it  has  seemed  to
assume  consistency.  Therefore  the  world  of  claims
and  counter-claims  is  oppressed  not  only  with  a
claim  for  goodness  which  can  never  be  realised,  but
with  a  claim  for  considerate  treatment  from  without
which  bears  no  relation  to  spiritual  reality.  And,
therefore,  to  acquiesce  in  the  ideas  of  that  world  is
to  be  always  in  moral  despondency  and  also  in
pessimism,  and  filled  with  a  sense  of  injustice.

For,  as  we  have  urged,^  the  spiritual  world,  as  a

1  Aristotle'sdistiibutivejustice,  though  itself  a  formof  individualistic
apportionment,  is  yet  by  its  recognition  of  an  organic  difterentiation
in  society  akin  on  the  whole  to  a  principle  of  spiritual  membership,


V  THE TRUE  RULE  NOT  FOR UNITS  153

world  of  true  membership,  affords  no  encouragement
to  ideas  of  justice  turning  on  apportionment  of
advantages  to  units  by  any  rule  whatever.  To
begin  with,  the  very  basis  of  apportionment  is  cut
away.  The  unit  makes  no  insistence  on  its  finite
or  isolable  character.  It  looks,  as  in  religion,  from
itself  and  not  to  itself,  and  asks  nothing  better
than  to  be  lost  in  the  whole  which  is  at  the  same
time  its  own  best.  Such  an  attitude  gives  no  ful-
crum for  the  principles  of  the  world  of  claims  and
counter-claims.  There  are  no  claims  and  counter-
claims.^

6. And,  secondly,  if  you  could,  or  so  far  as  you  why  nut
think  you  can,  find  a  basis  and  rule  of  apportionment  standard  of
to units taken as  separate,  the results  considered  j-ord^n'^^Jo
from  an  adequate  point  of  view  would  certainly  be  spiritual

i-  i-  J  member-

repulsive to US in their details, would contradict  ship?

Self-con-

the  conception  of  unity  in  happiness  and  suffering,  tradiction
and  would  take  us  back to the  ground  on  which  standard.
it  appeared  irrational  and  inequitable  that  one — to
recur  to  the  terminology  of  that  level — should  bear
the  suffering  or  the  punishment  of  another.

This  second  point  was  referred  to  in  the  Intro-
duction to  the  former  volume,  but  a  few  remarks
may  be  added  here  by  way  of  elucidation.

If  we  are  arranging  any  system  or  enterprise  of
a  really  intimate  character  for  persons  closely  united
in  mind  and  thoroughly  penetrated  with  the  spirit  of
the  whole — persons  not  "at  arm's  length"  to  one
another — all  the  presuppositions of  individualistic


as  against  the  justice  which  merely  recognises  the  necessity  of  securing
units,  qua  units,  in  their  apportionment.

1 We  discussed  what  is  pretty  nearly  the  equivalent  of  this  principle
in  Principle^  pp.  5,  ;6.


154  THE WORLD OF  CLAIMS  lect.

justice  at  once  fall  to  the  ground.  We  do  not  give
the  "  best  "  man  the  most  comfort,  the  easiest  task,
or  even,  so  far  as  the  conduct  of  the  enterprise  is
concerned,  the  highest  reward.  We  give  him  the
greatest  responsibility,  the  severest  toil  and  hazard,
the  most  continuous  and  exacting  toil  and  self-sac-
rifice.^ It  is  true,  and  inevitable  for  the  reasons  we
have  pointed  out  as  affecting  all  finite  life,  that  in  a
certain  way  and  degree  honour  and  material  reward
do  follow  upon  merit  in  this  world.  They  follow,
we  may  say,  mostly  wrong  ;  but  the  world,  in  its
rough  working,  by  its  own  rough-and-ready  standards,
thinks  it  necessary  to  attempt  to  appraise  the  finite
individual  unit ;  this  is,  in  fact,  the  individualistic
justice,  which,  when  we  find  it  shattered  and  despised
by  the  universe,  calls  out  the  pessimism  we  are
discussing.  But  the  more  intimate  and  spiritual  is
the  enterprise,  the  more  does  the  true  honour  and
reward  restrict  itself  to  what  lives

"  In  those  pure  eyes
And  perfect  witness  of  all-judging  Jove,"

that  is,  to  the  spiritual  fact,  the  realised  unity  in  which
the  higher  is  higher  by  his  completer  self-surrender.
We  may  think  of  the  "  honours  and  rewards  "  that
have  come  to  the  great  poets  of  the  world.  Plainly,
there  is  no  word  to  be  spoken  of  any  proportional
relation  between  these  and  their  services  to  the
world — there  could  be  no  proportion  between  such
things.  As  finite  material  beings  it  would  have
been  well,  we  think,  if  due  preservation  and  attention
qua  human units had come to  them  ;  and  so,  no

1  Cf.  John  Brown,  Rhodes'  Hist,  of  U.S.A.,  ii.  387,  "God  has
honoured  but  comparatively  a  small  part  of  mankind  with  such
mighty  and  soul-satisfying  rewards  "  of  an  enterprise  in  which  death
was  practically  certain.


V  APPLIED TO UNITS, SEEMS UNJUST  155

doubt,  founding  ourselves  on  the  general  duty  of
humanity  to  its  members,  we  are  right  in  thinking.
But  we  cannot  put  it  on  the  ground  of  a  just  pro-
portion between  their  deserts  and  their  treatment.
There  is  no  such  proportion,  and  the  justice  which
we  are  inclined  to  invoke  is  the  necessary /egard
of  a  decent  society  for  its  units,  and  not  any  appor-
tionment of  advantages  by  a  standard  of  merits.  No
advantages  that  we  can  apportion  count  in  the  scale.^
We  feel  that  to  make  a  great  poet,  say,  the  richest
man  in  his  community,  would  be  irrelevant  and  self-
contradictory.  It  is  not  what  he  wants,  and  would
probably  choke  his  work  and  do  enormous  social
mischief

If  we  tried  to  embody  our  highest  instincts,
founded  on  the  sense  of  spiritual  membership,  in
the  form  of  individualistic  justice,  i.e.  legislating  for
the  inherent  need  and  claim  of  isolated  units,  we
should  more  plausibly  get  some  such  result  as  when
we  send  women  and  children  first  to  the  boats  in
shipwreck.  "  Happiness  to  the  weak,  cowardly,
over-sensitive  ;  hard  service  and  endurance  to  the
capable  and  the  strong."  But  the  fact  is  that  this,
like  any  other  plausible  principle  of  individualistic
apportionment,  would  break  down  after  a  step  or
two.  The  weaker  souls  would  prove  unable  to
contain  and  possess  the  happiness  you  would  offer
them,  and  you  would  find,  as  you  do  find,  every  indi-
vidualistic principle  superseded  at  any  chance  point
by  the  working  of  the  spiritual  reality,  which  admits
of  no  such  principles  by  the  side  of  its  law,  "  realise

1  It  sounds  ridiculous  to  say  that  a  man  is  allowed  to  starve
because  no  material  recompense  is  adequate  to  his  merits.  But  I
have  no  doubt  it  is  a  wide-reaching  principle,  and  not  in  every  degree
wrong. Such  people  do  not  want  our  rewards.


156  THE WORLD OF  CLAIMS  lect.

the  best," For  each  the  only  real  claim  is  for  the

best  it  can  be,  at  once  the  highest  self-surrender,

and,  no  doubt,  the  completest  self-affirmation. If  we

say,  as  indeed  we  well  might  desire  to  say,  that  in

this  fullest  self-surrender  there  lies,  as the truest

self-realisation, so  too the  greatest happiness, we

should be coming in sight of  a  principle  which

undoubtedly  has  great  effect upon  our  judgments

even  in  common  life,  and  which  would  harmonise

well  with our  views of  the nature of  reality  and

satisfaction.^ But  it  would  not  in  any  way  appease

the  pessimistic  sense  of  injustice  rooted  in  the  world

of  claims  and  counter-claims. For  it  would  set  all

claims  at  defiance.

To  make  7. I  do  not  mean  to  say  that  the  actual  apportion-

mi-nd"'  ^ ment  of  fortune  to  finite  units  could  ever  seem  to

da.°mfthe  "^  wholly  intelligible. I only  say  that one  plain

judge  of  its  2,tA universal principle of false iudgfment, the

own  need  ^  ^  j o  >

for  hard-  principle  of  individualistic  justice,  is  got  rid  of  by
make  the  the  above  considerations,  and  so  far  we  are  gainers,
and  the  pessimistic  sense  of  injury,  analogous  to
moral  despondency,  is  done  away.  The  view  we
have  taken  paves  the  way  for  a  treatment  which  at
least  harmonises  better  than  current  pessimism  with
the  demands  of  actual  fact,  and  destroys  the  neces-
sity and  inclination  for  the  wearisome  "  why  ?  "  of
the  popular  pessimist,  and  the  equally  wearisome
sentimentalism,  of  compensation  to  be  found  in  a
life  beyond  the  grave.  The  principal  difficulties
which  remain  are  not  so  much  about  the  proportion
of  fortune  to  merit — not  really  an  idea  which  has
a  strong  hold  on  healthy  minds — ^but  about  certain
existences  whose  contribution  to  any  possible  whole

1 Philosophical  Theory  of  the  Siaic,  ed.  2 p.  xxx.


universe  a
farce.


V  FINITE CANNOT  CHOOSE ITS  INFINITY 157

we  find  it  hard  to  understand,^  and  about  certain
extremes  of  suffering  and  hindrance  which  seem  to
raise  the  same  question.  To  these  matters  we  shall
have  to  return  when  we  deal  expressly  with  pain
and  evil.  I  will  here  do  no  more  than  repeat  the
principle  touched  on  in  the  Introduction  to  the
former  course,  that  there  must  be  in  the  universe
something  bona  fide  above  and  beyond  the  finite
being,  from  which  he  has  to  learn,  and  to  which  he
has  to  go  to  be  moulded  and  disciplined.  Once
refer  the  degree  of  suffering  and  difficulty  necessary
and  permissible  in  the  realisation  of  the  best,  to  the
judgment  of  the  finite  beings  whom  it  is  to  affect,
and  you  have  turned  the  whole  idea  of  a  universe
into  a  farce.  Who  would  submit,  if  he  could  help
it,  to  the  discipline  inherent  in  his  membership
which  makes  him  a  real  man  and  a  soul  ?  ^

I  have  been  reading,  like  many  others,  I  suppose,
Miss  Johnson's  The  Long  Roll,  the  terrible  story  of
certain  campaigns  in  the  American  Civil  War.  I
might  be  challenged,  "  Would  I  maintain  that  such
things  could  exist  in  a  just  universe  ?  "  I  am  not
going  to  answer  the  challenge,  but  to  point  out
what  I  hold  an  absurd  implication  in  it.  Am  I,  an
elderly  gentleman  almost  tied  to  his  arm-chair,  to
be  asked  to  dictate  the  limits  of  heroism  and  suffer-
ing necessary  to  develop  and  elicit  the  true  reality
of  finite  spirits.-*  Why,  even  if  the  question  were,
should  we  ourselves  like  to  have  taken  part  in  those
campaigns,  or  to  take  part  in  such  struggles  con-

1  Imbeciles  are  a  typical  case.  Of  course,  in  all  these  extreme
cases  we  must  not  judge  them  both  as  capable  of  spiritual  life  and
as  not. If  they  are  not,  we  can  hardly  treat  them  as  deprived  of  it.

2  Cf.  Francis  Thompson's  wonderful  poem,  "  The  Hound  of
Heaven."


1 58  THE WORLD OF  CLAIMS  lect.

ceived  as  still  future,  I  imagine  that  very  different
voices  would  be  heard  from  different  sections  of
mankind.  And,  to  go  deeper,  take  more  cruel  and
less  brilliant  suffering,  of  which,  if  offered,  every-
one would  pray  that  the  cup  might  pass  away  from
him  (is  not  this  reference,  indeed,  sufficient  for  my
argument?),  is  it  not  clear  that  finite  judgment
would  practically  always  be  wrong,  and  one  would
refuse  what  alone  could  recast  one  as  a  less  worthless
being,  or  what  made  the  value  of  an  age  or  a  nation  ?
And  in  principle  is  it  not  clear  that  to  set  within  the
judgment  of  the  finite  spirit  those  depths  of  the
universe  on  which  its  being  more  than  finite  are  to
depend,  is  a  contradiction  in  terms,  and  makes  futile
the  whole  notion  of  a  finite  partaking  of  and  reaching
into  infinity  ?  The  whole  point  of  the  connection
is  that  the  finite  spirit  is  more  than  it  knows.  If
we  let  it,  taking  itself  as  finite,  lay  down  its  own
ultimate  limits,  why  then,  of  course,  all  that  it
dreads  is  gone,  and  with  it  all  that  made  life  worth
living.  I  venture  these  remarks  because  I  seem  to
observe  an  extraordinary  eclecticism  in  the  toleration
of  pain  and  trouble,  as  if  Marathon  and  Salamis
were  somehow  obviously  fine  and  desirable  events,
while  modern  battles  of  a  less  picturesque  type,  and
attended  no  doubt  by  miseries  on  a  more  enormous
scale  in  the  way  of  neglected  wounded  and  the
like — not  to  speak  of  the  thousand-fold  horrors  of
our  civilisation  in  its  grimmer  and  dirtier  parts —
were  obviously  and  self-evidently  to  be  ruled  out  as
intolerable.^ I  am  not  at  present  arguing  that  this

1 I  confess  that  eclecticism  of  this  kind always reminds  me  of
Hotspur's  interlocutor  :

"  And  but  for  these  vile  guns
He  would  himself  have  been  a  soldier."


V  ''VILLAINOUS  SALT-PETRE"  159

view  is  wrong,^  but  only  that  it  is  very  startling,
and  that  it  would  need  a  great  deal  of  explanation
and  defence  to  make  it  in  any  way  plausible.  The
following  lectures  will  attempt  a  more  thorough
treatment  of  the  subject.

1  Vatke  thinks  you  may  distinguish  between  evil  which  ought  (so
to  speak)  and  evil  which  ought  not  to  exist.  It  seems  to  me  scarcely
possible  to  maintain  the  view.  See,  however,  Rashdall,  Theory  of
Good  and  Evil,  ii.  236.


to  effect
maximise
rather  than
minimise.


B. HAZARDS  AND  HARDSHIPS  OF
FINITE  SELFHOOD— C^;^//;2z/^rtf

LECTURE VI

PLEASURE AND PAIN

Failure  of  I.  We  saw  in  the  last  lecture  that  the  hazards  and
S  ci^ms^  hardships  of  which  man  is  so  deeply  sensible  seem
What  our ^  ^ y^ accidents  of  his  lot,  but  rather  to  be  rooted

account

of  our  ij^  |-[^g  double  nature  which  he  possesses  as  a  finite-
aspires  infinite  being.  The  World  of  Claims,  we  held,  was
an  attempt  to  satisfy  the  demand  of  this  double
nature  by  a  sort  of  debtor  and  creditor  account,
expressing  our  relation  to  the  universe  as  claims
and  counter-claims  between  self-existent  beings  at
arm's  length  towards  one  another.  And  we  saw
that  such  a  scheme  could  not  but  leave  us  dissatisfied,
because  an  external  relation  to  a  quasi-finite  God
and  to  other  finite  beings  remains  wholly  inadequate
to  the  spiritual  membership  which  underlies  our
apparent  isolation.  Thus  it  seemed  that  our  moral
imperative  is  a  hazard — an  arbitrary  obligation  im-
posed by  a  power  unconnected  with  our  will — and
our  rule  of  individualistic  justice  must  leave  us  under
a  sense  of  hardship  when  we  find  it  fail  to  control
our  true  nature  and  destiny.  No  conceivable  rule
can  satisfy  us  so  long  as  it  treats  us  as  units  to  be
considered  on  our  several  merits.

There is indeed a more substantial world of

1 60


LECT.  VI '''TIS  SOMETHING TO BE GREAT"  i6i

morality,  in  which  spiritual  membership  has  attained
a  certain  degree  of  realisation.  The  consideration
of  this  belongs  to  the  philosophy  of  society,  or,  in
our  enquiry,  to  the  hopes  rather  than  the  hardships
of  selfhood.  And  there  it  will  fall  to  be  considered
under  the  general  heading  of  religion.  But  our
immediate  purpose  is  to  trace  to  their  common  root
the  troubles  of  the  finite  self,  and  to  display,  not
their  unreality,  not  their  certainty  of  compensation,
but  in  the  first  instance  simply  their  source  and
nature.  If  this  can  be  done,  as  we  have  attempted,
and  are  attempting,  the  result  should  be  interesting,
and  perhaps  something  more.  To  think  that  there
is  any  sort  of  rhyme  or  reason  in  our  sufferings,  that
they  are  not  a  dead  fact  of  destiny,  nor  a  cruelty  of
an  omnipotent  tyrant,  would  be  helpful,  I  believe,  at
least  to  certain  minds.  And  if  it  further  appears
that  our  troubles  and  our  value  have  one  and  the
same  root — and  this  again  we  have  attempted  and
are  attempting  to  make  good — it  will  not  indeed
directly  make  the  former  less.  Our  business  here  is
truth,  and  not  a  thMicde.  It  would  rather,  we
might  say  truly,  make  more  of  them,  make  them
deeper,  greater,^  more  significant. But  yet  in  doing

^ Cf.  T.  E.  Brown's  poem,  "Pain" —

The  man  that  hath  great  griefs  I  pity  not ;
'Tis  something  to  be  great
In  any  wise,  and  hint  the  larger  state
Though  but  in  shadow  of  a  shade,  God  wot  !

*  *  ;.t  *  *

But  tenfold  one  is  he,  who  feels  all  pains
Not  partial,  knowing  them
As  ripples  parted  from  the  gold-beaked  stem,
Wherewith  God's  galley  onward  ever  strains.

To  him  the  sorrows  are  the  tension-thrills
Of  that  serene  endeavour,
Which  yields  to  God  for  ever  and  for  ever
The  joy  that  is  more  ancient  than  the  hills.

M


1 62


PLEASURE  AND PAIN


LECT.


Pleasure
and  pain  ;
their  com-
mon root
in  the
double
nature  of
finite
beings.


SO  it  might  make  them  less  unwelcome,  though
that  is  not  here  our  primary  aim.  We  remember
how  Dante's  souls  in  purgatory  passionately  de-
sired the  pains  which  assured  them  of  their  place
in  the  eternal  love.^

2.  Another  set  of  experiences,  then,  which  may
well  be  counted  together  under  the  head  of  hazards
and  hardships,  are  what  we  call  pleasure  and  pain.
Pleasure  is  certainly  a  hazard.  It  may  come  from
anything,  good  or  bad,  and  we  cannot  tell  what  in  a
given  context  it  indicates.  Pain  is  both  a  hazard
and  a  hardship.  Not  only  may  it  come  from  any-
thing and  indicate  anything,  but  it  seems  to  be  in
itself  a  cruelty  exercised  by  the  universe  upon  us.
Pleasure,  taken  by  itself  and  out  of  context,  would
for  us  need  no  explanation.  Vddn  prima  facie  leaves
us  discontented  and  enquiring.

Pleasure  and  pain,  it  is  suggested,  are  rooted  in
the  same  characteristic  of  our  nature.  And,  more-
over, this  is  the  same  characteristic  which  is  the
source  of  all  the  hazards  and  hardships  of  selfhood —
our  finite-infinite  being.  The  essential  point  which
I  hope  to  illustrate  is  that  the  finite  being  is  always
passing  out  of  itself,  which  also  means  into  itself.
And  this  passage,  while  on  the  one  hand  the  condi-
tion of  expansion  and  attainment,  is  on  the  other
hand  inevitably  attended  by  some  degree  of  contra-
diction, friction,  sacrifice.^  It  is  in  the  tension  and
its  incidents,  which  this  self-transcendence  implies,
that  the  very  life  of  the  universe  consists.  And,  as
we  partly  saw  in  the  former  series,  and  shall  further

1  They  took  care  not,  in  the  interest  of  seeing  and  addressing
Dante,  to  extend  any  part  of  their  persons  beyond  the  flames.

2  Cf.  Principle,  Lect.  VI.


VI  ''PLEASURES  MIXED WITH  PAINS"  163

see,  the  nature  of  finiteness  forbids  a  frictionless
union.  If  experience  seems  to  show  something  of
the  kind,  it  must  be  a  partial  exaltation,  and  not  the
full  union  which  alone  is  relative  to  full  satisfaction.^

3. It is commonly assumed that pleasure  and  common
pain are plus and minus quantities on the  same  of  pleasure
scale — that  it  is  possible  to  find  a  quantity  of  either  [Jot  '''''" '
which  will  cancel  any  given  quantity  of  the  other,  opp°s'te

Jo  T  J  quantities

And in common experience somethinp- like this  °n  ^he

^  ^  same  scale.

appears  true.  We  do  seem  to  treat  the  two  as
opposites  which  can  only  come  together  in  a  whole
by  subtraction  of  the  one  kind  from  the  other.  But
the  more  serious,  the  more  deeply  implicated  in  life
our  action  and  feeling  become,  the  less  possible  is  it
to  acquiesce  in  this  simple  opposition.  Even  in
some  of  their  commonest  forms  the  two  refuse  to  be
finally  distinguished,  and  force  themselves  upon  us
as  kindred  aspects  of  some  condition  essential  to  our
lives.  All  the  classical  instances  of  pleasures  in-
separable from  pains  are  here  more  or  less  in  point.
For  the  fact  is  that  they  are  not  merely  linked  by
causation  and  in  succession,  but  they  infect  each
other's  character.^  The  fact  is  obvious  in  the  quasi-
satisfactions  of  the  fiercer  desires,  the  pleasures  of
pursuit,  the  pangs  and  delights  of  production.  It
needs  some  attention  and  imagination  to  realise  the
extraordinary  aptness  of  the  metaphor  by  which
Socrates  treated  creative  activity  as  a  travail  of  the
soul. It  is  not  merely  a  question  of  a  craving  and

1 Cf.  Principle,  Lect.  I.

-  I  think  it  quite  probable  that  in  saying  that  certain  pleasures
and  pains  "take  their  colours  from  "  one  another  {Rcfi.  585),  Plato
meant  not  merely  that  pains  give  a  false  intensity  to  pleasures,  but
that  they  infect  them  with  some  of  the  fierceness  and  restlessness  of
pains.


1 64


PLEASURE  AND PAIN


LECT.


Pleasure
and  pain
imply  self-
transcend-
ence ; in
pleasure
harmoni-
ous, in  pain,
obstructed
by  contra-
diction.


its  relief.  The  self-expression  or  self-expansion
itself  tears  its  pathway  ;  and  the  poet  or  artist,  I
take  it,  if  asked  whether  first-rate  production  were
pleasurable  or  painful,  would  not  be  able  to  analyse
the  experience  into  a  balance  of  opposites.^

4,  It  would  be  beyond  my  purpose  and  my
competence  to  attempt  a  complete  investigation  into
the  nature  of  pleasure  and  pain.  But  I  will  try  in  a
few  words  to  connect  our  doctrine  with  the  best
ideas  on  the  subject.

Pleasure,  I  think  it  is  generally  agreed,  accom-
panies activity  in  which  the  self  is  maximised  ;  that
is  to  say,  either  attends  upon  expansion  of  the  self
as  such,  or,  being  an  incident  of  activity,  is  dependent
on  the  harmoniousness  of  conditions  which  relatively
increases  it  by  negating  all  that  baffles  or  obstructs
it.  This  statement  includes,  I  hope,  what  is  clearly
true  about  the  connection  of  pleasure  with  conation.
We  cannot  disregard  the  classical  instances  of
the  pleasures  unattended  by  the  pain  of  previous
craving  ;  and  if  we  make  conation  the  condition  of
pleasure,  it  must  be  a  conation  which  can  be
continuously  merged  in  fruition."  All  the  special
theories  of  pleasure,  which  it  will  be  sufficient  to
imply  in  describing  theories  of  pain,  come  back,  I
think,  to  these  general  characters.  By  "activity  "  I
only  mean  a  change  accepted  by  the  self  as  issuing

1  I  suppose  we  common  people  know  something  of  the  kind  when
we  have,  e.g.,  to  make  a  speech.  We  are  miserable,  no  doubt,  but
this  is  partly  because  we  are  above  our  usual  level,  and  are  living  at
a  pitch  of  effort  and  excitement  to  which  we  are  not  normally  equal.
And  in  this  exaltation  there  is  also  enjoyment,  and  enjoyment  insepar-
able from  the  misery.  The  instance,  though  commonplace,  goes  to
the  heart  of  the  whole  argument  of  this  lecture.

2  Principle,  Lect.  IV.,  sect.  3,  and  Ar.  Proc,  19 12,  on  Mechanism
and  Purpose. Cf.  Bradley,  Mind,  xxxiii.  p,  43  note.


VI PAIN  =^  STIMULATION  PLUS OBSTRUCTION 165

from  Itself.  Persistence  or  self-maintenance  against
possible  cessation  or  diminution  must  count  as  such
a  change.^

The  nature  of  pain  has  been  stated  in  very  many
ways.  But  they  all,  so  far  as  I  can  see,  come  back
to  the  diminution  of  activity  or  self-maintenance  by
baffling  or  obstruction.  It  will  not  do  to  say  that
the  mere  diminution  of  the  world  of  consciousness
involves  pain.  Falling  asleep,  and  other  forms  of
narrowing  consciousness,  are  obviously  painless.  If
what  is  lost  vanishes  wholly,  so  that  nothing  remains
of  it,^  the  loss  does  not  cause  pain.  It  is  when  the
roots  of  what  is  gone  remain,  and  struggle  to
reinstate  it,  that  contradiction,  which  is  painful,  is
produced.

The  familiar  observation  that  pain  accompanies
what  is  organically  Injurious,  and  pleasure  what  is
advantageous,  is  rather  a  theory  of  how  they  come
about  in  evolution  than  an  account  of  their  actual
conditions.  And,  moreover,  the  injury  or  advantage
which  is  attended  to  Is  normally  local  and  partial
(a  sweet  poison  Is  the  classical  instance),  so  that  the
mere  feeling  produced  by  an  agency  Is  no  guide  to
Its  total  effect  on  the  organism.^  Nevertheless,  this
general  principle  Is  akin  to  a  whole  group  of
theories,  beginning  with  that  of  its  great  advocate,
Herbert  Spencer,  that  pleasure  attends  medium
exertion,  and  pain  repressed  or  extreme  activity/
It is not much  more  than  a  specification  of  this

1  See  Bradley,  Mind,  xliv.  439.

2  I  am  here  following  Bradley.

3  Spinoza's  account  of  partial  pleasures  and  pains  seems  to  me
still  the  soundest.

4  The  whole  group  of  theories  is  closely  akin  to  Aristotle's  connec-
tion of  pleasure  with  an  avf/ATrof^tfrT^?  ivepyeui.,  and  does  not  make
very  much  advance  upon  it.


1 66  PLEASURE  AND  PAIN  lect.

doctrine  when  we  have  pain  ascribed  to  fatigue  of
an  organ,  to  excess  of  wear  over  repair,  or  to  excess-
ive intensity  of  the  object.  An  analogous  account
gives  a  fuller  rationale  of  the  experience  when  it
says  that  pain  lies  in  the  stimulation  of  an  organ
combined  with  repression  or  obstruction  of  its
activity.^  A  simple  example,  very  relevant  to
theories  of  this  class,  is  the  discomfort  to  the  eye,
amounting  sometimes  to  actual  pain,  of  a  light
flickering  at  certain  small  intervals.^  It  is  a  case,
the  conditions  of  which  can  to  some  extent  be
analysed  by  attention,  and  which  yet  is  on  the
border  of  actual  sensation.  Pleasures  and  pains  of
sensation  cannot  as  a  rule  be  analysed  in  terms  of
any  theory,  and  our  direct  account  of  pleasure  and
of  pain  is  restricted  to  cases  in  which  psychical
antecedents  are  traceable.

The  conditions  of  pain,  then,  as  explicitly  or  im-
plicitly recognised  by  all  these  theories,  are  twofold.
We  want  an  activity — mind  or  body  reacting  to  an
object,  not  necessarily  by  conation  unless  in  a  very
wide  and  unusual  sense  —  and  also  a  baffling  or
obstruction  of  it.  It  is  not  going  far  afield  to  sum-
marise these conditions as a felt contradiction.

1  It  has  to  be  admitted  that  there  are  certain  kinds  and  amounts
of  obstruction  which  serve  pleasantly  to  augment  activity.  In  fact,
how  distinguish  obstruction,  technically,  from  the  work  in  doing  which
the  organ  is  exercised,  and  which  is,  ex  hypoihesi,  the  condition  of
pleasure  ?  It  is  difficult  to  get  away  from  inserting  in  the  standard
of  pleasurable  activity  the  condition  "pleasurable."  Still,  we  know
what  baffling  and  obstruction  are.  They  come  from  outside  the  relevant
object.  Cf.  Sidgwick,  Methods  of  Ethics,  ed.  6,  book  ii.  ch.  vi.
sect.  2.

2  There  is  some  analogy  between  this  condition  and  that  which
is  felt  as  discord  in  music.  The  latter  has  been  compared  to  the
feeling  of  trying  to  do  sums  in  one's  head,  and  finding  the  numbers
too  high.  The  ear  demands  a  smooth  tone,  and  is  baffled  by  the
irreducible  beats.


VI  TRUE  PLEASURE  MUST  INCLUDE  PAIN 167

The  general  nature  of  contradiction,  we  have  seen,
is  an  attempted  union  rendered  impossible  by  in-
adequate adjustment  of  the  terms.  Hence  pain
now  appears  to  us  as  correlative  to  contradiction,
while  pleasure  is  correlative  to  successful  union.

Thus  these  two  experiences  seem  to  reproduce
in  the  realm  of  feeling  the  general  structure  of  satis-
faction and  reality.  The  nature  of  the  finite-infinite
being  involves  constant  self- transcendence,  union
with  a  not-self  and  reshaping  of  the  self  The  dis-
tinction between  pleasure  and  pain  is  the  distinction
between  this  union  when  unobstructed,  and  when
obstructed,  or  realised  with  friction  and  sacrifice.

Both  experiences,  therefore,  in  a  sense  encourage
movement.  Pleasure  encourages  the  unobstructed
activity  to  persist ;  pain  forces  the  mental  or  bodily
organism  to  changes  of  attitude  in  seeking  for
relief.

5. Now  we  can  carry further  the  suggestion  of  Satisfac
sect. I, that pleasure and  pain are not plus and  IraLcend-
minus  quantities,  reciprocally  exclusive,  and  only  to  fin-te^Jef^g
be  broupfht  into  one  whole  by  subtraction. Rather,  !^"f'

o  ''  include

in  accordance  with Plato's indication to  which I  something

.  J  .  which  has

have  often  referred,  we  are  to  consider  them  as  been  pain,
pointing  to  an  inclusive  experience,  which  should
participate  in  the  character  of  both  while  trans-
cending either.  For  the  preceding  considerations
suggest  that  both  have  the  same  root  in  finiteness,
and  partake  of  the  same  character  in  different
modifications.  It  may  be  urged  that  according  to
my  own  contention  I  ought  to  take  pleasure  as  the
perfection  of  the  experience  which,  when  imperfect,  is
pain,  just  as  satisfaction  corresponds  to  the  perfec-
tion  of  the experience which, when imperfect, is


i68  PLEASURE  AND  PAIN  lect.

contradiction.  But  such  a  pleasure  would  have  to
carry  in  itself  the  significance  of  all  pains,  as  a
perfect  satisfaction  carries  in  it  the  reconciliation
of  all  contradictions.  Common  or  easy  pleasures
merely  omit  or  pass  by  obstructions,  as  common
and  easy  satisfactions — practical  or  theoretical —
merely  omit  or  pass  by  contradictions.  The  union
of  an  imperfect  self  with  perfection  cannot  be  mere
inclusion.  The  finite  being,  having  a  false  com-
pleteness in  itself,  and  being  based  on  a  casual
range  of  externality,  i.e.  being  "natural,"  has  not
merely  to  be  added  to  in  its  lifelong  struggle  to-
wards the  Absolute.  It  has  also  to  be  taken  from,
to  be  recast  and  opened  up  to  services  and  vistas
prima  facie  beyond  it.  And  this,  like  the  readjust-
ment of  terms  which  removes  contradiction,  means
a  profound  rearrangement  and  transformation.  The
sum  and  climax  of  such  an  experience,  though  we
are  aware  of  it  in  its  factors  rather  than  in  its
unity,^  must  be  in  principle  something  great  ^
rather  than  something  easily  pleasant.  Of  course,
it  is  well  seen  that  the  greatest  things  may  possess
the  profoundest  charm.

6. Thus  we  are  brought  to  a  theoretical  result  of
^^^"° some  importance. It  is  impossible  to  hold  pain  to

special  "■  *■

relation  to  j^g  the  effect  or  concomitant  of  evil  as  opposed  to
pleasure  good  ;  of  evil  either  in  the  form  of  moral  badness
oniyTrfk°'  or  of  sin  as  known  to  religion.  In  the  very  widest
sensS'^'''^ sense  we  may  say,  indeed,  that  pain  is  itself  a  form

^  Principle,  p.  273  ff.

2  Cf.  Dante's  Purgatorio,  and  the  kindred  theory  of  Purgatory  in
the  "  Dream  of  Gerontius."  Most  people  will  admit  there  is  a  great
deal  which  must  be  burned  out  of  us.  But  it  seems  redundant  to
add  on  this  process  after  our  earthly  life,  when  it  is  so  sorely  needed  in
helping  to  make  that  life  less  unintelligible.


Pain


VI  FINITENESS,  NOT  EVIL,  ROOT  OF  PAIN 169

of  evil,  being  an  experience,  so  far  as  it  goes,  incom-
patible with  complete  satisfaction.  And  this  is  the
same  thing  as  recognising  that  it  has  its  roots
in  the  same  condition  which  is  the  root  of  moral
badness  and  of  sin.  But  goodness  has  also  its  root
in  the  same  condition,  and  involves  the  same  con-
tradiction, which  is  fundamental  in  finite  being.
Thus  pain,  being  simply  the  feeling  of  a  de  facto
contradiction,  belongs  to  goodness  as  well  as  to
immorality  and  sin.  We  have,  moreover,  to  bear
in  mind  that  in  a  world  of  spiritual  membership  the
pain  or  wrongdoing  or  extinction  of  any  member  in
principle  belongs  to  the  world  throughout,  so  that
it  is  wholly  impossible  that  pain  shall  be  confined
to  those  who  in  the  normal  sense,  considered  as
units,  are  authors  of  evil.^  Pleasure,  on  the  other
hand,  as  it  escapes  the  contradiction  which  is  pain
by  being,  like  pain,  partial  and  abstract,  may,  like
pain,  be  met  with  in  any  one  of  the  three,  or  strictly
four,  types  of  experience  in  question — moral  or
religious  good,  moral  or  religious  evil.  So  compli-
cated is  the  context  of  life.  If  we  are  asked  how  a
distinction  can  be  drawn  between  pleasure  and  pain
on  the  one  hand,  and  good  and  evil  on  the  other
hand,  if  both  are  antitheses  rooted  in  the  funda-
mental nature  of  a  finite  being,  the  answer  is  in-
dicated in  what  has  already  been  observed.  Pain
and  pleasure  attend  upon  contradiction  and  non-
contradiction wherever  they  are  found  within  the
varying  complications  of  finite  life.  Good  and  evil  are
characters  of  selves  which  mark  a  definite  advance

1  In  a  sense,  plainly,  as  all  are  liable  to  the  pain  of  some,  so  all
are  authors  of  the  evil  done  by  some.  But  this  is  not  a  sense  accepted
by  the  mind  which  expects  the  good  to  be  protected  from  pain.  Of
course  in  all  fmite  life  there  is  at  least  the  loss  by  death  of  others.


I70  PLEASURE  AND  PAIN  lect.

in  a  certain  direction.  The  good  self  has  so  far
attained  a  harmony  of  being  that  by  it  the  general
contradiction  of  finite  life,  without  being  set  aside,
is  determined  to  definite  factors  and  a  definite  line
of  confiict,  in  which  a  partly  realised  harmony
stands  over  against  the  embodied  principle  of  dis-
cord. Thus,  it  might  be  urged,  we  have  admitted
that  pleasure  has  a  certain  ideal  and  ultimate  kin-
ship with  the  good,  as  with  a  principle  of  harmony,
and  of  antagonism  towards  the  bad  ;  and  this  is
true.  But  in  finite  being  the  affirmation  of  a  prin-
ciple of  harmony  is  in  itself,  as  it  were,  the  very
watchword  and  banner  of  a  radical  discord.

The  good  self  is  not  merely  at  strife  with  the  evil
self.  It  is  hampered  by  all  that  constitutes  finite-
ness  in  itself  and  others,  by  natural  conditions,  by
ignorance,  by  accident  and  circumstance,  by  the
sufferings  and  sins  of  others.  In  all  of  these,  and  all
of  which  they  are  typical,  it  meets  pain  as  inherently
attendant  upon  its  goodness.  So  that  practically
and  in  particular,  with  regard  to  the  connection  of
pleasure  and  goodness,  it  is  impossible  to  say  more
than  that  goodness  undoubtedly  stands  on  the  side
of  a  principle  which  it  has  in  common  with  pleasure,
and  is  sure  of  a  certain  basis  of  harmony.  But  as
it  falls  within  the  great  ultimate  contradiction  of  the
finite-infinite  nature,  it  is  impossible  to  say  how  far
in  detail  and  in  comparison  with  badness  it  may
escape  the  experience  of  contradiction.

One  further  point  arises  out  of  this  discussion.
We  saw  that  it  was  impossible  to  analyse  the  con-
ditions of  pain-sensation  so  as  to  bring  it  under  any
general  theory.  But  with  regard  to  pain-sensation
in  the  animal  creation,  including  man  as  a  sentient


VI  PAIN  NOT  A TEMPORARY  CURSE  171


organism,  it  is  obvious  that  in  a  certain  sense  there
is  present  a  kindred  contradiction  to  that  on  which
we  have  just  been  insisting.  Organisms  are  members
of  a  universe  which  transcends  them,  though  we
must  suppose  that,  in  so  far  as  merely  sentient,  they
have  no  reaHsation  of  what  membership  means.
Still,  what  we  call  evolution  involves  this  at  least —
that  organic  nature  develops  its  wealth  of  forms  under
pressure  of  a  changing  environment,  which  in  general
conditions  it  as  a  whole,  and  which  in  particular
is  furnished  by  the  organic  world  to  every  individual
organism.  Thus  in  the  recurrent  non-adaptation  of
organism  to  environment  we  have  both  the  direct
cause  of  pain  in  obstructed  functions  of  organs,  and
the  evolutionary  ground  for  the  acquisition  of  the
pain-sensation,  as  a  warning  and  deterrent  from
habits  injurious  to  the  organism.

Hence  it  appears  that  the  general  pain  and
struggle  of  the  organisms  below  man,  and  of  man  as
a  sentient  being,  are  not  of  the  nature  of  a  special
curse,  or  consequence  of  sin,  or  of  a  fall  from  perfec-
tion, which  we  should  look  to  see  one  day  removed.
They  seem  to  be  rather  a  characteristic,  belonging,
like  the  hardships  of  selfhood,  to  the  position  of
finite  members  in  an  infinite  universe,  which  is  per-
petually remoulding  them  by  struggle  and  death  to
a  wealth  of  expressions  of  itself,  including,  at  least
in  our  case,  the  becoming  the  vehicle  of  intelligence.

So  far  as  we  can  see,  in  short,  if  there  is  to  be
a  self-directing  system  of  life,  adapting  itself  to  a
universe  which  is  its  environment,  there  must  be
pain  and  death.  We  can  see  in  the  case  of  the
animal  creation  that  by  domestication  the  former
can be,  to  a  large  extent,  avoided. But  so  far  the


172  PLEASURE  AND  PAIN  LECT.

system  is  no  longer  self-directing,  nor  in  free  evolu-
tion. Thus  the  same  nature  seems  to  reveal  itself
in  the  unconscious  or  barely  sentient  organic  world
as  in  the  world  of  self-consciousness.  And  if  we
cannot  see  how  the  former  participates  in  the
membership  which  so  affects  it,  perhaps  this  very
difficulty  should  suggest  to  us  that  our  view  of
the  attitude  involved  in  such  participation  is  not
sufficiently  elastic.  Many  would  find  such  a  difficulty,
as  we  think  mistakenly,  in  the  destiny  of  the  rank
and  file  of  mankind.  We  perhaps  are  unfaithful  to
our  own  insight  when  we  find  it  in  that  of  sentient
or  even  of  inorganic  nature.  In  that  case  our
hardest  problem  is  nearing  solution.  However  that
may  be,  the  typical  occasions  of  pain  and  of  the
pain-sensation  seem  of  the  same  kind  throughout ;
and  we  are  not  professing  to  do  more  than  trace
them  home  to  the  general  nature  of  the  universe.

Our  main  problem,  however,  is  in  the  suffering
of  finite  self-conscious  beings.  And  here,  I  think,
we  have  come  to  some  result.  Both  it  and  pleasure
are  inherent  in  such  beings.  They  do  not  belong
to  good  and  evil,  each  to  each.  Both  of  them  are
hazards,  and  one  also  a  hardship,  rooted  in  the
finiteness  of  the  self.  Neither  is  a  safe  guide  to
perfection  ;  and  although  good  has  a  certain  kinship
with  the  condition  of  pleasure,  yet  the  inadequacy  of
finite  good  to  reality  is  such  that  a  very  general
human  instinct  as  well  as  the  voice  of  the  teacher
points  us  to  the  strait  gate  rather  than  to  the  prim-
rose path.

And  though  in  truth  a  perfect  experience  would
formally  be  of  the  nature  of  pleasure,  it  would  carry
such  a  weight,  in  enjoying  such  a  fulness  of  contra-


VI  UNIVERSAL  PAIN  INCONCEIVABLE  173

diction  overcome,  that  it  would  transcend  the  nature
of  both  as  they  appear  to  us.  Our  highest  experi-
ences— those  which  have  in  them  most  of  being  and
of  reahty — indicate  to  us  the  line  of  the  transforma-
tion. I  cite  an  often-cited  passage  which  can  hardly
be  bettered  : —

"We  can  only  have  the  highest  happiness,  such
as  goes  along  with  being  a  great  man,  by  having
wide  thoughts  and  much  feeling  for  the  rest  of  the
world  as  well  as  for  ourselves  ;  and  this  sort  of
happiness  often  brings  so  much  pain  with  it  that
we  can  only  tell  it  from  pain  by  its  being  what
we  would  choose  before  everything  else,  because
our  souls  see  it  is  good."  ^

7. Pain  is  a  fact  which  prima  facie  gives  rise  to  what
a  theoretical difficulty. It is incompatible, as it  mrufpain
stands, with the satisfaction of our nature as a  fi".'ag°"-

JStlC  to

whole. It  is,  as  we  have  seen,  a  felt  contradiction, theoretical

•  111  satisfac-

j\ow It may  be held that such  an  obstacle to  tion?
satisfaction  need  give  rise  to  no  theoretical  difficulty,  extreme  ^
If,  it  may  be  said,  we  could  see  a  theoretical  neces-  verlaT'  its
sity  for  the  total  misery  of  every  sentient  creature,  fts°"^ft'^
our  nature  as  a  whole  would  be  revolted,  but  our
theoretical  satisfaction  might be  complete.^ This,
however,  does  not  seem  possible. Pain  means  an
obstruction to activity,  though there  are  activities
which are its by-products.^ Now whatever  ulti-
mately obstructs my activity also obstructs my
understanding. I do not mean  merely  interferes,
as  toothache  may,  with  my  actual  thinking,  though
this  is  not  a  negligible  effect  of  pain. But  I  mean

^ Epilogue  to  Romola.

2  On  this  discussion  see  Bradley,  Appearance,  155  ff.

3  The barring of  an activity  by  way  of  pain therefore means
unrest,  not  tranquillity.


174  PLEASURE  AND PAIN  lect.

that  it  prevents  my  thought  from  reaching  its  goal.
Activity  is  a  mode  of  union  with  the  world,  in  which,
as in theory,  thought is operative. In so far  as
activity  is  barred,  some  thought  is  prevented  from
completing  itself,  and  the  possibilities  open  to  theory
are  so  far  curtailed. Misery,  not  in  any  way  trans-
cended, would  in  the  first  place  be  self-contradictory  ;
for pain itself,  as  we  have  seen,  needs  a  basis  of
harmonious  activity,  at  least  of  life,  as  something  to
obstruct. But  in  the  second  place,  admitting  pe}'-
impossibile  a  life  made  up  of  just  enough  harmony  to
be  obstructed,  it  would  mean  an  inability  of  thought
to  reach  any  goal  of  completeness. Thought  would
be  barred by  contradiction on every path. And
therefore even theoretical satisfaction would be
impossible. If,  so  to  speak,  you  were  met  by  con-
tradiction on  every  path  except  the  theoretical,  you
would  be  met  by  it  on  the  theoretical  also. The
separation  of  the  different  paths  of  thought  is  not
ultimately tenable. To explain is to think as a
whole,  and  if practical and emotional experience
were  nothing  but  unsolved  contradiction — and  that
is  what it would be  on  the  impossible  hypothesis
before  us — even  the  theoretical intelligence  would
have  no  clue  to  thinking  it  as  a  whole,  and  there-
fore could  not  explain,  and  therefore  could  not  be
satisfied.

But  no  one  actually  suggests  that  there  is  complete
misery,  or  that,  as  would  then  be  inevitable,  we  have
no  experience  enabling  us  to  conceive  the  trans-
cendence of  pain.  What  really,  I  take  it,  is  apt  to
terrify  us,  and  leads  to  the  idea  that  pain  has  the
upper  hand,  is  the  startling  recognition  that  pain
belongs  to  good,  almost,  if  not  quite,  as  intimately


VI  ITS GROUND IS  ITS  LIMIT  175

as  to  evil.  If  it  is  empirically  clear  that  good  very
frequently  brings  pain,  if  we  have  no  rationale  of
their  connection,  and  if,  moreover,  we  give  weight
to  a  sound  human  instinct  that  good  on  the  whole
is  the  more  widespread,  we  want  little  more  to
drive  us  into  pessimism.  It  is  not  so  much  that
we  genuinely  observe  pain  to  be  predominant,  as
that  we  argue,  "  If  pain  attends  upon  the  good,
what  is  there  that  it  will  not  attend  upon  }  "

So  the  answer  to  the  theoretical  difficulty  about
pain  lies  in  seeing  the  ground  of  its  necessity.  It
is,  we  have  seen,  in  principle  an  inherent  hard-
ship of  finiteness  and  of  soul-making.  Therefore,
although  prima  facie  it  prohibits  the  satisfaction
of  our  nature  as  a  whole,  yet  we  can,  in  principle,
be  theoretically  satisfied,  in  so  far  as  we  are  able  to
see  contradiction  as  essential  to  the  completeness  of
union — imperfection  as  essential  to  perfection.  We
can  see  that  it  must  be  so,  but  we  cannot  see  how,
in  all  the  detail  of  experience,  it  is  so.  Our  argu-
ment, however,  gives  us  this  much  ;  and  it  is  the
very  necessity  which  it  has  exhibited  that  enables
us,  theoretically  speaking,  to  set  limits  to  our  dis-
satisfaction. If  we  did  not  understand  the  inherent
ground  of  pain — if  we  held  it  to  be  a  caprice  of
destiny — we  should  have  no  clue  whatever  to  the
total  and  possible  extent  of  its  prevalence.  But
we  know  now  both  that  it  belongs,  and  in  what
sense  it  belongs,  to  the  structure  of  reality.  And
though  we  may  fancy  that  the  arrangements  of  a
moral,  benevolent,  and  omnipotent  being  would
have  been  otherwise,  yet  we  can  more  or  less  see,
and  have  forced  ourselves  to  confess,  that  the
world's  being  a  rough  place,  as  for  us  it  certainly


176  PLEASURE  AND  PAIN  lect.

is,  probably  contributes  to  a  greatness  and  perfec-
tion which  would  not  be  attained  by  the  methods
that  we  should  have  preferred.^
Our  8. It will be well to distinguish the attitude

distin-^  which  I  have  tried  to  defend  from  certain  current
from^^  types  of  what  might  be  called  the  apologetics  of
apologetics  p^in. What I have said,  in a  word,  amounts to

of  pain.  ^

this :  that  the  root  of  our  troubles  is  one  with  the
root  of  our  value,  and  if  our  value  is  unassailable,
our  troubles  cannot  preclude  theoretical  satisfaction.
I  am  not  flattering  myself  that  there  is  anything
new  in  this  contention.  All  that  I  claim  is  to
recognise  the  need  for  pushing  it  home,  to  the  ex-
clusion of  weaker  persuasions  as  to  the  mode  of
reconciling  pain  and  satisfaction.

For  this attitude is radically  different from  all

attitudes  which  rest  on  the  conception  of  pleasure

and  pain  as  plus  and  minus  quantities  to  be  brought

into  a  single  whole  only  by  subtraction.

Reject  i. Thus  we reject  all  theories  which  treat  pain

of  pain as an opposite to be  set in the balance against

opposke  of  pleasure,  furnished  as  a  corrective,  for  moral  purposes,

pleasure jj^  ^^  scheme  of  the  world. Doctrines  of  probation

justified  by  a^

moraiends  ^nd  discipline,  according  to  which  pain,  in  itself  an
evil,  is  permitted  both  as  a  test  and  as  an  education
of  character,  have  at  least  the  merit  of  recognising
that  pain  has  some  connection  with  value,  and  is  not
confined  to  the  wrongdoer  or  to  the  consequences
of  wrongdoing.  But  they  share  the  essential  vice
of  treating  it  as  a  means,  external  and  hostile  to  the
character  of  perfection,  an  opposite  of  happiness,
incapable  of  transformation,  and  therefore  to  be
neutralised in the universe, but only by sub-

1  See  previous  Lecture.


VI  EASY  TO SAY  ''WILL  BE"  177

mergence  under  a  balance  of  pleasure,  which
remains  wholly  heterogeneous  from  it.  And  this,
of  course,  is  not  in  principle  a  neutralisation  at
all,  and  we  are  back  in  the  evasion  which  relies
on  inappreciable  quantities.  "  The  sufferings  of
this  present  time  are  not  worthy  to  be  compared  "
— "  de  minimis  non  curat  lex."

On  the  other  hand,  in  the  doctrine  of  rewards
and  punishments  we  find  the  conception  of  pain
still  more  arbitrary  and  external,  involving  the  un-
tenable idea  of  individualistic  justice  and  apportion-
ment which  we  criticised  in  the  last  lecture.  It  is
inconsistent,  we  saw,  with  the  fundamental  fact  of
spiritual  membership  ;  and  as  the  restriction  of
pain  to  the  wrongdoer  would  conflict  with  every-
day observation,  it  is  usual  to  supplement  this
doctrine  by  those  of  probation  and  discipline,  in-
volving compensation  in  this  life  or  elsewhere.

In  none  of  these  conceptions  has  pain  any
organic  place  or  inherent  necessity.  They  leave
it  as  an  external  means  to  moral  ends,  evil  and
censurable  in  itself,  and  therefore  demanding  to
be  justified,  but  justifiable  only  by  neutralisation
as  an  inappreciable  quantity  submerged  under  a
huge  overbalance  of  its  opposite.  And  in  principle,
therefore,  it  is  not  justified,  and  no  least  amount
of  it  could  ever  be  justified.^

ii. No  less  we  reject  all  theories  which  essentially

1  But  as  a  means  by  which  a  greater  balance  of  pleasure  is
generated  than  could  have  been  generated  without  it  ?  Is  not  this
an  organic  function  and  a  justification  ?  One  can  only  say  that  it
involves  a  terrific  dualism,  implying  that  the  universe  is  so  weak
as  to  have  to  grasp  at  wholly  heterogeneous  means  in  order  to
accomplish  its  end.  For,  ex  hypothesis  the  means,  thus  considered,
are  in  flat  opposition  to  the  end.

N


178  PLEASURE  AND  PAIN  lect.

And  found  themselves  on  the  probable  disappearance  of

offtlt'Se  pain  in the  future. We  hope,  of  course,  for  some

elcTnce  degree  of  such  disappearance,  or  rather  for  a  certain

of  pain,  j^j  J 1^  transformation,  and  we  are  bound  to  work

except  as

some fQj-  it_ But  our  ars^ument  does  not permit us to

change  ^  ,  .  ,  , .

which  may  believe it possible in the  main,  and certamly  not

throw  Hght  i • i • i  i  i • i i  • ^

on  whole to  thuik  It  the  true  ground  on  which  the  existence
reality. ^^  ^^j^  j^  Compatible  with  theoretical  satisfaction.

We  must  carefully  distinguish,  indeed,  between
(a)  the  view  that  future  experience  may  throw
additional  light,  to  be  reconciled  with  that  of
the  past,  on  the  nature  of  the  whole  of  reality,  and
{fi)  the  view  that  a  favourable  change  in  the  future
may  compensate  for,  that  is,  wipe  out  by  a  sheer
overbalance,  what  we  dislike  in  past  and  present.

(a)  The  former  conception  is  obviously  admissible,
and  it  is  impossible  to  limit  dogmatically  the  extent
of  the  modification  which  accepted  theories  may
have  to  undergo.  But  to  postulate  so  radical  a
future  difference  in  the  world's  working  as  should
revolutionise  what  now  appear  its  fundamental
conditions,  and  extinguish  something  like  one-half
of  our  experience,  is  a  measure  demanding  very
stronof  reasons.  And  I  believe  that  such  reasons
are  only  present  if  we  adopt  the  double  conviction
that  the  real  is  "good"  excluding  evil,  and  that
pain  is  evil  excluding  good.  Even  then,  and
indeed  because  of  this  radical  opposition,  no  change
in  the  future  could  suffice  to  explain  away  in
principle  the  evil  that  has  apparently  been.

But  supposing  that  in  the  temporal  world  pain
were  actually  to  show  signs  of  disappearing,  it
would  no  doubt  become  easier  to  conceive  that  it,
which  could thus disappear,  could not have  been


VI  '' EIN UNLEBENDIGES GEMALDE''  i-jcj

a  deeply  inherent  feature  of  reality,  and  might  in
some  way  be  regarded  if  not  as  a  pure  illusion,  yet
at  least  as  a  relatively  negligible  character  in  the
eternal  whole.  The  argument  draws  its  strength,^
I  believe,  from  an  aspiration  founded  on  the  con-
viction above  referred  to  ;  an  aspiration  that  the
real  shall  show  itself  in  its  supposed  true  character
of  goodness  without  evil.  And  if  the  conviction,
as  formulated,  were  well  grounded,  the  conclusion
would  be  hard  to  withstand  for  all  who  have  at
heart  the  unity  of  perfection  with  reality.

For  us,  however,  the  conviction  that  reality
implies  perfection  does  not  carry  the  consequence
of  excluding  or  of  minimising  imperfection,  and
consequently  it  supplies  no  driving  force  in  favour
of  the  postulate  before  us.  Our  theoretical  pre-
possession in  some  degree  even  leans  the  other
way.  It  is  part  of  the  paradox  of  our  finite-
infinite  being  that  we  are  bound  to  maintain  the
combat  against  evil,  and  no  doubt  in  a  great
degree  against  pain,  not  merely  without  antici-
pating, but  even  without  whole-heartedly  desiring,
their  entire  abolition  in  every  possible  shape  with
all  their  occasions  and  accessories.  For  we  can
hardly  understand  what  of  life  would  survive  such
an  abolition.^  And  perfection  itself,  so  far  as
we  see,  would  lose  some  essentials  of  its  being.
The  Utopian  temper  as  a  rule  seems  dull  and  in-
human ;  and,  as  I  remarked  above,  there  is  some-
thing mediaeval  in  the  worst  sense  about  the  idea

1  There  is  also  a  well-known  argument  which  supports  the
evanescence  of  pain  on  purely  evolutionary  grounds.  But  this,  I
think,  hardly  demands  attention  to-day.

2  Take,  for  instance,  what  we  spoke  of  above,  the  pangs  of
creative  travail,  or  the  anxieties  of  love  and  work.


i8o  PLEASURE  AND  PAIN  lect.

of  a  future  in  which — to  take  a  typical  instance
— tragedy  is  to  be  enjoyed  without  any  tragic
experience.

(/3)  This  brings  us  to  the  other  and  cruder  atti-
tude,  for  which a future annihilation of  suffering
will not operate merely  by  throwing a  new  light
on  the  whole  nature  of  reality,  but  will  baldly  and
crudely  overbalance  and  compensate  for  the  suffer-
ings of the past. Here we have again the
absurdity of compensation for an admitted evil
by sheer quantity of its opposite, and also the
brutality  which bases the happiness of  some on
the  sufferings  of  others,  and in fact,  as  would be
inevitable,  on  the  actual  enjoyment  of  those  suffer-
ings. If  pain  is  a  wrong  per  se,  untransformable,
and incompatible  with perfection, it is plain that
no happier future can destroy the contradiction
of  its  having  existed. We  may  dismiss  any  view
which  suggests  it  as  a  thoughtless  evasion.
Though  we iii.  And  yet  in  a  certain  sense,  but  not  in  that
Ibie,  in™  "  which  we  have  been  discussing,  our  own  theory  does
Sid"'^^ prepossess  us  towards  some  belief  in  an  alleviation
progress of  p^jn  as  the  world  p"oes  on. What  sugrgrests  itself

towards  a  ^ _  _'=|  _ ^ o'^

change to  US  is  not  the  abolition  of  the  finite-infinite  conflict

from  brute  i  •  i  i  '  •  i  •  '

suffering  and  tensiou,  but  rather  its  more  conscious  realisation,
tragedy-  ^^^  might  almost  Say,  its  intensification.  As  any
race  of  finite  self-conscious  beings  gains  mastery
over  itself  and  its  experience,  there  will  be  a
tendency,  we  may  hope  and  think  we  see,  to  convert
brute  agony  and  dumb  endurance  and  despair  into
spiritual  conflict  and  triumph  ;  to  raise  suffering,  in
a  word,  to  the  level  of  tragedy.  The  tragic  element,
it  has  been  said,  is  the  waste — the  apparently
objectless expense of  spirit, as great characters


VI  NOT  PICK  AND CHOOSE OUR  PAINS  i8i

destroy  each  other.  It  is  a  curious  echo  from  a
distant  field  of  knowledge  when  we  remind  ourselves
that  in  economics  what  is  in  one  sense  the  waste —
the  direct  or  non-reproductive  expenditure  on  the
splendour  and  enjoyment  of  human  life  and  social
celebration — is  in  another  the  end  or  raison  detre
of  the  whole  arrangement.  If  to  be  a  means  to
nothing  is  to  be  waste,  then  everything  is  waste
which  is  an  end  in  itself.  So  it  may  be  with  the
tragic  waste  of  spirit — the  exhibition  or  realisation
of  the  qualities  that  come  nearest  to  perfection.
All  the  empirical  signs  point  to  man's  becoming
more  self-conscious,  but  wrestling  at  the  same  time
— it  is  almost  a  tautology — with  deeper  and  sharper
problems.  This  is  the  direction  in  which  it  seems
to  me  tolerably  certain  that  suffering  has  been  and
is  being  transformed.  The  self-consciousness  of
labour  in  civilised  countries,  for  example,  is  a
commonplace  of  to-day.  The  full  nature  of  reality
will  thus  be  brought  nearer  and  made  clearer,  but  not
as  a  truncated  perfection,  or  one  with  its  characters
dispersed  through  time — pain  here  and  pleasure
there — rather  in  a  closer  and  closer  concentra-
tion of  experience,  with  tears  made  human  by
laughter,  and  laughter  triumphant  over  tears.

It  follows,  I  think,  as  we  said  in  the  last  lecture,
that  we  cannot  pick  and  choose  in  estimating  reality.
We  cannot  judge  our  own  possibilities  or  gauge
our  own  nature.  If  we  had  our  choice  of  pains,  we
should  always  rule  out  our  own  greatest  opportunities.
To  the  charge  that  if  we  may  not  pick  and  choose,
may  not  say,  this  pain  is  fair  and  tolerable  but  that
excessive,  we  should  in  logic  have  to  be  satisfied,
though  every  being  in  the  universe  were  in  extremest


1 82  PLEASURE  AND  PAIN  lect.

misery, I believe that  our  argument has offered
sufficient  answer.
Organic  9. I  hope  that  the  reasoning  of  this  lecture  has

standpoint  . .  ,  , .  .  ,  .  ,  ,

as  to  pain  remiorced  a  conclusion  m  the  former  volume,  to
optTm'isn^  the  effect  that  the  issue  of  optimism  and  pessimism
sk^ism^  must  not,  and  indeed  cannot,  be  treated  as  a  question
of  the  quantitative  balance  between  pain  and  pleasure,
but  rather  from  an  organic  standpoint  as  a  problem
of  the  function  of  pain  in  soul- making,  and  its
transformation  in  the  higher  experiences,  not  its
neutralisation  or  submergence  by  an  overbalance  of
an  opposite.  In  general  we  may  say  that  this
problem  should  be  argued  on  the  basis  of  value  and
not  of  pain  and  pleasure.

And  I  think  our  attitude  explains  why  the
challenge,  "Would  you  willingly  live  your  life  again?"
is  irrelevant  to  the  question  whether  life  is  worth
living.  We  may  wish  to  go  on  reading  the  Aeneid,
without  wishing  to  return  to  the  Latin  grammar.
But,  it  will  be  rejoined,  this  is  to  assume  a  continu-
ance beyond  the  life  to  which  the  question  refers.
It  is  a  fair  challenge  to  ask  whether  the  experience
we  have  had,  with  its  actual  proportion  of  grammar
and  Aeneid,  is  one  which  we  should  care  to  repeat.
But  I  think  our  answer  holds  good.  The  idea  of  a
repetition '"  is  repugnant  and  meaningless  in  itself
Life,  we  believe,  has  a  meaning  and  has  values  to
realise  which  have  their  rank  and  place,  such  as  it  is,
in  the  universe.  Apart  from  theory,  we  all  have
this  idea.  We  want  to  live  out  our  life,  to  work
out  our  self — a  poor  thing,  but  our  own — and  so
all  we  have  to  give  and  to  create. It  is  not  much,

^  Principle,  Lect.  VI.
2  "All  repetition  is  unspiritual,"  De  Profundis.


VI  PAIN  IN  RELIGION  183

but  such  as  it  is,  no  one  else  can  give  it.  And  in
principle  there  would  be  the  wishes  of  others  to
consider.  Now,  if  you  suggest  a  repetition,  you
cut  us  loose  from  this  substantial  basis.  Repetition
is  stultification.  Our  life  ceases  to  be  a  universal
value,  and  is  regarded  as  a  game,  to  be  played  over
again  for  our  private  amusement.  Of  course  its
interest  is  gone.

10.  This  is  not  the  place  to  enter  upon  our  main  Rank
discussion  of  religion. It  does not  belong  to  the  to  pain
hazards  and  hardships  of  finite  selfhood,  but  rather  Ifanky'^
to  its  security  and  happiness. Yet  in  an  account  of  '^"J°)j^^^^
the  sisfnificance  of  pain  and  an  estimate  of  its  rank  and  sub-

^  _ ^  ^  ,  stantial

and  rootedness  in  experience,  it  would  be  a  grave  recon-

,  ,  -  .  ,  ciliation.

omission  not  to  touch  upon  the  tact  that  the  great  spiritual
religion  of  the  Western  world  announces  itself  as  a  '"  '^''^'°""
religion  of  suffering.  By  a  religion  of  suffering  I
mean  one  which  emphasises,  and  requires  its  disciples
in  some  sense  to  share,  the  sufferings  of  its  Founder.
I  do  not  enter  upon  problems  of  comparative  religion,
but  I  imagine  that  in  most  great  religions  a  similar
element  is  influential.^

In  spite  of  all  the  sincerest  efforts  throughout  the
centuries  of  Christian  development  to  apprehend
the  depths  of  this  paradox,  the  fact  that  the  cross  is
the  banner  of  our  religion  and  our  civilisation  ^  seems
still  to  have  far  more  meaning  than  we  find  it  easy
to  grasp.

We  ask  in  this  place  not  what  is  the  whole
significance  of  religion, but what  is  the character

1  Cf.  Cornford,  From  Religion  to  Philosophy,  on  the  Suffering
God.

2  For  the  sense  in  which  our  civilisation  must  be  held  to  be
Christian,  see  the  essay  "  The  Civilisation  of  Christendom  "  in  my
volume  of  that  title.


1 84  PLEASURE  AND PAIN  lect.

of  pain  that  gives  it  this  pre-eminence — nominal  at
least — in  one  of  man's  most  conspicuous  attempts  to
realise  the  secret  of  peace. ^  We  have  dismissed,
by  implication,  all  such  ideas  as  that  pain  can  have  a
value  in  se  and  per  se,  or,  so  taken,  can  contribute
to  perfection  and  to  complete  satisfaction.  And  yet
even  here  we  must  be  cautious.  In  science  and
philosophy,  for  example,  contradiction  is  in  se  and
pej^  se  a  defect,  but  it  may  imply  or  carry  along
with  it  a  value,  which  its  character  as  contradiction
indicates  but  yet  detracts  from.  A  contradiction
may  be  better  than  a  prejudice,  for  there  cannot  be
a  contradiction  without  some  complexity  of  con-
siderations. So,  while  thoroughly  hostile  to  fanatical
or  superstitious  demands  for  meaningless  torture  of
body  or  mind,  I  am  far  from  thinking  that  the  very
deep-seated  impulse  towards  such  aberrations  has
no  shadow  of  justification  in  the  truest  needs  of  a
self-conscious  being.  The  impulse  to  make  life
painful,  especially  at  its  critical  moments,^  seems  to
be  one  side  of  the  instinctive  dissatisfaction  which
pronounces  unmodified  nature  inadequate  to  man.

But  if,  agreeing  that  the  mere  fact  of  contradic-
tion is  failure  and  not  satisfaction,  we  ask  what  it  is
in  virtue  of  which  such  a  failure  may  imply  and
carry  with  it  an  essential  factor  of  success,  the
answer  given  by  logic  refers  to  the  degree  of
opposition  between  the  discordant  experiences.
Formally,  indeed,  there  are  no  degrees  of  opposition  ;

1  The  parallel  of  this  to  the  development  of  tragedy  in  his
supreme  attempt  to  find  enjoyment  is  exceedingly  striking.

-  I  am  thinking,  e.g.,  of  the  initiatory  ceremonies  of  many  savage
tribes  at  the  entrance  upon  manhood.  Mutilations,  supposed  to  be
decorative,  imply,  as  Goethe  observed,  the  same  feeling,  that  Nature
"  will  not  do  "  as  she  is,  and  must  be  cut  and  carved  to  improve  her.


VI  THE  EXTREME OF  FINITENESS  185

a  contradiction  is  a  contradiction,  neither  more  nor
less.  But  considering  the  systematic  character
which  belongs  to  all  organised  experience,  it  is
plain  that  one  contradiction  may  only  be  removable
by  a  complete  remodelling  of  a  system,  while  another
may  demand  only  a  trifling  readjustment  within  it.
Contradictions  of  the  former  character  may  be  con-
sidered as  more  radically  contradictory  than  those
of  the  latter,  though  it  is  perhaps  truer  to  say  that
they  are  contradictions  between  more  fundamental
experiences  than  to  say  that  they  are  more  contra-
dictory contradictions.  But  however  described,  the
contradictions  which  take  more  to  reconcile  them
are  the  more  significant  contradictions.  The  reason
is,  that  what  amounts  to  a  new  world  must  be
experienced  or  conceived  in  order  to  bring  their
differences  into  harmony.  Such  a  contradiction  in
philosophy  is  that  of  freedom  and  necessity  ;  such,
I  suppose,  in  biology  is  that  of  preformation  and
epigenesis.  In  such  antithesis  the  one  member
prima  facie  excludes  the  whole  system  of  experience
to  which  the  other  belongs.  You  cannot  conceive
them  as  united  in  a  single  whole  except  by  complete
recasting  of  the  point  of  view  from  which  their
antagonistic  systems  are  built  up.

Now  it  is  such  a  contradiction  that  is  represented
by  the  extreme  of  mental  and  bodily  suffering.
Finiteness  seems  here  to  reach  its  maximum.  Life
and  mind  exist,  only  to  support  obstruction  and  be
aware  of  impotence  and  isolation.  What  would  be
merely  finite  would  not  even  be  finite,  but  would
cancel  and  go  out,  as  its  root  of  vitality  in  the
greater  universe  was  cut.  And  the  extreme  of
suffering  seems on the edge of  this  nothingness.


i86  PLEASURE  AND  PAIN  lect.


The  contradiction  is  between  fundamentals  ;  between
the  whole  power  and  content  of  life  and  mind  on
the  one  side,  and  the  whole  obstructive  and  isolating
reaction  of  a  discordant  externality  on  the  other.
And  thus  a  contradiction  arises  which  \s  prima  facie
a  deadlock.  The  finite-infinite  being  retains  only
enough  hold  on  infinity  to  realise  its  own  finiteness
in  impotence  and  despair.

The  value  implied  in  such  a  contradiction,  assum-
ing it  to  be  transcended,  is  twofold.  The  union  or
reconciliation  which  overcomes  it  must  be  (a)  uni-
versal and  (/3)  substantial.

(a)  The contradiction has been driven to the
extreme,  as  a  mere  contradiction. No  possible  case
of  pain,  impotence,  isolation,  can  go  beyond  it. In
principle,  therefore,  it  covers  every  example  of  the
finite-infinite  being. No  one,  who  has  life  enough
to  be  wretched,  can  be  too  wretched  for  the  union
to be asserted in him. Other  forms of  satisfac-
tion or  unity  may  be  limited. But  the  satisfaction
which  involves a  finiteness  driven  to  its extreme,
its  extreme  of  extremes,  indeed,  for  death  is  included,
must  be  of  a  kind  that  is  absolutely  universal. And,
of  course,  this  is  a  commonplace  of  Christian  teaching.
I  use  it  here  merely  to  emphasise  the  significance  of
suffering, in  forcing  the  problem  of  union  with  the
infinite to complete universality. Of course, it
seems  to  be  only  in  principle  that  it  covers  every
case. The  awareness  of  reconciliation,  it  might  be
said,  has  never  spread  very  far,  and,  according  to
the  rule  we  have  insisted  on,  the  possibilities  of  the
future  afford  no compensatory  explanation  for  the
past and present. But we are speaking of the
nature and capacities of  a finite-infinite or self-


VI  ACCIDENT  IS  ESSENTIAL  187

conscious  being.  We  know  that  they  seem  never
to  be  fully  realised,  and  over  an  immense  area
hardly  to  be  realised  at  all.  But  as  imperfection
is  contributory  to  perfection,  this  is  probably  less
the  case  than  we  think,  and,  so  far  as  it  is  the
case,  matters  less  than  we  think.  We  have  never
been  concerned  to  deny  the  actuality  of  suffering,
but  only  to  show  its  significance  and  its  place  in
the  logic  of  reconciliation.

And  (/3)  the  solution  is  substantial.  It  arises  out
of  the  apparent  failure  of  the  finite,  its  most  hope-
less contradiction.^  And  just  because  of  this  a  new
experience — a  new  world — is  entered  upon.  The
world  of  spiritual  membership  affirms  itself;  and  the
finite  system,  such  a  compromise,  for  instance,  as  the
world  of  claims,  is  seen  or  felt  in  its  imperfection.

The  appeal  to  the  experience  of  suffering  has
a  curious  analogy  to  what  has  been  called  the
"method  of  difference"  in  Inductive  Logic.  What
you  can  take  away,  and  yet  leave  the  substantive
matter  of  the  enquiry,  is  irrelevant  and  unessential.
The  solution  of  the  contradiction  of  suffering  is  in
this  sense  substantive.  It  shows  us  how  much  we
can  do  without,  and  in  what  things  strength  really
lies.  Perfection,  no  doubt,  demands  the  whole,  and
does  not  reside  in  any  part  alone.  But  some  things
have  more  of  the  nature  of  the  whole,  and  some  have
less,  and  in  finite  life  the  gain  is  to  discriminate
rightly.

II.  This  we  see  more  especially  in  cases  which  illustration
sum  up  the  doctrine  of  suffering  as  a  hazard  and  and  death.
hardship  of  finite  selfhood,  the  cases  of  accident  and  l^^^'s'^piHtuaf
death.  '"^"'^^'°"-

1  Cf.  Lect.  X.,  below.


PLEASURE  AND  PAIN  lect.


of  our
finite  self


Why  no  By  accident  I  do  not  mean  all  that  in  the  logical

ofpure'  sense  comes  relatively  from  chance,  but  primarily
ThJTribute  what  wc  mean  by  it  in  colloquial  language— an
injury  to  person  or  belongings  that  could  not  be
foreseen,  or  if  foreseen,  could  not  be  provided  against.
War  or  disasters  due  to  nature  are  the  principal
types.

As  I  disbelieve  in  the  future  evanescence  of
pain,  so  I  disbelieve  in  the  future  abolition  of
accident.  Grant  that  the  self-consciousness  of  finite
beings  and  their  groups  is  to  increase  indefinitely,
and  to  play  providence  in  a  degree  not  now  conceiv-
able, still  finite  existence  will  remain  finite,  and  in
the  main  at  the  mercy  of  accident.^  Accident,
injurious  and  disastrous  hazard,  is  inherent  in
finiteness,  and  has  a  part  to  play  in  that  spiritual
induction  to  which  I  just  now  referred.^  Accident
is  by  the  hypothesis  external.  Externals  are  not
indifferent.  They  are  continuous  with  the  spiritual
life,  and  their  connection  with  it  is  a  matter  of
degree.  Still,  the  incursion  of  disaster  into  externals
is  an  instrument  of  emphasising  their  externality,
and  making  clear  the  distinction  between  particulars
of  that  kind  and  the  roots  of  spiritual  life.

1  Indeed,  this  is  ultimately  indistinguishable  from  the  general
course  of  nature  so  far  as  uncontrollable  by  finite  beings,  e.g.  the
future  of  this  globe.  For  the  temper  which  expects  and  demands  to
exclude  accident,  cf.  a  newspaper  after  the  loss  of  the  Ti/am'c.
"  Until  the  way  across  the  Atlantic  is  made  safe,  no  liner  shall  sail."
Another  journal  well  remarks,  "  That  was  indeed  a  great  and  tragic
catastrophe  which  has  struck  the  imagination  of  the  whole  world,
and  set  it  thinking  about  its  own  littleness  in  the  grip  of  the  forces
of  nature.  But  the  dignity  of  it  is  lost  when  there  rises  up  a  great
clamour  of  people  complaining  that  science  and  skill  have  not  as
they  thought  made  an  end  of  the  risks  of  the  sea." — Westminster
Gazette,  April  27,  19 12.

2  I  do  not  say  that  war  can  never  cease  ;  but  we  may  illustrate
the  place  of  accident  in  finite  being  by  the  effects  of  war.


VI  A RELIGION  OF  PLEASURE?  189

So  it  is,  finally,  with  death,  the  ultimate  hazard,
in  which  p7^ima  facte  the  very  being  of  the  finite
self  is  cancelled.  We  shall  devote  a  special  treat-
ment below  to  ideas  of  the  ultimate  destiny  of  the
finite  self.  But  it  is  plain  in  pure  theory  that  to
transcend  the  contradiction  which  death  introduces
into  finite  life  means  in  some  way  to  have  hold  of  a
world  which,  while  including  what  is  essential  to
the  self,  is  not  obstructed  by  physical  death. ^

Of  course,  either  accident  or  death  may  be  too
lightly  met.  The  contradiction  may  be  slurred  over
and  not  solved.  There  may  be  a  death,  as  Hegel
says,  which  has  no  more  significance  than  cutting
off  a  cabbage  head.  The  contradiction,  i.e.  the
apparent  termination  of  all  activities  and  interests,
must  be  realised  before  it  can  be  solved.

When  we  speak  of  what  is  untouched  by  death
of  the  finite  self,  we  do  not  mean  merely  that  truth,
for  example,  remains  true.  We  mean,  for  instance,
the  love  and  courage  which  make  death  seem  a  little
thing,  and  which  constitute  a  grasp  of  reality  by
which  the  finite  being  offers  up  its  finiteness  as  a
contribution  to  the  true  being  of  the  universe.
This  will  seem  more  intelligible  when  we  have
spoken  of  the  nature  of  religion.

Why  should  there  not  be  a  religion  of  which  the
central  experience  should  be  pleasure  .''  I  do  not
profess  to  know  whether  historically  such  an  experi-
ence has  been  approached  ;  '^  but  there  seems  room
to  suggest  it  for  the  sake  of  illustration.  For
pleasure,  as  we  have  seen, accompanies  expansion

1  Here  again  Spinoza's  treatment  seems  the  most  suggestive.

2  I  believe  that  in  Bacchic  festivals  and  similar  rites  there  was
always  a  foundation  at  least  of  repeating  the  sufferings  of  the  god  or
hero. Cf.  Cornford,  op.  cit.


I  go


PLEASURE  AND  PAIN  lect.


or  unobstructed  activity  of  the  self,  and  therefore
ought  to  be  a  feature  of  any  felt  union  with  the
infinite.  And  certainly  in  all  religion  there  must  be
pleasure,  or  the  element  of  pleasure  within  a  fuller
experience,  as  well  as  the  element  of  pain.  But  in
anything  like  a  religion  of  pure  pleasure  the  diffi-
culty would  be  that  a  thoroughgoing  expansion  of
the  finite  mind  must  be  charged  with  a  burden  of
contradiction  or  obstruction,  and  therefore  it  could
not  quite  be  the  experience  which  we  indicate  under
the  name  of  pleasure.  Religions  of  pleasure,  I
suspect,  usually  became  savage  or  ascetic.  There
is  something  fierce  and  horrible  about  the  lowest
pleasures  when  fairly  let  go,  and  something  severe
and  austere  about  the  highest.  The  expansion  of
the  self,  as  we  said  above,  tears  its  way.  Even  if
freely  pursued,  in  the  sense  and  intention  of  enjoy-
ment, the  ritual  of  such  religions,  I  imagine,  carried
with  it  from  the  occasion  of  their  origin  some
horrible  or  severe  accessories.  A  mere  service  of
pleasure  would  hardly  give  the  sense  of  refuge  and
liberation,  much  less  the  guidance  into  the  world  of
love  and  truth,  which  is  ensured  by  the  transcended
contradiction  of  a  religion  centred  in  suffering.

Pain,  then,  with  accident  and  death,  belongs
essentially  to  the  hazards  and  hardships  which  are
involved  in  the  double  nature  of  the  finite-infinite
being.  And  we  do  not  believe  that  it  is  worth
while  to  speculate  philosophically  upon  the  greater
or  less  degree  of  these  incidents  of  finitude.  If  we
are  prepared  to  quarrel  with  the  scheme  of  things
because  finiteness  is  a  factor  in  it,  we  are  at  least
logical  pessimists.  But  to  say  that  we  approve  the
hazards  and hardships  so far, but  judge them a


VI  PAIN  TRANSCENDED IS VALUE  191


censurable  feature  of  the  universe  when  we  think
them  more  than  we  can  bear,  seems  arbitrary  in
theory,  and,  as  we  have  reiterated,  and  as  experience
constantly  shows,  would  mean,  if  our  choice  had
effect,  the  repudiation  of  our  greatest  chances.

What  is  important  is  to  see  that  the  incidents  of
our  finiteness  are  more  than  finite  incidents.  They
belong  to  the  tension  of  our  double  being,  in  which
it  affirms  its  unity  with  the  absolute.  We  have
spoken  of  the  spiritual  induction  to  which  the
experience  of  suffering  is  instrumental,^  and  have
indicated  the  direction  in  which  to  look  for  the
pleasure  that  would  be  higher  than  pain,  and  not
its  co-ordinate  opposite.  Our  pain,  I  repeat,  has
the  same  root  as  our  value,  that  is  to  say,  both  lie  in
the  tribute  of  our  finite  self  which  we  bring,  not
rejected,  but  transformed  through  reconciled  con-
tradiction, to  the  absolute.

1 Compare  Francis  Thompson's  "  Hound  of  Heaven."


B. HAZARDS  AND HARDSHIPS OF
FINITE '^^l^YWOOX^— Continued

LECTURE VII

GOOD AND EVIL

Good  and  I.  We  have  treated  pleasure  and  pain  as  rooted
lasted"  in  the  nature  of  a  finite  being,  necessarily  self-
o!^^  transcendent,  and, in  its self-transcendence, which

Pleasure

and  Pain, jg ^jsq Jtg self-maintenance, inherently liable to

as  attitudes  i  i  r  t>i

of  whole  obstruction,  yet  capable  of  success.  Pleasure  and
Good  in  pain,  we  held,  were  the  primary  attendants  of  these
de^fi^nabie!^  hazards  of  finiteness.  As  commonly  experienced,
both  are  partial  and  de  facto,  we  might  almost  say,
indeed,  incidental,  and  tell  us  little  or  nothing  of
the  whole  progress  of  the  finite  creature,  and  of  its
status  in  regard  to  perfection.

When  we  consider  the  further  hazards  of  good
and  evil,  also  rooted  in  the  finiteness  of  finite
beings,  whether  natural  or  spiritual,  we  are  dealing
with  a  more  fundamental  opposition.  We  are
taking  account  not  merely  of  a  partial  superficial
and  de  facto  perfection  and  imperfection,  but  of  an
attitude,  an  idea,  a  desire ;  that  is,  a  relation  of
the  finite  creature  as  a  whole  to  perfection  and  to
imperfection.  The  general  character  of  good,  by
common  consent,  is  that  it  satisfies  desire. Absolute

192


LECT.  VII GOOD  AND EVIL, CORRELATES  193

perfection  may  be  held  to  exclude  desire  ;  or  if,  as
I  have  argued,  the  character  of  desire  is  bound  to
survive  in  it,  it  must  be  in  some  form  quite  different
from  the  unsatisfied  desires  which  we  know.  But
good  is  an  element  of  finite  experience,  and  it
means  not  perfection  as  such,  but  perfection  in  so
far  as  it  appears  in  the  dualism  of  finiteness,  as
involving  a  discord  and  a  reconciliation  of  idea  and
existence.  Thus  the  idea  of  good  at  once  concerns
the  creature's  whole  being ;  it  is  not,  like  pain  and
pleasure,  mere  de  facto  experience  of  obstruction
or  unobstructedness.  In  its  desire  for  good — its
desire  for  an  object  which  as  desired  is  good — the
creature  as  such  takes  a  side,  and  pledges  itself  to
the  search  for  satisfaction  as  such,  for  complete
satisfaction,  for  something  in  which  its  being  will
be  at  one  with  itself.  It  may  seem  that  so  much
is  not  involved  in  the  desire  for  this  or  that,  which
may  be  readily  slurred  over  and  forgotten.  But
this  is  only  in  so  far  as  the  creature  is  distracted
between  its  objects  of  desire.  Its  nature,  as  self-
conscious,  is  to  aspire  to  unification.  So  far  as  it
desires,  it  takes  a  side  and  assumes  an  attitude  to
this  effect.  In  evil  desire — there  is,  we  shall  argue,
no  desire  for  evil — in  evil  desire  this  taking  sides,
though  confronted  with  hostility,  is  presupposed.
Good  involves  an  attitude  to  satisfaction,  an  ap-
proval on  the  whole.  Evil  is  the  reverse  of  this,
the  rebellion.  It  is  the  inclination  to  a  satisfaction
which  is  attended  by  dread  or  hostility  against  the
threatening  absorption  in  good  ;  the  self-assertion  of
some  element  which  does  not  want — in  which  the
self  does  not  want — to  be  organised  within  the
creature's satisfaction as desired. The point of

o


194


GOOD  AND  EVIL  lect.


view  of  the  whole, and  opposition to it, are the
characteristics  of  good  and  evil.

It  has  been  maintained  that  good  is  undefinable.
It  is  easy  to  see  the  difficulty  on  which  this  doctrine
insists. Good is ex hypothesi not a  content  but
a  character. Definable,  I  should  urge,  is  just  what
it  is  ;  describable,  perhaps,  is  what  it  is  not. We
cannot describe perfection  ; that is, we cannot
enumerate its components and state their form
and connection in detail. But  we  can define  its
character  as  the  harmony  of  all  being. And  good
is  perfection  in  its  character  of  satisfactoriness  ;  that
which is considered as  the  end of  conations and
the fruition of  desires. I have argued in the
previous  volume  ^  that  this  is  a  character  which  can
be reasoned upon and established in  general,  in
accordance  with  the  conception  of  degrees  in  being
and  trueness. And  therefore  I  hold  it  in  the  true
and systematic sense definable, not by external
reference,^  which  is  spurious  definition,  but  by  the
law of its individuality, which is the only true
definition. But  it  is  not  exhaustible  by  enumeration
of  its  constituents  ;  that  would  be  indeed  to  construct
the  universe a  priori, to  deduce the detail  of  its
components  from  the  single  fundamental  character
of  satisfactoriness. Everything  is  good,  so  far  as
a  constituent  of  perfection,  which  involves  possess-
ing the  character  of  satisfactoriness  or  value. But
we cannot deduce from this the detail of the
universe  ;  for  example,  the  special  nature  of  beauty
or  truth. "  In  order  to  be  good,  the  other  aspects  of
the  universe must also be themselves "  ^ (beauty,

1  Principle,  p.  298.  2  As  you  define  a  yard  to  be  3  feet.

3  Bradley's  Appearance,  p.  410.


VII  PLEASURE  MAY  BE  BAD  195

truth,  sensation,  etc.).  Therefore,  if  definition  means
enumeration  of  components,  good  is  undefinable  ;
if  it  means  the  exposition  of  the  universal  character
of  any  whole,  it  is  definable.  Nothing  which  does
not  possess  such  a  character,  an  individual  or  internal
form  and  law,  is  in  the  true  sense  definable.^

Enough  was  said  in  the  previous  volume  to
determine  our  idea  of  perfection,  as  that  which  has
the  quality  of  satisfactoriness,  as  judged  by  the
criticised^  totality  of  conations  or  desires.  What
we  are  dealing  with  at  this  moment  is  the  difference
between  good  and  evil  on  the  one  hand,  and
perfection  and  imperfection,  and  also,  moreover,
pleasure  and  pain,  on  the  other  hand.  The  differ-
ence in  the  first  contrast,  if  we  speak  of  the  positive
terms  only,  is  between  perfection  as  the  complete
experience,  and  good  as  its  appearance  in  finite
life  as  an  object  of  desire ;  in  the  second  contrast,
between  good  as  a  line  taken  by  the  finite  creature's
aspiration, and  pleasure  as  dide facto  unobstructedness,
sporadic  throughout  the  activities  of  such  a  creature.

2.  In  conformity  with  these  ideas  I  argued  in  the  can  any
previous  chapter  that  pleasure  and  pain  were  no  fhen^b^
reliable  e^uides  to  the  gfood  and  evil  of  our  activities.  ^'''.''  °'"  ^7^

c>  o  » pain  good,

being variously distributed consequences of the'"^^'' ^^

!•••  c  r • ^ •  T~\  concerns

limitations  of  a  finite  being. Do  we  mean  to  say  partial
that,  in  themselves,  pleasure  need  not  be  good  and  Sr^pain?
pain  need  not  be  evil  ?

In  the  first  place,  the  question  is  less  important
than  might  appear.  For  when  we  come  to  think  of
serious or total unobstructedness or obstruction,

1  Author's  Logic,  ed.  2,  ii.  261.

2  See  also  Sympos.  paper  on  "  Mechanism  and  Purpose,"  Arisi.
Proc.  191 2.


reasons  for
affirmative.


196  GOOD  AND  EVIL  lect.

in  the  case  of  a  finite  creature  or  perhaps  of  a
society,^  there  is  no  doubt,  from  the  definition,  that
the  one — ex  hypothesi  attended  by  pleasure — must
come  to  be  considered  as  good,  as  approved  and
desired,  and  the  other  as  evil.  The  doubtful  point
can  only  concern  very  partial  exaltations  and  de-
pressions of  vitality,  where  a  partial  exaltation  may
be  the  condition  of  an  all  but  total  depression,"  or  a
partial  depression  of  an  all  but  total  exaltation.

And  even  as  regards  these,  it  will  be  said,  the
knot  may  be  very  simply  cut  by  saying,  ''  So  far  all
exaltation  is  good  ;  so  far  all  depression  is  evil.
Their  effects  may  overbalance  their  quality  with
more  of  its  opposite,  but  cannot  modify  it  in  itself."
I  do  not  feel  sure  that  this  is  satisfactory.  Accord-
ing to  Spinoza,  I  think,  and  also  according  to
Aristotle,  it  does  not  go  to  the  root  of  the  problem.
Good  and  evil  really  differ  from  pleasure  and  pain
by  the  attitude  which  they  involve  towards  a  whole.
So  that  a  pleasure  which  involves  all  but  total
depression  may  still  be  pleasurable  in  itself,  but  can
hardly,  I  think,  be  good  even  in  itself.^  For  a
pleasure  is  not  independent  of  its  activity.  It  is
infected  by  it.  If  we  follow  Aristotle's  doctrine,
surely  the  soundest,  of  the  qualification  of  pleasures
by  the  nature  of  their  accompanying  activities,  we
shall,  I  believe,  call  a  pleasure  evil  which  belongs  to
an  activity  obstructive  on  the  whole  to  life,  and  a
pain  good  which  attaches  to  what  destroys  such  a
pleasure, and so  on the  whole promotes vitality.

^  This  specification  may  be  necessary  to  cover  the  case  of  self-
sacrifice  in  members  of  the  group.

-  That  is  to  say,  a  depression  total  but  for  the  exaltation  in
question.

3 I  am  aware  that  this  sentence  deviates  from  Spinoza.


VII  GOODNESS  NOT  =  EMPTY  GOOD WILL  197

The  question  is  almost  verbal.  But  it  is  well  to
maintain  the  two  points  on  which  our  answer  turns  :
the  infection  or  qualification  of  pleasure  and  pain  by
their  activities,  and  the  differentia  of  good  and  evil
as  bearing  on  satisfaction  as  a  whole.  Thus  a
pleasure  belonging  to  an  activity  hostile  to  satis-
faction as  a  whole  must  be  nuanced,  infected,  in
itself,  by  the  evil  character  attaching  to  such  an
activity. And  I  am  sure  that  in  fact  it  is  so.^

3. Wherever  good  is  discussed,  we  shall  find  a  The

,  ,  .  -11  r  1 antithesis

curious  problem  intervening,  though  very  frequently  between
unrecognised. There  is,  or  seems  to  be,  good  in  ™°d  go^o?'^
general,  and  also  moral  good. All  sorts  of  things  are  llJfhar''^'
eood,  and  among:  them  is  virtue,  or  moral  excellence,  between

^5  "  , _  ,  funda-

This is the  prima  facie impression. But when  mentals  of

....  .  .  .  .  hfe  and

serious  discussion  is  entered  on,  there  is  a  tendency  their  coroi-
for  good  to  be  narrowed  down  to  moral  good.  How
can  a  thing  be  good,  and  moral  beings — self-judging
beings — not  be  bound  to  ensue  it  ?  And  if  we  are
bound  to  ensue  it,  how  can  it — the  ensuing  of  it —
fail  to  be  a  moral  duty  and  a  moral  good  ?  But
then,  on  the  other  hand,  if  the  attainment  of  it  is  a
moral  virtue  or  moral  good,  must  not  this  moral  good
be  pursued  for  its  own  sake  rather  than  for  any
objective  value  outside  the  moral  good  of  the  pursuit  ?
But  then  we  have  juggled  ourselves  out  of  the
objective  value  of  the  thing — beauty,  or  truth,  or  love
— whatever  it  may  be,  and  have  reduced  good,  the
whole  world  of  values,  to  goodness,  v^hich  prima  facie
is  one  among  them,  and  far  from  being  the  whole.

Nothing  can  save  us  here  but  to  recognise  that
the  difference  between  goodness  and  good  in  general
is  not  the  difference  between  the  empty  good  will

1 Cf.  previous  lecture  on  infection  of  pleasure  by  pain.


198  GOOD  AND  EVIL  lect.


and  the  values  which  it  wills.  Moral  virtues  or  the
mere  good  will  cannot  be  their  own  ends.  They  are
characters  drawn  out  in  the  complete  life  of  the  moral
organism,  but  without  the  objective  filling  of  con-
crete values  they  are  worthless  or  worse.^  To  be
brave  for  the  sake  of  courage  or  kind  for  the  sake
of  kindness  is  to  lose  all  ground  and  standard  in
conduct  and  to  approach  a  self-seeking  hypocrisy.

Goodness  as  distinguished  from  good  in  general
is  not  the  good  will  or  moral  excellence  as  opposed
to  all  concrete  objective  values.-  If  this  were  so,
those  extremists  would  be  right  who  have  maintained
that  virtue  and  duty  are  valueless  in  themselves,
and  only  have  value  as  means  to  objective  values
beyond  them.  But  the  question  is  really  one  of
objective  values  throughout ;  of  constituents  which
enter  into  the  total  harmony  and  perfectness  which
in  all  its  fragments  we  desire  and  approve.  The
difference  is  merely  that  some  of  these  are  funda-
mental in  all  and  any  ordered  life,  in  any  permanent
society  or  civilised  grouping  or  pursuit  of  rational
purposes. These,  being  the  conditions/^r  excellence

1  The  point  is  familiar  in  criticism  of  Kant,  but  it  needs
reiteration,  and  is  well  insisted  on  by  Green,  Prolegomena,  sect.  247,
following  a  striking  argument  of  Hume.

2  Nettleship,  Remains,  i.  93.  "  I  suppose  moral  worth  ought
simply  to  mean  whatever  contributes  in  any  way  to  whatever  the
person  who  is  talking  thinks  the  best  thing  or  the  thing  most  worth
having  in  the  world.  What  I  like  in  Greek  philosophy  is  that  it
puts  that  point  of  view  so  simply.  It  sickens  one  to  hear  the
ordinary  enlightened  man  talk  about  morality,  whether  he  talks  for
or  against  it.  He  almost  never  seems  to  realise  that  there  can  be
only  one  standard  of  absolute  value  for  things,  and  that  ultimately
the  morally  'good'  must  either  mean  that  (and  then  everything
that  is  really  worth  having  or  being  has  moral  value),  or  else  must
describe  some  special  form  of  such  absolute  value  (in  which  case
'moral'  will  be  co-ordinate  with,  not  supreme  over,  artistic,
political,  commercial,  etc.)."


VII  ALL WISDOM  IS GOODNESS  199

of  all  and  any  values,  being  the  attainment  of  the
fundamental  values  on  which  all  others  depend,  and
being  readily  recognised  as  akin,  are  traditionally
grouped  together  and  called  goodness  or  moral
excellence  as  one  among  other  goods.  Other  values
again  are  provincial  or  departmental,  and  are  not
indispensable  to  every  life,  though  they  well  may  be
so  to  life  as  a  whole.  These,  though  really  of  the
same  kin,  as  forms  of  harmony  and  perfection  in
mind  and  world,  but  lying  apart  from  each  other,
and  often  in  apparently  sharp  contrast  with  the
former,  come  to  be  considered  as  in  some  inexplic-
able way  independent  gifts,  excellences,  values,
desirabilities  of  the  world,  which  have  nothing  to  do
with  the  central  perfection  of  experience.  I  have
urged  this  interpretation  of  the  connection  between
goodness  and  general  goods  in  the  previous  volume,^
and  need  not  insist  upon  it  here.  All  that  makes
for  perfection  is  good  and  has  value ;  all  of  it  is  an
order  and  completeness  in  experience  and  in  mind —
we  may  think,  for  example,  of  truth  and  beauty.
None  of  it  can  in  principle  be  indifferent  to  the
finite  creature  for  whom  perfection  is  the  inherent
aim,  and  good  is  what  so  far  fulfils  it.  And  the
distinction  between  goodness  and  goods  in  general
is  only  the  distinction  between  the  fundamentals  of
unified  life  and  its  outlying  corollaries.

Thus  the  antithesis  between  good  in  general  and
moral  goodness  is  easily  understood,  on  the  lines
suggested  in  the  previous  volume.  It  is  in  a  great
measure  a  false  and  unwholesome  antithesis,  as  when
we  exclude  from  moral  goodness  the  ordering  of  our
souls  in  respect  of  the  sense  of  truth  and  of  beauty,

^ Principle^  p.  346  ff.


200  GOOD  AND  EVIL  I.ECT.

or  the  capacity  of  dealing  with  the  world.  Goodness
is  certainly  wisdom  ;  and  to  draw  a  hard-and-fast  line
between  its  simplest  forms  and  its  further  develop-
ments is  both  illogical  and  ethically  narrow-minded.
Thus,  further,  we  cannot  deny  that  in  its  degree  all
wisdom  is  goodness.
Difficulty  4. And  yet  there  is  a  difficulty — a  very  instructive

ing^good-  difficulty — in  enlarging  goodness  to  the  compass  of
include  all  ^^  goods.  We  need  not,  indeed,  think  of  goods
goods. It  ^vhich  are  totally  and  in  principle  apart  from  experi-

comes  to  y  1  i  1  1

include  ence,  e.g.  a  world  of  beauty  inaccessible  to  any  and
every  mind,  finite  or  infinite.  Such  a  world  could
be  neither  beautiful  nor  a  good.  But  it  is  true  that
in  considering  the  characters  of  perfection  we  are
driven  more  and  more  to  recognise  how  far  the
roots  of  a  finite  mind  extend  beyond  itself;  and
morality,  goodness,  the  affirmation  of  fundamental
values,  passes  continuously  into  gifts  and  graces  due
to  nature  or  history.  We  should  not  like  to  make
health  or  good  luck  a  part  of  moral  goodness,  though
they  are  certainly  not  unconnected  with  it.  Yet  if
we  try  to  rule  out  from  goodness  all  external  gifts
and  graces,  physical  endowments,  education,  age  and
country,  ability  to  learn  and  to  act,  we  shall  find  that
we  have  ruled  out  moral  excellence  itself.  The
conclusion  is  forced  upon  us  that  morality,  even  if
expanded  to  the  compass  of  all  mental  and  bodily
excellence,  is  still  only  a  relative  point  of  view,^  one
which  cannot  be  pushed  to  the  point  of  conceiving
the  finite  creature,  in,  by,  and  of  himself,  as  fully
equipped  with  the  conditions  and  constituents  of
goodness.  Goodness  passes  continuously  into  goods,
and  goods  into  gifts.

^  Principle^  Lect.  VI.


VII  GOOD  AND  EVIL, FINITE VENTURES  201

The  individual,  though  responsible,  has  neverthe-
less his  roots  deep  in  the  universe  beyond  him.

5.  Wholly  apart  from  his  attitude,  on  the  other  Yet  apart
hand,  it  can  hardly  be  said  that  we  have  what  can  attitude
count  as  good  or  evil. The  relation  of  these  to  the  hrve^good
antithesis of  pleasure  and pain has already been  J'^JJ^gjion
discussed. It  is  also  customary  to  lend  unconscious  of  success

'  and  failure

nature  an  attitude  to  perfection,  and  to  see  good  and  in  Nature
evil  in  her  supposed  failure  and  success.  But  all
this,  like  much  of  our  judgment  of  success  and  failure
among  mankind,  rests  upon  an  ascription  of  ends
which  is  highly  fallible,  even  if  in  any  way  justifiable
in  principle.  To  mention  one  elementary  case,  when
the  poet  says,  as  an  example  of  incompleteness
permitted  by  nature,

"  And  finding  that  of  fifty  seeds
She  often  brings  but  one  to  bear,"

did  he  remember  what  bread  is  made  of.'*  No  doubt,
this  is  a  human  adaptation  of  a  natural  process.  But
if  such  an  end  is  attainable  through  what,  within
nature  strictly  taken,  is  but  arrest  and  failure,  how
can  we  lay  stress  on  any  ascription  of  ends  to  apparent
organic  purposiveness  throughout  .'*  The  fact  is,  it  is
neither  nature  nor  finite  mind  that  authoritatively
recognises  and  prescribes  the  operative  end  of  the
universe.  It  is,  so  far  as  accessible  to  our  judgment
at  all,  the  working  of  the  whole,  in  which  each  in  its
place  is  an  instrument.  But  good  and  evil  are  unin-
telligible expressions  apart  from  the  attitude  of  finite
minds.

6.  Thus  it  should  not  be  counted  strange  that  in  Thus  good
spite  of  their  fundamental  importance  for our  life  rigiuiy

I  should  reckon  good  and  evil  among  the  perilous  inddentsof


2o2


GOOD  AND  EVIL


LECT.


finiteness  ;
but  yet
stability
will  attach
through
them.


incidents — the  risks  and  difficulties — of  finiteness. It
may  be  objected  that  if  we  insist  on  thus  emphasis-
ing  the finiteness of the finite, we shall end by
seeing  in  its  whole  experience  nothing  but  hazard
and  hardship. And I admit  that  I am  anxious  to
bring  home  this  point  of  view. It  is  not  in  order  to
make  life  appear  terrifying  and  chaotic. It  is  rather
in  order  to  point  out  that  in  all  its  risks  and  terrors
there  is,  after  all,  nothing  but  what  flows  from  the
source of  its strength and value ; the continual
passing  of  the  finite  beyond  itself  in  the  venture  of
achieving  a  fuller  world. And  under  a  later  heading
we  shall  gather  up  the  suggestions  on  the  positive
side which have pervaded the whole argument,
and  shall  insist, following  the  line  of  the  previous
volume,^  on the note  of completeness  which per-
meates these  very  experiences  of  risk  and  obstruc-
tion and  is  actually  sustained  by  them. This  note  of
completeness,  present  throughout,  has  its  own  forms
of  expression,  which  are  found  imperfectly  realised,
but inherently  implied, in  all  the phases  we  have
considered, 2 When we turn to its characteristic
shape, the religious consciousness, under a later
heading, we shall not be sharply passing across
an absolute distinction, from the discords to the
harmonies  of  experience,  as  from  opposite  to  opposite.
In  that  case  the  briefer  treatment  of  the  latter  would
seem  to  concede  that  they  are  overbalanced  by  the
former. And,  moreover,  it  would  suggest  itself — and
the  suggestion would be  one  which  we  could  not
altogether  repel — that  even  the  religious  conscious-


1  Principle,  Lect.  VIII.

2  See, e.g., Lect, V.  on  the  implication  of  organic  morality in
the  world  of  claims.


VII FORMAL  SAMENESS OF  GOOD  AND  EVIL 203

ness  is  one  among  the  risks  and  difficulties  of
finiteness.  It  is  the  invocation  of  a  fundamental
force,  to  which,  as  to  the  spell  on  the  lips  of  the
wizard's  apprentice,  terrible  dangers  are  attached
for  the  unthinking  or  the  insincere.  But  all  this
only  bears  witness  to  the  continuity  of  our  double
life  through  the  forms  which  we  are  analysing.
We  shall  only  be  drawing  out  to  its  explicit
manifestation  an  element  which  has  been  present
throughout  as  a  spirit  of  vigour  and  inclusive-
ness,  through  which  alone  the  risks  and  discrep-
ancies we  have  indicated  become  endurable  and
significant.

7.  With this explanation we may proceed to  in  what

,  .  , . ,  ,  ,  J sense  good

indicate  the  sense  m  which  good  must  be  counted  is  a  hazard,

a  hazard, and  evil  both  a  hazard and a  hardship.  both^I'

It  would  not,  indeed,  seem  unnatural  to  extend  the  Jj^'j^JJ^Jlsh^p

double  title to  good  as  well  as  to  evil. But  this

would only mean that finite life is hard at best,

and that point has been sufficiently illustrated.

We  will begin  by  noting  the  curious kinship  and

interdependence of  the  two experiences, in  which

both  of  them  share  the  hazardous  and  adventurous

character  of  finiteness  resting  on  infinity.^

i. Both  good  and  evil  are  formally  self-transcend-  Good  is

ence  of  the  finite  mind. In  both  the  finite  creature  obstruction

throws  himself  forward,  losing  something  that  he  is,  oni™'^  ^

and,  formally  at  least,  gaining  something  that  he  was  ^g^^jf^^

not, if  it  were  only  a  drunken  hilarity. In  both,  the  distinc-

. .  . .  i\o\\  be-

therefore,  and  not  in  evil  only,  he  is  liable  to  con-  tweenthem

,. .  , ,  .  , .  1 • 1  arises  in

tradiction  and  obstruction,  and  in  a  sense,  which  we  the  venture
drew out in discussing the kindred conditions of  uiJ'seif."^

^ Cf. Principle, 242, on  structure  of  reality  and  the  kinship  of
good  and  evil  in,  e.g..  Green's  theory.


204  GOOD  AND  EVIL  lect.

pleasure  and  pain,  is  always  confronted  with  them.
This  we  might  venture  to  designate  as  primary  con-
tradiction, meaning  by  that  the  elementary  difficulty
of  adjusting  the  content  of  the  finite  creature  with
any  degree  of  completeness  to  the  demands  of  any
situation,  any  case  of  union  with  the  not-self,  at  all.
All  action,  all  living,  has  a  side  of  difficulty,  and
formally  involves  self-sacrifice,  evil  as  actually  as
good,  though  not  in  the  same  degree — to  begin  with
less,  and  ultimately  more.^

When  we  are  told  that  it  is  a  fatal  dualism  in  the
good  to  have  two  divergent  paths  of  attainment,
self-sacrifice  and  self-affirmation,  that  we  approve
of  both,  and  cannot  in  principle  determine  ourselves
to  the  preference  of  either,  the  answer  is  prepared
by  what  has  just  been  said.  In  principle  every
action  combines  the  two  ;  it  is  a  single  consequence
of  finiteness.  The  cost  at  which  we  achieve  our
ends  varies  in  every  instance,  and  in  very  many
cases  it  would  be  impossible  to  say  whether  the
element  of  self-affirmation  or  of  self-sacrifice  is
predominant.  Formally  there  are  always  both,  and
though  they  may  seem  to  diverge  as  the  one  side
or  the  other  is  the  more  prominent,  yet  they  both
spring  from the single principle we  are  tracing.^

^  I  am  merely  pressing  home  an  initial  technical  character  of  all
finite  action.  I  am  not,  I  think,  substantially  in  conflict  with  Mr.
Bradley's  conclusion  {Ethical  Studies,  p.  277)  that  there  cannot  be  in
the  strict  sense  self-sacrifice  for  the  bad,  i.e.  for  the  bad  reflectively
known  and  considered  qua  bad.

'^  Here  is  an  example,  drawn  from  what  I  believe  has  not
unfrequently  occurred.  A  scholar  abandons  the  notes  and  materials
of  his  lifework,  along  with  the  moral  monopoly  or  goodwill  of  it,  to
a  younger  man,  who,  he  thinks,  will  accomplish  it  more  efficiently.
How  far  this  is  self-sacrifice  as  opposed  to  self-affirmation  depends
on  the  form  of  the  end  with  which  the  self  is  identified.  If  the  end  is
7«/ achievement,  we  get  one  answer,  if  it  is  the  achievement,  another.


VII  ATTITUDE MAKES GOOD  AND  EVIL  205

And  in  as  far  as  the  self  can  come,  in  the  highest
experience,  to  surrender  itself  without  loss,  a
convergence  between  self-sacrifice  and  self-affirma-
tion begins  within  finite  life  which  in  principle,  we
can  see,  must  be  completed  beyond  it/

Again,  both  good  and  evil,  like  truth  and  error,
are  made  of  the  same  stuff.  There  is  nothing  else
of  which  they  can  be  made ;  desires,  volitions,
habits,  ideas,  these  are  what  life  consists  in,  and
their  mere  positive  nature  is  not  stamped  ab  initio  as
either  good  or  bad.  Our  evil  desires  are  not  desires
for  evil  ;  our  good  desires  are  not  desires  for  some-
thing heterogeneous  from  the  objects  of  those  which
are  bad.

What,  then,  makes  things  good  or  evil  ?  How
does  good  differ  from  evil,  and  evil  from  good  ?
The  first  or  formal  answer,  again,  leaves  them  undis-
tinguished and  on  the  same  level.  Good  is  good
because  it  is  in  contradiction  to  evil.  Evil  is  evil
because  it  is  in  contradiction  to  good.  Of  course
this  is  not  enough,  for  it  does  not  tell  us  which  is
which,  but  it  is  so  far  true.  Neither  has  or  could
have  its  character  without  the  other ;  and  if  you
could  wipe  out  the  one  you  would  annihilate  the
other  along  with  it.  Each  expresses,  as  we  have
seen,  an  attitude  on  the  part  of  the  finite  being,  and
this  attitude  is  in  each  determined  by  a  contradic-
tion, other  than  the  mere  liability  to  obstructedness
common  to  all  finite  action  and  expression,  though
rooted  in  the  same  characteristics  of  finiteness.
Good  is  primarily  the  conflict  with  evil  and  the
triumph over it  ; evil is primarily the rebellion

1 Cf.  author's  paper  in  Ar.  Proc.  for  1902  on  "Recent  Criticism
of  Green's  Et/iicsP


2o6  GOOD  AND  EVIL  LECT.

against  good.  The  purpose  which  is  a  root  of  evil
in  one  self  may  be  the  spur  to  good  in  another  ;  it
is  not  the  content  of  the  object,  but  the  side  assigned
to  it  in  the  contradiction  of  attitudes,  that  is  decisive
of  its  goodness  or  badness.

Thus  we  can  understand  how  both  good  and  evil
are  hazards  of  the  finite  self.  There  is  no  simple
general  choice  between  rows  of  objects  antecedently
labelled  as  good  and  bad.  The  whole  positive
material  of  life  is  in  principle  ^  before  or  within  the
finite  self,  and  out  of  this  it  has  to  build  up  a  symbol
or  relative  world  of  perfection  involving  the  repudia-
tion of  what  conflicts  with  it.  To  understand  what
makes  one  side  good  and  the  other  side,  inseparable
from  it,  evil,  we  must  look  to  a  further  characteristic,
which,  within  the  affinity  we  have  noted,  funda-
mentally differentiates  them.
What  ii.  Why  do  we  call  evil  not  merely  a  hazard  but  a

ev?i,^and'a  hardship  ?  If  hardship  meant  only  what  is  hard,  it
itTseif-^''  would,  we  saw,  be  true  in  a  great  measure  also  or
contradic-  especially  of  good  ;  yaXeira  TO.  KoKa.  But  we  mean
Must  take by \i  something more, something hostile to our

account  "'  ^  . ,  . .  . .

of  the fundamental  nature,  though  m  a  way  mherent  m  it  ;

wo^dd'of  something  in  which  the  finite,  though  transcending
itself,  transcends  itself  towards  ultimate  dissatisfac-
tion, and  not  towards  harmony  and  completeness.
The  possibility  of  such  hardship  is  rooted,  we  have
to  remember,  in  the  possibility  of  satisfaction  and
harmony.

The  answer  is  that  besides  the  adventurousness
which  it  shares  with  good,  besides, moreover,  the

1  In  principle,  because,  of  course,  it  is  not  all  in  fact  at  the
command  of  every  finite  self.  What  is  so  in  each  case,  and  how
related  to  the  opportunities  of  good  and  evil,  is  part  of  the  adventurous-
ness which  the  finite  must  accept.


good.


VII STANDARD ONLY  IN  THE  MORAL WORLD 207

primary  contradiction  between  good  and  evil  in
which  both  are  on  a  level,  the  evil  attitude  involves
a  further  or  second  contradiction.  It  is  not  merely
interested  to  realise  the  self  against  a  contradictory
element,  as  good  also  is,  but  it  is  interested  to
realise  it  in  and  as  a  contradiction.

And  here  it  is  impossible  to  reason  the  matter
further  without  reference  to  the  realised  or  organic
moral  world,  which  was  mentioned  in  contrast  to
the  externality  of  the  world  of  claims,  and  of  which
the  world  of  claims  itself  was  a  very  superficial
aspect  and  anticipation.  Any  one  who  should  insist
on  restricting  the  argument  at  this  point  to  the
apparent  or  finite  individual  would  not  be  able
effectually  to  distinguish  between  the  good  and  evil
attitude.  For  it  is  only  possible  to  distinguish  them
by  implicit  or  explicit  reference  to  the  world  of
spiritual  membership  in  which  the  apparently  finite
creature  comes  to  his  reality.  Apart  from  this,  he
is  a  chaos  of  impulses,  all  of  which  have  their  ends,
and  these  ends,  pro  tanto,  are  goods.  And  if  we
find  one  of  them  contradicting  another,  by  what
possible  standard  can  we  determine  which  is  right  .'*
The  difficulties  and  irrational  compromises  of  altru-
ism and  egoism,  of  asceticism  and  hedonism,^  arise
from  the  attempt  to  discriminate  good  and  evil  in
the  desires  and  volitions  of  the  self  without  taking
into  account  any  totality  to  which  it  is  relative  by
finding  completion  in  it. No  doubt,  within  every

^  One  may  see  a  similar  difficulty  and  its  implied  solution  in
Plato's  account  of  the  inward  order  which  is  the  truth  of  justice,
dissociated  for  the  moment  from  the  complement  of  the  external
world.  The  reader  feels  at  once  that  there  is  nothing  in  this
inward  order  to  justify  the  rank  or  value  of  objects  of  desire,  beyond
an  apparent  tendency  to  intellectualism.  Plato,  of  course,  immediately,
supplies  the  corrective  in  correspondence  with  the  social  organism.


2o8  GOOD  AND  EVIL  lect.

self-conscious  finite  creature  there  is  something  of  a
formed  system,  which  constitutes  or  indicates  its
attitude  to  perfection,  and  by  contrast  with  which
what  opposes  it  is  evil.  But  there  is  no  standard
or  rationale  for  the  identification  and  estimate  of  its
structure  unless  we  take  it  in  connection  with  the
spiritual  organism  in  which  the  finite  being  finds  to
some  extent  completion  and  satisfaction.  I  do  not
mean  simply  the  social  whole  or  the  general  will,
though  that  is  an  obvious  part  and  instance  of  what
is  here  in  question.  I  mean  the  whole  world  of
achievements,  habits,  institutions  in  which  the
apparent  individual  finds  some  clue  to  the  reality
which  is  the  truth  of  himself  This,  then,  imperfectly
as  it  is  realised  in  connection  with  him,  stands  to
him  so  far  for  the  satisfaction  and  the  foundation
which  his  nature  demands.  And  his  attitude,  so  far
as  good,  is  to  harmonise  his  being  with  it,  while
eliciting  from  the  material  of  life  a  further  harmony
for  both.  This  spiritual  world,  in  its  purpose  and
persistence,  is  the  attainment,  so  far  solid  and  real,
in  which  self-transcendence  is  assured  of  the
identification  of  the  self  with  good,  that  is,  with  a
something  which  is  at  once  himself  and  greater  than
himself,  and  bears  up  to  a  certain  point  the  coherent
and  satisfactory  character  of  perfection.

Now,  against  this  relatively  solid  achievement
there  is  on  the  side  of  evil  nothing — simply  nothing
— correlative  to  be  set.  There  are,  indeed,  in  the
self-transcendence  towards  evil,  positive  ends  and
purposes  which  might  have  belonged  to  the  good.
But  as  evil,  they  have  for  their  common  bond  and
inclusive  construction  only  the  spirit  of  conflict  and
contradiction  ; of  resentment  and  hostility  as  at  a


VII  FINITE GOOD CANNOT  SATISFY  209

threatening  absorption  into  the  harmonious  world  of
the  good.  Evil,  one  might  say,  is  good  in  the
wrong  place,  as  dirt  is  matter  in  the  wrong  place.
But  being  in  the  wrong  place,  it  takes  on  the
character  of  conscious  contradiction.  And  being
in  contradiction  against  the  unity  in  which  the  self
is  realised,  and  being  affirmed  by  the  self  in  such
an  attitude,  it  brings  the  self,  so  far  as  affirmed  in
it,  into  contradiction  with  itself.  And  it  is  into  such
contradiction  that  self-transcendence,  so  far  as  evil,
passes  out  in  the  act  which  should  constitute  self-
realisation.  The  act,  of  course,  has  a  content.
You  cannot  take  up  an  attitude  of  bare  contradiction
and  no  more.  But  the  point  of  the  content  is  not
in  any  whole  which  it  subserves,  but  in  hostility  to
the  identification  of  the  self  with  such  a  whole.^

8. Why  do  we  represent  evil  as  the  inherent  or  why  is
adherent  complement  of  good  1 The  answer  might  herent  to
be  put  in  many  forms.  M°ny

We migfht say,  for instance,  that it  is  due  to  ^°^'^^  ^^

o  J  '  '  answer.

the  inadequacy  of  finite  s^ood. If  we  could  have  "inade-

.  . .  quacy  of

all  we  want,  without  collision  of  ends,  there  would  finite
be  no  ground  of  discord  and  no  motive  for  rebellion,  which  =
But  as  finite  good  cannot  satisfy  a  finite  being  as  a  finitTbdng
whole,  there  is  always  some  element  of  the  finite  ^^^^^ ,.
creature which demands satisfaction outside the  '•^-  ""°'

adequate  to

system identified  with good,  and consequently in  perfection

T  •!•  n*  •!•  All  ir ^^'^  perfec-

direct or mdirect  conflict  with  it. And the sell,  tion  useless

being  in  this  element  as  in  all  the  rest,  inevitably  .?ev'ii  "^'

sets  itself in  rebellion,  against  itself  as identified  "o^'j-rJe!'^^

with  the  system  of  sood. But  if  we  ask  why  the  '^°'"-"  f''-

•>  o  J  "moral

finite  good cannot  satisfy  the finite creature  as a  standpoint

involves
^ Of  course I am  following  at  a  great  distance Mr. Bradley's  '^""''"-''•
analysis  of  the  good  and  bad  self  in  Ethical  Studies.

P


2IO  GOOD  AND  EVIL  lect.

whole,  by,  so  to  speak,  exactly  fitting  it,  the  answer
must  come  back  to  this  :  that  the  finite  creature,
being  only  an  apparent  and  not  a  real  whole,  cannot
be  satisfied  except  by  being  made  into  a  real  whole.
And  this  means  that  it  could  not  be  satisfied  by  a
good  which,  per  impossibile,  should  just  fit  it  as  it
is.  For  such  a  good  would  leave  it  in  self-contra-
diction and  inconsistency.  Therefore  the  supposed
good  could  not  be  more  than  a  relative  good,  and
to  speak  of  its  being  a  complete  satisfaction  would
be  a  contradiction  in  terms.

So  the  fundamental  answer  is,  that  the  contrast
of  good  and  evil,  like  the  other  hazards  and  hardships
which  beset  the  finite  creature,  depends  upon  its
finite-infinite  nature.  For  in  consequence  of  this
it  perpetually  transcends  itself  towards  a  perfection
to  which,  as  it  stands,  it  is  not  adequate ;  and  there-
fore the  only  perfection  it  can  realise,  its  finite
good,  is  in  turn  not  adequate  to  it.  Nothing,  as
we  saw,  can  satisfy  a  self-contradictory  being,  except
what  will  make  it  harmonious,  which  means  a  radical
transformation.  It  takes  the  whole  object — this  is  the
moral  of  Plato's  Republic — to  satisfy  the  whole  man.
But  then  the  man  cannot  receive  the  whole  object,
and  therefore,  ex  hypothesis  cannot  bring  his  whole
nature  into  correspondence  with  any  satisfaction.
And  thus  his  innate  self- transcendence,  his  in-
eradicable passion  for  the  whole,  makes  it  inevitable
that  out  of  the  superfluity  which  he  cannot  systematise
under  the  good,  he  will  form  a  secondary  and  negative
self,  a  disinherited  self,  hostile  to  the  imperative
domination  of  the  good  which  is,  ex  hypothesi,  only
partial.  And  this  discord  is  actually  necessary  to
the  good  ; for  it  sets  it  its  characteristic  problem,


VII  THE  INSUPERABLE  ANTITHESIS  211

the  conquest  of  the  bad.  And  the  good  is  necessary
to  the  evil,  for  beyond  rebellion  against  the  good,
the  would-be  totality  of  the  disinherited  self  can
find  no  other  unity.

A  shorter  form  of  the  answer  would  be,  that  evil
is  necessary  to  freedom.  I  do  not  mean  that  tempta-
tion is  necessary  to  prove  and  train  the  empty  free
will.  The  ego  has  a  content  before  it  is  a  moral
agent.  But  I  mean,  what  I  take  to  be  the  truth
underlying  this  doctrine,  that  a  spirit  which  has  its
being  in  transforming  the  external  into  the  absolute
must  proceed  by  trial  and  error,  and  so  by  setting
itself  against  itself  Its  business,  we  have  seen,^  is
to  initiate,  to  fuse  and  concentrate  externality  into
elements  of  perfection.  Now  this  origination  pre-
supposes a  perpetual  struggle  with  misdirected  desire
and  endeavour.  The  constructive  spirit  rises  upon
its  own  failures,  and  in  advancing  loses  itself  often
in  blind  alleys.  If  it  could  not  go  wrong,  its  creation
would  not  be  its  own.

In  a  word,  the  world  of  hazard  and  hardship
arises  over  the  whole  arena  where  finite  individual-
ism battles  with  spiritual  individuality  ;  and  in  this
arena  good  and  evil  form  the  central  conflict.  Their
import  is  an  antithesis  to  be  fought  out  on  finite
ground,  which  is  as  much  as  to  say,  there  is  an
insuperable  antithesis  to  be  overcome.  Thus,  as
in  the  world  of  claims,  so,  though  in  a  lesser  degree,
in  the  world  of  organised  and  realised  morality,
moral  faith  is  found  looking  to  the  future,  to  progress
and  modification  of  the  finite,  in  short,  to  an  infinite
advance  in  which  the  insuperable  opposition  may
be overcome. This is, as we have seen more

1  Principle,  Lect.  IX.


212


GOOD  AND  EVIL


LECT.


These
hazards,
etc. ,  how
far  charac-
ters of  the
Absolute  ?
Evil,  e.g.
a  sub-
ordinate
aspect  in
good,  and
good  itself
hardly  a
character
of  the
Absolute.
Evil  and
error  are
in  it  but
not  o/\l.


generally,  the  typical  moral  attitude,  the  fundamental
individualistic  attitude  to  which  the  antithesis  of
good  and  evil  belongs.  Each  being  has  his  work
to  do  ;  he  is  responsible  for  the  future  of  the  world  ;
he  looks  to  do  his  part  in  modifying  and  reforming
the  universe.

In  drawing  to  a  conclusion  of  this  attempt  to
exhibit  the  rationale  of  the  risks  and  buffets  which
are  inseparable  from  finite  selfhood,  we  are  bound
to  say  a  word  on  the  question  how  far  these  hazards
and  hardships  characterise  the  absolute.  Let  evil
stand  as  the  typical  case.  How  far  is  evil  a  character
of  the  Absolute  ?

9.  There  is  a  very  important  consideration  of
principle  which  affects  this  question  in  regard  to
all  the  forms  of  imperfection.  All  of  them,  we  have
seen,  spring  from  the  general  source  of  satisfaction
and  value,  the  self-transcendence  or  finite-infinite
nature  of  finite  beings.  Each  of  the  imperfections,
moreover,  is  relative  and  subordinate  to  a  certain
aspect  of  completeness  and  perfection,  which  belongs
(as  a  hazard,  we  have  maintained)  to  the  tension
of  finite  being  in  its  transformation  towards  the
Absolute.

Now,  in  the  first  place,  the  Absolute  cannot  be
fully  characterised  by  any  one  of  these  subordinate
excellences  itself.  As  the  perfect  experience  it  is
more  than  beautiful,  more  than  pleasant,  more  than
true  and  than  good.  We  have  seen  this  from  a
general  argument  in  the  case  of  all  particular
perfections,^  and  more  especially  we  have  seen  it  in
the  previous  lecture  in  the  case  of  pleasure,  and  in
the  present  lecture  in  the  case  of  good. It  is  plain

1  Principle,  Lect.  VII.


VII  HOW  ERROR  DIFFERS  FROM TRUTH  213

that  a  perfection  which  reconciles  all  these  character-
istics must  be  more  than  each  of  them.  It  cannot
be  a  conjunction ;  it  must,  as  we  have  argued
throughout,  be  a  transformation.

Much  less,  then,  can  the  Absolute  be  charac-
terised by  any  one  of  the  imperfections  which  are
relative  to  each  of  these  several  forms  of  perfection,
each  to  each.  Thus  the  Absolute  certainly  contains
error,  as  it  contains  everything.  But  we  cannot
say  that  it  is  characterised  by  error,  i.e.  that  when
we  think  of  it  as  the  perfection  which  transcends
and  completes  the  nature  of  truth,  we  can  think  of  it
as,  in  this  completeness,  having  error  as  a  constituent
member.  The  same  argument  applies  throughout,
to  error  as  to  ugliness,  to  evil  as  to  pain.  Error  is
made  through  and  through  of  the  same  stuff  as
truth.  It  is  affirmed  as  truth.  It  is  an  arrange-
ment in  the  same  world  as  truth  and  deals  with  the
same  realities.  The  very  same  judgments  are  true
or  erroneous  according  to  the  purpose,  conditions,
and  context  which  we  supply  to  them.  It  is  false  to
say  that  water  boils  at  200°  Fahrenheit.  That  is  to
say,  it  is  false  if  you  understand  it  to  mean,  under
normal  conditions,  viz.  at  sea-level.  But  if  you
supply  the  condition  "  at  a  certain  height  above  sea-
level  "  it  becomes  true.  You  may,  of  course,  specify
conditions  which  wholly  and  utterly  conflict  with
the  possibility  affirmed  to  be  real.  But  still  you  are
only  dealing  with  a  confusion  between  realities —
with  the  assertion  of  one  alternative  under  the
condition  belonging  to  another.^  By  rearranging
and  readjusting  the  condition  the  error  can  always
be  transformed  into  truth.

1 See  Author's  Logic,  ed.  2,  vol.  i.  p.  383.


214  GOOD  AND  EVIL  lect.

Thus  error  differs  from  truth  simply  in  systematic
distinction  and  completeness.  Its  character  of
falsity  is  a  matter  of  degree,  normally  reducible  to
exaggerated  emphasis  on  some  one  element  in  a
whole.^  And  I  suppose  there  is  no  finite  truth —
and  all  truth  is  finite — which  has  not  such  ex-
aggerated emphasis,  "partiality"  in  the  most
pregnant  sense.

Error  thus  shows  no  characteristic  irreducible  to
truth.  The  perfection  which  finite  mind  implies  as
its  only  ultimate  reality  involves  the  absorption  of
error  into  a  coherent  and  "impartial"  system  of
truth,  and  consequently  of  values.  That  is  to  say,
in  as  far  as  truth  becomes  complete,  error  must  be
absorbed  and  disappear.  There  is  nothing  to  keep  it
alive,  except  the  incompleteness  of  truth.  If  truth,
in  becoming  complete,  ceases  to  be  truth  and
becomes,  say,  reality,  that  transformation  none  the
less  involves  the  disappearance  of  error.  Error  is
what  stands  out  and  refuses  to  come  into  the  system,
though  of  one  substance  and  texture  with  it.  If  the
system  is  completed,  in  itself  or  as  something  else,
that  is  to  say  that  error  is  absorbed.

If,  then,  we  consider  the  absolute,  the  perfect
experience,  from  the  standpoint  of  truth  and  error,
we  must  say  though  it  contains  error,  this  is  a
subordinate  aspect  of  its  character  as  truth,  and  can
only  belong  to  the  ultimate  experience  so  far  as
imperfect  truth  belongs  to  it. But  that  can  only  be

1  Take  the  simplest  and  most  definite  blunder.  "  The  lady  in
blue  is  Mrs.  A.,"  when  she  really  is  Mrs.  B.  The  judgment  is  a
confusion  of  identities,  due  to  some  fact  or  mark  about  Mrs.  B.  which
suggests  Mrs.  A.,  and  which  the  percipient  overestimates,  neglecting
all  the  other  facts  and  marks.  The  mistake  may  or  may  not  be  a  bad
one. The  two  ladies  may  be  "  identical  twins."


VII  VIDEO  MELIORA,  ETC., TRUE?  215

as  an  element  absorbed  in  it,  so  that  all  varieties
of  relative  points  of  view  and  one-sided  emphasis
come  together  in  the  one  experience  of  reality
and  value.

So  with  evil,  taken  in  the  sense  which  gives  it  a
distinctive  meaning  apart  from  mere  natural  facts  of
pain  and  of  what  we  take  to  be  failure  in  external
nature  ;  that  is,  as  anything  which  is  or  implies  an
attitude  opposed  to  good.

The  stuff  of  which  evil  is  made  is  one  with  the
stuff  of  which  good  is  made.  No  tendency  or  desire
could  be  pointed  out  in  the  worst  of  lives  or  of
actions  which  is  incapable  of  being,  with  addition
and  readjustment,  incorporated  in  a  good  self^
There  would  not  be  the  contradiction  of  good  and
evil  if  there  were  not  this  community  of  nature  as
in  pain  and  pleasure,  or  in  error  and  truth.  The
essence  of  the  evil  attitude  is  the  self-maintenance
of  some  factor  in  a  self  both  as  good  and  also  as
against  the  good  system.  It  is,  as  we  saw  above,
good  in  the  wrong  place,  and  therefore  wrenches
the  whole  nature  of  the  soul  out  of  gear.  It  is,  to
employ  an  old  definition,  "  when  we  use  what  we
ought  to  enjoy,  and  when  we  enjoy  what  we  ought
to  use.""  No  doubt,  we  cannot  easily  see  how  it  is
psychologically  possible  to  will  or  approve  some-
thing as  good,  while  recognising  it  as  in  conflict
with  the  good  system.  It  is  as  if  one  asserted  error
not  merely  as  truth,  and  de  facto  against  the  system

1  I  do  not  believe,  e.g.,  in  disinterested  cruelty.  I  take  the
appearance  of  it  to  be  due  to  certain  forms  of  self-assertion  which  are
capable  of  finding  perfectly  legitimate  objects.  They  become  cruel
by  their  narrowness,  just  as  "  virtuous  "  fanaticism  may.

2  The  classical  account  of  evil,  from  this  point  of  view,  is  in  Plato's
Republic.


2i6  GOOD  AND EVIL  lect.

of  truth,  but  as  truth,  and  yet  consciously  against
the  system  we  hold  to  be  truth, ^  which  seems
strictly  impossible.  And  in  the  case  of  evil  it  will
perhaps  be  necessary  to  go  back  to  Socrates,  and
to  admit  that  in  the  moment  of  evil  volition  the
inherent  contradiction  is  blunted,  and  the  system
willed  and  recognised  as  good  (if  not  willed  it  is
not  recognised)  is  modified  by  self-deception  so
as  apparently  to  accept  for  the  moment  the  evil
attitude.^

However  this  may  be,  on  the  main  point  there  is
no  doubt.  The  evil  attitude  is  an  incident  of  the
good,  asserting  the  same  sort  of  aims,  and  asserting
them  as  good  ;  and  only  asserting  them  against  the
acknowledged  good  system  because  the  acknow-
ledged finite  good  and  the  finite  creature  are  unable
to  adjust  themselves  to  each  other  in  an  all-inclusive
system.  The  evil,  it  is  sometimes  said,  is  superseded
good,  good  of  the  past ;  as  heresy  has  been  said  to
be  the  orthodoxy  of  the  past.  At  any  rate  this
doctrine  illustrates  our  point.

Supposing,  then,  the  good  to  become  an  adequate
system  in  which  some  being  could  fully  affirm
itself — and  in  the  absolute  it  must  be  so,  even  if
in  becoming  so  it  transforms  itself — there  can  be
no  difficulty  in  thinking  of  evil  as  absorbed  in  it.
There  is  room  in  good  for  the  character  of  all  evil,
redistributed  and  resystematised,  just  as  there  is  in
truth  for  the  elements  of  all  error. In  the  case  of

1  We  can  very  nearly  do  this,  and  the  limiting  case  throws  a  good
deal  of  light  on  the  evil  attitude.  We  can  say,  "  I  know  that  all
experience  and  authority,  except  a  very  little,  are  against  me  ;  but  I
cannot  see  my  way  out  of  that  little,  and  I  must  defy  the  whole  social
and  scientific  world."  If  there  is  temper  in  such  a  position,  it  passes
into  evil.  -  See  Bradley  in  Mitid^  xliii.  306.


VII  ''GOOD''  NOT  THE  HIGHEST VALUE  217

good  the  transformation,  instead  of  being  specially
difficult,  is  singularly  easy  to  conceive.  The  ampler
judgment  of  the  world  and  of  practical  life  tells  more
on  the  good  than  on  the  true,  because  it  is  a  more
widespread  and  a  more  indispensable  experience.
The  world  is  wiser  than  the  abstract  moralist.  It
knows  that  no  qualities  are  wholly  valueless.  How
constantly  we  hear  it  said,  "  They  will  do  capital
work  together;  A's  failing  will  counteract  B's,"  or,
"  if  A  and  B  could  be  shaken  up  in  a  bag  together,
they  would  make  a  perfect  man."  The  Absolute
is  a  limiting  case  of  such  a  process.  John  Brown  at
Harper's  Ferry  showed  himself  what  might  be  called
a  cold-blooded  murderer  ;  but  a  good  which  could
not  include  the  spirit  of  his  will  would  be  a
wretchedly  poor  one.  This  was  recognised  by  all
plain  men  who  came  in  contact  with  him.

There  is  evil,  then,  within  the  Absolute,  but  the
Absolute  is  not  characterised  by  evil.  That  is  to
say,  there  is  nothing  in  evil  which  cannot  be  absorbed
in  good  and  contributory  to  it ;  and  it  springs  from
the  same  source  as  good  and  value.  If  we  think  of
good  as  a  character  of  a  perfect  experience,  we  cannot
help  thinking  of  evil  as  transcended  and  subordinated
in  it.  It  is  true,  good  as  good  involves  evil,  but  good
as  absorbed  in  perfection  only  involves  evil  as
absorbed  within  good.  And  so,  if  we  think  of
judging  the  universe,  we  should  remember  that  our
highest  form  of  judgment  is  not  the  judgment  of
good  and  evil ;  not  even  if  we  take  good  to  imply
an  attitude  to  all  that  has  value,  the  widest  meaning
of  morality.  Our  highest  judgment  is  the  judgment
of  perfection,  and  raises  a  different  problem  from  the
judgment  of moral  good  and  evil in  their  widest


2i8  GOOD  AND  EVIL  lect.

sense. The  universe  may  be  perfect  owing  to  the
very  fact,  among  others,  that  it  includes,  as  conditions
of  finite  Hfe,  both  moral  good  and  evil.
Borderland lo. Before  concluding  this  lecture  I  will  try  in  a

of  this  and /•  1  ,  .  , -  . ,

previous l^w  words  to  clear  up  a  pomt  on  the  frontier  between
ohjS!^ its  subject  and  that  of  the  previous  one.
b°othIuffe1-- ^^  ^^  ^  ^^^y  v^^,  we  may  be  told,  to  take  things
ingand thus  in  detail,  and  to  find  an  exalted  source  first  for

contempt-
ible. Our pain  and  then  for  the  evil  attitude. But  this  does

clear  up  not  meet  the  overwhelming  impression  of  the  whole.

pahi'and^  ^^  ^^  not  mere  pain  and  it  is  not  mere  moral  failure.

Mu^t  ^^  ^^  ^^  mass  of  combined  misery  and  worthlessness

choose  in  the  world. We  could  stand,  it  might  be  argfued,

whether  to  .  ....

argue  from  cotttlnual  pleasurc  along  with  brilliant  wickedness,
moral  or  high  values  very  widely  distributed  along  with  a
a  ness.  gQQ^j  share  of  pain.  But  what  shocks  us  is  the
general  low  level  of  life,  accompanied  with  misery  ;
the  mass  of  heathendom  with  its  wars  and  sensuality  ;
the  oppression  and  ignorance  of  the  dark  ages,  or
the  wretchedness  and  vice  of  a  very  large  part  of
our  life  in  the  height  of  civilisation.  If  everybody
was  like  our  noble  selves,  cultivated,  peaceful,  and
living  in  moderate  comfort  and  refinement,  it  would
all  be  much  easier  to  understand.  And  some  day,
we  hope,  they  will  be  so.

Disclaiming,  as  throughout,  all  attempts  at  a
thdodiUe,  because  we  do  not  regard  the  universe
as  ruled  by  an  omnipotent  moral  person,  we  must
attempt  to  consider  the  connection  and  real  facts  of
things  with  an  open  mind,  and  we  must  insist,  to
begin  with,  that  the  critic  should  elect  with  which
horse  he  means  to  win.

If  he  means  to  found  his  complaint  on  suffering
as  such,  then  he  must  go  to  the  facts  of  suffering  as


VII  FACTS  DISTINCT  FROM  OUGHTS  219

such,  as  actually  felt  by  the  sufferers,  and  must  not
bring  in  our  moral  ideals  to  eke  out  the  sense  of
failure.  He  must  analyse  the  actual  life  of  heathen-
dom or  of  Europe  in  the  dark  ages  or  of  the  poor  in
our  great  cities,  or  any  other  type  of  life  he  chooses
on  which  to  rest  his  case.  He  must  rebut  the
presumption  drawn  ^  from  the  inherent  relation  of
pleasure  and  pain,  that  where  the  capacity  of  pain  is
actualised,  that  of  pleasure  must  be  so  at  least  in  the
same  measure,  and  he  must  deal  with  the  improb-
ability that  life  should  be  sustained  at  the  precise
point  at  which  it  can  support  suffering  without  an
overbalance  of  vitality  for  unobstructed  activity.
For  if  that  point  were  not  precisely  kept,  then  if
life  fell  below  it,  it  must  soon  end ;  if  it  rose  above
it,  pleasure,  which  is  attached  to  all  life  as  such,
must  on  the  whole  be  predominant.

I  do  not  love  this  mode  of  argument,  but  the
critic  who  insists  on  the  brute  facts  of  suffering
condemns  himself  and  others  to  it.  I  should  have
said  that  prima  facie  the  poor  and  the  benighted
heathen  were  more  light-hearted — we  are  now
speaking  of  facts  and  not  of  "oughts" — than  the
well-to-do,  cultivated,  and  respectable  Christian.
Light-heartedness  is  not  mere  pleasure ;  but  then  I
believe  the  argument  on  the  basis  of  mere  pleasure-
pain  to  be  inadequate.  If,  however,  you  go,
without  moral  prejudices,  to  pleasure  merely,  you
must  remember  that,  say,  a  savage  or  barbarian
chief,  whose  life,  if  I  had  to  live  it,  would  be  to
me  prolonged  hardship,  terror,  and  remorse,  prob-
ably enjoys  his  existence  as  much  as  I  do  mine,
or more. And he would certainly prefer to be

1  Lect.  VI.


GOOD  AND  EVIL  lect.


shot  a  dozen  times  rather  than,  well  warmed
and  well  fed,  to  sit  in  my  arm-chair  and  try  to
read  Hegel.

If,  on  the  other  hand,  we  are  to  go  upon  moral
or  cultural  failure,  then  we  ipso  facto  acknowledge
a  certain  moral  or  cultural  development  in  the
creature  we  are  criticising,  and  the  question  becomes
one  of  particular  kind  and  degree.  And  it  is  very
far  more  difficult  than  most  pessimists  have  for  a
moment  conceived.  The  popular  revolt  against
"  intellectualism,"  dating  at  least  from  Rousseau,  has
done  good  in  this  direction.  Self-conscious  civilised
life  and  self-culture  are  no  doubt  fine  things  in  their
way,  but  very  largely  because  they  presuppose  and
reveal  such  great  fundamental  values  as  love,^  and
courage,  and  self-sacrifice.  The  notion  that  the
supreme  values  lie  all,  as  it  were,  up  above  and
beyond  us,  on  a  road  which  has  yet  to  be  traversed,
and  at  some  higher  pitch  of  civilisation,  contains,  I
should  suggest,  only  a  very  moderate  amount  of
truth.^  Values  are  distributed  all  over  the  tem-
poral revelation  of  the  Absolute,  not  reserved  for
a  climax.

And  if  any  one  speaks  of  "slum-life"  as  a  whole  and
treats  it  as  not  worth  living,  he  writes  himself  down

1  Compare,  e.g.,  the  function  of  sacred  art  as  a  revelation  of  the
fundamental  experience  of  the  family  through  its  treatment  of  the
Holy  Family,  and  also  of  heroism  and  self-sacrifice  in  the  saints  and
martyrs.  Such,  too,  is  the  function  of  tragedy,  which  we  have  often
insisted  on.

^  Cf.  Wallace,  Lectures  and  Essays,  p.  200.  "  Non-moral,  i.e.
non-social,  and  non-civilised  man,  we  know  not.  Morality,  sociality,
civility,  is  his  proprium.  His  morality,  indeed,  may  be  quaint
and  untasteful  as  judged  by  later  specimens  more  familiar  to
us  ;  yet  that  is  a  judgment  which  the  lowest  savage,  as  we
complacently  call  the  savages  of  another  type  than  ours,  can  easily
retort."


VII  PERFECTION  IS THE STANDARD


as a victim of class prejudice and conventional
superstition.^

II.  In  regard  to  the  general  problem  of  the  censure  in  regard
of  the  universe,  I  may  repeat  in  other  words  what  I  cerfsu^rof
"said  in  the  last  lecture. The  test  is  the  satisfaction  ""suTIads-
of  our  criticised  desires. We  obviously  can  require  ^^^^^
no other satisfaction. Criticism means reducing  criticised

•  1 1 r  r •  desires,

their  object  to  a  self-consistent  ideal  oi  pertection  and  to

,  ,  .  .  ....  .,  , possess  this

or  proving  the reduction in principle impossible,  almost
And  therefore  it  is  hardly  conceivable  that  we  should  'll'^^l^^
ever possess the basis from which we could go  P'|[J'^^jf°-


our
own  nature

ante-


forward  confidently  to  an  estimate  of  the  universe,  cannot

"'  ...  limit  o

Except  by  possessing  perfection,  that  is,  we  are
unable  to  grasp  in  detail  the  nature  of  the  satis-  cedemiy
faction  it  would  offer,  and  therefore,  ex  hypothesi,
some  elements  of  our  nature  must  always,  for
finite  creatures,  seem  likely  to  stand  out  unsatisfied,
just  as  they  would  if  perfection  were  theoretically
inconceivable.  It  is  an  instance  and  illustration  of
this  that  our  moral  judgment,  if  that  means  our
estimate  of  things  as  determined  by  the  antithesis
of  good  and  evil,  and  the  consequent  yearning  for
infinite  progress  and  for  compensation  or  poetic
justice,  is  plainly  not  our  highest  form  of  judgment.
Even  if  we  take  it  in  the  widest  sense,  in  which  it
practically  is  never  taken,  that  is,  as  including  all
finite  values  in  the  conception  of  moral  good,  this
remains  true. The  judgment  which  conceives the

1  There  is  a  curious  illustration  of  a  parallel  limitation  of  judg-
ment to  that  which  we  have  been  discussing  in  the  arguments  of
some  at  least  of  those  who  think  that  Bacon  must  have  written
"  Shakespeare."  It  comes  out  quite  plainly  in  some  of  the  treatises
that  the  true  motive  of  the  contention  is  the  idea  that  no  one  but  a
cultured  man  of  letters  could  possibly  have  written  the  plays.  It
does  not  occur  to  the  writers  that  a  man  of  letters  in  their  sense
is  the  last  sort  of  person  to  whom  these  works  should  be  attributed.


GOOD  AND  EVIL  LECT.


universe  as  a  perfection  within  which  good  and  evil
arise  and  conflict  is  the  highest  expression  of  our
underlying  or  real  self,  and  the  only  one  which
attempts  to  do  justice  even  in  the  abstract  to  the
demands  of  perfection.

And  I  must  urge  once  more  in  reference  to
criticism  which  restricts  itself  to  the  degree  of  evil,
what  I  urged  with  reference  to  similar  criticism
dealing  with  the  degree  of  pain.  So  long  as  we
can  experience  the  general  nature  of  satisfaction
and  solution,  revealing  to  us  the  clue  to  all  problems
in  our  finite-infinite  nature  as  their  root,  we  cannot
pick  and  choose  among  the  hazards  and  hardships
which  empirically  confront  us.  We  cannot  say,  so
much  of  evil  would  be  all  very  well,  but  this  which
we  find  is  more  than  we  can  put  up  with.  We
have  seen  it  to  be  evidently  essential  to  the  logic
of  our  station  in  the  universe  that  its  dealings  with
us  should  transcend  in  detail  our  finite  discretion.^
If  not,  we  should  be  placing  antecedent  limits,  drawn
from  our  ignorance  and  impotence,  upon  the  com-
munication to  us  of  our  own  nature,  which  we  have
called  "  Soul-making."  As  with  pain,  so  with  evil  ;
if  we  might  rule  out  what  we  think  excessive,  it  is
clear  that  our  best  experience  would  be  lost.  What
finite  creature,  in  drawing  his  schedule  of  permiss-
ible evil,  would  not  have  ruled  out  the  crucifixion  ?
If  we  are  going  to  rebel,  and  repudiate  pain  and
evil,  we  must  begin  at  the  beginning,  and  go  to  the
root,  by  repudiating  our  finite-infinite  nature,  with
the  frightful  strain,  amounting  to  dissolution  and
recasting,  which  it  necessarily  involves.

In  the  considerations  of  this  and  the  two  previous

1  Principle,  Lect.  I.,  ante  Led.  VI.


VII  THE  FULL SELF-RECOGNITION  223

lectures,  I  hope  that  we  have  fairly  exhibited  in
action  that  double  nature  of  finite  creatures  which
makes  them  inherently  the  prey  of  hazard  and
hardship.  For  accident  and  disturbance  are,  we
may  say,  their  own  nature  in  disguise.  This  is
why  they  come  in  pairs,  so  strangely  opposite  yet
akin,  according  as  the  strain  and  friction  or  the
satisfaction  and  solution  predominate  in  the  self-
transcendence  of  the  finite -infinite  being,  which
inevitably  lends  itself  to  both.  This  is  why,
again,  as  has  been  pointed  out  above,  there  persists,
within  and  by  means  of  accident  and  disturbance,
a  recognition  implicit  or  explicit  of  an  underlying
real  in  which  the  two  aspects  of  our  being  become
one  and  their  contradiction  rises  into  a  satisfac-
tion which  it  deepens.  This  recognition,  we  saw,
accompanies  the  whole  series  of  our  development,
but  it  is  enough  to  take  it  in  a  single  explicit  form
as  typical  of  all.

And  therefore  I  will  pass  from  the  hazards  and
hardships  of  finite  selfhood  to  exhibit  in  the  two
next  lectures  the  principle  of  its  stability  and
security  ;  in  other  words,  the  recognition  which  con-
stitutes religion — we  may  call  it  the  stability  and
security  of  the  finite  self


C. THE STABILITY  AND SECURITY
OF FINITE SELFHOOD

LECTURE VIII


The

Religious
Conscious-
ness as
typical  of
stability
and

security
in  con-
trast with
the  two
previous
headings.


THE RELIGIOUS CONSCIOUSNESS

I.  Throughout  this  second  course  of  lectures,
down  to  the  present  point,  we  have  been  treating  of
the  finite  being,  the  Individual  commonly  so  called.
We  have  spoken  of  his  origin  and  formation,  as  a
self  to  whom  on  the  one  side  his  own  nature  is
communicated  by  the  world,  and  who,  on  the  other
side,  in  eliciting  that  nature  from  the  world,  reveals
himself  as  a  creative  force,  and  as  a  copula  raising
externality  towards  the  Absolute.  We  regarded
him  so  far  as  being  moulded  by  nature,  though  in
being  moulded  he  reveals  the  power  of  eliciting  its
secret,  a  secret  even  from  itself.

Thus  the  finite  being  was  considered  as  identified
with  a  range  of  natural  circumstance,  whose  meaning
is  embodied  in  him  through  a  severe  formative
discipline,  analogous  to  what  operates  in  lower
nature  as  "  natural  selection."  As  a  consequence  of
this  position  he  has  for  his  apparent  destiny  to  be
the  plaything  of  hazard  and  the  prey  of  hardship.
For  he  is  a  unit  engaged  by  a  process  of  self-adjust-
n^ent — necessarily more or less obstructed  —  in

224


LECT.  VIII  THE OPPOSITE OF  ''CLAIMS''  225


forming  a  link through  which  a  prima  facie  con-
fusion  is absorbed in and transformed into the
underlying harmony. The technical formula for
this  position  of  his  we  found  in  some  such  expression
as  "  a  finite-infinite  "  or  "  self-transcendent  "  creature.
This is  to  say  that  his nature  is  in  contradiction
with  his  existence,  and  in  the  adjustment of  this
contradiction  at  once  by  remoulding  circumstance
and  by  recasting  the  self  he  has  to  deal  with  the
chances  offering  prima  facie  now  satisfaction and
now  obstruction,  which  we  discussed  as  the  hazards
and  hardships  of  finite  selfhood. We  emphasised
the  point  that  the  chapter  of  accidents  is  necessary.
It  belongs  to  finiteness. It  is  just  the  appearance
of  externality,  by  overcoming  which  in  its  degree,
the  finite  self  makes  its  contribution  to  the  Absolute.
Now  I  turn  to  insist  on  the  other  side,  implied
throughout in this conception of the finite self-
conscious  being,  and  present  throughout  in  the  facts
of  his  existence. What  I  have in mind is most
simply  and  adequately  indicated  by  the  title  of  this
lecture,  "  The  Religious  Consciousness. " I  f  we  wish
to consider what our third general sub-heading
postulates, "  The Stability and Security of the
Finite Self" — a characteristic correlative to its
hazards  and  hardships,  and,  like  its  value,  rooted  in
the  nature  which  gives  rise  to  them — if  we  wish  to
complete  our  treatment  by  considering  this  founda-
tion of  all our experience, it is to the religious
consciousness,  however  broadly  interpreted,  that  we
must have recourse. Its  general formula, in the
wide  sense here in question, is simply  the com-
pletion or  recognition  of  the  finite-infinite  or  self-
transcendent  nature  which  we  have  attributed  to  the

Q


226  THE  RELIGIOUS CONSCIOUSNESS  lect.

"individual."  It  is  the  surrender  or  completion  of
finite  selfhood  in  the  world  of  spiritual  membership.
It  is  the  full  opposite,  therefore,  of  the  world  of
claims,  which  was  the  typical  case  of  that  insistence
on  finite  isolation,  mitigated  by  relations,  in  the
contrast  of  which  with  the  spirit  of  self-transcendence
we  found  the  source  of  all  hazard  and  hardship.
The  finite  being  tends  to  fix  and  rely  upon  rules,
incidents,  characteristics,  which  his  own  nature,
always  aiming  at  unity  with  the  whole  which  inspires
it,  as  constantly  repudiates.^  But  if  the  finite-
infinite  nature  asserts  itself  with  any  approach  to
completeness,  then  we  have  not  merely  the  constant
self-transcendence  of  the  finite,  but  a  recognition,
implicit  or  explicit,  of  what  lies  beneath  it ;  and
therefore,  in  principle,  a  present  realisation  of  the
perfect  satisfaction.  The  perfect  satisfaction  would
be  the  possession  of  the  Absolute  as  such,  in  short,
to  be  the  Absolute.  But  the  present  realisation  of
the  perfect  satisfaction,  which  in  its  degree  the
religious  consciousness  offers,  is  just  the  recognition
by  the  finite  being  of  its  own  impotence,  as  finite,
for  such  an  attainment,  and  the  insistence,  in  spite
of  this,  on  its  own  unity  in  principle,  through
recognition,  with  perfection  as  opposed  to  the  evil
which  persists  in  its  finite  being,  i.e.  with  perfection
in  the  form  of  good.  Thus  we  must  not  say  that
every  satisfaction,  every  sense  of  attainment  or  self-
transcendence  by  the  conquest  of  externality,  is
religious. On  the  contrary,  the  sense  of  satisfaction

1  How  as  to  moral  goodness  ?  Moral  goodness,  strictly  taken,  is
something  the  self  attempts  in  its  own  strength,  and  insists  upon  as
its  own.  And  this  is  a  possession  which  its  ultimate  nature  repudi-
ates, and  even  tends  to  identify  with  evil.  But  there  cannot  really
be  a  healthy  working  morality  apart  from  religion,  as  we  shall  see.


VIII  PVE  KNOW  THE WORST  227

and  achievement,  in  our  own  strength  (taking  no
note  of  what  is  implied  in  the  self-transcendence
which  all  achievement  actually  involves),  may  well
become  the  self-sufficiency  which  is  the  essence  of
irreligion.^  But  every  satisfaction  and  achievement
— every  self-transcendence  in  which  we  become
united  with  something  which  was  beyond  us — may
be  religiously  felt,  if  it  is  taken  as  involving  recogni-
tion of  a  higher  perfection,  that  is,  as  coming  to  us
not  in  our  own  strength,  but  as  a  pledge  of  our
absorption  in  the  greater  world.

In  this  consciousness,  then,  which  amounts  to  the
recognition  of  its  own  nature  by  a  finite-infinite
creature,  we  have  the  justification  of  the  general
heading  under  which  I  propose  to  speak  of  religion.
There  are  two  preliminary  points  on  which  a  word
of  explanation  may  be  of  use  ;  first,  the  reconciliation
of  this  heading  with  the  two  previous  headings,
"  The  Moulding  of  Souls  "  and  "  The  Hazards  and
Hardships  of  Finite  Selfhood  "  ;  and  secondly,  the
question  whether  this  recognition  involves  the
possession  of  a  reflective  metaphysical  doctrine,  or
how  far  it  may  be  an  experience  even  of  a  naive
consciousness.

a.  In  the  first  place,  then,  if  we  broke  off  our  Recondiia-
treatment  at  the  point  we  have  reached,  we  might  IhT/sub-^
be  held,  in  spite  of  our  protests,  to  have  done  little  \^■^^'^■^^

two
1  We  have  not  to  go  to  Christianity  to  learn  this.  previous.

"  €t  jj^dXa  KapTepos  ecra-L,  ^eo?  ttov  crol  to  y eSwKev." — //.  i. 1 78.

"  If  thou  hast  strength,  'twas  Heaven  that  strength  bestowed.
For  know,  proud  man,  thy  valour  is  from  God." — Pope.

Fluellen,  I  always  supposed,  does  not  see  the  point  of  the  king's
recognition  that  the  victory  was  God's  giving,  but  tries  courteously  to
meet  it  by  assigning  God  some  merit.  "  Yes,  by  my  conscience,  he
did  us  great  good."


228  THE  RELIGIOUS CONSCIOUSNESS  lect.


but  lay  a  foundation  for  pessimism.  We  have
insisted  throughout  that  the  troubles  of  the  finite
being  spring  from  the  same  source  as  his  value.
But  what  has  been  explicitly  set  out  belongs  in  the
main  to  the  accidents,  the  obstructions,  the  con-
tradictions of  finite  living.  All  this  is  involved  in
what  we  might  call  the  particularity  of  finiteness,  in  its
contrast  with  the  true  individuality  or  completeness
which  underlies  and  inspires  the  finite  being.  That
is  to  say,  it  belongs  to  the  prima  facie  position  of
the  finite  being  as  an  external  among  externals,  a
one  exclusive  of  others,  while  at  the  same  time  in
various  degrees  disowning  this  exclusiveness  and
reaching  out  after  completeness  or  individuality.
Thus  it  is  from  and  through  this  particularity
that  its  participation  in  individuality  has  to  emerge.
In  other  words,  it  is  out  of  finite  particulars,
and  more  than  that,  it  is  by  their  instrument-
ality, that  the  grasp  of  completeness  has  to  be
created.

Thus  the  value  of  the  unit,  the  enrichment  it
brings  to  the  perfect  whole,  is  only  the  other  of  the
selection  which,  along  with  the  miracle  of  will,  has
moulded  and  recast  it,  of  its  own  continual  toil
and  trouble  in  partly  obstructed  self-adaptation  to
environment,  and  of  its  spiritual  education  under
the  influence  of  the  chapter  of  accidents.  And  in
turning  to  the  "  Stability  and  Security  of  Finite
Selfhood  "  we  are  not  abandoning  our  insight  into
the  world's  roughness  and  hazardousness.  We  are
merely  completing  it  by  indicating  the  spirit  and
impulse  of  reality  which  lives  throughout  all  these
troubles — in  fact,  as  we  have  seen,  producing  them
— and implicitly or explicitly carries with it the


VIII  PHILOSOPHY  RESTS ON  RELIGION  229

recognition  of  a  whole  which  they  can  only  intensify
and  enrich.

In  a  word,  when  besides  experiencing  finiteness
we  take  hold  of  the  real  which  it  reveals  as  some-
thing more  than  the  finite,  then,  in  principle,  the
troubles  and  hazards  pass  into  stability  and  security.
In  letting  go  his  false,  prima  facie,  fragmentary
individuality  and  accepting  its  value  only  as  con-
tributory to  the  true  individuality  manifested  through
it,  the  finite  creature  replaces  the  world  of  chance  and
disaster  by  one  of  stability  and  security.  For  perfec-
tion is  stable  and  secure  ;  it  possesses,  as  we  saw,^  the
full  character  of  satisfactoriness — of  non-contradic-
tion ^  or  of  trueness  and  reality.  And  by  identifying
the  private  self  not  with  its  own  achievement,  but  with
the  perfection  divined  as  its  true  individuality,  the
finite  creature  attains  what  he  cannot  attain  in  his
own  right,  the  character  of  perfection.  His  partial
satisfactions,  full  of  friction  and  obstruction,  then
become  simply  enrichments,  matters  which  con-
tribute their  significance  to  the  fundamental  in-
dividuality of  the  whole.  If  you  claim  nothing  for
your  finiteness  but  to  repose  on  the  perfection  of
the  whole  through  your  recognition  of  your  spiritual
membership,  you  have  a  position  which  is  secure
with  the  security  of  the  whole  itself.

/3. Secondly,  we  asked  whether  this  recognition  is  the
involved a grasp of metaphysical theory, and
whether, therefore, the religious consciousness is  "JbeTad
only  to  be  had  through  philosophy. The  answer  to  "j'j°^_^''
this  question  seems  plain. Philosophy  depends  on  sophy?

1  Principle,  Lect.  VIII.

2  We  must  bear  in  mind  the  discussion  in  Principle,  Lect.  II.,
which  showed,  as  I  hope,  that  the  only  genuine  non-contradiction
belongs  to  a  positive  and  inclusive  system.


religious
conscious-


THE  RELIGIOUS CONSCIOUSNESS  lect.


the  religious  consciousness  ;  the  religious  conscious-
ness does  not  depend  on  philosophy. This  is  not  to
deny  that  in  considering  the  religious  consciousness,
as  in  considering  the  essence  of  art  or  the  foundations
of  science,  much  assistance  may  be  given  by  philo-
sophy in  separating  the  essential  from  the  unessential.
But,  primarily,  philosophy  is  the  theoretical  in-
terpretation of  experience  as  a  whole,  and  thus,  no
doubt,  the  forms  of  experience  which  come  nearest
to  the  whole — which  have  the  most  of  trueness  and
reality,  or  the  highest  logical  stability^ — are  obviously
for  its  purpose  of  the  highest  significance. And  in
as  far  as  the  religfious  consciousness  at  its climax
comes to include  the  vision  of  all  that  has  value,
united  in  a  type of  perfection,^ metaphysic  comes
to  be  little  more  than  the  theoretical  interpretation
of  it alone. In  this  case, observing  the  limits  of
religious and philosophical subject-matter to be
pretty much coincident,  we may  probably fail in
noting the difference between their respective
attitudes. We  may  forget  that  religion is largely
practical,  or  rather  inherently  unites  the  attitudes  of
practice  and  of  conviction,  while philosophy  is  in
the  first  instance  a  purely  theoretical  activity. And
therefore  we may  find ourselves maintaining  that
philosophy is religion in a  higher  form, or  even
that  reflective theory  is essential to  all forms of
religious  experience.

1  Bradley,  Appearance^  ed.  2,  449.  "  We  can  see  at  once  that
there  is  nothing  more  real  than  what  comes  in  religion.  To  compare
facts  such  as  these  with  what  comes  to  us  in  outward  existence
would  be  to  trifle  with  the  subject.  The  man  who  demands  a  reality
more  solid  than  that  of  the  religious  consciousness  knows  not  what
he  seeks."

2  See  Principle,  Lect.  VII.,  on  Dante's  religion.  And  the  same
is  true  of  all  religious  consciousness  in  its  reference  or  intention.


VIII  ''SAME THING  AS  RELIGION''  231


Of  course  there  is  nothing  to  prevent  the  two
from  coming  together  in  the  same  person,  and
heightening  one  another,  as  in  Plato,  or  Dante,  or
Spinoza.  But  the  distinction  between  them  may
be  simply  pointed  out  by  the  observation  that
neither,  strictly  taken,  can  supply  the  place  of  the
other.  No  doubt,  a  philosopher  should  understand
a  thing  if  he  is  to  philosophise  rightly  about  it,  and
one  might  argue  that  a  man  cannot  understand
religion  if  he  has  not  experienced  it,  nor  experience
it  if  he  does  not  possess  it  in  himself.  But  this
argument  would  prove  far  too  much  and  yet  too
little.  It  would  require  the  philosopher  to  be  the
Stoic's  perfect  man,  and  yet  would  not  show  the
two  attitudes  in  question  as  the  same.  In  fact,  the
power  of  thought  is  the  power  of  apprehension  and
appreciation  on  a  foundation  of  direct  experience
which  may  be  relatively  very  slight ;  ^  and  it  is  very
differently  distributed  from  the  actual  possession  of
special  experiences.  The  religious  consciousness,
like  the  perception  of  beauty  or  goodness,  or  the
belief  in  the  uniformity  of  nature,  permeates  the
whole  of  life.  It  is  the  business  of  philosophy  to
understand  it,  like  any  other  leading  characteristic
of  life.  To  understand  it  is  in  some  degree  to
liberate  it  from  accidental  accretions,  and,  so  far,
indirectly,  to  reinforce  it  and  promote  its  mainten-
ance. And  we  may  say,  if  we  are  careful  to  limit
our  meaning,  that  philosophy  is  the  same  thing  as
religion  in  another  form  ;  and  this,  though  it  is  true

^  Shakespeare's  power  of  understanding  things  from  what  must
have  been  in  each  case  a  small  experience  relatively  to  that  of  a
specialist,  is  what  has  misled  uncritical  thinkers  into  attributing  to
him  in  turn  pretty  nearly  every  profession  or  vocation  under  the
sun.


232  THE  RELIGIOUS CONSCIOUSNESS  lect.

of  all  facts  and  their  interpretation,  would  be  rather
more  true  in  the  case  of  philosophy  and  religion
than  in  the  case  of,  say,  logic  and  the  details  of
natural  science.  For  the  two  former,  at  their
highest  pitch,  do  represent,  because  of  the  near
identity  of  their  subject-matter,  very  closely  kindred
interests  of  the  mind  ;  whereas  for  one  interested
in  philosophical  logic  it  is  conceivable  that  the
detail  of  natural  knowledge  might  have  the  value
of  example  for  his  theory  and  no  more.^

Still,  in  strict  method  the  above  answer  holds
good.  Religion  is  at  least  half  practical ;  philosophy
is  prima  facie  pure  theory.  Religion,  being  a  very
full  experience,  is  a  subject-matter  highly  essential
to  philosophy,  but  philosophy,  as  the  theoretical
interpretation,  is  not  necessary  to  religion,  nor  any
component  of  it.  The  religious  consciousness
stands  on  its  own  foundation,  and  needs  no  sup-
port from  philosophical  theory,  except  in  the  way
above  mentioned,  by  disengaging  its  essentials.
And,  of  course,  in  the  end  and  in  general,  all
facts  and  theories  which  harmonise  reinforce  each
other.

^  This  does  not  in  the  least  represent  the  writer's  attitude,  but
it  seems  quite  a  possible  one.  It  may  be  asked  whether  the
observation  in  the  text  would  apply,  say,  to  Hume,  and  if  not,
whether  it  is  denied  that  he  is  a  great  philosopher,  and,  if  he  is,
whether  this  is  not  a  disproof  of  the  view  that  religion  and  great
philosophy  are  akin.  I  should  answer,  first,  the  view  of  the  text  is
an  obiter  dictum^  a  concession  by  way  of  departure  from  the  strict
and  main  contention  ;  but,  secondly,  the  writer  remembers  to  have
been  greatly  impressed  with  the  observation  of  a  very  competent
friend  that  "  Hume's  thoughts  must  have  burned  within  him."  I
believe  that  his  cool  and  careful  manner  often  betrays  a  white-hot
passion  for  truth,  traceable  perhaps,  as  has  been  said  iniitatis
mutandis  of  Virgil's  love  of  natural  beauty,  mainly  in  the  special
strength  and  attentiveness  of  his  style  in  certain  passages.  And  a
devoted  passion  for  truth  is  certainly  in  the  region  of  religion.


VIII  "MESSIEURS  DE  LA RELIGION"  233

2.  We  may  now  speak  in  a  more  general  sense,  "Religion"

.  .  ■,  ■.,■,.  i*-  iri  • '  r  in  broadest

Other  than  that"  which  is  traditional,  01  the  signincance  sense  in-
of  religion,  and  apply  our  account  to  the  fundamental  dcTOdon'^,^
characters  of  stability  and  security  in  the  nature  of  ^■■^;!°*™^^

■^  J  and  beauty.

the  finite  self.  "Ethical"

In a  striking discussion of what is meant by  "natural"
religion  ^  it  has  been  observed  that  a  name  in  the  unction
first  instance  expresses  what  the  outsider  sees  and  ^somKoli^x
marks,  and  is  not  given  by  a  race  or  persuasion,  or  ^°^|f!^j"^
the  intimate  possessors  of  anything,  to  themselves
or their belongings. So the  name  "religion,"  in
its  Latin  etymology,  in  whatever  form  we  accept  it,
utters more especially the feeling of those who
looked  from  the  outside on the "religious" man.
He  attracted  observation,  we  must  suppose,  as  being
in some way more bound, more attentive, than
others. "  Religiosi  =  qui omnia quae ad cultum
deorum pertinent  diligenter retractant " (Cic. De
natura  deorum,  ii.  28),  "superioris  cuiusdam  naturae
(religio) . . . curam ceremoniamque affert " {De
mv. ii. 53). The religious man produced the
impression of  being peculiarly careful in certain
matters,  of  being  under  a  law,  or  bond.

And  long  after  Roman  times  this  characteristic
has  continued  to  attract  notice.  "  And  so  Calvin
says  {Instit.  66),  'J'estime  que  cet  mot  est  oppose  a
la  trop  grande  licence  et  excessive  que  la  plupart  de
monde  s'est  permise.  .  .  .  Religion  done  comporte
autant  comme  une  retraite  et  discretion  mure  et  bien
fondle.'  It  is  the  same  disciplinary  consciousness
of  being  ever  in  the  great  taskmaster's  eye  that  made
Frenchmen  speak  of  the  Huguenots  as  '  messieurs  de

1  Wallace,  Lectures  and  Essays,  p.  5  2  ff.  I  am  largely  indebted
to  Wallace  in  this  lecture.


234  THE  RELIGIOUS CONSCIOUSNESS  lfxt.

la  religion.'  Religion  is  the  sense  of  a  covenant
obligation,  a  binding  tie.  It  need  not  surprise  us,
therefore,  that  in  Parsifal  and  the  Nibelungen  Lied
the  word  for  religion  and  its  sanctity  is  E  (the
modern  Ehe,  now  only  used  of  marriage) ;  e.g.  in
Kristenlicker  E,  or  den  iouf,  und  Kristen  E.  And
so  in  Shakespeare  the  commonest  sense  involves
this  emphasis  on  conscientious  obligation,  strict
fidelity,  loyal  obedience,  e.g.  '  Keep  your  promise
with  no  less  religion'  {As  You  Like  It,  iv.  i.  201),
'When  the  devout  religion  of  mine  eye'  [Rom.  i.  2.
97),  '  How  many  a  holy  and  obsequious  tear  hath
dear  religious  love  stolen  from  mine  eye '  (Sonnet
31)."  [To  which  I  add,  "A  coward,  a  most  devout
coward,  religious  in  it,"  i.e.  he  keeps  his  "rule"
(Twelfth  Night,  iii.  4.  424).]

Luther  in  effect  deepened  rather  than  overthrew
this  traditional  impression.  But  he  started  from
the  other  extreme.  "  For  the  outward  ordinance,
the  minute  and  accurate  performance  of  measured
duties,^  it  (the  Lutheran  reform)  substituted  the
inward  feeling,  the  subjective  attitude  of  faith.  The
word  for  true  religion  in  the  Lutheran  language  is
Glaube,  '  Du  muss  bei  dir  selbst  im  Gewissen  fuhlen
Christum  selbst,  und  unbeweglich  empfinden,  dass  es
Gottes  Wort  sei.'  "

And  so  the  term  "  religieux,"  descended  from  the
older  tradition,  "has  no  English  equivalent."^

Still  we  cannot  dismiss  the  original  impression.
"  It  hardly  needed  Schleiermacher  to  repeat  that  the

1  The  ordinary  reader,  for  example,  of  Cardinal  Newman's  life,  is
struck  at  once  by  the  fact  that  the  first  requirement  of  a  religious  house
is  its  "  rule,"  given,  it  appears,  by  some  external  authority.

2  Bradley,  Ethical  Studies,  p.  300.  And  I  suppose  the  nearest
German  equivalent  is  "  Geistlicher,"  a  remarkable  contrast.


VIII IS THERE  LIFE WITHOUT  RELIGION? 235

essence  of  religious  life  is  the  sense  of  utter  and
all-round  dependency."  ^

When  we  turn  to  consider  religion  in  its  widest
bearing  upon  life,  the  impression  thus  left  by  the
specialised  tradition,  though  broadened,  is  confirmed.
In  this  sense  the  religious  consciousness  has  no
special  or  exclusive  connection  with  the  super-
natural, the  other  world,  or  even  the  divine.  It  is
essentially  the  attitude  in  which  the  finite  being
stands  to  whatever  he  at  once  fears  and  approves,
in  a  word,  to  what  he  worships.  It  is  impossible  to
draw  the  line  at  any  point  between  the  simplest
experiences  of  this  kind  and  those  completest  forms
of  devotion  to  which  the  term  religion  has  been
exclusively  applied.  Whatever  makes  us  seem  to
ourselves  worthless  in  our  mere  private  selves,
although  or  because  attaching  ourselves  in  the
spirit  to  a  reality  of  transcendent  value,  cannot  be
distinguished  from  religion.  The  Shakesperian
passages  cited  above,  for  example,  although,
perhaps,  echoes  of  a  conventional  language,  yet
point  to  a  continuity  which  is  undeniable.  It  is,
indeed,  explicitly  set  forth  in  the  phases  of  Dante's
adoration  of  Beatrice.

Whenever,  then,  we  find  a  devotion  which  makes
the  finite  self  seem  as  nothing,  and  some  reality  to
which  it  attaches  itself  seem  as  all,  we  have  the
essentially  religious  attitude.  Thus  there  may  be
false religions," conflicting religions, partial and

1  Wallace,  op.  cit.  58,

2  I  suppose  the  attitude  of  the  whole-hearted  worshipper  of
wealth  and  power  must  be  called  a  religion.  There  cannot  be  a
religious  attitude  towards  an  object  recognised  as  bad  (Bradley,
Appearance,  p.  440),  but  there  may  be  any  degree  of  defectiveness
in  the  object  taken  as  good.  Of  course  the  stability  connected  with
it  is  greatly  decreased  by  such  defects.


236  THE  RELIGIOUS CONSCIOUSNESS  lect.

hesitating  religions.  But  a  finite  self-conscious
life  without  religion  is  hardly  to  be  found. ^  As  we
saw  in  the  Introduction  to  the  previous  volume,
there  is  always  death.  Its  significance  as  a  negation
of  the  finite  may  vary  from  the  fullest  to  the  cheapest.
But,  in  form,  it  is  always  there  to  realise  the  sup-
pression of  the  finite  which  is  inherent  in  the  finite's
own  nature.

From  this  widest  point  of  view  most  of  the
distinctions  drawn  by  the  positive  science  of  religions
appear  as  matters  of  degree.  There  is,  for  example,
no  really  fundamental  difference  between  "  natural  "
and  "ethical"  religions.^  In  the  crudest  forms  of
worship  directed  to  external  objects  there  seems
to  be  the  sense  of  something,  however  capriciously
selected,  which  is  of  value  and  importance  to  a
community,  and  the  ritual  in  honour  of  which,
therefore,  takes  the  individual  worshipper  out  of
himself,  and  places  his  centre  of  gravity,  so  to  speak
— his  sense  of  value  and  importance — in  the  concerns
of  a  group  extending  beyond  his  private  self.  Where
such  a  common  interest  is  recognised,  it  cannot  be

1  What  of  the  brute  creation  ?  It  has  been  said  that  man  is  the
god  of  the  brutes  ;  and  when  the  rehgious  attitude  is  described  as
above,  it  is  hard  to  avoid  finding  some  kinship  to  it  in,  c.g.^  the
dog's  attitude  to  his  master.  I  suppose  the  technical  question
would  be  whether  the  dog  has  a  self  and  self-transcendence  at  all.

2  "  We  may  .  .  .  assert  that  in  the  very  beginnings  of  religion  there
was  morality.  Non-moral,  i.e.  non-social,  and  non-civilised  man,  we
know  not.  Morality,  sociality,  civility,  is  his  proprnim.  His
morality,  indeed,  may  be  quaint  and  un tasteful  as  judged  by  later
specimens  more  familiar  to  us  ;  yet  that  is  a  judgment  which  the
lowest  savage,  as  we  complacently  call  the  savages  of  another
type  than  ours,  can  easily  retort.  But  the  rudest  savage  has  a  life
only  because  he  lives  in  others,  for  others,  by  others  ;  because  his
life  is  determined  and  formed  by  rules,  customs,  observances,
painfully  numerous  and  apparently  onerous  "  (Wallace,  Lectures  and
Essays,  p.  200).


VIII  THE  JEWS  KNEW  SOME THINGS  237

said  that  the  ethical  consciousness  is  lacking.  The
truth  is  that  its  fuller  and  truer  form,  the  religious
attitude,  comprehends  it  from  the  beginning  as  it
transcends  it  in  the  end.  The  strictly  moral  attitude,
in  its  self-consciousness  and  self-isolation,  is  a  phase
within  and  dependent  upon  the  religious  attitude,
as  the  economic  world,  to  which  we  have  so  often
compared  it,  is  a  phase  within  and  dependent  on  the
normal  social  tissue.^

If  a  difference  of  kind  is  to  be  found  in  early-
religious  phenomena,  it  would  probably  lie  in  the
contrast  between  a  social  and  an  anti-social  applica-
tion of  supernatural  resources.  The  latter  seems
to  involve  an  outlawed  and  rebel  consciousness,
hostile  to  the  simple  recognition  and  good  faith  of
service  to  the  social  whole.^  The  identification  of
the  religious  spirit  with  rules  of  the  common  life  is
a  fine  feature  of  early  religions  which  later  spiritual
refinement  has  too  much  thrown  aside.  "They
(the  Jews)  knew  some  things  which  it  would  have
been  well  if  the  later  ages  had  not  lost  sight  of.
They  knew  that  even  if  religion  is  not  a  matter  of
meats  and  drinks,  meat  and  drink  are  no  trifles
which  religion  may  ignore.  They  knew  that  re-
ligion is  intimately  wrapped  up  with  the  tillage  of
the  field,  the  pasture  of  the  flocks,  the  rules  and

1  All  this  is  strikingly  illustrated  by  the  unity  of  the  primitive
collective  consciousness,  as  described  in  Cornford,  From  Religion  to
Philosophy.

2  The  prominence  of  the  common  interest  in  the  crudest  forms
of  cultus  is  emphasised  by  Caird's  suggestion  that  ancestor-worship
is  the  effect  and  not  the  cause  of  importance  attached  to  external
objects  as  concerning  the  common  weal.  They  are  held  to  be
ancestors  because  they  are  important,  not  held  important  because  of
a  misinterpreted  tradition  that  they  are  ancestors  (Caird,  Evoliitio7i
of  Religion,  i.  239).


238  THE  RELIGIOUS CONSCIOUSNESS  lect.

modes  of  wedlock,  the  customs  of  the  market,  with
sanitary  rules,  with  the  treatment  of  disease.  They
may  have  been  mistaken  in  some  of  their  views,
but  they  were  certainly  right  in  their  main  thesis ;
and  the  whole  bent  of  modern  progress  is  towards
doing  what  they  did  in  a  completer  way."  ^

Throughout this attitude, whether directed to
the  so-called  natural  or  the  so-called  supernatural,
we  see  the  essence  of  the  power  conferred  by  the
religious  absorption  in  a  reality  worshipped  by  the
finite self. I will venture to permit myself  one
more quotation from the volume which I have
already  exploited  so  freely. "It  is  usual  in  these
days  to  regard  everything  under  the  conditions  of
the  struggle  for  existence,  and  as  a  weapon  for  use
therein. Of  material  weapons  man  has  invented  or
appropriated many. He has wrested from the
creatures  their  own  tusks,  claws,  bones,  and used
them  to  subdue  others  ;  he  has  chipped  and  shaped
stones,  and  finally  hammered  and  fused  metals  into
his  tools. But  all these  implements  are  slight in
importance  if  compared  with  the  metaphysical  ally,
the  supernatural  aid,  which he  has  secured  in  his
contest. All the ranges of nature, animate and
inanimate, may  regard as they  like his  efforts  to
subdue  them ;  but  man  has  a  weapon  in  his  possession
stronger than anything they can possibly bring
against  him. By  an  instinct  earlier  than  any  history
can  trace,  he  sets  the  power  in  and  behind  phenomena
on  his side. He is naturally  a theogonic being  ;
he  has  at  the  very  root  of  all  his  actions  an  instinct,
the  instinct  of  reason,  which grows  and becomes
more  determinate,  that  he  is,  as  it  were,  backed  by

1  Wallace,  op.  cit.  162.


VIII  "AfV  STATION  AND  ITS  DUTIES"


239


great  powers  to  the  extent  of  which  he  can  and  will  fix
no  limits.  He  projects  his  own  self  to  be,  into  the
nature  he  seeks  to  conquer.  Like  an  assailant  who
should  succeed  in  throwing  his  standard  into  the
strong  central  keep  of  the  enemy's  fortress,  and
fight  his  way  thereto  with  assured  victory  in  his
eyes  of  hope,  so  man,  with  the  vision  of  the  soul,
prognosticates  his  final  triumph."  ^

Thus  the  religious  attitude,  if  we  judge  by  what
is  zn  the  mind,  and  not  merely  by  what  is  explicitly
before  it,  permeates,  at  least,  the  whole  of  finite
self-conscious  life.  In  the  broadest  sense,  wherever
man  is  devout — wherever  he  places  his  value  in
something  beyond  his  private  self,  and  that  some-
thing taken  to  be  real — there  he  has  set  his  foot  on
ground  which  so  far  emancipates  him  from  the
hazards,  the  hardships,  the  discipline,  of  finiteness  ;
or  rather,  emancipates  him  not  so  much  from  these
incidents  as  actually  through  them.  Like  the
beings  of  folk-lore  whose  life  is  hidden  elsewhere
than  in  their  own  bodies,  his  worth  and  his  interest
are  laid  up  where  accidents  affecting  his  temporal
self  cannot  reach  them,  and  in  the  complete  and
typical  case,  where  no  accident  or  injury  can  do
anything  but  intensify  them.

It  is,  I  suppose,  a  question  of  degree  how  far  the
true  tribal  or  social  consciousness  involves  a  religious
spirit,  though  we  have  seen  that  religion  in  its  most
naive  and  early  forms  certainly  involves  the  social
consciousness.^ The  true  social  consciousness,  such

1  Wallace,  op.  cit.  192-3.  On  the  words  "final  triumph,"
compare  the  comment,  p.  326,  below,  on  the  expression  "ultimate
triumph  "  as  employed  by  Caird.

2  In  a  late  and  reflective  development  of  religion,  it  may  seem  to
be  a  relation  between  the  individual  and  God  alone,  independent  of


240  THE  RELIGIOUS CONSCIOUSNESS  lect.

as  it  is  described  by  Mr.  Bradley  in  his  well-known
essay  on  "My  Station  and  its  Duties,"^  seems  to  me
to  possess  the  essential  feature  of  religion.  It  has
the  value  of  the  self  placed  in  a  real  whole  in  which
it  is  absorbed  and  with  which  the  will  is  identified.
It  is  true  that  in  society  it  is  not  the  whole  ideal  of
perfection  which  is  taken  as  realised.  The  social
religion,  taking  religion  to  imply  a  real  object,  must
be  a  partial  religion  only,  more  especially  in  the
higher  grades  of  civilisation,  when  so  much  of  life
has  been  apparently  separated  from  it.  But  we
have  seen  that  we  must  take  note  of  partial  religions;
and,  moreover,  the  view  drawn  from  earlier  phases
when  interests  seem  less  subdivided,  is  fundament-
ally sound  even  in  later  times  when  the  social  whole
has  become  in  appearance  an  accidental  condition
only.^

In  short,  then,  wherever  man  fairly  and  loyally
throws  the  seat  of  his  value  outside  his  immediate
self  into  something  else  which  he  worships,  with
which  he  identifies  his  will,  and  which  he  takes  as
an  object  solid  and  secure  at  least  relatively  to  his
private  existence — as  an  artist  in  his  attitude  to
beauty  or  as  a  man  of  science  to  truth — there  we
have  in  its  degree  the  experience  of  religion,  and,
also  in  its  degree,  the  stability  and  security  of  the
finite  self.  I  am  careful  not  to  say  its  happiness.
The  whole argument has been  directed to  show

society.  But  this  is  one  of  those  forms  of  independence  which  are
only  possible  when  the  condition,  taken  as  superfluous,  has  been  so
absolutely  secured  that  it  is  tacitly  presupposed.

1  Ethical  Studies,  1876.

2  See  Philosophical  Theory  of  State,  ed.  2,  Introduction,  on
the  relation  of  the  higher  experiences  to  the  social  whole,  and  cf.
Principle,  Appendix  II.  to  Lect.  X.


VIII  THE  RECOGNITION  OF  EVIL  241

that  happiness  in  the  current  sense  of  the  word^  is
not  secured  to  the  finite  creature  by  any  goodness,
or  by  any  reHgion,  or  according  to  any  doctrine
involved  in  religion.  We  are  least  of  all  imply-
ing compensation  in  this  life  or  in  another.
We  are  speaking  of  the  consciousness  inherent  in
the  finite -infinite  being,  so  far  as  his  full  nature
affirms  itself,  that  he  is  one  with  something
which  cannot  be  shaken  or  destroyed,  and  the
value  of  which  is  the  source  and  standard  of
values.

3. It  is  certain  that  in  some  sense  the  existence  EvIi

c "i •  -111  !••  •  from  the

ot  evil  IS  recognised  by  the  religious  consciousness,  religious
Nothing,  it  might  be  said,  is  more  characteristic  of  J°'^^  °^
religion  than  the  sense  of  sin.  Religion  is  largely
practical,  and  therefore  the  contradiction  of  good
and  evil  is  essential  to  it  as  truly  as  to  morality.
How  are  we  to  think  of  evil  from  the  religious
point  of  view,  seeing  that  it  does  not  interfere  with
the  stability  and  security  of  the  self?

i.  The  answer  is  given  in  the  nature  of  religion  opposite
as  already  explained,  and  is  emphasised  by  its  con-  f^rdigbn
trast  with  morality,  that  is,  with  the  reflective  and  ^"^=,^f^^

J '  '  morality.

individualistic  morality  of  the  world  of  claims. In  evIi  recog-

.  . .  nised  only

this  reflective  morality  the  contradiction  of  what  is  to  be

, ,  t  1 • 1  1  T disowned

and  what  ought  to  be  is  brought  to  an  extreme. It  in  the
is  almost  held  that  nothing  which  is,  ought  to  be,  e^mpiL
and  therefore  that  nothing  which  ought  to  be,  is.
Thus,  one  might  say,  it  rests  on  the  conviction  that
evil  is real,  and  good  is  a  mere  thought. In  the
concrete  morality  of  social  observance  the  good  is

^  And  it  is  not  worth  while  to  argue  about  the  right  to  understand
the  word  otherwise.  But  I  have  no  doubt  that  it  carries  a  compound
meaning,  and  that  the  security,  the  stabiHty,  which  I  speak  of,  is  a
large  part  of  what  it  indicates  even  in  everyday  usage.

R


of  devotion.


242  THE RELIGIOUS CONSCIOUSNESS  lect.

at  least  partially  realised,  and  ethical  faith  takes  the
shape  of  holding  the  good  to  be  a  reality  in  which
the  individual  finds  himself  sustained  and  affirmed
against  the  evil  which  is  less  real.  In  religion  the
attitude  of  abstract  morality  is  reversed,  and  that  of
concrete  morality  is  intensified.  The  characteristic
faith  of  religion  is  not  merely  that  the  good  is  real,
but  that  nothing  else  than  the  good  is  real.  I
quote ^  "the  vehement  expression  of  mysticism.
When  reason  tells  thee  'Thou  art  outside  God'
then  answer  thou  '  No,  I  am  in  God,  I  am  in
heaven,  in  it,  in  him,  and  for  eternity  will  never
leave  him.  The  devil  may  keep  my  sins,  and  the
world  my  flesh  ;  I  live  in  God's  will,  his  life  shall
be  my  life,  his  will  my  will ;  I  will  be  dead  in  my
reason  that  he  may  live  in  me,  and  all  my  deeds
shall  be  his  deeds.'"  This  tells  us  more  than
volumes  of  argument  directed  to  prove,  e.g.,  the
"  existence "  of  God.  The  primary  point  in  the
religious  consciousness,  then,  is  that  the  finite-
infinite  self,  implicitly  or  explicitly  conscious  of  the
secret  of  its  own  nature,  holds  the  evil  of  the  world
and  of  its  own  finiteness  to  be  absorbed  in  the
whole  of  which  it  is  a  spiritual  member.  It  takes
for  its  own,  for  its  ideal  self,  the  character  of  what
it  worships,  and  repudiates  everything  in  itself
which  conflicts  with  that  character.  The  theory,  as
we  have  urged,  is  common  and  inherent  throughout
finite  life.  One  man's  career,  for  example,  may
be  summed  up  in  a  sentence  by  those  who  knew
him  best.  "  He  faithfully  served  King  Charles  I.
from Edgehill fight to the end of  the unhappy

^ From  Bradley's  Ethical  Studies^  p.  293,  note. I  presume  from
the  previous  note  that  J.  Bohnie  is  the  author  cited.


vni  THE WILL TOWARDS  PERFECTION  243

war."  ^  There,  we  may  suppose,  he  set  his  stake  and
his  value,  "there  took  his  station  and  degree."  All
he  asked  was  to  be  allowed  to  serve  what  he  took
to  be  the  best.  Failure  cannot  touch  the  essence  of
such  a  life,  even  though  expended  in  a  cause  which
seems  to  some  of  us  so  poor.  "  'Tis  better  to  have
loved  and  lost  Than  never  to  have  loved  at  all."  I
will  speak  below  of  the  relation  of  religious  faith  to
factual  truth.  But  the  first  thing  is  to  understand
the  experience  itself,  and  to  grasp  it  as  in  one  form
or  another  the  commonest  of  experiences — one,
perhaps,  of  which  no  human  life  is  devoid,  and
possibly  not  all  lives  of  the  higher  brute  creation.
It  is,  in  principle,  the  self-surrender  to  some  perfec-
tion taken  as  good  and  so  as  to  be  realised,  though
having  itself  the  power  and  rank  of  a  dominant
reality.  Thus  there  is  thrown  into  it  the  whole
will,  and  the  whole  attribution  of  value.  It  may  be
asked  what  identification  with  a  higher  will  there
can  be  in  a  devotion  to  something  which  is  not
obviously  a  cause  or  general  principle  of  action  ;
what  will,  for  instance,  is  presupposed  in  truth  or
beauty  with  which  the  will  of  their  devotee  can  be
identified.  The  question  answers  itself  if  we  reflect
on  the  example  from  which  we  started — the  devotion
to  a  cause.  The  cause  which  a  man  takes  to  claim
his  devotion  is  for  him  the  type  and  centre  of  a
real  perfection  and  he  wills  it  as  such.  He  finds  in
the  aspiration  which  it  realises  the  content,  or  the
main  content,  which  for  him  constitutes  the  value  of

1  Epitaph  in  a  country  church  known  to  the  writer.  We  may
urge  that  knowing  nothing  of  the  man  in  question,  we  cannot  tell
that  his  consciousness  was  such  as  the  text  proceeds  to  postulate.
But  it  does  not  greatly  matter.  The  sentence  has  its  full  meaning
in  many  cases,  if  not  in  this.


244  THE RELIGIOUS CONSCIOUSNESS  lect.

life,  and  his  will  to  give  it  visible  and  total  victory-
is  one  with  his  belief  that  in  truth  it  is  absolutely-
founded  among  the  very  roots  of  things.  Truth
and  Beauty  are  thus  each  of  them,  to  its  devotees,  a
cause,  and  one  in  its  own  nature  triumphant,  against
which  falsehood  and  ugliness  have  no  true  hold  on
the  real,  and  which  only  need  to  have  made  evident
the  triumph  which  they  possess  in  their  inherent
nature.  It  is  true  that  they  are  not  in  themselves  of
the  nature  of  will,  and  the  religious  attitude  towards
them  is  therefore  not  so  simple  and  natural  as  that
in  which  the  central  fact  is  the  surrender  of  the
will  to  the  aim  of  some  self-conscious  group  or
being.  But  the  will  towards  perfection  is  involved
in  devotion  to  them,  and  in  souls  of  a  certain  type
this  forms  a  sufficient  basis  for  a  religious  attitude.
As  in  the  ii. In  the case, however,  of an experience re-

expedences  cognised  as  religious  in  the  full  sense,  the  surrender
genTus^'°'''  of  will,  in  its  identification  with  the  higher  will,  is
the  central  and  predominant  fact.  We  are  on  the
same  track  which  we  traversed  in  dealing  with  the
world  of  claims,  but  we  see  it  more  clearly.  There
the  supreme  will  was  treated  as  that  of  a  being  self-
contained,  external  to  the  universe  of  nature  and
finite  souls,  the  typical  god  of  Theism.^

But  after  completing  the  discussion  of  finiteness,
which  has  brought  us  within  sight  of  its  complement,
the  true  religious  experience,  it  becomes  inevitable
that  we  should  recognise  the  true  human-divine
nature  in  its  completeness.  This  recognition  was
anticipated  by  the  repudiation  of  the  strict  Theistic

1  Lect.  V.  It  was  recognised  that  modern  Theism  would  not
admit  this  isolation  of  the  Deity.  But  it  seemed,  nevertheless,  to  be
the  logical  consequence  of  any  view  which  refuses  to  recognise  the
unity  of  the  human-divine  will.


Vlll  THE TYPICAL  INSTANCES  245

position  which  was  found  essential  to  the  reality  of
human  freedom/  There  cannot  be  freedom,  we
saw,  unless  the  divine  will  is  genuinely  one  with
that  of  finite  beings,  in  a  single  personality.^  The
creation  of  creators  is  a  mere  self-contradiction.

Thus,  then, what we have in religion is the
practical  recognition  of  the  absorption  of  the  finite
will  in  the  will  for  perfection,  that  is,  in  the  will  for
good, as  the  real  and  actual  will  dominant  in  the
universe. It  would  not  be  suitable  to  the  tone  of
these theoretical reflections to enlarge upon the
utterances,  in  this  sense,  of  great  minds  who  have  had
a  genius  for  religion. But  I  will  venture  to  remark
that,  whereas  in  commonplace  orthodoxy  and  current
theology,  we  meet  with  perhaps  the  acme  of  super-
stition and  unreason,  in  the  actual  convictions  and
experiences  of  religious  genius in  all  religions  we
find,  with  few  exceptions,  an  insight  in  the  fullest
harmony  with philosophy ; from  which, indeed, it
has  only  to  learn. We  may  take  Plato,  St.  Paul,
and Dante, not to say Jesus himself,  as  typical
instances. The  stability  and  security  of  the  finite
self,  which  is  felt, as  we have  urged,  sporadically
over the whole area of human life, reaches its
climax  in  these  great  minds. It  here  reveals  to  us
in  luminous  experiences  what  is  everywhere  true  in
principle. The  finite  mind  so  far  as  religious  accepts
as  its  true  self  an  actual  perfection,  which  alone  is
real,  and  in  which  evil  is  absorbed  and  annihilated.
With  this  perfection  it  identifies  itself  by  faith,  that
is  to  say,  in  the  will  to  be,  allied  with  the  judgment

^ See  citation  from  Vatke,  Lect.  V.  p.  136.

-  Unless,  of  course,  the  supreme  Being  is  taken  as  finite,  and  one
among  others.  In  that  case  he  has  no  such  relation  to  other  spirits
as  is  typified  by  inclusion  or  creation.


246


THE RELIGIOUS CONSCIOUSNESS


LECT.


The  Para-
dox of
Religion.
Its  double
make-
believe.
The  two
aspects
and  the
necessity
of  their
fusion.


of  what  is,  disowning  its  finite  imperfections  and
those  of  the  world,  and  treating  them  as  nothing —
but,  it  must  be  added,  not  as  non-existent.  This  is
the  secret  of  the  stabiHty  and  security  of  the  finite
self  so  far  as  religiously  minded,  in  spite  of,  and  even
by  means  of,  the  discipline  of  its  moulding  and  the
hazards  of  its  finite  existence.  "  So  far  as  religiously
minded  " — and  here,  perhaps,  philosophy  can  be  of
some  use.  For,  by  comparison  and  analysis,  which
the  religious  temper  will  not  undertake  for  itself,  it
is  able  to  point  out  that  at  least  self-conscious  finite
mind  is  always  religious  in  its  nature  and  structure,
and,  one  way  or  another,  has  always  a  religious  side
in  actual  empirical  fact.

iii.  "  Treating  its  finite  imperfections  as  nothing,
but  not  as  non-existent."  This  is  the  paradox  which
survives  in  religion,  because  it  is  practical,  and
therefore  "good"  in  it,  although  perfection,  is
perfection  as  the  object  of  an  attitude  which
inherently  contrasts  it  with  evil.  Evil,  or  finite-
ness,  so  far  as  still  self-assertive  and  not  wholly
subordinated  to  the  perfect  will,  is  sin.  That  is  to
say,  it  is  the  acutest  conceivable  contradiction  of
the  self,  as  identified  with  perfection,  against  itself.
It  is  something  which  is  in  the  self,  but  does  not
belong  to  it,  and  while  existent,  is  yet  repudiated
with  the  whole  ardour  of  the  self.  The  self,  aware
of  itself  as  rebellious,  and  as  asserting  itself  in  its
finiteness,^  nevertheless  as  identified  with  the  higher


^  There  is  a  technical  point  here  which  might  cause  difficulty.
All  volition,  we  have  argued  throughout,  is  technically  self-trans-
cendence, i.e.  the  self  in  it  asserts  itself  in  something  new,  and
sacrifices  something  old.  How,  then,  can  some  volition  affirm
finiteness  against  the  infinite  whole,  and  some  affirm  identification
with  the  infinite  whole  ? The  answer  is  drawn  from  the  theory  of


VIII  PRACTICAL  ATTITUDE  IMPLIES  EVIL  247


will  repudiates  and  rejects  the  self  which  it  is  thus
aware  of.  It  will  not  admit  that  it  really  is  what  it
is  in  fact.

This  complexity  of  the  religious  attitude  is  the
explanation of the extraordinary  combinations of
habit  and  conviction  which  are  found  in  persons  the
genuineness  of  whose  religion  up  to  a  certain  point
can  hardly  be  disputed. Probably,  in  principle,  all
religious  persons  exhibit  such phenomena, but in
some  cases  they  appear  beyond  measure  paradoxical.
Many preachers, whose honesty and devoutness
there is no reason to deny, have invoked the
blessing  of  God  upon  the  cause  of  negro  slavery.
And  perhaps  there  is  no  practice,  however  vicious,
which has not in some stage of  civilisation  been
hallowed by  a religious temper which could  not
justly  be  called insincere. If  the  whole complex
attitude  fails  to  cohere,  if  repudiation  of  sin  as  our
true  belonging  fails  to  be  fused  both  with  a  wide
appreciation  of  what  perfection  must  mean  and  with
a  complete  subordination  of  the  personal  will  to  the
will taken as perfect,^  it is obvious that such a
repudiation  may  develop,  as  it  has  been  known  to
develop,  into  the  most  fatal  antinomianism.

In  religion,  then,  as in morality, good is still
loaded  with  the  inherent  contrast  to  evil ;  and  if  evil


the  good  and  evil  self,  and,  strictly  and  rightly,  emphasises  the
point  that  in  all  volition  the  finite-infinite  or  self-transcendent  nature
is  in  play,  but  in  some  volition  negates  its  own  infinity  by  affirming
a  very  partial  end  against  the  infinite  whole  with  which  the  good
self  is  identified.  It  is  the  same  point  as  that  of  partial  satisfaction,
in  which  immediate  obstruction  may  be  evaded  at  the  cost  of
inconsistency  with the  system  of  self  as a  whole. See  Lect.  VI.

p.  68.

1 Cf,  (J.j^'-.,  J.  Bohme's  language,  cited  above,  p.  242. We  have  here
the  essence  of  the  controversy  about  faith  and  works.


248  THE RELIGIOUS CONSCIOUSNESS  lect.

were  entirely  to  disappear,  the  practical  attitude,
which  depends  upon  its  presence,  would  vanish,
and  with  it  would  go  the  attitude  to  perfection
as  a  good ;  as  something  to  be  realised.  For
in  religion — this  is  the  other  side  of  the  paradox  of
evil — perfection  is  the  good,  necessarily  to  be
realised,  because  it  is  the  sole  reality.  It  has  been
said,  therefore,  that  religion  is  doubly  and  con-
tradictorily a  make-believe.^  It  is  a  make-believe
as  if  good  were  all  reality,  and  again  as  if  it  were
not,  but  demanded  to  be  realised.  If  the  first  side
of  this  paradox  falls  out,  the  stability  and  security
of  the  religious  consciousness  falls  with  it.  If  the
second  side  is  omitted,  the  practicality  of  religion
— the  sense  of  sin  and  the  devotion  of  will  to  the
good  as  its  opposite — disappears.  In  either  case
the  nature  of  religion  loses  its  characteristic  com-
pleteness, and  to  fail  in  holding  the  two  together  is  to
be  arrested  by  the  central  problem  of  all  philosophy.^

The  inherence  of  evil  as  sin  within  the  religious
consciousness,  combined  with  the  essential  doctrine
of  the  unity  of  the  divine  and  finite  will,  raises  the
inevitable  problem  of  the  presence  of  sin  or  evil  in
the  consciousness  of  God.

For  the  general  and  technical  answer,  it  is  enough
to  refer  to  the  previous  discussion  of  the  absorption
of  evil  by  inclusion  and  rearrangement.  Evil,  we
saw,  is  only  in  the  contradiction  of  good  ;  it  is  any
aim  which  excludes  the  good  system  and  is  excluded
by  it.  If  this  contradiction  is  adjusted,  so  that
inclusion  becomes  possible,  the  content  of  the  evil

1  Bradley,  Appearance^  p.  443.

2  For  the  inclusion  of  these  sides  in  a  single  attitude,  see
Principle^  Lect,  VII.  p.  272  ff.


VIII  THE GOOD WILL,  NOT THE  ABSOLUTE 249

attitude  passes  as  a  positive  factor  into  the  good.
What  is  evil  in  the  finite  will,  then,  and  its  very
contradiction  with  the  good — the  heat  of  opposition
and  rebellion — is,  for  religion,  in  the  divine  will,
but  not  as  evil. It  has  undergone  transformation.

But  this  answer,  acquiesced  in  by  itself,  would
destroy,  as  we  saw,  the  practical  attitude  essential
to  religion,  which  depends  on  the  preservation  of
the  good  in  the  character  of  what  is  opposite  to
evil.  The  contradiction  of  the  world  of  claims,  of
the  "  ought "  which  is  not  real,  and  the  real  which
clashes  with  the  "ought,"  recurs,  if  only  as  a
vanishing  factor,  so  long  as  the  practical  attitude
survives,  and  with  it  the  contradiction  of  good  and
evil.  God,  conceived  as  identified  with  the  finite
struggle  against  evil,  cannot  be  the  perfection —
the  Absolute — in  which  all  evil  is  absorbed.

4. The  fact  that  the  religious  attitude  is  largely  Practicality
practical,  and  the  fact  that  religious  tradition,  with  agrees  with
one voice, admits that it contemplates God in  [jJat^Js^
imaginative shapes,^  are  thus obviously in agree-  doctrines

o  jr '  y  o  express

ment. Father,  Son,  Holy  Spirit,  Lord  Omnipotent,  Gods

,  ' *■  ^  nature

Creator,  Providence — none  of  these  terms  can  apply  imagina-
to  a  Universe  or  an Absolute  which has nothing  not^Ist^^e
outside it. The  practical  attitude  means  that  the  ^^^°'"'^-
contradiction  between  good  and  evil  survives,  and
the  survival  of  this  contradiction  necessarily  implies
that  God  as  worshipped  in  religion  is  not  a  being

1 Cf.  Dante,  Paradiso,  iv.  43.

"  Per  questo  la  Scrittura  condiscende
A  vostra  facultate,  e  piedi  e  mano
Attribuisce  a  Dio,  ed  altro  intende  ;
E  santa  Chiesa  con  aspetto  umano
Gabriel  e  Michel  vi  rappresenta,
E  I'a  Itro,  che  Tobbia  rifece  sano."


250  THE RELIGIOUS CONSCIOUSNESS  lect.

for  whom evil is  annihilated. Granting that  evil
as  evil  is  not  in  him,  yet  evil  as  essential  to  finite
freedom  produces  itself  in  beings  continuous  with  him.
And  a  being  who  had  no  concern  for  the  triumph
of  good,  that  is,  who  was  not  a  moral  being,  would
not  be  the  God  who  is  worshipped  in  religion,  and
so  stands  in  relation  to  finite  minds  as  their  Lord,
Father,  or  Creator. It  is  true  that  we  do  not  with
Theism  assume  specific  and  miraculous  communica-
tions of  grace  to  the  finite  mind. We  have held
that the  divine  intercourse  with man is mediated
by  nature  and  society,^  and  the  means  of  grace  are
the  same  as  the  disciplining  and  exalting  influences
of  the  world. At  the  same  time,  the  God  who  is
worshipped in religion is the will for good as
against  evil,  and  a  universe  in  which  this  antithesis  is
absorbed  in  perfection  cannot  be  one  with  a  God
whom  the  religious  consciousness  thus  presents  to
itself We saw in the  previous volume that the
universe  as  a  whole  must  rather  be  the  theatre  of
good  and  evil  than  good  or  evil  in  itself,  and  thus
the  God  who  is  the  object  of  religious  adoration  is
rather  the  representative  of  the  universe  when  con-
sidered as overcoming evil by good, than the
universe  in  its  totality  which  absorbs  good  and  evil
in  perfection. "^

In  thus  conceiving  the  matter,  it  may  be  re-
marked, we  recover  something  of  the  unity  and
concentration  which  are  aimed  at  by  Theism. God,

1  Green,  Pro/egovtena,  sect.  no.

2  This  ought  to  be  clear,  the  moment  it  is  carefully  considered.
If,  as  we  hold,  good  and  evil  are  relative  to  each  other,  and  depend
on  the  contradiction  between  them,  it  is  quite  impossible  that  the
universe  as  a  whole  should  be  either  one  or  the  other.  They  must
inevitably  be  features  or  characters  within  it.


VIII /S  IT  JUST  AN  ATTITUDE WE CHOOSE? 251

we  might  say,  is  for  us  the  world-consciousness,  to
which  all  consciousnesses  are  contributory,  in  respect
only  of  a  certain  nisus  or  characteristic,  viz.  its
attitude  to  or  in  the  genesis  and  absorption  of  evil.
And  it  is  for  this  reason  that  he  is  always  repre-
sented by  religion  in  imaginative  forms,  which
could  not  be  applied  to  the  totality  of  things  as  a
totality.  The  genesis  of  evil  is  the  condition  of
finite  life  ;  its  absorption  or  suppression  as  evil  is
the  condition  of  the  contribution  made  by  the
finite  to  the  whole.  The  whole  considered  as  a
perfection  in  which  the  antagonism  of  good  and
evil  is  unnoted,  is  not  what  religion  means  by  God,
and  must  rather  be  taken  as  the  Absolute.

5. I have  now  to explain,  perhaps  in  presence  The

-  .  .  .  ,  1 • 1  1  Relation

01  an  impatience  in  my  hearers  which  at  the  same  of  Religion
point  in  the  argument  I  have  in  past  years  myself  iveVuth.
strongly  experienced,  the  relation  of  such concep-  ?^°o^yg  "^^^
tions  as  we  have  been  advancing  to  objective  truth  existence  of

^ . . ■^  ,  ,  God  as  a

and  fact. Do  we  mean  that  "religion  is  true"  or  fact? The
not  ? Is  there  or  is  there  not  a  God  ? Does  he  conscious-

r ^  • ^  J  1  ^  ->  ness  is  not

in  tact  exist  or  does  he  not :  concerned

In  other  words, does  the  religious  consciousness  gg'^^ate
-prove  anything'.'* May  it  not  be — is  it  not,  prima  Beings

. ,  .  existence.

facie,  if  we  accept  the  sort  of  thing  we  have  been  it  is  an
saying — either  an  arbitrary  fancy  of  the  individual  the  human-
mind  about  facts  which  it  cannot  prove,  or,  if  other  ^^^^  of
than  that,  a  practical  attitude  adopted  towards  the  '^"^  ^^^^'
universe,  independently  of  any  assignable  state  of
facts  or  realities  which  can  in  reason  sustain  it.-*

I  will  say  at  once  that  the  latter  is  the  difficulty
which,  if  any,  threatens  our  view.  The  former
issue  is  irrelevant  to  it,  because,  if  we  keep  to  terms
in  their  ordinary  sense,  it  cannot  be  alleged  that  we


252  THE RELIGIOUS CONSCIOUSNESS  lect.

are  professing  to  affirm  any  facts  at  all.  It  is  not
here  asserted  that  the  reality  of  the  religious
consciousness  establishes  the  fact  of  human  happi-
ness, as  the  word  is  currently  understood,  for  past,
present,  or  future,  nor  the  fact  of  the  future  visible
triumph  of  the  good  in  this  world  or  another,  in
any  mode  in  which  it  has  not  been  triumphant
hitherto  ;  nor  of  personal  survival  beyond  our  present
life,  nor  of  a  supreme  being  existing  as  a  conscious-
ness external  to  finite  mind,  personal  in  the  sense  of
being  a  magnified  man.  The  religious  conscious-
ness is  self-contained,  and  stands  on  its  own  basis,
although  it  must  be  remembered  that  in  our  view
that  basis  is  exceedingly  broad,  and  includes  indeed
the  greater  part  of  our  most  vital  experience.

We  may  put  the  matter  in  this  way.  The  truth
of  religion,  as  we  conceive  it,  does  not  come  to  us
as  something  forced  upon  us,  by  metaphysical  or
theological  argument,  through  which  we  are  to  be
driven  to  conclusions  about  matter  of  fact,  beyond
our  normal  beliefs.  But  this  does  not  mean  that
it  rests  upon  an  arbitrary  or  a  priori  conviction,
derived  only  from  private  fancy,  and  devoid  of
roots  in  the  working  of  intelligence.  It  is,  as  we
understand  it,  a  leading  characteristic  of  experience.
Its  outward  aspect,  in  itself  a  mere  fact,  is  guaranteed
first  by  the  naive  unity  of  human  beings  within  it,
and  in  later  and  reflective  ages  by  the  comparative
sciences  which  recognise  it  as  a  phenomenon  co-
extensive with  humanity.^ Its  value  and  its  inter-

1  I  am  aware  that  there  is  danger  in  this  line  of  argument.  The
extensive  occurrence  of  a  fact  is  a  very  different  matter  from  its
value.  Some  facts,  of  extensive  occurrence  in  some  ages,  disappear
in  others.  Still,  reserving  the  right  of  interpretation,  we  may  treat
very  extensive  occurrence  as  emphasising  a  problem.


VIII  AN  '' INTUITION''— ITS  MEANING?  253

pretation  are  primarily  self-contained,  and  are  part
of  the  experience  itself.  But,  like  everything  in
human  consciousness,  they  can  be  supported,  in  the
sense  of  being  analysed  and  connected,  by  critical
and  philosophical  reflection.  And,  as  has  been  said,
the  essential  in  it  can  in  some  degree  be  separated
from  the  unessential.

But  it  may  be  asked — and  here  we  confront  what
we  called  the  more  serious  problem — is  there  not
one  great  fact  at  any  rate  to  which  this  treatment  of
religion  will  not  apply  ?  Is  not  the  assertion  that
God  exists  either  true  or  not  true,  and  how  can
any  appeal  to  an  attitude  of  finite  experience,  unless
it  is  relied  on  as  a  metaphysical  proof  of  something
beyond  it,  establish  the  fact  of  that  existence,  which
is  needed  for  the  raiso7i  d'etre  of  the  attitude  itself.-*

I  may  set  forth  the  whole  difficulty  which  con-
fronts us  at  this  point  by  referring  for  the  sake  of
illustration  to  an  extreme  doctrine  of  the  orthodox
tradition,  which  I  have  in  the  past  uncompromisingly
rejected,  and  which,  as  understood  by  its  adherents,
I  still  uncompromisingly  reject.  I  will  borrow  the
statement  from  an  authority  whose  learning  and
sincerity  are  unquestionable.

"  Christianity  therefore  as  the  absolute  religion
of  man  assumes  as  its  foundation  the  existence  of
an  Infinite  Personal  God  and  a  finite  human  will.
This  antithesis  is  assumed  and  not  proved.  No
arguments  can  establish  it.  It  is  a  primary  intuition
and  not  a  deduction.  It  is  capable  of  illustration
from  what  we  observe  around  us  ;  but  if  either  term
is  denied  no  reasoning  can  establish  its  truth.  Each
man  for  himself  is  supposed  to  be  conscious  of  the
existence  of  God  and  of  his  own  existence. We


254  THE RELIGIOUS CONSCIOUSNESS  lect.


can  go  no  further.  If  he  has  not,  or  says  he  has
not,  this  consciousness,  he  must  be  regarded  as  one
whose  powers  are  imperfect."  ^

Now,  taken as a description of the rehgious
consciousness in its complete and characteristic
shape,  I  beheve  this  passage  on  the  whole  to  express
truth,  allowing for the reservation to which the
author  calls  attention in  the following paragraph.
The  epithets  "infinite"  and  "personal,"  he  points  out,
involve  a  contradiction. Obviously,  then,  a  state-
ment which  contains  them  cannot  be  read  either  as
a  statement  of  simple  fact  or  as  one  of  ultimate  truth.
The  term  existence,  as  of  two  separate  finite  things
or  persons,  must  be  a  misnomer  for  what  is  meant
to be affirmed. And indeed the existence  of  a
supreme being,  as  a person  external to  ourselves
and  to  the  world,  like  a  magnified  human  creature,
is  not  affirmed  by  the  religious  consciousness,  and
if  it  were  known  to  be  fact,  would  have  no  bearing
on  religion. But the truth  of  the  experience, in
which  we  are  aware  implicitly  ^  or  explicitly  of  the
finite-infinite nature of the finite spirit  —  this is
actually  present  and  contained  within  the  religious
consciousness  itself. It  is  plainly  the  same  which
the  statements  above  cited  are  intended  to  describe ;
but by throwing it into external and relational
language  they  mutilate  its  nature  and  transform  it
into  an  assertion of an independent and isolable
existence,  which  would  need  a  special  demonstration,

1  Westcott,  Gospel  of  the  Resurrection,  pp.  15-16.  Similar
language  is  of  course  constantly  held  by  J.  H.  Newman,  e.g.  Apologia,
ed.  of  1865,  p.  4,  "two  and  two  only  absolutely  and  luminously  self-
evident  beings,  myself  and  my  Creator."

-  I  call  our  awareness  implicit  when  the  devotion  which  expresses
it  is  directed  to  a  partial  object,  say,  to  a  woman.


VIII  GOD  NOT THE  ABSOLUTE  255

and  would  not,  if  so  demonstrated,  harmonise  with
the  essence  of  the  experience  itself.^

Thus  the  rehgious  attitude,  being  at  bottom  a
recognition  of  the  nature  of  the  finite  and  of  an
underlying  reality  which  inseparably  belongs  to  it,
is,  as  recognised  by  the  doctrine  just  mentioned,  an
inherent  character  of  experience.  But  it  neither
needs  nor  establishes  any  external  or  isolable  fact
or  existence.  It  rather  bears  witness  to  a  character
or  nisus  of  the  world  of  spiritual  membership  which
is  inseparable  from  the  finite  self  -  consciousness.
We  are  not,  however,  to  say  that  religion  thus  taken
is  an  arbitrary  attitude  of  the  finite  mind,  resting  on
no  reality  beyond  it.  This  might  be  true  of  the
above-mentioned  theological  doctrine  in  respect  of
the  assertions  which  it  grounds  upon  the  recognition
of  the  finite-infinite  nature.  But  the  recognition
itself,  so  far  from  being  unsupported  by  experience,
is  the  sum  and  substance  of  what  it  is  when  it  is
most  solid.  And  the  reservation  which  we  noted  the
orthodox  doctrine  to  make,  in  respect  of  the  self-con-
tradiction in  its  language,  along  with  the  imaginative
nature  of  the  phrases  which  throughout  history  have
been  employed  in  the  description  of  the  supreme
being,  thoroughly  support  our  analysis.

The  conclusion  is,  in  a  word,  that  the  God  of
religion,  inherent  in  the  completest  experience,  is
an  appearance  of  reality,  as  distinct  from  being  the
whole  and  ultimate  reality  ; a  rank  which  religion

1  Much  of  the  introductory  argument  of  Westcott's  book  above
cited  is  of  extreme  interest  for  our  purpose,  e.g.  such  a  sentence  as
that  "pure  Theism  is  unable  to  form  a  hving  rehgion,"  which  I
beheve  to  be  perfectly  true  ;  or  the  idea  that  for  some  great  men
"faith  in  a  thought,"  as  opposed  to  a  historical  fact,  is  possible,  and
that  it  is  only  for  the  masses  that  some  outward  pledge  and  outward
fact  is  necessary  (^op.  cit.  pp,  9  and  10).


256  THE RELIGIOUS CONSCIOUSNESS lect.  viii

cannot  consistently  claim  for  the  supreme  being  as
it  must  conceive  him.  But  this  conception,  which
finds  him  in  the  greater  self  recognised  by  us  as
present  within  the  finite  spirit,  and  as  one  with  it  in
love  and  will,  assigns  him  a  higher  reality,  than  any
view  which  stakes  everything  on  finding  him  to
exist  as  a  separate  being  after  the  model  of  a  man.
Religion  establishes  the  infinite  spirit  because  it
is  continuous  with  and  present  in  the  finite — in  love
and  in  the  will  for  perfection.  It  does  not  need  to
appeal  to  facts  of  separate  being,  or  to  endeavour
to  demonstrate  them.  It  is  an  experience  of  God,
not  a  proof  of  him.

Here,  then,  I  trust,  the  stability  and  security  of
finite  selfhood,  as  its  inherence  in  the  whole  of
reality  and  value,  and  its  contribution  to  it  through
the  birth-pangs  of  soul-making  and  the  hazards  of
self-transcendence,  have  been  in  principle  elucidated.
In  the  following  lecture  I  hope  to  apply  this
doctrine  to  the  difficult  questions  afiecting  the
continuance  of  the  finite  self  after  what  we  call
death.


C.  THE STABILITY  AND  SECURITY  OF
FINITE SELFHOOD— Con^mzced

LECTURE IX

THE DESTINY OF THE FINITE SELF

I. It is the idea of Transformation,  which has  The  idea
J  ,  . . 1  1 of  Trans-

governed  our  argument  up  to  this  pomt,  that  alone  formation.

gives  hope  of  any  clearness  in  considering  the
destiny  of  the  finite  self.  That  the  ultimate  reality
of  persons,  like  that  of  everything  else,  is  in  the
Absolute,  and  that  the  Absolute  is  non-temporal,
are  conclusions  which  seem  inevitable  from  the
idea  of  completeness  or  perfection.  Therefore  the
only  remaining  questions,  as  regards  the  destiny
of  persons,  are,  in  the  first  place,  whether  we  can
form  any  conception  of  the  degree  of  transforma-
tion compatible  with  what  we  desire  in  the  way  of
personal  continuance ;  and,  in  the  second  place,
whether  we  can  see  any  reason  for  expecting  one
degree  of  transformation  rather  than  another.

2.  The  latter  is  the  direct  question  to  which  we  We  hardly
should  all  welcome  a  direct  answer.  There  is  but  reason!  for
little  that  I  can  say  about  it ;  and  it  will  be  best  to  anfs'pccfai
say  this  little  at  once.  l^sree  of

'  Trans-

The  whole  problem  is  governed  for  us  by  the  formation.
principle  that  the  finite  self,  like  everything  in  the

257  s


258  DESTINY  OF THE FINITE SELF  i,kct.

universe,  is  now  and  here  beyond  escape  an  element
in  the  Absolute/  Thus,  if  we  desire  to  affirm  that
its  destiny  involves  becoming  more  fully  one  with
the  absolute  experience  than  it  is  in  the  world  we
know,  this  must  be  established  on  special  and
relevant  grounds.  We  must  not  fall  into  the  habit
of  equating  the  Absolute  with  heaven,  and  assuming
that  to  be  "in"  the  Absolute  is  a  new  thing  and
a  sequel  compared  with  our  present  degree  of
finiteness,  as  heaven  is  for  the  ordinary  Christian
compared  with  life  on  earth.  We  are  here  and  now
participants  in  it,  and  if  a  change  in  the  kind  or
degree  of  our  participation  is  to  be  expected,  definite
cause  for  this  expectation  must  be  shown.

We  have  even  seen  that  finiteness  is  an  element
essential  to  the  infinite  real;  and  this  doctrine,  if
sound,  does  seem  to  militate  against  any  conception,
according  to  which  it  should  be,  even  apparently,
the  law  of  the  inferior  appearances  to  lead  up  in
time  to  a  perfection  which  should  in  principle
supersede  and  abolish  them.  That  is  to  say  that
it  is  an  inconceivable  abstraction  to  place  eternity,
or  heaven,  or  perfection  as  such,  in  a  future  beyond
all  time  and  finitude."  Of  course  such  a  presumption
determines  nothing  about  the  possibility  of  future  ex-
periences much  more  perfect  in  degree  than  anything

1  I  do  not  say  "a  member  of"  the  Absolute.  Such  an  expression
might  imply  that  it  is,  separately  and  with  relative  independence,  a
standing  differentiation  of  the  Absolute.  And  that  question  must  not
be  prejudged.

-  See  McTaggart  on  the  relation  of  Time  and  Eternity,  Mind,
Ixxi.  343.  Of  course  he  does  not  say  that  Eternity  is  future  ;  only
that  it  may  be  the  law  of  appearances  that  it  should  seem  so.  It  is
the  same  question  as  whether  Hegel's  Absolute  involves  in  its  nature
the  process  which  generates  it.  See  the  same  author's  Commetitary
on  HegePs  Logic  and  the  present  writer's  review,  Mind,  Jan.  191 1.


IX  WHAT WE  REALLY WANT  259

we  know,  on  the  part  of  finite  selves  in  a  continued
existence.  It  must  be  remembered,  however,  that
the  deeper  view  of  religion  itself^  has  usually  insisted
on  the  idea  of  eternal  life  as  something  to  which  the
contrast  of  present  and  future  is  indifferent.

On  the  other  hand,  our  conception  of  a  repre-
sentative nature  or  origin  of  the  self  does  not
essentially  involve  its  transitoriness  in  time.  His-
torical and  natural  conditions,  such  as  we  have
supposed  to  be  focussed  in  finite  selves,  are  prima
facie  transitory  appearances.  But  there  seems  to
be  no  necessary  limit  to  the  power  to  constitute  a
centre  of  experience  that  the  being  in  which  they  are
focussed  may  elicit  and  reveal  within  them.  And
this  power,  which  is  their  value  for  the  whole,  and
which  in  any  case  cannot  pass  away,  might  for  all  we
know  express  itself  in  a  temporal  continuance  of  that
spiritual  being,  just  as  again  it  might  express  itself
merely  in  the  contribution  of  some  modifying
element  to  the  experiences  which  come  together  in
the  Absolute.

But  when  the  question  of  man's  destiny  is  stated
in  this  the  only  reasonable  form,  it  inevitably  refers
us  away  from  the  second  to  the  first  of  the  two
questions  which  we  propounded.  We  cannot  de-
termine what  period  or  degree  of  recognisable
continuance  may  be  appropriate  to  different  orders
of  finite  spirits."  But  we  can,  by  consideration,  to
some  extent  introduce  order  into  our  own  desires,
and determine how far the reasons which seem

^  Certainly  in  St.  John's  Gospel.

2  To  illustrate  by  a  very  old  suggestion.  Is  it  clear  that  if  all
human  spirits  are  such  as  to  continue,  no  spirits  of  the  brute  creation
are  so  ?  If  we  are  to  go  by  our  wishes,  I  take  it  there  is  much  in
these  spirits  that  the  world  woukl  not  willingly  let  die.


26o  DESTINY  OF THE  FINITE SELF  lect.

Operative  in  our  longing  for  continuance  are  con-
sistent with  one  another  ;  and  what  sort  of  destiny,
therefore,  we  do  recognise,  and  ought  in  reason  to
recognise,  as  a  genuine  and  also  desirable  con-
tinuance of  our  self.  This  self-criticism  of  our
desires  may  show  that  our  faith  in  their  satisfaction
is  less  dependent  on  unanswerable  questions  than
is  commonly  supposed.  And  it  seems  worth  while,
therefore,  to  lay  some  stress  upon  it.
What  3. And  first,  it  is  inconceivable  to  me  that  the

?an  con-''''  truth  which  for  us  is  now  established,  of  the  reality
tS? and perfection of  the  Absolute, can  fail to  carry
with  it  a  fundamental  value  in  its  bearing  on  the
continuance of the self. We have seen in a
previous  lecture  what  positive  elements  we  believe
the self  mainly  to  consist  in, apart  from  the  im-
potence and  bodily  limitation  which,  interpreted  in
a  negative  fashion,  are  the  rationale  of  its  formal  or
repellent  distinctness. No  one  will  much  object  to
an  identification  of  the  self  in  the  main  with  the
things  we  mainly  care  for. Now  when  we  are  sure
that  the  things  which  we  care  for  are  valued  in  the
universe  on  the  whole  as  they  are  for  us,  and  are
by  the  very  nature  of  the  universe  guaranteed  as
characters  of  the Reality^  throughout its appear-
ances, it  seems  to  me  a  mere  want  of  considerateness
to  deny  that  the  main  problem  of  our  continuance
is  in  principle  solved. If  our  main interests  are
guaranteed  as  enduring,  then  surely  that  for  which
we  desire  our  own  endurance  is  in  principle  safe-
guarded. Common  sense  recognises,  and  a  sound
psychology  sustains the recognition,  that we can
and  habitually  do desire and delight in a future

1 Cf.  citation  from  Appearance  and  Reality  in  Principle,  p.  269.


IX  WHAT IVE CARE  FOR  IS OUR SELF  261

prosperity  of  interests  which,  in  desiring  it,  we  do
not  expect  that  "we"  shall  live  to  see.  It  is  true
that  for  common  sense  such  interests  are  naturally
of  a  kind  closely  concerning  ourselves,  and  readily
realised  in  imagination.  But  when  the  principle  is
admitted,  it  will  carry  us  all  the  way.  The  self
can  and  ultimately  must  identify  itself  with  what
transcends  its  direct  personal  experiences,  provided
it  is  of  a  qualitative  texture  to  unite  with  the  main
web-tissue  of  our  being.  This,  we  have  amply
seen,  is  secured  to  us  in  the  Absolute.  We  are  at
worst  in  a  general  position  corresponding  to  such
particular  positions  as  that  of  a  patriot  who  dies
knowing  that  his  country's  freedom  is  secure,  or  that
of  a  man  of  science  who  passes  away,  confidently
assured  that  the  truth  for  which  he  has  spent  himself
is  victorious.  Our  assurance  is  less  particularised
than  theirs,  but  is  fundamental  and  has  a  universal
range.^  In  general,  we  know  that  what  we  care
for,  in  so  far  as  it  is  really  what  we  care  for,  is  safe
through  its  continuity  with  the  Eternal.  In  this
assurance  there  is  comprised,  in  principle,  all  that
we  long  for  in  the  desire  for  our  own  survival.
After  illustrating  this  point  by  some  extreme
examples  of  belief  in  what  would  naturally  be  called
impersonal  continuance,  which,  I  shall  suggest,
derive  their  power  from  this  general  truth, I will

1  This  non-particularity  of  assurance — the  belief  that  whatever
comes  is  the  true  fulfilment — is  always  the  characteristic  of  the
highest  religious  faith,  as  we  see  it  from  the  central  petition  of
the  Lord's  Prayer  downwards.  It  is  distinct  and  emphatic  in
William  James's  examples  of  assurance,  collected  in  his  Varieties  of
Religious  Belief,  p.  285.  These  are  precisely  of  the  type  of  a  belief
in  the  Absolute,  and  the  sharp  separation  between  them  and  convic-
tion in  intellectual  form  is  seen,  after  the  explanation  of  Principle,
Lect.  II.,  to  be  illusory.


262


DESTINY  OF THE  FINITE SELF


LECT.


Subjective
Immor-
tality and
Causal
Continu-
ance.


return  to  a  closer  consideration  of  its  relation  to  the
common  wish  for  personal  immortality.

Of  those  extreme  forms  of  belief  I  will  select
three  for  remark — the  "subjective  immortality"  of
the  Comtist,  with  which  we  may  rank  the  causal
perpetuation  insisted  on  by  the  scientific  mind ;
continuance  by  way  of  metempsychosis  or  trans-
migration, which  is  impersonal  or  nearly  so  in  its
transitions  ;  and  the  views  which  may  be  typified
by  the  conception  of  Nirwana,  according  to  which,
however  the  ultimate  being  may  be  conceived,  the
absorption  of  what  common  sense  understands  by
personal  consciousness  is  not  only  complete,  but  is
illustrated  by  contrast  with  the  activities  and  values
of  our  experience,  and  not  by  a  self-transcendence
in  the  same  direction  as  theirs.  I  take  these  views
as  three  typical  cases  of  tendencies  of  the  mind,
and  do  not  pledge  myself  that  they  are  stated  with
historical  exhaustiveness  and  precision.

a.  I  cannot  think  that  any  considerate  person  can
reject  the  kindred  ideas  of  subjective  immortality
and  causal  continuance  as  wholly  worthless  and
negligible.  We  survive,  these  doctrines  tell  us,  in
the  memories  we  leave  behind  us,  and  in  the  effects
of  our  lives  and  actions.  No  one  who  looks  at  the
question  attentively  will  brush  aside  this  solution  on
the  ground  that  enduring  fame,  and  obvious  causal
influence  on  the  future,  are  granted  to  very  few
indeed  among  the  human  race.  It  is  true  that  the
memory  left  behind  by  individuals  is  fugitive,  and
that  the  effects  of  their  lives  very  soon  become
indistinguishably  blended  with  the  innumerable
other  influences  operative  in  the  course  of  events.
Yet  we  may  note  that  the  remembrance  of  common


IX  ANAPfiN EnicE-ANON HASA TH 263

persons  is  not  really  annihilated  when  it  ceases  to
record  them  by  name.  It  is  absorbed  in  and  blended
with  the  tradition  of  character  and  achievement  in
all  the  great  groupings  and  interests  of  humanity —
the  family,  the  nation,  the  religions,  the  trades,^  the
arts  and  sciences.  All  of  these  things  we  recognise
as  the  quintessence  distilled  from  human  lives,  and
our  reverence  for  them  is  inextricably  interwoven
with  the  praise  of  ancient  men  and  our  fathers  that
begat  us.  If  their  names  are  forgotten,  while  we
understand  their  deeds,  does  it  greatly  matter?
Do  the  authors  of  the  Iliad  and  Odyssey,  or  of  the
early  books  of  the  Old  Testament,  gain  much  in
honour  and  remembrance  if  we  call  them  Homer
and  Moses  ?  Or  do  the  cathedral-builders,  or,  even
greater  than  these,  the  generations  who  have  built
up  racial  and  national  character  and  religion,  lose
much  in  honour  and  remembrance  if  we  have  no
distinct  vocable  by  which  to  call  them  over  one  by
one  ? "  On  the  contrary,  we  seem  here  to  have  a
lesson  on  the  expansion  and  absorption  of  the  self,
which,  when  we  look  precisely  at  the  problem  of
survival,  sets  before  us  inevitable  conditions  of  its
solution. The suggestion is that the self  which

1  We  may  take  this  as  the  limiting  case,  in  which  remembrance
of  individuals  is  at  a  minimum,  and  reflect  upon  our  consciousness
of  what  we  owe  to  the  generations  of  "  tradesmen "  (craftsmen).
Cf.  Goethe's  lines —

"  The  mason's  ways  are
A  type  of  existence,
And  his  persistence
Is  as  the  days  are
Of  men  in  the  world."

2 "  Those  perfect  in  their  little  parts,
Whose  work  is  all  their  prize  ;
Without  them  how  could  laws  or  arts
Or  towered  cities  rise  ?  "


264  DESTINY  OF THE  FINITE SELF  lect.

does  much  for  the  universe  must  blend  with  the
universe  in  proportion  to  its  achievement.  And  so,
in  a  sense,  absorption  is  inevitable  at  both  extremes  ;
the  multitude  bequeath  no  name  to  posterity,  which
nevertheless  reverences  them  in  their  tradition  ;  the
greatest  men  leave  little  more  than  a  name,  because
their  work  has  blended  with  cosmic  forces,  from
which  it  cannot  be  separated  for  estimation.^

Thus,  from  speaking  of  remembrance,  we  have
passed  into  the  region  of  continuance  through
causation.  Conscious  tradition  passes  gradually
into  unconscious,  and  unconscious  tradition  into
the  effects  of  causes.  "  A  man  touches  me  with
his  hand,  looks  at  me,  speaks  to  me.  All  this  is
called  '  personal '  communication.  He  writes  a  letter
to  me.  This,  too,  would  be  called  by  some  '  per-
sonal' He  builds  a  house,  makes  a  picture,  founds
an  institution,  passes  a  law  ;  I  live  in  his  house,
enjoy  his  picture,  am  maintained  by  his  institution,
am  put  in  prison  or  protected  by  his  law.  Is  this
personal  or  not?  If  not,  why  not?""  It  is  not
personal,  the  author  continues  in  effect,  so  far,  and
only  so  far,  as  men  come  short  of  the  power  to
recognise  that  it  is.  Only,  I  add,  we  have  to
remember  that  this  want  of  power  extends  to  the
finite  personality  whose  action  is  being  considered.
He  does  not  know  or  contemplate  the  full  destiny
of  his  picture  or  his  law,  any  more  than  we  are  able
to  restore  contact  with  the  full  personality  out  of

1  Note  the  remark  that  Jesus  and  Socrates  left  no  written  records
or  doctrines.  We  know  them  only  from  the  "  movements "  they
initiated.  So  it  is,  too,  with  great  poets  and  statesmen,  from  the
enormous  cosmic  material  which  they  embody.  You  cannot  estimate
their  "persons"  apart  from  their  "worlds."

2  Nettleship,  Remains,  i.  5.


IX  BOUNDS OF  PERSONALITY  265

which  they  sprang.  This  is  a  self-transcendence,
in  the  world  of  finite  context,  which  does  not  carry  the
main  character  of  the  self  as  conscious  beyond  itself,
but  only  fragments  of  it.  But  it  puts  the  problem
of  self-transcendence  in  a  very  striking  light.^  We
shall  have  to  suggest  below  that  there  may  be  a
self-transcendence  which  carries  the  self,  even  as
a  conscious  whole,  beyond  its  own  powers  of
recognition.

Thus  it  is  needless  to  labour  the  point  that  these
two  kindred  forms  of  survival  are  fragmentary  and
contingent,  partaking  of  the  transitoriness  and
impotence  of  the  human  race.  Yet,  though  in-
sufficient to  constitute  a  personality,  unquestionably
they  are  integral  parts  of  one.  Unquestionably  the
being  of  any  person  would  be  diminished  by  the
annihilation  of  his  share  in  remembrance,  in  tradi-
tion, and  in  causation.  You  cannot  conceive  the
part  played  by  one  person  in  the  experience  of
others  to  be  diminished,  without  conceiving  his
personality  pro  tanto  to  undergo  diminution.  We
may  say,  then,  that  these  are  not  adequate  accounts
of  personal  survival ;  but  it  would  be  irrational  to
say  that  they  amount  to  nothing,  or  do  not  count
at  all  in  the  problem  of  continuance.  And  in  sug-
gesting the  conception  of  a  personality  expanded
beyond  its  own  recognition  they  raise  a  question
which  will  return  upon  us  below.

1  Jesus,  for  example,  if  merely  human,  could  not  conceivably  have
any  idea  of  the  range  which  his  own  personality  was  destined  to
attain. Cf.  Clough's  poem,  "  The  Shadow  " —

"  And  the  Shade  answered,  '  What  ye  say,  I  know  not ;
But  this  is  true,

I  am  that  Jesus  whom  they  slew,
Whom  ye  have  preached,  but  in  what  way,  I  know  not.' "


266  DESTINY  OF THE  FINITE  SELF  lfxt.


But,  while  we  admit  the  value  and  profound
suggestiveness  of  these  two  ideas,  it  seems  plain
that  nothing  can  have  caused  them  even  for  a
moment  to  seem  satisfactory  solutions,  except  an
instinctive  reliance  on  the  reality  of  the  whole.  If
they  are  at  bottom  recognised  as  symbols  and  mani-
festations of  a  reality  beyond  time  and  contingency,
then  they  may  pass  muster  well  enough  as  favourite
forms  of  belief  with  this  or  that  mind,  deeply
interested  in  matters  to  which  such  beliefs  are
specially  relevant.^  But  when  we  come  to  think
of  the  complete  and  ultimate  persistence  of  persons,
it  is  plain  that  ideas  bound  up  with  the  future  of
the  human  race  and  of  our  globe,  and  dealing  only
with  fragments  of  the  personality,  can  give  us  no
final  satisfaction."
Metem-  y3. Jn the above conceptions of continuance —

psychosis.  .  . ^  ^

prima  facie  impersonal  continuance — the  content
of  personality  survived  and  might  be  immensely
expanded,  while  the  subjective  centre  remained  as
it  were  disconnected  from  its  circumference — a  char-
acteristic of  all  who  builded  better  than  they  knew,

^  I  mean,  minds  not  busied  with  ultimate  problems,  but
deeply  absorbed  in  progressive  human  interests,  from  the  family
upwards  and  outwards.  They  may  throw  their  instinct  of  perpetuity
into  the  shapes  in  question  ;  and  these,  because  incarnations  of  the
fundamental  truth,  may  serve  them  well  enough.

2  It  may  be  well  here  to  mention  the  idea  that  the  continuity  of
the  germ-plasm  in  human  beings  annihilates  the  individual's  causal
influence  on  the  future.  There  are  two  points  mainly  to  bear  in
mind.  One  is  the  nature  of  the  tradition  in  which  civilisation  con-
sists, which  is  such  that  on  it  the  individual  exercises  full  causal
influence.  The  second  is  that  through  his  own  action  and  his
influence  upon  others  he  operates  as  a  cause  on  the  selective  process
itself.  In  many  stages  of  society  and  to  many  persons  in  all  known
stages,  continuance  in  children  seems  a  satisfactory  survival  of  the
self.  It  is  a  peculiar  case,  neither  merely  traditional  nor  merely
causal. The  very  basis  of  the  self  is  passed  on.


IX  SATISFACTION  IN  METEMPSYCHOSIS  267

and  thus  perhaps  ultimately  of  all  finite  spirits.
And  in  this  type  of  persistence  we  recognised  a
real  value  for  personality.

In  the  doctrine  of  metempsychosis,  when  taken
in  bitter  earnest,  i.e.  giving  full  weight  to  the
absence  of  conscious  personality  connecting  any
one  life  with  its  successor,  we  have  a  precisely
complementary  conception.  Here,  the  bare  subject
or  ego,  the  naked  form  of  personality,  the  soul-
thing,  is  supposed  to  persist ;  but  no  content  of  the
personality  goes  with  it.  We  are  offered  chains  of
personalities  linked  together  by  impersonal  transi-
tions. We  need  only  point  out  in  passing  the
difficulty,  which  Aristotle  put  his  finger  on,  in  the
conception  of  an  identical  soul  animating  wholly
different  bodies  in  succession.  Our  question  at
present  is  simply  how  far  and  in  what  sense  any
such  doctrine  appears  to  satisfy  our  desire  of
immortality.  It  has  been,  of  course,  of  enormous
influence  in  the  history  of  philosophy  and  religion.
It  readily  lends  itself  to  pessimism,  and  has  roots
perhaps  in  very  primitive  beliefs ;  ^  but  it  is,  I  am
convinced,  the  form  which  Plato  preferred  to  give
to  his  working  conceptions  of  human  survival,  and,
in  shapes  largely  borrowed  and  spiritualised  from
Oriental  tradition,  it  is  exceedingly  popular  to-day.^

1  Such,  I  mean,  as  the  kinship  of  man  and  the  brute  creation.
Cf.  also  Cornford,  From  Religion,  p.  162  ff.

2  Dr.  McTaggart's  advocacy  of  it  on  strict  philosophical  grounds
is  familiar  to  students  {Studies  in  Hegelian  Cosmology,  sect.  41  ff.).
I  may  draw  attention  here  to  a  difficulty  which  Mr.  Bradley  mentions,
nearly  following  Plato,  Rep.  611  A.  "A  constant  supply  of  new
souls,  none  of  which  ever  perished,  would  obviously  land  us  in  an
insoluble  difficulty"  (the  universe  being  held  incapable  of  increase)
{Appearance,  ed.  2,  502).  It  would  follow  that  some  souls  must
perish,  or  be  used  over  again  as  in  metempsychosis.


268  DESTINY  OF  THE  FINITE SELF  lect.

The  satisfaction  which  it  unquestionably  affords
to  many  minds  is  founded,  I  imagine,  on  one  specific
and  one  general  presumption.

The  specific  presumption,  on  which  Plato,  for
example,  insists,  lies  just  in  not  taking  the  doctrine
in  bitter  earnest  according  to  the  views  of  common
sense.  Life  is  separated  from  life,  according  to  one
form  of  his  story,  not  only  by  a  period  of  reward
and  punishment,  but  by  the  draught  of  the  water  of
forgetfulness.  But  you  can  drink  of  it  more  or  less,
according  to  your  self-restraint,  and  it  matters  to
the  future  how  much  or  how  little  you  drink.  That
is  to  say,  somehow,  though  not  through  a  self-
conscious  continuity,  the  character  of  each  indivi-
dual's life  makes  more  or  less  difference  to  the  lives
of  those  other  individuals  ("  other  "  as  we  commonly
name  and  regard  them)  who  are  his  successors  in
the  chain  of  existence.  Advocates  of  this  conception
point  to  the  fact  that  character  and  the  principles  of
knowledge  can  persist  in  the  soul  through  intervals
of  oblivion  and  unconsciousness,  wholly  apart  from
specific  memories  of  the  incidents  of  their  acquisi-
tion. Why,  it  is  asked,  should  they  not  persist
from  life  to  life,  as  they  persist  from  day  to  day,
and  from  youth  to  age,  unimpaired  by  intervals  of
unconsciousness  and  by  the  loss  of  particular
memories  ?  Such  a  conception  affords,  to  minds
of  any  elevation,  a  motive  for  self-improvement
which  for  them  is  all  the  stronger  that  it  is  wholly
divorced  from  ideas  of  personal  self-satisfaction  in
a  future  world. ^


^  It  is  perhaps  hardly  necessary  now  to  point  out  that  Plato's
colloquial  reference  to  a  second  existence  (Rep.  498  D)  concerns  a
second  terrestrial  life.


IX  THE CONSERVATION  OF VALUES  269

The  difficulty  is  to  accept  this  transition  through
an  impersonal  phase.  Probability  suggests  that  as
there  is  bodily  transmission  of  qualities,  it  is  super-
fluous to  imagine  any  other.  Then  a  soul  would
carry  nothing  with  it,  and  if  the  conception  of  a
soul's  character  is  completely  abandoned  the  satis-
faction afforded  by  this  kind  of  belief  in  continuance
is  less  easy  to  account  for.  It  then  comes  to  be
fairly  represented  by  Leibniz's  comparison  of  the
"  King  of  China."  ^  It  is  taken  in  bitter  earnest,  and
we  can  hardly  see  how  continuity,  so  construed,
even  if  referred  to  a  continuous  substance,"^  has  any
element  of  personal  immortality.

Yet  it  is  unquestionable  that  this  mere  name,  as
we  may  think  it,  of  continued  identity,  does  convey
to  many  minds  a  certain  reassurance,  and  I  do  not
doubt  that  the  only  possible  explanation  of  the  fact
lies  in  the  general  presumption  to  which  I  referred
above.

This  I  take  to  consist  in  the  underlying  convic-
tion that  such  identity  is  the  pledge  and  symbol
that  the  values  of  our  life  are  one  with  those  of  the
world,  and  that  therefore  what  we  have  set  our
hearts  on  is  continued  from  and  beyond  our  life
into  the  future  of  the  universe. "  I shall  live  on

1  Leibniz  criticising  Descartes,  cit.  in  Latta's  Leibniz  {The
Monadology,  etc.),  225  note.  "  This  immortality  without  recollection
is  ethically  quite  useless  ;  for  it  is  inconsistent  with  reward  and
punishment.  [This  reason  surprises  us.]  What  good,  sir,  would  it  do
you  to  become  King  of  China,  on  condition  that  you  forget  what  you
liave  been  ?  Would  it  not  be  the  same  as  if  God  at  the  moment
He  destroyed  you  were  to  create  a  king  in  China?"  Not  that
Leibniz  himself  believed  that  a  mind  could  entirely  forget  {pp.  cit.
p.  258).

2  See  Dr.  McTaggart,  Hegelian  Cosmology.,  sect.  41  fif.  But
Dr.  McTaggart  endows  the  substance  with  those  persistent  characters
referred  to  above.


270  DESTINY  OF THE FINITE SELF  lect.

In  another,"  so  many  seem  to  feel,  and  though  I,
as  I  am,  shall  never  know  it,  yet  it  will  be  myself,
for  what  is  being  accomplished  in  me  will  be  carried
on  in  that  other.  ^  This  amounts  to  that  belief  in
an  eternal  real,  which  on  the  whole  sustains  our
valuations,"  to  which  I  referred  above,  and  I  submit
that  at  least  all  the  doctrines  of  survival  which  we
have  so  far  discussed  acquire  their  reassuring  force
from  being  concrete  cases  in  which  this  belief  is
incarnate.
Nhvvana  r^. In  the  couception  of  Nirwana,  whatever  may

absorption  be  its  prccise  formulation  in  Oriental  Divinity,  we
in  God.  ^^^  hardly  fail  to  recognise  an  absorption  of  the  finite
self  incompatible  with  its  self-conscious  continuance.
Yet  the  enormous  range  and  influence  of  doc-
trines which  deny  a  conscious  personal  survival
show  that  they  correspond  to  some  fundamental
need  of  human  nature.  "If  you  ask,"  the  writer
has  heard  an  experienced  Anglo-Indian  say,  "if
you  ask  any  native  of  India,  from  the  most  ignorant
to  the  most  highly  cultured,  what  he  expects  from
his  religion,  he  will  answer  with  the  same  word,
'  Liberation.' "  Thus  we  are  still  in  presence  of
our  main  presumption.  The  fundamental  need  of
human  nature  is  to  be  assured  of  its  continuity,  at
its  best,  with  an  analogous  best  of  the  universe.
Nirwana,  indeed,  however  positively  it  may  be  con-
strued, remains  a  very  different  thing  from  our
Absolute  with  its  appearances. Yet  there  can  be

1  See  footnote  above,  p.  266,  on  the  sense  of  continuance  in
children.  The  conception  seems  to  me  better  fulfilled  in  spiritual
heirship,  as  in  inheritance  of  a  work  or  of  ideas,  than  in  any  form  of
metempsychosis.

2  The  conservation  of  values.  To  identify  this  with  the  survival
of  persons  seems  to  me  quite  unjustifiable.


IX  THE  HEART  OF  THE DESIRE?  271

little  doubt  as  to  its  logical  nature.  It  is  an  attempt
to  conceive  the  highest  identification  with  the
Absolute,  rejecting  as  pure  illusion  all  its  appear-
ances. Now  if  the  best  has  been  thus  defectively-
interpreted,  that  is  an  error  in  ethical  and  logical
insight,  which  cannot  destroy,  and  never  has  been
found  to  destroy,  the  force  of  the  central  conviction.
The  demand,  we  saw,  in  this,  its  negative  form,
is  still  for  Liberation  ;  for  the  ideal  and  complete
satisfaction  of  unmixed  and  unconditional  affirma-
tion of  the  self.  And  this,  it  is  confidently  believed
by  the  supporters  of  such  a  doctrine,  the  universe
has  to  bestow,  although  in  many  influential  forms
of  the  creed  the  liberation  becomes  not  an  absorp-
tion of  the  self  in  the  more  concrete,  but  the
annihilation  of  it  in  an  abstraction.

It  is  easy  to  criticise  the  logic  and  ethics  of  such
a  doctrine.  But  the  fact  remains  unshaken  that  a
large  portion  of  the  human  race  ask  no  better
destiny  than  to  be  lost  in  the  Universe  or  in  God.
Their  real  desire  clashes  with  their  nominal  self,
and  for  the  sake  of  their  real  desire  they  are  willing
to  abandon  what  they  are  accustomed  to  call  their
personality.

4.  We  have  now  passed  in  review  certain  wide-  Theques-
spread  beliefs,  in  each  of  which  considerable  groups  f^her  ^
of  mankind  have  held,  and  still  or  even  increasingly  *=°"^'^'^''*^'^-
hold,  that  they  can  satisfy  their  yearning  for  what
is  beyond  their  present  self.

It  appeared  to  us  that,  literally  taken,  none  of
them  were  genuinely  commensurate  with  the  desire
which  all  of  them  recognise,  but  that  their  strength
really  lay  in  being  incarnations  of  a  fundamental
instinct  towards  the  identification  of  the  self  with


272  DESTINY  OF  THE  FINITE SELF  lect.

ultimate  reality.  This  discussion  was  to  serve  as
an  introduction  to  the  explicit  treatment  of  the
former  of  the  two  questions  raised  at  the  beginning
of  this  chapter,  viz.  whether  we  can  frame  any  idea
what  degree  of  transformation  of  the  self  is  com-
patible with  what  we  should  recognise  as  our  own
continuance  ;  or,  in  a  word,  what  immortality  can
we  desire  if  we  make  our  desires  self-consistent  ?  ^

The  question  is  not  one  of  mere  data,  to  be
answered  by  the  collection  of  opinions,  and  its
interest  is  not  one  of  mere  curiosity.  It  is  a  meta-
physical issue  ;  whether  the  elements  that  enter  into
our  longing  for  personal  immortality  are  consistent
with  each  other,  and  whether  or  in  what  form  the
desire,  therefore,  is  consistent  with  itself.  It  may
be  that  if  it  is  to  be  justified  by  criticism — that  is,
by  being  exhibited  as  an  inevitable  outcome  of  our
nature  as  a  whole — it  must  undergo  a  modification
of  its  current  shape.  Even  when  so  modified  it  is
not  by  itself  an  infallible  argument  for  the  reality  of
its  satisfaction.  But  without  being  so  modified,  it
is  self-destructive,  and  goes  no  way  to  prove  any
satisfaction  of  it  at  all.'
Simple  a. In  the  first  place,  should  we  accept  as  a  satis-

proionga-  f^^^j^j^  ^f  q^j.  longing  for  immortality  a  certainty  of
hsti?to  ^^^  unending  prolongation  of  our  present  existence  }
chain  of Here  two  difficulties  stand  in  the  way  of  an  answer.

lives  ?  ^

1  Always  bearing  in  mind  that  we  are  sure  to  begin  with  of  our  eternal
reality  as  an  element — I  do  not  say  a  member — in  the  Absolute,  and
of  the  recognition  of  values,  on  the  whole  agreeing  with  ours,  through-
out its  appearances.  The  question  of  "  immortality  "  is  a  question
about  a  further  temporal  appearance  more  or  less  intimately  related
to  our  present  self,  but  in  no  way  affects  our  present  or  our  eternal
reality  in  the  Absolute.

-  Cf.  Mr.  Bradley's  well-known  note  on  the  argument  from  the
affections,  Appearance,  ed.  2,  p.  509.


IX  NOT  MORE, BUT  BETTER  273

The  first  is  the  question  of  the  conditions  impHed
in  the  offer.  Are  we  to  be  guaranteed  happiness,
or  are  we  to  take  our  chance  in  the  ups  and  downs  of
human  destiny,  or  even  to  experience  the  prolonga-
tion of  some  one  among  the  most  miserable  of
human  lives  ?  Again,  how  are  the  phases  of  life,
infancy,  youth,  and  age  to  be  dealt  with  ?  Are  they
not  something  more  than  a  biological  accident  ?
Are  they  not  a  logical  necessity  ?  And  if  so,  how
are  they  to  be  adjusted  to  an  unending  existence  ?  ^
As  to  the  former  difficulty,  there  may  be  minds
which  think  that  they  would  welcome  an  endless
prolongation  of  commonplace  comfort,  or,  more
reasonably,  of  the  natural  progress  of  an  energetic
spirit,  following  the  changes  of  the  centuries.  But
we  must  remember  that  any  such  conditions  of
prolongation  are  themselves  of  the  nature  of  a
bargain,  by  which  something  is  offered  which  in
ordinary  experience  cannot  be  counted  secure.
Even  they,  I  mean,  involve  more  security  of  pro-
gress than  ordinary  existence  affords.  And  when
we  turn  to  the  conspectus  of  everyday  life,  we  find
that  \ls  prima  facie  unhappiness  and  insecurity  have
been  the  very  mainspring  of  the  desire  for  some-
thing beyond.  Compensation  for  misery,  or  at  least
a  sure  refuge  from  it,  the  cure  and  ending  of  sin,
even  when  misconceived  as  retribution,  and  in  minds
which  see  their  want  more  clearly  the  nearer  approach
to  God,  or,  by  a  logical  error,  a  self-affirmation
pure  from  appearances,  and  so  from  everything —
these are the principal shapes adopted by the

1  A  deathlessness  which  involves  unending  senility  has  been
adequately  treated,  I  presume,  by  Swift  and  Tennyson.  Homer,  in
the  wish  or  promise  of  deathlessness,  is  careful  to  exclude  old  age.

T


274  DESTINY  OF  THE FINITE SELF  lfxt.

instinct  of  perpetuity.  And  surely  they  betray  its
ultimate  nature.  The  question  is  metaphysically
the  old  one  of  satisfaction  in  the  unending  series
contrasted  with  that  in  the  self-contained  whole ;
and  the  philosophical  answer  is  given  in  Plato's
SyviposhmL  and  Hegel's  Category  of  Life.  The
longing  for  continuance  is  at  bottom  the  longing
for  the  satisfactory  whole ;  and  we  have  seen,  I
think,  that  this  character  is  verifiable  in  it  when  we
come  to  criticise  the  commonest  desire  for  a  further
life.  What  we  want  is  never  merely  something
more,  but  always  something  better,  if  only  in  its
greater  security.

The  second  difficulty  is  at  least  a  matter  of
curiosity,  and  also,  I  think,  has  philosophical
significance.  Is  not  the  chain  of  lives,  which  we
have  already  discussed,  the  only  conceivable  form
for  an  unending  temporal  existence?  Must  we  not
suppose  the  finite  being  to  be  finite  in  its  power  of
reception  and  development,  and  to  pass  through
phases,  of  the  type  which  we  know  as  infancy,  youth,
and  age,  appropriate  to  the  degree  of  the  burden
which  experience  progressively  lays  upon  it  ?  And
although  we  may  imagine  ad  libiturn  the  phases  of
youth  and  growth  to  be  lengthened  out,  yet  must
we  not  conceive  in  the  end  an  arrest  of  development
and  an  overburdened  state,  such  as  we  call  senility  ?
It  is  this  that  the  chain  of  lives,  with  the  periodical
fresh  start  in  an  advancing  environment,  seems
successfully  to  avoid.  It  secures  not  indeed  per-
petual but  periodic  youth,  and  also  a  periodic  fresh
look  at  the  world,  or  new  departure.  The  old,  how-
ever great  and  familiar  his  experience,  can  never
again  acquire  a  first  impression  from  its  totality.


IX PERSONAL IDENTITY  A MORE OR  LESS 275

If  this  suggestion  were  sound,  we  might  rely
here  on  our  previous  discussions  of  the  chain  of
Hves,  and  on  our  conclusion  that  satisfaction  in  such
a  conception  rests  either  on  the  special  presumption
of  spiritual  progress  from  life  to  life,  or  else  on  the
general  presumption  that  such  an  arrangement
guarantees  an  open  chance  at  least  of  approxima-
tion to  the  ultimate  satisfaction.  The  latter,  as
well  as  the  former,  is  definitely  stated  by  Plato,  as
well  as  in  Oriental  religion.^  If  a  chain  of  lives
is  the  only  logical  mode  of  conceiving  a  highly
prolonged  existence  analogous  to  our  own,  we  may
apply  these  conclusions  directly  to  all  our  desires
for  such  an  existence.  But  even  if  this  latter
speculation  were  ill-founded,  the  truth  which  has
always  been  recognised  stands  fast.  What  we
really  care  about  is  not  a  simple  prolongation  of  our
"  personal  "  existence,  but,  whether  accompanying
prolongation  or  in  the  direct  form  of  liberation,  some
affirmation  of  our  main  interests,  or  some  refuge
from  the  perpetual  failure  of  satisfaction.

/3. The  problem,  how  far  such  a  desire  can  be  Thede-
consistent  with  the  desire  for  what  we  call  personal  ZtH^rstlte.
immortality,  is,  as  we  said,  the  problem  of  transfer-  J^enuty  °^
mation. How  far  is  the  desire  for  complete  self-  and  per-

'■  fection.

affirmation  compatible  with  the  desire  for  the
continuance  of  what  we  call  the  self — what  we
indicate  to  ourselves  and  others  by  our  proper
name  ?  ^'  Any  suggestion  of  an  answer  must  hinge
upon  the  consideration  that  personal  identity — the

1  I  mean  in  as  far  as  the  succession  of  lives  is  regarded  as  capable
of  leading  up  to  a  goal  beyond  the  succession.

2  Ifi  Memoriam  includes  a  study  of  this  question,  though  not
in  philosophical  form.  See  Professor  A.  C.  Bradley's  Commentary,
pp.  47-48.


276  DESTINY  OF  THE  FINITE SELF  lect.


continuity  of  the  self — is  a  matter  of  degree,  and
is  conditioned  by  the  stages  of  the  personality  which
we  are  calling  upon  it  to  connect.  Therefore  when
we  raise  the  question  of  personal  continuance  in  a
further  existence,  it  is  arbitrary  to  limit  the  amount
of  change  which  we  are  ready  to  accept  by  our
current  judgment  of  what  constitutes  personal
identity  under  the  conditions  of  existence  which  we
know.  We  have  noted  ^  the  current  tendency  to
exaggerate  the  claims  of  negative  or  exclusive
elements  in  the  self.  We  observed  a  difference
between  the  formal  distinctness,  or  apparent  indi-
viduality, and  the  material  or  substantial  stuff  and
content  of  unity,  the  element  of  true  individuality,
which  to  some  extent  conflict  in  the  normal  self.'
It  is  the  same  contrast  which  was  referred  to  in  the
previous  section  when  we  contrasted  our  self  with
our  best.

Now  if  we  accept  the  current  estimate  of  the
normal  person  as  to  what  his  personal  continuance
involves,  we  are  at  the  mercy  of  a  demand  which
rests  mainly  on  his  exclusive  self-feeling  or  formal
individuality.  It  is  true  that  his  best,  his  real  self,
lies  elsewhere.  But,  as  we  saw,  the  best  and  the
self  are  often  felt  to  conflict,  and  even  those  who
have  the  instinct  to  throw  in  their  lot  with  their
best  do  not  in  all  cases  realise  that  in  doing  so  they
are  at  one  with  their  substantial  self.

Thus,  then,  our  desire  for  a  high  perfection  of
the  substantive  individuality  is  pretty  certain  to
conflict  with  the  desire  to  maintain  the  current  and

1  Lect.  II.,  above.

2  The  formal  or  exclusive  self  has  its  proper  place  in  the  sub-
stantial self.  But  that  place  is  not  the  place  which  it  is  most  apt  to
claim.


IX  FULFILMENT  OF  CAPACITY  277

average  relations  of  the  formal  or  exclusive  self.
In  a  critical  reconciliation  of  the  claims  of  our
nature,  how  are  the  two  to  be  brought  together  ?
There  can  be  no  doubt,  according  to  our  previous
analysis,^  that  the  exclusive  self  really  falls  within
the  substantive  self,  consisting  in  elements  of  the
latter  which  tend  to  fix  and  exaggerate  the  necessary
practical  distinction  between  you  and  me.  The
substantive  self  is  the  entire  self-maintaining  content
or  living  world  which  alone  gives  significance  either
to  our  exclusiveness  or  to  our  universality.  Thus
we  conclude  that  in  a  criticised  whole  of  desire  our
current  postulate  of  the  exclusive  personal  identity
which  we  yearn  to  see  maintained  cannot  hold  its
ground  against  the  self- transcendent  impulse  of
individuality  to  complete  itself  and  to  include  what
belongs  to  it.  Perhaps  we  never  know  quite  where
our  satisfaction  lies  until  we  have  achieved  it.  And
here  we  have  an  obvious  instance  of  that  principle.
In  claiming  a  continued  and  better  existence  for
ourselves,  as  we  think  we  are,  we  are  seeking  our
satisfaction  where  a  criticism  of  our  claims  reveals
that  it  is  not  to  be  found.

7. We  may  both test and further explain  this  Discussion

T  c  1  ...,,,.  .of  Green's

Ime  01  argument  by  comparmg  it  with  the  discussion  doctrine  of
of  continued  personality  in  a  writer  most  anxious  st^vat'i^n
to maintain no doctrine  of ultimate satisfaction  "'^p^'^"

sonality.

which  is  not  most  definitely  supported  by  spiritual
experience."

The  whole  discussion  of  man's  ultimate  destiny
is  conducted  by  him  in  subordination  to  the
principles that "all other values are relative  to

^ Lect.  II.,  above.
2  T.  H.  Green,  Prolegomena  to  Ethics^  bk.  iii.  ch.  ii.  init.


278  DESTINY  OF THE FINITE SELF  lect.

value  for,  of,  or  in  a  person,"^  and  "a  capacity,
which  is  nothing  except  as  personal,  cannot  be
realised  in  any  impersonal  modes  of  being."-  And
further,  "a  capacity  consisting  in  a  self-conscious
personality  cannot  be  supposed  so  to  pass  away"
[as,  e.g.,  the  capacities  of  myriads  of  animals  may].
"  We  cannot  believe  in  there  being  a  real  fulfilment
of  such  a  capacity  in  an  end  which  should  involve
its  extinction,  because  the  conviction  of  there  being
an  end  in  which  our  capacities  are  fulfilled  is  founded
on  our  self-conscious  personality — on  the  idea  of  an
absolute  value  in  a  spirit  which  we  ourselves  are."^
And  again,  such  a  fulfilment  involves  a  society.
"Without  society,  no  persons."  The  statement  is
as  clear  and  strong  as  any  believer  in  personal
immortality  could  demand.

But  there  is  another  side.  Membership  of  a
society  "implies  confinement  in  our  individual
realisation  of  the  idea."  ..."  No  one  so  confined,
it  would  seem,  can  exhibit  all  that  the  Spirit,  work-
ing in  and  through  him,  properly  and  potentially
is.  Yet  is  not  such  confinement  the  condition  of
the  only  personality  that  we  know  ?  "  ^

The  author  here  fully  emphasises  the  discrep-
ancy between  a  given  personality  in  human  society
and  the  complete  realisation  of  spiritual  capacity.
But  throughout  the  discussion  he  has  in  mind,
chiefly  though  not  exclusively,  the  contrast  between
any  speculation  on  a  perfected  condition  of  the
human  race  in  what  is  called  civilisation,  and  the
real  spiritual  gain  of  character  and  developed
capacity  in  the  human  individuals  who  compose  the

^  L.c.  sect.  184.  ^  Ibid.  sect. 185.

3 Sect.  189.  4  Sect.  183.


IX  SOCIAL  FUNCTION— A LIMITATION  279

race  or  people  in  question.  He  is  dwelling  on  the
danger  that  by  a  want  of  clearness  in  conception
the  former,  which  is  valueless  per  se,  may  be  mis-
taken for  the  latter,  which  alone  has  value.  This  is
so  far  a  question  of  the  contrast  between  impersonal
conditions  below  self-consciousness,  and  a  self-con-
scious personality.  This  is  quite  a  different  thing
from  the  contrast  between  personality  as  limited  in
an  earthly  society,  and  an  experience  which  may
be  conceived  in  various  degrees  to  transcend  the
limitations  of  such  a  personality.  The  latter  dis-
tinction has  grave  importance  for  the  moral  and
religious  consciousness,  because  it  enables  us  to
deal  finally  both  with  the  hostile  reproach  of  Agnos-
ticism and  the  crude  insistence  on  "personal  "  identity
which  condemns  as  Agnosticism  everything  but
itself.

And  this  latter  contrast  was  not  unnoticed  by
the  author  I  am  quoting.  To  make  his  position
and  our  inference  plain,  I  will  cite  two  passages  at
length.

"  There  may  be  reason  to  hold,"  he  writes,^
"  that  there  are  capacities  of  the  human  spirit  not
realisable  in  persons  under  the  conditions  of  any
human  society  that  we  know,  or  can  positively  con-
ceive, or  that  may  be  capable  of  existing  on  the
earth.  Such  a  belief  may  be  warranted  by  the  con-
sideration on  the  one  hand  of  the  promise  which
the  spirit  gives  of  itself,  both  in  its  actual  occasional
achievement  and  in  the  aspirations  of  which  we  are
individually  conscious,  on  the  other  hand  of  the
limitations  which  the  necessity  of  confinement  to
a particular  social function seems to impose on

1 Sect. 185.


28o  DESTINY  OF THE FINITE SELF  lect.

individual  attainment.  We  may  in  consequence
justify  the  supposition  that  the  personal  life,  which
historically  or  on  earth  is  lived  under  conditions
which  thwart  its  development,  is  continued  in  a
society,  with  which  we  have  no  means  of  communi-
cation through  the  senses,  but  which  shares  in  and
carries  further  every  measure  of  perfection  attained
by  men  under  the  conditions  of  life  that  we  know.
Or  we  may  content  ourselves  with  saying  that  the
personal  self-conscious  being,  which  comes  from
God,  is  for  ever  continued  in  God."  And  then
follows  the  sentence  previously  cited — the  negative
assurance  at  any  rate  must  remain — that  "  a  capacity,
which  is  nothing  except  as  personal,  cannot  be
realised  in  any  impersonal  modes  of  being."  In
this  case  the  exclusion  of  impersonality  expresses
the  nature  of  the  highest  conceivable  forms  of  being,
and  not  merely  excludes  those  forms  which  are
below  self-consciousness.

Here,  I  think,  we  begin  to  see  that  the  fulfilment
of  the  personal  conscious  being  may  lie  rather  in
that  which  it  would  most  wish  to  be  assured  of —
its  fundamental  interests — being  eternally  real  in
an  ultimate  being  and  in  the  universe  of  appear-
ances, than  in  itself,  with  the  formal  personality
which  belonged  to  its  proper  name,  being  con-
sciously perpetuated  in  a  prolonged  existence.

So  in  a  further  passage.  The  idea  of  human
development,  as  a  demand  involved  in  self-con-
sciousness, implies  the  eternal  realisation  for  or  in
the  eternal  mind  of  the  capacities  gradually  revealed
in  time.  "  When  that  which  is  being  developed  is
itself  a  self-conscious  subject,  the  end  of  its  becoming
must  really  exist  not  merely /<?r,  but  in  or  as,  a  self-


OUR  PERSONALITY  OR  A PERSONALITY 281


conscious  subject.  There  must  be  eternally  such
a  subject  which  is  all  that  the  self-conscious  subject,
as  developed  in  time,  has  the  possibility  of  becom-
ing ;  in  which  the  idea  of  the  human  spirit,  or  all
that  it  has  in  itself  to  become,  is  completely  realised.
This  consideration  may  suggest  the  true  notion  of
the  spiritual  relation  in  which  we  stand  to  God  ;
that  He  is  not  merely  a  Being  who  has  made  us,
in  the  sense  that  we  exist  as  an  object  of  the  divine
consciousness  in  the  same  way  in  which  we  must
suppose  the  system  of  nature  so  to  exist,  but  that
He  is  a  Being  in  whom  we  exist ;  with  whom  we
are  in  principle  one  ;  with  whom  the  human  spirit
is  identical,  in  the  sense  that  He  is  all  which  the
human  spirit  is  capable  of  becoming."  ^

The  important  point  for  our  argument  lies  in
the  conception  that  the  ultimate  being  can  be  con-
ceived as  comprehending  in  itself  the  human  spirit
and  all  that  it  is  capable  of  becoming.'

The  necessity  insisted  on  throughout  that  the
goal  of  development  shall  be  nothing  short  of  a
personal  self-consciousness,  does  not,  I  think,  signify
for  the  author  in  the  last  resort  an  emphasis  on  the
conscious  continuance  of  you  or  me,  with  unbroken
identity,  keeping  us  one  with  an  earthly  past,  within
or  into  the  ultimate  being.  In  the  last  resort  I
believe  that  it  means  simply  and  solely  this :  that
the  contents,  the  interests,  the  qualitative  experi-
ence and  focussing  of  externality,  which  are  our  bpst
— i.e.  our  whole  in  its  fullest  adjustment — and  the

1  Sect.  187.

2  Cf.  sect.  189.  It  is  clearly  repugnant  to  Green  to  think  of
"persons — agents  who  are  ends  to  themselves" — being  "extin-
guished." But  the  question  is,  what  sort  of  destiny  is  held  to  imply
extinction  ?


282  DESTINY  OF  THE  FINITE SELF  lect.

centre  of  our  being,  for  which  so  far  as  we  under-
stand ourselves  we  would  readily  sacrifice  our
nominal  self — that  all  these  things  find  their  full
development  in  the  ultimate  being,  and  in  a  form
of  experience  not  lower,  but  higher  than  what  we
call  personality.  In  a  word,  then,  what  is  held
essential  is  not  primarily  that  the  goal  of  develop-
ment should  be  our  personality,  but  that  it  shall  be
a  personality  ;  and  the  doctrine  has  nothing  against
its  being  more  than  a  personality,  so  long  as  in  it
all  that  constituted  ourself  can  have  fuller  justice
done  to  it  than  in  our  given  self  it  ever  could  have.
We,  both  our  form — I  mean,  our  peculiarly  quali-
fied individual  self-consciousness — and  our  content
— I  mean,  our  interests  and  experiences — are  thus
real  and  eternal  in  the  ultimate  being.  And  this
satisfies  the  condition  which  the  author  lays  down,
and  is,  I  think,  what  he  means  to  treat  as  the
ultimate  necessity  when  he  speaks  of  the  personal
self-consciousness  that  came  from  God  being  for
ever  continued  in  God.  The  terms  of  the  sentence
2iX^  prima  facie  in  some  degree  conflicting.  Their
combination  needs  some  interpreting  ;  and  I  believe
that  our  conclusion  gives  the  right  and  inevitable
interpretation.  I  will  now  try  to  justify  it  further.
Details  S. In the  first  place,  there is  every  reason  to

illustrating  r 11  i •  i

transcend-  suppose,  and  common  sense  tuUy  admits,  that  we
g"ven°per-  do  not  know  with  any  approach  to  completeness
sonahty.  even  what  we  ourselves,  in  our  present  finite  being,
actually  are.  As  it  was  suggested  above,  if  Shake-
speare were  to  depict  us  truly  to  ourselves,  we
might  hardly  recognise  the  portrait.  A  fortiori,
when  we  had  come  to  know  ourselves  far  more
truly,  and  that  not  as  we  are  now,  but  in  a  more


IX  PARENTS OF THE TWICE-BORN  283

perfect  being,  our  present  state,  then  our  past,
would  not  appear  to  us  in  the  least  as  it  does  to-day.
Even  within  actual  life  our  past  may  appear  to  us
a  hostile  not-self;  and  it  would  be  so  still  more
if  we  assume  a  progress  towards  perfection.  We
should  know  that  there  had  been  a  creature  with
such  and  such  a  history,  but  we  should  only  recog-
nise a  very  imperfect  continuity  between  its  parti-
cular features  and  our  surviving  self.

This  argument  may  be  driven  further.  I  have
suggested  elsewhere  that  in  a  total  or  partial
completion  of  our  being,  which  would  necessarily  be
desired  in  desiring  a  progressive  satisfaction  of  its
nature,  elements  would  have  to  be  included  which
now  appear  to  belong  solely  to  the  minds  of  others.
Obviously,  the  separation  on  which  suffering  and
despondency  so  largely  depend,  between  labour
and  effort  in  one  mind  and  its  recognition  and
effect  in  other  minds,  would  tend  to  pass  away,  as
it  does  in  part  within  our  common  experience,  by
every  diminution  of  the  impotence  which  constitutes
our  tiniteness.  But  this  being  so,  the  mere  formal
link  with  our  past  formal  personality  would  be
progressively  weakened.  We  should  include  much
more  material,  and  lose  something  of  our  exclusive-
ness.  This  is  an  effect  which  we  know  very  well
by  the  name  of  spiritual  heirship  and  the  second
birth.  My  present  self  was  not  born,  we  feel,  of
my  actual  parents  at  such  and  such  a  date  and
place.  It  was  born  when  I  met  such  a  friend  or
was  taught  by  such  a  teacher,  or  was  awakened  by
such  an  experience.  Suppose  us  now  free  of  our
original  body,  and  uttering  ourselves  through  a
new  arrangement  of  qualities,  admitting  of  a  wholly


284  DESTINY  OF THE  FINITE  SELF  lect.

new  distribution  and  apportionment  of  experiences.^
The  psychological  basis  of  continued  identity  on  its
formal  side,  the  mere  continuity  of  feeling,  would
be  gone  with  the  body.  The  overweight  of  the
material,  the  content,  the  interests  and  experiences,
as  against  the  mere  identity,  would  become  more
and  more  emphatic.  And,  in  a  word,  the  very
fulfilment  of  the  self  would  be  favourable  indeed  to
personality,  but  unfavourable  to  its  formal  identity.
I  am  not  saying,  it  should  be  observed,  that  our
true  personality  lies  in  our  defects,  and  that  with
their  removal  it  must  be  annihilated.^  I  am  trying
to  give  the  true  meaning  of  the  considerations
pointing  in  this  direction,  on  which  commonplace
mysticism  relies,^  and  which  will  certainly  force  us
to  abandon  the  higher  personality  if  they  are  not
confronted  with  a  fuller  interpretation.  What  I
am  urging  is  rather  that  our  true  personality  lies  in
our  concrete  best,  and  that  in  desiring  its  develop-
ment and  satisfaction  we  are  desiring  an  increase  of
our  real  individuality,  though  a  diminution  of  our
formal  exclusiveness."*

And  on  this  follows  a  further  conclusion.  Be-
cause we  wish  our  self  to  be  developed  to  its  fullest,

1  Cf.  Appearance^  p.  529,  on  readjustment  and  supplementation
of  the  self.

"  See  on  question  whether  Self-Consciousness  is  a  defect,  Prin-
ciple, Lect.  VI.

3  "  Earth,  these  soHd  stars,  this  weight  of  body  and  Hmb,

Are  they  not  sign  and  symbol  of  thy  division  from  Him  ?"
Tennyson's  Higher  Pantheism.

4  It  will  be  rejoined  that  true  individuality — greatness  of  range
and  organisation — augments  personal  distinction  as  well  as  com-
prehensiveness. Undoubtedly  ;  but  it  decreases  exclusiveness.  The
great  world-men  are  not  born  simply  of  their  earthly  parents.  Whole
ages  and  countries  are  focussed  in  them.  Schiller — I  think  Goethe  has
said — in  a  brief  time  "grew  so  that  you  would  hardly  know  him  again."


IX  ''WHOSE WIFE SHALL SHE  BE?"  285

and  to  draw  into  it  from  without  all  that  belongs  to
its  satisfaction,  the  temporal  and  spatial  incidents
by  which  simple  or  so-called  numerical  identity
might  seem  to  be  guaranteed,  actually  lose  their
applicability  to  the  fulfilment  of  what  we  long  for.
Details  of  place  and  time  cannot  be  predicated  of  a
being  developed  as  we  demand  that  our  self  shall
develop.  When  we  think  out  what  would  satisfy
us  as  the  perfected  being  of  Dante  or  Wordsworth,
we  see  that  their  proper  names  and  private  histories
would  no  longer  be  true  of  it.  Dante's  own  treat-
ment of  Beatrice  may  serve  to  illustrate.  The
historical  figure  is  submerged  in  the  meaning.
The  detailed  determinations  are  not  lost  or  ab-
stracted from,  but  they  are  absorbed  in  significance,
just  as  we  saw  to  be  the  case  with  the  features  of  the
landscape  which  animates  Dante's  poem.^  In  desir-
ing a  highly  developed  perfection  we  are  desiring  to
be  something  which  can  no  longer  be  identified
either  with  or  by  the  incidents  of  the  terrestrial  life.

e.  It  at  once  suggests  itself  that  the  relations  of  Argument
finite  individuals  in  love  and  duty  form  perhaps  the  Affections.
most  valuable  constituent  of  our  "  best  "  ;  and  it  will
be  asked  if  we  suggest  that,  for  desires  which  involve
the  readjustment  and  expansion  of  personality,  these
are  to  cease  to  have  a  meaning.  But,  on  the  con-
trary, it  seems  clear  that  a  desire  for  the  perfection —
the  harmony  and  self-consistency — of  these  relations
themselves  is  the  most  obvious  case  of  desire  for  an
experience  which  cannot  at  a  higher  level  stand  as
it  is  given.  The  case  put  by  the  Sadducees  to
Jesus,  along  with  his  answer,  remains  typical.^ The

1  Principle,  Lect.  VII.
2  .See  Bradley,  Appearance,  p.  509,  referred  to  above.


286  n EST/ An''  OF THE FINITE SELF  lect.

mother,  again,  does  not  long  to  meet  once  more
the  child  she  has  lost,  as  a  complete  and  perfected
personality.  What  she  longs  for  is  the  child.  Yet
we  cannot  consistently  desire  that  for  her  sake  the
infant  should  remain  an  infant  to  all  eternity.  In  a
word,  our  conflicting  duties  and  affections  form  a
splendid  content  for  our  finite  life  of  self-discipline
and  self-sacrifice.  But  if  we  demand  a  fuller  com-
pleteness and  satisfaction,  then  it  would  seem  that
the  limited  self-identity,  out  of  which  the  complica-
tions of  affection  arise,  must  be  modified,  and  there
must  be  a  system  which  can  include  the  whole  of
our  experiences  without  failure  or  waste.  "  The
whole  of  our  experiences "  ;  it  is  easy  to  base  a
partial  view  of  a  future  destiny  on  idealised  cases  of
non-conflicting  affection  ;  but  we  have  to  include
the  instances  which  are  the  prey  of  accident,  con-
flicting tendencies,  and  isolation.  Our  desire  for
the  solution  of  all  these  seems  inconsistent  with  a
desire  that  we  should  remain  what  we  are.  We
are  bound  to  aim,  in  our  longings,  at  some  sort  of
system  in  which  the  whole  affections  of  every  being
should  be  harmonised  with  each  other,  and  dis-
crepancies and  repulsions  should  be  not  merely
omitted,  but  transmuted  into  forms  of  harmony.
But  if  this  is  to  be  what  we  desire,  again  it  follows
that  personalities  must  undergo  material  readjust-
ment, and  their  adequacy  to  one  another  must
involve  a  new  type  of  completeness.^

It  is  needless  to  labour  the  point  further. It  is
perfectly  plain that the desire  for  the  attainment

1  Cf.  Aristotle  on  the  friendship  of  the  good.  Note  the  extra-
ordinarily narrow  limitations  involved  in  a  demand  which,  on  first
hearing,  seems  precisely  to  voice  our  need,  as  in  Lockhart's  lines,
p.  289.


IX  OUR  DESIRE  IS  FOR THE  ABSOLUTE  287

even  of  a  relative  best,  and  the  desire  for  the  con-
tinuance of  the  given  self,  2.r^  prima  facie  at  variance.
But  it  is  all-important  to  be  clear  what  conclusion
we  draw.  It  will  consist  first  in  a  negative  pro-
position, and  secondly  in  a  positive  one,  to  which
a  corollary  of  the  highest  importance  must  be
attached.

5. First, then, we do not conclude that the  conciu-

1 .  ^  1  .  r 1  1  r  r  sion  :  what

desire  lor  the  attamment  01  the  best,  01  perfect  is  certainly
satisfaction,  can  only  be  self-consistent  as  a  desire  fg'^the'^con-
for  the  absorption  and  annihilation  of  the  positive  ^^"^^  ^^^^^^
and  concrete  self.^  js  secure

But,  secondly,  we  do  conclude  that  such  a  desire  Absolute.
is  only  self-consistent  in  as  far  as  it  consents  to
accentuate  the  true  positive  self  of  content,  at  the
expense  of  formal  distinctness,  or  what  I  call  under
protest  numerical  identity,  that  is,  the  identity  with
myself  as  a  bodily  being,  externally  described  by
name  and  terrestrial  history.  I  cannot  desire  my
continuance  as  what  would  seem  to  7?ty  present
consciousness  the  same  personality,  while  also  de-
siring completeness  and  stability  in  my  experience,
due  to  comprehension  of  all  relevant  elements.
More  than  this,  I  cannot  desire,  along  with  a
relative  perfection,  even  such  a  prominence  of  my
terrestrial  individuality  as  would  enable  the  higher
self  to  look  back  and  say,  "  I  am  he  that  was  born
in  such  an  island  at  such  a  date."  For,  as  we  have
seen,  no  such  temporal  and  spatial  characters  could
remain  true  of  the  expanded  being.  They  remain
but  very  scantily  true  on  this  earth  through  three-
score years  and  ten.

1  Cf. Professor  A. C. Bradley, Commentary  on  In  Memoriam.^
pp.  47-48.


288  DESTINY  OF THE  FINITE SELF  lect.

And  lastly,  from  this  latter  statement  it  is  a
corollary  that  in  desiring  a  future  which  will  realise
our  best,  we  are  truly  ready  to  be  content,  if  we
understand  our  own  meaning,  with  the  being  of  the
absolute  Reality.  For  our  formal  self,  our  self  as
given  to-day,  is  not  that  of  which  we  mainly  and
imperatively  demand  the  continuance.  We  demand
what  we  care  for  ;  and  what  we  care  for  are  interests
and  affections  which  carry  us  beyond  our  formal
and  exclusive  self.  And  thus  we  are  and  must  be
prepared,  if  we  in  the  least  consider  our  own  mean-
ing, to  regard  as  the  satisfaction  and  perpetuation
of  our  self  something  which  for  common  sense  is
separated  by  a  gap  from  what  we  indicate  when
we  name  our  proper  name.  Common  sense  itself,
as  we  saw,  will  admit  that  we  can  care  for  what
transcends  us,  more  than  for  our  self.  And  it  is  no
great  step  to  urge  that  only  our  impotence  hinders
us  from  recognising  that  what  we  thus  care  for
most  is  in  deed  and  in  truth  the  essence  of  our  self.

It  is  thus  no  juggle,  no  "  faith  as  vague  as  all
unsweet,"  to  offer  the  eternal  reality  of  the  Absolute
as  that  realisation  of  our  self  which  we  instinctively
demand  and  desire.  It  is  impossible  to  deny  that
there  may  be  future  gradations  of  experience  con-
tinuous with  our  finite  selves  ;  we  know  them  in
our  present  existence,  and  no  one  can  disprove  the
possibility  that  there  are  others  beyond  it.  But  in
any  case  it  is  not  in  principle  the  bare  continuance
of  what  we  now  seem  to  ourselves  to  be,  which  our
heart  is  set  upon.  It  is  not  the  unbrokenness  of
the  link  of  personal  recollection.  It  is  the  security,
the  certainty,  of  the  realisation  of  what  we  care  for
most,  in  the  Absolute  ;  and  this  does  not  mean  in  a


IX  A QUESTION  OF  DEGREE  289

remote  and  supernatural  world,  but  in  the  fullest
experience  and  throughout  the  universe  of  its
appearances.  Whether  "  we  "  are  to  be  aware  of  it,
that  is,  how  far  what  is  or  possesses  the  realisation
is  to  be  consciously  identified  with  our  present  self,
is  really  a  question  of  degree,  of  the  importance  of
the  distinctiveness  of  our  present  self  within  the
whole  in  which  it  is  an  element.  The  fundamental
truth  is  that  it  is  an  element,  and  instinctively
regards  the  eternal  whole  as  its  reality  and  its
satisfaction.^

1  I  subjoin  here  Lockhart's  lines,  referred  to  on  p,  286,  note.
The  last  couplet,  intended  to  ask  for  more  than  we  now  possess,
plainly  asks  for  much  less — one  only  of  many  beauties  and  phases.
Clearly  we  demand  either  all  our  phases,  or  more  than  all.

"  But  'tis  an  old  belief,

That  on  some  solemn  shore.
Beyond  the  sphere  of  grief.

Dear  friends  will  meet  once  more

"  Beyond  the  sphere  of  time.
And  sin,  and  fate's  control,
Serene  in  changeless  prime,
Of  body  and  of  soul.

"That  creed  I  fain  would  keep
That  hope  I'll  not  forego
Eternal  be  the  sleep.
Unless  to  waken  so."


C  THE STABILITY  AND  SECURITY  OF
FINITE SELFHOOD— Con^mued

LECTURE X

THE GATES OF THE FUTURE

"  Un  plan  est  un  terme  assigne  k  un  travail  ;  il  clot  I'avenir  dont
il  dessine  la  forme.  Devant  devolution  de  la  vie,  au  contraire,  les
portes  de  I'avenir  restent  grandes  ouvertes."

Bergson,  Evobition  creatrke,  p.  114.

" . . . da  quel  punto
Che  del  futuro  fia  chiusa  la  porta."

Dante,  Inferno,  x.  108.

Theories  I. In the prcvIous Iccturc we did our best to
make ascertain what the demand for  continuance after
^""^^^^^j^g  death  amounts  to,  if  we  reduce  to  self-consistency
future, {-j^g  finite  being's desires  as  we  find  them in  our-
selves. We  hoped  that  the  result  was  such  as  to
coincide  on  the  whole  with  what  the  nature  of  finite-
ness  inherently  presupposes  and  demands.

And  now  it  seems  desirable,  in  concluding  our
argument,  to  consider  what  attitude  our  theory
seems  to  warrant  towards  the  kindred  problem  of
the  future  of  finite  beings  in  general,  but  primarily  in
what  we  are  accustomed  to  call  "this  life,"  Yet  as
there  is  a  view  which  holds  that  "this  life"  may
altogether  and  universally  pass  into  something
different, we must not omit this alternative in

290


LECT.  X  THE  EXTREME  ATTITUDES  291

Speaking  of  the  earthly  future,  though  it  partly
takes  us  back  over  the  ground  of  the  previous
lecture.

In  theorising  about  the  future  of  finite  beings,  my
object  is  clear  and  limited.  I  am  very  far  from
believing  that  philosophy  confers  the  gift  of  pro-
phecy. Hegel's  famous  disclaimer  expresses  my
doctrine  on  this  point.^  Philosophy  comes  after
the  fact,  and  interprets  it.  It  neither  preaches
nor  predicts.  But  yet  a  philosophical  position  is
definitely  characterised  by  the  attitude  adopted
to  the  course  of  time.  There  are  theories  which
in  one  way  or  another  manage  to  gain  much  sup-
port by  making  heavy  drafts  upon  the  future.  I
am  thoroughly  convinced  that  all  such  theories  are
in  the  eye  of  logic  discredited  ab  initio}  Having
recourse  to  what  is  in  principle  unverifiable,  they
cannot  be  tested,'^  and,  what  is  worse,  they  obstruct
genuine  insight  and  appreciation  of  values.  It  is  a
view  of  finite  life  as  substantially  rooted  in  an  all-
pervading  reality,  and  opposed  to  the  thinness  and
external  motivation  attendant  upon  such  theories,
that  I  desire  in  this  final  lecture  to  elucidate.  My
hope  is  thus  to  complete  an  outline  of  a  philosophy
which  might  express  the  reasonable  faith  of  resolute
and  open-minded  men,  as  suggested  in  the  beginning
of  the  previous  series/

I  take  the  passages  which  stand  at  the  head  of

1  Rechts-Philosophie,  p.  20.

2  See  the  same  criticism  applied  to  theories  of  inappreciable
quantity,  Principle^  Lect.  V.  p.  172.

3  Hdt.  ii.  23  €S  (leaves  rbv  \imBov  dveveiKas  ovk  c^ti  i\i.-yyov .  I
am  aware  of  Mr.  Bradley's  comment  on  the  use  of  the  term
"verifiable,"  Eih.  Studies,  p.  283.  I  mean  by  unverifiable  a  fact  of
the  historical  order,  alleged  as  future.

4  Principle,  p.  30.


292  THE GATES OF THE  FUTURE  lect.

this lecture  as typical of  the current  antagonistic
attitudes  towards  the  future,  that  is,  towards  time.
The  i. On  the  one  side,^  time  is  treated  as  going  on

oAhe  for  ever.  There  can  be  no  plan,  preconceived  or
o"en'^^  preconceivable,  for  a  plan  involves  an  end.  In
Time  a  going  on,  time  not  merely  expresses,  but  is,  the
movement  of  the  real,  that  is  to  say,  of  the  universe.
It  may  be  conceived,  indeed,  not  as  a  mathematical
abstraction,  but  as  a  concrete  super  -  intellectual
experience,  a  creative  growth.  It  is  so  far,  qtta
more  concrete  than  the  object  of  discursive  know-
ledge, akin  to  the  Absolute  as  we  conceive  it.  But
not  only  is  it  not,  as  manifested,  a  whole,  but  there
is  no  whole  for  it  to  manifest.  The  Universe  is
creative  progress  ad  infinitum.  Unity,  if  anywhere,
was  at  the  beginning,  in  the  primal  impulse.  It
may  or  may  not,  so  I  understand  the  doctrine,  be
recovered — "in  the  end"  I  had  almost  said;  but
there  is  no  end,  and  no  completeness,  I  should  have
said,  therefore,  it  may  or  may  not  be  asymptotically
approachable.  Divergence,  novelty,  free  originative-
ness,  and  a  certain  degree  of  indetermination  are
the  principal  laws  of  things.  And  this  is  the  very
source  of  our  freedom  and  of  our  inspiration.  The
open  gates  of  the  future  make  the  interest  and
excitement  of  life.

"  It  may  be  that  the  gulfs  will  wash  us  down :
It  may  be  we  shall  touch  the  happy  isles."

There  is  nothing  fixed, "Tout  est  donne  "  is  the

1  The  particular  text  cited  from  Bergson  refers  directly  to  evolu-
tion in  the  organic  world,  including  man.  I  use  it,  meo  pcriculo,  as
typical  of  a  general  view  which  is  widely  prevalent  to-day,  according
to  which  the  development  of  the  real,  the  universe  itself,  is  plastic
and  progressive  ad  infinitum.


X  THE GOLDEN  AGE TO COME  i<:)i

principle  most  abhorred.  Our  destiny  and  that  of
the  universe  is  really  and  effectively  in  our  own
hands,  with  no  reservation  except  that  the  universe
has  many  other  members  besides  us.  Time,  in  the
sense  of  duration,  is  at  the  very  heart  of  things.

ii. On  the  other  side,  it  is  postulated  that  time  The  Gates
will  one  day  cease. The  plan  of  the  universe  will  one  day.
be  fulfilled. Time  will  pass  into  eternity. Either  ce™e.^°
the number  of  the elect  will  be accomplished,  or
"  good  shall  fall  "

"  At  last,  far  off,  at  last  to  all.
And  every  winter  change  to  spring."

The  difficulty  that  eternity  must  be  inclusive,  and
cannot  have  a  place  after  time,  nor  can  anything
subsequent  in  a  m^ere  series  of  facts  really  and
strictly  compensate  for  or  overbalance  anything
that  is  past,  is  overcome  by  the  suggestion  that  time
may  be  in  truth  an  appearance  of  an  eternal  real,
but  may  be  such  as  one  day  to  be  absorbed  into  the
reality  which  always  underlay  it.  It  may  then  not
so  much  overbalance  the  past  as  transform  it  in  the
light  of  the  whole.  It  is  only  a  modernised  form  of
this  theory  which  suggests  that  the  kingdom  is  to
come  on  earth  as  an  everlasting  millennium.  Under
this  whole  theory,  as  under  the  former,  our  hopes  are
dependent  on  future  events.  If  the  good  time  is
coming,  either  on  earth  or  in  heaven,  then  "the
sufferings  of  this  present  time  are  not  worthy  to  be

compared " We may give up the past and

present,  or  confidently  expect  their  transformation
under  a  light  new  in  principle,  and  not  merely  an
intensification  of  what  we  possess.  The  golden  age
in  the  future  will  make  good  the  heaviest  drafts.


views
agree  in
a  facile
reliance
on  future,


294  THE GATES OF  THE  FUTURE  lect.

These  are  the  two  extremist  views,  both  repre-
senting prima  facie  demands  of  human  nature.  Let
time  be  the  most  real  of  realities,  and  give  us  a
fighting  chance  of  making  over  the  universe  into
something  nearer  to  what  we  take  to  be  our  heart's
desire.  Or  let  time  be  a  minor  incident  or  pheno-
menon in  a  whole,  planned  with  certainty  to  bring
us  in  the  end  to  our  heart's  desire,  whether  on  earth
or  in  heaven.

These  iii. In the broadest sense these two opposite

doctrines  have  a  common  attitude  to  the  future.^
Both  of  them  use  it  as  a  counterbalance  which  they
can  rely  on  to  turn  the  scales  against  any  conceiv-
able amount  of  past  and  present  evil.  Either  "the
world  may  be  as  bad  as  you  please  ;  we  can  re-
model it  ad  libitum'"  ;  or  "the  world  may  be  as  bad
as  you  please  ;  the  sufferings  of  this  present  time  are
not  worthy  to  be  compared."

If,  indeed,  the  passing  suggestion  were  seriously
relied  on,  that  we  may  expect  a  future  which  will
not  overbalance  nor  re-create  in  principle  this  world
as  we  experience  it,  but  will  cast  a  very  considerable
new  light  upon  its  nature — that  doctrine  implies
a  serious  consideration  and  appreciation  of  the
world  as  we  have  it,  and  so  far  forms  a  transition  to
the  point  of  view  we  shall  adopt.

But  looking  to  the  main  logical  motive  of  the
two  doctrines,  I  am  convinced  that  it  is  as  we  have

1  The  difficulty  attaching  to  the  term  "  we  "  or  "  us  "  as  denoting
the  subjects  of  the  future  experience  is  fundamental  for  both  these
views.  If  the  succession  is  to  be  a  reality,  we  should  have  the
happiness  of  some  based  on  the  misery  of  others  {Principle,  p.  18).
If  it  is  not  to  be  a  reality,  but  finite  beings  are  all  to  continue,  or  to
be  phases  of  one  individual,  then  we  get  into  an  order  of  ideas  for
which  the  "  future  "  has  little  meaning.


X  ''IF THE  PROPHET  HAD  BID THEE " 295

represented  it.  I  do  not  hold  that  we  have  nothing
to  gain  from  either.  I  admit  that  much  is  to  be
learned  from  the  idea  of  a  relative  wholeness  of  the
self,  postulated  in  the  doctrine  of  "duration,"  on  the
one  side,  and  that  we  have  no  right  to  rule  out  the
possibility  of  changes  in  finite  life,  beyond  what  we
can  now  imagine,  on  the  other.  But  granting  to
both  sets  of  ideas  this  relative  significance,  I  am
still  convinced  that  by  postulating  unlimited  resources
of  a  facile  kind  they  enter  into  irresistible  tempta-
tions to  neglect  the  arduous  scrutiny  of  what  actual
experience  reveals.  I  believe  what  is  thus  offered
us^  to  be  both  what  we  cannot  prove  and  what
we  do  not  want.  Our  attitude  to  the  open
secret  of  existence  is  thus,  as  I  hold,  seriously
distorted  and  superficialised,  because  such  facile
resources  pauperise  us,  so  to  speak,  and  obstruct  us
in  grasping  the  arduousness  of  reality,  and  therefore,
what  is  the  same  thing,  its  value.  In  what  may  be
called  our  literature  of  happiness — serious  fiction
and  popular  philosophy — the  reliance  on  the  future
has  become,  it  seems  to  me,  an  actual  disease.
There  is  much  recognition  of  the  higher  values,
which  the  best  of  such  literature  itself  reveals  by
an  analysis  of  our  daily  experiences,  but  it  seems
as  if  the  effort  to  concentrate  such  recognition  into
the  straightforward  philosophical  doctrine  which  it
suggests  were  too  difficult  to  be  made.  Or  is  it
perhaps  too  obvious  ?  The  story  of  Naaman  the
Syrian  often  appears  to  me  to  carry  the  moral  most
needed  for  our  civilisation.

2.  We repudiate, then, both of these  extreme
standpoints. We  consider  time as  an  appearance

^  See  Principle,  Preface.


296


THE GATES OF THE  FUTURE


LECT.


Our  ques-
tion is  the
rank  and
value  of
progress
according
to  our
theory.


How  a  non-
temporal
real  can
express
itself  in
an  infinite
temporal
series.


only,  a  position  which  the  former  doctrine  denies,
but,  In  opposition  to  the  latter  doctrine,  as  an
appearance  inseparable  from  the  membership  of
finlteness  In  infinity,  and  therefore  from  the  self-
revelation  of  a  reality  which  as  a  whole  Is  timeless.
We  have  thus  to  assign  a  place  to  progress  within
such  a  whole,  and  as  Its  manifestation.  The  test  of
a  philosophy  In  dealing  with  progress  Is,  I  am  con-
vinced, to  reconcile  the  sense  of  creative  achieve-
ment In  the  self  as  promotion  of  the  good  cause,
with  its  recognition  and  acceptance  of  a  perfection
which  Is  not  won  by  Its  own  finite  activity,  though
represented  In  It — in  shorter  phrase,  to  reconcile
the  attitudes  and  postulates  of  morality  and  of
religion.

I  will  recapitulate,  so  far  as  possible  In  positive
and  non-controversial  form,  the  main  characteristics
which  I  have  tried  to  establish  as  belonging  to  the
perfect  real.  And  from  this  statement  It  will  be
possible,  I  believe,  to  see  convincingly  how  the
attitude  and  demand  of  moral  progress  necessarily
belongs  to  the  members  of  such  a  whole,  but  not  as
an  ultimate  attitude.

I.  We  are  compelled  to  ask  how  a  perfect  whole
can  contain  the  material  of  a  progress  ad  infinitum,
and  all  Its  steps.  The  Infinite  real,  which,  according
to  our  argument,  manifests  itself  through  a  temporal
series.  Is  but  little  akin  to  numerical  Infinity,  even  If
that  could  be  established  as  a  given  reality.  The
real  cannot  be  conceived  as  a  series  or  succession.
It  Is,  as  we  have  seen,  not  numerable.^  A  succes-
sion or  even  a  duration — for  a  duration  Implies  a
succession,  though  a  succession  per  sc  is  not  a  dura-

1  Principle,  Lect.  X.  App.  I.


X  SERIES  AND TRUE  INFINITE  297

tion — a  succession  or  duration  is  an  appearance
which  can  only  be  presented  to  a  consciousness
relatively  split  in  two.^  And  that  must  be  a  finite
consciousness,  a  consciousness  incapable  of  entering
wholly  into  one  experience,  that  is,  again,  of  having
an  experience  which  can  occupy  it  as  a  whole.  Any
analysis^  of  the  sense  of  time  will  establish  the
necessity  of  two  concurrent  lines  or  streams  of
experience  for  its  apprehension.  A  mind  that  was
perfectly  present  to  itself,  that  is  to  say,  that  was
complete  in  a  complete  experience,  could  not  be
aware  of  succession  except  by  a  relative  impotence
through  which  its  rounded  whole  should  reduce
itself  to  discriminated  and  comparable  lines.  The
full  and  rounded  whole  might  be  compared — if  we
bear  in  mind  that  we  are  not  likely  to  possess  so
complete  a  mastery  except  in  comparative  trivialities
— with  the  profound  and  inclusive  feeling  which
may  rest,  for  example,  on  the  innumerable  events  of
the  history  and  achievement  of  a  great  family,  and
which  may  be  qualified  and  enriched  even  by  the
architectural  details  of  the  house  which  has  been
throughout  its  centre  and  symbol.^  Such  a  feeling
could  be  expressed  or  analysed  in  serial  or  spatial
form  only  by  the  acts  and  events  which  constituted
the  history,  and  by  the  spatial  details  of  the  fabric
which  constituted  the  symbol  and  the  focus.  And
if  it  were  not  so  actually  expressed,  there  could  be
no  such  experience  as  the  feeling  itself,  which  is  the

1  Nettleship,  Remains,  vol.  i.  p.  10.

2  E.g.  the  author's  Knowledge  a7id  Reality,  p.  330.

3  Cf.  the  illustration  from  Dante's  I)ivi?ie  Comedy  in  Principle,
Lect.  VII.  I  have  here  especially  in  mind,  of  course  as  a  mere  hint
and  analogue,  the  family  feeling  portrayed  in  Baroness  von  Hiitten's
striking  novel  Sliarrow.


298  THE  GATES OF  THE  FUTURE  lect.

concentration  and  quintessence  of  the  spatio-temporal
series.

We  saw  ^  that  an  infinite  series  could  not  as  such
be  given,  but  that  a  problem  could  be  set  in  a  given
experience  such  that  its  expression  in  serial  form —
just  because  the  serial  form  is  inadequate — could
only  be  a  series  ad  infinitum.  This  characteristic
might  represent  the  relation  of  the  spatio-temporal
unendingness  to  the  perfection  which  it  continually
endeavours  and  fails  to  express,  but  to  which,  never-
theless, its  members  belong,  and  are  aware  that  they
belong,  and  have  their  true  hold  of  perfection  only
through  this  awareness.

It  was  pointed  out  in  the  previous  course  of
lectures  in  what  sense  a  true  infinite  is  self-represent-
ative.'-^ This  is  a  character  which  the  recent  theory
of  infinity  may  be  taken  to  emphasise.  In  every
true  part — hence  in  every  member — of  an  infinite
whole  there  is  something  corresponding  to  every
feature  of  such  a  whole,  though  not  repeating  it.
The  part,  living  with  the  life  of  the  whole  and
claiming  its  perfection,  may  be  said  in  a  general
sense  not  to  be  less  than  the  whole — to  have,  that  is
to  say,  a  feature  for  every  feature  of  the  whole.  It
is,  in  truth,  something  more  than  a  part ;  it  is  a
member,  or  an  aspect ;  and  if  its  character  is  to  be
expressed  in  the  language  of  whole  and  part,
perhaps  it  demands  some  such  expression  as  that
it  contains  no  fewer  elements  than  the  whole.  It
would  certainly  be  true  of  a  genuine  infinite  that
if  we  speak  of  whole  and  parts  at  all,  the  whole
represents  itself  within  every  part.  This  helps
us  towards  our  view  of  the  place  in  perfection  which

1  Principle,  Lect.  X.  App.  I.  2 Lect.  II.  p.  38,  note.


X  OUR ''WORLD'' IS  MORE THAN  MEMORY 299

belongs  to  the  finite-infinite  being,  and  his  creative
achievement  and  self-realisation.

ii. When  finite  illustrations — the  only  kind  at  our  in  what

•  scnsG

disposal — are  used  to  elucidate  the  nature  of  a  time-  infinhe
less  experience,  certain  typical  objections  are  raised  can^?^

, .1  contained

agamst  them.  ^ i„  ^  perfect

I will refer  to two of these,  which, I believe,  ""eaiity-
exhaust  the  real  significance  of  such  criticism.

If  we  say  that  there  is  a  difference  in  the  ampli-
tude of  experiences,  and  that  this  indicates  a  scale
of  degrees  upon  which  we  might  extend  our  views
to  the  conception  of  an  experience  which  is  all-
inclusive,  the  answer  comes  that  we  are  confusing
memory  and  direct  apprehension.  It  is  true,  the
critic  urges,  that  the  past  can  be  presented  to  us  in
memory,  and  that  one  man  has  much  more  memory
than  another.  But  this  does  not  mean  that  one
man's  experience  has,  more  or  less  than  another's,
the  character  of  succession.  You  might  even  argue
that  for  the  man  of  ampler  memory  the  successive-
ness of  time  is  more  emphatically  given.

This  criticism  does  not  appear  to  me  to  deal  with
the  point.  To  live  in  a  larger  world  is  not  reducible
to  having  either  the  longer  or  the  fuller  memory.  I
have  indeed  refused  to  appeal  to  the  doctrine  of  the
specious  present^  as  an  adequate  account  of  the
all-inclusive  experience ;  but  the  specious  present
insists  on  a  truth  which  the  reduction  of  our  present
experience  of  the  past  to  memory  ignores.  And  if
this  doctrine  admitted,  what  I  understand  it  to  deny,
the  principle  of  transformation,  it  would  help  us
towards  conceiving  both  the  perfect  and  the  partial
timeless  experience. When  a  man's  whole  world  is

1  Principle,  Lect.  X.  App.  I.


300  THE GATES OF  THE FUTURE  lect.

modified  and  penetrated  throughout  by  the  Influence
of  things  and  events  which  are  Hving  and  essential
to  him,  though  to  another  they  are  a  blank  both  for
thought and feeling, this is not a mere  affair  of
memory — of  course,  indeed,  memory  could  at  most
only  touch  the  factor  of  personal past  experience.
It  is  a  question  of  the  depth  and  width  of  the  world
in  which  we  live. Memory  may  have  contributed
to  its  formation,  but  it  is  not  constituted  by  memory,
but  by the whole constructive work of thought,
envisaging  the objects  of  conations  and interests.
A  great  scholar,  whose  mind  is  dyed  and  shaped  by
the  thought  and  feeling  of  ancient  Greece,  possesses
so  far  an  ampler  immediate  experience  than  others
in  whom  that  factor  is  wanting. He  is  a  denizen,
so  far,  of  a  larger  world  ;  and  time  does  not  touch
the  mode  of  his  dwelling  in  it. He  has  more  in  him
that is independent of serial experiences. The
fabric  of  his  being  has,  so  far,  more  of  trueness  and
of  reality. I  submit  that  an  ampler  life  in such  a
sense  as  this,  a  life in which  the  self  approaches
nearer  to  possessing  itself  (its  complete  or  ideal  self,
of  course,  must  be  the  standard),  is  a  fair  example  of
a  life  in  which  time  so  far  ceases  to  prevail.

And  then  there  is  the  case  in  which  serial  appre-
hension seems  of  the  essence — the  familiar  case  of,
e.g.,  a  piece  of  music.  We  are  told,  and  it  is  true,
that  if  the  apprehension  of  it  were  not  serial,  the
whole  would  become  a  mere  chaos.  The  serial
order  is  inherent.  Now  this  is  not  met  by  suggest-
ing that  the  music  can  be  repeated  in  memory  just
as  it  was  performed.  A  series  repeated  in  memory
is  no  less  temporal  than  a  series  when  first  heard.
We  get  nearer  the  point  by  observing  that  a  whole


CAN  UNREAL CAUSE  REAL?  301


can  be  apprehended  or  remembered  as  a  whole,
without  apprehension  or  memory  of  its  detail  as
such.  As  in  the  last  case,  so  in  this,  transformation,
or  rather  apprehension  as  a  more  perfect  real,  of
which  the  serial  form  is  an  imperfect  rendering,
gives  the  clue  to  the  familiar  experience.  Take  the
musician's  whole  frame  of  mind — the  significance  of
the  piece  as  one  with  that  general  form  and  impres-
sion of  it  which  can  be  apprehended  as  a  whole —
and  you  get  something  like  what  we  may  conceive
to  be  the  complete  real,  which  for  a  being  that
apprehends  successively  through  sensation  must
be  so  drawn  out  in  time.  It  must  be  remembered
that  we  hold  the  temporal  succession  to  be  essential
to  the  non-temporal  experience.  The  notes  must
be  a  series,  but  the  impression  of  the  piece  is  not ;
and  the  notes  are  only  an  attempt  to  render  or
convey  the  impression.  Of  course  it  is  not  suggested
that  a  timeless  experience  is  confined  to  what  would
be  a  point  of  time  to  a  temporal  consciousness.  No
contrast  of  simultaneity  and  succession  is  here
relevant.  The  essential  is  the  totality  which  forbids
the  split  into  parallel  series,^  not  a  consciousness  of
simultaneity.

Logic  affords  another  clue."  Causation  in  time,
for  example,  can  only  be  understood  as  the  manifesta-
tion of  an  underlying  system,  itself  not  temporal.
The  apparent  temporal  relation  of  present  to  past  is
the  same  with  its  relation  to  future,  in  so  far  as  both
are  negative,  and  neither  pair  can  be  real  together.
It  is  as  unreasonable  to  say  that  the  real  present  is
caused  by  a  past  no  longer  real,  as  by  a  future  not

1  P.  297,  above. Simultaneity  is  a  case  of  succession.
^  Author's  Logic ^  ed.  2,  i.  250,  258.


302


THE GATES OF THE  FUTURE  lect.

yet  real.  The  genuine  reality  must  lie  in  a  system
to  which  all  three  belong  together,  though  in  finite
appearance  they  are  transformed.  "  Duration,"
indeed,  is  meant  to  supply  a  continuity  which  is
both  real  and  in  time.  But  this,  as  it  seems  to  me,
is  a  half-measure.  The  continuity  is  incomplete.
Some  of  the  past  is  abandoned,  some  of  the  future
is  deferred.  If  not,  the  distinction  of  past  and  future
would  vanish.  The  distinction,  being  maintained,
means  finiteness,  and  is  all  very  well  in  an  appear-
ance ;  but  what  sort  of  ultimate  reality  is  it  that  is
thus,  even  if  only  in  degree,  external  to  itself?  It
is  the  essence  of  dur^e  that  "  nous  ne  nous  tenons
jamais  tout  entiers."  We  are  obliged  to  treat  the
future  as  springing  from  past  events,  because  we
have  prima  facie  nothing  of  the  past,  except  past
events,  to  serve  as  a  guide  to  the  future.  But  we
know  that  nothing  really  springs  from  past  events
as  separate  and  successive,  but  only  from  a  real
totality  that  underlies  them.  And  in  all  sound
logical  procedure  it  is  our  conception  of  this  system,
and  not  a  transition  from  a  series  of  particulars  to  a
further  particular,  that  engages  our  attention.^

Thus  we  find  on  all  sides  that  the  difference
between  a  finite  life  and  apprehension  on  the  one
hand,  and  reality  on  the  other,  is  not  adequately
expressed  by  the  difference  between  part  and  whole
or  between  completeness  and  incompleteness.  It
is  a  difference  rather  of  kind ;  something  which
we  might  remotely  liken  to  the  difference  between
a  great  mind  and  a  little  one,  or  between  a  man's

1  Cf.  author's  Look,  ii.  220,  note  and  reff.  E.g.,  you  cannot  go
straight  from  an  enumeration  of  actual  cases  to  a  statement  of  chances.
You  must  consider  what  sort  of  system  the  enumeration  indicates.
Cf. Sigwart,  Logic,  Eng.  Tr.  ii.  227.


X  PERFECTION  OURS, NOT US  303

mind  and  that  of  a  lower  animal.  The  efforts  of
the  finite  creature  to  achieve  the  infinite  experience
naturally  fall  into  series.  But  it  is  not  the  cumula-
tive events  of  this  series,  but  a  character  to  be  won
or  developed  by  their  means,  that  can  bring  the  finite
mind  in  any  way  nearer  the  perfection  which  attracts
it.  These  considerations  are  all-important  for  the
problem  of  progress  to  which  we  shall  return  directly.

iii. But  one  more  point  must  first  be  considered,  if  the
It  sounds  fine  to  say  that  the  gates  of  the  future,  reaUs^
of  creative  evolution,  are  wide  open. Yet  in  saying  KfinTty.
it,  do  we  not  plainly  say  that  the  gates  of  perfection  ^reff^'^d
are  absolutely  closed  ^. There  is  one  road,  and  one  against

1  1  1111  I'lir-  perfection.

road  only,  we  have  held,  by  which  the  finite  creature
can  identify  itself  with  perfection,  and  that  begins
by  accepting  perfection  as  real,  while  admitting  that
he  cannot  attain  it  in  his  own  right.  Our  seemingly
innocent  boast  about  the  gates  of  the  future,  inter-
preted as  we  above  thought  fair  to  interpret  it,
appears  to  annihilate  both  these  simple  postulates.
If  the  real  is  an  infinite  series,  there  is  no  perfec-
tion. And,  paradoxically,  this  is  the  consequence  of
the  false  assumption  that  we  can  attain  it  in  our  own
right.  Now  that  the  finite-infinite  being  must  be
able  to  realise  his  nature  by  self-identification  with
perfection,  we  hold  to  admit  of  no  doubt  at  all.  But
no  less  we  are  certain  that  this  necessity,  which
overthrows  the  former  of  the  two  extreme  views
above  referred  to,  will  not  justify  the  latter.  We
cannot  entrust  the  fulfilment  of  our  postulate  to  a
miracle  of  the  future.  We  must  find  it  within  the
limits  of  that  very  universal  fact  which  suggests
and  demands  it.  We  have  seen  in  principle  how
the fulfilment comes,  and  we have  just now  con-


304


THE GATES OF THE  FUTURE  lect.


trasted  this  principle  with  the  two  extremist  views,

the  one  of  which  denies  it,  while  the  other,  we  might

say,  no  less  incredibly,  pretends  to  achieve  it  by  a

salto  niortak,  but  in  doing  so  denies  it  none  the  less.

Rank  and iv. It  remains  to  explain  the  rank  and  value  of

luraclill^''  the attractive  demand for a modifiable universe,

foT'reaf really changeable as a whole, and through the

progress achievement  of  its  members. This  view,  we  have

universe, seen,  neccssarily  denies  a  real  perfection.

The  explanation  does  not seem  difficult. The
finite -infinite creature, as we have repeatedly
observed,  is always in a condition of  self- trans-
cendence. This  is  the  same  as  saying  that  he  is
always endeavouring to pass beyond himself in
achievement. That  there  is  always  scope  for  this,
his  membership  of  the  universe,  as  we  have  analysed
it,  guarantees. He  is  always  a  fragmentary  being,
inspired  by  an  infinite  whole,  which  he  is  for  ever
striving  to  express  in  terms  of  his  limited  range  of
externality. In this, ex hypothesis he can never
succeed. But  this effort  of  his is not wasted  or
futile. It is a factor of the self-maintenance of
the Universe,  and so far is a real achievement ;
and it constitutes, as we have seen,  an element
in the Absolute — an element through which the
detailed  conflict  of  good  and  evil  is  sustained,  and
the  relative triumph  of  good,  within this conflict,
is  made  possible.

Thus  the  only  question  of  attainment  which  can
be  raised  about  this  progressive  endeavour  is  whether
or  no  the  finite  being  recognises,  it  may  be  implicitly
or  explicitly,  the  full  significance  of  his  own  nature.
It  is  this  that  determines  the  relation  of  his  progress
to  its  aim.


X  ''EACH  FOR  HIMSELF''  305

a. So  far  as  his  recognition  is  one-sided,  or  rather  The  one-

I  f  111  ••  •  ••  •ii\  c sided  self-

(lor  a  double  recognition  is  quite  inevitable)  so  tar  recognition
as  the  reflective  recognition  of  one  side  is  in  advance  n^orar^^
of  the  implied  recogfnition  of  the  other,  he  remains  standpoint

i-  o  — progress

in  the  general  atmosphere  of  the  world  of  claims,  an  absolute
The  fundamental  characteristic  of  this,  as  we  saw,
is  the  externality  of  the  members  to  one  another,
counting  among  them  the  creator  and  supreme  will.
Harmony  or  perfection,  it  follows,  is  taken  to  be
attainable  only  by  an  infinite  progression  ;  because
it  is  a  bringing  to  harmony  of  things  which  are
independent,  and  which  act  out  of  natures  which
they  do  not  share  with  each  other  and  the  whole.
Thinking  of  himself  thus  according  to  one  side  of
his  prima  facie  appearance,  as  a  self-contained
substance,  he  holds  the  progression  which  he  is
aware  of  to  be  an  advance  originated  by  himself
and  others,  each  by  himself,  out  of  himself,  and  in
his  own  strength,  except  in  so  far  as  a  theological
doctrine  may  suggest  a  miraculous  grace,  to  repair
the  defective  recognition  of  the  being's  inherent
nature.  The  changes  that  are  brought  about  seem
therefore  to  be  the  creation  of  new  things,  bringing
into  being  what  ought  to  be  and  therefore  is  not,
and  annihilating  what  is  and  therefore  ought  not
to  be.  This  latter  antithesis,  though  barred  from
its  full  effect  by  our  inherent  recognition  in  ex-
perience of  the  world  in  which  all  are  at  one,  is
involved  in  principle  in  the  doctrine  of  each  for
himself  and  no  real  solidarity.^  This  antagonism,
and the  consequent  demand  for  a  modification  of

^  It  is  a  complication  if  you  hold  that  there  was  a  solidarity  at
starting,  that  this  is  lost  as  "  individuals  "  develop,  and,  perhaps,  may
be  re-created  in  the  end.  But  it  only  prefixes  a  phase,  and  makes
no  essential  difference.


3o6  THE GATES OF THE  FUTURE  lect.

the  whole  reaHty,  actual  in  time,  from  what  is  to
what  ought  to  be,  is  the  necessary  consequence
of  the  individual's  failure  to  appreciate  reflectively
his  own  nature  and  the  meaning  of  his  self-trans-
cendence. This  failure  is  never  completely  ex-
perienced within  actual  life,  for  the  gulf  which  it
sets  between  the  "is"  and  the  "ought,"  between
the  conditions  and  the  action,  would  make  actual
life  impossible.  As  we  have  amply  seen,  an
implicit  recognition  of  man's  nature,  an  implicit
religious  attitude,  is  the  inherent  condition  of  all
actual  living.^  But  reflectively  noted  and  made
the  basis  of  a  theory,  the  misunderstood  awareness
of  self-transcendence  may  give  rise  to  the  demand
for  a  progress  of  the  universe  in  time.  And
because  of  the  incompatibility  presupposed  in  its
factors,  it  must  be  an  infinite  progression.

Theinciu.  /S.  When,  on  the  other  hand,  the  finite  being's
implied  recognition  of  its  own  full  nature  is  trusted,
as  it  is  by  all  mankind  in  the  current  affairs  of  life,

a  condition  ^j. j^^ ^^^  dcpfree  made  explicit throug^h religious

of  the  value  y  o  >■  o  o ^

ofprogress.  symbolism  and  reflection,  we  have  the  inclusive
attitude  which  was  analysed  in  the  former  course
of  lectures.^  The  fact  and  the  duty  of  self-trans-
cendence remain  where  they  were.  But  instead
of  dealing  with  a  machinery  of  external  wills  to
be  reconciled,  as  in  the  world  of  claims,  they  now
symbolise  the  absorption  of  the  self  by  will  and
conviction in the  perfection  which inspires  it  and

1  We  asked  if  the  lower  animals  have  religion.  It  might  be  said
that  so  far  as  they  live  in  unconscious  dependence  and  without  doubt
or  suspicion — how  far  this  is  so,  I  suppose,  is  questionable— they
possess  an  essential  of  the  religious  attitude,  which,  however,  can  only
become  religion  when  it  is  held  against  more  conscious  antagonism
than  can  exist  for  them.

2  Principle,  p.  277.


sive  self-
recogni-
tion :  real
perfection


PERFECTION  IS THE  INSPIRATION  307


belongs  to  it,  but  which,  in  its  character  as  a
finite  self  or  aggregate  of  such  selves,  it  can  never
realise.

The  true  rank  and  value  of  the  demand  for
progress  is  thus  inherently  secure.  There  can  be
no  fear  that  a  self,  identified  in  will  and  conviction
with  the  transcendent  perfection,  will  be  lacking
either  in  the  spirit  or  in  the  detailed  occasions
for  fuller  expression  of  that  which  inspires  it  in
the  actual  modification  of  its  world.  The  Absolute,
we  have  seen,  is  all-inclusive  by  transmutation,
and  is  thus  no  mere  aggregate,  which  might  be
exhaustible,  but  supreme  in  kind.  Therefore  it
cannot  be  adequately  expressed  in  any  mere  partial
appearance,  though  all  its  being  lies  in  the  tension
towards  self-expression.  The  conflict  of  good  and
evil  is  inherent  in  it.  But  if  the  fundamental
perfection,  maintained  throughout  imperfect  appear-
ance, were  not  real,  the  conflict  of  good  and  evil,
that  is,  of  perfection  as  the  object  of  a  positive
and  of  a  negative  attitude  respectively,  would
have  vanished  m  toto,  and  the  inspiration  of  pro-
gress, and  the  value  of  its  contribution  to  the  real,
would  inevitably  be  gone.

Thus,  finally,  a  view  which  rules  out  real  per-
fection, rules  out  the  whole  content  and  inspiration
of  progress.  For  it  is  the  spirit  of  perfection,
working  within  the  finite  self,  which  at  once
demands  perfection,  and  secures  it  in  the  only  way
open  to  finite  beings.  The  infinite  actual  pro-
gression, and  the  progression  which  is  to  cease
at  a  future  point  with  the  abolition  of  finiteness —
the  open  gates  and  the  shut — are  both  of  them
self- destructive ideas. The former has thrown


future  in
time  con
forms  to


308  THE GATES OF THE  FUTURE  lect.

away  its  inspiration  ;  the  latter  its  concrete  actu-
ality. Nothing  but  the  infinite  perfection,  working
as  that  which  inspires  the  imperfect,  can  fulfil  the
concrete  need  for  the  conflict  and  the  victory.
Both  are  certain  and  secure,  for  both  are  of  the
essence  of  the  finite-infinite  self.  And  we  have
seen  that  the  analysis  of  life — of  the  forms  which
must  be  held  in  principle  akin  to  religion — show
beyond  any  doubt  in  what  way  this  doctrine  is
universally  true.
What  3. At  this  point it  will be  well to  make  some

S  m"a ns  explanation  of  our  own  attitude  to  the  future,  seeing
that  we  do  not  expect  it  to  bring  any  special  and
unprecedented  contribution to the  solution  of  our

our  argu-  y^

meat?  specuktivc  problems.  It  is  plain  that  we  have
an  interest  in  it.  If  not,  we  should  not  continue
to  live.  It  is  on  the  very  ground  of  our  interest
that  we  object  to  the  conception  of  change  in  the
ultimate  real,  which  seems  to  destroy  what  we  care
for.  It  may  be  said,  "Your  question  is  wrongly
put.  You  do  not  continue  to  live  because  you  are
interested  in  the  future.  You  are  interested  in
the  future  because  you  and  the  race  have  to  con-
tinue living,  unless  you  take  violent  steps  to  prevent
it."  But  even  so,  continuance  in  living  is  not  a  bare
fact.  We  are  bound  to  think  of  it  as  bringing  us
something.  The  finite  being  is,  as  we  have  con-
stantly reiterated,  essentially  self-transcendent,  and
this  means  that  he  is  bound  to  have  something
before  him,  at  least  symbolic  of  the  satisfaction
which  he  inherently  pursues.  We  cannot  continue
living  unless  the  continuance  implies  something
like  hope.  Now  we  do  not  hope  for  a  new  and
ultimate  experience,  which  will  solve  all  problems


X  HOPES  FROM  FUTURE  309

and  end  all  discontents.  There  is  such  an  ex-
perience ;  but  no  finite  self — no  self  in  time — can
possess  it.

Therefore,  as  we  reject  traditional  views  of  a
future  climax  of  being,  and  their  modern  equivalents
of  a  millenary  type,  as  also  the  alteration  of  the
ultimate  real,  it  seems  well  to  say  what  sort  of
future,  should  it  be  realised,  would  be  compatible
with  our  ideas.  The  answer,  as  has  been  indicated,
will  not  be  a  prediction  for  its  own  sake.  The
hypothetical  prediction,  so  far  as  that  proves
necessary,  will  be  for  the  sake  of  the  philosophical
answer ;  that  is,  for  the  sake  of  explaining  what
sort  of  future  our  philosophical  views  would  welcome
as  bringing  the  type  of  satisfaction  which  they
suggest.

i. In principle,  then,  I think  it is  fair  to  press  what  sort
upon  us  the  question,  "What  sort  of  thing  do  you  can  i'?
hope  ? " Theoretical satisfaction  is  impossible,  we  fa°rques^
saw,^  without satisfaction  of  criticised desire. So  ^1°"- ^^

the  main,

from  a  theoretical  point  of  view  we  are  bound  to  anincreas-

in*^  sense  of

have  some  idea  of  what  such  a  satisfaction  might  true  values.

demand and bring. As regards the destiny of

the  "individual,"  the finite being by himself,  we

have already  confronted the  question. But  there

is still the question of the spatio-temporal life

of  the  race,  and of  any  kindred races  within the

universe.

And  our  answer  in  principle  is  simple  and  direct.
Where  the  question  speaks  of  the  future,  we  speak
of  the  whole.  That  the  mastery  and  realisation
of  it  for  us  lies  largely  in  the  future  is  in  one
sense  a  mere  consequence  of  our  finiteness. The

^ Lect.  VII.,  above.


3IO  THE GATES OF  THE  FUTURE  lect.

future  in  this  sense  means  any  experience  which
we  do  not  already  possess,  and  must  therefore
acquire  hereafter,  if  at  all.  But  that  the  object
of  such  an  experience  lies  in  events  subsequent  to
a  certain  point  of  time,  is  quite  a  different  im-
plication, is  by  no  means  universally  true,  and
perhaps  in  strict  principle  is  not  true  at  all.

That  our  mastery  of  the  whole  must  in  some
sense  be  "further"  and  not  merely  "continued,"
that  is,  that  it  must  be  relatively  and  within
our  connected  course  of  history  progressive,  is
guaranteed  by  the  nature  of  the  self-conscious  being,
whose  "  duration"  ^  or  affinity  with  the  timeless  lies
in  his  accumulating  a  past  which  he  carries  along
with  him,  adding  to  it  what  comes  after.  On  the
whole,  this  is  so,  and  in  some  degree  is  true  of  the
race.  But  that  what  he  keeps  and  gains  always
exceeds  in  value  what  he  lets  go,  would  be  a  bold
assumption  for  which  I  can  see  no  justification.

In  general,  however,  this  is  our  answer. What

is  left  that  our  probably  limited  future,  the  future  of

the  race,  can  do  for  us,  when  we  discard  what  I  call

miraculous  expectations,  is  to  increase  our  grasp  of

the  whole,  both  in  practice  and  theory,  and  more

especially,  in  consequence  of  this  fuller  grasp  and

also as a contribution to it,  to  aid  us in a  very

profound  and  considerable  transvaluation  of  values.

The  frame ii. It  will  repay  us  at  this  point  to  consider  for  a

whkiTcor- moment  a question  which  we may seem  to  have

responds tj-gated  too  cavalieHy,  deserving^  as  it  is  at  least  of

to  the  ^  *--'

recognition  ^  Httle  curiositv. If  the  standpoint  of  religion  is,  as

of  the  ; .  .^  . .  .,  ,  J

Absolute we  held,  not  ultimate  ;  if  it  is  possible  and  necessary
bey^ond""^ to  couceive  of  the  Absolute  as  something  of  which

'^^'^ '  1 See  Principle,  p.  355,  on  affinity  oi  duree  and  timelessness.


X  THE SENSE OF  GREATNESS  311

religion  itself,  with  the  conflict  of  good  and  evil,  is  Om-aware-

1  1*1  1  r  "ess  of  an

not  a  complete  account,  to  what  attitude  or  mode  of  inclusive
recognition  on  our  part  does  such  a  conception  ^°^^''^y-
correspond  ?  We  have  definitely  rejected  the  idea
that  philosophy  is  superior  to  religion.  But  there
is  something  more  to  be  said.  There  is  always,  I
suppose,  a  normal  and  general  mode  of  conscious-
ness, an  awareness  of  a  certain  kind  of  object,
corresponding  to  every  reflective  attitude  which
really  proves  distinct  and  well-grounded  ;  and  to
this  philosophy,  as  the  theory  of  the  Absolute,  is
no  exception.  We  feel  throughout  —  as  I  have
frequently  urged  in  these  lectures — a  general  rise
and  fall  of  life,  a  pervading  greatness  and  amplitude
and  coherence  which  in  the  higher  tides  of  vitality
seems  to  blend  all  finite  individuals  and  to  leave
nothing  outside  it.^  Now  religion,  as  it  takes
definite  shape  through  adoration  of  an  object  and
community  of  will  with  its  will,  tends  to  become
engaged  in  the  specific  conflict  between  good  and
evil,  and  though  it  transcends  this,  yet  remains
determined  by  this  particular  transcendence.  But
our  sense  of  wholeness  is  aware  of  something  that
does  not  precisely  fit  into  such  a  cadre.  We  are
aware,  as  I  said,  of  a  strength  and  amplitude  of  the
world,  which  even  the  contrast  of  good  and  evil  as
it  definitely  takes  shape  for  us  under  the  determinate
pressure  of  practice,  does  not  exhaust.  The  universe,
we  feel,  though  it  is  a  rough  place,  and  not  exactly
fitting  into  the  frame  of  good  as  against  evil,  is
great  and  splendid  in  ways  that  are  to  us  in-
exhaustible. If  we  interpreted  our  "good"  with
sufficient  breadth,  it  might  almost  fit  this  experience.

^ See  Prittdple  on  multiplicism  as  opposed  to  pluralism,  pp.  372-3.


312  THE GATES OF THE  FUTURE  lect.

Certainly  the  greatness  and  the  goodness  are  on
the  whole  akin.  But  the  stress  of  practice  forbids
our  reducing  them  to  one  and  the  same  thing  from
our  standpoint.  The  universe  is  the  magnificent
theatre  of  all  the  wealth  of  life,  and  good  and  evil
are  within  it.  This,  I  think,  we  are  aware  of  when
at  our  best  ;  and  this  awareness  corresponds  to  the
sense  of  the  Absolute  whole  within  which  religion
itself  is  a  feature  or  characteristic,  putting  a  point,
for  our  special  needs,  upon  the  general  recognition
of  a  transcendent  amplitude.

Here,  in  passing,  we  have  elucidated  our  common
sense  of  the  Absolute,  the  real  awareness  of  an
inclusive  world  to  which  philosophy  as  a  reflective
theory  corresponds,  and  which  widens  and  sweetens
our  religious  consciousness  by  forbidding  its  com-
ponents to  harden  into  mere  antagonistic  factors.
And  here,  too,  we  have  seen  how  the  whole,  the
inclusive  and  all-permeating  world,  is  the  ultimate
watchword  of  our  theory.

Now,  preserving  the  standpoint  of  the  whole,  we
return  to  the  question,  what  the  future  might  bring.
Distinguish iii. We  may  note  again,  with  reference  to  what

interest  in  ....  111  1  r  1

the  future  was  Said  just  above,  how  deeply  our  hopes  lor  the
im^est  in  "  future  "  ^  are  entangled  with  what  concerns  the
to\I^sat!s-  "P^st."  Great  part  of  our  pride  in  the  present,  and
fied  in  the gur hooe for what is to come, turn upon such

future.  '■  ^  ^ '■

matters  as  unravelling  the  laws  of  evolution  and  the
history  of  man,  the  real  significance  of  documents
and  events  belonging  to  the  first  century  of  our  era,

^  Cf.  the  question  of  the  true  formulation  of  the  principle  of
natural  uniformity  as  opposed  to  the  expression  "  will  the  future
resemble  the  past  "  ;  and  the  nature  of  so-called  scientific  "  prediction  "
which  has  in  strictness  no  special  concern  with  the  future,  but  merely
with  the  addition  to  knowledo^e  as  such.


X  WHAT  MATTERS  IS SELF-RECOGNITION 313

and  the  right  valuation  of  achievements  and  civilisa-
tion prior  by  ages  even  to  that  period.  All  this,  no
doubt,  gravely  affects  the  life  of  to-day  and  of  the
days  to  come.  But  the  fact  that  it  is  so  only  shows
more  conclusively  how  that  which  concerns  and
interests  us  is  not  essentially  something  still  to
come,  but  inherently  is  the  comprehension  and
valuation  of  the  whole  in  which  we  are  members.
It  is  the  future  that  will  amplify  it;  but  what  it  is,  is
the  vision  of  the  whole.  Whether  the  future  is  to
afford  us  individual  creations  of  the  mind  greater
than  any  of  the  past  is  a  question  beyond  the
possibility  of  prediction,  and  perhaps  unmeaning.
In  a  sense,  no  doubt,  it  m.ust  transcend  the  past;
but  whether  by  inclusion  or  by  repulsion,  whether
lifted  by  it  to  a  higher  plane  or  pursuing  a  new
track  on  the  level,  seems  impossible  to  determine  on
general  grounds.  It  is  not  even  easy  to  be  sure  of
the  meaning  of  the  expressions.  One  thing  seems
to  me  certain.  The  expression  of  the  Absolute
cannot  be  wholly  reserved  for  the  future.  The
past  must  have  had  its  share.  What  else  can  it
have  been  than  such  an  expression  ?  And  some-
thing is  certainly  dropped  as  we  proceed,  by  the
nature  of  finiteness,  though  it  is  open  to  any  one  to
argue  that  what  is  added  must  be  of  greater  value.
Therefore  our  progress,  though  progressive  in  a
sense,  cannot  be  an  absolute  advance  in  all  respects.

iv. But,  as  the  result  of  our  whole  argument,  we  what
are clear, I believe, about what really matters,  matters
And this is what I  want  unequivocally  to  affirm.  IsJhe^"^"^
It  follows  from  our  consideration  of  the  finite-infinite  ''^'^p^''  ^"'^

more

being:  that  what  really  matters — what  alone,  in  the  general

.  .  ,  ^  . self-recog-

main, the  future  can  conceivably  have  to  oner — is  nition.  i.e.


314  THE GATES OF  THE  FUTURE  lect.

there-  to  begin  with,  no  doubt,  an  increased  wealth  and
sdo°us'nes?.'  hamiony  of  finite  existence,  but  further,  because
of  and  along  with  this,  a  profounder  sense  of
the  worthlessness  of  the  finite  creature  in  and  by
himself,  and  a  deeper  union,  through  will  and  con-
viction, with  the  perfection  of  the  whole  ;  in  other
words,  a  religious  consciousness  more  widespread
and  more  profound.  All  progress,  all  civilisation,
all  transvaluation  of  values,  must  ultimately  be
tested  by  this  double  criterion.^  The  finite  being's
grasp  of  the  world  is  the  measure  at  once  of  what
he  has  to  renounce  as  his  own,  and  to  affirm  as  his
in  the  whole.
iiiustra-  4, In  order, then,  to  convey  some definite im-

suggesdons  pression  of  the  direction  in  which  views  like  ours
and^fumre  projcct  our  outlook  and  interest,  I  will  try  to  embody
[vef'""^^  our  results  of  principle  in  two  illustrative  suggestions  ;
first,  as  to  what  changes  have  been  most  important
in  the  history  of  our  race  down  to  the  present  time,
and  secondly,  in  what  sort  of  modification — however
brought  about — our  doctrine  of  values  would  teach
us  to  look  for  the  most  important  changes  of  the
future.  What  I  am  trying  to  indicate  is  a  sense  of
values  ;  and  I  ask  to  be  interpreted  by  the  intention
of  the  argument  in  this  respect,  and  not  to  be
judged  merely  by  defects  of  historical  knowledge  or
imagination.

o

1  This  double  criterion,  of  a  positive  gain,  the  magnitude  of  which
has  its  main  value  in  facilitating  its  own  absorption  in  the  whole,
obviously  repeats  the  two  sides  of  the  logical  criterion,  comprehensive-
ness and  coherence,  in  which  the  main  value  of  comprehensiveness
is  that  it  makes  contradiction  at  once  more  profound  and  more
possible  to  overcome.  The  satisfied  self,  in  possession  of  a  vast
social  and  intellectual  world,  has  more  to  give  up  than  a  simpler
being,  and  yet,  as  we  saw,  is  more  likely  to  feel  the  strain  of  holding
on  to  it,  and  has  more,  a  deeper  faith,  to  gain  by  self-recognition.


X ''VICTORIOUS  ANALYSIS"— AND DESPAIR 315

i.  The  most  important  changes  in  the  past  history  The  most
of  mankind,  whom  I  take  as  the  type  of  finite  self-  changes  in
conscious  beings,  have  been,  on  our  view,  all  those  fhose'con"-^
that  have  affected  their  freedom  in  the  most  inclusive  J^^^^^^"^ '""*
sense  of  the  word. It  has  very  many  senses,  but  "freedom"

. .  . ^r  recog-

for  us  thev  all  culminate  in  that  recognition  of  its  mtion  of

r • ■ r •  ^ •  ,,, his  full

own  true  nature  by  the  nnite-mnnite  bemg  which  nature.
I  have  spoken  of  as  the  religious  attitude  and  the  by'-'^thr
sense  of  the  Absolute.  This  recognition,  as  we  "onsdous-
have  seen,  is  highly  complex.  The  unity  of  the  "^^s"
finite-infinite  is  in  one  sense  diminished^  and  in
another  sense  advanced  by  the  conflicts  and  contra-
dictions which  set  man  against  himself  and  his
world.  The  expression  "the  unhappy  conscious-
ness" is  applied  in  a  famous  philosophical  classic^
to  a  particular  phase  of  mind  which  is  there  associated
with  the  failure  of  Stoicism  and  Scepticism  and  the
birth -pangs  of  Christianity,  a  phase  of  yearning,
isolation,  and  sense  of  loss,  in  the  individual  mind.
"  It  is  the  bitter  pain  which  finds  expression  in  the
words,  God  is  dead."  In  a  kindred  sense  the  name
might  be  applied  to  the  condition  of  any  and  every
consciousness  that  has  lost  its  hold  on  its  own
spiritual  foundation,  especially  in  ages  of  social  and
intellectual  unrest.  In  the  present  day  a  similar
phenomenon  seems  to  prevail,  associated  on  a  large
scale  with  pessimism.  And  therefore  the  idea  urges
itself  upon  us,  that  so  far  from  the  advance  in  a
scientific  and  practical  mastery  of  Nature  being  in

'  See  Cornford,  Frovi  Religion,  p.  77,  on  the  idea  of  an  original
unbroken  unity  of  feeling  in  which  the  tribal  group  included  external
nature — so  unbroken  that  it  could  hardly  be  called  conscious  or
religious.

2  See  Hegel's  Phenomenology  of  Alind,  Parts  iv.  and  vii.,  Eng.
Tr.,  vol.  i.  219,  vol.  ii.  762.


3i6  THE GATES OF THE FUTURE  lect.

itself  a  guarantee  against  the  unhappy  consciousness,
it  is,  taken  by  itself,  merely  a  fresh  source  of  con-
tradiction, and  a  root  from  which,  in  the  bewilder-
ment of  the  individual  mind  which  has  lost  itself^  in
the  labyrinth  of  things,  new  forms  of  evil  are  bound
to  spring.

The  suggestion  seems  inevitable  that  the  un-
happy consciousness,  the  sense  of  the  division
between  mind  and  the  universe,  and  therefore
between  mind  and  itself,  is  prima  facie  rather
intensified  than  set  at  rest  by  the  vast  material  and
intellectual  advance  of  mankind.  The  principal
benefit,  then,  derivable  from  the  more  tangible  and
verifiable  advances  of  civilisation  would  lie,  I  do
not  say  wholly  in  the  demonstration  of  their  own
worthlessness,  but  in  a  very  intricate  combination
of  spiritual  results,  in  which  such  a  demonstration
is  a  considerable  factor.  On  the  one  side  there
is  actually  an  intensification  of  the  unhappy  con-
sciousness, through  the  tendency  of  the  individual
spirit  to  lose  itself,  and  incur  recurrent  disappoint-
ment, in  the  alien  order  of  a  mechanical  universe,
reflected  in  satisfactions  which  do  not  satisfy,  and  in
falsification  of  values  throughout  all  social  relations.
On  the  other  side  there  is  the  contribution  of  this  very
form  of  consciousness  itself  to  the  depth  of  the  recon-
ciliation which  a  true  sense  of  the  finite-infinite  nature
now  as  always  involves.  And  the  transvaluation
of  values  belonging  to  this  latter  insight,  so  far  as
attained,  must  react  on  the  external  order  so  far  as
determined  by  man. Hence  human freedom, the

1  Cf.  Rousseau  in  the  Discours  sur  les  Sciences  et  les  Arts.  His
anticipation,  for  good  and  evil,  of  the  anti-intellectualist  attitude  of
to-day,  is  most  remarkable.


X  THE UNHAPPY  CONSCIOUSNESS  317

formal  conception  of  which  had  been  won  by  the
self- experience  and  self- recognition  of  mind,  but
has  tended  to  be  practically  lost  again  in  the
mechanical  order  with  its  jarring  of  fragmentary
aims,  has  begun,  and  must,  we  hope,  continue,  to
assert  itself  substantially — not  in  direct  proportion
to  material  and  scientific  progress,  but  in  proportion
to  such  progress  so  far  as  accompanied  by  the
insight,  won  by  sad  experience  of  its  failures,  into
the  insignificance  of  its  value  except  as  controlled  by
a  consciousness  which  is  aware  of  that  insignificance
and  of  its  relation  to  what  in  trtcth  makes  life  worth
living.

This  hard-won  insight  into  the  nature  of  finite
mind  and  its  satisfaction,  establishing  as  it  must
what  we  have  called  the  stability  and  security  of  the
finite  self,  with  the  true  sense  of  values  reacting  on
external  conditions,  may  be  described  in  general
as  the  sense  of  human  worth  and  freedom.  And  its
acquisition  seems  to  be  the  most  important  modifi-
cation of  life  which  the  past  has  bequeathed  to  us.
It  is  substantially  one  with  what  we  have  called
above  the  religious  consciousness  :  the  mind's  recog-
nition of  its  own  true  nature  and  the  conditions  of  its
strength  and  weakness.

I  will  venture  to  illustrate  the  position  by  citing
from  a  distinguished  writer  an  illustration  of  the
unhappy  consciousness  as  it  exists  to-day,  and
then  attempting  to  point  out  how,  from  our  stand-
point, facts  which  need  not  differ  in  their  tangible
aspect  from  those  there  rehearsed,  will  lead  us
to  an  attitude  of  polar  opposition  to  the  ideas  there
advocated.

I  cite  from  Mr.  Russell's  remarkable  essay,  "  The


3i8  THE GATES OF THE FUTURE  lect.

Free  Man's  Worship."  ^  The  whole  essay  should,  of
course,  be  read  : —

"  To  Dr.  Faustus  in  his  study  Mephistopheles
told  the  history  of  the  Creation,  saying,  '  The  endless
praises  of  the  choirs  of  angels  had  begun  to  grow
wearisome,  for  after  all  did  he  not  deserve  their
praise  ?  Had  he  not  given  them  endless  joy?  Would
it  not  be  more  amusing  to  obtain  undeserved  praise,
to  be  worshipped  by  beings  whom  he  tortured  }  He
smiled  inwardly,  and  resolved  that  the  great  drama
should  be  performed,'

"  For  countless  ages  the  hot  nebula  whirled  aim-
lessly through  space.  .  .  .  And  [man]  gave  God
thanks  for  the  strength  that  enabled  him  to  forego
even  the  joys  that  were  possible.  And  God  smiled;
and  when  he  saw  that  Man  had  become  perfect  in
renunciation  and  worship,  he  sent  another  sun  into
the  sky,  which  crashed  into  Man's  sun,  and  all
returned  again  to  nebula.

"  '  Yes,'  he  murmured,  '  it  was  a  good  play  ;  I
will  have  it  performed  again.'

"  Such  in  outline,  but  even  more  purposeless,
more  void  of  meaning,  is  the  world  which  Science
presents  for  our  belief.  Amid  such  a  world,  if  any-
where, our  ideals  henceforward  must  find  a  home.
That  Man  is  the  product  of  causes  which  had  no
prevision  of  the  end  they  were  achieving ;  that  his
origin,  his  growth,  his  hopes  and  fears,  his  loves
and  his  beliefs,  are  but  the  outcome  of  accidental
collections  of  atoms  ;  that  no  fire,  no  heroism,  no
intensity  of  thought  and  feeling,  can  preserve  an
individual  life  beyond  the  grave  ;  that  all  the  labours

1  Hon.  Bertrand  Russell,  Philosophical  Essays,  p.  59  ff.  ;  and
compare  quotation  from  Wallace,  p.  238,  above.


X  ''THE  FIRM  FOUNDATION  OF  DESPAIR" 319

of  the  ages,  all  the  devotion,  all  the  inspiration,  all
the  noonday  brightness  of  human  genius,  are  destined
to  extinction  in  the  vast  death  of  the  solar  system,
and  that  the  whole  temple  of  Man's  achievement
must  inevitably  be  buried  beneath  the  debris  of  a
universe  in  ruins — all  these  things,  if  not  quite
beyond  dispute,  are  yet  so  nearly  certain,  that  no
philosophy  which  rejects  them  can  hope  to  stand.
Only  within  the  scaffolding  of  these  truths,  only  on
the  firm  foundation  of  unyielding  despair,  can  the
soul's  habitation  henceforth  be  safely  built."

Here  we  have  the  unhappy  consciousness  in  the
plainest  form.  And  it  is  very  noticeable  how  in
these  deepest  depths  it  finds  a  foundation  on  which,
while  affirming  it  with  the  mind's  whole  force  to
be  despair,  it  succeeds  in  building  a  valuable  and
positive  structure.  No  one,  I  think,  could  compare
the  passage  just  cited  with  the  corresponding  transi-
tion in  the  philosophical  classic  to  which  I  have
referred  ^  without  observing  an  affinity  of  principle
between  the  modern  writer's  firm  foundation  of
despair  with  all  that  he  builds  on  it,  and  Hegel's
transition  from  the  unhappy  consciousness  to  the
self-confidence  of  reason.  The  affinity  turns  upon
the  familiar  point  that  every  negative  rests  on  an
affirmation,  and  we  touch  bed-rock,  the  "firm  founda-
tion," the  confidence  of  reason,  when  we  commit  our-
selves to  our  faith  in  inclusive  reality  and  repudiate
the  flattering  idea  of  our  private  substantiality  and
importance.  It  seems  plain  that  the  essayist's  posi-
tion is  capable  of  further  affirmative  development.
But  the  purpose  of  my  reference  is  not  to  renew  at
the  eleventh  hour  an  argument  about  the  Absolute.

^  Hegel's  Phenomenology^  I.e.


320  THE GATES OF THE  FUTURE  lect.

It  is  rather  to  point  out  that  such  views  as  I  have
advocated  demand  no  conditions,  of  a  kind  to  be
criticised  by  science,  at  variance  with  those  which
the  author  of  the  passage  assumes.^  We  interpret,
as  we  think,  the  whole  of  the  appearances  more
pregnantly.  But  the  author's  pessimism,  and  the
facts  on  which  it  rests,  so  far  as  they  go,  are  positive
parts  of  our  case,  and  they,  or  something  of  their
kind,  are  the  foundation  on  which  a  genuine  optimism
must  take  its  stand.  There  is  no  stability  nor  security
of  the  finite  self  which  has  not  in  principle "  drawn
its  confidence  out  of  the  ultimate  despair.  Freedom,
then,  we  say  with  the  author  of  "  The  Free  Man's
Worship" — but  in  a  sense  which  as  we  think  makes
man  more  profoundly  free  of  the  universe — is,  so  far
as  achieved,  the  main  achievement  of  mankind  in
the  past.  And  its  profoundest  element  is  the  spiritual
induction  by  which  our  accumulated  finite  acquisi-
tions convince  us  of  their  worthlessness  and  nullity,
except  in  so  far  as  renounced  in  themselves,  and
received  only  as  graces  from  the  supreme  will.

This  is  not  the  place  to  work  out  a  historical  and
social  study,  but  it  will  be  found  that  the  sense
which  I  have  given  to  freedom  includes  all  its
expressions,  both  formal  and  substantial.

1  In  saying  this  I  must  make  a  caveat  against  such  a  phrase  as
"  accidental  "  collocations  of  atoms.  But  this  can  hardly  be  called  a
tangible  or  verifiable  fact.  Obviously,  again,  I  cannot  pledge  myself
to  any  particulars  of  scientific  prediction,  any  more  than  to  the
prophecies  of  those  who  believe  in  some  far-off  divine  event.  All  I
say  is  that  to  an  absolutism  which  knows  its  business  the  former
make  no  difference,  and  the  latter  bring  no  support.

2  By  saying  "  in  principle,"  I  mean  merely  to  guard  myself  against
asserting  that  all  experience  which  goes  to  make  a  mood  must  be
personally  gone  through  by  every  individual  who  is  to  participate  in
the  mood.  Obviously,  in  these  matters  we  can  reap  where  we  did
not  sow. The  world  wins  moods  for  us.


X  SELF-SIMPLIFYING COMPLICATIONS  321

ii. In  the  future  of  our  race  there  will  no  doubt  The  most

be  enormous  material  changes  ;  and  especially  it  is  chMglTn

important  not  to  underrate  those  which  will  natur-  Jjjjj^'^f

ally  arise  from  the  transvaluation  of  values. For  our  race

example, all  genuine  social improvement  depends  leam,

on  the  right  valuation  of  the  things  which  are  in-  experience

creased  by  sharing  as  compared  with  other  values.  pro'^reJs!^

But  this  will  only  be  part  of  the  spiritual  change,  'g^dence

the  recognition  of  man's  own  full  nature  with  all  its  of  values
<-'  _  _  on  the  re-

consequences  ;  and  this,  we  believe,  will  be  the  most  nunciation

.  ,  -  -11  • involved  in

important  change  m  the  future,  as  it  has  been  in  seif-recog-
the  past.  The  main  result  of  our  obvious  "progress"  "ypicai  an-
will  be,  if  I  am  right,  through  forms  of  the  unhappy  JJf '^^'°°ij
consciousness,  to  bring-  us  to  a  sense  of  its  worth-  improved

"  _  society,

lessness  per  se,  which  sense  alone,  it  would  seem,  and  the
can  enable  us  to  control  and  subordinate  it  to  the  of  its
true  values  of  life. It  is  worth  noticing  as  an  illus-  ^^^^'°"-
tration  that  the  happiest  results  of  mechanism  and
applied  science  are  those  which,  often  through  very
complex  processes  and  discoveries,  bring  us  back  to
extreme  practical  simplicity. The  bicycle,^  electric
light  and  power — especially  when  worked  by  a  water-
fall, as  you  see  it  in  rough  settlements  of  the  U.S.A.,
or  in  a  peasant  village  on  the  St.  Gothard — the  condi-
tions of  healthy  living  as  aimed  at  in  town-planning
and  house-building,  are  modest  but  very  suggestive

1  The  very  fascinating  writer  known  as  Vernon  Lee  has  some-
where made  this  observation  about  the  bicycle.  I  may  remark  on
the  essence  of  the  opposite  character,  as  developed,  for  example,  in
the  technique  of  luxury.  The  point  here  is  not  primarily  selfishness  ;
the  point  is  letting  ourselves  get  interested  in  contrivances  to  secure
trivial  satisfactions,  forgetting  to  enquire  whether  the  whole  affair  is
worth  while,  judged  by  the  real  values  of  life.  Then,  before  we  know
it,  we  are  in  the  hands  of  a  Frankenstein's  monster,  and  have  to
learn,  sadly,  the  relative  worlhlessness  of  the  whole  mechanism  of
our  lives

Y


322  THE  GATES OF THE  FUTURE  lect.

examples  of  simplicity  and  subordination  to  natural
needs  emerging  from  the  highest  technique  of
mechanism  and  discoveries  of  biological  science.
This,  I  say,  is  mechanism  at  its  best,  when  it,  so  to
speak,  undoes  its  own  complication  and  brings  us
back  to  simple  means  directed  to  high  and  in-
dubitable values.  But  the  mere  increase  of  comfort,
convenience,  and  physical  security,  even  if  taken,  as
must  be  presupposed,  to  extend  to  all  classes,  will
not  bring  us  any  nearer  satisfaction.  In  saying  this
I  am  illustrating  my  argument  by  supposing  an  im-
possibility, for  I  do  not  believe  that  such  a  triumph
over  mechanism  is  conceivable  without  a  consider-
able advance  in  the  transvaluation  of  which  I  am
speaking  ;  and,  in  so  far  as  such  a  spiritual  change
is  realised,  the  conditions  of  a  more  profound  satis-
faction would  be  attained.

It  is  a  pleasure  to  me  to  elucidate  my  position  by
a  prolonged  quotation  from  the  late  William  James,
the  more  so  as  I  made  use  of  a  similar  quotation
to  express  an  acute  difference  from  him  at  an  early
point  of  the  previous  course  of  lectures.  I  will  read
a  passage  which  helps  me  to  bring  my  argument
before  you  in  what  seems  to  me  a  very  striking
way  : —

"  A  few  summers  ago  I  spent  a  happy  week  at
the  famous  Assembly  Grounds  on  the  borders  of
Chautauqua  Lake.  The  moment  one  treads  that
sacred  enclosure,  one  feels  one's  self  in  an  atmo-
sphere of  success.  Sobriety  and  industry,  intelligence
and  goodness,  orderliness  and  ideality,  prosperity
and  cheerfulness,  pervade  the  air.  It  is  a  serious
and  studious  picnic  on  a  gigantic  scale.  Here  you
have a town  of many thousands  of inhabitants,


X  A MIDDLE-CLASS  PARADISE  323

beautifully  laid  out  in  the  forest,  and  drained  and
equipped  with  means  for  satisfying  all  the  necessary
lower  and  most  of  the  superfluous  higher  wants  of
man.  You  have  a  first-class  college  in  full  blast.
You  have  magnificent  music — a  chorus  of  seven
hundred  voices,  with  possibly  the  most  perfect  open-
air  auditorium  in  the  world.  You  have  every  sort
of  athletic  exercise  from  sailing,  rowing,  swimming,
bicycling,  to  the  ball-field,^  and  the  more  artificial
doings  which  the  gymnasium  affords.  You  have
kindergartens  and  model  secondary  schools.  You
have  general  religious  services,  and  special  club-
houses for  the  several  sects.  You  have  perpetually-
running  soda-water  fountains,  and  daily  popular
lectures  by  distinguished  men.  You  have  the  best
of  company,  and  yet  no  effort.  You  have  no  zymotic
diseases,  no  poverty,  no  drunkenness,  no  crime,  no
police.  You  have  culture,  you  have  kindness,  you
have  cheapness,  you  have  equality,  you  have  the
best  of  what  mankind  has  fought  and  bled  and
striven  for  under  the  name  of  civilisation  for
centuries.  You  have,  in  short,  a  foretaste  of  what
society  might  be,  were  it  all  in  the  light,  with  no
suffering  and  no  dark  corners.

"  I  went  in  curiosity  for  a  day.  I  stayed  for  a
week,  held  spell-bound  by  the  charm  and  ease  of
everything,  by  the  middle-class  paradise,  without  a
sin,  without  a  victim,  without  a  blot,  without  a  tear.

"And  yet  what  was  my  own  astonishment,  on
emerging  into  the  dark  and  wicked  world  again,  to
catch  myself  quite  unexpectedly  and  involuntarily
saying  'Ouf!  what  a  relief.  Now  for  something
primordial  and  savage,  even  though  it  were  as  bad

1 For  base-ball,  I  presume.


324  THE GATES OF  THE  FUTURE  lect.

as  an  Armenian  massacre,  to  set  the  balance  straight
aofain.  This  human  drama  without  a  villain  or  a
pang  ;  this  community  so  refined  that  ice-cream  soda
is  tlie  utmost  offering  it  can  make  to  the  brute
animal  in  man  ;  this  city  simmering  in  the  tepid
lake-side  sun  ;  this  atrocious  harmlessness  of  all
things — I  cannot  away  with  them.  Let  me  take  my
chances  again  in  the  big  outside  worldly  wilderness
with  all  its  sins  and  sufferings.'  "  What  was  lacking,
he  found,  was  "  the  element  that  gives  to  the  wicked
outer  world  all  its  moral  style,  expressiveness,  and
picturesqueness — the  element  of  precipitousness,  so
to  call  it,  of  strength  and  strenuousness,  intensity,
and  danger."  ^

Assume  this  picture  to  include,  as  it  could  not
to-day,  all  social  classes,  and  the  processes  of  in-
dustry made  easy  and  pleasant  by  invention,  and
still  the  fundamental  defect  would  not  be  removed.
I  would  willingly  incorporate  in  this  concluding
lecture  the  whole  argument  of  that  remarkable
paper."  As  we  have  seen,  the  chapter  of  accidents,
the  world  of  hazard  and  hardship,  and  the  being
recast  as  if  in  the  furnace,^  are  inherent  belongings
of  finiteness  ;  and  we  can  have  no  good  without  evil.
The  self-satisfaction  of  the  finite  is  the  portal  where
hope  vanishes — the  sin  against  the  Holy  Spirit.
There  is  no  true  optimism,  we  saw,  which  has  not
absorbed  renunciation  into  itself,  and  learned  to  look

1  James,  Talks  to  Teachers  on  Psychology  and  Life's  Ideals,  p.
268  fif.

2  Note  the  subsequent  reference  to  Tolstoi's  view  of  the  labouring
class,  who  in  hardship  and  danger  seem  to  him  to  have  mastered  the
secret  of  existence. For  us,  of  course,  these  also  are  only  factors.

3  In  this  metaphor  throughout  I  have  had  in  mind  Ibsen's  man
with  the  ladle  in  Peer  Gynt,  who  comes  to  recast  those  who  have  not
proved  themselves  to  possess  a  self  really  of  their  own.


X  THINGS OLD  AND  NEW  ^  325

for  strength  and  security  to  its  union  in  will  and
conviction  with  the  whole  in  which  it  is  rooted.
Then,  and  then  alone,  when  their  worthlessness,  per
se,  is  seen,  can  its  finite  possessions  and  acquisitions
claim  value  as  embodiments  of  the  supreme  will,
or  as  contributions  to  the  Absolute,  The  universal
recognition  of  this,  with  its  consequences,  is,  in
my  belief,  the  main  thing  that  the  future  has  to
bring  us.

"In  this  solid  and  tridimensional  sense,  so  to  call
it,  those  philosophers  are  right  who  contend  that
the  world  is  a  standing  thing,  with  no  progress,  no
real  history."  So  William  James  observes  in  this
same  paper.

5. I  will  finally  summarise  the  doctrine  of  these  conciu-

.  .  .  .  .1 sion  :  the

lectures  m  two  passages — the  voices  respectively  reaction  of
of  the  ancient  world  and  of  the  new.  The  first,  seF^recog-^
from  a  writer  of  Aristotle's  school,  shows  us the  "'"°"  °"

the  appar-

effect  of  such  a  recognition  as  we  call  relicjious  on  atusofiife,

^ . .  .  ^  and  the

the  framework  and  constitution  of  life  ;  the  second,  absoime-
irom  a  great  teacher  01  your  own  country  but  lately  security
passed  away, indicates  the  depth  and universality  hivoives.
of  that  secure  optimism  which  we  have  endeavoured  Jf^entifica-

■T  tion  with

to  correlate  with  the  inherent  value  and  destiny  of  ultimate

■^  individu-

the  finite  individual.  ahty,  which

The  Eude77tian  Ethics,  written  by  an  Aristotelian  he  through
moralist  of  the  fourth  century  B.C.,  teaches  us  : — ^  seif^recog-
"  So  whatever  choice  or  distribution  of  worldly  "o^sSutes
resources,  whether  of  bodily  qualities  or  of  wealth  the  worth

•' '■ _  and  destiny

or  of  friends  or  of  other  goods,  will  be  most  helpful  of  finite
towards  the  contemplation  of  God,  that  is  the  best,
and  that  is  the  most  beautiful  standard  of  organisa-
tion ;  and  whatever  arrangement,  whether  by  defect

^  Ar.  1249  b  16-21.


326  THE GATES OF THE  FUTURE  lect.

or  by  excess,  hinders  men  from  glorifying  God  and
enjoying  him,  that  arrangement  is  to  be  rejected."

And  the  great  Scottish  teacher  reminds  us  that
"  it  is  a  significant  fact  that  no  one  has  ever  brought
such  an  accusation  [as  that  of  treating  evil  too
lightly]  against  the  greatest  optimist  whom  the
world  has  ever  seen.  And  the  reason  seems  to  be
that  in  the  life  and  death  of  Jesus  the  consciousness
of  suffering  and  of  evil,  not  as  a  far-off  subject  of
reflexion,  but  as  an  immediate  and  personal  experi-
ence, is  raised  to  the  highest  conceivable  point  of
intensity.  It  is  this  certainty  of  ultimate  triumph,
this  combination  of  the  despair  of  pessimism  with
an  optimism  that  overreaches  and  overpowers  it,
nay,  that  even  absorbs  it  as  an  element  into  itself,
which  constitutes  the  unique  character  of  the
religion  of  Jesus."  ^

It  will  be  noted  that  the  words  "  the  certainty  of
ultimate  triumph"  seem  literally  to  indicate  some
reference  to  a  future  event  or  attainment.  If  they
are  to  be  so  taken,  the  present  argument  could  not
endorse  them.  For  it  the  triumph  is  in  the  Absolute,
and  the  total  expression  of  it  within  the  temporal
series  is  inconceivable.  Nor  can  we  suppose  that
all  which  is  to  come  in  that  series  is  nearer  to  per-
fection than  anything  which  has  gone  before.  Our
answer  to  any  such  problem  has  previously  been
explained.^  It  remains  solid  ground  that  the  security
of  the  finite  is  fully  to  recognise  its  own  nature,  and
that  in  this  recognition  a  given  self-conscious  race
must  naturally  tend  to  advance.

I  said  at  the  beginning  of  the  previous  course
that  our  results  would  be  nothing  starding  or  extra-

1 Caird,  Evolution  of  Religioii^  ii.  109  ff.  2 p,  213.


X  THE OFFER  AND THE PRICE  327

ordinary.  I  have  tried  to  aim  throughout  at  sanity
and  coherence — at  showing  what  the  universe  in-
herently must  offer  to  the  finite  being,  at  what  price,
and  why.  Consider,  as  a  final  example,  only  the
case  of  love — the  typical  self-transcendence.  No
doubt  it  is  the  best  thing,  in  a  sense  the  only  thing,
in  the  world  ;  but  most  certainly  it  is  not  to  be  had
for  nothing.  That  is  the  essence  of  our  argument
in  this  second  course  of  lectures.  And  the  first  had
endeavoured  to  exhibit  the  relation  to  its  own  full
nature — to  the  full  individuality — in  which  the  self-
transcendence  lies  that  actually  constitutes  the  so-
called  or  finite  "individual,"

The  atmosphere  of  our  pilgrimage  has  necessarily
been  sombre.  It  is  not  the  business  of  philosophy
to  praise  the  universe  or  to  exalt  the  satisfactions
of  goodness.  The  framework  of  our  theory  has  been
the  logical  structure  of  the  real ;  and  our  attempt
has  been  to  connect  in  a  single  view  the  inherent
factors  of  self-transcendence.  Thus  we  hoped  and
intended  to  exhibit  the  perils  and  troubles  of  the
finite  self  as  essential  elements  of  the  whole  in  which
its  value  consists — its  union  with  the  ultimate  in-
dividuality. In  such  an  analysis  the  hindrances,  the
causes  of  friction  and  collision,  necessarily  attract
theoretical  attention.  They  call  for  explanation,
while  what  primarily  satisfies  is  readily  welcomed.
None  the  less,  I  trust  that  our  portrayal  on  the
whole  has  done  justice  to  the  higher  obvious  experi-
ence, of  which  we  spoke  at  starting  as  the  medium
in  which  alone  a  sound  logic  could  be  satisfied.
The  at-homeness  in  the  whole,  the  strength  and
vitality,  which  the  very  perils  of  the  finite  pre-
suppose, and  the  fuller  types  of  experience  so  per-


328  THE GA  TES OF THE FUTURE  lect.  x

sistently  reveal,  are  not  dwelt  upon  at  large  for
theoretical  purposes.  But  such  experience,  I  hope,
has  been  sufficiently  indicated  to  exhibit  the  general
nature  of  the  value — the  perfection  of  the  ultimate
individuality — which  the  fragmentariness  and  the  con-
flicts of  finite  existence  are  the  means  of  manifest-
ing and  sustaining,  and  his  degree  of  identification
with  which  constitutes  the  worth  and  the  destiny  of
every  finite  individual.


INDEX


Absolute,  pervading  sense  of,  i8  w.

Absolutism,  which  knows  its  busi-
ness, 320  n.

Accident,  inherent  in  finiteness,  188

Amiel,  Journal  Intinie,  36  n.

Aristotle,  i,  54  «.,  145  «.,  165  ;/.,
196,  286

Attainment,  self-satisfaction  in  finite,
20

Bacon  and  Shakespeare,  221  n.

Bergson,  Henri,  68  n.,  73,  88,
290

Bohme,  J.,  242,  247

Bradley,  A.  C,  63,  275  «.,  287  n.

Bradley,  F.  H.,  Appearance,  13  ;/.,
22  «.,  58  ff.,  194,  230,  235,
248,  260,  267,  272,  284  ;
Ethical  Studies,  35  «.,  113,
118,  127,  131,  141  «.,  209,
291  ;  Mind,  165  «.,  215  ;
Principles  of  Logic,  105  n.  ;
Prestippositions  of  Critical  His-
tory, 52

Brown,  John,  154  n.,  217

Brown,  T.  E.,  Pai7i,  161

Caird,  E.,  on  Anselm,  24  n.  ;  Evolu-
tion of  Religion,  237,  326

Calvin,  233

Charity  Organisation  Review,  89  n.

Chautauqua  Assembly  Grounds,  322

Cicero,  233

Circumstance,  113

Clarke,  pseudo-mathematical  prin-
ciples of,  99

Clough,  A.  H.,  265  n.

Collectivity,  10

Co-operative  movement,  116

Cornford,  From  Religion  to  Philo-
sophy, I,  36  «.,  77  «.,  142  n.  ;
on  the  "  Suffering  God,"  183  n.,
189  «.,  267,  315


Dante,  162,  168,  ^230;  Paradiso
cited, 249 n.  ;^  Inferno cited,

290,  297  ;/.

Darwin,  77  n.

Denison,  Edward,  127

Dissociation  of  a  Personality  (More-
ton  Prince),  48  n.

Dualistic doctrines of Mind and

Body,  2
Duff  on  Spinoza,  23  n.

Eudemian  Ethics,  325

Feeble  -  Mind,  Mr. ,  in  Pilgrim'' s
Progress,  68  n.

Finite,  relation  to  appearance,  15

Fluellen,  227

Future  experience,  forms  of  theoreti-
cal reliance  on,  178,  and  Lect.
X.

Goethe,  184  n.,  263

Green,  T.  H.,  Prolegomena  to  Ethics,

21 n., 105 n., 113,  126,  127,

135,  198,  250,  277

Haldane,  Lord,  Pathway  to  Reality,

36  «.
Hales  White,  Spinoza,  23  n.
Hegel, I, 21,  40  «.,  41 n.,  47  n.,

77  ff.,  89,  126,  128,  146,  187,

291,  315
Herbert,  George,  25
Herodotus,  291  n.
Holmes,  O.  W.,  131
Homer,  on  immortality,  273  n.
Huguenots,  233

Hume,  58  n.,  198  «. ,  232  71.

Idols,  doctrine  of,  26

Illusion,  14

Implicit,  religious  consciousness,  25

Institutions,  112


329


330


INDEX


James,  William,  Varieties  of  Religiotis
Experience,  36  n.  ;  Pragmatism,
36  «.,  285;  Talks  to  Teachers,
322  ff.

Joachim,  Spinoza,  23  n.

Johnson,  Miss,  I'he  Long  Roll,  157

Kant,  136

Keats,  "on  Soul-making,"  63

Lane  Cooper,  116

Leibniz,  124;  Latta's  Leibniz  cit.,
269  n.

Le  Play,  127

Lloyd  Morgan,  Instinct  and  Experi-
ence, on  mechanism,  4  «.,  78  n.

Lockhart,  Lines  on  Immortality,  286,
289

Logic,  author's,  80  n.,  105  «.,  122,
213,  301

Lower  animals,  religion  among,  27

Luther,  234

M'Taggart,  Dr.,  36  «.,  38  «.,  105  n.,

258  n.,  267,  269
Marathon  and  Salamis,  158
Mason,  the,  Goethe's  lines  on,  263
Meredith,  George,  16
Mind,  author  in,  42  n.
"  Mire  of  Logic,"  see  New  Age
Moral,  point  of  view,  140  n.
"My  Station  and  its  Duties"  (F.  H.

Bradley),  141  «•>  240

Naaman  the  Syrian,  295

Natural  Selection,  not  negative,  96  n.

Nettleship,  R.  L.,  on  death,  36  n.  ;
on  fear  and  desire,  41  «.,  66  n.,
108  n..  Ill  «.,  198,  264,  277

New  Age,  7  n.

Newman,  Cardinal,  Dream  of  Geron-
tins,  168  ;  Apologia,  254

Pain,  suggested  reason  for  belief  in

predominance  of,  174-175
Parallelism,  2
Philosophical Theory of  the State,

author's,  m,  240
Plato, I, 21,  49,  61, 104  n., 115,

215,  268  ti.
Pollock,  Sir  Frederick,  on  Spinoza,

23  n.
Pope's  Iliad,  227
Powerlessness  and  finiteness,  56

Rashdall,  Rev.  H.,  Personal  Ideal-
ism, 60  n.  ;  Theory  of  Good  atid
Evil,  159


Reynolds,  Stephen,  Seems  So  !  144  n.

Rhodes,  History  of  U.S.A.,  154

Rochdale  Pioneers,  116

Rousseau,  Discours  sur  I  origine  de
Cinigaliti  parmi  les  hommes,
20  n.  ;  Discours  sur  les  Sciences
et  les  Arts,  220,  316

Russell,  Hon.  B.,  70  «.,  317

Russell,  E.  S.,  in  Scientia,  4  n.

Sadducees,  285

Salamis,  158

Schleiermacher,  234

Schopenhauer,  126

Science,  its  course  predictable  ?  8

Scientia,  4  n.

Self-sacfrifice  and  finiteness,  204

Sensation,  as  act,  33  n.

Sharrow  (Baroness  v.  Hiitten),  297

Sidgwick,  H.,  58  n.,  166

Sigwart,  Logic,  302

Simultaneity, a case of  succession,

301
Sir  Andrew  Aguecheek,  25
Society  of  Friends,  116  n.
Socrates,  163
Solipsism,  59
Soul,  I

Spencer,  Herbert,  165
Spinoza, 21 if., 28  ft.,  44  ff., 124,

165  n.,  189  «.,  196
Stout, Prof. G. F., Fundamental

Points  in  Theory  of  Knowledge,

38  «.
Suffering  god,  183  n.  ;  reconciliation

in  religion  of,  186
Supra-social  activities  confused  with

non-social,  38

Tarde,  Les  Lois  de  r Imitation,  20  n.
Taylor, Prof. A. E.,  on  Cornelius,

35  «•
Taylor,  Jeremy,  68  «.
Tennyson, Palace  of  Art, 40 n.  ;

Tithonus, 273 w.  ; In Memo-

riam,  275  ; Higher  Pantheism,

284
Thompson, Francis, "The Hound

of  Heaven,"  157  «.,  191  n.
Tolstoi,  324  n.
Toynbee,  Arnold,  127
Trades  Unionism,  117


"  Unhappy consciousness,'

(Hegel),  315
Utopian  temper,  the,  179


the


INDEX


331


Varisco,  Professor,  /  Massimi  Prob-

lemi,  67
Vatke, RIenschliche Freiheit, 113,

135-136  «.,  159,  245
Vernon  Lee,  321
Vitalism,  see  Scientia

Wallace,  W.,  Lectures  and  Essays,
86,  220,  233,  235  ff.,  317


Ward, Professor J., 32, 34, 73,

96  n.
Wells,  H.  G.,  on  inhabitants  of  moon,

50  n.
Westcott, Bishop, Gospel of the

Resurrection,  254
Westminster  Gazette,  188  n.
Wilde,  De  Profundis,  182
Wilson,  Prof.  J.  C,  7  n.


THE END


Printed  by  K &  k.  Ci.akk,  LiMni-.D,  Eiiiiibxirgh


THE GIFFORD LECTURES FOR 1911

THE  PRINCIPLE  OF
INDIVIDUALITY  AND  VALUE

BY

B. BOSANQUET, LL.D.,  D.C.L.

8vo. los.  net.

SOME  PRESS  OPINIONS

Mr.  J.  ELLIS  McTAGGART  in  MmB.—^'K  most  remarkable
achievement.  No  book,  I  think,  gives  so  good  an  account  as  this  does  of
the  brilliant  and  fascinating  school  which  counts  among  its  members  Dr.
Caird,  Lord  Haldane,  and  Dr.  Mackenzie,  but  of  which  Dr.  Bosanquet  is
perhaps  the  central  and  most  typical  member."

ATHEN.^UM. — "The  Gifford  Lectures  have  been  the  source  of  much
good  philosophy,  but  never  more  so,  we  think,  than  in  the  volume  before  us.
.  .  .  To  the  critics  of  Absolutism,  Mr.  Bosanquet  would  say,  '  Mark  now
how  a  plain  tale  shall  put  you  down.' He  has  a  full  measure  of  success."

SPECTATOR. — "  So  far  as  a  difficult  argument  can  be  simply  presented,
it  is  so  presented  here.  It  is  the  most  valuable  of  recent  statements  of  the
central  position  of  modern  English  idealism."

TIMES. — "Will  be  recognised  by  competent  judges  as  one  of  the  most
important  contributions  to  philosophy  which  we  owe  to  Lord  Giftord's
bequest.  The  lectures  owe  their  importance  not  to  any  novelty  of  pronounce-
ment but  to  their  impressive  restatement  of  a  great  position  in  the  face  of —
and  with  special  reference  to — strong  currents  of  contemporary  speculation
which  make  against  it.  .  .  .  In  the  present  volume  Dr.  Bosanquet  has
given  us  a  contribution  which,  partly  by  its  opposition  to  current  fashions  in
philosophy  but  still  more  by  its  own  breadth  of  outlook  and  the  gravitas  of
the  presentation,  is  singularly  provocative  of  thought.  Mention  should  be
made,  in  conclusion,  of  the  felicitous  way  in  which  the  argument  is  illustrated
and  reinforced  throughout  by  references  to  poetry  and  art."

Professor  A.  E.  TAYLOR  in  THE  REVIEW  OF  THEOLOGY
AND  PHILOSOPHY.— "■Hx.  Bosanquet's  Gifford  lectures  will  be  ea^jerly
read  by  ail  British  students  of  philosophy,  not  so  much,  perhaps,  for  their
novelty  as  for  the  skill  and  literary  grace  with  which  they  promise  to  expound,
as  a  systematic  whole,  the  ideas  with  which  Dr.  Bosanquet  has  already  made
us  familiar,  more  in  detail,  and  in  a  necessarily  piecemeal  way,  in  his  well-
known  works  on  Logic,  Aesthetics,  and  Political  Theory."

OUTLOOK. — "The  present  lectures  would  be  sufficient  to  place  Mr.
Bosanquet  among  the  happily  gifted  with  'penetrative  imagination.'  They
are  a  very  noteworthy  contribution  to  the  criticism  of  experience."

MACMILLAN AND CO., Ltd., LONDON.


By B. BOSANQUET, LL.D., D.C.L.

PSYCHOLOGY OF THE MORAL SELF.

Crown  8vo. 3s.  6d.  net.

TIMES. — "  If  only  for  the  chapter  on  '  Body  and  Soul '  in  which  the  results
of  the  most  recent  discussion  of  the  crux  of  psychology  are  set  out  unpretentiously,
accurately,  and  clearly,  this  little  volume  would  be  well  worth  reading."

WESTMINSTER  REVIEW.— '■''^nmhxX  of  suggestiveness."

THE  PHILOSOPHICAL  THEORY  OF  THE

STATE. 8vo. I  OS.  net.

EMILE,  livre  4. — "  C'est  le  peuple  qui  compose  le  genre  humain  ;  ce  qui
n'est  pas  peuple  est  si  peu  de  chose  que  ce  n'est  pas  la  peine  de  la  compter."

MANCHESTER  GUAR  DUN— ''Students  of  philosophical  literature
will  not  need  to  be  told  that  the  name  of  Mr.  Bosanquet  on  a  title-page  is  a
guarantee  that  what  follows  will  be  worth  their  most  serious  attention.  They
have  learned  to  expect  much  from  each  successive  book  of  Mr.  Bosanquet's,
nor  will  their  expectations  be  disappointed  in  the  present  case."

SPECTATOR. — -"We  always  expect  from  so  accomplished  a  writer  as
Mr.  Bosanquet  a  work  of  literary  and  intellectual  distinction,  and  in  the  volume
before  us  he  has  justified  his  reputation.  .  .  .  The  positive  value  of  this  work
is  great,  and  its  leading  ideas  cannot  fail  alike  in  clearing  up  the  general
problem  and  in  providing  an  impetus  to  actual  social  progress  on  the  lines  of
sound  ethics  and  rational  politics.  ...  A  very  fine  and  important  contribution
to  political  philosophy."

OBSER  VER. — "  Packed  with  thought  and  knowledge  it  deserves  the  very
serious  attention  of  all  students  interested  in  that  curiously  fascinating,  if  some-
what abstruse,  matter,  the  theory  of  the  State."

DAILY  CHRONICLE. — "A  singularly  able  and  stimulating  work."

THE  ESSENTIALS  OF  LOGIC. Being  Ten

Lectures  on  Judgment  and  Inference. Crown  8vo. 3s.  net.

TIMES. — "  Mr.  Bosanquet's  treatment  of  his  subject  is  eminently  stimu-
lating and  instructive."

ATHENAEUM.  — "  In  a  manual  intended  for  students  and  even  for  begin-
ners in  a  science,  or  a  particular  view  of  a  science,  which  is  not  only  extremely
dry,  but  also  of  a  veiy  abstruse  character,  lucidity,  as  far  as  the  subject  admits
of  it,  is  the  first  of  virtues,  and  Mr.  Bosanquet  exhibits  it  in  a  high  degree."

MACMILLAN AND CO., Ltd., LONDON.


other  Works  on  Philosophy

By Professor HENRI BERGSON

CREATIVE  EVOLUTION.  Translated  by  ARTHUR
Mitchell,  Ph.D. 8vo. los.  net.

LAUGHTER  :  An  Essay  on  the  Meaning  of  the  Comic.
Authorised  Translation  from  the  Sixth  Edition  by  Cloudesley
Brereton,  L.  es  L.  (Paris),  M.A.  (Cantab.);  and  Fred
Rothwell,  B.A.  (London). Extra  Crown  8vo. 3s.  6d.  net.


A  CRITICAL  EXPOSITION  OF  BERGSON'S
PHILOSOPHY.  By  J.  M'Kellar  Stewart,  B.A.,  D.Phil.
8vo. 5$.  net.

By Dr. F. C. S. SCHILLER

RIDDLES  OF  THE  SPHINX.  A  Study  in  the
Philosophy  of  Humanism. Third  Edition. 8vo. ios.net.

HUMANISM.  Philosophical  Essays.  Second  Edition,
Enlarged. 8vo. los.  net.

STUDIES  IN  HUMANISM.  Second  Edition.  8vo.
IDS.  net.

FORMAL  LOGIC:  A  Scientific  and  Social  Problem.
8vo. IDS.  net.

By Professor HENRY  SIDGWICK

THE  METHODS  OF  ETHICS. 8vo. 8s.  6d.  net.
OUTLINES  OF  THE  HISTORY  OF  ETHICS  FOR

ENGLISH READERS. Crown  8vo. 3s.  6d.

PHILOSOPHY:  Its  Scope  and  Relations.  8vo.  6s.  6d.
net.

LECTURES  ON  THE  ETHICS  OF  T.  H.  GREEN,
Mr.  HERBERT  SPENCER,  AND  J.  MARTI NEAU.  8vo.
8s.  6d.  net.

LECTURES  ON  THE  PHILOSOPHY  OF  KANT,
AND  OTHER  PHILOSOPHICAL  LECTURES  AND
ESSAYS. 8vo. IDS.  net.

MACMILLAN AND CO., Ltd., LONDON.
3


THE

SCHOOLS  OF  PHILOSOPHY

A HISTORY OF THE EVOLUTION OF

PHILOSOPHICAL THOUGHT

BY  VARIOUS  WRITERS

Edited  by  Sir HENRY  JONES

PROFESSOR OF MORAL PHILOSOPHY IN THE UNIVERSITY OF GLASGOW

Ready.

THE  EVOLUTION  OF  EDUCATIONAL  THEORY.

By  Professor  John  Adams,  M.A.,  B.Sc,  LL.D. 8vo. los.  net.

In  Prepa7-atio7i.

THE  HISTORY  OF  GREEK  PHILOSOPHY  FROM
THALES  TO  ARISTOTLE.  By  Professor  John  Burnet,
LL.D.

THE HISTORY OF MODERN PHILOSOPHY
FROM  HOBBES  TO  REID. By  Professor  G.  F.  Stout.
Other  volumes  to  follow.


HISTORICAL STUDIES IN PHILOSOPHY. By

Professor  Emile  Boutroux.  Authorised  Translation  by  Fred
ROTHWELL,  B.A. 8vo. 8s.  6d.  net.

ESTHETIC  AS  SCIENCE  OF  EXPRESSION  AND

GENERAL  LINGUISTIC.  Translated  from  the  Italian  of
Benedetto  Croce  by  Douglas  Ainslie,  B.A. 8vo. los.  net.

ECONOMIC  AND  ETHIC  Translated  from  the  Italian
of  Benedetto  Croce  by  Douglas  Ainslie,  B.A. 8vo.

ON  THE  CONSCIOUSNESS  OF  THE  UNIVERSAL

AND  THE  INDIVIDUAL.  A  Contributon  to  the  Pheno-
menology of  the  Thought  Processes.  By  Francis  Aveling,
Ph.D.,  D.D. Crown  Svo. 5s.  net.

THE CROWNING PHASE IN THE CRITICAL

PHILOSOPHY.  A  Study  in  Kant's  Critique  of  Judgment.
By  Rev.  R.  A.  C.  Macmillan,  M.A.,  D.Phil. Svo.

IDOLA  THEATRI  :  A  Criticism  of  Oxford  Thought
and  Thinkers  from  the  Standpoint  of  Personal  Idealism.  By
Henry  Sturt. 8vo. los.  net.

PERSONAL  IDEALISM.  Philosophical  Essays.  Edited
by  Henry  Sturt. 8vo. los.  net.

MACMILLAN AND CO., Ltd., LONDON.
4
