The Principle of Individuality and Value (Bernard Bosanquet, 1912)
Public domain. Sourced from Internet Archive: pre-1931 edition scan (https://archive.org/details/principleofind00bosauoft). The Gifford Lectures: Bosanquet's metaphysics of the concrete universal and finite individuality.
Hosted by the Tower of Babel library, antarctic-labs.com.

==============================================================================

INDIVIDUALITY AND DESTINY


THE  GIFFORD  LECTURES  FOR 1911-12


MACMILLAN  AND  CO.,  LIMITED

LONDON  •  BOMBAY  •  CALCUTTA
MELBOURNE

THE MACMILLAN COMPANY

NEW YORK  •  BOSTON  •  CHICAGO
DALLAS  •  SAN  FRANCISCO

THE  MACMILLAN  CO. OF  CANADA,  LTD.

TORONTO


THE PRINCIPLE


OF


INDIVIDUALITY
AND VALUE


THE  GIFFORD  LECTURES  FOR  1911
DELIVERED  IN  EDINBURGH  UNIVERSITY


BY


B. BOSANQUET

LL.D.,  D.C.L.

FELLOW OF THE BRITISH ACADEMY


DATE


• EN  BY


:>i:M  vices


IX


MACMILLAN AND CO.,  LIMITED
ST.  MARTIN'S STREET, LONDON

1912


COPYRIGHT.


PREFACE

THESE  lectures,  however  defective,  at  least  contain
the  record  of  a  very  strong  conviction.  I  feel  assured
that  a  great  deal  is  offered  us,  especially  in  modern
philosophy,  which  we  do  not  really  care  about  and
cannot  seriously  expect  to  prove.  On  the  other
hand,  I  am  persuaded  that  if  we  critically  consider
what  we  really  want  and  need,  we  shall  find  that  it
can  be  rationally  established  by  a  straightforward
argument.

In  thus  maintaining  that  philosophy  gives  us  the
quintessence  of  life,  I  am  not  suggesting  that  the
best  thing  in  life  is  the  pursuit  of  philosophy.  What
I  mean  is  that  the  things  which  are  most  important
in  man's  experience  are  also  the  things  which  are
most  certain  to  his  thought.  And  further,  I  should
urge,  this  is  not  an  accident  but  inevitable,  because
importance  and  reality  are  sides  of  the  same
characteristic.

And  if,  as  is  quite  likely,  I  have  almost  entirely
failed  to  maintain  this  connection  in  its  detail,  I  am
confident  that  others  will  be  found  to  take  up  the
work  with  better  success.  Indeed,  I  do  not  conceal
my  belief  that  in  the  main  the  work  has  been  done,
and  that  what  is  now  needed  is  to  recall  and  con-


vi  INDIVIDUALITY  AND VALUE

centrate  the  modern  mind  out  of  its  distraction  rather
than  to  invent  wholly  new  theoretical  conceptions.

But,  it  will  be  asked,  is  there  to  be  no  progress
in  philosophy  ?  How,  one  might  retort,  can  there
be  progress  if  no  definite  ground  is  ever  to  be  _^
recognised  as  gained  ?  There  is  no  progress  in  a
Penelope's  web.  Problems  of  thought  are  deepening
and  ramifying,  no  doubt,  from  generation  to  genera
tion  ;  but  this  is  just  because  an  advance  has  been
made.  We  do  not  even  know,  it  may  be  said,  what
we  mean  by  matter,  nor  how  it  is  related  to  mind.
But  we  do  know,  I  think,  the  limits  within  which
the  explanation  must  fall,  and  we  can  exclude  certain
ways  of  approaching  the  problem  as  certainly
unfertile.

I  chose  Individuality  as  the  clue  to  my  subject,
because  it  seemed  to  be  the  principle  which  must
ultimately  determine  the  nature  of  the  real  and  its
constituents,  of  what  is  complete  and  self-contained,
and  of  what  approximates  or  belongs  to  such  a
reality.  I  wished  to  investigate  its  positive  nature,
to  show  what  it  intrinsically  demands,  and  what  are
mere  incidents  annexed  to  it  by  a  mistaken  tradition.
I  hoped  that  it  might  be  possible  to  disengage  the
positive  nexus  of  philosophical  thought  from  the
details  of  critical  controversy  which  have  been
necessary  to  secure  its  line  of  advance,  and  which
have  erroneously  been  held  to  indicate  a  mainly
destructive  attitude.  My  inmost  aspiration,  I  admit,
would  be  expressed  if  I  could  say  to  the  critics  of
Absolutism,  "  Mark  now,  how  a  plain  tale  shall  put


PREFACE  vii

you  down." But  I  am  well  aware  that  my  perform
ance  does  not  justify  such  language.

I  have  retained  in  this  book  the  formal  title
of  lectures.  But,  of  course,  it  was  not  possible  to
deliver  the  whole  of  what  is  here  printed  in  ten
addresses  each  occupying  less  than  an  hour.  I  have,
therefore,  some  hope  that  the  book  may  appear  more
coherent  than  the  lectures  may  perhaps  have  seemed
to  those  who  heard  them.

It  may  be  noted  that  I  have  not  sharply  dis
tinguished  between  God  and  the  Absolute.  If  I  am
able  to  complete  a  second  course  I  shall  hope  to  go
back  upon  this  distinction  in  dealing  specifically  with
the  religious  experience.

The  fourth  lecture  is  based  on  a  paper  which
appeared  in  the  Proceedings  of  the  British  Academy  ;
the  second  Appendix  to  the  tenth  lecture  is  part  of
a  paper  which  was  published  in  the  International
Journal  of  Ethics.  I  have  to  thank  the  editors  in
both  cases  for  permission  to  make  use  of  this
material.  For  the  ideas  expressed  in  the  latter  as
much  credit  is  due  to  Professor  Burnet's  edition  of
Aristotle's  Ethics  as  its  author  is  willing  to  accept.

I  have  reprinted,  after  the  Table  of  Contents,
the  abstracts  of  the  Lectures  prepared  by  me  for
the  daily  press,  which,  as  free  and  popular  versions,
may  be  of  service  to  some  readers.

BERNARD BOSANQUET.

EDINBURGH,  November  1911.


CONTENTS

•LECTURE I

INTRODUCTION— THE CENTRAL EXPERIENCES

PAGE

Description  of  the  Problem  .....  I

The  attitude  to  experience . . . . .  i

1.  The  truly  obvious .....  3

2.  The  Pilgrim's  Progress  of  Philosophy  7

3.  Some  instructive  negations ....  9

(1)  " // gran  rifiuto "  .  .  •  .10

(2)  "  Fact,"  " Life,"  and  "Self  "  dangerous  immediates 1 3

(3)  Immediacy  involves  individualism,  .  . 15

(4)  and  rules  out  tension  from  perfection, .  • 17

(5)  and  thrusts  the  Absolute  out  of  Life .  . 19

4.  Some  central  points .  .  .  .  .20

(1)  What  counts  is  mind  as  such .  .  .20

(2)  Logic  the  spirit  of  value .  .  .23

(3)  The  "good"  of  a  world .  24

(4)  The  greatness  of  souls . .  .26

(5)  We  have  the  Absolute  throughout  .  . 27

5.  Intended  course  of  the  lectures .  .  29


LECTURE II

THE CONCRETE UNIVERSAL

Universal  as  a  general  rule . . .  .31

1.  Defects  of  general  rule . . .  .32

2.  "World"  a  better  type  of  the  universal .  . 37

3.  and  is  one  with  the  Individual. Why  trust  the  nisus

towards  a  cosmos  ? . . . .  .40

(1)  The  whole  is  truth . . .  .41

(2)  Non-contradiction  involves  a  world  or  whole . 44

ix


INDIVIDUALITY  AND VALUE


4.  Truth  or  the  whole  as  non-contradiction  or  satisfaction.

What  whole? . . . . .  52

5.  The  concrete  universal  embodies  the  nisus  of  thought  to

individuality . . . . .  54

6.  The  negligent  Dualism  must  and  can  be  overcome  in

principle . . . . . . .  59

i. Sensation  can  become  transparent  to  thought .  61

ii.  Thought  is  the  life  of  feeling . /  63

iii.  Thought  the  essence  of  free  activity . .  65

7.  The  goal  of  the  universal ...  68

i. Individuality  =  a  world  self-complete . .  68
ii. Individual  is  positively  unique,  i.e.  has  his  own

quality  ...  .  .69

iii. Individuality  prior  to  purpose . .  70

iv. The  individual  is  infinite  but  not  a  series  7 1

8.  Is  the  spiritual  inward  ? ...  72

i.  The  "inward"  not  spatial  nor  mechanical .  72

ii. True  inwardness  is  outwardness  absorbed .  74

9.  Revolting  from  Mechanism  we  should  go  not  to  History

but  to  Art  and  Religion . . . .  77


LECTURE III

UNIFORMITY  AND  GENERAL  LAW  NOT  ANTAGONISTIC
TO INDIVIDUALITY

1.  Alleged  Mentality  in  Nature  at  issue  with  Uniformity .  , 82

2.  Uniformity  as  similar  repetition  dist.  relevancy .  .83

3.  Physical  measurements  compared  to  social  averages . 85

i. "  Average"  and  "  Constant"  distinguished  . 86

ii. In  comparing  group-averages  the  analogy  breaks

down .  .  .  .  87

4.  Physical  statistics  would  be  second-class. Social  are  first-

class  .  .  .  .  . 89

5.  Misconception  of  Uniformity  due  to  theories  of  similarity

and  repetition  '.  .  .  .  .91

6.  Individuality  implies  precisely  determinate  response  . 96

i. False  ideas  of  what  Law  involves  .  . 99

ii. Every  Individual  system  is  a  complex  of  Laws . 102
iii.  True,  a  shallower  world  does  not  give  law  to  a

deeper  .  .  .  .  .106

7.  To  change  a  response  the  system  must  be  inwardly  changed 1 1 7


CONTENTS  xi


LECTURE IV

THE TELEOLOGY OF FINITE CONSCIOUSNESS—
A SUB-FORM OF INDIVIDUALITY

PAGE

1.  Individuality  is  the  universal  as  spirit  of  a  world  of  which

one  aspect  is  Teleology .  .  .  .122

2.  End  and  means  run  into  one  another .  .  . 123

3.  The  End  as  Satiety  is  not  Satisfaction  .  .  .128

4.  Teleology  supported  by  Miracle  on  Monadism .  . 132

5.  Teleology  and  Objective  Selection ,  .  .135

6.  Convergence  of  spiritual  value  and  mechanical  intelligibility 138

7.  Organic  mechanism  due  to  the  world-wisdom,  not  to  finite

consciousness  .  .  .  .  .142

8.  The  "plan"  is  the  working  of  the  whole  .  .147

9.  Two  points .  .  .  ,  . 153

i. Teleology  below  consciousness . .  153

ii. Teleology  above  consciousness . . .  154
10. What  applies  to  Finite  Consciousness  applies  to  the  god

of  Theism . . . . . .  155


LECTURE V

BODILY  BASIS  OF  MIND  AS  A  WHOLE  OF  CONTENT  %

1.  Alleged  subordination  of  Mechanism .  .  .161

2.  Dangers  of "  Interaction "  .  .  .  .166

3.  Suggestion  is  based  on  idea  of  qualitative  systems  quanti

tatively  conditioned  .  .  .  .'174

(a]  Mechanical  series  in  mind  .  .  .176

(b)  Finite  Mind  based  on  a  complex  of  determinate

adjustments •.  .  .  .  .177

4.  Vice  of  admitting  discontinuity  in  the  logical  nexus . 179

5.  Ends  are  physically  embodied  in  such  reactions  as  that

of  Drosera .  .  .  .  .  .185

6.  The  sciences  of  body  and  mind  do  reinforce  each  other

at  some  points •.  .  .  .  .187

7.  The  world  of  finite  consciousness  is  also  its  pre-condition 189

8.  The  point .  .  .  .  .  .193

i. Mind is a self-shaping world, the  centre of  an

externality .  .  .  .  .193


xii  INDIVIDUALITY  AND VALUE

PAGE

ii. Life  is  very  much  wider  than  finite  mind,  and  rela
tively  "  natural "  .  •„  .  . 195
iii. Conscious Process is meaning, not effect, of

physical  process  .  .  .  . 196

APPENDIX  I. — THE  "GUIDANCE"  THEORIES .  . 204

APPENDIX  II. — NEURAL  AND  CONSCIOUS  PROCESS . 208
i. A Logical system can act through a Causal

system  adapted  to  it  .  .  .  .209

ii. Mind  the  mainly  non-spatial  unity  of  body  in  action 2 1 1
a. On  this  view,  what  acts is not the man  ?
Yes,  it  is  ; his  system  responds,  through
his  machine .  .  .  .214

J3. Mind  is  unity  of  self-direction,  but  absolute

condition  of  sense  of  value  .  . 216

iii. "Soul"  does  not  help. The  unity  of  finite  mind

is  an  ideal,  not  a  fact  .  .  .  .218


LECTURE VI

SELF-CONSCIOUSNESS  AS  THE  CLUE  TO  THE  TYPICAL V/
STRUCTURE  OF  REALITY

Finite Consciousness  not  ultimate. Is it a defect in  the

Universe? .  .  .  .  .  .221

1.  The  resistant  and  the  responsive  not-self  .  . 221

2.  Contradiction. What  is  a  solved  contradiction  ?  . 223

3.  The  spirit  of  otherness  is  Negativity .  ..  . 228

4.  Hostility  (Contradiction)  confused  with  Responsiveness

(Negativity). Vraisemblance  of  the  confusion . 234

5.  Conclusions  opposed  to  current  opinions  .  .240

(a)  Finiteness  and  evil  not  illusions  .  .  .  240

(/?)  The  perfect  stability  must  not  exclude  activity  .  243
(y)  "  Surplus  of  pleasure  over  pain "  not  the  true

point  at  issue  .  .  .  .  .244

(8)  All-important  whence  we  adopt  suggestions  of

satisfaction ..... 246

6.  The  two  aspects  of  the  not-self. Is  discord  essential

to  selfhood  ?  .  .  .  .  247

7.  Has  finite  selfhood  a  value  ? The  higher  mysticism  ;

Continuity  with  Absolute .  .  .  .251


CONTENTS  xiii


LECTURE VII

OURSELVES AND  THE  ABSOLUTE

PAGE

1.  "Man itself" beyond "man." That it is so is the

bedrock  fact  of  life .  .  .  .  .257

2.  The  spirit  of  Logic  must  carry  us  to  the  whole .  . 262

3.  The  higher  experiences  are  the  clue  to  true  individuality

and  to  the  mode  of  inclusion  of  the  lower . .  269
i. Three  vicious  analogies for Individual : Thing,

Legal  Person,  Self  in  reflective  self-consciousness  283

ii. Mind  is  sui generis  best  described  as  "a  world".  286


LECTURE VIII

INDIVIDUALITY AS THE LOGICAL  CRITERION
OF  VALUE

1.  Doctrine  that  you  cannot  argue  on  ultimate  values  . 291
Possible  subordinate  meanings  of  it . . 292

i.  Judgment  infallible  pro  tempore .  .  .  292

ii.  Value  relative  to  Feeling  :  but  criticised  Feeling .  294

2.  An  identical  criterion  in  all  forms  of  satisfaction  .  .  297

3.  Explanation  of  contingency  of  de  facto  Valuations. Impo

tence,  pre-occupation,  means,  and  ends  .  . 299

4.  "All  values  relative  to  Persons"  compared  with  "nothing

has  value  but conscious states  of  conscious  beings."
The  two  propositions  may  be  sharply  opposed  .  . 302

i. States of  consciousness, if  abstracted  from the

objective  world,  are  meaningless  and  valueless . 305
ii.  You cannot value states  of  consciousness  apart

from  individuals  or  the  Individual .  . 307

iii. You cannot value finite individuals apart from

universe ..... 309
iv.  True  in  a  sense  that  universe  is  not  "good"  or

"  bad  " ;  but  the  whole  is  always  the  unit  of  value 3 1  o
v.  Instance  the  State. Is  its  value  unitary  ? The
Greek  theory,  making  it  one  mind  in  a  number
of  bodies .  .  .  .  .311

5. Conclusion. Things  can  only  be  valued  in  their  full  nature,

and  a  state  of  consciousness  has  not  this  within  it . 316


INDIVIDUALITY  AND VALUE


LECTURE IX /

FREEDOM  AND INITIATIVE

I'AGE

1.  Our  view  inclusive  —  Individuality  means  being  a  world  in

oneself  and  implies  a  special  kind  of  self-determination 318

2.  Objection  that  we  make  circumstance  the  only  differentiat

ing  influence. We  hold  the  self  to  be  the  inwardness

of  circumstance  ..... 323

3.  Objection  from  pre-determination. Answered  by  exhibi

tion  of  creative  nature  of  Logic,  carrying  its  past  in  its
present,  as  in  Art .  .  .  .  .326

4.  Difficulties  in  the  emptiness  and  timelessness  of  self-con

sciousness . . .  .  336

a. Its  emptiness  is  its  omnipotentiality  . .  336

P. Its  timelessness  is  its  "  duree  " .  . .  338

5.  Logic  is  perfect  determination. Fatalism  is  determinist,

i.e.  imperfect  determination .... 340

6.  Apparent  exceptions  to  "  Determinateness  =  perfection  of  a

self"  ......  .343

(i.)  The  animal self  comparable  to  data  without  a

theory  —  an  abstraction  .  .  . 344

(ii.)  The naive good self compared  to  grasp  of  a

fundamental  principle  alone .  .  -345

(iii.)  The evil self  compared to a  theory  persistent

against  completer  knowledge .  .  .349

7.  The  ideal  of  Contingency  rests  on  a  confusion  between  the

original  and  the  arbitrary .  .  .  .356


LECTURE X

NATURE,  THE SELF,  AND THE ABSOLUTE

1.  "Nature"  the  environment  of  selves,  considered  as  self-

existent. The  line  between  it  and  mind  not  fixed. E.g.

Has  it  Beauty?  .  .  .  .  . 358

2.  Nature  inseparable  from  mind .  .  ,  .361

i.  Starting  from  kinship  we  arrive  at  Monadism  or

Pan-psychism  .  .  .  .  .362

ii.  Starting  from  "otherness"  we  arrive  at  "source

of  content"  .  .  .  .  .  366


CONTENTS  xv


3.  Finite  minds  the  living  copula  of  Nature  and  the  Absolute

— an  everyday  experience .  .  .  .371

4.  The  real  point  is  in  the  transmuting  or  expanding  power

of  common  finite  mind  .  .  .  -376

5.  The  Absolute  the  high-water  mark  of  a  familiar  fluctuation.

An  audacious  illustration .  .  .  . 378

APPENDIX  I. — DOCTRINES  OF  THE  ABSOLUTE  . 387

1.  An  all-inclusive  span  of  consciousness  either  trans

forms  the  events  or  is  no  gain.  .  . 387

2.  Perfection must  contain imperfection, though in

finite  experience  we  seldom  find  that  it  does . 389

3.  Absolute  cannot  be  will  or  purpose  because  these

must  always  be  parts  within  wholes .  . 391

4.  Numerical  Infinity  a  hybrid  doctrine .  . 393

APPENDIX II.— THE PERFECTING OF THE SOUL IN

ARISTOTLE'S  ETHICS .  .  .  .  396

1.  The  minimum  act  of  duty  .  .  . 396

2.  The  expansion  which  it involves. The  "mean"

the precise  adjustment  essential  to  excellence

or  vitality ..... 397

3.  The  standard  involved  in  moral  duty. Practical

wisdom  .  .  .  .  -398

4.  Theoretical  wisdom  or  religion  ultimately  standard,

viz.  as  the  ultimate  value  or  quintessence  of  life 400

5.  "Friendship,"  i.e.  communion  in  the highest  ex

perience, the  link  between  group-welfare  and
religion  ..... 402


INDEX


405


ABSTRACTS  OF  LECTURES

LECTURE I

THE CENTRAL EXPERIENCES

LORD  GlFFORD  especially  desired  that  the  knowledge
conveyed  by  these  lectures  should  be  "  true  " — not  merely
nominal,  and  "  felt " — not  a  mere  theory.  They  were  to
communicate,  or  try  to  communicate,  a  grave  experience.
This  demand  introduces  us  to  the  double  task  of  philo
sophy.  It  needs  the  best  of  logic,  but  also  the  best  of
life,  and  neither  can  be  had  in  philosophy  without  the
other.  The  present  lecture  will  be  devoted  to  explaining
by  anticipation  and  without  technical  proof  on  what  sort
of  experiences  the  lectures  will  lay  stress  as  a  clue  to  the
best  of  life.  It  will  be  clearest  to  begin  by  a  general
statement,  and  some  negations.

To  begin  with,  what  philosophy  needs  as  its  materia
is  the  sort  of  thing  that  is  in  a  serise^obvious,  and  yet  is
hard  tojnake^plain  and  distinct.  The  very  greatest  things
are  of  thlsTand — simple  examples  are,  what  the  painter
perceives  when  he  represents  a  wood,  and  not '  merely
a  number  of  trees,  or  the  sociologist,  when  he  understands
a  crowd  and  not  merely  a  number  of  persons — both  late
in  being  learnt,  though  the  things  are  so  obvious.  The
central  facts  should  be  in  the  centre.  This  needs  a
continual  -arduous  .effort,  as  opposed  to  resting  upon
fixed  points  here  and  there.  Only  the  great  men  attain
a  survey  of  this  kind,  and  thus,  comparatively  speaking,
are  right,  a  far  more  arduous  thing  than  to  be  clever.

Following  such  a  clue,  we  should  begin by  rejecting


INDIVIDUALITY  AND VALUE


the  presumption  that  we  are  secure  in  resting  where
we  are.  A  Pilgrim's  Progress  is  inevitable,  both  in  life
and  in  thought.  Stability,  if  found  at  all,  must  be  in
the  end  and  not  in  the  beginning  ;  this  again  is  obvious,
but  neglected.  Other  over-hasty  ideas  might  be  found
in  the  false  denial  that  great  philosophy  offers  the  quint
essence  of  life  ;  in  uncriticised  reliance  on  "  the  solid
fact,"  the  "  sense  of  living,"  the  "  unsharable  self."  All
these  mark  just  such  timid  or  indolent  withdrawals  from
the  great  world  of  reality.

So  with  other  naive  ideas — compensating  justice,
ethics  which  treat  the  individual  as  isolated,  teleology
as  guidance  by  finite  minds,  and  their  satisfaction  ;  a
heaven  modelled  on  the  nai've  experience  of  pleasure,  a
philosophical  "  hope  without  guidance,"  which  seems  to
thrust  the  absolute  reality  outside  the  world  we  deal
with — all  these  have  certain  claims  to  truth  ;  but  there
are  more  "  central  "  experiences  than  these.

Such,  if  we  turn  to  the  gist  of  our  positive  argument,
would  be  the  conviction  that  what  really  matters  is  not
the  preservation  of  separate  minds  as  such,  but  the
quality  and  achievement  which  as  trustees  for  the
universe  they  elicit  from  the  resources  assigned  them  ;
in  other  words,  it  is  logic,  the  spint_of_totality  or  effort
to  self-completion,  which,  being  the  principle  of  indivi
duality,  is  the  key  to  reality,  value,  and  freedom.  Thus
the  "  good  "  of  the  universe  would  be  emphatically  such
as  must  belong  to  a  world,  not  to  a  mere  member  of
one.  It  must  be  such  as  makes  possible  the  finite  being
and  his  task,  but  cannot  be  the  same  as  what  he  develops
in  his  task.  The  universe  could  not  truly  be  thought  of
as  a  place  of  pleasure,  nor  even  of  probation  and  justice  ;
it  would  be  nearer  the  truth  to  think  of  it  as  a  place  of
"  soul-making."  And  it  would  be  recognised  that,  so  far
from  our  feeling  absolute  reality  to  be  foreign  and  remote,
it  is  what  we  feel  most  fully  and  intimately,  for  we  feel
it  in  everything.

The  present  course  will  deal  with  the  principle  of
individuality — of  self-completeness — as  the  clue  to  reality


ABSTRACTS OF  LECTURES


and  value,  and  consider  its  relation  to  general  law,
teleology,  freedom,  and  the  connection  of  nature  and
the  self  in  absolute  reality.  The  result  will  be  nothing
new  or  startling,  but  will  perhaps  express  and  define  the
reasonable  faith  of  open-minded  men.  It  will  suggest
that  a  sane  and  central  theory  is  not  full  of  oddities  and
caprices,  but  is  a  rendering,  in  coherent  thought,  of  what
lies  at  the  heart  of  actual  life  and  love.


LECTURE II

THE "  CONCRETE UNIVERSAL  "

AN  experience  which  throws  light  on  something  beyond
j  itself  is  called  "  universal."  Our  first  impulse  is  to  think  of
this  in  the  form  of  a  general  rule — something  which  is  true
of  a  number  of  similar  things  beyond  that  in  which  we  first
noticed  it.  So  we  say,  e.g.,  "  Same  causes,  same  effects,"
and  we  take  a  rule  of  this  kind  to  express  the  nature  of
thought.  But  from  the  first,  though  useful  in  its  way,
this  is  untrue.  The  truth  which  it  disguises  is  that
thought  has  always  the  nature  of  a  system  of  connected!
members,  and  is  an  effort  to  take  that  form,  which  we]
may  call  a  "  world."  This  is  the  only  sort  of  thing  which
\v  can  satisfy  the  logical  law  that  contradiction  is  a  mark
of  unreality,  or — the  same  law — that  the  truth  or  the
real  is  "  the  whole."

What  is  really  universal,  then — i.e.,  what*  expresses
the  work  of  thought  in  throwing  light  on  experience — is
always  of  the  nature  of  "  a  world."  In  the  structure  of
a  world  every  detail  gains  incalculably  in  intensity  and  in
meaning.  "  A  second  of  time  may  be  apprehended  as  a
part  of  a  minute,  or  of  a  musical  phrase,  or  of  an  act  of
forbearance  "  ;  and  its  meaning  varies  accordingly.  The
moral  of  this  is  that  logical  completeness  or  universality
is  not  a  deadening  but  a  vitalising  quality,  and  thought  is

not a principle  of rpprnHiiritig rf>p1jj-y_u7i||-> nrm'gginn^  but

qf^organisingjvvorlds  and  investing  their  detail  with  fresh


INDIVIDUALITY  AND VALUE


significance.  We  should  compare  it  with  a  painter's
touch  or  poet's  phrase,  which  embodies  vast  stores  of
meaning  in  its  vital  precision.  The  essence  of  thought  is
this  nisus  towards  a  whole — to  adjustment,  to  seeing
things  as  harmonious.  It  is,  therefore,  the  principle  of
freedom — of  removing  barriers,  transforming  the  alien
into  the  kindred.  And  it  is  in  all  finite  experience.

There  is,  of  course,  a  dualism,  or  rather  a  multiplicity,
in  our  experience  at  first  sight ;  but  it  is  naive  and  hasty
for  philosophy  to  accept  that  appearance  without  an
attempt  to  overcome  it.  In  sensation,  for  example,  we
can  see  the  principle  of  thought.  Of  course,  sensation
speaks  to  us  and  has  its  laws — e.g.,  of  colour  and  sound.
They  are  not  the  less  logical  that  we  cannot  translate
them  into  words.  A  colour-harmony  is  a  necessity  of
thought  as  much  as  a  syllogism.  "  Colour  is  a  spirit  upon
things  by  which  they  become  expressive  to  the  spirit."
Suppose  all  sensation  were  to  us  like  the  touch  or  voice
of  a  friend.  Then  it  would  have  meaning  enough.  So
with  emotion.  The  structure,  as  of  a  "  world,"  does  not
check  it,  but  expresses,  and  in  expressing  creates  it ;  in  a
great  work  of  music,  for  example.  So  with  action.  To
fye  "  active "  as  an  originative  being  is  active  is  to  be  a
world  which  reshapes  itself  by  its  own  principle,  to  be  a
"  free  cause."

Thus  we  arrive  at  the  idea  of  the  logical  universal  as
a  living  world,  complete  and  acting  out  of  itself.  This,
so  far  as  complete,  is  the  "  individual,"  and  ultimately
must  be  one  only,  and  perfect.  It  is  not,  therefore,  an
atom,  which  is  its  extreme  opposite.  It  is  rather  in
divisible  as  a  life  is  indivisible,  not  as  something  too  small
or  too  unreal  to  be  divided,  like  a  mere  point.  In
dividuality,  then^  is  positive.  It  means  that  what  is
individual,  so  far  as  it  is  so,  is  itself;  not  merely  that  it
is  not  somebody  else.  In  finite  life  individuals  repeat
each  other  a  good  deal  ;  this  does  not  make  them  less
individual  if  what  they  have  is  really  made  their  own  ;
compare  the  borrowings  of  a  great  poet.  Individuality
rather  defines  purpose  than  is  defined  by  it.  Purpose  is


ABSTRACTS OF  LECTURES


determined by  the  world  in which  it arises ; it is the
need  to  remove  some  contradiction.

Is  an  individual  infinite  ?  It  is  self-complete,  and  so
without  limit  in  so  far  as  perfect,  but  only  seems  an
endless  series  in  so  far  as  imperfectly  understood.  Thus
to  know  God  as  a  series  in  time  would  be  an  endless  task,
because  misconceived  from  the  beginning.  The  individual
is  the  true  spiritual ;  but  not  "  inward  "  as  conventionally
opposed  to  "outward."  It  is  a  mistake  to  confuse  deter
mination  or  definiteness  with  externality  and  mechanism,
and  the  emptiness  of  most  revelations  of  the  higher
experiences  is  due  to  this.  True  spirituality  is  not  the
annihilation  of  the  "  outward,"  but  its  transfiguration  in
-the  total  life.  We  want  to  realise  what  is  individual  as
a  positive  self-moulding  cosmos,  a  definite  striving  of  the
universe.


LECTURE  III

INDIVIDUALITY  AND UNIFORMITY OR  "  GENERAL LAW  "

THE  object  of  this  lecture  is  to  remove  the  idea  of
inconsistency  between  individuality,  and  the  "  Uniformity
__pf  Nature,"  or  the  reign  of  "  General  Law."  There  is
a  suggestion  that  the  observations  of  physical  science
may  conceal  a  high  variability  in  the  minute  elements
of  matter,  just  as  social  averages  disguise  the  differences
of  human  beings.  But  it  must  be  noted  that  high
variability,  unless  in  principle  inexplicable,  is  in  no  way
opposed  to  the  conception  of  uniformity  (relevancy),  and
that  social  statistics  are  marked  by  an  extraordinary
sensitiveness  and  progressiveness  to  which  nothing  in  the
material  world  shows  any  parallel.  To  discount  the  con
trast  between  matter  and  mind  is  a  mistake.

So  with  the  reign  of  law.  In  attempting  to  defend
spontaneity  against  general  law,  there  is  grave  danger  of
abandoning  the  relevancy  of  response  to  occasion.  The
error  lies  in  a  conception  of  "  general  law,"  which  treats


INDIVIDUALITY  AND VALUE


it  as  a  predicate  of  a  class  of  similar  objects.  But  a
plurality  of  similar  things  is  not  the  proper  example
of  the  application  of  law,  but  is  a  sub-form,  and  is
never  strictly  found.  As  explained  in  previous  lectures,  a
true  universal  connection  is  that  which  holds  between  the
differing  parts_oJLajiJndiyidual  system,  such  that  the  parts,
and  their  variations,  though  not  similar,  determine  each
other,  as  in  any  machine,  or  more  completely  in  an
organism  or  mind.  The  law  of  falling  bodies  would  be
very  poorly  described  as  a  common  predicate  of  falling
bodies.  It  is  essentially  a  quantitative  connection
between  distinct  factors.  And,  in  principle,  each  case
of  the  connection  is  unique,  being  a  distinct  and  separate
variation  of  the  principle.  They  might  or  might  not  be

1  apparently  (never  exactly)  repeated.  That  has  nothing
to  do  with  the  universality  of  the  law,  which  lies  in  the
nexus  between  the  different  constituents  which  enter  into

'  each  case  under  it.

Thus,  the  more  perfect  the  individual  the  more  com
plete  would  be  its  universality,  and  the  smaller  the  element '
of  repetition.  When  a  need  or  function  has  once  been
provided  for,  to  provide  for  it  again  means  that  the  first
attempt  was  unsuccessful.  But  every  feature  of  the
whole  is  in  a  nexus  of  variation  with  every  other.  We
might  think  of  a  man's  actions.  The  "  universal  "  is  the:
man's  nature.  The  interest  of  his  actions  depends  on
their  expressing  this  connectedly,  but  differently  in
different  situations.  Every  individual  is  a  universal  law
expressed  in  a  set  of  connected  functions,  precise  in
quantity  and  adjustment  A  moral  failure,  for  instance,
betrays  itself  in  some  maladjustment  of  the  thousand
details  of  action.  (See  Appendix  II.  to  Lecture  X.)

What  is  meant  when  individuality  is  contrasted  with
general  law  is  that  the  laws,  e.g.,  of  space  and  time,  do
not  explain  the  conduct  of  a  person.  This  is  not  because
they  are  too  universal,  but  because  they  are  not  universal
enough.  They  have  too  little  in  them.  So  Laplace's
"  calculator "  could  not  predict  everything,  unless  he
knew  much  more  than  the  position  of  all  physical  elements.


ABSTRACTS OF  LECTURES


He  would  not  be  a  true  type  of  intelligence.  What  is
repugnant  to  man  is  not  prediction  of  his  conduct,  but
reduction  of  himself  to  a  different—kind  of—existence.
We  could  only  predict  action  in  as  far  as  we  are  the
same  with  the  agent.  But  this  is  not  a  prohibitive
condition.  The  spiritual  world  depends  wholly  on  our
being  continuous  with  one  another — "  entering  into  "  one
another,  and,  in  fact,  the  main  outline  of  men's  life  and
work  constantly  is  anticipated  by  others.  "  General
law,"  it  is  said,  "  would  require  a  man  to  do  the  same
in  the  same  situation  ;  but  his  will  might  be  changed,
so  that  he  behaved  differently."  But  a  will  could  not
be  changed  without  changing  the  world  which  is  the  man  ;
it  is  re-shaped,  and  the  whole  situation  is  different.  The
intention  of  the  views  here  combated  is  to  show  intelli
gence  as_inadequate  to  spiritual  reality.  But,  in  fact,
die  spiritual  world^depends  on  the  unity^of  intelligence,
and  "  man  is  a  shop  of  rules,"  and  even  prediction,  which
is  a  form  of  mutual  understanding,  is  not  wholly  to  be
rejected.


LECTURE IV

THE TELEOLOGY OF FINITE CONSCIOUSNESS

THE  question  for  this  lecture  is  what  help  we  get  from
the  notion  of  a  mind  which  purposes  or  desires  things,  in
appreciating  the  worth  of  factors  in  the  universe.  The
idea  called  "  Teleology "  is  that  you  find  something
valuable  when  you  find  what  has  been  the  purpose  or
intention  jgfjoniejnaind,  human  or  divine  ;  just  as  in  daily
life  there  are  some  things  we  want  ("ends")  and  other
things  ("means")  we  only  choose  to  help  us  in  getting  the
former,  and  only  the  "ends"  are  valuable  for  their  own  sake.
But  to  be  desired  by  ajiuman  mind  is  almost  no  proof  of
value,  for  their  desires  are  constantly  wrong;  while  it  is
impossible  seriously  to  treat  a  mind  which  is  the  universe
as  a  workman  of  limited  resources,  aiming  at  some  things

c


xxiv  INDIVIDUALITY  AND VALUE

and  obliged  to  accept  others  as  means  to  these.  Thus
the  distinction  of  what  is  purposed  for  its  own  sake  and
what  is  not  so  could  not  be  applied  to  the  universe  ;  and
teleology,  if  the  word  was  kept,  could  only  be  a  name  for
some  principle  which  would  help  to  tell  us  what  has  value,
quite  independent  of  being  or  not  being  the  purpose
of  some  mind.  It  would  mean  not  purposiveness  but
worthiness  to  be  purposive.  And  this  would  be  much
more  important,  because  the  actual  purpose  of  human
or  animal  minds  seems  constantly  to  be  wrong,  z>.,  to
defeat  itself.  If  such  a  point  of  view  were  pressed  home,
the  distinction  between  mental  purpose  and  natural
mechanism,  on  which  commonplace  teleology  rests,  would
be  superseded  so  far  as  this,  that  we  should  look  for  the
value  of  the  universe  in  its  entire  and  continuous  working  ;
and  while  its  order  or  unity  would  be  recognised  as  ex
pressing  itself  in  part  through  human  consciousness,  we
should  not  treat  this  as  super-adding  a  new  principle  of
plan  and  direction  upon  the  ordinary  laws  of  Nature
considered  as  directionless.  We  should  consider  the
whole,  nature  and  mind,  as  the  revelation  of  the  value  of
the  universe.  The  bearing  and  result  of  these  considera
tions  would  be  to  lay  greater  stress  on  a  factor  which
might  be  called  in  a  very  wide  sense  "  natural  selection  "  ;
that  is  to  say,  on  the  moulding  of  the  organic  world,  and
even  the  world  of  mind,  in  relation  to  the  environment
which  we  know  as  physical  Nature,  by  and  through  which
the  possibilities  of  life  and  mind  are  elicited  and  deter
mined  ;  while  they,  in  turn,  elicit  and  determine  those  of
Nature.  There  would  be  no  priority  in  "  mind,"  as  if  it
possessed  a  "  plan  "  apart  from  Nature.

It  would  become  apparent  that  there  is  a  teleology  (if
the  word  is  to  be  retained)  deeply  rootejU*1  the-iimvprsf^
wholly  above  and  beyond  any  plan  or  contrivance  of
a  consciousness  guiding  or  directing  the  universe,  but
expressing  itself,  for  example,  in  conjunctions  and  results
of  the  co-operation  of  human  minds,  quite  beyond  the
knowledge  and  intentions  of  any  of  them  ;  and,  again,  in
the  character  and  formations  of  inorganic  nature  altogether


ABSTRACTS  OF  LECTURES  xxv

below  the  region  of  intelligent  action,  but  plainly  the
foundation  of  the  development  to  which  that  action
belongs,  e.g.,  as  geological  to  biological  evolution.  It
should  be  noted  that  of  the  lower  forms  of  consciousness
at  least  it  is  impossible  to  suggest  that  they  guide  organic
evolution.  It  is  plain  that  the  guidance  comes  from  the
environment,  and  even  if  subjective  selection  assists
adaptation,  it  stands  or  falls  finally  by  the  verdict  of
natural  selection.  The  conclusion  would  be  that  jjie  value
of  the  universe,  or  its  capacity  to  constitute  an  experience
without  defect,  lies  much  deeper  than  in  what  is  commonly
called  jteleology  ;  which  is  understood  to  imply  direction
by  a  supreme  mind  outside  or  above  the  miiverse,  and  by
finite  minds  within  it.  The  suggestion  would  be  that  the
universe  is,  as  a  whole,  self-directing  and  self-experiencing,:
that  minds  (such  as  ours)  are  members  of  it,  which  play
their  part,  taught  and  moulded  through  Natnrp,  in  the
work  of  direction,  and  a  very  essential  part  in  the  work  of
appreciation.  But  the  supreme  principle  of  value  and
reality  would  be  wholeness,  complet^n^s^jndividuality,
and  not  teleology.


LECTURE V

BODILY BASIS OF MIND AS A WHOLE OF CONTENT

THE  relation  of  mind  to  body  is  a  leading  instance  of  the
true  nature  of  individuality.  The  view  of  this  relation
which  we  should  favour  would  be  more  akin  to  "  parallelism  "
than  to  "  interaction,"  because  we  should  wish  to  think  of
mind  rather  as  a  perfection  and  co-operation  of  the  adapta
tions  and  acquisitions  stored  in  the  body  than  as  a
separate  thing,  independent  of  these,  and  acting  upon  the
body  from  the  outside  without  being  regulated  by  them.

To  abandon  the  idea  that  the  mind  expresses  itself
in  action  through  energy,  whose  quantity  and  distribution
depend  on  the  nourishment  and  organisation  of  the  nervous
system  (and  "  interaction  "  in  principle  abandons  this  idea),


INDIVIDUALITY  AND VALUE


withdraws  all  limit  from  the  supply,  and  rationality  from
the  distribution,  of  the  energy  which  that  theory  must
suppose  to  be  gratuitously  furnished  by  the  mind  without
participation  of  the  body.  Views  of  this  type  only  escape
manifest  conflict  with  common  sense  by  restricting  the
amount  of  energy  so  furnished  to  an  amount  below  the*/
possibility  of  measurement,  operating  analogously  to  the
release  of  a  trigger  or  to  the  spark  which  explodes  the
gas  in  a  gas-engine.  But  this  restriction  to  an  inappreci
able  quantity  seems  to  be  really  an  appeal  to  ignorance.
In  principle  it  sacrifices  the  constancy  of  energy,  but
attempts  to  do  so  in  a  degree  which  can  never  be  experi
mentally  detected.  It  may  be  that  the  constancy  of
energy  ought  to  be  set  aside  ;  but,  if  so,  there  seems  no
reason  for  not  setting  it  aside  much  more  boldly,  in  a
degree  which  would  at  once  conflict  with  common  sense.
It  is  not  its  own  certainty  that  makes  its  maintenance  in
this  application  desirable,  but  the  necessity  for  some  order
and  limit  in  the  operation  of  the  whole  "  body  and  mind  "  ;
which  has  to  be  furnished  by  bare  imagination  if  this
simple  equivalence,  which  we  accept  unhesitatingly  on
the  large  scale  (in  the  dependence  of  life  on  food,  etc.),  is
to  be  thrown  aside.

Answers  to  the  objection  that  a  physical  system  (the
brain)  cannot  possibly  represent  a  "  meaning "  or  an
"  end  "  are  to  be  found  in  any  complex  reaction  in  which
the  nature  of  a  physical  whole  responds  to  a  simple
stimulus,  as  in  the  reaction  of  a  carnivorous  plant  or  of
a  penny-in-the-slot  machine,  and  in  the  action  of  the
brain  as  a  whole  in  support  of  a  particular  system  realis
ing  itself.

Thus  there  is  nothing  in  mind  which  the  physical
counterpart  cannot  represent,  and  the  whole  life  of  mind
being  continuous,  and  new  purposes  interwoven  at  every
point  with  old  purposes  and  experiences,  it  cannot  be
said  that  portions  of  mind  are  such  as  to  be  represented
in  the  physical  counterpart  and  portions  are  not.  This
would  make  mind  discontinuous  with  itself.

Thus,  admitting  that  we  cannot  think  of  "  explaining  "


ABSTRACTS OF  LECTURES  xxvii

consciousness,  we  should  obtain  a  more  genuine  notion  of
the  finite  soul.  It  would  seem  to  be  a  perfection,  follow
ing  upon  certain  physical  conditions,  and  constituting  a
conscious  world,  capable  of  diverse  degrees  of  unity  and
perfection,  and  essentially  an  organ  of  the  universe  for
focussing  and  appreciating  that  special  range  of  the
external  world  with  which  it  is  connected.

This  point  of  view  would  suggest  the  importance  of
the  support  of  abstract  ideas  (say,  ethical  ideas)  by  active
habits,  in  opposition  to  the  view  for  which  the  merit  of
ideas  has  nothing  to  do  with  their  effectiveness.  The
conditions  of  completeness  of  an  idea  are  highly  analogous
to  the  conditions  of  prevalence  of  a  nervous  impulse.  An
idea  which  has  no  range  of  application  to  reality  is  im
perfect  by  that  fact.  Body,  then,  would  be  a  highly
organised  and  adapted  causal  system  ;  a  mind,  a  logical
one.  The  difference  between _them  could  not  be  explained
away  ;  but  we  understand  them  best  if  we  take  mind  as
the  significance  and  interpretation  (not  the  effect)  of  body;
and  body  as  the  stored  acquisitions  and  adaptations
which  are  the  foundation  and  machinery  of  the  single
but  complex  world  which  is  a  mind.


LECTURE VI

SELF-CONSCIOUSNESS AS  THE  CLUE  TO  THE  STRUCTURE
OF REALITY

IT  has  been  made  clear  by  the  argument  up  to  this  point
that  minds  like  ours,  planning  and  guiding  matter  to  ends,
even  though  immensely  greater  than  ours,  could  not  be
the  mair^  directors  of  thejunive£se.  They  rest  on  arrange
ments  below  them  ;  they  indicate  in  every  feature  fuller
forms  of  completeness  above  them.  Still  their  main
character,  the  consciousness  of  self  might  indicate  to
us  something  of  the  structure  of  reality.  What  would  it
suggest  ?  The  approximation  of  self-consciousness  to  an
absolute  experience  must  be  determined  by  two  well-known


xxviii  INDIVIDUALITY  AND VALUE

phases  of  experience — contradiction,  and  the  negativity
or^ense  of  tension  which  survives  in  the  solution  of  a
contradiction,  which  latter  may  be  described  in  general  as
satisfaction.  Logical  contradiction  consists  in  different
natures  claiming:  the  same  place_  jji_the_  same  system,
so  that  they  conflict,  and  cause  logical  or  even  general
dissatisfaction  and  unrest,  which  constitute  an  impulse  to
the  "  solution  "  of  the  conflict.  This  would  consist  in  such
a  readjustment  of  terms,  by  a  new  distinction  or  the
introduction  of  a  fresh  point  of  view,  that  the  conflicting
terms  can  find  place  together  within  the  system  in
question,  both  of  them,  and  the  system,  being  somewhat
modified.  Any  advance  in  theory  or  reconciliation  in
practical  life,  is  an  example.  Such  a  contradiction  is  not
a  mere  mistake  of  ours  which  ought  not  to  exist.  It  is  a
character  of  the, finite  world,  and?  because  it  is  intolerable
to  the  mind,  is  the  mainspring  of  movement  and  effort
in  that  world.

Now  it  is  natural  to  think  that  when  a  "  contradiction  "
is  "  solved  "  nothing  like  it  survives  in  the  solution.  But
this  cannot  really  be  so.  If  it  were  we  should  not  feel  it
to  be  a  solution  or  satisfaction.  There  is  always  the
sense  that  something  has  been  overcome,  and  that  the  one
term  is  expanded  by  coalescence  with  the  other.  The
satisfaction  of  desire  is  an  example.  This  we  may  call  the
Negativity  which  survives  in  satisfaction.

Now — to  return  to  the  self — it  is  obvious  that  the
consciousness  of  self  (cp.  "  self-consciousness  "  in  the  bad
sense)  oftenjjepends  on  a  sense  of  ..hostility  to  the  not-self,
in  which  it  appears  to  conflict  with  or  contradict  the  self.
Sometimes  this  is  treated  in  theory  as  the  only  basis  of
the  assurance  of  self.  In  that  case  it  would  be  analogous
to  contradiction,  and  the  sense  of  self  would  disappear  as
experience  was  harmonised,  just  as  contradiction  disap
pears  in  a  "  solution."  But  this  would  neglect  another
obvious  fact,  that  the  self  is  at  its  best  and  fullest,  and  the
sense  of  it,  in  a  way,  strongest,  wjien_the  Jio^sdf  is  most
expanded  and  also  most  harmonious  with  it  (cp.  e.g.  a
savage  with  Newton  or  Darwin).  And  the  suggestion  of


ABSTRACTS OF  LECTURES  xxix

this  fact  is  confirmed  by  the  above  logical  account  of
negativity  in  satisfaction.  The  sense  of  distinctness  is  not
lost  in  a  "  solution  "  ;  on  the  contrary,  the  sense  of  having
found  yourself  in  another  is  an  essential  of  satisfaction.
Thus  the  suggestion  is  that  though^contradiction  disap
pears  in  perfection,  _negativity_  does  not ;  and  though
hostility  to  the  not-self  may  help  in  awakening  self-
consciousness,  yet  a  harmony  in  distinction  with  the
not-self  is  a  deeper  element  in  self-assurance,  and  one  that
increases  with  the  perfection  of  the  self.  This  points  to
the  conclusion  that  a  perfect  experience  maintains  the
posjtive  sense  of  the  self  as  something  which  continually
passes  out  of  and  regains  itself  (dies  to  live).  It  is  indi
cated  by  this  conclusion  that  pain  and  evil  are  not  illusions,
but  ^ssential  to  the  structu_re_pf  reality,  being  of  the  same
general  type  as  satisfaction  and  good,  but  renderedjcon-
tradictory  by  their  imperfection.  The  general  form  of
reality,  self-sacrifice  and  satisfaction,  being  ultimately  of
the  same  type  throughout,  would  be  in  a  perfect  life
completed  in  a  way  in  which  both  would  be  experienced.


LECTURE VII

OURSELVES AND THE ABSOLUTE

THIS  lecture  is  meant  to  summarise  the  reasons  for
believing  in  the  Absolute,  and  to  explain  what  indications
we  possess  of  the  way  in  which  we  could  be* included 'in
something  greater  than  ourselves ;  and  how,  in  con
sequence,  we  ought  to  think  of  our  own  being  and  of
our  connection  with  others.  Beginning  with  a  current
criticism,  first  made  by  Aristotle,  "  If  we  know  what  man
is,  what  is  the  sense  of  talking  of  '  real  man '  as  if  it  were
something  more  ?  "  the  answer  is,  "  We  do  not  know  man
as  he  is  ;  his  nature  is  only  in  process  of  being  com
municated  to  him."  This  is  to  be  seen  in  everyday  life.
When  some  great  experience — art,  love,  war — carries  a
man  "  out  of  himself,"  you  say,  "  I  shouldn't  have  known


xxx  INDIVIDUALITY  AND VALUE

him,"  and  he  feels  the  same.  So  in  the  perfect  experience,
only  more  so.  Of  course,  what  we  see  of  him  is  "  in  the
Absolute,"  because  everything  is  ;  only  there  is  much  more
of  him  than  we  see.

The  argument  that  expresses  these  facts  is  technically
known  as  the  argument  a  contingentia  mundi — i.e.,  the
fundamental  process  of  logic,  which  works  by  the  creative
method  of  meeting  and  removing  contradictions  through
the  development  of  the  world  of  thought.  This  is  the  law
of  non-contradiction  in  its  positive  operation,  finding  the
solution  of  difficulties  in  "  the  whole."  It  gives  rise  to  the
sort  of  unity  by  which,  e.g.,  we  now  think  of  the  Antipodes
in  one  and  the  same  idea  with  the  earth's  surface  as  we
see  it,  or  of  the  mere  parental  instinct  in  one  idea  with
the  civilised  family.  An  argument  of  this  kind  carries  us
to  the  Absolute  without  a  break,  merely  insisting  on  what
our  given  nature  implies.  What  it  does  for  us  is  not  to
assure  us  of  a  new  and  disconnected  experience,  such  as
"  Heaven,"  but  to  show  us  what  is  more  trustworthy  and
stable,  and  what  is  more  incoherent  and  defective,  in  the
range  of  our  life.  It  gives  us  "  hope,"  but  also  "  guidance."
"  Higher,  truer,  more  beautiful,  better,  and  more  real,
these,  on  the  whole,  count  in  the  Universe  as  they  count
for  us."

4  To  do  such  an  argument  justice,  we  should  take  into
account  man  at  his  best.  The  minimum  meaning  of  a
word  or  thing  is  often  treated  as  the  one  genuine  meaning,
because  it  is  current.  But  this  is  a  groundless  prejudice.
It  is  careless  to  say  that  a  man  "  really  is  "  separate  and
self-centred  because  he  feels  so  at  his  worst.  Why  not
found  our  theories  on  men  as  they  are  when  they  fight
on  the  same  side,  or  give  their  life  for  a  friend  ?  To
think  in  this  way  would  help  us  with  perhaps  the  greatest
difficulty  in  conceiving  the  Absolute — viz.,  how  one  mind
or  mood  can  be  included  in  another.  Take  Dante's
religion.  It  includes  religious  absorption,  moral  struggle,
the  aesthetic  sense,  and  intellectual  satisfaction.  We  weaker
minds  can  only  get  hold  of  these  moods  in  succession,
though  each  really  implies  all  the  others.  What  we  grasp


ABSTRACTS OF  LECTURES


of  them  at  any  moment  is  like  a  bit  of  a  mountain  seen
through  a  mist.  It  looks  quite  different  from  what  it
would  if  we  saw  more.  But  it  is  part  of  that  "  more,"
only  dissociated  from  it  by  our,  weakness,  which  is
necessary,  perhaps,  for  its  perfect  realisation.

The  conclusion  would  be  that  we  should  not  think  of
ourselves  merely  after  the  pattern  of  separate  things,  or
personalities  in  the  legal  sense,  or  even  as  selves  in  the
sense  of  isolation  and  exclusion  of  others.  We  are  minds,
i.e.,  living  microcosms,  not  with  hard  and  fast  limits,  but
determined  by  our  range  and  powers,  which  fluctuate  very
greatly.  There  would  be  no  gain  in  wiping  out  the  dis
tinction  between  one  self  and  another  in  finite  life  ;  our
limitations  themselves  no  doubt  have  a  value.  Still,  in
principle,  our  limitations  are  merely  de  facto  :  there  is  no
hard  barrier  set  that  can  make  our  being  discontinuous
with  others  or  with  the  perfect  experience.


LECTURE VIII

INDIVIDUALITY AS THE ULTIMATE CRITERION
OF VALUE

THE  subject  to  be  considered  is  "  Individuality  "  as  the
ultimate  criterion  of  value.  The  meaning  of  this  might
be  approached  through  two  well-known  sayings,  "  It  is
no  good  arguing  about  tastes,"  and  "  Excellence  in  art
depends  on  fundamental  brainwork."  The  former  we
should  deny,  the  latter  we  should  maintain.  "  Indivi
duality  "  we  saw  to  mean  logical  self-completeness,  freedom
from  incoherence.  And  we  saw  that  this  comes  only  by
a  strong  and  consistent  positive  nature.  So  the  idea  we
are  to  maintain  is  that  things,  acts,  feelings,  have  "  value  "
in  as  far  as  they  are  completely  organised,  do  not  break
down,  have  parts  or  members  which  confirm  and  sustain
one_  another.  Art  is  only  one  case  ;  the  principle  extends
to  everything  within  experience.  In  short,  the  power  of
giving  satisfaction,  "  satisfactoriness,"  is  a  thing  that  can


xxxii  INDIVIDUALITY  AND VALUE

profitably  be  argued  about.  We  are  not  satisfied,  i.e.  we
do  not  value  things,  without  some  positive  reason  in  their
nature.  The  denial  that  values  can  be  profitably  argued
upon  may  mean  either  of  two  things  which  are  true  as  far
as  they  go.  It  may  mean  that  our  judgments  hold  good
till  they  are  reversed  by  subsequent  judgments  ;  and  in
practice  this  is  a  hard  thing  to  get  done.  This  is  true,  but
equally  true  of  all  judgment,  and,  of  course,  we  do  modify
our  judgments  through  argument.  Or  it  may  mean  that
"  value  "  is  a  matter  of  feeling,  which  is  a  simple  fact,  and
judgment  may  state  it,  but  cannot  produce  it.  This  is
true  so  far  that,  apart  from  feeling,  there  can  be  no  value.
But,  having  feeling,  we  can  both  test  it  and  modify  it  by
critical  reasoning.  Good  literary  criticism  shows  how  this
can  be  done.  In  truth,  the  education  of  feeling  is  the  most
important  of  all  education — teaching  people  to  like  and
dislike  rightly — as  the  Greeks  knew  ;  and  this  means  that
there  is  a  standard.

The  question  of  "  value  "  then  is  the  question  of  com
plete  and  durable  satisfaction,  and  it  depends  on  what
Plato  would  call  "  amount  of  reality  and  of  trueness."
Plato's  doctrine  is  reproduced  with  higher  intensity,  but
without  its  logical  basis,  in  the  passage,  "  He  that  drinketh
of  this  water  shall  thirst  again,"  etc.

It  is  easy  to  explain  why  our  de  facto  valuations
are  so  conflicting.  It  is  just  like  our  conduct  and  our
opinions.  Our  minds  are  very  limited,  and  are  preoc
cupied  by  this  or  that  interest,  which  prevents  us  really
attending  to  others.

Two  views,  which  sound  much  alike,  of  the  relation
of  value  to  conscious  minds,  must  be  sharply  distinguished
— "  all  values  concern  persons?  and  "  all  values  attach  to
conscious  states"  Certainly  there  must  be  consciousness
and  feeling  in  order  to  appreciate  values.  But  the  second
statement  may  be  taken  to  mean  that  the  value  resides
in  the  separate  successive  conscious  states  (as  e.g.  in
moments  of  pleasure),  each  by  itself,  without  reference
to  their  place  in  the  personality,  orjn  any  higher  unity
such  as  the  social  whole  to  which  they  may  belong.  So


ABSTRACTS  OF  LECTURES


interpreted,  the  second  statement  not  only  does  not  repeat
the  first,  but  flatly  contradicts  it.

But  the  first  seems  true.  Things  can  only  be  valued
right  when  valued  in  their  whole  nature,  and  that  they
only  have  in  the  complete  being  to  which  they  belong.
So  the  Greek  theory  of  the  State  expressly  says  you
cannot  value  the  individuals  separately,  and  then  find
the  value  of  the  social  whole  by  adding  up  those  of  the
individuals,  because  each  individual  only  has  his  full  and
real  nature  and  value  in  the  whole  life  of  the  community.
Thus  not  only  the  servant  has  his  value  largely  in  his
master's  work,  which  he  makes  possible  ;  but  the  rulers
have  their  value  in  the  qualities  which  they  share  with
and  learn  from  the  subject  classes.  This  is  true  of  every
community,  and  a  fortiori^  of  the  conscious  moments
within  the  life  of  an  individual  compared  with  the  person
himself.  The  conclusion  is  that  the  judgment  of  value
can  be  logically  supported,  because  the  objects  of  our
likings  and  dislikings  possess  as  much  6f  satisfactoriness,
which  is  the  same  thing  with)  value,  as  they  possess  of
"  reality  and  trueness."  This  is  value  for  us,  because  our
whole  being  is  implicated  in  the  world  about  us,  while
our  vitality — our  feeling — is  raised  and  lowered  by  the
nutrition,  so  to  speak,  which  at  any  point  that  world  affords
to  our  mind  and  body.


LECTURE IX

FREEDOM AND INITIATIVE

OUR  view  leads  us  to  regard  freedom  and  initiative —
the  subject  of  the  lecture — as  the  inherent  effort  of  mind,
considered  as  a  "  world,"  in  the  direction  of  unity  and
self-completeness,  i.e.  individuality.  If  it  is  objected  that
according  to  such  a  doctrine  the  difference  between  one
mind  and  another  springs,  not  from  the  nature  of  its
self-consciousness,  but  from  the  range  of  circumstances
which  fill  up  its  world,  the  answer  is,  in  the  main,  that


INDIVIDUALITY  AND VALUE


that  is  what  our  minds  are  for — to  elicit,  to  represent  in
themselves,  the  "  true  inwardness  "  of  that  special  field  of
experience  in  which  they  are  embodied  ;  and  they  find
their  freedom  and  individual  initiative  in  the  working,
the  "  logic "  of  this  special  contribution  to  the  eternal
deed.  Of  course  it  would  be  untrue  to  suppose  that
circumstances  are,  in  such  a  mind  or  active  focus,  what
they  seem  as  seen  from  the  outside,  or  as  in  any  other
mind  or  focus.

This  may  be  tested  by  the  further  objection  that  our
doctrine  involves  determination  of  the  mind  by  previous
events,  which  are  fixed  and  past,  and  cannot  be  re
modelled,  so  that  the  action  of  the  "  individual "  has  been
compared  to  the  "  rattling  off  of  a  chain  "  previously  forged
— "  Tout  est  donne"  is  Bergson's  reiterated  criticism.

The  usual  and  sufficient  answer  to  this  criticism  lies  in
the  distinction  between  a  motive,  which  is  the  mind  read
ing  itself  as  a  whole  into  a  situation  as  a  whole  (so  that,
of  course,  any  factor  in  the  situation  may  take  on  quite  a
new  aspect),  and  a  cause,  in  which  there  is  no  such  total
presence  of  a  self,  but  only  a  succession  such  as  an  outside
observer  may  note.

Instead  of  restating  this  familiar  point,  we  might  raise
the  same  question  more  sharply  by  asking  what  sort  of
novelty  or  origination  there  is  which  would  satisfy  us,  if
the  inherent  logic  of  the  self  will  not  ?  What,  e.g.  do  we
really  expect  and  demand  of  what  we  call  "  creative  "  art
in  its  best  and  most  original  products  ?  There  is  much
misconception  in  the  popular  mind  on  this  point,  and  it  is
aggravated  by  recent  theories  which  break  up  the  inventive
process  of  transformation  into  sheer  imitation  plus  in
explicable  invention  in  a  quite  fallacious  manner.  Art  is
"  creative  "  by  the  concreteness  of  its  content  and  the  depth
of  its  penetration,  and  it  cannot  be  predicted,  for  the  same
reason  that  whole  lives  cannot — that  you  cannot  do  a  thing
beforehand  except  by  being  its  author  beforehand  ;  and
this  is  more  possible  in  abstractions  (e.g.  calculation)  than
in  very  concrete  life.  But  all  the  same,  its  creativeness
lies  in  its  fulness  and  penetration,  not  in  arbitrariness  and


ABSTRACTS OF  LECTURES


discontinuity  with  reality,  and  in  ultimate  principle  its
initiative  and  originality  is  of  the  same  nature  with  self-
transformation  of  the  self  in  moral  action.  Any  freedom
or  initiative  which  were  not  of  this  nature  would  be  wholly
devoid  of  the  continuity  which  is  necessary  to  a  human
interest.  "  Life,"  which  we  are  offered  as  the  type  of
active  duration  or  freedom,  is,  compared  with  the  freedom
we  speak  of,  like  a  bird's  song  to  the  Iliad.  A  freedom
freer  than  the  latter  type  has  never  produced  anything
worth  having,  and  never  could.  The  "  timelessness "  of
this  self,  i.e.  its  presence  to  itself,  is  the  same  thing  in
principle  with  the  duree  of  which  so  much  is  said  to-day.
This  determinatenesSj  which  must  be  fullest  in  the  most
perfect  being,  is  opposite  in  principle  to  determinism,
which  is  the  partial  determinateness  of  unawakened  beings
whose  responses  are  relative  to  exceedingly  limited  totali
ties,  and  form  what  we  call  physical  causation.  It  is
interesting  to  consider  why  imperfect  determinateness  in
a  conscious  being  is  not  always  a  sign  of  grave  moral
evil,  as  it  certainly  is  of  some  kind  of  imperfection.  The
answer  is  that  it  only  means  moral  evil; where  there  is
a  deep-seated  contradiction  within  a  determinate  self.
Otherwise,  as  in  naive  morality,  though  it  indicates  a
defect,  that  defect  is  not  an  explicit  contradiction.  Our"
view  has  attempted,  by  distinguishing  determinateness  and
determinism,  to  rescue  our  moral  freedom  from  the  two
vicious  ideals  of  contingency  and  predetermination,  and  to
exhibit  it  in  connection  with  the  type  of  activity  for  which,
by  common  consent,  the  terms  "  original  "  and  "  creative  "
are  most  appropriately  reserved.


LECTURE X

NATURE, THE SELF, AND THE ABSOLUTE

THE  object  of  this  lecture — "  Nature,  the  Self,  and  the
Absolute" — is  to  summarise  the  suggestions  which  had
been  made  in  the  lectures  as  to  the  connection  between


xxxvi  INDIVIDUALITY  AND VALUE

I  the  main  factors  of  experience  as  we  know  it,  "  Nature  "
j  and  "  the  Self,"  when  we  try  to  think  of  them  as  belonging
to  a  complete  and  single  system,  which  may  be  called  the
Absolute.  It  is  very  difficult  to  draw  the  line  between
Nature  and  the  Self.  Nature  as  regarded  by  mathe
matical  physics  is  not  a  reality,  but  merely  a  way  of
representing  certain  characters  of  the  world  which  are
convenient  for  calculation.  Nature,  as  we  really  experi
ence  it,  with  primary,  secondary,  and  tertiary  (aesthetic)
qualities,  can  only  be  distinguished  from  ourselves  as
fragmentary  experiences  from  conscious  centres  of  experi
ence.  It  is  actually  real  ;  but  that  cannot  mean  that  it
is  real  by  itself,  /.£.,  apart  from  minds  which  experience  it.
Its  being  physical  cannot  exclude  its  being  continuous
with  what  is  psychical.  Now  Nature,  so  understood,  is
closely  bound  up  with  Mind  or  Self;  but  the  question
is,  How  ?

It  is  sometimes  taken  as  made  up  of  elements  having
minds,  though  show/n^  to  us  as  bodies.  This  is  the
doctrine  of  Pan-psychism,  treating  Nature  as  like  Mind.
The  difficulty  is  that  what  we  want  of  it  is  its  body  rather
than  its  mind.  Its  mind  (e.g.,  that  of  a  lake  or  mountain)
does  nothing,  and  is  not  what  we  want  from  it.  Our
minds  represent  its  nature  better  than  its  own  mind
could.

Therefore,  it  seems  better  to  accept  it  frankly  as  com
plementary  to  mind,  i.e.,  as  an  external  system,  continuous
with  our  minds,  through  which  the  content  and  purposes
of  the  universe  are  communicated.  Note,  this  is  not
saying  that  our  minds  lay  down  purposes  which  Nature
is  bound  to  carry  out ;  but  that  they  are  able  to  learn
from  Nature  what  the  universe  suggests  and  demands.
Nature  is  not  the  slave  of  man.  Nature,  then,  lives  and
is  complete  in  the  life  of  ourjminds.  each  of  which  draws
its  content  from  some  particular  range  of  Nature,  so  that
all  the  detail  of  the  universe  is  elicited  into  mental  foci,
and  "  external "  conditions  are  held  together  in  such  foci,
and  pass,  through  them,  into  the  complete  experience
which  we  call  the  whole  or  the  Absolute.


ABSTRACTS OF  LECTURES  xxxvii

From  such  a  point  of  view  the  Absolute  is  the  high-
water  mark  of  an  effort  in  which  our  minds  actually
consist  and  have  their  being,  fluctuating  in  the  successful-
ness  of  the  effort  within  everyday  experience.  Each  self
is  more  like  a  rising  arid  falling  tide,  which  covers  a  wider
area  as  it  is  deeper  at  the  deepest  point,  than  like  an
isolated  pillar  with  a  fixed  circumference,  which  is  the
idea  suggested  by  popular  Pluralism.  Thus  the  important
point  of  view  is  what  we  might  call  Multiplicism,  to  mark
the  distinction  from  Pluralism — viz.,  the  variety  of  levels,
not  the  number  of  centres,  in  experience  ;  and  the  problem
of  Monism  would  be  how  far  we  could  conceive  a  highest
level  including  and  representing  all  the  others.  Dualism
has  no  prerogative  of  importance ;  Plato  deals  in  tri-
plicism,  quadruplicism,  and  multiplicism  quite  as  much  as
in  dualism.  The  transmutation  of  experience,  according"
to  the  level  of  a  mind's  energy  and  self-completeness,  is  a
fact  of  daily  life,  and  is  sufficient  in  principle  to  establish
the  reality  of  the  Absolute.

We  should  note  that,  as  is  natural  in  finite  beings,  the
qualities  of  the  same  mind  do  not  keep  step.  Plato,  for
instance,  leaves  plenty  of  room  for  "  the  Treasure  of  the
Humble."

Just  to  bring  our  suggestions  together  by  a  very  imper
fect  simile,  we  might  compare  the  Absolute  to,  say,  Dante's
mind  as  uttered  in  the  Divine  Comedy.  The  point  would
be  that  in  it  external  nature,  say,  Italy,  becomes  an  emotion
and  a  value,  not  less  but  more  than  spatial ;  each  self,  say
Paolo  or  Francesca,  while  still  its  real  self,  is  also  a  factor
in  the  poet's  mind,  which  is  uttered  in  all  these  selves
taken  together ;  and  the  whole  poetic  experience  is  single,
and  yet  includes  a  world  of  space  and  persons,  which  to
any  common  mind  fall  apart  and  become  "  a  geographical
expression "  plus  certain  commonplace  historical  figures.
This  inclusion  we  compare  to  the  Absolute,  as  it  holds
together  what  for  us  is  finite  experience.  Next  year  I
hope  to  apply  these  ideas  to  human  (i.e.  finite)  value  and
destiny.


LECTURE  I

INTRODUCTION — THE  CENTRAL  EXPERIENCES

THE  problem  which  I  am  to  invite  you  to  study
together  with  me  is  described  in  Lord  Gifford's
Deed  of  Foundation  by  help  of  very  various  formulae.
But  what  essentially  he  saw  to  be  important  may  be
reduced,  I  think,  to  three  requirements,  which  indeed
express  an  undying  need  of  the  human  mind.  We
are  to  study,  if  we  respect  his  wishes  (i)  the  nature
of  the  sole  Reality,  that  within  which  we  live  and
move  and  have  our  being ;  (2)  the  duty  and  destiny
of  finite  creatures  as  illuminated  by  their  relations
with  such  a  reality  ;  and  (3)  our  knowledge — and
this  requirement  he  puts  in  the  forefront — is  to  be  a
knowledge  not  merely  nominal,  but  true  (he  means,
I  think,  carrying  deep  conviction)  and  felt — or  as
we  might  say,  it  is  to  involve  the  communication  of
a  grave  experience,  and  not  the  mere  framework  of
a  theory.

"Not  the  mere  framework  of  a  theory." WeTheatti-
have  implied  in  this  requirement  the  double  task  of  experience.
philosophy. For  certainly,  in  approaching  this  high
argument,  we  cannot  lay  aside  the  method  of  serious
and  systematic  thought ; the  indispensable  justifica
tion  of  all  procedure  that  carries  our  beliefs  beyond

i  B


2  THE  CENTRAL  EXPERIENCES  LECT

or  below  the  simplest  surfaces  of  life.  The  frame
work  of  a  theory  we  unquestionably  must  develop.
But  there  is  something  more  ;  something  more,  and
yet  something  inseparable  ;  not  behind  or  beyond
the  theoretical  structure,  but  rather  its  informing
life  and  spirit.  And  this  something  is  our  attitude
to  experience  ;  or  more  strictly,  the  mode  of  experi-
.  ence  in  which  each  of  us  more  especially. sees  and
(  feels  his  continuity  with  reality.  And  it  might  very
naturally  be  said  that  the  framework  of  our  theories
has  its  value  only  as  an  embodiment  of  this  selection
and  feeling  and  point  of  view.  But  if  we  tried  to
pursue  such  an  idea  seriously,  we  should  quickly  find
it  reverse  itself;  and  our  attitude  in  selecting  the
experience  on  which  man  is  to  rely  in  interpreting
his  world  would  collapse  into  a  mere  mood  or
humour  of  our  mind,  if  it  were  not  concentrated  and
organised  in  a  serious  philosophical  theory.  It  is
the  old  story  of  matter  and  form,  of  their  absolute
relativity,  and  the  impossibility  of  conceiving  either
apart  from  the  other.

The  demands,  then,  of  the  gravest  methodic
thought  will  tax  our  best  energies  in  some  stages  of
the  pilgrimage  which  some  of  us,  as  I  hope,  are  to
undertake  together.  And  therefore  it  seems  well
to  devote  this  initial  lecture  to  a  rapid  anticipatory
survey  of  the  sort  of  attitude  in  experience  and  out
look  on  the  world  which  our  exposition  will  do  its
best  to  communicate,  as  knowledge  carrying  deep
conviction  and  appealing  to  our  whole  being.  That
was  the  sense  which  we  ascribed  to  Lord  Gifford's
words.

And  for  clearness'  sake  I  shall  begin  by  describing
this  attitude  of  ours'in  a  great  degree  through  nega-


THE  NEGLECTED OBVIOUS


tives.  It  will  help  us  to  apprehend  what  sort  of
thing  we  hope  to  establish,  if  we  lay  down  clearly
from  the  first  what  movements  and  tendencies  we
shall  be  obliged  on  the  whole  to  repel.

i.  And  first  we  may  say  a  word  on  the  idea  of  The  truly
proportion,  centrality,  sanity,  in  the  selection  of  the
experience  which  is  to  dominate  our  attitude. We
may  oppose  it  to  tendencies  and  inclinations  which
strike  us  as  pre-eminently  over-specialised,  centri
fugal,  capricious. It  is  commonly  held  right  to  avoid
the  obvious,  and  in  a  certain  sense  we  shall  preach
against  it  ourselves. But  there  is  an  obvious  which  /
depends not on immediacy  but  on centrality and  I
dominance  ; and  the  obvious  of  this  kind  it  is  not)
easy  to  apprehend  nor  yet  well  to  ignore. A  wood
seems  an  obvious  thing,  and  so  does  a  crowd. But >
we  know  that  it  is  not  easy  to  see  the  wood  for  the
trees,  or  to  apprehend  the  mind  of  a  crowd  or  of  a
society. The  former,  I  take  it,  is  a  late  acquirement
of  the  painter's  art ;  the  latter,  many  would  tell  us,
was  never  really  understood  till  the  last  generation.
These  instances,  the  first  that  come  to  hand,  may
serve  to  indicate  the  conception  of  that  "  obvious  "
which  is  familiar  and yet  jieglected. And  more
important  cases  will  emerge  as  we  proceed.

We  begin  then  with  the  principle — the  truism  if
you  like  —  that  in  our  attitude  to  experience,  or
through  experience  to  our  world,  we  are  to  put  the
central  things  in  the  centre,  to  respect  the  claims  of
the  obvious  which  is  neglected  —  to  take  for  our
standard  what  man  recognises  as  value  when  his  life
is  fullest  and  his  soul  at  its  highest  stretch.1

L  This  is,  I  venture  to  think,  a  more  tenable  form  of  the  demand
which  Professor  Varisco  makes  (7  Massimi  Problemi)  that  the


4  THE  CENTRAL  EXPERIENCES  LECT.

But  one  hears  the  critic  murmur  that  all  these
terms  of  rank  and  value  merely  beg  the  question.
What  are  the  centra]  things,  and  what  is  the  soul's
highest  stretch  ?  About  all  that  there  will  be  plenty
to  say  when  we  come  to  exhibit  our  attitude  in  its
aspect  of  logical  theory.  At  present  we  are  only
urging  by  anticipation  that  there  are  in  life  central
and  dominant  experiences,  whose  importance  is
obvious  and  undeniable,  but  which  seldom  find  due
recognition  in  the  formal  philosophy  of  others  than
the  greatest  men.  And  therefore  philosophical
theory  seems  frequently,  and  gravely,  to  fail  in
focussing  the  total  conviction  which,  with  courage
and  an  open  mind,  a  man  may  gather  from  the  world.
Theory  seems  too  impatient,  too  much  the  victim  of
antitheses,  too  liable  to  break  up  its  object  in  obedi
ence  to  crude  impressions,  instead  of  using-  all  its
strength  to  ensure  that  its  attitude  to  life  is  sane  and
central — that  its  experience  is  strong  and  profound
and  complete.

You  do  not,  for  example,  readily  find,  represented
in  philosophical  doctrine,  so  large  and  /ree  an  im
pression  of  the  world  as  has  recently  been  gathered
by  a  gifted  student  of  Shakespeare.1  Reducing  it
to  our  own  inferior  language,  it  is  something  like
this.  We  receive  from  the  world  a  tremendous  im
pression  of  evil ;  there  is  no  question  of  that.  We
also  receive  an  overwhelming  impression  of  good —
something  that  we  call  good ;  that  again  is  un
questionable.  And  the  difficulty  begins  when  you
try  to  disentangle  them  —  the  one  belongs  to  the

judge  of  values  shall  be  ex  veritate  "of  the  truth"  (in  the  N.T.
sense).  This  sounds  to  me  too  much  like  a  division  into  sheep  and
goats.

1  A.  C.  Bradley,  Shakespearean  Tragedy,  p.  24  ff.


THE  FULL  IMPRESSION


other,  and  you  cannot  get  them  apart.  Now  instead
of  patiently  interrogating  experience,  and  endeavour
ing  to  take  account  of  the  largest  and  bravest  attitude
of  soul,1  theory  here  is  apt  to  rush  in,  on  the  basis
of  first  appearances,  and  either  prove  that  black  is
white,  or  that  white  is  black,  or  that  the  whole  is  an
invisible  patchwork  of  the  two  and  is  really  grey.

But  this,  we  urge,  does  not  represent  our  central
impression  ;  it  does  not  confront  the  more  complete
and  sane  and  courageous  experience.  For  the
phenomena,  as  we  really  recognise  them,  are  like
those  of  beauty  and  ugliness  ;  you  cannot  divide
them  between  this  side  and  that,  and  say  "  Lo  here  !"
or  "  Lo  there  !  "  You  have  rather  to  open  your  eyes
to  the  higher  obvious,  and  look  at  the  greater  ex
periences  as  they  are.  You  have  to  apprehend
sublimity  and  splendour  actually  lighting  up  the
lines  of  horribleness  and  squalor.  You  cannot,
perhaps,  ''solve  the  problem";  but  you  can  see
that  the  whole  thing  belongs  together  in  a  way
which  our  prima  facie  judgments  wholly  fail  to  con
front.  So  with  "  good  "  and  "evil  "  in  the  Universe.
Such  experiences  as  Moral  Good,  Pleasure,  Justice,
take  you  only  a  certain  way.  With  the  best  of
logic  you  cannot  make  a  universe  out  of  them  ;  or,
more  truly,  the  best  of  logic  refuses  to  handle  these
alone.  The  matter  must  be  of  higher  quality  or  it
will  not  give  rise  to  the  fuller  form.  So  the  higher,
yet  obvious  and  dominant,  experience  carries  you  at
least  as  far  as,  for  example,  strength  and  endurance,
love  and  sacrifice,  the  making  and  the  achievement
of  souls.

1  Ruskin  has  somewhere  called  attention  to  the  loss  which  comes
from  thinking  being  "  the  work  as  a  rule  of  the  cowards  "  (say,  more
politely,  the  sedentary  classes),  and  not  that  of  the  soldiers.


6  THE CENTRAL  EXPERIENCES  LECT.

And  we  shall  observe  the  same  principle  to  hold  in
the  world  of  cognitive  apprehension.  We  certainly
feel  error  everywhere,  and  yet  again  we  have  a  hold
of  truth.  And  the  great  central  experience  which
may  be  called  the  arduousness_of  reality,  though  we
confess  it  with  our  lips  at  every  moment,  we  seldom
really  face  in  our  philosophical  theory.  We  fall
back  upon  one  phase  or  another  of  rest  and  refuge,
of  repose  on  a  solid  nucleus  which  we  call  fact,  or
surrender  to  a  stream  of  indetermination  which  we
call  life,  and  are  blind  to  the  open  secret  which  all
life  worth  living  should  make  as  plain  to  a  candid
apprehension  as  a  crowd  or  a  forest  should  be  to
the  bodily  eye.  For,  in  the  one  case  as  in  the
other,  what  is  familiar  and  fundamental  appears,  for
that  very  reason,  to  evade  precise  perception.  The
great  philosophers,  it  will  be  found,  are  just  those
who  have  succeeded  in  discerning  the  great  amd
simple  facts.  It  is,  I  am  convinced,  a  serious  lack
of  sympathetic  insight  which  prevents  us  from
understanding  that  to  be  right  in  one's  bird's-.eye
view  of  centrality  and  the  scheme  of  values,  demands
a  higher  intellectual  character  and  even  a  more  toil
some  intellectual  achievement  than  to  formulate
whole  volumes  of  ingenious  ratiocination.  True,
without  logical  development  there  is  no  philosophy  ;
but  no  skill  in  development  will  compensate  for  a
defective  attitude  to  life.  It  is  not  that  the  "  matter  "
may  be  bad  and  the  form  excellent,  or  vice  versa,
and  so  the  one  can  injure  or  redeem  the  other.  Jt
is,  as  we  said  just  now,  that  the  whole,  the  philo
sophy,  which,  like  a  poem,  is  matter  and  f^tm  in
one,  reacts  to  a  sound  or  defective  outlook  upon  life
alike  in  its  spirit  and  in  its  structure — call  matter  or


ARDUOUSNESS OF  REALITY


form  which  you  will.  Bad  taste  isjbad  logic,  and
bad  logic  is  bad  taste.  Simply  to  be  right,  as  the
greatest  men  are  right,  means  to  have  traversed
hundreds  and  thousands  of  ingenuities,  to  have
rejected  them  as  inadequate,  and  come  back  to  the
centre  enriched  by  their  negative  results.

2.  Turning  then  for  a  moment,  still  in  the  way  The
of  anticipation  and  description,  to  the  negative
aspect  of  the  sane  and  central  experience,  we  take
it  as  a  patent  and  dominant  -fact  that  rm  where,  in
assert  ing_our  continuity  with  the  real  dp_we  stand
in  the  beginning  on  safe  and  solid  ground.  I  mean
oir~grbund  on  which,  if  we  chose,  we  could  remain.
It_tells--"g  nothing  to  say-  tha*  an  experience  is
immediate  ;  for  there  are  countless  immediates  and
there  is  nothing  that  cannot  be  immediate.  But
if  we  understand  by  immediate  so  far  as  may  be
the  primary  datum,  the  factual  nucleus,  the  naive
apprehension,  then  it  is  the  plain  and  unmistak
able  lesson  of  logic  and  of  the  world  that  the
immediate  cannot  stand.  You  cannot  anywhere,
whether  in  life  or  in  logic,  find  rest  and  salvation
by  withdrawing  from  the  intercourse  and  implica
tions  of  life  ;  no  more  in  the  world  of  individual
property  and  self-maintenance  than  in  the  world  of
international  politics  and  economics  ;  no  more  in
the  world  of  logical  apprehension  than  in  that  of
moral  service  and  religious  devotion.  Everywhere

to


solid  it  y_-am  not  in  the  beginning^  but^if-any  where,
only  in.-  proportion  .-as  we  Center  upon  the  larger
vistas  of  things.

All  this  is  what  we  are  calling  obvious. But  as
we  shall  observe  throughout  with  reference  to  many


8  THE CENTRAL  EXPERIENCES  LECT.

supreme  characters  of  experience,  because  it  is
obvious,  it  is  neglected.  The  greatest  truths,  we
shall  often  have  to  maintain,  are  assented  to  but
not  believed.  If  this  obvious  character  of  all  our
dominant  experience  (experience  not  to  be  taken  as
exclusive,  but  as  the  profoundest  clue  to  the  rest)—
if  this  obvious  character  were  not  disregarded,  how
should  we  come  across  such  arguments  with  refer
ence  to  the  attainment  of  philosophical  truth,  as
that  the  stream  cannot  rise  higher  than  its  source
(a  type  of  occurrence  which  is  in  fact  the  essence
both  of  life  and  of  logic),  or  that  in  the  quest  for  the
Absolute  we  are  abandoning  our  solid  given  self?
The  clamour  resounds  on  all  sides  that  we  are
dropping  the  substance  for  the  shadow.  And  we
have  perpetually  to  recur  to  the  obvious  and  lead
ing  facts  of  our  existence,  to  reassure  ourselves
that  the  stubborn  truth  of  things  (if  these  rough
contrasts  are  to  be  tolerated  at  all)  lies  in  the
opposite  sense  ;  and  that  the  shadow  and  the  subA
stance  stand  towards  one  another  not  as  the  critic\
but  as  Plato  affirms  them  to  stand.  We  shall  find
occasion  to  return  to  the  question  of  Plato's  so-
called  dualism.  At  present  it  is  enough  to  say  that
this  splitting  up  of  Plato's  universe  into  two  per
sistent  extremes  is  a  part  of  the  easy-going  centri
fugal  attitude  against  which  our  whole  thesis  will
prove  to  be  a  protest.  For  Plato,  emphatically  and
primarily,  the  world  is  but  one  ; l  and  of  this  one
world,  the  human  soul,  when  most  self-centred  and
self-satisfied,  is  almost  wholly  disinherited.

Starting  with this attitude  and  perception, we

1 Mr.  Schiller,  I  think,  has  taken  the  same  point. I  have  not  the
reference. \A)v*v^


NECESSARY  PLATITUDES


see  that  if  our  Pilgrim's  Progress  is  adventurous,  it
is  beyond  a  doubt  inevitable.  To  cling  to  our
initial  standing  ground  —  or  to  strive  or  pretend
to  do  so,  for  it  is  not  really  possible — is  without  any
question  to  abide  in  the  City  of  Destruction.  The
idea  of  a  sHH  givrp  —  a  personality,  a  fact,  an
apprehension,  which  we  possess  ab  initio,  and  are
tempted  rashly  and  perversely  to  abandon  in  the
quest  of  the  Absolute,  is  an  illusion  which  has  no
warrant  in  vital  experience.  The  road  of  philo
sophical  speculation  is  not  the  possible  way  for
most  men,  nor  the  only  way  for  any  man  ;  that  is
true  and  sound.  But  in  one  way  and  another,  in
labour,  in  learning,  and  in  religion,  every  man  has
his  pilgrimage  to  make,  his  self  to  remould  and  to
acquire,  his  world  and  his  surroundings  to  trans
form.  In  sin,  too,  he  does  it ;  in  what  way,  we
shall  try  to  see  later.  We  are  only  attempting,  in
the  form  of  reflection,  what  every  living  creature  at
least  is  doing,  one  way  or  another,  between  birth
and  death.  And  it  is  in  this  adventure,  and  not
apart  from  it,  that  we  find  and  maintain  the  per
sonality  which  we  suppose  ourselves  to  possess  ab
initio.

Platitudes,  it  may  be  said,  from  some  old  book
of  hymns  or  sermons!  "We've  no  abiding  city
here  ! "  Why  yes,  /  rather  think  so.  But  the  odd
thing  is  that  so  much  philosophy  should  be  built  not
merely  on  the  denial  of  them,  but  on  disregard
of  the  common  and  recognised  human  experience
which  they  represent.

3.  We will now rapidly survey some typical  some
illusions, as they  appear  to me, of  what I have
called the centrifugal type,  a  negative relation  to


10  THE CENTRAL  EXPERIENCES  LECT.

which  will  help  to  define  the  course  of  our  argu
ment.  And  after  that  we  will  gather  into  a  few
propositions  the  more  burning  issues  of  our  own
contention.

"ii gran  (i)  I  hope  it  may  set  our  thoughts  in  tune  for
the  general  aim  and  method  of  our  argument,  if  I
begin  by  repudiating  what  seems  to  me  in  principle

11  gran  rifiuto,  the  ultimate_abriegation,  on  the  part
of  philosophy. I select  a  passage  from  a  writing
of  Professor  William  James, whose  presence  once
added  lustre  even to this University, and  whose
teaching  was  a  perpetual  stimulus  and  delight  to
the  philosophical  world. To  be  clear  and fair, I
must  point  out  that  in  this  argument  James's  moral
was  ultimately  the  same as  my  own. I find  *  the
great  abnegation '  in his applying it as a sound
criticism  upon  the  normal  study  of  the  great  philo
sophers,  and  as  a  ground  for  a  new  and  different
philosophy.

Here  is  the  passage.  "  I  wish  that  I  had  saved
the  first  couple  of  pages  of  a  thesis  which  a  student
handed  me  a  year  or  two  ago.  They  illustrated
my  point  so  clearly  that  I  am  sorry  I  cannot  read
them  to  you  now.  This  young  man,  who  was  a
graduate  from  some  Western  college,  began  by  say
ing  that  he  had  always  taken  for  granted  that  when
you  entered  a  philosophic  class-room  you  had  to
open  relations  with  a  universe  entirely  distinct  from
the  one  you  left  behind  you  in  the  street.  The  two
were  supposed,  he  said,  to  have  so  little  to  do  with
each  other,  that  you  could  not  possibly  occupy
your  mind  with  them  at  the  same  time.  The
world  of  concrete  personal  experiences  to  which  the
street  belongs  is  multitudinous  beyond  imagination,


LIFE  AND  LOGIC  n


tangled,  muddy,  painful,  and  perplexed.  The  world
to  which  your  philosophy-professor  introduces  you
is  simple,  clean,  and  noble.  The  contradictions  of
real  life  are  absent  from  it.  Its  architecture  is
classic.  Principles  of  reason  trace  its  outlines,
logical  necessities  cement  its  parts.  Purity  and
dignity  are  what  it  most  expresses.  It  is  a  kind  of
marble  temple  shining  on  a  hill.  In  point  of  fact  it
is  far  less  an  account  of  this  actual  world  than  a
clear  addition  built  upon  it,  a  classic  sanctuary  in
which  the  rationalist  fancy  may  take  refuge  from  the
intolerably  confused  and  gothic  character  which  mere
facts  present.  It  is  no  explanation  of  our  concrete
universe,  it  is  another  thing  altogether,  a  substitute
for  it,  a  remedy,  a  way  of  escape,"  and  so  on.1

I  remember  to  have  first  read  this  passage
with  an  interest  that  grew  more  breathless  as  I
approached  its  close,  thinking  what  a  magnificent
opening  Professor  James's  student  had  given  him  for
imparting  some  first  hints  of  the  nature  of  philo
sophy  in  the  hands  of  the  masters,  and  the  condi
tions  of  philosophic  study.  And  I  recall  my  gasp
of  disappointed  amazement  when  I  realised  that  the
opening  was  to  be  left  unused,  or  at  best  exploited
in  favour  of  something  to  be  called  Pragmatism  ;
that  a  teacher  had  actually  passed  these  ideas  as
sound  and  just,  when  taken  in  reference  to  the
principal  existing  philosophies.2

Now  I  presume  that  in  this  matter  your  experi-

1  James,  Pragmatism^  p.  21.

2  It  just  illustrates  the  difference  between  looking  at  philosophy
from  without  and  working  at  it  from  within,  that  after  some  hundreds
of  pages  of  discussion  James  finds  himself,  in  essence,  affirming  the
view^the  acceptance  of  which  by  Leibniz  he  began  by  treating  with
contempt. Cf.  Pragmatism,  p.  296.


12  THE CENTRAL  EXPERIENCES  LECT.

ence  is  the  same  as  mine.  When  you  first  come  in
contact  with  those  senior  fellow-students  who  are
called  your  professors  and  lecturers,  and  you  reveal
to  them,  intentionally  or  unintentionally,  your  feel
ing  that  philosophical  systems  are  foreign  to  the
concerns  and  difficulties  of  life,  I  imagine  that  they
meet  you  in  a  very  different  way  from  that  above
suggested.  Probably,  by  one  method  or  another,
they  try  to  lead  you  towards  the  conception  that
the  gulf  which  you  complain  of  is  caused  by  the
insufficient  quantity  and  quality  of  the  attention
which  you  have  hitherto  been  able  to  bestow  upon
the  facts  of  living,  compared  with  the  breadth,
patience,  insight,  and  sympathy  which  you  are  now
first  called  upon  to  devote  to  them,  and  which  are
new  to  you,  and  demand  a  considerable  efforu
Naturally,  experience  when  thus  approached  under
goes  transformation ;  and  the  language  we  hold
about  it  is  modified.  And  so  we  begin  to  have
gleams  of  insight  into  the  thought  and  expression
of  the  great  men  whose  breadth,  sympathy,  and
understanding  of  life  are  to  ours  as  the  ocean  to  a
streamlet.  We  see  how  they  come  to  hold  a
language  greatly  differing  from  that  which  we  were
used  to  before  we  gave  very  careful  attention  to
the  great  issues  and  predominant  facts  of  life.  We
learn  in  some  degree  how  any  point  we  take  up  in
the  tissue  of  experience  opens  out  into  tremendous
problems  and  indicates  unanticipated  depths.  We
begin,  as  Plato  said,  to  learn  the  alphabet  of  the
ethical  or  social  and  ultimately  of  the  metaphysical
world.1  Philosophy  is  the  formal  embodiment  of

1  Ye  can  discern  the  face  of  the  sky,  but  can  ye  not  discern  the
signs  of  the  times  ?


i  THE THREE  FALSE  IMMEDIATES  13

the  "penetrative  imagination";1  it  deals  with  the
significance  of  things  ;  and  transforms  them,  but
only  by  intensified  illumination.  We  shall  through
out  repudiate  this  ultimate  abnegation  which  treats
the_great  philosophies  as  abstractions  alien  to  life.
It  is  il  gran  rifiuto  when  life  ignores  and  disowns
its  own  largest  and  deepest  experiences.  The
phenomenon  is  a  common  one,  and  commoner  as
the  great  experiences  grow  greater.

(2)  We shall also meet, with uncompromising' "Fact,"
resistance,  the  attempt  to  take  any  form  of  immedi-|andlfe>
ateness,  understood  as  excluding  mediation,  for  aru  .


absolute  and  reliable  datum,  whether  in  the  form  of  immedi-

ates.

an object of  simple apprehension, called by the
name  of  (fact*  or  in  the_form  of_an  indeterminate

creative  impulse  called  by  the  name  oft  life,  or  in  the

•i  *  ^»»__— '^

form of  a  subject  of  experience^  impervious  and
isolated,  called  by  the  name  oCselfJ

Each  and  all  of  these  three  immediates  seems  to
invite  the  general  criticism  which  we  offered  above.
The  solid  fact  or  object  of  simple  perception  ;  the
indeterminate  living  or  duration  which  defies  the
notional  grasp  ;  the  isolated  personality,  impervious
to  the  mind  of  others,  seem  all  of  them  to  mark
arbitrary  refuges  or  timid  withdrawals  from  the
movement  of  the  world.  What  is  dreaded  in  that
movement  may  be  the  critical  dispersion  of  our
supposed  solid  nrov  <TTW  of  fact  or  self,  as  in  the  first
and  third  doctrines,  or  the  linkage  with  a  deter
minate  continuity,  the  spectre  of  tout  &tf  donnt,
as  in  the  second.  In  more  ways  than  one  there
asserts  itself  the  inherent  connexion  between  such
refuges  and  withdrawals  and  true  philosophical

1 Cf.  the  author's  History  of  Aesthetic,  p.  458.


14  THE CENTRAL  EXPERIENCES  LECT.

pessimism.  I  mean  by  this  not  the  mere  mood  in
which  one  mind  or  another  pronounces  life  not
worth  living,  but  the  argument  by  which,  connexion
is  radically  severed  between  real  existence  and  the
principle  of  perfection.1  This  applies  to  the  first
doctrine  and  the  third,  which  are  complementary
forms  of  the  same  ultimate  attitude.  The  second,
embodying  rather  a  principle  of  indetermination
than  a  determinate  discontinuity,  carries  with  it  a
pessimism  or  a  meliorism  as  the  holder's  temper
may  demand.2

Am  I  then  implying  that  a  true  philosopher  is
bound  to  Optimism,  and  that  the  two  other  attitudes
are  ex  hypothesi  condemned  ?  This  question,  I  hope,
will  answer  itself  in  extenso  below.  To  anticipate
in  a  few  words.  The  decisive  consideration  surely  is
that  our  best  and  worst  are  all  included  in  our  one
universe,  and  we  have  no  means  or  occasion  for
conceiving  another  or  others  in  which  either  could
be  separately  present.  We  can  hardly  pr6ceed  to
state  cases  for  comparison  in  respect  of  good  or^evil
until  we  have  a  fair  insight  into  the  actual  nature
and  connexion  of  what  as  we  primarily  apprehend
them  we  call  good  and  evil.  To  say  that  we  should
approve  a  universe  in  which  there  was  our  "good  "
without  our  "evil"  may  be  merely  a  ridiculously
illegitimate  hypothesis.  But  if  we  have  no  cases  to
compare,  we  have  no  right  to  use  the  comparative
or  superlative  forms  of  speech.  Our  real  effort  must

1  Cf.  e.g.  Russell's  Philosophical  Essays,  "The  Free  Man's  Wor
ship." The  view  that  the  judgment  of  value  is  not  susceptible  of
logical  defence,  together  with  the  doctrine  of  the  imperviousness  and
isolation  of  the  self,  appear  to  me  to  belong  ultimately  to  the  same
position  as  Mr.  Russell's.

2  In  James's  philosophy  I  seem  to  see  the  makings  of  both.


WHAT  IS THE  BEST?


be,  I  am  convinced,  towards  seeing  in  what  the  true
best  of  our  universe,  taking  account  of  the  worst,
must  consist.  It  is  clear  that  till  we  have  seen  to
the  bottom  of  this  problem,  we  cannot  be  equipped
to  pass  judgment  on  the  universe,  for  we  do  not
really  know  what  it  claims  its  best  to  be.  If  it  is
urged  that  we  must  be  entitled  to  judge  by  our
current  ideas  of  good  and  bad,  or  else  the  universe
is  a  fraud,1  I  agree  that  our  ideas  have  some  value,
and  bear  upon  the  point.  But  I  say  that  in  any
case  we  do  not  know  enough  to  pass  judgment
ultimately  ;  and  I  say  further  that  within  our  actual
current  ideas  there  is  so  much  room  for  discrepancy
(owing  to  the  different  attitudes  of  experience  on
which  we  have  insisted),  as  to  make  it  evident  that
there  is  in  them  a  principle  of  advance  which  would
at  least  lead  our  judgment  very  far  away  from  our
prima  facie  conceptions.

What  demands  our  attention  is  to  ascertain  what
we  really  and  self-consistently  mean by  the^best,
2  and  the  current  claim  to  judge  the  universe  is  one
of  the  immediates  which  we  must  repudiate.

(3)  If,  then,  adhering  to  immediacy,  we  commit  immediacy
ourselves  to  accepting  the_ apparent_-£ej£  as  a  solid,
starting-point,  and  demanding  for  it  a  distinct  fulfil-  ^
ment in  pari  materia, we  find  ourselves  on the
ground  of  justice,  ethics,  teleology. According  to
the  plan  of  this  Introduction  we  will  not  yet  reason
in  detail  upon  these  attitudes  and  postulates ;  but
we  may  point  out  that  there  are  modes  of  experience,
0  obvious '  and  dominant  in  our  sense  of  the term,
which  indicate  a  modification  and  transcendence  of
them. Consider  what  is  called  Justice. There  is

1  See  McTaggart  on  Mill's  saying,  Some  Dogmas  of  Religion,  p.  2 1 4.


1 6  THE CENTRAL  EXPERIENCES  LECT.

hardly  a  morbid  romance  but  founds  its  pessimism
on  the  wearisome  postulate  of  what  it  calls  justice
—some  proportion,  that  is  to  say,  which  is  claimed
as  a  right,  between  the  given  wants  and  the  fortunes
of  man.  The  note  of  this  mood  and  temper  is  the
reiterated  "Why"  — "  Why  should  A  be  at  a  dis
advantage  when  B  is  not?"-— and  we  feel  it  to  be
wholly  discordant  with  the  temper  of  the  stronger
souls  in  whom  we  delight  to  recognise  the  ready
welcome  of  differentiation  and  the  insight  that  even
the  call  for  endurance  is  an  opportunity.  Justice  as
thus  demanded  is  a  principle  of  compensation  for
being  what  you  are,  and  cannot  have  a  place  in  a
differentiated  universe.  It  would  fix  and  rivet  the
finite  member  of  a  world  to  his  finite  and  given
being,  in  opposition  to  his  real  power,  which  is,
precisely,  by  means  of  and  through  accepting  the
whole  involved  in  the  differentiation,  to  transcend
his  apparent  limits.

So  with  Ethics  and  Teleology.  We  can  see
their  value  and  necessity,  but  we  are  obliged  also
to  note  that  they  cannot  be  characters  of  a  whole

u-

or  world,  but  only  of  its  finite  members.  Their
nature  is  summed  up  in  the  paradox  "  The  end  is
progress,"  and  the  inconsistency  of  such  a  conception
forces  itself  upon  us  in  many  forms.  A  teleology
cannot  be  ultimate4;  it  can  express  nothing  but  a^
necessity  for  change  founded  upon  a  wjiole  whicJi
constitutes  the  situation  to  be  modified,  and,  in  that,
the  need  for  modification.  There  is  no  meaning
in  somebody  wishing  something,1  except  in  view
of  a  definite  situation  which  at  once  suggests  and
prima  facie  denies  his  wish.

1  James,  Pragmatism^  pp.  288-9.


I  SOMETHING  ABOVE  PLEASURE  17

We  are  convinced  by  daily  life,  I  think,  that  the
ethical  struggle,  justice,  and  teleology  are  in  place,
so  to  speak,  only  so  far  as  they  can  be  serviceable  ;
as  instruments,  that  is,  of  the  necessary  self-assertion
of  the  finite  mind.  When  that  point  is  passed,  or
that  aspect  subordinated,  there  is  room  only  for  love
and  pity,  or  again  for  faith  and  triumph.  We  feel,
as  we  constantly  admit,  that  our  judgment  of
morality  and  of  failure  is  not  all  there  is  to  be  said
about  a  man.  His  value  and  his  reality  lie  deeper
than  that.1  Good,  we  feel,  needs  and  includes  the*
ethical  struggle,  but  is  much  more  than  it,  or  the  •
struggle  itself  would  be  impossible.

(4)  Thus  it  has  always  been  a  fallacy  of  prima  and  rules  <
facie  judgment  to  split  up  the  tension  of  real  life  j
*into  pure  delight  and  pure  misery — heaven  and  hell  fectlon«
—representing  the  perfection  of  experience  by  the
former,  and  absolute  failure  by  the  latter.  Such  a
conception,  as  we  shall  see,  is  forced  to  a  restoration
of  unity  by  making  the  misery  of  the  lost  con
tributory  to  the  happiness  of  the  saved.  All  views
in  which  pain  and  struggle  are  conceived  as  leading
u£  to  a  happiness  from  which  they  are  wholly
excluded,  partake  of  this  absurdity.  When  Plato
said  that  neither  pleasure  nor  pain  were  fit  experi
ences  to  be  ascribed  to  divine  beings — indicating,  of
course,  not  a  neutral  state,  but  something  transcend
ing  the  two — he  said  what  represents  the  obvious
demand  of  mind  at  any  tolerably  high  level.  It
seems  plain  to  me  that  we  are  in  conflict  with
fundamental  necessities  of  the  better  life,  if  we

1  Every  one,  I  should  think,  must  have  had  his  moral  judgment  and
his  general  estimate  of  values  brought  into  collision  by  the  character
of  Falstaff.  We  cannot  conceive  him  in  hell  any  more  than  he
could  himself.  Every  one  knows  cases  of  the  kind  in  real  life.


iS  THE  CENTRAL  EXPERIENCES  LECT.

construe  the  Absolute  as  heaven,  and  reckon  it  as  a
future  of  enjoyment  crowning  the  struggle  of  time.
Tension  and  satisfaction  may,  as  we  know,  be
immensely  modified  in  character,  and  to  conceive
them  as  perfectly  fused  is  beyond  our  experience  ;
but  satisfaction  without  tension  is  a  thing  that  reason
does  not  suggest  and  experience  does  not  indicate.
The  direction  which  man  at  his  best  has  taken  in
seeking  freely  for  his  fullest  satisfaction,  shows  us,  in
the  significance  of  poetical  tragedy,  something  of  the
nature  which  must  attach  to  a  satisfactory  experience.
Of  course  I  do  not  say  that  the  most  perfect  tragedy
is  such  an  experience.  I  only  say,  in  conformity
with  the  anticipatory  character  of  the  present
lecture,  that  the  almost  supreme  rank  occupied  by
it  in  the  achievements  of  the  human  mind,  is  a
perfectly  obvious  and  highly  significant  fact,  which
I  have  never  but  once  seen  observed  upon  in  general
philosophy.1  If  we  really  think  the  race  is  pro
gressing  to  a  stage  of  felicity,  in  which,  without  any
jot  of  participation  in  any  tragic  experience,  it  is  to
draw  from  it  a  painless  enjoyment,  then  I  think  that
the  doctrine  of  hell  contributing  to  the  pleasures  of
heaven  is  not  far  away.

And  the  moral  of  this  paragraph  and  the  last
together  is  that  starting  from  commonplace  ex
perience  we  are  always  tempted  to  isolate  endeavour
and  fruition,  which  in  all  the  higher  attainments  of
mind  (we  may  instance  morality  so  far  as  socially
realised,  or  aesthetic  enjoyment)  we  find  to  be
impossible,  and,  supposing  it  possible,  ruinous  to  the
experience.  You  cannot,  so  to  speak,  believe  in

1  I  refer  to  a  passage  in  Mr.  Russell's  "  Free  Man's  Worship,"
{Philosophical  Essays),  with  which  I  am  very  strongly  in  sympathy.


I  HOPE  MUST  GUIDE  19

Optimism  or  Pessimism  alone.  If  you  will  have  a
pure  heaven,  you  must  add  a  pure  hell  to  complete
it.  If,  that  is,  pain  and  struggle  are  not  to  modify
and  be  modified  by  fruition,  they  must  fall  some
where  by  themselves,  as  a  life  of  Tantalus.

(5)  And  thus  an  opinion,  supported  by  thinkers  and  thrusts
for  whom  I  have  a  profound  respect,  seems  to  me  lutee  out°0"f
untenable, the doctrine, that is, that Philosophy  Llfe-
gives  hope,  not  guidance.1

So  far  as  this  tenet  is  a  warning  against  doc-
trinairism,  against  looking  to  philosophy  for  pre
scriptions  of  practical  detail,  it  seems  to  me  perfectly
just.  But  those  who  have  studied  the  distinguished
writer  who  formulates  it  will  be  convinced,  I  think,
that  there  is  something  more  general  behind.  In
the  way  we  have  deprecated  above,  perfection  is
identified  with  happiness,  as  unconditioned  by  anything
akin  to  pain, — the  motive  and  colour  of  the  doctrine
has  some  connection  with  Hedonism — and  great
stress  is  laid  on  the  probability  of  its  emergence  as
a  crowning  phenomenon  of  time.  And  thus — so  it
seems  to  me  —  we  are  enticed  away  from  any
conception  of  the  Absolute  as  the  principle  and
pervading  spirit  of  our  world,  and  from  the  con
viction  that  the  general  direction  of  our  higher
experience  is  a  clue  to  the  direction  in  which
perfection  has  to  be  sought.  To  put  it  plainly,  we
are  promised  a  "  harmony  " — that  is  the  "  hope  "
which  is  given ;  but  on  such  general  grounds  and
in  such  general  terms  that  the  concrete  system  of

1  See  McTaggart,  Studies  in  Hegelian  Cosmology,  Sect.  205  ;
and  A.  E.  Taylor's  Elements  of  Metaphysic^  357.  Professor  Taylor
is  referring,  I  think,  especially  to  the  question  of  the  future  life,  while
Mr.  McTaggart,  in  the  passage  referred  to,  speaks  more  generally  of
ideal  perfection.


20  THE  CENTRAL  EXPERIENCES  LECT.

values,  which  ought  to  be  immanent  as  our  clue  and
guidance  to  the  conception  of  the  best,  is  allowed  to
drop  out.1  And  this,  I  think,  is  due,  on  the  side
of  concrete  experience,  to  the  acceptance  of  too
immediate  a  fact  ab  initio  in  the  construing  of  the
ideal — to  taking  pleasure  as  a  type  of  felt  harmony.
With  this  clue  in  mind  we  necessarily  split  up  our
experience  of  life,  and  omit  to  employ  what  is  really
one  half  of  it  as  a  factor  in  our  ideal.  And,  there
fore,  we  fail  to  catch  the  heart-beat  of  the  Absolute
in  our  actual  world,  and  to  be  convinced  that  the
things  which  are  best  to  us  are  really  and  in  fact
akin  to  what  is  best  in  the  universe ;  that  their
fundamental  tendencies  are  discoverable  by  the  study
of  our  surroundings  ;  and  in  ultimate  reality,  though
modified  in  the  direction  indicated,  are  not  reversed.
Some  4.  I  will  draw  towards  a  conclusion  by  indicating

points!  m  a  few  positive  propositions,  still  by  way  of
description  and  anticipation,  the  critical  points  of  the
attitude  which  I  shall  endeavour  to  maintain  as
conformable  to  our  sane  and  central  experiences.
And  in  these,  intending  to  develop  them  technically
later  on,  I  shall  strive  for  plainness  even  at  the  cost
of  exaggeration.

what  (i)  The principal thing that matters is the

counts  is  level  and  fulness  of  Mind  attained.  The  destiny
and  separate  conservation  of  particular  minds  is  of
inferior  importance  and  merely  instrumental  to  the
former.2

1  This  is  not  a  mere  difference  of  mood  and  humour. I  believe
this  author's  treatment  of  the  Dialectic  to  be  one-sided  in  this  respect.
See  Review  of  McTaggart's  Commentary  on  Hegel's  Logic;  Mind,
January  1911.

2  Of  course  experience  involves  being  "  lived  "  by  some  being.
But  this  is  quite  different  from  saying  that  finite  persons  are  ultimate


mind  as
such.


I  MAN  IS  A TRUSTEE  21

This  conviction  we  shall  later  attempt  to  draw
out  in  argument.  But  I  am  sure  that  it  is  deeply
rooted  in  the  every-day  mind  at  its  best,  though
liable  to  be  overriden  by  conventions  which  have
nothing  like  the  same  reality.  What  a  man  really  |
cares  about — so  it  seems  to  me — may  be  described  i
as  making  the  most  of  the  trust  he  has  received,  f
He  does  not  value  himself  as  a  detached  and  purely^
self-identical  subject.  He  values  himself  as  the  m-
heritor  of  the  ..gifts,  and  surroundings  which  are
focussed  in  him,  and  which  it  is  his  business  to
raise  to  their  highest  power.1  The  attitude  of  a
true  noble,  one  in  whom  noblesse  oblige,  is  a  simple
example  of  what  mutatis  mutandis  all  men  feel.
The  man  is  a  representative,  a  trustee  for  the  world,
of  certain  powers  and  circumstances.  And  this
cannot  fail  to  be  so.  For  suffering  and  privation
are  also  opportunities.  The  question  for  him  is
how  much  he  can  make  of  them.  This  is  the
simple  and  primary  point  of  view,  and  also,  in
the  main,  the  true  and  fundamental  one.  It  is  not
the  bare  personality  or  the  separate  destiny  that
occupies  a  healthy  mind.  It  is  the  thing  to  be
done,  known,  and  felt ;  in  a  word,  the  complete
ness  of  experience,  his  contribution  to  it,  and  his
participation  in  it.

At  every  point  the  web  of  experience is con
tinuous  ;  he  cannot  distinguish  his  part  from  that  of

values. To  identify  the  conservation  of  values  with  the  permanence
or  survival  of  given  personalities,  as  Professor  Varisco  appears  to  me
to  do,  is  to  my  mind  an  extraordinary  assumption.
1  Cf.  the  Poets'  Chorus  in  "Paracelsus":
"  Yet  we  chose  thee  a  birthplace
Where  the  richness  ran  to  flowers  ;
Couldst  not  sing  one  song  for  grace,
Not  make  one  blossom  man's  and  ours  ?  "


22  THE  CENTRAL  EXPERIENCES  LECT.

others,  and  the  more  he  realises  the  continuity  the
less  he  cares  about  the  separateness  of  the  contribu
tion  to  it.1  Sometimes  it  seems  to  amount  to  an
accident  who  in  particular  becomes  the  mouthpiece
and  obtains  the  credit  of  knowledge  and  ideas
current  in  certain  circles  or  professions  ;  and  it  may
frequently  be  felt,  both  by  himself  and  by  others,
that  the  one  who  does  so  is  neither  the  main
originator  nor  the  one  best  fitted  to  be  the  ex
pounder.2  It  is  impossible  to  overrate  the  co
operative  element  in  experience.  And  its  import
ance  has  a  considerable  bearing  on  what  we  are  apt
to  call  the  problem  of  unfulfilled  promise.  By
unnoticed  contributions  to  the  common  mind,  very
much  is  preserved  which  seems  to  have  perished,
and  in  some  cases  perhaps  the  half  has  been  more
than  the  whole.

The  passion  of  love  may  be  instanced  against
these  ideas.  Here,  even  though  we  argue  that  the
one  who  loves  rather  merges  than  insists  on  his  own
particular  being,  yet  surely  the  particular  being  of
the  loved  object  is  the  very  core  and  centre  of  the
emotion.  Its  destiny,  its  permanence,  even  its
unchanged  immortality,  seems  to  matter  more  than
anything  in  the  universe.  Just  so ;  as  in  all  the
higher  levels  of  experience,  some  particular  person
ality  becomes  important  by  what  it  embodies.  That
is  quite  obvious  ;  and  the  fact  that  passionate  love,
as  the  engrossing  relation  of  two  personalities,

1  "  If  we  could  energise  a  great  deal  more  continuously  than  most
of  us  can,  we  might  experience  physical  death  literally  without  being
aware  of  it." — Nettleship's  Philosophical  Remains,  i.  90.

2  The  case  typified  by  Arthur  Hallam  is,  I  believe,  in  essentials
exceedingly  common  ;  that  is,  that  men  who  are  considerable  origin
ators,  and  influence  a  wide  circle,  are  prevented  from  producing,  and
reach  the  world  only  as  components  of  other  personalities.


WHAT  GIVES  PARTICULARS VALUE


seizes  on  and  kindles  into  flame  all  that  they  con
tain,  is  really  a  document  of  the  value  that  comes
to  a  particular  being  when  it  throws  itself  whole
heartedly  outside  itself.  The  thing  has  a  side  of
utter  selfishness  and  ownership  ;  but  it  is  when  this
is  burnt  away  that  the  greatness  of  the  experience
begins.  A  particular  is  all-important  to  each  ;  but
this  particular  is  not  his  own  particularity,  but
another's  ;  and,  moreover,  it  is  no  longer  to  him  a
particular,  but  takes  on  the  value  of  a  world.  It  is
this  that  the  desire  of  eternity  really  signifies,  and
with  this  comes  a  transformation.  A  great  writer  has
said  that  hate,  like  fire,  makes  any  rubbish  deadly  ;
and  it  is  no  less  true  that  love,  like  fire,  makes  the
poorest  things  splendid.  It  is  almost,  one  might
say,  the  absolute  in  propria  persona.

At  any  rate,  this  is  one  observation  which  seems
central  both  in  life  and  in  theory,  that  the  level  or
quality  of  mind,  and^not  jdie^destiny  of  its  centres,  is
the  main  thing — the  principal  value.

(2)  The  same  principle,  in  rather  more  technical  Logic  the
form,  amounts  to  this,  that  Logic,  or  the  spirit  of  Jaiue.°f
totality,  is  the  clue  tc^  reality,  value,  and- freedom.

The  key  to  this  principle  is  to  be  found  in  all
that  connects  the  satisfactoriness  of  experiences
with  their  stability  or  power  of  self-maintenance,
and  both  with  the  nature  of  creative  initiative.
Creative  initiative  is  obviously,  under  the  form  of
change,  what  stability  and  self- maintenance  are
under  the  form  of  duration.  The  desire  to  liberate
the  initiative  of  mind  from  pre-existing  conditions
sometimes  goes  so  far  that  it  seems  to  forget  that
an  inference  after  all — a  typical  act  of.  mind — must
have  data  or  premisses  to  issue  from,  and  that,  e.g.,


24  THE CENTRAL  EXPERIENCES  LECT.

the  creation  of  a  work  of  art  is  null  and  worthless  if
it  does  not  involve  an  apprehension  or  fore-feeling
of  just  that  coexistent  unity  which  makes  it  when
completed  the  very  type  of  a  logical  whole.  The
logical  spirit,  the  tendency  of  parts  to  self-transcend
ence  and  absorption  in  wholes,  is  the  birth-impulse
of  initiative,  as  it  is  the  life-blood  of  stable  exist
ence.  And  the  degree  in  which  this  spirit  is  incar
nate  in  any  world  or  system  is  one  with  the  value,
the  satisfactoriness  and  reality  by  which  such  a
system  must  be  estimated,  as  also  with  the  creative
effort,  by  which  it  must  be  initiated.1

The  (3)  The  "  good  "  of  the  universe  must  be  such  as

ofga°wd0rid.  belongs  to  a  world  and  not  to  the  member  of  one.

This  observation  seems  fundamental.  It  is  very
evident  in  so  comparatively  simple  a  question  as
that  of  morality  in  the  particular  person  and  in  the*^
state.  The  member  of  a  world,  relative  or  absolute,
is  conditioned  by  his  world,  and  his  task  presup
poses  it.  His  world,  itself  relatively  or  absolutely
the  ultimate  condition  of  things,  has  an  altogether
different  task.  It  has  to  sustain  within  it  all  the
organs  and  conditions  necessary  to  constitute  a
world.  The  member  of  a  world  is  conditioned  by
his  surroundings,  which  set  his  task  ;  the  world  is
the  condition  both  of  the  individual  and  of  his  task.
His  good  is  prescribed  by  his  relation  to  his  task,
his  dealing  with  his  surroundings.  Its  "good"
cannot  conceivably  be  the  same  as  his.  Its  "good  "
must  include  making  his  "good  "  possible  ;  and  if  it
could  be  "  good  "  through  and  through,  in  the  sense

1  I  attach  great  importance  in  this  range  of  thought  to  what  we
learn  from  reflection  upon  art  and  poetry,  and,  I  may  add,  in  the
discussion  of  our  de  facto  apprehension  of  the  absolute,  to  what  we
learn  from  the  theory  of  the  sublime.


I  THE  "GOOD" OF  A WORLD  25

in  which  he  is  expected  to  be  good,  his  goodness
would  not  be  possible.  We  expect  it  to  be  rather
the  birthplace  and  theatre,  or  more — the  including
totality  —  of  goodness,  than  itself  of  the  precise
nature  of  what  we  primarily  call  good.  Its  excel
lency  is  rather  to  be  great  in  its  possibilities,  beyond
the  reaches  of  the  finite  soul,  so  that  this  may
always  find  more  than  it  can  master ;  may  always
find  more  than  scope  for  its  utmost  effort  and  its
utmost  worship.1  We  could  not,  it  may  be  sug
gested,  possibly  be  satisfied  in  a  universe  in  which
we  could  be  content — which  simply  ministered  to
our  ."goodness,"  letting  us  sin,  endure,  and  aspire
slightly,  so  that  we  could  see  clearly  it  was  all
calculated  for  our  good.  We  should  then  feel  our
selves,  in  our  finiteness,  the  lords  and  masters,
because  sole  purpose,  of  the  world,  which  would
exist  simply  to  make  us  feel  good.  And  we  should
be  miserable,  and  the  end  would  not  be  attained,  for
we  should  have  nothing  greater  than  our  finite
selves  to  contemplate.  We  want  something  above
us,  something  to  make  us  dare  and  do  and  hope  to
be.  We  are  finite,  which  means  incomplete,  and
not  fitted  to  be  absolute  ends.2

1  The  world  which  we  began  by  speaking  of  was  the  State. Will
any  of  this  language,  it  will  be  asked,  apply  to  it  ? Is  it  not  a  mere
contrivance,  easily  worked  and  easily  seen through  ? Any  one  who
believes  this  must  be  puzzled,  I think,  by  the  apparent  fecundity  of
difficulty  and  evil  in  socio-political  matters. The  fact  is,  it  has  to
deal  with  a  whole  nest  of  lives  and  their  surroundings,  and  these  in
volve  greatness  and  conflicts  of  all  kinds. It  has  to  maintain  such
a  system  of  life  as  will  permit  of  the  development  of  many-sided
excellence  within  it.

2  Cf.  Browning  :

"  Oh,  dread  succession  to  a  dizzy  post,

Sad  sway  of  sceptre  whose  mere  touch  appals,
Ghastly  dethronement,  cursed  by  those  the  most
On  whose  repugnant  brow  the  crown  next  falls."


f


26  THE CENTRAL  EXPERIENCES  LECT.

Goodness,  in  other  words,  we  know,  cannot  be
the  moral  end. If  we  make  it  so,  it  loses  its  con
tent  and collapses into  nothingness.1 The  world
that  conditions  our  goodness  must  not  exist  merely
for  our  goodness'  sake,  but  must  subordinate  it,  to
I  some  concrete^  need  or  nature. A  world's  excellence
must  include  its  members1,  and  have  a  relation,  or
sort  of  kinship, to  it ; but  must  be  of  the  nature
of  a  greatness  that  goes  beyond  and  sustains  it.
The  great- (4)  The  universe  is  not  a  place  of  pleasure,  nor
souis° even  a  place  compounded  of  probation  and  justice  ;
it  is,  from  the  highest  point  of  view  concerned  with
finite  beings,  a  place  of  soul-majdng.

Our  best  experience  carries  us  without  hesitation
thus  far.  We  see  for  ourselves  that  mere  pleasure,
or  the  mere  sense  of  moral  desert  and  adjustment  of
consequences  to  it,  take  in  but  little  of  what  has
value  for  the  fully  capable  mind,  though  both,  of
course,  take  in  some  of  it.  We  may  call  in  evidence
history  or  science,  poetry  or  politics,  social  life  or
religion.  It  is  the  moulding  and  the  greatness  of
souls  that  we  really  care  for.

This  observation  has  to  be  reconciled  with  what
we  said  above  as  to  the  relative  values  of  the  parti
cularity  of  the  particular  centres  of  mind  compared
with  the  level  of  mind  as  such.  But  this  reconcilia
tion,  which  must  occupy  us  more  fully  later  on,  is
not  in  principle  difficult.  The  destiny  or  conserva
tion,  we  said,  of  particular  centres  is  not  what
primarily  has  value,  and  here  we  say  nothing  to
conflict  with  this.  What  has  value  is  the  contribu
tion  which  the  particular  centre — a  representative  of
certain  elements  in  the  whole — brings  to  the  whole

1  Cf.  Green,  Prolegomena,  Sect.  247.


I  HO IV WE  POSSESS THE  ABSOLUTE  27

in  which  it  is  a  member.  Its  particularity,  as  we
shall  see,  is  connected  with  its  special  contribution.
But  the  value  of  the  particularity  is  indirect,  and
depends  on  what  it  helps  to  realise.1

It  will  be  urged  that  "  making"  or  "  moulding'*
presupposes  time  and  succession,  and  so  we  should
stand  committed  to  the  reality  of  these.  But  this
will  not  disturb  us.  We  can  have  no  doubt  that
there  is  time  in  the  Absolute.  It  is  a  further  ques
tion  whether,  and,  if  at  all,  in  what  sense,  the
Absolute  is  in  time/*

(5)  Lastly,  we  experience  the  Absolute  better  we  have
than  we  experience  anything  else.  This  is  our  Absolute
answer  to  the  question,  are  we  finite  beings  in  any
way  or  degree  to  possess  or  enjoy  the  Absolute,  or
does  this  depend  on  some  such  question  as  whether
there  is  a  future  life  ;  and  is  the  Absolute  related  to
us  as  heaven  to  an  orthodox  Christian  ?

The  answer  is  fundamental  for  our  convictions,
and  is  already  decided  by  our  attitude  to  the
stability  of  our  starting-point.  We  all  of  us  experi
ence  the  Absolute,  because  the  Absolute  is  in  every
thing.  And  as  it  is  in  everything  we  do  or  suffer,  we
may  even  say  that  we  experience  it  more  fully  than
we  experience  anything  else,  especially  as  one  pro
found  characteristic  runs  through  the  whole.  And
that_is,  that_jhe  world  does  not  leLois  alone ;  it
drives  us  from  pillar  to  post,2  and  the  very  chapter
of  accidents,  as  we  call  it,  confronts  us  with  an
extraordinary  mixture  of  opportunity  and  suffering,
which  is  itself  opportunity.

1  Cp.  the  whole  poem,  "  It  is  not  growing  like  a  tree —
2  "  Rejoice  that  man  is  hurled

From  change  to  change  unceasingly

His  soul's  wings  never  furled." — BROWNING.


28  THE CENTRAL  EXPERIENCES  LECT.

Of  course  we  do  not  habitually  call  this  power
within  which  we  live  "  the  absolute."  And  wholly
unreflective  minds,  we  may  suppose,  are  hardly
aware  of  any  general  characteristic  in  life  pointing
to  a  unity,  such  that  it  is  at  once  something  which  is
too  many  for  them,  and  something  which  gives  them
wonderful  chances.  But  the  fact  is  there,  and  is
there  for  them,  though  it  may  be  only  distributed
through  their  perceptions,  and  never  reflected  on  as
a  general  fact.  We  all  have,  in  truth,  to  recognise
something  absolute  both  within1  and  without  our
selves  ;  an  external  power  prima  facie  too  strong
for  us,  and  yet  responding  to  our  destinies  and  pass
ing  into  us  as  an  inward  power  now  more  and  now
less  than  equal  to  the  external  surroundings.  If  we
refuse  to  find  absoluteness  even  in  love,  or  in  any
thing  but  the  minimum  of  positive  fact,  and  say
therefore  that  our  only  absolute  is  death,2  yet  even
that  is  a  power  which,  primarily  hostile  and  external,
an  accident  of  nature,  we  can  make  our  own  and  an
expression  of  our  will,  by  self-sacrifice,  or  by  resig
nation,  or  in  a  sense  by  suicide.3  A  being  who  can
determine  not  to  live — the  animals  below  man,  it  is
said,  never  so  determine — has  hold  of  something
which  is  more  to  him  than  every  possible  thing.
And  in  this  he  gives  this  something,  undefined  as  it

1  Such  a  phrase  as  "  absolute  certainty "  is  constantly  used  by
people  who  would  shrink  from  the  recognition  of  an  absolute.

2 "Me  non  oracula  certum
Sed  mors  certa  facit "


3  "  Glad  did  I  live  and  gladly  die,

And  I  laid  me  down  with  a  will."

In  suicide  there  is  not  the  full  union  of  self  and  not-self.  We  do  not
unite  with  necessity  but  borrow  its  form  to  clothe  our  self-will.  It  is
the  child's  "Then  I  won't  play."  I  do  not  say  it  cannot  be  right.


I  FAILURE  NECESSARY TO SATISFACTION 29

may  be,  the  value  of  an  Absolute,  of  a  not-self  which
is  more  himself  than  his  actual  self  is.

The  argument,  it  may  appear,  would  be  simpler
and  truer  if  it  were  the  fact  that  we  all,  under  the
discipline  of  life,1  became  obviously  wiser  and  better,
like  pupils  in  a  school  with  no  percentage  of  failures.
As  a  fact,  too  many  of  us  seem  to  deteriorate.  But,
as  we  hinted  above,  "  it  takes  all  sorts  to  make  a
world  ; "  and  if  we  could  be  at  ease  in  Zion,  and  see
every  one  virtuous  and  prima  facie  contented,  we
could  never,  I  think,  be  satisfied.  It  is  only  by  the
conjunction  of  what  is  quite  beyond  us  with  what  is
deep  within  us  that  the  open  secret  of  the  Absolute
confronts  us  in  life,  in  love,  and  in  death.

5.  It  is  in  agreement  with  the  clue  given2  by  intended
experiences  like  these,  which  I  venture  to  call
obvious,  centra],  and  sane  experiences,  that  I  shall
try  to  set  out,  in  logical  connection,  during  the
present  session,  the  foundations  and  demands  of  the
principle  of  Individuality,  and,  during  the  following
one,  the  straightforward  and  "  higher  obvious"  view
of  the  worth  and  destiny  of  finite  individuals.

In  the  present  course,  then,  we  shall  be  dealing,
for  the  earlier  part,  with  ^  jQ^inripl^  ^f  TnHiviHn-
ajtity  considered  as  the  immanent  criterion  of  the
real,  and  also  in  its  relation  to  inferior  forms  of  the
logical  universal,  such  as  general  law,  uniformity  of
nature,  and  directive  teleology  in  evolution.  In
connection  with  these  discussions  the  bodily  side  of
mind  and  the  rank  of  finite  consciousness  as  a  teleo-

1 "  Machinery  just  meant

To  give  thy  soul  its  bent,
Try  thee  and  turn  thee  forth,  sufficiently  impressed."

2  "  With  the  clue  given  "  only — of  course  all  experiences  have  a
right  to  recognition  in  their  place.


tures.


30  THE CENTRAL  EXPERIENCES  LECT.  I

logical  agency  will  fall  to  be  considered,  and  a  good
deal  of  logical  technique  will  be  unavoidable.  And
in  the  latter  part  we  shall  speak  of  the  same  prin
ciple  as  the  key  to  the  character  of  value  in  the  real,
and  to  the  freedom  or  initiative  of  its  members,  as
also  to  its  immanent  structure,  and  its  mode  of  in
clusion  of  nature  and  the  finite  self.

The  results,  I  give  fair  warning,  will  be  nothing
in  any  way  startling  or  extraordinary.  We  shall,
on  the  whole,  express  and  define.  I  believe,  the
reasonable  faith  of  resolute,  and  open-minded  men.
The  outside  of  what  I  could  hope  to  achieve  would
be  sometimes  to  insist  in  words  on  what  they  think
too  obvious  to  be  said,  and,  by  attempting  a
thorough  -  going  logical  connection  of  what  is
immanent  in  all  the  sides  of  experience,  to  establish
that  a  sane  and  central  theory  is  not  full  of  oddities
and  caprices,  but  is  ^  rendering,  in  coherent
thought,  of  what  lies  at  the  heart  of  actual  life  and
love.


LECTURE II

THE CONCRETE UNIVERSAL

WE  are  in  the  habit  of  thinking  that  we  have  raised  universal
the  level  of  our  experience  when  we  have  discovered  general
anything  that  app£oaches_a^_genera[_£u[e.  And  it  is  rule'
true  that  prima  facie  we  have  done  so.  We  have
relied  on  the  principle  of  community  or  continuity
in  experience.  That  is  to  say,  we  have  followed
some  conjunction  of  properties  beyond  the  case  in
which  we  first  found  them  conjoined,  and  have
trusted  it  to  hold  good  under  conditions  other  than
those  under  which  we  first  came  upon  it.  In  doing
this  we  have  pursued  the  tendency  on  which  all
knowledge  depends — the  /tendency)  of  experience  to
be  "  universal  "  ;  that  is  to  say,  to  carry  n.s  beyond
any,gLv&n-pierp  of  itselfUbyL-exhibMng1  a  character
which  throws  light  upon  further  and  different  con
texts,  and  receives  light  from  them.  It  is  needless
to  give  examples  ;  every  general  statement,  applying
a  single  predicate  to  a  number  of  different  cases,  is
an  instance  in  point.

Further,  in  doing  this  we  have  made  an  appreci
able  advance  towards  the  ideal  of  truth  ;  that  is,
towards  a  rendering  of  experience  which  shall  be
free  from  self-contradiction  —  free,  I  mean,  from
different  interpretations  of  the  same  facts  in  the

31


32  THE CONCRETE UNIVERSAL  LECT.

same  relations. Every  general  rule,  in  so  far  as  it
includes within a single  interpretation  an  area  of
experience which might have been discordantly
apprehended,  decreases  the  possibility  of  such  a  dis
crepancy,  and  is,  therefore,  so  far  as  it  goes,  a  move
ment towards the completion of  knowledge as  a
coherent whole. The instinct or  impulse which
thus  far  we  appear  to  take  as  our  guide  is  apt  to
express itself in some such formula as "  Same
causes,  same  effects,"  or  more  generally,  "  It  is  the
same  that  produces  the  same."1 And  this  some
times  passes  for  the  characteristic  principle  of  know
ledge  and  intelligence — a  principle depending  on
repetition  of  similars 2  and  the  recognition  of  them
as  they  recur. But  we  have  said  enough  to  show
that  from the  very beginning this conception is
untrue. Even  the  baldest  generality  has  its  value
in  the  differences  of  context  which  it  includes  and
which  it  illuminates. What  the  real  principle  of  in
telligence  is  we  shall  see  as  we  develop  this  charac
teristic  in  a  region  beyond  mere  generality.
Defects  of i. But the abstract generalisation, considered
l  with reference to truth, has defects which were
sufficiently  signalised  in  the  very  dawn  of  logical
theory by Plato's  critical  estimate  of  the  exact  or
mathematical  sciences. And,  following  him,  almost
all considerable  thinkers have pointed out  that  a
body  of  knowledge,  if  understood  in  the  sense  of  a
body  of  highly  abstract  rules  and  inferences,  must
be  said  prima  facie  to  depart  from  what  is  given  in
expejrignce,  and  truth,  if  taken  in  a  similar  sense,  to

1  Bergson,  U Evolution,  p.  49,  "  II  faut  le  meme  pour  obtenir  le
meme." Cf.  p.  177,  "  L'intelligence  rejette  toute  creation."

2  Ibid.  p.  49, ' '  Notre  action  .  . . ne  peut  se  mouvoir  que  parmi
les  repetitions." See  author's  Logic,  2nd  ed.,  Book  ii.  174  ff.


ii  PHILOSOPHY  IS  CATEGORICAL  33

abandon  fact.1  It  is  History,  we  are  even  told,  by
what  I  take  to  be  a  rash  interpretation  of  this
familiar  doctrine,  to  which  we  must  look  for  the  type
of  living  experience.  Or,  in  a  "  new  philosophy,"
we  may  be  referred  to  an  "  intuition,"  the  very
existence  of  which  in  its  purity  seems  a  doubtful
assumption.  These,  I  repeat,  are  to  my  mind  rash
interpretations.  But  they  point  to  something  which
is  common  ground.  For  better  or  worse,  the  his
torical  tense,  the  genuinely  personal  subject,  the
point  of  departure  which  we  indicate  by  such  terms
as  "this"  and  "  mine,"  are  unknown  to  the  pro
cesses  of  science.  Ajgeneral  statement  is  an  extract
or  an  abstract.  It  has  even  been  called  hypo
thetical.  Certainly  it  is  not  in  the  fullest  sense  cate
gorical.  Its  terms  are  not,  as  they  stand,  affirmed
to  be  actual  reality.  It  tejy^iS-tiuftg^-afeout  reality  \\
it  pomts^oyJLjQonseqi^^  from  the

application  to  it  of  specified  conditions.  It  does  not
pretend  toj>peak_jQLfLreal  beings  in  their  whole  and
fundamental  nature.  That  is  to  judge  categorically
in  the  full  s.ense;Ato  make  assertions  regarding  the
nature  of  the  universe  as  a  whole.  And  this  can  be
done,  if  at  all,  by  Philosophy  alone.  For  Philo
sophy  is  essenjially_of  the  concrete  and  the  whole,
as  science  is  essentially  of  the  abstract  and  the  part.
It  may  be  said,  then,  with  some  degree  of  truth,
that  science  deals  with  experienced  existence  at
secondhand.  It  "  murders  to  dissect."  The  impu
tation,  as  we  pointed  out,  is  an  old  one,  and  is  not,
of  course,  in  truth,  a  hostile  impeachment,  but  a

1  Bradley's  Principles  of  Logic,  e.g. 92-3. I assume  that  the  '
highest  segment  of  Plato's  divided  line  is  to  be  interpreted  as  imply
ing  a return to  the  concrete,  from  which the  second  highest  has
departed.

D


34  THE CONCRETE UNIVERSAL  LECT.

simple  recognition  of  the  functions  of  science  and  of
its  rank  in  a  logical  system.  For  this  reason,  Jf
taken  as  the  exclusive  basis  of  a  world -theory,
science  will  always  be  open  to  the  criticism  which
has  recently  been  launched  against  mechanical
theories  of  evolution.  But  also,  it  is  false  to  argue
as  if  a  mechanical  theory  could  contribute  nothing
to  the  construction  and  apprehension  of  the  whole.
Mathematical  reasoning  itself  is  synthetic,  and  in
the  continuity  of  experience  all  combinations,  how
ever  homogeneous  their  elements,  can  reveal  new
properties,  stand  in  relation  with  new  qualities,  and
throw  light  upon  their  nature.  The  geometrical
character  of  any  line  is  continuous  with  and  essential
to  the  significance  which  it  bears  in  the  most  con
crete  work  of  art.

The  principle  of  Abstraction  has  often  been
criticised  as  it  is  embodied  in  the  traditional  doctrine
of  Extension  and  Intension.  It  is  enough  to  glance
at  the  tree  of  Porphyry  to  see  whither  such  a  doc
trine  must  lead.  The  most  general  knowledge —
that  which  continues  into  wider  comprehensiveness
such  a  series  as  JVIan,  Animal,  Organism,  Material
body — must  obviously  be  the  least  instructive,  and
must  have  its  climax  in  complete  emptiness.

It  is,  indeed,  the  same  reason  which  compels  the
progressive  generalisation  to  diminish  the  depth  of
knowledge,  and  which  forbids  the  general  rule  at
any  stage  whatever  to  deal  with  the  whole  of  a  con
crete  subject,  or,  as  it  was  phrased  above,  to  be
categorical.

And  this  underlying  reason  is  to  be  found  in  the
attempt  to  cut  in  two  the  essential  principle  of  con
tinuity.  The  endeavour  of  the  simple  generalisation


II  A CLASS  IS  NOT  A WORLD  35

is  to  pursue  an  identity  apart  from  differences.  Its
method,  therefore,  is  omission.  The  generality  is/
framed  by  attending  to  the  common  qualities  of  a
number  of  individuals,  and  disregarding  their  dif
ferences.  This  procedure  has  two  inevitable  results,.
It  prohibits  the  consideration  of  any  world  or  struc
ture  of  which  the  individuals  before  us  are  members,
and  by  the  same  necessity  it  prohibits  the  considera
tion  of  the  entire  or  concrete  nature  of  any  individual
by  itself.  These  two  consequences  are  inevitable,
because,  so  long  as  identity  is  construed  as  excluding
diversity,  no  world  or  structure  can  be  constituted
by  the  identical  properties  of  individuals.  Indi
viduals  taken  per  se  as  members  of  a  class  in  virtue
of  identical  properties  are  ex  hypothesi  parts  or
members  of  a  whole  of  repetition,  and,  so  far,  of  no
other  kind  of  whole  whatever.  And  each  individual
of  those  so  taken  can  be  considered  only  in  respect
of  the  property  in  virtue  of  which  it  is  a  member  of
the  class.  The  differences  within  that  property
itself,  and  those  which  constitute  the  whole  remain
ing  content  of  the  individual  nature,  are  ruled  out  ab
initio  by  the  method.  While  we  are  faithful  to  such
a  conception  there  can  be  no  thought  of  a  whole  of
individuals,  and,  for  the  same  reason,  none  of  an
individual  as  a  whole.  The  general  statement  is
restricted  to  affirming  the  property  or  properties
repeated  within  each  similar  member  of  the  class  ;
and  their  membership  of  a  concrete  system,  either
constituted  by  their  fellows  of  the  class,  as  in  the
world  of  humanity,  or  by  groups  of  dissimilar  units,
as  in  the  reciprocally  dependent  organisms  of  a
locality,  is  forbidden  to  appear  as  a  source  of  further
knowledge  about  them.


36  THE CONCRETE UNIVERSAL  LECT.

We  have,  here  in  fact,  the  relation  of  classifica
tion  by  resemblance  to  grouping  by  reciprocal  deter
mination.  The  former  might  be  compared  to  the
attempt  to  explain  a  human  body  or  a  steam-engine
by  classifying  the  parts  of  each  in  terms  of  their
resemblances  to  one  another.  The  latter  would  be
typified  by  the  way  in  which  the  function  of  the
whole  system  is  accounted  for  by  the  co-operation
and  division  of  labour  due  to  the  different  structures
and  qualities  of  its  constituent  members.  And  it  is
important  to  notice  that  the  former  mode  of  con
sideration,  however  serviceable  for  certain  purposes,
is  essentially  due  to  a  superficial  application  of  the
very  same  principle  which  is  more  fully  realised
in  the  latter.  The  identification,  for  example,  of
Plato's  Forms  with  "  the  objective  correlates  of  class-
concepts  "  would  render  it  absolutely  impossible
to  conceive  them  as  a  world  of  interdependent
members,  such  as  is  implied  in  the  Form  of  the
Good,  and  in  the  conception  of  a  universe  of  reality.

It  must  be  added,  to  avoid  misunderstanding,
that  we  are  not  reducing  the  precise  determinations
of  science,  for  example,  the  law  of  gravitation,  to
the  level  of  commonplace  class-predications  resting
on  superficial  observation.

What  we  are  affirming  comes  to  this,  that  if,  by
an  inadequate  theory,  the  function  of  the  former
is  interpreted  as  merely  to  recognise  a  common
attribute  in  its  recurrent  examples,  to  apprehend
"  the  same  producing  the  same,"  then  such  a  reduc
tion  is  erroneously  effected,  and  the  operation  of
scientific  principles  in  leading  to  novelty  whether
of  truth  or  of  practice  is  made  wholly  unintelligible.

2. The endeavour to remove contradiction  in


II  A WORLD  MUST  HAVE  ALL SORTS  37

experience is therefore more successful when it  <worid'a
explicitly  assumes  a  further  shape,  such  as  is  indicated  J  "^  ty
by  the  term  "a  whole  of  parts,"  "an  organism,"  "  a  universa1'
system,"  or  more  generally  "  a  world."

At  present  we  are  only  desirous  to  grasp  the
principle  of  the  distinction  between  all  these  forms
of  experience,  on  the  one  hand,  and  the  abstract
generality,  on  the  other  ;  and  it  is  not  necessary  to
enter  upon  the  differences  between  these  several
conceptions  themselves.1  The  most  inclusive  of
the  terms  above-mentioned  is  "  world  "  or  "  cosmos."
A  world,  or  cosmos  is  a.  system  of  members,  such
that  every  member,  being  ex  hypothesi  distinct,
nevertheless  contributes  to  (The  unity  of]  the  w  hpl  e

which constitute its


distinctness.  And  the.  important  point  for  us  at
present  is  the  difference  of  principle  between  a  world
and  a  class.  It  takes  all  sorts  to  make  a  world  ;  a
class  is  essentially  of  one  sort  only.  In  a  word,
the  difference  is  that  the  ultimate  principle  of  unity
or  community  is  fully  exemplified  in  the  former,
but  only  superficially  in  the  latter.  The  ultimate
principle,  we  may  say,  is  sameness  in  the  other  ;  2
generality  is  sameness  in  spite  of  the  other  ;
universality  is_sameness  by  means,  of  die  other.

Thus  the  true  embodiment  of  the  logical  universal
takes  the  shape  of  a  world  whose  members  are
worlds.  "Whose  members  are  worlds"  —  for  the
same  reason  which  made  it  inevitable  for  the  mere
generality  to  be  defective  by  the  omission  of
contents  which  differentiate  the  class-members  from

1  See  Taylor,  Elements  of  Metaphysic,  p.  96.

2  The  principle  will  be  defended  when  we  come  to  speak  of  the
criterion  of  truth  and  reality.


38  THE  CONCRETE UNIVERSAL  LECT.

one  another.  The  universal  in  the  form  of  a  world
refers  to  diversity  of  content  within  every  member,
as  the.  universal  in_^g_jgrm  °f  a  class  neglects  it.
Such  a  diversity  recognised  as  a  unity,  a  macrocosm
constituted  by  microcosms,1  is  the  type  of  the


1  It  is  the  opinion  of  distinguished  recent  thinkers  that  in  such  a
macrocosm  the  numbers  of  microcosms  may  be  actually  endless,  and
that,  within  every  microcosm  the  complexity  of  detail  may  be  endless
also  (see  e.g.  Taylor,  Elements  of  Metaphysic,  bk.  xi.,  ii.  5  and  iv.
10).  I  cannot  understand  how  this  is  compatible  with  the  deter
minate  self-containedness  of  a  truly  infinite  whole,  unless  we  are
speaking  of  appearances,  such  as  space  and  time,  which  through
their  imperfection  suggest  an  endless  series.  Could  the  solution  of
our  difference  lie  here  ?  viz.,  that  a  true  infinite  gives  rise  to  an
appearance  of  endless  variety  in  so  far  as  it  is  interpreted  exclusively
through  characteristics  inadequate  to  the  whole  ?  Cf.  Appearance
and  Reality,  p.  290,  "  In  its  isolation  as  a  phenomenon  Nature  is
both  finite  and  infinite,  and  so  proclaims  itself  untrue."  It  is  almost
as  if  you  were  always  losing  your  place  in  a  book  and  so  reading  its
pages  ad  infinitum  in  different  combinations,  with  some  repetition.
Cf.  Logic,  2nd  ed.,  i.  163.  You  never  get  out  of  the  series,  because  you
never  get  nearer  the  whole.  But  the  important  matter,  on  which  as
I  understand  we  are  agreed,  is  that  even  if  the  true  infinite  include
endlessness,  yet  endlessness  is  not  enough  to  constitute  a  true
infinite.

And,  though  incompetent  to  estimate  the  doctrine  of  self-repre
sentative  series  I  may  venture  a  remark,  which  seems  to  me  relevant,
on  the  tendency  to  take  it  as  a  type  of  infinity.  It  is  so  taken,  as  I
gather,  not  because  of  its  endlessness,  but  because  of  its  self-determina
tion.  Well  and  good;  let  it  be  granted  that  proper  parts  similar  to  the
whole  constitute  self-representation.  But  in  truly  typical  infinite  wholes,
the  self-representation  is  present  in  a  way  curiously  analogous  to  that
involved  in  the  series  in  question,  but  characteristically  different.  In
a  sense,  the  differentiated  organ  or  spiritual  element  of  a  true  infinite
does  contain  or  repeat  the  structure  of  the  whole,  not,  however,  by  a
one-to-one  correspondence  of  terms,  but  by  a  differentiated  response  to
organic  necessities.  A  great  country  does  not  represent  itself  by
mapping  itself  on  a  portion  of  its  surface,  but  by  developing,  say,  a
university  at  one  point,  a  church  at  another,  a  manufacturing  town
at  a  third.  All  these  are  proper  parts  repeating  the  whole  structure
of  the  whole,  and  a  good  deal  could  be  done  to  show  in  detail  how
this  is  true.  But  it  would  not,  of  course,  be  a  one-to-one  corre
spondence  of  terms.  A  mind,  again,  does  not  represent  itself  by
thinking  over  its  thoughts  ad  infinitum,  but  by  the  varied  "  thought,
word,  and  deed  "  in  each  and  all  of  which  its  nature  becomes  incarnate.


ii  THE  PATH  TO COMPLETENESS  39

The  recognition  of  this  logical  form  as  the  true
type  of  universality  is  the  key  to  all  sound
philosophy.  It  is  possible,  indeed,  that  even  in
face  of  such  a  recognition  those  philosophers  may
prove  to  hold  the  more  suitable  language  who  deny
that  thought  can  ever  be  one  with  the  real.  But  at
any  rate,  we  are  bound  to  follow  thought  as  it
obviously  develops  Jtself  towards  a  higher  vitality^

i,  in  the  certainty  that  if  it  is


itself  a  vanishing  form,  it  will  point  us  the  way  to
what  lies  beyond,  and  when  necessary,  introduce  us
to  its  nature.  We  may  be  told  that  there  are  other
sides  of  experience  to  be  developed,  and  we  must
not  assume  that  by  following  the  development  of
thought  we  are  on  the  road  to  perfection.  A  warn
ing  like  this  sounds  well  before  we  have  begun  to
feel  the  pulse  of  experience  at  all  ;  but  it  really  rests
on  the  false  pre-supposition  that  we  have  different
minds  in  different  activities  of  mind.  If  we  view
experience  bona  fide,  and  follow  where  its  connec
tions  lead  us,  noting  the  relation  of  incompleteness  to
completeness  in  all  the  responses  of  mind,  it  does
not  matter  from  what  point  we  start.  It  is  like
going  up  a  hill  ;  you  only  need  to  keep  ascending,
and  you  must  reach  the  top.  You  cannot  study
thougJit  and  r^_bej£cLtQJadJlandTeeling,  nor  will  or
feeling  and  not  be  led  back  to  thought.

The  concrete  universal  may  be  contrasted  with
the  general  rule  as  a  centre  of  radii  compared  with)
a  superficial  area. The  test  of  universality  which  it  \
imposes  is  not  the  number  of  subjects  which  share

In  both  cases  what  might  be  serial  protrusions  are  turned  back  into
self-contained  organs,  and  what  would,  if  unsatisfied,  set  up  an  end
lessness,  if  satisfied,  finds  a  home  to  rest  in,  and  maintains  its  whole
"  chez  soi."


THE CONCRETE UNIVERSAL


LECT.


a  common  predicate,  but  rather  than  this,  the
number  of  predicates1  that_.._caru be- attached  to  a
smgle^uh^ct.  It  is  the  degree  in  which  a  systematic
identity  subordinates  diversity  to  itself,  or,  more
truly,  reveals  itself  as  the  spirit  of  communion  and
totality,  within  which  identity  and  difference  are
distinguishable  but  inseparable  points  of  view.  The
account  of  a  judgment  whose  subject  is  a  proper
name,  in  Mr.  Bradley's,2  or  any  similar  Logic,  is  a
good  introduction  to  what  is  meant  by  a  concrete
universal.3

and  is  one  3.  We  said  that  the  key  to  all  sound  philosophy
individual,  lies  in  taking  the  concrete  universal,  that  is,  the
S^nisus^  individual,  as  the  true  type  of  universality.  We  are
towards  a  often  to]^  tnat  tne  individual  cannot  be  made  by  a

cosmos  ?  *

combination  of  universals.4  It  is  true  that  it  cannot
be  made  by  a  combination  of  generalities,  but  the
reason  is  that  it  is  itself  the  superior  and  the  only
true  type  of  universal.

But,  it  may  be  objected,  assuming  that  this  is  so,
that  the  tendency  of  experience  to  carry  us  from  one
step  to  another  is  universality,  and  that  such  a
tendency  in  its  fulfilment  leads  us  not  to  general
rules,  but  to  a  construction  of  macrocosm  and

1  The expression serves to  explain  the  general nature  of  the
contrast. It  is  not  meant  that  number  is  a  real  test,  though  it  may
be  a  consequence,  of  richness  and  completeness  of  being.

2  Principles  of  Logic,  p.  6 1 .

3  The  universal,  as  possessed  by  the  mind,  is  essentially  a  j^stem
or  habit  of  self-adjusting  response  or  reaction,  whether  automatic  or
in  thought,  over  a  certain  range  of  stimulation. An  acquired  skill  such
as  that  of  a  cricketer,  is  a  good  example. Thus  resemblance  is  quite
an  inadequate  category  for  it. It  deals  quite  equally  with  difference.
So  that  I  cannot  at  all  accept  Mf.  Lindsay's  dictum  in  his  work  on
Bergson,  p.  228. "The  difference  (between  A  and  A'  in  induction)
must  for  our  purpose  be  ignored." Adjustment  to  the  difference  is
the  whole  point. See  author's  Logic,  2nd  ed.,  ii.  184.

4  E.g.  Schiller,  Humanism,  123-6.


ii  "NO  ROOM  FOR  DOUBT*  41

microcosms,  why,  nevertheless,  should  we  respect
this  result  ?  Why  should  we  consider  that  the
structure  so  developed  partakes  of  being  and  of
trueness,  as  Plato  might  tell  us,  and  is  something
more  than  a  castle  in  Spain  ?

The  argument  courted  by  such  an  objection  must
always  be  the  same  in  essence,  but  may  begin  from
either  end  of  the  process  which  it  analyses.

(i)  It  may  point  out,  on  the  one  hand,  that  to  The  whole  /
doubt  is  to  assert  a  ground  for  doubting,  and  that
the  tendency  of  the  logical  progression,  however
far  from  fulfilment,  is  "  to  leave  no  room  for  doubt  "  ;
that  is  to  say,  to  organise  experience  in  such  a  way
that  at  whatever  point  you  may  try  to  pick  up  a
positive  content  and  push  it  against  the  system,  you
will  be  sfiown  that  the  effort  is  anticipated,  and  only
takes  you  back  into  the  system  itself.  This  is  to
appeal  to  the  principle  that  truth  or  reality  is  the
whole.  According  to  this,  the  reason  why  you
cannot  contradict  the  truth  is  that  it  leaves  outside
it  no  TTOV  arc!)  on  which  a  contradiction  could  be
44  grounded."  We  shall  in  effect  be  illustrating
this  point  when  we  deal  below  with  the  flower  of  the
concrete  universal  —  its  capacity  in  the  way  of
unifying  experience.  I  may,  however,  be  permitted
to  adduce  an  elementary  example  of  the  process  and
principle  I  have  in  mind.

How  could  a  competent  astronomer  meet  the
doubt  expressed  by  a  child,  whether  in  a  first  or
second  childhood,  who  should  deny  en  bloc  the
revelations  of  astronomy,  and  who  should  say  that
the  Sun  and  Stars  were  in  fact — here  would  come
his  difficulty,  but,  let  us  suppose  him  to  urge, — just
about  what  they  look  like  to  the  naked  eye  ?  I  take


42  THE CONCRETE UNIVERSAL  LECT.

it  that  so  long  as  the  doubt  remained  indefinite  it
would  not  be  possible  to  deal  with  it  directly.  You
cannot  force  such  a  sceptic  to  follow  a  scientific
construction.  The  doubter,  even  if  a  child,  is
already  aware  that  there  is  some  kind  of  method
which  professes  to  get  step  by  step  to  the  result
which  he  distrusts.  It  is  just  this  method  which  his
indefinite  doubt  refuses  to  follow.  To  him  it  is  all
artificial  talk,  which  he  cannot  see  any  point  in.
He  refuses  to  believe  that  you  can  go  from  step  to
step  in  the  mode  which  science  adopts.  His  doubt,
if  arrested  at  this  point,  amounts  to  refusing  to
commit  himself,  and  defying  the  astronomer  to  draw
him  on  beyond  the  mere  momentary  spectacle  of
the  heavens.  It  is  the  scepticism  which,  if  con
sistent,  would  be  inert  and  dumb.

A  doubt  of  this  type  has  no  material  ground
against  the  system  of  experience.  It  has,  perhaps,
a  certain  prima  facie  formal  ground,  in  the  immense
apparent  interval  between  first  appearances  and  the
results  of  science.  But  this,  again,  unless  formulated,
is  no  ground  at  all ;  and  if  formulated  would  stand
on  the  same  basis  as  any  material  allegation  against
the  system  of  science.

Now  if  the  doubter  makes  a  positive  allegation,
whether  material  or  formal,  in  support  of  his
scepticism,  then  at  once  he  is  lost.  If  you  say,  the
sun  is  a  lantern,  lit  up  every  morning  and  put  out  at
night,  or  the  stars  are  holes  in  a  sort  of  dish  cover,
through  which  the  light  beyond  shines  through,
then,  I  presume,  the  competent  astronomer  has  you
in  his  power.  You  have  given  a  rival  interpretation
of  the  appearances.  You  have  picked  up  a  frag
ment  of  experience  which  you  are  attempting  to


II THE  SYSTEM  INCLUDES  THE  OBJECTION 43

push  against  the  system  of  sciences,  a  something
which  you  treat  as  outside  it  and  as  thus  destroying
its  universality.  In  doing  so,  however,  you  acknow
ledge  universality  as  the  test ;  you  are  no  longer
rejecting  the  system  in  toto,  but  are  calling  upon  it
to  alter  itself,  and  admit  your  interpretation  into  its
texture.  But,  so  far  as  it  is  the  whole,  the  system
can  reply  :  "  We  know  all  that  already  ;  we  already
possess  your  interpretation,  but  in  a  shape  which
effects  the  object  implied  in  every  interpretation  of
appearances,  which,  in  the  shape  you  gave  it,  it  failed
to  do.  You  wanted,  of  course,  to  connect  your
vision  of  the  starry  heavens  with  other  experiences
and  ideas  so  as  to  express  what  it  was  for  you  in  the
completest  way.  But  we  possess  the  experiences
which  you  used  for  that  purpose,  together  with  an
enormous  mass  of  others.  And  we  can  show  you
that  by  using  them  as  you  did  it  is  impossible  to
attain  the  complete  expression  you  desired,  because
in  that  way  they  cannot  be  united  with  the  full
appearances  in  question,  or  with  the  mass  of  other
experience.  On  the  other  hand,  we  can  show  you
a  set  of  connections  which  will  at  all  events  draw
out  the  nature  of  your  experience  very  much  more
completely  and  in  far  greater  union  with  the  rest  of
experience.  We  can  show  you  that  you  were  only
attempting  imperfectly  and  in  confusion  what  is
here,  at  least  comparatively,  perfect  and  complete."
The  main  line  of  the  argument  is  familiar  from  Plato
downwards.  But  I  have  modified  it  so  as  to
emphasise  that  side  of  its  implication  which  consists
in  the  principle  that  "the  truth  may  be  defined  as
the  whole."  The  whole  is  the  truth,  because  if  you
doubt  indefinitely  you  advance  nothing  against  it  ;


THE CONCRETE UNIVERSAL


LECT.


world  or
whole.


if  you  attempt to push forward a contrary, you
agree  that  "something  is,"  and  you  can  be  shown
j  that your something is already  contained in  the
system  against  which  you  have  advanced  it.
Non-con- But  (2)  we  may  begin  at  _the  other  end  of  the

tradiction  i  -, — . •  • — t —  — T~

involves  a  process,  and  analyse  its  inmost  nature  under  the
head  of  the  criterion.  I  am  not  introducing  this
subject  for  its  own  logical  interest,  but  merely,  in
the  treatment  of  the  concrete  universal,  to  point  out
that  the  appeal  to  "the  whole"  is  not  a  detached
or  arbitrary  procedure,  but  the  same  thing  with  the
principle  otherwise  known  as  the  principle  of  non
contradiction.

The  essence  of  the  matter,  as  I  understand  it,  is
simply  the  determinate  dev^lopmentjjif  jjhe  character
of. .being.  We  have  the  inevitable  line  of  thought
definitely  traced  in  Plato — in  almost  any  of  the
great  dialogues,  and  still  more  strikingly  and  funda
mentally  in  the  whole  evolution  of  his  logical  theory
taken  together.  And  we  have  it,  if  with  defective
detail,  yet  substantially  on  an  incontrovertible  basis,
in  Hegel's  Dialectic..  I  will  venture  to  state  it  in  a'
few  plain  sentences.  Whatsis,  (is)  hy__deJj£rminate
self^Tiaintenance.  There  is  no  meaning  in  "it  is"
apart  from  "it  is  what  it  is."  It  acts,  or  possesses
predicates,  and  its  action  or  its  predicates  are  "  what
it  is."  Now  there  is  a  sound  sense,  as  Plato  is
careful  to  explain,  in  which  "  is  "  and  "  is  not "  can
and  must  be  united  in  the  determination  of  the  same
content.  But  in  as  far  as  "is"  affirms  a  certain
determinate  self-maintenance  and  "is  not"  affirms
a  different  one,  or  the  character  of  otherness  in
general,  so  far  to  attach  the  two  as  predicates  to  the
same  point  of  being  is  to  allege  that  in  its  self-


II NON-CONTRADICTION  IMPLIES  A WORLD 45

maintenance  it  fails  to  maintain  itself.  This  is  so
far  to  destroy  the  character  of  being  as  an  expres
sion  for  any  positive  experience.  It  is  to  posit  and
to  annul  in  the  same  act.  In  so  far  then,  as  an
experience  presents  an  appearance  of  this  kind,  a
combination  of  "is"  and  "is  not"  (or  "is  other")
without  any  distinction  in  the  subject  of  affirmations,
it  falls  short  of  the  character  of  being.  We  cannot
hold  that  "  it  is  "  in  the  strict  sense  of  the  term.  It
jondoes^jtselfj  and  fails  to  conserve  itself  in  any
actual  character.  In  as  far,  on  the  other  hand,  as
the  appearance  of  hostility  to  self  is  removed,  by
transforming  the  content  of  experience  in  question
into  what  is  relatively  a  system,  such  as_Jo  accepL
both  jjiis  an(j__the  other  as  co-operative  and  no
longer  conflicting  members,  the  experience  "w"  in
a  higher  degree  ;  iis^elf^maintenan^e  _includes_more
and  is  pro  tanto  less


fronted  with  jgjcternaLJacts beyond^  its pov^eji—  to


assimilate.  This  is  the  process  which  Plato  indi
cates  in  Republic  v.  Everyday  experience,  he
says  in  effect,  tumbks^^ckwaut^_an.d  _  forwards
beJ^w_eejL_lli§L"  and__",Js_  not."  To-day  a  thing  is
experienced  as  beautiful,  to  -  morrow,  in  another
light  or  in  another  mood,  as  ugly.  This  minute  we
pronounce  a  thing  large  ;  the  next  minute  we  have
turned  to  compare  it  with  something  else,  and  we
pronounce  it  small.  This  is  because  the  beauty  we
judge  by  in  the  first  case,  and  the  magnitude  we
judge  by  in  the  second,  are  fragments  and  not
worlds.  If  the  one  judgment  were  adequately
grounded,  i.e.  included  the  right  conditions  and
were  guarded  by  the  right  distinctions,  it  could  not
30  lightly,  and  ultimately  it  could  not  at  all,  pass


46  THE CONCRETE UNIVERSAL  LECT.

over  into  its  contrary.  There  would  still  be  beauty
and  ugliness,  largeness  and  smallness,  but  they
would  be  differents  and  not  contraries.  They  would
not  both  be  predicated,  without  ground  or  reserva
tion,  of  the  same  subject.  When  we  know  what
beauty  fully  means,  and  have  found  it  in  a  world  of
our  experience,  then>  in  jDroportion^Jo ^  .the_extent
and_c_phe.rence .of  that  world  as  an  inclusive  content,
it  is  hard  for  any  change  of  temper  or  of  surround
ings  to  make  us  say  "  it  is  ugly."

What  we  have  been  describing  is  in  other  words
the  self- maintenance  or  self-assertion  of  the  uni
versal.  The  universal  is  just  that  character  of
e^erienc^wiii^^  "  by  reduc

ing  it  to  an  element  harmonious  with  and  corro
borative  of  the  "  is."  It  is  "  the  self  in  the  other."

When,  therefore,  we  say  that  the  criterion  of  truth
and  of  reality  is  one,  and  is  the  character  of  non
contradiction,  this  assertion  rests  on  the  general
nature  of  experience  as  outlined  above,  and  more
particularly  on  its  nature  as  universal.  And  we  can
see  that  we  are  thus  experiencing,  as  it  were  from
the  other  end,  the  same  principle  which  in  its
results  revealed  itself  as  the  concrete  universal.
For,  as  we  have  just  observed,  the  removal  of  con
tradiction  involves  the  character  of  a  "  world  "  ;  and
this  character  we  must  ascribe  to  Plato's  dyaQov  and,
in  ultimate  interpretation,  to  Kant's  Noumenon,  to
every  principle  in  fact  which  seriQusly.._aspires_tp
ejxpressjjiejklljiatur^^

It  is  often  thought  that  the  criterion  should
belong  to  a  special  class  of  principles  which  are
distinguished  by  the  peculiarity  that  they  carthot  be
denied  without  being  affirmed  by  the  denial.  Such


ii  EMPTINESS OF  INCONTROVERTIBLES  47

a principle, it may be  said, is expressed by the JjJ~*

assertion  that  there  is  a  self-consistent  reality  ;  for

to  say that  there is  no  self-consistent  reality (or  *  ^  *

even  that  reality  need  not  be  self-consistent)  implies

a  degree  of  insight  into  the  nature  of  things  and  the

conditions  of  true  assertion  regarding  it,  which  in

turn  involves  as  its  basis  the  postulate  of  a  reality

with  a  coherent  nature  of  its  own — the  very  principle

intended to be  denied. An  obvious case  of  the  f  •

I t/W*1p <•»-*•»-'''

kind,  again,  is  the  affirmation  that  every  judgment  \  t  ^
lays  claim  to  truth  ; for  no  disclaimer  of  the  pre
tension  to  truth  can  be  framed  which  has  not  as  a M<
main part  of  its  content  the  claim to  embody  a
truth — the  truth  of  the  disclaimer.

It  is  true  that  in  the  case  of  principles  thus  K^
expressed  the  absurdity  of  denying  the  significant
law  of  Identity  —  the  proposition  that  statements
true  of  reality  can  be  made — reveals  itself  "  within
the  compass  of  a  lady's  ring."  But  it  is  a  mistake,
I  suggest,  to  regard  these  as  logically  peculiar  cases
—case  of  a  priori  truth — and  therefore  to  rely  wholly
on  the  formal  refutation  of  scepticism  which  they
seem  to  afford,  neglecting  the  fuller  account  of  non
contradiction,  as  the  principle  of  the  "  more "  of
positive  experience  and  of  its  self-  maintenance,
which  was  drawn  out  in  the  last  paragraph.

For  the  impossibility  of  being  denied,  without
eo  ipso  being  affirmed,  which  characterises  these
very  simple  propositions,  only  attaches  to  them  in
consequence  of  the  extreme  emptiness  of  experience
in  so  far  as  they  appeal  to  it.  For,  so  far,  a  pro
position  implying  any  possibility  at  all  of  a  stable
experience,  even  if  negative  in  form,  is  sufficient  to
establish  all  that  such  principles  as  these  formally


48  THE CONCRETE UNIVERSAL  LECT.

contend  for,  which  amounts  in  one  shape  or  another,
to  no  more  than  the  reality  of  some  persistent  or
objective  experience.  In  a  word,  if  you  say  any
thing,  in  the  indicative  mood,  it  commits  you  to  the
affirmation  of  a  something  ;  and  this  is  why  even
the  formula  "  there  is  nothing,"  strictly  taken,  must
involve  the  affirmation  of  an  objective  world.

But  it  is  a  mistake,  so  far  as  I  can  see,  to  treat
this  ^pparenjly_  mimediate__££rt.aiiity.  which  is  at
bottom  equivalent  to  the  abstraction  "something
is,"  as  superior  in  logical  value  to  the  certainty  of


although  in  a  purely  formal  sense  the  latter  may
seem  to  be  at  a  disadvantage,  i.e.  to  be  incapable
of  being  formulated  as  a  content  of  a  priori  truth.
For  the  apparent  disadvantage  arises  precisely  from
the  fact  that  here,  where  we  appeal  to  an  advanced
phase  of  the  construction  of  experience,  it  is  prima
facie  conceivable  that  any  particular  elements  of  the
concrete  world,  however  closely  knit  up  with  the
whole,  might  be  de.nied  in  the  precise  context  which
they  claim,  and  yet  leave  standing  the  world  to
which  they  immediately  belong.  While  in  the  case
of  the  formal  principles,  to  which  that  of  non-con
tradiction  in  its  abstract  shape  belongs,  if  their
content  could  be  removed  or  destroyed  by  denial,
then  the  whole  world  would  be  gone  —  no  content
at  all  would  be  left  to  experience.  And  therefore,
because  even  denial,  as  we  have  seen,  implies  a
real  something,  we  say  that  in  denying  these  prin
ciples  we  inevitably  reaffirm  them  ;  that  is,  we
affirm  a  something,  which  (so  deficient  in  multi
plicity  is  the  content  of  experience  to  which  they
appeal)  is  necessarily  one  with  the  affirmation  of


ii  REAL CERTAINTY  ABOVE  FORMAL  49

them  in  their  abstract  shape.  If  you  say  "  there  is
nothing,"  you  assert  that  there  is  something ;  if  you
say  " there  is  no  truth"  you  are  proclaiming  that
there  is  this  truth  at  least ;  if  you  say,  "  contra
dictory  assertions  may  both  be  true "  —  you  are
asserting  the  notion  of  truth  which  the  nexus  of
your  proposition  destroys.  In  other  words,  when
thinking  of  experience  under  these  general  charac
teristics,  e.g.  that  A  is  A,  we  can  deny  none  of
them,  because  if  we  deny  at  all  we  deny  every
thing  ;  and  that  is  an  attempt  which  even  the  form
of  negative  assertion  suffices  to  frustrate.

But  this  distinction,  which  seems  to  confer  a
special  guarantee  upon  principles  of  the  type  in
question,  is  in  truth  merely  apparent,  and  due  to
our  insufficient  perception  of  logical  context.  For  !
the  proof  of  everything  that  is  proved  is  ultimately  j
one  and  the  same,  namely,  that  if  it  is  to  be  denied,
nothing  can  be  affirmed.  And  as  it  is  impossible
to  deny  everything,  a  proposition  so  guaranteed
must  be  allowed  to  stand.  Now  a  certainty  thus
grounded  is  really  and  in  the  spirit  of  logic  greater
in  proportion  as  the  whole  of  experience  is  fuller
and  more  coherent ;  for  the  difficulty  of  denying
everything  obviously  becomes  enhanced  as  every
thing  becomes  a  more  completely  apprehended
cosmos  with  a  fuller  self- maintenance.  But  the
distinction  in  favour  of  the  principles  whose  denial
directly  affirms  them  arises  in  the  following  way.
Though  the  certainty  of  experience  as  a  whole
grows  with  its  completeness  and  organisation,  yet
the  power  to  claim  that  certainty  as  guaranteeing
particular  propositions  in  any  precise  and  literal
form,  is  diminished  by  the  same  cause  as  that  which

E


So  THE  CONCRETE UNIVERSAL  LECT.

increases  the  certainty  of  experience  as  a  whole,
that  is  to  say,  its  diversity  and  comprehensiveness.
For  however  sound  we  may  hold  a  special  proof
to  be,  it  must  remain  prima  facie  possible  in  an
advanced  stage  of  experience  to  deny  the  precise
and  literal  assertion  made  by  any  single  and  so  to
speak  departmental  proposition,  and  yet  to  leave
standing,  apparently  untouched,  a  large  proportion
of  organised  experience.  The  resources  in  the  way
of  certainty  are  immensely  greater,  but  become  eo
ipso  much  more  difficult  to  use.

Yet  to  a  great  extent  this  difficulty  is  illusory  ;
and  if  we  choose  as  necessary  propositions  of
advanced  experience  those  which  indicate  vital
functions  or  whole  departments  of  our  world  rather
than  those  which  specify  precise  and  literal  fact,  we
can  realise  and  make  available  the  greater  certainty
which  attaches  to  a  full  content  of  knowledge  as
compared  with  any  abstract  content  whatever.  We
cannot  stake  our  whole  belief  in  reality  on  the  literal
and  exact  formulation  even  of  such  principles  as  the
Law  of  Gravitation,  the  principle  of  the  Conserva
tion  of  Energy,  the  existence  of  God,  still  less  of
special  conclusions  in  the  special  sciences.  But  we
can  and  do  stake  it  on  the  general  "  trueness  and
being  "  of  whole  provinces  of  advanced  experience,
such  as  religion,  or  morality,  or  the  world  of  beauty
and  of  science.  And  these  are  a  higher  and  deeper
evidence  of  the  being  and  nature  of  the  real  than
are  the  formally  undeniable  judgments,  undeniable
because  implying  only  the  minimum  of  experience,
to  which  the  abstract  shape  of  the  principle  of  non
contradiction  belongs.

The  above  argument  amounts to  denying the


II  CONTINGENT  TRUTH  AS THE TRUER  51

distinction  between  necessary  and  contingent  truth
—  truth  the  denial  of  which  involves  a  self-contra
diction,  and  truth  the  denial  of  which  is  only  a  con
tradiction  when  seen  in  its  connection  with  other
parts  of  experience.  The  test  of  the  inconceiv
ability  of  the  contradictory,1  if  rightly  understood,
applies  alike  to  both  these  classes  of  truths.  I  am
sure  that,  for  the  reasons  above  stated,  Leibniz'
extraordinarily  vraisemblable  defence  of  the  distinc
tion  cannot  ultimately  be  maintained.  Every  true
proposition  is  so  in  the  last  rejsort^because  its  con^/
c^  with  they  >


of  experiences  in  other  words,  is  not  merely
a  contradiction  of  facj:  but  a  self-  contradiction.
This  is  easily  seen,  if  we  fill  in  its  S  and  P  as  the
rest  of  experience  determines  them.2

And  further,  when  we  take  this  point  of  view,
the  fuller  ranges  of  experience  with  reference  to
which  we  say  that  the  truth  is  the  whole,  reveal
themselves  as  not  separate  in  kind,  but  as  a  further
confirmation  and  manifestation,  in  its  complete
growth  and  maturity,  of  the  truth  which  in  its
undifferentiated  form  presents  itself  in  abstract
principles  such  that  their  denial  involves  their
affirmation.  So-called  "  contingent  "  truth  might
in  this  sense  be  held  truer  and  more  fundamental

1  The  inconceivability  of  the  contrary,  in  the  strict  sense,  would
not  establish  any  truth. Two contrary  propositions  may  both  be
false.

2  E.g.  "  Beauty  [which  we  are  referring  to  as  an  accepted  experi
ence]  is  not  a  reality." This  is  in  principle  of  the  same  type  as
"there  is  no  truth,"  though  a  shade  less  directly  self-contradictory,
because  you  might  formally  deny  the  being  of  beauty  and  yet  leave
other reality standing,  whereas  the  second proposition  would not
leave  even  itself  standing. But  you  could  not substantially  deny
the  reality  of  beauty  and  yet  leave  experience  standing,  and  therefore
the  denial  is  substantially  self-contradictory.


52  THE CONCRETE UNIVERSAL  LECT.

than  what  passes  as  "  necessary,"  just  as  secondary
qualities  may  in  some  sense  be  held  more  real  and
fundamental  than  primary.  The  law  of  contradic
tion  might  still  hold  its  formal  place  if  there  were
no  such  thing  as  beauty  or  organised  knowledge  or
social  life  or  religion,  but  the  guarantee  of  its
necessity,  the  difficulty  of  accepting  the  alternative
of  believing  in  nothing,  would  be  very  considerably
weakened.

Truth  or  4.  Having  now  connected  the  concrete  universal
asenon°e  with  the  abstract  form  of  the  principle  of  non-con-
tk>ntrordic  tradiction,  and  shown  that  the  conception  of  truth


satisfac- as  «  ^Q  whole  "  is  a  realisation  and  embodiment  of

tion.

what  the  latter,  we  might  pursue  the  consideration  of  the
cone  rete  ..  uniy  ersal  as  the  clue  to  Individuality.  -4^

But  before  proceeding  with  our  subject,  there  is
a  possible  misconception  which  must  be  met.

If  you  take  the  principle  of  non-contradiction,  or
of  the  whole,  as  criterion,  it  may  be  said,  you  can
get  out  of  it  no  distinction  between  truth,  goodness,
and  beauty,  and  you  leave  it  to  be  supposed  that  all
satisfaction  of  the  need  for  harmony  is  of  the  same
type  ;  and  that  truth  and  beauty  are  simply  names
for  what  suits  us  and  makes  our  experience  satis
factory.  Truth  and  beauty  would  therefore  collapse
into  one  under  the  heading  of  the  good  and  would
be  ^distinguishable  from  whatever  is  found  felic-

o

itously  subservient  to  practice.  This  is  what  a
Pragmatist  might  say.  And  the  first  and  general
answer  would  be,  that  the.  principle  of  the  concrete
universal  does  apply  to  all  types  -of  experience^and
that  alike  in  knowledge,  in  life,  and  in  enjoyment
it  is  the  harmoniously  concrete  which  is  the  higher
and  the  more  real.  And  the  meaning  of  this  is,


1 1  DIFFERENCES '  OF  SA  TISFA  CTIONS

\iJ-'f"

that  injione  of  the  three  aspects  can  the  self, as.. it-
happens  to  be  serve  as  a  test  of  reality.  In  follow
ing  the  law  of  the  universal,  it  must  transmute  itself
and  undergo  expansion  and  correction,  obeying  the
necessity  imposed  by  the  real,  with  which  it  aims  to
be,  but  as  given  is  not,  at  one.  This  is  enough  to
dispose  of  the  essential  contention  of  the  Pragmatist,
the  point  of  which  lies  in  a  confusing  truth  with
goodness,  and  j3  reducing  the  goodness,  so  made
ultimate  standard,  to  the  satisfaction1  of  the  given
self.

The  essential  notion  of  reality  as  a  spring  of
adjustment  in  the  self  is  incompatible  with  this
doctrine,  whatever  form  of  experience  we  con
template.

But  the  further  answer  is  that<Jiot  only  is  there
in  all  approach  to  reality  an  adjustment  of  the  self,
but  the  adjustment  takes  different  forms  according
to  the  function  of  the  self  which  is  in  play.  The
question  is  simply  whether  the  nature  of  things  can
interest  us  for  its  own  sake,  apart  from  the  concrete
endeavour  to  transform  our  lives  and  their  world.
When  once  the  conception  of  a  world  which  pos
sesses  being  beyond  our  own  has  distinguished
itself  from  the  tentative  endeavour  to  supply  our
wants,  it  seems  inevitable  that  we  should  be  in
terested  in  such  a  world  purely  from  the  point  of
view  of  what  it  is,  if  only  because  we  have  the  idea
of  it,  which  necessarily  aspires  to  complete  itself.
As  to  the  facts,  Mr.  Bradley's2  criticism  of  Bain's

1  Whether  this  is  admitted  by  Pragmatism  or  not,  I  will  commit
myself  to  saying  that  all  we  want  either  to  overthrow  the  latter,  or  to
make  it  a  truism,  is  to  be  allowed  to  argue  upon  the  nature  and  con
ditions  of  satisfaction.

2  Principles  of  Logic,  p.  18  ff.


54  THE CONCRETE UNIVERSAL  LECT.

doctrine  of  practice  and  belief  deals  sufficiently  with
them,  and  has  not,  to  my  knowledge,  met  with  an
answer.  Not  all  truth  is  subordinate  to  practice,  or
has,  as  sought  for  and  held,  any  connection  with
practice  at  all.1  In  a  word,  in  all  our  functions,
"theoretical,"  "practical,''  and  "contemplative,"  we
seek  or  accept  real  reality,  and  we  never  entertain  a
thought  of  modifying  it.  If,  therefore,  a  neglect  of
the  distinction  were  inevitable — if  all  forms  of  self-
expression  must  be  ranked  together  either  as
"vision"  or  as  "action"  —the  old  point  of  view
which  makes  Oevpia  the  truest  and  highest  Trpa&s,
would  be  preferable  to  subordinating  truth  to
"action"  in  the  sense  of  change.  But  there  is  no
reason  for  confounding  plain  distinctions  either  in
one  direction  or  in  the  other.

5.  We  now  return  to  the  concrete  universal  as  a

The  con-

crete elite  to  individuality. We  are  regarding  it, in  general

universal  J  J — -£* &---.*- -& — —

embodies as  tjie  type  of  complete  experience,  and  from  this

the  nisus  ......  .  ,  , ,

of  thought  point  of  view  its  characteristics  are  the  same  whether
uaiity.m we  think  of  it  as  the  object  of  knowledge,  of  will,  or
of  enjoyment.

In  the  first  place,  then,  we  have  to  meet  the
common  contention  that  our  thought  is  purely  dis
cursive,  and  is  therefore  unable  so  much  as  to
approach  to  the  type  of  self-contained  reality.  It
almost  seems  at  times  that  in  speaking  about  thought
different  philosophers  have  not  the  same  experience
in  mind.2  The  tradition  of  the  British  school,  start-

1  If,  that  is,  "practice"  is  to  be  distinguished  as  one  type  of  the
satisfaction  of  a  conation. Truth  is,  of  course,  a  satisfaction  of  a
conation  ; one  hardly  likes  to  suggest  that  there  has  been  drawn
from  this  fact  a  simply  and  directly  fallacious  inference. But  the
example  of  Hedonism  warrants  the  opinion  that  even  in  expert  con
troversy  the  sine  qua  non  may  be  confused  with  the  essence.

2  Ward,  Naturalism  and  Agnosticism,  ii.  2  8  2 . Bergson,  p.  3  2  above.


THOUGHT  THE WORLD-BUILDER


55


ing  from  a  theory  for  which  thought  is  decaying
sense,  is  corroborated  by  the  modern  analysis  accord
ing  to  which  thought  is  an  abstracting  and  general
ising  faculty,  and  science  a  departure  from  factual
experience.1  To  some  extent,  as  we  saw,  this  view
is  justified  by  the  primary  character  of  abstract
science  ;  to  some  extent  also  it  must  be  admitted
that  the  contents  of  sense-perception  are  not  trans
parent  to  finite  thought,  and  so  far  it  is  a  linking
and  transition  between  contents  which  are  not  a
unity  for  it.  The  double  aspect  of  finite  life  consti
tutes  here,  as  everywhere,  the  difficulty  and  interest
of  philosophy.  For,  on  the  other  hand,  it  has  been
.  urged,  and  we  feel,  that  4t  is  thought  which  con
structs  and  sustains  the  fohrir  of  experience,  and
that  it  is  thought-determinations  which  invest  even
^nse^percegjipjijddLii5_X^^  and  itsjneaning.  It
1  is  only  in  part,  then,  that  our  thought  is  discursive  1
it  has  als^an  intuitivj^jKypect,  in  which  it  remains,


within  itself,  secure  in  the  great  structures  of  its  crea
tion. The  ultimate  tendency  of  thought,  we  have
seen,  is  not  to  generalise,  but  to  constitute  a  world.2
It  is  true  that  it  presses  beyond  the  given,  following
the  "what"  beyond  the  limits  of  the  "that." But
it  is  also  true  that  in  following  the  "  what  "  it  tends  A
always  to  jeturn  to  a  fuller  "that/' If  its  impulse •
is  away  from  the  given  it  is  towards  the  whole—
the  world. And  as  constituting  a  world  it  tends  to
return  to  the  full  depth  and  roundness  of  experience
from which its first step was to depart. In a

1  See  R.  L.  Nettleship  in  Biography  of  Green,  i.  1 1 8  ff.  ;  and
Logic  Lectures,  Remains,  i.  173;  Green  in  review  of  John  Caird,
Works,  iii.  142  ;  cf.  Bradley,  Logic,  p.  92.

1  This  is  so  even  in  Induction.  The  aspect  of  generalisation  even
here  is  quite  subordinate.  See  author's  Logic,  2nd  ed.,  ii.  174  ff.


56  THE CONCRETE UNIVERSAL  LECT.

,.-*  ----  —  -  —

"world,"  a  "concrete  universal,"  we  do  not  lose
directness  and  significance  as  we  depart  from
primary  experience  ;  on  the  contrary,  every  detail
has  gained  incalculably  in  vividness  and  in  meaning,
by  reason  of  the  intricate  interpretation  and  inter-
j  connection,  through  which  thought  has  developed
I  its  possibilities  of  "being."  The  watchword  of  con
crete  thinking  is  "Philosophiren  ist  dephlegmatisiren,
vivificiren."  "  A  second  of  time  obeys  different
laws  of  proportion  according  as  it  is  an  element  in
an  hour,  in  a  musical  phrase,  or  in  an  act  of  forbear
ance  respectively.  In  Plato's  language,  it  gets  more
'  determined  '  at  each  step  ;  it  remains  the  same
itself,  but  it  acquires  new  significance,  and  is  linked
to  larger  issues.


"  l


Following  this  clue,  we  skaH—be  inclined


in  thought  the_principle_of^concreteness  rather  than
of  abstraction,  and  t#  recognise  the  highest  truth  or

(reality  of  which  thought  is  capable  in  the  fullest
experience,  the  most  self-contained  world  which
finite  minds  can  attain  to  from  any  given  point.  It
is  fully  admitted  that  no  absolutely  self-contained
experience  is  accessible  to  finite  intelligences,  and
that  therefore  they  must  always  be  on  one  side  dis
cursive.  On  the  other  hand,  so  far  as  a  difference
between  the  less  and  the  more  true  or  real  is  within
our  horizon  at  all,  it  is  by  this  standard  —  the  standard
of  wholeness  or  self-containedness,  /which  unites
with  the  principle  of  non-contradiction^in  the  charac
teristic  of  logical  stability,2  Jthat  the  difference  must
be  estimated.  And,  in  so  far  as  this  estimate  can
be  made,  it  involves  a  character  in  which  thought  is
at  home  with  itself,  and  is  not  driven  from  pillar  to

1  Nettleship,  Remains,  i.  329.  2  See  above,  p.  46.


II  INTENSIFIED VITALITY  57

post  to  make  its  fortune. All  students  are  familiar
with  Mr.  Bradley 's  criticism  of  the  "  thing  "  and  the
"self,"  the apprehension of  beauty, and  even  the
moral  and  religious  consciousness. It  is  fully  in  the
spirit  of  Plato,1  and original and brilliant  as  it  is
in  detailed  execution,  the  reception  of  it  by  philo
sophical  opinion,  as  if  it  introduced  a  principle  new
and  unheard  of  in  Idealism,  has  always  been  to  me
a  source  of  the  greatest  amazement. It  is  plain,
even if  it  were  not  plainly  stated,  that  the  possi
bility  of  estimating  the  comparative  remoteness  of
these  experiences  from  the  Absolute  implies  in  them,
r  on  the  other  hand,  positive  degrees  ^f^the  charajcter
j  which  constitutes  reality,  and  which  I  have  ventured
to  identify  with  JOgicflj^jj^kilityr In  as  far  as  such
types  of  experience  take  the form of  self-centred;
worlds  we  may  adopt  them  as  examples  of  what  we!
mean  by  the  concrete  universal,  in  which  the  aspira-j
tion  of  all  experience  to  be  a  whole  partially  comes  \
to  its rights. Only,  in  as far  as  they  partake  of  I
such a character, I  hardly  see  how  we  can  deny
to them an aspect  in  which thought is  at  home
with  itself  in  reality,  and  assumes  the  attitude  of  an
intuitive  understanding.

We  may  take  as  an  example  a  work  of  art.2
This  is  an  object  in  which  we  can  realise  what  the
Greeks  meant  by  Th^oria.  In  its  essence,  as  a
thing  of  beauty,  and  neglecting  its  aspect  as  a
physical  object  or  movement,  it  is  self-contained  and
a  true  whole,  possessing  its  significance  in  itself,  and

1  Cf.,  for  example,  on  the  self, the  monster  simile  in  Rep.  ix.,
and  the  condemnation  of  the  phenomenal  soul  in  x. ;  and  on  the  finite
perception  of  beauty  the  well-known  place  Symposium,  2  i  o  e.

2  Here  I  am  glad  to  have  Professor  Taylor  with  me,  at  least  in
some  degree. See  Elements  of  Metaphysic,  pp.  32-3.


58  THE CONCRETE UNIVERSAL  LECT.

not  driving  our  thought  beyond  it  to  a  detached
meaning  and  explanation.  Every  point  in  it  carries
the  burden,  or  lives  with  the  life,  of  the  whole.  Of
course  its  unity  and  independence  are  imperfect,1
but  that  makes  no  difference  when  we  once  under
stand  that  we  are  talking  about  matters  of  degree
within  finite  experience.  The  point  to  be  grasped
is  simply  the  contrast  between  the  relation  of
abstract  generalisation  on  the  one  hand,  and  of  con
crete  modes  of  thinking  on  the  other,  to  complete
ness  of  experience.  In  the  latter  we  see  the  return
to  the  fulness  of  experience  which  thought  jn  the
former  appeared  to  abandon.  Pursuing  the  same
law  or  principle — the  removal  of  contradiction — the
mind  tends  to  arrive  at  experience  incomparably
more  living  and  intense,  as  also  incomparably  more
logical  and  rational,  than  that  of  every-day  percep-  \
tion.  The  true  office  of  thought,  we  begin  to  see,  L
is  to  build  up,  to  inspire  with  .meaning,  to  intensify,  /
to  "  vivify."  The  object  which  thought  in  the  true  Is*
sense  has  worked  upon  is  not  a  relic  of  decaying
sense,  but  is  a  living  world,  analogous  to  a  percep
tion  of  the  beautiful,  in  which  every  thought-deter
mination  adds  fresh  point  and  deeper  bearing  to
every  element  of  the  whole.  We  may  think  of  a
great  business  organisation,  the  economic  life  of  a
great  city,  the  moral  life  of  a  society,  as  seen  by  the
casual  observer,  as  subjected  to  general  formulae  by
the  statistical  investigator,  or  as  grasped  by  an
active  participant,  who  is  also  a  student,2  familiar
with  all  its  aspects,  and  competent  to  realise  the
relation  of  its  purposes  to  their  expression.  The

1  Appearance,  2nd  ed.,  p.  465.

2  Contrast  the  assumption  that  dualism  is  inevitable. Ward  on
business  and  the  looker-on,  Naturalism  and  Agnosticism,  ii.  133-4-


ii  PATIENCE THE CURE  FOR  DUALISM  59

more  concrete  knowledge  is  the  more  vital  for  being
methodically  precise,  and  more  precise  for  being
more  intimately  vital,  just  as  the  touch  of  a  painter
or  a  musician  depends  for  its  vital  value  on  its  extra
ordinary  quantitative  and  qualitative  accuracy,
which  it  owes  in  turn  to  the  dominating  sense  of  the
whole.  Logical  exactitude  in  the  full  and  true
sense  is  not  a  deadening  but  a  vitalising  quality.
Form,  interdependence,  significance,  self-complete
ness  are  characters  as  of  thought  at  its  best,  so  of
1  vitality  at  its  highest.  This  is  the  general  character  ^
by  which  the  concrete  universal  gives  us  the  clue  to
the  individual.  We  will  further  draw  it  out  in  three
closely-connected  relations.  Thought,  we  are  insist-\
ing,  is  not  a  separate  faculty  of  something  known  as
the  intelligence.  It  is  the  active  form  of  totality,
present  in  all  and  every  experience  of  a  rational
being — perhaps,  in  a  degree,  in  every  experience  in  /
he  universe.

6.  When  thought  is  pronounced  purely  discur-  The
sive,  and  so  contrasted  as  secondary  and  extraneous  \
with  immediate  experience  and  activity,  it  is  being
opposed,  I  imagine,  to  the  content  of  sensation,  to  °verconie
the  living  force  of  will,  and  to  the  immediacy  and  cipie.
interest  of  feeling.  On  all  of  these  oppositions  the
conception  of  the  concrete  universal  can  throw  some
light,  though  it  cannot  abolish  a  distinction  of
aspects,  characteristic  of  the  finite  mind,  and  neces
sary  to  the  richness  of  experience.  On  these
matters  altogether  it  seems  worth  while  to  remark
that,  if  philosophy  is  to  make  any  definite  advance,
it  must  make  an  effort  to  get  behind  the  old  idea  of
the  irreducible  dualism  involved  in  man's  nature  as
at  once  spiritual  and  animal.  It  is  very  easy  to  be


>t

'


6o  THE CONCRETE UNIVERSAL  LECT.

in  a  hurry,  and  say  "of  course  thought  cannot  see
through  the  differences  of  the  sensuous  world,  or
play  a  part  in  feeling  or  volition  other  than  that  of
the  reflective  onlooker ;  how  can  we  possibly  exhibit
the  distinctions  of  green  and  red,  of  love  and  hate,
of  choice  and  refusal,  as  operations  of  the  intelli
gence  ?  Therefore  thought  is  purely  discursive,
and  has  to  accept  its  matter  from  elsewhere,  and
experience  can  never  be  a  whole."  And  it  is  no
less  easy  to  say,  "  Man  in  ideal  experience  must
become  purely  spiritual ;  and  thought  must  find  its
completion,  if  it  is  to  be  homogeneous,  apart  from
the  world  of  sense,  of  feeling  or  of  action."  But
the  task  of  philosophy  is  just  to  have  the  care  and
patience  necessary  to  disentangling  and  estimating
the  signs  and  media  by  which  man's  animal  nature
gives  utterance  to  his  spiritual  being,  and  without
which  our  ideas  of  his  perfection,  imperfect  as  they
are,  would  be  more  imperfect  still.
/  I  will  say  a  word  on  the  nature  of  thought  in
/general,  and  then  point  out  its  participation  in  the
forms  of  experience  which  are  held  to  be  most  alien
to  it.

/  Thejiature  of  thinlpng  is  not  exhausted  in  the
abstract  reflective  judgment  or  course  of  inference.
I  ts_essence  lies  in  the  passage  of  a  being  or  content
beyond  itself,  in  a  word,  ideality,  adjustment,  or  the
universal.  It  is  one,  therefore,  with  the  experience
of  freedom.  "He  who  talks  of  freedom,  and
excludes  thought,  knows  not  what  he  says."  The
identity  of  the  two  conceptions  lies  in  the  trans
formation  of  the  align  into  the  kindred,  the  affirma
tion  of  self  in  and  through  the  other.  Where  we

1  Hegel's  Gesch.  d.  Philosophic,  iii.  477,  Eng.  Trans,  iii.  401.


ii  THOUGHT WITHIN  SENSATION  61

have  this,  we  have  the  essence  of  thought,  and  it  is
easy  to  see  that  we  have  it  in  the  higher  phases
of  all  finite  experience,  sentient,  emotional,  conative,
as  well  as  cognitive. The  characteristic  embodi-j
ments  of  thought  within  finite  life  are  "knowledge/
(including sense- perception), love, and work or/
activity.

i. It  is  true  prima  facie that the contents of  sensation

i  i can

sense -perception  are  not  transparent  to  thought,  become
As  such  and  by  themselves  they  cannot  be  defined  ; l
they  cannot  be  brought  as  members  into  an  in
telligible  system.  They  are  not  objects  in  which
reason  can  by  logical  process  recognise  its  own  nature,
as  it  can  in  life  and  purpose,  and  even  in  mechanical
connections.  This  is  prima  facie  true,  but  it  is  not
the  whole  truth,  and  it  just  misses  the  fundamental
principle.

The  contents  of  sense-perception,  like  everything
else,  reveal  a  new  character  in  becoming  elements
of  a  new  whole.  Although,  like  everything  else,
undefinable  in  their  minimum  significance,  they
acquire  in  fresh  combinations  fresh  meanings,  which
must  be  rooted  in  what  they  are.  And  it  would
not  be  justifiable  to  suppose  that  the  contents  of
sense,  in  the  actual  context  in  which  we  apprehend
them,  are  devoid  of  meaning  in  which  their  nature
has  been  drawn  out  and  rendered  explicit  by  contrast
and  relation.  It  is  certain  that  they  speak  to  us,
that  they  convey  meanings  to  our  complex  nature
as  a  whole,  though  it  is  true  that  our  thought  must
fail  to  interpret  adequately  in  other  language  what
they  have  to  say.

1  But  then  this  is  really  true  of  every  term.  Definition  is  always
in  principle  further  determination.


62  THE CONCRETE UNIVERSAL  LECT.

The  strongest  case  of  this  enhanced  significance
is  no  doubt  in  the  world  of  beauty.  For  the  thought
which  has  become  expert  in  this  world,  such  media
as  sound,  colour,  form,  rhythm,  and  metre  have  un
doubtedly  a  logic  and  a  necessity  of  their  own.  The
universal — the  straining  towards  the  whole — is  in
them  as  in  all  experience  ;  and  it  is  idle  to  deny
their  constructive  and  creative  nisus  the  name  of
thinking,  because  it  does  not  operate  through  what
we  call  par  excellence  logical  language  and  con
ceptions  attached  to  words.  The  rhythm  that  com
pletes  a  rhythm,  the  sound  that  with  other  sounds
satisfies  the  educated  ear,  the  colour  that  is  demanded
by  a  colour-scheme,  are  I  take  it  as  necessary  and  as
rational  as  the  conclusion  of  a  syllogism.1

Some  reference  to  this  characteristic  may  include
or  at  least  may  illustrate  the  idea  that  to  know  the
conditions  of  occurrence  of  a  sensation  is  one  with
and  supersedes  the  presentation  of  the  sensuous
element  itself.  There  seem  to  be  two  directions  in
which  such  a  suggestion  might  be  interpreted.  It
might  mean  a  restriction  of. reality  to  an  intelligible
world,  after  the  fashion  of  Plato's  forms  as  commonly
understood,  implying  that  sensation  is  a  nullity  and
a  matter  of  indifference;  or* it  might  imply  that

1  Nettleship,  Remains,  i.  178,  "To  say  that  a  combination  of  two
tones  is  musically  wrong  is  to  say  that  *  I  cannot,  consistently  with
the  law  or  principles  of  musical  thinking,  conceive  or  hold  together
those  two  tones.3  To  sum  up  then,  each  sort  of  object  has  its  own
laws,  and  each  such  law  is  a  law  of  conception."  Cf.  Whistler's
Life,  i.  185.  A  visitor  to  Whistler's  studio  remarked  that  the  upright
line  in  the  panelling  of  the  wall  was  wrong  .  .  .  adding  "  of  course,
it's  a  matter  of  taste."  To  which  Whistler  replied  ..."  remember,
so  that  you  may  not  make  the  mistake  again,  it's  not  a  matter  of  taste
at  all,  it's  a  matter  of  knowledge."  I  do  not  say  he  was  precisely
right  but  he  was  right  as  implying  a  necessity  of  the  type  of  rational
necessity.


II  THOUGHT  MAKES  FEELING  GREAT  63

sensation  can  become  so  transparent  to  thought,  so
definitely  absorbed  in  expressiveness,  that  its  con
tingent  and  unintelligible  character  is  done  away,
and  it  becomes  a  revelation  undistinguishable  from,
though  involving  a  special  perfection  in,  the  mean
ing  which  it  expresses.  Something  of  this  kind  we
can  almost  conceive,  when  we  think  of  the  highest
moods  of  aesthetically  creative  sympathy.  And
according  to  the  principle  on  which  I  shall  later
have  to  insist,  it  is  from  these  fullest  experiences
that  our  clues  should  be  sought,  if  we  desire  to
apprehend  how  life  can  most  nearly  approach  per
fection.  "  Colour,"  it  has  been  said,  "is  a 'spirit
upon  things  by  which  they  become  expressive  to  the
spirit."1  And  we  see  that  in  a  concrete  universal
there  may  be  a  beginning  of  a  transfiguration  of
sense  which  at  a  higher  level  would  remove  the
alienation  between  sense  and  thought.  It  is  always
an  illusion,  more  or  less,  to  think  that  you  can
remove  the  expression,  and  leave  the  meaning.
It  is  like  thinking  that  we  should  lose  nothing  of  a
friend's  personality  if  we  were  never  to  hear  his
voice  again.  If  all  sensation  became  to  us  like  the
tones  of  a  voice  we  know,  or  the  touch  of  a  hand
we  love,  we  should  realise  the  inseparability  of  the
symbol  and  the  symbolised.2

ii.  We  have  also,  in  claiming  any  higher  status  Thought  is
for  thought,  to  meet  the  current  idea  of  its  relation  feeling.  °
to  feeling. The  same  antagonism  which  common

1  Pater,  Essays  on  the  Renaissance,  2nd  ed.,  p.  63. The  passage
is  very  relevant.

2  Compare  the idea, often suggested, that in music we un
consciously  hear  the numerical relations of  the  vibrations which
underlie  the  sounds. This  is  no  doubt  overstrained  ; but  in  the
arts  which  appeal  to  sight  we certainly  are  affected  in  this  way  by
underlying  proportions  which  condition  the  whole  effect.


64  THE CONCRETE UNIVERSAL  LECT.

sense  is  apt  to  find  between  thought  and  sentient
experience,  rooted  in  the  same  ideas  of  abstraction
and  of  decaying  sense,  it  also  emphatically  finds
between  thought  and  feeling,  whether  feeling  is
taken  in  the  sense  of  immediate  psychical  being,
of  emotion  towards  an  object,  or  of  pleasure  and
pain.

In  all  these  respects  the  experience  of  aesthetic
enjoyment  may  again  serve  as  a  type.  If  there
could  be  a  Hedonistic  standard  of  excellence,  it
would  be  of  an  analogous  nature  to  the  degree
of  aesthetic  enjoyment.  For  here  the  feeling  is
necessarily  and  notably  one  with  and  proportional
to  certain  determinate  attributes  of  the  object.  And
though  we  are  not  prepared  to  reduce  the  "  higher  "
pleasure  to  the  "greater"  one,  and  therefore  cannot
attach  ourselves  to  Hedonism,  yet  it  is  true  that  in  the
aesthetic  object  there  is  something  which  characterises
the  feeling  responsive  to  it  in  a  way  susceptible  of
objective  valuation,  though  not  necessarily  of  valua-
\  tion  in  terms  of  pleasurableness.  As  with  sensation,
|  so  with  emotion  or  pleasure-pain,  it  is  the  concrete
j  universal  that  draws  them  out  of  their  blankness
I  and  exhibits  them  as  aspects  of  the  difference  made
i  to  a  living  world  by  contents  in  which  it  is  affirmed
or  negated  ;  and  thus  makes  explicit  the  "  more  "  and
"greater"  of  which  they  are  capable.  It  seems
probable  on  the  whole  that  Pleasurableness  and
Emotion  vary  in  value  directly  and  not  inversely  as
the  constructive  achievement  of  thought  on  which
they  attend.  We  need  only  reflect  for  a  moment
on  the  greater  works  of  art  to  see  that  this  must  be
so.  If,  as  may  be  the  case,  there  is  a  specially
concentrated  intensity  which  goes  with  the  blank


ii  WE  KNOW  NONE  BUT  A FREE CAUSE  65

formlessness  of  the  fiercer  pleasures  and  pains — a
subject  which  Plato  and  Aristotle  have  thoroughly
worked  out — it  is  an  intensity,  which,  however  it
may  be  explained,  has  in  it  relatively  less  and  not  more
of  "  being  and  of  trueness."  It  negates  the  expansion
of  the  self,  and  in  some  way  forces  the  whole  to
concentrate  itself  into  what  cannot  contain  it.  We
feel  ourselves  smothered  in  it,  and  driven  into  a  cul
de  sac.1  In  the  kinds  and  degrees  of  love,  as  in
those  of  pleasure-pain,  we  can  see  the  difference  \
made  by  approaching  to  the  character  of  thought —
the  character  of  a  harmonious  world.

And  even  if  we  take  feeling  as  immediate  psychical
being,  the  relation  remains  the  same.  All  thought,
no  doubt,  has  a  mediate  side ;  but  all  concrete
thought  has  become  immediate  no  less  than  mediate.
In  fact,  what  the  great  philosophers  meant  by  thought,
the  highest  possible  phase  of  realisation,  is  much
what  most  people  mean  (so  far  as  they  grasp  the
notion  of  it  at  all)  when  they  speak  of  feeling.2  For
if  we  admit  thought  to  be  in  part  intuitive,  a  unity
asserted  through  diversity,  there  is  no  longer  any
thing  to  prevent  it  from  reproducing  the  character
of  feeling  in  the  sense  of  immediate  apprehension  ;
an  immediate  apprehension  which  is  the  totality  of  a
mediate  discourse.  This  is  the  sort  of  apprehension,  /
which  a  name,  familiar  and  adored,  awakes  in  us.  *

iii. To  act  is  to  exhibit  the  same  essential  nature.  Thought

hi  11  •  • .  j •  • the  essence

is  to  go  beyond  the  starting-point,  and  in  going  offree

beyond  it,  to  remain at home.3 Both sides are  actlvlty-
essential,  and  when  either  is absent,  the  full  con-

1  Nettleship,  Remains, i. 336. I do  not  say  it  has  no  special
claim  to  reality.

2  Nettleship,  Biography  of  Green,  p.  1 1 8.

3  Hegel,  Rechts-Philosophie,  Sect.  7.


66  THE CONCRETE UNIVERSAL  LECT.

ception  of  activity  is  not  realised.  It  will  be
pointed  out  below,  that,  if,  as  is  alleged,  the  con
ception  of  causal  interaction  between  spatial  things
originates  in  our  personal  sense  of  activity,  it  is  a
singularly  unhappy  piece  of  anthropomorphism,  which
has  reacted  most  deplorably  on  the  conception  of  its
archetype.  For  causal  activity,  as  we  ascribe  it
to  nature,  is  just  what  it  is  impossible  for  us  to
experience  ;  and  our  own  experience  of  activity
is  just  what  we  cannot  without  utter  confusion
ascribe  to  natural  things.  No  activity  is  "  ours  "  in
which  we  do  not  remain  at  home  as  well  as  go
abroad  ;  the  mere  effect  of  body  upon  body  can
never  constitute  an  act  of  an  originative  being.  To
be  active,  in  the  sense  in  which  we  experience
activity,  means  to  be  a  "free  cause"1  and  not  a
natural  cause  —  that  is  to  say,  not  to  be  a  term
in  a  succession,  perceptible  only  to  an  observer,  but
to  be  a  world  which  reshapes  itself  in  virtue  of  its
nature  and  that  of  its  content,  and,  in  doing  so,  ex
tends  its  borders,  and  absorbs  and  stamps  itself  upon
something  that  before  seemed  alien.  If  we  want
to  interpret  our  experience  of  activity  we  should  go
to  Leibniz  and  Spinoza,  or  to  the  more  modern
conception  of  a  "free  cause."  And  then  we  should
find  that  without  assimilating  conation  to  cognition
(except  that  cognition  is,  of  course,  a  conation)  we
must  recognise  in  all  conation,  as  at  least  in  all
other  finite  experience,  the  essential  character  of
thought.

It  may  be  observed  for  the  sake  of  clearness  that
not  all  thought  is  cognition,  though  all  cognition  is

1  Green, Prolegomena, sect. 77  ; and Joachim, Ethics of
Spinoza,  pp.  199-200.


^^^


n  WE  MUST  HAVE  FREEDOM  67

thought.  Cognition  is  a  conation  determined  by
special  interests  and  ideas  ;  they  are  independent
ideas,  and  not  parasitic  ;  but  the  form  of  experience
which  they  determine  is  not  the  complete  and
exclusive  form  of  the  unity  which  experience  seeks.
Their  advantage  as  candidates  for  the  place  of  sole
end,  or  criterion  of  perfection — an  advantage  the
undue  assertion  of  which  would  constitute  in-
tellectualism — rests  on  the  defective  formulation  of
opposing  views.  Cognition  at  any  rate  emphatically
exhibits  that  self-transcendent  character  of  thought
which  constitutes  its  freedom  and  initiative.  For
these  are  essentially  forms  of  adjustment  and
adaptation  ;  they  mean  that  there  is  an  appearance
of  friction  and  antagonism  which  by  the  right  kind
of  self-assertion  can  be  transformed  into  responsive
ness  and  co-operation.  If  the  same  character  were
fully  recognised,  as  it  might  be,  by  the  "activist,"
to  coin  an  expression,  and  the  voluntarist,  in  their
account  of  the  mainspring  of  experience,  they  might
soon  destroy  the  tendency  to  identify  thinking  with
cognition.  But  if  the  champions  of  freedom  and
spontaneity  insist  on  tearing  up  the  roots  of  these
very  qualities,  by  making  them  in  Spinoza's  sense
"  passive  " — that  is  to  say,  unconnected  with  adequacy
of  ideas  to  an  objective  situation  ;  then  there  is
liable  to  be  a  reaction  towards  finding  in  cognition
those  essentials  of  a  free  and  active  being  which  are
denied  by  the  advocates  of  will.

But  neither  extreme  is  inevitable  ;  nor  has  either
been  adopted  by  Greek  or  modern  Idealism.  Will
and  ^ctiyity  mean  the  operation  of  the  nature"  of
thought  through  the  expansion  of  ideas  into  fact ;
but  are^  not  confined  to,  though  they  include,  that


universal,


68  THE CONCRETE UNIVERSAL  LECT.

operation  of  certain  special  ideas  which  constitutes
the  province  of  cognition.

The  goal  7.  Thus  by  pursuing  the  conception  of  the  logical

universal  we  have  arrived  at  thejdea  of  something
complete  and self-contained, in which sensation
becomes transparent and feeling becomes deter-
-  minate.

-/  i.  This  idea  is  the  idea  of  the  jndiyjdnaJ,  and
worid~saeif-(  Individuality  is  the  ultimate  completeness  of  that
complete.  charact;er  of  wholeness  and  non-contradiction  which

L,

/  we  first  generalised  under  the  name  of  logical
/stability.  It  is  all  one  whether  we  make  non-con-
j  tradiction,  wholeness,  or  Individuality  our  criterion
>  of  the  ultimately  real.  What  we  mean  by  it  is  in
/'each  case  the  same;  we  me^p  that  which  must
Nj  stand;  that  which  has  nothing  without  ,v  to  set
against  it,  and  which  is  pure  self-  maintenance1
within.

Individuality,  it  has  been  said,  has  prima  facie
two  extremes.  An  "atom"2  may  claim  it,  on  the
ground  that  it  is  less  than  can  be  divided  ;  a
world  may  claim  it,  on  the  ground  that  its  positive
nature  is  ruined  if  anything  is  added  or  taken  away.
In  the  ultimate  sense,  the  sense  indicated  above,  it
is  common  ground  that  there  can  only  be  one
individual,  and  that,  the  individual,  the  Absolute.3

1  The  purest  self-maintenance  must,  in  a  sense,  involve  negation,
though  not  contradiction,  see  Lect.  VI.  3.

2  The  atom,  as  incapable  of  organised  self-maintenance, would
really  be  the  extreme  opposite  of  the  true  individual.  —  Appearance^
2nd  ed.,  p.  364. Cp.  Leibniz  on  atoms  versus  monads.

3  We  say  then  with  Mr.  Bradley,  following,  of  course,  Plato  and
Hegel,  that  the  Individual,  which  as  we  have  seen  is  the  only  true
form  of  the universal, is  the Real. The curious misconception
through  which  this  principle  has  been  rejected  by  and  maintained
against  Idealism  has  sprung  from  the  negative  or  exclusive  notion  of
the Individual. Thus Mr. Schiller's  perfect Individual  would  be


II "SELF"  IS  MORE THAN  "NOT  ANOTHER" 69

It  is  not,  however,  my  primary  object  here  to  carry
further  the  theory  of  the  Absolute.  My  _guggose  is
rather,  accepting  ultimate  Individuality  as  the
character  which  our  fullest  experience  tends  to
approach,  to  draw  conclusions  as  to  the  nature  and
position  of  the  human  beings  to  whom  in  a  secondary
sense  we  apply  the  term  Individuals.

ii.  The  first  and  most  important  matter  that  the  individual
argument  leads  me  to  insist  on  is  this,  that  Indivj-
duality  is  essentially  a  positive  conception.  There
has  been  far  too  great  a  tendency 1  to  state  the  <iuality-
essence  of  Individuality  not  as  the  being  oneself,
but  as  the  not  being  some  one  else.  And  in  the
Absolute  no  doubt  these  two  sides  must  come
together ;  in  a  perfect  arrangement  there  can  be  no
mere  repetition,  but  in  finite  experience  it  is  all-
important  on  which  of  the  two  we  insist.  Unique
ness  as  guaranteed  by  a  negative  relation  to  other
series 2  is  one  thing ;  as  constituted  by  a  profound  or
comprehensive  content  it  is  another  thing.  The
one  may  descend  to  eccentricity  ;  the  other  is  in
itself  originality.  Originality,  within  finite  conditions,
is  not  in  principle  excluded  by  agreement  or  even  by
a  large  measure  of  repetition.  Its  essence  lies  in
the  richness  and  completeness  of  a  self,  not  in  the
non-existence  of  any  other  self  approximating  to  it.
The  merely  exclusive  relation  is  in  the  first  place
purely  formal,  giving  no  clue  to  the  content  of  the
individuality  ;  and  in  the  next  place,  if  insisted  on,
it  tends  to  become  dangerous.  All  that  is  true  in  it  is

one  of  a  multitude,  say  an  angel.  Humanism,  p.  124,  cf.  Ritchie,
Darwin  and  Hegel,  i.  100,  with  the  reference  to  Seth's  Hegelianism
and  Personality.

1 Royce,  i.  456-460.

-  The  guarantee  can  never  be  final,  Bradley,  Mind,  Ixxiv.  167.


70  THE  CONCRETE UNIVERSAL  LECT.

that  individuals  must  be  distinct ;  to  say  that  in  every
sense  they  are  not  each  other  soon  becomes  untrue;
The  individual  is  individual ,  primarily  because  his
own  content  is  stable  and  self-contained  ;  the  ulti
mate  individual  has  indeed  no  other  individual  to
be  distinguished  from.

iii.  The  uniqueness  which  is  made  the  mark  of
individuality  is  often  stated  in  the  form  of  unique
ness  of  jDurpose.  We  shall  return  to  the  subject  of
purpose  when  it  is  necessary  to  speak  of  teleology.
But  it  is  important  to  remark  at  this  point  that  the
conception  of  purpose  shares  the  purely  de  facto
character  of  negative^  individuality.  A  purpose,
after  all,  is  nothing  but  a  want,  or  at  most,  a  wanted
object.1  It  gives  no  guarantee  of  depth  or  value  by
being  a  purpose  which  only  one  being  entertains.
It  is,  moreover,  something  which  cannot  be  ascribed
to  a  timeless  reality  ;  and  admitting  that  a  timeless
reality  is  a  conception  open  to  dispute,  it  is  still
the  case  that  a  purpose  is  nothing  more  in  essence
than  a  partial  element  of  a  logical  whole  which  is
(whether  necessarily  or  not)  drawn  out  in  time.
And  there  is  no  reason  to  expect  that  the  part
which  at  any  moment  remains  unfulfilled  and  so
presents  itself  as  a  "want"- — a  contradiction  set  up
by  the  incompleteness  of  the  world  to  which  it
belongs,  is  a  matter  of  pre  -  eminent  interest  or
value.  In  short,  as  a  want  in  a  finite  mind  a  pur
pose  may  be  "  distinctive,"  but  a  higher  quality  of
content,  as  representing  a  profound  necessity  of  a
highly  organised  world,  would  be  needed  to  make
it  individual.  It  is  not  the  de  facto  purpose,  but
the  quality  and  comprehensiveness  of  the  world

1 For  the  distinction  see  Green,  Prolegomena,  sect.  85.


ii  THE  SELF-COMPLETE  NOT  A SERIES  71

that sets the purpose, that makes or mars the
individuality.

iv. The  same  set of  contrasts appears in the  The
connection  of  individuality  with  infinity.

It  has  already  been  attempted1  to  show  that
recent  investigations  on  the  subject  of  infinity  leave
the  distinction  between  self-completeness  and  end
lessness,  for  philosophical  purposes,  where  it  was
before.  The  individual,  if  our  treatment  of  the
problem  has  any  justification,  is  characterised  by
self-cojij^inedness  or  self -completeness  ;  and  in- I
eludes  endless  detail  only  in  the  sense  in  which
any  endeavour  is  endless  which  proceeds  in  the
solution  of  a  problem  by  a  method  demonstrably
inadequate.  To  take  a  simple  though  all-important
example  ;  to  know  God  in  spatial  extension  or  in  a
temporal  series  would  be  a  task  involving  endless
ness.2  And  in  as  far  as  that  which  is  to  be  known
is  a  reality,  and  its  nature — the  nature  of  God  or  of
the  Absolute  —  inevitably  when  approached  in  a
certain  way  gives  rise  to  the  endless  procedure,  it
might  even  be  affirmed  that  the  endlessness  was
actually  real.  But  this  could  not  mean  that  the
endless  series  was  given.  I  note,  indeed,  that  the
infinite  numbers  of  modern  mathematics,  are,  so
far  as  I  can  follow  the  account  of  them,  not  to  be
reached  by  enumeration.3  Their  nature  is  rather
that  of  a  class  concept  involving  an  extension  con
sisting  of  "all  possible  cases,"  which  is  practically
left  indefinite,  although  it  is  clear  that  there  must

1  Page  38,  footnote.

2  On  the  question  whether  infinite  progression  as  such  involves  a
contradiction  see  Review  of  McTaggart's  Commentary  on HegeFs
Logic;  Mind,  January  1911.

3  Russell,  Principles  of  Mathematics,  sect.  342,  ff.


not
nor
chanical.


72  THE  CONCRETE UNIVERSAL  LECT.

be  a  number  corresponding  to  it.  Attention  has
long  ago  been  called  to  this  characteristic  of  class
concepts  on  purely  logical  ground  ;  1  and  it  would
almost  seem  that  here  again  we  have  a  concept  or
definition  that  demands  the  completeness  of  a  series,
rather  than  a  series  that  is  actually  complete.

We^c^clu^e,  then,  that  the  Individual  is  one  in
idea  with  the  true  infinite,  and  is  the  embodiment
of  the  concrete  universal^which-is  the  universal  as
asserting  itself  to  the  full  through  identity  and
through  difference  together.  It  is  complete  and
coherent  —  characters  whose  connection  is  estab
lished  by  the  relation  above  drawn  out  between
wholeness  and  non  -  contradiction.  And  in  the
ultimate  sense  there  can  be  only  one  Individual.
is  the  8.  To  form  a  just  estimate  of  what  is  involved

hfwardt  *n  tne  nature  °f  Individuality  or  the  concrete  uni
versal,  it  is  necessary  to  examine  the  commonanti-
thesis  of  inward  and  outward.

The  i. The  Individual  is  one  with  the  spiritual,  and

the  characteristic  of  the  spiritual  in  its  proper  nature


is  inwardness  as  opposed  to  externality.  But  it  is
important  to  interpret  these  terms  correctly.  The
terms  are  evidently  taken  from  the  experience  of
the  mind  as  aware  of  its  own  processes,  in  contrast
with  the  character  of  space  in  which  objects  appear
as  outside  one  another.  Mental  process  is  inward
because  its  component  phases  are  typically  insepar
able,  although  diverse.  The  possession  of  one
carries  with  it  that  of  the  other.

f  Memory  is  inward  because  its  diversity  is  bound
up  with  the  being  of  the  mind  ;  you  cannot  take  the
one  and  leave  the  other.  Inwardness  is  diversity

1  Knowledge  and  Reality,  pp.  64-5.


ii  THE  MECHANICAL  RESPONSE  73

wjthp^t_dissociation.  Matter  is  outward,  because,
as  it  seems,  you  can  take  part  of  it  and  leave  part,
without  essentially  modifying  either.  It  would  be
untrue  to  say  that  the  parts  of  space  in  no  way
presuppose  each  other;  but prima facie  the  connec
tion  is  not  given  within  each,  and  spatial  objects
refuse  to  form  a  self  or  centre  of  experience,1
though  they  may  be  inconceivable  without  one.
Such,  in  general,  is  the  character  of  Nature,  taken
as  independent  non- psychical  existence.  It  is,  as
thus  hypostasised,  the  type  of  being  most  remote
from  spirit  and  from  individuality.2

With  the  externality  of  Nature  is  bound  up  the
conception  of  Mechanism.  The  essence  o£jt  js
that  the  world  consists  of  elements,  complete  in
themselves,  and  yet  determined  in  relation  to
elements  beyond  them.  If  not  complete  in  them
selves  the  elements  would  be  at  the  mercy  of  the
whole,  and  their  claims  to  be  its  self- subsistent
components  would  be  gone.  If  not  determined  by
others,  the  elements  would  not  manifest  even  the
appearance  of  entering  into  and  constituting  an
orderly  world.  And  yet,  these  two  £r£tensions,  the
claim  to  have  a  nature  of  their  own,  or  really  to  be,
and  the  admission  that  they  have  their  reality  in  a
behaviour  determined  ab  extra  by  relations,  form
when  taken  together,  the  crudest  case  of  externality.
The  element  behaves  according  to  relations  which  ^
connect  it  with  the  whole,  but  it  has  in  itself  a  being
—a  purely  physical  or  self-external  existence — which
possesses  no  communion  with  the  whole.  Thus  its

1 See  Timaeus,  520. It  is  plain  that  for  a  perfect  apprehension
there  can  be  in  this  sense  no  externality.
"2  Appearance,  2nd  ed.,  p.  552.


74  THE CONCRETE UNIVERSAL  LECT.

behaviour  is  conceived  as something  betwixt  and

between ; it  does  not refuse all response to the

system  in  which  it  stands,  but  it  responds,  we  might

say, ignorantly and narrowly, "  speaking when

spoken to "  but in no  way  showing a sympathy

with  its  world  beyond  the  definite  reactions  which

answer, each to each, to particular solicitations.

1 According  to  an  old  distinction,  it  acts  according  to

. l_aw,  and  not  from  the  idea  of  law. It  pursues  a

routine,  and  takes  no  account  of  purpose.
True  in-  u. All  this  is  the  received  account  of  the  anti-

is  out-*83  "thesis  between  the  inward  or  spiritual  and  the  out-
abs^rbed war<^  or  natural,1  which  culminates  in  the  opposition
. between spirit  and extension ; and between pur-
posiveness  and  mechanism. It  is,  as  I  understand,
i when formulated by philosophy, a  partly contro
versial  and  partly  provisional  account. That  is  to
say, in the  first  place  it reiterates  from  a  hostile
point  of  view  the  ideas  of  Naturalism,  which  means,
those of  uncritical metaphysic founding itself  on
conceptions current within the natural sciences.
And in the next place it  recognises  that  in the
different  types  of  our  experience  there  is  a  certain
prima  facie  justification  for  such  distinctions,  with
out  admitting  that  they  can  contain  ultimate  truth.

My  reason  for  drawing  out  the  contrast  of  inward
and  outward  at  the  present  point,  is  to  repudiate
what  I  take  to  be  a  misapplication  of  it.

Inwardness,  when  meant  to  be  the  equivalent  of
Individuality  or  the  character  of  spirit,  should  be
taken  as  a  type  of  experience  superior  to  exter
nality  and  including  it.  But  there  is  a  natural

1 Cf.  "  The  outward  and  visible  sign,"  and  "  inward  and  spiritual
grace." It  is  plain  that  spiritual  is  here  opposed  to  visible.


I


II  THE  PURE  INWARD  A VACANCY  75

tendency,  partly  due  to  the  apparent  correspondence
of  the  metaphors,  partly  to  the  evasiveness  which
shrinks  from  all  concrete  synthesis,  to  interpret  in
wardness  as  the  co-ordinate  contrary  of  externality.1
The  inward  thus  conceived,  drops  from  the  inclusive
concrete  to  the  exclusive  abstract.  The  mere  inner,
Hegel  will  always  tell  us,  is  the  mere  outer.  In
dividuality,  instead  of  being  the  fulness  of  life  and
content,  becomes  the  bare  abstraction  of  a  holy  of
holies  which  if  it  could  be  entered  would  prove  an
empty  shrine.  Structure,  Logic,  Determinateness,
are  banished  as  implying  externality  and  mechanism.
Technically  speaking,  the  point  is  that  absence
of  externality  seems  most  cheaply  purchased  by
rejecting  all  determinations  because  they  seem  to  be
possible  starting-points  of  external  relations.  And,
therefore,  the  inward  or  spiritual  ceases  to  be  a  world
and  becomes  an  empty  point,  as,  for  instance,  in  the
ego  or  free  will  of  popular  philosophy  in  contrast
with,  say,  the  will  of  a  society  or  the  inspiration  of
a  religious  enthusiasm.  It  is  to  this  misconception
that  the  emptiness  of  most  accounts  of  the  higher
experiences 2  is  in  a  great  measure  due  ;  and  such
emptiness  in  its  turn  promotes  the  misconception.
It  is  true,  of  course,  that  our  accounts  of  an  experi
ence  essentially  beyond  our  own  can  only  be  abstract
and  provisional.  But  it  is  not  true  that  the  contents
and  objects  which  form  the  interest  of  finite  experi
ence  can  in  principle  be  taken  as  abolished  into
vacancy,  however  they  may  be  transformed.  A
world  cannot  consist,  so  far  as  I  understand,  of
spiritual  centres  without  circumferences,  nor  can

1  Taylor,  Metaphysic,  p.  99.
2  Cf.  James, Varieties  of  Religions  Experience.


76  THE  CONCRETE UNIVERSAL  LECT.

they,  as  inward  centres  in  the  popular  sense,  form
circumferences  for  each  other.1  Individuality  and
true  spiritual  inwardness  do  not  lie  at  all  in  that
direction.  Exter^Jlity  can  subsist  only  as  ^sub
ordinated  to  inwardness  ;  but  inwardness  can  subsist

>  ,.-.-

only  in  the  conquest  of  externality.  The  tendency
to  accept  the  self-external — nature  or  matter — as
self-existent,  must  be  corrected  in  the  higher  experi
ence  ;  as  in  fact  this  tendency  can  never  completely
maintain  itself  in  any  actual  consciousness.  But  to
deny  its  self-existence  is  one  thing,  to  deny  its  sub
sistence  as  the  object  or  determinate  character2
necessary  to  spiritual  reality  is  quite  another.  The
"  outer"  is  the  content  of  the  "  inner,"  and  granting
that  these  expressions  no  longer  are  suitable  lan
guage  for  the  absolute  experience,  yet  it  is  a
blunder  of  principle  to  analyse  the  outer  into  a
series  of  inners  deprived  of  all  outer.  There  are
two  distinct  modes  of  conceiving  the  advance  in
spirituality,  the  one  to  resolve  all  externality  into
series  or  complexes  of  psychical  centres  ; 3  the  other
to  conceive  it  as  raised  to  an  adequate  object  or
character  for  individuals  whom  it  characterises.

The  moral  is,  then,  that  as  we  approach  Individ-

1  The  spiritual  body,  to  use  my  own  phrase,  conceived  by  Mr.
Bradley,  Appearance^  pp.  340-41,  would be, I presume, relatively
external ;  a  system  of  differences  more or  less  fixed  against  each
other. I  cannot  see  how  there  should  be  a  universe  without  at  least
some  such  system.

2  Character  as  opposed  to  object,  if  it  is  urged  that  minds  at  their
best  are  what  they  know.

3  See  below,  Lect.  X. The  body  seems  to  be  not  so  much  a
symbol  or  repetition  of  the  soul  as  its  basis  and  complement ;  i.e.  the
"truth"  of  the  two  would  involve  a  reconstruction  of  the  soul  as  well
as  of  the  body. And  thus  again  the  body  cannot  be  taken  as  con
sisting  of  monads  which  are  not  the  soul ;  this  would  deprive  the
soul  of  an  essential  factor  ; unless  indeed  we  say  that  the other
monads,  which  enter  into  the  body,  also  enter  into  the  soul.


II  INWARDNESS  IS WHOLENESS  77

uality  we  are  not  to  look  for  diminution  of  content,
of  structure,  of  determinateness.  Individuality  will
show  itself  as  inwardness  and  spirituality,  not  by
emptiness  and  abstraction,  not  even  by  blank  in
tensity  of  incommunicable  feeling,  but,  in  a  word,
by  the  characteristics  of  "a  world."  Mechanism
and  externality  will  in  a  sense  be  superseded,  but
not  by  inwardness  as  their  co-ordinate  contrary.
Part  will  not  be  bound  to  part  within  the  whole
purely  by  quantitative  reaction  ;  but,  in  principle,
we  should  expect  the  adjustment  of  quantitative
determinations  to  be  infinitely  more  delicate  and
more  subtly  precise  —  though  not  insisted  on  as
numerable — as  they  become  concomitants  or  vehicles
of  a  more  intensely  focussed  significance.  In  the
same  way  we  should  expect  to  find  in  the  higher
individuality  not  more  but  less  of  what  is  commonly
called  spontaneousness,  if  that  means  "  indetermina-
tion,"  laxity  of  connection,  and  unaccountable  new
development ;  and  more  of  logic,  more  of  expansion
towards  giving  full  effect  to  demands  which  emerge
by  systematic  necessity  from  the  articulation  of  the
whole  ;  less  of  the  urgency  of  exclusive  feeling,
more  of  the  definite  emotions  attaching  to  fuller
self-expression  ;  less  of  the  mere  passion  of  mystical
religion  ;  more  of  the  amor  intellectualis  Dei  resting
on  clear  spiritual  insight.  Inwardness  will  not  be
the  banishment  of  all  that  seems  outward,  but  the
solution  of  the  outward  in  the  circulation  of  the
total  life.1

9.  The failure to find a satisfactory type of

1  That  these  are  not  words  without  meaning  may  be  realised  in
some  degree  by  the  student  of  Dante  or  Wordsworth,  and  indeed  of
all  art,  science,  and  history.


78  THE CONCRETE UNIVERSAL  LECT.

Revolting experience  in  the  abstract  or  conditional  judgments

from  Me- _r . . .  , ,  ,  ,  ,

chanismwe  of  mechanistic  science,  may  lead  us  elsewhere  than
not  to  8  to  the  concrete  universal  or  cosmos  conceived  as
butu/Art  individual.  And  so  we  find  the  genuine  experience,
which  thought  as  abstract  science  fails  to  grasp,
identified  with  "the  historical."1  "The  actual  is
wholly  historical."  It  is  contrasted  both  with
natural  science,  and  with  thought  as  such,  quite  in
the  tone  of  nai've  Realism.  It  alone  is  concrete
experience ;  richer  than  thought,  which  can  only
be  universal  and  relational  (note  the  confusion  of
universal  and  general),  giving  only  science,  not
existence.  It  is  contingent,  admitting  contingency
into  the  heart  of  things  as  against  the  necessity  of
thought  -  connections.  It  is  the  life  and  the  end,
while  science  is  the  means.  I  presume  that  we
have  here  the  influence  of  an  ideal  of  individuality.
The  intention  must  be  to  take  as  a  basis  the  life  of
persons,  who  in  some  sense  pass  for  individuals,
and  within  whose  soul  -  process  in  time  all  finite
experience  must  be  included.

Such  view,  as  was  said  just  now,  seems  little
better  than  Natural  Realism.  We  are  to  accept
as  richer  than  thought  a  reality  consisting  in  the
fragmentary  diorama  of  finite  life-processes  unroll
ing  themselves  in  time,  seen  from  the  outside,  not
strictly  knowable  because  a  tissue  of  mere  conjunc
tions  ;  and  yet  not  given,  because  a  mere  construc
tion  on  the  basis  of  the  present ;  and  contingent
through  and  through,  not  having  so  much  as  stripped
off  the  form  of  conjunction  which  makes  true  con
nection  impossible.

History  is  a  hybrid  form  of  experience,  incapable

1  Ward,  Nat.  and  Agn.  ii.  280.


II  WITH  CONTINGENCY, NO  FREEDOM  79

of  any  considerable  degree  of  "  being  or  trueness."
The  doubtful  story  of  successive  events  cannot
amalgamate  with  the  complete  interpretation  of  the
social  mind,  of  art,  or  of  religion.  These  inter
pretations,  when  attempted  in  connection  with  a
narrative  of  events,  fall  into  separate  chapters,
isolated  from  the  narrative.  The  great  things,
which  are  necessary  in  themselves,  become  within
the  narrative  contingent,  or  ascribed  by  most  doubt
ful  assumptions  of  insight,  to  this  actor  or  that  on  the
historical  stage.  The  study  of  Christianity  is  the
study  of  a  great  world-experience  ;  the  assignment
to  individuals  of  shares  in  its  development  is  a
problem  for  scholars,  whose  conclusions,  though  of
considerable  human  interest,  can  never  be  of  supreme
importance.  Are  we,  indeed,  to  see  the  philosophy
of  history  joining  hands  with  the  "  psychological
valet,"  l  who  takes  upon  him  to  interpret  the  minds
and  natures  of  great  men  as  if  he^vaslGod's  spy?

And  the  reason  for  taking  this  hybrid  form  of
experience  for  the  type  of  reality  lies  in  ignoring
the  concrete  universal.  This  is  the  defect  which
leads  us  to  suppose  that  concreteness  and  conting
ency  are  inseparable,  and  makes  us  confound  the
1  apparent^contingency  of  details  within  a  cosmos,
whose  main  members  are  necessary  to  the  whole,2
with  the  contingency  at  the  heart  of  a  spatio-
temporal  world  of  incident,  which  has  never  been
recreated  by  experience  of  the  fullest  type.  It  is
impossible  for  life  at  its  best  to  be  contingent,  and
if  "  freedom  "  is  mentioned,  it  must  be  remembered

1  Hegel,  Philosophic  des  Rechts, sect. 124. Cf. Green,  Prole
gomena,  sect.  293.

2  3ee  above,  p.  48  ff.,  on  necessity  and  totality.


8o  THE CONCRETE UNIVERSAL  LECT.

that  freedom  is  the  logic  of  individuality,  and  as
remote  as  possible  from  contingency.  To  say  that
reality  can  only  be  found  in  the  given,  and  not  in
its  expansion  and  interpretation  through  thought,
is  surely  the  ancient  fallacy  of  naive  Realism.  If
thought  had  a  point  of  departure  foreign  to  exist
ence,  then  it  would  be  idle  to  speak  of  either  gener
ating  the  other.  But  the  connection  of  thought
and  existence,  whatever  it  may  be,  is  not  so  simply
disposed  of  as  this.  We  have  on  our  hands  the
world  or  worlds  of  experience  in  their  fullest  and
most  exact  realisation,  and  in  them,  as  we  have
seen,  we  find  thought  inseparable  from  the  recog
nition  of  what  things  are  for  us  at  their  best.1
Social  morality,  Art,  Philosophy,  and  Religion  take
us  far  beyond  the  spatio-temporal  externality  of
history ;  these  are  concrete  and  necessary  living
worlds,  and  in  them  the  finite  mind  begins  to
experience  something  of  what  individuality  must
ultimately  mean.

The  object  of  the  present  lecture  has  been  to
remove  from  various  points  of  view  the  prejudice
which  sees  in  the  individual  not  a  positive  cosmos,
with  its  own  logic  and  organisation,  expressive,  in
spite  of  its  immediate  unity,  of  a  determinate  being,
but  an  empty  and  exclusive  point,  whose  spontaneity
and  purposiveness  mean  an  initiative  that  draws

1  If  it  is  true  that  in  all  predication  the  subject  is  Reality,  and,
further,  that  there  are  no  ideas  which  do  not  qualify  this  subject,  it
follows  that  the  truth  of  the  ontological  argument  is  conceded  in
principle,  and  the  value  of  the  knowledge  to  be  obtained  by  it  is  only
a  question  of  degree — that  is,  of  the  reservation  under  which  any
given  predicate  truly  qualifies  reality.  This  seems  important,  as  the
right  way  of  putting  the  problem  of  truth  and  reality,  though  open,
of  course,  to  such  criticism  as  Mr.  Bradley's  in  Appearance,  2nd
ed.,  pp.  396-7  ;  Schiller,  Humanism,  p.  251.


ii  A COSMOS, NOT  A POINT  81

upon  no  positive  source,  and  focusses  in  itself  no
positive  striving  of  the  universe.  In  subsequent
lectures  we  shall  further  illustrate  the  former  con
ception  with  reference  to  the  problems  of  teleology
and  interaction.


LECTURE III

UNIFORMITY AND GENERAL LAW NOT ANTAGONISTIC
TO INDIVIDUALITY

Alleged  i.  IT  is  a  widespread  idea1  that  the  essence  of
.individuality  conflicts  with  the  postulates  of  the
Uniformity  of  Nature  and  of  universal  law.  We
shall  not  be  able  to  grasp  the  true  character  of  the
individual,  and  the  bearing  of  the  argument  of  the
previous  lecture,  till  we  have  disposed  of  these
misconceptions.  They  arise  from  the  confusion
between  the  abstract  and  concrete  universal ;  be
tween  the  recurrence  of  similars  and  the  identity  of
a  differentiated  system.

It  is  held  .that  a  ^spiritual  philosophy  requires
mentality  in  nature,  that  mentality  demands  vari
ability,  and  that  high  variability  is  incompatible  with
the  principle  of  uniformity.  The  principle  of  Uni
formity  is  thus  misconstrued  and  a  fatal  opposition
set  up  between  it  and  the  nature  of  mind  ;  just  as,
more  generally,  it  is  held  that  Individuality  excludes

1  The  general  position  which  I  am  criticising  is  to  be  found  in
Ward,  Naturalism,  i.  108  ;  cf.  ii.  241,  280;  Taylor,  Element sy
221  ff.  ;  Royce,  World  and  Individual,  ii.  191,  195.  Professor
Ward  does  not  indeed  explicitly  argue  for  pan-psychism  (though  note
p.  1 08,  "the  order  of  an  ever-living  spirit"),  and  his  sharp  contrast
between  inorganic  and  organic  Nature  would  be  in  conflict  with  such
a  tendency.  Yet  I  can  hardly  understand  his  desire  to  discredit
uniformity  throughout  the  material  world  in  any  other  sense.

82


LECT.  in UNIFORMITY  NOT '=  REGULARITY  83

the  fulfilment  of  general  law.  Thus  we  have  a  fallacy
affecting  the  whole  interpretation  both  of  nature
and  of  man.  The  responsiveness  of  nature  to  spirit,
their  magnificent  opposition  and  reconciliation,  is
frittered  away  into  a  remote  resemblance  between
them,  depending  on  a  character — the  character  of
variability — which  is  exaggerated  by  a  forced  hypo-  f
thesis  in  the  case  of  nature,  and  abstracted  from  its
conditions  and  true  significance  in  the  case  of  what
we  know  as  mind.

2.  To  begin  with,  the  Uniformity  of  Nature  is  uniformity
taken  for  this  purpose,  not  in  the  sense  in  which  repetition
it  has  been  held  to  constitute  a  logical  principle,  ™
but  in  the  popular  and  prima  facie  sense,  disclaimed
by  logicians, that "  the future  will resemble the
past"-— that  the  procedure  of  nature  is  regular, is
a  mode  of  repetition,  and  its  elements  similar,  in
a  very  high  though  unspecified  degree.

It  is  then  argued  that  actual  purposiveness  and
spontaneity,  assumed  to  be  evinced  by  variation
and  irregularity,  are  more  widely  distributed  in
nature  than  Uniformity  so  construed  would  admit ;
while  on  the  other  hand,  an  appearance  of  such
uniformity  can  be  generated  even  in  human  conduct,
which  we  know  to  be  spontaneous,  by  the  use  of
methods  analogous  to  those  which  give  rise  to  the
impression  of  extreme  regularity  and  resemblance
as  prevalent  in  nature.  The  conclusion  is  that  the
spontaneity  which  we  know  to  prevail  in  what  we
recognise  as  mind,  may  also  prevail  in  what  we  are
accustomed  to  think  of  as  external  nature,  accom
panied  by  a  similar  variability,  which  our  methods
of  enquiry  disguise.

The Law of Uniformity, then, in the logical


84  LAW  AND  INDIVIDUALITY  LECT.

sense  of  the  term,1  in  which  it  means  rational
system,  such  that  all  changes  and  differences  are
relevant  to  each  other,  is  not  here  expressly  in
question.  On  the  other  hand,  unless  it  is  intended
by  the  way  to  impeach  this  law — to  affirm,  that  js,
inexplicable  or  irrelevant  variation  as  a  proof  of
spontaneity — there  seems  to  be  no  contention.  To
say  that  tEere  are  more  differences  in  nature  than
some  people  have  thought  is  to  say  nothing.  To
say  that  there  is,  in  supposed  inorganic  constants,
rational,  progressive,  and  significant  variation,  would
be  to  say  something  ;  but  to  this,  as  we  shall  show,
the  facts  lend  no  kind  of  countenance.  To  say,  first,
that  variability  in  conduct  due  to  minds  establishes
indeterminate  spontaneity,  and  that  this  excludes
Uniformity  in  the  logical  sense — what  I  prefer  to
call  "  relevancy  "  —and,  further,  that  such  spontaneity
is  also  to  be  presumed  as  a  fact  in  what  we  take  for
natural  elements,  and  in  their  behaviour,  would,
indeed,  be  to  say  something.  And  considering  the
belief  in  an  antagonism  between  individuality  and
general  law  which  accompanies  the  views  we  are
discussing,  it  seems  probable  that  we  are  really  in
presence  of  such  an  attempt  to  discredit  the  con
ception  of  logical  nexus — the  conception  of  relevancy,
which  is  what  logicians  mean  by  uniformity — alike
in  nature  and  in  what  we  know  as  mind.  This
may  be  disclaimed ;  but,  strictly  speaking,  it  is  the
only  thing  that  can  be  meant.2  The  contention,

1  Mill,  Logic,  chapter  on  Ground  of  Induction  ;  Green,  Works,
ii.  282,  288-90,  "The  Conception  of  the  'Unity  of  the  World'";
author's  Logic,  2nd  ed.,  ii.  164,  183.

2  It  is  clear,  I  think,  that  both  Ward  and  Taylor  are  prepared  to
maintain  that  a  given  cause  may  vary  its  operation  spontaneously.
See  below,  p.  96,  note.


in  SOCIAL  AVERAGES  85

otherwise  interpreted,  to  the  effect  that  atoms  of
the  same  element  are  not,  in  fact,  all  of  the  same
size,  is  not  a  philosophical  contention  at  all.  The
point  is  worth  examining,  if  only  to  throw  light  on
the  true  interest  of  Social  Statistics.

3.  The  argument  rests  on  a  comparison  of  social  Physical
statistics  with  those  physical  measurements  which
can  only  be  carried  out  with  reference  to  enormous  t°
numbers  of  units  en  masse.  You  cannot,  it  is  urged,  averages-
isolate  an  atom  of  oxygen.  When  you  represent
its  atomic  weight  by  16,  all  you  mean  is  that  this
figure  results  from  the  measurement  en  masse  of  an
enormous  number  of  atoms,  the  result  being  attri
buted  with  hypothetical  equality  of  distribution  to
each  single  atom;  in  short,  you  have  got  an  average
figure  like  the  average  height  or  weight  of  school
children  of  a  certain  age,  or  like  an  actuarial  estimate
of  the  prospect  of  life  for  individuals  under  certain
conditions.  Such  average  figures,  of  course,  are
true  of  a  class  or  group  as  a  whole  for  certain
purposes,  but  not  of  each  individual  ;  and,  indeed,
their  value  lies,  we  might  say,  in  not  pretending
to  represent  the  individual  but  in  simply  serving
the  purpose  for  which  they  are  computed — some
collective  result  or  comparison.

So,  too,  it  is  urged,  the  atoms  of  oxygen,  for  all
we  know  by  measurement,  may  not  be  rigidly  equal
at  atomic  weight  16,  but  may  oscillate  round  this
amount,  as  any  statistical  figures  oscillate  round  the
arithmetical  mean.  In  the  physical  measurement,
it  is  said,  we  have  only  the  total,  from  which  we
infer  an  average,  and  we  cannot  get  at  the  indi
viduals  to  measure  them  separately  ;  in  social
statistics  enumeration  and  separate  measurement


86  LAW  AND  INDIVIDUALITY  LECT.

are  possible,  and,  therefore,  we  are  able  to  criticise
the  average  figure,  and  the  criticism  gives  rise  to
the  suggestion  before  us.

In  this  way,  the  contention  is,  we  can  see  that
a  figure  representing  some  character  of  a  social
group  is  single  and  may  be  constant,  without  indi
cating  any  absence  of  variety  among  the  individuals
composing  the  group.  And,  therefore,  analogy
suggests  that  minute  physical  elements  may  after
all  be  various,  and  endowed  with  life  and  spon
taneity,  seeing  that  there  may  be  what  one  might
call  sociaL  constants,  as  well  as  physical  constants,
though  no  one  doubts  the  variability  of  the  members
of  the  social  group.

To  me  all  this  argumentation  sounds  like  special
pleading. The  distribution  of  mentality  in  nature
seems  to  be  a  mere  issue  of  fact, l^is^hejugg-estio
falsi^zs  to  Uniformity  and  its  antagonism  to  mind  that
I^des^i re  to  Combat. I  will  mention  one  or  two  points.
"Average" i. Am  I wholly  wrong  in  thinking  it  necessary

and  "Con-  r  r ti i  i- -  - i

stant"  dis-  to  say,  first  of  all,  that  we  must  distinguish  an
average  from  a  constant  ?  You  can  strike  an
average  from  any  set  of  figures  ;  but  whether  it
is  or  is  not  a  constant  depends  on  a  comparison  of
averages  representing  groups  in  some  way  different.
Thus,  it  is  true  that  if  an  atomic  weight  is  only  a
single  average,  it  admits  of  any  degree  of  variation
in  the  actual  atoms ;  but,  for  the  same  reason,  if
the  social  statistic  is  only  a  single  average,  it  offers
no  suggestion  of  constancy  in  the  social  phenomena.
So  far,  there  is  nothing  against  the  suggestion  that
physical  elements  vary  ;  but  there  is  nothing  for  the
suggestion  that  social  phenomena  can  present  the
appearance  of  constancy.  You  can  take  the  average


in SOCIAL  AVERAGES  ADVANCE OR  DECLINE 87

of  2,  10,  and  10,000  without  the  slightest  implication
that  the  figures  averaged  show  any  uniformity.

ii.  To  establish  a  constant  average,  the  averages  in
of  different  groups  or  periods  must  be  compared,
or  else  the  approximation  of  the  several  figures
averaged,  to  their  average,  must  be  directly  noted
—  a  method  ex  hypothesi  impossible  with  minute
physical  elements.

But  here,  when  we  compare  physical  and  true
social  phenomena,  the  analogy  breaks  down.  The
physical  measurements,  for  all  accessible  groups  of
units  with  the  same  name  (similar  atoms,  similar
wave-lengths,  etc.)  are  ex  hypothesi  identical  ;  true
social  measurements,  as  opposed  to  physical  ones,
for  comparable  groups  under  different  conditions
and  in  different  periods,  deviate  as  a  rule  pro-

It  is  not  true,  ^^


whole,  that  they  oscillate  round  constant  amounts
or  tend  to  come  back  to  them  "in  the  long  run."1
The  early  statistics,  which  seem  to  have  created
this  impression,  were  in  part,  I  suspect,  fallaciously
handled,  and  were  also  drawn  from  inadequate
periods  of  time.2

1  Contrast  Taylor,  Elements,  p.  221.

2  Presupposing,  of  course,  that  no  statistical  constancy  could  be
relevant  to Buckle's  anti-freewill  conclusions  (cf.  Ward, i.  1  1  1  ),  it
still  remains  a  question  of  some  interest  whether  the  sort  of  constancy
which  impressed  him,  Quetelet,  and  even  Mill  (Logic,  ii.  529)  really
existed  or  exists. I can  see  nothing  in  Quetelet's  tables  to  justify
his  own  saying,  that  from the  figures  of  one  year  it  is  possible  to
predict  those  of  the  next. I have  not  been  able,  as  I  had  wished,
to  find  completer  material  in  order  to  criticise  the  famous  instance  of
the  percentage  of  unaddressed  letters  on  the  whole  number  posted.
But  modern  statistics  of  true  social  phenomena,  as  I  point  out  in  the
text, show  no signs of  fixity, and if  any  uniformity  at  all, it  is  a
uniform rate  of  change  of  ratio. It  is  more  than a  mere matter
of  curiosity,  for  I feel  sure  that, e.g.,  Venn  and  Ward  and  Taylor
have  been  influenced  by  the  audacity  of  the Quetelet  and  Buckle


88  LAW  AND  INDIVIDUALITY  LECT.

True  social  statistics,  figures  which  depend
directly  or  indirectly  on  human  conduct,  such  as
the  records  of  crime  and  pauperism,  and  in  a  great
degree  those  of  health,  are  marked  in  general  by
extraordinary  sensitiveness,  being  subject,  for  dif
ferent  groupings  or  successive  periods,  to  definite
adapted  or  progressive  variations,  which  show  no
sign  of  oscillation  round  a  fixed  point,  and  are
readily  explicable  in  connection  with  changes  of
moral  and  material  conditions.  The  records  of
crime  and  pauperism  for  the  nineteenth  century  are
ample  proof  of  this.1  If  these  facts  are  considered

statements,  as  to  the  degree  of  constancy  in  the  long  run  which  they
allow  to  be  assumed.  See  Venn,  Empirical  Logic,  p.  580  ;  Taylor,
Elements,  p.  221  ;  Ward,  loc.  tit.  There  is  extraordinary  laxity  of
statement  on  such  matters,  e.g.  Venn  (Logic of 'Chance p,  3rd  ed.,  p.  241)
speaks  and  makes  Laplace  speak  of  the  number  of  unaddressed
letters  remaining  the  same  year  by  year.  All  other  authorities  speak
of  the  proportion  (ratio).  I  have  not  seen  the  tables.  With  what
number  Quetelet  expected  the  next  year's  figures  of  suicides  to  agree,
whether  the  average,  or  actual  figures  of  the  current  year,  or  the
ratio  to  population,  I  can  form  no  idea.

1  E.g.  "Chart  of  principal  Classes  of  Crime,  1858  to  1898"
(Criminal  Statistics,  1898),  or  any  chart  of  pauperism  for  the  latter
half  of  the  nineteenth  century.  No  doubt  a  progressive  decrease  must
have  a  limit ;  but  an  irreducible  minimum,  e.g.  in  pauperism,  such
as  experts  conceive  of,  would  not  be  a  mere  statistical  mean,  but
would  be  a  new  fact,  causally  explained.  To  show  how  slippery  is
this  question  of  the  persistence  of  social  constants  I  cite  two  passages
from  Venn,  which  the  slight  difference  of  the  subjects  concerned  does
not  seem  to  me  sufficient  to  reconcile:  Empirical  Logic,  p.  580
(Murder,  Thefts,  Suicides,  Sums  expended  in  charitable  or  other
such  purposes,  or  Insurances  effected  in  the  year)  :  "  But  of  such
portions  of  human  conduct  as  of  most  other  portions,  it  is  a  simple
datum  of  experience,  that  in  the  long  run,  when  we  extend  our  obser
vations  over  a  sufficient  space,  a  great  and  growing  degree  of  uni
formity  is  generally  observable."  Cf.  Logic  of  Chance,  p.  91  :
"  These  conditions  (health,  circumstances,  manners  and  customs  of
the  parents  ;  the  question  is  of  the  ratio  of  sex  to  sex  at  birth)  par
taking  of  the  nature  of  what  we  term  generally  Progress  and  Civilisa
tion,  cannot  be  expected  to  show  any  permanent  disposition  to  hover
about  an  average."

A  careful  study  of  Buckle,  Quetelet,  and  the  authorities  cited  by


in  COUNTING V. CAUSATION  89

the  alleged  analogy  between  physical  and  social
constants,  beyond  the  fact  that  any  one  group  of
figures  can  be  represented  by  an  average  figure,
disappears.

4.  And  it  seems  necessary  to  distinguish  between  Physical
the  principle  of  what  may  be  called  second-class  would  be
and  first-class  statistics.  Second-class  statistics  are
those  which  aim  at  discounting  unknown  causes  by
including,  as  near  as  may  be,  their  whole  cycle.
Such  is  the  method  we  instinctively  adopt,  if  in
order  to  estimate  the  number  of  words  in  every  line
of  our  MS.,  we  count  them  for,  say,  a  dozen  lines,
and  take  the  average  as  our  guide  to  the  normal
number  in  a  line.  We  hope  that  the  main  causes
of  difference  in  the  number  of  words  per  line  will
have  occurred  within  the  single  dozen,  and  that  the
average  on  the  whole,  perhaps  of  ten  thousand  lines,
will  be  much  the  same  as  that  in  the  dozen  which
we  have  counted.  We  do  not  trouble  ourselves  to
think  what  may  cause  the  numbers  to  vary,  but
merely  hope  that  we  have  got  a  fair  sample  of  all
the  effects  of  the  unknown  causes,  and  that  our
average,  therefore,  is  a  constant.  Of  such  a  nature
would  be,  according  to  the  hypothesis  before  us,
the  measurement  of  atomic  weights  and  of  ethereal

them  leaves  no  doubt  that  what  they,  like  Mill,  mean  to  insist  on  is
relevant  variation,  i.e.  that  the  figures  are  constant  under  constant
conditions,  and  vary  with  varying  ones.  But  adopting  the  unfor
tunate  terms  uniformity  and  regularity,  they  are  to  some  extent
hypnotised  by  them,  as  appears  I  think  from  the  case  in  which  Mr.
Rawson  uses  the  word  "constants,"  cited  in  Buckle,  i.  31.  I  can
not  help  repeating  the  suggestion,  rash  as  it  may  appear,  that  an
undue  influence  is  exercised  in  discussions  of  constancy  by  the  fact
that  an  average  figure  can  be  struck  for  any  single  period,  however
prolonged,  containing  recurrent  counts  ;  which,  of  course,  apart  from
the  comparison  of  averages  for  parts  of  the  period,  is  a  mere  arith
metical  tautology,  leading  to  no  inference  of  any  kind.


90  LAW  AND  INDIVIDUALITY  LECT.

vibrations  ;  such  is  the  determination  of  average
durations  of  life  in  specified  callings  or  for  specified
categories  of  the  population.  The  essence  is  the
absence  of  all  attempt  to  suggest  causes  of  the
observed  variations.  The  method  is  one  which
deals  with  them  qua  unknown.1

But  as  Sigwart  has  said,2  it  is  really  by  their
variations  that  statistics  are  suggestive ;  and  it  is
when  we  come  to  such  comparisons  as  different
death-rates  under  different  sanitary  conditions,  or
different  rates  of  pauperism  under  different  systems
of  administration,  that  we  approach  the  province
of  what  might  be  called  first-class  statistics.  In
these  we  no  longer  operate  with  numbers  of  recur
rences  of  effects,  admitting  our  ignorance  of  their
causes.  It  is  like  the  difference  between  a  state
ment  of  chances  giving,  say,  the  chance  of  an
individual  dying  of  smallpox,  based  on  the  ratio  of
cases  to  population,  and  the  statement  based  on
highly  complete  causal  knowledge  giving,  say,  the
chances  for  the  throws  of  a  perfect  die.  We  pass
beyond  the  disjunction  of  ignorance — under  X,  so
many  cases  a,  so  many  b,  we  have  not  the  least
notion  why — into  the  province  of  the  disjunction  of
knowledge  ;  x  being  a  gives  a,  being  j3  gives  b,  etc.,
and  we  know  there  is  nothing  persistent  in  favour

1  It  may  be  said,  that  the  very  specification  of  the  category  to  be
dealt  with  involves  the  suggestion  of  a  cause  ;  e.g.  duration  of  life  of
bachelors,  married  men,  clergy,  saw  grinders,  etc. The  fact  is  that
a  unity  which  has  an  interest,  has  also  an  incipient  causal  presump
tion. It  is  true  that  when  comparison  begins  to  work  in  this  way,  a
transition  to  first-class  statistics  is  suggested. But primarily,  e.g.
for  actuarial purposes or  for simple compendiousness in keeping
records,  no  such  suggestion  is  involved.

2  Eng.  Trans,  ii.  501. This,  I  think,  must  be  borne  in  mind  as  a
mitigation  of  Taylor's  statement  that  taking  an  average  must  always
give  results  which  have  a  mechanical  appearance  (Elements,  p.  331).


in  RELEVANT VARIATION  TYPICAL  91

of  a  more  than  of  /3  and  the  rest,  and  vice  versa.
Variations  in  ratio  of  crime  and  pauperism,  variations
in  the  occurrence  and  fatality  of  diseases,  variations
of  the  general  death-rate  of  a  community,  and  per
haps  also  of  its  birth-rate,  are  capable  in  different
degrees  of  being  correlated  with  assignable  causes,
and  become  more  intelligible  as  they  become  more
divergent,  and  so  in  the  superficial  sense  less  con
stant.  It  is  true  that  statistical  conclusions  as  such
remain  hypothetical  as  regards  incidence  on  indi
viduals.  We  may  see  that  a  death-rate  must
diminish,  but  we  do  not  know  which  individuals
will  be  saved,  nor,  from  the  death-rate  alone,  which
have  been  saved.  But  the  unexplained  variation  is
no  longer  the  typical  daj^um,  nor  the  assumption  of
it  the  ideal  of  method.  We  can  go  to  meet  the
statistical  figure  from  the  other  end,  with  precise
analytic  explanations  of  the  individual  case,  given
his  health,  his  morals,  his  economic  history.1  In
dealing  with  social  phenomena,  this,  the  variable
aricl  individual  element,  is  the  climax  of  intelligi
bility.  Piot  constancy,  but  explicable  or  relevant
variation  is  the  typical  character  of  the  measure-
mentsjnyolved.  Even  tEeTroughest  methods,  pro
perly  used,  can  give  no  such  analogy  as  is  asserted
by  the  argument  we  are  discussing.  And  the  more
we  perfect  the  measurements,  the  less  the  analogy
holds.

5.  It  was  suggested  above  that  the  argument  in
question  —  the  argument  from  non-uniformity  to  unu°n
spontaneity  in  nature — depends  on  a  false  con-  J™^
ception  of  the  Uniformity  of  Nature.  It  aims  at  theories  of

similarity

1  Taylor  seems  to  exaggerate  the  opposite  view  to  this  (Elements,  j^n  re
PP-  234-5)-


92  LAW  AND  INDIVIDUALITY  LECT.


disproving what we may call the uniformity of
Similarity,  expressed  in  the  principle  that  the  future
will  repeat  or  resemble  the  past,  or,  more  generally,
that  one  thing  of  a  kind  will  simply  repeat  another.
But  this,  as  was  observed  above,  is  not  the  meaning
of Uniformity  as a  logical principle  or  postulate
of  Science. No  doubt  the  name  Uniformity,  pro
posed  by  Mill,  was  a  misleading  appellation  for  the
postulate  of  rational  system  and  coherence  in  the
world of  experience. But  Mill,  like others  after
him,  clearly  explained  that  the  Uniformity  of  Nature
does not mean that  the  future  will resemble the
past. This  may  seem  a  superfluous  discussion  of  a
familiar  point. But,  in  truth,  the  prejudice  which
interprets  the  Uniformity  of  Nature  as  the  principle
of  science,  in  the  sense  which Mill  was  careful  to
reject,1  is  at  the  root  of  the  whole  recent  polemic
against  the  intelligence,  and  rests  on  something  far
deeper  than  a  mere  verbal  confusion. It  springs
from a deep-rooted impulse to misconceive and
mutilate  the  whole  activity  of  thought,  which  is,  in
essence,  a  recrudescence  of  the  superstition  that  its
work  is  purely  analytic. Wherever  in  recent  litera
ture,  from  John  Henry  Newman  to  Mr.  Kidd,  from
M.  Tarde  and  Professor  Baldwin  to  M.  Bergson  and
his  followers, we  find  emphasised  the  solvent  and
analytic character  of  intellect,  or  the  antithesis  of
Imitation  and  Invention,  of  Repetition  and  Creation,
there, I am convinced, we have a fundamental
error  of  principle  depending  on  a vicious logical

1  I  do  not  forget  that  Professor  Taylor  believes  himself  faithful
to  the  law  of  Ground  and  Consequent  (pp.  cit.  p.  230).  But  I  cannot
reconcile  this  attitude  with  his  prolonged  advocacy  of  inexactness  in
nature.  What  point  can  there  be  in  this,  if  it  only  means  that  some
variations,  relevant  and  grounded,  escape  our  notice  ?


in  RELEVANCY  IS THE  POINT  93

theory.1 The  hopeless  failure  of  all  these  theories
to  deal  with  the  nature  of  genius,  with  creation  and
invention,2  shows  that  we  have  before  us  an  abstrac
tion of  elements  —  the elements of identity and
diversity,  which  in  the  attempt  to  dissociate  them  be- 1
come  unmeaning  and  contradictory. Invention  and  v^
creation  are  really  present  in  every  pulse  of  thought,  f
in  every  employment  of  significant  language,  and/
pure  repetition  is  an  impossibility  for  intelligence.3

Uniformity,  then,  as  a  principle  of  science,  is  a
uniformity  not  in  the  way  of  resemblance  but  in  the
way  of  identity ;  not  a  repetition  of  resembling
elements  but  the  coherence  of  differences  in  a  whole.
It  should  be  called  by  some  such  name  as  Relevancy.
An  argument  which  is  directed  against  the  former
and  leaves  the  latter  standing,  admits  everything
that  can  be  demanded  by  a  reasonable  mechanistic
view  of  the  universe.  Nothing  is  gained  against
uniformity  by  making  it  probable  that  atoms  vary
in  size,  if  their  variation  is  not  assumed  to  be  in
principle  irrelevant  to  their  conditions.

The  argument  set  out  to  show  that  a  psychical
or  at  least  a  spontaneous  character,  incompatible
with  mechanical  uniformity,  might  be  presumed  in
physical  objects ;  and  offered  to  reveal  how  the
appearance  of  constancy  in  them  was  analogous  to
one  which  must  arise  in  connection  with  subjects
whom  we  know  to  be  psychical.  But  what  has
appeared  on  examination  of  it  is  that  the  only  true
principle  of  uniformity  (Relevancy),  so  far  from
being  incompatible  with  a  psychical  character,  is  in

1  See  author's  Logic,  2nd  ed.,  vol.  ii.  p.  174  ff.

2  See  Lect.  VIII.  below.
3  Nettleship  on  use  of  language,  Remains,  i.  128.


94  LAW  AND  INDIVIDUALITY  LECT.

the  highest  degree  applicable  to  the  prerogative
case  of  mind,  and  that  the  more  nearly  as  we
approach  the  individual  subject.1  So  that  instead  of
defeating  the  principle  in  alleged  physical  objects,
the  argument  has  forced  us  to  assert  it  in  true
psychical  objects.  The  important  point  is  to  dis
own  the  idea  that  the  establishment  of  great  de  facto
variety  either  disproves  true  Unijprmity  (Relevancy)
or  proves  a  psychical  nature  ;  and  that  there  is  any
kind  of  connection  between  the  disproof  of  the  one  and
the  proof  of  the  other.  Such  an  idea  sets  us  wrong
ab  initio  in  our  attitude  to  the  characteristics  of  con
sciousness,  teaching  us  to  connect  it  with  eccentricity
and  caprice — the  negation  of  coherent  system —
instead  of  with  system  and  rationality.  The  same
fundamental  error  identifies  the  spontaneity  of  life
with  an  unmotived  diversity,  and  intelligence  proper
with  an  impotent  identity.

It  is  not  indefinite  variation  but  coherent  pro-
gressiveness  and  adaptiveness  that  we  take  as
indications  of  consciousness.  And  in  this  feature,
as  we  have  seen,  the  argument  has  failed  to  sustain
the  alleged  approximation  of  what  is  called  matter
to  mind.  ^

The  point  is  somewhat  subtle,  and  I  will  restate
it  against  an  objection  which  might  be  drawn  from
our  own  reasoning.  Why  you  complain,  it  may  be
replied,  of  taking  breach  of  uniformity  of  resem
blance  as  a  proof  of  psychical  character,  and  yet
such  a  breach  is  the  very  difference  which  you  allege
between  inorganic  and  social  statistics  to  prove  that

1  The  living  organism,  so  far  from  being  outside  the  province  of
intelligence  (Bergson,  Evolution  creatrice)  being  in  the  strict  sense
the  only  thing  we  can  really  understand  (Caird,  Kant,  ii,  530).
See,  however,  note,  p.  168,  on  Bergson's  "  Intuition."


Ill


THERE  IS  EXTERNALITY


95


the  latter  do  and  the  former  do  not  suggest  con
scious  spontaneity.

Our  answer  would  be,  insisting  on  what  we  have
said,  that  what  we  allege  to  indicate  psychical
spontaneity  is  not  mere  breach  of  the  uniformity  of
resemblance,  but  systematic  progressiveness  and
adaptiveness  of  response.  What  we  combat  is  the
suggestio  falsi — based  on  confusing  rational  identity
in  diversity  with  the  recurrence  of  resemblances —
that  we  approach  the  psychical  by  coming  near  to
the  inexplicable  ;  a  suggestion  by  which  the  argu
ment  for  universal  mentality  draws  the  popular  love
of  the  marvellous  to  its  side.  Treating  this  sug
gestion,  however,  as  indefensible  and  probably  not
meant  to  be  defended,  we  confine  ourselves  to  ex-  G,
plicable  variation,  which,  in  any  degree  of  it,  is  no
breach  of  the  uniformity  (Relevancy)  of  Nature.
This  kind  of  variation  we  see  no  reason  to  deny,  if
theory  requires  it,  in  physical  phenomena  hitherto
supposed  to  be  uniformly  similar  ;  but  we  insist
on  the  fact  that  in  regions  which  we  know  to  be
psychical  there  is  not  only  variation  but  progressive
and  adaptive  variation  correlated  with  changes  of
volitioiL.  And  therefore 'a  we  maintain  the  prima  ,
facie  difference.,  between  material  and  psychical
existence;  and 73  we  insist  that  in  the  mental  pro
vince  the  true  Uniformity  of  Nature  exhibits  itself
in  the  fullest  and  completest  sense.  The  concep
tion  of  relaxing  uniformity  to  make  room  for  mind
in  nature  means  a  failure  to  face  the  problem  of
externality  as  the  antithesis  of  subjective  "mind"  ^v
on  the  one  hand  ^  and  the  problem  of  free  initiative  Jx
or  creative  logic  on  the  other.2

1  See  Lect.  X.  2  See  Lect.  IX.


96  LAW  AND  INDIVIDUALITY  LECT.


the conditions of  '.individuality)  conflict with the


individu- 6.  The  same  fallacy  is  apparent  in  the  idea  that

ality
implies

deter-dy postulate  of  universal  law.

It  does  not  much  matter  in  what  details  this  idea
asserts  itself.  It  is  the  same  thing  throughout ;  a
denial  of  relevant  adjustment,  confused  with  a  denial
of  similar  repetition.  An  efficient  cause,  we  are
told,  for  example,  need  not  be  uniform  in  its  action.1
This  is  intended,  it  would  seem,  to  guard  the
spontaneity  of  true  causal  activity,  considered  as
that  of  a  subject.  It  can  only  mean  that  a  cause  A,
without  variation  of  conditions  as  between  B  and  C,
can  produce  out  of  itself  alternatively  effects  b  and
V  ^jj  c.  Such  spontaneity,  of  course,  would  mean  not
v  adjustment,  but  failure  of  adjustment,  a  complete

denial  of  Relevancy.  To  stimulus  B,  A  might
respond  with  reaction  c,  to  stimulus  C  with  b.  We
are  told  again,  that  Individuality  is  unique  and  the
self  impervious.2  This  is  its  character,  not  acci
dentally,  but  essentially  ;  its  essence  is  to  be  sui
generis?  It  is  the  playground  of  contingency.
Laws  cannot  be  shown  to  be  absolutely  exact ;
purposive  life  cannot  coexist  with  rigid  routine
conformity  to  general  law.4  Everywhere  the  polemic
is  against  the  character  of  rigidity,  fixity,  repetition,
supposed  to  be  inherent  in  the  nature  of  law,  and
to  be  the  same  thing  with  adequacy  and  precision
of  measurable  adjustment.  Spontaneity  is  held  to

1  Ward,  Naturalism,  ii. 241. Contrast  Joseph,  Introduction  to
Logic,  p.  374  : "  Let  us  ask  what  is  involved  in  the  conception  of  a
cause  not  acting  uniformly  ;  we  shall  see  that  it  is  the  same  as  if  we
denied  the  existence  of  causal  connections  altogether."

2  Seth, Hegelianism and  Personality, pp. 225-8  ; cf. Taylor,
Elements,  p.  282.

3  Ward,  Naturalism,  ii.  163-66.

4  Taylor,  Elements,  p.  223.


in  SPONTANEITY  TAKEN  AS  ISOLATION  97

be  throughout  in  escaping  from  general  rules,  i.e.  rules
of  recurring  resemblance.  The  idea  of  identity  in
difference  seems  never  to  be  applied.  For  if  it  were,
fineness  of  adjustment,  precision,  and  relevancy  of
determinate  response,  would  be  recognised  as  the
very  incarnation  of  the  universal,  and  so  of  life  and
spontaneity  which  are  one  with  it.  The  whple
contention,  there  can  be  little  doubt±  reflects  the
modern  tendency  to  pronounce  intelligence  not
merely  in  fact  but  in  principle  made.cjuate._to  life
and  reality.1  It  is  difficult  indeed  to  see  how  this
tendency  can  accord  with  the  attempt  sometimes
conjoined  with  it,  to  enthrone  the  finite  conscious
ness  as  the  director  of  history  and  evolution.  But
the  fact  is,  that  we  are  here  on  the  edge  of  pluralism
and  voluntarism,  and  although  the  term  direction  is
employed,  the  guidance  by  the  finite  consciousness
as  the  independent  controller  and  reformer  of
destiny,  divorced  from  an  immanentjreal,  i£jL_b[ind  /

leading  of  the  blind. For  Ward  no  less  than  for  /

— - —  \,

Bergson  reality  is  richer  than  thought,  history  is  the  /
type  of  the  Absolute,  and  the  true  concrete  w_qrld_of  j
philosophyjropsjaway.2  V

At  all  events  what  we  have  to  deal  with  is  this.
The  work  of  the  intelligence  is  conceived  as  the
formulation  of  general  rules  of  repetition  or  resem
blance,  by  which  everything  new  is  analysed  in
terms  of  the  old.3  And  the  princ.ple  of  intelligence,
thus  understood,  is  naturally  conceived  to  have  no

1  As  in  Bergson  passim,  e.g.  Evolution,  p.  175. It  is  important  to
note  how  old  this  tendency  is,  dating  at  least  from  Schopenhauer,
and  backed  by  revived  religionism  (J.  H.  Newman).

2  See,  however,  as  to  Bergson  A. D. Lindsay's Philosophy  of
Bergson,  ch.  v. I  adhere  to  the  statement  in  the  text.

3  Bergson,  Evolution,  p.  177.

II


98


LAW  AND  INDIVIDUALITY


LECT.


/  grasp  or  purchase  on  vital  and  purposive  reality.1
I  The  conception  of  teleology,  indeed,  is  exploited  to
I  eke  out  the  missing  character  of  rationality.  We

shall see later how far it  justifies the attitude

adopted.
/ Our attitude is,  on the other hand, that the

principle of life and reality is one  ^throughout.
land  is  the  prinrip]^  of  tnrh'yjdrmlity, and  that  this


can  be  traced  in  all  forms  of  experience,  none  of

which  ate  to  be  taken as  superseding  or  as dis

continuous with each other. Finite intelligence,

for  example,  will  not  be  superseded  by  but  also  will

not  supersede,  any  other  form  of  finite  experience,

though it may lead  up to a perfect experience

other  than  itself. We must  avoid  the two com

plementary  errors, of which modern philosophy

appears  to  us  to  be  full,  and  which  have  one  and

the  same  root. We  must  not  identify  intelligence

with  cognition  —  the  error  of  alleged  Intellectualism,

committed  mainly  if  not  exclusively  by  its  antagonists

—and  make  it,  so  interpreted,  the  guide  and  rule  of

life. We  must  not,  on  the  other  hand,  influenced

by  aversion  to  this  error,  set  up  as  sovereign  any

form  of  spontaneity, activity,  subjective  teleology,

or  intuition  of  life,  against  the  character  of  intelli

gence  as  the  active  form  of  totality  and  nisus  towards

the  whole. We  must  distinguish  the  character  of

thought  in  its  widest  and  deepest  sense  as  the  active

form  and  logical  spirit  which  lives  in  all  modes  and

contents  of  experience,  from  the  discursive  abstract

thinking  which  is  one  shape  —  a  typical  or  schematic

outline  —  of  the  operations  of  mind. We  must  under-

1  The  grasp  of  universals,  it  is  held,  marks  the  failure  of  insight
and  interest  (Ward,  Naturalism,  i.  no,  ii.  90).


in  MINDS  NOT  MIRACULOUS  AGENTS  99

stand  how  all  sides  and  features  approach  their
respective  completions  concurrently  and  convergently
as  the  underlying  principle  of  individuality  expresses
itself  more  thoroughly  through  a  more  determinate
grasp  of  the  content  of  the  world.  The  conscious
intelligence  is  not  to  be  dethroned  ;  it  remains  above
the  unconscious,  as  a  revelation  of  what  is  there
implicit,  and  as  a  fuller  phase  of  the  remodelling  of
self  by  adaptation  to  the  whole.  But  it  is  not  to  be
one-sidedly  sovereign  either  as  abstract  cognition
or  again  as  finite  mind  or  will,  furnishing  direction
out  of  its  own  isolated  contingency.  It  is  neither  a
subordinate  means  to  evolution,  nor  an  independent
rational  agent  in  a  world  which  is  mere  material
for  its  spontaneity.  It  is  simply  the  principle  of
Individuality  permeating  all  experience,  but  when
taken  in  abstract  shape  constituting  that  side  of
experience  which  we  call  discursive  thought.  We
will  now  follow  more  in  detail  the  nature  of  the
fallacy  which  sets  Individuality  and  Spontaneity
in  contrast  to  universal  law.

i.  We  may  start  from  Lotze.1  Faise  ideas


The  Absolute  is  no  magician,  it  does  not  produce
Things  in  appropriate  places  out  of  a  sheer  vacuum,  merely
because  they  correspond  to  the  purport  of  its  plan.  All
particular  cases  of  its  operation  are  based  on  a  system  of
management  according  to  law,  adapted  to  its  operation  as
a  whole.  But  I  must  repeat :  it  is  not  here  as  it  is  with
man,  who  cannot  do  otherwise  ;  rather  this  uniformity
with  general  principles  is  itself  a  part  of  what  is  designed
to  exist.  Hence  it  is,  that  each  stage  in  the  development
of  organic  life  seems  to  arise  step  by  step  out  of  the
reactions  which  are  made  necessary  for  the  combined

1  Mctaphysic,  sect.  233  ;  cf.  Introduction,  Eng.  Trans,  p.  x.


of  what
Law  in-


ioo  LAW  AND  INDIVIDUALITY  LECT.

elements  by  their  persistent  nature ;  nor  is  there  any
where  an  exception  to  the  dependence  of  Life  on
mechanical  causes.

Here  we  find  stated  the  view  which  seems  prima
facie  reasonable.  But  the  protest  which  accompanies
it  suggests  the  contrast  of  law  and  individuality,
which  since  Lotze's  day  has  developed  so  as  to
destroy  the  doctrine  to  which  in  his  hands  it  was
subordinate.

The  protest,  which  opposes  the  idea  of  law  to  the
idea  of  an  individual  system,  rests  on  the  fallacy  that
/a  plurality  of  undifferentiated  points  of  application
is  essential  to  the  universality  of  a  law — that  the
universality  of  a  law,  in  a  word,  must  be  embodied
in  a  class  of  similars.  This  fallacy  is  the  same  at
its  root  with  the  negative  or  exclusive  doctrine
of  individuality.  It  depends,  as  has  been  pointed
out,  on  the  confusion  of  similarity  and  identity,
by  which  a  scientific  truth  is  supposed  to  be
essentially  the  expression  of  an  attribute  in  which
a  great  number  of  instances  resemble  one  another.
But  the  view  of  sound  logic  is  rather  that  a  scientific
truth  is  the  expression  of  a  definite  connection  of
contents  within  a  system — an  identity  pervading  a
number  of  distinct  determinations  whose  connection
does  not  lie  in  resemblance  of  the  elements  to  one
another,  although  certain  resemblances  may  and
must  result  from  the  interconnection.1  Thus,  for
p  example,  it  is  possible  to  regard  the  law  of  gravita
tion  as  a  record  of  certain  resemblances  between  all
particles  of  matter.  But  this  resemblance  is  really
secondary.  The  point  which  constitutes  the  theory 2

1  See  author's  Logic^  2nd  ed.,  ii.  174  ff. 2  Green,  Works,  ii.  288.


in  SYSTEM  PRIOR TO  RESEMBLANCE  101

is  the  conception  of  the  systematic  relation  between
J;he  distance  and  the  attraction,  and  the  contribution
whjch_^isconceptic»n'makes  Jo~ffie~fteB^  deter
mination  of  the  nature_of_the  physical  world.  When
the  nature  of  the  gravitating  system  is  so  far
revealed,  the  resemblances  following  from  the  partial
identity  so  far  established  between  portions  of
matter  are  a  corollary.  But  the  basis  of  the  resem
blances  could  not  be  established,  except  by  analysing
them  into  the  precise  partial  identity  which  is
expressed  in  the  determinate  interrelation  of  parts
within  the  gravitating  system.  So  in  the  easy
example  of  a  machine,  say,  a  steam-engine.  The
universal  in  which  tl\e  members  participate  is  the
working  of  the  engine,  which  primarily  depends
upon  the  differing  adaptations  of  the  members  to
their  purpose.  Certain  partial  identities,  giving
rise  to  resemblances,  are  involved  in  these  adapta
tions,  as,  for  example,  that  all  the  parts  must  share
a  certain  degree  of  strength  and  toughness  and
durability.  But  no  machine,  no  city,  no  system,
could  be  made  out  of  merely  similar  members.
Even  a  number  of  undistinguishable  coins,  if  they
are  to  operate  upon  each  other's  value,  must  be
taken  as  affecting  one  another  by  a  relation  which
is  not  their  resemblance,  i.e.  the  relation  of  co
operating  towards  the  supply  of  some  demand.
The  distinction  is  no  doubt  a  truism.  But  it  is  an
embarrassing  fact  that  forgetfulness  of  such  truisms
forms  a  leading  feature  of  the  most  modern  philo
sophy.  If  they  were  not  forgotten,  no  one  could
treat  a  Universal  Law  or  statement  of  a  uniformity
of  nature  as  a  generality  which  depends  for  its  truth
on  the  recurrence  of  similar  qualities  or  events.


102  LAW  AND  INDIVIDUALITY  LECT.

And  consequently  there  could  be  no  reason  for
suggesting  that  a  universal  law  is  not  a  necessary
element  in  the  conception  of  a  system  or  individual.
The  fact  is  that  Plurality  and  Repetition,  which  are
the  medium  of  generalities^  j.s  commonly  understood,
arej;elatively ^unimportant  subforms  of  universality.
This  is  a  consideration  which  goes  very  deep  into
:he  modern  attitude  towards  the  intelligence.  We
are  constantly  being  told  l  that  the  intelligence  can
deal  with  nothing  but  repetitions.  This  is  simply
an  echo  of  the  Logic  of  extension  and  classification
which,  greatly  as  it  has  been  amplified  of  late,  can
never,  surely,  give  a  genuine  account  of  know
ledge.

Every  u.  We may  take  the  matter  further  than this.

The  relation  of  the  universal  law  to  the  individual
°f  system  is  closely  typified  by  that  of  the  Hypothetical
to the Categorical Judgment, or of Science to
Philosophy. The individual is essentially the
province of Categorical judgment, the abstract
universal  of  the  Hypothetical ;  and  we  might  venture
to  say  that  the  Categorical  judgment  is  the  sphere
\  of  Philosophy,  the  Hypothetical  of  science. Philo-
1  sophy  deals  with affirmations  about  the  universe  ;
\Science  with  the  interdependence  of  details  within
ithe  universe 2 — the  precise  consequents  of  conditions
precisely  assigned. Thus  every  Hypothetical  judg
ment — every  relation  of  antecedent  and  consequent

1  E.g.  Bergson,  passim.  Ward  (Naturalism,  ii.  280)  points  out
that  in  History,  where  we  have  less  of  repetition,  we  understand
better,  than,  e.g.  in  exact  science.  Cf.  p.  94  for  a  similar  contrast
between  Caird  and  Bergson.  In  Paulsen,  Einleitung,  p.  384,  to  which
Ward  refers,  the  polar  antithesis  of  Begreifen  and  Verstehen  is
suspect  to  me.  It  involves  saying  that  you  drop  determinateness  as
you  approach  true  concreteness,  which  I  do  not  believe.

-  Caird,  Kant,  ii.  312.


in  THE  LAWS  OF WORLDS  103

-is  within,  and  founded  upon,  a  categorically
asserted  ground  or  relatively  individual  system.
Geometrical  truth  is  only  true  if  there  is  space ; l
economic  truth  holds  only  within  the  economic
world  ;  biological  truth  belongs  to  the  kingdom  of
organic  life.  The  abstract  truth  traces  the  detailed
connections  which  go  to  constitute  the  concrete
being  ;  and  the  nature  of  the  relation  implies  that
every  concrete  being  is  a  system,  the  analysis  of
whose  detail  may  be  expressed  as  abstract  truth.
We  are  not  saying  that  any  number  of  Hypotheticals
can  be  equivalent  to  a  categorical  truth,  or  that  a
series  of  abstractions  taken  together  can  be  equivalent
to  an  individual  reality ;  but  we  are  saying  that
every  individual,  every  living  world,  as,  on  the  one
hand,  it  has  its  own  system  of  truths^  which  hold
good  only  within  and  presupposing  it,  so,  on  the
other  hand,  possesses  in  these  truths  a  system  of
determinations,  each  of  which,  when  its  background
and  foundation  are  made  explicit,  realises  the
character  of  a  universal  nexus  as  once  true  always
true.  It  is  always  true,  because  it  carries  its  full
conditions  with  it.  A  judgment  of  colour  harmony,
or  of  decorative  or  dramatic  fitness,  or  of  appropriate
biological  response  to  environment,  or  of  morality,
may,  or  rather  must  be,  the  proper  background  pre
supposed,  as  necessary  as  a  geometrical  axiom  ;  and
if  equally  necessary,  it  possesses,  considering  the

1  I  suppose  this  would  be  disputed  on  the  ground  that  geometrical
reasoning  is  independent  of  experience.  I  cannot  think  that  such
a  view  is  tenable.  It  is  one  thing  to  distinguish  inference  from
observation  of  fact ;  another  thing  to  say  that  you  can  think  or  infer
in  any  matter  without  immersing  the  mind  in  that  matter.  As  for
the  truth  of  new  kinds  of  geometry,  I  suppose  that  they  are  affirmed  of
reality  under  a  precise  reservation,  and  so  may  be  necessary  even  if
their  objects  are  impossible.


104  LAW  AND  INDIVIDUALITY  LECT.

greater  fulness  of  its  content,  a  considerably  higher
degree  of  truth.  If  the  background  or  basis  of
relation  is  wanting  the  judgment  is  meaningless  and
cannot  be  thought.

The  universality  of  such  a  determination,  which
derives  from  the  nature  of  the  whole  present  within
it,  lies  in  its  embodiment  of  the  spirit  of  the  whole
to  which  it  belongs.  A  potential  plurality  of  similar
instances  under  it — a  potential  generality  or  repeti
tion,  follows  as  a  corollary  in  finite  experience.  But
it_is_a  character  of  imperfection  in  such  experience,
nd  not_  of perfection.  For  the  ideal  of  uniqueness,
if  rightly  understood,  is  in  truth  one  which  attaches
to  a  perfect  individuality  and  its  members.  A  mis
interpretation  of  this  character  of  uniqueness  is  at
the  root  of  the  view  which  finds  an  antagonism
between  individuality  and  universal  law.  So  far
from  uniqueness  being  antagonistic  to  universality,
the  ideal  of  a  universal  nexus  is  to  be  embodied  in
the  unique.  This  must  be  so,  if  the  identity  of
Indiscernibles  is  a  true  principle — a  mere  repetition
is  pro  tanto  fatal  to  comprehensiveness,1  because  it
tends  to  collapse  into  featureless  unity,  leaving  no
differences  to  comprehend.  And  in  fact,  the  nearer
any  experience  approaches  to  an  unmotived  repeti
tion,  the  more  we  feel  ourselves  in  the  province
of  error  and  confusion.  Why  should  any  being
express  a  second  time  what  has  been  adequately
expressed  before,  or  how  can  such  a  repetition  carry
knowledge  forward  ?  A  repetition  which  is  not
unmotived  but  demanded .  stands  on  different

1  Taking  comprehensiveness,  width,  inclusiveness,  generality,  as
simple equivalents of universality, indisputable even to common  ,
sense.


in  TRUEST  INDIVIDUAL, CLEAREST  LAW 105

ground  ;  the  mere  fact  that  it  is  demanded  (as  in  a
decorative  repeat)  rests  on  a  difference  in  the  situa
tion  and  makes  it  in  principle  unique.  The  thing
is  obvious  if  we  think  of  the  ultimate  universal  as
the  spirit  of  a  single  system,  constituted  by  differ
ences  which  have  for  their  function  to  develop  and
manifest  the  content  of  its  nature.  The  nexus  of
these  differences,  in  the  system  which  is  the  uni
versal,  is  a  system  of  laws,  each  of  which  is  general
by  holding  together  the  diverse  expression  of  the
one  life  and  spirit.  It  is  no  less  obvious  if  we  think
of  the  completest  types  of  individuality  which  finite
experience  furnishes,  such  as  a  work  of  art,  or  a
person,  or  a  highly  unified  society.  In  a  work  of
art,  a  picture,  or  a  poem,  every  particular  effect  is
unique  in  the  sense  that  it  says  something  special
and  distinctive,  dependent  on  the  nature  of  the
whole  which  reveals  one  of  its  aspects  in  that  deter
minate  arrangement  on  which  the  effect  depends.1

And  we  must  have  read  Plato's  Philebus  and
Aristotle's  Ethics  to  very  little  purpose  if  we  do  not
understand  that,  in  principle,  the  fullest  universal  of
character  and  consciousness  will  embody  itself  in
the  finest  and  most  specialised  and  unrepeatable
responses  to  environment ;  and  that  life,  and
especially  its  intensified  forms  as  morality  or  know
ledge,  do  not  consist  in  observing  general  rules,  but
in  reacting  adequately,  with  logical,  that  is,  with  fine
and  creative  adjustment  to  the  ever-varying  com
plexities  of  situations.  Precision,  measurableness,
and  universal  law,  these  are  in  the  moral  act,  but
they  are  features  of  the  solution  of  problems  by
constructive  organisation,  and  not  of  obedience  to

1 Cf.  Essentials  of  Logic,  p.  57.


io6  LAW  AND  INDIVIDUALITY  LECT.

abstract  rule,  and  the  same  thing  is  relatively  true
of  the  adjustments  and  arrangements  of  a  highly
unified  society.1

Now  every  such  determination — the  relation  of
every  colour,  point,  and  line  in  a  Turner  picture,  of
the  members  of  the  rhythm  in  a  poem,  of  intervals
of  time  in  an  act  of  patience  or  courage — all  these
are  more  well  and  truly  to  be  designated  universal
laws  and  connections  than  the  truths  of  number
and  geometry,  or  statements  of  the  characters  of
an  organic  genus  or  species.  They  presuppose
indeed  a  far  more  special  and  concrete  world  or
background  than  the  world  of  space  and  time  in  the
abstract,  or  than  the  world  of  plants  or  animals.
But  they  are  no  less  necessary,  and  much  more  uni
versal  ;  for  they  imply  the  world  of  spatio-temporal
abstraction,  and  many  other  worlds  besides,  and
embody  a  system  of  differences  much  more  pro
foundly  connected,  and  a  much  fuller  and  more
coherent  grade  of  reality  and  revelation  of  the
nature  of  things.2

True,  a  iii.  W hat  wc_  really  mean  i  n__cpn  t  ras  t  i  ng  Individ-

^oridToes  uality  with  general  law  is  explained  by  the  contrast
lawfcTa between  different  degrees  of  Individuality,  of  which

1  The  general  law,  it  may  be  said,  is  a  statement  of  some  common
character which can be elicited from the relevant reactions of
members  in  a  system. But  where  the  universal  is  well  developed,
there  will  be  no  similarity  in  the  sense  of  repetition. There  will  be
a  completing  of  one  element  by  others. Cf.  on  the  whole  subject  a
paper  on  "  Theoria  in  Aristotle's  Ethics,"  International  Journal  of
Ethics,  January  1911,  reprinted  below  in  Appendix  II.

2  I  hold  it  to  be  a  fundamental  error,  and  a  most  instructive  one,
on  the  part  of  M.  Bergson  to  think  that  the  human  intelligence  is
especially  at  home  in  geometry,  and  less  satisfied  and  less  efficient
as  its  work  is  remote  from  cognition  of  that  type. The  error  is  due  to
measuring  the  at  homeness  of  intelligence  by  its  apparent  purity  or
independence  ;  but  this  purity  just  means  that  it  has  hardly  begun
to  discover  its  full  self. Cf.  pp.  94  ff.


in CALCULATION  IS  SOMETHING, NOT  ALL 107

the  lower  enter  into  but  do  not  complete  the
higher.  Thus,  as  we  have  seen,  it  is  perfectly  true
that  laws  of  the  world  of  time  or  space  will  not
furnish  the  content  of  art  or  personality.  But  this
is  simply  because  they  fall  short  of  the  requisite
universality.  They  have  too  little  to  say  of  what
there  is  in  the  world,  and  their  necessity  is
dependent  on  a  far  simpler  background  than  that
of  the  living  whole  within  which  the  fine  adjust- L
ments  of  art  or  of  morality  have  their  inevitable  {
place.

This  contrast,  which  is  incontestable,  and  which
applies  also  in  its  degree  to  the  chemical  and  bio
logical  worlds  as  compared  with  the  province  of
self-conscious  and  volitional  life,  is  apt  to  be  ex
ploited  with  a  recklessness  and  ruthlessness  which
falsifies  the  theory  of  individuality,  and  cuts  the
membership  of  the  universe  apart  with  a  hatchet.

The  Laplacean  imagination  of  the  ideal  calculator
is  being  held  up  in  terrorem^  as  representing  the

1  Ward,  Naturalism,  \.  4 1 ;  Bergson,  Evolution  creatrice,  p.  4 1 ;  Ver-
worn,  Allgemeine  Physiologic,  Eng.  Trans.  31  ff.  Dubois  Raymond
apparently  pointed  out  that  "an  astronomical  knowledge  of  the  brain  "
could  never  indicate  to  us  how  consciousness  arises  ;  a  limit  which  is
analogous  to  the  limit  suggested  below,  that  without  special  experience
it  could  never  indicate  to  us  what  consciousness  would  accompany
each  special  physical  condition.  Cp.  "  Nous  devons  done  envisager
Petat  present  de  1'univers  comme  1'effet  de  son  etat  anterieur  et  comme
la  cause  de  celui  qui  va  suivre.  Une  intelligence  qui,  pour  un
instant  donne,  connaitrait  toutes  les  forces  dont  la  nature  est  animee,
et  la  situation  respective  des  etres  qui  la  composent,  si  d'ailleurs  elle
etait  assez  vaste  pour  soumettre  ces  donnees  a  1'analyse,  embrasserait
dans  la  meme  formule  les  mouvements  des  plus  grands  corps  de
1'iinivers  et  ceux  du  plus  leger  atome  ;  rien  ne  serait  incertain  pour
elle,  et  1'avenir  comme  le  passe  serait  present  a  ses  yeux.  L'esprit
humain  offre,  dans  la  perfection  qu'il  a  su  donner  a  1'Astronomie,
une  faible  esquisse  de  cet  intelligence.  Ses  decouvertes  en  Mecanique
et  en  Geometric,  jointes  a  celle  de  la  pesanteur  universelle,  1'ont  mis
a  portee  de  comprendre  dans  les  memes  expressions  analytiques,  les


io8  LAW  AND  INDIVIDUALITY  LECT.

presumptuous  pretensions  of  the  intelligence  and
furnishing  their  reductio  ad  absurdum.  Now  it
cannot  be  doubted  that  the  ideal  in  question  not
merely  is,  as  Laplace  observed,  at  an  infinite  dis
tance  from  the  possibility  of  practice,  but  contains
a  theoretical  defect.  But  it  is  very  important  in
what  we  take  this  defect  to  consist,  and  how  far  it
goes  to  suggest  an  inadequacy  of  intelligence  to  the
real.

In  the  first  place,  it  is  a  mistake  to  assume  that

Isuch  a  scheme  of  calculation  is  typical  of  the  real
work  of  intelligence  in  connecting  individuality  with
universal  law.  And  in  the  second  place  it  is  an
exaggeration  to  argue  that  calculations  of  the  type
imagined — founded,  that  is,  on  very  general  charac
teristics  of  the  spatio  -  temporal  world  • —  have  in
principle  no  value  at  all  for  the  interpretation  and
even  the  prediction  of  what  is  most  individual.

First,  then,  such  a  scheme  of  calculation  is  not
truly  typical  of  intelligence  in  its  dealings  with  law.
Intelligence  is  fundamentally  creative  and  synthetic,
and  the  more  so,  the  more  concrete  the  world  with
which  it  deals.  Now  though  there  is  literally  no
such  thing  as  a  purely  analytic  work  of  intelligence,
yet  in  the  treatment  of  homogeneous  quantity  the
synthetic  element  is  reducible  to  a  minimum.  We
might  perhaps  assume  the  supposed  calculation  to
take  a  form  not  exposed  to  the  extreme  objection,

dtats  passes  et  futurs  du  systeme  du  monde.  En  appliquant  la
meme  methode  a  quelques  autres  objets  de  ses  connaissances,  il  est
parvenu  a  ramener  a  des  lois  generates  les  phenomenes  observes,  et
a  prevoir  ceux  que  des  circonstances  donnees  doivent  faire  eclore.
Tous  ces  efforts  dans  la  recherche  de  la  verite  tendent  a  le  rapprocher
sans  cesse  de  1'intelligence  que  nous  venons  de  concevoir,  mais  dont
il  restera  toujours  infiniment  eloigne." — Laplace,  Essai  philosophique
sur  les  probabilitts i  p.  3.


in TO  AND  FROM  WHAT  IS  THE  CALCULATION? 109

based  on  a  theoretical  defect,  that  from  the  move
ments  of  a  matter  conceived  as  absolutely  homo
geneous  and  uniform  no  difference  and  therefore
nothing  could  arise.1  For  the  knowledge  of  data
assumed  in  the  hypothesis  might  furnish  a  basis  for
scientific  prediction  apart  from  the  extreme  concep
tion  of  homogeneity  criticised  by  Leibniz  and  later
writers ;  and  it  would  still  remain  a  question  of
theoretical  importance  how  far  predictions  of  life
and  conduct  could  be  deduced  by  calculation  from
any  physical  data  whatever.  If  the  responses  of
"  mind  "  were  to  be  known  beforehand  as  readily  as
the  phases  of  youth  and  age,  or  of  disease,  or  of  the
reactions  of  the  lower  organisms,  that  would  still
be  prediction  on  a  relatively  mechanical  basis.  The
restitution  of  a  newt's  hand  is  a  peculiar  feat,  but  it
responds,  I  take  it,  absolutely  to  very  simple  con
ditions,  and  the  ordinary  course  of  many  diseases
is  predictable  with  certainty.

But  it  is  not  clear  whether  Laplace's  imaginary
calculator,  whatever  his  primary  data,  is  supposed
ad  hoc  to  stand  to  the  world  of  mind  as  a  physicist
stone-deaf  from  birth  would  stand  to  the  theory  of
sound  ;  or  whether  in  his  knowledge  of  all  forces
and  of  the  respective  situations  of  all  beings  in  the
world  at  a  single  moment  there  would  be  included
the  full  experience  of  mind  and  its  actual  objects.
In  the  former  case  it  is  obvious  that  the  significance
of  his  results  would  not  be  appreciable  by  himself,

1  See  Leibniz  on  the  movement  of  a  uniform  wheel  (Latta's
Leibniz,  p.  221).  This  appears  to  give  what  is  the  essence  of
Professor  Ward's  criticism  of  mechanistic  science.  See  Naturalism,
i.  133,  where  Ward  repeats  that  argument  of  the  Monadology  in
illustration  of  which  Latta  cites  the  reference  to  the  wheel  from
Epistola  ad  Des  Bosses.


i io  LAW  AND  INDIVIDUALITY  LECT.

and  their  interpretation  and  valuation  would  be  a
further  and  independent  operation.  But  it  does  not
follow  from  this  that  the  two  operations  together
could  give  no  results  of  supreme  importance.  In
the  latter  case,  which  we  may  suppose  Laplace  to
have  contemplated,  the  calculator  is  in  principle
assumed  to  have  both  types  of  data  in  his  hands,
and  the  substantive  question  is  whether  by  mere
calculation  he  could,  in  developing  the  physical
data,  develop  with  them  the  psychical  data  and
the  world  of  quality,  making  his  knowledge  of  the
universe  as  complete  as  the  knowledge  of  a  piece
of  music  would  be  to  one  who  could  both  predict
the  vibrations  and  interpret  their  musical  values.

Now  for  our  immediate  purpose  the  point  is
this.  Whether  or  no  it  would  be  theoretically
possible  for  the  calculator  to  determine  the  physical
basis  of  every  occurrence  beforehand,  we  are  not
bound  to  say.  But  it  is  certain  that,  on  the  ex
treme  assumption  that  this  is  conceivable,  he  would
yet  be  very  far  from  doing  the  work  of  the  intelli
gence  in  the  full  sense.1  In  order  to  pass  from
moral  or  social  experience  given  by  the  hypothesis
in  his  complete  view  of  the  world  at  the  moment  to
the  unknown  phases  of  such  experience  correlative
to  his  physical  conclusions,  he  would  have  to  control
and  to  manipulate  in  thought  wholly  different  worlds
from  that  of  physical  nature,  worlds  aesthetic,  moral,
political  —  the  regions  of  life  and  mind.  In  any
case,  give  it  what  assumptions  we  will,  the  work  of
calculation  can  never  be  typical  of  the  work  of
intelligence  in  grasping  reality.  We  must  choose
between  the  types  of  the  deaf  physicist,  and  the

1  Here  I  am  glad  to  agree  with  Professor  Ward,  ib.  44.


in  YOU  CAN  CALCULATE  MANY  THINGS  in

physicist-musician.  In  the  former  case  the  work  is
not  done  ;  in  the  latter  a  vast  additional  assumption
is  employed  to  make  it  conceivable.

But  secondly,  it  is  false  in  principle  to  deny  that
calculations  of  the  kind  imagined  might  be  able  to
throw  light  on  the  operations  of  mind,  whether  past,
present,  or  future.  We  must  not  forget  the  con
tinuity  of  worlds — the  building  up  of  the  fuller  upon
the  shallower  individuality.  It  would  not  amount
to  nothing  if  a  man  could  do,  say,  for  the  analysis
of  pain  and  pleasure  what  the  theory  of  wave
propagation  has  done  for  the  analysis  of  sound.
To  say  that  the  comprehension  of  feeling,  or  even
its  experience  or  actual  being,  could  not  or  might
not  be  affected  by  a  knowledge  of  its  physical  con
comitants  seems  rash  if  not  plainly  false.  Besides,
the  world  of  things  in  space  comprises  the  organic
and  human  world  in  simpler  ways,  which  do  not
amount  to  nothing.  It  is  something  to  know,  if  we
do  know,  that,  as  a  thing  in  space,  an  organism
cannot  be  in  two  places  at  once,  and  can  only  com
municate  with  other  organisms  under  conditions  of
space  and  time.  In  short,  it  is  easy  to  show  that
the  abstractions  of  the  sciences  which  deal  with
things  as  in  space  are  not  everything ;  but  it  is  a
great  mistake  to  suppose  that  they  are  nothing,
more  especially  if,  in  supposing  this,  one  argues  at
the  same  time  that  they  are  all  of  actual  life  which
intelligence  can  comprehend  and  predict.

It  is  argued  as  a  matter  of  general  principle  that
nature  is  not  self-dependent,  that  it  presupposes
mind,  and  that  mind  cannot  be  subordinate  to  or
definable  by  that  which  apart  from  it  is  nothing.  I
cannot  think  this  an  important  consideration,  apart


ii2  LAW  AND  INDIVIDUALITY  LECT.


from  a  definite  exhibition  of  the  modus  operandi  of
mind  in  asserting  its  superiority.  Such  an  exhibi
tion  will  be  attempted  at  a  later  stage  of  this  work.
But  prima  facie  the  experiences  which  we  sum  up
as  "  nature  "  are  none  the  less  what  they  are  because
we  accept  them  as  coming  to  us  through  umind."
Such  a  general  consideration  does  not  alter  their
content  or  loosen  their  connection  with  the  self.
lTo  say  everything  is  experienced  through  mind
makes  no  more  difference  than  to  say  that  every
thing  is  the  work  of  God.  On  the  contrary,  its
prima  facie  result  is  to  bring  them  into  nearer
intimacy,  and  to  tinge  all  psychical  being  with
something  of  their  character.1  In  short,  all  that  we
know  of  the  worlds  of  space  and  time,  and  of  the
causally  connected  appearances  which  we  treat  as
matter,  are  already  universal  connections  partially
defining  the  individual  real.  The  real,  so  far  as  they
define  it,  may  be  incomplete  and  inconsistent,  but
the  whole  cannot  be  cut  loose  from  it.  The  supreme
individuality,  and  still  more  any  individuality  which
can  be  attained  in  finite  experience,  is  characterised
by  this  fact  of  appearance  in  "  a  nature  "  ;  and  the
further  features  which  seem  to  us  more  appropriate
to  self-determining  mind  are  also  universal  connec
tions,  but  within  worlds  of  conduct,  which  though
fuller  than  what  science  calls  nature,  both  pre-

1  Note,  for  instance,  the  growing  idea  that  psychical  states  may
be  extended.  I  have  strong  sympathy  with  much  in  Professor
Alexander's  point  of  view.  But  it  is  plain  to  me  that  its  moral  lies
in  the  expansion  of  psychical  and  logical  characteristics  to  be
characters  of  "  things,"  in  compensation  for  cutting  down  the  con
tent  of  "  minds."  Here  I  am  afraid  we  should  differ.  Cf.  Professor
Varisco's  account  of  external  things  as  elements  of  consciousness,
only,  qua  things,  not  included  in  the  unity  of  any  subject  (/
Massimi  Problem^  p.  30).


in  PREDICTION  IS  P RE-DO  ING  113

suppose  and  rest  upon  it.  There  can  be  no  reason,
prima  facie,  to  deny  that  what  science  calls  a  know
ledge  of  natural  law  is  a  partial  analysis,  and  in
principle  might  lead  to  a  high  degree  of  prediction,
of  what  we  call  individual  activity  ; l  and  it  is  false
in  principle  to  deny  that  what  we  call  in  the  highest
sense  individual  characteristics,  are,  within  the
world  to  which  they  belong,  universal  laws.  What
possible  interest  or  significance  could  they  possess
if  it  were  not  so — if,  say,  all  Cromwell's  actions  were
not  respectively  cases  under  the  same  universal—
the  same  pervading  spirit  ?

We  should  instinctively  resent  prediction  of  our
conduct,  it  has  been  well  said,  based  on  mere
scientific  calculation  from  data  existing  previous  to
our  birth.  We  do  not  resent  prediction  based  on
observation  and  experience  of  our  formed  individual
character.2

The  reason  is,  that  the  former  kind  of  prediction
seems  independent  of  our  individuality,  while  the
latter  is  founded  upon  it.  It  is  natural  to  argue,
in  harmony  with  this  instinct,  that  the  former  is
impossible,  and  the  latter  is  possible.  The  important
point,  again,  is  to  make  a  clear  distinction  between
calculation  and  intelligence.  Calculation,  in  the
main,  cannot  suggest  new  ideas  ;  intelligence  has  this

1  There  are,  of  course,  all  sorts  of  things  which  we  can  predict
out  of  mere  "  natural  law  "  about  organic  beings  on  our  earth ;  and
though  for  the  most  part  common  form,  these  things,  e.g.  the  need
of  food,  may  at  any  moment  leap  up  into  vast  moral  and  historical
importance.

2  Bradley,  Eth. Studies,  p. 18. Cf. Taylor,  Elements,  p.  220.
We dislike  not  really  the  foretelling, but the  reduction to some
thing  which  leaves  out  all  we  are. In  a  word,  prediction  does  not
matter  if  it  depends  on  an  understanding  of  what  we  are,  and  not  on
reducing  us  to  what  we  are  not. Cf.  "  A  Study  in  Bergson,"  Inter.
Journ.  of  Ethics,  October  1910.

I


ii4  LAW  AND  INDIVIDUALITY  LECT.

creative  insight  for  its  fundamental  function.  In
the  nature  of  things,  there  seems  nothing  to  hinder
the  previous  calculation  of  all  physical  movements
and  the  behaviour  of  all  physical  systems  such  as
organic  bodies.  It  must  be  remembered  that  this
would  involve  the  construction  of  the  whole  environ
ment,  as  it  is  only  in  relation  to  the  environment
that  the  development  of  organic  bodies  can  be
understood.  Assuming,  purely  for  the  curiosity  of
the  speculation,  this  monstrous  possibility,  there
could  be  no  reason  why  the  accumulation  of  capacity
for  complex  automatic  responses  to  stimuli — the
physical  correlate  of  teleological  action — should
not  be  naturally  explicable  and  capable  of  being
scientifically  predicted.1  But  new  ideas,  the  signifi
cance  of  things,  according  to  our  previous  distinc
tion,  would  be  inaccessible  to  the  calculator  as  such.2
If,  however,  we  were  to  speak  not  of  pure  calcula
tion,  but  of  calculation  plus  intelligence,  then  no
limitation  seems  theoretically  tenable.

It  may  be  said  that  you  could  not  predict
individual  conduct,  because  the  data  of  individual
character  could  not  be  complete  while  any  thing
remained  to  be  predicted.  But  in  principle  intelli-

1  On  the  correlation  of  these  with  psychical  process,  see  Mitchell's
Structure  of  the  Mind.

2  If  the  calculator  (speaking  always  from  the  point  of  view  of
theoretical  curiosity)  could  predict  the  words — the  mere  sounds  —
that  would  be  used,  but  not  the  ideas,  or  the  movements  which  make
history  and  not  the  motives,  is  this  a  reductio  ad  absurdum  ? It  may
seem  so,  but  really  there  is  not  much  in  it. The  ideas,  of  course,
would  come  with  the  cerebral  activities  which  produce  the  sounds,
but  the  calculator,  officially  so  to  speak,  would  have  no  cognisance
of  them,  just  as  the  electrician  who  instals  or  even  who  operates  a
duplex  system  has  no  official  knowledge  of  the  significance  of  the
messages  to  be  sent,  or  that  are  being  sent. A  battle  or  a  parlia
mentary  debate  would  be  to  the  calculator  like  an  earthquake  or  a
thunderstorm  ;  or  like  a  treatise  to  the  compositor. Why  not  ?


in  P RE-DOING  IS  P RE-BEING  115

gence  is  one  ;  and  new  ideas  and  motives,  which
could  be  generated  out  of  new  fact,  are  not  inaccess
ible  to  forethought  in  presence  of  a  forecast  of  the
facts.  The  real  answer  then  would  be  that,  on  the
extreme  speculative  hypothesis  proposed,  calculation
plus  intelligence  might  in  principle  predict  the  whole
of  individual  character  and  conduct ;  but  this  would
only  be  possible  if  and  because  the  intelligence  in
question  was  able  to  pre-construct  the  ideas  and
habits  of  the  future  individual.  It  cannot  be  said
that  we  know  of  no  facts  at  all  analogous  to  this
possibility.  Intelligence  being  essentially  one,  this
would  be,  and  is,  no  detriment  to  the  later  indi
vidual.  It  would  be  as  when  an  earlier  thinker
or  statesman  has  anticipated  the  ideas  or  furnished
a  solution  of  the  practical  problems  which  are  pre
sented  independently  to  a  later  one.1  The  latter's
individuality,  practical  and  intellectual,  is  thus  in
its  main  lines  covered  by  that  of  the  former ;  but
it  is  no  detriment  to  his  freedom  or  to  his  separate
actuality.  It  is  merely  that  finite  mind,  repeating
itself  because  of  its  imperfection,  has  to  all  appear
ance  needlessly  doubled  a  part.  The  thing  is  only
too  common  ;  it  occurs,  e.g.  in  the  case  of  every
scientist  or  philosopher  whose  work  wholly  fails
to  transcend  at  any  point  that  of  his  predecessors.
No  doubt  this  only  applies  in  practice  to  the  main
outline  of  a  man's  thought  and  work,  and  not,  as  a
rule,  to  the  details  of  his  history ;  though  it  is
common,  of  course,  for  others  to  know  that  two
people  are  in  love  before  they  know  it  themselves.
But  there  it  is  an  actual  and  common  and  an  all-
important  fact ;  and  we  produce  it  only  as  an

1  See  "  A  Study  in  Bergson,"  loc.  cit.


ii6  LAW  AND  INDIVIDUALITY  LECT.

analogy  for  a  very  remote  speculation.  As  a  fact,
however,  it  is  too  little  noticed,  and  it  has  a  real
bearing  on  our  main  issue.  In  all  essentials,  the
lines  of  individuals'  life-work  can  be  and  constantly
are  either  unconsciously  anticipated  or  consciously
laid  down  and  predicted  by  others  who  come  before
them,  or  are  close  upon  them  in  similar  enterprises.1
Or,  reversing  the  point  of  view,  surely  we  may  say
that  to  all  appearance  there  are  many  individuals
who  in  many  ways  fall  within  others,  and  so  are
surplusage,  and  "  never  would  be  missed,"  though
we  must  suppose  that  the  apparent  repetition  has
a  value  which  we  do  not  see.  Not  that  to  carry
out  what  another  mind  has  predicted  is  necessarily
a  defect.

In  the  above  argument,  the  interest  of  the
question  has  carried  us  farther  than  we  were  bound
to  go.  Our  problem  was  the  relation  of  Indi
viduality  to  universal  law.  And  all  we  were  bound
to  show  was  the  possibility  of  analysis  or  explana
tion,  and  not  the  possibility  of  calculation  or  pre
diction.  It  is  enough  to  insist  that  an  individual
system,  being  a  nature  or  spirit  which  is  universal
throughout  its  differences,  necessarily  determines
between  those  differences  a  nexus,  which  itself  is,
as  embodying  a  side  of  the  system,  universal  and
necessary.  And  that  it  is  not  repeated  in  a  number
of  resembling  instances  is,  as  we  saw,  a  feature
belonging  to  its  universality.  Repetition  suggests

1  The  history  of  inventions  affords  many  cases.  The  reinvention
of  the  lever  and  the  screw  is  a  striking  instance.  The  reinvention
had  been  "  covered  "  by  the  unknown  earlier  mind.  You  can  predict
in  short,  in  as  far  as  you  are  the  same  with  the  individual  predicted,
and  this  is  not  a  prohibitive  condition,  because  there  can  be  real
identity  between  different  individuals.  All  mutual  intelligence  depends
upon  the  fact  that  individuals  cover  each  other  in  some  degree.


in  A WHOLE IS  A WEB OF  LAWS  117

groundlessness  or  failure.  What  truly  fills  its  place
as  a  successful  expression  of  the  whole  at  that  place,
can  fill  no  other.  But  its  nexus  within  the  whole
is  intelligible  to  the  mind  thinking  in  terms  of  the
whole,  and  this  is  the  very  type  of  a  necessary  law.

And  in  all  the  repetitions  which  every  day  gener
alities  express,  the  true  type  of  the  universal,  how
ever  abraded  by  careless  handling,  is  ultimately  to
be  found.  We  may  fail  to  observe  the  differences
in  or  in  spite  of  which  a  repetition  takes  place.
But  it  is  certain  that  if  they  were  not  there,  there
could  be  no  repetition ;  that  the  two  cases  or
examples,  having  nothing  to  hold  them  apart,  could
not  be  two  but  one.  The  nature  of  the  universal
is  traceable  even  within  the  bare  numerical  series,
and  a  fortiori  in  every  constituent  of  an  organic
whole.

Every  nexus,  so  far  as  a  universal  law,  is  a
necessary  determination  within  and  hypothetical
upon  an  Individual  whole — whether  a  world- whole
or  a  member  of  it,  a  macrocosm  or  a  microcosm,
makes  no  difference  of  principle.  This  is  as  true
of  the  Law  of  Contradiction  as  of  the  rhythm  of
the  first  line  of  "  Lycidas,"  l  and  vice  versa.

7. I  cannot  but  hold  it  to  be  a  confusion  if  sub-  TO  change
jective  teleology is  held to be incompatible  with
the  views  which  have  just been  advanced. You  J
cannot  have  individuality  or  spontaneity  along  with  changed-
universal  law,  so  the  allegation  runs,  because  uni
versal law would require the individual world to
repeat  its  behaviour  if  the  same  situation  is  repeated  ;
and  this,  if  its  end  or  purpose  in  the  two  cases  is

1 I  am  assuming  that  the  nexus  of  this  rhythm  approves  itself  to
expert  thought  as  necessary  in  its  place.


ii8  LAW  AND  INDIVIDUALITY  LECT.

different,  it  will  not  do,  but  will  respond  differently.1
The  question  of  teleology  will  be  entered  upon  more
fully  in  the  next  lecture,  but  this  much  seems  clear
at  once.  The  end  or  purpose  can  be  nothing  but
j  the  nature  of  the  whole,2  which  is  the  spirit  of  the
f  individual  world,  in  as  far  as  its  accomplishment
I  is  deferred  in  time,  and  therefore  arouses  a  sense
of  want  and  contradiction  because  the  individual
system  is  sensitive  to  the  delay.  It  follows  that
if  the  purpose  is  different  in  two  apparently  identical
cases,  the  identity  is  an  illusion  due  to  superficial
inspection.  Within  the  world  which  constitutes  the
individual's  being,  the  contradiction  has  in  some
way  shifted  its  place,  and  this  fact  cannot  possibly
mean  a  new  suggestion,  an  additional  idea,  tacked
on,  so  to  speak,  without  affecting  the  organised
system,  concerning  only  the  future  and  not  the  present
or  the  past.3  There  must  have  been,  in  principle,
a  dislocation  of  the  whole  system,  a  rearrangement
of  "  views,"  acquiescences,  attitudes,  and  percep
tions.  The  "  circumstances  " — the  elements  of  the
situation  which  "  stand  round "  the  centre  of  the
individual  world  and  take  their  colour  and  reciprocal
bearing  from  the  adjustment  of  its  content — them
selves,  as  a  whole,  are  liable  to  have  undergone  in
such  a  case  any  degree  of  transformation,  however
much  their  external  or  fragmentary  aspect  may
remain  unchanged.  But  all  this  is  no  contingent

1  Taylor,  Elements  of  Metaphysics,  p.  224.

2  Does  this  way  of  stating  it  suppose  every  purpose  to  be  right  ?
Only  in  as  far  as  the Individuality  is  right, free  from  defect  and
deformity. Ultimately,  it  might  be  said  that  to  have  a  purpose  is
a  proof  of  being  somehow  wrong. But  the  wrong  may  or  may  not
be  rightly  conceived  by  the  individual.

3  See below on the continuity of  purposive adjustment with
habitual  system.


in  PURPOSE  IS  A SYMPTOM  119


or  arbitrary  new  determination  ;  it  is  the  reorgan
isation  of  a  microcosm— a  change  of  apperception.
The  truth  may  well  be  illustrated  by  Leibniz's  ,
conception  of  self-developing  monads,  even  though  »  {$**.
we  accept  the  accession  of  suggestions  from  without.
For  the  suggestion  from  without  can  only  operate
by  modifying  the  distribution  and  connection  of  the
whole ;  so  that  ultimately  we  have,  as  Leibniz  said,
a  progression  of  thought  and  appetition  dependent
at  every  stage  on  the  previous  phase  of  thought
and  appetition.  A  man  who  has  yielded  to  temp
tation  once,  and  who  resists  the  same  temptation
successfully  when  it  recurs,  has  not  merely  ex
changed  volition  A  for  volition  B,  as  one  might
pick  up  this  pebble  instead  of  that ;  he  has  modified
his  view  and  sentiment  of  past,  present,  and  future.
His  world  has  dislocated  and  reshaped  itself,  so
that  its  main  contradiction  would  now  be  found  in
doing  what  before  it  was  an  intolerable  contradiction
not  to  do.  Purpose,  in  a  word,  is  secondary  ;  what
is  primary  is  the  nature  of  our  microcosm  ;  and,  of
this,  purpose  is  an  unfulfilled  corollary.

Therefore  subjective  teleology  brings  with  it
nothing  to  invalidate  our  conclusion,  which  is  as
follows  : —

Individuality  and  Spontaneity  are  not  antagonistic  f
to  Uniformity  of  Nature  and  General  Law,  if  these  r
are  rightly  understood,  but  include  and  necessitate  I
them.

The  Uniformity  of  Nature  or  principle  of
Relevancy  means  that  every  variation  is  a  member
in  an  intelligible  system.  It  excludes  spontaneity
only  in  the  sense  of  behaviour  responsive  to  nothing.
Variation  is  a  means  of  adjustment  or  response,


120  LAW  AND  INDIVIDUALITY  LECT.

and  to  establish  its  existence  in  a  high  degree  is  not
inconsistent  with,  but  evidence  of,  the  uniformity
of  nature  in  the  true  sense.  The  proof  of  genuine
•  spontaneity  is  not  mere  variation,  but  progressive
and  adapted  variation.  Individuality,  therefore,
meaning  not  empty  eccentricity,  but  the  character
of  a  system  as  self-contained  and  coherent,  is  fully
in  harmony  with  the  Uniformity  of  Nature.

Universality  lies  in  the  expression  of  the  nature
of  a  system  by  each  and  all  of  its  parts  suitably
to  the  place  or  function  of  each.  A  system  so
expressed  or  organised  is  a  universal,  and  the  nexus
between  its  parts,  though  none  is  primarily  similar
to  or  a  repetition  of  any  other,  is  a  universal  nexus
or  law.  It  is  true  that  in  finite  experience,  the
uniqueness  of  parts  within  individuality,  or  of  indi
viduals  as  parts  of  the  universe,  is  never  perfect.
Thus  they  not  only  are  universals  in  the  true  sense,
and  are  built  up  of  universal  nexuses,  but,  in  finite
experience,  necessarily  occasion  the  approximate
repetitions — an  imperfection — which  are  expressed
in  ordinary  "general  law."  Every  nexus  in  finite
experience  has  a  potential  class  or  plurality  corre
sponding  to  it.  Individuals  are  therefore  doubly
accessible  to  the  intelligence,  and,  indeed,  in  many
typical  instances  are  its  work,  though  not  necessarily
the  work  of  cognition  nor  of  discursive  thought.
Hence  there  is  no  occasion  to  deny  that  intelligence
is  in  principle  capable  of  anticipating  the  nature  of
individuals,  their  action  and  cognition ;  but  this  is
not  to  say  that  every  form  of  intelligence,  such
as  calculation  per  se,  is  adequate  to  every  type  of
individual  world.  The  best  way  to  think  of  the
finite  individual  is  to  bear  in  mind  the  nature  of


in  MY  PURPOSE IS  MY  NEW  SHAPE  121

a  work  of  art,  or  of  the  moral  temper  as  analysed
by  Aristotle,1  or  of  an  organic  being  as  the  con
tinual  source  of  adaptation  by  fine  adjustments  of
extreme  determinateness  and  precision.  And  sub
jective  teleology,  understood  as  it  should  be  of  the
shaping  and  reshaping  of  a  world  in  the  endeavour
to  find  itself  and  its  whole,  has  nothing  to  urge
against  our  views.  We  will  speak  of  it  more  fully
in  another  lecture.

1  See  Appendix  II.


LECTURE IV

THE TELEOLOGY OF FINITE CONSCIOUSNESS A SUB-
FORM OF INDIVIDUALITY


i. WE  have  so  far  in  the  main  been  endeavouring
to remove the misapprehension which sees an
antagonism  between  Individuality  and  the  universal.
which  one  <j\Ve  have  attempted  to  show  that  it  arises  from  the

aspect  is

Teleology.  \  imperfect  penetration  of  thought,  when  it  accepts
I  the  particular  in  lieu  of  the  individual,  and  reduces
i  the  universal  to  the  general.  For  us  the  .type  at
once  of  the  individual  and  the  universal  has  been
the  life  or  spirit  of  a  world,  which  realises  itself  in
form  and  determinateness,  that  is,  in  fine  and  ade
quate  adjustment  of  element  to  element.  For  every
where  it  is  creativ£_JLpgic,  the  nature  aQbe  whole
working  in  the  detail,  which  constitutes  experience
and  is  appreciable  in  so  far  as  experience  has  value  ; l
and  the  more  fully  we  enter  into  reality  the  more
do  we  realise  the  universal  nature,  the  interdepend
ent  nexus  in  which  the  whole  finds  expression.
All  the  faults  of  philosophy,  it  might  be  said,  lie  in
failing  to  apprehend  this  nature  of  the  individual,
and  in  therefore  arbitrarily  preferring  some  one
element  of  experience  to  the  whole.  For  the  whole,
of  course,  cannot  be  experienced  as  a  whole  by  us,

1  See  Lecture  VIII.  below.
122


LECT.  iv "END  AND  MEANS"  PARTIAL  IDEAS 123

and  to  grasp  its  constituents  and  divine  its  nature
is  an  arduous  task  ;  while  it  is  comparatively  easy
to  set  the  apparent  data,  uncriticised  and  unadjusted,
over  against  one  another  in  opposition.

We  have  now  to  define  our  position  with  refer
ence  to  one  of  these  sets  of  data,  which  is  often
placed  in  antagonism  to  the  rest.  I  speak  of  that
popular  principle  of  ethical  or  theistic  Idealism
known  in  general  as  Teleplogy.  We  have  further
to  consider  the  claims  and  functions  assigned  by  it
.  to  finite  consciousness,  seeing  that  they  furnish  the
type  on  which  ethical  and  theistic  philosophy  is  apt
to  model  its  conception  of  the  supreme  mind  in
relation  to  the  universe.

The  object  of  the  present  lecture,  then,  is  to
examine  and  estimate  the  idea  of  teleology.  We
have  to  develop  the  point  that  teleology  is  a  con
ception  which  loses  its  distinctive  meaning  as  we
deepen  its  philosophical  interpretation  ; l  and  that,
pari  passu,  the  simplest  surface  features  of  finite
consciousness,  from  which  its  conception  is  drawn,
reveal  themselves  as  an  inadequate  basis  for  a  theory
of  reality,  perfection,  or  value.

2.  We  are  familiar  in  every-day  life  with  the  dis-  End  and

r  ,  ,  »> T ^ i T  i means  run

tinction  of  "  end  and  means.  It  embodies  a  rough  into  one
discrimination  of  values,  relative  to  current  practice.
We  care  for  some  things  for  their  own  sake,  for
others  because  they  help  us  to  the  former.  The
former,  then,  serve  to  explain  the  valuation  or  the
acquisition  of  the  latter,  and  themselves  need  no
defence  nor  explanation.  Prima  facie,  the  former
come  last  in  time,  and  the  latter,  the  "  means,"

1  Cf. Hegel's  view of  Teleology, McTaggart's Commentary  on
HcgcPs  LogiC)  sect.  255.


124  TELEOLOGY—A SUB-FORM  LECT.

come  before  them  as  conditions  precedent  of  their
being  attained.  "  Means  "  presuppose  a  degree  of
impotence.  They  are  ex  hy pot  he  si  not  what  we
want.  We  take  them  because,  with  the  resources
open  to  us,  we  can  get  what  we  want,  the  "  end,"
in  no  other  way.  Thus  it  is  the  very  essence  of  an
"  end  "  to  be  partial  within  a  whole,  though  it  may
be  the  completion  of  a  part,  and  to  be  selected  in
contrast  to  something  else,  and,  prima  facie,  to
events  preceding  it  in  time.  Aristotle,1,  indeed,
C  whom  in  this  our  argument  follows,  understands  by
j  "  end  "  at  once  the  completion  of  a  positive  whole
which  is  developing  through  a  process,  and  the
cessation  of  the  process  itself.  In  modern  theory
the  positive  whole  tends  to  drop  out.  The  prima
facie  meaning,  based  on  the  current  modern  usage
of  "  end,"  has  gained  the  day.

There  are  indeed  facts,  in  general  conformity
with  Aristotle's  view,  which  might  make  us  pause
before  treating  this  temporal  and  selective  character
—this  essential  contrast  with  a  past  process  and
with  means — as  typical  and  universal.  In  many
cases  of  choice  it  is  obvious  that  consequences  have
to  be  discounted  on  the  same  footing  as  means.
Our  "  end,"  in  the  sense  of  that  which  we  aim  at,
may  come  first,  or  in  the  middle  ;  and  the  price  to
be  paid  for  it,  the  cost  of  the  means,  may  extend
before  and  after  and  all  round  it.  We  can  seldom,
in  common  life,  discharge  the  whole  cost  before
delivery.  Thus,  at  least  the  temporal  distinction
between  end  and  means  loses  its  sharpness.  Our

1  Cf.  Burnet,  Aristotle's  Ethics,  xlvi.,  with  Stout's  Groundwork
of  Psychology,  p.  21.  The  modern  view  makes  more  of  the  cessa
tion  than  of  the  positive  completion.  I  am  referring  more  especially
to  the  doctrine  of  vital  series.


iv  WHY  MAN, WHY  FUTURE?  125

view  of  the  end  is  always  qualified  by  the  means*
and  the  means,  for  computation,  include  the  con
sequences,  or,  more  largely,  the  price  to  be  paid.
Attainment  and  conclusion  cease  to  be  the  same  t*^
idea ;  and  we  become  aware  that  in  the  whole  train
of  occurrences  there  is  nothing  which  may  not  par
take  of  the  character  of  an  end l  or  desirable  object.
In  ordinary  life,  we  continually  experience  this
blending  of  end  and  means — the  desired  object  and
its  price — and  when  we  approach  philosophical  re
flection  it  is  a  fact  that  starts  up  into  importance.
We  soon  come  to  recognise  that  what  we  have
called  an  end,  as  if  it  were  a  goal  and  a  stopping-
place,  is  in  reality  "  not  a  point,  but  a  line,"  or  even
a  solid  ;  that  it  tends  to  expand  itself,  irregularly,
over  the  whole  process  of  our  activity.  When,  for
example,  we  are  dealing  with  a  total  system,  whether
of  life  or  of  nature,  how  are  we  to  discriminate
between  end  and  means  ?  We  begin  with  two
natural  prejudices,  the  anthropocentric  and  the
temporal,  borrowed  from  our  every-day  selective
practice,  and  from  our  primary  association  of  accom
plishment  and  cessation.  But  neither  will  stand  a
moment's  reflection.  Why  should  man  be  the  end  ?
And  indeed,  is  there  anything  to  suggest  that  he  is
so  ?  Why  again  assign  pre-eminent  value  to  a

far  off  divine  event

To  which  the  whole  creation  moves  ?

1  So  in  the  modern  conation  theory,  the  pleasure  and  the  end
are  found  to  fall  apart  (Stout,  Analytic  Psychology,  ii.  273),  and  the
value  comes  rather  to  be  in  the  pleasure  than  in  the  end  =  terminus
ad  quern  ;  i.e.  the  two  characters  of  value  and  terminus  are  dissoci
ated — the  one  is  a  concomitant  of  the  whole  process,  the  other  is
only  its  close.  The  same  is  true  of  the  account  of  the  higher  desires
which  Plato  employs  ;  the  pleasure  is  not  merely  in  the  satiety  of  the
terminus  ;  it  is  a  character  of  the  whole  activity.


126  TELEOLOGY— A SUB-FORM  LECT.

It  is  obvious  that  no  such  ascription  of  ultimate
value  to  a  particular  class  of  creatures  nor  to  a
particular  moment  in  time  can  be  justified  as  an
ultimate  conception.  It  rests  on  the  analogy  of  the
choice  of  a  finite  being,  compelled,  because  finite,
to  exercise  selection  within  the  universe.  It  is  an
attempt  to  apply  the  principle  of  subordination  of
means  to  ends  to  a  system  within  which  we  can
recognise  no  necessity,  and  can  conceive  no  clue,
for  the  distinct  being  of  ends  or  of  means.  A  finite
being  selects  a  possible  value,  and  out  of  the  re
sources  which  he  can  find  in  his  world  further  selects
the  instruments  by  help  of  which  he  proposes  to
make  it  actual.  But  we  cannot  conceive  that  a
perfect  reality  is  divided  into  ends  which  have
value,  and  means  which  a  limitation  of  resources
compels  to  be  employed  to  realise  them.  Such
a  conception  is  drawn  from  the  analogy  of  a
finite  contriver.

Thus  the  principle  of  Teleology  when  applied  to
cosmic  theory,1  loses  at  once  and  completely  all
assistance  from  the  ordinary  distinctions  of  means
and  ends,  and  from  the  presumption  of  a  coincidence
between  termination  and  attainment.  If  it  is  to
retain  a  meaning,  it  must  abandon  the  whole  analogy
of  finite  contrivance  and  selection,  and  must  fall
back  on  the  characteristics  of  value  which,  apart  from
sequence  in  time  and  from  selected  purposes,  attach
to  the  nature  of  a  totality  which  is  perfection.  In
this  transition,  the  principle  of  purposiveness,  of  a
nature  imperative  on  every  element  of  a  whole,

1  "  Parlar  di  fine,  a  proposito  dell'  universe,  e  adoperar  la  parola
fine  in  un  significato  che  non  e  piu  quello  che  le  conosciamo." —
Varisco,  /  Massimi  Problemi^  p.  218.


IV


"ENDS"  HAVE  NO  PRIMACY  127


expands  into  the  principle  of  Individuality,  or  posi
tive  non-contradiction.  In  working  with  it,  we
substitute  the  idea  of  perfection  or  the  whole — a
logical  or  metaphysical,  non-temporal,  and  religious
idea — for  that  of  de  facto  purpose — a  psychological,
temporal,  and  ethical  idea.  We  deal  with  a  sub
stantive  criterion  of  value  applicable  to  every  detail
of  a  totality,  and  equally  valid  if  Time  is  treated  as
an  appearance.  The  criterion  can  deal  with  pur
poses,  but  mere  de  facto  purposiveness  can  neither
impeach  nor  support  the  -  criterion.  In  short,  a
purpose  as  such — a  de  facto  want  or  desire — only
contributes  to  intelligibility  by  serving  as  a  reason
for  its  means.  For  itself,  as  a  mere  purpose,  it  can
never  exhibit  a  justification.  Every  purpose,  no
doubt,  implies  a  subjective  value,  but  there  is  no
reason  why  every  true  value  should  be  a  purpose.  I
TrTextending  the  idea  of  teleology  to  the  universe
as  a  whole  we  are  turning  from  the  question  whether
this  fact  or  that  has  the  appearance  of  being  con
trived  for  a  purpose,  to  the  question  whether  the
totality — contrivance  or  no  contrivance,  and  without
any  suggestion  of  dividing  it  into  part  which  is
means  and  part  which  is  the  end — can  be  appre
hended  or  conceived  as  satisfactory,  i.e.  as  a  supreme
value.

The  theoretical  importance ;  of  the  transition  is
this,  that  the  selective  conations  of  finite  minds  can
not,  in  face  of  such  a  principle,  claim  a  fundamental
position  as  the  spurce  of  order  and  value.  And
this  applies  to  the  mind  of  a  finite  god,  if  such  a
being  is  to  be  treated  as  conceivable.  The  finite
consciousness  is  to  be  considered  as  creative  and
as  possessing  initiative  in  a  sense  which  we  shall


128  TELEOLOGY—  A SUB-  FORM  LECT.

attempt  to  explain  ;  but  the  principles  of  the  uni
verse  are  thought  of  as deeper  laid than in the
choices  of  finite  mind. Minds,  as  we  are  aware  of
them,  fall  into  place  rather  as  an  imperfect  medium ]().
and  manifestation  ot  theTeality  than  as  an  ultimate  1
"n  source  oTit.


The  End  3.  Along  with  the  idea  that  the  true  sense  of
hfnot116  value  in  the  universe  is  of  a  teleolpgical  type,  wre
find  the  idea  that  the  true  nature  of  mental  process
is  conative.1  And  in  a  certain  restricted  sense  both
one  and  the  other  doctrine  may  be  sustained,  but  in
the  latter  case  as  in  the  former  it  is  important  to
note  the  precise  implication.

In  the  typical  conation  the  important  points  are
the  beginning  and  the  close.  The  beginning  is  a
disturbance,  and  the  close  or  end  is  a  recovery
of  equilibrium.  As  we  saw  above,  in  elementary
notions  of  teleology  which  are  drawn  in  fact  from
the  simplest  conative  experience,  the  purpose  and
the  close  are  one,  and  the  end  coincides  with  both.2
The  recovery  of  equilibrium  means  satiety,  and  this
is  one  with  the  cessation  of  the  conative  process.
This  is  the  account  of  ordinary  desire  and  its  satis-
r  faction  which  Plato  on  the  whole  accepted,  and  it  is

retained  in  outline  by  the  modern  theory  of  conation
as  a  "  vital  series."

But  the  latent  opposition  between  the  two  con
ceptions  of  the  end  reveals  itself  within  the  pleasure-
theory  which  is  continuous  from  Plato  to  Aristotle.
The  "  end  "  for  Aristotle's  theory  was  not  merely
satiety  but  satisfaction  ;  and  satisfactoriness,  the

1  Cf. McTaggart on the full meaning of "  Cognition  " and
"Volition,"  op.  cit.  sect.  284.

2  Stout,  Analytic  Psychology,  ii.  270;  Groundwork  of  Psychology,
pp.  21,  25.


iv  WHAT  IS  FRUITION?  129

power  of  giving  satisfaction,  was  a  positive  char
acteristic,  the  completeness  of  ajjpjun,  and  not  simply
the  cessation  of  a  disturbance.  It  is  a  twice-told
tale  how  this  idea  was  worked  out  in  the  theory  of
Plato  and  Aristotle.  For  our  purpose  it  is  enough
to  repeat  that  in  Aristotle's  usage  the  term  "  end  "
is  applied  to  positive  maturity  as  more  than  the
mere  cessation  of  growth  which  it  involves,  and  to
the  continuous  or  perhaps  timeless  character  of  the
fullest  life  and  fruition,  rather  than  to  the  completion
of  any  serial  process.

Now  at  bottom  fruition  is  distinct  from  conation
as  above  described,  as  Aristotle  is  at  pains  to  point
out  in  his  criticism  of  anti-Hedonist  arguments1;
and  a  satisfaction  that  can  be  attained  and  possessed
is  something  other  than  satiety.  Thus  the  "end"
no  longer  appears  as  a  terminus  ad  quern.  It  has
expanded  into  something  which  is  either  a  type  of
activity  independent  of  and  other  than  conation,
or,  if  it  is  to  be  identified  with  conation,  throws  a
wholly  different  light,  from  that  by  which  we  de
scribed  it  above,  upon  its  nature  and  the  conditions
of  its  value.2  And  so  we  see  in  recent  pleasure-
theory,  in  spite  of  the  primary  doctrine  that  end
and  cessation  coincide,  that  the  desirable  element  of
a  conation,  its  end  in  the  ethical  sense,  is  taken  to
lie  in  its  character  extending  over  its  process  and
not  in  its  close  or  termination.3  The  "  End,"  in  the
sense  of  attainment  or  achievement,  expands  itself

1  Eth.  Nic.  x.  iv.  I.

2  It  is  clear  that  for  Aristotle  7rpa£t?  in  the  full  sense  and  at  the
highest  value — the  quintessence  of  vrpa^ts — is  one  with  the  perfect
€i/€/>yeia. But  this  does  not  mean  that  the  full  conception  of  e

can  be  reduced  to  that  of  every-day  7r/oa£is.

3  See  reference,  p.  125  above.

K


130  TELEOLOGY— A SUB-FORM  LECT.

from  the  idea  of  a  terminus  into  that  of  a  satisfactory
experience  which  may  be  taken  as  including  a  cona-
tive  process  of  a  certain  type,  or  as  a  new  inde
pendent  and  perfected  self-affirmation  following
upon  the  completion  of  the  changes  which  form  the
conation.  The  distinction  made  familiar  by  Kant
between  sensuous  desire  and  aesthetic  interest  is
typical  for  this  difference,  which  lies  at  the  root  of
the  expansion  above  referred  to  as  recognised  and
emphasised  by  Aristotle  in  dealing  with  Plato's
theory  of  pleasure.  In  sensuous  desire  and  its
satisfaction  you  have  a  transition  followed  by  satiety ;
and  that  is  the  typical  conation  with  its  "  end."  In
aesthetic  enjoyment  or  any  other  true  fruition,  you
have  a  response  from  an  object  in  which  the  self  is
at  home,  and  you  have  not,  in  principle  and  in  the
main,  any  transition  nor  any  satiety.1  It  may  be
argued  that  in  the  higher  fruition  as  in  common
desire  you  have  really  a  conative  transition,  and
that  the  inexhaustible  possibilities  of  the  object  are
in  fact  what  produce  the  appearance  of  an  achieved
and  persistent  satisfaction.  We  may  agree  that
this  is  an  element  in  the  case ;  but  still  there  seems
an  unmistakable  difference  of  principle.  In  the
process  of  a  finite  mind,  no  doubt,  there  will  always
be  succession  and  transition,  but  in  aesthetic  enjoy
ment,  for  example,  it  is  not  the  transition  towards
an  unattained  terminus  that  makes  the  essence  of

1  No  doubt,  as  Aristotle  points  out,  in  the  fullest  fruition  a  man
is  liable  to  fatigue.  But  this  seems  to  be  in  principle  an  incident  of
our  limited  strength,  and  not  a  sign  of  true  satiety  with  reference  to
the  object  of  interest.  It  should  be  explained  that  the  aesthetic
interest  or  desire  which  makes  us,  e.g.  go  to  look  at  a  picture  or  wish
to  buy  it,  does  not  undo  the  peculiarity  of  aesthetic  enjoyment  in
being  directed  to  the  pictured  semblance  of  an  object,  and  not  to  its
actual  use  or  possession.


iv  "END"  PASSES  INTO "VALUE"  131

the  activity.1  The  mind's  direction  in  it  is  outward,
not  onward  ;  and  one  moment  of  it,  as  Aristotle
urges,  is  self-complete  and  as  good  as  the  next.  It
borrows  nothing  from  an  approach  to  a  future  com
pleteness.  Such  a  fruition  may  be  understood,  as
is  perhaps  the  natural  way  of  understanding  it,  to
be  as  it  were  the  protracted  terminus  of  a  conation,
like  eternity  coming  after  time  ;  or  may  be  treated
as  throwing  a  light  on  the  true  nature  and  value  of
conation  itself.2  In  either  case,  it  is  something
different  in  principle  from  the  conation  whose  begin
ning  is  disturbance  and  whose  end  is  satiety.

And  the  importance  of  this  is  that  the  nature  of
conation  itself  has  led  us  back  to  our  old  conclusion  ;
and  we  see  again  that  the  tr_ue  "  end  "  or  value  does
not  lie  in  this  special  relation  to  a  terminus  or  finite
purpose,  but  in  a  cj^acter^oj^£erfection,  which  may
;  in  finite  experience  be  relatively  present  throughout
I  a  process,  or  as  a  persistent  result  of  it,  or  at  the
^beginning  of  it,  or  in  the  middle.  I  repeat,  in  the
simplest  case  of  conation  satiety  and  satisfaction
coincide.  But  if  end  is  to  mean  a  value,  satisfaction
must  be  more  than  satiety.  And  the  idea  of  cona
tion  must  be  remodelled  to  meet  this  necessity,  as
the  modern  pleasure-theory,  when  it  lays  stress  on
positive  interest  within  the  conation  in  contrast  to
mere  escape  from  tension  or  disturbance,  in  some
degree  recognises.3

1  Aristotle's  counter-attack,  alleging  that  self-complete  activity  or
fruition  is  really  the  enjoyable  part  in  all  conation  whatever,  even  in
the  painful  pleasures,  so  that  conation  would  not  be  in  any  degree
the  condition  of  value  or  pleasure,  may  be  thought to prove  too
much,  and  to  correct  one  mistake  by  another. The  view  taken in
the  text  avoids  this  danger  (see  Ethics,  vii.  12.  2  and  14.  7).

2  See  above,  p.  129  and  following  note.

3  Stout,  Analytic  Psychology,  ii.  280: "The  analogy  of  a  bent


132  TELEOLOGY— A SUB-FORM  LECT.

It  seems  to  be  the  case  that  in  finite  life  conation
and  fruition  coincide  in  different  degrees,  from  a
conation  which  is  principally  valued  as  a  release
from  pain  to  one  which  is  practically  indistinguish
able  from  pure  positive  enjoyment  of  self-affirmation,
in  which  if  there  is  essentially  conation  at  all,  it  is
wholly  latent.1  Between  these  two  extremes  there
are  all  sorts  of  intermediate  cases.  But  the  point
for  us  at  present  is  simply  the  expansion  of  the  idea
of  end  into  a  connection  with  fruition  and  value,
and  into  throwing  off  all  special  connection  with  the
ideas  of  termination  as  against  a  process,  and  super-
ordination  as  against  means,  v

Teleology  4.  Thus,  the  point  of  principle  to  which  I  desire
to  ca^  attention  may  be  stated  by  contrast  with  the
position  adopted  by  more  than  one  distinguished
critic  of  Naturalism,  in  maintaining  the  claims  of
Teleology  against  ^Mechanism  and  Epiphenome-
nalism.  As  I  understand  the  matter,  they  rightly
contend  that  the  universe,  with  all  its  variety  and
adaptation,  cannot  really  be  understood  out  of
quantitative  relations  between  homogeneous  units,
whether  or  no  such  an  ideal  construction  is  useful
for  scientific  purposes.  It  is  enough  for  us  to  say
that,  in  the  first  place,  the  units  along  with  their
relations  have  not  the  character  of  self -complete
existences — do  not  fulfil  the  conditions  of  self-sub-
'tsistent  being  or  self-maintenance  ;  and  that,  in  the

spring  is  not  in  point."  Groundwork  of  Psychology,  p.  24.  The
effect  is  that  pleasures  and  pains  depend  on  characters  of  the  pro
gress  of  a  conation,  not  on  its  completion.

1  The  question  is  akin  to  the  problem  whether  feeling  involves
conation.  See  Stout,  Groundwork,  pp.  24,  25,  and  Bradley,  Mind,
n.s.  xl.  p.  449.  There  is,  of  course,  a  wide  gap  between  the  simplest
effortless  enjoyments  and  the  highest  persistent  satisfaction  (say,
aesthetic).  But  the  relation  of  the  two  to  conation  seems  analogous.


iv HAVE WE  MECHANISM  PLUS  MIRACLE? 133

second  place,  they  obviously  wear  the  features  of
hypostasised  abstractions,  which  may  be  of  service
in  describing  the  world,  but  cannot  conceivably
suffice  as  a  theoretical  reconstruction  of  its  qualitative
and  conscious  aspects.1

But  if  I  correctly  follow  the  critics  beyond  this
point,  in  proceeding  to  enforce  the  claims  of  teleology
within  the  universe  they  rest  its  case  exclusively
on  the  capacity  of  finite  consciousness,  as  such
(e.g.  apart  from  its  unconscious,  or  supra-conscious
solidarity),  for  a  guidance  and  selection  which  con
stitutes  the  world  as  we  know  it.  They  deny,  as  I
gather,  in  principle,  that  the  supreme  individuality,
whose  reality  they  are  concerned  to  maintain,  can
manifest  itself  through  a  nature  which  is  the  comple
ment  of  mind,  and  through  a  social  and  historical
evolution  which  is  more  than  the  work  of  finite  minds.
\They  would  not  admit  that  processes,  which  must
1  appear  to  the  finite  consciousness  as  necessity  below
/  it,  and  as  evolution  or  providence  above  it,  are
what  equip  it  with  its  content,  and  bestow  on  it  its
significance  in  the  world-order.

If  I  read  the  tendency  aright,  the  reaction  against
mechanism  bids  fair  to  end  in  the  antithesis  of  an
empty  directive  unit  with  a  directionless  mass  of
externality,  and  to  enthrone  the  finite  subject,  or,
worst  still,  a  theistic  Demiurge,  in  his  blankness
and  isolation,  as  guides  and  masters  of  nature  and  of
history.  If  this  is  rightly  read,  I  believe  that  we  shall
have  to  recall  the  votary  of  mechanism,  along  with
Spinoza,  in  the  interests  of  the  philosophy  of  history,
and  the  theory  of  religion.  It  is  intolerable  that
Nature,  through  which  alone  spirit  attains  incarna-

1 See  Lecture  III.


134  TELEOLOGY— A SUB-FORM  LECT.

tion,  should  be  treated  as  a  directionless  material  ;
or  that  art,  thought,  society,  history,  in  which  mind
begins  to  transcend  its  finiteness,  should  be  ascribed
to  the  directive  abilities  of  units  in  a  plurality,
precisely  apart  from  the  world  -  content  and  the  j
underlying  solidarity  of  spirits,  the  medium  in  which
all  great  things  are  done.

The  view  in  which  I  find  a  difficulty  seems  to  be
present  in  two  degrees.  Either  the  realm  of  finite  con
sciousness  is  taken  to  be  co-extensive  with  the  organic
kingdom,  that  is,  with  life,  and  to  be  responsible
for  the  introduction  along  with  life,  of  a  principle  of
guidance  and  construction  unknown  to  inorganic
matter,  and  accounting  wholly  and  essentially  for  the
teleological  element  in  evolution  and  in  history  ; l  or
f  again,  the  realm  of  finite  consciousness  is  extended
\  throughout  the  inorganic  world  itself,  not  merely  as
)  a  possibility  of  fact,  but  as  a  means  of  accounting
for  the  manifestation  of  design  or  harmony  in  actual
nature  through  reactions  which  are  by  others  falsely
taken  to  be  mechanical.2  The  distribution  of
mentality  through  the  inorganic  and  organic  worlds
is  a  mere  question  of  fact ;  but  I  am  certain  that  no
appeal  to  it  can  release  us  from  the  necessity  of

1  In  the  sharp  opposition  between  the  organic  world  as  on  the
up  grade,  and  the  inorganic  as  on  the  down  grade,  Dr.  Ward  is  very
much  at  one  with  M.  Bergson. On  the  other  hand,  as  to  the  nature
of  the  mainspring  in  the  organic  world,  whether  a  life-impulse  or  a
teleological  consciousness,  they  seem  profoundly  at  variance. See,
however,  below  on  Ward's  meaning  when  he  speaks  of  working  the
organic  machine.

2  For  Ward,  this  view  is  simply,  as I understand,  an  extension
of  his  individualism. But  in  asserting  the  claims  of  finite  mind  as
known  in  the  organic  world  he  has  made  its  opposition  to  inorganic
nature  so  pronounced,  that  I  do  not  see  how  he  can  treat  the  guidance
ascribed  to  finite  mind  as- immanent  in  the  members  of  the  world  as
a  whole.


iv THERE  MUST  BE  A BONA FIDE  NATURE 135

assuming  a  determinate  outward  side^  which  gives
contjmLtcvthe  mind  or  will  of  separate  beings  ;  nor
can  account  for  definite  characteristics  of  the  world
from  a  multiplication  of  subjective  centres  alone.

In  both  cases  it  appears  to  me  that  an  error  of
fundamental  principle  has  been  committed.  I  do
not  doubt  that  anything  which  can  ultimately  beL
must  be  of  the  nature  of  mind  or  experience,
and,  therefore,  that  reality  m usF  liltirn ~ateI)TT^  con-
ceived  after  this  manner.  Bat  to  pass  from  this
ultimate  conviction  to  the  idea  that  finite  minds  are
the  soj£_  vehicles  and  determinants  of  teleology
apart  from  "  a  nature," — a  relatively  external  and
mechanical  system,  by  which  their  content  is  defined
and  their  individuality  manifested,  and  also  apart
from  a  deeper  unity  through  which  they  co-operate
to  a  harmony  transcending  their  finite  purposes — this
seems  to  me  as  serious  an  error  as  that  of  the
mechanistic  view  itself.  And  I  have  attempted  to
point  out  that  the  misconception  is  deep-rooted  in
the  double  meaning  of  the  term  teleology.

5. I  will  insist  on  this  point  again. We  have  seen,  Teleology
I  think,  that  Teleology  is  an  unlucky  term.1 In  the
sense  of  aiming  at  the  unfulfilled  it  gives  an  unreal  ilon"
importance  to  time,  and  to  the  part  of  any  whole —  /
it  may  be  a  relatively  trivial  part — which  happens
to  come  last  in  succession. Of  the  two  implications
*  of  the  term — "end" — completeness  and  conclusion!
— the  latter,  which  is  an  accessory,  usurps  precedence  '
over  the  former  which  is  fundamental. But  in  truth
its  significance  does  not  depend  on  what  comes  first
or  last,  but  what  there  is  in  the  individual  real  when
it  is  apprehended in  its  completeness. Action is

1 Cf.  McTaggart,  I.e.


136  TELEOLOGY— A SUB-FORM  LECT.

not  truly  teleologicar^  because  in  the  time-process
some  deferred  element  of  some  subordinate  quasi-
totality  is  in  it  being  carried  out  by  means  of  a
finite  desire.  The  "end,"  in  this  sense,  would  not
necessarily  have  teleological 2  value,  and  if  it  had
it  in  some  degree,  would  not  necessarily  be  a
leading  constituent  of  it.  The  true  question  of
value  would  be  independent  of  temporal  relations,
and  would  depend  on  the  structure  and  significance
of  the  whole  in  course  of  completion  ;  that  is,  on  its
character  of  individuality,  or  nearness  to  the  ulti
mate  whole.  The  great  enemy  of  all  sane  idealism
is  the  notion  that  the  ideal  belongs  to  the  future.
The_ideal  is  _what  we  can  see  in  the  light  of  {he
whole,  and  the^way  in  whi^uit-^sharjes  the  future
for_jLis_Js  only  an_jncident — and  never  the  most
important  incident — of  our  reading  of  past,  present,
and  future  in  their  unity.  Thus  when  "end"  or
"  purposiveness  "  or  "teleology"  merely  indicates
the  fact  that  some  finite  consciousness  is  urged  by
some  pleasurable  impulse  or  by  some  unfulfilled
idea,  there  is  in  this,  apart  from  the  content  of  -the
idea,  nothing  specially  sacred  or  significant.3  It  is
vain  to  look  to  the  bare  fact  of  conscious  purpose  or
impulse  for  the  essence  or  significance  of  -teleglogy.
Purpose  only  means,  prima  facie,  that,  using

1  Assuming  "teleological"  to  imply  sojnethmgjvaluable  and  desir
able,  in  harmony  with  the  universe  as  most  perfectly  experienced.

2  Refer  to  previous  footnote.

3  It  is  all  very  well  to  speak,  e.g.  of  pleasure  as  a  guide  to  fulness
of  life  ;  but  facts  of  natural selection  and  of  anti-Hedonism  (I  do
not  mean  in  philosophical  theory  but  in  the  temper  and  deliberate
conduct  of  mankind)  show  plainly  that  the  prima  facie  case  is  as
strong  against  its  guidance  as  for  it. "  If  your  pleasures  are  right,  you
survive " is only the correlative of "  If they are wrong you
perish."


iv  GIVEN WANT  NO TEST  OF VALUE  137

. .

consciousness  in  the  very  widest  sense,  some  creature
consciously  wants  something.  But,  omitting  all  the
very  serious  difficulties  connected  with  criticism  of
the  value  of  the  purpose,  does^the  something  lose
its  value  when  it  is  attained^?  Does  everything,/
then,  not  merely  exhibit  its  value,  real  or  fancied,\
in  being  wanted,  but  derive  its  value  from  beingx
wanted  ?  Are  fruition  or  perfection  really  the  deatl
of  value  ?

Are  the  ideas  of  positive  fulfilment  and  satisfac
tion,  of  a  being  which  is  good  in  itself,  and  above
the  alternations  of  want  and  satiety,  mere  chimeras?
If  this  is  so,  then  there  is  no  Absolute,  or,  if  we
appeal  to  finite  experience  alone,  the  character  of
the  Absolute  wholly  fails  to  suggest  itself  in  or
through  the  experiences  of  our  lives.  But,  as  I  have
attempted  to  show,  such  a  conclusion  would  be  flatly
in  the  face  both  of  fact  and  of  theory.  No  doubt
our  wants  ptay  a  part  in  the  ultimate  whole,  but  it
is  plain  that  as  given  they  cannot  conceivably  be  a
measure  of  value.  We  cannot  think  oParT intuitive
intelligence  itself  as  creating  values  out  of  all
relation  to  a  whole  with  determinate  content.  It,
the  supreme  experience,  whatever  name  we  may
give  it,  must  be  one  with  its  world  and  not  a  creator
out  of  nothing.1

Things  are  not  teleological  because  they  are
purposed,  but  are  purposed  because  they  are
teleological.2  Thus,  when  we  speak  of  the  ultimate
real  as  an  individual  or  as  teleological  it  is  hazardous
to  say  that  purpose,  in  the  sense  of  a  craving  un-

1  See Bergson  on the "  neant " as  the  chimera  of  a  possible
alternative  to  all  positive  worlds  {Evolution  creatrice^  iv.).

2  In  the  sense  explained  in  footnote  on  previous  page.


138  TELEOLOGY— A SUB-FORM  LECT.

fulfilled  in  time,  can  play  any  part  in  our  conception.
Teleology  which  depends  on  a  feature  of  the  time-
process  is  not  a  teleology  which  any  one  but  a
pragmatist  can  affirm  of  ultimate  reality  ;  and  the
lesson  thus  suggested  is  only  enforced  when  we
come  to  ask  ourselves  what  is  the  true  test,  even
for  organic  evolution,  for  social  progress,  or  for
morals,  of  the  purposiveness  of  a  purpose.  Sub
jective  selection  is  very  poor  work,  except  in  as  far
as  it  becomes  more  than  subjective.  Objectiveness
of  selection,  the  selection  of  values  which  will  stand
criticism,  is  the  test  of  true  "  teleology "  or  pur
posiveness.
converg-  6.  The  problem  may  be  developed  by  consider-

enceof .  .  , .  r J  . .  '

spiritual  mg  the  relation  of  two  positions  respecting  the
mechanical  nature  of  mechanism  whose  compatibility  has  been
denied.  It  has  been  argued  that  the  position  a,
that  nature  is  instrumental  to  the  development  of
spiritual  values,  is  incompatible  with  the  position  /3,
that  the  spiritual  view  is  that  which  regards  ex
perience  as  a  mechanically  intelligible  whole.1

In  considering  this  question,  the  first  thing  is  to
make  our  attitude  clear,  whether  right  or  wrong.
For  this  purpose  three  points  must  be  explained.

In  thejirst  place,  according  to  the  ideas  developed
in  the  previous  chapter,  the  Uniformity  of  Nature
is  here  taken  as  a  logic^Lpogtulate,  equivalent  to  the
Law  of  Identity  as  interpreted  into  the  Law  of
Sufficient  Reason  ; 2  and  all  attempts  to  impeach

1  Cf.  the  author's  Psychology  of  the  Moral  Self, pp. 117, 126,
and  Professor  Taylor,  Mind,  lii.  488.

2  Author's  Logic,  ii.  210-2. If  we  take  the  Law  of  Sufficient
Reason  as  especially  implying  Teleology,  which  I  understand  to  have
been  Leibniz's  view,  and  which  is  closely  analogous  to  the  conception
of  Taylor's  Metaphysics,  it  really  makes  no  difference  of  principle.


iv  "MAN  IS  A SHOP OF  RULES"  139

it  on  the  score  of  de  facto  irregularity in natural
phenomena  are  held  irrelevant. To  suppose  that  ;
the  Uniformity  of  Nature  is  a  principle  of  repetition  •
of  similars,  and  means  that  the  future  will  resemble
the  past,  and  can  be  impeached  by  any  irregularity
which  is  not  taken  as  miraculous,  we  considered  toi/
be  an  elementary  logical  blunder;1 While  to  suppose  •
that such an impeachment is a guarantee of
spirituality  in  the  universe is a  recurrence to  the *
position  of  the  upholders  of  miracles in  the  same
imagined  interest.

In  the  second  place,  we  treat  it  as  a  parallel
error  to  contrast  individuality  with  law,  and  to
suppose  that  universal  connections  are  hostile  to  the
former,  and  only  exist  in  the  form  of  generalities
applying  to  collections  of  instances  related  in  the  ^
way  of  resemblance.  The  case  of  what  we  vulgarly
call  an  individual,  a  person  designated  by  a  proper
name,  is  a  sufficient^  instance  to  the  contrary.2  In
the  notion  that  such  an  individual  is  not  a  universal
and  framed  of  universals.  and  that  to  have  a
universal  you  must  have  a  number  of  resembling
points,  we  have  the  old  fallacy  of  the  substitution  of
similarity  for  identity,  with  the  consequent  mis-
apprehension  of  the  nature  of  a  universal  and  as  a

Teleology,  as  we  have  seen  in  the  previous  paragraphs,  is  simply  a
temporal  sub-form  ()(_jwi]jOjW<  ju^t-  ;i^  Sufficient  Reason  is  a  sub-
form  of  Identity  in  concrete  application.

1  The  familiar  suggestion  that granting logical  uniformity  it  is
still  conceivable  that  the  apparent  or  de  facto  inconstancy  of  nature
might  be  such  as  to  disconcert  our  theory  and  practice  does  not  seem
relevant  here. If  realised,  it  would  only  mean  that  different  sense-
perceptions  from  ours,  and  perhaps  greater  intellectual  gifts,  would
be needed to penetrate  such  a nature, and we should be like
savages  in regard to it, which is no doubt in some degree the
case.

2  Bradley,  Principles  of  Logic,  p.  60.


HO  TELEOLOGY— A SUB-FORM  LECT.

corollary,  the  failure  to  apply  a  genuine  conception
of  the  spiritual.


»


And  in  the  third place,  the  idea^  of  mechanism
r- here accepted is one which neither reduces the

%j*?*v  «^. r~

4miverse  to  modifications  of  homogeneous  quantity,1
nor  yet  impeaches  the  "  uniformity  of  nature,"  and  j
the  general  quantitative  relations  underlying  natural
phenomena.  It  accepts  as  the  apparent  custom  of
the  universe  and  as  a  corollary  of  the  interde
pendence  of  content  and  system,  that  qualities  have
quantitative  connections,  and  that  a  high  degree  of
spiritual  or  emotional  expressiveness  accompanies
a  high  degree  of  complexity  and  intelligible  deter-
minateness.2  It  is  one  thing  to  reject  a  purely
abstract  calculation  as  the  exclusive  scheme  of
reality  ;  it  is  another  thing  to  be  driven,  by  a  sense
of  the  faulty  philosophy  of  popular  science,  into  the
extremes  of  depreciating  the  spiritual  value  of
intelligence,  and  assigning  to  the  bare  facts  of  finite/
conation  an  unreal  independence  in  the  universe.  »
In  presence  of  these  three  explanations  the  truth
and  compatibility  of  the  above  cited  assertions  will
seem  perhaps  to  be  even  too  obvious,  r  The  disputed
position  was  that  it  is  the  true  spiritual  view  which
regards  Nature  as  mechanically  intelligible.  The
position  that  Nature  is  organic  to  spiritual  ends  was
accepted  and  need  not  be  defended.  It  was  the
:onsistency  of  the  former  with  the  latter  that  was  in
question.  What  the  author  desired  and  still  desires
to  maintain  is  that  either  position  is  inconceivable .
apart  from  the  other.  Individuality,  the  union  of  \

1  See  M.  Bergson's  criticism  of  the  vortex  theory,  Les  Donnees,
p.  157;  and  p.  109  above.

2  See  Lecture  VIII.  on  the  logical  basis  of  the  estimate  of  value.


iv  MIRACLE CANCELS  PURPOSE  141

comprehensiveness  and  coherence,  the  incarnation
of  non-contradiction,  could  not  be  realised  in  any
system  which  is  not  transparent  according  to  the
Law  of  Causation  or  Sufficient  Reason.1  Where
there  is  (or  appears  to  be)  discontinuity,  as  tested
by  these  characteristics  of  an  intelligible  whole,
there  inevitably  is  (or  appears  to  be)  pro  tanto  a
gap  in  the  embodiment  of  spiritual  purpose  and
significance.  A  purpose  is  not  realised,  it  is  not  a
reality  as  penetrating  and  vivifying  a  mass  of
content,  if  it  is  not  affirmed  continuously  and
traceably  in  a  coherent  structure.2  No  purpose  or
significance  can  be  realised  through  miracle.  Any
prejudice  to  the  contrary  arises  from  the  logical
blunder  of  fancying  the  concrete  universal  —  the
individual  —  incompatible  with  the  realisation  of
"  general  law ";  which  is  really  nothing  but  a
weakened  form3  of  one  or  other_pf  the  universal
determinations  concerned  in  the  individual  structure.
I  shall  be  reminded  that  causal  or  mechanical
explanation  is  necessarily  incomplete  and  proceeds
ad  infinitum.  But  this  is  only  so  if  it  is  taken  as

1  I  observed  above  (p.  138)  on  the  application  of  this  law  to  the
justification  of  contingent  matter  by  final  causes. If, as  we  have
held,  teleology  in  the  sense  which  connects  it  with  contingency,  is
secondary and  ultimately  unreal, the  distinction thus  founded of
course  disappears.

2  It  is  most  obvious,  and  most  remarkable,  that  M.  Bergson  has
never  dealt  with  the  conception  of  a  logical  universal. His  notions
of  identity  and  association  are  those  of  Mill  and  Bain. He  holds  it
inconceivable  for  identity  to  be  realised  through  difference. The
position  is  absolutely  clear  in  Donnees,  pp.  122,  158. A  true  notion
of  Identity  would  remodel  his  entire  philosophy.

3  Every significant idea is potentially  a class  -  idea  ; but to
consider  it  as  a  class-idea — a  predicate  capable  of  plural  applications  /
— instead  of  considering  the  detail  of  its  content  as  a  member  in  the
universal  nature  of  the  system  to  which  it  JDelongs,  is  to  consider  it
in  a  weakened  form. To  obtain  such  class-predications,  is  not,  for
example,  the  aim  of  true  scientific  induction  (Logic,  2nd  ed.,  ii.  174  ff.).


142  TELEOLOGY— A SUB-FORM  LECT.

total  or  absolute,  i.e.  as  involving  homogeneity.
And  even  so  it  is  only  another  side  of  the  same
defect  of  finite  experience  which  makes  all  teleo-
logical  explanations  arbitrary  and  eclectic.  The
former  cannot  be  complete  nor  the  latter  rationally
justifiable  in  any  experience  so  far  as  it  is  incapable
of  unifying  reality.  If  both  were  complete,  they
would  inevitably  blend,  and  the  special  characters
which  constitute  their  differences  would  become
aspects  within  a  unity.  This  is  not  an  empty
Imagination.  The  relation  of  cause  and  ground  to
the  whole,  on  the  one  hand,1  and  the  tendency  of
teleology  to  expand  into  systematic  coherence,2  on
the  other  hand,  exhibit  the  beginning  of  the  con-
v^rgence.

Organic  "  j.  A  note  of  the  one-sidedness  which  we  are
duTtoThT  deprecating  is  to  be  found  in  the  attempt  to  analyse
wisdom  mechanism  into  degenerated  finite  teleology,  on  the
not  to  finite  anaiOpry  of  secondary  automatism;  to  interpret

conscious-  .*~.,~«. '  .  ,  i ,

ness.  reflex  response  throughout  the  organic  world  in
terms  of  such  acquired  facility  as  that  of  the  skilled
pianist.3  The  contention  is  that  there  cannot  be  a
machine  embodying  an  idea,  unless  it  is  definitely
constructed  and  also  "  worked"  —  supervised  and
guided — by  a  finite  consciousness  with  its  explicit
finite  teleology.4

In the case  of  machines constructed by  man,
there  is  a  certain  plausibility  in  this  contention. If

1  Author's  LogiC)  2nd  ed.,  i.  238.

2  P.  129  above.

3  Note  that  if  this  explanation  only  appeals  to  consciousness  in
the  sense  of  an  instinct  determined  by  natural  selection,  there  is  really,
no  basis  at  all  of  conscious  teleology,  beyond  the  need  or  pleasure
of  following  an  instinct, which implies  no guidance by  purposive
consciousness.

4  Ward,  Naturalism  and  Agnosticism,  i.  291.


iv  MACHINES  PRIOR TO  FINITE  MINDS  143

we  fix  our  eyes  on  their  limitations,  and  not  on  their
positive  nature,  it  is  undeniable,  of  course,  that  their
independence  and  self-dependence  do  not  carry
them  far.  But  this  surely  is  very  explicable.  It  is
just  because  the  teleology  of  finite  consciousness,
whose  construction  they  are,  is  itself  so  very  partial
and  eclectic.  The  inferior  self-dependence  of  the
artificial  machine  is  a  mirror  of  the  narrowness  of
the  finite  consciousness,  and  we  shall  see  reason
to  suggest  below  that  there  are  problems  which
civilised  man  actually  solves  from  day  to  day,  which
are,  as  a  whole,  beyond  the  grasp  of  conscious
intelligence,  and  cannot  be  dealt  with  except  by  a
conjunction  of  consciousnesses  only  in  part  deter
mined  by  their  consciousness.  Nevertheless,  there
is  nothing  in  the  contact  of  men  with  their  machines
to  show,  so  far  as  this  goes,  that  the  human  con
sciousness  is  not  mechanically  constituted  ;  there  is
certainly  no  observable  point  in  the  construction
or  control  of  a  machine  at  which  anything  but
mechanical  interconnection  takes  place  between  the
producer  and  his  product.

And  if,  instead  of  picking  out  the  limitations,  we
look  at  the  possibilities  and  distinctive  nature  of  a
machine,  as  well  as  that  of  any  human  achievement
in  material  construction,  as,  say,  of  a  work  of  fine
art,  is  not  its  plain  lesson  that  ideas  can  be  embodied
in  unconscious  and  external  form  mechanical  in  every
fibre,  and  that  these  cases,  which  are  unmistakable
because  of  their  origin  in  finite  consciousness,  should
give  the  line  to  our  interpretation  of  nature  where
no  such  consciousness  is  traceable  ?

Exactly  so,  I  suppose  is  the  rejoinder,  it  does
give  the  line  to  our  view  of  nature,  and  that  view,


144  TELEOLOGY— A SUB-FORM  LECT.

therefore,  is  thatjill  organic  machinery  originates  in,
and  is  worked  by.  a  finite  consciousness.  But  this
seems  to  be  drawing  a  moral  which  rests  on  a  purely
incidental  feature,  and  on  the  whole  is  contrary  to
fact,  in  place  of  one  which  is  supported  by  all  the
phenomena.

No  doubt  our machines, for  the  reason  stated
above,  are  one-sided  and  imperfect  machines  ;  and
the  works of  nature  excel them  in  independence,
though  not  in  special  contrivance. But  the  works
of  nature,  like  the  greater  achievements  of  history
and  practice,  are  not  dependent  for  their  construc
tion  and  operation  on  a  relevant  and  explicit  con
sciousness. We know  that  in man  himself  it  is
only a  small  proportion  of  the  bodily  mechanism
of  which  we  even  say  in  popular  language  that  it  is
controlled by consciousness ; and whatever con
sciousness  may  be  present  in  the  world  of  plant-life
or  of  the  lower  animals,  it  is  obviously  not  of  a  kind
that  could  devise  or  know  how  to  employ  the  major
part  of  the  complex  arrangements  of  their  bodies.
A  famous  argument  of  Kant  applies  here  in  principle.
Reason  has  its  purposes,  but  they  are  higher  pur
poses than to effect the working of the bodily
machine  ;  even  in  man  that  is  mainly  left  to  reflexes
and  instinct,  and  is  better  done  by  them. We  know
that  reason  is  incapable  of  teaching  us  to  swallow,
or  to  move  an  arm  ;  and  we  cannot  imagine  that
the  dim  feelings,  if  there  are  any,  which  accompany
plant-life,  taught  the  orchid  to  put  gum  on  the  base
of  its  pollen-masses,  or  to  adopt  stamen-fibres  which
bend  as  they  are  carried  through  the  air. If  we
ascribe  these  things  to  a  finite  teleological  conscious
ness, we  must  inevitably  be  driven on  to  say  as


iv  "EXPRESSION"  MEANS  PERFECT  MECHANISM  145

much  for  the  forces  which,  in  shaping  the  Eastern
Mediterranean,  prepared  the  essential  basis  of
Graeco-Roman  and  Christian  civilisation,  or  which
made  Great  Britain  an  island,  and  planted  marble
mountains  in  Attica.

I  am  not  concerned  to  maintain  that  purposes
and  ideas  do  or  do  not  as  such  operate  in  nature  ;
it  seems  doubtful  what  the  question  can  mean.
What  I  am  interested  in  pointing  out  may  be  taken
to  mean  almost  the  reverse,  viz.  that  Nature  below
conscious  intelligence,  and  Providence,  if  we  like  to
call  it  so,  above,  can  achieve,  without  the  help  ofa
a  relevant 1  explicit  consciousness,  results  of  the
same  general  type  as  those  which  are  ascribed  to  the
guidance  of  finite  minds.  The  participation  of  the
inorganic  world  in  history  is  thoroughly  continuous
with  that  of  the  organic  world  ;  and  it  will  hardly
be  contended  that  in  the  former  at  all  events  finite
consciousness  is  operative,  or  that  the  process  is  not
mechanical  in  the  sense  we  have  given  to  the  word.

The  notion  that  expression  of  ideas  is  somehow
opposed  to  mechanism  is  widespread  and  tenacious.
And  it  is  a  fallacy  of  the  same  kind  as  that  which
takes  uniformity  to  mean  that  the  future  will  resemble
the  past.

Thus,  for  example,  in  dealing  with  the  utterance
of  mind  through  the  fine  arts,  we  constantly  speak
as  if  "expression"  came  somehow  straight  from  the
soul,2  while  "  mechanical  finish  "  was  something
different  in  kind.  But  in  truth,  of  course,  both
are  prima  facie  alike  mechanical,  and  "  expression  "
must  mean,  at  least  in  some  respects,  a  more  perfect

1  I  mean  by  this  a  consciousness  having  before  it  the  full  end
which  is  achieved.  2  Cf.  Ward,  Naturalism,  i.  109.


146  TELEOLOGY— A SUB-FORM  LECT.

mechanical  control  over  the  medium  than  what  is
termed  par  excellence  mechanical  execution.  Mind
and  individuality,  so  far  as  finite,  find  their  fullest
expression  as  aspects  of  very  complex  and  precisely
determined  mechanical  systems.  This  is  the  law,
I  believe  wholly  without  exception,  for  every  higher
product  of  human  soul  and  intelligence  and  also  of
cosmic  evolution.  It  follows  necessarily  from  the
nature  of  "  being  and  trueness,"  as  Plato  calls  them.
The  greater  being  must  have  the  more  perfect
coherence,  and  the  more  perfect  coherence  must
have  the  fuller  content.  The  mechanical  appear
ance — the  continuity  of  transition  and  determination
— must  therefore  be  unbroken,  though  we  may
suppose  it  to  depend  on  the  nature  of  a  system  in
which  individuality  is  manifested  through  universal
law.  But  it  is  idle  to  appeal  to  finite  purposive
consciousness  as  in  principle  the  sole  vehicle  of
teleology  within  our  experience,  and  the  source,
through  its  fossilised  habits,  of  what  is  construed
as  a  mechanical  "nature."  The  external  must  be
frankly  accepted  as  a  factor,  actual  but  not  ultimate,
in  the  universe.

Having  now,  after  the  argument  of  section  4,
no  need  to  restrict  teleology  to  the  realm  of  finite
purpose,  we  can  freely  suppose  the  world -plan  to
be  immanent  in  the  whole,  including  finite  mind
and  also  mechanical  nature.  Thus  the  obviously
secondary  and  fragmentary  being  of  the  former
would  constitute  a  partial  revelation  of  the  meaning
of  things,  but  by  no  means  its  principal  vehicle  or
the  sole  organ  of  guidance  in  evolution  or  in  history.
The  point  here  maintained  against  the  critic  depends
on  the  continuity  of  mechanism  with  the  individuality


iv  VALUES  NEITHER  BY-PRODUCTS  NOR  "ENDS"  147

of  the  real,  in  virtue  of  that  deeper  aspect  of  the
latter  which  is  logical  rather  than  teleological.
This  is  why,  admitting  a  certain  inadequacy  in
the  mechanical  view  as  commonly  understood,  we
still  contend  that  the  true  spiritual  ideal  demands
mechanical  intelligibility.

8.  We  may  now  approach  a  positive  result,  and  The
first  take  for  illustration  the  case  of  an  organic  isine"
product  commonly  supposed  to  be  below  the  line  of°theng
of  consciousness,  say,  a  flower.  Our  view  excludes  whole-
two  extremes.  On  the  one  hand,  it  is  ridiculous  /
to  say  that  such  a  product  arises  by  accident ;  that
is,  as  a  by-product  of  the  interaction  of  elements
in  whose  nature  and  general  laws  of  combination
no  such  result  is  immanent,  as  though  we  were
dealing  with  the  insight  of  a  human  contriver,  by
which  the  more  complex  developments  and  com
binations  were  not  anticipated.  It  is  impossible
in  this  way  to  treat  part  of  the  world  as  primary
and  part  as  a  secondary  superstructure.  We  must
interpret  the  nature  of  nature  as  much  by  the  flower
as  by  the  law  of  gravitation.  If  we  come  to  that,
there  are  appearances  which  we  cannot  on  any
sound  principle  refuse  to  rank  with  the  flower  as
teleological,  in  the  most  direct  and  simple  formations
of  the  inorganic  world.  The  motions  of  the  solar
system,  the  curl  of  a  wave,  the  curve  of  a  cataract,
the  abruptness  of  a  precipice,  are  appearances  deeply
rooted  in  the  simplest  material  data,  and  yet,  for  all
we  can  see,  as  well  meriting  a  presumption  of  teleo
logical  value  as  any  object  of  consciousness  except
consciousness  itself.1

1  Ward  (Naturalism,  i.  276  flf.)  has  insisted  on  the  downhill  trend,
the "katabolic"  character  of  the  physical  environment. And  he


148  TELEOLOGY— A SUB-FORM  LECT.

On  the  other  hand,  we  must  not  say  that  "  pur
pose  is  operative  "  in  the  flower  or  the  wave,  if  that
is  to  mean  that  we  ascribe  them  to  an  end  or  idea,
somehow  superinduced  upon  the  course  of  their

connects  with  this  its  non-teleological,  non-constructive  character.
"  The  inorganic  world  has  nothing  to  match  dynamite,  Liebig's
extract,  a  steam-engine,  or  a  ship-torpedo."  But  there  are  some
points  to  bear  in  mind  if  we  think  of  drawing  a  fundamental  con
trast,  i.  The  "katabolic"  processes  of  inorganic  nature  are
physically  continuous  with  and  essential  to  the  "  anabolic  "  processes
of  life,  and  if  the  latter  are  teleological  the  former  can  hardly  be
otherwise.  The  whole  life-process  as  storage  of  energy,  e.g.  depends
on  the  sun.  Much  of  the  work  done  by  purely  inorganic  forces,
e.g.  the  change  of  rock  into  soil,  are  obvious  conditions  of  the
adaptation  of  the  earth  to  life.  It,  therefore,  can  make  no  difference
of  principle  whether  life  arose  on  our  earth's  surface  or  not.  2.  It
is  only  by  an  eclectic  type  of  teleological  judgment  that  inorganic
nature  can  be  termed  in  itself  non-teleological.  A  sunset  or  a
mountain  or  a  stormy  sea,  not  to  speak  of  the  solar  system,  though
they  need  no  anabolic  process,  yet,  if  we  think  of  them  as  ends,  give
as  much  colour  for  supposing  a  directed  process,  a  machine  that
produces  them,  as  Liebig's  extract  or  a  ship-torpedo  ;  and  their  value,
surely,  may  well  be  reckoned  as  not  smaller.  You  reply,  "  They
need  no  construction,  no  machine  ;  they  flow  from  the  principle  of
least  resistance."  But  then,  we  urge,  the  contrast  between  teleology
and  the  principle  of  least  resistance  falls  to  the  ground.  3.  The
continuity  of  the  earth's  geological  structure  with  social  and  historical
teleology  is  obvious.  They  plainly  and  essentially  belong  to  the
same  process.  "  Not  so,  for  life  has  simply  used  what  it  found,  and
could  have  used  anything  it  found,  and  perhaps  has  used  quite
different  conditions  in  other  planets."  This  is  no  answer,  in  face
of  the  different  degrees  of  success  in  adaptation  which  we  observe.
Life  might,  for  all  we  know,  be  successful  on  different  lines  from
those  which  prevail  here  ;  but  our  kind  of  life,  at  all  events,  does  not
deal  equally  well  with  all  actual  conditions,  and  there  is  no  reason
to  think  that  any  other  kind  would  be  more  absolute.  Clearly  it
needs  a  basis  which  is  at  one  with  it.  It  does  appear  to  me
as  if  Ward  had  not  made  up  his  mind  between  an  unteleological
foundation  plus  "guidance,"  and  a  nature  which  is  self-directing
throughout  (cf.  Nat.  ii.  253-54).  And  I  believe  the  reason  lies  in
the  refusal  to  admit  a  true  externality  and  the  consequent  belief  that
whatever  is  teleological  must  be  living  and  subjective  (see  above,
p.  142);  cf.  also  "  L5  evoluzione  geologica  e  la  biologica  non  si
possono  separare "  (Varisco,  /  Massimi  Problemi,  Milan,  1910).

|  It is hopeless to separate inorganic from organic in respect of

I  teleology.


iv  THE WORLD  PRESCRIBES THE  PLAN  149

elements  by  a  power  comparable  to  finite  conscious
ness,  operating  as  it  were  ab  extra,  and  out  of  a
detached  spontaneity  of  its  own.  If  the  former
notion  spelt  accident,  this  spells  miracle.

We  have  seen  that  teleology  is  destroyed  if  no
determinate  universal  relations  between  the  differ
ences  of  the  unity  can  be  truly  predicated.  As  we
saw  in  Lotze,1  it  is  impossible  to  find  a  point  at

which  life  is  not  in  appearance  mechanically  con-
> r  r • —  *  J

ditioned.  Thus  the  individuality  manifested,  apart
from  operative  consciousness,  in  a  flower,  or  moun
tain,  or  wave,  really  forces  on  us  a  conclusion  which
goes  so  far  that  the  case  of  human  consciousness,
though  appearing  so  widely  different  in  degree,  can
hardly  carry  us  further  in  principle.2

Avoiding  the  two  extremes  just  pointed  out,  we
are  driven  to  affirm  that  in  the  structure  and  being
of  the  flower  the  common  natural  elements  behave
accord ingLlo.  what  they  are,  and  that  the  wonderful
creation  we  behold  is  simply  the  immanent  develop
ment  of  certain  factors,  which,  no  doubt,  in  their
isolation  seem  far  enough  removed  from  anything
of  the  kind.  We  have,  indeed,  to  bear  in  mind
that  the  environment,  the  objective  selection,  of  the
world,  has  been  active.  It  is  not  in  a  few  elements,
as  laid  side  by  side  in  the  laboratory,  but  only  in
the  whole  interactions  of  nature,  that  the  plan  of
the  flower  has  been  immanent.  All  that  we  are
certain  of,  ^nd  of  this  we  are  certain  under  any  view
of  evolution,]  is  that  the  structure  of  the  plant  or

1  Page  99,  above.

2  Relation to consciousness, presence  in  an  experience, is no
doubt  the  sine  qua  non  of  all  values. But  this  does  not  forbid  a
comparison of  our  experience  of  external  objects,  as  indicative  of
teleology,  with  our  experience  of  our  conscious  acts.


i5o  TELEOLOGY—A SUB-FORM  LECT.

animal  is  a  microcosm  from  which,  with  ^adeguate
knowledge,  the  nature  of  its  environment  could  be
read  off  Whether  we  attempt  to  adhere  to  the
strictest  doctrine  of  natural  selection,  or  assume  a
cause  of  psychological  nature,  with  or  without  in
heritance  of  qualities  acquired  by  individuals,  the
fundamental  point  remains  the  same  ;  it  is  the  world,
the  environment,  which  is  responsible  for  the  re
spective  differences  between  the  forms  of  organic
evolution.  The  powers  of  protoplasm  or  the  initial
impulse  of  life  l  are  a  common  condition  and  might
be  responsible,  at  the  outside,  for  certain  common
phenomena  in  the  divergent  lines.  But  on  the
whole,  through  one  capacity  of  life  or  another,  it  is
the  world  that  hen


agnmonlv  so  called. The  thing  is  plain in the

sphere  of  intelligence  and  *  volition,2  and  with  the
slight  possible  reservation  indicated  above  it  is  no
less  obvious  in  the  world  of  organic  evolution.  I
venture  to  urge  that  here  we  are  really  not  relying
on  any  point  which  can  be  disputed  on  metaphysical
grounds.  Say  if  you  like  that  the  cause  is  psycho
logical,  e.g.  that  it  is  subjective  selection  and  not  a
reaction  of  matter  as  such.  Still,  no  sane  man  will
maintain3  that  in  the  regions  of  structural  adapta
tion,  except  in  our  conscious  efforts  to  develop
the  human  body,  such  a  psychological  cause  does
conscious  teleological  work.  There  is  really  an
equivocation  in  suggesting  that  the  assumption  of

1  Bergson,  Evolution  creatrice,  passim. Cf.  Varisco's  spontaneity
of  the  monads. All  this  "  life.irnpulse  "  and  "  spontaneity  "  seem  to
me  merely  devices  to  represent  a  concrete  start  for  the  universe.
But  the  universe  must  be what  it  is,  and  they  might  just  as  well
assume  a  "nature,"  as.  I  do.

2  See  Lect.  IX.,  below.  3  See  p.  144,  above.


iv  NOT  FINITE CONTRIVANCE  151

such  a  cause  in  these  cases  helps  to  account  for
their  teleology.  It  does  not  solve  problems,  nor
contrive  adaptations.  In  fact,  it  would  be  much
truer  to  assert  that  subjective  selection  is  negative
and  natural  selection  positive  than  with  writers  of
eminence  to  affirm  the  reverse.  Subjective  selec
tion,  we  must  conceive,  offers  an  infinity  of  reac
tions  tending  to  pass  into  habits ;  and  it  is  only
natural  selection  that  can  mould  them  to  a  definite
line  of  progress,  and  elicit  from  among  them  a
positive  structure.  To  say  that  natural  selection
is  negative  is  like  saying  that  the  sculptor's  art  is
negative  because  it  works  by  removal,  jf^mind,
then,  is  operative  in  the  structural  adaptation  of  the
animal  and  even  of  the  plant^it  is  not  operative
as  mind.  It  does  not  contain  the  plan,  or  guide
the  line  of  progress!  It  may  be,  as  compared  with
the  reactions  of  matter,  a  more  felicitous  conception
of  the  agency  by  which  the  plan,  immanent  in  the
whole,  can  be  appropriated  and  actualised.  But
in  any  case,  we  are  jjure  of  this,  that  a  work  as
wonderful  as  the  works  of  finite  consciousness  is
done,  say,  in  a  flower,  without  any  intervention
of  consciousness  as  a  teleological  agency  ;  that  is,
as  endowed  with  a  plan  or  capable  of  solving  a
problem.  In  this  case  no  one  would  advance  the
suggestion  of  the  miraculous  intervention  of  a  con
sciousness,  which  would  meet  us  if  we  appealed  to
the  embodiment  of  mind  in  artificial  machines  or  in
works  of  aesthetic  expression.1

And,  moreover,  any  such  suggestion  has,  in  my

1  In  Driesch's  Entelechy,  which  is  his  name  for  the  power  under
lying  the  wonderful  facts  of  alternative  development,  or  repair  of
injuries,  there  is,  of  course,  no  question  of  consciousness.


152  TELEOLOGY— A SUB-FORM  LECT.

view,  been  entirely  put  out  of  court  by  the  examina
tion  to  which  we  have  subjected  the  correlative
conceptions  of  mechanism  and  teleology.  The  idea
that  when  a  man  constructs  a  clock,  or  composes
a  sonata,  you  have  a  purposive  intelligence  operat
ing  by  the  bare  form  of  design  on  a  system  which
thus  receives  something  that  cannot  be  communi
cated  by  the  reaction  of  mechanical  parts  on  one
another,  should  now  appear  to  be  a  contradiction
in  terms.  No  one  would  think  to-day  of  account
ing  for  a  flower  by  an  explanation  of  that  kind,  say,
by  the  purposive  interposition  of  a  creative  intelli
gence,  and  whether  or  no  Nature  can  aim  at  ends,
it  is  bare  fact  that  without  any  contriving  conscious
ness  she  can  present  them  to  our  minds.

Thus  we  have  partly  seen,  and  we  may  now
further  see,  that  the  foundations  of  "teleology" —
really  Individuality- — in  the  universe  are  far  too
deeply  laid  to  be  explained  by,  still  more,  to  be
restricted  to,  the  intervention  of  finite  conscjous-
ness.  Everything  goes  to  show  Uiat  such  con-
v  sciousness  should  not  ^be  regardetd^as-^the^  source
ofLjekmlogy,  but  as  itself  a  manifestation,  falling
within  wider  manifestations,  of  the  immanent  indi
viduality  of  the  real.  It  is  not  teleological,  for  the
reason  that  as  a  finite  subject  of  desire  and  volition
it  is  "  purposive."  It  is  what -we  call  purposive
because  reajity  is  individual  and^whpjp,  and  mani
fests  this  character  partly  in  the  short-sighted  and
eclectic  aims  of  finite  intelligence,  partly  in  appear
ances  of  a  far  greater  range  and  scope.  The  large-
scale  patterns  of  history  and  civilisation  are  not  to
be  found  as  purposes  within  any  single  finite  con
sciousness  ;  the  definite  continuity  and  correlation


iv  A SECOND  NATURE  153

of  particular  intelligent  activities,  on  which  the
teleological  character  of  human,  life  as  a  whole
depends — the  "ways  of  Providence" — are  a  fact,
on  the  whole  of  the  same  order  as  the  development
of  the  solar  system  or  the  appearance  of  life  upon
the  surface  of  the  earth.  It  is  impossible  to  attribute
to  finite  consciousnesses,  as  agents,  the  identity  at
work  within  finite  consciousness  as  a  whole.  This
identity  is  exhibited  in  a  development  which  springs
from  the  linked  action  of  separate  and  successive
finite  consciousnesses  in  view  of  the  environment.1
Every  step  of  this  development,  though  in  itself
intelligent  and  teleological,  is  in  relation  to  the
whole  unconscious  ;  and  the  result  is  still  "a  nature,"
though  a  second  and  higher  nature.  This  principle
is  all-important,  and  holds  throughout  all  levels  of
being.  I  am  content  to  stake  my  whole  contention
upon  it,  and  if  it  can  be  overthrown,  or  if  I  have
misconceived  the  relation  of  anti-naturalist  writers
to  it,  I  shall  be  most  eager  to  be  set  right.

9. I  will  repeat  and  emphasise  the  two  parts  of  TWO
the  contention.

i.  There  is_leleology  below  consciousness.  The
intelligence  of  man  and  of  animals  that  can  be  called
intelligent  dojes  not,  as  I  see  the  matter,  sustain  or
conduct  their  bodily  life.  To  say  that  all  vital
responses  have  been  inherited  from  volitional  or
quasi-volitional  behaviour  is,  to  my  mind,  doubtful
in  fact,  but  in  any  case,  an  evasion  of  the  point  of
principle.

( In the first place, if  something analogous to
volition 2 moulded the structure of the body in

1  This  argument,  as  was  suggested  above,  is  capable  of  a  further
application. See  below,  p.  159.  2  Lotze,  Metaphysics,  sect.  230.


below  con
sciousness.


154  TELEOLOGY— A SUB-FORM  LECT.

earlier  phases  of  evolution,  it  never  moulded  them
by  any  conscious  wisdom  in  the  mind  of  that  phase  ;
it  followed,  almost  blindly,  the  determining  of  a
deeper  wisdom,  which  lay  hidden  in  the  general
structure  of  the  environment.  The  denial  of  teleo-
logical  significance  to  natural  selection  is  typical  of
the  contention  which  I  am  arguing  against.

In  the  second  place,  whatever  mind  may  have
done  in  the  past  for  our  bodily  structures  and
responses,  this  cannot  come  into  court  when  we
ask  what  part  it  plays  to-day.  Man's  mind  and
purposes  presuppose,  accept,  and  are  founded  on,
his  actual  ^body  ;  the  plant-mind,  if  there  is  one,
presupposes  and  accepts  the  plant-form.  Say  here,
as  was  said  of  man,  that  mind  is  present  from  the
beginning ;  still  it  is  present  in  forms  so  elementary
that  they  must  on  the  whole  be  moulded  rather  than
mould.  The  orchid,  as  I  have  said  above,  could
have  no  mind  that  contrives  its  fertilisation  any
more  than  man  has  a  mind  which  could  teach  him
to  swallow  or  digest,  or  could  choose  the  place  or
century  of  his  birth.  Everywhere  finite  conscious
ness  makes  its  appearance,  so  far  as  this  is  obvious
and  unmistakable,  at  a  relatively  high  level,  focus
ing  and  revealing  the  significance  of  a  huge  compli
cation  of  mute  history  and  circumstance  behind  it
and  surrounding  it.

Teleology  ii.  And  with  the  mention  of  history,  and  the
time  and  place  of  a  man's  birth,  we  come  to  Tele
ology  aj32Y^Jinjte_cc^^  In  history,  or  in
what  is  greater  than  history,  the  linked  develop
ment  of  art  or  ideas  and  religions,  the  principle  of
a  teleology  beyond  though  exhibited  in  finite  con
sciousness  is  clear  and  unambiguous.  It  is  not


above  con
sciousness.


iv MECHANISM  ESSENTIAL TO  A WHOLE 155

finite  consciousness  that  has  planned  the  great
phases  of  civilisation,  which  are  achieved  by  the
linking  of  finite  minds  on  the  essential  basis  of  the
geological  structure  of  the  globe.  Each  separate
mind  reaches  but  a  very  little  way,  and  relatively
to  the  whole  of  a  movement  must  count  as  un
conscious.  You  may  say  there  is  intelligence  in
every  step  of  the  connection  ;  but  you  cannot  claim
as  a  design  of  finite^  intelligence  what  never  pre
sented  itself  in  that  character  to  any  single  mind.
The  leader  of  a  Greek  colony  to  Ionia  in  the  eighth
or  ninth  century  B.C.  was  certainly  paving  the  way
for  Christianity  ;  but  his  relation  to  it,  though  in  a
higher  way  of  .working,  was  essentially  that  of
a  coral  insect  to  a  coral  reef.  Neither  Christianity
nor  the  coral  reef  were  ever  any  design  of  the  men
or  the  insects  who  constructed  them ;  they  lay
altogether  deeper  in  the  roots  of  things ;  and  this,
as  I  hold,  really  carries  with  it  the  conclusion
which  in  principle  must  be  accepted  about  evolu
tion.  Nothing  is  properly  due  to  finite  minHT  as
such,  which  never  was  a  plan  before  any  finite
mind.

10. The  contrast,  then,  of  mechanism  with  tele-  what
ology  is  not  to  be  treated  as  if  elucidated  at  one
stroke  by  the  antithesis  of  purposive  consciousness  ;
and  the  reactions  of  part  on  part. It  is  rooted  in|^?odof

'Theism

the  very  nature  of  totality,  which  it  regards  from
two  complementary  points  of  view,  as  an  individual
whole,  and  as  constituted  of  inter-reacting  members.
Of  the  two  points  of  view,  it  is  impossible  for  either
to  be  entirely  absent.  Assuming  this  impossibility
to  be  possible,  a  total  failure  of  mechanical  intelli
gibility  would  reduce  the  spiritual  to  the  miraculous,


156  TELEOLOGY— A SUB-FORM  LECT.

the  negation  of  all  spirituality,  as  a  total  failure  of
teleological  intelligibility  would  reduce  individuality
to incoherence, and annihilate mechanism. But
teleology,  being  usually  thought  of  par  excellence
or in abstraction, may more easily  be supposed
absent than mechanism, which must attend any
inter-relation at all. "Understanding without  I
Reason  is  something, Reason  without  understand-  {
ing  is  nothing."  *

The  entire  doctrine  of  theism  in  the  Kantian
sense  as  involving  a  personal  creator  and  governor
of  the  world,  and  with  it  the  paramount  importance
of  subjective  selection  and  bare  finite  consciousness
as  agents  in  the  universe,  in  contrast  with  natural
selection  and  the  immanent  plan  of  things,  is  here
called  in  question,  though  another  and  a  deeper
importance  might  attach  itself,  as  has  been  indicated,
to  finite  consciousness  from  a  wholly  different  point
of  view.  The  meeting  of  extremes  in  metaphysics
is  not  a  thing  that  should  surprise  us  ;  and  the
polemic  against  the  mechanical  view  of  the  universe
and  the  epiphenomenal  doctrine  of  intelligence
may  find  these  conceptions  falling  back  upon  an
alliance  unexpected  alike  to  themselves  and  to  their
antagonist.  In  these  suggestions  we  are  entirely
discarding  the  actual  context  and  contentions  of
recent  epiphenome,nalism.  But  the  name  "  epi-
phenomenalism "  seems  to  suggest  a  significance
which  has  not  usually  been  given  it.  I  do  not
mean  to  treat  consciousness  or  the  self  as  a  by
product  or  an  accessory  ;  but  it  is  becoming  more

1  HegePs  Life,  Rosenkranz,  p.  546.  There  is  really  a  teleology
in  any  order,  and  there  must  be  some  order  (Bergson,  Evolution
crtatrice,  p.  240).  But  our  ideas  of  teleology  are  arbitrary  and
eclectic  ;  and  in  our  sense,  therefore,  Teleology  may  be  absent.


iv CONSCIOUS  SELF  ON  TOP OF  EVOLUTION 157

and more obvious that, qua the developed finite  ,  •
mind,  they  must  be  regarded  as  appearances  which  I/
come  on  the  top  of  a  great  deaLthat  must  go  before
them. Two  opposing  contentions  seem  .to  demand
fusion. To  the  voluntarist,  the  believer  in  a  some
thing  hardly  conscious, underlying explicit intelli
gence, in  which he finds the fundamental reality
and the true mainspring of  the soul, it must be
admitted  that  a  vast  underground  work  is  involved
in  the  formation  of  an  intelligent  moral  being. The
conscious  self  is  plainly  the  last  word  of  an  immense
evolution  which  is practically and relatively from
unconsciousness  to  consciousness  ;  and  presupposes,
necessarily presupposes, so  far as we  can  under
stand, the  ^co-operation  ""of  unconscious nature in
moulding  the  foundation  of  mind.1 I  see  no  logical ;
;  value  whatever  in  assuming  the  presence  of  mind  \
j  in  simpler  forms  at  earlier  phases  of  evolution.

But  to  admit  all  this  to  the  advocates  of  an
obscure  something  called  the  will-to-live  does  not
destroy,  but,  if  rightly  understood,  corroborates  and
enhances,  the  significance  and  value  of  intelligence,
and  of  self-realisation  through  the  realisation  of
ideas.  For  it  is  this  that  is  brought  to  pass  as  the
climax  and  the  revelation  in  as  far  as  the  under
ground  self  emerges  into  completeness.  It  is  only
then  that  we  begin  to  learn  what  we  are,  and  to
enjoy  or  possess  ourselves,  and,  by  consequence,
the  world.

The  conscious  and  intelligent  self  is  on  the  top
of,  it  is  made  possible  by,  all  the  stress  and  com-

1  "  Ma  perche  la  monade  si  svolga  in  un  soggetto  e  in  un  io,
e  necessario  che  divenga  il  centre  d'  un  organismo,  che  quest'  organismo
passi  per  le  diverse  phasi,"  etc.  (Varisco,  op.  cit.  p.  222).  I  cannot
see  how  the  monad  helps.


158  TELEOLOGY— A SUB-FORM  LECT.

plexity  of  the  work  that  goes  before  it.  If  instead
of  calling  it  epiphenomenal  we  call  it  the  climax
and  sum  and  substance  of  evolution,  we  should  be
stating  the  truth  which  epiphenomenalism  carica
tures.  But  it  follows,  of  course,  that  when  the  self
comes,  it  does  not  come  empty  or  without  presup
positions.  Mind,  in  a  sense,  no  doubt  is  the  active
form  of  totality,  and  in  that  sense  is  everything ;
but  every  particular  finite  mind  has  received  some
filling  before  it  is  aware  of  itself;  and  it  could  not
be  aware  of  itself  if  it  had  not.  It  begins,  so  to
speak,  high  up  in  the  world  of  experience,  and  is  in
possession  at  starting  of  a  content  and  a  machinery
which  its  world  has  prepared  for  it.  However  little
a  man  to-day  may  believe  in  materialistic  deter
minism  he  will  be  slow  to  deny  that  the  bodily
arrangements  and  mechanisms  are  at  least  the  basis
of  the  working  of  the  soul.  If  we  look  at  the  matter
rightly,  this  gives  the  organised  consciousness  an
enormously  greater  significance  and  importance,
than  if  we  held  it  to  be,  so  to  speak,  a  structureless
intellectual  protoplasm.  It  is  nothing  less  than  an
individual  spiritual  body,  a  special  utterance  and
revelation  of  the  universe  in  its  highest  finite  form.
(_  It)is  bare  consciousness  and  the  unmoulded  power
of  selection  that  seem  to  us  in  their  emptiness  im
potent  abstractions.  The  concrete  self  is  different,

land,  as  we  have  said  throughout,  is  a  world  within

'a  world  of  worlds.

The similarity between these ideas and the
deepest  conclusions  of  religious  philosophy  cannot
fail  to  attract  our  attention. That  on  the  whole  the
finite intelligent  being has the  duty  and position""
rather  of  coming  to  himself  and  awakening  to  his


iv  THE  DOUBLE  DOCTRINE  REQUIRED  159


_^

imperfect  analogy  a  greater  mind  and  will,  than  of
control  lin£_the__course  of  the  world,  or  mouldmg^it
as  an  independent  cause,  this  is  a  point  of  view
which  seems  to  demand  reaffirmation.1  At  least  it
is  suggestive  as  against  claims  which  largely  spring
from  making  absolute  the  attitude  of  individualistic
moralism,  and  has,  I  think,  been  divined  with  a
Spinozistic  enthusiasm,  though  not  adequately  ex
pressed,  by  some  of  the  scientific  leaders  whose
inadequate  mechanical  theory  is  the  legitimate  prey
of  recent  philosophical  criticism.

It  will  be  necessary  at  a  further  stage  to  deal
expressly  with  the  question  of  the  finite  individual's
freedom  and  initiative.  It  is  enough  for  the  present
to  suggest  that  as  a  self-conscious  being  he  is  in
principle  a  member  of  the  universe  inter  pares  ;  he
is  something,  however  trifling,  without  which  it
would  not  be  what  it  is.  He  is,  indeed,  an  organ
through  which,  however  slightly  in  degree,  the
whole  maintains  itself.  And,  therefore,  it  could  not
justly  be  maintained  that  nothing  is  genuinely  done
or  effected  in  him  and  by  him.  Only  the  erroneous
implication  must  be  avoided  as  if  a  finite  individual
could  find  as  it  were  a  TTOV  o-rw  outside  the  universe
and  proceed  to  act  upon  and  reform  it.  A  doctrine
which  brings  together  the  conception  of  action,
freedom,  initiative,  achievement,  on  the  one  hand,
and  of  the  coming  to  oneself,  learning  one's  place
and  nature,  awakening  to  one's  membership,  and
rejoicing  in  that,  greater  than  one's  self,  which
underlies  and  surrounds  one's  self,2  may  give  and

1  Cf.  McTaggart,  Studies  in  Hegelian  Cosmology  ',  sect.  135.
2  "  Haeremus  cuncti  superis."


160  TELEOLOGY— A SUB-FORM  LECT.  iv

receive  assistance  in  the  attempt  to  conceive  the
relations  between  mind  and  body,  or  if  this  is  an
incorrect  expression,  the  way  in  which  spirit  appears
as  a  focus  to  matter.

To  put  the  case  in  the  extreme.  If  finite  con
sciousness  were  nothing,  beyond  a  mind  awakening
to  the  significance  of  that  realm  or  circumference  of
externality  to  which  it  serves  as  a  centre,  and  a
self-identification  with  the  logic  and  the  tension  of
the  absolute  in  that  one  vortex  or  focus  of  its  being,
can  we  say  that  this  would  amount  to  no  achieve
ment,  and  to  nothing  at  all  of  value?  But  I  am  not
maintaining  this  ;  it  seems  as  if  we  might  get  nearer
the  matter  and  make  a  better  case  for  personality
and  initiative  than  that  of  mere  revelation  and
awakening.  Still,  dare  we  say  that  this  alone,  the
mere  recognition  of  the  infinite  in  ourself,  would  be
nothing  worth  having,  and  nothing  in  which  the
living  finite  man — the  conscious  body  as  a  whole,
might  be  ennobled  by  achievement  ?


LECTURE V

BODILY BASIS OF MIND AS A WHOLE OF CONTENT

i.  WE  have  seen  that  teleological  wholes  are  in-  Alleged
evitably  constituted  by  what  may  fairly  be  called  tionof Me-
mechanical  relations,  that  is  to  say,  a  determinate  cl
relativity  of  part  to  part  in  the  light  of  the  whole.
In  accordance  with  this  contention  we  have  so  far
insisted upon the "  mechanical " aspect of the
material  expressions  of  intelligence. Now  we  are
to  argue  from  the  character  of  material  expressions
of  intelligence  to  the  general  possibility  of  a  material
counterpart  of  consciousness,  the  term  counterpart
being  used  in  the  restricted  sense  suggested  by  the
relation  of  "  equivalent  "  quantitative  and  qualitative


series.1


But  one  misunderstanding  should  first  be  guarded
against.  "  Granted,"  it  may  be  said,  "  that  within
every  teleological  whole  there  is  and  must  be  some
thing  which  we  may  call  mechanism,  yet  neverthe
less  we  must  bear  in  mind  the  complete  and  certain
subordination  of  Mechanism  to  Teleology.  The
end  determines  the  means  ;  the  means,  the  parts  or
elements,  with  their  determinate  reactions,  have  no
initiative  ;  no  power  of  self-organisation  ;  they  are

1  Cf.  author's  Logic,  2nd  ed.,  ii.  74  ff.  on  "  a  and  a  series."

161  M


162  BODILY  BASIS OF  MIND  LECT.

in  no  sense  to  be  credited  with  the  end  ;  that  can
only  come  from  purpose."

Now we have seen that in one sense the
"mechanical"  point  of  view  is  really  subordinate.
It  is — though  not  logically  or  truly  separable — yet
separable  on  sufferance,  separable  as  accompanying
an  insight  which  is  imperfect in comparison  with
the  complete  apprehension  of  an  individual  whole.
A  child  will  quickly  see  how  one  brick  rests  upon
another  ; it would be beyond  him to  understand
what  thickness  a  wall  must  have  to  carry  itself  and
the  roof,  or  how  the  lines  of  the  house  must  run  if
they  are  not  to  jar  with  one  another  for  the  educated
eye. These  are  all  "  determinate "  reactions,  and
"  according  to  law  "  ;  but  as  the  construction  of  the
whole  is  approached  they  become  more  various  and
harder  to  hold  together,  so  that,  for  example,  the
fact  that  every  brick  must  be  held  in  place  by  some
thing  else,  becomes  relatively  less  and  less  illuminat
ing  as  we  go  on  to  consider  the  buttress  or  the  arch.
But  if  we  pass  on  to  say  that  the  purpose  of  the
whole "  determines " the mechanical factors, we
seem  to  be transmuting  the antithesis  of  part  to
whole within something individual into the  anti
thesis of  bare  particulars  to  an  empty  generality.
The  "  purpose  of  the  whole,"  after  all,  simply  is  the
1  whole,  put  together  as  it  must  be  put  together  if  it
i  is  not  to  contradict  itself  and  the  context  of  experi
ence. Certainly you could not construct such a
whole  as  a  human  dwelling-place  by  attending  solely
to  the  laws  according  to  which  bricks  can  be  built
up  into  a  wall. The  essentials  of  life,  apart  from
which  the  structure  will  be  self-contradictory,  must
impose  a  number  of  conditions  and  reservations  on


v  THE  "MATTER*  HELPS THE  ARTIST 163

the  choice  and  application  of  material ;  and  in  this
sense  one  may  say  that  the  material  is  subordinate,
and  is  selected  by  the  purpose  of  the  structure.
Only  we  have  clearly  to  understand  that  this  point
of  view  is  purely  relative ;  that  the  essentials  of
life  on  their  side  must  clothe  themselves  in  deter
minate  form,  and  submit  to  selection  and  modification
by  the  nature  of  what  is  called  par  excellence  the
material,  as  actually,  though  not  in  general  to  so
great  a  degree,  as  the  material  by  them.  And  by
entering  into  this  larger  combination,  what  first
appear  as  the  several  conditions,  the  definite  isolable
factors,  show  on  their  side  that  more  is  immanent
in  them  than  we  knew  ;  and  in  face  of  the  work  of
a  great  architect  we  may  exclaim,  "  I  never  thought
that  such  things  could  be  done  with  brick,"  perhaps,
or  "  with  iron."

"  But  are  you  not  forgetting,"  it  may  be  urged,
"  that  a  heap  of  bricks  left  to  itself  will  not  so  much
as  build  itself  into  a  wall  ?  Surely  the  man  with
his  pair  of  hands  is  the  all-important  factor,  with  the
appearance  of  which  on  the  scene  teleology  begins
to  operate  directly,  and  ideas  impose  themselves
upon  what  would  otherwise  remain  mere  heaps  of
material."  *

This  does  well  enough  for  a  rough  statement  of
apparent  facts  from  the  point  of  view  of  common
sense  ;  but  it  is  inadequate  for  critical  theory,  and,
as  is  constantly  the  case,  the  supreme  insight  of
skilled  and  sensitive  practice  will  be  found  to  sup
port  the  attitude  of  theoretical  criticism.

What  is  it,  then,  that  man  with  his  hands  can

1  Cf.  Driesch,  Gifford  Lectures,  ii.  193,  which  I  had  not  seen
when  I  wrote  this  passage.


1 64  BODILY  BASIS OF  MIND  LECT.

do  ?  He  can  apply  a  mechanical  force  which  in
virtue  of  the  character  ultimately  revealed  in  con
sciousness  *  is  able  to  react  in  view  of  a  great  variety
of  conditions  taken  together  as  a  whole,  and  as  a
whole  extended  in  time.  He  cannot — I  speak  now
of  what  is  indisputable,  of  external  effects — he  can
not  produce  in  the  world  any  change  except  by  his
bodily  mechanical  force  in  strict  co-ordination  with
the  ..forces- .and  qualities  of  jnateriaLthings.  The
idea  in  his  consciousness  is  powerless  except  in  as
vf  far  as  if  is  a  Iguidej  to  combinations  and  modifica
tions  which  are  latent  in  determinate  Reality,  includ
ing  his  own  physical  abilities.  His  advantage  over
"  natural "  objects  is  that  his  range  of  combination
is  wider — that  it  is,  indeed,  in  principle  universal,
for  all  that  can  be  experienced  can  enter  into  his
construction  of  the  world.  But  yet,  in  his  opera
tions  on  nature,  he  is  essentially  no  more  than  a
co-operative  mechanical  force.  He  may  be  the
predominant  partner,  from  dealing  with  a  completer
whole  ;  but  in  principle  he  is  just  as  dependent  on
the  reactions  which  he  can  elicit  from  the  other
members  of  the  partnership  as  he  is  on  his  own.
His  very  ideas  are  not  created  from  the-^oid,  but
simply  represent  the  immanent  capacities  of  his
world  as  it  develops  in  fact  and  for  consciousness
towards  a/  more  individual  whole  ;  and  so  far  as  by
defect  and  confusion  they  fail  to  represent  this,  they
become  mere  empty  symbols  of  ignorance  and  im
potence.  After  all,  then,  the  man  with  -his  iiands
does  not  bring  with  him  a  new  principle  or  create
out  of  nothing  a  new  totality.  He  reacts,  so  to
speak,  ta  a  much  more  concrete  whole  than  his

1 See  below,  p.  198.


;


v "THE ' METAL1 IS  ALIVE IN  HIS  HANDS" 165

material  copartners,  but  he  can  do  nothing  with
them  beyond  what  it  is  in  themselves  to  do.  Tele^-
ology,  if  we  know  what  we  mean  by  it,  is  a  very  \  /
goocT  name  for  the  principle  of  his  action  ;  but  it  \s
only  means  that  he  is  able  to  take  account  of  more
complete  totalities  than  those  with  which  material
objects  in  random  grouping  (i.e.  grouping  not
specially  interesting  to  man)  are  likely  to  be  in
relation.  Every  bit  of  his  totality,  as  of  theirs,  is
determinately  necessary  in  the  combination  which
constitutes  it.  As  an  end  it  is  not  to  be  credited,
on  the  side  of  content,  to  finite,  conscious,  and
"  purposive,"  interposition.  It  is  the  purpose  of  a
section  of  the  world  which  through  consciousness
has  become  explicit ;  or  perhaps,  which  in  making
itself  explicit  has  found  it  necessary  to  develop  con
sciousness.  It  may  be  rejoined  that  at  least  the
man  wants  it,  while  there  is  no  meaning  in  saying
this  of  the  material  associates  of  his  work.  But
this  again  probably  covers  a  fallacy.  "  The  man
wants  it,"  means  that  under  all  the  conditions  of  the
situation  he  finds  in  himself  a  contradiction  if  he
does  not  have  it ;  but  take  away  the  conditions  of
the  situation  and  you  modify  or  remove  the  want,
while  if  the  conditions  are  to  remain  and  to  count
in  the  result  the  want  cannot  be  ascribed  to  the
man — the  man  cannot  be  ascribed  to  the  man — in
abstraction  from  them.

The  sense  of  co-operation,  thus  demanded  by
theory,  is  strongly  marked  in  the  highest  grades  of
practice,  without,  it  may  be  noted,  having  any  re
course  to  pan-psychism.  The  sculptor  tells  us  that
the  statute  is  found  lying  in  the  marble.  The  glass-
maker  reports  that  the  "  metal  "  (the  heated  glass)


1 66  BODILY  BASIS  OF  MIND  LECT.

is  alive  in  his  hands,  simply  coaxing  him  to  make
something  beautiful.1 The  iron-forger,  it  has  been
said,  is  useless  until  he  acquires  the  feeling  of  the
iron.2 These  things  are  more  than  rhetoric. The
matter — the  physical  medium  of  art,  is  one-half  its
inspiration. Teleology  does not  come  out  of  the I
empty  mind ; it  is^the  focusing  of  external  things  J
togethej^until  they  refve.a.1  their  internal  life.
Dangers  of 2. In  approaching  the  discussion  of  a  "  mechani-


Inter-

i0*'


cal  "  counterpart  of  conscious  process,  it  will  be  well
to  begin  by  explaining  the  point  of  view  which  for
us  gives  interest  to  the  question.

It  is  strenuously  denied  that  the  hypothesis  of
"  interaction  "  supports  Indeterminism.  One  would
be  glad  to  credit  this  denial,  and  it  may  be  admitted
that  the  connection  between  the  two  hypotheses  is
not  inevitable.  But  the  confusion  which  prevails
in  the  whole  treatment  of  teleology  strongly  suggests
that  the  connection  is  natural,  if  not  inevitable,  and
that  if  it  is  abandoned  the  main  attractiveness  of
interaction — in  itself  a  difficult  view3 — is  removed.
It  is  possible  no  doubt  to  conceive  a  system  of  a
purely  psychical  nature  such  as  to  fulfil  the  conditions
essential  to  connected  mental  process,  and  differen
tiated  character  or  energy.  And  there  would  -seem
to  be  no  theoretical  objection  to  the  idea  of  such  a
system  in  itself.  But  if  it  is  bona  fide  to  satisfy  an
interest  which  can  not  be  satisfied  compatibly  with
the  idea  of  a  mechanical  counterpart,  then  there  is
a  question  if  it  can  remain  within  the  conditions  of

1  Morris,  joint vol. of  Lectures on Art, p. 195  ; Bosanquet,
History  of  Aesthetic,  p.  455.

2  Daudet's /<w£.

3  See  Stout,  Manual  of  Psychology,  Introd.  Chapter  iii. "  Body
and  Mind."


v  MIND  NEEDS THE  EXTERNAL  167

determinate  interconnection,  and  whether  the  whole
conception  of  the  individual  as  being  something,  or
possessing  a  nature  of  his  own,  would  not  have  to
be  surrendered.  In  short,  the  idea  of  the  mechanical
counterpart  is  not  so  valuable  for  its  own  sake,  as
by  way  of  a  protest  against  a  certain  theoretical
tendency,  apart  from  which  the  exclusion  of  the
mechanical  from  the  conditions  of  psychical  action
would  lose  all  its  attractiveness.

We  have  seen  the  strength  of  this  tendency  in
the  impulse  to  bring  purposive  action  into  sharp
antithesis  with  determinate  reaction  ;  to  treat  pur
pose  and  selection  as  if  they  were  sufficiently  ex
plained  by  pronouncing  the  word  consciousness,
and  as  if  the  logic  of  the  whole  or  the  assertion  of
unity  against  contradiction  ceased  to  be  intelligible
when  we  pass  from  the  laws  of  nature  to  the  aims
of  conscious  action.  Now  so  long  as  we  continue
to  pay  attention  to  all  that  side  of  purposiveness
and  teleology  which  finds  expression  in  the  material
and  quantitative  counterparts  of  mind — the  socialised
surface  of  the  earth,  the  machine,  the  work  of  art,
the  body, — we  have  before  us  something  which
emphasises  the  intelligible  and  coherent  side  of
content  and  self-expression.1  We  observe — and  it
is  contrary  to  our  most  dangerous  prejudices  but
fully  in  harmony  for  example  with  Plato's  deepest
views  —  that  the  subtlety  and  precision  of  cor
relations  which  are  quantitative  though  not  appre
hended  through  number  does  not  diminish  but

1  There  is  a  tendency  to  say  that  the  unity  of  a  system  can
lie  solely  in  the  purpose,  and  to  treat  it  as  a  high  conception  that
the  means  may  be  without  limitation  adaptable  to  the  purpose.  It
follows  from  our  analysis  of  teleology  that  this  conception  is  a  con
tradiction  in  terms.


1 68  BODILY  BASIS  OF  MIND  LECT.


increases  as  we  approach  the  completest  forms  of
self-utterance  accessible  to  man  ;  and  we  are  led  to
look  for  the  differentia  of  the  spiritual  rather  in  the
most  comprehensive  organised  harmony  than  in  the
escape  from  determinateness  and  sufficient  reason.1  '
Now  it  seems  to  be  in  this  very  escape  from

1  The  typical  action  which,  e.g.,  M.  Bergson  loves  to  use  as  an
instance  is  the  raising  of  one's  hand.  (Evolution,  p.  99  and  else
where.)  And,  no  doubt,  its  unity  as  a  felt  action  is  very  simple,
though  if  M.  Bergson  takes  it  as  indivisible  in  the  sense  of  not  pos
sessing  diversity  because  it  is  comprised  in  a  single  feeling,  his  view
seems  incorrect.  (See  Bradley,  Mind,  Ixix.  p.  5  i  ;  Appearance  and
Reality,  pp.  521,  569.)  No  doubt,  also,  as  M.  Bergson  observes,
the  analysis  of  such  an  act  into  definite  multiplicity,  as  e.g.  into
spatial  positions  traversed  by  the  hand,  is  the  application  of  an
external  point  of  view,  which  does  not  present  itself  in  carrying  out
the  act.  That  is  to  say,  the  positions  traversed  are  felt  as  a  whole,
not  one  by  one.  (Mitchell,  p.  45.)  But  what  a  type  of  act  to
choose,  compared  with  what  Spinoza  or  Leibniz,  or  M.  Bergson  at
his  best,  would  term  in  the  full  sense  a  free  activity  !  ("  C'est  de
I'ame  entiere,  en  effet,  que  la  decision  libre  emane  ;  et  1'acte  sera
d'autant  plus  libre  que  la  serie  dynamique  a  laquelle  il  se  rattache
tendra  d'avantage  a  s'identifier  avec  le  moi  fundamental."  Donnees,
p.  128.)  What  are  we  to  say  of  the  action  of  a  statesman  or  a
general,  or  of  any  dominant  action  in  which  the  whole  of  a  life  is
summed  up,  when  a  single  piece  of  conduct  issues  from  the  logical
focus  of  a  library  of  books  and  papers  and  a  life-time  of  experience  ?
And  for  us,  these  are  pre-eminently  the  actions  by  which  man  is
man.  And  one  strongly  suspects  that  underneath  the  emphasis  laid
on  spontaneity  and  immediacy  of  action  as  a  part  of  "  life,"  and  as
contrasted  with  intelligence,  there  is  a  basis  of  latter-day  prejudice
and  pessimism,  by  which  the  value  and  genuineness  of  such  work  as
that  just  referred  to  is  depreciated,  and  the  conscious  side  of  creative
art  and  invention  disparaged,  by  contrast  with  what  is  in  the  narrower
sense  naive  and  impulsive  and  impressionist.  We  may  call  attention
in  M.  Bergson  as  in  all  other  recent  theory  of  this  type  to  the  extra
ordinarily  inadequate  account  of  the  artist  and  the  inventor.  Evolu
tion,  pp.  49  and  368.  Invention  for  him,  as  for  all  of  a  certain  group
of  French  and  American  thinkers,  is  an  unaccountable  divergence
from  imitation — a  difference  split  from  its  identity,  which  the  intelli
gence  cannot  grasp.  Cf.  also  Le  Rire,  p.  175.  "  L'art  est  une
rupture  avec  la  societe  et  un  retour  a  la  simple  nature."  (See
Evolution,  p.  178.)  No  doubt  it  is  natural  to  suggest  that  for
M.  Bergson  Intuition  is  inclusively  related  to  Intelligence,  much  as,  for
Hegel,  Reason  to  Understanding.  Cp.  Lindsay's  Bergson,  p.  237  ff.
I  see  that  it  ought  to  be,  but  I  do  not  think  that  it  is.


v  EQUIVALENCE  HAS  A MEANING  169

determinateness  that  the  true  attractiveness  of  inter
action  consists.  It  is  bound  to  treat  mind  as  a
source  of  renergy^'unaccounted  for  in  the  bodily
balance-sheet.  So  long  as  the  system  of  body  and
mind  together  is  capable  of  being  regarded  as
having  something  to  which  it  is  bound  to  be  "  equi
valent,"  as  possessing,  however  ideally  and  in  the
abstract,  an  aspect  of  correlation  with  a  quantity,
there  is  meaning  in  treating  it  as  of  the  nature  of  a
totality  ;  as  something  to  which  it  makes  a  differ
ence  how  far  it  is  occupied  or  possessed  by  interests
and  impulses  according  to  their  respective  inten
sities  and  their  capacity  for  unification.  But  if  the
very  idea  of  limit  or  equivalence  is  destroyed,  then,\
it  would  appear,  we  have  to  deal  with  an  unfathom-  I
able  fountain  of  undifferentiated  "  spiritual  energy,"  *
and  all  presumption  of  the  unity  of  reason — of  a
tendency  in  hostile  impulses  to  conflict,  and  there
fore  to  be  reconcilable,  is  torn  up  by  the  roots.
"  The  very  idea  of  equivalence  "  ;  for  this,  it  would
seem,  is  all  that  the  constancy  of  energy  amounts
to.2  All  the  arguments  which  point  out  how  very  ,
slight  and  abstract  is  its  import,  and  how  little  it
affects  the  nature  of  processes  which  are  quantita
tively  equated,3  are  really  in  favour  of  leaving  to

1  Cf.  Wundt,  Logic,  ii.  507,  tit.  in  the  author's  Logic,  ii.  75.

2  In  Manual^ Introd. chap. iii. Professor Stout points out, a
little  in  the  tone  which  I  deprecate,  that  the  Law  of  Conservation  of
Energy  is  only  asserted  of  a  material  system. But  surely  a  psychical
system,  capable  of  exchanging  energy  with  a  material  system,  is  ad
hoc  material.

3  In  these  regions  it  seems  pretty  much  to  equal  an  assumption
that  a  finite existence has a finite quantity,  that is to  say,  that
although  different  forms  of  energy  may  not  be  measurable  by  the
same  physical  unit,  or  some  of  them  not  by  any  physical  unit  at  all,
yet  on  the  assumption  defended  in  the  text  it  is  possible  to  say  that
in  principle  they  correspond  to  measurable  quantities,  and  will  not
vary  without  a  reason  affecting  all  the  equivalents  alike.


i;o  BODILY  BASIS  OF  MIND  LECT.

psychical  activity  this  last  vanishing  link  with  the
world  of  physical  constants.  Apart  from  it,  or
from  some  effective  substitute  in  an  assumption
of  rationality  of  the  psychical  system,  the  whole
context  and  tissue  of  consistent  habit  and  reasonable
motive  is  at  the  mercy  of  a  volcanic  redistribution
of  energy,  suggested  by  nothing,  and  bearing  no
relation  to  the  positive  factors  operating  in  the
mind.

Now  what  seems  worth  pointing  out  is  this.  If
the  popular  mind  had  its  way  it  would  doubtless
exploit  this  conception  to  the  full,  not  merely  in  the
/  directions  where  it  is  perhaps  impossible  to  refute,
£  but  in  the  coarser  suggestions  which  no  serious
philosophy  would  countenance.1  We  should  not
merely  be  told  as  by  the  popular  doctrine  of  Free
Will  that  the  intensities  with  which  objects  are  pur
sued  bear  no  relation  to  their  rank,  connection,  and
predominance  in  the  mental  organism,  but  that
spiritual  energy  is  neither  limited  by  nutrition  nor
capable  of  being  exhausted  by  fatigue.  There  is
much  in  literature  and  in  common  speech  that  indi
cates  a  proneness  to  all  three  of  these  views,  and  if
they  were  to  be  seriously  pushed  home  the  interac
tion  hypothesis  would  at  all  events  have  promoted
an  important  theoretical  contention.

But  views  of  this  kind  seem  never  to  be  pushed
home.  They  are  restricted  within  limits  which
depend  _on_  the^jnirjqssibility  of  precise  measure
ments,  sometimes  making  use  of  ideas  analogous  to
thg*  QJJLP^wer  _  of  direction  without  expenditure  of

1  It  is  noticeable  in  this  connection  that  Driesch  takes  alleged
spiritualist  phenomena  as  an  analogy  for  the  action  of  his  "  Ente-
lechy."  I  believe  hiin  to  be  a  thoroughly  sound  thinker,  but  the
juxtaposition  is  suggestive.  See  G.L.  ii.  235.


v  HAVE  SOULS  PRE-NATAL CHARACTER? 171

mechanical  energy.1  They  do  not  challenge  the
overwhelming  improbability  which  would  attend
any  thorough-going  denial  of  our  current  assump
tions  about  the  logic  of  conduct,  about  nutrition,  and
exhaustion.

There  is  an  analogous  problem  about  heredity.
If,  as  on  some  theories  would  be  the  case,  the  soul
is  supposed  to  come  to  the  body  with  its  definite
endowment  of  capacities  and  dispositions,  then  that
view  ought  to  be  defended  and  explained.  But  the
overwhelming  weight  of  probability  is  surely  on  the
side  of  the  assumption  that  all  definite  differentiation
belongs  to  the  body,  and  that  all  tendencies  and
capacities  are  transmitted  through  bodily  arrange
ments.  It  is  not  so  much  that  there  is  any  special
difficulty  in  conceiving  a  soul  endowed  with  disposi
tions  as  that  one  can  see  no  logical  motive  for
adding  these  to  the  bodily  arrangements  which
prima  facie  seem  to  form  the  main  element,  or  a
main  element,  in  the  differentiation  of  individuals.
To  insist  on  such  an  addition  is  in  fact  to  attribute
excessive  importance  to  the  physical  aspect  of  life.
It  is  because  we  are  afraid  of  the  physical  that  we,
try  to  reduplicate  it  in  the  psychical.  A  true  view,  ^
recognising  that  the  whole  affair  is  an  arrangement
of  appearances,  would  not  be  afraid  to  follow  the
plain  probabilities  as  to  the  nature  of  the  arrange
ment.  But  certainly  the  result  would  be  favourable
to  supposing  that  all  positive  factors  of  soul  life  are
represented  in  the  physical  counterpart.


1  See  Appendix  I.  It  is  not  merely  that  all  such  ideas  '  are
difficult  and  indemonstrable  hypotheses.  Our  objection  is,  moreover,
that  they  bring  a  fundamentally  false  bias  into  psychology  and  into
all  higher  walks  of  mind.  They  disconnect  directive  power  from
dominance  and  organising  power.


172  BODILY  BASIS OF  MIND  LECT.

And  therefore  the  views  in  question  seem  both
to  be  not  worth  proving  and  to  be,  for  logic,  dis
credited  ab  initio.  "  Not  worth  proving,"  in  so  far
as  they  seem  only  to  survive  by  restricting  them
selves  to  quantities  which  would  involve  no  serious
deviation  from  our  common  assumptions.  It  may
be  that  no  one  can  prove  —  the  present  writer
certainly  could  not — that  it  is  impossible  to  delay
death  by  starvation  a  second  or  a  minute  through  a
supply  of  physical  energy  having  a  psychical  source
independent  of  nutrition.1  But  it  is  certain,  I  sup
pose,  that  no  philosopher  intends  to  maintain  such
a  possibility  up  to  a  point  which  seriously  conflicts
with  our  ordinary  assumption  that  life  and  all
psychosis  depends  upon  the  ingestion  of  food.  A
thesis  which  did  so  conflict,  however  improbable,
would  be  well  worth  proving.  But  a  thesis  which
merely  raises  a  doubt  at  the  margin  where  quanti
ties  are  too  small  for  verification,  accepting,  for  all
the  rest,  our  normal  assumption  as  a  working  law,2
seems  not  to  stand  to  win  anything  important  even
if  per  impossibile  it  were  established.

And  they  are  discredited  ab  initio.  It  is  not
playing  the  game  in  philosophy  to  suggest  a  new
principle  of  explanation,  bringing  it  up  at  every
point  to  the  edge,  but  not  into  the  region,  of  pos
sible  analysis.  But  the  main  line  of  argument
which  is  adopted  in  favour  of  regarding  conscious- 1
ness  as  a  source  of  energy  seems  to  be  of  this)

1  The  contention  would  have  to  be  that  the  work  of  life  could
thus  be  bonafide  carried  on  ;  the  phenomena  of  trance  and  the  like
would  not  be  fully  relevant.

2  Evolution,  p. 275. "  Maintenant,  d'ou  vient  1'energie? De
Faliment  ingere,  car  1'aliment  est  une  espece  d'explosif,  qui  n'attend
que  1'etincelle  pour  se  decharger  de  1'energie  qu'il  emmagasine." Cf.
ref.  to  Wundt,  p.  169,  above.

M*


v  ENERGY  DEMANDS ORGANISATION  173

nature.  It  appears  to  rely  on  the  impossibility  of
establishing  the  constancy  of  energy  as  an  abso
lutely  precise  generalisation.

Now  this  generalisation  may  not  be  a  principle
for  which  or  for  its  applicability  to  body  and  mind
one  would  incur  serious  logical  or  ethical  sacrifices.
In  the  present  context  it  has  perhaps  no  meta
physical  advantage  over  the  idea  of  a  psychical
unity  exercising  mechanical  energy  \  according  to
some  determinate  or  rational  system.  The  only
thing  is,  that  the  latter  has  to  be  invented,  so  far  as
at  present  appears,  entirely  out  of  imagination,  and
entirely  to  overthrow  our  ordinary  ideas  of  causa
tion  ;  while  the  fo£mer  is  ready  to  hand,  corresponds
in  general  with  our  working  assumptions  as  to  the
conditions  of  human  life,  and  in  principle  assigns  the
control  of  energy  to  the  predominance  of  content.
There  seems  to  be  no  reason  for  departing  from  it
except  the  bare  possibility  of  inserting  at  the
unknown  margin  a  fragment  of  a  different  principle,
which  in  its  general  tendency  belongs  to  an  order
of  ideas  that  dare  not  lift  their  heads  in  daylight,
and  has  for  its  effect,  if  not  for  its  intention,  to
dissociate  will-power  from  organisation  of  content.
And  therefore — not  because  of  the  content  of  these
ideas  but  because  of  the  attempt  to  maintain  them
only  in  the  dark — the  suggestion  that  the  soul  may
be  a  source  of  energy  without  mechanical  limit
seems  to  be  logically  discredited  ab  initio.

This  then  is  the  interest  which  dictates  the  re
marks  of  the  present  chapter  on  interaction.  Inter
action,  as  here  understood,  means  the  operation  of

1  I  believe,  if  the  idea  were  worked  out,  such  a  "  psychical '
system  would  show  itself  to  be  physical  ;  cp.  pp.  215,  218,  below.


174  BODILY  BASIS OF  MIND  LECT.

body  and  mind.on  one  another  after  the  analogy  of
jtransient  cajasatjon  Jbetween  jmaterial  things,.  And
it,  therefore,  means  that  bare  mind  develops
mechanical  energy  outside  and  independently  of
the  mechanical  system  of  which  the  body  is  a  part.
This  once  assumed,  there  seems  to  be  no  ground
for  the  limitation  of  such  energy  nor  for  its  distri
bution  in  accordance  with  any  sufficient  reason.1  It
is  not  here  alleged  that  to  accept  a  physical  counter
part  subject  to  quantitative  relations  is  the  only
conceivable  system  of  law  for  consciousness.  But
it  is  maintained  that  some  such  system  there  must
be,  if  the  mind  is  to  be  a  mind  at  all,  that  any  such
system  will  possess  the  leading  characteristics  which
we  find  in  the  physical  counterpart,  and  that  it  is
all  important  to  be  clear  whether  in  the  theory  of
interaction  more  adequate  suggestions  to  this  end
are  being  brought  forward,  or  whether  the  idea  of
system  and  sufficient  reason  is  being  covertly  dis
carded  from  the  philosophy  of  mind.

suggestion  , 3. Such  a  theoretical  interest  is  hostile  only  to
views of interaction which demand


operation  from  naked  consciousness. So  long  as  it'
\{s  admitted  that  we  cannot  dissociate  physical  from

/  ...

ditioned.  *  psychical states, arid that interrelation is most


/naturally  assumed  to  hold  between  conditions  each
of  which  has  both  a  physical  and  a  psychical  side,
the  fundamental  difficulty  does  not  arise.  Any
such  view  allows  us  to  remain  within  the  general
analogy  of  qualitative  wholes  conditioned  by  /
more  homogeneously2  quantitative  counterparts.

1  P.  169,  above.

2  The  qualitative  wholes  themselves,  though  less  homogeneous,
present,  it  must  be  remembered,  innumerable  relations  of  quantity,
gradation,  contrast,  etc.,  essential  to  their  effect.


v  FINITE  MIND  INVOLVES  A SYSTEM  175

The  view  thus  suggested  would  not  precisely
coincide  with  either  interaction  or  parallelism.
The  psychical  side  would  be  regarded  as  an
inherent  character  within  the  physical  process,
coming  to  light  under  conditions  of  relative  per
fection.

Such counterparts are normally of  a material
nature,  as  in  the  familiar  cases  of  the  physical  bases
of  sound  and  colour,  and  the  simplest  assumption  to
which  analogy  leads  us  would  result  in  treating  the
relation of  psychical and physical on some such
plan  as  that  which  does  duty  in  these  well-known
instances. Enough  has  been  said  in  the  preface  in
the  way  of  disclaiming  all  explanation  of  conscious
ness. The  suggestion  before  us  is  not  to  "  explain  "
consciousness on the analogy of the relation
sound  to  mechanical  motion  of  an  extended  mediui
(which  relation  itself  is  a  relation  of  objects  of  con
sciousness), but to extend to consciousness in
general  the  conception  of  de  facto  equivalence  which
is  illustrated  by  that particular  case. We  should
thus  get  a  certain orderly  arrangement  and con
tinuity  in the  objects  of  our  experience. As  has
been  said above, no character necessary  to con
sciousness  appears  to  be  interfered  with  by  retain
ing  the  conception  of  equivalence. For,  even  if  we
drop  equivalence,  we  must,  in  the  interest  of  system,
retain  finite  totality,  which  then  would  present  itself
as  a  quantitative limit, no less determinate than
equivalence, but without the systematic rationale
'  which  equivalence  affords  it. We  could not  pos
sibly  allow  that a  given  finite mind is  an  uncon
ditioned,  source of ideas or  of energy. Thus, it
appears  that  there  must  at  least  be  determinateness


1 76  BODILY.  BASIS OF  MIND  LECT.

of  a  psychical  system.1  And  in  _the_  last  resort  this
would  suffice.  But  it  seems  better  to  retain  the
connection  with  physical  mechanlsrn,  because  the
evidence  carries  it  so  far  that  to  dispense  with  it
after  that  point  b^comes__ji^serious  break  of  con
tinuity,  and  because  it  supplies  us,  as  we  have  said,
with^ome  suggestion  nf  a  rntinnafc  ffrr  the  •QsyrVnral

limitation  and  differentiation  which  any  sane  view
i  /

must  assume, y

Mechanical  (a)  It  appears  to  be  admitted  that  there  are  parts
mind.'"  of  psychological  doctrine,  dealing  with  the  more
mechanical  aspects  of  conduct,  which  "may  ulti
mately  be  replaced  by  Physiology."  Wherever  an
idea  or  perception  sets  in  motion  a  series  of  connec
tions  that  run  an  accustomed  course  to  a  habitual
end,  it  seems  to  make  no  theoretical  difference
whether  the  entire  reaction  is  treated  as  physical  or
psychical.  If  the  "  end  "  is  a  muscular  movement
it  is  plain  that  at  some  point  physical  connection
enters  into  the  series,  and  there  is  nothing  in  its
character,  even  if  accompanied  by  consciousness,  to
suggest  that  it  has  not  a  physical  aspect  throughout.
Such  a  series,  whether  physical  or  psychical,  merits
the  predicate  mechanical.  It  is  released  a  tergo  by
a  stimulus,  and  in  the  typical  case  runs  down  to  its
end  like  clockwork  without  readaptation.  Whether
this  typical  case  is  too  narrowly  described  is  a  question
that  will  need  reconsideration.  But  such,  in  general,
is  held  to  be  the  character  of  the  associative  habits
of  minds,  and  especially  of  those  physical  or  psychical

1  See  further,  Lect.  IX.,  below.

2  Taylor,  Elements,  p.  303. Bradley  on  identical  nervous  system,
involving  identical  memory,  Appearance  (2nd  ed.),  p.  356,  and  Mind,
xlix.  23,  on the  necessity  of  dispositions, partly  physical, for  that
realisation  of  ideas  which  is  will.


v MIND  AT  LEAST  RESTS ON  MECHANISMS 177

formations  which  have  become  known  as  "  disposi
tions."  The  conception  here  suggested  is  not
even  obliged  to  use  the  whole  of  the  above  admis
sions.  It  is  not  necessary  to  argue  that  any  part  of
Psychology  can  be  replaced  by  Physiology.  It  is
enough  to  note  that  there  can  be  psychical  process
which  itself  bears  a  mechanical  character,  and  which
without  any  theoretical  sacrifice  might  at  least  be
associated  with  a  strictly  physical  and  mechanical
counterpart.

(d)  Every  student  of  psychology  must  be  struck  Finite
by  the  recent  rapprochement  between  ideas  due  to  based  on


Hegel  and  a  sort  of  glorified  resurrection  of  British
psychology.  It  is  no  longer,  if  it  ever  really  was,  -™
the  boast  of  the  idealist  to  know  nothing  of  the  ments-
steps  of  psychical  action  and  evolution.  The  term
''machinery"  perpetually  recurs  in  the  analysis  of
volition  ;  and  while  it  would  be  contemptible  to
make  capital  of  such  a  casual  expression  in  favour
of  a  mechanical  theory,  it  is  certainly  noteworthy
that  the  adult  mind  is  coming  more  and  more  to  be
treated  as,  at  least  inter  alia,  a  shopful  of  machines.1
Now  such  a  point  of  view,  for  an  idealist  who  knows
his  business,  is  not  a  retrogression  from  the  deepest
insight  into  mind.  It  is,  if  rightly  handled,  the  very

1  Here  M.  Bergson's  language  is  very  significant.  Our  volitional
life  consists  for  him  in  constructing  mechanisms,  and  selecting  which
to  combine  and  to  set  going,  e.g.  Evolution,  pp.  273-4.  Cf.  Bradley,
Mind,  xlix.  e.g.  p.  25.  It  may  be  said  that  the  view  of  the  text  makes
the  mistake  of  regarding  the  work  of  the  cortex  as  continuous  and
homogeneous  with  that  of  the  seats  of  reflex  action.  But  in  modi
fiable  reflexes  I  suppose  it  is  so  in  some  degree,  and,  at  any  rate,
what  is  said  in  the  text  is  sufficiently  borne  out  by  the  facts  of
associative  nexus,  if  we  bear  in  mind  that  association  marries  only
universals,  and  that  the  identity  operative  in  a  connection  can  always
develop  into  fresh  detail  (Bradley,  Logic,  p.  303).  Any  habit  may
carry  one  on  to  new  ground  ;  sportsmanship,  for  instance,  to  politics.

N


V

1 78  BODILY  BASIS OF  MIND  LECT.

legacy  of  Hegel,  if  not  even  of  Spinoza.  Hegel's
1  'actual  soul"  is  the  perfection  of  a  living  body
highly  trained  and  definitely  habituated.1  We  do
not  know,  Spinoza  warns  us  in  a  wonderful  passage,
how  much  the  body  may  be  capable  of  doing.2  The
question  really  in  principle  goes  very  deep.  It  is
the  question  of  the  ultimate  nature  of  teleology,  on
which  something  has  been  said  above.  Teleology
is  not  the  immediate  translation  into  fact  of  fancies)
drawn  from  nowhere.  It  is  the  unity  of  a  real
individual,  for  whose  parts  there  is  nothing  undignified
in  framing  and  disciplining  themselves  to  a  definite
conformity  with  the  whole.  When  we  think  of
Hegel's  conception  of  the  psychical,3  how,  for  him,
the  planetary,  the  terrestrial,  and  the  climatic  in
fluences  draw  together  and  become  organic  to
consciousness  in  the  concrete  soul-life  of  a  race  and
an  individual,  we  must  recognise  that  to  be  some
thing  in  particular,  to  be  built  up  on  a  definite
structure  which  has  learned  many  detailed  lessons
of  conformity  to  reality,  is  in  principle  what  we
should  expect  for  the  most  central  and  concrete  of
all  finite  exisjten£es.  Thus  it  would  be  a  false
idealism  to  protest  against  the  use  made  of  laws
and  "  dispositions "  in  recent  analyses  of  Will,
Thought,  and  Self.  And  it  is  interesting  that,  more
particularly,  such  means  are  accounted  essential  for
the  passing  of  any  idea  into  external  fact.4  The
mind  is  at  least  erected  on  a  foundation  of  habit
and  determinate  reaction,  to  which  no  injustice  could
be  done  by  connecting  it  with  a  physical  counterpart,
and  equating  it  with  a  sum  of  mechanical  energy.

1  Phil,  des  Geistes,  sect.  411.  2  Ethics,  Hi.  2.

3  Phil,  des  Geistes,  sect.  390  ft"  4  Bradley,  loc.  tit.


v  DUALISM  FROM  IDEA OF  CREATION  179

4.  But  a  sharp  line  is  apt  to  be  drawn  when  we  vice  of
come  to  fresh  purposjve  adjustments 1  or  to  selective  discon-ng
interest,  to  that  which  decides  what  presentations
shall  actually  be  attended  to,  where  we  deal  with  '
considerations  belonging  to  the  psychology  of  feeling
and  attention.  Here,  it  is  said,  we  have  something
which  cannot  be  represented  in  a  physical  or
mechanical  system  ;  something,  therefore,  which  we
must  attribute  to  the  purely  teleological  idea  of
consciousness  per  se.  Now  the  term  Teleology,  it
has  already  been  argued,2  though  not  a  bad  way  of
describing  a  certain  side  of  conscious  activity,  con
stantly  shows  itself  to  be  open  to  grave  misunder
standing.  Such  misunderstanding  seems  to  be  pre
sent  whenever  the  higher  or  teleological  process,  in
being  contrasted  with  mechanism,  is  also  contrasted
with  that  necessity  and  determinateness  which
mechanism  and  logic  have  in  common.  This
contrast  we  seem  to  meet  with  in  the  dissociation
of  ethical  and  historical  appreciation  from  logical
insight,3  as  well  as  in  the  conception  of  points  in  the
world's  history  where  a  new  principle  comes  upon
the  stage,  and  mechanism  is  replaced  by  the  action
of  final  causes.4

It  is  a  misunderstanding  of  this  nature  which  is
here  attacked. The  central  principle  of  Idealism  I
seems  to  be  abandoned,  if  the  objects  of  ethical  and  ?
historical  appreciation  are  set  up  as  more  than  an
aspect  of  the  whole  in  its  logical  individuality. The  i
issue,  as  it  presents  itself  to  me,  is  whether  teleology
lies  in  the  mere  fact  that  some  one  cares  for  some-

1  Taylor,  Metaphysic,  p.  311  ;  cf.  App.  i.

2  Above,  Lecture  IV.  3  Taylor,  Metaphysic,  p.  305.
4  Ward,  Naturalism,  i.  276.


i So  BODILY  BASIS OF  MIND  LECT.

thing,  or  whether  the  real  question  is  not  rather
what  makes  anything  worth  caring  for,  and  anybody
capable  of  caring  for  it.1  And  it  appears  to  me  that
the  reason  for  which  the  former  or  accidental  aspect
'is  insisted  on,  and  the  latter,  the  fundamental  aspect,
is  neglected,  lies  in  the  spurious  interest  aroused  by
!the  conception  of  naked  consciousness,  or  the  stream

life,  creating  determinations  agartjjsjni^suffipieilt
-eason.  It  is  here  that  there  comes  the  parting  of
the  ways  with  reference  to  the  mechanical  counter
part  of  consciousness.  Why  cannot  fresh  purposive
adjustment  and  selective  interest,  be  linked,  subject
to  the  reservations  already  laid  down,  with  a  mechani
cally  determined  system  ?  The  answer  plainly  is,
because  they  are  not  thought  of  as  flowing  from  the
nature  of  any  totality,  but  are  conceived  as  origin
ating  de  novo,  and  out  of  nothing.

Fresh  2urp.Qaiv-e..adjiiSLtment  and  selectnae-interest
are  the  same  thing  viewed  from  two  sides.  It  is
enough  to  discuss  the  former.  It  is  admitted  that
external  action  involves  psycho-physical  systems  or
"  dispositions,"  which  being  started  by  their  normal
stimulus  run  down  like  clockwork  to  a  habitual  end.
And  it  is  common  ground  that  so  far  as  mental
operations  of  this  kind  are  concerned  there  is  no
final  impossibility  in  their  being  translated  into
physiological  terms.  But  it  is  urged ,  that,  so  to
speak,  on  the  top  of  these,  of  a  mind  thus  organised
and  habituated,  the  nature  of  purpose  forces  us  to
superadd  a  power  of  a  wholly  different  order,  by
which  new  activities  are  freely  generated  in  view  of

1  See  Lect.  IV.  sect.  5.  Contrast  "The  only  real  reason  I
can  think  of  why  anything  should  ever  come  is  that  some  one  wishes
it  to  be  here"  (James,  Pragmatism^  p.  289).  If  the  fulfilment  of  a
wish  meant  satisfaction  this  might  be  so.  But  it  does  not.


v  OLD  ADJUSTMENTS  SLIDE  INTO  NEW 181

new  experiences,  the  process  remaining  for  certain
phases  independent  of  the  physical  series,  and
resuming  relations  with  it  at  some  further  point.1

This,  no  doubt,  is  not  the  way  in  which  those
who  insist  upon  such  a  view  would  represent  the
connection.  They  would  say,  to  put  the  principle
in  a  word,  that  teleology  comes  first,  and  that
mechanism  is  fossilised  teleology.  The  bodily
counterpart  of  action,  some  might  add,  accompanies
it  thus  far  and  no  farther,  viz.  as  far  as  automatism,
of  which  secondary  automatism  would  be  taken  as
typical,  is  used  in  or  substituted  for  psychical
process.

But  for  the  present  purpose  priority  between  the
two  alleged  types  of  process  does  not  matter.  The
point  to  which  attention  is  drawn  remains  unaffected.
It  may  be  stated  as  discontinuity  or  severance  of
logical  nexus.

\\i  The  end,  we  have  urged,  is  the  whole  ;  and  if
this  subject  and  predicate  conflict,  then  it  is  the
character  of  being  an  end  in  time  which  must  give
way.  We  have  it  admitted  that  an  adult  human
mind  contains  an  immense  structure  of  automatic
machinery,  by  which  connection  is  effected  with  its
habitual  ends  in  normal  surroundings.  I  insist  on
this  view,  which  I  believe  to  be  true,  and  to  have
more  significance  than  is  usually  seen.  Somehow,
on  the  top  of  and  by  the  side  of  this  machinery,
life  is  carried  forward  and  new  adjustments  made.
Now  life  is  highly  continuous.  New  adjustments
are  made  on  the  basis  of  old.  The  machinery  must

1  Taylor,  Metaphysic,  p.  311.  The  quite  extraordinary  discon
tinuity  introduced  into  mental  life  by  Bergson's  view  must  strike
every  student.  It  becomes  in  so  many  words,  mechanism  plus
indeterminate  choice.  See  reference  above,  p.  177.


1 82  BODILY  BASIS OF  MIND  LECT.

be  somehow  co-operating  in  all  determinate  thought
and  action. The  environment  is  a  continuum,  and
life,  corresponding  to  it,  is  also  a  continuum. In
every  change  of  environment,  and  in  every  relevant
adjustment,  the matter, so  to  speak,  the  stuff  and
medium,  is  mos_tly_old. The  old  slides  into  the  new,
framing  and  conditioning  it  at  every  turn.1 A  man
is  dissatisfied  with  his  tailor  or  his  house  or  his  own
character,  and  wants  to  make  a  change. There  is
no  point  at  which  his  want  is  unconditioned  by  his
past  practice  and  surroundings. Things  do  not  suit
him,  and  the  particular  ways  in  which  they  do  not
suit  him  slide  into  the  ways  in  which  the  new  ones
are to  suit him. He rides on the old identity,
guided  by  negations,  to  a  new  diversity. Or  say
that  he  begins  by  chancing  upon  some  new  practice,
and  it  harmonises  with  his  past  and  present  better
than  something  in  that  past  and  present  with  which
the  new  conflicts,  and  which  finally  it  extrudes. It
is  a  very  puzzling  suggestion  that  all  this  determining
continuum,  which makes the  main content  of  the
new  as  of  the  old,  is  to  be  represented  by  a  psycho-
physical order  discontinuous  with the  new  adjust
ment  and  heterogeneous  from  it. "  But  the  end  has
generated  it ;  has,  so to  speak,  deposited  it ;  and
persists  itself,  as  the  growing  point,  to  determine
without  being  determined." But  is  not  this  in  great
part  a  misapprehension  ? In  depositing  this  sup
posed  stalactite  of  mechanical  habit,  the  "end"  has
surely  all  along  been  determining  not  merely  some
thing  else  but  itself. Take  the  "  end" — the  selective
mind — when  it  was  most  nearly  free,  unsupported  by
mechanism,  disposing  of  no  automatic  connections.

1 Cf.  Mitchell,  Structure,  etc.,  p.  480.


v THE  NEW  IS  A RE-SHAPING OF  A WHOLE 183

In  that  phase  it  was  correspondingly  empty  of  con
tent.  Probably  it  had  not  then  even  the  teleological
form  of  distinct  consciousness.  Its  distinctness  most
likely  depends  on  the  quantity  of  determinate  con
ditions  in  relation  to  which  it  has  embodied  in
machinery  its  own  nature.1  All  this,  the  habitual
and  determinate  reaction  of  the  mind,  by  which  it,
as  a  continuum,  responds  to  its  continuous  environ
ment — all  this  falls  not  outside,  but  inside  the  end.
The  end,  no  doubt,  is  something  more  than  any  of
the  automatic  habits,  and  more  than  all  of  them
together ;  but  it  cannot  be  formulated  or  be  aimed
at  except  by  definite  reference  to  them.  It  is  hard
to  believe  that  it  can  stand  in  need  of  conditions  and
a  mode  of  determination  wholly  discontinuous  with
those  which  belong  to  the  greater  part  of  itself.
Here  again  the  question  of  principle  is  the  important
thing.  If  the  end,  the  object,  the  want,  were  some
thing  emerging  out  of  the  depth  of  a  creative
consciousness,  dissociated  from  any  larger  universe,
then  the  demand  for  discontinuity,  both  logical  and
mechanical,  would  be  intelligible.  But  if  the  endf
is  the  completion,  or  the  supposed  and  relative  *
completion,  of  what  already  stands  shaped  in  a
determinate  continuum,  and  if  the  very  want  which
constitutes  it  as  subjectively  teleological  means  a
negative  and  positive  congruity  of  the  formed  system
to  its  logical  complement,2  then  the  suggestion  of

1  M.  Bergson,  e.g.  j&volution,  pp.  125,  284,  makes  a  strange
use  of  this  idea,  but  his  view  supports  our  contention  in  some
degree.

It  cannot  be  too  strongly  insisted  on  how  small  a  part  of  a
relatively  individual  system  the  desired  logical  complement  at  any
moment  may  be — the  opening  of  a  door  or  the  turning  of  one's  head.
It  will  be  replied  the  end  is  not  the  existence  but  the  possession  of
the  whole,  and  the  change,  however  slight,  is  ex  hypothesi  needed  to


1 84  BODILY  BASIS OF  MIND  LECT.

discontinuity  seems  wholly  untenable  in  principle,
whatever  view  may  be  taken  as  to  "  what  the  body
can  do."

On  this  point  a  rough  statement  was  admitted
ad  interim  above.1  But  so  far  as  experience  shows,
the  exclusive  assignment  of  automatism  to  the
physical  and  teleology  to  the  pure  psychical  series
would  break  down  on  the  physical  side.  We  have
observed  on  this  in  treating  of  plant  life,  and  when
we  come  to  secondary  automatism  there  is  no  room
for  doubt.  Broadly  speaking,  adjustments  of  quite
the  same  character  that  would  be  made  by  reflection
can  be  made  under  automatic  habit,  with  almost  any
degree  of  unconsciousness.  In  other  words,  it  is
not  true  that  psycho-physical  automatic  series  are
confined  to  identical  trains  of  movements,  unmodi-
fiable  after  being  released  a  tergo  by  a  stimulus.  In
the  first  place,  variation  according  to  the  stimulus
can  itself  pass  into  adaptation  ;  and,  in  the  second
place,  it  is  clear  that  adjustment  takes  place  in  the
whole  course  of  movements,  whether  we  call  it
variation  according  to  continuously  varying  stimuli,
or  adaptation  to  conditions.  The  example  of  skill
in  games  seems  quite  unambiguous.2

We  are  not,  by  the  line  which  we  have  taken,
bound  to  account  for  fresh  purposive  adjustments
out  of  purely  physico-chemical  combinations.  All

achieve  this.  But  it  is  the  partial  presence  of  the  whole  in  you,  a
"  partial "  which  may  be  all  but  complete,  that  conditions  the  need
for  completeness.

1  Page  176.

2  Cf.  Stout,  Anal  Psych, i. 66, 72, on  relative  suggestion. A
simple  illustration  is  a  cricketer  playing  a  ball. He  is  guided  by  a
"  universal "  which  adjusts  his  movements  to  the  special course  of
the  ball ;  but  the  universal  is  a  habit,  all  but  unconscious,  and  involving
no  reflective  action  of  the  mind. Cf.  p.  40,  above.


v PHYSICAL  SYSTEMS  REPRESENTING  ENDS 185

that  is  here  attempted  is  to  defend  the  conceivability  I
of  a  physical  r.onnterpart  of  consciousness  on  the  j
general  lines  of  determinateness.  This  is  the
point  of  the  analogy  (a)  of  mechanical  processes  in
consciousness,  such  as  admittedly  might  have  a
physiological'counterpart,  and  which  yet  are  abso
lutely  continuous  with  choice  and  initiative,  (b)  of
adaptive  processes  apart  from  explicit  consciousness,
which  seem  homogeneous  with  such  adjustments  as
consciousness  itself  in  other  cases  accompanies.  ,  It~~
seems  impossible  to  disregard  such  a  continuity.  If
it  is  clear  that  physical  movement  per  se  explains
nothing,  it  is  no  less  clear  that  in  every  purposive
adjustment  there  is  on  our  hands  the  fact  of  a
physical  system  in  reaction,  with  an  immense  store
of  pre-adaptations  by  all  of  which  the  new  reaction
must  presumably  be  influenced.

It  is  impossible  to  rule  all  this  out  when  we
consider  the  relation  of  the  physical  and  psychical
series.  ^/

5.  Two  further  points  may  be  mentioned,  "  How,"  Ends  are
it  is  asked,  "  can  a  physical  system  possibly  repre-  embodied
sent  a  'meaning'  or  an 'end'?" Understanding  J-eac^ons
that representation and not explanation is in  ^^^  '
question, the  answer  seems obvious. Meaning  is
represented in a  material system in as far  as"  a
complex  reaction,  involving  the  nature  of  the  system
as a whole, follows upon a  simple stimulus. A
penny-in-the-slot machine represents a meaning ;
and the principle is  not  confined  to  the  world  of
human  contrivance. When  mere contact, such  as
would  have  no  effect  on  an  ordinary  leaf  beyond  a
slight deflection, causes a carnivorous plant to
enfold and absorb a substance, it is plain that


1 86  BODILY  BASIS  OF  MIND  LECT.

we  have  what  in  conscious  form  (which  in
instinct  is  imperfect)  would  be  a  meaning  of  the
contact.

So  again  with  a  purposive  consciousness.  "  The
experience  of  seeking  is  the  experience  of  giving
ourselves  to  realising  an  end,  of  adopting  it,  of
identifying  ourselves  with  it.  Hence  for  its  corre
late  we  may  suppose  an  action  of  the  brain  as  a
whole  in  support  of  the  particular  system  realising
the  end.  Such  an  action  of  whole  on  part  is  well
known  experimentally  in  the  inhibition  and  the
enhancement  of  reflex  actions."  l

This  is  only  a  side  of  the  facts  that  have  already
been  insisted  on.  It  comes  to  this.  There  is  no  I
purely  fresh  purposive  adjustment.  There  is  no
selective  interest  cut  off  with  an  axe  from  the
continuum  of  interests.  In  face  of  a  change  of
situation  there  must  be  a  determinate  modification
of  the  whole  and  its  parts  for  consciousness,  by
which  the  so-called  "new"  purpose  is  generated  out]
of  the  old,  because  the  universal  or  spirit  of  the
totality  is  real.  There  must  also  be  a  determinate
modification  of  the  whole  nervous  system,  and  its
parts,  whatever  they  are.  The  former  is  what
commands  our  interest.  It  must  be  logical,  an
effort  to  maintain  and  adjust  the  whole,  giving  rise
by  a  definite  modification  to  a  fresh  balance  of
interests  and  a  fresh  purposive  conception.  But
the  latter  also  we  have  on  our  hands,  and  it  cannot
be  disregarded.  The  mechanical  continuum  must
react,  and  its  reaction  cannot  but  be  interwoven  with
the  new  logical  development,  into  the  stuff  and  sub
stance  of  which,  as  has  been  explained,  it  enters  at

1 Mitchell,  Strticture  and  Growth  of  the  Mind,  p.  485.


v  MIND  "THE  IDEA OF  BODY*  187

every  point.1  Is  there  really  anything  to  be  gained
by  suggesting  a  "guidance,"  a  '  '  dfalanchement  "  —
which  by  the  very  phrases  and  conception  imply  an
exterior  pushing  or  pulling  at  certain  points,  or  the
release  of  a  trigger  at  certain  isolated  moments  —
from  outside  the  system  which  is  so  plainly  in  the
main  continuous,  self-contained,  and  self-directing  ?  2
6.  The  object  of  the  present  lecture  has  been  The

,  , ,  ...  r  .  sciences  of

merely  to  help  in  paving  the  way  for  a  genuine  con-  body  and


ception  of  the  concrete  individual. I  do  not  for  a
moment  pretend  that  I  can  overcome  the  difficulties,  each  other

1  at  some

which have been pronounced insurmountable, of  points.
uniting  the  treatment  of  soul  and  body  in  a  single
explanatory  theory.

The  difficulties  are  :  first,  the  imperfect  and  self-
contradictory  nature  of  such  beings  as  body  and
soul,  when  taken  apart  from  each  other  and  from
the  rest  of  the  world  ;  secondly,  the  separateness
and  independence  of  the  physiological  and  psycho
logical  points  of  view  as  represented  by  physiology
and  psychology  respectively  ;  and  thirdly,  the  re
moteness  from  actual  experience  of  the  scientific
descriptions  furnished  by  the  two  sciences  in
question.

I  cannot  help  thinking,  however,  that  when  diffi
culties  of  this  type  are  advanced  as  final  objections
to  the  philosophical  unification  of  appearances,  the
pretensions  of  the  special  sciences,  against  which
the  objection  is  supposed  to  be  directed,  are  really
being  put  too  high.  Granted  that  a  certain  falsity
attaches  to  all  appearances  in  isolation,  and  that  the

1  On  the  continuity  of  old  and  new  adjustment,  see  Mitchell,
p.  480.

J  This  externality,  as  of  an  artist  to  his  material,  is  strongly
expressed  in  Driesch,  Gifford  Lectures,  ii.  336.


188  BODILY  BASIS  OF  MIND  LECT.

special  sciences  which  deal  with  them  are  defective
if  compared  with  a  concrete  idea  of  truth  ;  still  it
seems  erroneous  to  suppose  that  such  isolation  and
abstraction  so  much  as  aims  at  being  the  last  word  of
intelligence,  and  that  it  is  impossible  to  reconstruct
concrete  experience  with  a  distinctness  borrowed
from  abstraction.  The  connection  of  subjective
Idealism  with  a  special  form  of  fallacy,  as  though
the  subjectivist  position  had  in  itself  no  scintilla  of
truth  or  significance,  is  an  example  of  this  readiness
to  disorganiseJsBo.wledge.1  I  see  no  reason  against
an  attempt  to  conceive  the  restoration  of  the  indi
vidual  unity  which  the  sciences  of  body  and  soul
have  helped  to  construct  by  analysing  it.  For
scientific  analysis,  it  must  be  remembered,  always
constructs  while  it  analyses.  The  thing  or  object  is
not  realised  as  a  whole  before  analysis  as  it  is  after.2
It  might  be  possible  to  make  use  of  such  detail
belonging  to  these  sciences,  as  would  help,  if  only
in  the  most  general  way,  to  reconstruct  the  idea  of
their  common  object.  It  seems,  for  example,  to  be
needlessly  rejecting  a  st.und  suggestion,  if  we  neg
lect  to  bring  together  with  the  complexity  of  bodily
reactions  the  more  recent  conceptions  of  the  complex

1  On  the  limited  truth  of  the  connection  between  Introjectionism
and  Subjective  Idealism,  see  Norman  Smith,  Mind,  Iviii.  p.  149. I
confess  that  the  primary  subjectivist  argument  seems  to  me  to  be
simpler  than  Introjectionism,  and  to  apply  to  one's  private  experience
without  consideration  of  the  relation  to  others. It  is  simply  that  we
have  a  logical  idea  of  what  self-subsistent  objects  should  be,  and  that
the  immediate  objects  of  experience  fail,  on  account  of  their  non-
independence,  to  satisfy  this  idea. I  may  add  that  it  is,  I  believe,
an  error  in  fundamental  principle  to  try  and  obtain  any  conclusion
from  comparison  with  others'  experience  which  cannot  be  got  from
comparison  with  our  own  at  different  times.

2  On  the  idea  that  mind  is  dealt  with  by  Psychology  is  a  wholly
symbolic  and  unreal  object,  see  Alexander,  Ar.  Proceedings,  1908.


°onscious-


v A  SOUL  COMES  WHEN  ITS  WORLD  IS  READY  189

psychical machinery of  the self  and the presup
positions  which  it  involves.

7.  Of  course,  even  so,  I  do  not  hope  to  effect  The  world
much.  But  it  would  be  something,  in  my  judgment,
to  emphasise  the  idea  of  a  being  essentially  con
nected  with  or  even  founded  upon  its  environment
(past  as  well  as  present),  to  which  nevertheless  or
out  of  which  it  brings  a  principle  of  unity,  in  a  sense
opposed  to  the  struggling  partnership  of  a  body
and  a  soul,  isolable  from  the  environment  and
from  each  other,  as  traditional  popular  metaphysic
represents  them  to  us.

Instead  of  a  self-subsistent  eternal  angelic  being
we  should  then  be  led  to  conceive  of  the  soul  as —
to  adapt  a  phrase  of  Lotze — a  perfection  .^granted
by  the  Absolute  according  to  general  laws,  upon
certain  rnrnplfav  ^^ns1*0^  and  arrangements  of  j
externality.  After  all,  we  must  not  shut  our  eyes  to  '
the  fact,  that,  though  we  cannot  see  life  coming  out  of
inorganic  matter,  we  can,  every  day  and  everywhere,
see  souls,  with  full  human  capacities,  apparently
being  brought  into  existence  by  the  fulfilment  of
certain  very  elementary  conditions  of  cell-conjuga
tion  and  division ;  and  we  see  that  soul  is  emphati
cally,  though  Plato  would  not  have  it  so,1  a  thing  or
power  or  quality  (whatever  we  like  to  call  it),  of
which  there  can  be  more  and  less  in  every  conceiv
able  degree,  and  the_jncire  and  less  vary,  with  the
complication  of  the  material  system  in  connection
with  which  it  is  observed.  We  are  not  suggesting
that  mere  temporal  or  spatial  multiplicity  (as  in  the
oscillation  of  light  waves)  constitutes  a  claim  to  the
production  of  consciousness.  Such  expressions  as

1  Phaedo,  93  D,  E.


190  BODILY  BASIS  OF  MIND  LECT.

complexity  and  complication,  which  are  forward  to
suggest  themselves  as  non-committal  terms,  fail  to
do  justice  to  the  point.  The  interest  is  rather  in
the  protracted  history  and  wide  comprehensiveness
of  continuous  and  also  co-operative  organisation,
that  lie_s_behind  and  beneath  the  ^ppearance_of  the
soul,  and  still  more  of  the  self  or  ego  in  its  full
character.  It  is  not  that  the  mere  lapse  of  time  or
the  intricacy  of  changes  postulated  by  evolutionary
theory  can  make  a  transformation  explicable,  which
would  be  inexplicable  if  simpler  or  more  rapid.  But
it  is  that  the  determinate  incidents  of  self-main
tenance  which  necessarily  come  into  being  in  the
constitution  of  a  living  and  still  more  of  a  sentient
body — the  structures,  the  reflexes,  the  instincts,  the
feejings — are  shown  as  at  once  the  instruments  by
which  consciousness  and  then  self^are  evoked,  and
the  world  with  which_fram_their  first  appearance
they  are  identified.  Q n d ivid u al  ity\i s  there  for  the
observer  before  it  is  for  tEe^suDJect ;  or,  we  may
say,  determinateness,  objective  continuity,  the  char
acter  of,  a_  drfjpjJ-e  r^nfr^._^L_f!ZTprl'Pri^)  precede
conscious  _selfhoojd  and  furnish  its  pre-supposition
and  materials.  The  finite  self,  then,  qua  finite,  is
the  centre  or  awakening  of  a  determinate  world
which  is  its  pre-supposition.  We  may  smile  at  the
simplicity  of  the  materialist  who  could  explain,
consciousness  as  an  effect  of  material  combination  jf
but  it  seems  to  remain  true  on  the  whole  that  whenj
the  self  appears  it  is  "  granted  by  the  absolute  "  as  a.1
solution  to  a  definite  situation  in  external  arrange
ments  ;  a  solution  which  could  not  have  been*
predicted  or  constructed  from  the  mere  observation
of  physical  nature,  but  which,  nevertheless,  being


NEITHER  LEVEL UP  NOR  LEVEL  DOWN 191


given,  can  in  some  degree  understand  itself  in
correlation  with  its  own  experience  of  the  physical
order.1  And  we  must  bear  in  mind  that  in  the  end
this  being  granted  by  the  Absolute  upon  a  certain
combination  is  all  that  any  connection,  any  form  of
causation  or  inherence,  can  mean.  There  could
therefore  be  no  harm,  if  we  knew  what  the  words  J
meant,  in  saying  that  matter  or  externality  is  the
cause  of  consciousness.  It  is,  in  all  probability,  as
Lotze  says,  that  if  we  could  observe  the  germinating
soul  as  the  microscopist  observes  the  body,  its
development  would  appear  to  the  observer  to  pro
ceed  part  passu  with  the  organisation  of  the  body.2
And  in  such  a  view,  whether  right  or  wrong  in  fact,
there  is  nothing  whatever  materialistic  or  unspiritual.
In  apparent  cosmic  development,  whether  inor
ganic,  organic,  or  logical,  the  rule  is  for  the  stream
to  rise  higher  than  its  source.3

We  shall  find,  then,  that  the  absolute  must  under
certain  conditions  appear  as  a  soul  with  capacity  for
forming  a  self,  because  the  stuff,  and  pressure  for
utterance,  are  there,  to  which  nothing-  less  than  a
soul  can  do  justice.  There  will  be,  as  we  said  at  the
beginning,  no  motive  whatever  to  level  down  the
nature  of  consciousness  to  that  of  the  psychical  or
physical  foundation ;  on  the  other  hand  there  will
not  be  the  smallest  presumption  that  the  psychical
or  physical  stuff  in  which  the  Absolute  has  deigned

1  It appears to  me  an  absolute  error  of  principle  to  say  that
"  newly  arising  elemental  agents  must  be  conceived  as  already  pre
existing  in  some  way  so  that  life  cannot  arise  upon  a  constellation  of
known  non-vital  agen.ts." (Driesch,  Gifford  Lectures,  ii.  234.)

2  MetaphyriC)  sect.  246.

3  We  have  seen  that  if  the  inorganic  world  really  follows  the  line
of  least  resistance,  then  the  line  of  least resistance is  capable  of
leading  up  continuously  to  life  and  history.


192  BODILY  BASIS  OF  MIND  LECT.

to  become  self-conscfcus  is  unfit,  because  itself  an
externality,  to  be  the  instrument  of  the  manifesta
tion  of  which  it  has  become  the  occasion  ;  and  no
motive,  therefore,  to  level  up  as  is  attempted  by
Panpsychism.  What  could  be  higher,  short  of  the
Absolute  itself,  than  a  being  which  is  directly  its
organ  for  appropriation  and  appreciation  of  some
context  and  province  of  experience  ?

It  may  be  urged  that  a  conclusion  of  this  kind  is
mystical  and  equivocal.  Is  the  self,  we  shall  be  asked,
mechanically  determined  a  tergo  by  the  responses
and  excitements  of  the  nervous  system  ?  Or  is  it
purposive  and  selective,  able  to  be  determined  by
an  idea  of  an  object  which  is  not  yet  in  existence,
and  which  is  therefore  incapable  of  producing
physical  effects  upon  the  present  nervous  system  ?
The  question  is  not  merely,  Does  a  man  act  freely  ?
but,  Does  a  man  act  at  all  P1  We  shall  attempt  to
answer  these  questions  precisely  and  concisely
below.  But  in  general  principle  I  answer  stubbornly
that  I  cannot  see  why  consciousness,  being  con
ceived  as  the  ^determinate  working  of  a  world  o£
content,*though  gifted  with  a  peculiar  unity,  a  nisus
towards  totality,  which  can  only  be  noted  and  not
explained,  should  not  be  the  meaning  and  true
inwardness  of  a  physical  process  which  at  every
point  there  would  be  something  definitely  to
determine.

If  indeed  the  self  brought  with  it  from  another
world  a  new  and  independent  content,  there  would
not  be  in  such  a  suggestion  as  the  above  even  the
show  of  rationality  which  I  ascribe  to  it.  But  as
the  self  is  essentially  a  world  of  _  conjent  engaged  in
1  Stout,  Manual)  Introd.^  ch.  iii.


v  MIND  =  A HIGH  RESPONSIVENESS  193 '

certain  transformations,  and  is  nothing  merely  of
itself  or  apart  from  its  world,  the  conception  that  this,^
like  other  new  qualities  and  responses,  is  granted  as
a  supervenient  perfection  upon  certain  conjunctions
of  external  elements,  seems  at  least  a  way  of  formu
lating  the  problem  with  the  minimum  of  temptation
to  definite  error.  At  any  rate,  it  places  in  strong
relief  a  set  of  ideas  which  seem  to  me  to  demand
attention  :  ideas  of  the  dignity  and  splendour
attaching  to  the  position  of  a  conscious  being,
just  because  it  is  a  world,  however  subordinate
in  the  whole  scheme  of  the  universe,  in  which
the  Absolute  begins  to  reveal  its  proper  nature,
through  and  in  union  with  a  certain  focus  of
externalities.

8. I  will  conclude  by  trying  to  bring  this  problem  The  point.
of  body  and  mind  to  the  clearest  possible  point,  in
order  to  leave  no  ambiguity  as  t<9  the  principle  here
advocated.

i. It  is  hoped  that  the  problem  has  been  made  Mind  is  a
more approachable by  our  attitude to teleology,  ing


The  peculiarity  of  mind,  for  us,  is  to  be  a  world  of
experience  working  itself  out  towards  harmony  and  ternality
completeness.  Such  a  world,  as  compared  with  a
something  bringing  with  it  a  new  end  or  principle,
some  angel  or  genius,  or  some  spark  of  intelligence
coming  from  out-of-doors,1  is  much  more  easily
correlated  with  an  arrangement  ostensibly  spatial,
like  the  nervous  system.

According to the conception here advocated
then, mirid,  is  not  so  much ^something, a  unit, >
exercising  guidance  upon  matter,  as  the  fact  of  self-
guidance of  that  world  which appears as matter,

1 6vpa6ev  (Ar.  Ile/H  f.  y.  p.  736  b  28).

O


i94  BODILY  BASIS OF  MIND  LECT.

when  that  reaches  a  certain  level  of  organisation.
Matter  is  externality,  a  side  of  our  experience  which
seems  essential to the whole  of  things,1  but  not
capable  of  independent  reality. Under  certain  con
ditions, which are uniform in our experience, a
certain  type of  this externality, also  in  the  main
uniform)  persists  and  develops  as  the  vehicle  of  life
and mind. Its responsiveness, which all matter
ex  hypothesi  possesses,  takes  on  a  new  form,  ceases
to  be  spatial  appearance,  and  becomes  a  centre  of
response,  to  which  its own antecedent conditions
persist  as  external  environment. All  that  has  comei
to  pass  is  this  new  kind  of  apprehensiveness  and;
responsiveness ; purposiyeness, according to ouf
views,  is  an  incidental  consequence  of  it. Every-
f  thing,  from  an  elementary  substance  upwards,  reacts
in-the-whole  in  which  it  is  a  member  ;  life  and  mind
do  no  less,  but  nothing more. It is purely  our
eclecticism  that  fails  to  see  "  purpose  "  everywhere,
e.g. throughout the inorganic world, and conse
quently, nowhere  par excellence. The so-called
purpose  is  really  at  every  point  of  the  whole,  though
more noted  when  it  is  a  conscious  self  that  is  at
some  point  in  self-contradiction,  when  what  we  are
apt  to  call  a  true  or  subjective  purpose — a  wish  or
want — arises. Thus  the  true  representative  of  pur
posive  consciousness  is  an  organised  system  ;  not  a
mere  subject  feeling  a  want.

ii. It  is  for  us  really  a  minor  question  whether

1  This  is,  as  I  understand,  the  point  of  divergence  between  our
view  and  that  of  the  many  eminent  thinkers  (e.g.  Professor  Stout  in
Manual,  introd.  ch.  iii.),  who  advocate  pan-psychism.  Even  if  there
were,  de  facto,  a  psychical  something  underlying  matter,  yet  it  is
only  as  definite  externality  that  it  plays  a  part  in  our  life.  We  have
no  use  for  it  as  inwardness.  Professor  Stout  seems  to  have  modified
his  view.  See  Mind,  Ixxvii.  p.  9.


is  very
much  wider


v  "REGULATION" IS  IMMANENT  195

life,  with  all  the  facts  of  organic  regulation,  can  be  Life
explained  on  a  physico-chemical  basis.  For  us  the
point  is  that  it  "most  certainly  can  and  must  be
explained,  or  left  unexplained,  apart  from  what  is  "natural.
commonly  called  mind,  that  is,  from  finite  centres  of
consciousness.  If  we  take  Driesch's  theory  of  the
entelechy  as  typical  for  vitalism,  we  see  that  the
influence  of  the  entelechy  is  precisely  relevant  to
the  state  of  the  material  system  and  to  the  stimuli
acting  upon  it ;  and  it  becomes  a  verbal  question
whether  in  such  a  case  we  speak  of  natural  causa
tion  or  not.  The  theory  with  the  facts  on  which  it
rests  plainly  shows  the  impossibility  of  denying  that
self-guidance  can  be  immanent  in  a  purely  natural
system,  if  we  take  natural  in  the  sense  of  "  unguided
by  conscious  mind."  The  attempt  to  treat  the
Entelechy  as  an  element  operating  ab  extra  upon
the  material  system,  when  it  simply  represents  the
latter  in  its  normal  functioning,  must  be  held  purely
artificial  and  fictitious.1

Thus,  then,  we  have  it  in  principle,  plainly  from
vitalist,  and  ex  hypothesi  from  anti-vitalist,2  that
organic  regulation  is  natural  and  immanent.  If
matter  cannot  be  said  to  do  it,  matter  can  produce  a
situation  in  which  it  must  be  done,  and  done  rele
vantly  to  stimuli  dependent  on  spatial  and  material
relations.  Regulation,  then,  is  a  fact  prior  to  and
independent  of  consciousness,  and  if  it  is  extended
when  consciousness  comes  on  the  scene,  as  in  action
determined  by  experience,  that  does  not  necessarily
mean  that  consciousness  supplants  and  supersedes
without  any  continuity  the  purely  organic  ground  of
regulation.  It  seems  more  likely  that  at  a  certain

1  Driesch,  Gifford  Lectures,  ii.  336.  2  E.g.  from  Verworn.


196  BODILY  BASIS OF  MIND  LECT.

point  the  organism  becomes  aware  of_a_J£ature  of  its
own,  which  becomes  at  the  same  crisis  more  com
plete,  than  that  its  whole  character,  which,  moreover,
certainly  persists  for  three-fourths  of  its  processes,1
should  be  cut  away  about  three-quarters  up  the
scale  and  replaced  by  something  totally  different.
Consciousness^  we  repeat,  neither  creates  a  high
organism  nor  works  it.  It  is  rather  the  indispens
able  means  of  reaping  the  final  and  supreme  result
of  the  organism's  complex  adaptations.

Conscious iii- In  part  of  the  behaviour  of  human  beings,
and  a^so  no  doubt  of  the  higher  animals,  externality


not  effect, ancj consciousness become plainly distinct and

of  physical

process,  divergent.  Nervous  process,  we  must  believe,  is
movement  in  space  (not  that  its  differences  need  be
purely  spatial  ;  they  are  very  probably  to  a  great
extent  qualitative),  while  consciousness,  even  if
some  of  its  states  and  objects  are  extended,  is  in
the  main  unspatial  ;  its  elements  penetrate  one
another  in  a  way  which  defies  assignment  of
distance  and  relative  locality.  All  bodily  move
ment  and  brain  change  is  caused,  we  must  believe,
if  there  is  to  be  any  science,  by  bodily  conditions.
But  again,  consciousness  is  the  only  thing  we
recognise  as  the_  nature  and^substance  of  any  act
which  we  call  our  own.

Now  we  have  seen  that  interaction  asks  us  to
make  consciousness  at  once  material  and  not
material,  and  in  this  way  opens  up  an  unlimited
vista  of  inconceivable  suggestion,  while  parallelism
is  not  so  much  a  positive  theory  as  a  precaution  of
method.

1  For  all  forms  of  regulation,  except  restitution,  persist,  of  course,
in  high  organisms,  below  the  level  of  action  due  to  experience.


-


v  SENSATION  IS  APPRECIATION  197

Hence  the  only  possible  course,  as  it  seems  to
me,  is  simply  to  accept  conscious  process  as  thf*
essence,  of  a  certain  kind  of  physical  process,  and  as
covered  by  its  physical  cost  in  the  body's  balance-
sheet.  In  all  probability,  as  we  have  seen,  we  have
to  accept  an  analogous  principle  of  unity  in  the
realms  of  life  below  consciousness.  This  unity  and
responsiveness  of  part  to  whole,  as  seen  in  organic
"  regulation,"  is  a  character,  it  seems,  of  or  neces
sitated  by  organic  matter ;  and  in  the  case  of
unconscious  life,  it  seems  impossible  that  it
should  be  set  out  by  itself  as  an  additional  effect,
demanding  a  separate  output  of  energy.  There  is
no  separate  factor  concerned  that  could  be  thus
set  out.

Now  consciousness,  as  we -read  the  relation,  is  a
character  of  further  increased  sensitiveness  and
responsiveness  on  the  same  analogy.  Take  as  an
example  the  incoming-  sensation — the  feeling  of  the
prick  of  a  pin.  Is  this  feeling,  a  sensation  with  a
painful  tone,  an  effect  of  the  physical  prick  or  not  ?
I  should  reply,  "  No ;  not  an  effect  but  an  inter
pretation."  An  effect  is  a  continuation  of  a  process
into  a  further  stage.  The  pin-prick  sets  up  neural
change,  and  ultimately  some  degree  of  motor
stimulus.  That  is  an  effect.  An  interpretation  is  a
going  into,  an  appreciating,  the  nature  of  a  process
as  it  happens.  It  is  an  interpretation  when  we
hear  certain  shocks  as  music,  instead  of  regarding
them,  on  physical  evidence,  as  transmitted  vibra
tions.  Very  possibly  it  may  be  a  rule  that  there  is
more  effect  observable  when  a  physical  process
finds  interpretation  ;  because  interpretation  has
something  to  do  with  the  degree  in  which  the


198  BODILY  BASIS OF  MIND  LECT.

process  excites  the  nervous  system.  There  may  be
more  physical  effect  when  no  anaesthetic  is  used  for
an  operation,  than  when  it  is  used.  But,  all  the
same,  ^an  interpretation  is  not  an  effort;  itis  not  a
jiew_Jiap|iening  ;  it  is  an  appreciation  of  what  is


Is  this  mere  words  and  evasion  ?  I  cannot  think
so.  It  foHows  from  our  whole  line  of  thought.  The
approach  to  the  nature  of  mind  has  been  for  us,
always  on  the  basal  conception  of  a  centre  of^a
world,  an  approach  to  a  wider  apprehensiveness  and
responsiveness.  We  thought  of  a  brick  just  resting
on  another  brick,  of  a  brick  in  an  arch  or  in  a
facade,  of  an  element,  one  might  add,  in  a  crystal.

tWe  argued  that  the  growth  towards  teleology  was
simply  the  growth  towards  individuality  of  the
Iwhole  recognised  by  the  centre.  Of  course  there
is  a  gap  between  external  relation  and  conscious
apprehension  and  response  ;  but,  especially  con
sidering  the  intermediate  realm  of  mere*  life,  it
invol-ves,  from  our  point  of  view,  no  change  of  prin

ciple. On  the  hypothesis  of  interaction  you  destroy
continuity  by  extracting  the  principle  of  unity,  and

j  then setting it, empty, to act  ab extra  ; it is a

,  different  thing  when  you  keep  it  within  the  concrete
to  which  it  belongs.  All  that  happens,  on  our  view,
is  that  when  you  come  to  matter  which  has  been
granted  life  or  consciousness,  its  capacities  of

'  apprehension  and  response  open  up  a  new  signific
ance  and  become  the  for11  *  nf  a  npw  Y™<\  ^f  whnl^
Sensation  and  pain,  it  is  submitted,  are  what  the
prick  is  when  the  apprehension  of  it  is  deepened  ;
they  are  no  additional  reaction,  but  the  reaction  as
apprehended  by-^^ej:tam_Jdnd  ^J3f_syj>tem.  They


v  CORRESPONDENCE  NOT  COINCIDENCE 199

are  what  the  effect  on  the  sentient  organism  is  like
when  you  come  to  realise  it.1

So  with  volition  and  with  speculative  thought.
The  difference  of  the  brain  process  and  the  conscious
process  is  given,  when  we  take  the  one  as  spatial
and  the  other  as  not.  When  this  is  accepted,  the
facts  are  truly  given  by  saying,  "We  control  our
acts  and  ideas ;  that  is,  the  contents,  habits,  and
reflexes  which  we  are,  and  which  in  our  nerve-
change  and  brain  process  blend,  inhibit,  and  enhance
each  other,  correspondingly  blend  and  inhibit  and
enhance  each  other  in  the  unity — a  very  partially
realised  unity,  of  course — of  our  non-spatial  thought.
And  in  our  awareness  of  this  we  feel  and  know
what  in  the  nervous  process  we  do — what  the  world
of  contents  and  habits,  which  is  the  self,  generates
by  its  total  response."

Much  difficulty  has  been  raised  by  the  assump
tion  that  the  two  systems  must  be  similar,  a  cell  for
a  thought,  a  spatial  coincidence  for  identity,2  and  the
like.  All  we  need  is  that  their  systematic  action
should  be  capable  of  corresponding,  and  this  in
general  we  can  understand.3  There  is  no  reason  for
demanding  point  to  point  similarity  between  the  two.

1  The  difficulty  is  here. If  I  prick  my  hand,  there  is  presumably
all  the  movement  pressure,  etc.,  which  there  would  be  if  I  pricked  an
indiarubber  ball ; and  then  there  is  the  sensation  too. Is  it  not
then  an  effect,  and  one  unaccounted  for  ? I  think  not. I,  my  hand,
can  interpret  the  complex  responses  of  the  organism  to  the  simple
shock  (p.  185). A  movement  needs  no  more energy  because  its
meaning  is  seen.

2  This  has,  no  doubt,  partly  to  do  with  a  false  theory  of  identity,
which  destroys  its  range  and  grasp,  and  makes  it  analogous  to  a
spatial  point. As  we  are  constantly  urging,  for  us  the  true  type  of
identity  is  the  system  of  a  world.

8  See  p. 185,  above,  on  meaning  and purpose. Cf.  Mitchell,
Structure  and  Growth  of  the  Mind,  p.  480  ff.


200  BODILY  BASIS  OF  MIND  LECT.

And  there  is  a  consideration,  important  in  the
theory  of  knowledge  and  will,  which  shows  the
value  of  accepting  a  correspondence  between  the
nervous  system  and  our  self-determination.  For
the  self  is  not  wholly  an  affair  of  the  distinctest
consciousness.  Its  clear  course  of  ideas,  as  we  have
constantly  insisted,  is  only  a  light  that  breaks  out
over  a  huge  organisation  of  adaptations,  impulses,
reflexes,  peripheral  sensitiveness  of  every  kind  and
degree.  We  get  a  truer  conception  of  the  self,  in
many  important  and  valuable  ways,  from  thinking  of
the  whole  nervous  system,  and  not  merely  of  cortical
process,  as  corresponding  to  what  we  are,  than  by
merely  following  the  central  course  of  our  clearest
purposes  and  reflections  and  intensest  emotions.
Here  is  one  fundamental  point,  for  example,  not
generally  recognised.  We  have  been  taught  that
the  will  is  good  or  bad  apart  from  failure  or  success,
i.e.  if  there  is  an  idea  passing  into  realisation,  in
which  a  large  component  is  of  a  type  we  generally
approve,  the  detailed  result,  some  would  say  as
intended,  and  nearly  all  would  say  as  achieved,
makes  no  difference  to  its  value.  But  this  cannot
really  be  so.  If  an  idea  cannot  secure  its  own
adequate  realisation,  it  is  "  not  ideal  enough."  It
has  not  enough  conformity  with  the  environment  ;
it  does  not  really  contain  as  much  of  the  secret  of
coherence  or  perfection  as  it  professes  to  contain.
I  take  it  that  a  glance  at  the  nervous  system  shows
us  this  incontrovertibly.  A  phase  of  consciousness,
as  I  gather,  corresponds  to  a  set  of  co-ordinations
in  which  ultimately  the  whole  nervous  system  is  or
may  be  engaged.  What  we  can  think  depends
largely  both  on  our  receptiveness  and  on  our  active


v  A DEFECTIVE WILL  201

dispositions  (psychical  or  physical),  and  these  need
not  appear  as  such  and  distinctly  in  the  focus  of  our
thinking.  All  the  same,  our  general  ideas  will  be
truncated,  or  rather  aborted,  if  they  do  not  find
copious  and  largely  organised  active  dispositions  to
fit  their  content  to  corresponding  detail,  and  carry  it
out  adequately  into  the  real  world.  What  we  can
will  is  reacted  upon  by  what  we  can  do.  This  is
why  in  the  beginning  we  do  not  know  how  to  will
the  good,  and  have  to  learn  it  with  pain  and  labour, ;
by  forming  habits  adequate  in  detail  to  its  content  |
as  the  concrete  unity  of  our  world.

A  man  wishes,  let  us  say,  as  purely  as  he
knows  how  to  wish,  to  promote  religion  among
his  neighbours.  But  he  has  no  habits  or  formed
dispositions  of  self- adaptation,  self- repression,
sympathy,  beneficence,  penetrative  imagination.
This  defect  reacts  on  his  religious  ideas  them
selves.  He  cannot  promote  them,  because  they
are  imperfect  ;  but  also  they  are  imperfect
because  he  has  no  trained  capacities  adequate  to
promoting  them.  The  religious  idea  is  not  filled  in
and  made  to  bridge  the  gap  between  abstraction  and
realisation.  The  cortical  process  (should  we  not  be
justified  in  saying  ?)  is  in  such  a  case  starved  and
aborted  by  the  failure  to  find  habitual  systems  and
dispositions,  whether  cortically  or  subcortically
seated,  which  can  meet  and  amplify  and  enrich  its
content  with  theirs.  It  has  not  at  its  disposal  either
extended  areas  of  cortical  excitement  or  complex
systems  of  motor  activity ;  and  those  which  it  can
dispose  of,  being  insufficiently  co-ordinated  lines  of
action  and  expression,  are  immediately  and  continu
ally  being  checked  by  failure,  and  consequently


202  BODILY  BASIS OF  MIND  LECT.

bring  no  peripheral  reinforcement  to  the  idea.  The
same  would  be  true,  reading  suggestion  for  realisa
tion,  of  defective  theoretical  thinking.  Now  such
defects,  or  their  countervailing  merits,  are  in  a  great
degree  not  factors  within  consciousness  in  our
explicit  volitions  and  trains  of  thought.  But  they
affect  it  and  make  it  other  than  it  would  be  if  the
whole  nervous  organisation  were  different.

In  a  word,  our  whole  world  is  at  work  in  every
remodelling  of  itself;1  and  if  we  admit  that  its
habitual  and  automatic  elements  help  to  mould  our
thinking  and  our  will,  we  need  not  scruple  to  admit
that  the  formed  mechanism  of  the  brain  is  our
instrument  throughout.  Consciousness,  as  we  have
maintained  throughout,  is  not  an  epiphenomenon,  if
i  that  mean  something  extraneous  and  otiose,  but  it
'  is  a  supervenient  perfecticjTi ;  it  is  plainly  and  unmis
takably  so.  It  comes  when  the  individuality  of
worlds  has  reached  such  a  pitch  of  comprehensive
ness  and  their  self -direction  is  faced  with  such
problems  of  apprehensiveness,  that  to  be  an  object
of  experience  no  longer  does  justice  to  their  value.

1  Could  there  be  a  more  suggestive  description  of  the  unity
of  mind  than  the  following  account  of  the  nervous  system  ?
"  (The  student)  should  not  forget  the  constant  work  that  has
to  be  done  by  the  nervous  system,  and  especially  how  action  at
every  part  of  the  whole  is  affected  by  action  at  any  and  every  part.
To  work,  to  carry  out  its  function,  is  necessary  to  the  health  of  a
neurone  ;  efferent  neurones  have  to  maintain  the  tonus  of  muscles  ;
in  order  to  do  this  they  require  their  own  stimulation  by  afferent
neurones  ;  and  the  cortex,  besides  its  conscious  functions,  regulates
the  nutrition  of  the  whole  body.  Experiments  in  reflex  action,  and
other  facts  concerning  the  summation  of  stimuli,  show  that  the  whole
system  is  somehow  affected  by  stimulation  at  any  part.  All  parts  of
the  nervous  system  hold  each  other  in  mutual  tension,  and  the
passage  of  an  impulse,  afferent  or  efferent,  is  better  represented  as  a
disturbance  of  equilibrium  than  as  a  transmission  of  energy  "  (Broad-
bent,  Brain,  xxvi.  324-5,  cited  by  Mitchell,  p.  452).


v  BODY  CAUSAL, MIND  LOGICAL  203

Suppose  a  mountain  had  a  mind — a  mind,  according
to  all  analogy,  lower  than  that  of  an  oyster — what
could  it  know  of  its  own  worth  ?  That  would  still
remain  for  the  artist  and  the  alpine  walker  to  appre
ciate.  It  is  not  meant  that  the  value  to  be  realised
evokes  by  a  miracle  the  means  of  realising  it.  But'
we  shall  see  reason  to  conclude  that  the  degree  of
individuality,  which,  on  the  one  side,  is  the  evolu
tionary  demand  that  self- direction,  hitherto  uncon-,
scious  or  associative,  shall  become  explicit  and  freely
logical,  is,  on  the  other  side,  the  measure  of  value.

This,  then,  is  our  conclusion  in  principle.  The
difference  between  bodily  change  and  mental  action
cannot  be  explained  away,  but,  while  accepting  it,
we  have  no  right  to  make  capital  of  it  in  the  way  of
multiplying  differences  praeter  necessitate™.  In
saying  that  body  is  spatial  and  mind  not  spatial  we
have  said  in  effect  that  bQcjyJs  a  causal_sy^tem  and
mjnj  a-logiral  nqg  But  body  is  a  causal  system
long  disciplined  and  subordinated  to  a  unitary  self-
maintenance,  and  it  has  within  it,  clearly  and  obvi
ously,  the  bases  of  all  the  motives  and  stimuli
which  enter  into  mind.  I  believe  we  have  just  to?
accept  the  action  and  expression  of  a  logical  system
through  such  a  physical  one.  If  it  follows  that
matter  is  not  confined  to  physico-chemical  properties
we  should  accept  the  conclusion.  But  it  cannot
follow  that  the  principle  of  Uniformity,  rightly
understood,  and  of  conservation  of  energy,  are  in
applicable  to  it.  There  is  no  ground  for  contending
aggressively  that  rational  prediction  is  inapplicable
to  its  organic  forms.  We  must,  indeed,  remember
that  bare  calculation  will  give  neither  quality  nor
meaning,  and  significant  prediction  would  need  both.


204  BODILY  BASIS  OF  MIND  LECT.  v

But  there  is  nothing  in  this  to  cause  the  foes  of  in
telligence  to  triumph.  In  principle  all  intelligence
is  one,  and  its  logic  is  the  very  essence  of  creative
and  inventive  process.  Therefore  a  greater  intelli
gence  may  include  a  lesser,  and  in  regard  to  the
main  problems  and  purposes  of  a  lifetime,  still  in  the
future,  not  infrequently  does  so,  and  if  all  intelli
gences  did  not  in  this  way  "  cover  "  one  another  to
some  extent,  there  could  be  no  spiritual  world,  and
no  creative  activity,  implying  co-operation,  in  the
universe.  To  suppose  that  this  unity  involves  an
interference  with  freedom  and  initiative  is  totally  to
misapprehend  the  nature  of  originality.

In  a  future  lecture  we  will  draw  out  the  nature
of  freedom  and  initiative  as  an  embodiment  of  that
self -directing  logical  process,  which  is  the  true
meaning  and  the  actual  working  of  our  minds,
through  the  instrumentality  of  our  organised
nervous  system.

APPENDIX  I.  TO LECTURE  V

THE "  GUIDANCE  " THEORIES

Cf.  Taylor's  Metaphysics,  p.  289  :  "  Nor  again  have  we
any  experimental  means  of  proving  that  those  quantities
(mass  and  energy)  are  more  than  approximately  con
stant,"  and  references  there  cited.  Add  Ward,  Natural
ism^  ii.  59,  82-4,  where  he  explains  but  rejects  the
notion  of  a  mechanical  system  guided  by  mind  with  no
expenditure,  or  an  inappreciable  expenditure,  of  energy,
and  so  far  his  view  seems  just  and  consistent.  But  it  is
clear  from  p.  84  and  from  his  attitude  throughout,  that,
though  for  him  a  mechanical  theory  is  to  be  rejected  in
principle,  yet  in  effect  what  we  are  to  look  for  is  again
an  inappreciable  interference  ab  extra  with  the  laws  of


APP.  i  THE  INAPPRECIABLE  FORCE  205

motion.  It  is  inert  mass  plus  direction,  which,  on  the
whole,  he  has  in  mind,  although  a  different  ideal  some
times  suggests  itself  to  him.  It  is  this  separation  of  the
whole  from  the  guiding  element  which  the  view  of  the
text  regards  as  a  survival  in  principle  of  the  notion  of
matter  plus  miracle — the  attitude  of  common  external
teleology.  The  "  plan "  is  brought  to  the  material  ;  is
not  iiL.it  or  elicited  from  it.  The  same  discontinuity  is
startlingly  apparent  in  M.  Bergson's  views,  and  here,  j
again,  unites  itself  with  the  inappreciable  quantity.  I  cite
a  characteristic  passage  (Evolution  creatrice,  p.  125):  "  Sup-
posons,  comme  nous  le  faisions  entrevoir  dans  le  precedent
chapitre,  qu'il  y  ait  au  fond  de  la  vie  un  effort  pour
greffer,  sur  la  necessite  des  forces  physiques,  la  plus
grande  somme  possible  d'indetermination.  Get  effort  ne
peut  aboutir  a  cre"er  de  Tenergie,  ou,  s'il  en  cree,  la  quantite
creee  riappartient  pas  a  Pordre  de  grandeur  sur  lequel  ont
prise  nos  sens  et  nos  instruments  de  mesure,  notre  experience
et  notre  science  [italics  mine].  .  .  .  Lui-meme  [1'effort]  ne
possede  que  ce  pouvoir  de  declancher.  Mais  le  travail
de  declanchement,  quoique  toujours  le  meme  et  toujours
plus  faible  que  n'importe  quelle  quantite  donnee,  sera
d'autant  plus  efficace  qu'il  fera  tomber  de  plus  haut  un
poids  plus  lourd,  ou,  en  d'autres  termes,  que  la  somme
d'energie  potentielle  accumulee  et  disponible  sera  plus
considerable."

So  Schiller,  Humanism,  according  to  M'Dougall's
Social  Psychology,  p.  234,  suggests  the  idea  of  a  ball
balanced  in  unstable  equilibrium  on  the  top  of  a  high
divide,  disturbed  by  a  minimal  force.  I  have  not  been
able  to  find  the  passage  referred  to.

All  these ideas seem  to show  the  radical defect  at  ,
which my argument is aimed ; the choosing unit or  j
element  is  not  a  system  of  the  contents  dealt  with  by  !
choice. Mind  and  its  world,  choice  and action,  become  '
utterly  discontinuous. For  a  hint of  a better  view cf.
Bergson,  Donnees,  p.  135. (The  criticism  of  taking  direc
tions  of  action  as  things  which  await  our  choice.)

Driesch's  form  of  vitalism  exhibits  all  these  difficulties
in  the  relation  of  "  mechanical "  to  "  natural "  and


206  THE "GUIDANCE" THEORIES  APP.

"  psychical  "  operation.  By  "  mechanical "  operation  he
means  the  production  of  an  extensive  manifold  by  a  pre
viously  existing  extensive  manifold,  involving  a  single  and
external  cause  correlative  to  every  element  in  the  effect.
No  such  extensive  manifold,  no  arrangement  of  parts  in
the  three  dimensions  of  space,  is  capable,  in  his  view,  of
producing  the  results  which  are  observed  in  the  "  regula
tion  "  characteristic  of  organic  life,  by  which,  for  example,
a  typical  form  may  be  developed  out  of  the  set  of  elements
which  normally  produce  it,  though  rearranged  at  random
in  space,  or  halved  in  number.  Life,  then,  is  not  for  him
"  mechanically "  explicable,  and  he  proclaims  himself  a
vitalist.

Per  contra  the  entity,  the  ^,  which  he  takes  to  repre
sent  the  interests  of  the  normal  organic  whole,  and  to
which  he  gives  the  name  of  Entelechy,  is  for  him  a  purely
natural  element.  It  is  never  identical  with  consciousness,
and  in  its  purely  organic  forms  it  is  not  even  accompanied
by  consciousness.  It  is  conceived  by  him  as  an  intensive
manifold,  revealed  only  in  its  operation.  It  exercises  no
energy,  but  has  a  power  of  "  regulation  "  through  post
poning  some  to  others  of  the  reactions  possible  within  the
organism,  and  setting  free  those  which  it  has  itself  sus
pended  or  postponed.  I  cannot  offer  a  scientific  criticism
of  these  ideas,  but  they  seem  on  the  surface,  though  nomi
nally  excluding  the  ascription  of  physical  energy  to  con
sciousness,  very  analogous  to  those  which  make  mind
control  body  by  the  exercise  of  an  inappreciable  amount
of  force,  which  seems  to  mean,  by  exercising  force  and  yet
not  exercising  it.

But  in  the  facts  which  sustain  the  result,  simply  taken,
we  can  hardly  help  finding  a  "  natural "  determination
referable  to  the  characteristics  of  certain  material  com
binations,  even  if  the  special  type  of  explanatory  theory
above  defined  as  "  mechanical  "  is  rightly  excluded.  The
determination  is  described  as  thoroughly  univocal ;  con
sciousness  is  not  concerned  in  it ;  it  is  characteristically
relevant  and  differential  (i.e.  logically  uniform)  over  an
immense  area  of  organic  being.  The  elaborate  proofs
that  it  cannot  be  mechanical  are  themselves  in  every  case


i  THE  ARTIST  AB  EXTRA  207

proofs  of  very  precise  and  relevant  reactions  to  the  varia
tions  of  external  stimuli.  The  very  meaning  of  his  equi-
potential  system  is  that  it  is  composed  of  elements  each
of  which  can  do  whatever  its  place  in  the  system,  however
changed  by  disturbance,  may  demand  in  the  interests  of
the  normal  form.  One  way  or  other,  it  has  to  be  admitted
that  these  powers  are  exercised  not  only  apart  from  con
sciousness  but  in  the  closest  concomitant  variation  with
matter.  If  this  is  true  it  is  unimportant  that  there  is  no
one  living  substance  (Driesch,  ii.  246).  Is  it  not  really
special  pleading,  a  verbal  distinction  due  ultimately  to
exaggerating  the  homogeneousness  of  physical  causation,
when  such  artificial  hypotheses  are  resorted  to  in  order  to
distinguish  responses  which  cannot  but  be  called  natural,
in  toto  and  in  principle  from  the  qualitative  reactions  of
the  material  world  ?

In  Driesch's  view  of  the  psychical  we  see  the  relation
yet  more  clearly.  Even  in  life,  without  reference  to
mind,  he  makes  a  decided  attempt  to  separate  the
"  entelechy  "  from  the  material  whole,  to  treat  it  as  inter
fering  ab  extra  like  an  artist  with  his  material,  even  to
think  of  it  as  a  possible  object  of  systematic  classification
on  a  priori  grounds,  apart  from  moulding  by  the  environ
ment.  The  universal  is  made  a  particular,  operative
among  the  particulars  of  spatial  form,  and  its  immanence
in  the  environment,  in  the  world,  is  neglected.

When  we  come,  in  Driesch's  theory,  to  the  Entelechy
or  Psychoid  (as  it  may  then  be  called)  at  the  level  of  in
telligence,  the  discontinuities  inherent  in  all  the  guidance
theories  become  glaringly  prominent.  It  is  admitted  that
the  type  of  hypothesis  we  are  dealing  with  is  that  (familiar
from  Lotze1)  according  to  which  there  is  a  something
that  plays  on  the  brain  as  a  piano-player  on  a  piano.
Or,  by  a  variation  of  the  metaphor,  the  brain  is  repre
sented  as  "  a  sort  of  warehouse,  a  place  of  storing  ;  .  .  .
it  possesses  the  faculty  of  storing  engrammata.  But  it
can  only  store  engrammata  in  the  sense  of  given  com
binations  of  given  elements,  and  therefore  nothing  but

1  Metaphysics,  sect.  296.  There  must  be  a  better  reference,  but
I  cannot  recall  it,  Driesch,  Gifford  Lectures,  ii.  97.


2o8  THE  "GUIDANCE" THEORIES  APP.

the  psychical  phenomena  of  simple  recognition  and  of
association  by  contiguity  are  immediately  related  to  cere
bral  processes — the  faculty  of  rearranging,  nay,  even  the
faculty  of  association  by  identity  and  contrast,  has  no
relationship  with  any  performance  of  physico-chemical
agents  whatever."  "  Ideas,"  again,  "  have  real  cerebral
process  as  their  starting  point,"  but  judgment  has  not.
Now,  if  we  hold  what  I  take  to  be  plainly  true,  that  all
association  is  impure  judgment  "marrying  only  universals,"
and  that  ideas  are  strictly  elements  in  judgment,  we  are
bound  to  condemn  these  discontinuities  as  contrary  to
fundamental  truth  in  logic  and  psychology  (see  Driesch,
Gifford  Lectures,  ii.  97  ff.).  Bergson  appears  to  me  to
make  an  equally  impossible  dissociation  between  con
templative  and  motor  memory,  treating  the  former  as
corresponding  to  differences,  and  being  wholly  uncon
nected  with  brain  ;  the  latter  as  corresponding  to
identities,  and  being  dependent  upon  it  (Matiere,  p.  169).
The  whole  theory  of  the  relation  between  mind  and  brain,
critical  no  less  than  traditional,  seems  to  suffer  from  a
want  of  freedom — from  an  assumption  that  if  matter  is
the  instrument  of  mind  we  must  somehow  find  material
structure  repeated  in  the  structure  of  mind.

But  in  thinking  thus,  we  are  really  doing  just  what,  as
critics  of  materialism,  we  intend  to  avoid.  We  are
limiting  our  theory  of  mind  to  our  theory  of  matter,  and
then,  in  order  to  escape  from  our  limitation,  cutting  the
manifestation  of  mind  in  two.  Cf.  Mitchell,  p.  43.


APPENDIX II.  TO  LECTURE  V

NEURAL AND CONSCIOUS PROCESS

Can  we  take  the  relations  of  neural  process  to  conscious
process  a  little  more  into  detail,  comparing  the  character
of  the  two  with  respect  to  mechanism  and  logic,  and
estimate  the  need  and  meaning  of  postulating  in  the
account  of  consciousness  a  single  immaterial  being,  or
"  soul "  ?


ii  CA  USA  TION  AND  LOGIC  209

i.  We  must,  of  course,  beware  of  limiting  the  power  of  A  Logical
mind  by  inference  from  our  notions  of  neural  process. The  acfSroug
object  of  the  present  remarks  is in the  other  direction,  a  Causal
We  have  seen  that  a  full  view  of  the  nervous  system  tends  adapted
actually  to  intensify  our conception  of  the  concreteness,  to  il-
and of  the spiritual value  of the concreteness, of the
mental  life. And  now  it  seems  possible  to  suggest  how
neural  process  must  fall  short  of  consciousness,  and  how
nevertheless it may  be  a  basis  and  instrument of  mind,
without  placing  any  invidious  limitation  upon  the  latter.

We  have  endeavoured  throughout,  in  dealing  with
body  and  mind,  to  substitute  the  idea  of  a  logical  whole,
in  the  widest  sense  of  the  term,  for  that  of  teleological
process  in  the  sense  of  something  mainly  concerned  with
temporal  transition  from  point  to  point — to  replace  a  line
by  a  system.  This  conception  seemed  to  give  a  new
value  and  reality  to  the  unity  of  body  and  mind.  We
can  see  how  it  is  natural  and  likely  that,  to  use  the  most
general  and  modest  language,  there  is  always  a  some
thing  in  body  to  correspond  to  anything  that  there  may  be
in  mind.  The  notion  of  a  system  with  all  its  parts  in  a
state  of  reciprocal  tension  takes  us  some  way  towards
a  logical  unity.

In  thinking,  then,  of  the  correspondence  between
physical  and  mental  movements  and  elements,  we  must
dismiss,  it  would  seem,  some  of  the  cruder  difficulties.

To  begin  with  the  difference  between  causation  and
logical  or  teleological  determination.  All  causation,  as
we  have  seen  throughout,  is  in  a  fundamental  sense
logical,  and  thus,  in  the  larger  meaning  of  the  term,
teleological.  It  only  falls  short  of  agreement  with  what
we  take  to  be  reasonable  procedure  in  so  far  as  special
causal  processes  may  only  take  account  of  a  limited  set
of  factors  ;  and  we  have  no  guarantee  in  any  given  case
that  those  will  be  included  which  are  important  or
interesting  to  us.  But  causation  embodied  in  a  special
machine  may  follow  lines  which  are  even  in  our  sense
reasonable,  if  the  machine  has  been  made  to  represent
our  interests.  There  can  be,  for  example,  as  we  all  know,
a  logical  machine  ;  and  the  apparatuses  which  are  used  in

P


210  NEURAL  AND CONSCIOUS  PROCESS  APP.

experiment  or  observation  to  augment  accuracy  or  correct
error,  are,  as  I  have  pointed  out  elsewhere,  much  more
concretely  and  effectively  logical  than  the  so  -  called
logical  machines.1

Now  we  must  remember  that  the  nervous  system  is  a
machine,  or  rather  a  shopful  of  machines,  built  up  by
adaptive  processes  —  however  we  may  construe  their
nature — primarily  to  direct  our  bodily  movements  in  the
interest  of  the  preservation  of  the  species  ;  secondarily
and  consequentially  (secondarily,  I  mean,  from  a  bio
logical  point  of  view)  to  represent  and  to  realise  our
predominant  interests  and  desires.  I  include  among  these
the  disinterested  interests,  which  are  the  most  char
acteristic,  and  which  emerge  from  and  yet  include  the
others  in  a  way  not  difficult  to  understand.2  We
shall  be  helped  and  not  hindered  by  frankly  assuming
that  the  brain  like  many  other  organs  seems  as  if  it  had
been  meant  to  do  one  thing,  and  then  had  come  to  be
used  for  something  quite  different.  This,  I  suppose,
is  almost  a  law  of  the  evolution  of  organs,  and  is  really  a
useful  clue  in  estimating  the  brain's  relations  to  the
guidance  of  movement  and  to  activities  of  a  theoretic
type.

Hence  if  our  interests  and  aims  are  embodied  in  the
nervous  system,  predominating  in  its  organised  structure
in  proportion  as  they  predominate  in  our  lives — and  is  it
not  practically  plain  that  this  must  be  the  case  ? — I  can
see  no  possible  reason  why  the  output  of  this  physical
system  should  not  be  logical,  allowing  for  intensity  and
complexity  of  excitement  as  well  as  for  its  extent,  and  for
coherence,  or  presence  and  absence  of  reciprocal  inhibition  ;
and  why,  therefore,  it  should  not  act  as  the  engine  of  will,
thought,  and  feeling.  It  has  been  said  that  it  amounts
to  a  miracle  3  if  physical  movement  and  consciousness  are
simply  concomitant.  Well  ;  it  does,  and  it  does  not.  In
a  sense  everything  is  a  miracle ;  all  we  can  do  is  to

1  Knowledge  and  Reality,  p.  327.

2  See,  on  the  plot  of  Aristotle's  Ethics,  "  The  Perfecting  of  the
Soul,"  Appendix  II.  to  Lect.  X.

3  Stout,  Manual^  introd.  iii.


II  SOUL  FOLLOWS  MATTER  211

require  the  miracle  to  be  self-consistent  and  consistent
with  all  else.  And,  after  all,  the  apparent  dualism  between
matter  and  consciousness  is  an  arrangement  which  falls
within  consciousness  ;  though  we  hold  it  only  fair  play
to  disregard  this  general  sine  qua  non  when  we  are  study
ing  and  comparing  the  detailed  content  of  experience.
But  the  correspondence  of  psyche  (life-mind)  and  body
from  the  amoeba  up  to  the  nervous  system  of  man  is  a
very  extensive,  highly  differentiated,  and  thoroughly  self-
consistent  miracle ;  and  if  the  nexus  is  impeached  as
illusory  it  may  fairly  claim  the  benefit  of  the  saying,
"  Whom  God  deceives,  he  is  well  deceived."  The  corre
spondence  would  not  practically  cover  a  much  wider
area  if  we  were  to  succeed  in  eliciting  life  from  inorganic
matter.  It  would  be  then  much  as  it  is  now ;  some
material  arrangements,  by  comparison  extraordinarily
simple,  though  in  themselves  no  doubt  exceedingly  com
plex,  are  able  to  "  produce "  with  inevitable  certainty  a
minimum  of  soul.  And  if  soul  follows  matter,  corre
sponding  to  all  its  degrees  from  the  amoeba — perhaps
from  the  crystal l — to  man's  nervous  system,  this  enormous
world  of  detailed  and  graduated  correspondence  seems
enough  to  supply  the  required  rational  continuity  as
between  two  stages  of  a  process  fundamentally  identical.
I  refer  again  to  the  example  of  material  undulations  and
musical  tones.  We  bridge  this  gap  without  hesitation  ;
yet  though  not  so  deep  as  the  other  it  is  quite  as
distinct.

It  seems  then  that  there  is  no  necessary  opposition  of
principle  between  the  nervous  system  reacting  to  stimuli
always  in  view  of  its  acquired  pre-arrangements,  thus
giving  rise  to  just  those  movements  which  its  meaning,
our  consciousness,  demands,  and  the  structure  of  con
sciousness  as  by  its  inherent  logic  demanding  these
movements,  or  in  the  same  way  those  other  neural
changes  which  continue  its  own  progression.  Difficulties
of  this  type  are  founded  on  misapprehension.  Mind  the

ii.  Can  we  penetrate  further  into  the  meaning  of  the  "oil-spatial
difference  between  the  physical  process  and  the  conscious-  uni*y  of

body  in
1  See  Lehmann  on  Liquid  Crystals,  Nature,  Jan.  7,  1909.  action.


212  NEURAL  AND CONSCIOUS  PROCESS  APP.

ness  which  it  subserves  ?  Our  very  language  regarding
the  two  admits  an  enormous  difference  between  them  ;
and  it  is  a  difference,  it  would  seem,  that  must  carry  us
further.  We  assume  that  the  neural  process  must  be
accepted  as  a  movement  in  space  or  at  most  as  a  qualitative
change  of  spatial  objects  of  consciousness.  Consciousness,
on  the  other  hand,  is  what  can  have  objects,  and  is  not
spatial.  We  have  said  enough  of  the  prima  facie  miracle
that  each  should  be  tied  to  the  other  at  all.  Now  the
question  is  what  their  difference  involves.

A  hint  for  discussion  might  be  taken  from  M.  Bergson's
conception  of  the  brain  as  the  pointe  aceree  of  the  mind.1
There  is  a  brain  state,  he  allows,  for  every  psychical  state.
But  the  brain-movement  includes  only  the  tendency  to
action  (action  naissante),  which  the  psychical  movement
involves.  Brain  is  the  point  (and  edge  ?)  of  the  knife-
blade,  which  as  a  whole  is  the  mind.  The  two  are  not
co-extensive,  but  the  former  is  in  play  wherever  the  latter
is  effective.

And  some  such  relation  seems  actually  given  in  the
obvious  differences.  The  brain  movements,  as  spatial
objects,  cannot  be  a  unity  in  the  sense  in  which  conscious
ness  is  a  unity.  We  have  rejected  all  idea  of  represent
ing  identity  as  it  is  for  consciousness  by  spatial  coincidence
in  the  brain.  The  excitement  of  an  area  of  brain  is
prima  facie  matter  in  a  certain  state,  with  every  point
distinct  from  every  other.  The  thought  to  which  it  corre
sponds  has  its  factors  distinguishable  but  not  separable.
Take  our  previous  instance,  meaning  and  purpose.  In  these
cases  there  seem  to  be  certain  material  systems,  excitable
or  excited,  so  as  to  awaken,  reinforce,  or  inhibit,  each
other's  excitement.  But  it  is  impossible,  one  would  say,
that  the  excitements  of  physical  systems  could  blend  and
qualify  one  another  as  do  factors  in  a  conscious  whole.  In
brain  process,  the  correlate  of  the  sound  of  a  word  and  of
its  meaning  must  be  a  spatial  system  ;  and  the  correlate  >
of  the  purpose  cannot  be  coloured  and  penetrated  by

1  Evolution  creatrice,  p.  285.  Mr.  M'Dougal's  distinction
between  psycho-neural  and  psycho-physical  parallelism  seems  to  point
in  the  same  direction.


II  MIND THE UNITY  OF  MATTER  213

the  nature  of  the  cooperant  system  in  space  (p.  1 86)
as  the  purpose  is  in  mind.  And  it  seems  to  follow
that  there  is  in  consciousness  a  something  more,  an  actual
fusion  and  interpenetration  of  contents,  which  could  not
be  conceived  as  embodied  in  the  physical  movement.
What  corresponds  to  an  individualised  conception, "Socrates
a  mortal  man,"  cannot  be  at  once,  like  the  conception,
singular  and  universal  ;  in  a  word,  within  the  physical
world  identity  and  diversity  can  only  be  symbolised  and
not  realised  in  their  own  nature.  It  is  as  if  the  brain
processes  must  have  in  them  the  materials  of  the  conscious
structure,  but  only  in  the  rough  ;  as  if  the  being  of  the
real  system,  the  interpenetrating  reciprocal  qualifications,
the  unitary  organisation  of  contents,  can  only  be  symbolised
by  the  spatial  process,  and,  in  its  real  nature,  is  included
in  the  miracle  which  we  have  agreed  to  admit,  and  cannot
really  be  given  in  the  physical  connections.  And  yet
these  physical  connections  carry  out — this  is  a  simple
fact — the  work  which  the  other  structure  demands,  and
may  be  the  basis,  the  substructure  of  the  true  solidarity
which  belongs  to  it  alone.1

The  relation  might  be  illustrated  by  that  of  our  logical
inference  to  the  operations  of  the  logical  machine.  As
Mr.  Bradley  has  pointed  out,2  the  machine  can  hardly  be
said  to  draw  a  conclusion.  It  conducts  certain  combinations
and  carries  out  certain  eliminations,  but  it  is  we  who  take
the  result  as  the  conclusion  of  an  inference.  The  universal
nexus,  the  thread  of  inference,  is  indeed  in  a  sense  real
and  a  fact,3  but  it  hardly  is  together  as  a  universal  except
when  made  one  with  the  conation  of  a  mind.  Something
of  this  kind  might  be  the  case  as  between  mind  and
nervous  system.  Neural  process,  we  might  say,  gives  the
physical  response  or  the  course  of  brain  change  ;  but  only

1  It  is  important,  and  in  some  degree  diminishes  the  magic  of  the
matter,  that  psychical  solidarity  is  so  very  imperfect  as  it  is,  and  that
its imperfection largely  corresponds, I suppose, to  physical non-
organisation. The  suggestion  is  one  of  a  struggle  towards  unity,  in
which  brain  plays  an  indispensable  part.

2  Principles  of  Logic,  p.  357.

3  Alexander,  Arist.  Proceedings,  1908.


214  NEURAL  AND CONSCIOUS  PROCESS  APP.

mind  reads  these  off  as  elements  in  its  unitary  system,
that  is  to  say,  as  in  psychological  and  logical  union  with
each  other.  The  important  point  is  not  to  confuse  the
discontinuity  between  brain  change  and  mind  change  with
a  supposed  discontinuity  between  the  parts  of  mind
change.  (See  Appendix  I.)

If  we  take  the  line  just  indicated,  two  difficulties  meet
us.  That  which  we  say  does  the  work  has  no  inkling  of
the  initiation  which  it  carries  out.  Not  merely,  it  has
been  said  of  a  kindred  view,  has  no  man  on  this  hypothesis
ever  acted  freely,  but  no  man  has  ever  acted  at  all.1  And
why  should  consciousness  have  been  evolved,  if  it  was  not
a  means  of  directing  behaviour  superior  in  practice  to
unconscious  responses,  and  therefore,  a  fortiori  at  any
rate,  a  means  of  directing  behaviour  ?

On  this  a. If  we  pay  attention,  as  is  surely  right,  mainly  to

actTis^nof  ^e  mam  structure  of  brain  and  mind,  there  can  be  little
the  man?  doubt  or  difficulty.  Here  it  is  quite  plain  that  the
hiJsystem  ^JI^QHi JX^Q-L 2  *s  tne  engine  of  the  mind;  its  leading
responds,  and  predominating  systems  correspond  to  the  mind's
leading  and  predominating  systems  ;  its  responses  are
determined  by  a  whole  which,  in  as  far  as  we  are  awake
to  its  working,  is  our  mind  par  excellence  ;  though  really
to  describe  our  mind  completely  we  ought  to  include  a
good  deal  to  which  at  any  given  moment  we  are  not
awake.3  The  difficulty  arises,  like  so  many  difficulties
in  philosophy,  from  being  desirous  not  merely  to  legislate
for  hard  cases,  but  to  make  hard  cases  the  sole  basis  of
legislation.  We  will  deny  the  obvious  facts  in  order  to
conceive  it  possible  that  the  mind  shall  be  able  to  upset
its  own  system  ;  and  so  we  go  astray  after  an  idea  of
guidance  ab  extra  ;  not  the  guidance  of  a  self-directing
whole,  a  world  which  remodels  itself;  but  a  guidance
which  exercises  upon  its  processes  interferences  of  minimal
and  so  inappreciable  magnitude.  But  all  this  is  evasion
in  the  interest  of  preconceived  theory.  Take  a  central

1  Stout,  Manual,  I.e.

2  I  prefer  this  expression  to  the  brain,  because  of  the  considera
tions  stated  on  p.  202  above.

3  See  p.  200  above.


ii STORED ADAPTATIONS  MUST  BE  BODILY 215

and  unmistakable  case  of  will,  when  the  mind  as  a  whole
as  near  as  possible,  remodels  its  life  as  a  whole  as  near  as
possible,  in  a  volition  extending  perhaps  over  months
or  years.  Here  I  hold  it  to  be  plain  that  no  inappreciable
exertion  through  any  kind  of  steering  gear  will  meet  the
case.  It  is  not  a  case  of  a  rudder  at  all  ;  the  direction  is
due  to  the  comparative  working  of  the  propellers.  To
conceive  it  otherwise  introduces,  without  any  theoretical
gain,  an  unintelligible  breach  of  continuity.  You  are
supposed  to  realise  an  idea  not  because  of  its  logical
character,  its  power  to  find  alliances,  and  to  disarm
opponents  in  the  mental  structure,  but  because  of  a
miraculous  finger  placed  for  no  conceivable  reason  (for
every  conceivable  reason  is  ex  hypothesi  ruled  out  of  court)
on  the  levers  of  the  mind.  But  a  system  which  is  to  be
free  must  mould  itself  out  of  its  own  organisation  of  con
tent,  or  its  activity  cannot  be  self-directed.  For  this  the
nervous  system  as  we  understand  it  is  the  appropriate
engine.  What  would  we  have  ?  An  arrangement  of
psychical  material  acting  straight  on  external  things  by  a
mere  thought  or  feeling  ?  It  might  be  answered  that  is
just  what  we  have.  We  may,  if  we  like,  insist  that  our
body  is  of  psychical  material — an  "  image  "  .as  M.  Bergson
says.1  The  objector's  difficulty  does  not  lie  there,  but  in
the  systematic  fixity  and  partial  unconsciousness  of  the
acquired  connections.  If  our  psychical  system  is  to  have
these  characters  2  it  becomes  partly  dissociated,  and  so
material  or  external.  Yet  if  not,  our  whole  conception
of  an  acquired  conformity  with  and  mastery  of  the
environment,  of  a  vast  machinery  of  response,  leading  up
but  gradually  to  a  vision  of  significance,  goes  by  the  board.
We  should  no  longer  see  any  reason  why  God  and  the
Absolute  should  not  be  as  adequately  revealed  in  the
amoeba  as  in  civilised  man.  It  is  further  worth  noting
that  the  brain  is  the  less  in  need  of  a  steering  gear  outside
it,  as  cc  entelechy  "  or  "  psychoid,"  because  in  a  remarkable

1  Cf. Varisco, /  Massinii  Problemi, for whom all bodies  are
"sensibles,"  though  when  not  "sensed,"  outside  the  unity  of  anysubject.

2  They  are,  in  fact,  precisely  what,  if  we  take  body  as  psychical,
it  does  have.


216


NEURAL  AND CONSCIOUS  PROCESS


APP.


sense  it  is  itself  a  specialised  machine  for  not  merely
steering,  but  determining  the  direction  to  be  steered,  in
contrast  with  merely  transmitting  impulses  to  the  large
scale  machine — the  body.  What  I  refer  to  is  the  fact
that  the  brain  receives,  modifies,  and  organises  all  sorts  of
impulses  which  are  never  allowed  to  try  their  isolated
effects  against  each  other  on  the  big  machine.  What
reaches  the  big  machine  has  already  competed  with  and
been  tried  out  and  organised  by  myriads  of  adaptations
and  arrangements  in  the  interest  of  the  whole  organism,
connecting  it  with  a  countless  incoming  of  stimuli  and
store  of  habits.  An  impulse  to  stop  walking  does  not,  as
a  rule,  conflict  in  the  leg-muscles  with  the  impulse  to  go
on.  They  come  to  terms  previously  in  the  brain,  with  all
their  allies  on  either  side.  Thus  in  its  very  nature  it
is  prepared  to  act  by  logic  and  not  by  brute  force.

/3.  How  should  it  come  to  pass  that  finite  conscious
ness- should  be  evolved,  if  not  as  a  superior  means,  and
therefore,  a  fortiori,  as  certainly  at  least  a  means,  of
directing  bodily  movement  ?  Here  we  must  recall  the
of  sense  of  fundamental  fact  of  evolution,  that  organs,  whose  history
looks  as  if  they  had  been  meant  exclusively  for  one
function,  are  constantly  being  re-adapted  so  as  to  do
something  else.  The  nervous  system,  when  its  history
is  considered,  certainly  looks  as  if  it  had  only  been  meant
to  conduct  external  stimuli  to  the  machinery  of  physical
response.1  But  when  it  has  to  become  an  instrument  for
dealing  with  stimuli  from  distant  objects,  with  deferred
responses,  with  possibilities,  with  the  behaviour  of  other
systems  on  the  same  footing  as  itself,  then  the  fact  of  self-
direction,  common  to  all  material  things,2  passes,  in  view
of  the  storage  of  experience  and  capacities,  into  a  sense  of
centrality  and  self-value;  and  the  microcosm,  thus  focused,
becomes  aware  of  its  own  self-direction.  It  awakens  to  a

1  This  is  M.  Bergson's  strong  point,  and  I  suppose  has  much  to
do  with  the  modern  disparagement  of  so-called  Intellectualism.

2  Or,  if  this  is  denied,  at  least  to  unconscious  organisms. But  it
seems  ridiculous  to  deny  that  the  reactions  which  have  made  the
terrestrial  globe  habitable  are  self-directed,  or  to  maintain  that,  say,
the  participation  of  Diatoms  in  the  formation  of  chalk-beds  has  intro
duced  into  them  a  new  principle  of  direction.


Mind  is
unity  of
self-direc
tion,  but
absolute
condition


II  MOBILITY  OCCASION  OF  MIND  217

sense  of  its  own  meaning,  because  now  it  has  a  meaning
which  could  not  be  represented  through  its  being  an
object  for  another  consciousness.

But  why,  it  may  be  asked,  should  such  a  meaning  be
confined  to  high  organisms  ?  Why  should  not  a  mountain
or  the  globe  itself  have  such  a  meaning  ?  How  much
they  must  have  gone  through  ;  how  much  they  might
tell,  if  they  had  memory  and  could  give  utterance  ?  All
we  can  say  is,  that  according  to  all  analogy,  full  conscious
ness  seems  reserved  for  the  high  organisms  par  excellence  ;
and  its  condition,  no  doubt,  is  mobility.  As  we  suggested
above,  if  a  mountain  had  consciousness,  it  would,  accord
ing  to  all  analogy,  be  nothing  to  compare  with  the  con
sciousness  which  we  have  of  a  mountain,  and,  therefore,
there  seems  the  less  reason  why  it  should  have  conscious
ness  at  all.  It  is  mobility  which  demands  the  great  and
varied  store  of  adaptations  and  experiences,  and  which,
by  the  demand  for  a  precise  and  flexible  adjustment  to
the  environment,  prepares  the  way  for  the  awareness  in
which  the  environment  represents  itself.  The  conditions
of  awareness  were  very  probably  first  awakened  by
mobility,  but  it  is  contrary  to  all  principles  of  evolution
to  infer  from  this  that  to  control  mobility  is  its  final
function.

But  surely,  it  will  be  urged,  it  is  an  absurdity  to  say
that  the  system  would  work  as  well  if  the  awareness  were
unawakened,  if  pain  had  no  deterrent  effect,  and  if  the
meaning  of  books  did  not  govern  their  composition  and
effect.

Here  we  must  insist  that  there  is  an  unwarranted
assumption.  We  do  not  know  that  such  a  system  as  we
possess  could  be  developed  beyond  a  certain  level  with
out  an  awareness  being  awakened.1  Our  point  has  been
that  the  principle  of  self-direction  has  been  there  through
out,  and  that  in  a  whole  of  a  certain  representative
capacity  it  must  necessarily  awaken  to  the  value  of  its

1  See  above  on  the  effect  of  an  operation  with  and  without
anaesthetics.  The  "  more "  of  physical  effect  and  of  feeling  go
together,  and  we  incline  to  say  this  is  because  we  feel  more.  But
it  may  be  because  the  nervous  shock  is  more  widely  transmitted.


218  NEURAL  AND CONSCIOUS  PROCESS  AFP.

world.  The  system  of  the  finite  universe,  we  might  say,
is  one  of  vicarious  representation.  Externality  is  joined
to  the  absolute  tErougli  conscious  centres.  Consciousness
is  the  climax  of  direction,  but  the  absolute  condition  of
all  sense  of  value.

•  •Soul"  iii. If  the  mind  transcends  the  neural  process  in  the

does  not way  suggested  above  would  it  not  be  better  to  postulate
unity  of a  soul  as  the  substratum,  and  to  call  it  a  single  immaterial

finite  mind Kemo-  ?  1
is  an  ideal, UC1US  r

not  a  fact.  It  is  true  that  we  do  not  want  to  make  mind  an
adjective^of_bpdy.  It  is,  according  to  the  view  here
advocated,2  a  fujler  unity.,  more  completely  differentiated,
more  thoroughly  integrated.  On  the  other  hand,  an  im
material  being,  other  than  and,  so  to  speak,  behind  or
below  the  uniting  consciousness  or  experience,  seems  to
be  unintelligibly  framed  on  the  analogy  of  a  material
thing.3  It  takes  us  back  into  all  the  difficulties  of  the
persistent  soul-substance,  from  which  Kant's  criticism  of
rational  psychology  had  set  us  free.  All  we  desire,  and
all  we  logically  need,  is  to  take  i^njj  ^or  soul  for  what  it
is — a  _centre  or  unity  of  experience^  in,  fnnn^tJOP  wltll  a
certain  ma t£rial_arrapgernprLi-)  which  halTevery  appearance
of  being  the  condition  of  its  special  and  distinctive  organ
isation,  and  of  its  peculiar  adaptation  to  the  environment.
If  we  ask,  as  an  able  writer  has  asked,  why  should  'mind
have  a  body ; 4  the  answer  seems  to  be,  as  hinted  above,5
"  to  store  up  and  adapt  the  necessary  resources  for  self-
maintenance  as  a  distinctive  world."  And  as  we  said,
supposing  the  same  task  set  to  psychical  characters,  they
would,  in  order  to  achieve  it,  have  to  throw  off  much  of
their  psychical  quality.  They  would  have  to  be  stored
up  in  the  form  of  relatively  fixed  and  orderly  combina
tions,  embodying  the  ways  in  which,  for  the  distinctive

1  M'Dougal,  Physiological  Psychology,  p.  168.

2  Cf.  Psychology  of  Moral  Self,  p. 124. The  passage  referred
to  does  not,  as  has  been  alleged  by  critics,  maintain  psycho-physical
parallelism  in  the  received  sense. Like  the  present  work,  it  treats
mind  as  the  more  complete  and  the  superior  system.

3  Cf.  Mitchell,  p.  16  ff.

4  Strong,  Why  Mind  has  a  Body.

5  Page  215.


II  MIND, A WORLD  SEEKING UNITY  219

world  in  question,  an  appropriate  way  of  being  together
had  created  itself.  A  being  could  not  consist  of  mere
momentary  response  and  adaptation  ;  it  must  bring  along
with  it  a  stuff  to  give  the  adaptation  content  and  value.1

And  it  would  be  a  futile  dualism  to  argue  that  the
unity  of  experience,  and  its  types  of  interconnection,  are
to  come  in  from  out  of  doors — from  an  immaterial  being
—and  organise  or  crystallise  a  chaos  of  content.  This  is
all  upside  down.  Tr;e  world  comesjrrst ;  it  works  towards
finding  a  centre,  and  in  this  working  the  types  of  our
thinking  and  experience  arise.  So  far  from  the  centre
being  given,  in  finite  experiences  it  is  only  an  ideal  never
to  be  completely  realised.  A  spiritual  nucleus,  a  given
unitary  being,  does  not  help  us  at  all.  After  postulating
it,  either  in  all  living  matter  or  at  some  arbitrary  stage  of
its  development,  we  should  have  to  explain  away  by  im
pediments  to  its  self-assertion  appearances  which  it  is  far
simpler  to  treat  as  degrees  of  imperfection  in  the  forma
tion  of  finite  centres  of  experience.  Finite  consciousness  •
and  the  finite  selLcome  lale^on  thg__top  of  immense  stores
of  unconscioii^  mechanism  and—adaptation,  which  are  to
all  appearance  its  pre-condition.  It  is  not  a  datum  from
the  beginning ;  it_i^a_light  andjucfi&elation  which  comes  v


onlgjyhen  itJs_  prepared-  for  and  demanded,  and  in  finite
experience  very  unequally  and  imperfectly.  The  standing
miracle  lies  in  its  difference  from  brain.  The  duty  of
rational  theory,  with  this  as  with  all  the  miracles  of  ex
perience,  is  to  interpret  its  plain  character  with  as  little
intrusion  as  possible  of  gratuitous  factors.  Mind,  so  far
as  it  can  be  in  space,  is  nervous  system  ;  nervous  system,
focyssgd  in^  the  nisus  jtojyjajii&uinity,  which  a  standing
miracle  associates  with  it,  is  finite  mind.  You  cannot  say
that  the  one  acts  and  not  the  other.  There  is  nothing-
no  part  nor  point — in  the  one  that  is  not  in  the  other.

1  Would  it  be  argued  that  the  denial  of  this  precisely  gives  the
definition  of  a  spiritual  being,  as  having  no  stores  or  acquisitions
relatively  inert,  but  being  all  always  in  flaming  activity  through  and
through  ?  But  such  would  not  be  a  finite  spiritual  being.  It  would
be  all  always  in  contact  and  continuity,  and  could  experience  no
succession.


220  NEURAL  AND CONSCIOUS  PROCESS APP.  n

Mind,  we  have  suggested,  is  the  interpretation  of  nervous
system  ;  but  a  false  tradition  inclines  us  to  treat  th^'  in
terpretation  as  a  gloss,  and  the  letter  as  the  reality.  If
we  discard  this  false  tradition,  and  also  remember  that  in
comparing  mind  to  an  interpretation  we  are  comparing  it
to  a  part  of  its  own  activity,  the  suggestion  takes  us
perhaps  as  far  as  we  can  get.  *  Mind  is  the  meaning  of
externality,  which  under  certain  conditions  concentrates
in  a  new  focus  of  meaning,  which  is  a  news  finite  mind/
When  we  speak  of  the  making  of  souls,  we  mean  nothing
more  than  the  moulding  and  relative  perfecting  of  minds.


LECTURE VI

SELF-CONSCIOUSNESS AS THE CLUE TO THE TYPICAL
STRUCTURE OF REALITY

'  WE  have  seen  that  Finite  Consciousnesses  cannot  be/  Finite
I  the  ultimate  directors  or  constituents  of  the  universe./
They  and  their  subjective  teleology  are  appearances
at  a  rprfaiq  fijgo-p  •  they  rest  on  arrangements  below  defect  in

~ ^  f J  °  the  Uni-

them  ;  they  indicate  in  every  feature  fuller  forms  of  verse?
totality  above  them.  Finite  consciousness,  whether
animal  or  human,  did  not  make  its  body,  and  does
not  set  the  greater  purposes  to  its  world.  Some
thing  greater  and  more  inclusive  than  itself  both
operates  through  it  and  reveals  itself  to  it.

i.  Is  finite  consciousness,  then,  an  accident  in  a  The
universe  of  alien  nature  ?  Is  self-consciousness,1  the
fullest  form  of  consciousness  which  we  experience,
born  of  a  defect,  and  killed  by  its  removal  ?  Or
may  we  look  to  find  in  this  completest  phase  of
finite  experience  something  which  furnishes  a  clue
to  the  typical  structure  of  reality  —  something  which
is  not  annihilated  but  rather  enhanced  by  the  transi-

1  I  mean  by  self-consciousness  the  recognition  of  self  in  other  as
experienced  in  cognition,  practice,  the  aesthetic  attitude,  and  religion.
Its  essence  is  not  the  perception  of  the  whole  self  as  an  object  by
itself  as  a  subject  (Appearance,  2nd  ed.,  p.  in),  but  the  recognition
in  externality  of  a  counterpart,  whether  discordant  or  harmonious,
with  its  own  principle.


221


222  SELF-CONSCIOUSNESS  AND  REALITY LECT.

tion of  discord into responsiveness and of the
hostile  not-self  into  the  other  of  the  self?

The  question  is,  in  other  words,  whether  self
hood  runs  parallel  with  Individuality,  or  whether
the  former  experience  must  cease  when  the  latter  is
at  a  maximum  ?  The  question  is  not  one  necessarily
of  ultimate  importance.  There  might  be  experiences
in  the  highest  individuality  which  would  rightly
supersede  the  experience  of  self-hood.  But  yet,  if
we  can  remove  a  certain  misapprehension  which
stands  in  the  way,  we  shall  have  opened  the  path
to  a  deeper  conception  of  reality,  framed  at  least  on
the  analogy  of  self-consciousness.

Now  in  finite  experience  that  to  which  the  uni
versal  opposes  itself  in  its  unceasing  effort  to  become
fully  individual,  that  in  overcoming  which  the  self
feels  itself  relatively  one  and  self-complete,  is  prima
facie  difference  in  the  form  of  what  is  alien  or
hostile ;  a  resistant  not-self  in  face  of  which  we  are
ignorant  and  weak  and  never,  as  finite  beings,
become  absolutely  triumphant  and  at  home.  And
it  is  essential  to  the  basis  of  our  account  of  Indi
viduality  to  understand  whether  this  npliS£lf  is
something  which  depends  on  and  indicates  imper
fection,  or  something  which  belongs  to  the  essential
structure  of  the  real.1  Might  we,  for  example,
conceive  of  individuality  as  perfecting  itself  as  a
cosmos  and  a  self-in-otherness,  in  proportion  as  the
irresponsiveness,  or.  even  hostility,  which  for  us  is
one  great  mark  of  the  other  or  the  different,  is  being
overcome  ?

1  A  very  just  illustration  of  this  problem  and  of  the  general  lines
of  its  solution  is  to  be  found  in  the  aesthetic  experience  of  the  "  sub
lime  "  (see  A.  C.  Bradley,  Oxford  Lectures  on  Poetry).


vi  SELFHOOD  AND THE  NOT-SELF  223

One  obvious  view  rests  wholly  on  the  discordance
of  the  not-self,  and  consequently  holds  that  self
hood  is  confined  to  imperfect  being,  and  vanishes
in  so  far  as  the  hostile  not-self  is  overcome.  This
view  perilously  resembles,  though  it  is  not  one  with,
the  view  for  which  all  consciousness  is  a  disease
and  a  defect.  It  is  facile,  but  dangerous,  simply  to
drop  the  higher  characters  of  experience  when  we
endeavour  to  conceive  the  absolute.  It  is  a  more
trustworthy  plan  to  indicate,  if  possible,  the  line  of
thejrjxaoismuj^ipn.  And  indeed  I  notice  that  the
responsive  or  concordant  not-self  makes  its  appear
ance  within  the  same  set  of  speculations,  though
disregarded  in  their  result.  It  seems,  then,  an  error
to  neglect  this  significant  feature  in  treating  of  the
ultimate  nature  to  which  the  individual  can  aspire.
In  a  word,  is  discordance  the  only  otherness,  and  is
otherness,  therefore,  ultimately  unreal  ?  Is  it  not
the  case  at  bottom  that  discordance  itself  rests  upon
the  claim  and  possibility  of  harmony  ?

2.  I  desire,  then,  to  discuss  in  this  chapter  the  contra
familiar  view  which  treats  what  may  be  called
Negativity  not  as  a  vanishing  defect  but  as  a  funda-
mental  characteristic  of  the  real ;  to  exhibit  this
view  in  connection  with  one  or  two  points  in  logical
theory,  and  to  insist  that  its  value  depends  on  the
principle  being  pressed  home  in  its  full  force.

I  start  from  what  I  take  to  be  the  nature  of  full
or  logical  contradiction.  The  crucial  point  seems
to  be  that  nr>  prgffiytes  are  intrinsically  contrary  to
one  another.1  They  only  become  so  by  the  con
ditions  under  which  they  are  drawn  together.  Con-

1  See Bradley,  Appearance,  2nd ed.,  p. 562  ; and  cf.  author's
Companion  to  Plato's  Republic,  notes  on  436  B  and  479  A.


224  SELF-CONSCIOUSNESS  AND  REALITY LECT.

tradiction  consists  in  "  differents "  being  ascribed
to  the  same  term,  while  no  distinction  is  alleged
within  that  term  such  as  to  make  it  capable  of
receiving  them.

This  is  Plato's  Law  of  Contradiction — what  does
or  suffers  "opposites" — (the  danger  of  a  logical
circle  is  removed  if  we  say  "  differents,"  which  is
enough  l)  in  the  same  relation  must  in  itself  be  two
and  not  one.  And  this  is  the  root  of  his  distinction  i
between  Opinion  or  Appearance,  and  Knowledge-
or  Reality.  It  is  a  formal  contradiction  if  you  say,
"  This  colour  is  both  beautiful  and  ugly,  i.e.  not
beautiful."  It  ceases  to  be  a  contradiction  if  you
say,  "  This  colour  by  daylight  is  beautiful  and  by
candle-light  is  ugly."  Are  not,  it  may  be  asked,
those  terms  intrinsically  contrary  which  can  in  no
case  be  affirmed  of  one  another,  such  as  the  circle
and  the  square  ?  Why,  no.  They  do  not  impede
one  another  or  the  process  of  thought  unless  we
bring  them  together  in  a  special  form,  to  which
their  content  is  inadequate.2  They  may  quite  well
be  conjoint  predicates  of  the  same  complex  term,
and  when  thus  affirmed,  and  protected  by  adequate
distinction,  have  nothing  in  them  contrary  to  one
another.  It  is  one  of  the  points  that  at  first  tries
our  patience  in  Plato,  that  he  seems  to  find  it  con
tradictory  that  the  same  thing  should  look  different
at  different  distances.3  It  is  really  just  a  case  of
what  he  is  constantly  explaining,  as  in  the  argument
above  referred  to.  Obviously,  it  would  be  a  contra-

1 Bradley,  I.e.  '2  Cf.  Bradley  in  Mind,  Ixxii.  p.  173.

3  When  he  introduces  the  judgment  of  magnitude,  "  We  see  it
bigger  and  smaller,"  the/«r/  becomes  doubtful.  But  there  is  enough
truth  in  the  statement  for  his  immediate  purpose.  There  is  a  tend
ency  to  the  error  in  question.


vi  CONTRADICTION  HOW  ACTUAL?  225

diction  if  a  thing  looked  the  same  at  different  dis
tances  ;  that  it  looks  different  at  different  distances)
is  a  plain  case  under  his  Law  of  non-contradiction.
There  are  places  for  all  predicates ;  and  when  all
predicates  are  in  their  places,  none  of  them  is  con
trary  to  any  other.  It  is  the  bringing  them  together,
on  an  inadequate  basis  of  distinction,  which  is  the
essence  of  contradiction  and  contrariety,  and  this
may  happen  with  any  diverse  terms  whatever.  I
venture  to  think  that  when  we  find  an  implication
that  predicates  can  be  antecedently  "contrary"  or
"  opposite,"  we  may  infer  that  contradiction  has  not
been  adequately  analysed.1  Contradiction,  then,  we
suggest,  is  not  a  dead  fact  about  certain  predicates  ;
it  is  an  imperfection  in  the  organisation  of  systems.

We  may  describe  Contradiction  then  as  a  dead
lock,  caused  by  the  attempt  to  bring  together  two
or  more  different  terms  without  adequate  adjust
ment  of  content  for  their  reception.  Contradiction
in  this  sense  is  rightly  pronounced  unthinkable,  and
cannot,  therefore,  be  a  characteristic  of  Truth  or  of
Ultimate  Reality.  For  these,  if  they  are  anything,
are  experiences  in  which  Thought  is  triumphant
and  harmonious  with  itself  at  least,  even  if  with
more  besides.

It  will  be  a  first  step  in  our  argument  if  we  can
decide  at  this  point  in  what  sense  even  such  com
plete  and  formal  contradiction  is  in  some  way  an
actual  existent,  and  a  characteristic  of  Reality.  We
see  at  once  that  it  cannot  be  ultimate  ;  and  we  are

1  I  meet  with  this  difficulty  in  McTaggart's  Studies  in  Hegelian
Dialectic,  p.  9.  If  I  am  right,  the  term  opposite,  applied  to  predi
cates,  has  none  but  a  rhetorical  meaning.  Cf.,  however,  the  same
author's  Commentary  on  Hegel's  Logic,  sect.  1 16,  where  "  opposites  "
are  terms  referred  to  a  common  basis  and  reconciled  by  distinction.

Q


226  SELF-CONSCIOUSNESS  AND  REALITY LECT.

disposed  at  the  first  look  to  admit  that  it  is  merely
a  blunder  of  our  own making,  a  subjective  error,
incapable  of  belonging  to  the  world  of  fact. But  in
saying  this,  we  seem  to  have  unduly  idealised  our
actual  world — our given experience  so far  as  we
can  at  all  recognise  anything  as  given. We  seem
to be treating this with the respect  only  due  to
ultimate reality. For  if  there  is  anything  that is
given,  it  is  a  perpetual  unrest  of  action  and  cogni
tion  ; and  this  testifies  to  the  presence  of  conflict
and  discord  within  every  pulse  of  our  experience,
that  is  to  say,  the  presence  of  contradictions  which
both  in  action  and  speculation  make  it  impossible
to  repose  in  any  actual  moment. It  must,  I  infer,
be  admitted  that  every  day  fact,  what  is  given  in
normal  experience,  is  self-contradictory  as  well  as
actual. If  we  say that  what  is  self-contradictoryj
cannot  be  actual  fact,  then  we  must  deny  the  actuality;
of  our  whole  normal  world  which  is  the  field  of  ouij
knowledge and action. For it is too  plain  thatj
every  object  of  knowledge  and  every  situation  such]
as  to  determine  practice,  if  acquiesced  in  for  a  time,
is  acquiesced  in  only  on  sufferance,  and  really  con
tains  incoherences,  combinations  impossible  as  they
stand,  which must  as  soon  as  noted  drive  us  on
wards. Facts,  as  we  call  them,  are  stable  op^-to  a
certain point,  —  will, so to speak, answer  certain
questions and meet  certain needs ; but when we
transcend  their  several  limits  of  stability  by  bringing
them  into  connection  with  more  of  the  real  world,
we  become  aware  that  none  of  them  are  sufficiently
stubborn  things  to  stand  as  finally  coherent. The
common appearances of our lives — of material
things,  of  conduct,  and  of  institutions,  all  carry  us


vi  PETRIFIED FACTS WILL  NOT  SERVE  227

a  certain  way,  and  to  pronounce  them  illusory  would
be  a  foolish  exaggeration.  But,  to  take  a  single
example,  if  we  trust  to  man's  living  by  bread  alone
—by  bodily  comfort — we  shall  find  he  cannot,  and
that  though  bodily  nutrition  is  actual,  we  shall  fall
into  contradiction — find  that  nourishment  is  not
nourishment — if  we  take  it  as  the  exclusive  mode
in  which  human  beings  are  kept  alive.  We  shall
find  other  needs  asserted ;  what  we  took  for  our
system  of  "  fact "  will  not  give  room  for  them.  Our
fact  has  broken  down  ;  and  all  our  facts  break  down
in  some  such  way,  and  at  some  such  point.  Thus,
if  we  do  not  care  to  adopt  the  doctrine  of  Maya —
which  arises  from  a  misapprehension  on  this  head
— and  class  the  whole  known  world  as  illusion,  we
must  admit  that  what  is  experienced  as  actual  fact
may  yet  be  self-contradictory.1  We  cannot  escape
by  saying  "  thus  far  and  no  farther "  ;  by  saying
"  we  will  take  the  world  without  asking  questions,
and  thus  it  shall  be  perfect  fact,  and  real  without
contradiction."  For  such  a  world  will  not  keep
pace  with  our  experience.  We  shall  find  that
action  and  argument,  "  like  a  wind,"  take  us  outside
it ;  and  our  petrified  facts  will  neither  serve  our
need  nor  maintain  themselves.

The  whole  difficulty  springs  from  trying  to
attribute  to  given  fact  the  features  of  ultimate
Reality.  In  truth,  the  actual  world  is  charged  with
contradiction.  Things  are  given  with  conjunctions

1  Metaphysical  criticism  directed  to  establishing  degrees  of
reality,  after  the  manner  of  Plato  and  those  who  follow  him,  is  of
course  the  completest  support  of  this  point  of  view.  It  is  most  strik
ing  to  note  that  Hegel  desires  to  treat  "  Widerspruch  "  as  a  category
of  his  Logic,  that  is,  as  a  necessary  predicate  of  reality  at  a  certain
stage,  apart  from  the  working  contradiction  by  which  every  category
passes  into  its  successor  (McTaggart,  Commentary,  sect.  1 1 8-9).


228  SELF-CONSCIOUSNESS  AND  REALITY LECT.


of  predicates  which  no  distinctions  are  at  hand  to
deal  with  and  explain.  In  the  life  of  conscious
beings,  again,  contradiction  is  a  felt  experience,  as
actual  as  pain,  dissatisfaction,  unrest,  which  are
forms  of  it  or  one  with  it.  It  consists  in  an  attempted
union,  which,  though  given,  yet  because  it  fails  in
the  contents  necessary  for  adjustment,  a  mind  or
even  a  life  (it  would  appear)  cannot  endure.  It  is
actual,  as  the  experience  of  progress  proves,  over
the  whole  region  of  action  and  cognition,  which  is
equivalent  to  the  region  of  finite  experience.
The  spirit  3.  Our  next  step  is  to  ascertain  what  form  or

of  other-  . .  r , ,  ,,  .  .  1*1

ness  is  spirit  of  "  otherness  survives  when  a  logical  con-
Vlty'  tradiction  is  resolved.  The  point  I  would  draw
attention  to  is  that  we  are  here  dealing  with  a  sur
vival  of  what  was  present  in  Logical  Contradiction.
Nothing  is  changed,  except  that  what  was  attempted
has  been  achieved.  The  contents  are  diverse,  as
they  were  ;  sensuous  contents,  ideas,  emotions,  con
scious  members  of  a  social  world.  The  principle  is
the  same  throughout ;  they  rush  towards  one  an
other  through  the  same  impulse,  to  come  together
in  the  whole  which  animates  them  ;  the  change  is
merely  that  now  they  and  their  world  have  been
readjusted,  and  can  carry  out  their  union.  How
are  we  to  describe  the  form  of  their  surviving
distinctness  ?  We  may  take  such  examples  as  a
sensuous  harmony  of  colour  or  sound,  or  mind  and
motive  at  their  best,  or  two  selves  united  in  one
emotion,  or  the  satisfaction  of  desire.

I may  illustrate the  point by Hegel's  view  of
contradiction.1 It  is merely  an illustration, for  I
do  not  wish to raise any  historical  question. It
1  See  above,  p.  225.


vi CONTRADICTION  THE  MAINSPRING OF  LIFE  229

is  familiar  ground  that  Hegel  has  been  accused
of  denying  or  disregarding  the  logical  law  which
pronounces  contradiction  to  be  unthinkable,  and
that  his  best  interpreters  have  shown  the  charge  to
be  false.  They  have  pointed  out  that  the  Dialectic,
so  far  from  disregarding  the  law  of  Contradiction,
rests'entirely  upon  it.  It  is  because  Contradiction
is  unthinkable  and  intolerable  that  a  conjunction
of  judgments  which  makes  their  predicates  irrecon
cilable  demands  a  readjustment  of  contents  and  the
formation  of  a  new  totality.

Now,  while  I  admit  that  this  is  contained  in
Hegel's  view  of  Contradiction,  I  cannot  but  think
that  there  is  something  more  behind.  Hegel  obvi
ously  feels  himself  fundamentally  in  antagonism  to
the  current  formal  view  of  Contradiction  as  merely
unthinkable.  No  words  are  too  strong  for  him
to  express  his  scorn  of  such  an  attitude.  "  What
moves  the  world  is  Contradiction  ;  it  is  ridiculous
to  say  that  Contradiction  is  unthinkable.  What  is
true  in  this  assertion  only  comes  to  this,  that  Contra
diction  cannot  be  final,  and  that  by  its  own  action

I  it  cancels  while  it  maintains  itself  (Sick  aufhebt}.
The  cancelled  and  maintained  contradiction,  how
ever,  is  not  abstract  identity,  for  this  is  only  one
side  of  the  antithesis."  Here,  no  doubt,  we  are
in  the  region  of  essence,  where  oppositions  are
sharp  and  pointed.  But  this  does  not  account  for
the  whole  of  Hegel's  attitude,  which  is  fundamental
with  him  :  "  Whereas  people  say  that  Contradiction

j  is not  thinkable, the truth is that in pain which
a  living  being  feels  it  is  actually  a  real  existence."
(He  says  the  same of  motion  in  space.) Again  :

1  Encydop.  p.  119,  Zusatz  2.  ^  Werke,  Bd.  v.  249.


230  SELF-CONSCIOUSNESS  AND  REALITY LECT.

"  Formal  thinking  prescribes  to  itself  the  rule  that
Contradiction  is  not  thinkable  ;  but,  in  fact,  the
thinking  of  Contradiction  is  the  essential  moment
of  the  Notion."1  These  latter  passages  are  from
the  discussion  of  Life  and  of  the  Absolute  Idea.
It  is  clear  that  we  have  here  a  reference  to  some
thing  more  than  the  mere  deadlock  between  saying
and  unsaying  the  same  thing.  It  is  agreed  that
a  logical  contradiction  is  a  position  which  cannot
be  held  ;  but  we  further  note  a  strong  conviction
that  it  contains  and  implies  something,  the  value
and  necessity  of  which  accounts  for  and  justifies  the
inevitability  of  contradiction  itself.  Contradiction,
as  we  saw  above,  is  not  just  a  mistake  of  ours  ;  it  is
a  check  or  friction  incident  to  the  misfit  of  experi
ence  in  its  self-systematisation.  The  question  is,
what  is  left,  what  is  found  to  have  been  the  true
movement  of  union,  when  the  check  or  friction  is
removed  by  readjustment  ?

This  brings  us  to  a  suggestion  for  meeting  the
problem.  "  What  survives  when  a  contradiction
is  resolved?"  We  might  venture  to  reply — "A
successful  embodiment  of  '  negativity.' '  Hegel
often  speaks  of  Negativity  as  apparently  a  factor
or  moment  lying  deep  in  the  inmost  structure  of
the  Real,  as  the  pulse  of  life  and  spring  of  move
ment  of  the  world.2  It  is  not  one  with  the  dead
fact  of  unthinkableness  which  attaches  to  logical
contradiction.  It  is  rather  the  spirit  of  system3

1  Werke,  Bd.  v.  332.

2  For  different  views  on  this  question  see  McTaggart,  Studies  in
Hegelian  Dialectic, sect. 9 and 117;  Prof. McGilvary, Mind,  vii.

P-  397-

3  See  author's  Logic,  2nd  ed.,  i.  289,  on  place  of  Negation in
Knowledge. Cf.  Bergson,  Evolution  creatrice,  p.  315,  who  on  this
point  seems  unaware  oT  Plato's  profound  discussions.


vi NEGATION  THE UNITY  OF THE DIVERSE 231

and  self- consciousness — the  intimate  nature  of  a
being  which,  while  acting  and  expanding,  is  yet  at
home  with  itself  —  distinguishable  or  self -distin
guishing,  in  and  throughout  the  intimate  union  with
its  contents  in  expansion  and  in  action.  It  is  the
successful  and  pure  expression  of  that  whole  aspect
or  tendency  of  anything  real,  which  finds  imperfect
manifestation,  with  an  accompaniment  of  friction
and  hindrance,  in  what  has  been  described  above
as  Formal  or  Logical  Contradiction.

Negativity,  then,  it  is  submitted,  is  fundamental
in  all  that  is  real.  It  is  the  same  characteristic
which  has  been  described  as  the  fact  that  experience
is  always  beyond  itself — the  character,  indeed,  which
we  have  described  from  the  beginning  as  that  of  the
universal,  or,  in  other  words,  the  tendency  of  every
datum  to  transcend  itself  as  a  fragment  and  com
plete  itself  as  a  whole.  It  is  what  has  been  spoken
of  under  the  name  of  self-consciousness  as  the  nature
of  a  being  which  is  itself  and  its  other  in  one.

I  am  suggesting  that  Negation  and  Negativity
have  sometimes  been  confused  with  Contradiction.
Contradiction,  as  we  have  tried  to  explain  it,  is_an
unsuccessful  or  obstructed  Negativity;  Negativity
a  successful  or  frictionless  contradiction.  Negation,
according  to  our  views  which  have  been  maintained
elsewhere,  is  correlative  to  affirmation.  The  ques
tion  about  it  is,  not,  how  much  meaning  you  can
conjure  out  of  a  bare  denial,  but  why,  in  the  most
highly  developed  experience,  negation  bears  an  equal
part.1  And  the  answer  is,  that  negation  is  funda-

1  Cf.  author's  Logic,  loc.  cit.  M.  Bergson  has  discussed  the
question  at  length  (Evolution  creatrice,  loc.  cit.}.  His  answer,
though  emphasising  the  factor  of  interest  and  sentiment,  falls  within


232  SELF-CONSCIOUSNESS  AND  REALITY LECT.

mental  in  a  systematic  whole.  Its  members,  in
order  to  be,  must  also  not  be.  In  a  sense  this  is  true
even  of  the  whole  itself,  as  active  in  them.

It  seems  erroneous,  therefore,  to  hold  that
Negativity  vanishes  as  perfection  is  approached.
The  reverse  seems  to  be  the  case.

Negative  and  affirmative  grow #ari fiassu.  When
this  is  not  admitted,  we  suspect  a  confusion  between
Contradiction  and  Negation.  It  is  a  point  which
seems  full  of  significance,  and  which  can  hardly
be  too  much  insisted  on,  that  otherness  and  the
not-self,  , ,  the  vastness  of  the  universe  with  which
every  self  has  to  be  reconciled,  increases  and  does
not  diminish  by  the  same  movement  by  which
friction,  obstruction,  conflict,  are  reduced  and  re
moved.  So  long  as  there  is  no  science,  and  the
world  baffles  and  contradicts  the  mind  of  the  savage
at  every  turn,  there  can  be  no  such  conception  of  a
reality  not  ourselves  over  against  the  self  as  there
is  in  the  days  of  Newton  and  Darwin.  Whether  it
is  here  interpreted  to  the  right  effect  or  not,  this
matter  is  one  which  is,  and  ought  not  to  be,  neglected ;
viz.,  that  negation  plays  a  larger  and  not  a  smaller
part  as  contradiction  diminishes.  It  is  contradiction
in  fact — confusion  or  conflict  checking  the  orderly
expansion  of  a  system,  whether  a  life  or  a  theory —
which  hinders  significant  negation  from  appearing.
A  true  negativity,  say,  an  organised  universe  of
desire,  is  a  solved  contradiction.

This,  therefore,  it  is  submitted,  is  the  spirit  of
difference  which  survives  even  where  contradiction

the  general  account  given  by  Plato  and  others,  that  negation  is  the
spirit  of  an  interdependent  system.  This  is  why  often,  instead  of
affirming  a,  it  is  convenient  to  deny  b.


vi  THE  ESSENCE OF  SATISFACTION  233

has  been  overcome,  and  where  we  possess  what  is
most  real  and  most  thinkable.  Everything  con
tributes  to  the  whole,  and  the  friction  or  failure  of
adjustment,  which  made  the  contradiction  or  dead
lock,  say,  in  the  attempted  combination  of  two  or
more  desires,  no  doubt  represented  and  enhanced
the  distinctness  of  the  two  sides,  which  survives  in
and  tends  to  perfect  the  completed  union.  But
it  appears  to  me  that  we  are  allowing  ourselves  to
lose  sight  of  the  full  problem  if  we  treat  the  mere
fact  of  having  refused  to  enter  together  into  a  whole
—that  is,  of  having  been  in  contradiction,  as  some
thing  which,  surviving  as  such,  qualifies  the  success
ful  union.  The  qualification,  whatever  it  is,  can
surely  count  and  work  only  as  it  survives  within  the
completed  whole,  and  it  is  in  the  factors  of  this
whole  itself  that  we  have  to  find  the  experience  of
negativity ;  which  is  not,  according  to  the  view
here  insisted  on,  a  note  of  imperfection,  but  is  a
character  that  is  deepest  in  the  most  perfectly  real
experience.

What,  then,  do  we  mean  by  Negativity  as  a
feature  of  experience?  If  it  only  means  difference,
the  distinctness  necessary  to  identification,  is  not
a  term  connected  with  the  idea  of  negation  too
violent  and  exaggerated  to  use  for  it  ?  What  is
here  meant  is  not  precisely  difference,  but  difference
as  subsumed  under  the  general  character  of  nega
tion,  that  is  to  say,  diversity  or  distinctness  as
regarded  from  the  point  of  view  of  an  attempted
union  ;  the  attitude — to  take  a  conscious  being,
probably  the  only  ultimate  case,  as  at  least  an  illus
tration — of  any  spirit  that  demands  a  union  or
satisfaction,  to  that  with  which  it  is  impelled  to


234


SELF-CONSCIOUSNESS  AND  REALITY LECT.


Hostility
fContra-
diction)
confused
with  Re-


ness(  Nega

tivity).

Vrai-

semblance

of  the

confusion.


unite  or  in  which  it  aspires  to  be  satisfied.  Now
no  doubt  self-completion,  .satisfaction,  felt  solution
of  contradiction,)  are  possible  at  many  levels  of  life  ;
and  compatible  with  very  easy  and  effortless  ex
periences.  But  it  is  here  suggested  that  in  a  true
typical  satisfaction — felt  resolution  of  a  contradic
tion —  there  is  always  a  certain  exaltation  which
depends  essentially  on  the  fact  that  in  satisfaction
the  self  goes  out  into  the  other,  and,  though  or
because  it  becomes  enriched,,  is^beyond  itself.  In
a  word,  to  put  the  whole  paradox  brutally,  it  is
undergoing  an  experience  which  logically  and  in
its  fundamental  structure  is  one  with  self-sacrifice.1
How  can  this  be  construed  of  anything  but  a  finite
being?  Obviously  not  by  help  of  such  words  as
have  just  been  used,  presupposing  limits  and  a
temporal  modification  in  the  self.  But  there  is
a  point  of  some  interest  which  may  at  least  serve
to  bring  out  the  distinction  of  principle  between
taking  Negation,  as,  like  Contradiction,  an  incident
of  finiteness,  and  taking  it  as  fundamental  in  Reality.
4.  It  has  already  been  implied  that  the  current
view  of  experience,  influential  even  among  philo
sophers,  confuses  Contradiction  and  Negativity.
The  principle  that  an  element  of  Reality  can  find
completion  only  in  what  is  not  itself,  is  confused
with  the  imperfection  of  adjustment  in  finite  beings
or  contents,  which  so  far  hinders  such  completion
from  taking  place.  And  thus  it  comes  to  be  held
that  Negation,  like  Contradiction,  is  a  vanishing
quantity,  and  that  in  a  complete  experience  it  would

1  There  is  self-sacrifice,  in  form,  in  so  far  as  the  self  contradicts
itself  as  a  condition  of  self-expression.  But  the  form  may  include  a
contradiction  we  do  not  approve  of — one  which  minimises  the  self
on  the  whole — and  then  we  call  it  wrong-doing.


vi  APPARENT VALUE OF  DISCORD  235

disappear.  The  point  of  interest  which  was  just
now  referred  to  as  emphasising  the  distinction  of
principle,  is  the  extreme  difficulty  of  avoiding  this
confusion.  When  we  endeavour  to  insist  upon  the
nature  of  self-consciousness,  as  self  and  other  in
onej,  by  instances  and  analyses  drawn  from  actual
experience,  we  constantly  find  ourselves  appealing
to  characteristics  which  depend  upon  ignorance  and
imperfection.  The  ideal  which  we  have  in  mind
is  the  self  fz7/\the  other,  but  in  actual  experience  we
get  little  rmsre  than  the  self(#W)the  .other.1  Now
the  crux  in  the  distinction  of  principle  arises  at  this
point,  because  of  the  appearance  as  if  it  were  the
discrepancy  of  self  and  other  that  for  us  gives
interest  to  the  realisation  of  self  in  other.  We
may  take  as  a  characteristic  case  that  apparent
responsiveness  of  external  Nature  to  human  moods,
the  perception  of  which  is  at  least  a  great  part  of
the  apprehension  of  the  beautiful.  The  freshness
and  strength  of  the  feeling  which  such  perceptions
bring  with  them  is  surely  in  a  great  measure  de
pendent  on  the  fact  that  they  come  to  us  as  unde
signed  coincidences.  It  is  for  this  reason  that
they  seem  to  bring  to  us  a  confirmation  of  our
own  sentiments  which  is  rooted  somewhere  beyond
the  foundations  of  our  own  private  being.  If  there
were  no  novelty,  no  unfamiliarity,  in  a  word,  no
friction  nor  discrepancy  intruding  upon  our  appre
hension  of  natural  beauty,  then,  we  are  inclined  to
conceive,  the  return  upon  ourselves  would  lose  in
vigour  what  it  gained  in  facility,  and  the  magic
of  the  new  and  inexplicable  would  be  lost  in  a  dull
sensation  that  it  is  all  the  same  old  story.

1 Nettleship,  Biography  of  Gree?i,  p.  206.


.


236  SELF-CONSCIOUSNESS  AND  REALITY LECT.

Now  the  case  thus  stated  emphasises  the  opposite
side  of  the  question  from  that  which  was  stated
before.  And  the  interest  is  that  both  are  undeni
ably  actual.  It  is  true,  as  we  urged,  that  the  sense
of  the  beyond,  of  a  something  which  stands  over
against  the  mind,  must  be  incalculably  greater  for
Newton  or  for  Darwin  than  for  a  savage  to  whom
nature  is  chiefly  a  mysterious  source  of  unaccount
able  interferences.  But  it  is  also  true  that  a  loss
of  novelty  and  strangeness — of  friction  in  making
the  world  our  own — seems  to  very  many  minds
destructive  of  poetry,  and  of  responsiveness  on
Nature's  part.  The  two  tendencies  are  deep-
rooted,  and  both  no  doubt  must  have  their  justifi
cation.  Does  complete  knowledge  and  familiarity
dull  the  interest  of  a  landscape  or  a  poem,  or  does
it  rather,  as  some  would  say,  cause  the  response
to  be  even  deeper,  and  the  significance  to  be  more
profoundly  felt  ?  Is  novelty  necessary  to  enjoy
ment,  and  ought  a  story  to  lose  its  interest  when
we  find  we  have  read  it  before  P1  In  these  simple
questions,  which  our  every-day  acquaintance  with
nature,  art,  and  letters,  forces  upon  us,  we  have  an
embodiment  of  the  metaphysical  issue  which  is  the
subject  of  this  chapter.  Is  Logical  Contradiction
a  necessary  condition  or  accompaniment  of  a  genuine
conciliation  and  satisfaction  ;  or  is  this,  compara
tively  speaking,  an  accident  of  growth,  giving  place
to  an  exaltation  which  increases  with  mastery  and
the  removal  of  incidental  interferences,  as  the  self
comes  together  with  a  not-self  which  is  completer

1  Cf.  the  question  how  far  hostility  to  sense  is  necessary  to  the
sublime  (Professor  A.  C.  Bradley,  Oxford  Lectures,  p.  56).  On  the
whole,  and  when  the  experience  is  at  its  best,  it  is  not  so.


vi  THE CHARM  OF  CONQUEST  237

and  more  free  from  discrepancy  ?  There  can  be
no  doubt  that  the  latter  alternative  on  the  whole
represents  the  truth.  It  is  a  bad  romance  which
interests  on  the  first  reading  only.  It  is  a  vulgar
appetite  for  the  marvellous  which  finds  superstition
more  exciting  and  poetical  than  science.  It  is  not
the  obstructive  but  the  truly  responsive  different,
which  in  the  deepest  sense  attracts  and  exalts  us.1
Of  course  the  possibility  of  the  former  is  rooted
in  the  characteristic  which  constitutes  the  latter.

The  other  tendency  we  can  empirically  see  to  be  f
of  a  vanishing  nature  ;  or  else  civilisation  would,  as  *
the  pessimist  thinks,  destroy  the  charm  of  the
world.  But  the  pessimist  is  not  without  his
grounds,  and  novelty  and  inexplicability  must  have
genuine  features  of  attraction.  The  two  sources
of  interest  have,  as  we  saw,  the  same  root ;  the
possibility  of  discord  is  involved  in  the  claim  to  har
mony.  In  the  first  place,  we  can  see  the  necessity
that  it  should  be  so ;  if  not,  if  their  first  aspect
was  purely  deterrent,  progress  could  never  begin.
Secondly,  as  we  have  said  already,  the  response
that  is  cumbered  with  strangeness  and  obstruction
has  the  seal  of  an  undesigned  coincidence ;  we  feel
that  the  very  enemy  takes  our  part.  These  might
be  called  formal  feelings,  like  the  analogous  enjoy
ment  of  detecting  a  plot  puzzle,  or  being  amazed
at  unheard-of  ingenuities  of  romance.  But  when
the  rind  of  things  is  pierced,  and  the  content  begins
to  be  won,  a  deeper  set  of  emotions  is  stirred  ;  and

1  The  two  tendencies  in  the  appreciation  of  beauty  which  I  have
taken  as  examples  of  interest  depending  on  Logical  Contradiction
and  on  simple  Negativity  respectively,  are  curiously  parallel  to  the
two  views  of  the  conditions  of  the  consciousness  of  self,  which.  wLU
be  discussed  below,  p.  247.


238  SELF-CONSCIOUSNESS  AND  REALITY LECT.

we  begin  to  rejoice  in  the  substantive  values  which
expand  and  affirm  our  self,  and  not  merely  in  the
surprise  that  the  crust  should  yield  to  our  instru
ments  at  all.  There  is  more  to  be  said  than  this,
of  course,  about  the  delights  of  mystery  ;  but  we
must  be  content  with  a  single  warning.  The  atti
tude  of  the  mystic,  which  all  philosophy  must  re
spect,  does  not  depend  on  mystery  in  the  vulgar
sense  ;  not  on  the  marvellousness,  or  unaccountable-
ness,  or  obscurity  of  ideas.  The  mystic,  above  all
men,  is  absorbed  in  the  greatness  of  a  content  for
its  own  sake,  and  in  its  overwhelming  clearness.
It  is  not  contradiction,  not  friction  and  obstruction,
but  immediacy  as  opposed  to  discursiveness  that
distinguishes  his  apprehension  of  the  real.

We  may  thus  understand,  perhaps,  or  approach
an  understanding,  how  Logical  Contradiction,  though
apparently  a  characteristic  attending  interest  and
value  in  the  response  of  the  not-self,  is  so  really  only
as  an  introduction,  and  for  vanishing  reasons.  And
we  can  infer  that  to  interpret  our  interesting  sense
of  the  beyond  or  "  other "  which  furnishes  our
satisfactions,  as  due  to  our  ignorance  and  defect,
and  as  a  vanishing  quantity  in  the  progress  of  the
mind,  is  to  confuse  the  incident  with  the  essence  ;
and  that,  as  in  the  example  of  natural  knowledge,
the  otherness  becomes  more  definite  as  the  object
becomes  more  adequate  to  the  subject.

It  is  partly,  perhaps,  with  the  view  of  constru
ing  these  appearances  that  many  thinkers  have
embarked  on  the  adventure  of  treating  all  the
content  of  life  as  a  translation  of  the  interaction
of  conscious  beings.  Here,  no  doubt,  we  seem  to
have  a  suggestion  of  an  "other"  which  is  able


vi  SPIRIT  PRESUPPOSES  NATURE  239

to  maintain  its  independence,  its  otherness,  along
with  any  degree  of  transparency  or  familiarity.
And  I  mention  the  speculation  chiefly  to  make
clear,  if  it  does  not  seem  clear,  what  is  the  particular
crux  which  I  have  had  in  mind.  We  may  hold  it
possible  to  imagine  an  intelligent  being  who  has
nothing  left  to  learn  from  a  sunset  or  even  from
a  pain  or  pleasure  ;  and,  putting  that  impossible  case,
we  should  be  unable  to  comprehend  how  they  can  any
longer  be  experiences  by  union  with  which  his  self  has
anything  to  gain.  But  a  person,  it  would  be  urged,
however  well  you  know  him,  is  still  an  independent
source  of  response,  and  it  may  be  argued  that  here,
and  here  only,  you  find  the  true  other  of  a  self.

I  find  a  difficulty  in  this  speculation  which  may
rest  on  misapprehension,  but  which  I  will  indicate
in  a  few  words  because  our  view  of  externality
is  concerned.  What  we  must  have,  on  any  theory,
for  Reality  and  especially  for  Negativity  to  be  mani
fested  in,  is  the  content  of  life,  pain,  conflict,  sacrifice,
satisfaction.  Now  there  is  a  difficulty,  is  there  not  ?
in  getting  these  contents  out  of  a  universe  in  which
nature  is  a  system  of  persons,  except  by  presuppos
ing,  in  the  outside  or  other  of  every  thing  regarded
as  a  person,  what  might  as  well  have  been  pre
supposed  as  the  outside  or  other  of  the  persons
commonly  recognised  as  such.  It  is  things,  is  it
not  ?  which  set  the  problems  of  life  for  persons  ;  and
if  you  turn  all  things  into  persons  the  differences
which  make  life  interesting  are  gone,  except  in  as
far  as  for  practical  purposes  you  turn  the  persons
back  again  into  things,  i.e.  your  food,  or  your  own
body,  or  the  place  at  which  you  were  born.  In
making  the  outside  adequate  to  the  highest  claims,


/I


240  SELF-CONSCIOUSNESS  AND  REALITY LECT.

you  have  turned  it  into  an  inside,  and  so,  while
professing  to  meet  the  problem  of  the  outside  in  the
highest  degree,  you  have,  it  appears  to  me,  really
abandoned  it  altogether.  If  the  instruments  and
attributes  of  my  life  are  turned  into  persons,  I  surely
am  reduced  to  emptiness  and  deprived  of  my
character,  for  without  external  activity  my  character
is  nothing.  This  criticism  may  be  mistaken,  but  it
may  pass  as  affirming  that  we  must  perceive  as
actual  the  distinctions,  which  give  life  its  content.
There  cannot  be  spirit,  it  would  seem,  constituted
by  nothing  but  pure  spiritual  centres.1  Spirit  i^  a
ligku.a  forjis..^a _  significance,  wJiicJi^c^
contact  with  a  "nature."  2  an  external  world.
Conciu-  5.  I  will  proceed  to  indicate  the  consequences  of

opposed  to  these  ideas,  well-known  consequences,  to  which  I
opinions,  have  nothing  to  add,  except  just  this,  to  urge  that
their  point  is  lost  if  they  are  not  conceived  in  their
whole  depth  of  paradox.  I  will  try  to  express  them
through  antitheses  to  current  opinions,  which  will
bring  out  the  reasons  for  which  they  seem  to  me
important ;  and  these  are  also  the  characteristics
which  define  their  peculiarity.

a.  It  is  a  mistake  to  treat  the  finite  world,  or
pain,  or  evil,  as  an  illusion.  To  the  question  whether
they  are  real  or  are  not  real,  the  answer  must  be,  as
to  all  questions  of  this  type,  that  evejy^thingjsj^l,
so  long  as  you  do  not  take  it  for  more  than  it  is.
On  the  view  here  accepted,  finiteness,  pain,  and  evil

1  Cf.  Caird,  Critical  Philosophy  of  Kant ',  ii.  536  ;  Bradley,  Mind,
li.  p.  327  note.

2  How  far  is  such  a  view  cognate  with  the  ideas  of  M.  Bergson  ?
Would  he  say  that  la  vie  would  be  better,  and  could  be  at  all,  without
matter,  which  appears  to  be  for  him  in  the  main  the  debris  or  detritus
of  life,  and  yet  in  some  way  its  positive  sine  qua  non  ?


VI  PAIN  IS  REAL  BUT  NOT ULTIMATE  241

are  essential  features  of  Reality,  and  belong  to  an
aspect  of  it  which  leaves  its  marks  even  on  perfec
tion.  The  view  that  they  are  illusions  says  that  if
we  knew  everything  and  could  feel  everything  we
should  see  and  feel  that  there  was  no  pain  or  evil  at
all.  The  view  that  contradiction  is  actual,  and,  more
than  that,  is  an  exaggeration  of  a  feature  truly
fundamental  in  reality,  says  that  if  we  knew  every
thing  and  could  feel  everything  we  should  see  and
feel  what  finiteness,  pain,  and  evil  mean,  and  how
they  play  a  part  in  perfection  itself.  The  way  of
meeting  them — though  it  is  not  our  business  to
preach,  yet  we  may  permit  ourselves  to  illustrate
our  view  by  its  effect — the  way  of  meeting  them  is
different  in  principle  for  these  two  theories.  Lit  is
absurd  and  insulting  to  tell  a  man  in  pain  or  in  sin
that  there  is  no  such  thing  as  pain  or  sin  ;  it  is
neither  absurd  nor  insulting  to  try  to  let  him  feel
that  of  each  of  them  something  great  and  precious
can  be  made.j  In  a  certain  sense  the  two  views,
that  which  disposes  of  them  as  illusion,  and  that
which  accepts  them  as  immanent  in  perfection
though  not  just  as  they  seem,  may  be  forced  into
approximation.  But  our  present  task  is  to  insist
on  their  difference,  to  urge  that  all  depends  on
being  in  earnest  with  the  idea  of  negativity,  and
that  from  such  a  point  of  view  the  idea  of  illusion  is  .
rejected,  though  that  of  appearance,  as  something
actual  and  yet  contradictory,  is  accepted.  I  do  not
think  that  Hegel  can  be  held  to  treat  evil  as  an
illusion,  though  he  has  used  the  word  illusion  in
discussing  the  matter.1  As  I  understand,  the  illusion

1  Encyclopadie,  sect.  212; cf. McTaggart,  Studies  in  Hegelian
Dialectic,  Chap.  v.

R


242  SELF-CONSCIOUSNESS  AND  REALITY LECT.

which  he  speaks  of  is  not  the  belief  that  evil  or
finiteness  is  actual,  but  the  belief  that  its  actuality
prevents  the  supreme  end  from  being  accomplished,
whereas  in  truth  it  is  essential  to  its  accomplishment.
At  all  events,  as  against  the  idea  that  finiteness,
pain,  and  evil  are  illusions,  the  view  here  indicated
would  maintain  that  finite  conscious  beings  actually

jsuffer  and  do  wrong  because  it  is  their  nature  to
complete  themselves,  and  the  general  form  of  this

'completion  involves  as  one  factor  in  it  the  relative
loss  of  self,  and  in  the  finite  world  this  is  emphasised
by  various  degrees  of  what  we  have  called  Logical

-  Contradiction,  that  is  to  say,  inadequacy  of  the
elements  in  which  completion  is  sought.  It  would
follow,  and  this  seems  to  agree  with  the  best  ethical
theory,  that  the  ultimate  logical  structure,  if  I  may
so  speak,  of  suffering  and  of  evil  is  the  same  as  that
of  satisfaction  and  of  good.  That  is  very  noticeable,
of  course,  in  Green's  theory  of  morality.  It  is
undoubtedly  not  easy  on  this  theory  to  distinguish
otherwise  than  in  degree  between  moral  good  and
evil.  And  I  believe  this  to  be  an  indication  that  its
main  outline,  its  metaphysical  fabric,  is  sound.1  The
difference,  in  principle,  is  one  of  the  adequacy  of  the
contents  in  which  self-completion  is  sought,  and  the
consequent  degree  of  their  tendency  to  give  rise  to
discord2  and  contradiction.  But  in  all  important
satisfaction  there  is  a  thrill,  which  is  analogous  to

1  A  theory  of  the  bad  self,  such  as  we  have  in Mr.  Bradley's
Ethical  Studies,  is  needed  to  work  out  the  distinction  of  good  and
bad  in  conduct.

2  It  must  be  remembered  (Bradley,  Appearance,  2nd  ed.,  p.  364)
that  the  discord  which  is  not  felt  may  be  the  most  extreme. The
hardened sinner is an  obvious case. That the inadequate self-
completeness  is  sought  as  true  self-completeness  is  an  essential  point
of  the  bad  self. It  is  involved  in  the  statement  of  the  text


vi  THE  FORM  OF  SELF-SACRIFICE  243

pain,  due  to  the  tension  of  self-completion ;  and
theory  seems  to  demand  that,  as  Plato  suggested,  a
perfect  experience l  should  be,  not  indifferent  or
neutral  as  the  careless  reader  supposes,  but  such  as
to  include  and  harmonise  in  itself  the  characteristics
of  pain  and  pleasure.

13.  The  same  mode  of  thought  would  be  hostile? The  perfect
to  any  conception  of  the  divine  nature  which  should  must  not
involve  stability  and  perfection  in  such  a  sense  as  to  R
exclude  activity  and  the  general  form  of  self-sacrifice.
It  is  not  intended  to  adhere  to  the  view  of  those  who
conceive  the  divine  being  as  finite,  and  as  possibly
one  of  a  number. The  intention  is  rather  the  reverse,
namely,  to  maintain  that  finiteness  eo  ipso  arises,  if
negativity  is  not  given its  full  significance  in  the
conception  of  the  supreme  nature. Dr.  E.  Caird's
criticism  of  Aristotle's  Theoretic  Life,2  as  literally
interpreted,  puts  this  point  very  clearly. It  is  not
an imperfection in the supreme being, but an
essential of his completeness, that his nature,
summing  up  that  of  all  Reality,  should  go  out  into
its  other  to  seek  the  completion  which  in  this  case
alone -is  absolutely  found. The  "other"  in  question*
can only be finite experience ; and it is in and  *
because  of  this,  and  qualified  by  it,  that  the  Divine
nature  maintains  its  infinity. And,  therefore,  it  may
be  said  that  the  general  form  of  sglj^sacrifice — the!
fundamental logical  structure  of  Reality — is  to  be
found  here  also, as everywhere. I^Jgi, of  course,
that  the  infinite  being  can  lose  and  regain  its  per
fection,  but  that  the  burden  of  the  finite  is  inherently  a
part  or  rather  an  instrument  of  the  self-completion  of

1  Philebus,  33  B  ;  Nettleship's  Remains,  ii.  311.

2  Evolution  of  Theology  and  Greek  Philosophy,  i.  382  ;  ii.  25  ff.


244  SELF-CONSCIOUSNESS  AND  REALITY LECT.

the  infinite. The  view  is  familiar. I  only  plead  that
it  loses  all  point  if  it  is  not  taken  in  bitter  earnest.1

I  have  used  remorselessly  phrases  which  imply
vtime — "activity,"  " going  out  of  oneself,"  "seeking
and  finding."  The  objection  to  predicating  time  of
the  supreme  experience  lies  in  the  nature  of  self-
completeness,  and  if,  on  the  one  hand,  succession
seems  incompatible  with  this,  on  the  other  hand,  the
idea  of  instantaneousness  or  simultaneity,  which  is
a  temporal  idea,  must  not  here  be  introduced  to
embarrass  our  thoughts.  We  must  surely  distinguish
the  conception  of  changing  or  progressing  as  a
whole  from  the  conception  of  uniting  in  a  self-
complete  being  characteristics  which  for  us  demand
succession.2  If  we  were  to  be  barred  from  ascribing
content  to  the  supreme  being,  because  for  us  all
content  is  developed  in  time,  the  end  must  be  that
for  us  the  supreme  being  will  be  nothing.
*•  surplus  7.  Finally,  our  point  of  view  is  hostile  to  the
form  in  which  questions  of  optimism  and  pessimism
are  usually  raised  as  to  the  surplus  of  pleasure  over
paj;n  m  tne  universe.  Even  Mr.  Bradley  has  dis
cussed  this  question  with  reference  to  the  Absolute.
But  I  cannot  help  thinking  that  it  is  improperly
stated.  What  we  as  factors  of  Reality  demand,
what  any  factors  of  Reality  as  such  must  demand,  is
essentially,  if  I  am  right,  not  pleasure  but  satisfac-_

jjnn rVmf  is,  fhp^opnsp th^r  hy  V>e]p of  the negative
wejiave  fltf^rne.d  nursg]vp,,^ This,  no  doubt,  implies

some  pleasure  ;  but  the  point  is,  if  I  am  not  alto-

1  I  have  had  much  in  mind  Nettleship's  fragment  on  the  Atone
ment.

2  I may  refer  again  to  one  of  Nettleship's fragments, that  on
Immortality. Cf.  also  Kant's  doctrine  of  the  infinite  moral  progress
as  seen  by  God.


vi  SOUL-MAKING MUST  BE COSTLY  245

gether  wrong,  that  in  satisfaction  the  pain  or
difficulty,  as  a  "  moment "  -  i.e.  a  phase  which
remains  an  elementV- contributes  actively  to  the
positive  attainment.  Whereas,  in  comparing  pleasure
and  pain  as  experienced  facts  of  feeling,  I  presume
that  they  retain  their  first  positions  as  respectively
plus  and  minus  quantities.

This  is  one  point,  and  another  follows  from  it.
The  comparison  of  pleasure  and  pain  in  respect  of
quantity,  even  if  we  disregard  the  difficulties  pointed
out  in  anti- Hedonist  polemic,  betrays  an  inorganic
point  of  view.  The  question  cannot  surely  be  how
many  moments  of  pain  you  have  experienced,  and
whether  you  have  had  enough  moments  of  pleasure,
allowing  for  the  intensities  on  each  side,  to  outweigh
them,  but  whether  the  experience  has  done  its  work,
and  returned  you  to  yourself  a  complete  or  at  least
a  completer  being.  So,  it  would  seem,  the  problem
should  be  stated  about  the  universe.  Not,  if  we
could  reckon  up  moments  of  equal  pleasure  and
pain  (to  simplify  the  question  by  reducing  it  to  a
matter  of  counting)  which  of  the  two  classes  would
be  found  to  outnumber  the  other,  but  rather,  is
there  reason  for  thinking  that  pain  and  finiteness
are  elements  playing  a  definite  part  in  the  whole
such  that  its  completeness  depends  upon  containing
them  ?  Broadly  speaking,  I  suggest,  experience
indicates  that  a  soul  which  has  never  known  pain,
like  a  nation  which  has  never  known  war,  has  no  -{
depth  of  being,  and  is  not  a  personality  at  all.  Of
course,  this  way  of  looking  at  the  matter  does  not
by  itself  dispose  of  the  suggestion  that  the  cost  even  J
of  perfecting  a  soul  may  be  too  high ;  but  the
conviction  that  there  essentially  must  be  a  certain


tion.


246  SELF-CONSCIOUSNESS  AND  REALITY LECT.

cost  corresponds  to  our  best  insight  in  the  sphere  of
every  day  experience.

AH-  8.  And  so,  in  the  end,  if  such  a  question  as  that

of  pleasure  or  pain  in  the  Absolute  has  reality  for
us  at  a^>  it  seems  all-important  whence  we  take
the  suggestions  from  which  we  are  to  learn  what
to  look  for.  We  ought  surely  not  to  start  from
commonplace  experiences,  but  rather  from  those
in  which  self-expression  is  at  the  fullest,  the  rare
moments  to  which  Aristotle  alludes  in  the  discussion
of  the  Theoretic  life.  It  may  be  noteworthy  that
Aristotle  consents  while  Plato  refuses  to  ascribe  the
feeling  of  pleasure  to  the  Divine  nature  ;  and  this
may  be  connected  with  Aristotle's  apparent  omission
of  negativity  from  his  conception  of  an  ideally  perfect
experience.  In  his  distinction,  however,  between
the  enjoyment  of  self-realisation  and  the  enjoyment
of  recreation  he  throws  out  a  hint  which  we  might
do  well  to  follow.  And  for  him  as  for  us,  apparently,
the  activities  primarily  devoted  to  sheer  enjoyment
and  delight  are  wrested  by  the  very  structure  of
man's  soul  to  severer  forms  of  self-expression,  so
that  the  completest  of  all  the  creations  in  which  as
yet  man  has  freely  and  spontaneously  sought  what
at  his  best  he  most  enjoys  is,  I  presume,  for  us,  as
for  Aristotle,  that  of  poetical  tragedy.  This  does
seem  to  me  to  be  a  paradox  worth  noting.  Can
we  seriously  suppose  that  a  nature  which,  when  it
reaches  the  summit  of  evolution  so  far  as  we  have
experienced  it,  is  taking  such  a  line  as  this,  will  find
a  perfection  in  any  attainment  which  is  not  strongly
marked  with  an  analogous  temper  P1

1 Is  it  tolerable  to  contemplate  enjoying  such  imaginations  without
sharing  something  of  the  experiences  which  suggest  them  ? And  if


vi  THE TRUER SELF  LESS  A SELF?  247

I  am  only  using  this  idea  to  set  the  question  of
optimism  in  a  certain  light  ;  that  is  to  say,  to  state
it  not  as  the  question  whether  pain  is  as  it  were
quantitatively  submerged  or  neutralised  by  pleasure,
but  by  looking  for  a  completeness  in  which  souls
have  found  themselves,  or  realised  their  inherent
structure  ;  which  completeness,  considered  as  a
whole,  cannot  be  quantitatively  compared  with  the
factors  or  elements,  such  as  pain  or  pleasure,  sub
ordinated  within  it.  If  we  had  no  negative  factor
but  Contradiction  as  such,  then  I  suppose  complete
ness  could  only  be  in  its  abolition,  i.e.  in  an  Absolute
or  perfection  which  bore  in  it  no  trace  of  the
character  present  in  finiteness  and  imperfection.
But  the  distinction  between  Contradiction,  as  we
defined  it,  and  Negativity,  seemed  to  be  suggestive
on  this  head.

6. It  is  on  the  whole  an  attractively  simple  view  The  two
that  the  not-self  means  discord  and  collision  with
the  self,  and  that  the  self  is  experienced,  and  self-


hood  indeed  exists,  by  opposition  to  such  a  not-self;1  essential  to

11  1-11  •  r i-  selfhood?

and  that  consequently,  with  the  cessation  of  discord
ance,  that  is,  of  what  we  have  called  Logical
Contradiction,  the  experiences  of  selfhood  as  such
must  cease  and  determine,  though  Individuality

the  idea  is  tolerable,  yet  could  such  enjoyment  be  possible  ?  A  truth
may  be  hidden  under  the  notion  that  the  saved  are  to  delight  in  the
vision  of  the  sufferings  of  hell  (Browning,  Johannes  Agricola),  but
our  ordinary  thoughtless  hope  that  others  have  suffered  for  the
happiness  and  amusement  of  those  who  come  after,  who  are  to  enter
upon  the  inheritance  without  a  pang,  strikes  me  as  essentially  one
with  that  mediaeval  mood,  and  as  prima  facie  revolting.  Its  error  is
in  wholly  separating  satisfaction  from  pain.  The  truth  must  bring
them  nearer  together.  Cf.  Introduction,  p.  14,  on  Mr.  Bertrand
Russell's  remarks  on  Tragedy  in  his  essay  entitled,  "A  Free  Man's
Worship"  (Philosophical  Essays}.

1  Taylor,  Metaphysic,  p.  340;  cp.  pp.  61  and  350.


248  SELF-CONSCIOUSNESS  AND  REALITY LECT.

proper  would  all  the  more  survive  and  prosper.
For  such  a  view  the  responsive  not-self  would  have
no  existence,  and  consequently,  all  differentiations
or  sub-individualities  within  the  Absolute  would  be
in  various  degrees  imperfect  and  self-discordant,
and  the  Absolute  itself  could  have  no  experience  of
selfhood.  They  would  be  mere  appearances  whose
inner  imperfection  would  reveal  itself  in  their  dis
crepancy  as  against  an  outer  not-self.  A  conception
of  this  kind,  involving  the  admission  that  all  minor
individualities  within  the  Absolute  must  be  imperfect
and  self- discrepant,  would  cut  many  knots.  It
would  release  us  from  the  attempt  to  understand
the  perfect  experience  as  implying  a  society  of
perfect  selves,  and  to  explain  the  relation  of  our
imperfect  selves  to  such  supposed  perfect  differentia
tions  of  the  Absolute.1

But  there  is  an  obvious  and  all-important  fact,
already  mentioned  at  the  beginning  of  this  chapter,
which  demands  that  any  such  ideas  should  only  be
accepted  with  considerable  modification.  It  is  quite
plain  that  our  conception_Qilsd£Jias  two2  sources  in
its  relation  to  the  not-self,  and  not  one  only;  and  that
the  sense  o£ajrut^rj|njd_jje^^  with  the  world

beyond  us  is  a  far  larger  factor  in  our  awareness  of
selfhood,  and  one  which  increases  concomitantly
with  it,  than  is  the  sense  of  collision  with  the  not-self.

Now  if  we  are  going  to  say  that  the  sense  of
union  with or  satisfaction  in  the  not-self — e.g. of

1  The  difficulty  raised  by  Mr.  McTaggart's  view. See  Studies  in
Heglian  Cosmology,  sect.  22  ff.

2  See Taylor, Elements^ p. 350. "The two typical forms  of
experience  from  which  the  concept  of  self  appears  to  be  derived,"  I
can  hardly  reconcile  this  with  the  exclusive  prominence  given  to  the
negative  form,  e.g.  on  p.  340.


vi  SELFHOOD CANNOT  BE  NEGATIVE  249

co-operation  with  a  society  —  is  not  an  element  in
furnishing  us  with  our  conception  of  selfhood,  then
we  are  driven  to  this  result,  that  the  awareness  of
selfhood  disappears  in  proportion  as  the  self  expands
in  excellence  and  success.  And  in  a  certain  sense
such  a  conclusion  is  tenable  ;  l  and  in  this  sense  it
might  give  us  a  useful  indication  when  we  come  to
consider  the  attribution  of  an  awareness  of  self  to
the  Absolute.

But  the  fundamental  point  is  here.  In  agreement
with  the  whole  doctrine  of  this  chapter,  we  must
take  it  that  the  sense  of  disc_orcl  and  the  sense  of


concord  are  rooted  in<6ne  and  the  same  characteristic
oTexperienc^,  i-hp  npgia1'ivl'fy  whiVh  m^J^s  satisfaction
which  in  imperfect  conjunctions  takes


the  form  of  contradiction.  If  we  are  willing  to
dispense  with  the  conception  of  a  system  of  perfect
selves  as  constituting  the  Absolute,  then  we  may
admit  that  in  some  degree  contradiction  as  well  as
harmony  will  attach  to  every  finite  self,  because  of
its  imperfection.  Therefore,  we  may  concede  that
however  complete  the  reconciliation  with  the  not-
self,  however  true  it  is  that  the  self  at  its  best  has
in  its  world  of  externality  an  immense  affirmative
expansion,  yet  the  determination  of  the  sense  of
selfhood  by  contradiction  with  the  not-self  is  an
element  never  altogether  absent  from  the  finite  self-
consciousness,  and  one  that  co-operates  in  giving
sharpness  to  the  recognition  of  self.

The  finite  self,  then,  would  be  essentially  such  as
we  know  it,  imperfect  and  inconsistent  with  itself  ;
though  it  would  have  in  its  nature  an  element  of

1  Cf.  "self-consciousness"  in  the  bad  sense,  the  disappearance  of
which  certainly  means  a  strengthening  of  the  self.


250  SELF-CONSCIOUSNESS  AND  REALITY LECT.

unity  and  expansion,  suggesting  a  completion  which
as  a  finite  self  we  must  conceive  that  it  would  never
attain.  As  experienced  in  the  absolute  experience,
when  the  essence  of  perfection  is  to  transmute  and
to  triumph  over  imperfection,  it  would  no  longer,  so
the  indication  runs,  be  called  a  self.1  As  we  have
seen  and  shall  see,  its  substance  would  lend  itself  to
new  arrangements,  to  the  constitution  of  new  worlds
in  continuity  and  readjustment  with  other  selves,  so
that  the  experience  would  be  no  longer  describable
as  constituting  a  system  of  selves.

Nevertheless, the positive affirmation of  the
expanding  self  in  its  not-self,  which  we  have  seen  to
be  the  really  essential  element  of  self-consciousness,
though not perhaps the  limiting factor, gives  an
indication  that  cannot  be  disregarded  either  for  the
self  in the Absolute, or  for the Absolute if  we
attempt to regard it as a  self. We have  urged
throughout that it is in the highest  of  our own
experiences  that  we  must  seek  for  the  clues  to  the
fullest  reality. And that  we  experience  our  self
most  completely  just  when  we  are  least  aware  of  its
finite  selfness 2  is  a  clue  which  must  not  be  forgotten.
Defect  and  contradiction  cannot  constitute  the  really
significant essence even of  a  finite  being. It  is
positive awareness of  an area  or quality of  self-
maintenance  that  after  all  the  self  aspires  to,  though
failure  and  contradiction  may  force  on  it  a  recog
nition  of  its  limits — and  it  is  this,  the  real  foundation
of  selfhood,  that  is  in  some  way  possessed  by  the
self  in  the  Absolute,  and  by  the  Absolute  so  far  as

1 -  f^-njM-raiii,,  -^'"^---^•^^*-*a^^fe°*1^  J

analogous  to  a  self.

1  Bradley's  Appearance,  2nd  ed.,  p.  529.

2  Cf.  again  the  case  of  self-consciousness  in  the  bad  sense.


VI  HPOTON MEN MH $TNAI— ?  251

7.  Thus  we  have  attempted  to  show  that  while  Has  finite
contradiction  and  discrepancy  are  inevitable  in  the
constitution  of  the  finite  self,  they  are  not  the
ultimate  characters  which  the  constitution  of  a  self  £°t£tinuity
presupposes  ;  and  that  this  ultimate  character,  quite  Absolute.
apart  from  speculations  about  the  Absolute,  reveals
itself  in  increasing  degrees  through  those  experi
ences  which  exhibit  the  finite  self  as  a  self  in  the
fullest  sense.  We  have,  however,  admitted  that
much  of  what  we  habitually  associate  with  the  idea
of  a  self  in  the  "other,"  is  connected  with  the
features  of  apparent  discord  and  opposition,  which
give  the  idea  of  freshness  and  independence  that
seems  to  reinforce  any  responsiveness  we  meet  with
in  nature.  And  it  is  not  in  the  absence  of  negation,
but  in  the  growth  pari  passu  and  even  in  the
fusion  of  the  negative  and  positive  responses,  that
we  found  reasoii-_lQ_lreat  self  -  consciousness  as
conditioned,  if  by  a  negative,  yet  not  by  a
contradiction.  ^^L  •»

A  strong  light  is  thrown  upon  the  difference
between  these  two  conceptions  by  a  problem  which
is  fundamental  for  our  attitude  to  the  finite  self  and
finite  life  in  general.  It  is  allied  to  the  problem  of
pessimism,  but  is  really  rather  the  issue  between
the  lower  and  the  higher  mysticism.  Men  have
asked,  from  Greek  times  downwards  at  least,
whether  it  is  better  to  be  born  or  not  to  be  born  ?  I
do  not  mean  in  the  commonplace  sense  of  asking
whether  or  no  life  or  the  world  of  lives  contains
more  of  pleasure  or  of  pain,  as,  in  my  opinion,  we
roughly  and  rather  unthinkingly  distinguish  them.
On  our  attitude  to  this  form  of  the  question  I  have
said  something  above,  and  shall  have  more  to  say


252  SELF-CONSCIOUSNESS  AND  REALITY LECT.

below.  But  the  point  now  before  us  is  different
and  much  more  serious.  It  is  not  a  survey  of  life
by  a  standard  taken  within  it,  but  an  ultimate
question  as  to  the  place  and  functions  of  finite  life
in  the  universe  ;  the  question  insisted  on  by  mysti
cism  in  its  popular  and  aggressive  forms.

Every  student  of  Plato  must  often  have  longed
to  know  what  Plato  held  to  be  the  function  and
justification  of  terrestrial  life  on  the  whole  and  in
the  scheme  of  the  universe.  One  might  state  the
problem  crudely  by  asking  if  he  ever  admitted  that
any  soul  was  the  better  for  undergoing  or  having
undergone  the  life  on  earth.  Did  our  knowledge,
our  morality,  our  love  of  beauty,  partially  and
laboriously  won  in  the  conflict  of  sensations  and
desires,  seem  to  him  to  be  of  any  value,  for  ourselves
or  for  the  universe,  which  would  not  have  equally
been  real  —  more  real  —  without  them?  Did  he
consciously  apply  to  the  whole  being  of  the  finite
the  principle  so  obvious  in  ,his  detailed  theory,  that
hindrances  and  contradictions  are  opportunities  and
starting-points  ?  It  would  be  beyond  our  present
subject  to  attempt  an  answer  to  these  questions  as
regards  Plato.1  But  they  serve  as  an  introduction
to  the  standpoint  of  mysticism.

"  Earth,  these  solid  stars,  this  weight  of  body  and  limb,
Are  they  not  sign  and  symbol  of  thy  division  from  Him  ?  "

These  lines,  as  I  understand  them,2  show  an  in
teresting  deviation  towards  natural  mysticism  in  a

1  See Caird, Evolution of  Theology in  Greek  Philosophy,  on
Timaeus,  i.  254.

2  Tennyson,  "The  Higher  Pantheism." I  take  the  poet  to  mean
that  it  is  finite  life  which  separates  the  soul  from  God  ;  I  have  known
it  to  be  held  that  he  meant  the  hint  of  separation  to  lie  in  the  possi
bility  of  death,  inherent  in  the  body.


vi  IF  HEA  VEN  IS  BEST, WHY  EARTH?  253

poem  which  contains  along  with  them  a  splendid
expression  of  "immanence."1  And  so  the  mysti
cism  of  the  East,  at  any  rate  in  a  popular  stage  which
passed  into  European  thought  largely  through
Schopenhauer,  answers  decisively  that  it  would  be
better  if  no  one  were  born.  Self,  self-consciousness,
self-will  are  held  to  be  disturbances,  diseases  of  the
universe,  and  illusions  in  the  full  meaning  of  the
word,  that  is  to  say,  not  merely  appearances
whose  contradictions  point  to  a  fuller  reality,
but  phenomena  which  essentially  involve  the  total
contradiction  and  disappointment  of  the  ideas
and  desires  which  constitute  them.  And  this  dis
appointment  and  contradiction  are  not  held  to  be
in  any  way  instrumental  to  a  realisation  of  the
content  of  such  ideas  and  desires  in  any  form  what
ever.  A  link  between  such  an  attitude  and  the
constructive  conceptions  of  Western  thought  is
indeed  supplied  by  the  reservation  that  though  not
instrumental  to  any  fulfilment  of  itself,  the  finite
world  is  connected  with  the  one  desirable  fulfil
ment — its  own  suppression — by  a  law  imposing
certain  conditions  on  the  attainment  of  the  goal.
It  cannot  be  suppressed  by  violence,  e.g.  by
suicide  ;  the  evil  lies  deep  in  the  will  to  live,  and
only  the  suppression  of  this  will  by  means  which
take  a  form  akin  to  art,  morality,  and  religion,
can  put  a  stop  to  the  vicious  circle  of  the  wheel
of  life.

The  same  paradox  is  inherent  in  popular  Chris
tianity,  and  is  acutely  felt.2 And  the  popular  solution

1  "  Speak  to  Him  thou  for  He  hears — "

2  E.g. Twelfth  Night, Act  i. Sc. 5. Fool:  "The more fool,
madonna,  to  mourn  for  your  brother's  soul  being  in  heaven."


254  SELF-CONSCIOUSNESS  AND  REALITY LECT.

is  not  unlike  the  solution  of  Schopenhauer's
Buddhism.  It  presses  itself  on  the  earliest  reflec
tion,  and  we  may  state  it  in  the  words  in  which
Plato  refers  to  it.  "  We  mortals  are  here  on  duty,
and  must  not  withdraw  till  we  have  our  orders."  l
Heaven,  we  understand,  though  much  better  than
what  we  have,  would  be  forfeited  by  the  attempt  to
grasp  at  it  prematurely.  And  if  our  enquiry  presses
behind  the  details  of  the  "  scheme  of  salvation  "  and
we  ask,  "  But  was  the  Fall  itself  a  part  of  the
scheme  of  salvation,  and  is  a  world  with  sin  and
atonement  a  better  world  than  one  without  them  ?  "
it  seems  as  if  different  views  may  be  taken  as  to
p\  \  what  a  typical  Christianity  should  answer.  For
Christianity,  no  doubt,  sirpis  the  greatest  of  evils —
the  evil ;  and  the  victory  over  it  the  object  of  the
world.  But  it  would  seem  that  for  a  Christianity
which  has  the  courage  of  its  opinions  the  idea  of  the
victory  involves  the  idea  of  the  Fall,  and  the  answer
would  be  that  the  scheme  of  salvation,  involving
finiteness  and  sin,  was  essential  to  the  nature  of
God  and  the  perfection  of  the  universe.  Speaking
at  the  level  of  reflective  orthodoxy,  it  would  appear
hardly  possible  to  admit  that  anything  so  deep-
rooted  as  the  connection  of  the  doctrine  of  the
Trinity  with  the  Incarnation  and  the  Atonement
should  be  considered  as  an  excrescence  on  the  plan
of  the  universe  or  an  arrangement  contrived  in  time
to  remedy  an  incidental  aberration.  Thus  we  are
brought  in  sight  of  the  philosophical  conception,
which  has  frequently  been  applied  to  the  inter
pretation  of  Christian  dogma,  that  finitejoe^s  is
essential  to  true  infinity,  and  that  tEeT  two  are

1  Phaedo,  62  B.


vi  HEAVEN  MUST  BE  EARTH  AND  MORE 255

continuous  and  interwoven, not  exclusive and  an
tagonistic  alternatives.1

It  is  from  this  point  of  view  that  we  have  to
adjust  our  conceptions  of  the  defectiveness  of  the
self  and  of  self-consciousness.  We  are,  broadly
speaking,  to  enter  into  the  idea  that  finite  experience,
though  itself  defective,  is  neither  an  accidental  dis
turbance  of  the  Quiet,2  nor  a  regrettable  deviation
from  the  Perfect.  The  absolute  or  infinite  should
present  itself  to  us  as  more  of  the  finite,  or  the  finite
at  its  best,  and  not  as  its  extinction.  More,  not  in
time  nor  in  quantity,  but  in  completeness,  in  progress
along  the  path  of  continuity  which  is  indicated
by  the  nature  of  things.  It  is  at  bottom  a  logical?
blunder  to  hold  as  obvious  truth  that  merely  to  j
annul  the  finite  is  to  affirm  the  infinite,  i.e.,  that
merely  not  to  be  in  the  finite  world  is  logically  and
per  se  a  presumable  gain.  In  logical  phrase,  the
bare  negation  has  no  significance.  To  be  nearer
perfection  than  on  earth  must  mean,  if  it  is  to  mean
anything,  not  merely  to  be  rid  of  terrestrial  life,  but
to  have  realised  it  and  more.

The  above  treatment  of  the  relation  of  self  and

1  The only important difference between my view and Dr.
McTaggart's  (Studies  in  Hegelian  Cosmology,  sect.  243  ff.),  is  on
the  question  of  the  attitude  of  Christianity  to  virtue  and  to  sin  (see
especially  sect. 255). Technically, to  Christianity, I should  have
thought,  virtue  per  se  is  nothing  ;  and  no  man  can  take  part  in  a
Christian  liturgy  except  as,  officially,  a  sinner. It  is  an  overstrained
feeling,  but  not  wholly  false  to  the  Christian  attitude,  which  makes
men  sing  "  Doing  is  a  deadly  sin  ;  Doers  shall  be  damned.3' I  was
much  struck  by  a  passage  in some novel, where a child  says  to
a  respectable  and  worthy  old  gentleman,  "  Of  course  I  know  that  you
are  a  bad,  bad  man." "Why,  my  dear?" "Because  I  heard  you
say  so  in  church  on  Sunday."

2  Caliban  upon  Setebos. The  Christian  idea  of  a  "state  of  pro
bation  "  is  at  least  an  attempt  to  furnish  a  logical  nexus between
fmiteness and  perfection, though the need of  probation remains
unexplained.


256  SELF-CONSCIOUSNESS  AND  REALITY  LECT.  vi

not-self  in  self-consciousness  is  in  harmony  with
these  ideas.  As  in  the  antithesis  of  morality  and
religion,  so  in  the  antithesis  of  self-consciousness
and  what  is  more  than  self,  it  is  our  conviction  that
a  positive  continuity  can  be  exhibited,  and  that  the
defects  of  the  given  not  merely  necessitate  trans
cendence  but  positively  indicate  its  nature.  It  is
after  all  not  the  bare  negation  by  a  not-self,  but
reconciliation  with  it  and  expansion  through  its
response,  on  which  self-consciousness  in  its  fulness
depends.  Satisfaction  and  sacrifice,  which  for  us
are  opposite  examples  of  the  same  fundamental
structure,1  must  both  contribute  of  their  nature  to
the  complete  experience.  And  such  an  experience
would  possess  and  absorb  into  its  being  all  that
finite  selfhood  exists  to  achieve,  self-maintenance  in
self-transcendence.

1  Page  242  above.


man.

is


LECTURE VII

OURSELVES AND THE ABSOLUTE

i. IT  seems  desirable  before  going  further  to  make  "Man

,  111  itself"

an  attempt  at  stating  simply  and  clearly  what  beyond
appears  to  us  to  be  the  fundamental  nature  of  the  That  u
inference  that  carries  us  beyond  ourselves  to  affirm  ^rock

^  absolute  being.  It  is  not  merely  the  logical  out-  factof  life-
line  of  the  argument  that  needs  explanation  ;  it  is
what  this,  rightly  understood,  involves — the  whole
estimate  of  the  relative  value  and  significance  of
different  provinces  of  experience,  and  the  question
where  we  are  to  look  for  that  which  will  most  help
us  to  appreciate  the  whole.  It  is  here  that  current
opinion  seems  so  seriously  defective,  and  that  even
first-rate  metaphysical  speculation  hardly  shows  full
appreciation  of  the  resources  open  to  it.

The  doctrine  of  a  rational  reality  transcending
the  given  has  been  subjected to  two  main forms
of  criticism,  the  one  aimed  at  the  rationality  of-ih^:
real, the  other  at  its  t-rar^rpnrlprir'" -  nf  ffrp  givn  •
TKe  former  may  be  summed  up  in  three  words  of
Bergson,  the  phrase  which  he loves to reiterate,
I"  tout  est  donne  "  ;  the  latter  was  first  expressed  by
Aristotle  in  his  criticism  of  Plato's  form  of  the  good,
and  continues  to  be  urged  by  considerable  thinkers
jto-day. The  latter is the  subject  of  the  present

257  s


258  OURSELVES

chapter ;  the  former  will  be  discussed  at  a  further
point  in  our  argument.  It  will  be  time  enough  to
show  that  freedom  and  initiative  are  one  with  the
rationality  of  the  real  when  we  have  shown  that  a
real  transcending  the  actual  is  the  very  substance
and  spirit  of  our  experience.

The  archetype,  then,  of  one-half  the  later  criticism
of  absolutist  theory  may  be  found  in  the  impatient
observation  that  Aristotle  has  more  than  once  let
fall  with  reference  to  the  Platonic  doctrine  of  Form,
"  What  on  earth  can  they  mean  by  *  the  thing  itself/
as  e.g.  'man  himself,'  [or  more  strictly  *  itself],  if,  as
is  the  case,  the  definition  of  man  itself  is  the  same
with  that  of  man  P"1

What,  indeed  ?  If  things  as  given  to  us,  or  man
as  we  have  experience  of  him,  can  have  their  nature
defined,  so  that  the  definition  shall  include  self-
consistently  all  that  they  are,  and  nothing  beyond  it,
what  more  can  we  possibly  want?  If  that  is  all,
frisch  zu ;  let  us  set  down  our  definitions  of  man
and  of  nature  in  terms  adequate  to  our  experience
and  to  which  our  experience  is  adequate,  without
internal  incoherence  and  external  reference,  and  be
done  with  troublesome  speculation.2

But,  as  we  all  know,  here  the  difficulty  begins.

If  you  set  down  a  description  of  man  as  he  seems  to

be,  you  find  that  his  self — what  gives  character  to

,  the  appearance,  and  is  needed  to  understand  it — lies

i  outside  what  you  have  portrayed. If  you  now  try

to  define  or  describe,  coherently  and  intelligently,

1  Ar.  Ethics^  i.  6.

2  Of  course  no  one  would  suggest  that  this  was  Aristotle's  real
attitude. I  suppose  it  is  one  of  the  perplexities  of  Aristotelian  inter
pretation  that  Aristotle  appears  so  na'ive  when  criticising  Plato,  while
so  profound  in  himself.


vii  NOUS  NE  NOUS TENONS  JAMAIS  259

the  self  of  man,  or  indeed  of  anything,  you  find  that
you  have  got  far  beyond  what  we  actually  possess
in  our  experience.  The  moment  we  enter  upon  the
reflective  study  of  man,  we  learn  that  his  individu
ality,  his  self-identity,  lie  outside  him  as  he  presents
himself  in  time.1  His  nature,  according  to  Green's
phrase  which  goes  to  the  root  of  the  matter,  is  in
process  of  being  communicated  to  him.

Now  jf  all  this  is  so,  there  seems  to  be  a  sufficient
reason  why  things  themselves,  or  man  itself,2  should
be  contrasted  with  things  and  man  as  prima  facie
given  to  our  experience.  The  "  self  of  man  "  or  of
things  will  not  be  a  reduplication  of  their  given
being,  but  will  be  that  way  of  being  in  which,  in
Platonic  language,  they  can  really  be,  i.e.  can  main
tain  themselves,  can  experience  or  be  experienced
without  contradiction.  And  if  this  way  of  being
proves  to  be  very  different  from  the  ways  which
were  the  first  to  be  suggested  and  accepted  in  our
interpretations  of  experience,  that  is  only  a  case  of
the  universal  destiny  which  is  manifest  in  all  growth
and  education  ;  and  even  if  the  character  which
things  bore  in  our  immediate  world  seems  to  be
absorbed  and  to  disappear  in  their  fuller  realisation,
this  is  a  characteristic  for  which  there  is  the  strongest
every-day  analogy  in  the  relation  of  our  common
place  perception  and  sentiment  not  to  the  most

1  See  e.g.  Nettleship's  Biography  of  Green,  pp.  27,  114,  136. It
is  the  same  on  any  view  of  the  nature  of  the  true  self. Cf.  Bergson,
Evolution,  p.  218  :  {<  Nous  ne  nous  tenons  jamais  tout  entiers. Notre
sentiment  de  la  duree,  je  veux  dire  la  coincidence  de  notre  moi  avec
lui-meme,  admet  des  degres."

2  This  is  not,  or  not  merely,  a  question  of  approaching  the  special
form  of  consciousness  which  we  call  the  consciousness  or  experience
of  "  self." The  self  of  anything  as  Plato  meant  it — the  form  in  which
it  attains  stability  and  consistency — is  a  standard  with  reference  to
which  even  the  awareness  of  selfhood  has  to  be  judged.


260  OURSELVES  AND THE  ABSOLUTE  LECT.

remote  abstractions,  but  to  the  full  concrete  appre
hension  of  what  life  contains.  Ultimately,  of  course,
an  absolute  must  be  all-inclusive,  and  even  impotence
must  find  a  place  in  it

But  nevertheless,  to  any  mode  of  reasoning
which  rests  on  accepting  as  final  what  we  imagine
to  be  first  given,  whether  immediate  experience  or
divided  personality,  it  is  a  fair  rejoinder,  and  one
/  i  not  nearly  enough  relied  upon,  to  say,  ''There  is
nothing  in  the  world  worth  having,  doing,  or  being
which  does  not  involve  a  self-transcendence,  and  an
enormous  self-transcendence,  of  the  type  which  you
deny."  Think  of  the  attitude  demanded  of  one  by,
say,  a  masterpiece  of  art.  You  say  you  do  not  want
an  Absolute  in  which  you  would  not  recognise  your
self.  But  you  scarcely  recognise  yourself  when  for
a  moment  Shakespeare  or  Beethoven  has  laid  his
spell  upon  you.  j  It  is  a  difficult  matter  to  deal  with
truths,  which,  as  it  sometimes  appears  to  the  present
writer,  every  one  accepts,  and  no  one  believes.]  And
perhaps  the  most  efficacious  shelter  of  disbelief  is
the  observation  that  there  is  nothing  new  in  them.
But  there  would  be  enough  of  novelty  were  we  to
believe  them  in  bitter  earnest.

Thus  it  is  largely  in  obedience  to  commonplace
prejudices  that  interpreters  of  Plato  have  agreed  to
find  in  him  a  recognition  of  two  worlds.1  The  really
fundamental  point  for  him  I  take  to  have  been  that
there  was  and  could  be  only  a  single  world,  and  that

1  If  we  will  have  it  that  it  is  unhistorical  to  credit  Plato  with  a
monism,  then  we  should  understand  him  better  by  adhering  to  his
own  figure  of  a  triplicism  or  quadruplism  as  in  the  divided  line,  or
more,  as  in  the  progression  from  unity  to  plurality  of,  say,  the
Philebus ;  we  should  thus  see  more  clearly  that  none  of  the  lower
phases  are  solid  agaijist  the  whole,  so  as  to  form  par  excellence  a
dualism.


vii  AS1 THE  ABSOLUTE THE  SHADOW?  261

what  we  commonly  presume  to  be  a  world  is  not
jne  at  all,  not  possessing  the  features  which  belong
to  the  self  of  anything,  to  a  stable  and  coherent
complex.

The  prejudice  which  expresses  itself  in  the
popular  interpretation  of  Plato  and  the  popular
conception  of  idealism  is  really  the  same  which
levels  to-day  the  reproach  of  Agnosticism  at  the
critical  effort  to  establish  the  nature  of  a  world
which  could  be  taken  as  real.  We  have  the  given,
it  seems  to  say,  and  why  go  further  ?  You  can  get
to  nothing  concrete  or  actual ;  you  admit  that  you
cannot  possess  the  experience  in  which  you  say
your  Absolute  consists  ;  why  dissolve  what  you  have
by  hostile  criticism  when  it  leads  to  nothing  beyond  ?
So  with  the  votaries  of  Personality.  Metaphysical
analysis  seems  to  them  to  go  further  and  fare  worse  ;
to  abandon  or  dissolve  the  solid  facts  of  individual
life  and  will  and  the  self,  and  to  reach  no  assignable
result  which  can  be  put  in  their  place.  It  seems  to
them  a  gratuitous  abandonment  of  the  substance  for
the  shadow.1

All  this  is  supposed  to  be  rooted  in  common
sense,  in  every-day  thought  and  feeling,  and  it  is
not  surprising  that  it  should  assert  itself  strongly.
It  is  really  rooted,  not  in  common  sense,  but  in  the
attitude  most  opposed  to  common  sense,  that  of
common  sense  theory.  There  are  two  points,  how
ever,  that  should  be  borne  in  mind  with  reference  to
its  latest  form.

One of  these is the substantive  unity  in the

1  It  does  almost  seem  to  me,  though  I  feel  strongly  how  likely  I
am  to  be  wrong,  that  even  so  wise  and  accomplished  a  philosopher
as  Professor  Pringle  Pattison  argues  with  this  naivete  in  Man's  Place
in  the  Cosmos.


262  OURSELVES  AND THE  ABSOLUTE LECT.

history  of  philosophy  of  that  point  of  view  which
takes  us  beyond  the  given,  or  what  the  first  inter
pretation  assumes  to  be  the  given.  There.,Js_a
tendency  to  be  lost  in  the  detai^  and  to  forget  that
when  we  reject  this  way  of  looking  at  things  we
have  to  meet  not  merely  this  or  that  modern  writer,
with  his  special  form  of  dialectic,  but  the  whole
position  of  idealistic  philosophy  from  Plato  down  to
living  thinkers,  which  is  in  the  main  perfectly  simple
and  direct.  And  the  other  is  the  deficient  disposi-
tion  to  appeal  for  corroboration  and  explanation  to
the  nature  of  our  best  experience  itself  and  to  its
progressive  difference  from  what  is  prinia  facie
given.  Metaphysic  itself  to-day  appears  to  be
infected  with  this  diffidence,  and  to  be  in  conse
quence  too  deeply  imbued  with  prejudices  resting
on  prima  facie  appearance.  I  will  deal  with  the
two  points  just  mentioned  in  the  two  following
sections.

The  spirit 2. The  essential  argument  of  metaphysic;  might
mit°c!iCrry  be  described  in  general  as  an  argument  a  contingentia
who°ethe mundi. And  the  failure  to  recognise  the  true  nature
of  this argument and its identity in all Idealist
philosophies,  depends  ultimately  on  an  inadequate
conception  of  logjqgJL  determination. If,  one  might
almost  say, if  we  have  settled it  as a  matter of
principle that a conclusion cannot transcend its
premisses  either  in  certainty  or  in  content,  then  we
never  admit  the  central  p


All  the  commonplace  analogies,  such  as  that  water
cannot  rise  higher  than  its  source,1  or  that  you
cannot  get  more  out  of  a  box  than  you  put  into  it,
are  wholly  hostile  to  the  nature  which  metaphysical

1 Pringle  Pattison,  Marts  Place  in  the  Cosmos,  p.  207.


vii  EXPERIENCE  IS TRANSCENDENCE  263

analysis  finds  in  rational  procedure.  Whether  or
no  it  is  correct  to  say  that  Aristotle  held  some
reasoning  to  be  analytic,  it  is  certain  that  his
definition  of  the  syllogism  describes  in  so  many
words  the  synthetic  character  by  which  thought
builds  up  its  world,  "  Discourse  in  which  certain
things  being  posited,  something  else  than  what  is
posited  necessarily  follows  on  their  being  true."
And  we  may  add,  what  the  theory  of  induction  has
made  clear,  that  in  the  conclusion  the  premisses
become  not  only  more^ignjficant,  but  more  certain.
It  will  be  objected  that  this  is  only  the  case  if  the
conclusion  affirms  a  fact  independently  verified,  for
the  explanation  of  which  a  particular  premiss  is
demanded  to  the  exclusion  of  any  other.  And  it
would  commonly  be  denied  that  there  is  any  such
relation  between  a  conclusion  and  its  premisses  when
the  premisses  or  inductive  hypothesis  have  not  been
shown,  by  the  trial  and  rejection  of  a  number  of
others,  to  be  the  only  ones  that  are  compatible  with
the  required  conclusion.

I  am  convinced  that  such  a  view  underrates
the  continuity  and  fails  to  apprehend  the  essence
of  logicajjrocess.2  What  really  happens  in  any
inference  whatever  is  that  the  data  and  premisses
are  brought  together  in  a  new  whole,  and  by  reason
of  the  jiew^ombinaiJDiL  their  respective  limitations,
las  isolated  factors,  are/n?  tanto  removed,  and  a  new
character  is  made  explicit,  which  belongs  to  them  in
their  new  combination.  Now  it  is  impossible  that
such  a  new  character  should  not  bring  with  it  a

1  Joseph,  Logic,  p.  225.

2  See  author's  Logic,  2nd  ed.,  ii.  159,  171,  and  for  a  statement
of  the  opposite view add to the reference there given  Joseph's
Introduction  to  Logic,  pp.  485-6.


264  OURSELVES  AND THE  ABSOLUTE LECT.

step  towards  non-contradiction,  and  new  contacts
with  the  general  whole  of  experience ;  it  is  imposs
ible  that  a  new  meaning  read  into  a  proposition,  a
new  application  of  a  purpose,  a  new  sensitive  fibre
developed  in  an  emotional  disposition,  should  not
affect  the  issue  of  its  truth  completeness  or  stability.1
This,  then,  is  the  nerve  of  logical  determination,
viz.  tb?  rfn^n1  "f  error  ™  r^itrpHi'ni^n  hy  mfans

in wkirh data or premisses


destroy  each  other's  defects,  and  give  rise  to  a  new
totality  which  transcends  its  factors.  This  is  the
essential  process  of  experience  throughout,  and  in
all  its  kinds,  and  when  traced  and  analysed  in  pro
position^]  form  k  reveals  itself  qs  login — the  creative
and  originative-  nexus  of  mind  as  snr.h,  It  may  be
made  explicit,  as  we  have  argued  above  in  Lecture
II.,  under  the  principle  which,  when  abstractly
stated,  is  called  the  principle  of  non-contradiction  ;
but,  as  we  have  seen,  this  principle  is  simply  a
formulation  of  the  life  of  the  whole,  and  is  not
subject  to  the  formal  limitations  which  its  abstract
appearance  may  suggest.  I  will  restate  this  point
in  a  few  words.

First,2  you  cannot  escape  the  application  of  the
principle  by  what  might  be  called  a  logical  quietism.
You  cannot  say,  "  If  I  affirm  little  or  nothing,  I  am
safe  from  being  forced  forwards  into  self-transcen
dence."  For  all  negation,  all  exclusion,  rest,  as  we
know,  on  affirmation.  You  can  never  satisfy  the
principle  which  demands  consistency,  so  long  as
anything  remains  outside  your  system.  The  nega
tion  which  puts  it  outside  carries  an  affirmation

1 Cf.  Bradley,  Mind,  Ixxi.  335  note.
2  Cf.  ibid.  Ixxii.  494  ff.


vii  CERTAINTY  DEPENDS ON  FULNESS  265

which  must  bring  it  inside.  A  vacuum  or  nothing
ness,  or  an  "  I  "  or  an  "is"  reduced  to  the  merest
point,  are  not  self-consistent  by  force  of  emptiness,
but  are  nests  of  contradictions.  Each  is  entangled
in  a  congeries  of  relations,  and  yet,  claiming  no
explicit  content,  it  has  no  power  to  unify  or  organise
them.1  It  is  an  old  argument,  but  it  needs  to  be
insisted  on  in  view  of  the  notion  that  the  principle
of  non  -  contradiction  can  be  satisfied  by  mere
emptiness,  and  has  no  driving-power  towards  the
concrete.

Secondly  and  more  particularly,  therefore,  as  we
mentioned  in  Lecture  I.,2  the  operation  of  the  prin
ciple  cannot  be  restricted  to  the  maintenance  of  the
propositions  whose  denial  involves  their  assertion,
as  when  we  say,  "There  is  no  truth."  That  is  to
say,  it  cannot  be  so  restricted  unless  we  have
learned  to  discern  this  characteristic,  in  its  real
meaning,  in  all  the  great  provinces  of  experience,
and  more  distinctly  as  they  are  greater.

We  are  apt  to  think  that  within  these  provinces
—the  spheres  of  our  ordinary  informal  experience
and  interest — we  can  deny  this  and  that,  without  in
any  way  shaking  the  general  framework  of  our
world  ;  and  therefore  we  are  apt  again  to  be  misled
into  supposing  that  here  we  have  to  do  with  a  lower
order  of  certainty  than  that  attaching  to  formal
principles  with  little  apparent  content.  But  as  I
attempted  to  show  above,3  this  apparent  freedom  to
deny  is  only  possible  because  in  every  such  negation
so  very  much  more  is  asserted  than  is  touched  by
the  negation's  immediate  content,  so  that  the
negation  asserts  affirmative  truth  without  itself

1 Bradley's  Appearance,  p.  364.  2  Page  48  ff.  3  L.c.


266  OURSELVES  AND THE  ABSOLUTE LECT.


being  false.  For  when  we  make  negative  obser
vations  in  the  world  of  historical  fact,  or  of  beauty,
or  of  morality,  our  negation  is  in  every  case  founded
upon  the  affirmation,  as  a  whole,  of  the  world  within
which  we  are  making  a  denial.  In  every  negation,
fthen,  and  not  solely  in  that  of  certain  formal  pro
positions,  an  affirmative  content  is  asserted.  The
difference  is,  that  a  negation  which  can  be  true
asserts  immensely  more  than  it  denies,  while  a
negation  which  must  be  false — the  negation  of  an
a  priori  proposition — affirms  only  what  it  denies,
and  nothing  more.  In  the  former  case  we  are
pointing  out  a  contrast  or  distinction  within  the
content  of  some  enormous  general  affirmation  ;  in
the  latter  we  are  addressing  our  negation  to  the
whole  affirmation  of  our  world  as  such.  But  if  in
the  former  case  we  were  to  attempt  a  parallel
procedure  to  that  which  we  appeal  to  in  the  latter,
we  should  obtain  the  same  result  with  substantially
better  justification.  If  we  were  to  say,  not  "that  is
not  well  done,"  but  "  there  is  no  morality";  or
instead  of  "  that  is  not  good  art,"  "  there  is  no
aesthetic  perception,"  we  should  be  convicted  of
self-contradiction  in  the  same  manner  and  degree  as
if  we  had  said,  "  There  is  no  truth."  l  As  we  .realised
the  meaning  of  our  negation,  the  world  of  morality
and  of  beauty  would  spring  up  and  reaffirm  them
selves  as  at  once  the  condition  and  contradiction  of
our  denials.  The  fuller  experience,  in  spite  of  the
room  it  leaves  for  negation  in  defining  the  system

1  It  might  be  rejoined  that  "there  is  no  truth"  claims  to  be
truth,  while  "  there  is  no  goodness  "  only  implies  or  involves  the
being  of  goodness.  But  I  think  the  difference  is  only  one  of  degree  ;
the  fundamental  point  is  the  impossibility  of  denying  what  makes  the
fact  of  your  denial  possible.


vii  NO  HIATUS  267

of  its  members,  is  more  truly  supported  by  the
principle  of  non-contradiction  than  the  simple  and
abstract  proposition.  It  is  really  because  we  cannot
conceive  ourselves  denying  the  complete  world  of
our  experiences  that  we  are  obliged  to  hold  the
simplest  a  priori  truths  to  be  affirmed  in  their
negation.  They  have  to  be  affirmed  because
they  are  the  world  at  its  minimum,  with  only  "  a
single  neck."  But  non- contradiction  has  really
a  stronger  purchase,  the  more  there  is  to  lose  by
contradiction.1

This,  then,  the  positive  and  constructive  prin
ciple  of  non-contradiction — in  other  words,  the  spirit
of  the  whole — is  the  operative  principle  of  life  as  of
metaphysical  thought.  We  might  call  it,  as  I  said,
in  general  the  argument  a  contingentia  mundi,  or
inferencefroni  the  imperfection,  of  data  g£J__pre-
jni§S£S,  And  it  is  this,  essentially,  and  overlooking
differences  of  degree,  in  virtue  of  which  alone  we
can  at  all  have  progressive  and  continuous  experi
ence,  whether  as  inference,  or  as  significant  feeling,
or  as  expansion  through  action.  It  is  this  through
which  my  perception  of  the  earth's  surface  makes
one  system  with  my  conception  of  the  Antipodes,
or  the  emotion  attending  the  parental  instinct  passes
into  the  wise  tenderness  of  the  civilised  parent,  and
the  instinct  itself,  as  we  are  told,  develops  into  the
whole  structure  of  social  beneficence.2  And  it  is
this,  only  further  pursued,  that  forces  us  to  the
conception  of  the  Absolute.  I  am  aware  of  no

1  Compare  the  author's  discussion  of  the  relation  between  "  posi
tive  ';  and  "  negative  "  freedom. Philosophical  Theory  of  State,  pp.
143-6. It  is  the  full  and  positive  conception  that  is  the  basis  of  the
empty  and  formal,  not  vice  versa.

2  M'Dougal,  Social  Psychology,  p.  79.


268  OURSELVES  AND THE  ABSOLUTE LECT.

point at  which an arrest in the process  can be
justified.

This,  then,  is  the  fundamental  n a t u r e-^oJL^hejii -
ference  to  the  absolute  ;  the  passage  from  the  con-
traclictory  and  unstable  in  all  experience  alike  to  the
stable  and  satisfactory,  the  j3e/3aiov.  It  is  the  transi
tion  which  is  carefully  worked  out  for  every  side  of
life  in  Plato,  and  which  has  formed  the  framework
of  serious  philosophy  ever  since.  It  is  misappre
hended  if  we  call  upon  it  to  put  us  in^possession^of
an  Mltir1^  fiKpFripnrq  whiVb  is  ex  hyp^ke^i .jnrpm-
rjatible  with  our  limited  being.  What  it  will  do  for
us  is  much  more  relevant  to  the  transformation  of
our  lives.  It  exhibits  to  us  in  their  relative  stability
and  reciprocal  suggestions  of  completeness  the  pro
vinces  of  experience  which  comprise  the  various
values  of  life ;  it  interprets  the  correlation  of  their
worth  with  their  reality,  and  of  both  with  their
satisfactoriness  to  the  soul.  We  put  the  whole
enquiry  in  a  wrong  perspective,  and  lose  its  truth
and  its  significance,  if  we  make  some  special  form  of
human  destiny  the  unspoken  interest  of  our  argu
ments  ;  if,  one  might  say,  when  we  refer  to  the
Absolute  we  are  really  thinking  of  Heaven.  We
should  not  expect  metaphysic  to  predict  terrestrial
history ;  and  still  less,  therefore,  that  which  lies
beyond  the  grave.  What  it  may  do,  and  in  the
hand  of  the  masters  has  always  done,  is,  starting
from_any_daUuri,  no  matter  what,  to  point  out  what
sort  of  thing  is_  in_actual_jjfe — which  is  in  the
Absolute  now  as  ever — the  higher  and  more  stable  ;
and  what  is  the  more  defective  and  the  more  self-
contradictory  ;  and  to  indicate  the  general  law  or
tendency  by  which  the  latter  is  absorbed  in  the


vii THE  STANDARD  NEVER THE  MINIMUM 269

former.  In  this  way,  it  seems  true  that  it  "  gives  us
hope,"  but  it  does  not  seem  true  that  it  does  not
give  us  knowledge  and  guidance.  "  Higher,  truer,
more  beautiful,  better,  and  more  real,  these,  on  thel
whole,  count  in  the  Universe  as  they  count  for  us.
And  existence,  on  the  whole,  must  correspond  with
our  ideas.  For,  on  the  whole,  higher  means  for  us
a  greater  amount  of  that  Reality,  outside  of  which
all  appearance  is  absolutely  nothing."1

3.  We  have  seen  that, from  a  logical point  of  The
view,  the  criterion  of  self-maintenance,  degr_ees_of
being,  or  jion-contradictinn applies not  merely to  ^Sn
fundamental  abstract  principles  but,  as  Plato  applied  anaiTth

1  17J1  1  r  mode  of

it, to the several worlds and l£Yids--43£_cQlLQrgte  inclusion
experience. It  holds  good,  we  have  seen,  of  signi-  Sower.
ficant sensation as in beauty, and of feeling in
the sense of emotion, or of  pleasure and pain,
no less than of strictly logical structures, such
as  science  and  philosophy,  or  of  the ideas  which
operate in morality, in social behaviour, or in
religion.

Now  all  these  types  of  .experience  are  phases  of
individual  living,  stages  in  which  the  "  individual "
maintains  himself  in  different  modes  and  degrees,
and  with  different  achievements  in  the  way  of  com
pleteness  and  consistency.  And  therefore  it  seems
all-important  when  discussing  the  nature  of  the  indi-
vidujd  to  draw  into  evidence  their  main  character
istics,  and  to  avoid  acquiescing  in  conceptions  of
ourselves  adopted  from  our  first  reflections  on  the
apparently  separate  human  being:  wie  er  geht  und
steht.  It  is  obvious  that  if  we  take  our  idea  of  the
individual  from  what  he  is  at  the  minimum  of  his

1  Bradley's  Appearance,  p.  550;  cf.  p.  560,  and  above,  p.  19.


2/0  OURSELVES  AND THE  ABSOLUTE  LECT.

conscious  being,  say  in  the  state  of  fear  or  ineffec
tive  desire,  we  shall  get  a  wholly  different  reading
of  his  nature  from  that  which  will  suggest  itself  if
we  take  into  account  the  social  aesthetic  or  religious
consciousness  and  their  characteristic  or  their  highest
development.  And  further,  identifying  degrees  of
reality  with  degrees  of  being  or  self-maintenance,  it
seems  fair  to  take,  as  under  one  pretext  or  another
is  usually  assumed  in  ethical  theory,  the  fuller  self
for  the  truer  self.  And  from  this  simple  considera
tion,  which  many  will  call  an  elementary  platitude,
very  serious  results  appear  to  me  to  follow,  which
are  habitually  neglected.  The  individual,  then,
does  not  attain  the  maximum  of  individuality  in  his
exclusive  self  when  he  feels  himself  repellent  against
others.  And  if  personality  is  taken  in  the  strict
sense  of  the  character  of  being  a  subject  of  rights
and  duties  among  other  similar  subjects,  then  per
sonality  itself  is  only  possible  in  virtue  of  an  indi
viduality  which  already  transcends  it.  For  there  can
be  no  system  of  rights  and  duties  except  in  virtue
of  an  identity,  .of _wil]j  in  which  rights  and  duties
become  a  mere  machinery  of  daily, life.  You  cannot
coerce  the  individual  and  organise  his  life  within  a
system  of  "  persons "  except  on  the  ground  of  a
consciousn^s_s_o_n_his_,part  which  at  bottom  desires
to  be  coerced  and  to  be  organised.  So  individu
ality,  the  principle  of  reality  and  the  consistent
whole,  takes  us  on  beyond  personality  in  the  strict
sense,  beyond  the  consciousness  of  self  which  is
mediated  by  an  opposing  not-self,  into  the  region
where  we  go  out  of  the  self  and  into  it  by  the  same
movement,  in  the  quasi-religion  of  social  unity,  in
knowledge,  art,  and  in  religion  proper.  And  in  all


vii  BUT  ALWAYS THE  MAXIMUM  271

these  experiences,  as  the  repellent  self-consciousness
diminishes,  and  the  sense  of  unity  with  the  world
and  with  man  becomes  pre-eminent — in  all  these^
individuality  is  strengthened,  and  the  self,  though,
less  in  opposition  to  a  not-self,  is  more  itsjelf,  and  is
more  at  home.  And  when  freedom  and  spontaneity
reach  their  climax  in  religion  the  self  no  longer
insists  on  its  exclusive  claim,  and  the  whole  being
goes  out  together  into  the  service  which  is  perfect
freedom.  In  all  this  there  is  nothing  that  is  not
familiar,  but  the  result  of  it  for  the  theory  of  per
sonality  or  individuality  does  not  seem  to  be  readily
apprehended.  It  is  plain  that  the  height  of  indi
viduality  is  to  be  looked  for  in  experiences  which
raise  to  the  acutest  pitch  the  sense  and  fact  of
identity  with  man, nature  and  God.  And  if  we  ask
for  a  definition  or  identification  which  will  give  us
the  individual  finite  being, per  se,  so  that  we  can  say,
this  much  and  no  more  is  he,  and  at  this  level  we//
have  him  and  can  estimate  his  separate  value,1  there'
is  nothing  of  the  kind  to  be  found.  If  we  take  him
at  his  best  he  exhibits  quite  other  features  than
those  which  his  normal  being  tempts  us  most  to
emphasise,  and  if  we  could  take  him  as  he  really  is,
it  may  be  again  that  the  best  we  know  of  him  would
be  wholly  left  behind.

At  any  rate,  to  repeat  the  point  precisely,  two
things  seem  made  out.  First,  the  minimum  of
individuality  has  not,  any  more  than  the  minimum
meaning  of  a  word,2  any  claim  to  be  accepted  as  the
normal  and  determining  standard.  In  such  ques-

1  Contrast McTaggart on  "  Individualism of  Value,"  Interna
tional  Journal  of  Ethics,  July  1908.

2  I  refer  again  to  the  discussion  of  freedom,  Philosophical  Theory
of  State,  l.c,


272  OURSELVES  AND THE  ABSOLUTE  LECT.

tions  as  that  of  the  communicability  and  objectivity
of  feeling,  or  of  the  identity  between  human  souls
or  of  the  continuity  of  the  maximum  experience  of
the  self,  there  is  no  justification  whatever  for  making
our  commonplace  sense  of  impotence,  isolation,  or
self-will  the  basis  of  our  theories.  The  formal
separateness  of  "  individual "  centres  of  experience
is  progressively  outweighed  by  their  material  iden
tity  of  content  and  emotions,  and  if  we  were  to  base
our  theories  on  what  human  beings  are  as  they  sing
together,  or  fight  on  the  same  side,  or  sacrifice
themselves  for  those  dear  to  them  or  for  a  cause,  or
think  with  the  full  power  of  their  intelligence,  the
difference  in  our  attitude  would  not  be  one  of  idle
sentiment  alone,  but  would  be  a  logical  and  meta
physical  difference  of  immense  significance.  It
would  consist  in  the  emphasis  laid  on  identity  of
content  and  system  in  which  different  selves  are
one,  and  in  which  the  usually  unrealised  continuity
of  the  single  self  with  itself  also  ultimately  lies,  as
against  the  differences  of  organic  sensations  and
limits  of  immediate  experience  -determined  by  im
potence,  which  appear  to  be  the  grounds  of  dis
tinction  that  keep  "  a  mind  "  apart  from  others,  and,
for  the  same  reason,  from  itself.  And,  as  is  sug
gested  by  a  modern  view  on  which  I  have  com
mented  before,  the  self,  as  that  which  is  our  unity,
the  good  of  life,  and  that  for  which  we  care,  would
turn  out  to  lie  not  in  a  consciousness  of  the  not-self
but  in  a  content  or  quality  of  being,  which,  as  the
view  referred  to  admits,  is  most  completely  realised
-  when  the  antagonistic  consciousness  of  the  not-self
is  at  its  minimum.  This  set  of  notions  would  give
a  wholly  different  lead  on  the  problem  of  conscious-


vii HO IV  CAN  ONE  MOOD CONTAIN  ANOTHER? 273

ness  of  self  in  the  Absolute  from  that  .which  is  the
outcome  of  taking  self-consciousness  as  a  reflec
tive  awareness  of  self,  dependent1  on  an  adverse
not-self.

And, secondly, this comparison of  the higher
regions of  experience with each other and with
those  that  are  less  complete  enables  us  in  principle
to  understand  the  relation  of  the  less  to  the  more
inclusive  and  perfect  conditions  of  mind  as  a  world,
and  thus  to  meet  one  of  the  fundamental  difficulties
in  the  conception  of  an  absolute  experience. Such
an experience, we say, includes  and  absorbs  the
experiences  which  we possess severally — includes
them  positively  and in a fuller  form  of  each,  yet
without  reproducing  them  in  their  separate  distinct
ness. I  am  inclined  to  think  that  the  difficulty  of
n  any  way  conceiving  this  relation  as  between  any
^iven conditions of  mind and any others is the
nain hindrance  to grasping the  notion  of  a con-
inuity  between  our  defective  self  and  a  perfection
ranscending  it. No  one,  it  seems,  is  unreasonable
nough  to  make  it  a  fatal  difficulty  that  we  do  not
•rofess by metaphysical argument to attain and
ome into possession of the perfect experience.
t  there  is  a natural scepticism as to  the con-
eivability  of  our  alternating  and  seemingly  hetero
geneous  moods  and  phases  of  mind  being  fused,
.bsorbed, and  transcended  in any  single  mode  of
xperience  that  could  really  be  continuous  with  all.
How  can  they  be  contained  in  it  ? How  and  under
ivhat  conditions  can the  partial  moods,  which  are

1  Taylor's  Elements  of  Metaphysic,  pp.  340,  343,  350.  It  is
oteworthy  how  the  positive  view  tends  in  these  passages  to  supplant
he  negative.

T


274  OURSELVES  AND THE  ABSOLUTE  LECT.

really  in  it,  subsist  apart  from  it  under  the  conditions
of  finite  being  ? l

This  difficulty  can,  I  believe,  in  principle  be
removed  from  the  point  of  view  on  which  we  are
now  insisting.

We  are  saying,  then,  that  the  clue  to  the  nature
of  individuality  lies  in  the  contrast  between  the
forms  of  mental  life  in  which  self-transcendence  is
at  its  minimum  with  those  in  which  it  approaches
its  maximum.  There  is  •&  prima  facie  difficulty  due
to  the  difference  between  true  self- transcendence
and  the  alienation  from  self  which  lies  in  the  uncon
sciousness  of  limitation  or  impotence.  Obviously
the  latter  is  almost  perfect  where  the  limitation  and
impotence — the  de  facto  alienation  from  self — are
extreme,2  while  a  great  measure  of  true  self-trans
cendence,  as  in  some  types  of  religious  emotion,
may  be  accompanied  by  an  acute  and  despairing
f  sense  of  impotence  and  bondage.  But  the  standard
should  be  the  amount  of  genuine  self-identification
with  the  content  of  reality  ;  the  accompanying  con
sciousness  of  bondage  or  of  freedom  is  so  wholly
relative  to  the  range  of  the  self's  outlook  that  it
might  in  some  cases  be  taken  as  an  indication  that
varies  inversely  as  the  fact.

Passing  over  this  difficulty,  then,  as  only  apparent,
we  can  see  that  in  the  normal  case  our  less  complete
attitudes  are  absorbed  and  united  in  those  which  are
more  complete,  and  tend  to  reappear  in  their  frag
mentary  character  as  our  impotence  is  revealed  by
relative  or  absolute  diminution  of  mental  or  bodily

1  An  instance  in  which  the  fact  and  interpretation  of  this  absorp
tion  is  all-important  is  the  advance  in  Hegel's  Logic,  from  Cognition
to  the  Absolute  Idea.  See  McTaggart,  Commentary,  sect.  288,  and
my  notice,  "Mind,"  January  1911.  2  Bradley's  Appearance,  I.e.


vii  DISSOCIATION  OF THE  ABSOLUTE  275

force.  As  life  becomes  more  finite,  in  short,  our
attitudes  tend  to  become  alternative  and  successive
rather  than  fused  and  solid.  It  is  a  simple  and
necessary  consequence  of  the  grades  of  our  im
potence,  in  a  world  which,  though  one  in  principle,
is  full  of  diverse  aspects,  solicitations,  and  oppor
tunities.  The  only  real  difficulty  is  to  see  how  in
principle  the  aspects  and  attitudes  can  be  fused  or
absorbed  into  one,  and  not  merely  blended  or  con
joined.

In  the  first  place,  we  must  remember  that  our
1  phases-^nd  attitudes  never^axe  wholly  s^vere^  ;^hat
Iman  is  never  in  any  phase  purely  feeling,  purely
practical,  purely  moral,  aesthetic,  intellectual,  or '
religious.  There  is  one  kind  of  unity  —  it  is  a
familiar  topic — before  the  evolution  of  differences  ;
there  is  another,  we  hope  and  contend,  as  they  are
absorbed  and  unified  in  perfection.  But  also  in  the
intermediate  region  in  which  we  live,  where  the
differences  are  very  marked  and  insistent,  there  is
always  the  unity  of  feeling  in  which  the  self  has  a
certain  ^QlH^rityjLYJth  its^f,  with  ^th^rs,  gjvl  with
nature.  So  that  there  is  always  a  basis  of  repose,
a  faith  and  purpose  and  appreciation  uniting  the
man  with  somewhat  beyond  him  ;  and  you  do  not
and  cannot  get,  for  example,  morality  apart  from
religion — the  reliance,  that  is,  on  the  particular  will,
judgment,  and  sense  of  duty,  apart  from  the  social
and  the  cosmic  basis  of  life,  which  imply  man's
reliance  on  a  strength  and  wisdom  beyond  his
own.

Bearing  this  preliminary  point  in  mind,  let  us
consider  the  relation  of  morality,  theoretical  cogni
tion,  the  aesthetic  attitude,  and  what  we  commonly


276  OURSELVES  AND THE  ABSOLUTE  LECT.

call  religion,  to  the  more  intense  and  inclusive  forms
of  the  religious  consciousness.

Religion,  like  other  forms  of  experience,  has
many  modes  and  levels,  and  because  of  this,  a  single
answer  to  the  question  how  it  is  related  to  science
and  philosophy  can  hardly  be  given.  In  its  primi
tive  form  it  seems  to  show  but  little  analogy  to  the
scientific  or  speculative  consciousness  ;  l  in  its
developed  and  intermediate  forms,  in  the  civilisa
tions  known  to  history,  it  seems,  if  anything,  hostile.
So,  too,  in  its  relation  to  art  and  to  morality,  there
is  plenty  of  ground  in  many  of  its  stages  for  pro
nouncing  it  hostile,  or  at  best  indifferent,  both  to
one  and  to  the  other.  Still,  as  we  have  just  seen,
actual  life  can  never  allow  its  activities  to  become
from  one  another,  and  the  logical


connection  between  them  which  the  nature  of  con
sciousness  implies  never  wholly  ceases  to  exhibit
itself  in  the  manner  of  their  interdependence.  Even
the  myths  of  the  savage,  as  we  are  told  to-day,  are  a
first  effort  at  interpretation  of  the  appearance  of
things,  ultimately  of  the  same  nature  with  the  hypo
theses  of  science.

Thus  it  is  a  question  of  convenience  and  degree
how  we  estimate  the  relation,  say,  of  philosophy  and
religion  par  excellence.  But  undoubtedly  we  can
find  experiences  in  which  the  two  have  come
together,  or  rather  have  not  been  separated,  and
are,  or  have  come,  together,  with  very  much  more
besides.  If  we  choose  to  adopt  the  name  of  reli
gion  —  understanding  that  it  is  capable  also  of  many
inferior  applications  —  for  that  frame  of  thought  and

1  According  to  a  certain  view  of  Magic  and  to  the  theory  of
Animism  some  kinship  is  traceable.


vii  LEGATO CON  AMORE  277

levotion  which Dante, for  example, expresses  as  \
his ideal, then we  shall be  able  to  illustrate the
unity  of  a  highest  experience,  and  the  necessity  of
its  dissociation according  to  the  degrees  of  finite-
ness  and  impotence.

In  Dante's  religion,  for  example,  we  have  the
suggestion  of  an  experience  in  which  (a)  as  it  is
religious  par  excellence  the  individual  finite  being
feels  his  will  and  emotions  absorbed  and  trans
formed  in  the  perfect  will,  which  is  also  his  will.
Yet  (b]  inseparable  from  this  unity,  but  distinct
within  it,  there  is  a  side  of  morality.  The  supreme
will  is  realised  through  conflict ;  and  pain  and  evil,
and  with  them  effort  and  aspiration,-^  are  present
potentially  in  the  finiteness  by  which  the,  individual
contributes  to  the  divine  perfection.  Arisd  when  I
say  "  potentially  "  I  do  not  mean  that  they"  might
be  present"  but  are  not.  I  mean  that  they~>are
present  as  a  characteristic  of  the  religious  experi
ence  in  question,  a  depth  or  tension  or  seriousness
which  depends  on  the  holding  together  of  its  con
stituents  in  a  way  analogous  to  the  survival  of
desire  in  satisfaction.1  And  this  characteristic,  if
experienced  in  relative  isolation,  owing  to  the
obscuring  of  other  aspects  of  the  whole,  could
reveal  itself  as  the  effort,  or  in  extreme  cases  the
despair,  which  belongs  to  the  moral  attitude  taken
by  itself  and  unqualified.

And  further  (c]  it  is  an  integral  part  of  this
religion  that  the  sensible  universe  is  apprehended
as  a  revelation  of  the  Divine  order,  an  apprehen
sion  which  includes  the  completest  realisation  of  all
that  the  aesthetic  attitude  can  mean  ;  and  (d)  what,

1  Cf.  the  argument  of  Lecture  VI.  sect.  3.


278  OURSELVES  AND THE  ABSOLUTE  LECT.

taken  apart,  would  be  the  theoretical  or  speculative
intelligence,  as  all  things  are  seen  in  God,  has  also
the  completest  satisfaction,  and  its  need  for  non
contradiction  throughout  experience  is  thoroughly
fulfilled.

Now,  of  course  it  may  be  urged  that  even  this
highest  religious  experience  is  not  one  which  most
of  us  at  any  rate  can  actually  possess  ;  that  merely
to  describe,  as  we  have  done,  its  constituent  factors,
in  the  language  of  our  separate  ways  of  behaviour,
is  to  abandon  the  conception  of  its  unity  ;  that  if  its
unity  were  complete,  the  separation  of  the  experi
ences  would  have  disappeared  ;  and  that  if  they  are
traceable  as  separate,  the  characteristic  imperfection
and  self-contradiction  of  each  are  not  done  away.

I  do  not  believe  that  this  is  a  relevant  criticism.
It  belongs  to  the  general  type  of  thought  which  may
be  described  as  logical  pessimism,  a  method  funda
mentally  eristic,  which  proceeds  by  the  juxtaposi
tion  of  extreme  cases  in  the  absence  of  the  analysis
which  would  exhibit  their  continuity.  It  is  thus
that  pain,  pleasure,  evil,  personality  are  exhibited
as  hard  units,  repellent  and  unyielding  against  the
claims  of  perfection  and  totality.  But  what  is  here
relied  on  is  analysis,  sustained  by  the  truth  of  living
experiences.  No  man  is  confined  even  at  a  single
moment  within  the  limits  of  a  single  mood  or  type
of  behaviour ;  every  man  has  experience  of  being
aided  by  greater  characters  and  intelligences  or  by
great  emergencies  to  surpass  his  habitual  self,  and
to  apprehend  the  effect  of  an  exaltation  of  his  whole
being  upon  the  currently  distinguished  elements  of
his  finite  consciousness.  In  these  experiences  we
only  apprehend  through  life  and  feeling  the  truth


vii  CIO CHE— SI  SQUADERNA  279

on  which  the  philosopher's  analysis  insists  when,  for
example,  he  points  out  that  abstract  morality  cannot
and  does  not  exist  per  se,  but  that  in  logic  as  in
experience  its  sharp  antagonism  between  ought  and
"is"  implies  and  possesses  a  deeper  basis,  in  which
what  ought  to  be  is  one  with  what  is.

And  now  our  point  does  not  seem  hard  to  under
stand.  We  assume  a  finiteness,  consisting  in  various
kinds  and  degrees  of  impotence,  to  be  the  condition
of  existence  for  a  being  capable  in  principle,  say,  of
the  religious  experience  we  have  described.  It  is
not  hard  to  see  how  the  logical  elements  of  such  a
beatific  vision  should  persist  or  stand  out  in  relative
isolation,  according  to  the  nature  of  the  impotence,
and  the  type  of  emergency  with  which  it  is  con
fronted.  We  can  see,  surely,  every  day,  that  the
finite  mind,  whose  life  is  in  succession  and  in  choice,
will  not  be  able  to  hold  on  all  at  once  even  to  the
highest  mode  of  consciousness  of  which  in  principle
and  on  occasions  it  is  capable.  But  this  is  no
hindrance  to  the  fundamental  truth  that  what  it  does
hold  on  to,  what  shows,  as  it  were,  through  the  mist,
is  both  of  one  logical  texture  and  of  one  emotional
tissue  with  that  which  relative  emphasis  and  dis
tinction  has  for  the  moment,  or  for  part  or  for  the
whole  of  an  age  or  a  lifetime,  withdrawn  from  its
distinct  apprehension.  The  facts  are  obvious  and
familiar,  though  their  importance  is  apt  to  be  unre
cognised.  It  is  plain  that  when  engaged  in  one
thing  we  cannot  be  engaged  in  another,  and  that
what  we  are  doing  or  suffering  at  the  moment  com
mands  our  mood  and  our  mental  attitude.  In
moments  of  moral  difficulty  we  are  full  of  effort,
preoccupied  with  the  sense  of  wrong  in  the  world,


28o  OURSELVES  AND THE  ABSOLUTE LECT.

the  sense  that  the  next  move  is  with  us,  and  that
good  and  evil  rest  upon  our  shoulders.  In  moments
of  detached  analytic  labour — say,  when  occupied  in
experimental  research — we  necessarily  set  aside  the
"relativity"  of  the  "external"  world  to  some  kind
of  knowledge  or  apprehension,  and  treat  it  ad  hoc
as  a  self-existent  reality  which  we  have  to  take  as
given.  In  moments  of  religious  exaltation  of  the
commoner  and  narrower  type,  our  minds  are  with
drawn  into  a  mood  of  repose  and  absorption,  in
volving  a  faith  which  excludes  the  temper  of
research,  and  the  attribution  of  independence  and
full  reality  to  the  world  apprehended  through  sense-
perception  ;  and  into  an  attitude  of  trust  and  resigna
tion  which,  it  may  be,  does  less  than  justice  to  moral
endeavour  and  responsibility,  and  yet  represents  a
logical  implication  apart  from  which  such  endeavour
and  responsibility  would  be  torn  up  by  the  roots.
All  these  limitations  are  defects  in  the  several
moods  and  attitudes  themselves,  but  defects  in
some  degree  inevitable  to  their  existence  in  finite
subjects,  whose  life  is  carried  on  by  succession  and
alternation.

The  matter  is  made  much  easier  to  grasp  when
we  remember  what  we  insisted  on  as  a  preliminary  ;
that  we  never  do  realise  in  actual  living  the  dissocia
tion  which  we  postulate  alike  for  purposes  of  theo
retical  analysis  and  in  the  rough  nomenclature  of
every-day  life.  We  never  are  purely  intellectual
without  volition,  nor  moral  apart  from  being  reli
gious,  nor  aesthetic  without  practical  or  theoretical
interest.  Each  of  these  attitudes,  indeed,  is  in  and
by  itself  an  instance  and  example  of  all  the  others  as
well  as  of  itself,  although  their  central  characteristics


vii  ARE WE  NOT  ABSOLUTE UNITS?  281

are  not  its  central  characteristics.  This  familiar  fact
is  highly  significant  of  the  inherent  unity  of  all
experiences  which  our  impotence  merely  disguises,
and  the  problem  is  to  give  it  its  value  without
making  it  into  a  ground  of  failure  to  recognise  plain
distinctions.

Thus  the  connection  of  things  is  obscured  and
loosened  by  our  finiteness,  but  it  is  not  done  away  ;
and  we  are  able,  if  we  attend,  to  see  how  our  moods,
alternating  apparently  at  random,  are  in  truth  the
limbs  and  features  of  fuller  forms  of  mind,  left  out
standing  in  seeming  separation  through  the  mist
that  limits  our  particular  world.

"  Well  then,"  the  reader  may  say,  "  will  you
plainly  tell  us  what  you  take  the  individual  finite
being  to  be  ?  We  have  hitherto  supposed  him  to
be  a  single  and  permanent  spiritual  unit,  having  as
his  minister  a  physical  body,  but  with  a  nature  or
essence  of  his  own  apart  from  this,  perhaps  inherited
from  other  souls,  perhaps  unique  and  eternal ;  with
a  power  of  initiative  which  we  are  in  the  habit  of
calling  will,  activity,  spontaneity,  a  power  depending
on  this  essence  and  not  on  the  suggestions  of  ex
perience,  and  possessing  to  an  indefinite  extent
ability  to  arrest,  modify,  and  initiate  bodily  pro
cesses.  In  fact,  we  have  conceived  the  soul  to  be
like  a  whole  living  man,  and  the  body  to  be  like  a
machine  which  he  directs  '  like  a  boatman  in  his
boat.'  Probably,  we  have  thought,  he  outlives  his
body.  At  any  rate,  the  being  and  destiny  of  his
soul,  those  of  a  thing  which  is  itself  and  nothing
else,  are  distinct  and  exclusive  against  those  of
other  souls  as  much  as  the  bodily  life-history  of  a
man  on  earth  is  distinct  from  and  exclusive  of  the


282  OURSELVES  AND THE  ABSOLUTE  LECT.

bodily  life-histories  of  other  men.  This  is  at  least
clear  and  decisive.  If  it  is  not  right,  what  do  you
put  in  its  place  ?  You  seem  to  volatilise  the  indi
vidual  into  a  sort  of  logical  progression  of  ideas  and
emotions,  always  passing  out  of  itself  into,  as  it
were,  another  theory,  as  a  thought  can  blend  with
and  be  absorbed  in  another  thought  within  the
limits  of  a  single  mind.  Is  this  what  you  mean?
Is  it  not  then  a  man's  principal  interest  and  value
that  he  is  permanently  he  and  no  one  else,  a  self-
complete  being,  not  composed  out  of  the  outward
world,  but  over  against  it,  a  rival  or  superior  power,
liable  to  sin  and  failure,  but  not  essentially  incapable
of  perfection  while  remaining  what  he  is  ;  and,  as
one  of  the  constituent  members  of  the  universe,
having  a  weal  and  woe  of  his  own,  which  and  the
like  of  which,  in  him  and  in  others  distinct  from
him,  determine  the  perfection  and  imperfection  of
the  world."

And  the  answer  is,  first,  negatively,  that  there
are  three  analogies  in  the  challenge  just  stated,  all
of  which  should  be  avoided,  or^  at  all  .events  tran-
scended,  in  our  conception  of  the  individual.

And  in  the  second  place,  affirmatively,  that  we
want  to  think  of  the_indjvjdu^]_^riniarUY  as  mind.  -
And  we  must  learn  to  interpret  "  mind  "  positively,
in  its  own  right,  by  what  it  is  and  does.  The
temptation  is  overwhelming  to  suggest  comparisons
and  analogies  either  from  external  objects  or  from
isolated  phenomena  within  the  sphere  of  mind  itself.
But  though  we  may  help  ourselves  by  these,  partly
as  suggestions,  mainly  as  contrasts,  what  we  really
need  is  to  accept  the  significance  of  mind  on  its
own.  merits  and  as  sui  generis,  not  as  a  "  thing,"


vii  ATOMIC  ANALOGIES  283

nor  yet  as  a  mere  power  or  attribute  of  a  thing  (say,
of  body  or  of  brain),  nor  again  even  as  a  "  life,"
however  attractive  the  analogy  may  be — but  as  a
"  whole "  of  a  special  kind,  with  a  structure  and
concreteness  of  its  own,  only  to  be  appreciated  by
experiencing  it  where  there  is  a  "  more  "  of  it,  and
entering  into  the  characteristic  differences  between
the  more  of  it  and  the.  less.

i. First, then, we  do  not  want  to  think  of  the  Three
individual  merely  on  the  pattern,  a  of  a  thing,  /3  of  Sofies
a  legal  personality,  7  of  a  self  for  reflective  self-  f^^ .
consciousness.  ?hmf(  ;

.Legal |/

a.  We  are  aware,  no  doubt,  on  reflection  that  a  Person,

...  ,  .  ir u  •  j  Selfin  til-

thing  m  external  nature  is  not  self-subsistent  and  reflective

would  be  nothing  by  itself.  I  do  not  mean  merely  sciousness.
apart  from  the  apprehending  mind,  but  apart  from
the  context  and  reactions  of  other  things.  But  the
implication  by  which  the  analogy  of  a  thing  affects
our  idea  of  the  soul  (nobilissimae  substantiae]?  ego,
or  self,  is  that  of  an  identity. behind  and  supporting
diversity,  but  not  entering  into  it  or  constituted  by  it.
The  soul  as  assumed  in  the  conception  of  metem
psychosis  is  a  sufficient  instance ;  it  is  a  trans
ferable  thing,  compatible  with  any  body  and  with
any  set  of  experiences.  In  the  face  of  such  a  notion,
based  on  an  extreme  assumption  of  numerical
identity,  to  speak  of  the  identity  of  the  souls  or
selves  inhabiting  at  the  same  time  different  bodies,
or  of  the  diversity  of  souls  within  one  body,  seems
wholly  unmeaning.  It  is  like  speaking  of  the
identity  of  a  chair  and  a  table  which  stand  side  by
side,  or  of  a  chair  which  becomes  a  table  from  time
to  time  as  the  fancy  seizes  it.  This  is,  I  imagine,

1  Bacon.


284  OURSELVES  AND THE  ABSOLUTE  LECT.

the  feeling  with  which  many  people  first hear  of
multiple  personalities  within  a  single  body.

We  feel  it  hard,  on  the  other  hand,  to  assign
concrete  and  individual  value  to  an  ideal  or  an
experience.  But  some  effort  in  this  direction  was
made  inevitable  once  for  all  by  Kant's  criticism  of
rational  psychology,  and  by  Hegel's  emphasis  on
the  idea  of  subject  as  opposed  to  substance.1  The

/active  form  of  totality  within  a  certain  mass  of  con
tent,  a  life  of  self-transformation  on  the  part  of  such
a  mass  towards  the  riddance  of  contradictions,  is  the
sort  of  conception  we  require  ;  and  the  analogy  of  a
thing  suggests  to  us  nothing  more  than  unaccount-

*able  persistent  identity  heightened  to  exclusiveness,
which  just  leads  us  astray.

ft.  The  term  person  or  personality  has  all  sorts
of  meanings,  and  has  been  made  the  vehicle  of  what
are  meant  to  be  the  highest  claims  on  behalf  of  the
individual  nature.  The  individual,  it  is  argued,  if
he  is  to  have  value,  if  indeed  he  is  to  be  anything
at  all,  in  the  strict  sense  of  being,  must  distinguish
and  be  aware  of  himself,  so  that  he  can  be  an  object
to  himself,  and  therefore  an  interest  and  a  source  of
aspiration  after  perfection.  No  doubt  the  require
ment  is  sound  in  principle,  and  for  us,  for  our  moral
activity  and  our  social  obligations,  is  true  in  its
accepted  form,  involving  personalities  which  are
exclusive  and  more  or  less  repellent.  The  person,
as  a  subject  of  rights  and  duties,  is  essentially  the
individual  in  society,  as  defined  by  law  ;  and,  as  we
said  above,  the  legal  personality  already  presupposes

1  The  idea  of  Subject,  implying  the  Subject-object  relation,  is
itself  not  final  but  it  affords  at  least  a  clear  line  as  against  the  idea
of  substance.


vii  AVOID THE  NEGATIVE  APPROACH  285

a  stage  of  individuality  which  transcends  it.  Legal
personality  represents  the  social  machinery,  the
mechanism  of  definite  co-operation.  But  the  social
spirit  which  sustains  it  must  be  beyond  the  system
which  it  sustains.  You  could  not  secure  recog
nition  for  a  system  of  obligations  unless  the  minds
which  accept  them  were  united  in  a  purpose  of
which  the  obligations  were  corollaries.  And  the
social  spirit  itself  is  not  the  final  form  of  individuality
even  in  our  experience.  Thus,  no  doubt,  the  indi
vidual  must  at  least  be  a  person,  as,  at  his  minimum,
he  must  have  the  self-identity  of  a  thing.  But  if
personality  means  rigid  systematic  limitation  as
against  other  persons,  and  a  union  with  the  whole
which  is  only  partial  and  indirect,  individuality  must
be  capable  of  taking  a  form  in  which  the  negative
may  play  a  more  affirmative  part.

7.  We  should  not  interpret  individuality  as  limited
to  a  self-consciousness  reflected  from  the  contrast
with  a  not-self.  Our  main  point  in  conceiving  Indi
viduality  is  to  maintain  its  freedom^;  its  power  or
essential  nature  of  self-transformation  in  obedience
to  the  logic  of  the  whole  which  operates  in  it.  We
do  not  want  to  be  burdened  with  the  negative
approach,  and  to  say  that  when  we  are  most  fully
entering  into  the  content  which  best  unites  us  with
the  whole  and  with  ourselves,  we  are  ceasing  to  be
individual,  because  we  are  beyond  the  reflective
consciousness  of  self  against  not-self.  Individuality
is  positive  and  constructive  ;  and  if  self-conscious
ness  is  negative  against  the  idea  of  self,  individuality
must  not  be  limited  by  being  construed  in  analogy
with  it.  Diversity  or  affirmative  negation  will  play
its  part  in  the  system  of  contents  into  which  indi-


286  OURSELVES  AND THE  ABSOLUTE  LECT.

viduality  develops ;  but  that  is  a  different  thing
from  a  contradictory  negative  in  the  form  of  a  not-
self  resisting  the  expansion  and  affirmation  of  the
system  of  the  self.

Mind  is  ii.  Secondly,  then,  we  may  use  all  these  analogies,

but  we  must  not  bind  ourselves  by  them.  What
we  can  say  affirmatively  is  that  the  individual,  as  we

world-"  know  btnyjs  mindf  aod-~#~jTiirid.  The  meaning  of
his  individuality  centres  on  the  sense  in  which  he
is  a  mind.  For  he  is  this  really  in  two  disparate
senses,  by  negation  and  by  affirmation,  and  the  two
are  not  in  harmony.  His  mind  is  one,  because  it  is
united  in  itself,  and  also  because  it  is  exclusive
of  others.  But  the  principle  through  which  it  is
united  in  itself  is  not  in  harmony  with  its  exclusive-
ness  of  others,  at  any  rate  in  the  sense  in  which
it  does  actually  exclude  them.  Its  exclusiveness,
judged  by  the  principle  of  its  self-identity,  is  a
deject.1  The  individuality  or  distinctness  which
depends  purely  upon  this  is  external  and  self-con
tradictory,  connected  with  the  positive  unity  only  by
the  corollary  that  unity  and  power  go  together,  and
where  power  ceases,  unity  must  also  find  its  limit.
If  a  man  has  more  power  of  comprehension  and
inclusion  so  that  less  is  outside  him,  and  that  what
is  outside  him  is  less  outside  him,  his  own  unity  and
individuality  is  so  far  and  for  that  reason  not  less
but  greater.  A  mind  then  is  a  mind,  not  through
a  principle  hostile  to  the  nature  which  makes  it
mind,  but  through  a  realisation  of  that  nature,  to
the  imperfection  of  which  realisation  the  imperfec-

1  Contrast  Ward,  Naturalism,  ii.  167  :  "  Individuality  consists
precisely  in  this  impossibility,"  viz.  the  impossibility  of  the  presenta
tions  of  each  of  several  subjects  becoming  accessible  to  the  others.
(See  Varisco,  op.  cit.  p.  37.)


vii  THE  BEST  ANALOGY—  A WORLD  287

tion  of  its  unity  is  correlative.  The  conditions  of
psychical  oneness,  such  as  qualitative  continuity  of
feeling  and  logical  connection  of  ideas  and  purposes
merely  carry  out  on  a  small  scale  what  is  necessary
to  constitute  a  unity  of  mind.  But  there  is  no
reason  to  limit  this  unity  to  any  special  complex  of
feeling  and  experience,  and  in  fact  it  is  not  so
limited.  The  best  general  description  of  the  nature
of  mind  is  to  call  it  a  workL^and  the  world  which
constitutes  a  mind  is  not  limited  according  to  any
hard  and  fast  rule.  It  has  been  found  suggestive
and  convenient,  for  example,  to  speak  as  if  the
principle  of  individual  distinctness  were  "  one  mind,
one  social  function."  But  obviously  this  is  a  quite
unreal  simplification  of  the  facts,  unless  we  reduce
its  meaning  to  what  is  true  enough  ;  viz.  that  it  is  a
serviceable  ideal  to  regard  the  content  of  a  single
mind,  however  complex,  as  constituting  a  single
conation.1  Consciousnesses  are  of  all  degrees  of  com
prehensiveness.  They  are  centred  par  excellence
no  doubt  in  a  range  of  externality  which  a  single
body  focusses  for  a  single  mind  each  to  each  ;  but
this  immediate  centredness  is  no  ultimate  limit  for
their  comprehension  ;  and  there  are  many  conditions
under  which  it  might  truly  be  said  that  a  single
mind  is  constituted  by  and  controls  more  bodies
than  one.  In  a  word,  then,  we  are  to  think  of  the
individual  as  a  world  of  experience,  whose  centre  is
given  in  the  body  and  in  the  range  of  externality,
that  comes  by  means  ofjLJbuL  whose  limits  depend
He  is  a  world  that  realises,  in  a


limited  matter, the  logic  and  spirit  of  the  whole  ;

1 It  would  be  hard,  however,  to  show  that  the  contents  of  two  or
more  minds  could  not  together  constitute  a  single  conation.


288  OURSELVES  AND THE,  ABSOLUTE  LECT.

and,  in  principle,  there  is  no  increase  of  compre
hension,  and  no  transformation  of  the  self,  that  is
inconceivable  as  happening  to  him.  Whether  he
even  continues  to  be  a  self  in  our  limited  sense  of
the  term  is  a  matter  of  degree.  Why  and  how
there  come  to  be  these  separate  microcosms  which
we  call  finite  selves,  or  (improperly)  individuals  is  a
question  we  cannot  answer.  But  we  can  see  that
by  its  being  so,  a  certain  completeness  through  in
completeness  is  attained.  Every  degree,  and  every
distinct  centre  or  origin  of  individuality  or  compre
hension  necessarily  constitutes  a  different  vision  and
interpretation  of  things,  and  through  all  these  in
completenesses  a  totality  of  differences  must  emerge
which,  so  far  as  we  can  grasp,  could  not  be  attained
in  any  other  way.

It  is  suggested,  as  we  noted  above,  that  the
unity  of  the  individual  lies  in  a  purpose  or  a  conation.
And  for  a  being  which  is  finite,  whose  life  is  there
fore  in  time,  and  its  world  more  or  less  self-contra
dictory,  the  element  of  purpose  and  conation  cannot
be  absent.  But  this  way  of  speaking  seems  con
nected  with  what  we  have  before  designated  as  the
negative  approach.  For  a  purpose  or  a  conation,
in  general,  is  nothing  more  than  the  operation  of  a
dissatisfaction  or  a  contradiction  towards  its  own
removal.  But  this  is  a  very  negative  and  unchar
acteristic  conception.  According  to  the  nature  of
the  contents  which  set  up  the  dissatisfaction  and  are
reconciled  in  the  satisfaction  you  may  have  a  conation
of  any  degree  of  value  from  negative  to  positive.  A
conation  may  be  a  mere  escape  from  discomfort,  and
end  in  indifference  ;  or  it  may  partake  in  a  greater
or  less  degree  of  the  nature  of  a  positive  develop-


vii  "  THE  INDIVIDUAL"  IS  DE  FACTO  289

ment  evoked  by  and  evoking  a  response  harmonious
to  the  self.  If  we  are  to  define  the  individual  by
his  conation,  it  should  be  his  conation  as  relative  to
some  special  type  of  fruition  ;  and  it  should  be
understood  that  the  content  in  which  the  individuality
is  based,  no  less  than  the  completion  which  its
nature  demands,  characterises  and  determines  the
individuality.

What  we  call  "  the  individual  "  then  is  not  ja  fixed.
essence,  but  a  living  world  of  content,  representing
3  ^rrt?in  range  °f  externalitYT  which  in  it  strives
afterumtY^and  true  individuality^  or  completeness
because  it  has  in  it  the  active  .spirit  o£-ao«-contra-
diction,  the  form  of  the  whoje.  It  is  not  a  series  of
mental  occurrences,  nor  a  power  or  attribute  of  the
brain.  It  is,  on  the  contrary,  a  higher  concrete  than
the  body,  which  enters  into  it  and  is  its  instrument
of  communication  with  spatial  objects,  but  in  being
so  is  itself  only  a  small  part  of  the  spatial  theatre  as
we  perceive  and  conceive  it.  The  structure  and
conditions  of  unity  of  a  single  mind,  under  normal
conditions  and  par  excellence,  are  plain  and  definite.
They  are  nothing  mysterious,  but  just  what  they
are  ;  a  continuity  of  interest  and  identity  of  content
and  quality  maintained  in  ways  which  are  analysed
by  psychology.  There  can  be  no  question,  normally,
of  doubt  as  to  where  one  self  ends  and  another
begins,1  and  no  suggestion  that  selfhood  is  a  trivial
or  unreal  thing.  Nevertheless,  we  breathe  a  freer

1  The  abnormal  phenomena  are  enough  to  show  that  the  distinct
ness  and  identity  of  selves  are  matters  de  facto,  a  question  of  actual
qualities  and  contents  ;  and  this  is  what  on  a  sane  theory  we  should
expect,  and  gives  a  far  higher  interest  and  value  to  selfhood  than  if
it  were  a  mysterious  isolation,  imposed  by  destiny  inexplicably  and
without  degrees.

U


290  OURSELVES  AND THE  ABSOLUTE LECT.  vn

air  when  we  realise  it  on  the  analogy  of  a  concrete
thought,  held  together  and  kept  apart  by  what  it  is
in  itself,  and  by  nothing  else  in  the  universe  ;  and
when  we  have  banished  the  conception  of  a  thing
whose  limits  are  fixed,  and  which  is  characterised
and  limited  by  another  nature  behind  and  apart
from  the  experiences  which  grow  up  within  it.


LECTURE VIII

INDIVIDUALITY AS THE LOGICAL CRITERION OF  VALUE

i. IT  is  a  doctrine  in  favour  to-day,  with  speculative  Doctrine
thinkers  of  high  rank,  that  the  judgment  of  value  cannot"1
cannot  be  logically  supported  ;  cannot,  as  I  under-  ultimate1
stand  the  contention,  be  shown  by  logical  process  values-
to  be  right  or  wrong,  and  therefore,  cannot  in  prac
tice,  except  through  some  misconception,  be  modified
by  criticism  or  argument. "  Every  idealistic  theory
of  the  world  has  for  its  ultimate  premiss  a  logically
unsupported  judgment  of  value — a  judgment  which
affirms  an  end  of  intrinsic  worth,  and  accepts  thereby
a  standard  of  unconditional obligation."1 "  When
a  judgment  of  value is asserted to  be  ultimately
true,  it  is,  of  course,  useless  to  seek  for  a  proof  or
to  demand  one. It  must  be  either  accepted  or  left
alone." We  may  go  back  indeed  to  Mill,  "  Ques
tions  of  ultimate  ends  are  not  amenable  to  direct
proof. Whatever  is  proved  to  be  good  must  be  so
by  being  shown  to  be  a  means  to  something  admitted
to  be  good  without  proof."3

1  Pringle  Pattison,  Man's  Place  in  Cosmos,  p.  vii  and  p.  225.

2  McTaggart,  Int.  Journal  of  Ethics,  July,  1908,  p.  434.

3  Utilitarianism,  p.  6,  and  note  the  well-known  passage  a  few
lines  farther  down,  "  There  is  a  larger  meaning  of  the  word  '  proof,'  "
etc. With  this  cf.  Sidgwick,  Methods  of  Ethics,  6th  ed.,  pp.  420-1,
where he  suggests a process  of  argument  directed  to produce  a
modification  of  an  ultimate  estimate  of  value. The  definition  of  a

291


292  LOGICAL CRITERION  OF VALUE  LECT.

This  doctrine,  understood  in  its  natural  sense,
seems  wholly  adverse  to  the  principal  doctrines  of
Plato's  philosophy,  as  also  to  Aristotle's  treatment
of  the  question  of  the  end  for  man.  And  it  is  im
possible  not  to  feel  a  certain  surprise  that,  without
any  kind  of  notice  or  any  argument  advanced,  the
leading  conceptions  of  such  thinkers  should  be
altogether  set  aside.  The  contention  in  question
is  indeed  capable  of  being  understood  in  more  than
one  subordinate  sense,  and  not  as  flatly  denying  the
principle  which  we  claim  to  share  with  Plato.
Possible  I  proceed  first  to  consider  how  far  in  such  sub-

nater ordinate interpretations the doctrine retains its
meanings pO'm^  an(j  ^Qn  to  set  out  the  substantive  contention

opposed  to  its  full  and  natural  meaning.
judgment i.  It  is  true,  in  a  sense,  that  every  one  must  treat
Pro  himself, at  any  given moment,  as infallible. To

suspend  action  or  to  declare  himself  in  doubt  cannot
help  him  ;  for  by  either  course  he  positively  affirms
that  the  occasion  is  one  which  demands  it.  The
necessity  is  not  confined  to  action,  nor  is  its  exist
ence  an  argument  for  Pragmatism.  Adjudgment
when  made,  JTol^s?  thejjeld  ;  it  can  only  be  called  in
question  by  a  grounded  review  of  it,  made  by  means
of  another  and  subsequent  judgment.1  This  is  so
with  all  judgment,  and  therefore  with  the  judgment
of  value.  We  are  powerless,  as  a  recent  representa
tive  of  extreme  Libertarianism  has  pointed  out,  to
modify  even  our  moral  valuation  otherwise  than  by

man's  Good  in  terms  which  demand  a  critical  readjustment  of  his
actual  feeling  by  hypothetical  considerations  (p.  m),  and  the  re
quirement  (p.  406)  that  the  common  end  should  "  systematise  human
activities,"  seem  both  of  them  to  open  the  question  of  the  ultimate
good  to  argument  in  spite  of  Sidgwick's  tendency  to  make  it  a  matter
of  Intuition.  l  Bradley,  Mind,  April,  1908.


vni  DE GUSTIBUS—NOT  TRUE  293

itself;  it  represents  what  we  are,  as  long  as  we  are
so.1  Our  will,  he  thinks,  we  can  modify,  but  not
our  estimate  of  value.  It  is  in  the  possibility  of
contradiction  between  these  that  he  finds  our  free
dom  and  our  wrong-doing.

And  this  fact,  as  we  know  by  experience,  we
have  to  recognise.  No  argument  can  make  sure  of
altering  a  man's  mind.  For  purposes  for  which  a
particular  person's  action  or  judgment  are  important,
we  must  argue  under  his  principles  and  address
ourselves  to  his  existing  attitude,  his  accepted  scale
of  values,  or  else  let  it  alone.

But  nothing  of  all  this  applies  solely  to  thejudg-
ment  of  value.  It  is  a  consequence  of  the  nature  of
judgment  as  such  ;  of  its  dependence  upon  mental
structure.  It  is  the  same  for  theory  as  for  practice,
for  speculation  as  for  desire.  And  it  does  not,  of
course,  exclude  in  principle  the  openness  of  all
judgment  to  discussion  and  revision  ;  it  only  reiter
ates  that  fat  any  moment  we  think  what  we  think  [
unless  ana  until  we  see  reason  to  think  otherwise.)
It  insists  on  what  we  have  throughout  maintained,
that  mind  operates  as  a  logical  whole.

Probably  the  recognition  of  this  truth  plays  a
part  in  the  opinion  we  are  discussing.  "  De  gustibus
non  disputandum  "  2  is  a  half-truth  ;  and  is  a  principle
which,  so  far  as  it  is  tenable  at  all,  extends,  as  we
have  just  seen,  to  cognition.  It  is  not  easy  to
remodel  the  framework  of  a  mind.  It  is  wiser  for

1  Mack, Freikeitstheoriecn, sect. 177. "Wir konnen nicht
nach Belieben werten,  sondern  nur  so  \vie  gemass  unserer  Natur
geschehen  muss."

2  In  fact,  nothing  is  more  open  to  controversy  than  matters  of
taste  ;  there  is  nothing  more  constantly  the  object  of  it,  and  nothing
in  which  education  and  argument  are  more  effective.


294  LOGICAL CRITERION  OF VALUE  LECT.

many  purposes not  to  attempt  it, but  to become
all  things  to  all  men.

value  ii.  Again,  emphasis  may  be  laid  on  the  distinction

Feeling;0 which  we  have  just  held  irrelevant,  the  distinction

criticised between  cognition,  and  feeling  or  desire. To  value

Feeling. .'a  thing,  it  may  be  said,  is  to  desire  it  or  to  find  it

!  pleasant,  or  at  least  to  think  of  it  as  possessing  the

; properties which would under certain conditions

excite  desire  or  produce  pleasure. All  this,  it  may

be  urged,  is  a  question  of  feeling,  not  of  reasoning.

Judgment  may  state  that  a  thing  pleases,  but  the

pleasure is  a  fact ;  and  reason, as Hume  will  tell

us, cannot  make  a  new fact. To  judge  a  thing

valuable  is  to  recognise  a  fact,  but  not  to  create  on^e.

The  valuation  is  antecedent  to  the  judgment.

And  here,  perhaps,  appeal  would  be  made  to  the
fact  that  the  discussion  is  about  ultimate  ends  or
values.  Admit  for  argument's  sake,  it  will  be  said,
that  we  can  by  critical  examination  modify  our
conception  of  what  things  or  characters  are  compre
hended  in  or  flow  from  the  ultimate  end,  still  the
valuation  of  something  as  ultimate  comes  first,  and
the  further  discrimination  of  what  its  nature  com
prehends,  rests  upon  and  presupposes  that  valuation.
The  fundamental  fact  is  that  I  care  for  some  sort  of
thing  ;  then  you  may  argue  upon  the  consequences
in  which  that  fact  involves  me.  But  you  cannot
by  argument  undo  my  first  sense  of  value,  nor  could
you  impart  it  if  I  did  not  possess  it.  If  there  was  no
feeling  there  could  be  no  value.

I  do  not  doubt  this  last  proposition,  but  it  belongs
to  a  very  dangerous  class  of  half-truths.1  "  If  no
knowledge,  then  no  truth."  "If  no  aesthetic  sense,

1  Bradley 's  Appearance,  p.  405.


viii  VALUE  HAS  ITS  REASONS  295

then  no  beauty."  But  so  far  we  have  only  sine
quibus  non,  and  the  simple  converses  of  these
judgments  (though  the  converse  is  not  commonly
held  to  be  implied  in  the  original),  may  be  quite
equally  true,  and  in  these  cases  unquestionably  are
so.  For  instance,  it  is  plain  that  if  there  were  no
values  there  could  be  no  feeling.  That  is  to  say,
unless  in  certain  experiences  our  being  was  re
spectively  less  or  more,  had  in  it  a  less  or  greater
reality  or  perfection,  there  could  be  no  cause  or
reason  for  the  immediate  sense  of  heightened  or
lowered  vitality.  Thus  no  inference  lies  from  this
connection  to  the  impossibility  of  arguing  relevantly
upon  the  conditions  of  the  higher  or  lower  perfection
and  on  their  presence  in  any  instance.1  We  are  not
bound  to  show  that  argument  can  de  facto  modify
the  feeling  of  value  in  a  concrete  case,  though  to
show  this  supports  the  view  that  argument  can  have
relevancy,  but  only  to  explain  the  relativity  of
feelings  of  value  to  a  standard  beyond  them,
e.g.  to  the  mind's  degrees  of  self-completeness  or
individuality.

But  as  a  matter  of  fact,  experience!  and  argument,
which  is  merely  a  mode  of  making  experience  tell,Jcan
modify  both  the  feeling  and  the  judgment  of  value,
just  as  much  and  in  the  same  way  as  they  can
modify  any  mood  or  attitude  of  mind,  cognitive  or
emotional.

The  whole  question  is  really  that  of  the  connection
between  mediate  and  immediate  experiences,  and
the  assertion  -that  no  argument  is  possible  about
judgments  of  ultimate  ends  rests  on  a  confusion,  and
a  mistake.  The  confusion  is  between  the  immediate

1 Bradley,  Appearance,  p.  406.


296  LOGICAL CRITERION  OF VALUE  LECT.

and  the  ultimate  ;  and  the  mistake  is  in  holding  the
immediate  to  be  above  or  below  critical  discussion,
an  idea  already  false  of  the  immediate,  and  more
over  transferred  by  confusion  to  the  ultimate,  of
which  it  is  much  more  false.

It  is  true  that  before  arguing  upon  questions  of
value,  we  must  have  immediate  experience  of  what
is  meant  by  caring  for  something.  We  must  have
the  judgment  that  something  can  be  cared  for,
before  we  can  develop  it  by  considering  what  must
be  cared  for  more  or  less ;  just  as  we  must  have  the
judgment  that  something  is  true  or  real,  before  we
can  develop  a  science  of  logic  or  metaphysic.  But
these  necessary  minima  of  experience  are  in  none  of
the  cases  ultimate  or  fundamental ;  they  are  merely
the  starting-points  from  which  experience  develops,
starting-points  of  which  the  typical  form  is  Hegel's
place  of  departure  in  the  idea  of  mere  being.  If  we
were  to  urge  that  worth  or  value  is  the  power  to
satisfy  an  idea,  and  that,  therefore,  the  content  of  the
idea  is  prior  to  the  conception  of  worth  or  value,  we
should  properly  be  answered  that  our  interest  in  the
content  of  an  idea  is  itself  what  is  meant  by  value,
and  that  this  only  shows  that  a  standard  of  value  is
prior  to  the  valuation  of  particular  things.  But
granting  the  answer  to  hold,  it  is  surely  plain  that
the  power  of  an  idea  to  interest  or  satisfy  us  is  not
merely  a  brute  fact,  but  a  matter  for  logical  estima
tion.1  The  ultimate  or  fundamental  interest  is
certainly  not  \heprimafacie  interest ;  and  in  general,
the  immediate  fact  of  interest,  which  gives  us  the
idea  of  valuing  or  caring  about  anything,  is  at  the
opposite  pole  of  experience  from  the  ultimate  or

1  Bradley's  Appearance,  p.  406.


VIII  VALUE  IS THE  POWER TO SATISFY  297

fundamental  interest  in  which  we  find  by  considera
tion  that  all  our  power  of  caring  would  be  adequately
occupied.

And  it  is  not  true  that  there  is  any  purely
immediate  experience.  Immediacy  is  merely  a  form
which  any  content  can  take,  and  which  is  peculiar  to
none.  It  is  not  true  that  any  form  of  liking,  valuing,
or  caring  is  unaffected  by  the  shaping  of  the
whole  of  life,  and  by  the  critical  reflection  which
shows  us  where  fulness  lies.  And  if  this  is  so  of
immediate  experience,  it  is  immensely  more  so  of
ultimate  experience.  There  may  be  some  justifica
tion  for  supposing  that  you  cannot  be  argued  into  or
out  of  a  simple  experience  of  pleasure — though  most
unquestionably  in  many  cases  you  can 1 — but  to
suggest  that  it  cannot  be  argued  and  explained  in
what  lies  the  power  of  objects  or  of  ideas  ultimately
to  satisfy  a  mind — in  which  power  lies  their  value
for  a  mind — seems  contrary  to  everyday  experience
as  well  as  to  the  whole  bearing  of  aesthetic,  ethic,
and  metaphysic.

In  case  the  above  criticism  should  be  based  on
some  misunderstanding  of  the  opinion  criticised,  I
will  repeat  in  a  positive  form  what  it  is  here  intended
to  maintain,  and  what  I  take  as  the  essential  mean
ing  of  the  view  -I  am  defending.

2.  It  is  admitted  then  (i.)  that  a  man's  judgment  An  iden-
is  his  judgment,  and  binds  him  till  he  has  altered  it  criterion
by  a  further  judgment  ;  and  (ii.)  that  before  you  can  formlof
argue  on  the  ultimate  end  or  worth  you  must  have  satlsfac-

'  tion.

1  I  repeat,  there  is  nothing  in  which  the  mind  responds  more
readily  to  teaching  and  criticism  than  in  questions  of  enjoyment.
Neglect  of  this  truth  is  one  of  the  signal  causes  of  bad  education.
To  learn  to  like  and  dislike  rightly  is  the  essence  of  education,  as
the  Greeks  maintained.


298  LOGICAL CRITERION  OF VALUE  LECT.

experience  of  what  it  is  to  seek  an  end  or  to  care
for  something  as  having  worth.  But  (iii.)  it  is  here
maintained  that  these  are  merely  the  relevant  cases
of  the  general  conditions  which  attend  development
of  all  experience  whatever,  cognitive  no  less  than
emotional  or  practical,  and  that  they  do  not  interfere
with  the  essential  nature  of  the  logical  process  from
the  minimum  to  the  maximum  of  experience.  Such
a  process  can  always  be  traced  within l  the  meaning
or  conditions  of  pleasure  or  satisfaction,  or  of  the
character  which  constitutes  an  end ;  and  the  degrees
of  this  meaning  or  character  can  be  exhibited  by
logical  argument,  and  can  to  a  great  extent  be
brought  home  and  enforced  by  reflection,  even  with
practical  results.  Every  one  must  know  that  it  is
sometimes  possible  to  tell  a  man,  "  Now  you  are  not
really  enjoying  yourself,"  and  for  him  to  admit  that
it  is  so,  and  to  change  his  conduct  in  consequence,
with  satisfactory  results.

I  repeat  that  before  we  can  dismiss  this  con
ception  of  an  identical  criterion  in  truth,  reality,  and
satisfaction  we  should  have  to  deal  with  the  whole
argument  by  which  Plato  leads  up  to  the  form  of
Good — or,  what  is  the  same  thing,  to  the  conception
of  a  perfection  of  positive  pleasure — and  with  the
substantially  similar  arguments  as  advanced  by
v/  Aristotle.  The  principle  of  these  arguments  in  a
wdrd  is  this,  that  positive  pleasure  and  all  satisfaction,
as  distinct  from  an  intensity  of  feeling  which  there
is  reason  to  suspect  of  being  illusory,  depends  ©n  the
character  of  logical  stability  of  the  whole  inherent  in
the  objects  of  desire,  and  that  what  in  this  sense  is
more  real,  that  is,  more  at  one  with  itself  and  the

1  Appearance^  I.e.


vin VALUATIONS CONFLICT WITH VALUES 299

whole  (e.g.  free  from  contradiction)  is  also  the  ex
perience  in  which  the  mind  obtains  the  more  durable
and  coherent  satisfaction,  and  more  completely
realises  itself.  This  consideration  prescribes  the
nature  of  the  ultimate  good  or  end,  which  is  the
supreme  standard  of  value,  and  cannot  itself  be
measured  by  anything  else.1  The  standard  is  positive
non-contradiction,  developed  through  comprehensive
ness  and  consistency.  3  And  by  this  standard  any
judgment  as  to  ultimate  end  or  value  can  be  criticised
or  estimated.

3. But, it may  be urged, the  facts  are  plainly  Ex^iana-

»r  .  .  ri • i  1*1*  tionofcon-

against  you. You  say  that  degrees  of  logical  stability,


of  perfection,  of  reality,  are  the  standard  by  which
satisfactoriness,  worth,  and  the  character  of  being
an  ultimate  end,  are  to  be  measured.  Now  it  is  Pation.

means,  and

notorious  that  interest  is  selective,  and  that  great  ends.
provinces  of  the  highest  and  most  perfect  experi
ence,  whether  cognitive,  practical,  or  aesthetic,
may  wholly  fail  to  have  value  for  the  majority  of
minds,  or  so  much  as  to  attract  their  attention.
And  if  everything  was  for  every  mind  as  in
different  as  every  experience  in  its  turn  is  for
some  mind  or  other,  then  value  would  be  word
without  a  meaning.  And,  therefore,  value  cannot
be  measured  by  metaphysical  perfection,  but  is  purely
relative  to  the  feeling  of  particular  sentient  beings.

This  is  an  argument  from  de  facto  impotence,  on
which  our  particularity,  though  not  our  individuality,
depends.  But  we  have  seen  that  the  nature  of
mind  contradicts  the  fact  of  its  impotence,  and  that
tt  always  is  more  than  it  is  aware  of  being.

1  Ar.  Ethics, 1101 b 10  on  ri/xia  and eVao/era and Kant  on
Wiirde  and  Preis.


300  LOGICAL  CRITERION  OF VALUE  LECT.

In  the  first  place,  then,  as  has  been  pointed  out
above,  the  total  absence  of  interest  is  incompatible
with  the  nature  of  finite  mind.  Such  mind  is
involved  and  entangled  in  the  world  of  experience,
and  its  degree  of  being  cannot  be  divorced  from  its
implication  in  the  world  of  which  it  is  a  member.
^  In  principle,  there  must  be  interest  and  value
1  where  there  is  a  mind  a  member  of  a  world.  The
partial  and  apparent  divorce  between  reality  and
value  cannot  be  pleaded  in  support  of  the  <:on-
ceivability  of  a  complete  one.

And  in  the  second  place  this  partial  divorce  itself
means  nothing  more  than  that  finite  minds  are  what
we  must  call  contingent,  in  their  degree  and  direction
of  development.  Their  interest,  like  their  know
ledge  and  action,  varies  and  stops  short  in  ways
which  in  detail  are  unaccountable,  but  which  in  general
we  can  see  very  well  to  be  merely  cases  of  their
powerlessness.  It  is  all-important,  however,  that  the
positive  argument  shows  no  signs  of  failure,  though
the  negative  corroboration  can  only  be  exhibited  in
,  part.  Where  we  have  interest,  and  so  far  as  we
\  have  it,  we  have  implication  in  reality;  where  we  have
more  stable  and  satisfactory  interest,  we  have  more
implication  in  reality.  It  is  true  that  where  more
implication  in  reality  seems  to  be  offered,  we  do  not
always  have  more  interest ;  it  is  obvious  that  our
participation  in  the  real  must  be  limited,  and  the
map  of  its  limitations  is  for  us  in  the  main  con
tingently  determined.  The  general  explanation  of
this  is  clear  ;  we  are  preoccupied  by  certain  interests,
whose  contents  are  not  such  as  readily  to  form  a
logical  whole  with  certain  others  ;  just  as  we  may
be  preoccupied  with  certain  theoretical  principles


vin  MERE  DE  FACTO VALUATIONS  DON'T  COUNT  301

which, as we  hold them, refuse to coalesce with
^provinces  of  knowledge  \v\\\ohprimafacie  lie  open
to  us.

But,  it  may  be  rejoined,  there  is  more  than  this.
Not  merely  different  minds  pursue  different  values,
but  a  given  mind  may  apprehend  and  be  familiar
with  an  object  or  activity  of  high  logical  perfection,
but  yet  be  relatively  or  completely  indifferent  to  it,
i.e.  refuse  to  assign  it  value.  The  answer  is
practically  the  same  ;  the  object  in  question  is  ex
cluded  by  its  nature  from  forming  a  whole  in  its  own
right  with  the  contents  which  have  preoccupied
the  mind  ;  but  it  is  pursued  and  receives  attention
in  virtue  of  some  interest  extraneous  to  it,  which  is
a  part  of  that  whole  of  contents,  as  a  man  learns
up  a  repulsive  subject  for  examination,  or  makes  a
living  by  work  that  he  detests.

It  has  been  said1  that  in  principle  every  man
loves  every  woman  ;  but  individuals  may  plead  in
excuse  non-acquaintance,  or  special  cause  of  dislike,
or  a  limited  capacity  of  affection  which  is  already
preoccupTecTr  There  is  a  truth  in  the  joke  ;  and  it
applies  more  seriously  to  the  individual's  love  of
perfection.

It  is  hard  to  know  how  far  this  discussion  needs
to  be  pursued.  If  we  abandon  the  doctrine  "  De
gustibus  non  disputandum  " — as  surely  every  serious
student  or  critic  does  abandon  it,  except  in_  the
sense  that  it  is  difficult  to  modify  habitual  likings—
the  view  we  are  disputing  seems  abandoned  along
with  it.

No  one  would  advance  the  de  facto  indifference
of  my  mind  or  of  his  own  as  an  argument  against

1  Oliver  Wendell  Holmes.


302


LOGICAL CRITERION  OF VALUE


LECT.


"All
values
relative  to
Persons  "
compared
with

"  nothing
has  value
but  con
scious
states  of
conscious
beings."
The  two
proposi
tions  may
be  sharply
opposed.


the  value  of  a  scientific  discovery  or  an  artistic
achievement  ;  and  every  objective  standard  of
worth  which  can  be  suggested  must  ultimately  be
reducible  to  degrees  of  perfection.

4.  It  would  throw  light  on  the  nature  of  value  if
we  consider  in  what  sense  the  proposition  is  to  be
understood  that  "  all  other  values  are  relative  to
values  for,  of,  or  in  a  person."1  Translated  into
the  statement  that  "  Nothing  has  value  except  the
conscious  states  of  conscious  beings  "  it  has  often
revealed  a  tendency  to  generate  corollaries  hostile
to  the  meaning  with  which  Green  or  Kant  affirmed
it.2  This  has  certainly  happened  in  so  far  as  it  has
been  pleaded  in  aid  of  Hedonism.3  And  another
interesting  application  of  it  has  been  made,  from  the
literal  statement  of  which  I  have  no  right  to  say
that  thinkers  of  Green's  type  are  bound  to  dissent,
but  which  appears  to  me  to  point  in  a  very  different
direction  from  what  is  most  characteristic  in  their
views.

The  doctrine  is  this  : 4  Nothing  has  value  but  the
conscious  states  of  conscious  beings  ;  and  the  value
of  the  universe  has  no  unity  but  that  of  a  sum  of
these  values  ;  more  obviously  so  if  the  universe  as  a
whole  is  not  a  conscious  being,  but  also  in  a  great
measure,  even  if  it  is.  For  still,  even  in  that  case,
the  values  of  the  conscious  states  of  finite  beings
are  addible  amounts,  to  be  counted  in  addition  to
that  of  the  universe  as  a  single  conscious  being.

1  Green,  Prolegomena,  sect.  184.

2  See  Kant  on  Kingdom  of  Ends,  and  cf.  his  distinction  between
Dignity  and  Value,  with  Aristotle's  (I.e.  supra]  between  ri/ua  and

€7TCUV€Ta.

3  Sidgwick,  Methods,  6th  ed.,  bk.  iii.  chap.  xiv.

4  McTaggart,  International  Journal  of  Ethics,  July,  1908.


vni PART-VALUES  PRIOR TO WHOLE OR V.V. 3*3

For  those  who  maintain  that  the  universe  as  a
whole  is  a  single  experience,  including  the  finite
beings  which  are  finite  centres  of  experience,  the
discussion  is  of  subordinate  importance  so  far  as
regards  the  unity  of  value.  But  even  for  them  it  is
still  worth  entering  upon,  both  for  the  subordinate
issue  as  to  value,  which  on  that  hypothesis  it  still
raises,  and  because  the  principle  underlying  it  has
an  important  bearing  on  the  cognate  question
whether  in  truth  the  universe  is  conscious  or  not.

To  begin  with,  if  we  are  speaking  of  all  conscious
states  of  all  conscious  beings,  including  all  that  is
demanded  for  their  completion,  and  all  possible
ways  of  their  being  or  coming  together,  it  would  be
true  that  within  this  totality  we  must  find  all  that  is
of  value.  And  this  will,  I  think,  be  agreed  to  by  all
who  accept  the  doctrine  above  referred  to  in  Green
and  Kant.  They  might  say  on  second  thoughts
that  the  word  "person,"  if  strictly  taken,  narrows
the  proposition  unduly.  But  all  would  admit  it,  I
believe,  if  for  persons  we  read  conscious  beings.

Does  this  take  us  at  once  to  the  doctrine  that  the
universe  has  no  value  but  the  sum  of  the  values  of
the  conscious  states  of  all  conscious  beings  ?  Not,
I  think,  in  the  natural  sense  of  the  latter,  and  in
the  sense  in  which  I  gather  it  to  have  been  pro
pounded.  I  take  its  point  to  be  that  the  part-values
are  primary,  prior  to  their  sum,  which  is  their  sum
and  nothing  more — is  determined  by  them,  and  is  in
no  sense  a  whole  or  standard  by  which  they  are
determined.  The  idea  that  the  whole  is  single  and
primary,  the  source  and  standard  of  value,  and  that
part-values  are  to  be  reckoned  as  determined  by  the
character  of  contributoriness  to  it,  is,  I  gather,


304  LOGICAL CRITERION  OF VALUE  LECT.

intended  to  be  rejected.  The  two  statements  might
be  read  as  having  much  in  common  ;  for,  it  might
be  urged,  according  to  both  views  the  parts  make
up  the  whole,  and  the  whole  is  made  up  of  the  parts;
so  what  can  be  the  ultimate  difference  between
them  ?  Yet  those  who  think  with  Green  or  (I  should
suppose)  with  Mr.  Bradley  would  probably  accept
the  first  doctrine  (see  p.  302),  but  not  the  second.
The  second  assumes  that  the  states  could  have  value
if  they  existed  alone,  and  if  they  were  in  all  respects,
and  were  rightly  considered  as,  states  external  to
one  another  and  without  implication  beyond  them
selves.  The  first  assigns  them  value  in  respect
of  what  they  imply,  and  of  their  not  being,  and
not  being  rightly  regarded  as,  states  external  to  one
another  or  to  what  they  imply.  The  point  is  a  little
difficult,  though  of  fundamental  importance.  If  we
assign  value  to  any  whole  as  a  unit,  it  may  be  urged
that  values  relative  to  this,  though  derivative  from
it,  must  in  some  sense  be  assignable  to  all  factors
which  are  in  any  way  involved  in  the  whole ;  but
then  any  such  assignment  does  not  imply  any  value
in  the  factors  taken  by  themselves.1  It  is  a  concep
tion  fundamentally  distinct  from  that  of  factors
which  have  a  value  as  such  and  per  se,  so  that  the
value  of  the  whole  can  be  conceived  as  a  sum  of
values  which  bona  fide  and  primarily  belong  to  the
factors  as  such.2  And  this  I  understand,  in  its
fullest  disintegrating  implication,  to  be  the  meaning
in  which  the  statement  has  been  advanced.

The  difficulty  which  this  doctrine  presents  may

1  I  am  glad  here  to  be  supported  by  Mr. Moore's  principle  of
organic  wholes,  Prindpia  Ethica,  p.  27  ff.

2  Mr.  Moore,  loc.  tit.,  denies  this  assumption  totidem  verbis  so
far  as  applied  to  "  organic  wholes."


vin  STATE OF  CONSCIOUSNESS  PER  SE?  305

be  stated  by  means  of  a  paradox.  ^  If  you  treat  a
state  of  consciousness  of  an  intelligent  finite  being
as  simply  a  state  of  consciousness,  you  treat  it  as
something  which  it  is  not.  Its  essence,  as  we  have
so  constantly  reiterated,  lies  outside  it.  „  Its  nature
is  to  be  a  perfect  world  ;  but  in  any  given  state  this
world  is  incomplete  though  implied.  And  the  state
of  consciousness  takes  its  value  from  the  object  and
the  individuality,  which  must  be  read  into  it  in
order  to  appreciate  it,  and  which  in  actual  experi-  .'
ence  are  never  wholly  disjoined  from  it.

We  will  pursue  this  line  of  thought,  and  finally
note  its  bearing  on  the  question  whether  the  universe
is  a  conscious  being.

i.1  There  is  a  familiar  argument  by  which con-  states  of
sciousness  is  distinguished  from  the  objective  rela-
tions  of  the  conscious  being,  such  as  those  implied


in  Truth, Beauty,  Virtue, Freedom. You  cannot,  objective

,  .  .  11  i • i i  world,  are

this  argument  maintains,  really  and  in  the  last  resort  meaning-

.  r  .......  .  less  and

—  i.e.  it  you  precisely  discriminate  what  you  are  valueless.
doing  —  justify  a  preference  for  a  state  of  conscious
ness  which  is  true,  or  virtuous,  or  has  beauty  present
to  it,  in  so  far  as  your  preference  is  influenced  by  a
care  for  these  characteristics  —  objective  relations  —
which  you  judge  to  attach  to  the  state  of  conscious
ness.  Your  judgment  of  such  relations,  it  is  urged,
is  liable  to  error.  Therefore,  in  formulating  a
preference  for  one  state  of  consciousness  over
another  you  cannot,  or  at  least  you  ought  not  to,
take  account  of  anything  but  the  state  of  conscious
ness  —  the  condition  of  the  mind  at  the  moment—
in  and  by  itself;  and  in  thus  taking  account  of  it
you  must  exclude  all  reference  to  the  fact  that  you

1 Cf.  Sidgwick,  Methods,  III.  xiv.  4.

X


306  LOGICAL CRITERION  OF VALUE  LECT.

hold  applicable  to  it  certain  predicates,  such  as  true,
good,  free,  aesthetically  right.  These  predicates
are  separable  ;  they  depend  on  objects  outside  the
mental  state  ;  they  do  not  lie  within  the  four  corners
of  the  mental  condition  itself.

If  I  understand  rightly,  what  we  have  in  the
view  I  am  discussing  is  this  familiar  argument,
modified  in  a  single  point.  The  character  of  the
universe,  by  which  in  objective  relation  to  the
mental  state  in  question  it  is  a  ground  of  the  truth
or  freedom  or  other  characteristic  ascribed  to  that
state,  is  not  here  ruled  out  of  consideration,  but  is
admitted  as  a  means  to  the  character  of  the  state  of
consciousness  itself,  which  alone  has  value.

But  this  will  not  suffice.  The  error  of  taking  a
state  of  consciousness  in  an  intelligent  being  as  in
its  nature  confined  to  itself  seems  to  be  fundamental.
You  cannot  dispose  of  its  object  as  a  mere  means  to
its  character,  [its  object  is  a  partial  apprehension
by  consciousness  of  its  own  nature  ;  it  is  a  world
continuous  with  but  extending  beyond  it ;  and  you
cannot  value  the  fragment  without  an  appreciation
of  the  whole.  1  Truth  of  a  thought  does  not  mean
that  a  mental  state  is  so,  and  that  an  object  separate
from  it  is  also  so.  This  may  be  the  case,  and  yet
the  thought  may  be  perfectly  false.1  Truth  of  a
thought  means,  surely,  that  the  thought  is  of  a
content  and  context  to  occupy  a  harmonious  place
in  the  whole  spiritual  structure  of  experience.  But
this  character  does  not  lie  within  the  mental  state,

1  This  is  so  in  the  case  of  a  "true"  conclusion  from  "false"
premisses.  Cf.  also  The  Cloister  and  the  Hearth,  chap.  xxvi.  :  "  His
sincere  desire  and  honest  endeavour  to  perjure  himself  were  baffled
by  a  circumstance  he  had  never  foreseen  nor  indeed  thought  possible.
He  had  spoken  the  truth."  See  author's  Logic,  2nd  ed.,  ii.  282.


vni STATES OF  CONSCIOUSNESS V. PERSONS 307

though  it  makes  a  great  difference  in  the  mental
state.  It  belongs  to  it  only  as  organised  within  the
whole,  according  to  the  contrast  which  was  drawn
above.1

In  a  word,  in  valuing  truth,  beauty,  virtue,  and
the  like,  we  are  valuing  spiritual  worlds,  at  once
objective  and  subjective,  and  essentially  continuous
with  greater  worlds.  Though  given  to  and  even  in
conscious  minds,  they  are  not  states  of  conscious
minds,  nor  is  it  clear,  without  special  examination  and
proof,  that  the  apparently  particular  consciousnesses
to  which  they  are  given  are  separable  existences
either  as  against  their  own  continuance  or  against
other  so-called  particular  beings.  We  may  refuse
to  call  such  particulars  individuals,  and  we  may
refuse  to  treat  the  true  whole  or  individual  as  a  sum
of  individuals.

So  much  with  regard  to  states  of  consciousness
taken  as  exclusive  of  the  objective  world.

ii. We  may  carry  the  argument  further  by  com-  YOU  cannot
paring  the  statement  which  places  value  in  states  of **


consciousness  as  such  with  that  which  at  first  we  sclousness

apart  from

set  beside  it,  which  places  value  solely  in  "  persons,"  individuals
or,  as  I  should  prefer  to  say,  in  individuality.  individual.

When  it  was  maintained  that  all  value  was  value
in  or  for  persons,  this  was  because  persons  meant  a
capacity  for  being  ends  or  worlds.  Nothing  else,  it
was  thought,  existed  in  its  own  right,  or  could  be  a
focus  or  centre  in  which  a  complex  of  being  could
come  together  as  fulfilling  a  plan.  But,  as  has  been

1  It  appears  to  me  an  important  concession  when  the  writer  says
that  the  self  in  a  conscious  state  need  not  know  the  value  of  its
state.  It  removes  the  valuation  of  the  state  from  immediate  feeling
or  judgment,  and  leaves  it  for  some  further  standard  —  what,  if  not
perfection  ?


3o8  LOGICAL CRITERION  OF VALUE  LECT.

pointed  out  with  reference  to  Bentham's  valuation
of  pleasurable  states,1  and  also 2  very  ably,  with
reference  to  the  analogy  between  the  egoist's  self,
which  he  respects,  and  the  moral  cosmos,  which  he
rejects,  it  is  quite  conceivable  that  in  attaching  value
to  the  state  of  consciousness  you  may  wholly  lose
the  reference  to  the  person,  the  unity,  the  idea  of
end  or  purpose  (i.e.  so  far  as  concerns  the  egoist,  he
might  as  well  deny  his  own  totality  as  that  of  the
cosmos).  And  this  is  prima  facie  the  essence  of
any  view  which  attaches  value,  not  to  persons  or
to  individuality,  but  to  states  of  mind.  It  is  as
drawn  out  above.  You  may  value  the  states  either
as  entities  per  se,  or  as  implying  a  personality  which
is  their  whole,  or  world,  or  end.  But  in  the  latter
case  you  are  not  valuing  them  per  se ;  and  you
could  not  value  them  as  you  do  without  compre
hending  the  personality  to  which  they  belong,  or
the  world  of  which  they  are  dependent  fragments.
The  argument  is  the  same,  or  stronger,  if  we  sub
stitute  individuality  for  personality,  to  avoid  the
narrower  implications  which  attach  to  the  term
person.  If  all  value  is  in  individuality,  then  we
must  start  from  the  fullest  experience  of  it  we  can
construct,  and  the  valuation  of  particular  states  of
consciousness  will  be  secondary  to  that  and  deriva
tive  from  it.

1  Green, Prolegomena, sect. 214$ "It is not every person,
according  to  (the  Benthamite  view),  but  every  pleasure,  that  is  of
value  in  itself."

2  Sidgwick,  Methods,  IV.  ii.  6th  ed.,  cf.  pp.  124  and  381. It  is
worth  noting  that  in  Studies  in  Hegelian  Dialectic,  sect. 156,  Mr.
McTaggart  sustains  the  ultimate  reality  of  separate  persons  against
that  of  particular  moments  of  time. But  if  these  latter  are  unreal,
the  states  of  consciousness  which  fill  them  must  be  also  in  the  same
degree  unreal.


viii  MUST  GIVE  CREDIT  FOR  FULL  IMPLICATION  309

The  argument  is  strengthened  for  those  who
hold  that  succession  in  time  is  only  an  appearance.
For  in  this  case  the  particular  state  of  consciousness
has  ultimately  no  separate  being,1  but  all  the  states,
as  Kant  said  of  the  infinite  moral  progression  qua
viewed  by  God,  are  ultimately  comprehended  in  a
similar  reality.  But  that  which  has  ultimately  no
distinguishable  being,  cannot  ultimately  have  a
distinct  valuation.

iii.  And  the  reversal  of  an  argument2  above  YOU  cannot
referred  to  carries  us  further  still.  If  a  man  denies
his  unity  with  others,  it  was  asked,  why  should  he
assume  his  unity  with^himself  ?  But,  again,  if  he
postulates  his  unity  with  himself,  how  can  he  deny
his  unity  with  the  further  stages  of  individuality  ?
There  seems  no  reason  for  drawing  a  line  at  which
the  continuity  is  to  break  off,  and  prima  facie  the
inference  is  to  a  unitary  perfection  lying  in  the
complete  individuality  of  the  universe  as  a  conscious
being,  which  is  the  ultimate  value  and  standard  of
value.  To  call  it  an  end  seems  as  dangerous  as  to
call  it  a  person  ;  but  to  regard  it  as  an  individual
whole  seems  no  more  than  is  inevitable.  This  con
sideration  travels  outside  the  subject  of  unity  of
value,  and  refers  to  unity  of  experience.  But  it  is
impossible  to  exclude  it  here,  because  it  is  one  of
the  consequences  which  show  what  slippery  ground
we  are  on  when  we  attempt  to  treat  a  state  of
consciousness  as  a  state  of  consciousness  and  no
more.

For  the  same  reason,  on  the  hypothesis  of  a
universe  conscious  as  a  whole,  the  separate  valua
tion  of  its  life  and  of  the  finite  lives  that  enter  into

1  Cf.  note  2,  previous  page.  2  Sidgwick,  loc.  tit.


3io  LOGICAL CRITERION  OF VALUE  LECT.

its  life  seems  inconceivable,  except  in  the  secondary

sense  admitted  above. The  finite  consciousness  is

finite  because it  stops  short and does not come

up  to  its  own  nature  ;  you  cannot  give  it  a  value

except  through and relatively  to its  own nature,

• which is the whole. You cannot  add  the  value

which  it  retains,  in  spite  of  its  shortcoming,  to  the

value  which  it  has  in  the  complete  being  which  it

implies. If  a  thing,  seen  as  you  see  it,  is  worth  two,

but  properly  seen  is  worth  ten,  you  cannot  add  the

two  to  the  ten  in  counting  its  full  value.

True  in  a iv. If,  indeed,  in  the  assertion  that  the  universe

universe  is is not  as  such  good  or  bad,  stress  is  laid  on  the

?«°g00d  - peculiarity  of  these  predicates  as  implying  a  quasi-

or  "bad";  mOral  estimate,  a  divorce  between  what  is  and  what

but  the

whole  is ought  to  be,  then  on  this  point  a  measure  of  agree-

alwaysthe  '  Tr i  •  •  i

unit  of  ment  is  possible.  If  the  universe  is  taken  to  be  a
perfect  conscious  being,  then,  judged  comparatively
to  its  members,  and  as  giving  and  being  the
standard,  it  is  relatively  good  and  the  fulfilment  of
all  ideas.  But  in  itself,  though  perfect,  it  is  not
good,  because  it  is  not  on  one  side  in  the  contrast  of
what  ought  to  be  with  that  which  is  not  what  it
ought  to  be,  but  is  in  process  of  becoming  so.  Good
and  bad  are  then  not  appropriate  expressions  by
which  to  raise  a  question  about  it,  but  if  it  is  raised,
the  universe  must  be  pronounced  good  as  opposed
to  bad.  It  is,  however,  though  in  the  above  sense
not  strictly  good — certainly  not  morally  good  in
the  ordinary  sense — yet  perfection  and  the  standard
of  all  goodness  and  value.  Strictly,  you  do  not  value
it  j1  you  value  all  else  by  it.  Its  value  is  the  unit,
and  all  other  values  must  be  adjusted  so  as  to

1 Cf.  Ar.  Ethics,  loc.  cit.


vin  THE STATE  AS ONE MIND  311

amount  to  it.  And  this  I  take  to  be  so  far  the
meaning  of  those  who  say  that  all  value  is  in  or  for
a  person,  just  as  it  is  the  meaning  of  those  who  take
all  value  to  be  ultimately  one  in  the  perfection  of
the  universe.  That  all  value  is  of  conscious  states
of  conscious  beings  as  such  would  then  be  just  the
opposite  of  this  contention.

v.  The  treatment  of  the  State  1  in  this  discussion  instance
is naturally analogous to the treatment of the  is
universe. And we may agree that here is an  T
experience  rightly  taken  as  typical of the higher
experiences. If  the  particular — the  individual  in  the  one  mind

— ,. — .  -111.  in  a

current  but  incorrect  sense — is  to  be  the  ultimate  number
unit  of  value  here,  he  will  have  to  be  accepted  as  °
such  throughout.  If  here  we  can  see  that  individu
ality  transcends  the  particular  given  consciousness,
we  shall  be  prepared  for  a  completer  transcendence
as  we  pass  to  fuller  experiences.  For  this  reason  it
seems  well  to  indicate  our  view  of  this  matter.  Is
the  value  of  a  State  in  the  full  sense  in  the  psychical
successions  forming  the  several  consciousnesses  of
the  conscious  beings  who  compose  it,  as  addible
amounts,  i.e.  starting  with  a  value  which  each  item
severally  possesses  per  se  ?

Our  argument  is  the  same  as  before  ;  in  fact,  in
our  previous  argument,  the  State,  with  other  high
experiences,  would  enter  into  the  sequence  at  the
point  where,  in  our  view,  the  values  of  successive
states  of  consciousness  must  be  referred  to  their

1  I  use  the  term  "  State  "  in  the  full  sense  of  what  it  means  as  a
living  whole,  not  the  mere  legal  and  political  fabric,  but  the  complex
of  lives  and  activities,  considered  as  the  body  of  which  that  is  the
framework.  "  Society  "  I  take  to  mean  the  same  body  as  the  State,
but  minus  the  attribute  of  exercising  what  is  in  the  last  resort
absolute  physical  compulsion.


312  LOGICAL CRITERION  OF VALUE  LECT.

"  unity  in  "  a  person  or  individual.  The  State,  for
us,  is  a  phase  of  individuality  which  belongs  to  the
process  towards  unity  at  a  point  far  short  of  its  com  -
pletion.  We  understand  and  accept  the  warning
that  there  can  be  no  value  in  anything  less  than  a
personal  consciousness,1  '/in  any  history  of  develop-
ment  of  mankind  as  distinct  from  the  persons  whose
experiences  constitute  that  history,  or  who  are
developed  in  that  development."

But  granted  that  nothing  has  value  which  is  not
in  some  sort  a  personal  consciousness,  the  question
is  not  settled  how  much  more  than  its  given  self  at
any  moment  such  a  consciousness  may  imply  as  the
unit  of  value  to  which  it  belongs.  And  first,  we
might  well  argue  as  in  effect  we  argued  above,
when  we  said  that  in  a  personal  consciousness  we
have  already  accepted  a  standard  that  goes  beyond
the  states  of  consciousness  of  a  conscious  being.  By
a  person,  or  a  being  partaking  in  individuality  (even
if  we  include  in  our  idea  animals  and  young  children),
we  presumably  mean  some  sort  of  a  whole  ;  and  the
states  of  consciousness  as  such  are  not  wholes.  But
further,  the  real  question  is  whether  two  or  more
so-called  persons  can  be  members  of  the  same  whole
or  unity  for  purposes  of  valuation.  Are  they  to
be  valued  as  given,  or  do  they,  by  forming  an
integral  part  of  greater  wholes,  acquire  a  value
completely  other  than  that  which  they  would  prima
facie  possess  ?  I  hold  it  at  this  point  as  was  indicated
above2  a  concession  of  enormous  importance  that
the  value  of  any  state  of  consciousness  is  said  not

1  Green, Prolegomena, sect. 184. I make a reservation on
behalf  of  the  lower  animals,  in  their  degree.

2  Page  307  note.


vin PLATO'S  QUESTION— IS  THE  CITY  HAPPY? 313


necessarily  to  be  known  to  its  subject  or  to  any
actual  judge.  This  seems  to  remove  all  compulsion
to  interpret  the  value  as  an  immediate  aspect  of  a
given  complex.  It  is  consistent  with  the  view  that
the  significance  and  implications  of  the  complex,
however  latent  and  remote  to  the  ordinary  spectator,
are  the  grounds  of  its  value.

Let  us  view  this  question  in  the  light  of  the
Greek  theory  of  society,  at  its  best.  Its  famous
paradox  runs  that  the  value  of  a  society  lies  in  its
happiness  as  a  whole  ; l  not  in  the  happiness  of  the
separate  individuals  who  compose  it.  That  is  to
say,  if  you  supposed  each  individual  to  have  the
happiness  which  an  observer,  looking  at  him  by
himself,  would  be  forced  to  assign  as  his  highest
happiness,  and  if  you  treated  the  happiness  of  the
community  as  the  aggregate  of  happinesses  assigned
by  such  a  set  of  judgments,  you  would  altogether
miss  the  nature  of  the  true  happiness  of  the  com
munity.  "  Happiness,"  I  take  it,  here  may  fairly
be  said  to  equal  valu,e,  i.e.  fe.lt  perfection.  This
you  could  only  obtain  by  first  judging  the  per
fection  of  a  society  as  a  unitary  body  of  experience
— because  it  is  in  this  alone  that  the  individual
conscious  being  is  all  he  can  be — and  then  adjusting
to  this  your  estimate  of  individual  perfection.

Of  course  to  value  the  individuals  apart  with  full
understanding  would  be  equal  to  valuing  them  as
fully  unified,  and  the  difference  of  the  points  of  view
would  vanish,  except  that  valuing  states  of  con
sciousness  as  such  could  not  properly  equal  valuing
unified  individuals.

1  Plato,  Rep.  iv.  init.  Mr.  McTaggart's  contention  might  have
arisen  as  a  direct  denial  of  the  contention  of  Plato  in  this  passage.


314  LOGICAL CRITERION  OF VALUE  LECT.

The  whole  view  rests  on  a  denial  of  the  position
that  "individuals"  are  a  mere  plurality,  such  as
cannot  be  unified  in  their  contributions  to  a  common
experience.  Take,  for  example,  the  theory  of  the
position  of  slaves  ;  which  applies  in  principle  to  all
imperfection  and  reciprocal  supplementation  of
consciousness  in  all  society  whatever.  The  point
amounts  to  this,  that  the  social  life  and  experience
is  that  of  pjie~mind  in  a  number  ofjaodies,  whose
consciousnesses,  formally  separate,  are  materially
identical  in  very  different  degrees.  In  value,  there
fore,  they  severally  take  on  the  character  of  that
to  which  they  are  instrumental,  in  as  far  as  each  of
them,  by  thought  and  loyalty  (not  merely  as  a
means),  transcends  its  immediate  self  and  is  ab
sorbed  in  the  total  result.  Thus  the  loyal  servant
of  the  statesman  or  scholar  takes  a  value  from  the
latter's  work — he  is  in  and  through  it  a  participant
in  the  perfection  of  the  whole,  just  as  the  entire
society  is  dignified  and  sanctified  by  the  knowledge
or  beneficence  or  religion  which  it  respects  and
makes  possible  ;  and  is  also,  of  course,  brutalised
and  degraded  by  the  sores  and  evils  within  it.
The  principle,  I  said,  is  universal.  That  it  does
not  excuse  the  special  incidents  of  slavery,  is  per
fectly  true  ;  but  its  importance,  first  pointed  out  by
Plato  and  Aristotle  in  respect  of  the  child  and  as
a  partial  theory  of  the  slave's  position  is  absolutely
fundamental  for  the  whole  social  experience.  The
life  of  any  fairly  harmonious  household  is  a  clear
example  of  what  I  mean.  It  is  possible  for  a  con
sciousness  to  have  its  end,  its  explanation  and  value,
in  what  it  shares  with  another  consciousness,  and
what  is  incompletely  present  in  itself  alone  ;  and,


vni HOW  MUCH  "INDIVIDUAL"  INCLUDES 315

ultimately,  all  finite  consciousnesses  have  it  so.
Not  only  the  so-called  lower  are  dignified  by  their
respect  for  a  dim  apprehension  of  the  achievements
of  the  "  higher."  The  "  higher  "  or  so-called  leading
minds  borrow  much  of  their  tincture  of  courage,  and
dutifulness,  and  self-denial,  from  their  felt  unity  with
the  lower.

God  uses  us  to  help  each  other  so,

Lending  our  minds  out.

All  this  is  involved  to  a  careful  reader  in  the  class-
system  of  Plato's  Republic ;  and  the  foundation  of
it  all  is  this,  that  no  phase  in  a  particular  conscious
ness  is  merely  a  phase  of  the  apparent  subject,  but
it  is  always  and  essentially  a  member  of  a  further
whole  of  experience,  which  passes  through  and
unites  the  states  of  many  consciousnesses,  but  is
not  exhausted  in  any,  nor  in  all  of  them,  as  states,
taken  together.1  It  is  true  that  my  state  of  mind
is  mine,  and  yours  is  yours ;  but  not  only  do  I
experience  in  mine  what  you  experience  in  yours—
that  would  be  consistent  with  the  total  independ
ence  of  the  two  minds — but  I  experience  it  differ
ently  from  you,  in  such  a  way  that  there  is  a
systematic  relation  between  the  two  contents  ex
perienced,  and  neither  is  intelligible  or  complete
without  the  other.  When  you  have  admitted  the
unity  of  the  person  with  himself,  it  is  impossible
to  stop  short  of  his  unity  with  others,  with  the
world,  and  with  the  universe  ;  and  jhe perfection
by  Which  he  is  to  be  valued  is  his  place  in  the
pr.rfection  of  these  greater  wholes.  The  principle  i
that  all  value  is  value  of  individual  experience  is
thus  absolutely  maintained ;  the  difference  is  in  v

1  Appearance  and  Reality p,  2nd  cd.,  p.  526.


316  LOGICAL CRITERION  OF VALUE  LECT.

what  we  call  individual  experience,  and  the  point
\y  of  departure  in  valuing  it.

In  all  finite  individuals  there  is  self-transcend
ence,  and  therefore  translocation  of  the  point  of
reference  in  valuing  ;  but  not  all  self-transcendence
isjyimarilvlsocial.  It  is  therefore  untrue  to  'say  that
u  all  good  as  such  is  social  good,  and  it  is  well  that
^-  this  common  incorrectness  should  have  challenged
criticism.  It  is  the  paradox  of  humanity  that  the
best  qualities  of  man  himself,  and  the  forms  of
experience  in  which  he  is  most  perfect,  are  not  at
first  sight  very  widely  distributed.  Art,  philosophy,
religion,  though  they  bear  to  society  the  relation
above  indicated,  are  not  immediately  concerned
with  the  promotion  of  social  relations,  and  are  not
specially  moulded  to  the  promotion  of  social  ends.
The  doctrine  which  we  have  been  opposing  is  prob
ably  a  reaction  against  the  exaggerated  claims  of
social  good  to  be  the  only  good,  but  it  seems  a
mistake  to  push  it  so  far  as  to  deny  that  the  State
is  a  name  for  a  special  form  of  self-transcendence,
in  which  individuality  strongly  anticipates  the  char
acter  of  its  perfection.

5.  Thus,  then,  we  admit  that  in  the  judgment
of  value  every  man  is  in  a  sense  infallible  for  him-

'  but  only  as  in  every  possible  judgment. We


can


their  fuii  j'agree that there must be experience of feeling

&


nature,  and

a  state  of before  the  judgment  of  value  can  be  reasoned  on  ;

conscious-  111  •  i "  r i  •  i

ness  has  -  and  that  the  unitary  value  of the universe  ought

r •  \  ---  '  ---  „  _,  __  ^  _  . —  -  -  —  O

.  not  properly  to  be  called  goodness  —  certainly  not
with  an  ethical  implication  —  but  should  be  thought
of  as  the  Completion  ofjndividuaHty,  or  as  perfec
tion.  And  we  understand  that  all  which  is  valuable
must  lie  within  the  whole,  of  conscious  ...exp_erjence,


viii LOGICAL  STANDARD^  STANDARD  OF  WHOLE  317

or  the  aggregate,  or  coming  together  in 'some  way
of  conscious  states  of  conscious  beings.  The  ques
tion  has  been  whether  the  judgment  of  value  can
be  logically  supported,  and  whether  the  whole  which
has  value  lies  in  the  sum  of  the  values  of  conscious
states  ;  understanding  that  the  states  are  taken  as
distinct  and  successive,  and  their  values  as  addible
quantities.  The  two  questions  appeared  to  be  akin;
because  what  is  logically  supported  must  involve
a  continuous  principle  as  opposed  to  a  collection  of
ultimates  ;  and  the  answer  to  both  seemed  to  be
that  before  you  can  judge  of  anything,  you  must  see
it  in  its  full  nature,  and  that  the  nature  of  any  con
scious  state  of  a  conscious  being  is  not  to  be  found
within  itsel£  unless,'-by  a  reference  to  the  whole,,  we
have  specially  taught  ourselves  to  find  it  there.
Therefore  we  adhere  to  Plato's  conclusion  that
objects  of  our  likings  possess  as  much  of  satis-
factoriness — which  we  identify  with  value — as  they
possess  of  reality  and  truefcess.  And  that  is  a
logical  standard,  and  a-  standard  involving  the
whole.


LECTURE IX


Our  view
inclusive —
Individual
ity  means
being  a
world  in
oneself
and  implies
a  special
kind  of
self-deter
mination.


FREEDOM AND INITIATIVE

i.  OUR  thesis  in  Lectures  III.,  IV.,  and  V.  was
what  in  old-fashioned  phrase  might  be  called  the
dependence  of  the  finite  individual  upon  the  external
or  mechanical  world.  It  was  what  an  enemy  might
set  down  as  something  akin  to  materialism  and  to
Naturalism.  The  fundamental  conviction  which  has
guided  our  discussion  has  been  that  the  truth,  or
the  real,  is  the  whole.  And  our  anxiety  has  been
lest  by  neglecting  any  factor,  by  committing  our-
selve.s  to  any  fundamental  antithesis,  we  should
ipso  facto  subordinate  mind  or  spirit  to  excluded
elements,  which,  so  far  as  excluded,  must  remain
both  hostile  and  superior.  Little  as  it  may  have
seemed  so,  therefore,  our  primary  object  and  ideal
has  been  that  of  freedom.  For  so  far  as  our  mind
or  spirit  attempts  to  draw  upon  itself,  in  the  narrower
sense — upon  an  innej^iejf^jcjo^  to

— so  far  we  are  convinced  it  dis


guises  and  mistakes  its  own  procedure,  and  converts
the  logic  of  the  self  into  fallacy  and  superstition.
We  have  been  eager,  at  the  risk  of  being  misunder
stood,  to  shake  off  all  bias^and  prejudice  against
speaaj_^brm^_pLap^ie5J^iiJC€,  except  in  so  far  as,
taken  in  isolation,  they  claim  an  unreal  predominance.

318


LECT.  ix ONLY  A WORLD CAN  BE  FREE  319

It  should  hardly  be  necessary  to  point  out  that
our  materialism  or  externalism  is  materialism  or
externalism  with  a  difference.  We  claim  it  as  the
fulness jjnd  thejyenujm^pnrp^rt  ^r^nrr^r^  idealism,
and  if  it  is  offered  in  a  shape  that  implies  a  reac
tionary  temper,  we  unhesitatingly  reject  it.  For
us,  the  true  j3£^cus_tl}xau£hQut  *s  lQgjcaj^gd  syn-
thetky  not_ca.usal  in  the  popular  sense  in  which
causation  is  analytic — a  repetition  of  undifferentiated
connexions.  "  Everything  is  what  it  is,  and  not
another  thing,"  so  far  as  this,  that  the  interdepend
ence  of  different  appearances  does  not  simply  reduce
one  of  them  into  another.  For  example,  it  is  plain ;
that  the  external  world  cannot  be  a  self-subsistent  \
entity.  But  it  is  one  thing  to  exhibit  it  as  the }
conrjjtiorL  and  the  complement  of  spiritual  being.
and  quite  another  thing  to  attempt _to_ reduce  Jt_to
mereJjTwardness,  to  subjective  or  psychical  imagery.
If  it  is  urged  that  indeed  everything  is  another  thing
or  more  than  one  other  thing  in  the  sense  that
appearances  are  transfigured  by  progressive  experi
ence,  this,  no  doubt,  is  a  fundamental  truth  ;  but
it  loses  all  sense  and  value  if  it  is  taken  to  suggest
that  differences  can  be  absorbed  without  bringing
anything  of  their  former  self  to  the  transfigured
whole.

Thus  our  type  of  Individuality  has  been  from  1
the  first  what  we  described  as  the^concrete-iiniversaL  I
or,  more  generally,  as^_^*ajdLi_j[Hix^  And  so

far  from  admitting  that  this  principle  makes  con
cessions  to  Determinism,  or  to  Materialism,  or  to
Naturalism,  in  a  sense  hostile  to  Idealism  or  to
spiritual  freedom,  our  contention  is  that  no  other
conception  offers  any  loophole  whatever  by  which


320  FREEDOM  AND  INITIATIVE  LECT.

5  Freedom  can  be  saved,  or  a  creative  constructive,
?  and  initiative  character  vindicated  for  the  self.

After  restating  summarily  the  essence  of  the
idea  in  question  we  will  go  on  to  justify  our  view
of  its  connection  with  Freedom.

The  essence  of  Individuality,  it  seemed  to  us,
was  to  be  a  worldjn  o_neself.  That  a  being,  which
has  this  character,  must,  moreover,  be  no  other
world  than  itself — that  the  individual,  so  far  as
individual,  is  unique  —  seemed  to  be  merely  a
corollary  from  the  ultimate  ideal  of  organisation.
Among  finite  beings  the  positive  character  of  origin
ality  is  but  little  impaired  by  de  facto  overlapping
or  recurrence.  It  lies  in  what  a  man  is,  not  in  what
he  is  not.

The  essence  of  individuality,  then,  is  to  be  a
world  in  oneself.  And  this  holds  good  in  its  degree
for  the  most  finite  "  individual."  In  him,  however
incompletely,  we  see  what  it  is  to  have  experience,
or,  in  the  most  general  sense  of  the  term,  to  be
conscious.  And  we  cannot  use  the  term  "being"  in
its  full  sense  of  anything  but  the  whole  of  a  con
sciousness  or  an  experience.  Whatever  else  is
(though  it  may  in  a  derivative  and  secondary  sense
possess  individuality,  like  a  mountain  or  tree,
assuming  them  to  have  no  degree  of  conscious
ness),  is  only  as  a  fragment  or  abstraction  within
these.  We  cannot  attach  any  meaning  to  it  except
as  some  portion  of  the  experienced  or  the  experi
encing,  or  both  in  an  undivided  moment.

This  is,  perhaps,  common  ground  to-day,  but  it

has a  corollary  which needs  to  be  insisted  upon.

I  The character of self- completeness, of being a

ll  cosmos, carries  with  it  its  OWTL  mode  of  self-deter-

w —  ~~~- "f  ^""" * *«• .^. .  '  ' -'>"-**" ,Ab,  4WMC&V*


ix  THE  SELF  IS  A CONTENT  321

ruination  and  initiative. It  is  impossible  to  consider
a being  as constituted by a  unity  in  diversity  of
content,  and  yet  to  suppose  that  the  nature  of  the
content  is  to  be  indifferent,  and  is  not  to  have  its
way in the responses and transformation of the
whole. It is  an  old  remark, but  a  true  one,  thati
our  fears  for  freedom  are  due  to  wanting  to  learn  {
to  swim  without  going  into  the  water,  or,  in  more*
serious  language,  to  a  lack  of  faith  in  the  Absolute.
We  desire  to  keep  our  individuality  unspotted  by\\
the  world,  unstained  by  the  content  of  life,  and  it
is  the  inevitable  result  that  we  are  driven  to  envisage
it  as  the  slave  of  circumstance. On  the  contrary,
the  conception^  of  consciousness  which is  _here  set
before  us  is,  in  jjgne  r  al  _ajid_j  n p  r  i  n  c  ipl  e  , that  of

> "come  alive" according to


certain  arrangements  by  means  of  which  the  Ab
solute  allows  minor  worlds,  formally  distinct,1  and
of  many  degrees  of  fulness,  to  constitute  its  union
with  externality,  which  union  is  itself.  The  over
whelming  impression  of  such  a  law  of  arrangements
subserving  life,  produced  by  the  general  survey  of
the  organic  world,  and  especially  of  the  animal
intelligence,  cannot  be  set  aside.  The  gradation
of  animal  minds  presents  an  insuperable  difficulty
to  all  theories  which  suggest  that  finite  conscious
nesses  are  correlative  each  to  each  with  persistent
and  self-subsistent  differentiations  of  the  Absolute.
It  is  far  more  natural  to  suppose,  what  the  plain
facts  seem  to  teach,  that  feelirg  pr  consciousness

anr| in_ rn fnr nc th^


by  content  to  he.  experience^  thenvaj^earanre.  being

-°£  tri  e


1  We  shall  recur  to  this  in  the  second  series.


322  FREEDOM  AND  INITIATIVE  LECT.

j^terjiaLeystem  which  in  innumerable  degrees  pave
the  way  for  the  growth  of  microcosms.  In  this
,  way  something  is  realised  not  unlike  what  is
demanded  by  monadism,  viz.  that  every  possible
'gradation  of  reality  must  be  occupied  ;  and  the
Absolute  is  enriched  by  experience  of  all  conceiv
able  grades  and  varieties  of  content.  However
this  may  be,  the  idea  illustrates  our  point  that  a
finite^  Individual  is  iri  essence  a  cosmos  „. wjhjch  is
a  portion  of  the  cosmos,  bringing  relatively  to
perfection  and  full  experience  that  which  in  and
through  the  correlated  externality,  the  Absolute  has
to  manifest  and  to  appropriate.

The  relative  lateness  and  artificiality  of  the  ego
or  self,  and  the  protracted  discipline  of  a  living  body
or  succession  of  bodies  which  it  presupposes,  make
for  the  same  conclusion.  The  objections  that  have
been  brought  against  the  idea  of  the  "eternal  self,"
though  as  objections  they  are,  in  my  view,  entirely
without  weight,  yet  serve  to  illustrate  the  p^int  at
issue.  In  a  word,  if  we  once  admit  the" provisional
reality  of  succession  in  time,  there  is  nothing  what
ever  to  be  gained  by  antedating  the  higher  appear
ances.  They  come,  we  must  believe,  when  their
conditions  are  present,  and  not  before.  The  self
is  experienced  when  a  persistent  mental  system  has
been  developed,  capable  of  opposition  to  a  not-self,
though  it  seems  strange  to  say  that  it  can  only  be
felt  in  as  far  as  such  an  opposition  takes  a  hostile
form.  We  might  say,  in  a  sense,  that  it  is  active
before  it  is  experienced,  in  the  de  facto  unity  of
feeling,  within  which  the  unity  of  consciousness
grows  up.  But  all  this  is  a  mere  distinction  of  dates
of  appearance.  It  is  one  thing,  as  Green  constantly


ix CONDUCT  FLOWS  FROM  CIRCUMSTANCE1? 323

reiterates,  to  say  how  we  reach  the  experience  of
the  eternal  self;  the  truth  that  we  possess  it  is  quite
another  thing.  There  is  no  doubt  a  perplexing  and
interesting  question,  why  the  animal  mind,  in  so
many  ways  continuous  with  the  human  mind,  should
seem  bound  to  arrest  its  development  at  a  compara
tively  early  stage.  It  would  be  much  easier  to
explain  a  more  complete  evolution.  As  it  is,  we
can  only  accept  the  fact,  but  it  cannot  be  a  motive
for  any  treatment  of  human  experience  which  is  not
necessary  per  se  to  deal  with  the  phenomena.  Mind,
we  repeat,  is  best  regarded  as  a  cosmos,  and  as
working  out  its  behaviour  by  the  logic  of  a
cosmos.

2. A  difficulty  is  raised  at  once  by  any  such  way  objection
of  presenting  the  facts,  which  may  be  considered  by
the  help  of  a  criticism  that  has  been  passed  upon
Green's  account  of  the  self-conscious  moral  agent.  differ-

°  entiatmg

Broadly  speaking,  it  comes  to  this. Self-conscious-  influence.

j.  5'  . . , We  hold

ness,  according  to  Green,  is  a  character  or  principle  the  self  to
which  is  the  same  for  all  and  in  all  moral  agents.1  inwardness
Between  such  individuals  there  is  no  difference  but
a  difference  of  content ;  for  the  self  which  experi
ences  as  well  as  that  which  is  experienced,  is  content.
Now  an  assignable  difference  of  content — even  of
character  or  of  disposition — goes  back  ultimately
to  data  and  environment,  including  bodily  inherit
ance  ;  it  may  be  called,  in  fact,  a  difference  of
circumstances.  This  being  so,  and  the  principle
of  self- consciousness  being  as  such  common  and
identical,  it  is  argued  that  the  differences  between

1  It  seems  clear  that  the  same  difficulty  might  be  raised  about  any
universal  principle,  e.g.  about Bergson's  "Life"  ;  and  the  solution  would
be  closely  analogous  to  that  which  will  be  offered  here  but  subject
to  the  limitation  of  the  principle  proposed.


324  FREEDOM  AND  INITIATIVE  LECT.

individuals  are  externally  accounted  for ;  the  self,
in  as  far  as  it  is  distinctive,  springs  from  circum
stance  and  not  from  its  own  initiative  ;  in  short,
what  determines  the  individual  to  be  such  as  he
is  comes  from  _wjtlipjjt  ajrid_jipt  from _jwithin,  from
1  surroundings,  in  the  wide  sense  explained  above,
and  not  from  self-consciousness.  And  therefore,
in  a  word,  determinism  triumphs ;  the  spiritual
principle  accounts  for  nothing  distinctive  ;  the  body
and  the  circumstances  make  the  man  what  he  is.1
The  criticism  is,  in  sum,  that  according  to  Green's
doctrine  the  difference  between  one  self  and  another
lies  simply  in  circumstances.  To  this  at  first  sight
the  rejoinder  is  obvious.  "  No,  not  in  circum
stances,  but  in  what  a  man  makes  of  his  circum
stances.  Different  minds  spring  from  practically
the  same  circumstances,  and  make  of  them  wholly
different  worlds."  We  shall  discuss  the  problem
of  character  and  circumstances  more  fully  in  a  later
Lecture.  But  it  certainly  seems  ,as  -if  against  a
resolute  antagonist  such  an  answer  would  not
entirely  hold  good.2  "  Of  course,"  he  would  reply,
"  things  look  like  that ;  but  the  appearance  can
only  be  superficial.  No  doubt  the  difference  of
minds  is  one  thing,  and  the  difference  of  immediate
externals  another  ;  but  the  difference  of  minds,  of
interests  and  capacities,  is  itself,  according  to  the
hypothesis,  dependent  up'on  circumstances,  and
cannot  be  taken  as  created  by  the  endowment

1  Sidgwick,  Green,  Spencer,  Martineau,  pp.  19-20.

2  Unless,  of  course,  one  were  prepared  to  suggest  that  each  soul
comes with  a character  previous to terrestrial  circumstances  and
independent  of  it. But  such  a  view  seems  superfluous  and  would
not  save  freedom. The  antecedent  character  thus  brought  down  from
heaven  would  itself  be  a  mere  circumstance.


ix  A DESCRIPTION  IS  NOT  A FACTOR  325

of self- consciousness, seeing that this is the
common  character  of  selves."

I Such  a"  thorough-going  deterministic  interpreta
tion1  cannot  be  met  by  any  compromise. It can
only be dealt with from a point of  .view  more
thorough  than  its  o,wn.

We  are  hopeful  that  such  a  point  of  view  is
involved  in  what  has  already  been  advanced.  We,
following  Green,  do  not  wish  or  need  to  exclude
"  circumstances "  from  the  determinant  and  dis
tinctive  features  of  the  self.  The  self,  on  the  one
hand,  bears  in  its  quality  and  content  the  banner  of
its  place  and  .time.  It  is  what  it  includes.  It  is
only  finite,  imperfect,  self-contradictory,  exclusive,
through  the  impotence  which  causes  it  to  include  so
little.  On  the  other  hand,  its  true  and  ultimate
nature  lies  outside  it,  in  the  whole  to  its  dependence
on  which  the  defects  of  its  impotence  bear  witness.
And  it  is  actually  through  the  impact  of  that  whole
in  various  forms,  in  all  that  we  mean  by  struggle
and  circumstance,  that  its  own  nature  is  being
progressively  communicated  to  it.  Therefore  it  is  a
mere  observation  ab  extra  to  remark  that  all  particu
lar  given  selves  bear  the  identical  feature  of  self-
consciousness,  which  is  in  other  words  a  conation
towards  the  unity  of  a  harmonious  cosmos,  or
towards  the  completed  system  of  an  eternal  self.
The  truth  of  this  abstract  generality  respecting
selves  as  such  in  no  way  tends  to  establish  an
abstract  character  for  the  partly  individualised  cona
tions  in  which  concrete  selves  consist.  The  striving
towards  unity  and  coherence  is  the  striving  of  the

1  Sidgwick,  of  course,  would  not  have  accepted  this view  ;  he
would  hold  it  to  be  a  reductio  ad  absurdum  of  Green's  position.


326  FREEDOM  AND  INITIATIVE  LECT.

self  as  a  living  system  of  content ;  and  the  fact  that
this  content  has  its  origin  "  without "  is  only  a
corollary  of  the  central  truth  that  every  self  is  a
special  ''within,"  and  deals  with  some  group  of
elements  of  that  world-life  in  which  all  experience

is  one.
f\

In  a  word,  then,  we  hold  that  no  ideal  of  freedom
lies  in  the  direction  of  isolating  the  self  from  the
world.  Freedom  lies  in  the  direction  towards  unity
and  coherence  ;  and  all  that  becomes  one  with  the
self  is  capable  of  contributing  (even  through
apparent  contradiction  and  the  effort  which  it  stimu
lates)  to  this  satisfaction  of  the  inherent  logical
tendency.

Therefore,  to  the  criticism,  "  Your  individual
conation  takes  its  line  not  from  a  self-conscious  entity
within  it,  but  from  outward  circumstance,  which  is
given  to  the  self,  and  not  created  by  it,"  we  reply,
"  That,  on  the  whole,  though  we  demur  to  the  last
five  words,1  is,  as  we  understand  the  matter,  what
the  self  is  there  for  and  consists  in — to  convert
externality  into  inwardness,  to  elicit  the  conation,
the  need  if  we  like,  or  if  we  like,  the  teaching,  which
underlies  the  circumstances  out  of  which  and  by
means  of  which  it  becomes  a  self.  It  is  the  work
ing,  the  *  logic,'  of  this  relative  totality  of  experience
thaj*  as  we  understand  the  matter,  constitutes  the
freedom  of  the  concrete  self;  which  thus  affirms
itself  as  a  part  of  the  eternal  deed  in  which  the
Absolute  sustains  its  living  whole  of  experience."
objection  /  3.  So  much,  then,  for  the  reduction  of  individu-
determina-/ality  to  difference  of  conditions.  But  the  critic  will
return  to  the  charge.  Granted  that  the  difference

1  See  sect.  3,  below.


tion.


ix  TOUT  EST  DONNE?  327

of origin between different individuals, together  Answered
with  the  fact  that  this  is  rooted'  in  the  world  beyond  tiono/
them,  is  no  impeachment  of  the  essential  individu-


ality  of  each  ;  still,  it  will  be  urged,  the  fact  remains  Losic-

' ^  carrying  its

that  it  all  comes  from  somewhere  ;  previously  exist-  past  in

.  its  present,

ing  circumstances,  united  in  a  centre  which  brings  as  in  Art.
no  new  positive  element  to  combine  with  them,  work
out  their  inevitable  resultant  in  combination  with
present  conditions.  It  makes  no  difference,  to  use
the  terms  of  Kant's  familiar  argument,  whether  the
sequence  is  physical  or  psychical  ;  the  essential
point,  is  predetermination,  the  power  of  a  past,  which
is  no  longer  a  present,  to  prescribe  what  the  present
is  to  be.1  Thus  we  seem  to  have  Determinism
intensified  into  fatalism  ;  and  the  action  of  an  indi
vidual,  and  indeed  the  history  of  the  world,  is
described  as  the  rattling  off  of  a  chain  of  results  ~)
inevitably  decreed.  "  Tout  est  donne."

It  seems  needless  to  insist  at  length  on  the  answer
to  this  difficulty,  as  it  emerges  from  a  consideration
of  the  relation  of  noumenon  and  phenomenon  in
Kant,  or  as  it  forms  the  essence  of  Green's  doctrine
of  the  eternal  self.

Those  who  are  prepared  to  deny  that  a  world  of
consciousness  carries  its  past  in  its  present,  and
that  the  logical  determination  of  the  outcome  of  such
a  present  world,  in  the  way  in  which  a  conclusion
comes  from  premisses,  is  essentially  different  from
determination  by  what  is  past  and  gone  in  the  way

1  It  must  be  noted  that,  metaphysically  speaking,  the  mere  state
ment  of  this  conception  amounts  to  a  contradiction  in  terms.  How
can  a  past,  which  is  past  and  no  more,  determine  a  present  which  is
present  and  no  more  ?  But  we  grant  that  in  physical  causation  the
underlying  unity,  which  is  certainly  presupposed,  does  not  operate  as
a  mind  operates.


328  FREEDOM  AND  INITIATIVE  LECT.

of  natural  causation  whether  physical  or  psychical,
will  not  be  affected  by  any  restatement  of  this  well-
known  argument  in  its  accustomed  form.  While  to
those  who  have  in  any  degree  grasped  the  way
of  working  of  a  living  mind  or  individual  cosmos —
the  relation  of  a  want  to  a  motive,  of  a  motive  to  a
volition,1  of  a  volition  to  the  structure  of  the  self,  it
would  be  wearisome  to  meet  with  a  reiteration  of  the
familiar  account.

But  an  attempt  may  be  made  to  present  what  is
ultimately  the  same  argument  in  a  more  aggressive
and  perhaps  more  universally  applicable  shape,
determined  by  the  recent  speculations  which  tend  to
exclude  logic  and  intelligence  from  life,  creation,  and
initiative — even  from  the  "  intuition"  permitted  to
philosophy,  which  ought,  surely,  to  stand  on  the
whole  to  ''intelligence"  as  Hegel's  Reason  to  his
Understanding.  It  has  been  said  above — and  the
assertion  may  have  excited  surprise — that  the  whole
recent  tendency  which  separates  imitation  and  in
vention,  repetition  and  creation,  fails  most  utterly
and  demonstrably  in  its  treatment  of  the  creative
imagination  of  art.2  But  the  truth  is  that  when  you
have  broken  in  two  the  indivisible  energy  of  reason,
and  assigned  one  part  of  it  to  likeness  and  the  other
to  difference,3  you  have  rendered  both  the  one  and
the  other  utterly  and  finally  impotent  and  incon
ceivable.  We  see  this  in  the  general  view  which
condemns  the  logical  intelligence  to  be  at  home

o  o

exclusively  in  spatial  considerations,  in  solids,  in
geometry,  and  to  be  repelled  as  by  a  foreign  element

1  See  e.g.  Green,  Prolegomena^  bks.  ii.  and  iii.  ;  Stout,  Manual
of  Psychology,  p.  583  ;  Mitchell,  Structure  and  Growth  of  the  Mind,
pp.  400  and  485.  2  See  p.  168  note.  3  Ib.


ix  CREATION  DE  NOVO  AN  ABSURDITY  329

when  it  comes  to  deal  with  life.  We  remember
that  a  truer  philosophy  has  suggested  that  so  far
from  finding  the  organism  unintelligible,  man's
reason  can,  strictly  speaking,  understand  nothing
else.1  And  we  recognise  in  the  account  of  artistic
creation  as  a  pure  incarnation  of  the  new  and
unaccountable  the  same  irrational  severance  of
identity  and  diversity  which  has  been  due,  through
out  the  tradition  in  question,  to  working  with  like
ness  and  unlikeness 2  instead  of  with  identity  and
difference.  What  the  theory  really  means  to  say  is
that  in  artistic  creation,  in  the  work  of  genius
and  imagination,  you  have  pure  difference  without
identity,  pure  novelty  issuing  from  no  determinate
connection,  pure  irrationality  and  unaccountableness.
The  work  of  art  cannot  be  predicted,  given  its
matter  and  its  author.  It  is,  in  a  word,  beyond  the
reason  and  the  intelligence,  as  life,  in  the  specula
tions,  we  are  referring  to,  is  beyond  logic.

This  is  a  less  trite  form  of  the  controversy  about
Freedom  than  that  which  deals  with  moral  volition
as  such.  But  it  is  thoroughly  relevant,  and  a
decision  in  this  court  will  carry  with  it  the  issue  in
all  others.

It is a common and natural notion that the

1  Caird,  Kant,  ii.  pp.  530,  535  ;  cf.  Bergson's  Evolution,  pp.  174-5,
and  on  Art,  *#.,  p.  368, "  cet  imprevisible  rien  qui  est  le  tout  de
Poeuvre  de  Part."

2  See  Lect.  I.  and  Lect.  II.  6. The  reason  why  likeness  and  unlike
ness  will  not  do  the  work  of  identity  and  difference,  and  why  their
adoption  always  leads  to  the  fallacy  signalised  in  the  text,  is  simply
that  likeness,  being  a  repeated  effect,  cannot  be  subserved  by  differ
ence  between  the  terms  alleged  to  be  like,  whereas  identity,  being  a
co-operative  universal,  is  best  subserved  by  difference. Likeness  leads
up  to  class  relations  ;  identity  to  organic  wholes. See  Lect.  I.  on  the
relation of  the abstract universal,  which  is  often  spoken of  as  a
resemblance,  to  the  concrete  universal  which  must  be  an  identity.


330  FREEDOM  AND  INITIATIVE  LECT.

creative  imagination  of  the  artist  is  a  faculty  of
origination  de  novo.  The  phrases  "  creative "  or
"  productive  "  exercise  in  themselves  a  certain  magic
over  our  minds ;  and  especially  in  elementary  stages
of  art,  and  in  early  phases  of  aesthetic  training,  the
imaginative  process  is  apt  to  be  opposed  to  logical
derivation  from  reality,  as  the  "ought,"  in  imperfect
moral  theory,  is  contrasted  with  the  "  is."
\/  This  tendency  is  supported,  when  we  come  to
theorise,  by  the  obvious  difference  between  a  work
of  art  and  a  calculation  or  an  abstract  argument.
In  the  former  not  only  can  another  person  not  follow
the  process  of  production,  but  the  artist  himself
would  be  apt  to  say,  though  by  no  means  always,  or
always  in  the  same  degree,1  that  he  did  not  know
how  it  came  to  him.  In  the  latter  case,  we  are  apt
to  say  roughly  that  the  production  is  common  form  ;
that  it  is  open  to  any  mind  which  will  give  the
requisite  labour  and  attention,  and  that  the  process
can  be  analysed  step  by  step.  Of  course,  if  we
pressed  it  home,  this  statement  would  soon  betray
serious  limitations  ;  there  is  genius  in  science  as  in
art,  though,  it  may  be,  less  definitely  specialised  and
directed  by  nature.  But  in  any  case  all  this  with
the  fullest  weight  that  can  be  given  it  amounts  to
very  little,  compared  with  the  thesis  to  which  it  is
supposed  to  be  relevant.

It  only  means  that  in  calculation  or  abstract
argument  we  are  dealing  with  relatively  simple  and
definite  matter,  which  is  fixed,  combined,  and  com
municated  with  comparative  ease.  In  it  we  are
only  reproducing  skeleton  elements  of  the  frame-

1  We  have  to  bear  in  mind  such  an  expression  as  Rossetti's  about
"  fundamental  brainwork."


ix  CONCRETE  MIND  ALWAYS CREATIVE 331

work  of  microcosms,  and  not  the  full  effect  of  their
concentred  contents  ;  and  it  is  not  surprising  that,
within  limits  which  are  narrower  than  we  are  apt  to
think,  one  mind  can  do  in  these  ways  much  the  same
as  another.  But  when  we  come  to  any  issue  in
which  the  whole  man  is  concerned  the  case  is  alto
gether  otherwise.  It  is  then  only  natural  and  to  be
expected  that  you  cannot  or  cannot  entirely  1  substi
tute  one  mind  for  another  ;  and  that  the  issue  of  one
world  of  content  is  not  to  be  matched  or  reproduced
by  that  of  other  such  worlds  whose  contents  ex
hypothesi  are  different.

This  is  all  that  the  appeal  to  impossibility  of
prediction  really  corroborates.  Prediction  means
doing  a  thing  before  it  is  done  ; 2  and  of  course  this
is  only  possible  when  the  conditions  are  such  as  can
with  certainty  be  determined,  and  can  be  assembled
in  completeness  at  our  pleasure.  But  in  anything
which  depends  on  the  entire  response  of  the  content
of  a  mind,  it  is  ridiculous  to  suggest  such  a  possi
bility,  except  in  so  far  as  a  mind  may  on  the  whole
and  in  the  main  fall  within  another  and  a  greater
mind,  or  perhaps  be  identified  with  it  so  that  the  one
may  be  in  some  degree  substituted  for  the  other.3
And  in  such  a  case  prediction  of  the  main  lines  of
action  or  thought  is  possible  and  frequently  actual.

Therefore,  the  alleged  impossibility  of  prediction
or  construction  of  a  work  of  art  by  other  than  the
author  adds  nothing  in  principle  to  the  argument

1  Cf.  Lect.  III.  above,  p.  in.

2  Cf.  Bergson,  Donnees,  p.  168  ;  cf.  p.  1 16  supra.

3  This  is  the  basis  of  the  acceptance  of  testimony  or  authority.
There  are  some  minds  we  can  treat  as our  own. See Bradley,
Presuppositions  of  Critical  History. All  spiritual  unity  depends  on
this. L.c.  supra.


332  FREEDOM  AND  INITIATIVE  LECT.

based  upon  the  obvious  contrast  between  such  a
work  and  calculation  or  abstract  demonstration.
And  this  argument  goes  only  to  the  difference  of
the  matter,  and  does  not  in  the  least  suggest  that
the  creative  nature  of  an  artistic  achievement  rests
on  a  fundamentally  different  principle  from  that
involved  in  all  advance  and  completion  effected  by
the  spirit  of  logic,  wJajcJiJjesJiL.the_,r.ontini]ity  o£,the
universal.  AlllogicaLprQcessJs  the  re-shaping  o£a
wodcLoLcon±£n±  byjts  owq  jmiyjejrsjilj^irJL  There
is  no  repetition — not  so  much  as  the  recurrent  appli
cation  of  a  word — which  is  devoid  of  this  creative
element ; l  and  in  creative  production  par  excellence
we  have  only  the  same  thing  at  its  fullest.

And  as  we  learn  to  deal  with  greater  shapes  of
art,  and  as  aesthetic  insight  and  experience  increase,
the  penetrative  imagination  reveals  itself  as  the
higher  form  of  the  creative.  And  we  feel  that  not
the  invention  of  novelty,  but  the  logic  which  lays
bare  the  heart  and  structure  of  things,  and  in  doing
so  purifies  and  intensifies  the  feeling  which  current
appearances  are  too  confused  and  contradictory  to
evoke,  is  the  true  secret  o£  art.  No  doubt  we  should
fail  to  predict  the  incarnation  which  a  painter's  or  a
poet's  thought  will  assume  ;  if  we  could  predict  it,  we
should  ourself  be  he.  But  this  is  not  because  we  are.
too  rational,  but  because  we  are  not  rational  enough.
The  "  fundamental  brainwork  "  is  lacking  to  us  ;  as
is  a  special  capacity  for  the  infinitely  delicate  logic  of
expression,  by  which  the  passionate  thought  already
in  itself  too  great  for  us,  is  embodied  in  a  million
ramifications  of  detail,  constituting  a  tissue  of  precise
determination  in  which  alone  the  thought  in  question

1  Cf.  author's  Logic,  2nd  ed,  vol.  ii.  p.  174  ff.


ix  ALL CREATION  IS  "UNCONSCIOUS"  333

with  its  passion  could  find  utterance — could  become
itself. If  we  say  that  the  process  is  not  rational,
because  it  is  largely  unconscious,  we  are  committing
a serious confusion. The process itself is an
intense  and  exquisitely  adjusted  and  organised  con
sciousness  to  a  great  extent  obviously  and  plainly
logical. But it is not, of  course, another and a
different  consciousness  watching  and  analysing  the
first  while  it  proceeds. And  in  this  sense,  we  are
apt  to  forget,  all  logical  process  without  exception
is  _uncanscious. You cannot make the working
function  of  a  syllogism  into  its  major  premiss  :  you
cannot  predict  its  conclusion  ab  extra  by  a  watching
and inactive consciousness. The spirit of logic,!
when  at  work,  deals  with  what  is  before  the  mind,>
and  reshapes  it ;  but  it  is  not  itself  a  part  of  what  is
before  the  mind. And  in  this,  though remote in
degree, it shows its kinship with the creative
imagination  which  at  its  best  and  greatest,  as  we
have  urged,  turns  markedly  towards  the  penetrative.
If  it  is  "creative,"  it  is  so  because  profound  pene-,
tration  reveals  positive  treasures  beyond  the  scope]
of  the  average  mind  ;  not  because  it  deviates  into  ^
paths  of  arbitrary  fantasy.1 In  short,  then,  all  logical'
activity  is  a  world  of  content  reshaping  itself  by  its
own  spirit  and  laws  in  presence  of  new  suggestions  ;  a
syllogism  is  in  principle  nothing  less,  and  a  Parthenon
or  "  Paradise  Lost"  is  in  principle  nothing  more.2

1  Here I  sympathise  with Professor  Stout's  view  of  possibility
as  something  discovered  within  reality.

2  No  one,  so far  as my  knowledge  goes,  has  ever  raised  the
question  whether  the  future  course  of  exact  science, say,  of  pure
mathematics,  is  predictable,  and  if  not,  why  not  ? The  best  answer,  as
always,  is  the  affirmative,  plus  conditions. It  is  predictable,  of  course,
in  so  far  as  you  are  at  the  point  of  growth  and  adequately  gifted,  but
only  in  so  far. Prediction  is  pre-doing,  and  passes  into  doing.


334  FREEDOM  AND  INITIATIVE  LECT.

Now  this  is  the  nature  and  type  of  originality
and  initiative  which  the  whole  of  our  argument  is
directed  to  vindicate  for  our  conative  development,
^whether  practical  or  intellectual.  Our  actions  and

iH^5_isgil£_J£QID-jQnr  wnrlH  ^jajVT>jTHllsion  :fc2rnJtS

premisses,  or.  as~a  poem  from  its  author's  spirit.  Do
we  demand  any  more  complete  originality  and
initiative  ?  Is  it  urged  that  our  ordinary  life-progress
through  moral  volition  ought  to  exhibit  a  creative-
ness  and  a  novelty  of  departure  to  which  King  Lear
or  the  Sistine  Madonna  could  present  not  the  faintest
approximation  nor  analogy,  and  which,  if  per  impos-
sibile  it  could  be  imputed  to  them,  would  tear  up  by
the  roots  their  significance  and  their  human  interest  ?
For  when  we  say  "  continuity,"  we  say  ". logic  ";  and
if  we  deny  and  remove  the  latter,  we  make  a  cut  in
the  universal,  and  sever  the  issuing  production  from
its  roots  in  human  nature.  It  is  true  that  art  is  not
governed  by  the  purpose  or  interest  of  producing  a
total  representation  of  the  actual  world,  but  has  an
autonomous  growth  and  interest  of  its  own.  But
still  the  main  principle  holds  good.  In  that  which
we  hold  the  freest  creation,  the  unchallenged  domain  \
of  productive  originality,  there  is  nothing  which  is
not  one  in  nature  with  the  remoulding  of  a  cosmos
by  its  own  yearning  for  totality,  that  synthetic
vitality  of  the  logical  spirit  which  Mephistopheles  as
the  genius  of  modern  thought *  desiderated,  and
which  the  Middle  Age  at  its  best  had  already
symbolised  by  the  growth  of  the  leafy  spray.2

This,  then,  the  creative  freedom  of  art,  is  what

1  Kuno  Fischer's  Goethe's  Faust,  ii.  205  ff.

2  Type  of  the  Syllogism  ;  see  what  Ruskin  has  called  the  Strait
Gate  in  the  Spanish  Chapel  at  Sta.  Maria  Novella,  in  Florence.


ix  GREATEST  ART,  DEEPEST  LOGIC  335

we  offer  as  the  type  of  the  characteristic  logic  or
movement  of  the  self.  I  do  not  see  how  an  initiative
or  originality  more  complete  than  this  can  be  con
ceived  or  desired,  or  can  be  consistent  with  a  self
that  is  anything  at  all.  Life — to  which  we  are  so
often  referred  as  the  true  continuity  or  active  duration
— is  nothing  in  the  world  but  a  lower  phase  of  an
analogous  logi^,  related  to  human  activity  as  a
hill  or  cloud  to  a  Turner  sketch  of  it,  or  as  a  bird's
song  to  the  Iliad.  What  we  are  here  offered  is  a
share  in  the  eternal  deed  which  constitutes  reality  ;
and  I  am  unable  to  see  what  more  than  this  our
largest  wishes  can  demand.

A  self,  then,  appears  to  us  as  the  active  form  of
totality,  realising  itself  in  a  certain  mass  of  experi
ence,  as  a  striving  towards  unity  and  coherence.!
Its  se  1  f ^djetermj n atjon  is  that  of  a  logical  world,
ultimately,  in  the  general  type,  one  with  the  relation
of  a  conclusion  to  premisses,  by  which  a  new  and
transfigured  whole  emerges  from  a  mass  of  data
which  in  one  sense  contains  it,  but  which  in  another
sense  it  transcends.  The  nature  which  we  have
claimed  for  it  is  more  easily  identifiable  as  we  appeal
to  the  completest  and  most  triumphant  achievements
of  art  and  poetry.  For  the  leaps  and  eccentricities
of  a  purely  freakish  fancy  are  from  a  logical  point
of  view  simply  possibilities  predicated  of  reality
under  an  exceptional  amount  of  tacit  reservation,  all
of  which  is  formally  a  breach  of  logical  continuity  ;
while  by  the  creations  of  the  greatest  art  the  possi
bilities  of  man  and  nature  are  rather  intensified  and
expanded  than  wiredrawn  into  decorative  ramifica
tions  ;  and  the  logical  continuity  is  therefore  apt  to
be  deeper  and  more  thorough,  not  more  fragile  and


336  FREEDOM  AND  INITIATIVE  LECT.

attenuated,  than  that  which  passes  current  in  ordinary
life.  To  stigmatise  an  initiative  of  this  kind  as  the
rattling  off  of  a  preformed  chain  is  simply  to  reject
the  continuity  which  makes  life  interesting.  If  we
want  a  creativeness  more  free  than  this,  we  shall
find  no  analogy  for  it  in  the  processes  by  which
anything  worth  having  is  produced  in  the  field  of
knowledge,  of  practice,  or  of  art.  This,  then,  is  our
!  conception  of  a  self,  of  "  what  it  is  to  be  a  self,"  and
j  of  "  what  it  is  to  be  "  free  or  self-determined.

pifficuitiesx 4. Two  special  questions  may  be  considered  in

emptiness illustration  of  the  above  point  of  view,  and  the  most

ks-snesT" prominent  difficulties  of  grasping  it.

ofself'  a.  The  emptiness  of  self-consciousness  or  of  the

conscious
ness, its bare  subject-object relation,  as  implied in  Green's

is  its idealism,  has  already  been  referred  to,  and  will  be

tiaiityP°U  l more  fully dwelt  upon in a later  lecture  as the

secret  of  the  power  of  the  self. But  in  the  present

^context  a  few  words  of  explanation  seems  desirable.

r  The  general statement  that x  self- consciousness  or

1  self-objectification is the principle  of  the self ,  is

\  plainly  an  empty  and abstract  statement. And  in

•'this  sense  the  conception  which  it  describes  is  also

an  empty  conception  ;  that  is  to  say,  there  is  nothing

within  the  four  corners  of  the  statement  to  identify

the  characteristic  there  referred  to  with  any  special

interest  or  content.

All  this  is  true.  It  follows  inevitably  from  the
character  manifested  in  self -consciousness  as  the
principle  of  the  whole.1  It  is  inconceivable  that  the
principle  of  the  whole  should  be  occupied  ab  initio

1  Green, Prolegomena, sect. 81, cites De anima, 429 a 19
dvdyKt]  apa d/uyrj  eivcu  TOV  vovv  KT\.  ;  cf.  ib.  431 b  21 •»?
ovra  TTWS  tern


ix  SELF-CONSCIOUSNESS  OMNIPOTENTIAL 337

by  a  determinate  partial  content. If  we  ask,  is  the
mind  or  self-consciousness indifferent, divorced  in
its  nature from any  and every  content, like  pure
water  which  has  no  taste,1  the  only  proper  answer
is  that  its  rpnt^rit  i^J;hp  AJ22£J^Lpi  even  if  in  attain
ing  the  Absolute its own special form has  to  be
surrendered. And  again,  if  we  ask,  is  it  no  more
proper  to  one  partial  content  than  to  another,  then
the  answer  is,  "Certainly  it  is  always  more  proper
to that content which compared with another
approaches more nearly to the character of the
Absolute." But  if  we  are  asking,  "  Does  the  bare
fact  that  I  am  a  self-consciousness  bind  me  a  priori
to  a  determinate  form  of  life,  habit,  or  character  ?  "
the  question  is  plainly  absurd. The  power  of  self-,
consciousness  is  to  make  a  self  out  of  circumstances^
a n djtQ  do_this1_jf_we  were,  so  to  speak,,  circurnstanti-j
ajjy  determinate  antecedently,  to  circumstance,  would^
be an impQ§§[fr|lity. We must understand that
everything comes from somewhere,  and that the
meaning of  self-consciousness, the active form  of
totality,  is  to  give  everything  its  character,  to  be
the  centre  in  which  everything  in  its  degree  tells  on
the  import  of  the  whole. The  emptiness  of  self-
consciousness  as  such  is  an  inevitable  condition  of
its  fulness  in  actual  individuals. Any  experiences
which fulfil certain very general conditions will
suffice  to  constitute  a  self-consciousness. And  it
seems  to  be  imagined  that  this  truth  in  some  way
impeaches  or  impedes  the  value  and  significance  of
self-consciousness. But  if  self-consciousness is, I
do  not  say  the  ultimate  form  of  experience,  but  the

1  A  comparison  which  we  should  probably  hold  erroneous,  applied
by  Winckelmann  to  the  character  of  perfect  beauty.

Z


338  FREEDOM  AND  INITIATIVE  LECT.

highest  and  most  significant  of  its  finite  shapes,  what

other  law  or  condition  of  its  being  could  we  have

hoped  for  or  anticipated  ? Such  phenomena  as  are

recorded  in  the  "  Dissociation  of  a  Personality  "  only

confirm the  general  conception  of  a  self  and  the

conditions  of  its  stability,1  which  we  ought  to  have

gathered  from  such  thinkers as  Plato  and  Hegel.

(  The  keynote  is  throughout  that  a  true  self  is  some-

)  thing  to  be  made,  and  won, to  be  held  together

I  with  pains  and  labour,  not  something  given  to  be

\enjoyed.

its  time-  p.  The  timelessness  or  eternity  which  the  same

is  its Idealism  ascribes  to  the  fundamental  self  has  also


a  source  of  difficulty.  But  really  the  matter
seems  very  simple.  Time  itself,  as  we  all  know
to-day,  is  a  hybrid  experience.  Succession  does  not
suffice  to  constitute  it  ;  and  in  the  same  way  and
for  the  same  reason  succession  does  not  suffice  to
constitute  a  self.  All  this  is  familiar  ground  ;  and
the  only  point  of  difference  arises  in  the  interpreta
tion  of  that  continuity  of  content  which  is  admittedly
necessary  to  the  experience  of  duration  throughout
a  succession.  The  interpretation  assumes  different
shapes  according  to  ultimate  metaphysical  theory  ;
and  those  who  take  the  element  of  succession  in
time  to  be  ultimately  a  mere  appearance,  incapable
of  maintaining  itself  in  a  perfect  experience,  will
hold  different  language  as  regards  the  common  facts
of  duration  from  those  who  take  succession  and
continuity  to  be  two  inseparable  factors  of  a  reality
which  is  fundamentally  temporal.  The  former  will

1  This  actual  word,  fundamental  in  the  Platonic  theory  of  mental
being,  constantly,  recurs  in  this  recent  €tudy  of  the  life-history  of  a
self,  as  indicating  the  high-water  mark  of  its  unification  of  content.


ix TIMELESSNESS  OF  THE  FINITE  IS"  DUR&E" 339

speak  of  the  self,  in  proportion  as  it  assumes  the
nature  of  a  whole  present  to  itself,  and  further
implies  a  continuity,  limited  only  by  de  facto  impot
ence,  with  the  whole  content  of  the  universe,  as
approximating  to  the  nature  of  eternity  or  non-
temporal  being,  which  they  hold  to  be  the  ultimate
nature  of  the  experience  which  alone  is  true  reality.
The  latter  will  treat  the  experience  of  system  and
continuity  in  the  self  as  merely  a  side  of  the  real,
which  can  never  be  shown  capable  of  wholly  defeat
ing  or  including  the  aspect  of  successiveness.  But
when  the  hybrid  or  at  least  the  dual  nature  of  time
(and,  we  may  add,  of  space)  is  thoroughly  admitted,
the  actual  facts  as  to  the  nature  of  the  finite  self  are
no  longer  in  dispute,  and  the  question,  so  far  as  it  con
cerns  such  a  self,  becomes  one  of  words.  "  Duree,"
the  operative  concentration  of  the  self's  past  history
at  the  growing  point  of  the  present,  is  one  with  the
relative  timelessness  of  a  finite  self.  If,  then,  it  is
admitted  that  timelessness  is  an  essential  constituent
of  time — and  this  much  will  hardly  be  denied  to-day
—then  to  say  of  any  finite  being  that  it  is  temporal
(has  or  is  "  duree ")  includes,  strictly  speaking,  all
that  can  be  demanded  for  the  description  of  such  a
self  by  the  theory  which  takes  eternity  to  be  its  full
and  perfect  character.  For  that  the  finite  has  an
aspect  of  succession — that  qua  finite  it  is  not  "  all
there"-— this  again  is  what  no  one  could  dream  of
denying.  The  point  at  which  the  theory  of  the
eternal  self  continues  to  part  company  from  its  critics
lies  in  the  emphasis  which  it  will  attach  to  the
differential  degrees  in  which  the  feature  of  externality
and  successiveness — of  determination  by  space  and
time — accompanies  the  degrees  of  completeness  and


340  FREEDOM  AND  INITIATIVE  LECT.

stability  attained  to  by  the  self,  and  its  recognition
that  its  true  being  lies  beyond  its  fullest  actual
realisation.  The  distinctive  being  of  the  self  is
inversely  as  its  dependence  on  externality  and
successiveness.

Logic  is  5.  The  crucial  point,  then,  which  separates  deter-

deter-  minateness  from  determinism  is  the  distinction
Fatalism  between'' logic  and  fatality/  By  logic,  we  understand,
minisT^  ^with  Plato  and  Hegel,  the  supreme  JaaaLXuijialure  of
imperfect  experience,  the  impulse  towards  unity  and  coherence

deter-  -C— » ^  mi iiMnrfir tun  «•  r  Jr  r-

mination.  (the  positive  spirit  of  non-contradiction)  by  which
every  fragment  yearns  towards  the  whole  to  which
it  belongs,1  and  every  self  to  its  completion  in  the
/  Absolute,  and  of  which  the  Absolute  itself  is  at  once
(^an  incarnation  and  a  satisfaction.  The  attempt,
which  bulks  large  in  recent  controversy,  to  identify
this  principle  with  one  of  its  cases,  has  really  no
significance  beyond  that  of  a  relative  emphasis  which
arises  in  the  applications  of  daily  life.  It  is  an
obvious  though  very  important  truth  that  the  higher
moods  or  attainments  are  the  more  concrete  and  the
more  inclusive  ;  and  that  in  dropping  to  less  arduous
and  intense  experiences  we  become  restricted  to
more  limited  and  specialised  attitudes.  This
principle,  as  we  argued  above,2  is  the  key  to  the
relation  between  our  commoner  experiences  and  the
Absolute ;  and  we  have  an  everyday  instance  of
it  when  in  the  succession  of  our  average  moods

1  opeyerai, Phaedo, 75  B,  of  a  fragmentary  perception,  such  as
that  of  a  pair  of  terms  which  suggest  what  they  fail  to  realise. I  am
convinced  Plato  meant  this  much  more  literally  than  we  take  it. It
is  an  experience  which  clamours  for  completion.

2  See  p.  274  ff.  above. M.  Arnold  gives  us  the  principle  in  an
everyday  shape —

"  But  tasks  in  hours  of  insight  will'd
Can  be  through  hours  of  gloom  fulfilPd."


ix FATALITY  =  IMPERFECT  DETERMINATION 341

intellectual  work  is  dissociated  from  practical  self-
assertion,  and  both  from  love  and  adoration.  But
none  the  less  it  is  the  strict  and  fundamental  truth
tha£  love*s  the  mainspring  of  logic,  and  that  practice,
if  the  term  has  a  distinctive  sense  at  all,  is  a  sub
ordinate  feature  of  its  movement.

Fatality  would  be  the  opposite  of  this  ;  it  would
be  a  movement,  a  succession,  without  love  or  logic,
and  with  moments  external  to  each  other,  such  as
we  seem  to  ourselves  to  detect  in  the  unconscious
processes  of  what  we  call  physical  nature.  "  It
takes  all  sorts  to  make  a  world  "  ;  and  a  true  theory
of  appearances  will  leave  room  for  externality  not
as  a  self-subsistent  real,  but  as  representing  an
element  of  dissociation  essential  to  the  order  and
emphasis  qf  the^  whole.  It  is  only  when  we  come
to  treat  it^as  subsistent  in  its  own  right,  and  to  erect
it  into  the  type  by  which  conscious  experience  is  to
be  construed,  that  it  assumes  the  menacing  form  of
fatalism  or  determinism.1  It  is  really,  as  compared
with  logical  determinateness,  an  imrjgrfect,  relative,
and  indeterminate  form  of  connection.  It  involves
the  paradox  of  a  universal  or  continuity,  which
operates  without  possessing  any  being  in  its  own
right  and  form.  According  to  an  old  comparison,
it  is  like  the  reaction  of  an  intelligent  body  in  its
sleep,  or,  in  more  modern  language,  like  the  effects
of  a  split-off  consciousness  as  they  appear  within
the  self  from  which  it  is  split  off.  Now  what  all
this  means,  for  our  present  point  of  view,  is  that
^externality  or  rjhysical  detemi^nation  is  imfe£lfectly.
Hfjprmlnatg.  It  is  sensitive,  to  use  a  metaphor,
only  to  certain  factors  of  a  situation.  It  is  not  the

1  See  McTaggart,  Commentary,  sect.  185.


342  FREEDOM  AND  INITIATIVE  LECT.

awareness  of  a  whole  reshaping  itself  according  to
the  full  significance  of  the  constituent  contents.  We
must  learn,  if  we  wish  to  understand  the  relation
justly,  to  think  of  physical  causation  not  as  the  type
of  perfect  complex  determinateness,  against  which
spiritual  freedom  shows  as  the  responsiveness  of  a
simple  self-centred  creature,  the  direct  guiding
reaction  of  a  purely  unitary  being  ;  we  must  rather
compare  the  two  as  a  region  of  abstract  and  external
contexts  and  responses  between  unawakened  beings,
contrasted  with  a  living  and  concrete  world  of
appreciation,  in  which  the  whole  quality  of  every
element  is  capable  in  principle l  of  bearing  upon  and
responding  to  the  whole  quality  of  every  other.

Therefore  it  must  be  observed,  in  concluding  this
consideration  of  freedom,  that  determinateness  and
determinism  are  in  principle  opposed.  Determin
ateness  must  be  fullest  in  the  Absolute  and  in  God.
And  in  all  experience  the  plain  tendency  is  for
determination  and  value  to  go  together.  The
ultimate  value  is  in  the  whole,  and  value  rises  with
participation  in  it,2  which  means  the  transfiguration
of  experience  by  the  bringing  to  bear  of  all  upon  all
in  the  fullest  vitality.  Such  is  the  ideal  of  the  logic
of  a  self,  and  to  such  an  ideal  the  conception  of
determinism,  of  a  causation  which  is  partial  and,  so
to  speak,  unawakened,  is  thoroughly  antagonistic.

God,  it  has  been  said,  could  only  impart  Himself
by  imparting  a  self,  and  we  may  urge  the  comple
mentary  truth  that  a  self  can  jonly_ be ..ajself  mjjojar
as  it  is  the  self.  The  desire  to  escape  the  principle

1  Of  course  it  is  only  in  the  whole that  the  appreciation  and
response  are  complete.

2  Apparent  exceptions  to  this  principle  will  be  dealt  with  below,


ix "FREE WILL" SHIRKS  RESPONSIBILITY 343

ofjelf-determi^ationfor^ositive  non-con tradictionjs

really,  though  it  may  seem  otherwise,  a  desire  to
shirk  responsibility.  What  the  ordinary  advocate
of  freedom  at  bottom  demands  as  "the  power  to
have  acted  otherwise,"  is  in  the  same  breath  to  act
and  not  to  act,  or,  acting,  yet  not  to  act.  It  is  to
repudiate,  not  to  accept,  responsibility,  that  is,  the
qualification  of  the  self  by  its  behaviour.  He  is
offered  what  he  pretends  to  ask,  that  his  act  shall  be
his  and  himself ;  and  he  runs  from  his  demand  the
moment  he  is  confronted  with  its  meaning.  In

o

every  action,  and  even  in  the  moment  of  acting,  he
is  to  be  as  if  he  had  not  acted  and  was  not  acting,
uncommitted  and  undeveloped.  "  Uncommitted,"
it  may  be  replied,  "  before  the  action,  but  not  after."
But  this  is  an  evasion.  If  uncommitted  after
thousands  of  actions,  and  before  the  thousand  and
first,  he  is  uncommitted  no  less  after  the  thousand
and  first.  The  point  of  the  doctrine  is  not  that
the  act  does,  but  that  it  does  not  characterise  the
self.1

6.  It  was  admitted  just  above2  that  the  test  of  Apparen
log^aLdetermmatejie^ss,  as  indicating  degree  of
individuality  or  the  completeness  of  a  self,  may
seem  to  conflict  with  the  facts.  The  analogy  of  the
soundness  of  a  theory,  in  judging  of  which  we  give
weight  to  the  distinction  between  more  or  less
fundamental  principles, — principles  whose  denial
involves  the  denial  of  more  or  less  complete  and
coherent  ranges  of  experience,  will  suffice  to  remove
the  difficulty.

It  will  be  best  to  combine  the  discussion  of  this

1 In  Mack,  Freiheitstheorien,  this  is  plain,  e.g.  p.  175.
2  Page  342  footnote.


344  FREEDOM  AND  INITIATIVE  LECT.

appearance  with  the  application  of  the  foregoing
views  to  the  evil  self.  For  obviously  we  are  likely
to  be  asked,  Do  you  mean  to  say  that  the  evil  self
is  simply  a  case  of  the  inevitable  logic  of  the  self?

When  we  approach  the  problem  of  the  evil  self
from  the  point of  view  of  Individuality  and  com
pleteness,  there  are  at  least  three  typical  forms  of
imperfection  which  present  themselves  as  demanding
consideration. There  is  the  animal,  self ;  the  naive
'  or  elementary  good self ;  and  the  bad  self,  proper,
the  rebellious  or  positively  negative  self. If  badness
is defect of  individuality, a logic imperfectly  in
formed,  and  so  a  relative  failure  to  construct  a  whole
(so  the problem states  itself),  why  should  not  the
two former  types of the self,  which  prima  facie
certainly  exhibit  this  incompleteness, be  set  down
as  pre-eminent  cases  of  the  evil  self? How,  upon
Tour  view,  can  any  distinction  between  badness  and
.  imperfection  be  upheld  ?

The  animal  (i.)  The  animal  self — the  bodily  needs  and  desires
which  man  shares  with  the  brute  creation — furnishes
a  ready  and  obvious  example  of  the  imperfect  self,

theory— anc[  has  beeri  exploited  in  that  sense  in  some  degree

an  abstrac-  °

by  the  ethical  philosophy  of  Greece,  and  also  by
popular  morality  and  religion  in  all  ages.  It  is
needless  to  refer  at  length  to  the  fallacies  which
thus  arose.1  It  is  plain,  and  the  Greeks  themselves
were  well  aware  of  it,  that  the  animal  content  of  life
must  be  regarded  as  the  common  root  of  man's  pur
poses,  good  and  bad  alike,  and  not  as  something

1  The  phrase  of  George  Eliot's  old  lady,  "  drinking  and  smoking
like  the  beasts  that  perish,"  well  sums  up  the  absurdity.  Aristotle
(Eth.  Nic.  1 1 1 8  b  8)  was  aware  that  the  main  danger  to  morality
lies  in  specialised  desires  and  not  in  the  simple  wants  which  we  share
with  the  lower  animals.  Cf.  Green,  Prolegomena^  sect.  265.


ix  WHY  IS  NAIVE  NESS  NOT WICKED1?  345

that  is  to  be  negatived,  unless  in  the  sense  of  trans
formation,  which  takes  place  in  the  bad  self  no  less
than  in  the  good.  The  form  of  imperfection,  there
fore,  that  would  consist  in  remaining  a  brute  beast
is  one  that  cannot  actually  exist  in  a  human  con
sciousness,  and  the  forms  of  vice  that  are  confused
with  it  bear  in  reality  quite  a  different  relation  to
the  individual  self.  The  animal  basis  of  life  is  fytj**
imperfect  in  the  sense  in  which  data  are  imperfect
without  a  theory,  and  not  in  the  sense  of  a  theo
retical  structure  capable  of  narrowness  and  self-con
tradiction.  It  would  not  amount  to  so  much  as  an
imperfect  human  self.1

(ii.)  When  we  consider  the  naive  or  elementary  The  naive
life  of  morality 2  and  religion,  that,  let  us  say,  of  a  compared
simple,  uncultured,  but  kindly  and  honourable  per-  *°
son  of  any  creed  which  is  not  actively  savage  or  su^tei

i  i  i  •  1  -  rr P.rinciPle

cruel,  we  seem  to  be  met  by  a  more  serious  dim-  alone—
culty.  In  the  light  of  the  analogy  we  are  pursuing,
such  a  life  is,  even  relatively  to  the  average,  very
decidedly  imperfect,  claiming  but  a  low  rank  of  indi
viduality.  The  mental  equipment  which  suffices  for
it  omits  huge  provinces  of  experience,  and  would
be  unable  to  deal  with  the  bulk  of  the  relations
which  constitute  the  world  'of  an  advanced  civilisa
tion.  If  defective  individuality  is  analogous  to
failure  of  theoretical  grasp,  and  lies  in  openness  to
contradiction  and  ^££arja.citv  to  mjjfy  life,  surely,  it
might  be  argued,  here  we  have  it,  and,  on  our  hypo-

1  A  question  of  great  interest,  but  not  relevant  here,  is  how  far  a
brute  animal  can  be  said  to  possess  a  self. How  far  do  we  endow
them,  out  of  our  gathered  observations,  with  the  character  which  for
us  they  certainly  display  ? How  far  is  it  anything  for  themselves  ?

2  I  am  here  discussing  naive  morality  in  respect  of  that  solid  and
realised  content  which  it  involves,  abstracting  from  the  theoretical
aspect  of  "  moralitat "  as  a  mere  struggle  against  evil.


346  FREEDOM  AND  INITIATIVE  LECT.

thesis,  we  should  be  driven  to  the  absurdity  of
admitting,  in  the  plainest  sense  of  the  words,  that
ignorance  is  vice.  For  certainly,  as  compared  with
such  anmnocent  ignorance,  a  mind  which  we  should
unhesitatingly  pronounce  wicked  and  corrupt  may
have  a  far  wider  range  of  culture,  and  a  relatively
full  capacity,  not  only  for  the  theoretical,  but  even
for  the  practical  unification  of  life.  This  apparent
fact,  that  a  plain,  ignorant  mind  may  be  good,  and
one  refined  and  cultured  in  the  highest  degree 1  may
be  bad,  is  what  would  commonly  be  alleged  against
us.  And  what  is  true  in  the  objection  leads  up  to
a  most  striking  verification  of  our  point  of  view.

The  ignorance  which  Socrates  pronounced  to  be
vice  was  ignorance  of  the  good.  The  good  meant
for  him  the  urjifkation  of  life.  Now,  the  unification
of  life  is  a  problem  which,  like  other  problems,  has
its  fundamental  necessities  and  its  outlying  corol
laries,  things  which  must  be  known  and  done  to
realise  it  at  all,  things  which  may  be  known  and
done  to  realise  it  more  completely.  And  the
essential  matter  is  that  the  naive  or  simple  self  of
everyday  morality  and  religion  consists  of  the  prin
ciples  which  are  fundamental  in  the  unification  of
life.  The  contention  that  wisdom  is  goodness
transforms  itself  in  the  end 2  into  the  contention
that  goodness  is  wisdom,  and  with  complete  justifi
cation.  Applying  the  analogy  of  a  theory  we  have
here,  in  the  self  at  the  level  of  naive  morality,  an
imperfection  comparable  to  the  possession  of  some
sound  fundamental  principle  in  science,  politics,  or
philosophy,  apart  from  the  special  knowledge  or

1  I  state  the  common  opinion,  subject  to  some  reservation  which
the  discussion  will  reveal.  2  Plato,  Laws,  689  A-E.


ix IT  CONTAINS  "  THE  ROOT  OF  THE  MATTER" 347

aptitude  demanded  by  abstruse  and  remote  pro
vinces  of  research.  It  would  be  fair  and  true  to
say  that  what  is  called  morality  par  excellence  is
constituted  by  the  main  structural  outline  of  the  in
telligence,  a  defect  in  which  cannot  be  wholly  com
pensated  as  concerning  the  unification  of  life  by  the
most  complete  aptitude  and  control  in  specialised
provinces  of  experience.

Thus  we  see  at  once  why  naive  morality  and
religion,  although  very  highly  imperfect  forms  of
individuality,  are  not  in  principle  ranked  as  com
parable  in  negative  value  to  forms  of  the  bad  self,
or  as  wholly  and  inevitably  surpassed  in  positive
value  by  the  higher  developments  of  civilised  mind
if  possessed  in  isolation.  (That  they — the  naive
attitudes  in  question — are  morally  and  religiously
defective  by  reason  of  the  limitation  which  con
stitutes  their  naive  character,  and  that  they  do  fail
in  a  high  degree,  though  not  fundamentally,  in  the
unification  of  life,  is  a  consequence  which  I  not  only
admit  but  energetically  maintain.)  It  is  because
they  possess  the  essential  and  fundamental  condi
tions  of  unification,  of  which  scientific  or  artistic
aptitudes,  for  example,  are  outlying  corollaries  and
completions,  but  relatively  posterior  and  dependent.
A  man  is  good  in  as  far  as  his  being  is  unified  at  all
in  any  sphere  of  wisdom  or  activity.  And  in  deal
ing  with  a  whole  so  vital  as  the  whole  of  mind,  one
cannot  say  that  the  perfection  of  any  part  is  indif
ferent  to  that  of  any  other,  or,  therefore,  that
morality  is  entirely  unimpaired  by  aesthetic  and
scientific  incapacity.

Still, in  the  main,  the  dependence  is  the  other
way  ;  simple  morality  can  more  nearly  stand  alone,


348  FREEDOM  AND  INITIATIVE  LECT.

and  its  absence  shakes  the  whole  foundations  of  life
and  mind.  Such  absence  is  in  respect  to  life  as  a
whole,  what  a  failure  of  belief  in  the  first  principles
of  rational  system  is  to  the  scientific  intelligence.1

This,  then,  is  the  true  distinction  between
morality,  commonly  so  called,  and  intellectual  or
aesthetic  excellence,  which  is  goodness  in  the  wider,
or  (should  we  rather  say  ?)  in  the  narrower  sense.2
It  is  a  distinction  of  degree  between  the  more  and
the_ less i  fundamental  of  the  ideas  which  govern  life.
It  is  not  the  current  distinction  between  ideas  intel
lectually  held  and  ideas  so  held  as  to  be  effective  in
action.  Ideas  which,  as  we  said  of  moral  ideas,
form  the  main  structure  of  the  mind,  cannot  but  be
operative — ideas  whose  content  claims  such  a  place,
but  which  do  not  occupy  it  because  inadequately
held,  are  not  truly  knowledge.  In  bare  fact,  the
presence  of  adequate  ideas  which  are  inoperative  in
moral  matters  is  vastly  exaggerated,  and  it  is  even
doubtful  whether,  strictly  speaking,  it  can  be  shown
to  be  real.  The  point  is,  that  ideas  which  prove
inoperative  are  such  as  are  not  carried  out  into  the
connections  and  associations  which  would  constitute
at  once  their  meaning  and  their  power.3  It  is  not
true,  as  a  bare  fact,  that  the  selfish  man  knows  and

1  One  meets  with  men  of  enormous  learning  and  cleverness  who
nevertheless seem fundamentally incapable of  dealing fairly  with
evidence  or  of  understanding  the  elementary  requirements  of  a  sound
theory. A  mind  which  is  like  this right  through  would  be  a  bad
mind — a  mind  whose  powers  of  unification  only  served  to  deepen  con
tradiction.

2  Narrower,  because  these  excellences  per  se  are,  after  all,  pro
vincial  moralities,  not  dealing  with  the  main  framework  of  life  as  a
whole.

3  Cf.  further,  the  analysis  of  what  is  involved  in  such  dominance
of  an  idea  as  cause  its  realisation. Bradley,  in  Mind,  xliv.  pp.  447-8.
See  pp.  20 1 -2  supra.


ix  GOODNESS  IS WISDOM  349

realises  the  value  of  unselfishness  or  the  superficial
man  the  value  of  thoroughness,  It  may  be  argued
backwards  and  forwards  how  we  strain  our  imagina
tion  of  what  we  lack,  and  how  we  "rack  the  value"
of  what  we  have  missed,  but  these  feverish  aspira
tions  never  reach  the  plain  solidity  of  knowledge.

The  intellectual  rank  and  value  of  morality  has
here  been  discussed  on  the  basis  of  the  actual  con
tent  of  the  leading  moral  ideas,  and  the  conclusion
would  stand  fast  even  if  per  impossibile  it  could  be
shown  that  the  ideas  can  be  fully  present  without
being  operative.  For  if  they  could  exist  (as  "know
ledge  ")  without  morality,  yet  morality  could  not
exist  without  them,  and  its  nature  lies  essentially  in
their  content.  Whatever  we  may  think  of  the
phrase  "  wisdom  is  goodness,"  it  stands  fast  that
goodness  is  wisdom,  and  this  truth  has,  as  we  shall
see,  ramifications  and  corollaries  of  the  highest  im
portance.

We  have  seen,  then,  that  (i.)  the  animal  self  is  so
much  below  imperfection  as  not  to  count  at  all,  even
for  an  imperfect  human  self;  and  that  (ii.)  the  self
of  naive  morality  and  religion  is  certainly  imperfect,
but  by  reason  of  possessing  the  fundamental  condi
tions  of  unification  is  a  sound  foundation,  not  to  be
dispensed  with  or  undone,  for  the  fuller  determina
tions  demanded  by  the  fuller  experience.

But  when  we  come  (iii.)  to  the  evil  self  we  have  The  evil
before  us  something  which  we  recognise  at  once  as
different  in  kind. For  here  we  have  essentially  the


phenomenon,  familiar  to  us  in  the  province  of  theory,  against
of  two  quasi-rational  systems  in  active  _antagpnism,  knowledge.
as  claiming  to  attach  different  principles  and  predi
cates  to  identical  data  —  here,  to  the  common  basis  of


350  FREEDOM  AND  INITIATIVE  LECT.

the  self.  In  this  case,  no  doubt,  we  may  and  do
find  a  considerable  area  of  positive  unification  in  a
system  which,  nevertheless,  we  are  obliged  to  recog
nise  as  an  evil  self.  It  is  just  as  we  may  find  a  high
degree  of  organisation  and  rationality  in  a  theory
which,  on  the  whole,  we  are  obliged  to  reject  in
favour  of  one  more  solid  and  complete.  The  evil
self  is  not  evil  in  itself.  The  most  suggestive  and
extraordinary  fact  about  it  is  the  very  high  degree
in  which  objects  and  interests,  which  in  many  con
texts,  or  most,  we  should  pronounce  good  and
desirable,  may  enter  into  the  very  tissue  and  texture
of  the  evil  life,1  just  as  beauty  enters  into  the  detail
of  the  terrible  or  hideous  in  art,  or  as  truth  enters
into  the  detail  of  theories  which,  on  the  whole,  are
false.

The  evil  self  is  evil,  then,  because  and  in  as  far
as  it  is  antagonistic  to  the  good,  for,  however  highly
organised  in  itself,  it  is  inevitably  through  this  anta
gonism  the  adversary  of  unification  of  experience,
and  the  vehicle  of  contradiction  in  the  very  heart  of
the  self.  Many  questions  of  interest  may  arise  out
of  this  formulation.  Is  not  the  evil,  then,  after  all  a
species  of  the  good — good  in  the  wrong  place  as  dirt
is  matter  in  the  wrong  place  ?  And  could  not  the
self  be  equally  divided,  so  that  while  the  contradic
tion  in  it  was  obvious,  we  should  find  it  hard  to
pronounce  which  self  was  good  and  which  evil  ?

But  for  our  present  purpose  we  have  seen
enough.  We  have  seen  how  it  is  that  not  every
imperfect  self  is  pro  t 'ant 'o  an  evil  self;  and  again,
that  an  evil  self  may  be,  regarded  in  and  by  itself,
of  a  higher  degree  of  consistency  and  coherence  in

1  Macbeth  is  a  good  instance.


ix MORAL  EVIL  HAS  ITS  PLACE  IN  THE WORLD  351

virtue  of  its  positive  aim  (not  of  its  aim  as  evil,
which  is  essentially  negative  or  rebellious)  than
many  an  imperfect  self  which  is  either  non-moral  or
morally  good.  It  is  simply  the  difference  between
inadequacy  and  developed  contradiction,  and  thus
thgja£ts  confirm  our  conception  of  ^maximum  i n d i -
viduality  or  unification  of  experience  as  the  standard
of  real  and  good,  and  therefore  our  conception  of
logic  as  the  law  of  the  striving  of  the  self.

But  if  this  is  so,  then  the  evil  self  is  a  case  of
the  logical  striving  of  the  self  after  unity,  which  has
brought  it  into  contradiction  with  a  fuller  and
sounder  striving  (just  as  in  the  region  of  pure
theory  we  may  be  a  prey  to  an  insoluble  antagonism
of  which  both  sides  are  due  to  the  theoretical
impulse).  Thus  a  question  will  naturally  arise  as  to
the  application  of  the  idea  of  self-determination
to  this  form  of  the  self.  Do  we  affirm  that  the
essential  nisus  towards  unification  and  individuality,
the  conation  of  the  self,  can  take  the  shape  of
a  bad  self,  and  this,  according  to  the  tenor  of  our
views,  as  a  logical  necessity  ? l  And  is  not  this
doctrine  open  to  the  dangers  of  fatalism  ?  Is
the  bad  will,  where  and  so  far  as  developed,  a
logical  necessity  in  the  self  which  develops  it,  no  less
than  the  good  will  ?  Certainly  it  is  so.  The  point
and  meaning  of  the  bad  will  is  wholly  lost  unless  it
is  a  development  of  the  self  in  the  same  sense  as  the
good  will  ;  the  only  difference  being  that  it  has
seized  a  false  clue  such  as  is  essentially  incapable  of
doing  the  work  of  unification,  which  the  will  as  such
sets  out  to  do,  and  is  thus  brought  into  more  or  less
explicit  antagonism  to  the  purposes  of  unified  life,

1  Cf.  Green,  Prolegomc?ia,  sect.  1 1 1 .


352  FREEDOM  AND  INITIATIVE  LECT.

and  ultimately  to  itself.  There  is  no  metaphysical
difficulty  in  this  view.  The  assertion  of  moral  evil
is  involved,  as  has  often  been  pointed  out,  in  the
very  nature  of  morality.  Moral  evil  is  not  in  its
whole  content  something  alien  and  menacing  to  the
world.  It  is  something  which  has  a  relative  right
to  be  ;  it  is  involved  in  the  fact  of  finiteness,  though
its  special  shapes  arise  from  the  logic  of  individual
finite  beings.  That  this  should  be  embodied  in  the
inherent  work  of  selves — it  cannot,  ex  hypotkesi,  be
the  whole  work  of  any  self — is  only  part  of  the  con
tradiction  belonging  to  finite  life,  where  completely
harmonious  self-affirmation  is  impossible.  Moral
evil,  we  might  say,  is  good  hostile  to  good.1  As
hostile,  it  demands  amendment  and  subordination,
but  it  is,  in  its  positive  nature,  not  in  the  mere
antagonism  of  which  by  subordination  it  would  be
divested,  obviously  a  contribution  to  the  vitality  of
the  whole.

Is  this  doctrine  dangerous,  as  a  suggestion  of
fatalism;  of  the  will  in  some  agents  being  predestined
to  be  evil  ?

The  question  applies  to  good  and  evil  alike.  It
is  whether  a  necessary  action2  implies  a  necessary
agent;  whether  when  we  say  a  decision  cannot  but
be  such  and  such,  we  are  saying  that  the  agent
"  cannot  help  "  making  it.

1  Other  forms  of  evil,  not  specially  relevant  to  the  problem  of
moral  good  (e.g.  pain)  will  be  considered  elsewhere. Must  the  bad
self  be  rebellious  against  its  own  good  self? May  it  not  be,  all  of  a
piece  so  to  speak, rebellious  against  the  socially  recognised  good  ?
I think, if  the  case is worked out, it must mean that  the  good
rebelled  against  is  recognised  in  the  character  of  good,  and  therefore
as  a  good  self  against  the  rebellious  self. Would  a  man,  unaware  of
good,  be  immoral,  or  a  criminal  lunatic  ?

2  Green,  Prolegomena,  I.e.


ix  MY  ACT  DOES  DEPEND ON  ME  353

The  primary  principle  that  should  govern  the
whole  discussion  is  this,  that  the  attitude  of  moral
judgment  and  responsibility  for  decisions  is  only  one^
ajtrion^_other  attitude^.,  pnd  spheres  of  experience.
More  than  this,  it  is,  as  we  shall  see,  only  an  aspect
of  the  actual  fact  and  reality,  an  aspect  which  would
show  quite  differently  in  the  whole  but  is  isolated
(relatively)  by  our  impotence.  It  must  not  be  set
up  as  absolute  or  pressed  as  the  whole  and  inclusive
reality  of  human  action.  The  attitude  of  moral
judgment  and  decision  —  the  feeling,  it  now  all
depends  on  me,  and  I,  and  I  only,  can  determine
and  am  responsible  for  what  is  now  to  take  place,  is
right  and  true  in  face  of  a  moral  decision  to  be  made,
because  the  several  factors  or  constituents  of  the  will,
and  the  law  or  spirit  of  action,  are  already  pre
supposed  in  the  fact  of  my  being  a  world  which  is  a
self.  The  question  now  is  how  that  self  will  reshape
£nd  .  develop,  itself^  At  tneH  jmflSBt  a^  In  Prespnre
of  the  situation  this,  its,  absolute  independence,  js^
fact,  and  JS—  itself  an


mining  my  behaviour.  But  metaphysical  theory,
viewing  the  self  in  its  essential  basis  of  moral
solidarity  with  the  natural  and  social  world,  and  in
the  special  relations  with  others  which  forbid  its
isolation,  cannot  admit  that  the  independence  of  the
self,  though  a  fact,  is  more  than  a  partial  fact.1  'Both
views  are  true  and  represent  the,  reajity__o_f.jLhe

but  it  is  fatal  to  confuse


them,  or,  which  is  the  same  thing,  to  set  them  in
antagonism  as  if  they  belonged  to  the  same  situation
and  had  to  meet  the  same  need.  It  is  true  that  in
the  moral  emergency  all  depends  on  the  individual

1  See  above,  Lecture  VII.  p.  277.

2  A


354  FREEDOM  AND  INITIATIVE  LECT.

will  which,  as  explained  above,  is  in  the  right  when
it  recognises  this.  But  it  is  true  that  the  individual
will  is  a  principle  and  content  having  far  deeper
roots  than  what  we  commonly  take  to  be  the  individual
mind,  and  the  task,  which  is  really  and  rightly  its
task,  is  set  it  by  the  universe.

The  Detenninist  has  relied  on  this  deep-rooted-
ness  of  the  will ;  but  not  with  complete  justification.
He  rightly  urges  that  prima  facie,  if  moral  dona
fides  is  presupposed,  our  ideas,  say,  about  the  nature
of  volition  cannot  be  drawn  in  to  affect  the  positive
influences  and  motives  which  are  presupposed  as
constituting  volition.  To  say  in  general  that  your
ideas  guide  your  actions  ought  not  to  be  taken  as
favouring  some  ideas  (e.g.  ideas  of  fatalism)  at  the
expense  of  others.  But  this  argument  does  not
come  quite  fairly  from  the  Determinist.  For  his
metaphysical  position  is  really  hostile  to  the  nature
of  self-determination.  He  construes  the  self  and
motives  on  the  analogy  of  things  which  are  not  a
self  or  motives;  and  his  term  "  necessary"  does
not  merely  express  a  conviction  as  to  the  rationality
of  the  result,  but  conveys  a  conception  of  the  nature
of  the  process  irreconcilable  with  the  true  idea  of
the  moral  deliberation  by  which  motives  are  framed
and  modified.

With  the  present  theory,  it  is  submitted,  this  is
not  the  case.  It  can  in  no  way  be  held  to  narrow
the  scope  or  transmute  the  conceptions  of  moral
deliberation  or  determination.  It  recognises  the
self  as  operative  in  its  nwnjiatujre,  as  creative  and
cud^inati_ye_ac.c0rding  to  its  own  Iaw4— the  only  Jaw
of  creativeness  which  prevails  in  the  universeH  It
recognises  a  necessary  act  —  an  act  which  must


IX  BUT  I  AM  CONTINUOUS WITH  THE  UNIVERSE  355

be  what  it  is — but  not  a  necessary  agent,1  because
nothing  but  the  ^enjtj^e^mnie^jh^^t,  and  there
:is  no  meaning  in  applying  to  him  any  "must"  or
''cannot  help  it"  except  in  the  sense  that  everything
is  what  it  is.  In  other  words  we  may  say2  that
nothing  past,  nothing  external,  is  operative  in  the
agent's  choice.  It  is  all  gathered  up  and  made  into
the  agent  himself,  and  its  remodelling,  in  him  is  one
with  his  creative  production  of  a  new  deed.  All  it
does  is  to  supplement  the  strictly  moral  attitude,
"  It  is  I,  and  I  only,  who  have  to  act ;  it  is  I  who
determine  what  is  to  happen,  and  in  determining  it
I  am  good  or  bad,"  an  attitude  which  cannot  exist
per  se,  nor  be  pushed  to  the  bitter  end.  It  supple
ments  this  attitude  by  the  wider  recognition  of
metaphysic  (akin  to  that  of  religion,  apart  from
which,  however  unrecognised,  morality  could  not
conceivably  subsist),3  that  I  through  my  goodness
or  badness,  which  means  through  my  moral  judgment
and  decision,  a  burden  which  I  cannot  possibly  be
relieved  from  or  put  away  from  me,  am  yet  more
or  less  completely  doing  the  work  of  the  universe,
and,  as  and  because  I  am  myself,  am  acting  as  a
member  in  a  greater  self,  and  am  in  a  large  measure
continuous  with  it,  and  dyed  with  its  colours.

7.  The ideal that appears  irrepressible  in  the

1  This  view,  derived  directly  from  Green,  but  on  the  whole  the
view  of  the  philosophical  tradition  from  Plato  downwards,  is  curiously
coincident  in  its  application  with  Bergson's  doctrine,  which  alleges
that  every  theoretical  account  of  free  will  is  deterministic  as  resting
on a spatial '  representation of  time, neglecting the character of
"duree"  (DonnJes,  p.  168). I  agree  so  far;  but  as I  have  argued
throughout,  he  seems  to  me  to  truncate  the  character  of  "duree."

2  See  above  on  Kant,  p.  327.

3  A  morality,  e.g.,  which  should  attempt  to  disown  the  "  means  of
grace  "  in  the  suggestions  and  influences  of  nature  and  society  would
be  as  untrue  to  moral  fact  as  it  would  be  hostile  to  religion.


356  FREEDOM  AND  INITIATIVE  LECT.

The  ideal  treatment  of Freedom, Initiative, Individuality,  is

tingency  the  ideal  of  Contingency. To  establish  Contingency

confus£n  m  ^  heart  of  things  is  the  motto  and  motive  of  the

between  moralistic Idealist,1  and  the  scientific  thinker,  who

the  original  '

and  the appeals  from  mathematics  to  biology,  is  disposed  to

arbitrary. .....  • 9 -ri  i'-  r i

join  in  the  enterprise/  1  he  object  of  the  present
lecture,  in  harmony  with  the  aim  of  the  present
work,  is  to  defend  a  wholly  different  set  of  suggestions.
The  bias  towards  contingency  arises,  it  would
appear,  from  a  misinterpretation  of  the  demand  for
creative  initiative,  combined  with  a  failure  to
appreciate  the  true  nature  of  logical  process.  Our
effort  has  been  to  bring  the  conception  of  moral
and  individual  J£idative  n^arerJLaJthe_idea_  .of.  logical
determination,  and  so  into  comparison  and  con
nection  with  the  forms  of  creative  activity  most
indubitably  recognised  as  such  and  as  giving  the
highest  value  known  in  human  experience.  And  it
is  very  noticeable,  as  has  been  observed  above,
that  the  tendency  to  confuse  creative  determina
tion  with  arbitrariness  and  contingency  displays
itself  in  popular  ideas  of  what  is  fine  and  desirable
no  less  in  these  other  spheres  than  in  morality.3

1  Ward,  Naturalism,  ii.  280.

2  Bergson,  Evolution,  e.g.,  p.  125. Conscious  life  depends  for
him on the accumulation in the body  of an immense store of
indetermination. It  is  obvious  that  in  view  of  the  conceptions  which
we  are  working  with,  the  store  of  indetermination  would  become  the
substructure  of  logical  as  superseding  mechanical  determinations.

3  Such are the  ideas  of  art  and  of  originality  which were  so
constantly  the  object  of  Goethe's  satire,  e.g.  Werke,  iii.  1 1 1.

"  From  masters  I  have  ever  kept  apart,
To  follow  others'  footsteps  seemed  disgrace  ;
Myself  have  from  myself  learned  all  my  art."
"  Too  plainly,  it's  the  case."

("  Es  ist  auch  danach  ")  ;  or  the  famous  lines  on  inheritance,  Werke,
iii.  411,  "  Gern  war'  ich  Ueberliefrung  los  Und  ganz  original  ..."


ix HIGH  EXPERIENCE  REJECTS  CONTINGENCY  357

From  the  present  point  of  view,  not  only  logical
theory,  but  the  whole  doctrine  of  the  expression  of
thought  and  emotion  in  aesthetic  form,  of  social  right
and  duty,  of  religious  aspiration  and  attainment,  no
less  than  the  achievements  of  science  and  philosophy,
is  fatal  to  the  ideal  of  contingency.  It  is  being
master  of  and  mastered  by  content,  with  its  trans
figuration  as  it  reshapes  itself  towards  the  whole,
that  confers  logical  stability  and  exalts  individuality.


LECTURE X

NATURE, THE SELF, AND THE ABSOLUTE

"Nature" i. Is  it  possible  to  speak  intelligibly  of  a  relation
between  Nature  and  the  self? Either  term  seems


inconceivable  without  the  other ;  and  there  must  be
existent  something  of  arbitrariness  in  any  attempts  to  draw  a
The  line  Jme  between  them.

and  mind  If  indeed  we  took  Nature  to  mean  the  homo-
E.g.  Has  it  geneous  world  of  units  adapted  for  calculation  as
known  to  mathematical  physics,  then  there  would
be  no  difficulty  in  the  distinction,  but  no  interest  in
the  relation.  Nature  would  then  be  one  special
abstraction  under  which  our  intelligence  brings
together  some  general  characteristics  of  the  world
in  space  and  time,  for  the  purpose  of  reducing
its  different  appearances  to  comparable  formulae.
It  would  no  doubt  be  an  effective  form  in  which  to
recognise  many  external  conditions  that  operate
upon  the  self,  but  it  would  be  far  short  of  what
nature  means  either  to  the  common  man  or  the
poet.

On  the  other  hand,  if  we  understand  by  Nature
the  universe  in  space  and  time  interpreted  as  a
living  system,  the  meaning  which  lies  at  the  root  of
all  art  and  poetry,  we  should  find  it  hard  to  exclude
from  it  the  spiritual  side  of  the  higher  organisms,

358


LECT.  x  NA  TURK  =  WHA  T  WE  CONTRAST  WITH  MIND  359

and  any  further  spiritual  being  which  we  may  suppose
their  existence  to  imply.  An^the^d|sjdnc^do£^if  any
remained,  bet  ween  the  self  and  Nature,  would  be  simply
that  ^tween_part  and  whole,  and  so  far  as  a  relation
between  the  two  was  concerned,  could  only  be  taken
as  leading  up  to  some  such  view  as  the  following.

For  there  is  a  distinction  of  kind,  relevant  to  our
purpose.  We  want  to  understand  what  it  is  that
the  environment,  the  world  of  things  and  facts  as  we
experience  it,  contributes  to  the  being  of  the  self,
the  subject  or  centre  for  which  things  or  facts  are
objects.  Nature  in  this  sense,  the  spatial,  external,
objective  world,  with  its  full  beauty  and  usefulness,
though  nearly  everything,  is  not  quite  everything.
It  is  hard  to  say  where  it  stops  ;  but  plainly  we
must  draw  tlie  line  somewhere.  It  cannot  be  drawn
always  at  the  same  point  between  the  subject  and
its  environment.  For  the  self,  itself,  draws  its
material  from^Natflffi  and  even  as  subject,  as  con
fronted  with  its  objective  surroundings,  is  making
use  of  that  material  to  give  itself  the  feeling  of  self
hood.1  Nature  for  everyday  sentiment  and  perception
differs  only  in  degree  from  what  it  is  for  the  artist
and  the  poet.  It  is  the  world  in  space  and  time,
with  all  its  secondary  qualities,  and  moreover,  with
all  the  interpretations  and  emotions  by  which  in  our
experience  it  is  taken  as  qualified.  We  know  that
m  this  sense  it  could  be  nothing  apart  from  a  self
which  at  least  must  be  sentient.2  Nevertheless

1  Psychology  of  Moral  Se/f,  p.  5  7 .

2  I  do  not  see  how  this  proposition  can  be  overthrown. Grant
that  sensations  are  objects,  grant  even  per  impossibile,  that  they  are
physical, I think we must  interpret  these  predicates consistently
with depending upon sentience. Professor Alexander, I think,
would  admit  that  they  are  adapted  to  form  part  of  a  world  of  which
mind  is  a  leading  constituent.


360  NATURE, SELF,  AND  ABSOLUTE  LECT.

it  is  not  created  by  the  self  taken  apart  from  the
detail  of  the  environment ;  for  so  taken  the  self
would  be  nothing.  The  jself  may  indeed  be  said  to
make^rts  own  environment.  33ut  this  is  only  by
selection;  it  depends  on  the  given  ;  and  even  within
the  given  it  cannot  be  arbitrary.  It  is  an  affair  of
interests,  motives,  preferences,  grounds,  reasons ;
at  all  events,  of  something ;  and  something  does
not  come  from  nothing,  but  from  something  in
particular.  The  self,  which  makes  the  environment,
is  itself  all  soaked  in  environment.  You  cannot  say
where  self  ends  and  environment  begins.  Nature,
conceived  as  an  environment,  can  hardly  be  reckoned
as  less  than  the  whole  detail  of  thing  and  fact  which
enters  into  the  world  of  the  self.  How  far  we  treat
it  as  qualified  by  the  interpretations  and  emotions  of
the  self,  is,  as  we  have  said,  a  matter  of  degree.  The
influence  upon  us  of  our  own  bodies,  of  our  friends
in  the  world  of  lower  animals,  or  of  external  events
in  which  other  human  beings  are  concerned,  cannot
be  excluded  from  it  on  any  consistent  principle.

The  distinction  thus  becomes  the  same  in  principle
with  that  of  circumstance  and  character.1  It  is  a
distinction  of  points  of  view.  Anything  in  ourselves
or  our  environment  is  in  this  sense  Nature,  which  is
not  considered  in  the  light  of  the  behaviour  of  a
self.  Anything  belongs  to  a  self,  in  which  details
of  our  world  are  seen  as  connected  parts  within  the
total  reaction  of  a  mind.  If  we  consider  the  distinc
tion  between  Nature  and  fine  art,  Nature  and  morality
or  politics,  Nature  and  industrial  or  economic  activity,
we  shall  find  that  no  other  contrast  is  justified  by
common  usage  and  experience,  or  is  relevant  to  the

1  We  shall  return  to  this  in  the  second  series.


NATURE CONTINUOUS WITH  MIND  361


distinction  between  Nature  and  the  self.  Thus  my
being  born  and  bred  in  the  Highlands  or  Lowlands,
in  town  or  country,  of  a  strong  or  a  feeble  race,  are
all  natural  facts;  obvious  pieces  of  environment;
though  my  attitude  to  these  facts,  or  to  other  things
by  reason  of  these  facts,  belongs  to  myself,  and  is  the
sort  of  stuff  or  substance  in  which  myself  consists.

Nature,  then,  as  thus  considered,  is  the  world  in
space  and  time,  abstracted  from  our  momentary
attitude  and  considered  as  self-existent,  though  at
the  same  time  held  to  be  possessed  of  qualities
which  presuppose  it  to  be  in  relation  with  a
cognitive  sentient  purposive  and  emotional  being.1

2. Nature,  as  thus  considered,  has  obviously  an  Nature

.,,«-.,  o i  r T  1 inseparable

intimate  connection  with  J|Lmd  or  belt. 1  use  the  fr0mmind.
term  connection  as  the  most  non-committal  term  that

1  This  view  of  Nature  seems  to  me  to  prescribe  the  true  line  to
be  taken  in  the  recent  discussion  (see  Ar.  Proc.  for  1909)  whether
such  objects  as  sensations  are  psychical  or  physical.  All  objects  of
mind,  the  answer  will  be,  are  psychical.  But  some  are  physical
as  well  ;  i.e.,  some  enter  into  a  determinate  context  of  reactions,  which
forms  a  special  part  of  the  psychical  world,  which  we  call  the  physical
world  and  contrast  with  the  psychical.  But  this  is  an  abstraction,
for  the  physical  world  can  never,  in  the  last  resort,  put  off  its
psychical  character.  A  tree  is  beautiful,  and  green,  and  tall.  All
these  qualities  are,  as  presentations,  necessarily  psychical ;  but  the
tallness  at  least,  as  a  character  of  a  thing  in  space,  is  certainly
physical.  And  this  is  probably  the  true  line  of  demarcation.  They  are
all,  as  we  said,  psychical  ab  initio  as  presentations.  But  qua  determined
by  a  construction  of  objects  in  space  they  all  (including  "  physical "
beauty)  become  physical  also.  Then  they  are  relatively  opposable
to  the  psychical.  But  not  more  than  relatively.  For,  taking  as  the
test  of  psychical  nature  the  being  destroyed  if  the  percipient  mind
were  destroyed,  it  is  plain  that  in  a  degree,  though  only  in  a  degree,
presentations  remain  psychical  not  only  as  pure  presentations,  but
even  as  qualities  of  spatial  objects.  The  subjective  mind,  which
has  perceived  and  which  conceives  them,  being  destroyed,  their
existence  would  certainly  be  pro  tanto  diminished,  though  not
necessarily  annihilated.  A  physical  object  must  at  least  be  capable
of  becoming  psychical  at  any  moment.  If  not,  it  so  far  has  not
full  existence.


362  NATURE, SELF,  AND  ABSOLUTE  LECT.

I  can  think  of. For  what  nature  has  to do  with
mind  or  self  is  just  the  question  we  are  to  discuss.

In  any  case  it  is  undeniable  that  Nature  is  in

some  sense  plastic  and  responsive  to  finite  subjective

mind,  and,  so  far  may  be  set  down  as  in  some  sense

"expressive"  of  mind,  or  as  its  embodiment,  or  as

a  crystallisation  or  hieroglyph  of  it. But  this  familiar

and  obvious conception hides  within  it  two  quite

antagonistic  lines  of  thought,  the  one  starting  from

/  the  idea  that  mind  and  nature  are '  akin,  the  other

from the idea that they  are  complementary, and

prima  facie  in  a  kind  of  opposition.

starting  i. If  our  impression  of  the  unity  of  Nature  and

ship  we  Mind  leads  us  to  start  from  the  idea  of  kinship  or
resemblance,  we  shall  be  led  to  travel  the  road,
so  fashionable  to-day,  which  ends  in  the  conception
of  the  Universe  as  a  society  of  spirits,  in  which  the
constituent  parts  of  Nature  are  members,  in  grades
and  divisions  unknown  to  us,  but  intelligible  by
analogy.  The  external  world  would  thus  be  the
body,  and  its  behaviour  the  language  and  conduct,
of  actual  spiritual  beings,  not  ourselves.1  And
whether  we  preferred  the  phraseology  of  will  or  of
meaning,  there  would  be  literal  and  immediate
truth  in  saying  that  nature  possessed  a  purpose  and
a  significance,  akin  to  our  own,  and  communicable
to  us  according  to  our  measure  of  sympathy  and
insight,  while  barred  against  us  in  the  main  by
difference  perhaps  of  modes  of  utterance,  perhaps
of  the  span  of  consciousness.  We  should,  in  short,
have  accepted  the  general  attitude  of  Pan-psychism.

1  This  so  far  is  a  view  to  which  I  understand  Mr.  Bradley  to
be  favourable  (Appearance,  pp.  271  and  275).  But  when  it  is  driven
to  the  extreme  of  Pan-psychism,  I  gather  that  he  does  not  follow,
Mind,  li.  p.  327  note.


x PAN-PSYCHISM  DOES  NOT  FACE  PROBLEM 363

Now  it  should  be  noted  that  if  this  attitude  is
carried  through,  all  externality  is  dissolved  away,
i.e.,  all  outward  appearance  becomes  resolvable  ad
infinitum  into  spirits.  For  if  not,  if  it  is  admitted
that  there  is  and  must  be  externality  as  a  counter
part  of  spirit,  then  there  is  no  reason  in  principle
for  denying  that  parts  of  Nature  in  which  subjective
mind  seems  a  superfluous  hypothesis,  are  just  ex
ternality  or  the  counterpart  of  subjective  mind  else
where.  If  Pan-psychism  is  necessary,  the  resolution
into  spirit  must  be  universal.

I  confess  that  it  is  a  doctrine  which  has  always
appeared  to  me  to  reveal  the  poverty  of  philosophical
imagination.  It  treats  the  striking  and  thorough
going  opposition  and  inseparability  of  mind  and
externality  as  if  it  had  no  more  significance  than  a
mere  congeries  of  centres  of  experience  belonging
to  different  classes  and  degrees.  It  transforms  the
complementariness  of  mind  and  nature,  on  which  as
it  would  seem,  their  inseparability  depends,  by  an
analysis  of  one  into  the  other  such  as  wholly  to
destroy  the  speciality  of  function  for  which  the  one
is  needed  by  the  other.1  Why  insist  on  reducing
to  a  homogeneous  type  the  contributions  of  all
elements  to  the  whole?  What  becomes  of  the
material  incidents  of  life — of  our  food,  our  clothes,
our  country,  our  own  bodies  ?  Is  it  not  obvious  that
our  relation  to  these  things  is  essential  to  finite
being,  and  that  if  they  are  in  addition  subjective
psychical  centres  their  subjective  psychical  quality
is  one  which  so  far  as  realised  would  destroy  their
function  and  character  for  us  ?

The  work  for  which  finite  mind  is  necessary  and
1  Cf.  Mind,  Lc.


364  NATURE, SELF,  AND  ABSOLUTE  LECT.

valuable  may  surely  be  summed  up  as  guidance,
includmg__will,  and  appreciation,  including  emotion.
Below  the  limits  of  adjustable  conduct  and  behaviour,
in  the  lower  organic  world,  as  in  most  of  the  actual
working  of  human  and  animal  bodies,  there  is  no
need,  as  I  have  pointed  out,1  of  finite  mind  for  will
or  guidance.  The  mind  which,  if  any,  we  presume
to  be  present  in  a  newt  or  an  orchid,  must  be  such
as  can  have  no  relation  in  the  way  of  guidance  to
the  processes  of  organic  "  restitution  "  or  the  con
trivance  of  fertilisation.  The  highest  human  intel-
lect  could  hardly  COnJflS£_ailch-dfi3d£fiS,  and  there  is
in  them  no  trace  of  the  peculiarities  which  attend
guidance  bj_cj^j^^  It  would  be  contrary

to  all  our  convictions  to  presuppose  subjective  mind
to  be  present  in  a  degree  obviously  irrelevant  to  any
functions  which  it  does,  or  apparently  could,  in  such
cases  perform.  Some  shrinking  from  the  hostile
and  attraction  to  the  favourable  there  may  be  in  the
higher  of  the  two  cases  mentioned,  in  the  lower  not
even  that  can  well  be  supposed.  A  marvellous
work  of  guidance  is  carried  on,  but  not  by  finite
subjective  mind.  This  relation  must  be  acknow
ledged  and  finally  accepted.

It  is  more  difficult  to  limit  the  value  of  mind  for
appreciation,  Why  should  not  a  plant  enjoy  its
own  being,  or  a  mountain  or  the  sea  feel  its  own
power  and  persistence  ?  Of  course  we  are  here  in
a  region  with  but  little  to  sustain  conjecture,  but  it
seems  worth  observing  that  appreciation  is  of  less
interest  as  its  object  loses  distinctiveness,  and  that,
according  to  all  presumptions  of  analogy  as  well  as
definite  evidence,  the  capacity  of  consciousness  for

1 Lecture  IV.  above,  and  its  Appendix  II.


x  IT  IS WE WHO  APPRECIATE  NATURE 365

distinctive  apprehension  must  diminish  as  we  go
down  the  organic  scale.  We  involuntarily  ascribe  to
the  higher  animals  some  appreciation,  analogous  to
ours,  of  their  own  grace  and  splendour.  But  even
here  we  probably  overstate.  It  is  impossible  to
suppose  that  their  own  appearance  is  known  to
them,  and  that  their  apparent  pride  and  pleasure  in
existence  has  any  support  beyond  their  immediate
feeling  of  life  and  vigour.  In  love  and  loyalty  to
offspring  and  to  their  group  their  minds  show  the
highest  appreciative  quality  which  we  can  discern  in
them,  but  this  value  or  function  of  consciousness
again,  we  should  suppose,  must  disappear  where
there  cease  to  be  distinctive  family  relations,
attended  by  a  more  or  less  constancy  in  a  special
behaviour  towards  certain  units  of  the  group.

Thus  even  in  the  higher  animal  world,  still  more
in  that  of  the  lower  organisms,  the  function  of
appreciation  can  hardly  be  supposed  to  exist  as  a
raison  d'etre  of  subjective  mind.  It  is,  on  the  other
hand,  emphatically  present  in  the .  onlooker,  the
higher  among  finite  spiritual  beings,  which,  in  a
wdrd,  appreciate  and  understand  the  lower  organic
world  very  far  better  than  that  world  can  be  sup
posed  to  appreciate  and  understand  itself.  Such  an
argument  applies  to  the  inorganic  world  very  much
more  strongly.  Suppose  a  mountain  or  a  lake  to
have  a  dim  subjectivity  of  its  own,  this  consciousness
can  neither  guide  itself,  nor  again  appreciate  itself  as
the  poet  and  artist  can  appreciate  it.  Whether
or  no  it  possesses  a  subjectivity,  its  subjectivity
does  nothing  in  the  finite  world.  Its  function
is  that  of  an  object  to  the  subjectivity  of  another,
an  externality  correlative  to  finite  mind,  not


366  NATURE, SELF,  AND  ABSOLUTE  LECT.


that of  a being  which  is itself  a  subject  or  finite
mind.

Thus  Pan-psychism  seems  to  me  a  gratuitous
hypothesis,  depending  on  a  hasty  resolution  of  the
responsiveness  of  Nature  to  mind  by  help  of  the
idea  of  resemblance,  and  wholly  failing  to  recog
nise  the  complejnenj^ijL^jim^tigns  of  subjective
mind  on  the  one  handarid_  externality  on  the  other
as  together  essential  to  any  complete  form  of  con
scious  experience.
starting  \\.  Suppose  that  now  we  start  from  the  opposite

from  _  _

"other-  point  of  view.  Let  us  conceive  of  externality,  of  a
arrive  aT  world  having  systematic  determinations  in  space  and
con°tente"°f  t^me'  whatever  the  secondary  and  tertiary  qualities
(e.g.,  aesthetic  qualities)  with  which  as  fully  experi
enced  it  may  be  endowed,  as  something  comple
mentary  to  subjective  mind,  something  apart  from
which  mind  would  not  be  itself,  would  not  be  a  self,
would  not  be  anything.  In  this  case  it  would  still,
in  a  sense,  be  true  that  nature  is  plastic,  is  respon
sive  to  finite  subjective  mind,  but  its  external  world
would  not,  in  principle,  be  held  to  be  resolvable  into
elements  which  are  themselves  severally  subjective
centres.  Itwould  have  a  distinctive  place  and  function
as  externality,  in  the  finite  world  and  in  the  universe,
and  that  place  and  function  would  amount  to  nothing
less  than  to  be  the  source  and  storehouse  of  all
positive  properties,  contents,  and  distinctions.  We
should  still  be  able,  if  we  liked,  to  say  that  it  is  a
symbol  of  mind,  the  expression  of  will,  or  of  intelli
gence  (which  of  these  we  say  really  makes  no  differ
ence  if  we  understand  what  we  are  talking  about,
for  either  is  inseparable  from  what  is  expressed,  and
neither  is  a  complete  or  felicitous  description  of  it),


x  ALL CONTENT  COMES FROM  NATURE 367

and  is  the  very  content  of  our  consciousness  embodied
in  a  form  in  which  we  learn  to  recognise  it.

But  all  this  is  a  little  unfair  to  the  part  really
played  by  Nature.

No  doubt  it  does  reveal  a  content  which  is  the
content  of  mind,  but  that  does  not  mean  that  mind
has  .&£-4#&&24he^  and  superfluously,

de  haut  en  bas,  comes  to  recognise  it  in  nature.
The  content  of  mind  is  the  content  of  Nature  because
Nature  is  the  instrument  or  element  of  the  Absolute
by  which  the  mind's  own  "  nature  "  is  communicated
to  it.  On  the  other  hand,  the  content  of  Nature  is
the_content  of  mind,  because  it  is  only  in  the  sphere
of  mind  that  Nature  reveals,  to  begin  with,  anything
at  all,  and  a  fortiori,  that  she  reveals  the  possibilities
of  life  and  spirituality  that  are  shut  up  within  her.
As  we  saw,  it  is  all  but  impossible  to  distinguish
Nature  from  mind.  To  separate  them  is  impossible.
If  you  ask,  what  in  Nature  is  not  mind,  you  can  only
answer,  the  fragmentary  or  disconnected  qua  frag
mentary  or  disconnected.  If  you  ask  what  in  mind
is  not  Nature,  you  can  only  answer,  the  spirit  of
totality,  the  attitude  which  makes  everything  alive
in  its  bearing  on  the  whole.  Thus  we  are  careful
not  to  libel  Nature  by  saying  that  she  has  no  mean
ing,  no  will  (if  we  prefer  the  phrase)  of  her  own,
but  simply  borrows  from  ours.  That  would,  in  our
view,  be  false  and  perverse.  On  the  contrary,  we
have  them  to  give  her  only  because  we  take
them,  nay,  we  are  and  exist  by  taking  them,  from
her.  Mind  hasjjodliDg-^fJta-Qmi  but  the  active/
foj^i^ofjotality  ;  everything  positive  it  draws^fronV
Nature.

The  parallel  in  this  respect  between  mind  and


368  NATURE, SELF,  AND  ABSOLUTE  LECT.


life  is  striking,  and  appears  to  me  to  be  insuffi
ciently  observed.  All  those  discussions  which  lay
weight  on  the  self-sufficingness  of  life  and  mind
respectively  as  guides,  initiators,  contrivers  among
the  forces  and  data  of  the  environment,  ignore  the
true  parallelism  and  the  relation  to  which  it  points.

There  is  no  credit  or  merit  due  to  life  or  mind,
as  compared  with  the  natural  environment,  on  the
ground  of  furnishing  definite  and  special  lines  of
variation,  peculiar  contrivances,  adaptations,  prin
ciples  belonging  to  them  and  not  to  nature  as  con
trasted  with  them.  Everything  points  to  the
general  conclusion  that  life  and  mind  respectively
are  the  appearance  at  diffej^nt^j^ges_^jLn_jC)mni-
polentiaP  principle,  wjy^jdiats^t^^
cpnteut  ancLde^lpjpm^^  I  n

the  case  of  life  the  general  term  for  this  evocation
of  form  from  the  environment,  whatever  its  detailed
methods,  is  natural  selection,2  and  the  same  term
will  serve,  in  a  somewhat  wider  sense,  for  the
evocation  of  finite  mind.3  In  both  cases  the
strength  of  the  principle  lies  in  what  might  be
called  its  emptiness.  It  brings  with  it  no  content
which  could  resist  or  oppose  the  organisation  of  all
contents.  And  when  we  are  told  of  the  contrast  of
life  with  the  supposed  mechanical  order  of  inorganic
nature,  we  have  to  remember  that  within  the  realm
of  life  itself,  and  above  its  first  appearance  in  some
speck  of  protoplasm,  there  is  a  huge  world  of
development  whose  reactions  are  no  less  determi
nate,  no  less  identical  under  identical  conditions,

1  The  term  is  coined  on  the  analogy  of  Driesch's  "  equi-potential
systems."

2  See  Lecture  IV.  above.  3  See  second  series.


x  SPIRIT—  THE WORLD TWICE-BORN  369

than  those  of  the  mechanical  world  proper.1  So
that  within  the  realm  of  life  itself  there  is  just  the
same  essential  contrast,  though  beginning  at  a
higher  level,  as  there  is  between  process  commonly
held  to  be  mechanical  and  the  world  of  life  as  a
whole  —  the  contrast  between  the  uniformity  of  the
responses  to  stimuli,  and  the  adaptation  and  qualita
tive  variety  of  the  new  developments.  Thus  the
latter  are  not  due  to  miraculous  guidance  and  con
trivance  on  the  part  of  life  or  mind  per  se  within  a
homogeneous  environment,  any  more  than  the
earliest  beginnings  of  organic  life  display  powers  of
initiative  and  self-adaptation  apart  from  relevant
stimuli  and  occasions  in  the  inorganic  world.  The
real  miracle  lies  in  the  significance  hidden  in  Nature
as  a  whole,  and  a  counterpart  miracle,  if  we  like,  in
the  omni-potentiality  of  life  and  mind,  which,  as  the
active  forms  of  totality,  are  able,  starting  from  a
minimum  of  organisation  or  of  subjective  being,  at
apparently  random  points  within  the  external  world,
to  elicit  into  organisms,  selves,  and  civilisations,  in
short,  into  a  second  nature,  whatever  is  latent  in
the  first.

External  nature,  then,  in  the  view  here  sug
gested,  is  not  a  masked  and  enfeebled  section  of
the  subject-  world,  but  isthat  from_which  all  finite

^


as  the  active  form  of  totality  is  revealed  in  partial
centres,  according  to  some  unknowji_Jaw_t)y__which

1  This  is  true  of  all  the  elementary  phenomena  of  life,  such  as
morphogenesis  and  restitution.  I  do  not  mean  to  suggest  that  there
are  in  the  universe  any  reactions  which  are  not  identical  under  iden
tical  conditions.  I  only  mean  that  in  the  lower  organic  world  such
reactions  are  as  normal  and  as  verifiable  experimentally  as  in  the
physico-chemical  world.

2  B


370  NATURE, SELF,  AND  ABSOLUTE  LECT.

nature,  under  certain  conditions  only,  becomes  the
vehicle  of  life  and  of  subjective  mind.  Independent
being  we  cannot  ascribe  to  it,  nor  could  we  do  so,
in  respect  of  its  character  as  we  are  aware  of  it,
even  supposing  it  an  appearance  of  minds  analogous
to  our  own.  For,  so  far  as  the  outside  is  concerned,
all  the  arguments  for  the  impossibility  of  independ
ence  in  primary,  secondary,  and  tertiary  properties
would  retain  their  force.  And  nothing  but  the  out
side  has  any  portion  in  our  world  or  any  contact
with  us.  We_w^n_t_jt_jor_J^^  to

our^  minds  ;  it  is  jdle  and  superfluous  J^give  it  a
mind  of  its  own.  Our  minds  are  its  own  mind.

Only,  it  must  be  repeated,  this  is  not  to  deprive
it  of  a  being  of  its  own,  or  to  make  it  merely  ancil
lary  to  the  ends  of  humanity.1  Our  view  is  not  that
we  bring  with  us  ends  which  Nature  is  bound  vto
subserve  ;  it  is  that  Nature  teaches  us  what  are  the
ends  of  the  universe  (so  far  as  in  our  given  phase
and  rank  we  are  able  to  appreciate  them)  and  we
are  able  to  learn.  It  is  a  vice  to  make  humanity
the  end 2  unless  all  we  mean  by  such  phrases  is  that
humanity  has  power  to  make  its  own  the  ends
which  the  universe  through  Nature  teaches  it  to
appreciate.

3.  The  system  of  the  universe,  it  was  said  in  an

1  Note  Miinsterberg's  just  protest  against  this  procedure,  Eternal
Values,  p.  276. Contrast  Man's  Place  in  the  Cosmos,  vi.  61.

2  Cf.  Laurence  Binyon,  Painting  in  the  Far  East,  p.  24  : "The
high  Renaissance  pride  and  glow  are  apt  to  leave  this  bitter  taste  in
the  end. Absorption  in  man  as  the  centre  of  the  world  and  the  hero
of  existence  leads  certainly  to  loss  of  that  sanity  and  sweetness  which
an  openness  to  the  abiding  presence  of  the  non-human  living  world
around  us  infuses  into  life. It  is  not  by  that  absorption  that  we  shall
find  the  full  meaning  or  animating  power  of  our  Western  faith  that  in
man  the  divinity  is  revealed." Cf.  above,  pp.  25-6.


x  FINITE  MIND  IS THE COPULA  371

earlier  lecture,  might  be  described  as  a  representa-  Finite..
tive  system. Nature, or  externality, lives  in  the 1
life of conscious beings. This characteristic is
essential and not  incidental. We call Nature a

splute — an

system  in  space  and  time  ;  but  if,  per  impossibile,  it  everyday

1 .  .  *  .  experience.

were  purely  in  space  and  time,  then  it  could  be
neither  in  the  one  nor  in  the  other.  Or,  to  put  the
point  more  simply  and  truly,  space  and  time  them
selves  are  Jiyind_formsjof  being.  They  are  exter
nality  and  succession,  presupposing  a  degree  of
unity  which  would  annihilate  them  if  it  either  were
completed  or  were  reduced  to  zero.  Nature  thusi
exists  only  through  finite  mind.  But  finite  minds  \
again  exist  only  through  nature.  All  finite  minds
focus  and  draw  their  detail  from  some  particular  /
sphere  of  external  nature.  They  in  some  degree  /
express  and  interpret  the  significance  of  external
conditions  for  a  focus  of  mind  arising  in  and  consti
tuting  a  certain  concentration  of  them.  Why  it  is
so,  in  an  ultimate  sense,  we  can  no  more  tell,  than
why  the  universe  is  what  it  is.  But  we  can  see
that  by  such  an  arrangement  the  value  of  all  that
the  universe  contains  may  be  elicited  (supposing  all
to  pass  through  finite  minds)  in  its  strength  and
purity  on  the  one  hand,  and  on  the  other  brought
into  a  form  which  lends  itself  to  a  yet  fuller  unity.
Every  instinct  of  what  we  call  the  lower  creation,
every  feeling  of  joy,  of  energy,  of  love,  even
throughout  the  animal  world,  is  the  outcome  of
some  set  of  external  conditions  as  focussed  in  life
and  mind,  and  is  fitted  to  pass  as  their  crown  and
climax  into  that  complete  experience  which  is  the
life  of  the  whole.

It is difficult if  we  start  from  such a  point  of


*-~  )


372  NATURE, SELF, AND  ABSOLUTE  LECT.

view,  which  nevertheless  is  almost  a  datum  of  fact,
to  understand  the  perplexity  and  hostility  aroused
by  the  conception  of  the  Absolute.  The  truth
seems  to  be  that  we  have  formed  to  ourselves  a
quite  unreally  hypostasised  notion  of  the  conscious
ness  of  finite  minds,  whether  of  the  animal  or  of  the
,  human  type.  We  seem  unable  to  shake  off  the
super  sti t ion_.  -which,  regards  them  as  substances,
crystaLiiucieia  fallen_or__cel£stial  angels,  or  both  at
once.  And  if  we  deny  these  characteristics  to  the
animal  mind  we  probably  for  that  reason  get  a  truer
notion  of  mind  from  it  than  from  our  traditional
ideas  of  the  human  soul.

The  whole  ground  of  discussion  would  be  changed
if  we  realised  how  every  fogus  of  rnnsr.ioiisness  is
aiXj^gart,  whose  success  is  subject  to  constant  and
enormous  fluctuations,  to  seize  and  make  its  own
the  value  and  significance  of  a  world1  beginning
from  some  simple  minimum  of  experience,  but
capable  of  extending  far  beyond,  and  appreciated
only  by  fits  and  starts.  So  far  from  its  being  a
strange  or  unwarranted  assumption  that  the  experi
ences  of  conscious  units  are  transmuted,  reinforced,
and  rearranged,  by  entrance  into  a  fuller  and  more
extended  experience,  the  thing  is  plainly  fact,  which,
if  we  were  not  blinded  by  traditional  superstition,
we  should  recognise  in  our  daily  selves  as  a  matter
of  course.2  We,  our  subjective  selves,  are  in  truth
much  more  to  be  compared  to  a  rising  and  falling
tide,  which  is  continually  covering  wider  areas  as  it

1  The  idea,  traceable,  e.g.,  in  James,  that  thinkers  of  Green's  type
take  the  finite  to  be  merely  the  object  of  the  Absolute  knowledge  and
not  a  constituent  of  the  Absolute  energy  has  no  foundation. Cf.
James'  Pluralistic  Universe,  p.  36.

2  Cf.  Lecture  I.  p.  27.


x  MINDS  RISE  AND FALL LIKE TIDES  373

deepens,  and  dropping  back  to  narrower  and  shal
lower  ones  as  it  ebbs,  than  to  the  isolated  pillars
with  their  fixed  circumferences,  as  which  we  have
been  taught  to  think  of  ourselves.

If  we  start  from  such  a  point  of  view,  for  which
there  is  ample  suggestion  in  Plato,1  the  contro
versy  about  Monism  assumes  a  new  appearance.
Pluralism,  which  indicates,  so  to  speak,  a  vertical
and  not  a  horizontal  division,  into  pillars  and  not
into  strata,  falls  away  as  relatively  unimportant  and
superseded,  though  not  wholly  false.  Multiplicism,
the  variety  of  levels  of  experience,  each  possessing
its  peculiar  range  and  area,  becomes  the  obvious
truth.  Dualism  loses  its  prominence  as  the  one  ^
antithesis  of  Monism,  and  the  question  of  Monism
and  the  Absolute  becomes  simply  the  question  how
far  we  are  able  to  maintain  a  unity  within  multi-
plicism  while  following  it  out  into  its  higher,  which
are  also  necessarily  its  deeper,  ranges.  The  general
formula  of  the  Absolute,  I  repeat,  the  transmute.^
tion  and  rearrangement  of  particular  experiences,
and  also  of  the  contents  of  particular  finite  minds,
by  inclusion  in  a  completer  whole  of  experience,  is
a  matter  of  everyday  verification.  The  elements
of  our  experience  are  transmuted  by  every  change
of  work  and  of  scene,  and,  in  co-operation  of  several
minds,  the  constituent  elements  of  them  all  are
modified  into  members  of  the  new  and  common
mind  which  arises.2  It  may  be  objected  that  this

1  There  is  no  reason  for  giving  a  pre-eminent  place  to  "  Dualism  "
in  Plato's  account  of  the  levels  of  experience. We  might  just  as  well
speak  of  his  quadruplism  or  triplicism,  or  even  multiplicism.

2  For  the  facts  on  this  head  as  recognised  by  modern Genossen-
schaftsrecht,  so  far  as  a  corporate  will  is  concerned,  see  Maitland's
Introduction  to  his  translation  of  Gierke's  Political  Theories  of  the
Middle  Ages,


374  NATURE, SELF,  AND  ABSOLUTE  LECT.

latter  is  a  mere  abstraction,  depending  on  some  one
or  two  common  objects  with  which  the  several
minds  come  in  contact.  But  in  principle  this  is  not
so,  though  the  unity  may  be  of  any  degree  of
depth  or  shallowness,  and  the  utterance  is  much
restricted  as  compared  with  the  felt  unity.  The
tendency  of  minds  is  always  in  forming  a  working
whole  to  supplement  and  widen  and  reinforce  each
other  on  various  sides  and  in  innumerable  details.
In  the  inclusive  spirit  that  is  the  result  every  mind
contributes  to  the  others  something  of  its  own  mind
and  content,  so  that  in  proportion  as  they  are  thus
deepened  and  widened  together,  the  detail  of  the
minimum  consciousness  of  each,  fears  pains  and
perplexities,  assumes  quite  a  different  value  and
colouring  from  that  which  they  possess  in  the
minimum  of  normal  existence.1  Our  mere  varieties
of  mood  during  the  day  produce  an  effect  on  us
which  is  obviously  analogous  to  this,  owing  to  the
different  contents  by  which  we  are  affected,  and  we
experience  every  day  and  all  day  long  the  same
kind  of  fluctuation  in  the  value  and  relative  signifi
cance  of  the  details  of  existence.2

This  then,  so  far  from  being  an  idealistic  chimera,
is  the  common  law  and  fact  of  experience,  as  veri
fied  both  every  day  within  what  we  uncritically  take
as  our  single  private  consciousness,  so  far  as  its

1  See,  e.g.,  Trevelyan's account of  the Thousand under Gari
baldi. But the fact is not  merely exceptional. All of  us draw
courage from our soldiers, industry from our workers, and so
on. That is  the  true  meaning  of  Plato's  virtues  of  the  Common
wealth.

2  When  James  lays  it  down  (Pluralistic  Universe,  p. 38)  that
"  we  must always experience  the  Absolute  as  if  it  were  a  foreign
being,"  I  feel  on  this  point  I  have  no  common  experience  with  him.
See  Lecture  I.  I.e.


x  DUALISM, TRIPLICISM, QUADRUPLISM  375

weakness  may  permit,1  and  on  the  larger  scale  when
we  compare  together  such  creations  as  the  State,
and  fine  art,  and  religion,  and  when  we  note  the
mode  of  our  private  participation  in  them.2  There
is  no  magic  in  any  precise  enumeration  of  the  levels
of  experience,  such  as  Plato  has  thrown  out  on
different  occasions.  You  may  take,  as  he  has
taken,  for  purposes  of  illustration,  two  main  levels,
or  three,  or  four,  or  a  great  number.  The  point  is
not  in  the  number  chosen,  but  in  the  character  of
the  transmutations ;  and  in  the  fact  that  they  are
not  merely  intellectual,  but  moral,  aesthetic,  and
religious  ;  that  they  form,  in  fact,  on  the  one  hand,
different  worlds  with  different  degrees  of  reality,
though  on  the  other  hand  they  are  nothing  but  one
and  the  same  world,  more  and  less  fully  experienced.3

1  I  mean  that  while  every  mind  unquestionably  shows  a  rise  and
fall  of  this  nature,  it  is  not  every  mind  that  reveals  plainly  the  higher
phases of experience. But  as  we shall see, something of  these
probably  comes  to  all.

2  The  question  of  the nature of  participation is  no harder  in
principle,  that  I  can  see,  in  the  case  of  the  Absolute  than  in  the  case
of  poetry. The  fact is,  our conscious life, being  a universal, is
essentially  a  participation  ;  though  ever  varying,  as  we  have  said,
in  degree.

3  I  am  sure  that  where  we  tend  to  go  wrong  in  interpreting  Plato,
is  by  failing  to  combine  the  two  principles  on  both  of  which  his  heart
was  set. Those  who  insist  on  the  transcendent  nature  of  the  Forms
are  so  far  in  the  right,  that  it  was  Plato's  main  passion  and  the  nisus
of  his  inspiration  to  portray  the  gulf  between  the  worlds  in  which
different  minds  may  actually  live  and  move. At  the  same  time,  the
whole  significance  of  this  contention  is  lost  if  it  is  not  held  together
with  the  truth maintained  by  those  who  deny  the  transcendence,
viz.,  that  the  world  is  above  all things  single,  and  the  difference
of  worlds  is  wholly  relative  to  degrees  of  impotence. In  the  passage
about "faculties"  and  their  objects, at  the  end  of  Rep.  v.,  he  is
insisting  on  these  two  truths  in  language  so  forcible  that  we  think  he
cannot  mean  what  he  says. "  We  do  really"  he  seems  to  be  saying,
"  live  in  different  worlds  according  to  the  differing  energy  of  our
minds  ;  but  again,  it  is  only  according  to  the  differing  energy  of  our
minds  that  we  do  live  in  different  worlds."


376  NATURE, SELF,  AND  ABSOLUTE  LECT.

The  real  4.  When  these  facts  are  given  their  due  weight,

thettgns?  a^  difficulties  in  the  conception  of  the  Absolute  are
expanding  m  principle  removed.  The  positive  proof  in  its
common  ^avour  rests  logically  on  the  principle  of  non-contra-
fiuitemind.  diction,  in  respect  of  its  positive  bearing  as  explained
in  an  earlier  lecture.1  When  the  nature  of  the
normal  process  by  which  a  contradiction  is  removed
has  once  been  appreciated  and  observed  to  be  valid
not  merely  in  abstract  cognition,  but  throughout  all
the  regions  of  our  experience,  no  difficulty  of  principle
remains  in  affirming  a  complete  unification  in  which
all  contradictions  are  destroyed,  though  diversity  or
a  negative  aspect  of  course  remain.  From  finding
our  way  among  mountains  to  moulding  our  daily
business  with  a  self-consistent  purpose  or  solving  an
economic  problem,  or  discerning  the  reality  of
beauty  through  the  appearance  of  ugliness,  or  the
lovable  through  the  apparent  failings  of  character,
we  find  from  day  to  day  how  contradictory  aspects
blend  into  harmony  as  linking  and  distinguishing
contents  come  into  view.

But,  it  will  be  asked,  do  we  not  find  the  opposite?
Does  not  greater  knowledge  bring  greater  suffering
and  the  highest  effort  encounter  the  most  insuper
able  obstacles  ?  And  the  answer  seems  to  be,  that
this  is  not  so  in  any  sense  that  could  invalidate  the
principle  on  which  we  are  proceeding.  Every  finite
being  has  some  limits  :  that  does  not  surprise  us,
when  once  we  understand  what  finiteness  is.  And
its  properties  are  ill-balanced  ;  that  again  does  not
surprise  us.  It  is  not  a  perfect  microcosm  or  minia
ture  of  the  universe  ;  so  that  its  knowledge,  love,
and  happiness  do  not  keep  step  together.  That  is

1 Lecture  II.


x  ONE  DAY  IS  PROOF  ENOUGH  377

natural  for  beings  which  are  fragments  of  a  greater
being.  But  all  this  granted,  still,  so  far  as  the  finite
being  lives  a  life  at  all,  it  affirms  in  its  whole
existence  the  principle  of  the  Absolute.  It  trans
mutes  toil  into  happiness  by  seeing  it  as  a  pledge  of
devotion,  and  pain  into  love  by  the  depth  of  the
tenderness  it  evokes,  and  hardship  into  courage  by
its  revelation  of  what  a  man  is  able  to  be.  That  it
fails  in  degree,  and  in  degrees  which  are  not  con
comitant,  is  nothing  at  all  against  such  an  analysis
of  its  nature  if  we  have  once  accepted  finiteness.
We  are  not  here  preaching  optimism  or  "justifying
the  ways  of  God. "  We  are  doing  something  much
more  humble  and  critical.  We  are  pointing  out
that_transmutation  of  experience,  in  accordance  with
the  law  of  non-contradiction  in  its  positive  bearing,
is  the  principle  of  daily  life.  And  if  this  is  admitted
here,  there  can  be  no  reason  for  making  it  a
fundamental  difficulty  when  we  come  to  deal
with  ultimate  reality.  There  is  no  hiatus  in  the
transition.

It  is  likely  to  be  said  that  these  appeals  to  daily
fact  and  commonplace  life  add  nothing  to  knowledge.
But  what  is  to  be  done  ?  The  facts  no  doubt  are
familiar  ;  they  are  indeed  commonplaces  of  litera
ture  and  practice.  But  their  significance,  to  my
amazement,  seems  never  to  be  noted,  and  therefore
it  is  essential  to  dwell  on  it.  It  seems  well  within
the  mark  to  say  that  a  careful  analysis  of  a  single
day's  life  of  any  fairly  typical  human  being  would
establish  triumphantly  all  that  is  needed  in  principle
for  the  affirmation  of  the  Absolute.  For  this  is
merely  something  more  of  what  we  are  continually
experiencing,  and  the  hard  and  fast  limits  of  range


378  NATURE, SELF,  AND  ABSOLUTE  LECT.

and  quality  often  attributed  to  our  self  or  personality
are  not  to  be  found  anywhere  in  the  real  world.

When  we  come  to  the  great  achievements  of
knowledge,  of  social  and  super-social  morality,  of
the  sense  of  beauty,  and  of  religion,  the  argument
that  the  limits  of  our  normal  self  cannot  be  applied
as  limitations  to  our  ultimate  self  becomes  irresistible.
But  as,  in  this  sphere,  the  principal  transformations
of  the  minimum  self  are  already  victoriously  initiated,
and  in  some  degree  set  apart,  the  evidence  of  such
transformations  as  normal  facts  of  conscious  living
is  actually  less  striking  than  in  the  course  of  a  com
mon  day  when  we  are  continually  aware  of  their
taking  place.  If  I  instance  Plato  or  Shakespeare,
the  answer  comes  readily,  "  But  you  are  not  Plato
or  Shakespeare,  far  from  it."  The  expansive  power
of  the  common  mind  is  really  the  crux.

The  Abso-  5 5. Regarded from such a point of view the
Absolute  is  simply  the  high-water  mark  of  fluctua-


I


famiii°rfa  fions  in  experience,  of  which,  in  general,  we  are
^a^y  an<^  normally  aware.1  The  evanescence  of
the  limits  of  personality,  or  rather,  their  absorp-

illustration. .  .  .  . . . . 1  n

tion in  an  experience which  is  deeper  as  well  as
wider  than  our  minimum  self,  as  in  the  supersocial

1  What  is  meant  by  the  frequently  reiterated  criticism  that  the
Absolute  is  non-human,  is,  as  it  were,  divorced  from  human  life,  I  am
wholly  unable  to  understand.  Cf.  James,  cit.  supra.  If  nothing
more  is  meant  than  that  it  is  not  present  in  its  full  nature  within  any
finite  experience,  this  is  nothing  but  a  truism  regarding  any  and
every  feature  of  the  objective  world  in  the  commonest  sense  of  the
term  —  the  sun,  history,  love,  or  poetry.  But  if  it  is  meant  to  deny
that  our  experience  is  more  human  and  valuable,  as  well  as  more
solid  and  more  verifiable,  in  proportion  as  we  approach  the  Absolute,
the  denial  is  utterly  futile  and  foolish.  We  experience  nothing
perfectly,  but  we  experience  the  Absolute  better  than  we  experience
anything  else,  because  it  is  greater  and  because  everything  else  we
only  experience  among  other  things,  the  Absolute  we  experience  in
everything.  Cf.  Lecture  I.


x  THE TREASURE OF THE HUMBLE  379

activities  ; l  and  also  the  transmutation  of  externality
and  obstruction  into  instruments  and  factors  of
more  complete  living,  are  in  their  general  type
familiar  facts  of  every  day.  The  technical  point  lies
in  paying  due  attention,  with  Plato,  to  the  levels  of
experience,  as  determined  by  the  logical  criterion,
and  not  allowing  ourselves  to  be  obsessed  by  con
sideration  of  its  divisions  into  partially  exclusive
centres.2  Of  course,  and  fortunately,  finite  excel
lence  is  much  broken  up  and  subject  to  division  of
labour.  It  is  not  as  if  some  persons  were  at  the
highest  level  in  everything,  and  the  rest  nowhere.3
If  we  adequately  noted  the  meaning  of  the
"  philosophic "  spirit  in  Plato,  we  should  see  that
he  leaves  plenty  of  room  in  the  highest  place  for
the  Treasure  of  the  Humble.4  It  is  his  purely
diagrammatic  representation  of  the  ultimate  co
herence  of  all  excellences,  which  is  true  in  principle,
that  suggests  the  reverse  to  superficial  readers.

Let  us  have  the  audacity  to  select  an  actual  work
of  man  as  a  remote  analogue  of  the  Absolute,  simply

1  Cf.  Philosophical  Theory  of  the  State, 2nd  ed.,  Introduction.
I  have  there  pointed  out  that  such  supersocial  activities  as  Art  and
Religion  are  at  once  the  quintessence  of  social  life,  and  beyond  its
machinery  of  explicit  group-relations. See  further  Appendix  II.  below.

2  We  shall  return  to  this  subject  in  the  second  series.

3  What  those  who  call  the  Absolute  non-human  (and  a  fortiori  I
suppose  non-animal)  make  of  the  dog  that  dies  for  its  master,  or  the
sparrow  for  her  young,  not  to  speak  of  the  love  of  mothers,  and  the
devotion  of  comrades  among  the  poor,  I  cannot  imagine. It  is  no
answer  to say  that these  are not  the whole Absolute  in  its  full
transcendent  nature. They  are  transcendent,  in  the  only  true  sense,
and  it  is  in  and  through  them,  with  other  elements,  that  we  faintly
learn  what  experiencing  it  means.

4  The  title  of  Maeterlinck's  well-known  work. See  on  this  whole
point  R.  L.  Nettleship,  Remains,  vol.  i.  p.  385  : "In  the  heart  and
on  the  lips  of  Plato  the  love  of  wisdom  is  itself  that  divine  foolishness,
that  strength  in  weakness,  before  which  the  cunning  of  the  world  and
the  pageantry  of  power  fade  and  are  discomfited."


380  NATURE, SELF,  AND  ABSOLUTE  LECT.

in  order  to  explain  the  general  structure  which  we
attribute  to  it  in  respect  of  nature  and  of  finite
selves.

Let  us  think  of  the  mind  of  Dante  as  uttered  in
the  Divine  Comedy,  in  relation,  on  the  one  hand,  to
the  spatial  universe,  and  more  particularly  to  Italy,
and  also,  on  the  other  hand,  to  the  characters,  the
selves,  represented  in  his  poem.

In  the  first  place,  externality,  the  country  of
Italy,  and  in  a  lesser  degree  the  universe,1  as  an
extension  in  space  and  time,  is  there  in  the  experi
ence.  It  is  not  destroyed  or  abstracted  from,  but
yet  appears  throughout  as  something  more  than
extension  in  space  and  time — as  expression,  char
acter,  emotion,  of  a  kind,  however,  in  which  real
externality  is  involved.  It  is  needless  to  labour  the
point.  Dante  is,  under  reservation  for  his  peculiar
place  in  history,  the  voice  of  Italy,  as  Shakespeare
is  of  England.  Each  of  them  is  his  country  "  come
alive."  In  such  a  passage  as  "  I  ruscelletti,"  2  we
see  how,  by  the  alchemy  of  genius,  external  Nature,
while  still  external,  has  passed  into  a  concrete
emotion.

In  the  next  place,  the  selves  who  figure  in  the
poem  have  all  rendered  up  their  content  to  the
great  experience  which  was  the  poet's  mind,  and  are
constituent  parts  of  it ;  while  none  the  less  it  is
necessary  for  its  effectiveness  as  a  poem,  that  they
should  be  regarded  as  acting  and  thinking  beings

1  Dante's  misconception  of  the  universe  from  the  scientific  point
of  view,  partly,  I  suppose,  wilful  and  allegorical, is  irrelevant  'here.
So  is  the  element  of  pessimism  in  his  theology. The  question  is
merely  of  the  development  of  fact  in  his  imagination.

2  Inferno,  xxx.  64. The  observation  might  be  extended  to  the
whole structure of  the universe, as Dante has framed it in his
imagination.


x FREE  SELVES  PARTS  OF  A  GREATER  SELF 381

for  themselves  and  in  the  outer  world. For  pur
poses of  the analogy, it does not  matter  greatly
whether a poem is purely imaginative, or, like
Dante's, semi-historical. Always  it  presumes  and
presents  the  selves  as  real  agents  in  the  historical  or
external  field,  though  it  also  makes  them  part  of  a
vision  of  reality  more  profound  and  complete  than
they  themselves,  or  the  onlooker  at  prosaic  or  at
poetic  history,  are  supposed  to  recognise. But  it  is
to  be  emphasised  that  the  selves,  however  on  the  one
side  to  be  taken  as  historically  or  externally  actual,  yet
are  not  pure  separate  objects,  disconnected  from  the
mind  which  is  the  poem,  merely  mirrored  by  it,  and
existing  outside  and  for  themselves  only. On  the
contrary,  all  of  these  selves  are  in  their  degree  par
ticipants in the moods,  volitions,  and  perceptions
which, taken as a whole of  experience, are  the
substance  and  tissue  of  the  poet's  mind  in  the  poem
—the  conflicting  passions  of  Italy,  of  the  Empire
and  the  Papacy,  in  a  word,  of  human  nature  within
a  certain  historical  region. In  accordance  with  the
view maintained above,1 all the minds are con
templated  as  actually  extending  in  various  degrees
beyond  their  minimum  point  of  historical attach
ment  ; 2  and  in  the  levels  and  ranges  of  being  which
they  achieve  embody  all  varieties  up  to  the  range
and level of the poem itself. In Vergil and
Beatrice the level of the poem — of the poet's
imaginative  vision — is  even  supposed to  be  tran
scended, and here, therefore  the analogy to the
Absolute  must  fail. But  it  is  good  as  suggesting  the
nature  of  finite  participation  in  reality,  through  the

1 Lecture  III.  p.  115.
'  This  point  will  be  more  fully  considered  in  the  second  series.


382  NATURE, SELF, AND  ABSOLUTE  LECT.

varying  grasp  and  fluctuating  power  of  the  selves
which  constitute  it.  In  principle,  we  see,  the  Abso
lute  is  only  the  totality  of  a  hold  on  reality  which
permeates  in  its  degree  all  the  conscious  creatures
of  the  creation,  and  uses  all  its  externality.

Finite  selves,  then,  reveal  themselves  as  the
copula,1  the  living  tension,  by  which  the  full  experi
ence  affirms  itself  in  and  through  externality  just  as
through  certain  selves  Dante's  mind  laid  hold  of
Italy  and  the  world.  Every  self,  as  we  have  seen,
is  the  representative  centre  of  an  external  world  ;
some  nature  "  comes  alive  "  in  it.  Every  self  par
takes  in  some  degree  of  selves  and  experiences
beyond  its  own  centre  or  minimum,  and  so  expands
from  its  place  in  nature  to  a  more  or  less  wide  and
deep  participation  in  the  Absolute  ;  within  which
expansion,  as  by  all  inclusion  of  content,  some
degree  of  transmutation  is  effected  in  the  matter
of  the  selves  and  experiences  which  it  partially
includes.

The  Absolute,  finally,  as  remotely  suggested  by
the  whole  experience  which  is  the  living  form  and
substance  of  the  poem — the  poem  as  a  thought  and
mood  in  its  fullest  completeness 2 — is  a  perfect  union
of  mind  and  nature,  absorbing  the  world  of  Nature
by  and  through  the  world  of  selves.  Every  self  is
a  copula,  a  meeting  point  of  tension  and  fulfilment,  a
self-maintenance  of  the  one  life  through  a  portion  of
the  external,  and  of  the  external  as  centred  in  a
case  of  the  one  life.  But,  as  it  is  distantly  figured
in  the  poem,  the  complete  experience  brings  to-

1  Cf.  Hegel, Wiss.  d.  Logik,  iii.  72.

"2  A  poem  exists  in many  degrees  ; cf.  A. C.  Bradley, Oxford
Lectures,  p.  28.


x  WE  SHOULD START  FROM  ABOVE  383

gether  all  the  selves,  with  nothing  omitted,1  but
transformed  and  expanded  by  the  place  they  hold
and  the  illumination  they  receive  in  it.  Such  inci
dents  as  those  of  Paolo  and  Francesca,  of  Ugolino,
or  of  Ulysses,  are  worth  many  pages  of  theory,  when
we  come  to  ask  ourselves  how  there  can  be  meaning
in  speaking  of  an  actual  historical  self  as  transformed
and  expanded  in  the  reality.

Such  phrases  as  transformed,  transmuted,  ex
panded,  indeed,  though  convenient  for  our  procedure,
which  naturally  makes  its  start  from  the  common
facts  of  our  lives,  are  in  one  way  false  and  mis
leading.  The  true  normal,  of  course,  is  the  real ;
and  it  is  the  self  as  we  know  him  in  Space  and
Time — whether  our  own  self  or  that  of  others — who
is  a  figure  deformed  and  diminished,  as  we  see  him,
by  our  impotence  to  attain  the  grasp  which  holds
all  being  in  one,  and  by  the  individual  being
narrowed  down  for  us  into  an  appearance,2  in
complete  and  successive,  in  actual  history.  As
we  saw  above,3  this  naturally  happens  to  every
aspect  of  a  supreme  whole,  and  must  happen  to
it  if  a  system  of  finite  centres  is  to  be  the  rule  of
the  universe.  Nature  must  drop  down  almost 4  into
space  and  time,  selves  must  drop  down  into  con
sciousnesses  only  partly  transcending  their  spatio-

1  Obviously  this  is  a  characteristic  which  cannot  be  reproduced
in  a  finite  example. But  it  is  well  to  remember  that  if  Shakespeare
were  to  portray  one  of  us,  he  would  tell  us  a  great  deal  more  of  our
selves  than  we,  or  common  history,  were  aware  of.

2  This  is  quite  recognised  by  common  sense  in  such  matters  as,
e.g.,  the  attempt  to  pass  final  moral  judgments. Mr.  McTaggart  has
somewhere  a  fine  speculation  that  the  love  which  clings  to  the  "worth
less  "  has  divined  a  truth  beyond  our  knowledge,  and  I  do  not  doubt
that  this  idea,  which  common  feeling  strongly  supports,  is  sound.

3  Lecture  VII.  3.

4  For  the  reason  why  one  must  say  "almost,"  see  above,  p.  371.


384  NATURE,  SELF, AND  ABSOLUTE  LECT.

temporal  limits  ;  the  concrete  vision  of  mind  must
drop  down  into  a  degree  of  relative  separation  as
Nature  and  as  subjects.  But  it  is  all-important  for
us  to  note,  as  we  insisted  in  the  passage  referred
to,  that  the  dissociation  of  the  Absolute  (to  employ
this  expression  in  our  own  sense),  which  is  met
with  in  daily  life,  never  at  all  approaches  complete
ness.  There  is  no  fusion  or  union  which  we  can
conceive  ourselves  bound  to  ascribe  to  the  Absolute
in  its  own  form,  which  has  not  something-  to  repre
sent  it  in  the  world  of  time  and  space.  Take  the
case  of  these  abstractions  themselves,  which  we
hypostasise  really  owing  to  the  mere  custom  of
current  talk,  where  their  names  have  such  glib
currency.  We  remember  that  no  mere  time  and
space,  and  no  being  merely  in  time  or  space,  are
or  can  be  present  in  our  own  experience.1

This  stubborn  dissociation  of  the  Absolute,  how
ever,  the  rule  and  essence  of  finite  life,  is  an  obstacle
to  the  effectiveness  of  our  illustration  which  only  a
vigorous  sympathy  with  its  intention  can  even  in
part  overcome.  But  it  is  something  to  recognise
where  precisely  the  difficulty  lies.  In  actual  exist
ence  Dante's  poem  was  a  great  imaginative  creation
in  a  single  human  mind.2  The  nature  and  history
with  which  it  dealt  were  separate  and  independent
facts,  outside  it,  as  we  should  say,  and  merely  more
or  less  reflected  in  it.  But  all  we  can  use  in  our
comparison  is  not  the  actual  independent  historical
or  natural  fact,  but  only  the  reflection  or  interpreta
tion  of  this  fact  within  the  imaginative  product  of

1  See  above,  p.  371.

2  For  our  purpose  we  may  disregard  its  reproduction  in  other
minds.


x MINDS  AND SPACE  IN  A QUASI-ABSOLUTE 385

Dante's  mind.  And  so,  of  course,  we  are  liable  to
convey  the  impression  that  we  are  content  to  re
present  reality — rocks  and  streams,  men  and  cities —
as  the  figures  of  somebody's  dream.

But  this  is  to  ignore  our  point.  Our  meaning
depends  on  placing  ourselves  within  the  world  of
Dante's  imagination,  and  taking  its  nature  and  its
figures  (whether  in  fact  "  historical "  or  purely
poetical),  as  his  imagination  necessarily  took  them,
for  the  actual  scenery  and  inhabitants  of  that
"actual"  world.  And  what  we  are  to  learn  from
this  effort  is,  we  suggest,  something  of  the  true
relation  between  an  actual  Nature  and  personalities,
as  we  habitually  regard  them,  on  the  one  hand — for
Dante's  imagination  clearly  brings  beings  like  these
before  itself  and  us — and  the  spiritual  interpretation
which  exhibits  all  these  facts,  on  the  other  hand,  as,
without  detriment  to  their  actuality  l  elements  in  a
Vast  unitary  vision  and  experience  constituting  a
single  spiritual  world.  It  is  not  merely  what  we
have  in  Wordsworth,  or  any  spiritual  interpretation
of  life.  For  we  here  have  actual  persons  shown  as
moving  freely,  and  obviously  themselves  and  self-
determined,  while  no  less  obviously,  though  merely
through  a  deeper  insight  into  their  selves,  exhibited
as  elements  within  an  embracing  spiritual  universe,
the  universe  as  present  to  Dante's  imagination.
And  this  spiritual  world  we  feel  on  the  whole — with
immense  reservations — not  to  be  an  arbitrary  and
artificial  comment  on  the  imagined  factual  history
as  lying  outside  it,  but  to  be  of  the  nature  of  a
revelation  of  the  true  appearance  which  such  a
history  might  yield  under  intense  illumination,

1  The  imagined  actuality  of  the  imaginative  world.

2  C


386  NATURE, SELF, AND  ABSOLUTE LECT.  x

without  detriment  to  its  factual  objectivity  for  the
common  eye.

In  the  ultimate  reality — knoMrn  to  us  as  our
everyday  world — which  we  were  thus  attempting
to  illustrate,  we  are  confronfed,  as  I  said,  with  a
far  more  stubborn  dissociation.  Here  the  element
corresponding  to  the  unitary  experience  embodied
in  Dante's  poem  is  prima  facie  wanting.  What
confronts  us  in  everyday  life  is  a  huge  obstinate
plurality  of  independent  facts.  So  we  are  told.
In  a  large  measure,  as  I  said  at  starting,  I  deny  the
statement.  But  let  us  take  it  at  its  worst.  In  face
of  this  obstinate  dissociation,  what  I  have  attempted
to  effect,  and  what  is  summarised  in  the  final  illus
tration,  is  to  show,  both  by  systematic  logic,  and  by
the  interrogation  of  our  higher  obvious  experience,
that  our  life,  within  the  region  of  genuine  fact,
contains  uncounted  degrees  of  power  and  insight,
by  which,  without  in  any  way  denying  that  things
are  what  they  are,  we  can  attain  to  some  beginning
and  can  frame  some  positive  conception  of  what
more  *  they  must  be,  and  how  if  we  take  them  as
such  a  "  more,"  they  are  at  once  more  themselves,
and  plainly  indicate  their  dissociation  to  be  a
character  of  partial  reality,  and  their  full  nature
to  lie  in  the  universe  of  a  single  experience.

This  concludes  our  general  theory  of  the  self-
interpretation  of  the  real  through  the  fundamental
principle  of  individuality.  Another  year,  we  shall,
I  hope,  be  able  to  pursue  in  detail  the  ideas  which
it  leads  us  to  entertain  of  man's  worth  and  destiny.

1  See  author's  Logic,  2nd  ed.,  ii.  301  on  the  fallacy  of  withdrawal
or  abstraction  in  the  search  for  reality.


APR  I  DOCTRINES OF THE  ABSOLUTE  387


APPENDIX I TO LECTURE X

I  SUBJOIN  in  an  Appendix  a  discussion  of  some  recent
and  special  metaphysical  doctrines  of  the  Absolute.  In
the  following  book  I  shall  attempt  to  work  out  its
relation  to  the  individual  as  it  affects  our  conception  of
his  fortunes  and  destiny.

i. The  eternal  character  of  the  Absolute,  its  inclusion  An  aii-
of  all  succession  in  a  non-temporal  whole,  has  lately  been  l^^fe
affirmed  to  be  explicable  by  the  doctrine  of  the  span  of  conscious-
consciousness  and  the  specious  present.1  transforms

Our  present  is  undoubtedly  perceived  as  a  solid — a  the  events
duration — and  not  as  a  vanishing  point  between  past  and  gain.™
future.  Postulate — so  I  understand  the  argument — the
same  character  for  an  all-inclusive  experience,  and  you
may  regard  it  as  seeing  the  whole  series  of  events  at  a
blow,  just  as  we  may  hear  a  sentence  or  a  musical  phrase
as  a  single  thing.  This  is  all  the  secret  of  eternity,  it  is
suggested,  and  there  is  nothing  more.  The  succession  of
events  is  before  the  Divine  Mind  2  as  the  notes  of  a  single
musical  phrase  may  be  before  our  mind  ;  in  one  sense,
all  at  once,  in  another  sense,  as  a  succession.  Its  span  of
consciousness  can  embrace  an  infinite  succession  as  a
unity.

I  will  go  at  once  to  the  fundamental  difficulty  of
principle  which  I  feel  in  this  hypothesis.  Among  the
occurrences  which  are  present  as  at  once  to  a  conscious
ness  with  a  protracted  time-span,  the  later  must  either
modify  the  earlier,  or  not.  If  they  do  3  it  is  impossible
that  the  string  of  events  can  remain,  in  actual  content,
within  a  longer  span  of  consciousness,  what  they  were,  or
could  be,  within  a  shorter.  A  man  passes,  say,  four  hours

1  Royce, World  and  Individual,  ii.  145  ff.

2  I do  not gather  that any difference  between God and the
Absolute  is  treated  as  relevant  here.

3  This  seems  to  me  the  fact  in  any  portion  of  succession  appre
hended  as  a  whole.


388  DOCTRINES OF THE  ABSOLUTE  APP.

in  misery  because  he  fancies  that  a  friend  has  taken
offence  at  some  act  of  his.  At  the  end  of  the  four  hours
he  becomes  aware  that  he  was  mistaken,  and  his  distress
is  dispelled.  If  the  later  contents  act  on  the  earlier
within  the  same  specious  present  of  the  longer  span  of
consciousness,  in  the  same  way  as  they  do  within  the
shorter  specious  present  of  an  ordinary  consciousness,  the
four  hours'  interval  of  distress  must  for  such  a  conscious
ness  cease  to  exist  as  such.  It  cannot  help  being  trans
formed,  and  turned,  on  the  whole,  to  a  feeling  partaking
of  gladness.  Granting  that  the  supposed  omnipresent
mind  is  merely  a  spectator,  still  a  spectator  for  whom  the
end  is  within  one  and  the  same  specious  present  as  the
beginning  cannot  regard  that  beginning  as  one  does  who
has  it  without  the  end.  I  am  far  from  denying,  however —
I  am,  indeed,  anxious  to  assert — that  in  the  larger  reality
thus  envisaged  the  sorrow  must  survive,  and,  blending
with  the  subsequent  joy,  give  rise  to  a  content  different
from  either.  Still,  there  must  be  a  transformation.1  If
again  within  the  one  specious  present  the  later  occurrences
do  not  modify  the  earlier,  if  that  is  to  say,  as  in  a
common  temporal  succession,  the  earlier  are  not  influenced
till  the  later  have  occurred,  then  we  have  no  trans
mutation,  but  only  a  fixed  panorama  of  exactly  the
same  occurrences  which  form  a  diorama  for  the  man  who
goes  through  them.  This  gives  a  mere  aggregate  or
congeries.  Omniscience  is  then  to  see  in  any  lapse  of
successive  events  nothing  more  than  a  finite  being  would
see  so  far  as  he  followed  that  identical  lapse.2  Surely
this  will  not  do.  Though  nothing  is  omitted  in  the
perfect  mind,  everything  must  be  transformed  ;  and  the


1  Such  a  fusion  may  be  read  backwards,  i.e.  taking  the  complete
unity  as  starting  point  according  to  the  conception  of  the  dissociation
of  the  Absolute  ;  and  thus  we  should  obtain  a  lifelike  idea  of  the  way
in  which  want  and  fulfilment  are  dragged  apart  by  appearance  in  the
finite  realm.

2  The  point  is  illustrated  by  Kant's  idea  that  God  would  see  in  a
unity  what  for  us  is  the  unending  moral  progression. How  as  a
unity  ? The  idea  is  meaningless  unless  it  involves  a  transformation
in  kind.


I  DOES  PERFECTION  INVOLVE  LOSS?  389

bare  events  as  we  (by  superficial  abstraction)  say  that
"  we "  know  them,  cannot  be  what  take  place  for  the
Divine  Mind  or  the  Absolute.  Applying  our  former
arguments  we  see  that  this  is  inconceivable.  For  the
so-called  bare  events  are  not  the  same  for  any  two  human
beings,  whether  agents  or  observers.  How  can  they
possibly  be  the  same  for  a  finite  spectator  and  for  the
perfect  mind  ?  On  this  showing,  a  doctor  or  an  expert
magistrate,  not  to  speak  of  a  Dante  or  a  Shakespeare,
would  be  far  better  off  than  the  Absolute  experience.
For  unquestionably  to  spectators  so  qualified,  occurrences
which  are  dumb  and  single  happenings  to  the  sufferer
and  to  the  ordinary  looker-on  will  reveal  themselves  as
steps  in  a  destiny,  and  as  phases  of  recovery  or  of
decay.

2.  A  difficult  problem,  that  of  loss  or  forfeiture  Perfection
through  advance  towards  totality,  must  just  be  mentioned  j™1^0.11"
here.  The  complete  mind,  it  will  be  urged,  though  it  perfection,
cannot  accept  the  four  hours'  misery  as  final,  must  be  ^
able  to  appreciate  the  feeling  of  the  finite  mind  which
for  the  moment  does  so.

In  this  sense  it  must  include  the  aggregate  of  incidents  il  does.
as  well  as  their  transformation.  Every  perfection,  it
would  seem,  however  in  principle  inclusive,  must  super
sede  or  thrust  out  some  other  appearance  or  expression,
unless,  what  seems  inconceivable  and  what  we  have  just
rejected,  there  are  also  reproduced  by  literal  repetition
innumerable  variations  that  fall  within  it.  How  far,  and
by  what  rule,  does  the  truer  truth,  the  more  perfect  art,
the  higher  religion,  the  more  total  and  complete  reality,
supersede  and  render  obsolete  and  fit  to  be  blotted  out
the  tentative  or  imperfect  or  one-sided  phase  of  either  ?
For  all  of  these,  though  more  satisfactory  and  more
complete  than  their  ruder  forerunners  (taking  as  a  good
example  the  relation  of  successful  to  tentative  effort)  yet
are  different  from  them.  The  picture  may  in  a  sense
include  the  sketch  ;  but  the  sketch  has  a  something  that
we  miss  in  the  picture.  Can  the  divine  being,  or  the
Absolute,  not  apprehend  or  feel  imperfectly,  and  would
such  inability  be  a  defect  ?


390  DOCTRINES OF THE  ABSOLUTE  APR

Now  how  far  is  this  to  be  pressed  ?  I  do  not  think
we  escape  by  saying  that  though  he  cannot  apprehend
imperfectly,  he  can  apprehend  my  imperfect  apprehension.
Is  every  point  of  view,  for  instance,  from  which  my  eye
(and,  of  course,  that  of  every  sentient  being)  has  un
thinkingly  contemplated  every  scene  it  has  ever  rested
on,  to  be  recorded  eternally  in  the  tablets  of  omniscience
or  at  least  of  omni-experience  ?  Or,  putting  the  question
in  the  difficult  form  from  which  we  started,  can  a  value,
which  is  held  to  be  superseded  by  inclusion,  as  in  art  or  in
cognition,1  be  dropped  and  pass  away  without  loss  to  the
whole  ;  or  if  not,  must  every  step  and  essay  and  partial
failure  enter  separately  and  in  its  own  right ;2  into  the
content  of  the  supreme  experience?  In  principle,  the
answer  can  hardly  be  doubtful.  We  saw,  in  the  first  case
under  the  theory  of  the  extended  specious  present,  what
the  result  must  be.  There  must  be  inclusion  and  trans
mutation.  You  cannot  heap  up  contents,  all  relevant  to
each  other,  within  a  single  experience,  and  prevent  them
from  reacting  on  each  other.  A  hope,  and  its  fulfilment
in  an  unhoped-for  form,  will  not  stay  apart  if  the
impotence  that  was  the  barrier  is  withdrawn  ;  and  in  their
fusion  the  whole  hope  itself  must  become  another  thing
from  what  it  was,

For  the  perfect  experience,  then,  the  contents  and
values  must  be,  so  to  speak,  like  solids.  "  Accidental
views,"  imperfect  essays,  lower  forms  of  beauty  and  good
ness,  must  be  experienced  within  the  totals  which  must
gain  depth  and  weight  from  all  that  has  led  up  to  them.
The  quality  of  the  sketch  must  be  found  in  the  picture  ;
the  picture  must  be  differently  apprehended  because  of
the  sketch  which  went  before  it.  But  occurrences  cannot
be  eternised  as  a  detached  and  dispersed  congeries  of
facts,  as  if  one  were  to  preserve  a  Galtonian  photograph
in  the  form  of  all  the  images  which  came  together  to


1  Like  the  early  astronomical theories in  comparison  with  de
veloped  modern  astronomy.

2  This,  of  course,  is  the  difficulty. If  we  allow  transmutation  and
inclusion  all  becomes  easy.


I "OUGHT?  "  WILL?  ETC.,  PRESUPPOSE WHOLES  391

compose  it.  In  coming  to  this  conclusion,  we  must  be
careful  not  to  appeal  to  the  difficulty  of  supposing  the
supreme  experience  to  include  and  retain  so  many  facts.
That  would  be  very  crude  anthropomorphism.  Our
argument  rests  on  the  necessary  fusion  of  experiences
relevant  to  each  other.  But  if  we  maintain  this  point
of  principle  we  may  agree  that  the  dissociation,  the
realisation  of  the  particular,  which  gives  value  to  the
total,  enters  largely  into  the  experience  of  the  total.

Transmutation  then,  must  be  the  rule  in  the  complete
experience.  Everything  must  be  there,  as  all  the  artist's
failures,  and  the  fact  of  failure  itself,  are  there  in  his
success.  But  they  cannot  be  there  as  analysed  into
temporal  moments  and  yet  drawn  out  unchanged  into
a  panorama  within  a  specious  present  of  immeasurable
span.

3. It  has been urged  that the Absolute  is  will  and  Absolute
purpose. The  matter  has  often been dealt  with.1 But  ™™£  *
I  will  mention  one  point  following  from  our  earlier  argu-  purpose
ments  which  seems  to  me  decisive. A  purpose,  or  a  will,  the
can  never  be  the  whole  of  a  world. A  purpose  always  always  be
means  that,  founding  yourself  on matter  accepted  as  a  ^trhin
basis,  you  recognise  a  certain alteration as essential  in  wholes.
view of .  the admitted situation, for the restoration or
partial restoration of  harmony. Ex  nihilo nihil. You
cannot  gather  material  for  purpose  out  of  no situation.
The  content  you  are  impelled  to  produce  must  be  relative
to  a  content  which  you  admit. The  same  is  true  of  Will,
and  of  Ought.2 You  cannot  say,  without  basis  or  prelimi
nary,  "  I  ought  to  do  this." That would indeed be  a
judgment  such  as  could  not  be  logically  supported. It  is
the  defect  of  all  these  positions,  those  which  make  Purpose,
Will, or Ought into ultimate determinants, that they
accept a  violently  unsystematic procedure of  valuation
after  the  apparent  fashion  of  Kant's Ethics. "  Ought "
must  always  mean  the  satisfaction  of  a  nature  ;  but  you
cannot  express  the  satisfaction  of  a  nature  okne  weiteres

1  See,  e.g.,  Appearance,  p.  483  ft".
2  Cf.  Royce, World  and  Individual,  ii.  36  flf.


392  DOCTRINES OF  THE  ABSOLUTE  APR

by  saying  "  ought."  You  may  say,  perhaps,  ab  initio,  "  I
ought  to  do  something  " — "  I  want  " — "  My  nature  cries
out  for  a  fulfilment "  of  some  kind  ;  though  even  to  do
that  you  must  postulate  a  certain  kind  of  nature  in  your
self.  But  certainly  what  I  ought  to  do  must  come  from
an  accepted  basis  of  content,  a  selection  of  objects  to
be  achieved,  suitable  to  a  need  or  want,  itself  determined
by  a  contradiction  in  some  existing  situation.  In  a  word  ;
every  want,  will,  purpose,  or  ought,  is  a  partial  phenome
non  within  a  totality.

But  how,  it  may  be  retorted,  do  you  get  any  basis 1
except  by  an  ought  ?  Why  accept,  e.g.>  the  Law  of  Non-
Contradiction  on  which  we  ourselves  laid  such  stress  in  an
earlier  Lecture,  except  by  an  acknowledgment  that  you
ought  to  accept  it  ?  Now  we  may  construe,  if  we  like,
our  actual  participation  in  the  life  of  the  world  as  an
acknowledgment  that  we  ought  to  accept  something  or
other.  It  is  an  artificial  mode  of  statement ;  for  we
have  been  participants  in  the  world  long  before  a  question
whether  we  ought  to  be  so  could  possibly  be  raised,  and
for  most  people  it  is  never  raised  at  all.  But  this,  it
might  be  answered,  is  mere  history,  not  justification.
When  once  it  is  put  to  us,  why  accept  the  principle
of  positive  non-contradiction  ?  Why  do  we  affirm  it
except  that  we  feel  we  ought,  or  will  ?  But  the  prior
answer  lies  in  the  nature  of  our  world.  It  is  a  world
whose  implications  are  of  such  a  type,  and  within  which
oneself  is  so  implicated,  that  even  in  refusing  to  accept  it,
as  was  explained  in  an  earlier  chapter,  we  already  are
accepting  it.  In  trying  to  reject,  we  are  meddling  with
our  world,  and  owing  to  its  nature,  are  accepting  our
implication  in  it.  What  we  are  must  determine  what
we  owe.

It  is  a  condition  of  our  willing  that  we  cannot  will  two
contradictories  at  once  ;  but  we  cannot  find  ourselves
willing  that  two  contradictories  at  once  shall  be  unwill-
able.  It  would  be  setting  out  to  make  a  condition  which
is  presupposed  in  the  making  of  any  condition.  That  one

1  See  Royce,  Lc.


i  THE  ABSOLUTE  NOT  NUMERABLE  393

contradictory  excludes  the  other  is  a  basal  condition
of  the  world,  revealed  by  the  analysis  of  its  structure  ; l
that  we  accept  it  in  approaching  any  matter  of  theory  or
practice  is  a  consequence  of  our  accepting  participation  in
the  world,  and  this  depends  upon  the  datum  that  our
nature  is  to  be  a  world,  and  apart  from  this  acceptance,
no  ought  can  appeal  to  us.  ^

Will and Ought,  in a  word,  are  the properties  of  a
world  that  mends  discrepancies  within  itself  by  a  process  1
in  time. There  can  be  no  will  or  ought  except  on  the  ^
basis  of  a  presupposed  reality,  within which  non-adjust
ment  calls  for  adjustment. If  you  so  much  as  acknow
ledge  a fact  because you ought, the meaning of  that
is  that  you  cannot  at  once  reject  it  and  retain  the  world
which  you  presuppose.

Therefore  it  seems  unintelligible  for  the  Absolute  or
for  any  perfect  experience  to  be  a  will  or  purpose.  It
would  be  a  meaningless  pursuit  of  nothing  in  particular.
If  the  pursuit  is  to  be  intelligible,  it  must  be  rooted  in  an
actuality  that  makes  it  inevitable.  To  say  that  the
reality  as  a  whole  may  contain  an  untold  number  of  finite
purposes,  and  must  itself  include  a  satisfaction  in  which
purpose  and  fulfilment  are  one,  is  another  thing.

4. It  is  said  that  the  Absolute  may  or  must  contain  Numerical
a numerical infinity of  elements, say, of  selves. The  ^
analogy  of  a  "self-representative"  system,  such as the  doctrine.
system  of  numbers  viewed  with  reference  to  certain  corre
spondences  within  it,  has  been invoked  to  support  this
view.

I  have  referred  to  this  subject  in  an  earlier  Lecture,2
but  will  summarise  my  position  here.  The  doctrine  of
the  self-representative  system,  at  least  in  its  application  to
the  infinity  of  a  conscious  whole,  is  a  curious  hybrid.  It
shows  the  characteristics  of  both  the  types  of  totality 3

1  It  is  a  postulate,  of  course,  in  the  sense  in  which  all  laws  of
experience  are  so,  i.e.  they  work  first,  and  are  reflectively  established
afterwards.  This  is  the  rule  of  all  developing  mind  ;  it  is  more  than
it  knows  itself  to  be.  2  Lecture  II.  p.  38  note.

3  Of  course  an  idealist  will  not  admit  that  the  "false"  infinity
is  a  true  totality.  I  therefore  use  the  word  under  protest.


394  DOCTRINES  OF  THE  ABSOLUTE  APR

which  Idealists  have  been  accustomed  to  call  the  true  and
false  infinity.  It  was  first  introduced,  one  gathers,  as  a
defence  of  numerical  infinity  as  an  actual  given  fact.
Waiving  objection  to  this  doctrine,1  we  saw  that  it  seemed
to  promise  nothing  from  our  point  of  view  desirable.
Numerical  recurrences  ad  infinitum,  however  arranged  in
series  linked  by  correspondences,  revealed  in  themselves
nothing  valuable.

But  the  infinity  of  recurrences  came  to  be  represented
as  an  infinite  fountain  of  various  and  valuable  content,  an
unfailing  source  of  diversity  in  unity.2  This  is  new
matter  in  the  doctrine  of  the  numerical  infinite,  but  very
old  and  familiar  matter  in  the  doctrine  of  real  infinity.
The  two  gain  nothing  by  their  marriage  in  the  self-
representative  system.  As  thus  united  they  claim  infinity
on  one  ground  and  value  on  another.  The  numerical
series  has  recurrence  ad  infinitum,  and  borrows  value  from
a  development  of  content,  which,  though  not  wholly
absent,  is  slighter  than  in  any  other  conceivable  type  of
whole.  The  system  of  content  has  value  of  its  own,  but
borrows  infinity  from  a  system  of  recurrences  funda
mentally  alien  to  it.

In  truth,  surely,  the  Absolute,  like  any  high  experi
ence,  is  not  numerable.3  You  cannot  enumerate  the
members  of  a  poem  or  picture,  or  of  a  great  character.
You  can  find  in  them  numerable  parts,  but  these  are  not
their  parts.  That  is  to  say,  the  numerable  parts  are  not


1  Perhaps,  however,  I  had  better  repeat,  for  clearness'  sake,  the
objection,  that  while  I  very  well  see  how  a  formula  or  definition  of
the  kind  suggested  can  involve  or  necessitate,  if  it  is  to  be  realised
in  number,  a  system  of  infinite  series, I  cannot  see  how  the  infinite
series  in  question  can  be  said  to be "  given "  in  it,  any  more,  in
principle  than  the  complete  evaluation  of  TT  is  given  in  the  idea  of  TT.

2  Royce, World  and  Individual^ i. 508, 576. I may say,
in view  of  p.  508,  that I have  nowhere  in  my  Logic spoken of
wearisomeness  or  of  want  of  interest  in  connection  with  infinite  num
bers. My  typical  case  in  attacking  the  false  Infinity  has always
been  the  attempt  to  solve  a  problem  by  a  method  irrelevant  to  its
nature. Cp.  also  Taylor,  Metaphysic,  116,  148  ff.

3  See  R.  L.  Nettleship  in  Review  of  Archer-Hind's  Timaeus  (Mind,
xiv. 131).


I A TRUE  INFINITE  ARRESTS  ALL  SERIES 395  • *'

relevant  to  the  sense  in  which  such  wholes  are  experi
enced  when  experienced  as  they  are  meant  to  be  or  fitted
to  be.1  When  a  man  reads  a  poem,  as  a  poem  is  fitted
to  be  read,  there  is  no  place  in  his  mind  for  number.
But  if  the  inspiration  leaves  him,  he  may  count  the  lines,
words,  and  syllables,  and  count  them,  if  he  likes,  over  and
over  again.  But,  though  he  may  count  them  for  ever,  he
will  never  reach  the  poem  by  that  road,  any  more  than  he
will  get  parallels  to  meet  by  producing  them.2  So  with  the
Absolute.  If  interpreted  irrelevantly  and  dragged  down
out  of  its  nature,  it  may  be  analysable  into  infinite  selves,
infinite  sensations,  infinite  pleasures  and  pains  ;  what
does  it  matter  ?  In  the  first  place  this  does  not  show  a
given  quantitative  infinity,  for  an  infinity  is  not  given  by
a  fact  or  formula  being  given  which  generates  a  persistent
failure  to  re-express  it  in  another  medium,  any  more  than
meeting  parallels  are  given  if  we  say  they  meet  at  infinity.
And  in  the  second  place,  if  it  was  a  given  quantitative
infinity,  that  would  not  thereby  be  shown  to  be  the
nature  of  the  Absolute,  because  the  Absolute,  as  we  said,
is  not,  qua  infinite  and  self-complete,  numerable  at  all.
Its  self-representation,  like  that  of  any  high  experience,  is
of  a  wholly  different  order.  It  stops  the  recurrent  series,
and  does  not  prolong  them.3  That  the  higher  experi
ences  involve  an  extreme  precision  and  delicacy  of
adjustment,  as  we  have  maintained  throughout,  is  another
affair.  The  old  example  of  the  fine  adjustment  of  a
moral  act  to  the  situation  is  enough  to  exhibit  the  sense
in  which  this  is  the  case.  See  Appendix  II.

1  See  Professor  A.  C.  Bradley,  Oxford  Lecture  on  Poetry,  p.  1 4  ff.

2  Cf.  author's  Logic,  2nd  ed.,  i.  162.

3  See  Lecture  II.  p.  38  note.


396  PERFECTING OF THE  SOUL  APR


APPENDIX II TO LECTURE X

THE PERFECTING OF THE SOUL IN ARISTOTLE'S
ETHICS


The  mini- i . EVERY  soul  of  every  creature,  such  is  Aristotle's  start-
mum  aci
of  duty.


ing  point,  has  a fojrn,  or  possible  perfection,  which the


universe  is  striving  in  it  to  bring  to  completion  through
its  life.

In  the  human  soul  every  stage  towards  this  completion
may  be  called  an  excellence  or  virtue  ;  and  of  these  excel
lences  or  virtues  there  are  two  general  divisions.  There
are  first  the  excellences  of  man's  compoundL-oature,  in
which  feeling  and  desire  are  learning  submission  to  the
law  of  reason.  These  he  calls  the  "  ethical "  virtues  ;  a
term  which  we,  somewhat  unfortunately,  have  taken  up
and  rendered  as  if  equivalent  to  all  that  we  understand
by  moral  excellence.  They  derive  their  name,  for  him,
from  their  connectiorLjvvith  habit  ;  they  are  qualities  or
rather  attitudes  of  soul  which  we  acquire  in  society,  and
in  the  main  through  assimilating-  tfre  .social  tradition.
Temperance,  courage,  gentleness,  generosity,  with  many
like  them,  are  Aristotle's  excellences  of  man's  compound
nature,  or  excellences  of  habituation,  ethical  excellences.

The  other  set  of  excellences  are  the  excellences  of  the
intellectual  part,  the  so-called  i njellectual^  virtues.  But
I  will  say  at  once  that  we  commit  a  mere  misconstruction
if  we  take  them  to  be  excellences  of  intellectual  capacity  ;
as  we  might  say,  memory,  or  mathematical  talent,  or  the
power  of  learning  languages.  The  dominant  ones  at  least
are  nothing  of  this  kind  ;  they  are  clearly,  as  we  shall
see,  the  e^^loj^c^s^o^good^ife^^^  habit,  exalted,  rein
forced  and  reinterpreted  "Bypassing  into  the  region  of
principle  and  of  great  ideas.  Intelligence  is  not  an
exclusive  part,  bnljis  rhejnrrr}  of  rhq  whole.

Now  let  us  begin  to  sketch  the  nature  of  a  single  act
of  duty,  as  Aristotle  conceives  it,  and  trace  from  that


II  THE  RIGHT  RATIO— MORAL CRITERION 397

point  the  expansion  of  the  moral  horizon,  till  time  and
place  fall  away  or  rather  are  rounded  into  a  whole  and
morality  passes  into  religion.

2. The  simplest  moral  duty  has  for  Aristotle  a  double  The  ex-
aspect The  motive  of  the  citizen  who  gives  his  life  for  j^chTt
his  country,  for  example,  is  described in  a  curious  two-  involves.
fold  language,  the  significance  of  which  is  not  difficult  to  ^niean"
see. He  does  the  act  of  duty  for  its  own  sake. There  the  precise
is  in  it  something  absolute. If  it  were  done  for  the  sake  essratiafto
of  something  beyond,  of  praise  or  gain,  it  would  no  longer  excellence
be  the  act  it  seemed  to  be. This  we  can  see  at  once. But
again  ; this  and  every  act  of  duty  is performed for  the
sake  of  the  beautiful — for  in  all  virtue  this  is  the  motive.
And  here  again  we  have  no  doubt  what  is  meant. The
duty  is  done  for  its  own  sake,  for  the  sake  of  what  it  is.
But  the  conception  of  what  it  is  is  capable  of  expansion.
"  For  the  sake  of  the  beautiful  " — a  widening  horizon  is
set before  us  by  this  description of  the moral motive.
What  is  the  moral  beautiful  ? If  we  fully  understood  the
simplest  act  of  duty,  what  is  it  that  according  to  Aristotle
we  should  see  there  ?

Let  me  illustrate  further  by  the  famous  doctrine  of
the  mean,  the  definition  of  an  ethical  excellence.  An
ethical  virtue  or  excellence  of  man's  compound  nature  is
an  attitude  of  will,  "  being  in  a  relative  mean  defined
by  a  ratio,  and  by  whatever  the  man  of  practical  wisdom
would  define  it  by."

I  will  not  enter  into  negative  criticism.  I  shall  say  at
once  what  I  think  it  signifies,  having  just  pointed  out
that  once  more  it  refers  us  to  something  on  ahead — to
the  man  of  practical  wisdom.

We  must  have  observed  in  any  such  form  of  conduct
as  an  act  of  beneficence,  or  munificence,  how  infallibly
the  churl  in  spirit  betrays  himself,  to  use  Aristotle's
phrase,  in  the  quantity  or  degree  or  time  or  place  or
manner  or  personal  relations  of  his  action.  Only  the
true  motive  gives  you  the  perfect  act.  The  brave  man
again  ;  how  hard  it  is  to  be  brave,  and  gentle,  and  modest,
and  calm,  and  wise.  The  brave  and  noble  soul,  and  it
alone,  will  ring  true  in  every  side  and  aspect  of  its  act ;


398  PERFECTING OF THE SOUL  APR

time,  place,  manner,  degree,  behaviour  to  persons  ;  all  the
characters  which  make  up  an  act  whose  quality  takes
form  in  quantity,  and  is  adapted  to  the  situation  with  a
beautiful  adequateness.  in  every  detail  just  right,  neither
too  little  nor  yet  too  much,  like  the  petals  of  a  rose.  Such
an  action  is  a  manifestation  of  an  excellence,  a  soul
rightly  tempered  and  attuned,  a  disposition  or  attitude
of  mind  that  is  the  "  mean  "  or  adjusted  condition  relative
to  or  demanded  by  the  situation.

So  far,  then,  the  horizon  has  expanded.  The  excellent
action,  done  for  its  own  sake,  which  is  for  the  sake  of  the
beautiful,  is  now  understood  to  be  an  act  expressive  of
a  statg^pf  soul  rightly  attjuned  so  that  in  every  detail
and  quantitative  particular  its  utterance  hits  what  is
appropriate  and  adequate.

But  there  is  something  more  ;  this  temper  or  attitude
does  not  explain  itself,  and  the  phrase  which  described
it,  at  the  same  moment  beckoned  us  forward  to  a  further
standard.  The  mean  adjustment  or  ratio  which  was  the
characteristic  of  the  excellent  attitude  of  soul  was  not  yet,
we  saw,  thoroughly  defined.  It  is  an  adjustment  to  cir
cumstances  ;  but  an  adjustment  in  the  interests  of  what  ?
The  answer  was  given  by  a  reference  to  something  not
yet  stated.  The  mean  is  determined  by  a  further  stand
ard  ;  and  the  standard  is  thfcjright  ratio,  and  whatever
the  man  ojjpractical  wisdom  would  determine^
The  3^  This  is^sTl^ferenceT  forwardTrom  the  first  half  of

fnwted the treatise to the second half. Let us recapitulate.
in  moral Every  act  of  the  compound  nature  of  man — his  combined
Practical reason  and  desire — which  is  excellent,  or  an  act  of  virtue,
wisdom. is  done,  we  saw,  at  once  for  its  own  sake, and for  the
sake  of  the  beautiful. That  is  to  say,  its  own  nature,
being  more  fully  understood,  is  one  with  the  nature  of
the  beautiful. Wishing  to  know  to  what  this  points  us
forward,  we  found  that  such  an  act,  as  an  expression  of
virtue,  is  something  perfectly  adequate  and adjusted to
the  situation,  right  in every  particular, in every  detail.
If  the  motive  or  attitude  of  soul  were  in  any  way  wrong
or  imperfect,  the  act  would  betray  it  at  once  by  passing
over  into  exaggeration  or  deficiency  at  some  one  of  its


ii  THE FURTHER  STANDARD  399

innumerable  aspects  and  peculiarities.  What  should  be
courage,  for  example,  would  be  vulgar,  or  ostentatious,
or  rash,  or  false,  or  wanting  to  itself  in  resolution  or  in
tranquillity  or  in  gentleness.

The  churl  in  spirit,  howe'er  he  veil
His  want  in  forms  for  fashion's  sake,
Will  let  his  coltish  nature  break

At  seasons  through  the  gilded  pale,

For  who  can  always  act  ?

We  can  understand  that  a  moral  perfection  which  results
in  a  reliably  perfect  expression  may  be  called  beautiful,
but  still  we  Have  not  learned  in  the  interest  of  what  cen
tral  principle  our  adjustments  are  to  be  determined,  and
we  have  been  referred  to  something  that  lies  ahead.

The  standard,  we  are  told,  lies  in  what  is  determined
by  the  man  of  practical  wisdom.  What  is  practical
wisdom,  and  where  does  it  obtain  its  standard  ?

We  said  that  besides  the  excellences  of  man's  com
pound  nature,  Aristotle  ascribes  to  him  what  he  calls  the
intellectual  excellences  ;  not,  we  said,  such  capacities  as
memory,  or  scientific  acumen,  or  creative  genius,  but
rather  the  content  of  good  life,  when  raised  to  a  level  of
principle  and  systematic  insight,  as  opposed  to  mere
habituation  and  customary  self-control.

According  to  Aristotle,  the  tw^intellectual  excellences
are  practical  and  theoretical  wisdom.  About  theoretical
wisdom  we  will  speak  later.  It  is  practical  wisdom  to
which  we  have  been  referred  ;  and  which,  in  approaching
its  discussion,  Aristotle  implies  to  possess  "  the  standard
of  the  means  or  adjustments."

Practical  wisdom  for  Aristotle  is  one  with  something
which  is  present  in  all  the  animal  creation  and  different
for  every  kind  of  creature.  It  is  the  grouj>instinct,  or
the  grourj-intelligence,  or  the  consciousness  of  kind.  In
humanity  it  is  the  statesman's  knowledge  and  perception  ;
the  gift  and  ability  of  the  man  who,  having  trained  in
sight  into  the  distinctively  human  good  or  evil  of  life,
based  on  his  own  excellence  of  character  in  which  it  is
up  to  a  certain  point  realised,  is  able  to  guide  the  organisa-


400


PERFECTING OF THE SOUL


APP.


Theoretical
wisdom  or
religion
ultimately
standard,
viz.  as  the
ultimate
value  or
quint
essence
of  life.


tion,  habituation,  and  education  of  the  group  (for  the
statesman's  business  is  more  especially  education)  in  the
direction  which  will  lead  them  to  it.

But  here  once  more  the  horizon  expands.  The  states
man  knows  what  is  the  end  of  human  life,  and  has  skill
and  insight  to  govern  society  and  direct  the  educational
habituation  which  instils  the  ethical  or  current  social
virtues  in  the  right  direction  and  to  the  right  adjust
ments  and  adaptations  —  the  ratios  or  means  in  conduct.

4.  But  still  our  quest  is  not  ended.  What  is  the  end  of
human  life,  in  view  of  which  the  statesman  organises  both
politics  and  education  ?  The  answer  is  to  be  found  in  the
relation  of  practical  wisdom  to  theoretical  wisdom.  Prac
tical  wisdom,  we  have  seen,  is  different  for  every  organic
group,  and  in  a  measure  may  be  said  to  be  distributed
throughout  creation.  Theoretical  wisdom  is  always  one
and  the  same,  and  strictly  speaking,  it  is>dmne  ;  it  studies
no  production  of  instruments  for  the  good  of  mankind  ;
it  cannot  strictly  be  said  to  aim  at  the  special  good  of
mankind  ;  it  does  not  specially  concern  itself  with  man,
or  at  all  with  one  group  of  creatures  rather  than  with
another.  Its  j^bjert  of  study  or  contemplation  is  rather
what  is  above,  and  jDe^^idjmari,;  there  are  many  things
in  the  universe  more  divine  than  man,  Aristotle  emphatic
ally  observes  ;  more  especially,  it  occupies  itself  with  the
nature  of  God.  But  though  it  is  not  an  efficient  cause
of  attaining  the  end  of  man,  the  name  for  which  in  Aris
totle  is  happiness,  it  is  the  formal  cause,  or  at  least  a
part  of  the  formal  cause  ;  that  is  to  say,  it  does  not
produce  human  happiness  as  a  cause  may  produce  an
effect  other  than  itself;  but  it  is  human  happiness  or
the  end  of  man,  or  at  least  a  considerable  constituent
of  that  end.

Now  the  precise  relation  of  practical  to  theoretical
wisdom  according  to  Aristotle  is  an  interesting  point.
Practical  wisdom,  we  said,  is  the  wisdom  of  the  statesman,
and  so  far  must  be


^

On  the  other  hand,  theoretical  wisdom  is  the  higher
activity,  and  is  identical,  or  identical  so  far  as  human  nature
can  attain  it,  with  that  activity  of  the  soul  wjiich  is  happi-


II RELIGION  THE  SPIRIT  OF  A COMMUNITY 401

ness  and-±hejsiid_o£ Jmoian  life.  Now  how  can  the  lower
activity  of  practical  wisdom  be  supreme  over  the  higher,
which  is  theoretical  wisdom  ?  Which  of  the  two  is  really
superior  and  the  guide  of  life  ?  Aristotle  puts  the  con
tradiction  plainly,  and  his  answer  is  clear.  ^Practical
wisdom  rules  society  in  the  interests  of  theoretical  wi^Hnm
but  does^not  rule  over  theoretical  wisdom  if  self.  Ex
panding  the  answer,  a  follower  of  Aristotle  compares  the
statesman's  art  to  the  house-steward  or  head  of  the  serv
ants,  and  theoretical  wisdom  to  the  master  of  the  house.
The  house-steward  rules  the  house  with  a  view  to  the
master's  leisure,  his  a^o\r).  The  master  has  his  duties  of
magistrate  or  thinker  or  soldier  to  perform  ;  the  house
hold  is  organised  to  give  him  leisure  for  them.  Just
such  is  the  statesman's  duty,  let  us  say,  towards  art,  or
the  life  of  thought  or  religion.

The  relation  is  expanded  by  an  Aristotelian  writer  :
"  So  whatever  choice  or  distribution  of  worldly  resources,
whether  of  bodily  qualities  or  of  wealth  or  of  friends  or
of  other  goods,  will  be  most  helpful  towards  the  contem
plation  of  God,  that  is  the  best,  and  that  is  the  most
beautiful  standard  or  organisation  ;  and  whatever  arrange
ment,  whether  by  defect  or  by  excess,  hinders  men  from
glorifying  God  and  enjoying  Him,  that  arrangement  is
bad."  (Stewart,  ii.,  4,  E.  E.  ©.,  3,  1249,  a2i-b25.)  The
final  standard  of  the  means  or  adjustments  of  conduct,
then,  is  the  highest  life  of  the  soul.  The  habituation  of
the  young  and  the  moral  education  of  society  are  to  be
so  guided  and  framed  by  the  statesman  that  art  and
learning  and  religion  shall  always  hold  the  highest  place,
and  so  far  as  humanly  possible  shall  have  the  lead  in,  and
form  the  inspiration  of,  his  country.  The  simplest  act
of  duty,  we  may  say,  in  its  twofold  scope,  points  forward
to  the  knowledge  of  God.  The  act  of  duty,  we  saw,  in
being  for  its  own_jsake.  is  fnrj-hp  <^Vp  nf  i-V^  h^ntjjiii  ;
and  in  being  for  the  sake  of  the  beautiful  it  is  a  perfect
ing  of  the  sonl  by  a  fine  and  delicate  adjustment  and
adaptation  to  the  social  order  ;  and  further,  in  being  an
adaptation  to  the  social  order,  it  is  finally  instrumental
to  tjjai^whkhJospires  and  justifies  and  resumes  the  mean-

2  D


402  PERFECTING OF THE  SOUL  APP.

ing  of  the  social  order,  namely,  to  the  activity  in  which

the  soul  finds  its  perfection  in  laying  hold  of  the  divine.

You  do  not,  in  the  view  of  Plato  and  Aristotle,  in  aspiring

to  intellectual excellence  and  to  religious  contemplation,

tread a separate and diverging path from that  of  the

ordinary  good  citizen. You follow  his  path  but  pursue

it  further,  and  what  the  saint  or  the  poet  or  the  thinker

may attain at  the  end  is  only  the  quintessence  of  what

all  of  you  have  been  practising  from  the  beginning.

"Friend-  5. The  true  relation  of  theoretical  wisdom  to  moral

ship,"  i.e. development  receives  a  remarkable  illumination from  the

munion  in theory  of  friendship,  which  shows  how  practical  wisdom

experience'  must  in  its  highest  f°rm  actually  pass  into  that  which  is

the  link theoretical. .

group-0  Practical  wisdom,  we  saw,  is  the  human  form  of  the

welfare  and  group  instinct  or  consciousness  of  kind.  In  Aristotle's
view  there  is,  all  through  creation,  a  certain  feeling  of
affection  corresponding  to  every  form  of  this  conscious
ness  of  kind.  He  illustrates  it  by  the  different  levels  of
parental  care  which  attend  upon  the  different  levels  of
intelligence  in  the  animal  world.  This  is  so  in  man  as  in
other  species.  Every  form  of  human  association  has
its  characteristic  type  of  group-sentiment  or  liking,  or
"  friendship,"  as  he  terms  it,  corresponding  to  the  form  of
group-intelligence  which  it  implies.

This  being  so,  you  have  only  to  consider  the  case  of
the  highest  form  of  human  association  to  see  how  the
group-intelligence  or  sense  of  group-welfare  (practical
wisdom)  must  transform  itself  into  theoretical  wisdom.
For  the  highest  form  of  human  association  is  that  in
which  human  beings  have  come  to  care  for  that  in  each
other  which  is  the  best  and  consequently  the  most  real
thing  in  them,  namely,  the  highest  goodness  and  intelli
gence.  When  this  is  so,  the  group-consciousness  has
become  the  consciousness  of  a  response  in  the  other  per
son  to  what  is  highest  and  best  in  the  self.  This  response
is  a  heightening  of  life,  by  the  extension  of  the  aware
ness  of  our  life  to  the  life  of  the  friend  who  shares  our
consciousness  of  the  best  things.  We  feel  our  life  intensi
fied  in  his.  Therefore  the  consciousness  which  we  share


II MINIMUM  DUTY  IMPLIES THE  ABSOLUTE 403

with  him  is  ipso  facto  the  consciousness  of  the  highest
activity  of  the  soul.  Any  other  common  consciousness
would  be  comparatively  external  and  accidental,  and
would  not  give  us  the  same  community  of  feeling.

Therefore  practical  wisdom  or  the  instinct  toward
group-welfare  not  only,  in  directing  human  society,  aims
at  adjusting  it  to  the  presence  of  the  highest  activities  ;
but,  in  so  far  as  men  become  all  they  might  become,
actually  passes  into  other  activities.

Thus  we  have  followed  the  expanding  horizon  of  the
great  moralist's  account  of  the  end  of  human  life,  or  of  the
activity  of  the  soul,  which  is  the  provisional  definition  of
that  end,  also  called  by  the  name  of  happiness.

What  we  have  found  is  that  the  simplest  act  of  social
duty  taught  by  habituation  to  the  growing  citizen,  say
courage  or  soberness,  has  in  it  a  motive,  or  we  may  say
really  implies  an  awakening  and  a  yearning  of  the  soul,
which  first  expresses  itself  in  loyalty  to  society  and  in
good  citizenship,  but  which  can  find  no  final  satisfaction
till  it  completes  itself  in  the  knowledge  and  thought  of
God,  in  union  with  whom  alone  the  individual  comes  to
be  that  which  he  really  is.


2  I)  2


INDEX


Absolute,  27,  97,  99,  137,  189,  193,
248  ff.,  VII.,  321,  337,  340,
X.,  Appendix  I.

A  contingentia  mitndi,  262

Agnosticism,  261

Alexander,  Professor  S.,  112  ;/.,  188
«.,  213,  359

Alphabet  of  the  world,  12

Analogies,  false,  in  conception  of  in
dividual,  282

Anti-vitalism  and  vitalism,  195

A  priori  principles,  source  of  their
certainty,  46

Aristotle,  124,  129,  193,  246,  258,
263,298,  302  «.,  336,  344,  X.,
Appendix  II.

Art,  in  M.  Bergson,  168  «.,  329  n,

Atomic  weights,  85

Average,  dist.  constant,  86

Bain,  Alexander,  53,  141

Beauty,  5,  51  n.

Ben  Jonson,  quoted,  27  n.

Bergson,  Professor  Henri,  Evolution
creatrice,  32,  54  n.,  94,  102  «.,
107  «.,  134,  137,  150,  168  «.,
172, 177,  204 ff.,  230,  259,355;
Donntes,  141,  168  n.  ;  Le  Rire,
1 68  n.  ;  Matierc,  208

Binyon,  Laurence,  370

Body  and  Mind,  V.

Bradley,  Professor  A.  C.,  Shake
spearean  Tragedy,  4  ;  Oxford
Lectures  on  Poetry ',  222,  236,
382,  395

Bradley,  F.  H.,  in  Mind,  69,  132,
168  «.,  177,  224,  240,  264,
292,  348,  362;  Appearance  and
Reality,  38  «.,  57,  58,  68,  73,
76,  168  ».,  223,  242,  250,  265,
269,  294,  315,  362  ;  Presupposi
tions  of  Critical  History ',  33 1  n. ;
Principles  of  Logic,  33,  40,  53,


55,  177,  213;  Ethical  Studies,

1 13  n.,  242
Broadbent, quoted from Mitchell,

202  «.
Browning,  quoted, 21, 25,  27, 29  ;

"  Caliban,"  255
Buckle,  H.  T.,  87  «.,  88  «.
Burnet,  Professor  John,  124  n.

Caird,  E.,  94,  102,  240,  243
Calculation  and  Prediction,  107  ff.
Causal activity  in nature not  com
parable  to  free  cause,  66
Christianity, on  sin  and  atonement,

253  ff-

Criminal  statistics  1898,  88  n.

Class,  dist.  "world,"  35-36:  see
Similarity,  Induction

Cloister  and  the  Hearth,  quoted,  306  n.

Cognition  and  thought,  66  ;  not  in
telligence,  98  ff.

Colour,  "a  spirit  upon  things,"  63

Conation,  modern  theory  of,  128

Consciousness,  a  single,  limits  of,  287

Constancy  of  energy,  169

Content,  dist.  satisfied,  25

Content,  organisation  and  predomin
ance  of,  173  ff.

Contingent  truth,  51

Contradiction,  dist.  negativity,  222  ff.

Creative,  initiative,  23,  IX. ;  imagina
tion,  330

Dante,  fusion  of  moods  in,  276  ;  the
world  of  the  Divine  Comedy,
380  ff.

Dtclanchement,  187

"De  gustibus" — false,  293,  301

Determinism,  opp.  to  determination,

341,  354

Discontinuity,  in  mental  life,  181
Dissociation  of  the  Absolute,  279  ff.,

384


405


406


INDEX


Driesch,  Dr.  Hans,  151  n.,  163,  170
n.,  187  n.,  191;  his  "  equi-
potential,  368  ;  entelechy,  195,
207  ff.

"  Duree,"  339,  355

Dubois  Reymond,  107  n.

"  End  "  a  value,  not  a  terminus,  131

Entelechy,  151  n.,  195

Epiphenomenalism,  132  ff.

"  Equivalence,"  idea  of,  169  ff.

Evil,  not  illusion,  280

"Expression"  and  "mechanical  fin
ish,"  145

Externality,  73  ;  of  guidance  to
organism,  187,  193  ff.,  220,  289,
380

Fact,  13

Falstaff,.  17  «.

Faust, Goethe's, Kuno Fischer  on,

334

Feeling  and  thought,  63
Finite  world  not  illusion,  240
Forfeiture  of  the  imperfect,  389
Forms,  in  Plato,  375
Freedom  and  thought,  60,  IX.  '
Fruition  and  Conation,  129  ff.
Fusion  of  moods  in  Absolute,  274  ff.  ;

read  backwards  as  dissociation,

388

Gierke's  Political  Theories  of  the
Middle  Ages  (Maitland),  373

Gifford,  Lord,  I,  2

Goethe,  quoted,  356  n.

Green,  T.  H.,  Prolegomena  to  Ethics,
26,  66,  79,  302,  308,  312,323,
336,  355  5  Works,  55,  100

Hedonism,  64

Hegel,  44,  60,  65,  79,  156,  178  ;  on

contradiction,  228  ff.
Heredity,  171
History,  contrasted  with  science  and

philosophy,  33,  78
"Hope,  not  guidance,"  criticised,  19
Horizontal  division  of  real  truer  than

vertical,  373
Hostility  to  sense  in  sublime,  236

Ideal,  its  true  nature,  136

Identity,  dist.  similarity,  35  ;  law  of,

138  ;  in  Bergson,  141
II gran  rifiuto  in  philosophy,  10
Illusion,  241


Illustration  of  place  of  quantity  in  high
experience,  Aristotle's  "mean,"
396  ff.

Imitation  and  invention,  168  n.

Immediate  experience,  70,  295

Immediates,  three  precarious — fact,
life,  self,  13

Inconceivability,  test  by,  51

Individual,  as  the  real,  68,  77  ;  finite
individual,  286  ;  province  of  the
categorical,  102

Individuality  and  a  \\orld,  77  ;  sup
posed  discrepant  with  universal
law,  96

Induction  does  not  aim  at  class-
generality,  141

Infinity,  numerical  and  other,  38  n.,
71,  X.,  Appendix  I.

Intellectualism,  66,  216

"  Interaction "  and  Indeterminism,
166,  168-169

Interest,  inherent  in  finite  mind,  300

Intuition  in  M.  Bergson,  168  «.,  328

Inward  and  outward,  72

James,  Professor  Wm.,  Pluralistic
Universe,  372,  374  ;  Pragma
tism,  10,  1 80;  Varieties  of
Religions  Experience,  75

Joachim,  Ethics  of  Spinoza,  66

Joseph,  H.  W.  B.,  An  Introduction
to  Logic,  96,  263

Judgment,  infallible,  reviewed,  292

Justice,  5,  16

Kant,  46,  144,  156,  218,  302  «.,
309,  388

Laplace,  88  n.  ;  Essai  philosophique

sur les probability, quoted,

107  n.

Latta,  Professor  R.,  109  n.
Leibniz,  66  ;  on  the  movement  of  a

uniform  wheel,  109  n.
Life,  13,  99,  150,  189
Lindsay,  A.  D.,  on  Bergson,  40,  97,

1 68  «.

Logic,  the  spirit  of  totality,  23,  340
Logical  pessimism,  278
Logical  stability,  68,  299
Logical  structure  of  reality,  243
Lotze,  99,  149,  189,  191
Love,  argument  for  value  of  particular

being,  22

Lower  and  higher  mysticism,  231  ff.
Lucan,  quoted,  28  n.


INDEX


407


M'Dougal,  Social  Psychology,  267

M'Gilvary,  Professor,  230

M'Taggart,  J.  E.,  "  Individualism  of
Value, "27 1,  291,302;  Hegelian
Cosmology,  19,  159,  248  ;  Com
mentary  on  Hegefs  Logic •,  21,
123,  128,  225,  274  ;  Stiidies  in
Hegelian  Dialectic,  225,  241,
308,  383

Machines,  142  ff.,  209  ff.

Mack,  Freiheitstheorien,  293,  343

Mechanism,  73,  132,  138  ff.,  155;
subordinate  to  teleology,  1 64  ff. ,
206  ff.

Mill,  J.  S.,  Utilitarianism,  291  ;
Logic,  84,  88  n.

Mind,  and  its  filling,  158,  V.,  220;
minds  we  can  treat  as  our  own,

331
Mitchell, Professor, Structure and

Growth  of  the Mind, 114 ;;.,

168  n.,  182,  186
Moore, George, Principia ethica,

304

Moral  good,  5
Moral  action, only  one  side of  life,

353
Morality,  par  excellence,  dist. other

goodness,  348
Miinsterberg,  Eternal  Values,  390

Naturalism,  74

Natural  selection,  a  positive  agency,

J51

Nature,  X.,  135

Necessary  action  and  agent,  352

Negative  approach,  the,  288

Negativity,  232  ff.

Nervous  system,  illustrates  an  ethical
principle,  200  ff.,  216

Nettleship,  R.  L.,  22,  55,  56,  62,  65,
92,  235,  243  ff.,  259,  379,  394

Newman,  John  Henry,  97

Non-contradiction,  law  of,  44,  52  ;
a  positive  and  constructive  prin
ciple,  267

Norman  Smith,  on  introjectionism,
1 88

Objective  relations,  opp.  to  conscious

states,  305
Obvious,  the,  7

Omnipotential,  life  and  mind,  368
Ontological  argument,  80
Optimism,  14,  242
Organic  regulation,  195


Pain,  see  pleasure,  not  illusion,  240,

244

Pan-psychism,  82,  194,  362
Pantheism,  in  Tennyson,  252
Pater,  Walter,  on  colour,  63
Paulsen,  Einleitungin  die  Philosophic,

I  O2

Personality,  261
Persons,  284,  VIII.
Philosophy, essentially  of the con

crete,  33  ;  categorical,  102
Physical system, 173  ; how repre

sents  a  meaning  or an "end,"

185  ;  continuous  with  psychical,

361  ».
Plato, 8, 17,  45,  57,  73,  167,  223

ff., 246, 298, 313, 317, 340,

346,  373
Pleasure, 5, 26, 65, 125 n.  ; as  a

guide,  136  n.  ;  in  universe,  244,

308

Porphyry,  tree  of,  34
7rpo£is  and  tv^pyeia,  129  n.
Pragmatist,  the,  52-53  ; Pragmatism,

292
Prediction  of  conduct,  dist.  "reduc

tion," 113  n.  ;  unity  of  intelli

gence,  115
Pringle  Pattison, Professor  A. Seth,

96,  261  n.,  291,  370
Probation,  26
Psychical,  store  of  acquisitions,  exer

cising  energy,  would  be  physical,

173,  215  ;  relation  to  physical,

361  n.

Psychoid  (Driesch),  207  ff.
Purpose, cannot be a  whole, 162,


Quantitative  counterparts  of  qualities,

174
Quetelet,  87  n.

Relevancy, better term than uni

formity,  93,  119
Repetition, wholes  of, 35  ; root  of

generality,  opposed  to  the  uni

versal,  104
Ritchie, Professor David, Darwin

and  Hegel,  68  n.
Royce,  Prof.,  69,  82,  387,  394
Ruskin,  John,  5  ;/.
Russell,  Hon.  Bertrand,  Philosophical

Essays,  14,  18,  247  ;  Principles

of  Mathematics,  7  1


4o8


INDEX


Satiety,  dist.  satisfaction,  128

Satisfactoriness  and  satisfaction,  23,
53,  128;  and  self-sacrifice,  234;
dist.  pleasure,  244,  256

Schiller,  F.  C.  S.,  Humanism,  40,
68,  80,  205

Schopenhauer,  97,  253

Science,  hypothetical,  102:  see  Philo
sophy

Self,  13;  animal,  342;  naive,  343;
bad,  349,  X.

Self-  consciousness,  no  account  of
differences  between  selves,  323  ;
the  two  forms  of  its  "other,"
235  ff.  ;  its  full  content  the
Absolute,  337

Self-direction,  217

Self-representative  series  and  infinity,
38  ».,  393

Self-representation  in  a  true  infinity,
38  «.,  393

Self-sacrifice,  234,  243,  256

Sensation,  character  of  thought  in,
59 ;  of  a  pin-prick,  197  ;  an
interpretation,  197;  psychical  or
physical  ?  361  n.

Sidgwick,  Henry,  291,  308,  324

Sigwart,  Dr.  Christoph,  Logic,  90

Sin,  reality  of,  241

Similarity,  root  of  general,  dist.  uni
versal,  35

Soul,  does  it  bring  properties  with  it?
171  ;  what  it  is  like,  189,  218,
372

Soul-making,  26

Span  of  consciousness,  388

Specious  present,  388

Spinoza,  66,  133,  178

Stability,  23

State,  the,  25  n.,  311,  313

Statistics,  first-class  and  second-class,
89  ;  physical  and  social,  85  ff.

'<  Strait  Gate  "  in  Ruskin's  Florence,

.  ,334
Spiritual, popularly  connected with

"  inward,"  74
Spiritualist phenomena, in  Driesch,

170  «.

Stevenson,  Robert  Louis,  quoted,  2%n,
Stewart,  Professor  J.  A.,  401
Stout, Professor G. F.,  Manual  of

Psychology,  1 66,  169,  192,210;

Groundwork  of  Psychology,  114,

128,  132;  Analytic  Psychology,

125,  128, 131, 184  n.  ;  Mind,

194


Strong,  C.  A.,  218

Subjective  Idealism,  188

Sublime,  222

Sufficient  reason,  law  of,  138

Supersocial  activities,  379

Syllogism,  essentially  creative,  334

Taylor,  Professor  A.  E. ,  Elements  of
Metaphysics,  19,  37,  38,  57  «.,
75,  82,  87,  91  ff.,  96,  113  n.,
1 1 8,  138,  176,  179,  204  ff.,  247,

273

Teleology,  subjective,  and  "law,"
117?  IV.  ;  below  and  above  con
sciousness,  153,  179

Theism,  156

Thought,  its  ultimate  character,  and
relation  to  sense,  feeling,  will,
60  ff.  ;  to  cognition,  66

Timaeus,  73  n.

Timelessnessoftheself,cpd.  "Duree,"

339

Tragedy,  significance  of,  18

Transmutation  of  experiences  in  Ab
solute,  373,  387-388

Truth,  as  "  the  whole,"  43  ;  not  in
mere  correspondence,  306

Twelfth  Night,  quoted,  253  n.

Ugliness,  5

Ultimate  and  immediate  confused,
295-296

"  Unconsciousness,"  in  invention  and
inference,  333

Uniformity  of  nature,  interpretation
discussed,  83  ff.,  138  ff.

Universal  "  world,"  37  ;  root  mean
ing  of,  II.,  40  n.  ;  its  self-
maintenance,  46  ;  the  system  of
an  individual,  103  ;  in  principle
excludes  plurality  of  similars,
104;  in  the  "mean,"  397-398,
1 20,  184  n.

Varisco,  Professor  Bernardino,  7
Massimi  Problemi,  3  n.,  1 12  n.,
126,  148  ».,  150,  157,  215,  286

Value,  128;  in  inorganic  world,  147,
VIII.

Venn,  Dr.  John,  Empirical  Logic  and
Logic  of  Chance,  87  ff.  n.

Verworn,  Allegemeine  Physiologic,
107  n.,  195

Ward,  Professor  James,  Naturalism
and  Agnosticism,  54,  58,  78,  82,


INDEX


409


96,  107  n.,  109  ;z.,  134,  142  ;
on  katabolic  character  of  inor
ganic  world,  147  ?z.,  I79j  204
ff.,  286,  356

Whistler,  J.  McNeill,  on  taste  and
knowledge,  62

"  Widerspruch,"  in  Hegel's  Logic,
227


William  Morris,  166

World,  opp.  to  class,  35-36 ;  universal,
37  ;  essential  to  non-contra
diction,  46  ;  type  of  mind  and
individual,  289  ;  essence  of  in
dividuality,  320  ;  two  or  more,
in  Plato,  374

Wundt,  Logic,  169


THE END


O


Printed  by  R.  &  R.  CI.ARK,  LIMITED,  Edinburgh.


University  of  Toronto
brary


SEEN  BY

PRESERVATION

SERVICES


DATE


NOV  1
