Logic, or The Morphology of Knowledge, Vol. 1
Bernard Bosanquet (1888)
========================================================================

PROVENANCE NOTE (Tower of Babel staging): Bosanquet's Logic, or the Morphology of Knowledge (1888), Vol. 1 — the British idealist logic: judgment and inference as the mind's self-development.

========================================================================

Digitized  by  tine  Internet  Archive

in  2009  witii  funding  from

Ontario  Council  of  University  Libraries


http://www.archive.org/details/logicormorpholog01bosauoft


LOGIC


BERNARD  BOSANQUET


VOL.  I.


HENRY FROWDE


Oxford  University  Press  Warehouse
Amen  Corner,  E.G.


PVi\\oe
^3  7^1  k.  3


2oo


-LOGIC


tr


OR


77/7^  MORPHOLOGY  OF  KNOWLEDGE


BY


BERNARD ^BOSANQUEXJ M.A.

FORMERLY FELLOW AND TUTOR OF UNIVERSITY COLLEGE, OXFORD


IN TWO VOLUMES


VOL. I


AT THE CLARENDON PRESS
z888

\^AH  rights  reserved'^


v-1


PREFACE.


The  conception  of  Logical  Science,  which  has  been  my  guide
in  the  present  work,  is  that  of  an  unprejudiced  study  of  the  forms
of  knowledge  in  their  development,  their  inter-connection,  and
their  comparative  value  as  embodiments  of  truth.  If  an  attempt
founded  on  such  a  conception  appears  to  err  by  over-ambitious-
ness,  I  can  only  plead  that  an  honest  effort  in  the  right  direction
does  not  depend  for  its  value  solely  on  its  intrinsic  success.  It  is  at
any  rate  a  heavy  wager  laid  by  the  author  on  his  judgment  of  the
true  aim  and  future  of  his  science,  and  may  attain  results  as  a
suggestion  which  it  misses  as  an  achievement.

In  the  present  centrifugal  state  of  logical  research,  no  under-
taking, perhaps,  can  be  entirely  valueless  which  aims  at  reintro-
ducing some  sort  of  unity  into  the  enquiry.  Such  an  aim  is
necessarily  involved  in  the  idea  of  a  single  connected  science  of
logical  processes  and  products.  It  has  therefore  been  my  object
to  maintain  the  central  identity  of  judgment  and  reasoning
throughout,  and  in  no  case  to  permit  the  variety  of  applications
due  to  diversity  of  matter  to  interrupt  the  connection  and  sub-
ordination demanded  by  unity  of  principle.  Although  in  periods
of  transition  logical  science  has  been  most  effectually  advanced  by
detached  discussion,  in  separate  chapters,  '  books,'  or  volumes,  of
Inductive  or  experimental  method,  of  equational  reasoning,  and  of
the  Logic  of  Chance,  yet  it  seems  plain  that  a  time  must  come
when  the  various  cases  and  species  of  inference  shall  fall  into  their
respective  places  as  organic  members  within  the  intellectual  whole.
But  when  this  transformation  is  effected  it  is  necessary  that  they
should  lose  something  of  their  interesting  peculiarity  and  novelty ;
and  it  is  natural,  from  the  difficulty  of  the  task,  that  they  should


vi  Preface.

lose  more  of  these  qualities  than  is  necessary.  For  this  reason,  as
well  as  from  incompetence  in  the  field  of  exact  science,  I  claim  no
discoveries  in  scientific  method  or  in  mathematical  reasoning,  but
shall  be  content  if  my  attempts  to  represent  them  have  not  many
more  errors  than  are  either  necessary  or  natural.

There  is  in  England  a  healthy  objection  to  system-making,  and
a  preference  for  free  criticism,  against  which  I  should  be  sorry  to
offend.  I  think  however  that  systematic  form  is  essential  to  clear
exposition  and  to  really  effective  criticism,  and  I  have  not  supposed
that  my  work  will  be  considered  as  a  system  in  any  other  sense
than  that  thus  implied.  In  particular,  I  do  not  hope  or  even  desire
that  the  specific  names  which  I  have  invented  for  some  kinds  of
Judgment  and  argument  should  come  into  general  use.  I  have
endeavoured  in  every  case  to  retain  the  accepted  usage  of  the
generic  names,  which  are  all  that  are  recognised  in  ordinary  logical
discussion,  and  have  only  used  strange  tides  for  subdivisions  which
have  no  accepted  place  in  existing  logic,  and  which  merely  serve  to
insist  upon  certain  views  of  logical  evolution.

It  is  almost  superfluous  to  acknowledge  here  what  I  owe  to  other
writers,  as  the  Index  bears  copious  testimony  to  the  amount  of  my
borrowings.  In  bringing  together  'Inductive'  and  'Deductive'
Logic  I  have  followed  more  particularly  Sigwart  and  Jevons ;  in
the  arrangement  and  analysis  of  Judgment-forms  and  forms  of
Inference  I  have  gone  to  a  great  extent  in  the  track  of  Lotze,  and
also  of  Hegel,  to  whom,  so  far  as  I  know,  the  idea  of  this  organic
treatment  of  Logic  is  primarily  due ;  and  in  fundamental  theory  of
judgment  as  in  many  details  I  owe  even  more,  probably,  than  I  have
acknowledged,  to  Mr.  Bradley,  whose  work,  '  Principles  of  Logic,'
appears  to  me  no  less  valuable  now  than  it  did  three  years  ago  \
On  one  particular  point,  relating  to  the  simplest  process  of  equa-
tion (colour-equation,  for  example),  I  am  especially  indebted  to
Mr.  Spencer's  Psychology.

Every  student  will  understand  that  my  obligation  to  former
writers  is  frequently  as  great  when  I  diverge  from  them  as  when

*  See  the  author's  '  Knowledge  and  Reality,  a  Criticism  of  Mr.  Bradley's
"  Principles  of  Logic."  ' Kegan  Paul,  Trench  &  Co. 1885.


Preface.  vii

I  assent  to  their  opinion.  As  I  have  often  been  led  to  express
disagreement  with  Lotze,  portions  of  whose  views  certainly  appear
to  me  strange  in  so  eminent  a  philosopher,  I  ought  to  say  that  but
for  his  great  work  on  Logic  the  larger  part  of  what  I  have  written
would  never  have  come  into  my  head.  I  may  also  express  my
strong  conviction  that  the  reform  of  Logic  in  this  country  dates
from  the  work  of  Stuart  Mill,  whose  genius  placed  him,  in  spite  of
all  philosophical  short-comings,  on  the  right  side  as  against  the
degenerate  representatives  of  Aristotle.  A  glance  at  the  Index  will
suffice  to  show  how  constantly  I  have  referred  to  his  treatise.

I  may  venture,  finally,  to  discharge  an  obligation  of  older
standing,  and  at  the  same  time  to  emphasise  the  guiding  idea  of
my  work,  by  observing  that  the  first  germ  of  imprejudiced  interest
in  the  forms  of  knowledge  was  implanted  in  my  mind,  when  wholly
innocent  of  Hegel  or  Lotze,  by  some  remarks  made  in  a  course  of
Logic  lectures  which  I  had  the  good  fortune  to  hear  about  twenty
years  ago,  the  lecturer  being  Mr.  Alfred  Robinson,  of  New  College,
Oxford.  A  comparison,  which  he  threw  out,  between  the  study
and  analysis  of  judgment-forms  and  the  study  and  analysis  of  the
forms  of  flowers  or  plants  has  never  left  me  since,  and  I  have  never
seemed  to  myself  able  to  exhaust  its  suggestiveness.  If  I  have  at
all  reproduced  for  others  the  spectacle  of  continuity  and  unity  in
the  intellectual  life,  combined  with  the  most  varied  and  precise
adaptation  of  its  fundamentally  identical  fxmction  to  manifold  con-
ditions and  purposes,  which  this  comparison  never  fails  to  present
to  my  own  mind,  I  shall  so  far  have  succeeded  in  the  object  of
my  work.

BERNARD  BOSANQUET.

London,  April,  1888.


TABLE  OF  CONTENTS.


VOL.  I.

Introduction.

PAGE

1.  Title  of  the  work  explained '

2.  Knowledge  and  its  content *

i.  Truth a

ii.  Meaning 4

3.  What  is  the  knowledge  which  we  investigate  ?

4.  The  act  of  Naming 8

5.  \\'hat  that  act  implies '3

i.  Logical  significance . . . . . . • •  ^3

ii.  Meaning  of  '  implies  *......••  16

iii.  Objectification 18

iv.  A  positive  content 19

V.  Meaning  of  Verb-  and  Case-endings 20

vi.  Naming  and  distinction 2a

vii.  Naming  and  Comparison 26

6.  Concept  and  Judgment 3°

7.  Logical  meaning  and  the  individual  mind ......  41

8.  Intension  and  Extension .........  4^

i.  Intension  and  Extension  complementary  and  inseparable . .  46

o.  Their  nature ......•••  4^

/3.  Fictitious  Ideas 48

7.  Nonsensical  expressions .......  48

5.  Names  of  Attributes 48

«.  Proper  names . . • -5°

f.  Names  with  number  attached 54

ii.  Alleged  inverse  ratio  of  Extension  to  Intension  ....  58

a.  Mathematical  phrase  wrong ....••  59
/3.  Greater Extension  and  Intension  may  go  together,  and

lesser  likewise 60

7.  Subsumption  not  the  sole  principle  of  reasoning . .  62

iii.  Truth  of  the  inverse  ratio 63

a.  Alternative  Classification  .......  63

/3.  Higher  individuals  and  abstractions 65

7.  ^Inverse  ratio  justified  by  natural  classification ...  68


X  Table  of  Contents.

Book  I. The  Judgment.

CHAPTER  I.

Of  Judgment  and  Judgment-forms  in  general.

PAGE

I,  Nature  of  Judgment  as  such 72

i.  Symbolic  Ideas 73

ii.  Reference  to  Reality 7^

iii.  Judgment  and  Proposition 79

a.  The  parts  of  the  Judgment 80

/3.  Judgment  in  relation  to  Time . . . . . -85

1.  Arriving  at  Judgment 85

2.  The  complete  Judgment . . . . ' .  86

II.  Arrangement  of  Judgments 90

i.  Purpose  of  Scheme . .92

ii.  Explanations 93

a.  Use  of  the  terms  Categorical  and  Hypothetical ... 94
/3.  Divergent  species  of  Judgment  ...... 96

7.  Use  of  the  terms  '  Analytic '  and  '  Synthetic ' . . -97

CHAPTER  II.
Quality  and  Comparison.

Quality  and  Comparison 104

1.  The  Judgment  of  Quality  . 104

i.  Meaning  of  Quality 105

ii.  Judgment  of  Quality  proper 105

iii.  Demonstrative  Judgment 114

2.  The  Judgment  of  Comparison 116

i.  Quantitative 1:7

ii.  In  space  and  Time  as  such . . . . . .120

iii.  So-called  Qualitative 123


CHAPTER III.
Quantity  and  Proportion.


#


The  Judgment  of  Measurement 128

I.  Measurement  and  Individuality  . . . . . .128

i.  Simple  measurement. Pure  Quantity . . . .129

ii.  Complex,  mediate  or  ideal  measurement. Proportion . 131
iii.  Qualitative  unity  of  Individual  . . . . . .139

iv.  Change  and  Motion  as  revealing  Individuality  . . • 140
V.  Abstraction  and  Necessity  . . . . . .143

vi.  Absolute  and  Conditional  affirmation .... 144

vii.  Knowledge  as  union  of  absolute  and  relative . . .151


Table  of  Co7itents.  xi

CHAPTER  IV.
Measurement  (contixved) — Abstract  Qvaxtitv.

PACE

2.  One-sided  forms  of  measurement 154

i.  Ennmeration  and  Simple  Counting 154

Corollaries :  a.  Simple  Counting .... 156

&.  Discrete  and  Continuous . . .159

iL  Judgments  AfiBliated  to  the  Enumerative  Judgment . . 160

a.  Plural  or  Particular  Judgment 160

/3.  Collective  Judgment 162

7.  Enumerative Judgment reverting towards Generic,

Exhaustive  Judgment 168

5.  Judgment  of  Complex  or  Mediate  Counting,  Addition

and  Multiplication.  The  Equation  .  .  •  1 7°
t.  Abstract  Enumeration  and  the  Infinite  Series  .  .173
f. Abstract  and  Infinite  Time  . .  .178

17.  Abstract  and  Infinite  Space  . . . .184

a.  Measurement  of  actual  distances  . . . .185

b.  Theoretical  relations  of  spatial  attributes . . 187

(l)  Individuality  of  figures  in  Space . .  187

(a)  Existence  of  figures  in  Space . . .  191

(3)  The  quasi-generic  Judgment . . .  195

3.  Infinite  Space 197

iii.  Mechanical  view  of  Universe  and  general  relation  of

Equation  to  Judgment 200


CHAPTER  V.

Singular  and  Uxh-ersal  Judgment.

1 .  Singular  Judgment 208

i.  Individual  Judgment ........  208

a.  with  Proper  Name ........  208

/3.  with  Name  and  ideas 210

ii.  Corporate  Judgment  . . . . . . . .212

iii.  Existential  and  Temporal  element  in  the  Singular  Judgment .  314

2.  Universal  Judgment 220

i.  Generic  Judgment ... ......  322

o.  Quasi-collective  Judgment . . . . . .224

/3.  True  Generic  Judgment 326

a.  Analogical  Judgment . . . . . .  «26

b.  Its  existential  meaning 337

c.  Individual  (Generic)  Judgment 243


xii  Table  of  Contents,

CHAPTER  VI.

Universal  Judgment  {continued).

PAGE

ii.  Pure  Hypothetical  Judgment 249

a.  Its  relation  to  previous  forms 249

/3.  Its  external  form 250

7.  The  assertion  which  it  makes 252

a.  The  idea  of  Ground 253

b.  The  idea  of  Cause 264

(i)  Cause  as  corresponding  to  Complete  Ground .  264
(2)  Cause  as  an  event ;  i.e.  distinguished  from  Ground

Complete  or  Incomplete . . . .266

c.  The  element  of  supposition  in  universal  Judgment .  2  78

(i)  Historical  relations  of  simple  and  hypothetical

judgment .......  283

(2)  The  basis  of  hypothetical  judgment . . .  287


CHAPTER  VII.

Negation,  Opposition,  and  Conversion.

1.  Negation  how  related  to  Affirmation 293

2.  Bare  Denial  and  the  Infinite  Judgment ......  297

3.  Significant  Denial ..........  300

4.  Opposition  and  Conversion ........  310

i.  The  opposition  of  Judgments . . . . . . • 311

a.  In  the  case  of  Singular  Judgments . . . . -311

i8.  In  the  case  of  Particular  Judgments 311

7.  In  the  case  of  Generic  Judgments 313

5.  In  the  case  of  Hypothetical  Judgments . . . -315
ii.  Double  negation . . . . . . . . ■319

iii.  Conversion 324

a.  Simple  Conversion  of  Singular . . . . . -325

/3.  Conversion  by  limitation 326

7.  Modal  Conversion ........ 329

5.  Simple  Conversion  of  Universal  Negative  .... 330

«.  Contraposition 331

5.  Privation  as  warrant  of  Affirmation  and  of  Exclusion  .... 332

a.  Privation  and  real  possibility . . . . . . 333

i8.  Privation  and  impossibility 335


Table  of  Contents.  xiii

CHAPTER  VIII.

Disjunction  and  the  Statement  of  Chances.

rAGE

I.  The  disjunctive  judgment 340

i.  Genesis  of  the  disjunctive  judgment 340

ii.  Imperfect  disjunctions 34a

o.  Not  exclusive 34a

6.  Disjunctions  of  Ignorance 343

7.  Disjunctions  referred  to  point  of  Time ....  344
iii.  Logical  affiliation  of  true  disjxmction 345

a.  The  Generic  judgment .  345

6.  The  h)-pothetical  judgment 347

iv.  When  are  parts  disjunctively  related  ? 349

V.  Is  Disjunction  reducible  to  Hypotheticals  ? . . . .  351

a.  The  statement  of  chances 35a

i.  Limits  of  the  problem  in  present  work .....  35a

ii.  Affiliation  of  the  abstract  disjunction 353

iiL  Essence  of  the  statement  of  chances 355

iv.  Applications  of  the  statement  as  calculus ....  356

o.  Alternatives  and  Results . . ....  356

^.  Physical  Alternatives 357

7.  Interesting  Results 357

V. What  does  statement  of  chances  represent  ? . . . .  358

vi.  Chance  and  series .........  361

a.  Fallacies  relating  to  series 361

0.  Causal  inference  from  series 369

7.  Coincidence  of  observed  and  calculated  series . . .  370

8.  Series  a  reality  for  some  purposes 371

viL  Probability  of  Judgments  in  the  absence  of  Knowledge .  371

CHAPTER  IX.

Modality.

I.  Kant's  view  of  Modality  fimdamentally  just 377

a.  The  Problematic  Judgment 380

L  Nature  of  mere  suggestion  or  question 380

ii.  Is  the  Problematic  Judgment  a  form  oftheApodeictic  Judgment?  383

a.  The  Particular  Judgment — the  exception  and  the  instance  383

^.  The  modal  Particular — negative  and  positive  possibility .  385

7.  Essence  of  the  Problematic  Judgment ....  388

3.  The  Assertory  Judgment 389

4.  The  Apodeictic  Judgment 391

i.  The  hypothetical  judgment 391

iu  The  disjunctive  judgment 397


xiv  Table  of  Contents.

VOL.  II.

Book  II. Inference.

CHAPTER  I.
The  Nature  of  Inference.

PAGE

1.  The  Essence  of  Inference ' . •  i

2.  Some  Accidents  of  Inference . 4

i.  Mental  transition  in  Time 4

ii.  Discovery  or  novelty ........  8

iii.  Omission  of  relevant  matter .......  9

iv.  Selection,  and  omission  of  irrelevant  matter? . . . •  T3

v.  Three  terms  ? 13

3.  The  lower  limit  of  Inference ........  14

i.  The  reproduction  of  Ideas 15

ii.  General  necessity  of  Judgment  . . . . . . .  t6

iii.  Specific  necessity  of  Judgment . . . . . . .18

iv.  The  true  immediate  Inferences  .......  20

a.  Comparison . . . . . . . . .21

/3.  Abstraction 21

7.  Recognition 24

S. Discrimination,  etc 26

f.  Inferential  character  of  above  processes ....  26

f.  Comparative  Science 27

4.  Species  of  Inference  which  have  been  erroneously  identified  with  its

principle  ............  29

i.  Inference  from  particulars  to  particulars 29

ii.  Subsumption ..........  30

iii.  Calculation  and  equation  . . . . . . . -31

a.  Calculation  proper ........  32

^.  The  logical  calculus  . . . . . . . -33

iv.  Constraction ..........  36

a.  Physical 36

/3.  Imaginative 38

7.  Intellectual,  in  geometry  and  mechanics . . . -39

5.  Intellectual,  without  limitation  to  geometry  and  mechanics  40

Scheme  of  types  of  Inference . 42

CHAPTER II.

Enumerative  Induction  and  Mathematical  Reasoning.

I.  Enumerative  Induction . . . 43

a.  Syllogism  in  fig.  3 ........  44

/3.  Divergent  tendencies .......  45

7.  The  Individual  Judgment  in  Induction  (Lotze) . .  46


¥


Table  of  Contents.  xv

PACE

2.  Mathematical  Reasoning 48

i.  Number  and  Analogy — Divergence 49

a.  Complete  Enumeration  as  false  IdeaL Syllogism  and  In-
duction .........  49

/3.  Enumeration  as  Arithmetical  computation .  51

7.  Calculation  compared  wth  argument ....  54

ii.  Applications  of  Calculation 56

o.  Substitutive  Inference 57

{fi.  Apprehension  of  Connections  in  Space  and  Time) . .  59
7.  Calculation  applied  to  Geometrical  Reasoning. The  Con-
stitutive Equation 63

2.  Calculation  applied  to  disparates. Proportion  68

(i)  Homogeneous  Terms 68

(a)  '  a  and  a '  series 69

«. Proportion,  Analogy,  and  the  Hypothetical  Judgment  73

f.  Consciousness  and  Conservation  of  energy ...  74

iiL  The  mechanical  aspect  of  Knowledge 77


CHAPTER III.
Analogy.

I.  Analogy  and  Enumerative  Induction. Examples ....  83

3 .  Logical  criticism  of  the  Analogical  argument 88

L  Fig.  3. Undistributed  middle,  Import  of  this  defect  .  88

ii.  Real  value  of  Analogical  argument 90

iii.  No  ratio  of  Identities  to  Differences 98

iv.  Concurrent  Analogies. Negative  confirmation  . . .  103

v.  Divergent  tendencies  in  Analogy 105

CHAPTER IV.
Scientific  Induction  by  Perceptive  Analysis.

1.  Negative  Inference 108

i.  Its  nature  and  conditions  . . . . . . .108

ii.  No  conclusion  from  two  n^atives  . .  . .Ill

iii.  The  negative  instance 115

2.  Scientific  Induction 117

i.  Induction  and  other  Inference  . . . . . . .118

ii.  Induction  as  Perceptive  Anal3rsis . . . .  .123

a.  Symbolic  expression  of  the  problem  . . . . .123

^.  Establishment  of  ordinary  Hypothetical  Judgment  124

7.  Establishment  of  reciprocal  Hypothetical  Judgment  . .128
6.  Conversioa  or  Generalisation 1 30


xvi  Table  of  Contents.

PAGE

iii.  Logical  character  of  Perceptive  Induction  . . . .133

a.  Its  essence  as  Inference 133

i3.  Tlieoretical  purpose  of  representation  by  symbols . .135

7.  Part  played  by  wMw^^r  of  instances 136

(i)  In  Perceptive  Analysis  proper .... 136
(2)  In  assigning  known  effects  to  classes  of  unknown

conditions 137

iv.  Observation  and  Experiment 143

o.  Natural  Experiment  . . . . . . .143

)3.  Observation  with  accurate  instruments , . . .144
7.  Experiment  expressed  in  logical  symbols  . . . • 145

5.  Experiment  with  the  Siren  analysed 149

CHAPTER  V.
Scientific  Induction  by  Hypothesis. Generalization.

1.  Hypothesis  and  Postulate 155

i.  Hypothesis  falls  outside  Postulate 155

ii.  But  not  if  Hypothesis  alleges  Vera  causa 158

2.  Phases  of  Hypothesis .159

i.  Rudimentary  Hypothesis 159

ii.  Mediate  Hypothesis 160

a.  Hypothetical  nature  of  Induction . . . . .160

6.  Example  of  fusion  between  Hypothesis  and  data . . i6i

3.  Generalisation 168

i.  '  From  many  to  all '  exploded 168

ii.  By  mere  determination 169

iii.  Material  or  Analogical  Generalisation . . . . .170

4.  General  view  of  Induction  . . . . . . , -175

i.  Difference  irom  Jevons . . . . . . . •175

ii.  Ultimate  nature  of  Induction 176

CHAPTER  VL
Concrete  systematic  Inference.

1.  Philosophical  Subsumption 180

i.  Logical  content  of  these  Inferences . . . . . . 186

o.  Real  system 186

/3.  Apodeictic  sequence 186

ii.  Their  form,  Syllogism  in  fig.  i  . . . . . . 188

2.  Disjunctive  reasoning  , . . . .  ' . . . .190

3.  The  judgment  of  value 195

i.  Real  Teleology 195

ii.  Mediation 196


Table  of  Contents.


Recapitnlation  of  the  main  characteristics  of  Inferaice
i.  No  antecedent  scheme  of  Inference .
ii.  Conditions  of  Inference ....
iii.  Relation  of  Syllogism  to  these  conditions
a.  The  traditional  syllogism  .
^.  The  syllogism  as  reasoned  judgmeit


xvu

PAGE

197
199
30I
201
202


CHAPTER  VII.
The  Relation  of  Knowledge  to  its  Postulates.

The  fonnal  postulates  of  Knowledge J05

i.  The  Law  of  Identity 207

ii.  The  Law  of  Contradiction 208

iii.  The  Law  of  Excluded  Middle 310

iv.  The  Law  of  Sufficient  Reason  and  Law  of  Causation . .212

The  material  postulates  of  Knowledge 214

i.  The  maintenance  of  life 216

ii.  The  reality  of  human  purposes 219

The  ultimate  nature  of  Necessity 221

.<^ /n'on' necessity  and  mediation 221

o.  Mediate  nature  of  necessity  forgotten  in  controversy  . .222
/5.  Organised  and  unorganised  experience,  with  ambiguity  of

test  by  Conception 224

ii.  Rehabilitation  of  formal  distinctions  in  Logic ....  328

iii.  Criticism  of  '  Aesthetic '  necessity 231

a.  Aesthetic  necessity  as  a  contradiction  in  terms . . .  232

/3.  Aesthetic  necessity  as  a  mere  case  of  logical  necessity  233


VOL.  I.


INTRODUCTION.

'  If  it  is  held  a  valuable  achievement  to  have  discovered  sixty  and  odd  species
of  parrot,  a  hundred  and  thirty-seven  species  of  veronica,  and  so  forth,  it
should  surely  be  held  a  far  more  valuable  achievement  to  discover  the  forms
of  reason ;  is  not  a  figure  of  the  syllogism  something  infinitely  higher  than  a
species  of  parrot  or  of  veronica  ?  ' — Hegel,  Wissenschaft  der  Logik,  p.  139.

'  We  have  seen  that  the  members  of  the  same  class,  independently  of  their
habits  of  life,  resemble  each  other  in  the  general  plan  of  their  organisation.
This  resemblance  is  often  expressed  by  the  term  "  unity  of  type  "  ;  or  by  saying
that  the  several  parts  and  organs  in  the  different  species  of  the  class  are  homo-
logous. The  whole  subject  is  included  under  the  general  term  of  morphology.
This  is  one  of  the  most  interesting  departments  of  natural  history,  and  may
almost  be  said  to  be  its  very  soul.' — Darwin,  Origin  of  Species,  p.  383.

I.  In  giving  to  the  present  work  the  title  of  '  Morphology  Title
of  Knowledge '  I  intended  to  indicate  as  its  purpose  the  %^^^
unprejudiced  study  of  judgment  and  inference,  throughout
the  varied  forms  in  which  their  evolution  may  be  traced
and  their  relationships  determined.  Mere  classification,
therefore,  or  mere  enumeration  of  the  species  of  judgment
or  of  inference,  would  not  achieve  the  aim  which  I  have  set
before  myself,  although  I  am  wholly  of  Hegel's  mind  when
he  says  that  the  species  of  syllogisms  are  at  least  as  well
worth  disco\ering  as  those  of  parrots  or  of  veronicas.  The
two  quotations  which  stand  at  the  head  of  this  Introduction
may  together  exhibit  my  conception  of  a  logical  system,
if  interpreted  to  mean  that  I  would  treat  the  forms  of
judgment  and  of  inference  as  science  treats  the  forms  of
animals  or  of  plants,  not  in  the  spirit  of  enumerative  classi-
fication,  but  in  the  spirit  of  morphological  analysis.  In  the  '
conception  so  determined,  however,  one  further  correction
must  be  made.  Morphology,  as  the  science  of  external
shape,  involves,  I  understand,  an  antithesis  to  physiology  as
the  science  of  vital  function.  This  contrast  belongs  to  the
distinction  of  outer  and  inner,  of  persistent  bodily  form
•fc^ VOL.  I.  B


J


2  Introduction.  LIntrod,

and  living  productive  process,  which  appears  at  first  sight
to  prevail  in  the  world  of  visible  and  tangible  matter.
Were  we  to  transfer  any  such  contrast  to  the  scientific
treatment  of  intelligence,  we  should  obviously  be  forced  to
identify  the  morphology  of  knowledge  with  the  science  of
language  or  of  grammar,  and  reserve  for  the  analysis  of
the  vital  thinking  function  some  such  appellation  as  that  of
Mental  Physiology.  I  do  not  say  that  such  an  antithesis
would  be  false,  but  it  would  fail  to  illustrate  the  point  of
view  on  which  I  am  now  desirous  to  insist.  In  the  sys-
tematic activity  of  thought  the  contrast  between  bodily
shape  and  vital  process  is  non-existent.  Even  the  evolu-
tion of  the  animal  organism  might  be  considered  as  the
development  of  a  function  which  is  a  system  of  functions,
and  the  science  of  life  if  thus  regarded  would  unite,  as  it
appears  to  me,  what  is  valuable  in  morphology  with  the
essence  and  spirit  of  physiology.  Of  the  system  of  know-
ledge, at  any  rate,  this  is  the  true  account.  The  form  of
thought  is  a  living  function,  and  the  phases  and  moments  of
this  function  are  varieties  and  elements  of  the  form.  There-
h  fore  the  'Morphology  of  Knowledge'  must  be  construed

i  as  not  excluding  the  Physiology  of  Thought. The  science

of  intellectual  form includes the science of  intellectual
life.
Knowledge 2.  Knowledge  involves  the  ideas  (i)  of  Truth  and  (ii)  of
Sfntent. leaning. i. How does the analysis  of  knowledge as
Truth. a systematic function, or system of functions, explain
that  relation  in  which  truth  appears  to  consist,  between
the human intelligence on the one hand and fact or
reality  on  the other.? At first sight,  even  the  genetic
analysis  of  a  systematic  development  which  we  propose
to undertake, though a more genuine explanation of
that development than any mere summary of types,
is  powerless to grasp  the relation between the system
so developed, and an object-matter that lies outside
it. To this difficulty  there is only one reply. If  the
^object-matter  of  reality  lay  genuinely  outside  the  system  of


\


isTROD.]  Trtith.  3

thought,  not  only  our  analysis,  but  thought  itself,  would  be
unable  to  lay  hold  of  reality.  For  logic,  at  all  events,  it  is  >  ^
a  postulate  that  '  the  truth  is  the  whole.'  The  forms  of '
thought  have  the  relation  which  is  their  truth  in  their
power  to  constitute  a  totality  ;  which  power,  as  referred  to
the  individual  mind,  is  its  power  to  understand  a  totality.
The  work  of  intellectually  constituting  that  totality  which
we  call  the  real  world  is  the  work  of  knowledge.  The
work  of  analysing  the  process  of  this  constitution  or  deter-
mination is  the  work  of  logic,  which  might  be  described  as
the  self-consciousness  of  knowledge,  or  the  reflection  of
knowledge  upon  itself.  Logicjbasjio  criterion  of  truth  nor  r
test^  of  reasoning.  Truth  is  individual,  and  no  general  —
principle,  no  abstract  reflection,  can  be  adequate  to  the
content  of  what  is  individual.  It  is  indeed  impossible  to
study  the  growth  of  knowledge  without  lighting  upon
confusions  of  thought  that  evoke  a  warning  word.  But
even  a  confusion  of  thought  may  have  a  material  signifi-
cance, and  therefore  contain  a  material  truth,  which  escapes
the  logical  critic  who  perforce  ignores  its  individual  content.
The  relation  of  logic  to  truth  consists  in  examining  the
characteristics  by  which  the  various  phases  of  the  one  in-
tellectual function  are  fitted  for  their  place  in  the  intellec-
tual totality  which  constitutes  knowledge.  The  truth,  the  \
fact,  the  reality,  may  be  considered,  in  relation  to  the
human  intelligence,  as  the  content  of  a  single  persistent  and
all-embracing  judgment,  by  which  every  individual  intelli-
gence affirms  the  ideas  that  form  its  knowledge  to  be  true
of  the  world  which  is  brought  home  to  it  as  real  by  sense-
perception.

The  real  world  for  every  individual  is  thus  emphatically  >
his  world ;  an  extension  and  determination  of  his  present
perception,  which  perception  is  to  him  not  indeed  reality  .
as  such,  but  his  point  of  contact  with  reality  as  such.
Thus  in  the  enquiry  which  will  have  to  be  undertaken  as  to
the  logical  subject  of  the  judgment,  we  shall  find  that
the  subject,  however  it  may  shift,  contract,  and  expand,

B  3


4  Introduction.  [Introd.

is  always  in  the  last  resort  some  greater  or  smaller
element  of  this  determinate  reality,  which  the  individual
has  constructed  by  identifying  significant  ideas  with  that
world  of  which  he  has  assurance  through  his  own  per-
ceptive experience.  In  analysing  common  judgment  it  is
ultimately  one  to  say  that  /  judge,  and  that  the  real  world
for  me,  my  real  world,  extends  itself,  or  maintains  its
organised  extension.  This  is  the  ultimate  connexion  by
which  the  distinction  of  subject  and  predication  is  involved
in  the  act  of  affirmation  or  enunciation  which  is  the
differentia  of  judgment.
Meaning.  ii.  To  speak  of  consciousness  as  a  single  persistent  judg-
ment is  at  first  sight  a  paradox,  in  view  of  the  distinction
between  an  idea  and  the  affirmation  of  an  idea.  It  is
not  easy  to  deny  that  there  is  a  world  of  ideas  or  of
meanings,  which  simply  consists  in  that  identical  reference
of  symbols  by  which  mutual  understanding  between
rational  beings  is  made  possible.  A  mere  suggestion,  a  mere
question,  a  mere  negation,  seem  all  of  them  to  imply  that  we
sometimes  entertain  ideas  without  affirming  them  of  reality,
and  therefore  without  affirming  their  reference  to  be  a
reference  to  something  real  or  their  meaning  to  be  fact.
We  may  be  puzzled  indeed  to  say  what  an  idea  can  mean,
or  to  what  it  can  refer,  if  it  does  not  mean  or  refer  to  some-
thing real — to  some  element  in  the  fabric  continuously
sustained  by  the  judgment  which  is  our  consciousness.  On
the  other  hand,  it  would  be  shirking  a  difficulty  to  neglect
the  consideration  that  an  idea,  while  denied  of  reality,  may
nevertheless,  or  even  must,  possess  an  identical  and  so  in-
telligible reference — a  symbolic  value — for  the  rational
beings  who  deny  it.  A  reference,  it  may  be  argued,  must
be  a  reference  to  something.  But  it  seems  as  if  in  this
case  the  something  were  the  fact  of  reference  itself,  the
rational  convention  between  intelligent  beings,  or  rather  the
world  which  has  existence,  whether  for  one  rational  being
or  for  many,  merely  as  contained  in  and  sustained  by  such
intellectual  reference.


In  TROD.]  Meaning.  5

I  only  adduce  these  considerations  in  order  to  explain
that  transitional  conception  of  an  objective  world  or  world
of  meanings,  distinct  from  the  real  world  or  world  of  facts,
with  which  it  is  impossible  wholly  to  dispense  in  an  account
of  thought  starting  from  the  individual  subject.  The  para-
dox is  that  the  real  world  or  world  of  fact  thus  seems  for
us  to  fall  within  and  be  included  in  the  objective  world  or
world  of  meanings,  as  if  all  that  is  fact  were  meaning,  but
not  every  meaning  were  fact.  This  results  in  the  contra-
diction that  something  is  objective,  which  is  not  real.

We  do  not  meet  this  paradox  adequately  by  reminding
ourselves  that  e.g.  a  negation  or  a  question  is  a  fact  in
some  one's  mind,  and  therefore  as  a  psychical  occurrence
is  a  real  event,  and  in  that  sense  falls  within  reality.  In
considering  an  idea  as  a  psychical  occurrence  we  abstract
from  its  meaning,  which  apparently  consists  in  some  identity
or  persistent  unity  that  extends  beyond  the  isolated  occur-
rence of  the  idea  in  time.

The  solution  of  the  difficulty  appears  howev^er  to  be
suggested  by  the  distinction  which  we  have  just  taken.  As
the  psychical  occurrence  and  objective  reference  are  dis-
tinguishable by  abstraction  only,  so  objective  reference'
and  reference  to  reality  (affirmation)  are  distinguishable  by
abstraction  only.  The  world  of  objective  reference  and  the  j
world  of  reality  are  the  same  world,  regarded  in  the  former
case  as  composed  of  isolated  though  determined  contents,  and
in  the  latter  case  as  composed  of  contents  determined  by
systematic  combination  in  a  single  coherent  structure.  The
former  point  of  view  is  an  abstraction  that  goes  near  to  be  a
fiction,  for  isolated  contents  qua  isolated  are  not  determined.
But  it  is  possible  and  usual  to  consider  ideas,  by  help  of
abstraction,  in  respect  of  those  relations  which  especially  de-
termine them,  as  detached  islands  or  spheres  of  knowledge,
without  actually  referring  them  in  a  thoroughly  determinate
judgment  to  a  place  in  the  one  individual  system  which  for
each  of  us  is  the  reality.  Ideas  thus  isolated  are  what  we  '  en-
tertain' as  significant  or  symbolic  ideas  which  have  meaning


6  Introduction.  [introd.

or  objective  reference,  and  yet  are  not  affirmed  of  Reality.
Objective  reference  is  the  substance  of  the  convention  by
which  rational  beings  communicate  with  each  other  and
with  themselves,  and  which,  though  a  consequence  of  the
unity  of  Reality,  can  be  regarded  without  being  directly
identified  with  that  unity.  To  show  that  every  idea  which
is  entertained^  as  for  example  suggested  or  supposed,  must
be  taken  to  be  tdtimately  affirmed  of  reality,  is  the  task  of
those  portions  of  logic  which  deal  with  question,  suggestion,
supposition,  and  denial.  Thus  in  the  discussion  of  mere  or
bare  denial  we  shall  be  forced  to  the  conclusion  that  where,
in  an  attempted  judgment  of  denial,  no  positive  basis  nor
positive  consequence  of  the  denial  is  to  be  discovered, —
where,  that  is,  the  idea  which  is  verbally  denied  forms  no
element  in  any  affirmation  of  any  kind  about  Reality,  there
no  judgment  can  really  take  place,  nor  can  the  idea  in
question  be  enunciated  as  an  intelligible  idea.  The  mean-
ing which  an  idea  seems  to  retain  when  named  in  a  spurious
judgment  or  unintelligible  proposition  of  this  kind  depends
on  its  initiation  of  other  acts  of  thought  than  the  denial  in
which,  ex  hypothesis  we  were  to  look  for  its  unaffirmed
signification.  Our  treatment  of  supposition  will  lead  us  to
the  same  result.  All  significant,  i.e.  all  logical,  ideas  are
ultimately  elements  in  a  single  judgment,  the  judgment
which  sustains  the  ideal  structure  of  the  real  world.

Thus  the  world  of  truth  and  the  world  of  meaning  are
not  really  distinct,  and  the  process  which  logic  investigates
is  the  single  process  and  individual  self-determination  of
the  whole  which  is  the  truth  or  reality.
What  3.  It  is  natural  to  ask,  '  Where  and  what  is  this  self-

knowledge  determination.? Wheie does it begin? Where does it

are  we  m-  _ _  o

Aestigat- end  ? Is  it  in  the  individual  mind  or  in  the  history  of  the
"^^  race,  or  in  an  arbitrary  combination  of  the  two } '

I  cannot  attach  much  importance  to  this  question,  which
might  be  asked  with  equal  justice,  as  it  appears  to  me,  of
every  science.  A  science  deals  with  its  object-matter
wherever  it  finds  it. The  self-determination  of  the  knowing


introd] What  knowledge  are  we  studying  f  7

intelligence  as  the  real  world  takes  place  wherever  there  is
knowledge  and  in  as  far  as  there  is  knowledge.  If  the
question  is  whether  the  process  as  described  is  necessarily
involved  in  knowledge  or  is  a  mere  fact  like  any  isolated
fact,  there  can  be  no  answer  except  that  the  question  is
either  superfluous  or  meaningless.  Of  any  particular  logical
theory,  such  as  that  contained  in  the  present  work,  it  is
superfluous  to  ask  whether  it  is  in  all  respects  necessary
and  absolute.  Of  course  it  will  contain  many  erroneous
and  many  accidental  elements.  But  to  eisk  whether  a  true
account  of  the  logical  process  would  be  necessary  and
essential,  or  would  contain  mere  fact  or  accident,  is  simply
to  ask  whether  a  true  account  may  not  perhaps  be  false.
All  truth  is  necessary  in  as  far  as  it  is  rationally  known.
And  if  a  scientific  analysis  were  to  lead  to  no  truth  at  all,
it  would  simply  lead  to  nothing.  Whether  in  any  particular
instance  such  a  nothing  may  have  resulted  is  a  matter  for
consideration  on  the  merits  of  the  individual  case.  But
in  general  I  must  protest  that  there  is  no  more  reason  in
asking  what  evolution  of  thought  we  are  studying,  than  in
asking  what  laws  of  motion  are  studied  by  mechanical
science.  The  laws  of  motion  express  the  characteristics  of
moving  bodies  qua  moving ;  and  the  laws  of  knowledge
express  the  characteristics  of  knowing  subjects  qua  knowing.
It  is  no  more  necessary  to  specify  in  what  particular  cases
you  find  knowledge,  than  to  specify  in  what  particular
cases  you  find  motion.  If  knowledge  has  a  nature  that
can  be  studied — and  if  not,  there  is  no  logic — it  can  only
exist  where  that  nature  is  realised ;  and  however  the  pro-
gress of  the  race  may  have  prepared  the  intellectual  in-
heritance which  is  devolved  upon  successive  individuals,
those  individuals  can  only  make  it  their  own  by  fulfilling
the  conditions  which  constitute  its  nature.  I  do  not  deny
that  the  type  and  content  of  knowledge  must  change  with
the  advance  of  evolution ;  I  only  affirm  that  any  such
change  depends  on  the  modes  and  degrees  in  which  the
general  conditions  of  knowledge  are  fulfilled  in  successive


8  Introduction.  [introd.

generations,  and  not  in  any  difference  between  knowledge
in  its  essential  nature,  knowledge  as  developed  in  the  race,
and  knowledge  as  a  process  within  the  individual  intelli-
gence.
The  act  of  4-  To  give  a  name  is  for  civilised  thought  the  first
Naming,  g^^p  -^^  knowledge.  It  at  once  depends  upon,  and  in  a
sense  creates,  a  recognisable  arrangement  of  things,  quali-
ties, and  relations.  Wherever  new  ground  has  to  be
appropriated,  whether  actually  or  in  metaphor,  the  first
necessity  is  to  find  recognisable  points,  by  which,  being
named,  we  can  observe  and  communicate  our  where-
abouts.

The  value  of  this  first  step  is  only  to  be  estimated  by
experience,  now  necessa,rily  exceptional,  of  the  attempt  to
attain  knowledge  without  it. We  do  not  experience  this
simply  by  going  where  a  language  is  spoken  that  we  do
not  understand. No  doubt,  in  the  long  run,  lack  of  com-
munication with  our  fellows would affect our  reasoning
power ;  but  we  are  now  looking  for  an  instance  in  which
we  ourselves,  within  our  minds,  have  no  names  to  aid  us  in
distinguishing  and  recognising  things. We  find  such  an
instance  in  our  attempts  to  deal  with  any  new  region  of
knowledge  of  which  we  have  not  mastered  the  rudiments
and  in  which  we  have  neither  books  nor  teachers  to  guide
us. This  is  merely  individual  ignorance ; but  the  great
pioneers  of  knowledge  must  be  in  the  same  predicament
when,  going beyond  established distinctions  and taking
note  of  new  phenomena,  they  lay  the  foundations  of  a  fresh
structure  of  science. Great discoverers  are able  to add
fresh  names  to  language  ;  ordinary  men  content  themselves
with  learning  the  meaning  of  those  in  common  use. The
\  limitations  of  popular  nomenclature  form  the  limitations  of
r  popular  observation. When  we  are  brought  face  to  face
with  a  scientific  classification  and  the  terminology  it  in-
volves, we  are  astounded  at  the  blindness  in  which  we  had
contentedly  been  living. Every  yellow  ranunculus  we  call
a  buttercup,  every  myosotis  a  forget-me-not,  every  large


TsTROD.]  Naming.  9

white  umbelHfer  a  hemlock ;  not  merely  as  an  epithet,  but
because  we  really  see  no  difference.  So  in  the  history  of
architecture  or  of  fine  art,  popular  knowledge  is  confined
for  the  most  part  to  the  application  of  two  or  three  terms
which  have  gained  currency.  Few  people  are  able  to
obser\-e  without  the  help  of  names.

It  is  true  that  there  is  something  ludicrous  in  the
tendency  of  common  minds  to  cling  to  a  name ;  in  the
insistance  of  an  inexperienced  art-critic  on  superficial
characteristics  which  happen  to  be  nameable,  when  he
ought  to  be  looking  into  the  special  significance  of  a  work
of  art ;  in  M.  Jourdain's  delight  at  the  discovery  that  he
conversed  in  prose,  or  in  the  sudden  zeal  of  Strepsiades
for  the  correct  employment  of  the  masculine  and  feminine
terminations.  Nevertheless,  the  current  censure  of  verbal
knowledge  is  itself  largely  founded  on  ignorance,  and
actually  on  the  same  ignorance  which  creates  the  risk  and
opprobrium  of  mere  verbal  knowledge.  In  the  annals  of
philosophy  there  is  nothing  more  tragi-comic  than  Mill's
condescending  excuse  for  Plato's  discussions  about  related
existence — discussions  which  laid  the  permanent  foundations
of  scientific  logic ;  the  modern  logician  showing  his  superiority
to  verbal  quibbles  by  an  attempt  to  dissociate  existence  from
attribution  based  simply  and  solely  on  the  fact  that  existence
is  sometimes  expressed  by  a  peculiar  kind  of  attribution.
The  condemnation  of  a  knowledge  which  rests  in  mere  words
too  often  means  that  the  word  and  no  more  has  reached  the
understanding  of  the  critic.  It  is  probable  that  we  think
too  little  rather  than  too  much  of  Naming  as  a  first  step  in
knowledge.  To  give  names  which  endure  is  with  few
exceptions  the  prerogative  of  genius.  The  number  of
terms  which  we  inherit  from  Plato  and  Aristotle  is  among
the  most  striking  proofs  of  the  immense  advance  which
they  won  for  the  human  intellect.  These  two  great  minds
mapped  out  the  world  of  knowledge  in  its  essential  features
much  as  we  have  it  before  us  now,  and  gave  to  its  main
divisions  the  names  which they  still retain. Or,  again,


lo  Introduction.  [introd.

what  a  gigantic  advance  was  made  by  the  work  of  Linnaeus,
though  it  now  serves  as  the  stock  example  of  an  '  artificial '
classification  !  It  was  the  indispensable  starting-point  for
the  more  profound  and  rational  researches  of  modern  times,
and  thus  if  not  one  of  the  most  arduous,  at  least  one  of  the
most  valuable,  of  scientific  achievements.

I  spoke  of  Naming  as  the  first  step  in  knowledge  yj??-
civilised  thought.  Plato  recognised  the  operation  much  as
we  recognise  it.  And  yet  there  must  have  been  a  time
when  it  was  not  easy  thus  to  isolate  a  single  word  from  the
sentence.  Indeed,  even  now,  the  single  word  is  not  really
isolated.  Except  in  the  instances  in  a  logical  text-book,
the  utterance  of  a  single  word  always  implies  a  sentence,
and  usually  a  judgment.  We  now  print  the  title  of  a  book
or  the  description  of  a  species  of  flower,  contrary  to  older
custom,  without  a  verb ;  but  none  the  less  they  are  read  off
into  propositions  or  judgments.  The  artificial  nature  of  the
supposed  concept  which  is  thought  to  correspond  to  a
name  and  to  be  generically  other  than  a  judgment  is
curiously  illustrated  by  the  fact  that  Linnaeus  was  the  first
to  omit  the  verb  in  the  descriptions  of  flowers.  Such  des-
criptions, though  in  appearance  reduced  to  logical  names,
are  of  course  understood  as  sets  of  judgments.  No  doubt
however  all  these  habits,  including  the  use  of  dictionaries,  fa-
miliarise us  at  least  with  thcappearmtce  of  the  significant  noun
in  complete  isolation  from  the  sentence,  and  lead  us  to  ima-
gine that  in  such  isolation  it  is  still  a  fair  representative  of
some  individual  object  or  quality  (also  isolable)  in  a  way  in
which  the  complete  sentence  is  not.  But  I  must  repeat  that
under  no  circumstances  does  a  man  in  his  senses  make  use
of  an  isolated  noun,  except  to  indicate  an  assertion,  wish,
or  command.  A  dependent  sentence,  as  its  name  shows,
cannot  stand  alone ;  and  a  name  is  for  grammar  in  this
respect  like  some  form  of  dependent  sentence.  If  a  man
were  to  say  '  the  sun,'  the  difl"erence  between  this  and  a
given  proposition  like  '  the  sun  is  low,'  is  not  that  in  the
first  case  we  have  a  mere  name  and  in  the  second  a  propo-


iNTROD.]  Isolation  of  the  Name,  1 1

sition,  but  that  in  the  second  case  we  have  a  given  pro-
position, while  in  the  first  we  are  set  to  make  propositions
at  random.  The  same  is  true  of  any  logical  noun,  i.  e.
descriptive  or  appositional  sentence — and  a  noun  may,  we
shall  see,  be  equivalent  even  to  a  conditional  sentence —
such  that  it  can  stand  as  subject  or  predicate  in  a  propo-
sition. No  such  sentence  is  ever  used  independently;  for
all  thought,  if  not  optative  or  imperative  \  is  categorical.

Thus  it  would  seem  that  the  isolation  of  the  significant
name  from  its  context,  which  is  even  now  more  apparent
than  real,  must  in  very  early  stages  of  language  have  been
a  wholly  unfamiliar  process.  The  history  even  of  proper
names  shows  a  tendency  to  illustrate  this ;  though  proper
names  for  human  beings  would  be,  one  would  suppose,
among  the  earliest  productions  of  language.  As  we  go
back,  we  find  the  '  proper '  name  less  purely  distinctive,  less
*  proper,'  and  more  significant  or  predicative.  The  animal
names  borne  by  some  savages  must  be  significant,  though
how  or  of  what  may  be  doubtful.  The  Roman  Agnomen
and  the  Athenian  Deme  name  were  directly  significant,
as  of  course  are  many  modern  surnames  in  their  recent
origin.  The  addition  of  a  name  of  father  (also  husband  or
master)  in  the  possessive  case  was  not  originally  a  mere
appellation ,  it  was  an  assertion  of  ownership  -.  It  is  well
known  that  among  the  Romans  the  gentile  name  {notneti)
was  the  name  par  excellence,  as  indeed  for  most  purposes  the
surname  is  now.  It  is  less  well  known  that  the  'fore-name,*
which,  if  any,  was  individual,  was  not  at  all  freely  chosen  to
serve  as  a  distinctive  sign  ;  it  was  characteristic  of  family,
and  the  choice  was  exceedingly  restricted.  Among  all  the
Roman  patricians  only  about  thirty  '  fore-names  '  were  in
use,  and  the  •  fore-name '  of  women  was  constantly  omitted

'  Whether  optative  and  imperative  forms  can  or  should  be  analysed  into
categorical  propositions  is  a  psychological  rather  than  a  logical  question.

*  Mommsen,  Romiache  Forschungen,  vol.  ii.  p.  5.  He  shows  good  ground
for  supposing  that  the  original  form  was  '  Marcus  Mard,'  used  equally  of  wife,
slave  or  son,  and  that  Marcus  Marci  filius  (no  corresponding  form  was  adopted
in  Greek)  was  a  later  modification.


1 2  Introduction,  [introd»

ia  Cicero's  time.  It  would  be  interesting  to  find  parallels
for  some  of  these  features  in  modern  usage  ;  a  small  number
of  Christian  names  no  doubt  serves  to  name  by  far  the
greater  number  of  individuals  in  one  country,  and  the  selec-
tion of  Christian  names  is  to  a  certain  extent  characteristic
of  families  or  of  family.  But  on  the  whole  it  is  now  admitted
that  the  chief  purpose  of  a  proper  name  is  to  be  a  name,  i.  e.
a  constant  sign,  and  even  the  surname,  although  significant
in  many  respects,  is  not  really  to  be  relied  on  as  an  indica-
tion of  family.  The  law  lets  a  man  bear  what  name  he
pleases  and  change  it  as  he  pleases,  so  long  as  he  makes  his
desire  sufficiently  well  known ;  in  other  words,  the  law  accepts
no  purpose  in  the  name  beyond  that  of  mere  recognition.

And  in  the  case  of  the  common  or  significant  name  the
same  thing  is  more  evident.  Even  so  highly  modernised  a
language  as  classical  Greek  has  no  unambiguous  expression
for  '  a  word,'  though  '  noun  '  and  '  predicate '  or  *  verb  '  were
familiar  terms  to  Plato  and  Aristotle.  The  latter  has  to
describe  a  '  word '  by  the  periphrasis,  '  the  least  portion  of
discourse  which  is  significant  when  taken  by  itself  The
Greeks  did  not  separate  their  words  in  writing ;  and  in  their
inscriptions  a  terminal  consonant  is  affected  by  the  following
initial  consonant,  as  it  would  have  been  in  a  compound
word.  I  do  not  think  it  is  fanciful  to  refer  to  these  facts  in
illustration  of  the  closer  cohesion  of  sentences  in  ancient
than  in  modern  speech.  The  solvent  of  the  sentence  is
obviously  writing.  You  cannot  take  to  pieces  the  spoken
sentence  as  you  can  that  which  lies  written  before  you.  If
you  ask  an  uneducated  man  about  some  one  point  in  what
he  told  you,  he  will  say  it  all  over  again.  But  this
enquiry  hardly  belongs  to  logic,  though  it  helps  to  rouse  us
out  of  the  analytic  abstractions  in  which  we  are  now  at
home.  I  only  wished  to  guard  myself  against  asserting
that  the  conscious  selection  of  an  individual  object  and  the
appropriation  to  it  of  an  element  of  language  common  to
all  sentences  in  which  that  object  is  referred  to — that  this
act  of  Naming  comes  first  in  history  as  it  does  in  modern


iNTROD.]  Logical  Signijicaiue.  1 3

science.  It  appears  to  me  that  the  descriptive  sentence
must  have  furnished  the  material  for  a  subsequent  appro-
priation of  names  ;  and  that  the  appropriation  of  names  by-
habitual  description  must  have  .been  quite  a  different  pro-
cess from  methodically  searching  for  new  '  points  d'appui '
and  fixing  their  appellations  at  one  blow.

5.  The  act  of  Naming  implies  in  the  first  place  '  Logical  \Miat  the
Significance.'  i.  A  name  then  is  a  sign  which  rouses  the  mind  Xaming
to  a  set  of  activities  having  an  identical  element.  In  the  ™»pl»es.
purely  artificial  case,  when  a  name  is  spoken  in  my  hearing  g^^,
without  any  context  expressed  or  implied,  such  activities  cance.
may  probably  take  the  shape  of  interrogation  or  suggestion ;
i.e.  as  is  commonly  supposed  (but  see  sect.  2,  above),  a
review  of  matters  which  we  might  employ  in  judgments,
but  do  not  yet  know  how  to,  being  unable  to  attach  any  of
them  to  our  real  world.  The  meaning  of  the  name  consists
in  its  power  of  suggesting  and  controlling  these  activities,
these  judgments  completed  or  incJioate.  If,  to  return  to  the
example  suggested  above,  I  hear  some  one  say  '  The  sun,'
my  first  idea  is  that  the  speaker  is  thinking  aloud,  and
that  I  have  caught  the  fragment  of  a  sentence  which  he  has
completed  in  his  mind.  But  with  a  view  to  logical  theory
we  may  neglect  the  speaker's  intention  (though  no  theory
should  forget  that  it  has  neglected  this  feature  of  the  case),
and  simply  consider  what  the  word  does  for  the  hearer.
It  makes  him  think  of  something,  and  in  this  case  of  what
is  called  par  excellence  a  thing :  had  the  word  been  '  red,'  it
would  have  suggested  a  quality ;  had  it  been  '  parallel/  a
relation.  We  have  not  to  do  just  now  with  the  difference
between  these  three  kinds  of  signification,  but  only  with
what  signification  is  as  such.  In  thinking  of  something
without  more  guidance  than  a  significant  name,  we  find  our-
selves involuntarily  thinking  not  merely  of  it,  but  aSout  it.
And  this  is  inevitable.  That  which  the  name  signifies  is,
for  us  at  all  events,  an  identical  character  exhibited  by
different  contexts,  or  different  contexts  united  by  a  common
character. Any  one  who  has  been  told,  by  an  old-fashioned


14  Introduction.  [introd.

mesmerist,  to  '  think  of  nothing  but '  a  copper  and  zinc
disk  which  is  put  in  his  hand,  and  which  he  is  expected  to
contemplate  for  some  minutes,  must  have  found  (supposing
that  he  attempted  to  do  what  he  was  told)  that  his  thoughts
traversed  in  a  series  of  judgments  the  various  ways  in  which
the  thing  affected  his  perceptions,  or  reacted  in  the  com-
parisons that  suggested  themselves  ^.  These  judgments,  if
expressed  in  language  as  propositions,  would  all  contain
the  same  name,  that  of  the  thing  which  they  described.
But  although  connected  with  different  standards  of  com-
parison in  the  different  judgmicnts,  the  thing  spoken  of
in  them  all  is  not  different  things,  but  the  same  thing.  If
you  persevere  and  try  to  elicit  the  root  and  basis  of  its
identity,  you  may  indeed  fix  more  or  less  arbitrarily  upon
certain  '  essential '  attributes,  but  these  attributes  represent
the  thing  in  different  contexts,  and  are  also  themselves,  as
Mill  has  explained  ^  elements  of  identity  between  different
contexts.  You  may  judge  the  thing  to  be  round,  hard,
heavy,  flat,  cold,  and  to  be  on  the  palm  of  your  hand,  and
you  may  define  circular  form,  hardness,  weight,  etc.  as  you
please ;  but  you  will  not  express  either  thing  or  attribute
as  other  than  an  element  of  identity  which  is  exhibited  and
takes  shape  in  different  aspects  or  relations.  Mr.  Bradley  ^
has  pointed  out  that  extension  in  space  or  duration  in  time
are  sufficient  to  invest  that  which  has  them  with  the
character  of  an  identity  into  which  differences  enter.
This — an  identical  element  which  enters  into  and  is  entered

^  I  suspect  that  the  particular  mesmerist  to  whom  I  refer  was  influenced  by
the  fallacy  which  has  been  combated  in  the  text,  and  imagined  that  to  think
continuously  of  an  individual  thing  involved  an  immobility  of  thought,  as  though
the  thing  were  for  thought  like  an  image  in  space  fixed  and  isolated.  In  at-
tempting to  attain  such  an  immobility  (which  attempt,  on  this  hypothesis,  the
operator  intended  to  be  made)  the  patient  would  simply  arrest  the  operation  of
his  intelligence,  and  would  thus  approach  to  that  withdrawal  of  attention  from
all  specific  stimuli  which  is  perhaps  a  condition  of  the  mesmeric  sleep.  How
far  this  principle  is  connected  with  that  of  Braid's  and  similar  experiments,
I  am  not  expert  enough  to  say. Cf  Lotze,  Metaphysik,  sect.  304.

"  See  Mill's  Logic,  i.  201  (sixth  edition).

*  See  Bradley's  Principles  of  Logic,  p.  44.


introd]  Rational  Convefition.  15

into  by  differences — is  what  we  might  call  the  logical  signi-
ficance, the  significance  which  must  be  postulated  in  all
cases,  of  a  name  as  such.

The  process  of  Naming,  as  known  to  our  reflective
thought,  is  to  adopt  an  individual  element  of  language
as  the  instrument  of  intellectual  reference  to  an  individual
identity  in  the  knowable  world.  The  conscious  adoption
or  appropriation  of  the  linguistic  sign  is  the  same  thing
in  principle,  whether  the  sign  is  employed  solely  within
my  own  consciousness,  or  is  applied  to  communication
with  other  intellectual  beings.  The  '  convention '  ^  or
agreement  which  has  been  said  to  give  language  its
meaning,  would  be  the  same  thing  between  other  persons
and  me  that  the  employment  of  significant  signs  is  be-
tween me,  so  to  speak,  and  myself.  It  is  as  wonderful,
and  as  much  a  proof  of  'convention,'  i.e.  of  the  power  to
agree,  that  '  goodness '  should  mean  the  same  to  me  yester-
day and  to-day,  as  that  in  this  sentence  it  should  mean  the
same  to  me  and  to  my  reader.  It  may  be  said,  and  here  we
anticipate  a  difficulty  which  must  be  treated  later  in  this
chapter,  '  But  goodness  does  not  mean  quite  the  same  to
you  and  to  your  reader,  or  to  you  at  different  times.'  Then
I  will  change  the  phrase  and  substitute  '  refer  to.'  It  will
be  seen  at  once  that  if  '  goodness '  in  my  mouth  and  in
yours  does  not  refer  to  the  same  characteristic,  it  is  not
intended  to  vuan  the  same,  and  its  meanings  however
different  cannot  be  conflicting.  In  that  case  the  two  charac-
teristics referred  to  are  '  homonymous,'  and  the  same  word
goodness  is  used  for  them  only  by  accident  -,  as  glass  is
for  a  telescope  and  a  tumbler.  The  point  and  purpose
of  a  name  is,  always  to  refer  to  the  same ;  it  is  on  this
reference  that  the  whole  possibility  of  mutual  intelligence
depends. The  connection  between  isolated  reference,  or

^  A  name  is  speech  which  has  meaniog  according  to  convention  (jcara
awOT)Krp/). Arist.  II«pt  'Epfitjvftas,  sect.  2.

'  By  accident  as  regards  present  use ;  there  may  be  a  common  history,  but
this  is  rather  a  source  of  deception  than  of  clearness.


I


16  Introduction.  [introd.

meaning,  and  reference  to  a  system,  or  affirmation,  has  been
explained  above  (sect.  2).

Identical  reference  or  rational  convention  is  thus  the
root  and  essence  of  the  system  of  signs  which  we  call  lan-
'  guage  ^.  The  act  of  Naming,  i.  e.  of  establishing  such
a  reference,  and  of  appropriating  a  sign  to  it,  has  been
elaborately  analysed  into  a  number  of  processes  or  aspects.
In  my  opinion  such  an  analysis  should  be  regarded  mainly
as  a  mere  analysis — as  a  distinction  of  aspects  and  not  as  a
history  of  acts.  Historical  conclusions  may  flow  from  it ;
but  the  analysis  is  the  first  thing.  We  are  here  met  by  a
difficulty  which  besets  all  the  higher  sciences,  and  which  I
shall  endeavour  in  the  first  instance  to  grapple  with  in  its
general  form.
Meaning  of  ii.  The  distinction  of  stages  in  a  continuous  growth  has
'implies,  always  a  degree  of  artificiality.  It  is  hard  to  say  precisely
when  an  embryo  becomes  a  chicken,  or  a  boy  a  man.  It  is
impossible  to  say  at  what  point  feeling  appears  in  the
organic  world,  or  when  a  child  acquires  a  will,  or  a  primitive
tribe  the  instinct  of  religion  or  of  fine  art.  Characteristics
which  attract  general  notice  only  when  full-grown,  are
traceable  far  back  when  we  come  to  look  for  them  ;  and
further,  they  are  frequently  implied  by  the  nature  of  an
individual  long  before  any  scrutiny  can  detect  them.  It  is
a  cheap  and  false  accuracy  to  express  such  a  growth  in
successive  stages  according  to  the  definite  emergence  of
obvious  features,  without  scrutinising  the  continuous  identity
which  is  present  from  beginning  to  end.  But  it  is  a  fatal
carelessness,  on  the  other  hand,  to  treat  rudimentary  attri-
butes as  ipso  facto  equivalent  to  their  mature  form,  or  as

'  I  can  see  no  ground  for  restricting  the  logical  conception  of  language  to
written  or  spoken  words.  We  must  not  argue  from  the  possibility  of  educating
the  deaf  and  dumb  (cp.  Lotze,  Logik,  sect.  6)  that  '  the  logical  operation  in  the
mind  is  independent  of  the  possibility  of  linguistic  expression.'  It  is  unfoftunate
that  the  German  '  Sprache '  and  '  sprachlich '  make  this  inference  appear  a
truism,  while  if  we  ask  whether  the  deaf  and  dumb  can  in  thinking  dispense
with  fixed  signs  wholly  or  in  part,  the  question,  though  still  of  interest,
assumes  a  very  different  complexion.


iNTROD.]  Continuity  of  growth.  17

necessarily  identical  therewith  in  the  features  of  chief  con-
cern. The  labour  of  genuine  science  is  to  disentangle  the
true  continuity  of  processes,  limiting  it  only  by  modifications
which  are  certainly  traced  or  inevitably  implied  ;  never
assuming  the  existence  of  a  highly  developed  attribute  or
function  where  it  is  not  seen  in  operation,  or  shown  to  be
implied  to  the  exclusion  of  all  conceivable  alternatives.  In
fact,  if  '  conceivable '  means  '  conceived  up  to  a  certain  stage
of  knowledge,'  the  last  clause  is  not  stringent  enough ;  a
suspension  of  judgment  is  often  preferable  to  a  conclusion
from  disjunction  which  violates  general  analogy.  Many
complete-looking  disjunctions  are  imperfect  ;  and  unless
supported  on  a  thoroughgoing  principle,  a  disjunction  is
worth  nothing  at  all.

It  is  hard  to  escape  both  the  complementary  blunders
which  I  have  indicated,  and  the  object  of  this  digression  is  to
point  out  that  though  we  may  not  escape  them  altogether,
their  sting  is  removed  if  we  are  not  too  ready  with  our  dis-
junctions, but  discuss  to  the  best  of  our  power  the  principles
which  underlie  functions  and  attributes,  and  the  consequent
limits  and  laws  of  their  modifications.  Have  such  and  such
savages  the  instinct  of  fine  art  ?  Probably  Yes  or  No  would
be  no  answer.  We  should  find  that  they  had  some
elements  or  germ  of  such  a  tendency,  perhaps  the  love  of
imitation,  or  earlier  still,  the  instinct  of  construction.
Then  we  should  have  to  estimate  the  value  of  this  and  its
connection  with  aesthetic  capacity;  and  the  correctness  of
our  whole  reading  of  the  facts  would  probably  depend  on
the  rightness  of  this  estimate.  The  act  of  naming  presents
such  a  problem.  Does  Naming,  for  instance,  imply  the
processes  of  Comparison  and  Distinction  ?  Does  it  imply
a  Judgment,  such  as  the  Judgment  of  Perception  ?  If  we
look  at  the  activity  of  highly  reflective  thought,  we  must
unhesitatingly  answer  both  questions  in  the  affirmative.
It  is  a  serious  matter  to  introduce  a  new  word  into  lan-
guage, or  to  christen  a  new  phenomenon  or  a  new  species.
All  that  science  can  do  to  verify  and  determine  is  being

VOL.  I.  C


tion


1 8  Introduction.  [Introd.

done  when,  and  is  largely  done  before,  such  an  event
occurs.  Or  if  we  go  to  the  extension  of  the  individual's
knowledge,  which  is  to  him  a  creation  of  new  appellations,
the  same  holds  good  for  kindred  reasons.  The  individual
profits  by  the  work  which  language  presupposes,  and  all
sorts  of  apparatus  is  at  hand  by  which  he  can  put  himself
through  the  processes,  in  learning  a  name,  which  the  dis-
coverer went  through  before  him  in  conferring  it.  This  is
the  one  extreme  of  the  growth  we  have  to  watch  ;  the
extreme  at  which  the  function  we  are  discussing  has
become  an  instrument  of  conscious  science.
Objectifica-  iii.  In  speaking  of  the  opposite  and  lower  extreme,  we
have  to  depend  on  analysis  and  implication.  Let  us  think
of  the  feature  of  reference,  which  we  found  to  lie  at  the  root
of  intelligent  speech.  A  name  always  refers  to  something.
(I  must  repeat  that  the  idiomatic  '  something '  is  not  to  be
taken  as  meaning  an  individual  ''thing''  in  space.)  I  avoid
saying  that  it  refers  to  an  idea  in  the  mind,  because,  unless
the  name  explicitly  proclaims  itself  the  name  of  an  idea,  it
does  not  refer  to  an  idea  in  the  mind  as  such  ^.  When  I  use
the  word  '  red '  I  do  not  refer  to  or  mean  my  idea  of  red
considered  as  my  idea,  though  I  do  mean  red  as  I  under-
stand it  by  help  of  my  idea.  When  I  use  the  word,  I  mean
a  colour,  a  quality  of  surface,  or  at  least  of  light,  which  I
represent  to  myself  by  help  of  one  or  more  reds  which  I
have  seen,  but  which  I  think  of  as  not  dependent  either  for
being  or  for  quality  on  my  happening  to  know  it.  The  fact
that  my  perception  of  red  may  be  abnormal  does  not  affect
this  reference.  As  I  pointed  out  above,  if  it  were  not  for
the  identical  reference  there  could  be  no  conflict,  no  question
of  normal  or  abnormal.  This,  then,  if  no  more,  is  involved
in  naming.  That  which  is  named  is  recognised  as  having
a  significance  beyond  the  infinitesimal  moment  of  the
present,  and  beyond  the  knowledge  of  the  individual.  It
enters  into  the  '  convention '  which  he  who  uses  language
maintains  with  himself  and  with others. It  is,  in  short,

*  See  below,  ch.  i.  sect.  i.


iNTROD]  A  positive  content.  1 9

characterised  as  an  object  of  knowledge*.  Under  this
aspect  the  act  of  Naming  has  been  well  called  the  act  of
Objectification.

Let  us  further  consider  what  is  implied  in  the  act  of
Naming  considered  as  an  act  of  Objectification.

iv.  In  the  first  place,  then,  the  matter  which  is  invested  with  A  poatiTc
the  attribute  of  being  such  as  to  be  known — ^which  is  thus
objectified ' — must  be  something  f>ositive,  something,  so  to
peak,  of  affirmative  nature^.  It  must  be  presentable  to
:  3nsciousness  by  help  of  some  actual  modification  of  con-
sciousness. I  mean  that  it  cannot  consist  simply  and  solely
in  the  distinction  between  itself  and  something  else.  It  is
one  question  how  we  come  to  perceive  a  certain  content —
contrast  and  distinction  may  be  essential  to  perception —
another  what  it  has  in  it  when  brought  into  perception.  It
may  be — the  question  is  chiefly  psychological — that  if  red
had  been  the  only  colour  we  should  never  have  been  aware
of  it  as  red.  But  now,  being  aware  of  it,  we  find  in  it  a
positive  quality  or  character  which  is  not  exhausted  by  the
distinction  between  it  and  all  other  colours.  This  is  the
primary-  condition  of  the  act  of  naming. That  which  is  to  ^

be  referred  to  by  a  name,  which  is  thus  erected  into  an
object  for  intelligence,  must  be  at  least  a  positive  content,
something  with  a  nature  and  character.  It  is  not  safe  to
clinch  the  matter  by  saying  '  definite  nature,'  '  determinate
character;'  for  though  scientific  naming  involves  aU  this,
yet  it  would  be  overbold,  and  would  beg  a  question  which
we  shall  soon  arrive  at,  to  presuppose  all  this  for  ever>'  act
of  naming.  '  Definite '  and  '  Determinate '  introduce  nega-
tion into  knowledge,  and  so  are  not  words  to  be  used  lightly.
We  must  if  possible  keep  to  one  thing  at  a  time,  and  what
we  are  sure  of  at  this  point  is  this,  that  the  identity  in  differ-
ence which  is  referred  to  by  a  name  is  something  positive ;
not  necessarily  a  'quality'  in  the  technical  sense  of  an
immediate  unrelated  matter  of  perception,  but  necessarily
a  something.

*  Cp.  Lotz^  LogOc,  sect  3.  *  Cp^  Lotze,  1m^,  sects.  10,  1 1.

C  2


20  Introduction.  [Introd.

It  is  obvious  that  for  the  general  purposes  of  logic  such
meaning  is  not  confined  to  substantive  and  adjective  nouns
or  names. A  positive  content  is  also  referred  to  by  the
material  or  uninflected  element  in  verbs,  if  we  may  for
logical  purposes  distinguish  this  from  the  formal  or  inflected
portion,  which  indicates  the  connection  and  function  of  the
verb  as such. When I  say  '  it  flows,'  of  course  in the
element  'flow'  I  use  a  significant  sign  which  refers  to  a
positive content. Very probably as we go back into
primitive  speech  the  distinction  between  this  and  the  gram-
matical Name  would  disappear. Aristotle  certainly  treats
'  is  white '  as  a  verb  ^.
Meaning  of V.  Here  wc Cannot  escape raising  a  further  question,
case-end^ Granting  that  pronouns  used  independently  rank  as  nouns,
ings.  still  there  remain  inflected elements  of  verbs,  the  case-

endings  of  nouns,  adverbs,  prepositions  and  conjunctions.
Does  not  each  of  these  indicate  an  identity  in  differ-
ence, a  positive  feature  in  the  world  of  meanings?  Why
are  not  they  too  to  be  treated  as  names  ?  There  is  no
doubt  that  the  words  in  question  are  fixed  signs  which  refer
to  positive  features  of  the  world  ;  nor  that  their  contents  are
such  as  can  have  names  given  them  which  can  be  employed
in  propositions  as  substantives  or  adjectives.  Presence  in
time  or  space,  Intention,  Direction,  Proximity,  Property,
Attribution,  Reference,  and  the  corresponding  adjectives,
these  are  all  intelligible  names  and  designate  familiar
matters.  Yet  they  are  but  another  shape  of  such  linguistic
elements  as  '  Here,'  '  Now,'  '  For,'  '  To,'  '  At,' '  Of,'  '  About,'
the  s  in  '  flow.?.'

It  would  be  easy  to  answer  that  these  elements  are  signs

^  He  distinctly  treats  the  p^/xa  as  capable  of  indicating  time.  So  his  idea  of
it  did  not  quite  cover  our  Predicate,  which  he  would  call  to  naTq-^opovyavov ,
though  on  the  other  hand  we  do  not  recognise  '  is  white '  as  a  verb.  It  is
remarkable  that  he  should  have  insisted  on  the  indication  of  time  in  face  of  the
fact  (constantly  borne  out  by  his  own  instances)  that  the  verb  '  is '  could  be
omitted  in  Greek,  and  predication  conveyed  by  position  only.  It  seems  therefore
that  to  say  the  verb  was  tinderstood  would  have  been  no  empty  phrase  to  him,
but  would  have  expressed  the  fact  as  he  regarded  it.


iNTROD.]  The  formative  elements.  2 1

whose  content  consists  in  the  actual  operations  of  thought ;
that  therefore  they  are  not  at  first  names,  because  we  are
operating  directly  and  not  reflecting  on  the  operations ;  but
that  they  become  names  at  the  stage  of  reflection  in  which
we  become  aware  of  the  part  played  by  our  intelligence  in
connecting  and  comparing  the  data  of  sense-perception.

But  this  would  not  be  true.  There  are  names  for  intel-
lectual acts,  such  as  Comparison,  Measurement,  Enumera-
tion ;  but  these  just  show  the  diflference  between  the
operations  themselves,  and  the  results  gained  by  them.
'  Similar,'  '  Equal,'  '  xV  of/  '  Present,  '  Near,'  are  not  mere
signs  of  operations  performed  by  the  individual  intellect.
We  unhesitatingly  treat  them  as  characteristics  of  matters
which  we  meet  with  in  the  objectiv-e  world.  We  find  them
out  by  combination,  comparison  and  measurement,  but  we
treat  them  as  independent  of  the  acts  of  our  individual  mind.
'  Present '  may  create  a  difficulty,  if  we  think  of  it  solely
as  present  to  us ;  but  it  is  obviously  a  relation  predicable
and  constantly  predicated  of  objects  or  occurrences  with
reference  to  any  self-conscious  subject.  Indeed,  all  names
are  agns  of  thinking  operations,  so  that  this  would  be  no
distinction  between  names  like '  equal,' '  near,'  and  names  like
'  warm,'  '  painful.'

But  it  is  true  that  the  inflectional  and  formative  elements
in  question  have  this  much  in  common  with  mere  signs  of
intellectual  acts,  that  we  use  them  in  propositions  before  we
make  propositions  about  them ;  and  that  when  we  come
to  make  propositions  about  them  we  still  have  to  employ
them  in  one  form,  in  order  to  make  propositions  about
their  other  and  abstract  forms.  And  further  ;  like  signs  of
intellectual  operations,  they  cannot  exist  by  themselves;
they  are  not  intelligible  unless  put  in  connection  with  sub-
stantive elements.  You  might  say ' "  Of"  is  not "  For  " '  in  the
sense  that  a  man's  legal  property  is  not  morally  for  his  sole
benefit ;  but  then  the  related  points  are  supplied  in  inter-
preting. The  proposition  is  not  intelligible  in  the  same
immediate  sense  in  which  '  Red  is  not  Green  '  is  intelligible.


2  2  Introduction.  [introd.

Thus  the  formative  elements  of  language  are  not  complete
names  on  the  one  hand,  nor  mere  signs  of  intellectual
functions  on  the  other.  They  are  however  significant,  and
significant  of  matters  which  are  capable  of  being  named.
But  the  matters  or  characteristics  which  they  signify  are
such  as  to  presuppose  related  terms,  and  to  be  incapable
not  merely  of  being,  but  of  being  understood,  apart  from
those  terms.  We  find  these  meanings  or  attributes  therefore,
in  the  first  instance,  in  explicit  dependence  on  the  simpler
contents  which  they  imply ;  and  we  only  find  them  treated
as  nameable  or  isolable  contents  at  a  stage  of  reflection
which  can  supply  the  presupposed  simpler  contents  in  a
typical  form.  Thus  their  apparently  subordinate  position  in
the  simpler  classes  of  judgment  comes  not  from  their  being
so  little  significant,  but  from  their  being  so  much.  They
indicate,  not  indeed  mere  acts  of  mind,  but  the  realised
wholes  which  arise  for  knowledge  through  those  acts  of
mind.  Their  names  are  names  for  such  wholes,  and  for
nothing  less ;  as  expressive  of  a  special  relation  within  an
individual  whole  they  are  not  names  but  auxiliaries  ^.

It  is  quite  true  therefore  that  the  formative  elements  of
language  imply  acts  of  mind  ;  but  not  true  that  what  they
indicate  are  mere acts of  the  individual mind,  such  as
Judgment  or  Comparison.
Naming  vi.  So  far  we  have  spoken  of  Naming  as  involving  Refer-

tinction.'  ^^^^  °'*  Objectification,  and  of  Objectification  as  involving  an
affirmative  or  positive  content.  Are  we  obliged  by  these
conditions  to  treat  Distinction  and  Comparison  as  essential
to  the  act  of  Naming  ?  When  we  refused  to  apply  the  terms
'  definite '  and  '  determinate  '  to  the  positive  something
which  constituted  the  identity  that  can  be  named,  we  did
so  in  order  to  avoid  begging  the  question  of  distinction

*  '  Here '  and  '  now '  are  peculiar.  As  implying  relation  to  the  subject  which
judges  they  carry  their  points  of  application  with  them  even  in  their  first  and
direct  use,  and  can  be  used  as  logical  subjects  even  in  perceptive  judgment ;
while  for  instance  '  at '  and  '  in  '  cannot.  But  '  here '  and  '  now '  generalised
into  '  Presence '  drop  the  special  relation  to  the  judging  subject,  and  indicate
a  relation  to  any  judging  subject.


iNTROD.]  Distinctioji.  23

and  comparison.  We  felt  sure  however  of  one  thing,  that
a  positive  content  is  what  makes  distinction  possible^,  and
cannot  itself  consist  in  a  mere  distinction  from  something
else.  I  am  speaking  all  through  of  being  as  it  is  for  know-
ledge ;  not  of  the  ontological,  and  to  my  mind,  fruitless
question,  how  being  can  be  apart  from  a  consciousness.
What  I  say  is,  that  we  cannot  see  how  the  characteristic
quality  of  a  colour  should  be  supplied  by  the  distinction
between  it  and  all  other  colours.  And  if  the  process  of
distinction  does  in  fact  make  us  notice  all  the  features
of  something  present  to  perception,  this  is  only  because
contrast,  in  this  case,  invests  those  features  with  an  interest
which  they  might  equally  have  obtained  in  some  other  way.

Mere  distinction  is  not  the  essence  of  naming.  On  the  s/
other  hand,  distinction  is  implied  in  the  purpose  of  naming.
I  do  not  say  that  the  implication  is  always  apparent.  But
the  least  reflection,  the  least  practice  in  the  use  of  language,
must  bring  it  to  the  surface.  We  shall  constantly  have
occasion  to  speak  of  the  interest  or  purpose  which  is  essen-
tial to  all  judgment.  And  it  meets  us  here  on  the  threshold
of  intelligence.  Why  do  we  name  ?  Why  do  we  refer  to
an  identity  ?  What  do  we  want  with  a  set  of  signs  ?  To
give  voice  to  our  positive  wishes  and  feelings,  we  may  reply.
Doubtless,  in  the  first  instance.  But  this  very  giving
voice,  this  fixing  on  a  something,  is  selection.  It  answers
the  question,  '  What  do  you  want  ? '  and  is  meaningless
except  as  an  act  of  choice.  If  there  was  only  one  thing  in
the  world,  we  should  not  want  a  name  except  to  dis-
tinguish between  having  it  and  not  having  it ;  or  if  we
wanted  no  distinction,  we  should  want  no  name.  And
when  we  use  a  name,  we  ipso  facto  select,  because  we  omit ;
and  we  omit  on  a  plan  and  with  grounds,  because  a  purpose
guides  us  in  selecting.

Therefore  I  should  state  the  relation  between  naming
and  exclusion  or  distinction,  as  follows.  Reference  or
Objectification,  as  represented  by  Naming,  carries  Distinc-

^  Cp.  Lotze,  Logik,  sect.  ii.


V


24


Introduction.  [introd.


tion  or  Exclusion  with  it  formally.  I  do  not  mean
externally  or  explicitly,  but  just  the  reverse.  The  act  of
Naming  is  in  the  abstract  an  act  of  selection,  though  we
may  not  at  first  find  it  out.  It  is  therefore  selective  or
exclusive  in  form,  but  is  not  so  materially,  in  any  special
relation,  till  we  use  it  for  that  purpose.  And  how  soon  this
happens,  how  soon  and  how  far  a  material  value  is  actually
given  to  the  implied  element  of  exclusion,  is  a  question
rather  of  anthropological  psychology  than  of  logic.  In
the  very  beginnings  of  human  thought  (which  I  take  as
equivalent  to  thought  aided  by  speech)  it  may  be  supposed
that  the  sense  of  distinction  would  be  chiefly  represented  by
the  effort  to  identify  and  fix  under  a  name,  and  by  the
feeling  of  success  when  the  desired  result  was  attained  by
such  means.  It  is  clear  that  such  effort  or  success  would
represent  a  rudimentary  work  of  distinction,  which  combats
the  difficulty  of  fixing  the  content  and  of  finding  and
adopting  the  sign.  Or  if  the  sign-system  grows  without
perceptible  effort  on  the  part  of  individuals,  there  is  still  the
interest  to  which  I  have  alluded.  The  distinction  of  man
and  woman  or  meiim  and  ttmm  must,  one  would  think,
invest  some  contents  with  negative  determination  from  the
very  first.

On  the  other  hand,  even  our  reflective  thought  is  per-
plexed when  its  attention  is  first  directed  to  the  mutual
implication  of  very  familiar  facts,  which  seem  to  have  inde-
pendent being  because  so  familiar.  The  essence  of  objects
in  space  may  not  be  in  distinction ;  we  certainly  however
tend  to  underrate  the  importance  of  distinction  in  knowing
them.  And  when  we  come  to  negations  such  as  those
implied  in  consciousness  or  morality,  for  instance  mind
and  matter,  sin  and  the  law,  the  degree  in  which  essence
seems  to  consist  in  distinction  surprises  us  at  first.  Distinction
then  is  formally  involved  in  Naming;  but  the  degree  in
which  it  is  realised  as  distinction  between  '  this'  and  a  definite
other,  and  as  essential  to  the  character  of  '  this,'  is  not  deter-
mined by  the  mere  use  of  a  significant  sign. It  may  not


iNTROD.j  'Essentially  relative'  25

be  so  realised  at  all.  And  when  it  is  so  realised,  it  involves
logical  forms  which  go  beyond  the  Impersonal  or  other
nuncupative  Judgment ;  forms  such  as  negation,  disjunction,
and  classification.

There  are  indeed  facts  which  are  such  as  to  be  essentially-
relative — (ku^'  avTOL  TTpos  Tt) — 3.  pregnant  conception  of  Aris-
totle. And  obviously  all  facts  partake  progressively  of  this
character  as  they  are  united  with  the  whole  of  knowledge,
and  as,  in  this  process,  their  centre  of  gravity,  so  to  speak,  is
shifted  outside  them  by  their  connection  with  larger  systems.
We  can  scarcely  understand  a  curve  except  as  distinguished
from  a  straight  line ;  nor  sin  except  as  distinguished  from
a  good  will.  Nor  can  we  know  even  red  light  or  violet
light  scientifically  without  including  in  the  conception  of
each  its  wave-length  and  degree  of  refrangibility  or  place
in  the  spectrum — a  disjunctive  knowledge  which  involves
a  number  of  precise  reciprocal  distinctions.  As  thought
grasps  more  of  its  object,  the  object  takes  more  of  this
coherent  character.  And  in  an  object  thus  coherent,  it
may  seem  that  distinction  or  negation  takes  the  place  of
affirmative  nature.  Straight  is  the  Hne  which  is  not
curved.  Sin  ts  the  will  which  is  not  good.  Red  is  the
light  at  the  other  end  of  the  spectrum  from  violet.
Here  we  are  in  the  region  of  the  complicated  contents
described  above  as  relations.  Distinction  has  here  a
value  which  it  had  not  before,  but  it  is  not  mere  distinc-
tion or  mere  negation.  The  distinction  is  valuable  for
its  positive  ground,  and  the  negation  for  what  it  affirms.
The  point  is  not  that  the  essence  of  a  fact  can  be
given  by  mere  distinction,  but  that  positive  matter  finds
it  necessary  to  take  the  shape  of  distinction  and  negation.
I  shall  return  to  this  subject  in  treating  of  negation  and
disjunction.  The  distinction  from  straight  is  the  essence
of  curve,  only  because  or  as  far  as  the  positive  spatial
nature  of  line  and  direction  is  involved  in  '  straight,'  and  this
same  spatial  nature  is  also  involved  in  the  opposite  curved.
It  is  not  really  that '  Not  straight  is  curved,'  but  that  ■  What-


26  Introduction.  [introd,

ever  is  a  line  and  not  straight,  is  curved.'  It  is  the  nature  of
space,  as  known  in  hne,  and  in  constant  and  varying  direc-
tion, that  forms  the  positive  content  of  both  determinations.
Thus  it  is  never  true  in  the  plainest  sense  that  a  thing  or
matter  of  fact  has  its  essence  in  mere  distinction  from
another ;  but  it  is  true,  as  we  shall  see  more  fully,  that  all
reality  is  so  entangled  and  interwoven,  or  rather  is  so
coherent  in  each  of  its  several  regions,  that  in  mastering  the
positive  essence  of  one  fact  we  are  forced  to  master  that  of
many  more,  all  of  them  being  branches  of  the  same  stem.
Even  in  the  simplest  cases  there  is  at  least  an  element  of
content  common  to  the  facts  distinguished,  like  the  stem
up  to  the  parting  of  the  branches ;  and  every  distinction
made  between  them  has  this  at  least  for  its  positive  content,
as  in  distinguishing  red  from  violet  we  imply  that  both  are
light.  But  no  doubt  in  more  intricate  cases,  the  alternative
or  alternatives  may  be  essential  to  their  subject ;  and  in  that
case  the  metaphor  of  the  tree  breaks  down,  for  the  nature
of  the  whole  is  such  that  one  branch  perhaps  cannot  be  seen,
or  perhaps  cannot  exist,  apart  from  the  perception  or  the
existence  not  merely  of  the  stem  but  of  the  other  branch.
Still  we  must  think  of  the  positive  nature  of  the  whole
revealing  itself  in  this  peculiar  form  (say  the  nature  of  a
moral  being  revealing  itself  in  the  good  and  bad  will) ;  mere
distinction  or  negation  is  no  characteristic  at  all.

Distinction  then  is  involved  in  the  purpose  and  essence  of
naming,  but  primarily  as  a  consequence.  Meaning,  or  the  use
of  names,  is  never  mere  distinction  ;  though  proper  names
are  used  for  the  sake  of  mere  distinction,  and  so  with  no
care  for  positive  meaning  except  as  subservient  to  that  end.
And  though  in  the  deeper  grasp  of  reality  Distinction,
Exclusion  or  Negation  comes  to  be  an  active  and  prominent
property  of  fact,  yet  this  exclusion  depends  for  its  value
always  on  its  positive  ground  or  motive,  and  never,  as  such,
constitutes  the  essence  of  anything.
^d"com-  ^"*  "^^^  what  is  true  of  Distinction  is  true  of  Comparison,
parison. or  rather,  as  I  shall  use  the  terms  in  future,  of  Identification.


isTROD.]  Comparison,  or  Identification.  27

Formally,  in  the  light  of  analysis,  and  in  respect  of  purpose
and  interest,  to  use  or  give  a  name  is  Comparison.  For  it
is  identification,  the  establishment  of  an  identity  which
holds  good  in  spite  of  differences.  We  may  illustrate  by  the
German  word  '  Vergleichung,'  which  is  usually  rendered
'  comparison,'  and  which  seems  to  be  used  in  logic  (I  am
not  speaking  philologically)  to  mean  the  establishment  of
a  '  Gleichheit '  or  immediate  identity  between  the  terms
compared.  This  applies — cannot  but  apply — to  the  use  of
names  as  we  have  described  it.  But  if  we  take  Comparison
at  the  other  extreme  of  its  meaning,  which  '  Vergleichung '
shares  with  it,  we  must  say  that  it  is  a  distinct  reflective
operation,  which  presupposes  naming  and  is  not  implied  in
naming.  Comparison  par  excellence  is  a  process  which
starts  from  the  content  of  recognised  names,  and  reacts
upon  it  with  a  view  to  the  interest  which  may  have  provoked
the  operation.  Ultimately  as  a  scientific  method,  it  involves
measurement,  and  is  the  instrument  of  classification  ;  where-
as the  use  of  names  must  be  prior  to  number  or  measure,
and  classification  as  a  method  of  science  arises  so  late  that
its  genesis  is  almost  within  our  ken  ^.

It  would  be  easy  to  say,  in  the  tone  which  I  deprecated
above,  that  Identification  as  a  method  of  science  pre-
supposes Distinction,  and  therefore  is  a  process  naturally
later  than  Distinction,  and  not  to  be  looked  for  concurrently
with  the  latter  in  the  earlier  stages  of  knowledge.  But  this
would  be  merely  a  commonplace  blunder.  It  would  be  as
easy  to  show  that  Distinction  presupposes  Identification,  as
that  Identification  presupposes  Distinction.  Before  you  can
distinguish  colours  as  red  and  green,  you  must  identify
them  as  coloured  surfaces  ;  and  before  you  can  identify  the
surfaces  in  respect  of  colour,  you  must  distinguish  them  as
separate  areas  in  space.  We  can  come  to  no  good  result  in
this  way. We  are  merely  pointing  out,  not  any  special

^  In  Western  thought,  it  was  probably  first  analysed  and  its  import  pointed
ont  by  Plato.  In  practical  life  it  must  have  arisen  in  the  earliest  society  by  the
effect  of  social  rules;  see  above  on  distinction.  Ex^gmy  is  an  instance  of
an  early  custom  which  operates  through  classification.


28  Introduction.  [introd.

relation  between  Distinction  and  Identification,  but  that
every  level  of  reflective  observation  presupposes  a  previous
level  on  which  it  improves.  How  do  we  begin  then  ?  It
may  be  hard  to  say  how  matters  get  into  consciousness,  but
all  that  is  in  consciousness  seems  to  present  both  difference
and  identity.  And  we  shall  find  how  closely  they  are
connected,  and  reveal  the  true  relation  of  Distinction  and
Identification  in  the  germ  of  knowledge — the  act  of  Naming
— if  we  look  closer  at  the  nature  of  Comparison  itself,  taking
this  as  a  process  which  may  end  either  in  Distinction  or  in
Identification.

If,  in  order  to  efifect  a  comparison,  we  trace  two  shapes,
say  the  shapes  of  two  leaves,  one  upon  the  other,  it  is
clear  that  we  shall  have  a  repetition  at  every  minutest
step  of  what  takes  place  in  the  act  of  naming.  Coincidence,
deviation — curve  and  straight — ^jagged  or  uncut — notched
or  entire ;  the  discrimination  of  universal  characters  like
these,  with,  if  worth  while,  accurate  measurement  of  differ-
ences, will  mark  the  process  as  it  goes  on.  In  respect
of  each  of  these  points  we  may  infer  an  identity  or
a  distinction ;  we  express  an  identity  by  a  single  judg-
ment, either  'The  outlines  coincide'  or  'Both  outHnes  are
slightly  serrate  ; '  a  distinction  either  by  the  single  judgment,
'  The  outlines  are  different,'  or  by  the  two  judgments,  '  One
outline  is  serrate  and  the  other  simple.'  We  should  notice  that
if  any  portions  of  the  two  outlines  absolutely  coincide,  we
can  only  predicate  identity  of  them  within  that
portion  by  bearing  in  mind  the  ideal  continuity
of  that  bit  of  line  E  C  with  the  two  differing  out-
lines E  C  F  and  E  C  A.  If  we  leave  this  out
of  account,  judgment  and  identity  disappear.
Hence  it  seems  to  follow  that  complete  comparison  must
always  resolve  the  terms  compared,  in  the  respect  in  which
they  are  compared,  into  cases  under  a  uni  -ersal,  or  differ-
ences within  an  identity.  Identity  without  difference,  or
difference  without  identity,  destroy  the  meaning  of  com-
parison. It  is  for  this  reason  that  the  single  judgment  will


iNTROD]  Complementary  aspects.  29

not  contain  a  complete  comparison.  We  shall  see  that
a  disjunctive  form  is  really  required.  But  it  is  true  that  the
conclusion  in  these  processes  moulds  its  result  into  apparent
opposition  to  its  starting-point,  or  rather,  causes  us  to  read
into  the  starting-point  the  complementary  aspect  to  that
which  is  proclaimed  in  the  result.  This  is  simply  because
the  result  is  a  modified  form  of  one  element  in  the  starting-
point  ;  of  the  identity  if  it  is  an  Identification,  of  the  differ-
ence if  it  is  a  Distinction.  The  complementary  element  is
thrown  into  relief  by  the  explicit  exhibition  of  the  new-
determination,  so  that  Difference  always  seems  to  be  predi-
cated of  Identit}^  and  Identity  of  Difference.  But  really
the  judgment  has  done  nothing  more  than  to  develope  further
either  the  identity  or  the  difference  of  the  datum.  '  X  and  Z
are  like ; '  here  we  take  X  and  Z  as  distinct  objects,  though
we  know  well  enough  that  if  they  are  like,  they  were  com-
parable. '  X  and  Z  are  different ;'  here  we  take  X  and  Z  as
instances  of  some  class  or  rule  and  so  far  identical,  though
we  know  that  if  they  are  different  they  were  distinguishable.
'"  Sorrow"  and  "  Sorry"  have  quite  different  etymologies.'
' "  Sorrow  "  and  "  Sorry  "  have  the  same  meaning.'  The  former
proposition  assumes  sameness  of  meaning,  in  spite  of  which
it  asserts  difference  of  etymology;  the  latter  starts  from
a  difference  of  form,  perhaps  intensified  by  a  difference  of
etymology,  in  spite  of  which  it  asserts  identity  of  meaning.
And  yet  the  former  also  treats  the  words  as  two,  and  the
latter  z.^  prima  facie  the  same  in  their  significant  part.

I  do  not  think  that  distinction  can  be  effected  except  by
developing  differences  which  are  presented,  or  identification
except  by  developing  an  existing  identity.  But  of  course
either  element  may  be  very  faint  at  first.  It  is  of  no  use  to
say  that  w'e  may  be  artificially  set  to  search  for  distinctions.
No  motive  will  help  us  in  science  unless  it  guides  us ;  and  if
it  guides  us  to  a  distinction,  then  it  contains  the  distinction  x
in  germ.  The  same  is  true  in  searching  for  identities.  Thus
it  would  be  hopeless  to  distinguish  the  two  sodium  lines  in  the
spectrum  while  they  look  single  as  a  small  instrument  shows


30


Introduction.


[Introd.


Concept
and  Judg-
ment.


them.  And  we  could  never  distinguish  Ricardian  rent  from
common  farmer's  rent  (e.g.  including  interest  of  capital)
except  by  pressing  home  the  differences  which  are  given
with,  and  in,  the  two  kinds  of  cases.  This,  like  many  con-
siderations in  logic,  will  help  us  to  understand  the  childishly
tardy  progress  of  early  intelligence,  and  the  cumulative
rapidity  with  which  knowledge  generates  knowledge.

Naming  then  implies  some  degree  of  Distinction  and
Identification.  These  two  processes  might,  as  we  have  seen,
conveniently  be  included  under  Comparison.  But  Com-
parison, Identification,  and  Distinction,  as  involved  in
naming,  are  not  the  developed  methods  of  which  I  have
spoken  ^.  In  developed  knowledge  their  organa  are  measure-
ment and  counting,  in  which  it  becomes  mere  pedantry  to
separate  Identification  from  Distinction  ^.  I  shall  return  to
this  point  in  speaking  of  the  value  of  Judgments,  and  shall
there  treat  the  earliest  distinct  judgment  of  Comparison  as
the  transition  to  number  and  measurement.  But  the  key-
word of  mere  naming  is  Recognition  ;  and  this  is  the  limiting
purpose  of  all  functions  qua  subservient  to  naming.  And  as
regards  the  affinity  between  Distinction  and  Identification,
they  are  obviously  two  sides  of  the  same  process,  and  it
is  idle  to  ask  which  came  first.  So  far  as  we  can  see,  Con-
sciousness, or  at  least  Intelligence,  must  begin  with  both.

6.  Enough  has  already  been  said  to  make  clear  my
general  view  of  the  growth  of  logical  functions.  While  I
would  spare  no  pains  to  ascertain  the  precise  order  in  which
and  differentia  with  which  logical  activities  make  their
appearance,  I  have  never  been  able  to  doubt  that  the  central
function  of  the  intellect,  I  would  even  say  of  consciousness,
is  one  from  beginning  to  end  ^. In  speaking,  therefore,  of

^  See  further  Bk.  II.  ch.  i.  on  '  Immediate  Inferences.'

*  I  mean  that  it  is  pedantic  to  restrict  measurable  identity  to  the  case  of
absolute  equality,  but  that  if  you  do  not,  you  must  admit  a  degree  of  distinction
to  be  present  in  all  cases.  A  distance  of  400  miles  and  another  of  400  miles
I  yard  are  as  we  say  '  the  same  to  a  yard ' ;  and  this  is  the  true  way  of  putting  it.

^  Cp.  Bradley,  Principles  of  Logic,  p.  455  ff.  Mr.  Bradley's  views  on  this
question  have  influenced  mine,  but  rather  in  the  way  of  moderating  than  of
suggesting  or  intensifying  the  view  adopted  in  the  text.


iNTROD.]  Succession  of  logical  activities.  31

the  connection  between  impressions  and  ideas,  and  again
between  ideas  or  concepts  and  the  judgment,  I  am  obliged
to  reject  the  easy  partition  into  distinct  operations  which
finds  place  in  many  text-books.  More  especially,  I  cannot
at  all  follow  Lotze  in  his  treatment  of  this  connection,  and
I  select  his  work,  as  probably  the  most  permanent  in  value
of  those  which  adopt  these  views,  to  comment  upon  when
comment  is  necessary.

As  I  read  Professor  Lotze,  the  act  of  Naming  coincides
with  that  shaping  or  moulding  of  an  impression  which  is
required  to  convert  it  into  an  idea,  as  a  stone  requires
shaping  to  make  it  fit  for  use  in  a  building.  And  then,
subsequently,  the  ideas  so  shaped  are  fitted  together,  and
the  result,  I  suppose,  is  a  concept ;  while  it  is  not  till  the
simpler  concepts  come  to  be  combined  that  the  judgment
takes  its  rise.  Ideas,  it  will  be  observed,  are  thus  subse-
quent to  impressions,  concepts  to  ideas,  and  the  judgment
is  subsequent  to  the  simpler  concept.

It  is  worth  while  to  notice  the  nature  of  the  analysis  by
which  this  account  is  defended.  Impressions  must  be
shaped  like  stones  before  they  can  be  fitted  together  K
Judgments  must  presuppose  at  least  simple  concepts"^,
because  judgments  consist  of  concepts,  and  if  such  con-
cepts presuppose  judgments,  where  are  the  concepts  to  come
from  which  -make  up  these  latter  judgments  ?  It  is  hard
to  think  that  such  arguments  as  these  really  expressed
Lotze's  mind  ;  they  must  rather  have  resulted  from  over-
eagerness  to  present  a  perfectly  clear  arrangement  to  his
readers.  The  thought  of  a  germ  which  unfolds  differences,
of  the  elementary  sensation  as  already  containing,  in  the
features  which  make  it  a  state  of  consciousness,  rudi-
mentary distinctions  which  are  shadowy  at  first  but  receive
form  and  fixity  by  degrees, — such  conceptions  seem  at
once  to  destroy  the  application  of  arguments  drawn  from
mechanical  processes.  If  metaphors  are  indispensable,  we
should  rather  call  to  mind  such  processes  as  the  formation  of

^  Lotze,  Logik,  sect.  i.  '  Ibid.  sect.  8.


32  Introduction.  [introd.

structure  In  an  embryo,  as  the  separation  of  a  double  star
by  successively  higher  powers  of  the  telescope,  or  indeed
as  the  discernment  of  features  in  a  distant  landscape  which
prolonged  attention  even  without  optical  assistance  has  the
power  to  effect.

And,  though  the  suggestion  is  hazardous,  I  cannot  but
think  that  Lotze  allowed  himself  to  confuse  change  as  pro-
cess in  time  with  the  rectification  of  error  in  knowledge  ^.
There  is  nothing  whatever  in  the  concept  or  idea,  as  Plato
thought  of  it,  to  interfere  with  its  expressing  the  laws  of
process  in  time.  The  constitutive  equations  of  curves,
read  in  connection  with  the  law  of  gravity,  have,  so  far  as
we  can  see,  precisely  fulfilled  one  of  the  grandest  aspirations
embodied  in  Plato's  view  of  science,  the  establishment  of
the  true  laws  of  motion  as  they  are  in  general,  and  not
solely  or  specially  for  the  heavenly  bodies  ^.  And  these
equations  are  the  instance  which  Lotze  gives  of  the  highest
order  of  concept  ^.  Such  a  concept  or  idea  embodies  the
very  essence  of  process  in  time,  or  change.  It  is  true  that
change  is  also  a  principal  vehicle  of  indications  that  our
concepts  are  erroneous,  and  therefore  often  requires  them
to  be  changed,  but  this  is  not  because  the  concepts  are
concepts,  but  because  they  are  wrong.  It  is  wholly  an
illusion,  founded  I  presume  on  the  doubtful  idea  that  pre-
dication involves  reference  to  time,  or  even  that  the  judg-
ment is  a  transition  in  time,  to  suppose  that  the  judgment
as  such  can  represent  change  or '  Becoming,'  while  the  concept
cannot.  To  make  this  in  the  least  probable  it  would  be
indispensable  to  confine  the  judgment  to  narrative  judg-
ments which  use  tense,  and  thereby  to  abandon  all  scientific
knowledge.

I  cannot  but  think  that  the  reasons  alleged  by  Lotze  for  the
transition  from  Concept  to  Judgment  are  wholly  visionary ;
and  merely  conceal  the  unreality  of  the  entire  arrange-
ment which  made  such  a  transition  necessary. There  is

^  Lotze,  Logik,  sect.  34.
"  Plat.  Republic,  530-1.  ^  Lotze,  Logik,  sect.  117.


iNTROD.]  '^  yudgment  audits  parts.  33

truth,  indeed,  in  the  remark  that  the  judgment  reconstitutes
the  concept  zi'ith  a  reason  ;  but  is  there  any  possibility  that
the  act  which  reconstitutes  the  concept  is  fundamentally
other  than  that  which  constituted  it  at  first  ?

I  will  summarise  the  criticism  which  I  think  essential
on  the  whole  point  of  view  indicated  by  the  ordinary  succes-
sive arrangement,  and  especially  by  Lotze's  form  of  it.

If  a  Sensation  or  elementary  Perception  is  in  Conscious-
ness (and  if  not  we  have  nothing  to  do  with  it  in  logic)  it
already  bears  the  form  of  thinking.  I  will  not  say  that  it  is
a  rudimentary  judgment ;  but  it  is  certainly  an  act,  for  it
is  a  change  within  a  percipient  subject;  it  has  identity  in
itself,  or  it  could  be  nothing  for  consciousness,  and  differ-
ence, or  it  could  not  have  identity;  and  it  stands  out
against  other  elements  of  the  momentary  consciousness  in  a
way  that  approaches  to  an  attribution.  An  Impression  or
sensuous  idea  becomes  a  logical  idea  when  it  is  fixed  and
referred  ; — fixed  and  referred  if  we  like  to  say  so  by
receiving  a  name,  though  this  is  rather  a  sign  of  the  act
than  the  act  itself.  We  have  here  the  explicit  form  of
judgment  given  to  what  before  must  have  been  a  mere
actual  extension  of  sensations  by  idea,  depending  on  a
general  identity,  but  not  consciously  referred  to  an  identity
other  than  the  psychical  image.

Judgment  is  not,  in  relation  either  to  impressions,  ideas
or  concepts,  a  mechanical  combination  of  parts  which
remain  outside  each  other.  It  is  an  expression — perhaps
at  bottom  the  only  expression — of  the  unity  in  which
consciousness  consists.  I  do  not  mean  that  it  is  nothing
more  than  an  idea  or  impression  ;  but  I  incline  to  think
that  it  is  better  described  as  an  idea  or  impression  writ!
large  than  as  a  combination  in  which  ideas  or  impressions  are
units.  Judgments  may  contain  complex  ideas,  but  every
Judgment  ^7/«  Judgment  exhibits  the  content  of  a  single  idea.
Ideas  and  Impressions,  as  I  have  tried  to  show  above,  are
not  found  lying  apart  as  words  lie  on  a  page,  although,  by
a  reflective  abstraction,  we  can  regard  them  as  so  lying

VOL.  I.  D


34


Introduction.  [Introd.


A


apart,  and  when  thus  regarded  they  form  the  world  of
meanings  or  of  objective  references — the  identities  symbol-
ised by  logical  ideas.

We  have  then  Judgment  or  some  analogous  operation  of
Consciousness,  from  the  first  ^ ;  and  in  naming  and  all  subse-
quent operations  we  certainly  have  Judgment.  What  we  are
watching  all  along  is  the  development  of  an  act,  a  function.

Thus  Judgment  and  Idea  go  pari  passu.  An  Idea  is  not
presupposed  by  Judgment  anymore  than  vice  versa.  And
it  is,  as  I  have  explained,  an  extraordinary  confusion  to
account  for  the  advance  from  concept  to  judgment  by  the
inability  of  the  concept  to  represent  change.

And  indeed  the  whole  question  of  advance  from  concept
to  judgment  is  meaningless  to  me,  for  I  think  of  the  concept
as  existing  only  in  the  act  of  judgment.  I  have  tried
above  to  explain  the  deception  which  language  practises
on  us  in  this  respect.  The  question  is  not  easy,  and  is
all-important. I  shall  therefore  return  to  it  for  a  moment.

If  a  man  were  to  say  in  our  presence  '  The  Sun '  and  no
more,  we  should  either  suppose  that  he  meant  '  The  Sun  is
visible,'  or,  if  circumstances  excluded  this  interpretation  and
furnished  no  other,  we  should  turn  upon  him  sharply  and
ask,  '  Well,  what  about  it  ? '  This  implies  that  the  words
have  conveyed  a  meaning  to  us,  but  that  the  meaning  is
incomplete.  I  will  speak  of  the  second  point  first.  It  may
be  said  that  our  impatience  of  the  incompleteness  of  the
thought  is  ethical  and  not  logical ;  that  it  arises  from
annoyance  at  the  waste  of  an  intellectual  effort,  or  at  the
interruption  of  other  thoughts,  seeing  that  nothing  is  to
result  from  it ;  and  not  from  any  inability  to  think  the
thing  '  sun  '  by  help  of  our  idea  of  it,  without  judging.

This  explanation  would  have  much  truth,  and  only  needs
pushing  further.  We  should  in  such  a  case  miss  the
ethical  purpose  which  all  thought  implies.  But  this  defect
would  have  a  logical  side,  which  would  be  this;  that  we

^  Cp.  Bradley,  p.  455  ff.  And  see  below,  Book  II.  chap,  i,  on  the  lower
limit  of  Inference.


iNTROD.]  What  is  a  tentative  judgment  ?  35

should  be  started  upon  an  intellectual  exercise  not  only
objectless,  but  also  and  for  that  reason  endless.  Thus  the
meaning  is  incomplete  because  undetermined.  We  are  left
to  traverse  an  indefinite  series  of  judgments.

And  yet  (I  return  to  the  first  poipt)  a  meaning  has  been
conveyed.  In  what  shape  does  it  exist  ?  The  natural
answer  would  be  that  an  incomplete  meaning  must  exist  in
the  shape  of  questions  or  suggestions — of  tentative  judg-
ments. But  a  tentative  judgment  lacks,  it  would  seem,  the
differentia  of  a  judgment.  It  does  not  assert,  it  does  not
claim  truth.  Therefore  we  have  prima  facie  in  the  idea
or  conception  something  that  will  not  go  into  the  form  of
the  judgment.  An  idea  in  this  stage  seems  to  be  in  a
position  corresponding  to  that  of  a  relative  or  dependent
clause  or  clauses  without  a  principal  clause;  a  form  of
language  which  certainly  can  exist,  but  which  has  not  an
independent  right  to  existence.  Or  it  may  be  taken  as
corresponding  to  a  question.  '  The  sun,  around  which  the
planets  revolve,  which  is  hot  and  bright ; '  '  The  battle —
lost  or  won?'  These  instances  give  different  cases.  In
the  former  the  attributes  are  all  constant,  and  we  might  if
we  chose  say  that  we  first  judge,  affirm  certain  attributes
of  a  thing,  and  only  leave  it  undecided  what  attribute  is  in
question  here.  If  this  was  so,  we  should  have  something
like  a  disjunctive  judgment.  In  the  latter  case,  that  of  the
question,  the  form  of  sentence  is  considered  absolutely  to
exclude  a  judgment,  although  we  have  assumed  the  material
for  a  disjunction  to  be  furnished  by  the  prevalent  interest
of  the  moment.  What  is  the  thought  corresponding  to  a
question?  I  do  not  find  any  sufficient  discussion  of  this
subject  in  the  logic  books  ^.  Is  a  question  a  peculiar  act
of  thought  at  all.  putting  language  aside?  The  test  for
this  is  to  see  whether  we  can  genuinely  ask  ourselves  a

*  Cp.  Bradley,  Principles  of  Logic,  pp.  13-14-  His  treatment  is  definite
though  brief,  and  I  cannot  agree  with  it.  I  cannot  think  it  possible  that  the
content  of  a  donbt  or  negation  should  be  the  same  as  that  of  the  corresponding
affirmation. Cf.  Sigwart  on  the  Question,  Logik,  i.  191.

D  3


o


6  Introduction.  [introd.


question,  or  whether  it  is,  like  a  lie,  only  a  form  of  speech
which  has  the  object  of  producing  a  certain  effect  on  others.
I  am  disposed  to  doubt  whether  we  can  interrogate  our-
selves. It  appears  to  me  that  a  question  directed  to  one->
self  for  information  which  one  has  is  always  rhetorical,  is
a  concise  summary  of  the  interest  which  the  information
has  for  us.  But  we  too  often  have  to  ask  ourselves  questions
which  we  cannot  answer,  and  know  that  we  cannot  answer.
I  do  not  see  how  these,  again,  can  be  genuine  questions.
While  in  the  former  case  we  know  the  answer  already,  in  the
latter  we  know  that  there  is  at  present  no  answer  possible.  A
question  addressed  to  another  person  in  such  a  case,  i.  e.  know-
ing that  he  cannot  now  answer,  has  not  the  differentia  of  a
question ;  it  is  a  mere  guide  to  him  as  to  the  information
which  we  wish  to  possess,  a  memorandum  for  future  use
when  he  may  have  the  information.  But,  if  we  are  speak-
ing with  ourselves,  this  leads  to  the  former  ground  of
rejection ;  the  question  becomes,  as  before,  merely  rheto-
rical. And  thus  there  is  not  even  a  prospect  of  genuine
self-questioning;  to  treat  oneself  as  another  may  react
powerfully  on  the  imagination,  but  is  impossible  in  strict
thought.

Thus  a  question  cannot  be  an  act  of  thought  as  such,
just  as  a  lie  is  not,  and  for  the  same  reason,  that  it  is  not
an  attitude  that  the  intellect  can  maintain  within  itself.
A  question  is  not  merely  doubt ;  nor  merely  doubt  plus
the  knowledge  that  the  doubt  can  be  resolved  in  a  particu-
lar way.  It  is  a  demand  for  information  ;  its  essence  Is  to
be  addressed  to  a  moral  agent,  not  ourselves,  in  whom  it
may  produce  action.  It  is  closely  analogous  to  the  impera-
tive, which  also  cannot  be  addressed  to  ourselves  except  by
mere  metaphor.  Thus  to  say  that  the  mere  mention  of  a
name  leaves  us  questioning  or  fills  us  with  questions,  is  not
to  say  what  it  does  for  thought.

I  suppose  that  the  thought,  on  which  a  question  is  based,
must  always  partake  of  the  nature  of  disjunction.  Where
the  interest  lies  wholly  on  one  side  of  the  alternative  this  is


iNTROD.]  Question  and  Disjunction.  3  7

hardly  noticeable,  •  Are  you  going  to  see  Hamlet  ? '  We
scarcely  think  of  the  possible  negation  as  an  alternative  at
all,  but  rather  as  a  bare  nothingness,  a  rejection  of  the  idea
proposed  in  the  question.  A  more  difficult  case  is  '  How
much  did  you  give  for  that  horse?'  In  this  case,  as  in
asking  'Where'  or  'When?'  we  assign  the  general  principle
of  the  Disjunction  under  which  the  answer  is  to  fall,  instead
of  selecting  an  alternative  and  demanding  information
about  //.

I  should  therefore  be  inclined  to  think  that  when  a  man
says '  The  battle ' — and  then  stops,  and  we  ask '  Lost  or  won? '
our  thought  is  really  a  disjunctive  judgment  with  reference
to  which  we  express  a  desire  for  an  action  ab  extra  that
will  enable  us  to  accept  one  of  the  alternatives.  The  same
result  follows  if  we  describe  an  act  of  thought  as  doubting.
It  is  impossible  to  doubt  without  knowledge,  and  a  definite
doubt,  apart  from  a  moral  or  religious  sense  of  the  term
(for  a  degree  of  failure  of  will  may  pass  for  doubt  in  these
spheres)  is  unquestionably  a  disjunctive  judgment.

And  if  now  we  return  to  the  case  of  the  sun  and  its
constant  attributes,  we  may  find  that  a  similar  account  is
possible.  The  speaker  has  uttered  what  is  the  equivalent
of  a  dependent  sentence ;  he  sets  us  judging  in  distinct
affirmations  about  reality  which  form  our  resources  for
estimating  what  he  can  mean  (or  suppose  we  judge  about
his  mind,  it  is  no  less  true  that  we  judge),  and  the  in-
definite series  of  these  affirmations  may  be  treated  as  an
imperfect  disjunction.  It  makes  no  difference  whether  we
conjecture  as  to  his  meaning  or  as  to  the  fact  which  may
underlie  it ;  whether  we  think  '  He  either  means  the  sun  is
just  visible,  or  that  it  is  hot,  or  — ,'  etc. ;  or  again,  simply,
'  Either  the  sun  is  just  visible  or,'  etc.

Such  judgments  ^r^ prima  facie  substantive  or  indepen-
dent judgments.  But  if  it  is  our  express  purpose  to  regard
what  has  been  communicated  as  nearly  as  we  can  in  the
light  of  a  mere  idea,  mere  concept,  or  mere  possibility,  then
we  must  be  taken  to  affirm  the  universal  meaning  which


38  Introduction.  [Introd.

pervades  these  judgments  to  be  true  of  Reality  under
specific  but  unknown  conditions,  a  mode  of  affirmation
which  we  shall  find  to  be  the  essence  of  the  problematic
judgment.  Such  a  point  of  view  as  this  is  rendered  inevit-
able, in  the  case  supposed,  by  the  absence  ex  hypothesi  of
any  ground  for  restricting  our  affirmation  to  any  special
element  of  the  universal  content,  unless,  as  in  the  example
of  the  question  about  a  battle,  a  determinate  or  partly
determinate  disjunction  is  provided  by  the  context.  A
mere  idea  then  as  distinguished  from  a  judgment,  but  con-
sidered as  the  mere  meaning  of  a  name  or  as  an  objective
reference  in  the  world  of  meanings — an  isolated  idea — is
the  content  of  a  reflective  problematic  judgment,  and  is
referred  to  reality  as  true  under  unknown  conditions  or
among  unknown  alternatives.  But  every  idea  has  its
existence  in  the  medium  of  judgment.

The  judgments  which  embody  ideas  may  have  many
degrees  of  unity.  The  identity  which  pervades  a  set  of
judgments  may  be  quality,  thing,  or  complex  attribute.
When  the  identity  is  a  quality  the  judgments  in  which  it
appears  are  but  slightly  connected,  and  one  member  of  the
group  will  not  necessarily  be  accompanied,  opposed,  or
conditioned  by  any  of  the  others.  In  the  case  of  groups
of  not  very  coherent  attributes,  such  as  form  concrete  things
in  space,  the  result  is  exceedingly  curious,  and  it  is  very
doubtful  whether  the  judgments  into  which  the  thing  enters
should  be  treated  as  single  rather  than  as  multiple.  For
the  judgment  which  is  made  is  often  related  to  the  others
which  the  identity  binds  to  it,  not  as  consequent  to  con-
ditions or  grounds,  nor  as  conclusion  to  premisses,  but  as  if
joined  with  them  either  by  a  copulative  or  even  by  an
adversative  conjunction.  '  The  strongest  men  were  afraid
of  him,'  i.  e.  The  strongest  men,  though  much  stronger  than
him,  yet  were  afraid.  Or,  The  strongest  men  were  very
much  stronger  than  him ;  and  yet,  etc.  Or,  again.  The
Venus  of  Milo  is  in  the  Louvre ;  in  this  any  number  of
judgments  may  be  supplied  out  of  the  subject,  and  linked


introd.]  Petrified  Coiuepts.  39

by  a  mere  '  and '  to  the  one  given.  There  are  all  degrees
of  conjunction ;  it  is  well  known  that  even  '  and '  may  carry
either  adversative  or  inferential  meaning.  But  where  it
carries  pure  conjunctive  or  pure  adversative  meaning,  there
must  be  a  question  how  far  the  proposition  represents  a
single  judgment.  It  is  from  this  ambiguity  that  the  judg-
ment is  freed  by  assuming  the  hypothetical  form.

To  analyse  these  degrees  of  unity  here,  under  the  head
of  the  concept,  would  be  superfluous.  The  whole  work
of  logic  is  to  depict  them  in  the  order  of  judgment  and
inference.

It  should  be  mentioned  that  there  is  unquestionably  a
reaction  of  judgment  on  the  actual  image  or  appearance
presented  to  perception.  No  doubt,  all  arrangement  in
space  has  been  learnt,  but  I  take  it  that  the  disposition  of
points  on  surfaces  perpendicular  to  the  axis  of  the  eye,  even
if  a  result  of  interpretation  applied  to  feelings  of  motion,  is
when  once  learnt  an  inevitable  process,  for  every  detail  of
which  there  is  a  special  distinct  sense-stimulus.  On  the
other  hand,  in  the  perception  of  depth  it  appears  to  me
that  we  have  a  generically  different  case.  The  interpreta-
tion of  certain  dispositions  of  colour,  and  of  certain  feelings
in  the  ocular  muscles,  to  mean  '  if  I  want  to  touch  that
point.  I  must  put  my  arm  out  as  far  as  I  can ' — this  would
cause  me  no  surprise,  and  would  simply  be  knowledge
brought  to  bear  on  perception,  just  as  it  is  when  certain
appearances  indicate  that  one  has  food  or  poison  before
one.  What  is  noticeable  in  the  case  I  now  speak  of,  is
that  the  interpretation  reacts  on  the  image,  that  we  seem
to  see  depth  exactly  as  we  see  height  and  breadth ;  and
that,  in  learning  to  draw,  the  counteraction  of  this  inter-
pretation, and  the  reduction  of  objects  to  their  places  on  a
plane  surface  is  a  matter  of  extreme  difficulty.  The  solid
images  in  which  a  mere  interpretation  is  thus  made  visible
as  a  fact,  do  realise  the  popular  notion  of  what  I  might  call
a  petrified  concept,  a  group  of  attributes  and  relations
which  stands  still  to  be  looked  at. Ultimately,  however.


40  Introduction.  [introd.

even  this  petrified  concept  is a  judgment— a  perceptive
synthesis.

I  will  recapitulate  our  results  so  far : —

i.  Naming,  or  the  appropriation  of  fixed  signs  for  mean-
ings, always  marks  a  first  step  in  the  thought  which  acts
so ;  scientific  naming  e.  g.  marks  a  first  step  in  a  region
of  science,  though  a  late  stage  in  the  history  of  the  human
mind.

ii.  The  formative  elements  of  language  are  significant,
but  qua  formative  elements  are  not  names,  because  their
meaning  is  incomplete  without  that  of  other  elements.
At  a  later  stage  of  reflection  names  are  assigned  to  their
entire  significance,  that  is,  to  the  classes  of  complex  wholes
which  they  imply.

iii.  A  name  has  meaning  only  in  a  sentence  or  by  sug-
gesting a  sentence.  The  sentence  is  the  significant  unit  of
language.  This  is  most  easily  seen  in  ancient  speech,  but
is  equally  true  of  modern  and  analytic  tongues.  Depen-
dent or  appositional  sentences  can  enter  into  names.  It  is
probable  that  the  thought  corresponding  to  a  sentence  is
always  assertory.

iv.  Naming  involves  Objectification — the  treatment  of
that  which  receives  a  name  as  an  object  of  knowledge,  as
recognisable,  that  is,  in  a  world  which  exists  for  all  thought
as  such,  and  is  not  dependent  on  the  thinking  of  the  indi-
vidual mind.

V.  Objectification  involves  being  as  a  positive  somewhat
on  the  part  of  that  which  is  to  be  treated  as  an  object  of
knowledge,  but  this  does  not  amount  to  the  exhibition  of  a
'definite'  and  'determinate'  nature.

vi.  '  Being  as  a  positive  somewhat '  includes  in  a  formal
sense  being  known  by  Identification  and  Distinction,  which
are  the  two  sides  of  Comparison.  But  as  processes  of  real
or  material  import,  these  methods  presuppose  number  and
measurement,  and  are  posterior  to  fixed  names.

vii.  That  which  is  named  is  always  an  identity  in  differ-
ence, and  must  disappear  if  either  element  is  neglected  or


iNTROD.]  Work  of  the  individual  Mind.  41

removed  by  abstraction. This  is  illustrated,  by  the  relation
of  names  to  sentences.

viii.  Every  name  refers  to  such  an  Identity  treated  as
an  object  of  knowledge,  whether  thing,  quality,  or  relation.

ix.  The  meaning  of  every  name  is  in  what  it  refers  to  or
is  meant  to  mean ;  but  this  is  represented  to  the  individual
intellect  by  the  significant  idea  which  the  name  causes  it  to
produce.

X.  An  idea  or  concept  is  not  an  image,  though  it  may
make  use  of  images.  It  is  a  habit  of  judging  with
reference  to  a  certain  identity.

xi.  There  is  no  correspondence  between  Concepts  as  such
and  Quiescence,  or  between  Judgments  as  such  and  Change.
As  the  fundamental  form  of  Knowledge  the  Judgment
tends  to  overcome  change,  and  to  view  phenomena  sub
specie  oeternitaHs,  and  is  in  this  respect  at  one  with  the
Platonic  '  forms.'

xii.  The  grades  of  unity  and  complication  of  ideas  and
concepts  are  the  same  as  those  of  judgments  and  argu-
ments.

xiii.  The  relation  of  the  concept  as  representative  of  the
meaning  of  a  mere  name,  to  the  assertory  judgment,  is
illustrated  by  the  relation  of  the  dependent  sentence  and  of
the  question  to  the  assertory  judgment,  and  depends  upon
the  possibility  of  making  the  identity  in  a  group  of  judg-
ments the  content  of  a  relatively  reflective  judgment.

7.  It  will  be  observed  that  having  spoken  at  first  of  what  Logical
I may  call  the  logical  meaning of  names, i.  e. of  their  ^^^ef
reference  in  the  general  world  of  thought,  I  have  digressed  mind,
in  the  last  few  pages  into  discussing  the  act  of  judgment
by  which  the  individual  mind  realises  that  meaning. The
purpose  of  this  was  to  show  that  the  acts  set  in  motion  by
the  name  and  by  the  proposition  were  the  same,  and  there-
fore the  logical  function  of  these  forms  could  not  be  gene-
rically  different.

But  before  further  considering  the  logical  meaning,  it
will  be  well  to  say  something  on  the  relation  between  the


42  Introduction,  [Introd.

universal  or  logical  meaning  and  the  act  of  the  individual
mind.

Logical  meaning  we  have  treated  all  along  as  taken  to
exist  in  the  world  of  meanings,  the  world  which  is  common
to  thinking  beings  as  such.  Not  merely  London  and  Mont
Blanc,  but  virtue,  redness  and  pleasure,  have  their  being  in
this  objective  world  of  meanings.  And  yet  the  meaning
which  on  the  one  hand  belongs  to  a  world  independent  of
the  individual  peculiarities  of  our  thought  and  perception,
is  on  the  other  our  meaning.  It  is  dependent  on  our
private  experience  and  our  private  intellectual  endowment
in  two  ways.

First,  the  psychical  '  ideas,'  the  images  which  our  mind
generates  from  moment  to  moment  and  which  never  recur,
are  only  such  as  our  memory,  conjoined  with  the  sugges-
tions present  at  the  moment,  will  supply.  Mr.  Bradley  has
well  explained  how,  as  images  in  our  minds,  these  are  not
ideas  in  the  logical  sense,  not  significant,  not  meanings.
We  use  these  images,  make  them  starting-points  of  thought,
treat  them  as  containing  approximations  to  what  we
mean;  we  direct  ourselves  to  omit  parts  of  them,  or  to
note  that  they  require  weakening  or  intensification.  We
may  illustrate  this  by  the  way  in  which  we  attempt  to
communicate  a  qualitative  impression ;  but  it  is  only  an
illustration,  because  we  cannot  employ  as  an  instrument  of
communication  a  particular  momentary  psychical  image  ;
it  is  not  transferable,  not  capable  of  being  reawakened
with  precision  by  language  in  another  individual  mind,  nor
in  our  own.  We  must  employ  then  an  image  which  is
already  so  far  universalised  as  to  be  subordinate  to  a  mean-
ing ;  but  which  may  be  diverted  from  its  original  meaning
and  applied  to  another  in  a  way  that  illustrates  the  em-
ployment of  a  psychical  image.  '  Not  quite  sky  blue,  but
a  little  darker ;'  '  Between  pleasure  and  pain  ;'  '  A  baritone
is  in  quality  something  like  a  tenor,  though  with  points  of
resemblance  to  a  bass.'

Now  though,  after  this  fashion,  we  can  deal  freely  with


iNTROD.]  Refer eftce  and  Content.  43

our  particular  psychical  images,  and  make  them  do  duty  in
very  various  contexts,  yet  there  are  limits  to  the  modifica-
tions which  can  be  effected  in  them.  To  take  a  well-worn
instance,  we  cannot  suppose  that  a  man  blind  from  birth
can  ever  make  judgments  involving  the  quality  of  colours,
although  he  can  obviously  learn  the  mathematical  theory
of  undulation  and  refraction.  But  the  whole  region  of
particular  psychical  occurrences,  immediate  impressions  of
colour,  which  are  made  use  of  in  referring  to  the  recognised
colour-system,  would  simply  be  absent  from  his  mind.
Structure,  on  the  other  hand,  involves  mainly  relative
conceptions,  such  as  movement  and  position,  in  which  the
nature  of  the  particular  images  employed  is  indifferent ;
or,  if  we  mean  the  structure  of  an  argument  or  institution,
the  notions  required  are  such  as  condition  and  consequent,
function  and  purpose.  Structure  therefore  can  be  repro-
duced by  any  intelligence  furnished  with  the  chiefcapacities
of  an  intelligence  as  such.

But,  secondly,  ideas,  even  in  the  sense  of  meanings,  are  /

on  one  side  individual  and  peculiar.  The  intellect,  at  least
the  individual  mind  of  which  we  are  now  speaking,  does
not  move  wholly  in  the  objective  world  of  meanings  to
which  its  acts  bear  reference.  In  extreme  cases  Content
and  Reference  are  in  contradiction ;  in  less  extreme  cases,
in  veiled  contradiction.  '  Oh  I  see,  my  dear  sir,'  said
a  theological  disputant,  'your  God  is  my  Devil!  Both
parties  had  made  the  same  reference,  viz.  to  God ;  neither
took  what  he  was  speaking  about  for  an  idea  merely  in  his
mind ;  but  nevertheless,  in  making  the  reference,  each  of
them  had  employed  a  peculiar  and  special  act  of  thought,
determined  by  his  own  intellectual  conditions  and  history.
The  opponent  in  the  dispute  maintains  that  your  reference
is  inconsistent  with  your  content ;  that  one  or  the  other
must  be  wrong.  But  the  possibility  of  conflict  is  gone  if
the  reference  of  both  disputants  is  not  the  same,  and  the
retort  quoted  above  is  an  ironical  suggestion  of  a  basis
of  agreement  on the score of  different  reference. The


44  Introduction.  [Introd.

antagonists  refer  to,  or  mean  to  mean,  the  same  thing,  but
they  cannot  bring  their  notions  of  it  into  agreement.

If  we  go  lower  into  mere  quality  we  obtain  good  illus-
trations of  the  line  between  meaning  and  psychical  idea.
It  is  possible,  on  certain  assumptions  which  do  not  concern
us  here,  to  compare  some  of  the  colour-perceptions  of
individuals,  and  it  appears  that  there  are  various  degrees
of  sensitiveness  to  red  light.  Now  if  we  take  a  case,  not
of  absolute  red-blindness,  but  of  over  or  under-sensitiveness
to  red  light ;  we  see  that  the  eye  which  is  thus  abnormal
can  produce,  presumably,  all  the  images  which  the  normal
eye  can  produce,  excepting  only  the  very  weakest  in
the  one  case  and  the  most  intense  in  the  other.  But
these,  as  we  rarely  meet  with  or  think  of  them,  we  may
neglect.  Now  the  mind  of  a  man  whose  eye  is  thus
abnormal  has  the  same  furniture  of  images  as  our  own,  but
the  meaning  in  each  external  reference  in  which  they  are
used  must  always  be  slightly  different  from  ours,  though
such  differences  pass  undetected  in  common  life.  If  I
speak  to  him  of  the  red  of  a  Doctor  of  Divinity's  hood,
he  may  indeed  represent  it  to  himself  by  any  shade  of  red
which  springs  to  his  mind's  eye  ;  but  he  will  mean  a  weaker
or  a  more  intense  colour  than  I  mean.  In  this  case  the
abnormal  condition  has  not  interfered  (as  in  absolute
blindness)  with  the  supply  of  images,  but  only  with  the
occasions  on  which  they  are  produced,  and  therefore  with
the  meaning  attached  to  each  external  influence,  to  each
red  object.

This  paradox — that  in  using  names  we  refer  to  matters
as  independent  of  our  individual  thinking  which  in  this  very
reference  are  only  represented  to  us  by  an  act  of  our  own
individual  mind,  certainly  inadequate  and  possibly  contra-
dictory to  the  reference — this  paradox  is  inevitable  if  we
maintain  the  ordinary  line  between  the  mind  and  the
world.  No  doubt  the  reference  demands  some  one  correct
or  at  least  recognisable  element  of  meaning,  or  else  we
should  set  down  the  name  employed  as  a  mistake,  and  thus


iNTROD.]  The  World  as  a  Construction.  45

if  the  reference  contradicts  the  content,  the  content  must
also  contradict  itself.  But  this  does  not  alter  the  fact
that  what  we  refer  to  as  independent  of  our  intellectual
act  exists  for  us  when  referring  to  it  wholly  in  that
intellectual  act.

An  effort  of  imagination  might  help  us  to  see  the  real
nature  of  this  paradox.  We  might  try  to  think  that  the
world,  as  known  to  each  of  us,  is  constructed  and  sustained  by
his  individual  consciousness ;  and  that  every  other  individual
also  frames  for  himself,  and  sustains  by  the  action  of  his
intelligence,  the  world  in  which  he  in  particular  lives  and
moves.  Of  course  such  a  construction  is  to  be  taken  as
a  re-construction,  a  construction  by  way  of  knowledge
only ;  but  for  our  present  purpose  this  is  indifferent.  Thus
we  might  think  of  the  ideas  and  objects  of  our  private
world  rather  as  corresponding  to  than  as  from  the  be-
ginning identical  wdth  those  which  our  fellow-men  are
occupied  in  constructing  each  within  his  own  sphere  of
consciousness.  And  the  same  would  be  true  even  of  the
objects  and  contents  \vithin  our  o^vn  world,  in  as  far  as  an
act  or  effort  would  be  required  to  maintain  them,  of  the
same  kind  with  that  which  was  originally  required  to
construct  them.  We  should  know  that  correspondence
implies  a  degree  of  identity,  but  also  that  every  degree
from  mere  correspondence  upwards  had  to  be  won  and
justified  by  intellectual  work ;  the  onus,  so  to  speak,  of
establishing  it  would  be  thrown  on  the  intellect ;  and  the
progressive  coincidence  of  our  separate  worlds  would  be
the  reward  of  knowledge.  The  moral  of  such  a  view  is
not  a  bad  one ;  for  it  places  the  solidarity  of  mankind  in
the  intellectual  life.

Thus  the  paradox  of  reference  would  become  clearer.
We  should  understand  that  we  refer  to  a  correspondence
by  means  of  a  content.  We  should  soften  down  the
contradiction  of  saying  that  a  name  to  meet  which  we  have
and  can  get  nothing  but  an  idea,  nevertheless  does  not  stand
for  that  idea  but  for  something  else. We  should  be  able


46


Introduction.


[Introd.


Extension
and  Inten-
sion.


Insepar-
able.

Their
nature.


to  say  that  the  name  stands  for  those  elements  in  the  idea
which  correspond  in  all  our  separate  worlds,  and  in  our  own
world  of  yesterday  and  of  to-day,  considered  as  so  corre-
sponding. Even  when  we  say,  taking  the  most  subjective
of  feelings,  '  Pleasure  is  the  accompaniment  of  activity,'  we
refer  to  pleasure  as  a  point  in  which  all  separate  worlds
correspond;  which  occupies  the  same  relative  position  in
all  the  worlds  which  are  framed  by  the  consciousness  of
individuals,  or,  what  is  technically  the  same  thing,  a  constant
position  in  the  world  framed  by  our  own.  But  we  should
not  pledge  ourselves  to  any  special  degree  of  correspondence
or  of  identity  resulting  from  comparison  ;  only  to  the  bare
justifiability  of  the  reference.  This  suggestion  may  be
considered,  if  the  reader  chooses,  as  a  mere  simile ;  but
even  so  it  may  assist  him  in  seeing  the  true  relation
between  the  idea  which  a  name  arouses,  and  the  object
to  which  that  idea  refers.  The  distinction  between  ob-
jective reference  and  actual  affirmation  depends,  as  we  have
seen,  on  the  difference  between  the  analytic  consideration
of  a  connected  group  of  judgments,  and  the  affirmation  of
one  among  them.

8. 1  now  return  to  some  further  characteristics  of  the  logical
meaning  of  names,  and  shall  follow  Mr.  Bradley  in  using
'  idea '  for  a  fixed  content  or  logical  meaning,  not  for  the
psychical  images  which  pass  through  the  mind  and  never
recur — for  the  signification,  so  to  speak,  of  the  signal  flags
not  for  the  particular  flags  themselves,  whose  meaning  is  not
affected  if  different  bits  of  cloth  are  used  on  every  occasion.

i.  Intei\sion  and  Extension  are  complementary  and  insepa-
rable, a.  If  an  idea  is  the  meaning  or  fixed  logical  content
indicated  by  a  name,  how  does  it  come  to  pass  that  ideas
or  names  are  said  to  have  two  kinds  of  meaning,  known  as
Intension  and  Extension  ?  The  meaning  proper,  the  fixed
content,  is  obviously  the  Intension  of  the  name  or  idea,
sometimes  inadequately  defined  as  the  meaning  which  the
name  implies,  in  contrast  with  the  Extension  considered  as
the  whole  range  of  individual  objects  or  instances  to  which


iNTROD.j  Intension  and  Extension.  47

the  name  applies.  But  it  is  clear,  as  Mill  has  well  insisted,
that  the  intension  is  the  primary  meaning,  or,  as  we  have
said,  the  meaning.  To  speak  of  it  as  implied  or  connoted,
or  as  the  connotation,  seems  therefore  to  be  a  terminology
which  Mill's  own  view  should  condemn.

But  if  Intension  is  the  meaning  of  a  name,  or  is  the  idea
which  is  this  meaning,  what  is  Extension  }  How  can  a  name
mean  anything  beyond  its  meaning,  or  how  can  an  idea,
which  is  a  meaning,  yet  have  a  further  meaning?  The
answer  is  so  familiar  in  practice  that  it  seemed  worth
while  to  observe  that  it  is  not  free  from  paradox.  Ex-
tension or  Denotation  consists  of  the  instances,  ideal  or
actual,  in  which  any  content  is  considered  as  realised  or
realisable.  That  is  to  say,  extension  is  the  aspect  of
a  content  as  particular,  or  as  an  exclusive  unit.  The
plural  of  a  noun  substantive  affords  the  simplest  illus-
tration. '  Men '  form  the  extension  or  denotation  corre-
sponding to  the  content  intension  or  comprehension  of
the  name  or  concept  *  man.'  But  '  a  man,'  the  singular
meaning  correlative  to  'men,'  is  extensive,  just  as  is  the
plural  itself.

If  there  are  two  or  more  instances  of  the  one  content,
the  distinction  between  these  particulars  and  the  content
itself  is  obvious ;  if  there  is  only  one  instance,  and  still  more
if  there  can  be  only  one\  the  relation  is  obscured.  But
in  every  idea  the  distinction  between  universal  meaning
and  particular  embodiment  or  exclusive  self-identity  can
be  traced,  and  neither  aspect  can  be  lacking  in  any  idea.
A  name  or  conception  without  Intension  would  be  a  name
without  meaning,  and  therefore,  also,  without  Extension  ;
for  it  is  only  the  meaning  that  prescribes  the  Extension.
And  a  name  or  conception  that  should  have  no  Extension
would  be  one  that  would  not  apply  to  any  particular  thing

*  Sigwart,  vol.  i.  p.  304,  gives  as  an  instance  '  The  centre  of  the  material
universe.'  There  cannot  be  two  points,  of  which  this  content  is  tme,  but  the
meaning  is  still  distinguishable  from  the  particular  instance,  and  is  theoretically
capable  of  ha^•ing  further  particulars  subsumed  under  it.  Of  course  there  may
be  two  such  points  in  succession — the  centre  may  shift.


/


48


hitroduction.


[Introd.


Fictitious
ideas.


Nonsensi-
cal ex-
pressions.


Names  of
attributes.


or  case,  and  therefore  could  have  no  Intension ;  for  the
attributes  which  are  thought  of  as  embodied  in  particular
cases  are  what  constitute  Intension.

^.  This  latter  conclusion  might  be  objected  to  on  the
ground  that  names  of  fictitious  ideas  or  vain  imaginations,
or  again  nonsensical  or  self-contradictory  expressions,  have
a  sort  of  meaning,  or  at  least  find  a  place  in  would-be
significant  speech,  and  yet  apply  to  nothing,  i.e.  have  no
Extension.  'Nothing'  in  this  objection  must  mean  nothing
actual,  if  the  objection  is  to  be  true  in  fact;  but  actual  in
any  determinate  sense  is  a  limitation  or  factor  in  Intension,
and  if  we  introduce  it  into  an  imaginary  conception  we  create
a  contradiction  and  bring  the  fictitious  idea  or  name  under
the  head  of  self-contradictory  or  nonsensical  expressions  or
conceptions,  of  which  we  shall  speak  directly.  But  if  we
do  not  take  nothing  to  mean  nothing  actual,  then  the
objection  is  not  true  in  fact,  and  imaginary  ideas,  the
content  of  absolute  fictions,  have  their  extensions  in  the
instances,  particulars,  or  units,  or  in  the  aspect  of  unity
which  they  naturally  imply.  Chimeras,  four  dimensional
space,  Gulliver's  voyage  to  Lilliput,  have  all  the  same
complementary  aspects  of  meaning  and  particularity  that
are  involved  in  man,  horse,  or  triangle.

y.  On  the  other  hand,  a  word — for  under  this  head  we
can  no  longer  speak  of  an  idea — which  is  unintelligible
whether  as  a  mere  unknown  noise  or  as  a  contradiction  in
terms  with  no  rhetorical  significance,  is  of  course  not  a
name,  and  cannot  enter  into  the  discussion ;  for  it  has,
strictly  speaking,  neither  intension  nor  extension,  so  cannot
illustrate  the  existence  of  the  one  apart  from  the  other.
Only  it  must  be  observed  that  even  as  a  name  or  sign  for
a  certain  noise  ^  the  combination  of  letters  has  still  its  dual
aspect  of  universality  as  an  identifiable  sound,  corresponding
to  Intension^  and  particularity  as  a  momentary  and  unique
utterance  corresponding  to  Extension.

8.  Another  case  is  that  of  abstract  names  of  attributes,

*  See  Bradley's  Principles  of  Logic,  p.  157.


iNTKOD.]  Names  of  Attiihifes.  49

such  as  '  whiteness,'  '  virtue.'  It  is  quite  clear  that  these
abstractions  are  true  of  particular  instances.  The  simplest
rule  is  to  adopt  as  extension  the  meaning  of  the  plural  of
the  noun ;  thus  virtue  becomes  a  generic  conception,  and  has
its  extension  in  the  virtues,  i.e.  the  kinds  of  virtue,  coufage,
temperance,  etc.,  and  its  intension  in  the  generic  meaning
'  a  habit  of  volition  directed  to  distinctively  human  ends,'
or  whatever  our  definition  of  virtue  may  be.  Whiteness  is
not  obviously  a  generic  term,  but  has  unquestionably  a
possible  plural  either  in  the  sense  of  kinds  of  whiteness  ^  or
in  the  sense  of  instances  of  whiteness.  In  Latin  as  in
English  it  is  somewhat  of  a  rarity  to  use  the  plurals  of
very  abstract  abstractions ;  but  yet  they  are  sometimes
used ;  and  besides,  the  difference  between  singular  and
)lural  only  illustrates  and  does  not  constitute  the  distinction

;tween  Intension  and  Extension.  As  in  the  line  quoted
rem  Shelley,  the  singular  whose  meaning  is  on  all-fours

ith  that  of  one  case  among  those  indicated  by  the  plural

itself  a  particular,  and  accentuates  the  extensional  aspect
the  idea. I  may  add  that  it  has  been  w-ell  pointed  out  ^

lat  such  abstractions  are  '  doubly  adjectival,'  for  they  not
mly  apply  to  real  cases  or  kinds  of  the  abstraction,
^whites'  or  'whitenesses,'  but  they  actually  mean  the
ibstraction  of  a  concrete  thing  or  subject  that  Jias  the
ittribute.  They  imply  not  merely  particular  whites,  but
particular  things  that  are  white.

The  intension  of  the  simple  abstraction '  whiteness '  is  hard
or  impossible  to  state  in  general  terms,  if  we  leave  out  of
account  the  theory  of  light,  which  has  not  been  available  for
this  purpose  till  a  comparatively  late  date  in  the  history  of
logic.  A  parallel  difficulty  caused  Plato  to  say,  at  least  at  one
stage  of  his  views,  that  he  could  frame  no  et^os  of  a  smell,  i.  e.
he  could  find  no  general  determinate  attributes  by  which  to
formulate  its  definition.  Such  difficulties  are  plainly  matters
of  the  state  of  knowledge. A  content  which  is  recognisable

^  Cf.  Shelley's  line, '  White  with  the  whiteness  of  what  is  dead.'
^  Bradley,  Principles  of  Logic,  p.  156.
VOL.  I.  E


50  Introduction.  [Introd.

and  identifiable  in  different  contexts  always  has  a  meaning
and  intension.  We  are  about  to  turn  to  two  extreme  cases,
that  of  proper  names  and  that  of  number,  which  will  illus-
trate the  lowest  grade  to  which  the  intension  of  a  significant
name  can  be  reduced.  No  attribute,  however  hard  to
define,  can  be  so  indifferent  to  intensional  meaning  as  the
significance  of  a  strictly  proper  name  and  the  denomination
of  a  number.
Proper  e.  Proper  names  have  sometimes  been  pronounced  non-

Names,  connotative,  i.  e.  without  intension ;  because  their  meaning
is  not  fixed  and  generalised.  On  the  other  hand,  Jevons,
rightly  rejecting  this  view,  which  is  absurd  because  as  we
have  seen  intension  and  extension  are  inseparable,  goes
into  the  other  extreme  by  refusing  to  distinguish  Proper
from  Singular  names,  and  therefore  ascribing  to  the  former
a  maximum  of  intension.  By  a  proper  name  I  understand
primarily  a  name  that  merely  serves  to  distinguish  a  place
or  person,  or,  in  exceptional  cases,  a  thing.  As  a  rule,  a
thing  which  is  neither  place  nor  person  has  not  the  indi-
vidual interest  independent  of  fixed  content  which  is  the
root  of  the  employment  of  proper  names.  We  name  a
thing  according  to  its  species,  its  type  or  function,  not  with
reference  to  its  absolute  particularity.  Cases  like  that  of
a  favourite  animal,  e.  g.  a  horse,  to  which  a  proper  name  is
usually  given,  or  even  a  favourite  thing,  such  as  Henry
Smith's  hammer  Samson  in  '  The  Fair  Maid  of  Perth,'  are
exceptions  that  prove  the  rule.  We  can  see  that  in  such
cases  as  these  a  special  interest  has  come  to  be  attached
to  the  particular  individual  independently  of  its  specific
nature.  By  a  '  singular '  name  as  contrasted  with  a  proper
name  I  mean  a  name  that  indicates  content  as  such,  but
content  that  is  in  its  nature,  or  at  any  rate  assuming  it  to
be  located  in  the  actual  world,  unique.  Such  is  the  instance
given  above,  '  The  centre  of  the  material  universe ; '  or,
again,  'The  king  of  England  in  the  year  1832.'  There  is
a  certain  difficulty  in  finding  instances  of  these  names,
unless  as  in  the  last  case  we  limit  them  in  time,  or  as  in


iNTROD.]  Proper  and  Singular  Names.  5 1

'  The  chief  murderer  of  Caesar '  confer  uniqueness  upon
them  by  relation  to  a  true  proper  name.  WTien  we  come
to  speak  of  the  singular  judgment  we  shall  see  that  there
is  a  good  reason  for  this  difficulty.  It  is  prima  facie  im-
possible for  any  content  into  which  time  does  not  enter  to
stand  as  the  subject  of  a  singular  judgment.  The  centre
of  gravity  of  the  material  universe  may  shift  its  place  and
thus  become  in  one  aspect  plural,  though  in  another  it
remains  unique.  No  idea  can  guarantee  its  own  uniqueness,
which  is  only  given  by  reference  to  a  position  in  the  actual
sensuous  series.  Still  there  is  a  difference  between  the
singular  and  the  proper  name ;  which  I  proceed  to  state  as
shortly  as  I  can.

Every  name  has  intension  and  extension.  But  the
extension  naturally  follows  the  intension,  and  the  intension
attaches  to  the  name,  without  reserve ;  that  is  to  say,  the
name  as  such  has  a  meaning,  and  is  applied  to  all  objects
of  which  this  meaning  is  true.  Now  the  term  '  proper,'  which
means  in  this  usage  '  peculiar '  or  '  individual,'  is  in  contra-
diction with  the  above-mentioned  characteristic  of  significant
names,  and  imposes  upon  them  a  function  with  which  the
nature  of  intension  is  essentially  at  variance,  viz.  the  recog-
nition of  individuals  as  such,  in  their  particularity,  and
without  primary  reference  to  their  attributes.  Intension
thus  becomes  a  means  and  not  an  end.  A  significant
general  name  is  used  of  many  objects  in  the  same  sense;
and  a  significant  singular  name  is  used  of  one  object  only,
because  there  is  or  can  he  only  one  object  to  which  its  meaning
applies ;  but  a  proper  name,  though  used  of  many  objects,
is  used  of  each  in  a  different  sense.  Its  rudiment  of  general
meaning  is  in  such  an  implication  as  that  John  is  the  name
of  a  man  and  not  of  a  mountain  or  a  steam-engine;  or
again,  some  one  of  the  thousand  different  applications  of  a
proper  name  may  become  typical,  and  so  set  up  a  general
meaning,  which  however  does  not  attach  to  the  name  in  its
remaining  999  applications,  but  only  elevates  it  into  a  term
of  ordinary  language  in  respect  of  one  application. I  refer

E  2


52  Introduction.  [introd.

to  such  cases  as  '  a  Daniel,'  '  a  Croesus,'  '  a  Solomon,'  '  the
Rupert  of  debate,'  etc.

But  these  are  abnormal  uses  in  which  the  proper  name
ceases  to  be  proper.  The  particular  Johns,  on  the  other
hand,  to  whom  the  name  John  is  applied  as  a  proper  name,
do  not  form  one  extension  corresponding  to  a  single
intension  of  this  name.  Each  of  them  forms  by  himself  a
separate  extension  corresponding  to  a  separate  and  distinct
intension  of  the  name  John.  The  men  called  John  are  not
related  to  their  name  as  'men'  to  'man'  or  as  'towns'  to
'  town,'  but  as  Salviati's  glasswork  and  the  Pentateuch  to
'  Mosaic,'  or  as  a  human  being,  and  a  cairn  in  the  Lake
Country,  to  '  man.'  The  subject  is  not  without  historical
interest,  but  to  pursue  it  would  take  us  too  far  from  logic.
No  doubt  it  might  be  maintained  that  in  early  language
Intensional  and  Extensional  meaning  must  to  a  great  extent
have  coalesced.  Whatever  sound  was  appropriated  to  a
sensible  incident  would  at  first,  very  possibly,  attach  itself
only  to  the  concrete  or  confused  perception  as  a  whole,
and  it  might  be  long  before  pointing  out  the  occurrence
could  be  in  any  way  distinguished  from  saying  in  what  it
consisted.  Thus  it  might  be  said  that  language  must  have
begun  with  proper  names  for  everything,  and  advanced  to
general  names,  and  only  then  had  to  face  the  problems  arising
from  the  necessity  of  identifying  individuals  by  help  of
symbols  whose  nature  is  to  be  general.  The  problem  is
'  now  solved  to  a  considerable  extent  by  a  peculiar  conven-
tion as  to  mode  of  writing  and  amount  of  signification  to
be  expected.  We  know  that  to  find  a  town  in  Ontario
called  by  the  name  of  London  justifies  no  single  inference
as  to  points  of  identity  between  it  and  the  metropolis  of
England.  We  must  keep  etymology  out  of  the  question.
A  word  means  what  it  is  used  to  mean,  not  what  it  once
meant.  The  derivation  of  proper  names  justifies  no  infer-
ence at  all  as  to  their  meaning.  The  Remington  type-
writers bear  the  stamp  of  Ilion.  In  the  same  way  inten-
sional meaning  cannot  justly  be  ascribed  to  Christian  names


Introd.] Decline  of  Significance  in  names,  53

or  surnames,  at  least  in  modem  England.  There  is  now
no  legal  monopoly  of  such  names  (though  there  may  be  of
trading  designations),  and  if  we  are  taken  in  by  ascribing
intension  of  birth  and  breeding  to  a  particular  name,  it  is
our  o\\Ti  fault.  But  probably  this  state  of  things  is  modern,
and  the  existence  of  proper  names  of  persons  in  the  full
sense  would  in  that  case  be  modem  also.  If  legal  or  social
rights  depended  on  bearing  a  particular  name,  then  such  a
name  had  as  an  element  of  tme  intension  those  general
relations — patriciate,  legitimacy,  civic  birth — in  which  the
right  to  bear  it  and  the  incidents  of  bearing  it  were  involved.
'  The  art  of  giving  names,'  it  has  been  said,  '  is  lost.'  It  is
certain  that  the  purpose  of  mere  recognition,  to  which  all
attributes  are  in  their  nature  indifferent  and  serve  only  as  a
means,  tends  to  destroy  the  picturesqueness  of  nomen-
clature by  dissociating  it  from  interest  in  a  general  and  so
significant  intension.  The  close  relation  between  mere
extensional  meaning  and  the  use  of  number  is  nowhere
more  strikingly  illustrated  than  in  the  custom  of  number-
ing not  only  houses  but  streets,  as  in  great  American
cities.  In  the  proper  name  there  is  still  the  semblance  or
fiction  of  a  general  Intension — the  special  name-word  seems
indicative  of  distinct  meaning  ;  in  the  number  even  this
fiction  has  disappeared,  and  nothing  remains  but  the  place
of  the  particular  in  an  aggregate  of  particulars,  united  solely
by  a  common  denomination.

Thus  the  distinction  between  a  proper  name  and  a
significant  name  (whether  singular,  as  God,  or  general,  as
*  man ')  is  that  in  the  use  of  a  proper  name  signification  is
a  means  to  identification  ;  in  the  use  of  a  singular  or  general
name  signification  is  predicated  for  its  own  sake.  '  But  the
identification  of  a  person  or  thing  is  signification,'  it  will  be
said.  This  raises  the  question  of  the  nature  of  personal  or
individual  identity,  which  is  not  in  place  here ;  it  is  enough
to  point  out  that  mere  identification  is  a  very  barren  kind
of  signification,  since  there  is  hardly  a  single  attribute  of
actual  content  as  distinguished  from  mere  external  relations


54  Introduction.  [Introd.

that  is  necessarily  conveyed  by  it.  Macaulay  after  his
mind  was  gone  was  still  Lord  Macaulay  and  his  father's
son,  but  what  else  was  he  that  he  had  been  ?
Nameswith  ^.  If  pure  Extension  were  to  be  found  anywhere,  it  would
tacSed'^^'^  be  found  in  a  general  name  or  idea  determined  by  number,
or  of  which  number  is  predicated.

An  extensional  whole  is  an  aggregate  of  individuals
sharing  a  common  nature,  but  regarded  as  particulars,  i.  e.
as  each  identical  with  itself  and  external  to  all  the  others.
This  is,  as  we  shall  see  more  fully  from  the  analysis  of
Enumeration  (Book  I.  ch.  4),  the  nature  also  of  a  numerical
whole.  The  unit  of  number  and  the  particular  of  extension
are  closely  allied.  Each  of  them  consists  in  the  identity
with  itself  of  a  concrete  thing  or  discernible  particular  in
spite  of  differences  which  it  includes.  Proper  names  also
depend  on  this  self-identity,  but  have  for  their  purpose  to
single  it  out  and  mark  it  apart  from  the  whole  universe
besides.  Number  does  not  seek  to  single  out  one  such
identity /<?:r  excellence^  but  to  formulate  the  relations  which
arise  between  such  discrete  identities  as  factors  in  a  sum  or
aggregate.  In  the  first  place  then,  number,  though  an
attribute  and  so  an  element  of  intension,  yet  by  accentu-
ating the  embodiment  of  a  content  in  units  external  to  one
another,  demands  an  extensional  rendering  of  the  idea.
And  in  so  far  as  depth  of  meaning  is  indifferent  when  we  are
thinking  of  aggregate  units  and  not  of  connected  attributes,
so  far  the  intension  of  a  concept  may  be  reduced  to  the
denomination  of  a  numerical  aggregate.  But  if  this  remnant
of  intension,  which  determines  the  range  of  the  aggregate,
is  removed,  the  thought  is  destroyed  in  both  its  aspects.

And  further,  in  the  second  place,  a  numerical  determina-
tion, although  itself  an  attribute,  tends  to  contradict  inten-
sion proper,  and  so  force  the  attribute  of  extension  or
particularity  into  importance.  It  is  obvious  that  in  every
concept  the  intension  dictates  the  extension.  And  the
extension  so  dictated  must  as  an  aggregate  of  instances  be
theoretically  at  least  capable  of  representation  by  a  number,


iNTROD.]  Number  and  Extension.  55

or  if  not,  it  must  be  in  conflict  with  any  and  every  number.
We  may  omit  the  consideration  of  parts  of  space  and  parts
of  time,  which  seem  to  constitute  a  series  that  theoretically
defies  enumeration  ;  but  no  actual  content  of  our  real  world
can  be  thus  infinite,  so  far  as  we  can  understand.  The
human  race  itself  must,  as  we  are  bound  to  suppose,  have  a
limited  career,  and  the  limitation,  however  far  beyond  our
knowledge,  must  be  immanent  in  man's  nature  in  its
relation  to  his  environment.  Thus  the  intension  even  of
man,  colour,  gold,  or  other  ordinary  general  names,  must
ultimately  and  theoretically  imply  a  finite  numerical  aggre-
gate of  instances^.

This  number,  which  in  such  cases  as  the  above  we  can
never  know,  could  be  of  no  possible  interest  to  us,  were  it
not  that  it  affects  the  import  of  any  other  number  by  which
any  such  concept  may  be  determined.  In  other  instances  the
knowledge,  which  in  the  above  cases  seems  not  worth  serious
thought,  is  actually  ours,  or  treated  as  being  ours.  Such
instances  are  the  three  persons  of  the  Trinity,  the  three  sides
of  a  triangle,  the  ten  decemviri,  the  670  members  of  the
House  of  Commons,  the  five  r^ular  solids,  the  ninety  degrees
of  a  right  angle.  It  will  be  obser\'ed  that  these  illustrations
display  the  number  in  verj'-  different  relations  to  the  inten-
sion. A  member  of  the  House  of  Commons  is  no  less  a
member  if  some  units  are  withdrawn  from  the  legal  number
of  670,  as,  in  consequence  of  death  or  resignation  is  often,
perhaps  always,  the  case.  The  number  in  which  he  is  a
unit  does  not  directly  affect  his  position,  although  no  doubt,
if  an  immense  proportion  of  seats  were  to  become  vacant
owing  to  some  extraordinary'-  catastrophe,  the  House  would
be  unable  for  a  time  to  act  as  a  House  of  Commons.  The
same  is  the  case  with  the  decemviri  or  the  two  Roman  con-
suls, for  the  authority  of  one  member  of  these  boards  was

*  This  is,  in  so  far  as  the  instances  are  true  individuals  in  a  known  system.
Mere  '  observations '  on  the  other  hand,  successive  presentations  to  sense,  mnst
alwajrs  be  taken  as  entering  into  an  infinite  series,  for  no  power  can  tell  how
often  they  may  recur,  nor  what  constitutes  a  single  one.  Nor  do  they  by  mere
repetition  tend  to  generate  a  system.


56  Introduction.  [introd.

independent  of  that  of  the  others  or  other.  But  if  we  take
the  case  of  twelve  Engh'sh  jurymen  the  matter  is  altered,
for  the  number  is  essential,  though  only  made  so  by  specific
enactment,  and  if  ' «  juror  is  withdrawn '  the  others  ipso
facto  lose  their  powers  of  trying  a  case,  i.  e.  cease  to  be  in
the  full  sense  jurymen.

And  it  is  possible  for  the  number  to  enter  even  more
deeply  into  the  essence.  Two  sides  without  a  third  cannot
be  two  sides  of  a  triangle ;  and  an  angle  of  one  degree  is
not,  considered  in  itself,  a  degree  in  a  right  angle.  The
nature  of  space  as  an  ideal  whole  does  indeed  introduce
a  difficulty  here,  for  it  may  be  said  that  a  degree  can  only
be  understood  with  reference  to  the  circle,  and  therefore
involves  the  conception  of  a  right  angle ;  and  that  in  space,
a  figure  is  all  that  it  involves.  The  objection  draws  atten-
tion to  a  principle  which  holds  good  of  all  units  without
exception,  viz.  that  every  unit  ultimately  involves  the  whole
in  which  it  is  a  unit,  but  it  does  not  alter  the  fact  that  we
have  no  right  angle  unless  we  have  ninety  degrees,  while  we
have  a  House  of  Commons  (unless  Parliament  is  dissolved)
so  long  at  least  as  it  has  enough  members  to  form  a
quorum.  In  other  words,  the  whole  implied  in  the  unit  in
the  one  case  involves  a  precise  numerical  determination,
and  in  the  other  case  does  not.  And  it  will  be  observed
that  as  instances  tend  to  approach  the  former  type,  the
number  ceases  to  be  truly  extensional,  becoming  as  we  shall
see  (Book  I.  ch.  3)  a  result  due  to  measurement  rather  than
to  mere  enumeration.  The  content,  that  is  to  say,  no
longer  falls  chiefly  within  each  unit  of  the  enumeration,  so  as
to  make  the  number  a  mere  sign  of  the  repetition  of  embodi-
ments of  the  content,  but  in  some  essential  respects  is  gene-
rated by  a  repetition  of  the  parts  and  does  not  exist  in  each
taken  alone.  Thus,  as  was  said,  the  character  of  being  a  right
angle  is  not  present  in  every  degree  of  angular  measure-
ment, nor  is  the  character  of  being  a  commonwealth  present
in  every  individual  person — not,  at  any  rate,  in  the  same
sense  in  which  the  character  of  being  a  man  is  present  in


introd.]  Collective  Names.  57

every  person.  A  name  or  idea  which,  while  invohdng  a
number  of  identical  parts,  is  not  truly  predicated  of  each
such  part  singly,  was  called  in  the  old  logic  a  collective  as
contrasted  with  a  general  name.  Army  e.  g.  is  a  '  collec-
tive '  name  as  regards  the  individual  soldiers  in  it,  but  a
general  name  as  applied  to  the  English,  German,  French
and  other  armies.  The  distinction  indicated  by  the  term
was  not  valuable,  for  it  was  not  explained.  But  it  is
obvious  that  a  '  collective  '  name  or  concept  like  '  army '  is
a  halfway  house  between  the  mere  common  nature  of  units
like  men,  horses,  books  and  the  like,  in  which  the  enumera-
tion of  the  particulars  repeats  the  intension  in  every  item  of
the  extension,  and  wholes  like  nation,  Parliament,  triangle,
plant,  in  which  the  parts  are  bound  together  by  other  rela-
tions than  that  of  number,  and  therefore  their  number  does
not  form  the  extension  of  the  whole,  so  much  as  an  inten-
sional  attribute  of  that  whole.  Thus  the  enumeration  of
Englishmen  is  not  so  much  the  extension  of  the  English
nation  as  it  is  at  the  moment  an  attribute  of  the  English
nation  to  contain  such  a  number  of  Englishmen.  The
question  is  whether  the  content  falls  within  the  unit,  or  only
within  the  synthesis  of  units.

But  whether  mere  units  in  an  aggregate  or  elements  in  a  J
numerically  determinate  whole,  numerable  parts  must  have
a  number,  which  must  directly  or  drcuitously  depend  on
intension.  And  every  numerical  determination  other  than
that  which  thus  springs  from  intension  has  the  effect  of
erecting  a  mere  whole  of  enumeration  which,  as  regards
the  intension  of  the  general  name,  is  arbitrary  and  irrele-
vant. An  exceptional  instance  will  illustrate  this.  Any
two  sides  of  a  triangle  are  together  greater  than  the  third
side.  Here  the  two  sides  are  not  a  mere  whole  of  enumera-
tion, and  are  not  irrelevant  to  the  conception  of  the  three  sides
of  a  triangle.  What  is  here  predicated  of  them  is  a  result  of
analysis  applied  to  the  triangle  wth  its  three  sides,  and  is
a  consequence  of  the  three-sidedness  of  the  triangle.  The
three  sides  might  indeed  be  named  as  subject  in  the  pro-


58  Introduction.  [introd.

position.  But  if  we  say  '  There  were  10,000  men  in  Hyde
Park  last  Sunday'  we  have  constructed  a  whole  of  enumera-
tion prima  facie  irrelevant  to  the  concept  man  and  having
an  extension  that  conflicts  with  the  extension  of  that  con-
cept, and  therefore  with  the  intension  that  dictates  that
extension.  In  other  words,  we  have  depressed  the  term
'  man '  into  the  denomination  or  designation  of  the  unit
employed  in  counting.  The  number  may  if  we  choose
be  stated  as  a  predicate,  and  the  limit  '  in  Hyde  Park '
taken  into  the  qualification  of  reality  which  forms  the  sub-
ject ;  all  that  concerns  us  here  is  to  point  out  that  we  are
speaking  of  an  aggregate  framed  ad  hoc  by  enumeration,
i.  e.  by  taking  men  one  after  the  other  in  their  particularity
up  to  a  limit  which  does  not  prima  facie  present  itself  as
implied  in  their  nature.  We  not  merely  count  men  as  par-
ticulars,— we  count  particulars  if  we  count  the  angles  of  a
pentagon, — but  we  divorce  them  from  their  natural  inten-
sion by  excluding  the  greater  portion  of  the  extension  which
it  indicates.  It  is  true  then  that  number,  qua  mere
enumeration,  is,  like  the  proper  name  qua  mere  identifica-
tion, in  a  large  measure  antagonistic  to  intensional  meaning.
Alleged  in-  ii.  The  two  cascs  which  have  just  been  discussed  are
of  Extati-°  enough  to  show  that  not  every  variation  of  intension  involves
sion  to  In-  a  Corresponding  variation  of  extension,  or  vice  versa.  The
essence  of  proper  names  and  of  numbers  is  to  mark  the
same  extension  or  the  same  amount  of  extension  as  persistent
through  intensions  partially  at  any  rate  varying.  Never-
theless, the  demand  for  a  formal  rule  of  inter-dependence
between  these  two  obviously  connected  aspects  of  concept
and  of  judgment  was  satisfied  in  traditional  logic  by  the
doctrine  that  intension  varied  inversely  as  extension.  This
idea  was  an  early  development  of  the  Aristotelian  definition
by  genus  and  species, from  which  it  obviously  followed  that
whereas  the  generic  attributes  were  contained  together  with
others  in  the  definition  of  the  species,  the  individuals
belonging  to  the  species  must  be  contained  together  with
others  among those  belonging  to the genus. Aristotle


iNTROD.]  Tlie  inverse  ratio.  59

noticed  this  consequence  of  his  own  views,  but  the  false
accuracy  of  the  traditional  rule  was  a  later  development
of  the  forms  which  he  established,  when  their  life  was
beginning  to  fail.  Recent  logicians  have  more  or  less  com-
pletely condemned  the  doctrine  in  question  ;  perhaps  the
latest  well-known  writer  who  ascribed  to  it  first-rate  import-
ance was  Professor  Jevons.  His  account  excludes  one
obvious  objection,  viz.  that  a  multiplication  of  identical
instances  cannot  affect  intension,  by  a  proviso  that  only
logical  change  of  extension  could  affect  intension.  But  this
makes  the  view  a  truism ;  if  logical  change  of  extension
means  admission  into  extension  of  a  new  kind  as  opposed
to  a  mere  multiplication  of  instances,  it  is  obviously  equiva-
lent to  some  change,  of  whatever  kind  it  may  be,  in  meaning
as  such  or  intension.  But  even  so,  even  accepting  this
proviso,  it  remains  doubtful  whether  the  doctrine  of  the
inverse  relation  is  important  in  any  sense  in  which  it  is
true.  I  am  inclined,  however,  to  think  that  the  recent
logicians  to  whom  I  have  alluded,  e.  g.  Sigwart,  Wundt,
and  Bradley,  and  also  to  a  smaller  extent  Lotze,  err  by
sheltering  themselves  under  a  point  of  form,  and  avoiding
the  question  of  import.  It  is  true,  no  doubt,  that  you  may
have  any  arrangement  of  concepts  ;  but  it  is  hard,  in  view
of  our  gigantic  natural  classifications  with  their  unrivalled
grasp  of  reality,  to  place  any  other  arrangement  of  concepts
on  a  level  in  real  import  with  that  of  genus  and  species.

I  will  begin,  however,  by  going  briefly  through  the  weak
points  of  the  supposed  law  that  the  Intension  of  a  concept
or  name  varies  inversely  as  its  Extension.

a.  The quasi-mathematical phrase 'inversely as' isThemathe-
wrong. It  asserts  a  ratio,  and  a  ratio  is  a  numerical  rela-  ^J^^  jg
tion. But  in  the  case  before  us,  one  side  of  the  matters  wrong,
compared  does  not  lend  itself  to  enumeration  at  all. The
parts  of  extension  may  be  counted,  as  we  have  seen,  but  it
is  inept  to  count  the  parts  of  intension. For  they  are  not
external  to  each  other,  and  they  form  a  whole  such  as
cannot  be  divided  into  units  except  by  the  most  arbitrary


6o  Irib'oduction.  [Introd.

dilaceration.  And  if  it  were  so  divided,  all  its  parts  would
vary  in  value,  and  there  would  be  no  reason  to  expect  that
ten  of  them  (i.e.  ten  attributes)  should  have  twice  the
amount  or  value  of  five.  We  must  constantly  bear  in
mind,  e.  g.  in  estimating  the  false  doctrine  of  analogical
inference,  that  there  is  absolutely  no  sense  in  counting
attributes.

It  may  be  added  that  if  we  disregard  Jevons'  proviso
the  idea  of  a  proportion  is  upset  at  once.  The  multiplica-
tion of  actual  instances  can  obviously  go  on  without  affect-
ing intension,  so  long  as  we  adhere  to  the  ordinary  formal
idea  of  an  instance.  Whether  in  strict  reality  every
instance,  at  least  in  the  organic  world,  must  not  constitute  :
an  infinitesimal  step  in  evolution  and  therefore  be  an  in-
finitesimal approach  to  a  new  kind,  is  a  further  question.
If  the  fact  were  so,  it  would  merely  have  the  result  for  our
present  purpose  that  every  increase  of  extension  must  be
treated  as  the  addition  of  a  new  kind,  and  therefore  as  ipso
facto  affecting  intension.  It  may  also  be  pointed  out  that
the  mere  existence  of  proper  names  as  above  explained,
and  of  descriptions  in  Mill's  sense,  i.  e.  definitions  used  as
practical  guides  to  application,  and  to  that  end  substituting
some  single  mark  for  the  whole  complex  of  attributes  which
forms  the  intension  of  a  concept,  is  enough  to  destroy  the
idea  that  the  range  of  a  concept's  application  must  be
altered  as  its  depth  of  import  is  varied.
Concurrent  /3.  But  putting  aside  the  mere  pedantic  form  of  the
onnten°-^  rule  and  the  multiplication  of  identical  instances,  and  taking
sion  and  an  increase  of  extension  to  involve  a  modification  of  kind,
the  substance  of  the  rule  may  still  be  impeached.  An
increase  of  extension  may  even  be  conjoined  with  an
increase  of  intension,  either  by  the  inclusion  in  the  exten-
sion of  new  instances  which  present  attributes,  previously
unnoticed,  in  a  striking  form,  or  by  the  discovery  of  conse-
quences or  implications  of  the  meaning  or  intension  which
show  that  a  class  of  cases,  not  thought  of  in  that  connection
before,  are  essentially  sharers  in  the  intension  so  understood.


Extension.


m  ^


t^^i/ru-  .e.  /»</)•'  ,


u t •■•-«


C  C»  j^o /J «'*^  *»«t


Jtirv  P^»  •  c .


\^ Vf  rO


i/CCvl


(^'^,4^1 iL tv.^*^ ^.r #/irvt* A^.Z» /•»>»>»


1  r^K^KKK[  I iiiiiiMiiiirini»iMiilffnB


i


[


ixTROD.]  hicrcase  of  Intension.  6i

Thus,  if  we  consider  Rent  from  the  Ricardian  point  of  view
as  the  element  of  profit  that  depends  upon  monopoly,
we  bring  under  the  conception  many  species  of  gain  which
were  never  thought  of  in  that  light  before — say,  for
instance,  the  usurious  interest  which  may  be  demanded
for  money  when  concealment  is  necessary  to  the  borrower
and  he  consequently  cannot  apply  to  the  open  market

But  it  will  be  replied,  and  I  have  purposely  courted  the
objection,  *  You  are  not  increasing  the  intension,  or  at  any
rate  you  are  diminishing  it  as  well  as  increasing  it ;  you
have  stripped  off  all  such  attributes  as  "  paid  for  hire  of
land,  houses,"  etc.,  and  so  of  course  you  can  increase  the
extension  of  your  idea  of  rent.'  This  is  in  a  sense  true.  If
new  instances  are  included  under  a  given  intension,  either
they  must  possess  the  whole  of  it,  and  in  that  case  their
inclusion  as  such  does  not  make  any  amplification  of  it
necessarj', — for  as  it  stands  it  is  at  least  not  incorrect,  i.  e.
they  are  not  new  kinds,  but  mere  instances, — or  they  must,
as  in  the  above  illustration,  bring  with  them  a  modification
of  it  which  science  chcioses  to  adopt,  and  then,  from  a  purely
external  and  formal  point  of  view,  they  must '  diminish'  the
iven  intension  ;  i.  e.  they  must  leave  out  some  element  of
But  this  only  shows  how  impossible  it  is  to  discuss  the
latter  on  the  basis  of  counting  attributes.  The  new
istances  may  bring  with  them  determinations  far  more
mcrete,  penetrating,  and  constitutive  of  the  reality  in
md,  than  those  that  had  to  be  omitted.  We  should  then
jhtly  say  that  the  extension  and  intension  had  been
igmented  together  ^.  When  the  conception  of  *  falling
)dies  close  to  the  earth's  surface'  had  its  extension
icreased  by  the  inclusion  of  all  material  elements  belonging

^  The  case  in  which  the  addition  of  attributes  modifies  the  old  attributes  is
ke  most  interesting  and  the  most  typical.  A  content  in  which  the  attributes
are  not  known  as  reciprocally  modifying  each  other  does  not  belong  to  a  high
phase  of  being  or  of  knowledge.  If  the  new  instances  do  not  remove  any  hin-
drance in  the  way  of  accepting  the  new  attributes,  but  merely  lead  to  our
detection  of  a  new  attribute  as  if  by  chance,  it  is  hardly  a  fair  case  of  increasing
intension,  it  being  so  purely  our  own  fault  that  we  were  not  as  wise  before.


62  Introduction.  [introd.

to  the  solar  system,  then  no  doubt  some  such  restriction  as  '  at
the  earth's  surface'  was  stripped  off  from  the  intension  of
faUing  bodies,  but  on  the  other  hand  a  determinate  con-
creteness  of  detail — the  inverse-quadratic  ratio  of  attraction
— was  added  to  this  intension  that  made  it  far  more  full  of
significance  than  before.  If  we  count  every  attribute  for
one  we  may  say  that  the  amount  of  intension  in  this  case
remains  unchanged,  but  this  would  be  a  ridiculous  con-
clusion. What  is  one  attribute .''

The  complementary  proposition  to  that  which  began  this
paragraph  does  not  in  its  natural  sense  apply  to  knowledge.
Knowledge  does  not  decrease,  but  only  increases ;  for  the
operations  of  forgetfulness  are  arbitrary  and  do  not  follow
the  laws  of  knowledge.  I  cannot  therefore  undertake  to
show  that  a  decrease  of  extension  may  involve  or  be  in-
volved in  a  decrease  of  intension  ;  except  in  the  sense  that
a  change  of  classification  may  leave  a  name  or  recognisable
idea  robbed  of  much  of  its  import,  and  also  deserted  by
many  of  its  instances.  Thus  the  word  '  Ecclesia,'  which
originally  meant  the  whole  visible  church  or  congregation  of
believers  in  any  locality,  now,  in  its  derivative  '  ecclesiastic,'
is  applied  to  a  sort  of  civil  servants  who  exist  within  that
body,  and  thereby  has  lost  as  notably  in  range  as  in  import.

But  of  course  the  mere  formal  complementary  proposi-
tion, that  the  lesser  Intension  may  be  conjoined  with  the
lesser  Extension,  is  only  the  other  reading  of  the  instances
which  show  that  the  greater  Intension  may  be  conjoined
with  the  greater  Extension.
Subsump-  y.  The  whole  idea  that  judgment  and  reasoning  naturally
or  exclusively  depend  upon  subsumption,  i.  e.  upon  taking
attributes  as  connected  simply  within  and  by  the  unity  of
individual  subjects,  has  of  late  been  rejected,  and  with  good
reason.  And  with  this  idea  disappears  any  formal  or
universal  necessity  that  may  have  been  supposed  to  attend
the  arrangement  of  attributes  as  designations  of  succes-
sively wider  aggregates  of  individual  subjects.  It  is
important that  we should dismiss the  notion that the


tion.


ixTROD ]  Truth  of  the  ' inverse  ratio*  t^i

higher  degrees  of  knowledge  are  necessarily  and  in  the
nature  of  intelligence  framed  out  of  abstractions  that  omit
whatever  has  interest  and  peculiarity  in  the  real  world.
Nothing  has  been  more  fatal  to  the  truth  and  vitality  of
ideas  than  this  prejudice,  which  I  do  not  admit  to  be  a  just
representation  of  the  principles  of  Plato  and  Aristotle,
although  certain  salient  features  of  their  doctrine  gave  it
an  unfortunate  advantage.  If  the  present  reaction  against
formal  logic  should  end  in  establishing  a  more  vital  con-
ception of  universality  than  that  which  sets  it  down  to  mere
abstraction,  a  fundamental  reform  will  have  been  made  in
philosophical  first  principles.

iii.  Nevertheless,  subsumption  and  abstraction  play  a  Truth  of
part  in  knowledge.  It  is  not  quite  certain  that  there  is  any  '^^^yse
judgment  or  argument  which  is  incapable  of  being  exhibited
in  subsumptive  form.  It  is  certain  that  to  abstract  and  to
distinguish — to  know  what  belongs  to  one  relation,  and
what,  again,  though  conjoined  with  that  relation,  yet  does
not  arise  out  of  it,  but  out  of  some  other  condition  or  cause
— is  the  first  duty  of  the  scientific  intelligence.  In  conse-
quence of  this  activity,  arrangements  of  individual  objects
under  a  series  of  abstractions,  each  applying  to  a  wider
aggregate  than  the  last,  meet  us  on  every  hand,  and  most
obviously  of  all  in  family  relationships  as  estimated  among
civilised  nations.  The  question  before  us  cannot  be  dis-
missed untU  we  have  treated  it  from  this  more  real  point  of
view.  Is  the  '  pyramidal '  arrangement  of  concepts,  sub-
ordinating the  less  to  the  more  abstract,  scientifically  con-
venient, or,  what  in  an  ultimate  sense  comes  to  the  same
thing,  is  it  true?  In  answer  to  this  question  I  will  mention
three  points  of  interest.

a.  Sigwart  reminds  us  that  every  concept  may  be  re-  Alternative
garded  from  different  points  of  view,  and  classification  or  classifica-
abstraction  may  therefore  have  different  lines  open  to  it :
e  g.  do  we  class  a  square  first  with  four-sided  figures,  and
then,  subject  to  that  limitation,  with  equilateral  figures,  or
vice  versa} It  is  obvious  that  we  put  the  square  in  quite


64  Introduction.  [introd.

different  company  according  to  the  order  in  which  we  apply
these  points  of  view.  The  point  is  that  in  this  and  similar
cases  we  seem  to  have  bona  fide  alternatives.  No  serious
attention  would  be  needed  by  the  mere  fact  that  we  can
class  a  copy  of  '  Paradise  Lost '  either  as  a  black  or  as  a
rectangular  object.  But  if  genuine  alternative  classifications
are  possible,  it  is  clear  that  we  may  have  a  hundred  objects
before  us,  and  being  forced  to  divide  them  into  classes
from  each  of  ten  unconnected  points  of  view,  may  be  left
with  ten  different  classifications  for  each  object,  and  apart
from  some  peculiar  ground  there  will  be  no  reason  for
subordinating  each  object  decisively  to  one  classification
rather  than  to  another.

The  first  remark  that  such  a  suggestion  invites  is  that  the
idea  of  alternatives  only  touches  the  subordination  of  every
object  to  one  class  or  series  of  classes,  but  does  not  touch
the  alleged  necessity  of  successively  emptier  abstractions
within  any  one  point  of  view  which  may  be  selected  (as
some  one  must  always  be  selected  at  least  pro  hac  vice)  and
adhered  to.  And,  secondly,  the  mere  difficulty  of  alterna-
tives is  inherent  in  the  nature  of  intelligence,  meets  us  in
the  problem  of  giving  names,  and  is  overcome  in  some
degree  whenever  we  venture  to  affirm  a  fact.  In  its  most
genuine  form  it  is  met  by  the  theory  of  the  relation
between  different  sciences,  to  each  of  which  the  same
individual  thing  obviously  presents  a  different  aspect.
Sigwart's  suggestion  ^  of  an  inference  to  Pantheism  from  the
doctrine  of  essence  combined  with  that  of  subordina-
tion— because  only  the  essence  of  the  highest  abstrac-
tions is  in  no  relation  accidental — seems  to  me  perfectly
wild.  We  should  by  this  time  be  well  aware  that  all
essence  is  relative,  but  that  relativity  does  not  exclude
absoluteness.  One  set  of  attributes  are  a  man's  essence
qua  citizen,  and  another  qua  parent.  I  may  add  that  his
argument  depends  on  assuming  that  any  class  may  be
regarded  in  its  turn  as  genus  and  as  species. But  this  is

^  Logik,  i.  308.


iKTROD.]  Individuals  and  Abstractions.  65

an  obsolete  conception  belonging  to  purely  formal  logic.  \-
The  successive  abstractions  of  classification  have  distinct
characters  expressed  by  definite  titles  and  not  interchange-
able. A  genus  is  not  a  species  of  an  Order,  and  a  Class
is  not  the  genus  of  a  Division.

/3.  A  group  of  objections  which  carry  on  the  idea  dis-  Higher  In^
cussed  above  of  abstraction  by  modification  as  opposed  to
mere  neglect  or  omission  of  attributes,  appears  to  me  to  be
more  important.  If  we  look  at  a  real  individual  into  which
other  individuals  enter  as  constituent  parts,  are  we  prepared
to  say  that  the  containing  whole  (e.  g.  the  state  as  compared
with  the  citizen)  has  the  less  meaning  or  intension  of  the
two  ?  The  old  logic  would  retort  here  that  the  extension
of '  state '  is  made  up  of  particular  '  states/  not  of  persons,
or  that  that  of  '  nation '  or  '  army,'  consists  in  the  several
nations  and  armies,  not  in  individual  men  and  soldiers ;  or
that  the  extension  of  God  is  in  his  particular  existence  (as
we  do  not  here  admit  a  plural)  not  in  elements  within  God's
being.  But  this  would  only  meet  the  objection  at  the  cost  of
narrowing  the  idea  of  universality  to  that  of  mere  abstrac-
tion, in  contrast  with  the  sense — synthesis  of  differences — in
which  we  have  taken  it  throughout.  Moreover,  even  the
i  aggregate  of  men,  nations,  or  animals  which  is  indicated  by
Ian  abstract  universal  name  has  in  virtue  of  that  universal
ra  common  nature  which  is  a  germ  of  concreteness.  A
crowd  is  not  an  army,  but  it  has  in  it  always  the  ele-
ments of  a  mob.  As  we  saw  above,  collective  names  mark
a  mere  half-way  house  from  aggregation  to  individuality
and  it  is  a  purely  arbitrary  procedure  when  examining  the
nature  of  universals,  to  restrict  our  notice  to  such  as  have
attained  to  no  higher  embodiment  than  an  aggregate  of
particulars.  But  in  fact  our  prejudices  would  cause  us  to
neglect  a  concrete  nature  if  any  such  were  apparent  within
the  aggregate.  We  should  insist  that  the  idea  which  should
include  the  states  or  nations  of  the  world  must  have  less
import  than  the  idea  of  England  or  France,  and  should
therefore  look  for  this  idea  in  the  abstraction  'state'  or

VOL.  I.  F


66  Introduction.  [introd.

'nation,'  neglecting  to  consider  whether,  e.g.  as  the  source
of  international  law,  the  aggregate  of  nations  has  not  in  it
something  beyond  the  elements  common  to  various  peoples,
or  whether,  if  this  is  not  so,  the  absence  of  such  a  central
unity  is  not  at  least  a  defect  which  we  might  hope  to  see
amended.

But  even  if  we  yield  to  tradition  so  far  as  to  conceive  of
all  universality  as  arising  by  way  of  abstraction,  we  have  a
further  difficulty  to  meet.  It  has  been  well  pointed  out
that  even  abstraction  in  the  scientific  sense  is  not  mere
omission  of  attributes  from  the  idea  of  a  kind  ^  If,  in  a
generic  conception,  all  attributes  were  omitted  which  are
variously  modified  in  the  species  under  it,  the  conception
would  as  a  rule  be  stripped  of  its  entire  content.  That  it
could  ever  have  been  thought  possible  to  distinguish  be-
tween attributes  which  are  the  same  in  all  species  of  a
genus,  and  attributes  which  are  different  in  the  different
species,  must  have  been  owing  chiefly  to  superficiality  in
the  analysis  of  attributes  and  a  neglect  of  their  real  con-
crete character.  It  is  easy  to  say  that  animality  is  common
to  men  and  beasts,  while  rationality  belongs  to  men  only,
and  in  place  of  it  animals  have  either  instinct  or  nothing,
and  that  therefore  animality  is  the  intension  of  the  class
which  includes  beasts  and  men,  while  each  of  these  sub-
classes has  a  separate  and  additional  intension.  But  in
fact  the  animality  of  men  is  quite  different  from  the
animality  of  beasts,  and  is  not  an  attribute  common  to
both  in  the  sense  in  which  a  tree-trunk  is  the  common  sup-
port of  two  of  its  branches.  While  on  the  other  hand  the
thorough  modifications  which  distinguish  the  intelligence
of  man  from  that  of  animals  do  not  suffice  to  dissociate
them  beyond  identification ;  and  the  class-conception  which
simply  omits  all  reference  to  intelligence  is  an  inadequate
class-conception  for  men  and  animals.  Therefore  the  notion
or  abstraction  which  is  to  include  both  men  and  animals
must  on  the  one  hand  provide  for  a  variable  animality;

^  Lotze,  Logik,  sect.  23.


iNTKOD.]  Abstraction  without  omission.  67

must  be  considered,  that  is,  not  in  the  light  of  a  fixed  mark,
but  as  a  scheme  of  modifiable  relations ;  and  must,  on  the
other  hand,  find  room  for  some  reference  to  intelligence,
and  not  simply  strike  it  out  as  a  mark  in  which  the  kinds
to  be  classified  are  not  the  same.  Prima  facie  then  the  -^
content  of  the  superior  class-conception  is  made  up  of  the
very  same  elements  as  those  of  the  conception  nearer  to
individual  reality,  only  that  it  must  represent  each  attribute
schematically,  by  limits  of  variation,  instead  of  embodying
a  fixed  system  of  amounts  or  values.  It  is  obvious,  how-
ever, that  this  principle  can  only  apply  to  the  few  most
concrete  abstractions  nearest  to  sensuous  reality,  in  spite
of  the  allowance  to  be  made  for  cases  in  which  the  total
absence  of  an  attribute  in  some  subordinate  kind  may  be
intelligibly  set  down  as  an  extreme  instance  of  its  fluc-
tuation, and  therefore  does  not  require  all  reference  to  such
attribute  to  be  omitted  in  the  class-conception  to  which
the  defective  species  is  subordinate  \  Even  when  we  come
to  Organism  as  including  both  plant  and  animal,  we  must
sacrifice,  it  would  seem,  something  of  content.  It  is  hard
to  say  whether  we  could  ever  be  justified,  for  instance,  in
including  sentience  in  the  general  idea  of  organism,  in  order
subsequently,  according  to  the  principle  just  mentioned,  to
deny  it  to  '  Plant.'  The  more  general  abstractions  of  the
type  just  mentioned  become  rather  groups  of  law^s  or  condi-
tions by  which  individuals  are  controlled  than  characteristics
of  the  individuals  in  themselves.  But  that  all  their  charac-
teristics, besides  being  characteristics,  rest  upon  conditions
no  less  universal  and  absolute  than  these  laws, — ^this  must
never  be  forgotten.  The  question  of  mere  marks  which  do
not  enter  into  the  main  line  of  natural  classification  has  been
treated  above  in  speaking  of  alternative  classifications.
The  truth  of  these  alternative  modes  of  looking  at  reality

*  It  is  a  commcHi  thing  to  find  within  a  genus  of  plants  which  aie  not
nmked  as  apetalons  the  aitry  referring  to  some  one  or  more  species  '  Petals  o.'
In  snch  a  case  the  other  species  nsnally  reveal  minateness  or  toadency  to  abor-
tion of  the  petals. See  on  this  whole  subject,  Lotze,  Logik,  sect.  33  £

F  3


68


Introduction.


[Introd.


/


Inverse

ratio

justified


is  bound  up  with  the  question  of  the  relative  truth  of  the
various  sciences.
\ Thus  it  is  clear  that  immense  deductions  must  be  made
I  from  the  traditional  doctrine  that  Intension  and  Extension
x^ ( vary  inversely. It  has  been  seen  that  the  one  may  vary
' ' without  the  other,  that  they  may  vary  together,  that  infer-
ence and  judgment  are  not  restricted  to  a  subsumptive
scheme,  that  individuals  may  be  universal  in  a  sense  which
does  not  depend upon abstraction,  that  thus  the  whole
vraisemblance  of  the  doctrine  vanishes  so  far  as  the  con-
struction of  individuals  is  concerned  ;  and  that  even  if  we
deal  with  the  abstractions  of  common  classification  the  true
proximate  genus,  as  distinct  from  a  mere  abstract  mark,
has  a  content  as  rich  as  that  of  the  species,  though  more
schematic.

y.  Nevertheless,  I  cannot  think  that  Wundt  is  right  in
tracing  the  relations  between  class-idea  and  individuals  to
the  mere  effort  of  language  to  economise  its  store  of  words.
The  whole  fabric  of  the  organic  and  even  of  the  inorganic
world  creates  prima  facie  an  overpowering  impression  that
natural  classification  can  correspond  to  reality.  The  per-
ceptible fact  of  graduated  affinity  has  in  all  ages  taken
precedence  of  its  causal  explanation.  The  facts  of  human
or  animal  descent,  so  far  as  immediately  observed  and  as
embodied  in  systems  of  relationship,  supplied  a  name,  if
not  a  thorough-going  explanation,  for  the  affinities  observed
in  nature  K  The  degrees  of  family  connection,  at  least  in
mature  European  society,  are  the  simple  prototype  of  the
ordinary  process  of  classification ;  and  the  analogy  has
extended  since  the  earliest  days  of  Logic  to  the  inorganic
as  well  as  to  the  organic  world.  Now  the  alleged  relation  of
Intension  and  Extension  may  be  simply  illustrated  by  the
characteristics  shared  by  a  group  of  first  cousins,  i.  e.
persons  descended  from  the  same  grandparents,  compared
with  those  shared  by  second,  third,  or  fourth  cousins,  whose


*  See  Lotze,  Logik,  sect.  30,  on  the  probable  original  meaning  of  7«Voy
and  itbo%.


V


iNTsoD.] Truth  of  Successive  Abstractions.  69

common  descent  is  more  remote  by  one  or  by  several
generations.  In  the  human  race,  indeed,  individuality  of
mind  and  disposition  has  so  much  to  feed  it  in  special
knowledge  and  experience  that  the  phenomena  are  but
irregularly  observable ;  but  in  the  evolution  of  plants  and
animals  their  characters  have  the  same  graduated  identity
without  the  same  deductions  on  the  score  of  special  training
and  mental  development.  And  it  is  not  only  evolution
by  descent  that  will  produce  these  pervading  affinities.
Cognate  processes  of  causation  result  in  kindred  formations
all  through  the  world  of  inorganic  substances;  and  even
in  the  sphere  of  necessary  ideas,  of  number  and  geometrical
figure,  identical  relations,  under  varied  conditions,  produce
the  appearance  of  graduated  kinship  or  affinity.

Granting,  therefore,  in  accordance  with  what  has  been
said  above,  that  the  work  of  abstraction  should  be  repre-
sented not  as  selective  omission  but  as  constructive  analysis,
and  that  the  blanks  in  a  schedule  of  attributes  common  to
a  large  range  of  existence  are  not  mere  blanks,  but  zero
values  that  may  become  positive  in  some  cases;  still  we
cannot  on  the  whole  deny  that  the  graduated  operation  of  y/
natural  causes  is  most  fittingly  embodied  for  knowledge  in
a  hierarchy  of  abstractions.  It  is  said  that  the  sumtnum
genus,  '  thinkable  content,'  or  some  such  conception,  must
on  such  a  scheme  be  empty  and  futile.  But  when  we  have
surrendered  the  precise  inverse  ratio  of  Intension  to  Ex-
tension, I  see  no  ground  for  this  reproach.  Why  should
we  pursue  abstraction  to  a  useless  point — to  a  point,  that
is,  at  which  the  conception  which  we  reach  ceases  to  be  a
penetrating  and  illuminating  law?  If  philosophy  has
nothing  sensible  to  say  about  thinkable  contents  as  such,
then  we  had  better  not  pay  attention  to  this  highest  ab-
straction. But  philosophy  can  hardly  be  expected  to  make
so  suicidal  an  admission.

It  must  be  remembered,  however,  that  as  has  been  shown
above,  where  the  higher  concept  is  not  a  mere  law,  but  a
concrete  real  whole,  the  idea  of  diminishing  Intension  has


yo  Introduction.  [introd.

no  application  whatever.  It  is  for  special  knowledge  to
determine  how  far  these  different  points  of  view  are  re-
spectively to  be  taken.  Psychology  -subordinates  the
human  soul  to  a  set  of  laws  which  include,  as  they  grow
more  abstract,  a  larger  range  of  animal  and  organic  exist-
ence. Political  science  treats  the  same  spiritual  being  in
its  concrete  relations  within  an  actual  community  of  such
beings — not  as  a  mere  member  of  a  class.  To  which  of
these  two  sciences  that  of  Ethics  ought  to  assimilate  its
procedure  is  a  vexed  question  which  illustrates  the  problem
of  deciding  in  what  regions  the  rule  of  diminishing  Inten-
sion applies.

One  more  suggestion  may  be  ventured  which  aims,  it
will  be  said,  at  rehabilitating  an  old  fallacy.  I  am  unable,
however,  to  persuade  myself  that  it  does  not  appeal  to  an
unquestionable  truth.  I  assumed  above,  for  the  sake  of
simplicity,  that  regressive  abstractions  such  as  figure  in
classification  could  represent  in  respect  of  their  abstractness
no  character  of  reality.  The  grandparents  from  whom  a
cousinhood  is  descended  have  often  a  more  real,  marked,
and  individual  character  than  their  grandchildren,  though
what  these  latter  retain  of  that  character  can  only  be  repre-
sented by  an  abstraction,  much  of  it  having  been  lost  and
supplemented  from  other  sources.  The  grandparents  are
represented  by  an  abstraction,  in  the  existing  first  cousin-
hood,  but  were  not  themselves  in  any  way  more  abstract
than  their  descendants.  But  when  we  look  at  long  intervals
of  evolution  the  matter  undergoes  a  change,  as  is  easily
verifiable  in  the  case  of  human  character  and  intellect.  A
savage  has  not  the  individuality  of  a  modern  European ;
he  is  more  abstract ;  his  nature  includes  fewer  differences,
less  profound  feelings,  less  grasp  of  fact,  and  less  definiteness
of  imagination.  Or  to  take  a  more  tangible  instance  (for
the  facts  of  savage  life  are  always  subject  to  dispute  if  not
to  doubt),  even  the  Greek  intellect  in  its  prime,  or  Greek
art  at  its  best,  has  not  the  many-sided  concreteness  that
belongs  to  Shakespeare  or Goethe,  Raphael or  Turner.


iNTROD.]  From  Abstract  to  Concrete.  71

And  indeed,  if  we  go  to  natural  history,  and  say  that
*  Organism  in  the  abstract '  never  existed,  really  the  Amoeba
or  the  white  blood  corpuscle  seem  to  contradict  us.  It  is
hard  to  see  how  every  successive  generation  or  epoch  of
evolution,  so  long  as  growth  is  not  counterbalanced  by
decay,  can  avoid  adding  import  and  significance  to  the
content  of  things.  With  the  mind  this  is  admittedly  the
case,  and  the  course  of  evolution  seems  to  show  it  in  nature
too.  It  may  be  said  that  the  antecedent  is  no  more  abstract
than  the  consequent,  and  that  the  universe  as  a  whole
cannot  grow  either  more  or  less  concrete.  But  it  may  be
doubted  whether  this  formal  argument  applies  to  a  system
which  has  individuals  within  it.  In  bringing  to  bear  its
total  content  upon  such  individuals  there  seems  to  be
scope  for  infinite  grades  of  concreteness.  In  this  case  the
advance  from  abstractness  to  concrete  individuality  would
have  grounds  in  historical  fact.  In  one  form  or  another
this  idea  has  often  been  maintained,  and  I  think  that  it
bears  witness  to  a  truth.

We  have  now  considered  the  primary  aspects  of  the
materials  or  instruments  of  logical  thought — the  idea  and
the  name.  This  discussion  seemed  appropriate  to  an
Introduction,  because  it  is  impossible  to  admit  that  the
name,  concept,  or  idea,  is  a  portion  of  the  content  of  Logic,
in  the  sense  in  which  such  a  position  is  assigned  to  the
Judgment  and  to  Inference.  We  do  not  enter  upon  logical
development  proper  till  we  come  to  deal  with  the  evolution
and  affiliation  of  judgments.


BOOK  I.

Of Judgment.


CHAPTER I.

Of  Judgment  and  Judgment-forms  in  general.

I.  The  Judgment  is  co-extensive  with  affirmation  and  denial,

Tud^gment °^'  which  is  the  same  thing,  with  truth  and  falsehood. True
as  such. and  false  are  not  indeed  terms  applied  exclusively  to  judg-
ments ; but yet in all  their applications  their  essential
meaning  depends  upon  judgment. The  sensations  of  a  dis-
eased organ  may  be  abnormal,  but  cannot  possibly  be  false
unless,  on  the  strength  of  them,  we  judge  erroneously. A
false  note  is  a  real  sound,  a  false  man  is  an  actual  individual.
It  is  not  their  existence,  but  a  judgment  implied  in  their
nature,  that  gives  meaning  to  the  censure  of  falseness. The
musical  note  is  not  what  its  place  demands ;  the  man  is  not
what  he  pretends  or  aspires  to  be  ;  it  is  the  demand  or  pre-
tension, ascribed  actually  or  by  metaphor  to  thing  or  person,
which  condemns  them  as  false  in  as  far  as  it  is  unrealised.
Thus  truth  and  falsehood  are  co-extensive  with  judgment,
/ and  depend  on  the  fact  which  is  its  primary  condition ;
{ the  fact  that  a  thing  may  have  an  ideal  relation  to  reality
^ over  and  above  its  own  particular  existence  ; so  that  its
existence,  though  in  itself  real  and actual,  is  empty  and
valueless  in  the  absence  of  the  further  reality  that  such  a
relation  demands. Truth  must  belong  to  something  whose
unreality  is  not  simply  non-existence  ;  or  how  could  false-
hood exist? The  essence  of  falsehood  or  fiction  is  that
there  should  be  an  actual  something  that  pretends  to  be
something  else.


Symbolic  Ideas.  73

Thus  if  we  describe  Judgment  as  the  act  of  thought  which
is  capable  of  truth  and  falsehood,  the  description,  although
tautologous,  is  not  unsuggestive.  It  tells  us  that  we  are  to
look  for  the  differentia  of  judgment  not  in  a  mere  mental
fact,  but  in  some  further  value  with  which  the  mere  mental
fact  is  invested.

i.  This  primary  condition  of  judgment  recalls  us  to  the  Symbolic
subject  of  the  Introduction.  In  judging,  we  use  ideas,  ^  ^^'
but  the  ideas  which  we  use  are  not  mere  particular
mental  images,  the  perishing  existences  which  pass  through
consciousness,  and  which,  qua  particular  psychical  states
on  a  level  with  mere  sensations,  never  recur.  Ideas  ^,  /  ^
according  to  Locke,  though  particular  in  their  existence,
are  general  in  their  signification.  In  judgment,  ideas
are  employed  solely  for  the  sake  of  their  general  signifi-
cation, and  without  reference  to  their  particular  existence.
An  idea,  considered  as  a  general  signification,  is  what  was
described  in  the  Introduction  as  the  meaning  of  a  word.  It
is  not  without  effort,  as  we  all  know,  that  we  can  find  in  our
consciousness  any  intermediary  between  the  word  on  the
one  hand,  and  the  reality  on  the  other ;  and  when  it  is
brought  to  our  notice  that  a  reality  cannot  as  such  be  a
state  of  our  individual  consciousness,  we  are  sometimes
tempted  to  deny  that  it  has  any  representative  there
beyond  the  name.  We  see  from  this  how  utterly  the  sym-
bolic and  secondary  employment  of  psychical  images
obliterates  all  consideration  of  their  particular  existence  as
mental  occurrences.  We  no  more  take  note  of  them  than,
on  meeting  a  welcome  friend,  we  give  ourselves  a  detailed
account  of  the  peculiarities  by  which  we  recognise  him.
The  word  and  its  reference — a  reference  to  some  continued
identity  in  the  world  of  meanings  ^ — are  inextricably  welded
together.  It  is  only  by  reflective  analysis  that  we  discover,
within  and  auxiliary  to  the  meaning  of  a  word,  the  par-
ticular psychical  images  by  help  of  which  we  symbolise  it.

^  Essay  on  Human  Understanding,  Book  III.  chap.  3.  sect.  11.
^  See  Introduction,  sect.  7.


74  Judgment  and  Judgment-forms. [book  i.

And  the  meaning  tyrannises  over  the  psychical  image  in
another  respect.  Besides  crushing  out  of  sight  its  particular
and  exclusive  existence,  it  also  crushes  out  part  of  its  con-
tent. The  psychical  images  that  pass  through  our  minds
might  be  compared  to  a  store  of  signal  flags.  Not  only  is
it  indifferent  whether  your  signal  flag  of  to-day  is  the  same
bit  of  cloth  that  you  hoisted  yesterday,  but  also,  no  one
knows  or  cares  whether  it  is  clean  or  dirty,  thick  or  thin,
frayed  or  smooth,  so  long  as  it  is  distinctly  legible  as  an
element  of  the  signal-code.  Part  of  its  content,  of  its
attributes  and  relations,  is  a  fixed  index  which  carries
a  distinct  reference;  all  the  rest  is  nothing  to  us,  and,
except  in  a  moment  of  idle  curiosity,  we  are  unaware  that
it  exists.  The  well-known  difficulty  of  detecting  misprints
arises  from  the  same  despotism  of  the  meaning.  Let  the
main  index-letters  of  a  word  be  correct,  or  even  the  main
index-words  of  a  sentence,  and  we  are  off  at  once  in  thought
to  the  word  or  sentence  which  is  indicated,  and  remain
unaware  of  minor  variations  in  the  content  employed  as
index.

Thus  the  idea,  as  used  in  judgment,  is  a  general  sig-
nification, or  in  other  words,  a  fixed  reference.  And
because  fixed,  it  is  limited ;  limited  to  portions  of  content
which  serve  as  indices  of  the  reference,  and  are  compatible
with  psychical  accompaniments  that  vary  with  the  series  of
mages.  I  will  give  another  instance.  Some  one  speaks
to  me  of  the  Aegean  Sea,  which  I  have  never  seen.  He
tells  me  that  it  is  a  deep-blue  sea  under  a  cloudless  sky,
studded  with  rocky  islands.  The  meanings  of  these  words
are  a  problem  set  to  my  thought.  I  have  to  meet  him  in
the  world  of  objective  references,  which  as  intelligent  beings
we  have  in  common.  How  I  do  this  is  my  own  affair,  and
the  precise  images  at  my  command  will  vary  from  day  to
day,  and  from  minute  to  minute.  It  sounds  simple  to  say
that  I  combine  my  recollections  of  sea  and  sky  at  Torbay
with  those  of  the  island-studded  waters  of  Orkney  or  the
Hebrides. Even  so,  there  is  much  to  adjust  and  to  neglect ;


Chap.  I.]  Non-SymboHc  Ideas,  75

the  red  cliffs  of  Torbay,  and  the  cloudy  skies  of  the  north.
But  then  again,  my  recollections  are  already  themselves
symbolic  ideas ;  the  reference  to  Torbay  or  the  Hebrides
is  itself  a  problem  set  to  thought,  and  puts  me  upon  the
selection  of  index-elements  in  fugitive  images  that  are
never  twice  the  same.  I  hsiXQ  first  to  symbolise  the  colour
of  Torbay,  using  for  the  purpose  any  blue  that  I  can  call
to  mind,  and  fixing,  correcting,  subtracting  from,  the  colour
so  re-called,  till  I  reduce  it  to  a  mere  index-quality ;  and
the?t  I  have  to  deal  in  the  same  way  with  the  meaning  or  sig-
nificant idea  so  obtained,  clipping  and  adjusting  the  qualities
of  Torbay  till  it  seems  to  serve  as  a  symbol  of  the  Aegean.

Here  then  we  have  the  first  essential  of  judgment.  The
ideas  used  in  judging  are  not  particular  existences  but
general  significations,  or  objective  references.  No  mere
mental  occurrences  as  such,  no  series  or  combination  of
particular  images,  can  by  any  possibility  be  a  judgment.
It  is  the  essence  of  judgment  to  claim  a  value  which  is
beyond  the  mere  mental  act  itself,  and  which  is  therefore
liable  to  be  divorced  from  the  mental  act ;  and  this  divorce,
as  we  have  seen,  is  what  falsehood  means.  That  is  false,
which  is,  but  like  a  false  coin,  has  not  the  significance  which
it  claims.  In  judgment,  then,  all  ideas  are  symbolic,  that
is  to  say,  have  a  constant  reference.

Can  ideas  be  symbolic  apart  from  judgTnent?  If  no
ideas  in  a  human  consciousness  are  apart  from  judgment
(see  Introd.  2.  ii)  this  question  falls  to  the  ground  so  far  as
concerns  that  consciousness.  But  the  discussion  referred
to  made  it  clear  that  apart  from  ultimate  analysis  we  do
entertain  ideas  without  judging  them  true,  as  in  the  question
and  in  the  negation,  and  that  these  ideas  are  symbolic.  The
further  problem  may  then  be  pressed  upon  us :  '  Are  there
at  all  ideas  which  are  not  symbolic  ?  '  In  identifying  the
human  intelligence  with  a  continuous  judgment  we  seem  to
have  denied  in  advance  that  non-symbolic  ideas  are,  for  that
consciousness.  The  answer  is  that  a.  In  judgment  itself  the
idea  can  be  distinguished  qua  particular  in  time  or  psychical


76  ytcdgment  and  yudgment-forms. [book  i.

fact,  and  so  far  is  not  symbolic,  and  /3.  In  all  those  human
experiences  from  which  we  draw  our  conjectures  as  to  the
animal  intelligence,  when  in  languor  or  in  ignorance  image
succeeds  image  without  conscious  judgment,  we  feel  what  it
is  to  have  ideas  as  facts  and  not  as  symbols.
Reference  ii.  Granting  that  symbolic  ideas  cannot  ultimately  be
o  rea  \  y.  entertained  without  judging,  it  does  not  follow  that  to  judge
is  merely  to  entertain  ideas.  In  what  does  the  act  of  judg-
ment consist  ?  An  act  it  undoubtedly  is  ;  an  act  which  is
as  certainly  present,  and  which  we  find  as  hard  to  describe,
as  the  much  disputed  act  of  volition  itself.

I  shall  attempt  in  the  first  instance  to  make  the  essentials
of  the  matter  quite  clear  in  a  simple  case,  with  which  we
shall  afterwards  find  that  all  more  elaborate  instances  agree
in  fundamental  structure.

If  I  say,  pointing  to  a  particular  house,  'That  is  my
home,'  it  is  clear  that  in  this  act  of  judgment  the  reference
conveyed  by  the  demonstrative  is  indispensable.  The
significant  idea,  '  my  home,'  is  affirmed,  not  of  any  other
general  significant  idea  in  my  mind,  but  of  something
which  is  rendered  unique  by  being  present  to  me  in  per-
ception. In  making  the  judgment,  'That  is  my  home,'
I  extend  the  present  sense-perception  of  a  house  in  a
certain  landscape  by  attaching  to  it  the  ideal  content  or
meaning  of 'home';  and  moreover,  in  doing  this,  I  pronounce
the  ideal  content  to  be,  so  to  speak,  of  one  and  the  same
tissue  with  what  I  have  before  me  in  my  actual  perception.
That  is  to  say,  I  affirm  the  meaning  of  the  idea,  or  the  idea
considered  as  a  meaning,  to  be  a  real  quality  of  that  which
I  perceive  in  my  perception.

The  same  account  holds  good  of  every  perceptive  judg-
ment ;  when  I  see  a  white  substance  on  a  plate  and  judge
that  '  it  is  bread,'  I  affirm  the  reference  or  general  meaning
which  constitutes  the  symbolic  idea  '  bread '  in  my  mind,  to
be  a  real  quality  of  the  spot  or  point  in  present  perception
which  I  attempt  to  designate  by  the  demonstrative  '  this.'
The  act  defines  the  given  but  indefinite  real  by  affirmation


Chap.  I.] TJu  Constructed  Real  World.  jy

of  a  quality,  and  affirms  reality  of  the  definite  quality  by
attaching  it  to  the  previously  undefined  real.  Reality  is
given  for  me  in  present  sensuous  perception,  and  in  the
immediate  feeling  of  my  own  sentient  existence  that  goes
with  it.  The  real  world,  as  a  definite  organised  system,
is  for  me  an  extension  of  this  present  sensation  and  self
feeling  by  means  of  judgment,  and  it  is  the  essence  of
judgment  to  effect  and  sustain  such  an  extension.  It
makes  no  essential  difference  whether  the  ideas  whose
content  is  pronounced  to  be  an  attribute  of  reality  appear
to  fall  within  what  is  given  in  perception,  or  not.  We
shall  find  hereafter  that  it  is  vain  to  attempt  to  lay
down  boundaries  between  the  given  and  its  extension.
The  moment  we  try  to  do  this  we  are  on  the  wrong  track.
The  given  and  its  extension  differ  not  absolutely  but
relatively ;  they  are  continuous  with  each  other,  and  the
metaphor  by  which  we  speak  of  an  extension  conceals
from  us  that  the  so-called  '  given '  is  no  less  artificial  than
that  by  which  it  is  extended.  It  is  the  character  and
quality  of  being  directly  in  contact  with  sense-perception,
not  any  fixed  datum  of  content,  that  forms  the  constantly
shifting  centre  of  the  individual's  real  world,  and  spreads
from  that  centre  over  every  extension  which  the  system  of
reality  receives  from  judgment.

Waiving  then  this  distinction,  though  as  a  matter  of
degree  it  may  find  a  place  in  the  enumeration  of  judgments,
we  find  the  same  general  features  in  all  judgments  of
perception.  There  is  a  presence  of  a  something  in  contact
wuth  our  sensitive  self,  which,  as  being  so  in  contact,  has
the  character  of  reality ;  and  there  is  the  qualification  of
this  reality  by  the  reference  to  it  of  some  meaning  such  as
can  he  symbolised  by  a  name.  It  cannot  be  alleged  in
theory  that  a  name  is  essential  to  judgment.  At  least  for
'name'  it  would  be  necessary  to  substitute  in  such  an
allegation  'some  symbol.'  The  spatial  order  of  things
which  we  see  whenever  we  open  our  eyes,  is,  qua  order
of things, the content of a perceptive judgment, in


78  Judgment  and  yudgment-forms. [book  i.

which universal ideas are presented through sensuous
symbols.

The  subject  in  every  judgment  of  Perception  is  some
given  spot  or  point  in  sensuous  contact  with  the  percipient
self.  But,  as  all  reality  is  continuous,  the  subject  is  not
merely  this  given  spot  or  points  It  is  impossible  to
confine  the  real  world  within  this  or  that  presentation.  ,
Every  definition  or  qualification  of  a  point  in  present  y
perception  is  affirmed  of  the  real  world  which  is  continuous
with  present  perception.  The  ultimate^  subject  of  the
perceptive  judgment  is  the  real  world  as  a  whole,  and  it
is  of  this  that,  in  judging,  we  affirm  the  qualities  or
characteristics.

The  claim  to  be  true,  which  as  we  saw  belongs  primarily
to  judgment,  indicates  the  same  relation.  In  every  judg-
ment, as  Mill  incisively  contends,  we  profess  to  speak
about  the  real  world  and  real  things.  '  The  Sun '  means
*  the  Sun ' ;  and  whatever  that  may  be,  it  is  not  anything
merely  in  my  mind  ;  not  relative  purely  to  me  as  a  conscious
organism ;  not  a  psychical  fact  in  my  individual  history.
Every  judgment,  perceptive  or  universal,  might  without
altering  its  meaning  be  introduced  by  some  such  phrase  as  y

'  Reahty  is  such  that ,'  '  The  real  world  is  characterised

by—.'

Thus  in  the  Perceptive  Judgment  at  least  we  find  the
meaning  or  objective  reference  of  an  idea — such  a  content
as  is  indicated  by  a  name — affirmed  to  characterise  some
reality  present  in  sense-perception,  and  through  it,  reality
as  a  whole.  We  shall  find  that  all  Judgments  of  every  kind
share  the  main  elements  of  this  description ;  only  that  the
reference  to  an  indeterminate  element  of  present  sense-
perception  is  gradually  displaced  by  the  introduction  of
explicit  ideas  to  designate  the  immediate  subject. Such

^  See  Introd.  2.  i.

^  See  Introd.  2 .  i.  Analysis  and  cross-examination  readily  verify  this  as  a
fact.  After  admitting  any  judgment  to  be  true,  you  cannot  deny  its  modifying
effect  on  any  portion  whatever  of  your  real  world ;  i.  e.  it  has  been  admitted  of
the  real  world  as  a  whole.


Chap.  I.]  Tlie  Proposition.  79

ideas  disguise  but  do  not  remove  the  reference  to  Reality  as
the  ultimate  subject  in  every  judgment ;  they  have,  however,
important  effects  in  modifying  both  the  act  of  affirmation,
and  the  nature  of  what  is  affirmed.  When  I  come  to
examine  the  chief  types  of  judgment,  I  shall  have  to
consider  the  nature  of  these  effects.  But  I  intend  in  the
first  place  to  say  something  of  the  proposition,  from  the
analysis  of  which  many  current  views  about  judgment  are
derived.

iii.  The enunciative sentence  —  the  unit of  language  judgment
which represents a judgment  —  is  called a proposition,  ^q^ ^^^
Language,  as  we  saw,  supplies  the  fixed  symbols  which  *
stand  for  ideas. It  would  be  rash  to  say  that  there  can  be
thought  without  language — if  language  includes  every  pos-
sible system  of  recognisable  signs — and  wholly  perverse  to
imagine  that  the  ideal  of  intelligence  lies  at  all  in  the  direc-
tion of  a  severance  of  thought  from  words. The  Introduc-
tion, in  dealing  with  Names,  showed  us  the  absurdity  of
any  such  conception. But  yet  the  spoken  or  written  pro-
position differs  fundamentally  from  the  judgment.

I  do  not  think  that  it  is  convenient  to  rank  the  narrative
or  temporal  affirmation  as  a  '  proposition '  (German  *  Satz'),
and  reserve  the  name  of  judgment  for  an  act  of  thought
which  has  some  purpose  in  the  way  of  classification  or
definition.  To  do  so  is  in  English  terminology  at  least  to
confuse  a  distinction  of  degree  with  one  of  kind ;  but  it  is
worth  noticing  that  such  a  nomenclature  has  been  pro-
posed ^,  and  that  according  to  it  judgment  proper  would
begin  at  the  point  where  inference  and  necessity  become
explicit.  For  against  any  doubt,  judgment  maintains  itself
as  an  inference  -,  and  this  is  exactly  the  test  that  has  been
held  to  distinguish  a  judgment  from  a  proposition.  To
affirm  that  a  carriage  is  passing  the  house,  Hegel  says^,  is
not  a  judgment  unless  there  is  a  question,  e.g.  whether  it
is  a  carriage  or  a  cart ;  i.  e.,  I  suppose,  unless  some  general

'  Hegel's  Logic,  Wallace's  Translation,  pp.  258-9.
*  Bradley,  Principles  of  Lc^c,  p.  404.


8o  Judgment  and  judgment-forms. i.book  i.

connection  of  attributes  is  intentionally  affirmed.  Now  a
general  connection  involves  a  ground,  and  so  an  inference.
Thus  the  classification  in  question  would  have  the  merit  of
suggesting  that  judgment  begins  with  inference.  But  the
point  of  commencement  taken  is  really  arbitrary ;  though
judgment  and  inference  begin  together,  yet  both  begin
before  this  point.

I  prefer  then  to  take  the  proposition  all  through  as  the
actual  spoken  or  written  enunciative  sentence ;  while  the
judgment  is  the  intellectual  act  which  depends  in  various
degrees  upon  words  or  other  symbols,  but  is  different  from
any  mere  combination  of  words  or  symbols  whether  heard,
read,  or  remembered.

The  essential  differences  between  judgment  and  proposi-
tion may  be  arranged  under  two  heads,  which  cannot  how-
ever be  wholly  separated  from  each  other.  I  shall  first
speak  of  the  so-called  parts  of  the  judgment,  the  current
conceptions  of  which  are  derived  from  grammatical  analysis
of  the  proposition ;  and  then  pass  on  to  consider  how  far
the  idea  of  a  transition  in  time,  which  is  inseparable  from
the  apprehension  of  a  sentence,  is  applicable  to  the  judgment
as  such.
The  a.  The  division  of  the  Judgment  into Subject Copula

parts  of  the  g^j^jj  Predicate  is  obviously  derived  from  the  analysis  of
the  enunciative  sentence.  The  finite  verb,  which  is
a  proposition  in  miniature,  contains  all  these  elements
within  itself;  and  the  history  of  their  being  distin-
guished within  the  sentence  is  the  history  partly  of  lin-
guistic evolution  and  partly  of  grammatical  or  quasi-logical
analysis.  Even  the  separation  of  the  substantive  from  or
within  the  verb,  is,  I  suppose,  an  early  analytic  develop-
ment of  language ;  and  it  is  the  tendency  of  modern
speech,  no  less  than  a  supposed  convenience  of  thought,
that  has  finally  transmuted  Nominative  and  Verb  into
Subject  Copula  and  Predicate.  The  Copula  in  the  modern
sense  was  unknown  to  Aristotle,  although  the  use  of  the
predicative  Verb  'to  be '  attracted  his  attention  and  drew


Chap.  I.] What  pai'ts  has  the  yiidgment  f  8 1

from  him  a  somewhat  inadequate  explanation.  If  we
return,  however,  to  Aristotle's  main  position,  and,  in  agree-
ment with  students  of  English  grammar  \  regard  the  Judg-
ment as  made  up  of  Subject  and  Predication  {ovo\La  and
prjfia),  we  have  got  rid  of  one  fiction  in  the  separate  Copula,
but  the  distinction  which  we  retain  may  still  be  challenged.
It  is  plain  that  the  judgment,  however  complex,  is  a  single  *
idea.  The  relations  within  it  are  not  relations  between
ideas,  but  are  themselves  a  part  of  the  idea  which  is  predi-
cated. In  other  words,  the  subject  must  be  outside  the  ~~ c

judgment  in  order  that  the  content  of  the  judgment  may ,

be  predicated  of  it.  If  not,  we  fall  back  into  *  my  idea  of
the  earth  goes  round  my  idea  of  the  sun,'  and  this,  as  we
have  seen,  is  never  the  meaning  of '  The  earth  goes  round  the
sun.'  What  we  want  is  '  The  real  world  has  in  it  as  a  fact
what  I  mean  by  earth-going-round-sun,'

This  view,  stated  thus  extremely,  would  not  only  annihi-
late the  copula  with  separate  content,  but  also  the  whole
distinction  of  Subject  and  Predication,  and  it  is  an  argument
in  its  favour,  that,  in  doing  so,  it  would  seem  only  to  lay
bare  in  all  judgments  the  elementary  type  which  forces  itself
on  our  observation  in  the  simplest  perceptive  apprehension  ;
at  a  stage,  that  is  to  say,  before  the  grammatical  subject,
which  creates  our  present  difficulty,  appears  explicitly  in  the
proposition.  But  we  shall  see  in  tracing  the  evolution  of
judgment,  that  it  is  impossible  to  dispense  with  the  distinc-
tion of  Subject  and  Predication,  and  that  the  appearance  of
contrast  between  propositions  which  have  and  which  have
not  grammatical  subjects,  is  caused  by  the  necessity  of
representing  immature  thought  in  developed  language;  so
that  the  thought  in  which  distinctions  are  rudimentary
must  either  be  mutilated  by  the  omission  of  an  element,  or
transformed  by  explicit  articulation.  It  is  impossible  to
represent  a  judgment  by  a  single  noun  belonging  to  a
modem  language,  though  such  a  noun  is  often  all  that  we

*  Cp,  Mason's  English  Grammar,  Jones's  Analysis  of  English  Sentences,  and
Wrightson's  Functional  Elements  of  the  Sentence.
VOL.  I.  G


82  Judgment  and  ytidgment-forms. [booki.

utter.  Such  a  judgment  should  really  be  represented
either  by  a  rudimentary  sentence,  that  is,  by  some  element
of  language  not  yet  reduced  to  the  position  of  a  part  of
speech,  or  by  a  miniature  sentence,  i.e.  by  a  verb.

In  other  words,  although  the  ultimate  Subject  extends
beyond  the  content  of  the  judgment,  yet  in  every  judgment  /
there  is  a  starting-point  or  point  of  contact  with  the  ulti-
mate subject ;  and  the  starting-point  or  point  of  contact
with  reality  is  present  in  a  rudimentary  form  in  the  simplest
perceptive  judgment,  as  it  is  explicitly  in  the  later  and
more  elaborate  types.

Then  it  would  come  to  this. Subject  and  Predicate  in
V  the  actual  judgment  are  really  distinct,  as  a  real  identity

from  or  in  its  differences.  The  relation  of  their  contents
is  itself  ideal,  and  not  a  relation  between  ideas  ;  but  never-
theless the  judgment  demands  this  relation ;  for  the  judg-
'  ment  is  my  consciousness  qua  judging,  and  my  conscious-
ness in  judging  identifies  the  ideal  or  symbolised  reference
which  constitutes  the  predication  with  its  own  construction
of  the  Real  world  ^.

The  difficulty  is  that  you  cannot  affirm  without  intro-
ducing a  distinction  or  reference  into  the  content  of  the
affirmation ;  and  yet  such  distinction  or  reference,  being
part  of  what  is  affirmed,  and  not  a  relation  between  what  is
affirmed  and  something  else,  cannot,  it  would  seem,  be  the
essence  of  the  affirmation.  What  is  the  connection  be-
tween the  two  things;  between  the  reference  of'is-building-
a-wall '  to  '  Balbus,'  and  the  affirmation  that  the  whole  idea
'  Balbus-building-a-wall '  is  true  of  reality  ?  What  has  the
action  of  Balbus  to  do  with  my  affirmation  that  Balbus
acts?  The  latter  seems  wholly  unconnected  with  the
former,  and  yet  they  are  inseparable.

And  the  answer  is  that  the  real  world  is  primarily  and
emphatically  my  world.  I  take  it  to  be  real  in  virtue  of  its
contact  with  me.  Therefore  though  the  ideal  relation
within  a  judgment  is  not  a  psychical  fact  in  my  mind  but  a

^  Cp.  Introd.  2.  i.


Chap.  I.] Subject,  in  Logic  and  Grammar.  83

fact  affirmed  objectively  of  the  real  world,  yet,  the  real  world
for  me  being  the  world  that  hangs  from  my  present  per-
ception, I  identify  my  assertion  about  it  with  its  assertion
of  itself.  In  every  judgment  the  ultimate  subject  Reality
is  represented  by  a  selective  perception,  or  idea,  which
designates  a  something  accepted  as  real.  This  something,
taken  as  standing  for  reality,  is  the  actual  subject  of  the
judgment,  and  is  qualified  by  the  ideal  content  which  forms
the  predication.  No  judgment  can  be  found  in  which  Sub-
ject and  Predicate  are  not  apparent.  Reality  is  one,  but  its
presentation  varies ;  and  it  is  impossible  to  judge  without
explaining  where  and  how  Reality  accepts  the  qualification
which  we  attach  to  it.  The  presentation  of  Reality,  quali-
fied by  an  ideal  content,  is  one  aspect  of  Subject  and
Predication ;  and  my  individual  percipient  consciousness
determining  itself  by  a  symbolic  idea,  is  the  other.  That
the  latter  is  identified  with  the  former  follows  from  the
claim  of  conscious  thought  that  its  nature  is  to  know.

Thus  I  am  of  opinion  that  Subject  and  Predication  are
essential  elements  in  the  Judgment.  But  whereas  in  the  •
judgment  they  are  differences  within  an  identity,  in  the
proposition  they  are  isolated  parts  of  an  extended  whole ;
and  the  copula,  which  in  Judgment  is  merely  the  reference
that  marks  predication,  and  has  no  separate  content,  be-
comes in  the  proposition  an  isolated  part  of  speech.  When
therefore  the  analysis  of  the  proposition  controls  the  inter-
pretation of  the  judgment,  each  of  these  parts  of  the
sentence  is  treated  as  a  separable  content,  and  perhaps  as  a
separate  psychical  existence  ;  and  we  are  told  of  two  ideas
or  two  ideal  contents,  and  a  variable  copula,  itself  also  an
ideal  content,  which  indicates  the  varying  relations  ^  between
them.  In  this  sense  Subject  and  Copula  and  Predicate
are  mere  fictions.  The  judgment  is  not  a  relation  between
ideas,  nor  a  transition  from  one  idea  to  another,  nor  does  it

^  Lotze,  Logik,  sect.  52.  It  is  ven-  doubtfnl  whether  in  this  passage  Lotze
escapes  the  error  which  he  imputes  to  others,  of '  reducing  a  logical  operation
to  a  mere  psychical  occurrence.'

G  a


84  yudgment  and  yudgment-forms. [booki.

contain  a  third  idea  which  indicates  a  particular  kind  of
connection  between  two  other  ideal  contents.

The  real  nature  of  the  copula  we  have  seen  already.  It
is  the  mere  sign  of  affirmation,  and,  though  usually  con-
veyed by  a  finite  verb  in  languages  which  possess  one,  does
not  depend  on  tense.  Aristotle,  who  was  inclined  to  in-
clude '  indication  of  time '  in  the  differentia  of  affirmation,
was  nevertheless  aware  that  judgment  could  take  place
'  absolutely '  (aTrAoJs)  as  well  as  with  note  of  time  {KaTo.
Xpovov).  Moreover  a  verb  can  exist  without  definite  tense,
and  predication  can  exist  apart  from  a  distinctly  formed
verb.

The  reason  why  the  verb,  where  there  is  a  verb,  is  appro-
priated to  the  act  of  predication,  is  not  that  the  verb  signi-
fies time,  change  or  action,  but  that  it  is,  as  has  constantly
been  repeated,  a  miniature  sentence.  Not  merely  does  the
verb  *  agree '  with  its  subject — the  adjective  also  agrees
with  its  substantive — but  by  convention,  or  explicitly  in
the  person-ending,  it  includes  within  itself  a  reference  to
given  reality,  and  can  therefore  stand  alone  as  an  enuncia-
tion, which  no  other  part  of  speech  can  do.  In  other
words,  the  verb  is  prima  facie  a  content  referred  to  a  real
individual  subject,  and  though  the  subject  may  be  by  the
I  help  of  additional  phrases  defined,  set  down  as  imaginary,
or  even  denied,  the  verb  has  always  in  itself  the  force  of
this  demonstrative  reference.  An  adjective  implies  a  re-
ference to  something  else,  but  the  something  may  be  a
mere  idea ;  it  is  only  the  verb  that  professes  to  select  an
element  directly  related  to  the  speaker's  apprehension,  and
to  attach  a  significant  content  to  that  element.

It  is  in  the  demonstrative  force  of  the  verb  that  we  must
look  for  its  fundamental  predicative  force.  I  suppose  that
the  collocations  which  in  Greek,  and  more  or  less  in  many
languages,  have  power  to  turn  the  epithet  into  a  predicate,
owe  their  significance  to  a  quasi-demonstrative  emphasis.
In  *  the  white  horse '  (6  XevKos  ittttos)  there  is  nothing  that
can  be  taken  as  a  reference  to  a  special  point  in  reality;  no


Chap.  I] Is  Judgment  a  change  in  time?  85

indication  of  a  real  existence,  either  in  the  ideal  content  or
out  of  it,  which  we  propose  to  qualify  by  its  meaning.  In
'  the  horse  (is)  white '  (6  tinroy  Afvicos)  there  is  an  indication
of  a  line  between  a  an  individual  that  may  be  real  and  /3
a  content  that  may  be  attached  to  him  or  it,  and  therefore
the  instinct  of  reason  which  sees  a  judgment  wherever  a
judgment  is  possible,  takes  the  individual  named  as  if  it
were  an  appeal  to  perception,  i.  e.  a  demonstrative  reference
to  reality,  and  the  content  as  a  quality  ascribed  to  the
real  subject  so  obtained.  In  the  universal  judgment  this
demonstrative  reference  becomes  merely  formal ;  but  it  con-
tinues in  all  language  to  supply  the  symbol  of  judgment.

/3.  It  has  been  proposed  to  distinguish  Subject  and  Judgment
Predicate  simply  as  earlier  and  later  in  time,  and  the  above  [^  xiims"
instances  of  demonstrative  reference  appear  to  support  this
notion.  But  rather  than  admit  it  to  be  correct,  I  should
surrender  the  distinction  altogether  and  adopt  the  view
that  there  is  no  subject  in  the  judgment  as  such.  For  it  is
absolutely  impossible  that  priority  in  time  should  subsist
between  the  parts  of  a  completed  judgment.  But  if  not,
the  priority  of  the  subject  would  exist  merely  in  memory;
and  an  act  of  thought  cannot  be  characterised  by  a  mere
recollection  of  the  process  that  generated  it.

In  what  sense  is  it  true  that  the  Judgment  is  in  time,  and
in  what  sense  not  ?  It  may  be  convenient  to  distinguish
between  arriving  at  the  judgment,  and  subsequently  modi-
fying the  judgment,  although  the  two  processes  are,  as  we
shall  see,  really  continuous.

In  what  follows  I  do  not  identify  the  aspect  of  Judgment
as  in  time  with  the  series  of  images  qua  psychical  occur-
rences that  pass  through  the  mind  while  we  judge.  It  is
probable  that  the  view  w^hich  defines  Judgment  as  a  change
is  influenced  by  the  particularity  of  ideas  qua  events  of
consciousness  as  well  as  by  the  constant  transition  from
judgment  to  judgment.  But  the  former  element  ought  to
have  been  eliminated  by  what  has  been  said  above.

1.  In  arriving  at  a  Judgment,  as  when  we  hear  a  sentence  Arriving  at

Judgment.


86  yiidgment  and  judgment-forms. [bookI.

and  '  wait  for  the  verb,'  or  scrutinise  an  approaching  person
until  his  name  comes  into  the  mind,  we  undoubtedly  appear
to  begin  with  a  ready-made  Subject,  to  which  a  Predicate  is
added  by  a  subsequent  transition.  But  closer  attention  will
show  us  that  this  is  not  the  case.  We  have  always  some
anticipation  of  the  meaning  of  a  sentence,  and  this  antici-
pation takes  the  shape  of  a  provisional  judgment  or  judgment
in  outline,  very  probably  disjunctive  in  type,  the  shape  of
which  becomes  more  definite  as  we  follow  the  sentence,
until  the  final  clause  determines  its  ultimate  content.  In
the  first  place,  consciousness,  when  any  ideal  content  what-
ever is  presented  to  it,  absolutely  refuses  to  abstain  from
judging  ;  and  in  the  second  place,  what  comes  first  could
not  have  (as  it  undoubtedly  has)  the  significance  of  a
subject,  unless  with  reference  to  something  already  referred
to  it  in  the  way  of  predication.

The  case  of  perception  leads  to  the  same  conclusion.
You  can  come  to  no  judgment  by  help  of  perception
unless  you  interrogate  perception  ;  and  you  cannot  interro-
gate perception  unless  you  have  in  the  mind  some  general
idea  as  a  basis  for  further  specification.

Thus,  in  reaching  a  particular  apprehension  or  perception,

there  is  a  transition  that  occupies  time. But  the  transition

is  not  from  Subject  to  Predicate,  which  we  will  call  5  and  P

respectively,  but  from  s-py  (where  y  indicates  superfluous

detail, which is omitted when the perception becomes

clear)  through  2-n, to S-P. To  speak  of  a  transition

from  5  to  /*  is  wholly  false. We  never  have  an  5  first,

and  then  tack  a  P  on  to  it ;  we  have  always  an  inchoate

judgment  or  a  choice  of  judgments. The  process  is  not

like  adding  one  piece  in  a  mosaic  to  another ;  it  is  more  like

enlarging  a  hole,  which  has  centre  and  circumference  from

the  beginning.

The  2.  What  has  been  said  of  the  transition  by  which  we

complete  .  .  ,  , . ,

Judgment,  arrive  at  a  judgment  cannot  but  apply  to  the  judgment

when  arrived  at. It  is  clear  indeed  that  we  are  thus  led  to

regard  the  completion  of  the judgment  as  an  arbitrary


Chap.  I.] yudgmcnt  is  extended  in  tirne.  ^']

distinction,  dependent  solely  upon  our  momentary  interest.
The  completed  judgment,  like  the  process  by  which  it  is
obtained,  obviously  possesses  duration.  It  is  absurd  to
suppose  that  a  judgment  cannot  be  dwelt  upon,  and  only
exists  as  a  momentary  transition  from  5  to  P.  Such  a
conception  arises  from  the  confusion  of  two  points  of  view,
either  of  which  may  be  taken  as  a  presupposition,  and
reconciled  with  the  other  by  a  mistaken  compromise.  It
may  be  assumed  that  the  judgment,  as  such,  is  not  in  time,
and  then  this  assumption  has  to  be  reconciled  with  the
obvious  fact  that  judgment  as  an  intellectual  process  is  a
transition  that  occupies  duration  ;  or  it  may  be  taken  as
certain  that  the  judgment  is  a  transition  in  time,  and  then
we  have  to  face  the  experience  that  its  essential  parts  do
not  fall  outside  each  other  in  succession.  To  treat  it  as  an
instantaneous  transition  is  a  ridiculous  attempt  to  combine
the  character  of  occupying  duration  with  that  of  not  being
in  succession.  It  recognises  both  principles,  and  satisfies
neither.

As  we  have  seen  in  the  process  of  arriving  at  the  judg-
ment, the  act  of  judging  as  an  occurrence  in  consciousness
presents  itself  in  the  aspect  of  an  interval  of  consciousness
extended  in  time,  and  therefore  including  successive
differences  within  it.  But  it  does  not  include  succession
because  the  nature  of  the  judgment  is  to  be  successive,  but
because  the  flux  of  sensations  and  ideas  is  always  pressing
new  material  upon  consciousness,  and  a  perception,  once
attained,  satisfies  no  interest  by  being  further  dwelt  upon
unless  it  eains  in  content  from  moment  to  moment.  Thus
the  duration  of  the  judgment  as  a  transition  in  time  is,  so
to  speak,  its  external  aspect,  the  aspect  which,  as  a  whole,
it  presents  when  compared  with  other  occurrences  in  con-
sciousness ;  and  this  duration  is  theoretically  capable  of  any
degree  of  extension.  On  the  other  hand,  as  between  Sub-
ject and  Predication,  that  is  to  say,  within  the  judgment,
there  is  no  transition  at  all.  5  and  P  are  modified  pari
passu,  and  so,  as  a  relation  between  them,  the  judgment  is


88  Judgment  and  Judgment-forms. [booki.

not  in  time.  This  relation  is  a  continued  identity  S-P
which  includes  within  it  the  differences  s-p,  2-n,  and  so
on.  The  transition  is  not  from  vS  to  P,  but  from  s-p  to
2-n  within  the  general  signification  S-P.  The  idea  of
mere  momentary  existence  has  therefore  thus  much  truth,
that  if  you  cut  across  the  interval  of  consciousness  occupied
by  a  single  judgment  at  any  point  whatever,  you  will
always  find  in  the  plane  so  laid  bare  both  5  and  P  in  one
or  other  of  their  forms.  They  are  in  every  minute  part,
but  they  are  not  confined  to  such  a  minute  part.  Judgment
breaks  up  into  judgments  as  rhomboidal  spar  into  rhom-
boids, but  nevertheless  it  is  one  through  its  whole  ex-
tension.

But  if  a  judgment  can  be  thus  extended,  what  do  we
mean  by  a  judgment,  and  how  do  we  know  when  we  enter
upon  a  new  one  ?  The  question  is  in  each  case  a  material
one,  being  in  fact  the  question  of  continued  identity,  and  it
is  impossible  to  give  it  a  formal  answer.  As  a  first  ap-
proximation we  might  say  that  a  single  judgment  is  any
extent  of  judging  activity  that  can  be  summed  up  in  a  single
proposition.  But  as  the  proposition  takes  its  value  from
the  judgment,  and  not  vice  versa,  this  is  no  more  than  an
appeal  to  the  fact  that  we  succeed  in  distinguishing  single
judgments.  The  question  is  one  of  continued  identity,  and
therefore  must  be  dealt'  with  as  concerning  organised
wholes  or  systems.  A  mere  extension  of  a  system,  or  a
mere  omission  within  a  system,  does  not  bring  us  to  a  new
and  different  system.  The  clearest  cases  of  transition  from
judgment  to  judgment  are  those  in  which  language  uses  a
mere  conjunction.  When,  on  the  other  hand,  we  have
propositions  united  by  the  inferential  particle,  it  is  a
matter  of  degree  how  far  they  stand  for  separate  j  udgments.
Ultimately  perhaps  every  inference  may  or  should  be
\y  represented  as  a  single  judgment,  as  being  a  mere  extension
of  an  existing  whole  of  thought,  and  not  a  transition  to  a
different  one.  Such  an  idea  conflicts  with  the  traditional
differentia  of  inference,  that  it  should  lead  to  a  new  judg-


Chap,  i.j Continued  identity  of  judgment,  89

ment ;  but  this  only  means  a  bona  fide  extension  of  the
previous  whole,  such  that,  if  taken  in  abstraction  from  the
process  that  generates  it,  it  wonld  appear  a  perfectly  new
judgment.  At  least  in  elementary  cases  it  is  easy  to  see
how  inevitably  inference  shrinks  up  into  single  judgments,
if  we  look  at  the  actual  life  of  thought.

Take  such  an  every-day  judgment  of  mixed  perception
and  inference  as  '  He  is  coming  downstairs  and  going  into
the  street.'  It  is  the  merest  chance  whether  I  break  up
the  process  thus,  into  two  judgments  as  united  by  a  mere
conjunction,  or,  knowing  the  man's  habits,  say,  when  I  hear
him  half-way  downstairs,  '  He  is  going  out.'  In  the  latter
case  I  summarise  a  more  various  set  of  observations  and
inferences  in  a  single  judgment ;  but  the  judgment  is  as
truly  single  as  each  of  the  two  which  were  before  separated
by  a  conjunction  ;  for  each  of  them  was  also  a  summary  of
a  set  of  perceptions,  which  might,  had  I  chosen,  have  been
subdivided  into  distinct  propositions  expressing  separate
judgments ;  e.  g.  *  He  has  opened  his  door,  and  is  going
towards  the  staircase,  and  is  half-way  down,  and  is  in  the
passage/  etc.  If  I  simply  say  '  He  is  going  out '  I  am  not
a  whit  the  less  conscious  that  I  judge  all  these  different
relations,  but  I  then  include  them  all  in  the  single  systematic
content  '  going  out.'  '  Cromwell  Road  runs  east,  and  the
Brompton  Road  north-east,'  are  two  judgments  ;  but  if  the
road  happens  to  be  thought  of  qua  continuous,  one  would
say,  '  Cromwell  Road  turns  from  east  to  north-east,  where
it  becomes  the  Brompton  Road.'  Again,  '  Knightsbridge
and  Kensington  Gore  run  east '  may  be  generalised  as
'  The  street  from  Kensington  Church  to  Knightsbridge
Barracks  runs  east.'

Thus  a  judgment  is  one  in  respect  of  the  continued
identity  of  its  Subject  and  Predication,  and  this  identity
cannot  be  defeated  by  the  inclusion  of  difference,  but  only
by  the  failure  to  recognise  continuity.  It  is  obvious  that
the  generalised  forms  in  the  above  instances  presuppose  a
work  amounting  to  colligation  of  facts,  if  not  to  elementary


90  ytidgment  and  yudgment-fo7^ms. [book  i.

induction  and  analogy.  If  the  included  judgments  were
never  separately  made,  the  inferential  work  of  colligation
has  not  been  explicitly  done  ;  but  it  would  be  found  abso-
lutely impossible  to  draw  the  line  between  cases  where  it
has  been  done  and  those  where  it  has  not.  Every  judgment
would  on  scrutiny  reveal  differences  which  had  more  or  less
been  absorbed  into  its  formation.  It  follows  inevitably
that  every  systematic  inference  considered  as  a  judgment  is
single  and  not  multiple.  However  this  may  be,  it  is  clear
that  extension  in  time  is  no  bar  to  the  unity  of  judgment.
Scheme  of H.  Judgment,  as  we  have  seen,  is  primarily  the  intel-

arrange- i  i  i  . i

ment  of  Icctual  act  which  extends  a  given  perception  by  attachmg
Judgments.  ^^  content  of  an  idea  to  the  fact  presented  in  the  percep-
tion. The  whole  of  consciousness,  in  as  far  as  it  is  the
consciousness  of  a  single  world  that  shares  the  reality  of
our  waking  self,  may  be  regarded  as  a  continuous  judg-
ment, which  qualifies  our  present  feelings  and  surroundings
by  the  knowledge  of  what  is  more  remote  in  space  and
in  time.  From  the  point  of  view  of  common  logic,  that
is  of  individual  knowledge,  the  intellect  sustains  its  world
by  continued  effort,  as  Atlas  held  up  the  sky.  Every
judgment  is  an  effort  of  this  kind,  afifirming  on  the  one
hand  that  the  same  reality  which  we  touch  in  the  present
is  rightly  described  by  such  and  such  an  idea,  and  on  the
other  hand  that  such  and  such  an  idea  is  real  with  the
same  reality  as  that  which  we  touch  in  the  present.  The
'  idea '  of  which  I  am  speaking  is,  of  course,  not  the  par-
ticular existence  or  single  occurrence  of  a  psychical  image  ;
it  is  the  general  signification  for  the  sake  of  which  we  use
the  psychical  image.
/  The  object  of  this  Book  is  to  analyse  judgment  into  its
/  principal  kinds,  and,  as  a  necessary  consequence,  to  trace
I  their  affiliation.  We  shall  find  that  no  linear  arrangement
will  represent  these  affinities.  Judgment,  as  the  effort  of
thought  to  define  reality,  must  vary  with  the  kinds  of
reality  to  be  defined  no  less  than  with  the  degree  of  its
success  in  defining  them. An  equation  is  to  one  kind  of


Chap.  I.]  Lifuar  series  inadequate.  91

whole  what  a  definition  by  genus  and  species  is  to  another,
or  an  appreciation  of  aesthetic  value  to  a  third  ;  the  function
of  judgment  is  present  in  each  of  these  activities,  and  the
difierence  between  them  is  the  difference  of  the  wholes
which  they  respectively  analyse.  They  are  divergent
developments  of  the  same  relation,  in  each  of  which  an
aspect  has  become  predominant  that  remains  subordinate
in  the  others.

But  we  shall  have  to  deal  with  convergence  no  less  than
with  divergence.  The  unity  of  the  judgment  excludes  no
complexity  of  synthesis,  and  in  determining  the  species  of  a
plant  or  the  character  of  a  man  we  may  be  obliged  to
employ,  among  others,  accurate  determinations  of  number,
time,  and  space.  That  is  to  say,  the  treatment  of  a  content
by  abstraction  as  a  spatial  or  numerical  whole  may  be  re-
absorbed in  a  more  concrete  treatment  of  it  as  an  organic,
aesthetic,  or  moral  whole.

It  might  indeed  be  urged,  from  the  point  of  view  of  meta-
physics, that  every  kind  of  judgment  must  have  its  value
and  no  more  as  a  contribution  to  the  whole  of  Reality,  and
that  therefore  the  series  of  judgments,  arranged  according  to
the  degrees  of  their  significance  for  knowledge,  must  after
all  be  linear.  In  other  words,  if  a  whole  in  number  or  a
whole  in  space  is  not  final  in  itself,  but  demands  something
further  to  complete  its  significance,  this  might  be  enough  to
show  that  we  ought  not  to  represent  it  as  the  goal  of  an
independent  series,  but  rather  as  a  stage  or  phase  of  con-
struction, subordinate  to  the  more  concrete  forms  of  know-
ledge ^  I  should  not  greatly  object  to  such  a  view,  and
shall  endeavour  in  some  degree  to  meet  its  requirements  by
exhibiting  the  more  complete  and  concrete  syntheses  as
involving  the  reunion  of  aspects  which  have  been  developed
in  the  abstract.  But  though  the  forms  of  space  and  time
are  involved  as  a  fact  in  the  perceptive  construction  of  the
world  of  individual  things,  yet  the  mathematical  analysis  of

'  Cp.  Plato's  arrangement,  in  the  Republic,  of  the  mathematical  sciences  in
an  order  proceeding  from  abstract  to  concrete.


92


Judgment  and  Judgment-forms. [booki.


these  forms  is  an  effort  of  the  same  scientific  spirit  which
recognises  the  principles  of  order  in  the  world  of  things
itself.  The  two  aspects  of  constructive  science  are  co-
ordinate and  complementary  activities  of  reason,  and  it
would  be  ridiculous  to  treat  geometrical  analysis  as  prior  to
the  perception  of  characteristic  size  or  proportion.  Intelli-
gence is  many-sided,  in  spite  of  its  unity ;  and  its  aspects,
which  are  correlative  to  each  other,  lose  their  true  inter-
dependence by  being  drawn  out  into  a  linear  series.


SCHEME ILLUSTRATING AFFILIATION OF  JUDGMENTS
AS DESCRIBED IN BOOK  I.

Rudimentary  or  Intermediate
Series  of  Judgments.

(Judgments  of  Quality.)
Impersonal  Judgment;
Demonstrative  Judgment ;
[beginning  with  '  this,'  '  here,'  etc.]
(Judgments  of  Quantity.)
Comparative  Judgments,  etc.
(Judgment  of  Proportion.)
Measurement,  etc.

I  Abstract  or  Hypothetical

Series.


Concrete  or  Categorical
Series.


(Singular  Judgments.)
Individual  Judgment,  etc.

(Universal  Judgments.)
Quasi-collective  Judgment.

True  Generic  Judgment.


(Enumerative  Judgments).
Plural  or  Particular  Judg-
ments.
Collective  Judgments.
Equation.
Abstract  relations  of  Space
and  Time.


Hypothetical  Judgment.


Disjunctive  judgment.


Infinity  in  Space  and  Time.


Purpose  of
scheme.


i.  I  subjoin  a  scheme  of  the  arrangement  which  I  pro-
pose to  follow  in  the  remainder  of  the  present  Book.  It  is
simply  intended  to  assist  the  reader  in  apprehending  the


Chap.  I.]  hiHovations  in  scheme.  93

views  which  I  submit,  and  is  not  meant  to  be  a  bed  of  Pro-
crustes for  the  facts  of  logic.  I  take  it  that  variations  of
arrangement  and  nomenclature  are  as  inevitable  in  logic  as
in  botany,  and  are  not  undesirable  in  either  science ;  for
they  force  upon  our  minds  the  truth  that  species  are  but
sections  of  evolution,  and  that  their  arrangement  is  merely
subsidiary  to  a  correct  apprehension  of  the  process  which
we  divide  into  such  intervals.

ii. I  will  begin  with  a  few  words  in  explanation  of  the  Expkna-
scheme  which  I  have  adopted.  Scheme.

There  is  no  need  to  apologise  for  describing  some
types  of  judgment  by  appellations  which  are  not  to  be
found  in  Mill,  Whately,  or  Hamilton.  Recent  attempts  to
restore  to  logic  its  hold  on  living  concrete  thought,  a  direc-
tion in  which  Mill  was  himself  an  able  and  adventurous
pioneer,  have  made  us  familiar  with  a  whole  chaos  of  psy-
chological, grammatical,  and  quasi-mathematical  titles  ap-
plied to  phases  of  the  judging  activity.  All  that  I  have
done  has  been  to  concentrate  in  a  single  review  the  best  *
estimate  that  I  could  make  of  the  typical  character  and
true  affiliation  of  such  phases,  attempting  to  give  each
judgment  its  appropriate  place  in  relation  to  all  the  prin-
ciples employed  in  the  classification,  and  eschewing  the
too  common  habit  of  adducing  various  groups  and  appel-
lations in  two  or  three  successive  chapters,  without  any
distinct  reference  of  the  one  grouping  to  the  other.

But  besides  adding  to  the  traditional  scheme  of  judg-
ments, the  arrangement  suggested  involves  a  dislocation  of
its  parts,  and  the  omission  of  one  familiar  antithesis.  These
innovations,  though  by  no  means  original  ^,  may  conveniently
be  indicated  and  justified  in  a  few  introductory  remarks.

a.  '  Categorical '  and  '  Hypothetical '  are  taken  to  desig-  Categori-
nate  fundamental  characters  of  knowledge,  and  not  mere  ^^  ^^f
grammatical  appearance. It  follows  that  the  natural  series  thetical.

*  The  treatment  of  the  universal  judgment  as  fundamentally  different  from
the  singular  in  categorical  character  was  really  initiated  by  Mill  in  so  far  as  he
analysed  the  content  of  affirmation  into  coexistence  of  attributes ;  and  has
been  adopted  and  accentuated  by  Lotze,  Sigwart,  and  Bradley.


94  yudgment  and  judgment-forms. [Booki.

of  judgments  commonly  known  as  singular,  particular,  and
universal,  cannot  wholly  fall  within  the  genus  categorical,
but  at  a  certain  point  and  in  a  certain  degree  assumes  a
hypothetical  character.  More  especially,  the  formal  equi-
valence of  the  singular  to  the  universal  judgment  is  replaced
by  a  profound  distinction  of  kind  between  the  two.  The
disjunctive  judgment  again  has  a  place  and  value  of  its  own,
and  is  not  a  mere  proposition  or  grammatical  form.
Divergent  ^.  The  true  quantitative  judgment — not  the  'universal^
species.  judgment  of  ordinary  thought,  which  derives  only  its  name
from  quantity — reveals  itself  as  a  divergence  from  the  central
development  of  the  judgment  by  reason  of  its  extreme
abstraction,  in  which  one  element  of  the  relation  essential
to  judgment  almost  disappears.
Analytic  y.  The  familiar  terms  '  analytic '  and  '  synthetic  '  are  not

s  th  f  J^^de  use  of  in  the  classification,  because  they  belong  to
the  theory  in  general  and  are  not  distinctive  of  any  par-
ticular types.

I  subjoin  a  short  explanation  on  each  of  the  above
subjects.
Categorical  a.  A  categorical  judgment  asserts  an  actual  fact  abso-
theticah'^"  lutely.  A  hypothetical  judgment  asserts  only  the  conse-
quence that  follows  on  a  supposition.  The  distinction
between  the  two  seems  clear.  It  is  the  difference  between
'  There  is  a  bad  smell  in  the  house '  and  '  If  there  is  an
escape  of  gas  there  will  be  a  bad  smell.'  But  when  we
come  to  the  '  Universal'  Judgment  the  line  of  demarcation
is  at  once  blurred.  Hamilton  gives  '  Rainy  weather  is  wet
weather '  as  an  instance  of  a  categorical  proposition,  and
'  If  it  rains,  it  will  be  wet '  as  an  instance  of  a  hypothetical.
In  the  former,  according  to  him,  '  rainy  weather '  is  '  un-
conditionally thought  to  exist.'  But  is  it?  Prima  facie
the  two  propositions  represent  the  same  judgment,  that  is
to  say,  their  difference  is  grammatical  only,  and  their
meanings  are  identical.  It  may  be  that  the  categorical
shape  conveys  a  presupposition  which  is  absent  from  the
hypothetical enunciation — the presupposition that rainy


Chap.  I.]  Abstract  is  Hypothetical.  95

weather  exists  in  rerunt  natura — and  into  the  question
thus  raised  we  shall  have  to  enter  at  length  later  on.  But
it  is  clear  at  all  events  that  the  '  categorical '  form  conveys
in  this  case  a  meaning  which  is  in  a  large  measure,  if  not
entirely,  hypothetical.

By  referring  to  our  account  of  judgment  as  such  we
shall  see  that  the  distinction  before  us  involves  a  funda-
mental difficulty.  Every  judgment  affirms  an  idea  of
reality,  and  therefore  asserts  the  reality  of  an  idea.  Now
an  idea  is  necessarily  abstract,  because  determinate  ;  and
therefore  all  judgment  involves  abstraction.  And  abstrac-
tion is  the  essential  element  of  hypothesis  ;  it  consists  in
taking  up  into  an  idea  some  elements  out  of  the  content  of
experience,  for  the  sake  of  consequences  which  attach  to
the  elements  so  taken  up.  Therefore  it  seems,  as  the  real
world  for  us  is  maintained  and  extended  by  Judgment
only,  that  in  all  extension  and  even  maintenance  of  the
given  reality  there  is  involved  an  element  of  abstraction,
which  is  the  same  as  to  say  that  in  all  categorical  judging  ^

there  is  an  element  of  hypothesis. The  relation  of  these y
characters  to  each other  throughout the history  of  the
judgment  will  be  the  main  principle  of  the  evolution  which
I  shall  attempt  to  describe. But  we  must  accept  as  the i
usage  of  thought,  which  we  are  to  explain,  that  the  assertion s
of  actual  fact  coincides  as  a  rule  with  the  individual  or '
singular  judgment,  and  that  the  universal affirmative  of I
formal  logic,  on  the  other  hand,  may  in  every  case  be  taken
as  purely  hypothetical.

The  categorical  character  of  a  judgment  in  the  above
simple  sense  may  be  tested  by  the  possibility  of  expres-
sing its  meaning  by  an  impersonal  proposition,  however
awkward  may  be  the  necessary  grammatical  transforma-
tion. For  *  Caesar  was  crossing  the  Rubicon '  we  may
substitute  '  There  was  Caesar  crossing  the  Rubicon  ' ;  but
for  '  All  men  are  mortal '  it  is  impossible  to  frame  such
an  equivalent,  for  the  reference  to  given  reality  in  the
impersonal  expression  would  be  at  once  contradicted  by


9 6  Judgment  and  Judgment-forms. [booki.

the  abstract  'all,'  which  =  ' any'  or  'if  a-/  and  so  points,
in  the  absence  of  any  more  effective  assertion  of  the  limited
unity  of  the  race,  to  an  infinite  series.  If  it  is  possible  to
say  '  These  are  all  the  men  who,  etc.,  etc.,'  the  '  all '  cannot
be  the  true  generalising  '  all,'  but  must  indicate  a  sum  of
known  individuals.  It  will  be  necessary  however  to  point
out  hereafter  that  the  distinction  between  these  two  senses
of '  all,'  or  in  other  words  the  limit  of  individuality,  is  not
absolute,  but  is  a  matter  of  degree.

These  instances  suggest  the  principle  to  which  we  shall
^  adhere,  viz.  that  every  assertion  is  as  absolutely  categorical
as  the  nature  of  its  elements  will  permit ;  and  that  demon-
strative or  individual  judgments  are  in  the  plainest  sense
categorical,  because  the  realities  indicated  by  their  subjects
are  of  a  nature  that  can  be  given,  in  a  way  in  which  the
realities  indicated  by  more  definite  abstractions  cannot.
In  every  case  the  real  subject  is  the  reality  indicated  ;  in
every  case  this  subject  is  alleged  to  exist ;  but  the  question
is  how  and  in  what  way  it  is  capable  of  existing ;  in  other
words,  what  is  the  kind  and  degree  of  its  individuality.
For  only  what  is  individual  can  have  actual  existence  as  a
whole.  An  infinite  series  cannot  have  such  existence,  and
therefore  cannot  be  taken  to  have  it.  The  '  all '  in  this
latter  case  remains  a  demand  with  which  we  cannot  comply.
Divergent  ^3.  The  content  of  a  judgment  is  always  a  significant
species.  \^Q2.,  that  is  to  say,  a  recognised  ^  identity  in  differences.
The  varieties  of  judgment  correspond  to  the  forms  which
identity  in  difference  is  capable  of  assuming.

An  identity  in  relation  to  its  differences  may  always  be
regarded  as  a  whole  in  which  they  are  parts.  An  expanse
of  the  same  colour  includes  the  changing  lights  and  several
points  of  space  through  which  the  one  identical  colour
extends ;  the  policy  of  a  government  includes  the  details

^  '  Recognised '  is  necessary  to  restrict  the  description  to  significant  ideas.
For  a  sequence  of  images  in  elementary  reproduction,  such  as  we  ascribe  to  the
animal  mind,  is  an  identity  in  difference,  though  we  do  not  suppose  it  to  be
an  objective  reference,  i.  e.  a  recognised  identity.  See  Bk.  II.  chap.  i.  sect.  3,
The  Reproduction  of  Ideas.


Chap.  I.]  'Analytic' and 'Synthetic'  97

into  which  its  principles  are  developed ;  the  moral  character
of  a  man  is  a  whole  in  which  his  several  acts  of  volition  are
the  variously  dependent  parts.  In  this  wide  sense,  as  a
synthesis  of  differences,  not  as  a  sum  of  units,  the  relation
of  whole  and  parts  is  a  fundamental  relation  of  all  judg-
ment. It  is  only  when  the  differences  or  parts  assume  the
maximum  of  homogeneity,  and  conceal,  so  far  as  is  possible,
the  individuality  of  their  relations  to  the  whole,  that  the
parts  become  units,  and  the  whole  a  total  or  a  sum.  The
relation  of  unit  to  sum  total,  that  is,  of  quantitative  part  to
quantitative  whole,  is  thus  obtained  by  abstraction.  It  is
not  the  complete  natural  relation  of  concrete  identity  and
differences,  but  is  a  device  of  knowledge  which  by  sinking
all  other  aspects  of  a  given  content  is  enabled  to  regard  it
as  a  sum  of  units,  that  is  to  say,  as  a  whole  of  magnitude.

For  this  reason  it  seems  right  to  consider  the  judgments  -j
of  number,  with  the  kindred  judgments  of  magnitude  in
space  and  duration  in  time,  as  belonging  to  an  outgrowth
of  thought  which  diverges  from  the  complete  evolution  of
judgment.  All  these  judgments  begin  as  qualitative,  but
become  quantitative  by  intentional  abstraction,  and  end  in
the  creation  of  ideal  totalities  (abstract  number,  abstract
space,  abstract  time  ^ )  which  we  are  unable  to  think  of  as
complete,  and  therefore  are  debarred  from  treating  as
actual  totalities.  This,  I  may  point  out,  is  a  case  of  the
connection  between  individuality  and  actual  existence,
which  I  spoke  of  under  the  last  head.

y.  Ever>'  judgment  is  both  analytic  and  synthetic.  This  Analytic
'^  would  not  by  itself  be  a  sufficient  ground  for  refusing  to  ^etic.^
employ  these  terms  as  heads  of  classification,  for  it  is  more
or  less  the  case  through  the  whole  of  Logic  that  terms  must
be  employed  to  mark  predominant  aspects  rather  than  ex-
clusive characters.  Nor  do  I  find  a  suflScient  ground  of
objection  in  the  psychological  comment  that  the  judgment
which  adds  a  fresh  predicate  to  a  subject  to-day  must
become  tautologous  or  analytic  if  repeated  to-morrow,  and

'  Cp.  Locke's  Essay,  II.  xiv.  ai,  on  *  Duration.'
VOL.  I.  H


/


si


98  yiidgment  and  Judgment-forms. [Book  i.

that  therefore  it  merely  depends  on  individual  knowledge
and  memory  whether  a  given  judgment  is  synthetic  or  ana-
lytic. Any  conception  of  dominant  quality,  function,  or
essence,  is  enough  to  make  this  comment  futile,  and  without
such  a  conception  it  would  seem  that  science  is  impossible.
It  is  a  superstition  to  suppose  that  the  progress  of  theo-
retical explanation  in  terms  of  general  law  threatens  the
doctrine  of  essence,  form,  or  function.  However  clearly  an
individual  thing  may  be  explained  as  a  section  of  evolution
or  a  meeting- point  of  forces,  there  will  always  be  a  definite
continued  identity  conferred  by  characteristic  form  or
function.  No  explanation  can  destroy  the  actual  relations
of  whole  and  parts  which  form  the  essence  of  everything
that  is  real.  Knowledge  has  quite  enough  fixity  to  give
meaning  to  the  contrast  of  analytic  and  synthetic  judgments
wholly  apart  from  the  progress  of  individual  minds.

The  reason  why  I  no  longer  care  to  lay  emphasis  on  the
antithesis  in  question  is  not  that  it  is  purely  'subjective' —
for  this  is  not  the  case — nor  even  that  it  is  only  a  distinc-
tion of  degree — for  that  is  the  character  of  most  distinctions
in  Logic ;  but  simply  that  it  is  not  a  sufficiently  specific
antithesis  to  be  of  practical  value  in  classification.  I  sup-
pose that  if  the  terms  were  to  be  employed,  we  should  call
those  judgments  analytic  which  attain  to  an  adequate  ex-
planation or  appreciation  of  a  complex  whole.  The  best
instances  might  be  the  definition  or  the  disjunction,  the
equation,  and  judgments  passed  upon  moral  and  aesthetic
value.  In  all  these  cases  we  have  the  whole  completely
given  in  its  parts,  the  identity  in  its  differences,  and  there-
fore we  are  entitled  to  consider  not  so  much  the  nature  of
the  whole  reconstructed,  as  the  exhaustiveness  of  the  re-
construction. But,  as  the  above  instances  show,  adequacy
or  exhaustiveness  exhibits  itself  in  contents  whose  nature
is  wide  apart,  and  therefore  it  has  no  convenient  place  as  a
general  character  in  a  classification.

On  the  other  hand,  as  terms  belonging  to  the  general
theory  of  judgment,  analytic  and  synthetic  are  of  profound


Chap.  I.J  Parts  and  wliole.  99

significance.  I  said  at  the  beginning  of  this  section  that
every  judgment  is  both  analytic  and  synthetic.  This  asser-
tion demands  no  explanation,  if  we  remember  our  account
of  judgment  as  always  involving  identity  in  difference.  But
I  will  attempt  to  illustrate  its  meaning  more  fully.

If  I  say  '  Caesar  crossed  the  Rubicon,'  I  start  with  an
individual  Caesar,  whose  continued  identity  extended
through  a  certain  space  of  time  and  revealed  itself  in  a
variety  of  acts,  and  I  exhibit  his  identity  in  one  of  the  acts
and  moments — its  differences — through  which  it  persisted.
What  I  mean  by  the  affirmation  is  that  he,  the  Caesar^  who
had  before  conquered  Gaul,  and  who  was  afterwards  mur-
dered on  the  Ides  of  March,  displayed  his  character  and
enacted  part  of  his  history  by  crossing  the  Rubicon.  This
is  a  clear  case  of  exhibiting  an  identity  in  difference.  But
the  process  has  inevitably  two  aspects.  On  the  one  hand,
I  analyse  the  individual  whole  that  is  called  Caesar  by
specifying  one  of  the  differences  that  may  be  considered  as
a  part  within  it :  on  the  other  hand,  I  construct  or  make
synthesis  of  the  individual  whole  in  question,  by  exhibiting
it  as  a  whole  that  pervades,  and  absorbs  in  itself,  each  or
all  of  its  differences.  It  is  only  an  individual  whole  that
is  obviously  present  in  each  as  well  as  in  all  of  its  differ-
ences, as  the  individual  Caesar  in  the  act  of  crossing  the
Rubicon.  A  totality  whose  unity  is  incomplete,  such  as
'  all  men,'  is  only  implied  in  each  of  its  differences,  and  is
not  given  as  a  whole  in  anything  short  of  all.  But  this
does  not  alter  the  fundamental  nature  of  assertion.  Every
judgment  exhibits  a  whole  in  its  parts,  and  parts  as  con-
tributory to  a  whole.

Much  has  lately  been  said  of  Kant's  celebrated  instance,
the  equation  7  +  5  =  12.  We  have  here  a  total,  twelve,
which  can  be  compounded  in  a  variety  of  ways — if  we  con-
sider numbers  larger  than  twelve,  and  permit  subtraction,
in  an  infinite  variety  of  ways — and  we  display  this  total  as
identical,  whether  expressed  by  its  place  in  the  series  of

*  Contrast  Lotie,  Logik,  sect.  Sj9^

H  3  tOL-*-^ ^^ Q


lOO  yudgment  and  judgment-forms. [booki.

numbers  (which  implies  one  and  the  simplest  mode  of  its
formation)  or  treated  as  the  sum  of  two  other  totals,  each
of  which  is  expressed  in  the  same  simple  way.  It  is
obvious  that  if  analytic  and  synthetic  were  reciprocally
exclusive  characters,  the  question  *  Is  this  equation  an
analytic  or  a  synthetic  judgment?'  would  be  wholly  un-
answerable. If  12  were  not  the  same  number  as  7  +  5,  the
judgment  would  not  be  true;  if  7  +  5  gained  nothing  by
being  defined  as  13,  the  judgment  would  cease  to  be
a  judgment  at  all.  7  +  5  is  one  of  the  differences  which
constitute  the  nature  of  the  total  1 2,  and  by  constructing  1 2
in  this  way  we  ipso  facto  analyse  it. ^/

The  relation  of  these  two  processes,  or  rather  two  aspects
of  the  same  process,  is  so  fundamental  in  all  knowledge,  being
in  fact  the  relation  which  especially  characterises  knowledge
as  such,  that  I  may  be  pardoned  for  continuing  to  insist  on
it  by  help  of  another  set  of  considerations.  The  notion  of
a  plain  difference  between  taking  to  pieces  and  putting
together  arises  from  actual  operation  on  material  things.
This  origin  of  the  metaphor  involved  in  'analysis'  and
'  synthesis  '  has  reacted  and  still  reacts  injuriously  on  our
conceptions  of  intellectual  processes.  In  mechanical  opera-
tions we  cannot  pull  to  pieces  and  put  together  the  same
thing  by  the  same  act,  and  which  of  the  two  we  can  do  is
determined  by  the  material  handed  to  us.  If  a  thing
is  complete  already,  we  cannot  put  it  together  any  further ;
the  only  alternative  then  open  to  us,  as  between  these  two
processes,  is  to  pull  it  to  pieces;  and  so  vice  versa.  But  this
feature  of  material  operation  cannot  be  transferred  to
thought,  and  for  this  reason,  that  the  essence  of  thought
is  to  show  the  process  in  the  result,  and  exhibit  each  as  n
/  necessary  to  the  other.  Therefore,  if  we  construct  in
thought,  the  materials  out  of  which  we  construct  have  not
lost  their  separateness  when  the  fabric  is  finished ;  the
fabric  as  it  is  still  issues  from  them  as  they  were  ;  if  not,  we
have  dropped  a  link,  and  our  construction  is  unwarranted.
\y  The  synthesis,  one  might  say,  is  based  on  the  analysis ;


Chap.  I.] Synthesis  in  fact  and  in  thought.  loi

but  this  would  ascribe  a  false  priority,  because  the  fragments
supplied  to  us  only  become  an  analysis  as  the  synthesis,
which  relates  them  to  a  whole,  progresses.  Apart  from  the
synthesis  they  are  mere  fragments,  and  therefore  are  not  an
analysis  of  anything.  The  workman  who  puts  together  the
parts  of  a  watch  has  first  the  handful  of  wheels  and  springs,
and  then  the  completed  watch ;  he  cannot  have  both  at
once,  and  in  as  far  as  he  has  one  he  has  not  the  other.
Moreover,  when  he  has  made  the  watch  the  wheels  and
springs  are  together  and  are  not  separate,  nor  are  they  separ-
able consistently  with  the  existence  of  the  watch.  Synthesis
in  this  sphere  is  incompatible  with  analysis,  and  vice  versa.
But  a  man  who  wishes  in  thought  or  calculation  to  construct
any  instrument  out  of  parts  has  a  very  different  task.  Every
element  of  the  handful  of  parts  must  have  its  place  and
functions  clearly  retained  in  the  intelligence  which  constructs
the  whole ;  for  the  whole,  as  a  whole  of  intellectual  synthesis,
exists  no  longer  than  its  parts  are  clearly  apprehended  in
their  relations.  '  Yes,'  it  may  be  said,  *  but  the  distinction
must  remain  that  even  in  thought  you  may  either  begin  by
considering  detached  wheels,  etc.,  and  finding  out  how  they
must  act  in  the  watch,  or  by  looking  at  a  watch  and
detecting,  \\-ithin  its  completed  system,  the  separate  parts
and  their  relations.  The  former  process  is  synthesis,
the  latter  analysis.'

This  is  true  so  far  as  judgment  or  inference  is  an
activity  in  time,  and  includes  within  itself  a  transition  in
time.  In  so  far  as  it  has  this  character,  the  process  of
thought  can  simulate  or  share  the  characteristics  of
material  operation.  But  this  does  not  affect  the  internal
nature  of  judgment,  as  I  have  pointed  out  in  discussing  its
temporal  character.  The  question  is  not  whether  you  begin
with  the  whole  or  with  the  parts,  but  merely  what  sort  of
whole  and  what  sort  of  parts  you  begin  with.  Given  an
escapement  wheel,  I  may  chance  even  to  be  ignorant  that
it  belongs  to  a  watch  at  all ;  but  none  the  less  I  judge  of  it
as  a  part  in  a  whole,  which  whole  I  can  at  first  only  think


102  Judgment  and  Judgment-forms. [bookI.

of,  perhaps,  as  'some  piece  of  mechanism  that  depends  on
a  catch  playing  into  a  dehcately  toothed  wheel.'  The  further
intellectual  construction  of  this  mechanism  and  the  ultimate
definition  of  it  as  a  watch,  is,  according  to  the  views  of  the
passage  just  referred  to,  not  a  transition  from  5  to  P,  but  a
transition  from  the  judgment  s-p  to  the  judgment  S-P.  We
therefore  find  analysis  no  less  than  synthesis  to  be  the  internal
essence  of  every  minutest  section  of  the  judgment  or  inference
in  question.  In  the  same  way,  if  a  watch  is  put  into  my  hand
with  instructions  to  find  out  what  makes  it  go  as  it  does,  I
have  primarily  a  thing  in  space  as  the  given  whole,  and  in-
definite wheels,  springs,  etc.  (which  as  yet  I  cannot  distin-
guish by  position  or  characteristic  shape)  as  given  parts.  No
doubt  in  space  all  the  parts  which  I  shall  need  to  learn  are
given  in  positioji  within  the  whole,  and  so  we  tend  to  describe
the  problem  as  one  of  analysis,  in  contrast  to  the  other  (in
which  I  had  to  find  out  or  imagine  the  position  of  the  parts
in  the  whole)  as  synthesis ;  and  these  titles  serve  well
enough  as  superficial  descriptions  of  certain  cases  to  which
judgment  and  inference  are  applied — not  of  <3:;2j  judgment  or
inference  as  such.  But  the  whole  is  not,  in  the  latter  case
any  more  than  in  the  former,  given  as  an  intelligible  machine,
nor  are  the  parts  given  within  the  whole  of  knowledge
because  they  are  within  the  whole  of  space.  In  other
words,  to  see  the  escapement  wheel  lying  inside  the  watch
does  not '  give '  me  this  wheel  as  a  part  of  a  mechanical
arrangement ;  to  know  it  as  a  part  of  such  a  whole  I  must
understand  it ;  and  in  understanding  it,  i.  e.  in  my  analysis,
perform  the  synthesis  of  the  watch  as  a  definite  mechanical
contrivance.

^  Therefore  not  only  is  every  judgment  both  analytic
Vand  synthetic,  but  it  is  analytic  only  as  far  as  it  is  syn-
1^  thetic.  It  can  only  be  called  analytic  or  synthetic  par
excellence  if,  by  the  same  confusion  that  causes  the  judgment
to  be  regarded  as  a  transition  from  ^  to  /*,  we  consider
the  joint  analysis  and  synthesis  of  one  whole  as  the  ana-
lysis or  synthesis  of  another  j because  in that case  we


Chap.  I.] Analytic  or  Syiithetic par  excellence. 103

seem  to  have  a  fixed  and  given  whole,  and  to  predicate
of  it  nothing  but  parts,  or  vice  versa.  In  this  confusion
there  is  an  element  of  truth.  Though  s  must  become  5
when  p  becomes  /*,  yet  s  has  continued  identity  with  5  and
/  with  P,  and  therefore  the  transition  in  time  from  s-p  to
S-P  does  all  that  could  be  done  by  the  unreal  transition
from  s  to  P.  Present  me  with  a  pattern  s  which  is  a  tissue
of  intersecting  curves  /,  and  when  I  have  analysed  it  into
the  thistle  design  P,  the  pattern  s  is  transformed  to  my  eye
into  a  distinct  and  beautiful  design  6" ;  but  6"  is  the  same
that  was  s,  and  in  that  sense  we  have  connected  s  with  P,
and  we  may  represent  P  as  the  analysis  of  j,  only  not  for-
getting that  it  is  the  synthesis  of  vS"  which  is  the  same  as  s,
and  that  therefore  in  predicating  P  oi  s  we  ipso  facto  trans-
form s  into  5.  And  thus  the  complete  understanding  of  a
watch  as  a  mechanical  system,  expressed  in  the  joint
analysis  and  synthesis  5-P,  may  be  accepted  as  happening
to  involve, /^r  excellence,  either  the  intellectual  analysis  of
the  watch  as  a  given  whole  in  space  s^  or  the  intellectual
synthesis  of  the  watch  out  of  given  separate  parts  in  space
^ij  ^2'  -^3'  ^^^'  '^^^  given  whole,  or  given  parts,  can  be
thus  allowed  to  pass  as  merely  whole,  or  merely  parts,
because  they  are  not  respectively  whole  and  parts  in  the
sense  contemplated  by  the  judgment  S-P^  and  therefore  it
does  not  press  home  their  relation  to  one  another.  The
watch  seems  to  be  from  the  first  a  ready-made  whole,  a
round  thing  s  in  space,  which  can  only  be  analysed,  and
not  constructed,  by  the  judgment  S-P.  But  \\.  is  further
constructed,  not  as  a  round  thing  in  space,  but  as  a
mechanical  system,  by  means  of  that  judgment.


CHAPTER II.

Quality  and  Comparison.

I  NOW  turn  to  examine  specific  types  of  judgment ;  but
in  doing  so,  I  must  beg  leave  to  remind  the  reader  of
the  principle  which  I  have  laid  down  as  governing  any
enquiry  into  a  continuous  development  ^.  What  we  wish  to
master  is  the  nature  of  a  process,  the  scientific  history  of  a
function.  To  do  this,  we  must  of  course  study  and  arrange
its  detailed  manifestations  ;  mere  generalities  are  valueless.
But  we  need  not  be  disheartened  if  our  subdivisions  and
specific  names  are  different  here  and  there  from  those
adopted  by  better  authorities,  nor  even  by  the  possibility
(which  can  hardly  be  absent  from  a  highly  detailed  treat-
ment) that  we  may  misinterpret  some  phase  of  evolution,  or
lay  down  some  inconvenient  demarcation.  If  the  main
problem  is  thoroughly  faced,  and  the  analysis  of  some  chief
typical  forms  accurately  conducted,  the  reader  will  be  in  a
position  to  correct  blunders  and  to  supply  omissions  by  the
light  of  the  knowledge  so  gained.  If  we  can  help  him  to
sound  principles  and  practice  of  morphology,  he  will  make
short  work  of  particular  varieties  of  type.

Judgment,  we  have  seen,  is,  speaking  generally,  the
intellectual  function  which  defines  reality  by  significant
ideas,  and  in  so  doing  affirms  the  reality  of  those  ideas.
I  use  the  term  'define,'  because  to  define  implies  some-
thing given  which  is  to  be  defined ;  and  it  is  an  essential  of
the  act  of  Judgment  that  it  always  refers  to  a  Reality  which
goes  beyond  and  is  independent  of  the  act  itself.
The  Judg-  I.  We  will  now  look  at  the  judgment  in  its  simplest  form,
Quality, vvhich  I  havc  ventured  to  call  the  Judgment  of  Quality,  and

*  Vid.  Introduction,  p.  i6.


Qualitative  Content.  105

which,  with  its  immediate  sequel,  the  Judgment  of  Com-
parison, finds  linguistic  expression  in  the  Interjectional  or
Impersonal  Proposition.

i.  By  Quality  I  understand,  not  all  attributes  without  Meaning  of
distinction,  but  the  unanalysed  content  of  any  idea,  when  ^°^ '  ^"
treated,  in  its  unanalysed  simplicity,  as  a  feature  of  reality.
It  may  be  that  all  qualities  are  capable  of  being  analysed
into  relations  ;  but  for  our  present  purpose  the  question  is
not  whether  a  quality  can  be,  but  whether  it  is  so  analysed.
Even  the  diagrams  familiar  to  us  in  Euclid,  which  exist  for
the  very  purpose  of  being  analysed,  have  each  its  peculiar
look  or  effect,  lopsided  or  symmetrical,  solid  or  slender,
circular  or  bristling  with  angles.  Qualities  of  shape,  how-
ever, are^a  rule  quickly  analysed  into  relations  of  propor-
tion, so  that  the  commonly  cited  phenomena  of  colour  and
sound  give  better  instances  for  our  purpose,  while  percep-
tions which  are  named,  like  softness  and  sweetness,  with
some  reference  to  pleasure  and  pain,  are  the  best  instances
of  all.  It  might  indeed  be  suggested  as  a  definition  of  V
quality  that  it  is  that  aspect  of  any  perception  or  idea  in
which  it  gives  rise  to  pleasure  or  pain.

ii.  The  Qualitative  Judgment  proper  affirms  a  nearly  Judgment
simple  content  directly  of  present  Reality.  An  absolutely  pro^er/*^
simple  content  is  indeed  an  impossibility ;  every  '  red '  or
'  sweet '  or  '  pleasant '  belongs  to  some  context  and  includes
some  differences.  But,  as  I  have  attempted  to  explain  in
the  last  paragraph,  a  qualitative  content  is  very  nearly
simple.  The  context  which  makes  its  difference  is  the
context  for  the  sake  of  which  we  affirm  it,  and  is  thus  pre-
supposed, and  not  itself  affirmed  as  a  further  complication.
If  I  exclaim  '  How  hot ! '  I  do  so  because  the  weather  or  the  >
^room  is  hot,  or  perhaps  if  I  am  feverish,  because  I  am  hot
for  no  obvious  reason.  In  all  these,  no  doubt,  the  content
I*  hot '  belongs  to  something ;  it  is  not  isolated  from  the  varied
|surroundings  of  my  position,  but  exists  in  and  extends  over
some  of  them.  But  I  affirm  it  without  specification,  or
rather  as  a  first  effort  to  make  specification,  of  my  position


io6  Quality  and  Comparison.  [booki.

and  surroundings  in  general,  and  neglect  to  analyse  its  rela-
tions, or  only  analyse  by  implying  that  it  has  some  relation
or  other.

Thus  much  for  the  Predication.  As  for  the  subject  of
a  pure  Qualitative  Judgment,  there  \^  prima  facie  no  assign-
able subject  within  the  judgment.  No  ideas  are  employed
to  limit  the  aspect  of  reality  to  which  the  predication  refers.
The  whole  of  what  is  perceived  at  the  moment,  or  more
probably  some  unspecified  aspect  of  it  or  element  within  it,
is  the  subject,  and  it  is  of  this  that  the  content  is  affirmed.
By  '  unspecified,'  I  do  not  merely  mean  unspecified  in  words
spoken  aloud,  but  undefined  by  any  such  act  of  conscious-
ness as  employs  symbolic  ideas  and  tends  to  call  up  words.
But  if  thus  unspecified,  how  can  the  subject  be  indicated,
limited,  or  selected  ?  I  answer,  simply  by  the  concentration
upon  it  of  perception  or  attention,  the  exclusive  gaze  which
might  be  represented  by  pointing  with  the  finger,  and  which,
though  it  has  limits,  is  definitely  aware  of  none.  In  this
sense,  confining  what  is  '  present  to  perception '  within  the
limits  of  what  more  especially  arrests  attention  and  is
taken  as  '  This '  par  excellence,  we  might  say  that  the  subject
of  the  Qualitative  Judgment  is  always  the  whole  of  what  is
present  to  perception.

The  best  illustrations  of  this  rudimentary  Judgment  are
drawn  from  significant  Interjections,  or  from  significant
phrases  used  as  Interjections.  A  distinction  must  be  obsei'ved
between  the  true  Interjection  ^,  the  outcry  which  relieves  the
urgency  of  feeling,  and  the  affirmation  which  refers  the  con-
tent of  feeling  as  a  quality  to  the  surroundings  that  evoke
it.  The  cry  of  an  animal  is  often  significant  for  us  ;  it  tells
us  what  the  animal  feels,  and  why ;  but  we  do  not  therefore
reckon  it  as  the  expression  of  a  judgment.  What  makes
the  judgment  is  the  idea  that  exists  in  our  minds  and  yet
that  only  has  truth  as  referred  to  Reality.  And  therefore
if  we  doubt  whether  we  have  a  judgment  before  us,  we
should  ask  if  it  is  anything  that  could  intelligibly  be  denied.
^  Cp.  Lotze,  Logik,  sect.  48.


Chap.  II.]  Interjection  and  Judgment.  107

It  is  impossible  to  deny  the  animal's  mere  expression  of  its
feeling ;  and  although  we  may  see  a  reason  for  its  feeling
which  we  know  to  be  an  illusion  (e.g.  if  a  dog  barks  joyfully
in  expectation  of  being  taken  out,  when  he  is  not  going  to
be),  yet  there  is  nothing  which  we  can  deny  unless  we  can
suppose  that  this  illusion  exists  in  the  animal's  mind  as  an
idea  distinguished  from  and  referred  to  reality.  If  we  could
believe  this  to  be  so,  we  should  have  to  admit  that  the
animal  judges.  But  short  of  this,  there  is  nothing  to  deny.
The  dog  sees  me  take  my  hat  and  stick,  he  has  a  set  of
mental  images  connected  with  going  out,  and  he  expresses
pleasure.  I  cannot  deny  that  he  has  the  images  or  that
they  give  him  pleasure.  It  would  be  only  if  he  could  take
these  images  as  standing  for  something  other  than  them-
selves, and  so  distinguish  their  meaning,  a  future  event  in
reality,  from  their  existence,  as  present  images  in  the  mind,
that  anything  could  possibly  arise  which  I  could  intelligibly
deny.  The  ideas  used  in  judgment  must  exist  before  they
can  be  denied,  and  therefore  their  existence  cannot  be  denied,
but  only  the  affirmation  of  their  meaning  ^

Coming  to  human  interjections,  we  might  think  that
■  Alas ! '  characterises  the  present  as  grievous ;  and  it  is
certainly  sometimes  answered,  though  hardly  denied.  But
the  answer,  even  if  it  takes  the  form  of  a  denial,  is  usually
rather  prohibitive  (imperative)  than  negative  ;  though  if  self-
deception  or  hypocrisy  are  suspected, '  alas  I '  may  be  inter-
preted as  '  I  am  sorry,'  and  in  that  sense  denied.  The
distinction  to  be  kept  in  mind  is  here  one  degree  more
subtle  than  in  the  last  case,  for  the  objective  content  of  the
judgment  is  the  fact  of  a  feeling  in  the  mind  of  the  person
who  judges.  Thus  we  have,  if  '  alas !'  is  a  true  interjection,
le  emotion  of  grief  present  in  the  mind  of  the  person,

^  These  remarks  are  made  purely  for  the  sake  of  illustration. I  have  not  the

St  prejudice  against  admitting  that  animals  can  judge,  if  the  admission  can  be

ranted  by  fact,  and  does  not  involve  truncating  the  theory  of  judgment.

smestic  animals  certainly  seem  to  use  the  imperative,  i.  e.  to  insist  on  the

ation  of  their  ideas. Cp.  Bradley,  Principles  of  Logic,  p.  33.


io8  Quality  and  Comparison.  [booki.

which  merely  forces  him  to  utterance  by  way  of  relief.  But
if  it  is  to  be  taken  as  a  judgment,  then  we  have  in  any  case
the  symbolic  idea  of  sorrow,  existing  in  psychical  images,
but  having  its  meaning  beyond  them,  and  a  reference  of
this  meaning  to  the  present  perceived  being  of  the  person
in  question.  And  above  all  this,  if  the  judgment  is  true,
there  must  be,  as  before,  the  actual  felt  emotion  of  sorrow,
though  if  it  is  false,  this  element  of  the  complication  is
absent.  It  is  possible  that  this  peculiar  complication,  of  the
idea  with  the  actual  feeling  behind  it,  is  responsible  for  the
curious  duplication  of  personality  which  is  sometimes  ex-
perienced in  protracted  pain  or  anxiety.  The  person  whom
we  analyse  and  judge  seems  other  than  the  person  who  all
through  the  process  has  the  feelings  which  are  being
analysed,  or  rather  are  forcing  their  disagreeable  peculi-
arities on  our  attention.  '  If  /  were  suffering  so,  how  horrible
it  would  be,'  we  repeat  to  ourselves.  Just  as  the  comple-
mentary image  comes  between  our  eyes  and  the  sun,  so  the
idea  of  our  feeling  comes  as  the  object  of  knowledge  between
us  and  the  feeling  itself,  which  remains  in  the  background
and  resists  our  successive  efforts  to  include  it  in  an  adequate
idea.  The  sufferer  remains  to  us  distinct  from  the  person
whose  suffering  we  conceive  and  affirm.

However  this  may  be,  when  we  come  to  such  quasi-inter-
jectional  expressions  as  '  Bad ! '  '  How  ugly !'  '  Such  pain  ! '
'  Oh  horrible ! '  we  are  unquestionably  dealing  with  judgments.

The  Impersonal  Proposition  is  also  a  suggestive  counter-
part of  the  judgments  in  question,  which  have  even  been
treated  as  Impersonal  Judgments.  But  the  impersonal  form
of  sentence  has  become  in  developed  language  so  purely  a
grammatical  fiction,  that  it  no  longer  illustrates  with  special
appropriateness  any  one  type  of  assertion ;  although  it
exhibits  a  certain  coincidence  with  the  range  of  the  concrete
existential  or  singular  categorical  judgment.

A  few  instances  however  occur  to  us  at  once — and
philology  might  be  able  to  furnish  more — of  impersonal
sentences  that  really  seem  to  have  stood  for  judgments


Chap.  II.]  TJie  Impcrsoual  Proposition.  109

whose  subjects  were  not  especially  designated  by  means  of
ideas,  but  were  accepted  as  merely  the  given  in  perception.
Such  may  be  '  Methought,'  'Him  list,'  'Mir  traiimt'sV
'  Es  trieb  mich,'  '  Taedet,'  '  piget,'  etc.,  '  It  rains,'  '  es  macht
heiss,'  vet.  As,  in  the  plastic  Greek  imagination,  Athene
may  suggest  a  man's  thought,  and  the  actual  Dream  stand
over  him  in  sleep,  so,  it  would  seem,  in  the  beaten  track  of
language,  the  thought  and  the  dream  are  simply  referred  to
'  it '  or  to  '  something ; '  to  the  present  reality  or  to  an  in-
definite element  within  it.  Though  the  formed  verb  pre-
supposes a  distinct  reference  of  ideal  contents  to  real
subjects,  yet  the  habitual  use  of  expressions  in  which  this
reference  is  blunted  and  neutralised,  testifies  to  a  survival,
in  certain  preeminently  obscure  relations,  of  a  rudimentary
type  of  judgment.  This,  I  think,  is  the  only  connection
that  we  can  safely  assume  between  the  Judgment  of  Quality
and  the  Impersonal  Proposition.

The  Qualitative  Judgment  is  the_  germ  and  simplest  case
of  the  Perceptive  Judgment.  Perception  is  a  wide  word,
including,  as  frequently  used,  any  so-called  immediate
apprehension ;  even  that,  for  instance,  by  which  we  are
supposed  to  see  the  necessary  truth  of  one  of  Euclid's
axioms.  But  if  we  are  to  give  the  term  a  distinctive
logical  meaning,  we  should  do  well  to  restrict  it  to  so-called
immediate  apprehension  when  dealing  with  the  portion  of
reality  which  is  in  contact  with  the  individual  through  the
senses.  Perception  thus  defined  deals  primarily  with  what
is  present,  but  extends  it  by  ideas  which  go  beyond  the
present.  WTien  we  recognise  a  man  and  call  him  by  name,
we  are  said  to  'see  who  he  is,'  Le.  to  perceive.  In  this
case  our  perception  is  expressed  by  an  idea  that  goes  a

*  In  Greek,  a  conservative  though  flexible  language, '  I  dreamt,'  is  never,  so

far  as  I  know,  impersonally  rendered :  but  on  the  other  hand,  in  Homer  the

dream  is  personified. The  principle  is  the  same  in  so  far  as  my  dream  is  not

referred  to  me  as  my  act. Indeed  the  coincidence  is  curious  with  the  view  of

{those  who  have  held  that  the  subject  of  an  impersonal  proposition  is  the  content

|Of  the  verb  itself  as  in  '  the  rain  it  raineth  every  day.' It  is  much  the  same  to

i.y  '£s  traiimte  mir '  and  to  say '  A  dream  came  to  me.'


no  Quality  and  Comparison.  [booki.

long  way  beyond  the present and brings in  the man's
entire  personality.

The  Qualitative  Judgment  does  not  differ  from  the  judg-
ment which  recognises  an  individual,  by  being  shut  up
within  a  minute  interval  of  present  space  or  time.  It  is
not  minuteness  of  extension  or  of  duration  that  distinguishes
the  reference  of  this  simplest  case  of  the  perceptive  judg-
ment ;  the  qualitative  aflfirmation  may  deal  with  what  is
really  a  considerable  area  of  space  or  interval  of  time.  The
distinction  is  not  one  of  magnitude,  but  of  definiteness.
There  is  always  a  risk  of  construing  the  absence  of  quan-
titative determinateness  into  determinate  minuteness  of
quantity.  This  is  just  what  we  want  to  avoid.  The  quali-
tative judgment  knows  nothing  at  all  of  duration  or  of
extension,  and  can  have  no  specified  individual  for  its
subject.  It  is  thus  confined  within  the  given  presentation
in  so  far  as  the  universality,  whether  abstract  or  concrete,
is  absent  that  alone  could  extend  it  beyond.  The  Reality
which  is  the  subject  is  the  given  as  given,  not  as  a  universal
that  reaches  before  and  after ;  the  content  of  the  predi-
cation includes  no  negative  element,  summarises  in  itself  no
diverse  manifestations,  and  thus  neither  refers  to  anything
beyond  the  present,  nor  in  any  specific  way  to  the  present
itself.  It  is  attached  to  the  present  by  the  mere  fact  of  its
actual  reference  to  presentation,  not  by  anything  within
its  expHcit  content.  The  first  specification,  the  first  estab-
lishment of  an  identity  that  can  be  called  by  a  name,  is
the  work  of  this  judgment,  and  is  not  presupposed  by  it.
We  must  take  it,  I  think,  after  the  discussions  of  the
Introduction,  that  the  establishment  of  a  name — a  per-
manent identical  symbol  of  a  meaning — must  on  the  whole
have  coincided  with  the  establishment  of  meanings  as  such,
distinct  from  psychical  occurrences,  and  capable  of  being
referred  to  reality.  I  have  attempted  in  the  discussions  in
question  to  qualify  the  rashness  of  this  unverifiable  ^  his-

'  Of  course  there  can  be  verification  by  analogy ;  and  it  is  hard  to  draw  the
line  between  this  and  actual  verification. The  characteristic  cries  of  animals


Chap.  II.]  Analytic  and  Synthetic  Judgment  of  Sense.  1 1 1

torical  allegation,  by  pointing  out  that  the  two  co-ordinate
processes — the  constitution  of  s>'mbolic  ideas  and  of  lin-
guistic symbols — must  be  regarded  as  processes  of  gradual
and  unconscious  adaptation,  widely  differing  from  the
methodical  extension  of  nomenclature  according  to  modem
ideas.  But  the  logical  track  is  the  same,  whether  the  his-
torical evolution  is  quick  or  slow,  conscious  or  unconscious.

Perception  as  above  defined  would  include  two  species
which  have  been  called  respectively  the  'Analj'tic'  and
the  '  Synthetic '  judgments  of  sense.  If  these  distinctions
are  to  be  seriously  treated,  and  we  are  to  speak  of  any
judgments  as  merely  analysing  a  presentation  of  sense,
without  going  beyond  what  is  given  within  it,  then,  I  think,
we  must  identify  the  Analytic  Judgment  of  sense  with  the
Judgment  of  Quality.  It  appears  to  me  quite  idle  to  treat
a  description  of  an  ordinary  scene,  such  as  '  The  blacksmith
is  at  his  forge  mending  the  ploughshare,'  as  a  case  of  a
judgment  confined  within /r^j^///  perception.  Every  element
of  the  description  is  a  concrete  individual,  including  innu-
merable differences,  involving  elaborate  cat^ories,  and
extending  indefinitely  into  past  and  future.  If  ever  there
was  a  constructive  or  synthetic  judgment,  this  is  one.  It
would  surely  be  more  appropriate  to  treat  these  common
perceptions,  which  we  deal  with  lower  dowTi,  as  Synthetic
judgments  of  sense,  because  they  interpret  what  is  given  by
ideal  contents  that  go  beyond  it.  And  then  we  might
reserve  the  title  'Analytic  Judgments  of  sense'  or 'Judgments
of  Quality'  for  the  activities  represented  by  the  Interjectional
and  Impersonal  propositions  of  which  I  have  spoken,  and
the  true  Demonstrative  propositions  of  which  I  shall  speak
below.

The  difficulty  of  identifying  simple  forms  of  judgment  is
intensified  for  modern  reflection  by  the  definite  and  diverse
articulation  of  the  elements  of  modem  speech. The  lan-

and  children  have  significance  for  us,  and  we  cannot  suppose  that  they  do  not
react  upon  the  intelligence  of  those  who  ntter  them.  It  would  be  far  easier  to
understand  how  animals  should  acquire  language,  if,  like  childroi,  they  did  so
in  iaxX,  than  it  is  to  understand  how  they  stop  short  of  it.


112  Quality  and  Comparison.  [booki.

guages  which  embody  the  reflective  thought  of  Europe,  both
ancient  and  modern,  resist  the  expression  of  elementary-
perception  in  two  ways.  First,  for  a  germinal  thought  we
need  a  germinal  word.  But  the  languages  which  mould
our  ideas  have  no  germinal  words.  Every  word,  in  the
language  of  European  culture,  is  a  particular  'part  of
speech.'  That  is  to  say,  it  is  adapted  to  fulfil  some  one
function  in  a  sentence,  whether  substantive,  verb,  pronoun,
or  conjunction,  and,  if  used  alone,  has  an  air  of  incomplete-
ness which  forces  us  to  '  understand  '  supplementary  words.
The  existence  of  the  Judgment  of  Quality  is  but  slightly
corroborated  by  the  fact  that  a  single  word  often  conveys  a
judgment.  Many  such  single  words  are  conventional  sym-
bols for  quite  definite  sentences.  But  the  judgment  of
which  we  have  been  speaking  corresponds  to  a  whole
sentence  in  the  bud,  with  its  differences  unevolved.  How
far  philology  could  furnish  authentic  representations  of  the
sentence  in  such  a  stage — words  which  are  not  '■parts  of
speech,'  but  entire  though  undifferentiated  Muits  of  speech —
it  is  beyond  the  limits  of  the  present  work  to  enquire.
Even  the  verb  of  ancient  Greek  or  Latin,  which  required
no  supplementary  pronoun  to  represent  its  subject,  is  one
degree  more  appropriate  for  the  purpose  than  any  element
of  modern  speech.

And  the  second  difficulty  is  really  a  case  of  the  first.
Most  judgments  are  expressed  by  help  of  a  verb,  and  if  we
employ  a  substantive  or  adjective  alone,  it  urges  us  to
'  understand '  a  verb.  But  a  verb  is  in  our  languages  above
all  things  a  tense  ;  and  for  a  rudimentary  judgment  like  the
judgment  of  Quality,  a  tense  is  exactly  what  we  do  not
want,  least  of  all  the  elaborate  duration-tense  of  the  present
(rpe'xet,  amat,  '  he  is  acting ').  We  want  to  affirm  neither
duration  nor  yet  point  of  time  ;  we  simply  want  to  qualify
the  given  by  a  content,  without  specific  limitation  or  ex-
tension. It  is  true  that  the  logical  present,  the  absolute
present  of  the  universal  judgment,  marks  no  limitation  of
time,  and  it  depends  on  the  nature  of  the  content  involved


Chap.  II.] Subject  in  and  outside  yudgment.  113

whether  universality  of  time  as  an  infinite  series  is  asserted
in  such  a  case.  But  whether  it  claims  universality  in  time
or  by  negation  of  time,  such  a  judgment  implies  the  con-
ception of  time  as  an  abstract  whole  and  is  posterior
to  this  conception,  while  the  reference  of  which  we  are
speaking  is  prior  to  the  origin  of  the  systematic  idea  of
time.

These  properties  of  developed  language, — and  prior  to
developed  language  it  would  scarcely  be  possible  to  have
analytical  reflection, — may  be  compensated,  but  cannot  be
cancelled.  The  fact  that  sometimes  thought  is  behind
language,  and  at  other  times  struggles  to  pass  it  (it  would
be  hazardous  to  complete  the  antithesis  by  saying  that
thought  can  really  outstrip  speech)  is  a  fruitful  source  of
misinterpretation.  Children  learning  to  speak,  or  savages
learning  a  European  tongue,  are  like  the  wizard's  ap-
prentice uttering  a  spell :  they  are  incapable  of  grasping
the  significance  or  controlling  the  effect  of  their  words.
And  all  human  beings  perpetually  oscillate  between  limits,
different  in  every  case,  on  the  scale  of  intelligence ;  for  not
nly  is  the  student's  or  politician's  world  of  thought  very
different  from  that  of  an  illiterate  man,  but  every  man
varies  in  the  level  of  his  intelligence  according  to  momentary
conditions  of  interest  and  capacity.  The  same  difficulties
of  interpretation  which  are  found  by  a  student  in  the  speech
of  a  child  or  Anglicised  savage,  subsist  in  a  less  degree  as
between  every  man  and  every  other,  and  as  between  every
man  and  himself

Up  to  this  point  the  constituent  elements  of  the  Judg-
ment have  been  naked  before  us.  There  was  the  Subject, —
the  actual  contact  in  which  reality  pressed  upon  our  sense-
perception, — and  there  was  the  significant  idea  by  which
we  defined  it.  It  is  this  case  that  affords  the  strongest
support  to  the  view  which  denies  all  meaning  to  the  dis-
tinction of  Subject  and  Predicate,  as  a  distinction  of
elements  within  a  judgment.  The  Reality  to  which  we
ascribe  the  predicate  is  undoubtedly  self-existent ;  it  is  not

VOL.  I.  I


114  Quality  and  Comparison.  [booki,

'merely  in  my  mind  or  in  my  act  of  judgment ;  if  it  were,  the
judgment  would  only  be  a  game  with  my  ideas.  It  is  well
to  make  this  clear  in  the  case  before  us,  for  in  the  later
forms  of  the  judgment  it  will  be  much  disguised.  Still  the
reality  which  attracts  my  concentrated  attention  is  also
within  my  act  of  judgment ;  it  is  not  even  the  whole  reality
present  to  my  perception ;  still  less  of  course  the  whole  self-
existent  Reality  which  I  dimly  presuppose.  The  immediate
subject  of  the  judgment  is  a  mere  aspect,  too  indefinite  to
be  described  by  explicit  ideas  except  in  as  far  as  the  quali-
tative predication  imposes  a  first  specification  upon  it.  This
Reality  is  in  my  judgment ;  it  is  the  point  at  which  the
actual  world  impinges  upon  my  consciousness  as  real,  and
it  is  only  by  judging  with  reference  to  this  point  that  I  can
refer  the  ideal  content  before  my  mind  to  the  whole  of
reality  which  I  at  once  believe  to  exist,  and  am  attempting
to  construct.  The  Subject  is  both  in  and  out  of  the  Judg-
ment, as  Reality  is  both  in  and  out  of  my  consciousness.
The  de-  jjj^  \Yg  have  now  to  consider  a  slightly  more  definite

monstra-  ^

tivejudg-  type  of  judgment,  which  we  may  still  rank  among  the
judgments  of  quality,  although  we  can  detect  in  it  the
beginning  of  a  further  growth.

When  we  say,  '  This  is  hot,'  '  Now  it  is  raining,'  "-Here  it
is  dark,'  the  demonstrative  pronoun  or  particle  designates
the  point  in  given  Reality  to  which  the  affirmed  content  is
to  refer.  The  point  is  designated,  but  seems,  prima  facie,
not  to  be  described.  The  demonstrative  has  a  meaning,
no  doubt,  but  its  meaning  seems  to  consist  of  a  mere  refer-
ence to  what  is  presented  before  perception,  and  therefore
does  not  seem  to  introduce  any  abstract  limitation  that
qualifies  the  given  subject.  Compare,  for  instance,  '  This
is  hot '  with  '  This  metal  is  hot.'  The  latter  judgment  may
possibly  be  met  with '  This  is  not  metal  at  all,'  and  by  such
a  reply  the  judgment  is  cut  in  two,  and  the  more  significant
half  becomes  a  conditional  assertion  whose  condition  does
not  apply  to  the  '  this  '  in  question.  But '  This '  alone  is  on
a  different  footing. You  cannot  say,  '  There  is  no  this  at


ment.


Chap.  II.] Spoce  and  Time  brought  in.  115

all.' There  is  always  a  this^  as  there  is  always  a  that ;  and
the  same  applies  to  here^  there ^  now,  and  then.

One  of  these  demonstratives  indeed  appears  at  once  to
take  us  over  a  boundary.  *  Then '  requires  a  past  or  future
tense  in  the  predication ;  and  in  referring  to  the  past  or
future  we  get  beyond  analysis  of  the  present,  which  is  the
proxdnce  of  the  analj-tic  judgment  of  sense.  The  problem
is  one  of  real  importance,  but  its  point  is  not  where  we  are
most  likely  to  look  for  it.  It  is  not  that  the  Judgment  of
quality  refers  to  a  point  of  time,  and  that  '  then '  takes  us
outside  this  point ;  it  is  that  the  Judgment  of  quality  is  prior
to  the  idea  of  duration,  and  that  we  have  now  introduced  the
idea  of  duration  definitely  into  the  subject.  The  effect  on
tense,  which  happens  to  be  the  vehicle  of  predication,
produced  by  taking  'then'  as  the  subject,  calls  our  at-
tention to  the  fact  that  ever}'^  present  includes  a  past.  The
contrast  of  '  here '  and  '  there,'  not  happening  to  affect  the
verb,  did  not  force  on  our  notice  the  equally  real  uni-
versality of  the  present  in  space.  Every  '  here '  is  made  up
of  '  there's '  as  every  '  now '  is  made  up  of
thus  in  designating  a  given  subject  as  '  now
|)iave  unawares  included  in  the  subject  a  '  then '  and  '  there,'
id  by  introducing  universals  of  space  and  time  have  set

)ur  faces  to  leave  the  region  of  the  qualitative  judgment.
le  demonstratives stand for  ideas,  and  it  is  therefore"

through  ideas  that  in  the  judgments  now  in  question  we

sfer  to  reality. But  the  demonstratives  have  the  pecu-
ity  that  their  application  cannot  be  denied,  as  can  that

)f  a  determinate  idea  such  as  metal,  and  therefore,  though
ley  characterise  the  given  Reality  as  appearing  in  space

>r  time,  yet  they  can  specify  no  nexus,  introduce  no  con-
dition, which  may  be  absent  in  fact,  and  through  its
absence  may  save  the  judgment  from  falsity  by  rendering
it  inapplicable.  If  heat  is  not  present  in  the  '  this '  to  which
it  is  ascribed,  the  judgment  '  this  is  hot '  is  false  without
reserv^e  ;  but  if  to  '  this '  we  add  '  metal '  then  the  absence
in  fact  of  the  condition  '  metal '  makes  the  whole  judgment

I  2


re is  made  up
'  then's.' And 1
'  or  '  here,'  we |


ii6


Quality  and  Comparison.


[Book  I.


The  Judg-
ment of
Com-
parison.


x/


ambiguous  and  inapplicable.  Thus  we  have  in  the  demon-
strative judgment  of  quality,  as  in  the  simple  or  pure
judgment  of  quality,  a  perfectly  categorical  judgment ;
the  Subject  must,  in  its  nature,  exist,  and  the  Predication
must  therefore  be  alleged  to  hold  good  of  actual  existence.
It  is  noteworthy  that  of  this  perfectly  categorical  judgment
we  cannot  say  whether  the  existence  of  the  Subject  is
affirmed  or  presupposed.  Where  we  are  dealing  with  the
given  qua  given,  the  difference  between  affirmation  and
presupposition  has  not  emerged.

2.  The  contrast  between  '  now '  and  '  then '  suggests  to
us  the  consideration  of  such  judgments  as  are  expressed  by
'  Now  it  hurts  less  than  then,'  '  This  is  redder  than  that,'
'  Here  it  is  hotter  than  there.'  The  form  of  these  judg-
ments indicates  as  their  appropriate  title  the  Compara-
tive judgment,  or  the  Judgment  of  Comparison.  They  arise
naturally  out  of  the  Demonstrative  judgment  of  quality,
because,  as  we  saw  in  the  case  of  'now'  and  'then,'  it  is
impossible  to  prevent  the  present  subject  from  revealing
differences  within  itself.  '  This,'  as  more  clearly  defined,
will  display  itself  as  a  part, '  not-that '  within  '  this  and  that,'
'now'  as  a  part  'not-then'  within  'now  and  then,'  'here'  as
a  part  'not-there'  within  'here  and  there.'  The  whole,
when  thus  resolved,  displays  differences  of  quality  between
its  parts,  or  rather  the  given  reality  reveals  itself  as  a  whole
for  the  first  time  when  it  breaks  up  into  parts  united  by  an
identical  but  varying  quality.  Even  if  we  forget  that  the
'  this '  and  '  that '  ever  entered  into  a  single  whole,  yet  the
identical  quality  because  of  which  we  compare  them  contains
in  itself  the  essential  of  the  comparative  judgment,  viz.
the  explicit  recognition  of  difference  in  identity.  '  Redder,'
'  hotter,'  '  less  painful,'  are  terms  that  go  beyond  mere
quality  by  introducing  the  conception  of  more  and  less,  that
is  to  say,  the  beginning  of  quantity.  I  give  instances,  bracket-
ing the  explanatory  words  which  would  be  superfluous  in
presence  of  direct  perception,  and  which  belong  to  a  higher
level  of  judgment  than  that  which  we  are  discussing.  'This


chap.il] Comparison  involves  Quantity.  117

[paper]  is  green,  and  this  [part  of  it]  is  lighter  green  than
that.'  '  Now  [all  to-day]  it  ^  hurts  less  than  it  did  [yester-
day] ;  but  [just]  now  it  hurts  more  than  it  did  [a  moment
ago].'  But  in  cases  like  these  we  are  apt  not  to  notice  that
we  are  predicating  differences  within  a  single  identity,  the
green  paper,  or  the  whole  of  to-day ;  though  we  must  be
aware  that  we  imply  them  in  the  comparison  of  quality.
And  therefore,  having  pointed  out  the  underlying  character
of  such  a  simple  analysis  as  the  above,  I  will  pass  at  once  to
a  case  which  is  one  degree  more  complex,  but  which  dis-
plays the  essence  of  comparison  beyond  possibility  of
mistake.  I  refer  to  the  case  in  which  a  given  whole  of
perception  designated  by  one  demonstrative  has  parts  dis-
tinguished within  it  by  means  of  the  others,  and  differences
assigned  to  it  conditionally  upon  these  distinctions.  There  is
no  difference  of  principle  between  defining '  this,'  within  'this
and  that,'  and  defining  it  within  'here  and  there.'  The
only  advantage  is  that  a  demonstrative  of  another  kind  is
more  readily  taken  as  a  condition,  while  one  of  the  same
kind  is  apt  to  be  understood  as  a  jump  to  a  wholly  new
subject.  We  will  therefore  merely  change  the  farts,  which
might  be  new  and  substantive  wholes,  into  conditions.  '  This
is  redder  now  than  it  was  then.'  '  This  is  hotter  in  this
part  than  in  that'  '  This  [green  paper]  is  lighter  here  [in
this  part  of  it]  than  there  [in  that].'  These  instances  clearly
show  the  primary  datum  revealing  itself  as  a  whole  with
parts  distinct  yet  bound  together  by  a  common  quality.

i.  Let  us  now  examine  the  essential  nature  of  the  com-  Quantita-
parative  judgment  in  one  of  the  above  instances. It  is  not  ^^jg^j,
my  intention  to  enter  upon  the  niceties  of  quantitative  com-
parison at  the  present  stage.

We  will  take  the  instance,  '  This  is  redder  now  than  it
was  then  ; '  or  in  the  simpler  form,  '  This  is  redder  than  it
was.'  We  will  take  the  Predication  first,  and  then  consider
its  reaction  upon  the  subject

^  The  '  it '  in  this  instance  is  on  the  veige  of  introdndng  an  identical  sub-
ject. I  did  not  however  mean  it  to  stand  as  a  definite  subject,  but  merely  as
the  grammatical  complement  of  the  impersonal  verbs.


ii8  Quality  and  Comparison.  [booki.

That  which  is  redder  is  also  red.  The  red  and  redder
are  both  red,  and  yet  differ  from  each  other,  not,  or  not
merely,  in  other  ways,  as  in  time  or  place,  but  in  respect  of
their  redness.  It  has  been  sufficiently  insisted  on  that  there
cannot  be  difference  without  some  identity,  as  for  instance  a
red  and  green  surface  are  identical  in  respect  of  reflecting
light.  But  these,  though  the  same  in  as  far  as  they  reflect
light,  are  not  the  same  in  the  light  which  they  reflect.
There  is  a  break  between  the  two  colours,  considered  as
colours  ^,  which  nothing  can  bridge,  and  the  immediate  per-
ception of  their  discontinuity  supplies  the  terms  which  indi-
cate the  difference  between  them.  The  surfaces  which  are
both  red,  but  one  redder  than  the  other,  are  separated  by
no  such  break.  If  one  changes  into  the  other,  it  does  not
cease  to  display  the  same  quality  that  it  displayed  before.
'  But  a  quality  that  changes,  and  yet  remains  the  same  quality,
has  passed  into  quantity,  which  might  be  defined  as  differ-
ence, not  merely  in  identity  as  its  meeting  point,  but  con-
sisting of  identity  as  its  material.

Thus  the  fundamental  identity  and  difference  of  judgment
are  specified  by  the  comparative  judgment  as  whole  and
parts  in  the  simplest  form  of  that  relation  :  viz.  the  form  in
which  the  whole  differs  from  any  part  by  an  interval  which
consists  of  other  homogeneous  parts.  Parts  in  this  sense
differ  from  units  only  by  lack  of  precise  comparison  ;  but
precise  comparison  is  posterior  to  the  conception  of  a  whole,
of  which  we  are  just  considering  the  first  establishment.
We  do  not  measure  or  count  until  we  know  of  some  totality
that  requires  definition  by  these  processes.

The  reaction  of  comparison  upon  a  simple  subject  indi-
cated by  a  demonstrative,  that  is,  on  a  mere  spot  or  point
upon  which  perception  is  concentrated,  is  an  essential  step
towards  the  recognition  of  an  individual  totality.  The
present  of  space  or  time  is  as  we  saw  in  its  nature  con-

^  It  is  possible  that,  considered  as  amounts  of  light,  red  or  green  may  share
a  continuous  element  and  so  have  quantitative  relation.  If  so,  this  is  another
case  in  point.  For  the  difference  is  then  in  respect  of  the  characteristic  which
forms  the  identity.


Chap.  II.]  Analysts  of  the  Subject.  119

tinuous.  Therefore  the  spot  or  point  on  which  perception
is  fixed,  and  which  we  indicate  perhaps  by  '  this,'  will  un-
doubtedly exhibit  differences  under  analysis.  Such  analysis
is  brought  to  bear  by  the  judgment  of  Comparison.  The
spot  or  point  ^  in  which  a  change  of  degree  is  observed
forces  itself  on  by  that  fact  from  being  a  mere  spot  on
which  the  eye  is  fixed  to  the  first  stage  of  individuality  as
a  synthesis  of  differences.  Change  is  not  necessary  to  this
result,  though  negation  in  some  form  is.  The  observation
of  parts  differing  in  degree  within  the  spot  which  we  have  in
view  is  as  effective  for  the  purpose  as  the  detection  of  suc-
cession within  the  time  which  we  call  '  now.'  The  mere
spot  fixed  by  perception  begins  under  such  analysis  to
assume  the  character  of  a  Thing ;  and  by  a  parallel  process,
the  distinctions  of  Time  and  Space  begin  to  emerge  as
parts  within  homogeneous  systems.

It  is  obvious  that  such  a  point  in  the  evolution  of  thought
would  correspond  to  the  first  distinction  of  Noun,  Finite  Verb
with  Tense  system,  and  the  more  elaborate  spatial  and  tem-
poral adverbs  and  prepositions.  But  it  would  not  be  fair
to  test  the  correspondence  strictly  by  negative  instances.
Language  fits  thought  as  a  very  loose  glove  ;  and  if  it  were
the  case  that  we  could  find  several  languages  in  which  our
familiar  parts  of  speech,  more  especially  the  tense  system,
do  not  exist,  we  should  still  no  doubt  find  that  the  distinc-
tions, whose  origin  we  are  examining,  are  represented  in
some  other  way  than  by  linguistic  signs,  or  are  thought  even
if  not  represented.  It  would  be  ridiculous  to  contend  that
the  Chinese  do  not  think  of  self-identical  and  independent
things,  even  if  it  is  true  that  their  language  has  no  special
class  of  nouns  substantive. Nevertheless,  the  contrast  of

^  It  is  hard  to  escape  the  dangerous  pitfall  of  speaking  as  though  there  were
no  perception  but  sight,  and  therefore  as  if  the  germ  of  the  judgment  were  always
fixation  of  the  look  in  space.  The  focus  of  attention  may  operate  through  any
sense,  and  is  characterised  at  any  moment  by  that  identity  which  the  judgment
makes  explicit.  But  the  identity  is  referred  in  rudimentary  judgment  not  to
a  special  content  as  subject  but  to  what  could  only  be  paraphrased  as  '  That
which  engrosses  my  attention,'  the  present  feeling  which  the  judgment  deter-
mines into  thought.


I20  Quality  and  Comparison.  [booki.

development  between  different  languages  has  or  has  had  its
meaning ;  and  it  appears  to  me  absolutely  impossible  that
a  people  whose  sole  language  was  Hebrew  could  have  had
the  accurate  consciousness  of  time  as  a  system  which  came
easily  to  the  Greeks  and  Romans  of  the  classical  age.  I
believe,  indeed,  that  the  origin  of  the  Aryan  tense-system
is  not  beyond  the  ken  of  philology,  and  that  its  probable
history  reveals  an  evolution  much  like  that  which  has  been
here  suggested — a  transition  from  simple  unspecified  refer-
ence, to  reference  differentiated  by  a  temporal  system.

'This,'  then,  as  the  subject  of  a  continuous  Quality  in-
cluding differences  tends  to  acquire  an  individual  name.
I  have  pointed  out  in  the  Introduction  that  the  process  of
Naming  in  a  world  distinctly  organised  by  knowledge
cannot  be  that  which  belongs  to  the  unreflective  epochs  of
thought.  A  natural  name  must  be  a  petrified  description.
The  linguistic  element  which  stands  for  the  content  of  the
Judgment  of  Quality  is  already  a  name.  And  some  such
element,  in  the  simplest  case  perhaps  that  element  itself,
will  emerge  in  later  forms  as  a  description  of  the  newly  dis-
tinguished individual,  which  in  the  Judgment  of  Quality  is
only  known  as  '  this.'  '  This  red  (leaf)  is  redder  than  it
was.'  And  when  the  individual  is  once  revealed  as  a
whole  with  parts  by  this  judgment  of  Comparison  or  syn-
thetic judgment  of  sense,  the  ascription  of  other  differences
to  it  cannot  but  follow.  It  seems  obvious  that  an  adjectival
appellation,  or  at  least  an  appellation  of  unspecified
grammatical  class,  would  come  first,  and  the  hardening
into  a  substantive  be  a  later  process.  I  incline  to  think  that
the  hardening  of  a  description  by  usage,  and  the  isolation
of  its  elements  by  employment  in  different  judgments,
must  have  been  the  real  and  natural  process  of  naming.
Com-  ii.  It  is  evident  that  judgments  which  assert  distinctions

Spac°and  ^'^  Space  and  Time,  without  proceeding  to  measurement
Time. by  units,  must  be  ranked  among  comparative  judgments,
or,  as  these  might  otherwise  be  called,  judgments  of  con-
tinuous quality. It  is  not  the  business  of  Logic  to  analyse


Chap.  II.] Quality  in  Spatial  Perception.  121

the  means  by  which  the  consciousness  of  extension  or  suc-
cession is  obtained.  Logic  only  deals  with  the  nature  of
such  a  consciousness,  and  not  with  its  psychical  genesis.
But  we  cannot  entertain  a  doubt  that  position  in  Time  V
or  Space  can  only  be  indicated  to  consciousness  by  quali-
tative marks  that  fall  outside  the  content  which  is  per-
ceived as  in  Time  and  Space.  Our  inability,  in  many  or
most  cases,  to  detect  these  marks  by  immediate  observa-
tion (I  have  never  been  able  to  analyse  my  seemingly
direct  perception  of  the  quarter  from  which  a  sound  comes),
cannot,  I  think,  outweigh  the  impossibility  of  showing
other  means  by  which  the  eye  can  judge  distance,  the  ear
direction,  and  the  memory  recal  a  series  in  its  serial  order,
and  no  other.

The  only  logical  importance  of  this  psychological  analysis  ^
lies  in  its  confirmation  of  the  idea,  suggested  by  the  facts  of
language  and  the  very  nature  of  quantity,  that  Space  and
Time  must  imply  qualitative  discrimination  as  an  element
of  quantitative  comparison.  Nearer  and  further  must  be
qualitatively  distinct  spatial  perceptions,  as  red  and  redder
are  qualitatively  distinct  chromatic  perceptions.  Thus,  the
abstract  totalities  of  Space  and  Time  have  their  germ  in
comparisons  effected  by  perception  co-ordinate  with  the
perception  of  continuous  quality  and  of  its  differences.

But  the  demonstrative  judgments  have  forced  upon  our
notice  a  further  and  peculiar  distinction  within  space  and  time
as  continuous  qualities,  which  is  known  in  space  as  difference
of  direction,  and  in  time  as  difference  of  past  and  future.
'  Nearer  "  and  •  further '  are  different  spatial  perceptions  ;
and  it  is  possible  that  'this'  and  'that'  may  be  naturally
equivalent  to  '  nearer  '  and  further,'  as  '  here '  and  '  there '
must  be,  or  must  soon  have  become  ^  But  besides  '  this '
and  '  that '  we  have  in  space  the  distinction  of  '  that '  and
'  that,' '  there  '  and  '  there,'  just  as  in  time  besides  '  now  '  and
'  then  '  we  have  '  then  '  and  '  then ' — a  distinction  which  may

*  Even  if,  prior  to  a  spatial  distinction  recognised  as  snch,  there  may  have
been  a  less  defined  distinction  as  between  '  by  me  '  and  '  not  by  me.'


122  Quality  and  Comparison,  [booki.

apply  to  points  equally  removed  in  past  and  future,  and
therefore  cannot  be  reduced  to  quantity,  i.  e.  degree  of
remoteness.  '  That '  and  '  that,'  '  there '  and  '  there,'  imply
no  difference  of  remoteness,  nor  indeed  do  '  this  '  and  '  that '
necessarily  do  so.

All  these  may  just  as  well  mean  on  the  right  hand  and
on  the  left  as  nearer  and  further.  They  must  indeed  be
comparable  in  distance,  but  it  need  not  be  distance  that
furnishes  the  distinction  between  them.  With  other  qualities
J  the  case  is  different. There  cannot  be  two  different  reds

that  match  ;  all  reds  that  match,  i.  e.  that  are  '  equal,'  are
the  same.  And  if  there  can  be  two  or  more  different
musical  sounds  that  have  the  same  pitch,  this  is  because  the
distinction  between  them  is  one  of  kind,  not  of  simple
quality,  because,  that  is,  they  are  composite  perceptions
which  are  estimated  with  reference  to  one  element  within
them  taken  as  dominant  or  essential.

Thus  it  seems  that  (i)  Space  and  Time  appear  in  the
germ  as  mere  qualities  whose  continuity  is  displayed  in  the
judgment  of  comparison  like  that  of  any  other  qualities.  If
apprehension  of  Space  and  Time  really  depends  on  '  local '
and  '  temporal  signs,'  we  must  suppose  that  the  peculiar
definite  externality  which  characterises  extension  could
only  appear  by  degrees,  and  that  perception  must  have
been  transformed  from  perception  of  contents  plus  local
signs,  to  perception  of  contents  arrayed  in  extension  by
means  of  local  signs,  that  the  logical  character  of  spatial
perception,  its  continuity  and  homogeneous  differences,
must  have  been  present  from  the  first  in  any  system  of
apprehension  which  could  develope  into  our  spatial  world.
The  judgment  of  continuous  quality  admits  of  this.  And
(2)  the  distinctions  which  first  present  themselves  within  a
given  spatial  or  temporal  perception  are  not  simply  and
solely  differences  of  quantity,  though  in  time  more  so  than
in  space,  and  in  both  capable  of  quantitative  expression.
They  are  more  analogous  to  differences  of  kind.  We  must
therefore take  the spatial  and  temporal  demonstratives,


Chap.  II.] Qualities  as  such  are  disparate.  123

apart  from  explicit  quantitative  comparison  in  space  and
time,  as  in  themselves  comparative  contents  involving
continuous  quality.

The  divergence  from  the  main  progression  of  the  judg-
ment, by  which  space  and  time  are  erected  into  totalities
having  a  special  structure  of  their  own  and  a  peculiar  mode
of  existence,  must  be  taken  as  beginning  with  the  resolution
of  a  given  '  now  '  and  '  here '  in  the  judgment  of  comparison.
In  this  resolution  we  have  the  two  grades,  corresponding  to
distinctions  of  direction,  or  to  the  distinction  of  past  and
future,  and  to  quantity  respectively;  first  that  in  which  'this'
and  'that'  may  be  e.g.  to  left  and  right  (not  nearer  and
further),  where  the  spatial  comparison  is  implied  rather  than
expressed,  corresponding  to  the  judgment, '  This  is  red,  and
that  is  green ;'  and,  secondly,  that  in  which  a  true  spatial  com-
parison is  introduced  into  the  content,  as  in  '  This  is  nearer
than  that,'  which  is  analogous  to  '  This  is  redder  than  that.'

iii.  Under  the  head  of  Comparison  it  is  usual  to  treat  of  So-called
like  and  different  in  kind,  as  co-ordinate  with  more  and  less.  Q^^itative

Com-

But  it  is  to  be  observed  that  such  a  co-ordination  is  not  parison.
accurate. Mere  qualities,  as  such,  are  disparate,  incom-  ^

parable  with  each  other.  The  judgment  of  quality  pure
and  simple,  as  we  have  seen,  excludes  comparison.  This
is  red,  this  is  black,  this  is  golden,  this  is  sweet,  this  is  sour.
These  are  successive  and  isolated  judgments  of  quality;  and
the  semblance  of  comparison  which  they  now  bear  is  due
exclusively  to  the  advanced  point  of  thought  at  which
language  places  us  to  begin  with.

Comparison  of  degree,  as  we  have  seen,  includes  difference
or  elementary  negation  within  the  limits  of  a  single  quality,
but  the  differences  themselves,  in  regard  to  the  aspect  which
makes  them  distinct,  remain  disparate  or  incomparable.
In  other  words,  every  part  of  a  quantitative  whole  is  dis-
tinguished by  a  peculiar  quality  as  well  as  united  with  the
rest  by  an  identity  of  quality.  Every  shade  of  red,  besides
being  a  degree  of  red  in  general,  is  also  a  particular  hue
and  produces  a  distinct  impression. Every  perception  of


124  Quality  and  Comparison.  [booki.

warmth  is  qualitatively  peculiar,  and  often  it  is  not  without
an  efifort  that  we  can  recognise  the  character  in  respect
of  which  it  can  increase  or  decrease.  Every  inch  in
a  yard  measure,  every  cannon  ball  in  a  heap,  is  thus
distinguished ;  and  if  it  were  not  so,  the  parts  would  have
no  stability  and  the  quantitative  whole  would  cease  to
exist.

We  therefore  are  driven  to  conclude  that  quantitative
comparison  is  not  prima  facie  co-ordinate  with  qualitative,
but  rather  stands  in  its  place  as  the  effect  of  comparison  on
quality,  which  so  far  as  comparable  becomes  quantity,  and
so  far  as  incomparable  furnishes  the  distinction  of  parts
essential  to  the  quantitative  whole.  It  is  with  this  latter
aspect  in  which  qualities  are  incomparable  that  qualitative
comparison  as  such  must  be  connected.  It  is  thus,  prima
facie,  comparison  of  the  incomparable.  Any  two  shades
of  red,  regarded  as  shades  of  red,  are  respectively
more  and  less.  But  they  must  also  be,  as  we  have
insisted,  different  reds,  and  if  regarded  simply  thus  are
pronounced  incomparable  as  a  result  of  comparison.  If
we  pass,  as  we  can,  by  slow  transitions,  along  the  complete
solar  spectrum,  comparing  each  colour  with  that  which
formed  our  starting-point,  we  shall  arrive  first  at  differences
which  may,  and  then  at  differences  which  must,  be  thus
regarded.  The  difference  between  red  and  green,  for
instance,  is  not  to  ordinary  perception  a  difference  in  the
same  quality ;  and  if  it  can  become  measurable,  can  only
become  so  by  reference  to  an  identical  quality,  such  as
brightness  of  illumination,  which  falls  outside  the  pecu-
liarities of  red  and  green  as  such.

I  believe  that  it  is  futile  to  attempt  the  measurement  of
difference  except  in  respect  of  a  continuous  quality.  And
the  mere  afifirmation  of  difference,  without  the  attempt  to
measure,  appears  to  me  absolutely  devoid  of  meaning.
The  mere  judgment,  'These  two  colours,  —  these  two
sounds, — or,  these  two  perceptions  (a  colour  and  a  sound),
are  different,'  is  an  imperfect  and  unreal  judgment,  which


Chap.  II.]  Quality  and  Kind.  125

in  this  form,  and  apart  from  a  meaning  which  I  shall
explain  below,  is  as  I  believe  to  be  found  nowhere  but  in
logical  text-books.  It  may  best  be  considered  as  an
incomplete  quantitative  comparison,  in  which  the  parts  are
distinguished,  but  their  place  in  a  continuous  whole  has
proved  impossible  to  determine.  In  this  sense,  the  mere  ^
judgment  of  difference  would  mark  the  initial  effort  of
quantitative  comparison.  Such  a  relation  is  illustrated  by
the  well-known  fact  that  qualitative  difference,  e.g.  between
two  musical  notes,  is  perceptible  before  its  quantitative
nature  (their  relative  pitch)  is  ascertained.  Such  a  judg-
ment of  qualitative  difference  may  be  regarded  as  a  first
determination  of  quantity ;  for  its  point  is  merely  to  deny
identity  of  quality,  and  in  matters  of  simple  quality  to  be  v
identical  is  to  be  equal  and  vice  versa.  In  this  sense  the
judgment  of  qualitative  difference,  such  a  judgment  as  we
make  when  we  see  that  two  colours  do  not  match,  is  an
aspect  of  the  initial  stage  of  quantitative  comparison.

But  another  judgment  of  sameness  or  difference,  which  it
is  almost  impossible  to  avoid  confusing  with  the  above,  has
its  true  place  in  classification  and  analogical  inference,
and,  if  explained  as  mere  qualitative  comparison,  is  an
unreal  fiction.  Such  judgments  are  : — '  These  two  instru-
ments are  not  in  tune ' ;  '  Gladstone  and  Chamberlain  are
very  different  men ' ;  '  That  victory  is  uncommonly  like
a  defeat ' ;  '  The  globe-flower  is  just  like  a  hellebore,  only
it  is  yellow.'  Here  we  are  not  speaking  of  an  immediate
qualitative  identity  and  difference,  but  of  essential  and
dominant  qualities  or  rather  attributes,  in  other  words  of
differences  valued  by  a  presupposed  standard  or  purpose.
The  idea  of  a  standard  involves  the  idea  of  kind,  and  kind
goes  beyond  quality.  Therefore,  we  come  to  a  conclusion
which  I  think  frees  us  from  much  sham  accuracy  and
pretended  precision.  The  judgment  of  difference  is  never  ^
made  apart  from  a  standard  of  difference.  The  apparent
exception,  when  such  a  judgment  denies  identity  of  quality,
is  simply  the  first  step  in  quantitative  comparison,  and  it  is


126  Quality  and  Comparison,  [Booki.

by  quantitative  comparison  that  precision  must  in  such  cases
be  obtained.  But  the  class  of  judgments  from  which  our
later  instances  are  drawn  do  not  refer  to  identity  oi  quality^
but  identity  of  kind.  They  presuppose  classification,  and
affirm  difference  or  likeness  with  reference  to  this  classifi-
cation. All  attempts  therefore  to  introduce  a  quantitative
estimate  into  these  generic  judgments  of  difference  are
founded  on  a  confusion  between  judgments  of  quality  and
judgments  of  kind,  on  an  attempt,  that  is,  to  reduce  the
latter  to  the  former.  This  does  not  deny  that  the  latter
may  imply  the  former  in  addition.

It  is  a  futile  introduction  of  psychology  into  logic  to
speak  of  measuring  difference  by  the  difficulty  or  duration
of  a  psychical  transition ;  the  measure  of  the  difference
is  what  we  mean  by  the  difference,  and  what  we  mean
by  it  depends  on  the  series  or  classification  within  which
we  affirm  it.  Apart  from  such  a  standard  the  judg-
ment of  difference  is  nonsense ;  it  becomes  like  '  The  soul
is  not  square.'  How  idle  to  inform  us  that  Gladstone  and
Chamberlain  are  different !  How  superfluous  to  affirm
that  one  plant  is  like  another !  Any  assertion  like  these,  if
it  is  not  referred  to  a  ground  of  distinction,  in  these  cases
to  political  and  botanical  classifications  respectively,  is  as
destitute  of  content  as  a  bare  negation.  The  instance  of  two
instruments  pronounced  out  of  tune  with  each  other  may
seem  not  to  be  in  place  under  this  head,  and  to  be  a  judgment
of  true  qualitative  comparison.  I  inserted  it  expressly  to
indicate  the  line  of  demarcation.  Different  colours  are
such  as  do  not  match,  i.e.  are  not  discernible  in  simple
quality.  But  in  comparing  musical  notes  we  have  not  to
do  with  simple  quality  ■',  but  with  dominant  quality  ^,  i.e.
kind.  ^A  note'  is  identified  by  its  pitch,  and  different
notes  are  sounds  differing  in  pitch.  Therefore  in  pro-
nouncing notes  to  be  different  we  do  not  merely  deny  that
they  are  indiscernible ;  we  deny  more  than  this,  we  deny

1  I  use  quality  in  the  logical  sense,  in  which  it  includes  timbre  (musical
quality),  pitch,  and  loudness.


Chap.  II.]  Kind  is  Essential  Quality.


127


that  they  are  indiscernible  in  their  dominant  quality,  viz.
their  pitch.  That  the  pitch  is  itself  a  quantitative  attribute
makes  no  difference  ;  for  it  is  a  quantitative  attribute,  which
has  become  cJiaractcristic,  and  therefore  stands  logically  in
the  same  position  as  any  other  basis  of  classification.

In  short,  then,  we  must  not  confuse  quality  and  kind.
Kind  is  dominant  or  characteristic  quality  and  involves
a  series  of  ideas  which  we  have  not  yet  discussed.  And
whereas  comparison  in  respect  of  simple  quality  is  prior  to
and  absorbs  itself  in  quantitative  comparison,  comparison
in  respect  of  kind  is  subsequent  to  quantity  and  involves
other  ideas.  An  isolated  judgment  ofjdifference  can  have
no  meaning  except  as  the  first  stage  of  quantitative  com-
parison^ the  negation  of  identity  ( =  this  and  that  are
unequal).  The  attempt  to  assign  gradations  to  the  mere
judgment  of  difference  rests  on  a  confusion  between  quality
and  kind,  each  of  which  has  in  itself  an  adequate  and
objective  principle  of  measurement  independent  of  psychical
transition,  and  in  the  case  of  kind,  incapable  of  reduction  to
quantity.


CHAPTER III.

Measurement — Quantity  and  Proportion.

Measure-  i j,  MEASUREMENT  is  the  equation  of  any  whole,  by  com-
ment and  .  . ,  ^  . ,  .  -^
Individu- parison^  to a numerical  aggregate  of  determmate  parts.

ahty.  'Yhe  parts  may  be  determinate  through  reference  either

outside  or  within  the  whole  to  be  measured;  but  if  the

reference  falls  within  it  (as  when we  say  a  man's  whole

height  is  so  many  times  the  length  of  his  head)  the  whole

must  be  complex  and  contain  subordinate  systems. The

reference  may  also  take  the  shape  of  relations  which  are

not  purely  quantitative  (as  a  tone  or  semitone  in music,

apart  from  its  physical  cause,  is  simply  a  difference  between

two  peculiar  sounds) ; but  in  that  case  we  are  passing  out

of the region of pure measurement. Some reference,

however,  there  must  be  in  measurement  beyond  that  to

J the  simple  whole which is to be measured. It is no

measurement  of  a  line  to  divide  it  into  loo  or  looo  equal

parts. We  must  know  what  else  they  are  parts  of,  besides

being  parts  of  the  line  to  be  measured. The  length  of  a  line

is  measured  when  it  is  equated  to  feet  and  inches— to  the

length,  that  is,  of  some  actual  piece  of  metal  agreed  upon

as  a  standard — the  pitch  of  a  note  is  measured  when  we

have  determined  its  place  in  the  scale  or  the  number  of

vibrations  per  second  that  enter  into  it ;  the  specific  gravity

of  a  substance  is  measured  when  we  have  stated  the  ratio

of  its  weight  to  that  of  an  equal  volume  of  distilled  water  at

a  certain  temperature. Here  a  verbal  difficulty  may  be

cleared  away. If  the  weight  of  the  substance  before  us  is

twelve  times  that  of  water,  our  definition  of  measurement

applies  straightforwardly. We  equate  the  whole  substance

in  respect  of  its  weight  to  a  numerical  aggregate  of  twelve

parts,  each  of  which  is  determined  by  equation  to  a  known


Chap.  Ill] Measurement  and  Comparison.  129

volume  of  water  ^.  But  if  the  substance  is  yV  of  the
weight  of  water,  we  seem  not  to  be  breaking  up  the
whole  which  is  being  measured  into  an  aggregate  of  parts,
but  to  be  representing  it  as  a  part  within  another  aggre-
gate. This  is  a  mere  matter  of  practical  convenience.
The  equation  of  a  whole  to  a  numerical  aggregate  is  as
much  involved  in  the  expression  ^  (a  twelfth  part),  as  in
the  expression  'twelve  times.'  In  measuring,  we  bring
two  terms  into  precise  equation,  and  the  entire  relation  of
whole  and  part  is  involved  in  each.  The  numbers  in  which
the  same  part  enters  into  two  or  more  wholes  are  in  every
case  the  organon  of  measurement.

i.  Measurement  is  to  begin  with  Simple  Measurement,  Simple
resulting  in  pure  Quantity.  mST"^^

Simple  Measurement  consists  in  judging  of  a  perceived  Qnantity.
object  that  it  is  a  whole  containing  a  certain  number  (one  *-
or  more)  of  a  determinate  unit.  Measurement  is  thus  a
development  of  comparison,  which  is  the  first  revelation  of
the  unit,  or  equal  part — the  result  of  successful  equation —
within  continuous  quality.  Simple  qualitative  identity,  for
instance,  such  as  that  of  colours  which  match,  may  be  set
down  to  comparison  or  to  measurement  according  as  it  is
or  is  not  ideally  referred  to  a  scale  of  degrees.  In  pure
qualitative  identification  we  have  sometimes  no  idea  of
possible  degrees,  and  such  identification  must  be  regarded
as  the  earliest  germ  at  once  of  measurement  and  of  com-
parison. Thus  '  The  taste  of  this  is  the  same  as  the  taste  n/
of  that '  is  mere  identification  or  comparison  if  it  only
means  that  the  tastes  of  the  two  things  are  indiscernible,
but  is  measurement  if  we  are  considering  whether  the
one  taste  is  sweeter  than  the  other. We  have  seen  that

'  Practically  of  course  we  do  not  heap  np  volomes  of  water  in  cme  scale  till
they  balance  a  substance  in  the  other  scale.  The  process  employed  is  equivalent
to  weighing  first  the  substance,  and  then  the  water  which  it  displaces,  against
known  standard  weights,  and  taking  the  two  results  as  a  ratio ;  i.  e.  by  help  of
the  balance  we  state  the  two  things  to  be  compared  in  terms  of  an  aggregate
of  already  known  and  determinate  parts ;  one  thing  will  =  1 2  oz.  and  the  other
I  oz.

VOL.  I.  K


130  Quantity  and  Proportion.  [booki.

qualitative  identification  is  only  the  germ  of  quantitative
comparison,  and  that  the  two  are  not  co-ordinate  ^.

How  is  the  unit  fixed  ? It  is  fixed,  as  we  have  seen,  by
equation  or  identification  of  it  as  the  same  throughout  the
various  wholes  or  aggregates  into  which  it  enters  as  a  part.
This  process  of  equation  tends  to  repeat  itself  ad  infinitum.
Pure  quantity  is  an  essentially  relative  attribute. Hence
in  Simple  Measurement  the  paradox  of  knowledge  takes
an  extreme  form,  for  every  measurement  presupposes  and
provokes  others  ad  infinitum. The  tables  of  weights  and
measures  of  our  arithmetic  books  are  enough  to  illustrate
this. They  are  long  lists  of  equation  after  equation,  by
means  of  which  all  objects  that  are  measured  or  weighed
are  ultimately  equated  with  some  single  portion  of  matter
or  relation  in  nature  ^,  arbitrarily  selected  as  a  basis  of  the
division  and  multiplication  that  facilitate  comparison. The
substitution  of  a  determinate  physical  motion  supposed  to
be  constant  for  a  particular  portion  of  matter  makes  no
change  of  principle  so  long  as  it  is  taken  qua  a  term  in
a  fixed ratio or  mere ratio,  and not  qua  a  term  in  a
generalised  ratio  or  proportion. But  in  fact  the  two  ideas
are  at  bottom  inseparable. Everything  fixed  is  qua  fixed,
potentially  generalised. The  wave-length of  what is  a
particular  red  to  a  normal  eye  does  not  vary  (so  far  as  I
know),  but  this  is  so  to  speak  an  accident ;  and  if  we  take
in  non-normal  eyes,  all  that  is  certain  is  that  this  wave-
length preserves  its  place  in  the  colour-series  above  some
wave-lengths  and  below  others. Its  fixity  for  red  judged
by  the  healthy  eye  has  however  caused  it  to  be  suggested
for  an  unit  of  length. Weight — the  relation  of  a  portion
of  matter  said to  weigh i lb.  to all other  portions of

1  p.  1 23  ff.

"^  Such  as  a  fraction  of  the  earth's  circumference.  But  any  such  relation  is
likely  to  be  variously  determined  at  different  times,  while  it  is  not  convenient
to  alter  the  basis  of  a  system  of  measures.  I  believe  that  practically  all  systems
of  measures  depend  upon  the  actual  material  standard,  which  as  a  mere  piece
of  metal,  not  capable  of  being  tested  by  any  general  relation  in  nature,  must  be
reckoned  as  a  purely  arbitrary  standard.


Chap.  III.]  Generalised  Measurement.  131

matter  in  respect  of  their  gravity — becomes  a  generalised
relation  or  proportion  the  moment  we  consider  distance  from
the  earth's  centre.  '  i  lb.  at  earth's  surface  :  2  lbs.  at  earth's
surface  : :  i  lb.  five  miles  up  :  2  lbs.  five  miles  up.'  When
a  thing  is  described  generically  by  the  number  of  its  own
parts  this  is  more  obvious,  for  the  ratio  is  then  ipso  facto
generalised  by  the  mere  recurrence  of  individual  things.
But  simple  measurement  of  perceived  objects  gives  simple
ratios  expressed  in  singular  judgments  with  external  refer-
ence. As  the  judgment  becomes  general  the  ratio  becomes
first  formally  proportional,  because  the  ratio  is  generalised
as  against  instances  in  which  it  occurs,  and  then  really
proportional,  because  this  generalisation  comes  to  apply  to
cases  in  which  the  corresponding  terms  are  different  mag-
nitudes. The  ratio  between  measures  *  is  formally  propor-
tional ;  that  between  weights,  explained  as  above,  is  really
proportional.

ii. Thus measurement necessarily becomes complex,  Complex
ideal,  or  mediate :  i.e.  in  short  generalised. In  this  aspect  measure-
it  first  appears  within the  singular  judgment,  and then  ?'^*-
breaks  loose  from  it.  tion.

Every  relation  established  by  measurement  is  a  ratio,  or
relation  between  magnitudes ;  and  as  incommensurable
magnitudes  are  for  logic  a  contradiction  in  terms,  every
ratio  can  be  expressed  in  so  far  as  it  is  a  true  ratio
(in  so'  far  as  its  terms  are  magnitudes)  by  a  relation
between  two  numbers.  Number  refers  the  relation  to  an
abstract  whole  of  quantity,  and  therefore  determines  the
identity  of  the  relation  by  its  place  in  a  self-identical
articulate  system.  But  the  effect  of  such  expression  is
to  generalise,  while  the  results  of  simple  measurement
can  warrant  no  generalisation,  and  therefore  are  not  spoken
of  as  a  ratio,  and  often  not  reduced  to  their  simplest
numerical  expression. Nothing  would  be  gained  by  saying

*  By  ultimate  refinement,  this  too  is  really  proportional.  Suppose  all
measurable  things  to  expand  and  contract  preserving  their  ratios,  we  could
never  know  it.  Given  a  foot-rule,  we  could  still  construct  a  yard-measore,
however  the  absolute  length  of  the  foot-rule  might  vary.

K  2


132  Quantity  and  Proportion.  [booki.

that  a  given  plant  5  ft.  high  had  a  height  which  was  to  i  ft.
as  5  :  I,  nor  by  judging  that  this  piece  of  lead  is  to  this
piece  of  gold  in  weight  as  11  to  19.  The  ratios  so  affirmed
would  still  be  destitute  of  general  significance,  would  be
mere  facts,  alleged  of  a  particular  reality  present  in  per-
ception, and  would  therefore  gain  nothing,  but  might  lose
their  truth,  by  abstract  expression.
^  But  thought  always  tends  to  coherence  and  necessity,

and  we  cannot  even  employ  a  determinate  idea  to  assist  us
in  pointing  out  an  object  of  perception  without  creating
the  impression  that  the  ideal  content  which  we  use  will
be  characteristically  connected  with  the  content  of  our
predication.  When  this  occurs  in  the  judgment  of  mea-
surement, ratio  passes  into  proportion ;  that  is  to  say,  the
ratio  enunciated  as  true  of  the  particular  given  subject
becomes  a  universal  rule  applicable  to  all  variations  com-
patible with  the  determinate  idea  which  conditions  the
subject.  Such  measurement  is  complex,  because  the  unit
on  which  it  is  based  is  no  longer  single  and  fixed,  but
variable  in  absolute  magnitude,  though  determined  by  a
condition.  It  is  ideal,  because  no  longer  a  mere  fact  of
sense-perception,  but  enunciated  as  flowing  from  a  content
intellectually  defined.  It  is  mediate,  because  the  reference
to  reality  which  constitutes  this  as  every  judgment^  is  not
direct,  but  has  to  pass  through  a  condition  before  it  can
attach  to  reality.

Therefore  if  we  take  one  of  the  above  simple  measure-
ments, and  even  without  removing  the  demonstrative  '  this,'
insert  a  determinate  condition  into  the  content,  we  shall
find  that  the  whole  affirmation  is  greatly  modified  in  its
nature.  Let  us  judge  that  'This  piece  of  lead  and  this
piece  of  gold,  being  of  the  same  volume,  are  found  to  be  in
weight  as  11  :  19.'  Then  we  at  least  suggest  the  erection
of  the  ratio  11:19  into  a  law  of  proportion  :  'The  weights
of  equal  volumes  of  lead  and  of  gold  are  as  11  to  19.'

So  again,  we  may  have  simply  counted  the  leaves  on
a  plant-stem,  going  round  the  stem  in  the  same  direction,


Chap.  III.]  Characteristic  Ratio.


aa


till  we  find  a  leaf  immediately  over  or  under  that  from
which  we  began.  If  we  do  not  know  that  these  ratios  are
characteristic,  or  if  we  suspect  the  plant  to  have  been
injured  so  as  to  make  its  ratio  undiscoverable,  we  may
simply  judge,  'On  this  plant  I  find  five  leaves  in  going
twice  round  the  axis.'  Whereas  if  we  insert  the  name  of
the  plant  or  tree,  and  use  an  abbreviated  expression  for  the
ratio  of  divergence,  we  at  least  suggest  the  idea  of  a  cha-
racteristic law  of  the  leaf  spiral.  '  This  oak  shows  a  diver-
gence of  I '  (i.  e.  the  sixth  leaf  is  directly  over  the  first,  and
in  counting  from  i  to  6  you  have  gone  twice  round  the
stem).  It  is  obvious  that  here  generalisation  and  cha-
racteristic attribution  have  begun.  Granting  that  we  have
not  yet  any  assertion  about  the  genus  oak,  or  even  about
the  species  in  question,  for  the  '  This '  hinders  such  an
interpretation,  yet  we  unquestionably  are  awakening  to  the
expectation  that  the  tree  before  us  will  present  the  ratio  in
question  in  all  its  different  parts  and  from  time  to  time,  and
to  the  problem  whether  and  how  far  we  may  drop  the
'  This '  which  indicates  particularity.  When  the  '  This  '  is
dropped  the  judgment  ceases  to  be  singular,  unless  it  is
attached  to  a  proper  or  in  some  way  individual  name.
Whether  and  how  far,  failing  these  refuges,  it  ceases  to  be
categorical  and  becomes  hypothetical,  or  how  far  indi-
viduality continues  or  even  revives  after  the  loss  of  particu-
larity, as  a  factor  in  the  evolution  of  thought,  is  a  question
which  will  frequently  occupy  us  in  the  sequel.

Characteristic  ratio,  or  proportion,  may  refer  to  standards
external  to  the  whole  which  it  qualifies,  or  to  relations
within  that  whole.  In  the  former  case  the  qualitative
quantity  remains  subject  to  relativity  and  eked  out  by
equations  ad  infinitftm,  hardly  less  than  in  the  case  of
simple  measurement.

In  any  table  of  specific  gravities,  for  instance,  we  have
a  number  of  substances  each  severally  characterised  by  the
ratio  of  its  density  to  that  of  distilled  water  at  a  temperature
of  about  39.1**  Fahrenheit. Now  in  the  first  place,  each  of


134  Quantity  and  Proportion.  [booki.

these  several  ratios  may  obviously  be  regarded  as  a  propor-
tion in  so  far  as  it  applies  without  variation  to  any  volume
of  the  same  substance,  in  the  sense  that  the  weight  of  any
volume  of  any  substance  is  to  the  weight  of  the  same  volume
of  water  ^  in  the  ratio  of  the  specific  gravity  of  the  sub-
stance. Proportion  is  defined  as  'equality  of  ratios' ;  and
equality  of  ratios  obviously  is  identity  of  the  ratio,  and  exists
between  every  ratio  and  all  cases  in  which  it  applies.

But  in  the  second  place,  although  in  these  cases  we  have
proportion,  yet  we  have  also  relativity  ad  infinitum.  Select
the  specific  grayity  of  some  one  body,  and  suppose  that  of  all
the  rest  except  water  itself  to  be  erased  from  knowledge ;
the  significance  of  our  one  fragment  of  information  would
then  be  all  but  gone,  were  it  not  for  the  accessory  idea,
which  we  cannot  now  get  rid  of,  that  the  rest  could  easily
be  recovered.  Apart  from  this  accessory  idea,  the  sup-_
position  makes  it  plain  that  the  ratio  between  the  density
of  silver  or  flint  glass  and  that  of  water  is  not  sought  out  as
valuable  per  se,  but  is  valued  as  a  means  of  equation  with
all  measurable  densities.  In  such  instances  as  these  we
have  the  first  grade  of  characteristic  quantity  or  proportion,
still  subject  to  an  external  relativity  which  extends  into  an
infinite  series.

Now  though  this  relativity  never  disappears  as  an  aspect
of  human  knowledge,  yet  characteristic  quantity  can  assume
a  more  self-sufficing  position  than  that  which  has  just  been
described.  Instead  of  developing  the  this  and  that  of  the
comparative  judgment  into  separate  units  connected  only
by  an  abstract  identity  of  quality,  we  may  consider  them  as
structural  elements  within  a  concrete  whole.  As  before,  we
shall  find  ourselves  at  first  in  the  stage  of  simple  measure-
ment and  pure  quantity.  But  the  tendency  to  advance  to
proportion  is  in  cases  of  this  type  much  more  pronounced,

1  I  omit  for  the  sake  of  brevity  in  this  and  parallel  cases  to  repeat  in  every
sentence  the  precise  determinations  by  which  the  standard  unit  is  made  a
standard.  But  it  is  all-important  to  remember  that  there  are  such  determina-
tions, and  that  they  in  turn  need  re- determination  ad  infinitum.  There  is  no
ultimate  unit.


Chap.  III.] Proportion  and  hidividuality.  135

because  the  parts  of  an  individual  whole  are  more  likely  to
vary  in  connected  ways  and  therefore  lend  themselves  to
proportion,  than  the  elements  of  wholes  external  to  one
another.  Still  we  begin  with  pure  quantity.  '  This  plant
has  petals  exceeding  the  calyx  segments,'  or  '  has  radical
leaves  half  the  height  of  the  stem,'  or  'has  twenty-one
carpels  and  forty-two  stamens,'  or,  as  we  said  above,  '  has
a  divergence  of  f  between  its  stem-leaves.'  In  the  first
instance  such  judgments  as  these  are  mere  judgments  of
perception,  or  at  the  outside  of  direct  historical  fact,  and  the
ratio  which  forms  the  content  of  predication  is  therefore
not  a  proportion,  because  it  has  no  extent  of  application.
In  proportion,  the  ratio  is  to  the  cases  of  the  ratio  as  Inten-  v*

sion  to  Extension.

But  the  moment  thought  has  seized  a  designative  idea,  it
is  committed  and  must  go  wherever  the  idea  carries  it,  in
despite  of  the  demonstrative  '  this.' And  the  moment  that  <J

any  such  internal  ratio  as  those  which  I  have  suggested  is
taken  to  be  characteristic,  i.  e.  to  be  involved  in  the  desig-
native idea,  it  becomes  a  proportion,  i.  e.  a  law  of  structure
which  holds  in  spite  of  varieties  of  size,  shape,  and  number,
although,  at  least  in  natural  objects,  always  subject  to  limits
which  as  regards  the  proportion  itself  are  arbitrary  and
external.

Proportion  is  the  simplest expression  of  individuality.  v

All  intelligent  recognition  of  individual  objects  depends
either  on  proportion  or  on  some  principle  which  involves
proportion.  It  is  in  this  that  the  truth  lies  of  the  well-
known  Pythagorean  doctrine  that  all  things  are  embodi-
ments of  number.  All  things  have  aspects  and  effects  which
find  generalised  expression  in  number.  Shorten  a  snipe's
beak,  take  one  from  the  divisions  of  the  horse-chestnut  leaf,
or  misplace  the  accent  (a  variation  of  loudness  and  duration)
in  an  English  word,  and  recognition  falters  or  fails.  Even
a  human  character  or  an  artistic  inspiration,  though  not  in
^itself  susceptible  of  numerical  expression,  leaves  traces  in
|all  its  acts  and  products  of  an  individuality  that  takes  shape


136  Quantity  and  Proportion.  [booki.

in  proportion  or  qualitative  quantity.  An  exhaustive  statis-
tical treatment  of  a  man's  life  in  all  its  tangible  aspects  would
give,  by  the  graphical  method,  not  indeed  his  character,  but
a  set  of  proportions  penetratingly  significant  of  his  character.

It  may  seem  indeed  that  in  common  hurried  thought
recognition  simply  attaches  to  some  pre-eminent  quality,
a  bright  colour,  a  marked  outline,  a  peculiar  movement ;
and  that  such  elements  as  these^  without  extension  into
proportional  systems,  furnish  the  practical  meaning  of
words  in  ordinary  life.  But  in  the  first  place,  this  is  per-
haps a  superficial  analysis  of  perception,  I  very  strongly
doubt  if  the  element  of  proportion,  both  external  as  in
size  compared  with  surroundings,  and  internal  as  in  shape,
symmetry,  or  harmony  of  sound  or  colour,  is  ever  absent
in  a  recognitive  perception  of  an  individual  thing.  A  really
abstract  quality  would  hardly  mean  anything;  we  should
be  able  to  place  it  nowhere  in  our  world ;  and  if  we  even
recognised  its  degree  of  intensity,  that  would  at  once  con-
stitute a  quantitative  element.  It  has  indeed  been  observed
that  a  familiar  scent  (one  of  the  least  articulate  of  qualities)
has  a  notable  power  of  stirring  associated  memories.  But
this  seems  so  noteworthy  just  because  the  scent  does  not
recall  any  individual  thing,  but  rather  brings  back  a  general
state  of  feeling  connected  perhaps  with  entire  scenes  and
incidents,  but  especially  with  emotions.

And  in  the  second  place,  if  an  abstract  or  mere  quality
were  used  designatively  in  judgment,  it  would  not  grasp
or  enter  into  the  nature  of  a  real  individual ;  it  would
simply  be  a  falling  back  towards  the  demonstrative  affir-
mation with  its  '  This,'  which  may  on  occasion  be  eked  out
by  any  element  that  draws  attention.

But  all  ordinary  recognition  of  individuals  undoubtedly
depends  on  the  judgment  of  proportion.  We  cannot  indeed
tell  the  specific  gravity  of  a  metal  by  the  mere  sense  of
pressure  or  of  resistance,  but  we  know  how  a  sovereign
ought  to  feel  when  we  lift  it  on  the  palm  of  the  hand ;  and
though  we  may  call  this  effect  on  the  hand  a  quality,  it  is


Chap.  III.] Internal  and  External  Proportion. 1 3  7

plainly  a  quality  pervading  differences  and  so  quantitative,
and  moreover  taken  as  characteristic  and  so  proportional.
Consider  once  more  the  effect  of  altering  an  accent  in
English  (I  do  not  speak  of  languages  in  which  accent
depends  on  pitch)  as  exemplified  in  the  change  of  '  conquer'
into  '  concur'  by  transferring  the  stress  from  the  first  to  the
second  syllable,  or  the  utter  unrecognisability  of  such  a
term  as  '  sleeping-car '  when  pronounced  with  a  heavy  stress
on  the  second  syllable  ^,  and  a  light  stress  on  the  first.  Here
it  is  the  internal  proportion  that  is  modified,  with  the  result
of  destroying  the  peculiar  rhj-thm  by  which  in  a  great
degree  the  ear  instantaneously  recognises  a  word.  The  V
more  marked  an  individuality  is  the  more  it  depends  on
internal  proportion.  Every  instrument  fitted  for  a  purpose
has  internal  proportions  dictated  by  its  purpose ;  a  knife  is
sharp  at  the  edge  and  blunt  at  the  back ;  the  thickness  of
the  blade  in  its  transverse  section  depends  on  the  require-
ment of  strength  on  the  one  hand  and  on  that  of  dividing
without  displacement  on  the  other,  and  these  requirements
together  dictate  a  certain  set  of  proportions  characteristic
of  a  blade  suited  for  some  particular  purpose.  The  length
of  the  blade  compared  with  its  width  depends  on  such
another  set,  and  its  temper  on  a  third.  All  of  these  being
on  the  one  hand  relative  to  each  other  and  on  the  other  hand
relative  to  a  purpose  are  internal  proportions  subject  to  limits
prescribed  by  external  proportions.  It  is  by  acquaintance
with  the  perceptible  character  impressed  by  such  proportions
as  these  that  we  readily  pronounce  on  the  use  of  objects
made  by  the  hand  of  man,  and  that  we  detect,  somewhat  less
readily,  the  actual  purpose  served  by  adaptations  in  the  or-

nic  world.  Such  attributes  as  are  expressed  in  these  pro-
portions form,  for  perception,  the  content  of  individualities.

It  follows  from  these  considerations  that  the  question  of
individuality  in  contents  the  main  attributes  of  which  arise
from  external  proportions  is  not  an  easy  one. Such  are

*  The  author  once  heard  the  words  thus  mauled  at  Calais,  and  could  not
imagine  what  was  being  said,  though  no  elements  of  the  sound  were  omitted.


138  Quantity  and  Proportion.  [booki.

nearly  all  inorganic  substances,  except  where  adapted  to
a  purpose  by  man.  External  proportions  per  se  produce
no  effect  of  individual  unity,  and  though  it  is  true  that  all
substances  occur  in  particular  fragments  which  have  de-
finite characteristic  forms,  yet  the  ratios  which  would  ex-
press these  forms  are  not  absolutely  typical  or  essential
(though  perhaps  all  substances  prefer  some  shapes  to
others,  and  have  typical  fractures,  &c.),  nor  do  the  par-
ticular masses  of  substances  or  volumes  of  gases  demand  or
receive  individual  names.  Professor  Jevons  has  called  atten-
tion to  this  curious  fact,  which  goes  deep  into  the  nature  of
individuality.  Below  the  level  of  organic  form,  or  form
given  by  human  interference,  what  do  we  mean  by  a  thing}
Of  course  we  may  take  a  lump  of  metal  or  an  ounce  of
water,  a  handful  of  sand  or  a  jarful  of  chlorine,  and  speak  of
it  as  a  thing  ;  but  we  shall  be  puzzled  to  find  any  name  that
recognises  its  separate  identity  as '  lion '  or '  spade'  or '  house '
recognise  that  of  the  contents  that  form  their  meaning.  Is
gold  a  class-name,  say  a  specific  name,  and  are  the  actual
pieces  of  gold  individuals  under  it  ?  This  does  not  seem  to
be  right ;  a  class-name  is  true,  without  further  determination,
of  the  individuals  under  it.  '  This  is  a  lion,'  '  This  is  a  spade,'
si  &c. But  you  cannot  say  '  This  is  a  gold ' :  you  can  only  say

'this  is  gold,'  where  'gold'  almost='made  of  gold,'  i.e.  is
adjectival,  and  has  no  plural,  or  if  it  has  one,  uses  it  for
different  kinds,  not  for  different  pieces,  of  gold.

It  is  enough  at  present  to  call  attention  to  this  difficulty
as  illustrating  the  place  of  structure  in  individuality.  It
should  be  noticed  that  a  structure  however  complex  which
repeats  itself  homogeneously  throughout  all  atoms  of  a  cer-
tain substance  tends  to  confer  individuality,  if  at  all,  on  the
minute  units  in  which  the  complex  structure  exists,  but
neither  on  the  substance  as  such  nor  on  its  larger  frag-
ments ;  the  supposed  minute  structure  is  not  the  structure
of  it  or  of  them,  but  only  a  structure  repeated  within  it  or
them.  A  heap  of  corn  is,  qua  heap,  no  more  organic  than
a  heap  of  sand. But  it  may  be  for  instance  that,  in  virtue  of  a


Chap.  III.] Disparate  Qualities  how  combined  f 139

common  structure,  all  the  iron  that  any^'here  exists  is  united
by  reciprocal  reaction  in  a  common  magnetic  world  ;  if  so,
it  is  then  up  to  a  certain  point  single  and  individual.  The
further  consideration  of  this  difficult  subject  belongs  to  the
discussion  of  the  Individual  and  Generic  judgment.

iii.  The  relation  of  Quantity  to  Quality  results  at  this  Qualitative
point  in  a  further  problem.  Assuming  that  a  thing  which  ]^^iVi-
has  marked  individuality  has  always  a  number  of  pervading  duak.
qualities,  each  of  which  contains  gradations  and  a  distribu-
tion expressible  by  a  ratio  or  proportion,  what  are  we  to
say  of  the  interconnection  of  these  various  systems  of  pro-
portion with  one  another  ?  Is  it  necessary  that  there  should
be  a  general  proportion  of  proportions  which,  whether  our
actual  apprehension  of  it  be  rough  or  exact,  must  be  taken
as  capable  of  expressing  the  various  systems  of  attributes  as
gradations  \\'ithin  one  and  the  same  totality  ?  Is  there  any
sense  in  talking  of  the  proportion  not  only  of  length  to
length  and  of  colour  to  colour,  but  of  length  to  colour ;  or
of  the  proportion  not  only  between  rhythm  and  rhythm  or
pitch  and  pitch  in  a  melody,  but  between  rhythm  and  pitch  as
elements  of  the  musical  effect  ?

The  view  which  we  took  above  of  the  effect  of  comparison
upon  quality  forces  this  suggestion  upon  us. If,  in  other  %/

words,  a  single  qualitative  effect  pervades  any  and  every
totality  which  we  apprehend,  and  if  within  such  a  quality
there  are  parts  perceived  as  differences  of  it,  then  these
differences  must  in  respect  of  that  quality  be  regarded  as
gradations.  It  is  not  necessary  to  press  this  conception
home  at  present  It  is  possible  that  there  may  be  indi-
viduals whose  unity  lies  in  an  idea  only  and  not  also  in
a  quality,  and  that  an  idea  may  hold  together  without
crushing  them  into  gradations,  antitheses  which  a  quality
could  only  admit  as  quantitative.  But  it  is  worth  while  to
bear  in  mind  two  things.  In  the  first  place,  the  initial  judg-
ment of  mere  difference,  '  Colour  is  not  form,'  may  always
be  regarded  as  an  equation  of  one  term  to  zero  of  another.
And  in  the  second  place,  there  may  be  a  quality  of '  effect/


140  Quantity  and  Proportion.  [Booki.

or  secondary  quality,  within  which  even  form  and  colour  or
pitch  and  rhythm  may  take  their  place  as  degrees,  just  as
the  repetition  of  analogous  though  different  forms  in  a  picture
or  design  gives  the  impression  of  a  pervading  character
which  is  more  and  less  intense  in  different  parts  of  the
work.  Take  for  instance  a  picture  about  which  there  is
a  question  whether  Turner  painted  it,  or  a  song  which  is
ascribed  without  certainty  to  Shakespeare.  In  such  cases
we  point  to  this  and  that  characteristic  as  more  or  less
Turneresque  or  Shakespearean  ;  and  the  elements  so  desig-
nated need  not  be  in  actual  sensuous  quality  comparable
with  each  other.  It  might  even  be  suggested  that  the
exhibition  of  such  a  pervading  quality  was  a  condition  of
sesthetic  though  not  necessarily  of  actual  individuality ;
a  suggestion  which  would  raise  the  fundamental  problem
whether  all  actual  individuality  has,  for  those  who  have  eyes
to  see,  a  thorough  characteristic  unity.  It  would  seem  not
improbable  that  true  individuality  is  attained  by  actual
individuals  in  very  different  degrees.
Change  iv.  In  explaining  the  apprehension  of  individual  things,

fn  reference  ^hich  I  have  set  down  to  the  sense  of  proportion,  it  is  usual
to  Indivi-  to  lay  stress  on  the  fact  of  change,  including  motion.
Change  in  time  and  place  is  no  doubt  a  primary  instrument
in  revealing  the  fact  of  individual  existence.  The  move-
able and  modifiable  Thing  proclaims  itself  unmistakeably  as
distinct  and  permanent.  Nevertheless,  for  logical  purposes
change  is  only  a  case  of  difference  or  negation  ;  or  if  in  fact
the  two  are  coextensive,  yet  change  is  not  the  essence  of  all
difference.  It  may  be  that  every  apprehension  of  difference
requires  lapse  of  time,  but  this  is  only  because  our  activity
is  in  succession,  and  does  not  mean  that  the  differences
themselves  must  be  (though  they  may  be)  successive.

What  the  whole  matter  comes  to  is  this.  Difference  is
the  principle  which  when  generalised  is  known  as  Negation  ;
in  as  far  as  contents  merely  differ,  they  are  merely  not  each
other.  Every  continuous  quality  includes  negative  determi-
nation, i.  e.  differences,  elements  which  are  not  each  other.


Chap.  III.]  Change  and  Difference.  141

Among  other  continuous  qualities,  duration  and  extension
characterise  a  large  part  ^  of  the  world  of  sense-perception,
and  duration  characterises  in  one  aspect  everything  that
comes  before  the  human  intelligence.  It  is  not,  therefore,
surprising,  that  not  only  the  parts  or  elements  of  individuals,
but  the  individuals  themselves  as  parts  or  elements  of  our
perceived  world,  should  bear  a  negative  relation  to  each
other  and  to  themselves  in  time,  in  space,  or  in  time  and
space  together.

Now  if  we  contrast  change  and  motion  on  the  one  hand
with  mere  perceived  difference  on  the  other,  as  influences
bearing  upon  the  apprehension  of  individuality,  the  distinc-
tion between  the  two  cases  amounts  simply  to  this,  that  in
the  latter  we  have  a  single  set  of  dift'erences,  which  can  go
but  a  short  way,  as  a  rule,  to  exhaust  any  identity,  while  in
the  former  we  have  at  once  a  summary  of  innumerable
differences  or  negative  relations.  These  differences,  in  virtue
not  of  their  mere  spatial  or  temporal  distinctness,  but  of  their
positive  content,  are  read  off  in  judgments  which  may^
coalesce  into  one  or  may  be  distinguished  into  several
determinations  of  the  individual.  These  judgments  may
have  a  negative  or  positive  form,  but  must  always  express
a  partly  negative  element  of  apprehension,  viz.  that '  what  is
not  B  is  not  A.'

When  we  see  a  moving  animal  against  a  variously  coloured
background,  different  elements  of  its  outline  and  colouring
are  successively  throwm  into  relief  by  successive  contrasts,
and  perception  traces  its  form  with  increasing  completeness
by  the  negations  which  these  contrasts  furnish,  L  e.  by  the
correction  which  is  effected  when  a  Une  or  colour,  which
the  moment  before  ran  into  the  background,  is  sharply
defined  by  a  change  of  contrast.  The  perceptive  judgment
esulting  from  this  change  will  take  the  shape  '  That  (the

cannot  think  that  sonorous  bodies  appear  to  be  clothed  with  sound  as
ons  bodies  are  with  colour. To  me  sound  is  an  unextended  perception,

ough  referred  to  a  cause  in  space.

*  See  the  general  theory  of  judgment  in  time,  chap.  L  above.


142  Quantity  and  Proportion.  [booki.

dubious  border  of  colour)  was  not  B  (a  particular  part  of  the
animal's  outline)  and  therefore  is  not  A  (does  not  belong  to
the  animal).'  More  elaborate  interpretations  than  this  may
of  course  attach  themselves  to  the  motion  of  a  separate
material  thing ;  thus,  for  instance,  that  which  moves  all
together  must  in  all  probability  have  mechanical  cohesion,
for  it  is  unlikely  that  in  presence  of  varying  friction  at  its  dif-
ferent points  the  parts  of  a  moving  appearance  should  keep
together  apart  from  such  a  condition.  But  cohesion  is  for  our
present  purpose  merely  a  definite  content  assigned  to  unity,
and  the  negative  relation  of  the  moving  thing  to  what  does
not  partake  of  its  cohesion  is  established  by  just  the  same
logical  process  as  its  relation  to  that  which  does  not  partake
of  its  distinctive  shape  or  colour.  Change  in  time  without
motion  has  the  same  effect ;  nothing  is  more  readily  detached
from  its  background  and  apprehended  as  individual  than  an
object  whose  transformations  take  place  before  our  eyes  in
surroundings  which  do  not  share  them.  The  judgment  or
judgments^  'What  is  not  «i,  a^,  a^,  &c.  is  not  A'  seems  to
form  itself  in  such  a  case  almost  without  an  effort  of  mind.
We  shall  be  told  indeed  that  '  What  is  not  a-^,  a^,  &c.  is  not
A'  is  a  mere  inference  from  '  A  is  «^,  a^,  &c.'  This  objection
would  raisequestionswhich  cannotbedealt  with  till  we  treat  of
negative  and  of  inductive  inference.  Here  we  need  only  insist
that  however  we  may  elect  to  describe  the  process  of  the  nega-
tive instance,  it  is  easily  seen  to  be  the  most  effective  instru-
ment of  definition.  When  we  inject  a  system  of  vessels  with
coloured  fluid,  in  order  to  observe  them  under  the  micro-
scope, it  is  not  the  particular  colour,  red  or  blue,  that  we
look  for,  but  the  contrast  between  the  artificial  colour  and
the  dull  grey  or  yellow  of  the  background.  Even  granting
that  we  start  from  '  The  vessels  which  are  to  be  traced  (A)
are  the  red  lines  [a-^,  a^,  &c.),'  still  this  judgment  cannot
have  scientific  precision  apart  from  the  determination  of  the
detailed  not  a^,  not  a^,  &c. ;  and  when  the  not-^'s  assume
a  positive  character,  the  negation  ceases  to  be  an  inference

^  See  the  account  of  judgment  as  an  act  in  time,  p.  85  fF.


Chap.  III.] Measurement  leads  to  Necessity,  143

from  the  affirmation  A  is  a.  And  change  is  an  infinite  suc-
cession of  such  contrasts,  that  gives  every  element  of  the  com-
plex individual  before  perception  its  chance  of  being  sharply
defined,  and  by  successive  negations  defines  each  of  them
both  against  its  own  permanent  elements  and  against  the
background.  Instead  of  the  simple  change  of  colour  by  in-
jection, let  us  think  of  the  effect  produced  by  rotating  the
polariser  or  analyser  while  observing  an  object  that  modifies
polarised  light.  The  successive  but  gradual  changes  of  colour,
illumination,  and  background  which  are  thus  obtained  bring
out  the  details  of  a  structure  as  clearly  as  if  we  could  handle
it  and  move  it  freely  in  space.  Change  and  motion  merely  do
for  a  single  individual  identity  what  a  comparison  of  instances
does  for  an  abstract  identity.  That  is  to  say,  they  show
through  what  contrasts  the  individual  can  pass,  to  what
negations  it  can  be  subjected  whether  within  its  content,  or
between  its  content  and  the  background  from  which  it  is
distinguished,  without  losing  characteristic  identity.  Change  ^
and  motion  have  their  logical  value  simply  as  embodiments
of  difference.

V.  In  the  Judgment  of  Measurement  we  find  ourselves  Abstrac-
ice  to  face  with  the  element  of  abstraction  and  necessity,  Nec^hv
le  medium  in  which  exact  science  moves,  and  the  occasion
the  most  fundamental  crux  for  logic  as  for  ethics.  We
re  no  longer,  as  in  the  Judgment  of  Quality,  simply  as-
ribing  the  meaning  of  an  idea  to  an  unspecified  reality
^ven  in  perception.  We  are  indeed,  as  always  in  judgment,
^fining  the  reality  which  perception  presents  to  us ;  but
re  find  that  in  trying  to  define  any  special  feature  or
lement  within  it,  we  are  under  constraint,  not  merely  as
Iways  from  the  pressure  of  perception,  but  from  the  ina-
)ility  to  select  and  connect  at  pleasure  within  the  presented
content.  Judgment — so  far  as  it  escapes  from  the  dis-
tractions of  mere  association — proceeds  in  grooves  or  along
threads  which  are  always  leading  it  across  and  out  of  the
picture.  It  cannot,  in  the  present  stage  at  all  events,  simply
characterise  a  given  identity  by  differences  related  to  it  and


144  Quantity  and  Proportion.  [Booki.

to  nothing  else.  Such  differences,  as  we  have  seen,  would
have  no  stability,  and  could  characterise  nothing ;  although
the  more  highly  organised  and  individual  the  identity  the
more  capable  it  is  of  prescribing  a  necessity  to  subordinate
wholes  which  appear  as  differences  within  it.  The  course
of  judgment  within  the  present  whole  of  perception  is  deter-
mined by  connections  which  refer  beyond  that  accidental
whole,  to  other  more  comprehensive  totalities^  and  ulti-
mately, in  every  case,  to  the  system  of  the  known  world.
The  connections  thus  prescribed  between  part  and  part
within  some  systematic  whole  are  necessary  connections,
and  judgment,  in  so  far  as  it  is  controlled  by  them,  is  ab-
^  stract  or  hypothetical  judgment.
J  But  the  appearance  of  this  element  in  the  judgment  of

perception  makes  it  simply  self-contradictory.  The  specifi-
cation of  a  subject  by  means  of  an  idea,  which  is  only  meant
to  point  out  a  feature  in  present  reality,  brings  the  judgment
into  a  groove  of  necessity,  and  all  but  makes  its  affirmation
v/  conditional. A  speaker  who  has  affirmed  that  '  This  exe-

crable ruffian  should  be  hung'  will  probably,  if  convinced
that  the  man  is  not  a  ruffian  at  all,  consider  that  the  non-
existence of  the  condition  precludes  the  application  of  the
judgment;  i.e.  in  spite  of  the  'this,'  he  will  maintain  that
his  judgment  was  essentially  conditional.  We  shall  not  find
it  easy  to  decide  whether  the  idea  in  question  was  really
a  condition  or  a  predicated  content.  In  the  latter  case  the
judgment  is  falsified  by  the  non-existence  of  the. fact  in-
dicated in  the  subject,  in  the  former  it  is  not.  There  can
be  little  doubt  that  we  must  follow  the  analogy  of  '  this,'
'  here '  and  '  now,'  by  treating  ideas,  which  designate  the
subject,  as  presupposed  rather  than  affirmed ;  but  seeing
that  in  this  case  the  idea  which  forms  the  presupposition  is
such  as  may  or  may  not  be  realised,  and  yet  is  welded  to-
gether with  a  presupposition — the  '  this ' — which  cannot  but
be  realised,  there  is  an  inevitable  ambiguity  in  the  judgment,
— the  ambiguity  between  absolute  and  conditional  assertion.
Absolute vi.  In  logic  as  in  ethics,  Individuality  or  Absoluteness  is  at


Chap.  III.]  Relativity  and  Explanation.  145

first  sight  opposed  to  Necessity  or  Relativity.  That  which  and  Con-
is  individual  or  absolute  claims  to  be  self-sufficing ;  that  is  Affinna-
to  say,  to  be  an  Identity  which  determines  and  is  deter-  ^°''^-
mined  by  its  own  differences,  but  is  not  dependent  on
anj^hing  outside  itself.  Every  content  partakes  of  this
character  in  so  far,  but  in  so  far  only,  as  it  has  a  unity  or
an  interest  for  its  own  sake  or  in  itself.  A  material  '  thing,*
an  organism,  a  work  of  fine  art,  possesses  such  unity  in  a
degree  that  forces  its  individuality  upon  perception  and  en-
sures it  universal  recognition  in  language.  But  every  content
without  exception  that  is  exhibited  in  judgment  has  such
unity  or  interest  in  some  aspect  or  to  some  degree.  Even
the  abstract  idea  that  qualifies  '  this '  in  a  perceptive  judg-
ment such  as  '  This  cold  is  intolerable '  is  taken  as  the  key
to  the  interest  of  a  presentation,  as  a  predominant  feature
that  arrests  attention  in  our  momentary  surroundings.  That
the  distinctive  character  which  makes  the  unity  of  the  pre-
sentation is  abstract  and  indeterminate  follows  merely  from
the  judging  function  being  in  a  rudimentary  stage  to  which
a  concrete  synthesis  is  still  unattainable.

On  the  other  hand,  every  judgment  may  also  be  regarded
under  an  aspect  of  relativity  or  necessity.  In  so  far  as  a
content  is  necessary  it  is  not  self-sufficing,  but  is  a  conse-
quence of  something  else,  and  in  so  far  as  it  is  relative  it
fails  to  explain  itself,  and  refers  to  something  else  for  ex-
planation. Every  content,  every  identity  in  human  know-
ledge is  on  one  side  wholly  of  this  character.  How  the  two
sides,  the  absoluteness  and  relativity  of  the  objects  of
knowledge,  can  coexist  without  interfering  may  be  consi-
dered if  we  please,  though  in  my  judgment  erroneously,  as
a  desperate  problem.  But  that  they  do  coexist  we  may
convince  ourselves  by  the  evolutional  history  of  any  flower,
by  the  analysis  of  any  ornamental  design,  by  the  study,  in
its  genesis  and  with  a  view  to  the  influences  that  conditioned
it,  of  any  human  mind.  And,  in  one  sense,  necessity  is  more
universal  than  what  I  call  absoluteness,  or  if  I  may  coin  a
phrase  significant  of  the  sense  in  which  I  speak  of  absolute-

VOL.  I.  L


146  Quantity  and  Proportion.  [booki.

ness,  morphological  unity.  Morphological  Unity  has  de-
grees, but  relativity  or  necessity  has  none.  The  only  escape
from  relativity  is  in  the  exhaustion  of  relations.  If,  for
instance,  w^e  can  intelligibly  speak  of  the  universe  as  a  whole,
we  must  take  it,  I  presume,  as  the  totality  of  relations,  and
therefore  as  bearing  no  relation  to  anything  outside  itself.
But  this  speculation  is  unprofitable,  because  what  is  out  of
relation  is  out  of  knowledge ;  or  it  has  at  most  a  negative
value  as  against  doctrines  which  extend  the  relativity  which
holds  within  the  totality  of  relations  to  the  ideal  totality  of
relations  itself,  and  so  discuss  its  origin  or  the  possibility  of
it  not  having  been.  This  is  futile,  from  the  very  nature  of
explanation.  All  explanation  is  within  the  universe,  not  of
it.  Therefore  every  content  that  designates  a  subject  invites
consideration  as  an  antecedent  in  necessity  in  a  judgment
'if  a  is,  then  b  is,'  while  it  is  not  every  content  that  has
morphological  unity  and  so  is  given  as  a  whole  in  each  and
all  of  its  differences.  And  only  such  a  content  as  this  is
adequate  to  reality,  or  can  stand,  without  special  symbols
of  reference,  for  an  individual  reality.  What  is  not  indi-
vidual cannot  as  a  whole  be  real.

The  above  considerations  were  touched  upon  in  chap.  I.
in  explaining  the  pregnant  distinction  between  Categorical
and  Hypothetical  judging,  and  are  to  govern,  as  was  there
indicated,  the  application  of  that  distinction  in  the  remainder
of  the  present  Book.  We  start  from  the  principle  that  all
judgment  whatever  is  an  attempt  to  make  explicit  the  nature
of  Reality,  and  is  directly  or  indirectly  attached  to  the
-reality  which  is  presented  through  perception.  The  ulti-
mate subject  of  all  Judgment  is  the  Real,  and  any  idea  which
appears  as  designating  or  even  as  in  lieu  of  the  subject  of
judgment  must  be  taken  as  simply  indicating  or  calling
attention  to  some  aspect  of  the  real  world.  That  is  to  say,
such  an  idea  must  be  taken  as  morphologically  correspond-
ing to  the  '  this,'  '  here,'  or  '  now '  in  the  demonstrative
judgment,  to  the  unnamed  direction  of  perception  in  the
pure  judgment  of  quality,  or  to  the  designative  ideal  con-


Chap.  III.]  Individuality  and  Reality.  147

tent  which  expands  the  '  this '  or  '  here '  in  the  elementary
judgment  of  measurement.  It  follows  from  this  that  in
every  judgment  the  immediate  subject  \^  prima  facie  taken
to  be  real,  and  therefore  every  judgment  is  prima  facie
taken  to  be  categorical  This  does  not  mean  that  in  the
strict  sense  it  asserts  real  existence  of  the  subject,  for  its
real  existence  is  presupposed  ^,  but  rather  that  it  defines  the
reality  of  a  real  existence  presupposed  as  subject.

But  \.h\s  prima  facie  semblance  of  the  judgment  must  be
qualified.  The  explicit  content  which  designates  the  real
subject  may  be  inadequate  to  the  nature  of  reality.  In
'  this  red  thing,' '  this  metal,'  even  '  this  man,'  the  explicit
contents  '  red/  '  metal,'  '  man '  are  typical  and  general,  not
single  and  individual ;  and  still  more  is  this  the  case  if  we
think  of  such  judgments  as  '  Red  is  a  colour,' '  Metcil  is  lus-
trous,' '  Man  is  mortal.'  These  contents  stand  for  imperfect
and  incomplete  realities  ;  realities  that  could  only  be  com-
pleted in  an  infinite  series  of  time  and  space.  The  difficulty  is
not  that  they  go  beyond  present  perception  and  beyond  our
knowledge.  Caesar  is  not  in  present  perception  and  we  do
not  know  all  that  he  did,  yet  in  '  Caesar  crossed  the  Rubicon '
no  one  doubts  that  Caesar  is  a  reality.  Caesar  is  an  indi-
vidual, and  his  entire  identity  is  present  in  his  every  act  and
attribute.  Man  is  no  doubt  a  definite  concept,  but  its
instances  or  manifestations  have  not  prima  facie  individual
identity  one  with  another.  The  centre  of  morphological
unity  is  in  each  separate  human  being,  not  in  the  idea  of
the  race  as  such.  The  concept,  as  we  commonly  think  it,  is
an  abstract  idea,  and  the  reality  that  corresponds  to  it  is  a
series  of  individuals,  which  not  merely  is  not  yet  actual  as
a  whole,  but  is  not  in  our  predication  treated  as  an  actual
whole.  The  reciprocal  relations  which  bind  together  say  the
English  nation  or  the  Roman  Empire  into  a  historical  indi-
vidual may  be  present  also  more  or  less  in  the  case  of
humanity,  but  when  we  say  '  Man  is  mortal '  this  is  not  the
light  in  which  we  look  at  the  Subject ;  we  are  speaking  of
*  See  last  section.
L  2


148  Quantity  and  Proportion.  [booki.

individual  men  whom  we  designate  by  help  of  the  concept
man,  not  of  humanity  or  mankind  as  such,  for  which  it  might
be  maintained  that  morphological  unity  is  possible.  No
doubt  however,  if  we  push  the  matter  home,  even  the  predi-
cate mortality  is  affirmed  of  all  individual  men  in  virtue  of
a  oneness  of  nature  running  through  them  all ;  and  therefore
we  must,  as  I  have  said,  take  the  individual  unity  to  be  a  mat-
ter of  degree,  and  to  be  wholly  absent  in  no  content  that  can
be  presented  to  thought  as  designating  a  subject  of  judgment.

When,  in  view  of  cases  like  these,  we  qualify  the  principle
laid  down  above  that  in  every  judgment  the  subject  is  taken
as  real,  we  must  do  so  by  the  emendation,  '  The  subject  is
taken  as  possessed  of  that  kind  of  reality  of  which  it  is
capable,  subject  to  any  alteration  which  the  predicated
content  may  declare  in  such  reality.'  The  first  part  of  this
sentence  provides  for  judgments  introduced  by  abstract
ideas  and  not  referred  to  actual  individuals,  the  second  for
all  kinds  of  judgments  which  formally  affect  reality  and
which  are  alleged  ^  as  proofs  that  content  and  reality  cannot
depend  upon  one  another.  First  among  these  come  the
Negative  Judgment  which  sets  up  an  aspect  of  Reality  in
order  to  demolish  it,  and  then  all  such  peculiar  cases  as
'  The  chimera  is  a  fiction,'  '■  Nothing  is  here,'  '  A  wise  knave
is  a  contradiction  in  terms.'

The  view  to  which  I  have  just  alluded  might  raise  an
objection  at  this  point,  which  I  will  only  mention  in  this
place,  as  the  real  answer  to  it,  if  any,  can  only  be  found
in  the  whole  conception  of  the  judgment  which  we  have
adopted.  'Whether  an  idea  stands  for  a  reality  or  not
does  not  depend  on  its  content,  but  on  that  content  being
recognised  as  somehow  and  at  some  distance  or  other
belonging  to  the  world  continuous  in  quality  with  the
object  of  present  perception — i.  e.  to  the  actual  world.'
My  answer  to  this  would  be  that  I  have  accepted  this
identification  in  quality  as  the  abstract  logical  or  rather  as
the  psychological  condition  of  all  judgment ;  but  that  this

^  Bradley's  Principles  of  Logic,  p.  14.


Chap.  III.]  Necessity  in  yudgment.  149

identification  is  empty  apart  from  the  specific  kind  and
degree  of  reality  assumed  or  alleged,  and  this,  as  it  appears
to  me,  is  a  matter  of  content  and  of  content  alone.

The  Hypothetical  Necessary  or  Relative  aspect  of  judg-
ment is  a  consequence  of  the  designation  of  the  subject  by
any  determinate  ideal  content.  It  is  the  universal  con-
nection of  attributes  within  systems,  as  opposed  to  the
morphological  unity  of  individual  systems  upon  which
that  connection  rests.  This  aspect  is  undoubtedly  per-
ceptible from  the  moment  that  the  immediate  subject  is
made  explicit  by  help  of  ideas,  but  as  long  as  there  is  a
gulf  between  the  ideal  content  and  the  latent  reality  which
it  designates — the  'this' — the  necessary  aspect  of  the
judgment is absolutely dissociated from its categorical

pect,  and  the  divergence  almost  amounts  to  a  duality  of
the  judgment.  In  some  cases  indeed  the  contents  employed
to  designate  the  subject  will  have  only  a  partial  connection
With  the  predicate,  as  in  '  This  flower  is  a  rose  ^.'  Such  a
judgment  has  been  called  a  double  appellative  judgment.
But  I  incline  to  think  that  affirmation  of  this  type  is  always
on  the  road  to  necessity;  'flower'  does  not  indeed  tie  down
the  predicate  to  '  rose,'  but  the  thread  of  botanical  classifi-
cation runs  through  both.  If  it  were  not  a  flower  it  could
not  be  a  rose.  So  the  two  designations  are  undoubtedly
chosen  with  reference  to  one  another,  and  the  true  duality
of  the  judgment  is  not  in  christening  the  rose  twice  over  as
rose  and  as  flower,  but  in  the  ambiguity  between  '  This  is  a
rose '  and  '  This,  if  (or  '  in  as  far  as ')  it  is  a  flower  at  all,  is
a  rose,'  which  might  well  be  said  of  the  Tudor  rose  as  it
appears  in  some  decorative  designs.

The  judgment  whose  subject  is  designated  by  a  proper
name  is  at  first  sight  devoid  of  necessity.  For  in  it  deter-
minateness  of  content  is  sacrificed  to  the  indication  of  actual
continued  individuality,  and  therefore  the  relation  of  neces-
sity or  hypothesis,  which  depends  on  determinateness  of
content,  is  not  easily  traceable. Yet  a  name  is  always

*  Cp.  Sigwart,  voL  L  p.  62.


150  Quantity  and  Proportion.  [booki.

capable  of  acquiring  a  definite  content,  which  at  once
brings  such  a  relation  into  prominence.  The  indignant
denial,  '  Gladstone  never  said  that,'  '  Socrates  never  gave
immoral  advice,'  is  obviously  hovering  between  the  sense
of  'A.  B.  did  not  go  to  town  to-day'  and  that  of  'An
honest  man  cannot  say  what  is  certain  to  mislead,'  that  is
to  say  between  the  assertion  of  fact  and  that  of  necessity.
And  again,  if,  as  explained  in  the  last  paragraph,  the
content  which  designates  the  subject  has  not  the  nature  of
a  complete  or  individual  whole,  then  its  reality  must  be
taken  as  that  of  which  alone  it  is  capable,  viz.  indefinite
presentation  in  the  series  of  space  and  time ;  and  this
amounts  to  so  little  (for  the  presentation  may  be  as  rare  as  is
consistent  with  occurring  at  all)  that  the  element  of  necessity
or  relativity  dominates  the  element  of  unity  or  actuality,
and  the  judgment  appears  to  have  as  its  essential  content
a  necessary  sequence  or  connection  about  the  presence  of
which  in  reality  little  or  nothing  is  affirmed.  Such  a  judg-
ment, and  every  judgment  in  as  far  as  it  can  be  thus  regarded,
is  hypothetical,  that  is  to  say  it  runs  wholly  or  partly  along
a  line  which  may  be  formulated  as  '  If  «  is  (or  in  as  far  as  a
is),  then  b  is  (or  so  far  b  is).'

On  the  other  hand,  even  those  perceptive  or  historical  judg-
ments, including  ordinary  assertions  about  people  or  places
called  by  proper  names,  which  betray  in  their  content  no
tendency  to  enter  a  groove,  i.  e.  to  exhibit  a  universal  con-
nection of  attributes,  nevertheless  must  be  held  as  bound  by
this  ideal,  which  is  involved  in  the  employment  of  contents
which  have  a  meaning,  and  therefore  can  acquire  a  de-
terminate meaning.  If  then,  as  in  such  instances  we  may
assume  to  be  the  rule,  the  contents  actually  employed  in
judging  embody  no  principle,  but  merely  exhibit  irrelevant
differences  as  coexistent  in  a  concrete  subject,  such  judg-
ments, even  when  true  in  their  first  meaning  as  mere
statements  of  fact,  are  yet  fundamentally  false.  That  is  to
say,  they  are  true  in  their  categorical  aspect  but  false  in
their  hypothetical or  relative aspect,  from  which,  being


Chap.  III.]  Universal  =  HypotJietical  ?  151

definite  judgments,  they  cannot escape. They do not

express  an  a,  upon  which,  within  some  real  system,  the

content  of  predication  follows  as  b. But  it  is  important  to

remember  that  we  are  dealing  from  beginning  to  end  with

aspects  and not  with total differences. I  believe  that

a  misapprehension  on  this  head  has  of  late  years  given  rise

to  an  erroneous  conception  regarding  the  tendency  and  goal

of  knowledge.

vii.  It  is  a  great  thing  to  have  raised  the  notions  of  Logic  Knowledge

to  a  level  with  the  ideas  of  exact  science. This  has  been  Absolute

done  by  Mill  and  subsequent  writers^,  and  the  work  hada^drela-

.  .  tive.

become  necessary,  though  the  views  to  which  it  led  were

not  in  principle  new.  The  essence  of  Judgment  was  by
them  declared  to  lie  in  the  coexistence  and  rational  con-
nection of  attributes,  and  the  ideal  of  science  to  consist  in
the  knowledge  of  the  fewest  assumptions,  from  which,  if
given,  the  whole  course  of  the  world  might  be  deductively
derived.  As  a  consequence  of  these  ideas,  the  universal
judgment  was,  in  part  by  Mill  himself  and  more  distinctly
by  later  writers,  identified  with  the  hypothetical  or  abstract
affirmation  of  necessary  connections  ;  and,  further,  by  iden-
tifying this  type  of  judgment  with  the  extreme  case  of
supposition  for  the  sake  of  argument,  the  universal  judgment
as  such  was  denuded  of  all  affirmation  having  real  content.
It  was  still  treated  as  affirmed  of  Reality,  but  was  held  to
be  related  thereto  as  a  known  consequent  to  an  unknown
antecedent.  It  was  pointed  out  that  in  supposal  for  the
sake  of  argument  no  element  of  the  content  supposed  or  of
its  consequence  is  affirmed  either  to  be  actual  or  even  to
be  possible,  and  that  nothing  more  is  alleged  as  fact,  in
judgment  based  on  supposition,  than  that  Reality,  which
itself  does  not  appear  within  the  judgment,  is  such  as  under
the  supposed  conditions  to  exhibit  the  inferred  consequent.

*  Mill's  Logic  and  Lotze's  earlier  Logik  seem  to  have  appeared  in  the  same
year  (1843.  Lotze,  I  presume,  was  largely  influenced  by  Herbert  on  the  point
in  question.  I  have  in  my  mind  also  Sigwart,  Wnndt  (whose  doctrine  of  *  G^;en-
standabegriff'  does  not  however  seem  to  me  per£ei^y  clear;,  and  Bradley.


152  Quantity  and  Proportion.  [book  i.

Truth,  it  might  therefore  be  concluded,  may  be  taken  to
illustrate,  but  it  cannot  be  taken  to  define,  reality.  The
strong  implication  of  actuality  which  attaches  to  the  content
of  many  ordinary  universal  judgments  was  dismissed  as
explicable  on  grounds  of  habit  and  confusion.  Thus  the
categorical  judgment,  in  the  sense  of  a  judgment  which
asserts  any  specific  content  to  be  actual,  was  primarily  con-
fined within  the  limits  of  affirmation  about  individuals  in
space  and  time,  although  in  disjunctive  judgment,  and  in
judgments,  if  any,  dealing  with  existences  beyond  time
and  space,  a  categorical  character  was  admitted  to  reassert
itself

In  contrast  with  the  conception  of  logical  progress  and
with  the  ideal  of  knowledge  which  I  have  just  described,  it
appears  to  me  that  a  somewhat  modified  form  of  the
views  in  question  might  yield  less  one-sided  conclusions.
I  should  prefer  to  regard  the  normal  and  central  evolution
of  judgment  as  categorical  from  beginning  to  end,  and  as
gaining,  not  losing,  in  this  characteristic  as  it  passes  from
perception  and  history  to  the  more  complete  forms  of
science.  The  implication  of  real  existence  which  attaches
to  the  content  of  ordinary  generic  and  universal  judgments
seems  to  me  to  be  of  the  same  kind  as  the  implication  of
existence — for  it  is  no  more — which  accompanies  the
demonstrative  '  this,'  '  here,'  or  '  now,'  or  its  expansion
by  a  significant  idea,  or  a  proper  name,  or  the  significant
name  of  any  actual,  even  if  not  in  the  full  sense  individual,
totality,  such  as  the  English  nation,  or  the  Natural  Order
Rosaceae.

The  main  function  of  judgment  would  then  be  identified
with  the  exhibition  of  individual  totalities  at  once  in  their
absoluteness  and  in  their  relativity.  We  should  thus  not
wholly  subordinate  classification,  type,  and  individuality
to  the  claims  of  explanatory  theory,  but  endeavour  to
represent  the  two  as  complementary  and  indispensable
aspects  of  knowledge.  Abstract  -  and  ideal  judgments
like those  which embody  the necessary connections of


Chap. III.] Transition  to  Abstract  Quantity.  153

geometry  we  should  rank  as  an  indispensable  divergence,
but  still  as  a  divergence,  from  the  natural  track  and
tendency  of  reason,  and  as  attaining  their  truth  most  fully
when,  returning  towards  that  track,  they  are  taken  up  into
the  precise  determination  of  typical  structure  in  space,  or
even  of  individual  realities.  We  should  refuse,  in  spite  of
identity  in  linguistic  expression,  to  take  supposition  for  the
sake  of  argument  as  the  type  of  universal  judgment,  and
should  point  out  that  as  supposition  passes  from  selection
within  reality  into  free  imagination  it  becomes  detached
from  the  real  ground  of  all  relations,  and  ceases  even  to
exhibit  a  necessary  relativity.

It  is  in  accordance  with  these  views  that  I  have  treated
measurement  as  involving  both  the  revelation  of  Individuality
(morphological  unity)  through  characteristic  ratio,  which  is
the  same  thing  as  proportion,  and  the  exhibition  of  relativity
by  the  reference  of  the  unit  to  something  outside  the  indi-
vidual, I  now  proceed  to  speak  of  kindred  judgments,  which
present  the  essential  aspects  of  measurement  in  one-sided
modifications.


k


CHAPTER IV.

Measurement  {continued)— A'^stract  Quantity.


One-sided
forms  of
Measure-
ment.


Enumera-
tion.


3.  Individuality  as  revealed  in  measurement  may  be
simple  or  complex,  and,  if  complex,  it  must  involve  a  variety
of  simple  factors.  In  a  simple  individuality,  or  the  simple
factor  of  a  complex  individuality,  the  qualitative  distinct-
ness of  the  parts  is  at  a  minimum  ;  for  any  exceptional
qualitative  difference  in  any  part  would  challenge  measure-
ment and  constitute  a  complication  within  the  unity.  When
an  individual  is  thus  taken  in  its  simplicity,  in  a  single  aspect,
and  yet  considered  as  being  a  whole  complete  in  itself,  it  is
treated  as  a  whole  of  quantity ;  that  is  to  say,  such  a  content
as  is  exhibited  in  the  predication  of  the  comparative  judg-
ment, but  taken  as  standing  in  the  place  of  the  individual
Subject,  now  that  the  conception  of  individuality  is  attained.

i.  In  such  instances  we  find  the  simple  quantitative  whole
which  is  thought  of  as  constituted  by  absolutely  homo-
geneous parts — an  idea  which  we  have  seen  to  be  never
strictly  true,  for  without  some  distinctness  of  quality  the
parts  would  cease  to  be.  Such  a  whole  differs  from  the
normal  individual  by  the  lack  of  anything  that  can  be
called  dominant,  essential,  or  characteristic  within  the  con-
tent itself.  There  is,  for  instance,  no  need  to  consider  its
unity  in  the  light  of  a  secondary  or  aesthetic  quality.
The  unity  is  already  that  of  a  continuous  quality,  and  in
the  attempt  to  define  it,  it  lapses  almost  wholly  into  relati-
vity, for  the  determination  of  the  whole  depends  on  the
equation  of  the  parts,  in  an  unending  series,  with  other  and
independent  standards.  Thus  the  purely  quantitative
whole  is  characterised  by  being  capable  of  construction
by  ideal  repetition  of  a  unit  or  fixed  part ;  and  such  ideal
repetition  is  enumeration. Enumeration  may  seem  prior


Enumeration  and  Measurement.  155

to  measurement  or  identical  with  it ;  in  measuring  we
enumerate  units,  and  whenever  we  enumerate  units  we
measure  some  totality.  When  we  count  the  carriages  in
a  railway  train  we  are  measuring  the  train,  when  we  count
the  sheep  in  a  flock  we  are  measuring  the  flock,  just  as
when  we  count  the  feet  and  inches  in  the  length  of  a  room
we  are  measuring  the  room.  But  usage,  as  we  feel  at  once,
does  not  bear  us  out  in  speaking  of  the  two  former  in-
stances as  measurements,  and  the  reason  is  plain.  In
measurement  we  start  from  a  whole  which  we  characterise
by  its  differences ;  in  enumeration  we  start  from  a  distinct
unit,  out  of  which  we  desire  to  construct  a  collective  or
aggregate  whole — a  sum  total.  The  whole  in  enumeration,
which  is  a  predicate,  is  a  weakened  form  of  the  individual
whole  in  measurement,  which  is  a  subject ;  and  the  unit  in
enumeration,  which  is  a  subject  (generally  distinguished  by
a  natural  individuality),  is  a  strengthened  form  of  the  dis-
tinct unit,  ideal  part,  or  constant  difference,  which  forms
the  predicate  in  measurement.

Enumeration  is  therefore  in  one  sense  posterior  to
measurement,  because  it  presupposes,  as  a  naturally
distinct  unit,  the  'thing,'  the  idea  of  which  can  only  be
furnished  by  a  sense  of  proportion  or  perception  of
limit ;  but,  on  the  other  hand,  enumeration  is  an  instru-
vient  of  precise  measurement,  which  involves  the  notion
of  a  scale  of  degrees  or  aggregate  of  homogeneous  parts.
The  two  processes  are  constantly  concurrent,  and  only
differ  in  the  respective  values  of  the  parts  and  wholes
with  which  they  deal.  It  would  be  futile  to  distinguish
them  from  one  another,  but  for  the  consequences  which
result  from  the  possibility,  first  exemplified  in  abstract
enumeration,  of  systematising  the  synthesis  of  parts  without
relation  to  a  whole.  The  whole  of  enumeration  is  depressed
into  a  mere  aggregate,  or  not  even  a  definite  aggregate,  and
therefore  the  part  into  a  mere  unit,  or  even  into  the  mere
place  in  which  a  unit  might  be.  The  process  with  all  its
corollaries,  including  the  three  unreal  infinities  of  Number,


J


156  Abstract  Quantity.  [Booki.

Time,  and  Space,  must  be  regarded  as  belonging  to  a  form
of  the  judgment-function  in  which  the  relation  of  whole
and  part  is  denuded  of  all  structural  variety,  and  therefore
the  aggregate  or  sum  which  is  the  outcome  of  that  relation
lacks  predominant  unity.  This  principle  is  expressed  in
the  saying  that  in  a  numerical  system  the  sum  of  units  is
the  same  whatever  may  be  the  order  in  which  they  are
counted,  i.  e.  any  part  [qua  part  of  a  total  formed  by
enumeration)  can  be  interchanged  with  any  other  part
without  modifying  the  whole  in  which  they  are  parts.
Corollaries. I  proceed  to  state  and  illustrate  some  corollaries  which

follow  from  the  above  idea  of  enumeration.
Simple  a.  Simple  cotmting  always  consists  of  a  series  of  singular

coun  ing. j2i(ilgfnetits,  and is in this respect  07i  a  level  with  simple
measurement.

However  abbreviated  or  abstract  each  step  in  counting
may  be,  it  can  always  be  expanded  into  a  singular  judg-
ment which  records  its  own  position  in  a  coherent  series.
In  counting  the  birds  in  a  covey,  or  the  stitches  in  a  bit  of
needle-work,  we  often  merely  repeat  aloud  the  words  '  one,'
'  two,'  'three,'  and  the  real  nature  of  the  judgment  which
accompanies  them  is  open  to  question.  In  fact,  each  of
these  numerals  in  such  a  case  implies  a  separate  singular
judgment,  though  extreme  abbreviation  tends  to  conceal  its
structure.  The  essence  of  counting  is  in  just  such  a  pro-
gressive distinction  as  is  conveyed  by  '  this,'  '  that,'  and
'  the  other ' ;  '  alter '  and  eVepos  have  almost  the  value  of
numerals.  The  exclamation  '  One ! '  when  we  are  begin-
ning to  count  any  set  of  objects  means  '  This  unit  is  a  part
in  the  whole  which  interests  me,'  e.  g.  '  One — two — three —
eight  birds  in  that  covey.'  The  bird  is  the  naturally  distinct
unit  by  which  in  so  simple  a  case  we  proceed  as  a  matter  of
course,  and  the  covey  is  the  total  up  to  which  we  wish  to
count.  If  birds  get  up  belonging  to  another  lot,  we  shall
probably  desire  to  keep  them  distinct,  and  so  count  them
separately,  beginning  'One,'  'two,'  etc.  over  again.  It
is plain  in  this or  any  similar  instance  that  we do not


Chap.  IV.]  What  do  we  count?  157

count  right  on  as  long  as  units  can  be  found,  but  that  every
step  of  the  enumeration  is  made  with  reference  to  a  limit  as
well  as  to  a  unit.  This  limit,  however  disguised  by  our
caprices  and  interests,  is  simply  the  common  or  continuous
nature  of  the  unit  in  so  far  as  it  interests  us,  and  in  every
enumerative  judgment  without  exception  the  elements  of
separate  unit  and  common  nature  may  be  traced.  The
unit  need  not  be  externally  distinct  or  physically  separable  ;
and  the  common  nature,  instead  of  being  hard  to  trace,
may  all  but  obliterate  the  differences  that  exist  within  it.
But  it  is  the  nature  of  the  unit  that  furnishes  both  rule  and
limit  of  enumeration,  which  is  a  process  unmeaning  without
a  limit  and  impossible  without  a  rule.  If  we  are  told  to
count  even  all  the '  things '  in  a  room,  we  shall  find  ourselves
obliged  to  ask  what  is  to  be  reckoned  as  a  '  thing.'  Is  a  book-
case with  500  volumes  in  it  one  thing  or  500,  or  501  ?  'In
a  room,'  however,  is  a  kind  of  limit,  and  assigns  a  totality
to  be  constructed  by  synthesis  ;  but  if  we  are  asked  simply
to  count,  we  should  reject  the  request  as  pure  nonsense,
because  it  assigns  no  totality  to  be  constructed  by  counting.
What,  then,  is  the  meaning  of  counting  '  One  I '  '  Two ! '
'  Three  ! '  in  starting  a  race,  or  of —

'And  still  stood  aU  who  saw  them  fall
While  men  might  coont  a  score '  ?

In  the  latter  case,  the  idea  is  that  of  counting  the  names  of
the  numbers  up  to  a  fixed  limit  at  a  rate  determined  by
habit  or  by  the  time  which  is  required  to  pronounce  the
words  distinctly.  In  the  former  case  the  object  is  perhaps
not  merely  to  let  time  elapse,  but  to  set  attention  in  a
certain  rhj-thm,  so  that  the  tendency  of  rhythmical  antici-
pation may  assist  in  seeing  or  hearing  the  starting  signal
;  at  the  moment  it  is  given.  For  this  purpose  the  periods
should  be  exactly  equal,  and  in  fact  at  the  Oxford  boat-
[races  every  boat  has  some  one  beside  it  who  counts  aloud
[the  last  few  seconds  before  the  gun  fires.  Of  course,  finally,
[the  names  of  numerals  may  be  repeated,  as  any  words
I  may,  without  a  meaning. But  to  do  this  is  not  to  count.


158  Abstract  Quantity.  [booki.

Thus  even  simple  counting  always  involves  the  elements
of  the  judgment — of  an  identity  exhibited  in  differences
and  affirmed  of  reality;  which  elements  present  themselves
in  the  shape  of  a  distinct  unit  within  a  continuous  nature,
its  relation  to  which  nature  is  indicated  by  number.  And
that  the  simple  enumerative  judgment  is  always  singular
follows  from  the  nature  of  the  unit,  which  is  theoretically
nothing  more  than  the  content  to  which  we  ascribe  dis-
tinctness pro  hac  vice;  in  other  words,  the  unit  is  the
difference  or  part  that  is  taken  as  distinct  by  one  act  of
judgment,  and  it  may  be  said  that  what  we  count  in
enumeration  are  primarily  the  acts  of  judgment,  as  acts  of
distinction  and  relation  within  a  certain  continuous  quality.

Does  it  follow  from  this  view  that  Number  arises
essentially  out  of  the  sense  of  time  or  succession  ?  I  answer,
Not  'essentially.'  The  connection  between  number  and
succession  is  a  psychological  and  not  a  logical  question.
If  it  is  impossible  for  two  related  acts  of  judgment  to  be
simultaneous,  as  we  are  naturally  inclined  to  suppose  that  it
is,  then  two  enumerative  judgments  must  always  be  suc-
cessive, and  in  this  sense  enumeration  may  depend  upon
succession.  Nor  do  I  think  that  this  connection  is  necessa-
rily disproved  by  such  observations  as  that  perception  can
take  note  of  six  balls  at  once  being  dropped  into  a  box.
Such  a  perceptive  judgment,  in  my  opinion,  is  probably
one,  and  applies  the  result  of  previous  counting,  as  an  attri-
bute resting  on  experience,  to  the  perceived  content,  just  as
we  can  judge  the  number  of  pips  on  a  card  from  the  mere
form  of  the  pattern  which  they  make.  So  if  we  count  by
twos,  fours,  or  more,  I  think  that  this  is  complex  counting,
the  unit  being  the  mass  of  two  or  four,  known  to  be  such
by  previous  experienced  A  logical  order  among  the  units,
i.  e.  an  order  in  which  the  apprehension  of  each  unit  has  a
place  in  the  series  conditioned  by  the  separate  apprehension
of  other  units,  is  of  the  essence  of  enumeration,  although  a
material  order  among  them,  i.  e.  such  an  order  that  a  unit

*  Vid.  the  Author's  Knowledge  and  Reality,  p.  92,


Chap.  IV.]  Number  and  Magnitude.  159

changes  its  value  by  changing  its  place  in  the  series,  is  in
contradiction  with  the  essence  of  enumeration.  Unless
there  is  what  I  have  called  a  logical  order,  we  have  no
security  that  the  unit  as  such  is  apprehended  at  all,  and
what  we  take  for  enumeration  may  really  be  an  inference
like  that  which  detects  from  the  pitch  of  a  note  the  number
of  vibrations  per  second  which  generate  it.  But  whether  a
logical  order  of  succession  can  only  be  realised  in  tempo-
rally successive  acts  of  apprehension,  is  a  purely  psycho-
logical question ;  the  more  so,  that,  as  we  have  seen,
succession  and  time  do  not  exclude  unity  of  judgment,  and
the  acts  of  judgment  which  constitute  an  enumeration
might  even,  like  an  inference,  be  brought  under  the  head
of  a  single  continued  state  of  consciousness.  In  any  case,
succession  in  time  would  be  a  mere  psychical  condition  of
number,  following  from  the  unity  of  the  intelligence  as
forbidding  (if  it  does  forbid)  two  judgments  to  be  made
at  once.  There  is  no  sort  of  ground  for  connecting  enume-
ration with  the  apprehension  of  equal  parts  in  time,  unless
the  equality  of  such  parts  be  the  material  purpose  of  the
apprehension  in  hand.

/3.  It  follows  from  the  nature  of  enumeration  that  tite  Discrete
distinction  between  discrete  and  continumts  magnitude  ^w^tinnous."
the  opposition  of  miniber  as  discrete  to  space ^  time,  and  other
kinds  of  quantity  as  continuons,  rests  on  a  confusion.
Number  as  mere  names  or  mere  sounds  may  be  discrete,
i.  e.  disconnected,  but  then  it  has  nothing  to  do  with  magni-
ttude.  but  is  a  set  of  mere  words  destitute  of  meaning.  On
le  other  hand,  number  considered  as  the  vehicle  of  magni-
ide  or  quantity  is  both  discrete  and  continuous ;  and  the
ime  is  true  of  all  quantity,  as  we  saw  in  examining  the
)mparative  judgment,  and  it  is  the  essence  of  quantity
to  be  so.  The  distinctness  of  natural  units  such  as  recipro-
|:ally  exclusive  material  things  does  not  make  any  difference
)f  principle.  They,  like  all  units,  are  numbered  in  virtue  of
a  continuous  quality  or  identity  which  pervades  them,  and
every  unit,  though  it  may  only  be  suggested  by  a  mo-


i6o


Abstract  Quantity.


[Book  1.


Judgments
affiliated  to
Enumera-
tive  Judg-
ment.


The  Plural
or  Particu-
lar Judg-
ment.


mentary  purpose,  is,  like  them,  a  distinguishable  part,
within  a  whole  or  aggregate  consisting  of  such  parts.  The
books  on  a  shelf  are  not  merely  discrete,  and  the  inches  in
a  yard  or  the  units  of  weight  in  a  gravitating  body  are  not
merely  continuous ;  in  every  case  the  unit  is  a  distinct  or
discrete  part,  and  the  sum  is  a  self-identical  or  continuous
whole.  It  is  nonsense  to  speak  of  counting  without  saying
what  is  to  be  counted  ;  and  in  specifying  what  is  to  be
counted  we  specify  at  once  the  nature  of  the  continuity  and
the  rule  of  the  discretion.

ii.  Judgmejiis  affiliated  to  the  Enumerative  Judgment.

The  Enumerative  Judgment  is  the  root  of  all  quanti-
tative determination ;  and,  as  we  have  seen,  all  the  matter
of  knowledge  above  the  stage  of  pure  quality  is  either  in
itself  or  in  its  conditions  accessible  to  quantitative  deter-
mination. But  the  judgment  in  question  also  contains,  that
is  to  say,  w,  though  in  a  depressed  form,  the  universal
essence  of  judgment  in  the  principle  of  identity  and  differ-
ence ;  and  it  is  possible  for  this  to  be  revived  by  one  kind
of  abstraction  into  a  different  relation  from  that  of  unit  and
sum,  as  it  is  for  it  to  be  further  specialised,  by  an  opposite
abstraction,  into  an  idealised  form  of  the  latter  relation.
But  before  indicating  the  genesis  of  other  types  of  judg-
ment out  of  enumeration,  we  must  glance  at  those  which
it  necessarily  generates,  and  which  must  be  regarded  as
species  of  itself.  These  are,  a.  the  Plural  or  Particular,  and
/3.  the  Collective  judgment.

a.  The  Plural  Judgment,  or  the  Particular  of  traditional
Logic,  differs  in  no  essential  respect  from  the  singular. It
is  not  however  accurately  described  as  a  mere  aggregate
of  singular  judgments,  and  indeed  this  description  does  not  ^
explain  itself,  for  is  such  an  aggregate  several  judgments  opj
only  one  ?  I  cannot  doubt  that  the  plural  judgment  is  a  single|
act  of  thought,  which  determines  a  certain  whole  or  aggre-
gate, given  at  the  moment,  though,  it  may  be,  in  process  of]
modification,  by  an  attribute  or  condition  such  as  two,  three,]
or  some  other  number  which  expresses  the  reciprocal  relational


Chap.  IV.]  Plural  implies  Ratio.  l6i

of  its  homogeneous  parts.  Thus  the  plural  judgment  is  not
an  aggregate  of  judgments,  but  a  judgment  about  an  aggre-
gate. Therefore  the  number  is  to  be  regarded  as  a  predi-
cated content  or  determining  condition,  attributed  to  a  whole
consisting  of  the  units  which  have  been  counted  up  to  the
point  at  which  the  plural  judgment  is  taken.  That  the
element  of  continuity,  or  designation  of  the  whole  whose
parts  are  to  be  counted,  must  quarrel  with  a  determination
by  any  number  short  of  this  whole  ^,  and  demand  a  con-
tinuance of  the  enumerative  process,  is  only  a  case  of
what  happens  in  every  judgment  of  perception.  Such
judgments,  as  we  have  seen,  never  embody  'pure  cases,'
i.  e.  they  never  fit  precisely  into  a  groove  of  necessity,
that  is,  a  sequence  of  reason  and  consequent.  There  is
always  something  relevant  omitted,  or  something  irrelevant
retained.

Thus  the  particular  judgment  from  the  very  first  implies
a  ratio ;  and  the  implication  may  be  so  strong  as  to  take  the
judgment  out  of  the  category  of  particular  judgments  and
place  it  in  that  of  collective  judgments,  e.  g.  '  "^"^f^  members
of  the  House  of  Commons  are  Liberals.'  As  every  one
knows  that  the  House  of  Commons  contains  altogether
670  members,  this  is  just  the  same  as  to  say  'half  of  the
House  of  Commons  are  Liberals.'  It  depends  for  its
meaning  on  a  completed  enumeration,  and  therefore  is
essentially  a  collective  judgment.  It  may  even  be  re-
garded as  an  instance  of  simple  measurement,  i.  e.  of  ratio
treated  as  pure  historical  fact,  in  as  far  as  its  purpose  is  to
measure  the  voting  power  of  the  Liberals  against  that  of
other  sections  of  the  House.  The  Liberals  and  the  whole
House  are  equated  in  respect  of  numerical  strength ;  the
whole  House  minus  half  of  the  whole  House  =  the  Liberals.
In  short,  as  we  have  seen,  the  completed  judgment  of
Enumeration  passes  into  Measurement,  though  the  idea  of
Measurement  is  prior  to  the  act  of  Enumeration.  If  on  the
contrary  we  say  that  'Two  Cambridge  men  are  coming

'  See  Knowledge  and  Reality,  p.  65,  and  above,  lutrodaction,  pp.  54  flf.
VOL.  I.  M


1 62  Abstract  Quantity.  [booki.

down  to  lecture,' the  number  two  \s,  prima  facie  non-signifi-
cant ;  the  judgment  tells  us  nothing  of  the  ratio  borne  by  two
to  the  whole  number  of  Cambridge  men,  nor  even  to  the
whole  number  of  local  lecturers.  Nevertheless  if  we  think
of  it,  we  shall  see  that  either  it  was  wholly  superfluous  to
mention  the  number,  or  else  some  context  or  latent  allusion
must  imply  a  ratio.  Number  has  significance  only  by
comparison  with  number.

The  Plural  Judgment  is  equivalent  to  the  Particular  of
traditional  logic  in  the  form  '  Some  men  are  mortal.'  There
is  no  essential  difference  between  '  some  men  are  mortal '
and  '  four  men  are  mortal ';  the  two  assertions,  if  interpreted
literally,  belong  to  the  same  logical  class.  It  will  appear
however  below  that  this  literal  interpretation  does  not
render  the  true  meaning  of  the  old  '  Particular  Judgment  ^.'
But  we  must  distinguish  from  the  above  a  form  which
has  been  employed  in  quasi-numerical  arguments,  viz.  the
form  '  Most  men  are  mortal,'  or  '  The  majority  of  the  House
of  Commons  that  has  just  been  elected  is  Conservative.'
These  judgments  are  not  merely  particular  even  in  immediate
appearance.  They  present  on  their  very  surface  the  relation
to  a  collective  judgment  which  we  saw  to  be  at  least  latent
in  every  particular  affirmation.  'Most'  or  'The  majority'
means  more  than  half;  and  when  we  speak  of  half  or  a
quarter  or  any  ratio  we  assume  a  completed  enumeration
of  the  whole.  We  must  therefore  now  pass  to  the  Collective
Judgment  or  Judgment  of  completed  Enumeration.
The  Col-  ^'  '^^^  Collective  Judgment  has  of  late  been  rightly  dis-
lective  ^  tinguished  from  the  Generic  and  from  the  Hypothetical
Judgments,  which  correspond  to  the  real  meaning  of  the
Universal  Judgment  known  to  traditional  logic.  It  has
been  justly  pointed  out  that  the  '  All '  of  mere  extension  or
numerical  totality  does  not  really  express  what  is  intended
by  such  an  allegation  as  'All  men  are  mortal,'  or  'All  triangles
have  their  three  angles  equal  to  two  right  angles.'  In  such
cases  complete  Enumeration  is  inconceivable,  and  something

^  See  on  *  Modal  Conversion,'  chap.  7,  below.


Judgment.


CHAP.rv.]  Meaning  of '' All,"  163

quite  different,  viz.  the  universal  connection  of  attributes
which  are  not  results  of  enumeration  (for  number  is  also  an
attribute)  is  really  the  matter  affirmed.  So  far  all  is  clear,
and  Logic  has  greatly  gained  by  the  distinction.

But  when  we  come  to  erect  a  difference  of  kind,  and  to
treat  the  collective  judgment  as  purely  on  a  level  with  the
singular  or  particular  judgment,  and  as  in  fact  a  mere
aggregate  of  singular  judgments,  and  as  thus  separated  by
an  impassable  gulf  from  the  universal  judgment ;  and  when
we  further  maintain  that  enumeration  cannot  warrant  its
own  completeness,  then  we  fall  into  difficulty  and  confusion.
Even  the  Plural  Judgment,  as  we  saw,  is  not  a  mere  aggre-
gate of  singulars.

The  Collective  Judgment  I  understand  to  be  a  judgment
made  about  a  definite  group  or  limited  class  of  individuals,
which  individuals  are  taken  to  have  been  exhaustively
enumerated,  or  to  be  capable  of  exhaustive  enumeration.
It  is  not  necessary  that  the  individuals  should  all  be
together  in  space  or  time ;  it  is  not  necessary  that  they
should  all  exist  or  have  existed  with  any  specific  degree  of
reality ;  but  it  is  necessary  that  every  one  of  them  should  be
brought  before  the  mind,  or  should  be  capable  of  being
brought  before  the  mind,  in  a  distinct  and  separate  enumer-
ative  judgment.  Such  judgments  are  'All  the  books  on
that  shelf  are  German,'  '  Every  horse  that  I  have  bought
in  the  last  three  years  has  gone  lame,'  'AH  the  kings  of
England  since  the  Conquest  but  three  have  died  natural
deaths.'

When  it  is  said  that  such  judgments  as  these  are  on  a
level  with  the  singular  or  the  particular  judgment,  I  take
it  that  we  must  exclude  from  the  meaning  of  singular  or
particular  judgment  all  dependence,  whether  latent  or
explicit,  on  completed  enumeration  ;  otherwise  our  account
of  the  collective  judgment  becomes  circular.  But  if  so,
then  we  have  the  '  allness '  of  the  collective  judgment  staring
us  in  the  face  as  a  distinction  between  it  and  the  particular.
And  this  distinction  becomes  an  absolute  severance  if  we

M  2


1 64  Abstract  Quantity.  [booki.

are  to  insist  that  the  process  of  enumeration,  a  process  which
consists  in  singular  and  particular  judgments,  cannot  furnish
the  warrant  of  its  own  completeness.

I  have  maintained  elsewhere^,  and  it  follows  from  my
whole  conception  of  the  judgment,  that  enumeration  cannot
be  made  intelligible  on  such  a  view.  It  is  impossible  for
enumeration  to  go  on  apart  from  the  discriminative  control
exercised  by  the  pervading  nature  of  the  totality  under
construction  upon  the  successive  apprehension  of  the  units.
It  is  this  control  which  takes  the  form  of  an  inchoate  per-
ception of  ratio  as  the  counting  advances,  and  of  the  warrant
of  exhaustiveness  when  it  is  completed.  Apart  from  such
an  influence  of  the  whole  there  can  be  no  purpose  in
enumeration.  No  doubt  therefore  complete  enumeration  is
in  one  sense  on  a  level  with  the  singular  and  particular
judgments,  because  they  present  though  in  an  imperfect
form  (as  we  have  excluded  the  case  of  definite  ratios  such
as  '  Half  A  are  B')  the  same  relation  to  totality  which  the
collective  judgment  completes.

But  for  the  same  reason  it  is  impossible  to  justify  an
absolute  separation  between  the  collective  and  the  generic
or  universal  judgment.  The  collective  judgment,  we  may
say,  must  emanate  from  an  enumeration  of  actual  indi-
viduals, or  at  least  of  individuals  actually  brought  before
the  mind,  one  by  one.  But  how  can  we  carry  a  genetic
distinction  like  this  into  the  interpretation  of  judgments
whose  actual  content  is  precisely  the  same?  It  is  the
commonest  thing  in  the  world  for  a  judgment  to  be  taken
as  exhausting  a  group  or  set  of  distinct  individuals,  without
resting  in  any  way  upon  direct  enumeration ;  in  other
words,  a  judgment  that  might  be  obtained  by  enumeration
constantly  is  obtained  in  some  other  way.  The  fact  is,
that  when  we  have  gone  beyond  sets  of  individuals  present
to  perception  or  within  the  power  of  the  mind  to  represent
at  once  as  distinct  individuals  (and  no  one  could  possibly
propose  to  limit  the  collective  judgment  to  such  sets  of

^  Knowledge  and  Reality,  p.  77.


Chap,  rv.]  Unity  of  an  Aggregate.  165

individuals),  we  have  entered  on  a  process  which  is  plainly
and  obviously  mediate  and  hypothetical,  and  the  fact  that
many  judgments  thus  mediated  are  taken  to  refer  to  a  finite
group  of  individuals  is  a  mere  instance  of  our  general  rule
that  every  content  in  judgment  is  taken  to  have  the  reality
of  which  it  is  capable.

Is  there  then  no  difference  between  a  collective  judgment
and  a  true  universal  ?  Certainly  there  is  a  difference,  and
it  is  illustrated  though  not  constituted  by  the  connection
of  the  former  with  complete  enumeration.  It  is  simply  this,
that  a  collective  judgment  deals  with  a  content  which  can  be
presented  to  thought  as  possessing  the  character  of  an  aggre-
gate of  exclusive  units,  or  finite  whole  of  enumeration.  This
point  of  view  would  involve  identification  of  the  collective
judgment  with  the  aggregate  of  singulars  only  if  all  enu-
meration were  simple  enumeration.  But  a  numerical  whole
may  be  obtained  by  mediate  enumeration,  and  it  is  to
a  whole  so  obtained  that  the  content  of  many  collec-
tive judgments  is  equivalent.  It  is  true  that  a  collective
judgment  is  not  a  genuine  universal,  but  it  is  not  true  that
such  a  judgment  must  be  equivalent  to  a  mere  aggregate
of  singulars.  This  conception  is,  in  the  first  place,  irrecon-
cilable with  the  unity  of  the  judgment^;  and,  in  the
second  place,  is  not  warranted  by  the  plain  meaning  of  the
propositions  in  question.  It  is  impossible  to  designate  a
number  of  individuals  by  a  common  name  as  the  subject  of
a  judgment  without  implying  a  significance  in  the  designa-
ition.  Even  if  the  predication  is  true  of  the  different  indi-
sviduals  for  different  reasons,  the  common  interest  of  the
[judgment  must  give  it  unity  of  purport.  An  arbitrary
limitation  either  of  number  or  of  time  tends,  no  doubt,  to
[interfere  with  this  significance,  and  to  force  an  extensional

'  No  doubt  there  is  a  difficulty  here.  *  George  and  John  have  gone  to  school,'
'  The  two  boys  have  gone  to  school.'  Does  the  former  sentence  convey  two
judgments  and  the  latter  only  one  ?  The  latter  only  one,  certainly ;  the  former
conveys  two  at  first  sight ;  but  if  we  bear  in  mind  our  account  of  the  Judgment
as  an  act  in  time,  we  shall  see  that  these  two  may  readily  pass  into  one.  See
p.  85,  supra.


1 66  Abstract  Quantity.  [Book  i.

meaning  upon  the  judgment ;  but,  as  we  know,  the  purest
extensional  meaning  is  only  a  minimum  of  intensional
meaning.  And  there  are  collective  judgments  which  could
not  possibly  be  taken  as  mere  aggregates  of  singulars.
Such  are  reflective  historical  judgments.  'All  States  of  the
North  American  Union  are  prohibited  from  interfering
with  the  tenure  of  property.'  I  need  not  know  this  by
simple  enumeration ;  I  may  know  it  mediately,  as  a  pro-
vision of  the  Constitution  of  the  United  States.  I  need  not
even  be  actually  able  to  enumerate  the  States  which  are
included  in  the  Union.  But  I  know  that  they  are  numer-
able, because  I  know  that  they  are  an  actual  limited
group,  and  so  I  judge  it  as  a  historical  fact,  though  I  may
know  it  also  as  rooted  in  the  nature  and  tendencies  of  the
Union.

The  fact  is,  that  superficial  as  is  the  view  which  makes
'  allness '  the  adequate  expression  of  logical  necessity,  it  is
if  possible,  more  superficial  to  deny  their  connection.  From
the  first  use  of  the  designative  idea,  necessity  makes  itself
felt ;  and  '  allness,'  or  the  aspect  of  a  finite  totality  as  an
aggregate  of  exclusive  units,  is  never  without  a  warrant  and
significance  however  arbitrarily  the  totality  may  be  taken.
It  is  by  the  certainty  of  complete  enumeration  that  count-
ing becomes,  as  was  said  above,  the  organon  of  precise
measurement.  For  instance,  the  series  of  enumerative
judgments,  '  One,  two,  three,  four,  five,  six  ounces  are  in
the  scale  balancing  this  packet,'  is  convertible,  in  virtue  of
their  exhaustiveness,  into  the  judgment  of  measurement,
'  This  packet  weighs  6  oz.'

We  saw  that  the  act  of  counting  tends  to  assume  inde-
pendence, as  if  it  could  have  a  meaning  apart  from  any
continuous  nature  in  the  units,  i.  e.  in  short,  apart  from  an
identity  presented  as  a  totality.  This  is  not  merely  owing
to  the  customary  abbreviation  of  the  enumerative  judgment,
as  when  we  seem  to  count  by  saying  '  One,  two,  three,'  etc. ;
rather  such  an  abbreviation  is  made  possible  by  the  appa-
rently independent  reality  of  number. This  appearance  of


Chap.  IV.]  Abstract  Number.  167

reality  depends  on  the  fact  that  the  numerical  series  does
furnish  a  generalised  scheme  of  the  relation  of  whole
and  part  when  envisaged  in  the  form  of  total  and  units.
Such  a  generalised  scheme,  though  meaningless  except  as
applied  to  a  positive  content  of  thought,  contains  neverthe-
less definite  and  necessary  relations  which  are  imposed  by
it  on  any  content  to  which  it  is  applied ;  and  the  pre-
supposition that  it  is  taken  as  applied  to  an  adequate
content  fades  into  forgetfulness  that  it  need  be  applied  to
a  content  at  all.  But  need  it.?  We  may  surely  investigate
the  numerical  series  for  its  own  sake.  When  we  say  that
twice  50  is  ICO,  need  we  mean  that  twice  50  of  some  parti-
cular kind  of  thing  are  ico  of  it.?  We  may  surely  mean
t  in  the  numerical  series  100  is  separated  from  50  by  the
same  number  of  places  as  50  from  o,  which  relation  involves
a  variety  of  consequences,  all  true  of  the  numerical  series
as  such.  No  doubt  this  is  so,  but  it  will  be  observed  that
we  have  to  appeal  to  the  idea  of  places  in  the  series,  and
these  places  are  the  abstractions  of  enumerative  judgments
and  imply  relation  to  a  content.  Such  places  contain  in
themselves  no  reason  for  stopping  at  any  point  of  enume-
ration, are  applicable  hypothetically  to  every  content,
but  can  yield,  in  their  abstraction,  no  conclusion  about  any.
It  is  a  well-known  fallacy  to  obtain  a  concrete  estimate  by
multiplying  an  amount  by  the  number  of  times  its  cause  as
;given  has  to  be  repeated.  Hardly  any  concrete  quantity  is
naffected  in  the  ratio  of  its  increase  by  a  great  addition  to
its  absolute  magnitude.  To  say  that  the  stock  or  trading
capital  of  England  is  worth  so  many  hundred  millions
sterling  is  a  graphic  expression  for  the  fact  that  its  amount
is  a  million  times  as  great  as  an  amount  worth  so  many
hundred  pounds.  But  in  the  economical  sense  of '  worth '
the  conclusion  is  nonsense.  A  thing  is  onh-  worth  what
it  will  fetch,  and  who  is  going  to  buy  the  whole  stock  of
England  if  thrown  on  the  market  at  once,  at  the  rate  which
is  commanded  by  the  amounts  of  stock  which  change  hands
the  common  way  of  trade  ?


1 68  Abstract  Quantity.  [booki.

J  The  numerical  series  is  an  ideal  scheme  of  the  relations

of  units  within  totals,  but  is  itself  unreal  apart  from  its
applications,  not  because  it  is  ideal^  but  because  it  has  in
itself  no  element  of  limit  or  totality  ;  i.  e.  its  units  make  no
choice  between  belonging  to  one  total  and  another,  and  so
naturally  belong  to  an  infinite  series.

This  aspect  of  the  enumerative  judgment — the  system  of
number — leads  to  the  consideration  of  complex  counting
and  of  numerical  infinity. But  before  pursuing  the  enquiry
in  this  direction  I  pause  to  indicate  a  reversion  or  conver-
gence to  which  the  simple  enumerative  judgment  tends  in  its
other  aspect.
Enumera- V-  Every  Concrete  enumerative or  collective  judgment
tion  be- bears  reference  to  an  identity  which  controls  its  selection  of
(ieneric. units  and  fixes  the  limit  of  its  enumeration. This  identity
'^he  is  the  pervading  nature  of  the  units. Now  if  this  nature

I£xll3.ll  stive

Judgment,  consists  in  the  characteristic  quality  of  an  individual  thing,
then  it  is  possible  that  on  the  one  hand  it  suggests  no  con-
ceivable limit  of  enumeration,  while  on  the  other  hand  the
characteristic  individuality  claims  completion  in  respect  of
its  positive  connections  of  content.  In  such  a  case  there  is
no  true  whole  of  repetition  concerned ;  no  whole,  that  is  to
say,  which  in  its  nature  draws  nearer  completion  by  every
repetition  of  an  individual.  The  books  in  this  room  are
a  true  whole  of  repetition  ;  the  human  race,  to  our  present
knowledge,  is  not.  Thus  a  problem  which  is  first  attacked
\  by  enumeration  may  transform  itself  unawares.  Meeting
with  a  series  of  individuals  in  which  we  perceive  some
important  attribute,  we  enumerate  them  as  cases  of  it.  But
soon  their  characteristic  nature  reacts  on  the  function  of
thought,  and  we  find  our  successive  judgments  attempting
\  to  grasp  a  connection  of  content  and  not  to  exhaust  a  sum
total  of  cases.  Now  as  enumeration  is  on  one  side  selective
analysis,  we  continue  to  give  our  judgments  enumerative
form,  and  even  couch  them  by  anticipation  in  the  shape  of
exhaustive  totality.  Then  we  have  what  has  been  called
Induction  by  simple  enumeration,  with  its  results  embodied


i


Chap.  IV.] A  further  meaning  of  "All."  169

in  the  Judgment  of  Allness,  which  to  avoid  an  un-English
expression  I  shall  venture  to  speak  of  as  the  Exhaustive
Judgment.

The  most  varied  opinions  have  prevailed  as  to  the  nature
and  value  of  this  process,  obviously  because  it  forms  a  tran-
sition between  two  distinct  lines  of  thought,  marking  the
revival  within  mere  enumeration  of  the  sense  of  characteristic
individuality  which  belongs  to  the  judgment  of  proportional
quality  and  the  kindred  judgments  of  individualising  thought.
We  meet,  for  instance,  with  the  question  whether  the  judg-
ment '  All  men  are  mortal '  claims  to  represent  completed
enumeration  or  not.'  The  answer  is  that  its  form  and  its
meaning  are  at  variance ;  in  form  it  does  make  this  claim
and  in  meaning  it  does  not.  Such  a  judgment  indicates
that  the  spirit  of  analogy  and  of  characteristic  quality  has
reawakened  within  the  form  of  mere  enumeration,  and  is
sweeping  the  line  of  evolution  back  towards  judgments
which  predicate  individual  and  generic  character.  When
we  come  to  speak  of  Induction  as  a  phase  of  Inference  we
shall  see  that  there  are  good  reasons  for  such  an  awakening.
At  present  we  have  only  to  note  that  the  exhaustive  judg-
ment '  All  men  are  mortal '  is  a  transitional  form  between
a  collective  judgment  on  the  one  hand,  and  the  generic
judgment  '  Man  as  such  is  mortal,'  also  couched  in  the  form
'  All  men  are  mortal,'  on  the  other  hand  ;  and  arises  from  an
incipient  reaction  of  positive  content  upon  ideal  schematic
form  in  the  process  of  making  number,  before  an  external
separation  has  been  effected  between  the  two  elements.  It
is  idle  to  demand  the  perfection  of  complete  enumeration
from  the  exhaustive  judgment ;  for  this  latter  is  a  popular
and  unstable  form  of  thought,  and  must  simply  be  recog-
nised as  such.  It  is  better  to  treat  the  collective  judgment
as  inevitably  leading  up  to  a  connection  of  attributes  and
as  therefore  having  its  ideal  in  the  spirit  of  the  exhaustive
judgment,  than  to  interpret  the  exhaustive  judgment
according  to  the  letter,  as  having  its  ideal  in  the  collective
judgment. We  shall  have  to  recur  to  this  subject  when


170  Abstract  Quantity.  [Booki.

we return to the central development of  the  judging
function.

We  have  now  to  trace  the  further  abstractions  which  have
their  root  in  enumeration.
Judgment  8.  On  the  side  of  the  relations  between  units  and  total  as
Counting?  such,  abstraction  being  made  from  the  positive  nature  of  the
contents  submitted  to  enumeration,  the- judgment  of  com-
pleted enumeration  is  an  ideal  or  generalised  scheme  of  all
possible  constructions  of  such  purely  numerical  totalities.
It  starts  from  a  measurement  or  collective  judgment  of  the
type  '  All  the  books  in  this  room  amount  together  to  a
thousand.'  The  further  abstract  development  of  such  a
predication  may  be  brought  about  by  the  most  various
occasions,  but  it  essentially  consists  in  this,  that  the  positive
concrete  units  of  enumeration  which  stand  as  subject  in  a
J  judgment  like  the  above-  are  replaced  by  generalised  rela-
tions of  ideal  units  equated  to  a  total  which  also  becomes
ideal  and  generalised.  This  substitution  reveals  the  fact
which  alone  makes  it  possible,  viz.  that  in  the  numerical
scheme  all  units,  being  abstract,  retain  the  same  value  in
every  part  of  the  series  ;  e.  g.  the  units  between  50  and  60
count  for  as  many  as  and  no  more  than  those  between  30
and  40  or  between  o  and  10.  Thus  a  series  of  units  may
safely  be  named  by  the  number  of  places  which  it  occupies
counting  from  the  zero  of  the  whole  numerical  series,  but  it
is  the  same  wherever  and  however  often  it  recurs.  It  is  on
this  characteristic  of  number  that  the  possibility  of  mediate
or  complex  counting  and  of  equation,  which  is  implied  in
these  processes,  depends.  If,  for  instance,  we  desire  to  re-
compose  the  sum  of  books  in  the  room  by  equating  it  to
component  sums  or  to  factors,  we  do  so  by  conducting  a
number  of  enumerations  separately  from  the  beginning  of
the  numerical  series,  and  then  combining  their  totals
according  to  the  rules  of  that  series,  which  are  known  to  us
simply  by  experience.  Thus,  if  we  count  700  English
books,  200  German,  and  ico  Italian,  we  find  that  these
sums,  considered  merely  as  numbers,  are  equal  to  the  total


Bin


chap.R'.] ''Mediate'  and  ''Abstract!'  171

1000  obtained  by  direct  enumeration.  *  Considered  merely
as  numbers,'  because  the  rules  of  the  numerical  series  cannot
warrant  us  against  any  material  influence  of  the  actual
individual  things  upon  each  other.  Some  of  them  may
cancel  each  other,  or  may  produce  more  by  combination ;
but  this  has  nothing  to  do  with  the  properties  of  number,
except  for  the  fact  that,  when  known,  it  is  capable  of
numerical  expression.  The  component  numbers  in  the
subject  of  a  judgment  like  the  above  (These  700  English
volumes  with  these  200  German  and  those  100  Italian  make
up  1000  volumes)  correspond  to  the  designative  ideas  in  an
affirmation  like  '  This  execrable  ruffian  should  be  hung.'  It
is  hard  to  say  if  they  are  general  conditions,  or  if  they  are
specifications  of  fact  taken  as  true  merely  in  the  present
instance.  ''

But  it  is  clear  that  in  such  enumerations  we  are  on  the
brink  of  mediate  counting,  that  is  to  say  of  the  abstract
equation  700  +  200  +  100=1000,  just  as  in  the  individual
judgment  mentioned  above  we  were  on  the  brink  of  the
generalisation  '  Every  execrable  ruffian  ought  to  be  hung.'
'  Mediate  counting ! '  it  will  be  said ;  '  then  we  are  in  the
region  of  inference,  and  no  longer  in  that  of  judgment.'  It
is  certain  that  when  we  speak  of  necessary  connection
between  attributes,  of  hypothetical  or  mediate  judgment,
we  are  in  the  region  of  inference ;  but  it  is  not  the  case  that
we  are  therefore  out  of  the  region  of  judgment.  By
'  mediate '  in  the  present  connection  I  only  intend  to
designate  a  judgment  which  has  for  explicit  subject  a
generalised  or  abstract  attribute,  and  being  free  from  any
demonstrative  or  sign  of  perception  must  be  taken  as
conditioning  its  predication  by  that  attribute.  Such  a
predication  is  mediated,  i.  e.  is  affirmed  of  any  particular
dividual  only  through  and  in  virtue  of  the  attribute
xpressed  in  the  subject.  Mediate  counting  forms  the
transition  between  ratio  and  proportion  just  as  mediate
measurement  does.  Logically  speaking  every  equation
expresses  a  ratio,  and  a  ratio  becomes  a  proportion  directly


172


Abstract  Quantity.


[Book  I.


Abstract

Counting

and

Infinite

Series.


it  is  applied — directly  its  unit  is  taken  as  variable.  Thus
an  algebraical  equation,  which  exists  with  a  view  to  a  variety
of  applications,  is  ipso  facto  a  proportion.

Complex  counting  is  a  case  of  mediate  counting ;  that
case  in  which  we  count  by  units  which  are  themselves  sets
of  numerical  places,  i.  e.  by  multiplication  and  division,  which
may  for  the  purpose  be  taken  to  include  addition  and  sub-
traction. The  only  difference  between  multiplication  and
division  on  the  one  hand  and  addition  or  subtraction  on  the
other  is  the  equality  to  each  other  of  the  subordinate  totals
in  multiplication  and  division,  which  enables  them  to  be
counted  as  units  and  their  number  indicated  like  any  other
number,  by  its  place  in  the  series  counting  from  o  upwards.
In  this  sense  multiplication  is  a  mere  abridgment  of  addition  ;
it  is  only  a  question  of  form  whether  we  say  3  +  2+2  +  2  =  8
or  2  X  4  =  8.  This  latter  equation  represents  what  is  essen-
tial as  well  in  addition  and  subtraction  as  in  multiplication
and  division,  a  total  analysed  into  factors  and  a  process.
Complex  counting,  as  a  case  of  mediate  counting,  shares  its
abstract,  hypothetical,  and  necessary  character.

e.  The  processes  of  mediate  counting  deal  with  the  con-
struction and  reconstruction  of  any  given  numerical  total.
Even  the  quantitative  relation  of  part  and  whole  in  its
extremest  abstraction  retains  thus  much  of  structural  unity,
that,  given  a  total  of  units,  it  can  only  be  dissolved  or
reconstructed  according  to  certain  rules  of  combination  or
analysis.  But  the  quantitative  unit  per  se,  or  rather  the
one-sided  abstraction  of  the  quantitative  unit,  the  mere
numerical  place  which  no  positive  identity  links  with  the
other  places  of  the  series,  has  in  it  no  principle  of  totality
or  limitation,  that  is  to  say  no  reason  for  stopping  short
after  one  set  of  such  places  rather  than  after  another.
Enumeration  of  units  as  such  may  be  continued  at  plea-
sure, and  the  process  of  so  continuing  it  without  limit  is
summarised  in  the  conception  of  numerical  infinity.

We  have  here  tracked  to  its  genesis  this  paradoxical
conception,  in  its  right  place  so  powerful  for  good,  and  in


Chap.  IV.]  Progress  to  hifinity.  173

its  wrong  place  for  evil.  It  would  not,  perhaps,  be  beyond
the  province  of  logic  to  comment  on  its  use  in  its  right
place,  that  is  to  say  in  mathematical  science ;  nor  could  a
more  interesting  subject  readily  be  found.  But  lack  of
mathematical  knowledge  deters  me  from  attempting  such
a  comment  with  any  degree  of  detail ;  for  a  logician  is
aware  of  the  risk  incurred  by  venturing  beyond  his  know-
ledge, and  as  he  preaches  that  there  is  no  royal  road  to
truth,  must  keep  clear  of  the  delusion  that  he  himself  has
found  one.  But  any  one  may  offer  a  suggestion,  and  this
I  propose  to  do  by  saying  that  it  seems  to  me  most  pro-
bable that  the  scientific  use  of  the  conception  of  infinity
rests  in  every  case  on  a  justifiable  neglect — justifiable,
because  that  which  is  neglected  has  a  known  nature,  and
may  be  set  down  as  insignificant  either  altogether  or  from
the  point  of  view  of  a  specific  purpose.

If,  to  take  a  coarse  and  non-mathematical  instance,  we
set  about  any  task  in  a  way  which  is  demonstrably  perverse
and  inadequate,  a  looker-on  is  justified  in  disregarding  our
efforts.  He  will  tell  us  that  we  shall  not  get  it  done  in
that  way  if  we  live  to  the  age  of  Methuselah.  Translated
into  logical  phrase,  his  comment  means  that  our  way  of
going  to  work  has  not  the  element  of  totality;  the  suc-
cessive efforts  which  make  up  the  series  of  our  activity,
bearing  no  relation  to  the  nature  of  the  work  to  be  done,  do
not  include  in  themselves  successive  parts  of  it,  and  therefore,
as  regards  it,  have  no  tendency  to  come  to  an  end  and  will
(unless  we  choose  to  leave  off)  go  on  to  infinity.  We  may  even
apply  this  illustration  to  a  simple  mathematical  idea,  say  to
the  case  of  parallel  straight  lines.  We  may  consider  as  the
task  to  be  accomplished  such  a  change  of  direction  in  either
or  both  of  a  pair  of  parallel  straight  lines  that  they  should
cease  to  be  parallel  to  one  another.  And  we  may  consider
as  the  means  adopted  to  bring  about  such  a  change  the
production  of  the  two  straight  lines  in  their  original  direc-
tioiL  Then  our  supposed  on-looker  would  say,  '  You  might
go  on  for  ever  at  that  game;'  'You cannot  change the


1^4  Abstract  Quantity.  [booki.

direction  of  a  straight  line  by  producing  it  in  its  original
direction.'  Therefore  it  would  be  justifiable  to  neglect  the
production  of  parallel  straight  lines  to  infinity,  in  other
words  to  pronounce  that  such  production  cannot  alter
their  character  as  parallel  straight  lines,  i.  e.  that  even  if
produced  to  infinity  (which  they  can  never  actually  be)
they  do  not  meet.  Probably  such  a  case  as  this  would
hardly  be  recognised  as  an  instance  of  the  mathematical
use  of  infinity,  but  in  as  far  as  it  introduces  the  conception
of  quantitative  infinity  as  a  term  in  a  positive  definition  it
would  seem  to  be  at  least  analogous  to  such  a  use.

More  subtle  and  interesting  are  cases  in  which  the  con-
tinuance of  the  series  makes  a  difference  in  the  task  to  be
performed,  but  the  whole  possible  difference  can  be  shown
to  fall  within  certain  known  limits.  These  cases,  which  I
presume  to  be  of  the  nature  of  infinitesimals  rather  than
of  infinites  (both  of  which  must  fall  under  the  head  of
infinite  enumeration)^  may  be  reduced  to  the  same  class  as
the  former  if  we  reflect  that  in  the  former  also  the  differ-
ence fell  within  known  limits,  but  these  were  limits  of  kind,
whereas  we  are  now  speaking  of  limits  of  quantity.  In
cases  of  this  second  type  we  know  that  a  series  could  be
continued  to  infinity,  and  that  some  difference  would
be  made  to  the  problem  before  us  by  this  being  done ;
but,  on  the  other  hand,  we  are  aware  of  a  limit  within
which  the  whole  series  must  fall,  and  we  are  therefore  able
to  pronounce  that  the  difference  which  can  be  made  by  its
continuance  after  a  certain  point  is,  at  least  for  our  imme-
diate purpose^  a  negligible  quantity.  Such,  I  take  it,  must
be  the  principle  of  any  process  which  determines  e.  g.
the  area  of  a  circle  by  treating  it  as  between  the  area
of  a  polygon  inscribed  in  the  circle  and  that  of  a  poly-
gon described  about  it.  So  far  as  I  follow  the  exoteric
utterances  of  mathematicians  ^,  the  principle  of  abstraction
based  on  a  positive  knowledge  of  the  capacities  of  a  series

*  I  have  in  mind  more  especially  Mr.  Spottiswoode's  Presidential  Address  to
the  British  Association,  which  unluckily  I  cannot  refer  to.


Chap.  IV.]  Infinite  Number.  175

must  be  at  the  root  of  the  employment  of  mathematical
infinity.

But  our  immediate  business  is  with  infinite  number  con-
sidered logically,  i.e.  with  a  view  to  its  general  place  in
knowledge. And  from  this  point  of  view  we  have  to  notice —

(1)  That  the  idea  of  infinite  number  has  its  genesis  in  a  <^  \
one-sided  abstraction,  viz.  in  the  notion  of  counting  without
having  anything  in  particular  to  count  ^  which  corresponds
to  the  idea  of  difference  without  identity,  and  of  parts
without  a  whole.  By  such  an  abstraction  the  enumerative
judgment  is  destroyed,  the  essence  of  judgment  as  such —
the  exhibition  of  identity  in  difference  or  of  the  whole  in  its
parts — being  withdrawn  from  it ;  and  the  names  of  the
numbers  are  turned  into  a  meaningless  repetition,  the  pur-
pose of  enumeration  having  disappeared.  We  are  no  \
longer  saying  '  One  tree,  two  trees,  three  trees,'  etc.,  but  we  j
are  merely  saying  '  One,  two,  three,'  and  it  is  for  this  reason

that  we  need  never  stop.

(2)  Being  one-sided,  the  idea  of  infinite  number  is  self-  J
contradictory.  The  essence  of  number  is  to  construct  a
finite  whole  out  of  homogeneous  units.  The  idea  of
numerical  infinity  arises  from  neglecting  the  continuous
nature  of  the  unit,  and  therefore  omitting  the  element
which  alone  arrests  computation  at  one  number  rather
than  at  another.  Thus  an  infinite  number  would  be  a
number  which  is  no  particular  number,  for  every  particular
number  is  finite.

(3)  It  follows  from  this  that  infinite  number  is unreal,
lis  does  not  mean  that  there  may  not  actually  be  more

mits  of  one  kind  or  another  than  we  can  count  in  the  time
It  our  disposal  or  in  any  finite  lapse  of  time. The  state-

lent  deals  with  the  nature  of  number,  not  with  the  extent
)f  the  sensuous  universe. If,  to  put  a  common  idea  coarsely,

/e  are  asked,  '  Supposing  that  you could  travel  through

*  A  series  which  is  ex  hypothesi  infinite  comes  under  the  head  even  if  it
ems  to  have  a  positive  nature.  For  its  nature  ex  hypothesi  does  not  deter-
ae  the  number  of  its  units.


176  Abstract  Quantity.  [booki.

space  for  ever,  and  never  come  to  an  end  of  it,  must  not
space  contain  an  infinite  number  of  units?  or  even  if  you
can  go  on  subdividing  a  given  portion  of  matter  for  ever,
must  it  not  contain  an  infinite  number  of  parts  ? '  to  such
questions  we  could  only  reply,  'Things  or  the  parts  of
things  may  quite  conceivably  transcend  our  power  to  count.
But  except  in  view  of  a  finite  goal,  number  does  not  help
us,  does  not  tell  us  anything,  grounds  no  ratio  of  parts  to
whole.  We  should  in  fact  never  give  up  counting  any  units
that  had  interest  for  us,  and  should  in  doing  so  always  be
at  some  finite  number.  But  if  it  could  be  miraculously
revealed  to  us  that  there  was  no  end,  then  I  think  we  should
stop  counting,  unless  the  units  in  question  entered  into
subordinate  or  graduated  totals  which  had  an  interest
for  us.  Thus  we  go  on  counting  the  stars  for  definite
reasons.  Their  relation  to  us  is  graduated,  and  several
subordinate  totals  within  their  number  have  already  been
completed  by  enumeration ;  e.  g.  stars  of  the  first  eight
magnitudes  have  been  identified  and  counted.  In  counting
them  we  have  always  in  view  some  definable  total  to  be
constructed  or  to  be  corrected.  Who  counts  the  waves  of
the  sea  ?  The  hope  of  complete  enumeration  is  the  justifi-
cation of  counting.'

Then  why  do  we  count  the  years  and  centuries?  Do
we  pretend  to  know  that  they  will  have  a  numerable
sum  ?  and  when  they  have  reached  it,  do  we  imagine
that  the  race  will  survive  to  take  an  interest  in  the  com-
pleted enumeration?  In  the  first  place,  for  each  of  us
time  seems  to  have  an  end  ;  and  in  the  second  place,  all
history  is  parcelled  out  in  overlapping  epochs  which  we
have  an  interest  in  measuring.  We  do  not  in  fact  ordina-
rily know  or  compute  the  whole  numerable  series  of  years
that  has  elapsed  since  the  first  events  of  ascertainable  date
in  history;  we  adopt  this  or  that  era  according  to  some
overpowering  historical  interest  which  makes  it  seem  to
mark  a  fresh  beginning.  We  do  not  count  the  years  to
ascertain  their  total  quantity,  but  to  give  them  names  by


Chap. R'.]  An 'infinite  Series!  i^y

which  we  can  fix  events  ;  and  as  a  means  to  fixing  the
relations  of  events  we  no  doubt  desire  to  note  the  quantita-
tive relations  within  the  total  of  historical  time  which  has
elapsed  down  to  any  given  present.  If  we  are  pressed
further,  and  told,  '  But,  after  all,  the  years  may  go  on  for
ever  and  the  human  race  may  go  on  counting  them  for
ever,'  we  can  only  reply  that  the  faculties  with  which  we
are  endowed  refuse  to  express  this  '  ever.'  that  at  any  point
taken  in  the  series  we  should  be  at  some  finite  number,  and
that  if  a  conviction  of  the  endlessness  of  the  series  could  be
miraculously  impressed  upon  our  minds  we  could  only
conclude  that,  except  as  a  record  of  the  past,  counting  the
years  was  an  unmeaning  form,  seeing  that  the  nature  of  the
series  could  not  be  represented  in  number.  A  very  simple
case  of  enumeration  ad  injinitiitn  would  be  that  in  which,
by  persistent  errors  of  identification,  we  should  count  the
same  objects  over  again,  round  and  round,  without  being
aware  that  we  were  doing  so.  In  such  a  case  it  is  obvious
that  the  conception  of  number  would  be  destroyed  so  far  as
these  objects  themselves  were  concerned,  though  if  they
wa-e  at  known  intervals  of  space  we  might  none  the  less
use  them  as  a  measure  for  other  things.  When  we  measure
with  a  foot-rule  we  do  in  fact  count  the  inches  marked  on  it
over  and  over  again  in  this  way,  not  for  their  own  sake  or
the  process  would  be  infinite,  but  only  for  the  sake  of  some
other  quantity  which  we  characterise  by  them.  In  this
respect  the  inch-marks  on  the  foot-rule  correspond  to  the
physical  changes  which  indicate  the  day  and  year,  and
which  sene  as  a  measure  for  occurrences  other  than
themselves.

An  infinite  series,  then,  is  not  anything  which  we  can  >/
represent  in  the  form  of  number,  and  therefore  cannot  be.
qua  infinite  series,  a  fact  in  our  world.  Relations  may
indeed  be  given  as  actual  which  only  an  infinite  series  could
represent  on  their  quantitative  side,  such  as  the  ratio  of  the
diameter  to  the  circumference  of  a  circle.  But  for  this  very
reason they  never  are adequately  represented on that

VOL.  I.  N


178  Abstract  Quantity.  [booki.

side,  although  we  may  know  and  argue  from  the  positive
character  of  the  series,  which  ex  hypothesi  its  prolongation
to  infinity  is  not  to  change.  Our  constructive  judgment
requires  parts  and  a  whole  to  give  it  meaning.  Parts
Wb  I  iJ^J'slated  to  any  whole  cannot  be  judged  real  by  our
thought.  Their  significance  is  gone,  and  they  are  parts
of  nothing.

Thus  it  is  nonsense  to  speak  of  any  definite  number,  say
ICO,  as  a  portion  of  number,  in  the  sense  in  which  a  foot  is
a  portion  of  a  yard,  or  a  minute  of  an  hour.  The  question
'what  portion?'  at  once  disposes  of  any  such  relation.
Number  as  such  cannot  be  identified  with  any  particular
total  such  that  a  given  number  is  a  definite  fraction  of  it.

Closely  allied  to  infinite  number,  and  in  a  great  measure

depending  upon  it,  are  the  conceptions  of  abstract  or  ideal

time,  and  of  abstract  or  ideal  space,  tending  respectively  to

generate  ideas  of  infinite  time  and  of  infinite  space.

Abstract  ^.  In  speaking  of  Comparison  we  saw  that  every  '  now  '

and  Infinite  ,  ,  .  ,  . .  j 1  . 1 > 1

Time. tends  to  become  a  part  withm now and then,  and  every

'  then  '  again  within  *  then  '  and  '  then.'  This  analysis  is  very
gradually  brought  about,  speaking  historically,  in  the  evolu-
tion of  the  tense-system.  The  sense  of  Time  is  in  the  first
instance  the  mere  consciousness  of  continuity  in  succes-
sion, that  is,  the  mere  perception  of  a  succession  or  pro-
cess of  change.  This  sense  however  being  only  possible
through  setting  off  the  succession  against  a  comparatively
permanent  background  of  consciousness,  is  in  embryo  the
comparison  of  successions,  with  the  development  of  which
comparison  measurement  of  Time,  and  with  this  the  abstract
idea  of  Time,  are  brought  into  existence.  The  measurement
of  Time  consists  in  the  equation  of  one  set  of  perceptible
changes  identified  by  a  common  nature,  to  another  set  of
perceptible  changes,  in  the  sense  that  the  beginning  and  end
of  a  numbered  series  of  the  one  coincide  with  the  beginning
and  end  of  a  numbered  series  of  the  other.  The  enumera-
tion of  phases  of  one  series  that  coincide  with  one  or  more
phases  of  the  other  series  might  conceivably  be  undertaken


Chap  IV.] What  IS  Unvarying  Duration  f  1 79

apart  from  any  belief  that  either  series  has  a  constant  dura-
tion in  time,  i.  e.  if  repeated,  would  occupy  the  same
amount  of  duration  as  before  ;  but  in  enquiring  whether
such  a  belief  actually  exists  we  must  distinguish  between  the
reasonable  doubt  whether  any  portion  of  any  series  ever  can
or  will  be  repeated  absolutely  without  physical  modifica-
tions which  may  affect  its  duration,  and  the  unmeaning
doubt  whether  a  series  assumed  to  be  repeated  without
physical  or  causal  variation  may  not  nevertheless  have
varied  in  the  absolute  amount  of  duration  which  it  occupied.
The  former  kind  of  doubt  will  only  lead  to  a  demand  for
criticism  and  reciprocal  adjustment  of  our  time-measures,
together  with  the  temperate  scepticism  which  our  lack  of
exhaustive  knowledge  must  produce  about  our  acquaintance
with  even  those  natural  conditions  which  we  have  most  fully
investigated.  The  latter  kind  of  doubt,  if  pressed  to  its  con-
clusion, would  reduce  the  enumeratfon  of  successive  changes
to  a  statement  of  mere  numerical  fact  wholly  devoid  of  signifi-
cance. Such  enumeration  would  not  be  impossible,  but
would  scarcely  fulfil  the  requirements  of  judgment.  It
would  be  on  a  level  with  the  mere  repetition  of  the  names
of  numbers.  It  is  hardly  necessary  to  give  instances  ;
every  one  can  see  at  once  that  if  we  entertain  the  idea  of
variation  in  the  measures  of  time  occurring  without  any
reason,  all  equation  of  successions  becomes  futile,  and  ceases
to  afford  any  ground  of  expectation  or  of  inference.

But  though  a  doubt  of  this  nature  has  been  mentioned
by  great  writers,  yet  it  has  never  been  extended  to  affect  the
only  element  of  our  time-perception  which  is  essential  to  its
utility,  viz.  the  constant  ratio  obtaining  between  the  succes-
sions employed  as  measures  of  duration.  This  limitation  of
the  doubt  arises  from  the  confusion  in  which  it  originates,
the  confusion  which  consists  in  treating  the  whole  as  if  it
were  a  part.  Time,  for  us,  is  a  relation,  a  ratio,  and  its
constancy  is  the  constancy  of  this  ratio.  If  all  processes  in
time  maintain  a  constant  ratio  to  one  another  so  far  as  they
are  unaffected  by  physical  modifications,  then  there  is  no

N 2


i8o  Abstract  Quantity.  [bookI.

meaning  in  suggesting  that  tried  by  some  unknown  or  im-
possible standard  ^  they  may  be  variable.  But  yet  this
suggestion  is  a  natural  suggestion  arising  out  of  a  natural
confusion.  We  naturally  frame  an  idea  of  duration  in
itself,  as  that  which  has  successive  parts  really  and  abso-
lutely equal,  because  equality  of  successive  parts  in  terms
of  one  of  our  time-measures  is  what  we  are  always  endeav-
ouring to  ascertain  from  some  other  time-measure.  And
we  forget  that  equality,  if  we  exclude  from  it  the  idea  of
measurement,  ceases  to  be  an  intelligible  conception.  This
ideal  of  duration  then,  whose  successive  parts,  though  ex
hypothesi  not  measurable,  are  assumed  to  be  equal,  we
actually  set  up  as  an  imaginary  measure  against  the  totality
of  consenting  measures  and  processes  the  ratio  of  which
to  one  another  forms  our  world  of  time,  and  is  merely
represented  in  an  abstract  and  ideal  form  by  '  duration  in
itself.'  '  Duration  in  itself,'  says  '  Locke  ^,'  is  to  be  con-
sidered as  going  on  in  one  constant,  equal,  uniform  course.
But  none  of  the  measures  which  we  make  use  of  can  be
known  to  do  so ;  nor  can  it  be  assumed  that  their  assigned
parts  or  periods  are  equal  in  duration  one  to  another.'

But  'duration  in  itself  not  being  a  relation  of  successions,
could  not  be  perceived  as  time,  nor  could  any  being  that
perceives  as  we  perceive  be  aware  of  equality  or  the
opposite  in  its  successive  parts  ;  for  equation  is  necessary  to
equality.  If,  on  the  other  hand,  we  set  it  against  our  time-
measures,  then  it  becomes  one  measure  amotig  many,  and
in  case  of  a  discrepancy  that  should  remain  unaccountable  it
is  only  caprice  that  could  choose  which  we  should  regard  as
right.  The  question  in  fact  would  be  unmeaning,  for  the
whole  discussion  obviously  originates  in  the  attempt  to
transfer  an  attribute  which  depends  on  a  comparison  to  a
set  of  terms  considered  in  themselves  and  apart  from  com-
parison, and  then  to  suggest  a  comparison  between  them

^  E.  g.  by  measurement  of  successive  phases  against  each  other,  which  is
tx  hypothesi  impossible.
^  Essay,  book  II,  14.  21.


Chap. IV.] ^Duration-  and* Thin^-ifi-Hself!  i8r

(the  supf>osed  equal  parts  of  ideal  duration)  and  the  totality
of  our  time-measures  of  whose  reciprocal  relations  those
parts  are  an  idealised  form.

But  this  confusion  does  not  naturally  originate  a  doubt
of  the  constant  ratio,  physical  disturbances  being  allowed
for,  of  our  measures  of  time  compared  with  one  another.
For  it  is  this  constant  ratio  from  which  the  idea  of  duration
as  such,  hypostasised  by  abstraction  into  duration  in  itself
with  equal  successive  parts,  is  derived  ;  and  to  doubt  the
constancy  of  this  ratio  would  be  to  deprive  ourselves  of
that  idea  of  duration  on  which  the  confusion  itself  depends.
If  oscillations  of  a  pendulum  of  fixed  length,  such  as  are
normally  equal  when  measured  by  the  rotation  of  the  earth,
may  varj'  without  a  physical  cause  affecting  either  of  the
compared  motions,  the  conception  of  uniform  duration  is
destroyed,  and  no  equation  of  successions  is  more  than
an  isolated  fact.  On  such  a  hypothesis  there  would  be
nothing  to  generate  the  idea  of  uniform  duration,  and  no
measure  of  time  with  which  to  compare  that  idea.

The  antithesis  between  duration  in  itself  and  our  measures
of  it  is  merely  a  case  of  the  antithesis  between  the  thing- in-
itself  and  our  knowledge  of  it.  It  is  possible,  though  un-
meaning, to  doubt  whether  our  knowledge  as  a  whole  is
real  knowledge — i.  e.  corresponds  to  some  test  or  condition
which  we  may  imagine  as  imposed  upon  it  from  without.
The  possibility  arises  from  our  possession  of  an  ideal  of
knowledge,  which  by  an  act  of  abstraction  can  be  set  in
antithesis  to  the  actual  whole  of  knowledge  from  which  it  is
abstracted.  But  it  is  impossible  when  operating  in  detail
upon  the  matter  of  experience  to  doubt  the  existence  of
rational  connection  in  any  one  particular  group  of  appear-
ances ;  for  by  so  doing  we  paralyse  the  understanding,
which  can  only  act  in  the  search  for  causes,  and  leave
neither  knowledge  to  condemn  nor  an  ideal  by  which  to
condemn  it.  We  shall  have  to  return  to  this  subject  in  a  later
chapter,  when  we  speak  of  the  postulates  of  knowledge.

We  have  just  seen  that  it  is  idle  to  treat  the  whole  as  if


1 82  Abstract  Quantity.  [Booki,

it  were  a  part — our  reciprocally  adjusted  measures  of  time
as  if  they  were  one  measure  among  many.  It  is  also  worth
while  to  observe  in  the  same  instance  the  impossibility  of
making  a  part  do  duty  for  the  whole,  which  is  strikingly
exemplified  in  the  ultimate  data  of  time.  No  process  of
perceptible  change  is  a  trustworthy  measure  of  time  except
in  as  far  as  it  is  equated  with  other  processes  of  known  con-
stancy, and  observed  to  be  in  itself  free  from  physical
causes  of  variation.  That  is  to  say,  the  part  can  only  be
taken  as  a  definite  standard  when  it  has  been  criticised  in
the  light  of  the  whole.  This  is  true  of  all  premises  of
knowledge.

Amount  of  Time,  like  all  quantity,  is  measured  by  the
enumeration  of  units  which  have  a  known  value.  But,
unlike  any  other  kind  of  quantity  with  the  exception  of
space,  it  follows  number  not  only  into  mediate  counting
(all  quantity  does  this),  but  into  enumeration  ad  infinitum.

Simple  enumeration  in  the  case  of  Time  gives  such  judg-
ments as  '  He  died  three  years  ago,'  '  It  is  seven  days  since
I  saw  him,' — which  expand  by  reference  to  a  standard  of
succession  the  mere  indications — probably  of  various  nature
and  origin  ^ — conveyed  by  the  tenses.

Mediate  or  complex  counting  in  Ti.me  gives  such  judg-
ments as  the  equation  '  365  days  =  one  year.'  Such  judg-
ments deal  with  our  real  and  ideal  time  as  the  result  gained
by  comparison  and  equation  of  actual  processes  in  expe-
rience. But  the  abstraction  which  stands  as  subject  tends
to  assert  itself  as  a  something  apart  from  the  actual  pro-
cesses whose  relation  it  is,  and  thus  as  we  have  seen
generates  the  conception  of  '  duration  in  itself '  or  '  absolute
time,'  which  again  having  lost  the  element  of  totality  pre-
cipitates us  into  the  idea  of  infinite  time.

Enumeration  to  infinity,  when  applied  to  the  parts  of
time, has characteristics analogous to those of infinite

*  Tense  need  not  have  originated  in  the  idea  of  succession  at  all ;  and  may
often  have  arisen  out  of  the  expression  of  emotions  or  anticipations  or  out  of
the  mere  negation  of  presence  as  a  perception  of  a  certain  kind.


Chap.  IV.]  Reality  of  World  in  Time.  183

number,  but  more  striking,  inasmuch  as  time  is  closely
bound  up  with  the  attributes  of  actual  existence.  Infinite
time  is,  like  infinite  number,  an  unenditig  whole,  which  is  a
contradiction  in  terms.  That  is  to  say,  we  are  prevented
by  the  nature  of  our  minds,  if  by  no  other  cause,  from
attaching  any  meaning  to  infinite  time  as  a  quantitative
expression  indicating  an  aggregate  expressible  by  enumera-
tive  judgments.  Whether  the  problem  (for  so  we  must
consider  it)  which  is  put  before  us  in  this  form  is  capable  of
becoming,  not  a  problem,  but  a  fact,  in  some  other  form,  is  a
question  which  does  not  concern  us  here.  The  instances
which  are  alleged  to  show  that  an  infinite  series  may  be
given  point  somewhat  in  this  direction ;  I  allude  to  such  an
instance  as  that  of  the  relation  between  diameter  and  cir-
cumference. However  this  may  be,  it  remains  true  that
infinite  time,  as  a  mere  quantity  of  duration,  is  a  phantom
generated  by  a  meaningless  abstraction.

But,  as  we  asked  whether  there  may  not  he  endless
numerable  units,  so  we  may  be  challenged  to  ask,  May
there  not  or  must  there  not  have  been  an  endless  chain  of
actual  occurrences  in  succession  ?  And  if  we  are  prepared
to  deny  reality  to  every  endless  series,  must  we  not  first  of
all  deny  it  to  the  actual  world  as  in  time,  and  we  may  add
by  anticipation  of  the  next  section,  as  in  space  ?  There  can
be  no  doubt  that  the  relativity  of  events  and  appearances
in  time  and  space  does  involve  for  our  minds  an  infinite
progression  in  the  way  of  referring  one  thing  or  appearance
to  another  as  its  cause  or  explanation,  or  at  least  as  in  some
way  its  determinant.  We  can  hardly  conceive  that  we  are
really  counting  in  a  circle,  but  our  position  is  just  as  hope-
less as  if  we  were.  Our  ideas  of  reference,  determination,
causation,  do  not  allow  us  to  fancy  a  first  event,  a  beginning
of  time,  or  a  limit  of  space.  On  the  other  hand,  so  far  as
we  can  understand,  it  is  impossible  for  such  a  succession  as
we  postulate  to  be  actual  in  the  sense  in  which  a  known
section  of  history  is  actual.  It  is  not  merely  something
more  than  we  do  construct  as  a  whole  ;  it  is  something  the


184  Abstract  Qtcantity.  [booki.

essence  of  which  is  to  be  incapable  of  construction  as  a
whole.  We  may  say  if  we  like  that  we  are  bound  to  think
of  such  a  succession  as  actual  in  the  sense  that  it  is  a
problem  inseparable  from  the  relativity  of  our  world  ;  but
we  cannot  take  the  endless  series  qua  endless  as  a  positive
element  in  our  organised  experience.

In  dealing  however  with  the  succession  of  actual  events
having  positive  character  and  content  we  are  in  spite  of
their  serial  appearance  on  different  ground  from  that  of
abstract  time  or  equable  succession  as  such.  Actual
events — the  history  of  our  world — have  more  in  them
than  a  mere  series.  We  may  say  either  that  the  world
in  time  and  space  is  not  mere  succession  and  externality,
or  that  the  real  world  which  intelligent  perception  pre-
sents to  us  is  not  merely  a  world  in  time  and  space.
The  human  mind  and  will  are  always  busy  in  turning  a
series  into  a  coherent  and  almost  individual  whole,  projected
more  or  less  definitely  on  a  scene  of  time  and  space,  but  not
exhausted  in  its  meaning  by  the  nature  of  that  background.
Greece  for  instance  or  England  are  not  mere  'geogra-
phical expressions  ;'  and  if  they  were  they  would  still  have
a  physical  unity  of  a  deeper  kind  than  the  juxtaposition  of
extended  units  or  the  sequence  of  a  series.  They  are
historical  realities,  but  their  coherence  lies  in  their  meaning.
Therefore  in  denying  that  for  us,  in  our  way  of  under-
standing, an  endless  progress  can  be  a  real  and  controlling
factor  of  organised  experience,  we  do  not  deny  the  reality  of
the  phenomenal  world  as  presented  to  intelligent  perception.
Abstract  ^.  Xhe  nature  of  Space  is  in  many  respects  analogous

Space.  to  that  of  time,  and  bears  on  the  whole  a  similar  relation  to
the  system  of  number,  with  its  degrees  of  simple  or
categorical  counting,  mediate  or  complex  counting,  and
counting  ad  infinitum.  The  corresponding  grades  of  ab-
straction in  dealing  with  space  may  be  identified  as —

a.  The  measurement  of  actual  distances.

b.  The  theoretical  relations  of  spatial  qualities,  including
the  whole  of  the  mathematical  sciences,  excepting  what  may


Chap.  IV.]  A  ctual  Distances.  185

be  included  in  the  mere  system  of  number,  viz.  all  forms
of  simple  and  generalised  (algebraical)  arithmetic  ;  and

c.  The  conception  of  infinite  space.

In  defence  of  the  subdivision  here  adopted,  I  venture
with  a  good  deal  of  diffidence  to  suggest  that  the  idea  of
infinite  space  is  not  an  idea  belonging  to  geometrical
science.  The  employment  of  the  idea  of  infinity  in
geometrical  reasoning  belongs,  if  the  account  above  given
of  it  is  correct,  to  the  second  of  the  above  heads,  being
really  an  abstract  mode  of  describing  a  geometrical  whole.
If  enough  space  is  given  to  make  manifest  the  positive
nature  of  the  whole  before  us,  it  would  seem  that  no
addition  can  really  affect  the  case.  Quantitative  infinity
may  be  a  roundabout  description  of  a  direction  or  a  quality.
That  a  certain  straight  line  is  infinite  may  only  mean  that
its  direction  is  such  that  it  can  never  meet  a  certain  other
straight  line.

a.  The  measurement  of  actual  distances  is  prima  facie  a  Measure-
case  of  simple  measurement,  and  must  obviously  arise  at  ™^ai°
the  point  where  positions  distinguished  by  the  comparative  distances,
judgment  are  discovered  to  have  relations  of  distance  and
direction  reducible  to  degree.  Degrees  of  distance  from
assigned  points,  and  proportions  of  such  degreeS:  considered
as  properties  of  objects,  pass  into  the  determination  of  con-
crete individuals  and  of  their  characteristic  attributes.  In
this  respect  we  have  considered  them  above.  But  also,
receiving  their  significance  from  a  system  of  equations  by
which  all  spatial  magnitudes  are  brought  to  a  common
denomination,  they  contribute  to  reflection  upon  space
in  the  abstract,  a  reflection  which  is  developed  by  the
process  of  enumeration  applied  to  the  parts  of  space  when
thus  idealised  and  considered  for  their  own  sake.  The
system  of  measures,  as  we  have  seen  above,  is  a  connecting
link  between  simple  and  complex  measurement.  It  is
prima  facie  a  system  of  ratios,  and  requires  an  arbitrary
starting-point  to  give  it  meaning.  But  when  taken  as
general  and  typical  it  passes  into  a  system  of  proportions,


1 86  Abstract  Qziantity.  [booki.

as  we  see  in  such  a  judgment  as  '  This  map  is  on  the  scale
of  twelve  inches  to  the  mile.'  There  need  not  be  twelve
inches  in  any  direction  in  the  actual  map  before  us;  the  phrase
expresses  a  proportion,  not  a  simple  fact  of  enumeration.
It  is  not  necessary  to  know,  for  the  purpose  of  the  scale,
how  much  absolutely  (i.  e.  in  the  mass  of  other  relations)
an  inch  or  a  mile  is ;  we  can  interpret  the  scale  if  we  know
how  many  inches  there  are  in  a  mile.  The  abstract
numerical  expression  i  :  6^,^60,  which  is  a  proportion
as  governing  the  relation  between  every  part  of  the  map
and  the  corresponding  part  of  reality,  represents  what  the
formula  '  one  inch  to  the  mile '  really  means  to  say.  We  may
compare  this  case  with  the  financial  expression  'five  per
cent.';  some  newspapers  will  print  this  as  £^  per  cent,
which  is  a  confusion  between  singular  or  merely  actual,  and
generalised  or  proportional  ratio.  They  do  not  really
mean  that  £^  need  be  concerned ;  their  predication  is  as
true  if  the  interest  in  question  only  amounts  to  five  shillings.
The  expression  five  per  cent,  is  simply  a  fractional  or  pro-
portional expression.

Now,  when,  e.  g.  in  the  two  instances  just  quoted,  the
reference  to  an  arbitrary  magnitude  is  dropped  out,  and
when  moreover  the  generalised  equation  is  taken  as  ex-
pressing the  relations  between  distances  in  space  com-
bined in  a  certain  way,  then  we  have  ideal  or  mediate
enumeration  as  it  exists  in  geometrical  science.  '  Mediate '
because  the  proportion  contained  in  the  equation  is  af-
firmed of  reality  as  qualified  by  definite  spatial  attributes,
which  therefore  enter  into  the  content  of  the  equation  as
interrelated  conditions.  The  equation  of  an  ellipse  is  a
hypothetical  judgment  asserting  that  the  axes  of  an  ellipse
(or  other  quantities  involved  in  an  ellipse)  being  treated  in  a
certain  way  will  be  always  equal  to  themselves  treated  in  a
certain  other  way.  It  is  obvious  that  being  mediate  this
geometrical  enumeration  or  computation  is  also  complex  ^ ;
for  the  conditions  by  which  it  is  mediated  may  involve

^  See  p.  172  above.


Chap.  IV.]  Geometrical  Equation.  187-

units  of  any  degree  of  numerical  complexity.  Thus  judg-
ments dealing  with  squares  and  cubes,  still  more  with  conic
sections,  presuppose,  on  their  numerical  side,  more  or  less
elaborate  enumerative  processess  as  involved  in  the  forma-
tion or  apprehension  of  the  spatial  unit.

b.  The  generalised  relations  of  spatial  attributes  form  a  Geometry,
systematic  science  with  a  distinctive  object-matter.

(i)  'Any  two  sides  of  a  triangle  are  together  greater  than  Indivi-
the  third  side.' 'Triangles  upon  equal  bases  and  between  Spatial°
the  same  parallels  are  equal  to  each  other.' '  The  square  of  Figures.
the  hypotenuse  is  equal  to  the  squares  of  the  containing
sides.' '  The  angles  at  the  base  of  an  isosceles  triangle  are
equal  to  one  another.'

Such  judgments  as  these  are  among  the  simplest  results
of  mediate  enumeration  ^  as  applied  to  space,  and  they  pre-
sent an  obvious  peculiarity  shared  with  them  in  a  high
degree  by  complex  judgments  of  mere  number,  and  in  a
less  degree  by  judgments  that  compute  time.  Although
geometrical  science  proper  consists,  as  a  science,  exclusively
of  the  equation  with  each  other  of  variously  described
spatial  units,  which,  if  we  further  consider  the  sciences  of
motion,  we  must  take  as  referred  to  units  of  time,  yet  under
this  '  variously  described '  there  lurks  a  whole  classificatory
science  of  forms  possessed  of  structural  unity  and  quasi-
organic  relations  between  part  and  whole.  Thus  in  the
definitions  and  definitory  judgments  of  geometry,  as  in  the
inductive  judgment  of  enumeration,  there  is  a  revival  of
that  structural  subordination  of  part  to  whole  which,
though  dormant,  yet  is  never  dead  so  long  as  judgment  has
a  meaning.  The  triangle,  the  square,  the  circle,  the  ellipse,
though  each  of  them  capable  of  being  exhaustively  defined  by
generalised  enumerative  processes  dealing  with  homogeneous
units,  have  also  an  aspect  of  structural  unity  and  subordina-
tion of  parts  to  the  dominant  quality  of  the  whole.  Both
clauses  of  this  statement  are  however  subject  to  reservation.

'  For  the  further  distinction  between  arithmetical  and  geometrical  reasoning,
-eBk.  II.  ch.  3.


1 88  Abstract  Quantity.  [bookt.

In  the  first  clause,  the  expression  '  homogeneous  units  '  is
not  entirely  adequate  to  the  facts.  Distances  in  the  three
spatial  dimensions  are  indeed  as  distances  homogeneous,
but  it  can  hardly  be  said  that  an  angle  is  homogeneous
with  a  distance  or  direction,  although  a  proportion  of  dis-
tances is  an  exhaustive  measure  of  an  angle.  Therefore,
though  an  angle  may  be  represented  in  terms  of  distance,
yet  in  considering  the  elements  in  the  spatial  structure
of  a  square  or  triangle  we  must  assume  the  angle  as  well  as
the  straight  line.  The  apprehension  of  converging  direction
is  hardly  given  in  the  mere  apprehension  of  direction.

In  the  same  clause  we  must  qualify  the  assertion  that  all
geometrical  shapes  can  be  exhaustively  defined  by  equation
of  quantities.  I  presume  that  the  impossibility  of  squaring
the  circle  implies  a  difference  of  kind  between  circle  and
straight  line  which  is  disguised  but  not  destroyed  by  the
efficient  methods  employed  to  express  the  one  in  terms
of  the  other  ^.  Here  again,  in  the  adequacy,  as  distin-
guished from  exhaustiveness,  with  which  quantitative  equa-
tions represent  characteristics  of  kind  not  wholly  reducible
to  quantity,  we  find  an  analogy  with  the  various  systems  of
necessity  which  are  superimposed  upon  one  another  in  the
organic  and  moral  worlds.

And  the  truth  of  our  second  clause  would  be  a  good
deal  interfered  with,  if  not  annihilated,  by  enlarging  our
list  of  geometrical  figures,  and  by  regarding  every  figure  in
all  its  possible  variations.  As  to  the  first  point,  every
spatial  figure  is  a  geometrical  figure  ;  and  those  which  we
mentioned,  together  with  others  that  occur  to  the  mind  at
once  as  commonly  considered  in  plane  and  in  solid
geometry,  have  no  real  prerogative  of  existence  to  the
exclusion  of  trapeziums  or  any  other  irregular  figures,  even
if  partly  curved  and  partly  rectilinear  in  outline.  The
world  would  be  easier  to  explain  than  it  is  (or  so  it  seems
to  a  superficial  glance)  if  irregularity,  ugliness,  and  disease  did

'  The  quadrature  of  the  parabola  shows  that  the  impossibility  of  squaring
the  circle  does  not  arise  from  the  mere  difference  between  curve  and  right  line.


Chap.  IV.]  Continuity  destvoys  Speciesf  189

not,  as  they  do,  exist  by  law  and  necessity^  just  as  much  as
symmetry,  beauty,  and  health.  It  may  be  said  in  defence
of  treating  the  regular  figures  as  if  there  were  no  others,
that  all  others  are  reducible  to  them, — all  rectilineal  figures
to  triangles,  and  so  on.  But  this  is  a  mere  ideal  reduction
by  measurement,  and  in  no  sense  a  deduction  of  the  exist-
ence of  the  one  from  that  of  the  other.

And  again,  most  '  figures  '  of  which  we  speak  are  really
classes  of  figures,  even  if  we  take  all  '  similar '  figures  as  the
same,  i.  e.  disregard  size  and  only  look  to  characteristic  pro-
portion. I  do  not  know  why  we  should  not  take  the  conic
section  as  '  a  figure '  and  treat  the  circle  simply  as  a  case  of
it.  Anyhow  the  ellipse  comprises  in  itself  a  w^hole  class  of
figures  which  are  qualitatively  quite  different  from  each
other,  and  pa.ss  by  imperceptible  gradations  into  figures
which  are  not  elliptical.  By  insisting  on  facts  like  these
we  might  melt  away  the  individuality  of  typical  figures,
and  exhibit  every  group  of  geometrical  shapes  as  destitute
of  common  characteristics  beyond  those  which  flow  from
the  mere  genetic  relation  itself.  Thus,  for  instance,  an
ellipse  when  just  passing  into  a  circle  or  into  a  straight
line  has  none  of  the  characteristics  which  we  associate  with
elliptical  form,  although  the  analytic  relation  by  which  its
nature  is  theoretically  determined  may  be  within  the  limits
which  must  as  a  matter  of  geometrical  classification  be
assigned  to  that  figure.  Such  a  treatment  would  be  the
triumph  of  explanatory  theory  and  necessary  connection
aver  individuality  and  characteristic  quality.  But  it  is  a
reatment  of  which,  in  geometry,  the  facts  admit,  and  which
ren  in  the  organic  world  is  rendered  indispensable  by  the
lea  of  continuous  evolution.

It  is  right  that  attention  should  be  drawn  to  the  above
^servation.  No  habit  is  more  pernicious  than  that  of
ssuming  what  is  obvious  and  famihar  in  a  certain  sphere

*  I  do  not  say  by  the  same  necessity ;  I  only  mean  that  they  result  mechani-
illy  from  natural  conditions.  Any  limitation  of  which  this  statement  may  be
ipable  mxist  refer  to  a  distinction  of  kinds  of  necessity.


I  go  Abstract  Quantity.  [booki.

to  exhaust  the  contents  of  that  sphere.  Every  figure  is
geometrical ;  and  even  if  all  irregular  figures  can  be  reduced
for  purposes  of  reckoning  to  the  more  regular  types,  this
does  not  justify  us  in  speaking  theoretically  as  though  there
were  no  figures  in  space  besides  those  which  have  been
selected  as  typical  by  geometricians.

We  must  meet  such  conceptions  now  as  we  shall
have  to  meet  them  again,  perhaps  more  than  once,  in  the
evolution  of  the  judgment,  by  the  reflection  that  one
positive  existence  cannot,  by  the  mere  fact  of  its  existence,
cancel  another.  There  may  be  non-elliptical  ellipses,
figures  which  fulfil  one  set  of  conditions  that  mark  the
ellipse,  but  lack  attributes  without  which  we  hardly  recog-
nise the  figure ;  and  there  may  in  the  same  sense  be  or
have  been  (time  makes  no  difference)  non-human  human
beings.  And  explanatory  theory  may  be  able  in  both
cases  to  trace  step  by  step  without  saltus  or  miracle  the
transition  from  the  one  phase  into  the  other  by  develop-
ment of  elements  fundamental  in  both.  But  this  will  not
obscure  our  perception  of  the  elliptical  shape  of  a  character-
istic ellipse,  or  of  the  humanity  of  a  typical  human  being.
The  typical  human  being  is  made  typical,  as  we  shall
see,  by  real  teleology.  The  typical  ellipse  is  only  typical
through  a  subjective  quasi-teleology.  This  is  the  differ-
ence between  the  two  cases.

Thus,  in  spite  of  the  above  reservations,  it  remains  true
that  in  complex  enumeration  as  applied  to  Space  the
antithesis  of  individuality  and  necessity  is  strikingly  illus-
trated. A  generalised  relation  of  distances,  not  obviously
differing  in  kind  from  any  other  generalised  enumerative
relation,  when  interpreted  into  an  actual  figure,  may  at
least  produce  a  structural  totality  complete  in  itself  and  of
a  marked  individual  character.  It  is  enough  to  mention
such  simple  instances  as  the  equilateral  triangle,  the  square,
and  the  circle.  These  totalities  do  not  refer  outside  them-
selves for  definition  in  the  obvious  sense  in  which  simple
magnitudes  are  forced  to  do  so. They  are  primarily  cases


Chap,  iv.]  Is  Geometry  categorical?  191

of  internal  proportion,  of  proportion,  that  is.  between  one
and  another  element  of  a  single  totality.  Relativity  appears
in  them  in  another  shape  than  that  of  simple  equation  with
absolute  (in  the  sense  of  arbitrary)  standards  of  magnitude.
A  particular  triangle  or  ellipse  is  relative  and  finite  chiefly
in  the  sense  of  being  derived  from  arbitrary  conditions,  no  one
value  of  which  has  any  prerogative  of  existence  as  against
any  other,  and  an  extreme  modification  of  which  will  always
destroy  the  essence  of  the  figure.  There  is  also  a  further
sense  in  which  all  natural  existences  are  finite  as  compared
with  mind,  because  they  cannot  refer  to  themselves,  but  only
are  re/erred -whetheT  to  themselves  or  to  external  conditions.
The  subordinate  totalities  of  Time,  such  as  the  hour,  day,
^and  year,  are  not  really  cases  of  the  same  principle,  for
ley  are  mere  aggregates  of  units  \\-ithout  a  limiting
totality,  and  are  simply  formed  by  arresting  enumeration
at  inter\^als  prescribed  by  external  interests.  A  better
parallel  may  be  found  in  the  numbers  of  the  numerical
series  which  are  distinguished  by  any  peculiarity,  e.  g.  prime
numbers,  squares,  cubes,  etc.,  if  we  consider  these  peculiar
cases  in  their  relation  to  the  one  unvarj'ing  process  of  adding
together  homogeneous  units.  This  simple  synthesis  of  num-
ber may  be  regarded  as  analogous  to  the  mechanical  or
necessary  aspect  of  an  individual  thing  or  figure,  and  its
peculiarity  as  square  or  cube  to  structural  totality.

(2)  Figures  in  space  then,  and  numerical  relations,  al-  Exist-
though  abstract  and  ideal,  and  arbitrarily  selected  out  of^j^^
continuous  sets  of  value  of  which  no  one  has  existence  by  Space,
preference  to  the  other,  yet  seem  capable  in  a  sense  of
possessing  characteristic  quality  and  self-sufficing  totality.
What  is  to  be  thought  of  their  existence  ? Do  such  judg-
ments as  are  mentioned  on  p.  187  involve  the  assertion
that  the  qualifications  of  Reality  which  form  their  subjects
are  actual,  and  if  so,  in  what  sense  are  they  actual  ? The
difficulty of  the question is only  displayed  in its  true
extent  if  we  add  to  the  above  instances  some  ideas  for  which
actual  existence,  as  diagrams  in  books  or  as  thoughts  in  the


^


192  Abstract  Quantity.  [booki.

minds  of  individual  students,  cannot  with  probability  be
claimed ;  e.  g.  the  idea  of  a  polygon  with  a  thousand  and
one  equal  sides,  of  any  trapezium  chosen  at  will,  or  of
any  irregular  figure  or  high  number.

It  is  clear  that  the  square  or  triangle  qua  spatial  figure
has  no  actuality  which  does  not  equally  belong  to  all  such
less  familiar  shapes,  and  therefore  mere  presence  in  the
individual  mind  is  not  the  existence  in  question.  And
indeed  to  speak  of  it  as  such  would  be  to  enter  upon  a
vicious  circle  which  would  stultify  the  judgment ;  for  it  is
essential  to  the  judgment  to  affirm  a  reality  outside  itself,
and  it  would  be  too  ridiculous  that  your  judgment  should
refer  merely  to  the  content  of  mine  as  the  reality  asserted,
and  mine  in  turn  to  that  of  yours.  It  is  obvious  that  the
two  manifestations  of  the  thought-function  are  on  a  level,
and  if  each  refers  to  the  other,  each  might  just  as  well
refer  to  itself,  i.  e.  find  its  truth  in  the  simple  fact  that  it  is
made  ^.  A  triangle  must  be  just  as  real  when  no  one  is
thinking  about  it  as  when  many  students  are  engaged  upon
the  conception  of  one.  This  is  of  course  not  the  same  as
to  say  that  spatial  figures  do  not  depend  on  the  spatial
consciousness,  or  on  consciousness  at  all.  We  are  only
saying  that  they  cannot  depend  for  actuality  on  one  par-
ticular reflective  consciousness  of  those  particular  figures.
The  world  as  it  is  for  perception  and  intelligence  is  the
object-matter  of  our  whole  enquiry,  and  we  have  no  occasion
to  raise  a  question  that  assumes  the  destruction  of  the
object  which  we  are  considering.

The  absence  of  material  existence  and  also  of  any  mode
whatever  of  particularisation  in  determinate  forms  (the
selection  e.  g.  of  a  typical  ellipse  not  being  justifiable
on  purely  geometrical  grounds)  must  however  make  a
distinction  between  the  actuality  of  the  contents  under
discussion and  that  of  material  things or  their  sensible

*  Reference  to  the  world  of  meanings  or  objective  reference  (Introduction,
sect.  7)  is  not  merely  reference  to  judgments  in  fact  made  by  others.  It  is  an
inadequately  conditioned  reference  to  reality.


Chap.  IV.]  Are  Spatial  figures  real?  193

properties.  Admitting,  as  we  must  admit  for  logical
purposes,  that  Space  is  to  be  reckoned  with  as  having
a  peculiar  actuality  of  its  own,  still  it  is  not  clear  in
what  relation  geometrical  figures,  apart  from  the  shapes
of  actual  objects,  stand  to  actual  space.  Geometrical
figures  as  such,  the  subjects  of  judgment  in  geometrical
science,  are  not  the  shapes  of  actual  objects ;  they  are
not  identical  with  any  perceptible  figure ;  they  are  not
distributed  through  space  nor  present  as  special  chcU^c-
teristics  in  any  portion  of  it.  I  do  not  know  how  to  \/
describe  them  better  than  as  a  peculiar  class  of  laws
or  attributes  of  the  spatial  relation  as  such,  which  are
concrete  in  the  nature  of  their  content,  though  abstract
in  their  medium  of  presentation.  And  in  the  same  way
the  characteristic  totalities  of  number  must  be  taken  as
laws — embodied  laws — of  the  enumerative  relation  of  part
and  whole.

We  may  illustrate  the  nature  of  such  attributes  by
comparing  them  with  any  purely  imaginary  ideal  content
which  bears  (so  far  as  an  imaginary  content  can,  for  it
is  always,  in  my  opinion,  found  wanting  somewhere)
the  character  of  self-sufficing  totality.  Such  an  ideal
content  for  instance  is  Shakespeare's  Hamlet  ^,  or  the
material  spheres  of  ancient  astronomy,  or,  to  come  nearer
to  our  present  subject,  the  conception  of  '  Flatland '  as
space  in  two  dimensions  only,  with  sentient  beings  confined
to  it.  These  conceptions,  though  doubtless  based  on
elements  of  fact  and  illustrative  of  real  conditions,  yet
exist  only  in  the  minds  of  those  who  read  and  think  about
them,  or  more  strictly  in  the  identical  reference  which
these  minds  are  stimulated  to  make  to  a  world  of  meanings,
but  a  world  of  meanings  explicitly  discontinuous  with  and
detached  from  the  actual  world  of  fact,  or  what  we  call  in
short  an  imaginary  world.  Such  a  world  is  indeed  main-
tained by  judgment,  but  it  is  judgment  of  a  peculiar  kind

'  Omitting  the  considerations  which  arise  out  of  the  artistic  trnth  of  the  con-
ception, and  taking  it  merely  as  an  illustration  of  an  imaginary  idea.
VOL.  I.  O


194  Abstract  Quantity.  [booki.

and  under  peculiar  conditions — subject,  not  like  the  common
world  of  meanings  to  a  wholly  indeterminate,  but  to  a
conscious  and  explicit,  abstraction  from  reality,  which  be-
comes semi-conscious  in  artistic  fiction,  and  utterly  lost
and  obliterated  in  mere  error  and  superstition.

The  figures  which  represent  the  properties  of  actual
space  are  not  imaginary  in  this  extreme  sense  of  the  word.
It  might  however  be  a  question  whether  the  difference
between  them  and  such  ideas  as  have  been  mentioned
is  one  of  kind  or  one  of  degree.  Both  kinds  of  ideas  it
might  be  said  involve  abstraction  from  concrete  perceived
reality,  both  kinds  are  therefore  hypothetical  and  not
actual  existences,  and  how  far  the  abstraction  is  carried
cannot  be  a  question  of  principle.  Nor,  I  must  add,  do  I
mean  to  insist  on  the  manifest  contradiction  with  experience,
or  self-contradiction  when  viewed  in  the  light  of  experience,
that  some  of  my  instances  of  imaginary  ideas  may  be  held
to  present.  The  distinction  which  I  desire  to  draw  is
simply  between  abstract  but  real,  and  purely  imaginary
contents,  when  employed  as  subjects  in  judgment.

Perhaps  the  distinction  might  be  found  as  above  suggested
to  consist  formally  in  the7zatureofthe  abstraction  to  which  the
two  kinds  of  contents  are  severally  subject.  A  merely  abstract
content  is  subject  only  to  the  abstraction  which  its  ostensible
nature  implies.  The  name  of  a  figure  in  space  is  the
name  of  a  figure  in  space  and  not  the  name  of  a  man  or
a  mineral  or  of  any  material  object.  But  the  name  of
Hamlet  for  instance  is  and  yet  is  not  the  name  of  a  man.
The  name  of  a  knot  tied  on  an  endless  string  is  and  yet  is
not  the  name  of  a  reality  in  space.  These  imaginations  are
subject  not  merely  to  the  abstraction  which  separates  every
content  from  all  that  is  not  included  in  it,  but  to  a  further
abstraction  which  says,  *  This  is  a  meaning,  but  not  t/ie
meaning  you  would  take  it  for : '  in  other  words,  it  is  con-
ditional within  a  world  which  itself  can  only  be  predicated
conditionally  and  not  directly  of  the  reality  with  which  we
are  in  contact  by  means  of  perception.


Chap.  IV.]  Generic  and  Quasi-generic.  195

Thus  we  may  say,  if  we  choose,  that  our  ideas  of  actual  \l
space  have  for  their  meaning  only  possibilities,  but  these
are  at  least  real  possibilities,  that  is  to  say,  their  funda-
mental generating  relations  actually  exist  in  the  world
which  centres  in  present  perception.  They  are  therefore
as  real  as  colour  in  the  dark  or  as  sweetness  which  we  do
not  taste.  And  if  we  pronounce  these  attributes  unreal
outside  the  moment  of  perception,  we  have  laid  the  axe  to
the  root  of  the  perceptible  world.  We  might  as  well  say
that  the  wall  in  front  of  me  is  actual  and  that  behind  me  is
not.  But  what  corresponds  with  these  ideas  to  the  actuality
which  colour  and  taste  do  partake  of  when  perceived  ?  Here
we  find  a  real  difference.  Such  actuality  in  sensuous  pre-
sentation they  cannot  have.  But  we  do  not  of  course  admit
that  Reality  is  restricted  to  sensuous  presentation.  All  we
can  say  is  that  in  all  relations  of  actual  things  these  spatial
attributes  make  themselves  evident  as  controlling  conditions,  <v
and  are  introduced  as  conceptions  without  which  the  mind
fails  to  construe  the  phenomena.  They  are  abstract  cha-
racteristics of  the  actual  spatial  relations  of  things,  and  are
as  much  a  fact  for  logic  as  any  secondary  quality,  qua
general  quality;  and  they  are  not  on  a  level  with  mere
imaginations  and  fictions,  even  if  these  are  consistent,  or
not  notoriously  inconsistent,  with  reality.

(3)  The  judgments  mentioned  on  p.  187  are  thus  found  The  quasi-
to  display  in  their  own  line  of  abstract  evolution  which  we  ^dgment.
are  now  pursuing  a  character  analogous  mutatis  mutandis
to  that  which  the  Generic  Judgment  will  be  found  to  display
in  the  concrete  evolution  of  thought. The  subject  of  each "/
such  judgment  is  Reality  qualified  as  a  structural  whole
which  embodies  properties  rooted  in  an  actual  relation  and
controlling  the  consequences  of  that  relation  at  every  turn.
The  figures  in  question  do  not  claim  sensuous  particularity y
and  are  not  capable  of  it. The  judgment  therefore  is  a ^
degree  less  generic  and  more  hypothetical  than  classificatory
judgments  which  retain  much  of  the  meaning  of  the  col-
lective judgment.

03


196  Abstract  Quantity.  [booki.

Yet  the  judgment  in  question  is  generic. In  the  first
place,  the  particular  figures  which  arise  if  particular  con-
ditions are  assumed  are  individual  totalities,  not indeed
having  sensuous singleness,  but self-identical  as  laws  of
space. And  in  the  second  place,  although  no  doubt  any
series  of  such  figures  (triangles,  ellipses,  etc.)  is  in  one  point
of  view  an  infinite  series  (the  transition  from  value  to  value
of  the  generating  conditions  being  absolutely  continuous),
yet  the  whole  falls  within  known  limits,  and  is  bound  to-
gether by  a  characteristic  quality  which  might  probably  be
found  to  vary  with  the  variations  of  the  generating  factors  ^.
Therefore  a  judgment  like  this  presupposes,  not  as  do
the  judgment  of  zoology  a  limited  even  if  very  large  number
of  actual  individuals  forming  a  real  historical  unity  though
spoken  of  mediately  and  by  help  of  an  abstract  qualification
of  Reality,  but  a  series  of  laws  regulative  of  form,  or  rather
a  law  expressed  in  a  series  of  forms,  having  positive  common
characteristics  and  bounded  by  definable  limits  within  which
the  whole  series  must  fall. 'All  triangles'  is  hindered  from
meaning  every  particular  triangle  (i.  e.  variety  of  triangle —
j — I abstract from particular sensuous presentations all
/ through  this  discussion)  not  only  as  '  all  men '  is  hindered
from  meaning  every  particular  man,  by  the  practical  im-
j possibility  of  dealing  with  such  a  meaning,  but  also  by  a
I theoretical  absurdity,  for  all  particular  triangles  would  be
j an  infinite  series,  which  need  not  theoretically  be  the  case
1 with  all  particular  men. But,  as  we  saw  above,  a  series
which  has  a  known  positive  character  or  falls  within  known
limits  may  be  treated  as  an  actual  unity  in  spite  of  its
infinity. '  All  triangles  have  their  angles  equal  to  two  right
angles'  is  a  judgment  about  what  is  really  a  single  con-
tinuous relation,  but  embodied  to  the  mind's  eye  in  certain

^  It  seems  obvious  that  as  one  generating  factor,  a.  g.  one  axis  of  an  ellipse,
approaches  disappearance,  we  should  expect  the  characteristic  quality  to  diminish.
But  any  such  conception  is  not  easy  to  carry  out.  E.  g.  if  we  take  equality  of
the  axes  as  the  characteristic  point  in  a  figure  of  the  conic  section  class,  we  get
the  circle  as  the  characteristic  type  to  the  exclusion  of  the  ellipse.  The  question
has  perhaps  only  an  aesthetic  interest.


Chap.  IV.]  Subjectivity  of  Scnse-forms.  197

salient  types  resulting  from  geometrical  classification.  It
resembles  the  generic  judgment  more  strikingly  than
appears  at  first  sight,  for  the  generic  judgment  too  deals
with  a  section  of  evolution  in  which  a  vast  though  not
infinite  array  of  transitional  types  has  really  bridged  the
gulf  between  the  marked  species  which  are  familiar.

c.  Infinite  enumeration  applied  to  the  parts  of  space  is  infinite
the  last  result  of  abstraction  in  this  region.  Here,  as  in  ^P*<^^-
time  and  number,  we  have  the  idea  of  the  absolutely  homo-
geneous part,  i.  e.  the  part  whose  repetition  has  no  tendency
to  generate  a  whole.  The  idea  of  infinite  space  is  the  idea
of  the  endless  synthesis  of  such  parts,  which  must  always
present  to  us  the  appearance  of  an  unsolved  problem.  If
the  problem  has  a  solution,  it  must  consist  in  changing  the
point  of  view  from  which  we  regard  it,  as  if,  to  repeat  an
illustration  which  I  employed  above,  we  were  suddenly  to
awake  to  the  fact  that  we  had  been  counting  parts  extended
in  a  circle  and  not  in  a  straight  line.

Will  not  the  doctrine  known  as  the  subjectivity  of  space
and  time  help  us  to  explain  the  nature  of  this  contradictory
reality?  Up  to  a  certain  point  it  has  undoubtedly  done
good  service  by  showing  that  the  difficulties  which  attach
to  sensuous  reality  are  rooted  in  the  nature  of  the  percipient
intelligence  itself,  and  must  be  reckoned  with  as  inherent  in
sensuous  experience.  But  I  am  unable  to  see  that  the
'subjectivity'  of  these  forms  of  apprehension  can  carry  us
further,  unless  or  until  we  are  enabled  to  put  something
better  in  their  place.  At  present  we  seem  only  to  have  learnt
that  the  difficulties  of  knowledge  are  not  external  to  it,  but
are  inbred  and  inevitable,  at  least  so  far  as  concerns  the
series  of  sensuous  phenomena.  But  we  gain  nothing,  so
far  as  I  can  understand,  by  attempting  to  erect  a  world
beyond  as  a  non-sensuous  counterpart  of  the  sensuous
series.  If  a  counterpart,  then  it  would  seem  to  share  the
difficulties  attaching  to  this  series,  while  as  non-sensuous  it
lacks  the  compulsory  reality  of  sense-perception^. Our

*  Lolze  has  well  brought  out  the  diffictilties  attaching  to  the  conception  of


198  Abstract  Quantity,  [booki.

present  knowledge  rather  points  to  the  conclusion  that  if
we  are  to  attain  something  less  contradictory,  more  capable
of  self-sufficing  reality,  or  if  we  like  to  use  the  phrase,  more
above  sense,  we  must  look  for  it  in  facts  and  purposes  which
deepen  the  significance  of  life,  not  in  a  shadowy  counterpart
which  repeats  the  world  of  sense  without  enhancing  its
value.  Mere  series,  mere  space  and  time,  we  must  always
remark  are  mere  abstractions  ;  and  though  no  human  know-
ledge is  free  from  relativity,  i.  e.  from  the  reference  to  what
falls  outside  it ;  yet  on  the  other  hand  no  actual  human
knowledge  is,  like  the  abstract  infinities,  mere  relativity  and
nothing  more.  There  would  be  some  justification  for  saying
that,  as  contrasted  with  the  concrete  structure  of  individual
things,  a  'subjective,'  i.e.  artificial  and  unreal,  character
might  be  attributed  to  number,  space  and  time  as  infinite
wholes ;  on  the  ground  that  they  conflict  with  the  nature  of
actual  fact  however  comprehensive,  and  that  the  extension
to  infinity  deprives  them  of  relation  to  the  phenomena  in
which  they  are  known  to  us.  But  the  distinction  is  hardly
sound,  for  it  is  at  best  one  of  degree.  The  difficulties  of
relativity  do  not  wholly  cease  as  soon  as  we  turn  away
from  the  abstract  infinity  of  mere  number,  time,  and  space  ;
in  common  ideas  of  causation  they  affect  the  actual  content
of  phenomena.  From  the  very  beginning  of  knowledge,  as
I  have  tried  to  point  out.  Absoluteness  co-exists  with  Rela-
tivity; but  it  is  impossible  to  form  categorical  judgments
of  a  comprehensive  type  until  the  idea  of  causation  has  been
freed  from  its  primary  implication  of  an  endless  series.

The  question  might  be  asked,  why  are  we  exclusively
tempted  to  demand  the  reality  of  infinite  time  and  infinite
space  when  there  are  other  abstract  conceptions  of  homo-
geneous parts  not  subordinate  to  any  whole,  which  might
in  the  same  way  be  pushed  to  infinity?  In  the  first  place,
it  may  be  replied  that  abstractions  of  this  class  are  not  so
common  as  might  appear. The  essence  of  them  is  that

an  '  intelligible '  counterpart  to  the  world  of  sense. The  strange  thing  is  that
they  do  not  appear  in  any  way  to  make  him  discontented  with  that  conception.


Chap.  IV.] Space  and  Time  why  so  importunate. 199

progressive  enumeration  shall  not  tend  to  modify  their
character.  Thus  intensive  quantities,  such  as  infinite  force,
infinite  velocity,  are  conceptions  of  a  heightening  the  later
stages  of  which  would  modify  the  earlier  and  not  remain  in-
differently beside  them.  Therefore  although  the  phenomena
of  velocity  or  of  force  do  suggest  the  idea  of  quantitative
infinities  of  those  kinds,  yet  they  do  not  impel  us  to  judge
those  infinities  to  be  real,  because  the  perceived  forces  do
not  in  their  nature  refer  to  and  presuppose  infinite  degrees
of  themselves,  but  rather  each  manifestation/^;'  se  excludes
the  infinity  which  would  involve  a  qualitative  change  in
itself.  Infinite  force  or  velocity  is  as  contradictory  an
idea  as  infinite  space,  but  is  not  in  the  same  sense  a
problem  or  a  paradox,  because  it  does  not  in  the  same
sense  claim  reality.

And  secondly,  Space  and  Time  may  be  called  the
Categories  of  sense.  That  is  to  say,  they  are  the  only
principles  according  to  which  the  world  of  sen«:e-perception,
both  of  our  own  immediate  feelings  and  of  external  objects,
appear  to  us  to  be  possible.  The  question  is  not  merely
whether  we  can  imagine  the  absence  of  either  or  both.  I
take  it  that  experience  would  reply  to  this  by  saying  that
we  cannot  seriously  imagine  (i.e.  conceive  with  full  considera-
tion) the  absence  of  either  in  a  world  of  sense-perception  ^.

But  the  real  point  is  not  merely  psychological,  although
of  course  in  dealing  with  it  we  must  appeal  to  facts  of  the
mind.  The  point  is  that  the  very  character  and  essence  of
sense  is  isolation,  and  therefore  in  apprehending  variety,
series.  So  extreme  is  this  character  of  isolation  that  the
presentation  of  sensuous  contents  even  as  a  series  is  due  to
an  intelligence  that  goes  beyond  sense. Space  and  Time

*  Psychologically  speaking,  I  should  suppose  that  we  may  lose  consciousness
of  either,  perhaps  more  readily  of  space,  e.  g.  when  listening  to  music.  Time
is  perhaps  the  more  importunate  of  the  two  ideas  because  it  extends  to  our  inner
feelings,  etc.,  and  I  suspect  this  to  be  the  reason  of  Lotze's  notion  that  time
is  more  '  objective '  than  space.  Yet  we  may  of  course  in  a  fit  of  absorption  lose
consciousness  of  time.  I  do  not  suppose  that  these  half-illusory  states  are  at
all  perfect  in  their  neglect  of  the  non-obtruding  element.


200  Abstract  Qtiantity.  [booki.

are  for  us  the  first  work  of  knowledge,  as  the  conquest  of
them  is  the  second.  But  all  we  are  concerned  with  here  is
that,  assiimmg  the  impulse  to  construct  out  of  our  sensuous
perception  a  whole  of  the  same  nature  as  itself,  we  cannot
but  attempt  to  erect  space  and  time  also  into  wholes,  an
attempt  which  is  frustrated  as  we  have  seen.
Mechanical  iii.  But,  lastly,  reflective  science  in  pursuing  an  analogous
Universe,  attempt  does  meet  with  analogous  difficulties.  It  assumes
as  further  characteristics  of  the  sensible  world  the  abstrac-
tions of  matter  and  motion.  Matter  and  motion  are  the
abstractions  in  which  the  sensuous  world  is  reduced  to
homogeneity  in  order  to  be  susceptible  of  quantitative  treat-
ment, and  in  this  treatment  they  are  able  to  a  large  extent
to  represent  genuine  and  actual  relations  of  that  world.  In
this  respect  they  correspond  to  the  structural  classifications
of  geometry,  and  form  the  content  of  mechanical  science.
It  would  hardly  be  true  I  suppose  to  say  that  the  infinity
of  matter  and  motion  in  space  is  an  inevitable  paradox  to
the  scientific  consciousness.  It  appears  possible  to  conceive
of  the  universe  as  a  coexistent  finite  mechanical  whole,
demanding  no  determination  from  without.  But  this  is  only
because  the  determination  from  without  is  thrown  back  in
time  by  the  doctrine  of  the  eternity  of  motion,  which,  with
a  similar  doctrine  applied  to  matter,  introduce  the  infinite
series  under  the  guarantee  of  the  law  of  causation.  Here
again  we  have  the  insoluble  problem  which  arises  from  the
relativity  of  the  sensuous  world  and  presses  upon  us  in  its
naked  form  as  soon  as,  by  reduction  to  homogeneity,  the
element  of  absoluteness  or  totality  which  helped  to  balance
it  is  destroyed.  It  is  to  the  latter  element  that  we  really
look  for  a  solution  in  the  degree  in  which  it  is  possible.
The  infinite  series  cannot  itself  be  reality,  but  so  far  as  we
can  transmute  the  series  into  an  articulated  whole,  so  far  we
can  gain  a  reality  out  of  it.

This  distinction  suffices  to  justify  the  well-grounded  con-
clusions of  science  respecting  the  past  and  future  of  the
material  universe. Such  conclusions  are  contributions  to


Chap.  IV.] Concrete  and  Abstract  Individuals. 201

the  projection  that  forms  the  actual  world  in  which  as
percipient  and  intelligent  beings  we  live.  But  with  eternity
in  the  shape  of  infinite  regress  and  progress  such  a  projec-
tion can  have  nothing  to  do.

We  have  thus  traced  to  its  climax  in  mechanical  science
that  form  of  identity  and  difference  in  which  an  identity
is  regarded  as  the  sum  of  the  differences  in  which  it  is  pre-
sented. This  one-sided  aspect  of  identity  and  difference  is
what  takes  the  shape  of  whole  and  part  in  the  strict  or
quantitative  meaning  of  those  words,  the  meaning  in  which
the  whole  is  taken  as  equated  to  a  relation,  whether  par-
ticular or  generalised,  of  homogeneous  parts.

It  naturally  occurs  to  us  to  ask  at  this  point,  how,  if
quantity  is  homogeneous,  and  if  proportion  is,  as  we  have
reckoned  it  to  be,  generically  a  quantitative  relation,  the
concrete  individual  (vid.  p.  135)  whose  characteristic  quality
takes  the  shape  of  proportion  differs  in  content  from  a  re-
lation in  number,  figure  in  space,  or  system  of  motions
which,  though  purely  quantitative,  is  also,  as  we  have
seen,  characteristic  and  self-contained.  In  the  first  place,
we  have  spoken  of  the  quasi-individuality  which  does  attach
to  the  structures  that  embody  geometrical  and,  we  may
now  add,  mechanical  laws.  And  we  must  remember  that
their  quasi-individuality  is  only  made  possible  by  a
certain  revival  of  the  qualitative  element  within  the  whole
of  quantity,  even  if  the  quality  so  present  throughout  the
parts  is,  like  the  curvature  of  a  circle,  constant  in  all  of
them.  And  in  the  second  place,  we  have  to  point  out
that  in  a  true  concrete  individual  its  individuality  exists
in  the  form  of  a  conscious  purpose,  a  real  teleology,  and
is  the  cause  of  its  homogeneousness,  the  proof  of  this
being  that  if  the  elements  are  isolated  and  removed  from
the  individual  they  fall  back  into  disparateness.  The
proportion  in  which  its  parts  are  held  together  is  as  we
saw^  secondary  and  not  primary';  it  is  a  proportion  be-
tween proportions.  And  though  it  is  true  that  in  the
'  See  p.  139,  above.


202


Abstract  Quantity.


[Book  I.


simplest  forms  of  comparison,  such  as  matching  a  colour,
judgment  and  equation  are  hardly  to  be  distinguished,
being  in  fact  as  yet  in  their  common  germ,  yet  the  peculiar
secondary  unity  of  a  complex  whole  characterised  by  in-
ternal proportions  is  not  fully  expressed  by  reciprocal
equation  of  its  elements.  Thus  the  concrete  individual
is  from  the  first  characterised  by  rather  than  equated  to
pure  quantitative  relations  of  parts.  With  abstract  tota-
lities just  the  reverse  is  the  case.  Their  elements,  homo-
geneous to  begin  with,  are  placed  arbitrarily  in  any  whole
(in  as  far  as  the  elements  of  various  curves  resist  such
construction  they  are  not  pure  quantity),  and  only  acquire
the  semblance  of  a  relation  to  a  whole  by  their  non-
resistance  in  such  a  construction  ab  extra.  In  the  former
case  the  differences  involve  the  character  of  parts  as  the
concrete  involves  the  abstract ;  thus  head,  arms,  legs  in
a  man  have  quantitative  relations  to  each  other  and  to
his  whole  figure,  which  vary  only  within  narrow  limits,
and  which  sculpture  or  painting  must  not  violate ;  or
again,  his  whole  life  is  only  possible  subject  to  definite
quantitative  relations  of  energy  supplied  to  work  done.
In  the  latter  case  the  parts,  indifferent  in  themselves,
are  forced  by  construction  into  the  function  of  differences.
The  reservations  to  which  this  last  assertion  is  subject
have  been  explained  above  (see  pp.  187-8).

Thus  equation  and  judgment  are  no  doubt  closely  re-
lated in  their  origin ;  and  this  is  further  illustrated  by
the  facility  with  which  judgment  drops  back  or  crosses
into  the  equational  form,  which  demands  altogether  less
effort  and  insight  than  the  attempt  to  grasp  the  differ-
entiated structure  of  things.  I  cannot  refrain  from  quot-
ing in  illustration  a  paragraph  from  a  powerful  and  sen-
sible writer  whose  one  fault  is  the  love  of  moving  in  the
lower  categories  and  avoiding  the  effort  to  grasp  entire
realities  as  they  afe.  '  As  to  the  general  result  ^  [of
human  progress]  what  is  it  ? Say,  roughly,  three  hundred

'  James  Fitzjames  Stephen,  Liberty,  Equality,  and  Fraternity,  p.  177.


Chap.  IV.]  TJie  Tclapse  into  Number.  203

million  Chinese,  two  hundred  million  natives  of  India,  two
hundred  million  Europeans  and  North  Americans,  and
a  miscellaneous  hundred  million  or  so. — Central  Asians,
Malays,  Borneans,  Javanese,  South  Sea  Islanders,  and  all
sorts  and  conditions  of  blacks ;  and  over  and  above  all
the  rest,  the  library  at  the  British  Museum.  This  is  the
net  result  of  an  indefinitely  long  struggle  between  the
forces  of  men  and  the  weights  of  various  kinds  in  the
attempt  to  move  which  these  forces  display  themselves.  En-
thusiasts for  progress  are  to  me  strange  enough.  "  Glory,
glor}' :  the  time  is  coming  when  there  \nll  be  six  hundred
million  Chinese,  five  hundred  million  Hindoos,  four  hun-
dred million  Europeans,  and  Heaven  only  knows  how
many  hundred  million  blacks  of  various  shades,  and  when
there  will  be  two  British  Museums,  each  with  a  library." '
The  numbers  here  are  not  merely  descriptive  ;  they  are
essential ;  otherwise  the  element  of  progress  could  not
consist  in  their  augmentation.  Of  all  instances  that  show
in  what  thin  abstractions  a  writer  who  prides  himself
on  contact  with  realities'  may  live  and  move,  I  know  none
more  grotesquely  striking  than  this ;  and  it  cannot  be
defended  by  suggesting  that  its  absurdities  are  in  some
degree  imputed  rather  than  adopted.  For  they  can  only
be  so  imputed  because  they  are  adopted.  The  faith  in
progress  need  involve  no  assumption  of  numerical  increase
of  population.  Had  the  writer  ever  heard  of  virtue  or
knowledge?^  That  his  main  thesis  in  the  passage  is
somewhat  of  a  truism  does  not  justify  so  gross  a  miscon-
ception in  supporting  it.  The  more  we  examine  the  more
we  shall  find  that  it  is  indolence  which  makes  us  drop
into  the  equation  when  our  subject-matter  demands  the
judgment.

I  have  finished  the  account  of  the  equation  before  pro-

*  Contrast  Dante's  lines : —

'Considerate  la  vostra  semenza;
Fatti  non  foste  a  viver  come  bruti
Ma  per  s^iiir  virtude  e  conoscenza.*

Inferno,  xxvi.  1 18.


204  Abstract  Quantity.  [bookI.

ceeding  with  the  judgment  proper  chiefly  with  a  view  to
coherence  in  treatment,  and  not  with  an  intention  of  repre-
senting the  former  as  inferior  to  or  less  ultimate  than  the
latter,  though  in  a  sense  which  may  appear  from  p.  91  above,
such  a  representation  might  be  held  justifiable.  But  the
conception  of  divergence,  of  a  co-ordinate  evolution  gener-
ated by  abstraction,  seems  more  appropriate  to  the  matter
before  us  than  that  of  linear  development^.  The  equation
is,  as  we  saw,  hardly  even  a  momentary  phase  in  the
growth  of  genuine  judgment ;  the  two  functions  part  com-
pany almost  as  soon  as  their  significance  reveals  itself.

And  quantity  is  more  than  one  among  many  categories ;
as  the  simplest  point  of  view  which  admits  of  difference
and  system  it  aspires  to  be,  and  in  one  sense  is,  the  sole
category,  or  ultimate  ideal  of  knowledge.  It  may  be
treated  as  sole  category  falsely  or  truly.  It  may  be  sole
in  the  sense  that  though  abstract,  yet,  subject  to  the
reservations  involved  in  its  abstractness,  it  has  universal
applicability.  Every  science,  as  we  read  in  Aristotle,
assumes  its  subject-matter,  and  does  not  give  an  account  of
it.  The  schematic  world  of  space,  time,  and  mass  is  in  this
sense,  as  an  object  of  science,  beyond  question  ;  it  has  only
to  serve  as  an  abstract  postulate  in  working  with  perceptible
facts,  and  from  this  point  of  view  is  a  truth,  if  not  the  truth
about  the  universe  as  a  whole.  As  enabling  a  coherent
reflective  view  to  be  obtained  of  perceptible  phenomena  as
a  quasi-totality  (always  encumbered  indeed  by  the  infinite
series),  it  is  of  immense  scientific  value  and  co-extensive
with  definite  existence.  For  these  reasons,  again,  the  equa-
tion— the  judgment  of  quantity — is  rather  co-ordinate  with
judgment  than  a  phase  in  its  development.  And  still  more
is  there  reason  for  so  considering  it  if  we  take  account
of  the  false  employment  of  quantity  as  sole  category.
This  false  employment  arises,  or  would  arise,  supposing  the
category  of  quantity  to  be  considered  not  merely  as  co-
extensive with  determinate  existence,  but  as,  in  its  abstrac-

^  Above,  p.  91.


Chap.  IV.] Truth  and  falsehood  of  Qicantiiy.  205

tion,  the  ultimate  reality  of  all  determinate  existence,  and
consequently  as  furnishing  the  final  ideal  of  science.  It  is
obvious  that  the  true  use  of  this  as  of  every  category  slides
easily  into  the  false  one.  Every  science  is  occupied  with  its
own  abstractions.  Every  individual  mind  tends  to  magnify
that  with  which  it  is  occupied.  The  category  of  quantity,
for  reasons  mentioned  above,  lends  itself  to  universal  appli-
cation. It  seems  a  short  step  from  universal  application  to
sole  application,  but  it  is  the  step  from  truth  to  falsehood.
It  is  not  made  exclusively  by  votaries  of  physical  science,
nor  perhaps  by  them  chiefly.  It  meets  us  in  theology  and
in  philosophy  under  the  form  of  the  quantitative  infinite  as
a  sublime  attribute  of  the  Deity,  or  of  soul  life,  or  of  the
universe  as  contrasted  with  the  '  finite '  mind  of  man.  We
find  it  again  in  barbaric  or  vulgar  art,  in  as  far  as  this  relies
for  effect  on  mere  magnitude,  mere  evidence  of  expended
labour,  or  mere  costliness  of  material.  And  we  do  also  find
it  no  doubt  in  a  formulated  shape  wherever  matter  and
motion  are  invested  with  the  dignity  of  real  existence  in  a
sense  and  to  a  degree  that  degrades  the  individual  and
concrete  realities  of  life  into  something  secondary  and
fictitious.  But  it  is  plain  that  no  such  tendency  is  neces-
sarily involv'ed  in  the  treatment  of  these  abstractions  as
real  characteristics  of  the  perceptible  world.  There  is  no
special  virtue  in  non-atomic  continuous  extension,  nor  any
especial  iniquity  in  the  resolution  of  material  objects  into
systems  of  vortex-rings,  if  such  resolution  either  is  a
good  working  hypothesis  or  represents  a  real  fact.  The
only  error  is  in  taking  either  a  hypothesis  for  a  fact,
or  a  fact  for  t/ie  sole  fact — in  confusion,  not  in  mere
abstraction.

The  category  of  Quantity  is,  as  we  have  seen,  in its  y

nature  wholly  relative.  It  is  therefore  incapable  of  furnish-
ing an  absolute  and  ultimate  account  of  things.  It  not
only  cannot  escape  from  the  reference  ad  infinitum  from
term  to  term  and  condition  to  condition,  but  is  forced  to
make this  contradictory  conception the  very  basis and


2o6  Abstract  Quantity.  [booki.

postulate  of  its  scheme.  We  have  seen  that  the  moment
characteristic  quantity  or  proportion  makes  its  appearance
in  the  judgment,  as  in  any  quantitative  judgment  it  may,
the  whole  between  parts  of  which  the  characteristic  propor-
tions obtain  is  tending  to  exhibit  itself  as  an  individual
synthesis  of  true  differences,  not  as  a  mere  aggregate  of
indifferent  parts.  The  pure  quantitative  judgment  or  mere
equation  ^  is  possible  only  by  abstraction  from  one  aspect
of  the  essential  judgment-function.  It  is  not  easy  to  find  a
parallel  to  so  comprehensive  and  systematic  an  employment
of  a  single  class  of  abstractions,  except  in  any  attempt
which  may  have  been  made  to  regard  the  world  as  simply
a  congeries  of  qualities,  say  of  pleasures  and  pains.  No
such  system  indeed  exists — the  point  of  view  excludes
system ;  but  one  may  conjecture  of  some  such  state  of
feeling  as  forming  the  consciousness  of  children  and
childish  adults  who  have  no  judgment  to  pass  on  things,
persons,  or  events  beyond  the  expression  of  their  likes  and
dislikes.

Thus  I  have  thought  it  desirable  to  treat  as  in  some
degree  co-ordinate  developments  the  two  series  of  judgments
which  diverge  from  the  simplest  measurement  or  equation
such  as  a  colour-match.  On  the  one  side  we  have  the  full
evolution  of  concrete  thought,  as  it  builds  up  the  actual
and  individual  world  within  the  series  of  relativity;  on  the
other  side  we  have  the  truncated  evolution  which  embodies
relativity  almost  pure  and  simple,  but,  as  the  abstraction  is
never  quite  complete  (for  then  it  would  annihilate  itself),
may  in  particular  matter  revive  its  relation  to  totality,  as
we  see  in  the  exhaustive  judgment  of  enumeration,  and  in
the  quasi-generic  judgments  of  geometrical  classification.
And  in  the  same  way  the  more  concrete  judgment  may
in  particular  phases  and  under  particular  stimuli  borrow

^  An  equation  that  embodies  a  characteristic  proportion  is  not  purely  quan-
titative. It  involves  in  its  interpretation  the  material  differences  between  the
parts  which  are  in  the  assigned  ratios,  e.  g.  between  angle  and  arc.  See  p.  i86,
above.


»


ft


c»AP.  IV.] Meeting-points  of  t/ie  two  series.


20'


determinations  from  or  generate  approximations  to  the
abstract  series.  This  happens  when  the  life  of  a  nation  is
subjected  to  statistical  treatment ;  when  the  disjunctive
judgment  is  taken  in  the  weakened  form  of  enumerated
alternatives,  and  so  gives  rise  to  the  calculus  of  proba-
bilities ;  or  when  any  one  of  the  grooves  or  threads  of
relativity  which  compose  the  perceptible  world  is  taken  as
a  problem  per  se  and  tracked  to  its  consequences  by  means
of  a  pure  hypothetical  judgment.


CHAPTER  V.

Singular  and  Universal  Judgment.

Singular  1.  The  transition  from  the  singular  to  the  universal  judg-
ju  gmen  .  ^^^^^  jg  ^j^g  transition  from  the  affirmation  of  particular  fact
to  that  of  general  fact.  This  transition  may  be  expressed
by  distinguishing  two  forms  of  the  singular  judgment,  which
may  be  called  respectively  the  Individual  and  the  Corporate
Judgment.
Individual  i.  In  approaching  the  Individual  Judgment  we  are  return-
ju  gmen  .  .^^  from  the  one-sided  offshoots  of  measurement  to  the
normal  and  concrete  evolution  of  the  judgment.  We  saw
in  chap,  iii  that  it  is  the  judgment  of  proportion  which  first
reveals  individual  quality;  that  is,  quality  which,  although
particular  and  characteristic,  yet  does  not  refuse  to  admit
diversity  into  itself  and  itself  to  enter  into  various  contexts.
This  quality,  however,  we  found,  if  merely  indicated  as  the
content  of  an  abstract  idea,  stood  in  antagonism  to  the
demonstrative  indication  of  present  perception  which  alone
could  attach  it  to  actual  reality.  We  found  ourselves  en-
tangled in  such  judgments  as  '  This  oak-tree  has  a  leaf-spiral
of  f,'  'This  teasel  has  the  bracts  longer  than  the  head,'
'  This  tower  diminishes  in  width  from  story  to  story.'  Such
judgments  as  these  must  rank  as  singular,  for  it  is  of  their
essence  to  qualify  present  perception  by  the  meaning  of
ideas  ;  yet  their  content  is  really  ambiguous,  for,  as  we  saw,
the  designative  idea  which  ekes  out  the  demonstrative  refer-
ence to  the  concrete  subject  tends  to  grow  into  a  condition
and  to  make  the  judgment  abstract,  and  in  that  sense
universal.
Judgment  a.  The  ambiguity  which  tends  to  split  in  two  the  im-
Nanf'^"^^^  perfect  singular  judgment  of  the  above  type,  which  we  have


I


Proper  Name  indicates  Universal.  209

ranked  among  the  judgments  of  measurement,  is  apparently
removed  in  the  class  of  singular  judgments  which  we  now
proceed  to  consider,  and  which  are  avowedly  based  on  the
fact  of  recognisable  individuality.  Such  are  judgments
whose  subjects  are  designated  by  Proper  Names.  Enough
has  been  said  in  the  Introduction  of  the  essential  nature  of
Proper  Names.  We  have  now  only  to  consider  the  logical
value  of  the  judgments  which  are  made  by  their  means.

The  determinate  idea,  present  in  the  judgment  of  pro-  y
portion,  is  omitted  in  the  judgment  made  by  means  of  a
proper  name.  On  the  other  hand,  the  demonstrative
particle,  which  by  itself  is  helpless,  being  only  an  indefinite
reference  to  presentation,  is  replaced  in  the  proper  name  by
the  indication,  not  to  be  effected  without  some  kind  of
meaning,  of  a  particular  individual.  Thus  it  might  be  said
that  the  two  elements  of  the  subject  in  such  a  judgment  as
'That  young  soldier  is  the  victor  of  Actium'  are  fused
together  in  the  subject  of  '  Caius  Julius  Caesar  Octavianus
is  the  victor  of  Actium.'  But  the  union  is  effected  at  the
cost  of  a  mutilation  of  the  significance  ;  although  as  in  the
present  example  the  diminution  of  determinate  content  may
be  more  than  compensated  by  the  accession  of  suggested
ideas.  Identification  no  doubt  involves  ideas,  but  with  the
proper  name,  as  we  saw,  identification  is  the  end  and  ideas
are  only  the  means.  In  unfamiliar  matter,  say  in  a  chronicle
of  remote  date,  we  might  conceivably  identify  the  unknown
possessor  of  some  name  as  figuring  in  several  scenes  or
incidents  without  being  sure  what  he,  she  or  it  might  be ;
whether  a  man  or  a  woman,  or  a  favourite  horse.  In  this
sense  the  judgment  that  deals  with  a  proper  name  is  merely
particular.  It  has  no  meaning  that  can  carry  its  application
beyond  the  unique  individual  to  whom  it  is  taken  to  refer.

But,  though  subject  to  this  imperfection,  yet  Singular
Judgments  of  the  class  now  before  us  form  a  real  advance
on  the  Singular  Judgment  of  Proportion.  They  rest  upon
the  fact  of  characteristic  individuality  capable  of  change  and
persistence  without sacrifice of  identity. Instead of  an

VOL.  I.  P


2IO Singular  and  Universal  Judgment. [Booki.


abstraction  limited  by  pointing  as  if  with  the  finger  they
refer  us  to  a  unique  concrete  thing  in  its  continuous  perma-
nence. In  this  sense,  because  attached  to  a  continuous
t  element  of  reahty  not  shut  up  within  a  particular  time  or  a
given  perception,  the  Individual  judgment  is  universal,  and
as  we  shall  see  leads  up  to  a  transition  which  takes  us  in
one  respect  beyond  the  Singular  Judgment.  But  universality
— concrete  universality — is  not,  we  must  understand,  anta-
gonistic to  individuality.  '  Caesar  crossed  the  Rubicon'  is  an
individual  Judgment ;  yet  in  it  we  are  not  ^  confining  the
reference  of  Caesar  to  the  moment  in  which  he  was  engaged
in  fording  the  river.  If  we  thus  refused  to  refer  the  predi-
cated content  to  the  whole  extended  identity  of  Caesar  the
significance  of  the  judgment  would  be  destroyed,  and  an
eristic  error  committed  by  reducing  an  assertion  to  a
tautology.  Where  is  the  significance  of  crossing  the
Rubicon  if  we  do  not  affirm  it  of  the  conqueror  of  Gaul,  the
rival  of  Pompey,  and  the  true  founder  of  the  Roman
monarchy?  Thus  the  judgment  regarding  a  person,  place
or  other  object  that  bears  a  proper  name  introduces  a  refer-
ence that  is  determinate  without  being  abstract,  and  par-
ticular without  being  confined  to  present  perception.  It
should  be  observed  that  not  all  classes  of  objects  are  suited
to  be  distinguished  by  proper  names.  This  fact  is  akin  to
the  inapplicability  of  significant  names  indicating  a  thing  to
many  objects  endowed  with  material  existence.  The  range
of  proper  names  falls  within  that  of  significant  names  of
things,  and  the  spheres  of  application  of  these  two  kinds  of
symbols  compared  with  each  other  and  with  the  sphere  in
which  neither  applies  have  a  curious  bearing  on  the  subject
of  individuality  (see  above,  p.  138).
Judgment  /3.  With  these  Individual  judgments  must  be  classed  all
and  ide^aT.^  predications  dealing  with  particular  events,  individuals,  or
objects,  in  which  the  demonstrative  particle  is  dispensed
with  and  replaced  by  a  symbol  referring  to  the  individual.
It  will  be  found  that  these  particular  events,  persons  or

^  Contrast  Lotze,  Logik,  sect.  58.


Chap.  V.]  Personal  and  objective  era.  2 1 1

objects  have  ultimately  to  be  designated  by  reference  to
a  proper  name,  or  to  some  symbol  which  nearly  approaches
the  nature  of  a  proper  name.  As  such  e.g.  may  be  ranked
all  chronological  indications — 'Christmas  Day,  1885  A.D.'

It  is  obvious  that  such  a  symbol,  or  a  proper  name,  as  a
fixed  point  in  history,  may  be  supplemented  by  any  amount  j
of  definitely  significant  ideas  ;  and  as  the  proper  name  or  the
date  is  often  understood  or  presupposed,  e.g.  in  a  continuous
narrative,  we  are  apt  greatly  to  under-estimate  the  part
played  in  judgment  by  the  content  of  such  symbols.  Page
after  page  of  discussion  about  political  or  social  tendencies
may  chance  to  be  found  in  a  reflective  history,  say  in
Lanfrey's  History  of  Napoleon,  without  the  mention  of  a
proper  name.  But  in  so  far  as  these  discussions  are  to  be
taken  as  significant  of  the  actual  conditions  of  an  actual
epoch,  they  are  understood  as  ideal  content  predicated  of
the  nation,  age  and  persons  with  whom  the  narrative  is!
concerned.  Chronological  symbols  exhibit  the  transition
from  the  demonstrative  to  the  proper  name  in  a  peculiarly
clear  light.  '  To-day,'  '  yesterday,'  '  last  year,'  are  just  on
the  line  between  demonstratives  and  proper  names.  '  To-
day' seems  naturally  to  =  '  This  day,'  a  demonstrative  indi-
cating mere  relation  to  the  percipient  subject  ^.  '  Last
year,'  '  twenty  years  ago,'  show  the  relation  to  the  percipient
subject  growing  into  an  objective  system.  And  when  we
come  to  the  employment  of  an  era,  A.U.C.,  B.C.,  A.D.,  we
have  the  system  transferred  from  the  accidental  percipient
subject,  and  attached  to  the  content  of  a  proper  name.
Wherever  we  have  '  I '  or  '  my'  etc.  as  points  of  reference  in
narration,  we  are  dealing  with  something  between  a  demon-
strative and  a  proper  name.  And  every  narrative  judgment
which  goes  beyond  a  mere  impersonal  or  demonstrative
reference  to  present  reality  or  to  my  own  perception  may

*  I  take  what  I  believe  to  be  the  actual  meaning  in  use.  Philology  may  or
may  not  support  it  as  the  original  meaning.  We  are  bound  to  take  philology
into  account  as  evidence  of  evolation  and  as  a  guide  to  observation ;  but  it
cannot  override  present  usage.

pa


212 Singular  and  Universal  Judgment. [Booki.

prima  facie  be  said  to  involve  a  reference  to  some  proper
name.  No  mere  abstract  idea  can  form  the  subject  of
historical  predication.  How  far  this  prima  facie  conception
must  be  corrected  by  allowing  for  judgments  which  may  be
capable  of  uniting  without  mutilation  the  powers  of  unique
reference  and  of  determinate  notions  is  a  question  which
will  occupy  us  in  the  sequel.
Corporate  ii.  Closely  allied  to  the  Individual  Judgment,  and  perhaps
ju  gmen  .  j^  j-jgifj  technicality  not  distinguishable  from  it,  is  what  for
want  of  a  better  name  I  call  the  corporate  judgment.  This
title  is  meant  to  include  all  such  affirmations  as  deal  with
comprehensive  totalities  or  aggregates  which  we  bona  fide
take  in  their  corporate  or  singular  aspect,  and  do  not  con-
sider either  as  in  the  collective  judgment,  in  the  light  of
,  sums  of  enumerated  particulars,  or  as  in  the  hypothetical
'  judgment,  in  the  light  of  mere  abstractions  whose  very
existence  is  not  absolutely  postulated.  Such  a  judgment
may  be  expressed  indifferently  by  a  singular  or  by  a  ^ural
enunciation,  so  long  as  the  name  used  in  the  plural  is  a  bona
fide  designation  of  a  known  or  knowable  unity  in  respect  of
its  characteristic  features:  e.  g.  '  The  ancient  Greeks  were  at
once  a  most  scientifically  and  a  most  imaginatively  minded
race.'  This  judgment  obviously ='  The  Greek  race  was,'  etc.
This  is  not  a  collective  judgment  in  the  sense  which  has
above  been  given  to  that  title.  It  is  not  capable  of  being
obtained  by  successive  synthesis  of  the  component  units —
by  enumeration — and  retains  therefore  no  special  exten-
sional  reference  to  the  individuals  who  as  an  aggregate
constituted  the  ancient  Greek  race ;  it  starts  from  the  idea
of  a  common  stock  as  a  historical  entity  with  peculiar
endowments  and  with  its  own  rise,  decline  and  fall.  Other
instances  are  such  as  '  Europe  has  acted  harshly  to  the
modern  Greek  nation.'  Europe  is  here  not  a  geographical
expression,  nor  even  a  mere  body  of  nameable  states  ;  it  is
an  organisation  acting  upon  definite  resolutions  and  through
a  known  combination  and  proportion  of  forces.  Several
states  in  geographical  Europe  probably  do  not  count  in


Chap,  v.]  Historical  realities.  213

political  or  concerted  Europe.  Again,  we  may  say  '  The
House  of  Commons  detests  a  bore.'  This  might  be  trans-
formed into  '  All  members  of  the  House  of  Commons '  etc.,
but  the  two  affirmations  are  only  equivalent  if  the  latter  is
understood  of  the  members  qua  members,  i.  e.  as  engaged
in  debate  in  the  House;  otherwise  this  latter  becomes  a
mere  collective  judgment,  dealing  with  the  members  as  a
collection  of  individuals  who  share  two  attributes,  viz.
belonging  to  the  House  of  Commons  and  hating  bores,
but  wholly  neglecting  any  reference  to  the  House  in  itself
as  a  single  body  with  its  own  functions  and  peculiarities,
among  which  is  the  one  predicated  in  the  judgment.  The
glacial  period,  The  French  Revolution,  The  Italian  renais-
sance. The  solar  system,  are  '  corporate  '  realities  and  sub-
jects of  singular  judgments  of  the  species  of  which  I  am
now  speaking.

The  distinction  between  such  individualities  and  those  of
really  single  objects  or  persons  such  as  form  the  subjects  of
individual  judgments  is  not  a  matter  of  principle,  for  in  both
the  existence  of  the  subject  is  affirmed,  or,  as  I  prefer  to
say,  absolutely  postulated.  Nevertheless,  the  fact  that
such  individualities  as  we  have  now  before  us  do  on  one
side  consist  of  immense  aggregates  of  particulars,  and  are
therefore  capable  of  being  regarded  at  any  moment  from
points  of  view  antagonistic  to  that  of  their  individuality,
either  as  abstract  ideas  or  again  as  series  of  numerable
units,  makes  it  desirable  to  mark  by  a  specific  distinction
the  fact  that  in  their  unity  they  can  be  regarded  as  indi-
viduals.

On  the  other  hand,  the  subjects  in  question  are  again  not
easy  to  distinguish  absolutely  from  the  content  of  scientific
class  conceptions  whose  individual  unity  and  actuality  are
disputable.  The  line  which  I  have  drawn  is  intended  to
correspond  \\ith  the  distinction  between  history  on  the  one
hand  and  truly  physical  science  on  the  other.  History
deals  on  the  whole  with  contents  into  the  essence  of  which
time  enters,  and  which  therefore,  however  comprehensive,


214 SingiUar  and  Universal  yudgment. [booki.

are  ultimately  particular  within  the  phenomenal  series.
Abstract  science  as  a  rule  deals  with  timeless  connections
and  systems  of  attributes,  though  it  will  be  necessary  in
exhibiting  this  tendency  to  make  allowances  for  a  consider-
able admixture  of  and  recurrence  to  the  historical  attitude,
for  in  the  light  of  evolution,  time,  or  at  least  amount  of
change,  enters  into  the  essence  of  most  things.  And
besides  Abstract  Science  we  must  not  leave  out  of  account
Classificatory  Science  on  the  one  hand  and  Philosophy  on
the  other,  both  of  which,  though  in  different  senses,  may
claim  to  deal  with  actual  realities.

The  Corporate  Judgment  marks  the  fullest  development
of  the  affirmation  of  particular  fact,  and  at  the  same  time  a
near  approach  to  the  affirmation  of  general  fact.  In  other
words,  the  affirmation  with  which  we  have  so  far  been
dealing  is  beyond  possibility  of  dispute  Categorical  affirma-
tion, treating  of  contents  which  the  judgments  affirm,  or  at
least  absolutely  postulate  to  be  features  that  have  or  have
had  actuality  in  the  world  continuous  with  present  percep-
tion. But  from  this  point  onwards  the  Categorical  character
of  judgments  becomes  a  matter  of  theory  and  of  analysis.
There  is  indeed,  according  to  the  scheme  here  adopted,  no
absolute  separation  between  the  Singular  and  the  Universal
Judgment.  Still  the  distinction,  unknown  to  Formal  Logic,
which  is  the  ground  of  that  separation  as  made  by  recent
writers,  is  the  basis  of  our  scheme  also.  The  Historical  or
Singular  Judgment,  and  a  fortiori  the  perceptive  or  im-
perfect singular  judgments  that  precede  it  in  our  scheme,
are  not  on  all  fours  with  the  judgments  of  science,  whether
classificatory  or  analytical,  or  of  philosophy.  Before
attempting  to  trace  in  these  latter  types  of  judgment  the
elements  which  we  have  observed  in  the  former,  though  in
other  proportions  and  combinations,  it  will  be  well  to
examine  more  particularly  the  one  leading  difference
between  the  two  chief  stages  of  affirmation.
Time  and j{j^  T'\\Q.  Judgment  that  asserts  particular  fact  coincides

existence  in .  , , ^  . , , i  • i

Singular With  the  Categorical  Judgment  m  the  primary  sense  of

Judgment.


Chap,  v.]  The  time  in  Predication,  215

the  latter  title.  According  to  the  standpoint  which  for
the  present  we  have  adopted,  a  judgment  is  Categorical
when  it  asserts  some  thing  or  event  to  belong  to  the  actual  .
world  in  which  we  live.  This  assertion  is  made  both  by  the
Individual  and  by  the  Corporate  Judgment.  For  the
subject  in  these  judgments  is  something  that  can  exist  as  a
particular  reality,  and  is  therefore  taken  or  presupposed  to
be  a  real  particular,  while  at  the  same  time  its  reality  is  so
far  determinate  that  it  can  intelligibly  be  denied,  which  we
saw  not  to  be  the  case  with  the  *  this,'  '  here,'  or  '  now'  of
the  Imperfect  Singular  Judgment.  In  these  judgments,
therefore,  though  not  necessarily  in  them  alone,  we  have
existential  assertion. And  the  simplest  test  of  the  presence  ^

of  such  an  assertion  is  to  ask  whether  the  non-existence  in
reality  of  the  content  which  enters  into  the  judgment
renders  that  judgment  false.  To  such  a  question  the
primary  answer  is  that  at  least  in  all  judgments  where
time  enters  into  the  content  —  i.  e.  which  assert  facts
in  time  —  the  non-existence  of  this  content  renders  the
judgment  false.  And  these  judgments  will  be  found  to  be
coextensive  with  the  Historical  Judgment,  affirming  as  it
does  not  necessary  connection,  but  particular  reality  within
the  phenomenal  series.  And  thus,  as  said  above,  the  His-
torical or  Singular  Judgment  is  equivalent  to  the  Cate-
gorical Judgment  in  the  sense  here  under  consideration.

This  answer,  however,  demands  explanation  and  limita-
tion. If  non-existence  of  the  content  or  subject  of  a  judg-
ment renders  the  judgment  false,  we  have  further  to  ask,
Non-existence  when  ?  •

In  every  judgment  we  must  distinguish  between  the  time  ,
of  predication  and  the  time  in  predication.  The  time  of
predication,  i.e.  the  time  at  which  some  thinking  being
makes  the  judgment,  is  relatively  to  the  content  of  the
judgment  a  mere  accident,  and  alters  actually  while  we  are
occupied  in  judging,  and  a  fortiori  when  the  judgment  is
rethought  after  a  lapse  of  days  or  years.  The  time  iti  pre-
dication is  the  relation  of  the  predicated  content  to  the


2i6 Singular  and  Universal  Judgment. [Booki.

total  content  of  the  temporal  series  of  events  which  we  con-
struct and  contemplate  as  objective.  The  time  in  predica-
tion, if  any,  is  affirmed  as  an  attribute  by  the  judgment ;
the  time  of  predication  is  not  affirmed  as  an  attribute  by
the  judgment,  which  therefore  is  not  made  false  by  any
relations  whether  negative  or  positive  between  its  content
and  that  time.  Hence  it  follows  that  the  non-existence  of
the  individual  subject  or  content  which  falsifies  a  Singular
Judgment  is  non-existence  at  the  time  in  the  predication,  not
non-existence  at  the  time  ^/the  predication.  '  Thucydides
is  among  the  greatest  historians  of  the  world '  is  not  false,
although  Thucydides  is  in  fact,  when  we  speak,  not  a  living
man  ^.  '  The  House  of  Commons  is  an  integral  part  of  the
British  Constitution '  does  not  depend  for  its  truth  on
Parliament  not  being  in  dissolution  at  the  moment  of  pre-
dication, but  only  on  the  co-existence  of  a  House  of
Commons  with  the  British  Constitution  in  the  sense  and  to
the  extent  demanded  by  the  import  of  the  judgment.  It
appears  to  be  a  corollary  from  this  principle  that  if  no  time
in  particular  is  involved  in  the  import  of  the  judgment,
which  is  the  case  at  any  rate  with  geometrical  truth,  it
becomes  all  but  impossible  to  convict  a  judgment  of  falsity
on  the  score  of  non-existence  of  its  content ;  although
the  demonstration  of  utter  non-existence,  i.  e.  I  suppose  of
impossibility,  would  so  convict  it.  This  bears  on  the
categorical  character  of  the  generic  and  hypothetical  judg-
ment.

A  subtlety  is  introduced  into  the  problem  by  the
phenomena  of  tense  which  include  the  time  of  predication,
or  a  relation  to  that  time  or  personal  era,  within  the  con-
tent of  the  judgment,  and  so  within  the  allegation  of  time  in
the  predication. The  content  so  superadded  is  of  the  most

^  It  may  be  objected  that  it  is  false  to  say  '  Thucydides  is  a  general  in  the
Peloponnesian  war,'  simply  because  Thucydides  does  not  exist  at  the  time
of  predication.  "Where  we  have  true  tense  this  is  so;  we  have  then  not
got  rid  of  the  personal  era.  See  p.  211.  It  must  be  remembered  that  in
'  Thucydides  was '  etc.  Thucydides  is  non-existent,  and  yet  the  judgment
is  true.


Chap,  v.]  Tcnse  and  Personal  era.  217

fugitive  and  relative  nature,  and  is  constantly  neglected
even  by  historical  narrative.  Picturesque  history  neglects
it  by  the  use  of  the  historical  present,  and  philosophical
history  by  the  use  of  the  logical  present.  Nevertheless
where  a  past,  future,  or  true  present  tense  (neither  historical
nor  logical)  is  intentionally  employed,  its  relation  to  the
personal  era  or  date  at  which  the  narrative  is  drawn  up
beyond  a  doubt  enters  into  the  judgment  and  makes  an
assertion  which  demands  a  particular  limited  existence  on
the  part  of  certain  objects  and  events,  and  is  false  if  this
existence  is  not  as  affirmed.  In  the  case  of  the  present
tense  there  is  a  peculiar  subtlety  arising  from  the  confusion
between  the  atomic  or  nearly  atomic  and  the  continuous  or
ultimately  non-temporal  present.  The  former  is  the  im-
port of  the  present  as  a  true  tense ;  the  latter  of  the  present
as  it  approaches  to  a  mere  vehicle  of  affirmation.  Compare
the  following  examples :  '  The  Derby  is  being  run  at  this
very  moment;'  '  The  horses  are  leaving  the  paddock  for  the
Derby  of  1861  '  (from  a  narrative  written  in  1883)  ;  '  The
Derby  is  run  once  a  year;'  'The  Derby  race  in  England
is  an  instance  of  those  customs  which  owe  nothing  to
government  but  yet  amount  to  national  institutions.'  The
first  of  these  judgments  if  true  now  must  be  false  after  the
lapse  of  five  minutes.  The  second  is  only  false  if  there  was
no  paddock  or  no  Derby  in  1861.  The  third  is  only  false  if  at
the  time  of  its  predication  the  race  has  altogether  ceased  to
be  an  annual  event ;  but  its  present  is  well  able  to  compre-
hend within  itself  the  intervals  of  time  which  the  import  of
the  judgments  admits  and  requires,  and  is  not  falsified  by
reason  of  the  non-existence  of  the  race  during  these  annual
intervals.  And  the  fourth  is  false  only  if  there  never  was
nor  will  be  such  a  thing  as  a  Derby  race  having  the  im-
portance alleged  in  English  life.  I  am  discussing  of  course
only  how  far  the  respective  judgments  become  false  if  we
assume  non-existence  of  the  content ;  I  am  not  raising  the
question  of  the  material  truth  of  the  attributes  enunciated.
It  is  only  in  the  first  of  these  four  examples  that  we  see  the


2i8 Singular  and  Universal  yudgment, [Booki.

present  operative  as  a  true  tense.  In  the  case  of  the  past
and  future  the  difficulty  of  tense  does  not  arise  in  its  full
extent;  the  tenses  which  indicate  them  must  of  course
introduce  the  personal  era,  but  for  that  very  reason  cannot
be  confused  with  a  mere  form  of  predication,  for  which  they
have  not  the  appropriateness  that  the  present  possesses.
Therefore  they  do  not  risk  the  reduction  of  every  possible
judgment  to  a  statement  about  a  momentary  date  or
epoch,  which  would  be  the  result  of  neglecting  the  above
distinctions  in  the  use  of  the  present  tense.  And  moreover,
these  very  tenses  '  was '  and  '  will  be '  prove  that  it  is  at
least  not  necessary  to  the  truth  of  a  judgment  that  its  con-
tent should  exist  in  the  moment  ^predication.  It  is  how-
ever necessary  for  judgments  dealing  with  past  and  future
that  their  content  should  have  the  alleged  relation,  however
fugitive  and  accidental,  to  the  time  of  predication.  But  at
any  rate  in  none  of  these  cases,  neither  in  present,  past  nor
future,  need  the  content  be  shut  up  within  the  time  of  pre-
dication or  the  time  related  to  that  personal  era.  Past  and
future  do  not  pretend  to  be  momentary,  and  the  present
cannot  possibly  succeed  in  being  so.  It  must  be  credited
either  with  duration  in  itself  or  with  a  continuity  that  shades
by  degrees  into  the  past  and  future.

Thus,  though  the  time  of  predication  has  the  slightest
possible  relation  to  the  content  of  judgments,  yet  no  doubt,
when  predicated  as  an  attribute  by  help  of  true  tense,  a  re-
lation to  the  time  of  predication  or  subjective  era  enters
into  predication.  And  in  so  far  as  history  as  a  whole  falls
in  the  past,  the  use  of  the  past  tense  in  narrative  bears  true
witness  to  the  essential  particularity  and  limitation  of  the
existences  with  which  history  deals.  But  after  all,  the  past
is  not  a  point  but  a  line ;  and  so  for  precise  temporal  im-
port even  of  narrative  propositions  in  the  past  tense  we
must  go,  not  to  the  tense,  but  to  the  import  of  the  judg-
ment. And  a  fortiori  this  is  the  case  with  the  present,
where  the  true  tense  is  difficult  to  distinguish  from  the
same  tense  used  as  the  mere  form  of  predication.


Chap.  V.] Defects  of  Singular  yudgnients.  2 1 9

We  have  thus  seen  in  what  sense  and  to  what  extent
Singular  and  Perceptive  Judgments  are  identifiable  with  .
Categorical  affirmation.  The  Judgment  whose  content  in-  /
volves  a  limitation  of  time  is  plainly  false  if  in  the  time-
relation  prescribed  by  such  a  Umitation  its  content  is  non-
existent. This  test  shows  that  all  such  Judgments  are
assertions  of  particular  fact-  Even  the  example  (on  p.  217)
which  goes  beyond  common  historical  usage  nevertheless
asserts  fact  which  is  essentially  in  time,  although  the  truth
of  the  assertion  is  not  relative  to  the  date  of  predication.
If  the  Derby  race  never  existed  the  judgment  would  be
false,  and  its  existence  involves  a  multitude  of  temporal
relations  which  are  necessary  to  its  being  what  it  is.  It  is
essentially  a  fact  in  time.

When  we  get  away  from  the  proper  name  and  the  re-
lations of  events  in  the  temporal  series,  we  find  it  much
less  easy  to  say  what  non-existence  of  particulars,  if  any,
would  imply  the  falsity  of  the  judgment,  and  in  what  sense
therefore,  if  in  any,  the  judgment  alleges  actual  fact  be-
longing to  the  real  world.  We  must  bear  in  mind  that  we
have  up  to  this  point  been  dealing  with  unanalysed  per-
ceptions and  with  proper  names  and  their  expansions.  We
have  therefore  not  got  rid  of  the  element  of  irrational  con-
creteness  which  attends  all  judgment  whose  subject  is
given  as  if  by  simple  pointing  with  the  finger;  for  qua  a
mere  symbol  of  identification  the  proper  name  itself  par-_
takes  of  the  character  of  simple  pointing;  and  until  we
reached  the  proper  name  we  were  encumbered  with  the
demonstrative  particle.

Therefore  the  judgments  thus  far  considered,  omitting
the  one-sided  forms  that  arise  out  of  measurement,  possess
certain  peculiarities.  They  assert,  to  begin  with,  the
existence  of  things  or  events  in  time.  In  doing  so,  they
restrict  and  burden  with  irrelevant  matter  the  application
of  determinate  ideas,  which,  as  the  only  symbols  of  mean-
ings, they  cannot  avoid  emplo>ang.  Taken  therefore  as
rational  connections  of  attributes,  a  point  of  view  which


L


2  20 Singula!''  and  Universal  Judgment, [booki.

determinate  ideas  challenge,  and  towards  which,  as  we  saw,
the  import  even  of  proper  names  tends  to  develope,  the
judgments  which  we  have  been  considering  3X0.  false,  being
burdened  with  irrelevant  and  deficient  in  relevant  matter.
This  is  the  same  thing  as  to  say  that  they  present  an  as-
pect of  necessity,  in  which  aspect  they  are  defecth^e  and
so  false.
The  2.  By  the  title  of '  Universal  Judgments '  I  mean  to  desig-

Tudcment  i^^te,  in  all  their  phases  of  import,  the  assertions  usually
typified  by  such  well-worn  examples  as  'All  men  are
mortal,'  '  All  fire  burns,'  and  '  All  triangles  have  their  three
angles  equal  to  two  right  angles.'  It  has  been  shown
above  that  perceptive  and  singular  judgments,  and  more
especially  those  which  employ  proper  names,  possess  an
element  of  universality  as  predicating  identities  into  which
differences  enter  or  which  persist  through  differences.  But
in  spite  of  this  fundamental  unity  of  the  judging  function,
the  distinction  between  the  'Singular'  and  the  'Universal'
Judgment  has  an  importance  for  us  which  it  has  not  for
traditional  Logic ;  which  indeed  treats  the  Singular  and
the  Universal  Judgment  as  on  the  same  level  in  a  strictly
logical  point  of  view,  and  both,  consequently,  together
with  the  particular  judgment,  as  species  of  Categorical
enunciation.  The  attitude  which  we  have  to  adopt  to-
wards this  arrangement  was  defined  in  an  early  part  of
the  present  book  ^,  where  we  saw  that  it  was  impossible
for  us  to  retain  these  species  of  enunciation  in  their  tra-
ditional relations.  It  is  beyond  a  doubt  that  the  Uni-
versal assertion  must  at  some  point  of  its  development
assume  in  some  aspect  or  in  some  degree  a  hypothetical
character ;  while  if  the  genus  Categorical,  which  certainly
includes  the  singular  judgment,  extends  into  or  over  the
domain  of  the  Universal,  it  can  only  do  so  subject  to  re-
servations which  are  unnecessary  so  long  as  it  is  confined
to  the  judgments  of  present  perception  or  of  simple  nar-
rative.

*  See  supra,  chap.  i.  p.  93  ff.


Chap.  V.J Universal  distifiguisfied f TOM  Singular . 221

The  Universal  judgment,  then,  is  not  distinguished  from \/
the  Singular  judgment  by  the  mere  feature  of  Universality,
but  by  a  special  phase  of  Universality,  that  is  to  say,  by
the  predication  of  a  universal  law  of  cottnection. It  has,
indeed,  been obvious  to us throughout the  analysis  of
judgment that universal connection was everywhere at
work  in  the  background,  exploiting  any  qualification  ex-
pressed or  implied  in  the  Subject,  for  the  benefit  of  sys-
tematic connection  or  necessity,  and  at  the  expense  of  the
simple  perceptive  or  narrative conjunction of  contents;
until,  surrendering  for  the  moment  the  task  of  intelligible
qualification  of  reality,  we  fell  back,  in  the  proper  name,
on  an  attempt  at  unique  designation  ^. But  here  again  we
fail  to  escape  from  universal  connection  or  necessity,  and
in  the  names  of  illustrious  individuals,  as  in  those  of  na-
tions, epochs,  or  movements,  we  have  found  that  every
significance  tends  to  break  down  the  mere  conjunction  of
data,  and  to  exhibit  itself  as  a  connection  of  reason  and
consequent. We  attempted  to  draw  the  line  at  events  and
individuals  into  whose  content  time  entered,  and  to  show
that  judgments  dealing  with  such  matters  as  these  were
inevitably  allegations  of  fact,  and  not  of  abstract  connec-
tion. Now  we  adhere  to  this  distinction,  and  it  is  per-
fectly true  that  any  fact  which  is  especially  involved  in
one  portion,  however  extended,  of  the  temporal  series  of
phenomena,  must have existence  within  that portion  if
an  affirmative  judgment  about  it  is  to  be  true. The  as-
sertion  of  such a  fact  in its accidental concreteness is
therefore  radically  different  from  the  assertion  of  a  mere
law  or  relation,  and  if  taken in this  latter  sense  would
necessarily  be  false. But  we  found  in  the  corporate  judg-
ment that  it  was  not  perfectly  easy  to  distinguish  the  facts
of  history  from  the  truths  of  science;  for  sets  of  events

*  I  have  said  above  (Introduction)  that  I  do  not  give  this  as  a  historical
account  of  the  genesis  of  proper  names,  which  must  no  doubt  have  been  applied
and  recognised  by  a  gradual  differentiation.  But  none  the  less,  wherever
language  has  fixed  them  as  a  class  of  words,  they  perform  the  function  and  are
subject  to  the  modihcations  indicated  in  the  text.


222 Singular  and  Universal  judgment, [booki,

greatly  extended  in  time  appear  to  pass  by  a  sort  of
sorites  into  sets  of  events  which,  though  in  respect  of  ex-
istence precisely  on  all  fours  with  actualities  limited  in
time,  are  nevertheless  either  not  treated  as  relative  to  time
or  really  are  not  held  to  be  so  relative.  In  order,  while
marking  the  distinction  demanded  by  the  absence  of
limited  particularity,  to  give  full  weight  to  the  continuity
of  import  between  these  types  of  judgment,  I  shall  not
follow  Lotze  and  other  modern  writers  in  identifying  the
universal  ab  initio  with  the  hypothetical  judgment.  I
shall  prefer  to  distinguish  within  it  two  species,  of  which
the  first,  the  generic  judgment,  alone  belongs  to  the  main
evolution  of  thought,  and  the  second,  the  pure  hypothe-
tical is  regarded  as  an  abstraction  of  a  quasi-mechanical
character,  and  consequently  as  a  divergence  in  the  direc-
tion of  the  arithmetical  and  geometrical  judgment.
The  i. The  generic  judgment  is  the  qualification  of  reality

Judgment,  under  the  aspect  of  a  Natural  Kind  by  attributes  or  re-
lations incident  to  that  Kind.  A  Natural  Kind  is  for  our
purpose  a  Kind  accepted  and  treated  as  such  by  any  science.
We  have  already  seen  that  the  geometrical  sciences  are  in
this  respect  in  a  peculiar  position,  and  we  have  discussed
the  limits  under  which  their  quasi-generic  judgments  may
be  taken  to  embody  truth  about  actual  reality.  The
question  of  alternative  classification,  which  arises  on  account
of  the  different  points  of  view  introduced  by  different
sciences,  was  treated  in  the  Introduction,  and  should  cause
us  no  difficulty  if  we  are  once  able  to  understand  the  nature
of  the  truth  embodied  in  any  science.  For  every  science
employs  some  abstraction  and  idealisation,  though  there  is
an  all-important  difference  of  degree  between  contents
which  are  merely  abstract  as  not  sensuous,  and  contents
which  are  abstract  as  not  concrete.

The  restriction  '  incident  to  that  kind '  is  not  intended  to
exclude  relations  which  one  kind  shares  with  other  cognate
kinds.  A  purist  logic,  following  a  suggestion  to  be  found
in  Aristotle,  might  indeed  require  that  every  generic  judg-


Chap,  v.]  Graduated  Identity.  223

ment  should  be  '  commensurate'  or  characteristic.  It  would
then  have  to  deny  that  the  possession  of  breathing  apparatus
was  incident  to  man,  because  he  shares  the  respiratory-
function  with  the  whole  organic  world.  Such  a  view  would  be
illustrated  by  the  fact  which  was  commented  on  above,  that
e.  g.  the  animal  properties  of  man  are,  in  man,  modified  by
their  relation  to  his  humanity;  so  that  in  order  to  represent
them  as  features  of  vtan  they  ought  ideally  to  have  certain
modifications  assigned  to  them,  while  in  their  abstraction
they  can  only  be  set  down  as  characters  correlative  to  the
no  less  abstract  idea  of  animality  as  such.  But  this  prin-
ciple seems  needlessly  purist.  The  attributes  which  man
shares  with  the  animal  world  are  elements  of  identity,
however  partial,  between  him  and  it ;  and  there  can  be
no  reason  against  characterising  him  by  these  identities
which  would  not  tell  equally  against  any  knowledge  which
falls  short  of  perfection.  The  rule  to  be  borne  in  mind  about
such  cases  is  that  imperfect  knowledge  only  becomes /«/j^
when  mistaken  for  perfect  knowledge.  In  as  far  therefore
as  the  form  of  the  judgment  implies  a  truth  completely
adequate  to  its  subject,  something  may  be  said  for  the  view
which  has  just  been  stated.  But  we  shall  find  if  we  press
the  matter  home  that  this  ideal  is  to  be  regarded  as  the
vital  principle  active  in  knowledge,  but  not  as  hostile  to  any
genuine  fact  that  is  free  from  confusion.

Under  'incident  to  the  kind'  then  are  included  the
attributes  and  relations  which  lie  at  the  root  of  the  indi-
viduals' being,  although  shared  by  them  with  individuals
of  other  kinds,  or  even  with  mechanical  or  geometrical
wholes.  It  is  only  to  be  borne  in  mind  that  such  relations,
e.g.  the  characters  of  vertebrate  organisms,  are  not  thought
as  mere  abstract  properties,  when  applied  to  specific  kinds,
but  are  regarded  as  concrete  schemes  presenting  both  a
general  and  a  specific  aspect.  It  is  in  this  characteristic
of  graduated  identity  that  the  intelligible  order  of  the
world  reveals  itself  to  us.

The  generic  judgment  has  always  been  the  battle-field


224 Singular  and  Universal  Judgment, [booki.

of  conflicting  logical  tendencies,  corresponding  to  actual
needs  and  features  exhibited  in  various  points  of  view  by
the  judging  activity.  I  shall  endeavour,  on  the  same  plan
which  I  have  hitherto  pursued,  in  some  measure  to  satisfy
these  tendencies  by  distinguishing  as  different,  in  phase  and
line  of  evolution,  intellectual  acts  which  are  often  reckoned
as  one  and  the  same.  But  it  follows  from  the  nature  of
thought  that  all  such  aspects  have  a  real  connection,  and
are  in  fact  rather  distinguishable  than  separable.  Thus  in
distinguishing  the  generic  judgment  from  other  acts  of
thought  we  shall  also  be  analysing  this  many-sided  judg-
ment itself  and  justifying  to  some  extent  the  views  of
those  who  have  recognised  in  it  only  one  or  other  of  its
many  sides.
The  a.  The  Generic  Judgment — the  Universal  Judgment  of

Q'Jf^^' common  life  and  of  classificatory  science — was  regarded

collective  •^  °

Judgment,  by  Aristotle,  as  is  well  known,  under  two  connected
aspects,  as  a  judgment  of  Allness  and  as  a  judgment  of
Necessity.  The  former  of  these  aspects  has  been  seized
on  by  formal  logic,  and  the  doctrine  of  logical  universality
has  been  adapted  mainly  to  the  consideration  of  subject
and  predicate  as  names  or  ideas  applicable  to  groups  of
individuals.  We  examined  the  judgment  from  this  point
of  view,  as  dealing  with  an  aggregate  arising  out  of  enume-
ration, in  a  former  chapter.  We  there  saw  its  actual  goal
in  the  Collective  Judgment  and  its  reversion  towards  a  more
concrete  and  natural  mode  of  thought  in  the  Exhaustive
Judgment,  which  amounts  to  nothing  but  a  Generic  Judg-
ment very,  strictly  taken  in  extension.  It  must  however
be  remembered  that  we  did  not  think  it  possible  for
any  judgment,  however  closely  confined  to  an  aggregate
resulting  from  enumeration,  to  avoid  designating  the  in-
dividuals by  a  common  attribute,  and  predicating  an
attribute  of  them.  Attributes  are  enunciated  by  exten-
sional  no  less  than  by  intensional  judgments ;  but  in  the
latter  .they  are  connected  with  attributes,  in  the  former
they  aire  centred  in  the  identity  of  individuals. Therefore


Chap,  v.] Quasi-collective  Generic  Judgment. 225

it  is  possible  to  consider  the  Generic  Judgment  as  differing
from  the  Collective  Judgment  simply  in  degree,  viz.  by
predicating  attributes  of  an  unknown  or  unlimited  and  not
of  a  known  or  determinate  aggregate,  the  actual  means
of  predication  being  in  both  cases  alike  a  general  attribute,
though  in  the  latter  case  attached  to  reality  by  a  proper
name  or  its  equivalent.  But  an  unknown  or  unlimited
aggregate  of  individuals  is  a  contradiction  ^,  a  numerical
problem  which  proclaims  itself  insoluble  by  enumeration,
and  therefore  the  judgment  which  is  couched  in  this  shape,
and  which  in  fact  conveys  a  perfectly  intelligible  meaning,
must  derive  this  meaning  from  some  other  source  than
from  such  an  enumeration  as  that  on  which  the  collective
judgment  rests.  The  Exhaustive  judgment  must  be  inter-
preted by  the  Generic  and  not  by  the  Collective.

Examples  of  the  Quasi-collective  judgment  of  which  we
are  speaking  are — '  All  men  are  mortal,'  '  All  organisms  both
breathe  and  assimilate,'  'All  unstriped  muscle  in  the  human
body  is  inaccessible  to  the  control  of  the  will.'  This  last
example,  however,  is  suggestive.  The  Exhaustive  judgment,
i.e.  the  Generic  judgment  in  its  aspect  of '  allness,'  is  helpless
in  the  face  of  the  most  trivial  exception.  Thus  '■Nearly  all
striped  muscle  is  under  the  control  of  the  will,'  but  the  muscles
of  the  heart  form  an  exceptional  case,  and,  though  striped,
are  normally  inaccessible  to  volition.  Nevertheless  there
can  hardly  be  a  doubt  that  the  coincidence  expressed
by  the  judgment  must  indicate  some  sort  of  connection,
however  circuitous,  between  the  appearance  of  the  muscle
and  the  degree  in  which  it  is  under  control,  and  that
the  exceptional  case  must  be  accounted  for  by  special
conditions.  But  on  its  purely  enumerative  side  the  judg-
ment has  nothing  to  say  to  this ;  it  only  knows  that
the  sum-total  of  Enumerative  judgments  cannot  be  made,
and  the  judgment  of  allness  is  therefore  unwarranted.  It
is  obvious  that  the  affirmation  of  universal  connection
which  in  such  an  instance  we  feel  to  be  all  but  warranted

'  See  p.  175,  supra.
VOL.  I.  Q


y


2  26 Singular  and  Universal  Judgment. [Booki.

is  not  approached  from  the  side  of  the  individual  units,
but  from  the  side  of  the  common  or  continuous  nature
which  binds  them  into  a  whole.
True  Gene- ^.  As  dealing  with  a  common  or  continuous  nature  the
Blent.  Generic  judgment  may  be  more  properly  expressed  in  the

form,  '  Man  is  mortal,'  '  Water  boils,  under  one  atmosphere,
at  212°  Fahrenheit,'  'A  society  organised  on  a  purely  com-
mercial basis  treats  the  working  classes  as  little  better  than
slaves.'  These  propositions  are  accepted  as  practically
equivalent  to  '  All  men  are '  &c.,  '  All  water '  &c.,  '  All
societies'  &c.  Here  however  it  is  plainly  the  connection
of  attributes  that  warrants  the  affirmation  concerning  indi-
viduals and  not  vice  versa.  When  thus  regarded,  the
Generic  judgment  challenges  comparison  with  the  Singular
judgment  in  both  its  forms,  both  as  Individual  and  as
Corporate.
Ordinary  a.  '  Man  is  an  animal  capable  of  social  life,'  '  The  bacillus
Analogical  ^s  a  septic  organism,'  '  Throughout  the  vast  Orchidean
Judgment,  order,  including  433  genera  and  probably  about  6000
species,  the  act  of  fertilisation  is  almost  invariably  left  to
insects.'  These  are  affirmations  that  unquestionably  refer
to  something  real,  but  yet  employ  neither  perception  nor  a
demonstrative  nor  a  proper  name.  Ther&iore,  prima  facie,
it  seems  as  if  the  determinate  idea  had  come  to  its  rights,
and  were  no  longer  obscured  by  any  irrelevant  elements  of
the  phenomenal  concrete.  The  act  of  thought  ought,  it  would
appear,  to  fall  at  once  into  the  groove  of  abstract  necessity :
'//"  man,  then  social;'  ^ If  Orchid,  theft  insect-fertilised.'
But  ideas  such  as  those  now  before  us  offer  a  resistance  to
such  treatment.  The  determinate  idea  is  abstract,  indeed,
as  all  thought  is  abstract,  but  nevertheless  it  may  have  a
content  which  is  concrete,  and  in  the  example  before  us  we
have  such  concrete  contents.  These,  therefore,  bear  the
morphological  character  of  individuality,  by  which  alone
even  the  unique  object  named  by  a  proper  name  is  made
recognisable,  persistent,  and  so  universal.  Compared  with
such  an  individual  subject  the  Generic  subject  has  lost  unique


Chap,  v.] Adstroct,  in  Form  and  Content. 227

reference ;  but  it  has  gained  abstract  significance,  with  which
the  proper  name  was  incompatible.  And  it  is  in  virtue  of
this  significance,  the  significance  of  individual  self-complete-
ness, that  the  Generic  subject  persists  as  an  identity  through
the  differences  which  form  its  attributes.  Now  the  indi-
viduality when  reduced  to  a  content  is  not  single,  but  exists
in  instances.  Thus,  in  attaching  differences  to  the  individually
characteristic  content  as  such  the  judgment  goes  altogether
beyond  the  synthesis  of  differences  in  an  actual  individual
subject,  and  affirms  such  a  synthesis  mediately  of  a  number
of  subjects,  which  may  be  taken  as  endless  seeing  that  its
limit  is  at  this  stage  not  held  essential  and  not  enquired
after.  Such  a  judgment,  which  treats  a  concrete  individu-
ality as  an  abstract  universal,  and  extends  its  incidents  to
all  individual  instances,  may  be  described  as  an  analogical
judgment.  And  this  is  the  fundamental  nature  of  the
ordinary  Generic  assertion.

The  introduction  of  the  term  analogy  into  the  theory  of
judgment  may  indeed  be  objected  to  on  the  ground  that
analogy  is  a  kind  of  inference.  But  the  fact  is,  that  apart
from  any ^^«^^/ question  of  a  connection  between  judgment
and  inference,  we  are  now  at  any  rate  on  the  threshold  of
an  activity  of  judgment  in  which  inference  is  unmistakably
present.  All  that  we  can  do  in  order  to  avoid  a  premature
discussion  of  inference  is  to  approach  the  analogical  judg-
ment rather  as  a  conclusion  the  content  of  which  is  open  to
analysis  than  as  a  complete  inference  whose  process  lies
before  us.  It  may  be  added,  that  logic  is  quite  familiar
with  the  idea  of  'necessary'  judgments.  Yet  necessity
involves  inference  far  more  explicitly  than  does  analogy.

In  the  analogical  or  ordinary  generic  judgment,  then,  we
have  neither  implied  reference  to  perception  as  in  the  im-
personal judgment-form,  nor  the  demonstrative  'this'  or
'  that,'  '  here '  or  '  there,'  nor  a  conventional  implication  of
unique  reality  by  means  of  a  proper  name.  The  subject —
I  speak  of  the  immediate  subject  or  subject  within  the  judg-
ment— is  an  idea,  and  qua  idea,  is  abstract. But  we  must

Q2


2  28 Singular  and  Universal  ytidgment. [Booki.

distinguish  between  abstractness  as  incident  to  thought  in
contrast  with  sense-perception,  and  abstractness  as  a  cha-
racter attaching  to  contents  present  in  thought.  In  the
former  way  of  speaking  all  thought  is  abstract.  In  the
latter,  some  is  abstract  and  some  is  not.  The  ideas  which
form  the  subject  of  the  generic  judgment  in  the  phase  now
before  us  are  not  abstract  in  the  latter  sense.  They  are
ideas  of  totalities,  existences  complete  in  themselves,  to
which  we  cannot  indeed  venture  to  apply  the  conceptions
of  teleology  proper  except  in  so  far  as  the  wholes  in  ques-
tion are  products  due  to  the  human  mind,  but  which  must
be  regarded  from  the  standpoint  of  that  secondary  finality
which  may  be  described  as  morphological  unity  or  quasi-
teleology.  We  have  thus  a  character  or  complex  of
attributes  which  is  at  once  general  and  individual,  abstract
in  thought  and  concrete  in  content.  As  abstract,  it  defies
enumeration  of  instances,  and  implies  necessary  sequence
or  connection  of  attributes.  As  individual  and  concrete,  on
the  other  hand,  it  refuses  to  be  taken  as  a  mere  ideal  ante-
cedent in  a  relation  of  necessity,  i.  e.  of  reason  and  consequent.
The  conciliation  demanded  by  these  antagonistic  elements
of  import  is  found  in  the  judgment  of  analogy.  The  essence
of  this  judgment  is  that  it  is  neither  purely  subsumptive,  as
expressing  a  de  facto  conjunction  of  attributes  in  a  single
subject,  nor  purely  constructive  as  expressing  a  de  jure
connectio7i  of  attributes  independent  of  the  immediate  subject
in  which  they  may  exist,  but  is  something  intermediate,  as
expressing  a  perception  or  presumption  that  the  content
enunciated  in  the  judgment  is  bound  up  with  the  character-
istic individuality  which  forms  the  immediate  subject.

The  ultimate  foundation  of  any  such  insight  must  be  the
final  cause  or  teleological  idea  of  the  individual,  which  how-
ever, when  considered  as  an  immanent  or  embodied  final
cause,  is  most  prudently  treated  on  the  level  of  morpho-
logical character.  We  may  indeed  safely  say  that  the
purpose  or  final  cause  for  which  we  make  a  microscopic
lens  is  to  combine  magnifying  power  with  light  and  defini-


Chap,  v.]  Morphological  Unity.  229

tion,  and  from  this  purpose,  by  help  of  a  number  of  further
judgments  dealing  with  optical  and  mechanical  truths,  the
physical  attributes  of  a  good  lens  may  be  constructed.  But
in  dealing  with  things  not  made  for  a  known  purpose  we
cannot  apply  any  such  abstract  rule,  and  must  fall  back  on
the  idea  that  the  thing  discharges  an  actual  function,  or  at
least  looks  as  if  it  had  a  function,  which  must  be  taken  as
immanent  and  identified  with  the  thing  in  its  concreteness.
The  judgment  that  pronounces  what  is  involved  in  this  con-
tent and  what  is  not  rests  on  the  presumption  of  the  indi-
vidual unity  of  the  content,  and  on  the  capacity  of  discerning
from  the  structure  of  this  unity  aided  by  empirical  know-
ledge of  instances  what  is  essential  to  it  and  in  what  degree.
The  insight  in  question  has  undoubtedly  some  kinship  to
aesthetic  judgment,  for  both  depend  on  the  power  of  seizing
the  concretely  presented  import  or  principle  of  unity  of  a
concrete  whole.  To  judge  the  structure  of  a  fossil  creature
from  a  vertebra,  or  to  detect  the  affinity  between  two
zoological  species  which  are  externally  much  modified,  is  a
synthetic  apprehension  of  the  same  nature  as  that  which
realises  the  construction  of  a  picture  or  of  a  drama.  Such
judgment,  however,  is  merely  the  condition  precedent,  and
not  the  essence,  of  the  true  relation  between  the  mind  and
fine  art

The  analogical  judgment,  like  the  aesthetic  judgment,  is
essentially  outside  relativity  and  necessity,  and  incapable  of
being  resolved  into  them.  It  is  true  that  judgments  of
abstract  relation,  drawn  from  the  mechanical  or  geometrical
sciences,  are  perpetually  coming  in  aid  of  analogical  truth,
by  indicating  that  this  or  that  de  facto  service  within  the
concrete  individual  can  only  be  performed  by  its  parts
under  this  or  that  condition.  To  support  a  certain  weight
the  plant  stem  or  spinal  column  must  have  adequate
strength.  To  impel  a  certain  bulk  and  mass  through  the
air  at  a  certain  velocity  the  bird's  wings  must  have  a  certain
area  and  striking  rate,  the  arrangements  necessarj'  to  which
of  course  react  on  the whole muscular circulatory  and


230 Singular  and  Universal  yudgment. [bookI.

respiratory  apparatus.  But  even  this  merely  rhetorical
selection  of  an  abstract  final  cause  is  really  unjustifiable.
Which  comes  first  ?  why  such  a  weight  on  the  stem  ?
why  should  the  bird's  body  have  such  a  bulk  or  mass.^
There  is  nothing  to  fix  any  one  of  these  elements  as  a
given  final  cause  to  which  the  others  must  be  adapted.
Adaptation  to  the  bird's  prey  or  the  like  is  again  simply
de  facto.  An  animal  might  have  to  change  its  prey  by
reason  of  a  change  in  their  relative  powers,  just  as  probably
as  it  might  develope  new  powers  to  keep  pace  with  those  of
its  prey.  And  further,  in  the  background  we  may  see  such
a  law  as  that  of  the  Conservation  of  Energy  dominating  the
entire  system  and  operations  of  everything  that  moves.
In  all  these  relations  we  observe  the  ultimate  character  of
necessity,  viz.  the  reference  of  a  subject  to  a  whole  other
than  itself;  e.  g.  the  treatment  of  an  animal  as  a  part  in  the
whole  of  moving  matter,  or  as  a  figure  having  properties  in
space,  so  that  in  each  of  these  relations  it  appears  as  deter-
mined by  the  character  of  a  totality  other  than  its  concrete
self.  The  nature  of  space  for  instance  is  per  se  a  datum
or  fact ;  but  when  it  determines  the  results  entailed,  e.  g.  by
the  shape  of  a  leaf,  it  is  exhibited  as  a  whole  prescribing
the  relation  of  its  parts,  which  relation  as  regarding  some-
thing that  is  not  merely  a  part  in  space  is  external  but
constraining  and  so  necessary.

Yet  even  if  the  entire  construction  of  an  individual  con-
tent were  laid  before  us  in  terms  of  mechanical  analysis,
still  the  analogical  judgment  would  force  itself  upon  us,  as
the  aesthetic  judgment  would  in  a  parallel  case.  Analogy
would  then  indeed  no  longer  be  the  chief  instrument  in  dis-
covery, or  at  least  in  presumption  of  universal  connections,
because  these  would  be  capable  of  constructive  apprehen-
sion of  a  more  direct  and  relevant  kind.  Such  a  state  of
knowledge  may  already  in  some  degree  be  illustrated  by
the  Darwinian  analysis,  say,  of  an  orchid-blossom,  in  as  far
as  it  succeeds  in  tracing  the  mechanical  modifications,
which,  each  of  them  representing  a  definite  physical  adap-


Chap,  v.]  Individuality  as  a  Result.  231

tation  to  some  external  circumstance,  have  generated  the
present  structure  of  the  flower.  The  same  observation  might
even  be  applied  to  the  identification  of  types  and  their
affinities.  The  mechanical  history  of  any  organic  structure
would,  if  ideally  complete,  include  the  nature,  degree  and
physical  causes  of  its  deviation  from  kindred  structures.

But  all  this  would  not  interfere  with  the  import  of  the
generic  or  analogical  judgment.  For  this  import  consists
in  the  identification  of  individuals  with  a  concrete  content,
and  such  an  identification  involves  connections  which
differ  in  kind  from  the  identification  of  abstract  relations
which  are  not  Things.  They  take  the  content  not  in
its  external  relativity,  but  in  its  relation  to  self  or  to  an
immanent  final  cause — a  final  cause  identical  with  itself.
We  have  examined  this  self-relation  in  the  more  difficult
case  of  geometrical  figures  which  are  absolutely  and  ade-
quately reducible  to  examples  of  general  conditions,  and
seem  merely  to  mimic  the  self-contained  relation  of  the
concrete  thing.  This  relation  is  an  element  of  import
which  does  not  wholly  disappear  even  in  those  kinds  of
existence  which  are  hardly  ranked  by  common  language  in
the  category  of  individual  things — as  we  saw  to  be  the
case  e.g.  with  the  elements,  and  in  short  with  all  un-
organised substances.  I  do  not  restrict  the  meaning  of  the
term  unorganised  to  =  '  inorganic '  in  the  technical  sense ;
but  I  employ  it  to  designate  any  portion  of  matter,  organic
or  inorganic,  which  is  not  shaped  into  a  whole  by  human
activity,  or  regarded  in  respect  of  its  natural  subordination
of  parts  with  interest  due  to  its  unity  for  our  intelligence.
Every  element  has  no  doubt  its  peculiar  minute  structure,
and  every  fragment  or  portion  of  matter  has  no  doubt  its  spa-
tial or  other  relations  which  unite  it  into  a  whole.  A  pebble
or  a  bit  of  rhomboidal  spar  or  a  nugget  of  gold  has  a  self-
relation,  a  characteristic  peculiarity  which  makes  it  single,
and  distinguishes  it  as  a  persistent  universal  from  things
external  to  it.  Much  more  has  any  organism  a  typical
individuality  which  introduces  the  distinction  of  inner  and


232 Si7igidar  and  Universal  Judgment, [booki.

outer,  essential  and  relative,  into  what  as  a  mere  example
of  general  laws  has  no  self-relation  ^  and  no  inner  or  outer.
And  in  these  last  two  sentences  I  have  omitted  the
strongest  case,  because  it  is  so  strong  as  to  dispense  with
the  reservation  which  we  were  trying  to  illustrate.  But
when  we  come  to  reflect  on  the  conception  of  a  thing,  we
must  be  struck  with  the  fact  that  by  far  the  greater  amount
of  what  we  most  readily  recognise  under  that  title  are  ob-
jects made  by  man  for  purposes  which  he  consciously  em-
bodies in  their  structure.  I  cannot  think  that,  apart  from
our  familiarity  with  such  objects,  the  conception  of  a  thing
would  seem  so  simple  as  it  does.  A  mountain,  a  waterfall,
a  wave  of  the  sea,  are  things  chiefly  to  the  aesthetic  percep-
tion ;  and  if  we  left  this  perception  out  of  account,  it  would
not  be  easy  to  assign  the  boundaries  of  their  individuality,
or  to  single  out  its  essence.  Complaint  has  been  made^
that  those  who  lay  stress  on  the  progressive  interpretation
of  the  idea  in  nature  do  not  find  room  in  their  theories
for  the  achievements  of  the  screw  and  the  lever,  and  for
the  laws  of  the  equilibrium  of  fluids,  of  pressure,  and  of
tension.  These  examples  may  be  regarded  in  two  aspects.
The  screw  and  the  lever  are  best  known  to  us  as  tools,  in
which  capacity  they  belong  to  the  sphere  of  mind,  as  ob-
jects endowed  by  human  foresight  with  an  immanent  signi-
ficance depending  on  their  adaptation  to  a  determinate
purpose.  But  as  mere  characteristics  of  matter  mechani-
cally considered  they  rank  with  any  of  its  general  attri-
butes,— rigidity,  gravity,  inertia, — attributes  which  are  the
basis  of  all  material  organisation,  but  do  not  by  themselves
suffice  to  give  individual  interest  to  any  fragment  in  which
they  are  embodied  ;  and  among  such  attributes  must  be
ranked  equilibrium  of  fluids,  and  the  effects  of  tension  or
of  pressure.

1  Of  course  such  a  point  of  view  is  unreal  in  its  abstraction.  If  tlie  thing
were  absolutely  regarded  without  self-relation,  its  external  relation  would  be
gone  too,  for  what  would  there  be  to  determine  it?  The  point  is  that  the
centre  of  interest,  in  relativity,  falls  outside  the  self,

"  Lotze,  Mikrokosmus,  English  Translation,  vol,  i.  p.  17.


Chap,  v.] DmibU  Impo7't  of  Afeckaitism.  233

But  what  are  we  to  say  of  the  shell  that  screws  itself  into
the  sand,  of  the  screw  propulsion  exerted  by  the  porpoise's
tail,  or  of  the  levers  which  form  the  limbs  of  animals  ?  We
dare  only  speak,  in  relation  to  such  phenomena,  of  a  de  facto
purpose  or  actual  function.  In  virtue  of  this  function,  this
contribution  to  an  obvious  and  real  end,  the  total  life  and
motion  of  the  animal  in  which  they  are  found,  we  claim  for
these  arrangements  a  morphological  unity  which  forces  us
to  grant  them  the  character  of  elements  in  things  that  have
concrete  individuality.  We  dare  not  ascribe  to  them  the
unity  of  an  ideal  purpose,  as  we  safely  may  to  the  screw
of  a  micrometer  or  to  the  lever  of  a  balance ;  but  we  treat
them  as  elements  in  a  unity  afialogous  to  that  with  which
we  are  familiar  in  objects  that  represent  the  purposes  of
our  mind.  The  rudest  mechanical  contrivance  is  in  this
respect  on  a  level  with  the  products  of  fine  art  and  superior
to  those  of  nature,  that  it  unites  the  abstractness  of  thought
with  the  concreteness  of  sensuous  existence;  i.e.  while  in
one  aspect  a  mere  material  object,  yet  in  another  it  em-
bodies an  idea,  and  does  so  determinately  and  without
irrelevancy.

Thus  the  conception  of  machinery  has  a  double  and
not  a  single  import  for  logic.  If  on  the  one  hand  it
accents  the  fact  that  matter  is  indifferent  to  our  purposes
and  simply  acts  and  reacts  according  to  its  own  nature —
and  it  is  this  of  which  we  are  constantly  being  reminded  as
the  mechanical  or  uniform  aspect  of  the  world — yet  on  the
other  hand  it  is  the  most  obvious  example  of  a  concrete
embodiment  of  mind  in  matter,  and  corroborates  if  it  does
not  awaken  the  reflections  of  the  understanding  on  the  ra-
tionality of  things.  Of  this  rationality  the  existence  of  in-
dividual types  as  concrete  universals  recognisable  by  the
analc^ical  judgment  is  a  higher  phase,  a  phase  more  akia
to  individual  intelligence,  than  matter  in  its  abstract  and
general  modes.  And  therefore  the  generic  judgment  rest-
ing on  analogy,  i.e.  on  the  perception  of  concrete  identity
of  content,  is  not  capable  of  being  superseded  by  the  ab-


234 Singular  and  Universal  Judgment, [booki.

stract  judgment  of  pure  relativity.  The  latter,  if  ideally
complete,  gives  a  true  account  of  what  occurs  in  terms  of
mass  and  motion,  but  necessarily  omJts  the  teleological  or
quasi-teleological  import  which  gives  the  content  of  the
judgment  its  interest  and  significance  for  knowledge.

I  will  analyse  a  single  example. Exogenous  trees  dis-
play 'annual  rings'  in  the  wood,  which  are  due  to  the  aug-
mented pressure  of  the bark as each year's new  wood
expands  the  stem,  resulting  in  the  flatter  formation  of  the
outer  and  later  cells  in  every  year  ^ As  this  stands  I  call
it  a  generic  or  analogical  judgment. It  is  indeed  based  on
one  of  the  above-mentioned  simple  mechanical  relations,
the  effect  of  pressure ;  but  it  predicates  this  relation  with-
in a  concrete  individuality  which  gives  it  an  import  that
as  a  mere  mechanical  problem  it  would  not  possess. Let
us  reduce  its  essential  points,  however  roughly,  into  the
latter  shape. We  shall  obtain  some  such  residuum  as  this  :
'  A  fabric  gradually  constructed  under  increasing  pressure
out  of  a  material  which  hardens  after  a  time  will  show  in-
creasing effects of  pressure in  its later-formed portion.'
Here  we  have,  in  part  at  least, '  freed  the  direction,'  to  borrow
an  expressive  phrase  from  Bacon,  i.e.  stripped  off  circum-
stances which  are  irrelevant  to  the  production  of  the  effect
in  question. But  with  these  irrelevancies  we  have  lost  in  the
case  before  us  not  merely  confused  concomitants  of  percep-
tion, but  the  interest  which  gave  the  example  its  place  in
knowledge. The  fabric  is  no  longer  wood,  the  gradation
no  longer  that  displayed  in  the  annual  rings  of  timber,  the
subject  of  the  judgment  is  no  longer  reality  embodied  in
the  characteristic  individuality  of  the  exogenous  trees. The
import  of  the  judgment  is  gone. '  But  its  content  is  sub-
sumed under  the  simple  mechanical  relation,  if  this  is  rightly
understood.' Perhaps  ;  but  what  does  this  mean  } If  the
import  of  the  concrete  thought  is  to  be  saved,  it  must  mean

*  Probably  other  causes  concur  in  this  process.  I  have  purposely  simplified
it.  The  rings  are  annual  only  if  the  period  of  growth  in  the  year  is  single.
A  second  hot  season  may  cause  a  second  ring.


Chap,  v.]  Distinction  of  Categories.  235

that  the  analogical  judgment  is  re-thought  in  its  full  depth,
but  with  the  explicit  knowledge  that  it  includes  the  abstract
mechanical  relation. The  typical  character  of  exogenous
trees,  though  we  must  not  call  it  a  final  cause,  yet  prescribes
the  extension  and  gives  a  definite  reference  to  the  content
of  the  judgment. And  I  must  here  put  the  reader  in  mind,
that,  wishing  to  gain  nothing  from  what  may  be  called  acci-
dental ignorance,  I  have  laid  no  stress  on  the  present  im-
possibility of  constructing  any  living  thing  on  purely  me-
chanical principles. Individuality  rests  on  a  difference,  not
on  a  confusion,  of  categories. I  am  convinced  that  no
organic  nor  spiritual  movement  accessible  to  human  intel-
ligence is  without  a  mechanical  aspect. I  have  therefore
>treated  the  present  subject  from  a  point  of  view  which  ad-
fmits  such  an  aspect  to  be  knowable  in  all  vital  and  spiritual
[processes. This  point  of  view  may  seem  absurdly  fictitious
|when  we  consider  the  present  state  of  exact  explanation  in
'the  sphere  of  biology,  or  again  of  social  science. The
generic  or  analogical  judgment  now  has,  and  seems  likely
long  to  retain,  what  we  may  describe  as  a  secondary  func-
[tion  ;  a  function  not  merely  of  interpreting  but  of  predicting
\ — not  merely  of  resuming  sensible  facts  under  higher  cate-
gories, but  of  anticipating  -their  actual  occurrence. In  all
science  that  deals  with  subjects  beyond  our  power  to  con-
fstruct,  we  draw  our  conclusions  by  means  of  analogical
^judgment  in  this  secondary  sense. When  we  judge  a  par-
|ticular  plant  of  deadly  nightshade  to  be  poisonous,  or  a
)articular  red  stag  to  be  dangerous  at  a  certain  time  of
rear,  we  are  judging  on  analogy ;  on  an  anticipation  based
[upon  a  concrete  character  whose  particulars  we  cannot  con-
struct. The  precise  nature  of  these  inferences  will  occupy
us  in  the  theory  of  inference;  it  is  plain  that  the  larger  part
of  inexact  science  consists  of  them.

We  must  not  confuse  analogy  in  that  secondary  sense,
as  a  mere  anticipation  of  nature  ^,  with  the  true  generic  or
analogical  judgment  which is compatible  with complete

*  Anddpatio  naturae. — Bacon.


236 Singular  and  Universal  ytidgment. [booki.

analytic  perception  of  mechanical  cause  and  effect  within
the  subject  considered.  We  have  perfect  examples  of  these
latter  judgments  in  the  case  of  things  made  by  man  for  a
purpose;  in  which  a  complete  and  accurate  perception  of
their  structure,  interior  causal  nexus,  and  inevitable  course
of  movement  in  no  way  supersedes  the  summary  of  their
import  which  a  knowledge  of  their  purpose  enables  us  to
embody  in  a  generic  judgment.  When  we  wind  up  a  watch
of  which  we  know  the  construction,  we  do  not  merely  an-
ticipate that  it  will  go  because  we  have  seen  other  watches
go  ;  we  can  point  to  the  specific  causal  connections  by
which  it  must  (excluding  accidents)  result  that  the  main-
spring, unwinding  itself,  will  draw  round  the  wheels ;  that
the  motion  passed  through  the  wheels  will  at  one  point  be
regulated  by  the  escapement,  &c.,  &c.  If  we  knew  nothing
of  the  use  of  a  uniform  measure  of  succession,  but  had
some  experience  in  mechanics,  we  should  be  quite  certain
that  the  watch  must  go,  but  we  should  have  no  notion  of
its  generic  content — we  should  not  know  '  what  a  watch  is,'
i.e.  what  its  purpose  is.  We  could  not  therefore  make  the
pure  generic  judgment,  'A  watch  is  a  motion  regulated  by
an  escapement  so  as  to  maintain  a  uniform  rate.'  In  order
to  this  judgment  we  must  know  the  purpose  of  the  instru-
ment, viz.  to  maintain  a  uniform  rate.  With  this  know-
ledge however  we  are  in  a  position  which,  in  strict  theory,
we  can  never  attain  with  regard  to  any  natural  product.  We
can  dictate  the  generic  import  of  the  watch  ;  we  can  say  that
if  any  watch  possesses  this  import  imperfectly  it  is  a  bad
watch ;  if  it  possesses  it  not  at  all,  it  is  not  a  watch  at  all.

Judgments  such  as  this  form  the  ideal  to  which  the
universal  judgment  in  the  form  now  under  consideration
always  aspires.  The  properties  expressed  in  .such  judg-
ments are  not  merely  anticipated  or  presumed;  they  are,
or  at  least  may  be  without  altering  the  nature  of  the  judg-
ment, deducible  with  the  utmost  rigour.  Yet,  again,  they
are  not  mere  causal  sequences ;  it  is  possible  to  have  before
us  all  the  causal  sequences  concerned  in  the  object,  and  yet


Chap,  v.] Affirmation  in  Generic  ytidgment. 237


not  to  make  the  true  generic  judgment  which  unites  them
into  a  coherent  system.  In  this  class  of  objects  we  may
fearlessly  say  that  it  is  the  purpose  which  is  the  essence,
and  that  generic  judgment  rests  on  the  knowledge  of  es-
sence. In  all  other  classes  of  objects  such  a  view  has  degrees
of  precariousness.  and  can  only  be  applied  to  the  purpose
as  immanent,  and  therefore  as  not  determinate,  and  as
uncertain  in  its  boundaries.  Nevertheless,  when  we  predi-
cate in  the  organic  world  '  growth/  '  development,' '  self-pre-
ser\'ation,'  '  irritability,'  we  are  really  referring  mechanical
processes  to  an  idea  of  life — an  idea  of  self-relation,  of  'inner'
and  'outer,'  which  is  a  higher  result,  though  it  is  a  result,  of
their  purely  mechanical  nature.

The  above  is  the  best  account  that  I  can  give  of  the  normal
generic  judgment,  which  represents  the  really  central  pheno-
mena that  were  designated  under  the  title  of  Universal  Judg-
ment by  Formal  Logic.  The  point  of  view  which  emerged
in  comparing  this  Universal  with  the  Collective  Judgment,
and  which  was  suggested  by  the  quasi-collective  form  of  the
plural  subject  with  '  All,'  can  never  have  been  really  felt  to
include  what  the  judgment  intended  to  affirm.  But,  as  was
said  above, '  allness'  is  undoubtedly  an  aspect  of  universality.

b.  In  order  to  bring  to  a  focus  the  nature  of  this  judg-
ment we  have  now  to  consider  how  its  affirmation  is  to  be
classed — whether  as  asserting  the  existence  of  fact,  or  the
connection  of  attributes.

To  determine  this  question,  we  must  recur  to  the  distinc-
tion laid  down  above  ^  between  abstractness  as  a  character  of
thought  in  contrast  with  sense-perception  and  abstractness
as  belonging  to  a  kind  of  thought  as  distinguished  from  con-
crete thought.  Abstractness  in  the  former  sense  is  compatible
j^with  individuality,  while  in  the  latter  sense  it  is  not ;  and  it  is

the  former  sense  that  we  apply  the  term  abstract  to  the
leas  which  are  subjects  in  the  generic  judgment. Thus

lough  we  have  no  longer  a  proper  name  as  in  the  singular
judgment,  yet  we  have  a  concrete  idea,  which  being  as  a  whole
*  p.  aaS,  supra.


%


Elxistential
meaning.


238 Singular  and  Universal  Jtidgment. [booki.

capable  of  reality,  presupposes  such  a  reality.  We  saw  that
in  the  case  of  the  demonstratives  'This,' '  Here,'  &c.the  reality
which  is  the  immediate  subject  cannot  be  intelligibly  taken
as  affirmed  to  exist,  but  only  as  presupposed.  The  ideal
qualification  which  sometimes  accompanies  such  demon-
stratives showed  us  the  point  at  which  presupposition  of
existence  tends  to  pass  into  affirmation,  simply  because  a
significant  presupposition  can  be  intelligibly  denied.  But
this  tendency  is  never  absolutely  fulfilled.  The  union  of
actual  and  ideal  qualifications  in  the  demonstrative  judg-
ment— e.  g.  '  This  bad  man,'  for  though  he  were  a  good
man  he  would  still  be  this — always  leaves  the  ideal  qualifi-
cation the  option  of  being  read  as  a  condition.  The  proper
name,  again,  in  its  primary  function,  being  void  of  deter-
minate meaning,  presupposes  rather  than  affirms  the  exist-
ence of  its  content.  It  only  tells  you  that  some  individual
is  in  question  ;  and  you  cannot  deny  that  an  individual
may  be  in  question.  But  then  as  the  proper  name  becomes
more  charged  with  import,  which  may  even  be  made  ex-
plicit in  ideal  contents  as  it  is  in  the  Corporate  Judgment,
it  also  becomes  as  we  saw  capable  of  conditional  meaning.
Now  as  the  primary  function  of  the  proper  name  can  never
be  cancelled  while  it  remains  '  proper,'  there  arises  within
the  singular  judgment  a  parallel  ambiguity  to  that  which
arises  within  the  demonstrative  judgment.  The  presupposi-
tion that  reference  is  in  any  case  made  to  actual  existence
is  at  war  with  the  determinate  qualification  which  can  and
will  only  refer  to  some  determinate  existence  that  may  or
may  not  be  forthcoming.  A  determinate,  i.  e.  significant,
ideal  qualification  standing  as  or  in  the  subject  of  a  judg-
ment is  never  unambiguously  affirmed  to  be  an  actual  exist-
ence. It  may  always  take  refuge  in  a  conditional  meaning.
The  reference  to  actual  existence  is  presupposed  in  the  sense
possible  for  the  subject-,  in  perceptive  judgments  because  we
are  never  without  perception,  and  in  singular  judgments
because  the  form  of  the  subject-idea  suggests  an  individual,
and  reality  consists  of  individuals.


Chap.  V.] Existeutial  and  Condi tio?tai.  239

The  independence  of  these  two  kinds  of  qualification,
ideal  and  existential,  and  their  consequent  liability  to  con-
tradict one  another,  is  the  very  root  both  of  existential  and
of  conditional  affirmation.  In  existential  affirmation  the
two  qualifications  are  taken  as  meant  to  coincide,  though  it
is  a  purely  material  assumption  or  assertion  that  they  do  so  ;
in  conditional  affirmation  the  two  are  allowed  to  fall  apart,
i.  e.  the  ideal  qualification  is  not  read  as  implying  ein  indi-
vidual reality  that  possesses  it.

Returning  now  to  the  concrete  idea  which  stands  as
subject  in  the  generic  judgment,  '  society,'  '  man,'  '  art,'  '  the
bird,'  "the  rose,'  'a  time-piece,'  'a  telescope,'  we  find  the  same
elements  of  meaning,  but  in  reversed  proportions.  The
subject  here  consists  technically  and  primarily  of  ideal
qualification  and  nothing  more.  It  has  reference  neither  to
an  unnamed  perception  nor  to  a  unique  individual  undeter-
mined by  abstract  significance.  Hence  the  presupposition
that  the  subject  is  an  actual  reality  is  less  prominent,  while
the  abstract  conditional  import  of  the  ideal  content  is  more
so.  In  the  earlier  types  of  judgment  we  feel  that  we  are
referring  to  reality,  and  we  assent  with  reluctance  to  the
analysis  which  shows  us  that  our  reference  is  conditional.
In  the  more  abstract  forms  at  any  rate  of  the  generic  judg-
ment we  feel  that  we  are  affirming  conditionally,  and  we  at
once  acknowledge  our  reference  to  actual  reality  to  be
merely  implied  or  presupposed.  It  will  be  noticed  that  I
do  not  admit  this  side  of  the  antithesis  to  be  completely
developed  in  the  simpler  generic  judgments.  I  do  not  think
that  in  '  The  rose  has  pinnate  leaves  and  perigynous
flowers '  the  existence  of  the  subject  is  merely'  implied '  and
not  '  asserted.'  It  is  not  uncommon  to  find  in  a  manual  of
botany  '  Such  and  such  a  variety  is  no  doubt  a  mistake  of
the  observer,'  which  shows  that  the  observer "s  description
asserts  existence  so  far  as  existence  is  asserted  by  any  judg-
ment ^  All  this  however  is  a  mere  question  of  degree.  What

*  It  may  be  said  that  in  such  a  case  the  observer  has  alleged  the  plant  to
have  been  found  in  a  given  spot  at  a  given  time.  But  this  is  not  essential ;  he
may  simply  send  in  the  description.


240 Singular  and  Universal  yudgment. [book  t.


I  am  here  concerned  to  show  is  that  the  mere  implication
or  presupposition  of  real  existence,  to  which  in  one  way  or
another  we  do  undoubtedly  come  in  the  Universal  Judg-
ment, is  not  extraneous  to  the  affirmation  and  dependent  on
a  mere  fancy  or  habit  of  ours,  but  is  the  lineal  descendant,
mutatis  mtitandis,  of  that  so-called  existential  affirma-
tion which  we  have  traced  in  perception. and  in  narrative.
And  the  strength  of  this  implication  depends  on  the  con-
creteness  of  the  idea  which  here  forms  the  immediate  sub-
ject in  judgment.  We  have  then  here  as  before  two
elements  in  the  content,  or  rather  a  content  regarded  in
two  lights.  We  have  self-relation,  existence,  or  a  cate-
gorical aspect,  and  external  relation,  necessity,  or  a  hypo-
thetical aspect.  But  the  nature  of  the  generic  affirmation,
as  analysed  above,  shows  for  the  first  time  a  trace  of  recon-
ciliation between  these  two  points  of  view.  The  concrete
self-relation  is  no  longer  void  of  meaning  and  purely  desig-
native  ;  it  is  a  system  of  assignable  import,  and  the  analogy
of  which  we  have  spoken  is  the  anticipation  or  the  insight
based  on  this  import.  But  again,  this  analogy  introduces
relativity  and  necessity,  and  as  we  saw  interprets  relations
that  unite  the  individuality  in  question  with  other  totalities
which  prescribe  to  it  either  conditions  or  purposes.  Thus
the  generic  judgment  is  categorical  in  respect  of  its  concrete
self-relation,  and  hypothetical  or  necessary  in  respect  of  the
analogical  or  constructive  nexus  to  which  the  import  of
that  self-relation  gives  rise.

But,  it  will  be  objected,  this  might  be  all  very  well  if  we
were  speaking  of  individuals,  whose  nature  is  to  be  unique,
like  the  present  Queen  of  England,  or  the  centre  of  the
material  universe  ;  but  here  we  are  speaking  of  an  indefinite
set  or  series  of  individuals  whose  common  nature  is  nothing
and  nowhere  but  in  them.  This  is,  it  may  be  urged,
Scholastic  Realism  over  again.  What  existence  does  a
generic  judgment  presuppose,  when  and  where?  In  reply
to  such  an  objection,  I  insist  in  the  first  place  that  we
cannot  treat  any  imperfection  of  knowledge  as  incident  to


Chap,  v.]  Existence  of  a  Kiftd.  241

knowledge  unless  we  can  prove  that  it  necessarily  is  so,  and ,
that  to  treat  a  natural  kind  as  an  indefinite  set  or  series  of
individuals  is  an  imperfection  of  knowledge  which  can  be
shown  not  to  be  necessary. This  consideration however
belongs  to  the  subsequent  section.

But  in  the  second  place  I  reply  that  even  without
treating  a  kind  as  an  actual  unity,  and  though  in  fact  we
do  not  treat  it  so  in  judgments  which  are  true  of  each
individual  singly  (as  common  generic  judgments  are),  yet
still  the  individuality  of  the  content  dictates  its  own  time,
place  and  measure  of  existence.  And  it  is  this  time,
place  and  measure,  wholly  without  reference  to  subjec-
tive era  ^,  place  or  fancy,  that  is  affirmed  ^  in  generic
judgment.  It  is  characteristic  of  the  rose  to  exist  in  a
certain  epoch  of  evolution  and  within  certain  limits  on  the
earth's  surface.  Existence  within  this  time  and  place,
subject  to  such  variation  as  the  nature  of  the  content
allows,  is  what  the  generic  judgment  affirms  (or  implies)  of
the  rose  ;  that  is  to  say,  in  affirming  that  '  the  rose  has
perigynous  flowers  '  we  mean  that  individual  actual  roses,
found  within  these  limits,  have  the  attribute  in  question.  If
there  are  none  such,  then  the  rose  is  like  any  genus  or  species
that  has  been  imagined  to  exist  by  a  mistake  of  identifica-
tion ;  the  kind  in  question  would  in  that  case  not  exist,  and
the  judgment  would  beyond  question  be  false.  Of  course
in  everj'-day  subjective  judging  the  place  and  time  etc.  of
existence  is  but  roughly  indicated  by  what  we  happen  to
know  or  believe  about  the  actual  subject  of  judgment,  but
it  is  never  referred  to  the  time  or  place  in  which  we  judge,
unless  per  accidens  our  knowledge  is  limited  to,  or  the  con-
tent especially  concerns,  that  time  and  place. Rose  in  the

*  See  above,  p.  217,  discussion  on  tense  in  judgment

*  I  should  not  object  to  replacing  '  affirmed '  by  '  implied,'  in  order  to  mark
the  unquestioned  line  between  the  singular  and  the  universal  judgment,  if  it  were
admitted  that  the  implication  is  an  int^xal  part  of  the  judgment,  and  not  a
fancy  of  our  own.  The  point  is  that  existence  is  implied  or  affirmed  in  these
judgments,  just  as  Necessary  connection  is  implied  or  affirmed  in  Perceptive  and
Singular  judgments.

VOL.  I.  R


242 Singular  and  Universal  Judgment, [booki.

J  abstract  does  not  exist. But  it  is  a  concrete  universal  which

has  power,  in  the  context  of  the  real  world  to  which  we
refer  it,  to  dictate  the  epoch,  place  and  quantity  of  its  indi-
te vidual  embodiment.

I  need  hardly  guard  myself  against  the  misapprehension
that  I  am  alleging  that  anything  and  everything  exists  which
we  choose  to  fancy.  I  am  maintaining  just  the  opposite,
viz.  that  if  we  attempt  to  embody  fancied  realities  in  judg-
ment, such  judgment  is  false  ;  for  all  judgment  is  a  definition
of  real  reality.  We  can  only  escape  this  result  if  the  fancied
content  is  such  as  is  in  its  logical  nature  debarred  from
being  real,  i.  e.  a  mere  abstraction,  and  is  therefore  incapable
of  claiming  to  stand  for  a  reality.
Individual  c.  The  reality  involved  in  a  concrete  universal  will  be
Jud'nnent.  ^nade  plain  by  insisting  on  a  third  aspect  of  the  generic
judgment,  viz.  that  in  which  it  challenges  comparison  with
the  Corporate  Judgment.  For  this  purpose  we  must  think
of  generic  judgments  which  are  not  merely  analogical,  but
which  for  want  of  a  better  term  I  may  designate  as  Indi-
vidual. These  judgments  are  characterised  by  not  being
true  of  any  and  every  individual  singly,  but  only  of  the
kind  taken  as  an  individual.  Such  judgments  are,  '  The
animal  world  represents  an  evolution  coordinate  with  that
of  the  plant  world,'  '  The  Orchidean  order  includes  433
genera  and  probably  about  6000  species,'  '  Space  has
three  dimensions,'  '  Humanity  is  the  object  of  worship  to
Positivists,'  '  Monarchy  disappears  with  the  advance  of
civilisation.'

In  comparing  such  judgments  as  the  above  with  that
form  of  the  Singular  Judgment  which  we  called  the  Cor-
porate Judgment,  we  find  at  first  sight  little  distinction
between  them  beyond  the  fact  that  these  Generic  Judg-
ments do  not  employ  a  proper  name  in  the  subject,
whereas  the  Corporate  Judgments  do  And  even  this|
distinction  is  in  some  degree  bridged  over  when  we  call
to  mind  that  such  determinations  as  '  now,'  *  last  year/|
•  this,'  and  '  mine '  appeared  to  us  essentially  to  rank  eithej


Chap.  V.] Proper  Name  and  Generic  Name. 243

with  proper  names  or  with  demonstratives ;  and  also  that
there  is  a  tendency  on  the  part  of  proper  names  themselves
to  assume  abstract  significance,  so  that  a  proper  name  is
not  always  easily  distinguished  from  a  generic  name.  The
Greek  race,  Europe,  are  proper  names  ;  but  it  is  more
doubtful  how  we  should  class  '  the  Arj^an  languages,'  '  the
North  Pole,'  and  '  the  Mahometan  religion.'  Again,  '  the
earth,'  'the  solar  system,'  seem  free  from  all  arbitrary
reference ;  but  in  speaking  of  them  we  really  imply  '  our
earth,'  '  our  solar  system,'  and  so  fall  back  into  some  form
of  the  singular  judgment.

The  difficulty  is  worth  noticing  ;  but  it  is  simply  one  of
those  which  must  arise  from  the  Sorites-like  character  of
any  continuous  evolution. It  is  hard  to  say  whether  '  the
Mahometan  religion,'  as  we  mean  to  employ  the term,
involves  a  reference  strictly  of  the  order  of  a  proper  name^,
or  on  the  other  hand  is  simply  an  ideal  content,  and,  so
far  as  ideal,  abstract. The  reason  of  this  is  that  the  con-
ception is  in  fact  on  the  border-land  between  the  proper
iXiame  and  the  mere  determinate  content,  and  in  all  proba-
)ilitj'  it  is  sometimes  employed  in  the  one  sense  and  some-
imes  in  the  other. The  question  is  whether  the  general
Imeaning  or  the  individual  identification  comes  first  in  the
lind. As  we  saw  above,  it is  not improbable  that  in
mmitive  careless  and  unscientific  thought  the  significant
rord  is  not  made  distinct  from  the  proper  name — in  other
ivords,  the  intension  which  is  the  mere  means  to  identifi-
ition  is  the  only  intension  signified,  but  for  this  very
"reason  the  purpose  of  identification  is  not  distinguished,
so  as  to  be  considered  primary,  from  the  purpose  of  defini-
tion. In  fact,  when  we  now  speak  colloquially  of '  the  bay
mare,'  '  the  low  pasture-field,'  we  are  using  '  bay '  and  '  low '
merely  as  signs  of  identification,  though  of  course  by  help

*  In  every  case  we  most  keep  etymology  out  of  the  question.  The  reference
to  Mahomet  as  a  historical  individual  is  certainly  not  the  chief  element,  and
perhaps  hardly  an  essential  element  at  all,  in  the  direct  significance  of
'  Mahometan'  at  the  present  day.  Cp.  the  rhetorical  antithesis  that  has  been
drawn  betweai  *  Christianity '  and  *  the  religion  of  Jesus.'

R  Z


244 Singular  and  Universal  Judgment, [booki.

of  their  meaning'.  Such  is  the  type  of  usage  which  we  may
imagine  to  have  been  the  common  root  of  the  significant
and  the  proper  name.  The  terms  of  the  Linnaean  arrange-
ment of  plants,  in  as  far  as  they  are  subservient  to  mere
recognition,  are  a  somewhat  similar  case  in  point.

But  when  all  deductions  are  made,  there  remains  a  clear
distinction  of  principle  between  judgments  which  use  proper
names,  and  judgments  which  do  not.  From  this  point  of
view  the  generic  judgments  now  before  us  agree  with  those
last  discussed  and  contrast  with  the  singular  judgment.
They  are  able  to  convey  their  reference  to  reality  by  means
of  a  determinate  ideal  content.

On  the  other  hand,  in  the  nature  of  their  reference  to
reality  they  agree  with  the  singular  judgment  and  differ
from  the  common  generic  judgment.  They  do  not  rest  on
analogy.  The  individual  to  which  they  refer  is  a  real  and
a  single  individual,  and  not  a  mere  individuality.  So  far
from  being  mediated  predications  about  a  number  of
particulars  they  are  not  even  true  of  the  particulars  that
enter  into  their  content.  When  we  said,  in  the  former
section, '  The  rose  has  perigynous  flowers,'  we  were  treating
the  individuality  of  all  roses  as  one  by  analogy^.  But
when  we  say, '  The  rose  family  is  a  descendant  of  x,  a  diver-
gence from  y,  and  a  transition  towards  z',  such  a  judgment
is  not  made  about  each  particular  plant  within  the  tribe,
nor  even  about  each  particular  species.  If  true,  it  is  true
of  the  whole  section  of  plant-life  in  which  every  particular
rose-plant  is  a  distinct  and  separate  progressive  or  diver-
gent phase. There  can  be  no  doubt,  I  think,  that  from

*  Subtlety  of  transition  must  have  an  end  somewhere  in  writing,  but  in  fact
it  has  none.  Thus  the  reader  may  object  that  if  it  is  nonsense  to  say  that  the
rose  family  as  an  actual  individual  has  perigynous  flowers,  yet  we  may  always
safely  say  in  such  a  case  that  it  prescribes  that  the  particular  rose  shall  have
perigynous  flowers.  I  can  only  admit  the  objection ;  the  fact  is  so  if  we  are
bona  fide  regarding  the  genus  as  a  whole  of  evolution,  whose  actual  individu-
ality expresses  itself  in  this  and  in  other  common  predicates.  But  if  as  is  most
probable  we  realise  nothing  of  the  kind,  but  are  merely  going  by  analogy  to  a
common  property  of  roses,  then  we  are  treating  the  kind  as  a  mere  individuality,
and  must  not  pretend  to  be  treating  it  as  an  individual.


Chap.  V.]  Generic  as  Categorical.  245

an  ideal  point  of  view  every  natural  kind  in  the  concrete
sensible  world  must  be  thus  regarded  ;  and  of  course  when
we  consider  existences  in  which  Intelligence  is  more
definitely  active — society,  mankind  or  at  least  civilised
man,  fine  art,  or  morality — in  these  phenomena  the  totality
is  more  real  and  concrete,  and  the  reciprocal  relations  of
its  parts  exist  not  merely  for  the  microscope  of  analysis,
but  as  patent  every-day  facts.

Although  universal,  the  Generic  judgment  in  the  aspect
now  before  us  is  fully  Categorical.  It  is  in  this  respect
wholly  on  a  level  with  the  Singular  judgment,  being  in  fact
related  to  the  judgment  of  Analogy  with  its  dual  nature
much  as  the  Singular  judgment  is  related  to  the  propor-
tional or  comparative  judgments  that  are  introduced  by  a
demonstrative.  The  Singular  judgment  may  be  regarded
as  a  premattire  attempt  to  concentrate  individuality — the
'characteristic  quality'  which  the  proportional  judgment
had  revealed — into  an  individual ;  resulting  as  we  saw  in
the  omission  of  determinate  quality  from  the  individual
content  by  the  use  of  Proper  Names.  The  generic  judg-
ment raises  (in  its  Analogical  form)  and  meets  (in  its  Indi-
vidual form)  the  same  problem  in  a  more  adequate  way,
concentrating  individuality  into  an  individual  by  comple-
tion and  not  by  omission.  It  is  as  a  system  of  such  indi-
viduals, united  perhaps  in  a  yet  more  concrete  individual
reality,  that  we  must  conceive  of  the  world  known  to  us
through  space  and  time,  if  we  are  to  assign  it  any  existence
beyond  the  present  of  presentation.  For  us,  it  is  plain,  such
individuals  are  intellectual  constructions,  and  only  attached
to,  not  shut  up  within,  the  actual  present  perception.  The
distinction  between  concrete  realities  and  abstract  truths  is
not,  for  us  at  any  rate,  that  the  latter  are  intellectually
initiated  and  the  former  are  not ;  it  is  not  a  question  of
origin,  but  a  question  of  nature,  i.  e.  of  the  degree  in  which
a  content  is  capable  of  being  regarded  as  something  that
exists  as  a  whole  and  can  be  considered  in  relation  to  itself,
)r  on  the  other  hand  is  incapable  of  being  given  as  a  whole


246 Singular  and  Universal  Judgment, [booki.

and  affords  no  matter  for  consideration  in  relation  to  itself.
All  contents  must  theoretically  be  regarded  as  combining
these  two  characters ;  and  as  an  important  application  of
this  idea  I  may  instance  the  answer  to  a  question  which
arises  when  we  make  the  categorical  nature  of  assertion
depend  upon  the  degree  of  concrete  self-relation.

Is  it  possible,  we  shall  be  asked,  to  lay  down  a  hard  and
fast  line,  by  which  abstract  shall  be  divided  from  concrete
contents  ? And  if  not,  does  not  our  view  surrender  the  self-
dependence  of  reality  and  make  it  purely  relative  to  fancies
and  notions  in  the  individual  mind  ? Does  it  not  enable  us
to  treat  as  actual  any  content  however  abstract  or  trivial,
and  any  however  concrete  or  significant  as  a  mere  element
in  hypothesis,  simply  by  varying  the  point  of  view  from
which  we  regard  them  ? And  the  answer  is,  that  as  reality
unites  these  two  characteristics,  we  can  always  emphasise
either  at  will ;  and  further,  we  commit  no  error  in  so  doing,
unless  we  assume  and  assert  the  relation  which  we  happen
to  be  considering  to  be  the  only  relation  that  there  is. Our
knowledge  always  falls  short  of  reality,  and  apart  from  false
identification  of  relations — with  which  false  antithesis  is  at
bottom  the  same — we  have  a  right  to  see  all  that  we  can
either  of  absoluteness  or  of  relativity  in  any  content  what-
ever. Reality  is  such  that  any  element  or  feature  of  it,
however  slight  or  superficial,  can  be  raised  by  our  intellec-
tual gaze  to  the  position  of  a  self- related  significant  whole.
The  nature  of  mind  is present  in  everything; the  only
difficulty  is  to  see  it  there. And  such  an  elevation  is  not
false,  except  in  as  far  as  it  is  exceptional ;  in  as  far,  that  is,
as  we  fail  to  view  the  remaining  contents  of  reality  with  the
same  constructive  insight. Not  merely  a  fragment  of  stone
or  metal,  but  a  colour,  a  curve,  a  relation  of  size  or  weight,
is  ideally  capable  of  being  passed  through  the  stages  of
generic  judgment,  of  being  regarded  first  as  an  individuality,
and  then  as  an  individual. What  is  false  or  forced  in  such
a  mode  of  contemplation  depends  on  the  want  of  proportion
between  it  and  our  ordinary  careless  vision  of  organisms


Chap.  V.]  Logic  and  Metaphysics.  247

and  fine  art,  of  men  and  of  society.  All  contents  are  rela-
tive except  the  absolute ;  but  the  import  and  degree  of  their
relativity  is  not  the  same.

A  further  corollary  may  be  worth  drawing  in  a  few  words
from  the  above  considerations.  Our  present  treatment  of
logic  starts  from  the  individual  mind,  as  that  within  which
we  have  the  actual  facts  of  intelligence  which  we  are
attempting  to  interpret  into  a  system.  But  our  consequent
preoccupation  with  the  phenomena  of  the  individual  mind,
with  its  imperfect  grasp  of  reeility  and  the  varying  aims  and
tendencies  of  its  thought,  brings  with  it  a  double  danger
which  haunts  every  phrase  and  every  idea  in  a  logical
treatise.  Either  one  may  speak  as  if  reality  were  simply
relative  to  the  individual  mind,  a  ridiculous  idea,  but  one

^hich  the  very  caution  required  of  a  modem  writer  is  apt
|o  encourage ;  for  he  hardly  dares  to  allude  to  Mind  as  such
>r  in  itself;  or  one  may  become  interested  in  tracing  the
Termination  and  growth  of  ideas  in  the  individual  mind  as
rpical  facts  indeed,  but  only  as  one  animal's  habits  are
)ical  of  those  of  others,  and  so  we  may  slur  over  the

^primarj'  basis  of  logic,  which  is  its  relation  to  reality.  For
mental  facts  unrelated  to  Reality  are  not  knowledge,  and
therefore  have  no  place  in  Logic.  The  difficulty  is,  in  other
words,  simply  that  modern  Logic  has  a  hard  task  to  hold  its
own  between  Metaphysics  and  Psychology'.  I  entertain  no
doubt  that  in  content  Logic  is  one  with  Metaphysics,  and
differs  if  at  all  simply  in  mode  of  treatment — in  tracing  the
evolution  of  knowledge  in  the  light  of  its  value  and  import,
instead  of  attempting  to  summarise  its  value  and  import
apart  from  the  details  of  its  evolution.  My  object  however
in  mentioning  the  difficulty  at  this  point  is  merely  to  protest
that  though  I  assume  reality  as  the  norm  of  the  mind,  in
constructing  which  it  is  reconstructing  and  not  creating  de
novo  out  of  itself,  yet  I  can  entertain  no  doubt  that  intelli-
gence is  essential  to  the  being  of  Reality,  and  that  an
abstraction  which  tries  to  regard  the  one  apart  from  the
other  is  a  hopeless  and  helpless  self-contradiction. As  a


248 Singular  and  Universal  Judgment.

working  conception  in  Logic  we  are  forced  to  adopt  some
such  idea  as  that  of  a  normal  intelligence  operative  in  all
human  minds,  but  subject  to  the  accidental  limitations  of
each.  The  evolution  of  knowledge  is,  as  Plato  long  ago
portrayed  it,  the  emancipation  of  individual  minds  from  their
accidental  limitations,  and  their  education  into  the  knowledge
of  the  one  real  and  intelligible  world.  But  the  duty  of
modern  science  is  to  preserve  the  continuity  of  this  evolu-
tion, and  to  admit  no  saltus  at  any  point  between  the  world
in  which  we  live  and  the  world  which  is  real  and  intelligible.
And  in  this  continuity  we  have  a  standpoint  which  Plato,
although  he  reached  it,  did  not  consistently  maintain.
Objective  Intelligence  presents  itself  in  Logic  as  the  mere
postulate  required  by  such  a  continuity,  and,  starting  as  we
have  done  from  the  individual  consciousness  in  time,  it  is
merely  as  a  postulate  that  we  propose  to  treat  it.  To  say
that  the  real  world  is  the  intelligible  world  is  only  to  repeat
what  we  found  ourselves  obliged  to  suggest  as  an  elucida-
tion of  the  earlier  stages  of  judgment,  that  reality  is  some-
thing at  which  we  arrive  by  a  constructive  process  \

We  are  now  to  consider  the  consequence  of  emphasising
the  abstract  or  relative  aspect  of  the  Analogical  judgment.
We  are  thus  led  to  a  form  of  thought  which  is  antithetical
to  the  Individual  Generic  judgment  of  which  we  have  just
been  speaking,  and  consequently  must  be  regarded  as  a
divergence  from  the  concrete  evolution  of  thought  towards
the  mechanical  or  analytic  judgments  which  begin  with
enumeration.

'  See  above,  Introduction,  p.  41  ff.


CHAPTER  VI.
Unr^RSAL  Judgment  {contintied).

ii.  The  Universal  Judgment,  when  pushed  to  the  extreme  PnreHvpo-
point  of  abstraction,  becomes  the  Hypothetical  Judgment ?*^*^

a.  The  Hypothetical  Judgment  is  distinguished  from  all  ^^  elation
which  have  thus  far  been  spoken  of,  by  its  essentially  abstract  to  previous
character ;  abstract  not  merely  as  thought  is  said  to  be
abstract  w'hen  compared  with  sense-perception,  but  as  the
thought  of  an  ideally  isolated  attribute  is  abstract  compared
with  the  thought  of  a  self-dependent  and  self-related  in-
dividual. It  represents  the  fourth  of  the  elements  or  *^
aspects  which  have  been  confounded,  or  at  any  rate  have  not
been  duly  distinguished,  by  traditional  logic  within  the  so-
called  Universal  Judgment.  Its  differentia  is  that  it  does
not  refer  to  a  concrete  subject,  not  even  to  what  we  called
an  individuality  or  the  concrete  self-related  content  in  its
aspect  of  self-relatedness  ;  and  that  consequently  we  do  not
consider  whether  its  subject  is  given  in  actuality  or  not.
For  it  is  essentially  the  judgment  of  necessity  or  relativity,
in  which  the  subject  is  taken,  not  given,  and  taken  not  for
its  o\^^^  sake  nor  with  reference  to  its  individuality,  but  for
the  sake  of  that  which  is  to  follow  from  it,  that  is,  for  the
sake  of  its  relativity.  It  is  a  judgment  which  follows  out
the  single  thread  of  a  nexus  of  attributes,  and  does  not  heed
the  import  of  the  pattern  into  which  it  enters.  If  a
gravitating  body  is  set  free  to  fall,  it  falls  with  an  accelera-
tion proportional  to  the  squares  of  the  times,  whether  it  is
a  drop  of  rain,  or  a  tortoise  with  the  head  of  Aeschylus
below  it.  Here  we  have,  in  an  explicit  shape,  the  relativity
of  knowledge  which  has  haunted  us  throughout  the  evolu-
j  tion  of  judgment,  forbidding  us  to  feel  satisfied  in  connecting


250  Universal  Judgment.  [booki.

together  any  data  which  we  might  merely  chance  to  light
upon  in  conjunction,  and  requiring  that  every  idea  should
always  be  limited  and  controlled  by  its  reference  to  some-
thing else,  and  not  simply  taken  as  we  find  it  in  perception
or  in  ordinary  life.  And  just  because  this  principle  has  so
haunted  us,  the  judgment  that  embodies  it  cannot  be
sharply  severed  in  meaning  from  the  earlier  forms  of  the
universal  judgment,  and  even  the  quasi-collective  'All
gravitating  bodies  etc'  may,  and  most  frequently  in  this
case  does,  contain  what  is  really  meant  as  a  hypothetical
affirmation.  '  In  this  easel  for  the  distinction  really  goes,  as
we  have  maintained  all  through,  not  by  the  shape  of  the
proposition,  but  by  the  content  of  the  judgment.  The  con-
nection however  between  all  the  types  of  universal  judg-
ment is  intimate  and  essential,  so  that  in  popular  usage  one
easily  slides  into  the  other,  or  even  combines  the  other
with  itself  as  its  ground  or  consequence.  When  I  say  '  All
animals  need  food '  I  am  probably  expressing  a  quasi-col-
lective conclusion  about  a  property  shared  by  all  species  of
animals,  taking  its  significance  from  an  analogical  perception
of  the  generic  function  and  immanent  purpose  of  animal
life,  but  ultimately  resting  on  the  hypothetical  judgment^
expressing  a  necessary  or  relative  principle, '  If  force  is  to  be
expended  it  must  be  supplied.'  It  will  be  observed  that
the  second  type  of  generic  judgment,  which  for  want  of  a
better  name  I  have  called  Individual  Generic,  is  omitted
from  this  combination  of  aspects.  It  represents  a  tendency
divergent  from  that  of  the  Hypothetical  assertion,  while
the  Analogical  judgment  is  undecided  between  the  two.
If  the  Individual  Generic  judgment  is  capable  of  combina-
tion with  the  Hypothetical,  we  must  look  for  the  result  in
the  Disjunctive  and  not  in  the  Universal  affirmation.
External  /3.  The  type  of  the  Hypothetical  Judgment  in  traditional

logic,  so  far  as  it  is  recognised  at  all,  is  stated  in  one  of
three  forms:  '  If  A  is  B  is;'  'If  A  is  B,  then  C  is  D;'  and
'  If  A  is  B,  then  it  is  C.'  The  third  of  these  forms  is  that
which  guides  us  to  the  true  import  of  the  judgment,  though


Form.


chap.\t]  Expression  of  Nexus,  251

conformably  to  the  habitual  irrelevancy  of  popular  thought
the  second  is  that  most  commonly  in  use.  But  this  second
is  obviously  a  broken-backed  sequence,  in  which  no  point  of
unity  is  formally  recognised  between  the  antecedent  and
the  consequent.  When,  indeed,  significant  words  are  sub-
stituted for  letters,  the  unity  would  generally  be  obvious,
supposing  the  sequence  to  have  scientific  value  at  all ;  but
in  such  a  case  the  expression  is  not  essentially  distinguish-
able from  that  of  the  third  form.  The  first  form,  '  If  A  is
then  B  is,'  has  been  said  to  be  an  abbreviation  in  which
letters  stand  for  clauses ;  in  that  sense  of  course  it  must  be
reducible  to  either  the  second  or  the  third  form.  We  get
the  same  result  if  we  try  to  take  it  as  a  combination  of
single- word  or  impersonal  predications.  Contents  may  un-
doubtedly be  ascribed  in  judgment  to  an  unanalysed
present,  but  an  unanalysed  present  can  form  no  bond  of
union  for  a  necessary  sequence.  '  If  guilty,  then  death'  is
a  mere  linguistic  abbreviation  for  *  If  he  is  guilty  then  he
wUl  be  put  to  death.'  And  even  '  Where  there  is  smoke,
there  is  fire '  superadds  to  the  impersonal  '  There  is '  a  true
local  particle  in  the  "where'  of  the  antecedent,  and  this
reacts  by  a  curious  equivocation  on  the  impersonal  '  there '
of  the  consequent.  No  doubt,  but  for  the  awkwardness  of
the  expression,  we  should  say,  *  Where  there  is  smoke,
there  there  is  fire.'  Here  again,  then,  we  have  in  essential
meaning  the  third  tj'pe  of  the  Hypothetical  judgment,
•  If  A  is  B,  it  (A)  is  C  I  will  next  illustrate  the  trans-
formation of  type  ii.  into  type  iii,  '  If  the  barometer  (A)
falls  (B).  the  weather  (C)  becomes  stormy  (D)'.  'If  the
atmosphere  (A)  decreases  its  pressure  locally  (B),  it  (A)
must  leave  a  gradient  for  wind  (C).' But  now  if  we  take

the  lines,

' .  .  .  when  in  Salamanca's  care
Him  listed  his  magic  wand  to  wave.
The  bells  would  ring  in  Notre  Dame,*

we  find  that  the  saltus  from  antecedent  to  consequent  is  all
but  essential  to  the  judgment ;  the  point  of  the  mystery  is
that  we  cannot  get  at  the  imderlying  unity. Thus  we  see


252  Universal  yudgment.  [booki.

the  extreme  case  of  type  ii.  in  a  judgment  which  has  for  its
object  to  assert  magical,  i.  e.  irrational,  connection.  Of
course  the  general  scheme  of  reduction  would  have  to  be,
'  When  his  magical  power  (A)  was  exerted  (B),  it  (A)  could
act  at  any  distance  (C).'  It  is  in  this  sense  that  Schopenhauer
calls  some  of  Euclid's  demonstrations  conjuring  tricks,
because,  although  in  a  demonstration  some  unity  of  course
must  be  shown  between  antecedent  and  consequent,  yet
the  unity  shown  is  often  not  central  or  fundamental  ^,  and
is  therefore  a  causa  cognoscendi,  and  not  a  causa  essendi.
In  the  pure  type, '  If  A  is  B,  then  C  is  D/  we  have  no  indi-
cation even  of  a  causa  cognoscendi.

Much  more  might  be  said  about  the  forms  of  conditional
sentence ;  but  the  subject  is  really  grammatical  rather  than
logical,  for  the  hypothetical  judgment  can  be  expressed
without  a  conditional  sentence  at  all.  Hypothetical  and
Categorical  Judgment,  as  we  understand  the  terms,  are
a  question  of  content,  not  of  grammatical  form,  and  the
hypothetical  judgment  is  found  wherever  we  frame  asser-
tions about  an  abstract  content,  in  the  above  sense  of
abstractness  ;  although  there  is  a  difference  of  adequacy  in
different  grammatical  expressions  for  any  kind  of  judgment,
and  the  conditional  sentence  resists  any  attempt  to  embody
in  it  a  purely  categorical  meaning.  '  If  this  man  dies,  our
cause  is  lost,'  takes  '  this '  as  a  sign  of  unanalysed  content
and  not  as  a  point  of  attachment  in  reality.  We  know
that  the  reason  is  somewhere  in  the  unanalysed  content,
and  so  take  it  as  an  antecedent  in  the  lump  2.
Assertion  y.  What  is  the  precise  nature  of  the  assertion  conveyed
Hypotheti-  by  a  Hypothetical  Judgment  ? In  answer  to  this  question

cal  Judg- J shall speak first  of  the  idea  of  Ground  or  nexus  in
ment.  '-

general,  secondly  of  Ground  as  compared  with  Cause,  and

thirdly  illustrate  our  view  by  the  attitude  of  the  individual

mind  in  hypothesis  or  supposition.

^  Schopenhauer,  Werke,  i.  1 36  ff.

^  I  take  this  analysis,  which  appears  to  me exceedingly  felicitous,  from
Bradley's  Principles  of  Logic,  pp.  89-90.


chap.vt.] Ground  as  Identity  in  System.  253

a.  The  contrast  which  we  have  anticipated  throughout  The  idea  of
the  above  account  of  judgment  determines  the  central
attribute  which  we  are  now  to  consider.  The  content  of
a  true  hypothetical  judgment  is  abstract ;  abstract  in  itself
and  not  merely  by  the  absence  of  sensuous  perception.
In  other  words,  the  subject  of  a  hypothetical  judgment
is  not  an  individual,  not  a  whole,  nor  anything  considered  as
a  whole,  i.e.  as  a  self-related  system.  On  the  contrary,  the
content  of  a  hypothetical  judgment  is  composed  of  ground
and  consequent,  each  referring  to  something  other  than  itself,
and  hence  essentially  a  part.  For  a  system  as  a  whole,
such  as  space,  or  the  totality  of  gravitating  matter,  or  the
British  Constitution,  is  a  mere  fact,  complete  in  itself,  and
neither  a  ground  for  nor  a  conclusion  from  anything  else^.  It
is  only  as  parts  within  a  system  that  elements  can  be  so
relative  to  one  another  that  'z/this  is  so,  then  that  must  be  so.^

It  is  only  a  question  of  detail  how  far  the  system  in  and
by  which  the  nexus  subsists,  is  itself  made  explicit  as
a  content  within  the  hypothetical  judgment.  We  may
say,  if  we  like,  that  the  ideal  of  logical  sequence  demands
that  the  system  as  a  totality  should  be  so  made  explicit,
because  the  system  is  the  real  ground  of  the  nexus  ;  and  if
the  system  does  not  appear  in  the  content,  the  real  ground
does  not  appear  in  the  content.  But  this  argument,  from
the  comprehensiveness  of  the  real  ground,  does  not  overcome
the  essential  principle  which  is  involved  in  there  being
a  ground,  as  ground,  at  all.  Ground  implies  a  consequent
other  than,  though  fundamentally  one  with,  itself.  This
transition  or  otherness  ceases  to  exist  if  the  content  does
not  formally  present  itself  as  part  to  part.  For  say  that
the  totality  of  the  system  is  explicit  in  the  ground,  still
this  totality  is  depressed  into  the  relation  of  a  part  by
the  fact  that  a  part  is  selected  to  appear  over  again  as

^  This  applies  to  the  examples  given  only  when  considered  with  reference  to
their  internal  nature.  It  may  be  said  that  space  implies  an  intelligence ;  but  this
is  as  within  a  further  whole.  There  is  of  course  no  ultimately  Absolute  whole
except  the  Absolute  whole.


k


254  Universal  Judgment.  [booki.

consequent,  and  so  as  formally  at  least  external  to  the
ground.  Thus  it  remains  true  that  the  elements  of  content
in  a  hypothetical  judgment  are  related  as  other  to  other
within  an  identity  which  determines  the  one  on  the  basis
of  the  other.  Such  an  identity,  as  far  as  exhibited  in  the
one  term  that,  in  virtue  of  it,  determines  the  other,  is  what
we  mean  by  Ground.  It  is  obviously  capable  of  all  degrees
of  completeness  up  to  the  ultimate  fact  or  whole  which
embraces  in  itself  as  parts  both  ground  and  consequent
commonly  so  called.  The  various  degrees  of  imperfection
or  broken-backedness  in  Hypothetical  judgments,  such  for
instance  as  were  illustrated  in  the  last  section,  are  simply
the  degrees  in  which  the  system  that  determines  the  nexus
fails  to  manifest  itself  within  the  content  connected.  It
must  not  be  forgotten  however  that  we  have  refused  to
treat  the  grammatical  form  of  propositions  as  decisive  of
the  character  of  judgments.  Where  no  rational  nexus
is  traceable,  but  only  a  coincidence  in  fact,  however
general,  we  cannot  admit  that  the  essentials  of  hypothetical
judgment  are  present.  But  then  if  we  are  impelled  to
make  a  judgment  in  hypothetical  form,  there  always  is
some  presumption  of  a  rational  nexus.  We  shall  consider
in  the  following  section  what  attributes  of  true  hypothetical
judgments  are  shared  by  analogical  assertions  such  as  '  If  he
is  a  negro,  he  has  woolly  hair.'  It  is  not  worth  while  to
insist  more  fully  on  these  degrees  of  imperfection,  except
in  so  far  as  they  will  come  under  our  notice  in  dealing  with
the  doctrine  of  causation  and  with  the  kindred  subject  of
the  negative  in  hypothetical  judgment.

Let  us  attempt  to  make  perfectly  clear,  before  we  go
further,  the  nature  of  the  relativity  within  a  system  which
we  ascribe  to  the  contents  before  us.  The  simplest  cases
of  such  relativity  are  drawn  from  the  field  of  numerical
or  geometrical  construction.  A  Chinese  puzzle  or  dissected
map  may  give  us  a  first  idea.  Any  selected  piece  out  of
such  an  arrangement  determines  nothing  by  itself,  but
when  a  second  piece  is  given  some  relation  between  them


Chap. VI.]  The  Basis  of  Necessity.  255

emerges,  though  perhaps  only  a  negative  one.  It  is  fur-
ther possible  for  a  piece  entirely  enclosed  by  others  to
have  its  place  relatively  to  them  determined  long  before
the  whole  arrangement  is  completed ;  but  this  determi-
nation will  really  be  partial,  for  the  place  of  the  whole
group  of  pieces  cannot  be  determined  till  the  whole  puzzle
is  put  together.  Now  the  arrangement  as  a  whole  is  a
mere  matter  of  fact ;  it  is  only  within  it  and  by  reason  of  it
that  each  piece  has  a  prescribed  place  in  virtue  of  its  own
shape  combined  with  the  shapes  of  all  the  other  pieces.
All  the  pieces  being  given,  of  course  the  arrangement  is  given
too  ;  but  if  nothing  is  given,  of  course  all  is  in  the  air,  and  one
arrangement  and  set  of  shapes  is  as  likely  as  another.

Or  again  in  the  region  of  number,  we  may  take  as  equi-
valent to  Hypothetical  judgments  those  which  in  treating
of  Enumeration  we  called  Mediate.  50  x  3  =  25  x  6  would
run  in  conditional  language,  '  If  50  is  multiplied  by  3,  the
product  is  equal  to.'  etc.  Here  we  have  one  form  of  the
numerical  whole  150  presented  as  a  term  from  which
another  term,  viz.  another  form  of  the  same  whole,  may
tbe  inferred.  The  system  within  which  the  relation  exists
[^is  of  course  not  the  whole  150,  but  the  system  of  number
-as  such ;  or  we  may  say  if  we  prefer,  the  whole  150  as
linvolving  and  exemplifying  the  nature  of  the  whole  of
J  number  as  such.  This  system  may  be  brought  to  bear
^either  by  simple  counting,  the  process  which  is  so  to  speak

le  medium  in  which  number  exists ;  or  by  developing  any

^of  the  relations  which  are  embodied  in  the  several  places  of

the  series  with  their  individual  names. Thus  the  above

statement may  at  once be reduced to a tautology  by

;  taking  50  as  25x2  and  6  as  2x3. The combinations

which might be made  with the same result might be

pursued  as  long  as  we  cared  to  continue  the  enumeration

of  places  in  the  series,  and  from  whatever  point  we  started

in  the  system  we  should  obtain  the  same  result  so  long  as

both  sides  of  the  equation  were  subjected  to  treatment  that

was  equivalent  according  to  the  rules  of  the  system. On


256  Universal  yudgment.  [Booki.

the  other  hand,  if  we  were  to  assume  the  invalidity  of  the
equation,  we  should  at  once  make  the  whole  numerical
system  inconceivable — a  unit,  say,  would  have  to  be
taken  as  varying  in  value  without  being  subjected  to
any  arithmetical  process,  and  such  variation  is  incom-
patible with  the  fundamental  principle  of  number.

The  same  may  be  shown  in  space,  treating  it  not  qua
extended  whole  of  parts  outside  one  another,  but  in  respect
of  the  connection  of  its  attributes.  '  If  two  straight  lines
have  the  same  direction,  they  can  never  meet.'  This  is
a  consequence  drawn  from  the  conception  of  direction  in
homogeneous  space.  If  we  destroy  the  idea  of  homogeneous
space,  the  relation,  which  only  holds  within  a  totality  having
that  attribute,  is  annihilated.  If  there  can  be  a  change  of
direction  which  yet  is  not  a  change  of  direction — I  do  not
know  how  else  to  express  the  notion  of  direction  in  space
which  is  itself  curved — then,  I  presume,  the  judgment  from
which  we  started  is  no  longer  true.

The  same  characteristic  might  be  pointed  out  in  relation
to  gravity,  inertia,  or  any  property  which  is  the  basis  of
exact  inference.  The  consequences  of  gravity  hold  only
within  the  totality  of  gravitating  matter,  of  inertia  in  the
combination  of  motions,  and  so  forth.  Every  sphere  of
this  kind,  every  set  of  relations  within  which  certain  nexus
of  attributes  hold  good,  is  itself  ultimately  a  fact  or  datum,
relative  no  doubt  within  some  further  totality,  but  absolute
relatively  to  the  inferences  drawn  within  it.  Hence  we  are
brought  to  a  conclusion  of  the  last  importance.  All  hypo-
thetical judgment  rests  on  a  categorical  basis.  That  is  to
say,  all  relativity  rests  on  an  absolute  datum  and  all  ne-
cessity on  fact.  Why  then  is  mechanism,  necessity  or
relativity,  opposed  to  individuality,  fact  or  absoluteness,  if
all  mechanical  relations  are  themselves  characteristics  given
in  some  individual  whole ^.'' The  answer  seems  to  be  dic-

^  Space  and  Time  are  as  we  saw  imperfect  individualities.  But  it  is  their
individuality  and  not  their  imperfection  that  makes  them  sources  of  general
relations  in  things.


Chap.  VI.]  Examples  of  Necessity.  257

tated  by  what  has  been  said.  Individuality  is  in  self-rela-
tion, Necessity  is  in  external  relation.  But  as  all  relation
is  within  some  whole,  it  follows  that  wherever  we  have
necessity  or  relativity  we  are  concerned  with  more  than
one  whole  or  individual  content ;  that  is  to  say,  we  have
a  whole  or  content  with  its  own  import  and  significance
taken  as  a  part  within  a  wider  or  completer  totality  *.
The  ground  or  necessity  which  forms  the  affirmed  nexus
of  attributes  lies  then  in  the  systematic  nature  of  the  wider
whole,  that  within  which  the  terms  of  the  nexus  are  capable
of  being  opposed  as  part  to  part.

We  will  examine  two  or  three  instances  of  ground  and
consequent  in  the  light  of  the  above  doctrine. '  A  picture
6  ft.  X  7  ft.  cannot  be  hung  in  a  space  5  ft.  x  6  ft' Here
we  are  taking  the  picture  as  a  w^hole  in  itself,  but  as  a  part
within  space,  and  as  therefore  having  external  relations  de-
termined by  the  spatial  system  as  including  other  objects.
The  arrangement  of  other  spatial  objects  so  as  to  leave  only
the  area  5  ft.  x  6  ft.  is  incompatible  with  the  occupation  of
the  area  6  ft.  x  7  ft.  by  the  picture. But  again,  we  may
judge  that '  If  the  boat  in  the  right  foreground  of  the  pic-
ture were  erased,  the  arrangement  of  the  distances  would
become  confused.' In  this  judgment  we  still  call  attention
to  spatial  determinations,  but  only  as  involved  in  the  con-
crete individuality  of  the  work  of  art,  which  assigns  them
their  meaning  and  value. We  are  thus  taking  not  space  as
such,  but  the  individual  picture  before  us,  as  the  totality  or
determining  system,  and  contemplating  the  necessary  rela-
tions which  this  fact  or  whole,  from  its  nature  and  structure,
imposes  on  its  several  parts. Of  course,  apart  from  the
effect  of  the  whole  picture,  there  would  be  no  such  necessity
or  relation  between  the  parts. This  is  an  illustration  of  the
ultimate  nature  of  logical  necessity  or  relativity  and  its  re-
lation to  fact,  which  is,  if  not  specially  felicitous,  at  least
true  in  every  detail. In  a  true  work  of  art  we  have  the
bearing  of  every  part  on  every  other,  the  innumerable  de-

'  See  on  Measurement,  chap,  iii,  supra.
VOL.  I.  S


258  Universal  yudgment.  [booki.

tails,  none  of  which  could  be  altered  without  necessitating
the  alteration  of  others,  all  concentrated  in  a  unity  which
is  itself  constituted  by  all  these  parts,  and  yet,  as  a  whole,
prescribes  the  relations  existing  between  them.  And  yet
the  whole  is  itself  a  comprehensive  fact,  and  apart  from  it
or  outside  it  all  these  prescribed  relations  lose  their  neces-
sity and  disappear.

Again,  take  such  a  judgment  as  '  The  sound  of  the  violin
is  of  peculiarly  piercing  quality.'  If  we  describe  the  sound
merely  in  terms  of  the  mechanical  system  of  vibratory
movements,  it  is  governed  by  the  necessary  relation,  '  If
a  string  be  dragged  by  a  bow,  slipping  from  it  at  in-
tervals, its  vibration  is  of  highly  angular  form,'  i.  e.  in  terms
of  its  effect  on  the  air,  produces  sharp  and  not  gradual
transitions  from  increase  to  decrease  of  condensation.  Omit-
ting the  effect  on  our  hearing,  this  is  a  nexus  of  attributes
grounded  in  the  properties  of  vibrating  bodies,  and  in  the  laws
of  friction  and  of  undulatory  transmission.  But  here  again  the
whole  system  of  physical  properties,  though  comprehensive,
is  a  datum,  and  except  in  it  no  necessity  could  be  shown
why  motion  communicated  by  a  bow  must  have  this  parti-
cular form,  or  why  this  particular  form  should  find  a  cor-
relative in  a  peculiar  type  of  impulse  communicated  to  the
air.  It  is  this  system  which  as  an  identity  in  differences
appears  first  in  the  effect  of  the  bow  on  the  string,  and
then  in  the  peculiar  impulses  communicated  to  the  air  by
the  sounding-board.  It  is  only  as  having  such  a  unity
behind  both  of  them  that  the  one  of  these  phenomena  can
condition  the  other.  And  here  again  we  may  obtain  a  re-
lative absolute  by  considering  the  compound  tone  of  the
violin  string  as  perceived  by  the  mind  through  the  ear,
simply  on  its  own  merits.  It  then  becomes  an  ultimate
fact,  embodying  certain  relations  between  musical  sounds.
And  within  this  fact  we  may  distinguish  the  necessary  re-
lation, '  When  a  tone  is  piercing  in  quality,  the  higher  over-
tones are  strongly  marked  in  it.'  And  finally,  we  may
bring  the  physical  and  the  musical  system  together  under


Chap. VI.]  Can  the  whole  change?  259

the  complex  fact  of  the  correspondence  between  the  shape
of  oscillations  and  the  character  of  tones,  and  say  on  the
faith  of  this  complex  fact  that  where  the  oscillations  are
angular,  the  higher  overtones  are  audible,  and  proceed  to
the  whole  system  of  deductions  made  possible  by  Fourier's
analysis  of  all  vibrations  into  combined  single  oscillations.

The  idea  on  which  we  have  been  insisting — that  of  a
system  or  unity  which  prescribes  the  relation  between  its
parts  or  differences — is  the  idea  of  Ground,  which  includes
the  sphere  of  the  Hypothetical  Judgment,  and  indeed  wher-
ever it  appears  may  be  said  to  involve  a  Hypothetical  ele-
ment. It  is  difficult  to  express  the  essence  of  this  concep-
tion otherwise  than  by  saying  that  the  system  is  the  same
in  the  one  difference  or  aspect  as  it  is  in  the  other.  We
thus  appeal  to  the  notion  of  identity  in  difference,  which
we  have  taken  throughout  to  be  the  content  of  judgment.
Only,  as  Ground,  it  is  not  mere  identity,  but  systematic
Identity,  a  notion  easier  to  illustrate  than  to  define,  but
apparently  equivalent  to  '  identity  such  that  the  differences
in  which  it  is  manifested  have  definite  relations  to  one  an-
other.' Of  course  any  such  definition  only  repeats  the  cha-
racteristic which  the  account  of  the  Hypothetical  Judgment
presupposes.

Assuming  however  these  characteristics  as  summarised
in  the  above  definition,  we  can  draw  from  them  two  con-
sequences that  affect  the  idea  of  Ground.  First,  it  is  plain
that  when  once  a  Ground  is  rightly  stated,  in  conformity
with  the  true  nature  of  the  system  which  it  presupposes,
and  with  which  it  is  in  fact  identical,  such  a  Ground  is  un-
alterable except  by  alteration  of  this  system  itself.  With
what  justification,  theoretically,  we  refuse  to  contemplate
such  alteration  of  the  universe  as  a  whole,  or  how  far  prac-
tically we  permit  ourselves  to  contemplate  it  in  respect  of
subordinate  systems,  e.g.  man's  moral  nature  or  the  type  of
disease,  are  questions  that  must  be  reserved  for  a  general
discussion  of  the  postulates  of  knowledge.  Formally,  we
may  say,  the  whole  cannot  alter,  because  any  alteration

S  1


26o  Universal  Judgment.  [Booki.

must  be  included  in  the  whole.  But  we  shall  see  that  so
purely  formal  a  postulate  would  not  satisfy  the  purposes
for  which  a  postulate  is  required.

And  secondly,  it  is  plain  that  a  ground  is  not  rightly
stated  unless  it  either  embodies  the  whole  essence  of  the
system  which  constitutes  the  ground,  or  at  least  is  exactly
relevant  to  or  compatible  with  that  system,  and  to  the
particular  bearing  which  a  given  interest  in  any  context
imposes  upon  it. In  the  former  case  it  is  clear  from  what
has  been  said  that  the  hypothetical  judgment  must  tend
to  expand  itself  into  a  categorical  one. When  we  go  to
the  root  e.  g.  of  geometrical  truths  we  find  ourselves  affirm-
ing facts  regarding  the  nature  of  space. We  shall  thus  at
a  later  stage  have  to  face  the  conception  of  judgments  at
once  categorical  and  necessary;  we  have  indeed  anticipated
something  of  the  kind  in  speaking  of  the  individual  generic
judgments. The  latter  case  is that  which gives  rise  to
hypothetical  judgments  having  strict  reference  to  a  sys-
tematic ground,  which  they  therefore  imply,  but  do  not
need  to  express. Such are the  ordinary  statements  of
'pure  cases'  in  exact  science,  or  geometrical  truths  as  com-
monly treated  without  raising  fundamental  questions  of  the
nature  of  space. A  '  pure  case '  is  a  nexus  of  differences
reduced  to  their  expression  as  the  differences  of  the  system
in  which  they  have  their  nexus. Without  knowledge  of
such  a  system  we  may  analyse  ad  infinitum  and  yet  never
be  sure  that  we  have  obtained  a  '  pure  case.' This  has,  as
we  shall  see,  an  important  bearing  on  the  theory  of  Induc-
tion. I  gave  a  rough  instance  of  a  pure  case  on  p.  234  in
reference  to  the  annual  rings  of  exogenous  trees. Such,
again,  are  the  mechanical  and  chemical  elements  in  the
vital  processes  of  man,  e.g.  the  pumping  action  of  the  heart,
the  oxidation  of  the  carbon  in  the  blood  and  so  forth,  in
stating  any  one  of  which  as  a  necessary  sequence  of  ground
and  consequent  it  must  be  treated  as  belonging  to  its  own
mechanical  or  chemical  world,  and  not  as  an  element  in
human  life. All  such  judgments  are  abstract  in  the  fullest


chap.\7.j  Hypothetical  is  reciprocal.  261

sense,  and  anal>'tic ;  their  very  point  is  that  they  disregard
the  import  which  constitutes  the  individual.  On  the  other
hand,  a  system  which  is  the  combination  of  individuals  in
their  full  import,  L  e.  the  state  in  relation  to  moral  beings
within  it,  is  most  naturally  dealt  with  not  in  hypothetical
but  in  categorical  judgments.  For  the  subject  is  either  the
concrete  system  itself,  or  an  individuality  subordinate  to  it,
taken  in  its  full  concreteness.  It  would  be  sheer  pedantry
to  speak  in  hypothetical  language  of  man's  moral  being,  its
ground,  and  its  necessary  relations.

It  is  a  corollary  from  the  idea  of  Ground  as  a  relation
purely  relevant  to  a  positive  determinate  system  that  the
hypothetical  judgment,  when  ideally  complete,  must  be  a  ^
reciprocal  judgment.  '  If  A  is  B,  it  is  C  must  justify  the
inference  '  If  A  is  C,  it  is  B.'  We  are  of  course  in  the
habit  of  dealing  with  hypothetical  judgments  which  will  not
admit  of  any  such  conversion,  and  the  rules  of  logic  accept
this  limitation  as  they  accept  the  custom  of  ordinary  speech
as  to  the  comparative  range  of  subject  and  predication.
Some  cases  of  non-reciprocal  sequence  and  their  justifica-
tion will  be  considered  in  the  next  section.  But  here  we
are  only  concerned  to  explain  the  principle  upon  which
necessary  sequence  must  ultimately  rest ;  and  according  to
that  principle,  the  unity  of  a  system  in  its  determinations,
it  follows  that  if  A  B  necessitates  A  C,  then  A  C  must  also
necessitate  A  B.  We  are  not  now  speaking  of  causation,
but  simply  of  coherence  in  principle,  and  it  is  obvious  that  ^
the  idea  of  coherence  in  a  system  is  reciprocal.  A  cannot
cohere  with  B  unless  B  coheres  with  A.  If  in  actual  fact
this  is  found  not  to  hold  good,  and  A  B  is  found  to  involve
A  C  while  A  C  does  not  involve  A  B,  it  is  plain  that  what
was  relevant  to  A  C  was  not  really  A  B  but  some  element
a  /3  within  it.  '  But  may  not  the  irrelevant  element  be  just
the  element  which  made  A  B  into  A  B  as  distinct  from  A  C,
so  that  by  abstracting  from  it  A  B  is  reduced  to  A  C,  and
the  judgment  is  made  a  tautology,  i.  e.  destroyed  ? '  The
suggestion  is  tempting,  because  it  aims  at  cutting  up  by  the


s.


262  Universal  yudgment.  [booki.

root  a  troublesome  scientific  problem,  viz.  the  statement  of
connected  attributes  as  purely  relevant  to  one  another  and
yet  as  distinct. We  constantly  tend  either  to  insert  irrele-
vancies  by  way  of  distinction,  or  to  let  both  attributes  fall
back  into  the  undistinguished  abstract  relation  which  con-
nects them. To  grasp  a  distinction  in  unity  is  an'  effort,
and  we  dislike  efTort. Nevertheless,  if  it  were  impossible,
the  idea  of  system,  of  the  one  in  the  many,  would  be  gone.
A  systematic  relation  is  always  within  an  individual  whole,
and  the  priority  or  antecedence  of  its  elements  belongs  to
the  imperfection  of  knowledge,  and  not  to  the  relation  in
itself. I  am  not  saying  that  every  individual  reality  exists
endlessly  in  time,  but  I  am  saying  that  every  whole  in  as  far
as  its  parts  form  a  system  has  a  nature  which  is  independent
of  time,  or  (what  really  comes  to  the  same  thing)  continues
positively  and  actively  through  the  fugitive  moments  of  time.
But  apart  from  time  on  the  one  hand  and  irrelevant
elements  on  the  other,  I  cannot  see  how  the  relation  of
conditioning  differs  from  that  of  being  conditioned. Every
B  that  is  conditioned  by  A  is  the  condition  of  A  being  such
as  to  condition  B,  i.  e.  of  A  being  what  A  is  ;  and  if  the
being  of  A  were  wholly  relevant  to  B,  this  would  be  equiva-
lent to  saying  that  the  existence  of  B  involves  the  existence
of  A. In  other  words,  if  there  is  nothing  in  A  beyond  what
is  necessary  to  B,  then  B  involves  A  just  as  much  as  A  in-
volves B. But  if  A  contains  irrelevant  elements,  then  of
course  the  relation  becomes  one-sided,  as  if  we  were  to  say
that  a  plane  section  of  a  sphere  has  its  radii  equal. The
mention  of  the  sphere  makes  the  relation  of  coherence  one-
sided ;  the  circle  need  not  be  regarded  as  a  section  of  a
sphere. But,  always  assuming  the  homogeneous  nature  of
Space,  the  relation  between  equidistance  from  a central
point  and  uniformity of  curve  is  inseparable,  and it is
impossible  to  see  that  either  of  these  essential  differences
of  the  circle  is  prior  to  the other. It  may  however  be
questioned  whether  in  an  ultimate  sense  any  incomplete
case  can  be  pure,  i.  e.  whether  irrelevancy  can  be  wholly


Chap. VI.] Irrelevance  hindtrs  Reciprocity. 26


a


avoided  except  by  including  the  whole  fact  to  which  the
judgment  belongs.  What,  e.  g.  has  distance  to  do  with  cur-
vature ?  The  only  answer  is  in  the  nature  of  space.  This
amounts  to  a  doubt  whether  in  the  end  any  Hypothetical
Judgment  can  be  true,  and  points  us  again  to  a  further  type
of  judgment  in  which  such  deficiencies  may  be  made  good.

The  relation  of  Ground  is  thus  essentially  reciprocal,  and
it  is  only  because  the  '  grounds '  alleged  in  every-day  life  are
burdened  with  irrelevant  matter  or  confused  with  causation
in  time,  that  we  consider  the  Hypothetical  Judgment  to  be
in  its  nature  not  reversible.  The  habit  of  thought  is  to  pro-
ceed by  determining  an  undetermined  datum  ;  and  this  habit
is  never  wholly  laid  aside  even  in  the  Hypothetical  Judg-
ment which  is  theoretically  its  negation.  But  a  given  condi-  ^
tion,  though  interpreted  in  a  single  aspect  by  the  judgment
which  draws  its  consequence,  may  have  other  consequences
just  for  the  same  reason  for  which  its  consequent  may  have
other  (alternative,  not  merely  co-operative)  conditions.  The
'  other '  conditions  arise  through  a  variation  of  the  irrele-
vancy present  in  the  given  condition  ;  as,  if  a  circle  has  been
said  to  arise  through  cutting  a  sphere  in  a  plane,  this  con-
dition may  be  varied  by  altering  the  superfluous  relation  in
which  a  plane  figure  bounded  by  a  line  equidistant  from  the
centre  can  be  regarded  ;  e.  g.  it  may  be  taken  as  a  section  of
a  cone,  or  as  an  ellipse  with  equal  axes.  And  just  as  each
of  these  irrelevancies  would  present  the  antecedent  of
circular  curvature  in  different  garb,  so  the  presence  of  an
irrelevancy  which  is  thus  capable  of  variation  involves  all
the  independent  consequences  that  follow  from  the  irrelevant
idea — in  this  case  that  of  a  sphere-section — which  has  been
included  in  the  condition.  If  we  restrict  ourselves  to  the
relation  of  equidistance  in  a  plane,  we  can  get  no  result
beyond  that  of  a  circular  figure  with  the  properties  which
belong  to  it  in  the  geometrical  system.

A  ground  that  admits  of  such  variation  is  not  only  partial
or  abstract,  i.e.  one  which  leaves  the  true  ground  in  a  measure
to  be  understood,  but  is  actUcdly  in  part '  impure,'  i.  e.  burdened


264


Unive7'sal  yudgment.


[Book  I.


The  idea
of  cause.


Cause  as
complete
Ground.


V!)


with  matter  which  gives  rise  to  diverging  consequences,  and
makes  the  ground  itself  one  among  many  converging  grounds.

We  have  thus  seen  the  idea  of  Ground  in  three  aspects  ;
as  an  actual  system,  interpreted  in  its  bearing  upon  its  parts  ;
as  a  '  pure  case,'  i.  e.  a  factor  within  a  system  stated  in
terms  precisely  relevant  to  the  system  and  entering  into  a
nexus  in  virtue  of  that  system  ;  and  as  an  '  impure  case,'
i.  e.  a  condition  weighted  with  irrelevant  matter  and  so
failing  to  express  the  real  nexus  which  is  aimed  at.  The
first  of  these  three  is  necessarily  categorical  in  import,  and
may  perhaps  be  identified  with  Schopenhauer's  *  Seyns-
Grund,'  or  Ground  of  Being  ;  the  two  others  are  primarily
hypothetical  and  only  imply  reality  behind  them,  and
correspond  together  to  his  Erkenntiiissgrund,  or  Ground  of
Knowledge.  It  need  hardly  be  remarked  that  the  ground
of  Being  is  also  the  only  genuine  and  complete  ground  of
knowledge.  In  respect  of  reciprocal  character  they  must
be  divided  differently;  the  first  two,  the  complete  and  the
abstract  ground,  being  necessarily  reciprocal  with  their  con-
sequents, and  the  third  being  as  obviously  not  so.

b.  Cause  may  correspond  either  to  the  complete  form  or
to  the  incomplete  forms  of  Ground.  In  the  former  sense  it
can  scarcely  be  taken  to  differ  from  ground  at  all.  In  the
latter  sense  it  is  a  distinct  species  which  is  included  in  a
common  genus  with  the  incomplete  forms  of  Ground.

(i)  Cause  ^  as  corresponding  in  meaning  to  complete
Ground  would  consist  in  the  exhibition  of  some  selected
attribute  or  event — the  effect—  in  the  totality  of  systematic
relations  which  constitute  its  necessity.  And  in  such  mean-
ing it  can  scarcely  be  taken  to  differ  from  Ground,  because
the  temporal  succession,  which  seems  the  natural  differentia
of  Causation,  disappears  in  the  reference  of  the  effect  to  a
positive  and  continuous  system.  Mere  temporal  relation
is  negative,  is  nothing.  It  is  only  the  unity  behind  the
temporal  relation  that  can  bind  cause  to  its  effect ;  and  in

^  0;i  the  conception  of  Cause,  see  some  very  acute  remarks  of  Professor
Clifford,  Lectures  and  Essays,  i.  150.


^


Chap.  VI.] Catisc  ds  *  Sum  of  Conditio7is!  265

the  real  or  complete  Ground  this  unity  is  made  explicit.
The  cause  of  the  earth's  being  where  it  is  at  this  moment
may  indeed  be  popularly  indicated  by  saying  that  it  was,
wherever  it  was,  at  the  previous  moment;  but  strictly
of  course  the  relation  of  the  present  position  to  the  last
position  when  fixed  before  the  mind  as  discrete  and  succes-
sive in  time,  is  simply  that  the  one  is  not  the  other,  which
is  so  far  the  same  relation  that  subsists  between  the  earth's
present  position  and  the  sun's  or  moon's  last  position,  and
amounts  to  nothing  at  all.  The  cause  of  the  earth's  present
position  is  the  persistent  velocity,  together  with  the  persistent
influences  regulating  the  direction,  of  its  passage  through
space.  This  meaning^  of  Cause  is  the  ideal  logical  import
of  the  term^  and  is  what  Mill  meant  to  indicate  when  he
defined  Cause  as  the  '  sum  of  the  conditions.'  The  word
'  sum '  is  unfortunate,  because  it  indicates  a  special  way
wnich  may  be  mappropriate  of  combining  the  factors.  The
totality  of  the  relations  would  be  a  better  phrase  than  the
sum  of  the  conditions.

The  only  difference  between  Cause  in  this  sense  and
Ground  would  be  that  Cause,  though  not  a  sensible
event,  still  retains  an  import  relative  to  the  explanation
of  sensible  events  or  of  attributes  entering  into  events
(character,  health,  etc.),  and  is  therefore  not  coextensive
with  Ground,  which  includes  e.  g.  geometrical  relations
where  the  phenomena  of  process  in  time  are  wholly  wanting.
There  would  be  no  sense  in  saying  that  the  attributes  of  a
triangle  are  the  cause  of  those  of  parallel  straight  lines,  or
vice  versa  ^.  The  distinction,  however,  is  more  one  of  usage
than  of  theory.  On  the  one  hand,  the  effect,  subsequent  in
time,  which  is  exhibited  as  one  relation  or  difference  within
_a  necessary  nexus,  is  necessary  to  the  persistence  of  the
rhole  system  and  to  the  evolution  of  its  significance,  so
lat  the  parts  of  the  unity  or  system  are  reciprocally  neces-
iry  in  complete  Cause  as  in  complete  Ground  ;  and  on  the

P  Schopenhauer's '  Seynsgnmd '  describes  the  relation  of  such  cases,  supposing
:  rational  connection  to  be  central  and  fundamental  to  the  contents  connected.


266


Universal  Judgment.


[Book  I.


0


Cause  as
an  event,
distinct
from
Ground.


other  hand,  if  in  investigating  a  ground,  say  in  geometrical
matter,  we  go  back  to  the  whole  system  of  fact  which  is  at
the  root  of  the  necessary  connection,  we  shall  be  justified
in  treating  this  fact  as  a  Cause.  We  could  hardly  be
censured  for  saying  that  the  nature  of  space  is  not  only  the
ground,  but  the  cause,  of  the  attributes  of  triangles  and  of
parallels  alike.

Cause  then,  in  its  largest  sense,  is  a  real  ground,  and
ultimately  there  is  no  complete  ground  which  is  not  a  real
ground.  Ground  and  Cause  are  thus  not  co-ordinate  but
convergent  conceptions,  i.e.  as  they  are  completed  they
tend  to  coincide,  and  the  striking  differences  between  them
depend  on  a  comparison  of  their  imperfect  and  ultimately
self-contradictory  forms.

Complete  Cause,  like  complete  Ground,  corresponds  to  a
Hypothetical  Judgment  whose  condition  and  consequent
are  reciprocal.  If,  as  is  perhaps  the  case  in  Mill,  the  phrase
'  sum  of  the  conditions '  is  not  limited  to  relevant  con-
ditions, and  the  hypothetical  judgment  which  expresses  the
nexus  of  such  a  sum  with  its  effect  is  consequently  not
reciprocal  ^,  the  notion  of  sum  of  conditions  loses  the  only
merit  which  it  appeared  to  possess.  But  if  it  means,  as  it
seems  to  mean,  a  persistent  and  systematic  fact,  then  it
agrees  with  other  indications  in  suggesting  that  for  the
complete  Ground  or  the  complete  Cause  we  must  go
beyond  the  Hypothetical  Judgment.

(2)  Cause  as  an  event  in  time  is  thus  an  imperfect
conception.  Indeed  it  is  hardly  possible  to  formulate  the
idea  of  one  event  in  time  as  the  cause  of  another  that  falls,
in  time,  wholly  outside  the  first.  Cause  is  always  taken  to
be  more  or  less  of  a  compHcation  of  relations  and  circum-
stances ; and these, as acknowledged to bear on one

^  Cp.  Essays  in  Philosophical  Criticism,  p.  96  note.  Of  course  if  Cause  as  =
sum  of  conditions  is  compatible  with  Mill's  plurality  of  causes,  the  Cause  aS
sum  of  conditions  cannot  =  Ground.  But  it  ought  to  be  incompatible;  for  in
any  concrete  circumstance  that  may  be  named  as  condition,  what  is  not  relevant
is  not  condition.  So  the  sum  of  conditions  ought  to  be  restricted  to  the  relevant
or  minimum  conditions.


Chap.  VI.] Cause  US  incomplete  Ground,  267

another,  are  not  mere  events  in  time.  It  may  indeed  be
retorted  that  mere  time  is  an  unreality  and  that  no  one
ever  said  that  causation  was  in  mere  time,  i.  e.  in  succession
taken  as  discrete ;  but  that  real  time  involves  continuity  as
well  as  discreteness,  and  in  such  real  time  causation  really
is.  Such  a  retort  might  be  ill-founded  as  a  statement  of
common  logical  opinion,  but  would  in  substance  express
the  principle  which  I  am  endeavouring  to  explain.  ^  Mere
time  is  mere  succession  ;  but  real  time  involves  something
that  is  not  in  succession,  though  it  remains  through  suc-
cession. The  consciousness  for  which  there  is  time  has
begun  a  process  which  tends  to  abolish  time.  To  say  that
in  this  sense  Causation  is  in  real  time  is  to  say  that  Cause
corresponds  to  an  incomplete  ground,  i.e.  a  partially  kno\\Ti
unity  including  the  factors  which  are  in  question  as  Cause
and  Effect.  But  when  we  come  to  speak  of  an  incomplete
Ground,  the  difference  between  thought  and  reality  emerges,
for  it  is  only  the  complete  Ground  that  is  the  real  ground.
When  the  ground  in  thought  is  distinguished  from  the
ground  in  fact,  then  the  cause  is  one  with  the  ground  in
fact  and  is  separable  from  the  ground  in  thought,  which
latter  is  sometimes  called  by  analogy  the  causa  cognoscendi.
Of  course  the  causa  essendi  ^  must  be  a  causa  cognoscendi,
but  a  causa  cognoscendi  need  not  be  a  causa  essendi.  As  a
matter  of  fact  the  ground  in  thought  or  causa  cognoscendi
often  belongs  to  the  effect  in  time  ^,  but  may  be  any  ele-
ment whatever  related  to  the  real  ground,  whether  cause,
effect,  or  abstract  principle.

*  Schopenhauer's  distinction  between  the  Causa  essendi  (Seynsgnmd"  and  the
Causa  JUndi  ^Ursache,  caose  proper)  is  reduced  by  the  Tiew  taken  in  the  text
to  a  distinction  of  degree.  Effect  cannot  be  in  succession  to  cause  in  the  sense
of  falling  outside  it ;  there  must  be  a  real  whole  which  includes  both.

*  It  is  worth  remarking  as  a  matter  of  usage  that '  antecedent '  in  the  con-
ditional sentence  has  absolutely  no  allusion  to  the  temporal  relation  of  the
events  connected.  Its  name  may  have  come  from  the  usual  grammatical  place
of  the  condition,  or  from  some  profounder  idea  of  priority.  But  this  would  be
a  mere  historical  connection.  Mill's  application  of  the  term  to  succession  in
time  creates  quite  an  unfounded  idea  of  correspondence  between  Causation  and
the  Hypothetical  Judgment


268  Universal  yudgment.  [booki.

The  root  of  these  distinctions  is  that  the  nexus  of  ground
and  consequence  is  at  this  stage  still  charged  with  irre-
levancy. The  cause  and  effect,  ground  and  consequent,  are
all  of  them  at  this  stage  concrete  events,  or  groups  of  incom-
plete relations,  among  which  the  special  aspects  belonging
to  any  nexus  that  may  be  in  question  have  not  yet  htoxi  freed
by  analysis.  As  a  result  of  this  state  of  things  the  hypo-
thetical judgment  which  embodies  such  a  connection  follows
the  analogy  of  singular  judgments  or  of  imperfect  uni-
versal, and  has  an  antecedent  which  is  not  affirmed  by
affirming  the  consequent,  just  as  the  subject  of  a  singular  or
generic  judgment  is  not  affirmed  by  affirming  its  predica-
tion. And  in  so  far  as  the  hypothetical  judgment  is  taken
to  be  the  natural  vehicle  in  which  to  assert  causation,  this
characteristic  of  it  agrees  with  the  popular  view  that  the
same  cause  always  has  the  same  effect»-but  the  same  effect
need  notalways  be  due  to  the  same  cause.  This  doctrine,
formulated  bv_MilL  und^r  the  naineof  the  plurality  of
causes^nd  wholly  incompatiblejvith  his  view  which  treats
Cause  as  '  the  sum  of  the  conditions/  is  a  mere  translation
into  analytic  science  of  the  notion  of  subject  and  attribute,
here  quite  out  of  place.  The  degree  of  truth  which  the
view  possesses  depends  solely  on  an  imperfection  of  know-
ledge and  not  in  any  way  on  the  nature  of  causation.

It  is  an  old  story  that  if,  having  said  that  'AH  men  are
mortal,'  you  then  further  say  that  'A.  B.  is  a  man,'  you  are
committed  to  the  assertion  that  he  is  also  mortal ;  but  if
you  prefer  to  make  the  more  cautious  assertion  that  he  is
mortal,  you  do  not  thereby  pledge  yourself  that  he  is  a
man.  The  same  maxim  in  relation  to  the  Hypothetical
Judgment  is  summarised  in  the  formula  '  Assert  the  ante-
cedent or  deny  the  consequent.'  It  makes  no  sort  of
difference  in  the  application  of  this  formula  whether  cause
is  antecedent  and  effect  consequent  or  vice  versa.

Thus  the  reason  why  the  law  of  Causation  has  been
stated  in  the  form  '  The  same  cause  always  has  the  same
effect '  rather  than  in  the  complementary  form  '  The  same


Chap. VI.]  Savie  Effect,  same  Cause?  269

effect  always  has  the  same  cause'  is  that  popular  philosophy
tends  to  start  from  the  event  which  comes  first  in  time,  as
logical  antecedent,  because  the  primary  source  of  knowledge
is  simply  to  observe  processes  in  time :  and  so  the  further
determination  of  any  datum  or  circumstance  "when  effected
by  this  elementary  method  corresponds  to  the  succession  of
events  in  time,  and  that  event  which  comes  first  is  taken  as
the  datum  to  be  further^ielermined,  and  that  which  comes
after  is  regarded  as  its  determination.  Of  course  then  the
same  datum  always  has  the  same  determination,  for  every
content — and  a  datum  is  a  content — is  an  identity,  and
having  attended  to  an  identity  in  respect  of  one  of  its
differences  we  are  quite  safe  in  saying  that  this  identity —
this  datum — will  always  have  the  same  difference.  For
if  it  seems  not  to  have,  we  may  say  either  that  the  difference
is  disguised,  or  that  the  datum  is  not  the  same.  And  so
we  come  first  to  the  principle  that  the  same  cause  always
has  the  same  effect ;  and  sometimes,  to  make  quite  clear
that  we  are  simply  regarding  a  real  content  in  respect  of  a
difference  which  we  have  selected  out  of  its  concrete  nature,
we  add  '  the  same  cause  under  the  same  conditions,'  or  '  in
the  same  relation ; '  thereby  showing  that  we  know  very
well  that  the  concrete  cause  has  all  sorts  of  different  effects
under  different  conditions  and  in  different  relations.

It  is  usually  presupposing  the  truth  of  the  first  principle
that  we  go  on  to  consider  whether  the  same  effect  always
has  the  same  cause  ;  and  neglecting  in  the  effect,  which  we
take  at  first  as  a  goal  in  which  thought  can  rest,  the  idea  of
a  limiting  reference  to  a  particular  antecedent,  we  are  im-
pressed by  the  variety  of  relations  and  conditions  compatible
with  the  undetermined  result,  as  contrasted  with  the  single
aspect  in  which  we  watch  the  operation  of  a  cause ;  and  we
forget  that  each  set  of  these  generates  the  effect  in  a  slightly
different  form.  It  seems  so  common-sense  to  say  '  If  a  man
is  drowned  he  is  dead,  but  if  he  is  dead  he  need  not  therefore
have  been  drowned,'  that  we  forget  that,  if  he  is  dead  m  the
particular  way  produced  by  drowtting,  then  he  has  been


270  Universal  Judgment.  [booki.

drowned.  We  might,  from  the  very  first  consideration  of  an
effect,  draw  a  parallel  to  the  popular  form  of  the  Law  of  Cau-
sation, 'Same  cause  in  same  relation,  same  effect,'  by  a  Law
of  Effect  which  should  affirm,  '  Same  effect,  in  same  form,
same  cause.'  But,  as  our  first  impression  in  starting  from
Cause  is  of  the  Identity  of  Effects,  so  our  first  impression  in
starting  from  Effect,  because  there  is  no  simple  guide  to  fur-
ther determination,  is  of  the  Plurality  of  Causes.  Really
however  we  have  to  supplement  these  ideas  by  those  of  the
Plurality  of  Effects  and  of  the  Identity  of  Causes.  It  is,  tech-
nically speaking,  an  accident  which  of  these  four  points  of  view
attracts  our  attention  first.  The  knowledge  that  the.  same
effect  has  the  same  Cause  is  not  necessarily  later  than  or  de-
pendent on  that  of  the  converse  maxim.  '.Ifajnanjs  deadhis
heart  has  stopped '  does  not  involve  a  knowledge  whether
stoppage  of  the  heart  must  always  cause  death.  Still,  as
we  saw,  the  common  law  of  Causation  is  most  readily  sug-
gested by  our  experience  of  simple  observation,  and  has  a
certain  real  pre-eminence  because  of  this  experience.  ,^*^
perimgntally  we  only  follow  up  Causejnto  Effect,  not  Effect
into  Cause.  And  thus  the  natural  tendency  is  to  identify
Cause  with  Antecedent,  and  the  common  law  of  Causation
'  Same  cause  has  same  effect '  is  the  resulting  one-sided
application  to  Cause  and  Effect  of  the  commonplace  rules
of  the  Hypothetical  Judgment.  Of  course,  when  we  have
both  principles  together  we  have  more  than  either  alone ;
but  in  itself  nehh^r  prima  facie  involves  the  other.

We  have  seen,  then,  that  even  the  incomplete  or  partially
known  Cause  can  always  enter  into  a  Hypothetical  Judg-
ment either  as  Ground  or  as  Consequent.  In  the  same
way  it  is  possible  for  Effect  to  be  either  Ground  or  Conse-
quent in  Hypothetical  Judgment.  But  Effect  can  never  be
Cause,  unless  we  go  back  to  the  doctrine  of  complete
Ground  in  which  the  boundary  between  Cause  and  Effect
really  melts  away.  Effect  can  never  be  Cause,  and  yet
Effect  may  be  as  inevitable,  as  essential  to  the  sequence,  as
necessary  a  Ground  of  hypothetical  nexus  as  ever  Cause


Chap. VI.]  Why  is  Effect  not  Cause?  271

could  be. It  is  a  well-known  saying  that  we  cannot  con-
ceive a  storm  to  have  been  less  violent  than  it  actually  was
without  the  difference  involving  differences  in  a  series  of
physical  processes  going  back  ad  infinitum  in  the  causal
nexus. Yet  we  cannot  bring  ourselves  to  treat  the  storm
as  the  cause  of  the  previous  physical  processes  which,  as  we
say,  resulted  in  it. The  distinction  which  is  at  the  root  of  our
inability  to  do  so  is  of  course  the  distinction  of  Time. The
operation  of  this  distinction  has  never  been  more  trenchantly
stated than by  Aristotle  \  who  lays down the  general
doctrine  of  Ground  with  perfect  clearness,  but  in  going  on
to  deal  with  causation  in  succession  doubts  the  security  of
all  arguments  from  cause  to  a  subsequent  effect. For  '  in
the  moment  between  the  two,  it  would  be  false  to  say  that
the  second  has  taken  place,  although  the  first  has  already
taken  place.' It  may  of  course  be  rejoined  that  the  cause
cannot  have  completely  taken  place  if  the  effect  has  not
begun. This  rejoinder  however  depends  on  the  postulated
unity  of  the  causal  process  and  on the  consequent  con-
tinuity of  time. If  we  press  this  point  of  view,  it  takes  us
back  to  the  doctrine  of  complete  ground,  which  consists  in
exhibiting  the  unity  or  continuity  of  causation  regardless
of  succession  in  time. But  we  are  anxious  at  this  moment
to  do  all  we  can  in  the  way  of  elucidating  the  problem
involved  in  the  natural  conception  of  causation  as  sequence,
and  therefore  we  will  not  simply  fall  back  on  this  notion  of
complete  ground. Granted  that time  and  sequence are
continuous,  yet  they  are  also  discrete. There  is  indeed  no
empty  ^lera^v  or  interval  in  which  we  can  stand  and  say,
'  The  cause  is  past  and  the  effect  is  not  begun.' But  un-
questionably we  can  make  a  stand  at  any  point  in  the
continuous  sequence  and  say,  '  So  much  is  (or  '  has  been ')
real,  the  rest  is  not  yet  real.' And  what  is  not  yet  real
cannot  be  the  cause  of  what  is  or  has  been  real.

This  appears  to  be  the  root  of  our  whole  conviction  about
cause  and  effect  in  time. Even  after  the  entire  sequence  has

*  Anal.  Post.  ii.  95  a,  30  ff.


272  Universal  yudgment.  [booki.

been  realised,  and  when  all  of  it  is  alike  real  or  unreal,  as  we
may  choose  to  count  the  past,  still  the  objective  temporal
order  into  which  we  project  our  experiences  embodies  the  suc-
cession of  relative  reality  and  non-reality  which  attached  to
the  order  in  its  original  constitution.  We  remember  that
this  became  real  while  that  was  still  unrealised,  and  we
therefore  feel  that  however  certainly  they  may  reveal
themselves  as  parts  of  a  single  whole,  we  can"  never  hold  the
event  which  came  after  to  be  an  element  in  the  actual
determination  of  that  which  went  before.  It  would  involve
to  our  minds  the  absurdity  of  treating  the  existent  as  caused
by  the  non-existent.

I  do  not  mean  to  deny  the  reality  of  this  distinction.  It
amounts  to  just  what  it  is.  Time  is  a  condition,  is  the
condition,  is  we  may  almost  say  the  inmost  nature,  of  our
sensitive  experience.  The  fii'st  operation  of  our  intellectual
synthesis  is  to  build  up  an  ideal  objective  order  which,
though  itself  not  in  time,  yet  contrasts  as  a  more  or  less
completed  reality  with  the  sensitive  experience  which  is
always  passing  into  it.  It  is  obvious  that  we  can  only  con-
struct our  anticipation  of  reality  out  of  its  positive  content
so  far  as  known  to  us  ;  and  its  positive  content  so  far  as
known  to  us  belongs  to  the  past.  We  may  fill  up  gaps  in
the  past  out  of  other  parts  of  itself,  but  we  can  get  nothing
out  of  nothing,  and  therefore  can  draw  no  anticipations
from  the  future.  Therefore  at  any  given  moment  we  have
no  choice  but  to  say  that  the  future  is  conditioned  by  the
past,  and  the  past  not  by  the  future  ;  effect  by  cause,  and
cause  not  by  effect.  Cause,  at  any  such  given  moment,  is
what  we  have,  and  effect  what  we  have  not.  And  further,
taking  the  past  as  a  representation  of  all  that  is,  for  it  is  the
only  positive  content  that  we  have  to  represent  anything,
we  are  right  in  saying  that  the  past  as  a  whole  is  the  cause
of  the  future  as  a  whole.  What  is,  is,  and  will  act  as  it
will  act ;  and  what  we  already  know  of  it  is  the  only  source
from  which  we  can  anticipate  its  action.  But  of  course  the
past  as  a  mere  series  of  events  is  past ;  it  has  ceased  to  be


Chap.  VI.]  Reality  of  Succession.  273

real  just  as  truly  as  the  future  is  not  yet  real ;  the  relation
between  two  nothings  is  nothing,  and  cannot  cause  any-
thing. The  same  applies  to  particular  events;  it  is  hard
to  find  words  which  describe  the  negative  relation  of  effect
to  cause,  and  which  do  not  apply  equally  to  that  of  cause
to  effect.  Effect  cannot  be  the  cause  of  its  cause,  for  the
reason  that  it  is  absurd  to  find  the  cause  of  something
existent  in  what  does  not  (yet)  exist.  But  is  it  less  absurd
to  find  the  cause  of  what  is  now  entering  upon  existence  in
what  does  not  (any  longer)  exist  "^  Yet  this  is  what  we  do
if  we  take  cause  as  an  event  and  effect  as  a  subsequent
event.  Hence  we  are  driven  to  the  second  operation  of  our
intellectual  synthesis,  which  is,  after  erecting  an  objective
temporal  order  not  itself  in  time,  to  strip  this  temporal
order  of  the  importance  attaching  to  its  successiveness,  and
to  treat  it  more  and  more  as  the  expression  of  a  plan  or
unity.  Except  as  the  expression  of  such  a  unity,  causation,
as  we  have  seen,  disappears  ;  but  as  the  expression  of  such
a  unity,  the  causal  relation  ceases  to  be  in  time,  because  the
positive  connection  between  cause  and  effect  being  made
manifest,  the  two  are  united  in  the  complete  ground.  This
must  be  carefully  distinguished  from  saying  that  time
may  be  introduced  anyhow  without  making  a  difference ;  it
does  not  mean  that  eggs  boil  water,  or  that  death  produces
a  revolver-shot.  It  simply  means  that  the  order  of  succes-
sion, which  has  a  largely  negative  aspect,  disappears  in  the
significance  of  a  positive  systematic  connection,  and  that
we  do  not  in  fact,  in  considering  a  past  sequence,  regard
what  came  later  in  time  as  less  fundamental  or  elucidatory
than  what  came  before.

Then  is  not  Time  real?  I  answer  that  everything  is
real,  so  long  as  we  do  not  take  it  for  what  it  is  not.
Time  is  real  as  a  condition  of  the  experience  of  sensi-
tive subjects,  but  it  is  not  a  form  which  profoundly
exhibits  the  unity  of  things.  And  when  we  transfer
the  true  judgment  '  What  has  not  yet  happened  must
be a  manifestation of  the  same  unity  which  is  involved

VOL.  I.  T


V


2  74  Universal  Judgment.  ,[Booki.

in  what  I  already  positively  know'  to  a  totality  which  is
already  in  all  its  parts  equally  real,  we  confuse,  and  give
'  time '  a  reality  which  it  has  not.  Such  a  confusion  is
involved  in  the  idea  that  there  can  be  no  more  in  the  effect
than  there  was  in  the  temporal  cause,  and  in  the  tremendous
power  consequently  exercised  by  historical  analysis  over
common  minds.  The  confusion  is  reinforced  by  another
aspect  of  causation.  Practice,  like  sensitive  experience,  is
in  time.  In  translating  a  plan  into  practice,  the  relations
of  succession  hold  good.  A  sequence  is  what  it  is,  and
nothing  else ;  and  a  reversed  sequence  would  simply  be
different.  Therefore  for  practice  the  earlier  event  is  more
important,  in  the  sense  in  which  the  means  is  more  im-
portant than  the  end.  For  knowledge  of  the  end  does  not
give  power  to  produce,  but  knowledge  of  the  means  does.
But  this  importance  begins  and  ends  with  practice,  and
even  there  it  only  exists  in  virtue  of  the  unity  whose  nature
is  expressed  for  us  in  the  fabric  of  ideal  reality — a  fabric
which  is  not  in  time.

Thus  it  is  easy  to  see  the  relation  between  Cause  and
Ground  in  the  imperfect  stage  in  which  they  are  dis-
tinguishable conceptions.  Ground  is  a  content  which  is
perceived,  by  reason  of  any  systematic  relation  whatever,
to  involve  the  determination  of  another  content.  Cause  is
also  a  Content  perceived  to  involve  the  determination  of
another  content,  and  is  therefore  a  kind  of  Ground,  but  is
primarily  confined  to  the  special  case  in  which  the  deter-
mining content  is  real  and  the  determined  content  unreal.
But  as  this  is  merely  a  negative  relation,  even  the  first  pre-
sumption of  causation  in  some  degree  supplements  it  by  the
postulate  of  a  positive  nexus,  and  we  know  very  well  that
in  practice  if  no  positive  nexus,  no  continued  identity  of
process,  can  be  alleged,  we  do  not  allege  causation.  A
familiar  illustration  is  the  sequence  of  day  and  night.  It
is  generally  urged  that  if  causation  were  mere  succession,
day  must  be  the  cause  of  night,  but  that  really  day  is  not
the  cause  of  night,  because  both  are  effects  of  a  common


Chap.  VI.]  Night  and  Day.  275

cause,  and  either  might  very  well  go  on  without  the  other.
This  is  one  of  those  trivial  examples  that  seem  hardly
worth  arguing  about,  and  yet,  if  argued  about,  must  be
treated  at  length.  I  have  showTi  that  I  at  least  think
*  Causation  =  mere  constant  succession '  plainly  false  and  A
in  contradiction  with  facts ;  but  if  I  must  discuss  this  caseV  •  ,

I  should  like  to  have  the  terms  defined.  The  question,  as  I  jf  /^^  '  f
take  it,  is,  Does  'day'  in  the  sense  in  which  it  is  here  used  I
include  a  unity,  a  system,  a  principle,  which  is  continuous  J
in  and  responsible  for  night  ?  If  so,  day  is  the  cause  of
night ;  if  not,  not.  The  reason  why  we  think  it  wrong  to
call  day  the  cause  of  night  is  not  because  night  has  the
same  claim  to  be  called  the  cause  of  day.  There  is  no
contradiction  here.  In  our  ordinary  way  of  treating  imper-
fect causation  there  is  no  reason  why  the  daylight  hours  of
Monday  should  not  be  the  cause  of  Monday  night,  ^londay
night  of  Tuesday,  Tuesday  of  Tuesday  night,  and  so  on.
The  difficulty  does  not  lie  in  the  sequence  being  of  this
alternate  nature — a  single  oscillation  of  a  pendulum  is  cer-
tainly the  cause,  though  not  the  complete  ground,  of  the
next — but  that  the  persistent  unity  which  lies  at  the  root  of
both  phenomena  does  not  fall  within  the  natural  definition  of
either.  If  day  meant  not  merely  the  presence  of  light  on
the  earth's  surface,  but,  in  relation  to  any  given  point  on
the  earth's  surface,  that  portion  of  the  earth's  rotation
which  carried  that  point  from  its  sunrise  to  its  sunset,  then
I  do  not  see  how  it  could  be  denied  that  this  portion  of
rotation,  in  as  far  as  it  determined  the  position  of  the
selected  point  throughout  the  immediately  succeeding  sec-
tion of  the  rotation,  was  the  cause  or  principal  condition  of
the  ensuing  night.  But  of  course  the  name  'day'  is
applied  e.  g.  to  the  six  months'  day  of  the  poles  only  by
metaphor,  being  a  chronological  idea  which  has  become
largely  independent  of  the  relation  of  a  particular  place  to
the  sun's  illumination,  and  having  legal  and  social  meanings
which  do  not  admit  of  an  antithesis  with  night.  So  the
true  reason  why  we  do  not  like  to  predicate  causation  of


276  Universal  yudgment.  [Booki.

this  sequence  is  simply  that,  owing  to  their  varied  accessory
significations,  the  terms  day  and  night  do  not  apply  to  suc-
cessive stages  of  a  continuous  natural  process,  but  are  mere
chance  distinctions  that  are  drawn,  according  to  our  shifting
purposes,  on  the  surface  of  that  process.

But  though  we  do  not  allege  causation  where  we  cannot
allege  a  positive  nexus,  yet,  as  I  pointed  out  above,  there  is
a  considerable  distinction  of  degree  between  the  objective
temporal  order  and  the  intelligible  unity  of  things. The
less  we  advance  beyond  the  stage  of  perception  and  narra-
tive to  that  of  science  and  intelligence,  the  more  does  the
negative  distinction  of  time  retain  its  significance. Strictly
speaking,  the  distinction  between  cause  and  effect  in  time  is
only  real  at an  arbitrary  moment  in  which  we  draw  an
ideal  line  across  the  temporal  process  of  sensitive  experi-
ence, between  the  real  and  the  unreal. When  cause  and
effect  are  both  absorbed  in  the  past,  the  distinction  is  only
transferred  by  memory  into  the  content  of  reality,  which  thus
takes  the  form  of  the  objective  temporal  order. This  order
would  be  an  intolerable  chaos  but  for  a  certain  presumption
of  causation,  i.  e.  of  unity,  which  binds  it  together  according
to  some  sort  of  system  ;  there  is  no  real  history  apart  from
the  idea  of  causation. Nevertheless  this  unity  remains  for
the  most  part  inchoate,  i.  e.  only  in  some  degree  explicit ;
and  so,  though  not  itself  in  time,  presents  the  scheme  of  a
de  facto  evolution  in  time  as  a  sort  of  extended  memory,  with
the  transferred  character  of  determination  of  unreal  by  real,
/ i.  e.  of  effect  by  cause. Now  it  is  plain  from  what  has  been
] said  that  the  distinction  of  Cause  and  Effect  is  self-destructive.
\ It  is  utterly  impossible  to  be  successful  in  the  investiga-
7 tion  of  a  causal  relation  without  reducing  it  to  the  intelli-
\ gible  unity  of  a  complete  ground. History  therefore,  in
the  sense  of  the  mere  record  of  remembered  fact,  would  seem
to  have  for  its  ideal  to  disappear  into  systems  of  hypo-
thetical judgment,  in  which  complete  ground should  do
duty  for  cause  and  effect,  and  the  relation  of  time  should
disappear.


Chap. VI.]  History  and  Science,  277

This  conclusion  is  true,  in  my  judgment,  in  relation  to
the  mere  phenomena  of  the  past,  and  the  resulting  con-
nection between  causation  and  ground.  But  as  regards
what  we  really  mean  by  history,  such  a  conclusion  is  repug-
nant to  our  feelings  and  inconceivable  to  our  understanding.
The  reason  is  plain.  History  is  not  merely  a  name  for  the
recorded  past.  A  series  of  astronomical  observations  is
not  history;  it  is  science,  and  has  no  value  but  for
science,  unless  by  chance  it  throws  light  on  the  observer's
character  or  on  the  state  of  science  in  his  time  as  an
element  in  the  condition  of  man.  What  we  mean  by  His-
tory is  the  revelation  of  man's  nature  in  action  and  intelli-/
gence.  And  when  we  deprecate  the  reduction  of  history  to
a  system  of  hypothetical  judgments  founded  in  some  single
abstract  individuality — to  a  science  like  abstract  mechanics
or  abstract  economics — what  we  really  mean  is  that  man's
nature  reveals  itself  in  individuals,  in  actions,  in  forms  of
intelligence,  and  we  do  not  want  to  lose  these  realities  in
abstractions  of  relativity  and  necessity.  But  if  we  consider
that  hypothetical  necessary  or  relative  judgment  is  entirely
based  upon  categorical  judgments,  that  all  nexus  is  within
an  individuality,  we  shall  see  that  history  may  be  received
into  the  intelligible  unity  of  knowledge  without  sacrificing
its  concrete  import  and  characteristic  significance.  This
could  only  be  destroyed  if  we  insisted  on  predetermining
within  what  whole  or  system  we  should  find  the  facts  of
history  to  be  necessarily  related.

And  no  doubt  a  suspicion  of  some  such  prejudice  is  opera-
tive in  the  reluctance  to  absorb  history  in  '  science '  to  which
I  have  adverted.  If  science  meant  exclusively  the  sciences
which  grow  out  of  the  one-sided  forms  of  measurement,
then  we  should  rightly  deny  that  there  is  a  science  of  history,
and,  for  the  same  reasons,  that  there  is  a  science  of  art,  of
political  form,  or  of  religion.  We  escape  however  from  such
suspicions  if  we  remember  that  all  connection  is  based  on
fact,  and  all  analysis  on  individuality;  and  that  the  nature
of  the  facts  or  of  the  individual  whole  or  system  with  which


2^^  Universal  yudgment.  [booki.

a  science  deals  can  ex  hypothesi  be  only  for  that  science
itself  to  determine.
^  Thus  the  conception  of  Cause  as  an  event  in  time  anterior

to  effect  gives  way  on  analysis,  and  forces  us  back  to  the
conception  of  the  complete  Ground ;  and  the  conception  of
incomplete  G:roVin^{causa  cognoscendi)2,s,  distinct  from  Cause,
expands  into  the  same  unity,  which,  as  we  saw,  is  at  once
the  complete  Cause  and  the  real  Ground ;  i.  e.  the  relation  of
part  to  part  within  an  actual  and  systematic  totality.  This
relation  of  part  to  part,  either  burdened  with  irrelevancy  as
in  the  ordinary  hypothetical  judgment,  or  pure  and  relevant
as  in  the  hypothetical  judgment  whose  terms  are  reciprocal,
forms  the  content  of  the  abstract  universal  judgment.  And
this  abstract  judgment  is  a  divergence  from  the  concrete
evolution  of  thought,  and  joins  with  the  mediate  and  quasi-
generic  judgments  of  the  sciences  which  arise  out  of  one-
sided measurement  ^.  But  it  may  also  be  regarded  as  an
element  in  or  aspect  of  the  popular  or  transitional  quasi-
collective  and  the  generic  judgments  which  are  enumerative
or  individual  in  form  but  analogical  in  meaning.  Analogy,
as  we  pointed  out,  is  compatible  with  systematic  necessary
relation.
1  On  the  otl^er  hand,  though  a  complementary  aspect  of

the  universal  judgment,  the  pure  hypothetical  is  destitute
of  finality,  and  incapable  of  standing  alone.  It  demands  a
reversion  to  concrete  thought  by  the  fact  that  it  presupposes
a  self-existent  whole.  Apart  from  such  reversion  it  may
become  a  wholly  arbitrary  and  meaningless  play  of  fancy,
presupposing  conditions  which  are  not  made  explicit.

As  I  have  not  yet  dealt  with  negation,  I  shall  leave  the

negative  forms  of  the  hypothetical  judgment  to  be  dealt

with  in  the  same  chapter  as  the  disjunctive  judgment,  with

which  they  are  closely  connected.

Supposi- c.  The  above  appears  to  me  to  be  a  fair  account  of  the

universal hypothetical or abstract universal judgment  considered

judgment, from  a  Strictly  logical point  of  view. In  one  important

^  See  Scheme,  p.  92.


Chap.  VI.]  Idea  as  Subject.  279

respect  however  it  is  prima  facie  at  variance  with  con-
clusions which  might  be  drawn  from  the  grammatical
shape  of  these  predications  as  to  the  attitude  of  mind  in
which  they  are  normally  made.  The  point  in  doubt  is  the
existential  significance  of  the  universal  judgment.  The
account  which  I  have  given  treats  the  existential  implica-
tion which  attaches — undoubtedly  in  very  various  degrees
— to  the  different  forms  of  the  universal  judgment,  as  cog-
nate with  the  existential  affirmation  involved  in  the  singular
and  in  the  perceptive  judgments.  But  it  has  been  trench-
antly laid  down  by  Mr.  Bradley  that  a  different  view  is
suggested  by  the  attitude  of  the  mind  in  all  purely  abstract
judging — abstract  be  it  remembered  not  necessarily  in
content,  but  only  as  all  thought  is  abstract  when  contrasted
with  sense-perception.  I  am  unable  to  reconcile  this  view  J
with  the  existential  value  of  judgments  about  individuals
designated  by  proper  names,  in  which  there  is  no  direct
reference  to  sense-perception  nor  to  anything  but  a  content,
whose  real  existence  is  as  I  imagine  taken  to  be  asserted
owing  to  its  concrete  nature.  But  I  proceed  at  once  to
discuss  the  analysis  of  the  abstract  universal  affirmation,
from  the  point  of  view  to  which  I  allude.

It  will  be  remembered  that  in  the  general  discussion  of
the  nature  of  judgment,  we  agreed  that  the  ultimate  subject
in  judgment  was  never  an  idea, — never  that  is  to  say  even
a  logical  idea  or  content,  for  the  particular  psychical  image
we  found  not  to  concern  us  in  logic.  The  ultimate  subject
|in  judging  was  always,  we  held,  the  Real,  which  in  the  act
^cf  judgment  is  qualified  by  certain  logical  ideas.  So  long
as  the  immediate  subject  was  present  perception,  whether
additionally  qualified  by  designative  ideas  or  not,  all  went
smoothly,  for  the  immediate  subject  was  then  simply  the
point  of  contact  with  the  ultimate  subject  of  judgment.  Some
difficulty,  indeed,  arose  in  explaining  the  real  reference  of  the
Singular  judgment  in  which  the  subject  may  fall  outside
present  perception  and  may  have  to  be  united  therewith  by
a  constructive  process. Still,  however,  the  immediate  sub-


28o  Universal  Judgment.  [book  i.

ject  was  a  determinate  element  in  the  whole  of  Reality^
having  individual  existence  manifested  within  the  sensible
series,  although  e.g.  in  the  case  of  an  organism,  still  more  in
the  case  of  a  man,  not  of  a  kind  that  could  really  be  pre-
sented by  sense-perception  as  such.  So  far  therefore  we
were,  in  judging,  referring  an  ideal  content  to  reality  in
some  particular  concrete  aspect,  and  therefore  our  Judgment
was  still  plainly  existential,  i.e.  such  as  to  become  false  if
the  concrete  element  of  reality  described  had  no  place  in
the  series  of  sensible  events.

Now  when  we  come  to  deal  with  the  Universal  Judgment
it  must  be  admitted  that  at  least  as  a  question  of  form  the
reference  to  reality  becomes  less  easy  to  define.  The
pseudo-collective  and  the  analogical  judgment  at  any  rate
(dismissing  the  conception  of  the  individual  generic  judg-
ment, in  which  the  singular  judgment  revives)  are  unques-
tionably capable  of  an  interpretation  which  reduces  them  to
the  pure  Hypothetical  Judgment.  In  our  old  acquaintance
'AH  men  are  mortal'  the  'all'  is  too  obviously  «<?/ collective
to  stand  in  the  way  for  a  moment.  We  certainly  might  be
driven  to  confess  that  in  so  judging  we  had  only  asserted
'  If  man,  then  mortal '  or  '  Where  man,  there  mortal'  Such
an  interpretation  is  involved  no  less  in  Mill's  analysis  of  the
import  of  propositions  than  in  Lotze's  or  Bradley's  treat-
ment of  the  universal  judgment.  To  affirm  co-existence  of
attributes  is  not  to  affirm  existence  of  subj  ects  K  The  analogical
judgment  has  this  aspect  even  more  plainly.  'An  organism
as  such  is  mortal '  means,  it  may  be  urged,  if  taken  strictly
and  without  counting  implications,  '  If  organism,  then
mortal,'  '  Where  organism,  there  mortal,'  *  Whatever  is
organic  is  mortal.'  If  in  consequence  of  such  an  assertion
we  take  it  that  organisms  are  actual  elements  of  the  real
world,  this  is  implication — though  very  strong  implication —
and  not  assertion.

'  This  comes  out  very  emphatically  in  Mill's  account  of  Definition,  which
when  Real  at  all,  he  analyses  into  a  meaning  and  a  postulate  of  existence.  In
this  he  is  pretty  much  at  one  with  Mr.  Bradley's  account  of  universal  judgment.
See  also  Mill's  account  of  mathematical  truth.


Chap.  VI.]  Tlie  nature  of  Supposition.  281

According  to  this  analysis,  the  essence  of  which  is  to
regard  the  implication  of  existence  in  these  judgments  as
outside  the  matter  affirmed,  all  abstract  affirmation — abstract
merely  in  the  sense  of  not  referring  to  present  perception  or
to  particular  sensible  events — is  on  the  level  of  hypothesis,
has  for  its  immediate  subject  an  idea  not  a  reality,  and
consequently  has  no  existential  import,  or  'deals  purely
with  adjectivals  \'

The  identification  of  the  universal  judgment  as  such  with
affirmation  based  on  hypothesis  being  thus  made,  the  further
development  of  the  view  turns  on  the  nature  of  hypothesis  v^
or  supposition.  The  essence  of  supposition  is  that  it  is  qua
supposition,  wholly  arbitrary  in  its  starting-point.  Its  con-
tent is  taken,  not  given,  is  an  idea,  not  a  fact  (if /rr  accidens
a.  fact,  is  not  used  as  a  fact,  i.  e.  its  existence  is  not  argued
from),  and  is  considered  not  in  itself,  but  for  the  sake  of  its
relativity,  i.  e.  for  what  flows  from  it,  for  its  consequences.
The  essence  of  supposition  is  in  short  argument  from  content,
and  not  from  existence  of  content.  The  consideration  of
any  proposed  l^islation,  e.  g.  a  Reform  or  Land  Act,  with
reference  to  its  consequences,  is  an  example  of  supposition.
^'Suppose  every  adult  male  to  have  a  vote,  it  will  be  impos-

ible  to  maintain  indirect  taxation;'  'Suppose Ireland  to  have
|a  Statutory  Parliament,  the  Imperial  Parliament  will  by  this

ict  itself  become  statutory.' Or  again,  '  Supp>ose  beings
|endowed  with  perception  but  confined  to  a  plane  in  the  ex-

rcise  of  it,  they  must  see  all  figures  as  lines  or  points.'
The  process  is  to  select  or  to  fabricate,  apparently  at

)leasure,  an  ideal  content,  to  think  of  it  as  in  connection

rith  some  known  reality,  and  to  judge  the  result  as  a  truth

conditional  on  such  connection.

It  is  plain  that  in  this  operation,  subject  to  a  certain

[reservation  to  be  mentioned  directly,  the  supposition  selec-

[tion  or  fabrication  -  of  content  is  arbitrary,  but  the  judgment

)roper  is  necessary.

*  Bradley's  Principles  of  Logic,  p.  8i.  ^

*  Selection  and  fabrication  differ  only  in  d^ree^  not  meiely  because  all


282  Universal  ytidgment.  [booki.

What  then,  precisely,  it  has  further  been  asked,  is  in
such  a  case  affirmed  about  ultimate  Reality?  Plainly,  not
the  existence  of  the  content  as  a  fact  in  the  context  of  our
world.  We  may  take  Sigwart's  instance,  reproduced  by
Bradley.  '  Si  tacuisses,  philosophus  mansisses.'  Something
is  here  affirmed,  but  not  the  actuality  of  the  content,  which
is  by  the  strongest  implication  denied.  Or  again,  'All  tres-
passers will  be  prosecuted.'  The  truth  of  this  declaration
does  not  depend  on  there  being  trespassers,  though  it  cannot
be  tested  unless  there  are  trespassers.

W^hen  we  have  once  accepted  this  point  of  view,  and
excluded  as  unessential  the  various  implications  of  existence
which  attach  to  various  Universal  Judgments,  the  conclusion
is  inevitable.  Judgments  so  regarded  do  not  affirm  as  true
of  Reality  any  explicit  content  or  even  any  connection  of
explicit  content.  We  have  seen  that  it  is  no  impeachment
of  the  judgment  that  its  content  never  has  been  nor  can  be
actual.  '  The  necessary  may  be  impossible  or  non-existent  ^.'
And  as  for  the  coimection  of  content,  though  it  is  necessary,
yet  it  cannot  be  actual  unless  the  content  to  be  connected  is
actual,  and  the  judgment  may  be  true  though  the  content
be  incapable  of  actuality.  Therefore  the  truth  of  the  judg-
ment, according  to  this  extreme  analysis,  depends  neither
on  the  actuality  of  its  content,  nor  on  the  actuality  of  the
connection  it  alleges  within  its  content.  What  then  does  such
a  judgment  assert  of  that  Real  which  is  the  ultimate  subject
in  every  judgment  ?  Simply  this,  that  the  Real  is  such  that
under  the  ideal  condition  which  forms  the  immediate  subject
of  the  judgment  it  will  furnish  the  ideal  consequent  which  is
expressed  in  its  predication.  The  hypothetical  judgment
would  then  be  illustrative  but  not  enunciative  of  Reality.
The  property  of  Reality  which  it  illustrates  may  however
be  accessible  to  knowledge  ;  or  again,  according  to  the  view
before  us,  it  may  not. Simple  examples  of  the  former  case

fabrication  is  selection,  but  also  because  all  selection  is  fabrication — involves
the  constitution  of  an  idea  from  a  given  or  chosen  point  of  view.
^  Bradley's  Principles  of  Logic,  p.  186.


HAP.  vr.] Idea  of  Supposition  criticised.  283

form  the  best  explanation  of  the  conception  which  we  are
discussing.  '  If  you  ask  him  for  money  he  will  refuse  you.*
The  real  quality  of  the  real  man,  on  which  this  prediction
rests,  may  be  that  he  is  a  miser ;  then  his  miserliness  x  is
the  real  fact,  not  apparent  in  the  jtidgtneftt,  which  the  sup-
position and  consequent  a  and  b  only  illustrate  by  its  effect
in  an  ideal  case ;  and  which  is  categorically  affirmed,  but
only  as  an  unknown  x,  in  the  Judgment.  And  it  is  conceiv-
able that  the  property  of  Reality  which  lies  at  the  root  of
the  judgment  may  not  be  known,  and  wherever  the  connec-
tion envisaged  as  hypothetical  is  considered  to  be  ultimate
and  not  susceptible  of  further  explanation,  the  property  of
Reality  at  its  root  is  pro  tanto  unknown.  Such  a  connec-
tion would  be,  I  suppose, '  Whatever  is  material,  has  gravity.'
The  property  ;r  of  reality  which  is  here  categorically  asserted
as  the  basis  of  this  connection,  '  If  a  then  b,^  is,  I  presume,
and  is  likely  to  remain,  unknown.

The  real  criticism  which  I  have  to  offer  upon  this  view
is  contained  in  the  whole  account  of  judgment  which  has
been  submitted  to  the  reader. Its  point  and  purpose  have ]
been  to  exhibit  the  aspects  of  fact,  and  of  relativity  or \
necessity,  within  the  judging  function  as  complementary / Vjf^
and  inseparable,  but  as  differently  predominant  in  dealing  J
with different contents. Consequently, the abstractness —
on  which  their  respective  predominance  has  hinged,  has
been  treated  as  the  abstractness  of  contents,  and  not  as
that formal abstractness which is merely the mark of
thought as opposed to sensuous perception. And the
result  has  been  to  exhibit  the  graduated  existential  im-
plication of  universal  judgment  as  falling  within  and  not  •
without  the  import  of  those  judgments,  and  as  homologous  1
with the aspect  of  existential  affirmation in perception  l
and in  historical  narrative. But  I  propose  to  comment  ■
very  briefly  on  two  special  problems  raised  by  the  view
before  us.

(i)  It  is  easy  for  any  one  to  form  for  himself  a  catena  of  Simple  and
universal  judgments, beginning  where the  proper  name  jndgmems


284  Universal  yudgment.  [booki.

becomes  significant,  as  with  Europeans,  Christians,  Peelites,
and  passing  on  through  the  generic  conceptions  of  classi-
ficatory  sciences,  to  physical  and  mechanical  principles,
geometrical  axioms  or  theorems,  and  finally  to  imaginary
and  impossible  but  self-coherent  hypotheses,  like  that  em-
bodied in  the  ingenious  jeii  d esprit  entitled  '  Flatland.'
Such  a  catena  is  at  the  root  of  the  view  of  Universal
Judgment  which  I  have  endeavoured  to  formulate.  Any
one  who  will  take  the  trouble  to  follow  up  and  to  fill
out  with  instances  familiar  to  himself  the  terms  of  such
a  series,  will  hardly  be  able,  I  think,  to  avoid  forming  the
conviction  that  no  single  type  of  proposition  is  adequate
in  the  same  degree  to  the  content  of  all  universal  affir-
mations. If,  however,  we  are  compelled  to  choose,  the
conditional  proposition  is  the  more  adequate.  But  it
is  not  adequate.  Such  a  judgment  as  'All  Christians
hold  that  God  is  a  Spirit '  combines  collective  and  generic
meaning  with  necessity.  It  indicates  not  merely  that  the
doctrine  is  of  the  essence  of  Christianity,  i.  e.  that  '  If
a  man  is  a  Christian  he  holds '  etc.,  but  that  there  is
a  Christian  world,  realised  in  many  individuals,  which  is
united  in  this  conviction.

And  on  the  other  hand,  after  our  too  laborious  con-
sideration of  the  subject,  it  is  not  necessary  to  remind
the  reader  that  relativity  is  operative  within  the  judgment
from  the  moment  of  the  first  analysis  introduced  by
perception  into  the  data  of  sense ;  that  is  to  say,  even
when  the  judgment  assumes  the  external  form  of  the
impersonal  proposition,  which  indicates  that  identifiable
subjects  are  not  yet  constituted  in  virtue  of  determinate
qualifications.

The  fact  then  is  this.  Speech  can  express  no  logical
relation  except  by  making  it  the  correlative  of  a  word
or  clause.  But  the  common  types  of  speech,  which  have
been  made  the  basis  of  logical  investigation,  are  direct  and
simple.  They  therefore  embody  only  one  aspect  of  the
concrete  logical  thought,  and  leave  all  others  to  be  guessed


Chap.  VI.] Self -defence  of  the  Hypothetical.  285

at  from  variety  of  context  and  the  requirements  of  content.
The  process  of  recognising  explicit  linguistic  correlatives
of  relations  which  in  these  direct  forms  are  only  implicit  is
a  slow  process — Aristotle  did  not  recognise  the  conditional
proposition  on  its  merits — and  begins,  as  is  usual  in  such
cases,  by  substituting  one-sided  abstraction  for  unanalysed
confusion.  Therefore  by  adopting  either  the  direct  or  the
conditional  mode  of  expression  we  ignore  in  the  first
case,  and  formally  exclude  in  the  second,  elements  without
which  it  is  impossible  for  judgment  to  exist.  The  direct
or  '  categorical '  form  is  used  till  it  breaks  down  under  the
burden  of  an  import  for  which  it  was  not  invented ;  and
the  conditional  form  then  takes  its  place,  to  express  the
relative  import,  the  determinate  and  restricted  reference
from  part  to  part  within  a  whole,  which  now  insists  on
making  itself  predominant.  But  both  forms,  not  one  only,
are  inadequate  to  their  content.  The  content  of  categorical
assertion  has  relativity,  and  that  of  hypothetical  assertion
has  absoluteness.  But  categorical  assertion  (I  am  speaking
of  grammatical  form)  leaves  the  former,  and  hypothetical
assertion  leaves  the  latter  to  be  implied.  The  two  forms
however  have  not  an  equal  right  to  the  ground  they
commonly  claim.  The  first  comer  has,  naturally,  occupied
all  it  could  get,  and  more  than  it  could  adequately  deal
with.  It  is  against  this  encroachment  of  the  categorical
judgment-form  that  modem  logicians  have  rightly  espoused
the  cause  of  the  hypothetical.  The  true  frontier  is,  beyond
a  doubt,  where  the  singular  judgment  ends.  After  that
point,  if  we  dismiss  the  Individual  Universal  and  omit
to  consider  the  Disjunctive,  the  purpose  of  assertion  is
relativity  or  sequence,  and  absoluteness  or  existence  is  only
its  presupposition.  Formal  Logic  granted  this  territory,
that  of  the  pseudo-collective  and  the  analogical  judgment,
to  the  Categorical  Jiidgfnent,  simply  because  it  found  the
Categorical  or  direct  Proposition  in  possession.

And  the  further  analysis  of  the  irrelevant  connections
which  encumber  every  perceptive  and  singular  judgment,


286  Universal  yudgment.  [booki.

and  which,  if  understood  to  be  generally  affirmed,  imme-
diately become  false,  may  be  regarded  as  a  reprisal  on
behalf  of  the  hypothetical  judgment,  which^  now  that
attention  has  been  drawn  to  the  meaning  made  explicit
in  the  conditional  sentence,  threatens  to  dislodge  the
categorical  judgment  even  from  the  fields  of  perception
and  of  history.  The  degree  in  which  such  a  claim  should
be  conceded  has  been  indicated  above.

Thus  the  simple  and  the  conditionaP  propositions  are,  the
one  of  them  an  indeterminate  and  the  other  a  one-sided
type  —  both  therefore  imperfect  expressions  of  thought.
The  latter  is  borrowed  no  doubt  from,  or  is  at  any  rate
most  appropriate  to,  the  extreme  and  arbitrary  attitude  of
mind  known  as  supposition.  It  is  natural,  as  we  have  seen,
that  the  empire  of  the  first  comer  should  not  be  broken
into  unless  a  forcible  demand  arose  for  something  utterly
incompatible  with  its  type.  The  representation  which  is
correlative  to  supposition  is  thus  the  sole  representation  in
ordinary  speech  of  the  aspect  of  necessary  sequence  within
the  judgment.  This  is  why,  when  logic  awakens  to  this
aspect,  it  is  tempted  to  find  its  essence  in  supposition.

But  supposition  is  not  the  essence.  Supposition  is
intentional  abstraction  or  selection  culminating  in  fabri-
cation ;  and  the  essence  of  the  judgment  is  not  in  the  fact
of  intention,  but  in  the  logical  ground  and  justification  of
the  intention.  The  interference  of  the  will  is  no  differentia
in  a  logical  process.  All  thinking  presupposes  will,  but
the  gnide  of  thought  can  never  be  moral  purpose,  the
purpose  of  will,  but  must  always  be  logical  necessity.
What  remains  then  out  of  the  fact  of  supposition  is  that  a
content  is  taken,  chosen,  fabricated,  if  we  will,  with  a  view
to  its  relative  aspect,  to  its  consequences. But  what  is

^  The  grammatical  difference  between  the  two  is  connected  with  their  logical
import  in  that  the  conditional  sentence  provides  for  an  express  analysis  ad  hoc
of  the  subject-qualification  of  Reality,  whereas  the  direct  sentence  simply  indi-
cates a  subject-content  by  a  name.  If  we  insist  on  the  name  being  the  right
subject  name  in  the  context,  as  in  Aristotle's  wa^oXou,  we  have  an  intermediate
stage.


Chap.  VI.] Unkfiowfi  basis  of  Hypothetical.  287

presupposed  in  so  taking  it,  and  what  are  the  conditions
under  which  alone  it  can  be  so  taken — whether,  that  is,
it  can  be  taken  in  the  air  and  without  either  self-relation
or  relation  to  an  actual  system,  are  questions  in  no  way
touched  by  the  mind's  attitude  in  supposition.  We  shall
see  that  speech  finds  the  embodiment  of  a  necessity  resting
on  fact  in  the  proposition  which  expresses  the  disjunctive
judgment.

(2)  The  quality  x  of  Reality  on  which  the  sequence  '  if  a  The  basis
then  b '  depends  may  be,  and  is  in  ultimate  sequences  so  "^eti^**^
far  as  ultimate,  unknown.  This  follows  from  the  reduction  Judgment,
of  the  abstract  or  universal  judgment  to  judgment  based
on  supposition.  But  it  follows  from  our  analysis  of  the
hypothetical  judgment  that  if  this  were  so,  the  back  of  the
sequence  would  be  broken.  The  ground  would  be  absent.
Every  hypothetical  judgment  is  affirmed  only  within  an
actual  system.  What  then  are  we  to  do  with  our  ultimate
sequence,  e.  g.  with  the  nexus  between  resistance  and
gravity?  I  cannot  but  maintain  that,  if  we  have  no
explicit  ground  to  go  upon,  we  must  either  surrender
the  sequence  altogether,  or  affirm  it  categorically,  i.  e.
not  as  a  sequence,  but  as  a  datum ;  not  as  a  coherence,
but  as  a  conjunction.  'AH  matter  (i.e.  all  that  resists)
gravitates'  is  no  doubt  a  judgment  in  which  we  look
for  necessity.  But  it  does  not  follow  that  we  find  it.
It  presupposes  the  judgment  '  There  is  gravitating  matter.'
It  is  not  adequately  rendered  by  '  If  or  wherever  there  is  ^

matter  it  gravitates.'  We  are  unable  (or  at  least  I  am
unable,  which  is  all  that  my  illustration  requires)  to  assign
any  system  which  acts  as  ground  and  compels  the  sequence
to  be  true  within  it.  The  world  of  matter  given  as
resisting  and  gravitating,  as  a  systematic  fact,  is  the
ground.  And  therefore  it  is  on  the  other  hand  a  true
hypothetical  judgment  to  say,  '  If  a  material  object  is
set  free  within  range  of  a  gravitating  centre,  it  falls  with
a  velocity  accelerating  as  the  squares  of  the  times.'  For
the content  of  this  judgment is within the system of


288  Universal  Judgment.  [Booki.

gravitating  bodies,  and  the  sequence  is  compelled  by  that
system,  whose  existence  as  a  fact  is  required  by  the  judg-
ment, but  not  in  this  form  explicitly  asserted.  In  this  case
the  unity  of  gravitating  matter  is  the  x  on  which  the
sequence  a-b  is  founded.

May  not  the  whole  system  be  supposed,  ground  and  all  ?
Certainly  not ;  and  this  is  the  fundamental  point  at  stake.
Every  judgment  is  a  qualification  of  reality  by  some  ideal
content,  and  when  the  basis  of  a  sequence  is  the  content  by
which  reality  is  qualified,  that  basis  is  by  the  judgment
affirmed  to  be  actual.  So  far  Mr.  Bradley  and  I  are
together ;  my  further  contention  is  that  this  ground  or
basis  must  be  known,  and  must  be  indicated  in  the  judg-
ment, of  which  it  forms  the  essence.  The  degrees  in
which  it  is  so  indicated  form  the  various  complete  and
incomplete  grounds  which  were  discussed  above.  But  an
ultimate  ground  must  be  actual ;  it  is  the  fact  which  is
judged  in  a  hypothetical  judgment.  We  may  of  course
freely  suppose  or  imagine  a  system,  as  complex  as  we
please ;  but  if  we  proceed  to  judge  about  the  consequences
or  results  of  such  a  system^  it  must  thus  be  related  to  these
consequences  within  some  further  system  ;  and  this  further
system  must  be  actual.  In  other  words,  you  can  only
suppose  an  antecedent,  you  cannot  suppose  a  consequent ;
the  consequent  must  be  judged,  not  supposed ;  and  in
judging  the  consequent  you  assert  the  underlying  ground
to  be  actual.

This  may  be  illustrated  by  the  extreme  cases  in  which
we  refuse  to  entertain  a  supposition.  This  means  that  we
are  not  aware  of  any  reality  which  furnishes  a  system  such
that  the  supposed  case  is  capable  of  entering  into  it.  When
supposition  begins  to  infect  the  nature  of  the  reality,  we
are  beginning  to  suppose  and  not  to  judge  our  sequence.
It  is  quite  doubtful  whether  the  conclusions  of '  Flatland  '
can  be  taken  as  true  even  qna  hypothetical  judgments.
When  your  supposition  has  knocked  the  keystone  out  of
actual  reality,  how  is  it  to  support  a  conclusion?


Chap.  VI.]  Illegitimate  Suppositions.  289

The  application  of  this  conception  would  I  think  solve
the  curious  cases  in  which  a  sequence  is  true,  though  it  is
possible  for  the  content  of  supposition  not  to  exist,  or  even
impossible  for  it  to  exist.  What  must  exist  is  a  system
that,  subject  to  the  supposition,  necessitates  the  conse-
quence drawn  from  the  supposition.  Whether  the  content
itself  exists  or  not  depends  upon  whether  it  is  an
element  essential  to  the  system  ;  and  how  it  exists,  on
the  nature  and  self-completeness  of  the  system.  The
former  condition  meets  the  case  of  impossible  contents,
which  are  in  every  case  illegitimate  suppositions — i.e.  sup-
positions in  which  the  consequent  has  to  be  supposed  and  not
genuinely  judged,  because  the  supposed  antecedent  conflicts
with  the  nature  of  the  real  system  on  the  basis  of  which
alone  any  conclusion  about  it  can  be  drawn.

I  will  take  some  examples.  '  Given  a  first  cause,  we  can
dispense  with  the  idea  of  a  regress  to  infinity.'  But  Cause,  m
any  sense  which  it  could  be  First,  i.e.  in  temporal  relation,
means  an  element  in  a  system  of  relativity.  Therefore  the
idea  of  a  first  cause  contradicts  the  whole  actual  system  to
which  the  idea  of  Cause  refers,  and  it  is  utterly  impossible
to  affirm  anjlhing  about  an  idea  which  begins  by  destroying
its  own  basis  of  affirmation — the  causal  system.  Or  again  :
'  If  one  man  were  throughout  the  whole  period  of  his
conscious  life  alone  in  the  universe,  his  moral  purpose
could  be  nothing  but  to  please  himself.'  Here  we  are
judging  on  the  basis  of  an  existing  moral  world — for  it
is  only  this  that  gives  a  meaning  to  a  judgment  relating
to  moral  purpose — but  we  are  putting  a  case  which  con-
tradicts the  nature  of  man  as  a  being  existent  in  a  moral
world.  I  do  not  think  that  in  this  case  any  judgment  can
reasonably  be  made.  But  the  purposes  of  supposition  in
argument  are  so  various,  for  its  object  may  be  in  diff"erent
degrees  to  emphasise  the  impossibility  of  the  content
supposed,  that  the  limits  of  legitimate  supposal  are  ex-
ceedingly hard  to  define.  Undoubtedly  its  use  is  one  of
the  most  fallacious  if  one  of  the  most  effective  means  of

VOL.  I.  U


290  Universal  Judgment.  [booki.

controversy.  '  If  A.  B.  were  to  turn  coward ' — '  But  he
could  not' — 'But  I  am  only  putting  a  case' — 'But  if  you
put  such  a  case  I  may  put  any  consequence  I  choose  as
equally  likely,'  i.e.  it  is  felt  that  the  real  basis  on  which
judgment  rests  is  annihilated.

This  real  basis  can  never  be  dispensed  with  in  judgment.
The  nearest  approach  to  dispensing  with  it  is  made  when
elements  of  reality  which  would  conflict  with  the  suggested
case  are  wilfully  kept  out  of  account  by  an  act  of  abstrac-
tion ;  which  act  of  abstraction  may  be  either  borne  in
mind,  or  forgotten.  If  the  act  of  abstraction  is  borne  in
mind,  we  obtain  such  judgments  as  those  in  which  mathe-
matical science  deals  with  imaginary  quantities^.  Thus
judgments  are  subject  to  the  reservation  implied  in  the
abstraction  from  reality  which  enables  them  to  be  made.
Yet,  in  as  far  as  they  are  judged  at  all,  they  must  rest  upon,
and  involve  the  affirmation  of,  properties  of  reality.  If  the
abstraction  is  forgotten,  we  then  obtain  such  judgments  as
apply  imaginary  conceptions  without  reservation  to  the  real
world  ;  'A  conjuror  can  tie  a  knot  in  a  string  whose  ends
are  held,  because  he  understands  the  properties  of  four-
dimensional  space.'

I  may  further  illustrate  this  last  case  by  the  example
of  artistic  fiction,  which  I  have  discussed  at  length  else-
where. It  consists  of  judgments  both  singular  and
universal  ^^  made  on  the  basis  of  human  nature,  but  subject
to  a  reservation  which  separates  them  from  the  world  of

^  See  p.  1 74  ff.  on  mathematical  infinity.

*  It  may  be  doubted  how  far  the  universal  judgments  in  a  fiction  ought  to
partake  of  the  character  of  fiction.  It  depends  on  their  grade  of  universality.
Judgments  of  a  reflective  order,  about  human  nature  for  instance,  if  not  dramatic,
are  expected  to  be  true  without  reserve.  Judgments  about  parties,  nations,  etc.
may  be  fictitious.  Dramatic  sayings  are  yet  more  complicated ;  they  are  not
judgments  of  the  author  at  all ;  the  author's  (fictitious)  judgment  is  that  they
were  uttered.  Then  their  value  or  merit  is  compounded  of  their  truth  as
estimated  by  the  limited  reality  of  the  drama  in  which  they  occur  (i.  e.  their
appropriateness)  and  of  their  truth  as  estimated  by  real  reality,  i.  e.  their  weight
or  depth,  which  of  course  involves  the  whole  relation  of  the  piece  to  real
reality. Vid.  Knowledge  and  Reality,  p.  i4off.


Chap.\i.] Affirmation  of  Sensible  Events.  291

past  sensible  events.  While  actually  under  the  spell  of
romance  or  of  the  drama,  we  forget  or  half  forget  this
reservation ;  but  we  do  not  and  cannot  forget  the  true
and  ultimate  basis  of  the  judgments,  fundamental  human
nature,  which  is  the  ground  and  substance  of  the  whole
matter.

But  we  raised  a  question  not  only  whether  the  content
exists,  but  how  the  content  exists.  This  depends,  we  said,
on  the  nature  and  self-completeness  of  the  system  within
which  it  exists.  Many  universal  judgments  deal  with
sensible  events,  which  are  not,  within  our  knowledge,
contained  in  any  really  concrete  whole  in  time  and  space.
For  these,  according  to  the  principle  which  we  have
followed  throughout,  the  abstract  universal  or  hypothetical
judgment  postulates  such  existence  as  they  can  have,
according  to  their  nature  and  that  of  the  incomplete
system  to  which  they  belong.  There  is  nothing  which
cannot  ultimately  be  taken  up  into  some  individuality
by  constructive  thought.  But  as  in  ordinary  judgment
no  such  actual  construction  is  operative,  we  have  to
substitute  for  it  the  mere  assertion  of  the  basis  to  which
the  sensible  occurrence  in  question  is  known  to  have  some
relation.  The  imperfect  explicitness  of  this  relation  is  the
note  of  distinction  between  the  hypothetical  and  the
disjunctive  judgment.  '  Pure  red  is  ethereal  undulation
impinging  on  a  normal  eye  with  x  vibrations  to  the  second.'
Here  the  ground  or  basis  of  affirmation  is  the  existence
of  light,  which  is  ultimately  dependent  on  the  existence  of
sentient  organisms  in  a  certain  relation  to  the  material
world.  Now  this  relation,  though  not  known  nor  explicit
in  the  judgment,  must  be  taken  as  knowable  and  real.
Space  and  Time  indeed  produce  the  illusion  of  endlessness  ;
but  no  special  positive  content  like  sentience  or  light  is
involved  in  this  illusion  ;  we  rather  assume  every  positive
content  to  have  its  own  time,  place  and  conditions  within
our  actual  individual  system.  No  doubt  we  may  be  asked.
Does  the  above  hypothetical  judgment  assert  the  existence

U  a


292  Universal  Judgment.

of  red,  or  not  ?  And  can  we  claim  to  assert  the  reality  of
what  is  for  tis  an  indeterminate  endless  series  which  as
a  whole  cannot  be  real?  To  these  questions  I  should
propose  to  reply:  'The  hypothetical  judgment  in  question
asserts  the  existence  of  light  as  the  categorical  basis  of  the
nexus  which  it  selects.  The  existence  of  red  light  is
involved  in  the  existence  of  normal  light-stimuli  and  normal
eyes.  Therefore  the  judgment  in  question  asserts  the
existence  of  red  light  as  a  feature  of  the  reality  constructed
by  and  for  us,  and  subject  to  the  r.eservations  which  its
position  in  that  reality  imposes  on  it.  We  do  not  claim
to  assert  the  reality  of  an  endless  series  of  sensations  as
such ;  but  in  the  first  place  a  positive  series  as  referred  to
an  actual  system  is  already  placed  beyond  theoretical  end-
lessness, and  in  the  second  place  it  is  not  as  an  occurrence
in  the  way  of  sensation  that  we  assert  its  reality,  but  as
an  attribute  of  things  in  the  whole  of  consciousness,  which,
as  constructed  out  of  perception,  \sfor  us  the  only  reality.'
This  is  in  effect  the  answer  which  was  given  above  to  the
question  whether  the  conceptions  of  geometry  were  judged
to  be  real ;  and  it  follows  inevitably  from  the  considerations
to  which  we  were  led  in  treating  of  the  doctrine  of  Ground.
We  shall  see  that  the  real  Ground,  when  made  explicit,
takes  us  into  the  province  of  the  disjunctive  judgment.
The  element  of  categorical  assertion  in  the  hypothetical
judgment,  consisting  as  it  does  in  some  underlying  real
attribute,  also  presents  a  close  analogy  to  the  positive  basis
of  negation,  as  will  appear  in  the  following  chapter.


CHAPTER VII.

Negation,  Opposition,  and  Conversion.

1.  The  Negative  Judgment  presents  at  first  sight  a  para-  Negation
doxical  aspect.  We  are  bound  to  take  it,  qua  judgment,  fixation
as  playing  some  part  in  knowledge,  and  as  at  any  rate
capable  of  contributing  some  factor  to  the  ideal  fabric  of
reality.  But  it  assumes  the  external  shape  of  ignorance,  or
at  least  of  failure,  and  the  paradox  consists  in  this — that  in
negation  the  work  of  positive  knowledge  appears  to  be  per-
formed by  ignorance.  The  contradiction  arises,  as  we  have
seen  other  contradictions  arise,  from  the  adoption  by
thought  of  a  shape  which  at  best  expresses  it  but  partially,
and  the  retention  of  that  shape  when  the  aspect  which  it
did  express  has  come  to  be  dwarfed  by  other  aspects  of
knowledge.  But  of  course  the  shape  could  neither  be
adopted  nor  retained  did  it  not  in  some  prominent  aspect
coincide  with  the  requirements  even  of  developed  thought.
Here  then,  as  elsewhere,  the  key  to  our  problem  must  be
looked  for  in  the  conception  of  the  individual  mind  working
out  its  participation  in  reality  by  help  of  forms  never  wholly
alien  to  this  aim,  but  profoundly  transmuted  in  proportion
as  it  is  attained.

Negation  is  at  first  sight  merely  negative.  It  appears  to
say  nothing,  but  only  to  deny,  i.  e.  to  put  away  some  ideal
content  as  other  than  reality  or  to  express  our  inability  to
recognise  it  as  belonging  to  reality.  The  first  step  then
towards  ascertaining  its  import  is  to  ask,  tv]iat  does  it  deny
or  pronounce  unreal }  what  does  it  presuppose  to  be  pre-
sent before  denial  is  possible  }

It  certainly  does  not  presuppose  an  affirmation.  Both
fact  and  theory  protest  against  such  a  view.  We  have  not
always  judged  a  matter  to  be  true  before  we  deny  it. And


294 Negation,  Opposition^  and  Conversion, [booki.

if  an  affirmation  ^  of  the  same  content  is  to  subsist  as  a  con-
dition of  the  negation,  it  seems  doubtful  whether  a  negation
would  not  always  have  to  be  self-contradictory.  Although
Sigwart's  account  of  double  negation  rests  on  this  view,
yet  he  more  cautiously  says  elsewhere^  that  it  is  an
attempted  affirmation  ('  Den  Versuch  einer  Bejahung ')
against  which  negation  is  directed.  And  this  seems  so  far
to  agree  with  experience.  What  is  the  nature  of  this
attempted  affirmation  ?  '  Suggestion  '  and  '  question '  come
into  the  mind  as  possible  equivalents  for  it.  It  is  difficult
however  to  find  a  special  significance  for  either  the  one  or  the
other  on  purely  logical  ground.  A  question  is  closely
related  to  a  command,  and  has  its  differentia  in  being
addressed  to  the  will  of  another  person.  It  is  impossible  in
good  faith  to  ask  a  question  of  oneself.  The  power  of  the
metaphor  by  which  men  are  said  to  question  themselves
rests  on  treating  oneself  as  another  person.  A  question  is
a  demand  to  the  will  to  reveal  something  known  to  the
person  whose  will  is  appealed  to  ;  but  if  I  know  the  answer,
I  need  not  ask  myself ;  if  I  do  not,  I  cannot  ask  myself.

A  question  then  as  such  has  not  a  logical  differentia,  and
cannot  be  the  logical  presupposition  of  negative  judgment.
Still  it  may  contain  what  we  want.  It  is  not  merely  an  ideal
content  floating  before  the  imagination,  even  if  we  were  to
grant  that  there  are  such  floating  ideas.  It  is  an  idea  in
some  way  tested  by  Reality.  A  suggestion  seems  to  be
the  same.  It  is  not  a  floating  content ;  it  is  suggested  as
something,  as,  so  to  speak,  a  candidate  for  a  place  in  a
judgment  already  framed.  That  is  to  say,  a  question  or
suggestion  as  it  is  on  logical  ground,  omitting  any  demand
upon  or  incitement  to  another  will,  amounts  at  least  to  an
idea  whose  content  is  Reality  qualified  in  a  certain  way.
Is  this  all  ? This  would  not  suffice  to  explain  the  import  of

^  Sigwart  distinguishes  'affirmation,' as  the  conscious  opposite  of  negation,
from  '  Positive '  judgment,  as  assertion  without  consciousness  of  possible
negation.  We  shall  see  in  the  sequel  the  value  of  this  distinction,  which  can
only  be  taken  as  one  of  degree.

*  Logik,  vol.  i.  p.  120.


Chap. VII.]  Negatio7i  and  Suggestion.  295

suggestion  followed  by  affirmation  or  denial.  It  would  not
explain  the  significance  of  the  decision  even  when  negative.
There  is  something  more,  and  it  is  this.  The  content  of  ^
the  suggestion  is  taken  within  a  whole  in  which  we  have  an
interest  and  which  is  referred  to  actual  Reality.  Every
suggestion  enters  into  a  rudimentary  disjunction.  I  mean
by  rudimentary  disjunction  an  alternative  whose  limits
are  not  made  explicit.  Where  there  is  a  question  or  sug-
gestion, there  is  always  a  something— some  general  pre-
dicate— ^known  to  be  true  with  reference  to  the  matter
before  the  mind,  and  an  interest  which  we  have  in  that
something.  It  is  within  this  something  that  the  attempt
to  state  it  more  precisely,  the  question  or  suggestion,  falls.
It  is  hazardous  to  obtrude  analysis  on  the  simpler  stages  of
consciousness  ;  but  I  do  not  see  how  we  can  have  a  sugges-
tion followed  by  denial  cheaper  than  this.  We  might  even
fall  back  on  the  principle  which  has  been  laid  down  in
previous  discussions,  that  any  consciousness  for  which  a
continuous  real  world  exists,  sustains  that  world  by  a  judg-
ment. When  a  man  first  doubts  and  then  decides,  on
such  a  question  as  whether  the  river  which  he  sees  before  him
is  safe  to  ford,  however  simple  the  mental  process  may  be,
there  must  be  in  some  form  a  positive  basis  of  the  two
or  more  alternatives  as  well  as  one  suggested  alternative.
He  must  start  with  the  fact  that  the  river  has  depth,  or
current,  which  he  must  deal  with  in  crossing,  and  within
this  fact  the  doubt '  too  deep  ? '  '  too  swift  ? '  has  its  meaning
for  him.  In  simple  cases  this  embracing  judgment  of  fact
is  hardly  traceable  except  through  the  interest  in  the  question.
This  interest,  if  looked  at  closely,  betrays  the  nature  of  the
alternative  which  the  question  involves.  '  Too  deep  ? '
'  What  then }'  'I  cannot  get  home  to-night,'  i.  e.  the
general  fact  is  that  the  river  is  between  me  and  home.

Negation  then  presupposes  an  idea  suggested  as  true  of ^
Reality  within  a  state  of  facts  judged  to  be  true  of  Reality
and  interesting  to  us  in  respect  of  the  matter  suggested  ;  or
in  other  words,  an  alternative  judged  to  be  true  of  Reality,


i


296 Negation^  Opposition^  and  Conversion, [book  i.

but  only  so  judged  as  one  among  a  set  of  alternatives,  and
therefore,  in  itself  alone,  problematically  judged  true  of
reality — judged  as  a  possibility,  as  one  among  a  number  of
alternatives,  or  as  subject  to  unexpressed  conditions.

We  are  now  able  to  decide  the  disputed  question  whether
Affirmation  is  prior  to  Negation,  or  whether  they  are  co-
ordinate types  of  Judgment.  Negation  is  not,  as  such,  the
denial  of  affirmative  Judgment,  and  therefore  does  not  pre-
suppose the  affirmation  of  that  which  is  denied.  So  far,
affirmation  is  not  essentially  prior  to  negation.  On  the
other  hand,  Negation  does  presuppose  some  affirmation,
that  is  the  affirmation  of  a  state  of  facts  which,  being  judged
true  as  a  whole,  carries  with  it  the  problematic  affirma-
tion, the  affirmation  as  a  possibility  or  enunciation  as  a
conception  in  the  world  of  meanings,  of  the  idea  '  sug-
gested.' In  this  respect,  therefore,  affirmation  is  in  the
beginnings  of  knowledge,  at  any  rate,  prior  ^  to  Negation.
The  world  must  have  positive  content  judged  to  be  real  as
a  condition  of  anything  following  from  the  removal  of  a
positive  suggestion.  But  I  cannot  believe  that  the  con-
sciousness of  a  positive  world  could  in  fact  exist  for  an
appreciable  time  without  the  development  of  negation^.
Further,  however,  it  is  also  true  that  in  the  beginnings  of
knowledge  negation  is  a  degree  more  remote  from  reality
than  is  affirmation^;  and  this  character  of  ideality  clings  to
the  negative  form  through  its  whole  development,  though
without  debarring  it  from  the  acquisition  of  objective  value.
The  remoteness  consists  in  this,  that  the  suggestion  which
denial  presupposes  is,  as  we  saw,  not  a  mere  floating  content,
but  a  suggested  qualification  of  reality,  in  short  'a  sug-
gested affirmative  relation  ^.'  An  affirmation  can  be,  com-
paratively speaking,  given  as  fact ;  a  negation  cannot,
except  in  quite  another  sense,  be  given.  It  has  to  be
made,  and  made  by  setting  an  ideal  reality  over  against

*  In  this  sense  it  may  be  called,  if  we  prefer  to  do  so,  '  positive '  judgment.
^  See  above,  Introduction,  p.  24,  on  the  formal  implication  of  distinction  in
objectification.
^  Cp.  Bradley's  Principles  of  Logic,  p,  116.  *  See  Bradley,  ib.


Chap. VII.] Affirmation  prior  to  Negation? 297

real  reality  and  finding  them  incongruous.  *  That  fire  is
still  burning'  involves  no  doubt  intellectual  selection  and
is  so  far  ideal,  but  '  that  fire  is  not  out '  is  one  remove  more
ideal,  because  it  has  to  bring  up  the  idea  of '  that  fire  being
out'  and  test  it  by  the  perceived  reality,  and  then  only
proceed  to  judge  its  exclusion  to  be  a  fact.  We  must  not
however  exaggerate  this  difference.  AflSrmation  itself,  or
even  positive  Judgment,  cannot  take  place  until  the  dis-
tinction between  a  mere  idea  and  a  fact  of  reality  is  recog-
nised. And  with  this  distinction  the  idea  of  negation  is
given.  It  might  therefore  be  argued  that  Judgment,  not
to  speak  of  affirmation,  presupposes  the  idea  of  a  negative
relation^ ;  just  as  negation  presupposes  that  of  an  affirma-
tive relation.  The  fact  seems  to  be  that  affirmation  pre-
supposes the  idea  of  negative  relation  in  general,  while
negation  presupposes  the  idea  of-2i  corresponding  affirma-

i  tive  relation  in  particular.  This  applies  to  the  beginnings
of  knowledge.  In  complete  thought  we  shall  find  the  two
more  on  a  level.

Thus  it  is  true,  especially  in  the  beginnings  of  know-
ledge, that  Affirmation  is  prior  to  Negation,  both  as  one
remove  nearer  to  reality,  and  as  supplying  the  reality  within
which  alone  Negation  has  a  meaning.  But  it  is  no  less
true  that  Negation  has  from  the  first  its  essential  place  in
knowledge ;  and  as  Reality  becomes  for  us  an  articulated
system,  the  value  of  negation  approaches  more  and  more
nearly  to  that  of  affirmation,  with  which  it  finally  becomes
equivalent.  This  is  however  not  to  be  understood  in  the
sense  that  the  import  of  negation  disappears  from  know-
ledge ;  but  in  the  sense  that  affirmation  and  negation  alike
become  double-edged,  each  involving  the  other.

2.  Negation  then,  in  its  primarj'  shape,  is  the  exclusion  Baredoiial

;  of  a  suggested  qualification  of  reality. The  bare  expression  judgment!*

*  Cp.  Bradley,  Principles  of  Logic,  pp.  2,  no. I  find  some  difficulty  in
iTeconciling  these  two  passages.

'  Not  '  presupposes  a  corresponding  affirmative  relation  as  j  ndged  true.'
That  Tiew  we  have  rejected.


298 Negation,  opposition,  and  Conversion, [booki.

of  this  import,  reduced  to  its  minimum,  would  be  found  in
what  has  been  called  by  a  mis-translation  of  Aristotle,  the
infinite  judgment.

The  infinite  judgment  was  a  term  applied  by  Kant  (fol-
lowing, I  presume,  the  tradition  of  formal  logic)  to  judg-
ments which  had  for  their  predicate  what  Aristotle  called
an  'indefinite'  or  'undistinguished'  name  or  predication';
i.e.  such  a  phrase  as  'not-man,'  'not-good,'  or  the  like.
More  important  however  than  Aristotle's  expression  '  in-
definite name'  was  his  distinct  verdict  that  such  phrases
were  not  names  or  predications.  He  gave  them  the  title
of  indefinite  or  undistinguished  names  or  predications,  '  be-
cause they  may  be  truly  predicated  of  everything  alike,
whether  existent  or  non-existent^.'  It  is  plain  that  Aris-
totle's verdict  is  right,  and  that  such  names  have  no  sig-
nification. They  are  '  undistinguished '  because  they  are
undistinguishing.  It  may  therefore  be  observed  in  passing
that  to  attempt  to  read  all  negation  as  affirmation  of  a
negative  name  is  an  unmeaning  device,  though  possibly
guided  by  a  feeling  of  a  true  ideal,  viz.  that  negation,  if
it  is  to  have  a  positive  import,  must  involve  an  affirmative
element.  Only  by  this  contrivance  the  affirmative  element
is  ludicrously  absent.  We  should  be,  as  Mr.  Bradley  says,
denying,  and  then  affirming  that  we  have  denied.

It  is  for  this  reason  that  the  '  Infinite  judgment'  may  be
fairly  represented  by  examples  in  which  the  denial,  though
undeniable,  is  unmeaning.  'Virtue  is  not  square,'  'The
soul  is  not  red,'  '  Man  is  not  a  stone.'  These,  qua  nega-
tive, are  fully  on  a  level  with  '  A  monkey  is  not-man,'
'A  stone  is  not-Christian.'  And  so  in  illustrating  the
import  of  negation  we  may  disregard  the  pseudo-affirma-
tive character  of  the  latter  instances.  Our  interest  in
them  is  that,  if  strictly  interpreted,  they  display  to  us  the

1  /5^/Mi  or  6voiM  aopiarov.

"^  Ar.  Utpl  'Ep/J..  2.  3.  Though  the  reading  is  doubtful  in  the  application  of
these  words  to  ovk  ovoixa,  it  is  enough  for  our  purpose  that  they  are  applied  to
ov  pfiiM.


Chap.  VII.] Bare  Negation  and  Tautology.  299

nullity  of  bare  denial.  '  Not-Christian'  literally  interpreted
includes  not  only  heathen  humanity,  but  the  fixed  stars,
the  sea,  and  indeed,  in  Aristotle's  words, '  everything  whe-
ther existent  or  non-existent '  except  Christians.  It  refers
to  no  one  sphere  in  preference  to  another,  and  thus  says
nothing  definite  enough  to  be  intelligible.  The  point
being  once  established  that  negation  qua  negation  has  no
significance,  we  may  disregard  the  attempt  to  erect  it  into
affirmation  which  draws  our  attention  to  this  fact.  And
we  may  then  safely  take  as  instances  of  the  infinite  judg-
ment, so  far  as  its  import  is  concerned,  the  judgments
typified  by  '  Virtue  is  not  square.'  These  show  the  true  type
of  bare  denial,  for  they  are  the  only  negative  propositions
in  which  usage  does  not  irresistibly  limit  the  sphere  of  the
•negation.  And  when  the  sphere  is  limited,  the  denial  is  no
|longer  bare.

Thus  it  appears  that  bare  denial,  whether  disguised  as

[spurious  affirmation,  or  taken  as the mere  exclusion  of

[^^mere  suggested  predicates,  amounts  in  the  strict  sense  to

lothing. The  judgments  by  which  it  is  typified  are  the

Icxact counterpart of  absolute  tautology, and like such

Itautology,  are  not  really  judgments  at  all. Identity  and

idifference  are  inseparable  aspects  of  all  that  exists  or  can

|be  thought; but  in  these  two  classes  of  would-be  judg-

|inents  identity  and  difference  fall  apart,  and  thereby  the

[conditions  of  intelligible  judgment  are  destroyed. Pure

Itautology  aims at mere identity,  and bare negation  at

[mere  difference. It  will  be  found  that  any  meaning  which

[in  practice  we  attach  to  an  apparent  tautology  or  an  ap-

rent  bare  negation  is  owing  to  the  introduction  of  dif-

Iference into the former, or of  identity into the latter.

I*  Business  is  business'  qualifies  a  certain class  of  affairs

)y  the  principles  on  which  they  ought  to  be  conducted ;

The  soul  is  not  a  machine'  qualifies  the  soul,  not  by  the

lere  exclusion  of  mechanical  properties  in  favour  perhaps

)f  absolute  nothingness,  but  by  some  positive  characteristic

)f  the  soul  which  is  incompatible  with  its  being  a  machine.


300 Negation,  Opposition,  arid  Conversion, [book  i.

Significant  3.  We  have  seen  that  denial  was  not  to  be  made  into
affirmation  by  the  rough  and  ready  method  of  the  Infinite
Judgment.  But  we  started,  on  the  other  hand,  from  the
postulate  that  denial,  as  a  form  of  judgment,  must  be  capable
of  contributing  something  positive  to  knowledge.  Whether
positive  necessarily = affirmative  is  a  problem  that  will  solve
itself  as  we  come  to  understand  the  full  nature  of  negation.
I  use  it  here  simply  as  antithetical  to  'nothing,'  or  as  an
emphatic  reiteration  of  '  something.'  We  must  assume  with
Plato  that  knowledge  is  the  knowledge  of  something ;  and
if  the  nature  of  'nothing,'  as  e.g.  the  abstraction  of  empty
thinking,  can  be  known,  then  nothing  is  so  far  and  in  that
sense  something.

All  significance  then  is  in  this  sense  positive  significance,
and  significant  negation  must  therefore  convey  something
positive.  What  is  it  that  it  does  convey?  We  shall  find
the  answer  if  we  look  at  that  which  all  judgment  has  in
common,  viz.  the  interest  or  bearing  of  the  judgment.  What
is  it  that  we  really  mean  or  wish  to  predicate  when  we  make
an  ordinary  negative  judgment.?  There  is  always,  I  may
observe,  something  unreal  in  the  analysis  of  isolated  propo-
sitions. Apart  from  the  context  of  a  book  or  of  a  conver-
sation, or  from  the  precise  standards  which  involve  the  fixed
context  of  science,  our  interpretation  of  propositions  into
judgments  is  almost  entirely  arbitrary.  On  the  other  hand,
it  may  be  said  that  in  a  given  context  the  'bearing'  which
we  ascribe  to  a  proposition  is  not  strictly  within  the  limits
of  what  the  proposition  enunciates,  but  is  read  by  us  into
its  meaning.  It  may  be  doubted  however  whether  in  actual
living  thought  there  is  any  judgment  that  is  not  an  enthy-
meme,  i.e.  an  argument  with  a  suppressed  premise  or  a  sup-
pressed conclusion.  If  we  attempt  to  prune  away  from  the
judgment  all  the  implied  and  suggested  bearings  of  the
proposition  which  conveys  it,  we  shall  find  that  we  have
whittled  away  the  meaning  which  is  the  judgment  itself.
We  must  never  forget  the  conclusion  which  we  reached
above,  that  the  unity  of  the  judgment  does  not  exclude


Chap. VII.]  TJie  'Poitit'  of  a  yzidgmcnt.  301

systematic  multiplicity  within  it.  The  logical  content  em-
ployed in  any  given  judgment  is  a  many-sided  although
determinate  idea,  and  is  gripped  and  attached  to  its  actual
place  in  the  logical  mechanism  now  by  some  of  its  promi-
nences and  now  by  others.  Some  reservations  will  have
to  be  made  in  this  respect  when  we  come  to  speak  of  judg-
ments that  deal  with  self-contained  systems,  a  type  which
we  have  more  or  less  anticipated  in  the  individual  and
generic  judgments.  But  in  ordinary  reflective  judging  we
are  constantly  referred  away  and  away  along  a  series  of
grounds  and  consequences,  and  it  is  idle  to  attempt  to  re-
duce the  judgment  to  simplicity.  What  we  really  7nea7i  to
mean  is  only  to  be  found  in  the  explicit  articulation  of  the
whole  system  of  fact  which  the  interest  of  the  moment
covers ;  and  all  ordinary  judgment  toils  after  our  interest  in
vain.  But  prima  facie  the  positive  judgment  has  an  ad-
vantage in  this  respect  over  the  negative.  A  positive  con-
tent is  at  all  events  something ;  it  is  an  instalment  in  satis-
faction of  our  interest.  If  I  say  that  the  fire  is  burning  in
the  dining-room,  this  judgment  is  no  doubt  compatible  with
various  grounds  and  various  consequences,  and  in  the  judg-
ment as  I  mean  it  some  particular  ground  and  some  par-
I'ticular  consequence  are  probably  included.  Such  a  state-
ment would  not  be  made  a  propos  of  nothing,  or  if  it  were,
it  would  be  resented  just  as  talking  gibberish  would  be
resented.  There  is  some  point  or  purpose  to  which  it  must
be  taken  as  contributing,  and  some  reason — though  possibly
falling  outside  the  content  of  the  judgment — which  serves
as  a  ground  for  making  it.  But  over  and  above  all  this
there  is,  in  the  affirmative  judgment,  the  positive  logical
[content  itself,  which,  though  modifiable  within  very  wide
!  limits,  yet  cannot  be  modified  beyond  certain  limits.  The
judgment  may  be  in  praise  of  some  one's  thoughtfulness,
in  condemnation  of  their  extravagance,  in  contempt  of  their
effeminacy,  or  in  alarm  at  their  carelessness.  But  there  is
a  nucleus,  not  indeed  fixed  nor  free  from  ideal  selection
*ind synthesis, yet not quite indefinitely variable and


302 Negation,  opposition,  and  Conversion, [booki.

containing  a  positive  element  of  appeal  to  normal  per-
ception.

In  a  negative  judgment  strictly  interpreted  as  mere  denial
this  nucleus  is  lacking,  as  the  consideration  of  bare  denial
taught  us.  Therefore  we  have  nothing  left  but  those  ele-
ments of  meaning  to  which  the  interest  of  predication  is  the
sole  clue.  Let  us  take  a  plain  every-day  judgment  such  as
'  A.  B.  is  not  a  dishonest  man.'  If  we  enunciated  this  pro-
position in  the  sense  of  the  infinite  judgment,  meaning  e.g.
that  A.  B.  is  not  a  man  at  all,  but  a  stone  or  a  monkey,  we
should  unquestionably  be  held  to  have  violated  the  conven-
tions of  speech.  The  meaning  of  every  judgment  is  to  be
looked  for  in  the  attribute  to  which  is  attached  the  interest
that  guides  the  selection  of  the  content  used  in  judging.
But  this  attribute  must  obviously  have  definite  relations,  at
any  rate  for  some  special  purpose,  to  the  content  affirmed  or
denied.  Whether  it  can  precisely  coincide  with  the  content
affirmed  is  a  point  to  which  I  shall  have  to  recur ;  but  it  cannot
precisely  coincide  with  the  content  denied,  for  if  so,  no  result
in  which  we  had  an  interest  would  spring  from  the  denial —
the  whole  reason  of  our  interest  would  be  cancelled  and  be  put
away  with  the  denial  of  the  attribute  on  which  it  centred.

Now  I  maybe  interrupted  at  this  point  with  the  objection
that  this  is  exactly  what  is  always  happening  in  negation.
When  we  have  suspected  a  man  or  thing  of  having  some
attribute  which  interests  us,  and  then  find  that  we  were
mistaken,  our  interest  in  the  individual  may,  and  often  does,
fall  dead  at  once.  A  man  may  be  pointed  out  to  us  in  a
crowd  as  about  to  be  our  fellow-traveller  on  a  difficult
journey,  and  we  may  regard  him  with  some  interest  on  that
account ;  but  if  we  learn  that  it  was  a  mistake,  and  that  we
have  nothing  to  do  with  him,  we  shall  probably  after  that
regard  him  as  'nothing  to  us.'  This  is  in  fact  almost  a
recurrence  to  the  infinite  judgment ;  for  though  we  must
know  that  he  is  a  man,  yet  so  long  as  he  is  not  to  be  our
fellow-traveller  we  do  not  care  whether  he  is  alive  or  dead ;  i.e.
for  any  positive  quality  of  his  humanity.  The  judgment  '  he


Chap.  VII.]  Content  of  Denial.


0^0


d

I


is  not  coming  with  us '  approaches  then  to  a  judgment  of
bare  exclusion,  the  attribute  in  which  we  have  interest  being
the  attribute  excluded.

In  the  first  place,  I  think,  we  must  to  a  great  extent
admit  this  contention ;  and  simply  refer  it  to  a  difference
of  degree.  Negative  judgment  does  begin  with  a  phase
inappreciably  differing  from  the  infinite  judgment.  But
yet,  of  course,  the  question  '  Coming  with  us  ? '  must  have
originated  in  some  such  judgment  as  '  He  is  the  sort  of
person  who  might  be  coming  with  us ; '  and  it  is  within
this  fact  judged  true  that  the  ultimate  negation  '  not
coming '  has  its  meaning.  The  interest  is  first  awakened
by  the  whole  attribute  '  such  as  to  come,'  and  could  never
have  been  aroused  but  for  the  presentation  of  such  an
attribute.  If  the  negative  judgment  were  really  one  of
bare  exclusion  it  would  apply  equally  well  to  everything  in
the  world,  and  no  interest  would  have  been  aroused  which
could  have  led  us  to  make  it  of  a  particular  individual.  But
in  the  second  place,  it  must  be  added  that  in  as  far  as,  in
the  alternative  which  formally  arises  within  the  attribute
'  such  as  to  come,'  all  the  interest  practically  falls  on  one
side  of  the  alternative,  this  is  an  actual  defect  of  knowledge
and  morality,  but  has  not,  in  the  case  supposed,  been
pushed  far  enough  to  prevent  the  insistance  on  the  positive
attribute  '  capacity  to  come  ^.'  And  this  attribute  supplies
in  fact  a  positive  content  for  the  denial,  though  we  by  the
hypothesis  happen  to  be  now  indifferent  to  it.  The  denial
really  contains  the  judgment,  '  The  man  is  one  who,  we

^  It  is  a  commonplace  satire  to  say  of  a  man  that  the  universe  interests  him
only  in  as  far  as  it  is  what  his  particular  whim  requires.  \STiat  is  not  money,
or  total  abstinence,  or  woman's  emancipation,  as  the  case  may  be,  is  nothing  to
him.  This  is  a  good  illustration  of  the  moral  and  intellectual  impotence  indi-
cated by  any  approach  to  bare  negation.  Hegel  has  quaintiy  compared  the
distinction  between  bare  and  significant  denial  to  that  between  crime  and  cinl
dispute.  If  I  steal,  my  act  says  '  This  is  not  yours,'  without  asserting  that  it  is
mine  or  any  one's  by  right,  i.  e.  it  ignores  the  whole  sphere  of  property  or
reasonable  possession  by  alleging  no  ground  for  its  denial. In  a  civil  dispute

say  '  This  is  not  yours,  because  it  is  mine,'  i.  e.  I  assert  rights  of  property,  as
you  do  ;  but  I  deny  your  right  on  the  ground  of  mine.


?


304 Negation,  Opposition^  and  Conversion, [book  i.

thought,  might  come,  but  is  not  coming.'  The  proximate
case  in  the  ascending  scale  of  knowledge  may  be  illustrated
by  supposing  that  instead  of  our  interest  dropping  dead  on
hearing  that  he  does  not  come  with  us,  this  negative  judg-
ment enunciates  to  us  a  regret  that  he  is  not  coming,
implying  that  we  ascribe  to  him  some  positive  quality  which
causes  us  to  regret  losing  his  company.  In  this  case  the
positive  bearing  of  the  negation '  He  is  not  coming  with  us '
is  primarily  a  consequence  of  the  negation  operating  upon
the  judged  content '  We  should  wish  him  to  come  with  us.'
This  consequence  supplies  the  denial  with  a  positive  import,
and  may  be  the  only  aspect  of  it  prominent  in  the  mind.

But  there  is  something  else  to  be  considered.  Every
judgment  without  exception  challenges  the  question
'  Why  is  it  so  ? '  or  at  least  '  How  do  you  know  it  to  be
so?'  the  former  question  demanding  the  cause  or  real
ground,  the  latter  demanding  the  cause  of  knowledge  or
logical  ground.  Th6se  two  kinds  of  ground  run  into  one
another,  as  we  saw,  and  need  not  be  distinguished  for  our
present  purpose.  In  denial,  then,  there  must  be  this
element  also  of  positive  import,  the  attribute  which  justifies
the  denial  for  us.  It  is  plain  further  that  in  case  of  the  non-
existence of  the  immediate  or  apparent  subject,  this  attri-
bute may  be  judged  directly  of  Reality,  which  is  the  ultimate
subject  in  Negation  as  in  all  Judgment.  '  The  house  on  the
marsh  is  not  burnt  down '  may  be  true  because  there  is  no
house  on  the  marsh,  and  although  reality — positive  fact —
excludes  the  burning  down  of  any  such  house  ^.

Thus  in  Negation  we  have  two  positive  elements  which
may  be  present  together,  or  in  various  relations  of  promin-

^  It  may  be  objected  that  in  such  a  case  to  say  '  The  house  on  the  marsh  is
burnt  down,'  is  not  so  much  false  as  unmeaning,  in  other  words  that  the  nega-
tive '  the  house  is  not  burnt  down,'  has  meaning  only  if  there  is  a  house,  and
presupposes  or  asserts  that  there  is  one.  I  have  strong  sympathy  with  this
objection,  which  turns  on  the  problem  of  a  real  distinction  between  subject  and
Predication  within  the  Judgment.  But  an  unmeaning  judgment  is  clearly  not
true.  The  only  doubt  is  whether  its  not  being  true  justifies  any  negative  except
one  which  should  brand  it  as  unmeaning,  e.  g.  '  There  is  no  house  to  bum  down.'
The  more  hypothetical  judgments  are,  the  less  they  present  this  difficulty.


Chap.  VII.] Positive  Basis  of  Negation.  305

ence,  or  may  wholly  or  partially  coincide.  The  third
element  of  import,  the  positive  content  explicitly  employed
in  judging,  falls  away  in  the  negative  judgment,  being
replaced  by  a  bare  exclusion  of  an  explicit  content.  This
bare  exclusion  is  what  we  discussed  on  its  own  merits  in
the  second  section  of  the  present  chapter,  and  found  to
amount  in  itself  to  nothing.  We  are  therefore  referred  for
the  meaning  of  significant  negation  to  the  positive  ground,
or  positive  consequence,  of  the  exclusion  which  forms  the
outward  and  visible  shape  of  negation.  Thus  we  approach
the  solution  of  the  problem  how  knowledge  can  take  the
form  of  ignorance — how  '  what  it  is '  can  be  known  through
knowing  '  what  it  is  not.'

The  primary  analysis  of  the  significant  negative  judgment
presents  therefore  a  close  parallel  to  that  of  the  hypothetical
judgment. '  A  is  not  B  '  may  always  be  taken  to  =  ' A  is  x
which  excludes  (or  which  is  implied  in  excluding)  B.' Or
in  extreme  cases  we  may  have '  Reality  is  .r,  which  excludes
or  is  involved  in  excluding  A  B.' Just  thus  we  saw  that '  If
A  is  B  it  is  C  '  may  always  be  interpreted  into  '  A  is  a  factor
in  a  real  system  x  which  given  A  B  involves  C  ; ' or  in
an  extreme  case,  '  Reality  contains  a  system  x  such  that,  if
A  B  were  placed  within  it,  C  would  result.' We  examined
at  length  the  conditions  under  which  such  a  relation  as
that  enunciated  in  the  hypothetical  judgment could be
made  intelligible,  and  we  found  that  a  real  system  within
which  the  separate  terms  should  be  interdependent  was  the
)ond  of  union  which  alone  could  justify  such  a  reference  of
)ne  thing  to  another. In  the  same  way  we  saw  that  nega-
tion presupposes  a  real  system — a  system  affirmed  in  judg-
lent  to  be  actual — as  a  condition  of  its  intelligibility;  and
Sf  it  is  replied  that  a  system  presupposes  negation — for  it
>resupposes  difference — we  must  answer,  first,  that  negation
its  pure  form  as  simple  contradiction  is  the  abstraction
'of  difference,  and  may  be  later  in  origin  than,  or  at  least
presupposes  as  coeval  with  it,  the  positive  differences  which
all  thought  involves ;  and  secondly,  that  in  thought  it  is
VOL.  I.  X


3o6 Negation,  Opposition,  and  Conversion. [Book  i,

possible  and  indeed  is  the  rule  for  factors  to  presuppose
each  other,  and  to  grow  into  distinctness  pari  passu.  In
fact,  Negation  is  simply  the  logical,  conscious  expression  of
difference.

Significant  negation,  then,  like  hypothesis,  is  intelligible
within  and  with  reference  to  a  system  judged  to  be  actual.
It  is  only  within  such  a  system  that  something  can  be  made
out  of  nothing  by  implying  a  positive  ground  or  conse-
quence in  a  bare  denial.  In  other  words,  the  essence  of
formal  negation  is  to  invest  the  contrary  with  the  character
of  the  contradictory,  or  to  raise  mere  discrepancy  or  posi-
tive opposition  to  the  level  of  the  absolute  or  contradictory
alternative  which  is  the  abstraction  of  difference.  It  is  only
contradictory  negation  which  allows  a  conclusion  to  be
formally  drawn  from  the  negative ;  contrary  negation  does
not  admit  of  this.  It  is  only  contrary  negation  which
allows  any  import  to  be  materially  attached  to  the  nega-
tive ;  contradictory  negation  does  not  admit  of  this.  The
fact  that  contrary  negation  can  be  given  the  force  of  contra-
diction, that  a  positive  opposite  can  be  known  as  a  sole
alternative,  and  that  unless  this  is  done  knowledge  remains
inarticulate  and  chaotic,  is  simply  the  fact  that  Reality  is  a
system.  It  is  in  considerations  of  this  kind  that  we  must
look  for  a  reconciliation  of  conflicting  ideas  as  to  the
'subjective'  or  'objective'  place  of  negation.  We  must
ask  in  every  case  what  negation  ?  The  negation  of  what
and  under  what  presuppositions?  Without  going  further
into  extreme  views  about  the  objective  import  of  nega-
tion, I  am  most  anxious  to  persuade  the  reader  that  the
fruitful  question  is  not  '  Can  we  conjure  a  meaning  out  of  a
bare  denial?'  but  '  Why  is  it  that  in  knowledge  we  cannot
do  without  denial  ? '  'In  your  "  system  of  differences," '  it
may  be  said,  '  you  put  a  significance  into  your  negations,
and  then  pride  yourself  on  finding  there  what  you  put  in.'
This  is  true.  What  I  want  to  insist  on  is  the  fact  that  this
kind  of  significance  cannot  be  put  into  anything  but  nega-
tion, and  the  light  which  this  fact  throws  on  the  significance


chap.vii]  System  and  Negation.  307

in  question. Reality  is  a  system,  and  you cannot  have
system  apart  from  negation. This  is  the  central  fact  from
which  all  enquiry  must  start. The  connecting  link  between
difference,  contradiction,  and  contrariety  ^  is  that  difference
becomes  contradiction  when  taken  as  mere  difference  or
as  the  abstraction  of  difference,  that  is,  as  expressed  in
a  negative  judgment  which  (like the infinite  judgment)
professes  merely  to  exclude  a  given  idea,  or  deny  a  given
affirmation. If  the denial were within a self-identical
system  it  w^ould  carry  a  positive  bearing. As  ex  hypothesi
it  has  no positive bearing,  it embodies mere difference
'without  identity,  or  the  abstraction  of  difference. Such  a
denial  is  the  pure  contradictory  of  the  affirmation  which  it
denies. On  the  other  hand,  difference  becomes  discrepancy
or  contrariety  when not  the  formal  abstraction  of  differ-
ence, but  positive  differents  claim  the  same  place,  and  the
same  place  means  the  same  relation  to  the  same  system.
Such  contrariety  exists  between  'A  is  Bj'  and  'A  is  Bj.'
Thus  the  articulate  arrangement  of  differences  under  their
systematic  relations is  the root of  positive  discrepancy.
The  system  as  determined  by  one  relation  excludes,  under
that  relation,  the  system as  determined  by any other ;
and  the  system  as  a  whole  identifies  any  one  of  its  positive
relations with the mere  difference  from, i.  e. the bare
exclusion  of,  certain  other  positive  relations. A  is  either
Bj  or  Bg. This  is  the  combination  of  Contradiction  and
Contrariety.

It  is  not  essential  that  the  positive  ground  and  positive
consequence  of  a  denial  should  be  different.  Under
conditions  of  precise  knowledge  they  must  be  the  same.
We  shall  see  that  where  only  t\vo  alternatives  are
possible,  and  they  exclude  one  another,  either  of  them
is  denied  by  the  affirmation  of  the  other,  and  affirmed
by  its  negation.  Under  such  conditions  the  denial  of
one  alternative  has  the  affirmation  of  the  other  both  for

*  See  below,  Book  11.  chap,  vii,  on  the  '  Formal  Postulates  of  Knowledge.'

X  2


3o8 Negation,  Opposition,  and  Conversion, [book  i.

its  ground  and  for  its  consequent.  '  He  will  either  dissolve
or  resign'  permits  us  to  understand  under  the  denial
'he  will  not  resign'  the  affirmation  'he  will  dissolve'  alike
as  its  ground  and  as  its  consequent.  It  is  plain  that  in
actual  knowledge  there  are  degrees  of  this  coalescence.
The  ground  may  be  imperfect  or  extraneous ;  it  may  be
replaced  by  any  positive  quality  that  excludes  the  predi-
cate denied,  i.  e.  in  this  case,  excludes  resignation.  This
positive  quality  might  be  even  difficult  to  formulate  pre-
cisely, and  might  run  as  close  as  possible  to  a  bare  denial ;
we  might  feel  sure  that  '  he  is  not  the  man  to  resign  ; '
which  means  that  his  general  character  as  we  understand  it
precludes  the  idea  that  he  will  resign.  Such  a  general
ground  would  be  at  once  reinforced  in  its  cogency  and
restricted  in  its  result  by  the  consequence  of  the  denial,
the  necessities  of  the  case  being  as  supposed  above.  The
two  in  their  coalescence,  '  he  is  a  man  who  will  not  resign,'
and  '  not  resigning,  he  must  dissolve,'  would  in  that  case
form  the  complete  analysis  of  the  denial  '  he  will  not
resign.'

It  has  been  necessary  in  this  discussion  to  anticipate  the
account  of  disjunction  which  will  be  given  in  the  next
chapter.  Perfect  disjunction  is  of  course  a  late  form  of
knowledge.  But  it  is  an  ideal  inevitably  involved  in  the
nature  of  negation.  All  significant  denial — all  denial,  that
is,  which  rises  above  the  level  of  the  infinite  judgment —
corresponds  to  this  ideal  in  two  respects  at  least.  Every
denial  has  its  meaning  within  an  attribute  or  set  of  attri-
butes judged  to  be  real ;  and  every  denial  affirms  some
positive  matter  which  affects  and  is  affected  by  its  relation
to  such  a  comprehensive  attribute.  This  may  be  illustrated
in  another  way,  which  will  also  serve  as  a  recapitulation  of
the  stages  of  negation.

Negation  is  rooted  in  the  fact  of  difference,  but  difference
is  not  enough  to  warrant  negation.  Mortality  is  a  differ-
ence within  the  identity  of  man,  but  we  do  not  therefoi^e
deny  that  man  is  mortal. Significant  negation  begins,  we


Chap.  VII.] Negation  implies  Coiitradiction.  309

said,  when  positive  differents  claim  the  same  place  in  the
same  system — in  the  simplest  case,  when  differents  claim
to  be  identical.  Man  is  not  mere  mortality,  i.  e.  does  not
coincide  \A\h.  mere  mortality  in  the  system  of  reality.  As
thus  conflicting,  which  of  course  can  only  happen  in  a
judgment,  differents  are  contraries  or  opposites,  and  the
assertion  of  one  is  the  negation  of  the  other.  Now  these
contraries  or  opposites  may  be  of  any  number.  There  is
nothing  to  limit  them.  Any  colour  is  the  contrary  or
opposite  of  black,  if  asserted  in  the  same  relation  ;  and  so
would  any  sound  or  taste  be,  if  asserted  in  the  satne  rela-
tion, which  seems  impossible  for  a  sane  man.  If  then  we
consider  negation  at  this  stage  as  embodying  contrary
opposition,  what  follows  from  it  ?  '  This  surface  is  not
black '  has  indeed  a  ground,  viz.  that  it  is  some  particular
other  colour ;  but  what  about  the  consequent  of  the  nega-
tion ?  There  is  none,  except  that  the  surface  is  some  colour
other  than  black,  and  therefore  we  lose  by  choosing  the
negative  expression  rather  than  the  positive,  and  the  signi-
ficance of  the  negation  qua  negation  is  absent.  What
follows  from  the  absence  of  a  consequent  as  definite  as  the
ground  ?  Nothing  less  than  this,  that  negation  cannot  be
explained  on  the  basis  of  mere  exclusion  of  contraries.  It
is  indeed  possible  to  deny  intelligibly  on  such  a  basis,  in
virtue  of  the  general  consequence  of  negation,  but  no
reason  can  be  assigned  for  in  such  a  case  preferring  nega-
tion to  affirmation.  For  in  the  case  supposed  we  should
be  concluding  from  '  A  is  red,'  through  'A  is  not  black,'  to
'  A  is  of  some  colour  other  than  black ' — a  manifest  loss.

Negation  can  have  no  bearing,  i.  e.  no  interest  or  raison
detre,  unless  the  contraries  are  limited  so  that  something
follows  from  the  negation.  In  other  words.  Negation
always  involves  Contradiction  between  contraries  and  not
merely  Contrariety.  There  may  be  any  number  of  alterna-
tives, but  unless  the  number  is  limited  or  falls  within  some
positive  characteristic  however  vaguely  known,  nothing  can
follow  from  the  denial  either  of  one  or  of  any  number  among


3IO Negation,  Opposition^  and  Conversion, [booki.

them.  Therefore  though  negation  originates  in  difference,
which  it  raises  to  contrariety  by  embodying  it  in  definite
relations,  and  though  it  does  not  arrive  at  formal  contradic-
tion between  opposites  till  long  processes  of  thought  and
language  lie  behind  it,  yet  I  am  unable  to  comprehend  how
any  negation  can  have  interest  apart  from  being  taken
within  a  positive  whole,  however  vague,  which  is  of  the
nature  demanded  by  the  relation  of  contradiction  when
established  between  opposites.  Mere  contradiction  as
between  '  he  is  good  '  and  '  he  is  not  good '  is  given  in  the
nature  of  negation  from  the  first ;  and  its  development
consists  in  filling  this  unmeaning  form  with  significant
opposites,  so  that  from  '  he  is  not  good  '  we  may  be  able
to  infer  something  more  than  that  '  it  is  not  true  that  he  is
good.'

Significant  Negation  then  combines  in  itself  the  absolute
Contradiction  which  was  illustrated  by  the  Infinite  Judg-
ment, and  the  Contrariety  which  arises  between  differents
when  referred  to  the  same  place  in  the  same  system.
Without  contrariety  negation  would  have  nothing  that  it
could  mean,  but  without  contradiction  it  would  not  have  in
itself  the  power  to  mean  anything.
Opposition  4.  The  rules  of  the  opposition  and  conversion  of  Judg-
versioTof  "^^'^ts,  which  have  come  down  to  us  almost  as  Aristotle
Judgments,  formulated  them,  are  founded  on  the  classification  of  judg-
ments according  to  '  quantity.'  They  therefore  lay  down
the  relations  to  one  another  of  all  classes  of  judgments
which  this  principle  recognises,  in  as  far  as  the  truth  or
falsehood  of  any  one  judgment  affects  the  truth  or  falsehood
of  any  other  which  deals  with  the  same  content.  But
when  we  attempt,  as  we  have  attempted  above,  to  distin-
guish the  kinds  of  truth  which  various  types  of  judgment
embody,  then  the  relations  between  the  various  classes
of  judgment  cease  to  be  a  matter  of  mechanical  rule-of-
thumb,  although  not  hard  to  understand  if  we  pay  attention
to  the  actual  significance  of  the  judgments  with  which  we
deal.


Chap. VII.] Singular  and  Plural  yudgments. 311

i.  The  principle  from  which  we  must  set  out  is  that  every-  Opposi-
thing  which  can  be  affirmed  can  also  be  denied. In  some  *^°°'
cases  the  denial  will  be  confined  to  a  shape  closely  corre-
sponding to  that  of  the  affirmation,  and  in  some  there  will
be  two  kinds  of  denial  which  will  fall  apart.

a.  The  Singular  Judgment  cannot  be  treated  for  the  Between
present  purpose  as  a  case  of  the  universal.  It  has,  as  j^^ents
we  saw,  a  universal  character,  but  not  in  the  sense  of  re-
ferring to  an  aggregate  of  individuals.  If  '  Caesar  crossed
the  Rubicon '  is  true,  '  Caesar  did  not  cross  the  Rubicon '
is  false ;  and  if  the  negation  is  false  the  affirmation  is  true.
Thus  the  relation  of  Contrary  Opposition,  according  to
which  the  Universal  Affirmative  and  the  Universal  Nega-
tive of  formal  logic  may  both  be  false,  falls  away  in
the  case  of  a  Singular  Judgment  in  our  sense  of  the  term.
In  this  type  of  judgment  we  have  the  simple  relation
of  affirmation  to  formal  negation  which  is  contradictory,
i.e.  presents  an  absolute  alternative.  The  reason  of  this
we  shall  have  further  to  consider  in  treating  of  Double
Negation.

)3.  The  Judgments  of  Enumeration,  Plural  or  Particular  Between
Judgments,  including  the  Collective  Judgment,  present  the  jaj^ents.
relations  towards  each  other  with  which  we  are  familiar
in  the  common  scheme  of  opposition.  The  peculiarity  of
these  relations  is  that  in  them  an  absolute  alternative  or
contradictory  opposition  is  only  to  be  obtained  by  opposing
judgments  of  different  quantities.  The  reason  of  this  is
well  brought  out  in  a  phrase  which  Aristotle  employs  in
his  account  of  opposition,  where  he  states  the  contradictory
of  '  All  are '  to  be  '  Not  all  are ' — instead  of  using  the
expression  of  our  text-books  '  Some  are  not ; '  or  when
he  says  that  the  contradictory  of  a  proposition  which
affirms  a  predicate  universally,  is  one  which  asserts  that
of  the  same  subject  the  predicate  is  not  universally  true.
What  is  affirmed  in  a  collective  judgment  is  the  homo-
geneity in  a  certain  respect  of  an  aggregate  still  regarded
as  an  aggregate  of  enumeration,  although  endowed  with


312 Negation,  Opposition,  and  Conversion, [book  i.

sufficient  unity  to  warrant  itself  as  a  completed  whole.
The  denial  of  the  judgment  is  the  denial  of  this  homo-
geneity, and  is  rather  a  consequence  of  than  identical
with  the  partial  counter -enumeration  which  our  logic-
books  take  as  its  type.  If,  for  instance,  we  assigned
a  number  to  the  counter-enumeration,  the  contradiction
would  no  longer  be  complete,  and  we  should  find  ourselves
in  contrariety  instead.  To  say  that  '  All  these  books  are
German'  and  that  'Two  of  them  are  not'  cannot  be  a
contradiction  pure  and  simple ;  for  the  falsehood  of  '  All
these  are '  is  compatible  with  the  truth  of  '  Two — three —
or  all  of  them  are  not.'  This  is  enough  to  show  that
'  some  not,'  if  we  take  it  as  a  sign  of  counter-enumeration,
is  less  safe  in  contradictory  opposition  than  '  not  all.'

As  regards  the  *  contrary '  opposition  of  '  All  are '  and
*  None  are,'  the  doctrine  of  formal  logic  is  true  so  long
as  we  confine  ourselves  to  Judgments  of  Enumeration.
'  None  are '  asserts  a  complete  counter- enumeration  or  its
equivalent  based  on  some  other  ground,  and  besides  this
assertion  and  its  contrary  there  are  as  many  alternatives
as  there  are  individuals  in  the  aggregate,  mintis  one.

The  particular  or  incomplete  collective  judgments  '  Some
are '  and  '  Some  are  not '  (sub-contraries)  are  of  course
compatible  with  each  other  so  long  as  we  do  not  determine
them  numerically;  and  continue  to  be  so  then  if  we  consider
that  incompleteness  of  enumeration  debars  us  from  all
reference  to  a  sum  total.  If  on  the  other  hand  we  permit
the  comparison  with  an  assumed  sum  total,  we  pass  at  this
point  into  calculation.  The  general  conception  under
which  we  are  enumerating  always,  it  must  be  remembered,
implies  a  total ;  so  that  calculation  lies  very  near  to  judg-
ments of  this  type.  '  Six  men  were  killed  and  ten  wounded
(but  not  killed) '  are  judgments  perfectly  compatible  with
one  another  if  the  number  of  men  on  the  ground  was  six-
teen or  more  ;  but  if  there  were  only  fifteen  or  fewer,  then  the
two  judgments  at  once  rise  into  contraries.  Both  may  then
be  false,  but  one  must  be. This  however  is  calculation.


chap.vii]  The  effect  of  Exceptiojis.  313

This  account  of  the  matter  includes  all  that  need  be
said  of  the  Singular  judgment  if  used  in  opposition  to
the  Collective  judgment.  In  such  a  case  the  Singular
judgment  takes  the  place  and  follows  the  rules  of  a
judgment  of  Enumeration.  It  must  however  undergo
a  transformation,  ev^en  if  only  implied,  in  taking  on  a
relation  to  the  basis  of  enumeration.  '  How  many  Liberals
voted  against  the  BiU?'  'A.  B.  did,  C.  D.  did,'  &c.,  &c.
These  singular  propositions  are  read  off  into  enumerative
judgments,  '  One  Liberal,  two  Liberals,'  &c.

The  further  judgments  which  arise  out  of  the  Judgment
of  Enumeration  and  Measurement  follow  the  characteristics
of  those  forms  of  the  true  universal  judgment  to  which,
whether  as  generic  or  as  hypothetical,  they  severally
approximate.

y.  I  will  now  point  out  shortly  the  characteristics  of  these  Between
judgments  themselves  when  placed  in  opposition.  The  ?^"^ents
tendency  of  the  higher  stages  of  knowledge  is,  as  we  saw  in
the  last  section,  to  fuse  contrariety  and  contradiction  into
one.  This  is  obvious,  for  instance,  in  the  individual  generic
judgment,  for  the  same  reason  as  in  the  singular  judgment
itself.  And  even  in  the  analogical  judgment  the  tendency
to  fusion  is  strongly  marked.  The  allegation  of  exceptions
against  a  generic  character,  whether  in  form  of  expression
positive  or  negative,  must  either  be  insignificant  as  when
the  exceptions  are  apparent  and  not  real,  or  else  tend  by
analogy  to  establish  a  contrary  alternative  or  positive
contradictory.  In  the  former  case  the  judgments  which
emphasise  the  exceptions  must  be  taken  to  be  not  generic
judgments  at  all,  but  mere  enumerative  judgments,  which
j^therefore  cannot  touch  the  essence  of  the  generic  judgments

ley  appear  to  oppose. For  we  shall  find  the  dominant
mnciple  in  these  relations  to  be  that  a  judgment  of  one
)e  a  cannot  deny  a  judgment  of  another  type  ^  ;  although

le  former  may  suggest  a  judgment  of  the  tj-pe  ^  which
|will constitute a  full denial of  the  other  judgment of

lat  same  type. Under  the  head  of  such  mere  enumerative


3 1 4 Negation^  Opposition,  and  Conversion, [book  i.

judgments  would  come  all  observations  of  artificial  forms,
mutilations,  abortions,  etc.  in  organic  and  spiritual  beings ;
and  all  accidental  juxtapositions  rendered  by  judgments
whose  subjects  have  no  connection  with  their  predicates.
The  generic  judgment  'Man  is  a  creature  with  a  sense  of
justice'  is  not  invalidated  by  instances  drawn  from  dead
men,  lunatics,  or  idiots  ;  nor  even,  perhaps,  from  criminals,
if  there  are  such,  whose  conscience  is  obliterat^ed  by  life-
long war  with  society.  But  I  shall  be  told  that  a  scientific
law  has  no  exceptions.  This  is  just  what  I  am  maintaining ;
I  am  saying  that  exceptions  are  either  apparent  or  real,  and
in  the  former  case,  that  now  before  us,  do  not  deny  the  law;
in  the  latter  proceed  positively  to  indicate  another  law.  In
the  second  case,  when  the  law  is  really  impeached  by  the
bearing  of  the  exceptional  instance,  this  bearing  must  have
a  positive  import,  which  may  not  amount  to  a  suggested
law,  but  must  be  in  the  same  region  of  essential  indi-
viduality in  which  the  characteristic  that  is  denied  has  its
import.

If  I  say  that  all  exogenous  trees  are  dicotyledonous,
I  am  opposed  by  a  real,  not  merely  apparent,  exception  in
the  case  of  the  Coniferae,  which  though  exogenous  have  in
many  species  more  than  two  cotyledons.  Here  we  have
one  Generic  judgment  (I  use  'generic'  in  the  logical  sense
which  I  have  explained)  opposed  to  another.  It  is  not
merely  that  here  and  there  an  aborted  or  mutilated  in-
stance is  to  be  found  in  which  a  part  of  the  plant  is  want-
ing; but  that  an  enormous  natural  order  with  marked
unity  of  habit,  and  in  the  strictest  sense  ^  sharing  the
characteristic  on  which  the  analogy  is  based,  does  not
display  the  character  required  by  analogy.  Now  I  am
not  aware  that  any  importance  has  been  attached  to
determining  the connection between exogenous wood-

^  Here  an  error  is  possible.  Tlie  wood-formation  of  Coniferae,  though  pro-
ceeding from  a  cambium  ring  outside  the  old  wood,  has  differences  from  that
of  Dicotyledonous  Exogens,  If  these  differences  were  of  importance  the  excep-
tion might  break  down  as  not  a  case  under  the  rule,  Coniferae  not  being  true
Exogens.


Chap.  VII.] Ge7ieric  Judgment  how  upset.  315

formation  and  the  number  of  seed-leaves  or  cotyledons  ;
but  it  is  plain  that  the  conflict  of  generic  judgments  so  far
as  we  have  followed  it  does  not  destroy  the  idea  of  such  a
connection,  which  would  be  the  effect  of  a  mere  contra-
diction, but  suggests  that  it  may  be  characteristic  of  plants
with  two  or  more  seed-leaves.  Supposing  that  monocoty-
ledons were  also  found  in  some  cases  to  form  wood  ex-
ternally, the  question  would  still  arise  whether  any  principle
of  development  could  be  traced  according  to  which  the
characteristics  under  discussion  might  arise  together  or
owing  to  connected  causes,  as  if  e.  g.  there  was  a  point  at
which  the  one  natural  kind  approached  very  close  to  the
other.  If  so,  the  supposed  further  exception  would  still
lead  to  a  positive  principle  or  contrary,  and  not  to  an  empty
contradiction.  Ev^en  if  the  first  generic  judgment  were  a
sheer  blunder  and  confusion,  as  has  been  the  case  from
time  to  time  with  judgments  propounded  in  science,  it  is
scarcely  possibly  to  rectify  the  confusion  except  by  substi-
tuting for  it  the  true  positive  conceptions  that  arise  out  of
the  cases  which  overthrow  it.  An  example  in  point  is
Ehrenberg's  inclusion  of  a  group  of  confervoid  Algae(Vol-
vox)  under  the  class  of  Infusorial  Animalculae,  or  again,
probably,  his  alleged  detection  of  highly-organised  struc-
ture in  the  Infusoria  proper.  Enumerative  exceptions  are
futile  in  such  cases  ;  what  is  needed  is  a  re-interpretation
of  the  character  of  the  group  as  such.  Such  a  re-interpre-
tation is  at  once  contrary  and  contradictory  to  the  mis-
taken judgment  which  it  corrects.  But  in  the  process  of
interpretation  it  may  and  perhaps  must  pass  through  a
stage  which  may  best  be  described  when  we  are  speaking
of  the  hypothetical  judgment.

h.  The  contrary  of  the  Hypothetical  Judgment  is  as  usual  Between
a  judgment  of  the  same  type. The  complete  contrary  of  theti^
*  If  outdoor  relief  is  refused  the  workhouses  are  crowded  '  Judgments,
would  be  '  If  outdoor relief is refused the workhouses
{caeteris  paribus)  are  not  crowded.' This  denial  means  that
the  condition  expressed  in  the  hypothesis  '  If  .  .  refused '  is


3 1 6 Negation,  Opposition  and  Conversion, [book  r.

not  merely  inoperative  to  cause  pressure  on  the  workhouse,
but  is  actively  operative  to  decrease  that  pressure.  I  insert
the  limitation  caeteris paribus  merely  to  secure  the  judgment
being  taken  as  truly  hypothetical,  because  in  such  concrete
matter  as  this  there  is  a  tendency  to  interpret  the  judgment
as  collective  in  the  sense  that  '  Every  case  of  a  is  a  case
of  j3 ;'  so  that  it  may  be  objected  to  on  the  score  of  acci-
dental instances.  In  abstract  matter,  e.  g.  in  geometry,
where  the  hypothetical  judgment  has  an  unambiguous
import,  these  objections  are  understood  to  be  inadmissible.
Parallel  lines  are  taken  qua  parallel  when  it  is  said  that  they
do  not  meet,  and  so  forth.

This  contrary  is  the  form  of  negation  to  which  all  precise
thought  aspires.  If  the  condition  is  irrelevant  and  wholly
unconnected,  then  indeed  the  entire  type  of  knowledge  to
which  we  have  aspired  is  a  delusion  and  a  snare,  and  the
mere  contradictory  which  will  express  our  ignorance  must
be  found  in  a  judgment  of  a  lower  type.  But  if  the  con-
dition is  relevant  it  must  operate  somehow,  and  we  can
only  choose  between  one  view  of  its  operation  and  another.
Such  a  choice  is  expressed  by  embodying  mere  contraries
in  an  absolute  alternative  or  contradictory  ;  by  considering
'If  A  is  B  it  is  not  C  as  the  contradictory  of  'If  A  is  B  it  is
C  ;'  as  it  is  the  only  way  of  denying  it  by  a  hypothetical
judgment.

But  if  we  are  to  destroy  the  hypothetical  judgment  itself
as  an  expression  of  ground  and  consequence,  we  must  aim
our  negation  precisely  at  its  form.  The  enumerative  parti-
cular would  not  help  us  here.  When  we  have  said  that
'  If  (i.  e.  in  so  far  as)  a  man  is  good  he  is  wise,'  it  is  idle  to
reply  that  some  good  men  are  not  wise.  This  is  to  attack
an  abstract  principle  with  unanalysed  examples.  What  we
must  say  in  order  to  deny  the  above-mentioned  abstract
judgment  is  something  of  this  kind  :  '  If,'  or  'Though  a  man
is  good,  yet  it  does  not  follow  that  he  is  wise,'  i.  e. '  Though
a  man  is  good,  yet  he  need  not  be  wise.'  The  particle
'  though '  introduces  the  condition  as  a  supposal,  but  by  its


Chap.  VII.]  The  Modal  Particular.  317

adversative  force  prepares  us  for  a  denial  that  it  has  any
connection  with  the  consequent.

This  same  form,  which  may  be  called  the  modal  particular,
is  the  appropriate  contradictory  to  a  generic  judgment  which
has  to  be  altogether  surrendered  and  cannot  be  corrected  by
a  positive  contrary.  Its  meaning  is  however  not  as  clear  as
that  of  the  Generic  or  Hypothetical  judgments.  For  it  does
not  assert  a  positive  relation,  but  drops  down  into  an  un-
analysed  quality  of  exclusion,  and  thus  into  the  confused
concrete  of  phenomena.  It  may  therefore  mean  that  the
supposed  condition  is  inoperative  and  irrelevant,  or  it  may
mean  that  it  is  weakly  operative  and  liable  to  be  overcome
by  normal  counteracting  conditions,  or  that  it  is  operative
as  asserted  in  the  hypothetical  judgment,  but  liable  occa-
sionally to  be  overcome  by  exceptional  conditions.  This
last  is  a  common  meaning,  but  is  not  the  true  negation  of
the  opposed  abstract  hypothetical  judgment,  and  ought  to
be  discarded  from  science,  though  there  is  no  means  of  re-
lieving the  modal  particular  negation  from  it.  How  then
are  we  to  treat  the  correlative  case,  in  which  we  deny  '  If  A
is  B  it  is  not  C '  by '  Though  A  be  B  yet  it  may  be  C '  ?
This  seems  to  confirm  our  view  that  the  character  of  mere
negation  is  incompatible  with  that  of  the  hypothetical
judgment.  For  the  former  of  these  two  contradictories  is
of  course  the  same  judgment  which  we  have  already  con-
sidered in  the  light  of  a  contrary  and  positive  negation  ;
and  the  latter  seems  therefore  to  retain  under  its  affirma-
tive form  the  essential  character  of  mere  denial.  '  Though
A  is  B  yet  it  does  not  follow  that  it  is  not  C '  expresses  the
only  sense  in  which  the  affirmative  modal  particular  is  a
true  or  mere  contradictory  to  the  negative  hypothetical
judgment^.  This  sense  is  not  in  itself  satisfactory  if  taken
as  the  import  of  possibility,  and  real  possibility  demands  a
nearer  advance  towards  the  affirmative  contrary — a  recog-
nition of  some  real  operative  condition  making  for  the
connection  alleged  possible. That  this  is  so  only  confirms

*  See  below,  on  Privation  and  Af&nnation.


3 1 8 Negation,  Opposition,  and  Conversion, [book  i.

the suggestion  made  above that in significant negation
contrary  and  contradictory  tend  to  become  one.

I  may  anticipate  the  case  of  Disjunction  so  far  as  it
here  concerns  us  by  saying  that  the  denial  of  z.  disjunctive
judgment,  though  formally  possible,  is  not  a  problem  that
naturally  arises  in  logic.  The  disjunction  is  the  pre-
supposition and  the  goal  of  negation  as  an  orgmion  of
knowledge.  By  denying  it  as  a  whole  we  sweep  away  the
fabric  of  knowledge  relative  to  the  matter  in  hand,  and
must  begin  over  again  from  the  beginning,  as  there  is  no
sphere  left  within  which  anything  can  arise  from  the  denial
of  the  disjunction.  To  deny  a  disjunction  in  this  sense  we
should  not  trouble  ourselves  with  the  alternatives,  but
analyse  them  into  their  common  basis  and  deny  that.  An
impersonal  judgment,  as  expressing  wholly  inarticulate
knowledge,  is  the  appropriate  form  for  such  denial,  unless
we  are  denying  one  disjunction  under  another.  '  The  soul
is  neither  square  nor  round  '  may  be  denied  by  '  The  soul  is
not  in  space ; '  for  this  denial  has  a  positive  ground  and
consequence  founded  on  an  implied  disjunction,  'either  in
space  or  intellectual.'  But  if  we  are  presented  with  a
number  of  alternatives  about  a  matter  which  seems  to  us
to  have  no  basis  in  reality  nor  relation  to  actual  knowledge
at  all,  then  we  may  reply  with  the  impersonal  negative  as
the  form  of  thought  most  suited  to  mere  absence  of  positive
content.  '  The  disembodied  spirit  in  its  earthly  presence  is
revealed  either  by  contact  or  by  signs.'  To  this  an  entire
unbeliever  would  probably  answer,  '  There  is  no  earthly
presence  of  disembodied  spirits,'  and  here  he  approaches,
not  wholly  by  his  own  fault,  the  infinite  judgment.  He
has  merely  said  that  reality  is  without  the  matter  alleged,
and  his  saying  has  no  positive  import  beyond  what  arises
from  the  imputation  to  reality  of  a  character — whatever
that  may  be  —  not  necessarily  incompatible  with,  but
rather  undistinguished  by,  the  presence  of  disembodied
spirits.

Specific  denials  of  a  disjunction  on  the  ground  of  incom-


Chap.  VII.]  Inference  from  Falsity.  319

pleteness  or  superfluity^  are  of  course  either  under  a  further
disjunction  which  the  denial  tends  to  make  explicit,  or  in  the
second  C2isc,  prima  facie,  under  the  disjunction  to  be  denied
itself,  with  the  result  of  excluding  one  of  its  alternatives.

ii.  In  treating  of  the  contradictory  relation,  that  namely  Doable
between  two  judgments  of  which  one  simply  denies  the  ^  *8*^**°-
other,  so  forming  an  absolute  alternative,  we  saw  the  results
that  spring  from  double  negation.  We  appealed  to  double
negation  for  instance  in  the  case  of  the  singular  judgment,
such  as  '  Caesar  crossed  the  Rubicon.'  This,  with  its  simple
denial  '  Caesar  did  not  cross  the  Rubicon,'  forms  an  absolute
alternative,  although  the  denial  has  a  meaning  and  is  not  a
mere  infinite  judgment.  So  far  as  this  is  the  case,  the  oppo-
sition between  the  two  is  at  once  contrary  and  contradictory.

Do  the  two  cases  of  inference  from  falsity  in  contra-
dictory opposition  stand  on  the  same  footing  ?  The  one  is
from  the  falsity  of  the  affirmative,  the  other  from  the  falsity
of  the  negative.  The  former  amounts  to  single,  and  the
latter  to  double  negation.

The  explanation  of  single  denial  which  has  been  given
above  may  be  briefly  restated  here.  The  abstraction  of
difference,  taken  in  respect  of  its  contreist  with  identity,
and  so  as  mere  non-identity  or  otherness,  is  employed
in  negation  as  the  vehicle  of  a  positive  contrary'-,  which
contrary  is  thus  invested  with  the  full  alternative  force
that  belongs  to  otherness  as  such  when  contrasted  in  the
abstract  with  sameness  as  such.  As  regards  the  history  of
early  thought  on  this  question,  of  course  we  are  not  to
look  for  determinate  abstractions  in  primitive  minds.  But
primitive  minds  probably  are  abstract,  though  they  do  not
deal  with  abstractions.  We  must  look  for  the  germ  of
contradictory  negation  in  mere  repugnance  or  repulsion,
which,  although  a  positive  state,  has  a  peculiar  aspect  of
negativity  to  which  the  inarticulate  abstractness  of  the
primitive  mind  lends  an  aspect  rather  of  contradiction
than  of  contrariety. Every  one  who  has  watched  children

*  See  following  chapter  on  this  case.


320 Negation,  opposition,  and  Conversion, [booki.

miist  have  noticed  the  remonstrant  '  No '  without  any
expressed  content,  which  is  a  sign  of  aversion  to  something
done  or  suggested.  The  absence  of  indicated  reference  to
any  particular  matter  is  often  surprising,  and  impresses  an
observer  by  the  difficulty  of  finding  either  the  bearing  or
the  ground  of  the  negation.  Here  it  is  rather  the  positive
contrary  that  is  undeveloped  and  latent  than  the  mere
rejection  or  contradictory.  Therefore  I  cannot  but  think
that  the  absolute  alternative — mere  generalised  otherness
or  rejection  —  makes  itself  explicit  by  the  side  of  the
positive  contrary  at  a  very  early  stage  of  thought.

Thus  though  I  do  not  take  every  negation  to  be  neces-
sarily aimed  against  an  affirmation  of  the  same  content,  yet
it  seems  to  me  that  the  pair  of  judgments  which  form
a  contradictory  opposition  embody  an  ultimate  fact  of
knowledge.  Single  negation  is  in  form  the  substitution
of  mere  difference,  or  nothingness,  for  the  combined  identity
and  difference  which  alone  have  meaning.  This  form  is
the  basis  of  the  alternative  in  contradiction.  It  is  the
alternative  antithesis  between  something  and  nothing.
That  'nothing'  is  furnished  with  a  meaning  in  hunc
effectum  does  not  appear  from  or  affect  the  form  of
contradiction.  Single  negation,  then — the  passage  from
the  falsity  of  'A  is  B'  to  the  truth  of  'A  is  not  B'—
must  be  regarded  on  its  formal  side  as  the  abstraction  of
a  universal  characteristic  of  knowledge.  It  nieans  that
A  is,  under  the  conditions  and  for  the  purpose  of  the
judgment  in  question,  in  a  relation  of  pure  otherness
to  B.

The  case  of  double  negation — the  passage  from  the
falsity  of  'A  is  not  B'  to  the  truth  of  'A  is  B ' — is  in  my
judgment  accounted  for  by  the  preceding  remarks.  The
true  problem,  to  my  mind,  is  not  how  negation  should  be
the  absolute  alternative  of  the  corresponding  affirmation,
but  rather  how,  being  in  its  exterior  form  and  vehicle  such
an  alternative,  it  should  become  possessed  of  positive
intelligible  import. The  fundamental  nature  of  negation,


Chap. MI]  Negation  as  Alternative.  321

thus  understood,  may  no  doubt  be  embodied  in  the  prin-
ciple of  Excluded  Third  or  Excluded  Middle,  which  asserts
that  of  two  contradictory  enunciations  one  must  be  true
and  the  other  false.  Thus  stated,  the  principle  is  merely-
formal,  because  the  question  immediately  arises,  'WTiat
are  contradictory  assertions?'  The  definition  might  be
made  plainer  by  substituting  for  the  phrase  in  question  an
expression  such  as  '  the  assertion  and  denial  of  the  same
content ; '  but  no  definition  can  relieve  us  from  the  task,
which  I  have  attempted  to  perform  in  this  chapter,  of
explaining  what  a  mere  denial  of  an  assertion  really  is.
Excluded  Middle  is  thus  merely  the  abstract  case  of
Contradiction  or  simple  negation,  and  the  proof  of  the
principle  lies  in  the  analysis  of  negation.

I  may  illustrate  this  view,  in  the  case  of  double  nega-
tion, by  two  conceptions  that  deserve  attention.  Sigwart
ascribes  the  affirmation  that  admittedly  results  from  double
jiiegation  to  the  reappearance  of  an  original  affirmation  at
irhich  the  first  negation  must  have  been  aimed,  so  soon  as
that  first  negation  is  cancelled  by  the  second.  I  take  this
view  to  be  true  in  substance,  but  false  in  the  fact  which  its
expression  postulates.  It  was  pointed  out  above  that
not  every  negation  presupposes  an  affirmation,  and  that
Sigwart  himself,  when  not  treating  of  double  negation,
more  correctly  postulates  as  the  condition  of  denial  only
an  attempted  affirmation.  But  it  is  true,  and  this  is  probably
what  Sig\vart  meant  to  convey,  that  every  negation  bears
on  its  face  the  nature  of  an  alternative,  so  that,  though  we
may  not  in  fact  have  proceeded  to  it  by  denying  an  explicit
affirmation  of  the  same  content,  we  are  yet  able  to  go
from  the  negation  of  one  member  to  the  establishment  of
another.  It  is  one  thing  to  say  that  every  negation  is
preceded  by  a  corresponding  affirmation, — for  we  may  not
have  judged  on  the  subject  at  all, — but  quite  another  to  say
that  every  negation  bears  on  its  face  that,  if  we  judge,  it  is
the  sole  alternative  to  the  corresponding  affirmation.  This
principle  appears  to  me  to  be  of  the  essence  of  the  matter.

VOL.  I.  Y


32  2 Negation,  Opposition,  and  Conversion. [Book  i.

It  is  this  that  gives  double  negation  its  distinctive  precision
and  emphasis.

In  opposition  to  Sigwart's  idea,  erroneously  expressed  as
I  admit  it  to  be,  of  re-establishing  an  original  affirmation,
Mr.  Bradley  has  maintained  that  the  warrant  of  double
negation  simply  consists  in  this,  that  in  order  to  deny
a  negation  we  must  already  be  in  possession  of  the  corre-
sponding affirmation.  We  can  only,  he  contends,  deny  A
is  not  B  on  the  ground  that,  within  our  knowledge,  A  is  B.
This  allegation  is  made  with  good  reason.  We  can  indeed
deny  A  is  B  on  the  ground  that  A  is  ;r  or  y,  each  of  which
excludes  B ;  but  we  cannot  assert  A  is  B  on  the  ground
that  A  is  not  x  or  y,  each  of  which  excludes  B.  We
cannot  deny  the  consequent  not-B  on  the  strength  of
denying  the  antecedent  x  or  y.  The  old  rule  of  the
hypothetical  judgment,  'Affirm  the  antecedent  or  deny  the
consequent,'  forbids  this.

But  on  looking  closer  we  shall  observe  that  this  impos-
sibility is  based  on  the  imperfect  view  of  the  hypothetical
judgment  which  assimilates  its  rules  to  those  of  the  judg-
ment of  enumeration.  This  view  disregards  the  possibility
of  a  connection  at  once  synthetic  (i.  e.  not  tautologous)  and
pure  (i.e.  free  from  irrelevancy).  For  in  this  case  the  denial
of  the  condition  is  the  denial  of  the  consequent ;  and  it  is
this  v/hich  has  been  before  us  throughout  as  the  essential
and  ideal  meaning  of  judgment.  This  assertion  of  a  pure
connection  between  condition  and  consequent  becomes,  in
the  case  of  a  negative  consequent  which  is  now  before  us,
identical  with  our  position  that  all  intelligible  negation
takes  its  meaning  from  contrariety,  though  its  form  may
be  that  of  contradiction.  To  say  that  in  '  If  A  is  ;«r  it  is  not
B'  we  cannot  go  from  '  not  x'  to  '  not  not-B '  (i.e.  to  B)  is  to
say  that  there  cannot  be  contradictory  opposition  between
contraries  ^

^  The  negative  character  of  not-B  might  cause  a  difficulty,  but  is  not  in  dis-
pute here.  What  is  disputed  is  the  possibility  of  getting  to  anything  by  denying
that  A  is  :ir  in  the  judgment  '  If  A  is  jt  it  is  not  B.'


Chap.  VII.] The  value  of  Doubh  Negattott.  323

Contradictory  opposition  between  contraries  can  of  course
exist  only  if  the  possibilities  are  limited  by  means  of  a
disjunctive  judgment,  and  in  this  case  Mr.  Bradley  admits
that  the  double  negation  may  be  got  at  otherwise  than  by
the  corresponding  affirmation.  If  we  divide  all  Liberals
into  Unionist  Liberals  and  Gladstonian  Liberals  we  can  go
from  '  That  Liberal  is  not  Unionist '  to  *  He  is  not  not
Gladstonian.'  So  too  in  a  pure  nexus  with  a  negative
consequent :  '  If  powder  is  slow-burning,  it  does  not  strain
the  gun  unequally.'  Under  this  judgment,  if  we  know  that
the  powder  is  not  slow-burning,  we  are  able  to  say  that  it
fails  in  the  quality  of  not  straining  the  gun  unequally.
We  can  unquestionably  get  this  inference  whenever  we
approach  the  knowledge  of  a  pure  ground.  The  pure
ground  and  the  limitation  of  cases  are  merely  different
aspects  of  the  same  form  of  knowledge.  The  ground  is
the  fundamental  and  operative  character  by  which  a  system
imposes  certain  relations  on  its  parts ;  the  limitation  is  the
external  and  formal  consequence  of  these  relations  which
may  be  mimicked  for  the  purposes  of  common  logic  by  an
arbitrarj'  or  conventional  restriction  of  alternatives.

My  only  difference  from  Mr.  Bradley  consists  therefore
in  the  view  which  I  have  maintained  throughout,  that  apart
from  some  limitation  there  is  no  intelligible  negation —
nothing  but  the  infinite  judgment,  and  therefore  in  strict
logic  no  negation  at  all.  Under  such  a  limitation  we  can
always  go  from  denial  of  a  jxjsitive  quality  to  a  positive
result  which  we  may  as  a  matter  of  both  theory  and  of  fact
approach  from  the  side  of  double  negation,  although  of
course  the  identity  of  double  negation  with  affirmation  is
in  a  reflective  stage  of  culture  too  immediate  to  admit  of
the  two  being  really  distinguished.  The  reason  for  which
I  am  anxious  to  insist  on  this  not  very  practical  distinction
will  appear  more  clearly  when  I  come  to  speak  of  induction.
It  is,  in  brief,  the  importance  of  the  negative  instance ;
that  is.  of  approaching  any  positive  content  from  the  side
of  its  limit,  of  the  exact  boundary  at  which  it  ceases  and

Y  %


sion


324 Negation^  Opposition,  and  Conversion, [booki.

some  other  content  begins.  For  this  boundary  is  a  negation
by  denying  which  we  not  only  affirm  the  content  that  hes
within  it,  but  affirm  it  in  its  conditions  and  genesis,  at
least  for  knowledge.  '  If  a  nation  has  no  true  art  it  is
not  religious '  is  a  judgment  that  gives  the  analysis  of
a  group  of  '  negative  instances,'  which  analysis  passes  into
an  affirmation  supported  by  those  instances,  in  the  form
'A  nation  which  has  true  art  is  not  not  religious.'  The
conclusion  thus  obtained,  '  This  nation  (having  true  art)  is
religious '  may  be  bona  fide  arrived  at  through  the  double
negation  I  have  described,  and  may  be  at  first  unsupported
by  the  direct  observation  '  This  nation  is  religious.'
Conver-  iii.  Conversion  is  usually  treated  with  opposition  under

the  head  of  immediate  inference.  It  is  primarily  a  transition
from  one  grammatical  form  to  another  which  introduces  no
new  elements  into  the  content.  Whether,  or  in  what  cases,
it  really  involves  inference,  i.e.  a  passage  from  owo.  judgment
to  another  warranted  by  the  first,  is  the  main  question
which  arises  in  treating  of  it,  and  of  course  includes  the
problem  what  inference,  if  any,  is  involved.

The  unity  of  the  judgment,  it  will  be  remembered  ^  does
not  exclude  a  considerable  measure  of  diversity.  It  is  often
a  mere  chance  whether  a  range  of  affirmative  thought  is
condensed  into  one  proposition  or  comminuted  into  several.
And  inference  is  working  through  the  whole  of  such  a  range
as  the  judgment  gains  depth  and  width,  and  defines  its  edges.
Thus,  if  we  mean  to  say  anything  definite  about  the  point
at  which  we  pass  from  one  judgment  into  '  another,'  we  must
look  at  what  is  bond  fide  implied  as  the  essential  import  of
the  judgment-forms  that  we  discuss,  and  not  at  the  actual
transitions  which  attend  our  interpretation  of  any  propo-
sition, and  which  vary  with  mental  endowment  in  the
interpreter,  and  with  the  lucidity  of  expression  of  the  given
sentence.  That  is  to  say,  we  must  distinguish  interpretative
inference  from  substantial  inference — transition  within  the
judgment  from  transition  between  two  judgments.
^  See  above,  chap.  i.


Chap.  VII.]  Mere  Transposition.  325

The  question  may  seem  indeed  to  settle  itself  at  once.
The  unity  of  judgment  is  determined  prima  facie  by  the
unity  of  the  Content  judged.  A  new  subject  or  a  new  pre-
dication, i.  e.  one  not  related  as  part  within  whole  to  that  of
a  given  judgment,  is  needed  to  constitute  another  judgment.
But  in  immediate  inference  there  is  no  new  content — at  any
rate  no  new  positive  content.  Can  there  then  be  a  new
judgment  ?

The  real  interest  of  Conversion  lies  in  the  discussion  which
it  provokes  of  the  precise  relations  imposed  upon  its  content
by  any  given  j  udgment,  and  of  the  boundaries  which  sepa-
rate the  botia  fide  meanings  of  the  various  judgment-forms.
In  arriving  at  these  relations  or  at  this  meaning  we  use
interpretative  inference  ;  it  is  only  when  we  find  ourselves
able  to  go  from  relation  to  relation  by  re-applying  the
same  form  of  judgment,  or  from  meaning  to  meaning  by
passing  from  a  judgment  of  one  type  to  a  judgment  of
another,  that  we  are  really  employing  substantial  inference.
It  does  not  much  matter,  however,  where  we  elect  to  draw
the  line  of  transition  from  judgment  to  judgment,  so  long  as
we  understand  the  connection  of  the  implications  concerned.

a.  I  will  begin  with  an  accidental  case  of  simple  con-  simple
version,  not  recognised  in  the  text-books  because  the  content  Canversion

,....-.,  .  .,  .of  Singular.

of  predication  m  smgular  judgment  is  not  necessarily  01
singular  reference.  '  The  Duke  of  Cambridge  is  Com-
mander-in-chief I  think  it  is  beyond  question  that  this
proposition  might  be  met  with '  The  Commander-in-chief  is
the  Duke  of  Cambridge '  in  a  tone  which  would  give  it  the
force  of  a  criticism  or  retort,  although  its  content  would  be
warranted  true  by  the  proposition  as  first  enunciated.  I  am
not  prepared  to  abolish  the  distinction  of  subject  and  predi-
cate within  the  judgment,  and  if  we  retain  the  distinction,
then  the  mere  transposition  of  the  two  makes  a  difference.
We  understand  the  subject  primarily  as  a  designation  and
the  predicate  primarily  as  an  attribution.  The  idea  of
concrete  individuality  clings  to  the  subject,  and  that  of
specially  selected determination to the predicate. The


326 Negation,  opposition,  and  Conversion. [bookI.

second  of  the  above  propositions  might  certainly  be  under-
stood to  mean  that  the  quaHties  of  the  office  were  limited
in  the  relation  in  question  by  those  of  the  individual,  and
not  those  of  the  individual  adapted  to  those  of  the  office.

If  it  is  replied  that  this  may  be  possible  enough,  but  that
really  one  who  commits  himself  to  the  former  proposition
has  bound  himself  to  know  and  judge  the  concrete  synthesis
of  qualities  which  the  predication  constitutes  along  with  its
subject,  I  cannot  deny  that  this  is  so.  And  I  am  therefore
content  to  rank  such  inference  as  is  illustrated  by  the  above
transition  under  the  head  of  interpretative  inference,  i.  e.
inference  that  falls  within  the  logical  unity  of  the  judgment
as  bond  fide  expressed  by  either  propositional  form.  It  is
true  that  in  some  simply  convertible  judgments,  e.g.  '  A  =
B  in  weight,'  the  order  of  terms  can  make  no  possible
difference  of  import.  But  the  reason  of  this  is  not  that
the  proposition  is  simply  convertible,  but  that  the  content
is  of  a  highly  abstract  character  which  annuls  all  indivi-
duality, and  thus  destroys  any  significance  that  might  attach
to  the  difference  between  subject  and  predication,  A
similar  character  belongs  in  some  degree  to  all  quantitative
'  judgments.
Conversion  /3.  The  Universal  Affirmative  Judgment  (under  which,  in
tion."^^^  ordinary  logic-books,  the  Singular  Judgment  is  compre-
hended) is  not  admitted  to  be  convertible  simply,  i.  e.  by
mere  transposition  of  subject  and  predicate,  but  is  sup-
posed to  be  convertible  '  by  limitation,'  i.  e.  by  trans-
position together  with  reduction  to  the  level  of  a  '  particular '
judgment.

With  reference  to  the  first  part  of  this  rule,  the  whole
course  of  our  investigation  of  judgment  is  a  comment  on  the
degree  and  rationale  of  its  truth.  It  is  equally  certain  that
the  prohibition  of  simple  conversion  is  warranted  by  common
usage,  and  that  the '  pure  case '  (which  does  not  mean  mere
tautology)  is  an  ideal  operative  throughout  the  judging
activity.  I  am  confident  that  Quantification  of  the  Predicate
and  the  Equational  Logic  owe  much  of  their  success  to  their


chap.vii] Conversion  of  Generic  yudgment.  327

recognition  of  this  ideal,  though  their  forcing  it  upon  the
ordinary  judgment  by  truncating  the  meaning  of  the  latter
is  a  blundering  anticipatio  naturae.

The  second  part  of  the  above  rule,  the  *  limitation '  of  the
converse,  has  different  values  as  applied  to  different  classes
of  judgment  which  correspond  to  the  so-called  'universal
affirmative.'  If  we  take  a  judgment  of  the  collective  type
and  argue  e.  g.  that  because  '  All  houses  in  this  street  have
gardens '  therefore  '  Some  houses  which  have  gardens  are  in
this  street'  we  do  not  seem  to  gain  anything  by  the
re-arrangement.  And  we  certainly  lose  something,  for  we
cannot  recover  the  original  judgment  by  re-conversion  of
the  particular  thus  obtained.  Of  course  re-conversion  can
only  give  '  Some  houses  in  the  street  have  gardens.'  But
we  know,  to  begin  with,  that  all  the  individual  houses  in  the
street  unite  with  their  other  attributes  that  of  having
gardens.  We  seem,  then,  only  to  have  advanced  to  a  doubt
of  what  we  knew.  There  is  however  a  shade  of  difference
suggested,  as  in  the  singular  judgment  examined  above,  by
the  mere  transposition  of  subject  and  predicate.  The  de-
nomination of  the  individuals  is  less  emphasised  than  the
content  enunciated  of  it.  The  former  fills  the  place  of
pointing  with  the  finger  to  an  object  of  perception,  the
latter  that  of  the  significant  ideas  by  which  the  perceptive
judgment  qualifies  such  an  object.  But  this  transition
seems  to  fall  within  the  interpretative  inference,  and  not  to
amount  to  substantive  inference.

In  the  case  of  the  generic  judgment  of  either  type  the
import  of  the  change  becomes  more  emphatic.  '  The
dahlia  is  one  of  the  Compositae '  tells  me  that  this  regular
flower,  apparently  a  mass  of  petals  like  a  garden  rose  or
peon}'  or  hollyhock,  is  really  an  aggregate  of  little  florets
like  those  of  the  daisy  or  dandelion  ^  In  short,  this  judg-
ment distinguishes  the  dahlia  from  flowers  externally  not

'  In  the  double  dahlia — ^the  form  till  lately  commonest  in  gardens — erery
floret  is  developed  into  a  one-aded  corolla  like  those  of  the  florets  which  form
the  ray  of  the  common  daisy.


328 Negation^  opposition,  and  Conversion, [booki.

unlike  it,  but  having  no  structural  affinity  with  it  whatever.
'  The  Compositae  include  the  dahlia,'  or  '  Some  Compositae
are  dahlias,'  presents  us  with  the  typical  or  generalised
structure  of  a  Composite  flower  determined  and  differenti-
ated by  the  peculiarities  of  a  dahlia.  The  rose  or  peony
would  in  this  case  never  come  into  our  heads  ;  we  should
be  occupied  with  some  such  individual  as  the  daisy  or  the
thistle,  and  the  object  of  the  judgment  would  practically  be
to  distinguish  the  dahlia  from  other  Compositae,  not  to
distinguish  it  from  flowers  which  are  in  no  way  akin  to  it.
The  one  judgment  qualifies  the  external  appearance  of  a
dahlia  by  the  internal  structure  of  the  Compositae ;  the
other  qualifies  the  diagrammatic  type  of  a  composite  plant,
as  admitting,  among  others,  of  the  specific  peculiarities  of
the  dahlia.

I  have  but  little  doubt  that  this  account  represents
the  meaning  of  the  two  propositions  in  fact.  But  it  may
be  said  that  we  have  no  right  to  separate  them,  and  that
we  ought  to  demand  the  explicit  recognition  of  both
these  determinate  affinities  as  essential  to  the  meaning  of
the  generic  universal  judgment  itself ;  and  it  may  even  be
insisted  that  if  the  second  proposition  contains  more  than
the  first  in  any  respect — e.  g.  in  the  more  concrete  appre-
ciation of  diversities  of  composite  structure — then  it  cannot
be  warranted  by  the  first.  This  latter  suggestion  would
make  short  work  of  all  conversion  whatever  beyond  the
rank  of  grammatical  change,  unless — TrAeoz;  r\\i.i<Tv  iravros —
mere  selection  can  make  the  old  into  new,  or  unless  some
principle  is  appealed  to  that  goes  beyond  the  judgment
itself.  The  former  part  of  the  objection  may  be  met  by
saying  that  undoubtedly  the  original  judgment  may  be
made  with  the  whole  significance  of  the  two  propositions ;
but  that  when  so  made  it  is  somewhat  artificial,  and  that
the  distinction  of  a  specific  adaptation  within  the  Composite
type  is  naturally  a  different  process  from  the  qualification
of  a  given  shape  by  the  abstraction  of  that  type.  I  may
put  the  antithesis  thus :  the  generic  judgment,  which  we


Chap.  VII.]  Modal  Conversion.  329

took  as  the  convertend,  if  completed  into  identity,  would
determine  the  composite  type  by  limitations  restricting  it  to
the  case  of  the  dahlia  ;  while  the  particular,  in  this  case  the
converse,  if  similarly  completed,  would  extend  the  range  of
species  by  disjunctive  enumeration  till  they  expressed  the
whole  content  of  the  natural  order  of  Compositae.

y.  This  conversion  of  a  generic  judgment  may  be  taken  Modal
either  as  interpretative  or  as  substantial  Inference.  Tested  sion^^"^
by  common  usage  it  is,  I  incline  to  think,  a  substantial
transformation,  resting  on  some  such  principle  as  the
possibility  of  treating  every  content  in  turn  as  quasi-indi-
vidual. Tested  by  the  logical  ideal,  it  is  a  mere  phase
in  the  interpretation  of  the  judgment,  which  involves  re-
ciprocal determination  in  the  affirmation  of  a  nexus.  In
either  case  it  contains  the  only  fundamental  principle  on
which  conversion  can  really  proceed ;  viz.  that  every  con-  V

tent  can  be  exhibited  as  a  quasi-individual  element  in  a
system.  This  is,  for  instance,  the  principle  of  which '  modal '
conversion  is  merely  a  corollary.  In  the  typical  example
employed  above  modality  has  no  real  application ;  modality
only  appears  where  the  disjunction  is  one  of  ignorance.
The  particular  judgment  '  The  type  of  the  Compositae  in-
cludes among  its  alternative  modifications  that  of  the
dahlia '  may  be  read  into '  A  composite  may  be  a  dahlia,'
i.  e.  the  fundamental  structure  C  is  a  real  element  compa-
tible with  the  modification  D.  But  this  is  a  mere  conse-
quence of  feigning  ignorance  when  we  have  knowledge ;
in  order  to  get  the  possibility  we  have  to  imagine  that
conditions  are  unknown  which  in  fact  are  distinctly  known
and  enter  into  the  content  of  the  judgment

The  pure  Hypothetical  Judgment  differs  from  the  Generic
by  disregarding  individuality,  and  therefore  the  above  prin-
ciple is  disguised  in  converting  a  Hypothetical,  so  that  we
appear  in  this  case  to  obtain  pure  modal  conversion.  '  If
arsenic  is  taken  in  such  and  such  a  quantity,  it  will  cause
death  with  such  and  such  symptoms,'  which  gives  the  con-
verse '  Death  with  such  and  such  symptoms  at  least  may


330 Negation^  Opposition^  and  Conversion, [booki.

have  been  caused  by  arsenic' This  is  a  motived  possibility
{  or  real  possibility,  not  a  mere  possibility,  and  forms  a  sub-

stantial conclusion  and  one  warranted  by  the  convertend.
But  this  result  is  still  rather  a  corollary  from  the  converse,
than  the  converse  itself.  The  example  just  quoted  is  one
hardly  deserving  hypothetical  form.  It  involves  no  trace-
able modification  such  as  to  set  up  a  clear  nexus  between
antecedent  and  consequence.  Thus  we  cannot  assign  any
precise  conditions  under  which  the  consequent  is  related  to
the  given  antecedent,  and  the  possibility  that  such  death
may  result  from  such  poison  is  merely  a  fact  plus  unknown
alternatives.  In  a  true  hypothetical  there  is  more  than
this.  Grant  that  it  is  not  simply  convertible,  still  we  can
bring  the  possibility  home  to  the  nature  of  the  consequent.
'  If  straight  lines  are  parallel,  they  do  not  tend  to  meet.'
The  real  converse  of  this  is,  '  Straight  lines  in  the  same
plane  which  do  not  tend  to  meet  are  parallel.'  But  the
limiting  condition  is  not  given  in  the  convertend.  Nor
do  I  mean  that  we  have  a  right  actually  to  state  it  in  the
converse,  but  yet  we  must  think  of  the  converse  where
such  a  condition  can  be  suggested  as  exhibiting  a  real  if
undefined  attribute  of  the  content  which  is  now  the  subject,
in  virtue  of  which  this  content  includes  the  case  mentioned
in  the  antecedent  of  the  convertend.  The  affinity  between
generic  judgments  and  the  more  valuable  hypotheticals  is
very  close,  and  we  lose  all  hold  on  the  generic  element  in
\|  judgment  if  we  insist  on  reducing  a  definitely  determinable
content  to  one  real  alternative  in  an  unknown  number  of
unknown  ones.  I  cordially  agree  therefore  with  Mr.  Bradley's
distinction  between  real  and  mere  possibility,  and  only  in-
sist that  the  true  content  even  of  a  modal  converse  is  the
positive  nature  in  virtue  of  which  the  subject-content  is
variously  determinable,  and  not  a  mere  conjunction  of
attributes  phis  other  unknown  conjunctions.
Simple  6.  We  are  now  to  speak  shortly  of  conversion  in  which

of^Unher-  the  negative  is  employed. Every  negation  rests,  as  we
sal  Nega- havc  secn,  in  its  purely  formal  aspect,  on  the  ultimate  or


Chap.  VII.] Elementary  meaning  of  Negation. 331

absolute  disjunction.  But  it  does  not  follow  from  this
that  a  real  process  of  substantial  inference  takes  place
where  negation  intervenes.

I  begin  with  the  simple  conversion :  '  A  is  not  B,'  there-
fore '  B  is  not  A  ;'  '  No  negroes  have  straight  hair,'  '  No
straight-haired  man  is  a  negro.'  I  should  certainly  prefer
representing  this  transition  as  a  true  process  of  argument
to  illustrating  it  by  a  diagram  of  two  separate  circles,  be-
cause by  the  latter  means  we  destroy  all  idea  of  the  struc-
ture of  the  judgment.  But  yet  I  cannot  think  that  in  our
present  stage  of  reflection  the  argument  if  any  is  more
than  interpretative,  i.  e.  more  than  we  are  always  using  in
arriving  at  the  full  meaning  of  any  sentence.  We  can
formally  trace  out  the  process  of  inference,  but  in  using
it  we  are  like  an  engine  running  free  and  doing  no  work.
No  doubt  the  formal  steps  are,  beginning  from  the  ulti-
mate disjunction  between  'is'  and  'is  not,'  to  say  *  No
negroes  have  straight  hair;'  '  Straight-haired  men  are  either
negroes  or  not ;'  '  If  negroes,  then  they  are  both  straight-
haired  and  not  straight-haired  ;'  '  Therefore  it  is  false  that
they  are  negroes,'  '  therefore  they  are  not  negroes.'  But
all  this  is  given  in  the  meaning  and  practice  of  any  civilised
language ;  and  though  it  might  be  possible  to  stumble  in
using  this  converse  ^,  that  is  no  more  than  may  happen
in  reading  any  sentence  however  simple.  The  elementary
meaning  is  simply  that  the  two  contents  are  in  the  relation
of  abstract  otherness  to  each  other,  and  refuse  to  be  brought
together  in  the  modified  or  concrete  otherness  which  sub-
sists within  the  affirmative  judgment.

e.  Contraposition  seems  to  contain  a  more  remote  con-  Contra-
clusion. It  goes  from  A  is  B,  to  Not-B  is  not  A,  e.  g.  from  Po^^o°-
'  Every  negro  has  woolly  hair '  to  '  A  man  who  has  not
woolly  hair  is  not  a  negro.' I  remark  on  this  process,  i.
that  the  skeleton  argument  with  symbolic  letters  seems
far  more  remote  and  obscure  than  the  intelligible  example  ;

'  As  e.  g.  if  any  one  tried  to  argue  that  *  All  not-straight-haired  are
negroes.*


332 Negation,  Opposition^  and  Conversion, [booki.


Privation.

Affirma-
tion and
Exclusion.


ii.  that  we  are  much  hampered  in  the  apprehension  of  our
inference  by  being  forbidden  to  conclude  that  'Not- A  is
not-B,'  which  the  ideal  of  judgment  demands  as  the  ex-
pression of  the  negative  instance, '  Just  not-A  is  just  not-B,'
e.g. — the  affirmative  being  'True  freedom  is  virtue' — 'If
you  fail  to  produce  freedom,  you  fail  so  far  and  for  that
reason  to  produce  virtue.'  And,  iii.  substantial  inference
is  less  likely  here,  for  the  unity  of  the  judgment  is
much  greater  in  affirmation  than  in  negation ;  and  when
we  have  just,  so  to  speak,  dipped  the  object  a  in  the
colour  b,  it  seems  idle  to  ask  on  the  basis  of  that  judgment
whether  what  is  not  of  the  colour  h  can  be  the  object  a.
We  are  in  fact  no  longer  dealing  with  a  and  b,  but  with  a  b
as  including  all  a.  We  may  say  of  course,  '  Oh  yes !  not-i^
is  not-«,  because  if  not-^  is  a  then  it  is  b'  But  this  remark
is  made  ready  to  our  hand  ;  we  have  just  qualified  a\iy  b
and  therefore  are  at  least  entitled  to  '  ^  is  not  not-^,'  which
brings  back  our  problem  to  the  last  head,  that  of  simple
conversion.

In  short,  then,  in  both  these  cases  we  employ  the  absolute
alternative  ;  but  this  is  given  in  the/(?rw  of  negation  or  con-
tradiction, and  needing  no  true  limitation  of  alternatives,
can  only  rank  as  a  formal  principle  of  intelligible  thought
and  speech,  not  as  a  real  addition  to  content  of  inference.
Transition  by  help  of  such  a  formal  principle  I  call  Inter-
pretative Inference.

5.  The  external  shape  of  negation  belongs  as  we  saw  to
ignorance,  and  significant  negation  is  knowledge  disguised
as  ignorance.  For  bare  denial  would  be  devoid  of  meaning.
Now  this  external  shape  of  negation  seems  really  appro-
priate where  positive  knowledge  fails,  i.  e.  in  the  region  of
what  has been called Privation  \ — the  mere  absence  of


^  '  Privation,' /';'?Va/2(7,  used  by  Sigwart  as  equivalent  to  Aristotle's  areprjais,
OTfprjTiKus,  and  as  contrasted  v/ith  opposition,  ivavnoTTjs,  and  distinct  from
negation,  a-n6(paais.  "ZreprjaLS  seems  to  be  applied  to  any  negative  enunciation,
diro(t>d(ns  only  to  the  denial  of  an  affirmation  ;  see  Aristotle's  Organon,  38  b,  13,
with  Waitz's  note.  Unluckily  the  distinction  of  privative  and  negative  terms
as  given  e.g.  in  Whately's  Logic  has  just the  reverse  meaning  to  that  of


Chap.  VII.] Docs  tiot-impossible  =^ possible  ?  333

positive  determination.  But  this  region  is  also  the  region
within  which  there  falls  the  limitation  of  knowledge,  a
matter  of  the  most  serious  and  positive  import.  Where
knowledge  simply  fails  us,  and  consequently  we  seem  to
have  nothing  left  but  privation  or  bare  denial,  how  are
we  to  pronounce  on  any  suggested  possibility,  a.  by  way
of  affirmation,  ^.  by  way  of  exclusion?

The  case  a  is  the  more  complicated  of  the  two.  The  Privation
privation  or  bare  denial  is  in  this  case  the  bare  denial  of  ^gab^ty
an  incompatibility  with  reality,  i.e.  of  an  impossibility.
Exclusion,  as  we  have  seen,  must  rest  on  a  positive  quality,
a  ground  of  negation.  Here,  ex  hypothesis  we  can  find  no
exclusimt  of  the  impossibility.  We  are  supposed  to  know
simply  nothing,  either  pro  or  con,  about  the  positive  matter
whose  possibility  is  in  question.  Are  we  therefore  bound
to  admit  that  it  is  not  not-possible,  and,  as  a  consequence
of  this  double  negation,  that  it  is  possible  ?  If  we  are  led
to  do  this — and  the  trick  is  often  attempted,  especially  in
popular  theology — we  feel  that  we  have  been  cheated.  A
possibility,  in  the  usual  sense  of  the  term,  is  something.
We  are  foolish  if  we  do  not  keep  it  in  view  and  let  it  in-
fluence our  deliberations  in  any  w^ay  which  its  nature  de-
mands. Yet  this  something  has  here  ex  hypothesi  been
created  out  of  nothing.  But  in  knowledge  at  least  nothing
can  come  of  nothing,  and  we  are  trapped  in  a  contradiction.

What  we  have  to  remember  is  that  our  denial  of  the
exclusion  of  the  positive  content  is  or  approximates  ^  to  a
bare  denial  ;  or  in  other  words,  rests  upon  no  positive
ground.  We  do  not  exclude  the  impossibility;  we  only
fail  to  find  it.  And  therefore  our  denial  is  meaningless
or  nearly  meaningless,  and  amounts  to  nothing. In  other

privation  and  negation  in  Sigwart  and  Bradley.  '  Privative '  in  Whately  indi-
cates a  positive  opposite,  and  'negative'  a  mere  absence.  The  association
with  active  '  deprivation '  implying  a  loss  appears  to  be  the  cause  of  this  usage.
^  '  Approximates '  for  a  suggestion,  if  intelligible,  contains  sorm  ground  in
its  mere  conceivability,  and  thus  affords  material  for  intelligible  support  or  refu-
tation. But  by  far  the  larger  element  in  the  importunity  of  many  suggestions  is
drawn  from  the  fallacy  of  inferring  from  non-impossibility  to  real  possibility.


334 Negation,  Opposition,  and  Conversion. [booki.

words,  the  possibility  which  we  are  asked  to  infer  from
mere  not-impossibility  has  as  so  inferred  no  foundation  in
positive  reality.  A  real  possibility  of  any  result  consists  in
something  given  as  actual,  which,  under  conditions  of
known  nature  and  not  known  to  be  impossible,  would  give
that  result.  A  gun  forms  a  real  possibility  of  shooting,  if
there  is  no  reason  to  suppose  that  cartridges  are  not  to  be
had ;  an  acorn  is  a  real  possibility  of  an  oak,  if  we  know  of
nothing  to  hinder  its  being  planted  and  growing.  But  in
the  case  supposed  we  have  nothing  like  this ;  we  have
simply  nothing — a  failure  to  find  incompatibility.  There-
fore we  ought,  strictly  speaking,  to  conclude  not  that  it  is
possible,  which  is  an  affirmation,  nor  even  that  it  is  not  im-
possible, which  borrows  the  form  of  intelligible  denial,  and
therefore  presupposes  a  positive  ground  of  denial,  but
simply  that  we  do  not  know  it  to  be  possible.  This  con-
clusion gives  its  true  value  to  the  form  of  bare  denial  by
making  the  ground  of  negation  what  in  the  case  of  ignor-
ance it  really  is,  an  actual  state  of  our  own  minds  which
excludes  the  knowledge  in  question.

Instances  of  assertion  resting  mainly  on  this  confusion
are  to  be  found  e.  g.  in  expositions  of  the  so-called  modern
Buddhism,  the  elaborate  dogmatic  fabric  of  which  is  chiefly
protected  from  criticism  by  the  impossibility  of  discovering
any  ground  on  which  it  may  be  taken  to  rest,  and  against
which,  therefore,  a  positive  objection  can  be  raised.

To  put  the  point  in  other  words,  in  the  case  before  us  it
is  not  true  that  double  negation  is  equivalent  to  affirmation.
For  the  double  negation  in  question  is  founded  neither  on
the  affirmation  itself,  nor  on  the  denial  of  a  specific  alterna-
tive to  the  affirmation.  If  there  were  such  a  specific
alternative  to  the  affirmation,  it  could  only  be  denied  on
some  positive  ground,  and  such  a  denial  would  not  be  the
bare  denial  of  which  ex  hypothesi  we  are  treating.

Or  again,  without  appealing  to  the  difference  between
privation,  i.  e.  bare  denial,  and  exclusion — a  confusion  be-
tween which  processes  however  is  the  root  of  the  fallacy —


CHAP.\ni.]  Privatio7i  and  Exclusion.  335

we  may  simply  lay  it  do%\'n  that  a  real  possibility  is
something  actual,  and  that  a  bare  denial  affirms  nothing  as
actual,  and  therefore  a  bare  denial  cannot  affirm  a  real
possibility.

And  it  must  be  added  with  reference  to  remote  sugges-
tions generally,  that  a  failure  to  demonstrate  impossibility
can  almost  always  be  secured  by  a  high  degree  of  remote-
ness or  of  abstractness  in  the  suggestion  itself.  Thus,  if
accepted  as  really  possible  because  not  demonstrably  im-
possible, such  a  suggestion  would  profit  by  its  own  wrong.
Reality  cannot,  for  us,  contradict  a  suggestion  that  has  no
point  of  contact  with  reality.  Things  in  themselves,
according  to  the  popular  notion  of  the  Kantian  doctrine,
are  the  content  of  such  a  suggestion.  They  made  no  claim
to  affect  knowable  Reality,  and  therefore  knowable  Reality
can  present  no  quality  which  excludes  them.  As  a  rule,  to
disprove  the  grounds  on  which  a  fact  is  advanced  is  not  the
same  thing  as  disproving  the  alleged  fact ;  denying  the
antecedent  does  not  amount  to  denying  the  consequent.
But  in  the  case  of  unverifiable  suggestions  the  grounds
which  are  implied  in  the  suggestion  are  for  a  given  state  of
knowledge  the  sole  grounds  conceivable,  or  at  least  the
grounds  which  can  be  stated  are  capable  of  exhaustion,
and  the  disproof  of  them  may  be  taken  as  for  that  state
of  knowledge  disproving  the  suggestion.  It  must  be
remembered  that  denying  the  antecedent  does  deny  the
consequent  qua  consequent  of  the  antecedent  denied.  At
any  rate  it  is  clear  that  in  such  cases  as  those  imder  dis-
cussion the  failure  to  prove  impossibility  which  arises
from  the  emptiness  of  the  suggestions  themselves  must  not
be  taken  as  amounting  to  the  establishment  of  real  pos-
sibility.

^.  We  cannot  go  from  bare  denial,  or  privation,  of  an  Privation
impossibility,  to  real  possibility,  because  privation  of  im-  ^jiityf^*^
possibility does not involve positive  affirmation as  the
exclusion  of  impossibility  does. It  may  seem therefore
that  we  have  decided  in  the  negative  by  anticipation  the


^2,^ Negation,  Opposition,  and  Conversion. [Booki.

question  whether  privation  or  bare  denial  can  ever  justify
exclusion.  We  denied  the  claim  of  privation  to  establish
real  possibility,  on  the  ground  that  it  could  not  exclude,
as  one  form  of  the  ground  that  it  could  not  affirm.  Thus
when  we  omit  the  incompatibility  or  impossibility,  and
consider  merely  the  exclusion  of  any  positive  content,  it
seems  that  we  cannot  predicate  exclusion  on  the  strength
of  privation.  Up  to  a  certain  point  common  sense  and
experience  support  this  result.  Gold  has  never  been  found
in  Northumberland,  but  that  alone  does  not  prove  that  it
never  can  be  found  there,  unless  the  geological  formation
forbids,  i.  e.  is  a  positive  ground  of  exclusion.

Still,  the  two  transitions,  from  privation  of  impossibility
to  affirmation  of  real  possibility,  and  from  privation  of
actuality  to  exclusion  of  possibility  or  of  actuality,  do  not
stand  on  quite  the  same  level.  The  former  is  explicitly
a  passage  from  denial  to  affirmation,  or,  as  we  saw,  from
nothing  to  something.  The  latter  retains  its  negative
form  and  vehicle  unchanged,  and  leaves  the  change  of  its
ground  and  bearings  the  two  other  elements  of  meaning  ^,
to  be  moulded  by  the  context.  Any  mere  denial  or  priva-
tion when  expressed  intelligibly  is  given  a  ground  and
bearing  with  reference  to  our  cognitive  state,  as  we  saw  in
dealing  with  the  instance,  '  We  do  not  know  that  there  are
things  in  themselves.'  What  is  a  bare  denial  with  reference
to  reality  is  a  positive  affirmation  about  our  knowledge.
We  have  agreed  that  we  cannot  transform  'We  do  not
know  it  to  be  impossible '  into  ^  It  is  possible.'  Can
we  transform  '  We  do  not  know  it  to  exist '  into  '  It  does
not  exist '  ?

It  is  plain,  I  think,  that  many  beliefs  become  abortive
and  cease  to  be  regarded  because  we  become  convinced
that  reality  does  not  constrain  us  to  accept  them.  And  it
seems  an  unworthy  shirking  of  a  theoretical  difficulty  to
treat  these  beliefs  as  shelved  but  not  denied.  If,  whether
in  serious  speculation  or  in  grave  practical deliberation,

*  See  above,  p.  305.


Chap. vii] Doubt  involves  Knowledge.  337

some  idea  cognate  with  the  matters  then  before  the  mind
has  ceased  to  exercise  the  slightest  bias  on  thought  or  on
action,  it  seems  idle  to  say  that  upon  such  an  idea  we  have
suspended  judgment  as  upon  something  that  may  be  true
in  itself  but  is  nothing  for  us.  It  seems  clear  that  upon
such  an  idea — I  may  instance  the  Swedenborgian  hierarchy
of  spiritual  beings  — we  have  in  fact  sate  in  judgment  and
have  condemned  it  as  unreal.  But  I  admit  that  the  specu-
lative expression  of  our  relation  to  such  conceptions  meets
with  serious  difficulty  from  the  necessity  of  basing  denial
upon  a  positive  ground.  On  what  positive  ground  can  I
base  a  denial  that  there  are  exactly  seven  heavens,  or
that  there  are  just  seven  orders  of  superior  spirits.?  I  un-
questionably do  deny  it,  that  is  to  say,  *  I  do  not  believe  it.'
The  habitual  use  of  such  phrases  as  this  ^,  which  refer
grammatically  to  a  fact  of  my  intellectual  state,  but  actually
serve  as  negations  of  something  ascribed  to  reality,  bears
witness  to  the  connection  which  I  am  attempting  to
point  out.

Incompatibility  in  the  ordinary  sense  depends  on  the
system  of  reality.  Differents  which  claim  the  same  place
are  incompatible,  and.  in  short,  everything  is  incompatible
with  reality  which,  while  not  conforming  to  our  ideal  system
which  stands  for  reality,  is  yet  without  the  power  to  modify
it.  But.  as  I  pointed  out  above,  all  this  falls  to  the  ground
where  the  system  does  not  extend.  Where  'we  do  not
know'  in  the  sense  of  having  no  knowledge — not  merely
in  the  sense  of  lacking  complete  knowledge — we  can  say
nothing,  and  ex  nihilo  nil.  '  Then,'  it  may  be  said,  '  neither
acceptance  nor  rejection^  I  cannot  follow  this.  Know-
ledge is  positive,  and  acceptance  and  rejection  are  not  co-
ordinate alternatives.  We  doubt,  where  we  have  a  basis
of  fact  to  go  upon,  and  presumptions  that  appeal  to  that
basis ;  but  where  we  have  nothing  to  go  upon  we  cannot
doubt.

'  Compare  ov  <p^iu,  which  means  '  I  deny,'  or  otir  common  phrase  'I  don't
think  that ' — which  is  really  eqnivalent  to  '  I  think  that — not'
VOL.  I.  Z


338 Negation,  opposition^  and  Conversion. [Booki,

The  only  conclusion  that  I  see  open  to  us  is  of  this
nature.  Where  privation  seems  to  warrant  exclusion,  we
must  look  for  the  positive  ground  of  exclusion  in  the  deter-
minate completeness  of  our  ideal  Reality.  Such  a  ground
may  be  hard  to  state,  and  may  amount  in  positive  content
to  little  more  than  our  experience  of  the  persistency  of  the
privation.  But  its  nature  must  be  that  the  ideal  Reality
by  its  organised  completeness  excludes  the  matter  which
attempts  to  introduce  itself.  This  must  not  be  taken  to
mean  that  we  are  nearly  omniscient.  It  means  that  the
general  plan  and  growth  of  our  knowledge  is  such  as  to
afford  no  basis  of  attachment  for  the  proposed  accretion,
although  for  this  very  reason  we  are  unable  to  specify  any
definite  antagonism  between  the  content  suggested  and  the
positive  contents  already  accepted  as  part  of  Reality.
Reality  is  not  especially  incompatible  with  seven  heavens  ;
it  could  be  so  only  if  we  accepted  some  kind  of  heaven  as  a
reality  and  were  prepared,  on  the  basis  of  our  knowledge
about  it,  to  reject  either  the  particular  number  seven,  or  the
application  of  number  to  such  a  subject  at  all.  What  we
really  have  to  say  is  that  we  do  seem  able  to  trace,  however
imperfectly,  something  like  a  development  of  the  sensuous
into  the  spiritual  world ;  and  that  the  main  lines  of  this
development  appear  to  have  a  completeness  of  their  own,
without  growing  out  into  a  duplicate  and  quasi-material
world.

It  is  not  enough  to  destroy  the  grounds  on  which  a
suggestion  is  explicitly  based,  unless  we  can  show  that  they
form  not  merely  the  sole  ground  alleged,  but  the  sole
ground  possible.  And  in  a  region  beyond  our  knowledge
this  ex  hypothesi  cannot  be  done.  It  is  often  possible  to
show  by  what  logical  fallacy  or  by  what  psychological
tendency  a  suggestion  was  generated  ;  but  this  is  not  a
logical  refutation.  It  may  however  grow  into  a  refutation
if,  besides  the  tendency  which  caused  the  error,  we  can
exhibit  the  satisfaction  which  reality  offers  to  the  rational
necessity  embodied  in  that  tendency. We  thus  not  only


Chap.  VII.] General  and  special  Negation.  339

destroy  the  raison  d'etre  of  the  error,  but  show  a  presumption
that  there  is  an  excluding  ground.

Exclusion  by  Privation  then  rests  on  a  conviction,  won
by  persistent  lack  of  affirmation,  of  the  true  negative  limit
and  external  contour  of  knowledge,  which  limit,  qua  the  true
limit,  must  be  held  true  of  reality.  A  privation  cannot
ultimately  be  referred  to  our  knowledge  only.  If  persistent
in  the  historv  of  thought  and  justified  by  the  tendencies  of
knowledge,  it  must  sooner  or  later  be  taken  as  true  of
reality.

At  best,  we  must  remember,  negation  is  always  negative.
The  last  step  from  the  positive  ground  to  its  formal  expres-
sion by  means  of  denial,  retains  the  form  of  privation,  i.e.  of
ignorance.  This  is  what  the  old  saying  means, '  you  cannot
prove  a  negative.'  The  negation  is  not  after  all  quite  the
same  as  the  positive  opposite  latent  under  the  negation.
You  cannot  prove  that  parallels  never  meet.  In  order  to  do
so,  you  would  have,  like  the  Irishman,  to  '  be  there  when  it
did  not  happen.'  You  can  only  prove  that  they  always  do
this,  that,  or  the  other  which  in  virtue  of  your  geometrical
experience  you  take  as  equivalent  to  not  meeting.  That  is
to  say^  assuming  your  geometrical  system  to  be  ad  hoc
exhaustive,  then  your  failure  to  see,  on  the  basis  of  that
system,  how  parallels  can  meet  becomes  knowledge  though
it  retains  the  form  of  ignorance.  It  expresses  a  limit  or
outline  essential  to  geometrical  science.  Thus  the  cases  of
persistent  privation  and  of  true  positive  exclusion  (genuine
denial,  not  bare  denial)  differ  simply  by  the  nature  of  the
positive  ground  which  underlies  them  respectively.  In
privation  this  ground  is  general,  drawn  from  the  character
and  tendencies  of  Reality;  in  true  exclusion  it  is  special,
drawn  from  a  system  within  which  the  alleged  reality  would
fall.  It  would  seem  fair  to  concede  to  the  former  somewhat
more  and  to  the  latter  somewhat  less  finality  than  common
theory  recognises.


Z  a


CHAPTER VIII.

Disjunction  and  the  statement  of  Chances.

The  pis- I.  The  Disjunctive  Judgment  combines  in  an  explicit
Judgment,  ^o^m  the  characteristics  of  the  Generic  and  of  the  pure

Hypothetical  Judgments.
Its  Genesis,  i.  It  is  needless  however,  and  would  be  artificial,  to
lay  down  rules  for  the  precise  mode  of  transition  from
these  judgments  to  the  complete  Disjunction.  The  whole
assertory  state  within  which  the  simpler  forms  of  judg-
ment, at  any  rate  from  Comparison  upwards,  have  their
import,  is  from  the  first  of  a  disjunctive  nature.  Re-
flection may  therefore  be  stimulated  to  the  explicit
formulation  of  this  type  of  knowledge  by  very  various
vj  occasions.  But  the  common  ground  which  must  operate  in
all  these  occasions  is  the  discovery  of  differences  into  each
of  which  the  identity  underlying  all  of  them  enters  as  a
whole,  and  in  all  of  which  taken  together  its  manifestations
are  exhausted.  Every  difference  has  the  former  of  thesej
characters  in  some  point  of  view.  A  conjunctive  judgmentj|
or  conjunction  of  judgments  with  an  identical  subject,  a
always  be  made  disjunctive  by  wilful  abstraction,
diamond  is  carbon,  and  crystalline,  and  very  hard,  anc
highly  refractive.  This  is  a  conjunctive  judgment  or  set  o^
judgments^.  But  if  we  limit  the  underlying  identity,  th<
nature  of  the  stone,  by  the  several  conditions  under  whicl
it  exhibits  these  several  predicates,  then  each  of  these
predicates  may  be  regarded  as  not  conjoined  with  bul
exclusive  of  the  other  attributes  enumerated.  A  diamonc
may  be  considered  either  merely  as  an  element,  or  merelj
as  a  transparent  substance  exhibiting  crystalline  structure
or  in  its  power  of  scratching  other  hard  substances,  or  in  it

'  *  See  above,  chap,  i,  on  the  Judgment  in  Time.


Transition  to  Disjunction,  341

effect  upon  light.  This  is  disjunction — arbitrary  and  sub-
jective, if  we  please,  but  still  disjunction.  Any  distinguish-
able attributes  may  be  regarded  as  reciprocally  exclusive  by
our  simply  refusing  to  attend  to  more  than  one  of  them  at
once.  X  may  be  both  a  and  b,  but  qua  «  it  is  not  b.  But
in  another  respect  also  the  above  instance  of  disjunction  is
bad  and  arbitrary.  It  makes  no  serious  attempt  to  exhaust
the  attributes.  We  stop  enumerating  them  simply  because
we  do  not  care  to  go  on.

It  is  clear  that  a  disjunctive  judgment  may  originate  with
a  conjunction  of  judgments  like  the  above,  which  turn  out  to
have  assignable  relations  to  one  another,  or,  again,  with  the
discovery  of  an  error  in  a  generic  judgment;  e.g.  ''  Cereus
is  a  night-flowering  plant.'  '  No  :  Cereus  grandiflonis  is  a
night-flowering  plant,  but  there  are  a  hundred  species  of
Cereus,  and  not  all  are  night-flowering.'  Such  considera-
tions would  force  upon  us  the  disjunction, '  Cereus  blossoms
either  at  night,  or  in  the  early  morning,  or  etc.,  etc'  Again,
the  attempt  to  convert  a  generic  judgment  naturally  leads  to
a  disjunction  ^.  And  so  does  the  challenge  thrown  down  by
the  specific  condition  and  consequent  of  a  pure  hypothetical
judgment.  '  If  we  catch  the  train  this  morning  we  reach
London  to-night.'  In  presence  of  such  an  assertion  it  is
not  in  human  nature  to  abstain  from  asking,  '  And  if  we
miss  the  train,  what  then?'  so  as  to  make  explicit  the
disjunction,  *We  either  catch  the  train  or  miss  it;'  and
probably  some  such  further  consequence  as, '  We  either  get
to  London  to-night,  or  have  to  sleep  at  Crewe.'

All  these  are  merely  different  ways  of  giving  utterance  to
the  interest  which  attaches  to  some  pervading  identity  and
compels  us  to  pursue  it  throughout  its  modifications.  Such
an  interest,  as  we  have  seen.environs  every- genuine  judgment,
and  makes  it  an  element  in  a  system.  And  in  proportion
as  such  a  system  is  made  explicit,  negation  enters  into
knowledge.  For  in  every  system  the  parts  have  an  aspect
of  negative  relation  to  one  another.

*  See  above,  chap,  vii,  on  the  Conversioii  of  generic  judgmoits.


342  Disjunction  and  the  statement  of  Chances,  [book  i.


Imperfect
Disjunc-
tions.

Not
exclusive.


Thus  the  immediate  occasion  on  which  we  form  a  disjunc-
tive judgment  may  vary.  But  the  characteristics  of  true
disjunction  do  not  vary.  By  true  disjunction  I  mean  a
judgment  in  which  alternatives  falling  under  a  single  identity
are  enumerated,  and  are  known  in  virtue  of  some  pervading
principle  to  be  reciprocally  exclusive,  and  to  be  exhaustive.
This  is  the  disjunction  of  which  I  shall  treat,  being  convinced
that  what  seem  to  be  different  kinds  of  it  are  in  fact  nothing
but  imperfect  examples.

ii.  I  will  mention  three  of  these.

a.  First,  there  is  the  so-called  disjunction  in  which  the
alternatives  are  exhaustively  enumerated,  but  are  not  taken
to  exclude  one  another.  '  He  is  either  knave  or  fool '
does  not,  it  is  said,  exclude  the  possibility  that  he  may  be
both.  On  the  question  of  the  genuineness  of  these  dis-
junctions I  must  refer  to  Mr.  Bradley's  detailed  discussion  S
which  appears  to  me  to  show  decisively  that  we  never
really  mean  to  take  into  consideration  under  our  judgment
the  conjunction  of  the  alternatives  specified  in  our '  Either ' —
'  or.'  Without  following  him  into  the  study  of  grammatical
details,  I  content  myself  with  remarking  that  any  Disjunc-
tion in  which  the  alternatives  are  not  reciprocally  exclusive
must  of  necessity  fail  to  be  exhaustive — the  case  or  cases
in  which  any  of  them  are  conjoined  being  casus  omissi.
If,  for  the  purpose  of  the  disjunction,  such  a  case  may  be
reckoned  under  one  of  the  other  alternatives,  then  indeed
the  disjunction  may  be  reckoned  to  be  perfect ;  but  then
the  case  of  conjunction  does  not  rank  as  conjunction,  but
under  one  or  other  of  its  component  elements.  Thus, '  To  go
by  train  you  must  have  either  a  first,  second,  or  third  class
ticket.'  A  man  may  of  course  buy  all  three,  if  he  pleases  ;
but  the  possession  of  them  does  not  constitute  a  fourth  case
of  liberty  to  go  by  the  train.  He  goes  by  the  train  ir\
virtue  of  one  or  other,  though  he  may  change  carriages  at
every  station  if  it  amuses  him. The  conjunction of  all


^  Principles  of  Logic,  Book  I.  chap.  iv.


Chap,  vaii.] Ignorance  on  a  specific  point.  343

three  tickets  forms  no  separate  alternative  as  a  particular
way  of  going  by  train,  and  therefore  is  rightly  disregarded
in  the  disjunction.  It  is  not  indeed  implied  that '  If  he  has
a  first-class  ticket  he  has  not  a  second  or  third,'  but  it  is
implied  that  '  If  he  goes  in  virtue  of  a  first-class  ticket  he
does  not  go  in  virtue  of  a  second  or  third.'

/3.  Secondly,  there  are  the  troublesome  cases  often  taken  r>isjtmc-
as  the  true  instances  of  Disjunction,  which  may  be  called  ignorance.
'  Disjunctions  of  ignorance.' The  essence  of  these  is  that
they  refer  to  an  individual  (actual  or  supposed)  and  not  to
an  individuality,  and  consequently  express  doubt  or  indeci-
sion rather  than  knowledge.

'  A  triangle  is  either  isosceles,  scalene,  or  equilateral.*
A  triangle  here  can  mean  any  individual  triangle  you  may
pitch  upon — '  any  given  triangle.'  And  with  respect  to
such  an  individual  triangle  the  disjunction  says  that  it
must  belong  to  one  of  the  three  kinds  mentioned,  but
that we do not know to which. Lotze, for instance,  V

appears  to  accept  this  expression  of  indecision  as  the
final  type  of  disjunction.  But  it  seems  obvious  that
this  uncertainty  is  purely  dramatic  or  fictitious,  and  is  a
mere  corollary  from  the  true  disjunction,  which  is,  '  A  three-
sided  plane  figure  as  such  must  have  all  its  sides  equal,  or
two  only  equal,  or  all  unequal.'  Or  we  may  take  a  case
where  the  doubt  is  real,  as  often  in  common  life;  but
here  also  it  is  a  mere  application  of  or  inference  from  the
true  disjunction  of  knowledge.  '  Being  an  Oxford  man,  he
is  either  a  University  College  man  or  a  Balliol  man,  or
etc'  This  judgment,  which  is  a  real  expression  of  doubt  or
ignorance,  is  based  of  course  on  the  positive  knowledge  that
the  conditions  of  University  life  require  the  student  as  such
(generically)  to  attach  himself  to  some  one  of  the  corporate
bodies  enumerated  in  the  judgment.  With  disjunctions  of
this  type  we  must  class  the  commonest  of  all  expressions
of  doubt  or  ignorance.  '  He  is  either  angry  or  jealous,'
'  He  has  either  measles  or  scarlet  fever.'  These,  like  the
above,  differ  not  in  principle  but  only  in  perfection  from  the


344  Disjunction  OMci  the  statement  of  Chances,  [booki.

ideal  disjunction.  What  operates  is  something  we  know,
and  know  to  contain  the  specified  alternatives.  We  do  not
however  specify  our  knowledge  in  detail — it  may  consist  in  a
content  hard  to  define — and  we  merely  point  to  the  concrete
individual,  in  whom  it  is  embodied  and  from  whom  it  takes
its  interest.  About  this  individual,  as  his  complete  state
goes  beyond  our  knowledge,  the  judgment  takes  the  shape
of  doubt,  just  as  in  the  case  of  '  any  given  triangle.'  The
higher  logical  form  may  be  imposed  on  the  lower  content ;
this  is  a  possibility  which  follows  from  the  nature  of  reason,
and  which  makes  abstract  distinction  appear  in  some  aspects
^  so  valueless. Every  thinkable  content  has  in  miniature  all

the  characteristics  of  reason,  and  in  the  abstract  you  can
hardly  say  anything  of  the  self-conscious  mind  which  is  not
also  true  of  a  protococcus  or  of  a  pebble.  The  precise
modes  and  degrees  in  which  the  content  fulfils  the  spirit  of
its  abstract  form  are  what  we  must  keep  our  eyes  on  in  a
true  concrete  science.  I  cannot  admit  then  that  the  mere
inference  from  our  disjunctive  knowledge  respecting  that
which  an  individuality  implies,  to  a  doubt  respecting  a
given  or  supposed  individual,  has  a  claim  to  rank  as  a
genuine  species  of  disjunction.
Disjunc-  y.  It  is  a  similar  vice  to  account  for  the  exclusiveness  of

ferred  to  ^  disjunction  by  referring  it  to  a  point  of  time.  No  judg-
point  of  ment  whatever  refers  to  an  atomic  point  of  time ;  and  no
universal  judgment  refers  to  any  time  except  that  implied
in  the  content  of  the  judgment  itself.  The  time  at  which
the  predication  happens  to  be  made  has  nothing  to  do  with
the  import  of  any  judgment  except  in  as  far  as  it  is  taken
into  the  content  by  reference  direct  or  indirect  to  present
perception  ^  The  denial  of  coexistence  in  time,  which
appears  in  some  disjunctions  to  be  the  principal  meaning,  is
a  corollary  from  the  nature  of  the  disjoined  contents,  not  a
result  of  the  present  tense  employed  as  a  vehicle  of  pre-
dication. '  A  railway  signal  shows  to  the  same  side  either

^  See  above,  chap,  v,  on  Time  in  singular  judgments.


time.


Chap.  VIII.] TJie  Disjunctive  Predication.  345

a  red,  or  a  green,  or  a  white  light.'  Now  of  course  this
judgment  informs  us  that  at  any  given  moment  of  time
we  shall  only  see  one  of  the  three  lights.  But  to  interpret
the  judgment  as  if  it  essentially  referred  either  to  the
moment  at  which  it  is  made  or  to  '  any  given  moment '  is
a  fallacy  on  all-fours  with  that  pointed  out  above  of  inter-
preting '  The  triangle '  as  =  '  any  given  triangle.'  The
judgment  means  that  the  nature  of  a  railway  signal  is  to
show  one  light  to  the  exclusion  of  another  and  the  other  to
the  exclusion  of  the  one.  From  the  nature  of  the  case  they
exclude  one  another  in  time  and  in  spatial  direction.  But  •
the  present  of  predication  is  coextensive,  in  its  reference,
with  the  nature  of  the  signal^  and  does  not  refer  especially
or  exclusively  to  the  moment  at  which  the  judgment
happens  to  be  pronounced,  nor  even  hypothetically  to  '  any
given  moment.'

We  must  clear  out  of  the  way,  then,  the  above  disjunctions
of  ignorance,  or  dramatic  disjunctions,  and  consider  exclu-
sively the  perfect  disjunction  as  a  form  of  knowledge.  One
more  peculiar  type,  indeed,  will  come  before  us  later  as  the
statement  of  chances.

iii.  A  true  or  ideal  disjunction  is  a  generic  judgment  Logical
whose  content  is  developed  or  inter- related  by  the  aid  ofoft^gDis-
hypotheticals.  jnncUon.

a.  It  is  a  generic  judgment  because  it  deals  with  an  The
individuality,  a  content  which is  a  whole  or system in  ^^^^^
itself So far, like the generic judgment, it is quasi-
categorical. The  subject  is  such  as  can  be  real,  and  the
judgment  assumes  its  reality. But  the  predication  made
of  this  real  and  quasi-individual  subject  is  peculiar,  and  has
points  of  analogy  both  with  the  negative  and  with  the  pure
hypothetical  judgment. The  individuality  is  exhibited  in V
the  different  forms  which  it  is  capable  of  assuming  as  a
whole,  and  which consequently  it  cannot  unite in  itself
under  a  single  set  of  conditions. If  the  individuality  is
considered  as  essentially  affected  by  time,  these  forms  may
be  successive ;  if  it  is  a  generic  or  specific  character,  they


34^  Disjunction  and  the  statement  of  Chances.  [Booki.

may  coexist  in  space  and  time  with  each  other  ;  all  that  is
necessary  is  that  the  subject-content  should  enter  as  a
whole  into  each  of  the  enumerated  forms. What,  then,  is

^  directly predicated of the subject-content? I see no

theoretical  reason  to  deny  that  the  '  either — or  '  considered
as  the  articulate  analysis  of  a  universal  ^  system  of  attri-
butes can  be  intelligibly  and  categorically  predicated  of  it.
Every  predication  includes  differences,  and  an  extended
^  present,  and  therefore  predicates  as  facts  elements  which
can  be  regarded  as  reciprocally  exclusive. In  fact,  every

^  universal  is  a  synthesis  of  such  elements.  But  undoubtedly
there  will  always  be  positive  qualities  which  are  the  con-
densed or  summarised  expression  of  the  total  analysis,  and
may  present  themselves  as  its  ground,  being  thus  in  dis-
junction as  the  positive  ground  or  bearing  in  negation,  and
as  the  underlying  quality  in  the  hypothetical  judgment.
'  The  triangle  is  either  scalene,  isosceles,  or  equilateral '
contains  as  this  condensed  relation,  or  synthesis  of  differ-
ences, '  a  plane  figure  bounded  by  three  sides,  which  may
have  any  relative  length  so  long  as  any  two  of  them  are
together  greater  than  the  third.'  Such  an  attribute  might
be  called  the  categorical  or  positive  basis  of  the  disjunction  ;
but  it  is  an  illusion  to  suppose  that  a  basis  or  ground  is
necessarily  more  real  or  more  primary  than  its  conse-
quences, and  that  therefore  the  implied  predication  in  dis-
junction is  more  categorical  than  the  explicit  '  either— or.'
The  ground  is  to  its  consequences  as  whole  to  part ;  but  if
the  consequences  are  fully  stated  in  a  connected  system
this  distinction  falls  away,  and  in  disjunction  such  full
statement  is  the  ideal.

The  disjunction  is  therefore  the  only  judgment-form
that  in  strict  theory  can  stand  alone.  All  connection  is
within  a  system  ;  and  only  that  judgment  is  self-sufficing
which  affirms  at  once  the  system  and  the  connections
within  it. I  do  not  say  that every  disjunction  is thus

*  *  Universal '  not  in  the  sense  of  abstract  or  generalised,  but  in  the  sense  of
a  concrete  identity  containing  differences.


Chap.  \ail.]


Reciprocal  Relations.


347


ultimately  self-dependent,  but  relatively  to  a  number
of  hypotheticals  which  have  their  truth  within  it  every
true  disjunction  has  a  substantive  character.  Thus  the
lisj unction  which  lays  down  the  nature  and  kinds  of  the
iangle  contains  the  ground  and  basis  of  all  the  hypo-
letical  judgments  which  expound  the  properties  of  that
ire.  In  other  words,  if  completed  and  made  explicit,
ly  one  of  those  hypotheticals  would  result  in  that  dis-
junction; which  however  itself  falls  within  the  ultimate
judgment  that  would  expound  the  nature  and  modes  of
ice.  The  above  then  is  the  generic  or  substantive
lement  in  disjunction.
^.  But  we  need  in  addition  the  reciprocal  relations  The  H>^-
tween  the  forms  which  constitute  the  explicit  development  judgment,
f  this  predicated  universal.  For  these  relations  we  must
p  to  the  hypothetical  judgment,  and  to  the  hypothetical
a  very  late  and  artificial  form,  viz.  that  in  which  the
gation  of  one  content  is  known  as  the  ground  of  the
rmation  of  another  content,  and  the  affirmation  of  the
ne  content  is  known  as  the  ground  of  the  n^ation  of  the
ither  content.  The  perception  of  the  relations  which  these
o  types  of  hypothetical  j  udgment  embody  is  essential  to
e  exhaustiveness  of  the  disjunction  and  to  the  reciprocal
xclusiveness  of  its  members.  In  order  to  know  that  the
tematives  enumerated  are  reciprocally  exclusive,  we  must
able  to  say  (using  as  an  illustration  the  simplest  case  in
hich  there  are  only  the  two  alternatives  B  and  C),  '  If  A
B,  it  is  not  C  And  in  order  to  be  sure  that  no  possible
ternative  is  omitted  we  must  be  able  to  say  (in  the  same
xample)  that  '  if  A  is  not  B,  it  is  C  According  to  a  rule
f  Conversion,  or  rather  of  Inference,  accepted  for  the  case
f  Hypothetical  Judgments  ('  Deny  the  consequent ')  the
uivalent  or  converse  judgments,  '  If  A  is  C  it  is  not
and  'if  A  is  not  C  it  is  B '  are  involved  in  the  two
rresponding  judgments  above  mentioned.  If  this  Conver-
ion  or  Inference  is  disputed,  then  we  must  say  that  all  four
ses, '  If  A  is  B— ,'  '  If  A  is  C— ,'  '  If  A  is  not  B— /  '  If  A


34^  Disjunction  and  the  statement  of  Chances,  [book  i.

is  not  C — ,'  must  be  perceived  independently  before  the
predication  of  disjoined  alternatives  is  justifiable^.

^  I  insert  here  some  details  which  are  legitimate  matter  of  curiosity,  but
would  needlessly  overload  the  text.

i.  It  might  be  urged,  on  the  analogy  of  the  argument  employed  above  (p.  342) —
that  a  disjunction  which  is  thoroughly  exhaustive  cannot  but  have  its  members
reciprocally  exclusive — that  the  hypothetical  which  prima  facie  secures  ex-
haustiveness  (If  A  is  not  B  it  is  C)  ought  to  affirm  the  reciprocal  exclusiveness
of  the  antecedent  and  consequent,  i.  e.  to  exclude  the  case  B  C.  If  it  did  so,
on  the  other  hand,  it  would  become  at  a  blow  equal  to  the  disjunction  '  A  is
either  B  or  C,'  and  would  include  in  itself  the  case  '  If  A  is  B ' — with  its  con-
verse. In  other  words,  it  would  become  a  reciprocal  judgment,  correlative  to  a
definitory  affirmation,  and  as  such  would  admit  of  conversion  or  inference  by
denial  of  the  antecedent ;  just  as  if  we  were  to  infer  from  'A  is  B '  that '  not-A  is
not-B.'  This,  as  we  have  seen  all  through,  is  the  ideal  of  the  judgment ;  and
a  hypothetical  judgment  with  negative  condition  or  negative  consequent,  that
fulfils  this  ideal,  coincides  already  with  the  disjunction.  But  usage  does  not
warrant  the  ascription  to  the  hypothetical '  If  A  is  not  B  it  is  C '  of  the  meaning
*If  A  is  not  B-without-C  it  is  C-without-B.'  As  commonly  employed,  there-
fore, it  lays  down  a  certain  outer  limit,  but  does  not  exhaust  the  subdivisions
within  the  limit.  This  is  just  the  point  of  contrast  between  the  hypothetical
judgment  in  its  ordinary  signification  and  the  complete  disjunction.  But  there
is  a  certain  tendency  on  the  part  of  the  former  to  advance  towards  the  latter.
It  is  plain  that  the  reasons  which  induce  us  to  give  prominence  to  the  alterna-
tives mentioned  as  the  only  ones  to  be  specially  considered  may  readily
transform  themselves  into  reasons  why  only  the  alternatives  mentioned  can  be
considered,  or,  perhaps,  can  exist.  We  have  such  reasons  just  warranting  a
disjunction  in  the  instance  given  above  (p.  342),  where  the  case  formed  by  the
combination  of  the  alternatives  considered  exists,  so  to  speak,  in  fact  but  not
for  the  law.

ii.  It  may  be  worth  while  to  point  out  that  disjunctions  with  more  than  two
alternatives  must  be  treated,  as  regards  the  hypothetical  judgments  involved,  as
a  succession  of  dichotomies.  The  hypothetical  judgments  of  each  type  involved
in  such  a  disjunction  would  therefore  be  equal  in  number  to  the  disjoined
members,  i.  e.  each  alternative  must  be  made  in  turn  the  positive  and  negative
condition  of  an  hypothesis,  with  a  compound  consequent,  the  disjunctive*nature
of  which  cannot  appear  in  the  hypothetical  judgment.  A  is  either  B,  C,  D,  or
E.  Then  we  have  the  negative  conditions, '  If  A  is  not  B,  it  is  within  C  D  E ; '
'  If  A  is  not  C,  it  is  within  B  D  E  ; "  If  A  is  not  D,  it  is  within  C  B  E ; "  If  A  is
not  E,  it  is  within  C  B  D.'  The  positive  conditions  will  correspond  severally
to  the  above  negative  conditions.

Here  we  see  a  second  defect  of  the  hypothetical  as  compared  to  the  disjunc-
tive judgment.  It  can  only  handle  one  reciprocal  relation  at  a  time,  and  cannot
master  a  whole  system  of  such  relations  in  a  single  view.  In  the  above  analysis
the  hypothetical  judgment  does  not  enable  me  to  express  more  than  a  single
contradictory  relation,  as  between  a  particular  A  and  its  not-A.  The  idea  of  a
pervading  contradictory  relation,  characterising  atiy  one  part  as  against  all  the
others,  cannot  be  expressed  in  any  one  hypothetical  judgment. By  saying


Chap.  VIII.] Disjwutiott  and  Conjunction.  349

The  reference  to  these  two  or  four  hyp>othetical  judgments
has  its  value  in  elucidating  the  nature  of  the  system  which
a  true  disjunction  embodies.  It  exhibits  in  the  plainest
light  the  indispensable  function  of  negation  in  articulated
knowledge,  and  the  positive  import  with  which  in  virtue  of
that  function  the  negative  is  invested.  We  have  already
seen  the  nature  of  this  import  in  the  analysis  of  the  signifi-
cant negation,  where,  however,  the  positive  ground  and
consequence  of  denial  were  matters  of  tacit  understanding
and  inference  from  context.  In  explicit  disjunction,  on
the  other  hand,  we  find  them  after  they  have  been  de-
veloped independently  and  distinctly  in  the  hypothetical
judgment,  and  affirmed  as  actual  attributes  within  a  system
that  is  alleged  to  exist  in  reality.

iv.  But,  it  may  reasonably  be  objected,  it  is  not  in  every  When  are
rsystem  that  the  parts  are  disjunctively  related.  As  a  rule  wa^^
|the  parts  of  a  system  are  predicable  in  conjunction  and  not  related?

disjunction.

Apart  from  the  case  of  intentional  abstraction  by  which

^any  conjunction  can  be  turned  into  a  disjunction — ^for  in

\the  last  resort  within  every  system  every  part  involves  the

Iwhole  nature  of  the  system — this  criticism  is  just.  A  human

[body  is  made  up  of  trunk,  limbs,  and  head ;  not  of  either

Itnmk  or  limbs  or  head. The  government  of  a  civilised

'nation  consists  of  the  legislative  and  the  executive  power,

not  of  the  legislative  or  the  executive. A  genus,  again,

Jmay  be  said  to  be  identifiable with  all  its  species,  not

[merely  with  either  this  or  that,  though  here  we  are  on  more

[doubtful ground. Triangles are isosceles, scalene, and

equilateral Men  are  white,  black,  and  yellow. We  could

hardly  say  however  that  '  the  triangle  is  isosceles,  scalene,

and  equilateral,'  or  that  '  man  is  white,  black,  and  yellow.'

,  The  difference  between  conjunctions  of  the  kind  here  brought

[forward,  and  true  fl'/jj unctions,  is  formally  speaking  a  differ-

[ence  of  the  aspect  in  which  a  real  system  is  regarded,  but

[ '  If  A  is  not  B,  it  is  a'iA^r  C,  D,  <7r  F '  we  sboold  be  pressing  the  hypothetical
[type  beyond  its  powers.


350  Disjunction  and  the  statement  of  Chances,  [booki.

materially,  therefore,  has  an  intimate  dependence  on  the
actual  nature  of  the  real  system  in  question,  which  may  be
such  as  to  throw  one  aspect  or  another  prominently  forward.
Every  universal  may  have  its  differences  conjunctively
enumerated,  whether  they  are  in  time  or  in  space,  or  merely
distinct  in  thought.  But  in  so  far  as  the  universal  itself
enters  as  a  whole  into  each  difference,  which  it  can  do  in
very  different  degrees,  so  far  each  difference,  if  imposed
as  a  condition  on  the  universal,  excludes  all  the  other
differences.  A  man's  having  a  hand  does  not  interfere  with
his  having  a  foot.  But  a  man's  having  a  feeling  in  his  hand
does  begin  to  make  a  claim  on  the  universal,  the  man  him-
self, which  is  to  a  certain  limited  extent  incompatible  with
his  having  a  feeling  in  his  foot  or  elsewhere.  And  when  we
come  to  consider  such  acute  interest  or  feeling  as  occasions
the  absorption  of  the  whole  mind  in  the  perceiving  or  suffer-
ing member,  then  it  is  true  to  say, '  The  man  perceives  or  feels
either^\\\\  eye  or  with  ear  or  hand  or  foot,'  as  the  case  may  be.
So  again  if  we  think  of  a  triangle  as  a  mere  abstract  gener-
ality that  describes  a  heap  of  various  figures,  we  may  say
that  it  includes,  or  that — in  a  collective  judgment — its  in-
dividual instances  are^  this,  that,  and  the  other.  But  if  we
think  of  it  according  to  its  complete  conception  as  an
individuality  that  must  necessarily  take  individual  shape,
and  if  we  follow  the  process  by  which  such  shape  must  be
determined,  then  we  can  only  express  our  insight  by  the
use  of  the  disjunctive  '  Either — or.'

The  conception  of  the  whole  as  conditioned  by  one  of  its
parts  takes  the  place  of  that  imaginary  reference  to  an
atomic  point  o(  time  which  has  been  supposed  to  be  of  the
essence  of  disjunction.  *  A  moving  object  is  either  here  or
there '  means  '  if  here,  not  there '  and  '  if  not  here,  then
there.'  It  does  not  mean  '  Within  the  indivisible  moment
in  which  I  am  judging  a  moving  object  can  be  in  one  place
only.'  For  I  cannot  judge  in  an  indivisible  moment,  nor
can  I  refer  to  a  present  that  is  an  indivisible  moment.  In
any  extended  time  a  moving  object  traverses  space,  and


Chap.  VIII.] The  Ultimate  Disjunction,  351

our  '  present '  is  always  an  extended  time.  And  so  the
disjunction  if  referred  to  our  '  present'  time  would  not  be
true,  and  the  moving  object  would  be,  like  Sir  Boyle  Roche's
bird,  '  in  two  places  at  once.'

V.  When  we  have  understood  the  nature  of  disjunction  Is  the  dis-
there  is  not  much  profit  in  asking  whether  the  disjunctive  Reducible

judgment  can  be  '  reduced '  to  two  or  more  hypothetical  to  Hypo-
• J  . ^i  r  111  , . , .  theticals?

judgments.  The  mere  fact  that  the  hypothetical  m  ques-
tion^ are  separate  judgments,  and  that  the  disjunction  is
a  single  judgment,  is  enough  to  show  that  we  have  in  the
latter  a  combination  of  unity  with  reciprocal  exclusion  which
we  have  not  in  the  former.  I  have  endeavoured  to  express
this  unity  y  representing  the  disjunction  as  a  combination
of  the  generic  and  the  hypothetical  judgments.  But  it
must  be  remembered  that  at  best  we  are  dealing  with
grammatical  types  which  are  only  the  symbols  of  states
of  knowledge  ;  and  it  is  most  probable  that  any  one  who  is
able  to  make  the  two  complementary  hypothetical  judg-
ments '  If  A  is  B  it  is  not  C  '  and  '  If  A  is  not  B  it  is  C,'
supplies  out  of  his  own  mind  the  systematic  relation  which
the  two  taken  together  involve,  in  a  judgment  equivalent
to  'A  is  either  B  or  C

Not  to  dwell  longer  than  I  can  help  on  formal  points,.  I
merely  remark  in  addition  to  what  was  said  above  ^,  that
in  any  case  these  hypotheticals  themselves  presuppose  the  ^

ultimate  or  formal  disjunction, '  A  is  either  B  or  not-B,'  by
their  introduction  of  a  negative  relation  into  knowledge;
and  that  further,  if  we  wish  to  take  the  two  hypotheticals
above  mentioned  as  implying  the  two  which  follow  from
them  by  denying  the  consequent,  we  are  once  more  relying
on  this  formal  disjunction,  which  is  essentially  involved  in
such  a  transition  ^.  The  material  importance  of  the  whole
question  lies  in  the  process  by  which  \htform  of  disjunc-
tion, in  itself  on  a  level  with  or  consisting  in  the  Law  of

'  See  foot-note,  p.  348.  *  p.  348.

'  See  the  account  of  Contraposition,  above,  chap,  vii :  the  process  by  *  denying
lie  consequent '  is  essentially  the  same  with  this.


352  Disjunction  and  the  statement  of  Chances,  [booki.


The  state-
ment of
Chances.

Limits
of  the
problem
in  present
work.


Excluded  Middle,  i.e.  of  contradictory  opposition  \  acquires
the  material  significance  of  Disjunction  between  positive
contraries.  I  have  tried  to  show  above  that  these  two
elements,  the  bare  rejection  and  the  positive  contrary,  are
probably  to  be  regarded  as  distinguishable  from  the  first,
but  as  tending  to  coalesce,  and  not  as  later  and  earlier
phases  respectively  of  the  same  movement.  Or  if,  in
history,  earlier  and  later,  then  the  later,  the  abstract  formal
negation  or  bare  rejection,  is  to  the  earlier,  the  actual  choice
between  positive  alternatives,  as  a  separable  outgrowth
which  consciously  reunites  with  it  in  the  region  of  reflective
intelligence.  No  anthropological  doctrine  can  affect —
though  it  may  elucidate — the  above  logical  analysis  of  the
relation  between  the  negative  and  its  material  import  as
made  explicit  in  the  judgment.

2.  The  statement  of  chances  is  a  case  of  the  Disjunctive
Judgment.

i.  The  title  which  I  place  at  the  head  of  this  section
indicates  the  limits  of  the  question  which  I  propose  to  treat
in  it.  The  calculus  of  chances,  like  all  mathematical
reasoning,  has  at  its  root  an  inference  that  can  be  expressed
in  ordinary  language.  In  treating  of  inference  it  will  be
incumbent  upon  us  to  discuss  the  differentia  which  sepa-
rates calculation  from  ordinary  reasoning ;  and  we  shall
find  the  outward  and  visible  sign  of  this  differentia  to  con-
sist in  the  enormous  abbreviation  of  reasoning  processes  by
their  condensation  into  the  import  of  recognised  symbols.
It  is  a  further  question  in  virtue  of  what  peculiar  nature  an
inferential  process  can  submit  to  such  an  abbreviation,  and
also  to  what  extent  the  abbreviation  has  the  effect  of  substi-
tuting something  else,  e.  g.  application  of  a  rule-of-thumb^,
for  the  reasoning  process  so  '  abbreviated.' But  the  value

^  It  is  an  unlucky  confusion  that  the  so-called  law  of  Contradiction  only
explains  Contrary  opposition,  and  that  it  is  the  law  of  Excluded  Middle  that
lays  down  the  principle  of  Contradictory  opposition. See  Bk.  II.  chap.  vii.

^  I  have  in  my  mind  as  an  instance  the  use  of  tables  of  logarithms.  It  does
not  appear  formally  essential  that  any  one  who  uses  them  should  understand
the  reason  of  the  rules  he  applies,  i.  e.  (I  presume)  the  nature  of  Indices.


Chap  Mil] Cottcret 6  and  abstract  Disjunction. 353

of  any  such  abbreviation  must  ultimately  rest  in  a  logical
<ense  upon  the  reasoning  which  it  represents,  and  this
reasoning  must  be  in  its  nature  explicable  in  language  like
any  other  reasoning^.  Thus  in  the  calculus  of  probabilities,
though  I  am  obliged  from  mathematical  incompetence  to
omit  much  that  might  be  of  interest  to  an  expert  even
from  a  logical  point  of  view,  yet  the  principle  of  the  state-
ment of  chances  is  not  a  matter  of  technical  method,  but  of
fundamental  postulates  of  knowledge.  And  also,  no  doubt,
it  illustrates  the  necessity  by  which  totalities  of  a  certain
degree  and  kind  of  abstraction  become  subject  to  numerical
manipulation.

ii.  The  statement  of  chances  rests  upon  a  species  of  dis-  Affiliation
junctive  judgment,  but  not  on  what  we  have  spoken  of  as  disjunction,
the  true  or  real  disjunction — which  might  also  be  called,  in
contrast  with  that  which  we  are  about  to  discuss,  the  con-
crete disjunction.  The  concrete  disjunction,  in  as  far  as  it
reaches  its  ideal,  embodies  differences  that  are  distinct  and
individual  modifications  of  the  underlying  system,  and  pro-
vides in  the  nature  of  the  common  subject  a  complete
account  of  the  conditions  which  determine  it  to  each  of
these  differences.  In  using  such  a  disjunction  we  know
precisely  how  and  why  the  whole  or  real  subject  must  enter
into  each  of  the  differences  which  constitute  it.  And  though
it  may  be  said  that  we  do  not  or  need  not  know  when  or
how  far  each  conditiori  involved  is  or  can  be  real,  yet  we
must  know  something  of  the  relation  of  such  conditions
to  the  reality  of  the  system  which  they  affect  (because  their
reality  is  partly  relative  to  its  reality),  and  at  least  there  is
no  sort  of  reason  for  supposing  that  the  reality  of  these
known  conditions  is  to  be  taken  as  an  equal  amount  in
the  case  of  all  the  several  alternatives. The  variety  of  the

'  A  practical  reservation  must  here  be  made  in  considering  the  higher
mathematical  processes  from  this  point  of  view,  because  they  may  presuppose
a  number  of  stages  consisting  of  subordinate  processes,  and  be  inexplicable
apart  from  these  latter.  But  to  explain  the  whole  complication  in  ordinary
language  might  involve  a  lengthiness  that  would  make  it  harder  to  follow  such
an  explanation  than  to  master  the  proper  mathematical  language.
VOL.  I.  A  a


354  Disjtmction  and  the  statement  of  Chances.  [Booki.

world  and  of  all  reality  throws  the  whole  presumption  the
other  way.  The  idea  of  equally  grounded  alternatives  is  a
negative  idea,  and  can  only  exist  by  a  defect  of  knowledge,
or  by  an  abstraction  from  what  we  know.

The  abstract  disjunction,  on  which  alone  a  statement  of
chances  can  be  based,  cannot  be  a  system  of  alternatives
whose  conditions  and  relations  are  thoroughly  understood.
It  is  rather  allied  to  what  was  spoken  of  above  as  the  dis-
junction of  ignorance.  The  affiliation  to  the  hypothetical
judgment  is  indeed  the  same  in  all  disjunctions  that  are
formally  perfect,  i.  e.  both  exclusive  and  exhaustive.  But
on  its  other  side  the  abstract  disjunction  does  not,  like  the
concrete,  descend  from  the  generic  judgment  with  its  pene-
trating and  dominating  individuality,  but  rather  from  a
judgment  of  enumeration  such  as  the  collective  judgment,
with  its  homogeneous  parts  which  do  not  occupy  individual
or  distinctive  relations  to  the  containing  identity.  It  is  true
that  to  give  meaning  to  any  disjunction,  or  to  a  statement
of  chances  founded  upon  it,  the  parts  or  members  of  the
whole  must  be  distinct  as  well  as  homogeneous.  But  the
distinction  is  in  this  case  mere  distinction,  interesting  as  a
result,  like  the  differences  between  the  six  sides  of  a  die,
but  on  the  side  of  its  relation  to  the  whole  not  rooted  in
any  known  modifications  of  that  whole.  In  other  words,
the  number  of  parts,  or  the  fact  that  each  is  one  among  so
many,  is  the  primary  fact,  and  their  nature  is  secondary.
We  may  illustrate  this  by  contrasting  an  example  of  a  con-
crete with  one  of  an  abstract  disjunction.  'The  constitu-
tion of  a  modern  nation,'  it  may  be  said,  '  is  necessarily
either  democratic  or  plutocratic'  Here  the  fact  that  the
species  assigned  are  two  in  number  is  of  no  importance.
No  one  would  think  of  trying  to  infer  anything  from  it  as
to  how  many  nations  were  likely  to  be  democratic  and  how
many  to  be  plutocratic.  The  whole  weight  of  the  judg-
ment rests  upon  the  component  elements  implied  in
'  modern  nation,'  and  upon  the  development  of  those
elements  which  the  judgment  indicates  to be  necessary.


Chap.  VIII. ] Equal  grounds  of  Affirmation.  355

But  if  we  take  such  a  judgment  as  'A  die  must  turn  up
one  of  its  six  sides '  we  here  regard  the  individuality  of  the
several  sides  as  indifferent  with  respect  to  the  probability
of  their  recurrence,  though  not  with  respect  to  its  results.
The  important  matter  is  the  number  of  the  alternatives.
For  either  we  are  unable  to  estimate  the  operative  causes
which  determine  one  alternative  rather  than  another,  or  we
wilfully  abstract  our  attention  from  them  for  the  sake  of
falling  back  on  a  more  general  process  of  estimation.  We
are  to  suppose  then  that  as  the  basis  of  our  statement  of
chances,  we  have  before  us  such  a  formal  disjunction  as  the
abov^e,  closely  akin  to  the  judgments  which  arise  in  the
process  of  enumeration,  but  with  the  addition  of  those
known  relations  between  the  enumerated  parts  which  are
embodied  in  the  hypothetical  judgments  with  negative
antecedent  and  consequent  respectively.

iii.  We  are  then  in  a  position  to  enter  upon  a  process  which  Essence  of
I  can  only  describe  as  taking  stock  of  our  knowledge  by  ment  of
arithmetical  methods.  We  know  that  the  die  has  six  sides  chances,
and  no  more,  and  that  as  the  result  of  a  single  throw  it
must  turn  up  one  of  them.  We  know  that  we  do  not  know
of  any  cause  operative  in  the  nature  of  the  die  or  in  the
conditions  of  the  throw  that  should  favour  any  particular
side,  nor  of  any  grounded  presumption  whatever  in  favour
of  any  one  side  in  particular.  In  the  case  of  the  die,  which
herein  differs  from  many  cases  of  the  statement  of  chances,
we  may  say  that  we  know  that  there  is  not  any  permanent
operative  cause  either  in  or  outside  the  die  that  can  favour
one  event  in  particular.  Therefore — and  here  is  the  all-
important  step  which  really  constitutes  the  statement  of
chances — we  go  from  '  no  known  inequality  of  the  grounds
for  affirmation^ '  to  '  equality,  so  far  as  follows  from  this
knowledge,  of  the  grounds  for  affirmation '  of  the  several

'  Judgment  about  the  future,  (/"we  judge,  is  of  course  affirmation  as  much
as  judgment  about  the  past.  But  it  is  not  essential  to  the  statement  of  chances
to  refer  to  the  future.  They  can  be  stated  on  given  premises  about  any  event,
although  its  real  issue  be  known.

A  a  2


356  Disjunction  and  the  statement  of  Chances, [booki.

alternatives.  Having  made  this  step,  i.e.  having  placed
the  grounds  for  each  alternative  on  a  level  as  equal,  we  are
of  course  free  to  treat  them  as  units,  and  a  ratio  expressing
the  relation  of  each  to  all  follows  as  a  matter  of  course.
Each  alternative  counts  for  one,  and  none  for  more  than
one.  In  other  words,  the  ground  for  the  affirmation  of
each,  assuming  the  reality  of  the  common  subject,  is  repre-
sented by  a  fraction  of  which  i  is  the  numerator  and  the
total  number  of  alternatives  the  denominator.  We  do  not
attempt  to  say  what  the  ground  is,  but  we  say  that,  by  the
terms  of  the  disjunction,  it  is  one  out  of  so  many  equal  and
reciprocally  exclusive  grounds.  This  transition  from  in-
difference of  formulated  knowledge  to  equality  of  grounded
affirmation,  and  so  to  the  relation  of  units  within  a  sum
total  or  fractional  parts  within  unity,  is  the  logical  foundation
on  which  the  statement  of  chances  rests.
Applica-  iv.  All  its  developments  are  applications  of  this  prin-
statement  ciple.  a.  For  instance,  it  may  happen  that  alternatives
as  calculus,  which  are  separate  units  in  respect  of  the  ground  for
Aitema- affirming  their  reality  are  identical  in  respect  of  that  result

tives  and  k>  j  1

Results.  of  which  the  chances  are  being  stated.  It  follows  that  the
chances  of  this  result  are  represented  by  as  many  units
cut  of  the  sum  total  as  there  are  equal  alternatives  which
produce  it.  In  other  words,  the  chances  of  the  common
consequence  of  a  number  of  alternatives  whose  chances  are
known  is  the  sum  of  the  chances  of  those  alternatives.  If
you  bet  with  me  that  you  will  throw  a  six  first  throw
with  a  single  die,  then  all  five  alternatives  from  one  to
five  inclusive  have  annexed  to  them  the  consequence  that
I  win  the  bet.  The  total  number  of  alternatives  being
six,  I  have  thus  f  of  the  chances  in  my  favour,  or  the
chances  against  you  are  5  to  i.

The  further  processes  of  the  calculus  must  always  reduce
themselves  to  obtaining  a  correct  enumeration  of  the  equal
alternatives,  and  a  correct  estimate  of  the  number  of  those
equal  alternatives  which  have  annexed  to  them  the  result
whose  chances  are  to  be  stated.


Chap. VIII.-]  Physical  Alternatives.  357

/3.  The  combined  chances  of  independent  events  illus-  Physical
trate  both  these  principles  very  simply.  tiv»°*

To  find  the  physically  different  throws  that  are  possible
with  two  dice,  we  must  take  into  account  which  is  which  of
the  two  dice.  It  is  obviously  possible  in  a  single  throw  for
any  side  of  the  one  die  to  concur  with  any  particular  side  of
the  other  die,  i.  e.  writing  down  the  six  sides  of  the  one  die
as  headings,  you  will  have  to  write  down  all  six  sides  of  the
other  as  possible  cases  under  each  of  these  headings.  This
relation  is  of  course  expressed  numerically  by  multiplying
the  whole  number  of  sides  of  one  die  by  the  whole  number
of  those  of  the  other :  (iy.6  =  0^6.  This  gives  the  correct
enumeration  of  the  alternatives  that  are  physically  possible,
the  chance  of  each  in  case  of  a  single  throw  being  ^V*
Generalising  this  process,  we  may  say  that  in  two  or  more
independent  sets  of  alternatives  the  chance  of  the  concur-
rence of  two  or  more  particular  events,  as  many  as  there
are  sets  concerned,  is  determined  by  the  product  of  the
numbers  of  alternatives  forming  each  separate  set  multi-
plied together.  That  is  to  say,  the  chance  of  any  par-
ticular concurrence  of  events,  consisting  of  one  out  of  each
independent  set,  is  i  divided  by  the  product  in  question.

y.  But  to  return  to  the  example  of  the  two  dice,  it  interesting
may  be  that  the  "^d  possible  concurrences  would  not  all  '^^^^
count  as  different,  because  e.  g.  the  throw  2  with  the
die  a  and  i  with  the  die  b  may  be  treated  as  the  same
with  the  throw  i  with  a  and  2  with  b.  Therefore  the
results  which  are  the  alternatives  according  to  this  mode
of  counting  have  not  all  of  them  the  same  chances  in  their
favour,  i.  e.  do  not  severally  contain  the  same  number  of
physically  distinct  alternatives.  Each  of  the  six  throws
1  and  I,  2  and  2  &c.  up  to  double  sixes  inclusive  corre-
sponds to  one  physical  alternative  only  out  of  the  possible
36,  and  therefore  has  only  the  chance  represented  by  gV-
On  the  other  hand,  each  of  the  fifteen  '  throws '  i  and  2,
1  and  3  to  1  and  6  inclusive,  2  and  3, 2  and  4  &c.  to  5  and  6
inclusive,  is  a  lesult  annexed  to  two  physical  alternatives


358  Disjunction  and  the  statement  of  Chalices,  [booki.

(i  and  2  or  3  and  i,&c.),  and  therefore  counts  as  two  equal
cases  or  units,  and  has  a  chance  represented  by  the  sum  of
the  chances  of  these  equal  cases,  viz.  by  -^V  instead  of  ^V-
These  15  '  throws '  then,  answering  to  two  actual  alternatives
apiece,  exhaust  the  30  real  cases  that  remain  after  deduct-
ing the  six  doublets,  and  the  whole  36  alternatives  are  thus
accounted  for.  Or  again,  if  we  take  into  account  merely
the  number  of  points  thrown  at  each  throw,  without  regard
to  their  distribution  between  the  two  dice,  we  get  six  com-
binations of  throws  that  will  give  seven  points,  five  for  eight
points  and  six  points  respectively,  and  so  on  to  one  com-
bination for  two  points  and  twelve  points  respectively.  The
chances  of  throwing  7  are  therefore  /^,  and  of  throwing  the
other  numbers  ^V,  -jV,  and  so  on  down  to  ^V  respectively.
What  does  V.  Logicians  are  not  agreed  as  to  the  proper  description
of^chTnces  ^^  ^^^^  which  is  expressed  by  the  ratio  that  embodies  a
represent?  statement  of  chances.  Their  disagreement  arises  more
from  the  subtlety  of  the  distinctions  involved,  which  makes
description  difficult,  than  from  a  substantial  difference  of
opinion  as  to  the  relation  between  reality  and  the  cognitive
act  in  question.  It  is  not  unnatural,  for  example,  to  say
that  the  ratio  expresses  our  subjective  expectation.  But
this  is  an  obvious  slip,  because  the  whole  process  of  the
statement  is  undertaken  in  order  to  correct  and  control
our  subjective  expectation,  and  is  futile  unless  it  does  so.
The  complete  counterpart  of  this  idea  would  consist  in
maintaining  that  the  ratio  expressed  an  actual  behaviour
on  the  part  of  real  things.  I  do  not  know  that  this  sug-
gestion has  ever  been  made  in  this  extreme  form.  Some-
thing of  the  same  kind  however  is  commonly  believed  with
respect  to  the  realisation  of  chances  in  a  series,  w^hich  I
shall  speak  of  directly.

The  ratio  of  chance  seems  really  to  express  the  amount
of  ground,  which  is  afforded  by  the  knoivledge  forvmlated  in
the  disjunctive  basis  of  the  calculation,  for  affirming  the
reality  of  the  result  whose  chances  are  in  question,  on  the
assumption  that  the  general  case,  which  forms  the  subject,


I


Chap,  viii.j True  pi'oblematic  Jtidgment.  359

is  realised.  Instead  of  amount  of  ground  '  it  would  be  more
usual  to  say  '  degree  of  probability.'  And  by  avoiding  the
expression  probability  we  do  not  really  escape  the  tautology
which  it  would  introduce.  For  the  idea  of  a  measurable
amount  of  logical  ground,  like  the  idea  of  a  measurable
degree  of  probability,  is  only  intelligible  with  reference  to
the  statement  of  chances.

^  Expectation '  sounds  more  like  a  term  which  might
elucidate  the  definition,  and  if  we  say  that  the  statement  of
chances  represents  tJte  expectation  which  is  justified  by  the
premise^  we  might  not  be  far  wrong.  But  I  do  not  feel
sure  that  anything  can  be  meant  by  a  degree  of  expecta-
tion except  the  mood,  whatever  that  may  be,  which  is
founded  upon  a  statement  of  chances.  So  that  the  chance
would  not  come  from  measuring  the  expectation,  but  the
expectation  from  measuring  the  chance.  Even  if  we  identify
expectation  with  judgment — a  proceeding  which  is  more
than  doubtful — we  cannot  say  that  the  chances  necessarily
represent  the  degree  of  certainty  with  which  we  judge  in  a
statement  of  chances ;  because  the  statement,  giving  due
numerical  weight  to  every  equally-grounded  alternative,
asserts  in  the  proper  ratio  the  reality  of  all  the  alternatives,
and  is  in  this  aspect  a  judgment  with  its  conditions  made
fully  e.xplicit,  and  therefore  necessary  or  apodeictic.  Net
that  a  statement  of  chances  is  usually  or  ever  true  in  fact ;
but  this  divergence  from  fact,  or  abstract  character,  affects
the  categorical  aspect  of  the  whole  disjunctive  basis  of  the
statement,  the  truth  of  which  basis  is  in  no  way  affirmed
or  impeached  by  the  ratio  of  chance  founded  upon  it.  The
chance  that  one  side  of  a  6-sided  die  will  turn  up  is  |- ;  but
this  says  nothing  about  the  certainty  that  there  is  a  6-sided
die.  Paradoxically  enough,  the  statement  of  chances  seems
to  measure,  if  anything,  the  degree  of  certainty  of  a  pro-
blematic judgment  made  without  knowledge  of  or  in  ab-
straction from  the  statement,  as  to  the  probability  of  a
single  alternative  out  of  a  number  without  reference  to  the
remaining  alternatives. Not  that  a  statement  of  chances


360  Disjunction  and  the  statement  of  Chances, [book  i.

can  govern  the  meaning  of  a  judgment  made  in  ignorance
of  it,  and  it  is  indeed  hard  to  see  any  meaning  in  degree  of
certainty  apart  from  measurement  by  the  enumeration
which  gives  a  ratio.  But  on  the  other  hand,  the  moment
we  have  the  ratio,  we  have  with  it  the  whole  consequence
of  the  assumed  reality,  and  the  judgment  which  asserts  the
ratio  is  mere  arithmetical  necessity,  the  nature  of  the
assumed  reality  being  given.  The  judgment  that  '  the  odds
against  any  one  side  of  a  (6-sided)  die  turning  up  at  one
throw  are  5  to  i  '  has  not  a  probability  as  5  to  i,  but  on
the  premises  is  necessary.  But  it  determines  what  I  ought
to  mean,  when  I  say,  in  ignorance  of  or  not  considering  the
calculation,  '  it  is  unlikely  that  a  six  will  turn  up  the  first
throw.'  If  I  reflect  and  say,  '  It  is  unlikely  (with  an  un-
likelihood of  5  to  I )  that  etc.,'  then  my  judgment  has  ceased
to  be  problematic,  and  has  become  necessary,  i.  e.  the  con-
ditions of  its  probability  are  analysed  and  made  explicit.
Thus  probability  as  a  character  of  judgment  disappears
when  measured.

The  ratio  of  chance  then  expresses  the  amount  of  ground
for  affirming,  that  follows  from  the  knowledge  formulated  as
the  disjunctive  basis  of  the  reckoning.  We  may  possess
knowledge  that  does  not  conform  to  the  conditions  of  the
statement  of  chances,  or  at  least  that  is  not  relevant  to  the
special  disjunction  which  we  are  able  to  employ.  Such
knowledge  may  cause  us  to  distrust  the  reckoning  slightly
or  wholly  as  it  affects  some  particular  case.  I  may  think
for  instance  that  the  calculated  risk  of  being  run  down  by  a
cab  in  the  streets  of  London  does  not  apply  to  one  man
who  is  in  the  prime  of  life  and  habitually  alert,  or  to
another  who  is  bedridden  and  never  goes  into  the  streets
at  all.  But  none  the  less  the  probability  of  cab  accidents
for  each  individual  of  the  population  on  the  data  that  are
taken  is  a  mere  question  of  calculation  and  can  only  have
one  correct  answer.  My  private  notion  that  I  have  supple-
mentary data  which  ought  to  be  considered,  or  that  a  more
careful  distinction  should  be  made  between  classes  of  per-


chap.\iii.]  Actual  Scries.  361

sons  in  the  data,  does  not  in  the  least  affect  the  probability
which  flows  from  the  premises  in  any  particular  calculation.

The  calculus  of  chances,  in  short,  bears  the  character  of
the  judgments  from  which  it  is  derived.  Like  the  pure
hypothetical  judgment,  and  the  greater  part  of  the  abstract
judgments  derived  from  the  judgment  of  enumeration,  it
affirms  of  Reality  indirectly  and  conditionally.  Its  truth
is  a  truth  of  necessity,  a  consequence  that  follows  from  a
selected  or  fancied  character  when  taken  as  real.  Such  a
consequence  is  not  subjective  or  arbitrary.  Given  the
premises,  it  can  only  be  drawn  in  one  way,  and  every  other
result  from  those  premises  is  wrong.  But  yet  it  does  not
express  actual  concrete  fact.  It  expresses  a  truth  necessi-
tated by  the  nature  of  Reality,  but  not  as  it  stands  em-
bodying a  fact  of  Reality.  It  is  simply  an  arithmetical
consequence  of  a  highly  abstract  disjunctive  enumeration.

vi.  In  every  statement  of  chances  we  admit  our  partial  Chance
ignorance. If  this  were  not  so,  the  statement  would in-  ^^es*^*^^
volve  a  flat  contradiction. For  our  grounds  for  affirming
reality  are  equal  in  the  case  of  all  the  alternatives,  and  yet
our  statement  of  chances  is  based  on  the  assumption  that
only  one  of  them  can  be  realised.

a.  But  if  we  do  not  bear  in  mind  the  proportion  of  ignor-  Fallacies
ance  which  enters  into  our  data,  we  are  tempted  into  two  ^^^  *°
fallacious  attitudes.

In  the  first  place,  we  consider  ourselves  justified  in  being
astonished  at  the  realisation  of  the  alternative  which  has
very  few  chances  in  its  favour.

And  in  the  second  place,  we  palliate  the  apparent  con-
tradiction between  equal  grounds  for  reality  and  unequal
realisation  by  affirming  that  the  statement  of  chances  has
genuine  truth  only  in  an  actual  series  which  realises  all  the
equal  alternatives  equally.  To  realise  all  the  equal  alterna-
tives equally  is  of  course  the  same  thing  as  to  realise  all
the  interesting  results  ^  in  the  ratio  prescribed  by  the  state-
ment of  chances.

*  See  above,  p.  357.


362  Disjunction  and  the  statement  of  Chances,  [booki.

First,  then,  we  have  very  small  ground  for  being  sur-
prised at  the  actual  occurrence  of  that  alternative  which
had  fewest  chances  in  its  favour ;  and  absolutely  none  for
being  surprised  at  the  occurrence  of  a  marked  or  interest-
ing alternative  which  has  against  it  enormous  odds,  but
only  the  same  as  against  every  alternative  which  can  pos-
sibly occur.  In  the  former  case  we  are  cherishing  a  private
presumption  that  the  knowledge  embodied  in  our  premises
represented  the  actual  operative  causes  which  determined
the  realisation  of  one  or  another  alternative,  and  this  is  ex
hypothesi  not  the  fact.  In  the  latter  case  we  are  misled  by
a  special  interest  into  comparing,  as  if  they  were  cases  of
which  the  chances  should  be  equal,  cases  which  are  not
'  equal  alternatives,'  but  '  interesting  results '  comprising
unequal  numbers  of  equal  alternatives,  viz.  on  the  one  side
a  single  case  which  is  in  some  way  remarkable^  e.g.  a  hand
at  whist  consisting  solely  of  trumps,  and  on  the  other  side
all  other  possible  hands  whatever,  which  we  implicitly  con-
trast, as  a  single  case,  with  the  opposite  '  interesting  result.'
We  are  therefore  surprised  at  the  immense  adverse  odds
in  spite  of  which  this  result  has  been  realised,  not  re-
flecting that  there  are  precisely  the  same  adverse  odds
against  any  one  of  the  alternatives  which  occur  in  every-
day experience,  though  not,  of  course,  against  all  of  them
together.

And  secondly,  the  realisation  of  the  ideal  alternatives  in
a  series  of  real  cases  is  confessedly  a  fiction  unless  we  stop
the  series  at  an  arbitrary  limit — say,  for  instance,  the
actual  limit  of  individual  objects  or  events  in  question  in
space  or  time — and  even  within  this  limit  the  series  is  not
what  we  want.

There  are  under  this  head  of  an  actual  series  two  possi-
bilities which  prima  facie  at  least  must  be  distinguished.
We  may  have  to  deal  with  a  natural  or  deductive  cycle
of  alternatives,  or  with  an  arbitrary  or  inductive  cycle.

In  what  may  be  called  a  natural  cycle  the  alternatives
are  ideal  cases  that  follow  obviously  from  the  nature  of  the


Chap. Mil] Verifiiatioti  by  Experience.  363

general  subject ;  and  are  distinct  from  the  real  cases,  the
actual  instances  or  events,  which  may  or  may  not  con-
tinue to  present  themselves  beyond  the  one  real  case  which
is  postulated  in  the  statement  of  chances.  The  sides  of  a
die  or  of  a  coin  furnish  ideal  cases ;  the  throw's  of  a  die  or
tosses  of  a  coin  are  real  cases.  The  natural  cycle  is  the
lowest  number  of  actual  events  in  which  the  ideal  alterna-
tives could  be  all  realised  equally ;  i.  e.  six  throws  in  the
case  of  the  die,  two  tosses  in  the  case  of  the  coin.  Beyond
this  natural  cycle  there  is  nothing  to  suggest  a  limit  to  the
series  of  real  cases.  We  have  therefore  to  ask,  in  consider-
ing the  verification  of  natural  cycles  by  experience,  whether
the  real  cases  correspond  to  ideal  cases  (i)  within  every
natural  cycle  that  is  observed  ;  and  (ii)  in  the  series  as  a
whole  continued  A\'ithout  limit.

In  what,  on  the  other  hand,  may  be  called  an  arbitrary
cycle  the  '  ideal  alternatives '  are  derived  from  the  enumera-
tion of  real  cases. The  population  of  Great  Britain  at  a
given  date  would  be  such  a  collection  of  real  cases,  and
_that these real cases are  identical  with  the  equal  ideal
Itematives  is  shown  by  the  fact  that  their  number  forms
le  denominator  in  the  fraction  that  states  the  chances,
[f e.  g. the population were 30,000,000, and 6oo,cco
)eople  died  in  the  year,  the  chance,  assuming  constancy  of
le  average  ^,  that  any  one individual  taken  at random
^ould  die  within  the  following  year  would  be  ^1^^^^,  viz.
^TS' The  analysis  of  such  a  statement  of  chances  appears
me  not  quite  simple,  and  I  doubt  whether  Mr.  Venn,  in
laintaining  that  chance  essentially  refers to series,  has
lentified its elements rightly. The individual human
iings  composing  the  population  in  question,  in  whatever
)rder  we  choose  to  take  them  (say,  in  the  accidental  order
)f  our  enumeration),  must  correspond,  I  think,  both  to  the

Or  following  what  was  said  above  of  the  independence  of  calculation  and

event,  we  may  neglect  the  constancy  of  averages,  and  say,  referring  to  the

le  year  for  which  the  enumeration  is  taken, '  the  chance  that  any  particular

ividual  will  have  died  in  that  year.' On  the  same  premises,  the  chance  is

lie  same  after  the  event  as  before  it


/


364  Disjunction  and  the  statement  of  Chances. [Book  i.

real  case  ^ — the  throw  of  a  die  or  toss  of  a  coin — and  also  to
the  ideal  cases — to  the  sides  ^  of  the  die  or  of  the  coin
considered  as  possible  alternatives.  And  the  two  general
cases  of  dying  or  not  dying  within  the  year  cannot  I  think
correspond  to  the  equal  ideal  cases  or  possible  alternatives,
but  must  be  treated  as  those  combinations  of  alternatives
which  arise  when  several  possible  '  ways  in  which  the  event
may  happen '  have  an  identical  consequence  in  which  we
are  interested.  Or,  in  short,  we  might  put  it  thus,  follow-
ing in  part  Mr.  Venn's  interesting  discussion  : — English
humanity  is  the  '  event ' ;  each  individual  is  '  a  way  in
which  the  event  may  happen  ^ ; '  dying  and  not-dying  or
male  and  female  *  are  general  consequences  or  results  each
of  which  emerges  from  a  large  number  of  '  ways  in  which
the  event  may  happen.'  Thus,  as  is  right  in  theory,  the
ratio  of  chances  is  determined  by  the  number  of  ways
in  which  the  event  may  happen,  which  in  these  arbi-
trary cycles  =  the  number  of  cases  in  which  the  event
does  happen.  It  is  a  consequence  of  the  inductive
character  of  the  cycle  that  this  number  of  ways  has
no  obvious  and  necessary  meaning,  but  is  a  mere  in-
ference from  the  number  of  times  that  the  event  does
happen.  It  is  as  if  there  was  a  die  of  unknown  structure
thrown  30,000,000  times,  and  exhibiting  a  white  side
29,400,000  times  and  a  black  side  600,000  times.  If  then
we  chose  to  assume  that  we  had  before  us  a  die  with  600,000
black  sides  and  29,400,000  white  sides,  and  to  estimate  all
further  chances  on  that  basis,  we  should  be  in  an  analogous
position  to  that  which  we  adopt  when  we  calculate  chance

'  This  is  what  Mr.  Venn  describes  (Logic  of  Chance,  chap.  i.  sect.  6 ;  chap,
iii.  sect.  33),  in  the  ordinary  language  of  the  theory,  as  the  'event,'  and  in  hi
own  language  as  the  collection  of  attributes.

^  This  is  what  Mr.  Venn  describes  either  as  '  a  way  in  which  the  event  may
happen,'  or  as  the  '  occasional  attribute.'

^  Or  a  particular  modification  of  the  collection  of  attributes  by  occasional
attributes.

*  Mr.  Venn,  Logic  of  Chance,  chap.  i.  sect.  6.  Male  and  female  are  not  the
'  ways  in  which  the  event  may  happen.'  This  would  give  the  chance  of  each
as  2.


Chap.  VIII.]  Adhereiue  to  a  Ratio,  365

on  the  basis  of  a  ratio  observed  de  facto  in  a  cycle  of
cases.  The  chances  of  white  and  black  respectively  are
then  %%  and  -V  on  the  basis  of  this  real  but  arbitrary
cycle,  regarded  as  the  foundation  of  an  ideal  cycle  of
alternatives  identical  in  content  with  itself.

Now  the  arbitrary  cycle  itself,  the  30,000,000  individuals
and  6cc,coo  deaths,  being  given  as  real,  there  is  no  question
of  its  correspondence  with  a  pre-established  ratio.  If  we
ask  whether  the  ratio  of  ^^  which  it  prescribes  is  realised
in  experience,  we  can  only  mean  to  enquire  whether  the
distribution  of  the  deaths  is  regular  within  the  observed
cycle,  or  whether  the  same  ratio  prevails  outside  this  real
cycle,  which  latter  question  may  be  followed  up  if  we
please  by  the  same  question  as  before  about  the  regularity
of  occurrence.  I  am  not  quite  sure  that  in  speaking  of  the
uniformity  which  attends  large  numbers  of  instances  our
writers  always  remember  that  such  uniformity  demands
the  comparison  of  two  or  more  cycles.  The  ratio  of
results  within  a  single  group,  even  if  embracing  all  hitherto
obser\'ed  instances,  is  in  the  absence  of  an  antecedent  rule
a  mere  fact  and  not  a  realisation  of  anything.  Every
ratio  is  definite,  and  any  two  numbers  have  a  ratio,  so  that  it
is  a  truism  to  speak  of  a  definite  ratio  as  prevailing  between
classes  of  cases  in  a  single  group  ^.  Within  a  single  large
group  if  we  speak  of  adherence  to  a  ratio,  we  can  only
mean  regularity  of  occurrence.  And  in  the  case  of  indi-
viduals that  are  not  events  in  time  the  significance  of  such
regularity  and  its  existence  must  depend  simply  and  solely
on  the  order  in  which  we  consider  and  enumerate  them.

Thus  the  two  kinds  of  cycles  or  groups  of  instances  seem
to  be  quite  differently  situated  with  respect  to  empirical
verification, i.  A  natural  cycle  from  the  first  corresponds

'  L-Dgic  of  Chance,  i.  6.  The  distinctive  characteristic  of  probability  is  that
ixrcasional  attributes  as  distinguished  from  permanent  ones  are  found  on  ex-
tended examination  to  exist  in  a  certain  definite  proportion  of  the  whole  number
of  cases.  The  italics  are  Mr.  Venn's.  How  could  they  exist  in  anything  but
a  definite  proportion  ?


366  Disjunction  and  the  statement  of  Chances, [book  i.

or  does  not  correspond  to  its  antecedent  law,  within  the
limits  which  that  law  spontaneously  prescribes.  If  we
throw  all  six  sides  of  a  die  in  every  six  throws  there  can  be
no  doubt  that  up  to  the  point  when  we  break  ofif  the  series
is  an  empirical  verification  of  the  chances  as  we  stated  them.
It  shows  that  the  unknown  causes  operate  equally,  and  thus
produce  the  result,  which  we  anticipated  by  neglecting
them.  But  in  treating  of  actual  experience  we  may  prac-
tically disregard  this  kind  of  correspondence,  which  is  not
common  in  fact  and  at  all  events  could  hardly  repeat  itself
through  an  extended  number  of  observations.

ii.  We  are  thus  referred  to  the  second  question  which  we
mentioned  as  capable  of  being  proposed  respecting  a  natural
cycle,  viz.  whether  the  law  which  it  presupposes  (e.  g.  every
side  to  turn  up  once  in  six  throws  of  a  die)  is  realised  in  the
long  run.  It  must  be  observed  that  to  speak  of  realisation
in  the  whole  set  of  actual  cases,  whatever  their  number  may
be,  cannot  furnish  a  standard  in  this  question,  because  this
number  is  constantly  varying  and  is  very  different  in
different  subject-matters.  There  is  nothing  between  reali-
sation in  every  natural  cycle  and  realisation  in  an  infinite
series  if  we  keep  clear  of  causal  presumptions  which  do  not
belong  to  the  reckoning  of  chances  pure  and  simple.  There
is  no  doubt  that  the  law  presupposed  by  a  natural  cycle
may  be  realised  in  a  great  and  increasing  number  of  obser-
vations, and  that  inferences  may  with  the  aid  of  causal
presumptions  be  drawn  from  this  realisation.  But  for  all
that,  it  is  simply  nonsense  to  speak  as  if  the  true  and
only  true  realisation  of  a  ratio  of  chance  was  in  the  series
of  real  instances  continued  ad  infinitum.  Mr.  Venn,  who  is
consistent  in  regarding  this  as  the  solution  of  the  antithesis
between  equality  of  ground  and  inequality  of  reality,  denies,
as  I  understand  him,  that  the  formula  \  ^  has  any  meaning

*  Mr.  Venn  seems  to  have  been  influenced  by  considerations  such  as  those  of
p.  360  above.  It  is  true,  as  there  shown,  that  the  judgment  which  measures
probability  loses  ipso  facto  that  isolated  reference  to  a  particular  alternative
which  marks  the  genuine,  or  at  least  the  natural  problematic  judgment. In


^.  Chap.  VIII.]  The  arbitrary  Cycle.  367

as  applied  to  a  single  real  throw  of  a  die,  except  by  associa-
tion with  the  idea  of  a  series  in  which  all  sides  should
equally  be  exhibited.  Here  we  come  into  the  province  of
fiction.  There  is  no  reason,  in  the  cases  before  us,  that  such
a  series  should  be  a  fact  at  all.  And  in  these  and  in  all
other  cases  alike  it  is  impossible  that  the  infinite  series  could
be  a  fact.  And  yet,  if  not  a  fact,  it  fails  to  solve  the  anti-
thesis as  a  solution  of  which  it  is  propounded.  It  is  not  in
fact  possible  to  go  on  trying  for  ever,  and  it  is  not  in  theory
true  that  supposing  we  did  go  on  trying  for  ever  (abstracting
from  the  contradiction  involved)  every  alternative  must  be
realised  according  to  the  ratio.  The  ratio  may  be  justly
erected  according  to  our  grounds  of  knowledge,  even  if
some  of  the  alternatives  are  absolutely  impossible  and
herefore  could  never  occur  although,  per  impossibile^  the
iries  of  trials  should  be  prolonged  to  infinity.
In  the  case  of  the  arbitrary  cycle  the  answer  to  the  ques-
ion  is  still  less  favourable.  The  primarj'  interest  of  the
arbitrary  cycle  is  just  in  that  statement  of  chances  affecting
idividual  real  cases  which  is  suggested  not  to  be  the  true
leaning  of  the  ratio.  There  is  in  this  case  no  antecedent
iw  between  which  and  the  real  c>xle  a  correspondence
could  be  observed.  The  real  cycle  itself  is  and  prescribes
le  law.  And  although  cycles  of  real  events  that  fall  out-
ide  it,  or  minor  cycles  within  it,  can  be  tested  and  compared
ith  it  in  respect  of  the  ratios  they  display — as  we  compare
le  ratios  of  deaths  to  population  in  successive  years — yet
is  not  easy  to  say  on  what  ground  the  first  cycle  that  we
lappen  to  obser\'e  should  furnish  a  rule  to  which  subse-
juent  cycles  are  expected  to  conform. The  whole  group  of

rery  statement  of  chance  we  have  an  apodeictic  judgment  involving  the  entire
Tcontent  of  a  disjmiction  in  the  bearings  of  its  members  upon  one  another  (as
condition  and  consequent).  So  far  Mr.  Venn  and  I  are  together.  The  question
therefore  reduces  itself  to  that  of  the  purport  with  which  the  reference  to  the
remaining  alternatives  is  charged,  whether  it  depends  on  the  idea  of  a  completed
series,  or  can  be  explained  by  the  (assumed)  equal  claim  which  each  alternative
makes  on  reality  in  virtue  of  the  (assumed)  equality  of  their  grounds.  The
latter  view  seems  to  me  to  be  demanded  by  the  natuse  of  the  abstraction  on
which  the  whole  idea  of  stating  chances  depends.


/


368  Disjunction  and  the  statement  of  Chances, [book  i.

observed  events  or  individuals  is  a  comprehensive  fact,  within
which  the  ratio  of  the  ways  in  which  they  happen  or  of
their  classes  is  also  simply  a  fact.  Any  comparison  which
we  may  make  of  the  ratio  exhibited  in  minor  cycles  within
this  entire  group  has  only  the  interest  of  the  comparison
between  different  groups  of  actual  occurrences  or  indi-
viduals^. On  the  assumption  that  the  operative  but  un-
known causes  are  not  changing  progressively,  or  that  we
can  allow  for  their  progressive  change,  we  may  no  doubt
expect  to  find  that  a  ratio  which  we  elicited  from  case  i  to
I  GOO  will  hold  good  for  cases  looi  to  2000.  But  if  what  we
want  is  merely  the  serial  form,  we  have  it  already  in  cases
I  to  1000 ;  while  if  what  we  want  is  the  multiplication  of
observations,  why  should  the  2000  cases — a  wholly  arbitrary
number — be  especially  satisfying  ?  The  fact  is,  that  when
we  have  the  serial  form  given  to  begin  with,  as  in  these
arbitrary  cycles,  or  groups  of  instances  limited  only  by  our
ceasing  to  enumerate  them,  we  see  that  it  omits  just  that
peculiar  transition  which  is  the  essence  of  the  statement  of
chance.  It  only  presents  us  with  this  transition  in  so  far
as,  surrendering  its  serial  form,  it  becomes  the  basis  of  a
fractional  expression  which  summarises  our  knowledge,
drawn  from  the  series,  with  reference  to  some  instance  or
instances  whether  within  or  external  to  itself.  This  criticism
applies  to  the  serial  form  as  such.  The  equal  realisation  of
alternatives  considered  as  equal  (i.  e.  apart  from  regularity
and  irregularity,  which  are  equality  and  inequality  as  judged
by  minor  cycles)  destroys  the  peculiar  relation  of  equal
knowledge  to  unequal  fact,  which  is  the  ground  of  chance.

On  the  infinite  series,  or  approximation  in  the  long  run,
I  can  say  no  more  than  I  have  said  above,  and  others  have
said  before  me. The  thing  is  simply  a  fiction,  and  the

'  Mr. Venn,  Logic  of  Chance,  ii.  8,  seems  thoroughly  to  accept  this  result,  and
to  conceive  that  all  probability,  even  in  what  I  have  called  natural  cycles  (in
his  phrase  '  a  priori''  probability),  is  at  bottom  this  and  no  more.  I  cannot  but
think  that  if  probability  in  a  specific  case  means  anything,  it  must,  even  though
dependent  on  an  arbitrary  cycle,  be  stated  as  above  in  the  form  of  a  natural
cycle.


chap.viii.j  Interpretation  of  Series,  369

reference  of  the  realisation  of  a  ratio  to  it  proves,  if  any-
thing, that  it  is  ultimately  necessary  to  admit  that  chance
is  independent  of  a  real  series.

^.  The  true  bearing  of  a  series  on  the  verification  or  Causal
corroboration  of  a  ratio  expressing  probability  must  consist  fro^*^
in  its  relation  to  the  causal  presumptions  which  dominate  Series,
our  judgments  about  reality. All  judgments  that  deal  with
fact  assume,  though  they  may  not  explicitly  assert,  causa-
tion. Statements  of  chance  do  not  proceed  by  follo^ving
causation  into  its  ramifications;  we  should  thus  have  concrete
knowledge  and  not  equality  of  alternatives. But  when  the
results  of  experience  coincide  with  the  predictions  of  the
calculus,  this  suggests  to  us  not  that  we  knew  the  right
causes  or  any  causes  at  all,  but  that  the  actual  causes  at
|i¥ork  have  a  character  compatible  with  the  results  which  we
)btained  through  the  indifference  of  ignorance. If,  on  the
>ther  hand,  the  results  of  experience  deviate  widely,  so  far
experience  goes,  from  the  ratio  suggested  by  the  calculus,
len  though  this  deviation  can  never  amoimt  to  a  flat  contra-
ction, yet  it  suggests  an  arrangement  of  causes  incom-
)atible  with the results which were generated by the
idifTerence  of  ignorance. If  we  cast six twenty  times
mning  with  the  same  die,  we  have  no  right  to  say  that
lis  theoretically  speaking  contradicts  the  ratio  of  chance
mless  we  take  as  a  standard,  which  no  one  would  ever  do,
le  natural  cycle  of  six  throws),  for  in  1 20  throws  the  balance
light  be  restored. In  other  words,  no  sequence  is  im-
)ssible  in  such  a  case,  nor  is  one  more  improbable  than
mother,  but  of  course  any  one  sequence  is  immensely  im-
)robable  beforehand  as  against  the  whole  remaining  mass
)f  possible  sequences. And  in  any  marked  or  so  to  speak
identifiable  sequence  this  improbability  strikes  us  as  though
it  had  occurred  in  face  of  some  enormous  probability  in
favour  of  some  otte  other  sequence,  all  the  less  identifiable
sequences  counting  as  if  one  in  number,  though  n—i in
probability. This  is  a  partial  account  of  our  surprise  ;  but
as  has  been  well  explained  by  SigNvart,  there  is  in  it  the
VOL.  I.  B  b


370  Disjunction  and  the  statement  of  Chances,  [book  i.

further  element  that  whereas  the  twenty  consecutive  sixes
are  on  the  assumptions  from  which  we  started  but  one
among  an  enormous  number  of  equal  possibilities,  they
happen  to  be  of  such  a  nature  that  on  another  assumption,
incompatible  with  those,  they  would  follow  with  absolute
or  all  but  absolute  certainty.  We  know  that  if  the  die  is
cogged  it  will  always  turn  up  the  same  side,  or  to  speak
generally,  if  there  is  present  an  operative  cause  which
necessarily  produces  one  alternative,  that  alternative  will
always  be  produced.  This  suggests  the  comparison  between
one  ratio,  that  with  which  we  started,  which  gives  a  very
minute  probability  for  the  result  found  in  practice ;  and
another  ratio,  formed  on  a  different  assumption,  which  gives
the  observed  result  with  something  like  certainty.  Nothing
binds  us  absolutely  to  either,  but  it  is  plain  that  so  far  as
experience  has  gone  the  probability  is  with  the  latter  in  the
proportion  in  which  it  gives  the  result  observed  with  greater
probability  than  does  the  former.  It  must  be  carefully
remembered  that  here,  as  all  through  this  discussion,  we  are
dealing  with  hypothetical  judgments  only.  The  probability
I  speak  of  is  only  on  the  data  taken  into  account.  If  I  am
playing  with  a  most  respectable  friend  who  says  he  has  got
the  die  from  a  good  shop,  I  may  prefer  to  believe  in  the
reality  of  a  peculiar  case  rather  than  in  a  fraud.
Observed  y.  I  do  not  see  that  it  is  inevitable,  as  has  been  maintained,
andcal- j^  ^  ^^  observed  series  must  deviate  from  the  calculated

culated

Series  may  ratio,  as  it  passes  through  fragments  of  a  fresh  cycle.  Of
coinci  e.  (^Quj-se  its  Coincidence  with  the  ratio  will  not  be  demonstrable
while  any  cases  are  wanting  to  finish  the  cycle ;  but  if  we
shrink  from  saying  that  the  observed  numbers  can  coincide
with  the  calculated  numbers  in  a  half  cycle  or  less,  we  must
not,  I  think,  say  that  they  deviate,  unless  coincidence  at  the
next  natural  cycle  is  already  impossible.  Five  complete
cycles  of  sides  and  three  different  sides  in  thirty-three  throws
of  a  die  surely  form  a  case  which  should  be  distinguished
from  the  same  five  cycles  of  sides  plus  three  repetitions  of
the  same  side.


CHAP.\aii.] CJiatices  of  Truth  a  priori.  371

5.  In  speaking  of  the  truth  of  chances  based  on  statistical  The  scries
averages,  we  may  illustrate  what  has  been  said  by  the  for^me
different  positions  of  an  insurance  office  and  an  individual  pnrposes.
customer  of  the  office.  To  the  individual  whose  expecta-
tion of  life  is  in  question  the  chance  of  life  gives  but  little
information,  at  all  events  so  long  as  it  is  large.  Whether
he  gains  or  loses  by  insuring  his  life  is  for  him  practically
a  mere  uncertainty.  He  knows  what  it  is  reasonable  to
expect  on  the  general  data  of  reasoning,  but  he  has  no  sort
of  ground  for  being  surprised  if  it  does  not  happen.  For  the
office,  on  the  other  hand,  so  long  as  the  averages  are  con-
stant, the  fate  of  individuals  is  wholly  indifferent  except  in
so  far  as  they  are  more  lightly  or  more  heavily  insured.  If
the  office  could  be  sure  that  in  each  class  of  customers
(ranking  them  by  the  amount  of  their  insurances)  the
average  of  deaths  would  be  maintained  at  the  same  figure,
it  would  make  no  sort  of  difference  to  it  who  in  particular
died.  Thus  it  is  true  that  in  a  real  cycle  the  ratio  of
chance  may  in  a  certain  sense  become  a  fact.  What  is  not
true  is  that  in  becoming  a  fact  it  remains  a  chance^,  and
that  if  it  fails  to  be  realised  in  the  short  run  it  must  be
realised  in  the  long  nm.

vii.  Before  passing  to the  subject of  modality I will  ProbabUity
mention  an  interesting  point  in  the  theory  of  chance,  which  mentm  the

is  cognate  to  the  above  discussions  on  Privation,  Affirma-  absence  of

knowledge.

tion,  and  Exclusion^.  What  statement  of  chances  expresses
the  attitude  which  we  ought  to  adopt  towards  an  affirma-
tion in  the  absence  of  all  knowledge  ?  The  accepted
answer  appears  to  be  \,  '  for  if  we  make  it  less  than  this
we  incline  to  believe  it  rather  false  than  true,'  or  putting
I  suppose  the  same  ground  into  mathematical  language,
'  If  we  grant  that  the  probability  may  have  any  value
between  o  and  i,  and  that  every  separate  value  is  equally

'  Cp.  Adam  Smith's  attack  on  lotteries. You  may  see,  he  said,  how  mnch
e  chances  are  against  yon,  by  the  fiact  that  if  yon  take  all  the  tickets  yon  are
jure  to  lose.
'  Chap.  viL  supra. See  Jevoas'  Prindples  of  Science,  p.  21  a.

B  b  3


372  Disjunction  and  the  statement  of  Chances.  [Booki.

likely,  then  n  and  \—n  are  equally  likely,  and  the  average
is  always  \^  I  am  not  prepared  to  deny  this  conclusion,
which  of  course  follows  from  its  data,  but  I  think  that  it
may  be  instructive  to  discuss  these  data,  which  appear  to
me  somewhat  superficial.  It  appears  that  the  symbol  %
has  also  been  proposed,  on  the  ground  that  '  the  a  priori
[formal  ?]  probability  derived  from  absolute  ignorance  has
no  effect  upon  the  force  of  a  subsequently  admitted  [real  ?]
probability^.'

It  cannot  but  strike  the  looker-on  that  these  two  sug-
gested values  %  and  \  seem  to  correspond  with  the
conceptions  of  non-impossibility  and  of  real  possibility
respectively,  and  that  to  take  probability  as  having  the
value  \  in  the  absence  of  all  knowledge  is  analogous
to  conjuring  a  positive  favourable  presumption  out  of  an
absence  of  counter-presumptions.  The  question  is,  accord-
ing to  the  analysis  of  chance  which  has  been  stated  above,
whether  the  two  alternatives  '  true  '  and  '  false '  are  sole  and
equal  alternatives.  Interpreting  absence  of  knowledge  as
Jevons  interprets  it,  to  include  entire  ignorance  of  the
meaning  of  an  enunciation,  I  do  not  see  that  they  are  sole
alternatives.  '  If  I  ask  the  reader  to  assign  the  odds  that
a  Platythliptic  coefficient  is  positive,  he  would  hardly  see
his  way  to  doing  so  unless  he  regards  them  as  equal  ^.'
But  to  a  reader  who  does  not  know  what  the  words  mean —
and  this  I  suppose  is  what  Jevons  intended — there  is  no
judgment  conveyed.  The  alternative  *  unmeaning'  must
then  be  allowed  for  in  addition  to  '  true  '  and  '  false.'  This,
it  may  be  said,  makes  nonsense  of  the  problem.  The  un-
meaning is  not  a  judgment,  and  the  problem  is  only  about
judgments.  Granted  ;  but  then  I  must  not  include  the
very  large  division  of  the  unmeaning  in  the  statement  of
chance  without  recognising  it  as  a  separate  alternative.
And  if  I  am  to  exclude  it  altogether  I  must  either  be  given
a  sentence  which  I  am  able  to  recognise  as  a  judgment,  or
the  problem  must  refer  to  any  judgment  as  such  without
^  Bishop  Terrot,  quoted  in  Jevons,  1.  c.  "  Jevons,  1.  c.


Chap.  VIII. J Effect  of  Ignoratue  ofi  yudgment. 373

considerinsr  whether  I  know  beforehand  what  it  is.  The
latter  case  is  not  that  in  question,  and  could  be  treated
perhaps  better  through  statistics  of  error  in  the  sciences,
than  by  deduction  from  the  alternatives  '  true '  and  '  false.'
It  includes  in  the  reckoning  all  judgments  known  to  be
true,  whereas  the  present  problem  says  nothing  of  these,
but  only  of  judgments  on  which  being  presented  to  me
I  am  unable  to  return  a  verdict  based  upon  positive
grounds.

The  real  question  then  is  this.  Given  a  judgment  which
I  can  understand,  but  which  I  have  no  positive  ground
either  to  affirm  or  deny,  what  are  the  chances  in  favour  of
its  truth  and  falsehood  respectively?  The  conditions  of
this  problem  cannot  of  course  be  actually  realised,  because
to  understand  the  meaning  of  a  judgment  theoretically
involves  some  consciousness  oiprds  and  cotHs.  Yet  there
are  in  the  world  so  many  almost  arbitrary  judgments,  that
the  question  has  some  importance.  Truth  and  falsehood
are  in  this  case,  the  case  of  intelligible  judgments,  sole
alternatives,  but  I  cannot  think  that  they  are,  under  the
supposed  conditions,  equal  alternatives.  I  cannot  think,
that  is,  that  every  separate  value  of  probability  between  o
and  I  is  equally  likely.  For  the  judgment  being  a  form  or
indeed  the  form  of  knowledge,  the  hypothesis  of  ignorance,
in  this  case  '  absolute  ignorance,'  on  which  the  statement  of
chances  is  erected,  has  a  peculiar  relation  to  the  content  of
such  a  statement  when  that  content  is  the  judgment.  If
we  knew  there  was  a  certain  motion  below  a  certain  limit
of  velocity,  but  had  no  further  clue  to  the  velocity  of  the
motion,  it  might  be  true  I  suppose  that  every  degree  of
velocity  below  that  limit  was  equally  probable.  But  if  we
know  that  there  is  a  judgment  made,  or  proposed  to  be
made,  and  have  no  clue  to  any  degree  of  positive  probability
in  its  favour,  then  for  us  the  zero  of  probability  is  the  fact,
and  if  we  were  to  make  the  judgment  in  question  it  would
in  our  mouth  be  false  even  if  in  reality  true.  Thus,  on  the
basis  of  my  individual  knowledge,  such  a  judgment  qua  judg-


3  74  Disjunction  and  the  statement  of  Chances.  [Book

ment  is  by  the  hypothesis /rm<3:/««>  false.  But  my  know-;
ledge  is  not  all  reality,  and  therefore  I  dare  not  say  that
falsity  holds  the  field  as  an  absolute  certainty.  The  possi-
bility however  drawn  from  the  mere  difference  between  my
knowledge  and  all  reality,  is  an  unmotived  possibility;  for
there  is  at  least  no  antecedent  likelihood  that  my  know-
ledge is  always  wrong.  And  I  am  not  entitled  to  raise
this  unmotived  possibility  into  an  alternative  having  equal
grounds  with  the  prima  facie  falsity  which  follows  from
the  hypothesis.

I  am  not  prepared  to  suggest  any  way  of  representing
these  chances  in  numbers.  Without  equally  grounded
alternatives  we  cannot  state  chances,  and  I  do  not  see  where
in  this  case  these  are  to  come  from.  If  one  read  '  doctrines'
for  judgments,  so  as  to  restrict  the  question  to  matters  of
some  depth  and  importance,  one  might  obtain  interesting
enumerations  out  of  the  history  of  science  bearing  on  such
relations  as  those  of  false  anticipations  compared  with  true
discoveries.  But  it  would  all  amount  to  very  little.  I  only
desired  to  point  out  that  the  suggested  symbols  %  and  \
seemed  to  lie  in  the  track  of  the  fallacy  discussed  above  ^.
To  say  that  objecting  to  a  judgment  we  do  not  know  to  be
true  is  as  unreasonable  as  accepting  a  judgment  we  do  not
know  to  be  true — and  to  say  that  truth  and  falsehood  have
a  chance  of  \  each  is  to  say  this — appears  to  me  to  be  a
sophism  in  the  vein  of  Sir  Anthony  Absolute^.  If  you
have  no  reason  for  accepting  a  judgment,  you  must  decline
to  accept  it.  If  you  only  decline  provisionally,  and  say
that  in  future,  or  to  the  knowledge  of  wiser  minds,  the
judgment  in question  may  perhaps  be  proved  true,  then

'  See  cbap.  vii.  p.  333.

^  '  Absolute.  "  Sure,  Sir,  this  is  not  very  reasonable,  to  summon  my  affection
for  a  lady  I  know  nothing  of."

'  Sir  Anth.  "  I  am  sure,  Sir,  'tis  more  unreasonable  in  you  to  object  to  a  lady
you  know  nothing  of." '

Sir  Anthony  wishes  to  represent  the  chances  of  attachment  and  non-attachment
to  any  unknown  lady  as  ^  each,  or  even  as  more  than  \  in  favour  of  attach-
ment. This  is  really  not  a  bad  parallel  to  the  view  criticised  in  the  text.


Chap.  \aii.] Sytubols  fov  Doubt  atid  Denial.  375

you  unquestionably  are  cherishing  some  distinct  though
general  presumption  in  favour  of  the  judgment,  and  it
is  not  one  of  those  whose  chances  '  in  the  absence  of
knowledge'  we  are  discussing.  We  do  not  treat  really
arbitrary  suggestions  with  so  much  respect.  It  seems  to
me  monstrous  to  say  that  half  the  equal  grounds  are  for
truth  and  half  for  falsehood  when  the  fact  is  that  you  have
no  ground  to  think  the  thing  true,  and  require  none  to
think  it  false.

This  brings  me  to  one  further  distinction.  The  reader
ought  to  reply, '  You  do  need  a  positive  ground  of  denial
in  order  to  deny,  and  in  stating  the  chances  as  %  you  are
denj-ing,  which  ex  hypothesi  you  have  no  right  to  do.'  But
I  suppose  that  by  the  symbol  %  we  do  not  so  much  deny
the  judgment  as  refuse  to  state  the  chances.  It  is  only  the
logical  interpretation  of  this  refusal  that  brings  something
like  a  denial  into  the  matter.  You  caimot  obtain  a  denial
out  of  a  pure  privation,  i.  e.  a  mere  profession  of  ignorance,
but  then  in  view  of  the  positive  mass  and  far-reaching  pre-
sumptions of  knowledge  as  a  whole,  no  privation  however
complete'^  can  be  quite /«r^^  i.e.  quite  free  from  positive
grounds  of  denial.  A  complete  and  persistent  privation
must  always,  as  I  have  tried  to  show  above,  verge  upon  an
exclusion.  But  if  we  had  at  command  a  direct  and  positive
ground  of  denial,  then  I  imagine  that  we  should  not  restrict
ourselves  to  refusing  to  state  the  chances,  i.e.  to  %,  but
should  employ  the  symbol-  o.  Or,  in  order  to  indicate
that  a  case  has  no  chances  in  its  favour  because  all  the
possible  chances  are  absorbed  by  another  case  which  is
certain  and  which  excludes  the  former,  we  ought  I  should
think  to  use  the  expression \,  i.  e.  negation  grounded  in


1  By  a  'complete'  privation  I  mean  one  in  which  we  know  absolutely
nothing  in  favour  of  the  matter  of  which  we  deny  all  knowledge,  while  I  call
a  privation  '  pure '  in  as  far  as  we  know  nothing  positive  against  the  matter  of
which  we  deny  all  knowledge.  And  my  suggestion  is  that,  looking  at  know-
ledge as  it  really  exists,  wherever  we  have  the  former  case  it  is  almost  impossible
to  have  the  latter.


376 Disjunction  and  the  statement  of  Chances.

positive  certainty,  which  is  the  remainder  of  ^y^  and  so
represents  the  total  certainty  available  for  the  two  cases  as
entirely  absorbed  by  the  one.  Thus  we  should  have  three
symbols  representing  ideas  which  we  ought  not  to  confuse,
^  for  demonstrable  impossibility,  %  for  absolute  ignorance
(privation  alike  of  real  possibility  and  of  impossibility),  \  for
a  conflict  of  proofs,  such  that  truth  and  falsehood  are  equally
grounded  alternatives,  which  in  presence  of  absolute  igno-
rance is  not  the  case.


^ViXw^  -«2/  ^  Mt4j  /cC^L/


CHAPTER IX.

Modality.

I.  I  PROPOSE  to  conclude  the  discussion  of  the  judgment  Kant's  view
with  a  short  treatment  of  Modality. For  Modality,  if  it  ment^y
exists  at  all,  is  simply  the  degree  in  which  individual  judg-  i^^-
ments  participate  in  the  certainty  of  that  permanent  and
all-embracing  judgment  by  which  the  individual  intelligence
.sustains  those  qualifications  of  the  Real  which  for  it  consti-
tute Reality. Our  account  of  Modality  must  therefore
:solve  itself  into  a  recapitulation  of  the  principal  types  of
idgment,  having  for  its  object  to  bring  together  in  a  single
^view  certain  of  their  characteristics  which have  already
been  noticed. The  question  before  us  is  whether  and  in
what sense  there are degrees of  logical certainty; not
^merely  of  habitual  conviction,  or  of  readiness  to  act  on  a
ilief,  which  are  psychological  and  not  logical,  but  of  that
laracteristic  which  forms  the  differentia  of  judgment,  and
rhich may be described as logical  assertiveness. This
)gical  assertiveness  itself  indeed  includes  a  psychical  or
sychological  element  which  must  be  carefully  distinguished
rom  the  purely  logical  or  rational  element  of  assertiveness.
One  preliminary  difficulty  meets  us  on  two  sides. We
ind Kant  ^ maintaining that modality  affects only  the
copula  in  judgment,  and  that  therefore,  though  a  measure
>f  assertiveness,  it  is  indifferent  to  the content  affirmed,
tnd  we  find  it  maintained  against  Kant  that  modality  has
lo  reference  to  the  copula  in  judgment,  nor,  consequently,
jto  the  assertiveness  of  assertion,  but  is  a  peculiarity  of  the

*  Kant,  Kritik  der  r.  V.  p.  97  (Haitenstein),  *  Von  der  log.  Function  im
Jrtheilen.'


378  Modality.  [Booki.

content  affirmed  which  does  not  affect  the  essential  act  of
affirmation  ^.  Both  of  these  views,  it  will  be  remarked,  by
separating  the  assertiveness  of  assertion  from  the  content
asserted,  represent  judgment  as  an  arbitrary  and  irrational
activity.  It  is  not  surprising  that  in  the  '  Grammar  of
Assent'  ecclesiastical  interest  should  have  thrown  itself
zealously  on  the  side  of  such  a  conception.

The  view  which  I  have  attempted  to  explain  in  the
present  discussion  is  incompatible  with  both  of  the  above-
mentioned  ideas.  Every  judgment,  as  we  have  seen,  unites
in  it  two  elements  of  certainty ;  the  formal  or  psychological
element,  which  consists  in  a  reference  of  its  content  in  virtue
of  a  perceived  identity  to  the  individual's  personal  world  of
perception  and  experience,  and  the  material  or  logical
element,  which  consists  in  the  attachment  of  this  content
by  rational  necessity  to  the  organised  nature  which  the
Real  possesses  as  already  qualified  by  the  individual's
knowledge.  The  former  element  corresponds  to  memory
and  the  latter  to  reasoning.  All  reasoning  is  in  the  medium
of  memory,  but  memory  as  such  does  not  involve  reasoning.
The  two  activities  however  are  one  in  origin  and  in  ultimate
nature.

Now  the  psychological  element  of  certainty  does  not
vary.  The  unity  of  a  content  with  the  individual  per-
ceptive self  admits  of  no  degrees.  If  it  appears  to  vary  in
degree,  we  are  remembering  by  something,  i.  e.  we  are  eking
out  memory  by  reasoning.  Memory  as  such  is  dumb  in
presence  of  questions  or  comparison  of  grounds.  It  tells  us
nothing  beyond  the  mere  content  which  it  recalls.  But
material  or  logical  certainty  depends  on  reasoning,  and  is

^  Sigwart  and  Bradley  certainly  agree  in  this.  Lotze  seems  to  say  it  of  the
old  Modality,  in  which  '  It  must  be  so  counted  as  apodeictic,'  but  does  not
distinctly  say  it  of  Modality  as  understood  by  himself  (and  subsequently  by  the
other  moderns  above  mentioned),  which  requires  hypothetical  or  disjunctive
form  for  apodeictic  judgment.  In  his  suggestion  as  to  Modality  Lotze  was  of
course  anticipated  by  Hegel.  Sigwart  and  Bradley  deny  the  superior  logical
certainty  of  the  apodeictic  judgment,  and  Sigwart  even  disparages  it  on  the
ground  of  its  mediate  character. Here,  at  any  rate,  he  commits  a  gross  blunder.


Chap.  IX. ] Kant  OH  Problematic  J udgments. 379

therefore  capable  of  more  and  less,  and  is  the  chief  element
of  the  assertiveness  of  judgments.  It  follows  that  modality
w,  as  Kant  said  it  was  not,  a  characteristic  of  the  content
affirmed,  but  is  also,  for  that  very  reason,  as  the  modems

y  it  is  not,  a  measure  of  the  assertiveness  of  assertion,
ether  modality  must  be  said  to  affect  the  '  copula '  at
all,  or  the  copula  only,  depends  on  w'hat  we  mean  by  the
copula.  If  the  copula  is  formal  and  empty,  an  unexplained
act  of  reference  like  that  of  memory,  then  modality  does  not
affect  it,  or  rather  it  does  not  affect  modality.  If,  on  the
contrary,  the  copula  is  the  act  by  which  grounded  necessity
is  recognised,  then  it  is  the  essence  of  modality.  The
formal  and  indifferent  copula  of  traditional  logic  is  the
psychological  copula,  and  when  treated  as  the  logical
copula  becomes  a  logical  copula  indifferent  to  the  logical
content^,  which  is  absurd.

As  a  matter  of  organic  principle,  therefore,  I  shall  follow
Kant,  although  by  what  I  must  regard  as  a  confusion,  he
refers  modality  to  the  form  of  judgment  and  not  to  the
content,  and  although  his  'problematic  judgment'  is  rightly
pronounced  by  later  writers  to  be  no  judgment  at  all.  His
summary  runs  thus  :  '  Because,  then,  in  this  aspect  [i.  e.  in
modality]  everything  incorporates  itself  with  the  intelli-
gence by  degrees,  so  that  one  begins  by  judging  pro-
blematically, and  subsequently  takes  the  matter  to  be
true  assertorically,  and  ultimately  affirms  it  as  inseparably
united  with  the  intelligence,  i.  e.  as  necessary  and  apodeictic,
it  follows  that  we  may  confer  on  the  three  functions  of
modality  the  further  appellation  of  so  many  moments  of
thought  as  such  ^.' Here  as  throughout  philosophy  it  has

'  Lotze  does  not  &11  into  this  trap.  But  he  seems  only  to  avoid  it  at  the
35t  of  separating  off  a  particular  fragment  of  content  to  be  identified  with  the
^opnla,  at  least  when  he  is  explaining  the  traditional  view.  But  as  against
this  the  traditional  view  was  right.  The  copula  must  have  to  do  with  all  of  the
content  or  with  none.  In  Lotze 's  own  view  of  Apodeictic  Judgment  it  has  to
.0  with  all.

^  Nearly  equivalent  to  what  I  have  often  spoken  of  as  non-impossibility.
^ee  below.


380  Modality.  [book  i.

been  the  task  of  later  writers  to  realise  in  the  concrete  a
conception enunciated by  Kant, but by  him only half
liberated from the formulae of obsolete conventions.
Hegel's  analysis  of  the  hypothetical  and  disjunctive  judg-
ment, adopted by  Lotze and subsequent  writers,  is  the
realisation  of  Kant's  idea  of  modality  as  progressive  incor-
poration with  the  understanding.
The  Pro- 2.  In  order  to  begin  at  the  beginning  we  must  start  from
Judgment.  Kant's  'problematic'  judgment,  which,  as  he  describes  it,
is not a  judgment  at all. The problematic judgment
according  to  him  expresses  mere  logical  possibility^,  not
'  objective'  possibility,  and  he  gives  as  examples  of  it  the
antecedent  and  consequent  in  hypothetical  judgments,  or
the  isolated  members  of  a  disjunction.
Nature  of i.  But  such  elements  of  thought  are  of  course  by  them-
or^ues-°°  selves  not  judgments,  i.e.  as  Kant  himself  says,  they  are
tion.  not  assertory. It  may  be  doubted  however  whether  such

elements  of  thought  exist  by  themselves  at  all,  and  whether
they  do  not  of  necessity  enter  into  some  judgments.  Their
nature  is  no  doubt  the  same  as  that  of  the  genuine^  Ques-
tion, which  Sigwart  has  the  merit  of  having  discussed.  I
cannot  think  however  that  his  psychological  expressions
help  us  to  grasp  the  logical  differentia  of  question  or  doubt.
It  is  nothing  to  say  that  the  idea  merely  floats^  before  the
mind. It  must,  in  order  to  rank  as  a  definite  doubt  or

*  Kritik  der  r.  Vernunft,  p.  97  (Hartenstein's  ed.).

*  The  question  which  expresses  a  real  doubt  or  ignorance ;  not  one  to  which
we  know  the  answer,  but  ask  in  order  to  force  the  interlocutor  to  give  it.  This
latter  is  an  imperative,  as  Sigwart  says  (vol.  i.  190-1).  But  then  the  former
hardly  perhaps  has  the  differentia  of  the  Question,  which  is  just  this  imperative
significance.  So  the  '  genuine '  Question  is  perhaps  not  a  Question  at  all,  but
only  a  state  of  knowledge.  What  state  of  knowledge?  Obviously  one  that
presses  for  an  advance,  so  probably  a  disjunction  of  ignorance.  Kant's  proble-
matic judgment  includes  all  supposition  qua  supposition,  although  known  to  be
false  or  known  to  be  true.  But  I  do  not  think  that  Sigwart's  complaint  of  a  want
of  distinction  between  these  cases  and  that  of  genuine  doubt  is  well  founded,
because  a  supposition  qua  supposition  is  considered  by  an  act  of  abstraction
apart  from  the  relations  which  constitute  its  falsity  or  certainty.  Therefore,  as
subject  to  this  abstraction,  any  supposition  may  rank  as  a  doubtful  judgment.

*  '  In  der  Schwebe.'


Chap.  IX.]  'Floating  Ideas!  381

question,  make  some  specific  claim,  be  a  candidate  for  some
definite  place,  in  the  permanent  judgment  of  consciousness.
There  is  a  nearer  approach  to  something  intelligible  in  the
suggestion  that  a  problematic  judgment  is  a  judgment  about
oneself,  saying  that  in  the  matter  before  us  we  are  unable
to  judge.  But  this,  though  often  true  in  fact,  is  an  eva-
sion of  the  theoretical  diflSculty.  There  must  be  some
definite  logical  situation  in  virtue  of  which  we  say  this.
When  we  judge  that  a  judgment  is  merely  possible  we
must  judge  that  its  content  has  mere  possibility.  The
reduction  of  judgment  of  possibility  to  possibility  of  judg-
ment is  an  attempt  to  take  refuge  in  psychology  from  a
logical  difficulty.

Although  then  the  mere  idea  of  a  judgment,  floating  be-
fore the  mind,  is  not.  even  if  it  exists,  a  judgment  at  all  and
therefore  not  a  problematic  judgment,  yet  every  genuine
question  and  every  judgment  made  subject  to  a  '  possibly '
or  '  perhaps '  represents  a  peculiar  logical  situation,  and
not  merely  a  psychological  incompleteness  of  the  act  of
judgment.  It  is  not  true  as  a  rule  that  we  begin  with
floating  ideas  and  advance  from  them  to  judgments.  I
doubt  if  such  a  beginning  is  possible ;  it  is  certainly  not
normal.  Our  thought  consists  in  the  continuous  modifica-
tion of  judgments — I  had  almost  said,  of  a  single  judgment.
The  question,  considered  as  a  state  of  knowledge,  is  a  dis-
junctive or  hypothetical  judgment  used  as  the  premise  of  an
inference.  A  groundless  question  is  as  unreal  as  the  '  in-
finite' judgment.  I  cannot  ask  'Are  you  going  home?'
except  on  the  basis  'You  are  possibly  or  probably  going
home,'  which  means  when  analysed  either  '  If  ;r  is  the  case
you  are  going  home,'  or  else  '  Either  you  are  going  home,
or  X  is  the  case.'  The  question  does  not  mean  '  I  have  a
floating  idea  in  my  head  of  you  as  going  home  ^,  and  want
to  know  if  I  am  to  refer  this  to  reality.'  It  means  rather,
'  I  judge  true  of  reality  a  definite  situation  in  which  some

'  The  idea  is  not  *  of  yon  as  going  home '  bnt '  thai  yon  may  be  going  home ;'
i.  e.  something  is  judged,  which  may  result  in  yoor  going.


382  Modality,  [bookI.

conditions  of  your  going  home  are  included  ;  I  want  to
qualify  reality  by  this  situation  more  precisely  defined  '  or
to  qualify  a  further  element  of  Reality,  viz.  yourself,  by  it.
Thus  Kant  is  not  so  far  wrong  in  identifying  a  problematic
judgment,  or,  as  we  may  call  it,  a  genuine  question,  with  an
isolated  member  of  a  complex  enunciation  ;  but  it  is  only
as  a  corollary  from  the  complex  thought  or  as  an  inability
to  make  its  outline  precise,  and  not  as  a  mere  isolated
member  of  it,  that  the  problematic  expression  can  be  a
judgment  at  all.  For  in  its  isolation,  ex  hypothesi,  it  is  not
referred  to  reality.
Problema-  ii.  Possibility,  then,  as  Mr.  Bradley  has  told  us,  is  a
Apodeictic  species  of  necessity,  and  it  seems  to  follow  from  this  that
Judgment,  the  problematic  judgment  is  a  form  of  the  apodeictic  judg-
ment, and  that  any  series  of  gradations  in  which  the  two
have  separate  places — such  gradations  as  Kant  laid  down —
must  be  in  contradiction  with  the  nature  of  the  case.  If
the  judgment  of  possibility  is  the  first  form  under  which
matters  of  knowledge  attach  themselves  to  the  under-
standing, then  it  can  hardly  be  a  species  of  the  final  form,
and  ought  to  be  verifiable  in  early  thought.

We  must  begin  by  admitting  the  difficulty  indicated  by
the  last  objection.  All  judgment,  I  have  said,  is  in  one
respect  assertory.  It  is  probable  that  very  early  thought
may  present  no  other  aspect.  The  distinction  between
memory  and  intelligence  is  a  late  distinction.  The  old
man  in  Homer  ^  who  '  knows  ten  thousand  things '  cannot
but  remind  us  of  the  schoolboy  whose  friend  '  knows  an
awful  lot.'  Whatever  is  in  the  mind,  such  expressions
seem  to  suggest,  ranks  alike  as  knowledge.  The  assevera-
tion, indeed,  may  be  supposed  to  begin  as  soon  as  man  feels
the  danger  of  deceit ;  and  this  form  of  speech  recognises  a
distinction  in  degrees  of  certainty,  and  attempts  to  raise
one  matter  of  knowledge  to  the  standard  of  another. But

^  Homer  is  of  course  not  primitive,  but  poetry  is  very  conservative,  and
Homer  is  full  of  ideas  which  are  derived  from  very  early  strata  in  the
mind's  formation.


Chap.  IX.]  Possibility  and  Necessity.  383

on  the  whole,  the  distinction  between  memory  and  intelli-
gence, and  therefore  that  between  mere  reference  to  per-
ceived reality  and  systematically  grounded  insight,  would
probably  be  found  a  vanishing  distinction  if  we  could
examine  the  earliest  phases  of  the  human  mind.  Possi-
bility, mere  assertion,  and  necessity,  as  they  exist  for  the
civilised  mind,  are  based  upon  differences  that  concern  the
material  logical  or  systematic  element  in  judgment.  We
have  to  remember  however  that  logical  facts  exist  long
before  the  technical  names  for  them,  and  we  must  not  limit
the  existence  of  modalities  by  that  of  w^ords  like  possibility
and  necessity,  but  only  by  that  of  speech-elements  bearing
the  power  of '  may,'  '  must,'  '  shall,'  or  '  would  that.'  And
we  must  add  that  we  cannot  see  how  judgment  should
exist  apart  from  all  sense  of  rational  necessity.  A  mere
instinctive  identification  with  reality,  wholly  without  why
or  wherefore,  is  rather  a  theoretical  limit  below  which
judgment  cannot  be  taken  to  exist,  than  an  historical  phase
of  the  judging  faculty.

The  next  difficulty  is  that  possibility  appears  on  the
view  taken  above  to  be  a  species  of  necessity,  and  yet  to  be
prior  to  necessity.  In  order  to  explain  this  we  must  refer
back  to  the  doctrine  of  opposition  and  conversion.  Strictly
and  properly,  a  judgment  can  only  be  denied  by  another
judgment  of  the  same  nature;  a  singular  by  a  singular
judgment,  a  generic  by  a  generic,  or  a  hypothetical  by  a
hypothetical.  But  a  very  strong  implication  of  denial  can
be  conveyed  by  a  judgment  which  being  of  a  different  type
from  that  contradicted  denies  the  right  of  this  latter  judg-
ment to  the  type  which  it  has  assumed.  If,  however,  the
denial  is  to  be  prosecuted  in  earnest,  the  judgment  of  the
lower  type  must  be  capable  of  maintaining  itself  on  the
level  of  that  which  it  assails.  Possibility,  if  not  derivative
or  calculated,  represents  such  a  first  effort  at  denial,  directed
against  a  necessary  judgment,  and  may  or  may  not  go  on
to  assume  an  explicitly  necessary  form.

a. Thus possibility  as prior to necessity  follows the


384


Modality.


[Book  I.


Particular
Judgment.

Exception
and  In-
stance.


meanings  and  development  of  the  Modal  Particular,  which,
owing  to  the  continuity  in  the  evolution  of  thought,  on
which  we  have  so  often  insisted,  has  its  roots  far  back  in  the
quasi-singular  or  particular  enumerative  judgment.  That
is  to  say,  the  consciousness  of  possibility  begins — I  do  not
mean  in  every  case,  but  in  its  most  rudimentary  logical
form — with  a  rule  and  an  exception  or  with  a  positive  in-
stance suggesting  a  rule.  And  it  passes  into  a  further  type
with  the  essentially  negative,  or  again  with  the  essentially
positive  modal  particular.  The  latter,  indeed,  the  positive
modal  particular,  is  hardly  intelligible  apart  from  the
explicit  recognition  of  necessity.  But  in  accordance  with
a  principle  to  which  we  shall  have  to  recur  it  is  quite  cus-
tomary for  thought  to  employ  a  derivative  and  secondary
judgment  which  is  dependent  upon  a  primary  principle
remembered  as  a  rule.  Many  judgments  of  possibility —
those  current  in  systematic  thought — are  after  this  fashion
corollaries  from  judgments  of  neccesity,  or  rather  from  the
fact  that  certain  judgments  of  necessity  are  accepted  as
true.  I  now  proceed  to  illustrate  the  development  just
described.

Possibility  is  at  first  negative. Bare  negation  indeed  is
nothing,  but  possibility  in  its  simplest  case  comes  very  near
bare  negation. Such  a  possibility  when  veiled  under  the
equivocal  form of  the particular  judgment rests on  an^
exception. We must  not  suppose  that  the  possibility  \i\
positive  because  the  exception  is  a  positive  case. The  con-
tent of  a  mere  exception  as  related  to  the  rule  which  it]
impeaches  is  purely  negative^  i.e.  only  contradicts,  and  sug-
gests no  contrary  principle. Suppose we  have a half-
collective  and  half-generic  judgment  like  'All  English  rail-
ways are  well  managed.' Suppose that  then  we comel
upon  an  English  railway  which  is  not  well  managed,  andi
embody  our  observation  in  the  judgment  'There  is  an  Eng-
lish railway  which  is  not  well  managed.' This  may  readily  |
be interpreted as  a judgment of negative possibility,;
amounting  to no more than this,  '  It is not  true  that  \


Chap.  IX.]  Degrees  of  Possibility.  385

English  railways  are  in  every  case  well  managed,'  or  in
other  words, '  It  is  not  impossible  for  an  English  railway  to
be  other  than  well  managed.'  The  principle  is  just  the
same  if  the  rule  is  negative,  e.g.  '  No  crows  are  white.'  An
exception  would  contradict  this,  but  only  by  establishing
little  more  than  mere  possibility  (not-impossibility)  that
a  crow  may  be  white.  '  There  is  a  case  in  which  a  crow  is
white ; '  '  It  is  not  true  that  no  crows  are  white.'

The  instance  makes  the  step  from  negative  to  positive
possibility.  Like  the  exception,  it  implies  a  generalisation,
at  least  incipient,  but  it  supports  this  generalisation  instead
of  contradicting  it.  Supposing,  what  is  always  ultimately
the  case,  that  the  exception  is  a  latent  instance,  the  judg-
ment which  expresses  the  exception  will  change,  in  coming
to  express  an  instance,  from  a  mere  contradictory  to  a  con-
trary which  is  also  contradictory.  Let  the  original  rule  be
'  No  secular  education  can  be  spiritual '  and  the  exception
be  '  In  the  case  of  literary  education  we  have  a  secular
education  which  is  spiritual,'  with  the  negative  result  '  It  is
not  true  that  no  secular  education  can  be  spiritual.'  Then
when  we  go  on  to  treat  the  exception  as  an  instance  ^  we
get  a  result  hardly  differing  from  the  former  in  words,  but
charged  with  the  material  distinction  that  we  now  see
reason  to  think  that  'secular  education  as  such  may  also  be
spiritualjM.e.  It  is  possible  that — or  'There  is  real  ground
or  supposing  that  secular  education,  etc.  etc'

^.  When  we  advance  to  the  modal  particular  we  have  Negative
the  same  distinction  in  a  purer  form. The  modal  particular  positive
has  been  treated  above  as  the  converse  by  limitation  '^  of  a  Possibility,
hypothetical  judgment,  and  at  all  events  may  always  be

*  Exception  presupposes  rule,  and  rule  presupposes  positive  instance,  it  may
be  said,  so  that  our  idea  of  negative  possibility  coming  first  gets  us  into  a
circle.  The  fact  alleged  is  true ;  a  positive  rule  must  come  from  somewhere,
and  probably  from  a  positive  instance.  But  prior  to  the  idea  of  denying  the
rule  the  generalisation  is  direct  or  naive,  and  does  not  pass  through  the  stages
of  modality  except  on  the  embryo  scale  on  which  it  also  implies  negation.

If  the  hypothetical  judgment  has  a  negative  consequent,  it  is  of  course  need-
less to  limit  it  in  converting.

VOL.  I.  C  C


386  Modality.  [book  i.

treated  as  the  contradictory  of  another  hypothetical  judg-
ment. '  If  A  is  B  it  is  C '  becomes  when  converted  by
limitation  '  If  A  is  C  it  may  be  B,'  which  latter  is  at  least
the  contradictory  of  '  If  A  is  C  it  is  not  B.'  Where  the
modal  particular  really  originates  by  the  conversion  of  a
hypothetical  judgment,  it  is  of  course  an  inference  or  corol-
lary from  a  principle  v/ith  reference  to  another  and  oppo-
site principle.  But  as  usual  the  actual  or  historical  modes
of  initiation  of  the  judgment  are  one  thing,  and  its  logical
essence  another.  Obviously  the  modal  particular  may  be
generated  either  by  inference  from  explicit  principles,  or  by
the  suggestion  of  rules  through  instances.

In  any  case  the  judgments  'A  may  possibly  be  B'  and
'  A  may  possibly  not  be  B '  have  two  degrees  of  meaning
analogous  to  those  of  the  exception  and  the  instance.
They  may  be  met-e  contradictories  of  the  hypothetical
judgment  to  which  they  are  respectively  opposed,  or  they
may  be  contradictories  growing  into  contraries.  If  they
are  mere  contradictories,  corresponding  to  exceptions,  then
the  judgment  'A  may  be  B'  merely  means  to  overthrow
the  principle  that  'A  cannot  be  B ' ;  that  is  to  say  it  asserts
that  if  or  though  A  is,  yet  it  does  not  follow,  from  that,  that
B  is  not.  It  is  easy  to  give  the  corresponding  significance
to  '  A  may  not  be  B.'  But  precisely  the  same  judgments
'  A  may  be  B '  and  '  A  may  not  be  B '  are  capable  of  cor-
responding to  the  instance,  and  their  meaning  then  is  that
there  is  some  positive  connection  between  an  unspecified
condition  x,  which  is  fairly  conceivable  of  A,  and  B  or  the
negation  of  B  as  may  happen.  Under  these  circumstances,
even  though  we  do  not  know  that  Kx  itself  is  actually
found  in  experience,  yet  we  have  ground  for  saying  that
there  is  a  rational  connection  or  antagonism  between  A
and  B.  Many  degrees  of  these  connections  are  to  be  met
with.  If  X  were  the  entire  ground  of  B,  and  we  knew  x  to
be  true  of  A,  then  we  should  no  longer  have  possibility  but
certainty.  But  if  x  is  part  of  the  ground  of  B,  and  we  know
X  to  be  true  of  A,  then  we  have  a  degree  of  real  possibility


Chap.  IX.]  Meatiings  of  Possibility.  387

varying  with  the  relation  of  x  to  B.  Or  again,  if  ;r  is  not
the  ground  but  a  consequent  of  B,  and  we  know  categori-
cally that  A  is  X,  we  have  in  effect  an  inference,  from  the
hypothetical  '  If  A  is  B  it  is  ;r'  converted  by  limitatloa
into  '  If  A  is  ;ir  it  may  be  B.'  I  will  give  a  concrete
example.

Plants  (A)  may  possibly  possess  sentience  (B).  Taken
as  the  mere  guess  of  an  unscientific  mind — prepared  to  say
the  same  no  less  of  stones  and  metals,  air  or  water — such  a
judgment  would  represent  a  mere  negative  possibility,  or  in
other  words,  it  would  express  no  more  than  the  fact  that
having  considered  the  universal  judgment  '  Plants  are  not
sentient'  the  individual  mind  happens  to  see  in  it  no  se-
quence of  reason  and  consequent  and  therefore  pronounces
that  '  There  is  no  ground  for  asserting  that  plants  are  not
sentient.'

But  the  same  judgment  '  Plants  (A)  may  possibly  have
sentience  (B) '  is  capable  of  conveying  a  more  positive
meaning.  It  may  rest  on  the  conviction  that  '  If  plants  (A)
have  irritability  {x)  they  must  have  sentience  (B).'  Assuming
^norance  as  to  actual  observations  of  irritability  in  plaats
v.  e  nevertheless  have  then  a  certain  congruity  ^  to  go  upon
in  saying  that  A  may,  in  a  sense  that  has  a  certain  basis  of
reality,  be  B.  But  still  more  strongly,  if  we  could  say  '  If
Plants  (A)  have  sentience  (B)  they  must  have  irritability
(.r),'  being  able  to  supplement  this  with  the  fact '  There  are
plants  (A)  which  have  irritability  (;r),'  we  should  be  able  to
affirm  'There  are  positive  grounds  for  maintaining  that
plants  A  have  sentience  B.'

Possibility  may  therefore  mean  (i)  the  inability  to  make
a  certain  hypothetical  judgment,  so  long  as  we  bear  in
mind  that  mere  privation  or  inability  is  a  limit  which  the
judgment  must  not  actually  reach  if  it  is  to  retain  signi-

*  We  should  not  e.g.  attach  any  such  weight  to  the  judgment  that  if  a
plant  had  poetic  genius  it  mast  have  sentience.  I  claim  throughout  that  con-
gruity is  essential  and  not  accidental  in  supposition.  If  we  go  outside  the  system
of  fact  which  is  our  basis  of  supposal,  we  get  results  analogous  to  the  *  infinite

judgment.'

C  C 2


388  Modality.  [booki.

ficance.  This  possibility  is  non-impossibility.  Or  it  may
mean  (ii)  the  inference  from  a  hypothetical  judgment,
whether  explicit  or  suggested  in  instances,  which  [a)  assigns
an  intelligible  condition  (or  makes  us  believe  that  there  is
such  a  condition),  which  would  if  real  establish  the  conse-
quent whose  possibility,  assuming  the  reality  of  the  sub-
ject of  judgment,  is  in  question,  or  {b)  assigns  a  certain
logical  consequent  to  the  attribute  or  event  in  question
considered  as  a  logical  antecedent,  which  consequent  is
known  to  be  real.  This  logical  consequent  may  be  either
an  effect  with  alternative  causes,  or  a  consequent  with  alter-
native reasons.  The  ideal  or  reciprocal  form  of  the  hypo-
thetical judgment  excludes  mere  possibility  and  therefore
does  not  concern  us  here.
Essence  y.  It  is  plain  from  the  above  examples  that  the  terms

blematic'°' '  possible,'  '  probable,'  '  may,'  '  might,'  and  '  must,'  stand  for
Judgment,  more  or  less  reflective  estimates  of  certain  kinds  of  knowledge .
The  essence  of  the  problematic  judgment  is  the  substi-
tution of  such  an  estimate  for  the  concrete  steps  of  in-
ference really  involved  in  an  affirmation.  Possibility
results  in  referring  to  reality,  without  transition,  but  subject
to  an  estimate,  what  is  only  connected  with  it  by  transitions.
When  the  whole  transition  is  made  explicit,  the  allegation
of  possibility  is  superseded  ^.  The  judgment  which  has  all
its  conditions  and  reservations  fully  assigned  to  it  is  of
the  apodeictic  order ;  possibility  arises  from  effecting  the
reference  to  reality  apart  from  the  conditions.  The  idea
of  '  possibility '  is  our  substitute  for  the  omitted  conditions.
Obviously  such  an  idea  may  emanate  from  all  degrees  of
confused  perception  or  of  reflection.  We  may  be  silent
about  the  conditions  either  because  we  cannot  clearly  grasp
them,  or  because  we  are  explicitly  abstracting  from  them.
But  an  estimated  indirectness  of  transition  there  must  be  if
we  are  to  judge  problematically.  Disjunction  can  be
treated  in  the  same  way,  owing  to  the  hypothetical  inter-
relations of  its  members,  and  thus  the  statement  of  chances

.'  Cp.  p.  360,  supra.


Chap.  IX.]  Assertory  yndgwent.  389

is  a  clear  and  extreme  case  of  the  estimate  in  question.  Its
essence  is  to  burden  the  reference  to  reahty  of  one  aherna-
tive  with  a  hindrance  drawn  from  the  number  of  other
alternatives.  All  possibiHty  indicates  a  similar  tendency.
But  the  statement  of  chances  has  measured  its  own  cloudi-
ness and  made  certain  of  its  own  uncertainty  ^.  It  is  there-
fore no  longer  problematical.  It  supplies  a  definite  predi-
cation of  a  hindrance  to  reality,  and  not  a  hindrance  to
predication.

Thus  the  true  problematic  judgment  is  a  judgment  with
a  peculiar  and  reflective  content,  which  interferes  with  its
assertiveness.  It  is  a  hypothetical  or  disjunctive  judgment
in  disguise.  All  judgment  whatever  is  within  a  real  system,
but  the  problematic  judgment  has  its  relations  to  its  real
system  peculiarly  obscured  or  neglected.  In  the  question,
for  instance,  we  only  make  explicit  a  part  of  the  intel-
lectual state,  ultimately  affirmative,  on  which  our  desire  for
further  knowledge  depends.  A  question  indeed  often
vanishes  when  we  insist  on  its  being  clearly  put.

3.  The  other  forms  of  modality  may  be  briefly  dismissed.  Assertory
Every  judgment  may  be  called  assertory,  as  we  saw,  in  virtue  «»  "^  •
of  its  psychological  reference  to  self-feeling.  If  any  judgments
are  to  be  called  assertory  in  a  strictly  logical  and  material
sense,  they  must  of  course  be  the  singular  judgments  which
depend  on  union  of  attributes  within  the  concrete  subject
of  the  judgment,  and  not  on  their  necessary  connection  in
a  larger  subject  falling  outside  the  judgment.  Such  judg-
ments are  even  logically  assertory'  in  as  far  as  the  concrete
subject  is  merely  individual  as  a  synthesis  of  differences  not
connected  by  abstract  necessity.  So  far  on  the  other  hand
as  it  displays  individual  character  and  lends  itself  to  analo-
gical affirmation,  it  stands  for  the  present  purpose  on  the

'  This  is  the  reason  why  the  '  Thermometer  of  Probability '  (see  De  Morgan,
Budget  of  Paradoxes,  p.  416  would  not  be  of  very  general  application.  What
it  measures  is  the  ratio  of  the  whole  number  of  equal  alternatives  arising  on  a
certain  condition  to  the  number  of  desired  alternatives  so  arising.  But  in  con-
crete knowledge  we  have  no  security  of  finding  eqtial  alternatives.


390  Modality.  [book  i.

same  footing  with  the  subjects  of  necessary  and  apodeictic
judgments.  The  assertory  judgment  has  a  higher  degree
of  assertiveness  than  the  problematical  judgment  as  such,
because  its  reference  to  reahty  though  not  apodeictic  is
direct  and  open.  It  would  be  impossible  to  maintain
Kant's  view  of  a  progressive  incorporation  of  contents  with
the  understanding,  if  he  meant  that  every  trivial  judgment,
say,  of  perception,  was  preceded  by  a  recognition  and
estimate  of  uncertainty.  But  all  experience  supports  his
contention  that  imperfect  judgments  in  which  only  one
element  is  clear,  and  in  which  this  clear  element  is  attached
to  reality  through  others  ivhich  are  not  clear,  belong  to  a
less  complete  phase  of  knowledge  than  judgments  in  which
the  reference  is  clear  and  complete.  If  the  problematic
judgment  arises  by  intentional  abstraction  from  precise
knowledge,  this  makes  no  difference.  We  are  returning  on
purpose  to  an  imperfect  form  of  judgment  from  a  more
perfect  one,  in  order  to  exhibit  a  net  result  which  the  more
explicit  form  will  not  display.  We  must  stand  by  the
result  which  we  thus  obtain.  We  cannot  eat  our  cake  and
have  it.

Of  course  where  an  instance  indicates  a  possibility,  the
assertory  affirmation  of  the  instance  and  the  problematic
affirmation  of  the  possibility  do  not  refer  to  the  same  con-
tent. '  This  Drosera  shows  irritability '  is  a  singular  judg-
ment of  perception.  The  problematic  judgment  '  There
are  conditions  though  unknown  in  detail  under  which  the
nature  of  a  plant  develops  irritability,'  i.  e. '  A  plant  as  such
may  have  irritability '  arises  from  the  analysis  of  the  above
instance  into  a  general  suggestion.  Such  an  analysis  is
probably  concurrent  with  the  perception  of  individual
identity  on  which  the  Singular  judgment  rests,  but  the  two
are  not  identical.  Imperfect  insight  into  necessary  con-
nection may  affect  the  same  content  which  is  being  erected
into  a  thing,  but  is  not  one  with  this  process  of  erection.
Assertory  assertion  and  problematic  assertion  may  be  and
must  be  conjoined  in  every  problematic  judgment,  but  they


Chap.  IX.]  Elejnenis  of  Uncertainty.  391

refer  to  different  elements  in  the  content  affirmed,  the
former  to  the  system  as  a  concrete  real  whole,  the  latter
to  some  element  of  the  system  as  related  by  abstraction  to
the  other  elements.  When  the  latter  aspect  of  the  judg-
ment is  dropped  or  superseded  we  have  the  assertory
affirmation  pure  and  simple.  The  assertory  judgment  has
no  degrees  of  assertiveness  except  in  so  far  as  in  virtue  of
its  specific  content  the  problematic  or  apodeictic  judgments
inevitably  show  themselves  within  it.

4.  Judgments  of  apodeictic  character,  i.  e.  hypothetical  The  Apo-
and  disjunctive  judgments,  lay  claim  in  virtue  of  their  form  judgment,
to  a  higher  degree  of  assertiveness  than  either  problematic
or  assertory  judgments.  The  reason  of  this  is  that  their
form  has  for  its  differentia  the  exact  exposition  of  the
transitions,  conditions,  or  alternatives  subject  to  which  the
judgment  is  true  of  reality.  By  such  exact  exposition  the
content  either  becomes  an  articulated  system,  or  at  least
reveals  itself  as  fitted  to  take  a  place  in  such  a  system.
The  former  is  the  ideal  of  the  disjunctive,  the  latter  that  of
the  hypothetical  judgment.  Reality  considered  as  abso-
lutely known  is  of  course  ex  hypothesi  taken  to  be  abso-
lutely asserted.  But  Reality  is  not  by  any  sane  person
considered  to  be  absolutely,  i.  e.  completely  and  precisely
known.  Degrees  of  certainty  in  apodeictic  affirmation  arise
from  the  consciousness — a  logical  consciousness  made  ex-
plicit in  the  structure  of  judgments — that  the  individual's
knowledge  is  but  imperfectly  identified  with  the  ideal
judgment  which  would  qualify  Reality  by  the  complete
content  of  Reality.

i.  In  the  hypothetical  judgment,  as  we  have  seen,  though  The  Hypo-
important  elements  are  made  explicit,  yet  the  connection  judgment,
which  is  affirmed  implies  an  underlying  reality  which  is  not
expressed  in  the  content  of  the  judgment.  Therefore  the
hypothetical  judgment  is  subject  to  two  elements  of  uncer-
tainty, viz.  its  own  reference  to  the  limited  reality  the  affir-
mation of  which  it  implies,  a  reference  which  may  be
partial  or  confused,  and  further  the  relation  of  that  affirmed


392  Modality.  [Booki.

real  system  to  the  content  of  Reality  as  a  whole.  '  The
British  Parliament  is  able  to  alter  a  statute  affecting  its
own  duration.'  This  is  rather  a  generic  than  a  hypo-
thetical judgment  ;  but  for  the  present  purpose  these  two
types  must  rank  as  very  closely  akin.  About  such  a  judg-
ment there  is  first  the  question  whether  it  really  follows,  or
how  necessarily  it  follows,  from  the  facts  which  we  are  pre-
pared to  affirm  of  the  reality  known  as  the  British  Consti-
tution, and  secondly,  what  opening  these  facts  themselves,
as  compared  with  the  greater  reality  of  our  entire  ex-
perience on  the  ground  of  which  they  in  turn  are  affirmed,
leave  for  error  or  for  unseen  modification.  Any  disjunc-
tive judgment,  as  compared  ^  with  a  given  hypothetical
judgment  of  which  it  may  be  regarded  as  a  development,
makes  this  underlying  real  system  explicit,  and  therefore
has  no  source  of  uncertainty  but  that  of  a  failure  in  the
necessity  by  which  this  system  itself  is  attached  to  Reality  as
a  whole.  But  of  course  the  disjunctions  which  we  commonly
use  are  for  the  most  part  systems  within  known  systems,
and  therefore  stand  on  the  same  logical  level  of  certainty
with  hypothetical  judgments.  Such  e.g.  is  the  disjunction
which  expresses  the  number  and  nature  of  the  conic  sec-
tion, resting  as  it  does  on  the  ultimate  real  system  which
we  take  to  be  the  nature  of  space.  Only  disjunctions  that
embody  a  complete  and  coherent  sphere  of  knowledge,
such  e.  g.  as  the  nature  of  space,  have  the  character  which
has  just  been  ascribed  to  the  ideal  disjunction.  But  even
with  such  a  disjunction  we  still  have  the  difficulty  in  the
background,  '  Does  the  real  system  which  we  affirm ' — in
this  example  the  nature  of  space — 'really  emanate  as  a

^  It  is  absolutely  necessary  when  we  attempt  to  compare  judgment  forms
in  respect  of  their  essential  import,  to  select  instances  which  belong  to  one
and  the  same  progression.  A  hypothetical  judgment  drawn  from  an  advanced
phase  of  science  has  at  once  more  content  and  more  precision  that  a  disjunctive
judgment  drawn  from  everyday  experience.  To  judge  the  capacities  of  the  two
forms  by  instances  so  selected  would  be  like  judging  the  powers  of  civilisation
and  savagery  by  comparing  a  civilised  infant  without  allowance  for  age  to  an
adult  savage.


Chap.  IX.] Degrees  of  Apodeictic  Assertion.  393

necessity  of  knowledge  from  the  whole  reality  which  is
forced  upon  us  by  experience?'  It  appears  to  me  to  be
quite  idle  to  maintain  that  all  judgments,  or  even  that  all
necessary  or  apodeictic  judgments,  are  on  a  level  in  this
respect.  Ultimately,  we  may  imagine,  nothing  can  be
rightly  known  without  knowing  all  else  rightly,  so  that
every  isolated  fact  and  principle  of  knowledge  would  be
implied  in,  say,  the  existence  of  morality  or  in  the  existence
of  an  intellectual  world.  But  as  knowledge  is  in  fact  con-
stituted its  parts  are  fragmentary  and  incoherent,  and  there
is  much  that  we  affirm  upon  only  a  partial  or  limited  neces-
sity, while  much  again  is  so  incorporated  with  the  whole
fabric  of  our  real  world  that  we  feel  bound  to  maintain
the  former  if  we  would  not  fall  into  hopeless  contradiction
with  the  latter  ^.  The  assertiveness  of  affirmation  is  not
indeed  measurable  outside  the  calculus,  but  it  is  capable  of
being  perceived  and  to  some  extent  compared.  It  is  not  a
mere  feeling,  but  an  insight  into  connections.  It  is  absurd
to  maintain  that  in  affirming  the  whereabouts  of  a  friend,
or  the  harmonious  or  other  effect  of  a  combination  of
colours,  or  the  continuity  or  non-continuity  of  matter  or  of
space,  I  am  pledging  my  intellectual  existence  to  the  same
degree  as  when  I  affirm  the  relations  of  the  multiplication
table,  or  (subject  to  the  requisite  interpretations)  the  law
of  causation,  or  the  existence  of  moral  purposes.

The  uncertainty  which  may  attach  to  apodeictic  judg-
ments arises  then  from  the  same  cause  as  the  uncertainty
of  problematic  judgments,  but  the  cause  is  operative  in  a
different  mode  and  in  a  slighter  degree.  We  always  feel
certain  when  we  judge,  for  all  judgments  involve  the  same
psychological  identification  w'ith  self-feeling.  But  we  know
that  this  certainty  is  conditional  on  our  expressing  Reality


'  This  must  be  read  subject  to  reservation  as  r^jards  the  actual  language  in
which  abstract  principles  are  expressed.  It  is  a  recognisable  function  of  the
body  of  knowledge,  not  a  limited  set  of  stereotyped  ideas,  which  we  may  be
justified  in  holding  indispensably  necessary  to  our  reason.  See  below,  Bk.  IL
chap.  vii.


394  Modality.  [bookI.

with  precision  and  completeness,  and  this  we  are  well  aware
that  we  never  do.  Of  course,  to  begin  with,  the  apodeictic
form  of  judgment  is  no  guarantee,  any  more  than  any  other,
against  falsehood  or  frivolity.  There  may  be  no  under-
lying real  system  at  all,  or  that  which  is  taken  to  be  referred
to  may  in  no  way  justify  the  sequence  erected  on  it.  Any
false  generalisation  is  an  instance  of  this.  Or  again,  the
necessary  transition  may  be  quite  incompletely  set  forth,  so
that  the  judgment  sinks  ipso  facto  into  a  problematic  judg-
ment in  spite  of  its  apodeictic  form.  Such  are  judgments
in  which  a  remote  cause  or  consequence  taken  as  a  sign  is
substituted  for  the  ground  of  the  sequence,  so  that  the
judgment  though  not  untrue  in  fact  has  the  appearance  of
a  riddle.  '  If  the  stick  will  beat  the  dog  the  old  woman
will  get  home  to-night'  Here  we  have  no  indication  of  the
real  arrangement  on  which  the  sequence  rests,  and  the  con-
dition^ so  far  as  can  be  seen  without  copious  supplementa-
tion from  ulterior  knowledge,  is  irrelevant  and  equivalent
to  an  unknown  condition,  implying  as  it  does  a  number  of
unknown  conditions.  This  is  the  explanation  of  the  exam-
ples to  which  Sigwart  appeals  as  showing  that  apodeictic
judgments  are  not  in  fact  made  with  any  peculiar  certainty
of  conviction.  '  There  is  a  common  idea  that  the  apo-
deictic judgment  stands  for  something  higher  than  the
assertorical.  It  is  believed  that  if  we  start  from  the  pro-
blematic judgment  and  ascend  to  the  apodeictic  we  steadily
increase  the  certainty  of  our  knowledge,  and  add  to  the
worth  and  dignity  of  our  assertions.  This  idea  must  be  re-
linquished. All  mediate  certainty  must  stand  in  the  end
on  immediate  knowledge  ;  the  ultimate  premises  of  every
proof  cannot  be  proved.  The  usages  of  life  stand  in  comic
discrepancy  with  the  emphasis  we  lay  upon  apodeictic  cer-
tainty. The  sayings  "  It  must  be  so,"  "  It  must  have  so
happened"  are  judgments  apodeictic;  but  the  confidence
they  express  has  most  modest  limits  ^'

This  is  not  the  place  to  criticise  the  fundamental  view

^  Sigwart,  Logik,  i.  195,  quoted  in  Bradley's  Principles  of  Logic,  p.  i86.


Chap.  IX.] Degrees  of  Apod eic tic  Assertion.  395

which  Sig^vart  here  expresses,  but  to  which  he  is,  happily,
not  faithful  throughout.  In  treating  explicitly  of  the
nature  and  bases  of  inference  we  shall  see  that  the  distinc-
tion between  mediate  and  immediate  knowledge  coincides
with  the  distinction  between  what  is  known  and  what  is
only  on  the  way  to  be  known.  If  Sigwart  meant  what  he
said  in  this  place,  he  would  have  cut  himself  off  from  all
possibility  of  believing  in  science.  As  to  the  examples
which  he  adduces,  they  fall  into  their  place,  according  to
what  has  been  said,  as  problematic  judgments.  '  It  must
have  so  happened '  is  an  inference  from  reality  under  a
condition,  to  reality  without  an  expressed  condition,  and
therefore  is  problematic.

The  degrees  of  certainty  belonging  to  the  apodeictic
judgment  itself  are  as  we  saw  of  the  same  kind  as  those
which  characterise  the  problematic  judgment.  The  whole
of  the  reality  on  which  the  sequence  is  intended  to  be  based
may  not  have  been  brought  to  bear  upon  the  sequence,  and
even  if  it  has,  its  own  relation  to  the  reality  which  is  the
ideal  of  knowledge  may  be  so  disproportionately  trifling  as
to  make  the  judgment  an  especially  inadequate  embodiment
of  the  ideal  Reality  which  alone  is  certain.

I  may  illustrate  this  conception  by  our  present  know-
ledge of  Hypnotic  and  kindred  phenomena  \  The  curative
action  of  Hypnotism,  or  the  beneficent  anaesthesia  which
may  be  produced  in  some  forms  of  the  Hypnotic  state,  are
now  as  it  seems  matters  cap>able  of  embodiment  in  empirical
generalisations.  These  rules  or  laws  can  be  exhibited,  like
all  rules  or  laws,  in  hypothetical  or  disjunctive  form  ;  that  is
to  say,  as  consequents  following  upon  conditions,  or  as
alternatives  arising  within  a  certain  identical  content.  On
a certain  degree  and  kind  of  hypnotic  trance  a certain

'  I  believe  myself  justified,  when  writing  for  pnrely  logical  pnrposes.  in
treating  the  actual  phenomena  known  to  science  as  freely  as  may  be  necessary
to  give  them  sharp  outlines,  and  to  avoid  a  mass  of  reservations  and  qualifica-
tions that  would  be  only  an  encumbrance  for  my  present  purpose.  I  on  my
side  hope  to  keep  clear  of  wilful  distortion,  but  the  reader  on  his  side  must  not
accept  my  illustrations  as  citations  from  a  biological  text-book.


396  Modality.  [book  i.

anaesthesia  is  consequent.  A  hypnotised  subject  is  capable
of  some  three  or  four  recognisable  alternative  states.  In
certain  forms  of  nervous  derangement  acquired,  or,  as  it
seems,  congenital,  repeated  hypnotic  treatment  exercises  a
sanative  influence.

Now  although  I  personally  entertain  no  doubt  that
there  is,  as  the  phrase  goes,  'something  in'  all  these  con-
ceptions, and  though  I  am  prepared  to  affirm  them,  i.e.  to
judge  them  true  of  reality,  as  embodiments  of  an  ex-
perienced content  which  must  be  affirmed  somehow  and
which  I  cannot  affirm  otherwise,  yet  so  far  as  I  understand
myself  I  do  not  stake  my  intellectual  existence  upon  them
as  I  do  on  the  existence  of  causation,  or  morality,  or
beauty.  On  what  I  mean  to  say  in  them,  on  the  ex-
perienced content  from  which  they  are  drawn,  I  do  stake
my  intellectual  existence  ;  but  this  content,  apart  from  my
explicit  judgment,  is  to  me  an  x,  a  thing- in-itself,  a  nothing.
I  must  stand  or  fall  by  my  judgment  as  it  is,  not  merely
by  my  ultimate  intention  to  embody  reality,  which  is  the
common  and  formal  feature  of  all  affirmation.  And  I  know
perfectly  well  that  by  my  explicit  judgment  on  such  mat-
ters as  these  I  am  very  likely  to  fall.  The  reason  of  this  is
not  that  the  cases  on  which  I  rely  are  few  in  number,
compared,  e.  g.  with  ordinary  cases  of  the  operation  of  digi-
talis on  the  heart  or  of  mercury  on  the  liver.  One  case  is
enough,  as  we  all  know,  where  the  framework  of  knowledge
stands  ready  to  receive  it  with  the  grip  of  necessity.  The
reason  is  rather  that  the  organised  system  of  reality  within
which  the  sequences  in  question  have  their  force,  lies  or
has  hitherto  lain  outside  the  great  fabric  even  of  biological
science,  not  to  speak  either  of  deductive  reasoning  on  the
one  hand  or  of  philosophical  construction  on  the  other,
been  as  a  whole  identifiable  either  with  the  principles  of
The  principles  of  abnormal  psychical  phenomena  have  not
physical  causation  or  with  those  of  normal  psychical  de-
velopment. The  judgment  is  therefore  obstructed  by  the
want  of  contact  or  necessary  relation  between  the  system  of


Chap. IX.]  Hypothetical  Disjunction.  2,97

such  abnormal  phenomena,  which  it  must  in  some  way  refer
to  reality,  and  the  entire  cosmos  of  normal  evolution.  Sup-
posing, however  (I  speak  merely  by  way  of  illustration),
that  the  abnormal  states  in  question,  even  those  which  pre-
sent the  apparent  puzzle  of  a  morbid  origin  combined  with
a  curative  effect,  could  be  exhibited  as  cases  under  the
known  principles  of  evolution,  the  whole  ground  and  cer-
tainty of  the  judgments  relating  to  them  would  be  put
upon  a  new  foundation.  It  is  an  old  idea^  that  many
states  and  susceptibilities  of  the  soul,  which  are  commonly
treated  as  mere  freaks  of  nature  or  capricious  results  of
disease,  may  really  have  their  place  among  the  phenomena
of  evolution  no  less  than  sleep  and  waking,  or  the  one-
ness, expressing  itself  through  heredity,  of  parent  and
child.  If  peculiar  forms  of  sensitiveness  and  peculiar
'  morbid  '  states  or  transitions  to  states  could  be  brought
under  such  heads  as  survival,  reversion,  or  analogous  de-
velopment, their  underlying  reality  would  be  grafted  on  the
main  stem  of  the  organised  real  world,  and  the  necessity
with  which  they  were  affirmed  would  become  more  deter-
minate and  more  concrete.

ii.  Disjunction  by  its  form  aims  at  the  standard  of  a  The  Dis-
complete  and  therefore  of  a  real  system.  '  Real '  because  it  ju'dll^ent
points  to  nothing  beyond  itself  as  an  implied  ground  of
truth.  We  have  seen  sufficiently  above  that  no  objection
can  be  raised  against  the  reality  of  the  content  of  any  judg-
ment by  reason  of  its  being  extended  in  space  or  time.
No  judgment  confines  its  reference  within  an  atomic  '  now,'
and  no  reality  can  display  itself  as  existent  within  an
atomic  now.  It  is  grammatically  possible  however  for
a  disjunctive  proposition  to  express  a  judgment  which  is
hypothetically  disjunctive :  *  A  man  who  would  act  so  must
be  a  knave  or  a  fool.'  This  shares  the  character  of  all
hypothetical  judgments  in  implying  an  unexpressed  real
system  as  the  basis  of  its  truth,  and  its  certainty  must  be
judged  as  the  certainty  of  a  hypothetical  judgment.  But
^  See  Hegel,  Encyclopadie  (Anthropologie,  sect.  404,


398  Modality.

the  disjunction  according  to  the  ideal  prescribed  by  its
form  is  in  itself  an  exposition  of  the  reahty  that  determines
its  parts,  and  therefore  is  not  a  sequence  within  a  presup-
posed system,  but  is  itself  the  content  of  a  real  system.  It
therefore  properly  ranks  with  the  generic  judgment,  to
which  it  is  affiliated,  as  quasi-categorical ;  and  has  only  the
imperfection  of  certainty  which  arises  from  the  compara-
tively minute  range  of  reality  that  is  comprehended  in  any
such  simple  system.

It  is  obvious  from  what  has  been  said  above  that  the
degrees  of  certainty  here  discussed  are  not  numerically
estimable,  because  they  are  not  reducible  to  ratios  of  equal
alternatives.  It  may  therefore  be  justifiably  complained
that  the  phrase  '  degree  of  certainty '  is  misplaced,  and
should  be  transformed  into  '  stage  of  logical  necessity.'  I
have  no  objection  to  some  such  transformation  provided
that  it  is  distinctly  understood  that  modality  affects  the
assertiveness  of  assertion,  that  this  assertiveness  is  a  matter
of  content  and  not  of  the  formal  copula  or  reference  to  self-
feeling,  but  that  if  we  extend  the  notion  of  the  copula  to
include  the  material  or  logical  grasp  by  which  a  complex
content  is  fitted  on  to  a  complex  Reality  then  we  may  say
that  Modality  is  a  matter  of  the  Copula.  In  any  case,  the
progressive  incorporation  of  a  content  with  the  under-
standing \  that  is,  with  the  organised  ideal  system  by  which
the  understanding  permanently  qualifies  the  Real,  is  the
same  thing  as  the  progressive  participation  of  that  content
in  the  certainty  that  could  only  be  complete  in  a  judgment
that  should  exhaust  Reality.

'  Cp.  Whevvell's  account  (see  Mill's  Logic,  i.  p.  279)  of  coming  to  perceive
the  necessity  of  a  principle  which  he  had  before  accepted  as  fact.  This  is
merely  the  acquisition  of  a  precise  and  coherent  insight  into  its  dependence  on
realit}'. Cp.  Eook  II.  chap.  vii.

END  OF  VOL.  I.

6c  '^ti^tz  -^iv  S^'vt,*^


t


n  (.


4i  JL ---r^


"tU  1 3  1983


PLEASE  DO  NOT  REMOVE
CARDS  OR  SLIPS  FROM  THIS  POCKET


UNIVERSITY  OF  TORONTO  LIBRARY
