Logic, or The Morphology of Knowledge, Vol. 2
Bernard Bosanquet (1888)
========================================================================

PROVENANCE NOTE (Tower of Babel staging): Bosanquet's Logic, or the Morphology of Knowledge (1888), Vol. 2.

========================================================================

LOGIC

BERNARD  BOSAXQUET


VOL.  II.


HENRY FROWDE


Oxford  University  Press  Warehouse
Amen  Corner,  E.G.


LOGIC


OR


THE  MORPHOLOGY  OF  KNOWLEDGE


BY


BERNARD BOSANQUET, M.A.

FORMERLY  FELLOW  AND  TUTOR  OF  UNIVERSITY  COLLEGE,  OXFORD


IN TWO VOLUMES
VOL. II


0;^fo»&  ^^■>'


AT THE CLARENDON PRESS
1888

[All  rights  reserved '\


^1?


copX


TABLE OF CONTENTS.


VOL.  II.
Book  II. Inference.

CHAPTER  I.
The  Nature  of  Inference.

PACE

1.  The  Essence  of  Inference ......... i

2.  Some  Accidents  of  Inference ........ 4

i.  Mental  transition  in  Time  . . .  . . 4

ii.  Discovery  or  novelty  ........ 8

iii.  Omission  of  relevant  matter ....... 9

iv.  Selection,  and  omission  of  irrelevant  matter  ? . . . -13
V.  Three  tenns? .......... 13

3.  The  lower  limit  of  Inference . . . . . . .  14

i.  The  reproduction  of  Ideas  . . . . . . -15

ii.  General  necessity  of  Judgment  ........ 16

iii.  Specific  necessity  of  Judgment 18

iv.  The  true  immediate  Inferences 20

a.  Comparison . . . . .  . . . .21

/3.  Abstraction 21

7.  Recognition ......... 24

8.  Discrimination,  etc.  ........ 26

f.  Inferential  character  of  above  processes .... 26

f.  Comparative  Science  . . . . . . -27

4.  Species  of  Inference  which  have  been  erroneously  identified  with  its

principle 29

i.  Inference  from  particulars  to  particulars 29

ii.  Subsumption ..........  30

iii.  Calculation  and  equation . -31

a.  Calculation  proper ........  32

/3.  The  logical  calculus 33

iv.  Construction 36

a.  Physical ..........  36

y3.  Imaginative .........  38

7.  Intellectual,  in  geometry  and  mechanics ....  39

5.  Intellectual,  without  limitation  to  geometry  and  mechanics  40

Scheme  of  types  of  Inference 42


vi  Table  of  Contents.


CHAPTER  II.
Enumerative  Induction  and  Mathematical  Reasoning.

PAGE

T.  Enumerative  Induction 43

a.  Syllogism  in  fig.  3 ........  44

/3.  Divergent  tendencies .......  45

7.  The  Individual  Judgment  in  Induction  (Lotze) . .  46

^  2.  Mathematical  Reasoning .........  48

i.  Number  and  Analogy — Divergence  ......  49

a.  Complete  Enumeration  as  false  Ideal. Syllogism  and  In-
duction .........  49

i  i3.  Enumeration  as  Arithmetical  computation . . -51

i 7.  Calculation  compared  with  argument ....  54

ii.  Applications  of  Calculation .......  56

a.  Substitutive  Inference 57

(fi.  Apprehension  of  Connections  in  Space  and  Time) . .  59

7.  Calculation  applied  to  Geometrical  Reasoning. The  Con-

stitutive Equation .......  63

8.  Calculation  applied  to  disparates. Proportion . .  68

(i)  Homogeneous  Terms ......  68

(2)  ' fl  and  a '  series .  69

«.  Proportion,  Analogy,  and  the  Hypothetical  Judgment .  73

f.  Consciousness  and  Conservation  of  energy ...  74

iii.  The  mechanical  aspect  of  Knowledge . . . . -77

CHAPTER  III.
Analogy.

1.  Analogy  and  Enumerative  Induction. Examples ....  83

2.  Logical  criticism  of  the  Analogical  argument .....  88

i.  Fig.  2. Undistributed  middle,  Import  of  this  defect . .  88

ii.  Real  value  of  Analogical  argument ......  90

iii.  No  ratio  of  Identities  to  Differences 98

iv.  Concurrent  Analogies. Negative  confirmation  ....  103

V.  Divergent  tendencies  in  Analogy ......  105

V
CHAPTER  IV.

Scientific  Induction  by  Perceptive  Analysis.

I.  Negative  Inference 108

i.  Its  nature  and  conditions  ........  108

ii.  No  conclusion  from  two  negatives 1 11

iii.  The  negative  instance 115


Table  of  Contents.


Vll

PAGE

Scientific  Induction H?

i.  Induction  and  other  Inference . . . . .  .118

ii.  Induction  as  Perceptive  Analysis 122

a.  Symbolic  expression  of  the  problem  . . . . .122

^.  Establishment  of  ordinary  Hypothetical  Judgment . . T  24
7.  Establishment  of  reciprocal  Hypothetical  Judgment  . .128
5.  Conversion  or  Generalisation . . . . . .130

iii.  Logical  character  of  Perceptive  Induction  . .... 133

a.  Its  essence  as  Inference . . . . . . - I33

i8.  Theoretical  purpose  of  representation  by  symbols . .135
7.  Part  played  by  ««////^^r  of  instances . . . . .136

( 1 )  In  Perceptive  Analysis  proper  . . . . 1 36

(2)  In  assigning  known  effects  to  classes  of  unknown

conditions . . . .  .  .  .  -137

iv.  Obser^'ation  and  Experiment . . .  .  .  .  -143

a.  Natural  Experiment . . .  .  -143

iS.  Obser\-ation  with  accurate  instruments  .  .  .  .144

7.  Experiment  expressed  in  logical  symbols  .  .  .  .145

5.  Experiment  with  the  Siren  analysed  .  .  .  .  -149

CHAPTER  V.

Scientific  Induction  by  Hypothesis. Generalization.


1.  Hypothesis  and  Postulate

i.  Hypothesis  falls  outside  Postulate ....
ii.  But  not  if  Hypothesis  alleges  Vera  causa  .

2.  Phases  of  Hypothesis

i.  Rudimentary  Hypothesis  ......

ii.  Mediate  Hypothesis  ......

a.  Hypothetical  nature  of  Induction

/3.  Example  of  fusion  between  Hypothesis  and  data

3.  Generalisation .........

i.  'From  many  to  air  exploded

ii.  By  mere  determination

iii.  Material  or  Analogical  Generalisation

4.  General  view  of  Induction  ......

i.  Difference  from  Jevons ......

ii.  Ultimate  nature  of  Induction


CHAPTER  VI.

Concrete  Systematic  Inference
Philosophical  Subsumption

i.  Logical  content  of  these  Inferences
a.  Real  system
)3.  Apodeictic  sequence
ii.  Their  form.  Syllogism  in  fig.  i


155
155
158

I.S9
159
160
160
161
168
168
169
170
1/5
175
176


180
186
186
1 86
1 88


Vlll


Table  of  Contents.


2.  Disjunctive  reasoning  ......

3.  The  judgment  of  value ......

i.  Real  Teleology  ......

ii.  Mediation

4.  Recapitulation  of  the  main  characteristics  of  Inference

i.  No  antecedent  scheme  of  Inference .
ii.  Conditions  of  Inference . . . . .
iii.  Relation  of  Syllogism  to  these  conditions

a.  The  traditional  syllogism  . . . .

j8.  The  syllogism  as  reasoned  judgment  .


I'ACK
190

196

197
197

199
201
201
202


CHAPTER  VI  r.


The  Relation  of  Knowledge  to  its  Postulates.

The  formal  postulates  of  Knowledge  ....... 205

i.  The  Law  of  Identity  . . . . . . . . 207

ii.  The  Law  of  Contradiction ....... 208

iii.  The  Law  of  Excluded  Middle 210

iv.  The  Law  of  Sufficient  Reason  and  Law  of  Causation  . .212

The  material  postulates  of  Knowledge . . . . . -214

i.  The  maintenance  of  life . . . . . . . . 216

ii.  The  reality  of  human  purposes  . . . . . . .219

The  ultimate  nature  of  Necessity . . . . . . .221

i.  .^ /r/(7;-/ necessity  and  mediation . . . . . .221

a.  Mediate  nature  of  necessity  forgotten  in  controversy  . . 222
/3.  Organised  and  unorganised  experience,  with  ambiguity  of

test  by  Conception  , 224

ii.  Rehabilitation  of  formal  distinctions  in  Logic . . . .228

iii.  Criticism  of  '  Aesthetic' necessity 231

a.  Aesthetic  necessity  as  a  contradiction  in  terms  . . . 232
/3.  Aesthetic  necessity  as  a  mere  case  of  logical  necessity . 233


BOOK  11.
Of Inferen'CE.


CHAPTER I.
The  Nature  of  Inference.

I,  Inference  shares  the  essence  of  Judgment,  but,  at  The
least  qua  explicit  Inference,  has  in  addition  a  differentia  jpfgrJ^ce!
of  its  own.  The  essence  of  Judgment  is  the  reference  of
an  ideal  content  to  Reality;  the  differentia  of  Inference
affects  the  mode  of  this  reference,  and  consists  in  Mediation.
Inference  then  is  the  tnediate  reference  of  an  ideal  content
to  Reality.  If  I  affirm  that  I  spoke  to  you  in  the  street
yesterday  simply  because  I  find  it  in  my  memory  that  I  did
so  speak  to  you,  that  is,  apart  from  refinements  of  analysis,
simply  a  judgment.  If,  as  against  your  denial  of  the  fact,  .
I  corroborate  my  recollection  by  pointing  out  that  I  must
have  spoken  to  you.  because  you  afterwards  acted  upon
something  that  I  then  told  you,  then  I  am  reasserting
the  content  of  my  original  judgment,  but  with  an  addition
and  modification  that  turns  it  into  an  Inference.  I  then
refer  an  ideal  content  to  Reality,  not  as  directly  giyen  in
memory  or  in  perception,  but  on  the  strength  of  a  content
distinguishable  from  the  former  content,  bearing  a  certain
relation  to  it,  and  itself  referred  directly  to  reality.

By  speaking  of  '  mediate '  reference  to  reality  we  have
mentioned  the  differentia  of  Inference,  but  have  not  ex-
plained it.  Direct  affirmation  appears  to  explain  itself;
but  mediate  affirmation  is  even  at  first  sight  somewhat
mysterious.  We  are  at  once  met  with  the  old  question,
^  VOL.  II.  B


2  The  Nature  of  Inference.  [Bookii.

'How  are  synthetic  judgments  a  priori  possible?'  The
qualification  a  priori  adds  nothing  to  the  qualification
'true'  which  is  claimed  by  all  judgment  as  such.  The
question  therefore  is  in  plain  English,  *  How  can  one
content  claim  to  be  true  of  Reality  on  the  strength  of
another  content  distinct  from  the  first  ? '  '  How  can  any
synthetic  judgment  qua  synthetic — i.  e.  going  from  content
to  content  and  not  simply  accepting  either  a  mere  occur-
rence or  a  mere  conjunction — how  can  such  a  judgment
conceivably  be  justified?'  The  answer  to  this  difficulty,
like  all  answers  in  philosophy,  is  at  first  sight  a  mere
restatement  of  it.  Whether  such  a  restatement  is  an  ex-
planation depends  on  its  congruity  and  coherence  with
reason  and  with  experience.  It  is  possible — so  the  answer
must  run — to  proceed  in  knowledge  from  content  to  content,
because  the  world  as  known  consists  of  universals  exhibited
in  differences,  and  the  contents  from  which  and  to  which  we
proceed  are  not  shut  up  within  their  respective  selves,  but
depend  on  a  pervading  identical  character  or  universal  of
which  they  are  the  differences.  ^  Of  which  they  are  the
differences ' — for  here  is  the  objection  which  meets  us  on
the  threshold.  Suppose  that  I  find  in  a  room  a  hundred
different  objects — books,  guns,  china — all  marked  with  the
same  label,  say  with  the  owner's  name.  Well  then,  it  may
be  said,  here  is  your  '  identical  character '  or  '  universal,'
but  what  can  you  infer  from  it  beyond  itself?  It  tells  you
nothing  of  the  object  to  which  it  is  attached.  You  may
go  on  for  fifty  cases  affirming  that  a  having  the  label  x  is
a  book,  b  having  the  label  ;tr  is  a  book  and  so  on,  but  you
cannot  tell  in  the  least  what  the  fifty-first  object  that  has
the  label  will  be,  whether  a  sporting  rifle  or  a  china  teapot.
There  is  an  identity  throughout  all  the  objects,  but  they  are
not,  or  seem  not  to  be,  its  differences.  They  simply  contain
it,  and  are  in  no  way  leavened  by  it.  You  cannot  in  any
way  determine  their  predicates  on  the  basis  furnished  by
this  pervading  identity.

The  whole  of  our  previous  and  subsequent  discussion


Chap. I] Abstract  and  Concrete  Universal.  3

really  deals  with  this  radical  difficulty.  Logic  is  little  more
than  an  account  of  the  forms  and  modes  in  which  a  uni-
versal does  or  does  not  affect  the  differences  through  which
it  persists^  I  can  only  point  out  that  all  turns  on  the
distinction  between  the  abstract  or  powerless  and  the
concrete  or  dominant  universal.  To  interpret  the  latter
by  the  former,  to  reduce  all  universals  to  marks,  i.  e.  to
the  level  of  the  example  just  mentioned,  is  a  fatal  tendency
of  popular  logic.  A  very  elementary  example  of  a  relatively
concrete  universal  may  be  found  in  the  nature  of  a  geo-
metrical figure,  say  of  the  circle  or  the  triangle.  Given  an
arc  of  a  circle,  we  have  the  radius  and  centre,  and  can  lay
down  the  whole  circumference.  The  given  arc  is  not
simply  repeated,  it  is  continued  according  to  a  universal
nature  which  controls  its  parts,  and  with  a  result  which
though  involved  in  the  given  arc  is  yet  outwardly  and  as
an  actual  content  distinct  from  it.  This  is  clearer  if  instead
of  a  circle  we  take  an  ellipse,  in  which  the  given  fragment
of  the  curve  cannot  in  any  sense  be  said  to  be  simply
repeated  without  change  in  constructing  the  remainder.
There  is  something  in  the  curve  as  given  which  is  capable
of  dictating  a  continuation  and  completion  of  its  outline
distinguishable  from  the  given  arc  or  fragment  itself.  Just
so  with  a  triangle — given  two  sides  and  an  angle,  we  can
find  the  third  side  and  remaining  two  angles.

And  we  can  now  see  that  in  the  first  example,  which
seemed  so  hopeless,  the  same  relation  would  be  traceable  as-
suming the  label  to  have  any  meaning  at  all.  A  inere  mark,
which  conveys  nothing,  is  not  even  a  mark,  for  what  is  it  a
mark  of?  But  supposing  the  label  to  indicate  A's  ownership
of  the  things,  then  we  could  infer  all  sorts  of  legal  conse-
quences about  them  from  this  ownership ;  and  these  conse-
quences would  not  be  the  same  for  all  the  objects,  but  would
be  modified  by  their  nature  ;  e.  g.  it  is  probable  that  some  of
the  .things  would  be  liable  to  seizure  by  a  judgment  creditor
and  some  would  not.  Thus  here  too  the  universal  would
be  an  identity  pervading  different  manifestations.

B  2


4  The  Nature  of  Infei-ence.  [book  ii.

The  universal  in  its  differences  is  then  the  basis  of
mediate  judgment  or  inference.  But  it  is  also  the  basis,
as  we  have  amply  seen,  of  judgment  as  such,  i.  e.  what
would  usually  be  called  immediate  judgment.  The
above  examples,  however,  furnish  the  further  distinction
to  which  we  shall  find  it  convenient  on  the  whole  to
adhere.  Mediate  judgment  or  inference  is  the  indirect
reference  to  reality  of  differences  wathin  a  universal  by
means  of  the  exhibition  of  this  universal  in  differences
directly  referred  to  reality.  The  differences  indirectly
referred  to  reality  may  fall  outside,  or  include,  or  even
consist  exclusively  of,  the  differences  directly  referred  to
reality.  Immediate  judgment,  according  to  its  idea,  would
be  the  mere  reference  to  reality  of  differences  as  united
within  the  identity  or  universal.  It  might  be  more  intel-
ligible if  we  were  to  substitute  '  parts '  and  '  whole '  for
'  differences '  and  '  universal ; '  but  then  it  would  have  to
be  borne  in  mind  that  we  arc  not  speaking  of  quantitative
parts,  i.e.  that  the  kind  of  whole  in  question  is  not  necessarily
the  sum  of  its  parts.  Subject  to  this  reservation,  I  have  no
objection  to  defining  Inference  as  the  indirect  reference  to
reality  of  parts  within  a  whole  on  the  strength  of  the  nature
of  that  whole  as  revealed  in  parts  directly  referred  to
Reality.  And  the  definition  of  Judgment  would  bear
a  corresponding  modification.  Of  course  I  do  not  mean
that  all  the  forms  which  have  already  been  discussed  under
the  head  of  Judgment  are  substantially  confined  within  the
definition  of  Judgment  and  excluded  from  that  of  Inference.
But  for  the  present,  in  order  to  obtain  a  clear  view  prima
facie,  we  are  considering  only  explicit  Inference  and  ex-
cluding all  that  takes  the  outward  shape  of  mere  Judgment.
Some  2.  The  above  account  of  the  essence  of  Inference  will  be

onnfe"^^ best  illustrated  by  considering  some  accidents  of  inference
ence.  which  I  have  endeavoured  to  exclude  from  the  definition.

Mental  i. First among  these comes the attribute of  mental

Ir^vl^^^  transition  in  time,  with  which  that  of  an  advance  from
known  to  unknown  may  in  one  sense  be  identified.


in  Time.


Chap.  L]  Real  Advance  in Time.  5

The  account  given  above  ^  of  the  Judgment  in  time
applies  also  to  Inference  as  a  mental  process  in  Time.  The
first  and  most  fatal  error  as  regards  both  Judgment  and
Inference  is  to  introduce  the  idea  of  an  actual  and  instan-
taneous transition  from  content  to  content.  This  idea
combines  the  error  of  denying  that  inference,  as  a  mental
process,  has  duration  in  time,  with  that  of  denying  that  as
intellectual  insight  its  parts  are  inward  to  each  other  and
exempt  from  temporal  succession.  The  universal  itself,  or
intellectual  synthesis  of  differences,  is  not  a  fact  in  time ;
and  throughout  the  interval  which  inference  occupies  as
a  psychical  process  the  operation  of  the  universal  as  a
growing  insight  is  traceable  in  every  point  of  time,  but
is  not  shut  up  within  any  atomic  moment.

But  apart  from  the  idea  of  instantaneous  transition,  there
is  an  idea  of  advance  in  time  which  has  great  appearance
of  truth  and  which  is  indeed  in  one  sense  true.  It  is
unquestionable  that  in  inference  we  start  from  data,  from
facts  thrown  down  before  us,  it  may  be  in  chaotic  disorder
and  with  no  suggestion  of  a  result^.  We  go  to  work  upon
these  facts,  and  after  the  labour  of  hours,  of  days,  or  of
a  lifetime  ^  we  light  upon  a  conclusion  which  issues  from
them  and  to  which  they  are  related  as  premises  ;  i.  e.  which
exhibits  them  as  differences  in  a  universal.  How  is  it
possible  to  deny  that  we  have  here  an  advance  in  time
from  data  without  conclusion,  at  any  rate  to  data  phis
conclusion,  and,  if  we  go  by  the  old  syllogism,  to  conclusion
minus  a  large  part  of  the  data?  The  difficulty  which  I
find  in  stating  the  above  antithesis  is  a  first  indication  of  its
fallaciousness.  It  was  impossible  to  write  simply  '  from
data  without  conclusion  to  conclusion  without  data.' A

'  Bk.  I.  chap.  i.

*  I  put  the  case  at  its  extreme  against  myself.  We  must  however  remember
that  we  can  only  see  in  the  facts  what  we  are  ready  to  see  there,  what  we  bring
with  us.  So  however  disorderly  in  fact,  the  data  are  really  from  the  beginning
theorised  upon  by  our  apprehension,  because  it  can  only  apprehend  them  on
the  strength  of  its  own  existing  content.

'  See  the  famous  preface  to  the  'Origin  of  Species.'


6  The  Nature  of  Infei^ence.  [Bookii.

conclusion  without  data  is  an  obvious  contradiction  in
terms,  and  if  even  part  of  the  data  are  dropped  (as  the
middle  term  in  the  syllogism)  the  conclusion  sinks /r^  tattto
into  a  on  rather  than  a  6 tort — a  fact  instead  of  an  inference.
No  doubt  we  are  apt  to  pluck  off  our  conclusion  like  a  fruit
from  a  plant  and  carry  it  away  for  consumption.  Practical
life  requires  this  procedure.  But  we  must  remember  that
from  the  moment  of  severance  death  has  begun,  and  that
the  intellectual  product  can  bear  isolation  far  less  than  the
material.  The  idea  of  an  actual  transition  from  data  to
result,  so  far  as  it  is  founded  on  this  habit,  is  in  science
simply  a  pernicious  blunder.  The  case  in  which  the  result
is  a  systematic  insight  that  includes  the  premises  in  a
transmuted  form  does  not  of  course  fall  under  this  censure.
But  this  case  is  not  as  a  rule  contemplated  by  the  traditional
forms  of  inference.

And  of  course  it  might  be  correlatively  maintained  that
facts  are  not  data,  except  by  virtue  of  a  result ;  or  if  this  is
not  true  of  data  but  only  of  premises,  then  that  inference
does  not  start  from  data  but  only  from  premises  ^.  At  first
sight  such  a  contention  seems  to  blink  the  difficulty.  The
conclusion,  it  seems,  may  be  removed  by  a  week's  work
from  the  data  or  premises  ;  and  granting  that  they  are  not
rightly  called  data  or  premises  till  the  week's  end  when  the
conclusion  is  won,  still  the  facts  concerned  were  present
and  active  at  the  beginning  of  the  week  and  certainly
entered  into  the  advance  that  has  been  made.

Two  things  are  here  to  be  distinguished,  viz.  mere  repro-
duction and  inferential  reproduction.  The  universal  active
in  the  mind  is  not  apparent  as  a  whole  within  the  mere
psychical  facts  of  the  transition.  Its  operation  is  extended
throughout  a  series  of  the  fugitive  psychical  facts  or  ideas,
and  although  in  logical  thinking  its  operation  is  conscious,
i.  e.  selects  and  modifies  within  the  content  of  these  ideas,
yet  it  is  not  in  itself  necessarily  a  conscious  activity.  It
acts  in  consciousness,  but  need  not  be  conscious  of  its  own

^  But  then  it  would  seem  the  data  must  be  premises  of  the  premises.


Chap.  I.]  Unity  of  Inference.  7

principle  of  action.  In  rudimentary  reproduction  we  see
a  man  far  off,  and  a  name  comes  into  our  mind,  apparently
as  a  detached  fact,  without  any  reason  that  we  can  assign
or  think  of  trying  to  assign.  It  is  only  later,  when  we
clearly  recognise  the  man,  that  we  become  aware  either
that  we  recognise  him,  or  how  and  why  we  recognise  him.
Logical  thinking  consists  of  making  this  process  conscious  ;
but  essentially  and  fundamentally  the  intellectual  tendency
which  controls  reproduction  need  not  be  present  as  a  distinct
content  operating  in  reproduction.  So  far  the  psychical
process  might  in  theory  begin  with  data  alone  and  then  go  on
leaving  them  behind  to  result  alone,  tiot  carrying  throughout
the  transition  any  conscious  unity  or  continuity  of  content.
But  in  explicit  inference,  at  any  rate,  this  is  not  the
case.  The  essence  of  inference  is  to  drag  into  consciousness
the  operation  of  the  active  universal  as  a  pervading  unity
of  content  on  which  inference  depends.  The  conscious
operation  of  the  active  universal  in  inference  is  what  we
have  to  distinguish  from  the  mere  implicit  action  of  the
universal  in  rudimentary  reproduction.  Therefore  when  we
speak  not  of  mere  reproduction,  but  of  inferential  reproduc-
tion or  passage  from  data  to  conclusion,  then  it  is  true  that
you  can  no  more  have  data  or  premises  without  conclusion
than  conclusion  without  data  or  premises.  The  appearance
to  the  contrary,  which  I  have  admitted  to  exist,  arises  from
our  fixing  our  attention  exclusively  on  the  conclusion  par
excellence  in  which  and  not  before  it  we  happen  to  rest.
This  conclusion,  though  it  may  close  a  stage  of  science  or
set  at  rest  a  longing  of  our  hearts,  is  in  no  way  different  in
logical  character  from  the  first  steps  of  preparatory  activity
with  which  reason  penetrates  the  facts  laid  before  it.  We
meet  the  data  with  a  judgment  when  they  are  laid  before
us,  and  we  modify  this  judgment  continuously  throughout
our  inference.  Any  section  taken,  so  to  speak,  across  the
interval  of  intellectual  activity  which  elapses  from  first  data
to  ultimate  conclusion  would  lay  bare  the  whole  structure
of  an  inference,  just  as  a  section  across  the  time  during


8, "  The  Nature  of  Inference.  [Bookii.

which  a  chord  is  sounding  on  the  organ  would  exhibit  the
whole  harmonic  structure  of  the  compound  tone.  Of  course
we  may  draw  partial  conclusions,  discard  their  data,  and
work  with  these  conclusions  as  with  fresh  data,  and  so  far
we  make  an  advance  from  content  to  content,  discarding
the  old  in  favour  of  the  new.  But  this  process,  though
necessary  in  practice,  comes  under  the  observation  made
above  upon  a  conclusion  severed  from  its  proof,  and  is
not  typical  of  inference,  but  of  its  limitations.

Transition  in  time  from  content  to  content  as  between
data  and  conclusion  in  inference  is  not  really  possible.  But
it  is  true  that  the  process  of  inference,  though  continuous
and  bound  together  by  a  conscious  unity,  is  extended  in
time  and  includes  considerable  modifications  of  the  judg-
ments from  which  it  starts.  The  appearance  of  a  transition
arises  from  discarding  data,  which  is  unjustifiable,  from
transforming  data,  which  is  right  but  is  no  transition,  or
from  comparing  ultimate  conclusions  and  primary  data
while  neglecting  the  intermediate  phases  which  constitute
the  continuous  and — not  transitional  but — inclusive  infe-
rential evolution.  It  is  in  this  character  of  transition  with-
out conscious  continuity  that  rudimentary  reproduction
differs  from  explicit  Inference.

Thus  our  definition  of  Inference  did  not  say  that  the
differences  which  form  the  data  are  previously  affirmed  of
reality,  although  it  is  only  from  them  as  affirmed  of  reality
that  the  reality  of  the  inferred  differences  can  flow.
Discovery  ii.  Secondly,  it  follows  from  the  above  considerations  that
oi  ove  ty.  fj^i^f-Q^gyy  js  aj^  accident  and  not  an  essential  of  inference.
Inference  is  not  essentially  passage  in  time  whether  instan-
taneous or  extended.  Therefore  it  is  not  the  case  that  a
conclusion  ceases  to  be  an  inference  the  moment  that  it
becomes  familiar,  the  moment,  that  is,  that  it  ceases  to  be
a  discovery.  On  the  contrary,  discovery  without  proof  is
conjecture;  an  element  of  proof  is  needed  to  constitute  in-
ference, and  indeed  to  constitute  discovery.  The  activity
of  inference  cannot  be  identified  with  the  perception  of


Chap. I]  Omission  in  Inference.  g

something  new.  It  is  quite  a  normal  occurrence  that  the
elements  which  are  indirectly  referred  to  reality  should  a/so
be  directly  referred  to  reality.  Whenever,  indeed,  as  the
ideal  of  inference  requires,  the  original  data  themselves  are
transformed  and  freshly  elucidated,  this  happens  as  a  matter
of  course.  When  the  working  of  a  machine  is  about  to
be  explained  we  see  a  wheel  or  piston  to  be  there  as  a
fact,  and  we  ask  what  it  does.  The  answer  tells  us  why
there  must  be  such  a  wheel  or  piston,  and  this  is  not  super-
fluous though  we  knew  beforehand  that  it  was  there.  The
part  in  question  then  becomes  to  us  an  element  or  difference
in  the  pervading  identity  or  universal  which  is  the  working
of  the  machine.  And  if  we  live  fifty  years  and  see  the
machine  every  day,  understanding  it  thoroughly,  still  the
use  of  any  one  of  its  parts,  considered  as  necessitated  by
the  nature  of  any  other  actual  part  or  set  of  parts  combined
with  the  working  of  the  whole  machine,  remains  to  us  an
inference  and  never  becomes  a  mere  fact.  Thus  novelty  or
discovery  is  an  accident  of  Inference.

iii.  Thirdly,  it  follows  from  the  above  considerations  that  Omission
omission  in  the  conclusion  of  contents  employed  in  the  matter,
premises  is  an  accident  of  inference.  Inference  is  confined
neither  to  what  is  novel  nor  to  what  happens  to  interest  us.
The  appearance  of  a  necessity  of  omission  arises  from
various  causes.  The  transformation  of  data  is  an  ideal  which
is  likely  to  be  misunderstood.  It  resumes  the  old  data  in
a  new  expression.  Again,  it  is  usual  and  in  complicated
matters  unavoidable  to  confine  ourselves  in  dealing  with
any  universal  to  some  aspect  determined  by  context  or  by
curiosity.  And  the  habitual  omission  of  the  middle  term  in
the  Aristotelian  syllogism  is  perhaps  due  in  part  to  the  above
causes,  and  in  part  to  the  vicious  habit  of  severing  the  con-
clusion from  the  premises  which  the  rhetorical  associations
of  early  logic  tended  to  foster  ^. But  the  entire  content  of

*  Because  the  rhetorician  only  wants  to  prove,  not  to  understand.  If  he
reaches  his  conclusion,  the  steps  by  which  he  reached  it  cease  to  interest  him  or
his  audience.


lo  The  Nature  of  Inference.  [bookii.

the  universal,  so  far  as  recognised  in  the  necessity  that
unites  its  differences,  is  the  true  content  of  every  infer-
ence, and  there  is  no  logical  reason  for  neglecting  to  make
explicit  any  portion  of  truth  which  our  perception  of  it
generates.

A  question  arises  on  the  margin  of  this  subject  of  omission
with  reference  to  the  systematic  realities  of  which  we  spoke
under  the  head  of  the  hypothetical  and  disjunctive  judg-
ments. If  I  directly  affirm  the  reality  of  a  complex  system,
such  as  a  railway,  or  a  government,  or  a  mind,  and  include
in  my  affirmation  a  mention  of  many  parts  and  properties
as  systematically  interrelated,  am  I  in  doing  so  rightly  said
to  be  inferring  ?  It  rather  seems  here  as  if  the  absence  of
omission  destroyed  all  semblance  of  a  conclusion^  and  how
can  there  be  inference  without  a  conclusion  ?  '  Cannon
Street  railway  station  has  interlocking  points  and  signals.'
To  any  one  who  understands  the  subject  it  is  unnecessary
to  complete  this  by  the  further  explanation  (which  even  if
inserted  may  of  course  be  a  mere  qualification,  not  a  fresh
judgment),  'such  that  opening  any  one  line  ipso  facto  needs
the  signals  to  be  at  danger  for  all  the  lines  that  cross  it.'  In
such  a  judgment,  regarding  it,  as  we  have  every  right  to  do,
in  the  light  of  a  single  affirmation,  I  am  obviously  embody-
ing matter  which  has  an  inferential  character.  But  whether
I  am  actually  inferring  or  not  depends — not^  as  one  might
be  tempted  to  say,  on  the  novelty  of  the  conclusion  implied,
but — on  the  degree  of  insight  with  which  the  judgment  is
made.  It  is  in  short  either  an  inference,  or  the  allegation
as  a  fact  of  relations  that  must  have  formed  the  conclusion
of  an  inference,  although  the  inferential  connection  7nay  now
be  lost.  If  however  we  go  into  such  detail  as  proves  that  we
have  an  insight  into  the  why  and  wherefore  of  the  system,  then
we  have  no  choice  but  to  say  that  we  are  inferring  but  are
stating  our  inference  confusedly.  The  confusion  is  in  not
distinguishing  data  from  conclusion — how  much  is  imme-
diately affirmed  of  reality,  and  how  much  is  mediate. The


Chap.  I.]  Hypothetical  Inference.  ii

judgment  is  a  mediate  judgment  simulating  an  immediate
character  ^

An  ordinary  hypothetical  judgment  is  really  an  analogous
case  to  the  above  (which  might  be  represented  by  a  disjunc-
tive judgment).  Inferential  matter,  a  relation  or  nexus,
seems  to  be  affirmed  of  reality;  but  yet  the  omission,  which
would  leave  as  affirmed  what  seems  to  be  the  conclusion,
cannot  be  made.  The  ground  per  se  is  not  affirmed  of
Reality,  and  so  the  consequent  per  se  is  not  affirmed  to  be
true.  The  moment  that '  If  passes  into  '  Because'  you  can
omit  the  ground  and  affirm  the  consequent  per  se.  But
retaining  the  'If  we  cannot  affirm  the  consequent.  We
cannot  affirm  upon  mere  supposition,  nor  can  we  infer  with-
out affirming.  Yet  certainly,  as  in  the  last  paragraph,  we
seem  to  have  before  us  an  inferential  activity.  '  In  four-
dimensional  space  (i.  e.  supposing  such  space)  a  knot  can  be
tied  in  a  string  whose  ends  are  held.'  In  this  judgment  the
nexus  between  four-dimensional  space  and  tying  a  knot  is
undoubtedly  inferential.  The  moment  we  affirm  the  reality
of  the  ground,  we  also  affirm  the  real  possibility  of  the  con-
sequent. But  the  hypothetical  judgment  as  such  affirms
neither  the  one  nor  the  other.  The  entire  judgment  is  no
doubt  itself  a  consequence  of  an  underlying  reality,  the
affirmation  of  which  it  implies,  and  on  the  ground  of  which
— a  ground  asserted  to  be  real — the  whole  complex  content
of  the  hypothetical  judgment  is  asserted  to  be  real,  subject
to  its  own  inherent  reservation  embodied  in  its  own  further
ground.  But  this  does  not  help  us  to  determine  the
presence  or  absence  of  inference  within  the  hypothetical
judgment  itself.

The  fact  seems  to  be  that  hypothetical  affirmation  is  a
contradiction  in  terms,  and  so  too  is  hypothetical  inference.

*  The  existence  of  these  ambiguous  inferences — half  inference  and  half
memory  or  authority— favours  in  appearance  the  restriction  of  inference  to
what  has  novelty.  When  an  inference  is  just  made,  then,  if  ever,  it  has  definite
data.  When  an  inference  is  familiar,  it  is  too  likely  to  rest  on  the  ground  that
it  is  remembered  to  have  been  approved  of.  Nevertheless,  not  novelty,  but
systematic  necessity,  is  the  true  differentia.


12  The  Nature  of  hiference.  [bookii.

The  whole  process,  apart  from  any  categorical  meaning
which  it  may  make  explicit,  which  is  a  matter  of  degree,  is
a  mere  make-believe.  You  choose  to  treat  as  real  in  one
sense  what  you  do  not  affirm  to  be  really  real  ^,  and  you
record  the  groove  of  necessity  which  manifests  itself  when
the  artificial  reality  is  considered  as  though  forming  part  of
the  real  reality.  Of  the  differences  within  the  universal
which  determine  the  remaining  differences  (in  this  case  the
consequent)  part  (the  hypothetical  ground)  are  only  sham
reality,  and  therefore  although  we  seem  to  exert  inferential
activity,  yet  we  cannot  affirm  the  conclusion  of  the  inference.
Here  then  we  have  the  two  degrees  of  impropriety  in  omis-
sion. Even  when  the  ground  of  inference  is  affirmed,  as
with  ordinary  premises,  the  reality  of  the  conclusion  is
restricted  to  the  precise  sense  imposed  by  that  ground,  and
it  is  therefore  theoretically  unsafe  to  affirm  the  conclusion
apart  from  the  ground.  But  when  part  of  the  ground  of
inference  is  not  affirmed,  then  we  have  really  the  case  of  the
problematic  judgment,  and  if  the  consequent  is  affirmed  with
omission  of  the  supposed  ground  it  can  only  be  affirmed
problematically,  i.  e.  cannot  be  affirmed  as  true,  or  in  the
proper  sense  affirmed  at  all.  The  reference  to  reality  is
then  incompletely  mediated.  But  on  a  pure  supposition  no
inference  can  be  erected.  The  element  of  supposed  reality
is  the  element  of  reservation,  and  the  element  of  real
reality  is  the  element  of  affirmation.  A  pure  supposition
would  be  all  reservation  and  no  affirmation.

Omission  in  inference  is  thus  accidental  and  hazardous  in
various  degrees.  It  is,  as  we  saw,  in  one  form  (as  omission
of  the  condition  or  reservation  in  judgment)  the  mark  of
problematic  judging. Omission  however  as  here  discussed

'  This  process  has  many  degrees.  The  content  of  supposition  may  be  real
all  but  some  very  minute  relation.  The  conclusion  from  the  supposition  can
then  be  affirmed  subject  to  a  very  minute  reservation.  The  main  content  of  the
conclusion  may  depend  on  what  is  absolute  fact.  '  If  that  picture  were  \  in.
to  the  left  it  would  hang  symmetrically  with  that  other  picture '  gives  the
conclusion. The  picture  A  hangs  symmetrically  to  \  in.  with  the  picture  B.


Chap.  I.]  Three  Terms.  x  3

is  omission  of  matter  relevant  to  the  inference,  or,  which  is
the  same  thing,  falling  within  the  conclusion.  In  this  sense,
as  within  the  relevant  content,  selection  is  the  converse  of
omission,  and  is  equally  an  accident  of  Inference.  If  you
select,  you  omit ;  and  if  yoM.  omit,  you  select.  But  you
need  not  do  either.

iv.  On  the  other  hand,  actual  data  must  always  present  Omission
irrelevancies,  and  must  be  exhibited  as  transformed — not  vant
necessarily  be  transformed  de  novo  by  an  act  of  discovery —  matter.
in  the  inferential  operation.  Otherwise  there  could  not  be
the  circuit  through  the  universal  which  we  have  taken  to
be  the  differentia  of  inference.  It  is  natural  therefore  to
think  of  Omission  and  Selection  with  reference  to  the  achial
data  on  which,  as  referred  to  reality  in  their  crude  form,  a
given  inference  depends.  Within  these  actual  data  Selec-
tion is  of  the  essence  of  Inference,  but  Omission  depends  on
the  existence  of  irrelevancies  in  the  data,  and  although  in
theory  these  disguises  and  superfluities  cannot  be  wanting,
yet  they  may  be  reduced  to  an  almost  inappreciable  margin,
and  the  element  of  omission  in  that  case  becomes  inappre-
ciable also.  There  is  then,  apparently,  selection  without
omission  ;  there  can  never  be  omission  without  selection.

V.  It  has  been  maintained  that  the  presence  of  three  Three
'terms.'  as  required  by  the  Aristotelian  syllogism,  is  an  **^™^
accident  of  inference  and  does  not  touch  its  essence.  I
must  leave  this  question,  which  is  largely  verbal,  to  decide
itself  in  detail  from  our  whole  account  of  the  subject.  Here
I  will  merely  indicate  the  distinction  on  which  in  my
opinion  the  answer  to  it  depends.  Of  course  an  inference
is  constantly  drawn  by  the  combination  of  very  numerous
fects  and  conceptions. Aristotle's  ^  or  Lotze's  Inductive

'  Td  KoSi'  fKaoTor  is  a  tenn  in  both  preouses  of  the  Aristotelian  Indoctive
Syllc^;ism.  Obviously  this  means  that  each  premise  would  be  a  ccHijimcticm  of
judgments,  or  a  conjanctiTe  judgment.  Such  a  group  of  judgments  would
correspond  to  the  so-called  premises  in  Lotze's  Inductive  Syllogism,  which
'  premises '  are  really  only  a  single  premise,  out  of  which  Lotze  takes  his
conclusion  /fr  saltum.  If  the  other  premise  were  filled  in,  his  inference  would
show  three  terms.


1 4  The  Nature  of  Inference.  [Book  ii.

syllogism,  or  a  Sorites,  or  a  Euclidean  construction,  are
familiar  examples  of  inference  so  drawn.  The  only  ques-
tion is  whether  these  numerous  facts  or  conceptions  corre-
spond to  phases  or  elements  in  the  logical  act  of  Inference,
and  whether,  if  they  do  not,  they  can  claim  the  title  of
logical  '  terms.'  Must  there  not  always  be  (i)  differences  or
parts  directly  referred  to  reality,  (ii)  the  universal  nature
or  continuous  identity  which  binds  these  differences  or  parts
into  a  whole,  pregnant  with  a  capacity  of  accepting  and
arranging  further  differences  or  parts,  and  (iii)  further
differences,  identified  as  parts  within  the  pregnant  whole
which  controls  the  inference,  and,  on  the  strength  of  this
identity,  referred  to  reality  ?  It  may  be  observed  that  this
last  '  term,'  moment  or  element  of  inference,  may  and  ought
to  include  the  two  former.  But  it  contains  them  in  another
sense  than  that  in  which  they  appear  as  isolated  elements
of  inference,  and  therefore  is  not  superfluous  nor  tautologous.
We  may  have  a  thousand  observations  of  the  places  of  a
moving  heavenly  body,  but  these  thousand  data  are  not  a
thousand  terms.  The  thousand  observed  places  fuse  into
the  law  of  the  orbit,  and  the  law  of  the  orbit  dictates  the
remaining  places  which  form  the  path  that  the  body
traverses.  Or,  as  the  above  instance  really  verges  upon
geometrical  construction,  we  may  take  an  example  more
cognate  to  what  is  commonly  meant  by  Induction,  though
it  is  hard  to  find  a  good  example  of  a  process  which  does
not  exist.  If  typhoid  fever  attends  a  certain  milk-supply
through  a  large  portion  of  its  ins  and  outs,  including  many
dozens  of  cases,  then  we  shall  no  doubt  be  apt  to  suspect
that  danger  attaches  to  that  milk  supply  as  a  whole,  and
consequently  menaces  any  localities  as  yet  unexamined  to
which  this  same  supply  extends  its  operations.  Here  again
the  three  elements  of  Inference  are  conspicuous,  though,  as
we  shall  see,  they  are  in  any  such  statement  exceedingly
ill-defined  and  their  connection  ill-warranted.
The  lower  3.  I  have  thus  far  been  speaking  of  explicit  Inference,  that
Inference ^^  ^°  ^^y"'  ^^  inference  in  which  three  or  more  '  terms '  or


chap.1.]  Continuity  of  Soul-Life.  15

intellectual  elements  are  consciously  distinguished  and
combined.  And  it  is  true,  as  I  said  above,  that  the  nature
and  phases  of  implicit  Inference  must  really  be  gathered
from  the  whole  theory  of  judgment  which  I  have  stated  in
Book  I.  to  the  best  of  my  power.  But  a  few  remarks  and
a  few  examples  may  be  useful  in  throwing  light  on  the
modifications  which  have  to  be  traced.

The  function  of  which  I  have  attempted,  in  the  theory  of
judgment,  to  write  the  later  history,  is  the  activity  of  the
universal  in  the  mind,  or  in  other  words,  of  the  mind  as
the  universal.

i.  I  have  at  present  neither  space  nor  competence  to  The  repro-
enter  upon  psychological  controversy  with  reference  to  the  id^g^  °
so-called  Association  of  Ideas.  But  it  is  necessary  to  de-
fine my  position  by  explaining  that  in  as  far  as  any  doctrine
of  Association  involves  the  hypothesis  of  reproduction  by
other  ideas  of  ideas  as  separate  particular  units,  i.  e.  the
denial  of  real  identity  of  of  the  active  universal,  I  am  unable
to  reconcile  such  a  doctrine  with  logical  phenomena.  And
logical  phenomena,  if  we  include  in  them  the  judgment
from  its  very  beginning,  take  in  by  far  the  larger  part  of
the  known  phenomena  of  mind.  I  cannot  suppose  a  dis-
continuity— in  my  opinion  moreover  wholly  unmotived  by
experience — between  distinctly  logical  phenomena  and  the
quasi-intellectual  activities  of  primitive  and  animal  soul-
life.  And  therefore  I  shall  treat  the  fundamental  activity
of  thought  as  the  same  throughout  and  as  always  consisting
in  the  reproduction  by  a  universal  or  a  real  identity,  pre-
sented in  a  content,  of  contents  distinguishable  from  the
presented  content,  which  also  are  differences  of  the  same
universal.

It  may  be  that  in  early  soul-life  this  reproduction  is
unconscious,  and  that  its  results,  the  images  which  it  brings
before  the  mind,  are  not  used  as  ideas,  i.e.  are  not  dis-
tinguished from  fact  or  known  to  be  symbolic  of  a  content
other  than  themselves.  The  results  of  experience  may  be
made  available  for  the  guidance  of  action  in  an  animal


1 6  The  Nature  of  Inference.  [bookii.

through  suggestion  effected  by  reproduction,  but  not  dis-
tinguished as  suggestion  from  any  presented  reality.  In
this  process  we  have  something  that  does  the  work  of
judgment  and  inference,  and  that  has  the  same  fundamental
nature  with  them.  But  it  is  not  judgment,  because  the
images  which  it  causes  to  succeed  one  another  in  the  mind,
not  being  distinguished  from  any  reality,  as  a  mere  meaning
necessarily  is  ^,  cannot  be  affirmed  in  qualification  of  reality.
And  a  fortiori  such  early  thought  is  not  inference,  because
it  is  not  judgment.  Inference  as  we  saw  involves  assertion.
To  begin  with,  then,  we  may  set  down  the  lower  limit  of
inference  as  at  any  rate  not  prior  to  the  beginnings  of
judgment.  Yet  even  this  prima  facie  boundary  is  drawn
subject  to  a  large  reservation  on  account  of  the  primitive
reproduction  or  redintegration  to  which  I  have  just  alluded.
The  unconscious  extension  of  a  sensation  by  reproduction
fulfils  some  functions  of  inference.
General  ii.  And  when  we  come  to  judgment  in  the  strict  sense,  the

Tndmient  ^^^  ^^  drawing  a  line  between  implicit  inference  and  what
is  not  inference  at  all  becomes  an  impossible  one.  For-
tunately it  is  also,  in  this  rigid  form,  an  idle  one.  What
we  have  to  say  upon  it  amounts  to  this.  All  Judgment,
we  are  told^  with  emphasis,  claims  necessity.  That  is  to
say,  every  one  who  makes  an  assertion  ^',  though  of  course
he  has,  as  a  rule,  never  heard  of  logic  or  of  a  ground,  yet
believes  that  he  cannot  think  otherwise  than  as  he  asserts.
In  full-blown  Inference  he  backs  up  this  belief  by  a  distinct
allegation  of  separate  but  connected  matters  which  he  takes
to  justify  his  conviction.  In  implicit  Inference  we  must
distinguish  the  feeling  that  there  is  a  justification  from  the
incipient  selection  of  definite  matters  as  forming  the  justifi-

*  When  psychical  images  come  to  be  employed  for  .the  sake  of  a  meaning
which  they  convey,  they  ex  hypothesi  are  not  treated  as  fact.  And  their  mean-
ing is  not  itself  a  psychical  fact,  but  is  an  intellectual  activity  which  can  only
enter  into  fact  by  being  used  to  qualify  reality.

^  Sigwart,  vol,  i.  pp.  193-4.

'  A  conscious  lie  is  only  a  sham  assertion,  except  in  as  far  as  the  hearer  is
induced  to  judge  it  true.


Chap. I.]  'Evidence  of  the  Senses'.  17

cation.  It  is  probable  that,  ks  Sigwart  implies,  the  feeling
of  justification  is  in  one  form  or  another  essential  to  judgment.
An  uneducated  man  or  a  child,  if  his  perception  or  his
memory  is  doubted,  will  sometimes  merely  reiterate  his
assertion.  This  reiteration  implies  on  the  one  hand  that
he  cannot  formulate  any  inferential  support  for  his  original
judgment ;  he  does  not  know  how  to  travel  outside  the  con-
tent of  his  assertion  in  order  to  invoke  external  aid.  Such
a  phase  of  the  judging  activity  is  well  illustrated  by  the
impersonal  judgment,  in  which  the  place  of  the  significant
subject  which  develops  into  the  pregnant  genus-idea,  or
ground,  or  condition,  is  devoid  of  all  content.  Yet  on  the
other  hand  such  reiteration  implies  an  effort  and  failure  on
the  part  of  the  speaker  to  get  beyond  the  original  content,
and  a  consequent  return  to  that  content,  which  is  the  germ
of  the  motived  inability  to  think  otherwise  that  constitutes
the  necessity  of  inference.  In  such  a  mind,  we  may  suppose,
imagination  and  conception  do  not  fall  apart,  and  his  think-
ing satisfies  the  criterion  of  necessary  truth  which  Mill
criticised  as  defectively  explained  by  Whewell,  in  that  he
cannot  even  imagine  (not  to  speak  of  conceiving)  the  matter
to  be  otherwise  than  as  he  asserts  it  to  be.

An  educated  man  makes  a  similar  justification  explicit
when  he  tells  us  that  he  relies  on  the  evidence  of  his  senses.
The  phrase  is  perhaps  primarily  intended  to  be  ironical,  as
implying  that  the  senses  give  the  fact  and  not  mere  evidence
of  the  fact,  but  its  irony  fails  because  it  is  strictly  true.
Sense,  though  it  is  a  fact,  cannot  give  the  fact,  and  is  strictly,
as  the  supposed  speaker  calls  it,  evidence — circumstantial
evidence  or  datum,  not  '  testimony '  ^  which  implies  asser-
tion. The  phrase  '  evidence  of  the  senses '  then,  if  taken
seriously,  conveys  the  consciousness  that  sense-perception
has  an  inferential  character,  and  rests  on  a  necessity  arising
out  of  combinations  of  elements  among  which  sensation  is  but

*  Evidence  in  this  application  may  have  originally  meant  obviousness  or
intnitiveness,  '  Evidentia/  '  Evidenz,'  and  would  then  have  no  close  connectioa
•with  the  common  meaning  of '  evidence '  as= '  testimony.'
VOL.  II.  C


1 8  The  Nature  of  Inference.  [Bookii.

a  part  or  datum.  When  this  consciousness,  which  experi-
ence of  illusions  soon  forces  on  reflecting  men,  is  thoroughly
attained,  then  the  perceptive  judgment  is  known  to  need
justification,  but  it  is  not  known  in  what  this  justification
consists  nor  that  it  may  lie  in  a  connection  of  content
apparently  going  beyond  the  observed  conjunction.  Atten-
tive observation  and  precise  interrogation  of  the  memory
are  the  engines  which  suggest  themselves  as  securing  the
necessity  of  judgment  at  this  stage.  Of  course  these  pro-
cesses imply  a  reliance  on  certain  principles.  But  the  in-
ference is  so  far  formal  and  general,  not  material  and  specific.
It  is  rather  a  general  conviction  that  perception  can  be
relied  on,  than  an  individual  inference  that  this  particular
perception  is  rightly  construed  to  give  this  particular  con-
tent. And  therefore  the  inference  falls  apart  from  the
judgment  as  such,  and  cannot  be  taken  as  an  element  within
it.  When  we  pass  this  point,  we  come  to  something  much
more  like  Inference  proper.
Specific  iii.  Prior  to  Judgment,  as  we  saw  reason  to  suppose,  the

TudOTieat°  Operation  of  the  universal  or  the  real  identity  which  governs
reproduction  is  unconscious.  Of  course  it  has  a  result  in
consciousness,  but  the  mind  is  not  aware  of  the  limits  and
pervading  ground  of  the  process  from  which  this  result
emanates.  I  cannot  say  on  what  definite  stimulus  my
friend's  name  rises  to  my  mind  when  I  see  him  at  a  dis-
tance, not  being  yet  aware  that  I  have  recognised  him,  nor
what  is  the  operative  content  which  makes  a  certain  room
recall  a  long  past  incident  which  occurred  elsewhere.  In
the  phase  of  judgment  which  has  just  been  alluded  to  this
real  identity  emerges  into  consciousness  as  the  meaning  of
sentences  and  as  the  active  guide  of  perception  and  memory.
In  this  capacity  it  is  attended  by  a  necessity  at  first
actual  and  then  perceived,  which  at  least  reveals  itself
(when  men  talk  of  the  evidence  of  their  senses)  as  a  partly
intellectual  necessity.  But  up  to  this  point  the  real  identity
or  meaning  has  simply  been  suggested  and  affirmed,  as  this
or  that  ideal  content,  to  be  true  of  reality,  and  has  not


Chap.  I.] Direct  and  Indirect  Affirmation.  19

within  itself  displayed  any  articulated  or  selective  character.
It  has  shown  no  systematic  organisation  to  which  thought
could  appeal  as  a  definite  individual  compulsion  prescribing
the  nature  of  the  ideal  content  which  it  reproduced.  The
matters  affirmed  have  simply  been  conjoined  within  a  unity
or  identity,  as  philosophy  and  self-conceit  may  be  conjoined
in  the  same  man.  They  have  not  been  shown  to  cohere
as  parts  in  an  intelligible  whole,  not,  that  is,  as  the  third
angle  of  a  triangle  coheres  with  two  given  angles  and  a
given  side,  or  as  personal  liberty  in  England  coheres  with
the  supremacy  of  law  ^.

But  a  further  principle  makes  its  appearance,  as  we
saw,  with  the  judgments  of  individual  character,  of  ideal
measurement  or  of  ideal  enumeration.  Here  the  universal
takes  on  the  character  of  a  system,  which  governs  its  parts
on  the  basis  of  its  pervading  nature.  From  this  point
onwards  we  have  in  fact  the  full  essentials  of  Inference,  and
it  is  very  much  a  question  of  convenience  whether  the
inference  takes  implicit  or  explicit  form.  So  long  as  we
retain  the  form  of  direct  synthesis  our  definition  forbids  us
the  title  of  explicit  inference.  For  the  identification  of  the
subject-idea  with  reality  is  presupposed  and  not  affirmed,
and  the  qualification  of  reality  by  the  predicated  content  is
therefore  direct  in  form,  though  indirect  to  a  large  extent
in  substance.  *  To  a  large  extent '  only,  for  according  to
the  view  which  I  take  of  judgment  the  affirmation  in  all
the  more  genuine  and  natural  forms  of  assertion  is  both
direct  and  indirect  even  in  substance.  If  I  affirm  '  The
Czar  of  Russia  can  throw  Europe  into  a  blaze  by  lifting  his
finger '  I  am  judging  both  categorically  of  the  historical
individual,  and  necessarily  or  inferentially  of  the  wielder
of  enormous  forces.  And  the  same  holds  good  in  some
degree  if  I  speak  of  the  British  Constitution,  or  of  the
force  of  gravity. The  educated  mind  sees  an  argument  in

^  See  Dicey  on  the  Law  of  the  Constitution.  I  may  venture  to  remark  that
works  of  this  class  are  a  valuable  study  for  logicians,  because  they  illustrate
fonns  of  necessary  comiectioQ  which  are  not  dependent  on  geometrical  per-
ception.

c  a


20  The  Nature  of  Inference.  [bookii.

judgments  dealing  with  these  matters  even  without  the
help  of  vocal  accent  and  inflexion  which  can  be  used  to
drive  home  the  inference.  From  the  individual  judgment^
then,  through  the  generic,  as  far  as  the  pure  hypothetical
which  has  already  been  discussed  in  this  context,  we  have
implicit  inference  which  verges  upon  explicitness  in  pro-
portion as  the  operative  ground  or  reason  is  more  clearly
set  out  in  the  subject-idea.  The  generic  judgment  shows
the  union  of  the  two  types  in  its  fullest  significance.  The
individual  content  here  claims  to  be  a  presupposed  qualifi-
cation of  reality,  and  therefore,  as  reality,  has  the  predicated
content  directly  identified  with  it ;  while  the  very  same
self-complete  organisation  which  entitles  the  subject-content
to  be  taken  as  real,  also  enables  it  to  demand  the  predicated
content  as  a  necessary  consequence,  and  to  act  as  a  middle
term  attaching  this  content  indirectly  to  reality.  '  Poetry
is  a  form  of  art  which  employs  ideas  as  the  medium  of
*  representation.' Here  we  are  at  once  qualifying  a  reality

and  drawing  an  inference.
The  true  iv.  These  principles  may  advantageously  be  elucidated
iSence?  ^X  ^^^  example  of  what  might  be  called  the  true  immediate
inferences,  which  may  properly  be  mentioned  here  on  the
threshold  of  Inference.  I  refer  to  such  processes  as
Recognition,  Abstraction,  Comparison,  Identification,  Dis-
crimination. All  these  titles  are  obviously  drawn  from
characteristics  which  in  a  certain  sense  no  judgment  or
inference  is  without,  and  which  reciprocally  imply  one
another^.  But  they  also  can  be  and  are  used  as  names  of
processes,  of  cases  of  the  judging  activity,  in  which  one
or  other  of  its  aspects  asserts  itself /^r  excellence.  They  are
cross  divisions  to  the  progressive  stages  of  judgment  which
were  described  in  Book  I,  and  might  be  spoken  of,  though
not  with  equal  appropriateness,  as  present  in  all  these  stages
short  of  disjunction.  They  are  separated  from  one  another
and  from  other  forms  of  judgment  rather  by  practical  and
methodological  than  by  strictly  logical  distinctions.
'  See  Introduction,  sect.  5.


Chap.  I.]  Cross-refevence.  21

a.  Comparison  is  a  good  example.  The  Comparative  Compari-
Judgment,  as  described  in  Book  I,  fills  an  important  place  ^"'
in  logical  evolution.  The  variations  of  a  common  quality
between  more  and  less  are  ihe  simplest  explicit  case  of
identity  in  difference.  But  the  reflective  comparison  of
common  life  both  stops  short  of  and  goes  beyond  what  I
have  called  the  comparative  judgment.  Comparison  in  the
ordinary  sense  is  a  name  applied  to  the  intentional  cross-
reference  of  two  or  more  given  contents,  in  order  to
establish,  between  those  contents  as  given,  a  general  or
special  identity,  difference,  or  partial  identity  (likeness).
And  with  the  establishment  of  a  relation  of  equality,  or  of
quantitative  difference  which  implies  equality  {a>  b  implies
a  =  b  ■\-  x).  popular  comparison  diverges  into  equation,  in
which  the  cross-reference  is  retained  throughout.  The
equation  is  essentially  comparative.  You  cannot  say  '  a  is
equal '  any  more  than  you  can  say  *  a  is  the  same.'  ^  In
Comparison,  identity  etc.  is  stated  as  a  result,  or  else  very
strongly  implied,  in  an  abstract  forju.  If  it  were  m.ade
concrete  and  definite  the  cross-reference  to  the  contents  as
given  would  be  superfluous  or  impossible,  other  and  pro-
founder  standards  being  introduced  and  the  contents  having
no  longer  their  original  shape.  The  result  required  in
comparison  is  such  as  '  A  is  like  B.'  If  we  say  '  A  and  B
are  both  red,'  this  too  is  comparison  in  virtue  of  the  cross-
reference  implied  in  '  both.'  But  if  we  say  '  A  is  red  and  B
is  green '  we  are  passing  out  of  the  process  popularly  called
comparison  into  ordinary  investigation,  aimed  not  at  a  par-
ticular cross-reference,  but  at  developing  the  facts  which  may
come  to  hand.  And  if  we  go  to  'All  a  (including  a  and  b^
are  coloured  surfaces,'  the  original  data  have  disappeared,
and  comparison  in  the  popular  sense  has  become  impossible.
When  the  process  has  justified  in  the  concrete  the  abstract
idea  which  guided  it,  it  has  put  an  end  to  its  own  raison
d'etre  and  passes  into  the  normal  operations  of  knowledge.

j3.  Abstraction,  again,  affords an example  worth  con-  Abstrac-

\xfm.
^  Cf.  Sigwart,  i.  p.  69.


22  The  Nature  of  Inference.  [Bookii.

sidering.  Abstraction  in  general  is  the  necessary  conse-
quence of  definite  thought,  and  indeed  of  all  definite
activity.  All  activity  has  its  restrictions  and  limitations,
selects  and  omits,  and  is  so  far  abstract.  But  though  all
thought  is  abstract,  yet  all  thought  need  not  be  abstraction
as  a  special  process.  Abstraction  in  this  sense  is  a  methodic
activity  guided  by  a  special  reflective  idea,  the  idea  of
obtaining  the  part  out  of  the  whole  by  omission  of  other
parts.  The  whole  is  theoretically  always,  and  practically
often,  more  knowable  than  the  part.  It  is  easier  to  say
that  99x5  =  five  hundreds  minus  five  units,  i.e.  495,  than
to  multiply  out  ninety-nine  by  five.  Subtraction  may  be
regarded  as  the  specific  term  for  abstraction  when  the
latter  deals  with  the  parts  of  a  homogeneous  or  quantitative
whole.  The  hydrostatic  explanation  of  the  cup  which  re-
tains the  juice  in  a  fruit-tart  is  an  example  of  abstraction'
which  obtains  knowledge  of  one  aspect  of  a  heterogeneous
whole  by  omitting  all  the  rest.  But  the  examinee  who
added  that  for  the  atmosphere  to  sustain  the  liquid  within
the  cup  it  was  necessary  that  the  cup  should  not  be  more
than  thirty  feet  high  had  passed  from  mere  abstraction
within  the  given  whole  to  independent  consideration  of  the
hydrostatic  relation  involved  in  the  example.

Abstraction,  then,  like  Comparison,  when  considered  as
a  method  par  excellence,  is  one  of  the  processes  by  which
Reason,  armed  with  reflective  ideas,  breaks  into  concrete  data
xw.  search  of  the  unity  of  the  universal.  The  reflective  idea
which  guides  it  is  the  equivalent  in  general  knowledge  of  the
mathematical  axiom  that  if  equals  are  taken  from  equals
the  remainders  are  equal.  Withdraw  a  known  relation  from
a  known  system  of  relations,  and  the  relations  which  remain
are  known. It  is  plain  that  if  the  whole  and  its  internal

'  In  saying  this,  I  do  not  mean  that  the  system  of  laws  which  an  investiga-
tion, beginning  with  such  an  abstraction,  ultimately  brings  to  light,  must  be
more  abstract  than  the  example  which  is  the  datum.  The  semi-logical  and
almost  arbitrary  character  of  these  methodic  processes  as  popularly  limited  is
illustrated  by  the  fact  that  abstraction,  as  in  the  case  before  us,  so  easily  slides
into  systematic  construction  which  leaves  the  example  behind.


Chap.  I.]  Inference  front  Abstraction.  23

relations  are  really  known  so  as  to  justify  such  a  process,
the  withdrawal  is  a  mere  intellectual  or  ideal  distinction.
This  is  so  even  in  mathematics.  To  know  the  difference
between  two  quantities  is  the  same  as  to  know  the  greater
as  the  sum  of  the  lesser  and  the  difference.  An  algebraical
sum  treats  subtraction  and  addition  as  on  a  level.  Ab-
straction would  thus  seem  primarily  to  restrict  itself  to
instances  where,  as  in  mere  numerical  conceptions,  the
withdrawal  of  a  part  leaves  the  other  parts  unaffected.
But  as  this  is  never  within  any  real  whole  theoretically  the
case,  although  by  compensation  or  in  loose-knit  wholes  it
may  seem  to  be  so,  the  instances  envisaged  by  abstraction
occupy  in  truth  no  separate  region  from  those  which  form
the  matter  of  all  definite  knowledge.  Thus  the  guiding
idea  of  abstraction  is  only  a  provisional  idea.  It  amounts
to  no  more  than  this,  that  within  known  wholes  known
changes  may  appear  to  leave  remainders  known  as  un-
changed. For  to  say,  as  we  said  above,  simply  '  known
remainders,'  really  lets  in  all  that  positive  knowledge  can
tell  us  of  the  positive  effects  produced  by  the  change  on
what  remains.  In  this  we  go  beyond  abstraction.  The
supposed  unchanged  remainder,  then,  is  predicated  of  the
whole  as  modified  by  the  withdrawal  of  some  parts.

But  really  of  course  the  abstraction  is  not  what  operates.
Neither  real  nor  ideal  abstraction  can  help  except  by  con-
ferring or  illustrating  knowledge  of  the  real  whole  in
question.  '  The  Parnellites  are  chief  men  in  Ireland,  and
were  Ireland  separated  from  England  would  be  chief  men
still.'  But  ivould  they  }  The  abstraction  puts  the  question,
but  does  not  answer  it.  The  answer  depends  on  our  know-
ledge of  Ireland.  '  He  has  lost  his  wife  and  yet  goes  on
much  as  before,  therefore  her  loss  has  made  no  great
change  in  him.'  But  perhaps  in  removing  one  motive  to
his  habitual  acts  the  loss  supplied  another.  The  inference
even  from  this  actual  abstraction  is  utterly  baseless  except
as  a  conclusion  from  our  knowledge  of  the  whole  man,  to
which  of  course  the  new  fact  created  by  the  actual  ab-


nilion.


24  '  The  Nature  of  Inference.  [book  ii.

straction  must  contribute.  But  had  we  had  such  knowledge
before,  we  could  have  gone  to  the  conclusion  without  the
actual  abstraction ;  and  apart  from  such  knowledge  we
cannot  go  to  the  conclusion  on  the  basis  of  the  actual
abstraction.

From  the  difficulty  of  bearing  in  mind  the  necessity,
often  extremely  obscure,  of  this  circuitous  route  through
the  nature  of  the  whole,  and  the  inapplicability  of  mere
subtraction  in  the  complicated  relations  of  non-mathe-
matical reality,  abstraction  is  perhaps  the  most  fruitful  in
mistakes  of  all  methods  of  knowledge.  Knowledge  in  fact  is
one,  and  any  method  which  consists  in  the  exaggeration  of
a  mere  characteristic  of  knowledge  is  ipso  facto  hazardous.
Recog-  y.  Recognition  ^  is  another  of  these  curiously  limited  pro-

cesses. In  its  complete  form  it  appears  to  be  reflective
reproduction  under  the  influence  of  an  idea  of  identity,
followed  by  comparison  and  identification  of  the  content
reproducing  with  the  content  reproduced.  Recognition
differs  from  Perception  and  from  Inference  as  such  both  by
dealing  with  a  reproduced  content,  and  by  always  ending  in
a  direct  comparison  of  contents.  We  do  not  speak  of  re-
cognition either  where  there  is  no  reproductive  process,  or
where  the  process,  though  it  may  establish  identity,  does
not  end  in  direct  comparison.  When  we  meet  a  friend
whom  we  see  every  day,  there  is  no  process  of  reproduction ;
the  extension  of  the  sensations  is  given  along  with  them  and
the  apprehension  of  his  identity  is  a  datum  of  perception.
For  true  recognition  to  take  place,  it  would  be  necessary
that  the  first  datum  should  create  a  second,  on  which  two
data  the  further  process  would  operate.  But  in  Inference
the  two  data  may  just  as  well  be  given  ;  and  this  is  also
the  case  of  course  with  mere  Comparison. On  the  other

'  I  restrict  recognition  to  the  elementary  meaning  of  knowing  again.  The
'  recognition  '  of  a  right  or  a  principle,  i.  e.  the  admission  of  it,  has  interesting
connections  with  the  former  case  both  in  Logic  and  in  Philology,  and  illustrates
the  ease  with  which  these  'processes'  pass  beyond  their  normal  sphere  into
knowledge  in  general.  But  it  is  truer  to  usage  to  regard  this  latter  import  as
metaphorical.


Chap.  I.]  Limits  of  Recognitimi.  25

hand,  if  I  ask  for  a  tune  of  which  I  know  the  name,  but  fail
to  recognise  it  when  it  is  played,  then  I  have  inferential
identification  without  recognition.  For  of  course  I  know,
supposing  that  I  am  confident  in  my  recollection  of  the
name  and  in  the  pianist's  knowledge,  that  it  is  the  same
tune  which  I  asked  for ;  but,  when  played,  it  fails  to  re-
produce the  desired  effect  in  my  mind,  and  either  there  is
nothing  to  compare,  or  if  I  compare  the  tune  I  hear  with
my  idea  of  the  tune  I  wanted,  the  result  is  distinction  and
not  identification.  Thus  recognition  is  absent,  though  in-
ferential identification  is  present.  Inferential  identification,
however,  though  ever  so  circuitous,  may  set  up  a  direct
comparison  ending  in  identification,  and  if  so,  then  we  have
recognition.  This  is  too  common  an  experience  to  need
illustration.

The  reflective  influence  of  the  idea  of  identity  may  be
active  in  recognition  to  very  different  degrees,  and  the  idea
itself  may  be  suggested  in  very  various  ways.  Probably
these  ways  may  all  be  included  under  imperfect  reproduc-
tion. An  interest  in  identification  is  necessary  to  make  the
idea  work ;  but  an  interest  can  only  operate  in  logical
thought  by  attaching  to  a  suggested  content.  Our  interest
in  recollecting  a  man's  name  operates  through  the  natural
but  unsuccessful  efforts  at  reproduction,  in  which  a  pro-
minent syllable  of  the  name,  or  the  like,  occurs  to  us.  And
like  the  rest  of  these  methodic  processes,  recognition  loses
its  differentia  when  the  abstract  relation  between  the
special  contents  in  question  ceases  to  interest.  It  is  re-
cognition to  say  '  That  is  the  man  who  was  with  me  in  the
train  yesterday.'  It  may  or  may  not  be  recognition  to  say
-'  That  is  Professor  Huxley,'  for  this  is  a  matter  of  fact
which  I  may  infer  otherwise  than  by  direct  comparison,
and  which  may  not  at  all  be  meant  to  indicate  an  identity
with  a  special  content  reproduced  in  my  mind.  And  when
I  go  deeper  into  knowledge  and  say  '  Professor  Huxley  is
one  of  the  leaders  of  scientific  thought  in  Europe '  I  have
altogether  got  beyond  recognition  pure  and  simple,  because


26


The  Nature  of  Inference.


[Book  II.


the  interest  is  no  longer  that  of  mere  identification  but  of
concrete  description.
Discrimi-  6.  Discrimination  and  Identification,  and  many  other
nation,  etc.  jngthQ^jg  qj-  processes,  might  be  analysed  in  the  same  way.
All  of  them  are  in  one  sense  characteristics  of  Inference  or
Judgment  as  such,  and  therefore  enter  into  each  other  and
into  the  various  processes  which  have  just  been  described.
But  each  of  them  may  also  be  regarded  as  a  special  though
transitional  method,  guided  by  a  more  or  less  reflective
idea  of  the  result  to  be  obtained,  and  subsuming  under  this
reflective  idea  all  matters  in  the  content  which  are  favour-
able to  its  purpose.  Discrimination  or  Distinction  is  pre-
sent in  all  judgment,  in  all  inference,  in  all  comparison,
and  in  all  recognition.  But  it  would  be  pedantry  to  deny
that  we  constantly  set  to  work  upon  a  presented  content  or
two  contents  as  yet  unexamined,  with  the  clearly  envisaged
purpose  of  making  out  a  contrast  or  difference  which  we
expect  to  find  between  them.  Two  Acts  of  Parliament  on
the  same  subject  ought  to  deal  with  different  aspects  of  it,
and  we  may  fairly  set  ourselves  to  distinguish  the  purpose
and  provisions  of  the  one  from  the  purpose  and  provisions
of  the  other.  What  we  have  to  keep  clearly  in  mind  is
that  the  name  Distinction  is  a  title  drawn  from  a  merely
dominant  and  not  exclusive  characteristic,  that  it  therefore
is  not  a  desirable  basis  of  logical  discussion  ;  and  that  the
process  of  Distinction  itself  is  transitory,  because  it  can
only  continue  as  such  so  long  as  the  result  is  abstract,  and
so  long  as  our  interest  attaches  rather  to  this  abstraction
than  to  concrete  and  material  content.

e.  There  are  thus  two  principles  which  limit  the  inferen-
tial and  non-inferential  character  of  the  practical  processes
which  we  have  been  considering.  As  processes  guided  by
reflective  ideas,  they  must  necessarily  involve  grounded
selection^  resting  either  on  presupposed  subsumption^  or

^  For  the  guiding  idea  operates  through  a  selection  within  the  content.
*  When  I  recall  a  man's  name  on  seeing  him,  this  recognition  is  not  based  on
a  necessary  connection  of  content. But  the  accepted  identification  or  subsump-


Inference
in  above
processes


Chap.  I.]  Sciences  of  Cr OSS-refer etice.  27

on  general  connection  of  content.  And  when  we  have
grounded  selection,  we  have,  as  we  saw,  the  essentials  of
inference — we  have  at  least  a  suggested  distinction  between
direct  and  indirect  reference  to  Reality.  On  the  other  hand,  |
the  abstract  and  therefore  accidental  character  of  the  con-
trolling ideas  renders  it  impossible  that  explicit  inference
should  form  the  essence  of  these  processes.  The  moment
we  really  found  our  argument  on  an  explicit  ground  going
deep  into  the  nature  of  the  subject  we  get  a  conclusion
that  must  go  beyond  mere  identity,  likeness,  or  distinct-
ness, which  with  one  modification  or  another,  but  always  in
more  or  less  abstract  form,  are  the  guiding  ideas  and
interests  of  these  subordinate  methods  of  knowledge.

^.  If  the above processes,  including Comparison, are  Compara-
arbitrary  and  vanishing  phases  of  knowledge,  how  do  we  science,
come  to  speak  of  Comparative  science?

The  Comparative  sciences  are  the  sciences  of  organic  and
intellectual  evolution  through  its  varied  series  and  ramifica-
tions. Their  data  are  thus,  in  the  first  place,  actual,  inde-
pendently of  the  operations  of  the  science,  and  in  the
second  place  are  essentially  types  relative  to  definite  func-
tions, and  so  not  as  a  rule  capable  of  being  illustrated  by
the  results  of  direct^  interference.  Hence  it  follows  that
the  sciences  in  question  (i)  begin  with  cross-references  be-
tween their  actual  data — the  method  of  ordinary  comparison
— and  (ii)  retain  their  data  untransformed  in  these  cross-
references — a  leading  peculiarity  of  ordinary  comparison.

tion  of  the  man  under  his  name  in  which  I  rest  when  the  name  is  reproduced
is  as  good  ad  hoc  as  such  a  connection.  The  reflective  idea  of  identity  guides
me  to  select  characteristic  marks  in  the  presented  content,  which  I  subsume
under  that  idea.  '  That  gait,  voice,  gesture,  is  surely  a  help  to  his  identity.'
Then  if  I  succeed  in  reproducing  anything  not  present,  this  reproduced  content
goes  up  to  fill  up  the  idea  of  identity.

*  That  face  of  his  I  do  remember  well ;

But  when  I  saw  it  last  it  was  besmeared

As  black  as  Vulcan  in  the  smoke  of  war,' —
and  then  a  whole  history  comes  up  and  mere  identity  gives  place  to  description
of  character.

'  Variations  of  animals  under  domestication  are  hardly  for  this  purpose  to  be
set  down  to  direct  interference.


28  The  Nature  of  Inference,  [Book  ii.

On  the  other  hand,  the  abstract  ideas  of  identity,  dif-
ference, etc.  which  guide  ordinary  comparison  could  not
form  the  content  of  any  science ;  and  the  comparative
sciences  go  beyond  '  comparison '  by  seeking  for  definite
concrete  principles  of  evolution  and  affiliation  between  the
types  with  which  they  deal.

All  science,  of  course,  compares  ;  but  chemistry,  for
example,  is  not '  comparative '  in  the  above  sense.  It  does
not  begin  by  cross-references  of  mercury  to  carbon  and  of
carbon  to  gold,  as  philology  does  with  Latin  and  Greek,
and  Greek  and  Sanskrit.  Chemistry  has  to  create  its
regular  series  of  phenomena  by  experiment  before  it  can  lay
down  principles  that  connect  them^  and  each  series  at  first
concerns  the  nature  of  a  single  group  of  substances  only.
The  data,  as  data  of  science,  are  not  actual.  And
chemistry  does  not  in  its  generalisations  retain  its  data
untransformed.  The  underlying  principle,  the  molecular  or
atomic  hypothesis,  is  the  essence,  the  element  of  rationality
and  of  interest.  In  its  results,  as  at  its  starting-point,  it
would  be  sheer  distortion  to  call  chemistry  a  comparative
science  of  elements  and  their  compounds.  It  is  an  analytic
enquiry  into  the  fabric  and  behaviour  of  matter.  The  ele-
ments and  their  compounds  have  no  individual  or  charac-
teristic value  like  that  of  a  language,  or  a  polity,  or  a  group
of  myths.  In  short,  in  the  sciences  which  are  analytic /«r
excellence  the  rationality  and  interest  are  on  the  side  of  the
underlying  principle,  while  in  comparative  science  the  un-
derlying principle  serves  rather  to  connect  and  illustrate
realities  which  have  independent  functional  importance.
Science  is  one,  and  these  distinctions  are  matters  of  degree.
But  even  should  chemistry  ever  succeed  in  representing  its
data  as  evolutionary  products  of  an  intelligible  process  and
so  as  thenceforward  challenging  comparison  ab  initio,  still
this  will  be  an  ultimate  achievement  and  not  a  method
pursued  throughout.  Geometry,  as  we  saw  in  treating  of
the  quasi-generic  judgment,  mimics  evolutionary  pro-
cedure with  some  success. But  its  data  in  their  pure  form


Chap.  I.]  The  Identity  in  Induction.  29

are really  made,  not  given as realities of  independent
significance.

4. I  will  now  attempt  to exhibit  in their  true light  Species  of
some  species  of  Inference,  each  of  which  has  in  turn  been  which  have
erroneously  identified  with  its  principle.  '  beentreat-

i.  Induction  in  Mill's  sense  of  the  term,  i.e.  Induction  by  principle,
incomplete  enumeration,  or  inference  from  particulars  to  From  par-
particulars,  js  obviously  to  be  identified  with  the  species  of  particolars.
inference  in  which  a  confused  or  implicit  universal,  indi-
cated  by  a common name, is the ground in mediate
assertion  respecting  concrete  things  or  events. I  do  not
mean  to  examine  here  the  case  of  Induction  by  complete
enumeration,  which  has  in  fact  been  sufficiently  illustrated
by  the  analysis  of  enumeration  in  Book  I.^ It  is  enough
to  remark  that  if  this  Induction  really  relies  on  the  com-
pleteness of  its  enumeration,  it  ceases  ex  hypothesi  to  be ^ — ^
Inference. If,  again,  it relies  on some discovery made
during  the  enumeration,  then  the  completeyiess  of  the  process
is  without  influence  on  the  result

In  the  Induction  by  incomplete  enumeration,  or  inference
from  particulars  to  particulars,  in  which  Mill  finds  the
fundamental  process  of  inference  as  such,  there  is  apt  to  be
at  first  sight  nothing  at  all  which  binds  these  particulars
together.  The  pervading  identity  or  universal,  which  we
affirm  to  be  the  operative  power  in  inference,  often  appears
in  popular  practice  as  in  Mill's  theory,  to  be  simply  non-  /
existent.  That  is  to  say,  it  either  creeps  in  under  the  ^
shelter  of  a  mere  common  name,  or  may  even  be  abso-
lutely ignored  in  the  expression  of  our  inference,  because
the  common  name  which  would  express  it  is  presupposed,
or  perhaps  is  not  known  or  does  not  occur  to  us.  '  Why
do  you  think  A  likely  to  be  a  good  scholar  ? '  '  Well,  be-
cause B  and  C  and  D  are  good  scholars.'  Here  it  is  plain
that  something  known  to  both  speakers  is  presupposed  and
not  expressed  ;  perhaps  for  example  the  fact  that  A,  B,
C,  and  D  were  educated  at  the  same  school. But  often  the

*  See  Bk.  I.  chap.  iv.


30  The  Nature  of  Inference.  [Bookii.

operative  identity  is  left  unexpressed  not  because  it  is
clearly  understood,  but  because  we  do  not  think  it  definitely
at  all.  'Why  do  you  think  that  picture  is  by  Mantegna?'
'  Because  it  reminds  me  of  some  pictures  of  his  in  the
National  Gallery.'  Here  the  words  '  reminds  me  '  appeal
to  a  merely  psychical  fact,  and  express  in  doing  so  my
inability  to  produce  a  distinct  formulation  of  the  ground  on
which  I  have  gone.

Thus  we  are  presented  with  something  like  an  antinomy.
Identity  is  necessary  to  Inference,  but  some  Inference  takes
place  without  Identity.

The  explanation  of  this  contradiction,  as  distinguished
from  the  logical  justification  of  Inference  from  particulars  to
particulars,  is  afforded  by  what  has  been  said  about  the
ultimate  nature  of  Inference. The  '  particulars  '  are  not  par- /
ticulars, but differences in a universal. The universal,
however,  which  in  elementary  reproduction  operates  un-  l/^
consciously,  may  in  elementary  inference  be  very  far  from
explicit  in  thought ;  or,  and  this  is  by  far  the  commoner
case,  there  may  be  an  obvious  deep-seated  identity  in  the
nature  of  the  concrete  instances,  which  is  not  in  its  entirety
relevant  to  the  attribute  about  which  we  draw  our  con-
clusion. Then,  in  accordance  with  the  principle  of  analogy,
we  follow  the  dominating  identity,  and  come  to  a  result
the  precise  or  relevant  ground  of  which  we  are  unable  to
ascertain. The  conception  of  inference  from  particulars  to y
A  particulars  is  thus  an  illusion  arising  from  the  activity  in  in-  l/
[/ ference  of  presupposed,  superficial,  or  unanalysed  universals.
Snbsump- ii.  Subsumption is the complement  of  inference  from
tion.  particulars  to  particulars. I  speak  here  as  above  of  the

natural  and  normal  process,  and  not  of  the  process  by  com-
pleted enumeration,  which  is  devoid  of  inferential  character.
Subsumption  is  based  on  the  conjunction  of  attributes  in
the  actual  concrete  nature  of  a  subject  or  subjects.  The
identity  of  nature  which  is  implicit  in  inference  '  from  parti-
culars to  particulars '  is  here  made  explicit  in  the  content
of  an  individual  or  individuality. But  this  identity,  though


^


Chap.  I.] Subsumptiou  and  Calculation.  31

seldom  wholly  destitute  of  inferential  significance,  is  in
respect  of  the  conjunction  of  attributes  within  it  a  confused
and  not  a  scientific  concrete.  The  connection  of  the  attri-
butes is  proved  by  it  not  as  a  principle  but  only  as  a  fact.
Of  course,  however,  an  inference  which  is  really  matter  of
principle  may  borrow  the  shape  of  subsumption,  and  in
doing  so  may  or  may  not  continue  to  imply  a  principle  that
really  goes  beyond  subsumption.  The  relation  between
inference  from  particulars  to  particulars  and  its  complement
subsumption  is  thoroughly  illustrated  by  Mill's  discussion
of  the  subsumptive  syllogism.  Putting  aside  the  notion  of
a  petitio  principii,  which  only  applies  when  the  major  pre-
mise in  Barbara  is  regarded  as  a  complete  enumeration,  we
find  that  the  major  premise  consists  in  an  explicit  enuncia-
tion of  the  common  nature  which  really  warrants  the  con-
clusion. Mill  regards  this  enunciatjoji-ealy  in  the  light  of  a
summary  of  particulars,  and  as  we  have  seen,  the  facts  of
rudimentary  reproduction  and  even  of  elementary  inference
bear  him  out  in  the  view  that  it  is  not  indispensable.  The
point  however  is,  that  though  the  enunciation  itself  is  not
indispensable,  yet  the  operation  of  that  identity  which  the  *^
enunciation  formulates  is  indispensable.  It  is  this  which,  ^-^
in  the  form  of  an  ideal  content  considered  as  a  subject
qualified  by  attributes,  is  the  point  of  union  in  subsumptive
inference.  Here  again  the  nature  of  the  active  universal
determines  the  inferential  form.

iii.  Calculation  is  a  divergent  form  of  subsumption,  in  Calcula-
which,  by  passing  through  the  stage  of  complete  enumera-  Equ^on
tion,  the  universal  operative  in  the  inference  has  been
transformed  from  an  ideal  content  existing  in  individuals  to
a  totality  where  parts  are  units.  The  concrete  individuality,
i.  e.  the  common  generic  nature  of  the  individuals,  has  faded
away  by  abstraction  into  a  mere  denomination  of  units,
and  the  attributes  which  were  conjoined  within  the  generic
content  have  also  become  denominations  of  the  numerical
wholes.  These  numerical  wholes  which  have  arisen  out  of
the  '  extension '  of  the  ideal  content  by  means  of  enumera-


/


32  The  Nature  of  Inference.  [bookii.

tion  are  related  to  each  other  as  measurable  parts  and
wholes  in  the  system  of  number.  Thus  the  subsumptive
syllogism,  'All  Englishmen  are  Europeans,  all  Londoners  are
Englishmen,  therefore  all  Londoners  are  Europeans,'  may
be  seriously  taken  in  the  aspect  of  extension,  which  through
the  affinity  between  the  individual  and  the  unit  is  always
closely  allied  to  the  aspect  of  number.  But  to  carry  this
aspect  to  a  genuine  result  we  must  not  simply  say  '  English-
men =  English  Europeans,'  etc.  etc.,  for  the  insertion  of
'  English'  in  the  predicate  makes  the  sign  =,  which  implies
restriction  to  the  aspect  of  number,  superfluous  and  mean-
ingless. And  if  we  do  not  use  =,  but  retain  the  copula
'  are,'  then  the  repetition  in  the  predicate  goes  a  long  way
to  destroy  the  meaning  of  the  judgment  by  reducing  it  to  a
tautology.
Calcala-  a.  If  we  seriously  intend  to  draw  a  conclusion  from  the

lonproper.  j.g}^^jQj^  of  individuals  as  units,  i.  e.  apart  from  their  content
except  in  so  far  as  it  distinguishes  them  into  groups,  we
must  first  constitute  each  of  our  wholes  into  a  numerical
whole  by  complete  enumeration,  and  then  refer  these  wholes
to  one  another  in  respect  of  their  measurable  identity  or
want  of  identity,  i.  e.  equality  or  inequality,  which  latter,
as  we  saw  above,  being  assignable  as  an  exact  differ-
ence, involves  the  former.  Then  we  should  get  something
like  Englishmen  =  -^V  Europeans,  Londoners  =  5  English-
men. That  is  to  say,  Londoners,  numerically  considered,
are  a  part  that  repeats  itself  four  times  in  the  numerical
whole  of  Englishmen,  and  Englishmen  numerically  con-
sidered are  a  part  that  repeats  itself  twenty  times  in  the
numerical  whole  of  Europeans.  Thus  the  same  numerical
whole  presents  itself  as  thoroughly  identical  with  itself  in
its  differences  or  different  relations,  whether  as  the  number
of  Englishmen,  obtained  by  simple  enumeration,  or  as  four
times  the  number  of  Londoners,  a  relation  obtained  by
comparison  of  enumerations  and  analysis  of  a  sum  into  its
parts,  or  as  a  twentieth  part  of  the  number  of  Europeans,  a
relation  obtained  in  the  same  way  as  the  last  mentioned.


Chap.  I.]  Calculus  at  second-haiid.  33

The  quantitative  universal,  which  is  the  same  in  kind
throughout  all  its  different  aspects  —  not  distinguishable
as  a  subject  controlling  attributes  and  as  attributes  that
severally  do  not  exhaust  the  subject — is  thus  an  embodi-
ment of  the  rule, '  Things  which  are  equal  to  the  same  thing
are  equal  to  each  other.'  Calculation  is  mediate  judgment,
in  which,  from  the  nature  of  the  whole  that  operates,  there
is  no  distinction  between  subject  and  predicate.

It  is  obvious  therefore  that  Calculation  cannot  be  applied
to  wholes  that  consist  of  heterogeneous  or  non-quantitative
parts,  or  at  least,  if  so  applied,  can  only  deal  with  them  in
their  aspect,  probably  a  subordinate  one,  of  homogeneity.
If  the  number  of  lines  in  Macbeth  is  -jVth  of  the  number  of
lines  contained  in  all  Shakespeare's  plays  together,  what
then  ?  The  relation  of  Macbeth  to  the  other  works  of
Shakespeare's  mind  must  be  expressed  by  other  universals
than  this.  There  have  always  been  logicians  whose  gaze
has  been  fascinated  by  the  simplicity  and  certainty  of  calcu-
lative  processes  ;  but  it  is  idle  to  place  the  ideal  of  argument
in  a  type  which  depends  on  the  relations  of  identical  units.
The  tendency  to  acquiesce  in  this  ideal  has  no  doubt  been
strengthened  by  the  absolute  reciprocity  of  the  equational
judgment,  which  has  been  explained  above.  This  recipro-
city anticipates,  though  at  a  long  interval,  a  prominent  attri-
bute of  notional  definition  or  of  any  complete  and  concrete
knowledge  ;  and  this  anticipation  of  a  characteristic  which
is  rightly  ascribed  to  the  logical  ideal  has  increased  the
attractiveness  of  computative  or  quasi-computative  pro-
cesses as  types  of  logical  method.

^.  The  importance  of  the  Equational  logic  is  so  great  Equational
that  I  will  return  for  a  moment  to  its  principle,  which  has  ^^'
been  cursorily  alluded  to  on  the  previous  page.  The  point  of
logical  interest  in  regard  to  it  is  that  it  is  not  at  first  hand  a
calculus  at  all,  though  it  is  a  calculus,  and  a  very  effective  one,
at  second  hand.  In  this  respect  it  is  of  the  same  grade  as
the  calculus  of  chances,  with  which  it  is  closely  allied.  By
saying  that  the  logical  calculus  is  not  a  calculus  at  first

VOL.  II.  D


34  The  Nature  of  Inference,  [bookii.

hand,  I  mean  that  the  judgments  with  which  it  deals  are
not  judgments  that  embody  numerical  or  quantitative  rela-
tions as  such,  and  therefore,  as  was  shown  above,  have  no
fair  claim  to  the  sign  =  as  copula.  This  is  absolutely-
clear  of  the  judgments  which  Jevons  calls  Partial  Identities,
in  which  the  employment  of  the  sign  =  is  not  in  accord-
ance with  usage.  It  is  not  intelligible  to  say^  that  Iron  =
a  metal,  or  that  Diatomaceae  =  a  class  of  plants,  or  that
Mammalia  =  a  class  of  vertebrates.  These  judgments  are
obviously  subsumptive  judgments,  intended  to  express  the
conjunction  of  certain  attributes  in  certain  individuals,  or
else  the  identity  of  certain  sets  of  individuals  under  certain
different  aspects  or  descriptions.  But  the  sign  =  does  not
express  this  conjunction  of  attributes  or  identity  of  indi-
viduals, except  as  the  attributes  or  identity  of  a  quanti-
tative whole,  and  as  on  the  other  hand  the  judgment
suggests  no  obvious  quantitative  aspect,  weight  or  number
or  value,  in  which  identity  can  be  asserted,  it  follows  that
the  form  of  the  judgment  simply  contradicts  its  content,
i.  e.  the  judgment  is  not  intelligible.

With  Simple  Identities  the  case  is  somewhat  different.
It  is  not  indeed  intelligible  to  say  that  '  Lord  Salisbury  =
the  Prime  Minister  of  England/  or  that  '  St.  Mary's  Church
at  Oxford  =  the  University  Church^.'  But  it  is  intelligible
— I  now  take  Jevons'  examples  of  simple  identities — that
'The  smell  of  a  rotten  &^^  =  that  of  hydrogen  sulphide ;'  and
that  'The  colour  of  the  Pacific  Ocean  =  the  colour  of  the
Atlantic  Ocean.'  And  the  reason  why  it  is  intelligible  is  this.
It  is  possible  to  interpret  these  judgments  as  establishing
identity  of  degree  ^  in  a  quality  capable  of  variations  ;  i.  e.

*  Principles  of  Science,  p.  40.

^  Unless  we  meant  to  affirm  that  Lord  Salisbury  when  Prime  Minister  retains,
for  example,  his  normal  height  and  weight ;  or  that  St.  Mary's  when  con-
sidered as  the  University  Church  suffers  no  diminution  of  size.  It  might  be
urged  that  this  is  worth  considering,  for  of  Merton  Chapel,  if  I  remember  right,
a  parallel  assertion  would  be  untrue,  the  choir  being  a  college  chapel,  and  the
church  as  a  whole  a  parish  church.

^  Jevons  does  not  in  the  least  distinguish  true  intensive  equation,  as  in  a
colour  match,  from  identification  of  individuals  or  classes  of  things  in  a  sense


Chap.  I.] Equatio7tal  Logic  ts  sudsumptwe.  35

quantitative  identity  or  an  equation  of  colours  or  of  smells.
And  by  a  metaphorical  usage  based  on  this  fact  identical
conceptions,  though  not  strictly  quantitative,  are  sometimes
said  to  be  equivalent,  and  this  equivalence  is  rudely  sym-
bolised by  the  sign  of  equality.  But  the  point  to  note  is  -
that  equivalence  cannot  be  affirmed  on  the  ground  of  indi-
vidual identity.  It  means  equal  amount  and  kind  ^/«/^«-
sioit,  and  does  not  mean  identity  of  component  individuals.^
Thus  it  is  simply  false  that  '  Ejcogens  =  Dicotyledons,'  for
the  meanings  are  not  equivalent,  though  the  individuals
designated  by  the  names  are,  exceptis  excipiendis,  the  same.

In  the  first  instance,  therefore,  the  judgment  as  formu-
lated by  the  Equational  logic  is  not  an  equation,  because
it  does  not  restrict  itself  to  a  quantitative  aspect,  but
predicates  individual  identity,  Although  you  say  that
Diatomaceae  =  a  class  of  plants,  you  may  not  go  on  to
say  that  this  class  of  plants  =  another  class  x  (meaning
that  the  two  are  equal  in  number),  and  that  therefore
the  Diatomaceae  =  the  class  x.  The  original  judgment
might  indeed  happen  to  justify  this  calculation,  but  in
passing  through  it  would  have  entirely  lost  its  peculiar
import.

The  office  of  computation  in  the  Calculus  is  not  to  com-
pare quantitative  attributes  of  objects,  but  to  secure  com-
plete enumeration  of  possible  judgments.  In  this  office  of
secondary  import  it  somewhat  resembles  the  translation  of
a  material  disjunctive  judgment  into  a  numerical  statement
of  chances.  But  the  statement  of  chances  gives  a
numerical  result,  whereas  the  logical  calculus,  after  pro-
tecting itself  by  a  computation  of  combinations,  returns  to
a  result  in  the  shape  of  identification  or  identifications.
Working  as  it  does  solely  by  the  identification  of  indivi-
duals under  different  aspects,  i.e.  as  conjoining  in  them-
selves different  attributes,  the  equational  logic  is  obviously

quite  beyond  quantity.  He  fails  to  distingnish  Quality  from  Kind  or  Individu-
ality. Hence  '  Deal  =  Landing-place  of  Caesar'  is  to  him  a  '  simple  Identity,*
no  less  than  '  Colour  of  Pacific  Ocean  =  Colour  of  Atlantic  Ocean.'

D  2


36


The  Nature  of  Inference,


[Book  II,


Construc-
tion.

Physical.


a  species  of  subsumption,  and  rests  ultimately  on  the  sub-
sumptive  principle  that  attributes  conjoined  in  the  same
individual  are  conjoined  with  each  other.  Thus  in  regard
to  the  nature  of  the  universal  which  is  operative  in  in-
ference through  the  calculus,  there  is  little  to  say  beyond
what  has  already  been  said  in  dealing  with  subsumption.
The  only  peculiarity  of  this  species  of  subsumption  is  that
in  it  the  undefined  capacities  of  subsumption  as  such  for
conveying  connections  of  principles  are  cut  down  to  the
most  abstract  expression  of  individual  unity,  without  being
allowed  to  develope  in  the  direction  which  such  abstract
unity  naturally  suggests,  viz.  that  of  participation  in  a
numerical  whole.

iv.  '  Construction '  is  a  term  frequently  applied  to  a  method
or  element  of  inference,  a.  It  primarily  indicates  an  auxiliary
process  employed  in  geometrical  or  mechanical  reasoning.
This  process  consists  in  making  accessible '  to  perception
a  geometrical  or  mechanical  complex  of  relations  which
embodies  a  problem  or  theorem  that  is  under  consideration.
The  actual  physical  construction — a  diagram  on  paper  or  a
model  or  experimental  machine  ^ — though  not  ideal,  but  an
object  of  sense,  is  nevertheless  abstract  in  its  sensuousness,
being  purposely  cleared  of  the  irrelevancies  which  encumber
our  ordinary  perceptions.  And  further,  the  nature  of  space
is  so  closely  related  to  sense-perception,  that  ideal  spatial
relations  can  be  adequately  symbolised  by  actual  figures
presented  to  perception,  although  the  ideal  relation  under-
lying a  theorem  is  always  both  Tnore  and  less  than  the
visible  or  tangible  lines  and  points.  '  More,'  because  the
visible  lines  can  be  but  a  case  of  the  ideal  relation  ;  '  less,'
because  the  perceptible  lines,  though  reduced  to  black  on
white,  still  include  errors  and  irrelevancies  which  the  mind


'  An  excellent  example  of  cohstniction  in  this  sense,  the  solution  of  a
problem  in  actual  physical  embodiment,  is  the  machine  for  drawing  sound
curves  of  any  shape  by  combination  of  actual  pendular  oscillations.  There  is
such  a  machine,  I  think,  with  actual  pendulums,  which  thus  does  not  merely
mimic  the  curves  (as  the  machine  with  cog-wheels  may  be  said  to  do),  but
actually  constructs  them  in  terms  of  the  theory.


Chap.  I.]  Coiistriiction  aids  Abstraction.  37

in  working  with  them  disregards.  The  case  of  a  working
model  or  machine  made  to  experiment  with  is  at  first  sight
different  from  that  of  a  mere  diagram.  But  the  difference
is  only  in  degree.  Both  the  diagram  and  the  machine  are
really  in  pari  materia  with  that  which  they  represent  to  the
mind  ;  the  diagram  with  ordinary  perception,  the  machine
with  ordinary  physical  causation.  But  it  is  harder  to  say
where  the  line  is  to  be  drawn  between  fact  and  representa-
tive of  fact  in  the  case  of  the  machine,  which  shades  off
gradually  into  the  ordinary  operations  of  nature.  Such  a
thing  however  as  a  working  model  ^  that  illustrates  the
lever  action  of  the  limbs  shows  how  the  machine  as  such
stands  between  natural  process  and  abstract  mechanics.
It  is  the  abstract  physical  expression  for  a  natural  activity,
and  paves  the  way  for  its  abstract  ideal  expression.

Construction  in  this  first  and  simplest  sense  is  not  even  a
case  or  species  of  Inference.  The  production  of  a  visible
material  figure  or  object  does  not  even,  strictly  speaking,^
enter  into  the  essence  of  the  inferential  process.  It  is  how-
ever a  peculiar  auxiliary  method  which  depends  upon  and
throws  into  relief  the  characteristic  nature  of  the  universal
— the  abstraction  of  sense — with  which  Inference  is  con-
cerned in  Geometry  or  abstract  mechanics.  The  lines
drawn  on  paper,  though  peculiarly  adequate  symbols,  are
nevertheless  only  symbols  of  the  lines  with  which  geometry
actually  works.  And  of  course  we  do  not  draw  the  lines
on  paper  at  random,  and  they  would  be  of  no  use  if  we  did.
We  only  draw  them  in  accordance  with  the  requirements
of  the  universal  operative  in  the  inference,  so  far  as  these
requirements  are  already  known  and  can  guide  us  from
moment  to  moment.  The  aim  is  to  aid  intellectual  reflec-
tion in  fixing  and  following  connections  which  suggest
themselves  within  that  universal ;  and  as  we  have  seen,  the
material  lines  or  even  cords,  pulleys,  levers,  etc.  represent

^  A  complete  model  of  the  ear  or  eye  may  seem  not  to  be  abstract,  but  only

magnified ;  it  is  however  abstract  by  its  isolation  from  other  parts,  its  fixity,
and  its  capability  of  being  taken  to  pieces.


tive.


38  The  Nature  of  Inference.  [book  11.

an  intellectual  work  already  partly  accomplished  in  the
exclusion  of  irrelevant  elements.  But  the  material  or
physical  construction  is  not  the  active  element  in  the
accomplishment  of  this  work.  This  construction  in  the
sense  of  actual  drawing  or  model-making  is  a  process
characteristic  of  geometrical  or  mechanical  inference,  but
not  identical  therewith.
Imagina-  |8.  But  this  brings  us  to  a  secondary  sense  of  construc-
tion— secondary  not  in  logical  value,  but,  as  I  think,  in
usage  and  the  growth  of  meaning.  Of  course  actual  lines
on  paper  are  not  essential  to  simple  geometrical  inference
in  which  we  can  'carry  the  figure  in  our  heads,'  and  if  so,
the  visible  external  figure  cannot  in  theory  be  essential  to
any  such  inference.  Professor  Clifford,  it  would  appear,
was  almost  independent  of  external  aids  to  realisation  in
considering  geometrical  or  physical  problems.  But  when
we  work  with  ideas  of  lines,  and  combine  spatial  elements
i7i  our  imagination,  and  not  on  paper,  is  not  this  still  con-
struction, and  yet  is  it  not  now  of  the  essence  of  inference  ?
I  fear  that  at  this  point  a  further  refinement  cannot  be
avoided.  It  seems  to  me  obvious  that  the  imaginative
experiment  is  a  different  thing  from  the  intellectual  per-
ception of  unity.  The  imaginative  experiment  may  be
misdirected  and  void  of  result,  as  a  line  drawn  on  paper  in
addition  to  an  actual  diagram  may  be  irrelevant  and
meaningless.  The  imaginary  line  projected  on  imaginary
paper,  though  necessary  perhaps  to  the  intellectual  appre-
hension, is  it  seems  to  me  purely  on  a  level  with  the
external  line  perceived  through  sense.  But  when  any  line
either  given  on  paper  or  suggested  in  imagination  has  been
intellectually  grasped  as  symbolic  of  a  relation  relevant
to  the  universal  which  we  are  developing,  then  it  is  taken
up  into  the  inference  and  has  passed  from  a  step  in  phy-
sical or  imaginative  construction  to  an  element  in  necessary
apprehension.  In  looking  for  that  point  in  an  ellipse  in
which  the  sun  had  to  be  placed  in  order  that  the  ellipse
might  represent  a  planetary  orbit  according  to  the  theory  of


Chap.  I.]  Intention  in  Inference.  39

gravitation  it  is  easy  either  in  imagination  or  on  paper  to
select  the  middle  point  of  the  longer  axis.  The  question
as  to  the  nature  of  the  process  is  not  whether  I  draw  or
only  imagine,  but  whether  in  doing  either  one  or  the
other  I  am  guided  by  insight  into  the  connection  of
the  data  and  into  the  conditions  of  the  problem.  If  I
seem  to  myself  to  have  such  an  insight,  but  am,  as  in  the
case  above-mentioned,  mistaken  in  the  connection  which
I  fancy  that  I  detect,  then  I  infer,  but  wrongly.  If  how-
ever, or  in  as  far  as,  I  put  the  sun  in  the  wrong  place  or  in
the  right  place  by  an  isolated  act  of  sensuous  fancy,  then  I
may  be  constructing,  but  I  am  not  inferring.

y.  The  organised  or  articulated  intellectual  perception  InteUect-
itself,  in  contrast  with  the  physical  or  imaginative  experi-  \^  ^^
ment — or  rather  taken  as  including  this  experiment,  for  the  Mechanics,
sensuous  ideas  cannot  be  dispensed  with — affords  a  third
meaning  which  may  be  put  upon  construction.  Of  course
this  perception  has  the  effect  of  a  synthesis,  of  a  putting
together  as  well  as  of  a  distinguishing.  And  especially
when  the  relations  thus  put  together  as  having  their  unity
in  one  universal  are  spatial  relations,  readily  symbolised  by
imaginative  pictures,  there  is  a  plausibility  in  translating
the  Greek  term  'synthesis,'  which  in  technical  logic  ex-
presses the  unily  of  differences  inherent  in  all  intelligible
judgment,  into  the  term  of  Latin  origin  'construction,'
which  may  be  held  to  express  this  same  idea  with  the
additional  implication  of  intentional  operation  in  time.,  by
which  elements  of  intellectual  perception  are  put  together
like  the  parts  of  a  machine.

Construction  in  this  third  sense,  a  sense  largely  insisted
on  by  Kant,  is  a  hybrid  idea.  I  cannot  doubt  that  it
designates  a  true  species  of  inference — inference  dealing
with  the  abstractions  of  sense — by  a  title  actually  drawn
from  and  implying  an  accident  of  inference,  viz.  intentional
combination,  successive  in  time,  of  visible  or  imagined
forms.  Now  the  intention,  except  in  as  far  as  it  is  a
general  intention  to  infer  correctly,  falls  outside  inference.


40


The  Nature  of  Inference.


[Book  II.


In  inference  nothing  can  guide  us  but  inferential  necessity ;
and  a  special  intention,  such  as  that  of  drawing  a  line  on  a
slate  or  on  paper,  or  of  constructing  a  model  of  a  joint,
arises  in  some  motive  external  to  the  inference  proper.
And  as  with  the  intention,  so  with  the  fact  of  material
construction.  It  is  a  mere  accident  of  inference.  Therefore
the  intentional  combination  of  perceptible  or  imaginable
elements  falls  outside  inference  proper  except  in  so  far  as
it  is  guided  by  inferential  grounds.  But  it  is  true  that,
especially  wherever  we  have  novelty  or  discovery  in  in-
ference ^,  imaginative  or  perceptive  construction  is  an  indis-
pensable auxiliary  to  thought.
Intellect-  8.  And  finally,  by  insisting  on  the  ideas  of  synthesis,  of
out  limita-  intention,  and  of  the  value  of  imagination  in  inference;  we
tion  to  arrive  at  a  fourth  meaning  of  Construction  2,  in  which  it  is
^^eome  rj,  ^y^g^^  ^^  bean  essential  element  or  even  the  essence  of  all
i>iference,  as  an  intellectual  combinative  process,  7iot  con-
fined to  the  region  of  geometrical  or  mechanical  abstrac-
tions. Thus  understood,  Construction  becomes  a  convenient
expression  for  the  distinct  realisation  in  inference  even  of
universals  which  are  not  numerical  or  geometrical,  if  they
are  more  than  subsumptive.  Transferring  a  spatial  meta-
phor to  such  universals,  it  appears  to  explain  the  definite
necessity  which  unites  their  differences,  by  reference  to  the
precise  and  unambiguous  coherence  which  belongs  to  geo-
metrical relations.  But  we  have  seen  that  even  as  applied
to  geometrical  inferences  construction  is  to  a  great  extent
a  metaphor  drawn  from  an  accident  of  those  inferences,
and  when  we  deal  with  universals  which  are  not  at  all
sensuous  the  simplicity  of  the  expression  becomes  actually
deceptive.  It  is  easy  to  say,  for  example,  that  we  intel-
lectually '  construct '  such  a  whole  as  the  British  Constitu-
tion out  of  isolated  facts,  principles,  and  accepted  ideas,
and  then  proceed  to  perceive  its  nature.  But  it  is  plain
that  anything  valuable  in  the  '  construction '  is  coincident


^  See  p.  8,  supra.

^  Bradley's  Principles  of  Logic,  p.  235,  and  passim.


Chap.  I.]  Construction  not  essential.  41

with  and  guided  by  the  growang  insight  into  the  nature  of
the  content  before  us  which  constitutes  the  inference  itself.
We  must  distinguish  from  this  usage  that  by  which  we
speak  of  constructing  a  Utopia.  Here  of  course  we  are
ostensibly  not  inferring,  though  we  have  really  to  use
inference.  We  are  playing,  employing  the  imagination
according  to  arbitrary  interests  and  motives,  and  not  under
intellectual  guidance,  until  we  begin  to  draw  consequences
from  what  we  have  said.  And  the  root  of  the  whole  usage
which  we  have  examined  is  that  in  all  inference,  so  far  as  it
has  novelty  or  is  a  process  modifying  itself  in  time,  there  is
an  arbitrary  and  external  element  which  supplies  guidance
to  the  attention  until  the  true  principle  and  the  relevant
details  have  been  disentangled,  and  operates  throughout  the
inference  by  the  side  of  the  true  principle  which  gradually
displaces  and  finally  ousts  it.  This  arbitrary  element  may
indeed  be  regarded  as  the  universal  itself  in  an  imperfect
form,  but  for  this  very  reason  it  contains  much  in  the  way
of  suggestion  or  experiment^ — much  tentative  synthesis —
that  has  to  be  dropped  and  erased  before  the  inference  can
assume  its  true  and  final  form.  And  the  name  construction
depends  largely  on  the  elements  which,  having  been  inten-
tionally and  therefore  tentatively  inserted,  are  ultimately
dropped.

The  outcome  of  our  account  of  Construction  then  is  this.
Construction  is  a  term  drawn  from  moral,  physical,  and
psychological  adjuncts  of  inference.  In  the  case  of  geo-
metrical and  mechanical  inference  these  adjuncts  are  so  far
akin  to  the  matter  of  the  univ'ersal,  that  the  term  '  Con-
struction '  drawn  from  them  may  be  held  a  fair  designation
of  such  inferential  processes,  e.g.  of  Kant's  account  of
matter  on  the  basis  of  attraction  and  repulsion.  In  the
case  of  other  and  less  sensuous  universals  this  is  not  so,  and
Construction  as  applied  to  them  is  a  mere  metaphor  and  not
even  a  case  of  Inference. Thus  Construction  should  never

^  Cp.  the  case  above  cited  in  which  the  focus  of  the  ellipse  was  the  point
required,  but  the  middle  of  the  longer  axis  was  the  first  point  selected.


42


The  Nature  of  Inference.


be  assigned  as  the  essence  or  as  an  essential  element  of
Inferential  activity.

The  above  account  of  four  main  cases  ^  of  Inference  may
serve  as  an  anticipatory  sketch  of  the  course  which  our
discussion  will  pursue  in  the  following  chapters.  (See
scheme  annexed.)


SCHEME ILLUSTRATING  AFFILIATION OF ARGUMENTS
AS DESCRIBED IN BOOK II.


Subsumptive  Series.

Incomplete  Enumerative

Induction

(Syllog.  Fig.  3).


Constructive  or  Relational
Series.

Apprehension  of  connections

in  Space  and  Time :

'  Construction.'


Complete  Enumeration
Arithmetical  Science.


Analogy  (Syllog.  Fig.  2),
(Natural  Classification).

I Scientific  Induction  '^.


Geometrical  and  Mechanical
*■  Construction,'


Explanatory  Theory.


Notional  Subsumption

(Syllog.  Fig.  I).

I
Disjunction.

Judgment  of  Value.


^  Or  five,  counting  among  them  the  process  which  Construction  in  its  fourth
sense  is  abusively  applied  to  designate.

^  Scientific  Induction  is  treated  as  a  transition  by  which  Explanatory  Theory
may  be  reached  from  the  side  of  Analogy.  The  scheme  is  intended  to  represent
each  type  of  inference  as  a  combination  of  that  vertically  above  it  with  that
with  which  it  is  connected  by  a  horizontal  line.  This  does  not  apply  to  the
relation  between  Explanatory  Theory  and  Complete  Enumeration,  which  stand
where  they  do  merely  as  being  intermediate  forms.


CHAPTER II.

Enumerative  Induction  and  Mathematical
Reasoning.

In  tracing  the  evolution  and  affiliation  of  the  forms  of
explicit  inference,  we  begin  wth  a  more  developed  phase
of  consciousness  than  that  to  which  we  went  back  in
describing  the  rudiments  of  judgment.  The  judgment-
form  in  which  the  universal  first  reveals  itself  as  the  simple
unity  of  differences  must  have  given  place  to  the  articulate
perception  of  things,  events,  and  relations,  before  we  can
grasp  it  as  a  system  whose  parts  are  in  necessary  connec-
tion. In  other  words,  we  have  no  longer  to  deal  with  the
simplest  judgments  of  perception— the  impersonal  and  the
elementary  comparative  judgment — but  may  go  at  once  to
the  world  of  things  with  their  characteristic  identity,  and  to
the  abstract  relations  of  number,  space  and  time  in  which
that  world  is  constructed  by  the  mind.

I.  On  the  basis  of  a  world  of  things  and  occurrences,  Ennmera-
which  involves  a  language,  i.  e.  a  more  or  less  systematised  ^^ctiOTi
nomenclature^,  the  articulate  universal  presents  itself  in  the
form  of  individual  objects  having  characteristic  identity,  in
which  identity  general  attributes  coexist.  Language  forces
such  coexistence  on  our  attention  through  its  natural  classi-
fications, and  the  first  suggestions  of  inductive  enumeration
issue  from  language — which  has  in  fact  gained  its  signi-
ficance by  the  same  process  conducted  naturally  and  with-
out explicit  intention.  Such  suggestions  are  operative,  as
we  saw,  in  the  so-called  inference  from  Particulars  to  Par-
ticulars, of  which  Incomplete  Enumerative  Induction  is  a
form  that  has  been  made  superficially  rational.

*  Cp.  Introduction,  sect.  4.


44  Enumeration  and  Mathematics. [bookii.

Syllogism a.  Throwing  this  inference  into  the  shape  naturally  pre-
in  Fig.  3. scribed  by  the  tendency  of  the  concrete  individual  thing  to
become  the  subject  in  judgment  ^,  and  making  use,  as  Aris-
totle also  did,  of  the  conjunctive  judgment  as  representing
a  single  step  in  inference,  we  obtain  an  inference  analogous
to  the  Aristotelian  syllogism  in  the  third  figure  : —
a,  b,  c,  d,  are  rational ;
a,  b,  c,  d,  are  men  ;
.*.  Are  all  men  rational  ?  or,  Men  may  be  rational.
The  ground  of  argument  being  the  characteristic  unity  of
the  unanalysed  individual  object  or  event,  naturally  takes
the place of  the subject in  judgment — of  the  concrete
individual  which  is  taken  as  real — and  therefore  gives  rise
to  that  syllogistic  form  in  which  the  middle  term  is  the
subject  of  both  premises.

Experience  bears  out  the  view  that  some  such  type  as
this  represents  the  simplest  operation  of  mediate  inference.
All  that  is  said  for  example  by  Stuart  Mill  about  inference
from  Particulars  to  Particulars  must  really  be  taken  as
j  applying  to  inference  of  this  type  ;  for  it  is  impossible  to
state  an  inference  in  a  shape  that  will  even  appear  to  be
convincing,  unless  we  supply  by  a  second  premise  the
element  of  unity  between  the  particulars,  always  operative
in  the  mind,  which  is  necessary  to  bind  the  particular
differences  into  the  differences  of  a  universal.  The  use  of
symbolic  letters  brings  to  light  this  formal  necessity,  which
significant  names  satisfy  without  acknowledging.  From
'  a,  b,  c,  d  are  good  books '  to  '  ^  is  a  good  book  '  no  sort  or
kind  of  inference  holds  or  is  in  any  way  suggested.  The
gulf  between  mere  d  and  mere  e  is  beyond  the  leaping
powers  of  the  boldest  conjecture.  These  symbols  are  true
particulars,  and  we  can  see  from  them  how  far  true  par-
ticulars will  carry  us  in  inference.  But  from  '  Ivanhoe,
Waverley,  and  Rob  Roy  are  good  books '  to  '  Guy  Man-
nering  is  a  good  book '  there  is  a  self-evident  passage  by
means  of  the  identity  of  authorship,  which  is  too  obvious

*  See  on  categorical  and  hypothetical  elements  in  judging,  Bk.  I.  chap.  i.


Chap.  II.]  Modal  Conclusion.  45

to  be  expressed,  but  which  would  form  a  premise  in  any
expHcit  statement  of  the  inference.  That  this  same  ground
would  justify  the  conclusion  '  The  Surgeon's  Daughter  is
a  good  book'  is  an  illustration  of  Bacon's  remark  that
enumerative  Induction  '  precarie  concludit,  et  periculo  ex-
ponitur  ab  instantia  contradictoria.'

Speaking  generally,  the  coincidence  of  several  attributes  >/
in  one  or  more  objects,  or  of  several  relations  in  one  or
more  events,  is  the  usual  starting-point  of  conscious  con-
jecture and  investigation.  And  this  starting-point  is  all
that  the  present  form  of  inference  embodies.  Conjecture
or  pure  'discovery'  differs  only  in  degree  from  proof.
Thus  the  conclusion  may  be  fairly  represented  by  a  question
or  a  modal  affirmation :  A,  B,  and  C  are  great  lawyers  and
had  a  classical  education  .*.  Has  a  classical  education  some-
thing to  do  with  making  great  lawyers^?  or  'A  classical
education  may  have  something  to  do  with  making  great
lawyers.'  In  the  case  of  events,  which  are  designated  more
analytically,  i.  e.  more  with  a  view  to  an  intended  inference,
than  individuals  can  be,  a  single  judgment  is  the  natural
form  for  elementary  arguments  of  this  kind.  '  He  killed
his  bird  every  shot,'  i.e.  '  Such  and  such  times  he  fired  ;  all
those  times  he  killed  .-.When  he  fires,  he  is  likely  to  kill.'
But  in  careful  reasoning  or  experiment  '  such  and  such '
becomes  an  elaborate  identification  by  marks.

y3.  In  this  argument  by  incomplete  Enumeration  we  find  Divergent
a  union  of  divergent  tendencies.  Plainly,  it  has  no  major  '^^°^^°'^^^^-
premise  ;  but  no  less  plainly,  the  principle  on  which  it
primarily  relies  is  the  principle  of  subsumption.  Its  con-
clusion is  therefore  particular  or  modal,  and  affirms  that  in
instances  or  under  conditions  which  we  are  not  in  a  position
to  assign  explicitly,  the  attributes  x  and  y  are  or  would  be
united.  For  the  premises  neither  express  precise  con-
ditions nor  furnish  the  basis  of  a  complete  inference  by
subsumption. In  order  to  assigning  precise  conditions,  the

*  The  disjunctive  import  of  this  question,  as  is  natural  with  a  rudimentary
type  of  inference,  is  simply  Yes  or  No.


46  Enumeration  and  Mathematics. [bookii.

form  of  subsumptlon,  i.  e.  of  identification  in  unanalysed
subjects,  must  be  surrendered.  In  order  to  furnish  a  com-
plete subsumptive  inference,  the  universal  must  appear  in
the  form  of  AUness,  i.e.  in  the  form  of  a  totality  of  examples
enumerated  up  to  a  limit  which  its  nature  prescribes.  Such
an  enumeration,  or  an  allegation  equivalent  to  such  an
enumeration — the  allegation  might  be  of  mediate  origin —
would  be  the  major  premise  in  a  pure  subsumptive  syllo-
gism. In  the  present  argument  as  it  stands  we  simply
formulate  the  first  impression  made  by  this  discovery  of  an
articulate-^  identity  in  difference,  and  the  first  suggestion
towards  completing  the  articulation  of  the  universal  thus
indicated.  This  suggestion  is  most  naturally  to  be  .taken,
in  accordance  with  the  type  of  the  inference,  as  quite
abstract  and  superficial,  consisting  as  it  does  in  a  single
pervading  attribute,  chosen,  so  far  as  we  are  told,  at
random.
Individual  y.  It  is  obvious  that  the  study  of  inference  must  re-
m  inSc-  traverse,  in  part  at  least,  the  path  taken  by  the  study  of
tioD.  judgment. In  the  present  form  of  inference  the  mind  is  at

the  same  critical  point  at  which  it  stands  when  in  the
Proportional  Judgment  it  has  become  familiar  with  the
identity  of  things  beneath  their  attributes.  Only  in  the
study  of  Inference  we  see  the  actual  process  by  which
the  judgment-forms  pass  into  one  another — in  this  case,
in  the  sphere  of  enumeration,  by  the  natural  pressure  of
their  own  recurrence.  Incomplete  Enumerative  Induction
is  an  obvious  result  of  recurrent  individual  Judgments,
which  accentuate  the  common  distinguishable  aspects
prevalent  in  things  and  in  their  individualities — i.e.  in  their
characteristic  natures.

In  Lotze's  representation  of  an  argument  akin  to  this,
he  has  set  out  the  recurrent  individual  judgments  as  so
many  premises  of  the  syllogism  ^ ;  and,  rightly  recognising

^  See  distinction  between  explicit  and  implicit  inference,  in  last  chapter.
*  Lotze,  Logik,  Eng.  Tr.  p.  loo :  '  Now  it  often  happens  that  the  same  predi-
cate occurs  or  does  not  occur  not  only  in  two  but  very  many  different  subjects,


Chap,  ii.] Which  Figure  suits  Induction  f  47

that  the  number  of  such  premises  is  not  limited,  he  has
thereby  cut  the  knot  of  the  question  whether  inference
essentially  proceeds  through  three  terms.  It  is  not  worth
while  to  dispute  about  a  matter  of  symbolic  representation.
So  I  have  only  to  explain  the  relation  of  his  scheme  of  the
argument  to  that  here  given,  by  pointing  out  that  his  entire
set  of  premises  corresponds  to  either  one  of  the  t^vo  which
I  lay  down,  while  the  relation  of  the  individuals  P,  S,  T,  etc.
to  the  common  attribute  2  forms  the  other  of  the  two  pre-
mises essential  to  the  inference.  The  use  of  a  conjunctive
judgment  in  inference  of  this  type  is  in  accordance  with
the  principles  laid  down  in  Book  P  as  regards  the  unity  of
the  judgment,  and  with  Aristotle's  practice  in  his  Inductive
Syllogism,  though  not  in  the  ordinary  Syllogism  in  figure  3
which  I  have  treated  as  the  inductive  syllogism.  By  using
the  individuals,  not  in  a  conjunctive  judgment,  but  as  subjects
to  several  premises,  Lotze  has  forced  his  inference  into  the
second  instead  of  the  third  syllogistic  figure,  the  only
common  term  being  the  common  predicate,  which  therefore
must  formally  serve  as  middle  term  though  it  does  not
operate  as  such.  His  transition  from  P,  S,  T  to  2  is
effected  without  an  explicit  judgment,  and  the  whole  pro-
cess is  more  akin  to  the  colligation  of  a  conjunctive  judg-
ment into  a  singular  or  generic  judgment  as  described  in
Book  I  -,  than  to  a  process  of  Mediate  Inference.  It  is
obviously  more  convenient  to  use  the  third  syllogistic
figure,  in  which  a  common  subject  is  the  middle  term,  for
Induction,  and  to  reserve  the  second,  in  which  a  common
predicate  is  middle  term,  for  Analogy.  This  was  the
scheme  followed  by  Hegel,  and  I  venture  to  think  that  the
deviation  from  this  scheme  ^,  like  other  modifications  which


P,  S,  T,  V,  W,  and  the  question  is  what  consequence  can  be  drawn  from  the
premisses  PM,  SM,  TM,  VM,  .  .  .  .  which  belong  in  form  to  the  second  fignre
of  Aristotle Oar  conclusion  runs  as  follows,  "  All  2  are  M." '

*  See  Bk.  I.  chap.  i.  sect  i.  iiL

M.C

'  See  Heel's  Wissenschaft  der  Logik,  iL  pp.  131,  148-9. Hegd,  following


48


Enumeration  and  Mathematics. [bookii.


Mathema-
tical Rea-
soning.


Lotze  has  introduced  into  a  logic  largely  resting  on  Hegel's
ideas,  is  far  from  being  an  improvement.

The  critical  point  which  is  involved  in  the  inference
before  us  is  the  point  of  divergence  between  the  concrete
and  the  abstract  forms  of  the  universal.  This  is  funda-
mentally one  with  the  divergence  between  subsumptive
inference  and  the  inference  which  depends  on  the  systematic
necessity  of  abstract  relations.  That  these  two  types  of
inference  unite  again  in  the  systematic  and  definite  con-
cretes of  the  higher  sciences  and  of  philosophy  is  obvious
from  the  interconnection  of  the  hypothetical  and  the
disjunctive  judgment.  But  for  the  greater  part  of  their
evolution  they  are  distinct,  though  not  fundamentally
discrepant.

The  abstract  universal  operates  in  all  systems  or  totali-
ties that  can  be  regarded  as  aggregates  of  homogeneous
parts,  although  this  very  word  homogeneous  indicates  that
the  whole  has  a  nature  which  is  also  the  nature  of  the  parts.
All  strictly  mechanical  science — all  science,  that  is,  which
regards  its  objects  in  the  light  of  number,  space,  matter  and
motion,  is  due  to  the  operation  of  the  abstract  universal.
And  in  a  certain  sense,  as  we  shall  see,  there  is  nothing
which  does  not  in  some  degree  correspond  to  these  abstract
relations ;  nothing,  at  all  events,  which  in  its  analysis  pre-
sents features  discrepant  with  their  abstract  necessity.

The  concrete  universal  follows  the  track  of  the  individual
totality,  and  displays  itself,  first,  imperfectly,  in  analogical
inference,  and  then  in  the  teleological  conceptions  which
govern  the  higher  evolutionary  sciences  ;  especially  in  those
sciences  which  have  for  their  object-matter  the  achievements
and  the  intellect  of  man.

2.  To  assign  the  directions  of  this  divergence  in  terms  of
traditional  logic  is  not  so  easy  as  to  describe  their  real
nature.  Logic  has  been  compelled  to  adapt  its  types  of
inference  to  the  false  directions  in  which  it  has  looked  for


the  order  which  he  finds  convenient,  calls  Aristotle's  figure  3  'figure  2,'  and
Aristotle's  figure  2  '  figure  3.' Is  it  possible  that  Lotze  was  misled  by  this  ?


Nnrmrical  Totality.  49


/  Thus  in  diverging  towards  the  abstract  universal
I  leaving  the  track  of  true  subsumption,  but  yet  we
lollowing  the  path  on  which  Formal  and  Quantifying
gic  have  taught  us  to  seek  the  perfectly  regular  sub- .
^mptive  syllogism.' Whereas  by  following  the  fortunes  of
true  subsumption  we  lose  all  hope  of  attaining  the  genuine
syllogism  of  AUness,  and  yet  we  go  forward  through  syllo-
gistic types — the  second  and  third  figfures — which  we  have,
been  taught  to  regard  as  only  demonstrable  by  reference  to
that  syllogism.

i.  The  lines  of  advance  really  suggested  by  Incomplete  Number
Enumerative  Induction  lead  to  Analogy  on  the  one  hand  logy— Di-
and to complete Enumeration on the other. In the '^'ergence.
remainder  of  the  present  chapter  I  shall  follow  out  the
latter  with  its  affiliated  types  of  inference  and  return  in  the
following  chapter  with  the  discussion  of  Analogy  to  the
central  line  of  concrete  inference  which  will  take  us  to  the
end  of  our  subject.

a.  It  is  unnecessary  to  repeat  the  analysis  of  the  Complete
Enumerative  process  which  was  given  in  Book  I.  It  is^ionasfj^
sufficient  if  we  bear  in  mind  that  complete  Enumeration  is  ideal,
the  establishment  of  the  universal  as  a  numerical  totality
or  aggregate  of  homogeneous  parts,  and  therefore  neces-
sarily depresses  the  pervading  nature  or  identity  of  the
universal  into  a  denoviinatiou,  and  its  differences  into  units.
By  an  extreme  of  abstraction  all  connection  between  the
parts,  beyond  the  fact  that  they  are  units  in  an  aggregate,
is  done  away  with,  so  far  as  the  numerical  point  of  view
prevails  and  the  universal  takes  on  the  uniform  attributes
and  modes  of  synthesis  which  belong  to  a  numerical  totality
as  such.  It  has  been  said  by  Mr.  Ruskin  *  that  two  and
two  do  not  in  fact  necessarily  make  four,  but  more  often
make  five.  So  of  course  they  often  may  and  do,  but  not  by
the  process  of  enumeration,  nor  by  calculation,  which  is  a
mere  abridgment  of  enumeration. Nearly  all  fallacies  and

'  I  quote  from  memon-,  merely  for  the  sake  of  illostration. I  have  no  serious
quarrel  with  the  statement

VOL.  11.  E


50  Enumeration  and  Mathematics. [bookii.

paradoxes  depend  upon  a  confusion  of  categories.  It  is
well  to  be  reminded  by  a  man  of  genius  that  there  are  other
spheres  of  knowledge  besides  calculation ;  but  it  would  be
wrong  to  take  the  paradox  for  a  truth,  and  to  impute  to
the  system  of  number  what  is  a  simple  omission  of  our
own.  Calculation  is  quite  equal  to  the  task  of  equating
2+2  with  5,  if  it  is  allowed  to  indicate  the  generation  of  an
additional  unit  somewhere  among  the  2  and  2.

Complete  Enumeration  has  been  operative  as  a  false
ideal  both  in  the  doctrine  of  Induction  and  in  the  doctrine  of
the  syllogism.  Incomplete  Enumeration  naturally  suggests
an  extension  of  itself  up  to  Complete  Enumeration.  It  is
readily  seen  indeed  that  in  dealing  inductively  with  the
ordinary  objects  of  perception  completeness  of  the  process
can  never  be  attained,  because  the  universal  nature  of  an
object  is  not  comparable  with  nor  reducible  to  an  enumera-
tion of  individuals.  Therefore  such  enumeration  must  fall
into  the  Infinite  series.  And  it  is  no  less  plain  that  if  we
interpret  the  universality  of  the  syllogistic  major  premise
in  Barbara  as  depending  on  a  complete  enumeration,  the
inference  is  at  once  reduced  to  a  petitio  principii  by  the
direct  affirmation  of  the  conclusion  in  the  major  premise.
Yet  though  both  these  shortcomings  are  obvious,  still  the
mere  aggregation  of  instances  always  tends  to  obtrude
itself  as  a  feature  of  certainty  in  Induction  ;  and  syllogistic
reasoning  always  tends  to  assume  the  shape  in  which  mere
extension,  i.  e.  mere  identity  of  individual  units,  is  the  bond
of  union  between  the  predicated  attributes.  Instances  of
J  this  tendency  are  to  be  found  in  the  diagrammatic  rcpre-
j  sentations  of  inferences  whether  by  circles  included  within
I  larger  circles,  or  by  straight  lines  of  varying  thickness  ^  in
'  the  quantification  of  the  predicate,  in  De  Morgan's  nume-
rically definite  syllogism,  and  in  the  logical  calculus.  All
of  these  treatments  are  founded  on  a  view  of  reasoning
which  diverges  from  concrete  determination  by  attributes,
,  but stops  short — except  in  the  case  of  the numerically

^  See  Sir  William  Hamilton's  Lectures  on  Logic,  vol.  ii.  Appendix.


Chap.  II.]  Computation.  5 1

definite  syllogism,  which  is  simply  calculation — of  arith-  (
metical  inference  by  true  numerical  relations.  All  of  these
processes  work  well  up  to  a  certain  point,  being,  technically,
examples  of  quasi-subsumption — subsumption  introduced
into  a  sphere  in  which  its  concreteness  is  lost.  All  of  them,
finally,  are  cases  of  the  tendency,  so  fatal  in  popular  science,
to  accentuate  at  the  expense  of  everything  else  any  aspect
of  any  content  which  affords  the  slightest  prospect  of
reduction  to  a  mechanical,  i.  e.  to  a  calculative  procedure.
For  calculation  goes  by  fixed  rules  and  according  to  regular
series,  and  is  in  that  sense^  an  easy  process,  whereas  concrete
enquiry  into  actual  and  material  conditions  or  connections
is  inventive  and  creative — the  very  travail  of  the  mind.

The  real  ground  on  which  number  of  instances  may  be
a  source  of  certainty  in  Induction  will  appear  when  we
treat  of  that  process  in  its  scientific  aspect.  No  doubt  the
influence  of  Complete  Enumeration  as  an  ideal  has  operated
in  part  through  association  w  ith  the  Calculus  of  Probabilities.
This  calculus  however  is  not  the  true  warrant  of  Induction,
and  indeed  in  the  case  of  an  infinite  series,  which  for  the
above-mentioned  reason  must  always  be  the  ultimate  nature
of  mere  enumeration  of  instances,  the  calculus  can  have  no
application.

/3.  But  Complete  Enumeration  in  its  strict  and  proper  Ennmera-
sense  leads  up  to  Arithmetical Computation,  and  in  due  *^°"  ^^ .

^  .  r-  s  Anthmeti-

course  to  the  generalised  or  symbolic  forms  of  computation  cal  compu-
which  are  founded  upon  arithmetic. The  judgment  which  *^*'°°-
corresponds  to  this  form  of  argument  is,  as  we  saw  in
Book  I  ^,  the  equation;  a  type  of  judgment  in  which  the
predominance of the whole as determining the parts

*  I  am  not  so  silly  as  to  maintain  that  abstrase  calculation  is  easy  in  the
ordinary  sense  of  the  word.  Bat  I  take  it  that  its  difficulties,  though  insuper'
9b\e  to  untrained  minds,  are  not  of  the  same  order  as  those  presented  by
original  investigation  of  actual  conditions,  in  which  the  intellect  is  thrown
entirely  on  its  own  guidance,  and  can  gain  but  little  aid  firom  general  rules.
And  it  is  not  merely  the  logician  but  also  the  physicist  who  may  complain  of
calculation  from  assumptions  being  substituted  for  investigation  into  them.

'  Bk.  I.  chap.  iv.

E  2


^Z  Enumeration  and  Mathematics. [bookii.

relatively  to  itself  is  no  longer  visible,  conformably  to  the
fact  that  we  have  left  the  field  of  subsumption,  and  are
now  dealing  with  combinations  of  connections  devoid  of
subsumptive  character.  The  nature  of  inference,  which
is  common  to  such  combinations  and  to  subsumptive
reasoning,  has  been  explained  in  general  terms  in  dis-
cussing the  Essence  of  Inference,  and  will  be  more  par-
ticularly examined  when  we  have  looked  carefully  at  the
type  of  Inference  now  before  us.

In  addition  to  what  was  said  in  the  last  chapter  on  the
nature  of  Calculation,  some  more  special  remarks  may  be
added  here.  Though  Calculation  may  take  the  most
varied  forms,  yet  it  must  always  depend  in  the  last  resort
on  the  conception  of  a  whole  which  is  the  sum  of  its
parts.  Enumeration  is  the  synthesis  of  this  sum  out  of,  or
its  analysis  into,  the  homogeneous  parts  or  units  themselves,
through  the  correlative  and  all  but  identical  processes  of
addition  and  subtraction.  It  is  represented  by  such  an
equation  as  3  =  1  +  14-1.  The  changes  of  sides  and  signs
in  an  equation  exhibit  the  true  relation  of  addition  and
subtraction.  Multiplication  and  division  are  similarly
correlative,  and  represent  synthesis  or  analysis  not  by  help
of  the  ordinary  unit,  but  by  help  of  an  artificial  unit.
The  equation  100=10x10  represents  multiplication  and
division  alike,  being  simply  an  analysis  or  synthesis  by
means  of  a  compound  unit.  Thus  multiplication  and
division  are  more  powerful  than  addition  and  subtraction,
but  less  widely  applicable,  because  the  compound  unit
must  be  uniform.  If  you  have  ninety  fives,  the  numerical
system  gives  you  the  total  in  a  moment  as  450 ;  but  if  you
have  such  a  succession  of  figures  as  4,  5j  3?  7,  9,  you  have  no
identical  compound  unit,  and  must  therefore  proceed  by  the
simple  one,  i.e.  by  addition.

In  multiplying  and  dividing  powers  by  help  of  their  indices,
the  procedure  (which  governs  I  presume  the  use  of  loga-
rithms) reverts  to  the  form  of  addition  and  subtraction,  that
is,  to  the  apparent  enumeration  of  simple  units  instead  of


Chap.u.] Developments  of  Calculation.  53

compound  units.  Thus  the  relation  of  8  to  32  comes  to
be  represented  not  by  the  ratio  i  :  4  (eight  taken  once
compared  with  eight  taken  four  times),  but  by  the  difference
between  2"  and  2^.  Multiplication  proper  was  the  con-
struction of  a  quantity  out  of  or.  its  analysis  into  an
identical  compound  unit  repeated  so  many  times.  Involu-
tion is  the  construction  of  a  quantity  out  of  or  its  analysis
into  a  simple  enumeration  of  the  employments  of  a  certain
compKJund  unit  in  multiplication  by  itself;  that  is  to  say
in  repetition  of  itself,  or  of  a  quantity  generated  by
repetition  of  itself  (the  given  compound  unit),  its  own
number  of  times.  It  is  plain  that  as  each  step  enumerated
is  a  multiplication,  or  an  employment  of  a  factor  in  multi-
plication ^,  in  order  to  multiply  or  unmultiply  (divide)  one
power  by  another  we  do  not  multiply  or  divide  index  by
index,  but  simply  count  on  or  count  off  the  number  of  acts
of  multiplication  designated  by  one  of  the  indices.  Thus  in
dividing  2*  by  2*  we  do  not  take  2^  as  the  result,  but  2' —
the  difference  of  the  two  indices.  In  dropping  from  2*  to
Q?  we  have  counted  off  three  multiplications  by  2,  and  have
thus  reduced  64  successively  to  32,  16,  and  8.  So  far  we
are  dealing  with  simple  enumeration  applied  to  a  complex
process.

It  is  possible  of  course  to  trace  the  same  develof)-
ment  further,  and  did  the  author's  knowledge  admit  of
his  attempting  the  task,  an  interesting  scheme  of  con-
tinuity in  calculative  processes  might  be  obtained.  When
we  come  to  powers  of  powers  and  roots  of  powers  we
are  dealing  with  complex  enumeration  applied  to  steps
consisting  of  complex  processes.  If  the  index  of  2*  is
divided  by  the  index  of  2^  the  result  2-  is  obviously
the  cube  root  of  2^ ;  and  if  the  index  of  2^  is  multiplied

*  To  say  '  each  step  is  a  multiplication '  would  prima  facie  mean  that
4  should  =  2'  instead  of  2*.  But  yet  it  is  not  wholly  false,  for  of  course  the
difference  between,  say,  2'  and  2'  consists  oi  two  acts  of  mxddplication  by  two,
not  of  only  one.  In  short,  multiplication  involves  two  iactois,  and  would  not
be  represented  by  enumerating  only  one  to  start  with.  In  every  further  step  the
previous  result  is  one  factor  in  the  process.


'54  Enumeration  and  Mathematics. [bookii.

by  the  index  of  2^,  the  product  2^^  is  obviously  the  cube  of
2^.  Here  we  are  constructing  by  multiplication  (complex
enumeration)  a  quantity  (18),  the  compound  units  6  and  3
employed  in  the  multiplication  being  themselves  repre-
sentative of  simple  enumerations  of  repeated  processes  of
multiplication  (complex  enumeration).

Simple  enumeration  may  of  course  itself  be  represented
as  the  chronicle  of  a  process,  i.  e.  as  consisting  of  units  equal
in  number  to  the  number  of  times  the  process  has  been
repeated. Only in it, in arithmetical progression, the
process,  though  applied  to  its  own  results,  does  not  obtain
the  power  of  creating  a  progressive  difference.
Calculation y.  All  arithmetical  calculation,  and  therefore  in  the  last
^thareu- ^^sort  all  Calculation  whatever,  may  thus  be  reduced, I
ment.  imagine,  to  enumeration,  or,  in  some  form,  to  enumeration

I of  enumerations. And  thus  the  entire  method  rests  on  the
/  conception  of  the  whole  which  is  the  sum  of  its  parts — the
\  universal whose differences, though distinguishable, are
'taken  as  equal  and  homogeneous. From  the  nature  of
this  universal,  in  which  the  whole  does  not  present  itself  as
a  concrete  system,  it  is  almost  futile  to  enquire  into  the
types  and  shapes  which  it  assumes  in  inference. Is  an
Equation  correlative  to  Judgment  or  to  explicit  inference  ?
Is  a  combination  of  Equations  necessary  to  explicit  cal-
culation, as  a  combination  of  Judgments  is  necessary  to
explicit  Inference?

The  Equation,  it  must  be  remembered,  is  a  comparison  of
numerable  relations  in  the  abstract,  and  therefore  corre-
sponds not  to  any  form  of  Singular  or  Perceptive  Judg-
ment, which  are  correlative  to  the  simple  Judgments  of
Enumeration,  but  only  to  a  universal  Judgment,  and  more
especially  to  the  pure  Hypothetical.  This  is  enough  to
show  that  the  Equation  is  essentially  of  a  synthetic  or  infe-
rential character.  And  there  is  also  a  special  reason  why
this  character  is  more  emphatically  marked  in  an  Equation
than  in  a  generic  or  hypothetical  judgment.  Every  judg-
ment— using  the  expression  in  the  narrower  sense  in  which


chap.ii.j  Equation  and  yudgment.  55

it  excludes  equation — is  liable  if  driven  home  to  be  accused
of  a  fallacy  a  dicto  secundum  quid  ad  dictum  simpliciter,  for
the  concrete  significance  of  the  subject  dwarfs  and  renders
trivial  the  conditions  under  which  alone  the  attribute  can
really  attach,  and  some  at  least  of  these  conditions  are
habitually  omitted,  or,  if  we  prefer  to  say  so,  presupposed.
But  in  the  equation  the  whole  content  is  homogeneous,  and
no  one  part  can  dwarf  any  other.  We  may  not  say  that
99,999  =  100,000.  We  must  put  in  the  condition,  however
trivial  in  real  life,  represented  by  4-1  on  the  left  of  this
equation,  or  —  i  on  the  right.  Therefore  every  equation,
even  the  simplest,  is  not  only  hypothetical,  but  it  is  hypo-
thetical on  the  basis  of  an  explicit  intellectual  process  or
synthesis  of  differences.  There  is  in  this  sphere  no  such
thing  as  massing  facts  together,  and  leaving  you  to  choose
how  you  infer,  or  whether  you  really  and  conscientiously
infer  at  all.  To  simply  equate  the  whole  with  itself  as
a  whole,  as  true  Judgment,  dealing  with  differences  of
attributes,  may  appear  to  do,  must  give  tautology,  and  so
nonsense,  in  Equation.  Being  debarred  from  even  the
appearance  of  such  judgments  as  'All  Exogens  are  Dicoty-
ledons,' the  equation  must  always  have  on  the  one  side  or  on
the  other  an  explicit  synthesis  of  differences.  It  is  there-
fore in  itself  a  step  nearer  to  explicit  inference  than  the
hypothetical  judgment.

The  Equation  then  exhibits  an  inferential  connection  more
clearly  than  an  ordinary  hypothetical  judgment.  In  respect
however  of  not  being  a  categorical  assertion  it  is  on  the
same  level  with  that  judgment,  and  only  qualifies  reality  in
virtue  of  the  real  element  which  underlies  its  hypothesis  ;
i.e.  pure  arithmetical  computation  qualifies  reality  in  as
far  as  it  expresses  the  properties  of  the  system  of  number.
7  +  5=12  means  If  five  is  added  to  seven  we  get  twelve,  and
is  categorical  in  as  far  as  it  involves  the  assertion,  '  The
system  of  number  is  such  that  "  if  five  is  added  to  seven,"  etc'
And  as  all  prerogatives  of  a  subject  are  absent  (as  is  also
the  case  with  pure  hypothetical  judgments)  no  difference  is


i


^6  Enumeration  and  Mathematics. [bookii.

more  especially  referred  to  Reality  than  the  others.  All
are  referred  indirectly  (i.  e.  through  the  system  of  number),
and  without  priority.

The  combination  of  equations  bears  the  same  relation  to
the  single  equation  as  the  combination  of  judgments  in
explicit  inference  to  the  single  judgment.  In  each  case  it  is
impossible  to  draw  the  line  between  the  single  act  and  the
combination.  An  equation  may  be  taken  as  involving  any
number  of  equational  steps,  just  as  a  judgment  may  be  taken
as  involving  any  number  of  intermediate  judgments.  In
short,  an  equation,  like  a  judgment,  is  the  form  of  conclusion
as  well  as  the  form  of  premise,  and  in  ultimate  analysis
always  partakes  of  both  characters.  But  for  this  very  reason
there  is  no  difference  of  principle  between  the  single  form
and  the  combination,  and  it  is  sufficient  in  discussing  infer-
ence to  treat  of  the  latter  which  has  the  advantage  of  being
explicit.  It  may  here  be  pointed  out  that  as  the  equation
is  non-subsumptive,  so  the  varieties  and  peculiarities  of
syllogistic  figure  disappear  in  the  combination  of  equations.
In  every  equated  term  or  expression  the  whole  is  present  in
its  entirety,  and  no  form  of  it  has  any  such  peculiarity  as
we  understand  by  the  Universal,  Particular,  or  Individual,
— the  subjects  and  predicates  of  the  syllogism.  This  in-
difference corresponds  to  the  nature  of  the  numerical
whole  and  renders  arrangement  and,  apparently,  number,
of  terms,  in  calculation  a  mere  matter  of  practical  con-
venience. But  in  every  system  of  equations,  if  bona  fide
treated  as  a  single  inference,  the  three  terms  may  be  de-
tected. Our  insight  develops  along  the  chain  of  equation,
and  does  not  simply  drop  one  term  out  and  replace  it  by
another.
Applica-  ii.  Lotze  has  treated  of  equational  inference,  i.e.  of  calcu-

cdcuktion.  Is-tion,  under  the  titles  of  substitutive  and  proportional  infer-
ence, and  of  inference  from  the  constitutive  equation.  I  will
comment  briefly  on  the  first  of  these  forms  at  present,  and
will  return  to  the  others  when  something  has  been  said  of
the  matter  to  which  they  apply.


Chap.  II.]  Equatioual  Identification.  57

a.  The  point  of  substitutive  inference — which  is  described  Substitn-

7  . , , .  ,  If  • tive  Infer-

as  a  species  of  syllogism  and as  possessed  ot a major  ^^^^

premise — consists  in  substituting  in  the  conclusion  for  the
middle  term  M  the  developed  content  of  M  as  assigned  in
the  major  premise,  under  the  operation  of  a  condition  s  repre-
senting the  peculiar  modification  attaching  to  the  minor
term  S. The  argument  is  thus  written  in  symbolic  form^ —

Major  Premise  yi  —  a±bx±cx^...

Minor  Premise S=xM.

Conclusion  ^^=3  {a±bx±cx^..?).

This  argument,  in  which  a,  b,  c  &c.  represent  any  marks
within  a  concept,  becomes  efficient,  as  Lotze  observes,  only
when  reducible  to  quantitative  terms,  because  in  other  cases
the  particular  change  effected  hy  sma  ox  b  is  simply  taken
from  experience  and  is  not  really  drawn  from  the  form  of
the  argument,  which  might  therefore  just  as  well  have
been  thrown  into  an  ordinary  syllogism.  But  on  the  other
hand  it  is  worth  observing  that  if,  in  constructing  such  an
inference,  we  remain  within  the  sphere  of  the  qjianiitative
universal,  then  the  relation  of  subsumption  and  the  prero-
gative of  the  major  premise  necessarily  disappear.  We
have  then  simply  two  equational  connections,  related  to  an
identical  whole,  and  therefore  capable  of  giving  rise  to  a
further  connection.  But  M  is  not  in  that  case  generic,  nor
is  S  specific,  nor  is  the  connection  of  S  with  s  {a±bx  &c.)
known  through  their  conjunction  in  and  subordination  to  a
concrete  individuality  M.  M  is  no  doubt  here  the  assigned
meeting-point  of  the  relations,  a  form  of  the  quantitative
universal  which  pervades  the  equational  connection  before
us,  but  S  is  no  more  a  case  of  M  than  M  of  S.  And  indeed,
having  once  been  led  to  observe  the  connection  of  S  with
its  development  s  {a  Sec),  we  no  longer  judge  this  true  on
the  mere  ground  of  conjunction  in  ]M,  but  on  the  ground  of
a  systematic  necessity  reveaJed  through  M.  S  or  i-  M,  if  it
is  or  has  a  true  quantitative  relation  to  M,  cannot  be  bona
fide  a  case  under  M,  an  element  in  a  concrete  individuality
^  Lotie,  Logik,  E.  Tr.,  sect.  109.


■58  Enumeration  and  Mathematics. [book  11.

or  case  of  a  generic  nature  M,  and  with  this  relation  the
whole  idea  of  subsumption  vanishes.

And  the  favourite  and  catching  phrase  'substitution'
must  be  similarly  treated.  Substitution  is  a  consequence
and  not  a  principle  of  inferential  relation.  It  arises  from
the  identity  of  the  whole  with  itself  in  all  its  forms,  the
discernment  of  which  identity  is  the  task  of  calculation.
We  may  infer,  to  take  a  very  elementary  example,  from
24=iax2,  and  8  =  ^,  that  8  =  ^^  We  here  'substitute'
12x2  for  24,  because  we  possess  the  connection  which  tells
us  that  the  former  is  a  synthesis  identical  with  the  whole
24.  To  '  substitute '  is  simply  to  treat  a  whole  as  identical
with  itself.

This  '  substitutive '  inference  then,  in  its  mathematical
shape,  has  no  syllogistic  character,  no  major  premise,  and
no  real  dependence  on  a  principle  of  substitution.  It  might
fairly  be  spoken  of  as  an  inference  by  equational  identifica-
tion. It  must  include,  so  far  as  I  can  see,  the  entire  range  of
strictly  arithmetical  computation,  whether  in  algebraical  or
in  arithmetical  form,  as  contrasted  with  computation  applied
to  geometry,  mechanics,  and  physics.  It  establishes  a  ratio,
for,  logically  at  least,  ratio  is  a  genus  of  which  equality  is  a
species,  but  it  does  not  ostensibly  compare  ratios,  and  there-
fore does  not  explicitly  challenge  problems  in  concurrent
but  heterogeneous  series.  But  we  must  remember  that  any
calculation  which  does  not  merely  develop  the  properties  of
number  depends  for  its  meaning  on  some  differences  of  real
aspect  correlative  to  the  differences  of  numerical  aspect.
'The  shelf-space  M  of  this  shelf  =  the  shelf-space  required
by  thirty  octavos.'  'I  can  have  shelf-space  which  =  100
M,  .*.  I  can  have  shelf-space  which  =  the  space  needed  by
100  X  30  octavos.'  Here  no  doubt  we  are  dealing  with  homo-
geneous quantity — feet  and  inches — all  through  ;  but  the
wholes  which  are  compared  are  differently  motived,  and
these  differences  of  motive — books  compared  with  shelves,
and  one  shelf  with  a  library — are  what  give  the  inference  its
point. The  next  step  is  that  these  differences  of  motive


Chap.  II.]  Co7istructwn.  59

affect  the  actual  denominations  of  the  units  themselves.
We  come  to  deal  in  short  not  with  simple  equality — iden-
tity of  number  of  the  same  units — but  with  equality  of
ratios,  i.  e.  with  identity  of  the  ratio  between  the  several
quantities  of  a  set,  with  that  between  the  several  quantities
of  another  set  or  other  sets.  The  unit  of  enumeration,  in
this  case,  must  not  be  identical.

^.  We  must  now  break  off  somewhat  abruptly  to  con-  Connec-
sider  the  apprehension  of  Connections  in  space  and  time,  Space  and
which  must  be  treated  for  our  present  purpose  as  an  inde-  Time,
pendent  root  of  knowledge,  and  must  be  investigated  before
we  can  proceed  further  with  the  analysis  of  calculation.
Primarily  no  doubt  the  apprehension  of  these  connections  is
an  offshoot  of  the  rudimentary  judgment,  which  as  we  saw  in
Book  I  ^  must  construct  its  world  of  Things  largely  under
the  influence  of  growing  spatial  and  temporal  discrimination.
But  starting  as  we  have  done  in  explicit  inference  with  the
developed  concrete  perception  of  the  world  of  things,  we
have  no  choice  but  to  assume  also  the  developed  abstract
perception  of  relations  in  space  and  time.  We  reason  from
these  relations  or  connections  before  w^e  have  subjected  their
elements  to  accurate  enumeration  or  measurement,  and  it  is
the  nature  of  non-numerical  inferences  from  such  relations
that  I  now  propose  to  consider  ^.  '  A  is  to  the  right  of  B,
B  is  to  the  right  of  C, .-.  A  is  to  the  right  of  C  ; ' '  A  is  prior
to  B  in  time,  and  B  to  C,  therefore  A  to  C  In  such
inferences  as  these,  Mr.  Bradley  has  told  us,  we  first  con-
struct, and  then  perceive.  I  have  expressed  at  length  in
another  work,  and  briefly  in  the  preceding  chapter,  my
objections  to  employing  the  term  construction  as  if  it  were
a  self-explaining  account  of  an  intellectual  process.  But  I
have  conceded  that  when  restricted  to  the  sense  of  intel-
lectual construction,  neither  imaginative  nor  physical,  it
affords  an  apt  description  of  the  peculiar  work  of  inferential

'  Bk.  I.  chap,  iu

'  See  Bradley's  Principles  of  Logic,  p.  225  ff.,  which  on  this  point  I  have
followed  very  closely.


6o  Enumeration  and  Mathematics. [bookii.

apprehension  in  the  field  of  space,  time,  and  motion.  At
all  events  we  must,  I  think,  agree  with  Mr.  Bradley  that  in
examples  like  those  just  given  there  is  no  bond  fide  major
premise,  and  therefore  no  syllogism.  The  form  'A  is
to  right  of  B,  B  to  right  of  C,  .•.  A  to  right  of  C '  is  so
obviously  the  natural  shape  of  the  inference  thus  expressed,
that  we  may  be  surprised  at  being  reminded  that,  qua
syllogism,  it  has  the  defect  of  four  terms.  To  fulfil  the
syllogistic  requirements  we  must  set  down  as  a  major  pre-
mise 'What  is  to  the  right  of  B  is  to  the  right  of  C,'  or  even
'  What  is  to  the  right  of  B  is  to  the  right  of  that  which  B  is
to  the  right  of.'  In  the  latter  case  the  entire  content  of  the
argument  recurs  in  the  minor  premise  'A  is  to  the  right  of
B  and  B  to  the  right  of  C  Plainly  this  minor  premise
would  carry  the  conclusion  without  a  major.

It  was  the  author's  experience,  when  engaged  in
teaching  elementary  logic,  that  pupils  had  an  invincible
tendency  to  construct  '  syllogisms '  in  one  of  these  two
types,  the  former  of  which  is  defective  as  a  syllogism,
and  the  latter  unreal  and  ineffectual.  In  using  the
former,  'A  to  right  of  B,  B  to  right  of  C,  therefore  &c.,'
their  instinct  was  just,  so  far  as  the  argument  to  be  ex-
pressed was  not  truly  subsumptive.  An  extension  of  this
just  practice  to  subsumptive  inference  in  which  it  becomes
erroneous  was  no  doubt  the  cause  of  Dr.  Thomas  Brown's
remarkable  view  as  described  by  Mill  in  an  interesting
passage  ^.  The  complementary  error,  to  which  also
pupils  are  prone,  is,  in  constructing  a  syllogism,  to  sur-
render the  whole  task  of  articulating  the  steps  of  the
argument  by  simply  putting  as  the  major  premise  some
syllogistic  canon,  in  analogical  argument  some  principle  of
analogy,  or  in  '  constructive '  argument  such  a  general  prin-
ciple of  construction  as  '  Whatever  is  to  the  right  of  B  is  to
the  right  of  that  which  B  is  to  the  right  of.'  It  thus  becomes
necessary  to  mass  the  whole  content  of  the  particular  infer-

*  Brown  thought  the  major  premise  always  superfluous.  See  Mill's  Logic,
i.  p.  225,  sixth  edition.


Chap.  II.]  Added  Determinants.  6t

ence  in  hand  within  the  minor  premise.  Wherever  a  syllo-
gistic canon  is  taken  as  the  ultimate  major  premise  of
inference,  this  error  is  committed.  The  error  consists  in
taking  out  the  active  form  of  the  inference — the  intellectual
function  which  the  syllogistic  or  constructive  arrangement
expresses — and  making  this  a  mere  portion  of  the  content
from  which  the  inference  is  drawn.  In  drawing  the  inference
the  intellectual  function  is  inevitably  active,  and  the  principle
expressed  in  the  major  is  no  justification  of  the  activity  of
this  function,  but  merely  a  content  on  which  it  operates  as
it  would  on  any  other  content,  so  that  the  explicit  major
really  adds  nothing  to  the  argument  ^  This  case,  of  sub-
sumption  under  the  principle  of  subsumption,  needs  itself
to  be  subsumed  under  the  same  principle  or  another,  and
so  on  ad  infinitum.  Take  '  A  mark  of  a  mark  is  a  mark  of
the  thing  marked,  growiih  is  a  mark  of  organic  nature  which
is  a  mark  of  life, .'.  growth  is  a  mark  of  life.'  Here  we  have
an  act  of  subsumption  under  a  principle  of  subsumption,
which  act  itself  falls  outside  the  principle  itself  and  needs
justification  in  a  prior  syllogism,  if  the  minor  premise  and
conclusion  needed  justification  in  this.

On  the  other  hand,  subsumption  does  not  allow  the  sub-
ject to  be  merely  treated  as  a  point  of  attachment,  as  is  the
case  with  abstract  series  in  space  or  in  time.  If  we  tried
to  infer  thus  in  concrete  matter  we  should  get  something
like  Jevons'  Added  Determinants,  which  is  an  excellent
example  of  inference  that  is  almost  necessarily  fallacious,
owing  to  the  disproportioned  effect  of  the  same  added
determinant  on  two  concrete  conceptions.  *  A  child  is  a
human  being,  A.  B.  is  a  big  child,  .-.  A.  B.  is  a  big  human
being;'  'Pericles  rules  Athens,  Aspasia  rules  Pericles,
.'.  Aspasia  rules  Athens.'  The  concrete  subject  in  subsump-
tion takes  up  the  determinants  into  itself  and  transforms
them  in  a  way  which  we  cannot  predict.  A  woman's
rule  over  her  lover  is  not  in  pari  materia  with  a  statesman's

*  See  Bradley's  Principles  of  Logic,  p.  475  ;  Hegel,  Wiss.  derLc^c,  ii.  p.  151 ;
and  the  Author's  Knowledge  and  Reality,  p.  275.


62  Enumeration  and  Mathematics. [bookii.

rule  over  a  commonwealth^  and  a  big  child  may  be  a  very
small  human  being.  We  must  not  try  to  read  off  conclu-
sions from  series  in  subsumptive  matter  as  we  can  in  space,
time  or  number.  Construction  or  abstract  connection,  on
the  other  hand,  deals  with  relations  which  bear  on  each
other  with  systematic  necessity,  and  which  are  not  affected,
or  are  assumed  to  be  affected  only  within  known  limits,  by
the  idiosyncrasies  of  the  points  of  attachment.  In  '  A  to
right '  etc.  we  take  A  to  be  a  point  or  body  in  space ;  if
not,  the  inference  is  unmeaning.  Therefore  in  this  sphere
no  premise  has  a  prerogative,  and  the  reciprocal  modifica-
tion of  relations  is  constructed  in  the  argument  and  not  pre-
supposed in  the  nature  of  the  Subject.  This  characteristic
of  '  construction  '  applies  to  number,  space  and  time,  and  to
the  mechanics  of  abstract  matter.

The  apprehension  of  relations  in  time  needs  no  separate
treatment  in  logic  from  that  of  relations  in  space.  Apart
from  measurement,  connections  in  time  are  not  capable  of
any  great  complexity,  seeing  that  they  contain  nothing
that  corresponds  to  a  curve  or  angle  in  space.  Mere
succession  is  the  relation  of  one  set  of  changes  to  a  per-
manent subject ;  but  in  this  there  is  implicit  from  the  first
the  idea  of  duration,  which  involves  the  elementary  com-
parison by  the  permanent  subject  of  two  distinguishable
sets  of  changes,  each  of  which  is  pinmd  facie  ihe.  measure  of
the  other.  There  is  no  science  of  time  in  the  sense  in  which
geometry  is  the  science  of  space.  From  this  point  of  view
it  has  been  said  that  time  is  one  degree  more  ideal  than
space ;  i.  e.  its  essential  character  of  successiveness  falls
outside  the  actual  contact  of  events  with  sensation  and
exists  for  the  most  part  in  the  ideal  medium  of  memory.
It  is  true  however  that  the  present  has  duration,  and  does
not  exclude  succession.  But  in  thus  possessing  duration,
in  spite  of  the  fugitive  character  of  actual  sensation,  the
present  of  course  displays  an  ideal  nature  which  makes  it
continuous  with  temporal  succession,  a  succession  which
pervades  even  the  present  itself.


Chap.  II.] Pure  Geometrical  Reasoning.  63

The  intelligence  in  bringing  order  into  the  feelings  begins
by  apprehending  space  or  time  and  constructing  its  pre-
conceived world  in  these  forms.  By  developing  them,
however,  into  scientific  characteristics  of  this  material
world,  it  further  proceeds  to  idealise  them  into  laws  and
proportions,  and  thus  to  take  away  their  immediate  and
perceived  character.  The  first  step  in  this  idealisation  is
the  conception  of  absolute,  standard,  or  uniform  space  and
time,  a  conception  which  guides  the  process  of  measure-
ment, but  which  is  strictly  speaking,  in  its  common-sense
form,  an  abstraction  to  which  no  real  thing  nor  process
corresponds.  Constancy  of  ratio  throughout  the  perceptible
world  is,  as  we  saw  ^,  all  that  measurement  can  give  us,  and
is  what  we  really  mean  to  assume.  Uniform  space  or  time,
as  embodied  in  a  single  series  and  not  in  a  comparison,  is
a  contradiction  in  terms.

y.  The  apprehension  of  connections — even  of  explicitly  Calcnla-

mediate  connections — in  space  and  time  does  not  neces-  *io°/P-
.  plied  to

sarily  mvolve the enumeration of  parts  with  a  view  to  Geonaetri-
precise  measurement. Such  apprehension  begins,  as  we  saw
in  Book  P,  with  the  perceptions  indicated  by  'Here'  and
'  There,'  '  right '  and  '  left,'  '  nearer '  and  '  further,'  '  now '  and
*  then,'  '  future '  and  '  past.'

But  all  these  expressions  involve  a  continuous  series,  and
such  a  series  is  the  beginning  of  measurement.  The  spatial
elements  however,  the  straight  line,  angle  and  arc,  are  not
constructed  by  measurement  but  are  given  spatial  relations,
although  the  discovery  of  their  properties  cannot  be  effected
apart  from  the  comparison  of  quantities.  I  am  not  prepared
to  say  that  the  identification  of  corresponding  geometrical
relations  might  not  (in  spite  of  the  etymology  of  the  word
'  geometry")  be  prior  to  intentional  quantitative  comparison.
Vertical  angles,  or  right  angles,  or  the  triangles  into  which
a  rectangle  is  divided  by  the  diagonal^,  might  be  seen  to

>  Bk.  I.  chap.  iv.  »  See  Bk.  I.  chap.  i.

'  In  elementary  schools  it  is  now  the  practice  to  familiarise  young  children
•with  such  relations  as  this,  e.  g.  by  folding  square  pieces  of  paper,  first  along


cal  Reason-


64  Enumeration  and  Mathematics. [bookii.

be  the  same,  before  numerical  comparison  was  applied  to
sides,  angular  distances,  and  areas.

Apart  however  from  definite  history,  nothing  can  tell  us
when  an  implicit  character  becomes  explicit.  It  is  certain
that  all  developed  consciousness  of  spatial  and  temporal
connection  must  operate  through  quantitative  comparison.

Geometrical  and  strictly  mechanical  reasoning  is  the  en-
dowment of  the  quantitative  universal  with  control  over  the
combination  of  homogeneous  parts  in  space,  or  in  space
and  time  together.  In  this  type  of  reasoning,  though
essentially  'constructive,'  we  are  often  reminded  of  sub-
sumption  by  the  peculiar  working  of  the  quasi-generic
judgment.

The  square  and  the  cube  are  elementary  and  striking
instances  of  the  power  of  enumeration,  i.e.  of  arithmetical
ideas,  to  represent  or  to  describe  generically  a  purely  geo-
metrical relation.  The  'square'  of  a  number  is  not  a
square  surface,  nor  does  it,  so  far  as  I  can  see,  display  in
itself  the  difiference  between  the  superficial  and  the  linear
unit.  But  such  a  number,  or  rather  such  a  numerical  rela-
tion, does  indicate  definite  combinations  of  parts  by  which
a  square  surface  may  be  recognised  or  constructed,  and
therefore  the  numerical  relation  may  for  many  purposes
be  regarded  as  equivalent  to  the  surface.  The  purely
homogeneous  universal,  qua  homogeneous,  already  at  this
stage  fails  to  grasp  the  nature  of  the  content  as  such,  whose
structure  is  to  be  represented  by  the  differences  of  the
universal,  but  succeeds  in  a  way  unknown  outside  mathe-
matics in  presenting  an  adequate  key  to  this  nature.

I  presume  that  the  marvellous  processes  by  which  curves
of  all  types  have  been  subjected  to  the  dominion  of  the
equation  must  ultimately  be  regarded  by  logic  in  the  same
light  as  the  relation  of  the  square  upon  a  line  to  the  square

a  line  dividing  them  into  equal  rectangles,  and  then  along  the  diagonal,  thus
exhibiting  the  equality  of  a  right-angled  triangle  to  a  rectangle  of  the  same
height  and  half  the  base,  both  being  halves  of  the  same  square.  This  is  an
equation,  and  so  a  measurement,  but  rudimentary  in  as  far  as  unanalysed.


Chap.  II.]  Adequacy  of  Co^istruction.  65

of  a  number.  These  processes  do  not,  as  I  understand,  ex-
haust the  nature  of  the  curves,  but  they  exhaust  a  com-
bination of  directions  and  distances,  referred  to  an  assumed
point,  which  can  be  given  any  required  degree  of  accuracy
in  representing  the  curves.  Hence,  though  numerical  re-
lations have  not  in  themselves  the  aesthetic  or  mechanical
attributes  of  the  particular  curves  which  correspond  to
them,  yet  the  nature  of  space  permits  a  curve  to  be  ade-
quately and  unerringly  constructed  by  putting  together
homogeneous  parts,  viz.  distances,  in  accordance  with  these
numerical  relations.  It  is  obvious  therefore  that  by  experi-
ence, if  no  othersviscj  both  aesthetic  and  mechanical  attri-
butes may  come  to  appear  as  if  directly  legible  in  certain
numerical  relations  considered  as  controlling  spatial  ele-
ments. In  the  case  of  curves  these  numerical  relations  or
attributes  are  expressed  in  constitutive  equations^  and  form
by  far  the  most  striking  examples  of  a  transition  from  and
through  the  homogeneous  to  the  heterogeneous.  But
strictly  speaking  all  the  simple  proportions  which  charac-
terise e.  g.  the  triangle  or  the  square  are  examples  of  the
same  principle.

We  spoke  in  Book  I  of  this  whole  class  of  truths  as
'  quasi-generic  judgments,'  and  insisted  on  the  peculiar
reversion  which  they  display  towards  the  type  of  concrete
or  organic  totality.  Never  again  in  knowledge  do  we
meet  with  such  simple  abstract  and  mechanical  construc-
tion so  unerringly  analysing  an  individual  and  charac-
teristic content.  For  this  reason  we  are  tempted  to  take
the  constitutive  equation  as  the  ideal  of  knowledge,  and
indeed  exceptis  excipiendis  we  are  right  in  doing  so.  But
the  excipienda  are  serious.  When  we  pass  from  abstractions
like  space,  time  and  matter  to  the  concrete  evolution  of  the
real  world,  to  organisms,  to  political  societies,  and  to  human
intelligences,  not  only  is  mechanical  construction  infinitely
more  difficult,  but  it  is  infinitely  less  adequate.  A  curve
after  all  is  a  line  in  space,  though  it  is  not  a  straight  line ;
so  that  it  can  be  no  such  enormous  leap  to  constitute  a

VOL.  II.  F


66  Induction  and  Reasoning.  [bookii.

curve  out  of  spatial  elements.  But  a  plant  is  hardly  in
the  strict  sense  a  phenomenon  in  space  at  all,  and  although
a  mechanical  view  of  it,  in  a  sense  to  be  explained  below,
must  certainly  be  aimed  at  by  science,  yet  there  will  remain
in  it  much  to  be  understood  which  cannot  be  constructed —
not  a  part  of  its  actions^  but  the  whole  result.

If  the  constitutive  equation  is  the  type  of  quasi-generic
judgment,  it  follows  that  Inference  from  the  constitutive
equation  is  the  type  of  quasi-subsumptive  inference.  Such
inference  has  two  aspects.  On  the  one  hand  it  is  pure
calculation  or  combination  of  connections,  like  any  mediate
equation  which  has  no  meaning  beyond  the  numerical
system.  It  combines  with  a  proportion  between  two
changing  quantities  some  particular  values  of  these  quan-
tities, and  follows  out  the  modifications  which  result  from
this  combination.  This  process  is  in  itself,  though  more
complex,  yet  not  a  whit  more  subsumptive  or  less  purely
calculative  than  to  equate  2  a  with  3  x,  and  supplying  any
number  as  the  value  of  a  to  fill  in  the  number  demanded  by
the  proportion  as  the  value  of  x.  In  such  an  expression
a  and  x  are  merely  generalised  numbers,  or  numerical
relations,  or,  if  we  like,  names  for  a  problem.  There  is  no
true  major  premise,  but  in  its  place  there  is  the  generalised
description  of  an  identical  numerical  whole  in  the  two  cases
of  being  constructed  with  a  factor  2  and  with  a  factor  3,
and  the  inference  consists  in  exhibiting  the  construction  of
any  such  whole  on  the  basis  of  these  factors  respectively.

If  a  and  x  represent  distances  in  space  defined  by  some
further  relations  (e.g.  perpendicular  to  each  other  or  the
like),  and  the  whole  expression  has  the  effect  of  charac-
terising a  definite  figure  in  space,  then  we  have  the  germ  of
what  I  have  called  quasi-subsumption.  The  inference  is
still  constructive  in  the  narrow  sense ;  it  proceeds  by  enu-
meration of  indifferent  parts  as  in  the  case  first  considered.
But  it  combines  with  this  aspect  another  and  a  different
one.  It  exhibits  a  particular  portion  of  a  particular  curve
in  the  light  of  a  characteristic  modification  of  a  generic


Chap.  II.] Abstract  constructive  science.  67

type.  The  curve  may  be  closed  or  open,  quick  or  slow,  sym-
metrical or  unsymmetrical.  And  these  attributes,  although
they  result  from  the  construction,  are  not  given  within  the
construction.  The  spatial  nature  of  the  type  of  curve  in
question  is  the  quasi-generic  content  through  which  the
subsumption  is  made.  It  is  not  pure  subsumption  ;  for  the
construction  would  suffice  in  theory  to  draw  out  the  par-
tictilar  curve  before  us  and  discover  its  properties,  without
ever  giving  it  a  generic  name  or  observing  that  we  are
analysing  the  properties  of  something  like  a  natural  kind.
And  in  fact,  I  presume,  this  is  the  usual  order  of  procedure.
Observations  are  obtained,  upon  which  as  data  the  curve  is
constructed,  and  its  general  nature  is  found  only  by  means
of  this  construction.  But  on  the  other  hand,  the  mere  fact
that  we  know  how  to  pass  from  an  equational  combination
of  numbers  to  a  spatial  figure  shows  that  we  are  proceeding
on  a  principle  involved  in  the  characteristic  nature  of  such
figures. The  scheme  of  the  argument  is —

A  spatial  figure  constructed  on  such proportions  has
such  and  such  an  outline  ;

This  is  a  spatial  figure  constructed  on  this  case  of  the
above  proportions ;

.*.  This  has  this  particular  outline.

The  element  of  subsumption  consists  In  the  impossibility
of  passing  from  the  ratio,  which  is  only  a  generalised  re-
lation of  numbers,  to  the  markedly  individual  figure  in
space,  except  by  identifying  the  subject  in  which  the
numerical  relation  and  the  characteristic  curve- properties
are  conjoined  as  the  nature  of  space,  or,  more  closely,  of  a
curve  in  space.

It  only  remains  to  mention  that  when  we  take  in  the
unit  of  time,  and  thereby  are  able  to  represent  motion  as  a
length,  and  when  we  further  erect  the  abstractions  force
and  mass  as  correlative  ppints  of  view  from  which  motion
is  regarded  as  affecting  bodies,  we  have  all  the  organa  of
what  may  be  called  pure  mechanism,  or  abstract  con-
structive science — a  complex  and  elaborate  system,  founded

Fa


68  Induction  and  Reasoning.  [bookii.

ultimately  on  the  combination  of  three  abstractions,  space,
time,  and  number. This  abstract  mode  of  consideration  is
true  in  so  far  as  it  applies  to  the  characteristics  of  real
things,  but  its  apphcation  is  obviously  limited. The  human
body,  for  instance,  is  of  course  a  case  in  which  the  geo-
metrical and  mechanical  laws  of  space  and  motion  have
reality,  but  to  a  large  part  of  its  activity  these  laws  in  their
purely  abstract  form  have  nothing  to  say. I  proceed  to
discuss  how  and  in  what  sense  mechanism,  and  mediately,
&v&nptire  mechanism,  has  a  wider  application.
Calculation 8.  Lotze  has  spoken  of  inference  from  proportion  as  a
to  Dispa- limit  of  knowledge,  and  as  assuming  a  type  which  from  his
rates.  description  appears  to  be  subsumptive,  although  he  does

Proportion.  ^^^  ^j^^  j^  ^j^j^  ^^^^^

Homo-  (i)  I  am  unable  to  see  that  we  have  in  proportion  either

l^e"ms.^  subsumptive  inference  or  a  limit  of  knowledge,  so  long  as
the  four  terms  of  the  proportion  are  either  of  the  nature  of
abstract  number,  or  are  in  pari  materia,  i.e.  of  the  same
denomination  with  one  another.  Numbers  by  themselves,
it  may  be  said,  prove  nothing,  and  computation  in  the
abstract  is  not  inference.  But  it  seems  obvious  that  the
properties  of  the  numerical  system  as  such  are  worth
establishing  for  their  own  sake.  2  :  4  :  :  ^  :  x .'.  x  =  6  is
not  a  worthless  tj/pe  of  inference,  although  the  example  is
one  which  has  no  interest.  It  depends  on  a  relation  within
the  numerical  system,  and  is  in  itself,  apart  from  its  ele-
mentary character,  as  well  worth  establishing  as  any  other
consequence  of  an  isolated  abstract  relation.

Or  again,  if  we  want  to  make  a  picture-frame  of  the
same  proportions  with  one  that  we  have,  but  of  different
size,  then  all  the  numbers  represent  lengths,  and  we  have,
say,  l6i°-  :  24'°'  ::  x  :y,  x  =  32'°-;  .-.  y  =  48.  In  this
example,  however,  the  limit  of  which  Lotze  speaks  is  just
beginning  to  make  itself  felt.  All  the  numbers  do  no  doubt
in  one  sense  stand  for  lengths  in  space ;  but  they  are
lengths  peculiarly  related,  in  a  way  which  falls  outside  the
statement  of  proportion. lu  the  object  to  be  constructed —


Chap.  II.]  Applicatio7is  of  Proportion,  69

this  is  the  very  reason  for  which  we  compare  them — the
one  spatial  length  is  to  be  at  right  angles  to  the  other ;  or,
in  popular  language,  they  are  respectively  length  and
breadth.  Thus  16  and  24,  and  their  correlatives  x  and  j,
are  in  one  sense  of  one  denomination,  but  in  another  sense
of  different  denominations ;  and  it  is  because  they  are  of
different  denominations — or  dimensions — that  we  have  an
interest  in  comparing  them.  Here  moreover,  as  in  geo-
metrical reasoning,  we  come  upon  a  trace  of  subsumption,
because  the  essential  identity  which  is  the  foundation  of
the  inference  consists  in  the  nature  of  an  object  which  has
length  and  breadth,  under  which  generic  nature.,  as  charac-
terised by  a  certain  ratio,  we  subsume  a  specific  case  of  the
same  nature  and  of  the  same  ratio.  The  meeting-point  of
the  relations  is  a  concrete  and  not  an  abstract,  and  this  is
the  differentia  of  subsumption.

It  would  be  easy  to  fill  up  many  gradations  of  the
appearance  of  heterogeneity  in  the  terms  of  a  proportion.
First,  the  two  sets  compared  cease  to  be  measurable  by
any  identical  unit — whereas  in  the  last  examples  both  sides
of  the  proportion  are  measurable  as  distances  in  space.
Such  are  the  proportions  of  times  to  distances  and  to  areas,
or  of  force  to  distance  or  to  mass.  And  secondly,  the
several  terms,  either  in  one  set  or  in  both,  cease  to  be  strictly
measurable  by  identical  units.  While  this  is  the  case  with
one  side  only,  some  sort  of  proportion  may  be  supposed  to
exist,  especially  as  the  other  side  may  present  variations  of
a  quantitative  character,  though  not  exhaustible  by  repe-
tition of  an  identical  unit.  But  when  neither  side  presents
a  true  ratio,  i.  e.  when  on  neither  side  are  the  several  terms
measurable  by  an  identical  unit,  then  proportion  is  gone,  and
we  are  referred  back  or  across  to  Analogy  or  Subsumption.

(2)  Leaving  the  intermediate  portion  of  these  gradations  *  a  and  a
for  the  reader  to  fill  up,  I  pass  at  once  to  a  class  of  pro-
portions which  prevail  in  a  certain  sense  throughout  the
entire  world  of  knowledge. I  speak  of  related  series  of
contents  which  might  appropriately  be  designated  ^ a  and  a'


7©  hiduction  mid  Reasoning.  [Book  ii.

series.  The  examples  which  spring  at  once  into  the  mind
are  the  perceptions  or  sensations  of  light  and  sound,  with
their  respective  physical  stimuli.  It  is  true  that  in  the
connection  of  such  series  as  these  we  come  upon  a  '  limit  of
knowledge ; '  but  it  admits  of  question  how  far  even  in  the
most  favourable  instances  of  them  we  can  be  said  to  have
proportional  inference  \  Perhaps  the  relation  of  angle  to
arc,  which  Lotze  gives  as  an  example,  is  about  the  extreme
instance  of  true  quantitative  proportion  which,  although
quantitative,  includes  heterogeneous  matter.

When  we  look  at  the  relation  of  musical  sound  to  stimulus
we  find  an  ascertained  parallelism  between  changes  in
the  rapidity  of  periodic  vibrations  that  reach  the  ear,
and  changes  in  pitch  of  the  musical  note  which  they
generate  in  consciousness.  And  further,  the  changes  in
pitch  are  a  continuous  variation  of  a  pervading  quality  and
therefore  are  quantitative ;  and  these  are  commonly  mea-
sured by  certain  intervals  of  change  taken  to  be  equal  in
the  sense  of  sharing  certain  attributes  and  capacities  which
remain  the  same  for  corresponding  intervals  in  all  parts  of
the  scale.  If  we  attempt  to  make  out  a  proportional  state-
ment of  these  relations  we  may  get  some  such  result  as
a  vibrations  in  second  :  2  a  vibrations  in  second  : :  note  a  :  its
octave  0.^  ;  a  relation  which  admits  of  thequasi-subsumptive
inference  a=.\6\  .•.  a  =  a  certain  note  x,  and  a^  a  certain
note  y.

^  I  suppose  that  '  irrational '  in  mathematical  language  designates  a  relation
which  cannot  be  expressed  as  a  ratio,  viz.  as  a  relation  between  two  numbers.
It  would  seem  then  that  '  incommensurable  ratios '  must  be  a  contradiction  in
terms.  The  convenience  of  the  expression  in  mathematics  would  not  neces-
sarily be  interfered  with  by  its  self-contradictory  character.  Many  conceptions
which  involve  a  more  or  less  latent  contradiction  are  employed  in  special
sciences — quantitative  infinity,  or  involuntary  contracts,  are  well-known  instances.
It  is  interesting  to  notice  that  the  reason  of  one  science  may  be  the  unreason  of
another.  Hegel  complains  that  mathematicians  call  everything  irrational  in
which  reason  begins  to  intrude — i.  e.  in  which  systematic  heterogeneity  begins
to  appear,  e.  g.  in  the  relation  between  straight  line  and  curve.  Ratio  is  the
reason  of  mathematics,  and  other  systematic  relations  may  be  irrational  in  this
sphere ;  just  as  ratio  may  be  an  irrational  relation  outside  mathematics,  e.  g.  in
political  science.


Chap.  II.]  Intensive  Quantity.  7 1

But  this  inference  is  by  no  means  purely  mathematical
or  quantitative.

First,  we  must  notice  the  presupposed  limitations,  which
do  not  exist  in  any  purely  mechanical  or  purely  geometrical
law.  The  vibrations  must  affect  a  hearing  ear,  and  to  affect
a  hearing  ear  they  must  be  within  certain  limitations  both
of  rapidity  and  amplitude,  which  from  a  mathematical  point
of  view  are  wholly  arbitrary.

Secondly,  we  must  observe  that  not  only,  as  in  true  cases
of  proportion  such  as  that  between  the  angle  and  the  arc,
are  the  two  sets  of  terms  incommensurable  with  one  another,
but  also  it  is  very  doubtful  whether  the  two  terms  repre-
sented by  a  and  a^  can  be  strictly  called  commensurable.  In
a  sense  no  doubt  the  tones  of  the  scale  are  units  and  serve
as  measures.  But  if  we  ask  which  note  is  '  twice  '  another,
we  are  perplexed  between  the  octave,  which  corresponds  to
twice  the  stimulus  of  the  octave  below,  and  the  note,
whatever  it  may  be,  which  is  next  above  the  lowest
audible  note.  For  two  of  any  identical  unit  ought  to  be
twice  one.  But  just  as  the  zero  of  the  common  thermometer
is  not  a  zero  of  heat  ^,  so  there  is  no  sense  m  making  the
lowest  pitch,  or  the  point  where  pitch  passes  into  separate
sounds,  a  zero  of  pitch  from  which  all  its  gradts  can  be
constructed  by  mere  multiplication  or  superimposition.
We  may  say,  if  we  like,  that  the  quantity  is  intensive,  i.  e.
that  the  grades  by  which  the  greater  is  separated  from  the
lesser  amount  do  not  persist  in  a  distinguishable  form  beside
or  within  the  greater  amount  when  it  is  attained.  This,
however,  is  only  to  say  in  other  words  that  we  are  passing
beyond  a  true  quantitative  relation.  All  true  measurable
quantity  is  extensive.  In  as  far  as  it  is  merely  intensive  it
is  unanalysed,  not  referred  to  parts,  and  so  not  quantitative.
Here  we  are  between  the  two  ;  we  have  degrees  which  are
not  parts,  and  of  which  the  whole  is  in  no  strict  sense  a

*  The  idea  of  an  absolute  zero  of  heat  does  not  matter  for  the  present  pur-
pose, which  is  merely  to  illustrate  the  nature  of  a  series  which  is  not  in  a  true
ratio. See  Mill's  Logic,  i.  pp.  441  and  446.


72  Induction  and  Reasoning.  [bookii.

multiple,  but  which  not  only  exhibit  an  advance  in  them-
selves but  correspond  to  parts  of  which  their  whole  is  a  true
multiple.

Then^  thirdly,  we  are  confronted  here  with  something  like
a  genuine  subsumption.  The  correspondence  of  '>>?)  vibra-
tion per  second  to  a  note  x  rests  on  a  concrete  relation,
which  we  find  but  cannot  construct,  between  an  impact  on
the  living  person  through  the  ear  and  a  reaction  in  the  soul
of  that  person.  It  is  by  subsumption  under  this  charac-
teristic individuality  that  we  justify  the  conjunction,  not
otherwise  necessary,  of  periodic  vibration  and  musical
sound.

It  should  be  noticed,  too,  as  bearing  on  the  concreteness
of  the  operation  which  we  are  now  considering,  that  loud-
ness is  a  quantitative  attribute  of  musical  sound,  and  corre-
sponds to  a  distinct  feature  of  the  sonorous  vibrations,  viz.
to  their  amplitude,  which  I  presume  must  on  the  whole
diminish  with  increasing  pitch.  This  ratio,  and  other
analysable  characteristics,  fall  within  the  same  series  of
contents  as  that  to  which  the  correspondence  between  pitch
and  rapidity  applies.  We  are  thus  in  such  a  case  far  from
being  able  to  obtain  a  simple  proportion  between  contents
as  wholes.

When  we  come  to  the  colour-sensations,  the  individuality
or  disparateness  of  the  a  terms  increases,  and  the  quanti-
tative relation,  still  traceable  in  sound,  heat  or  pressure,
becomes  much  more  obscure  if  it  does  not  disappear.  Not
to  speak  of  the  dark  heat  rays  and  the  dark  chemical  rays,
which  mark  differences  in  the  action  of  the  ether  corre-
sponding to  no  saltus  in  the  ratio  of  vibrations,  the
transitions  from  colour  to  colour  defy  all  attempt  at  quanti-
tative expression.  No  one  could  mean  anything  by  saying
that  central  violet  is  twice  or  three  times  or  five  times  central
red,  except  in  so  far  as  colours  may  be  characterised  by  an
intensity  of  illumination  which  is  a  different  thing  from  the
peculiarity  of  their  hue.  It  is  needless  to  go  into  detail  on
this  head. It  is  plain that  while  the  variations in the


Chap.  II.]  Proportiofi  and  Analogy.  ']'t,

mechanical  stimulus,  the  a  series,  are  still  strictly  numer-
able, the  terms  of  the  a  series  are  altogether  ceasing  to
present  commensurable  and  therefore  numerable  differences
in  respect  of  their  distinctive  individuality,  although  various
numerable  differences  may  be  traceable  within  their  content.
Then  proportion  in  the  strict  sense  wholly  ceases  to  apply,
because  there  is  a  ratio  on  one  side  only,  and  not  on  the
other  ;  and  there  cannot  be  equality  of  ratios  unless  we
have  two  sets  of  matters  with  a  ratio  between  the  members
of  each  set

Nevertheless,  there  is  in  the  colour  series  a  uniform  re-
lation of  a  proportional  character.  '  Wave-length  x  :  wave-
length j  : :  violet  :  red'  means  not  that  red  is  such  and  such
a  multiple  of  violet,  but  yet  that  in  a  series  in  ib'hich  wave-
length X  gives  violet  we  can  be  sure  that  wave-length  j  will
give  red.  And  though  these  colours  are  not  producible  as
multiples  of  one  another,  yet  they  are  identifiable,  on  the
assumption  of  correspondence  to  stimuli,  by  the  process  of
colour-equation.  Given  the  means  for  producing  true  spec-
tral red,  a  problematic  red  colour  can  be  equated  with  it,
and  the  difference  between  the  two  stated  in  terms  of  the
stiinulus.

e.  We  have  here,  it  might  be  said,  passed  from  Propor-  Proportion,
tion  to  Analogy,  which  abandoning  its  original  meaning  of  f^^^o-
proportion  has  come  to  signify  an  ifiexact  comparison  of  t^^etical
relations. But  Analogy  in  the  logical  sense  is  not  really  an ^^^  "
inexact  form  of  proportion, but  depends  on other than
quantitative  considerations,  as  we  shall  see in the next
chapter. And  though  we  are  now  passing  out  of  the  region
where  equality  of  ratios  would  grasp  and  penetrate  the
whole  essence  of  the  subject-matter,  yet  there  is  no  need  to
leave  behind  us  either  precision  in  the  designation  of  re-
lations, or  such  numerical  attributes  as  accompany  though
without exhausting the individuality of  contents. For
these  reasons  it  is  better  not  to  consider  that  we  are  here
returning  to  Analogy,  but  rather  that  we  are  approaching,
from  the  side  of  exact  science,  tlie  hypothetical  judgment.


74  Induction  and  Reasoning.  [bookii.

which  forms  the  meeting-point  between  the  concrete  and
abstract  forms  of  inference.  And  the  hypothetical  judg-
ment, especially  when  retaining  a  partially  quantitative
content,  represents  what  may  be  called  the  wider  or  the
philosophical  sense  in  which  mechanism  prevails  throughout
the  knowable  world.  In  many  regions  it  is  not  much  that
this  view  of  things  gives  us  ;  but  it  is  always  something.

It  is  needless  to  pursue  this  hypothetical  judgment  through
all  the  gradations  in  which  it  embodies  the  idea  of  propor-
tion throughout  the  sciences.  Everywhere  we  have  in  the
background  the  strictly  numerable  relations  of  space,  time
and  mass.  The  exhibition  of  connected  groups  of  contents
as  a  and  a  series,  in  both  of  which  the  terms  are  as  nearly
as  possible  commensurable,  is  the  ideal  of  natural  science,
or  oi physical  science  in  the  strict  sense.  How  far  in  detail
chemistry  or  biology  may  be  reducible  in  this  sense — for
there  is  no  other  sense  in  which  they  can  be — to  molecular
physics,  is  a  question  of  fact  and  practice.  At  present  it
must  often  seem  as  if  instead  of  a  and  a  series  we  had
rather  a  and  x  series,  i.  e.  correspondences  in  which
even  the  more  quantitative  series  has  hardly  a  true  ratio
between  its  terms,  while  the  less  quantitative  series  has  no
ratio  at  all.  I  have  in  my  mind  such  correspondences  as
those  between  changes  of  temperature  and  allotropic
phenomena  in  chemical  agents,  or  again  between  changes  of
temperature  and  degrees  of  irritability  in  organic  beings.
But  the  changes  of  temperature  themselves,  considered  as  an
a  series,  have  behind  them  as  a  true  a  series  their  mechanical
equivalents  in  the  way  of  mass  and  motion  (footpounds),
and  thus  the  whole  phenomena,  even  those  of  allotropism,
have  ultimately  a  true  correspondence  with  a  genuine  a
series.  Such  a  correspondence  would  form  the  content  of  a
hypothetical  judgment,  under  which  quasi-subsumptive  in-
ference would  be  possible.
Conscious-  ^  \\  ig  under  this  modification  of '  a  and  a  series '  that  we
Conserva-  Ought  to  Consider  such  a  question  as  the  relation  of  the
tion  of physical  changes  in  the  human  organism  to  the  activities  of


Chap.  II.]  Work  and  Consciousness.  75

consciousness.  I  am  not  now  dealing  with  the  sheer  ques-
tion of  fact,  whether  in  the  human  or  other  organism,  con-
sidered as  a  machine,  the  production  of  work  can  be
experimentally  proved  to  be  limited  by  the  supply  of
mechanical  energy.  We  know  too  well  from  daily  ex-
perience that  the  output  of  work  has  gradations  and  a  limit
— a  limit  related  at  any  rate  inter  alia  to  the  supply  of
food.  That  this  limit  is  prescribed  by  conditions  precisely
analogous  to  those  which  are  embodied  in  the  working  of
every  machine,  viz.  by  the  constancy  of  energy,  seems  to  be
the  natural  assumption  so  long  as  no  other  principle  of
gradation  and  of  limit  is  convincingly  demonstrated.

But  we  now  come  upon  a  second  difficulty.  We  assume
that  molecular  change  and  muscular  contractions  in  the
organism  must  be  taken  as  theoretically  subject  to  the  con-
stancy of  energy,  i.  e.  that  life  or  the  soul  so  far  as  operative
in  or  through  the  organism  cannot  create  energy  out  of
nothing  ^.  These  changes  and  contractions  either  are,  or
are  reducible  to,  mechanical  equivalents  in  motion  and
mass,  and  between  them  and  the  supply  of  energy  a  true
a  and  a  proportion  might,  if  our  knowledge  permitted,  be
established.

But  between  either  these  organic  changes  or  the  expen-
diture of  energy,  on  the  one  hand,  and  the  states  of  con-
sciousness which  sometimes  attend  these  changes  on  the
other,  no  possible  proportion  could  hold  good.  Here  we
have  then  a  pair  of  series  a  and  x  (organic  changes  and
consciousness)  on  the  basis  of  a  pair  a  and  a  (expenditure
of  energy  and  organic  changes).  It  does  not  matter  for
our  purpose  here  whether  consciousness  is  independent
work  performed  by  the  organism,  or  is  an  unaccountable

*  I  cannot  think  that  Wundt,  Logik,  iL  p.  507,  really  means  to  deny  this,
though  his  expressions  are  bewildering.  '  Hier  (in  the  spiritual  development)
gilt  vielmehr  (as  against  the  law  of  constancy  of  energ))  ein  Gesetz  unbegrenzter
NeuschbpfuDg  geistiger  Energie.'  To  judge  from  the  Physiologische  Psych,
ii.  pp.  461-3,  he  thinks  that  'Geist'  is  operative  throughout  nature,  and  its
*  creation  of  energy '  must  be  a  question  merely  of  new  forms  of  action.  But
I  cannot  thoroughly  understand  his  view.


76  Induction  and  Reasoning.  [bookii.

attendant  upon  such  work  which  is  not  represented  in  its
cost,  or  lastly,  a  consequence,  or  '  effect '  if  we  like,  of
certain  peculiar  organic  work,  represented  in  the  mechanical
cost  of  such  work,  and  inseparable  from  such  work  except
by  an  utterly  unmotived  abstraction.  In  all  of  these  cases
we  have,  whether  directly  or  through  organic  activities
known  to  accompany  consciousness,  what  may  be  called  an
a  and  a  relation,  or  more  truly  an  a  and  x  relation  mediated
through  a,  between  mechanical  work  and  consciousness.
But  on  the  side  of  consciousness  of  course  no  ratio  can  be
established,  and  therefore  there  is  no  proportion.  We
cannot  safely  say  that  to  learn  twenty  lines  of  Virgil
demands  twice  the  expenditure  of  work  that  is  needed  to
learn  ten.  We  cannot  say  that  to  write  the  same  letter
requires  the  same  exertion  on  one  day  and  on  another.
We  must  however  be  on  guard  here.  Interruption,  a
different  state  of  memory,  obstacles  in  the  content,  impair
the  reliability  of  what  might  seem  a  unit  of  mental  work.
But  mere  weariness  of  the  organism  which  may  lengthen
the  time  taken  and  the  apparent  exertion  demanded,  seems
only  to  affect  the  proportional  and  not  the  absolute  work
needed.  What  we  have  under  such  circumstances  is  merely
a  case  of  a  weak  machine  doing  slowly  what  a  strong
one  does  at  one  blow.  The  weak  machine  may  however  be
destroyed  by  application  to  work  too  heavy  for  it,  and  in
this  sense  even  an  identical  unit  of  work  has  not  always
the  same  total  effect.

If  a  unit  cannot  be  obtained  for  the  ;i:  or  a  series,  what
can  our  would-be  proportion  do  for  us  ?  It  enables  us  to
say  generally,  though  not  precisely,  that  amount  of  even
intellectual  activity  varies  as  expenditure  of  mechanical
energy  and  is  limited  by  the  sources  from  which  that
energy  is  drawn  ;  and  further,  to  say  precisely,  though  only
as  a  hypothetical  judgment  of  which  the  condition  can  never
be  entirely  fulfilled,  that  if  we  could  equate  two  amounts  of
intellectual  activity,  or  if  we  could  have  the  same  intellec-
tual activity  repeated  under  the  same  conditions,  we  should


Chap.  II.]  The  Thinking  Being.  77

find  it  had  absorbed  or  had  been  accompanied  by  the  same
amount  of  mechanical  work.  There  is,  that  is  to  say,  a
formal  and  constant  correspondence  between  amount  of
mechanical  energy  and  amount  of  intellectual  work ;  but
mechanical  equivalence  is  so  subordinate  an  aspect  of  such
work  that  this  constant  relation  tells  us  nothing  by  way  of
calculation,  and  only  embodies  in  an  abstract  principle
what  we  knew  before — if  he  does  not  eat,  neither  can  he
think.

It  may  be  objected  that  intellectual  activity  apart  from
molecular  change,  which  latter  is  not  intellectual,  absorbs
no  work  at  all.  But  Avhen  any  one  can  show  us  thought
apart  from  an  organism  it  will  be  time  enough  to  speak  of
thought  as  an  activity  not  dependent  upon  organic  changes.
Prima  facie  the  complex  molecular  changes  Avhich  accom-
pany thought  have  thought  for  their  natural  outcome  and
consequence,  and  owe  their  high  mechanical  cost  to  this
characteristic.  That  no  mechanical  expenditure  goes
directly  to  thought,  but  all  goes  to  molecular  change  which
is  in  some  cases  accompanied  by  thought,  is  only  what
we  should  naturally  expect  supposing  thought  to  be  con-
ditioned by  the  activity  of  a  physical  organism.  In  any
other  case,  i.  e.  supposing  a  contingent  of  energy  to  dis-
appear into  the  thought-process  and  be  unaccounted  for  in
the  balance-sheet  of  the  body,  we  should  have  a  propor-
tionate amount  of  thought  unaccompanied  by  material
change,  which  is  unknown  in  our  entire  experience  and  con-
trary to  the  whole  analogy  of  that  experience.  All  that
we  can  say  is  that  the  thinking  being,  as  we  know  him,  is
thus  and  thus  conditioned.  We  cannot  safely  separate  in
theory  what  can  never,  to  our  experience,  be  separated  in
fact.

iii.  Mechanism  in  the  widest  or  ultimate  sense  is  thus  The  Me-
compatible  with  the  disappearance  of  the  ratio  in  both  of  aspect  of
the  corresponding  series. The  principle  of  '  mechanism*  is  K°ow-
by  this  curtailment  reduced  to  the  law  of  Sufficient  Reason, "
and  simply  expresses  the  point  of  view  from  which  the


78  Induction  and  Reasoning,  [book  ii.

scientific  understanding  necessarily  and  inevitably  regards
the  world.  This  point  of  view  is  not  a  tyranny  to  be  avoided,
but  a  claim  which  must  be  satisfied.  The  Understanding
is  a  necessary  moment  in  the  Reason.  Instead  of  precise
proportion,  enabling  us  to  construct  or  to  predict  by  a
formal  process,  we  have  in  mechanical  determination  thus
understood  a  conception  which  confronts  us  with  a  material
problem.  A  man's  character  deteriorates,  or  the  pros-
perity of  a  nation  decays.  The  conception  of  mechanism
or  of  sufticient  reason  entitles  us  to  treat  these  phenomena
as  problems  demanding  explanation.  They  must  not  be
miraculous,  i.  e.  not  isolated,  '  cut  off  with  an  axe '  from  the
system  of  knowledge.  We  express  this  demand  by  saying
that  every  change — or  more  generally,  every  modification
— has  its  reason.  It  is  only  our  tendency  to  illustrate  the
universal  by  the  plural  that  makes  us  state  the  principle  as
if  it  necessarily  applied  to  a  number  of  examples  in  which
the  same  ground  has  the  same  consequence.  What  we
really  mean  is  that  every  content  is  a  consequent,  and  that
every  consequent  has  a  ground.  That  the  connection  of
ground  and  consequent  is  necessary,  and  therefore  if  the
one  is  repeated  without  modifying  circumstances  then  the
other  is  repeated  without  modifying  circumstances,  is  in-
volved in  the  point  of  view  from  which  we  speak  of  ground
and  consequent  at  all.  But  what  we  primarily  mean  is
objectivity,  not  uniformity.

Some  uniformity,  however,  is  for  us  a  corollary  from
objectivity.  The  ultimate  fact  of  knowledge,  on  which  the
objective  relation  of  ground  and  consequent  depends,  is
the  existence  of  systematic  connections.  Now  a  system  is  a
whole,  a  universal,  an  identity  in  difference.  From  the  very
beginning  this  is  what  we  meant  by  something  objective,
something  by  which  intelligence  could  agree  with  itself  in  the
world  of  meanings.  But  such  a  system  or  identity,  however
heterogeneous  the  parts  that  enter  into  it,  of  course  pervades
all  these  parts  as  a  common  character.  As  we  saw  in  the
last  chapter,  if  «,  b,  c  are  mere  particulars,  there  is  no


Chap.  II.]  Abstract  Hypothesis.  79

bridge  from  the  one  to  the  other.  A  connecting  quality-
there  must  be,  although  it  need  by  no  means  take  the  shape
of  an  immediate  and  simple  quality.  Thus  in  highly  com-
plicated matters  we  go  back  again  to  an  earlier  function  of
knowledge,  and  substitute  equational  comparison  for  exact
enumeration.  But  the  comparison  is  not  here  the  ground
of  inference  ;  the  contents  have  the  partly  quantitative
relation,  which  admits  of  such  comparison,  as  a  consequence
of  their  systematic  connection,  but  the  grounds  of  inference
lie  in  the  systematic  connection  itself.  Let  the  a  series  be
the  phases  of  the  artistic  individuality  of  a  painter,  and  let
the  a  series  be  a  chronologically  arranged  series  of  pictures
in  w^hich  these  phases  display  their  effects.  In  such  series
we  shall  always  have,  among  other  processes  of  judgment
and  inference,  a  comparison  by  way  of  equation  applied
to  pervading  qualities  as  between  phase  and  phase,  and
between  picture  and  picture.  No  one  would  doubt  that
Turner's  water-colour  picture  of  Durham  painted  in  1835
has  more  of  certain  striking  qualities  commonly  associated
with  Turner's  art  than  that  painted  in  1802.  But  of  course
there  would  be  no  sense  in  saying  that  the  one  is  twice  or
three  times  as  '  Turneresque '  as  the  other.

In  series  like  these  we  have  subsumption  or  abstract
hypothesis — which  latter  is  the  bridge  from  mechanical
construction  to  concrete  systematic  interference — according
to  the  nature  of  the  subject-matter.  In  tracing  the  phases
of  an  artist's  genius  we  have  properly  subsumption,  the
unity  which  operates  being  concrete  and  self-contained.
But  yet  as  regarded  in  the  light  of  causal  ideas  the  phase
of  mind  may  be  distinguished  from  the  picture  produced,
and  the  one  regarded  as  the  cause  or  ground  from  which,
on  the  latent  basis  of  a  real  individuality,  the  other  neces-
sarily issues.  From  this  relative  point  of  view  the  connection
would  be  expressed  by  abstract  hypothesis,  '  If  a^,  then  a^.'
In  this  aspect  everything  in  the  universe  may  be  referred  to
conditions  outside  itself,  and  nothing  is  free,  complete,  or
self-contained. For  to  regard  things  thus  is  simply  a  phase


8o  Induction  and  Reasoning.  [Book  ii.

or  moment  of  knowledge,  the  phase  which  consists  in
determining  every  x  in  terms  of  some  correlated  y.  Cause
and  condition,  reason  and  ground,  are  only  species  of  the
generic  idea  which  presides  over  thought  of  this  tj^pe.  But
in  ground  we  have  as  we  saw^  a  conception  in  which  the
correlated  terms  tend  to  fall  together,  and  to  pass  from
being  parts  related  within  a  system  to  being  the  system
itself.  The  whole  conception  which  we  are  discussing — the
conception  of  '  sufficient  reason ' — is  simply  a  corollary  of
or  aspect  in  the  ultimate  nature  of  the  universal,  which  is
in  other  words  the  ultimate  nature  of  thought  itself.  We
have  constantly  reiterated  that  every  universal  is  an  identity
in  difference  ;  and  it  is  only  the  converse  of  this  to  say  that
every  difference  has  a  distinct  and  assignable  place  among
the  differences  of  a  universal.

The  statement  of  the  principle  of  sufficient  reason  which
was  laid  down  above,  '  There  is  no  difference  ^  without  its
reason,'  may  be  illustrated  by  the  formula  in  which  Lotze^
embodies  it, 'A  +  B=:C.  This  formula  is  intended  to  mean
that  a  real  subject  A  can  only  pass  into  a  specific  phase  C
under  an  assignable  condition  B.  The  '  proof  or  analysis
of  the  principle  must  be  reserved  for  a  later  chapter.  Here
I  am  only  dealing  with  its  import.  And  we  see  its  import
reduced  to  the  most  abstract  type  when  we  are  in  a  stage
beyond  proportion  and  yet  have  not  returned  to  true  sub-
sumption,  i.  e.  when  we  are  dealing  with  the  pure  hypo-
thetical judgment.  For  we  have  at  this  stage  a  de  facto
correspondence  of  which  the  ultimate  ground  is  more  or
less  latent,  between  the  terms  a  and  a,  b  and  /3,  and  so
forth.  What  then  do  we  mean  by  correspondence  }  We
could  not  say  that  a  and  a  correspond  if  a  and  a  were
respectively  isolated  occurrences  of  their  kind.  For  what
could  possibly  justify  us  in  picking  them  out  of  the  myriad

1  Cp.  Bk.  I.  chap.  vi.

'  P.  78,  above.  It  is  commonly  worded  'there  is  no  change^  etc.,  but
I  have  attempted  to  show  in  Book  I.  chap.  i.  that  change  is  simply  a  case  of
difference  and  needs  no  separate  logical  treatment.

^  Logik,  sect.  63.


Chap,  u.]  The  Understanding.  8i

complications  of  reality  and  attaching  them  together  to  the
exclusion  of  other  events  and  relations  ?  Correspondence
involves  the  recognition  of  a  universal  which  fixes  the
relations  of  the  terms  that  correspond.  If  the  series  a,  b^  c
is  to  correspond  to  the  series  a,  ;3,  y,  then  both  series,  simply
in  order  to  the  possibility  of  selecting  them,  must  be
capable  of  being  r^arded  as  Ca.  ab-,  dc  and  Oa,  a^,  oy.  If
in  a  combination  of  musical  sounds  a  slight  harshness  a  is
raised  to  a  discord  6,  then  the  consequent  feeling  of
pleasurable  excitement  a  passes  into  a  feeling  of  pain  ^.
In  virtue  of  being  phases  of  the  same  combination  the  two
sounds  may  be  represented  as  a^  and  a^  respectively;  and
the  two  phases  of  emotion,  in  virtue  at  any  rate  of  relation
to  the  same  series  of  sounds,  may  be  represented  by  Oa  and
o^  respectively.  But  neither  sounds  nor  feelings,  of  course,
are  terms  between  which  a  ratio  subsists.  What  we  can
infer  is,  by  a  process  which  is  half-subsumption  and  half-
hypothetical  judgment,  '  In  a  pair  of  series  where  the  sound
aa  causes  the  feeling  a^,  the  sound  a^  will  cause  the  feeling
ae.'  When  we  develope  any  such  doctrine  as  that  the
source  of  pain  is  intermittent  irritation  of  sense,  of  which
musical  discord  is  a  species,  we  pass  into  subsumption  of
the  higher  kind,  which  has  absorbed  into  itself  what  can  be
done  by  mechanical  construction.

The  point  of  view  which  we  have  been  considering — that
of  reflection  and  relativity — is  the  point  of  view  which  has
been  distinguished  by  Kant  and  Hegel  as  the  standpoint  of
the  understanding.  It  is  not  separable  in  kind  from  the
mode  of  consideration  which  the  same  thinkers  have  desig-
nated by  the  term  Reason.  Nor  is  it  an  intelligible  conten-
tion, even  if  favoured  by  the  language  of  Kant  in  dealing
with  practical  philosophy,  that  Reason  could  be  actual  and
operative  otherwise  than  as  completing  and  containing  the
understanding.  That  the  understanding  must  have  its  rights
is  one  of  the  cardinal  principles  of  Hegel,  which  Lotze  has
but  laboriously  and  ingeniously  illustrated  in  his  analysis  of
the  pervading  mechanical  aspect  of  the  world. The  real

VOL.  II.  G


82  Enumeration  and  Mathematics.

prophet  of  the  understanding,  however,  was  Schopenhauer.
His  treatment  of  the  principle  of  sufficient  reason  as  atoncethe
fundamental  axiom  of  human  science  and  the  innate  source
of  its  illusions,  forms  an  ultimate  and  irreversible  criticism
on  the  aspect  of  intelligence  which  consists,  to  sum  up  its
nature  in  a  popular  but  not  inaccurate  phrase,  in  explaining
everything  by  something  else — a  process  which  taken  by
itself  is  necessarily  unending  and  unsatisfying.

In  returning  from  the  consideration  of  abstract  necessary
relations  to  that  of  concrete  real  totalities,  we  must  remark
that  ideally  speaking  every  concrete  real  totality  can  be
analysed  into  a  complex  of  abstract  necessary  relations.
Were  this  not  so,  as  it  is  Wundt's  and  Lotze's  great  achieve-
ment to  have  shown  in  detail,  teleology  itself  would  vanish.
For  adaptation  disappears  if  the  end  can  dispense  with  means,
and  a  universe  which  had  no  necessary  connections  between
its  parts  could  have  no  definite  or  significant  structure  as  a
whole.  In  the  remainder  of  the  present  Book  I  shall
attempt  to  put  these  relations  in  a  clearer  light.


CHAPTER III.
Analogy.

We  now  take  up  the  thread  from  the  end  of  sect,  i  of
the  last  chapter,  and  returning  into  the  track  of  concrete
inference,  we  have  to  ask  ourselves  how  we  go  forward  in^
inference  from  a  simple  enumerative  Induction  when  we  do^
not  accept  the  task  of  completing  the  enumeration.  In  this
case  we  no  longer  count  the  examples,  but  we  wejgh
them.  We  turn  the  focus  of  attention  upon  the  concrete
content  which  as  subject  of  both  premises,  as  a  real  thing  or
things,  formed  the  middle  term  of  Induction,  and  endeavour
to  deepen  it  by  observation,  and  to  define  its  relations  by
analysis.  The  first  effect  of  this  procedure  is  to  transform
the  content  in  question  from  a  subject  into  a  predicate,  as
no  longer  a  qualification  tacitly  presupposed  of  reality,  but
as  an  attribute  explicitly  referred  to  it  and  under  process  of
definition  and  extension.

I.  As  regards  the  relation  between  Analogy  and  Enumer-  Analogy
ative  Induction,  we  have  to  remember  that  Induction  only  merative
gave  us  a  problem  or  suggestion  ;  and  consequently  we  can-  Indncdon.
not  arrange  the  two  types  of  inference  in  a  simple  conca-
tenation by  taking  the  Inductive  conclusion  as  the  analogical
premise. Rather  we  have  in  Analogy  to  go  back  upon  the
suggestive  process  of  Induction,  and  repeat  it  with the
requisite  difference. Suppose  that  the  Inductive  Inference
or  grounded  conjecture  has  been —

The  poor  people  abed  are  pauperised  x ;

The  poor  people  abed  are  constantly  cared  for  by
charitable  persons  y ;

.'.  Being  cared  for  by  charitable  persons  j  may  have  to
do  with  their  being  pauperised  x.

If  now  we  desire,  as  we  ought,  further  to  examine  this


[


84  Analogy.  [bookii.

suggestion  on  the  basis  of  the  direct  experience  which  gene-
rated it,  we  shall  still  make  this  experience — the  cases  a,  b,  c,  d
— the  middle  term  or  ground  of  inference,  but  we  shall  divert
our  attentionfrom  the  number  of  the  examples  to  their  nature,
and  shall  therefore  put  their  nature  as  an  attribute  in  the
place  of  a  predicate  common  to  both  judgments.  Thus  we
obtain  an  argument  having  a  form  akin  to  that  of  the  Aris-
totelian second  figure.  And  the  premises  are  now  no  longer
conjunctive  individual  judgments,  but  are  passing  into
generic  judgments.

In  the  pauperised  type  x,  what  strikes  us  on  further
examining  the  cases  is  the  loss  of  independence  (A
as  common  content  oi  ab  c  d)\

In  the  charitably-cared-for  type  y,  what  strikes  us  on
further  examining  the  cases  is  the  loss  of  independence
(A  as  common  content  oi  a  b  c  d)\

.'.  The  type  y  has  a  fundamental  feature  A  akin  to  the
type  X  and  the  two  are  thus  closely  coherent.

We  are  apt  to  think  that  in  analogy  we  must  conclude
from  old  instances  to  new  instances.  But  analogy  is  essen-
tially an  argument  about  the  significance  of  a  type,  or  of
what  in  botany  are  called  characters.  Of  course  however
this  inference,  like  all  others,  has  the  aspect  of  discovery  as
well  as  the  aspect  of  proof.  The  deeper  theoretical  need  is
to  find  the  link  and  limit  of  connection  between  the  characters
X  and  jj'  sometimes  observed  in  conjunction,  i.  e.  \.o  prove  the
one  of  the  other.  But  the  reality  of  the  distinction  between
X  and  y  which  gives  interest  to  the  inference  makes  it  prac-
tically certain  that  in  some  examples  we  shall  be  first  struck
by  y  and  in  some  first  by  x,  and  that  we  shall  often  need
to  make  the  circuit  through  the  identical  nature  A  before
we  can  even  detect  or  have  ground  to  believe  in  the  remain-
ing character  x  or  y.  This  is  the  aspect  of  discovery.  Proof
overcomes  logical  disconnection,  discovery  overcomes  appa-
rent presented  disconnection.  Thus  our  account  of  Analogy
can  really  satisfy  the  popular  idea  that  inference  is,  here  as
in  Induction,  from  particulars  to  particulars.


Chap.  III.] Front  Induction  to  Analogy.  85

I  subjoin  one  or  two  simple  examples,  in  order  to  illus-
trate the  connection  of  proof  and  discovery,  and  the  working
of  the  process.

Enumerative  Induction  (<7r  observation  in  single  instance).

Almost  all  animals  have  some  power  of  self-movement ;

Almost  all  animals  have  some  degree  of  sentience  ;

.*.  Sentience  may  be  intimately  connected  with  self-
movement.

Analogical  Enquiry.

Self-moving  creatures  are  creatures  in  need  of  special
nourishment  and  protection  {qua  living  creatures) ;

Sentient  creatures  are  in  need  of  special  nourishment  and
protection  {qua  living  creatures)  ;

.•.  Sentience  is  connected  (by  the  requirements  of  animal
life)  with  self-movement.

I  may  give  another  instance  which  shows  the  transition
from  Induction  to  Analogy  just  not  made.  Newton
guessed  ^  that  a  diamond  was  combustible  because  of  its
high  refractive  index  relatively  to  its  identity,  a  feature
which  he  had  observed  in  many  combustible  bodies.

Enumerative  Induction.

Oil,  Canada  balsam,  &c.  are  combustible  ;

Oil,  Canada  balsam,  &c.  have  a  high  refractive  index
relatively  to  density ;

.'.  High  refractive  index  may  be  connected  with  com-
bustibility.

In  the  case  of  the  diamond  the  combustibility  had  not
been  observed,  so  that  when  applied  to  it  the  conclusion
was  a  prediction  or  discovery.  But  the  essential  import  of
the  conclusion  would  have  been  just  the  same  if  no  new
case  had  been  in  question.

The  next  step  would  have  been  to  say —

'  Combustibility  has  to  do  with  such  and  such  attributes
of  oil,  Canada  balsam,  &c.

High  refractive  index  has  to  do  with  these  same  attributes.

^  See  Mill's  Logic,  ii.  p.  88.  I  write  merely  on  the  faith  of  the  place  in  Mill.
The  instances  bywhichi  illustrate  Newton'sguess  are  thereforeofmy  own  invention.


86  Analogy.  [bookii.

/.  High  refractive  index  is  fundamentally  connected  with

combustibility.'
But  this  step,  which  would  have  constituted  an  analogical
inference,  has  not,  as  I  understand  from  the  passage  in  Mill,
been  taken.

We  may  now  look  at  an  instance  drawn  from  the  relation
of  natural  kinds.

Enumerative  Induction.

The exotic Pelargonia have a peculiar  herring-bone

structure  in  the  petals  ;
The exotic Pelargonia have  the  same  kind  of  seed-
vessels  as  our  wild  geraniums ;
.*.  In  flowers  with  the  peculiar  seed-vessels  of  our  wild
geraniums  it  is  worth  while  to  look  for  the  herring-
bone structure  in  the  petals.
Analogy.

The  herring-bone  structure  is  conjoined  in  the Pelar-
gonia with  the  characters  of  Geranieae  ;
The  flowers  with  such  seed-vessels  as  our  wild  geraniums

have  the  characters  of  Geranieae  ;
.•.  That  these  flowers,  e.g.  our  wild  geraniums,  should
have  the  peculiar  herring-bone  structure  ^  is  exceed-
ingly probable.
Botanical  classification might almost be said to rest
wholly  on  analogy. The  above  guess,  like  a  thousand  and
one  such  guesses  which  every  field  botanist  is  continually
making,  is  verified  in  fact. The  eye  that  can  detect  the
dominant  habit  of  a  natural  gemis  or  order  in  an  unfamiliar
species  is  constantly  inferring  in  analogical  form,  on  the
ground  of  generic  identity,  to  hundreds  of  details,  which  as
as  a  rule  confirm  its  diagnosis  on  more  minute  inspection.
And the term diagnosis, logically applicable, but not

^  As  a  matter  of  fact,  all  the  Geranieae  which  I  have  examined  possess  this
structure.  I  might  have  mentioned  this  verification  immediately  after  the
Induction ;  but  this  would  really  take  us  into  mere  enumeration  of  instances.
It  is  the  coherence  with  the  properties  of  a  natural  kind  that  ajone  gives  any
help  towards  a  general  conclusion.


Chap.  III.]  The  First  Suggestion.  87

customarily  applied,  to  botanical  science,  reminds  us  of
another  great  province  of  knowledge  in  which  analogical
inference  is  our  guide  and  counsellor.  As  in  the  normal  so
in  the  abnormal  activities — the  diseases — of  the  organic
world,  it  is  analogy  that  is  the  chief  clue  to  what  is  taking
place  and  to  what  we  must  anticipate.  Diagnosis  is  to
symptoms  what  classification  is  to  characters.  And  finally
we  may  here  mention  the  class  of  examples  to  which  we
shall  shortly  return  as  throwing  the  strongest  light  upon
the  true  rationale  of  analogy,  although  or  because  they
tend  ultimately  to  pass  beyond  its  province.  I  mean  our
judgment  of  the  actual  use  or  even  of  the  intentional
object  of  mechanical  adaptations  of  every  kind,  whether  in
nature  or  in  the  work  of  man.  Thus  we  may  infer  by
Analogy,

Cutting-tools  have  edges,  and  places  for  handles  '/ .

These  flints  have  edges  and  places  for  handles ;

.•.  These  flints  are  cutting  tools.

Here  we  go  at  once  to  analogy,  without  passing  through
the  observation  of  conjunctions  as  2i  first  suggestion.  It  is
not  simply  from  seeing  handles  and  edges  conjoined  in
knives  or  chisels  that  we  know  a  cutting-tool  must  have  a
handle  and  an  edge.  We  know  this  from  extraneous  con-
siderations, especially  from  the  texture  and  use  of  the
human  hand.  But  nevertheless  we  might  never  have  dis-
cussed the  coherence  of  these  attributes  if  we  had  never
seen  them  in  conjunction ;  and  further,  in  the  new  instance
of  the  flints,  we  have  had  to  go  through  a  process  of  obser-
vation which  told  us  that  here  too  there  were  both  edges
and  handles  or  places  for  handles.  Thus  the  present  ex-
ample illustrates  at  once  the  true  nature  of  analogy,  and  the
ground  and  degree  of  its  dependence  on  Induction.  The
observation  '  Flint  tools  have  edges,  flint  tools  have
handles,'  does  not  linger  in  the  stage  of  induction,  simply
because  we  are  not  dependent  on  the  nature  of  flint  tools
to  tell  us  the  connection  in  use  betw^een  a  handle  and  an
edge. We  leap  at  once  to  this  notion  of  cutting-tools,  and


88  Analogy.  [bookii.

compare  the  flints  with  them  in  respect  of  the  conjoined
attributes  which  we  try  to  deepen  and  define.
Logical  2.  The  logical  nature  of  analogy  may  be  analysed  as

criticism  of  r^ii^„,„
analogy. foUowS.

Undistri- i-  As  a  formal  syllogism  in  the  second  figure,  having

^".*ff, . an  affirmative  conclusion,  the  analogical  argument  has  the
middle  m  ^  la  &

fig,  2.  fallacy  of  undistributed  middle.  We  need  not  indeed
trouble  ourselves  at  this  stage  with  questions  of  distri-
bution involving  the  extension  of  the  judgment.  Never-
theless a  fault  in  the  extensional  relations  of  an  argument
infallibly  indicates  something  which  is  prima  facie  di  fault  in
its  connection  of  content.  In  the  present  case  the  fault  is
this — that  what  is  materially  the  ground  of  Knowledge,  the
content  which  underlies  and  links  together  the  two  matters
which  demand  explanation,  is,  qua  predicate  or  character-
istic, in  its  wrong  place,  the  place  of  a  consequent.  Now
according  to  the  ordinary  interpretation  of  the  judgment,
'  of  which  we  have  frequently  spoken  and  which  holds  good
for  our  present  level  ^  the  same  consequent  may  have  any
number  of  independent  grounds.  There  is  therefore  no
formal  necessity  whatever  for  the  two  grounds  or  antece-
dents which  in  this  case  possess  the  same  consequent  to
have  any  connection  with  each  other  beyond  the  fact  that
they  do  possess  it.

But  on  the  same  ordinary  interpretation  of  the  judgment
if  we  deny  the  formal  consequent  of  either  of  the  grounds
while  affirming  it  of  the  other,  we  can  then  deny  that  the
two  grounds  in  question  are  connected  through  the  universal
suggested  in  the  premises  before  us.  Thus  the  negative
argument  escapes  the  formal  defect  which  attaches  to  the
affirmative.  About  any  further  or  other  connection  that
they  may  or  may  not  have  the  denial  tells  us  nothing,
and  therefore  it  is  really  a  denial  not  of  all  or  any  con-
nection, but  of  a  particular  connection  through  a  particular
middle  term. The  customary  omission  in  the  conclusion

*  For  the  judgment  is  not  purged  of  irrelevancy  till  it  has  passed  through
scientific  induction.


Chap.  III.]  No  Major  Premise.  89

to  specify  the  excluded  connexion  is  a  fallacy  a  dicto
secundum  quid  ad  dictum  simpliciter.  It  may  be  said  that
the  denial  takes  on  the  absoluteness  of  the  assertion  on
which  it  rests.  '  Every  Tory  is  a  good  man ;  He  is  not  a
good  man  ;  .*.  He  is  not  a  Tory.'  If  the  major  is  true  without
reserve  the  conclusion  is  true  without  reserve,  and  in  logic
we  are  to  suppose  our  premises  true.  But  still  we  must
consider  what  the  judgment  means,  i.  e.  w^hat  it  really  is.
And  no  judgment  is  absolutely  meant.  The  conclusion
does  not  really  represent  the  inference  as  a  concrete
thought  unless  we  repeat  in  the  conclusion, '  He  is  not  a
Tory,  so  far  as  his  not  being  a  good  man  prevents  his
being  one.'  This  refinement  has  no  exclusive  relation  to
analogical  argument  or  to  fig.  2,  for  the  negative  argument
falls  into  fig.  i  as  readily  as  into  fig.  2,  the  ground  and
consequent  in  negation  being  reciprocal.  In  order  to  give
the  criticism  a  peculiar  relation  to  analogy  we  must  say,
'  He  is  not  a  Tory,  so  far  as  the  peculiar  way  in  which  he
is  not  a  good  man  prevents  his  being  one.'  This  positive
way  is  variable.

Except  then  for  the  purpose  of  negative  inference,  which
is  not  purely  analogical,  the  form  of  analogical  argument  in
fig.  2  is  at  variance  with  its  matter,  and  represents  no  infer-
ential necessity  at  all.  Inferential  necessity  is  either  sub-
sumptive  or  constructive.  In  order  to  obtain  subsumptive
necessity  one  of  the  premises  would  have  to  be  converted
and  become  a  major  premise.  And  this  conversion  would
have  to  be  material,  not  merely  formal ;  for  a  formal  con-
version of  an  aflfirmative  generic  judgment  would  destroy
its  generic  character  and  make  it  incapable  of  standing  as
a  major  premise.  The  Analogical  inference  as  it  stands
shares  with  enumerative  Induction  the  peculiarity  of  being
a  subsumptive  inference  without  a  major  premise — an
argument  from  a  concrete  content  without  the  assertion
that  this  content  is  absolutely  dominant  for  the  purpose  of
the  argument.  Again,  in  order  to  obtain  constructive  or
abstract  necessity  the relations  of  the  contents  must  be


9o


Analogy.


[Book  II.


Real  value
of  Analo-
gical Argu-
ment.


reduced  into  abstract  and  mechanical  relations  akin  to  the
universals  embodied  in  the  pure  hypothetical  judgment  or
in  the  equation.  The  formal  defect  of  analogy  as  it  stands  is
expressed  by  the  'probably'  inserted  in  the  conclusion,  which
indicates  a  coherence  under  conditions  not  precisely  known,
ii.  Seeing  that  the  form  of  analogical  argument  is  prima
facie  inconclusive,  on  what  does  its  value  really  depend  ?
It  represents,  we  said,  the  phase  of  thought  in  which  we  no
longer  count  but  weigh  the  examples.  It  might  be  said
therefore  that  analogy  is  a  material  and  not  a  formal  infer-
ence. This  is  so  far  true  that  the  value  of  analogy  depends
not  on  a  formal  conjunction  of  attributes  in  a  subject,  but
on  the  material  governing  power  or  essentiality  of  a  predi-
cate. Everything  turns  on  the  '  importance'  of  the  character
which  forms  the  common  predicate,  and  this  'importance'
is  closely  bound  up  with  completeness  of  definition.  I  will
return  directly  to  the  question  of  the  importance  of  cha-
racters ;  but  it  is  necessary  first  to  point  out  that  an  infer-
ence without  assignable  form  is  no  inference  at  all,  and  that
therefore  it  is  not  correct  to  say  that  analogy  is  a  material
and  not  a  formal  inference.  Every  inference  has  a  form,  in
the  sense  of  a  definite  relation  between  the  differences  of
the  universal  which  the  inference  exhibits.  I  do  not  how-
ever mean  to  say  that  such  a  form  can  be  laid  down  ante-
cedently for  every  inference.  It  is  this  relation,  as  we  have
seen,  which  varies  with  the  nature  of  the  universal,  and
which  by  its  variations  dictates  the  main  types  both  of
judgment  and  of  inference.  We  need  not  here  take  refuge  in
the  form  of  complete  subsumption  through  the  conversion
of  one  judgment.  When  that  is  possible — and  no  doubt
analogy  is  on  the  road  to  it  —  we  are  already  beyond
analogy.  But  the  form  of  analogical  argument  is  to  be
found  in  the  neglected  aspect  of  the  ordinary  judgment,  its
strong  implication  of  a  value  in  the  predicate.  If  all  judg-
ments were  taken  as  reciprocal,  analogy  would  be  ipso  facto
an  argument  from  ground  to  consequent,  besides  being  as  it
is  now  from  consequent  to  ground. 'Two  grounds  that


Chap. III.]  Logical  ''Importance^  91

have  the  same  consequent  ought  to  cohere,'  is  the  form  as  \
it  stands.  '  Two  grounds  that  have  the  same  consequent  j
are  consequents  of  the  same  ground,  therefore  must  cohere,'
is  the  implied  form,  or,  as  we  said  above,  the  matter  of  the
inference.  This  form  might  be  identified  with  fig.  3,  and  so
take  us  back  to  Enumerative  Induction.  But  the  content
being  changed  from  instances  into  their  defined  nature,  we
are  rather  taken  forward  into  the  hypothetical  judgment
as  used  in  constructive  inference,"  or  to  complete  sub-
sumption  in  fig.  I.  With  reciprocal  judgments  the  syllo-
gistic form  becomes  indifferent ;  and  the  premises  of
analogy  are  implicitly  reciprocal^.  That  their  reciprocity
is  implicit  and  not  explicit  is  in  accordance  with  the  nature
of  analogy,  which  is  as  we  have  agreed  only  ^method  of
problematic  conclusion,  not  a  method  of  absolute  and
'precise  determination.

I  now  return  to  the  question  of  the  material  *  importance'
of  characters,  the  attribute  on  which  the  implicit  form  of
analogical  inference  depends.  It  is  possible,  and  is  verified
in  daily  experience,  that  a  character  or  group  of  characters
from  which  the  remaining  properties  of  an  object  cannot
at  present  be  derived  by  mechanical  analysis  may  either
amount  for  inferential  purposes  to  a  ground,  or  at  least
may  serve  as  an  unerring  index  of  the  qualities  of  the
object.  Such  a  character  or  group  of  characters,  and  I  may
add  such  a  symptom  or  group  of  symptoms,  has  logical
'  importance.'

J  will  commit  myself  at  once  to  the  opinion  that  this  im-
portance rests  in  every  case  on  a  presumption  drawn  from

*  The  explicit  fonn  is  A  is  B  ; The  implicit  form  is  B  is  A ;
C  is  B ;  B  is  C ;

.'.  C  is  A.  .•.  C  is  A.

But  the  implicit  form  deals  not  with  mere  instances  as  in  Induction,  but  with
that  B  which  was  found  to  be  essential  in  A  and  C.  Therefore  the  whole
implied  argument  is —

If  B,  then  A  (which  is  also  a  sign  of  B) ;
If  B,  then  C  (which  is  also  a  sign  of  B)  ;
.*.  If  C,  then  B  and  therefore  A.


nI


92  Analogy.  [book  11.

what  I  may  call  morphology,  or  from  teleology ;  these  two
ideas  being  regarded  as  secondary  and  primary  forms  of
the  same  conception.  In  all  objects  or  institutions  made
for  a  purpose  by  man,  at  least  while  their  nature  corre-
sponds to  the  intention  embodied  in  their  structure,  there  is
true  teleology.  In  all  organisms,  parts  of  organisms,  objects
or  structures  that  live  a  life  or  have  in  any  way  a  being
that  is  to  our  eyes  individual  and  distinctive,  there  is
morphology  or  de  facto  teleology.  I  am  aware  that  a  de
facto  teleology  is  a  contradiction  in  terms.  Purpose  implies
more  than  actual  result.  But  as  a  description  of  a  result  in
language  borrowed  from  a  result  of  another  class — from
human  operation — the  phrase  though  contradictory  may
pass  ;  and  it  is  in  this  sense  alone  that  I  employ  it.  If
there  is  a  peculiar  principle  underneath  this  ambiguous
class  of  results,  it  is  at  least  not,  within  our  knowledge,  a
principle  of  intentional  adaptation  by  a  foreseeing  con-
sciousness. But  I  repeat  that  ^ery  universal,  every  per-
sistent identity  in  difference,  just  because  it  is  a  synthesis
of  differences  in  a  universal,  may  be  regarded  as  a  concen-
tration of  means  in  a  distinguishable  result.  How  far  such  a
view  is  '  subjective  '  or  in  what  sense  it  renders  a  real  aspect
of  the  nature  of  things  is  a  question  to  which  I  shall  return.
It  is  on  this  characteristic  of  all  universals  that  anticipa-
tion by  analogy  rests.  Where  we  have  a  constitutive
equation,  i.e.  an  absolute  rule  for  the  synthesis  of  the
differences,  we  can  construct  without  teleology  and  without
analogy.  If,  again,  according  to  Bacon's  dream,  science
could  arrive  at  '  forms '  or  underlying  qualities,  capable  of
doing  the  work  of  constitutive  equations  for  every  natural
attribute  and  every  natural  object,  then  in  presence  of  such
a  form  we  should  not  need  analogy.  Or  where  complete
concrete  subsumption  prevails,  where  we  have  actual  con-
scious teleology,  e.  g.  in  the  philosophical  analysis  of  laws,
.  institutions,  opinions,  logical  activities,  we  should  never
need  analogy  but  for  the  all-important  fact  that  all  these
contents  are  determined  by  growth  and  history  in  a  way


Chap.  III.]  Analogy  and  Teleology.  93

of  which  those  who  make  and  use  them  are  not  aware,  and
which  they  cannot  control.  Hence  all  such  matters  have
an  organic  and  almost  a  mechanical  side,  and  can  be  treated
by  comparative  science — analogy,  as  well  as  by  philosophy
— analysis.  No  actual  law  or  institution  or  idea  has  its
form  exclusively  determined  by  its  explicit  purpose.  All
of  them  are  loaded  with  inherited  matter  which  may  in
part  be  an  incumbrance,  but  in  large  part  serves  purposes
wider  and  not  less  essential  than  the  purpose  which  con-
sciousness is  able  to  recognise.  And  in  human  affairs  there
is  a  bridge  between  the  unconscious  and  the  conscious
function  ;  for  the  latent  purpose — which  as  latent  is  not  a
purpose  at  all — is  actually  one  side  of  the  explicit  purpose
and  is  continually  emerging  into  explicit  consciousness,  so
that  the  de  facto  operation  of  human  energy  in  one  stage
characterises  the  explicit  purpose  of  that  stage  itself
and  enters  into  the  explicit  purpose  of  the  next.  Thus
philosophy  can  deal  with  even  latent  or  unconscious  signifi-
cance partly  as  an  aspect  and  partly  as  a  condition  pre-
cedent of  conscious  significance.  The  history  of  religion  or
of  any  achievement  of  man's  intelligence  is  inexhaustible  in
illustrations  of  this  principle.  Precise  knowledge,  however,
whether  affirmative  or  negative,  whether  constructive  or  sub-
sumptive,  excludes  anticipation  by  analogy,  for  analogy  is
a  stage  on  the  road  to  precise  knowledge  ^.  This  condition
satisfies  the  popular  requirement  -  that  in  Analogy  we  must
know  neither  necessary  connection  nor  necessary  exclusion.

To  explain  the  connection  of  Analog^'  with  Teleology,  I
will  at  once  take  the  strongest  class  of  examples.

We  are  on  the  border  between  analogy  and  a  higher
form  of  inference  when  we  argue  from  a  presumed  genuine
teleology  to  the  conjunction  of  qualities  in  the  content  that
it  governs.  We  are  so  far  already  outside  analogy  that  the
argument  must  consist  largely  of  judgments  upon  actual
mechanical  adaptations,  the  de  facto  use  of  which  is  a
matter  of  precise  knowledge  and  not  of  presumption.  We
*  Compare  however  p.  231  suf  ra.  »  Mill's  Logic,  iL  p.  88.


94  Analogy.  [bookii.

are  not  wholly  outside  analogy,  because  the  de  facto  nature
of  these  adaptations  is  not  enough,  in  the  case  supposed,  to
carry  our  conclusion,  which  needs  the  actual  and  inten-
tional purpose.  This,  in  inferences  of  the  type  supposed,
can  only  rest  upon  presumption.  If  we  find,  near  a  known
seat  of  stone-age  inhabitants,  some  flints  of  peculiar  shape
and  make,  it  is  a  mere  judgment  on  a  matter  of  fact  to  say
whether  they  are  adapted  for  use  as  knives  or  as  hatchets  ;
but  to  say  what  they  were  meant  for,  and  so  actually  used
for,  and  therefore  whether  we  may  expect  to  find  near
them  chips  of  wood  or  bones  of  animals,  is  a  question  for
analogical  inference  based  on  the  nature  of  the  country,  on
the  known  or  supposed  habits  of  the  people,  and  on  any
convergent  indications  in  the  adaptations  of  the  flint  tools
themselves.  Any  character  in  such  a  connected  group  of
characters,  that  gives  the  key  to  the  pervading  purpose  of
the  whole  content  under  examination,  is  an  '  important '
character.  '  Importance  '  is  relation  to  the  purpose  or  per-
vading nature,  the  '  import,'  of  any  system.  If  both
qualities  to  whose  coherence  we  conclude  are  directly  deriv-
able from  the  presumed  purpose,  then  we  are  so  far  beyond
analogy,  but  the  element  of  presumption  which  consists  in
ascribing  true  intention  or  purpose  is  still  analogical.  If  one
or  both  of  the  qualities  to  whose  coherence  we  conclude  are
not  derivable  from  the  pervading  purpose,  then  we  are  more
completely  or  quite  completely  in  the  region  of  analogy,  and
the  inference  will  simply  be  that  identity  of  purpose  is  prob-
ably both  a  ground  and  also  a  consequentof  uniform  structure.

In  the  former  case,  both  properties  being  derivable,  we
have : —

The  flint  knives  are  adapted  for  cutting  wood  ;

Cut  logs  and  chips  are  connected  with  cutting  wood  ;

.'.  Cut  logs  and  chips  ^  will  probably  be  found  near  the
knives  (i.  e.  if  the  adaptation  which  we  observe  in  the
knives  is  a  true  index  of  the  use  for  which  they  were

*  I  omit,  merely  for  brevity,  to  say  anything  about  the  possibility  of  the  chips
&c.  having  been  removed.


Chap.  111.] Kfiowfi  and  Unknown  Conneciions. 95

really  made,  and  to  which — a  further  presumption —
they  were  actually  put .

Or  again : —

A  telescope  with  the  eye-piece  at  one  side  of  the  tube  is
probably  a  reflector ;

Lord  Rosse's  telescope  is  a  reflector ;

.'.  Lord  Rosse's  telescope  probably  has  the  eye-piece  at
one  side  of  the  tube.

In  the  latter  case  we  have,  one  or  both  properties  being
not  directly  derivable  from  the  presumed  purpose, —

A  clock  with  a  watch  movement  is  a  carriage-clock ;

A  clock  with  plate-glass  sides  is  a  carriage-clock.

.•.  A  clock  with  plate-glass  sides  is  probably  a  clock  with
a  watch-movement.

There  are  pendulum  clocks  with  plate-glass  sides,  so  the
analogy  is  not  made  out.  There  is  a  reason  why  a  clock
with  a  watch  movement  should  be  a  carriage  clock,  viz.
that  it  is  a  mechanism  which  the  motion  of  the  carriage
will  not  disturb.  But  there  is  no  reason  that  I  know  of  for
the  second  premise,  which  rests  on  mere  custom  and  turns
out  to  be  a  precarious  basis  of  argument.

Or  again  : —

A  horseshoe-stand  is  a  common  shape  of  French  micro-
scope-stands ;

A  very  simple  stage  is  common  in  French  microscope-
stands  ;

.*.  With  a  very  simple  stage  one  may  expect  a  horse-
shoe-stand ;

The  horseshoe  shape  is  not  the  best  for  securing  steadi-
ness, so  that  there  is  no  direct  connection  between  the  two
properties  of  which  the  conclusion  alleges  the  conjunction,
and  the  purpose  indicated  by  the  name  microscope-stand.
And  I  have  purposely  introduced  a  limitation  referring  to
the  character  of  the  conditions  under  which  the  purpose  is
carried  out, '  French  microscope-stand,'  in  order  to  illustrate
the  boundary-line  between  genuine  conscious  teleology  and
mere  characteristic  individuality. Probably  in  this  example


96  Analogy.  [Book  11.

the  two  join  hands ;  French  makers  must  have,  or  have  had,
an  idea  that  the  horseshoe  shape  and  the  simple  stage  best
secured  the  purposes  of  the  microscope.

The  former  set  of  examples,  with  both  properties  deri-
vable from  the  purpose,  illustrate  the  general  type  of  analo-
gical inference  affecting  attributes  connected  with  self-
preservation  in  the  organic  world  — chief  or  fundamental
attributes.  The  latter,  with  one  property  or  neither  de-
rivable, gives  the  general  type  of  analogical  inference
affecting  attributes  which  are  not  vital,  but  which  have  in
heredity  or  otherwise  their  own  degree  of  constancy.  But
these  examples,  though  illustrative  of  organic  relations,
are  by  their  connection  with  conscious  teleology  upon  a
higher  level  than  those  relations.

A  further  class  of  inferences,  to  which  the  last  example
prepared  a  transition,  is  intermediate  between  conscious  and
merely  organic  teleology.  I  allude  to  the  enormous  class
of  daily  inferences  relating  to  time  or  locality  of  origin  or
to  authorship,  in  the  case  of  literary,  artistic,  or  mechanical
productions.  Obviously  the  conception  of  the  presumed
period,  place,  or  person,  as  significant  of  peculiar  charac-
teristics, may  itself  be  the  presumed  ground  of  inference  in
virtue  of  which  the  coherence  of  certain  properties  is  analo-
gically expected ;  or  the  individual  characteristics  stated
explicitly  may  be  the  ground,  and  the  name  may  be  in-
ferred by  analogy.  Supposing  a  single  conjunction  (In-
ductive in  its  nature)  to  have  furnished  the  suggestion
'  This  design  which  is  beautiful  is  by  A.  B  \'  then
analogical  enquiry  will  infer  in  the  form  '  The  beauty  of
this  design  is  drawn  from  nature  yet  original  and  full  of
thought;  A.  B.'s  designs  are  drawn  from  nature  yet  original
and  full  of  thought ;  .'.  The  beauty  of  this  design  is  pro-
bably the  beauty  of  one  of  A.  B.'s  designs.'  The  reader
can  construct  further  variations  of  this  very  common  type
of  argument  for  himself.

The  common  analogical  inferences  which  run  throughout
^  In  the  form :  '  This  design  is  beautiful. This  design  is  by  A.  B.'


Chap.  III.]  *De  fucto'  teleology.  97

our  treatment  of  organic  and  even  of  inorganic  nature  rest
practically  on  the  existence  of  natural  kindS;  that  is  to  say,
on  morphology  or  on  de  facto  teleology. I  may  explain
the  distinction  of  degree  which  I  attach  to  the  two  expres-
sions by reference to the general conception of self-
maintenance  or  self-preservation. Where  self- maintenance
means simply any reaction of  a distinguishable agent
against  or  upon  an  influence  approaching  it  from  without,
I  should  speak  of  the  distinguishable  individuality  of  that
agent  as  morphological,  i.e.  as  consisting  simply  of  a  formal
or  recognisable  self  whose  unity  is  charged  with  no  especial
interest. Where  on  the  contrary  there  is  a  self  maintained
or  preserved  which  exhibits  the  attributes  of  life,  or,  how-
ever partially,  of  consciousness,  I  should  say  that  the  facts,
and  not  our  own  choice,  demand  that  we  should  apply  the
paradoxical  idea  of  an  actual  purpose,  or  de  facto  teleology.
It  is  obvious  that  the  conception  is  one  varying  in  degree
and  not  limited  by  any  despotic  necessity  to  the  range  of
the  organic  world. After  all,  it  is  a  plain  fact  that  elements
combine  in  processes  ;  and  the  moment  we  single  out  part
of  a  process  as  a  result  we  introduce  the  conception  of  de
facto  co-operation  on  the  part  of  means  towards  an  end.
Every  distinguishable  persistent  content  may  thus  formally
be  regarded  as  an  end,  without,  of  course,  any  implication
whatever  of  an  aim  pre-existing  in  a  foreseeing  conscious-
ness. That  from  a  purely  mechanical  or  analytic  point  of
view  such  constituent  relations  are  absolutely  indifferent  to
the  whole  which  they  co-operate  in  constituting  is  a  neces-
sary consequence  of  regarding  such  relations  in  their  isola-
tion. But  without  the  further  aspect  supplied  by  an  interest
in  the  whole  as  such,  not  merely  ethical  and  aesthetic  judg- \
ment,  but scientific  judgment itself,  loses all power of j
discrimination,  and therefore all objectivity. Even to |
name,  as  we  saw  in  the  Introduction,  is  to  select  and  to J
identify.

Analogy  then  rests  on  the  '  importance '  or  significance
of  attributes,  an  idea  well  illustrated  by  systems  of  true
VOL.  II.  H


98


Analogy.


[Book  II.


Identities
to  Dif-
ferences.


conscious  teleology  which  happen  to  be  but  partially  known
to  us,  but  really  dominant  throughout  the  various  grades
of  actual  self-maintenance  and  individuality  presented  by
the  organic  and  inorganic  world.  Analogy  is  never  de-
monstration. A  thorough  mechanical  nexus  and  a  sub-
ordination to  a  conscious  purpose  in  an  intelligent  being  or
rational  system  both  pro  tanto  exclude  it.
No  ratio  of  iii.  The  obvious  truth  that  ceteris  paribus  the  predicate
with  more  meaning  has  a  deeper  grasp  of  the  import  of  the
reality  which  it  qualifies,  and  so  is  the  safer  ground  of
inference  respecting  that  reality,  has  introduced  the  fatal
fascination  of  the  ratio  into  the  doctrine  of  analogy.  I
quote  from  Mill  ^  a  complete  account  of  the  idea  so
generated :  '  Since  the  value  of  an  analogical  argument
inferring  one  resemblance  from  other  resemblances  without
any  antecedent  evidence  of  a  connection  between  them
depends  on  the  extent  of  ascertained  resemblance,  com-
pared first  with  the  amount  of  ascertained  difference  and
next  with  the  extent  of  the  unexplored  region  of  unascer-
tained properties  ;  it  follows  that  where  the  resemblance  is
very  great,  the  ascertained  difference  very  small,  and  our
knowledge  of  the  subject-matter  tolerably  extensive,  the
argument  from  analogy  may  approach  in  strength  very
near  to  a  valid  induction.  If,  after  much  observation  of  B,
we  find  that  it  agrees  with  A  in  nine  out  of  ten  of  its  known
properties,  we  may  conclude  with  a  probability  of  nine  to
one  that  it  will  possess  any  given  derivative  property  of  A.
If  we  discover,  for  example,  an  unknown  animal  or  plant,
resembling  closely  some  known  one  in  the  greater  number
of  the  properties  we  observe  in  it,  but  differing  in  some  few,
we  may  reasonably  expect  to  find  in  the  unobserved  re-
mainder of  its  properties  a  general  agreement  with  those  of
the  former ;  but  also  a  difference  corresponding  propor-
tionately to  the  amount  of  observed  diversity.'

This  passage  gives  us  the  valuable  suggestion  of  negative
analogy,  to  which  I  shall  return  below. But  as  to  the  idea
*  Mill's  Logic,  ii.  p.  90.


Chap.  III.  Number  of  Rescmblafices.  99

of  ratio,  we  must  be  faithful  to  our  principle  that  in  analogy
the  examples — or  the  properties,  it  matters  not  which — are
to  be  weighed  and  not  to  be  counted.  Mill's  idea  is  in  fact
that  by  counting  the  properties  you  weigh  the  examples.
And  every  one  must  be  struck  by  the  verisimilitude  of
the  view  which  the  above  passage  propounds.  But  on
pressing  the  matter  home  we  see  that  at  least  the  form
which  it  gives  to  the  right  idea  of  insisting  on  the  depth  of
the  common  predicate  is  a  whoHy  unreal  form,  and  takes
us  into  the  wrong  track.  There  is  no  ratio  without  a  unit_j/]
and,  to  begin  with,  a  '  resemblance^  (a  point  of  identity)  Js_  j
not  as  such  a  content  that  can  be  employed  as  a  unit.  It
is  impossible  to  say  what  is  a  point  of  identity  and  what
amounts  to  many  such  points.  Identity  is  systematic  i  ^\jj^
through  and  through,  and  its  '  points '  derive  their  value
from  their  relation  to  a  system.  It  is  impossible  to  break
up  such  a  system  into  numerable  parts  and  points  without
prejudging  the  verj'  question— the  question  of  their  respec-
tive values  as  index-qualities— which  the  enumeration  is
supposed  to  be  a  straightforward  method  of  solving.

It  is  worth  while  to  illustrate  this  point.  Suppose  that
we  are  asked  to  compare  two  given  plants  of  different  species
in  order  to  determine  their  botanical  affinity  on  analogical
evidence  —  on  the  evidence  of  observed  resemblances  or
points  of  identity  matched  against  observed  differences.  In
order  to  meet  the  retort  that  affinity  in  botany  is  what  we
like  to  make  it,  by  the  arbitrary  value  which  we  attach  to
the  characters,  I  will  assign  to  affinity  the  definite  meaning
of  relationship  by  descent  as  indicated  through  the  accepted
natural  classification.  Thus  the  actual  fact  to  be  discovered
by  analogy,  put  at  its  lowest  value,  is  how  the  plants  in
question  are  classified  in  the  accepted  natural  classification,
and  put  at  its  highest  value  is  how  the  two  are  related  by
descent.  Let  one  of  these  two  given  plants  be  a  shrub  six
feet  high,  with  branches  and  stalked  leaves,  with  its  in-
florescence in  branching  masses,  without  any  '  bract '  or
small  leaf  at  the  base  of  each  mass,  with  white  flowers,

H  a


TOO  Analogy.  [Bookii.

with  nearly  black  fruit,  and  when  young  having  its  leaves
covered  with  silky  hairs.  Let  the  other  plant  be  herbaceous,
six  inches  high,  not  branched,  with  no  stalks  to  its  leaves,
its  flowers  in  heads  which  do  not  branch,  but  which  have
four  conspicuous  yellowish  'bracts'  at  the  base;  the  flowers
are  purple,  the  fruit  red,  and  the  leaves  have  only  a  few
hairs  on  them.  Add  to  these  difterences  that  the  general
look  and  habit  of  the  plants  are  very  different.  Now  set
against  the  above  differences  such  points  of  identity  as
number  of  parts  of  the  flower,  structure  of  the  flower  (poly-
petalous  with  inferior  ovary  and  epigynous  stamens  and
petals),  the  structure  of  the  fruit,  the  partly  identical
growth  of  the  head  of  flowers  (an  'umbel'  in  the  small
plant,  and  a  'cyme'  in  the  large  one),  and  certain  pecu-
liarities of  the  leaf  surface,  such  hairs  as  there  are  being
closely  appressed,  and  the  nerves  having  a  peculiar  pro-
minence. Perhaps  it  is  rather  easier  to  make  out  a  long
list  of  identities  between  the  two  plants  than  to  make  out  a
long  list  of  differences.  But  we  might  really  lengthen
either  list  to  infinity  by  subdividing  in  detail  characters
which  have  been  mentioned  in  the  abstract.  I  have  little
doubt  however  that  in  microscopic  structure  of  petals,
pollen-grains,  etc.  there  would  be  some  striking  identities,
hardly  compensated  by  differences.  Still  we  can  see  at
once  that  no  ratio  between  number  of  identities  and
number  of  differences  can  be  constructed  which  will  tell  us
anything — the  number  on  each  side  is  almost  purely
arbitrary.  The  vahie  or  importance  is  what  we  have  to
consider.

In  what  does  the  value  of  characters  consist  as  a  basis  of
natural  classification  or  as  a  proof  of  common  descent.?
Largely  no  doubt  in  their  connection  with  the  number  and
general  arrangement  of  parts.  Evolution  only  accounts  for
essential  changes  and  their  consequences,  and  though  it
may  modify  the  number  of  parts  and  their  arrangement,  at
first  superficially  and  in  course  of  generations  more  pro-
foundly, yet  an  older  general  arrangement  survives  long


Chap.  III.] Enumeration  and  Knowledge,  loi

beneath  the  modification  and  can  as  a  rule  be  traced  there '.
The  arrangement  of  those  four  or  five  whorls  of  leaves  on
a  shortened  stalk  which  we  call  the  flower,  is  thus  one
dominant  feature  in  the  analogical  estimate  of  a  plant's
affinities.  Its  inferential  value  is  the  same  whether  we  call
it  one  point  of  identity,  or  five,  or  twenty.  It  will  be
observed  that  in  considering  a  plant  in  the  light  of  evolu-
tion we  have  a  combination  of  the  higher  and  lower  forms
of  teleology,  related  negatively  to  each  other.  Just  as  in
the  example  employed  above  of  the  '  French  microscope-
stand,'  we  have  here  within  the  basis  of  analogy  both  a
definite  purpose  suggesting  definite  means,  and  the  mere
tendency  of  individual  or  racial  characteristics  to  perpetuate
themselves.  The  local  manufacturers'  custom  is  gradually
modified  towards  the  better  mechanical  adaptation,  as  the
organism  is  gradually  modified  towards  the  better  me-
chanical adaptation.  At  any  moment  a  manufacture  or  an
organism  is  a  compound  of  recent  useful  change,  and  of
survival,  some  of  which  survival  is  obsolete,  and  some,  the
major  part  probably,  has  never  ceased  to  be  useful.

Thus,  in  the  establishment  of  common  descent,  there  is
a  special  value  in  what  recent  evolutionary  modification  is
likely  to  have  spared.  This  would  include  both  underlying
arrangements  which  evolution  would  take  very  long  to
touch,  and  trifling  details  which  it  would  have  no  reason  for
touching.

The  account  which  I  gave  of  the  differences  between  the
plants  in  question  is  the  account  of  a  common  observer ;  the
account  of  their  identities  is  the  account  of  a  botanist.
This,  it  may  be  said,  is  enough  to  vitiate  the  argument
against  a  ratio,  for  of  course  knowledge  and  judgment  are
to  be  used  in  making  the  enumerations.  But  the  idea  of
enumeration  gives  us  no  right  to  employ  botanical  know-

'  See  Darwin's  beautiful  verification  of  the  modifications  of  the  orchid-
blossom  by  following  the  spiral  vessels  which  indicate  the  position  of  the
original  peUls  in  the  modified  corolla;  Fertilisation  of  Orchids,  p.  289 ff.
Homology  is  an  analogical  conception.


I02  Analogy.  [bookii.

ledge.  It  is  only  the  idea  of  a  presumption  resting  nega-
tively or  positively  on  teleology  that  enables  knowledge  to
operate  in  assigning  value  to  index-characters.  Thus  in
judging  of  the  plants  in  question  we  have  to  distinguish  the
element  of  heredity,  or  self-maintenance  in  the  lower  sense
including  the  deeper  and  also  the  more  trivial  survivals,
from  self-preservation  in  the  higher  sense  (though  even  here
not  involving  conscious  intention)  in  the  set  of  recent  differ-
entiations introduced  by  evolution.  Even  thus  we  omit
much  that  is  most  interesting  and  important.  Evolution
can  for  example  assimilate  plants  of  different  origin  as  well
as  differentiate  plants  of  the  same  descent,  and  we  ought
properly  to  show  that  any  identities  on  which  we  rely  cannot
have  been  initiated  by  such  assimilation  ^  We  have  so  far
anticipated  this  demand  by  requiring  the  identities  to  refer
to  matters  with  which  evolution  is  not  likely  to  have
recently  interfered.

The  plants  of  which  I  have  been  speaking  are  Cornus
j««^?^/«^^,  common  dogwood,  and  Cornus  suecica,  the  Swedish
or  dwarf  cornel.  They  are  in  fact  species  of  the  same  genus.
But  the  four  yellowish  bracts  round  the  flower-heads  of  the
dwarf  cornel  have  the  appearance  of  petals  and  form  a
striking  superficial  difference  between  the  two  plants,  not  to
mention  the  enormous  disparity  in  size.  And  now,  possess-
ing the  names  of  the  two  plants,  and  having  thus  opened  to
us  what  is  known  of  their  local  distribution,  we  can  confirm
our  analogical  estimate  based  on  passive  self-preservation
or  heredity,  by  a  presumption  drawn  from  the  coherence  of
the  modifications  which  that  estimate  ascribes  to  active  self-
preservation,  i.e.  to  evolution  since  the  divergence  of  the
species.  The  smaller  plant  is  sub-Alpine  and  Arctic ;  the
larger  belongs  to  southern  England  and  to  temperate
climates.  This  fact  suggests  that  the  smaller  plant,  whether
driven  northwards  by  a  change  of  climate,  or  simply  main-

*  Such  identities  are  called  in  biological  language  '  homoplastic,'  as  opposed
to  '  homologous.'  The  daisy,  for  example,  is  a  head  of  flowers  that  mimics  the
appearance  of  a  single  flower.


Chap. III.] Comparison  in  special  science.  \o%

tainting  a  portion  of  its  old  habitat,  has  been  dwarfed  or  has
not  grown  larger,  and  has  compensated  for  its  smallness  by
the  brilliant  simulated  flower.  Its  distinctive  leaf-growth
and  flower-growth  may  be  summed  up  as  a  dwarfed  or  at
least  as  a  miniature  growth,  stalks  and  branchings  having
disappeared  or  not  appeared.  How  the  contrast  between
the  inconspicuous  small  dark  purple  flower  of  the  small
plant  and  the  larger  white  flower  of  the  large  plant  is  to  be
explained  I  am  unable  to  suggest.  But  it  is  hard  to  suppose
that  the  petal-like  bracts  of  the  small  plant  are  not  in  some
way  a  compensation  for  the  inconspicuousness  of  its  flower.

iv.  Before  reducing  this  example  to  regular  form  it  is  Concurrent
worth  while  to  remark  that,  by  assuming  the  two  plants  to °^  ^P^"'
be  given  us  to  compare,  we  presuppose  the  work  of  enumer-  Confirma-
ative  induction  to  be  done  to  our  hand. And  in  fact,  where  *^°°'
a  subject-matter  falls  under  an  existing  science,  we  are  already
in general  beyond  the  stage  of  Enumerative  Induction,
though it  may  of  course  operate  in  particular  unfamiliar
instances. But  speaking  generally,  the  abstract  ideas  which
guide  Comparison  are  active  in every  special  science as
precepts  filled  with  a  content  capable  of  guiding  elementary
observations. We  approach  an  element,  or  a  plant,  or  a
part  of  speech,  just  as  the  state  approaches  a  taxpayer,  with
a  schedule  in  which  the  heads  of  our  requirements are
already  jotted  down,  forming  an  abstract  analysis  of  the
predicates  wdth  which,  in  the  class  of  cases  in  question,  we
are  concerned. But  if,  supposing  ourselves  unfurnished  with
such  a  schedule,  we  construct  a  conjunctive  Induction  for  the
case  before  us,  it  would  run  in  some  such  fashion  as  this : —

These  two  plants  ^  have  similar  berries  ;

These  two  plants  have  similar  leaf-nerves ;

.".  The conjunction of  similar leaf-nerves and similar
berries  may  not  be  an  accident  ^.

*  '  Plant '  here  =  species.  This  equivalence  itself  rests  on  analogical  aiga-
ment,  which  however  is  presupposed  in  any  highly  developed  language,  though
not  for  all  classes  of  objects.  See  above  on  Individual  Judgment,  and  Lotze,
Logik,  sect.  14,  on  'first  universals.'

*  In  strict  form,  '  Similar  leaf-nerves  perliaps  are  (involve)  similar  berries.


I04  Analogy.  [bookii.

Then  the  Analogical  argument  would  fall  into  some  such
shape  as —

Having  similar  berries  is  conjoined  in  these  plants  with  a
pervading identity of  underlying (and so long in-
herited) structure ;
Having  similar  leaf-nerves  is  conjoined  in  these  plants,

&c.,  &c. ;
.".  Having  these  similar  berries  is  connected  by  an  under-
lying (and  so long  inherited)  structure  with having
these  leaf-nerves.
And,  as  we  saw,  two  further  analogies  would  confirm
this  :—

The  resemblance  in  the  berries  is conjoined  in these

plants  with  trivial  identities  of  structure  (e.  g.  closely

appressed  hairs  on  the  leaves)  not  likely  to  be  modified

by  evolution ;

The  resemblance  in  the  leaf-nerves  is  conjoined  in  these

plants  with  trivial  identities,  &c.,  &c. ;
.*.  These  attributes  are  connected  with  each  other  by

attributes  probably  hereditary.
And  contra-positively,  giving  affirmative  content  to  the
negations, but leaving them their negative value in
inference : —

What  is  not  identical  in  the  fruit-growth  (e.  g.  the  cluster-
ing and  the  isolation  of  the  fruit)  is  not  a  property  likely
to  be  remotely  hereditary  (because  obviously  modified
by  alteration  of  length  of  the  stalks,  i.  e.  by  dwarfing) ;
What is not  identical  in the flower-growth  (e.g.  the
presence and absence of  the four white bracts)  is
not  a  property  likely  to  be  remotely  hereditary  (be-
cause obviously  related  to  the  inconspicuous flower,
i.  e.  to  dwarfing) ;
.'.  What  is  not  identical  in  the  flower-growth  of  these
plants is united with  what is  not  identical in  the
fruit-structure  as  parts  in  a  set  of  properties  not  likely
to  be  remotely  hereditary.
The  true  relation  of  these  arguments  to  each  other  would  be


Chap.  III.]  InductioH  and  Sub  sump  Hon.  105

that  they  should  form  a  single  analogical  inference,  in  which
.each  positive  premise  and  the  positive  conclusion  should  be
materially  d€:^n&d  and  limited  by  the  corresponding  negative  -
judgment.  When  this  reciprocal  adjustment  was  completed,
we  should  have  analysed  each  of  the  plants  into  two  related
systems,  in  respect  of  one  of  which  systems  the  two  plants
would  coincide,  and  in  respect  of  the  other  of  which  they
would  differ.  The  one  system  would  point  to  the  construc-
tion of  a  common  ancestor ;  the  other  would  point  to  the
evolutional  history  of  the  species  since  their  divergence.  As
their  boundaries  would  precisely  fit  each  other  we  should,
in  arguing  on  the  basis  of  either,  be  supported  by  the  de-
fining influence  of  the  other ;  that  is  to  say,  every  judgment
A  is  B  would  be  supported  by  its  converses  Not-A  is  not-B,
and  Not-B  is  not-A.  But  though  such  negative  relation  of  )
positive  contents  is  valuable  in  analogy  as  elsewhere,  yet  to  I
be  fully  effective  it  presupposes  great  accuracy  and  exhaus-  \
tiveness  of  analysis,  which  is  not  usually  to  be  obtained
where  analogy  flourishes,  and  which,  if  obtained,  takes  us
beyond  analogy.  By  its  negative  aspect  such  inference
leans  over  to  Scientific  Induction,  while  by  its  appeal  to  the
coherent  nature  of  a  system  it  tends  to  pass  into  definite  or
philosophical  subsumption.

v.  Analogy,  like Enumerative Induction,  is a critical  Divergent
point  from  which  two  tracks  of  knowledge  diverge. In  in  analt^y.
assigning  the  coherence  of  attributes  within  a  system  we
cannot  but  be  confronted  wnth  negative  relations,  which  are
the  conditions  of  all  precise  determination  and  of  all  causal  or
necessary  inference.  This  feature  of  deepening  analogical  con-
sideration points  forward  to  scientific  induction — the  analysis
of  the  teleological  whole,  or,  a  fortiori,  of  the  unformed  da-
tum of  perception,  into  its  definite  and  necessary  constituent ^
relations. The  goal  of  this  path  is  the  abstract  Hypothetical
judgment  which  forms,  as  we  have  seen,  the  point  of  transition
between  inference  by  combination  of  abstract  relations  and
inference  through  the  nature  of  concrete  subjects.

On  the  other  hand,  if  we  continue  to  regard  the  concrete v


I  o6  A  nalogy.  [book  ii.

I  subject  from  the  point  of  view  of  its  totality,  which  has
\ begun  to  dawn  upon  us  in  analogical  inference,  our  prin-
1 ciple  of  inference  tends  to  assume  the  shape  of  a  concrete
zvhole,  widerstood  as  a  syntJiesis  of  abstract  relations. Such
i  a subject  combines  within itself,  in perfect equilibrium,
\ the  two  aspects  of  the  universal  which  have  occupied  us
, throughout — the aspect of  concrete reality  and that  of
abstract  interconnection. Inference  based  upon  contents
of  this  nature  may  take  the  shape  of  the  complete  subsump-
tive  syllogism  in  fig.  i,  or,  when  more  adequately  expressed,
of  inference  under  a  disjunction,  or  finally  of  the  explicitly
\  teleological  inference  respecting  beauty  or  goodness.
/ It  is  plain  that  to  employ  in  inference  such  a  subject
I notion as I  have  just indicated presupposes  a  detailed
I mastery  of  the  abstract  relations  which  enter  into  it,  and
j therefore presupposes the advance, which was above
; described as a divergence taking the direction of the
I hypothetical  judgment. The  subject  can  be  known  as  an
I embodied  purpose  only  by  inference  based  on  its  necessary
! constituent relations. Why  then  should we regard the
; abstract  hypothetical  judgment  as  belonging  to  a track
: that  diverges  from  the  direct  high-road  of  concrete  know-
ledge? The  reason  is  simply  that  in  the  formation  and
combination  of  Hypothetical  judgments  we  sacrifice  reality
for  the  sake  of  necessity,  and  lose  an  element  which  was
present  in  Analogy. In other  words,  the Hypothetical
! judgment  with  the  combining  inference  that  belongs  to  it
\ is itself  an apex or climax of  one whole tendency  of
I knowledge — of  the  mechanical  view  of  the  world  which
I considers  necessity  apart  from  reality,  and  to  which  disease
1 is  as  orderly  a  sequence  as  health. This  is  the  view  of  the
eye  of  purely  physical  science,  which  in  a  catastrophe  that
should  extinguish  life  on  the  surface  of  the  globe  might
i see  '  no  more  disorder  than  in  the  sabbatical  peace  of  a
summer  sea^.' This  aspect  of  knowledge  has  been  sufii-

*  Professor  Huxley  in  Contemp.  Review,  Feb.  1887. For  a  further  considera-
tion of  this  point  of  view,  see  chap.  vii.  below.


Chap.  III.]  The  reigfi  of  Law.  107

ciently  analysed  and  discussed  in  our  treatment  of  mathe-
matical inference  which  is  its  purest  form.  My  excuse  for
constantly  recurring  to  it  must  be  that  a  thorough  under-
standing of  its  range  and  consequences  is  the  primary
condition  of  any  clear  thinking  on  the  subject  of  the  reign
of  law,  which,  as  thus  isolated,  is  absolutely  indififerent  to
the  purposes  and  interests  that  give  reality  its  relation  to
mankind.  The  apparently  self-dependent  completeness  of
this  analytic  view  of  the  universe  gives  it  a  right  to  an
independent  development,  although  this  right  of  indepen-
dence which  it  claims  may  also  be  regarded  as  a  limitation
to  which  it  submits.  Science,  professing  to  be  purely
physical,  has,  as  we  have  partly  seen  and  shall  more  fully
see,  in  our  own  day  at  least  occupied  itself  with  ideas  which
fall  outside  the  categories  of  abstract  necessity.  And  this
was  hardly  avoidable ;  for  we  have  seen  over  and  over
again  that  necessity  must  rest  upon  reality,  and  that  there-
fore the  self-completeness  of  the  mechanical  view  of  things
is  in  this  ultimate  instance  merely  apparent.


CHAPTER IV.
Scientific  Induction  by  Analysis.

The  moment  we  begin  to  demand  precise  definition  of
relations  and  to  attempt  analysis,  we  are,  as  the  develop-
ment of  analogy  proved  to  us,  face  to  face  with  inference
from  negations.
Negative  i,  I  will  now  speak  shortly  of  the  nature  of  this  in-
ference, and  will  then  attempt  to  explain  its  function  in
inductive  analysis.
Its  general  i.  All  inference  depends  on  the  relation  of  differences
condWons.  within  a  universal ;  and  negative  inference,  in  its  fundamental
nature,  does  not  deviate  from  this  principle.  It  may  be
laid  down  at  once  that  the  ideal  of  negative  inference  is  to
be  looked  for  in  Inference  under  Disjunction,  as  the  ideal
of  negative  Judgment  is  to  be  looked  for  in  negation  under
Disjunction.  Our  discussion  on  the  connection  between
bare  negation  and  significant  negation  will  have  prepared
us  for  this  conception.

But  negative  inference  in  this  sense  is  not  a  peculiar  or
separable  form  of  reasoning.  Negation  and  Afifirmation
in  disjunctive  or  precise  thinking  are  respectively  double-
edged  ;  and  though  this  character  which  thought  acquires
from  being  imbued  with  negation  is  pre-eminently  dis-
tinctive of  thought  that  has  reached  the  stage  in  question,
yet  it  does  not  admit  of  being  ascribed  to  negation  as
contrasted  in  the  abstract  with  affirmation.  It  is  for  this
reason  that  in  treating  of  calculation  and  of  geometrical
reasoning  it  has  been  unnecessary  to  devote  special  atten-
tion to  negative  inference.  Negation  appears  no  doubt  in
mathematical  principles  and  theorems,  e.g.  in  the  definition
of  parallel  straight  lines,  or  in  the  theorem  that  if  two
circles  cut  one  another  they  shall  not  have  the  same  centre.


Negation  zti  Geometry.  109

But  as  a  general  rule — I  will  not  venture  to  say  universally
— it  is  easy  to  substitute  for  a  negative  expression  of  this
kind  a  definite  though  not  thoroughly  particularised  positive
expression,  which  possibility  goes  to  show  that  the  negative
expression  was  adopted  rather  for  some  rhetorical  con-
venience—e.g.  for  brevity — than  because  a  positive  ex-
pression was  unattainable.  Often,  as  in  the  second  of  the
above  examples,  the  negative  form  of  a  conclusion  arises
from  the  employment  of  an  indirect  proof.  And  an  in-
direct proof  can  only  operate  «nder  a  disjunction.  True,
in  the  present  example  the  disjunction  seems  to  be  merely
formal, — i.e.  to  consist  simply  in  a  positive  judgment  and
bare  negation  ;  '  have  the  same  centre,'  '  have  not  the  same
centre.'  But  '  have  not  the  same  centre '  in  spatial  matters
means  '  have  different  centres,'  the  relations  of  which  are
easily  seen  in  general  from  the  content  of  the  indirect  proof
itself.  In  mathematical  or  pure  mechanical  reasoning  there
is  no  room  for  anything  approximating  to  bare  negation —
the  excluding  motive  must  be  definitely  demonstrable,  and
contains  the  idea,  though  not  necessarily  the  particulars,  of
an  assignable  quantitative  difference  between  the  excluding
and  the  excluded  content^.  Incommensurable  quantities  are,
so  far  as  incommensurable,  not  quantities  at  all.  Through-
out this  region  of  inference  therefore  negation  and  affirma-
tion have  as  a  rule  their  ideal  complementary  position,  and
no  ground  is  given  for  a  special  and  separate  treatment  of
negative  inference.  For  this  same  reason,  however,  zvhere
and  in  as  far  as  negative  inference  formally  occurs  within
this  sphere,  it  formally  falls  outside  the  character  required  -
of  combining  inference,  and  must  be  technically  referred,
not  indeed  to  subsumption,  but  to  a  special  genus  which
also  includes  any  negative  reasoning  that  may  arise  within
the  limits  proper  to  subsumption.

But  when  we  turn  from  calculation  with  precise  scales
of  difference  to  the  traditional  form  of  the  subsumptive

*  So  that  we  need  not  say  '  is '  or  '  is  not,'  but '  differ  by  a  yard,'  ♦  the  same
to  a  yard.'


no  Scientific  Induction  by  Analysis. [Bookii.

syllogism,  the  inherent  paradox  of  negative  inference  im-
mediately stands  in  our  path.  The  syllogistic  rules  un-
doubtedly contemplate  inference  from  bare  negation,  and
also,  so  far  as  they  are  concerned,  inference  that  has  bare
negation  for  its  conclusion.  But  all  inference,  we  have
been  insisting,  rests  on  an  identical  nature  or  a  pervading
universal,  which  prescribes  a  relation,  whether  definite  or
indefinite,  between  its  differences.  How  can  a  universal
prescribe  a  relation  between  itself  and  a  content  which  falls
wholly  outside  it,  and  is  absolutely  disparate  and  alien  to
its  nature  ?

We  were  met  by  this  difficulty  in  the  discussion  of
the  negatively  infinite  judgment,  and  of  the  ultimate
indemonstrability  of  the  negative  as  such.  Where  there
is  absolutely  no  connection  it  is  impossible  for  denial
to  be  intelligible ;  and  what  is  not  intelligible  cannot
convey  a  truth.  Denials  which  though  frivolous  seem  true
have  some  shade  of  assignable  meaning  beneath  them  ^.
Therefore  the  only  true  meaning  of  an  inference  in  Celarent
is  e.g.—

To  be  a  man  excludes  being  a  monkey  (in  virtue  of  a
certain  universal  nature  which  including  both  assigns
an  intelligible  difference  between  the  two)  ;

Socrates  is  a  man  ;

.'.  Socrates  is  not  a  monkey.

But  the  ordinary  graphical  representations  of  the  extensive
syllogism  slur  over  this  difference,  and  leave  us  to  suppose
that  from  an  titter  absence  of  connection  together  with  an
assignable  connection  we  can  infer  an  absence  of  connec-
tion, which  is  to  introduce  the  infinite  judgmen^t  into
inference.  It  is  worth  pointing  out,  however,  that  even
the  true  reasoning  in  Celarent,  considered  as  starting  with
its conclusion as a suggestion to be proved  ^ begins

^  For  examples,  see  Bk.  I.  chap.  vii.

'  I  am  confident  that  this  is  as  a  rule  the  most  instractive  point  of  view  from
which  to  analyse  inference,  corresponding  best  to  the  vital  process  of  thought.
The  essential  question  is,  what  difference  is  there  in  the  conclusion  as  a  judg-
ment, before  and  after,  or  in  and  out  of  the  inference.


Chap. IV.]  The  Negalive  Syllogism.  iii

with  something  nearer  a  bare  denial,  and  ends  with  an
intelligibly  motived  exclusion.  '  Socrates  is  not  a  monkey; '
'  Socrates  having  the  nature  of  a  man,  cannot  be  a
monkey.'

Thus  in  syllogistic  negative  inference  we  find  (i)  the
erroneous  idea  that  negation  is  utter  disconnection,  and  that
negation  in  this  sense,  bare  negation,  can  be  intelligibly
asserted  and  inferred.  And  we  have  (2)  the  true  idea  that
negation  in  order  to  be  significant  must  fall  within  a  con-
trolling identity,  although  its  ultimate  shape  is  indemon-
strable, and  qua  indemonstrable  or  irrational  falls  into  a
genus  by  itself,  and  outside  both  subsumption  and  con-
struction. And  as  a  testimony  to  the  inevitable  power  of
formalism  in  any  symbolic  scheme  of  inference,  we  may  J

point  out  (3)  that  the  accepted  syllogistic  rule  that  there '
can  be  no  inference  from  two  negative  premises  is  really  an
offshoot  of  the  idea  of  bare  negation.

ii.  If  we  have  two  bare  negations  or  mere  disconnections  No  conclu- ^
— negatively  infinite  judgments— nothing  follows,  because  two  nega^
nothing  is  said. And  as  two  negations  will  always  present  *^^^
the  external  appearance  of  two  mere  disconnections,  and
will  be  ambiguous  in  interpretation,  concealing  their  posi-
tive aspect,  it  is  well  to  maintain  this  rule  in  a  symbolic
scheme  of  inference. Once  at  least  in  every  inference,  the
rule  says,  you  must  show  your  hand,  and  develope  your
universal in terms of  its  positive content. Then,  with
one  positive  relation  of  content  before  us,  we  shall  not  be
far  out,  it  is  implied,  in  interpreting  the  denial  which  is
subjoined  to  it.

Nevertheless,  it  must  be  maintained  that  the  n^ative
syllogism  acquires  scientific  value  just  in  the  degree  in
which  this  rule  is  disregarded  and  in  which  the  syllogism
is  consequently  informal.  If  negative  inference  has  any
value  it  is  the  establishment  of  exact  and  self-consistent
boundaries  between  the  species  of  any  genus,  or  the  modifi-
cations of  any  principle.

The  rule  that  two  negatives  give  no  conclusion  has  been


112  Scientific  Induction  by  Analysis, [bookii.

impeached  by  good  authorities^  in  respect  of  the  third
figure — the  figure  which  we  followed  in  our  account  of
Enuraerative  Induction.  This  figure  is  obviously  adapted
for  the  expression  of  a  positive  instance,  or  of  an  exception
— of  an  instance  which  comes  under  the  condition  of  a  rule
but  of  which  the  consequent  annexed  by  the  rule  to  its
condition  does  not  hold  good  ^.  Why  should  it  not  also
express  a  true  negative  instance,  i.  e.  a  negation  which  does
not  conflict  with  but  corroborates  the  rule  by  coming
neither  under  the  condition  nor  under  the  consequent  ?  In
insisting  on  such  a  principle  as  '  Whatever  gravitates  is
matter'  we  may  often  find  ourselves  relying  on  such  in-
stances as  '  Light  is  not  matter ;  Light  does  not  gravitate ;
.•.  Something  which  is  not  matter  does  not  gravitate,'  or
vice  versa,  making  in  favour  of  the  contra-positive  converse
either  of 'Whatever  gravitates  is  matter'  or  of  its  reciprocal
'  Whatever  is  matter  gravitates.'

It  has  been  objected  against  this  case  of  a  conclusion
from  two  negations  that  either  the  argument  has  four  terms
or  one  of  the  premises  is  affirmative.  If  the  two  premises
are  mere  denials,  then  neither  of  them  can  furnish  the  nega-
tive predicate  required  to  be  subject  of  the  conclusion.
For  this  subject  must  be  a  positive  content  merely  de-
termined in  one  aspect  by  a  negation.  A  bare  negation
cannot  be  subject  in  any  judgment.  If  on  the  contrary  in
one  premise  such  a  positive  content  negatively  determined
is  the  predicate,  and  the  fallacy  of  four  terms  is  thus
avoided,  then  that  premise  is  affirmative  in  form  and  the
conclusion  is  not  drawn  from  two  negatives.

This  objection  is  not  only  sound  in  form,  but  has  sub-
stantial justification.  It  is  well  known  that  to  attach  the
negative  closely  to  the  predicated  content  has  a  tendency

^  Lotze,  Logic,  sect.  89;  Bradley,  Principles  of  Logic,  p.  254,  quoting
Jevons.

*  Or  in  case  of  a  reciprocal  judgment,  also  vice  versd.  Even  in  a  rule  which
is  not  reciprocal,  a  great  extension  of  the  consequent  beyond  the  condition  is
always  suspicious.


Chap.  IV.]  Limiting  Systems.  1 13

to  transform  the  idea  so  negated  from  an  excluded  con-
tent into  a  positive  opposite.  A  form  like  '  not-moral '
cannot  maintain  itself  in  living  thought.  It  must  advance
to  'immoral'  or  fall  back  to  'what  is  not  moral.'  And  if  J
we  admit  in  the  third  syllogistic  figure  that  the  same  judg-
ment can  be  both  affirmative  and  negative — for  accepting
the  above  case  of  inference  amounts  to  accepting  this — it  is
hard  to  say  why  the  same  double  character  should  not  be
adopted,  and  conclusions  from  two  negatives  introduced,
in  the  remaining  figures  as  well.  In  the  second  figure  we
should  be  tempted  actually  to  take  an  affirmative  con-
clusion from  two  negative  premises ;  but  as  the  ambiguous
term  is  here  the  middle  term,  and  not  the  subject  of
the  conclusion,  we  cannot  do  this  without  treating  both
premises  as  affirmative  (to  secure  an  identical  middle)
and  thereby  reducing  our  conclusion  to  a  problematic
judgment^,  thus.

Good  workmen  do  not  complain  of  their  tools ;
My  pupils  do  not  complain  of  their  tools ;
,'.  My  pupils  are  probably  good  workmen.

Or  again,

Not good workmen are not satisfied with their

tools ;
Not-my-pupils  are  not  satisfied  with  their  tools  ;
.'.  Not-my-pupils  are  probably  not  good  workmen.

Our  treatment  of  analogy  would  also  be  illustrated  by  the
case  in  which  Not- A  and  Not-B  join  in  a  positive  C.  But
as  both  premises  would  then  be  formally  affirmative,  the
case  does  not  come  under  the  present  head.

It  is  impossible  to  deny  that  arguments  like  the  above
may  have  material  weight.  Their  value  rests  on  the  possi-
bility of  gathering  up  the  phenomena  just  bordering  on  a

*  Both  premises  must  be  taken  in  the  same  way,  though  both  may  be  taken
as  either  negative  or  aflBrmative. It  is  only the  contrast of  exclusion  with
assertion  that  can  give  a  certain  result  in  the  figure.
VOL.  II.  I


114  Scientific  Induction  by  Analysis, [bookii.

system  we  are  investigating  into  a  system  of  their  own,  a,  ^,  y,
limiting  and  limited  by  the  former  A,  B,  C  at  every  point.  We
(  nearly  achieved  this — rudely  of  course — in  our  comparison
of  Corniis  sa7tgui7tea  and  Cortius  suecica.  We  then  obtained
two  systems,  A,  B,  C  and  a,  /3,  y,  such  that  A,  B,  C  were
respectively  not-a,  not-^,  and  not-y,  while  a,  /3,  and  y  were
respectively  not- A,  not-B,  and  not-C.  B  and  /3,  the  two
dominant  or  middle  terms,  stood,  it  will  be  remembered,
for  '  inherited  from  before  divergence  of  the  species '  and
'  modified  by  recent  evolution'  respectively ;  and  the  object
was  to  attach  all  the  peculiarities  of  the  two  plants  system-
atically to  one  or  other  of  these  conceptions.  Obviously  in
such  a  case  it  depends  merely  on  our  point  of  view  whether
we  take  as  premises  '  Not-A  and  Not-C  are  Not-B,'  or
'  a  and  y  are  Not-B,'  or  '  Not-A  and  Not-C  are  ^3/  which
are  the  various  forms  suggested  above.

In  the  same  way  it  might  be  argued  in  fig.  i  that

No  mere  animal  has  language  ;
A  deaf  mute  is  no  mere  animal ;
.'.  A  deaf  mute  has  language.

Horrible  as  these  arguments  must  appear  to  any  one  con-
versant with  syllogistic  rules,  I  do  not  see  how  they  are  to
be  kept  out  if  the  argument  from  two  negations  in  fig.  3  is
admitted.

There  is  however  an  indispensable  condition  on  which
alone  any  value  can  be  ascribed  to  these  inferences.  This  is
that  the  negation  of  a  content  should  in  all  cases  be  merely
an  aspect  of  a  positive  content^  which  is  really  in  question,
and  this  we  know  to  be  the  case  in  all  significant  negation,
although  not  reckoned  upon  in  the  technical  rules  of  the


^  There  is  a  puzzling  inconsistency  in  this  identification,  because  the  treat-
ment of  '  man  is  not-mortal '  as  an  affirmative  judgment,  which  I  have  regarded
as  making  'not-mortal'  a  positive  or  significant  content,  was  historically,  as
reference  to  a  class  'not-mortal,'  the  origin  of  the  'infinite  judgment'  which  is
the  very  type  of  bare  negation.  The  interpretation  employed  in  the  text
regards  'not-mortal '  not  as  a  fictitious  class  but  as  a  positive  attribute  excluding
mortality.


Chap.  IV.] Scheme  of  Negative  I  distance.


115


syllogism.  Moreover,  we  have  seen,  that  we  are  not  bound
to  omit  in  the  conclusion  of  inference  any  relevant  matter
given  in  the  premises.  But  if  not,  we  can  in  any  case
secure  the  positive  significance  of  the  denial  of  a  content
by  supplying  in  the  conclusion  the  middle  term  of  which
it  is  denied.  Thus  in  one  of  the  above  examples  we
may  conclude  '  Light  is  something  which  does  not  gravitate,
and  is  not  material.'

iii.  We  have  now  obtained  the  logical  formulation  of  The
the  Negative  Instance.  Like  the  Exception,  it  begins  in  jjfsfan^.
Enumerative  Induction,  and  is  capable  of  development
through  Analogy.  I  shall  assume  throughout  my  ex-
amination of  its  working,  in  order  to  avoid  uninstructive
complications,  that  the  rule  or  law  suggested  by  Enumera-
tive Induction,  of  which  the  negative  instance  is  confirma-
tory, has  come  to  begin  with  from  affirmative  instances,  and
is  expressed  in  an  affirmative  judgment.  Then  we  may
formulate  the  cases  supplied  by  mere  Enumerative  Induc-
tion, with  their  sequels  in  Analogy,  as  follows  : —


Affirmative  Instance Exception Negative  Instance

suggesting against confirming

the  prima  facie  rule  that  B  is  probably  C.

AisC;
AisB;
.-.  B  is  or  may  be  C.

A  is  not  C  ;

AisB;

.'.  B  may  not  be  C.

0  is  not  C  ;
a  is  not  B  ;
.-. Not-B may be
Not-C.

C  is  ;«rj'  2  R^  ;
Bis  xjj/zRi;
.-. B is for good

reasons likely to

be  C.

C  is  not  X  y  zK^
(i.e.  is;c,>',2,R'):

.*.  B  is  not exactly
C.

Not-C  is  x^y^  Zi  R,' ;
Not-B  is  .a^i^.Zi  R,^;
.-.  Not-B  is  Not-C
(i.  e.  C  is  B).

Symbolic
scheme  of
Instances.


Enumera-
tive
Induction.


Analogy.


*  Analysis  of  A.

*  The  analysis  of  a,  which  is  not-A,  i.e.,  not  xy  z  R.


I  a


ii6  Scientific  Induction  by  Analysis, [bookii.


Example  of
Instances.


Enumera-

tive

Induction.


Analogy.


Affirmative  Instance Exception  ^  Negative  Instance

suggesting  against  confirming

the  flower-structure  in  these  two  plants  probably

is  characteristic  of  a  common  descent  shown

also  in  the  leaf-structure.


In  these  two  plants
there  is  similar  leaf-
structure  ;

In  these  two  plants
there  is  similar  flower-
structure  ;

.".  The  flower  struc-
ture may  be  an  element
in  an  inherited  group  of
qualities  to  which  the
leaf-structure  also  be-
longs (or,  in  brief,  may
be  at  bottom  one  with
the  leaf-structure).


The  leaf-structure  in
these  two  plants  can  be
connected  with  a  whole
set  of  identical  generic
properties ;

The  flower-structure
in  these  two  plants  in-
cludes a  whole  set  of
identical  genric  pro-
perties ;

.-.  The  flower-structure
in  these  two  plants  pro-
bably is  characteristic
of  a  common  descent
shown  also  in  the  leaf-
structure.


In  these  two  plants
there  is  not  wholly  iden-
tical leaf-structure ;

In  these  two  plants
there  is  wholly  identical
flower-structure ;

.•.  Flower  -  structure
seems  not  to  be  generi-
cally  connected  with
leaf-structure.


Leaves  have  not  the
same  stalk-arrangement
(i.e.  are  sessile  in  one
case  and  stalked  in  the
other) ;

Flowers  have  the
same  stalk-arrangement
in  both  plants  (i.  e.  are
stalked  in  both) ;

.*.  Flower  -  structure
does  not  follow  varia-
tions of  leaf-structure
(in  these  two  plants,  i.  e.
species).


In  some  aspects  of
these  two  plants  there  is
a  difference,  e.g.  of  leaf-
stalk ;

In  some  aspects  of  these
two  plants  there  is  a
difference,  e.g.  of  flower-
stalk  (umbels  v.  cymes) ;

.•.  The  difference  of
leaf-stalk  may  be  con-
nected (through  those
aspects  of  the  two
plants)  with  the  differ-
ence of  flower-stalk.


The  difference  of  leaf-
stalk belongs  to  a  con-
nected set  of  aspects  ^  of
these  two  plants  not
concerned  with  their
remote  hereditary  pro-
perties ;

The  difference  of
flower-stalk  belongs  to
a  connected  set  of  as-
pects^ of  these  two
plants  not  concerned
with  their  remote  here-
ditary properties  ;

.-.  The  difference  of
leaf-stalk  is  connected
with  the  difference  of
flower-stalk  by  a  rela-
tion not  concerned  with
their  remote  hereditary
properties.


*  The  Exception  of  course  cannot  be  made  successful  if  the  Negative  Instance
is  to  be  so.  I  have  therefore  treated  the  Exception  as  a  mistaken  interpretation
of  the  facts  which  the  Negative  Instance  interprets  rightly.

*  Viz.,  the  recent  dwarfing  of  one  plant.


Chap.  IV.]  Systematic  Necessity.  117

2.  The  object  of  Scientific  Induction  is,  given  a  suggested  Scientific
coherence,  '  B  may  be  (probably  is)  C,'  which  has  become
through  analogy  a  hypothesis  in  germ  represented  by  an
'importance'  attached  to  the  mediating  content  ;r;/^rR,  to
bring  such  a  coherence  into  the  form  of  one  or  many  pure
Hypothetical  judgments.  The  outward  and  visible  side  of
this  process  is  to  modify  the  rule,  i.  e.  the  contents  B  and
C  with  their  connecting  content  .r  j  ^  R,  so  that  there  shall
be  no  exceptions  '  B  is  not  quite  C,'  and  that  the  two  contra-
positive  converses  'Not-C  is  not-B'  and  '  Not-B  is  not-C^'
shall  be  true  when  filled  up  with  positive  contents  precisely
excluding  B  and  C  respectively. The  inward  and  intel-  v/

lectual  side  of  the  process  however  simply  consists  in  grasp-
ing a  necessary  relation  based  upon  some  fundamental
reality.  This  essential  activity  of  the  scientific  spirit  can
only  be  characterised  beforehand  in  respect  of  its  most
general  attributes,  which  are  embodied  in  the  external  pro-
cess to  be  described  as  Scientific  Induction.  We  can  affirm
from  the  known  nature  of  the  logical  universal  that  it  must
be  purified  by  exceptions  and  finally  limited  by  negations.
But  as  all  data  presented  to  us  are  thoroughly  concrete,  it
follows  that  there  is  an  endless  possibility  of  erroneous
abstraction  and  construction  in  all  adjustment  of  contents
to  one  another,  so  that  the  outward  and  visible  side  of
induction,  though  knowable  in  respect  of  certain  essential
phases,  can  never  assume  the  character  of  a  mechanical
method  or  royal  road  to  knowledge.  In  the  same  way  the
ultimate  necessity  of  the  law  or  principle  at  which  we  arrive
can  be  guaranteed  by  no  general  considerations.  It  depends
in  general,  we  know,  on  the  systematic  necessity  of  the
negations,  which,  representing  its  relation  to  the  reality
within  which  it  falls,  hedge  it  in  on  every  side  and  exhibit
it  as  no  longer  itself,  but  as  transformed,  whenever  and  in  as
far  as  their  limits  are  passed. But  the  specific  necessity  of

^  The  contrapositive  converse  of  C  is  B,  which  affirmative  judgment,  and
therefore  its  contrapositive  converse,  must  be  true  if  B  is  C  is  to  be  a  pure  or
reciprocal  judgment.


ii8  Scientific  Indtiction  by  Analysis. [Bookii.


Induction
and  other
Inference.


individual  truths  cannot  be  assigned  by  any  general  theory
of  science.

i.  Induction  then  in  its  most  general  sense  consists  in

satisfying  the  principle  of  sufficient  reason  by  an  analysis  of

experience,  directed to revealing  the true coherence of

differences  within  universals. But  as  soon  as  this  is  stated,

a  difficulty  arises  in  distinguishing  Induction  from  Inference

as  such,  which  has  precisely  the  same  object. And  this

difficulty  has,  historically  speaking,  prevented  the  range  of

Induction  from  being  consistently  defined. As  in  Jevons'

theory  of  Induction,  the most recent and, so far  as I

know,  the  most  thorough  and  appreciative  account  of  the

operation,  so  in  Mill's  famous  analysis  of  the  four  methods

of  experimental enquiry,  we  are  dealing  with  processes

essentially  deductive. On  the  other  hand,  if  we  try  to

confine  ourselves  to  what  has  been  termed  '  Inference  from

particulars  to  particulars'  we  cannot  meet  the  requirements

of  Scientific  Induction. The  name  Scientific  Induction  is

indeed  something  of  a  contradiction  in  terms. Induction  is

meant  to  mean  the  treatment  of  instances. In  this  meaning

the  idea  of  enumeration  and  even  of  the  calculus  of  chances

is  confused  with  the  idea  of  an  analysis  of  observations —

a  confusion  all  the  harder  to  disentangle,  because  number

of  observations  does  as  a  rule  assist  analysis  and  contribute

to  eliminating  error. Scientific  analysis  as  such,  however,

does  not  deal  with  instances,  but  only  with  contents. When

we  speak  of  a  scientific  treatment  of  instances,  we  mean  a

precise  determination  and  skilful  resolution  of  their  content.

Therefore  the  distinction  between  Induction  and  other

forms  of  Inference,  erroneously  described  as  the  distinction

between  Induction  and  Deduction,  is  chiefly  a  distinction  of

aspects,  largely  based  on  a  confused  idea  of  Induction,  but

yet  in  some  degree  justified. I  have  just  spoken  of  the

confused  idea  in  virtue  of  which  Induction  is  regarded  as

. a  treatment  of  instances  pure  and  simple. I  need  only  add

that  a  semi-numerical  content  may  often  have  to  be  added  to

an  inductive  analysis  of  causes,  where  our  knowledge  of  con-


Chap.  IV.]  Induction  and  Discovery,  119

ditions  falls  short.  Here  we  really  fall  back  on  number,  on
ratio  of  instances  to  instances.  If  a  self-fertilised  flower  is
fertilised  90  times  in  100  cases,  and  an  insect-fertilised
flower  only  20  times  in  100  cases,  then  the  number  of  cases
strengthens  the  unlikelihood  of  any  exceptional  variety  and
relevancy  of  unknoTvn  conditions,  and  we  take  self-fertilisation
to  be  the  more  effective  process,  because  there  are  fewer
unknown  conditions  which  stop  it,  or  more  which  assist  it.
This  helps  the  confusion  which  regards  Induction  in  con-
trast to  Deduction  as  an  affair  of  number  of  instances.

Again,  Induction  does  not  exclude  Deductive  processes.  V

All  Induction  whatever  is  guided  by  principles ;  and  In-
duction as  considered  in  Jevons'  theory  essentially  consists
in  processes  of  mediate  Inference,  which  he  explicitly  calls
Deduction,  and  which  operate  by  deriving  data  deductively
from  hypothetical  premises.  And  usage  bears  him  out.  The
verification  of  hypothesis  has  been  considered  from  Bacon
downward  as  an  integral  part  of  scientific  induction.  And
nothing  can  be  more  deductive  than  the  connection  of  a
hypothesis  with  the  consequences  by  which  it  is  verified.

But  the  distinction,  as  one  of  aspects,  is  justified.  It  V
is  nearly  akin  to,  but  not  identical  with,  the  distinction
between  discovery  and  proof.  This  distinction  indeed  we
refused  to  recognise,  because  what  is  not  proved  is  not
really  discovered.  Xor  does  Induction  coincide  with  dis-
covery. For  discovery  may  include  as  in  mathematical
science  construction  and  proof,  which  no  one  would  call
inductive  ^

But  in  a  deeper  form  an  analogous  distinction  to  that
meant  to  be  drawn  between  discovery  and  proof  does  hold
good  between  Induction  and  Deduction.  We  may  take
Induction  as  Inference  viewed  from  the  side  of  the  differences^^
Deduction  as  Inference  viewed  from  the  side  of  the  universal.
In  Induction  par  excellence  the  Real  presents  itself  in  con-

^  There  may  be  and  indeed  must  be  tme  induction  in  mathematical  matter
in  so  far  as  instances  suggest  underlying  laws.  The  case  of  gravitation,  to  be
discussed  below,  illustrates  the  degree  in  which  this  is  possible.


I20  Scientific  Induction  by  Analysis, [boo

Crete  and  more  or  less  isolated  data,  in  virtue  of  which
universal  nature,  or  the  system  of  further  differences  char^
with  the  universal  nature,  is  referred  to  reality. In  Deduct'
par  excellence  the  Real  presents  itself  as  qualified  by
intelligible  system — e.g.  by  mathematical  attributes; ai
further  differences are  referred  to  reality  as  construct*
by  and  out  of  this  system. It  may  be  doubted  wheth
Newton's  discovery  of  Gravitation  was  Inductive  or  Dt
ductive. That  in  process  it  was  largely  deductive  there
of  course  no  doubt The  popular  story  however,  abo'
the falling  apple  ^,  would indicate,  if  true,  an  inductive
aspect — that of  a problem set by concrete  data, and
resolved  by  analysis  and  hypothesis. But  we  must  not
suppose  Newton's  mind  to  have  been  as  empty  of  mathe-
matical generalisations  as  our  own. He  probably  brought
a  systematised  qualification  of  Reality,  drawn  from  elements
in  the  researches  of  previous  mathematicians,  to  meet  the
facts  that  demanded  explanation. In  this  example  the
aspects  of  Induction  and  of  Deduction  are  about  equally
balanced,  and  we  see  the  whole  principle  involved  in  the
distinction  together  with  its  merely  transitory  importance.
The  relation  of  the  universal  to  its  differences  is  not  affected
by  the  order  in  which  they  have  presented  themselves  to  us
as  qualifications  of  Reality. But  it  is  this  order  alone  which
furnishes  the  differentia  of  Induction.

Regarded  as  relations  within  a  system,  i.  e.  in  the  light  of
the  principle  of  Suflficient  Reason,  all  inductive  explana-
tions point  beyond  themselves.  They  demand  in  the  first
instance  the  explicit  statement  of  the  system  from  which
their  necessity  is  derived,  and  thus  they  appeal  as  we  have
seen  from  the  pure  Hypothetical  judgment  to  the  Notional
or  Disjunctive  judgment.  But  the  underlying  real  systems
themselves  are  in  various  degrees  limited  and  incomplete,
and  in  virtue  of  their  finite  nature,  as  we  have  seen  to  be
the  case  with  space  and  time,  demand  explanations  which  go

^  For  comments  on  this  and  for  an  excellent  criticism  on  popular  notions  of
Induction,  see  De  Morgan's  Budget  of  Paradoxes,  pp.  49,  81.


chap.iv.] Limits  of  account  of  Induction,  121

further  and  further  afield  in  accounting  for  the  boundaries
which  persistently  present  themselves.  The  task  of  explana-
tion imposed  upon  the  mind  by  the  principle  of  sufficient
reason  is  therefore  an  endless  task.  The  principle  of  suffi-
cient reason,  as  Schopenhauer  says,  is  not  like  a  cab  which  you
can  send  away  when  it  has  brought  you  to  your  destination.
Nothing  is  isolated,  but  as  the  connections  which  debar
isolation  reach  to  infinity,  nothing  is  complete,  nor  has
what  it  requires  in  order  to  justify  its  existence.  This  is
the  standpoint  of  relativity,  which  applies  in  a  degree  to
all  known  matters.  How  far  we  can  escape  from  this
standpoint,  which  has  been  called  the  standpoint  of  the
Understanding,  and  which  as  thus  stated  is  merely  an
abstraction  of  our  own  minds,  will  appear  when  we  return
to  more  concrete  forms  of  thought.

Two  observations  may  be  made  about  the  account  here
to  be  given  of  Scientific  Induction.  I  shall  not  speak  in  it
especially  of  Causation.  I  have  attempted  to  show  in
Book  I  ^  that  cause  is  a  merely  popular  idea,  indicating
one  or  another  ill-defined  grade  in  the  process  of  inductive
explanation.  The  only  distinctive  peculiarity  of  Cause  con-
trasted with  Reason  is  that  it  refers  to  operation  in  time.  I
believe  that  all  which  has  value  in  this  idea  will  be  elucidated
by  our  account  of  inductive  explanation,  taken  together  with
the  analysis  of  the  idea  of  Cause  to  which  I  have  referred.

And  I  do  not  propose  to  give  any  account  of  inductive
disproof.  Disproof  is  for  the  theory  of  Inference  only
a  form  of  correction  or  modification.  If  at  any  point  we
are  unable  to  perform  the  processes  necessary  to  correction,
then  we  have  pro  tanto  a  disproof — if  e.g.  we  fail  in
accommodating  a  suggested  rule  to  actual  exceptions,  or
actual  exceptions  to  a  suggested  rule.  But  for  theory  such
a  failure  is  not  a  positive  phenomenon.  We  must  suppose
that  there  is  a  true  rule,  which,  if  we  could  but  hit  upon  it,
would  cover  the  facts  and  appear  as  a  correction  of  our
disproved  rule.  The  failure  to  light  upon  a  hypothetical
*  Chap.  vi.


122  Scientific  Induction  by  Analysis, [bookii.


Induction
as  percep-
tive ana-
lysis.

Sjnnbolic
expression
of  the
problem.


rule  fulfilling  these  conditions  is  a  mere  delay  In  making
the  required  correction,  of  which  theory  need  take  no
account.  Bacon's  complaint  that  the  '  axioma  distinctione
aliqua  frivola  salvatur '  is,  but  for  '  frivola  '  which  is  its  sting,
an  account  of  the  sole  and  inevitable  process  of  knowledge.

In  order  to  exhibit  distinctly  the  variations  which  impede
a  clear  definition  of  Induction,  I  propose  to  speak  separately
of  Induction  as  perceptive  analysis  and  of  Induction  as
inferential  explanation.  These  two  varieties,  together  with
Analogical  Inference  and  Enumerative  Induction,  are  all
confused  together  in  the  popular  idea  of  Induction  as
opposed  to  Deduction  ^.

ii.  Induction  in  the  narrowest  sense  is  perceptive  analysis.

a.  We  suppose  ourselves  to  have  obtained  from  any  source
whatever,  all  such  sources  being  ultimately  reducible  to
analogy,  the  problematic  judgment  that  the  attribute  or
occurrence  B  in  virtue  of  a  nature  a  b  c  ^^  has  probably
a  necessary  coherence  with  the  attribute  or  event  C.  This
is  so  far  only  a  presumption  arising  from  the  value  for
cognition  which  we  have  been  led  to  attach  to  the  nature
a  b  c  R — a  value  depending,  in  all  the  higher  and  truer
applications  of  analogy,  on  the  ultimate  identity  of  human
purposes  and  necessities^,  and  in  the  lower  walks  of  inference
on  the  identification  of  self-maintenance  orself-presei-vation
with  some  such  idea  as  that  of  purpose.  I  follow  Lotze  in
employing  an  expression  of  the  type  ab  c'Kxw  which  a,  b,  c
may  be  taken  to  stand  respectively  for  definite  attributes  or
relations  and  R  for  the  residual  nature  of  the  concrete
whole  before  us,  considered  as  only  contributing  its  normal
support  to  the  operations  oi  a  b  c  and  not  as  actively  inter-

• ^  Compare  Mill,  ii.  25  ff. He  tries  to  separate  Hypothesis  from  Induction,
^ but  really  includes,  though  he  denies  doing  so,  much  Hypothesis  in  Induc-
tion. His  test  seems  to  be  that  where  you have  a  vera  causa  you  have
Induction,  not  Hypothesis. But  he  admits  that  in  Induction  the  vera  causa
may  not  be  known  to  be  present  in  the  case  under  investigation.

^  The  process  of  learning  a  foreign  language,  and  ultimately  of  understanding
language  at  all,  is  an  excellent  example  of  this.  We  are  guided  throughout
by  the  assumption  that  identical  aims  and  feelings  underlie  the  different  systems
of  expression.


CHAP.rv'.]  Limit  of  Isolation.  123

fering  to  modify  them.  It  is  worth  mentioning  that  Mill's
account  of  the  Experimental  methods,  otherwise  at  least
suggestive,  is  rendered  terribly  perplexing  by  his  use  of
corresponding  letters  A  and  a  to  indicate  from  the  first
the  several  antecedents  and  consequents  underlying  con-
crete phenomena.  The  result  is  that  his  first  statement  of
ever}'  problem  presupposes  in  symbolic  form  its  explicit
solution.  When  the  phenomenon  can  be  resolved  into  ante-
cedents ABC  and  consequents  a  b  c  the  work  is  already
done.  Mill,  no  doubt,  does  not  mean  to  have  determined
by  his  expression  the  fact  that  a  particular  element  A  of  the
given  content  is  from  the  first  known  to  correspond  to
another  particular  element  a.  He  intends  A  and  a  to  be
empty  forms,  indicating  the  problem  which  our  analysis  has
to  solve.  But  the  correspondences  of  the  symbolic  letters
are  undoubtedly  misleading.

I  mention  this  question  partly  because  it  illustrates  our
present  task.  The  problem  is  just  to  break  up  B  into  a  ;3
y  R,  so  that  we  can  say  of  each  element  in  turn,  '  If  a  R,
then  a  R ;  and  if  a  R,  then  a  R.'  In  each  case  we  must
understand  all  the  elements  which  we  are  not  observing  to
fall  back  into  the  mass  of  R.  This  neglect  of  the  other
elements  is  capable  of  two  interpretations.  Either  the  other
elements  may  be  taken  to  retain  their  normal  relation  to
the  a  under  investigation,  and  are  not  especially  and  abnor-
mally operative  upon  it  under  the  conditions  of  the  obser-
vation, or  they  are  actually  inoperative  and  might  be  re-
moved. This  latter  interpretation  can  never  be  justified
without  special  proof,  which  must  address  itself  to  a  de-
finite analysed  R.  For  every  conjunction  of  conditions
whatever  is  an  R,  i.e.  an  inexhaustible  concrete,  even  in
the  most  precise  experiment,  and  all  that  can  ever  be  done
in  the  way  of  isolation  is  to  exclude  some  portion  x  of  the
whole  concrete  R,  by  substituting  for  it  an  element  y  which
has  the  effect  of  turning  R  into  R^.  We  have  then  ex-
cluded X,  but  not  R  as  such,  i.e.  we  can  only  exclude  R
in  as  far  as  we  can  analyse  it.


124  Scientific  Induction  by  Analysis, [bookii.

And  to  end  the  subject  of  symbolic  expression,  I  may
point  out  that  for  simplicity's  sake  I  shall  not  consider  the
whole  analogical  suggestion  '  B  is  probably  connected  with
C,  both  being  conjoined  with  a  b  c  R,'  but  shall  confine  my-
self to  one  member  at  a  time,  as  we  should  have  to  do  in  a
practical  investigation,  e.  g.  to  '  B  is  conjoined  with,  and  pro-
bably coheres  with,  a  b  c  R.'  This  is  not  an  inadequate
treatment.  It  would  be  easy  to  add  C  as  a  character  to
ab  c  ^^  indicating  that  their  conjunction  must  be  taken
subject  to  unknown  conditions ;  and  in  any  case  the  inves-
tigation of  B  in  relation  \.o  a  b  c  '^  is  certain  if  pursued  to
the  end  to  lay  open  the  track  of  coherence  between  ab c'R.
and  C.  The  defect  of  symbolic  modes  of  expression  in
these  higher  forms  of  reasoning  is  that  not  only  are  all
elements  of  the  content  most  variously  interconnected,  and
far  from  being  on  the  same  level  in  value,  but  also  every
element  of  the  content  is  undergoing  transformation  from
the  beginning  to  the  end  of  the  whole  process.  Therefore,
as  Mill  no  doubt  really  intended,  corresponding  symbols
like  a  and  a  represent  a  pair  of  series  or  a  pair  of  continuous
developments  within  the  inference  rather  than  a  pair  of  fixed
contents.
Establish-  /3.  I  will  begin  by  analysing  at  some  length  an  example
Ordhiar  °^  perceptive  analysis  conducted  chiefly  through  observation
Hypothe-  as  Opposed  to  experiment — though  experiment  was  at  times
ment.  ^  applied — and  in  respect  of  its  content  just  on  the  border-
land between  analogy  and  scientific  induction.

It  might  be  suggested  without  doing  violence  to  facts
that  the  Linnaean  classification  in  botany  corresponds  on  the
whole  to  the  stage  of  enumerative  or  conjunctive  Induction  ;
the  mere  natural  classification  to  Analogical  Inference ;  and
the  analysis  of  plant-structure  and  evolution  in  the  light  of
the  Darwinian  hypothesis  to  scientific  induction — to  percep-
tive induction  where  we  deal  with  the  visible  adaptations
of  particular  species,  and  to  generalising  or  reflective  induc-
tion when  we  lay  down  universal  conditions  as  controlling
the  evolution  of  the  organic  world.


Chap.  IV.] Fertilisation  of  Bee  Ophrys.  125

Let  us  suppose  that  Analogy,  the  habit  of  ascribing  what
I  have  ventured  to  call  de  facto  purposes  to  adaptations  in
the  organic  world,  has  made  it  probable  to  us  on  inspecting
the  flower  of  the  Bee  Ophrys  that  it  (B)  is  adapted  for  self-
fertilisation  {ab  c  R).

Here  the  expression  '  adapted  for,'  in  consonance  with
the  notion  of  de  facto  purpose,  refers  not  merely  to  the
mechanical  adjustment  of  a  contrivance,  but  to  the  fact  of
that  contrivance  actually  achieving  in  normal  use  the
purpose  which  it  suggests.  A  case  in  which  we  cannot
make  out  this  additional  element  of  meaning  will  be
mentioned  below,  and  in  it  the  purpose  will  not  rank  as
established  by  Induction.

I  should  observe,  too,  that  the  element  C  which  we  usually
spoke  of  in  analogy  and  which  we  mean  to  omit  here  for
the  sake  of  brevity  may  in  the  present  example  be  identified
with  any  peculiarity  the  conjunction  of  which  with  the
general  appearance  B  might  have  first  attracted  our  atten-
tion to  the  flower  B.

Of  course  my  analysis  is  only  rough  and  typical.  I
select  two  or  three  prominent  characters  out  of  a  whole
apparatus  of  converging  contrivances.

The  object  is  now  to  analyse  the  flower  B  in  the  light  of
abc^. We  may  attempt  this  roughly  as  follows  : —

(a)  Caudicles  (stalks  of  pollen-masses)  are  of  the  right
length  to  («)  reach  the  stigma.

(/3)  Anther-cells  open  of  themselves,  and  {h)  let  the  pollen-
masses  fall  to  the  level  of  the  stigma.

(y)  Hanging  pollen-masses  oscillate  in  the  wind  till  {c)
they  strike  the  stigma.

R  in  this  example  has  the  significance  that  the  remaining
parts  of  the  flower  and  plant  are  necessary  to  give  the  pro-
cess its  value,  and  to  make  it  possible  for  the  contrivance
to  operate,  by  nourishing  and  mechanically  supporting  the
flower.  But  all  this  is  involved  in  the  nature  of  a  plant,
and  therefore  assuming  a,  /3,  y  to  be  in  a  living  plant,  and
that,  of  course,  the  right  plant,  R  need  not  be  further  con-


126  Scientific  Induction  by  Analysis. [bookii.

sidered  in  the  analysis  at  present  \  i.e.  until  it  in  some  way
interferes  with  the  possibility  or  reality  of  the  action  we  are
investigating.

The  very  important  relation  of  y  to  ^  in  the  above  analysis
assumes  the  operation  of  an  external  cause,  and  requires  a
confirmation  without  which  the  whole  analysis  is  futile  ;  for
as  the  pollen  masses  when  liberated  do  not  fall  on  the
stigma,  but  only  hang  like  a  pendulum  on  the  level  of  the
stigma,  it  is  incumbent  on  us  to  show  how  they  can  be  and
are  brought  in  contact  with  it.  There  is  a  further  interest
at  this  point  in  affirming  or  denying  the  action  of  insects,
which  are  usually  necessary  to  cross-fertilisation,  but  the
need  for  whose  intervention  would  impair  the  certainty
which  is  the  purpose  of  self-fertilisation.  Here  we  have  re-
course to  the  negative  instance  which,  here  as  usual,  contains
an  element  of  experiment.  For  the  essence  of  the  negative
instance  is  to  obtain  a  positive  content  equivalent  ad  hoc
to  an  exclusion,  and  this  can  only  be  done  by  a  disjunctive
limitation  of  possibilities,  and  an  exact  ascertainment  of  the
reality  within  the  possibilities  so  limited.  The  limitation
of  possibilities  consists,  not  in  removing  all  R,  which  is
impossible,  but  in  securing  an  R  analysed  and  believed  to
be  passive  ;  and  artificial  combinations  give  the  best  chance
of  obtaining  this  condition.  And  the  exact  ascertainment
of  reality  consists  in  obsei-ving  a  positive  or  negative  condi-
tion, or  both,  whose  nature  we  can  exhaustively  analyse.
Here  again  artificial  production  gives  the  best  chance.  To
test  the  connection  of  y  (movement  by  wind)  with  c  (contact
with  stigma)  Mr.  Darwin  put  a  spike  of  Bee  Ophrys  in
water  in  a  room.  Thus  he  secured  an  R,  residuary  con-
ditions, which  he  could  ensure  to  be  passive  (absence  of
touching  by  animals  or  by  any  unknown  cause  of  motion),
and  having  thus  limited  the  possibiHties  he  was  able  to
observe  with  certainty  and  with  a  high  degree  of  ex-
clusiveness  the  absence  of  wind,  not-y,  which  resulted  in
absence  of  contact,  not-c,  the  pollen-masses  continuing  to
hang  freely  in  front  of  the  stigma. Thus  he  obtained  the


Chap.  IV.] A  Suggestion  and  Exception.  127

confirmatory  or  true  negative  instance '  not-y  is  not  r,'  which

is  the  contrapositive  converse  of  '  t:  is  y,'  i.  e.  '  contact  arises
from  wind.'  We  have  here  left  the  ground  of  formal  logic  \
in  which  'not-y  is  not  c  could  only  rest  on  the  knowledge
that  '■  c  is  y.'  In  the  process  now  considered  '  <:  is  y '  actually
rests  on  the  knowledge  that  '  not-y  is  not  r.'  The  corrobora-
tive power  of  the  negative  instance  in  induction  depends  on
the  fact  that  it  has  a  positive  content  within  the  same  tilti-
mate  system  as  c  and  y,  and,  within  that  system,  related  by
way  of  definite  negation  to  them.  Thus  the  negative  in-
stance is  capable  of  independent  agreement  with  the  positive
case.  '  Not-y  is  not  ^'  =  '  Free  caudicles  without  wind  give
no  contact.'

But  it  will  be  said  that  we  have  gone  too  fast.  We  read
the  '  free  caudicles  in  a  room  give  no  contact '  as  *  not-y
is  not  c'  But  it  was  probably  also  '  Not-G  (no  insects)  is
not  c/  '  where  no  insects,  there  no  contact,'  i.  e.  in  searching
R  we  have  found  a  not-G,  an  absence  of  a  condition,  which,
it  is  suggested,  may  not  be,  as  R  was  meant  to  be,  in-
different. We  may  treat  this  as  a  positive  suggestion  from
analogy,  '  G  is  probably  c ; '  for  in  the  absence  of  such  a
positive  suggestion  we  should  have  no  more  cause  to  note
the  absence  of  insects  G  from  the  experimental  R  than  to
note  the  absence  of  direct  sunlight  L  or  extreme  changes
of  temperature  T.  But  there  is  plenty  of  analogy  for  insects
fertilising  plants  ;  so  '  G  is  probably  c '  demands  attention.

Mr.  Darwin  provided  against  this  suggestion  by  exposing
some  of  the  flowers  under  a  net,  which  excluded  insects  but
admitted  wind.  In  the  cases  so  treated  contact  was  effected.
We  may  read  this  off  as  an  exception  in  the  form  'not-G  is  c^
against  the  suggested  rule  '  G  is  (probably)  c,'  or  '  insects
(probably)  produce  the  contact,'  and  as  at  the  same  time  a
positive  instance  in  favour  of  the  suggested  rule  'y  is  c,'
'  wind  makes  contact.'  This  double-edged  character,  proper
to  a  negated  content  at  this  stage,  is  justified  by  the  experi-

*  See  vol.  i.  pp.  322-4.  WTiat  is  true  of  the  double  negation  is  true  of  the
contrapositive  converse  which  implies  double  negation.


128  Scientific  Induction  by  Analysis. [Bookii.

ment  above-mentioned  which  might  be  read  off  as  'R  y  not-G
is  f ;' R  standing  for  the  mass  of  conditions  presumed  to
be  indifferent,  not-G  for  the  exclusion  of  insects,  y  for  the
presence  of  wind,  and  c  for  contact.
Establish- y.  And  this  connection  y  is  <:  (wind  acting  on  the  pendent
Reciprocal  poUen-masses  produces  contact  with  the  stigma)  has  been
Hypo- defined  and  confirmed — i.e.  re-inferred  in  a  precise  form —
Judgment,  through  the  two  conjunctions  claiming  to  be  connections,
R-not-y  is  not  c  (pendent  pollinia  without  wind^  do  not
touch  the  stigma)  and  R  y-not-G  is  c^  i.  e.  pendent  pollinia
with  wind  and  without  insects  ^  do  touch  the  stigma.  From
not-y  is  not  c  (R  being  disregarded  as  the  common  basis)
we  infer  c  is  y,  i.  e.  '  contact  comes  from  wind,'  the  reci-
procal of  '  wind  produces  contact.' And  by  '  y-not-G  is  c '
we  confirm  this  reciprocal  '  contact  comes  from  wind  '  by-
overthrowing  the  suggestion  that  G  may  be  the  operative
agent  in  c,  and  consequently  that  either  wind  or  insects  may
be  concerned  in  the  contact.

It  is  true,  however,  that  we  have  not  obtained,  against
'G  maybe  cl  the  more  fatal  exception  'G  is  not  c'  (in
presence  of  insects  no  contact  is  effected) ;  the  exception
which  we  obtained  is  strictly  an  exception  against  the
reciprocal  of  this,  viz.  against  ^  is  G  or  contact  comes  from
insects,  i.  e.  against  the  suggestion  that  insects  are  the  only
agency  in  producing  contact.  Thus  we  have  not  strictly
proved^  as  against  insect  agency  the  only  suggested  alter-
native, that  wind  is  the  exclusive  agency  in  the  self-fertilisa-
tion of  this  flower,  for  when  wind  was  excluded,  insects  were
probably  (in  the  room)  excluded  with  it.  In  fact  the  y  with
which  we  began  included  G,  and  was  really '  wind-or-insects,'
and  it  is  of  this  y  that  the  reciprocal  '  ^  is  y '  was  proved  by
the  experiment  not-y  is  not-^.  But  we  subsequently  make
it  probable  that  this  y  onght  to  mean  wind  only,  by  making

*  Experiment  of  the  flower  in  a  room.

*  Experiment  of  flowers  under  a  net  in  the  open  air.  This  experiment  goes
far  to  give  the  pure  judgment '  otily  7  is  e,'  which  no  ordinary  Judgment-form  will
express  for  Logic,  except  the  clumsy  equivalent '  All  c  is  7.'  I  have  written  it
'7-not-G  is  f.'


Chap.  IV.]  Exclusivc  Age^icy,  1 29

it  certain  that  it  may  mean  wind  only.  This  shows  the
transformation  which  a  content  undergoes  in  course  of  an
inductive  inference.

And  for  the  kind  of  matter  with  which  we  are  dealing
this  conclusion  is  perhaps  sufficient. We  are  studying  the
use  of  an  adaptation,  which  use  any  normal  agency  suitable
to  it  will  suffice  to  establish. We  could  not  hope  to  prove
that  no  insect,  or  that  no  human  hand,  has  ever  fertilised  a
Bee  Ophr}^s  by  pushing  the  pendent  pollen-masses. When
we  know  that  the  wind  can  do  it,  and  does  it without
other  aid,  and  that  wind  is  a  common  occurrence,  and  that
in  the  absence  of  wind  (though  in  the  absence  of  other
things  at  the  same  time)  the  adaptation  fails,  then  we  are
justified  in  saying  that  here  we  have  the  only  agency  which
is  normal  enough  to  account  for  the  growth  of  a  contrivance
adapted  to  it. Logically,  these  considerations  are  repre- V
sented  by  the  claim  of  every  judgment  to  become  reciprocal,
which  formal  claim  has  different  values  and  interpretations
in  different  kinds  of  matter. Here,  for  instance,  we  might
make  our  judgment  truly  reciprocal — and  purely  truistic —
by  transforming  the  content  of  y  into  simply  '  a  sufficient
cause  of  motion.' This  would  suffice  for  a mechanical
construction  of  our  problem,  but  not  for  an  organic  ex-
planation of  it. An  organic  adaptation  demands  for  its
explanation a definite regular agency to which it is
adapted ;  it  need  not  exclude  agencies  of  diverse  origin ;
but  it  is  pretty  certain  to  shape  itself  on  some  one  well-
defined  type  of  operation. Thus  in  speaking  of  agencies
to  which  evolution  has  adapted  structures,  the  claim  of  any
actual  and  normal  agency  to  be  the  exclusive  agency  is
prima  facie  very  strong. To  make  it  absolute  we  should
proceed  by  analysing  c  as  we  have  analysed  B  itself,  and
showing  that  y,  wind  agency,  as  f  v  ^,  is  the  (rtily  agency
corresponding  to  c  2&  x  y  z. But  this  I  at  all  events  am
unable  to  do,  further  than  by  pointing  out  that '  normal '
and  '  general '  in  y  correspond  to  '  gradual  growth '  and
'  need  of  a  reliable  agent'  in  the  contrivances  concerned  in^.
VOL.  II.  K


130  Scientific  Induction.  [book  11,

Thus  far  we  are  left  with  B  as  a j3  y  R  is  abc'R.  or  S.
The  flower  of  the  Bee  Ophrys  as  having  flexible  caudicles
of  the  right  length  and  self-opening  anther  cells,  and  con-
sidered as  acted  upon  by  wind,  is  adapted  for  self-fertilisa-
tion by  the pollinia falling  to the  level  of the  stigma
and  oscillating  till  they  touch  it.
Conversion §.  In  formal  logic  the  affirmation  of  one  attribute  can
isation. have  no  influence  on  the  affirmation  of  another  about  the
same  subject  unless  an  explicit  contrariety  between  the  two
affirmations  is  within  our  knowledge. In  short,  diff'erence
does  not  justify  negation. To  say  that  a  flower  is  self-
fertilised  does  not  formally  warrant  us  in  denying  that  it  is
cross-fertilised. But  in  science  every  content  claims  to  be
treated  as  a  system,  and  every  attribute  must  either  quarrel
with  any  other  attribute  suggested  of  the  same  subject,  or
must  make  peace  with  it  on  definite  terms. Therefore  the
inductive  conclusion B is S,  '  The  Bee Ophrys  is  self-
fertilising,'  which  we  have  thus  obtained,  contains  in  its
claim  for  reciprocity,  i.  e.  for  predominance  or  essentiality
on  the  part  of  the  attribute^  a  further  suggestion  to  which
in  material  or  actual  knowledge  we  are  bound  to  pay  atten-
tion. We  cannot  indeed  expect  to  show  that  every  self-
fertilised  plant  is  a  Bee  Ophrys  ;  i.  e.  we  cannot  reduce
self-fertilisation to mean solely the adaptations of  the
flower  in  question,  nor  can  we  extend  our  idea  of  the  flower
in  question  to  include all  adaptations  that  in  any  plant
might  ensure  self-fertilisation. The  attribute  '  self-fertilisa-
tion '  is  not  suflSciently  concrete  and  specific  to  be  identified
in  this  way  with  the  nature  of  a  particular  species  of  plant.
But  though  we  cannot  reduce  self-fertilisation  as  such  to
mean  simply  and  solely  the  fertilising  contrivances  of  Ophrys
apifera,  we  are  confronted  by  the  reciprocal  tendency  of
judgment  with  another  problem  which  Darwin,  with  his
usual exhaustiveness  of  apprehension,  has  frankly  stated
and  discussed. We  saw  that  B  is  S,  or,  to  prepare  for  our
present  enquiry,  B  is  ^  S,  i.  e.  The  flower  in  question  is
characterised  by  its  own  peculiar  contrivances  for  self-ferti-


Chap.  IV.] Difference  and  A  ntagonism,  131

lisation.  Can  we  convert  this  judgment  materially  ?  Can
we  say  '  Self-fertilisation  S,  not  cross-fertilisation  F,  is  the
characteristic  of  this  species,'  or  in  hypothetical  form,  '  If
S  pure  and  simple,  then  B'?  This  suggestion  might  be
embodied  with  more  formal  correctness  in  double  negation
or  in  contra-position,  as  '  B  is  not  not-S,'  or,  '  If  any  not-S,
then  not-B,'  and  the  question  would  thus  arise  whether  F
(cross-fertihsation)  was  not-S  in  the  sense  of  being  incom-
patible with  S  in  B.  But  Simple  Conversion  without
limitation  (formally  impossible)  expresses  the  guiding  idea
more  effectually,  in  demanding  that  an  essential  attribute  of
a  subject  shall  be  the  sole  attribute  in  the  relation  to  which
it  belongs.  Here  however  this  suggested  reciprocal  is  not
true.  The  contrivances  which  have  their  meaning  in  sub-
serving cross-fertilisation,  the  viscid  discs,  sinking  caudicles,
and  elastic  threads  tying  up  the  pollen-masses,  are  present
in  the  Bee  Ophrys  without  the  least  trace  of  becoming
aborted,  and  therefore  a  strong  analogical  inference  holds>
to  show  that  B  being  def'is  F,  and  so  is  not-S  in  as  far
as  not-S  is  identified  with  F ;  in  other  words,  that  S,  and
not-S  in  the  sense  of  F,  are  not  contrary  or  incompatible
in  B,  and  so  if  we  like  that  F  is  in  this  case  not  to
count  as  not-S,  or  else  that  B  is  both  S  and  not-S,  to
which,  if  not-S  only  means  different  from  S,  there  is  no
objection.

A  certain  methodical  gain  is  drawn  from  affirming  this
conjunction  of  S  and  not-S,  although  unintelligible  to
formal  logic.  Having  failed  in  Conversion,  we  are  driven
to  Generalisation.  For  though  S  and  F  form  no  logical
contradiction,  but  2.x  ^  prima  facie  quite  compatible  with  one
another,  yet  ultimately  and  from  the  point  of  view  of  a
harmonious  theory  there  is  a  contradiction  ttntil  we  reconcile
them.  Difference  without  a  reason, — i.  e.  difference  in  the
same  relation,  or  difference  of  means  ^  to  the  same  end  qua

*  Apart  from  the  insufficient  amount  of  the  one  means,  which  therefore  may
need  supplemeating  by  another.  If  the  one  means  is  as  easy  to  provide  as  the
other,  this  reason  falls  away.

K  Q,


132  Scientific  Induction.  [book  11,

the  same, — is  a  contradiction.  We  express  this  problem
justly  by  saying,  '  The  flower  B  is  self-fertilised  S,  and
apparently  may  also  be  cross-fertilised  Not-S.'  We  are
here  in  need  of  a  further  suggestion  by  which  to  generalise
S  and  not-S  into  one  conception.  This  suggestion  cannot
be  mechanically  obtained,  but  must  be  drawn  by  analogy
from  our  general  knowledge  of  the  organic  world.  Com-
bining what  Darwin  says  in  the  place  under  discussion
with  his  views  in  other  works,  we  might  give  this  suggestion
the  form,  '  2  (healthy  preservation  of  the  species)  demands
some  F  (cross-fertilisation)  at  least;'  under  which  we  may
infer  by  analogy  from  '  B  has  besides  S  some  F  (not-S) '
that  '  B  the  special  adaptations  of  the  Bee  Ophrys  have
for  their  all-embracing  and  determining  nature  the  tendency
to  2  the  healthy  self-preservation  of  the  species,  including
both  S  and  not-S.'

Beyond  analogy,  in  this  final  inference,  we  cannot  go,  for
cross-fertilisation  is  not,  according  to  the  passage  upon
which  I  rely,  affirmed  of  Reality  as  a  datum  in  the  content
of  Ophrys  apifera,  but  is  itself  only  inferred  from  analogy  ;
and  therefore  the  general  conclusion,  though  a  suggestive
concurrence  of  analogies,  cannot  be  considered  as  a  truth
resting  upon  scientific  induction.  The  operation  of  the
contrivances  by  which  the  self-fertilisation  of  this  flower  is
secured  may  on  the  other  hand  be  regarded  as  made  good
by  precise  perceptive  analysis  at  every  point.

In  establishing  this  positive  attribute  of  self-fertilisa-
tion considered  as  significant  of  a  de  facto  purpose,  we
have  about  reached  the  limits  of  perceptive  analysis.  In
establishing  the  probability  of  cross-fertilisation  we  have  in
one  sense  gone  beyond  the  limits  of  perceptive  analysis  into
the  region  of  hypothesis,  if  in  another  sense  we  have  retro-
graded into  mere  analogy.  Such  a  hypothesis  as  we  have
just  recommended  by  analogy,  if  drawn  out  into  a  variety
of  precise  details  and  supported  by  their  precise  verification
as  real  data,  would  be  the  essence  of  reflective,  mediate,  or
generalising  Induction. We  must  however  bear  in  mind


Chap.  IV.] Mediate  Infer etue  in  Induction.  133

that  hypothesis  was  present  in  a  germinal  form  through-
out perceptive  analysis,  throughout  analogy,  and  even
throughout  enumerative  induction,  where  it  was  repre-
sented by  the  content  of  a  common  name  ;  so  that  there
is  no  saltus  between  these  phases  of  inference.  The
fascination  which  attaches  to  the  researches  of  the  great
masters  lies  just  in  their  power  of  absorbing,  by  exhaus-
tive analysis,  the  mass  of  perceived  data  into  intelligible
conceptions.

iii. In order to estimate  the logical character  —  the  Logical
position  in  the  evolution  of  thought — of  such  a  process  ^f  percep-
as  this  which  I  have  attempted  to  describe,  three  special  tive  Induc-
points must be  briefly  treated. These  are, a. What  is
the essence of the inferential process concerned  ? ^.
What is  the purpose  of  the  symbolic  representation  of
it  by  letters  ? y.  What  part  in  it  is  played  by  number  of
instances  ?

a.  Ordinary  mediate  inference,  either  subsumptive  or  con-  Its  essence
structive,  may  be  detected  in  every  step  of  the  process  ^^^^
which  we  have  examined,  as  in  any  complex  judgment  of
perception.  As  we  analyse,  for  example,  the  flower  into
its  parts,  and  its  parts  into  mechanical  adaptations,  we
obtain  the  material  for  a  three-term  inference  by  which  the
adaptations  in  their  mechanical  aspect  would  be  formally
brought  home  to  the  flower.  Or  again,  the  contra-positive
conversions  and  the  ideal  reciprocity  of  the  judgment,  to
which  we  have  so  freely  appealed,  may  be  held  to  require
explicit  proof  through  syllogistic  or  disjunctive  argument
based  on  abstract  principles.  The  mediate  inference  thus
involved  is  of  two  kinds.

With  regard  to  the  mediate  inference  involved  in  every
complex  judgment  of  perception,  and  therefore  in  every
precise  one — this  is  really  present  in  the  Induction  of  which
we  are  speaking,  and  may  sometimes  need  to  be  explicitly
drawn  out  in  order  to  correct  the  results  of  an  overhasty
perceptive  analysis.  Especially  this  is  the  case  when  we
are employing experimental apparatus which embodies


134  Scientific  Induction.  [Bookii.

whole  chains  of  reasoning  and  concentrates  on  a  single
datum  a  multitude  of  precisely  determined  conditions.
The  observer  e.  g.  with  a  microscope  must  always  bear  in
mind  what  it  is  that  his  instrument  does  in  virtue  of  the
principles  of  its  own  construction,  and  in  many  classes  of
observations  is  liable  to  be  thrown  back  on  constructive
optical  inference,  in  order  to  determine  the  interpretation
of  the  appearance  presented  to  him, — whether  it  means  a
true  line  or  an  interference-line,  whether  an  elevation  or  a
depression,  whether  absence  of  structure  or  complete  trans-
parency of  structure  (in  which  latter  case  the  use  of  polarised
light  will  sometimes  detect  the  illusion).  Such  mediate
inference  as  this  is  really  and  genuinely  present  in  the  pro-
cesses we  have  been  considering,  being  concerned  with
material  principles  relevant  to  the  special  subject  of  the
inferences.  But  yet  such  mediate  inference  does  not
belong  to  the  differentia  of  Induction,  but  is  shared  by
all  Inference  whatever,  being  inherent  in  the  nature  of
Judgment.

On  the  other  hand,  it  appears  to  me  that  mediate  infer-
ence from  abstract  principles  of  knowledge,  such  as  prin-
ciples of  disjunction,  of  causation,  or  of  sufficient  reason,  is
not  a  genuine  element  of  scientific  Induction  at  all,  although
it  may  be  the  duty  of  the  logician  to  point  out  a  relation
between  inductive  inference  and  such  principles  as  these.
The  active  form  of  thought,  to  which  these  principles
belong,  loses,  as  we  have  seen^,  its  active  nature  if  it  is
made  a  mere  content  within  an  inference.  The  relation,  for
example,  of  the  judgment  that  embodies  a  '  negative '  in-
stance to  the  affirmative  judgment  which  it  corroborates  is
a  case  of  the  active  form  of  negation  engaged  in  acquiring
a  definite  content  within  a  certain  complex  system.  We
should  gain  nothing  in  such  a  case  by  erecting  an  argument
to  the  effect  that  What  is  not  A  is  not-A.  The  problem
is,  given  the  forms  A  and  not-A,  the  positive  and  its  limit,

*  Cp.  chapter  i.  of  the  present  Book.


Chap. IV.]  Positwe  and  Negative.  135

to  bring  these  two  forms  into  material  agreement  in  respect
of  the  matter  to  be  organised.

To  reject  abstract  argument  from  principles  of  knowledge  V
is  however  a  different  thing  from  the  omission  to  exhibit
the  material  of  inference  as  permeated  and  articulated  by
the  active  forms  of  thought.  Such  an  omission  I  hold  to
be  unjustifiable.  I  have  argued  elsewhere  that  Mr,  Bradley
goes  too  far  in  holding  that  an  inference  qua  inference  is
not  bound  to  exhibit  its  principle  or  rationale.

The  essence  of  induction  in  this,  the  perceptive  stage —  \J
and  beyond  this  stage  it  more  and  more  transcends  mere
induction — is  in  the  peculiar  parallelism  between  the  posi-  ^
tive  connection  which  suggests,  the  negative  connection
which  defines  in  corroborating  and  corroborates  in  defining,
and  the  '  exceptional '  connection  which  modifies  either^
itself  or  the  affirmative  connection.  I  have  explained^  why
I  do  not  take  account  of  the  sustained  exception  which
overthrows.  The  logical  peculiarity  of  the  process  is  in  the
positive  and  consequently  independent  value  of  the  nega-
tions, which  are  established  without  being  derived  from  the
affirmations,  but  operate  on  the  latter  through  the  formal
interdependence  of  negation  and  affirmation.  The  process
is  of  course  not  mechanical.  Mechanical  Induction  is  an
idle  dream.  The  reciprocal  adjustment  of  the  negations
and  affirmations  consists  in  the  revelation  of  intelligible
systematic  ideas  which  are  thus  inferred  to  be  true  of
reality.

y3.  The symbolic representation  of  these  processes  by  Theoreti-
letters  may  seem  to  have  an  external  affinity  with  the  pro-  ©f  re^^^
cesses  of  equational  logic. But  the  two  systems  are  to  be  sentarion
regarded  in  precisely  opposite  aspects. In  the  above  dis-
cus.sion  not-a  and  not-a  have  been  employed  to  designate
contents  which  are  positive,  but  have,  towards a  and a
respectively,  a  boundary  or  negative  side. The  only  object
of  such  designations  was  to  emphasise,  for  theoretical  pur-
poses, the  negative relations subsisting between certain

*  p.  43,  above.


136  Scientific  Induction.  [book  11.

inter-connected  positive  contents.  But  for  practical  use  the
events  or  attributes  in  question  must  be  taken  in  their  con-
crete form,  upon  which  everything  turns.  By  manipulating
them  in  the  shape  of  abstract  symbols  no  progress  can  be
made  in  the  task  of  Induction,  which  is  a  problem  of  mate-
rial suggestion  and  adjustment.  '  Jtist  where '  and  ^just
in  so  far  as  x  fails  to  be  a  it  fails  to  be  a\  this  is  the
meaning  of  the  inductive  '  not-a  is  not «.'  And  no  handling
of  symbols^  can  express  or  can  warrant  this  '  just^  and  '  in
so  far  as'  which  are  the  whole  essence  of  the  process.
What  warrants  these  expressions  of  definite  relation  is  and
can  be  nothing  less  than  a  ground  or  real  system  containing
parts  which  negatively  determine  each  other.  It  is  the
business  of  Induction  in  the  form  of  perceptive  analysis  to
initiate  the  disentanglement  and  reciprocal  determination  of
elements  within  such  systems,  in  the  light  of  ideas— germinal
hypotheses — suggested  by  analogy.  Analogy,  in  fact,  does
not  cease  to  operate  in  Induction.  Induction  is  Analogy
fortified  by  negative  and  precise  determination.
Part  played  y.  Induction,  we  saw,  is  popularly  identified  with  proof  by
oHn"™  ^^  instances,  and  owes  its  recognition  as  a  distinct  method  of
stances. inference  to  this  identification.

In  percep- (i)  But  scientific  induction  does  not  depend  on  or  in  any
tive  analy-  ^^y  ^^^X  with  instances  as  such,  i.  e.  particular  occurrences

SIS  proper.  •'  _  _  ;  ,  .

or  observations  with  reference  to  their  particularity — their

C  number  or  recurrence.  Here  we  have  an  antinomy,  to
which  at  the  present  stage  we  need  only  draw  attention,  as
it  has  really  been  solved  by  the  distinction  between  Enu-
merative  Induction  and  the  subsequent  diverging  phases  of
the  Inductive  process.  All  that  scientific  Induction  de-
mands is  a  content  referred  to  reality;  in  how  many  obser-
vations or  cases  or  occurrences  the  content  is  presented  is
a  matter  of  entire  indifference  to  science.  If,  to  put  an
extreme  supposition,  the  entire  content,  positive  and  nega-

^  Of  course  this  remark  does  not  extend  to  true  calculation,  which  has  been
independently  treated  and  does  not  fall  within  induction.  The  two  processes
have  some  common  ground  in  statistics,  as  will  appear  from  7  below.


Chap.  IV.]  Observed  Ratios.  137

tive,  employed  in  the  above  analysis  of  the  Bee  Ophrys,
could  be  observable  in  a  single  flower,  that  single  flower
would,  subject  to  one  reser\'ation  to  be  mentioned  presently,
form  a  sufficient  ground  for  all  the  conclusions  that  were
then  drawn.  What  characters  can  be  and  what  cannot  be
united  in  a  single  or  continuous  observation  is  a  question  of
the  nature  of  the  object  concerned,  and  not  of  logical
theory.  The  same  flower  cannot  be  both  fertilised,  and
ultimately  not  fertilised  at  all.  It  can  be  both  fertilised
(later)  and  not-fertilised  (up  to  a  certain  point  of  time).  Or
it  can  be  both  self-fertilised,  and  not- self-fertilised  in  the
specific  sense  of  being  cross-fertilised.  The  first  of  these
three  comparisons  requires  two  'instances';  the  two  latter
need  only  require  one  apiece,  or  indeed  one  between  them.
And  then  is  an  '  instance '  a  plant  or  a  flower  ?  If  a  plant,
one  instance  would  probably  do  all  we  should  demand.

(2)  There  is,  however,  one  case  to  be  distinguished  to  Known
which  the  above  remarks  do  not  apply.  The  self-fertilisa-  ^n^own
tion  of  the  Bee  Ophrj's,  Darwin  says,  is  markedly  '  sue-  conditions,
cessful.'  The  Bee  Ophrj's,  which  is  self-fertilised,  in  many
dozens  of  plants  had  a  capsule  (seed-vessel)  for  every
flower  ^.  The  Fly  Ophrys,  cross-fertilised  by  insects,  had
only  seven  capsules  in  forty-nine  flowers.  This  is  again
'a  is  tf,'  'not-a  tends  to  be  not  ^.'  And  here  number  of
instances  is  essential  to  the  result,  because  we  are  dealing  with
tJie  operation  of  conditions  not  fidly  known.  This  throws
us  back  at  once  into  enumeration  of  instances,  statistical
methods,  or  even  the  statement  of  chances.  We  proceed  by
the  comparison  of  hypotheses  explanatory  of  observed
ratios,  as  we  saw  in  discussing  the  statement  of  chances.  If,
to  use  an  extreme  illustration,  we  could  say  '  Fly  Ophrys  is
exclusively  insect-fertilised,'  and  '  the  observed  plants  of
Fly  Ophrys  are  in  a  place  inaccessible  to  insects,'  then  we
should  not  need  a  single  instance  to  fortify  the  conclusion
that  all  these  plants  must  remain  unfertilised.  But  as  we
do  not  know  with  precision  what  conditions  are  operative,
•  Exceptis  excipiendis — deformed  flowers.


138  Scientific  Induction.  [book  11.

and  to  what  degree,  in  securing  or  hindering  the  approach
of  the  right  insects  to  the  flower  at  the  right  moment,  we
are  reduced  to  enumerating  observed  instances  in  order  to
obtain  an  actual  ratio  between  successes  and  failures,  upon
which  we  may  base  an  estimate  of  the  nature  of  the  cause
or  causes,  whether  in  the  flower  or  outside  it,  which  would
probably  have  produced  the  observed  ratio  of  successes  to
failures.  We  have  as  data,  say,  forty-eight  cases  and  forty-
eight  successes  in  self-fertilisation,  compared  with  forty-
eight  cases  and  only  six  successes  in  cross-fertilisation  by
insects.  We  have  to  conjecture  or  construct  the  kind  or
type  of  causes  which  are  most  likely  to  have  produced  these
two  observed  series.

Supposing  indeed  that  we  take  into  account  all  unknown
conditions  whatever,  no  question  can  be  raised,  for  it  is  a
mere  transcription  of  the  series  to  say  that  the  one  flower  is
less  adapted  to  the  conditions  which  have  acted  on  it,  than
the  other  to  the  conditions  which  have  acted  on  it.  And
supposing  that  Darwin  excluded  interfering  causes  in
counting  both  his  sets  of  instances,  as  he  did  in  one,  there  is
no  more  to  be  said.  The  self-fertilised  plant  meets  the
unknown  conditions  wholly  and  the  other  does  not.  In
order  to  compare  probabilities  we  must  have  a  suggestion
as  to  some  special  kinds  of  causes  that  normally  operate
with  an  assigned  frequency  \  and  for  the  sake  of  illustration
I  will  assume  that  obvious  accidents  have  not  been  ex-
cluded. As  every  adaptation  has  its  limits  beyond  which
conditions  become  abnormal  to  it,  i.  e.  are  accidents,  I  am
able  by  this  means  to  suggest  the  idea  that  the  two  kinds

*  We  must  in  short  take  by  way  of  hypothesis  some  '  natural  cycle,'  or  what
comes  to  the  same  thing,  some  cycle  external  to  that  observed,  otherwise  there
are  no  two  ratios  to  compare  in  respect  of  each  observed  series.  See  Book  I.
chap.  viii.  We  might  indeed  compare  the  probabilities  that  each  series  pro-
ceeded from  a  supposed  cause,  and  from  chance  (unknown  independent  conditions)
respectively,  but  this  would  be,  where  we  know  some  of  the  conditions  operative,
to  forfeit  the  use  of  knowledge  which  we  possess.  If  we  wished  to  reckon
the  probability  of  either  series  occurring  by  chance,  I  suppose  we  should  have
to  take  {faute  de  mieux)  the  chances  of  failure  and  success  as  even  for  each
flower.


Chap.  IV.] Normal  and  Abnormal  Co7iditions. 139

of  flower  may  be  equally  well  adapted  to  normal  condi-
tions, but  that  in  the  observed  series  of  cases  the  Fly  Ophry.s
may  have  been  the  victim  of  a  set  of  disasters  which  de-
stroyed the  flowers  inspected,  by  causes  lying  outside  the
limits  of  adaptation  of  either  flower.  Abortion  of  the  flower
or  destruction  by  insects  before  maturity  may  easily  prevent
seeding  in  one  flower  out  of  four.  Now  of  course  in  the
first  place  it  is  an  impossible  assumption  that  Darwin
would  not  have  noticed  any  extraordinary  prevalence  of
abnormal  interfering  causes  confined  to  the  flowers  of  the
Fly  Ophrys.  In  order  to  obtain  a  useful  '  not-a  is  not  a '  the
two  negative  contents  must  diverge  from  the  positive  a  and  a
only  in  a-ness  and  ^-ness.  They  must  be,  as  we  have  insisted,
within  the  same  real  system  ;  i.e.  the  R  of  general  conditions
must  be  the  same  in  both,  or  in  the  same  relation  to  both  ^.
But  in  the  second  place,  making  this  false  assumption
for  the  sake  of  illustrating  our  point,  we  will  suggest
that  one  flower  in  four  of  the  Fly  Ophrys  is  on  the  average
destroyed  by  accidents  which  no  adaptation  could  avert.
And  then  it  becomes  not  impossible  that  in  a  given  series
of  forty-eight  inspected  flowers,  these  accidents  have
been  heaped  together  by  unknown  causes ;  and  that  the
flowers,  though  adapted  to  all  normal  conditions, — i.  e.  as
successfully  adapted  as  those  of  the  Bee  Ophrys, — were
nevertheless  in  forty-two  cases  out  of  a  given  forty-eight
hindered  from  being  fertilised  by  a  series  of  extraordinary
accidents.  We  have  then  to  compare,  as  regards  the  Fly
Ophrys,  the  hypotheses  of  maladaptation  to  normal  condi-
tions, such  as  to  cause  failure  in  forty-two  cases  out  of
forty-eight,  and  of  perfect  adaptation  to  normal  conditions,
hindered  of  its  effect  by  abnormal  conditions  in  forty-two
cases  out  of  forty-eight. The  possibility  of  making this

*  It  is  not  indeed  fair  to  say  that  in  order  to  a  jnst  comparison  the  Fly
Ophrys  must  have  its  insects  as  the  other  must  have  its  wind,  because  the
question  is  whether  the  Fly  Ophrys  was  wise  to  rely  on  so  capricious  an  agency
as  that  of  insects.  But  there  must  be  no  extraordinary  influence  known  to  be
keeping  the  insects  from  it


140  Scientific  Induction.  [book  11.

comparison  by  calculation  depends  on  our  being  able  to
assign  an  average  ratio  of  operation  to  the  abnormal  causes.
Taking  them  to  produce  on  an  average  established  by
general  observation  one  failure  to  be  fertilised  in  every
four  flowers,  and  excluding  probabilities  derived  from  the
non-appearance  of  extraordinary  hindrances  in  the  in-
stances of  the  Bee  Ophrys,  we  have  to  determine  the
probability  that  in  forty-eight  independent  flowers,  with
three  favourable  chances  and  only  one  unfavourable  for
each  flower,  we  should  obtain  a  set  (in  any  order)  of  forty-
two  failures  and  only  six  successes.  I  presume  that  this
problem  is  the  same  as  to  estimate  the  chances  of  drawing
a  black  ball  exactly  forty-two  times  in  forty-eight  out  of  a
box  containing  only  four  balls,  being  three  white  balls  and
one  black  ball.  These  chances  would  be  expressed  I  sup-
pose by  (1)^  X  (i)*^ — the  chances  of  six  successes  in  drawing
a  white  ball  on  assigned  occasions — multiplied  by  the  com-
binations of  forty-eight  things  taken  six  together,  in  order
to  add  together  the  number  of  independent  ways  in  which
six  successes  and  forty-two  failures  can  be  realised.

This  probability,  which  must  be  very  low,  owing  to  the
enormous  number  of  failures  required,  with  the  low  chance
5  for  each,  has  to  be  compared  with  the  high  pro-
bability with  which  the  assumption  that,  normally,  insects
only  visit  one  flower  in  eight,  and  that  therefore  the  flowers
are  maladapted  to  seven  sets  of  conditions  in  eight,  would
give  as  a  consequence  the  ratio  of  forty-two  failures  in
forty-eight  flowers.  This  would  I  suppose  be  the  same  as
the  chance  that  out  of  a  box  containing  seven  black  balls
and  one  white,  forty-two  black  balls  should  be  drawn  in
forty-eight  trials.  The  combinations  remain  the  same  as
in  the  former  case,  and  the  factor  supplied  by  the  fractions
expressing  the  chances  would  be  {^f  x  (i)*'^,  involving  a
high  power,  the  forty-second,  of  the  very  favourable
chance  |.  The  comparison  of  these  probabilities  would
be  our  warrant  for  deciding,  on  the  assumptions  which  we
have  made,  that  Fly  Ophrys  is  much  worse  adapted  to


Chap.  IV.] Share  of  Estimated  Reality.  141

normal  conditions  than  the  Bee  Ophrys.  In  fact,  our  con-
clusion is  much  more  certain  than  on  these  assumptions,
for  it  is  certain  that  any  violent  interfering  cause  which
destroyed  one  flower  in  four  would  have  been  noticed  and
excluded  by  any  such  observer  as  Darwin.  But  in  as
far  as  we  rely  on  the  exclusion  we  are  ceasing  to  rely  on
number  and  are  going  back  to  analysis  of  content.  The
exclusion,  however,  in  such  varied  and  uncertain  conditions
is  probably  imperfect,  and  therefore,  in  our  actual  inference,
I  take  it  that  we  eke  out  our  reliance  on  Darwin's  accuracy
of  comparison  by  a  reliance  on  the  probabiUty  of  a  normal
feature  in  the  conditions  (viz.  a  degree  of  unsuitability  to
the  flower)  as  against  the  very  low  probability  of  a  variety
of  accidental  conditions  which  Darwin  did  not  exclude.  We
shall  illustrate  this  particular  application  of  the  inference
from  number  of  instances  directly.

The  above  case  may  serve  as  a  type  of  all  Inductive
processes  in  which  number  of  instances,  as  number,  plays
an  essential  part. Their  essence  consists  in  selecting  as
most  probable  that  cause  or  class  of  causes  which  would
produce,  as  an  alternative  bearing  the  largest  proportion  to
the  sum  of  possible  alternatives,  the  ratio  actually  observed^
among  the  phenomena. Apart  from  the  assumption  of  any
particular  cause,  every  additional  instance  enormously  in-
creases the  improbability  of  every  single  definite  succession
by  making  every  such  succession  one  among  an  immensely
increased  number  of  possible  alternative successions  (or
conjunctions). If  therefore  any  cause  can  be  alleged  or
supposed,  which  would  give  that  particular  definite  succes-
sion which  exists  in  reality  as  sole  alternative  or  as  one  of
a  comparatively  small  number  of  alternatives,  the  principle
of  impartial  ignorance  urges  us  to  decide  for  that  cause  as
giving  to  the  actual  observed  succession  the  nearest  approach
to  its  actual  position  as  real — i.  e.  the  largest  share  of  esti-
mated reality. Or  if  two  or  more  causes  are  suggested,
from  which  each  component  event  of  the  actual  observed
succession  can  be  derived  as  one  out  of  different  numbers  of


142  Scientific  Induction.  [book  11.

alternatives  respectively  (e.g.  as  one  out  of  three  alternatives
in  one  case  and  as  one  out  of  twenty  alternatives  in  another),
then  we  compare  the  probability  of  these  two  causes  just
on  the  same  principle  as  that  on  which  we  compare  the
probability  of  a  single  imputed  cause  and  that  of  the  total
absence  of  any  single  cause  at  all,  forming  a  case  in  which  the
actual  succession  must  be  attributed  to  a  succession  of  what
we  call  accidents.  A  particular  class  of  accidents  however,
such  as  that  assumed  above  as  destroying  one  flower  in  four
before  maturity,  is  of  course  a  class  of  causes,  and  may  be
defined  and  treated  for  purposes  of  calculation  as  '  a  cause.'

Number  of  instances  thus  operates  by  increasing  the
improbability  per  se  of  every  particular  conjunction  or
succession  of  phenomena,  and  therefore  increasing  the
probability  of  any  cause  which  can  be  proved  capable  of
producing  the  given  conjunction  or  succession  as  one  out
of  fewer  alternatives  than  the  number  derivable  from  any
other  suggested  cause  or  from  the  whole  series  of  instances
treated  as  accidental.  Probability  is  estimated  by  counting,
on  the  basis  of  impartial  ignorance ;  hence  the  opposition
between  enumeration  of  instances  and  analysis  of  content.

The  case  of  so-called  elimination  of  irregularities  by  accu-
mulation of  instances  may  readily  be  exhibited  as  an  appli-
cation of  the  above  principle.  A  class  of  causes,  or  common
element  in  a  variety  of  active  conditions,  is  for  our  present
purpose  a  cause  or  ground.  If,  on  the  accumulation  of
instances,  there  appears  in  the  observed  succession  or  con-
junction any  feature,  e.g.  of  recurrence  in  certain  cycles,  or
a  fortiori  of  persistence  in  a  single  character,  which  can
be  hypothetically  referred  to  any  common  element  in  the
wholly  unknown  conditions ;  then  the  accumulation  of
instances  progressively  increases  the  relative  probability  of
causation  by  this  common  element,  by  progressively  de-
creasing the  probability  of  every  conceivable  sequence,
including  the  one  observed  if  considered  as  the  result  of
accident,  i.e.  of  independent  causes^. In  other  words,  it

*  See  below,  p.  175,  on  Kirchoff's  proof  of  the  presence  of  iron  in  the  sun.


Chap. IV.]  Artificial  Observation.  143

becomes  more  and  more  probable  that,  the  unkno\vn  irregu-
larities notwithstanding,  the  unknowTi  conditions  include
a  common  element,  however  composed,  relative  to  the
persistent  feature  of  the  observed  conjunction  or  succession,
and  uninterfered  with  by  the  unknown  irregularities  of  the
unknown  conditions.  Material  considerations  of  content,
suggesting  an  approximation  to  exhaustiveness  in  the
enumeration  of  kinds  of  instances  and  consequently  of  kinds
of  conditions,  are  almost  invariably  present  to  reinforce  in
some  degree  the  argument  from  sheer  probability.

iv.  Experiment  is  observation  under  artificial  conditions.  Observa-
What  is  artificial  bears  to  a  certain  extent  the  impress  of  Experi-
human  intelligence,  and  is,  to this  extent,  abstract and  ™^t.
idealised. Human  action,  in  virtue  of  the  human  thought
which  directs  it,  is  definite  and  selective. And  '  artificial '
means  produced  or  arranged  by  human  action. The  differ-
ence bet\veen  observation  and  experiment  therefore  is  in  the
degree  of  definiteness  and  ideal  selection  which  is  present  in
the  material  conditions  of  the  latter  process.

a.  It  is  obvious  that  natural  conditions  would  serve  the  Natural
purposes  of  enquiry  as  well  as  artificial  conditions  on  the  ^^^
assumption  that  they  were  exhaustively  known.  And  if
exhaustive  knowledge  of  natural  conditions  were  in  no  case
possible,  observation  could  not  exist  as  a  scientific  process.
But  it  must  be  noticed  that  in  giving  effect  to  the  knowledge
which  guides  it,  observation  itself  tends  to  take  on  the
character  of  experiment.  The  transition  between  the  two
processes  is  therefore  gradual.  Experiment  would  usually
be  considered  to  begin  where  we  pass  from  intentional
selection  of  our  standpoint  and  from  the  use  of  con-
trivances auxiliary  to  perception,  to  actual  analytic  inter-
ference with  the  object  under  observation.  Before  the  line
is  reached,  however,  observation  passes  into  something
which  may  properly  be  called  '  natural  experiment.'  I
quote  an  excellent  passage  from  Jevons  ^  in  illustration  of
this  point.

•  Principles  of  Science,  pp.  400-1.


T44


Scientific  Induction.


[Book  II.


Observa-
tion with
accurate
instru-
ments.


'  It  may  readily  be  seen  that  we  pass  upwards  by  insen-
sible gradations  from  pure  observation  to  determinate  ex-
periment. When  the  earliest  astronomers  simply  noticed
the  ordinary  motions  of  the  sun,  moon,  and  planets,  upon  the
face  of  the  starry  heavens,  they  were  pure  observers.  But
astronomers  now  select  precise  times  and  places  for  impor-
tant observations  of  stellar  parallax,  or  the  transits  of
planets.  They  make  the  earth's  orbit  the  basis  of  a  well^
arranged  natural  experiment,  as  it  were,  and  take  well-con-
sidered advantage  of  motions  which  they  cannot  control.
Meteorology  might  seem  to  be  a  science  of  pure  observa-
tion, because  we  cannot  possibly  govern  the  changes  of
weather  which  we  record.  Nevertheless  we  may  ascend
mountains  or  rise  in  balloons,  like  Gay-Lussac  and  Glaisher,
and  may  thus  so  vary  the  points  of  observation  as  to  render
our  procedure  experimental.  We  are  wholly  unable  either
to  produce  or  prevent  earth-currents  of  electricity,  but  when
we  construct  long  lines  of  telegraph,  we  gather  such  strong
currents  during  periods  of  disturbance  as  to  render  them
capable  of  easy  observation.'

/3.  There  is  a  further  point  connected  with  this  transition
which  calls  for  remark.  We  habitually  speak  of  telescopic,
microscopic,  or  even  of  spectroscopic  observation.  Con-
sidering what  an  enormous  artificial  interference  the  instru-
ments thus  employed  exert  upon  the  image  of  the  object  to
be  observed,  it  may  seem  strange  that  we  call  the  result  an
observation  and  not  an  experiment.  The  instinct  which
guides  our  use  of  language  is  however  just,  at  least  so  far
as  concerns  the  ordinary  applications  of  telescope  and
microscope  as  magnifying  instruments.  An  apparatus
which  merely  brings  the  object  nearer  our  perception  \s,  par
excellence  an  observing  instrument.  In  the  compound
microscope  the  image  is  variously  transformed,  and  often
goes  through  some  degree  of  chromatic  dispersion,  in  tran-
situ, but  as  it  is  reconstituted  before  reaching  the  eye,
these  transformations  do  not  amount  to  experiment.  This
question turns on  the employment of  interference not


Chap.  IV.] Phases  of  Condition  and  Result.  145

merely  to  make  an  object  accessible  to  us,  but  to  analyse
its  content.  Thus  the  moment  we  modify  the  object  under
observation  itself,  e.  g.  by  applying  heat,  electricity,  or
chemical  reagents  on  the  stage  of  the  microscope,  we  say
that  we  are  experimenting.  When  we  use  spectroscopic
devices  to  observe  the  real  prominences  of  the  sun,  without
waiting  for  a  total  eclipse,  we  are  really  analysing  the  solar
image,  though  not  the  sun,  but  strong  analogy  from  the
general  use  of  optical  instruments  makes  us  still  say  that
we  are  observing.  In  actually  compounding  coloured  lights
with  a  colour-box  for  the  purpose  of  equation,  however,
there  is  no  doubt  that  we  are  experimenting.  The  fact  is
then  that  experiment  is  not  merely  observation  under
artificial  or  determinate  conditions,  but  observatioji  under
determinate  conditions  which  constitute  an  integral  part  of
the  image  or  product  to  be  observed.  Thus  common  dissec-
tion is  not  experiment,  though  it  introduces  conditions  in
the  way  of  separation  and  demarcation  as  definite  as  any-
thing can  be ;  but  vivisection  is  experiment,  because  the
determinate  conditions  it  produces  enter  as  factors  into  the
action  of  the  organism  observed.

y.  Returning  for  the  sake  of  brevity  to  the  symbols  Experi-
which  we  used  before,  we  may  say  that  the  function  of  pr^^'^"
experiment  is  to  exhibit  both  a  and  not-a  as  determinate  in  logical
cases  of  /3,  y,  h,  &c.  which  form  the  ultimate  analysis  of  R
so  far  as  R  is  relevant  to  a.  The  cases  of  /3  y  8,  &c.
obviously  may  include  zero  values  of  any  one  or  more  of
these  factors,  and  apart  from  a  special  hypothesis  to  be
tested — or  rather  if  the  hypothesis  to  be  tested  is  merely
that  /3  y  8  are  concerned  in  a— all  possible  combinations  of
values  of  the  three  or  more  series  must  be  tried,  a  more-
over is  certain  to  be  continuous,  and  to  admit  of  variation
within  itself;  for  no  phenomenon  is  utterly  atomic.  But  in
order  to  secure  a  distinct  correspondence  between  phases  of
condition  and  of  effect,  it  is  well  to  treat  every  appreciable
phase  a,  within  the  general  a,  in  turn,  as  a  bounded  by
not-«,  so  as  to  identify  its  condition  a,  viz.  a  phase  of  /3  y  8,

VOL.  II.  L


146  Scientific  Induction.  [book  11,

with  absolute  precision,  as  being  on  both  sides  bounded  by
not-a,  viz.  other  positive  phases  of  /3  y  8  excluding  that
which  is  a.  The  goal  to  be  attained,  if  the  experimental
conditions  admit  of  it,  is  a  reciprocal  Hypothetical  judg-
ment;  ponsisting  of  an  affirmative  hypothetical  judgment
in  the  form,  '  If  a  (a  determinate  phase,  or  series  of  phases,
of  y8  y  8),  then  ^,'  supported  by  its  simply  corroborative
equivalent,  '  If  not-«  ^,  then  not-a '  (viz.  determinate
phases  of  ^  y  8  excluding  the  phases  a),  and  by  its  recipro-
cally corroborative  equivalent,  '  If  not-a,  then  not-^.'

Can  this  reciprocal,  equivalent  to  '  If  «  then  a,'  be  justified
by  experiment,  which  can  at  best  take  the  shape,  '  in
order  to  remove  a  you  must  remove  a,'  and  not  '  by  remov-
ing a  you  remove  a'}  It  can  be  thus  justified  on  the
assumption  that  a  considered  as  a  phase  of  ^8  y  8  is  an
ultimate  analysis  of  R.  For  in  this  case  all  possible  com-
binations of  the  ultimate  components  of  R  have  been
exhausted,  and  we  can  lay  down  throughout  them  all  the
demarcation  between  a  and  not-«.  But  if  we  take  R
in  its  primary  meaning,  of  which  we  cannot  stop  short
without  special  justification — viz.  as  the  entire  system  of
the  universe — this  assumption  can  never  be  true  except
in  virtue  of  a  consistent  abstraction  by  which  it  is  taken
as  true.

Such  an  abstraction  is  the  source  of  mathematical  neces-
sity. I  will  not  say  that  in  mathematical  construction  we
are  secure  from  the  irruption  of  any  conditions  beyond
those  which  we  have  put  there,  because  we  may  be
guilty  of  omission  or  oversight  on  mathematical  ground,
and  the  fact  that  discoveries  can  be  made  in  mathematics
seems  to  show  that  such  omission  constitutes  the  gradually
receding  limit  of  the  science.  But  it  may  safely  be  said
that  in  mathematical  construction  we  are  secure  against

^  Not-a  under  experimental  conditions  is  of  course  itself  positive  and  exclusive
of  a.  If  there  are  different  not-a's,  as  is  quite  possible  at  first  sight,  they
determine  different  ci%.  E.g.  aerial  impulses  too  slow  to  be  heard  as  musical
sound,  and  discord,  are  two  not-a's  as  against  a's  jn  musical  sound.


Chap. IV.]  Is  Residuum  irrelevant?  147

any  conditions  which  do  not  fall  within  the  definite  general
type  of  those  which  we  have  put  there.

Apart  from  such  an  abstraction,  the  assumption  that  we
have  a  perfect  analysis  of  R  is  always  erroneous,  and  the
postulate  that  we  must  express  a  and  not-a  in  terms  of
the  ultimate  analysis  of  R  is  theoretically  incapable  of
being  fulfilled.  The  approximate  or  presumptive  fulfilment
of  the  postulate  depends  chiefly  on  our  general  systematic
knowledge  of  the  course  of  things,  which  enables  us,  as  we
think,  to  draw  a  line  between  Rj  the  whole  irrelevant
residuum,  R-,  the  real  basis  of  both  a  and  the  positive
not-a  which  make  up  the  phenomenon  prima  facie  in
question,  and  therefore  as  such  irrelevant  to  the  distinction
between  a  and  not-a,  and  R3  the  limited  number  of  precise
positive  conditions  on  the  combination  of  which,  including
their  reciprocal  interference,  the  precise  distinction  between
a  and  not-a  depends.  R3  is  finally  reduced  to  the  general
a.  It  is  obvious  that  R3  has  its  roots  in  R^,  and  Rj
in  Rj.  so  that  the  distinction  between  these  remainders
cannot  be  pressed  far  except  on  the  ground  of  specific
knowledge.  Gravity  for  example  belongs  to  Rj  in  relation
to  an  acoustical  experiment  which  I  purpose  to  describe
presently.  No  doubt  gravity  is  essential  to  this  experiment
in  the  same  sense  in  which  it  is  essential  to  all  that  takes
place  on  the  surface  of  the  globe.  But  the  v-ariations  of
gravity  within  their  actual  limits  do  not  affect  the  experi-
ment appreciably  or  at  all.  Thus  general  systematic  know-
ledge operates  through  confining  the  immediate  problem  to
R3  or  at  most  to  Ro  and  R3,  by  setting  down  R^  as  for  this
purpose  not-R,  viz.  not  a  residuum  within  the  problem,
but  one  outside  it.  R  of  the  problem  (viz.  R^  and  R3)  is
related  to  not-R  of  the  problem  (viz.  R^)  just  as  a  is  related
to  not-a  in  the  immediate  experiment.

And  secondarily,  in  as  far  as  R^  is  not  materially
known,  but  is  an  unknown  residuum,  a  presumption  of  its
irrelevancy  may  be  supported  by  the  number  of  instances  in
which  R  (as  R^  and  R3)  is  a  sufficient  R  for  the  experiment^

La


148  Scientific  Induction,  [Bookii.

i.  e.  presents  a  and  not-a  as  required.  This  confirmation
of  the  line  drawn  between  the  R  of  the  problem  and  the
not-R  of  the  problem  is  precisely  the  same  in  kind  as  the
confirmation  by  number  of  instances  of  a  material  difference
in  the  adaptation  of  two  plants  to  their  environment,
worked  out  above,  p.  138.  Every  successful  trial  to  generate
a  and  not-a  on  the  basis  of  the  R  of  the  problem  alone,
increases  the  difference  between  the  probability  of  the  result
on  the  hypothesis  that  it  is  due  to  the  known  factors  in-
cluded in  the  R  of  the  problem,  whose  certainty  of  existence
is  assumed  \  and  the  probability  that  the  successive  occurs
rences  of  a  and  not-a  are  due  to  independent  causes,  some  of
which  must  therefore  fall  outside  the  persistent  conditions
which  make  up  Rg  and  R3.

If,  on  the  other  hand,  we  confine  ourselves  to  the  R  of
the  problem  in  its  most  limited  sense,  viz.  to  R3  analysed  as
y3,  y,  8,  then  the  assumption  that  we  have  in  ^,  y,  8  an  ulti-
mate analysis  of  R  can  only  be  questioned  on  the  ground  of
a  further  analysis  suggested  or  presumed.  The  possibility
of  a  positive  suggestion  needs  no  explanation  ;  it  would
arise  from  conjunctive  induction  and  pass  through  analogy
in  the  ordinary  way,  having  the  form  '  8  is  probably  com-
plex, consisting  of  A,  \i,  v^  and  would  be  tested  by  further
experiment  in  the  ordinary  way,  some  part  of  such  experi-
ment probably  coinciding  with  passing  /3y8  through  their
possible  variations.  This  experiment  would  however  then
be  extended  by  taking  account  of  the  variations  and  zero
values  oi  \\i.v  and  including  or  excluding  these,  as  the
result  might  require,  in  the  analysis  of  a  and  not-a.  A
presumptio7i  of  further  analysis  very  commonly  arises  when
no  positive  suggestion  is  forthcoming.  We  have  a  strong
presumption  e.  g.  from  the  history  of  chemistry  and  from
the  nature  of  ordinary  substances  that  we  shall  not  con?
stantly  be  lighting  upon  new  elements ;  and  therefore  we
do  not  assume  an  unfamiliar  substance  to  be  an  element-^

'  Because  if  we  fail  to  produce  them  all,  we  do  not  expect  a,  nor  count  the
Qase  as  a  trial.


Chap.  IV.]  Logtcal  Analysis.  149

i.  e. we presume  that  further  analysis is possible — even
though  we  should  fail  to  analyse  it  at  the  first  attempt.

After  using  the  above  example,  however,  I  must  guard
myself  against  the  idea  that '  analysis '  is  for  this  logical  pur-
pose to  be  understood  in  a  sense  borrowed  from  chemistry.
Logical  analysis  is  the  understanding  of  any  whole  in
reference  to  its  constituent  parts  or  factors,  and  chemical
analysis  is  only  the  understanding  of  a  chemical  whole  as
chemical.  It  is  a  trite  observation,  but  perhaps  necessary
to  be  repeated  here,  that  the  analysis  of  an  organism,  if  it
is  not  its  analysis  as  an  organism,  may  destroy  rather  than
display  its  inmost  nature.  If  8  is  an  organic  element,  and
A.,  ft,  V  are  its  chemical  constituents,  then  our  first  business
in  *  analysing  '  is  to  ascertain  whether  we  want  these  con-
stituents X,  fi,  y,  which  are,  strictly  speaking,  constituents
not  of  8  but  of  8j  (8  as  a  merely  chemical  substance),  or
whether  we  want  other  constituents  o,  ir,  r,  which  if  we  can
we  may  then  further  construe  into  forms  of  combined
chemical  action  \\lv  (0),  ><\lv  (tt),  \\kv  (t).  In  speaking  of
organic  characteristics  as  capable  of  analysis,  I  have  in
mind  such  questions  as  the  precise  degree,  direction  and
mode  of  transmission  in  which  irritability  in  plants  sets  up
reflex  action ;  or  how  far  certain  movements  are  reflex
and  how  far  purely  mechanical — e.g.  in  the  case  of  circum-
nutation  ^.  The  description  of  analysis  needed  in  each  par-
ticular case  must  of  course  be  determined  by  the  nature  of
a,  and  the  consequent  nature  of  parts  or  factors  with
reference  to  which  it  is  to  be  understood.

8.  A  very  simple  and  beautiful  example  of  the  progressive  Experi-
reciprocal  definition  by  experiment  of  a — a  and  not-a —  thr'siren
not-a  is  to  be  found  in  the  well-known  verification  of  the  analysed,
connection between rapidity  of  periodic vibrations and

'  I  have  not  the  smallest  desire  to  deny  that  the  joint  action  oi  \fiv  as
chemical  agents  may  make  np,  and,  for  all  I  care,  initiate  the  action  of  8  as
organic  Thequestionofabiogenesisisan  openonefor  Logic  I  am  only  pointing
out  that,  combined  as  S,  the  constitnents  X,  ^,  v  acquire  organic  attributes  o,  x,  t,
which  are  capable  of  having  their  nature  precisely  determined  by  experiment.


150  Scientific  Induction.  [book  11,

musical  pitch,  as  given  by  help  of  Helmholtz's  Siren.  The
reader  would  do  well  to  study  the  account  and  figure  of
this  instrument  in  Helmholtz's  Popular  Lectures  ^.  In  the
light  of  the  account  which  has  just  been  given  of  the  logical
purpose  of  experiment  we  may  roughly  analyse  this  ar-
rangement as  follows : —

Ri,  or  the  not-R  of  the  problem,  may  be  typified  by  the
action  of  gravity,  which  pervades  all  matter,  but  the  varia-
tions of  which  within  their  actual  limits  are  indifferent  to
the  phenomena  now  in  question.

The  R  of  the  problem,  consisting  of  Rg  and  R3,  within
which  a — a  and  not-a — x\ot-a  are  to  be  sought  for,  is  in
general  terms  the  musical  sound  produced  by  the  machine,
and  its  conditions,  including  the  machine.  Of  these  we  may
take  as  R2  (extending,  as  we  knew  it  must^  continuously
into  Ri)  the  air  in  the  room,  the  hearing  ear,  and  the  machine
itself,  as  operative  in  the  production  of  a  physical  effect
which  together  with  a  hearing  ear  results  in  musical
sound.  R2  is  relevant  as  the  proximate  basis  of  the  phe-
nomenon itself,  and  as  such,  regarded  by  contrast  to  R^  or
not  R,  is  itself  an  a  defined  by  a  not-a  and  connected  with
an  a.  But  prima  facie  and  outside  the  experiment  itself,
R2  does  not  demand  much  analysis.  The  air  in  the  room
or  some  conductor  of  sound  must  act  as  a  medium  between
the  machine  and  the  ear — sound  cannot  pass  through  a
vacuum ; — the  ear  must  not  be  outrageously  abnormal —
this  is  included  in  a  reasonable  interpretation  of  'hearing
ear' ; — and  of  course  there  must  be  no  other  source  of
sound  undistinguished  from  the  machine  itself.  And  as  R3,
the  unanalysed  whole  which  is  the  phenomenon,  we  must
take  the  action  of  the  machine  as  already  somewhat  ideal-
ised by  analysis,  i.  e.  in  respect  of  its  quantitatively  specified
effect  upon  the  air  in  generating  aerial  impulses  with  a
measurable  rapidity  of  succession  restricted  to  certain  limits,
and  in  one  series,  or  in  two  simultaneous  series,  at  pleasure.

*  Engl.  Transl.,  published  by  Longmans  &  Co.,  Series  I,  p.  57  ff.


Chap.  IV.] Deviations  as  cases  of  Law.  151

a,  the  musical  sound  *,  is  most  conveniently  considered  as
included  in  R3,  but  as  also  distinguished  by  anticipation
and  confronted  with  the  gradually  narrowing  R's  and  their
analyses  as  the  problem  to  which  they  are  all  directed.
Ultimately,  however,  a  itself  will  of  course  be  reacted  upon
by  analysis,  and  will  be  found  to  include  distinct  elements
both  in  kind  and  in  degree.

If  we  omit,  for  the  sake  of  brevity,  to  speak  of  the  cha-
racteristics of  quality  and  loudness  in  musical  sound  (and
these  are  in  fact  not  especially  illustrated  by  the  Siren),  we
find  that  R3  is  immediately  reducible  to  a  very  simple
relation,  the  relation  of  comparative  rapidity  of  succession
between  series  of  puffs  of  air,  which  series  differ  in  no  other
assignable  respect.  R3  is,  in  other  words,  assumed  ad  fioc  to
be  exhaustively  analysed.  Confining  our  attention,  to  begin
with,  to  the  case  of  a  single  series  (and  not  two  sounding  at
once)  we  become  aware  first  of  a  constant  relation  between
any  given  rapidity  and  the  pitch  of  the  note  which  is  heard
while  that  rapidity  is  maintained,  and  secondly  of  a  relation
of  quasi-proportion,  sufficiently  explained  above  ^,  according
to  which  rapidity  is  to  rapidity  in  a  definite  numerical  ratio,
while  pitch  is  to  pitch  in  a  definite  recognisable  relation,
measurable  by  intervals  but  not  made  by  summation  of
intervals.  First,  then,  every  particular  rapidity  is  to  us  as
an  Q,  deviations  from  which  on  either  side  are  to  it  as  not-a,
corresponding  to  an  a  deviations  from  which  on  either  side
are  to  it  as  not-«.  But  as  each  and  every  deviation  from  a
brings  a  '  proportional '  deviation  from  a  with  it,  every  such
not-a  is  to  some  corresponding  x\.o\.-a  as  an  a  to  an  a;  and
we  have  therefore  the  most  perfect  case  of  negative  relation
between  positive  contents.  But,  secondly,  when  the  quasi-
proportional  character  of  the  two  series  attracts  attention
(which  it  did  from  the  earliest  times,  as  a  fact  demanding

*  '  What  musical  sound  ? '  the  reader  may  ask.  I  reply,  in  fact  some  musical
sotmd  in  particular,  but  as  a  problem  musical  sound  in  generaL  It  is  impossible
to  particularise  the  sound  yon  have  heard,  except  as  a  resolt  of  advancing
analysis.

*  See  p.  70,  above.


152  Scientific  Induction.  [book  11.

explanation,  owing  to  the  relation  of  the  length  of  strings
to  the  notes  which  they  sound)  it  becomes  an  essential
element  in  the  relation  which  constitutes  R3,  and  presents
itself  as  a  further  determination  of  the  mere  principle
'  rapidity  has  a  constant  connection  with  pitch,'  which  forms
the  first  simple  a — a.  We  thus  obtain  the  suggestion  of  a
law^  and  the  verification  of  this  suggested  law  becomes  the
object  of  the  experimental  process.  A  law  is  treated  just
like  any  content  a.  The  object  is  to  show  that  a  the  reali-
sation of  the  condition  is  attended  by  a  the  realisation  of  the
consequent,  and  that  not-«,  any  deviation  from  the  conse-
quent (ultimately  perhaps  a  variation  of  the  consequent),  is
preceded  or  attended  by  a  deviation  from  or  variation
of  the  condition.  Thus  as  always  our  goal  is  in  the  Hypo-
thetical judgment,  '  If  a,  then  a^  with  its  reciprocal,  '  If  a^
then  a.'

It  is  further  worth  while  to  mention  how  the  experiment
in  question  obtains  minute  measurable  variations  of  a  and  a
at  pleasure.  If  rapidity  corresponds  to  pitch  in  a  certain
proportion,  then  two  rapidities  in  the  right  proportion  cor-
respond to  a  definite  harmony.  Deviations  from  a  harmony
are  recognisable  by  a  trained  ear  with  extreme  minuteness.
Helmholtz's  Siren  will  sound  two  sets  of  impulses,  of  con-
trollable rapidity,  together  ;  and  in  the  first  place  by  adjust-
ing the  two  precisely  to  the  proportion  required  by  the  law,
it  verifies  the  law  a — a  in  a  compound  case.  But  then  by  a
contrivance  for  very  delicately,  and  measurably,  altering  the
rapidity  of  one  of  the  series,  a  slight  or  considerable  discord
can  be  produced  at  pleasure.  If  we  were  interpreting  a — a
as  '  I  :  3  gives  note  and  octave,'  this  result  reads  as  a  con-
firmatory content,  '  not  a — r\o\.-al  i.  e.  '  deviation  from  i :  3
gives  deviation  from  note :  octave.'  But  of  course,  as  before,
this  not-o  is  a  case  of  a,  rapidity  corresponding  to  pitch,
though  not  to  two  notes,  one  an  octave  above  the  other,
because  the  sets  of  impulses  are  not  as  2  :  i  in  rapidity.

But  here,  with  the  Siren  alone,  we  are  pretty  much  at  an
end  of  our  analysis. That  R3  is  not  merely  a  law  of  rapidity


Chap.  IV.]  Reasoning  Machine.  I53

in  succession,  but  a  complex  theorem  concerning  shapes  of
vibrations  and  their  decomposition  into  pure  pendulum
oscillations,  related  to  the  quality  of  a  and  to  discordant
beats  in  a  (if  a  includes  two  notes  sounding  together),  does
not  appear  from  the  above  experiment.  It  would  perhaps
not  have  been  suspected  but  for  the  obvious  fact  that  an
air  wave  must  have  some  shape,  on  the  one  hand,  and  that
pitch  is  not  the  only  element  in  sound,  on  the  other.

The  point  of  the  above  illustration  consists  especially  in
displaying  the  various  senses  of  not-<2,  and  the  various  stages
of  its  adjustment  to  a.  R^  is  not-«  in  one  sense,  Rg  in
another,  and  in  a  relative  and  shifting  manner  portions  of  R3
are  not-«  also.  The  same  applies  throughout  to  not-a.
Induction  consists  in  separating  the  R's  and  in  establishing
those  variations  of  a  which  appear,  against  any  fixed  start-
ing-point, as  relative  not-«'s  (and  the  same  with  a).

I  may  conclude  this  chapter  by  calling  attention  again  to
what  I  have  insisted  on  in  another  work  \  as  the  claim  of
an  experimental  apparatus  to  be  considered  in  the  light  of
a  reasoning  machine.  It  must  be  granted  that  in  any
logical  engine  whatever  we  have  to  make  the  conclusion,
i.  e.  to  read  it  off  as  a  conclusion,  and  if  we  are  to  do  this
we  may  read  off  the  connection  of  imperfect  ratio  and  false
harmony  from  the  Siren  as  distinctly  as  we  can  read  a
combination  of  letters  from  Jevons'  logical  machine.  In
the  operations  of  nature,  causes  have  their  consequences ;
but  the  causes  are  not  precisely  known,  and  the  conse-
quences are  therefore  not  consequents.  In  experimental
instruments  we  find  the  attempt  made  to  generate  actual
consequences  which  shall  also  be  consequents,  as  arising
from  conditions  precisely  known  in  respect  of  the  mode  and
degree  of  their  combination.  Any  instrument  which  does
this  may  be  called  a  reasoning  machine,  whether  it  deals
with  combinations  and  eliminations  of  letters  as  logical
symbols,  or  with  the  same  relations  of  actual  number,  or  of

*  Knowledge and Reality, p.  327  ff. Cp.  Jevons,  Principles of  Science,
p.  282  ff.


154  Scientific  Induction.

any  definite  motions  with  their  effects.  The  value  of  the
connections  thus  demonstrated  is  of  various  degrees ;  but  a
complex  experimental  apparatus  has  the  advantage  in  the
synthetic  variety  of  the  contents  which  it  exhibits  as  rele-
vant to  each  other,  if  the  logical  machine  has  the  advantage
in  the  abstract  generality  of  its  formal  conclusions.


CHAPTER V.
Scientific  Induction  {continmd).

I.  Hypothesis  is  a  name  that  may  be  applied  to  any  Hj-po-
conception  by  which  the  mind  establishes  relations  between  Populate,
data  of  testimony,  of  perception,  or  of  sense,  so  long  as  that
conception  is  one  among  alternative  possibilities,  and  is  not
referred  to  reality  as  a  fact.

i.  From  Aristotle  onward,  indeed,  logicians  have been  Hypothecs

.  ,  ,  , .  ,  .  r  1  fallsontside

anxious  to  consider  a  hypothesis  as  the  suggestion  of  a  real  Postulate,
agent — a  thing  or  occurrence  in  a  thing — related  to  the  data
as  'cause'  to  'effect'  ;  and  to  distinguish  such  a  suggested
'  agent '  from  a  mere  suggested  '  reading '  of  the  phenomena
— a  principle,  law,  or  definition.  Of  course  there  is  a  primary
difference  between  a  material  agent  and  an  ideal  law  or
principle,  but  the  distinction  is  not  ultimate  in  theorj'  and
appears  to  be,  for  this  reason,  incapable  of  being  sustained
in  scientific  practice.  A  '  working  hypothesis  ' — and  most  of
the  great  unifying  conceptions  of  modern  science  are  work-
ing hypotheses — is  the  suggestion  of  a  real  agent  taken  as
equivalent  to  the  suggestion  of  a  mere  law  or  principle.  It
is  worth  while  for  the  sake  of  clearness  to  look  at  the  dis-
tinction between  law  and  real  agent  in  a  form  recently  given
to  it  by  Lotze,  viz.  as  the  distinction  between  Postulate  and
Hypothesis.

In  the  account  to  which  I  refer  ^  the  name  oi  Postulate  is
given  to  the  conditions  which  are  absolutely  and  essentially
involved  in  a  given  set  of  appearances,  and  apart  from  which
' the  content  of  the  obser\ation  with  which  we  are  dealing

'  Lotze,  Logik,  sect  273,


4


156  Scientific  Induction.  [Book  11.

would  contradict  the  laws  of  our  thought.'  These  con-
ditions, it  must  be  observed,  need  not  be  abstract,  except
in  the  sense  of  being  definite  and  precise.  They  might
therefore,  I  infer,  exhaust  or  define  the  nature  of  a  real
agent,  in  so  far  as  a  real  agent  is  capable  of  being  deter-
minately  known.  But  it  is  plain  that  as  a  rule  they  will
not  suffice  to  do  so.  The  concrete  nature  of  a  material
thing  will  contain  much  that  is  indifferent  to  the  conditions
precisely  involved  in  any  determinate  effect.

By  hypothesis^  therefore,  in  this  same  account,  is  meant
a  conjecture  which  specifies  the  natural  agents  taken  to  be
at  work  in  a  phenomenon  and  to  be  the  means  of  fulfilling
the  postulate  involved  in  it,  in  the  case  under  investigation.
In  other  cases,  it  is  implied,  the  same  postulate  might  be
satisfied  by  means  of  other  agents.  And,  it  should  be
added,  by  a  fiction  is  meant  the  reference  of  an  effect  to
a  cause  or  principle  which  we  know  to  be  incapable  of
producing  it,  but  from  the  real  effects  of  which  it  only
differs  by  an  error  which  is  capable  of  being  determinately
assigned.  Omitting  the  case  of  a  confessed  fiction,  and
including  a  fiction,  not  confessed  to  be  such,  under  the
title  of  a  hypothesis,  we  may  throw  the  remainder  of  our
discussion  into  the  form  t)f  an  enquiry  into  the  distinction
between  Hypothesis  and  Postulate.

The  Postulate  sets  an  abstract  problem  which  Hypothesis
has  to  solve  in  the  concrete.  The  distinction  prima  facie
coincides  with  that  upon  which  Mill  lays  stress  in  his
treatment  of  hypothesis,  between  a  quantitative  law  of
action,  and  the  thing  which  acts  according  to  that  law.
But  it  would  certainly  seem  that  every  hypothesis  in  order
to  be  established  must  be  passed  over  into  the  content  of
the  postulate,  in  the  sense  that,  without  the  matter  suggested
in  the  hypothesis  also,  '  the  content  of  the  observations  with
which  we  are  dealing  would  contradict  the  laws  of  our
thought.'  For  this  is  ultimately  the  ground  on  which  we
affirm  of  Reality  everything  that  we  do  so  affirm.  When  the
postulate  is  shown  to  contain  the  hypothesis,  by  a  concrete


Chap,  v.]  Law  and  Agent.  1 57

proof  that  the  suggested  thing  or  fact  is  necessary  to  prevent
self-contradiction  in  our  thought,  then  we  have  a  hypothesis
with  a  vera  causa  (see  ii.  below).  When  the  hypothesis  is
moulded  into  the  postulate,  not  or  not  exclusively  by  proof
of  the  concrete  supposition,  but  in  a  great  degree  by
attenuating  its  content  into  a  '  law  of  action,'  then  we  have
a  'working  hypothesis,'  i.e.  materially  an  abstract  postulate,
but  formally  a  supposition  of  a  real  agent.  Such  a  hypo-_
thesis  is  a  fiction  which  may  or  may  not  be  a  confessed
fiction.  In  Mill's  notes  on  Whewell  ^  we  see  the  process  of
attenuation  at  work,  reducing  hypotheses  to  fictions  which
are  confessed  by  Mill  and  not  confessed  by  Whewelf.
Modern  science  seems  to  the  outsider  more  and  more  V
tending  to  substitute  explanation  by  laws  of  action  for
causation  by  unknown  real  agents.  But,  in  theory,  >/
a  determinate  agent  may  be  involved  in  the  postulate
just  as  much  as  an  abstract  law,  supposing  that  the
agent  is  operative  in  the  content  in  modes  sufficiently
many-sided  to  assign  it  a  determinate  nature.  For  Ic^ic,  "^
law  and  agent  are  alike  conceptions  by  which  thought
constitutes  the  content  into  an  organised  whole ;  both  may
be  '  within '  the  content,  if  we  include  in  the  content  what
is  needed  to  constitute  it  rightly ;  neither  can  be  within  the
content  if  we  separate  it,  by  an  unreal  and  indeed  impossible
distinction,  from  the  work  of  thought  in  determining  it-
Every  object  of  perception  is  such  a  conception,  by  which
data  of  sense  are  determined  in  a  way  necessary  to  make
them  intelligible.

The  real  distinction  which  Lotze  should  have  drawn  is
not  between  the  law  of  action  and  the  concrete  real  agent,
but  between  the  concrete  real  agent  as  known  to  be  necessary
for  the  explanation  of  the  observations,  and  such  an  agent

'  Mill's  Ix^c,  i.  p.  335,  and  ii.  p.  24;  e.g.  'Can  an  agency  undnlate?
Can  there  be  alternate  motion  backwards  and  forwards  of  the  particles  of  an
agency  ? '  Mill  is  maintaining  in  effect  that  Whewell's  view  of  the  imponder-
able agents  reduces  them  to  laws  of  action.  He  is  distinguishing  an  agency
from  an  agent  (the  ether).  And  cf.  Clifford  on  Causation,  Lectures,  &c.,  vol.  L
p.  153-


158  Scientific  Induction.  [Book  11.

as  not  so  known,  but  arbitrarily  imagined,  or  identified  with
something  known  from  other  sources.  If  we  assume  a  thing
thus  arbitrarily,  or  on  the  ground  of  extraneous  knowledge,,
then  (considering  the  thing  in  the  latter  case  apart  from
the  extraneous  knowledge  on  the  ground  of  which  it  is
assumed)  we  have  the  relation  '  If  a,  then  «,'  but  not  the
reciprocal  '  If  a,  then  a ' ;  i.  e.  in  other  cases  other  agents
than  a  might  satisfy  the  same  postulate,  or  minimum  of
conditions,  involved  in  a.  But  this  unnecessary  element  in
a  hypothesis  cannot  of  course  be  acquiesced  in.  The
supposed  real  agent  must  either  be  elevated  into  the  content
of  a  postulate,  or  depressed  into  that  of  a  fiction.  Obviously,
however,  before  -deciding  that  the  latter  course  is  the  only
one  open  to  us,  we  must  concentrate  all  available  knowledge
upon  the  supposed  real  agent  in  order  to  test  its  right  to
become  a  postulate.  One  science  e.g.  may  need  one  aspect
of  it,  and  another  another.
Hypothesis  ii.  Thus  to  meet  the  difficulty  that  many  characteristics
^Causa^'^  of  a  thijig  assumed  hypothetically  to  account  for  certain
data  are  likely  to  fall  outside  what  those  data  demand  and
justify,  it  is  usual  to  require  of  a  hypothesis  that  a  the
supposed  agent  shall  be  a  vera  causa.  This  can  ultimately
have  but  one  meaning.  It  must  come  to  this,  that  a,
though  containing  elements  which  are  superfluous  for  the
explanation  of  the  data  from  which  we  happen  to  have
started,  yet  contains  no  elements  which  are  not  necessary
to  the  explanation  of  some  data  or  other.  It  is  commonly
said  that  a  vera  causa  is  one  independently  known  to  exist,
or  accessible  to  direct  perception.  Of  course  we  do  not
restrict  our  conviction  of  reality  to  matters  accessible  to
direct  perception — the  centre  of  the  earth,  the  inside  of
a  block  of  marble,  the  other  side  of  the  moon,  are  cases  in
point.  And  if  we  did  attempt  this  restrictionj  what  is  direct
perception.?  All  perception  is  inferential,  and  proceeds  by
furnishing  conceptions  which  bring  data  of  sense  into  in-
telligible relation.  And  if  we  require  that  the  cause  shall
be  independently  known  to  exist,  this  is  a  mere  question  of


Chap,  v.i  ColHgation  of  Facts.  159

the  range  of  observations  which  it  is  to  explain.  A  vera  >/
causa  then  is  a  thing,  or  occurrence  in  a  thing,  whose  reality
we  are  thoroughly  convinced  of  from  the  necessity  of
reconciling  observed  data  ^,  and  there  is  no  reason  in  the
nature  of  things  why  a  single  science  or  a  single  range
of  reality  should  not  suffice  to  produce  such  conviction.
'^ Direct  perception'  is  a  mere  popular  phrase  without  logical
meaning.  The  question  is  simply  whether  our  data  are  v/
determinate  enough  to  guide  us  to  the  nature  of  a  real
thing  as  explaining  them.  What  is  really  demanded  in
the  vera  causa  is  probably  independent  evidence  of  the
thing's  reality,  with  an  eye  to  the  doctrine  of  chances.
A  single  coherent  set  of  errors  may  vitiate  a  whole  co-
herent system  of  appearances,  but  the  chances  against
errors  in  independent  sets  of  obser\'ations  are  the  same  as
the  rapidly  increasing  chances  against  coincidences  of  inde-
pendent events  2.  This  is  a  parody  (as  the  doctrine  of
chances  is  always  a  formal  parody  of  some  material  truth)
of  the  operation  of  multiform  data  in  moulding  a  concrete
hypothesis,  which  will  be  illustrated  directly.

Thus  in  a  'working  hypothesis'  we  have  postulate  and
hypothesis  tending  to  identification  by  attenuation  ^  of  the
hypothesis,  in  a  hypothesis  with  vera  causa  we  obtain
the  same  result  by  extension  of  the  postulate  to  cover  the
alleged  cause  and  turn  it  into  a  vera  causa.

2.  In  an  ultimate  sense,  there  is  no  knowledge  without  Phases  of
Hypothesis.  gj^"

i.  'All  science  may  be  rightly  described  as  progressive

'  The  most  thorough  and  simple  way  of  classifying  matters  known  frona
testimony  or  history  is  to  include  them  under  the  head  of  conceptions  which
are  necessarj-  to  determine  obserred  data,  the  observed  data  being  the  books,
speech,  etc.  which  biing  the  facts  to  onr  individual  notice.  As  to  ranking
agents  under  the  head  of  conceptions,  I  may  say  that  this  is  not  reducing
agents  to  mere  conceptions.  As  known  and  established  to  us,  they  are  con-:
ceptions,  though  they  may  be  more

*  If  the  chance  of  error  in  one  set  of  data  is  \,  the  chance  of  independent  error  in
two  sets  (of  the  same  but  incependent  liability  to  error)  is  \,  in  three  i,and  so  on,

*  A  working  hypothesis  often,  and  perhaps  usually,  partakes  of  the  character
of  a  fiction,  being  in  fact  suggested  as  a  vera  causa,  and  subsequently  attenuated
till  it  is  clearly  not  a  vera  causa,  though  retaining  its  original  claim  to  be  so.


l6o  Scientific  Induction.  [Bookii.

Rudi-  «  colligation  of  facts  "  through  superinduction  of  conceptions  ^ '
Hypo-  if  it  is  understood  that,  though  such  conceptions  are  present
t  esis.  jj^  ^j^g  j.g^2  falcts  and  are  not  mere  additions  out  of  our
heads,  yet  in  the  progress  of  our  knowledge  such  colligation
does  not  operate  upon  the  real  facts  themselves,  but  only  on
the  facts  as  imperfectly  understood  by  us.  Thus  the  whole
course  of  the  present  work  has  been  an  attempt  to  trace  the
progressive  determination  of  feelings,  or  of  facts  imperfectly
understood,  by  conceptions  which  may  be  regarded  as
hypotheses  in  course  of  development  and  proof.  The
continued  identity  of  an  individual,  for  example,  which  is
the  soul  of  the  individual  judgment,  may  be  regarded  as
a  conception  or  hypothesis  which  is  superinduced  (though
without  conscious  reflection)  upon  the  successive  appearances
which  we  observe,  and  '  colligates '  these  facts.  And  as  we
have  seen  in  speaking  of  Induction,  hypothesis  in  a  genuine
sense,  as  a  conscious  activity,  begins  to  operate  where  the
individual  judgment  begins  to  be  employed  in  explaining
the  conjunction  of  attributes,  in  conjunctive  or  enumerative
Induction.  From  this  point,  at  which  Hypothesis  is  repre-
sented by  the  content  of  a  generic  or  specific  name,  we  have
watched  its  development  through  analogy  and  through
scientific  analysis,  till  in  the  experiment  of  the  Siren  we
found  ourselves  testing  by  determinate  perceptive  com-
parison a  relation  which  can  only  be  completely  explained
by  a  complex  mathematical  theorem  ^.
Mediate  jj Procedure  by  Hypothesis  proper  is  mediate,

thesis.  a.  It  is  clear  from  what  has  been  said  that  we  must  assent

Hypo- in  substance  to  the  view  of  Jevons  and  Sigwart  which  is  in
Nature  of  the  main  that  of  Whewell  ^  and  De  Morgan  *,  so  far  as  it
Induction,  asserts  the  essential  identity  of  Induction  with  procedure  by
Hypothesis. And  indeed Mill  himself  might  almost  be
reckoned  on  this  side. He  shows  ^  triumphantly  that  the

*  Green,  Philosophical  Works,  ii.  p.  288.

*  The  theory  of  wave-propagation,  which  explains  among  other  things  tho
discordant  beats  pioduced  by  sonorous  impulses  which  have  not  certain  definite
ratios  of  rapidity.

'  See  Mill's  Logic,  ii.  24. *  Budget  of  Paradoxes,  p.  49. '  Logic,  ii.  i  a.


Chap,  v.]  Function  of  Hypothesis.  i6i

Method  of  Difference  will  test  the  premises  of  a  Deduction,

and  the  fact  that  the *  instances ' on which  it operates

are  in  that  case  obtained  by  Deduction,  he  sets  down  as

of  no  consequence,  i.e.  as  not  interfering  wdth  its  Inductive

character. But  it  is  not  so  clear  that  this  method,  which

unquestionably  will test the consequences of  a precise

deduction and therefore the truth of  its premises,  will

perform  any  other  function  that  could  be  called  Inductive.

Mill's  objection  ^  against  Whewell's  hypothetical  method,  on

the  ground  of  insufficient  provision  for  excluding  unproved

or  unproveable  elements  of  hypothesis,  is  an  objection  which

arises  from  the  impossible  demand  for  merely  negative  and

exhaustive  determination. It  is  very  probable  that  Whewell

makes  too  little  of  the  necessity  for  showing  or  for  its  being

possible  to  show  that  nothing  but  a  could  produce  a  ;  but

what  Whewell  seems  to  have  rightly  felt  is  that  this  is  after

all  in  its  essence  a  material  and  positive  question,  depending

on  the  degree  and  mode  of  connection  between  a  and  a,  and

being  for  logic  the  same  as  the  question  whether  a  as  such

produces  a. The  possibility  of  proof  or  disproof,  which  is

claimed  as  essential  to  the  'legitimacy'  of  a  hypothesis,

must  be  a  material  or  real  possibility,  and  reduces  itself  to

specific presumptions  that  proof  may  be  had,  which  are

in themselves  grades  of  proof. But  while  accepting  the

general  view  to  which  I  have  alluded  of  the  importance  of

hypothesis  in  Inductive  Inference,  I  am  unable  to  agree

with  some  important  results  which  have  been  held  to  follow

upon  such  a  view.

;3.  I  shall  begin  by  endeavouring  to  lay  the  true  doctrine  Example

very  briefly  before  the  reader,  in  the  sense  in  which I  between

understand  it  and  in  which  it  seems  to  me  to  follow  from  hypothesis

aad  oata
our  previous  discussions. It  will  then  be  necessary  to  speak

of  the  relation  between  Induction  in  the  scientific  sense  and

the  work  of  generalisation  which  is  popularly  ascribed  to

it,  and  I  shall  conclude  the  present  chapter  with some

observations  on the above-mentioned misapprehensions,

'  See  Mill's  Logic,  ii.  p.  34.

VOL.  II.  M


1 62  Scientific  Induction.  [bookii.

and on  the true relation of  Induction to Inference  as
such.

The  purpose  of  the  example  which  I  propose  to  analyse
is  to  exhibit  the  mediate  identification  of  a  hypothetical
cause,  at  first  sight  somewhat  remote,  with  a  given  effect.
I  intentionally  select  an  instance  in  which  the  identification
is  not  quite  perfect,  in  order  to  display  the  full  nature  of
the  difficulty  to  be  overcome.

As  a  datum  to  be  explained,  we  will  take  the  curious  fact,
long  known  to  scholars,  that  the  Greek  god  Apollo,  especially
the  Apollo  of  the  Troad,  is  associated  with  the  mouse,  both
in  his  appellation  Smintheus  and  in  recorded  usages — there
were  sacred  mice  and  figures  of  mice  in  his  temple,  and  so
forth  1.

The  conjunction  of  aspects  which  excites  surprise  in  this
fact  is  the  association  of  an  insignificant  animal  with  the
worship  and  the  temples  of  a  comparatively  pure  religion.
A  large  choice  of  analogies  lies  open  to  us,  any  one  of
which  might  furnish  some  sort  of  mediation  between  these
two  extremes,  and  of  these  that  which  is  at  first  sight  the
most  remote  may  perhaps  on  a  consideration  of  all  the
phenomena  be  considered  the  most  hopeful.

It  seems  that  in  the  Peruvian  religion  we  find  this  same
conjunction  of  aspects,  the  association  of  insignificant  animals
with  the  worship  and  the  temples  of  a  comparatively  pure
creed.  And  in  that  instance,  it  further  appears,  we  have  a
definite  and  complete  mediation  or  explanation  of  the  two
terms  or  '  extremes.'  Before  the  establishment  of  Sun-
worship  by  the  Incas  as  the  creed  of  the  state,  the  Indians  of
the  various  tribes  worshipped  tribal  animal  gods,  including
all  sorts  of  insignificant  animals,  the  Indians  of  each  tribe
believing  themselves  to  be  descended  from  some  one  of
these  animals.  'After  the  establishment  of  the  purer
religion,  the  Incas  had  the  good  policy  to  collect  all  the

^  My  example  and  my  arguments  are  all  drawn  from  Mr.  Lang's  Custom
and  Myth,  p.  103  ff.  My  purpose  however  only  permits  the  most  meagre
reproduction  of  some  points  out  of  this  interesting  study.


Chap,  v.]  Suggestion  of  a  Hypothesis.  163

tribal  animal  gods  into  their  temples  in  and  round  Cuzco,
in  which  the  two  leading  gods  were  the  Master  of  Life,  and
the  Sun.'  This  toleration  of  an  older  and  cruder  in  sub-
ordination to  a  purer  faith  is  a  very  common  phenomenon,
as  Mr.  Lang  truly  observes,  in  religious  evolution.  And  he
cites  an  example  of  a  festival  described  by  Theocritus  which
still  continues  in  a  Catholic  country.

Here  then  we  have  a  content  the  whole  of  which  is  given
(I  assume)  in  perception  or  in  the  proximate  interpretation
of  perception,  viz.  in  history.  Analogy  or  Induction  would
not  commonly  be  held  to  apply  within  the  limits  of  this
content ;  but  nevertheless  in  as  far  as  within  the  single
'  instance  '  or  range  of  reality — which  is  really  the  life  of
a  whole  nation — a  principle  is  detected  by  our  thought,
there  is  operative  what  constitutes  the  essence  of  induc-
tive as  of  all  other  inference.  But  no  details  have  to  be
referred  to  reality  solely  on  the  strength  of  the  principle,
because  it  happens  that  they  are  all  warranted  by  testi-
mony ^.

Now  if  the  content  which  perplexed  us  in  Greek  religious
history  fell  bona  fide  within  the  lines  of  the  content  thus
warranted  and  interpreted  in  Peruvian  religion,  no  inference
would  be  necessary,  or  rather,  the  purely  formal  inference
which  recognised  the  identification  would  suffice  to  include
the  Greek  problem  under  the  same  solution  as  that  which
supplies  itself  for  the  Peruvian  problem.  But  the  very
slight  and  superficial  abstraction  which  is  all  that  we  have
thus  far  formulated  of  the  Greek  problem  can  warrant  no
such  material  identification — so  far  as  we  have  yet  stated
the  point,  almost  any  hypothesis  might  explain  it ;  the
misunderstanding  of  a  name,  or  the  caprice  of  a  priest  or
king.  What  we  must  now  do  is  to  look  in  the  Greek
problem  for  the  facts  and  relations  of  which  we  have  seen

*  It  is  probable,  and  appears  I  think  from  Mr.  Lang's  account,  that  the
interpretation  even  of  the  known  succession  in  Pern  into  an  intelligible  evolu-
tion would  involve,  as  almost  every  interpretation  does,  some  remodelling  and
supplementation  of  details. So  far  we  have  inference  in  the  popular  sense.

M  %


164  Scientific  Induction.  [book  11.

the  significance  in  the  Peruvian  problem.  But  as  historical
data  such  facts  and  relations  are  wanting ;  and  here  we  have
the  essential  difference  between  Induction  by  analysis  of
Perception,  and  Induction  by  mediate  Hypothesis.  Our
hypothesis  \^  prima  facie  a  conjectural  matter  of  fact  falling
wholly  outside  the  content  which  has  to  be  explained.
The  view  which  I  wish  to  illustrate  is  that  our  proof  of  the
hypothesis  must  ultimately  depend  upon  the  characteristic
positive  connection  between  the  hypothesis  and  its  conse-
quences. This  connection  is  as  we  have  seen  elucidated  and
purged  of  irrelevancy  by  the  establishment  of  limiting  nega-
tions, but  is  not  otherwise  dependent  on  the  disproof  of  an
indefinite  number  of  alternative  hypotheses,  and  is  no  more
restricted  to  mere  probability  than  is  the  determination  of
any  perceived  data  by  any  conception  which  makes  them
intelligible  ^.

We  have  before  us,  as  a  datum  of  fact,  a  surprising  con-
junction between  Apollo  and  the  mouse,  especially  in
Apollo's  temple.  We  have  as  a  suggested  fact  which  might
explain  this  conjunction,  a  previous  state  of  Greek  or  neigh-
bouring tribes  in  which  they  worshipped  animals  such  as
the  mouse,  together  with  a  religious  evolution  in  which  the
earlier  cult  survived  by  the  side  of  the  later  and  purer  wor-
ship. According  to  the  ordinary  process  of  Induction  as
inverse  Deduction,  we  proceed  to  '  deduce  the  consequences
which  might  be  inferred  from  the  hypothesis.'

In  drawing  consequences  from  a  hypothetical  state  of
facts  we  have  to  apply  that  state  of  facts  to  the  reality  on
the  basis  of  which  it  is  supposed,  and  to  examine  in  detail
the  results  of  the  combination.  This  analysis  of  the  con-
tent of  the  hypothesis  is  not  a  contrivance  of  demonstra-
tion, but  an  inevitable  necessity  of  knowledge. In  working

*  Contrast  with  this  the  mechanical  views  of  Jevons,  Principles  of  Science,
p.  152,  and  Sigwart,  Logik,  ii.  p.  357.  Jevons  thinks  that  no  proof  by  Imper-
fect Induction  (Induction  falling  short  of  complete  enumeration)  can  be  more
than  probable.  Sigwart  thinks  that  a  hypothesis  is  refuted  by  refuting  its
consequences,  but  not  proved  by  establishing  them,  though  it  grows  in  probft'
bility  as  its  consequences  agree  with  the  facts.


Chap,  v.]  Results  of  Hypothcsis.  165

out,  for  example,  the  hypothesis  now  before  us,  we  must
take  into  account  the  customs  relating  to  marriage  and  to
names  which  belong  to  that  phase  of  savage  life  which  we
are  conjecturally  imputing  to  the  Greek  race  in  the  past.
Among  savages  named  after  tribal  animals  which  they
worship  and  bear  as  name  or  emblem,  and  from  which
they  trace  their  descent,  the  members  of  one  family  do  not
intermarry  with  people  bearing  the  same  name  or  emblem,
and  the  children  of  every  marriage  take  the  mother's  name
or  emblem  (totem).  These  names  consequently  tend  to
become  scattered  throughout  a  large  region,  and  are  asso-
ciated with  the  well-known  phenomenon,  for  which  in  very
early  society  there  are  obvious  grounds,  of  counting  kinship
through  the  mother  and  not  through  the  father.  On  the
the  other  hand,  when  this  state  of  society  passes  away,  as
in  European  nations  it  has  passed  away,  it  is  plain  that  a
powerful  family  will  crush  out  the  names  of  the  other  famihes
in  a  district,  and  form  a  local  tribe  called  by  an  animal
name.  From  this  hypothesis  thus  analysed,  if  applied  to
'  mouse  families,'  there  follow  primarily  four  results,  which
briefly  stated  amount  to  this  : —

(i)  There  would  be  places  named  from  mice,  and  mice
will  be  held  sacred  in  those  places.  This  was  so  in  the
Troad.

(2)  The  mouse-name  would  be  given  locally  to  the  god
who  superseded  the  mouse.  This  was  so  in  the  places
called  after  the  mouse.

(3)  The  figure  of  the  mouse  would  be  associated  with  the
god  in  his  temple,  and  used  as  a  badge  or  local  mark  in
places  where  the  mouse  had  been  venerated.  The  former
usage  was  found,  and  the  latter  was  not  uncommon,  in
Greece.

(4)  Stories  would  be  told  in  the  district  in  question  to
explain  the  worship  of  the  mouse.  This  was  so  in  the
Troad.

I  do  not  say  that  these  four  points,  thus  baldly  stated,
carry  us very  far. But in so  far  as  they  support  the


1 66  Scientific  Induction.  [bookii.

hypothesis  at  all,  they  do  so  not  merely  as  an  arrangement
of  coincidences  due  more  probably,  in  a  calculable  degree,
to  a  single  cause  than  to  independent  unknown  causes ;
but,  like  an  arrangement  of  results  which  some  person  has
the  power  and  a  strong  motive  to  produce^  they  support  the
conjectural  cause  by  the  material  connection  of  the  data
with  it,  or  a  material  extension  of  the  data  towards  includ-
ing it. One  of  the  above  points  for  example  is  the  appear-
ance of  the  figure  of  a  mouse  as  a  badge  or  city  emblem  in
Greece. This,  when  referred  to  an  actual  race  of  men  ex-
ceedingly conservative  in  its  customs,  is  a  point,  though  a
trifling  one,  actually  in  common  between  hypothesis  and
data. The  badge  or crest of  a city is not the  same
thing  as  the totem  of  a family,  but the connection of
parts  of  cities  with  local  tribes  is  too  well  made  out  in
Greece  and  elsewhere  to  give  us  pause. And  the  venera-
tion of  an  animal  by  the  people  of  a  city  in  ways  strikingly
analogous  to  totem  worship  is  made  out  in  the  case  of
Egyptian  cities. Of  course  this  point  may  be  otherwise
explained  than  by  the  suggested  hypothesis,  and  so  may
all  the  others ;  but  they  all,  as  referred  to  the  life  of  a  race,
demand  some  explanation,  and the  only  difficulty  is  to
model  that  explanation  rightly. It  is  this  idea,  that  of
moulding  a  hypothesis,  that  should  be  substituted  for  the
idea  of  gauging  its  probability  as  something  attaching  to  its
definite  and  irrevocable  form. To  meet  paradox  by  paradox,
rather  than  admit  that  a  hypothesis  can  only  be  established
by  the  refutation  of  infinite  others  ^  and  the  non-refuta-
tion of  itself,  I  would  maintain  that  of  every  set  of  data
some  positive  hypothesis  (viz.  that  '  something  or other '
conditions  these  data)  is  within  otir  knowledge  demonstrably
true, and  that the  problem  of  induction  by  the  inverse
method  or  by  hypothesis  is  merely  to  further  determine

'  This  is  the  root  of  the  idea  that  no  results  of  hypothetical  Induction  can  be
certain.  The  idea  is  ridiculous  when  it  is  once  seen  that  hypothetical  Induction
is  identical  in  principle  with  common  perception  and  with  all  Inference  what-
ever.


Chap. v.]  Moulding  the  HypotJusis,  167

this  *  something  or  other.'  la  this  work  of  definition,  as  we
have  abundantly  seen,  negation  is  all-important ;  but  it
must  be  motived  and  relevant  negation,  '  not  this^  because
that,  which  has  a  determinate  relation  to  this.'

I  should  weary  the  reader  by  further  discussion  of  the
mouse  hypothesis,  which  moreover  space  forbids  me  to
treat  in  its  interesting  details.  But  I  must  point  out  that
by  considering  the  peculiar  marriage  customs  (e.  g.  maternal
kinship),  sacrificial  and  festival  rites,  and  animistic  beliefs,
which  are  traceable  throughout  Greek  life,  and  which  are
characteristic  of  the  primitive  phase  that  forms  the  content
of  our  hypothesis,  we  can  remodel  hypothesis  and  data
once  more,  and  this  time  into  a  really  intimate  approxima-
tion to  each  other.  Hypothesis  and  data  approach  amalga-
mation in  the  conception  of  a  finely  gifted  race  still  bearing
in  its  prime  the  traces  of  a  natural  though  characteristic
evolution  out  of  a  savage  past.  We  might  almost  claim
that  a  savage  phase  of  life  is  a  vera  causa,  apart  from  the
proof  of  ojir  special  hypothesis  ^,  not  only  in  the  Peruvian
but  in  the  Greek  race.  Is  not  the  conception  of  a  past  and
natural  evolution,  in  the  case  of  any  race  of  men  which  we
may  be  considering,  a  conception  'apart  from  which  the
content  of  the  observation  with  which  we  are  dealing  would
contradict  the  laws  of  our  thought'?  But  if  so,  then,
according  to  the  distinction  accepted  above,  the  conception,
altlwugh  that  of  a  real  agent  or  event,  is  a  postulate  and
not  a  mere  hypothesis,  and  therefore  is  the  conception  of  a
vera  causa  ;  and  the  work  of  induction  is,  as  said  above,  to
assign  to  the  postulate  in  detail  its  actual  content  or  law
of  action.

Other  hypotheses,  independent  of  that  which  the  author
advocates,  are  carefully  dealt  with  in  the  chapter  from  which
I  have  been  quoting.  And  I  think  that  any  one  who  con-
siders the  matter  in  the  light  of  this  or  any  equally  genuine
piece  of  research  must  feel  that  just  in  so  far  as  the  adverse
hj-potheses  are  independent,  their  refutation,  although  a  sine

'  Every  hypothesis  when  proved  is  a  hypothesis  with  vera  causa.


1 68  Scientific  Induction.  [bookiI.

qua  non  of  the  establishment  of  the  hypothesis  advocated,
can  never  genuinely  contribute  to  that  establishment.  In
other  words,  the  refutation  of  other  hypotheses  is  a  genuine
assistance  to  one  hypothesis  only  when  it  elicits  positiye
content  which  goes  to  model  this  latter  hypothesis.

Before  leaving  this  subject  I  must  refer  back  to  the  dis-
cussion of  Book  I  ^  on  cause  and  ground,  and  must  explain
that  the  content  of  a  hypothesis  may  correspond,  according
to  the  degree  of  its  purity  or  relevance,  to  any  member  of
the  series  there  described  ;  to  cause,  to  effect,  to  antecedent,
consequent,  or  ground. The  reason  for  treating  an  example
in  which  the  popular  sense  of  cause  is  dominant  was  simply
that  the  equally  popular  sense  of  hypothesis,  from  which  the
theoretical  difficulty  of  its  use  arises,  corresponds  to  the
)  popular  sense  of  cause  (or  effect). The  more  scientific  type
(  of  hypothesis  approaches  more  nearly  prima  facie  to  the
I  nature  of  a  postulate  or  ground — of  a  principle  included  in
)  the  facts,  or  of  a  systematic  reality  which  they  constitute.
And  hypotheses  which  are,  to  begin  with,  of  this  type  do
not  present  the  great  apparent  difficulty  of  passing  by  sheer
inference  from  isolated  data  to  actual  things  and  facts  not
)  included  in  them. As  we  have  seen,  a  hypothesis  which  to
!  begin  with  is  not  of  this  type,  necessarily  tends,  in  course
i of  demonstration,  to  approximate  to  it ;  just  as,  in  the  case
which  we  tried  to  analyse,  certain  isolated  data  and  isolated
suggestions  about  the  Greek  race  tended  to  coalesce  into  a
( systematic  conception  of  that  race  as  developing  in  a  normal
fashion  under  the  natural  influences  and  conditions  which
■ appear  to  be  common  to  mankind.
Generalisa- 3.  It  is  unquestionably  the  case,  that  a  process  or  result
***"*  which  may  be  termed  Generalisation  is  somehow  connected

with  Induction. The  only  question  is  how  to  state  the
connection.
'  From / i.  I  trust  that  the  popular  idea  according  to  which  Induc-
air*ex-°  (  ^^*-*^  ^^  ^  process  from  what  happens  often  to  what  happens
ploded. always,  from  particulars  to  the  totality  of  particulars,  has

*  Chap.  vi.


Chap,  v.]  Kinds  of  Generalisation.  169

been  set  in  its  true  light  by  the  whole  scheme  of  our  account  /
of  Induction. The  conception,  to  which  unhappily  Professor  '
Jevons  adhered,  of  Perfect  and  Imperfect  Induction  as  corre-
sponding to  complete  and  incomplete  enumeration  is  hope-
lessly fallacious. It  cannot,  I  think,  be  necessary  to  pursue
this  error  at  the  present  stage,

ii.  There  is  a  sense  in  which  all  abstraction,  i.  e.  all  becom-  By  mere
ing  conscious  of  the  determination  of  sensuous  data  by  ^^^^
explicit  conceptions,  operates  as  Generalisation.  Such
generalisation  is  embodied  in  the  hypothetical  judgment,
which  of  course  is  not  hypothetical  qtia  judgment  and  is  in
no  sense  a  hypothesis,  but  is  an  affirmation,  based  upon  a
reality  illustrated  by  a  hypothesis.  The  expUcit  conditions
forming  a  determinate  case  which,  as  the  antecedent  in  the
hypothetical  judgment,  illustrate  or  qualify  Reality,  take
the  consequent  with  them  wherever  they  go,  and  in  this
sense  the  judgment  is  general,  absolute,  or  universal.  Sup-
posing the  judgment  to  be  absolutely  true — and  formally
we  can  suppose  nothing  else  of  a  judgment  which  we  make,
though  of  natural  phenomena  no  judgments  are  absolutely
true — it  is  absolutely  universal.  Varieties  of  detail  may
fcJl  within  it,  but  they  do  not  affect  it.  Against  such  un-
essential variations,  and  against  mere  number  of  examples
in  time  and  space,  the  explicit  antecedent  appears  as  general,
and  in  selecting  and  defining  it  a  work  of  generalisation  has
practically  been  accomplished.  There  is  no  advance  from
known  to  unknown  in  the  strict  sense  of  the  case  we  are
now  considering.  There  is  no  advance  from  known  to  un-
known in  saying  that  a  pair  of  parallel  straight  lines  which
you  may  intend  to  draw  to-morrow  will  never  meet.  If
the  '  intent  and  purpose '  of  the  antecedent '  hath  full  rela-
tion' to  the  example  to  be  adduced,  there  \^  prima  facie  no
inference,  no  extension,  no  advance,  in  affirming  the  conse-
quent true  of  that  example.

A  still  stronger  and  a  far  more  important  case  of  such
generalisation  by  mere  determination  is  afforded  by  mediate
or  inverse  induction  through  hj'pothesis. A  hypothesis  is


170  Scientific  Induction.  [bookii.

a  hypothesis  because  it  is  not  to  begin  with  present  in  the
data,  and  has  to  be  brought  there  by  mediation.  But  to
supply  matter  for  modelling  a  conception  which  is  not
furnished  by  mere  direct  interpretation  of  sense,  i.e.  by
perception  or  by  testimony,  a  set  of  data  must  have  wide
range  and  be  capable  of  a  high  degree  of  systematic  inter-
relation. Thus  e.  g.  in  an  anthropological  hypothesis  about
the  past  of  the  Hellenic  race  a  considerable  portion  of  the
history  of  Europe  is  ultimately  involved,  and  the  data  bear-
ing on  it  are  inter-related  and  elucidated.

In  this  sense  a  hypothesis  or  mediately  obtained  deter-
mination of  observations  by  a  conception  superinduced  upon
them,  is  likely  to  involve  as  a  result  an  elucidation  and
articulation  of  a  wide  range  of  reality.  Sparta  and  Athens,
Crete  and  the  Troad,  Sicily  and  Magna  Graecia,  all  fall
within  the  region  of  reality  which  through  determination  of
our  knowledge  about  it  by  the  anthropological  hypothesis
in  question  would  acquire  for  us  a  certain  set  of  highly
important  common  properties  and  relations.  Here  the
generalisation  results  from  the  range  of  the  explicit  system,
and  not  from  the  mere  abstract  precision  of  a  hypothetical
antecedent.  What  we  are  systematising  is  a  reality,  and
the  judgment  which  expresses  our  conclusion  may  indeed,
like  all  precise  judgments,  be  thrown  into  hypothetical  form,
but  its  content  makes  it  really  categorical.  In  it  therefore
we  have  two  kinds  of  generalisation,  one  depending  on  the
range  of  the  system  which  we  have  constituted,  the  other  on
the  hypothetical  abstractness  which  makes  even  this  concrete
system  a  case,  within  the  lines  of  which  systems  differing
from  it  in  other  relations  may  conceivably  fall.
Material  or  iii.  The  generalisation  that  falls  within  the  limits  of  strictly
Generdi^-  scientific  Induction  is  confined  to  what  has  just  been  described
*io°-  as  Generalisation  by  mere  determination. It  is  not  generali-

1  sation  in  the  sense  of  an  advance  from  the  known  to  the
(  unknown.  Obviously  there  can  in  no  case  be  such  an
i  advance  except  in  the  sense  that  the  unknown  becomes
I  known. And  this  advance  is  made  in  the  determination


Chap,  v.]  Idefttification  of  Realities.  171

itself ;  the  case,  when  determined,  is  known,  and  is  general-
ised in  so  far  only  as  it  is  known.  Water  is  composed  of
oxygen  and  hydrogen  in  certain  proportions.  There  is  no
further  generalisation  in  applying  this  to  water  such  as  we
have  analysed ;  and  if  there  could  be  a  doubt  whether  a
certain  liquid  was  in  that  sense  '  water,'  the  judgment  gained
by  previous  analysis  would  not  prima  facie  determine  it.
The  hypothetical  character  of  this  judgment  is  an  automatic
apparatus  for  excluding  material  generalisation.  In  the
extreme  instance  of  such  exclusion  the  antecedent  '  water '
is  little  more  than  a  name,  to  which  '  composed  of  oxygen '
etc.  supplies  the  content.  Then  if  'composed  of  oxygen'
etc.  is  not  true  in  a  particular  case,  that  case  ipso  facto  falls
outside  the  hypothetical  judgment.  Or  in  a  less  extreme
instance,  'water'  may  indicate  certain  visible  or  other
properties  which  are  synthetically  related  in  the  judgment
to  the  chemical  composition.  But  here  again  the  least
variation  in  those  index- properties  may  formally  throw  the
case  in  which  it  occurs  outside  the  hypothetical  judgment.

This  is  all  very  well  so  long  as  we  interpret  the  hypo-
thetical judgment  to  be  strictly  hypothetical  abstract  or
necessary.  But  the  account  given  in  Book  I  of  the  Universal
Judgment  in  its  sub-forms  of  Corporate  and  Generic  Judg-
ment reminds  us  that  we  have  a  Categorical  element  to
deal  with  in  the  characteristic  nature  which  binds  things
together  into  ideal  or  actual  totalities,  and  we  have  to  face
the  possibility  that  the  nature  of  these  totalities  may  conflict
with  the  content  of  hypothetical  judgments  in  which  they
are  set  down  as  antecedents.  Every  universal  is  an  identity
in  difference,  and  the  identification  of  the  conditions  by
which  inductive  enquiry  has  determined  a  content  is  not,  as
we  assumed  just  now,  a  purely  formal  activity,  but  is,  like
every  judgment,  a  synthetic  and  material  operation.  Reli-
ance on  the  accuracy  of  our  analysis  will  lead  us  back  to  a
Lockeian  formalism,  if  we  neglect  the  identification  of  the
data  analysed.  '  Man  is  rational,  because  if  a  creature  turns
out  not  to  be  rational,  it  is  not  what  we  called  a  man,'  is  an


172  Scientific  Induction.  [book  11.

argument  which,  unless  specifically  justified,  has  no  more
content  than  A  is  A  because  we  called  it  A.  If  no  distinct
elements  are  fixed  within  the  synthesis,  the  synthesis  itself
is  destroyed.  But  on  the  other  hand,  if  we  affirm  our
analysis  directly  of  a  generic  content  which  is  categorically
taken  and  includes  a  system  of  differences,  it  is  clear  that
we  are  pledging  ourselves  to  a  material  generalisation.
Does  'water'  for  example,  in  the  judgment  above  cited,
include  steam  and  ice }  Apart  from  specific  chemical
knowledge,  I  do  not  see  how  we  could  predict  that  it  would
do  so.  And  if  we  say  'water'  for  chemical  science  is
matter  of  a  certain  composition,  whether  in  a  liquid,  solid
or  vaporous  state,  then  we  have  got  back  to  the  nominalist
judgment  criticised  above ;  ^  a\s  xy  because  what  is  not  xy  is
not  called  a!

I  do  not  mean  to  say  that  the  above  considerations  are
of  serious  importance  in  precise  scientific  induction,  in
which  the  definition  of  the  data  as  elements  in  a  synthetic
relation  is  always  a  primary  problem.  But  either  in  popular
applications  of  science — the  most  fertile  of  all  sources  of
fallacy — or  in  provinces  of  knowledge  which  are  largely
dealt  with  by  analogy,  it  is  essential  to  bear  in  mind  that
the  identification  of  the  datum,  which  has  been  analysed  or
determined  by  a  conception,  with  either  the  popular  import
or  the  analogical  generic  content  of  that  datum,  is  always
a  matter  involving  a  material  synthesis  and  not  a  mere
formal  recognition.  Where  indeed  the  precise  determinate
conditions  of  a  phenomenon  are  explicitly  recognisable,
there  the  identification  of  the  phenomenon  is  a  formal  act,
and  the  hypothetical  judgment  applies  ipso  facto.  But
where,  as  is  constantly  the  case  in  practice,  and,  owing  to
the  nature  of  a  universal,  always  in  theory,  the  conditions
are  not  unambiguously  recognisable,  but  only  either  a  part
of  them,  or  a  case  of  them,  or  an  index-mark  of  them  can
be  discovered,  then  we  must  form  a  synthetic  judgment  of
identification  or  distinction,  based  on  the  general  principles
which  we  have  seen  to  govern  argument  by  analogy,  viz.


Chap,  v.]  Material  Truth,  173

on  the  reality  of  a  system  of  recognisable  types  and
purposes.

Apart  from  such  a  material  assumption  the  truth  of
principles  derived  from  Scientific  Induction  itself  would  be
practically  though  not  theoretically  destroyed  ^.  A  system
of  unapparent  deviations  in  the  properties  of  natural
objects,  such  as  to  defy  classification,  might  be  such  as  to
destroy  the  applicability,  while  not  interfering  with  the
formal  truth,  of  hypothetical  judgments.  In  our  earlier
discussions  on  the  hypothetical  and  categorical  aspect  of
judgments,  it  was  conceded  that  the  ptire  hypothetical
judgment  does  not  allege  the  existence  of  the  elements
which  it  explicitly  puts  in  relation.  But  it  is  also  clear
that  no  ordinary  result  of  Induction  ought  to  be  taken
bona  fide  as  a  judgment  of  this  type.  A  judgment  which
cannot  be  denied  but  which  has  no  range  of  real  application
has  only  abstract  and  not  concrete  truth.  If  all  our  know-
ledge were  of  this  character,  as  qua  mere  determination  it
conceivably  might  be,  it  would  have  no  hold  upon  reality.

So  long  indeed  as  the  variations  of  natural  objects  ob-
served a  continuous  and  mutually  coherent  progression,  we
should  only  have  a  state  of  things  not  unlike  the  system  of
animated  nature,  w'hich  would  be  in  some  respects  favour-
able to  knowledge  by  the  clearness  with  which  it  w^ould
mark  the  course  of  evolution,  and  might  not  be  incom-
patible with  human  life.  But  it  is  easy  of  course  to  imagine
varieties  in  fundamental  properties  of  substances  not  indi-
cated by  external  appearance,  which  though  following
strictly  from  natural  antecedents,  and  not  in  any  way
miraculous,  would  yet  be  incompatible  with  such  a  degree
of  knowledge  as  is  necessary  to  maintain  human  life  on  the
surface  of  the  globe.  No  analysis  of  water  would  help  us,
however  true  under  the  conditions  under  which  it  was  made,
if  something  which  we  could  not  distinguish  from  water
except  by  renewed  chemical  analysis  were  liable  to  arise

*  i.  e.  wonld  be  destroyed  for  concrete  and  real  theory,  but  not  for  abstract
and  formal  theory.


174


Scientific  Induction.


[Book  II.


out  of  water  by  a  concealed  process  of  causation,  and  were
endowed  with  the  properties  of  sulphuric  acid.  No  formal
principle  will  meet  this  conceivable  difficulty.  Many  dis-
tinctions all-important  for  human  life  are  only  learnt  by
degrees  or  are  only  drawn  with  imperfect  success — e.g.
between  pure  water  or  milk  and  the  same  liquids  when
contaminated  with  sewage-poison.  We  can  only  say  that
if  we  are  to  live  on  the  surface  of  the  globe  the  results  of
scientific  induction  must  not  only  have  formal  or  hypo-
thetical truth,  but  must  also  have  that  degree  and  proportion
of  categorical  application  which  is  necessary  to  enable  us
to  adapt  ourselves  to  the  environment.  This  degree  of
categorical  application,  of  which  mere  determination,  except
in  the  case  of  an  extended  system  of  reality  like  the  Hel-
lenic race,  or  Europe,  or  the  British  Constitution,  or  the
Solar  System,  can  tell  us  nothing  whatever,  measures  the
work  of  recognition  or  of  generalisation  which  is  over  and
above  the  work  of  generalisation  by  mere  determination.
When  I  say  'Water  is  composed  of  Oxygen  and  Hydrogen,'
I  must  mean  by  water,  not  necessarily  all,  but  some  large
proportion  of  what  I  commonly  take  to  be  water.  If  not,
my  judgment,  however  true  in  the  abstract,  fails  to  grasp
reality  in  the  concrete.

The  ideal  of  knowledge,  no  doubt,  is  not  in  this  analo-
gical generalisation,  but  in  the  second  and  larger  kind  of
generalisation  by  mere  determination,  viz.  in  the  progressive
reduction  of  reality  to  a  single  system  or  to  comprehensive
single  systems.  It  must  be  remembered,  too,  that  the  syn-
thetic nature  of  every  universal  or  identity  is  double-edged.
If  all  sets  of  conditions  have  to  be  recognised  and  inter-
preted as  universals,  all  sets  of  conditions  should  be  fixed
and  determined  in  the  inductive  analysis  as  universals — i.  e.
with  the  full  prevision  that  differences,  variations,  extreme
cases,  will  arise  within  them.  Nevertheless,  it  seldom  hap-
pens even  in  geometry  that  a  principle  when  first  established
is  established  in  its  full  content  and  application.  Inductive
analysis  can  never  make  full  provision  for  the  application


Chap,  v.]  Induction  and  Chame.  175

to  fresh  cases  of  a  principle  which  it  discovers,  except  in  as
far  as  it  discloses  the  nature  of  a  comprehensive  individual
system  of  Reality  within  which  other  individuals  fall.

4.  Our  results  as  regards  Induction  are  then  as  follows.  General
i.  Our  view  of  Induction  as  an  inverse  process  differs  essen-  ][^^g°[on
tially  from  that  of  Jevons  by  its  dependence  on  material  and  Difference
positive  connections,  which  are  only  defined  by  negation.  In-  fr°™
verse  procedure  by  hypothesis  is  for  him  essentially  a  matter
of  probability,  and  depends  on  the  exclusion  of  alternative
hypothesis  simply  qua  alternatives,  i.  e.  ultimately  on  the
statement  of  chances^  or  the  number  of  cases  out  of  all  con-
ceivable cases  which  are  in  favour  of  the  result  in  question
upon  the  hypothesis  proposed.  This  view  essentially  depends  n
upon  the  false  conception  of  generalisation  which  has  been
frequently  alluded  to,  and  according  to  which  the  ideal  of  In-
duction is  perfect  Induction,  i.  e.  the  summation  of  an  infinite
series.  As  we  have  seen  ^,  the  statement  of  chances  admits
of  valuable  and  extended  application  where  we  are  dealing
with  classes  of  unknown  conditions,  i.  e.  conditions  known
to  us  simply  as  furnishing  such  and  such  numbers  of  '  equal
alternatives ; '  and  in  astronomical  and  other  exact  science
it  is  justified  by  the  splendid  success  of  its  results.  I  will
venture  however  to  point  out,  in  respect  of  one  example
adduced  by  Jevons,  that  other  considerations  seem  to  have
contributed  to  the  inference  beyond  those  which  fairly  arise
out  of  the  statement  of  chances.  Kirchoff's  proof  of  the
presence  of  iron  in  the  sun  ^  depends  upon  the  exclusion  of
the  alternative  that  the  60  dark  lines  of  the  solar  spectrum
coincide  by  chance  with  the  60  bright  lines  of  the  incan-
descent vapour  of  iron.  The  probability  of  a  chance
coincidence  being  (from  the  distance  between  the  lines  on
the  spectrum)  about  \  for  each  line,  the  probability  in  favour
of  a  chance  coincidence  for  all  60  lines  is  about  (i)^?  i«e.
less  than  one  in  a  trillion. '  But  on  the  other  hypothesis/

^  Sigwart  seems  to  waver  between  this  view,  and  the  true  view  of  proof  by
content. Logik,  ii.  pp.  384-5.
'  p.  137,  supra.  '  Jevons,  Principles  of  Science,  p.  345.


176


Scientific  Induction.


[Book  II.


Ultimate
nature  of
Induction.


Jevons  continues,  '  that  iron  exists  in  the  Sun,  it  is  highly-
probable  that  such  coincidences  would  be  observed.'  Here
the  proof  seems  to  appeal  to  some  of  the  considerations
which  belong  to  the  positive  connection  between  given
content  and  hypothesis,  or  to  material  generalisation,  or  to
both.  Why  should  Hhe  other  hypothesis'  be  'that  iron
exists  in  the  Sun '?  The  answer  must  be,  I  should  suppose,
either  that  the  60  bright  lines  have  a  connection  with  the
nature  of  iron,  as  a  characteristic  or  exclusive  differentia,
which  would  dispense  with  the  proof  by  calculation — or
that  though  there  is  no  exclusive  connection  between  the
nature  of  iron  and  the  production  of  60  bright  lines,  yet  in
fact  no  known  substance  but  iron  produces  such  lines,  and
it  is  very  improbable  on  general  grounds  that  a  substance
unknown  to  us  but  sharing  this  property  with  iron  is  present
in  the  Sun^  The  former  of  these  considerations  would
belong  to  the  nature  of  true  Inductive  determination,  the
latter  group  to  the  postulates  of  material  generalisation.
The  real  function  of  number  and  ratio  in  Induction  has  been
sufficiently  illustrated  above.

ii.  After  the  discussion  on  p.  118  above  of  the  connection
between  Induction  and  other  inference,  I  need  only  sum  up
the  view  which  I  have  taken  in  a  very  few  words.  Induction
is  not  a  species  of  inference,  as  calculation,  geometrical
reasoning,  analogy  and  subsumption,  are  species  of  inference.
It  has  not,  that  is  to  say,  for  its  differentia  any  peculiar
nature  in  the  universal  which  carries  the  conclusion.  It  is
consequently,  like  Comparison  or  Recognition,  like  Observa-
tion or  Experiment,  a  transient  and  external  characteristic
of  inference.  An  Inductive  proof,  when  completed,  may  be
a  geometrical  construction  or  an  arithmetical  calculation,  an
articulate  subsumption  or  a  morphological  analogy. Its

^  The  fraction  (^)^  represents,  I  suppose,  the  chance  of  60  coincident  cases
all  produced  by  independent  causes;  but  ought  we  not  also  to  consider  the
probability  not  merely  of  one  unknown  cause  producing  all  the  cases,  and
that  cause  being  iron,  but  that  of  all  the  possible  alternatives  in  which  2,  3
and  so  on  up  to  58  inclusive,  of  the  coincident  cases,  are  produced  by  a  single
tinknown  cause,  and  the  remainder  in  each  alternative  by  accident  ?


Chap,  v.] Wkat  do  conseqttences  provef  177

Inductive  character  belongs  exclusively  to  the  process  of
discovery,  and  depends  on  the  relation  between  the  elements
of  the  content  and  the  qualification  of  reality  from  which
the  process  of  cognition  starts.  Inferential  connection  is
one,  and  is  necessary  and  invariable ;  but  the  points  at
which  a  single  and  coherent  system  may  be  in  contact  with
the  real  world  as  known  to  an  individual  cognitive  subject
are  infinitely  various.  From  these  points,  whatever  they
may  be,  the  cognitive  subject  has  to  build  up  the  single  and
coherent  system,  which  he  then  refers  to  reality.  When
these  points  are  isolated  perceptions,  occurrences  or  qualities,
then  the  task  of  building  up  the  system  which  they  neces-  1
sitate  is  called  Induction.

Inductive  proof  rests,  like  all  Inference,  on  systematic  and  >/
necessary  connection  of  content.  How  many  observations,
what  experiments,  how  many  and  how  favourable  conjunc-
tions of  phenomena,  may  be  needed  to  disclose  the  connection
to  us,  is,  as  Aristotle  implied  in  the  Posterior  Analytics^,
theoretically  indifferent.  The  obser\-ations  do  not  give  us
the  connection,  but  we  judge  the  connection  on  the  basis  of
the  system  demanded  by  the  observations,  and  this  sys-
tematic or  reasoned  judgment  is  the  essence  of  the  proof.

Is  a  principle  then  proved  by  the  number  and  variety  of
its  verified  consequences  ?  It  gains  nothing  from  any  repeti-
tion of  identical  consequences  once  established  to  be  fact ;
but  variety  of  consequences  may  be  said  to  prove  it  by  dis-
playing its  nature  as  actual  and  modelling  it  into  concrete
identity  with  themselves.  I  incline  to  think  that  the  truth
upon  this  point  is  best  stated  through  the  paradox  pro-
posed above  ^.  Every  fact,  every  sense-perception,  every
datum  of  testimony,  absolutely  and  irrevocably  proves
something  and  necessitates  the  assumption  of  some  agent  or
principle.  Repetition  of  the  same  datum,  qua  the  same
(i.  e.  assuming  that  it  was  completely  and  correctly  observed

*  Anal.  post.  p.  90,  a.  24;  cp.  p.  87,  b.  39;  and  see  the  author's  Knowlec'ge
and  Reality,  p.  285.
»  p.  166.

VOL.  II.  N


1 78  Scientific  Induction  by  A  nalysis. [book  ii.

at  first,  which  is  never  true),  can  add  nothing  to  what  it
proves.  But  every  further  datum  which  can  be  connected
with  the  first  goes  to  develop  the  content  of  that  agent  or
principle  which  both  the  data  prove.  If  therefore  we  speak
of  the  mere  proof  that  something  or  other  beyond  the  datum
must  be  assumed,  one  datum  is  as  good  as  a  host  to  prove
this,  and  the  proof  of  it  is  absolute  at  first ;  and  to  allege
variety  and  range  of  data  as  contributory  to  this  proof  is  to
fall  once  more  into  the  fallacy  of  generalisation  from  num-
ber of  instances.  What  is  proved  once  does  not  need  to  be
proved  again.  Every  datum  proves  irrefragably  the  reality
of  the  system  to  which  it  belongs,  whatever  that  may  be.

But  this  representation  of  the  matter,  though  it  leads  up  to
the  truth,  is  in  itself  a  paradox  without  real  import.  A
proof  which  proves  the  reality  merely  of  something  or
other  is  a  proof  of  nothing  at  all.  But  if  we  speak  of  the
proof  of  a  determinate  agent  or  principle  or  real  system,
then  both  range  and  variety  of  data  are  essential  to  the
proof,  and  the  proof  of  the  whole  is  not  absolute  at  once,
and  therefore  the  proof  of  any  part,  as  a  part  in  that  whole,
is  not  absolute  at  once.  For  the  proof  depends  upon  the
intelligibility  with  which  the  hypothesis — to  use  the  terms
explained  above — is  adjusted  to  or  included  in  the  postu-
late ;  that  is  to  say,  with  which  the  alleged  real  system  is
identified  with  the  real  something  demanded  by  all  the  data
taken  together.  And  from  the  nature  of  knowledge  as  a
system  the  necessity  of  this  synthetic  connection  can  only
be  evident  in  an  extended  range  of  applications  ;  and  hence
it  is — not  from  number  of  consequences,  but  from  the  varied
determinations  which  are  indispensable  to  define  any
universal  in  its  inter-connected  differences,  that  range  and
variety  of  data  are  contributory  to  the  proof  of  a  hypo-
thesis ^ Thus  we  may  say,  if  we  like,  that  variety  and

^  I  am  omitting,  to  avoid  confusion,  the  consideration  of  repeated  observation
as  eliminating  accidental  errors,  which  depends  on  the  principle  of  chances
illustrated  above.  Accidental  errors  are  errors  arising  from  a  variety  of  un-
known causes.  Repeated  observation  distinguishes  series  such  as  are  likely  to
be  due  to  a  single  cause,  from  series  likely  to  be  due  to  unknown  causes.


Chap,  v.]  What  constitutes  Induction.  179

range  of  data  contribute  nothing  to  the  proof  of  a  hypo-
thesis, but  only  aid  in  its  definition.  But  we  must  then
bear  in  mind  that  the  proof  to  which  range  does  not  con-
tribute, and  which  each  isolated  datum  effects  absolutely
and  ultimately,  is  a  proof  of  something  in  general,  but  of
nothing  in  particular.

Induction,  then,  is  the  reference  to  reality  of  a  system  on
the  ground  of  particular  differences  within  it  by  which
reality  is  taken  as  qualified  ;  and  may  involve,  in  the  con-
stitution of  the  system  for  knowledge  and  in  its  identifica-
tion with  those  differences,  any  process  known  to  Logic.
It  is  essentially  an  advance  from  the  Individual  or  concrete
Generic  judgment  to  the  pure  hypothetical,  or  to  its  higher
form,  the  Disjunctive  judgment.  When  we  are  able  to
start  from  a  reality  qualified  to  us  by  pure  hypothetical  or
by  disjunctive  judgments,  then  we  can  go  at  once  from  the
differences  as  in  the  universal  to  the  relations  of  other
differences,  and  we  can  refer  these  differences  to  reality  on
the  basis  of  the  universal  itself  which  is  accepted  as  real.
We  do  not  in  this  case  employ  species  of  inference  unknown
to  Induction  ;  but  the  process  in  which  we  employ  them
has  not  the  peculiar  relation  to  given  Reality,  e.  g.  the
gradual  emergence  of  negative  determination,  which  con-
stitutes Induction.


N  1


CHAPTER  VI.

Concrete  Systematic  Inference.

A  PURE  hypothetical  judgment,  the  outcome  of  scientific
Induction  or  the  embodiment  of  abstract  relations  in  com-
bination, expresses  a  synthetic  connection  based  upon  an
underlying  real  system.  Analogical  inference,  from  which
scientific  Induction  was  a  divergence,  depended  rather  upon
an  estimate^  usually  inadequate,  of  such  real  systems  in
their  concrete  import.  Now  if,  as  a  result  of  a  highly
exhaustive  Scientific  Induction  taken  together  with  an
Analogical  reasoning,  we  are  able  to  recombine  the  abstract
relations  which  the  former  has  disclosed  one  by  one,  into  a
single  totality  which  has  an  obvious  significance,  then  this
totality  or  system  is  the  real  determinate  ground  of  each
separate  relational  judgment  that  enters  into  our  conception
of  it,  and  belongs,  at  the  same  time,  to  the  concrete  or
categorical  type  of  knowledge.  For  the  ground  which
warrants  a  hypothetical  judgment  is  in  the  last  resort
always  a  real  system,  and  moreover  the  content  of  every
judgment  is  understood^  to  have  such  Reality  as  it  is
capable  of.
Philoso-  I.  Therefore,  in  dealing  with totalities  which  are  thus

sumption. "  thoroughly  concrete  and  thoroughly  rational,  we  are  able  to
r advance  from  the  figure  of  analogy  '  A  and  C  are  B,  there-
'? fore  A  is  probably  C,'  to  the  first  figure  of  the  Aristotelian
syllogism,  '  A  is  B,  B  is  C,  therefore  A  is  C

In  spite  of  all  that  has  been  written  about  and  against
the  syllogism,  I  can  find  no  more  simple  and  natural  ex-
pression than  this  for  the  reasoned  judgment  which  embodies,

^  See  Bk.  I.  chap,  ii,  on  Categorical  and  Hypothetical  Judgment.


I


An  individual  System.  i8i

a  real  necessity.  Thus  applied,  the  syllogism  is  subsump-  ^
tive  in  so  far  as  it  appeals  to  unity  of  relations  within  a
concrete  subject,  but  has  abandoned  the  differentia  of
subsumption  proper,  in  so  far  as  the  definite  form  taken  by
the  result  of  the  appeal  depends  on  intelligible  coherence
and  not  on  mysterious  conjunction.  It  is  essential  to  such  V
arguments  that  the  teleological  or  quasi-teleological  unity
of  the  subject,  which  in  analogy  was  conjectural  and
obscure,  should  be  absolute  and  explicit.  It  is  only  this
absoluteness  that  can  warrant  the  position  of  the  middle
term  as  subject  in  one  premise,  i.  e.  as  a  qualification  which
prescribes  the  precise  content  afl^rmed  of  it  in  the  predi-
cation. It  is  only  this  explicitness  that  can  justify  by  a
specific  ^  necessity  the  determinate  relations  which  the
unity  of  the  subject  imposes  on  the  two  extremes.  The  J
conditions  thus  demanded  can  only  be  fulfilled  in  subjects
the  nature  of  which  is  known  as  a  definitely  organised
system.  We  saw  indeed,  in  the  earlier  discussions  of  Book
I-,  that  such  a  system  cannot  avoid  presenting  quantitative
relations  between  its  parts,  in  as  far  as  its  pervading  unity
contains  within  itself  differences  of  a  common  quality.  But
in  a  true  concrete  individuality  such  quantitative  relations
are  secondary,  resulting  from  the  nature  of  the  system  but
not  exhausting  it,  and  therefore  the  system,  although
definitely  intelligible,  cannot  be  '  constructed '  by  geome-
trical or  numerical  combination.  Such  combinations  may
however  enter  into  it  in  various  degrees.  Judgments  which
deal  with  these  concrete  individualities  are  at  once  individual
and  universal,  and  have  been  analysed  in  Book  I  as  a  com-
bination of  these  characters  ^.

Fluid  though  the  distinctions  between  types  of  inference
necessarily  are,  it  will  be  convenient  to  distinguish  the  im-
portant class  of  inferences  now  before  us  by  an  unmistake-

'  See  Bk.  II.  chap,  i,  on  specific  necessity  of  Judgments.
^  See  Bk.  I.  chap.  iii.

'  See  on  the  Corporate  Judgment  and  the  Indi\4dual  Generic  Judgment,
above,  Bk.  I.  chap.  v.


1 82  Concrete  Systematic  hiference. [bookii.

able  differentia,  at  the  risk  of  unduly  limiting  their
province.  This  differentia  is  the  ascription  of  real  teleology
to  the  content  analysed.  And  by  real  teleology  I  mean
the  embodiment  or  operation  of  a  conscious  purpose  enter-
tained by  a  human  intelligence.  All  other  teleological  in-
ferences, such  as  those  depending  upon  the  de  facto
teleology  (quasi-teleology)  of  the  organic  world  are  most
conveniently  relegated  to  the  category  of  analogy.

The  lowest  case  of  real  teleology  is  closely  akin  to  that
which  was  the  highest  case  of  analogy.  A  tool,  instrument,
or  machine,  of  which  we  know  the  use  intended  by  the
maker,  furnishes  this  lowest  case  of  real  teleology,  while
any  object  of  the  same  class  the  use  of  which  we  could  only
conjecture,  furnished  the  highest  case  of  quasi-teleology  or
analogy.  It  was  in  part  from  the  example  of  an  instrument
contrived  by  human  intelligence  that  Plato  introduced  the
conception  of  function  or  final  cause  into  philosophy  ^ ;  and
the  ultimate  meaning  of  '  organism'  is  a  system  of  tools  or
instruments.  The  term  '  mechanical '  in  its  modern  philoso-
phical acceptation  abstracts  from  one-half  of  the  import  of
'  machine ' ;  for  though  we  are  accustomed  to  think  of
mechanical  determination  as  a  resultant  of  any  de  facto
combination  of  forces,  yet  we  are  not  accustomed  to  think
of  a  machine  except  as  a  combination  of  forces  for  a  pur-
pose consciously  entertained.

At  first  sight,  then,  we  have  in  the  tool,  instrument  or
machine  with  known  purpose,  an  adequate  example  of  the
type  of  knowledge  before  us.  'A  screw  that  is  meant  to  turn
one  way  only  must  have  its  head  cut  so  as  to  give  the  screw-
driver no  purchase  when  turning  the  other  way;  a  coffin-
screw  is  a  screw  meant  to  turn  one  way  only ;  therefore  a
coffin-screw  is  one  which  has  its  head  cut,'  &c.,  &c. Or

^  Republic,  end  of  Bk.  I :  Spcnavqi  t^  eiri  tovto  ipyaoOivri.  The  examples
alleged  by  Plato  in  this  important  passage  are  of  very  different  values,  and  are
well  worth  careful  attention.  The  well-known  description  of  the  function  of  a
thing  &%  h  av  fi  fi6va)  eKfivai  iroi^  tis  ^  dpiara  leans  to  de  facto  teleology,  and
would  not  of  course  protect  an  object  from  a  function  alien  to  its  nature  but
relative  to  human  purpose. Such  a  function  could  justify  no  analogy.


Chap.  VI.] Purpose  in  Mechanical  Form.  183

again :  'A  locomotive  engine  meant  to  drag  a  weight  <z  at  a
velocity  b  must  have  boiler-space  x  and  cylinder-stroke
between  the  limits  z  and  Zy\  a  locomotive  which  is  to
work  in  the  Newcastle  coal  traffic  must  drag  a  weight  a,
&c.,  &c.;  therefore  a  locomotive  which  is  to  work  this  traffic
must  be  constructed  as  above  determined,'

It  will  strike  the  reader  however  on  looking  at  such
examples  as  these  that  the  premises  are  very  closely  allied  to
hypothetical  judgments,  and  are  much  more  'constructive'
than  '  subsumptive.'  It  is  true  that  in  the  analysis  of  a
machine  the  inference  does  rest  on  the  system  of  the
mechanical  combination,  and  that  this  system  with  all  the
details  dependent  on  it  can,  in  a  machine  that  ivorks  zvell,
be  deduced  from  the  intellectual  purpose  which  the  con-
structor proposed  to  himself  to  realise  in  that  mechanical
combination.  So  far,  as  reading  the  significance  of  the
parts  in  the  coherent  whole  without  which  they  would  lose
it,  the  inference  is  subsumptive.  On  the  other  hand,  all
tools  or  machines  are  liable  to  initial  or  acquired  mal-
adaptation.  Their  de  facto  function  or  actual  result  may
diverge  from  their  intended  function.  And  when  this  comes
to  pass,  their  existence  as  mechanical  combinations  is  not
thereby  terminated.  A  clock  that  has  a  hopelessly  vari-
able rate  may  not,  philosophically  speaking,  be  rightly
called  a  clock  (being  absolutely  useless  to  indicate  time),
but  it  remains  a  real  mechanical  combination  in  which  co-
operating parts  produce  a  necessary  result.  In  other  words,
though  a  machine  embodies  a  purpose,  yet  it  only  embodies
it  in  a  mechanical  form,  dependent,  that  is,  on  the  right
adjustment  of  a  mechanical  combination,  and  therefore  on
the  continuance  of  that  right  adjustment  Therefore  in
every  such  inference  there  might  be  substituted  for  the
statement  of  purpose  a  statement  of  the  mechanical  system
in  which  the  purpose  is  supposed  to  be  realised  ;  and  as  the
purpose  is  only  present  in  the  actual  system  of  adjustment,
and  not  as  an  intellectual  idea,  such  an  analysis  would  be
in  one  sense  adequate  to  the  nature  of  the  object  analysed.


y


184  Concrete  Systematic  Inference. [book  11.

Such  inference  might  fairly  be  treated  as  employing  merely
hypothetical  judgment  and  constructive  combination,  taking
no  account  of  any  significant  unity  in  the  content  of  infer-
ence, or  of  any  special  relation  between  it  and  the  real
world.  The  system  would,  by  such  a  transformation,  have
forfeited  its  individuality  and  have  become  a  mere  necessary
sequence  of  relations  upon  relations  in  the  abstract  world
of  force  and  mass,  instead  of  an  actual  whole  in  the  unique
structure  which  we  call  reality.  It  must  be  noted  however
that  the  limitation  or  abstraction  which  is  needed  to  make
such  an  account  intelligible,  has  by  the  change  supposed
become  merely  arbitrary.  Qtia  mechanical  result,  every
cinder  that  dropped  from  the  fire-box  and  every  cloud  of
vapour  blown  from  the  funnel  would  have  as  good  a  right
to  be  described  and  deduced  from  the  mechanical  combina-
tion which  makes  up  the  locomotive,  as  would  the  capacity
of  the  engine  in  the  way  of  traction.

'  But  the  purpose  may  be  hypothetically  inserted  into
the  inference,  as  indeed  was  done  above.'  We  may  state
a  purpose  or  any  other  content  hypothetically,  if  we  indicate
that  by  intentional  abstraction  we  are  doing  so.  I  only  say
that,  apart  from  any  mark  of  forcible  abstraction  from  reality,
a  judgment  or  inference  that  deals  with  a  system  having
unity  in  a  purpose  presupposes  the  reality  of  that  system
because  its  content  is  adequate  to  reality,  while  a  judgment
which  merely  draws  the  necessary  consequences  of  a  deter-
minate combination  of  forces,  without  reference  to  any  pur-
pose to  which  that  combination  is  directed,  is  essentially
hypothetical,  for  the  particular  combination  has  no  pre-
eminent individuality  or  raison  d'etre ;  and  essentially  im-
perfect, because  in  the  absence  of  a  raison  d'etre  there  is
nothing  to  guide  the  selection  of  aspects  or  of  consequences.
In  this  sense  the  hypothetical,  the  arbitrary,  and  the  merely
mechanical  coincide.

In  the  distinction  between  a  machine  which  serves  a
purpose,  and  a  machine  which  does  not,  we  have  in  a  nut-
shell the  question  of  categories.  Both  are  actual  mechanical


Chap.  VI.]  Tekological  Contents.  185

combinations  producing  results,  and  neither  has  in  it  one
whit  more  life  or  intellect  than  the  other.  But  it  is  per-
fectly clear  that  our  understanding  of  the  useful  one  is
incomplete  if  by  preserving  our  ignorance  of  its  purpose  we
remain  on  the  same  level  of  apprehension  with  reference  to
it  which  is  the  highest  we  can  possibly  attain  with  reference
to  the  other.  And  it  is  absurd  to  say  that  the  category  so
implied  is  an  accidental  aspect  and  does  not  represent  a
fact.  It  is  true  however  that  this  category  of  purpose  does
not  exist  within  a  mechanical  system  in  its  proper  or
intellectual  form,  and  that  therefore  the  system  can  be
regarded  by  a  natural  abstraction  as  on  a  level  with  a
purposeless  combination,  and  may  by  internal  or  external
changes  at  any  moment  become  such.  This  hypothetical
aspect  of  a  combination  of  forces,  in  virtue  of  which  it
produces  its  resultant  according  to  fixed  necessities  and  in
complete  indifference  to  any  purpose,  is  the  purely  'mechan-
ical '  relation  of  a  machine,  and  if  exclusively  pressed  home
destroys  as  we  saw  all  possibility  of  regarding  it  as  an
individual  thing  having  its  unity  in  a  function.

Beginning  \\Tlth  the  mechanical  contrivances  of  which  we
have  been  speaking,  there  extend  upwards  in  a  series  which
forms  the  content  of  philosophy  the  phases  and  embodi-
ments of  man's  intelligence  and  conscious  will.  All  of
these,  the  individual  will  with  its  complement  in  the  moral
order  of  society,  the  product  of  fine  art,  and  the  religious  or
philosophical  system,  are  totalities  which  combine  an  ex-
jplicit  intellectual  unity  with  determinate  interdependence
of  parts.  The  statement  of  the  general  character  of  these
embodiments  of  mind  may  serve  as  an  example  of  the
argument  we  are  considering.  'The  mind  is  a  unity  of
reciprocally  determinate  but  not  reciprocally  exclusive
parts.  A  feeling  is  an  element  in  the  mind  ;  therefore
a  feeling  enters  into  a  unity  of  reciprocally  determinate
but  not  reciprocally  exclusive  parts.'  Or  again :  '  The
British  Constitution  is  in  its  main  features  determined  by
the  thoroughgoing  application  of  ordinary  law ;  the  posi-


1 86


Concrete  Systematic  Inference. [bookii.


Logical
Content

Real

System.


tion  of  the  prime  minister  is  a  function  of  the  British
Constitution  ;  therefore  the  position  of  the  prime  minister
is  in  its  main  features  determined  by  the  thoroughgoing  ap-
plication of  the  ordinary  law.'  Or,  finally :  '  The  general  will
is  expressed  in  the  moral  order  of  society ;  the  individual
will  finds  its  freedom  in  the  general  will ;  therefore  the  indi-
vidual will  finds  its  freedom  in  the  moral  order  of  society.'
When  we  consider  the  logical  nature  of  such  arguments
as  these,  we  notice  two  obvious  characteristics  of  the  con-
tent, and  one,  resulting  from  them,  of  the  form.

i.  In  respect  of  their  logical  content  they  are  at  once
categorical  and  hypothetical.  a.  The  systems  which
form  the  content  of  such  reasoned  judgments  as  these
are  naturally  taken  as  real  systems  in  virtue  of  their
individuality.  It  is  of  course  not  impossible  to  construct
a  political  or  religious  system  on  paper  the  consequences
of  which  are  laid  down  in  hypothetical  judgments  and
inferences  from  them,  which  in  form  might  be  identical
with  such  judgments  as  are  here  employed.  The  content
of  such  judgments  has  an  indeterminate  place  in  reality
so  far  as  it  has  a  meaning  or  objective  reference,  and
depends  on  determinate  reality  so  far  as  it  proceeds  to
affirm  actual  consequences.  But  the  content  of  a  judgment
which  deals  with  an  individual  system  is  taken  as  real  in
our  world  unless  the  contrary  is  indicated ;  and  even  in
hypothetical  judgments  that  depend  on  the  nature  of  the
human  mind,  the  real  ground  which  would  have  to  be  made
explicit  in  order  ultimately  to  justify  the  consequences
drawn  is  the  intelligible  and  concrete  system  of  that  mind
itself.  Primd  facie.,  therefore,  we  are  dealing  in  these
arguments  with  categorical  judgments  about  reality,  which
explicitly  postulate  the  real  grounds  that  in  the  hypothetical
judgment  were  latent.
Apodeictic  ^.  The  nexus  of  the  inferences  in  question  is  not,  as  in
Sequence,  ^j^^logical  Reasoning  and  in  Enumerative  Induction,  devoid
of  strict  apodeictic  sequence.  The  systems  of  which  we  have
been speaking,  although they need not be capable of


Chap. VI.]  A  Real  Necessity.  187

mechanical,  numerical  or  geometrical  construction, — which
however,  as  in  the  case  of  a  machine,  may  play  their  part
in  the  analysis  of  the  concrete  whole, — are  nevertheless
invested  with  hypothetical  or  apodeictic  necessity  in  two
forms  ;  in  the  relation  of  their  parts  one  to  another  within
the  systems  themselves  as  wholes,  and  in  their  own  ultimate
relation  as  parts  to  the  unique  system  of  reality  as  a  whole.

Of  these  the  former  is  for  our  logical  purpose  the  more
important.  Within  such  a  whole  as  the  moral  order  of
civilised  society,  regarded  as  the  expression  of  the  general
will,  it  is  obvious  that  there  are  parts  united  by  necessary-
relations  dependent  on  the  nature  of  that  whole  and  capable
of  being  expressed  in  hypothetical  judgments  if  we  abstract
from  the  explicit  assumption  of  the  whole  itself.  We  may
say,  for  example, '  If  a  right,  then  a  duty.'  The  justification
of  this  statement  would  be  given  by  the  affirmation,  as  a
real  ground,  of  the  moral  purpose  involved  in  the  moral
order,  which  purpose  exhibits  itself  as  right  or  duty  accord-
ing to  the  attitude  which  the  individual  will  may  assume
towards  it.  Such  an  inference  as  this  does  not  cease  to  be
necessary  when  its  ground,  in  this  case  the  moral  purpose
and  moral  order,  is  affirmed  to  be  real.  .  The  basis  of  the
synthetic  transition  is  here  as  everywhere  the  nature  of  an
identity  or  universal,  and  that  the  universal  is  affirmed  to
be  fact  makes  no  difference  to  its  apodeictic  force.  What  in
particular  that  apodeictic  force  may  be,  how  it  should  come
to  pass  that  one  thing  can  necessitate  another,  depends,  as  I
have  said  before,  on  the  ultimate  fact  of  the  nature  of  know-
ledge. What  we  have  more  particularly  to  observe  at  this
point  is  the  coarseness  of  the  illusion  that  systematic
necessity  can  only  exist  in  spatial  and  numerical  percep-
tion. Given  the  relation  of  man's  intelligent  will  to  an
actual  moral  order,  the  relation  of  right  and  duty  is  as  plain
a  consequence  as,  given  the  nature  of  space,  the  equality  of
vertical  angles.  And  apart  from  a  given  reality,  there  is  in
either  case  nothing,  from  which  nothing  can  follow.

Hence  we  arrive  at  the  second  aspect  in  which  individual


Concrete  Systematic  Inference. [Bookii.


Logical
Form.

Syllogism
in  fig.  I.


systems,  though  real,  are  nevertheless  hypothetical.  They
are  each  and  all  of  them,  for  us,  hypothetical  upon  \}i\Q.whole
given  reality  within  which  they  exist.  When  we  speak  of  a
thing  as  real,  we  imply  that  it  is  complete  and  self-existent;
for  if  it  is  not,  its  reality  includes  a  condition  beyond  the
content  which  we  have  included  in  the  thing,  and  //  there-
fore, as  we  have  formulated  it,  not  including  the  conditions
essential  to  its  own  reality,  is  falsely  asserted  to  be  real.

Here  we  have  the  aspect  of  relativity  which  prevails
throughout  our  knowledge,  which  is  increasingly  overcome
by  the  work  of  intelligence  in  as  far  as  it  connects  the  actual
and  intellectual  world  into  an  organised  whole,  but  is  never
thoroughly  done  away.

ii.  As  regards  the  form  of  these  inferences,  it  follows  from
what  has  been  said  that  the  only  value  of  the  syllogistic
arrangement  is  to  exhibit  the  structure  of  the  reasoned  judg-
mentjwhich  itself  contains  or  displays  the  articulated  universal.
No  question  arises  as  to  which  premise  we  know  first,  and
so  which  supports  the  other.  The  prior  or  previous  phase
of  the  inference  is  not  the  proof  of  detached  premises,  but
the  entire  thought  in  a  less  precisely  articulated  form.  If
we  are  urged  to  say  whether  we  know  the  major,  the  minor
or  the  conclusion  first,  the  only  true  answer  is  that,  in  their
full  import,  we  know  them  all  simultaneously.  As  detached
fragments  of  experience  we  may  know  any  one  of  them  first.
And  as  each  element  of  the  universal  when  rightly  under-
stood involves  the  others  in  their  full  determinateness,  there
can  be  no  real  difference  in  kind  of  import  between  major
and  minor  premises,  and  no  reason  for  preferring  one  order
of  the  terms  to  another.  The  order  will  in  fact  be  subjec-
tive, depending  upon  the  qualification  of  reality  which  we
take  as  starting-point,  whether  in  time — if  our  inference  has
the  accidental  aspect  of  a  progress  in  time — or  because  of
its  individual  nature.  The  real  purpose  is  the  dominant
essence  of  the  universal,  but  the  real  purpose  may  be  taken
as  conveyed  by  the  general  idea  of  the  system  in  question
as  a  whole,  represented  by  its  name^  or  as  involved  in  the


Chap.  VI.]  No  Negative  Inference.  189

analytic  scheme  of  its  parts,  or  as  concentrated  into  some
special  application  by  which  some  one  part  does  the  work
of  the  whole.  And  thus  any  one  of  these  elements  of  the
universal  may  stand  as  the  middle  term  in  reasoning,  i.e.  as
the  ground  or  universal  par  excellence.  Hence  there  is  no
use  in  considering  the  syllogistic  rules  at  the  point  we  have
now  reached.  They  belong  to  collective  and  in  some  degree
to  analogical  argument ;  but  the  postulate  on  which  they
rest,  of  the  absence  of  reciprocal  determination  between  the
elements  of  inference,  does  not  hold  good  of  a  coherent
system  when  thoroughly  known.  We  have  thus  arrived  at
a  goal  analogous  to  that  attained  by  the  theories  of  Quanti-
fication and  of  Equation  in  judgment,  at  a  perfect  reciprocal
identity  between  the  elements  of  the  reasoned  judgment,  so
that  any  one  of  the  terms  may  occupy  any  place  in  the  argu-
ment. But  we  have  attained  it,  as  we  hope,  without  sacri-
ficing difference  to  identity,  and  thereby  destroying  the
identity  itself.  The  equational  form,  though  it  symbolises'
correctly  certain  results  of  the  reasoned  judgment  (the  con-
junctions which  this  judgment  in  fact  involves),  yet  crushes
into  shapelessness  its  true  living  texture,  and,  as  a  simple
sign  of  the  deformation,  forbids  all  growth  and  reconstruc-
tion within  the  inference  itself,  which  reconstruction  never-
theless, as  we  have  seen  and  shall  further  see,  cannot  be
avoided.

As  a  particular  case  of  the  inapplicability  of  the  syllo-
gistic rules  to  the  inferences  now  before  us,  it  may  be  men-
tioned that  we  have  here  nothing  to  do  with  inference  from
negative  premises.  We  must  take  the  negative  form  to
have  done  its  work  and  obtained  positive  significance,  in  the
process  which  we  have  watched  of  constituting  such  a
system  as  that  which  we  are  now  considering.  We  are  now
considering  these  systems  as  real  grounds,  and  so  with  refer-
ence to  what  falls  within  them,  and  not  with  reference  to
what  falls  outside  them.  For  to  what  falls  outside  the
system  itself,  unless  with  reference  to  a  further  system  in-
cluding that '  outside,'  the  system  can  ex  hypothesi  only  be


190  Concrete  Systematic  Inference. [book  11.

related  in  the  way  of  bare  negation  that  has  no  import  and
is  no  judgment.  In  analysing  the  completion  of  a  type  of
knowledge  it  is  vain  to  raise  a  question  which  would  take
us  back  to  the  beginning  of  the  course  we  have  traversed.
But  as  a  determining  agency  within  a  real  system,  and  as
invested  by  that  function  with  positive  import,  negation  re-
appears in  disjunctive  reasoning.
Disjunc-  2.  The  nature  of  disjunction  and  its  imperfect  forms  have

Disjunctive  been  discussed  under  the  head  of  the  disjunctive  judgment,
Reasoning,  and it  only  remains here  to  recapitulate  the  inferential
nature  of  this  the  most  complete  and  explicit  form  of  the
universal.

Inference  under  a  disjunction  is  usually  represented
thus :  '  A  is  either  B  or  C,  A  is  not  B  ,-.  A  is  C  ; '  or,  '  A  is
B  .•.  A  is  not  C  Yet  such  an  inference  has  no  meaning
except  in  the  case  of  a  disjunction  of  ignorance  or  a  dis-
junction referred  to  a  point  of  time.  The  categorical  minor
premise  adds  nothing  whatever  in  the  way  of  content  to  the
disjunctive  major  premise.  It  only  has  meaning  as  resolving
a  doubt  or  as  affirming  one  member  of  an  alternative  to  be
true  in  a  given  point  of  time.  This  defect  could  not  be
removed  by  specifying  in  the  minor  the  ground  on  which
that  one  member  of  the  alternative  is  affirmed,  for  this
ground  cannot  really  fall  outside  the  content  of  the  dis-
junction and  its  specification  can  only  throw  a  doubt  on
the  categorical  nature  (in  the  narrower  sense)  of  the  minor
premise  itself  '  The  signal  is  either  danger  or  safety ;  it  is
red  and  so  danger  .-.  not  safety.'  Obviously  here,  if  we  can
conclude  from  'red '  to  '  danger'  in  the  minor  premise,  this
relation  must  fall  within  the  knowledge  which  constitutes
the  major ;  and  moreover,  by  introducing  a  specific  ground
of  assertion  it  exposes  the  minor  to  a  charge  of  being
hypothetical.

We  saw  in  treating  of  the  disjunctive  judgment  that  the
disjunction  of  ignorance  and  the  disjunction  referred  to
time  are  not  cases  fundamentally  distinct  from  the  true
disjunction  of  knowledge,  being  justified,  in  as  far  as  they


Chap.  VI.]  No  Disjunctive  Syllogism.  191

are  justified,  by  the  same  type  of  knowledge  which  forms
the  basis  and  content  of  disjunction  proper.  Only,  being
limited  by  an  accidental  condition  (the  speaker's  knowledge,
or  an  arbitrary  point  of  time),  they  lend  themselves  to  an
appearance  of  progressive  inference  through  supplemen-
tation by  a  perceptive  or  narrative  judgment,  which  applies
them  under  a  limiting  condition  without  expressing  that
condition.  In  the  true  disjunction,  which  expresses  the  V
organisation  of  a  system  as  such,  the  reference  to  an  arbi-
trary condition  falls  away,  and  although  the  judgment  is
capable  of  inferential  application  under  specified  conditions,
whether  of  time  or  of  other  kinds,  yet  this  application  is  not
essential  to  its  import,  and  is  not  demanded  by  its  form.

We  are  thus  driven  to  the  paradoxical  conclusion  that  the
essence  of  disjunctive  argument  is  included  within  the  dis-
junctive '  major  premise  ' ;  in  other  words,  that  this  judgment
is  in  fact  not  a  mere  premise  but  at  once  a  categorical  judg-
ment and  a  complete  systematic  inference,  in  which  the
content  of  a  real  system,  thoroughly  understood,  is  de-
veloped in  its  reciprocal  positive  and  negative  bearings.
The  universal,  or  pervading  identity,  is  developed  in  it  as
a  system  of  «'s  and  ^just  not  «'s^,'  such  that  in  virtue  of
every  '  not  a '  the  system  is  positively  determined  to  a
certain  definite  a,  and  in  virtue  of  every  a  the  system  is
negatively  determined  to  a  certain  definite  not-^  (which  is
d).  Our  ideal  of  inferential  knowledge  does  not  go  beyond
an  individual  system  of  this  kind,  of  which  every  part  is
mediated  in  its  turn  by  all  the  other  parts  and  assigned  by
them  its  appropriate  place  in  the  whole,  whose  pervading
nature  is  present  in  every  part  and  prescribes  the  arrange-
ment and  content  of  all.  Such  a  system  contains  its  own
applications,  for  the  material  conditions  under  which  it
develops  its  nature  are  given  within  it.  The  mere  realisation
of  one  alternative  member  as  fact  or  as  a  point  in  time,
e.g.  in  present  perception,  has  in  relation  to  such  disjunctive
knowledge  the  aspect  of  a  case  brought  under  it  by  an  un-

^  See  account  of  Scientific  Induction,  chap,  iv,  atove.


igi  Concrete  Systematic  Inference. [bookii.

known  condition,  and  so  implies  a  defect  in  the  disjunctive
knowledge  itself.  For  if  there  is  no  such  defect,  then  per-
ception or  testimony  can  add  nothing  to  the  necessary
reality  embodied  in  the  disjunction.  A  watch  is  either
going  or  not  going ;  and  I  do  not  need  observation  or  testi-
mony to  tell  me  that  at  any  time  when  the  mainspring  is
broken  it  is  not  going.  '  But  your  disjunctive  knowledge
will  not  tell  you  beforehand  or  apart  from  observation
whether  the  mainspring  is  broken.'  I  reply, '  Oh  yes  it  will,
up  to  the  limits  to  which  it  extends^  It  will  tell  me  the
signs  of  breaking,  the  risks  of  breaking,  the  limit  of
breaking-strain ;  and  therefore,  supposing  my  knowledge
of  the  world  were  disjunctively  complete,  it  would  tell  me
exactly  when  and  how  often  the  mainspring  has  been  or
will  be  broken.  That  it  does  not  practically  tell  me  this  is
not  owing  to  the  defectiveness  of  disjunctive  knowledge
but  to  my  not  possessing  it.  Therefore,  as  in  all  the  affairs
of  life,  I  have  to  supplement  scientific  knowledge  from
testimony  and  unorganised  observation,  i.  e.  observation  of
what  occurs  under  conditions  not  precisely  known.  But
this  observation,  qua  unorganised,  adds  nothing  to  know-
ledge, though  in  fact  every  content  that  is  distinctly
observed  has  necessarily  some  organisation,  and  leaves  the
disjunctive  judgment  a  little  richer  than  before.  But  as
mere  abstract  position  or  affirmation  of  a  case  fully
known  before,  it  adds  in  theory  no  element  whatever  to
our  disjunctive  knowledge  of  a  real  system.

Therefore  the  disjunctive  judgment  must  be  taken  to
correspond  not  to  the  major  premise  of  the  syllogism,  but
to  the  whole  syllogism.  The  syllogism  must  tell  us,  for
instance,  that  the  human  will,  being  an  activity  of  the
human  intelligence,  sets  its  purposes  before  it  in  the  form  of
definite  ideas.  The  disjunction  would  in  this  case  perhaps
tell  us  that  the  human  animal  asserts  himself  practically
either  through  the  intelligence  as  will  or  through  the  sen-
suous instincts  as  appetite ;  or  again,  that  he  asserts  him-
self through  the  intelligence  either  practically  as  will  or


I


Chap.  VI.] Conju7tction  and  Disjunction.  193

theoretically  as  knowledge.  Here  we  obviously  have  the
whole  content  of  the  syllogistic  '  reasoned  judgment '  but  in
a  more  elaborate  and  more  thoroughly  articulate  form.  It
is  clear  that  the  whole  conclusion,  in  so  far  as  it  is  a  con-
clusion that  grasps  scientific  truth  as  the  definition  of  a  real
system,  falls  within  this  disjunctive  judgment.  The  appli«
cation  of  it  in  a  special  historical  case  can  be  of  no  import-
ance, unless  the  new  example  suggests  new  matter  for  the
definition  of  the  term  involved  ;  in  which  case  the  content
of  the  example  must  be  taken  up  into  the  disjunctive
judgment,

I  need  hardly  remark  that  it  need  not  be  an  objection
against  a  disjunction  of  this  class  that  the  determinations  of
the  system  do  not  exclude  one  another  in  time.  The
essential  point  is  to  know  how  the  system  in  question,  e.  g.
the  mind,  is  organised  into  parts  which  as  such  exclude  one
another.  I  am  not  prepared  or  concerned  to  deny  that
will  and  appetite  may  coexist  in  a  mixed  state  of  mind,  or
even  that  appetite  may  be  included  in  will ;  but  in  as  far  as
the  mind  merely  has  appetite,  it  does  not  will,  and  in  as  far
as  the  mind  distinctly  wills,  it  has  not  mere  appetite.  The
disjunction  would  only  be  false  if  appetite  and  will  were
essentially  identical  parts  of  the  mental  system,  and  not,
so  far  as  the  mind  enters  wholly  into  either,  reciprocally
exclusive  ^.

'  Then  mere  differents  are  disjunctively  opposed  ? '  Yes,
if  the  conditions  are  precisely  assigned  under  which  the  real
subject  becomes  capable  of  the  one  and  incapable  of  the  other.
A  'conjunction'  or  conjunctive  judgment  about  a  single
subject  differs  from  a  disjunction  merely  by  the  non-assign-
ment of  the  precise  relations  under  which  the  various
determinations  attach.  Thus  it  is,  as  Plato  showed,  that
knowledge  can  solve  the  apparent  contradictions  of  the
perceptive  judgment. 'A  is  both  great  and  small.' Know-

*  Appetite,  when  it  enters  into  will,  must  surrender  its  character  as  mere
appetite,  not  merely  by  the  addition  of  something  else,  but  by  taking  on  a  new
character  in  itself.

VOL.  II.  O


194  Concrete  Systematic  Inference. [Bookii.

ledge  distinguishes  cases  and  explains,  'A  is  compared
either  with  x  and  then  is  great  or  with  y  and  then  is
smalP.'

The  inferential  principle  of  Disjunction  is  nothing  more
than  the  principle  of  all  inference  in  its  niost  explicit  form.
Every  matter  capable  of  being  known  consists  in  a  common
nature  including  within  it  and  constituted  by  parts  or
differences,  which  are  related  to  one  another  at  first  sight
negatively  qua  excluding  one  another,  but  further,  through
this  very  negation,  are  related  positively  because  by  their
negative  relation  they  positively  determine  one  another.
Every  such  matter  when  explicitly  stated  in  articulate
form,  is  known  as  a  disjunctive  judgment.  And  this  is  the
nature  of  the  ultimate  judgment  by  which  the  individual
consciousness  sustains  its  real  world.  The  simplest  cases
of  these  reasoned  judgments  are  to  be  found  in  the  spatial
perception,  in  which  the  determining  differences  take  the
shape  of  parts  external  to  each  other  and  so  negatively
related,  but  nevertheless  by  their  position  determining  one
another,  and  so  through  their  negative  relation  positively
related.  But  the  most  perfect  cases  are  those  intellectual
creations  that  are  the  objects  of  philosophical  science,  in
which  the  whole  system  not  merely  appears  by  its  common
nature  in  parts  which  remain  external  to  each  other,  but
tends  to  throw  itself  in  its  entirety  into  each  of  these
differences,  passing  by  an  organic  necessity  from  one  differ-
ence to  another.  Here,  in  short,  the  differences  are  not
merely  parts  which  remain  outside  one  another,  not  merely
phases  which  succeed  one  another,  but  moments  which
succeed  one  another  so  that  the  earlier  are  retained  in
the  later  through  a  progressive  development,  and  yet  the
distinctive  character  of  each  moment  is  not  weakened.
Such,  for  example,  is  the  relation  of  the  conceptions
which  by  their  development  constitute  the  history  of
philosophy.

It  is  usual  to  treat  of  classification  as  one  special  form,

*  See  Plato,  Republic,  p.  524.


Chap.  \n.]  Will  and  Purpose.  195

among  others,  of  logical  thought.  I  am  unable  to  regard  it
in  this  light.  It  appears  to  me  to  be  merely  an  external
consequence,  reappearing  in  every  kind  of  universal,  of  the
relation  between  universal  and  differences.  The  nearest
approach  to  pure  classification  is  therefore  to  be  found  in
superficial  arrangements  destined  merely  to  facilitate  refer-
ence, in  the  dictionary,  the  index,  the  Linnaean  system.
After  this  come  the  natural  or  morphological  systems  of
botany  and  zoology,  in  which  the  universal  appears  though
not  explicitly,  yet  effectively/ through  analogy.  While  in
mathematical  conceptions  as  in  the  true  systematic  dis-
junction we  have  classification  relegated  to  its  proper  place,
as  a  corollary  of  the  comprehensive  application  of  explana-
tory theory.

3.  By  introducing  into  logic  the  real  or  conscious  teleology  The  judg-
of  the  human  intelligence,  we  have  rendered  unavoidable  Yalue°
some  consideration  of  the  judgment  of  value,  which  rests
upon  the  correspondence  of  a  real  system  and  the  purpose
for  which  it  exists.  This  judgment  obviously  presupposes
two  conditions ;  i.  our  knowledge  of  the  purpose  for  which
a  system  exists,  and  ii.  our  knowledge  of  the  d^ree  in
which  the  system  fulfils  that  purpose.

i.  The  /ormer  condition  demands  a  real  teleology ;  that  Real
is,  a  conscious  purpose  for  which  the  system  is  intentionally  ^^'

recognised  or  maintained  by  the  human  will.  We  cannot
here  enter  upon  the  questions,  belonging  to  ethical  science,
which  arise  with  reference  to  the  objective  justification  of
man's  recognition  of  a  purpose  in  the  non-intellectual  world.
Indeed  we  cannot  avoid  extending  such  questions  in  some
degree  to  the  world  of  man's  own  volition  by  admitting
that  e.  g.  the  systems  of  law^  and  government  which  appear
prima  facie  to  be  made  and  maintained  by  man  with  a
view  to  a  purpose  which  he  consciously  sets  before  him,
have  nevertheless  an  element  of  growth  or  development
which  goes  beyond  the  knowledge  or  intention  of  any  single
individuals  at  any  time  concerned  in  framing  them.  The
works  of  mind,  in  short,  are  something  more,  as  the  works

O  2


V


196  Concrete  Systematic  Inference. [book  11.

of  nature  are  something  less,  than  the  intentional  achieve-
ments of  any  individual  will,  and  therefore  our  estimate  of
their  value  is  in  many  respects  analogous  to  that  recognition
of  a  purpose  which  we  apply  so  fallibly  to  natural  objects.
We  may  however — for  we  must — assume  on  the  whole  that
the  persistent  purposes  of  mankind  are  represented  within
our  own  intelligence,  and  that  therefore  in  our  estimate  of
law  and  morality,  of  art  and  religion,  of  political  and  social
institutions,  there  is  at  any  rate  some  firm  foundation  of
real  teleology.

Mediation.  ii.  The  second  condition  demands  mediation.  We  have
to  ascertain  whether  a  whole  fulfils  its  purpose  by  comparing
the  operation  of  its  mechanism  with  the  idea  which  is
intended  to  be  its  essence. This  mediation  was  involved  in

nJ  the  philosophical  syllogism,  in  so  far  as  the  purpose  of  the

whole  was  taken  to  be  its  essence  or  unity.  But  after
analysing,  in  the  disjunction,  the  matter  of  the  universal
into  a  system  of  reciprocally  determined  parts  and  moments,
we  have  forced  upon  us  the  question  whether  the  totality  of
these  parts  or  moments  corresponds  in  detail  to  the  purpose
with  which  we  credit  it.  Such  correspondence  is  what  we
understand  by  goodness  or  value.  We  may  say  for  instance
of  a  given  social  system  that  under  it  the  people  are  either
aristocrats  who  are  not  the  best  and  do  not  rule,  or  a  pro-
letariate who  pay  no  honour  to  those  above  them  and  who
cannot  be  ruled.  And  this  contradiction  between  the  effect
of  the  system  as  realised  in  its  parts,  and  its  recognised
purpose,  entitles  us  to  say  that  it  is  a  bad  .system  ;  in  the
form  '  a  being  either  ^  not  x  or  C  not  z  is  not  A.'

Extra-logical  as  this  judgment  of  value  may  seem  to  be,
it  is  really  implied  in  the  constitution  of  knowledge  from
the  point  at  which  quasi-teleology  begins,  and  with  it  the
conception  of  '  a  thing '  takes  its  rise.  I  shall  have  to
return  to  this  subject  in  the  last  chapter  when  I  come  to
speak  of  the  ultimate  nature  of  dialectical  or  logical  neces-
sity to  which  the  term  aesthetic  has  sometimes  been
applied.


Chap.  VI.]  No  Schedules  of  reasoning.  197

4.  Inference  was  first  defined  on  p.  i  as  the  '  mediate  The  main
reference  of  an  ideal  content  to  Reality,'  and  further  ex-  ;^fe^^^
plained  on  p.  4  as  'the  indirect  reference  to  reality  of
differences  within  a  universal,  by  means  of  the  exhibition  of
this  universal  in  differences  directly  referred  to  reality.'
And  we  have  gone  throughout  on  the  principle  that  the
species  of  inference  are  determined  by  the  species  of
universal  which  occur  in  the  realm  of  knowledge.  Having
attempted  to  analyse  these  species,  and  to  point  out  their
affinities  and  their  distinctions,  we  have  not  much  more  to
say  about  the  nature  of  inference.

But  it  may  be  useful  by  way  of  recapitulation  to  read  off
from  the  somewhat  tedious  treatment  to  which  we  have
subjected  the  phases  of  inference  a  few  answers  to  the
vexed  questions  which  concern  it.

i.  Is  the  syllogism  a  complete  antecedent  scheme,  pre-
scribing the  shape  and  outcome  of  every  possible  inference  ?
ii.  Is  there  any  fundamental  set  of  conditions  to  which  all
Inference  must  conform,  and  further,  iii,  what  relation  does
the  syllogism  bear  to  such  a  set  of  conditions?

i.  There  is  no  such  thing  as  an  antecedent  scheme  pre- No  ante-
scribing,  so  to  speak,  a  set  of  schedules  in  one  or  other  of  g^^^g  ^f
which  every  argument  can  be  written  out  merely  by  filling  Inference,
up  the  blanks.  The  form  of  knowledge  is  an  active  and
constructive  principle,  to  the  workings  of  which  no  abstract
type  antecedently  prescribed  can  be  adequate.  Not  merely
is  Logic  incapable  of  passing  judgment  on  actual  truth,  but
it  is  incapable  of  prescribing  beforehand  the  type  of  rela-
tions which  an  inferential  totality  may  impose  upon  its
parts.  Granting  that  where  we  are  dealing  with  imperfect
subsumption,  with  the  relations  of  attributes  conjoined  in
individual  subjects  according  to  unknown  grounds,  the
syllogism  is  able  to  anticipate  the  very  indefinite  form  of
combination  that  can  result,  yet  we  should  not  dream  of
claiming  for  it  this  capacity  of  prediction  in  the  region  of
calculation,  of  mechanical  or  geometrical  construction,  or  of
philosophical  subsumption. It  is  true  that  as  regards  the


198  Concrete  Systematic  Inference. [book  11.

last-named  process  we  found  a  type  of  reasoning  which
appeared  to  represent  it  adequately  in  the  syllogism  in
Barbara.  But  the  reader  must  have  observed  in  the  ex-
amples which  were  given,  if  judged  by  the  standard  of  formal
logic,  that  irritating  inaccuracy  of  form  which  is  known  to
teachers  in  the  first  attempts  of  pupils  to  construct  a  pre-
cise syllogism.  In  our  examples  and  in  their  efforts  this
inaccuracy  is  due  to  the  same  cause ;  to  the  difficulty  of
moulding  the  vital  and  constructive  action  of  thought  into
shapes  prescribed  by  an  artificial  scheme,  which  does  not
precisely  correspond  to  any  single  type  of  intellectual
action.  The  violent  transformations  by  which  formal  logic
attains  this  end  are  not  perhaps  an  undesirable  scholastic
exercise ;  for  they  unquestionably  drag  into  light,  though
only  as  a  meagre  and  skeleton  framework,  a  certain  ultimate
community  of  type  in  all  inferential  operations.  In  so  far
as  the  difficulties  of  pupils  arise  from  inability  to  transform
or  translate  their  intellectual  operations  at  all,  any  exercise
which  demands  such  transformation  is  perhaps  better  than
none.  But  in  the  analysis  of  operations  that  constitute
highly  determinate  individual  totalities  the  difficulty  of
conforming  absolutely  to  the  scheme  of  the  traditional
syllogism  rises  into  something  like  impossibility,  because
the  parts  within  such  a  totality  do  not  lie  side  by  side  like
units  in  a  '  class,'  but  have  peculiar  and  distinct  relations,
imposed,  each  upon  each,  by  their  individual  place  within
the  whole.

Thus  we  cannot  preserve,  or  can  only  by  a  tour  de
force  succeed  in  preserving,  the  identical  correlations  of
terms  demanded  by  the  rules  of  formal  logic.  In  our
example  '  the  mind  is  a  unity  of  determinate  and  not  exclu-
sive parts ; '  we  could  not  go  on  to  affirm  '  a  feeling  is  the
mind,'  according  to  the  good  old  type  '  Socrates  is  a  man,'
and  so  we  could  not  conclude  that  *  a  feeling  is  a  unity,'  etc.
But  we  were  obliged  to  say  either  that  a  feeling  is  a  re-
action of  the  mind,  or  that  a  feeling  is  an  element  in  and  is
a  part  of  the  mind,  and  could  only  conclude  that  a  feeling


Chap.  VI.]  Terms  and  Data.  199

is  a  factor  or  element  in  such  a  unity.  And  the  other
examples  given  in  the  same  context,  which  preserve  more
appearance  of  correct  formulation,  are  in  reality  no  less
charged  with  individual  and  diverse  relations.  The  mere
fact  that  the  syllogism  naturally  leads  on  to  the  complete
disjunctive  judgment  is  the  most  striking  proof  of  this.
I  may  say  at  this  point  that  to  treat  ^  the  disjunctive  judg-
ment in  systematic  Logic  as  a  form  of  thought  needing
completion  by  Induction,  Analogy  and  Subsumptive  Syl-
logism, seems  to  me  to  be  a  hopelessly  erratic  selection  of
phases  out  of  the  progress  of  the  individual  mind.  This
progress  includes  no  doubt  even  in  very  early  stages  those
imperfect  shapes  of  disjunction  which  I  have  called  the  dis-
junctions of  ignorance;  and  these  disjunctions  are  expanded
into  systematic  knowledge  by  the  progress  of  determining
thought  in  its  various  forms.  But  to  make  the  complete
disjunction  prior  to  the  imperfect  forms  of  syllogism  in-
volves a  retrogression  from  complete  systematic  knowledge
of  a  real  ground  to  the  knowledge  of  the  operation  of  this
ground  in  individual  cases  and  in  a  latent  form.

ii.  If  we  ask  the  more  reasonable  question,  not  whether  Condirion
a  form  can  be  laid  down  beforehand  for  every  possible  in-  feraice.
ference  such  that  the  inference  can  be  drawn  by  merely
putting  terms  into  the  blank  spaces  of  one  or  another  of
certain  prescribed  schedules,  biit  whether  in  the  common
nature  of  thought  a  system  of  conditions  can  be  discovered
which  in  one  way  or  another  is  conformed  to  by  every  act  of
inference,  on  this  head  I  think  that  an  affirmative  answer
may  be  gathered  from  our  previous  discussions.

(a)  Inference  must  have  three  terms  and  no  more.

The  explanations  given  in  chap,  i  of  the  present  Book
appear  to  me  to  justify  this  assertion.  They  consist  in  a
sharp  distinction  between  terms  and  data — the  number  of
data  being  accidental,  while  the  number  of  terms  or  moments
depends  on  the  essential  nature  of  the  universal ;  and  in
the  restriction  of  Inference  proper  to  mediate  Inference.

*  As  Lotze  does,  Logik,  sect  97  fil


/


200  Concrete  Systematic  Inference. [Bookii.

We  admit  however  that  the  function  of  thought  from  ele-
mentary reproduction  upwards  is  essentially  one,  and  we
more  especially  contend  \\\2X  every  judgment,  in  so  far  as  it
is  explicitly  synthetic,  that  is  to  say  in  so  far  as  it  affirms
one  definite  content  to  be  a  consequence  of  another  definite
content,  is  an  activity  only  separated  from  Inference  by  the
degree  of  distinctness  with  which  its  parts  are  analysed.
Every  such  judgment,  and  therefore  ultimately  every  judg-
ment, can  by  further  reflection  be  expressed  as  a  three-term
inference,  and  this  is  especially  the  case  with  what  we  called
the  true  Immediate  Inferences,  Comparison,  Abstraction,
and  the  rest.

{b)  An  explicit  Inference  is  a  conclusion  from  two  premises
and  no  more,  which  assert  relations  betweeii  differences  qua
belonging  to  a  single  universal.  Assuming  therefore  that
the  propositio7is  which  express  the  premises  are  not  to
be  disguised  purposely  or  through  negligence,  but  are
bona  fide  to  express  the  judgments  employed  in  reason-
ing, the  two  premises  must  have  an  identical  term  in
common. And

[c)  that  this  identical  term  must  be  universal  ioWows  neces-
sarily from  the  theory  of  inference  which  has  been  developed,
and  follows  also  from  the  fact  that  this  one  term  is  able
to  stand  in  both  premises.  For  a  universal  is  that  which
without  prejudice  to  its  identity  persists  through  or  contains
in  itself  different  relations.  The  simplest  example  may  be
found  in  what  we  termed  the  '  Inductive'  Syllogism,  in  which,
if  we  take  the  middle  term  as  the  meaning  of  a  proper  name,
we  argue  that  Socrates  is  both  good  and  a  Greek,  therefore
a  Greek  may  be  good.  Here  Socrates,  although  ex
hypothesi  an  individual,  is  universal  at  least  in  virtue  of  the
double  relation  to  good  and  Greek — i.e.  of  the  synthesis,  in
the  '  middle  term,'  of  these  differences.  The  universal  or
identity,  however,  need  not,  as  in  this  case,  be  a  '  subject,'
although  it  will  be  found  ultimately  to  imply  a  subject.  The
identical  point  in  space,  in  which  two  lines  meet  in  a  spatial
construction,  is  the  synthesis  of  two  relations  in  space,  but


Chap.  VI.] The  Syllogism  as  a  hybrid.  201

is  not,  only  implies,  space  itself  as  a  whole  containing  these
relations.

And  {d')  I  do  not  see  how  we  can  escape  from  saying  that
not  only  one  premise,  but  both  premises  must  be  universal.
The  only  apparent  exception  would  be  the  case  in  which
one  premise  is  negative ;  about  which  it  might  be  urged
that  the  common  term  does  not  stand  in  two  relations,  but
in  one  and  none,  i.  e.  in  one  only.  If  this  were  so,  however,
the  negative  premise  would  be  a  bare  denial,  would  be  no
judgment,  and  could  give  rise  to  no  conclusion.  I  do  not
see  how  a  conclusion  can  arise  without  a  synthesis  of  two
positive  relations.

If  then  (<?)  negation  means  bare  denial,  it  results  that  there
can  be  no  negative  premise.  But  as  bare  denial  is  not  a  case
of  genuine  judgment  we  must  interpret  negation  to  mean
significant  denial  only,  and  in  this  sense  we  must  lay  it  down
that  both  premises  may  be  negative  ^.

iii.  If  now,  in  order  to  define  our  attitude  towards  the  con-  Relation  of
troverted  questions  which  centre  in  the  doctrine  of  syllogism,  ^^  t^Se™
we  enquire ;  In  what  relation  does  syllogism  stand  to  the  conditions.
type  of  inference  determined  by  the  conditions  just  enume-
rated ?  we  shall  obtain  the  following  results.

We  must  distinguish  the  traditional  syllogism  with  its
apparatus  of  rules  and  its  distinctions  of  quality  and  quantity
from  the  syllogism  as  treated  in  the  present  work.

o.  The  traditional  syllogism  is  a  hybrid  between  what  The  tradi-  ^J
we  have  called  analogical  inference  and  what  we  have  called  i^^m. '
inference  or  induction  by  complete  enumeration.  It  would
therefore  {a)  exclude  many  forins  of  inference  which  perfectly
conform  to  the  above  conditions,  and  also  some  which  have  been
included  in  our  account  of  the  syllogism.  Not  only  would  it
exclude  '  calculation'  and  what  has  been  called  '  construction'
in  the  mechanical  or  geometrical  sense  ;  but  it  would  find  no
place  for  Induction  or  Analogy  or  even  for  philosophical
subsumption  as  above  described.  Induction  would  be
excluded  by  the  conjunctive  premise  consisting  in  a
^  See  chap,  iv  above.


202  Concrete  Systematic  Inference. [bookii.

number  of  individual  judgments ;  Analogy  by  the  material
weight  and  stress  thrown  upon  the  definition  of  the
predicate,  which  the  ordinary  half-numerical  syllogism
has  no  power  of  indicating ;  and  philosophical  subsumption
by  the  genesis  within  it  of  new  relations,  not  prescribed  by
any  major  premise.  The  traditional  syllogism,  in  short,
fails  to  recognise  the  synthetic  activity  of  thought.

{b)  The  form  of  universality  relied  on  by  the  traditional
syllogism  is  vicious,  except  for  purposes  of  calculation,  which
it  does  not  attempt.  It  is  true  that  its  express  form  of  totality
'  All  A  are  B '  does  not  really  cover  what  we  understand
to  be  its  import ;  but  its  rules  and  transformations  are  derived
from  this  express  form,  and  exclude  such  vital  and  genuine
processes  as  for  example  modal  conversion.  The  fact  that
we  interpret  the  numerical  totality  into  true  synthetic  con-
nection only  shows  that  the  inadequacy  of  this  form  of
universal  is  actually  recognised.

{c)  There  is  no  justification  for  the  traditional  pre-eminence
assigned  to  one  premise  as  the  '■major' ;  a  pre-eminence  which
depends  on  the  vicious  quantitative  form  of  the  universal,
and  carries  with  it  the  petitio  priticipii  which  has  been  irre-
sistibly demonstrated  to  be  present  in  the  traditional
syllogism.

id)  There  is  no  justification  for  the  distinction  between
universal  and  particular  premises,  except  in  as  far  as  by  a
reservation  depending  on  unknown  conditions  one  premise
may  become  merely  probable.

{e)  The  true '' reduction^  or  transformation  of  arguments
in  figs.  2  and  3  into  fig.  i  can  only  be  effected  by  a  material
transformation  of  their  content  into  the  content  demanded  by
fig,  I  through  the  processes  of  analogy  and  scientific  induction.
Reduction  without  transformation  of  content  is  a  gram-
matical tour  de  force  which  illustrates  no  principle  except
that  a  simple  inference  can  be  awkwardly  expressed.
The  syl- ^3.  When  we come  however to make  the  comparison
reasoned^ between our general conditions of inference and the
judgment, syllogism  as  described  in  the  present  work,  our  results  are


Chap.  VI.]  Syllogism  and  Calculation.  203

somewhat  different.  Syllogism  as  we  have  described  it  is
a  subsumptive  reasoned  judgment  depending  upon  the  unity
of  differences  within  an  individual  subject,  and  making  the
rntelligible  ground  of  this  unity  explicit  in  various  degrees,
according  to  which  the  unity  displays  itself  as  a  conjunction
or  as  a  coherence.

The syllogism as thus understood is  {a)  co-extensive  >l

with  subsumption,  and  exclusive  only  of  calculation  and
construction.  The  differences  between  the  syllogistic  figures
in  the  sense  in  which  we  have  retained  them  depend  on  the
degree  in  which  the  Reality  that  stands  as  subject  to  the
reasoned  judgment  is  already  qualified  by  antecedent  judg-
ment as  a  concrete  unity  or  individual  system.  In  the
Inductive  Syllogism  the  Subject  is  as  nearly  as  possible
a  particular,  a  mere  name  or  designative  reference ;  in  the
Analogical  Syllogism  it  is  a  particular  as  known  under
a  universal  characteristic,  an  individual ;  in  the  Syllogism
of  Philosophical  Subsumption  it  is  an  individual  thoroughly
known  as  a  universal  in  its  particular  differences,  and  so
a  concrete  system.

{h)  The  difference  between  the  syllogism  thus  understood,
and  the  abstract  combinations  of  arithmetical  or  geometrical
reasotiing,  lies  merely  in  the  correlative  imperfections  of  the
two  processes.  The  syllogism  begins  with  the  perception
of  unanalysed  individual  unity,  which  it  is  unable  to  bring
to  bear  as  a  determinate  relation  upon  the  attributes
conjoined  within  it,  and  thus  rests  in  the  mere  fact  of  their
conjunction.  Calculation  and  construction  begin  with  the
perception  of  a  specific  determinate  unity  by  which  re-
lations affect  and  generate  each  other,  without  making
clear  at  the  outset  within  what  concrete  system,  and  subject
to  what  ultimate  conditions,  these  determinate  combinations
(e  g.  in  space)  are  effected.  The  two  sets  of  Inferences
ultimately  involve  the  same  elements.

And  therefore  {c)  if  the  deterfninate  ground  is  made  clear
within  a  subsumption,  or  the  individual  subject  is  made  clear
which  includes  a  combination  of  relations, the two types


204  Concrete  Systematic  Inference.

of  inference  fall  theoretically  together,  and  either  may  be
classed  as  the  perfect  form  of  the  other.  But,  as  we
have  seen,  this  identification  would  remain  formal  and  not
wholly  bona  fide,  because  of  the  comparatively  indifferent
and  unconstraining  character  of  the  abstract  totalities  within
which  geometrical  or  arithmetical  reasoning  is  carried  on.
It  is  true,  on  the  other  hand,  that  the  syllogism  as  we  have
treated  it  has  no  repugnance  to  the  genesis  of  constructive
relations  within  the  unity  that  is  expressed  in  the  inference.
Here  we  see  the  true  interdependence  of  the  classificatory
ideal  of  knowledge  with  the  ideal  which  takes  the  shape  of
explanatory  theory.  The  former  is  teleological,  categorical,
and  concrete ;  the  latter  is  mechanical,  hypothetical,  and
abstract.  It  is  only  by  a  combination  of  the  two — which
are  not  ultimately  separable — that  a  real  and  coherent  world
can  sustain  itself  in  the  judgment  which  is  knowledge.


CHAPTER VII.
The  Relation  of  Knowxedge  to  its  Postulates.

I. It  is  usual  to  devote  some  discussion  in  a  logical  The  formal
treatise  to  the  principles  or  axioms  on  which  the  possibility  ^n^ow^
of  knowledge  is  supposed  to  rest. Adhering  as  I  do  to  ledge- (
the  conviction  that  '  The  truth  is  the  whole,'  I  cannot  be  /

expected  to  attempt  a  justification  of  any  abstract  principles  /

as  points  of  attachment  antecedently  furnished  upon  which  /

the  truth  of  knowledge  could  be  supposed  to  depend.  But
as  postulates,  as  general  characteristics  of  known  Reality,
which  it  is  convenient  to  state  in  an  abstract  form  in  any
systematic  treatment  of  knowledge,  because  they  are  in-
woven in  the  whole  texture  of  the  real  world,  some  of  t
these  axioms  call  for  comment  both  on  their  actual  import  7
and  on  their  alleged  necessity.

It  is  convenient  to  distinguish  the  abstract  principles  or
postulates  which  are  thus  found  to  be  involved  in  the  nature  of
knowledge,  as  i.  Formal,  2.  Material  Postulates.  This  distinc-
tion must  not  be  understood  to  mean  that  some  are  drawn  from
the  nature  of  intelligence  exclusively,  while  others  are  merely
drawn  from  the  content  furnished  by  perceptive  experience.
It  would  be  more  correct  to  say  that  those  which  we  call
formal  are  drawn  from  the  character  of  experience  merely
as  experience,  existing  no  doubt  solely  for  intelligence,  but
for  that  very  reason  not  separable  in  its  source  or  nature
from  any  other  source  or  nature  which  could  be  described
as  intelligence  pure  and  simple.  Whereas  those  w^hich  we
call  material  are  drawn  from  the  actual  significance  which
we  ascribe  to  the  content  of  experience  as  developed  in
a  concrete  system,  and  being  ultimately  coincident  with
the  conclusions  of  philosophy  and  of  science  must  necessarily


2o6 Relation  of  Knowledge  to  its  Postulates. [Book  ii.

vary  with  the  progress  of  these  constructions.  And  it  is
obvious  that  the  formal  principles  are  in  fact  continuous  with
and  grow  into  the  material  principles,  the  two  kinds  of  axioms
bearing  at  bottom  the  same  relation  to  one  another  that
exists  between  the  judgment  that  there  is  a  system,  and  the
judgment  that  the  system  is  of  such  and  such  a  nature.
The  former,  of  course,  implies  the  rudiments  of  the  latter,
as  the  latter  includes  the  import  of  the  former.  Accordingly
the  distinction  between  the  two  classes  of  principles  will
correspond  to  the  distinction  between  abstract  and  concrete
science  ^ ;  between  explanatory  theory  and  classification  ;
between  the  law  of  sufficient  reason  and  the  conception  of
a  teleological  whole.

I  call  these  principles  by  the  name  of  Postulates,  because
when  presented  to  us  as  abstract  reflective  ideas  they
operate  as  guides  to  knowledge^  which  lead  to  their  own
subsequent  substantiation  in  a  concrete  form.  As  reflective
conceptions,  then,  they  are  postulates,  i.  e.  principles  which
we  use  because  we  need  them.  But  they  only  come  to  be
reflective  ideas  because  on  analysis  of  experience  they  are
found  to  be  active  factors  in  it  from  the  first,  factors  which
acquire  their  content  pari  passu  with  experience  itself,  of
which  they  merely  express  the  animating  principle  of  growth.
They  cannot  therefore  be  taken  in  a  definite  form  as  hypo-
theses or  axioms  antecedent  to  experience.  Experience
maybe  said  to  begin  with  the  certainty  that  'there  is  some-
what ; '  and  the  postulates  of  knowledge  do  but  express  in
abstract  form  the  progressive  definition  of  this  '  somewhat.'

Among  formal  postulates  of  knowledge  it  will  be  sufficient
very  briefly  to  examine  the  four  most  notable  ;  the  Law  of
Identity,  the  Law  of  Contradiction,  the  Law  of  Excluded
Middle,  and  the  Law  of  Sufficient  Reason. As  a  sub-form

^  This  is  in  strictness  almost  equivalent  to  the  distinction  between  physical
science  and  philosophy.  But  of  course  evolutionary  science  with  the  concep-
tions of  '  higher '  and  '  lower '  does  not  fall  within  physical  science  as  thus
defined.

*  See  the  account  of  reflective  ideas  as  guides  to  knowledge  in  comparison,
etc.,  Bk.  II.  chap.  i.


Chap.  VII.]  Identity  and  Tautology.  207

of  the  latter  the  Law  of  Causation  demands  no  separate
treatment.

Each  of  these  laws  may  be  interpreted  in  more  ways
than  one,  according  to  the  degree  in  which  we  may  acquiesce
in  its  mere  abstract  form,  or  attempt  to  penetrate  its  further
meaning.  But  at  any  rate  with  a  view  to  anything  like
a  separation  between  intelligence  and  experience,  as  such
a  separation  is  purely  fictitious,  there is nothing  to  be  ^

gained  by  cutting  down  the  content  of  these  principles  to
a  minimum,  in  the  hope  of  restricting  their  reference  to
thought  as  opposed  to  things.

i.  The  Law  of  Identity  must  be  taken  to  signify  at  least  The  Law  of
that  it  is  possible  to  make  judgments  that  have  a  meaning  ^^^*^*y-
and  are  true.

a.  In  the  bare  form  'A  is  A,'  however,  a  form  which  is  Tautology,
not  diawn  directly  from  Aristotle  or  from  Plato,  the  law
does  not  pritna  facie  possess  this  significance,  and  therefore
indeed  not  any.  If  it  means  that  A  is  A  and  no  more,  or
is  mere  A,  then  it  is  aggressively  untrue,  for  it  denies  the
synthesis  of  differences  which  alone  can  make  a  judgment.
If,  again,  the  law  is  taken  as  a  mere  symbol  of  the  pervading
unity  of  the  logical  subject,  and  not  as  intended  to  exclude
all  difterences  from  entering  into  it,  then  it  is  an  inadequate
symbol,  erring  by  omission  though  not  by  exclusion.  In
an  absolute  tautology  which  excludes  or  omits  difference,
identity  itself  disappears  and  the  judgment  vanishes  with  it  ^

Therefore,  /3.  we  can  only  assign  a  meaning  to  the  law  Symbol  of
'A  is  A'  if  w^e  take  the  repeated  A  to  be  not  a  specification  JJ^"^^^
of  the identical content,  but  an  abstract symbol  of  its
identity. The  law  will  then  mean  that,  in  spite  of  or  in
virtue of  the differences expressed in a  judgment,  the  ^^

*  It  is  desirable  to  remark  upon  this  peculiarity  of  the  formal  'Laws  of
Thought '  as  represented  in  symbolic  letters,  because  the  error  to  which  it
tends  is  characteristic  of  false  doctrines  of  identity  and  difference.  Locke  defines
Identity  by  saying,  '  When  the  ideas— vary  not  at  all,'  and  the  notion  of
negation  in  formal  logic  is  also  that  of '  mere '  or  '  bare '  negation.  Cf.  Enler's
circles.


2o8 Relation  of  Knowledge  to  its  Poshtlates. [bookii.

content  of  judgment  is  a  real  identity,  that  is  to  say,  has
a  pervading  unity.  It  says  that  there  is  such  a  thing  as
identity  in  difference,  or  in  other  words,  there  is  such
a  thing  as  genuine  affirmation — synthesis  of  differences
referred  to  reality — which  yet  is  true,  that  is  to  say,  does
not  interfere  with  (but  in  fact  is  indispensable  to)  identity.
Unity  of  And,  y.  we  are  only  expanding  what  is  implied  in  the
eaity.  allegation  of  real  identity  if  we  say  that  the  lawjA  is  A'
ultimately  asserts  the  thorough-going  unity  of  Reality,
A  significant  judgment,  symbolised  by  'A  is  A,'  lays  down
for  itself  no  reservation  beyond  that  which  its  own  content
may  dictate,  and  claims  therefore  to  be  true  without  any
reserve.  Its  simple  affirmation  leaves  no  room  for  any
discontinuity  in  the  real  world,  such  that  on  one  side  of  it
the  judgment  may  be  true,  and  on  the  other  false.  If  there
were  such  a  discontinuity,  the  judgment,  such  is  the  claim
of  the  categorical  affirmation  —  and  all  affirmation  qua
affirmation  is  at  least  categorical — would  have  taken  note
of  it  within  its  content,  and  would  in  that  respect  affirm
under  a  reservation.  But  once  true,  always  true.  All
reservations  necessary  to  truth  are  included  in  the  content.
Reality,  therefore,  is  one  throughout.  Relation  to  time,
for  example,  is  not  involved  in  the  fact  of  affirmation,  but
only,  if  at  all,  in  conditions  belonging  to  the  content
affirmed  which  depend  upon  facts  in  time^.  Affirmation
as  such  is  unconditional,  that  is  to  say,  is  not  limited  by
conditions  outside  its  own  content,  and  so  if  true,  is  true
without  reserve.  There  is  not  one  Reality  of  which  it
is  true  and  another  of  which  it  is  false.  Reality  is  what
it  is,  and  if  it  turns  out  not  to  be  what  we  thought^  then  we
thought  amiss,  i.e.  judged  falsely.
Law  of  ii.  The  Law  of  Contradiction  is  but  the  complement  of

tion.  '  the  Law  of  Identity.  It  supplies  something  without  which
the  Law  of  Identity  is  not  logically  complete  nor  distinctly
intelligible.  But  yet,  by  the  fact  of  conferring  distinctness,
it  is  an  addition.

^  See  Bk.  I.  chap,  v,  on  Time  in  the  singxilar  judgment.


chap.vii.j Contradiction  and  Excluded  Middle. 209

This  Law  also,  a.  in  its  barest  statement  'A  is  not  both  A  Truism  or
and  not-A,'  if  understood  to  deny  that  A  can  be  B,  is
either  unmeaning  or  aggressively  false.  Considered  as  the
principle  of  the  negative  infinite  judgment  A  is  not  viere
B,  it  corresponds  as  the  form  of  bare  negation,  to  A  is  mere
A  as  the  form  of  bare  affirmation.  In  this  form  it  is  simply
inadequate  or  unmeaning,  and  equivalent  to  'A  is  at  least
A.'  But  taken  as  the  exaggerated  abstraction  of  negative
judgment  in  the  sense  '  No  A  can  be  any  not-A,'  i.e.  '  No  A
can  be  B  at  all,'  it  corresponds  to  the  more  open  interpre-
tation of  the  Law  of  Identity  as  'A  is  at  least  A,'  and  is
equivalent  to  the  more  aggressive  interpretation  of  that  law
as  'A  is  mere  A.'  ^  For  it  then  denies  that  a?iy  B  (not
only  that  mere  B)  can  be  united  in  a  judgment  with  A.
This  is  simply  a  reiteration  in  negative  form  that  A  is  mere
A  and  no  more.

But  if,  /3.  we  take  the  Law  of  Contradiction  in  the  obvious  A  genuine
sense  that  a  statement  and  its  denial  cannot  both  be  true,  thought,
it  bears  witness  to  the  fact  that  a  judgment  may  be  truly
denied,  i.e.  that  a  judgment  may  be  false,  and  therefore  that
there  may  be  truth  in  a  negation  ^.  It  has  been  observed
above  ^  that,  apart  from  the  traditional  distinction  of  quantity,
the  difference  between  the  Logical  contrary  and  the  Logical

*  The  corresponding  meanings  of  the  Law  of  Identity  and  the  Law  of  Con-
tradiction, judged  by  the  latitude  employed  in  interpretation,  are  not  their
equivalent  meanings.  The  more  exaggerated  denial  is  equivalent  to  the  more
tautological  assertion,  and  the  more  pregnant  or  significant  assertion  to  the
denial  of  mere  identity. Thus

'  A  is  mere  A  *  corresponds  /<?  '  A  is  not  mere  B.'

'  A  is  at  least  A '  corresponds  to  '  A  isNwver  any  B.*

'  According  to  the  traditional  rule,  a  statement  may  be^^  denied  that  both
judgment  and  denial  are  false.  But  obviously  in  such  a  case  some  denial  is
true,  though  the  one  made  is  not. To  say  that  a  judgment  is  false  is  to  say  /</

that  it  is  truly  denied.  \

*  See  above,  on  negation,  p.  312  ff.  \
VOL.  IL P


2IO Relation  of  Knowledge  to  its  Postulates,  [bookii.

contradictory,  i.e.  between  the  principle  of  contradiction  and
the  principle  of  excluded  middle,  disappears.  But  because
they  retain  a  meaning  for  vital  thought  although  not  for
formal  logic,  even  in  the  absence  of  quantitative  distinctions,
we  will  distinguish  the  two  aspects  of  negation  treated  of
by  these  two  principles,  and  will  speak  first  only  of  falsehood
established  by  truth,  and  not  of  truth  established  by  false-
hood. Though  really,  if  our  instance  of  contrariety^  is  'A
is  B '  and  '  A  is  not  B,'  we  have  before  us  both  falsehood
established  by  truth,  and  truth  established  by  falsehood.

A  law  of  y.  If  we  do  not  press  hard  on  the  implications  of  the
^^  ^^^'  Law  of  Identity,  it  may  be  said  that  the  significance  of  the
Law  of  Contradiction  carries  us  one  step  further.  But  it  is
\  doubtful  if  truth  can  exist  apart  from  the  conception  of
)  falsehood,  and  therefore  it  is  better  to  say  that  the  Law  of
Contradiction  simply  confirms  and  reiterates  that  assump-
tion  of  the  unity  of  reality  which  the  Law  of  Identity  in-
jvolved.  Reality,  the  Law  of  Contradiction  asserts,  is  a
consistent  unity ;  which  is  merely  to  say  over  again  that  it
is  a  unity.  You  cannot,  that  is  to  say,  play  fast  and  loose
with  reality.  What  is  true  at  all,  as  the  Law  of  Identity
said,  is  true  throughout  Reality;  but  more  than  that,  every
such  truth  is  double-edged,  and  carries  with  it  throughout
Reality  consequences  by  which  it  affects  and  limits  matters
that  are  prima  facie  outside  itself.  To  infer  from  '  A  is  B  '
that  '  A  is  not  not-B '  means  at  bottom  that  A  is  deter-
mined by  B  in  respect  of  C  or  D.

Law  of  iii.  The  law  of  excluded  middle,  expressed  by  Aristotle

MWdle^  as  '  Between  the  assertions  of  a  logical  contradiction  there
is  no  middle,'  i.  e.  no  third  alternative,  applies  of  course  to
all  strict  denial,  for  all  strict  denial  is  a  logical  contradiction
of  the  judgment  denied.

A  Truism.  a.  In  its  symbolic  form  *  A  is  either  B  or  not-B '  it  lays
down  the  ultimate  formal  schema  of  negation  as  the  absolute

'  I  have  pointed  out  before  the  inconvenient  accident  that  the  Law  of  Con-
tradiction applies  to  Contraries  only,  while  Contradictories  or  Logical  Contra-
diction come  under  the  Law  of  Excluded  Middle.


Chap.  VII.]  Determinate  Negation.  211

alternative.  Literally  interpreted  according  to  this  sym-
bolic form  it  has  corresponding  defects  to  those  of  the
previous  laws  when  interpreted  in  the  same  way.  That  is
to  say,  all  that  it  absolutely  lays  down  is  the  form  of  bare
negation  which  is  per  se  not  enough  to  constitute  a  judg-
ment, because  it  involves  the  truth  of  the  infinite  judg-
ment ;  but  w^hich  in  relation  to  anything  further,  for
example  to  the  intelligible  antithesis  '  A  is  either  B  or  C  is
only  the  affirmation  of  a  possibility,  and  the  hypothetical
definition  of  a  relation.  To  invest  a  positive  contrary  C
with  the  logical  character  of  a  contradictory  not-B,  is  the
work  of  determinate  knowledge.

^.  Interpreted  in  the  plain  sense,  e.  g.  as  by  Aristotle,  A  law  of
the  law  of  Excluded  Middle  means  that  the  significant  ne-
gation  of  any  judgment  is  an  absolute  alternative  to  it,  viz.
that  not  only  the  judgment  and  its  negative  cannot  both  be
true,  but  one  or  other  must  be  true,  and  if  true,  we  may
fairly  add,  must  be  significant. This  means  that  falsehood '
can  establish  truth,  or  that  negation  can  involve  aflfirmative /
consequences. In  this  sense  the  postulate  in  question  is  the
essential  principle  of  disjunction,  which  is  an  absolute  alter-
native betzi'cen  tivo  or  more  positive  and  significant  members. ^
Therefore  genuine  disjunction  has  not  the  form  '  A  is  either
B  or  not-B,'  but  has  the  form  '  A  is  either  B  or  C,'  which
invests  the  positiv^e  assertion,  in  virtue  of  which  C  is  taken
to  deny  B  as  its  contrary',  with  the  absolute  exclusiveness
that  only  belongs  of  right  to  the  bare  form  of  denial,  which
has  for  its  essence  to  express  the  contradictory. In  other
words,  the  old  account  of  the  contrary,  that  it  denies,  and
also  asserts  something  more  beyond  the  denial,  must  also
be  true  of  any  significant  contradictory.

y.  The  principle  of  Excluded  Middle,  then,  ultimately  A  law  of
affirms  that  Reality  is  not  merely  one  and  self-consistent, ^  "^*
but is  a system of  reciprocally determinate parts. In
affirming  that  a  significant  or  genuine  judgment  is  possible,
such  that  within  it  a  negation  ^  shall  carry  a  determinate

'  According  to  the  bare  scheme  of  Excluded  Middle,  the  significant  negation

p  a


2 1 2 Relation  of  Knowledge  to  its  Postulates.  [Book  ii.

and  explicit  positive  consequence — not  merely,  as  the  law
of  contradiction affirms, that a truth may carry  with
it  definite  negative consequences — the law  of  Excluded
i Middle  fixes  upon  that  reality  which  is  constructed  and
1 maintained  by  judgment  the  character  of  a  self-determining
' whole. For  a nothing can only be invested with the
character of  a something by being a precisely  limited
\  nothing  that  implies  a  positive  nature  in  the  limiting  and

K^  V  sustaining  something,  such  that  in  affirming  the  nothing  we
are  not  affirming  an  absolute  nothingness,  but  are  covertly
alleging  a  positive  something  which  is  or  is  involved  in  the
nothingness  of  something  in  particular.  From  the  mere
and  entire  non-existence  of  mechanical  cohesion,  i.  e.  of  any
such  thing  as  mechanically  coherent  substances,  nothing
strictly  speaking  could  be  inferred.  The  idea  would  be  the
content  of  a  bare  denial,  and  unintelligible.  But  from  the
failure  of  mechanical  cohesion  in  the  axle  of  a  locomotive
running  at  sixty  miles  an  hour  under  precisely  known  con-
ditions, all  other  substances  retaining  their  mechanical  pro-
perties, the  most  precise  and  detailed  results  could  be
predicted  and  must  follow.  This  is  a  simple  instance  of  the
difference  between  the  negation  which  has  meaning  and
consequences,  and  that  which  has  none.
Law  of  iv.  The  law  of  Sufficient  Reason,  with  its  sub-form  the

Reason" ^^^  °^  Causation,  is  a  corollary  from  that  aspect  of  reality
and  of which  the  negative  laws  of  thought  have  brought  to  our

Causation.  .  t-> i- i •  r •  hi

notice.  Reality  being  a  system  of  reciprocally  determining
parts,  every  part  or  feature  of  reality  may  be  regarded  as
a  consequent  to  which  some  other  part  or  parts,  or  ulti-
mately the  whole,  stands  as  ground.  Every  consequent,  so
this  law  tells  us,  has  a  ground  from  which  it  neces-
sarily follows. Necessity  indeed means  nothing  but  the


must  be  a  negation  of  the  negation  ;  for  though  the  falsehood  of  the  affirmation
involves  the  truth  of  the  negation,  yet  in  the  phase  to  which  such  a  scheme
belongs  we  are  hardly  warranted  in  affirming  that  a  negation  as  such  has
positive  significance.  This  use  of  double  negation  is  a  factor  in  identifying
contrary  with  contradictory  opposition.


Chap.  VII.]  Necessity  and  Reality.  213

inevitableness  of  the  consequent  when  the  ground  is
given  ^.

In  plain  English,  the  Law  of  Sufficient  Reason  represents
the  demand  of  intelligence  for  the  explanation  of  everj-thing
by  something  else.  And  it  is  plain  that  in  the  case  of  any-
thing but  the  absolute  whole  this  demand  must  go  on  to
infinity,  for  outside  any  given  content  there  is  always  some-
thing which  can  be  regarded  relatively  to  that  content  as
something  else.  We  have  sufficiently  criticised  the  opera-
tion of  this  law,  the  law  of  natural  science  as  such,  in  the
construction  of  the  would-be  totalities  of  abstract  time  and
space,  and  it  is  not  necessary  to  repeat  the  proof  that
this  aspect  of  experience,  taken  per  se,  generates  and  must
generate  the  infinite  series.  For  it  rests  on  the  relations  of
parts  in  abstraction  from  the  whole,  or  in  other  words,
without  the  element  of  totality.

One  point  must  be  noticed  here.  Schopenhauer  rightly
maintains  that  absolute  necessity  is  a  cmitradictio  in  adjecto,
because  all  necessity  is  ev  hypotJiesi  conditional.  We  have
therefore  not  spoken  of  an  absolute  necessity  but  only  of  a
real  necessity,  namely  a  necessity  rooted  in  a  ground  which
is  a  fact.  We  ought  not  to  feel  as  if  in  this  substitution  the
world  had  lost  something  of  its  rational  coherence.  Abso-
lute necessity  was  a  false  ideal,  and  produced  a  fallacious
preference  of  necessity  to  reality.  For  a  part,  necessity  is
a  higher  point  of  view  than  mere  perceptive  reality,  because
necessity  involves  relation  to  the  whole,  whereas  perceptive
reality,  being  isolated,  is  only  formal  ^  or  potential  reality.
But  for  the  whole,  reality  is  a  higher  point  of  view  than
necessity,  for  reality  is  its  self-dependence  as  a  whole,  while
necessity  would  at  once  depress  it  into  a  part.

^  See  the  admirable  section  49  in  Schopenhaner's  treatise  on  the  "'  Satz  vom
Gnmde.'  His  attempt,  however,  to  show  (sect.  50}  that  the  law  of  gromid
and  consequent  in  cognition  does  not  entail  an  infinite  series,  although  in
causalitj-  or  in  space  this  is  entailed,  cannot  be  called  successful.  It  depends
on  his  distinction  between  Causality  and  Sufficient  Reason.

*  1.  e.  it  has  the  contact  with  feeling  which  is  the  form  of  all  cmitact  with
reality,  but  it  falls  short  in  content  and  is  a  mere  fragment  which  has  something,
we  do  not  yet  know  what  in  particular,  of  reality  in  it.


214 Relation  of  Knowledge  to  its  Postulates.  [Boorii.

\  The  above  are  the  principal  '  Laws  of  Thought.' We

class  them  not  as  principles  of  intelligence  apart  from  ex-
perience, but  as  principles  of  science  or  of  rational  experience
as  such,  discoverable  by  analysis  in  every  minutest  portion
of  its  texture,  and  capable  of  being  regarded  by  a  very  easy
abstraction  as  essential  to  its  existence  as  contrasted  with
its  special  significance.  They  may  therefore  be  ranked
together  as  the  formal  postulates  of  knowledge,  or  as  the
formal  aspect  of  the  principle  of  Uniformity,  in  contrast
with  those  which  are  not  prima  facie  necessary  to  the
existence  of  experience,  or  involved,  at  all  events  equally,
in  all  reality  as  such ;  and  which  may  therefore  be  con-
sidered under  the  head  of  material  postulates  of  knowledge.
The  reciprocal  implication  of  the  formal  and  material
postulates  in  one  another,  of  a  teleological  significance  in  a
self-consistent  system,  is  plainly  a  matter  of  degree,  and
our  task  is  to  analyse  the  mode  in  which  it  does  exist,  not
to  predict  how  it  must  exist.
The  2.  To  emphasise  the  transition  from  the  formal  to  the

postulates material  postulates  of  experience,  I  make  use  of  the  follow-
of  Know- jj^pr  sentence  from  a  distinguished  writer  ^ :  —

ledge. f  .  .

'  It  is  conceivable  that  man  and  his  works  and  all  the
I  higher  forms  of  animal  life  should  be  utterly  destroyed  ;
:  that  mountain-regions  should  be  converted  into  ocean
/  depths ;  the  floors  of  oceans  raised  into  mountains ;  and
the  earth  become  a  scene  of  horror  which  even  the  lurid
fancy  of  the  writer  of  the  Apocalypse  would  fail  to  portray.
And  yet,  to  the  eye  of  science,  there  would  be  no  more
disorder  here  than  in  the  sabbatical  peace  of  a  summer
sea.'

Translated  into  simpler  language,  this  sentence  means

*  I  quote  and  comment  upon  this  passage  purely  because  it  is  a  striking
illustration  of  my  point.  I  have  not  the  least  intention  of  imputing  to  its
eminent  author  (Professor  Huxley  in  Contemp.  Review  for  February,  1887)  ^^^
he  in  fact  undervalues  those  activities,  the  annihilation  of  which,  according  to
this  passage,  would  make  no  breach  in  the  order  of  science.  I  cannot  but  think,
on  the  other  hand,  that  any  logical  theory  with  which  such  a  statement  wcic
compatible  would  be  gravely  defective.


Chap.  VII.]  Laws  of  Nature.  215

that  if  all  these  things  happened,  they  would  happen  with-
out a  miracle ;  or  in  logical  phrase,  they  would  be  capable
of  explanation  according  to  the  law  of  sufficient  reason.
And  this  is  undoubtedly  a  truth  that  we  must  lay  to  heart.
Our  choice,  being  what  we  are,  lies  between  the  experience
intelligible  according  to  the  formal  laws,  or  none  at  all.  A
'  suspension  of  the  laws  of  nature,'  a  '  supernatural  inter-
position '  or  '  interference,'  is  perhaps  the  one  and  only
matter  that  if  alleged  as  a  fact  can  be  denied  on  the
sole  evidence  of  the  abstract  '  laws  of  thought.'  Against
any  phenomenon,  any  occurrence,  however  extraordinary,
these  laws,  apart  from  more  concrete  experience,  have  no
foothold  and  no  purchase.  But  the  allegation  that  some-
thing is  known  and  yet  not  knowable,  nay  more  known  as
not  knowable  and  in  respect  of  the  peculiar  essence  which
makes  it  not  knowable — this,  if  we  would  retain  our  sanity,
we  must  refuse  to  entertain  as  conceivable.  And  if  super-
natural means  anything  but  this,  any  causation  handled  by
superior  knowledge  and  power  within  the  unity  of  Reality,
then/<?r  logic  it  is  natural  and  we  must  treat  it  as  we  treat
all  natural  phenomena.  We  deny  no  occurrence  on  the
strength  of  formal  laws  ;  we  only  deny  a  theory  about  the
occurrence.  Formal  laws  do  not  care  how  extraordinary  a
phenomenon  may  be  ;  anything  viay  have  happened  or  may
happen  :  the  only  question  is  whether  it  did,  or  will.

Much  unclear  thinking  and  much  false  sentiment  might
have  been  avoided  if  the  mechanical  aspect  of  nature  had
been  recognised  ^  long  since  as  Professor  Huxley  states  it.
J^ature,  as  a  mechanical  system,  is  not  teleological.  Disease
and  deformity  are  as  natural,  as  orderly,  as  much  according
to  law,  as  health  and  beauty.  It  is  idle  verbiage  to  enlarge
upon  a  contrast  between  law  and  lawlessness  in  the  natural
world,  considered  as  a  natural  or  formally  knowable  system.
The  only  lawlessness  is  in  the  supposed  supernatural  within
the  natural. Nothing  that  happens  can  escape  from  the

^  e.  g.  by  Charles  Kingsley  and  teachers  of  his  school  who  preach  concur-
rence with  and  conformity  to  the  '  laws  of  nature.'


2i6 Relation  of  Knowledge  to  its  Postulates,  [bookii.

principle  of  sufficient  reason,  and therefore  nothing  that

happens  is  without  an  aspect  of  law.

But these considerations, though true, are not the

whole  truth. We  unquestionably  expect  something  more

of  the  world  than  a  capability  of  being  known  according

to  the  law  of  sufficient  reason. It  is  the  nature  and  the

warrant  of  these  expectations  that  I  now  desire  briefly  to

examine.

The  main- j,  I  (Jo  not  think  that  it  can  be  doubted  that  we  expect
tenance  of  .  .  .

Life.  an mdennitely prolonged — not necessarily everlastmg —

continuance  of  such  conditions  of  the  earth  s  surface  as  are
compatible  with  human  life.  It  would  not  be  justifiable  to
derive  this  expectation  from  the  formal  postulate  considered
above  on  any  such  ground  as  the  necessity  of  a  human
intelligence  to  the  existence — as  we  understand  existence —
of  the  actual  world.  This  merely  logical  necessity  might  at
worst  be  satisfied  by  an  appeal  to  our  ignorance  ;  for  how
can  we  know  that  the  human  intelligence  is  the  only  intel-
ligence, in  the  system  of  things  ?  But  in  any  case  we  are
now  compelled  to  accept  as  fact  a  state  of  the  globe  prior
to  the  existence  of  the  human  race,  or  even  of  organic  life,
and  if  we  find  no  insuperable  difficulty  of  form  in  this  view
of  the  past,  why  should  there  be  any  in  a  corresponding
belief  as  regards  the  future  ?

It  may  be  said,  again,  that  our  whole  state  of  knowledge,
and  the  absence  of  urgent  warning  from  our  scientific  look-
out men,  justifies  a  disbelief  in  any  imminent  disaster  or
transformation  of  the  earth's  surface.  Now  it  is  my  con-
tention in  the  present  chapter  that  the  postulates  of  which
we  are  speaking  simply  sum  up  the  pith  and  essence  of  our
knowledge,  and  I  have  no  reason  to  doubt  that  the  actual
state  of  scientific  prediction  is  a  large  element  in  the
practical  certainty  with  which  we  regard  the  future  of  our
globe.  Unmotived  possibilities  rightly  go  for  nothing,  and
it  is  the  case,  I  suppose,  that  there  are  not  at  present  above
the  scientific  horizon  any  seriously  motived  possibihties  of
a  speedy  end  to  man's  existence.


Chap.  VII.]  Eschatology.  217

But  I  cannot  think  that  this  exhausts  the  question.  It
appears  to  me  that  the  real  root  of  our  conviction  is  ethical,
and  ultimately  depends  upon  our  confidence  in  the  relation^
of  our  purposes  to  the  scheme  of  the  universe.  Such  an  ^
ethical  conviction  is  not  a  not;  orw  outside  our  knowledge,
but  is  the  very  core  of  almost  all  that  knowledge  on  which
our  distinctively  human  life  essentially  depends.  The  pur-
poses of  the  civilised  world  form  the  real  teleology  on
which  our  organised  knowledge  of  society  and  of  all  human
achievement  is  based,  and  it  is  on  the  conviction,  inwoven
in  this  knowledge,  of  the  reaHty  of  these  purposes  in  their
essential  content,  that  our  faith  in  the  future  seems  to  me
to  be  founded,  and  under  present  conditions  of  knowledge
to  be  rightly  founded.

It  may  be  said,  with  an  appeal  to  eschatology,  that  such
a  faith  is  not  even  a  '■quod  semper,  quod tibiqttel  etc.  and  that
a  speedy  end  to  man's  existence  on  earth  has  in  fact  fre-
quently been  expected  by  large  bodies  of  human  beings.
On  this  suggestion  two  observations  are  to  be  made.  In
the  first  place,  it  would  be  interesting,  both  logically  and
psychologically,  to  know  the  exact  effect  of  such  a  belief
on  the  practical  postulates  of  civilised  life  in  those  who  hold
it — to  know,  in  short,  the  degree  of  reality  with  which,  as  a
working  belief,  it  has  ever  been  held.  To  some  extent  the
doctrine  has  been  specially  directed  to  meet  the  dangers
which  it  tended  to  cause,  by  inculcation  of  the  duty  of
diligence  in  business  and  of  orderly  conduct  as  the  best
preparation  for  the  end.  And  then  in  the  second  place,  as
this  adaptation  of  the  doctrine  shows,  the  conception  of  an
ethical  continuity  of  purpose  is  satisfied  by  the  idea  in
question,  although  not  necessarily  under  the  form  of  a
continued  terrestrial  existence  ^.

'  Under  this  head,  of  a  satisfaction  for  our  ethical  demand  otherwise  than  in
the  form  of  our  continued  existence,  may  be  classed  in  great  part  the  cuiious
psychological  fact  of  the  slight  practical  effect  produced  by  prospective  death
even  on  men  whose  lives  are  by  any  cause  gravely  imperilled.  I  ascribe  this,
though  in  part  only,  to  our  prospective  satisfaction  in  the  maintenance  of  our
essential  activities  and  purposes  by  others  after  our  death  ;  and  I  do  not  think


2 1 8 Relation  of  Knowledge  to  its  Postulates,  [book  ir.

If  the  question  were  pushed  home,  and  we  were  asked  to
translate  our  ethical  postulate  into  terms  of  time  and  degree,
we  could  only,  I  think,  fall  back  on  conceptions  akin  to  the
^10?  reAeios  of  Aristotle,  i.e.  on  the  conception  of  a  duration
and  environment  of  life  adequate  to  the  accomplishment  of
some  worthy  purpose.  And  what  catastrophes  befalling  the
human  race  are  compatible  with  the  purposes  of  the  world
we  cannot  presume  to  guess  ^  It  would  be  hard  to  believe,
for  example,  in  the  likelihood  of  a  catastrophe  which  should
overwhelm  a  progressive  civilisation  like  that  of  modern
Europe  and  its  colonies,  so  that  the  history  of  the  world
would  have  to  be  begun  anew,  without  any  influence  at  any
time  arising,  by  rediscovery  of  remains,  from  the  prior
civilisation.

'  But  we  may  be  mistaken  in  our  postulate.'  Certainly
we  may  be  mistaken,  as  in  our  present  knowledge,  so  in  the
sum  and  substance  of  our  present  knowledge.  But  unmotived
possibilities  of  error  must  go  for  nothing ;  and  in  departing
from  the  positive  import  of  the  knowledge  which  at  present
we  possess,  we  abandon  concrete  reality  for  more  or  less
abstract  imagination.  In  this  first  material  interpretation
which  we  have  been  putting  upon  the  law  of  the  Uniformity
of  Nature,  we  have  simply  been  analysing  a  condition  which
is  essential  to  the  maintenance  of  human  life  as  reality  now
presents  it  to  us,  viz.  the  prospect  of  continuance.  If  the
constancy  of  content  which  this  prospect  demands  were  ever
to  become  doubtful  with  good  reason,  the  doubt  would  ex

that  this  satisfaction  would  exist  in  view  of  a  prospective  extinction  of  the  race.
Again,  the  trath  that  a  belief  in  some  continuance  is  necessary  to  any  action,
and  that  some  action  is  necessary  to  any  continuance,  is  merely  the  minimum
grade  of  the  postulate  we  are  discussing.

*  The  writer  is  aware  of  a  strong  prejudice  in  his  own  mind  that  a  disastrous
earthquake  in  London  is  an  exceedingly  improbable  occurrence.  Not,  of
course,  that  volcanic  agencies  can  act  otherwise  than  they  must,  but  that  such
a  degree  of  inconstancy  as  to  tempt  an  enormous  heavily  built  city  to  be
erected,  and  then  to  turn  and  rend  it,  would  seem  malicious  on  the  part  of
Nature.  The  prejudice  is  only  mentioned  as  a  psychological  curiosity,  and  is
not  defended  for  a  moment.  The  writer  believes  it  to  be  a  blundering  application
of  an  ultimately  genuine  principle.


Chap.  VII.] The  mitiimum  of  Knowledge.  219

hypothesi  show  itself  in  our  knowledge  on  positive  grounds  ;
but  till  then  we  must  accept  this  constancy  not  indeed  as  an
ultimate  certainty,  but  as  a  leading  characteristic  of  our
actual  world.

ii.  But  the  uniformity  of  nature  as  materially  understood  The  reality
goes  at  least  one  step  further  than  to  postulate  the  mainten-  purposes,
ance  of  human  life  on  the  earth's  surface. It  also  postulates
the  reality  of  those  purposes  and  achievements  which  make
man  what  he  is.

It  is  possible  to  fancy  not  merely  a  state  of  the  earth  in
which  the  life  of  the  human  animal  should  be  physically
impossible,  but  a  state  in  which  though  life  were  possible
and  actual,  yet  the  apparent  caprices  of  nature,  however
formally  rational,  should  prohibit  all  advance  in  knowledge
and  civilisation.  What  degree  of  ambiguity  in  the  appear-
ance of  natural  bodies,  in  spite  of  an  actual  constancy  of
their  properties,  might  make  knowledge  impossible,  is  a
question  which  there  is  no  sense  in  asking,  as  we  have  no
measure  by  which  to  estimate  the  answer.  Many  ambigui-
ties have  been  resolved  by  knowledge ;  but  the  operations
of  the  intellect  unquestionably  demand  not  only  the  theo-
retical constancy  of  properties,  but  sovie  degree  of  limitation
in  their  variety.  Exhaustiveness  is,  in  short,  though  not
theoretically  deducible  from  the  law  of  Sufficient  Reason,
a  largely  and  increasingly  essential  element  of  knowledge.
What  would  it  help  us  that  the  specific  gravity  of  gold  is
constant,  if  elements  undistinguishable  from  gold  by  other
ordinary  tests,  but  differing  in  specific  gravity,  were  con-
tinually to  present  themselves  in  our  operations  upon
Nature.?  And  although  infinitesimal  variation  is  a  pre-
dominant law  of  the  organic  world,  yet  knowledge  is  at
least  greatly  facilitated  by  the  existence  of  marked  points
of  transition  betw^een  species  and  species  ^,  and  it  is  plain
that  a  succession  of  animals  differing  by  variations  of
minute  and  equal  value  would  not  be  compatible  with  our
present  modes  of  natural  knowledge,  although  in  geometrical
*  Owing,  no  doubt,  to  the  extinction  of  intennediate  forms.


220 Relation  of  Knowledge  to  its  Postulates,  [bookii.

matter  the  intelligence  has  displayed  the  power  of  theoreti-
cally grasping  an  absolutely  continuous  evolution.

It  might  be  said  indeed  that  we  were  alleging  above  that
'  If  there  is  to  be  human  life  there  must  be  human  life,'  and
are  alleging  now  '  If  there  is  to  be  knowledge  there  must  be
knowledge,'  truisms  which  amount  to  nothing.  So  far  as
content  goes,  this  may,  by  abstraction,  be  true.  A  mere
analysis  of  content  is  eo  ipso  hypothetical.  But  the  content
which  we  are  analysing  is,  moreover,  affirmed  of  our  real
world  as  an  integral  element  of  the  significance  of  that
world,  which  significance  is  primarily  ethical.

And  this  significance  for  which  I  am  contending  is  not  an
a  prioid  postulate  or  axiom,  from  which  any  specific  know-
ledge could  be  derived  apart  from  experience.  If  I  am
asked  'What  is  the  material  uniformity?  How  do  you
limit  it?  What  does  it  imply?'  I  can  only  answer  by
pointing  to  the  progressive  content  of  knowledge  itself
The  postulate  of  Uniformity  is  ultimately  that  there  is  such
uniformity  as  our  knowledge  in  detail  reveals  to  us.  Do
I  believe  that  mass  and  energy  are  constant,  that  gravity
operates  in  the  region  of  the  fixed  stars,  that  any  of  the
heavenly  bodies  have  animated  inhabitants,  or  that  the  ele-
ments are  ultimately  reducible  to  a  single  form  of  matter?
None  of  these,  I  should  have  to  reply,  are  questions  of  an
ultimate  logical  postulate.  Our  convictions  upon  all  of  them
must  be  determined  by  the  state  of  our  knowledge  and  by
our  estimate  of  its  tendencies.  From  an  ethical  postu-
late we  can  deduce  nothing  but  the  empty  form  of  a
logical  principle,  the  form  that  '  what  is  involved  in  ethical
reality  is  real;'  the  material  details  must  come  from  science
only.
Three  The  three  degrees  then  which  may  conveniently  be  distin-

tixjns^of  ^ guished  in  the  interpretation  of  the  Law  of  Uniformity  of
Uniforaiity  Nature  or  of  the  Unity  of  Reality,  considered  as  the  postu-
late of  knowledge,  may  be  assigned  as  follows.
Reality  I.  Reality  is  a  mechanical  system  through  and  through,

nicaf. ' This  postulate  is  expressed  in  the  so-called  '  laws  of  thought '


CHAP,v^I.]  Meaning  of  *a  priori!  221

which  find  their  most  explicit  form  in  the  '  Law  of  Sufficient
Reason,'  or  principle  of  Relativity.

2.  Reality  as  a  mechanical  system  is adapted  to the  Reality  is
evolution  and  maintenance  of  life,  i.  e.  is  at  least  quasi-teleo-  ?eo^icaL
logical. This  is  a  first  approximation  to  what  is  practically
assumed  as  the  material  Uniformity  of  Nature.

3.  Reality  as  a  mechanical  system  is  further  adapted  to,  Reality  is
or  includes  as  elements  within  its  unity,  the  substantive  J^Joy^l
purposes  of  human  intelligence,  i.  e.  is  really  teleological.

It  is  possible,  by  intellectual  abstraction,  to  dissociate  the
first  of  these  aspects  from  the  others,  as  the  import  of
*  mechanical '  can  be  dissociated  ^  from  the  import  of
'  machine.'  It  is  not  possible  to  dissociate  either  quasi-
teleology  or  real  teleology  from  a  mechanically-conditioned
system.  The  nature  of  a  system  can  only  be  real  in  as  far
as  the  parts  or  differences  that  enter  into  it  have  a  real
mode  of  activity.  Miracle  destroys  teleology,  for  it  destroys
the  relation  of  part  to  whole.  And  activity  or  variation  of
activity,  that  has  no  ground  in  the  one  Reality,  is  miracle.

3.  It  seems  desirable  to  conclude  the  present  work  by  The
bringing to a point the  views  that  have  been implied  nat^  of
throughout it upon the ultimate nature of  intellectual  ^'ecessiiy.
necessity,  and  upon  the  sense  in  which  such  necessity  can
be  predicated  of  any  elements  within  knowledge.

i.  It  would  be  a  tedious  task  to  analyse  at  length  the  A  priori
components  of  Mill's discussions  ^ relating  to the basis  ^^^J5i-
of  necessary  truth. But  nothing  could,  in  my  judgment,  ^tion.
be  more  conducive  to  a  thorough  mastery  of  the  ques-
tion than  a  careful  study  of  the  chapters  referred  to  in
Mill's  Logic  in  the  light  of  some  plain  distinctions,  which,
in  default  of  a  better  guide,  I  will  here  endeavour  to  lay
down. By  MUl  himself,  together  with  the  writers  whom
he  quotes, nearly every position of importance in the

*  This  concession  must  be  read  subject  to  the  reservations  of  p.  97.  This
dissociation  is  not  possible  in  an  ultimate  sense.  But  of  course  dissociation
from  any  particular  teleological  scheme  is  abundantly  possible,  and  that  is  the
point  of  material  importance.

*  Mill's  Logic,  Bk.  IL  chaps,  v.  and  vi.


2  22 Relation  of  Knowledge  to  its  Postulates.  [Bookii.


Mediate
nature  of
necessity
forgotten.


'From

something
prior.'


4


controversy  is  assumed  in  its  turn,  and  the  argument  is  a
strange  mixture  of  penetrating  sagacity  with  unphiloso-
phical  confusion.

a.  Necessity,  as  we  have  abundantly  convinced  ourselves^,
involves  mediation  or  inference.  No  isolated  judgment
qua  isolated  can  have  necessity.  Every  necessary  truth
must,  in  so  far  as  it  is  necessary,  present  itself  as  the  conclu-
sion from  an  antecedent.  In  the  idle  controversy  whether
axioms  are  known  a  priori  or  '  from  experience '  this  aspect
of  necessity  is  forgotten  on  both  sides.

(i)  If  a  priori  necessity  is  taken  as  inherent  within  the
four  corners  of  the  axiom  itself,  the  very  nature  of  necessity
is  contradicted,  and  the  only  meaning  which  I  presume  the
phrase  a  priori  can  ever  have  had  is  stubbornly  denied  to
it  ^.  ''A  priori '  (ex  irpoTipcov)  says  in  so  many  words  that  the
knowledge  to  which  this  term  applies  is  '■from  something
prior  to  it,'  i.  e.  is  derivative,  inferred  and  mediate.  The
metaphor  involved  in  '  prior '  no  doubt  created  for  Aristotle
a  problem  about  the  series  of  premises,  which,  it  would  seem,
must  come  to  an  end  somewhere  in  an  ultimate  premise  ;
a  problem  which  could  only  be  solved,  as  Aristotle,  I
imagine,  was  really  quite  aware,  by  making  the  series  ulti-
mately return  into  itself,  and  lose  its  successive  character
by  transformation  into  an  organised  system.  But  this
difficulty  about  the  ultimate  premise  of  a  series,  even  if  un-
solved, does  not  justify  the  neglect  of  the  plain  logical
differentia  imposed  by  the  term  a  priori  upon  all  that
claims  to  be  known  a  priori^,  viz.  that  it  shall  be  inferred
from  knowledge,  whatever  this  may  be,  other  than  itself.


'  Cp.  especially  above,  i.  144.

"  I  am  quite  unable,  for  the  reasons  assigned  in  the  text,  to  subscribe  to  the
views  as  to  a  priori  knowledge  which  are  stated  in  sections  355-6  of  Lotze's
Logik.  In  placing  the  test  of  'self-evidence '  in  an  immediate  recognition  without
any  process  of  proof,  he  appears  to  me  to  surrender  altogether  the  rational
character  of  knowledge.  His  subsequent  explanation,  sect.  358,  seems  to  me
exactly  parallel  to  Whewell's  practical  retractation  respecting  the  law  of  atomic
weights. See  below,  p.  225.

*  Prantl,  Geschichte  der  Logik,  vol. iv. p. 78,  quotes  from  Albertus  de


Chap. VII.]  Victous  IntuUiotial  Belief.  223

(2)  If,  on  the  other  hand,  by  those  who  object  to  the  '  a  Indis-
priori'  origin  of  knowledge,  supposed  to  be  alleged  as  not  sodation.
experiential,  an  appeal  is  made  to  any  form  of  indissoluble
association,  originating  no  doubt  in  constant  experiential
conjunction,  but  operating  finally  through  a  sheer  psycho-  j

logical  inability  to  disjoin  the  parts  which  insist  on  present-  \

ing  themselves  together  in  the  mental  picture,  here  if  any-  I

where  we  have  the  victous  doctrine  of  a  priori  knowledge  in
its  most  outrageous  form.  For,  it  must  be  remembered,
the  past  is  past ;  the  psychological  history  of  our  conviction
cannot  come  into  court  when  we  wish  to  demonstrate  the
conviction  to  be  true  or  false.  It  is  of  no  use  to  say,  '  I
have  seen  it  so  often  that  I  cannot  help  believing  it  true.'
One  might  almost  as  well  say,  '  I  have  said  it  so  often  that
I  cannot  help  believing  it  true.'  The  question  is  not  how
often  you  have  seen  it,  but  what  you  now  know  that  you
saw,  and  under  what  precise  conditions.  If  nothing  in  the
content  of  the  experience,  as  it  now  is  in  the  mind,  goes
to  exclude  error  or  to  carry  conviction  ^,  then  we  believe
it  simply  because  we  find  it  in  the  mind,  which  is  just  the
description  of  vicious  or  intuitional  a  priori  belief  ^.

Saxonia,  A.  D.  1390,  as  the  oldest  authority  for  the  dnalistic  use  ol '^  a  priorV  \
'  Demonstratio  quaedam  est  procedens  ex  causis  ad  effectum,  et  vocatur  demon-
stratio  a  priori  et  demonstratio  propter  quid  et  potissima ;  .  .  .  .  alia  est
demonstratio  procedens  ab  efiectibus  ad  causas,  et  talis  vocatur  demonstratio
a  posteriori  et  demonstratio  quia  (thatl  et  demonstratio  non  potissima.'  Nothing
could  be  more  sharply  opposed  to  '  immediate '  knowledge.

*  The  distinct  relations  to  the  percipient,  which  make  us  sure  that  our  recol-
lection is  not  a  fancy,  are  what  perform  this  office  in  an  act  of  'simple'
memory.  In  fact,  no  act  of  memory  is  absolutely  simple,  as  indeed  no  intel-
lectual act  of  any  kind  is.  The  truth  of  our  recollection  is  inferred  from
content,  not  accepted  because  of  mere  psychical  indissolubility.

*  In  the  discussion  alluded  to  in  the  text.  Mill  is  on  the  whole  the  champion
of  organised  knowledge  and  inferential  necessity  against  unreasoned  conviction
and  mere  indissoluble  association.  But  he  wavers  in  his  position,  (i)  by  re-
fusing to  maintain  against  Whewell  that  a  justifiable  necessity  can  be  generated
by  experience,  and  confining  himself  to  the  contention  that  an  illusory  show  of
necessity  can  be  so  generated — this  means  that  the  experience  of  which  he  is
thinking  is  the  mere  repetition  of  sense-perception  and  not  a  determinate  system
of  science ;  and  (2)  by  the  constant  appeal  to  the  profusion  of  experimental
evidence  in  favour  of  geometrical  axioms,  and  in  particular  to  the  mental


2  24 Relation  of  Knowledge  to  its  Postulates,  [bookii.

Organised  ( /3.  The  distinction  on  which  the  relation  of  necessity  to
organised Experience  really  turns  is  the  distinction  between  organised
experience,  and  unorganised  experience. The  former  can  give  neces-
sity; the  latter  cannot  %\>jq.  knowledge. To  maintain  with
'  Whewell  that  there  is  a  necessity  which  does  not  depend  on
experience  is  to  concede  Mill's  contention  that  necessity  is
a  psychological  illusion. If  there  is  no  organisation  of  ex-
*  perience  into  a  system,  the  latter  view  is  obviously  the
truth  ; but  with the necessity  which Mill  rejects  there
must  in  that  case  also  be  thrown  overboard  the  knowledge
which  he  maintains. If  there  is  organisation  of  experience,
then the necessity which attends complete conception,
although  nothing  irrational,  supernatural,  or  immutable,  is
more  than  a  psychological  illusion. It  simply  means  that
given  this  and  that,  being  the  conditions  imposed  by  our
knowledge  of  the  matter  in  hand,  then  the  other  must
follow  because  of  the  relation  between  them.

This  distinction  may  be,  I  think,  pretty  thoroughly  eluci-
dated with  reference  to  Whewell's  treatment  ^  of  the  prin-
ciple, in  his  time  quite  a  recent  discovery,  that  chemical
combination  takes  place  between  elements  in  certain  con-
stant definite  proportions  only.  Whewell  was  able  to
persuade  himself  that  this  law,  when  once  understood  by  a
mind  with  adequate  scientific  resources,  could  not  but  be
accepted  as  a  law  whose  falsity  was  inconceivable.  Of
course  such  an  assertion,  made  by  a  writer  suspected  of  a
belief  in  intuitional  or  something  like  innate  andjunreasoned
convictions  of  necessity,  about  a  principle  '  the  discoverer  of
which  was  still  living,'  was  open  to  the  ridicule  with  which

picture  of  parallel  straight  lines  as  the  instrument,  by  a  constant  repetition  of
experiment,  of  generating  the  certainty  that  they  are  incapable  of  meeting.
Here  we  lose  sight  of  the  principle  which  owes  so  much  to  Mill's  advocacy,
/  that  one  good  experiment  will  establish  a  law.  Sir  J.  Herschel  as  quoted  by
Mill  wavers  in  precisely  the  same  way,  appealing  now  to  iteration  of  ex-
perience, and  now  to  systematic  knowledge.  Spencer  seems  to  hold  the  view
characterised  in  the  text,  not  interpreting  his  test  by  conception  into  logical
proof  and  therefore  leaving  us  to  suppose  that  it  consists  in  psychical  con-
junction.

^  Fully  adduced  and  discussed  in  Mill's  chapters  above  referred  to.


Chap.  VII.]  Intuition  and  Conceptio?i.


■22^


Mill  assailed  it.  But  the  interest  lies  in  the  explanations
which  Whewell  subsequently  offered,  and  which  make
the  course  of  his  mind  in  the  matter  tolerably  clear.  In
order  to  perceive  necessity  in  such  a  case,  you  must,  he
says  in  effect,  understand  the  terms,  you  must  conceive
all  the  elements  of  the  problem  distinctly^  and  you
must  be  furnished  with  a  degree  of  scientific  knowledge
which  not  every  man  of  science  possesses.  The  '  intui-
tion '  of  the  truth,  he  says,  '  may  be  a  rare  and  difficult
attainment.'

There  can  hardly  be  two  opinions  as  to  what  all  this
means.  Conception  as  thus  understood  is  simply  systematic,
knowledge,  and  the  reason  why  you  cannot  conceive  the  law
false  is  that  you  have  attained  a  thoroughly  mediate  insight
that  the  system  of  science  requires  it  to  be  true  ;  i.  e.  that  if
it  were  taken  not  to  be  true  your  system  of  reality  would
be  shattered  and  overthrown.  This  necessity  is  read  into
the  terms  of  the  principle  in  question,  the  interpretation  of
which  has  been  insensibly  enlarged,  and  without  careful
analysis  there  is  great  likelihood  that  the  principle  will
seem  to  possess  a  necessity  involving  no  relation  to  any-
thing outside  itself.  In  the  particular  case  in  question  it
may  be — though  the  suggestion  is  hazardous — that  a  con-
fusion was  operative  in  Whewell's  mind  between  a  very
abstract  principle  which  is  involved  in  the  place  held  by
quantity  in  the  real  world,  and  the  peculiar  law  discovered
by  Dalton  as  the  law  of  atomic  weights.  All  quantity  is
definite,  and  every  combination  is  a  combination  of  definite
quantities.  Nor  can  there  be  any  doubt  that  every  mixture
has  different  properties  according  to  the  relative  quantities  of
the  things  mixed  together.  Wine  and  water  will  mix  in  any
quantities,  but  the  mixtures  will  not  all  be  the  same.  I
venture  to  write  down  these  platitudes,  as  Mill,  in  main-
taining tliat  the  occurrence  which  Whewell  called  incon-
ceivable really  represents  the  general  rule,  almost  seems  to
forget  that  every  mixture  is  a  mixture  of  definite  quantities,
and  that  a  change  in  the  proportion  will  make  a  difference  in

VOL.  II.  Q


L


226 Relation  of  Know  leg de  to  its  Postulates, [bookii.

the  mixture.  No  doubt  this  comparatively  formal  principle
is  a  long  way  from  the  law  which  Dalton  discovered,  viz.
that  the  peculiar  combination  known  as  chemical  combina-
tion would  not  take  place  at  all  except  between  definite
proportions  of  the  elements.  But  yet,  assuming  the
constancy  of  the  resultant  combinations,  e.  g.  that  there  is
only  one  kind  of  water  and  not  two  or  more  kinds,  and  also
the  limitation  of  tkeirnumber,\.e.  that  there  is  not  in  nature
a  series  of  compounds  containing  the  same  elements  as  water
but  in  slightly  different  proportions — and  I  should  have
imagined  that  the  truth  or  untruth  of  these  two  suggestions
must  have  been  notorious  to  chemists  before  Dalton's  time
■ — then  presupposing  all  this  it  does  seem  to  an  outsider  as
if  the  law  of  combination  in  definite  and  constant  propor-
tions ^  was  pretty  much  rendered  necessary  by  the  mere
nature  of  quantity.  At  all  events,  without  being  so  rash  as
to  infer  from  the  operations  of  my  own  mind  to  those  of
Whewell's,  I  may  suggest  that  some  such  process  as  the
above,  which  is  obviously  a  mediate  inference  from  matters
of  fact  combined  with  a  formal  principle  about  quantity,
constantly  follows  upon  the  discovery  of  a  law.  We  are  apt
then  tacitly  to  presuppose  the  matters  of  fact,  and  to
identify  the  new  law  with  the  formal  principle  which  it
interprets.  This,  I  venture  to  think,  is  the  key  to  the
general  character  of  the  process  which  Whewell's  mind
must  have  passed  through  in  the  case  before  us,  with  the
result  of  his  mistaking  mediate  for  immediate  necessity^.
In  any  case,  his  reason  for  believing  Dalton's  law  plainly
was,  as  he  says  in  so  many  words,  that  he  thought  he  saw

*  The  theory  of  atoms  goes  further  than  this  in  form.  But  I  understand
Mill  and  Whewell  to  be  speaking  of  the  law  only  in  as  far  as  it  refers  to  definite
proportions.

'^  It  is  said  that  men  always  begin  by  denying  a  new  truth,  and  then  say  that
they  knew  it  before.  This  is  simply  that  the  material  interpretation  or  develop-
ment of  an  accepted  abstract  principle  is  at  first  strange  to  them  and  they
resist  it ;  but  when  they  have  understood  it,  they  pass  it  over  into  the  old
formal  principle,  identify  the  two,  and  become  unconscious  that  they  have
made  any  advance.


Chap. VII.] Conception  and  Imagination.  227

the  whole  order  of  nature  to  be  involved  in  it.  If  the
intuition  of  an  a  priori  necessity  excludes  mediation  or
inference,  then  this  logical  process  was  not  the  intuition  of
an  a  priori  necessity.

In  as  far  then  as  Conception  means  this  complete  in-
sight, its  necessity  is  clearly  the  sole  test  of  truth,  being
simply  identicgj  with  the  necessity  of  knowledge.  Mill's
polemic  against  the  test  by  mere  Conception  is  largely
justified  by  the  ignorant  use  that  was  made  of  this  test,  as
if  it  were  immediate  and  operated  by  mere  inspection.  In
this  polemic  Mill  shows  himself  alive  to  the  true  source  of
experiential  necessity,  although  he  rejects  the  term  neces-
sity except  in  reference  to  mathematical  reasoning.  Thus,
strangely  enough.  Mill  reintroduces  into  knowledge  the
distinction  between  necessary  and  not-necessary  truth,  which
the  experiential  school  might  be  expected  to  deny.  And
his  account  of  the  distinction  is  on  the  whole  sound,  re-
ferring it  simply  to  the  difference  between  the  complete
knowledge  of  the  conditions,  which  is  possible  in  mathe-
matics \  and  the  partial  knowledge  of  the  conditions  which
alone  is  possible  in  ordinary  physical  investigation.  It
would  be  better,  however,  either  to  abolish  the  term  neces-
sary altogether,  or  to  extend  it  to  all  scientific  knowledge
as  such.

Mere  imagination^  on  the  other  hand,  as  Mill  rightly
contends,  though  inclined  to  extend  the  contention  errone-
ously to  conception,  has  nothing  to  do  with  truth  or  know-
ledge either  way.  Allegations  are  not  more  likely  to  be
true  because  we  can  imagine  their  content,  nor  less  likely
because  we  cannot.

It  follows  from  the  above  considerations —

(1)  That  every  judgment  is  necessary^  and  mediate  in  as
far  as  it  is  known  ;  and  that  no  judgment  has  necessity  or
precision  (which depends  on  the  explicitness  of  the  me-

^  The  view  of  mathematical  conceptions  as  hypothetical  does  not  concern  us
here. See  Bk.  I.  chap.  iv.

^  See  also  chap,  i,  of  this  book,  on  the  specific  necessity  of  judgment.


J


A


228 Relation  of  K^tow ledge  to  its  Postulates,  [book  11.

diating  conditions) if  taken apart from the totality of
knowledge ;

and  (2)  That  the  content  of  every  judgment,  as  well  as
its  truth  or  necessity,  is  correlative  to  the  one  ultimate
judgment,  i.  e.  to  the  whole  system  of  knowledge  ;  and  that
therefore  while  we  do  well  to  maintain  that  the  body  of
knowledge  has  certain  indispensable  functions,  we  never-
theless commit  an  error  of  principle  if  we  deny  that  the
identity  of  these  functions  is  like  other  identities  compatible
with  variation.

Thus  for  instance  knowledge,  or  reality  as  known,  must
have  such  a  function  of  relativity  as  that  which  we  express
by  the  law  of  causation.  But  to  suppose  that  the  shape  in
which  that  function  happens  to  be  familiar  to  us,  involving
perhaps  homogeneity  of  cause  and  effect,  is  necessarily  an
ultimate  shape,  is  one  of  the  most  mischievous  results  of
the  fallacy  of  an  isolated  necessity.  I  do  not  think  that
there  can  be  any  doubt  that  even  the  conceptions  of  the
straight  line  or  of  three-dimensional  space  are  modified  in
their  content  by  the  explicit  distinctions  needed  to  save
them  from  being  confounded  with  arcs  of  great  circles  on  a
sphere  surface  or  with  space  of  more  or  less  than  three
dimensions.  Unquestionably  the  new  conceptions,  however
unreal,  make  themselves  felt  as  restricting  the  absoluteness
of  the  old  ones.  Every  judgment  is  relative  to  the  whole
of  knowledge,  and  no  judgment  entirely  escapes  modifica-
tion as  this  whole  is  modified.
Rehabilita-  ii.  In  order  to  illustrate  the  true  import  and  value  of  such
fomal  dis-  conceptions  as  that  of  a  priori  truth  or  of  necessary  know-
tinctions.  ledge,  I  will  venture  to  give  a  brief  sketch  of  the  process,
tending  to  repeat  itself  in  history,  by  which  such  distinc-
tions are  most  thoroughly  apprehended,  and  which,  if  only
in  the  individual  mind,  is  perhaps  necessary  to  their
apprehension.

When,  in  an  epoch  of  genuine  enquiry,  a  student  first
opens  his  eyes,  so  to  speak,  in  the  philosophical  world,  he
finds himself confronted by a multitude of traditional


Chap. VII.] Distinctions  reassert  themselves.  229

distinctions,  some  of  which  claim  to  be  fundamental  lines
of  demarcation.  Impressed  with  the  ruling  idea  of  all
great  epochs  or  earnest  intelligences,  that  of  the  unity  of
reality,  he  assumes  a  protestant  attitude  towards  these
distinctions,  which  appear  to  him  incompatible  with  the
demands  of  his  genius  or  of  his  time.  His  iconoclastic  zeal
is  inflamed  by  the  justification  which  it  finds  in  the
obviously  meaningless  and  mechanical  rigidity  of  the  tradi-
tion which  it  attacks,  a  tradition  that  has  come  to  be  in
many  respects  a  real  offence  against  the  primary  postulates
of  intelligence.  And  turning  from  his  contemporaries  to
the  great  masters  of  thought  whom  they  profess  to  inter-
pret, he  finds  in  them  also  the  phrases  and  ideas  which  he
has  learnt  to  regard  as  the  symbols  of  an  unmeaning  super-
stition. And  therefore,  finding  no  help  in  man,  such  a
protestant  reformer  in  philosophy  will  proceed  to  recon-
struct his  world  on  the  basis  of  that  aspect  of  it  in  which  its
unity  has  been  revealed  to  him  ;  that  is  to  say,  in  the  case
of  logic,  probably  on  the  basis  of  sensation,  of  observation,
of  particulars,  of  inductive  experience.

But  when  with  labour  and  pains  some  progress  has  been
made  in  this  reconstruction,  then  for  the  reformer  or  for  his
successors  there  arises  a  further  stage.  The  duty  now  falls
upon  them  of  maintaining  the  essential  distinctions  of
thought,  between  perceptive  comparison  and  geometrical
demonstration,  between  empirical  laws  and  laws  of  nature,
between  induction  by  simple  enumeration  and  the  con-
structive processes  of  methodic  science.  When  these  anti-
theses are  fully  developed,  then  the  time  has  come  for  a
rediscovery  of  the  meaning  of  Plato  and  Aristotle.  The
language  which  science  is  compelled  to  hold  reveals  itself
as  coincident  with  that  of  the  teacher  who  first  explained
in  what  science  consists.  The  distinction  between  the
province  of  self-contradictory  opinion  ^  and  the  province  of

*  De  Morgan's  Budget  of  Paradoxes  is  little  else  than  the  self-defence  of
science  against  opinion.  The  failure  to  distinguish  relations,  which  in  the
world  of  opinion  makes  difference  into  contradiction,  is  well  illustrated,  by  one


230 Relation  of  Knowledge  to  its  Postulates. [Book  11.

coherent  knowledge  recovers  for  science  the  meaning  which
it  had  all  but  lost  for  scholarship.  When  it  becomes  un-
avoidable to  erect,  within  the  whole  of  '  experience,'  which
has  been  passionately  proclaimed  to  be  coextensive  with
knowledge,  the  included  wholes  of '  empirical '  observation
and  mere  fact,  as  opposed  to  deductive  certainty  and
mathematical  necessity,  then  it  is  understood  how  such
distinctions  as  these  when  originally  made  were  distinctions
within  the  knowable  world,  and  were  not  incompatible  with
the  unity  of  experience.  No  geometrician,  I  imagine,
would  accept  the  statement  that  the  ratio  of  the  diameter
to  the  circumference  of  a  circle,  so  far  as  ascertained,  is
ascertained  by  observation,  because  this  would  mean  that
it  was  found  by  direct  measurement.  But,  in  denying  this
'  empirical '  origin  of  the  cognition  in  question,  he  would
not  suppose  that  he  was  alleging  its  independence  of  our
acquired  knowledge  concerning  space  and  spatial  relations.
He  would  explain,  I  suppose,  that  no  doubt  the  calculation
in  question  was  based  upon  spatial  relations  that  could  only
come  into  the  human  intelligence  through  its  being  aware
of  a  spatial  world  (however  this  its  spatial  perception  is
attained),  but  that  nevertheless  the  conclusion  is  reached  by
a  process  of  reasoning  or  calculation,  and  is  not  an  observa-
tion in  the  sense  in  which  it  is  an  observation  that  there  are
ten  volumes  in  the  shelf  at  my  right  hand.  And  by  ex-
tending the  same  reasonable  interpretation  to  Plato  and
Aristotle  which  we  extend  to  ourselves,  remembering,  that
is,  that  all  contentions  are  relative  to  certain  purposes  and
proceed  on  certain  assumptions,  it  becomes  possible  to
recover  something  like  their  natural  meaning.

The  development  of  Logic  in  England  from  Bacon  to
Mill  and  Jevons  is  a  good  illustration  of  the  process  which
I  have  attempted  to  describe.  And  on  a  still  larger  scale,
extending  to  every  side  of  life,  I  make  no  doubt  that  the

of  De  Morgan's  cases,  an  argument  against  the  rotation  of  the  earth  which  asks
'  How  can  a  man  go  200  yards  to  any  place  if  the  moving  superficies  of  the
earth  do  carry  it  from  him  ?'  p.  78.


Chap.  VII.] Logical  Meaning  of  ^Aesthdicl  231

Renaissance  itself,  and  also  the  new  Renaissance  of
VVinckelmann,  Schiller  and  Goethe,  were  examples  of  a
similar  phenomenon.  Ancient  systems  of  thought  or  of
religion  can  in  fact  only  be  interpreted  in  as  far  as  their  inter-
preters feel  the  necessities  which  were  pressing  upon  their
authors.  And  thus  the  individual  mind,  in  as  far  as  its
ideas  develope  from  a  root  of  genuine  interest  in  reality,
tends  to  pursue  an  analogous  course.  If  a  great  master  of
thought  could  come  on  earth  again  after  some  centuries,  he
would  seldom  find  his  true  followers  among  those  who
have  never  deviated  from  the  straitest  sect  of  his  ex-
ponents.

Thus  a  cynic  might  say  that  the  history  of  philosophy  is
a  process  in  which  the  meaning  of  Plato  and  Aristotle  is
periodically  forgotten  by  their  disciples  and  rediscovered  by
their  antagonists  ;  who  then,  perhaps,  become  their  disciples
and  so  the  cycle  recommences.  And  the  observation  would
be  just  except  in  so  far  as  it  implies  that  in  each  redis-
covery no  advance  is  made  on  the  meaning  as  understood
before.  The  cycles  of  philosophy  repeat  themselves,  but
not  with  identical  content.  The  Encyclopaedia  Britannica
is  a  very  different  thing  from  the  Encyclopaedia  of  existing
knowledge  as  sketched  in  Plato's  Republic.

iii.  It  has  been  suggested  by  a  great  writer^ — and  the ' Aesthetic
suggestion  falls  in  with  many  current  ideas  about  philo- °^*^^^**^'
sophy — that  the  necessity  or  propriety  on  the  strength  of  /

which  synthetic  connections  are  derive  d  from  or  com-
bined into  an  including  unity,  ultimately  the  unity  of  the
world,  may  be  rightly  described  as  '  aesthetic'  This  con-
ception contains  elements  of  very  unequal  value,  and  I
suspect  that  the  element  for  the  sake  of  which  it  is  recom-
mended is  one  for  the  sake  of  which  it  ought  to  be
rejected.

It  does  not  matter,  or  ought  not  to  matter,  whether  we
speak  of  self-evidence,  propriety,  or  necessity.  They  all
attempt  to  express  the  same  fact,  that  in  knowledge,  that

^  Lotze,  Logik,  sects.  364-5.


232 Relation  of  Knowledge  to  its  Postulates, [book  11.

is  in  judgment,  we  are  not  free,  but  are  under  a  constraint
exercised  upon  us  by  the  content  of  knowledge  itself,  such
that  some  judgments  have  to  be  accepted  and  others  to  be
rejected.  But  if  we  express  this  fact  by  the  term  necessity,
then  in  virtue  of  the  explanations  which  have  been  given
above  we  exclude,  and  rightly  exclude,  an  interpretation
which  the  terms  self-evidence  and  propriety  admit  if  they
do  not  compel,  that  is  to  say,  an  intuitional  interpretation.
'  Aesthetic  necessity,'  then,  would  either  mean  something
which  we  might  accept  as  a  fact,  though  we  should  pro-
nounce its  appellation  unduly  limited,  or  else  would  be  a
contradiction  in  terms.  I  will  consider  the  latter  alterna-
tive first.
In  one  a.  An  aesthetic  judgment,  like  a  moral  judgment,  is  in

ccmtr'a^  everyday  life,  at  any  rate,  not  explicitly  mediated.  It  is
diction.  the  peculiarity  of  the  aesthetic  product,  or  of  the  aesthetic
aspect  of  any  object,  that  although  coherent  and  rational,
having  passed  through  the  medium  of  mind,  yet  never-
theless, qua  aesthetically  operative,  it  is  not  discursively
analysed.  Although  in  aesthetic  judgment  discursive  anal-
ysis must  play  its  part,  yet  such  analysis  is  not  the  essence
of  aesthetic  appreciation,  but  is  on  the  contrary  that  which
aesthetic  appreciation  has  in  common  with  scientific  under-
standing, and  is  the  mere  organon  of  careful  perception,  by
which  the  aesthetic  product  is  constructed  and  brought  to
notice  in  the  mind.  A  work  of  art,  or  any  object  regarded
as  beautiful,  makes  an  appeal  to  feeling ;  which,  as  such
an  appeal,  must  be  immediate,  although  the  feeling  to
which  it  appeals  is  moralised  or  spiritualised,  and  conse-
quently there  is  on  both  sides,  in  the  work  of  art  and  in  the
spectator,  a  rational  content.  This,  though  it  appeals  to
feeling  in  an  immediate  form,  is  of  course  capable  of  being
analysed  in  mediate  form.  But  yet,  as  the  work  of  art  is
the  outcome  of  a  spiritual  mood  of  feeling  in  the  artist,  so
it  appeals  to  such  a  mood  in  the  spectator.  It  was  not
constructed  by  combination  of  abstract  relations,  and  though
its  fabric  must  be  coherent  and  charged  with  intelligence,


Chap.  VII.] Analysis  of  Work  of  Art.  233

yet  no  mere  intellectual  reconstruction  of  such  a  fabric  can
reproduce  the  spiritual  mood  which  is  the  essence  of  the
work  of  art.  This,  if  expressed  in  an  abstract  or  inferential
form,  may  retain  a  value  for  philosophy,  but  loses  the_
differentia  of  fine  art.  Therefore,  as  necessity  involves
explicit  mediation,  and  aesthetic  judgment  in  the  strictest
sense  excludes  explicit  mediation,  to  speak  of  aesthetic
necessity  is  a  contradictio  in  adjecto.  It  is  this  immediafe^
or  intuitional  self-evidence,  this  appreciation  by  feelings
which,  as  I  suspect,  the  suggestion  before  us  intended  to
identify  with  logical  coherence  or  necessity.  If  recom-
mended in  this  sense,  the  suggestion  must  I  think  be  abso-
lutely rejected.  Necessity  only  attaches  to  a  judgment  in
as  far  as  that  judgment  involves  the  whole  of  knowledge.
Unreasoned  necessity  is  irrational  belief.

/3.  If,  on  the  other  hand,  aesthetic  necessity  merely  meant  In  another
that  synthetic  coherence  of  parts  which  every  aesthetic  ^!^of
whole  shares  with  all  universals  whatever,  then  though  we  logical
should  admit  the  description  to  be  true,  and  in  one  respect
striking,  yet  we  should  have  to  add  that  it  really  did  no
more  than  refer  us  to  one  instance,  and  that  an  imperfect  one,
of  the  general  relation  to  be  described.  An  aesthetic  whole
is,  so  to  speak,  a  universal  made  easy.  In  it  the  individual
unity  which  belongs  to  everything  real  is  not  left  to  be  toil-
somely unravelled  by  reflection,  but  is  presented  in  a  shape
capable  of  at  once  appealing  as  a  unity  to  sense-perception
or  to  imagination.  Hence  the  discursive  analysis  which  is
instrumental  in  the  apprehension  of  a  work  of  art,  however
subtle  in  its  ultimate  refinements,  is  ex  hypothesi  in  great
part  evident  and  unavoidable.  In  this  sense  and  to  this
extent  the  rational  coherence  in  which  all  knowledge  con-
sists is  strikingly  illustrated,  not  by  the  aesthetic  judgment
itself,  but  by  the  analysis  which  accompanies  the  appre-
hension of  a  work  of  art  in  so  far  as  this  apprehension  is  of
the  same  nature  with  the  apprehension  of  any  perceived
object  or  complex  of  relations  -whatsoever.  For  this  reason  it
is  not  uncommon  to  take  a  work  of  art  as  an  example  of


234 Relation  of  Knowledge  to  its  Postulates, [bookii.

the  compulsion  by  which  the  nature  of  a  whole  controls  its
parts,  simply  because  this  control,  which  is  the  essence  of
individuality,  lends  itself  readily  to  analysis  in  a  work  that
is  pervaded  by  an  especially  harmonious  unity  ^.  But
precisely  the  same  is  the  case  with  geometrical  concep-
tions, and  for  precisely  the  same  reason  geometrical  neces-
sity, which  is  not  only  rational  but  also  essentially  mediate,
is  often  taken  as  the  type  of  logical  necessity.

Of  these  two  classes  of  examples  the  geometrical  con-
ception is  the  more  perfect  in  one  respect  and  the  aesthetic
in  another.  The  aesthetic  object  is  an  imperfect  type  of
necessity  because  its  nature  is  not  exhaustible  by  reasoned
judgment,  but  consists  in  being  such  as  to  produce  a  certain
spiritual  mood.  As  this  mood  involves  and  is  accompanied
by  some  degree  of  reflective  apprehension  directed  to  the
coherence  of  parts  in  the  artistic  whole,  which  coherence  is
necessary,  there  is  apt  to  be  a  confusion  between  the  feeling
and  its  concomitant  insight  which  leads  to  an  erroneous
notion  of  immediate  necessity.  And  it  may  be  added  that
in  trained  artistic  perception  there  is  an  immediate  reaction
of  repugnance  or  acceptance,  analogous  to  the  every-day
moral  judgment,  which  is  right  and  accountable  in  its  place,
but  is  the  worst  possible  elucidation  of  logical  necessity,
with  which  the  form  of  feeling  is  wholly  incompatible.
The  geometrical  object  is  not  open  to  this  censure.  Its
nature  is  to  be  capable  of  systematic  construction  through
and  through.  And  the  pervading  nature  in  virtue  of  which
the  universal  determines  its  differences,  the  root  of  logical

^  The  famous  simile  of  the  statue  in  the  beginning  of  the  fourth  book  of
Plato's  Republic  will  occur  to  every  one.  This  simile,  occurring  at  a  critical
point  in  an  important  work,  is  perhaps  responsible  for  a  current  idea  that  the
Logic  and  Ethics  of  Plato  and  Aristotle  were  '  aesthetic '  or  '  artistic'  But
the  fact  is  that  Plato  and  Aristotle  dealt  almost  exclusively  with  the  general
principles  which  underlie  all  individuality  and  function,  and  illustrated  these
from  tine  art,  from  industrial  art,  and  from  science,  almost  indifferently.  They
possessed  indeed  no  specific  term  for  fine  art,  and  though  they  gave  a  just
weight  to  the  idea  of  beauty,  yet  nothing  in  their  theories  was  aesthetic  if  that
means  sentimental  or  unreasoned.  If  anything,  they  were  too  systematic  and
intellectual.


Chap. VII.]  Specific  Necessity.  235

necessity,  is  nowhere  more  explicitly  formulated  and  ap-
plied than  in  geometry.

As  to  individuality,  however,  the  matter  is  reversed.  A  >/
work  of  art,  though  not  an  embodiment  of  real  teleology, —
for  it  has  not  a  purpose  conceived  as  a  definite  reflective
idea, — has  nevertheless  the  content  or  nature  of  real  teleo-
logy, being  thoroughly  penetrated  with  reason  ^  in  the  form
of  feeling.  It  is  therefore  individual  in  a  special  sense,  as
an  outward  and  visible  form  thoroughly  identified  with  an
idea  that  pervades  it,  so  that  the  work  of  art  is  distinctly
relative  to  human  intelligence,  though  it  has  no  separable
purpose  embodied  in  abstract  human  thought.  Thus  a
work  of  art  is  an  exceptionally  effective  instance  of  an
individual  whole.  In  geometrical  objects  the  pervading
unity  is  of  the  most  various  kinds,  and  sometimes,  taking  the
imperfect  form  of  a  progression  to  infinity,  appears  to  be
incapable  of  constituting  a  whole  complete  in  itself.  Even
space  seems  powerless  to  limit  itself,  and  therefore  its  parts
seem  rather  to  lie  indifferently  behind  one  another  than  to
constitute  a  totality  in  which  each  has  its  peculiar  place
and  function.  In  this  sense  no  doubt  the  peculiar  and
specific  necessity  imposed  upon  parts  by  the  whole  which
they  constitute  is  better  illustrated  by  the  aesthetic  than
by  the  geometrical  whole.

Yet  the  wholes  of  real  teleology,  the  moral  order,  for  ex-  \
ample,  as  exhibited  in  a  moral  person  filling  his  place  in  a \
community,  illustrate  the  nature  of  rational  necessity  better
than  either  the  aesthetic  or  the  geometrical  system. The
identification  of  necessity  with  the  idea  of  an  intuitional  or
isolated  self-evidence  is  the  rock  to  be  avoided.

Necessity,  then,  is  a  character  attaching  to  parts  or
differences  interrelated  within  wholes,  universals,  or  identi-
ties. If  there  were  any  totality  such  that  it  could  not  be
set  over  against  something  else  as  a  part  or  difference
within  a  further  system,  such  a  totality  could  not  be  known

'  Mr.  Matthew  Arnold's  phrase  '  criticism  of  life,'  applied  to  poetry,  explains
what  is  meant  by  saying  that  art  contains  reason.  That  the  reason  must  be
in  the  form  of  feeling  this  term  '  criticism '  appears  to  ignore.


236 Relation  of  Knowledge  to  its  Postulates.

under  an  aspect  of  necessity. The  universe,  however  we
/  may  conceive  of  it  as  including  subordinate  systems,  must
■ ultimately  be  incapable,  ex  hypothesis  of  entering  as  an  ele-
ment into  a  system  including  more  than  it. Strictly  speak-
I  Ing,  therefore,  its  relation  to  knowledge  must  be  one  of
reality,  not  of  necessity. But  also,  strictly  speaking,  it  is
a  reality  which  we  have  no  power  to  question  or  to  explain,
because  all  our  questioning  or  explanation  falls  within  it.
There  can  be  no  meaning  in  talking  about  what  might  be
the  case  if  the  universe  were  other  than  it  is,  or  about  what
has  been  the  case  to  make  the  universe  what  it  is.

But  except  in  the  case  of  this  unique  and  imaginary
reference  of  that  which  is  assumed  to  be  the  absolute  whole
to  something  outside  itself,  every  judgment  is  the  synthesis
of  differences,  in  a  whole  or  identity  expressed  or  under-
stood, and  is  therefore  at  the  same  time  the  analysis  of  that
identity.  It  makes  no  difference  to  the  ultimate  or  actual
import  of  a  judgment  whether  as  a  process  in  time  it  took
its  rise  from  the  synthesis  of  two  data,  or  from  the  analysis
of  one.  In  every  judgment  there  are  differences  within  an
identity.  In  every  judgment  therefore  there  is  affirmed  a
necessity  based  on  a  reality.  The  necessity  itself  may  have
for  its  content  a  further  reality,  or  may  remain  an  abstrac-
tion which  can  only  be  set  down  as  descriptive  or  illustra-
tive of  reality.  The  latter  is  the  case  with  the  more  extreme
forms  of  the  hypothetical  judgment.

The  various  forms  of  universal  which  are  the  source  of
necessity  and  constitute  the  content  of  judgments,  the  com-
parative value  of  these  forms  for  knowledge,  and  the  affinities
between  them,  are  the  object-matter  of  Logical  Science.
And  because  our  intelligence  creates  and  sustains  our  real
world  by  a  continuous  judgment  which  embraces  these
forms,  in  their  concrete  connection,  within  the  unity  of  its
system,  it  is  further  true  that  Logical  Science  is  the  analysis,
not  indeed  of  individual  real  objects,  but  of  the  intellectual
structure  of  reality  as  a  whole.


/O


_  /  -  ^^


INDEX.


Absolute  Necessity,  a  contradiction,

iL  213.
Abstract  Number,  i.  167.
Abstraction,  i.  65  ;  ii.  31  ff.
Abstraction  and  Necessity,  L  43  ff.
Added  Determinants,  ii.  61.
Addition  and  Multiplication,  ii.  53.
Addition  and  Multiplication of  In-
dices, ii.  53  ff.
'Aesthetic necessity' criticised, iL

331  ff.
Affirmation  and  Negation,  i.  294  ff.
Albertus  de  Saxonia,  on  *  a  priori'  and

'a  posteriori,^  iL  323  note.
All,  meaning  of  in  Judgment,  L  163.
Allness  and  Necessity,  i.  224.
Alternative  Classifications,  i.  63.
Analogical  Judgmoit,  i.  226  ff.
Analogy,  True  and  false  baas  of,  iL

988:
Analytic,  L  97.
Aimual  rings  in  trees,  i.  234.
OMOipaais,  dist.  Iriprjois,  L  332.
A  priori,  ii.  222.
Aristotle,  i.  9,  12,  15  note,  25,  80,

224,  271,  298,  332;  iL  177,  218,

222,  334  note.
Arnold,  Mr.  Matthew,  ii.  235  note.
Association  of  ideas,  ii.  15,  223.
Atomic  weights,  theory  o^  iL  334.
Axioms,  iL  205.

Bare  Denial,  i.  299.
Bee  Ophrys,  ii.  125.
Bradley,  *  Principles  of  Logic,'  L  14,

30,  49  note,  59,  79  note,  107,  252,

279  ff.,  285,  296-7,  323,  332,  342,

378,382;  iL  40,61,  113.
Brown,  Dr.  Thomas,  ii.  60,
'Budget  of  Paradoxes,'  De  Morgan,

L  389 ;  ii.  1 20.

Calculation,  iL  31.


Cat^orical  and  Hypothetical,  L  93  ff^

a85.
Categories  of  Sense,  L  199.
Causation,  law  of,  ii.  213.
Cause,  i.  364  ff.
Chances,  statement  of,  L  352.
Change  and  Diffeioice,  i.  I4I.
Characteristic  Ratio,  i.  133.
Characters, '  important,'  ii.  91.
Chronolc^cal  indications,  i.  3ii.
Classifications,  alternative,  i.  63.
Clifford,  on  Causation,  ii.  157  note.
CoUectiTe  names,  L  57.
Colligation  of  facts,  ii.  160.
Colour-match,  L  206.
ComparatiTe  Judgment,  i.  116.
Comparison  proper,  ii.  20.
Complete  Enumeration,  ii.  49.
Complex  Enumeration,  iL  53  ff.
Conception,  test  of  truth,  ii.  225  ff.
Concepts,  L  39.

Condition  and  Conditioned,  i.  262.
Conjunction  and  Disjunction,  i.  349.
Consciousness  and  Energy,  iL  74.
Constitutive  Equation,  ii.  65.
Construction,  ii.  36.
Continuous  magnitude,  L  159.
Contradiction,  law  of,  ii.  208.
Contraposition,  L  331.
Contrariety  and  Contradiction,  L  309-

10.
Conversion,  L  324.
Copula,  i.  80.

Corporate  Judgment,  i.  aia.
Counting  analysed,  i.  156.
Counting  mediate,  i.  1 70.
*  Criticism  of  life,'  ii.  235.
Cross-fertilisation,  ii.  126.

Dalton,  ii.  226.

Darwin,  Origin  of  Species,  L  i ;  Fer-
tilisation of  Orchids,  ii.  1 01  ff.
Day  cause  of  Night  ?  i.  275.


238


Index.


De  Morgan,  'Budget  of  Paradoxes,'

i.  389;  ii.  120,  160,  229.
Determination,  Generalisation  by,  ii.

169.
Dicey,  'Law  of  the  Constitution,'  ii.

19.
Difference  and  Change,  i.  140.
Difference  needs  a  standard,  i.  126.
Discovery,  ii.  8.
Discrete  Magnitude,  i.  159.
Discrimination,  ii.  26.
Disjunction  and  Conjunction,  i.  349.
Disjunctive  Judgment,  i.  341.
Distinction,  i.  22.
Double  Negation,  i,  320.

Ehrenberg,  i.  315.

Elements  (formative),  i.  20.

Enumerative  Judgment,  i.  160.

Enumerative  Induction,  ii.  43.

Equation,  ii.  31.

Equation,  Constitutive,  ii.  65.

Equation  and  Judgment,  i.  202.

Equational  logic,  ii.  33.

Exception,  i.  384.

Excluded  Middle,  law  of,  ii.  210.

Exhaustive  Judgment,  i.  168,  225.

Existence  of  geometrical  figures,  i.
191.

Existential  meaning  in  Generic  Judg-
ment, i.  237.

Experiment,  ii.  143.

Extension,  i.  46  ff.,  55,  59.

External  Proportion,  i.  137.

Figures of  Syllogism, ist, ii. 180;

2nd,  ii.  88  ;  3rd,  ii.  44,  115.
Final  Cause,  in  Plato,  ii.  182  note.
Formative  elements,  i.  20.

Generalisation,  kinds  of,  ii.  168  ff.
Generic  Judgment,  i.  322.
Green,  Prof.  T.  H.,  ii.  160.
Ground,  i.  259  ff.

Hegel,  i.  i,  79,  378,  380,  397 ;  ii.  47,

61,70,  81.
Helmholtz,  Popular  lectures,  ii.  1 50,
Herbart,  i.  151.

Herschel,  Sir  J.,  in  Mill,  ii.  224.
History  and  Science,  i.  276-7.


Huxley,  Prof.,  ii.  106  note,  214  note.
Hypnotism,  degrees  of,  i.  395.
Hypothesis,  dist.  Postulate,  ii.  155.
Hypothetical,  i.  93  ff.,  250  ff.,  285.

Idea,  i.  46.

Ideas,  Locke  on,  i.  73.

Identification,  i.  27;  ii.  26.

Identity,  i.  14,  28 ;  Locke  on,  ii.  207  ;

Law  of,  ii.  207.
Imagination  and  Conception,  ii.  227.
Imperative,  i.  107  note.
Impersonal  Proposition,  i.  108.
Indices,  ii.  53  ff.

Individuality  and  Proportion,  i.  135.
Individuality  and  Reality,  i.  147.
Induction, Essence  of  Perceptive,  ii.

135  ;  iiot  a  species  of  Inference,  ii.

176.
Inductive  Syllogism,  ii.  13,  46.
Inference,  Nature  of,  ii.  i,  3  ;  Ultimate

Conditions  of,  ii.  199  ff. ;  Conditions

of, compared  with Syllogism, ii.

20  r  ff.
Infinite  Judgment,  i.  298.
Infinite  Series,  1.  173.
Intension,  i.  46  ff.,  59.
Interjection,  i.  107.
Internal  Proportion,  i.  137.
Instance,  i.  384.
Intensive  Equation,  ii.  34.

Jevons,  Principles  of  Science,  i.  59,
371;  ii.  34,  112,  153,  160,  175;  on
Natural  Experiment,  quoted,  ii.  144.

Judgment,  i.  34,  72  ff. ;  and  Equation,


Kant,  i.  99,  377,  380;  ii.  81.

Kind  and  Quality,  i.  125.

Kirchoff,  on  Iron  in  the  Sun,  ii.  173,

Lang,  Custom  and  Myth,  ii.  162  ff.
Laws,  'Formal'  laws  of  Thought,  ii.

207  ff.
Liberty,  Equality,  and  Fraternity,  Sir

James  F.  Stephens  quoted,  i.  203.
Limitation,  conversion  by,  i.  326.
Linnaean  classification,  i.  10;  ii.  124.
Locke,  i.  73,  97  note, 180  note;  ii.

207  note.


Index.


239


Lotze,  Logic,  i.  14,  19  note,  31  ff.,  59,
68  note,  83,  151,  378-9;  ii.  13,  46,
56,  68,  80,  81,  103,  112,  133,  155;
Microcosmus,  i.  232.

Machinery,  double  import  of  in  Logic,
i.  223;  ii.  182.

Major  Premise,  ii.  46,  60.

Material  truth,  ii.  173.

Measurement,  i.  128.

Mechanism,  i.  200  ff.

Mediate  enumeration,  i.  186  ;  ii.  77.

Mill,  i.  9,  14,  78,  266-7,  280,  398;
ii.  17,  29,  44,  60,  71,  85,  93,  98,
122,  157  note,  160,  221,  227.

Mill  and  Lotze,  i.  151,

Miracle,  ii.  221.

Mommsen,  i.  11  note.

Morphology,  i.  i ;  as  weakened  Te-
leology, ii.  92.

Mortality,  i.  388.

'Mouse'  families,  hypothesis  regard-
ing, ii.  165.

Naming,  i.  8,  22.
Necessity,  a  real,  ii.  187.
Necessity  and  Abstraction,  i.  143  ff.
Necessity  and  Allness,  i,  224.
Necessity :  see '  Absolute,' '  Aesthetic'
Negation,  i.  293  ff.
Negative  Instance,  ii.  115  fif.
Night  cause  of  Day?  i.  275,
Number  (see  counting),  i.  159.

Omission,  how  related  to  Abstraction,

i.  67.
Ophrys  Apifera,  ii.  125.
Opposition  of  Judgments,  i.  310.
Organon  (Aristotle),  i.  271,  332.

Particulars  to  Particulars,  ii.  39,  44.

Parts  and  whole,  i.  103.

Personal  era,  i.  216.

Physical  Alternatives,  i.  357.

Physiology,  i.  i.

Plato,  i.  9  ff.,  91  ; ii.  182,  194,  334

note.
Plurality  of  Causes,  in  Mill,  i.  268.
Possibility,  i.  384.
Posterior  Analytics,  L  271  note;  ii  177

note.
Postulate,  dist.  Hypothesis,  ii.  155.


Predicate,  i.  80 ;  (in  Aristotle),  i.  20.

Predication,  i.  81.

Premises  of  Inductive  Syllogism,  ii.

13-
Privation,  i.  322.
Proper Name, i. 50; dist. Generic

Name,  i.  234.
Proportion  as  Inference,  ii,  68  ff. ;  as

Individuality,  i.  135.
Proposition,  dist.  Judgment,  i.  79.
Pure  Case,  L  260.

Quality  and  kind,  i.  125  ;  meaning  of,

i.  105.
Quantity,  category  of,  i.  205.
Question,  L  35,  380.

Ratio,  i.  161.

Real  world  and  my  world,  i.  82.

Reality  and  Individuality,  i.  147 ;  in

Judgment,  i.  76.
Recognition,  ii.  24  ff.
Reduction,  in  the  true  sense,  ii.  302.
Relative,  i.  25.

Republic,  Plato's,  ii.  183  note,  194.
^§/xa,  i.  20.
(niixa  dopurror,  L  398.

Scheme  of  Arguments,  ii.  42  ;  of  Judg-
ments, i.  92.

Schopenhauer  on  Euclid,  i.  252  ;  on
Necessity,  ii.  2 1 3 ;  on  Causa  Essendi
and  Fiendi,  i.  267.

Science  and  History,  i.  276-7.

Self-fertilisation,  ii.  125.

Sigwart,  i.  35  note,  59,  63,  151,  294,
321, 332,  378 ;  ii.  16,  21,  160,  175.

Singular  Judgment,  i.  208.

2T€pi;crty,  dist.  dnSipaats,  i.  332.

Structure  and  Individuality,  i.  138.

Subject,  i.  80.

Subjectivity  of  Space  and  Time,  i.
.197.

Substitutive  Inference,  ii.  57.

Subsimiption,  ii.  30.

Sufficient  Reason,  law  of,  ii.  213.

Syllogism,  fig.  i.  ii.  180  ;  fig.  3,  ii.  88  ;
fig-  3>  "•  44 ;  traditional,  ii.  301 ;
as  reasoned  judgment,  ii.  303.

Symbolic  Ideas,  i.  73.

Synthetic,  i.  97.


240


Index.


Tense,  i.  112,  216.

*  Thermometer  of  Probability,'  i.  389.

Thing,  what  is  a,  i.  138.

Three  Terms,  ii.  13.

Time,  Constancy  of,  i.  179  ;  Judgment
in,  i.  85  ;  in  Predication,  i.  215  ;  of
Predication,  i.  215; Reality  of,  i.

273-

TO  Kaff  tKacTov,  in  Inductive  Syllo-
gism, ii.  13.

Totems,  hypothesis  of,  in  Greece,  ii.
165.


Understanding,  the,  ii.  81.
Universal  Judgment,  i.  220  ff.

Venn,  Logic  of  Chance,  i.  363  ff.

Whateley,  on  Privative  and  Negative
Terms,  i.  332.

Whewell,  i.  398  ;  ii.  17,  160-1,  223-4.

Whole  and  parts,  i.  103.

Word,  no  Greek  term  for  a,  i.  12.

Wundt,  i.  59,  68,  82,  151  ;  on  Con-
stancy of  Energy,  ii.  75.


THE END.


CLARENDON PRESS,  OXFORD.
SELECT LIST OF  STANDARD  WORKS.

DICTIOXARIES P*ge  i

LAW „ a

HISTORY,  BIOGRAPHY.  ETC. ...  ,,4

PHILOSOPHY,  LOGIC,  ETC 6

PHYSICAL  SCIEXCE,  ETC „ 7

1. DICTIONARIES.

A NEW ENGLISH DICTIONAHY

ON  HISTORICAL PRmCIPLES,

Founded  mainly  on  the  materials  collected  by  the  Philological  Society.

Imperial  4to.

EDITED BY DR MURRAY.
Present  State  of  the  Work.  £  ,.  j^

Vol. I. A,  B By  Dr.  Mukkat Half-morocco a  la 6

VoL II. C By  Dr.  MtiKKAY Half-morocco 2  la 6

Vol.111. D,  E By  Dr.  MtTRBAY  and  Dr.  Bkadlet Half-morocco a  la 6

VoL  IV. P,  G By  Dr.  Bbadley Half-morocco a  12 6

VoL V. H — K By  Dr.  Muskat Half-morocco a  la 6

.Xi-Ijap o a 6

Lap-Leistirely  ...050

Iieisureness-Iiief  . . o a 6

Lief-Lock ....050

Iiock-Lyyii ,...050

M-Mandragon ...050

*  If  andragora-Matter  .050

.O-Onomastic ...050

Onomastical-Outitig . 050

Outjet-Ozyat ...026

P-Pargeted  ....050

Pargeter-Pennached. 050

VPennage-Pf . ...050

|Q 026

VoLVm.  Q— S  ByMr.  Ckaigik . . jB-^^eactive ....050

I  Eeactively-Bee ..050
(.Bee-Beign ....026

The  remainder  of  the  work  is  in  active  preparation.

Vols.  IX,  X  will  contain  S-Z  with  some  supplemental  matter.

Orders  can  be  given  through  any  bookseller  for  the  delivery  of  the  remainder  of
tile  work  in  complete  Tolumes  or  in  Half-rolumei  or  in  Sections  or  in  Parts.

HAIxF- VOLUMES.  The  price  of  half-volumes,  bound,  with  straight-grained
Persian  leather  back,  cloth  sides,  gilt  top,  is  £1  7«.  6J.  each,  or  £13  15*.  for  the
eleven  now  ready,  namely.  A,  B,  C-Comm.,  Comm.-Czech,  D,  E,  F,  G,  H,  I-K,
L-Matter.

SECTIONS.  A  single  Section  of  64  pages  at  3*.  6d.  or  a  double  Section  of  i a8
pages  at  5*.  is  issued  quarterly.

PARTS.  A  Part  (which  is  generally  the  equivalent  of  five  aasgle  Sections
and  is  priced  at  1 2«.  6d.)  is  issued  whenever  ready.

Nearly  all  the  Parts  and  Sections  in  which  Volumes  I-V  were  first  issued  are
still  obtainable  in  the  original  covers.

FORTHCOMING  ISSUE,  1905. A  portion  continuing  R,  by  :Mr.  Cbaigib.
Oxford :  Clarendon  Press. London :  Hkxst  Fbowsk,  Amen  Comer,  E.G.


VoL  VI. I.— N ByDr.  Bradi£T


Vol.  VIL O,  P By  Dr.  Mukkat


ENGLISH  AND  ROMAN  LA  IV,


A  Hebrew  and  English  Lexicon  of  the  Old  Testament,  with
an  Appendix  containing  the  Biblical  Aramaic,  based  on  the  Thesaurus
and  Lexicon  of  Gesenius,  by  Francis  Brown,  D.D.,  S.  R.  Driver,  D.D.,
and  C.  A.  Briggs,  D.D. Parts  I-XI. Small  4to,  2s.  6d.  each.

Thesaurus  Syriacus  :  collegerunt  Quatrem^re,  Bernstein,  Lorsbach,
Arnoldi,  Agrell,  Field,  Roediger:  edidit  R.  Payne  Smith,  S.T.P.  Vol.  I
(Fasc.  I-V),  sm.  fol.,  5?.  5s. Vol.  II,  completion  (Fasc.  VI-X),  81.  8s.

A  Compendious  Syriac  Dictionary,  founded  upon  the  above.
Edited  by  Mrs.  Margoliouth.  Small  4to,  complete,  63s.  net.  Part  IV,
1 5s.  net.  Parts  I-III  can  no  longer  be  supplied.

A  Dictionary  of  the  Dialects  of  Vernacular  Syriac  as  spoken
by  the  Eastern  Syrians  of  Kurdistan,  North- West  Persia,  and  the  Plain
of  Mosul. By  A.  J.  Maclean,  M.A.,  F.R.G.S. Small  4to,  15s.

An  Engiish-Swahili  Dictionary.  By  A.  C.  Madan,  M.A.  Second
Edition,  Revised. Extra  fcap.  8vo,  7s.  6d.  net.

Swahili-English  Dictionary.  By  A.  C.  Madan,  M.A.  Extra  fcap.
8vo. 7s.  6d.  net.

A  Sanskrit-English  Dictionary.  Etymologically  and  Philologically
arranged,  with  special  reference  to  cognate  Indo-European  Languages.
By  Sir  M.  Monier- Williams,  M.A.,  K.C.I.E.  Neuo  Edition.  Cloth,
bevelled  edges,  3?.  13s.  6d. ;  half-morocco,  ^l.  4s.

A  Greek-English  Lexicon.  By  H.  G.  Liddell,  D.D.,  and
Robert  Scott,  D.D. Eighth  Edition^  Revised. 4to. xl.  16s.

An Etymological Dictionary of the English Language,

arranged  on  an  Historical  Basis. By  W.  W. Sbeat,  Litt.D. Third

Edition. 4to, 2I.  4s.
A  Middle-English  Dictionary. By  F.  H.  Stratmann. A new

edition,  by  H.  Bradley,  M.A.,  Ph.D. 4to,  half-morocco. il.iis.6d.
The  Student's  Dictionary  of  Anglo-Saxon. By  H.  Sweet,  M.A.,

Ph.D.,  LL.D. Small  4to. 8s.6d.net.
An  Anglo-Saxon  Dictionary,  based  on  the  MS.  collections  of  the

late  Joseph  Bosworth,  D.D. Edited  and  enlarged  by  Prof.  T.  N.  Toller,

M.A. Parts  I-III.  A-SAR. 4to,  stiff  covers,  15s.  each. Part  IV,  §1,

sAR-SWfDRIAN. Stiff  covers,  8s.  6d. Part  IV,  §  2,  SWl)?-SNEL-

YTMEST,  i8s.  6d!.
An  Icelandic-English  Dictionary,  based  on  the  MS.  collections  of

the  late  Richard  Cleasby. Enlarged  and  completed  by  G.  Vigfiisson,

M.A. 4to. 3^.  7s.

2.  LAW.


Anson. Principles of the

English  Law  of  Contract,  and  of  Agency
in  its  Relation  to  Contract.  By  Sir
W.  R.  Anson,  D.  C.  L.  Tenth  Edition.
8vo. I  OS.  6d.

Anson. Law  and  Custom  of

the  Constitution. 2  vols. 8vo.
Parti. Parliament.  Third  Edition.

1 2s.  6d.
Partll.  TlieCrown.  SecondEd.  14s.


Bryce.  Studies  in  History  a7id

Jurisprudence. 2  Vols. 8vo. By  the
Right  Hon.  J.  Bryce,  M.P. 25s.  net.

Goudy. Von  Jhering's  Lavj

in Batty  Life. Translated by H.
Goudy,  D.C.L.  Crown 8vo.  z^.6d.net.

Digby. An  Introduction  to

the  History  of  the  Law  of  Real  Property.


Oxford  :  Clarendon  Press.


LAW,


BySirKenelmE.Digby,M.A.  PtfOi
Edition. Svo. I3S.  6d.

Qrueber. Lex  AquUia. By

Erwin  Grueber. 8to. los.  6d,

Hall.  International  Law.  By

W.E.Hall,M.A.  FiflkEdit.  Bevised
by  J.  B.  Atlay,  M.A.  8vo.  ais.  net.

• A  Treatise onthe Foreign

Powers  and  Jurisdiction  of  the  BrUisk
Crown. Svo. los.  6<I.

Holland.  Elements  of  Juris-
prudence. By  T.  E.  Holland,  D.C.L.
Xinth  Edition. Svo. los.  6d.

Studies  in  Intemaiional

Law. 8to. I  OS.  6d,

Gentilis, Alherid, Be


lure Belli  Libri  Tres. Small  4to,
half-morocco. 21s.

The  Institutes  of  Jus-


tinian. Second  Edition. Extra  fcap.
Svo. 5  s.

The  European Concert


in  the  Eastern  Question,  a  collection
of  treaties  and  other  public  acts.
Sto. 12?.  6rf.

Holland  and  Shadwell.  Select

Titles  from  the  Digest  of  Justinian.  By
T.  E.  Holland,  D.C.L.,  and  C.  L.
Shadwell,  D.C.L.  Svo.  14s.  Also
in  Parts,  paper  covers — I.  Intro-
ductory Titles.  28. 6d.  II.  Family
Law.  IS.  III.  Property  Law.  2s.6d.
TV.  Law  of  Obligations  (No.  i),
3s.  6d. (No.  2),  4s.  6<{.

nbert. TTie Government of

India .  Being  a  Digest  of  the  Statute
Law  relating  thereto.  By  Sir
Courtenay  Dbert,  K.C.S.I.  Svo,
half-roan. 21s.

Legislative  Forms and

Methods. Svo,  half-roan. i6s.

Jenks. Modem  Land  Law,

By  Edward  Jenks,  M.A. Svo. i^
Jenkyns. British  Bute  and

Jurisdiction  beyond  the  Seas.  By  the
late  Sir  Henry  Jenkyns,  K.C.B.
Svo.  half-roan. 16s.  wet

Markby. Elements  of  Law


considered  with  r^ermee  to  Prindples  of
QeneraiJuriiprudenee.  BySirWilliam
Markby.  StOh  EdUion.  Svo.  I3s.  6<2.

Moyle. Imperatoris lus-

tiniani  InsUtutionum  Libri  Quatiuor,
with  Introductions,  Commentary,
Excursus  and  Translation.  ByJ.  B.
Moyle,D.C.L.  Fourth  Edition.  2  vols.
Svo. Vol.  I.  16s. Vol.  II.  6s.

Contract  of  Sale  in  the

Ciril  Law. Svo. 10s.  6d.

Pollock and Wright. An

Essay  on  Possession  in  the  Common  Law.
By  Sir  F.  PoUock,  Bart.,  M.A.,  and
SirRS.Wright.B.C.L.  Svo.  8s.6d.

Foste. Graii Instituiionum

JwrisdmUsCommentarii  Quatiuor ;  or,
Elements,  of  Roman  Law  by  Gains.
With  a  Translation  and  Commen-
tary by  Edward  Poste,  M.A.  Fourth
Edison,  revised  and  enlai^ed.  Svo.
165.  net.
Badcliffe and Miles. Ctues

lUustraiing  the  Prineq)les  of  the  Law  </
Torts.  By  F.  R.  Y.  RadcUfife,  K.C.,
and  J.  C.  Miles,  MA.  Svo.  1 2s.6d.  net

Sohm. The Institutes. A

Text-book of the  History and

System of Roman  Private  Law.

By  Rudolph  Sohm.  Translated  by

J.  C.  Ledlie,  B.C.L.  Second  EdiOonj

revised  and  enlarged.  Svo. iSs.

Stokes. The Anglo-Indian

Codes. By  Whitley  Stokes,  LL.D.

VoL  L  Substantive  Law.  Svo.  yis.

VoL  n.  Adjective  Law.  Svo.  35s.
First  and  Second  Supplements  to

the  above,  1887-1S91.  Svo.  6s.(id.
Separately,  No. I,  2s.6d.;  No.  2,^6d.

Yonng. Corps  de  Droit  Otto-

manSecueU  des  Codes,  Lois,  Eeglements,
Ordonnances  et  Actes  ksplus  intporUmts
du  Droit  interieur,  et  Ifitudes  sur  U
Droit  coutumier  de  I'Empire  Ottoman.
Par  (George  Young.  Part  I  (Vols.
I-ni),  cloth,  21.  17s.  6d.  net ;  paper
covers,  2I.  12s.  6d.  net.  Part  II
(Vols.  IV-VII),  cloth,  1/.  17s.  mt ;
paper  covers,  lU  lis.  6d.  The  com-
plete Parts  I  and  11  separately,  will
cost  21.  \2s.  6d.  net  in  paper  covers,
or  2l.  17s.  Gd.  net  in  cloth  each.


London  :  Hkkky  Prowcs,  Amen  Comer,  £.C.


HISTORY,  BIOGRAPHY,  ETC.


3. HISTORY,  BIOGRAPHY,  ETC.


Asser. Life  of  King  Alfred,

together  with  the  Annals  of  St.
Noets,  erroneously  ascribed  to
Asser.  Edited  with  Introduction
and  Commentary  by  W.  H.  Steven-
son, M.  A.  2  vols.  Crown  8vo.  12s.net.

Aubrey. '  Brief  Lives,'  chiefly

of  Contemporaries,  set  down  by  John
Aubrey,  between  the  Years  1669  and
1696.  Edited  from  the  Author's
MSS.,  byAndrew  Clark,  M.A.,  LL.D.
With  Facsimiles. 2  vols.  8vo. 25s.

Ballard.  T//e  Domesday  Bor-
oughs. By  Adolphus  Ballard,  B.A.,
LL.B.  8vo.  With  four  Plans.  6s.  6rf.

n^t.

Barnard.  Companion  to  Eng-
lish History  (^Middle  Ages).  With  97
Illustrations.  By  F.  P.  Barnard,
M.A. Crown  Svo. 8s.  6d.  net.

Boswell's Life of Samuel

Johnson,  LL.D.  Edited  by  G.  Birk-
beck  Hill,  D.C.L.  In  six  volumes,
medium  8vo.  With  Portraits  and
Facsimiles. Half-bound. 3^.  3s.

Bright. Chapters of  Early

English  Church  History.  By  W.
Bright,  D.D.  Third  Edition.  Revised
and  Enlarged.  With  a  Map.  Svo.  12s.

Bryce. Studies in History

and  Jurisprudence.  By  J. Bryce,  M.P.
2  vols.  8vo. 25s.  net.

Butler. The  Arab  Conquest

of  Egypt  and  the  last  thirty  years  of  the
Roman  Dominion.  By  A.  J.  Butler,
D.Litt.,  F.S.A.  With  Maps  and
Plans. Svo. if>s.  net.

Chambers. The Mediaeval

stage.  By  E.  K.  Chambers.  With
two  illustrations.  2  vols.  Svo.  2CyS.net.

Clarendon's History of the

Rebellion  and  Civil  Wars  in  England.
Re-edited  by  W.  Dunn  Macray,
M.A.,  F.S.A.  6 vols.  CrownSvo.  2I.  5s.

Earle  and  Plummer. Two  of

the  Saxon  Chronicles,  Parallel,  vnth
Supplementary  Extracts  from  the  others.
A  Revised  Text,  edited,  with  Intro-
duction, Notes, Appendices, and


Glossary,  by  C.  Plummer,  M.A.,on
the  basis  of  an  edition  by  J.  Earle.
M.A. 2  vols. Cr.  Svo,  half-roan.
Vol. I. Text, Appendices, and

Glossary. los.  6d.
Vol.  II. Introduction,  Notes,  and

Index. I2S.  6d.

Fisher.  Studies  in  Napole-
onic statesmanship. —  Germany.  By
H.  A.  L.  Fisher,  M.A.  With  four
Maps. Svo. I2S.  6d.  net.

Freeman. The History of

Sicily  from  the  Earliest  Times.

Vols.  I  and  II. Svo,  cloth. 21.2s.
Vol. III. The Athenian  and

Carthaginian  Invasions. 24s.
Vol.  IV. From  the  Tyranny  of

Dionysios to the Death of

Agathokl§8. Edited  by  Arthur

J.  Evans,  M.A. 2i«.

Freeman. The Reign of

William  Rufus  and  the  Accession  of
Henry  the  First.  By  E.  A.  Freeman,
D.C.L. 2  vols. Svo. \l.  i6s.

Gardiner.  The  Constitutional

Documents  of  the  Puritan  Revolution,
1628-1660.  ByS.  R.Gardiner,  D.C.L.
Second  Edition. Crown  Svo. los.  6d.

Gross. The  Gild  Merchant;

a  Contribution  to  British  Municipal
History.  By  Charles  Gross,  Ph.D.
2  vols. Svo. 24s.

Hill. Sources for Greek

History  between  the  Persian  and  Pelopon-
nesian  Wars.  Collected  and  arranged
by  G.  F.  Hill,  M.A. Svo. los.  6d.

Hodgkin. Italy  and  her  In-
vaders.  With  Plates  &  Maps.  S  vols.
Svo. By  T.  Hodgkin,  D.C.L.
Vols.  I-II. Second  Edition. 42s.
Vols.  III-IV.  Second  Edition.  36s.
Vols.  V-VI. 36s.
Vols. VII-VIII {completing the
work). 24s.

Johnson. Letters  of  Samuel

Johnson,LL.D.  Collected  and  Edited
by  G.  Birkbeck  Hill,  D.C.L.  2  vols,
half- roan. 28s.

Johnson  ian  Miscellanies .

2  vols.  Medium  Svo,  half-roan. 2Ss.


Oxford :  Clarendon  Press.


HISTORY,  BIOGRAPHY,  ETC.


Kitchin.  A  History  of  France.

By  G,  W.  Kitchin,  D.D. In  three
Volumes. Crown  8vo,  each  los.  6d.
Vol.  I.  to  1453. Vol.  II.  1453-
1624. Vol.  III.  1624-1793.

Kyd. The  Works  of  Thomas

Kyd.  Edited  from  the  original
Texts,  with  Introduction,  Notes,
and  Facsimiles,  by  F.  S.  Boas,
M.A. 8vo. 15s.  yut.

Lewis {Sir G. Gomewall).

An  Essay  on  the  Government  of  De-
pendencies. Edited  by  C.  P.  Liicas,
B.A. 8vo,  half-roan. 14s.

Lucas.  Historical  Geography

of  the  British  Colonies.  By  C.  P.Lucas,
B.A. With  Maps. Cr.  Svo.

The  Origin  and  Growth  of  the
English  Colonies  and  of  their
System  of  Goremment  (an  Intro-
duction to  Mr.  C.  P.  Lucas's
Historical  Geography  of  the
Colonies).  By  H.  E.  Egerton.
2S.  6d.  Also  in  binding  luiiform
with  the  Series. 3s.  6d.

Vol.1. The  Mediterranean  and
Eastern  Colonies  (exclusive  of
India). 5s.
Vol.  II . The  West  Indian  Colo-
nies. Second  edition,  revised
to  1905,  by  C.  Atchley. 7s.  6d.
Vol.  Ilir West  Africa. Second
Edition,  revised  to  the  end  0/1899,
by  H.  E.  Egerton. "js.  6d.
Vol.  IV. South  and  East  Africa.
Historical and  Geographical.
9s.  6d.
Also  Vol.  IV  in  two  Parts —
Part  I. Historical,  6s.  6d.
Part  II. Geographical,  3s.  6d.
Vol.  V. The  History  of  Canada
(Part  I,  New  France). 6s.

Ludlow. The Memoirs of

Edmund  Ludloto,  Lieittenant-Oeneral  of
the  Horse  in  the  Army  of  the  Common-
iDealthofEngland,i62S-i6'j2.  Edited
by  C.  H.  Firth,  M.A. 3  vols. 36s.

Lyly.  The  Works  of  John  Lyly.
Collected  and  edited,  with  facsim-
iles, by  R.W.  Bond,  M.  A.  Insvols.
Svo,  uniform  with  Kyd. 42s.  net.


Machiavelli. H Principe.

Edited  by  L.  Arthur  Burd,  M.A-
With  an  Introduction  by  Lord
Acton. Svo. 14s.

Merriman.  Life  and  Letters  of

TJiomas  CromicdL  With  a  Portrait
and  Facsimile.  By  R.  B.  Merriman,
B.Litt. 2  vols. Svo. iSs.  net

Morris. The  Welsh  Wars  of

Edward  I.  With  a  Map.  By  J.  E.
Morris,  M.A. Svo. 9s.  6d.  net.

Oman.  A  History  of  the  Penin-
sular War.  6  vols.  Svo.  With  Maps,
Plans,  and  Portraits.  By  C.  Oman,
M.A.  Vol.  I,  1S07-1809.  14s.  net.
Vol.  II,  Jan. -Sept.,  1809  (from  the
Battle  of  Corunna  to  the  end  of  the
Talavera  Campaign). 14s.  net.

Payne. Histoid  of  the  New

World  called  America.  By  E.  J.
Payne,  M.A. Svo.

Vol.  I,  containing  The  Discovery

and  Ahoi-iginal  America,  iS*.
Vol.  II,  Aboriginal  America  (con-
cluded), 14a.

Plummer.  The  Life  and  Tiroes

of  Alfred  the  Great.  By  Charles
Plummer,  M.A- Crown  Svo. 5s.

net.

Poole. Historical Atlas  of

Modem  Europe  from  Vie  decline  of  Ute
Roman  Empire.  Edited  by  R  L.
Poole,  M.A.  5^.  15s.  6d.  net.  Each
Map  can  now  be  bought  separately
for  IS.  6d.  net.

Prothero. Select  Statutes  and

other  Constitutional  Documents,  Ulustra-
tive  of  the  Reigns  of  Elisabeth  and
Jamesl.  Edited  by  G.  W.  Prothero,
M.A. Cr.  Svo. Edition  2. los.  6d.

Bamsay  (Sir  J.  H.}.  Lancaster

and  York  (a.d.  1399-14S5).  2  vols.
Svo. With  Index. 37s.  6d.

Bamsay  (W.  M.). The  Cities

and  Bishoprics  ofPhrygia.

Vol.1. PartL The  Lycos  Valley
and  South-Western Phrygia.
Royal  Svo. iSs.  net.
Vol.  I.  Part  II.  West  and  West-
Central  Phrygia. iia.neL


London :  Qexry  Fbowdx,  Amen  Comer,  E.C.


PHILOSOPHY,  LOGIC,  ETC.


Smith's  Lectures  on  Justice,

Police,  Revenue  and  Arms.  Edited,
with  Introduction  and  Notes,  by
Edwin  Cannan. 8vo. los.  6d.  net.

Wealth of Nations.

With  Notes,  by  J.  e'.  Thorold  Rogers,
M.A. 2  vols. 8vo. 2  IS.

Smith  (V.  A.).  The  Early  His-
tory of  India,  from  600  B.C.  to  the  Mu-
hammadan  Conquest,  including  the
Invasion  of  Alexander  the  Great.  By
Vincent  A.  Smith,  M.A.  8vo,  witli
Maps  and  other  Illustrations.  1 4s.we^.

Stubbs. Select  Charters  and

other  Illustrations  of  English  Constitu-
tional History,  from  the  Earliest  Times
to  the  Reign  of  Edward  I.  Arranged
and  edited  by  W.  Stubbs,  D.D.
Eighth  Edition. Crown  Svo. 8s.  6d.

The  Constitutional  His-
tory of  England,  in  its  Origin  and
Development.  Library  Edition,  3  vols.
Demy  Svo. 2I.  8s.

Also  in  3  vols,  crown  Svo.  12  s,  each.

Seventeen  Lectures  on

the  Study  of  Mediaeval  and  Modem
History  and  kindred  subjects.  Crown
Svo. Third  Edition. 8s.  6d.

Registrwm Sacrum

Anglicanum.  Sm.  4to.  Ed.  2.  10s.  6  d.

VinogradofF. Villainage  in

England.  Essays  in  English  Medi-
aeval History.  ByPaulVinogradoff.
Svo,  half-bound. i6s.

4.  PHILOSOPHY, LOGIC,  ETC.


Banke.  A  History  of  Eng-
land, principally  in  the  Seventeenth
Century.  By  L.  von  Banke.  Trans-
lated under  the  superintendence  of
Q.  W.  Kitchin,  D.D.,  and  C.  W.
Boase,  M.A.  6  vols.  Svo.  63s.
Revised  Index,  separately,  is.

Rashdall. The  Universities  of

Europe  in  the  Middle  Ages.  By  Hast-
ings Rashdall,  M.A.  2  vols,  (in  3
Parts)  Svo. With  Maps.  2I.  5s.  net.

Rh^s.  Studies  in  the  Arthur-
ian Legend.  By  John  Rhys,  M.A.
Svo. I2S.  6d.

Celtic  Folklore :  Welsh  and

Manx.  By  the  same.  2  vols.  Svo.  21s.

Rogers.  History  of  Agricul-
ture and  Prices  in  England,  a.d.  1259-
1793-  By  J.  E.  T.  Rogers,  M.A.  Svo.
Vols.  I,  II  (i2£;9-i40o),  42s.  Vols.
Ill,  IV  (1401-1582),  50s.  Vols.V,
VI  (1 583-1 702),  50s.  Vol.  VII,  2
Parts  (1 703-1 793) >  ,50s-

Sanday. Sacred  Sites  of  the

GospeZs.  By  W.Sanday,  D.D.  With
many  illustrations, includingdraw-
ings  of  the  Temple  by  Paul  Water-
house. Svo. 13s.  6d.  net.

Scaccario. De Nece8sariis

Observantiis  Scaccarii  Bialogus.  Com-
monly called  Dialogus  de  Scaccario.
Edited  by  A.  Hughes,  C.  G.  Cnimp,
and  C.  Johnson. Svo. 12s.  6d.  net.


Bacon. Novum Organum.

Edited,  with  Introduction,  Notes,
&c.,  by  T.  Fowler,  D.D.  Second
Edition. Svo. 15s.

Berkeley. The Works of

George  Berkeley,  D.D.,  formerly  Bishop
of  Cloyne ;  including  many  of  his  writ-
ings hitherto  unpublished.  With  Pre-
faces, Annotations,  Appendices,
and  an  Account  of  his  Life,  by  A.
CampbellFraser,Hon.D.C.L.,LL.D.
New  Edition  in  4  vols. ,  cr.  Svo.  24s.

The Life and Letters,

with  an  account  of  his  Philosophy.  By
A.  Campbell  Eraser. Svo. i6s.


Bosanquet. Logic ; or,  the

Morphology  of  Knowledge.  By  B.
Bosanquet,  M.A. Svo. 21s.

Butler. The  Works  of  Joseph

Butter,  D.C.L.,  sometime  Lord  Bishop
of  Durham.  Edited  by  the  Right
Hon,  W.  E.  Gladstone.  2  vols.
Medium  Svo. 14s.  each.

Campagnac. The  Cambridge

Platonists :  being  Selections  from  the
writings  of  Benjamin  Whichcote,
John  Smith,  and  Natlianael  Culver-
wel,  with  Introduction  by  E.  T.
Campagnac,  M.A.  Cr.Svo.  6s.6d.net.


Oxford :  Clarendon  Press.


PHYSICAL  SCIENCE,  E7C.


Fowler.  Logic;  Deductive  and

Inductive,  combined  in  a  single
volume. Extra  fcap.  8vo. 7s.  6d.

Fowler and Wilson. The

Principles  of  Morals.  By  T.  Fowler,
D.D.,  and  J.  M.  Wilson,  B.D.  8vo,
cloth. 14s.

Green.  Prolegomena  to  Ethics.

By  T.  H.  Green,  M.A.  Edited  by
A.  C.  Bradley,  M.A.  Fourth  Edition.
Crown  8vo. 7s.  6d.

Hegel. The  Logic  of  Hegel.

Translated  from  the  Encyclopaedia
ofthe  Philosophical  Sciences.  With
Prolegomena  to  the  Study  of  Hegel's
Logic  and  Philosophy.  By  W.Wal-
lace, M.A.  Second  Edition,  Revised
and  Augmented,  a  vols.  Crown  8vo.
los.  6d.  each.

Hegel's  Philosophy  of  Mind.

Translated  from  the  Encyclopaedia
ofthe  Philosophical  Sciences.  With
Five  Introductory  Essays.  By  Wil-
liam Wallace,  M.A.,  LL.D.  Crown
8vo. los.  6i.

Hume's Treatise  of  Human

Nature.  Edited,  with  Analytical
Index,  by  L.  A.  Selby-Bigge,  M.A.
Second  Edition. Crown  8vo. 6s.  net

Enquii'y concemiv^g

the  Human  Understanding.  Edited
by  L.  A.  Selby-Bigge,  M.A.  Second
Edition. Crown  8vo. 6s.  net.

Iieibniz.  The  Monadology  and

other  Philosophical  Writings.  Trans-
lated, with  Introduction  and  Notes,

5. PHYSICAL

Chambers. A  Handbook  of

Descriptive and  Practical  Astrorwmy.

By  Q.  F.  Chambers,  F.RA.S.  Fourth

Edition,  in  3  vols. Demy  8vo.

Vol.  I.  The  Sun,  Planets,  and
Comets. 2 1  s.

Vol.  II.  Instruments  and  Prac-
tical Astronomy. 2  is.

Vol.  III. The  Starry  Heavens.  14&

De  Bary. Comparative  Ana-


by Robert Latta, M.A., D.Phil.

Crown  8vo. 8s.  6dt.

Locke. An  Essay  Concern-

ing  Human  Understanding.  By  John
Locke.  Collated  and  Annotated
by  A.  Campbell  Eraser,  Hon.
D.C.L.,  LL.D.  2  vols.  8vo. i/.  12s.

Iiotze's  Logic,  in  Three  Books

— of  Thought,  of  Investigation,  and
of  Knowledge.  English  Transla-
tion; edited  by  B.  Bosanquet,  M.A.
Second  Edition.  2  vols.  Cr.  8vo.  12  s.

Metaphysic, in Three

Books — Ontology,  Cosmology,  and
Psychology.  English  Translation  ;
edited  by  B.  Bosanquet,  M.A.
Second  Ediiion.  a  vols.  Cr.  8vo.  12s.

Martinean. Types  of  Ethical

Theory.  By  James  Martineau,  D.D.
Third  Edition. 2  vols. Cr.  8vo. 15  s.

A  Study  of  Religion :

its  Sources  and  Contents.  Second  Edition.
a  vols.  Cr.  8vo.  15s.
Selby-Bigge.  British  Moral-
ists. Selections  from  Writers  prin-
cipally of  the  Eighteenth  Century.
Edited  by  L.  A.  Selby-Bigge,  M.A.
2  vols. Crown  8vo. 12  s.  net.

Spinoza. A Study in the

Ethics  of  Spinoza.  By  Harold  H.
Joachim. 8vo. los.  6d.  nd.

Wallace.  Lectures  and  Essays

on  Natural  Theology  and  Ethics.  By
William  Wallace,  M.A.,  LIi.D.
Edited,  with  a  Biographical  Intro-
duction, by  Edward  Caird,  M.A.
8vo,  with  a  Portrait. 12s.  6d.

SCIENCE,  ETC.

tomy  of  the  Vegetative  Organs  of  the
Phanerogams  and  Ferns.  By  Dr.  A.
de  Bary.  Translated  by  F.  O.
Bower,  M.A.,  and  D.  H.  Scott,  M.  A.
Royal  8vo,  half-morocco,  343.  net;
cloth,  21s.  net.

\  De,  Bary. CoTnparative  Mor-

l  phology  arid  Biology  of  Fungi,  Mycetoma
arul  Bacteria. By  Dr.  A.  de  Bary.

'  Translated  by  H.  E.  F.  Gamsey,
M.  A. Revised  by  Isaac  Bayley  Bal-


London  :  Hkkrt  Frowcs,  Amen  Comer,  E.O.


8


PHYSICAL  SCIENCE,  ETC.


four,  M.A.,M.D.,F.RS.  RoyalSvo,
half-morocco,  24s.  net ;  cloth,  2  is.  net.

De  Bary.  Lectures  on  Bacteria.

By  Dr.  A.  de  Bary.  Second  Improved
Edition.  Translated  and  revised  by
Isaac  Bayley  Balfour,  M.A.,  M.D.,
F.R.S. Crown  8vo. 5s.  net.

Ewart. On  tlie  Physics  and

Physiology  0/  Protoplasmic  Streaming
in  Plants.  By  A.  J.  Ewart,  D.Sc,
Ph.D.,F.L.S.  With  seventeen  illus-
trations. Royal  8vo. 8s.  6d.  net.

Fischer. The  Structure  and

Functions  of  Bacteria.  By  Alfred
Fischer.  Translated  into  English
by  A.  C.  Jones.  Royal  Svo.  With
Twenty-nine  Woodcuts. 7s.  6d.  net.

Goebel.  Outlines  of  Classifi-
cation and  Special  Morphology  of  Plants.
By  Dr.  K.  Goebel.  Translated  by
H.  E.  F.  Garnsey.M.A.  Revised  by
I.  B.  Balfour,  M.A.,  M.D.,  F.RS.
Royal  Svo,  half-morocco,  22s.  6d.
net;  cloth,  20s.  7iet.

Organography  of  Plants,

especiaUy  of  the  Archegoniatae  and  Sper-
mophyta.  ByDr.K.  Goebel.  Author-
ized English  Edition,  byl.  B.  Bal-
four, M.A.,  M.D.,  F.RS.  Part  I,
General  Organography.  Royal  Svo,
half-morocco,  12s.net;  cloth,  ios.net.
Pt.  II,  half-morocco,  24s.  net ;  cloth,
2 IS.  net,

Miall and Hammond. The

Structure  and  Life-History  of  the
Harlequin  Fly  (Chironomus).  By  L.  C.
Miall,  F.R.S.,  and  A.  R.  Hammond,
F.L.S.  Svo.  With  130  Illustra-
tions. 7s.  6d.

PfeflFor. The  Physiology  of

Plants.  A  Treatise  upon  the  Metabolism
and  Sources  of  Energy  in  Plants.  By
Prof.  Dr.  W.  Pfeflfer.  Second  fully
Revised  Edition,  translated  and
edited  by  A.  J.  Ewart,  D.Sc,  Ph.D.,
F.L.S.  Royal  Svo.  Vol.  I,  half-
morocco,  26s.  net;  cloth,  23s.  net.
Vol.  II,  i6s.  »ie<;  cloth,  14s.  net.


Prestwich.  Geology — Chemi-
cal, Physical,  and  Stratigraphical.  By
Sir  Joseph  Prestwich,  M.A.,  F.R.S.
In  two  Volumes. Royal  Svo. 6 is.

Sachs. A  History  of  Botany.

Translated  by  H.  E.  F.  Gamsey,
M.A.  Revised  by  I.  B.  Balfour,
M.A.,M.D.,F.R.S.  Cr.Svo.  los.nei.

Schimper.  Plant  Geography
upon  a  Physiological  Basis.  By  Dr.
A.  F.  W.  Schimper.  The  Author-
ized English  Translation.  Royal
Svo.  With  a  photogravure  portrait
of  Dr.  Schimper,  five  collotypes,
four  maps,  and  four  hundred  and
ninety-seven  other  illustrations.
Half-morocco,  42s.  net.

Solms-Laubach.  Fossil  Bot-
any. Being  an  Introduction  to  PaLaeo-
phytology  from  the  Standpoint  of  the
Botanist.  By  H.  Graf  zu  Solms-
Laubach.  Translated  and  revised
by  the  same.  Royal  Svo,  half-
morocco,  1 7s.  net ;  cloth,  1 5s.  net.

OXFORD  HISTORY  OF  MUSIC.

8vo.  Edited  by  W.  H.  Hadow,  M.A.
Price  155.  net  each  volume;  but
upon  issue  Vols.  II  and  VI  will  be
sold  together  for  15.-!.  net,  and  the
temporary  price  of  the  whole  set  of
six  volumes  will  be  £i  I6s.  net.

I.  The  Polyphonic  Period.  Part  I
(Method  of  Musical  Art,  330-i33o).
By  H.  E.  Wooldridge,  M.A.

III.  The  Seventeenth  Century.  By  Sir
C.  H.  H.  Parry,  M.  A. ,  D.  Mus.

IV.  The  Age  of  Bach  and  Handel.
By  J.  A.  Fuller  Maitland,  M.  A.

V.  Tlie  Viennese  School.  By  W.  H.
Hadow,  M.A.

IMMEDIATELY.

II.  The  Polyphonic  Period.  Part  II.
By  H.  E.  Wooldridge,  M.A.

VI.  The  Romantic  Period.  By  E.
Dannreuther,  M.A.


OXFORD

AT  THE  CLARENDON  PRESS

LONDON,  EDINBURGH,  NEW  YORK,  AND  TORONTO

HENRY  FROWDE


/


ei 8o3 -w


PLEASE  DO  NOT  REMOVE
CARDS  OR  SLIPS  FROM  THIS  POCKET

UNIVERSITY  OF  TORONTO  LIBRARY
