eee gee 
x ote htee 


oe ee Ries aire Srieset Staite Sar ee ee eR res S[iesee SoBe ete oy Sees 


om 
as 


* 
= 
cS 


Peder” 
Fi 


oo, 


a 
a> 
Lair 
wht 
+ 


as 


> 
eeey 


Wark a 
as 


S 


Vut 


+ 


MMM? 
oe 


peaKe. 

, 
et re 
Diprat rrosadorté ier 


FeO re wh 
ee ea ee 
nw reeNtS 


pele 
Bator Moe? 
1} 
boy oe eS 
aR teat | 
Setatah 
‘*» 


hth! i ‘ 


* 
* 
- 
* 


- 


* 
- 
2 


A tS 


* 


ate 


sas Se =e oh 
See ST ts 


Pale Cr Be on 


(a4 


a ee 


AS 
a> ty Sees 





UNIVERSI LY OF 


— JLLINOIS LIBRARY. 
A) URBANA-CHAMPAIGS' 
STACKS 


; we : ; ; = Vide ; 
ore eT « eh tio ty bs 
RINT) RK _— 

ne i Mipkasd ao Qenisby, 
: 7 oe e an ta a ta 
ere byl; ups? 5 Stee 
he ‘v - f Ar G 
ape So 





Digitized by the Internet Archive 
in 2021 with funding from 
University of Illinois Urbana-Champaign 


https://archive.org/details/fossilmenelementOOboul 


CENTRAL CIRCULATION BOOKSTACKS 


The person charging this material is re- 
sponsible for its renewal or its return to 
the library from which it was borrowed 
on or before the Latest Date stamped 
below. You may be charged a minimum 
fee of $75.00 for each lost book. 

Theft, mutilation, and underlining of books are reasons 
for disciplinary action and may result in dismissal from 


the University. 
TO RENEW CALL TELEPHONE CENTER, 333-8400 


UNIVERSITY OF ILLINOIS LIBRARY AT URBANA-CHAMPAIGN 


DEC 05 03? 
NOV 26 1997 


When renewing by phone, write new due date below 
previous due date. L162 


i 


Pu! 
® 1% 
7 ' 
} 
~ 
uf 
. 
+* 
1 é 
s 
. + y 
’ 
=| : 7. 
® rs et 
i i i vy ie Ar ie 
” i - Pee ve ‘2 | 
‘ \ vi eee ’ e 
4 i; * fa'' : 7) i 
‘ P 
} or La - | | ‘ 


tie 
Cet) t 
wy, ae 


aru? 4 mh + 
‘e me 


¥ Wes yg 2 i | . Z ea a y ne Hy 

. oh | a 

; ; Fe y 
| - aT F | i 7 re Py af 
De 
car ae 


9 ae mn 
. ae e Went iy ; 

| im : bok, “4 4 ‘ Ae ad Li iy et a 

, ihe a a, | 4 ave 

Pus Ci ga ae Oe Loe 
ra, ie id Por bah hii ie ie 

A aires SE 
Mt i at 7m a Ae + tee any ois L ents _*, ‘ , if 





Call 
Number 





Overdue books are subject to 
afine of 2 cents a day. 


Author Retr ee tee 


Perrier ee 





CQ 


| CN : i eid boxe 
rm: _ j Lp /} A LA fra Am 
| Title..... Re Oe ad ne. tthe Aa 
| ; 
| a | i" A ii j iq 
a! a os | CE, 2, CIEE ae ERS Be 
/ 
Name....\_. Pane | Ld Sea eas 
| f 
Address22:3.., fb L2 54d SEL OS 
o~ oo ; 
a aN = 


Univ. of Ill. Lib. Call Slip 





FOSSIL MEN 


ELEMENTS OF HUMAN PALA ONTOLOGY 


(‘uenosag xvpy ‘yy Aq 004g) ‘azis [eInjeu Yy}UTU-dU0 ynoqy 
"9URI UOYINO ly ‘Hoqnopny,p ony, jo aavQ ayi ul f asy ssapuley ayy Jo uayy Aq Avjo ur payjapour suostg 





FOSSIL MEN 


ELEMENTS OF HUMAN PALZONTOLOGY 


BY 


MARCELLIN BOULE 


PROFESSOR IN THE MUSEUM NATIONAL D’HISTOIRE NATURELLE, PARIS 
DIRECTOR OF L’INSTITUT DE PALEONTOLOGIE HUMAINE 


TRANSLATED FROM THE FRENCH, WITH AN INTRODUCTION, BY 


Ves ooo RULCrIIE 


AND 


Weeviteoe te ELL Mv Ats Di5C. 9. F.R:S, Ei. 
Keeper of the Natural History Department, Royal Scottish Museum 


BROUGHT UP-TO-DATE WITH REVISED AND 
ENLARGED SECOND FRENCH EDITION (1923) 


WITH 250 ILLUSTRATIONS 


PDN GU RG. 
fern AND. BOYD, TWEEDDALE COURT 
LONDON: GURNEY AND JACKSON 


1923 












, es 


- 


3 4 = 
TUAUTE ) | 
ORO 
~~ AANA | eee. 
iat 
e 
\ 
; ; | 
a , " be 
A » tral ce Cite Pie ia 
e PRINTED IN GREAT BRITAIN ny A) ee 
OLIVER AND BOYD, EDINBURGH > 


TRANSLATORS’ INTRODUCTION 


FRANCE, by reason of her geographical position and her 
partial escape from the glaciers of the Great Ice Age, 
that swept the cumbered land surfaces of more northern 
countries, has treasured in her soil and caves many traces 
of the men of long past days. By a succession of 
fortunate chances, but still more by a series of deliberate 
and skilful excavations, a large number of the relics have 
been laid bare, and French scientists, by their description and 
interpretation of these, have taken a predominant share in 
piecing together the striking, though still incomplete, tale of 
the passage of the men of the Old Stone Age, an accom- 
plishment for which the world of science must ever remain 
deeply in their debt. 

It is fitting, therefore, that France should produce the most 
comprehensive account of the history of prehistoric men, and 
it is fortunate that the task should have fallen to the hands of 
so competent a scientist as Professor Marcellin Boule, whose 
wide knowledge of the various branches of prehistoric lore has 
stamped this work with a character of its own. For here are 
woven together strands gathered from the fields of zoology 
paleontology and geology, of anthropology and eee 
to form a close fabric in which a pattern may faintly "Be 
discerned, the pattern of the slow evolution of mankind. 

To English-speaking scientists Professor Boule and his 
works are well known, but a word may be said regarding 
them and the development of his scientific point of view by 
way of introduction to the general reader. Some forty years 
ago Boule began his scientific career under the aegis of 
Emile Cartailhac, whose outstanding contributions to the 
study of prehistoric Man placed him in the direct succession 


Me 


562989 


vl TRANSLATORS’ INTRODUCTION 


of the great French prehistorians of the first half of the 
nineteenth century. The influence of this great worker 
once and for all gave a bias to the mind of the young 
investigator; but already he had. almost unconsciously been 
laying a broader basis for the study to which he was sub- 
sequently to devote himself. He has confessed that as a 
student he fell under the sway of a distinguished group of 
English scientists, learning geology from the works of Lyell, 
prehistory from those of Lubbock and John Evans, and gain- 
ing insight at once into comparative 
anatomy and method from the 
writings of Huxley. 

So much promise was shown 
by Boule’s early work that he 
was appointed assistant to the 
great paleontologist Albert Gaudry, 
Professor of Palzontology in the 
National Natural History Museum 
of France, whose researches on fossil 
animals, particularly of Quaternary 
times, and whose _ paleontological 
generalizations in their turn con- 
tributed to the broad foundations 
upon which Boule was subsequently 
to build his story of Fossil Men. In 1903 our author was 
called upon to succeed Gaudry in the Chair of Palaeontology, 
and in addition, on the creation, through the generosity of 
Albert I., Prince of Monaco, of the ‘Institut de Paléonto- 
logie humaine” in Paris in 1914, he was appointed 
Director of the first establishment devoted solely to the 
investigation of the history of prehistoric men. 

His published researches during these years have covered 
a wide field, for Boule seems to be equally at home in the 
region of pure geology, as witnessed by his works on the 
central massif and the volcanoes of France, and on the 
geology of Velay, Auvergne, and Madagascar; in the field 
of paleontology, as shown by his researches in Madagascar, 
and his monographs on many Quaternary mammals in this 





Professor Marcellin Boule. 


TRANSLATORS’ INTRODUCTION vil 


country and in America, and on the Grimaldi caves; in 
general archeology, as the reports of his excavations of 
various prehistoric sites prove; and in human _palzontology, 
as revealed by his masterly studies of the Fossil Man of 
La Chapelle-aux-Saints. 

Outwith his official duties Boule has taken a prominent 
part in the advancement of the science of man’s history. His 
editorship for some thirty years of the journal L’ Anthropologie 
is reflected in the indispensable treasure-house which its pages 
have become for students of the subject the world over. The 
merits of his long life-work have been generally recognized by 
scientists in this country, where he has been elected a Foreign 
Member of the Geological Society of London, a Corresponding 
Member of the Zoological Society of London, an Honorary 
Foreign Fellow of the Royal Society of Edinburgh, and an 
Honorary Member of the Anthropological Institute of Great 
Britain, to which, on receiving the Huxley Medal, he delivered 
the Huxley Memorial Lecture in 1922. 

How have these varied activities and achievements been 
reflected in Boule’s scientific point of view, ‘and what influence 
have they had upon his treatment of the story of prehistoric 
men? At the outset of his career his outlook was largely 
geological and paleontological; he was interested generally 
in the relations of the materials of the earth’s crust, and in 
particular in their stratigraphical order, that is their time 
relations, which revealed the comings and goings of the 
animals of former ages. Thus he laid at the basis of his 
method of interpretation a sound knowledge of the geological 
successions in which remains of Fossil Men were likely to be 
found, and of the various faunas of extinct and migrated 
animals with which they were likely to be associated; and 
this is the first essential to a correct interpretation of the 
story of mankind. With this knowledge he was also able 
to picture with accuracy and in detail the various environ- 
ments in which the different prehistoric men passed their 
existence; prehistoric topographies, climates, vegetations and 
animal life assumed a greater reality. His “ssaz de 
Patéontologie stratigraphigue de ¢ Homme, published in 1888, 


Vili TRANSLATORS’ INTRODUCTION 


was a notable contribution to the temporal development 
of Man. 

But the story was yet far from complete. Boule’s studies 
on the comparative morphology of animals readily led to a 
balanced appreciation of the structural differences of the various 
types of prehistoric man himself, and value was added to his 
comparisons by his knowledge of modern anthropology. A 
last link was required to complete the chain: discoveries 
of fossil bones, correctly interpreted, might indicate the 
physical evolution of Man, but they shed no light on his 
habits and manner of life. Boule, therefore, set himself to 
examine the evidences revealed by archeology; and in 
interpreting these in relation to his physical data he has 
been enabled to invest with a breath of life the dry bones 
of the geological succession. , 

In his Fossett Men he has focussed these many varied 
shafts of light upon the problem of Man’s early history, so 
that from a mass of heterogeneous detail we see emerging 
a connected story of the development of Mankind upon the 
earth, a story still very imperfect, but apparently embodying 
the essentials of his physical and intellectual evolution. These 
remarks on Professor Boule’s work may be concluded with 
a quotation from a letter by his old master, the late Professor 
Emile Cartailhac, to an American correspondent of the present 
writer, in which he refers to this volume as ‘un magistral 
ouvrage sur ‘les hommes fosstles, cléments de paléontologie 
humaine’ tres supérieur a tout ce quiil y avait sur cette 
‘question supréme’ dans l’ancien ou le nouveau monde.” 

While France has taken a first place in the advancement 
of the study of prehistoric man, it would be a mistake to 
suppose that Great Britain has lagged behind in making her 
contributions to the subject, and this Professor Boule freely 
acknowledges in the following pages. 

It is true that remains of Paleolithic Man have been less 
frequently found here than on the continent, but indispensable 
additions have been made by the geological work of such as 
Lyell and Prestwich in former days, and in more recent 
times, particularly by the glacial geology of James Geikie 


TRANSLATORS’ INTRODUCTION 1X 


and W. B. Wright and the glacial botany of Clement Reid; 
by the quaternary paleontology of such as Falconer, Boyd 
Dawkins, and Newton, and the pioneer explorations of 
Buckland in Kirkdale Quarry, and of M‘Enery and Pengelly 
in Kent's Cavern, where, about the time of the researches 
of Tournal and Schmerling on the continent, M‘Enery for 
the first time discovered dressed flints in intimate proximity 
with the bones of extinct animals, and declared them to be 
coeval—to the amusement of his contemporaries; by the 
archeological researches of John Evans, Lord Avebury, 
Macalister and many more; and by studies bearing more 
directly on prehistoric Man himself by such as Turner, Sollas, 
Smith Woodward, Keith and Elliot Smith. A noteworthy 
development of recent years has been the discovery and 
exploration in Scotland of various sites yielding clear traces 
of Azilian culture, and a continuation of this work in a land 
which so far has yielded no trace of Paleolithic Man promises 
to aid materially in bridging the gradually narrowing gulf 
which still separates the culture of the Old Stone Age 
from the dawn of Neolithic times. ; 

Yet here we would echo for our own country Professor 
Boule’s more general appeal for further investigation. We 
know that men of different paleolithic cultures inhabited 
Britain, but the connected history of these and of their 
immediate successors is still a play enacted upon a darkened 
stage. Fortunate chance discoveries, such as that which gave 
a first hint of the presence of Piltdown Man, may focus a 
brilliant light on an isolated spot of the darkened stage; 
and because of this each chance discovery should be reported 
at the finding to experts who may probe the possibilities to 
their utmost limit. But a general illumination of the prehistoric 
play, a consecutive story of the comings and goings of the 
forerunners of Modern Man in Britain, is likely to be achieved 
only by carefully planned and skilfully executed excavations, 
carried out with a view to deciphering the chronological 
succession of human settlements in sites inhabited by the 
peoples of former days. 

This translation was already in page form when the revised 


x TRANSLATORS’ INTRODUCTION 


and enlarged second French edition made its appearance in 
the summer of the present year. While, therefore, it was 
impossible to amalgamate in the text all the many changes 
necessitated by the constant progress of discovery, the transla- 
tion has been brought up to date by the inclusion, either in 
the text or in the Appendix, of all the fresh illustrations and 
textual additions and alterations of the French second edition. 
A few notes, indicated by “square brackets” [ ], have been 
added by the translators for the guidance of English readers. 
Throughout, the translators have had the inestimable assistance 
of the advice of Professor Boule, who read a proof of the 
work and to whom they wish here to express their gratitude. 


jin: 


EDINBURGH, October 1923. 


Pm PELOR'S PREFACE TO FIRST EDITION 


BARELY a century and a half have elapsed since the prime 
question of the origin of Man was raised from the regions 
of dreams and fiction to the domain of science. Zoology 
and Comparative Anatomy first sought to solve it by methods 
soon found to be inadequate. Later, Paleontology became 
established as a separate science, having as its object the 
retracing of the history of beings of former ages, and since 
that time the highest hopes have been raised that this new 
science would reconstruct for us our own history. 

During the second half of the nineteenth century, after 
the ever memorable discoveries of Boucher de Perthes in the 
ancient alluvials of the Somme, and of Edouard Lartet in the 
caves of Périgord, research in Human Paleontology has been 
consistently prosecuted. The advances made in the last 
twenty years are so striking that the “problem of Fossil 
Man” has become a universal subject of discussion among 
the general public, even more so perhaps than in professional 
scientific circles. From the very moment of its announcement 
each new discovery relating to our distant ancestors becomes 
the subject of numerous articles in the daily press or popular 
reviews ; the substance of the articles could be easily criticized, 
but they bear clear witness to the lively and justifiable curiosity 
of the people. From all quarters comes a demand for a book 
which will give an account at once detailed and synthetic of 
our present-day knowledge of Fossil Men. 

In France there are already certain valuable works of 
this nature, such as Hamy’s Préczs de Paléontologie humaine, 
G. de Mortillet’s Le Préhzstoriqgue, E. Cartailhac’s La France 
préhistoriqgue, S. Reinach’s Catalogues du Musée de Saint- 
Germain, WDéchelette’s Manuel dArchéologie préhistorique, 


xi 


X11 AUTHOR’S PREFACE TO FIRST EDITION 


and the like. But these works are either too old, or 
else they present only the archzological aspect of Human 
Paleontology. 

In foreign lands, where interest in all that touches upon 
prehistoric studies is no less keen than in France, there 
have appeared many popular works in which the items of 
text and illustration have been largely drawn from French 
publications. Some of these have been written by pure 
geologists, some by archzologists obviously unacquainted with 
biological problems, and others, by medical men or anthro- 
pologists, are too exclusively anatomical. Each has its 
merits, but none deals with the subject in all its fullness, 
that is to say in all its manifold aspects. 

In writing in my turn this work on the Elements of HIuman 
Paleontology, | make no claim to more perfect achievement, 
but I have aimed at achieving something different. For close 
on forty years, from the time when I took up the science under 
the fond guidance of my very dear friend, Emile Cartailhac, | 
have never ceased to be interested in the natural history of 
Man. The variety of my researches, and the editing for 
twenty-five years of the journal L’ Anthropologie, have perhaps 
placed me in a less unfavourable position than more strict 
specialists for gathering to a point the facts now garnered by 
the various branches of the science. 

A few years ago, after having described at length 
the now famous skeleton from La Chapelle-aux-Saints, | 
sought to focus the present state of our knowledge of 
Human Paleontology. The copies of the memoir containing 
this attempt, of which too few were published, were soon 
exhausted; and besides it included a mass of technical 
evidence not easily grasped by readers insufficiently versed 
in the subject. 

On several occasions I have discussed Fossil Men in the 
course of my Museum lectures; but such a method of diffusing 
knowledge is very limited, and my audiences and friends have 
urged me to publish these lectures in a form readily accessible 
to all naturalists and even to all educated persons who may 
wish to peer into the mysteries of the past. Hence the origin 


AUTHOR'S PREFACE TO FIRST EDITION xii 


of this book, which attempts to sum up the main achievements 
of a science still young, in the establishment and development 
of which France has taken a preponderant part. 

Fossil Man is revealed to us by two classes of relics, by 
two sorts of evidence. The first consists in the presence, in 
the heart of geological layers, of bones contemporary with 
these layers and more or less fossilized, like the bones of 
extinct animals with which they are often mingled. The 
second comprises various objects bearing traces of deliberate 
handiwork, that is to say, the products of human industry. 

The latter evidences are much the more numerous, since 
they are most resistant to the various agents of destruction. 
They are to be met with in innumerable localities in almost 
all parts of the world. They provided the first proofs of the 
high geological antiquity of Man, and thereafter served as a 
basis for the establishment of a classification of prehistoric 
times. Above all, they reflect the intellectual and moral 
outlook of the oldest communities of Mankind. 

The bone evidences, more friable and less easily preserved, 
are much more rare. Yet it is the scientific study of these 
alone that, bringing to our ken the chief anatomical characters 
of our most remote ancestors, is capable of throwing some 
light on their origin, on their zoological descent and _ their 
physical evolution, that is on the genealogical history of 
human beings or Hominians, the highest group of the 
Primates. 

Although these two kinds of information both bear on 
Human Paleontology, although they should co-operate in 
establishing a History of Fossil Man, and are consequently 
inseparable, they belong to two somewhat different schools : 
for one is more zoological in nature, the other more archzxo- 
logical. With the second of these two points of view I shall 
deal much more briefly than with the first. 

I have endeavoured to write this work with complete 
detachment of mind, confining myself exclusively to scientific 
ground. In my anxiety to avoid attributing conclusive value 


Xiv AUTHOR’S PREFACE TO FIRST EDITION 


to any but positive facts, I have not hesitated to strew my 
text with more marks of interrogation than of affirmation ; 
and this I have done in the belief that thus I may best advance 
science, and at the same time show most consideration for 
my readers. 

Nevertheless, I am quite aware of my temerity. It is 
probable, indeed it is to be hoped, that almost as soon as 
my book is published, it may be already behind the times. 
Paleontological researches multiply on every side; new 
evidences will soon be brought to light, and we may expect 
them to be such that, if they do not controvert, they will at 
least modify our present theories, and present under unforeseen 
aspects the problems which engage our attention. 

It cannot well be otherwise, considering the extreme 
poverty of our evidences. Our researches have as yet been 
directed upon but tiny portions of the habitable globe, and the 
European region, the only one which we are beginning to 
know, cannot be regarded as a centre of appearance or of 
dispersal. It is but an appanage of the Eurasiatic Continent, 
which through all time has been a great laboratory of life. 
In this appanage, this blind-alley, the history of the early 
human races cannot present an aspect of continuous and 
regular evolution: it is rather made up of intermittent 
contributions brought by successive waves of far-distant origin, 
from vast Asiatic and African territories of which our 
knowledge is still very scanty and vague. 

The attempt I make is therefore only a provisional essay 
at focussing the subject. I am far from regarding it as a 
true A/zstory of Fossil Man: the writing of such a history 
will be possible only in the distant future. This work, which 
I have sought to render concrete by means of accurate and 
abundant illustrations, will none the less serve a useful purpose 
of its own. While satisfying so far as possible the justifiable 
curiosity of the general public as to the present aspect of the 
problem of our origin, it will, | hope, be of service to students 
and professional workers. It is with the second class of 
readers in view that I have given a large choice of biblio- 
graphical references, in order to aid more advanced study and 


AUTHOR'S PREFACE TO FIRST EDITION XV 


to permit of references to the sources of information. I may 
be excused for particularly recommending the thirty volumes 
of L’ Anthropologie. 


To me it is a source of much gratification that this work 
should appear at the same time as the official inauguration 
of an establishment which forms the finest instrument for 
research till now available for prehistorians, the /zs¢ztut de 
Paléontologie humaine, founded in Paris by a great patron of 
science, H.S.H. Prince Albert I. of Monaco. 


MARCELLIN BOULE. 


Ig2T. 





Cy aoe 


ae ee ae 
7 one aan = 5 ‘ 
oe aes 2 ; xs 
, \ 7 
> - > i; ‘Soba 25 on ry, 
3 2 ae 7 ee ee :s — aS s 
i+ - = cae . 
ee hs ae ee rh 
7 eee - aos £ HAs 
oes * rae 
she a te Z oe 7 -_ a . - c 
a ; 4 
L 
3 
\ 3 
oe be : 
* 
2 
“ 
3% 
ey « * 
- v ¥ ay 
. eo Ae, P a 
> >> . - : 
oa 
rea F »s 





GLO NVieEEN Td 


TRANSLATORS’ INTRODUCTION A 
AUTHOR’S PREFACE TO FIRST EDITION. 


(Sis Wed aed! 


HISTORICAL SUMMARY 


First Phase: From Ancient Times to the Renaissance. Second Phase: From 
Sixteenth to Eighteenth Century — Mercati — Sequence of Prehistoric 
Ages. Third Phase: John Frere—Nineteenth Century, Cuvier—Tournal 
and Schmerling—Boucher de Perthes—Edouard Lartet—Successors of 
Edouard Lartet—Bones of Fossil Man—Review of the Discoveries—The 
Neanderthal Discovery — La Naulette — Cro-Magnon — The Spy Men — 
Pithecanthropus—Later Discoveries—The Mauer Jawbone—La Chapelle- 
aux-Saints—Piltdown—Fossil Man beyond Europe 


CrrAP EER EL 


TIME RELATIONS OF EARLY MAN 


RELATIVE CHRONOLOGY 

The Geological ines The Tey ee meth its Mawes _ The 
Quaternary Formations—Marine Deposits—Deposits of Glacial Origin— 
Ancient Alluvial Deposits—Muds, Peat-Bogs, Calcareous Tufas—Screes 
and Debris—Grottos and Bone-Caves—Volcanic Formations—Classifica- 
tion of Quaternary Times—Stratigraphical Method—Quaternary Fossils 
and Method of Paleontology—Extinct or Emigrated Animals—Arche- 
ological Method—Proposed General Classification of Quaternary Times— 
Divisions of Pleistocene Period: Lower Pleistocene, Mid Pleistocene, 
Upper Pleistocene. 


ABSOLUTE CHRONOLOGY 


Relative and Absolute eiceitee ue Methods of Time 
Estimation—Discussion of Results—Duration of Post-Glacial Times— 
Immense Duration of Quaternary Times. 


HALLER LLL 


LIVING PRIMATES AND FOSSIL MONKEYS 


LIVING PRIMATES . 5 : 
Classification of the Ds eee ernie TM onicys or Baan eh like 
Apes (Anthropomorphs or Anthropoids)—Man and his Group (Hominians) 
—Anatomical Differences between Man and Monkeys. 


xvii b 


PAGE 


Xl 


65 


XVill CONTENTS 


FossIL MONKEYS : : . : 
The Eocene Primates — Sieeeon Monkeys — Miocene Monkeys: 
Pliopithecus — Dryopithecus — Fossil Monkeys of the Siwalik Hills— 
Sivapithecus — Pliocene and Quaternary Monkeys — Conclusions— 
Poverty of Paleontological Material. 


CHAR Dai: 
PITHECANTHROPUS—THE “ APE-MAN” 


Story of the Discovery—Study of the Deposit—Age of Pithecanthropus—The 
Skull-Cap—The Brain—The Teeth—The Femur—Interpretation of the 
Facts—Genealogical Relationships of Pzthecanthropus ; : 


Chin haleil Peete 
THE PROBLEM OF TERTIARY MAN. EOLITHS 


The Problem—Historical Review—Theories regarding Eoliths—Discussion 
of Evidences: Human _ Bone - Remains—Savona—Castenedolo—The 
Calaveras Skull—Animal Bones, Scratched, Incised, etc.—Pseudo Pit- 
traps — The Cracked Flints from Thenay — Flints used or worked by 
percussion: Eoliths—Palzontological Objections—Geological Objec- 
tions — Technical and Experimental Objections— Effects of Natural 
Forces—A Modern Eolith Factory—Conclusions 


CHAE Le hava 
MEN OF THE CHELLEAN OR LOWER PLEISTOCENE AGE 


Industry of the Lower Pleistocene—Human Bone Discoveries . 


THE WEIMAR FOSSILS . 
The Teeth from Talhach be Enrinesaere Jaw. 


THE MAUER JAW (Lomo hetdelbergensis) . 
The Layer—Age of the Jaw—Its Characters" en tition Se pacientes 


THE PILTDOWN MAN (LZoanthropus dawsont) 
Historical Account—Geological Age of the faver=Iyeseinaes of Re 
Bones—The Skull—The Jaw—The Teeth—Interpretation of the Facts— 
Is Eoanthropus an Artificial and Composite Creature ?—General Con- 
clusions. 


CPAer Reavis 
NEANDERTHAL MAN (Homo neanderthalensis) 


Characters of the Moustierian Period 


HISTORICAL SUMMARY : ; 4 : » : 
Neanderthal — Gece Naulette —Spy Discovery — Krapina— 
Grimaldi — La Chapelle-aux-Saints — Le Moustier— La Ferrassie — La 
Quina—Summary. 


PAGE 


a3 


ie cat 


138 
144 


147 


157 


176 
178 


CONTENTS 


DESCRIPTION. THE SKULL 
General Morphology of the Sknuil--Regiond of the Skull—The Face— 
Lower Jaw—Dentition. 

THE TRUNK AND LIMBS . : 

Vertebral Column—Girdles and Limbs—Attitude sei Peosorhicne of the 
Body—Reconstructions. 

THE BRAIN. : : : : 

Brain Capacity—Study of the Eine rinctional eniecasce of the Brain. 


CONCLUSIONS 
Diagnosis of the Seana Pee Ct erion with Moder Poi 
His Place in the Human Series—An Archaic and Extinct Species. 


MeaBVes Dore AON: 
THE MEN OF THE REINDEER AGE 


The Reindeer Age—Products of Industry—Subdivisions—The First Artists— 
Historical—Cro-Magnon, Laugerie, Duruthy—The Grimaldi Caves— 
Chancelade— Briinn, Predmost—-Les Hoteaux—Grimaldi Caves, 
Further Explorations—Combe-Capelle, Obercassel 


THE GRIMALDI RACE 


Its Geological Age— The giibiete _ The Suite” Denton — Limb 
Bones—Affinities and Survivals. 


THE CRO-MAGNON RACE 


The Cro-Magnon Skeletons—The Grimaldi Shetetons Other meen nces 
Varieties of the Type—Survivals. 


THE CHANCELADE RACE. 
_ Discovery—The Skeleton—Comparisons, 


HUMAN FIGURES 


Aurignacian BRntree Thee HARE erecta to the 
Bushmen—Magdalenian Sculptures—Conclusions. 


CEA Pi Rel 
FROM FOSSIL MEN TO LIVING MEN 


Difficulty of the Task—A Preliminary Study: Races and Peoples—-Races of 
Europe—Nordic Race—Mediterranean Race—Alpine Race—Holocene 
Period: Its Divisions—Comparative Chronology of Prehistoric and 
Historic Times—The Neolithic Age—Transition from Paleolithic to 
Neolithic—Azilian Races: Arrival of the First Brachycephalic People— 
Neolithic Races: Relationships of the Three Great Types—The Metal 
Ages—The Ancient Peoples in spermatic of the=Three, Great 

» Races—Conclusions : ; : : ; 

b 2 


X1xX 
PAGE 


194 


214 


246 


270 


281 


296 


8% ' CONTENTS 


ele l Wes hl ga: < 
FOSSIL MAN BEYOND EUROPE 


ASIA AND MALAYSIA ; : ‘ : : : 
Western Asia— Central Asia, Siberia— Southern Asia — Osteological 
Evidences. 

AUSTRALIA . : ; : : ; : ‘ : 
General Notes—Modern Australians—Archezological Evidences—The 
Talgai Skull. 


AFRICA : : : : : : : - : 
General . Survey—Egypt—Barbary—Sahara—Central Africa—Southern 
Africa—Human Bone-Remains—The Oldoway Skull—The Boskop Skull. 


THE Two AMERICAS 

NORTH AMERICA . : : ' : : : i 
General Description — Archeological Observations— The Trenton 
Alluvials—Imprints of Human Steps—Osteological Evidences—Trenton, 
Penon—The ‘‘ Loess Men”—Rancho la Brea—Discoveries in Florida— 
Conclusion. 


SOUTH AMERICA ‘ ‘ , ‘ ; : : . 
General Remarks—The Pampas Formations—Archeeological Evidences— 
Stone Relics—Cinders and Baked Clay—Bones of Fossil Animals, Worn, 
Worked, or Cut—Neomylodon—Human Bones, Lagoa-Santa—Argentine 
Republic—Discoveries in the Upper Pampean—Discoveries in the Lower 
Pampean—Prothomo—Diprothomo—Tetraprothomo—Conclusions. 


CEA PUIG wart 


GENERAL CONCLUSIONS 


Man, the First of the Primates—Human Evolutionary Stages—Relation- 


ships of Mankind—Place of Origin of Mankind—Differentiation of Races 
of Mankind—Moral and Intellectual Evolution—The Progress of Mankind 


APPENDIX 


Problem of Tertiary Man—The Weimar Fossils—Is Eoanthropus an 
Artificial and Composite Creature?—Neanderthal Man, Child’s Skull 
from La Quina—Neanderthal Man’s Brain Capacity—Aurignacian Human 
Figures—Azilian Human Remains at Mugem—Fossil Man in Southern 
Asia—Human Remains from Japan and the Philippines—The Wadjak 
Skulls—Australian Archeology—Stone Age in Egypt—Stone Relics in 
Algeria—The Sahara—Southern Africa, Broken Hill Skull—Stone Relics 
in Chili. 


INDEX 


PAGE 


351 


361 


372 


396 
398 


413 


438 


469 


487 


hey 
_ 
Q 


on Am &W YN 


0.9 


oe 
No 


ms 
Oo 


14, 
15, 


16. 
we 
18. 
19. 
20. 
eae 
2, 
23. 
24. 
ahs 
26. 
a: 
28. 


LIST OF ILLUSTRATIONS 


Bisons modelled in clay in the Cave of Tuc d’Audoubert in Ariége Frontispiece 


Portrait of Professor Marcellin Boule . 


Cea Le heed 


HISTORICAL SUMMARY 


. Thunder-bolts, figured by Mercati 
. Portrait of Mercati 
. Flint Weapon found by Frere a Fiome 


Remains mistaken in Eighteenth Century for those of Bossi Man . 


. Portrait of Tournal 


Portrait of Boucher de Perthes 


. Two Flints from Saint-Acheul . 

. Portrait of Edouard Lartet 

. Fragment of Ivory from La tga ane 
. The Neanderthal Skull. 

. Jawbone from La Naulette 

. The ‘Mentone Man” 

. Portrait of E. T. Hamy 


CHAPTER II 
TIME RELATIONS OF EARLY MAN 


Diagram of the Succession of the Geological Ages 

Diagram showing Development and Distribution in ime of einele 
and Man 

Geological Section of Sitens of Miediteernen near Mentone 

Shells from French Quaternary Marine Deposits 

Sketch showing former extent of Quaternary Glacier of Rhone eller 

Map of Europe at height of Ice Age 

Outline across Valley of the Garonne at Toulouse 

Old Sand-quarry at Chelles 

Shells of Land Molluscs from Loess 

Geological Section near Paris . 

Geological Section of Pleistocene Tufas at te Caller sous- es 

Section of Bone-pit in Gargas Cave 

Rock-shelters at Bruniquel 

The Grimaldi Caves 

Molar Teeth of three Suan: et of Fossil Elephants: 


264 


vi 


1S») 
O 


ee Oo OO O35 109 60 Go Ge iGo Od Go 
HOO ON Nm BB BW 


xxii LIST OF ILLUSTRATIONS 


FIG, 
29. 
30. 
Bi 
yy 
33+ 


34. 


35. 
. Head of Catarrhine Monkey 
37- 
38. 


39. 
4o. 
aL 
42. 
43. 
44. 
45. 
46. 
47. 
48. 
49. 
50. 


61. 


62. 
63. 


Upper Molars of Rhinoceros mercki and R. tichorhinus 

Paleolithic Dressed Axe and Neolithic Polished Axe 

Skull of Fossil Hippopotamus . 

Skeleton of Mammoth . 

Quaternary Carnivores in Paleanrotee rl alles, of Ponce National 
Museum of Natural History, Paris . 

Modern Reindeer 


CHAPTER ITI 
LIVING PRIMATES AND FOSSIL MONKEYS 


Representatives of Lemurs and each Great Group of Monkeys 


Head of Platyrrhine Monkey 

Comparative Morphology of Skull, seth ai Cervical Vereben of a 
Lemur, an Ape, and Modern Man . ; 

Dentitions of Man and an Ape : 

Skull, Vertebral Column, and Pelvis of Man ad of Corie 

Comparative Structures of Pelvis of Man and of an Ape 

Foot of Man and ofa Gorilla . 

Skull of Anaptomorphus homunculus . 

Skull of Adapis magnus . 

Lower Jawbone of PEMD Vee 

Lower Jaw of Pliopiothecus antiguus . 

Lower Jawbone of Oreopithecus bambolit 

Lower Jaw of Dryopithecus fontani 

Skeleton of Mesopithecus pentelict from Biker 

Portion of Right Lower Jaw of Szvapithecus indicus fo the Sivan 
Hills . 


1. Fragment of Left Deve: fawtone of Seren mien hee canine in nite 
. Restoration of Lower Jawbone of Szvapithecus indicus 


CHAPTER SLY 


PITHECANTHROPUS—THE ‘‘ APE-MAN ” 


. Island of Java : 

. Geological Map of Volcan leven Rance and Surround ae ; 

. The Prthecanthropus Bed on Bank of River Solo 

. Geological Section of Pithecanthropus Bed 

. Bone-Remains of Pthecanthropus 

. Sketch of Occipito-Temporal Ridge in Skulls of Ghinpames Paheee 


thropus, and Fossil Man 
Skulls of Chimpanzee, Pieeenirone and Neanderthal Man 


. Superimposed Profiles of the Skulls of Chimpanzee, Pitheran threes 


Neanderthal Man, and Modern Frenchman : 
Last Upper True Molar from Right Side of Orang, of Pithecanthropus, 
and of an Australian Aboriginal : : 
Reconstruction of Skull of Pzthecanthropus face Dabo 
Diagrams showing place of Pithecanthropus among the Primates 


PAGE 
45 
46 
51 
52 


53 
54 


95 
96 
97 


97 
100 


IOI 
102 


102 
103 


105 
107 


LIST OF ILLUSTRATIONS Xxill 


GOA LICR av 


THE PROBLEM OF TERTIARY MAN 


FIG. PAGE 
64. Paleolithic Implements from Different Parts of the Globe . Maat in 
65. Tertiary Flints from Thenay, Puy-Courny, and Otta ; mm eES 
66. Eoliths from the “ Reutelian” of Belgium . : : rh phy hf 3 
67. Rostro-Carinate (“ Keeled”) Flint from Crag, Bitar : ; edie is) 
68. Most perfect example of “ Keeled” Flint from Crag at Norwich |  Blz0 
69. Calaveras Skull ; : : : : : ‘ 123 
70. Bone of Halitherium, bearing incisions . real 24 
71. Tooth of Large Shark, Carcharodon megalodon ; : : 7. led 
72. Flake of Moustierian Flint from Grotte du Placard : ; he TO 
73. Natural Eoliths from Eocene Deposits at Clermont (Oise) 132 
74. Flint split in three fragments remaining in contact with each other, fear 
Eocene Eolith Beds at Clermont (Oise) . : im sta 
75. Chalk Quarry at Guerville i 2134 
76. Diluting Tanks where Flints come ao micient ante! eth each pines Lele 
77. Heaps of Eoliths taken from Tanks . ; . Pe .to4 
78. Eoliths from Cement Works at Mantes ; ; : : y Poee 


CHAPTER VI 


MEN OF THE CHELLEAN OR LOWER PLEISTOCENE AGE 


79. Stone Industry from Lower Pleistocene at Saint-Acheul . ; ETE) 
80. Tooth from Taubach and Tooth of Chimpanzee ; ; heeel4as 
81. Profiles of Weimar Jaw ; ; flO 
82. Weimar Jaw seen from above P ; : , : 146 
83. Geographical Position of Mauer, near eeipere : ee tas 
84. Photograph and Geological Section of Grafenrain nares at Maver eed) 
85. Heidelberg (Mauer) Jaw seen in profile : : ctethO 
86. Heidelberg (Mauer) Jaw seen from above . T5t 
87. Superimposed Profiles of Heidelberg Jaw, ait nnss S paw and Modern 

Human Jaw .. ee 52 

88. Vertical Sections of Rants ogee fave at Pied par is2 
89. Inner Lower Edge and Digastric Impressions of Various Jaws. par ox 
go. Inner Surface of Body of Mauer Lower Jaw, genial region . 154 

gt. Comparative Morphology of Lower Molars of Chimpanzee, Heideinere 

Man, a Tasmanian, anda Modern Frenchman . A ; ea 

92. Sketch showing Geographical Position of Piltdown. ns by; 
93. Section of the Piltdown Bed . ease 
94. Dressed Flint from the Piltdown Gravel eee tol 
95. Fragments of the Skull of Hoanthropus : . 164 
96. Lower Jaw from Piltdown : eS Uy 
97. Comparative View of Under Margin af Woaene Temes Jaws elo 
98. Lower Jaws viewed from Inner Face : : ; : ee 401°) 
99. Canine Tooth of Hoanthropus : ; » 4f70 
100. Reconstruction of Skull of Zoanthropus Wao full face. ent 7 3 
101. The Same, seen from above . ; : F ‘ bP eres 


102. The Same, three-quarters view ; : A175 


XXiv LIST OF ILLUSTRATIONS 


CHAPTER Vil 


NEANDERTHAL MAN 


FIG. : PAGE 
103. Moustierian Industry from North of France. : 7 ; ees 
104. Neanderthal Skull-cap : : . ; : : c ERS 
105. Fragment of Jaw from Arcy-sur-Cure : : ; = ERO 
106. Gibraltar Skull. : : : : : : » 3800 
107. Lower Jaw from La Naulette . ; ; : : ; ci OT 
108. Spy Skull (No. 1) : : : ; : ; : ui 482 
109. Jaw from Malarnaud . : : : : : . Sv obee 
110. Section of the Krapina Bed . : ; ey 4B 
111. Hill, showing Entrance to Cave at La Ghapelie aux- roa i DERG 
112. Section of Cave at La Chapelle-aux-Saints . : : : é. 7. oD 
113. Dressed Flints from Cave at La Chapelle-aux-Saints : : Maree 
114. Skull from La Chapelle-aux-Saints z7 stfu. : : : 1 38 
115. Skull from Le Moustier, full face : : : : : ; ee 
116. Skull of Male Skeleton from La Ferrassie . : : : bgt fu 
117. Skull from La Quina . : : : So ee 
118. Skull from La Chapelle-aux- Saints: Ses ree view. ae fe! 


119. Profiles of Skulls of a Chimpanzee, of Man from La Chapelle-aux- Saint . 
and of Modern Frenchman, superimposed along the basio-nasalline . 195 
120. Superimposed Profiles of Skulls of the Naturalist, Cope, and of the Man 


from La Chapelle-aux-Saints : 196 
121. Geometrical Diagrams of Skulls of a Chimpaneen of “Man from Ta 

Chapelle-aux-Saints, and of a Frenchman . ee cy 
122. Superimposed Profiles of Different Skull-caps of Nesarieriiel ae .. 198 
123. Photograph showing Comparison of Upper Aspect of Skulls of Chim- 

panzee, of Man from La Chapelle-aux-Saints, and of a Frenchman sco eee 
124. Superimposed Lateral Profiles of Different Skulls of Neanderthal 

Type . : 199 
125. Photograph race eee Denese ite Siealls: of a hin taaeee %53 

Man from La Chapelle-aux-Saints, and of a Modern Frenchman 200 
126. Photographs comparing Occipital Aspects of Skulls of a Chimpanzee, of 

Man from La Chapelle- aux-Saints, and of a Frenchman . 201 
127. Photographs comparing Lower Sucre of Skulls of a Chimnenree ee 

Man from La Chapelle-aux-Saints, and ofa Frenchman . 201 
128. Front Portion of Skull from La Chapelle-aux-Saints, and of Skull of 

Frenchman . 202 
129, Photographs Site hoes of Skulls ne 2 Ghinrpaneees of Man Bie 

La Chapelle-aux-Saints, and of Modern Frenchman : 2 Siena 
130. Skulls of Frenchman and of Man from La Chapelle-aux-Saints, cobenne 

Relative Development of Cerebral and Facial Portions . 203 
131. Facial Profiles of Skulls of Chimpanzee, of a Frenchman, and of Man fon 

La Chapelle-aux-Saints ; . ; ’ : - 2s 
132. Lower Jaw of Man from La Rermecie : . 1. ae 
133. Profiles of Various Types of Lower Jaws, showing diteene es in Chit | “aay 
134. Posterior Surface of Body of Jaw of Man from La Chapelle-aux-Saints . 208 
135. Lower Edge and Impressions of Digastric Muscles in Various Jaws ~) 206 
136. Palate and Upper Dentition of Skull from La Ferrassie . a 2 
137. Lower Jaw and Dentition of Skull from La Ferrassie j : ‘aa 
138. Portion of Lower Jaw from Krapina . . : : : “7 Rees 


FIG, 


139. 


140. 
I4I. 
142. 
1433 
144. 
145. 


146. 
147. 
148. 
1409. 


150. 
EET. 


152. 


E53; 
154. 


156. 
EST. 
158. 
159. 
160, 
161. 
162. 
163. 
164. 
165. 
166. 
167. 
168. 
169. 
170, 
1 ae 
bo ae 
173. 
174. 
175. 
176. 
gy. 
178. 


LIST OF ILLUSTRATIONS 


Three last Cervical. Vertebraee and last Dorsal Vertebra of Chimpanzee, 
Man from La Chapelle-aux-Saints, and of a European 

Humerus of Homo neanderthalensts . 

Radius of Gorilla, of Neanderthal Man, and rota Renee 

Right Hand of Skeleton of Woman from La Ferrassie 

Femurs of Neanderthal Man, of Spy Man, and of a Frenchman 

Tibia of Spy Skeleton, seen full face and in profile . 

Lower Extremity of tibia and Astragalus of Skeleton of a Woman Batea rie 
Ferrassie ‘ 

Right Foot of Female ecleron from ie Soereae ; 

Astragalus of Chimpanzee, of Hlomo neanderthalensis, and ee an lf eon 

Heel-bones of a Gorilla, of Man from La Ferrassie, and of a Frenchman . 

Hind View of Leg and Foot of Chimpanzee, of Woman from La Ferrassie, 
and of a Frenchman. : ; 

Reconstruction of Skeleton of Man for La Glanelle: aux- Suite : ; 

Reconstruction of Muscles of Head and Neck of Neanderthal Man from 
La Chapelle-aux-Saints . 

Photograph of Cast of Brain Cavity of foe Man fom ish Sets aux- 
Saints. 

Topography of Surrce of Left Side ee pen 

Skeleton of Fossil Man from La Chapelle-aux-Saints reconceered, ie 
view 


: Skeleton of an wusttation, TEE view . 


Cie ERP Vvirl 
THE MEN OF THE REINDEER AGE 


Characteristic Objects of Aurignacian Period 

Solutrean Flints : 

Characteristic Magdalenian Objects : 

Portrait of Edouard Piette 

Reindeer in Ivory from Bruniquel 

Statuette of a Horse in Ivory from Lourdes . ; 
Head of Horse carved in Reindeer Antler, from Mas PAzil 
Heads of Chamois, etc., engraved on Reindeer Horn from Lourdes 
Red Deer and Salmon from Lorthet Cave 

Reindeer on Stone from Limeuil 

Bison from Altamira Cave 

Hind in Polychrome from Altamira Cave 

Red and Black Deer from Calapata . 

Section of Cro-Magnon Rock-shelter 

Profile of Skull from Laugerie-Basse. 

Bear’s Teeth decorated with Engravings, from oetir: 
Red Rocks, or Baoussé Roussé, at Grimaldi . 

“The Mentone Man” 

View of the “ Grotte dee Paani < 

Skull from Combe-Capelle 

Section of the Grotte des Enfants 

Two Skeletons of Negroids from the Grotte deg Ratan 
Skull of Young Negroid from Grimaldi 


XXV 


PAGE 


214 
215 
216 
217 
218 
219 


N N 
N N WN 
NO Ne 


N 


N N 
WN N 
ui Uo 


N 
iS) 
N 


N 


WN 
K9 Oo 
Oo Uo 


Oo © 


N 
Ui U1 Ut Ut Un 
+ Oo, Go b. 


NN 


XXVl LIST OF ILLUSTRATIONS 


FIG. 


179 


181, 


182. 


187. 
188, 
189. 
190. 
IgI. 


192. 
193. 
194. 
195. 
196. 
197. 
198. 


199. 
200, 
201. 


Bo?: 
203. 
204. 
205. 
206. 
207, 
208. 


209. 


and 180. Upper and Lower Jaws of Young Negroid from Grimaldi 
Comparison of Upper Left Molars of the Young Negroid, of an Australian, 


and of a Frenchman . 
Comparison of Lower Left Molar of ie vonte Meeipich Xi an Koctalae 


and of a Frenchman. 


. Skull of “ Old Man” from ae Nerekas 
184. 
185. 
186. 


Skull of Large Male Individual from the Grotte dee aye 

Skeleton of Large Male Individual from Grotte des Enfants 

Hand of Large adie idual from the Grotte des Enfants and of a Modert 
Individual . 

Profile of Skull from Grae a Piderd 

Cro-Magnon Type still persisting in the Dordogne. 

Section of the Rock-shelter at Chancelade 

The Chancelade Skull 

Skeleton of Foot of Chimpanzee, of Chanceiade Man, ana of a Moder 
Man . : 

Ivory Statuettes from Bracsenrpeu” Gave 

Statuettes in Steatite from the Mentone or Grima Caves 

Willendorf Statuette 

Bas-relief from Laussel fopresennaee a Wonn 

Bas-relief of a Man, from Laussel 

Magdalenian Human Representations 

Painted Panel from Minateda, Spain 


CHAPTER IX 
FROM FOSSIL MEN TO LIVING MEN 


Representatives of the Three Physical Types of Europe : 

Map of Distribution of Three Principal European Human Types . 

Comparative Chronology of Prehistoric, Proto-historic, and Hstene 
Times in Western Europe, the East, Egypt and Chaldea 

Section of Archeological Layers on Left Bank of Mas d’Azil Cave 

Flat Harpoons of Red Deer Antler from Mas d’Azil : 

Coloured Pebbles from Mas d’Azil : 

Tardenoisian Flints from Valle, Spain 

“Chisel” from Campigny 

Burial in Trench at Ofnet 

Dolichocephalic and Brachycephalie Sicille ont Che Paccdee in 
Les Mureaux (Seine-et-Oise) 

Human Vertebra pierced by Neolithic Arromieet ome a Gave in the 
Lozere 


CHART Raw. 


FOSSIL MEN BEYOND EUROPE 


. Dressed Flint from Syria : 
. Scraper of Quartzite from Aphontons Gora . 
. Dressed Quartzites from India 


13. Human Sacrum from Loess at Ho-nan 


214. Different Types of the Tribe of Aruntas 


PAGE 


276 
277 


278 
282 
284 
285 


286 
287 
289 
290 
291 


293 
298 
299 
301 
302 
304 
309 
at 


319 
322 


325 
328 
329 
330 
331 
331 
333 


fe 


337 


352 
354 
356 
359 


FIG. 


215. 
216, 
217: 
218. 
219. 
290, 
2271: 
22, 
223. 
224. 
220 
226. 
227. 
228. 
229. 
230. 
wet 
22. 
333. 
234. 
235. 
235. 
a37: 
2 38. 
236. 


240. 


pat 
242. 
243. 
244. 
aA 
246. 
247. 
248. 


LIST OF ILLUSTRATIONS 


Weapons from Central Australia 

Australian Rock-paintings 

Skeleton of Diprotodon australis 

The Talgai Skull, from Australia 

Dressed Flints from the Egyptian Desert 

Dressed Flint from Diabet, Morocco : 

Dressed Flints from Tunisian Snail-shell Mounds . 

Flint Arrowheads from Fayum, Egypt 

Neolithic Arrowheads from the Sahara 

Quartzite Implement from Somaliland ; 
Quartzite dressed in Chellean fashion from Orange ener : 
Wall Engraving representing a Buffalo from Algeria 

Rock Sculptures from the Sahara 

Painting from Cave in Baroaland. Baennen reeked by retin: 
The Boskop Skull-cap. 

Skeleton of Wastodon americanus 

Flint Arrowhead found under Shoulder- Seah of ee eens 
Implement of Argillite found in the Trenton alluvials 
Skeleton of Megatherium 

Skeleton of Glyptodon . : 
Diagrammatic Section of the Pempas peemauon : 

Dressed Flint from the brook Observacion . 

Piece of Skin of Meomylodon with Hair and Beme Oerentes 
Human Skull from Sumidouro Cave. 

Human Genealogy according to Ameghino. 


CHAPTER XI 
GENERAL CONCLUSIONS 


Diagram showing different Theories of the Genealogical Relationships 
of Mankind with the other Primate Groups 


APPENDIX 


Lower Jaw of a Child from Weimar . 

Child’s Skull from La Quina . 

“Venus” from Lespugue : : 7 
Painting from Cave in Mirzapur ercene: representing Bmore Hunt . 
Skull, Wadjak I. : 

Upper and Lower Jaws of Skull enh I. 

Broken Hill Skull, profile : 

Skulls from Broken Hill and La Chapel: -aux- eefite 


XXVll 


PAGE 
364 
365 
368 
370 
373 
375 
377 
378 
380 
382 
383 
386 
387 
389 
393 
399 
400 
403 
414 
415 

417 
420 
425 
428 
430 


470 
473 
475 
477 


479 
480 


484 





po ve a3 ee 


_ q 


a ore 7 na a oe : 
| aner ANE aE Se fe, 


aa “a = as a 
7 ‘yo i le y a) - p> 


hse 


oe 





FOSSIL, MEN 
ELEMENTS OF HUMAN PALEONTOLOGY 


Or rok tt heel 
HISTORICAL SUMMARY 


By virtue of a supreme law of life, Mankind as a whole has 
had to pass through the phases of intellectual and physical 
evolution which to-day characterize the development of each 
individual in the human mass. In the beginning, the child 
is lulled by tales or songs of marvels: poetry is his first 
instructress. Later, his faculties of observation and reason 
awaken: truth compels him, and poetry is superseded by 
science. 

So, regarding the ‘‘supreme question” of its origin, 
Mankind in its infancy had at first no source of information 
other than fairy tales, legends and stories of the miraculous. 
Then human intelligence developed; in certain bright spirits 
genius was made manifest; next: calm observation, freed from 
all preconceptions, played its part; and finally, but only in 
later centuries when the reign of science began, there dawned 
some rays of Truth. | 

Our knowledge of Man’s existence on the earth in pre- 
historic times is a conquest of modern science. 

Neither in ancient times nor in the Middle Ages does there 
First Phase: Scem to have been expressed any but imaginary 
from Ancient conceptions of the origin of Mankind. In the 
eee Greek poets and philosophers of the pre- 
Simple imagi- Christian era, vague references occur bearing 
nary Views. on the low estate of the first Men. And so 

also in the Latin poets; everyone is familiar with the oft- 


quoted verses of Lucretius :— 
A 


HISTORICAL SUMMARY 


Arma antiqua manus, ungues dentesque fuerunt 
Et lapides, et item sylvarum fragmina rami, 


Et flammee atque ignis postquam sunt cognita primum 
Posterius ferri vis est, zerisque reperta 


Sed prior zeris erat, quam ferri, cognitus usus.! 


Similar views were expressed by Horace, Pliny, Strabo, 
Diodorus and others. 
) 


Probably all these notions were purely 
intuitive, but it may be that they owed something to the 
persistence of ancient traditions 


In any case they do not seem 
to have been based on true interpretations of relics of former 


8 
5 
S 
5 
S- 
= = 


I 


ies 





CERAVNIA 
LAPIS FVLMINEVS VVLGO FVLGVR 
Fic. 1.—Thunder-bolts, figured by Mercati in his AZe¢allotheca 


days, for even though stone axes and weapons, called ceraunza 
(Greek, xepavvds = thunder), were already well known, their origin 
or real significance was unrecognized. They were regarded as 
produced or launched by lightning, and extraordinary powers 
were attributed to them (Fig. 1) 


Such primitive ideas became widespread : 


: with slight 
variations they have persisted to our own day in the popular 
superstitions of almost every country.’ 


[1 The passage is thus rendered in English by Creech (1714) :— 
“ And RAGE not furnish’d yet with SWORD nor DART 
With FISTS, or BOUGHS, or STONES the Warriours fought 
These were the only WEAPONS Nature taught 


ght ; 
But when FLAMES burnt the TREES, and scorch’d the Ground 
Then BRASS appeared, and IRON fit to wound 
3RASS first was us’d.”] 
(Paris, 1878). 


Cartailhac, E., Ledge de pierre dans les souvenirs et superstitions populaires 


EARLY PHASES—* THOUNDER-BOLTS ” 3 


And yet it is to a considered study of these ancient objects, 
it is to archeology, that we owe the first positive concrete 
facts of the great antiquity of Mankind.’ 

In regaining contact with Nature, lost since the time of the 

Second Phase: ancient Greeks, the scientific spirit reawoke with 

fromthe the Renaissance. Two great artists, Leonardo 
Sixteenth to wile 

the Eighteenth ¢da Vinci and Bernard Palissy, propounded 

Century. correct views regarding the nature of fossils. 
Yet although various authors, Agricola (1558), Gesner (1565) 
and others, described or figured polished stone axes and stone 
arrow-heads, they regarded them simply as curiosities. They still 
considered these objects, together with so many other “ fossils,” 
as sports of nature, of which they gave 
more or less quaint explanations. 

At the end of the sixteenth cen- 
tury, Michael Mercati, whose writings 

Marcati were not published till 
discovers the 1717, more than a 


True Nature of Ses : ; 
Pe cotcaticed) century after hisdeath 


“Phunder- (1593), discovered the 
bolts.” true nature of the so- 
called thunder-bolts or ceraunza. 
“Most men,” he says, ‘believe that 
ceraunta are produced by lightning. 
Those who study history consider | 
that they have been broken off from | 
very hard flints by a violent blow, in 








Fic. 2.— Portrait of Mercati. 


the days before iron was employed Reduced from an engraving in 
for the follies of war; for the earliest the Metallotheca. 
men had only splinters of flint for knives.” And in this 


connection he quotes the verses of Lucretius.” 


1 See for the whole of the first part of this history: Hamy, E. T., Precis de 
Paléontologie humaine (Paris, 1870). Id., “ Matériaux pour servir 4 lHistoire de 
VYarchéologie préhistorique” (Revue archéologique, 1906). Evans, Sir John, Ancient 
Stone Implements, 2nd ed. (London, 1897). Cartailhac, E., La France preéhistorique 
(Paris, 1889). Reinach, S., Description raisonée du Musée de Saint-Germain-en-Laye. 
I. (Paris, 1889.) [Macalister, R.A. S., A Text-book of European Archeology, vol. i., 
The Paleolithic Period (Cambridge, 1921).] 

2 Mercati, M., Metallotheca, opus posthumum, Rome, 1717, p. 243. See on this 
subject, Vayson, “‘ Les précurseurs de la préhistoire” (Z’ Anthropologie, xxxi., p. 357): 


4 HISTORICAL SUMMARY 


In 1636 Boetius de Boot, regardless of being ‘dubbed 
a fool,” rejected the commonly accepted ideas ; but he believed 
that he was dealing with implements of iron transformed into 
stone through process of time. 

Various writers, however, Aldrovandus in 1648, Hassus in 
1714, A. de Jussieu in 1723, Lafitau the Jesuit in 172qmam 
Mahudel in 1730, compared the old stone weapons of our 
countries with the stone weapons of living native tribes, 
notably the American Indians, and so initiated an excellent 
working method based on comparative ethnography, giving 
at the same time ‘‘the finishing blow to the erroneous beliefs 
regarding ceraunia.” 

In 1750, Eccard, after investigating old German burials, 

Sequence ¢Stablished a succession of different prehistoric 

of Prehistoric ages; and in 1758, a learned magistrate, 
eke Goguet, published a remarkable work on the 
“Origin of Laws,” in which he declared that a Stone Age 
had been followed by an Age of Copper and of Bronze, and 
then by an Iron Age. Later this classification was firmly 
established and developed by the Danish archeologists 
Thomsen and Worsaae. 

Thus the hesitating science of the eighteenth century 
arrived at the same ideas as the ancient poets or philosophers ; 
but these ideas were now based on the observation of 
material evidences. Nevertheless, although it was recognized 
that the historic civilizations had been preceded by uncivilized 
or crudely barbarous periods, the great antiquity of these 
primitive times was not suspected. The theories had first 
of all to be accommodated to the demands of biblical 
chronology. The new idea of Mankind beginning ina state 
of primitive destitution seemed incompatible with the idea of 
the physical and moral perfection of the terrestrial paradise. 
Hence arose these heated discussions, fierce battles of words, 
which to-day seem so naive or ridiculous, especially when we 
consider, as M. Cartailhac has pointed out, that the most 
widely differing opinions regarding the date of the creation 
of Man did not diverge by more than 1500 years. 

Buffon, who first suspected the immense duration of 


DISCOVERIES OF EIGHTEENTH CENTURY 5 


geological time, although he sought to interpret the Scriptures 
“soundly,” was familiar with the stones which “were believed 
to have fallen from the clouds and to have been formed by 
thunder, but which nevertheless are really the first relics of 
the art of Man in a state of nature.” Yet, to his mind, the 
epoch of Man was only the seventh and last of his ‘‘ Epochs 
of Nature,’ much later than the fifth epoch, characterized 
by the remains of the Elephant, the Rhinoceros and the 
Hippopotamus, which he found in the superficial soil.’ 
With the nineteenth century Natural History sprang into 
Third Phase: Sudden life and vigour. To the new sciences 
Man dates from of Geology and Paleontology it fell to throw 
Ber cn to light on the great antiquity of Man. Upto that 
the Present time it had been a question only of objects 
= Shes dating no further back than modern geological 
times, objects which to-day are known as (Veo/c/hic. But now 
attention had to be turned to stone implements much more 
ancient, found in the very heart of deposits which dated from 
a geological period preceding the modern period, and which 
were distinguished by the presence of remains of animals no 
longer existing to-day. 

As early as 1715, Conyers, a pharmacist and antiquary of 
London, had found near that city, in the gravels of a former 
river and near the skeleton of an elephant, a flint worked 
after the manner now known as Acheulean. Bagford, a friend 
of Conyers, made the suggestion that the flint was a weapon 
used by a Briton to kill the elephant, brought over by the 
~ Romans in the reign of the Emperor Claudius! | 

In 1797, another Englishman, John Frere, made a similar 
discovery at Hoxne in Suffolk. He collected 
some dressed flints at a depth of four metres 
in a deposit containing bones of large extinct animals (Fig. 3). 
He was able to give his finda much more correct interpretation 
than Bagford, stating that it must certainly belong to a “very 
distant period, much more remote in time than the modern 
world.” This observation, so full of judgment, almost of 
genius, passed unnoticed. It was brought to light again by 


1 Buffon, Zpogues de la Nature (Paris, 1778). 


John Frere. 


6 HISTORICAL SUMMARY 


John Evans only after the memorable conflicts of Boucher de 


John 


Perthes, of whom 
forerunner.! 


Frere must 


be considered the 


In 1823, a French geologist, Ami Boué, presented Cuvier 


Nineteenth 
Century. 
Cuvier. 


with a human skeleton, exhumed near Lahr 
on the banks of the Rhine, from an ancient 
mud or. loess containing also remains of extinct 


animals. This discovery was set aside by the famous palzeon- 


iv \ 





















ss 


z —— 7 =A 
a = N 
——% = = SSA 
eS 2 
= BS : = 





SS 
SS 
SSS 


I 
ee 


o 


nt 
: i 


Weve 
gat 
CS 











——S 




















De AAS RC an 
‘ Nay 


WW 
iy" Fain tt \ 
\- SZ 


\ 
ee WV jj, ny 
i : \ a” 










Fig. 3.—One of the flint weapons found by 
Frere at Hoxne, Suffolk. Half natural size. 
Facsimile of a figure published by Sir 
John Lubbock. 


tologist. ‘All the evidence leads 
us to believe,” he said,” ‘‘that 
the human species did not exist 
at all in the countries where 
the fossil bones were found, at 
the period of the upheavals 
which buried them.” 

For these words the great 
naturalist has often been re- 
proached; but it is easy to 
excuse him.? Cuvier had, as a 
matter of fact, examined all the 
evidences sent from various 
parts as remains of ‘ante- 
diluvian Man.” Some were 
really human bones, such as 
those from Canstadt, from 
different German caves, from 
Lahr and from Guadeloupe ; 
but no accurate observation, 
no decisive geological evidence 
justified the assertion of their 
high antiquity. 


As for the other remains, Cuvier had recognized that the 
bones from Belgium were those of elephants; from Cerigo, 


PGVaNs, it |) OWN, 00o. C224 1p. 573. 


Archeologia, vol. xiii., 1800, p. 204. 
9 


John Frere’s account is to be found in 


2 “T)iscours sur les révolutions de la surface du globe” (in Recherches sur les 
ossements fossiles, 4th ed., vol. i., p. 217). 


* Cartailhac, E., “Georges Cuvier et Pancienneté de PHomme” (Matériaux pour 
LY Fist. nat. et primitive de ’ Homme, 1884, p. 27). 


PARTIES du Corps Human Petriftees . 


44 Anbert, ¢ 






Mi, 


VLE) 
MAY 
Vie 
haf 


Aux Apes de Mr Dargen ville ae fils, Consetller dit Loy ; 


Yuutre ordinare ern sa Chantbre des Comptes + 


FIG. 4.—Remains mistaken, even in the eighteenth century, for those of fossil man. 
Facsimile of an engraving from Orycto/ogie by d’Argenville (1755). 


I. Skeleton of a salamander found in a Miocene deposit in the neighbourhood of Constance 
and described by Scheuchzer as that of a “‘ Human Witness of the Deluge” (H/omo diluvii testis). 

2. So-called ‘‘ Petrified vertebrae from the back of a Man”: in reality vertebrie of a fossil 
reptile, the Ichthyosaurus. | 

3. Modern head in a pathological condition (hyperostosis) which may still be seen in the 
Anthropological Gallery of the French National Museum of Natural History. 


8 ~ HISTORICAL SUMMARY 


fragments of a cetacean; from Aix, remains of a chelonian ; 
from (Eningen, the skeleton of a salamander (the famous //omo 
diluvit testis of Scheuchzer) (Fig. 4). Such statements were 
well calculated to arouse scepticism, the more so as not the 
least trace of any fossil Ape had yet been discovered. Cuvier 
prudently added: ‘But I do not wish to conclude that 
Man did not exist at all before this period [that of the ‘last 
upheavals of the globe’|. He might have 
inhabited certain circumscribed regions 
whence he repeopled the earth after 
these terrible events; perhaps even the 
places he inhabited had been entirely 
swallowed up and his bones buried in the 
depths of the present seas, except for a 
small number of individuals who carried 
on ‘the race, 
Cuvier died in 1832, just at the time 
Fic, 5.—Portrait of Tournal, when discoveries were imminent. ‘“‘ Per- 
ee pues args chance had he lived,” wrote de Quatre- 
fages, “he would have repeated the words 
he addressed one day to his fellow-worker Dumeéril: ‘ My dear 
friend, we have been mistaken.’ ” 
About the year 1830, several naturalists in the Midi 
Tournaland of France, Tournal in the Department of Aude, 
Schmerling. Emilien Dumas, de Christol and Marcel de 
Serres in the Departments of the Gard and of Hérault, con- 
tinued in France such researches as Buckland had begun in 
England in 1820, by excavating the deposits accumulated in 
grottos and caves in their respective regions. There they 
found human bones, associated with numerous remains of 
animals belonging to species which had migrated or become | 
extinct, bears, hyanas, reindeer, and others, the bones of 
which sometimes showed traces of cutting instruments. 
So clearly did Tournal recognize the importance of these 
observations that in 1829 he had no hesitation in writing: 
““. . . Geology, in supplementing our brief history, will at length 
awaken the pride of Man by revealing to him the antiquity 
of his race; for henceforth it lies in the power of geology 





JOURNAL AND SCHMERLING 9 


alone to help us to some knowledge of the period when Man 
first made his appearance on the globe.”* These words 
assuredly mark a very great step in advance. 

Again, the Belgian author Schmerling published in 1833 an 
important work entitled Recherches su les ossements fossiles 
des cavernes de la province de Liége. In this he not only 
demonstrated the co-existence of Man with the rhinoceros, 
bear, hyzena, and other animals, but further, he entitled his 
concluding chapter: ‘“ Relics worked by the hand of Man.” 
These relics consisted of shaped bones, and in particular of an 
arrow-head and some flints. ‘‘ Everything considered,” he says, 
“it must be admitted that these flints have been cut by the 
hand of Man, and that they may have been used to make 
arrows or knives. ... Even if we had not found human 
bones in circumstances strongly supporting the assumption 
‘that they belonged to the antediluvian period, proof would have 
been furnished by the worked bones and the shaped flints.” 

Some years later, in 1840, Godwin-Austen, continuing 
McEnery’s studies of Kent’s Cavern in England, arrived at 
the same conclusions. 

Proof of the geological antiquity of Man was thus firmly 
established by these pioneers; but that is not to say that it 
was accepted by professional scientists, save perhaps by 
Constant Prévost.”. To Boucher de Perthes belongs the merit 
of impressing it upon the learned world and of giving it 
common currency as well. 

Boucher de Perthes (1788-1868) was Controller of Customs 

Boucher de at Abbeville. He was a learned and prolific 

Perthes. writer in diverse fields, a great lover of 
antiquities, ‘accustomed from childhood to listen to talk of 
fossils.” Having devoted himself to the collecting of all sorts 
of ancient human remains, he had, towards the end of 1838, 
the good fortune to find “in diluvial beds” the “first diluvial 
axes, which he submitted to his fellow-members of the ‘‘ Société 
d'émulation d’Abbeville.” In 1846 he published the first 


' Annales des sciences naturelles, vol. xviii., 1829, p. 258. 
* Gosselet, J., Constant Prévost, Lille, 1896, p. 165. 
* See Ledieu, A., Boucher de Perthes, sa vie, ses euvres (Abbeville, 1885). 


10 HISTORICAL SUMMARY 


volume of his Axtequités celtiques et antédiluviennes, entitled 
De Cindustrie primitive ou des arts &@ leur origine. In this 
work, Boucher de Perthes declared that the ancient alluvial 
soils, dz/uvial as he called them, in the suburbs of Abbeville, 
contained many stones worked by “‘anxtedtluvian” Man buried 
at various depths along with bones of large animals belonging 
to extinct species. ‘In spite of all their imperfection,” he 
says, ‘‘these rude stones prove the existence of Man as surely 
as a whole Louvre would have done.” 

This assertion, although founded on minute observations 
and on excellent evidence, at first 
met with the utmost disfavour. 
“Contradictions, jeers, scorn, were 
unsparingly heaped upon the author,” 
wrote M. de Saulcy. He was re- 
garded as a dreamer, as a kind of 
visionary, and the scientific world, 
priding itself on its detachment, 
allowed him to talk without further 
concerning itself with facts which, he 
maintained, he had forcefully intro- 
duced into the domain of practical 
science.* | 

Fic. 6.—Portrait of Boucher de Far from being discouraged, 

Na rahe Sat ites Boucher de Perthes continued, with 
fine perseverance and good nature, to combat this systematic 
and often sarcastic opposition. Soon two camps_ were 
formed in the learned world. The first included several 
naturalists of independent spirit, among them A. Brongniart 
and Constant Prévost, who, while maintaining a certain 
caution, supported Boucher de Perthes. In the second 
and by far the largest camp, that of the extremists, with 
Elie de Beaumont at their head were to be found the more 








1 See Meunier, Victor, Les Ancétres ad’ Adam, Thieullen Ed. (Paris, 1900). This — 
failure was probably due in part to the fact that Boucher de Perthes associated with 
true primitive instruments, as if they were of the same significance, other stone 

fgures or symbolic stones which were only “sports of Nature,” and which are now 
recognized as of no account. But how was it possible at that time to separate the 
tares from the wheat ? 


BOUCHER DE PERTHES 11 


academic scientists, the disciples and successors of Cuvier, 
who, while repudiating any suggestion of prejudice, never- 
theless exaggerated their master’s scruples. ‘‘ Before the 
intervention of English geologists and archeologists had 
deprived this great question, raised and solved by a 
Frenchman, of its wholly French bearing, for so long the 
entire French Academy followed the lead of its Permanent 
Secretary, like a flock of sheep on the heels of the shepherd.” 

In 1854, Dr Rigollot of Amiens, having found in the 
sand-pits at Saint-Acheul 
“axes similar to those from 
the gravels of Abbeville, was 
the first to associate him- 
self wholeheartedly with 
the views of Boucher de 
Perthes, which till then he 
had strenuously opposed. 
Further, a _ distinguished 
naturalist of the Midi, Dr 
Noulet, brought forward 
favourable evidence when he 
announced the occurrence at 
Clermont, near Toulouse, of 
an ‘alluvial deposit con- 
taining remains of extinct 





Fig. 7.—Two of the flints obtained by A. Gaudry 
from the gravels at Saint-Acheul. About one- 


animals, mingled with stones third natural size. Now in the Palzontological 
h d by h hands.” Gallery, French National Museum of Natural 
ala eae History. 


In 1859, after repeated 
study of the facts on the spot, several distinguished English 
scientists, the paleontologist Falconer, the stratigrapher Prest- 
wich, the archeologist John Evans, the anatomist Flower, and 
the famous geologist Lyell, who soon afterwards published his 
celebrated work 7he Antiquity of Man proved by Geology, all 
clearly and decidedly declared their adherence to the theory.” 


In the same year Albert Gaudry, a paleontologist then at 


1 Meunier, V., /oc. céz., p. ix. 

2 For an account of this intervention, see Falconer, H., Paleontological Memoirs, 
vol. ii., p. 596; Prestwich, “On the Occurrence of Flint Implements, associated 
with the Remains of Extinct Mammalia” (Proc. Roy. Soc., 1859). 


12 HISTORICAL SUMMARY 


the outset of a brilliant career, went to Amiens to study the 
deposits and to carry out excavations. Having made up his 
mind never to leave his workmen, he himself succeeded in 
extracting, along with teeth of a large ox, “nine axes’ from 
the ‘“diluvium” at a depth of 44 metres, and at a level from 
which, a short distance off, had been obtained bones of the 
Rhinoceros, Elephant and Hippopotamus’ (Fig. 7). Gaudry’s 
evidence made a deep impression upon the minds of several 
independent scholars, but opposition continued in the Institute, 
which held to the old conception of the deluge, and had 
absolute faith in the chronology of the Bible, according to 
which the creation of the world dated no further back than 
4000 years before Christ. This opposition was carried to such 
a point that, on 18th May 863, a geologist in the highest 
official position, Member and Permanent Secretary of the 
Academy, Elie de Beaumont, went so far as to say: ‘I do not 
believe that the human race was contemporary with //ephas 
primigenius. M. Cuvier’s theory is born of genius; it is still 
undemolished.”* He even wondered if the dressed flints were 
not of Roman origin. . . .? 

Academic immortality is but a senile illusion. Permanent 
Secretaries pass away and their names fall into oblivion ; but 
the name of Boucher de Perthes will shine forever in the 
firmament of Science. 

A very great advance in Science had been made by the 
discovery that beyond the limits of History stretched a vast 
Prehistory, which is finally lost in the obscurity of geological 


' Gaudry, A., ‘‘Contemporanéité de Vespéce humaine et de diverses espéces 
animales aujourd’hui éteintes” (Comptes rendus de VAcadémie des Sciences, 
3rd October 1859). 

> Comptes rendus de l’ Académie des Sciences, 18th May 1863. 

° The persistence of this injurious influence, which continues even to our own day in 
a more or less feeble or unconscious form, is shown by the following facts: At the death 
of Boucher de Perthes, his works were withdrawn from sale by decision of his family 
and sold for waste paper. Some years afterwards, Victor Meunier wrote his book, Zes 
Ancétres @ Adam, Histoire de ? Homme fossile. The book was printed in 1875, but 
was never published. It gave an account of the “martyrdom” of Boucher de 
Perthes, and the publisher, afraid of incurring the displeasure of the Academy, 
suppressed the whole issue. In 1900 the firm of Fischbacher published a new edition 
edited by A. Thieullen, a warm admirer of Boucher de Perthes. It is a work of 
great interest. 


EDOUARD LARTET 13 


time. Henceforth the origin of Man became a problem for 
paleontology, on a par with the problems of the origins of the 
animals. The impulse was given; everywhere zealous workers 
devoted themselves to investigations, with good results. <A 
new science, that of ‘‘ Human Paleontology,’ ’ was on the point 
of being definitely established. 

Edouard Lartet, who was born and died in Gers (1801-1871), 
was the chief founder of this new science. At 
‘first a lawyer by profession, he awoke to his 
true calling on seeing a molar tooth of a Mastodon, found by a 
peasant in his village. Deeply 
interested, he read Cuvier’s works, 
studied osteology, and devoted him- 
self to the investigation of fossil 
bone-remains, which abounded in 
the ground about his family estate. 
From 1836 onwards, he explored 
and made famous the rich beds 
of Sansan, which date from Mid 
Miertiary times, Iheré he dis- 
covered, among other strange forms 
entirely new to science, remains of s 
an anthropoid ape, an ancestor of Fig. 8.—Edouard Lartet, from his only 


‘the modern Gibbons, and this he ese oe vier ge pos hes 
named Ploprthecus. 

P. Fischer, author of one of the biographies of E. Lartet, 
points out the importance of this discovery from the point 
of view of the question of fossil Man: ‘Cuvier, in an 
enlightened and needful criticism of the so-called bone-remains 
of man and of contemporary monkeys of extinct species, 
exposed their lack of authenticity. He accordingly inferred 
that monkey and man were late in appearing. ‘What 
astonishes me, said he, ‘is that, amongst all these mammals, 
the majority of which have at the present day congeners in 
warm regions, there is not a single Quadrumana; and also 
that there has been found not a single bone, not a single 


Edouard Lartet 





1 The expression is due to Serres—“ Notes sur la Paléontologie humaine” 
(Ge neete, Sct. XXXVil., 1853, p. 518). 


14 HISTORICAL SUMMARY 


tooth of a Monkey, even of any extinct species. Neither is 
there any Man: all the bones of our species which have been 
collected along with those I have referred to were present by 
accident.’ ”’ 

“In thus associating the date of Man’s appearance with 
that of monkeys,” Fischer continues, ‘‘Cuvier prepared the 
way for the great reception accorded to the discovery of the 
Sansan Ape, and it could be foreseen that the discovery of a 
fossil Ape would be followed by that of fossil Man.”? 

The insight of Etienne Geoffroy Saint-Hilaire did not 
err. Cuvier's distinguished adversary had pointed out ‘the 
important bearing on natural philosophy” of Lartet’s discovery, 
destined “‘to inaugurate a new era of knowledge relating to 
human life.” But he added, “the time for philosophical 
research is not yet.” 

Even in 1845, Lartet boldly admitted the possibility of 
Tertiary Man. ‘This corner of ground,” he said, speaking 
of Sansan, ‘once supported a population of mammals of 
much higher degree than those here’ to-day. : > .. Herejane 
represented various degrees in the scale of animal life, up to 
and including the ape. A higher type, that of the human 
kind, has not been found here, but we must not hastily conclude 
from its absence in these ancient deposits that it did not 
exist... .’ These were prophetic words. )1t "seems asuan 
Lartet had “a presentiment of the important part he was to 
play later, in the scientific discussion regarding the co-existence 
of Man with the large Quaternary mammals.” 

About the year 1850, E. Lartet went to Paris to continue 
his researches. He settled near the Museum, the scientific 
treasures of which attracted him, and where he found none but 
friends. In 1856, he described the jaw of a new anthropoid 
ape, Dryopithecus. Three years later he published a compre- 
hensive monograph on the fossil Proboscidians, But his 
writings on the animals of former times constantly led him back 
to the great problem of fossil Man. With great sympathy and 
interest he followed the efforts of Boucher de Perthes. 


1 Fischer, P., “ Note sur les travaux scientifiques d’Edouard Lartet” (Bull. de la 
Soc. géolog. de France, 2nd Ser., xxix., p. 246). 


EDOUARD LARTET 15 


On the t1oth of March 1860, E. Lartet sent to the 
Académie des Sciences a note on the occurrence of Man in 
Western Europe in geological times, entitled, ‘“ Sur l’ancienneté 
eéologique de l’espece humaine dans |’Europe occidentale.” The 
Académie has been accused of refusing to print this memoir, 
and the fact is that only the title appears on p. 599 of Volume 
L.-of the Comptes rendus. For the text, reference must be 
made to the Archives des Sciences de la Bibliotheque universelle 
de Geneve, or to the Quarterly Jaurnal of the Geological Society 
of London, which received it with enthusiasm.' 

Now this memoir was of prime importance. Along witha 
description of the celebrated cave of Aurignac, which the 
author had just explored, it contained certain suggestions of 
the greatest significance, which were renewed and developed 
the following year (1861) in the Axnales des Sciences naturelles 
under the title: ‘‘ New researches on the co-existence of Man 
and of large fossil Mammals regarded as characteristic of the 
last geological period.” ’ 

It would seem that even from the time of his first purely 
geological writings, E. Lartet had been an opponent of the 
cataclysmic theory of the world’s development. It required a 
great deal of independence and true courage to challenge a 
theory held by the scientific pundits. This courage he showed, 
a fact which sufficiently explains the hostile attitude of Elie 
de Beaumont. 

In 1858, in his note “On the Ancient Migrations of 
Mammals of the Present Period,”’* he had already assailed the 
idea of deluges or other catastrophes. ‘‘The day is perhaps 
not far distant,” he said, ‘““when the erasure of the word 
cataclysm from the vocabulary of practical geology will be 
proposed.” Or again: “It is an abuse of the technical 


1 “Tt was too soon to announce these truths to the Académie des Sciences ; it did 
not understand that, in refusing to publish the forecast of E. Lartet, it was placing 
itself in the backwash of geological and anthropological progress, and that a day 
would come when it would be a cause for deep regret to find in a foreign publication 
seven pages so creditable to French science, rejected by the Institute of France.”— 
E. Cartailhac, zz /dz¢ 

* “ Nouvelles recherches sur la co-existence de Homme et des grands Mammi- 
féres fossiles réputés caractéristiques de la derni¢re époque géologique.” 

% “Sur les migrations anciennes des Mammiféres de l’époque actuelle.” 


16 HISTORICAL SUMMARY 


language of science to use such high-sounding expressions as 
upheavals of the globe, cataclysms, universal disturbances, general 
catastrophes, and so on, for they immediately give an exag- 
gerated significance to phenomena geographically very limited. 

The great harmony of physical and organic evolution 
on the surface of the globe has in no case been affected. 
Aristotle perfectly understood these alternating movements of 
the earth, which have at different times changed the relations of 
continents and seas; he knew-equally well how to reduce to its 
proper regional proportions the Deucalian Deluge, exaggerated 
and embellished by poetic fiction. Apparently this great 
naturalist also had to combat the fantastic ideas of the 
cataclysmic philosophers of his time, and the severe reproach 
he flung at them, might just as well, after 2000 years, be applied 
to certain of our geologists or paleontologists of the present 
day: ‘It is absurd, on account of small and transitory changes, 
to invoke the upheaval of the whole universe.’”’* 

The memoir contains another new and suggestive idea. 
The history of Man, like that of animals or like any geological 
history, is indeed a continuous story, and demands a chrono- 
logical method. ‘Were it possible to establish that the 
disappearance of the animal species characteristic of the last 
geological period was successive and not simultaneous, a 
means would be discovered of establishing, at one and the 
same time, the relative chronology of the unstratified fossil 
deposits and their time relations with these diluvial beds 
whose geognostic bearings are well defined.” Accordingly, 
Lartet proposed a “ palzontological chronology,” which for the 
first time allowed a classification to be made of the beds in 
which traces of fossil man had been found up to that time. 
“Thus, in the period of Primitive Man there would be the 
Age of the Great Cave Bear, the Age of the Elephant and 
of the Rhinoceros, the Age of the Reindeer and the Age of the 
Aurochs; much after the manner recently adopted by archzolo- 
gists in their divisions of Stone Age, Bronze Age, and Iron Age.” 

This classification could not be perfect, but its actual 


1 “Ridiculum enim est, propter parvas et momentaneas permutationes, movere 
ipsum totum ” (yeAo.dov yap, etc., Aristotle, AZefeorol., 1, 1, c. 2). 


EDOUARD LARTET 17 


existence was of great value, in that it asserted the geological 
nature of the problem of Man’s existence, showed how the 
history of our ancestors must be sought for in bygone ages, 
and fixed some mile-stones on the long journey. So a broad 
path was thrown open to investigators. In his eulogy of 
Lartet, Hamy has well said: ‘To the doctrine of the antiquity 
of Mankind, Aurignac converted a number of disciples, who 
were the more valuable in that they translated enthusiasm into 
productive activity.” | 

Soon after, in 1864, E. Lartet discovered the famous 
engraved mammoth from La Madeleine, where, in delightful 
fashion, one of our distant forebears had himself inscribed 





Fic. 9.—Fragment of ivory from La Madeleine, bearing an engraving of the Mammoth. 
One-third natural size. From the plate by E. Lartet. The original belongs to the French 
National Museum of Natural History. 


decisive proof of his geological antiquity (Fig. 9). Along with 
Christy, an Englishman, he undertook the investigation of the 
deposits of the Vézere valley, the fame of which is now world- 
wide. Thus he succeeded in revealing the astonishing artistic 
culture of the men of the Reindeer Age. The work in which 
so many fine discoveries were to have been described and 
expounded has unfortunately never been completed.’ 

In 1869 Lartet was chosen to succeed d’Archiac in the 
Chair of Palzontology in the French National Museum of 
Natural History. He was then sixty-eight years of age, and 
he died some months later, without having delivered his first 
lecture. 

1 Lartet, E., and Christy, H., Religuie aguitanice ; being contributions to the 


archeology and palzontology of Périgord (Paris, 1866-1875, 1 vol. in 4to, with 
102 plates), 


B 


18 HISTORICAL SUMMARY 


If I have spoken at length of Edouard Lartet, it is, first, 
from admiration for so independent and disinterested a man 
of science; secondly, to show the outstanding part which, 
through him, France played in the creation of the science of 
Human Paleontology ; and, finally, because the achievement of 
our illustrious countryman has not always been sufficiently 
understood. To the public at large it is unknown, and the 
scientist has not appraised it at its true value. And yet the 
passing of the years only adds to the fame of Edouard Lartet. 

Lartet’s example was followed in France by numerous 

Successors of scholars and investigators, P. Gervais, de 
Hdouard Lartet. Vibraye, A. Milne-Edwards, Louis  Lartet, 
Piette and others; whilst, in Belgium, Dupont took up and 
completed the work of Schmerling; and in England, where 
a good fight had also been waged, Lubbock, John Evans, 
and Boyd Dawkins published very valuable works on Pre- 
history.’ 

In 1864, in order that the progress of the science might 
be recorded, Gabriel de Mortillet founded a special Review, 
Matériaux pour Chistotre naturelle et primitive de l Homme, 
which he soon placed under the able and liberal editorship of 
Emile Cartailhac. Keeping the archeological standpoint 
especially in view, G. de Mortillet revised Lartet’s classifica- 
tions. With a lucidity that appealed to the comprehension of 
every investigator, he grouped systematically the innumerable 
facts of a science whose birth he had seen, and to the 
development of which he had largely contributed. 

It was not long before prehistorians began to hold inter- 
national congresses, where results in one country were com- 
pared with those in others, where general questions were 
discussed, and where interdependent labours were planned, 
for discoveries had meantime spread to every continent. So, 
step by step, we reach the present day, when researches in pre- 
historic archeology have become the fashion, when everyone 

1 Lubbock, John, Prehistoric Times (London, 1867, 7th ed., 1913); French 
translation by Barbier, under the title ZL’ Homme avant [ Histoire (Paris, 1867, 
2nd ed. 1871). Evans, John, Ancient Stone Implements (London, 1872, 2nd ed., 


1897). Dawkins, W. Boyd, Cave Hunting (London, 1874); Early Man in Britain 
(London, 1880). 


BONES OF FOSSIL MAN 12 


grubs in the most ancient of our archives, too often, alas, with 
an utterly inadequate scientific training. 


_ Thus arose the science of Prehistory or Prehistoric 
Archeology, founded on facts which, although supplied by 
all kinds of material things, nevertheless throw a_tolerably 
clear light on the intellectual and moral character of the 
Men regarding whom History is silent. 
In the meantime what progress had been made in research 
Bones of Fossil regarding the physical and zoological characters 
Man. of Man himself? What steps had marked the 
progress of Human Palzontology in the strict sense of the 
words, the sense in which they are mainly used in this work ? 
After the discovery by Ami Boué, in 1823, of a human 
skeleton in the loess of the Rhine Valley, a discovery the 
significance of which Cuvier, as we have seen, utterly repudiated, 
there followed a barren period. Every find of human bones 
was now regarded a przorz with suspicion. But when the 
great antiquity of Man was demonstrated by means of dressed 
flints and proved by geology, discoveries of human _ bones 
seemed more natural: they increased in number.’ No fewer 
than eighty have been recorded from the beginning of the 
nineteenth century to our own day. Paleontology would thus 
seem to have been provided with material sufficient to enable 
it to attain to great results and to frame important conclusions, 
Unfortunately these discoveries are far from being of 
Review of the equal value because of uncertainty regarding 
Discoveries. the age or even the authenticity of many of 
them. It is very easy to fall into error in dealing with such 
material. In many a place the earth is but human dust. 
Nothing alas! is more common in superficial soils than the 
skeletons of our fellows. Of course the physical characters 
of the bones vary according to the date of their burial ; 
and the burials of historic times present features which would 
hardly deceive a practised eye. In the case of prehistoric 


1 See Quatrefages, A. de, and Hamy, E. T., Cvania ethnica: Les Crénes des 
races humaines (Paris, 1882). Premiére partie. Races humaines fossiles. 


20 HISTORICAL SUMMARY 


burials or of bone-remains of the Quaternary Period, one 
important character must be taken into account, that of 
fossilization, by which is meant the physical and chemical 
transformation of a bone, which having lost its organic 
substance has become pervaded by. mineral matter and so 
more dense. But this character is not sufficient; the degree of 
fossilization may vary according to certain conditions of the 
environment, independent of age. Appeal must then be made 
to the conditions of the soil deposit, to geological and 
paleontological criteria. When a discovery is made, however, 
a competent observer is rarely on the spot, ready to make the 
necessary investigation. At the present day, now that the 
attention of an enlightened public has been directed to such 
events and their importance is understood, the assistance of 
professional scientists is usually invited; and several recent 
discoveries have also been made following upon systematic 
excavation conducted by experts. Formerly this was not the 
case, for then the geology and the paleontology of the 
Quaternary formations had barely been outlined. Many human 
skulls and skeletons, carelessly exhumed without scientific in- 
vestigation, have been placed in museums, where anthropologists 
study them without sufficiently enquiring into the record of 
remains the origin and exact bearings of which cannot now be 
accurately determined. 

As the question of age is a factor of prime importance in 
paleontology, scientific accuracy demands a courageous elimina- 
tion of all those osteological evidences the high antiquity 
of which is not assured. After close scrutiny of all the 
discoveries recorded up to the present day, I retain for 
consideration in this book only those whose authenticity and 
age are beyond dispute. Here it is better to err through 
excess rather than through lack of prudence. 

The story of these discoveries, which form the foundations 
of Human Paleontology, will be given in the following chapters 
in order of the age of the relics disclosed, that is, in their 
respective chronological order. For the present, I wish only 
to indicate briefly the main steps of progress up to the 
present day. 


NEANDERTHAL DISCOVERY 21 


The first and one of the most important stages centred 
The Neanderthal in the discovery, in 1856, of the famous brain- 
Discovery. pan or cranium at Neanderthal in Rhenish 
Prussia. This object was examined in succeeding years by 
various naturalists. With its considerable Fmcneaane its 
receding forehead, its enormous orbital ridges and its flattened 
brain-box, the skull presented an extraordinary appearance 
(Fig. 10). Schaaffhausen in Germany, and Huxley in England, 
declared it ‘the most 
bestial of all known 
human skulls,” and em- 
phasized its simian or 
monkey-like characters. 
This happened at a 
time when the scientific 
world was in a state 
of effervescence. Evolu- 
tionist ideas had begun to 
spread. Lamarck, who, 
long before Darwin, had 
not hesitated to attack 
the formidable problem 
of the origin of Man, —. eS 
and who conceived it as_ Fic. 10.—The Neanderthal Skull, seen full face and 
occurring through the nee ee One-third natural size. Photographs of 
modification of a Quad- ? 
rumane, had been forgotten before he had even been under- 
stood or appreciated. But now Darwin published 7z%e 
Origin of Species, Boucher de Perthes began to gain ground, 
and Albert Gaudry made public the results of his first re- 
searches on the transformations of fossil mammals; Broca 
founded the Société d’Anthropologie de Paris, and Huxley 
wrote his celebrated memoir on the Fuvzdence as to Man's 
Place wn Nature (1863), which was followed soon after by 
Carl Vogt’s excellent Vorlesungen tiber den Menschen (1863). 
The Neanderthal skull, by reason of characters obviously 
of low type, and a conformation resembling that of the skulls 
of certain large Apes, supported the evolutionist theory; in 











22 HISTORICAL SUMMARY 


the eyes of philosophic naturalists it appeared to be a sort 
of primitive form lessening the depth of the gulf which now 
separates the Apes from Men. 

But this interpretation was not to the liking of anti- 
evolutionists of the old school. The scientific value of the 
skull was disputed and denied. As it had been found by 
workmen, geologists and paleontologists took exception to 
the obscurity of its origin. Eminent anthropologists, among 
them Virchow, regarded it as a pathological specimen or 
the skull of an idiot. I- shall say nothing of the zealous and 
often foolish intervention of the defenders of religion, in a 
debate to which religion could only contribute arguments 
animated by sentiment, by tradition or by prejudice. It was 
an intervention of this kind which provoked the famous 
epigram of Huxley, that it was better to be a perfect Ape than 
a degenerate Adam. 

Just at this time there occurred the notorious episode of 
the jawbone of Moulin-Quignon. In 1863, Boucher de Perthes, 
desirous at all costs of discovering the fossil bones of the Man 
who had dressed the flints of Amiens and of Abbeville, found 
a human jawbone in conditions which stirred up lengthy 
polemics and caused floods of ink to flow. It would indeed 
seem as if on this occasion the famous and worthy archeologist 
had been the victim of a fraud. The English scientists who 
had so emphatically supported his views regarding the dressed 
flints, refused to believe in the authenticity of the jawbone; 
and one of them, John Evans, pronounced upon it a Reguzescat 
zn pace, of which the echoes have not yet died away. This, 
clearly, was not calculated to add to the credit of the new 
theory. 

But in 1865, Ed. Dupont, in the course of scientific explora- 
tions organized by the Belgian Government in 
the caves of that country, found a human lower 
jaw in one of the excavations on the left bank of the Lesse, 
the Nauletle fit (Fig. 11). The circumstances of its deposit 
left no loophole for criticism. Now this jaw, taken from 
a deep bed, where it lay along with bones of the Mammoth, 
Rhinoceros, Reindeer, etc., differed from the jaws of all modern 


La Naulette. 


LA NAULETTE AND CRO-MAGNON 23 


Men in one important character which struck the observer at 
first glance, the absence of a chin. Here again was the stamp 
of the ape, associated none the less with other characters which 
were purely human. One 
was tempted to associate 
the jaw from La Naulette 
with the Neanderthal skull, 
as belonging to a similar 
lowly type. 

In 1868, Louis Lartet, 
following with distinction in [| 
his father’s 
footsteps, Fic. 11.—The jawbone from La Naulette. Three- 
described the rock-shelter a natural size. After de Quatrefages and 
of Cro-Magnon on the 
banks of La Vézére, in the Dordogne, from which several 
human skeletons had already been obtained. On this occasion 
the skeletons presented all the features of modern Man; so 
much so indeed, that their great antiquity was not acknow- 
ledged by most anthropologists, who could not bring themselves 
to abandon their preconceived notions and to throw so far 
back into the past the physical type of Homo sapiens. So 
it was also with the skeleton found in 1872 by M. Riviere 
in one of the caves of Grimaldi (Fig. 12). The ‘‘ Mentone 
Man,” closely resembling the Cro-Magnon type, was considered 
to be Neolithic. The geological bearings were, however, 
perfectly definite. 

On the other hand, far too much importance was laid on 
some skeletons obtained, about the same time, from more or 
less ancient and more or less disturbed river deposits of the 
Seine, at Clichy, Grenelle, and elsewhere. 

In 1870 Hamy!? published a summary of the state of the 
science at this time, in a book which may still be consulted 
with profit. In the following year, Darwin,’ tackling the great 
problem of the descent of Man, published a work in which 
paleontological facts do not and could not as yet play any 





Cro-Magnon. 


1 Hamy, E. T., Precis de Paléontologie humatne (Paris, 1870) 
* Darwin, C., The Descent of Man (London, 1871). 


24 HISTORICAL SUMMARY 


but a secondary part, but in which the famous naturalist 
expounded in all its bearings the theory of the animal origin 


Fic. 12.—‘‘ Mentone Man,” 
found: by M. Riviere. An- 
thropological Gallery of the 
French National Museum 


of Natural History. 





of Man, formerly precisely stated by the 
great Lamarck.’ To this theory the 
German naturalist Haeckel had just given 
his strong support in his Generelle Mor- 
phologie der Organismen (Berlin, 1866).” 

About the same time, Broca’® pub- 
lished some excellent studies on the 
comparative morphology of Apes and 
Man, and thus placed his great cranio- 
logical knowledge at the service of 
human paleontology. During the years 
1873 to 1882, de Quatrefages and Hamy 
contributed to this branch of science a 
great work,* in which descriptions of the 
principal cranial types of modern Man 
were preceded by long systematic dis- 
cussions on all the fossil or pseudo-fossil 
evidences then known. 

The year 1887 was marked by an 
interesting discovery of 
two human skeletons in 
a cave at Spy in the province of Namur. 
This was an event of considerable scientific 
importance, fortunate in two respects : 
first, in that the Quaternary Age of the 
deposit, investigated by geologists, was 


The Spy Men. 


1 Lamarck, Phtlosophie Zoologigue, 1809, i., p. 
337: 
2 See also Haeckel, E., Wistotre de la Création (Fr. 
trans., Paris, 1874). Amthropogénie ou histoire de 
Pévolution humaine (Fr. trans., Paris, 1877). E£ta¢ 
actucl de nos connaissances sur Lorigine de 0 Homme 
(Paris, 1900). [English editions of these works ap- 


peared as follows: The History of Creation (ist Eng. ed., London, 1875; 3rd, 
1883). Zhe Evolution of Man (Eng. ed., London, 1879). Our Present Knowledge 
of the Descent of Man (1898).] 

3 Broca, P., “L’ordre des Primates” (Bull. de la Soc. @ Anthrop. de Paris, 2nd 


Series, vol. iv., 1869). 


* Quatrefages, A. de, and Hamy, E, T., Crania ethnica. 


SPY, PITHECANTHROPUS, AND OTHERS 25 


not open to question; secondly and especially, because the 
Spy skulls resembled in every way the Neanderthal skull. 
The hypothesis of the pathological nature of the latter was 
definitely destroyed by the fine 
report of Fraipont and Lohest, 
which helped to confirm the opinion 
of those who believed in the actual 
existence of an ancient human type 
very different from, and of lower 
nature than modern types. 
This opinion was _ notably 
strengthened some years later, in 
Pithec- 1894, by the work 
anthropus. of Dubois on the 
remains of /P2thecanthropus, dis- 
covered in Java in 1891. Ina 
succeeding chapter we shall discuss this famous fossil at some 
length; it is sufficient at present to state the indisputable 
fact, that the skull-cap of P7thecanthropus really embodies a 
morphological type ideally intermediate between the skulls of 
anthropoid apes, such as the Chimpanzee or the Gibbon, and 
a human skull. 
These fine discoveries instigated others. A positive fever 
took hold of investigators; and excavations carried out in 
almost every part yielded many evidences, but of very unequal 





Fic. 13.—E. T. Hamy, from a 
photograph. 


value. 

Amongst the most important of the later discoveries, first 

Pataripig. wil Order of itime> must) be mentioned that at 

coveries. Krapina in Croatia, which brought to light 
many human remains of Neanderthal type. 

Next come the results of the important explorations under- 
taken by the Prince of Monaco, Albert I., in the Grimaldi 
Caves. Several human skeletons were exhumed in the Grotte 
des Enfants: some belonged to the Cro-Magnon type, the 
Paleolithic Age of which was here definitely established ; while 
another, the most ancient, revealed to Professor Verneau 
the existence of a different type, of negroid character, the 
“Grimaldi type.” 


26 HISTORICAL SUMMARY 


In 1907, a new fact of prime importance was brought 

The Mauer forward. Up to that date, the Man of the 

Jawbone. oldest dressed flints was known only by the 
products of his handiwork—no authentic relic of his skeleton 
had been obtained. Then Schcetensack described a jawbone 
found in the ancient gravels of Mauer near Heidelberg. And 
this jawbone, very much older than those from La Naulette, 
from Spy, or from Krapina, presented a still more primitive 
appearance. 

By systematic excavations carried out in France, the 

La Chapelle. Abbés Bouyssonie and Bardon, Capitan and 
aux-Saints. Peyrony, and Henri Martin, discovered in 
human settlements, deep in the caves or shelters of La 
Chapelle-aux-Saints in the Department of Corréze, of La 
Ferrassie in Dordogne, and of La Quina in Charente, several 
skeletons and portions of skeletons of men of Neanderthal type. 

Human paleontology has thus been furnished with records 
of exceptional value, which have enabled us to gain a fuller 
knowledge of this ancient type than we possess of many 
modern savages.’ This Homo neanderthalensis will be the 
subject of one of the longer chapters of this volume. 

After a considerable period of relative inactivity in the 
sphere of human _ paleontology, England, 
which can claim a most honourable part in the 
foundation and development of the science, was seized with 
new enthusiasm for it. In addition to some recent discoveries, 
the importance of which was overestimated, such as that of the 
Ipswich skeleton, considered to belong to a period more remote 
than the Quaternary, but in reality barely prehistoric, there 
occurred the Piltdown find, studied from the anatomical point 
of view by the palcontologist Smith Woodward. Although 
its particular and general significance are still disputed, it is 
certainly a most important discovery, as we shall see later. 

So far, I have spoken only of Europe, and solely of Western 

FossilMan Europe, a very small part of the globe, yet 

beyond Burope. the rest is almost unknown from the point 


Piltdown. 


1 Boule, M., “L’Homme fossile de La Chapelle-aux-Saints” (Annales de 
Paléontologie, 1911-1913). 


FOSSIL MAN BEYOND EUROPE 27 


of view which interests us here. Researches carried out in the 
two Americas, especially noteworthy being those of Ameghino 
in South America, have not yet produced any conclusive 
discovery. Asia, the outstanding importance of which will one 
day become apparent, has yielded no results to speak of, except 
of an archeological nature. Quite recent discoveries at 
Boskop in South Africa,’ as well as at Talgai in Australia (see 
the last chapter of this book), show that, whenever investigations 
are undertaken with sufficient resources in these different parts 
of the globe, great results will be forthcoming. 


Rather than seek to revive the importance of the odds 
and ends of old bones, collected in past times without sufficient 
scientific guarantees, upon which many authors still dwell 
with too great satisfaction, we must now devote ourselves to 
making new explorations, with all the care, the precaution, and 
the scientific method now incumbent upon paleontologists and 
anthropologists having a true understanding of the problems 
to be solved. 

The results obtained during the last few years, following 
the method I advocate, at Grimaldi, at Mauer, at La Ferrassie, 
at La Quina and at Piltdown, are most encouraging. 


1 [And at Broken Hill Mine, Rhodesia. | 


GHAP TE Rei 
TIME RELATIONS OF EARLY MAN 
1. Relative Chronology 


Curonotocy is the basis of all genealogy, and it is therefore 
The Geological important, before entering upon the history 
Ages. of Fossil Man, to see how the evidences 
relating to our distant ancestors can be arranged according 
to the order of their relative antiquity. For this, some idea 
of geology is indispensable.’ 
The history of the earth falls into several Ages :— 


(1) The Archzan, 
(2) The Primary. 
(3) The Secondary. 
(4) The Tertiary. 
(5) The Quaternary. 


The Archzan Age, by far the longest, corresponds to the 
formations deposited in the primitive seas of the globe. Under 
the influence of central incandescent masses and of mechanical 
processes resulting from their contraction, these deposits have 
been subjected to innumerable transformations, which have 
caused the fossils they must once have contained to disappear 
almost entirely. 


' Boule, M., Géologie (6th ed., Paris, 1919); Conférences de Paléontologie (2nd ed., 
Paris, 1910). These two works are very elementary. For greater detail see the 
Abrégé and particularly the ZTyratté de Géologie of Albert de Lapparent. The 
admirable works of Albert Gaudry may also be read with much pleasure and 
profit—Enchainments du Monde animal and Essais de Paléontologie philosophique. 

[English readers may consult the articles dealing with Stratigraphical Geology 
in any standard Encyclopedia, or the corresponding sections in text-books, such 
as Lapworth’s Jntermediate Text-book of Geology, Lake and Rastall’s Text-book of 
Geology, or A. Geikie’s more detailed Zext-book of Geology.] 

28 


GEOLOGICAL AGES 29 


The succeeding Ages are characterized by the development 
of certain groups of organisms, and they are distinguished from 
one another owing to great changes in the physical world, such 
as upheavals of mountain ranges, alterations in the distribution 
of lands and seas, and so on. 

The Primary or Palaeozoic Age begins with the formation 
of the first deposits in which fossils are well preserved. At 
that time living things belonged to the lower groups or types of 
the organic world: the animals comprised only Invertebrates 
and, just towards the end of the Age, some Fishes and certain 
primitive four-footed creatures. 

The Secondary or Mesozoic Age is marked by an advance 
in the animate world. It is the Age of Reptiles, which were 
then much more numerous, more varied, and more powerful 
than at the present time. 

The Tertiary, or Cainozoic, shows fresh progress. The 
great Reptiles have disappeared, and their place has been taken 
by the more highly-organized animals, Birds and especially 
Mammals. 

Finally, the Quaternary Age, which still lasts, is character- 
ized by the reign of the most highly perfected of mammals, 
Man. 

The appearance and the development of the great zoological 
groups have thus followed in order of degree. Invertebrates 
appeared before Vertebrates, and amongst the latter, the lowest, 
the Fishes, came first, then the Batrachians or Amphibians, 
then the Reptiles, the Birds and the Mammals. 

The diagrams (Figs. 14 and 15) show that the importance 
of each Age is in close relation to the depth of the corre- 
sponding formations, and therefore in close relation to its 
duration.’ 

One is struck by the disproportion between these Ages. 
The following figures, although only very approximate, will 
give some idea of it. If the figure 1 be taken to represent 
the thickness of the Quaternary formations, or the duration 


1 The figures placed in the third column (duration in years) are purely hypothetical. 
Only their relative values need be considered. From the absolute point of view their 
proportion alone need be borne in mind. Further, we probably ought to compute by 
hundreds, rather than by tens, of millions of years. 


30 TIME RELATIONS OF EARLY MAN 


of the corresponding Age, the duration of the Tertiary Age 
must be represented by 20, of the Secondary Age by 30, and 
of the Primary Age by 150. And it is probable that the 


; Thickness} Duration 
Geological Ages of ‘Fi Reign 


Deposits} Years 


te 
———— oe 


== QUATERNARY -=2007.242125 000724: of MAN:: 
of 
MAMMALS 


of 
SECONDARY james 6000" |3 750 000 |pepritEs 


TERTIARY ' ™ | 2500 000 


F 
PRIMARY Bes ace 430 0007] 18 750 000 FISHES 


ARCHAAN 





FIG. 14.—Diagram of the general succession of the Geological Ages, of their relative duration 
(estimated according to the thickness of the corresponding formations), and of their principal 
paleontological characters. 

Archean Age corresponds to a lapse of time equal to or 

greater than that which separates us from the beginning of 

the Primary Age! 


THE TERTIARY AGE ol 


Man, a mammal, could not appear before the Tertiary Age, 
The Tertiary {or the mammals of the Secondary Age were 
Ageandits small and very primitive animals. The more 
Mammals. highly - developed types of mammals of the 

Tertiary Age are not all of the same antiquity. We must, 





~ QUATERNARY _ 2927727 
TERTIARY 
SECONDARY 
Amphibians 
R| 
PRIMARY Feud oe 


i 
' 
' 
' 
' 
' 
' 
| 
! 
' 
' 
' 
' 
{ 
' 
' 
' 
' 
' 
‘ 
' 
' 
' 
' 
i 
' 
' 
tae 
‘ 
' 
! 
( 
' 
! 
' 
1 
' 
' 
' 
1 
' 
' 
' 


ee ee ; a en 
‘ 


ARCHA AN Invertebrates 


Fic. 15.—Diagram showing the development and distribution in time of the Invertebrates as 
a whole, of the various classes of Vertebrates, and of Man. 


therefore, examine the divisions of the Tertiary Age, as well 
as the relative development of mammals in general, and more 
particularly of the most highly organized group, the Primates, 
of which Man is the most perfect type. 


32 TIME RELATIONS OF EARLY MAN 


Geologists divide the Tertiary Age into four great Periods— 

(1) As regards mammals, the Eocene Prriop, the most 
ancient, possessed only Marsupials (Dzdedphza), or else primi- 
tive placental mammals of synthetic types, presenting such 
a mixture of characters that it is often impossible to 
classify them in any of the now existing Orders. Certain 
strange Pachyderms of rather large stature became extinct in 
early times, without leaving any descendants. Other groups 
evolved and advanced. All had small brain capacity. 

(2) During the succeeding OLicoceNE PeEriop, a striking 
process of differentiation led mammals in the direction of the 
types of modern times. ‘There are yet no Horses, no true 
Ruminants, no true Proboscidians, but certain forms show 
very distinct tendencies towards these different groups. No 
genus of Oligocene mammals has, however, survived to our day. 

(3) In the Mrocenr PeEriop, which followed, the process of 
differentiation ended in the establishment of the now existing 
families, and many of the genera obviously appear to be the 
direct ancestors of those of our own day. 

(4) In the last period, called the PLriocEeNnr, there appear, 
side by side with the ancient genera, numerous genera still 
living, the species of which can often be recognized as the 
ancestors of the species now surrounding us. 

Finally, during the Quaternary Age, we are aware of the 
existence, together with several extinct species which have not 
survived to our times, of a great number of forms identical with 
the present-day species, or, at least, ancestral varieties of them. 

Considering the Primates in particular—that is to say, the 
zoological group to which Man belongs—we see that they make . 
their first appearance in the Eocene period in the form of 
the lowest type—the Lemurs. The Oligocene period presents 
the most ancient Tailed Monkeys; and in the Miocene and 
Pliocene periods appear numerous Anthropoid Apes.* So far 
as present knowledge goes, fossil Man is only known in 
the Quaternary Age. Here, also, we thus have a continuous 
progression: Man, the most highly perfected of the Primates, 
is also the last-comer. | 


~ 


1 For a more detailed account, see Chap. III. 


QUATERNARY FORMATIONS 33 


No very great difficulty would be likely to arise in 
The Quaternary indicating the chronological order of dis- 
Formations. coveries made in Tertiary deposits, for their 
succession is well established. The task is more difficult 
and much more delicate in relation to Quaternary formations, 
which are rich in human remains. It demands more precision, 
and I must therefore deal with this subject in some detail. 
The classification of Quaternary times may be based— 


(1) On the study of the formations and of their relative 
positions (Stratigraphy). 

(2) On the study of fossils (Paleontology). 

(3) On the study of human relics (Prehistoric Archecloaey 


The Quaternary deposits are numerous and of varied 
character. A complete acquaintance with them is indispensable 
to the study of human paleontology.t They may be classified 
as follows :— 


I. Deposits of marine origin. 


Glacial formations. 
II. Sedimentary deposits of continental ieee deposits of plains and 
origin. valleys. 
lees deposits. 


III. Deposits of volcanic origin. 






Jurassic 
imestone 






ES Ancient beach 


eis 


~ Borings of Lithodomus 


Jurassic 
limestone 


Sealeyel 


Fic. 16.—Geological section of the shore of the Mediterranean at the headland of Grimaldi, 
near Mentone. An ancient sea-beach, containing shells of warm seas, is almost 7 metres 
higher than the level of the present sea. It bears breccia or fallen debris, also Pleistocene, 
but of a later period. 








! For an account of our present knowledge of the Quaternary formations, see 
E. Haug’s 7vaité de Géologie, vol. ii. (Paris, 1911). [English readers should consult 
A. Geikie’s Text-book of Geology, vol. ii. (London)]. 


C 


34 TIME RELATIONS OF EARLY MAN 


Marine deposits are of relatively little importance from our 

Marine point of view. At the end of the Tertiary 

Deposits. Age the Pliocene seas already possessed 
approximately the configuration of the seas of the present day. 
In the Quaternary Age, the 
changes were relatively in- 
significant. Along certain 
coasts, however, there are to 
be seen, at altitudes gener- 
ally not exceeding a few 
metres, old littoral strands 
or ancient beaches which 


indicate slight oscillations of 
Fic. 17.—Shells fr Juaternary marine deposits . 
Oy ae rom Quaternary marine deposits the sea-level (Fig. 16). The 
in France. =) ; 

To the left a Strombus of warm seas (Strombus shells found on these raised 
bubontus). To the right a species from cold seas beaches are identical with 
(ya truncata). One-third natural size. : 

those of modern seas; certain 

slight differences in geographical distribution correspond to 
climatic differences, but they are scarcely noticeable (Fig. 17). 
It is very difficult, if not impossible, to establish a 
chronology of the Quaternary Age from these marine deposits 
alone. Attempts in this direction have till now been far from 
satisfactory, at least from the point of view of the present study. 
The study of fossil shells indicates a gradual cooling of 
Deposits of the Pliocene seas. In the Upper Pliocene 

Glacial Origin. Jayers Arctic shells extend as far as the 
Mediterranean. It is therefore not surprising to observe that 





Present 
Jungfrau Rhone 
Glacier 






Terminal 
Moraine 


‘LYON 












=—> 





' = =F $ 
we NIZE 


Fic. 18,—Sketch showing the extent of the Quaternary glacier of the Rhone 
Valley contrasted with the present-day glacier. 


towards the end of the Tertiary era—that is to say, at a date 
when the Pyrenees were still young, when the Alps had just 


QUATERNARY GLACIAL DEPOSITS STs) 


effected their greatest thrust, and when the volcanic eruptions of 
Central France were nearing completion—all these mountains 
were covered by glaciers greater by far than the greatest 
modern glaciers of the Alps. 

Under the influence of causes still not fully understood, 


AMIS RIK ALYY Wap eer 19 x MK 
ASN QS Ne TW SK 
y Winco ceatae Si x 


Bites 
Cl 








aera Glaciers GORE Ice pack eae wees lce floes 
Fic. 19.— Map of Europe in the height of the Ice Age. 


these glaciers underwent an extraordinary development at the 
commencement of Quaternary times." From the summit they 
reached the plains, where they extended vast distances from 
their starting-points, dispersing or accumulating all along their 
tracks enormous “‘erratics’’ and immense moraine deposits. 


1 This development is not peculiar to the later geological periods ; it followed all 
the great upheavals of mountain chains, at all periods and in every country. We 
now know that vast glacial fields existed during the Eocene, the Permian, the 
Silurian, and even the Archean Ages. 


36 TIME RELATIONS OF EARLY MAN 


In the northern countries of Europe, conditions were even 
more severe. On the heights of Scandinavia there originated 
rivers of ice, which flowed in all directions and joined in one 
continuous sheet, similar to the /zdandszs of modern Greenland, 
but even much vaster. On one side, these masses of ice, 
overflowing the North Sea, came into contact with the glaciers 
which covered a part of the Britisn Isles. On the other side, 
they spread over Denmark, Holland, Germany and Russia, the 
soil of which is still covered with moraines and erratic blocks 
of Scandinavian origin (Fig. 19). 

Geologists have come to recognize several stages in the 
advance of the glaciers—gdaczal phases—separated from each 
other by stages of recession of the glaciers, or zuterglaczal 
phases. The number of these periods varies according to 
different authors, or according to the countries. J. Geikie’ 
defines six for the British Isles. Penck and Bruckner? have 
described four in the Alps. In France there have long been 
distinguished, in most of the mountain regions, traces of three 
principal glacial phases, the oldest dating from Pliocene times, 
while the two others are Quaternary. 

The moraine formations, as one would naturally expect, 
contain neither fossils nor human remains; they cannot then 
be of direct interest in the study of paleontology, but they 
contribute to it valuable data regarding the climatic conditions 
of Quaternary times, and sometimes help us to establish useful 
stratigraphic relations.* 

Away from the bed of a stream or tidal river and up the 
Ancient Alluvial sides of the valley are to be found, above the 

Deposits. = flood-plain, areas of varying size arranged in 
terraces covered with gravel or rolled pebbles (Fig. 20). These 


1 Geikie, James, The Great Ice Age, 3rd ed. (London, 1894). The Antiquity of 
Man in Europe (Edinburgh, 1914). 

2 Penck, A., and Bruckner, E., Die Alpen tm Eiszeitalter (Leipzig, 1909). 

° A German school, too much in vogue in France, seeks to make glacial 
formations predominant in the classification of Quaternary times. But specialists 
in the different countries have not yet reached agreement; there is every shade 
of opinion, from that admitting only one single glacial phase, to that asserting at least 
half a dozen. Apart from other considerations, this diversity of opinion must make 
us cautious and inclined to doubt the value of a system of chronology based solely 
on glacial phenomena. 


ANCIENT ALLUVIAL DEPOSITS 37 


alluvial deposits have been laid down in Quaternary times 
by floods, due either to an extraordinary increase in rainfall, 







Upper : 
Terrace Middle L 
300™ Terrace Terrace TOULOUSE 
180™ 150™ Garonne 


FIG. 20.—Outline across the valley of the Garonne at Toulouse. 





or to the rapid melting of the glaciers. As each valley shows 
formations disposed in terraces at several levels, it may be 
concluded that the hollowing out of the valley was not 


© cettrenemcae sane nse reecqnmane seni teet sreperctocseesgentntensencnsssenetntenens wennee menintanntensonaanedntencmetnnenntecntnsseneet-nmemeecmnastenntitnt tans ittn/te-hetmernstinntnttnehentanacntemtennannent tee min - nonnnsnen ™ ortengennnssnctrgamacmpecnemnerce sername aa 





Fic. 21.—An old Sand-quarry at Chelles (Seine-et-Marne). 

There may clearly be distinguished two sets of alluvial deposits occupying the bottom 
of the Marne Valley and resting uncomformably the one upon the other (along the line 
X xX). The lower set is of Chellean age. The upper set, cutting into the former, is of 
more recent age, Acheulean or Moustierian. Phot. D’ACY. 


continuous, but was subject to periods of cessation, followed 
by new activity; here is a phenomenon of periodicity parallel 
to, and often correlated with that of the glacial phases.! 

1 These features can and must often be explained also by changes in the 


general slope of water-courses in consequence of movements of the earth’s crust, 
or to displacements in the line of the sea-shore. 


38 TIME RELATIONS OF EARLY MAN 


In general, ¢hese alluvials are the more ancient the higher 
the level they occupy. Those which cover the high plateaux 
in France generally date from the Pliocene period. Their 
components, exposed for a very long time to the action of 
atmospheric agents, are much changed and partially decom- 
posed. The middle terraces of the rivers of France and their 
large tributaries belong to the beginning of Quaternary times, 
and the lower terraces to more recent periods. By this definitive 
altitudinal arrangement, there may be established the relative 
age of the relics yielded by these alluvials, such as the bones of 
animals, the bones of man, or the products of man’s industry.” 

A serious source of error arises, however, from the altera- 
tions undergone by these gravels, which are constantly under- 
mined, displaced or swept away by the streams themselves. 
Often, indeed, in ancient alluvials at a definite level, the presence 
of elements derived from all the older levels may be observed. 
An imported fossil must be distinguished from a fossil con- 
temporary with the layer in which it is found. It must not 
be forgotten that ¢he true age of an alluvial deposit ts that of tts 
most recent fossils. 

In many countries, particularly the north of France, Belgium 

Muds. and Germany, the ancient alluvials are covered 

Peat-Bogs. with sz/¢s (or /oess), due either to the transport 

pater of dust by the wind, or to the violent rush of 

rain down, the slopes, but most often to both 
causes together. These muds contain shells of land molluscs 
(Fig. 22). They are oretie 
utmost importance in our 

‘ men study, because of their wealth 
FIG. 22.—Shells of land Molluscs from loess)5 of human fossil remains of all 
Left, Helix hispida. Right, Pupa muscorum. . 

kinds. We cannot apply to 
them the rule laid down above with regard to alluvials, and 
take their altitude as a basis for establishing the relative ages 





1 Tt must be noted that the rule is not absolute. Certain valleys, like that 
of the Marne at Chelles (Fig. 21), may have been completely hollowed out even 
below their modern channel since the Lower Pleistocene. New alluvials, due to 
change in the general gradient of the streams, may then have filled up the bottom 
of the valley, superimposing themselves upon the older alluvials, and occupying 
a higher altitudinal level than they did. 


RECENT SURFACE DEPOSITS 39 


of the layers. The muds form a kind of cloak cast over the sides 

of the valleys and their alluvial formations (Fig. 23); these may 

belong to different periods, but, owing to their continuity, the 

muds may actually be contemporaneous on the plateaux and in 
Villejuif 


st" 





Fort d’lvry 






£3 Ry, 
Wp 
fi 


Seine 
¢ ae 
0-0:0020.0:9".05.0 5 0-0-0, 

, 20°86 92092 0207°6,008 Gos So ee - 4 
Muds 
, . $50.0°95 0700.52. 00.0 x 


LI 











Upper Terrace 








Lower Terrace 








FIG. 23.—Geological section near Paris, to show the disposition of the Pleistocene muds, 
extending from the summit of the plateaux to the bottom of the valley, whilst the ancient 
alluvials are clearly deposited in terraces. 


the bottoms of the valleys. \gnorance of this fact has led many 
prehistorians, on occasion, into unfortunate mistakes. 

I shall merely mention the Aeat-deposits, which generally 
date, in France at any rate, from a relatively recent period 
(Neolithic), and which consequently do not possess the same 
interest for us. 

Calcareous tufas, deposited by springs charged with 
carbonate of lime, encrusting springs, often contain imprints 


100™ 










Tertiary , 
Deposits 


Fic. 24.—Geological section of Pleistocene tufas at La Celle-sous-Moret (Seine-et-Marne), 
The tufas, with warm flora, rest on Pleistocene alluvials, overlaid at one point by muds 
containing a cold fauna. A, Pleistocene alluvials. a@, Recent alluvials. 


of plants, remains of invertebrates, and bones of mammals, 
which give us valuable information relating to climatic 
conditions. Certain of these tufas have even yielded human 
relics, such as La Celle-sous-Moret, near Paris (Fig. 24), 
Cannstadt, in Germany, and others. 


40 TIME RELATIONS OF EARLY MAN 


The debris on the slopes is due to the disintegration of 
Screesanad the underlying rocks of a region. These 
Debris. accumulations may belong to any age, for the 
influence of the atmospheric agents to which they are due 
has been exerted at all times, but the most ancient have been 
destroyed, and the great majority hardly date beyond 
Quaternary times. They are particularly common and extensive 
in territories outside the range of glacial action, where, in a 
way, they take the place of moraine deposits (Fig. 16, p. 33). 
The accumulations of detritus of. which they are composed 
may contain all kinds of fossils and traces of ancient human 
settlements. 

When these accumulations of detritus, instead of forming 
talus-screes on the outer slopes, fill up fissures or cavities 
hollowed out in the solid rock by natural agencies, agglomerates 
containing angular fragments are formed, known by geologists 
as breccias. They are often composed of bones of animals, 
and in such a case are termed Jdone-brecczas. If the fissures or 
cavities thus filled attain any considerable extent or depth, 
they afford examples of every gradation up to grottos and 
bone-caves. 

In regions formed of calcareous rocks riddled with subter- 

Grottos and ranean cavities, the play of atmospheric erosion 

Bone-Caves. and the progressive hollowing of the valleys 
has established communications between these caves and the 
outer air. Through the openings thus produced, fierce torrents 
have carried in earth, pebbles, bones of animals, and so on. 
Further, the caves became the dens of lions, of bears, and of 
hyenas ; thither the wild beasts brought their prey, and there 
left their own dead bodies (Fig. 25). Finally, they often 
served as habitations for the Men of these times. From 
our point of view, two kinds of subterranean caves may 
be distinguished: first, caves serving as dens, the deposits 
of which contain mainly animal remains, and second, the 
habitations of cave-dwellers. The latter did not penetrate 
so far into the interior of the earth’s crust, and sometimes 
they only occupy the entrance of the deeper caves. Often, 
indeed, they are only simple sheiters under overhanging 


BONE-CAVES 4] 


rocks (Fig. 26). In such cases the cave deposits are formed 
chiefly by human agency, cinders from hearths and kitchen 
debris, in which are mingled products of man’s industries 
and sometimes even the bones of the ancient inhabitants 
themselves. 

All these remains of Quaternary times have been gradually 
buried under depths of rubble, so that the deposits in the 
interior of grottos or caverns now form, for the naturalist, 
archives as valuable as they are time-honoured. The more 
such deposits lend themselves to detailed and stratigraphic 





FIG. 25.—Section of a Bone-pit in the 
Gargas Cave (Haute-Pyrenees). 
C, bottom of cave. A, entrance 
to pit. P, O, clay, yielding skele- 
tons of bear, hyzena and_ wolf, 





now in Paleontological Gallery Fic. 26.— Rock-shelters at Bruniquel 
of National Museum of Natural (Tarn-et-Garonne), inhabited during the 
History, Paris. Reindeer Age. cs 


analysis, the more exact is the information they yield regarding 
the ancient stages of the human race in our country; and in 
this connection may be mentioned the Cave of Mas d’Azil, 
in the Pyrenees, and the Grimaldi Caves, near Mentone 


(ia 577). 
Volcanic countries are very often rich in fossils. The dense 
Volcanic streams of lava, ejected at burning heat, do 


Formations. not of course contain them, but the lava- 
flows are generally poured into the depths of the valleys, and 
cover the contemporary alluvials. These alluvials and all their 


42 TIME RELATIONS OF EARLY MAN 


paleontological content have thus been, in a sense, sealed 
up and preserved from all outside interference, and are most 
valuable for chronological study. 

Volcanic discharges, cinders and lapilli, may bury the dead 
bodies of animals ; they are often borne along and redistributed 
by water, in association with all kinds of debris scattered over 
the surface of the soil, and with it are deposited further on as 
stratified layers of volcanic tuffs. Pithecanthropus and the 


— 





Fic. 27.—The Grimaldi Caves. 
Photograph taken by Davanne about 1870, before the construction of the railway. 


Denise skull from near Le Puy, were found in layers of this 
nature. 
Even the detailed study of these different geological forma- 
ager tions would not in itself be sufficient to enable 
Classification : ‘ 
of Quaternary US to establish a correct chronology or classifi- 
Times. The cation of Quaternary times. The stratigraphical 
Stratigraphical ° ees . 
retiodl method, which is, in general, the most certain 
and the most precise, is here more difficult of 
application than in the preceding geological ages. The 
Quaternary deposits, indeed, varied as they may be, are 
isolated or placed side by side, rather than superimposed. 
Marine formations, so important in the consideration of the 


preceding ages, no longer cover great expanses, and it is 


~ on 


CLASSIFICATION OF QUATERNARY TIMES 43 


difficult to correlate them with the land formations. In 
short, we have only local and limited successions, each 
representing only a fraction of the duration of Quaternary 
times. 

The paleontological method also has its weaknesses. 

anisciaey There are no longer marine fossils SO widely 
Fossils, and the distributed as were the Graptolites of Primary 

Method of times, the Ammonites of Secondary, and the 

Paleontology. Nummulites of Tertiary times. And, more- 
over, the marine invertebrates of the ancient Quaternary 
raised beaches cannot afford much help, for all the Quaternary 
invertebrates present a degree of specific development closely 
resembling their modern state. 

The Quaternary plants were identical with the plants of 
to-day. They were too greatly influenced by topographical 
conditions to permit of their being used successfully to eluci- 
date the problems of chronology. But they furnish valuable 
information regarding climate. For it has been found that, 
in one and the same region, certain layers contain species of 
warm climates, whilst others yield species of cold climates. It 
is permissible to suppose that the latter date from a glacial 
phase, while the warm flora corresponds to an_ interglacial 
phase. 

The study of fossil vertebrates, particularly of mammals, 

mecinct is of great assistance. The Quaternary species 
or Emigrated are usually so closely akin to the modern 

Animals. species that it is often difficult to distinguish 
them. But there are also some extinct species: the Ancient 
Elephant (Zvephas antiguus), the Mammoth (-lephas prim- 
genius), Merck’s Rhinoceros (Aehznoceros merckt), the Woolly 
Rhinoceros (Rhznoceros tichorhinus), the Sabre-toothed Tiger 
(Machatrodus), the Cave Bear (Ursus sfeteus), and others. 
These animals are capable of furnishing excellent chronological 
data, for their extinction was not simultaneous. Thus 
of the three species of fossil elephants in our country, 
easily distinguished by their molar teeth (Fig. 28), Alephas 
meridtonalis became extinct before Elephas antiquus, and the 
latter before the Mammoth. In the same way the Woolly 


44 TIME RELATIONS OF EARLY MAN 


Rhinoceros persisted longer in our country than Merck's 


Rhinoceros (Fig. 29). 


Side by side with these forms which are now extinct, there 
is a fairly large number of species still alive, but no longer 








ee a 


Fic. 23.—Molar Teeth of the three principal 
species of fossil elephants found in our country. 


M, Southern Elephant (Z/ephas meridionalis) ; 
the tooth is very broad, the enamel plates are 
thick and widely separated. 

A, Ancient Elephant (Zvephas antiquus); the 
tooth is narrow, the enamel plates are jess thick 
but again widely separated. 

P, Mammoth (Z/ephas primigenius) ; the tooth is 
broad, the enamel plates are much more numerous, 
more compressed, and less thick. 


inhabiting our part of the 
globe; they are species 
which have mzgrated, and 
these are equally useful for 
study. At the present day 
the mean temperature of 
our regions is less high 
than it. was «during same 
warmest period of Quater- 
nary times, and_ it is less 
low than during the coldest 
period. So that, follow- 
ino Jlartets Jexaniple wine 
Quaternary mammals may 
be divided into two groups: 
a warm climate svroup, which 
migrated to the south; and 
a cold climate group, which 
migrated to the north. The 
principal animals of the 
southern group are the 
Hippopotamus, which could 
live only in a country where 
the rivers do not freeze; the 
Cave Lion, which differed 
from the modern Lion only 
in its slightly larger build ; 
the Cave Hyzena, which ex- 
actly resembled the Spotted 


Hyzena of Central Africa, although it was somewhat stronger 
in build; the Porcupine, and the Barbary Ape. .. . 

Among the animals of the northern group, which now live only 
in polar regions, must be mentioned the Blue Fox, the Glutton, 
certain rodents such as the Lemming, and the Musk-ox. 


CLASSIFICATION OF QUATERNARY TIMES 45 


The Reindeer deserves special mention. This ruminant, 
which cannot now live in a wild state in a degree of latitude 
lower than 60° N., was remarkably widespread throughout 
the whole of France at a particular epoch of Quaternary time, 





Fic. 29.—Upper Molars of Réznoceros mercki (left), and of R. ¢ichorhinus (right). 
Three-quarters natural size. 


called on that account the Reindeer Age. At the same time, 
the Ibex and the Chamois, now confined to the high peaks of 
the Alps and of the Pyrenees, frequented the lowest plains 
of France. 

Excellent fossil remains of all these animals have been 
obtained, but they must be made use of with judgment. The 
geographical distribution of animals had already become so 
complex during Quaternary times, that each region might have, 
and indeed did have, its own peculiar fauna; and this renders 
the synchronizing of deposits far from each other a task of much 
delicacy. Finally, we know that changes of climate have led 
to migrations of faunas, so that a species need not belong to 
the same age in two different localities. 

Other species, such as the Horse, the Pig, the Ox, etc., are 
found almost everywhere, at all levels; we must therefore regard 
their presence as of no definite significance. 

For the establishment of the chronology of Quaternary 

The times, a third method is available, the most 
Archeological ancient of all, the archeological method. It 
eed: is based on the study of human industry, which 

has developed and changed, becoming by degrees more and 


46 TIME RELATIONS OF EARLY MAN 


more perfect ; the least destructible of its products, implements 
of stone, are everywhere widespread. 

Thanks to them, it was early recognized, as we have seen, 
that an age of stone preceded the age of metals. And in the 
Stone Age an older or Paleolithic phase can be distinguished, 
during which Man did not know how to work or fashion stone, 
except by shaping it through repeated blows; and a more 
recent or (Veolithic phase, during which Man had learnt to 
fashion stone by another process, by wearing it down through 
friction and polishing it (Fig. 30). 


i 





f 
t 
: 
f 
RENE coe E ES A oes NO 


Fic, 30.—A Paleolithic dressed axe, and a Neolithic polished axe. 
One-third natural size. 


Further, in each of these phases a succession of periods has 
been determined, characterized by different forms of objects or 
implements. Archzologists have thus arrived at results of 
great value to collectors, and at the same time of great interest 
to science.’ But classifications of this kind can have only 
local significance, for, even at the present day, very different 
industries may be contemporaneous in different regions. 

Each method has thus its good qualities and its defects, and 
each is insufficient in itself. Certain classifications, established 
by pure geologists like James Geikie and Penck, incur the grave 
reproach of not taking sufficient account of paleontological 


1 Mortillet, G. de, Le Préhistorigue, 1st ed. (Paris, 1883). Mortillet, G. and A,, 
Musée préhistorigue (Paris, 1881). 


CLASSIFICATION OF QUATERNARY TIMES 47 


and archzeological facts, of being based entirely upon a 
single physical phenomenon—the glacial phenomenon.  Classi- 
fications based solely on fossils, like those of Lartet and 
of Boyd Dawkins, can serve only for the major divisions. In 
appealing to archeological facts exclusively, prehistorians have 
come to make a much greater number of stages in the series of 
prehistoric times and to establish a more detailed chronology. 
Unfortunately such classifications, initiated or perfected by 
Lartet, Gabriel de Mortillet, Piette, Cartailhac, Breuil, and 
others, can only be applied @ frzorz to restricted areas of our 
continent alone. It is not possible to establish with certainty 
synchronisms or time-correlations at great distances, for the 
human factor is essentially mobile, changing and varied in its 
manifestations. Archeological aspects tend to be local, rather 
than to show sequences of ethnographical facts having uniform, 
general and contemporaneous significance. The idea of /aczes 
should play as important a part in prehistory as in geology. 

In 1888 I proposed a classification of Quaternary times, 


Proposed - based on the use and correlation of the three 
General kinds of data. 
Classification SS yanink : h : b 
A Gnntecnary uch discoveries as have since been made 
Times, in all parts do not seem to necessitate any 


alteration in the main lines of this first attempt, which I here 
reproduce, simplified and modified in some points of secondary 
importance. 

First, I refer to geological and paleontological facts. They 
have a more general significance and bearing than ethno- 
graphical facts, because they are independent of human action, 
and because they dominate it. It therefore falls to geologists 
and paleontologists to establish the great divisions of 
Quaternary times, since these are of geological significance ; 
and it is within the limits fixed by them that prehistorians may, 
in their turn, make subdivisions of an archzological and of a 
more localized nature. 

A first problem is the delimitation of Tertiary and 
Quaternary times, a problem the more difficult to solve 


' Boule, M., “Essai de Paléontologie stratigraphique de ’?Homme” (Revie 
@ Anthropologie, 1888 and 1889). 


48 TIME RELATIONS OF EARLY MAN 


because no great physical or biological fact can be appealed 
to in order to establish a division between them. In reality 
the Tertiary era still exists in every respect. It would certainly 
be best to suppress the term ‘‘ Quaternary” in our classifica- 
tions, and to include it in the Tertiary under another name, 
Pleistocene, as a period analogous to the Pliocene, Miocene, 
and other periods which preceded it. 

Apart from this—the most rational view of the matter, which, 
however, does not seem likely to be readily adopted—we may 
either consider the Quaternary era as starting with the age of 
Elephas meridionalis, as 1 formerly thought, or immediately 
after this epoch, which would then remain in the Pliocene, 
and this is my present opinion. In any case, the matter is 
of little importance from our present point of view. Problems 
of grouping are somewhat arbitrary, for they represent only 
mental conceptions ; what must be established is the succession 
of events and the synchronism of the phenomena.’ 

I leave, then, in the Pliocene, the fauna which includes 
Llephas meridionatis, and which is found in geological formations 
indicating a topography, and sometimes even a geography, 
somewhat different from those of Quaternary times. It 
appears now to be established that this period was marked 
by a great glacial extension (Guazzan or Mindelan of Penck’s 
system) of which the moraines, few in number and_ badly 
preserved, appear to merge with the alluvials now covering the 
plateaux between the modern valleys. The principal fossils 
characteristic of these alluvials of the plateaux and of other 
contemporary formations are: the Southern Elephant (Z/ephas 
meridionatts), the Etruscan Rhinoceros (/hznoceros etruscus), 
a Horse (Zguus stenonts), the Great Hippopotamus (//7Afo- 
potamus major), and others. 

The deposits of Saint-Prest in Eure-et-Loir, of Solilhac in 


1M. Haug, in his 7vrazté de Géologie, wished to extend the range of the 
Quaternary era, making it begin much sooner and attributing to it half of the 
Pliocene. This innovation, unjustifiable from a scientific point of view, has besides 
the serious drawback of creating inextricable confusion in the minds of many 
naturalists interested in various ways in Quaternary times, for it diverts the 
significance of expressions currently employed by all these Senicit ie and results in 
a esi terminological dispute. 








SISNHDUAAINGI“XH 
OWOH 
NVJA DwaaTACIa 


) INOSMVd ONOH 
Q>| a> NVI NMOGLI1g 


SISNH IVHLYUACNVAN 
OWOH 
NVC IVHLUAGNVAN 


IGIVWIUYD 
jo s0ey 


NONDVI- OUD 
jo eovy 


> 





[ISSO] 


HOV'IHONVHO 
jo covey 


SNYIdVS OWOH 


SNHIdVS OMOH 
NVW NuaadoW 


| "UdTT [ISSO 








stuouass snnby—9dslo FY 
SNISNAJA “MY —SOIDIOULY Y 
sypuoipiaaue spy gays7—yaryda,y Uleyynog 


LNVHda1q NUYFHLNOS 9} JO osV 





. 


NVATTAHO \ 


NVA INAHOV 


IOMO'T 


NVINAILSNOW 


NVIOVNDINAYV ) 


OH LIYIO# 1Vg 


NvauLatos + reddy 


NVINHTVQ9OVW ) 


NVITIZV—poulag uorisuvl y, 
DIHLIIOAN 

saddoy 

azuolg 

uoL] 


STVLAIN 





1yILUL "fy —SOIIIOULYY, $, YI 
sanbyuv svy gag —yaeyde|yq uanuy 


snigiygup *77—snuiryododdrpy 


easy SANVLOdOddI 








‘oqo ‘snury s0YI17 


S0.4290ULY y¥—SOIBI0UIYY AT[OO AA, 


sniuasiwuisg spy Gat 7 —UYjOWUWL IAL 


95Y HLONNVW 





vune,y vipun T 


esy YAAGNIAY 


vune,y oddais 











eseyd [BVIOe1S JeoryH 
esBVyd [VIOV[S19}4UT YVOIH 
S[VIANT|e XNVI4C[ 


aa 
| 


ANADOITG 
—— 


AUVILUAL 





eseyd [eIovls yveis 
9} VUITI[ NUE 9} jo SoUulv1O TY 
Plat oyeUul] Cy 
esVvyd [VIOV[S19jUT FeSIH 
Ssvjny STLOOIVITLT) *SOORIIO} 
IOMOT pue plu jo S[CIAN|[TV 
susodop savo yusIUYy 





JSIOU PUL POD 91eUITO 
eseyd [eIov[s 

JVOIF JSv] 9Y} JO sourlviojy 
S]OAIT MOT 
*sSo0'T 

WNUIXV JA 


qe AyTUO s[vIAN|[y 
‘syisodap = aavo 


eseud [VIOV[S-1S0d 
svipun} pur soeddajs jo 
auise1 { AIp puv pjoo ozeully[d 
SSa0] oY} jo y1vd 


soddq,*sjisodap aavo ssddq 


| } 
19MO'T | 


2TPPHA 


ws 
ANADOLSIATA 


~ 


reddy 








sjeuliue o1sdulo( 
‘<ryunoo awivs ay} UI punoj mou soteds 





*SUOISIAI(] [VOLSO[OMYyUY 








*S1OJIVITYD) [VIISO[OJUON[Lg 





‘SHWIL AUVNUALVNO AO AIAVL 


Avp-0} sv jsowye ojeUNy{D 
sossoul vag 
S[CIANT[L JUI0Y 


*SUOTILULIO J 
puv vusmousyg [eoLsojo945 





INAOda 
10 


ANHODOTOH } 


*SUOISIAI(] 
[eosopoas) 


ANVNUALVAG 





49 


50 TIME RELATIONS OF EARLY MAN 


Haute-Loire, of the Forest-bed in England, of Siissenborn 
in Thuringia, etc, may be reckoned to be on the boundary 
between the Pliocene and the Pleistocene, that is to say, as 
forming the transition between the Tertiary and the Quaternary 
eras. They seem to represent a great interglacial period, the 
Norfolkian of Geikie. 

The Quaternary era comprises the Pezstocene period and 
the Holocene or Modern period.’ The Pleistocene of geologists 
corresponds exactly to the Paleolithic of archeologists, the 
Holocene to the Meolithic and the ages of the meta/s. 


GEOLOGICAL DIVISIONS. ARCHOLOGICAL DIVISIONS. 
Iron Age. 
Period of the Metals. J Bronze Age. 
Quaternary Holocene Period. Copper Ave. 
Era. Neolithic Period. Ap“OPP S 


Pleistocene Period. Palzolithic Period. 


The Pleistocene period may be divided into three ages 


corresponding to as many stages. The 
Divisions of the es ipa en ° 1 she 
Pleistocene following are their main characteristics, to 
Period. which, however, I shall return at greater length 
ke when dealing with the fossil men of each age. 
Pleistocene. 5 


With the Lower Pleistocene is associated, 
in the first place, a fresh and apparently the most important 
of the extensions of the ice-sheet, the moraines of which 
extend furthest from the mountain centres (Penck’s Lesszan 
phase). 

Following this glacial phase there came, in the second 
place, a great interglacial phase, distinguished by a fauna with 
species indicating a warm climate: the Ancient Elephant 
(Elephas antiguus), Merck’s Rhinoceros (/tAznoceros merckt), 
the Hippopotamus (Fig. 31), the Sabre-toothed Tiger 
(Machatrodus), monkeys, and so on. ‘The remains of these 
animals are found sometimes in the oldest alluvials of the 
recent series of freshwater deposits, sometimes in the deepest 
or the lowest deposits of caves. 


1 The term ‘“ Quaternary” is often used as synonymous with “ Pleistocene.” This 
is erroneous, since it mistakes the part for the whole; but the term, nevertheless, 
has passed into current use. 


DIVISIONS OF PLEISTOCENE PERIOD 5] 


It is also in the deposits of this period that the oldest 
stone implements universally recognized as authentic—the 
amygdaloid flints—are found. From the archeological point 
of view these represent the Che//ean, a name derived from the 
locality of Chelles, in the De- 
partment of the Seine-et-Marne, 
and which I consider excellent, 
at least in our present state of 
knowledge. Up to recent years, 
no bone-remains of Chellean | 
Man had been recorded. It 
will be necessary to consider two 
finds recently made in forma- 
tions which, according to all the 

: Fic. 31.—Skull of fossil Hippopotamus, 
evidences, must have dated from Pik Soe COOH aa 
the Lower Pleistocene. ‘These tological Gallery of French National 
consist of a few fragments of Re eR 
skull and jawbones, to which have been given the names 
Homo heidelbergensis and Loanthropus dawsont. 

The Mid Pleistocene is characterized, from the geological 
point of view, by a return of those great glacial 
developments which have left the best- 
preserved moraines, situated, as a rule, within the limit 
of the moraines of the preceding glacial extension (Wurmzan 
phase of Penck). It is also characterized by the formation 
of alluvial sheets, sometimes superimposed upon those of 
the Lower Pleistocene, but most often situated below the 
level of the latter, and forming terraces /owery in relation 
to the middle terraces. This is the period of the principal 
deposits of cave debris, and of the formation of great 
masses of mud or /vess in France, for both these deposits 
have a similar origin. It is also the period of the last 
hollowing out or filling up of the valleys, of the penultimate 
sculpturing of the surface configuration of the present 
day. 

The fauna is very different from that of the Lower 
Pleistocene. The Hippopotamus no longer inhabits our 
countries. The Ancient Elephant is replaced by the Mam- 





Mid Pleistocene. 


52 TIME RELATIONS OF EARLY MAN 


moth (Fig. 32). Merck’s Rhinoceros persists a little longer, 
and was succeeded by the Woolly Rhinoceros which, as we 
know, was adapted, like the Mammoth, to the rigors of a 
glacial climate. In France the Mid Pleistocene saw the 
reign of the great Carnivores: the Bear, the Hyzna and 
the Cave Lion (Fig. 33). It corresponds fairly exactly to the 

archeological period called 
es chee | Moustrertan, after the Cave of 
: Moustier in the Dordogne.’ 
Between the Chellean and the 
Moustierian is interposed the 
period known as Acheulean, 
after Saint - Acheul, near 
Amiens. 

In the cave - deposits of 
the Mid Pleistocene were 
found many human _ bones, 
sometimes almost complete 
skeletons, which revealed a 
prehistoric type very different 
from modern man, namely 
Neanderthal Man (Homo 
neanderthalensts), which we 
Fic. 32. — Skeleton of Mammoth from shall study at length, from 

Beresowka (N. E. Siberia). In Petrograd : : 
AT RecucnebeTei ph, 2 ommetres French material of exceptional 
importance. 

The Upper Pleistocene has no clearly defined characters 

Upper from the geological or stratigraphical points 

Pleistocene. of view. The deposits corresponding to it 
present a topography and hydrography very much resembling 
those of the present day, but, especially towards the end of the 
period, they were contemporaneous with a dryer climate. In 
the caves the deposits are principally formed by relics of Man, 
cinders from hearths and kitchen refuse. 

In spite of some forward movements of the ice, gradually 
decreasing in importance, but considered by certain authors 





Sees SOREN SUR SEE eng es Sore sca 


Generally written ‘“ Mousterian.” It seems ‘to me more correct to write 
Moustierian. 


DIVISIONS OF PLEISTOCENE PERIOD 53 


as glacial phases, this period marks the general retreat of the 
great glaciers of the preceding period; it is, therefore, often 
distinguished as Post-glacial. 

The fauna is still essentially that of the Mid Pleistocene. 
The large species are the same (Mammoth, Woolly Rhino- 
ceros, and so on), and in this respect the Mid and Upper 
Pleistocene may be regarded as forming one geological unit, 
as distinct from the Lower Pleistocene. But the strati- 
graphy of the caves generally allows of the recognition of 





FIG. 33.—Exhibit of Quaternary Carnivores in the Palzeontological Gallery of the French 
National Museum of Natural History, Paris. 


From left to right—Skeleton of Cave Hyzena; three skeletons of Cave Bears ; two 
skeletons of Cave Lions ; in the right foreground Cave Wolf. 


several successive layers enclosing slightly different faunas. 
It is impossible, however, always to affirm that these differences 
are not due to the interference of man. His intervention 
must certainly have brought to the settlements, to the exclusion 
of many others, the bones of certain animals which perhaps 
could not have come there by the simple play of natural 
causes. The Reindeer is accompanied first by a very cold 
fauna, known as the fauna of the ¢uzdras, because it contains 
the principal members of the fauna of the frozen and desolate 
countries which bear this name to-day, such as the Musk-ox, 
Glutton, Blue Fox, Lemming, Snowy Owl, and others, whose 


~~ 


5+ TIME RELATIONS OF EARLY MAN 


remains are found in association in certain layers of the Arctic 
peat-bogs. Then comes a less cold fauna, indicating a climate 
and habitat similar to those of the Russian and Siberian 
steppes, and including the Saiga Antelope, Prairie Squirrels, 
Jerboas,’ and others, whilst our low plains are invaded by the 
Chamois, the Ibex, the Marmot, and, everywhere abundant, 
these large ruminants, the Bison and Great Extinct Ox. But 
the Reindeer (Fig. 34) is always the dominant species through- 





Fic. 34.—Modern Reindeer. 


out the whole period, which has long been known as the 
Reindeer Age. 

Archeology has been of special service in enabling a very 
clear line to be drawn between the two great periods of 
Mid and Upper Pleistocene. The distinction between the 
Mammoth Age and the Reindeer Age, first made by Lartet, 
is justified much more by archeology than by paleontology. 
It crops up again in the almost parallel terms of Moustierian 
and Magdalenian, invented by G. de Mortillet. Modern 
prehistorians are agreed in dividing the Paleolithic into the 
Lower Paleolithic, comprising the Chellean and the Moustierian | 


1 See various works of Nehring, A., notably User Tundren und Steppen der 
Jetzt-und-Vorzett (Berlin, 1890). 


ABSOLUTE CHRONOLOGY 55 


periods, and the Upper Paleolithic or Reindeer Age, thus 
affirming the archeological and anthropological individuality 
of two periods difficult to distinguish by the resources of 
geology and paleontology alone.’ 

Ethnography goes even further, and allows of the intro- 
duction into the Reindeer Age, or Upper Paleolithic, of several 
divisions of real importance, at least for Western Europe. 
The names given to these are: Adurignacian (from Aurignac 
in the Haute-Garonne, where there is a grotto explored 
by Lartet), Solutrean (from Solutré, Sadne-et-Loire), and 
Magdalentan (from La Madeleine, in the Dordogne).’ 

The fossil men of these periods are fairly numerous and 
very different from Neanderthal Man. They have already the 
characters of Modern Man (/fomo sapiens), from whom they 
cannot be distinguished except on the ground of race or of 
ancestral variety. . 

Certain deposits, of which the grotto of Mas d’Azil may 
be taken as typical, correspond to a period called Azzlzan, 
which exhibits, as we shall see later, all the characters of a 
transition from Pleistocene to Holocene. 


2. Absolute Chronology. 


Relative chronology, which we have just been studying, 
‘Relativeana is distinct from absolute chronology. The 
Absolute latter must furnish dates in units of time— 
Chronology. years, centuries or millenia. History has its 
absolute chronology, which, it may be said, is the more deter- 
minate or precise as it deals with events more or less close to 
us. On every hand there arises the demand for an absolute 
chronology for prehistory. The first question asked by the 


1 The geological expressions, Upper, Middle, and Lower Pleistocene, should 
not be absolutely confounded with the archeological expressions, Chellean, 
Moustierian, and so on. The latter can only have a local or regional significance, 
while the former should be, in principle at least, of universal application. It will 
be useful to employ, as the case demands, one or other of these two nomen- 
clatures, in order to avoid confusions which prehistorians often make. 

2 Breuil, H., “Les subdivisions du Paléolithique supérieur et leur signification” 
(Congres international d Anthropologie, Geneva meeting, 1912). 


56 TIME RELATIONS OF EARLY MAN 


public at large, in connection with any prehistoric fact, has 
to do with its date. | 

Now we must honestly admit that, in the present state of 
the science, it is almost impossible in most cases to answer 
such a question.!. The temerity with which certain writers, 
without sufficient reservation, present figures which are all 
the more fallacious because their very detail suggests precision, 
makes an unfortunate impression on the minds of scientists 
aware of our ignorance. I would not for a moment suggest 
that the problem may or must remain unsolved, for no one 
can fix a limit to the progress of the human mind.’ But I 
hold that the first duty of the scientist is to respect the 
confidence of those who come to him in good faith, and to 
set before them only such facts as are sufficiently well 
established. 

In order to satisfy as far as possible the curiosity of my 
readers, which is after all quite legitimate, I shall briefly 
summarize the results of the leading attempts at establishing 
a definite chronology, and shall draw from these results such 
conclusions as seem to me most reasonable. 

There is no need to dwell here upon the estimates of the 
ancient writers, of biblical legends, of the Chaldean, Egyptian 
or Chinese traditions and chronicles, and others, which in 
this matter cannot be considered reliable. 

Since the great antiquity of Man was scientifically estab- 

Different lished, men of science have constantly striven to 
Methods of Time translate it into figures. They have conceived 

Bstimation. aj] kinds of time-measuring methods, based on 
astronomy, on geology, and even on biology. 

In principle, astronomical methods ought to be most 


‘ Thanks to certain historical dates furnished by Chaldea and Egypt, and to 
archzological comparisons established step by step, satisfactory results have been 
obtained for the Ages of Metals in the West. (See Chap. IX). But these ages 
only represent the end of our prehistoric era. What I am discussing here relates 
to an infinitely more remote past. 

* “When science undertook, scarcely more than half a century ago, to measure 
the mass and the dimensions of atoms, its first estimates varied, in the ratio of 1 to 
20, to such an extent that the problem seemed to certain minds insoluble and even 
non-existent. It is, however, solved to-day.” (Houllevigue, “Causerie scientifique,” 
in the Zemps, 16th Dec. 1911). 


METHODS OF TIME ESTIMATION 57 


satisfactory, since astronomy has given us our units of time. 
The difficulty is to discover a geological event which can be 
correlated at once with the antiquity of Man and with a 
measurable astronomical phenomenon. It was believed to 
have been found in the development of the glaciers, which 
were attributed either to variations in the eccentricity of the 
earth’s orbit (that is to say, to differences in the distance of 
the earth from the sun), or to variations in the obliquity of 
the earth’s axis (precession of the equinoxes). As astronomy 
can calculate the dates of such periodic variations, it should 
be enough to choose from among the dates those which 
correspond to the variations most favourable for the establish- 
ment of a glacial regime, in order to know the absolute age 
of the Glacial Period and, in consequence, the age of the 

men contemporary with this period. | 

Thus, according to the English astronomer Croll, the 
Glacial Period would have begun with the last great cycle 
of eccentricity in the earth’s orbit (corresponding to the 
maximum distance of the earth from the sun, that is, to 
a maximum of coldness) 240,000 years ago; further, it would 
have lasted 160,000 years and would have come to an end 
80,000 years ago. According to Lyell, the Great Glacial Period 
should have coincided with an older period of great eccentricity, 
and this would make it date back to 800,000 years ago." 

This theory has been attacked alike by astronomers, 
physicists and geologists. It has not been proved that the 
Glacial Period or periods were related to the astronomical 
phenomena in question; and we shall see that there are 
excellent reasons to-day for believing that the end of the 
Glacial period did not date so far back as was believed by 
Croll and Lyell. 

It will be enough merely to mention a few attempts at 
time-estimation based on paleontology and the phenomena 
of organic evolution. It was believed that a numerical 
appraisement could be made of the periods corresponding to 
changes undergone by the fauna of a country through extinction, 


Beeline, -7encipes de Géologie, Fr. ed,, Paris, 1873, t. 1, ch. xill., p. 351. 
[Principles of Geology, 1oth Eng ed., London, 1867, vol. 1., ch. xiii., p. 291 ef seg. ] 


D8 TIME RELATIONS OF EARLY MAN 


transformation or the appearance of species. The hints thus 
obtained are altogether vague and indefinite; they have, 
however, the merit of impressing on the mind the idea of the 
immensity of even the most recent geological times, when we 
learn, for example, that the changes which have taken place in 
the animate world since the end of the Paleolithic period are 
imperceptible or insignificant. 

The geological methods of estimating time are more 
numerous, and almost all depend upon much the same 
principle: A geological phenomenon is selected, the effects of 
which can be measured throughout a unity of time—that is, 
the rapidity of its progress in the present period, or throughout 
a lapse of time determined by historical data, can be gauged. 
From this result, by simple rule of three, the time may be 
calculated necessary to produce effects conforming to the 
prehistoric period the date of which we desire to discover. If 
we know, for example, the absolute value of the time required 
for the deposition of a certain thickness of alluvium, it will be 
easy to estimate the time required for the deposition of a 
greater mass of alluvium, the formation of which corresponds 
to a definite geological or archeological period. 

Unfortunately, conditions are far from being so simple as 
this. The first difficulty lies in really knowing what we wish 
to measure, especially in the case of events the beginning and 
the end of which it is impossible to determine with exactitude. 
The expressions we must necessarily employ, such as the 
“beginning” or “‘end” of the Glacial Period, the ‘date of 
Man's appearance,” and those serving to designate the divisions 
we make in the succession of the ages and of the events 
correlated with them, are perforce very vague; they correspond 
to no absolute reality, for such abrupt divisions exist only in 
our minds, 

Further, the duration of the same event may have varied in 
different countries. It is clear, for example, that the Glacial 
Period came to an end much sooner in France than in 
Scandinavia. Another, and still more serious objection, is 
that the geological methods of time-estimation depend on an 
assumption of the permanence and unbroken regularity of 


RESULTS OF TIME ESTIMATION 59 


natural processes ; and this is extremely improbable. In any 
event, in the majority of cases it 1s impossible to make 
allowance for the counteraction of destructive forces, which 
may have worked in inverse ratio to the constructive forces, 
weakening, diminishing and sometimes annihilating the effects 
of the latter. 

But whether these criticisms be justified or not, and their 
significance is evident, investigators, at any rate, have turned 
their attention to all kinds of natural accumulations. They 
have examined, in their turn, the peat-mosses, alluvials, 
glacial moraines, cones of mountain-torrent detritus, lake- 
deposits, deltas, marine ooze, calcareous concretions, alteration 
in rocks by atmospheric agents, the hollowing out of gorges, 
the backward cutting of waterfalls, the rate of progress or of 
retreat of glaciers, oscillations in the level of the sea, etc. I 
have noted more than forty attempts of this kind, and others 
must certainly have escaped me. 

On the following page will be found in tabular form a 

The Results, Number of estimates of the duration (1) of the 
and a Discussion Quaternary era; (2) of the Glacial period; 

eee e LL, (3) of Post-Glacial times. The figures denote 
the number of years. 

The numbers in the first two columns vary, in round 
numbers, from 10,000 to 1,000,000, that is to say, in a ratio 
of 1 to 100. The difference, therefore, is enormous; partly 
because many of the estimates are largely sentimental, the 
lowest having certainly been influenced by the philosophic or 
religious views of their authors. But, for the most part, 
such a discrepancy witnesses to the inaccuracy or inadequacy 
of the methods employed; and amongst them all it is very 
difficult to choose one that is better than the rest. 

The discrepancy of the figures in the third column, relating 
to the duration of Post-Glacial times, is much less great. 
Ignoring certain evaluations clearly erroneous, the 80,000 
years of the astronomer Croll and the 100,000 years of 
the geophysicist Forel, we find that the difference is only 
between 4,000 and 30,000, that is, in the ratio of about 1 to 7. 
It is still far too great, but it shows some improvement. 


60 TIME RELATIONS OF EARLY MAN 


SUMMARY OF TIME-ESTIMATIONS IN YEARS. 





























Author Guataemnty | Glial | 

ARCELIN and FERRY, French geologists. 10,000 m4) 4 to 5,000 
HotsT, Swedish geologist . , ; : 30,000 17,000 5 to 6,900 
PRESTWICH, English geologist . : : ~ 25,000 8 to 10,000 
WARREN UPHAM, American geologist . | 100 to 150,000 | 20 to 30,000 6 to 10,000 
BECKER, American geologist : ° ‘ cas 50,000 ad 
HEIM, Swiss geologist : : +2 100,000 16,000 
G. DE MoRTILLET, French pr ehistonan . | 230 to 240,000 100,000 16,000 
RuTOT, Belgian geologist and prehistorian . a 140,000 7 to 8,000 
CROLL, English astronomer . , ; 240,000 160,000 - 80,000 
A. M. HANSEN, Norwegian g geologist ‘ : oa 130 to 190,000 7 to 9,000 
J. LUBBOCK, English prehistorian : ; oe 200,000 Me 
WALCOTT, American geologist . : : 400,000 ap ae 
SOLLAS, English geologist . ‘ : 5 ree 400,000 17,000 
OsBORN, American palzontologist . é 500,000 500,000 25,000 
J. GEIKIE, Scottish geologist : ; - | 620,000 at least a 
DANA, American geologist . ; : ; act 720,000 
LYELL, English geologist . ; : ; ee 800,000 

( 500,000 500,000 
PENCK, German geographer : 5 to to } 20,000 

\ 1,000,000 1,000,000 
L. PILGRIM, German geographer : - | 1,620,000 1,290,000 
R. S. WOODWARD, GILBERT, RUSSEL, 

WINCHELIJ., E. ANDREWS, EMERSON, 

American geologists . : ; : j os Bs 7 to 10,000 
Hicks, American geologist . : ‘ as eke 15,000 
SARAUW, Danish prehistorian . , , 2 Se ai 10 to 25,000 
DE GEER, Swedish geologist . : ; see are 12,000 
GOSSE, Swiss prehistorian . : ; : ae es 18,280 
NUESCH, ” ” . . . . esis eos 24 to 29,000 
FOREL, ” ” . . . . S50 son 100,000 











An analysis, into which I cannot enter here, of the processes of 
calculation which give the lowest estimates, shows that these 
processes, for example those of Arcelin and Ferry, are marred 
by error. If, then, we take as the extreme limits the figures 
8,000 and 24,000, the ratio of difference is reduced to 1 to 3. 
Here we approach an agreement sufficiently close to give us 
confidence. Further, if we note that the majority of the 
estimates, in spite of the fact that they are based on very 
different phenomena, fluctuate between 8,000 and 15,000, that is 
to say, in ratio of 1 to 2, we are led to place a certain amount 
of trust in dates which now belong clearly to the same scale of 
magnitude, 

These figures would certainly have been still closer to each 
other had they really been applied to the same duration of 
time; but this is not the case, for the meaning of the 


DURATION OF POST-GLACIAL 'TIMES 61 


expression Post-Glacial times varies remarkably, according to 
the authors who use it and the countries in which it is used. 

If, in this case, agreement is much less imperfect than in 
that of the duration of the Glacial Period or of the sum total of 
Quaternary times, it is, first, because the space of time con- 
cerned is much shorter ; secondly, because the phenomena that 
must be studied are much nearer to us, so that their effects 
are better preserved and more exactly apprehended; and 
finally, because these phenomena themselves more closely 
resemble the happenings of modern times, so that the latter 
afford more equivalent terms for comparison. 

One of the most ingenious and most satisfactory methods, 

Duration of t00 lengthy for description here, is that by 

Post-Glacial which the Swede, de Geer,’ has been able to 
teh measure the rate of retreat of the last great 
Scandinavian glacier. If we compare the data published by 
this geologist with the results obtained by Sarauw, Kjellmark 
and other European scientists, on the one hand, and by 
various American geologists on the other, we reach a very 
satisfactory degree of agreement. I consider that we may 
reckon at 10,000 years ago, the extreme end of the Glacial 
Period in France, the departure of the Reindeer, the beginning 
of the superficial peat-bog formations, and the first evidences 
of the Neolithic civilisations. 

The round number I suggest shows that I have only an 
approximation in view; and I consider it is rather moderate 
than excessive. It is the only suggestion I am able to 
make. 

I have not the assurance to compute the duration of the 

Te ede older archeological or geological periods, being 
Duration of convinced, unfortunately, that the estimates 
Quaternary put forward do not, so far as is known, rest 
eunes. on secure foundations; but I hasten to add 
that everything tends to give the impression that an immense 
lapse of time separates our period from that of our first 
forefathers. 


1 Geer, G. de, “A Geochronology of the last 12,000 years” (Congres géolog. intern. 
de Stockholm, 1910, p. 241. 


62 TIME RELATIONS OF EARLY MAN 


Let us leave on one side the archeological aspect of the 
question, in order to consider only physical and biological facts. 
Since the end of the Pleistocene times of the geologists, or the 
Reindeer Age of the archeologists, that is to say, since about 
10,000 years ago, the geological changes undergone by our 
country are inappreciable. This will serve as a starting- 
point. 

The deposits corresponding to the period immediately pre- 
ceding, that is to the Reindeer Age, are already of remarkable 
thickness. This is not a matter solely of human contributions, 
which may have accumulated with great rapidity. I have 
specially in view these sterile layers due to the activity of 
atmospheric agents, which often alternate with the hearths, 
and correspond to long periods of disuse of the caves and 
shelters. I believe that we can, without fear of error, attribute 
to this period a duration equal to, if not greater than, that 
which separates us from it. 

Now these deposits of the Reindeer Age, in spite of their 
relative importance, which impresses us in excavations, in 
reality play only an insignificant part in the topography of our 
country. The bones they contain are barely fossilized; nearly 
all of them belong to animals or to men in every way similar to 
their modern representatives. But when we go back as far as 
the Moustierian period, we observe in other directions certain 
important changes. Here everything bears witness to a 
different topography, brought about by physical forces of 
which impressive traces are everywhere visible: the demolition 
of mountain regions, the accumulation of moraine deposits 
over thousands of square miles, the last stages of the sculpturing 
of the valleys, and the formation of the lower alluvial terraces ; 
enormous deposits of silt over the land surfaces, and of 
clays containing bones in subterranean caves; variations 
in the shore-line; repeated volcanic manifestations, and 
so on, 

These physical phenomena are accompanied by appreci- 
able changes in the fauna, particularly by the disappearance 
of several species of large mammals, whose bone-remains 
are more fossilized than those of the Reindeer Age. 


DURATION OF QUATERNARY 'TIMES 63 


Man, at least in our region, belongs to a species different 
from Modern Man (fYomo saprens). Who can hope to have 
any accurate notion of the duration of this period? And 
yet, can we refuse to accord to it an impressive number 
of millenia ? 

We are still, however, very far from the time at which 
Man's earlier presence in our country has been indubitably 
proved. 

This Man, belonging to very old Palzolithic times, lived in 
a physical and biological environment altogether different from 
that of his successor. The topography and even the geography 
of the Acheulean and Chellean periods show further changes 
of very considerable extent and duration. The seas and the 
continents had not yet assumed their present configuration ; 
the British Isles were attached to the continent; Europe and 
Africa were connected by land-bridges. The sculpturing of 
our modern valleys, which was particularly the work of the 
latter part of the Pliocene, had not yet been completed. That 
was the period of the middle terraces of the Seine, the Somme, 
the Garonne, etc. Hundreds of craters, now breached and 
broken, still illumined the Central Massif of France. The 
geological formations of the period consist of deposits the 
antiquity of which is still clearly evident in the alteration 
undergone by their contents. 

As different are the scenes revealed by organic nature. 
Europe was peopled by Asiatic or African mammals, of which 
many have long been extinct. Others have changed, and their 
evolution can only have occurred with very great slowness. 
The human industries of these remote times show everywhere 
the same obvious characteristics. The few bone-remains of 
the makers of the primitive implements reveal types very 
different from those of to-day. Everything now fades away 
in the mists of antiquity. The only chronological impression 
we can gather from these pictures is of an immense duration of 
time; the giddiness of immeasurable space begins to over- 
whelm us. 

And so, if none of the figures suggested for the duration of 
Quaternary time and for the antiquity of Chellean Man can 


64 TIME RELATIONS OF EARLY MAN 


satisfy our desire for precision, none can surprise, still less 
can any astound us. 

Even now, we are only at the dawn of Quaternary times. 
If, pursuing our giddy course, we penetrate into the Tertiary 
era, in our search for the real beginnings of Mankind, we must 
needs count no longer by hundreds, but by thousands of 
millenia ! 


"% 


Habeas isd conde 
LIVING PRIMATES AND FOSSIL MONKEYS 


BEFORE entering into the heart of our subject, we must make 
a*fresh preliminary study. We cannot well understand and 
appreciate the morphological characters of our distant ancestors, 
until we have gained some notion of the general zoological 
bearings of the Primates, and reviewed the discoveries relating 
to fossil monkeys. 


Living Primates. 


The term Primates, ‘the first” of the mammals, was 
created by Linnzus, who used also the designation Axthro- 
pomorphs. 

The Primates include animals of somewhat different 
appearance, but distinguished from all other mammals by a 
combination of the following characters: a large brain-box, 
containing a highly-developed brain; fore-limbs adapted for 
grasping, and terminating in hands with flat nails; teeth 
adapted for a mixed diet; two mammary glands on the 
breast. | 

As this definition applies to Man as well as to all the 
Classification of other Primates, the classification of the group 

the Primates. has been the subject of special discussion. 
Some naturalists, as Isidore Geoffroy Saint-Hilaire and de 
Ouatrefages,’ wished to set up a separate kingdom for our 
species, because of the superiority of its intelligence and of 
its “religiosity.” But in the classification of animals we do 
not take as a basis their intellectual characteristics. Why 
change the method when we come to Man? Linnzus and 


1 Quatrefages, A. de, L’esfece humaine (Paris, 1876); /ntroduction a Pétude des 
races humaines (1887), 
65 E 


66 LIVING PRIMATES AND FOSSIL MONKEYS 


Lamarck clearly comprehended this; and Darwin observed 
that much greater differences are to be found in the class of 
insects, for example between an ant and a parasitic insect, 
than between man and monkeys; and he added with reason: 
“If Man had not been his own classifier, he would never 
have thought of founding a separate order for his own 
reception.” * 

Buffon classified Man as Bimana, Monkeys as Quadru- 
mana. and Cuvier revived these terms.? In the genus f/omo, 
Linnaeus included Man and the large monkeys without tails— 
the Anthropoid Apes; here he had Homo sapiens, with his 
varieties ferus, europaeus, astaticus, and the rest, but here also 
he placed Homo sylvestris, or Orang, and Lomo troglodytes, 
or Chimpanzee. 

Cuvier completely separated Man (Bimana) from Monkeys 
(Quadrumana), and among the latter he distinguished a lower 
group under the name of Lemurs. ‘To-day we may still accept 
the following general classification * :— 





( : \ MEN or HOMINIANS. 

| Bimana—Arms shorter than legs. : 

| Very large brain. j Very aap 

| 

| (Orbits completely closed ; Sg hats ee mabe 
PRIMATES \ arms longer than legs. if ee seis and ' 

| Quadru- | iversified. 

mana. 

| Orbits incompletely closed; ) oa? EME ‘ 

| arms shorter than legs. f Birt e still 

\ ittle differentiated. 


The Lemurs, also called Prosimians, Pseudo Monkeys, or 
Fox-faced Monkeys, have neither the vivacity 
nor the intelligence of the true monkeys. 
The face is hairy instead of smooth. The skull is easily 


Lemurs. 


1 Darwin, Charles, The Descent of Man, London, 1871, vol. i., p. 191. 

* For this they have been criticized, and not unreasonably, for azatomically the 
lower extremities of monkeys are /ee/, just like the lower extremities of Man. But 
Cuvier knew this as well as Huxley or Broca. It is therefore rather in a physiological 
sense that he uses the terms Azmana and Quadrumana. This reservation made, 
we may, I think, continue to use the terms, especially in a work such as this. 

3 For the history of the classification of the Primates, see Topinard, P., L’ Homme 


dans la Nature (Paris, 1891); Gregory, W. K., Zhe Orders of Mammals (New 
York, 1910). 


CLASSIFICATION OF PRIMATES 67 





° 


Fic. 35.—A Representative of the Lemurs and of each great group of Monkeys. 


Above, left—A Lemur, the Pied Lemur (Lemur varius), after A. Grandidier. 

Above, right—A Flat-Nosed or New World Monkey, a Marmoset {/Yapale jacchus). 

Below, left—A Flat-Nosed or Cebian Monkey from South America (Cebus capucinus), after 
Elliot. 

Below, right—An African Long-Nosed Monkey (Cercopithecus brazzai), from a specimen 
in the Natural History Museum of France. 

Centre—An Anthropoid Ape, the Chimpanzee (7roglodytes niger), from a specimen in the 
collections of the same Museum. 


68 LIVING PRIMATES AND FOSSIL MONKEYS 


distinguished from a monkey’s skull: the occipital foramen is 
placed behind as in other mammals; the orbits are widely 
separated, directed laterally, and they communicate with the 
temporal fossa; the lachrymal foramen opens in front of the 
orbits. The cerebral hemispheres of the Lemurs do not 
completely cover the cerebellum; their structure is relatively 
simple. The Lemurs again have their lower incisors set in 
front and projecting forwards; they have long legs and short 
arms. They are still very primitive quadrumana and for the 
most part lead an arboreal existence. 

Formerly widely distributed in America and in Europe, 
they are now found only in Africa, in Indo-Malay, but chiefly — 
in Madagascar, where nine-tenths of the species occur, and 
where the group was formerly represented by strange giant 
forms, such as Wegaladapts. 

The true monkeys comprise a graduated series ranging 

Monkeys or from low and insignificant forms, like ~ the 

Simians. Marmosets, to powerful forms and those most 
akin to Man, the Anthropoid Apes; but they have a certain 
number of anatomical characters in common. The brain-box 
is highly developed in relation to the face, which is fore- 
shortened. The cerebrum, overlapping the cerebellum and 
covering it, is divided by. fissures into lobes; it shows well- 
developed convolutions. The occipital foramen lies deneath 
the skull. The orbits, directed forwards, lie in front, are 
closed by a bony septum, and no longer communicate 
with the temporal fossa; the lachrymal canal opens into 
the orbits. The teeth are arranged in a continuous series ; 
the lower incisors are upright like their neighbours, not 
‘inclined. The fore-limbs are longer than thé hind-limbs. 
The forearm, gifted with the power of movements both of 
pronation and supination, has become a perfect instrument 
for grasping. 

Monkeys have expressive faces ; their intelligence is superior 
to that of other mammals. They have strong passions; it has 
been truly said that they reflect Mankind in its lowest qualities. . 
They inhabit warm or temperate climates, living in trees or 
among rocks, and feeding on fruit, buds, eggs, and insects. 


CLASSIFICATION OF MONKEYS 69 


We may classify the monkeys as follows :!— 


(32 teeth (2 premolars). 
Narrow nasal septum 


(nostrils close together) ANTHROPOMORPHIC GROUP 


(Anthropoid Apes). 
Chimpanzee 


Gorilla 
Orang 


CATARRHINIANS. 


Long-nosed, or Old 


| No tail 
World Monkeys | 


Gibbon 
CYNOMORPHIC GROUP 
(Dog-faced Monkeys). 


Baboons (Cynocephalis) 








v3 Tail more or 
i less long _) Macaques 
x Fs Cercopithecus 
= Sacred Indian Ape (Semnopithecus) 
< and its allies 
= 
nH | FIG. 36. \ 
Py 7 
2) 
un Large nasal septum /( 
a 
= PLATYRRHINIANS. CEBIAN GROUP. 
= Flat-nosed or New Capuchins 
World Monkeys 36 teeth Sapajous or Weepers 


(3 premolars) | Ateles (Spider Monkeys) 
Howling Monkeys 
Sakis 


ARCTOPITHECUS GROUP, or 
32 teeth. Digits HAPALIDES. 


with claws Marmosets 


Midas Monkey 





FIG. 37 \ 


' This classification and nomenclature are essentially French. In other countries, 
the grouping and particularly the terms employed are rather different; and the 
latter may cause some confusion which it is well to point out. Thus the general 
group of Monkeys or Simians is sometimes called the Azthropoidea, a term long 
in use in France, concurrently with that of ‘‘Anthropomorphes,” to describe the 
higher monkeys—those most nearly related to ourselves. The Cynomorphic Apes 
of French authors constitute the Cercopithectde of British authors, and the Anthropo- 
morphic Apes of the former are called Szmz7de in Britain, a name too closely 
resembling the expression Simian Apes, used by French writers to describe monkeys 
as a group. 

General works to read or consult regarding the monkeys are: Gervais, P., 
flistoire naturelle des Mammiferes (Paris, 1854) (old but still good). Flower, W. H., 
and Lydekker, R., Am Introduction to the Study of Mammals (London, 1891). 
Elliot, D. G., A Review of the Primates (New York, 1912), (a large and superb 
monograph). 


70 LIVING PRIMATES AND FOSSIL MONKEYS 


The Hapatip# or Marmosets (genus Hlapale and Midas) 
are the smallest of the monkeys. In certain characters they 
are related to the Lemurs, for their digits are not opposable. 
They have only 32 teeth, as in the large monkeys and Man, 
but they have 3 premolars and 2 molars, in place of 2 pre- 
molars and 3 molars. 

The Cerprans, like the Marmosets confined to South 
America, are inferior in organization and intelligence to the 
Old World monkeys. Their nostrils are widely separated, their 
long tails are generally prehensile. The thumb is_ barely 
opposable. They have 36 teeth (3 premolars and 3 molars 
on each side, above and below). 

The CaTarRHINE or Lonc-nosepD Monkeys of the Old World, 
with nostrils close together, have the same dental formula as 
Man (2 premolars and 3 molars). The CyNnomorpus or 
Doc-raceD Monkeys, of which numerous species are widely 
distributed in Asia and in Africa, are the most common 
representatives of the Primates in our menageries. Their tails, 
sometimes rudimentary, as in the Barbary Ape, are never 
prehensile. 

The AntHroporp or MAN-LIKE ApEs (Axthropomorphs) are 

Manlike Apes. © Still greater interest to us as being the higher 
(Anthropomorphs monkeys most nearly related to ourselves in 
or Anthropoids). their whole organization.’ 

The Gibbons (genus //y/odates), of south-eastern Asia and 
the Malay Archipelago (Sumatra), are the smallest of the 
anthropoids, the largest species, the Siamang,. being scarcely 
a metre high. They show certain traces of low degree, 
suggestive of the tailed monkeys. Their fore-limbs are very 
long, but they generally walk erect, and in this, as in certain 
skull characters, they resemble Man. 

The Orang-Outang or Pongo (Szmza satyrus), of Sumatra 
and Borneo, is much larger and stronger. Its legs are very 
short ; its brain-box is round (brachycephalic) and high, and 
bears sagittal and occipital ridges. The males are armed with 
strong canine teeth. 


1 See Hartmann, R., Les Singes anthropoides (Paris, 1886). Various papers by 
Owen, Deniker, Selenka and others. 


CLASSIFICATION OF ANTHROPOIDS AND MEN 71 


The Gorillas (genus Gorz//a) inhabit the Gaboon region of 
western equatorial Africa. Largest of the apes, they are 
stronger and more robust than Man. Their skull is elongated 
(dolichocephalic) and, in old males, bears great bony crests, 
strong supra-orbital ridges and powerful canine teeth. The 
ears are small. | 

The Chimpanzees (genus 7voglodytes or Anthropithecus or 
Pan), probably represented by several species, are also African, 
inhabiting the equatorial forests of the west. In_ several 
respects they resemble Man more closely than do the other 
anthropoid apes. Although the male still possesses stronger 
canine teeth than the female, sexual dimorphism is nevertheless 
less marked than in the Gorilla. The skull is also elongated, 
but it lacks parietal and occipital crests, although the supra- 
orbital arches are prominent. Such morphological characters, 
together with the playfulness and intelligence of these apes, 
add a peculiar interest to the Chimpanzees. 

HuMAN BEINGS (or Homrntans) comprise one family only, 

Man andhig ‘educed in our day to the single genus Lomo, 

Group a genus the divisions of which have created 

(Hominians). more disagreement among naturalists than 
any other in all the class of mammals. | 

The divergences of the classifications of Modern Man are 
truly extraordinary: ranging from the monogenistic schemes 
of Linnzeus, Blumenbach, and Cuvier, with their four or five 
varieties or races of /YZomo sapiens, and incidentally that of 
Isidore Geoffroy Saint-Hilaire, with four principal types and 
twelve secondary races, to the modern schemes, such as that 
of de Quatrefages, with his five stems and eighteen branches, 
themselves dividing into numerous smaller branches; or 
that of Deniker, who recognizes twenty-nine races and sub- 
races; or the polygenistic scheme of Sergi, which includes 
three genera, eleven species and forty-one varieties or sub- 
varieties ; not to mention the composite scheme of Giuffrida- 
Ruggeri, etc.’ 


' Quatrefages, A. de, Lespice humaine: Introduction a [étude des races humatnes. 
Deniker, Races e¢ peuples de la Terre (Paris, 1900). Sergi, G., Le Ovrigini umane 
(Turin, 1912). Giuffrida-Ruggeri, Z’Uomo attuale (Milan, Rome, Naples, 1913). 


72 LIVING PRIMATES AND FOSSIL MONKEYS 


The discussions between ‘“‘ monogenists ” and “ polygenists, ” 
resulting in floods of ink, have never reached any settlement 
of a question which has been described, and with some reason, 
as ‘‘immaterial.” | 

Anthropologists have now returned to the ideas of the older 
naturalists, who divided Modern Man into three main groups : 
WuireE, YELLow (including Red-Skins), and BLack. 

According to the monogenists, these three divisions 
represent only races of the single species Homo sapzens. 
According to the polygenists, they are separate species. 
(1) Homo albus or Homo caucasicus (an old and quite 
inappropriate term), or //omo indo-europeus; (2) Homo flavus 
or H[. mongolicus ; (3) lomo niger or FH. ethiopicus. 

The sub-divisions of these three great groups are usually 
based much more upon community of language, religion, and 
morals, than on physical characteristics. They are most 
often merely ethnographical, a result due to the important 
part played by migration. Yet even if the hypothesis of the 
existence of several types, zoologically quite distinct in origin, 
be admitted, it is clear that innumerable minglings and 
crossings, repeated during thousands and thousands of years 
in complex ways, must have markedly reduced the primitive 
physical differences, and disguised them under a cloak of more 

orm characters. 

The anatomical differences separating Man, or the various 

SHEET EAD eae ies, Cll Man, from the highest monkeys, 

Differences the Anthropoid Apes, are numerous but of 

between Man different values. These differences we shall 
and Monkeys. have frequent occasion to cite, and we must 
que wa : 

therefore, now enumerate the most important.’ 

The most significant concerns the great development of the 
cerebral portion of the skull or brain-box, in which the brain is 
lodged, and the associated reduction in size of the facial 
part of the skull (Fig. 38). This relative development of the 

' For greater detail, see Huxley, Man's Place in Nature. Vogt, Carl, Lecons 
sur ?ffomme (¥r. trans., Paris, 1865 ; 2nd ed., 1878). [Lectures on Man; his place 
in Creation, etc., London, 1864]. Broca, P., L’Ordre des Primates (Paris, 1869). 


Topinard, P., Z’Homme dans la Nature (Paris, 1891). A good summary is to be 
found in Vianna de Lima, A., L’Homme selon le transformisme (Paris, 1888). 


MAN AND THE APES 73 





MAN 








LEMUR 


Fic. 38.—Comparative Morphology of the Skull, the Brain, and the Cervical Vertebrae of a 
Lemur, an Ape, and Modern Man. 

In the Pied Lemur (Lemur varius), the cerebral portion of the skull (shaded in figure) is small 
in relation to the facial part. The brain is not large; the cerebrum still lies in front of the 
cerebellum. The foramen magnum is situated at the hinder portion of the skull; the direction 
of the vertebral column is obviously in line with the axis of the brain. 

In the Ape (Chimpanzee), the cerebral portion of the skull is larger and the facial portion 
reduced. The brain is larger; the cerebrum has become complicated, and overlaps the 
cerebellum. _ The foramen magnum has moved nearer the base of the skull. The vertebral 
column is more oblique in relation to the axis of the brain; the cervical vertebrae have long 
spinous processes which stand at right angles to the bodies of the vertebrze. 

In Modern Man, the cerebral portion of the skull greatly exceeds the facial portion, here 
reduced to a minimum. The very large cerebrum, highly convoluted, overlaps and extends 
beyond the cerebellum. The foramen magnum occupies a still more forward position. The 
vertebral column forms a right angle with the base of the skull; the spinous processes of the 
cervical vertebrze are inserted obliquely on the vertebral bodies and are directed downwards. 


74 LIVING PRIMATES AND FOSSIL MONKEYS 


facial portion, that is to say of the mandibular region, 
connected with animal functions, and of the cerebral region, set 
apart for the noble or intellectual functions, is a zoological 
character of the first importance, as Cuvier long since pointed 
out: “Of all the animals, Man has the largest cranium and the 
smallest face; as animals deviate from these proportions, so 
they become more stupid or more fierce.” 

A second difference, related to the first, is the possession 
by Man of articulate language. This function implies not 
only a more highly organized brain, but also certain anatomical 
arrangements of the tongue and 
its surroundings which facilitate 
its working. 

Man and the Apes have the 
same dental formula, but there are 
differences in the size and shape of 
the various kinds of teeth. The 
principal difference relates to the 
size of the canines, which, highly 
| developed in the Apes, especially 
Fic. 39.—Dentitions, viewed from the side, in male individuals, are in Man 

oaMenanianAveCGuild Orctall so diminished in size that. they 

either do not exceed, or exceed 

only in slight degree, the general level of the other teeth 
(Fig. 39). This decrease in structures which had formerly 
served, for example in the Apes, as weapons of offence and 
defence, must have been effected very gradually, step by step 
with the attainment of the upright position, of the setting free 
of the fore-limbs, and of the correlated development of the brain. 

The perfectly erect attitude is characteristic of Man alone. 
The Anthropoid Apes, even the Gibbon, possess it only in 
an imperfect degree; and this incapacity is accounted for 
by anatomical differences. In Man, the vertebral column is 
inserted at the base of the skull, so that, in his normal upright 
position, the skull is almost naturally balanced on the first 
vertebra ; and thus the occipital foramen (foramen magnum) 
lies in a horizontal plane and is placed beneath the skull. In 
the Lemurs, as in almost all four-footed mammals, the axis 





MAN AND THE APES 75 


of the skull and of the vertebral column lie in line with each 
other, and the occipital foramen, placed almost in a vertical 
plane, occupies the hinder portion of the skull. In the true 
Monkeys the occipital foramen has begun to move towards 
the base of the skull; and in the Anthropoids it approaches, 
without actually attaining, the human position (Fig. 38). 


GORILLA 





Fic. 40.—Skull, Vertebral Column, and Pelvis of Man and of Gorilla. 


~ In the Gorilla, the vertebral column throughout its whole length only shows one single curve, 
concave in front ; its general direction is not vertical. The skull, with heavy face, falls forward, 
and has to be held back by powerful muscles and ligaments at the nape of the neck. The pelvis 
is narrow. 

In Man, the vertebral column shows several curves, alternately convex and concave in front 
(the arrows indicate the points where these curves change), in such a way that the whole forms a 
balanced system on which the head rests naturally in equilibrium, and which extends past the 
large pelvis in a likewise vertical direction towards the lower limbs. 


Certain differences in the vertebral column are also entailed 
by the more or less erect attitude (Fig. 40). In the Monkeys, 
whose body is always inclined forward, the column shows only 
two curves, a dorsal and a sacral, both concave in front. In 
the unborn or in the new-born human child, only these two 
curves occur. At a later stage childish endeavours to stand 
and walk erect induce a profound modification in the form of the 
spinal column, which before long shows four curves: a cervical 


76 LIVING PRIMATES AND FOSSIL MONKEYS 


curve, concave behind; a dorsal curve, concave in front; a 
lumbar curve, concave behind; and a sacral curve, concave in 
front. As these four curves follow each other alternately, in 
first one and then the other direction, the general trend of the 
column is vertical. In this manner, the weight of head and 
trunk bears principally upon the pelvis, and the direction of the 
resultant weight plainly falls in line with the general direction 
of the column, so that equilibrium in an erect posture becomes 
as easy as possible. Serres made these curves the special 
attributes of his ““ Human Kingdom.” 

These modifications in the curves, in their turn, entail 
modifications in the form of the vertebrae themselves, and 
particularly of their processes (apophyses), the direction and 
size of which are determined by muscular action. This is 
especially evident in the spinous processes of the cervical 





MAN CHIMPANZEE 

FIG, 41,—Comparative structures of the pelvis of Man and of an Ape (Chimpanzee). 
vertebrae. In consequence of this easy balance in Man which 
I have just described, the actions of the extensor muscles of 
the nape of the neck, of the spinal muscles, and of the 
cervical ligament may be, and indeed are, much less powerful 
in him than in quadrupeds, whose head and trunk tilt forward.. 
In Man and in the quadrupeds, then, the spinous processes 
differ both in their development and in their direction (Figs. 
38 and 40). And in these characters, Monkeys, and especially 
the Anthropoid Apes, are intermediate between the exclusively 
quadruped mammals and Man, the most perfect of the bipeds. 
Finally, the human races are not all exactly similar to each 
other, for the lower races, as we shall see later, still preserve 
certain characteristics of the stage now represented by the 
Anthropoid Apes, 


MAN AND THE APES (wi 


Further, the form of the pelvis also is correlated with the 
vertical position and erect walking. In Man, the haunch bones 
(ilia) are enlarged, widened, and spread out in the form of a 
bowl or basin, so offering easy support to the abdominal 
viscera. In Monkeys, the pelvis does not bear all the weight 
of the intestines, and the much narrower haunch bones are 
placed almost parallel to the sacrum, thus more closely re- 
sembling those of quadrupeds (Fig. 41). 

Another difference which Owen, the great English anatomist, 
considered to be fundamental, is the formation of the foot 





separated and much shorter than the others, is readily opposable 
to the latter and plays the part of a thumb. Thus the foot, 
physiologically speaking, has become a hand (whence the term 
Quadrumana). In Man, the great toe is the largest of the 
digits and is closely pressed against the others, to which it 
cannot be opposed. Here we have a true foot, that is to say, 
an organ for support; and this exclusive adaptation to a 
particular function is reflected in all the bones of the human 
foot, for their structures differ from those of the corresponding 
bones of the hind hand, or shall we say the prehensile foot of 
Anthropoid Apes. 

In spite of the existence of some transitional grades of 
structure, observed in certain Monkeys and Man, all these 
characters are practically so definite that there can be 
absolutely no confusion between the most highly-developed 
of living Monkeys and the lowest of living Men. 

It must therefore be acknowledged that zoology, the 
teaching of which I have just summarized, defines with 
tolerable clearness the boundaries of Man’s place in Nature. 


78 LIVING PRIMATES AND FOSSIL MONKEYS 


Can Paleontology supply any supplementary hints regarding 
the relationships between Monkeys and Man? To answer this 
question we must first review the discoveries bearing on fossil 
Monkeys, and this I shall now do briefly, in chronological order. 


Fossil Monkeys. 


The precursors of the great group of Primates appeared in 

The Eocene North America towards the base of the 

Primates. Eocene, almost at the beginning of the 
Tertiary era, when the archaic representatives of other orders 
of mammals also appeared. But for the most part they were 
still only generalized forms, difficult to dis- 
tinguish from some closely related groups, 
especially the Insectivores. 
oe Those best differentiated, however, bear 
Fic. 43.—Skull of a ag resemblance, in skull, dentition and brain, 

small Eocene Primate : ae ° ; 

- Anaptomorphus homun. to certain living Lemurs, and in particular 
culus, Natural size to the curious Tarsier of the Malay Archi- 
es pelago. The very interesting Axaptomorphus 

(Fig. 43) may be taken as an example of this highly evolved 

series. The famous paleontologist, Cope, was inclined to 

regard this fossil as the common ancestor of Monkeys and 

Man, because of the rounded form of its skull, and because, 

of all the Eocene mammals, it seemed to possess comparatively 

the largest brain. Perchance in the older deposits thete may 
yet be “ittstoxrazed forms more primitive still. 

In the Mid Eocene of the United States, the increase in 
numbers and differentiation of these early Lemurs becomes 
marked. The Anaptomorphus group, fruit-eaters, with rounded 
skulls, is represented by several genera. Other forms, such as 
Pelycodus, and Notharctus, omnivorous in diet and _posses- 
sing elongated skulls, show characters indicating evolutionary 
tendencies towards modern types.’ 

As there has not yet been observed the least trace of a 
well-defined Primate in the older deposits of other parts of the 





1 Osborn, H. F., “American Eocene Primates” (Bull, American Mus., xvi., 1902). 
Matthew, W. D., zdzd., xxxiv., 1915. Gregory, W. K., On the structure ant relAnons 
of Notharctus (Mem. A mer. Mus. N.S.) 1, 1920). 


EOCENE MONKEYS - 79 


world, we must suppose, pending further information, that the 
group originated in North America, or rather on a northern 
Americano- European continent, whose former existence is 
revealed by geology. Moreover, as the types which I have just 
described disappeared from America with the Upper Eocene, 
there must have been migrations in various directions. 

The oldest remains of authentic Old World Lemurs’ have 
been found in the Mid Eocene deposits of France and 
Switzerland. Their remains become abundant in the Upper 
Eocene and Lower Oligocene of Europe (Fig. 44). The rich 





FIG. 44.—Skull of a Lemur from the phosphorites at Quercy (Adafis magnus). ‘Three-fifths 
natural size. Palaeontological Gallery, French National Museum of Natural History. 


layers of phosphorites at Quercy have yielded, in a fine 
state of preservation, complete skulls of animals such as 
Necrolemur, Pronycticebus, and Adapis. 

Afterwards, having migrated to Asia, Africa, and especially 
Madagascar, these various types have persisted in these regions 
to the present day and have become differentiated : they divided 


1 Plesiadapis, from the lowest Eocene at Cernay, near Rheims, at first believed to 
be a Lemur, is also related to the Insectivores. Pvrofoadapis, from a level above the 
Lower Eocene, at first taken for a Lemur, was subsequently regarded as an Insecti- 
vore. To-day the tendency is to replace it among the Lemurs. Such examples 
show the difficulties which arise in classifying types of mammals with primitive and 
generalized characters. 

2 See especially Filhol, H., Recherches sur les Phosphorites du Quercy (Paris, 1877). 


80 LIVING PRIMATES AND FOSSIL MONKEYS 


into numerous branches, some of which thereafter developed 
into giant and specialized forms, such as the Megaladapis." 

The most ancient forms of the Primates likewise spread 
from North America to South America. It is probable that, - 
by the loss of a premolar, and the increase of their brain-box at 
the expense of their face, they became transformed into true 
Monkeys, the ancestors of the modern Flat - nosed Monkeys 
(Platyrrhinians). 

In an Oligocene or Miocene deposit in South America, 
known as the Sazx¢éa-Cruztan, there have actually been found 
remains of old-time Sapajous, to which the late Argentine 
paleontologist, Ameghino, attached the greatest importance, 
considering them ‘‘as the ancestors of all the monkeys of 
the Old and of the New Continent,” and even of Man. He 
gave them very expressive names: //omunculus patagonicus, 
Anthropops perfectus, and so on.” They are certainly interest- 
ing relics; but they are very fragmentary, and quite insufficient 
to support Ameghino’s far-reaching conclusions. For the 
present they may simply be regarded as ancestral forms of 
the modern Cebians or Flat-nosed (Platyrrhinian) Monkeys, a 
group the evolution and differentiation of which has taken 
place and is still in process in that very country. 

Although fossil monkeys are absolutely unknown in North 
America, Ameghino nevertheless announced the existence of 
higher monkeys in South America, on account of certain 
anatomical remains which have been the subject of much dis- 
cussion. The late paleontologist has described an atlas 
vertebra and a femur from Monte-Hermoso, which he considers 
a Miocene locality, but which the majority of geologists and 
paleontologists who have studied the sedimentary deposits of 
South America regard as scarcely even Pliocene. He sought 
to prove that these bones belonged to a creature which united 
his Homunculus to the genus /fomo, and which he named 
Tetraprothomo, attributing to it a stature of I to 1.10 metres. 


1 Grandidier, G., “ Recherches ‘sur les Lémuriens disparus” (Vouvelles Archives 
du Muséum, 1905). 

2 Ameghino, F., ‘Les formations sédimentaires du Crétacé supérieur et du 
Tertiaire de Patagonie” (Amales del Museo nacional de Buenos Altres, Xv., 
1906). 


OLIGOCENE MONKEYS 81 


He was thus led to conceive a complete new human phylogeny: 
Tetraprothomo was said to have been followed by 772prothomo, 
this by Dzprothomo, which was supposed to have given rise 
to Pyrothomo, from which in its turn would have arisen the 
genus /Zomo. We shall see later that these stages were purely 
figments of the imagination." 
To return to the Old World. Until recently it was im- 
Oligocene possible to affirm that the Catarrhine or 
Monkeys. J.ong-nosed Monkeys were very old in the 
geological sense of the word. Dog-faced Monkeys (Cyzo- 
morphs) and Anthropoid Apes seemed to appear simultaneously 
in the Miocene, and the first fossil anthropoids were even older 
than the known fossils of tailed monkeys. Such a state of 
affairs justified the expectation 
of important discoveries in the 
older deposits. About ten years 
ago one such discovery was made. 
The Eocene and Oligocene 
deposits at Fayum in Egypt 
are famous for their palzonto- 
logical treasures, and particularly 
for the remains of primitive 
Proboscidians, which form the 
subject of important works by 
Andrews. In 1910 Schlosser 
announced the discovery of re- Fic. 45.—Lower Jawbone of Propliopithecus 
mains of several Primates in the tk cacy ak hg ad 
Biemeeneuepositsat Fayum,and = *_>!de view, natural size. 
he has since published a detailed rT eee a Sean ew 
memoir on these curious fossils.’ 
Of the three species described, all of small size, as is usual 
in archaic forms, two bear some resemblance to the Eocene 
Lemurs of the United States, and some to the early Cebian 
Monkeys of South America. They are evidence of an evolu- 

















C, The same teeth enlarged two times. 


! For further details and bibliography, see that part of the last chapter of this 
book dealing with “ Fossil Man in South America.” 

* Schlosser, M., “ Beitraége zur Kenntnis des Oligoziinen Landsidugetiere aus dem 
Fayum” (Bettrage zur Paliontologie und Geologie Oesterreith-Ungarns, Xxiv., 1911). 
Résumé with figures in L’Anthropologie, xxiii., p. 417. 

F 


82 LIVING PRIMATES AND FOSSIL MONKEYS 


tionary stage from which may be derived, according to 
Schlosser, all the higher Primates, Man as well as Apes. 
The third species has been given the very suggestive name 
of Proplopithecus heckeli (Fig. 45). This monkey is repre- 
sented by two lower jawbones, and Schlosser considered it to 
be rae! closely related to the Gibbons (/P/ofzthecus) from the 
Mid Miocene deposits at 
Sansan and other localities. 
This form may possibly be a 
descendant from a species of 
the Anaptomorphus — group, 
which had passed perhaps 
through a Cebian stage, and 
os ae ee given. rise directly to Péo- 
Beg FS pithecus, trom which both the 
Anthropoids and Man may 
have been derived. 
é eee Certain of Schlosser’s views 
Pia 46. Lave: ln ot init rte chen Se 
profile and from above. Natural size. and of Man have been criti- 
ingore: canines: om atencles cized as being based on too 
Paleontological Gallery of the National incomplete evidence, and con- 
Natural History Museum of France. sequently as being very rash. 
Nevertheless one main fact is brought out in his work: the 
presence, in a Lower Tertiary, or at any rate an Oligocene 
deposit, of several generalized forms of true monkeys, and 
particularly of one form which might pass for a primitive type 
of Anthropoid Ape. 
The Miocene deposits of several countries have yielded 
fairly numerous remains of Monkeys which 






































Miocene as i ; a 
Monkeys. show most distinct affinities with living 
Pliopithecus. forms 


Phopithecus antiguus (Fig. 46), discovered by Edouard 
Lartet in 1837 at Sansan (see Chap. I.), and since found 
in certain contemporaneous deposits in several European 
countries, was related to the Gibbons,’ and we have just seen 


* Lartet, E., Comptes rendus de PAcadémie des Sciences (16th January and 
17th April (oy) 


MIOCENE MONKEYS 83 


that Schlosser regarded it as a direct descendant of the 
Egyptian Propliopithecus. 

Oreopithecus bamboliz, from Monte Bamboli, in Tuscany, 
first described by Gervais,’ and later by Ristori, bears some 
resemblance to the Dog - faced Monkeys (Cynomorphs), 
the Guenons (Cercopithecus), and the Anthropoid Apes 
(Fig. 47). | 

A geological horizon in South France, very like that at 
Sansan, the calcareous sand of Saint-Gaudens, 
has yielded several remains of a large Monkey. 
A jawbone was first described in 1856 by Edouard Lartet 


Dryopithecus. 




















FIG. 47.—Lower Jawbone of Oreopithecus bambolii from the Miocene deposits of 
Tuscany, seen in profile and from above. Natural size. 


7, incisors ; 3, 4f, premolars ; Ia, 2a, 3a, molars. After A. Gaudry. 


under the name Dyryopzthecus fontant.2 This find caused a 
great sensation, for Edouard Lartet and Albert Gaudry declared 
that Dryopithecus was more closely akin to Man than any 
other known monkey.’ But in 1890, the discovery of a more 
complete and better preserved lower jawbone (Fig. 48) enabled 


1 Gervais, P., Zoologie et Paléontologie générales, 2nd series, 1876, p. 9. 

= Lartet, E., “‘ Note sur un grand Singe fossile qui se rattache au groupe des 
Singes supérieurs” (Comptes rendus de Académie des Sciences, xiiii., 28th July 
1856). 

3 Gaudry, A., Les enchainements du monde animal. Mammtteres iertiatres 
(Paris, 1878, p. 236). 


84 LIVING PRIMATES AND FOSSIL MONKEYS 


Gaudry! to show that this fossil monkey was in reality 
lower in the scale of life than the large living anthropoids. 
Fragments of even less significance, most ofteos no more than 
isolated teeth, have been found in other European countries. 
_ Anthropodus from the “bonherz” in Swabia, examined by 
Schlosser, Gryphopithecus from Hungary, described by Abel, 
both known only from minute 
fragments, seem also to be con- 
nected either with Dyryopithecus 
or with closely related forms. 

The Upper Miocene at Ep- 
pelsheim yielded a femur to 
which the name /Péohylobates 
(= Paidopithex) was given, and 
this appears to have belonged 
to a monkey considered by 
some to be related to the 
Gibbons and by others to 
Dryoprthecus. 

Gaudry’s excavations at Pi- 
kermi, in Greece, from 1853 





Fic. 48. —Lower Jaw of Dryopithecus fontant, 
from Saint-Gaudens. Three-quarters y j 
natural size. Paleontological Gallery of to 1860, yielded the remains 


National Nat. Hist. Museum of France. 


of twenty - five individuals of 
Mesopithecus pentelict, and enabled him to reconstruct the first 
known skeleton of a fossil monkey (Fig. 49). The famous 
paleontologist was able to determine the affinities of 
Mesopithecus, and to show that it represented a form 
combining two modern types: for whilst its limbs were like 
those of a Macaque, its teeth resembled those of the Sacred 
Indian Ape (Semnopithecus). ° 
The Siwalik Hills, chains of hills or mountains in 
Fossil Monkeys Northern India, foothills of the Himalayas, 
of the Siwalik are well known to paleontologists on account 
ee of the rich faunas of fossil vertebrates con- 
tained in their layers, the age of which varies from Mid 


1 Gaudry, A., “Le Dryopithéque” (A/ém. de la Soc. géolog. de France, 
Paléontologie, No. 1, Paris, 1890). 
2 Gaudry, A., Antmaux fossiles et géologie de P Attique (Paris, 1862). 


SIWALIK FOSSIL MONKEYS 85 


Miocene to Upper Pliocene. These faunas include several 
species of monkeys which have been studied by two English 
paleontologists, Lydekker and Pilgrim.’ 

Some are Dog-faced Monkeys (Cyzomorphs), two are 
Sacred Indian Apes (Semnopzthecus), two, Short-tailed Baboons, 
in addition to a Macaque, and a Cercopithecus. Others, 
more interesting in connection with the present discussion, 
belong to several genera of Anthropoid Apes (Szmzzde), and 
these all lived towards the end of Miocene times. 





‘Fic. 49.—Skeleton of Fossil Monkey, Mesopithecus pentedict, from Upper Miocene 
at Pikermi in Greece. About one-sixth natural size. (After A. Gaudry). 


First of all, there is the European genus Dryofithecus, 
rediscovered by Pilgrim in the Siwalik Hills, where it is 
represented by three species, one of them a giant of its kind 
(D. giganteus). \f to these three species be added the 
European forms, the genus Dyryopithecus seems to embrace 
a group of Anthropoid Apes having manifold variations and 
forming a special branch now extinct. Certain of its smaller 
branchlets appear to have been fairly closely related to modern 
Chimpanzees and Gorillas, with, however, certain rather more 
primitive characters. Others would seem to have been more 
closely related, judging at least from the characters of their 
dentition, to the human stock,as Lartet and Gaudry first believed. 
A similar opinion has been expressed during the last few years 

1 Lydekker, R., “Indian Tertiary and Post-Tertiary Vertebrata” (Palcontologia 


Indica, series x., vol. iv., 1886). Pilgrim, G. E., ‘‘ New Siwalik Primates” (Records 
Geological Survey of India, x\v., 1915). 


86 LIVING PRIMATES AND FOSSIL MONKEYS 


by Gregory in America and by Sera in Italy.’ Dyryopzthecus 
would seem then to have been an ancestral and synthetic form. 

Further there is the genus Padeosimia, which may be 
considered a direct progenitor or collateral relation of the 
Orangs (Sima); and also the genus Paleopithecus, first 
associated by Lydekker with the Chimpanzees, which seems, 
however, to have some affinity with Dvyopethecus, and according 
to Gregory, may be closely related to the Gorillas. 





FIG. 50.—Portion of Right Lower Jaw of Sivapithecus indicus from the 
Siwalik Hills. Natural size. (After Pilgrim.) © 
There is finally the curious genus Szvapzthecus, recently 
discovered and described by Pilgrim, who has 
| not hesitated to place this new fossil Primate 
among the Hominians. It is only known from some isolated 
teeth and two jaw fragments, by means of which Pilgrim has 


Sivapithecus. 


1 Gregory, W. K., ‘‘Studies on Evolution of the Primates” (Bull. of . the 
American Museum, xxxv., 1916). Sera, G. L. “La Testimonia dei fossili 
Antropomorfi per la questione dell’ origine dell?’ Uomo ” (Atti della Societa ttaliana di 
Screnze naturalt, \vi., 1917). 


SIWALIK FOSSIL MONKEYS | 87 


attempted the restoration of the lower jaw (Figs. 50-52). 
The general form of the latter more resembles the human form 
than the jaw of any other anthropoid ape, living or fossil. It 
has, indeed, the canine of an anthropoid ape, but the true 
molars in their general appearance are more human in type 
than those of any known ape. 

Pilgrim has no doubt that the characters of the lower 





Fic. 51.—Fragment of Left Lower Jawbone of Szvapithecus, with the 
canine in place. Natural size. (After Pilgrim.) 


jawbone of Szvapzthecus justify the conclusion that this fossil 
belonged to the direct progenitors of the human race, a con- 
clusion the importance of which contrasts with the slightness of 
the evidences on which it is based. Lydekker, who was the 
first to study the fossil monkeys of the Siwalik Hills, at once 
raised doubts as to the value of the new genus, and questioned 
whether it might not be the lower dentition of his Padeopithecus, 
of which only the upper dentition was known. For my part, 


88 LIVING PRIMATES AND FOSSIL MONKEYS 


I have called attention to the fact that, apart from the presence 
of a strong canine, the characters which truly distinguish apes 
from Man occur in the skull and the extremities—that is to say, 
in parts of the skeleton which in the case of the genus Szva- 
pithecus are still unknown to us, and in consequence its place in 
the classification cannot yet be established with any certainty.” 

More recently, Gregory has keenly criticized the restora- 
tion made by his English colleague and has opposed his 
conclusions. He does not admit that Szvapzthecus should be 
classified with the Humans, and considers it rather to be closely 





FIG. 52.—Restoration of the Lower Jawbone of Sivapithecus indicus. 
Half natural size. (After Pilgrim.) 


allied to Dryopithecus and to the Orang. In his turn he also 
has attempted a restoration of the fossil jaw, and has succeeded 
in creating a form much more like the jaw of a female Orang 
than that of the most primitive human being. 

Pilgrim’s researches are nevertheless most interesting. They 
show that, during the Miocene period, Asia was inhabited by 
Anthropoid Apes, with characters diverging in all directions, 
and perhaps even in a certain degree, as in the case of 
Dryopithecus and Sivapithecas, towards the human type. In 
any case, they have made known to us a new type, exhibiting, 
in its lower jaw and its dentition, certain characters 
representing a new morphological transition between the 
Anthropoids and Man. These are valuable results, on which 
I shall have occasion elsewhere to lay stress. 


‘ For more detail, see the critical analysis which I have made of. Pilgrim’s 
Memoir, in L’ Anthropologie, vol. xxvi., 1915, p. 397: 


PLIOCENE AND QUATERNARY MONKEYS 89 


Returning to Europe, we find that the Pliocene deposits 

Pliocene ang CoMtain fairly numerous remains of monkeys, 
Quaternary | but now, even more than in previous ages, we 

Monkeys. have to deal only with animals closely akin to 
the genera and even to the species of the present day: 
Macaques from Montpellier andthe Vald’Arno; Dotichopithecus 
from Perpignan, akin to AZesopzthecus from Pikerm1 ; and Semno- 
pithecus from Montpellier and Italy. 

During the Lower Pleistocene period, monkeys very near to 

the modern Macaques or even identical with them, lived in 
various parts of Europe—in England, in Wurtemberg, in the 
Pyrenees, and in Sardinia. Here the difference is reduced to 
nothing more important than a difference in the geographical 
distribution of the species. 
Until recent times, we had no knowledge of Anthropoid 
Apes from European Pliocene or Quaternary deposits. When 
we come to discuss the fossil remains found at Piltdown in 
England, and attributed to a man of extremely primitive type, 
Eoanthropus, we shall see that there is occasion to make an 
important distinction; the jaw of Loaxthropus is perhaps only 
the jaw of a Chimpanzee, for which I have suggested the name 
Troglodytes dawsonr, and which an American geologist proposes 
to call Pax vetus. It seems that a tooth found in the alluvials 
at Taubach, near Weimar, and attributed by Wehring to Man, 
is likewise the tooth of a Chimpanzee. 

We see that paleontological discoveries concerning monkeys 
are comparatively scarce. We must confess 
that, in contrast to the case in other orders of 
mammals, for example the Perissodactyles or the Proboscidians, 
paleontology has rendered but feeble assistance in the work 
of reconstructing the history of the Primates. Here zoology 
has supplied many more facts than paleontology, for nature 
at the present day shows more variations and a far greater 
abundance of transitional forms than in past time—at least 
so far as the past has been revealed to us. 

Paleontology, nevertheless, does contribute a few to the 
number of transitional forms, and, moreover, unfolds a scheme 
of evolution conforming almost exactly with the zoological order. 


Conclusions. 


90 LIVING PRIMATES AND FOSSIL MONKEYS 


To begin with, it shows us the first Primates in the form of 
small creatures, confined to a northern Americano-European 
continent, and of so generalized a type as to render it difficult 
sometimes to distinguish them from certain small contemporary 
mammals which must be regarded as the starting-point of 
other orders, such as the Insectivores. Further, it helps us 
to group these first types in the world, and to understand 
their correlative differentiation. It helps us to comprehend, 
for example, how certain of them were able to surmount the 
Lemur stage, and to give birth in South America to the 
Flat-nosed (Platyrrhine) Monkeys, which have since remained 
independent and isolated. Paleontology has discovered at 
Fayum the remains of several animals with synthetic characters, 
and so has revealed certain ancestral forms, in several cases 
of Long-nosed (Catarrhine) Monkeys, and in one case of the 
Anthropoid Apes. Thus it proves the great antiquity of the 
splitting off of the different ancestral branches. Much later, 
after a period of differentiation regarding which we have no light 
whatever, we see appearing in the Old World certain monkeys 
closely related to living monkeys, and representing transitional 
forms between their various types. There is the A/esopzthecus 
of Pikermi, which links the Macaques to the Indian Apes 
and their kind (Semnopzthecus); there is Ovreopithecus, which 
seems to be connected both with the dog-faced monkeys 
(Cynomorphs) and the man-like monkeys (Anthropomorphs); 
there are the species of Dryofithecus, as well as Paleopithecus, 
and Szvapithecus, in which are found associated, characters 
now scattered among several species of Anthropoids. 

It must be confessed, however, that paleontology has not 
yet revealed any indisputable transitional form, any material 
proof of a hereditary connection between the ape form and the 
human form, for we cannot attribute any conclusive value 
to the Homunculus of Ameghino, or the Axthropodus of 
Schlosser. The significance that the latter scientist attributes 
to Propliopithecus is quite hypothetical. Szvapzthecus is still 
only a monkey, although it shows very interesting tendencies 
towards the human structure. How Prthecanthropus must be 
regarded in this respect, we shall soon see. 


CONCLUSIONS 91 


Paleontological evidences relating to the higher Primates 

Poverty of | are not only very rare, they are also extremely 
Paleontological poor. Apart from Mesopithecus and Dolcho- 

Material. — pithecus, of which we have almost complete 
skeletons, but which are relatively of little interest from the 
point of view concerning us here, since their intimate relation- 
ship is with modern tailed monkeys, we possess only minute 
fragments, at most some incomplete jawbones. ‘This poverty 
of material is not only regrettable in itself; there is a danger 
that it may lead to serious error. [It may be said that 
practically every day we learn, often at the expense of our 
pride as paleontologists, that incomplete evidences must be 
interpreted with great caution; that the famous law of the 
correlation of characters, formulated by Cuvier, of which it has 
been so often said that it enabled him to reconstruct an entire 
fossil by means of one single bone of its skeleton, is very 
often at fault; that nature takes a kind of pleasure in varying 
combinations in the most unforeseen manner, and that she 
produces associations of characters expressly made to lead 
astray such naturalists as still retain absolute faith in the 
attractive Cuvierian legend. 

In reality, in order fully to appreciate the nature of a fossil 
animal, and to assign to it its true place in the group to which 
it belongs, mere fragments of bone are in most cases insufficient. 
It is necessary to have skeletons, or at least complete skulls, 
especially when, as in the present case of very compact groups, 
there are numerous closely related forms which differ from each 
other only in fine degrees of structure, and that not always in 
the same parts of the skeleton. Perhaps, indeed, these shades 
of difference would not seem to us of so great importance were 
they possessed by creatures more distantly related to us than 
the apes. 

Therefore, even if a chance discovery were to put us in 
possession of a fragment of a creature forming a stage in the 
descent of Man, it might happen that we were not in a position 
to recognize its true nature from the single fragment. And 
on the other hand, owing to the occurrence of physiological 
convergence, another fragment of the same kind might show 


92 LIVING PRIMATES AND FOSSIL MONKEYS 


characters which we should be tempted to regard as human 
characters, or as tending towards such, whereas examination of 
fragments less incomplete would save us from this error. 

Such observations as these are not encouraging ; they con- 
demn paleontologists to a fate to which they have long since 
become resigned, but which is none the less hard. 

Be this as it may, the advance of our science is dependent 
on chance discoveries or on the importance of systematic 
explorations. The Jatter, however, are very expensive. Public 
authorities, at least in France, have not yet shown as much 
interest in this kind of work as it deserves; they are more 
concerned, and increasingly so as time goes on, with sciences 
of a utilitarian character. Further, paleontological explorations 
planned with a view to discovering remains of fossil monkeys 
are particularly uncertain in their results. Even in beds very 
rich in bones of mammals, the remains of Primates are extremely 
rare, and this because of the more or less arboreal life which 
these animals lead, of the relatively small number of individuals, 
and of conditions which enable their skeletons more easily to 
escape fossilization. For three years Filhol, on behalf of the 
French National Museum of Natural History, carried out con- 
siderable excavations in the Miocene bone-layers at Sansan, 
in the hope of discovering therein skeletons or portions of 
skeletons of Pliopethecus or Dyryopithecus. He came across 
not the smallest fragment. The material difficulties are thus 
very considerable, and the slight resources hitherto placed 
at the disposal of paleontology are quite insufficient to 
overcome them. 


REO Thos iV. 


) 


PITHECANTHROPUS—THE ‘‘ APE-MAN’ 


We have just stated that palaontology has not yet revealed 
the existence of a fossil ape which perceptibly lessens the gulf 
between the living apes and Man. In spite of certain indica- 
tions deduced from the structures of the teeth, we have no 
justification, up to the present, for declaring that there have 
existed fossil apes more highly organized than the large living 
Anthropoids. Readers already familiar with the great questions 
of palzontology will be sure to object that, in so saying, I have 
taken no account of Prthecanthropus. 

The discovery of this celebrated fossil was one of the most 
sensational made in the domain of natural science during the 
course of the nineteenth century. Regarded as representing 
the long-sought transition stage from Ape to Man—the “ Ape- 
Man,” pzthecos-anthropos—it has given rise to many lengthy 
discussions. I have thought it necessary to devote a special 
chapter to it, not only because of its importance, but also 
because many naturalists separate P2thecanthropus from the 
Apes and range it among the human beings, or Hominians. 

In Java there have long been known certain deposits, partly 

Story ofthe of volcanic origin, which contain bones of 

Discovery. fossil mammals. In 1890, Eugéne Dubois, 
a Dutch army doctor, was commissioned by his government 
to explore these layers. His work lasted for several years and 
was most fruitful in results; for besides enormous quantities 
of bones of various animals, there were found the remains of 
a large Primate—a skull-cap, a femur, and two teeth. In 1894, 
Dubois published a monograph! on his discovery, and its title 
summarizes its principal conclusion, that this newcomer into the 

1 Dubois, E., “ Pithecanthropus erectus, eine menschenaehnliche Uebergangsform 


aus Java.” In 4to with 2 plates. (Batavia, 1894.) 
93 


94. PITHECANTHROPUS—THE “ APE-MAN ” 


world of fossils represents the “intermediate form between 
the Anthropoids and Man,” implied by the doctrine of evolu- 
tion; it is the “precursor of Man.” The following is the 
diagnosis which the author gives of the new creature; it is of 
both generic and specific significance :— 


“ PITHECANTHROPUS ERECTUS.—Skull much larger, absolutely 
and also relatively to the body mass, than in the large apes, but less 
bulky than in Man; cerebral capacity about two-thirds that of Man. 
Inclination of the nuchal plane of the occiput much greater than in the 
large apes. Dentition different from that of the latter, although of 
archaic form. Femur of human dimensions and suited for walking in 
the upright position.” 


Dubois’ memoir was everywhere read, commented upon, and 
discussed. Palzontologists and anthropologists all the world 
over published their opinions or impressions, so that the list 
of works relating to Pzthecanthropus soon became considerable.’ 
At the International Zoological Congress held at Leyden in 
1896, in spite of certain divergences of opinion, there was 
unanimous agreement in recognizing the great interest of the 

. ° e &. ° . . 
Dutch scientist’s discovery, and in regretting the insufficiency 
of the relics brought to light. On every hand the wish was 
expressed that new explorations might soon be undertaken to 
supply additional information. 

In 1906, Mme. Selenka, the widow of a German zoologist, 
and author of important researches on the embryology of the 
Anthropoid Apes, organized, at great expense, a scientific 
expedition to Java to prosecute new investigations. These 

1 The following are the most important of these works: Manouvrier, L., ‘ Dis- 
cussion du Pithecanthropus erectus comme précurseur présumé de Homme” (Lu//. 
Soc. @’ Anthrop. de Paris, 1895); “ Deuxieme étude sur le Pzthecanthropus” (Lbid.) ; 
“Réponse aux objections contre le Pithecanthropus” (Ibid., 1896). Virchow, R., 
“* Pithecanthropus erectus Dubois” (Zezts. f. Ethnologie, xxvii., 1895). Dubois, E., 
“ Pithecanthropus erectus, eine menschenaehnliche Uebergangsform” (Congres intern. 
de Zool., Leyden, 1896). Houzé, M., “ Le Pithecanthropus erectus Dubois” (Bull. Soc. 
a@’ Anthrop. de Bruxelles, xiv. and xv., 1896). Marsh, O. C., “On Pithecanthropus 
erectus from the Tertiary of Java” (American Jour. of Scz., \., 1896). Martin, R., 
Weitere Bemerkungen zur Pithecanthropus-Frage (Zurich, 1896). Schwalbe, G., 
“Studien tiber Pzthecanthropus erectus Dubois” (Zetts. f. Morphol. und Anthrop,, i., 
1899). Berry, R. J. A., and Robertson, A. W. D., “The place in Nature of the Tas- 


manian aboriginal as deduced from a study of the calvarium” (Proc. Roy. Soc., 
Edinburgh, xxxi., 1910). 


THE SITE OF PITHECANTHROPUS 95 


lasted eighteen months. The precise spot where the remains 
of Prthecanthropus had been exhumed was easily found, thanks 
to a little commemorative monument which Dubois had had 
erected. Around this site the soil was dug out to a depth of 
I2 metres, and more than 10,000 cubic metres of earth removed. 
The expedition was thus enabled to garner important collections 
of fossil animals, which now rest in the Museums of Berlin and 
Munich ; in addition, numerous observations on the geology of 
Java were made; but the principal object was not attained—not 
the least relic of Pzthecanthropus could be found. The scientific 
results of this campaign were recorded in a volume published 
in 1911 by the efforts of Mme. Selenka and M. Blanckenhorn.’ 






BATAVIA 









Semarang Soerabaya 


Fic. 53.—The Island of Java. The shaded square corresponds to the part 
shown in more detail in Fig. 54. 


The most important of the results, worked out by numerous 
specialists, deal with the geology and paleontology of the 
region of Trini]. The interest of these new observations lies 
in the determination of the age of the deposit, a question of 
prime importance, which must first be considered. 

The deposit in question occurs at Trinil, a village situated 

Study ofthe near the town of Ngawi, on the banks of the 

Deposit. river Solo, or Bengawan, at the foot of the 
great volcano Lawou-Koukousan, whose terminal cone, still 
active, rises to a height of 3254 metres (Figs. 53-55). This 
volcano, like all the volcanoes of Java, rises from a substratum 
of Tertiary deposits of marine origin. At its base “occur 
layers of sand, cinders, and volcanic lapilli, rearranged by 
fierce streams of water descending from the volcano, as 
well as tuffs, and clays of more or less fluviatile origin ; 


1 Selenka, L., and Blanckenhorn, M., Die Pithecanthropus-Schichten auf Java. 
Geologische und paleontologische Ergebnisse der Trinil-Expedition, etc., vol. in 4to , 
with plates (Leipzig, 1911). 


—- 96 PITHECANTHROPUS—THE “ APE-MAN” 


these are spread over great expanses, sometimes attaining 
350 metres in thickness, and resting unconformably on more 
ancient marine formations. The section illustrated here (Fig. 56), 
shown in somewhat diagrammatic fashion as in the Selenka 
publication, gives the details of the beds forming the bank 





a d ‘Sy 


HT Let] Tertiary Lava | | Ashes and tuffs. 


Fic. 54.—Geological Map of the volcano Lawou-Koukousan and its surroundings. 
Scale, I : 1,250,000. (After Verbeck.) 


Trinil is 5 kilometres to the south of Paron, at point T. Inset on left of map, 
site on scale of I : 1,000,000, P, point where /:/hecanthropus was found. 


of the river Solo, at the very spot where the remains of 
Pithecanthropus lay. 

The layers contain many fossils of all kinds: plant 
impressions ; molluscan shells, Uxz0, Corbicula, and Melanza, 
belonging to species, with one exception, -still, living in the 
country ; vertebrate bones, of fishes, reptiles, and mammals. 
Mammals formed a very rich fauna; Elephants, including one 
or two species of the primitive genus Stegodox; Rhinoceros and 
Tapir; a Hippopotamus with archaic characters; ruminants, 
antlered and horned, among them a Pliocene genus, Leffodos, 
still showing relationship to the Antelopes; carnivores, especially 
of the cat tribe; a giant Pangolin, a monkey (Macaque), and, 


THE SITE OF PITHECANTHROPUS 97 


finally, P2zthecanthropus. This fauna includes several new 
genera, and almost all its species are different from existing 
species. Its affinities with the faunas of India show that at 








Fic. 55.—The Pithecanthropus bed on the bank of the river Solo. The spot of the discovery 
is indicated by a white cross. (From a photograph in Mme. Selenka’s work.) 
the period when the animals at Trinil lived in Java, this island 
was united to the Asiatic continent. 
It was in the layer containing lapilli (‘‘ dove Zayer” in section, 


- 














ae = Sandy Volcanic 
PITHECANTHROPUS - Turf, 
aes A cE TAT 
1 

© Rae a Siiceous Velcon JULE 

5 ; a Broan VP 
O/o Riv. ape - Grey Tiff with fresh-water shells. 
Seer sara a F Lat — > 
- TTT ee ey _>. Hard Tufts, streaked with white. 
——— MU na = rcies with plant remarrs. 
: - ie: 5 Ont. ox init ao one Bed. 


_ ee hars conglomerate 
with volcanic materts/ 





== -~ Marine beds 
with coral reefs. 


Fic. 56.—Geological section of the Pithecanthropus bed. 


Fig. 56) that the remains of P2thecanthropus were found by 
Dubois, all at the same level: first, in September 1891, one 
of the teeth; a month afterwards, the skull-cap, 1 metre 


distant from the tooth; the following year, in August 1892, 
G 


fu 


98 PITHECANTHROPUS—THE “ APE-MAN” 


the femur, 15 metres from the skull, and a little later, a 
second tooth, 3 metres from the skull. 

Dubois, founding his conclusions on the similarity between 

The Ageof the fossil fauna of Trinil and that of the 

Pithecanthropus. upper deposits of the Siwalik Hills in India, 
attributed the Pzthecanthropus layer to the Upper Pliocene. 
The underlying marine conglomerate, containing only 53 per 
cent. of existing species of molluscs, he regarded as Miocene. 
These conclusions have been disputed by several members of 
the Selenka expedition, particularly by the geologists Volz, 
Elbert, and Carthaus, who, following the conchologist Martin, 
regard the marine deposits as Pliocene, and the formation of 
the river sands and of the lapilli as Quaternary. This is also 
the opinion of Schuster, who studied the imprints of fossil 
plants from the same bed. Blanckenhorn summarizing the 
findings of his various collaborators, is of opinion that the 
Pithecanthropus layer may be ascribed to that period of 
transition which up till now has been termed the Z&dephas 
meridionalts stage of the Upper Pliocene.’ 

The differences of opinion between Dubois and _his 
Opponents are more apparent than real. They rest chiefly 
on differences in the definition of the limits of the Tertiary 
and Quatérnary. The summit of the Upper Pliocene and the 
base of the Lower Quaternary are obviously the same thing, 
for the line of separation between these two consecutive terms 
of our geological nomenclature is nothing but a mere mental 
concept. It must, nevertheless, always be remembered that, in 
the opinion of German scientists, the post-dating of the Trinil 
bed is opposed to the idea that Pzthecanthropus is the ancestor 
of Man, who has been recognized, with all his attributes, since 
the dawn of Quaternary times. I myself consider that the 
study of the fossil mammals, the most conclusive evidence in 
the present case, argues rather in favour of Dubois’ opinion. 


' Some wished to go further. As the fossil plants seem to indicate a somewhat 
colder, and in particular a moister climate than the present climate of Java, they 
have attributed the formation of the fossil-bearing deposits to a rainy epoch, and 
endeavoured further to correlate this epoch with the first Glacial Period in Europe. 
Comparisons of this kind between deposits situated at such distances are 
exceedingly rash. 


CHARACTERS OF THE REMAINS 99 


Let us now study the bone-remains of P2thecanthropus.' 
These remains are completely fossilized, as are the bones of 
the animals which accompany them. Their density is con- 
siderable: the femur weighs almost double the weight of the 
femur of a modern man of the same size. 

The skull-cap (Fig. 57) measures 0.185 metres in length 
and 0.130 metres at its greatest breadth, 
which gives a cephalic index of 70, and places 
the skull in the dolichocephalic group.” In spite of its 
large dimensions, it presents at first sight a simian aspect, 
due especially to flattening in a vertical direction. 

We may estimate the capacity of the whole skull at about 
850 cubic centimetres. As, in normal Man, even amongst 
the primitive races, this capacity very rarely falls below 
1000 cubic centimetres, and as in the largest anthropoid apes 
it scarcely ever exceeds 600 cubic centimetres, the volume of 
the skull of Pzthecanthropus is intermediate between that of the 
highest Apes and of the lowest Man. The weight of-the brain 
must have been about 750 grammes. 

The bones of the cranial vault are so fused that the sutures 
can no longer be distinguished. The anterior supra-orbital 
portion of the frontal bone exhibits a continuous ridge, a kind 
of rim similar to that which occurs in Gibbons and Chimpanzees. 
Behind this rim the forehead is very narrow and receding, 
more receding than in the Chimpanzee. The frontal bone 
has a slight keel on the median line, but the skull lacks any 
trace of the sagittal crest possessed by the largest anthropoid 
apes, the Orang and the Gorilla. On the contrary the 


The Skull-Cap. 


1 To the four relics already mentioned: skull-cap, two upper molars and a 
femur, there must be added a premolar found after Dubois’ departure. This 
scientist is also said to have discovered later, a good many kilometres distant, 
a fragment of the chin region of a jawbone. These two latter pieces have not been 
described. 

2 The cephalic index is the ratio of the greatest breadth of a skull to its greatest 
breadth x 100 
length 
the smallest indices (below 75); short or dvachycephalic skulls have the largest 
indices (above 80) ; the medium group is called the mesocephalic or mesaticephalic 
group (between 75 and 80). In other words, when a skull is said to be dolicho- 
cephalic, it means that its breadth equals about 75 per cent. of its length, while the 
breadth of a brachycephalic skull equals at least 80 per cent. of its length, and so on. 


length, multiplied by 1oo: Elongated or dolichocephalic skulls have 


100 PITHECANTHROPUS—THE “ APE-MAN” 


temporal lines are not very prominent and are widely separated 
from one another, as in the Gibbons, Chimpanzees, and Man, 





Fic. 57.—The Bone-Remains of Pithecanthropus. 
The skull-cap, seen from above and in profile, about one-third natural size. The femur, 
front view and profile, about one-fourth natural size. The third upper right true molar, in profile 
and the crown, natural size. (After Dubois.) 


and this indicates relatively slight temporal muscles and mandi- 
bular apparatus. According to Keith,! the fronto-malar region 
is that of an ape and in no respect resembles that of a Man. 


1 Keith, A., Zhe Antiquity of Man, p. 264 (London, 1915). 


CHARACTERS OF THE REMAINS 101 


The nuchal plane, formed by the occipital bone, is more 
inclined than in the anthropoid apes, and less inclined than 
in Man. Following Dubois, various anatomists, particularly 
Manouvrier, have rightly laid stress on the presence of the 
protuberance, here somewhat 
less but still continuous, which 
in apes unites the occipital, @ 
temporal, and supra - mastoid 
crests (créte tnto-mastotdienne r 
of Topinard, or créte tenporo- 
occiprtale of Manouvrier). This 
protuberance is always widely 
interrupted in Man, even in 
types which appear to us 
most primitive—even in micro- 
cephalics (Fig. 58). 

Taken as a _ whole, these 
structures are very similar 
to those of Chimpanzees and 
Gibbons. Dubois has said that 
the skull of Purthecanthropus 
might be compared to a 
Gibbon skull enlarged to twice 
its size. Figs. 59 and 60 show 
that, in its principal characters, 
the Trinil skull-cap is really Fic. 58—Sketch showing by a thick dark 
intermediate between that of line the continuity of the occipito-temporal 


ridge in the skulls of a Chimpanzee, and 
an ape, like the Chimpanzee, of Pithecanthropus. In the skull of a man 


and that of a man of really % pinitve s La ChaplleaurSxins 
low status, such as Neanderthal and occipital ridge (b.o.) are already dis- 
Man. continuous. 

A cast of the interior of the skull-cap enabled Dubois 
to gain an idea of the brain that had been 
contained therein. The convolutions, less 
simple than those of the Gibbons, seem already to be of 
the human type, an opinion shared by an eminent English 
specialist, Elliot Smith. But if the centres of sensation are 


well developed, as in apes, the association centres are much 


CHIMPANZEE 





PITHECANTHROPUS 





NEANDERTHAL MAN FROM LA CHAPELLE 


The Brain. 


102 PITHECANTHROPUS—THE “ APE-MAN” 


less developed than in Man. The frontal region, the site of 
the higher faculties, the noblest from the psychical point of 
view, is particularly reduced in size. The inferior frontal 
convolution, double that of a Chimpanzee or of an Orang, is 





Fic. 59.—Skulls: (1) of a Chimpanzee ; (2) of Pithecanthropus ; (3) of Neanderthal 
Man, seen from above and on the same scale (about one-fifth natural size). 


only half that of a European. In his brain, as well as in his 
skull, Pethecanthropus then may truly be considered as inter- 
mediate between the large apes and Man. Dubois declares 
that he may have had a rudimentary articulate language. 


FRENCH 





FIG. 60.—Superimposed profiles of the Skulls of a Chimpanzee, of Prthecanthropus, of 
Neanderthal Man, and of a modern Frenchman. About one-third natural size. 


The teeth found are three in number: a premolar which 
has never been figured; two last upper true 
molars (wisdom teeth), one of which, almost 
intact, is from the right side (Figs. 57 and 61), while the 
other, from the left side, is much worn and must have belonged 


The Teeth. 


CHARACTERS OF THE REMAINS 103 


to an older individual. These teeth were found separately, 
at various intervals of time and space. Each is of larger 
proportions than the corresponding human tooth, even if they 
be compared with the largest dentitions, such as those of the 
Australians. The true molars have strong, very divergent 
roots, a simian character; on the other hand, their crowns are 
relatively more developed in a transverse than in a longitudinal 
direction, and this may be regarded as a human character. In 
short, these teeth differ both from those of Man and from 
those of living or fossil apes (Fig. 61); but their greatest 





ORANG PITHECANTHROPUS AUSTRALIAN 


Fic. 61.—Last true upper molars (“‘ wisdom teeth’’) from the right side of an 
Orang, of Prthecanthropus, and of an Australian aboriginal. One and a 
half times natural size. (After Gregory.) 


similarities are with those of the Orang, and, according to 
Gregory,’ of Dryopithecus. They are thus definitely simian. 

~The left femur (Fig. 57) is complete. It measures 0.455 m. 
in length; if it really belonged to a Man, he 
must have been 1.65-1.70 metres in height. 
It exhibits in the upper portion, on the level of the lines of 
bifurcation of the femoral crest (wea aspera), a large irregular 
development of bone (exostosis). This accidental pathological 
structure has aroused much discussion, the net result of 
which is to show that it has no bearing on the zoological 
nature of P2zthecanthropus. 

In its whole structure, this femur is so human that, had it 
been found alone, there would have been no hesitation in 
attributing it to a Pliocene Man. It has been studied with 
very special care, and has been found to exhibit certain simian 


The Femur. 


1 Gregory, W. K., Studies on the Evolution of the Primates, p. 320. 


104 PITHECANTHROPUS—THE “ APE-MAN” 


characters ; but it is not proved that these characters may not 
be found in human femora. It is remarkable for its almost 
perfect straightness, a character which the femora of Gibbons and 
even of cynomorphic apes exhibit in the highest degree, but, 
according to Martin, it is more distorted than in a Gibbons. 
Dubois has called particular attention to certain differences in 
the manner of insertion of the muscles, especially the large 
adductor, and this would indicate a more marked aptitude for 
climbing than Man possesses. 

In any case, this femur points to its possessor having the 
faculty of standing and walking upright. Hence the qualifying 
adjective erectus, chosen as the specific name for a creature who 
was pithecanthropus—an Ape-Man—according to his skull. 

Such are the facts. If we possessed only the skull and the 

Interpretation teeth, we should say that we were dealing with 

of the Facts. aq large Ape; if we had only the femur, we 
should declare we were dealing with a Man. Of the two 
principal characters of the human race, its large brain and 
upright attitude, the latter would seem in this case to have 
been wholly acquired before the former. Duckworth has 
pointed out that this is not consistent with the ontogenetic 
development of Man.’ 

A first and important question thus arises: Did the skull- 
cap, the teeth, and the femur, found separately and at more or 
less considerable intervals of time and distance, belong to the 
same being? Dubois considered himself justified in asserting 
that they did, because no remains of large Primates have ever 
been found in Java, except'in this spot at Trinil) and=the 
simultaneous presence of several species appears very im- 
probable. Further, the various bones were scattered at quite 
inconsiderable distances from one another. 

These are certainly good arguments, but they are not 
conclusive. Some doubt remains, and will still remain, until 
new and more fortunate explorations put us in possession of 
less imperfect remains found in close association. The more 
recent discovery at Piltdown in England of the jawbone of a 
Chimpanzee, associated with the skull of a Man (see Chapter 


1 Duckworth, W. L. H., Prehistoric Man, p. 6 (Cambridge, 1912). 


INTERPRETATION OF THE REMAINS 105 


VI.), is not calculated to reduce the uncertainty regarding the 
unity of the discoveries at Trinil. 

The fact having been taken for granted that the Trinil 
remains belonged to one and the same creature, attempts at 
restoration were undertaken. Dubois and Manouvrier published 
reconstructions of the cranium and even of the whole skull 
(Fig. 62). These attempts, coming from medical men, and 


3 





ee a _ a 


FIG. 62.—Reconstruction of the Skull of Pithecanthropus, after Dubois. One-third 
natural size, The shaded surface indicates the only portion known. 


being based principally on human anatomy, are far too hypo- 
thetical, since we possess no data for the reconstruction of the 
base of the skull, the whole face, and all the apparatus of the lower 
jaw. Itis astonishing to find a great paleontologist like Osborn 
also publishing attempts of this kind. Dubois ventured still 
further in the realm of imagination when he exhibited at the 
International Exhibition of 1900, in the Dutch Indies pavilion, 
a painted model of Pzthecanthropus as he appeared in life! 
Various interpretations have been given of the facts which 
I have just summarized as briefly but as accurately as possible. 
According to many scientists, Dubois’ opinion, that we have 
here transition form between the Anthropoid Apes and Man, is 
justified. Of such, I may mention in France, Manouvrier and 
Verneau; in America, Marsh and Osborn; in England, Duck- 
worth, Sollas, and Keith; in Australia, Berry and Robertson ; 


106 PITHECANTHROPUS—THE “ APE-MAN ” 


in Germany, Nehring, Schwalbe, Haeckel, and others. Other 
German authors, Virchow, Krause, Waldeyer and Ranke, the 
Italian Sergi, and the Swiss R. Martin, believe that P2ethec- 
anthropus was simian in nature. Topinard in France, Houze 
in Belgium, Lydekker, Turner and Cunningham in England, 
are inclined to regard it as a Man.’ 

These differences of opinion are more apparent than real. 
Those who believe in the simian character of Pzthecanthropus 
really look upon it as an ape superior to all living apes, and 
those who believe in its human character regard it as inferior 
to all known men, living or fossil. Wherever we place the 
Trinil fossil, according to its morphological characters, in the 
series between Ape and Man, as at: P, P’, P”, 


the fact remains that in all its characters known to us, this 
fossil stands in an intermediate, or if terminological exactitude 
be preferred, an interposed, position. This is a positive fact 
admitted by all competent naturalists. 

To consider only the most important relic, the skuil-cap ; 
unquestionably this falls into place exactly, | might almost say 
ideally, between that of the large apes, like the Chimpanzee, and 
of a man of archaic characters, such as the Neanderthal Man. 

But it must be distinctly stated, and in this case repeated, 
that resemblance does not always imply descent. Even if, in 
the sum of his known characters (poor at the best), Pethec- 
anthropus actually forms a structural link between the large 
apes and Man, it does not necessarily follow that he must be 
regarded as a genealogical link, and this distinction is not, as 
has been asserted, merely a question of words. 

In order to come to a decisive conclusion regarding his true 
Geneniogieal genealogical relationships, we should require 
Relationships to possess at least the complete skull and 

of Pithec- lower jawbone of Prthecanthropus ; for all the 

anthropus. ; : f 

reconstructions, with their more or less marked 
anthropomorphism, which have been advanced by different 


1 I merely mention without comment the absolutely unfounded opinion that it was 
an imbecile or microcephalic human being, and the other equally wild assertion that 
Pithecanthropus was the result of a cross between a Man and an Ape. 


RELATIONSHIPS OF PITHECANTHROPUS 107 


authors, will never help to solve the problem. In the present 
state of our knowledge, I do not think that we are yet ina 
position to believe that there was any direct descent between 
Pithecanthropus and Man, such as the genealogical tree 
prepared by Dubois would indicate (Fig. 63, 1). 


ANTHROPOID MEN CYNOMORPH ANTHROPOID MEN  CYNOMORPH 
APES 


PITHECAN 
THROPUS 


MONKEYS APES MONKEYS 










PITHECAN 
THRORUS 





ANTHROPOID MEN CYNOMORPH 


APES MONKEYS 
PITHECAN 
THROPUS 





Fic. 63.—Diagrams showing the place of Pithecanthropus among the Primates: I, according 
to Dubois ; II, according to other naturalists ; III, according to Boule. 


It is certainly more satisfactory to admit that the evolu- 
tionary branch to which the famous Javan fossil belongs, was 
different from the human branch. Naturalists have no longer 
any doubt that we are related to the apes; but it is of some 
interest to try to define this relationship, especially when we 
meet with a creature apparently more akin to us than any 
other. Dubois rightly pointed out that if P2thecanthropus 
is, so to speak, only our granduncle instead of our grandfather, 
he is none the less an Ape-Man representing a stage in 
human descent. The majority of scientists to-day adhere to 


108 PITHECANTHROPUS—THE “ APE-MAN” 


this view. They consider P7thecanthropus to be an extinct 
lateral twig of the human branch. As such he is regarded by 
Keith, Gregory and Osborn, whose general views are shown 
in the second diagram (Fig. 63, II). : 

It is possible, however, to interpret these genealogical 
relationships in yet another way. Following Dubois, several 
naturalists have laid stress on the resemblance between the 
Pithecanthropus remains and the corresponding portions of a 
Gibbon’s skeleton. In that case, why not assume that Pe¢hec- 
anthropus represents a large form, a giant Ape, related to the 
Gibbon group? (Fig. 63, III). 

This hypothesis is not new; it was clearly stated by 
several naturalists, particularly by Volz." The bone fragments 
are in its favour; the most recent geological studies, tending 
to post-date the layer, also support it. The new argument 
which I think I can bring forward in its favour, is that we 
know several examples of comparative cases. 

In all countries, during Pliocene and Quaternary times, 
there were giant forms of animals whose living representatives 
are now greatly reduced in size. In addition to the great 
edentates of South America, Wegathertum and Glyptodon, which 
Cuvier named Giant Sloths and Armadillos, to the enormous 
Australian marsupial, Dzprotodon, to a giant Pangolin found in 
Java in the same layer as Pzthecanthropus, to the Zrogontherium 
of European Pleistocene deposits, which is really a sort of 
giant Beaver; in addition, also, to the whole series of large 
running birds of Madagascar and of New Zealand recently 
extinct, examples among the Primates themselves are not 
awanting. 

Pilgrim found in the Siwalik Hills the remains of a 
monkey which he named Dryopzthecus giganteus. Megaladapis 
of the recent geological formations in Madagascar is none 
other than a giant Lemur. <Avrcheolemur and Hadropithecus, 
from the same layers, are also Lemurs of larger size than the 
living forms; but they show morphological characters. of a 
higher order, denoting a tendency towards the higher ape type, 


' Volz, W., “Das geologische Alter der Pithecantropus-schichten bei Trinil” 
(Neues Jahrbuch fiir Mineral . . . Festband, 1907). 


RELATIONSHIPS OF PITHECANTHROPUS 109 


for the tendency towards greater perfection is not exclusively 
confined to the human branch.’ 

We may therefore consider that Pzthecanthropus, discovered 
in the same zoological region as the modern Gibbons, may 
have been a large species either of the genus Gzbdon, or 
rather of a closely allied genus related to the same group. 
This form might have been superior to its congeners, not 
only in size but also in other morphological characters, and 
particularly in cerebral capacity, a character of the first 
importance in which P2thecanihropus truly approaches the 
human stock. 

Just as Archeolemur and Hadropithecus show the tendency 
of certain of the lower Primates to ascend towards the higher 
simian forms, in the same manner P2thecanthropus appears 
to show a tendency to ascend from one form of anthropoid ape 
to a higher form, analogous to and parallel with the human 
form, It would thus represent a branchlet, more highly 
specialized than the neighbouring branchlets of the most 
highly developed Gibbon branch, and it must soon have died 
out, perhaps because of this very specialization.  P2thec- 
anthropus, then, does not belong to the ancestral line of the 
genus f/omo. ‘The more or less “human” characters of its 
skull-cap, and even of its femur, can only be looked upon as 
characters due to convergence and not to descent. 

This way of regarding Pzthecanthropus, which I cannot 
too often repeat is after all only hypothetical, seems to me 
at least as rational as any other. It is indeed more in 
keeping with the general facts of paleontology, which show 
that phylogenetic branches become more and more thickly 
clustered and more and more. profuse in variation, as well as 
more and more-independent. In accord with the new light 
which science sheds, we see the different branches lengthening 
towards the base, preserving the while their distinctness, and 
we see also how their union with the mother branches or with 
the main stem is projected farther and farther away, very 


1] must, however, observe that, according to Elliot Smith, the brain of 
Archeolemur shows certain characters of specialization in a retrograde direction. 
So far as I know, the brain of Hadropithecus has not been studied. 


110 PITHECANTHROPUS—THE “ APE-MAN” 


often quite beyond the points which our researches have 
reached. 

Not only at its origin, but even towards the end of its 
evolution, the human branch would thus have as neighbours, 
and in a sense as rivals, other branches of the higher Primates, 
the offsprings of a common stem. Various ape-like forms, 
starting from the first anthropoid stages, would seek, under 
the influence of the same environment or of the same needs, 
to evolve towards types better adapted to new conditions, that 
is to say, towards types of greater perfection. Several of 
these forms may have been able to surmount the stage where 
the living Anthropoids seem to stand, and to have acquired 
some of the higher characters that Man possesses to-day ; 
but the direct descendants of our primitive ancestors alone 
would seem to have reached the end of this race towards the 
goal of progress. | 

This interpretation of the memorable Javan discovery does 
not lessen its interest. I am tempted to say that, on the 
contrary, it increases it, since the human line, while still 
retaining its independence, seems thus morphologically less 
isolated than formerly from the neighbouring lines. It leads 
us to the admission that in other days there existed Anthropoids 
higher than living Anthropoids, but inferior to the fossil Men 
known to us, who themselves were inferior to living Man. 
The physical relationship between Ape and Man here asserts 
itself from a new point of view. 

In any case, in whatever manner we interpret them, the 
facts revealed by Dubois’ discovery remain of supreme interest 
to science. 


CAblegbel b Rag 
THE PROBLEM OF TERTIARY MAN 


Eoliths 


As soon as the existence of Quaternary Man was definitely 
proved, the desire was stimulated for evidence of the existence 
of a Man in still earlier times—of Tertiary Man. 

It must be allowed that no research could be better justified. 
The teaching of paleontology regarding the 
evolution and progressive development of 
mammals in general, warrants us in believing and stating 
that Man or his immediate precursor must have lived towards 
the end or even from the middle of the Tertiary era. 

We have seen (p. 32) that, during the Eocene and Oligocene 
periods, mammals still differed so greatly in their build from 
modern types, that paleontologists often experienced great 
difficulty in placing them in the orders or even in the families 
established by zoologists for the classification of living forms. 
Representatives of the order of the Primates had already been 
found, but these forerunners had not outgrown the evolutionary 
stage now represented by the lower forms of the group, the 
Lemurs and the tailed monkeys. From this we gather that 
the existence of Man, at least of Man possessing all the main 
characteristics of his kind,’ would seem to have been all but 
impossible during the first half of Tertiary times. 

During the Miocene period, the majority of the modern 
families of animals were clearly differentiated. Many of the 
Miocene genera are extinct, but there were, even then, certain 


The Problem. 


' 1 make this reservation because Men may have existed, potentially, in some 
primitive form of Primate. We have already considered the rdle attributed to 
Propliopithecus from Fayum (see p. 82). 

111 


112 THE PROBLEM OF TERTIARY MAN 


representatives of genera which still exist. Anthropoid apes 
were numerous. The existence during this period of a Man, 
or rather of a pre-Man, is quite Zosszbde. 

During the Pliocene period, almost all the modern genera 
were represented ; many species are akin to living species, and 
may be considered as the ancestors of the latter. The existence 
of a human being, or even of a true //omo, is quite probable.’ 

From the paleontological point of view, then, no a przore 
objection can be taken: physically, Man is closely akin to the 
anthropoid apes which existed, well defined, from at least the 
Lower Miocene. Why should he not also be, like them, 
geologically very ancient? His late survival may be explained, 
according to de Quatrefages, by his intellectual superiority, 
which would enable him to resist the various causes which led 
to the destruction of other species, and to adapt himself better 
than these to new conditions. 

Prehistoric archeology also supports this view. We now 
know that from the beginning of Quaternary times, Man 
occupied, if not the whole globe, at least a large part of the 
surface of the globe, practising everywhere a somewhat rude 
but remarkably uniform stone industry, more or less similar 
to the industries known as Chellean or Saint-Acheulean 
(Fig. 64). It would even appear, as we shall presently see, that 
he was already represented by several physical types. This 
of necessity implies a previous stage, a Tertiary stage. The 
origin of Man must certainly date from a past still more remote 
than that from which we actually know his presence. 

Therefore, not only is there no a frzorz reason for denying 
the existence of Tertiary Man, or, to put it otherwise, of an 
immediate ancestor of Quaternary Man, but, on the contrary, 
all the evidence tends to affirm such existence. A creature, 

1 Thirty years ago, I wrote (Revue a’ Anthrop., 1889, p. 217): ‘The majority of 
the genera of living mammals are very ancient. From the Upper Miocene onwards 
we have true Cats, true Hyaenas, true Deer, the true Rhinoceros; that is to say, 
representatives of living genera. Even certain species are closely akin to living 
species. Examples become more frequent during the Miocene period, and I see no 
reason why the genus //omo, with all its characteristics, should not have been con- 
temporary with the genera of animals which I have just enumerated. I am perfectly 


convinced that paleontologists will some day find the bone-remains of our Tertiary 
ancestors.” 


THE PROBLEM 113 


already in possession of the chief physical and even mental 
attributes of the human stock, must have lived somewhere 
during the Pliocene period, and perhaps even during the 
Miocene. 

But these theoretical considerations, convincing as they 
may sound, are not sufficient to solve the problem. The true 
question is this: Are we really in possession of material proofs 


3, arene $ 
ONS TAEAENTS HAUEOUITHIG OES 


hea ek Bea ay 





FIG. 64.—Palzolithic implements of similar forms from different parts of the globe. France 
(Saint-Acheul, Tilloux, Toulouse), England, Spain, Algiers, South Africa, and North 
America. One-third natural size. Paleontological Gallery, French National Museum of 
Natural History, Paris. 


of the existence of a Tertiary Man, of bone-remains, products 
of a primitive industry, or traces of any kind whatsoever? 
I regret to state that not one of the discoveries hitherto brought 
forward to settle this question appears to me to be conclusive. 
In face of such a statement, the reader will probably wonder 
why, in this book on fossil men, I devote a whole chapter to a 
being of whom we have no knowledge. I do so _ because, 
while “the question of Tertiary Man” is not solved, it 
none the less insistently arises, and because some of the 
evidences. in which I myself place no faith have nevertheless 
H 


114 THE PROBLEM OF TERTIARY MAN - 


their partisans. The discussion is not yet settled; and so 
the arguments must not be rejected in mass, but, on the 
contrary, must be brought forward and properly presented, 
in order that they may be the better submitted to serious 
criticism. In this way a sound foundation will be laid for 
future researches. 

The first of the discoveries referred to followed very soon 

Historical after the victory of Boucher de Perthes. In 

Review. 1863, Desnoyers, librarian of the French 
National Museum, announced that he had found in the gravels 
of Saint-Prest (Eure-et-Loir), regarded as Pliocene, bones of 
large animals bearing lines or incisions which could only be 
considered the work of man. 

In 1867, at the International Congress of Prehistoric 
Archeology and Anthropology, in Paris, Abbé Bourgeois 
exhibited flints from the Oligocene deposits at Thenay (Loir- 
et-Cher). According to him, certain of these flints showed 
fractures, small pittings, and traces of splitting by fire, while 
others had been deliberately dressed (Fig. 65, 1-3). At the 
same time, his fellow-worker, Abbé Delaunay, showed some 
bones, carved in the fashion of those from Saint-Prest, which 
had been obtained from Miocene shell-beds of marine origin, 
at Pouancé (Maine-et-Loire). Soon after, all the great beds 
containing mammalian fossils: Oligocene in the Bourbonnais, 
Miocene in the Orleans district, in the Gers, and at Pikermi in 
Greece, yielded bones which were alleged to have been de- 
liberately broken, scratched, or incised. 

In the same year, 1867, Professor Issel, of Genoa, 
announced the discovery of a human skeleton in the Pliocene 
layers of Savona in Liguria, and the Americans sent word 
of the discovery of a human skull in their gold-bearing 
alluvials at Calaveras in California, which also were regarded 
as Tertiary. | 

In 1875, Professor Capellini, of Bologna, described from 
marine deposits of Pleistocene age at Monte-Aperto, in the 
province of Siena, the bones of a fossil whale showing in- 
cisions of a particular character, which could be attributed 
only to man. | 


~ 
— 


HISTORICAL REVIEW 11 





Fic. 65.—Tertiary Flints regarded as products of Primitive Human Industry. 1 and 3, split 
flints from Thenay ; 2, burnt and fractured flints from Thenay (Loir-et-Cher) ; 4, split flints 
from Otta (Portugal) ; 5, 6, 7, split flints from Puy Courny, in Cantalia. Natural size. 


~ 


116 THE PROBLEM OF TERTIARY MAN 


About the year 1878, the Portuguese geologist, Ribeiro, 
recorded certain dressed flints from a Miocene deposit at Otta, 
in the neighbourhood of Lisbon (Fig. 65, 4); whilst the 
Cantalian geologist, Rames, sent to the International Exhibi- 
tion a case of flints of the same kind, collected in alluvials of 
the Upper Miocene at Puy Courny, near Aurillac (Fig. 65, 5-7). 

During a decade these discoveries gave rise to many 
discussions in Reviews, Societies, and Congresses devoted 
to prehistoric archeology.’ The existence, based on certain 
‘dressed stones,” of Tertiary Man or of a Tertiary forerunner 
of Man, was ably supported by de Quatrefages and Gabriel de 
Mortillet. 

The latter scientist, although he rejected all the other 
discoveries, became the ardent and zealous supporter of those 
from Thenay, Otta, and Puy Courny. Since, on =themone 
hand, his ideas on the subject of evolution precluded him from 
dating the genus fYomo as far back as the Miocene and 
Oligocene, and since, on the other hand, he had no doubt as to 
the deliberate carving on the flints exhibited, G. de Mortillet 
conceived the existence of a creature intermediate between the 
large apes and Man, and this he first named A xthropopithecus, 
and later //omosimius. He even went so far as to found 
three species corresponding to the three deposits; he pro- 
posed to locate at Thenay, HYomoszmzus bourgeoist; at Otta, 
HT. vibeitroz,; and at Aurillac, A. vamesiz.2 This somewhat 
childish method of solving a serious scientific problem aroused 
lively criticism. 

The final result of interminable discussions was rather 


antagonistic to the new theory, and the partisans of the’ 


belief in the deliberate dressing of Tertiary stones became 
fewer and fewer. In the end, while each protagonist clung 
to his own opinion, discussion gradually died down and a 
lull succeeded. 


1 The bibliography relating to these early discoveries is so voluminous that I 
could not give it here. See Mortillet, Ze Préhistorigue ; and particularly Reinach, S., 
Antiqguités nationales, “1. Alluvions et Cavernes.” Numerous references will be 
found on succeeding pages. 

2 Mortillet, G. de., Le Préhistorigue, p. 105 (Paris, 1883), 3rd ed. by Gabriel 
and Adrien de Mortillet, p. 96 (Paris, 1900). 


~ 


HISTORICAL REVIEW 117 


About 1889 a reawakening occurred. The venerable 
English geologist, Prestwich,’ signalled its commencement by his 
publications on the supposed implements found at Ightham in 
England. They dealt with flints showing indistinct traces of 
working, and with splinters or natural fragments slightly 
retouched, much older than those of Saint-Acheul, and 
‘dating from the pre-glacial period.” As the flint-containing 
deposits of the Kentish plateau may well be regarded as 
Pliocene, there was once more involved the question of 
Tertiary Man, who, in his archeological aspect, reappeared 
this time on the soil of Great Britain. 

The work of Prestwich at Ightham made a great impression 

The Holith in England, for he ranked as a geologist of 

Theory. high standing. His lead was followed ; so that 
before long, stones fashioned after the same manner were being 
found almost everywhere. English enthusiasts discovered them 
in other parts of the British Isles, for example in the Norfolk 
Forest-bed, and even in the Upper Tertiary of India; while 
Continental workers described them from numerous layers in 
France, Belgium, and Germany. Among amateur collectors 
of dressed flints there developed a perfect frenzy for seeing 
in every broken pebble and jagged edge products of human 
industry. Thus the question of “Tertiary flints” became 
again the order of the day, decked in new name, to wit ‘the 
Eolith theory”; it compelled the attention of all prehistorians ; 
in every country it had warm supporters. Presently an 
enthusiastic Belgian geologist, M. Rutot, put himself at the 
head of the movement by a perfect avalanche of publications.’ 

To the two periods of the stone industry long recognized, 
the Paleolithic and the Neolithic, G. de Mortillet had added 
a more ancient period which he called Fofthic, and which 
was meant to include “all that related to the Tertiary 


1 Prestwich, J., ‘On the Occurrence of Paleolithic Flint Implements in the 
Neighbourhood of Ightham,” (Quarterly Journal of the Geol. Soc. of London, 
xlv., 1889). 

2 The majority have been reviewed in L’ Anthropologie, vill. to xvil., assim. See 
particularly, Rutot, A., “Le Préhistorique dans Europe centrale. Coup d’ceil sur 
l’état de nos connaissances relative aux industries de la pierre.” (Congres a’archéol, 
et @histoire at Dinant, in 1903. Namur, 1904). 


118 THE PROBLEM OF TERTIARY MAN 


period.” According to Rutot, who adopted the name invented 
by G. de Mortillet, but somewhat distorted its original meaning, 


WPT 
Buy V 
we 


sp 


Wie 
{| IE it) 
/ | | 
ye 


Sell 
Wy SU 


mt 
uy 


! 
Hy, 
YY! —S- 





“~<S ~ 
——S 


Rg NSS 

Y WN AND 
SAVES 

eh 
Sater S +s 


<see 





Fic. 66.—Eoliths from the “ Reutelian”’ of Belgium. The chipped stones figured here, 
according to Rutot, are considered by him to be hammers, grinders, scrapers, and 
discs. Half natural size. 


the Eolithic period furnishes no stone dressed to a deliberate 
shape, but only natural forms, directly utilised. We must give 


1 Te Préhistoriqgue, ist ed., p. 18. 


THE EOLITH THEORY 119 


the name eo/zths to these rude and primitive implements, these 
stones which were simply used. LEoliths may be recognized 
by signs of retouching, that is to say by slight marks of 
chipping, localized or disposed as if they had been knocked 
off deliberately and systematically, in order to adapt the piece 
of flint to a definite end. ‘The special appearance,” said 
Rutot, “that experts rightly name ‘dressed’ is only to be 
attributed to human and essentially deliberate action, and all 
eoliths, whether from the Aquitanian [Oligocene] or Mosean 
[a name given by Rutot to a Quaternary level in Belgium] or 
from the intermediate stages of Miocene, Pliocene, and Lower 
Mosean, which exhibit retouching produced by usage, must be 
included among the authentic relics of primitive industries.” ? 

Foliths, thus regarded, are to be found in great quantities 
in Quaternary gravels, along with implements of definite and 
standard form. M. Rutot goes so far as to describe, from 
the gravels of the north of France and of Belgium, several 
“industries” of this kind-—‘‘ Reutelian,” ‘‘ Mafflian,” ‘‘ Mes- 
vinian,” and others (Fig. 66). 

But such objects are also to be met with in much more ancient 
deposits: chipped stones from the Oligocene at Thenay, from 
the Miocene at Otta and Puy Courny, flints from the Pliocene 
in France, England, Egypt and India, are eoliths. And here 
the question becomes much more serious, for the partisans of 
the new theory believed that a few chipped or fractured stones 
were enough to prove the existence, in geological times so 
remote, either of Man or of his immediate forerunners. After 
having made numerous converts in Belgium, Germany, England, 
and even in France, after a clamorous career which gained it 
notoriety everywhere, the eolith theory succumbed under 
the repeated blows of certain geologists and prehistorians. 
Accurate observations, made in every quarter by serious 
naturalists, showed that the play of the physical forces of nature 
may produce eoliths, and that it is impossible to distinguish 
the so-called human eoliths from eoliths wholly independent 
of any intelligent or conscious interference. The numbers of 
converts were almost as great as, although less striking than, 

1 Bull. dela Soc. @ Anthrop. de Bruxelles, vol. xx., 1902, p. 66. 


120 THE PROBLEM OF TERTIARY MAN 
Nevertheless, in recent 


the numbers of the original adherents. 
years, a form of the eolith theory has been resurrected in England. 















SS 


\\ 
Ni), 


l) 
‘ 





\\ 
\\\ 
\ 





y 
\ 






Z == 

Zz —S= 

a RE LDA 
SSS 


= 


ny! 
} 


Fic. 67.—Rostro-carinate (“‘ Keeled”’) Flint found at the base of the Crag at Ipswich. 
Two-thirds natural size. (After Sir Ray Lankester.) 
K. the keel. The shaded parts show the original surface of the flint nodule. 


In October 1910 Mr J. Reid Moir of Ipswich announced 
that he had taken from the bottom layer of a Pliocene marine 





Fic. 68.—The most perfect example of Keeled Flint (tye specimen) from the Crag at 
Norwich, side view. (After Sir Ray Lankester ) 


deposit, called the Red Crag of Suffolk, flints proving the exist- 
ence of Man prior to this Pliocene deposit.’ This discovery 
made a great impression on the mind of the eminent biologist 


1 Moir, J. Reid, “The Flint Implements of Sub-Crag Man,” (Prehistoric Soctety 


of East Anglia, \., 1911). 


SUPPOSED TERTIARY HUMAN REMAINS 121 


Sir Ray Lankester, who took an active interest in the matter.! 
Moir and Ray Lankester avoid bringing eoliths forward again, 
that is to say, pebbles simply used and bearing only the marks 
of this usage. It is now a question of implements of a very 
definite form, of a type quite as characteristic as, say, the 
Saint-Acheulean types, but far older, the “rostro-carinate” or 
eagle-beak type. The Chellean, Acheulean, and Moustierian 
flints are essentially flattened, in leaf form. The rostro- 
carinate type of the Crag is essentially narrowed in a lateral 
direction (Figs. 67 and 68). Further, it is true that they are 
also associated with scrapers, hammers, and large picks. 

The idea that these flints are artefacts has been contested 
in England by Sollas. I have myself discussed at length the 
works of Ray Lankester and Moir, giving numerous reasons 
which lead me to reject their interpretations.” I consider that 
the flints from the Suffolk Crag are only varieties of eoliths, 
and I have no hesitation in attributing them to the action of 
natural forces, which I shall presently discuss, rather than to 
the intervention of an intelligent being. 

After this long historical introduction, there must follow 

Discussion of 2 “iscussion of the evidences to which appeal 

Evidences. has been made. We have just seen that the 

Human Bone- testimony brought forward in favour of the 
Remains. . . : ; 
existence of Tertiary Man is of two kinds: 
(1) human bone-remains; and (2) products or traces of 
deliberate work. 


(1) The facts belonging to the first category, being from 
their very nature the most conclusive, should of themselves 
be sufficient to settle the question. Unfortunately no discovery 
of human bones, which, up to the present time, has been made 
in Tertiary deposits, has been able to withstand criticism. 
The only discoveries deserving examination here, are those 
made at Savona and Castenedolo in Italy, and at Calaveras 
in America. 


1 Lankester, Sir Ray, “On the Discovery of a Novel Type of Flint Implements. . .” 
(Philosophical Transactions, Series B., vol. 202, 1912). 

2 Boule, M., “La Paléontologie humaine en Angleterre” (L’ Anthropologie, 
XXV1., I9I5). 


122 THE PROBLEM OF TERTIARY MAN 


The skeleton from Savona, in Liguria, was found in 1852, 
during the reconstruction of a church, in a 
shelly clay of marine origin, rich in fossil 
oysters of Pliocene age; but it was not exhibited by Issel till 
fifteen years after, at the Paris Congress in 1867. The 
remains are rather badly preserved, so much so that Issel 
himself described them under the vague title of ‘‘ Anthropoid.” * 
The distinguished professor of Genoa University was convinced 
of the Pliocene age of the Savona skeleton; nevertheless, he 
acknowledges that the circumstances of the discovery were not 
such as to inspire confidence. He admits that, unfortunately, 
no naturalist was present ‘‘to confirm, by precise and scrupulous 
observation, that the deposit had not been resorted, and that the 
bones had really been buried at the same time as the oysters.” * 

The bones from Castenedolo, near Brescia in Italy, belong to 
several skeletons of men, women, and children, 
and were found on various occasions in a shelly 
bed of sand and clay, of marine origin and of Pliocene age. 
The first discovery was made in 1860, the second in 1880; 
they were described by Professor Ragazzoni,’® and immediately 
aroused a lively discussion. The anthropologist Sergi has 
been, and continues to be, their chief supporter, and he, in 
order to explain the presence of human skeletons in deposits 
of marine origin, was obliged to assume the shipwreck of a 
whole family.* In 1889, the discovery of a new human skeleton 
was the subject of an official report by Professor Issel, who came 
to the conclusion that the human bones and the Pliocene deposits 
were not of the same age.’ In 1896, a pupil of Ragazzoni, 
Professor Cacciamali, took up the question again, and, after a 
laborious and thorough inquiry, declared that there must still 
be doubt in the matter. At Castenedolo, as in Savona, we 
are very probably dealing with more or less recent burials.° 


1 Issel, A., Ligura preistorica, p. 140 (Genoa, 1908). 

2 Congres internat. @archéol. et d’anthrop, first meeting, Paris, 1867, p. 76. 

3 Ragazzoni, ‘‘ La collina di Castenedolo.. .” (Azeneo dt Brescia, 1880). 

* Sergi, G., “L’Uomo terziario in Lombardia” (Archivio per Antrop. e la Etnol., 
xiv., 1884). 

° Bulletino di paletnologia ttaliano, xv., 1889, p. 89. 

® Cacciamali, G. B., “Geologia della collina di Castenedolo” (A/eneo di 
Brescia, 1896). 


Savona. 


Castenedolo. 


SUPPOSED 'TER'TIARY HUMAN REMAINS 123 


The Calaveras skull is too famous for me to pass it over 
The Calaveras Without a few words.' It is said to have been 
Skull. found in 1866, at a depth of 30 feet in the pit 
of a mine dug through superimposed lavas and auriferous 
gravels of Pliocene age, in the Bald Hill near Altaville, in 
Calaveras County, California. This origin is more than 
doubtful. All the circum- 
stances suggest that some 
hoax was perpetrated —‘“‘a 
practical joke of the miners,” 
as the geologist Marcou 
declared. 

The incomplete © skull 
(Fig. 69) now belongs to the 
Peabody Museum in Cam- 
bridge, U.S.A.: it is partially 
fossilized and covered with a 
thin calcareous concretion. 
But the various American 
scientists who have studied 
it, are unanimous in affirming 
its resemblance to the skull of the modern Indians of that 
region. Its resemblances to a skull found in a Californian 
cave, likewise covered with a limy coating, are such that the 
anthropologist Hrdlitka declares we can ascribe both remains 
to. a single race, and what is more, to the same tribe. It 
is very probable that they have a similar origin, and that, 
like the other, the Calaveras skull also came from a cave. 
It cannot be very ancient in the geological sense of the 
word. 


Ameghino also believed that he had found, in South 





Fic. 69.—Calaveras Skull. 


1 The bibliography is large, for this discovery has been much discussed. The 
original report is by Whitney, “Auriferous Gravels of the Sierra Nevada,” 
Cambridge, U.S.A., 1879. We must also note: Holmes, W. H., “Review of the 
evidence relating to auriferous gravels Man in California” (S7zthsonian Report, 1899). 
Wilson, Th., “ La haute ancienneté de homme dans |’Amérique du Nord” (L’Anthre- 
pologie, xii, 1901). UHrdhtka, A., “Skeletal Remains ... in North America” 
(Smithsonian Institution, Bureau of Ethnology, Bull. 33, 1907). See also an article 
by Nadaillac, “Le Crane de Calaveras,” in the Revue des questions scientifiques, 
1900. 


124. THE PROBLEM OF TERTIARY MAN 


America, bone remains of Tertiary Man. He was hopelessly 
mistaken, as we shall see in the last chapter of this work. 

There is no good reason for dwelling further on these 
various discoveries, since they have been almost entirely 
abandoned, even by anthropologists who believe they possess 
other material proofs of the existence of Tertiary Man.’ 








24 Fic. 71.—Tooth of a large Shark (Car- 
Fic. 70o.—Bone of Halitherium, a charodon megalodon) from Miocene shell 


Sirenian fossil, bearing incisions ; from deposits in Touraine, probably the cause of the 
the Miocene shell deposits of the incisions depicted opposite. Half natural size. 
Maine-et-Loire. Natural size. (After Palzeontological Gallery, French National 
Farge.) Museum of Natural History. 


2. Proofs other than those derived from bones themselves 
may be furnished by traces or products of deliberate handi- 
work. They may be classified in four groups: (a) Bones of 
animals bearing traces of human action; (4) Hunters’ traps ; 


‘ The later supporters of these discoveries accuse their opponents of allowing 
themselves to be swayed by purely theoretical considerations, such as that the 
resemblance and even the identity of the supposed Tertiary bone-remains with 
those of modern Man, is contrary to the doctrine of evolution. 

I cannot, for my part, accept this reproach. The argument from general 
considerations certainly seems to me to be not without a certain value, but I do 
not consider it of itself sufficient, for I am far from denying a priori that the 
modern human type may be very ancient. The essential criterion must be definite 
proof that the relics brought forward are really of the same age as the deposits 
from which they were exhumed, and I affirm that this contemporaneity has not 


been satisfactorily demonstrated. The whole preliminary question rests on this 
and on this. alone. 


OTHER SUPPOSED EVIDENCES OF MAN 125 


(c) Burnt flints, splintered by fire; (d) Flints used or worked 
by percussion. 

(2) The first group now forms, in Déchelette’s phrase, a 

Animal Bones, | kind of obituary of ephemeral hypotheses” 

Scratched, in which no longer any one believes. The 

Incised, ete. fractures, marks, scratches, incisions and per- 
forations found on great numbers of fossil bones, of all ages 
and from all kinds of deposits, are due either to physical 
forces, such as desiccation, the accumulation of surrounding 
deposits, heavy pressure, or to the gnawing of carnivores. 
The incisions or grooves, so common on the bones of 
marine animals, such as //alztherzum of French shell-deposits 
(Fig. 70), or Batenotus from the Italian Pliocene, all of 
which are found in deposits laid down by the sea, were 
made by the sharp teeth of great sharks which lived in 
this sea (Fig. 71). This is no longer disputed, and I can 
only refer those of my readers who wish fuller information 
Gmmitae, subject to the. excellent’ critical account byeGde 
Mortillet. 

(6) In 1888, O. Fisher discovered bone-remains of E/ephas 

Pseudo meridionatis in a chalk-fissure at Dewlish in 

Pit-traps. J)orset, in the south of England. In 1905 
he endeavoured to show that this was artificial, It was 
said to be a true trench or trap, excavated by a human 
contemporary of the Southern Elephant to capture this 
Proboscidian, just as the natives of Equatorial Africa capture 
living Elephants: it was supposed to be the work of a 
Pliocene trapper.” 

This hypothesis has recently been revived by its author. 
An inquiry conducted by experienced geologists, under the 
auspices of the Dorset Field Club, clearly demonstrated the 
natural character of the fissure, due wholly to erosive action, 


and the absence in this so-called trench of any trace of Man’s 
handiwork.’ 


1 Le Préhistorigue, st ed. 1883, pp. 34 ef seg. 

* Fisher, O., ““On the occurrence of Elephas meridionalis at Dewlish, Dorset” 
(Quarterly Journal of the Geol. Soc., \xi., 1905, p. 35). 

3 Proceedings Dorset Natural History and Antiquarian Field Club, xxxvi., 1915, 
p. 209. 


126 THE PROBLEM OF TERTIARY MAN 


(c) In the Oligocene conglomerate of Thenay, in the 
The Crackea “istrict of Loir-et-Cher, there are sometimes 
Flints from to be found, together with eoliths, flints the 
Thenay. surface of which is covered with fine cracks, 
like that of old earthenware, or ‘“‘ decorticated ’’—covered with 
fine pitting. Similar appearances may be produced by heating 
flints and then cooling them rapidly ; they are, then, cracked 
and splintered by fire. In fact, certain native races; stle 
Mincopie of the Andaman Isles and the Australians, treat 
with fire any stones they wish to split, before shaping them. 
Abbé Bourgeois and G. de Mortillet supposed that Man or 
the ‘Anthropopithecus” of Thenay did the same.’ There 
would seem to have existed, therefore, during the Oligocene, 
a creature sufficiently intelligent to be able to light a fire and 
to submit flints to its action, with a definite purpose in view. 
All the evidences are against such an interpretation of facts 
which have long supplied material for discussion at scientific 
congresses. The conditions of the deposit where the flints 
were found do not support it. Cracked stones have been 
found in other and more ancient Eocene deposits, and these 
can be ascribed to no intelligent agency. Many observations 
have proved that different natural causes may produce the 
characters of the Thenay flints; changes of temperature of 
meteorological origin, especially in the conditions of a tropical 
climate, like that of the Oligocene; spontaneous forest fires ; 
the action of thermal waters; or simply, as in our present 
climate, the somewhat prolonged action of atmospheric agents. 
Laboratory experiments have given similar results. It is 
therefore quite unnecessary to invoke human agency to explain 
the cracked flints of Thenay.* It intervenes in this case as 


1 Bourgeois, Abbé, “ L’Homme tertiare, Etude sur les silex travaillés” (Congres 
intern. de Paris, 1867, p. 67); “La question de ’Homme tertiaire” (Revue des 
questions sctentifiques, 1877), etc. Reprints of Abbé Bourgeois’ various publications 
regarding Thenay will be found in Dr F. Houssaye’s L’wuvre de 1 Abbé Bourgeois, 
Paris, 1904. Mortillet, G. de, Le Préhistorique, 1st ed. 

2 “Discussion at the Congres de l’Association francaise & Blois” (Matériaux, 
1884). Arcelin, A., “Silex tertiaires” (/dzd@., 1885). D’Ault-Dumesnil, “ Note sur de 
nouvelles fouilles faites a Thenay” (/é7@., 1885). Mahoudeau, P. H., and Capitan, L., 
“Ta Question de ’Homme tertiaire 4 Thenay” (Revue de [Ecole ad’ Anthrop., xi., 
1901), etc. 


KOLITHS 127 


a kind of Deus ex machina. No longer does any one believe 
in it; the evidence in the Thenay case has been finally 
pigeon-holed. 

(z) The last category, by far the largest, comprises the 

Flints used or Stones shaped or simply used as found, and 
worked by constitutes the eolithic industry. 

Percussion. Whilst G. de Mortillet considered the du26 

Koliths. : : . 
or shell of percussion, which is formed in con- 
sequence of a blow sharply directed upon a particular point, 





i 


Fic. 72.—Splinter of Moustierian Flint from the Grotte du Placaid, 
retouched at the point. Three-quarters natural size. 


On the inner surface, detached from a mass of flint: f, point where struck ; 
6, percussion bulb. On the outer surface ; 7, retouching. 


as the criterion of deliberate shaping, he attributed to retouch- 
ing only secondary importance (Fig. 72). M. Rutot, as we 
have seen, does not attach much weight to the percussion bulb, 
but only to retouching with a view to use. We shall see 
presently that this second character is no more conclusive 
than the first. 

Discoveries of stones, apparently shaped or simply used, 
have been made in deposits belonging to all geological 
periods, from Eocene to modern times. Enumerating from 


128 THE PROBLEM OF TERTIARY MAN 


the most ancient to the most recent, the principal layers 
are :— 


Eoceng, even Lower Eocene.—Duan (Eure-et-Loir), Clermont 
(Oise),’ Escheu (Somme), etc. 

OxiGoceNnE, MippL_re.—Boncelles, province of Liége, Belgium.’ 

OLicocENE, Upper.—Thenay (Loir-et-Cher).° 

Miocene, Upper.—Puy Courny (Cantal),* Otta, in Portugal.” 

Piiocene.—Kentish plateau, Crag of Suffolk, Norfolk Forest 
Bed (England), Burma, Thebes (Egypt), etc. 

OQuATERNARY.—Almost everywhere in alluvials containing flints.° 





The objections raised against the eolith theory are of 
various kinds. They apply more or less to all the deposits, 
so that it would be tedious and unnecessary to examine them 
in detail. I shall describe these objections generally. 

Paleontology is not opposed on principle to the existence 
Paleontological Of Pliocene or Miocene eoliths, for it admits, 

Objections. as we have seen, that in Miocene times, 
representatives of the genus //omo may have lived on the 
earth. But palzontology takes exception to the theory of 
the existence of Oligocene, and especially of Eocene eoliths. 

Eoliths have almost always irregular and very varied forms, 
in which the supporters of the theory of their artificial origin 
endeavour to see the prototypes of palzolithic implements ; 
hammers, implements for striking, knives, scrapers, piercers, 


1 Breuil, H., “Sur la presence d’éolithes a la base de lEocéne parisien” 
(L’ Anthropologie, xxi., 1910). 

* Rutot, A., ““Un grave probleme” (AZém. de lu Soc. belge de Géol., xxi., 1907). 

3 Bibliographical references on previous page. 

* Rames, J. B., “Géologie du Puy Courny” (Matériaux, 1884). Quatrefages; 
A. de, “Introduction a étude des races humaines” (1887). Boule, M., ‘‘Temps 
quaternaires et préhistoriques du Cantal” (Assoc. franc. Congres de Toulouse, i., and 
kevue de L’ Anthropologie, 1889, p. 216). ‘Le Cantal miocéne” (Bull. de la carte 
gtéolog., 1846). Verworn, M., Die archeolithische Cultur in den Hipparionschichten 
von Aurillac (1905). Mayet, L., “ La Question de ?Homme tertiaire” (L’ Anthropologie, 
XVI1i., 1906), etc. 

° Ribeiro, C., Descrifcao de alguns silex e quartzites lascados incontrados nas 
camadas de terreno terciatro (1871). “L’Homme tertiaire en Portugal” (Congres 
internat. de Lisbonne, 1880). Cartailhac, E., Les dges prchistoriques deV Espagne et du 
Portugal (Paris, 1886). 

° The bibliography of the Pliocene and Quaternary deposits is too large to be 
given here. Consult contents of L’ Anthropologie. 


OBJECTIONS TO EOLITH THEORY 129 


etc. (Fig. 66, p. 118). But they are always the same, whatever 
their antiquity. They show no gradations with the passage 
of time, as Rutot himself allows. From the lowest Tertiary 
to the Quaternary, they preserve the same rough and defaced 
aspect. No progress, therefore, could have been made during 
this immense lapse of time. Such a fact is opposed to the 
laws of evolution and of general palzontology. 

Either the creatures who shaped these stones were Apes, 
as Gaudry, convinced of the superiority of Dryoprthecus over 
all living apes, supposed, and their skeletons have yet to be 
discovered; or else we have to deal with a Man whose state 
of intellectual stagnation during so long a period of time is 
incomprehensible. On the other hand, the permanence and re- 
petition of the forms is explained by the hypothesis of an origin 
due to natural causes, the effects of which are always the same. 

Since my first visit to Thenay, thirty-eight years ago, I have 

Geological constantly thought that eoliths have no worse 

Objections. opponents than the geological conditions of 
the layers in which they are found. 

On a heap of stones of any kind, on a beach, in a ballast 
pit, on garden walks spread with gravel, nay, even on a heap 
broken by a road-mender, nothing is easier than to make a 
selection of specimens obviously reproducing the same shapes, 
and these it is quite possible to classify in groups according to 
their shapes, so that, arranged on a table or in a drawer, they 
produce an impression of order and deliberate repetition. This 
is apparently the chief reason of the success of collectors of 
eoliths in the eyes of visitors whose geological knowledge is 
seldom of a kind to enable them to avoid such a pitfall. 

Studied in their beds, the same stones have quite a 
different significance. We then see that the most exacting 
care in selection has been necessary to obtain these deceptive 
series ; that the stones, said to be deliberately dressed, far from 
indicating the occurrence, at the spot where they were found, 
of the site of a human settlement, of a shelter, or such like, 
on an ancient surface, really form part of a true geological 
formation, usually thrown violently in place, just like thousands 
of other elements in the same formation; that the specimens, 

I 


130 THE PROBLEM OF TERTIARY MAN 


chosen with a preconceived idea, do not differ in any essential 
character from their innumerable neighbours in the layer; that 
it is easy to find every possible transitional form, ranging from 
the rudest elements composing the bulk of the gravel, con- 
glomerate or breccia, as the case may be, to those in which 
traces of fracture and splintering, a littlke more numerous or a 
little more definitely grouped, have gained for them the honour 
of being singled out and collected as representative specimens. 

Such is the general and the main fact characteristic of the 
histories of eoliths of all ages and in every country; a fact 
which in itself ought to have sufficed to put naturalists on 
their guard, and to have ended all the discussions which have 
long occupied so many persons, the majority without weight 
either as geologists or as prehistorians.* 

There are other geological arguments. Eoliths are found 
only in countries where flint occurs and never beyond layers 
naturally containing this material. This would not have been 
the case had these stones been weapons or implements, for such 
Man would not have failed to scatter almost everywhere on his 
travels or in his settlements. All eoliths are of flint, and all 
alluvial formations of cataclysmic or torrential origin, whatever 
their age, yield eolithic products, provided they contain flint 
pebbles. These pebbles constitute an integral part of true 
geological formations sometimes occupying thousands of square 
kilometres in extent, and these it would be absurd to attribute 
to Man. 

Let us add that many deposits containing eoliths are of 
marine origin. As the English paleontologist, Boyd Dawkins, 
has wittily pointed out, it is extraordinary that fossil Man so 
often reveals himself to us in the form of an aquatic being, 
incapable of travelling over hill and dale. 

The study of the stones themselves does not support the 

Technical ana Colith theory. We have just seen that, as 
Experimental regards the deposits, all stages of the stones 

Pblectsons. may be observed zz sztu; from ‘‘used” or 

“shaped” forms, to rough pebbles of any description; it is 


1 Boule, M., “La Paléontologie humaine en Angleterre” (L’ Anthropologie, XXVi., 
1915). 


~ 
— 


OBJECTIONS TO EOLITH THEORY 131 


therefore impossible to decide where eoliths begin or end. 
Further, along with eoliths of usable size, we usually find 
countless pebbles of similar and even identical shapes, but 
smaller, and the dimensions of such may imperceptibly diminish 
till they become sub-microscopic. The flint gravels of Parisian 
gardens and walks are full of them. It is impossible to 
maintain that tiny splinters could ever have been used, that is, 
that they re eoliths. Why attribute a different origin to the 
larger specimens ??* 

We now know that natural forces, quite independent of 

Effects of human will, can produce appearances identical 
Natural Forces. with those presented by eoliths, such as the 
percussion bulb, and the ‘“‘retouching” regarded as character- 
istic of deliberate dressing. 

The waves of the sea produce such effects, as has been 
shown by the studies of Hardy at Dieppe, of the present 
author on the Norfolk Coast, of Fraas on the Riigen beach, of 
Sollas in the Isle of Wight, of P. Sarasin at Nice, and so on. © 

The same may be said of effects caused by sudden changes 
of temperature, observed by many travellers in the East, by 
Stanislas Meunier (experiments on the action of frost), by 
Penck (on the action of glaciers), and so on. 

Of similar significance also are various manifestations of 
pressure, exercised through direct blows, accumulations, land- 
slides, earth-falls, local foldings, etc. Many observers, Arcelin, 
Commont, and Breuil in France, Worthington Smith, Warren, 
and Haward in England, have called the attention of pre- 
historians to the effects of such varied happenings, the close 
relationship of which to certain eolith-containing deposits 
they have observed.’ 

They have shown that pressure, or compressions due to the 
weight of the deposits, produce, even in the depths of geological 


1 Sarasin, P., “Einige Bemerkungen zur Eolithologie” (/ahresbericht der Geogr. 
Ethnogr. Geselisch. in Ztirich, 1909). 

* See particularly: Warren, S. H., “On the Origin of Eolithic Flints by Natural 
Causes” (Jour. Anthrop. Inst., xxxv., 1905). ‘“‘A natural eolith factory beneath the 
Thanet Sand” (Quart. Journ. Geol. Soc., \xxxvi., 1921). Breuil, H., “Sur la présence 
déolithes & la base de lEocéne parisien” (L’Anthropologie, xxi., 1910). Haward, 
F. N., “The Chipping of Flints by Natural Agencies ” (Proc. Prehistoric Soc. of East 
Angilia,i.,1912). The origin of the “Rostro-carinate Implements” (/62d., ii1., 1918-1919). 


132 THE PROBLEM OF TERTIARY MAN 


layers, results similar to those due to blows—sometimes 
percussion bulbs, and sometimes the chipping off of more or 
less numerous small flakes or retouches, which are often 
distributed in so regular a manner as to simulate the results of 
deliberate action (Fig. 73). Blocks of flint have frequently 
been found broken into several pieces, which while bearing all 
the characters of eoliths, remain zz sz¢w, each piece close beside 





Fic. 73.—Natural Eoliths from the base of the Eocene deposits at Clermont (Oise). 
Two-thirds natural size. (After H. Breuil.) 


the other or even still in actual contact (Fig. 74). Breuil’s 
observations on the Lower Eocene deposits in the neighbour- 
hood of Clermont (Oise) are of particular interest in this 
respect. In a large number of cases, flint nodules are found 
fissured, split and dispersed in small pieces, and these might 
readily be transformed into eoliths by subsequent re-sorting, in 
the course of which they might undergo shocks due to the 
dynamic forces of streams or of the waves of the sea. 

With regard to the play of natural forces, certain experi- 
A Modern Eolith mental facts have been quite conclusive. 

Factory. There is, near Mantes, a factory which produces 
cement by mixing chalk with plastic clay. These substances 


MODERN “EOLITHS” 133 


are mingled with water in round tanks, the water being kept in 
constant movement by means of a horizontal wheel, placed 
above the surface of the liquid, on the spokes of which are 
hung harrows of cast-iron which plunge into the water and 
chalky mass to a depth of 0.20 m. from the bottom. The 
circumference of the wheel rotates at a speed of about 4 metres 
in a second, the speed of the Rhone in flood. The speed of 
the liquid is, of course, less because of the friction. The water 
moves in an eddy, which carries along not only the particles of 





Fic. 74.—F lint split in three fragments which remained in contact with each other. Eocene 
eolith beds of Clermont (Oise). Two-thirds natural size. (After H. Breuil.) 


chalk or clay, but also a certain number of flint nodules 
which, overlooked by the quarrymen, have been deposited 
along with the chalk in the tanks (Figs. 75-77). 

During the course of twenty-nine hours these flint nodules 
undergo thousands of reciprocal shocks, and their clinking, 
plainly audible, reminds one of the sound of pebbles rolled by 
a turbulent stream. When the machinery stops the flints 
remain at the bottom of the tank, covered by a chalky deposit. 
They are taken out, washed, and put in heaps, in order to be 
used in the making of concrete. 

Now these pebbles, which have been submitted in the tanks 
to the mechanical action of an artificial whirlpool comparable 
to the dynamic action of a natural torrent, present all the 
characters of ancient river gravels. The majority become 
round pebbles identical with those in ballast-pits, but, as in 


134 THE PROBLEM OF TERTIARY MAN 


all ancient flint alluvials, be they Oligocene, Miocene, Pliocene 


~ 










Fic. 75.— The 
Chalk Quarry. To 
the right a heap 
of flint nodules, 
thrown aside in 
working. 











Fic. 76. — The 
Diluting Tanks, 
where the  flints 
come into violent 
contact with each 
other. 






Fic, 77.—Heaps 
of Eoliths taken 
from the tanks. 


Fics. 75-77 —Works at Guerville near Mantes (Seine-et-Oise), a factory turning out both 
cement and eoliths. (Photographs by E. Cartailhac.) 


or Pleistocene, many specimens show “retouching.” More- 
over, the splintering is not always distributed all over these 


MODERN “ EOLITHS” 135 


pebbles as if by chance, but there may be localized flaking on 





Fic. 78.—Eoliths from the cement works at Mantes. 


Specimens similar to those which Rutot describes under the name of hammers, scrapers, 
scratching knives, retouchers and notched flints. Below to the left-hand corner, flint with plane 
of fracture and percussion bulb. Natural size. 


only one surface of the flint, grouped, as if of deliberate purpose, 
at definite points, that is to say actual ‘‘retouching” in 


136 THE PROBLEM OF TERTIARY MAN 


the sense given to this word by the supporters of the 
eolith theory. 

In the course of a few minutes’ search I was able to make 
a fine collection comprising the most characteristic forms of 
eoliths, forms said to be typical, specimens in every way 
similar to those which M. Rutot describes under the names 
of strikers, scrapers, scratchers, retouchers, and notched flints 
(Fig. 78). Certain extraordinarily perfect specimens might 
well have been described as the results of finished work, 
of “methodical retouching many times repeated.” ? 

These facts prove that stones, identical with those from 
ancient alluvials which have been described as worked or used, 
may be shaped naturally by the simple play of physical forces, 
apart from all human intervention. 

The repeated, though somewhat infrequent occurrence of 
certain eolith forms alleged to be types of implements, is quite 
simply explained ; for the same causes, acting under the same 
conditions and on materials originally of the same configuration, 
as untouched nodules of flints often are, ought to produce the 
same effects and bring about the same results. 

This, in my opinion, is the position with regard to the 
“eolith problem.” In short, we have no 
infallible means of distinguishing natural 
accidents from the products of deliberate rudimentary work- 
manship. Where the pebbles have been collected in Quater- 
nary deposits, this distinction is of slight importance from the 
philosophic point of view. All expert prehistorians have long 
known that there are to be found in the same layers as fine 
palaeolithic implements, much greater numbers of simpler flints, 
mere splinters, bearing or seeming to bear traces of working, or, 
shall we say, of usage. But they also know the difficulty and 
often the impossibility of distinguishing in practice the results 
of deliberate rudimentary work from the productions of natural 
agencies. 

The question is much more serious when we have to deal 
with pebbles from Tertiary deposits, in which there has never 


Conclusions. 


1 Boule, M., “L’Origine des Eolithes” (L’Anthropologie, XV1., 1905). Obermaier, 
H., “Zur Eolithenfrage” (Archiv fiir Anthropologie, 1905). 


CONCLUSIONS 137 


been discovered the least trace of fossil Man. We must then 
be doubly careful, and make absolutely certain, in the first 
place, that stones having all the characters of eoliths could 
not have been fashioned by natural forces. Now, all the facts 
I have just stated show that eoliths collected in Tertiary 
deposits do not provide indisputable evidence of the existence 
of Man at the periods when these deposits were formed.’ 

This existence, it cannot be too often repeated, is possible 
in Europe, it is probable in some other undetermined spots of 
the globe; but we have not yet, scientifically speaking, the right 
to assert it; up to the present we possess no material proof. 
The opposite view, in the present state of our knowledge, can 
only be a matter of opinion, ‘I am very proud of the antiquity 
of my family,” said Sir John Evans, long ago, ‘“‘but I want 
some other proof of it than a percussion bulb.” 


Since the first edition of this work appeared, Mr Reid Moir 
has continued his researches in the neighbourhood of Ipswich. 
He has found, in the Red Crag at Foxhall, flints which really 
seem to present the characteristics of deliberate shaping, and 
his views in this respect are shared by various prehistorians on 
the continent as well as in England. ‘The author of this work 
is, however, not yet convinced, and continues to reserve judg- 
ment. (For further details see Appendix, page 469.) 


! Supporters of the eolith theory of the existence of Tertiary Man have sometimes 
violated their modesty in comparing themselves with Boucher de Perthes. But 
surely the position is entirely different. Boucher de Perthes had to struggle 
especially against preconceived ideas, against a deliberate determination to deny 
the antiquity of Man. To-day no competent naturalist doubts the existence of 
Tertiary Man; we no longer dispute anything but the value of the material data 
put forward in support of his existence. 


(Ebel sisal 


THE MEN OF THE CHELLEAN OR LOWER PLEISTOCENE AG 


Tue chief geological, paleontological, and archeological 
characters of the oldest Pleistocene formations, corresponding 
very closely to the Chellean period of prehistorians, have 
already been discussed (see p. 50). We know that these 
characters indicate a warm climate, rich vegetation, and a 
fine mammalian fauna—in fact a most favourable environ- 
ment for human occupation. And, indeed, the presence of 
Man is disclosed by an industry, admittedly very primitive, 
which has abundantly scattered its stone products, some of 
them most carefully wrought, in various lands almost all 
the world over (see p. 112). It is not implied, however, as we 
shall see later, that these universally distributed implements 
are everywhere of the same age. 

Influenced by G. de Mortillet, prehistorians have long be- 
The Industry of lieved in the extreme simplicity and uniformity 

the Lower of Chellean implements. ‘The industry of this 

EMI: period,” it has been said, ‘“‘is of the simplest, most 
rudimentary character ; it comprised a single stone implement, 
a flint or fragment of other rock, dressed on both surfaces by 
hammering, and rendered more or less amygdaloid by means 
of blows generally of some force. This implement varies 
much in form, size, finish, and in material; but, once known, 
it is always easily recognized.”? 

The variations are indeed very considerable, as_ the 
accompanying drawings (Fig. 79) show, and as is still better 
shown by the specimens in the d’Acy collection in the Museum 
at Saint-Germain. Further, we now know that along with 
the amygdaloid flints, which G. de Mortillet has named 


1 Mortillet, G. de; Le PreAistovtgue, 1st ed; pa133. 
138 


STONE IMPLEMENTS 139 


‘“hand-hammers” (coups de potng) to indicate the chief use 
he attributes to them, and which, in his opinion, were imple- 
ments of general utility, the industry of very ancient Palzeolithic 
Man comprises other forms of implements, differently worked, 
with retouching more localized on one surface only. Such 
forms occur more or less commonly in all layers, especially in 
those which represent ancient human settlements, rather than 
in the alluvial deposits of more or less turbulent streams, where 
only the most bulky objects have been able to withstand the 
effects of reshuffling. Many have been figured by d’Acy 
and Commont. Now such specimens exhibit the closest 
resemblance to types considered by archeologists as character- 
istic of the succeeding Moustierian period (Fig. 79, Nos. 5, 
6, 7). Thus, Moustierian forms, which in France are specially 
characteristic of the period of the Mammoth fauna, have 
sometimes been found, as at Grimaldi, along with the warm 
fauna of the Lower Pleistocene, that is to say of the Chellean 
period of archeologists.’ 

In France, archeologists divide the Lower Pleistocene 
into two periods. The oldest, the Chellean, is said to be 
characterized by thick and rough amygdaloid stones shaped 
by the chipping off of very large flakes, and having in con- 
sequence cutting edges forming a zig-zag (Fig. 79, No. 1). 
The following period, called the Acheulean, marks the 
transition from the Chellean to the Moustierian; the amygda- 
loids are less thick, occasionally flattened (the Zmandes of the 
Somme quarries), more regular and symmetrical in form, and 


1 Boule, M., Les Grottes de Grimaldi, Géologie et Pualéontologie, i. (1906). 
This fact has greatly surprised prehistorians who believe in the chronological stability 
and infallibility of the various types of palzolithic implements. Reflection, however, 
shows that there is here nothing extraordinary. The human industry named 
Moustierian is one of the most primitive imaginable; it is certainly simpler than 
that of the fine amygdaloids from Chelles or Saint-Acheul, since it only comprises 
flakes retouched at the edges. It is therefore not astonishing that we should find it 
from the commencement of the Palzolithic period ; and, moreover, it is extremely 
probable that there may have been, as early as the Lower Pleistocene, various 
archeological facies, distributed according to the regions inhabited by Men who 
themselves may have differed from each other. The idea of the homogeneity of the 
human populations of the Chellean period, based on the wide distribution of stones 
wrought in an almond or amygdaloid shape, is a common theory with nothing to 
recommend it but its simplicity. 


140 MEN OF CHELLEAN OR LOWER PLEISTOCENE AGE 





FIG. 79.—The Stone Industry of the Lower Pleistocene (Chellean and Acheulean 
from Saint-Acheul (Somme) ). One-third natural size. (After Commont.) 

1. Rude implement, with large flakes, of Chellean make; seen full face and in profile. 
2, Primitive hand-hammer (coup de poring), the base or heel of which, intended for grasping, 
is formed by part of the original flint nodule. 3. Amygdaloid of Chellean type, seen full face 
and profile ; the cutting edges still present a zig-zag line, 4. Flatter amygdaloid, Acheulean 
type, seen full face and in profile ; the cutting edges are less sinuous. 5. Flint dressed on one 
side, and at the upper extremity retouched into a point. 6, Another flint, dressed on one side 
only. 7. Flint dressed in form of a scraper. 


SUPPOSED CHELLEAN HUMAN REMAINS 141 


showing finer and more careful work, which gives the cutting 
edge a straighter outline (Fig. 79, Nos. 3 and 4). Some 
authors even distinguish a pre-Chellean period, preceding the 
Chellean and characterized by an extremely rude stone 
industry without true amygdaloids. 

It is extremely probable that the men of Chelles and Saint- 
Acheul utilized and worked wood, but they do not seem to 
have made use of bone. 

However that may be, the great quantity of the stone 
products of these early ages, which must have extended over 
a great period of time, would lead us to expect many 
discoveries of contemporary human bones. 

In reality, such fossils remained almost unknown till 1908. 
Remarks on Certain discoveries in previous years have 
Human Bone sometimes been brought forward as belonging 
me corelt®Ss “to the Chelléan period, but my first duty must 

be to show that they are either of uncertain age or belong to 
a more recent period. 

The oldest skull-fragment, from Cannstadt, near Stuttgart 
in Wurtemberg, dates back to 1700. The source of this 
specimen is quite obscure, its antiquity is more than doubtful.’ 
It owes its reputation largely to de Quatrefages and Hamy, 
who selected it as a prototype of their ‘‘early fossil race.” * 

The second discovery was made, in 1844, amongst the 
flood-sorted volcanic cinders from the volcano at Denise, near 
Le Puy, in the district of Haute-Loire. It comprised some 
portions of skulls and other human bones. The antiquity of 
these remains has been disputed. In the course of my 
geological studies in Velay I devoted much care to the 
question of their age, or rather of the age of the deposit in 
which they were found. Having examined the layer several 
times, I am of opinion that this deposit dates back to a very 
remote period of Quaternary times.* But perhaps it would be 

1 See Obermaier, H., ‘‘Les restes humains quaternaires dans |’Europe centrale ” 
(L’ Anthropologie, xvii., 1906, p. 63). 

2 Quatrefages, A. de, and Hamy, E. T., Crania ethnica. The history and 
bibliography of this and the following discoveries will be found in this work. 


5 Boule, M., Description géologigue du Velay, Paris, 1892, p. 219; L’dge des 
derniers volcans de la France, Paris, 1906, p. 31. 


142 MEN OF CHELLEAN OR LOWER PLEISTOCENE AGE 


well not to discard the hypothesis of an artificial burial. The 
study of the bones, outlined by Sauvage, has still to. be 
completed from the morphological point of view, as well as 
from the physical and chemical points of view. 

The year 1863 was marked by the discovery of the famous 
jaw from Moulin-Quignon, the status of which I have already 
defined in the chapter dealing with the historical aspect (p. 22). 

The skull from Olmo, discovered near Arezzo in Tuscany, 
in 1863, was not recorded by Cocchi till 1867. But so much 
uncertainty surrounds its geological age that it is impossible to 
place much weight upon it in such a work as this.’ 

With regard to the skeletons from the alluvial soils of 
Clichy (1868) and of Grenelle (1870), I merely mention the 
rashness of the anthropologists who have recently attempted 
to prove their geological antiquity. Such an attempt, made 
forty years wie the oe by individuals who had never 
seen the deposits, cannot be of much value.- The most 
elementary notions of caution demand of human palzontology 
that it should base its speculations only on evidences of 
irreproachable origin. This has not been the case with regard 
to the skeletons from the Parisian alluvials.? 

In 1888, portions of the skull and several other parts of a 
human skeleton were found in the Pleistocene gravels of Galley 
Hill, near Northfleet in Kent. The gravels are situated about 
30 metres above the level of the Thee and contain many 
Paleolithic flints of different shapes, especially of lanceolate form. 
The bones are said to have been discovered at a depth of eight 
feet from the surface. 

Seven years later, in 1895, they were described by E. T. 
Newton, the palzontologist.* Keith* has since asserted that 
the Galley Hill skeleton does not differ in any important 
character from that of a modern Englishman; but this does 
not deter him from attributing to it an age of 200,000 years. 


1 The distinguished Italian anthropologist, Sergi, still considers it contemporary 
with Elephas antiguus: “Sul PUomo fossile dell’Olmo” (Aivista di Antropologia, 
XX1., 1916-17). 

2 Mortillet, G. de, Ze Préhistorigue, ist ed., pp. 346 ef seg. 

3 Quarterly Journal of the Geological Society, 1895. 

4 Keith, A., Ancient Types of Man, London, 1911, p. 32. 


SUPPOSED CHELLEAN HUMAN REMAINS 143 


More recently, several other anthropologists, in different 
countries, have magnified the importance of the Galley Hill 
discovery; it is said to prove that /Zommo safzens there dates 
back to a very remote period. That is quite possible, but the 
proof is insufficient. The fact is that no geologist was present 
at the discovery of the skeleton, and none examined the layer 
at the time. When the bones were presented to the Geological 
Society of London, two highly competent scientists, Sir John 
Evans and Professor Boyd Dawkins, raised doubts as to 
their high antiquity and brought forward arguments pointing 
strongly to artificial burial. These doubts are but increased by 
the appearance of the skull, which is now exhibited in the 
British Museum. It is quite a distorted relic, with none of the 
physical characters of fossil bone remains. On the contrary, 
Duckworth’ has shown that it is exactly like many comparable 
specimens from recent burials. 

I believe that the Galley Hill discovery is of exactly the 
same nature as those which have been made on several 
occasions in the Pleistocene alluvials of the Seine, at Grenelle 
and Clichy, and to which we in France now attach no import- 
ance, determined as we are to consign to oblivion all osteological 
evidence the high antiquity of which is not absolutely assured. 

Finally, some years ago, in 1912, English newspapers 
contained many references to a similar find brought to notice 
by Reid Moir, the discoverer of the rostro-carinate flints. It 
was said that a human skeleton had been found at a depth 
of 44 feet in a layer of sand at Ipswich in Suffolk, immediately 
under glacial clay containing erratics. This skeleton, carefully 
described by Sir A. Keith, who considered it to be of quite 
a modern type, was said to belong to a period preceding the 
great glaciation of the region itself, older than the Pleistocene 
alluvials.” After having seen it at the College of Surgeons in 
London, and after having visited the layer at Ipswich, I was 


! Duckworth, W. L. H., Zhe Problem of the Galley Hill Skeleton (Cambridge, 
1913). 

2 Moir, J. Reid, “The Occurrence of a Human Skeleton in a Glacial Deposit at 
Ipswich” (Proceedings of the Prehist. Soc. of East Anglia), 1.. 1912, p. 194. Keith, 
A., “ Description of the Ipswich Skeleton” (/ézd., p. 202). The Antiquity of Man 
(London, 1915). 


144 MEN OF CHELLEAN OR LOWER PLEISTOCENE AGE 


obliged to express my opinion as follows: ‘The Ipswich 
skeleton must, as a measure of scientific caution, be entirely 
dismissed from the series of authentic evidences, such as have 
an established place and serve as a basis for speculation in the 
science of human paleontology.” ? 

Some months later, Reid Moir loyally acknowledged that 
he had been mistaken. ‘I wish to take this opportunity,” he 
said, ‘to state that those who opposed my contention as to the 
great age of these remains were in the right, whilst the views 
held by me regarding them have been shown to be erroneous.” * 

For a long time, French prehistorians, led by G. de 
Mortillet, considered, because of the dearth of osteological 
evidences from Lower Pleistocene deposits, that the Neander- 
thal human type was characteristic of the Chellean period. 
For long I opposed this assertion, stating that Neander- 
thal Man was essentially Moustierian, and that we were 
unacquainted with any bone-remains of Chellean Man. 
To-day the latter statement no longer holds true. Two fine 
and quite authentic discoveries have been made in the course of 
the last few years, in deposits belonging to the Lower Pleisto- 
cene, the first at Mauer near Heidelberg, and the second at 
Piltdown in England. 

The Mauer jaw, the remains of a skull and lower jaw 
from Piltdown, and, perhaps, two teeth and a fragment of 
jaw from calcareous tufa near Weimar, are the only evidences 
which date or can possibly date back either to the Chellean 
or to the Acheulean period. I shall describe them in order, 
beginning with the least important, those from Weimar. 


The Weimar Fosstls. 


The village of Taubach, in the neighbourhood of Weimar, 
The Teeth from is situated on a terrace of the I]m, the river 
Taubach. gravels of which are surmounted by calcareous 
tufa, sandy or of a close nature. For many years there had 


1 Boule, M., “La paléontologie humaine en Angleterre” (Z’ Anthropologie, xxvi., 


1915, p. 38). 7 
2 Nature, 12th October 1916 [vol. xcvili. p. 109]. See L’ Anthropologie, xxiii., 


I9I7, p. 188. 


THE WEIMAR FOSSILS 145 


been collected in these tufas, along with bones of large animals 
belonging to the warm fauna of ancient Pleistocene times, 
dressed flints, and bones, broken, burnt, and possibly utilized 
as tools. The deposit, with its traces of hearths, seemed to 
correspond to a station and place 
of encampment of a tribe con- 
temporary with Llephas antiquus. 

As early as 1871, the proprietor 
of the deposit presented anthro- 
pologists with a human skull which 
he said he had found in the fossil 5,4 96-1. Tooth from Taubach (first 





bed, but which was identified by lower left true molar), seen from the 
; T RG crown and in profile (inner side). 
Virchow OSE Neolithic. In 1892, a 2. First lower left true molar of a 


naturalist, Dr Weiss, himself ex- Chimpanzee. Natural size. (After 
tracted from the deposit containing pine 

remains of the warm fauna, a tooth which was sent to Nehring 
of Berlin, along with another tooth, whose source, although 
less definite, nevertheless appeared to be the same. The first 
is a lower milk molar; the second a permanent lower molar, 
the first on the left side. 

As a result of comparative study, Nehring’ considered 
them to be human teeth, at the same time pointing out that 
they differed from the latter in their greater size, and in certain 
other simian characters. The true molar in particular is 
remarkable, on account of its length, the arrangement of the 
cusps of the crown, and its much corrugated enamel, all 
characters which give it a resemblance to the tooth of a 
Chimpanzee (Fig. 80). 


1 


Speaking of this tooth, Duckworth® has since said: ‘It is 
difficult to decide if it is a human tooth, or the tooth of a 
pithecoid precursor of Man.” The American zoologists, 


Miller and Gregory,*? do not hesitate to ascribe it to a 
species of fossil Chimpanzee, to which they likewise 
attribute the Piltdown jaw, of which we shall presently speak. 


1 Nehring, A., “ Ueber fossile Menschenzaihne aus dem Diluvium von Taubach ” 
(Naturwissenschaftliche Wochenschrift, 4th August 1895). 

2 Prehistoric Man, p. 23. 

3 Studies on the Evolution of the Primates, loc. cit., p. 313. 


K 


146 MEN OF CHELLEAN OR LOWER PLEISTOCENE AGE 


But it is possible that it may have belonged to a man related 
to the Neanderthal type. 





Rass ey SS 


Fic. 81.—Right and left profiles of adult Weimar Jaw. Half natural size. (After Schwalbe.) 


Ehringsdorf is another locality in the neighbourhood of 

The Ehrings- Weimar, where Quaternary formations, identical 

dorf Jaw. with those at Taubach, are surmounted by a 
deposit of loess and by a tufa or overlying travertine. 

A human lower jaw 
was found on 8th May 
1914, in the lower tufa, 
at 11.90 metres below the 
soil, and Schwalbe, the 
German anatomist who 
described it, has called it 
“the Weimar jaw.”? 

Much mutilated and 
lacking the ascending 
ramus on the left side, 
it retains only a_ small 
part of the right ramus. 
Almost all the teeth are 
in position (Figs. 81 
and 82). 





Fic. 82,—The adult Weimar jaw, seen from above. apy b f hi 4 
Two-thirds natural size. (After Schwalbe.) CES Oe 


striking, the more so since 
it is accompanied by a very marked alveolar prognathism. It 
follows that the inner region of the symphysis slopes strongly 
from the front backwards, and so is very noticeable when the 
jaw, lying in a horizontal plane, is observed from above. The 


1 “ Ueber einen bei Ehringsdorf in der N&ihe von Weimar gefundenen Unterkiefer 
des Homo primigenius” (Anatomischer Anzeiger, x\vil., 1914). 


HEIDELBERG MAN 147 


chin region appears to be deprived of tubercles for the genio- 
glossal and genio-hyoid muscles, nor is there any mylo- 
hyoid ridge on the inner surface of the horizontal branches, 
The foramina on the chin are long and situated directly below 
the first true molars (almost as in Homo neanderthalensis). 
Schwalbe lays stress on the narrowness of the mandibular arch, 
but he supposes that the specimen may have undergone some 
post-mortem deformation. 

The teeth are much worn; and as the premolars are less so 
than the canines, we must suppose that the crowns of the latter 
extended beyond the level of the crowns of the premolars. 
There is no interval (diastema) between the canine and the 
first premolar. A remarkable and rather unexpected fact is 
the diminutiveness of the last true molar; which seems to 
prove that the tendency of this tooth to disappear is much 
older than has been supposed. 

Without any hesitation, Schwalbe associates the Weimar 
specimen with the Neanderthal type, which we shall study 
presently. This jaw is really human, but of a low type. 
It differs considerably from the Mauer specimen; there is 
every reason to believe that it is more recent, and that it 
dates from the end of the Acheulean period, while the Mauer 
fossil must date from the beginning of the Chellean. 

In 1916 several additional bones were found belonging 
to the skeleton of a child about ten years of age, notably a 
lower jaw which is of the same type as the adult jaw 
referred to above. These remains were described. in 1920 
by Virchow, and are referred to and illustrated in the 


Appendix (page 470). 


Lhe Mauer /aw. 
(Homo heidelbergensis.) 


At the end of 1908, Otto Schoetensack, of Heidelberg 
University, published a memoir entitled, ‘The lower jaw of 
Flomo hevdelbergensis, taken from the sands at Mauer, near 
Heidelberg.” * 


1 Schoetensack, O., Der Unterkiefer des Homo heidelbergensis aus den Sanden 
von Mauer bet Heidelberg (Leipzig, 1908). 


148 MEN OF CHELLEAN OR LOWER PLEISTOCENE AGE 


The village of Mauer is situated 10 kilometres south-east of 
The Mauer Jaw Heidelberg on the Elzenz, a tributary of the 
Site. Neckar (Fig. 83). The bed-rock of this region 
is of Triassic formation, overlaid in places by a covering of 
Pleistocene deposits, and particularly 
of river sands representing the ancient 
bed of the Neckar. “On 21st October 
1907, in one of the pits worked in 
these sands, the “Sandgrube Gra- 
fenrain,” a lower jaw was found 24 
metres below the surface of the soil. 
The accompanying photograph 
and geological section of the face of 
the sand-pit were made by Schoeten- 
sack (Fig. 84). The lower part of 
this section is formed by the ‘‘ Mauer sands” the base of 
which contains gravels with beds of rounded pebbles, and 
the upper portion of which, separated from the lower by 
a bed of clay, consists of fine sand. The upper part of the 
section is formed by silt or loess, subdivided into a lower 
or ancient level, of a brown and sandy character, and an 
upper and more recent level containing small calcareous 
concretions. 

The Mauer sands, very rich in fossils, contain shells of 
both land and fresh-water molluscs, which, taken as a whole, 
indicate a climate more continental than at present. Of thirty- 
five species, eight have emigrated to the East. 

The mammalian fauna comprises the Ancient Elephant 
(Elephas antiguus), the Etruscan Rhinoceros, a horse which 
may be a transition form between the Pliocene Horse (£guus 
stenonts) and the present-day Fguus caballus, a Wild Boar, 
Red Deer, Roe Deer, an Elk, a Bison, two Bears resembling 
the Pliocene Ursus etruscus,a Dog, two felines—a Lion and 
Wild Cat—and the Beaver. This fauna is most closely 
related to that of the lowest Pleistocene of France, such as 
we find in the oldest gravels of the valleys of the Somme 
(Abbeville) and of the Seine (Chelles), in the deepest deposits 
and settlements of the Grotto du Prince at Grimaldi, and in 





FIG. 83.—Geographical position 
of Mauer, near Heidelberg. 


SITE OF HEIDELBERG MAN 149 


a few archaic formations in the caves of the Pyrenees. It 
even exhibits the same zoological gradations as these—a horse 
akin to Aguus stenonzs, a small bear nearly related to Ursus 
etruscus, and such like. 

It has been suggested that the Mauer sands date from the 
Pliocene, but this is straining the facts of the case. The 
fauna of these sands hardly differs at all from that of various 


eee eee ee ee ee Se 


LOWER 


ee ee ewer anes 





eee eee ee 


MAUEK SANDS 
a 
SI 
S) 
w 


eee eww ee we ae 





Fic. 84.—Photograph and Geological Section of the Grafenrain Sand-pit at Mauer. 
+ indicates the spot where the human jaw was found, 24 metres below the surface 
of the soil. (After Schoetensack.) 


other European deposits, such as those at Siissenborn and 
Mosbach in Germany, in the Norfolk Forest-bed in England, 
at Solilhac and Saint-Prest in France, all of which lie on the 
borderland between Pliocene and Pleistocene. Yet the closest 
resemblances are with our ‘‘Chellean” fauna, a possibility the 
more to be kept in view inasmuch as it has not been disproved 
that the relics of the most ancient members of the Mauer sands 
may have been derived from deposits of greater age. 


150 MEN OF CHELLEAN OR LOWER PLEISTOCENE AGE 


As the topographical and stratigraphical conditions of the 
Mauer river formation confirm this interpre- 
tation, there is every reason to believe that the 
ancient owner of the human jaw extracted from the gravels was 
a representative of the oldest workers of Paleolithic stones. 
There can be no doubt that the jaw was found in the place 
ascribed to it, and that it is of the same age as the gravels, an 


Age of the Jaw. 





Fic. 85.—Heidelberg (Mauer) Jaw, seen in profile. Three-fourths natural size. 
(From a photograph by Schoetensack.) 


age indicated by the animal bone remains amongst which it was 
lying and with which it agrees in its state of fossilization. 

The Mauer discovery is of the utmost importance, since it 
brings us into touch with one of the rare relics of the most 
ancient human race known to us. Accordingly, it deserves to 
be studied in some detail. 

The Mauer jaw is almost complete and is well preserved. 
At the very first glance it impresses one by 
its great size, its massive and extraordinarily 
powerful appearance, by the great breadth of its ascending 
rami, and by the complete absence of chin (Figs. 85 and 86). 
These are simian features, or, shall we say, stamps of the 
beast. 


Its Characters. 


CHARACTERS OF HEIDELBERG MAN 151 


On the other hand, the dentition is altogether human ; the 
canines are small, and the molars possess dimensions and 
characters frequently found in modern Man. Therefore 
Schoetensack placed his fossil in the genus //omo, naming it 
Homo herdelbergensis, whilst Bonarelli* invented a new generic 


name for it, Paleoanthropus. 





fie a | 


Fic. 86.—Heidelberg (Mauer) Jaw, seen from above. Two-thirds natural size. 
(After Schoetensack.) 


Let us examine its morphology more closely. 

The ascending rami are extraordinarily broad and low. 
They measure 60 mm. in breadth (in place of an average of 
37 mm. in modern Man), and their height is 66 mm.; so 
that, seen in profile, they are almost square in form. The 
mandibular notch (on the upper surface of the ramus) is not 
deep; the coronoid process is blunt, rounded, and at a lower 
level than the condyle; the latter possesses a large articular 
surface. Among anthropoids, the Gibbon most closely 
resembles our fossil in these three characters. 


! Rivista tlaliana di Paleontologia, 1909. 


152 MEN OF CHELLEAN OR LOWER PLEISTOCENE AGE 


The angle of the jaw has the truncated appearance noticeable 
in anthropoids, particularly in the Orang, as well as in //omo 
neanderthalensis, whose remains we shall examine later. 





Frenchie: sss Heidelberg 


Chimpanzee 





FIG. 87.—Superimposed Profiles of the Heidelberg Jaw, of a Chimpanzee’s Jaw, and of a 
modern Human Jaw (French). Two-thirds natural size. 


The horizontal rami are high and massive. They attain a 

thickness of 23 mm. at the level of the last molar; at the level 

of the mental foramen they are still 18 mm. thick, while in 
modern Man they rarely exceed 14 mm. q 








t 
| 
\ 
{ 
| 
1 
' 
| 
| 
1 
| 
} 
' 
1 


Oe ee me we ae ee ee 


Fic. 88.—Vertical sections of various Lower Jaws at the symphysis. Two-thirds natural size. 
C. Chimpanzee; H. Heidelberg Man; F. Frenchman. To the right, the three profiles 
superimposed, that of Heidelberg being shaded. 


The lower edge is concave, as in the case of many 
cynomorphic apes, and contrary to the case in anthropo- 
morphic apes and Man. On the interior surface, the oblique 
ridge is faint, indicating weak mylo-hyoid muscles. 

In Fig. 87 I have shown the Heidelberg jaw superimposed 


CHARACTERS OF HEIDELBERG MAN 153 


on the jaw of a Chimpanzee and on the jaw of a modern Man 
(French), and this shows and summarizes clearly the differences 
exhibited by these three specimens as seen in profile. 

The symphysis is very thick (17 mm.), its external surface 
has a convex and receding curve, resembling that of the apes 
and quite different from that of modern Man (Fig. 88). There 
is really no trace here of a chin. Now 
the chin is essentially a characteristic of 
the human race. 

Seen full face, the region of the 
symphysis has, at its lower edge, a 
strongly marked chin pit (mental fossa) ; 
this structure occurs also in the Gibbons, 
and, to a less degree, in certain human 
jaws, either fossil or recent, as in the 
case of the Australians. 

In modern Man the lower part of 
the front of the jaw-bone terminates in 
a definite edge, and the imprints of the 
insertions of the digastric muscles are 
apparent on the other side of this edge, 
that is, on its inner surface. But in the 
Mauer jaw the edge is replaced by a 
flattened area, a facette bearing the two 
digastric muscle impressions, which are 
here shorter than in the Chimpanzee, = 
although longer than in modern Man. fic. een ane teeeedee and 
Mameeceemmrcspects | Neanderthal; Man. ; {8*tticimpressions of various 

: : ‘ jaws. About half natural size. 
stands intermediate between Heidelberg || Cen 
Man and modern Man (Fig: 89). 3.0Lay Chapelley ) 4.) French, 

The region of the symphysis further “% Sas ypgigesttic 

MmuscCles. 

shows certain peculiarities on its inner 

surface. It slopes strongly from the front backwards, as does 
the outer or chin surface. Moreover, it is not uniformly de- 
veloped: the part near the lower third, the genial region, instead 
of projecting as in Man, contains, as in the anthropoid apes, 
a hollow which takes the place of the upper genial tubercles for 
the insertion of the muscles of the tongue (Fig. go). 








154. MEN OF CHELLEAN OR LOWER PLEISTOCENE AGE 


In the characters of its symphysis, therefore, as Fig. 88 
shows, the Mauer jaw is more akin to that of the large apes 
than to that of modern Man. We shall see later that in this 
respect the jaw of Neanderthal 
Man (Homo  neanderthalensis) 
takes a place exactly between 
that of Heidelberg Man (/omo 
heidelbergensis) and of recent 
Man (ffomo sapiens). 

The structure of the anterior 
part of the Mauer jaw shows that 
the space left for the tongue was 
® greatly constricted, although less 
E ~so than in anthropoid apes, and 
Fic. 9o.—Inner surface of the body of the more so than in modern Man and 

Mauer Lower Jaw, genial region. Photo- even than in other fossil men 
graphed from a cast. Natural size. 
known to us. The play of the 
tongue in articulate language must in consequence have been 
singularly restricted. It would even seem, to borrow an 
expression which Gaudry thought might be justifiably applied 
to Dryopithecus, that, from an anatomical-point of view, we 
have here the embodiment of a kind of “intermediate stage 
between speaking Man and the howling beasts.”’ 

The dentition, as we have said, is definitely human, both 
in its entirety and inthe details@oreets 
characters. 

The alveolar borders, defining the dental curve, have a 
parabolic instead of the U-form of the great apes. 

The teeth are well preserved, slightly worn on the left side; 
the molars on the right side have been partially broken in dis- 
engaging the relic from its matrix. The dental series is regular, 
continuous, without any interval (diastema) between the teeth. 

The incisors are normal: their roots are slightly arched, 
following the curve of the region of the symphysis. The 
canine is not more developed than in modern Man, even of the 
civilized races; its crown does not perceptibly rise above the 
level of the neighbouring crowns. This fact is very important, 





The Dentition. 


1 “T)intermédiaire entre Homme qui parle et les bétes qui crient.” 


CHARACTERS OF HEIDELBERG MAN 155 


for it bears on a human adaptation which is thus shown to 
date from a very remote period. Even at the primitive stage 
represented by this simian jaw, the canines were no longer 
used as defensive weapons. 

The premolars also are quite normal. The true molars 
are almost as broad as long, whilst in apes they are generally 
longer than broad. Com- 
pared with those of civilized 
Man, their dimensions are 
considerable, and may be 
compared with those of 
many modern savages, such 
as the Australians (Fig. 91).: 
On the other hand, they 
appear weak in comparison 
with the strength of the jaw 
which bears them. 

The second true molar 
is the largest, as is the rule 
in Man, but is likewise the 
€acenin bapes. The last Sopcast oo! rae, Ne 
molar, or wisdom tooth, ry: ‘ 
had not been cramped in 
its development, for the 
alveolar border is prolonged 








CHIMPANZEE p p p 


w FIG. 91.—Comparative morphology of the Lower 


backward sufficiently faneto Molars of a Chimpanzee, of Heidelberg Man, 

accommodate a supplemen- of a Tasmanian and of a modern Frenchman. 
Natural size. 

tary molar. Ia, 2a, 3a—first, second, and third true molars ; 


Minute study of the 4, 4 external cusps; 4, posterior cusps, highly 
hath 1 developed in the true molars of the Chimpanzee 
crowns of the true molars ang Heidelberg Man, less developed in the 
proves of interest, and the Tasmanian, and only present in the first molar 
: ; of the Frenchman. 

smallest details are im- | 
portant enough to be taken into consideration, for while Man 
and the large apes have molars which are much alike they 


differ from those of other monkeys.’ 


! With reference to this subject, see the illuminating notes of A. Gaudry: “Sur 
la similitude des dents de !Homme et de quelques animaux” (L’ Anthropologie, xii., 
1901). ‘Contribution 4 Histoire des Hommes fossiles” (/dzd., xiv., 1903). 


156 MEN OF CHELLEAN OR LOWER PLEISTOCENE AGI 


In the anthropoid apes (Fig. 91), the crown of the large 
lower molars is always formed of five well-developed cusps or 
tubercles. In civilized Man, the fifth cusp (Fig. 91, J) is 
reduced or even completely lost, save in the case of the first 
true molar, which is the largest and where it is always present. 
In certain savage races, such as the Australians, in several 
types of fossil men, and in the Heidelberg Man, this fifth cusp 
persists more or less in all the true molars; but instead of 
projecting in the form of a heel, as in the apes, it has already 
become reduced in size and is wedged in between the two 
neighbouring cusps, as in the first true molar of men of the 
white races. 

All the teeth in the Mauer jaw have large pulp cavities. 
In the lower races at the present day these cavities are also 
larger than in Europeans. Here is illustrated the persistence 
of an infantile character which represents a primitive stage in 
the dentition of the large primates. 

Such are the principal morphological characters of the 
valuable Mauer fossil. According to Schoeten- 
sack, this ancient jaw represents a very primitive 
form, for certain of its characters are found in the lower 
monkeys and even in the Lemurs (great breadth of ascending 
‘rami, weak mandibular notch). Thus it would seem to have 
retained some aspects of a stage through which the common 
ancestors of Anthropoid Apes and Man must have passed. 
However that may be, it is certain that, in this very remarkable 
anatomical specimen, in this ancient relic of one of our oldest 
ancestors, there is a skilfully proportioned mixture of human 
and simian characters. 

Duckworth considers that the jaw discovered by Schoeten- 
sack may have belonged to Pethecanthropus—-an unnecessary 
hypothesis. We may go so far as to say, however, that the 
lower jaw of the Mauer fossil, like the brain-box of the Javan 
fossil, actually represents an almost ideal intermediate stage 
between the Apes and Man. 

Others have wished to go further, and to deduce from this 
valuable but too isolated relic more than it can _ signify. 
Reconstructions of the skull, and even the portrait of Homo 


Conclusions. 


PILTDOWN MAN 157 


hetidelbergensis have been published. Such attempts may 
serve as pleasant pastimes for men of science; but they should 
not be allowed to pass beyond the study walls. 

On the other hand comparisons between the Mauer fossil 
and similar fragments of other human fossils are justifiable. 
While reserving this examination for the following chapter, 
I may say, here and now, that between the lower jaw 
of Homo heidelbergensis and that of Homo neanderthalensts, 
his successor in Western Europe, there are certain similarities 
favouring the hypothesis of a fairly close relationship. 


The Piltdown Man. 


(Hoanthropus dawsont.) 


On 18th December 1912, Mr Charles Dawson, the geologist, 

Historical and Dr Smith Woodward, the eminent palaon- 

Account. tologist of the British Museum, exhibited before 
the Geological Society of London human bones obtained from 
a very ancient Quaternary deposit. English 
newspapers of the day following brought 
this sensational news to the knowledge of 
the public at large, and from that time the 
“Piltdown discovery ” has been expounded, 
criticized, and discussed almost everywhere. 
The bibliography relating to it consists, 
at the moment of writing, of more than one 
hundred articles, notes, or memoirs. 

In a field near Piltdown (Fig. 92), in the 
parish of Fletching in Sussex, there is a 
small quarry where the countrymen of the 





Sea pb. 


district obtain stones for repairing the roads. Fic. 92,—Sketch showing 


Geographical Position 


One day one of the workmen forwarded to 
of Piltdown. 


Mr Dawson a fragment of a human parietal 

bone, very ferruginous in appearance, as were the stones 
of the quarry. Some years later, in the autumn of tort, 
Mr Dawson collected among the rubble a fragment larger than 
the first, belonging to the frontal region. This find was 
remitted to Dr Smith Woodward, who immediately recognized 


158 MEN OF CHELLEAN OR LOWER PLEISTOCENE AGE 


its great interest ; and accordingly, by common consent, further 
explorations were carried out in the deposit during the summer 
of 1912. 

It would seem that a human skull, entire or almost entire, 
had been broken by the workmen, and the fragments scattered. 
Some of these it was possible to recover from the rubble, while 
the right half of a lower jaw was obtained by Mr Dawson zz 
situ in the gravel, at the very spot where the skull lay, and 
where, a yard away but at the same level, Dr Smith Woodward 
found a fragment of the occipital bone. Beside the human 
remains there were collected fossil animal remains and some 
dressed flints. 

Dawson has described the geological bearings of the bed, 
and Smith Woodward has identified the animal bones and 
reconstructed the human fossil.t1 As the reconstructed skull, 
according to a first measurement, seemed to have a capacity 
of only 1070 cubic centimetres, as the fragment of jaw had 
a very Simian appearance, and as, according to Elliot Smith, 
the intracranial cast revealed the most simian brain so 
far known in the human family, Smith Woodward believed 
that it was a very primitive form representing the dawn of 
humanity, and gave to the remains the very expressive name 
of Loanthropus dawsont. 

These early communications were followed by discussions 
bearing on the age of the bed, on the reconstruction of the 
skull, and on the question of attributing to the same being 
an undoubtedly human brain-box and at the same time an 
absolutely simian lower jaw. 

Sir A. Keith, the able anatomist of the College of Surgeons 
of London, opposed from the first certain of Dr Smith 
Woodward's conclusions.” According to him, the restoration 
of the skull was at fault: its capacity was really 1500 c.c. 


* Dawson, C., and Woodward, A. S., “On the Discovery of a Paleolithic Skull 
and Mandible... at... Piltdown ... with an Appendix by Elliot Smith” (Quart. 
Journ. Geol. Soc. London, \xix., 1913). Supplementary Note... (/bid, IQI4). 
Woodward, A, S., A Guide to Fossil Remains of Man in the British Museum, 
London, 1905 [3rd. ed. 1922]. 

* Keith, A., “Ape Man or Modern Man?” (Jllustrated London News, 16th and 
23rd August 1913), etc. 


——————— a ee ee 


AGE OF PILTDOWN SITE 


159 


instead of 1070 c.c.; so that we have here a being quite 
comparable to a man of our own day, to a “ London citizen.” 


Professor Elliot Smith de- 
fended Smith Woodward's 
restoration. 

In August 1913, a French 
palzontologist, a student in my 
laboratory, Pere Teilhard de 
Chardin, exploring the bed in 
Dawson’s company, found a 
canine tooth which was attri- 
buted to the jaw, and which 
reinforced the simian characters 
of the latter.’ 

In 1915 other human frag- 
ments were brought to light; 
they belonged to one or two new 
individuals.” The controversy 
continued and still continues, as 
we shall presently see. 

After this short historical 
preface, let us examine the facts, 
considering first those which 
bear on the geological age of 
Eoanthropus, and thereafter those 
which relate to the fossil itself. 

The geological age must 
be determined by stratigraphy, 
Geological Age paleontology, 

of the Layer. and archeology. 

The Piltdown gravels cover a 



































































































































@) a ms Df 
Os Cy: Pe gt Se e 
Be ages ee ee eee 
2 Bee tar ees erat Wie ey." 
3 
% 
§ = = = 


















































FIG. 93.—Section of the Piltdown 


1. Superficial soil, 0.30 metre. 2 
yellow clayey sand, containing, in its 


Bed. 


. Pale 


flood- 


sorted condition, certain constituents from the 
underlying bed; a palzeolithic implement 
was taken from the middle of this layer, the 


depth of which is about 0.75 metre. 3. 


Dark 


brown ferruginous gravel, with subangular 


flints and pieces of tabular iron ore. 


Bed 


of Loanthropus and water-worn Pliocene 


fossils. Eoliths and a dressed flint. 


The 


surface of the bottom layer shows depressions. 
Depth about 0.45 metre. 4. Bed of sand and 
clay, a sort of mud formed at the expense of 


the underlying beds and containing 


large 


blocks of flint. 5. Strata of the Tunbridge 


Wells Sands (Wealden) zm situ. 
Dawson.) 


(After 


plateau, 30-40 metres high, about 25 metres above the river 
Ouse; and at Piltdown, their depth varies from 0.30 metre 
to 1.50 metres. ‘They rest on the Wealden sandstone at the 


1 Woodward, A. S., “ Note on the Piltdown Man” (Geological Magazine, October 


1913). 


2 Woodward, A. S., ‘“‘ Fourth Note on the Piltdown Gravel, with evidence of a 
Second Skull of Zoanthropus dawsont” (Quart. Journ. Geol. Soc., London, \xxiii., 1917). 


160 MEN OF CHELLEAN OR LOWER PLEISTOCENE AGE 


base of the Cretaceous formation. The gravels are composed 
of Weald pebbles, dark brown and ferruginous, mixed with 
angular flints and fragments of quartzite, all of which are 
embedded in a sand markedly stratified in places and strongly 
cemented together by iron oxides, conditions particularly 
noticeable towards the base of the formation, where the 
palzeontological discoveries were made (Fig. 93). 

The gravels are the remains of an alluvial formation which 
formerly spread over vast areas, before the last sculpturing of 
the valley of the Ouse took place, excavating it to a depth 
of 80 feet. This topographical and stratigraphical arrange- 
ment seems to me to be similar to that which occurs in the 
valleys of Northern France, where the middle terraces, generally 
situated from 25-30 metres above the river channel, have been 
ascribed to the Lower Pleistocene, characterized by the fauna 
containing Evlephas anteqguus. This is also the opinion of the 
English geologist, Clement Reid, who has compared the 
Piltdown gravels to the ancient Paleolithic gravels of the 
Thames valley, both having been formed subsequent to the 
great Glacial Period of the British Isles. 

Paleontology expresses no very definite opinion on the 
subject. The mammal remains collected in the gravels have 
been attributed to two faunas of different ages. On the one 
hand, fragments of the teeth of a Mastodon, of Stegodon, and 
of a Rhinoceros, can only be of Pliocene age; but as they are 
much worn by transporting agencies, we may suppose that 
they originally came from a more ancient deposit. The 
teeth of a Hippopotamus may have belonged equally well 
to Quaternary or to Pliocene times. The other remains, 
fragments of the antlers of Red Deer, Beavers’ teeth, and the 
molar of a horse, would appear to be less impregnated with 
mineral matter and less water-worn. They may be regarded 
as Pleistocene and really contemporary with the gravel. 

There remains the archeological aspect. The flaked flints 
found in the Piltdown gravel are of two kinds. A large 
number of very water-worn and weathered fragments may be 
looked upon as eoliths, and, like the water-worn teeth of the 
Proboscidians, as originating from an older geological formation. 


AGE OF PILTDOWN SITE 161 


Some other fragments are distinctly worked, and _ their 
sharp edges are almost as well preserved as when they were 
made. They have been dressed or flaked on one surface 
only, and their general form is in no way remarkable. We 
know nowadays that although flints worked on one side only 
were formerly regarded as characteristic of the Moustierian 
civilization, they are very often, sometimes to the exclusion of 
other forms, found also in the Chellean. Nothing could be 
more natural, as we have already pointed out; for implements 
fashioned by simple flaking are the most elementary, the most 





FIG. 94,—Dressed Flint from the Piltdown Gravel. Three-fourths natural size. 
(After Dawson.) 


primitive that can be imagined; their manufacture certainly 
preceded that of implements dressed on both faces, and in 
particular that of the fine lanceolate forms of Chellean times 
(Fig. 94). So that in spite of the absence of amygdaloid 
types, it is possible, as Dawson would have us believe, that 
the Piltdown dressed flints are of Chellean age. 

More recently there has been found in the same gravels a 
detached splinter of a bone of a Proboscidian, which measures 
no less than 0.40 metre in length and 0.10 metre in breadth. 
Of the artificial character of this object, which is rounded at one 


end, and pointed at the other, there seems to be no doubt in 
L 


162 MEN OF CHELLEAN OR LOWER PLEISTOCENE AGE 


the minds of Dawson and Smith Woodward, who regard it as 
“an implement ”;’ although M. Breuil looks upon it as a bone 
gnawed by a large Beaver or 7vrogontherium, Beaver remains 
having been actually found in the bed.” 

To sum up, stratigraphy justifies us in dating the Piltdown 
gravels from a very remote period of the Pleistocene; the 
palzontological data may be interpreted in the same sense ; 
and the archeological evidences are in no wise contradictory 
to this view. 

Now, can we be certain that the human remains themselves 
are contemporary with the gravel? Their state of fossilization, 
the manner in which they lay, and their scattered positions in 
the alluvial would forbid us, according to some, from regarding 
them as more recent. Could they, then, be more ancient, 
and form part of the Pliocene fauna? A przorz, that would 
not be impossible, and it was actually the belief first held in 
England, whence came the announcement of the discovery of 
a Tertiary Man. But the conditions of the deposit do not 
support this hypothesis. The relatively large size of the pieces 
of skull, their excellent preservation, and the freshness of their 
edges, which show only very slight traces of wear and tear, 
are in strong contrast to the fragmentary, decayed, and eroded 
appearance of the mammalian remains. ‘The dispersal, within 
a small radius, of several pieces belonging to a single skull, 
bears out the same fact. We may still argue about the precise 
age of the Piltdown gravels; but there does not seem to be 
any doubt that the human bones were contemporary with the 
deposition of these gravels. 7 

All these deductions are valid only if we take for granted 
the hypothesis that the superficial Piltdown formation is 
homogeneous as regards age and composition. Now it is 
possible, it even seems apparent, that this is not the case. 
The primary origin of the deposits may be very ancient and 
date from Pliocene times, as certain of the most worn fossils 
appear to indicate. But the first alluvial formations may have 


' Dawson, C., and Woodward, A. S., “On an Implement from Piltdown” 
(Quart. Journ, Geol, Soc., London, \xxi., 1915). 
2 Revue anthropologiqgue, July-August 1922, p. 2209. 


CHARACTERS OF PILTDOWN REMAINS 163 


subsequently undergone successive alterations which may have 
mixed the more recent with the more ancient fossils. One 
thing is certain: that the human bones with edges still sharp 
cannot have undergone prolonged transportation. Moreover, 
the character of ferruginous mineralization loses much of its 
importance here, if we take into account the rapidity with which 
water charged with iron can change the physical aspect of 
objects it impregnates. Now all this region is made up of 
Wealden deposits formed of very ferruginous constituents. 

In short, it is very difficult to gauge precisely the geological 
age of the human bones. With my English colleagues, I consider 
them as dating from the Lower Pleistocene, but I must add that 
this does not seem to me to have been absolutely proved. 

The bone-remains, human or supposedly human, comprise, 

Description ‘first, a large portion of brain-box and half a 
of the Bones. lower jaw with the first and second true molars 

The Skull. in position. To these remains were added, 
later on, some nasal bones, a tooth and some fragments of 
another skull. 

There are four pieces of the first skull, composed of nine 
fragments, by means of which it has been possible to recon- 
struct the brain-box. The largest of these pieces consists of 
the frontal and parietal portions of the left side. The second 
is a left temporal bone, almost complete and well-preserved 
(Fig. 95). Unfortunately these two pieces have no point of 
contact with the two others, which belong to the right half of 
the skull, and consist of the larger part of the parietal and 
the median region of the occipital This blank explains 
the divergences which have arisen in the course of the 
reconstruction of the skull, a matter which will always remain 
somewhat problematical. 

The bones are normal, without any trace of disease; they 
have been in no wise deformed by their mineralization. 

The thickness of the bones is remarkable, from 10 mm. to 
12 mm. in the parietal and frontal, and so also is the depth of 
the impressions of the meningeal vessels on the inside of the 
skull. Apart from this peculiarity, detailed examination of 
each of the bones hardly reveals any characters which are 


164 MEN OF CHELLEAN OR LOWER PLEISTOCENE AGE 


not perfectly human, and even more akin to those of modern 
Flomo sapiens than to those of other fossil men such as //omo 
neanderthalensts. 

As there is preserved in the left frontal region a portion 





Fic. 95.—Various Fragments of the Skull of Zoanthropus. 


Above, to the left ; left frontal bone, seen from the outer surface ; cor,, coronal suture ; ¢.@.f. 
external angular process ; m.f. facette for malar; s.f facette for the sphenoid ; 4 temporal ridge. 

Above, to the right; left temporal bone, external surface ; ¢.a.m. external auditory meatus 
[blocked by a pebble]; g/ glenoid fossa; f.a.f. post-articular apophysis ; sa/. process for 
malar; mast. mastoid process. 

Below ; occipital bone, external surface ; ¢.0.c. external occipital crest ; ¢.0.f. external occipital 
protuberance ; 7 mag. occipital foramen (foramen magnum); lamb, portion of lamboid suture ; 
is. linea suprema ; w.c.Z., upper curved line ; Ac./. lower curved line. 

All the figures are two-thirds natural size (after Smith Woodward). 


CHARACTERS OF PILTDOWN REMAINS 165 


of the external or malar tuberosity (Fig. 95), it can be 
definitely ascertained that the supra-orbital ridges were not 
more developed than in modern Man. This conclusion was 
confirmed in 1916 by the discovery of a second piece of frontal 
bone belonging to a second individual. The coronal suture 
is highly complex. 

On the parietal bones, the curved temporal lines are very 
high; and the squamous suture is as arched as in a modern skull. 
The strong projection of the temporal ridge and the strength of 
the zygomatic apophysis indicate a considerable development 
of the masticatory apparatus. We must also note the position, 
almost in the middle of the parietal, of the very pronounced 
parietal boss, and the presence of a large flat area behind this 
boss. 

The left temporal bone, which is well preserved (Fig. 95), is 
similar in all its details to that of modern races: the glenoid 
cavity is as deep ; the tympanic bone is reduced; the mastoid 
process is large. Yet this bone seems to me to exhibit certain 
somewhat special characters—a very considerable projection of 
the temporal crest, and especially of the sub-mastoid tubercle, 
a large backward extension of the petrous region, the strength 
of the zygomatic apophysis, and the fairly considerable develop- 
ment of the post-glenoid tubercle. 

The occipital bone is remarkable for its development ina 
transverse direction. The external occipital protuberance is 
_ placed, as is the case in modern Man, below the plane separating 
the cerebral hemispheres from the cerebellum, instead of above 
it as in Moustierian Man. It is not thus in the portion of the 
occipital found in 1916; here the external occipital protuberance 
lies above the lateral sinuses, and the neck muscles extend 
higher, as in Neanderthal Man. Nevertheless, the noticeable 
projection of the upper arches contrasts with the very slight 
development of the external occipital protuberance. These 
upper arches are continued for some distance in the direction 
of the temporal. The lower curved lines seem to me to be 
relatively nearer the upper curved lines than in modern types, 
conforming in this respect to the arrangement seen in //omo 
neanderthalensts and to a greater degree in Chimpanzees. 


166 MEN OF CHELLEAN OR LOWER PLEISTOCENE AGE 


Nasal bones, found in an excellent state of preservation, 
are very human in character; relatively small and_ broad, 
they are rather of a Melanesian or African than of an Eurasian 
type. 
The skull, as finally reconstructed by Dr Smith Woodward, 
would be mesaticephalic, almost brachycephalic, having a 
cephalic index of 78 anda slightly flattened vault. Its capacity, 
according to the latest evaluation by the same author, should 
no longer be 1070 but 1300 cubic centimetres, comparable, 
therefore, to the average capacity of many present-day savage 
peoples, such as the Australians, Bushmen, or Andaman 
islanders. 

Asa whole, and in spite of certain peculiarities of a primitive 
type and of the extraordinary thickness of bone, the skull 
possesses in high degree the structure of a humanskull. The 
individual to whom it belonged, far from representing a different 
genus, can at the most be regarded only as the representative 
of a primitive race of HZomo sapiens. Professor Ramstrom’* of 
Upsala has recently drawn attention to the close resemblance 
of the Piltdown skull to the Aurignacian skull from Combe- 
Capelle, of which we shall speak later. 

But we have still to consider the jaw; and here the 
story of the Piltdown discovery becomes truly 
extraordinary. 

The lower jaw, contrary to all the indications of the cranium, 
is very simian! It shows the same degree of mineralization 
as the skull, with which it appears to correspond fairly well in 
point of size. The condyle is missing, as well as the upper 
portion of the front half of the horizontal ramus, but in the 
remaining portion the two anterior true molars are in 
place (Fig. 96). 

The ascending ramus is broad; the mandibular notch is 
not very deep, and the condyle must have been short. The 
mark of attachment of the temporal muscle is large. The 
mylo-hyoid groove is situated below the dental canal, instead 
of originating from it, as in Man. There is no mylo-hyoid 
ridge (internal oblique line). 


The Jaw. 


‘ Ramstrom, M., “ Der Piltdown-Fund” (Bull. Geol. Instit. Upsala, xvi., 1919). 


CHARACTERS OF PILTDOWN REMAINS 167 





Fic. 96.—Lower Jaw from Piltdown. Two-thirds natural size. (After Smith Woodward.) 


Top Fig.—Jaw seen from outer surface. The canine tooth has been drawn here as belonging 
to this jaw. It is now considered to be an upper canine. 

Centre Fig.—Jaw seen from inner surface ; cd. neck of condyle ; cor. coronoid process ; 4 area 
of insertion of temporal muscle; d. inferior dental foramen; m.g. mylo-hyoid groove ; 7.p/. area 
of insertion of internal pterygoid muscle; s. incurved boney flange of symphysis ; ™.1, 7.2, first 
and second true molars. 

Bottom Figs.—Jaw seen from above and below; #.3, socket of third true molar; other 
symbols as above. 


168 MEN OF CHELLEAN OR LOWER PLEISTOCENE AGE 


The lower symphyseal margin is not thickened and rounded 
as in Man; it forms a kind of thin plate, projecting inwards, as 
in the apes and particularly in the Chimpanzee. The re- 
construction of this region cannot but suggest a very receding 
symphysis, with complete absence of chin. 





C ik H F 


Fic. 97.—Photographs showing, in comparative view, the under margin of various lower jaws: 
C, Chimpanzee, from actual specimen; P, Piltdown mandible, from a cast ; H, Heidelberg 
Man, from a cast; F, modern Frenchman, actual specimen. Two-thirds natural size. The 
jaws used for comparison have been artificially mutilated in the same way as the Piltdown jaw. 


The Chimpanzee and the Piltdown jaws present a group very different at first sight even from 
that containing the jaws of the most ancient known Man and a modern European. 

A single glance at Figs. 97 and 98 will suffice to show, on 
the one hand, the-close resemblance of the Piltdown mandible 
to that of a Chimpanzee, and, on the other hand, the great 
difference which separates these two from a second small series 
comprising the Mauer jaw and that of modern Man. 

The canine tooth found by P. Teilhard (Fig. 99) differs 
from a human canine in its much larger dimen- 
sions, in the more raised, more conical, and more 
compressed form of its crown, and in the way in which it had 


The Teeth. 





CHARACTERS OF PILTDOWN REMAINS 169 


worn, for this implies the existence, in the opposing jaw, of a 
similar tooth and possibly of a corresponding space or diastema. 


At first Smith Wood- 
ward regarded this canine 
as belonging to the mand- 
ible, and described its 
resemblance to the canine 
teeth of apes, and to the 
lower milk canine of a 
human being. Gregory 
and Millar think that the 
tooth was in reality an 
upper left canine, very 
similar to that of a 
female Chimpanzee. 

The first and second 
true molars, preserved 
in position in the jaw, 
are relatively long and 
narrow. Their neck is 
well marked, the roots 
are not attached. The 
crowns have five well- 
developed cusps, arranged 
as in certain anthropoids, 
such as the Chimpanzee, 
where the fifth cusp is 
more important and pro- 
jects more markedly at 
the back edge of the tooth 
than in Man. Whatever 
may have been said of 
them, it is certain that 
these molars are much 
more simian than human, 
and that they wholly 
resemble those of the 
Chimpanzee, 














FIG. 98.—Lower Jaws viewed from inner face 
(half natural size). 

A, Chimpanzee ; B, Eoanthropus ; C, Mauer (Heidel- 
berg) Man; D, Modern Man. c¢., canine tooth; m.1, 
first true molar; 4, genial tubercle; 7m.g., mylo-hyoid 
groove ; m.r., mylo-hyoid ridge (internal oblique line). 
(After Smith Woodward.) 


170 MEN OF CHELLEAN OR LOWER PLEISTOCENE AGE 


In its general build as well as in the details of its structure, 
then, the Piltdown mandible exactly reproduces an ape's jaw, 


2a. 2b 


or, to be precise, the jaw 
of a Chimpanzee. I did 
not hesitate to say so, 
after having had = an 
opportunity of studying 
a cast of the specimen: 
“Had this jawbone been 
found alone in the Pilt- 


Fic. 99.—LZoanthropus dawsont. Lower right canine, down gravels, along with 
seen from the outer (2a), inner (24), anterior (2c), the renmiains of Pliocene 


See eel Natural size. (After mammals, one would not 

have hesitated to call it 

Troglodytes dawsont, and to declare that it testified to the 

existence in England in Pliocene times of an Anthropoid 
rat eeu 

We have, then, to face the problem of a small collection of 

bone-fragments, which present the paradoxical association of 
an essentially human skull with an essentially simian jaw. 

Dr Smith Woodward attributes the skull and the jaw to 
Interpretation the same individual, probably a female; and, 
of the Facts. struck by the simian characters of the lower 

jaw, he has made this individual the type specimen of a 
primitive genus of human creatures, which he has named 
Foanthropus. This opinion has been generally accepted in 
England, even by an anatomist like Sir A. Keith.? Professor 
Waterston, however, has expressed doubt on this point. He 
found difficulty in believing that the skull and jaw could have 
belonged to one and the same being, and drew attention to the 
fact that the glenoid fossa of the temporal is not formed to fit 
the jaw of an ape.. “It is just as possible,” he said, “to 
attribute this jaw to the skull, as it would be to articulate a 
Chimpanzee’s foot with the bones of an essentially human 
thigh and leg.”* This scepticism gained the adherence of 


1 Boule, M., “La paléontologie humaine en Angleterre” (L’ Anthropologie, xxvi., 
1915, p. 60). 

2 Loc. ctt., and also The Antiquity of Man, London, 1915. 

3 Nature, 13th November 1913 [vol. xcii., p. 319]. 


Za 





INTERPRETATION OF PILTDOWN REMAINS 171 


other naturalists. The American mammalogist, G. Miller,’ 
endeavoured to show, with a wealth of evidence, that the jaw 
was that of a Pleistocene species of Chimpanzee, and named 
it Pan vetus (Pan being the generic name used in America 
for the Chimpanzee). Another New York scientist, Gregory, 
whose knowledge of mammalian anatomy is comprehensive, 
also adopted this view.’ 

We seem, then, to be faced with a double discovery: that 
Is Eoanthropus Of 4 Man and that of an Ape. Loanthropus, 
an Artificial and therefore, would describe an artificial creature, 

Composite composed of two natural creatures: Homo 

Creature ? ; : 

dawsont and Troglodytes dawsont. 

Till now I have had a certain amount of doubt in the 
matter. Apart from the anatomical facts, the conditions of 
deposition made me hesitate. It is really very difficult to 
imagine the presence, at the same spot in the depth of an 
ancient alluvial formation, of remains belonging to two species 
of large Primates, and to explain, by pure chance, that these 
remains have the same physical characters, belong to creatures 
of the same stature, and are complementary pieces of the 
same part of the skeleton. On the other hand, the presence 
of an anthropoid ape in Western Europe in the Pliocene 
period or at the commencement of the Quaternary would not 
be in any way extraordinary, the less so as the Taubach teeth 
likewise appear to be those of a Chimpanzee. 

Since the appearance of the first edition of this work certain 
new facts brought out by Elliot Smith and Hunter are perhaps 
of such a nature as to incline the balance in favour of Smith 
Woodward’s hypothesis. But the new arguments do not appear 
to me to be conclusive; it is still permissible to suppose that 
the skull and the lower jaw from Piltdown may have belonged to 
two different beings (for fuller discussion, see Appendix, p. 471). 

And so examination of Dr Smith Woodward's reconstruc- 
tion of the skull is bereft of its interest, for it was only in 


1 Miller, G. S., “The Jaw of Piltdown Man” (Smithsonian Miscellaneous 
Collections, \xv., No. 12, 1915); “The Piltdown Jaw” (American Journal of Physical 
Anthropology, i., 1918. These two memoirs-contain a lengthy critical bibliography. 

* Studies on the Evolution of the Primates, p, 316. 


172 MEN OF CHELLEAN OR LOWER PLEISTOCENE AGE 


the firm belief that the jaw and the skull-bones belonged 
to the same individual, that he was able to undertake this 
reconstruction at all (Figs. 100-102). 

The shape of the brain-box, obtained by associating the 
fragments in their respective positions, cannot be far from the 
truth. The reconstruction of the face, on the contrary, is 
markedly hypothetical, since it could scarcely have been made 
without the assistance of nasal bones and a jaw which are 
foreign to it. It is not surprising, therefore, that it errs from 
lack of harmony, that it does not ring true. But that it is 
easy to criticize is chiefly due to the fact that here we have an 
example of that imprudent rashness which desires at whatever 
cost to glean from an unsatisfactory paleontological relic more 
than it could possibly yield. 

The Piltdown relics are, unfortunately, incomplete. The 

Gonecl interpretation of them, an extremely difficult 
Conclusions. task, is still doubtful regarding certain essential 
points. But in spite of all the uncertainties, they form a most 
important and one of the most instructive discoveries. Even 
although it be admitted that the skull and jaw are perfectly 
independent, it is at the same time none the less true that 
the fragments of the skull tell of the existence, at a period 
probably very early in the Quaternary era, of a man with an 
essentially human brain-box, and that this Man is more closely 
related to the ascending line of Modern Man than to that of 
Neanderthal Man. ‘The beginning of our direct ancestry must 
thus date from a very remote past. Up to the present time, 
this hypothesis had been supported only by a certain number 
of discoveries which possessed no geological sanction, and, in 
consequence, were of no value as proofs. Now we have 
brought before us a new, carefully observed fact, of which the 
significance seems clear and definite, always allowing that 
the Piltdown skull is really as ancient as is supposed. 

However it may be with regard to the question of age, 
which is very difficult to elucidate, we may ask if Dr Smith 
~ Woodward was justified in creating a new genus for the Piltdown 
fossil, for its fundamental characters are essentially human, 
particularly its cerebral capacity, which is as high as that of 


GENERAL CONCLUSIONS 173 










FIG. 100.—Reconstruction of the 
skull of Zoanthropus dawson7, seen 
full face (norma factalis). One- 
third natural size. (After Smith 
Woodward.) 







Fic. to1.—The same_ recon- 
struction seen from above (zorma 
verticalis). Same scale. 





Pigs 102. —- Lhé «same 
recon'struction. Three- 
quarters view. Same scale. 


174 MEN OF CHELLEAN OR LOWER PLEISTOCENE AGE 


many modern men. Above all, why the word Loanthropus ? 
There can be no question here of a dawning form of 
humanity in the zoological sense of the word. 

If, from the paleontological point of view, we compare the 
evolution of the human race with that of the horse, we shall see 
that Zohippus, the analogous expression invented by Marsh, 
really applies to a very ancient Perissodactyl in which we 
begin to notice a tendency towards the Solipede type. Then 
follow other forms: MWesohtppus, Protohippus, Pliohippus, etc., 
linking up this Zohzppus with the true horse, Eguus. Now 
it is quite certain that Hoanthropus does not bear to /fomo the 
relationship which Zohzppus bears to Eguus. Even on Smith 
Woodward's hypothesis it would barely represent in the scale 
of Mankind, anything like the stage which Protohippus occupies 
amongst horses. | 

A day will come when there will be discovered a human 
being of small stature, with almost erect carriage, having a 
brain-box relatively large in comparison to the total body-bulk, 
but much less in absolute size than that of any other human 
being already known. This will be the true Zoanthropus. 

Perhaps this day is near at hand, but it may be still very far 
off. While we await its coming, we must be satisfied with the 
knowledge we have so slowly and so painfully acquired. Our 
knowledge has indeed made some progress during the. past 
dozen years, for previously we possessed no authentic remains of 
Chellean Man. To-day we have at least a lower jaw, the 
Mauer jaw, and in all probability some portions of a skull, the 
Piltdown skull. 

May we, then, associate these two relics with each other, 
and attribute them to the same species? I do not think so. 
The Mauer discovery seems to belong to a much older 
geological age than the Piltdown: the former hails from the 
most ancient Chellean period; the latter, like the lower jaw 
from Ehringsdorf, cannot be older than Acheulean. 

The comparative morphology of the three kinds of bone- 
relics yielded by these various discoveries supports this view. 
We are dealing with two, or probably three, different types. 
Thus we reach the important conclusion that, even from the 


GENERAL CONCLUSIONS 175 


commencement or from the first phase of Quaternary times, 
the human beings (Hominians) in our country were already 
differentiated. It is a fresh proof that the origins of Man are 
lost in a past that recedes further and further into the distance. 
Assuredly the Pliocene and Miocene deposits have still in store 
for us some strange and exciting discoveries. 


CG CPs eave 
NEANDERTHAL MAN 
(Homo neanderthalensts.) 


Ir the poverty of human fossil remains in the Lower Pleistocene 
or Chellean period is marked, there is a striking contrast in the 
wealth of human fossils in the Mid Pleistocene, which almost 
corresponds to the Woustzerian period of archeologists. 
We already know that this period differs greatly from the 
Characters Preceding one in its geological, palaeontological, 
of the and archeological Bevis It corresponds 
Moustierlan. tothe last glacial invasion, to a period olenemt 
floods and deposit of alluvium, of the formation of the greatest 
accumulation of superficial muds and natural cave deposits. 
The Moustierian flora and fauna of Central and Southern 
Europe differ both from the Chellean flora and fauna, and from 
the flora and fauna cf the present day, and indicate a much 
moister and colder climate. The large extinct species of 
mammals, the Mammoth, the Woolly (Tichorine) Rhinoceros, 
etc., were covered witha thick coat of hair ; the majority of the 
species still living at the present day, such as the Reindeer, 
Musk-Ox, Glutton, Ibex, Chamois and Marmot now only 
inhabit northern countries or the highest mountains. 
From the archzological point of view, there are also changes. 
The amygdaloid flints are smaller, less thick and fee 
The predominating types are points and scrapers dressed and 
retouched on one face only. For the first time, we find traces 
of the use of bone (Figs. 103 and 113). 
Here we have to deal with conditions of environment 
totally different from, and much more severe than those of the 
Chellean period. Man, obliged to protect himself against the 


rigors of the climate, had to modify his habitat: he sought 
176 


CHARACTERS OF MOUSTIERIAN PERIOD 177 


refuge in caves, and there he lived, died, and left the bones 
which we exhume to-day with such excited curiosity. 


ws 


SSE 


\ 


\ 


\ \ N\t \ 





FIG. 103.—Moustierian Industry from the north of France. One-third natural size. 


(After Commont.) 


I, 2, 3, Amygdaloid flints carefully dressed on both faces ; 4, 5, 6, scrapers ; 7, 8, 9, piercers ; 
IO, II, 12, points; 13, flake, retouched as a knife; 14, fragment of bone with striations, probably 


used as a compressor. 
M 


178 NEANDERTHAL MAN 


Flistorical Summary. 


Moreover, the discoveries of human fossils attributed 
to the Moustierian period are very numerous, numbering, 
indeed, about forty, and dating from the year 1700 to our 
own day. 

Unfortunately many must be set aside or ignored, 
either because of the poor state of preservation of the 
remains obtained, or more particularly because of un- 
certainty regarding the age and even the identity of their 
beds. In the historical summary which I think it useful to 
insert here, I shall limit myself to discoveries the geological 
age of which justifies discussion and which have yielded 
bone-remains sufficiently well preserved to permit of serious 
study. 

The oldest is that at Cannstadt, and this has already been 
described (see p. 141). 

Next in chronological order comes the Lahr find, of 1823, 
which was given to Cuvier (see p. 6). In spite of Hamy’s’ 
attempt to vindicate this discovery, neither the conditions of 
the deposit nor the morphological characters of the bones 
themselves justify us in regarding them as authentic fossil 
remains. 

In 1856, a skull-cap and some long bones were dug up 
by workmen in the small Feldhofer grotto, 
situated between Diisseldorf and Elberfeld in 
Rhenish Prussia, in the valley known as Neanderthal, through 
which flows the River Diisse]. This is the famous discovery of 
Neanderthal Man, whose remains were obtained by Fuhlrott 
and described by Schaaffhausen.’ 


Neanderthal. 


1 Hamy, E. T., “ Nouveaux matériaux pour servir a l’étude de la paléontologie 
MEER (canes intern. @ Anthrop., Paris, 1889, p. 423). 

a Lhe very comprehensive bibliography of this discovery is of historical interest 
only. It isto be found in: Quatrefages and Hamy, Crania ethnica; Reinach, S., 
“ Description raisonée du musée de Saint-Germain” : Obermaier, “ Les restes funens 
quaternaires dans |’Europe centrale” (L’ Anthropologie, xvii., 1906), a memoir which 
gives numerous bibliographical references to all the deposits containing human fossils 
in Central Europe. Among later works published on the morphology of the skull may 
be singled out for mention: Schwalbe, G., “ Der Neanderthalschidel” (Bonner 
Jahrbiicher, Heft 106, 1901), 


HISTORICAL; NEANDERTHAL 179 


The greatly depressed skull-cap with its large superciliary 
arches (Fig. 104) keenly interested the foremost naturalists of last 
century. Some, along with Schaaffhausen and Huxley, saw in 


it the representative of a 
primitive human race, pre- 
serving simian character- 
istics; others, including 
the German  Virchow, 
leaned to the view that it 
was rather a pathological 
specimen or the skull of 
an imbecile. For long 
its high antiquity was 
suspected, since there 
was no irrefutable argu- 
ment in its favour. The 
extraordinary morph- 
ology of the skull-cap 
could not be successfully 
appealed to, for this was 
an isolated case. But we 








Fic. 104.—Neanderthal Skull cap, seen full face and 
in profile. (One-third natural size. Photograph 
from a cast.) 


shall see how later discoveries have destroyed this isolation, 
and have justified us in affirming that the clay whence the 





Seite UM RNS MOD CORI, PPR RON eT Le OE 





Fic. 105.—Fragment of a Jaw from Arcy-sur- 


Cure. Three - fourths natural 


(After de Quatrefages and Hamy.) 


Neanderthal bones were taken, 
indeed dates, like the majority 
of analogous formations, from 
the Mid Pleistocene. 

In 1859 there followed the 
discovery, in the Grotte des 
Fées, near Arcy-sur-Cure in 
Yonne, ofa fragment of a human 
lower jaw, accurately dated by 
the bone remains of extinct 
animals collected at the same 
time.’ This much mutilated 


specimen appeared remarkable for the smallness of the chin 


(Fig. 105). 


1 Vibraye, De (Bull. Soc. géolog. de France, 2nd series, xvii., 1860, p. 462). 


180 NEANDERTHAL MAN 


In 1864, at a meeting of the British Association, an 
English geologist, Busk, exhibited a human 
skull obtained in the year 1848 from the bone- 
breccia of an excavation known as Forbes’s Quarry at Gibraltar. 
Busk compared this skull to that from Neanderthal; de 
Quatrefages and Hamy attributed it to their Cannstadt race ; 
and, thereafter, this paleontological specimen, remarkable for 
ee its receding forehead, its great 
= a orbital arches and enormousuiee 
(Fig. 106), seemed to have been 
forgotten. The recent researches 
of Sollas, Sera, Keith and others, 
have, however, once more brought 
it to notice? 
= The high antiquity of the 
’ Gibraltar skull cannot be doubted. 
It is contemporary with the fauna 
of the breccia and deep deposits 
Fic. ana Siu, seen full facee of the caves described by Busk,? 
Regie opens) Pa Sn and this represents a southern 
facies of the Mid Pleistocene 
fauna. The human skull and the animal bones are in the 
same state of fossilization; and, furthermore, we now know 
that Southern Spain contains a typical Moustierian industry. 
The year 1866 was marked by the discovery of the lower 
jaw from La Naulette, almost as famous as 
the Neanderthal skull-cap itself (Fig. 107). 
Found by a distinguished Belgian geologist, Dupont, in an 
undisturbed layer in the Trou de la Naulette, near Dinant, 
and accurately dated by animal remains of Mid Pleistocene 
age which accompanied it,’ its morphological peculiarities, its 


Gibraltar. 



















Wi H 
| er \\\\ ; 
(fy . WW 
eg | 7 


a 4 







La Naulette. 


1 Sollas, W. J., “On the Cranial and Facial Characters of the Neanderthal Race” 
(Philosophical Transactions, B., cxcix., 1907). Sera, G.-L., “‘Dialcuni caratteri. . . nel 
cranio di Gibraltar” (Soc. romana di Antrop., xv., 1909). ‘“‘ Nuove osservazione.” 
(Arch. per l Antrop., xxxix, 1909). Keith, Sir A., Ancient Types of Man, London, 
Trig els 

2 Busk, G., “On the Ancient or Quaternary Fauna of Gibraltar” (Zvans. Zool. 
Soc., London, x., 1879). 

3 Dupont, E., “Etude sur les fouilles scientifiques . . . dans les cavernes de la 
Lesse (Bull. de ? Acad. roy. de Belgique, xxii., 1866). 


HISTORICAL; LA NAULETTE, SPY, ETC. 181 


strength, its absence of chin, and its large molar alveoli made 
a great impression upon anatomists.* 

To Hamy belongs the credit of foreseeing, if not of 
proving, that, on the one hand, skulls with receding foreheads 
and heavy superciliary arches, and, on the other hand, strong 
jaws without chin, known to be of this» period, must have 
belonged to the same type, that is to say, to the same race. 
Dr Topinard’ has since taken up again, in detail, the study of 
this jaw from La Naulette. 

Some doubt overhangs the geological age of the skull-cap 
obtained in 1872 from the 
ancient alluvials at Briix in 
Bohemia. Scientists are 
agreed in regarding this 
specimen as Neanderthal in 
type, but its poor state of 
preservation has rendered 
it of little use as evidence. 

The discoveries made, S=ciiinis se oe 
in 1881 in the Schipka cave FIG. 107.—Lower Jaw from La Naulette. Three- 
. . ° : fourths natural size. (After Quatrefages and 
in Moravia, in 1883 in the Home) = 
Marcilly clay (Eure), and in 
1884 in a clay pocket in the chalk at Bury St Edmunds in 
Suffolk, consist of mere fragments of jaws or of skulls in 
a state of preservation barely sufficient to warrant their 
classification as of Neanderthal type. 

It is equally impossible to date the skull obtained towards 
the close of 1883 from the loess at Podbaba, near Prague. 

The year 1886 is remarkable for the very important 

The Spy Dis- discovery made by Marcel de Puydt and Max 
covery. § Lohest, in the Spy cave in the province of 
Namur in Belgium. Here the requirements of scientific precision 
are all fully met. The stratigraphy of the layer was definitely 
ascertained by a geologist ; the fauna accompanying the human 





1 Pruner-Bey, “Sur la mdchoire humaine de la Naulette” (Bull. de la Soc. 
@ Anthrop. de Paris, 1866). Hamy, E. T., Precis de Paléontologie humaine, 
N23: 

2 Topinard, D., ‘Les caractéres simiens de la mdchoire de la Naulette” (Revue 
@ Anthrop., 1886, p. 385). 


182 NEANDERTHAL MAN 


remains was that of Mid Pleistocene times—the Mammoth 
(Elephas primigenius), the Woolly Rhinoceros (2. ¢echorhinus), 
etc. ; and the dressed flints were Moustierian in form. 

The human bones are numerous and well preserved: two 
brain-boxes, some portions of the face, two lower jaws, anda large 
number of long bones, more or less perfect, comprise the remains 
of two skeletons. These valuable relics have been studied by 
Fraipont and Lohest, whose fine monograph’ has added much to 
our knowledge of the human type known as Neanderthal. Till 





re 


Fic. 108.—Spy Skull (No. 1) seen in profile. About one-third 
natural size. (After Fraipont.) 


recent years the Spy skeletons were justly regarded as the most 
complete and the most important of ancient palzolithic remains. 
In 1889, Hamy’ examined certain human remains discovered 
by Piette in the Gourdan Cave, some of these being Magdalenian 
and others Moustierian. The latter comprised a fragment of 
lower jaw and a portion of face (upper maxillary and malar). 
Hamy, with his usual perspicacity, associated them with 
corresponding parts of the Gibraltar and Spy skulls. 


' Fraipont, J., and Lohest, M., “ Recherches ethnographiques sur des ossements 
humains découverts dans les dépdts dune grotte quaternaire & Spy (Arch. de Biologie, 
vil, 1886. Gand, 1887). 

* Congres intern. @ Anthrop., Paris, 1889, p. 413. 


HISTORICAL; MALARNAUD, BRECHAMPS, ETC. 183 


In the same year, H. Filhol described a lower jaw taken 
from the Malarnaud cave, near Montseron in Ariége. It was 
embedded in a mud containing bones of the Cave Bear and 
Mammoth, that is to say, in an environment and at a level 
corresponding to those of the La Naulette jaw, the anatomical 
characters of which are repeated in the Malarnaud specimen} 
(Fig. 109). 

A portion of skull, obtained in 1892 in a brick-field at 
Bréchamps (Eure-et-Loir), has been considered by Manouvrier 
fombelono. to the 
Neanderthal and Spy 
eypeeethe» principal 
characteristics of which 
it exhibits, though in 
much less marked de- 
gree. To my mind it 
resembles rather the 


modern skulls known as 


as neanderthaloid.”’ In Fic. 109.—Lower Jaw from Malarnaud in Ariége, seen 


ve in profile. Three-fourths natural size. (After 
any case, the conditions Filhol.) 


of deposit were not 

subjected to any examination, and the skull was not seen 
in place at the level occupied by the Moustierian flints of 
the brick-fields. 

A human jaw, found in 1895 at Isturitz (Basses Pyrénées), 
in a neighbourhood rich in bone-remains of the Cave Bear and 
Rhinoceros, should, according to M. Breuil, be compared to 
that from Malarnaud.’ 

About the same time, in the caves of Estelas in Ariége, 
at Aubert in Ariége, and at Salléles-Cabardées in Aude, 
there were found, by F. Regnault and L. Roule, two lower 
jaws of children and a frontal bone with well-developed 
orbital arches. These may be readily assigned to Mid 
Pleistocene times. 





1 Filhol, H., “Note sur une machoire humaine trouvée dans la caverne de 
Malarnaud .. . ” (Bull. de la Soc. philomathique de Paris, 1889). Boule, M., oS em 
caverne de Malarnaud” (/é7d.). 

* Breuil, H., “Les plus anciennes races humaines connues” (Revue des sciences 
philosophiques et théologigues, 1909). 


184 NEANDERTHAL MAN 


The discovery at Krapina in Croatia is of greater import. 
In 1899, a professor in the University of 
Agram, M. Gorjanovic-Kramberger, described 
a Paleolithic shelter where, in an undisturbed Pleistocene layer 
(Fig. 110), he collected portions of from ten to twelve skulls, 
fourteen pieces of lower jaws, one 
KRAPINA KE hundred and forty-four isolated 
“ teeth, as well as numerous frag- 
ments of vertebre, ribs, and long 
bones. Many of these bones, found 
in hearths, are calcined; indeed, 
the general state of preservation 
of all the remains leaves much 
to be desired. ‘They have formed 
the subject of a long and pains- 
FIG. 110.—Section of the Krapina Bed. — ta kxino monograph.’ 
(After Gorjanovic-K ramberger.) a 
The true age of the layer has 
R, Rock, forming shelter ; A, alluvial tee 
deposit of the Krapina, the bed being now often been misinterpreted. An 
25 metres lower; F, hearths, bed where attempt has been made to regard 
human remains were mainly found; B, . . 
products of disintegration of the Miocene It as very ancient, on the strength 
sandstone forming the shelter, towards of the presence of Rhinoceros 
the topmost layers of which are still to jh races h . 
be found bones of the Cave Bear. merck’ in the Jauna the remains 
of which accompany the human 
bones, and this in spite of the fact that, in respect of its other 
members, this fauna contains nothing to distinguish it from 
the typical Mid Pleistocene fauna. Now, in France, AAznoceros 
merckt persisted much longer than the Ancient Elephant 
(Elephas antiguus) and the Hippopotamus, with which it is 
associated in the fauna of the Lower Pleistocene. None 
of the really characteristic members of this fauna are to 
be met with at Krapina. From the paleontological point 
of view, therefore, this deposit cannot date further back 
than Mid Pleistocene times. And on this point the archezo- 
logical evidence agrees with the paleontological evidence: 
the dressed stones belong to the recognized Moustierian 


types. 


1 Gorjanovic-Kramberger, K., Der diluviale Mensch von Krapina in Kroatien, 
Wiesbaden, 1906. 


Krapina. 





HISTORICAL; KRAPINA, GRIMALDI, ETC. 185 


One of the principal results of the excavations carried out, 
i from 1895 to 1902, at the instance of Albert I., 
Prince of Monaco, in the Grimaldi caves near 
Mentone, was the discovery of several skeletons of fossil 
men, accurately dated by stratigraphy, paleontology, and 
archeology.’ Several of these skeletons, like those formerly 
found by Riviere and Abbo, do not date beyond the Upper 
Pleistocene period and present all the characters of the Cro- 
Magnon race of lomo sapiens. We need not dwell on these 
at this point. But in June 1901, the Canon of Villeneuve, 
director of the Prince's excavations, dug up from an older layer 
in the Grotte des Enfants, at a depth of 8.50 metres, two other 
skeletons with very different morphological characters. My 
learned colleague, Professor Verneau, who made a masterly 
study of them, established them as the type of a new fossil race 
remarkable for its negroid characters, the Grimaldi race. 
Examination of the bed and study of the animal bones 
collected immediately above and below the human skeletons, 
have led me to affirm that the latter date from Mid 
Pleistocene times, and are clearly of the same age as the 
Spy skeletons. But to this point I shall return in the 
following chapter. 

In 1906, Rzehak described a fragment of jaw found in a 
layer ‘‘containing glacial fauna,” in the grotto of Ochos in 
Moravia. ‘This fragment is too incomplete to enable us to be 
certain of its neanderthaloid character, but it seems to have 
possessed a chin, 

It will be sufficient simply to mention the discovery by 
M. Favraud of three fragments of human jaws in a Mous- 
tierian environment at Petit-Puy-Moyen in Charente. The 
jaws are strong, and have a receding chin and large 
teeth. 

We come now to a series of recent discoveries of such 
interest that they must be described at somewhat greater 
length. 


Grimaldi. 


' Boule, M., Cartailhac, E., Verneau, R., and Villeneuve, L. de, Les grottes de 
Grimaldi, Monaco, 1906-1919. See lengthy summaries of this work in L’An/thro- 
pologie, 1906. 


186 NEANDERTHAL MAN 


The first is that of the skeleton from La Chapelle-aux- 
La Chapelle- Saints.1 Near the village of that name, in the 
aux-Saints. (Corréze district, there is a small cave (Fig. 111), 

the excavation of which was undertaken by three priests, 


Eee 





Fic. 111.—The hill, showing entrance to the cave of La Chapelle-aux-Saints. The 
entrance to eae cave is almost in the centre of the sagt ae 









coe 





LA CHAPELLE- AUX- SAINTS / 
- Yj — 
res me S 














: = = - 2S 
eee OB 7 
Yj; 

“fj vA a EE 


Fic. 112.—Longitudinal section of the Cave of La Chapelle-aux-Saints. 
(After A. and J. Bouyssonie and Bardon.) 
R, rock in which the cave is hollowed out ; A, archzeological layer ; 
B, clay ; C, shifting sandy clay ; 5, human skeleton. 





1 Boule, M., “ L’Homme fossile de La Chapelle-aux-Saints” (Comptes rendus de 
? Acad. des Sciences, 14th December 1908). Bouyssonie, A. and J., and Bardon, L., 
“ Découverte d’un squelette humain moustiérien ” (/é¢a@, 21st December 1908). 





HISTORICAL; LA CHAPELLE-AUX-SAINTS 187 


MM. the Abbés A. Bouyssonie, J. Bouyssonie, and Bardon, 
already well known for their researches in prehistoric arche- 
ology. On 3rd August 1908, they discovered in it a quantity 










fy ty i 


CZ ii 


| 
AMIN 
ae 





GY 


Z 
ae 





aux-Saints. Three-fourths natural size. 


of human bones, and these they sent to me at the Paris 
Museum, and, with the utmost generosity, were good enough 
to hand over to me. 


188 NEANDERTHAL MAN 


This fortunate discovery provided the most complete and 
best preserved Moustierian human fossil known up to that time. 
It was found in unexceptionable topographical and strati- 
graphical conditions. The age of the skeleton was established 
as clearly as possible, and the conditions of its burial, beneath a 
thin coat of débris in the cave where it was found, accounted 
for its quite unusual state 
of preservation. 

The section here shown, 
from a drawing by MM. 
Bouyssonie and _ Bardon, 
clearly shows the arrange- 
ment of the layers (Fig. 112). 

On the floor of thescave 
extended an unbroken layer, 
0.30 to0.40 metre thick, con- 
taining archeological relics; 
it was covered by superficial 
deposits of much more 
recent appearance. 

The animal remains col- 
lected in this archeological 
layer belong to numerous 
species, the most character- 
istic of which are the Woolly 
Rhinoceros (2. ¢zchorhinus), Reindeer (Rangifer tarandus), 
Ibex (Capra zbex), extinct Bison (Bzson priscus), Cave Hyzena 
(Hyena spelea), and Marmot (Arctomys marmotia). 

The layer was very rich in dressed flints, comprising in the 
main the two well-known Moustierian types, points and 
scrapers (Fig. 113). Not the smallest object of bone showing 
real indications of workmanship was observed. 

According to MM. Bouyssonie and Bardon, the man whose 
skeleton they found had been deliberately buried. He lay at 
the bottom of a ditch hollowed out of the marly soil of the 
grotto, at a depth of about 0.30 metre.’ 





Fic. 114.—The Skull from La Chapelle-aux-Saints 
in its bed. Photo by Bouyssonie and Bardon. 


1 Bouyssonie, A. and J.,and Bardon, L., ‘“‘ La station moustiérienne de la ‘ Bouffia’ 
Bonneval a La Chapelle-aux-Saints ” (L’ Anthropologie, xxiv., 1913). 


eS Eee 


HISTORICAL; LE MOUSTIER 189 


The parts of the skeleton which I have been able to 
reassemble are the skull (cranium and lower jaw), twenty-one 
vertebrae and fragments of vertebre, about twenty ribs or 
portions of ribs, a collar-bone (clavicle), two almost complete 
upper arm bones (humeri), two incomplete radii, two cubital 
bones, several bones of the hand, two fragments of haunch 
bones (ilia), two incomplete 
femora, two knee-caps, portions 
of two tibiz, an astragalus, a 
calcaneum or _ heel-bone, five 
right metatarsals, two fragments 
of left metatarsals, and one 
phalanx. 

In January 1909, a dealer 
in antiquities, of 
Swiss nation- 
ality, who had only too long 
exploited, for German profit, the 
deposits in the Dordogne district, 
that is to say, the most ancient 
and the most valuable archives 
: . Fic. 115.—Skull from Le Moustier, seen 
in France, revealed the circum- full face, as reconstructed by the 
stances under which he had dis- German anatomist, Klaatsch. Photo- 
covered and exhumed a human Eis me a cee SS 
skeleton at Le Moustier.* 

The exhumation took place on the roth August 1908, 
in the presence of a tribunal of scientists from beyond 
the Rhine—Klaatsch, H. Virchow, von den Steinen, Hahne, 
Wiist, and others (and, of course, in the absence of any 
French scientist) Even so the scientific value of this 
relic is markedly diminished by the poverty of significant 
Stratigraphical or palzontological data, and especially by 
the deplorable manner in which it was extricated and re- 
stored. The reconstruction of the skull by Klaatsch, a 
professor of anatomy, is a positive caricature (Fig. 115). 


Le Moustier. 





' Hauser, O., “ Découverte d’un squelette du type de Néanderthal...” (L’ Homme 
préhistorigue, January 1909), followed by Klaatsch, H., “‘ Preuves que l’4/omo mous- 
teriensis Hauser? appartient au type de Néanderthal.” 


190 NEANDERTHAL MAN 


A second reconstruction, in which several of JKlaatsch’s 
distinguished colleagues were called upon to assist, has at 
least the merit of being more faithful. The monetary 
value of the skeleton from Le Moustier was, on the other 
hand, considered beyond compare by the ‘ Museum fiir 
Volkerkunde” in Berlin, which paid Hauser, the dealer, 
the fabulous price of 125,000 francs! According to Klaatsch, 
the skeleton from Le Moustier is that of a young man of 
about sixteen years. There seems to be no doubt that it may 
belong to the Neanderthal type. 

At La Ferrassie, near Bugue in Dorgogne, there is a rock 
shelter containing many superimposed settle- 
ments, rich in Palzolithic dressed relics, which 
were explored for ten years by MM. Capitan and. Peyrony. 
On the 17th September 1909, Peyrony saw some human bones 
projecting from the soil. At his invitation and that of his 
collaborator M. Capitan, several persons repaired to La 
Ferrassie to be present at and collaborate in the extrication 
of the skeleton—MM. Cartailhac, Breuil, Bouyssonie, and 
the author. We ascertained: (1) that the stratigraphical 
level is clearly the same as that at La Chapelle-aux-Saints, 
at the base of a layer containing Moustierian relics, and 
resting, according to MM. Capitan and Peyrony, on an 
Acheulean layer; (2) that the skeleton belonged to an 
individual of the Neanderthal type; (3) that the bones of 
this fossil Man had retained their anatomical relationships 
and that they lay in the very midst of undisturbed layers, 
without any observable trace of burial. 

In 1910, M. Peyrony obtained from the same layer a 
second skeleton, which lay not far from the first, and indicated 
a slighter individual of smaller stature, very probably a woman. 
Finally, in 1912, he collected some portions of the skeletons of 
three children.t It would appear that there are present here 
the bone-remains of a whole family, killed by accident, perhaps 
buried beneath a land-slip. This series, which is of outstanding 


La Ferrassie. 


1 Capitan, Dr, and Peyrony, “Deux squelettes humains au milieu de foyers de 
V’époque moustérienne” (Revue de l Ecole ad’ Anthrop., December 1909) ; Sa pré- 
historique de la Ferrassie (Revue anthropologiqgué, January 1912). 


HISTORICAL; LA FERRASSIE, LA QUINA 191 


value, was generously gifted to the French National Museum 
of Natural History by MM. Capitan and Peyrony. The 
clearing of the skeletons, their preparation, and the reconstruc- 
tion of a skull (Fig. 116), almost as complete as that from 
La Chapelle-aux-Saints, were carried out in my laboratory. A 
detailed description of them was on the point of publication 
when the war broke out. Reference will frequently be made 
to them in the course of this chapter. 


ae os 
ee 
ake 





Fic. 116.—Skull of Male Skeleton from La Ferrassie, seen in profile. 
One-third natural size Palzontological Gallery, French National 
Museum of Natural History. 


MM. Capitan and Peyrony likewise sent me the broken 
bones of a child’s skull, collected by them in the Moustierian 
bed of the little cave at Pech de l]'Azé, near Sarlat in the 
Dordogne. 

It was also a lony-continued exploration which led to the 
fortunate discovery by Dr Henri Martin in 
1911, at La Quina in Charente. After several 
years of slow and most careful excavation, he found a human 
skeleton in an environment which was clearly Moustierian. 
The well-preserved portions of the head (Fig. 117) possess 


La Quina. 


192 NEANDERTHAL MAN 


the characters of the corresponding portions of the Neander- 
thal skull-cap and the lower jaw from La Chapelle-aux- 
Saints.? 

Since this period Dr Martin has discovered in the same 
bed a fine skull of a child aged about 8 years, and a large 
number of fragments belonging to 18 other individuals.” 
(See Appendix p. 472.) 

In 1911, likewise, in a cave in the bay of Saint - Brelade 





DAR i OEE SOOO RTAEIIET 5 RBA AIRES RIE 


Fic. 117.—Skull from La Quina, seen in profile. One-third 
natural size. (Photograph by Henri Martin.) 


to the south-west of the Island of Jersey,? some human 
molar teeth were collected along with bones of the Woolly 
Rhinoceros (2. ¢zchorhinus) and the Reindeer, and also with 
Moustierian dressed flints. 

Hillebrand has mentioned bones of children taken from the 


1 Martin, H., “Sur un squelette humain de l’époque moustérienne trouvé en 
Charente” (C. Acad. Scz., 16th Oct. 1911) ; “ Homme fossile de La Quina™ (477, 
Morph. gen. exper, 15, 1923). 

2 TL)’ Anthropologie, xxxi, 1921, p. 331. 

3 Marett, R., ‘ Pieistocene Man in Jersey” (Arch@ologia, \xii., 1911). Keith, A., 
and Knowles, F., “A Description of Teeth of Paleolithic Man from Jersey” (Journal 
of Anatomy and Phystology, x\vi., 1911). 


HISTORICAL SUMMARY 193 


Cave of Balla, near Repashuta in Hungary; but their strati- 
graphical position has not been definitely established. 

In 1915, Messrs Pacheco and Obermaier described a lower 
jaw found, in 1887, in a Pleistocene calcareous tufa at Bafiolas 
in Catalonia. They classified it as of the Neanderthal type.’ 

Of this score of discoveries, having credentials sufficiently 
reliable to allow of their being allocated to Mid- 
Pleistocene times, about half consist only of 
mere fragments. The remainder have yielded bone-remains 
in such condition as to render them suitable for thorough 
morphological study — Neanderthal, Gibraltar, La Naulette, 
Spy, Malarnaud, Krapina, La Chapelle - aux - Saints, Le 
Moustier, La Ferrassie, and La Quina. So that to-day our 
knowledge of the Neanderthal type of human fossil has been 
gained from well preserved, easily studied specimens, number, 
ing at least some fifteen individuals. | 

What, then, of the ideas of Pruner-Bey, Gratiolet, Virchow, 
Hartmann, and others, regarding the exceptional, quite aberrant | 
or pathological nature of the skulls of the Neanderthal type? 
It is hardly necessary to point out that they are now only of 
historic interest. The opposition of German scientists, who 
have since bought the Moustierian skeleton for its weight in 
gold, was still at its height in 1892, when the “ Neanderthal 
Race” was looked upon as ‘‘imaginary,”’ as a ‘creation of 
fancy,” and was ‘‘laid to rest” by Virchow, von Hoélder, Haas, 
Kolmann, and others.? 

To-day, then, we are in possession of a comprehensive 
collection of materials, relating to the same homogeneous human 
type, which differs greatly from all living types, and indeed 1s 
better known than many of them. This human type, which 
exhibits many characters of inferiority, must be known (for 
reasons we shall consider later) by the name of lomo neander- 
thalensis. 1 shall give here a brief but as complete a descrip- 


Summary. 


1 Pacheco, E. Hernandez, and Obermaier, H., “La mandibula neandertaloide 
de Banolas” (Comision de Investigaciones eee y prehistoricas, No. 6, 
Madrid, 1915). 

2 The late J. Fraipont published at this time an eloquent paper in vindication 
entitled, ‘‘La race imaginaire de Cannstadt ou de Néanderthal” (Bull. de la Soc. 
a’ Anthrop. de Bruxelles, xiv., 1895). 


N 


194 NEANDERTHAL MAN 


tion as possible of it, taking as a basis the skeleton from La 
Chapelle-aux-Saints, on which I published a monograph,’ and 
the still unpublished descriptions of skeletons from La Ferrassie. 


Description. The Skull, 


The skull of the man from La Chapelle-aux-Saints looks 
strange even to the eyes of an observer only slightly acquainted 
with anatomy (Fig. 
118). First its great 
size strikes us, especi- 
ally regarded in rela- 
tion to the small 
stature of the indi- 
_ vidual to whom it 
* belonged, and who, as 

we shall see later, was 

less than 1.60 metre 
in height. Next we 
are impressed by its 
bestial appearance, or 
rather by the general 
effect of its simian 
| characterss sie 
ee “+, brain-box, elongated 


in form, is much de- 

Fic. 118.— The Skull from La_ Chapelle-aux-Saints. d: h tira 
Three-quarters view. About one-third natural size. pressed ; the orbita 
Palzontological Gallery, French National Museum arches are enormous } 


De ee the forehead is very 
receding; the occipital region very projecting and much 
depressed ; the face is long and projects forwards ; the orbits 
are enormous; the nose, separated from the forehead by a 
deep depression, is short and very broad; by a prolongation of 
the malar bones, the upper jaw forms a kind of muzzle; the 
lower jaw is strong and thick; the chin rudimentary. 


GE . Soodte gt ee atepetndahats F - . ay 


2 


eR RED ROAR RR NRE NRONTRR s3 eT 





! Boule, M., “‘L’Homme fossile de La Chapelle-aux-Saints” (Annales de 
Paléontologie, 1911-13). Numerous bibliographical references will be. found there 
to works already published on the morphology of Homo neanderthalensis or useful 
for consultation in studying it, but these I cannot repeat in this volume. 


GENERAL STRUCTURE OF SKULL 195 


Beginning with the general morphology of the skull, we 
Bonarnt find at first glance that the face is highly 
Morphology developed in comparison with the brain-box, 
of the Skull. and here, as we have seen (p. 72) lies a 
zoological character of the highest importance. It may be 
strikingly depicted in diagrammatic form by superimposing the 
profiles of the skulls of this fossil, of a Chimpanzee, and of a 
modern Frenchman upon a common base line closely following 
the boundary between the facial and the cerebral portions, after 





Modern French_ __ __ 


Chimpanzee........ La Chapelle 





Fic. 119.—Profiles of the Skulls of a Chimpanzee, of the Man from La Chapelle-aux- 
Saints, and of a Modern Frenchman, superimposed along the basio-nasal line, which 
~ has been made the same length in each. Ba, Basion ; Na, Nasion. 


having, it must be clearly understood, made the three basi-axial 
lines of the same length, Na-Ba, and reproduced the skulls in 
due proportion (Fig. 119). In the Chimpanzee, the facial 
region is almost as great as the cerebral region. In the 
Frenchman, on the contrary, the face is much reduced, and the 
brain-box greatly developed. Between these two extremes lies 
the skull from La Chapelle-aux-Saints. While it is more akin 
to that of its congener, Modern Man, in regard to the face, in 
regard to the brain-box it is almost intermediate between Man 


and the Chimpanzee. 


196 NEANDERTHAL MAN 


No less striking is Fig. 120, in which are shown, super- 
imposed, the profiles of the skulls of our fossil Man and of the 
famous American paleontologist, Cope. They are almost 
equal in cranial capacity, but we see how great is the difference 
between the size of the face in one of the most intelligent of 
men and in our savage of Quaternary times. 

In the relative development of its facial and cerebral regions, 
the skull from La Chapelle-aux-Saints differs widely from the 
skulls of living men even of the lower races, yet to a certain 
degree it reduces the morphological gulf separating the latter 
from the anthropoid apes. The broad lines of the architecture 
of the skull are no less different. 





FiG. 120.—Superimposed Profiles of the Skulls of the famous 
American naturalist, Cope (shaded), and of the Fossil Man from 
La Chapelle-aux-Saints (unbroken line). One-third natural size. 


A]l mammalian skulls are composed of the same parts, but 
the relative development and correlated arrangement of these 
component parts vary according to the nature of the skulls. 
The essential portion, constituting the keystone of the cranial 
edifice, is the base of the skull, formed, from behind forwards, 
by the basi-occipital, the basi-sphenoid, and the presphenoid. 
Around this daszcrantal axis, as Huxley named it, the principal 
modifications of the brain-box occur, under the influence of the 
development of the various parts of the brain. This axis itself 


ate 


——— 


REGIONS OF THE SKULL 197 


is straight in the majority of Mammals, but it becomes bent, 


curved, and more or less 
broken, as we consider 
ascending types of skull 
from the lower monkeys 
and anthropoid apes up to 
Man.’ 

On these facts we have 
constructed geometrical dia- 
grams of median longitudinal 
sections of the skulls of a 
Chimpanzee, of a European 
and of the Man from La 
Chapelle - aux - Saints (Fig. 
121). They clearly show 
the intermediate position of 
the last. The same result 
follows from a study of the 
relations of the various 
planes and fines of ortenta- 
tron used by anthropologists. 

After this general view, 

The Regions Wwe proceed 

ofthe Skull. to the ex- 
amination of morphological 
details. Seen from above, 
(xorma verticalis) all the 
skulls of Neanderthal Man 
appear remarkably uniform 
(iieei22): All are doli- 
chocephalic; their cephalic 
index,” ranging from seventy 
to seventy-six, corresponds 
well with the average human 
index as it occurs in an 


Br 









EUROPEAN 


Br 


LA CHAPFLLE 


CH/M PANZE£E 
«Fe € ct 





A 


FIG, 121.—Geometrical Diagrams of the Skulls of 
a Chimpanzee, of the Fossil Man from La 
Chapelle-aux-Saints, and of a Modern French- 
man. About one-fourth natural size. 


A, prosthion or incisive alveolar point; N, 
nasion (root of nose); Br, bregma (point of contact 
of the frontal and two parietal bones); L, lambda 
(point of contact of the two parietals and of the 
occipital) ; I, inion (base of the external occipital 
protuberance); O, opisthion (posterior margin of 
the foramen magnum); E, ephippion (anterior 
margin of the sella turcica); Fe, ethmoidal fossa ; 
Ct, upper level of cerebellum. 


1 Huxley, T., Hvidence as to Man’s Place in Nature, London, 1863. Topinard, 
P., “ La transformation du crane animal en crane humain” (L’An¢hropologte, ii., 1891). 
* For definition of this term, see footnote, p. 99. 


198 | NEANDERTHAL MAN 


archaic type. 


The skulls are much more enlarged behind 


than in front, where the frontal bone recedes greatly above the 









a 
a SS a 

Hy 

| 

\ La Chapelle mos Spy 1 

\ Néanderthal ____ Spy 2 


FIG. 122.—Superimposed Profiles of different 
Skull-caps of the Neanderthal type. One- 


third natural size. 


form of the occipital region 
and so on. 


great swelling ridges of the 
orbital arches. 

An interesting comparison 
of the fossil skull with that of 
a modern Chimpanzee and of 
a modern Man, photographed 
in the same position, is shown 
ING IGeeLer: 

In the lateral aspect of 
the skull (zorma laterals) the 
chief characters of the cerebral 
region are displayed. We can 
here observe the, importance 
of the face, the overhanging 
projection of the supra-orbital 
ridges, the very receding pro- 
file of the forehead, the general 
flattening of the vault, the 


like a flattened protuberance, 


The general flattening of the skull (platycephala) is a 





FIG. 123.—Photographs showing a comparison of the upper aspect of the Skulls of a 
Chimpanzee, of the Fossil Man from La Chapelle-aux-Saints, and of a Modern 
Frenchman. 


character of the greatest importance which the whole series of 
Moustierian skulls possesses in common (Fig. 124), and in which, 





— 


| 
’ 
| 





REGIONS OF THE SKULL 199 


at first glance, it seems to differ widely from modern skulls and 
to resemble those of the anthropoid apes without sagittal crests, 
such as the Gibbons and the Chimpanzees, even to such a 
degree as to warrant its inclusion in this group. 

In its receding forehead, or, one might almost say, its 
absence of forehead, the Neanderthal type still occupies the 
lowest rung of the human ladder and strikingly resembles the 
anthropoid apes, as is shown by the various methods invented 
by anthropologists for measuring the development of the 
forehead. 





la ChapeHe —_ Spin eee # 
Néanderthal —__ Soy eas ee 


FIG. 124.—Superimposed lateral Profiles of different Skulls of 
the Neanderthal type, oriented on the glabello-iniac line. 
One-third natural size. 


The parietal bosses are projecting and situated far back. 
The temporal lines are not more marked than in modern 
Man. 

_ The line of suture of the temporal and parietal bones is not 
much arched; it is known that while this line is rather 
straighter in apes and new-born children, it is more or less 
arched in the various human races, where, in the case of higher 
types, it finally forms a well-rounded curve. The zygomatic 
apophyses are massive, more inclined forward than in modern 
Man; the post-glenoid apophyses, relics of an ancestral 
condition, are more developed. The supra-mastoid crest is 
also very projecting. The mastoid apophyses are extremely 
small. The resemblance of the petrous portion, with its great 
extent, its disposition as a large, oblique surface, forming with 
the neighbouring parietal and occipital surfaces a single plane 
which inclines inwards and backwards, is much more akin to 


200 NEANDERTHAL MAN 


the same region in the skull of the Chimpanzee than to that of 
modern human skulls. 

The occipital region has a somewhat strange profile. 
Huxley had already described it: “To the eye of an anatomist, 
the posterior portion of the Neander- 
thal skull is even more remarkable 
than the front portion.” The new 
specimens from La Chapelle and 
from La Ferrassie, complete and well 
preserved, are admirably fitted for 
the study of this region, which forms 
a sort of chignon, very prominent 
but much compressed in a vertical 
direction. In this hinder part of the 
skull we seem to have a correlation 
with the receding character of the 
forehead. 

The posterior surface of the skull 
(norma occipitalis) does not show the 
usual pentagonal form, but has an 
almost circular contour, which is 
in keeping with the general platy- 
cephalia (Fig. 126) A marked 
transverse ridge, arched in shape, 
the torus occipitalis transversus, 
divides the upper from the lower part 

of the skull.. This ridge is@muce 

Fis, 15 —Thotogaate comming more developed in apes, where it 

of a Chimpanzee, of the Fossil connects the temporal and the supra- 

se enome er apel eaux Saint) mastoidean -crests, forming toseener 

with them one continuous ridge. This 

uninterrupted protuberance is present, as we have said, in 

Pithecanthropus, but in lesser degree. In Neanderthal Man, 

no junction takes place between the occipital protuberance 
and the temporal crest (Fig. 58, p. 101). 

There is no external occipital protuberance. In its place 
we find, on the transverse ridge, a sort of cup or cupule, which 
is present on every one of the known examples. The central 








SS eee 


REGIONS OF THE SKULL 201 


point of the cup does not correspond with the division between 
the cerebral hemispheres and the cerebellum; it is situated 
higher up. The cerebellar protuberances are much reduced. 
The whole surface of this region is very uneven; the 
projections and depressions representing the muscle-imprints 





FIG. 126.—Photographs comparing the occipital aspects of the Skulls of a Chimpanzee, 
of the Fossil Man from La Chapelle-aux-Saints, and of a Frenchman. 


are sharply defined, and this denotes an exceptional develop- 
ment of the muscles of the nape of the neck, in keeping with 
the enormous size of the head. 

The lower surface (xorma basilaris) of the skull of 
Neanderthal Man reveals a whole series of important characters, 





Fic. 127.—Photographs comparing the lower surface of the Skulls of a Chimpanzee, 
of the Man from La Chapelle-aux-Saints, and of a Modern Frenchman. 


although, even in the best examples, its state of preservation 
leaves much to be desired, because of the fragile nature of the 
bones of which it is composed (Fig. 127). 

The foramen magnum is placed in a relatively backward 
position. Though still widely removed from the apes in 


202 NEANDERTHAL MAN 


respect of this character, the Man from La Chapelle neverthe- 
less resembles them rather more than does Modern Man. The 
direction of the plane of the foramen magnum is likewise 
intermediate. 

Seen from below, the temporal bones are remarkable for 
their general flatness, that is to say, for the slightness of their 
prominences and hollows. This appearance differs from that 
of the temporal bones of modern Man, and resembles that 
found in apes, where, however, it occurs in accentuated degree. 
I have already pointed out the slimness of the mastoid 
apophyses, hardly more developed than those of Orangs and 





Fic. 128.—Front portions of Skulls from La Chapelle-aux-Saints on the 
left, and of a Modern Frenchman on the right, seen from below to show 
the difference in the profiles of the region of the Upper Jaw and Cheeks. 
One-third natural size. 


Gorillas. In front of the mastoid region, the tympanic 
resembles that of the large apes. The glenoid cavities, wide 
and shallow, recall to a certain degree those of the Chimpanzee, 
which are almost flat at the bottom. 

The maxillaries stand out as a continuation of the 
zygomatic arches, and accentuate the muzzle-like form of the 
face (Fig. 128). The palate is remarkable for its large 
surface, which in the Man from La Chapelle-aux-Saints is 
about 2700 square millimetres, whereas it is only about 1670 
square millimetres in the skull of a normal Frenchman. 

There remains to be examined the anterior surface of the 
skull (xorma facialis), which corresponds to 
the face in the living subject (Fig. 129). 
From the La Chapelle specimen we obtained our first accurate 
and complete knowledge of the physiognomy of Neanderthal 
Man. 


The Face. 


THE FACE 203 


In its dimensions, the face exceeds the largest known 
human faces. If it does not appear very high in relation to 





FIG, 129.—Photographs contrasting the Faces of the Skulls of a Chimpanzee, of the Man 
from La Chapelle-aux-Saints, and of a Modern Frenchman. 


its breadth, this is due to the flattening of the brain-box and 
consequent reduction of the forehead (Fig. 130). 


eoees@"=neea 
-- te 
- a 
-- a 
. 
a, 
. 
. 













a 


M 


x hit i : 
HI 
AWS " 1 Y} : 
We 
Hi 
? ii 
. : Pith 
3 } 
Wit ad} 
1! / bi) 





Fic. 130.—Skulls of a Frenchman and of the Man from La Chapelle-aux-Saints, seen full 
face, in order to show the difference of the relative development of cerebral and facial 
portions. One-third natural size. 


The dotted line indicates the supposed outline of the cranial vault of the fossil Man, 
had it been of the same proportions as in the French specimen. 


An immense development of the orbital arches characterizes 
all known skulls of Neanderthal Man. They unite in a 
projecting unbroken ridge, absolutely resembling the bony 


204 NEANDERTHAL MAN 


visor of the skulls of Chimpanzees, of Gorillas, and also of 
Pithecanthropus (see p. 99). Opinion is undecided as to the 
physiological part played by these protuberances. ‘The fact 
that they are more developed in males might lead to their 
being looked upon as a character favouring sexual selection. 
Turner suggested that perhaps they heightened an appearance 
of ferocity which was of some value in the struggle for life. 
In the opinion of many anatomists their development is 
directly correlated with that of the jaws and the apparatus 
concerned in mastication. For my part, I regard them as a 


vas 























LS f ih 


(NN 


CAE, ko is oi 4 () 


C8! must 























———————— 


Fic. 131.—Facial profiles of Skulls of a Chimpanzee, of a Frenchman, and 
of the Man from La Chapelle-aux-Saints. One-third natural size. 
a.n., nasal apophysis of the maxillary. 


means of protection of the organs of sight, acquired under the 
influence of particular environments. They do not represent 
a primitive character, for, in apes as well as in fossil Man, 
young specimens lack them. 

The orbits present a strange appearance owing to the 
projection of the superciliary ridges, which, by extending the 
roof of the orbits, form over them a kind of awning. They 
are widely separated from each other, and are rounded in form. 
Their size is relatively very great, half as great again as in 
a modern Man of the same brain capacity. 

The base of the nose (nasion), marked by the point i 
junction with the fronto-nasal sutures, is situated in a deep 
depression, as in native Australians. This arrangement is 


———— 


THE FACE 205 


the opposite of that found in apes, even in the apes with 
strong orbital ridges. The nose was very large (Platyrrhinian), 
as in the majority of modern men of the black races. The 
nasal bones, preserved in the Gibraltar skull, are essentially 
human and fundamentally different from those of monkeys. 
In other characters also, such as the development of the nasal 
apophysis of the maxillary and the area of the nostrils, the 
nose of Neanderthal Man, far from resembling that of 
anthropoid apes, differs from it much more than does that 
of living Man. This fossil man, which in so many of his 
characters approaches the apes more than any other man, is 
nevertheless so widely divergent from them as regards his 
nasal region, that instead of being simian in this respect, he 
might rather be looked upon as w/tra-human (Fig. 131). 

The arrangement of the malar or jugular bones indicates 
flat or receding cheeks. 

The maxillaries are strong and massive, and _ project 
prominently forwards. ‘Their anterior surface, instead of being 
concave and exhibiting canzne fosse, as in the case of all 
modern men without exception, is almost flat. This flat 
surface exactly continues the plane of the external surface of the 
malar bones, and so gives rise to the muzzle-like appearance 
which I have already described (Fig. 128), and which is one of 
the most characteristic traits of our Moustierian Man. It has 
the effect of adding greatly to the bestial appearance of the face 
of this man. I do not think, however, that we can regard these 
structures as simian, for, although the Chimpanzee has no 
canine fossz, they are very deep in the Gorilla and Orang. 

The sub-nasal or incisive area is very large. Jt continues 
the general direction of the profile of the face without projecting 
forwards. There is no alveolar prognathism.’* 

At the present day the lower jaw of Neanderthal Man is 
known from a large number of fragments which 
have all the appearance of a family resemblance. 
These jaws are massive and very strong, and their size corre- 
sponds to that of the skulls. 


The Lower Jaw. 


1 For an illustrated account of the recently discovered child’s skull from La 
Quina, see Appendix, p. 472. 


206 NEANDERTHAL MAN 


They have no chin, or only a rudimentary and receding 
one, a fact first observed in the jaw from La Naulette, the 
discovery of which caused a great sensation. Regarding it, 
Broca expressed the following opinion: “I have no hesitation 
in saying that the jaw from La Naulette is the first evidence 
to provide the Darwinists with an anatomical argument. It 
is the first link in the chain which, according to them, ought 
to lead from.Man to monkeys.” ? 


“SRtbtins ‘ . “ . - sg 





Fic. 132.—Lower Jaw, seen in profile, of the Man from La Ferrassie. Three- 
fourths natural size. Palzeontological Gallery of the French National 
Museum of Natural History. 

Assuredly we are here dealing with a most remarkable 
character, of the significance of which, from the point of view 
of its morphological rank in the Primate group, there does not 
seem to be any question. Anatomists regard the projection 
of the chin as an essentially human characteristic. Now, as 
regards the retreating character of chin, the jaws of Neanderthal 
Man are exactly interposed between the jaws of anthropoid 
apes and those of groups of modern human beings; and this 
is so even if we chose for comparison the races lowest in type 
in this respect. One of the most receding, if not the most 


1 In Topinard, P., “Les caractéres simiens de la machoire de La Naulette,’’ 
loc. cit. 





NS ee 


THE LOWER JAW 


207 


receding chin in the Anthropological Gallery of the French 


(OIE 


National Museum of Natural History, is 
that of the famous Hottentot Venus. 
Yet in it the symphyseal angle (the angle 
formed by the anterior and inferior margins 
of the jaw) does not exceed 94°, whereas 
in the Man from La Chapelle-aux-Saints 
it reaches 104°. It must be added that 
certain fossil jaws exhibit a chin in process 
of formation, such as that of the skeleton 
from La Ferrassie, in which there is really 
an indication of a chin triangle (Fig. 132). 
While the Heidelberg Man (Mauer jaw) 
from the Lower Pleistocene, possessed a 
jaw just as much lacking in chin as that 
of the apes, a study of various fossil jaws 
of Mid Pleistocene origin from various 
districts in France shows the gradual 
formation of a chin, the special attribute 
of Homo sapiens.’ This is shown in the 
series of diagrams in Fig. 133. 

The inner or buccal surface of the 
symphyseal region, or area of the chin, 
inclines in general direction from front 
to back; that is, the hinder as well as 
the anterior surface of the chin recedes, 
so that when we place a lower jaw of 
Neanderthal Man on a table and look at 
it from above, we see, not the anterior 
surface of the body of the bone, but the 
posterior surface, whereas in the case of 
the jaw of Modern Man we see exactly 
the reverse. 

The morphology of this inner surface 
shows certain interesting peculiarities 





we 


“CHIMPANZEE 





Fic. 133.—Profiles of various 


types of Lower Jaws 
showing a gradual series 
from chinless forms (Chim- 
panzee and Mauer Jaw) to 
formswith very pronounced 
chin (Frenchman), passing 
through intermediate forms 
(Malarnaud and La Fer- 
rassie). Two-fifths natural 
size. 


1 Important researches have been made of late years with regard to the develop- 
ment and significance of the chin, by the anatomists Mies, Walkhoff, Toldt, and 


others. 
de La Chapelle-aux-Saints. 


Bibhographical references will be found in my monograph, ZL’ Homme 


208 NEANDERTHAL MAN 


(Fig. 134). We find here, but rather less developed, the 
genial fossa which we observed in the Mauer jaw, and which 
is still deeper in apes. But there are well-developed upper 
and lower genial apophyses, just as in modern Men. To 
the right and to the left of the lower genial apophysis, there 
may be observed two rounded, elliptical or depressed tubercles, 
situated transversely, and united to the mylo-hyoid or oblique 
internal lines, which are very marked. These protuberances 
(J.¢.) separate the sublingual fossa (2) from the impressions 






+ 
AN\\\\ 


Gan «fll 7 Wan ? 
\ ‘\ i y mh au \sr Vit we h. 


) 
Ns } K \ N 
SG A MRE ETA RNC 
AS Y ul AVIAN 
\\ Wy) Uf, 35: r \ ve % \ \ 








SS 
=e 








/ Zz 
oo 


4, 


\ 
\ 
@ 
; \ ys \\ 
\ 
my, WAY NY AWW 
Spee Y] Pa bh lg “5 ® 
gpl a ANAS : RY 
Wty, ff ’ WYN a \ > 
Hig a \ Y S 
Mi ffs ‘ » 
WY ‘ ‘. Ne Vn 
DEW Mes y 
j . RS 
RENIN S 
\ 









Fic. 134.—Posterior surface of the body of the Jaw of the Man from 
La Chapelle-aux-Saints. Natural size. 


t.v.. openings for blood vessels; #g.s., upper genial foramen ; 
ag... upper genial apophysis; 4.g.z., inferior genial apophysis ; 
t.g.1., lower genial foramen ; 4o.7., internal oblique line ; 4.2, transverse 
prominence ; f./., sublingual fossa ; e.d7., impression of digastric muscle ; 
é.5.m., submental notch. 


of the digastric muscles (e.dz.), and may be taken as simian 
characters. But, on the whole, this arrangement of the 
genial area is quite human, although a little different from 
the usual arrangement. 

The development of the genial apophyses appears to have 
no connection with the development of articulate language, 
contrary to what has been believed and taught only too long. 
All that can be said of Neanderthal Man in this respect is that 
he had marked projections for the insertions of the genio- 
glossal and genio-hyoid muscles, whose functions are specially 
related to the movements of mastication and of swallowing, 
which are as necessary in animals as in Man. 


THE LOWER JAW 209 


The lower part of the body of the jaw in the symphyseal 
region is arranged in two facets, bearing impressions of the 
insertion of the digastric muscles. Thus we find here the 
arrangement already noted in the Mauer jaw, but in this case 
the impressions are shorter and differ less from those on the 
jaw of modern Man, where a true edge 
is developed, and where the marks of 
the attachment of the digastric muscles, 
smaller in size, are situated on the inner 
surface of the bone. So there exists a 
series of intermediate morphological 
stages which are brought out clearly 
rig.) 1 35. 

The vertical branches are very wide, 
somewhat narrower, indeed, than in the 
Mauer Man, but wider than in modern 
Man. On the inner surface the rugosi- 
ties for the insertion of the interior 
pterygoid muscle are very marked. 
The angle of the jaw, that is to say, 
the junction of the lower margin of the 
horizontal branch and of the posterior 
margin of the vertical branch, is as if 
it had been truncated and replaced by 
an oblique line corresponding to the === 
whole area of attachment of the internal Fic. 135.—Lower edge of the 

. : Jaw and impressions of the 
pterygoid muscle. ‘This arrangement Peo wtienes: ia Various 
occurs in the majority of the anthropoid —_Jaws. About one-half natural 
apes, particularly in the Gorilla. . ig ae ei 

ibe resion of the angleisivery thin; 3 ta Chapelle; 4. French. 
fmueatetnessame time deviates greatly 2+» impressions of digastric 
from the vertical. But the deviation "™°™ 
takes place inside the angle, somewhat as in the case of 
Marsupials, instead of outside the angle, as in the majority 
of human jaws; and this inversion is another indication 
of the great power of the pterygoid muscles. It really 
seems that the muscles of mastication, intended for the 
lateral movements of the jaw, were relatively more developed 

O 





210 NEANDERTHAL MAN 


than the elevator or biting muscles (the masseter and 
temporalis muscles). 

The coronoid apophyses are low, broad, and blunt; the 
sigmoid notch, shallow. The proportions of the condyles are 
really simian; their structure merely forms the counterpart to 
that of the large and shallow glenoid fosse: they confirm 
what I have just said with regard to the strength of the whole 
masticatory apparatus and of the relatively greater development 
of the chewing muscles than of the biting muscles. 

Human dentitions preserve a much greater similarity 
amongst themselves than do human skulls. 
It would seem that the general characters of 
these dentitions must be very ancient, and that the human 
branch must have acquired them, so to speak, from its origin ; 
or rather that they are associated with the very origin of this 
branch. And this is in accord, not only with what paleontology 
teaches regarding other groups of mammals, but also with the 
Mauer discovery ; for it revealed a dental morphology which, 
though quite human in character, was associated with a jaw 
differing greatly from other known human jaws. 

The dentition of Neanderthal Man is also definitely human. 
Several of the somewhat special secondary characters which 
it possesses are of a primitive nature, but they can have no 
specific value. 

The dental arches are very wide. The upper curve 
(Fig. 136) corresponds almost exactly to the architectural form 
known as a semicircular or Romanesque arch. On the arched 
portion are placed the incisors, canines, and premolars; the 
relatively short pillars of the arch are formed by the series 
of the three molars. This is rather different in plan from 
the parabolic, hyperbolic, or elliptical forms found in the 
majority of human jaws; it is, indeed, rather the U-form of 
the anthropoid apes, but in this case the vertical branches of 
the U are shorter and diverge ree thus showing an 
approach towards a parabolic form. 

The form of the lower arch (Fig. 137) is more akin to that 
of the upper arch than is usual in modern Man. It follows 
that the two arches stand to each other in a somewhat different 


Dentition. 


THE DENTITION 211 


Seal otter 





Fic. 136.—Palate and upper Dentition of the Skull of a Man from La 
Ferrassie. Natural size. Paleontological Gallery, ‘French National: ¥’ 
Museum of Natural History. 





Fic. 137.—Lower Jaw and Dentition, seen from above, of the Skull of a 
Man from La Ferrassie. Natural size. Paleontological Gallery, 
French National Museum of Natural History. 


212 NEANDERTHAL MAN 


relationship from what is the rule in modern Man, especially 
in civilized races, where the upper teeth overlap the lower, 
particularly in front in the region of the incisors. Here, when 
the jaws were closed, the upper and lower incisors met exactly, 
as in the case of modern Australians; or sometimes even 
the upper incisors were slightly behind the lower incisors, 
suggesting a little the condition in the bull-dog (see Fig. 116, 
p. 191). 

The study of the worn surfaces of complete sets of teeth, 
such as that of the skull from La Ferrassie (Figs. 136, 137), 
shows that mastication must have been performed partly by a 
forward movement of the lower jaw against the upper jaw—a 
movement which furthered the great surface development and 
slight depth of the glenoid cavities, as well as the barely 
projecting form of the temporal condyles. This structure 
indicates also great freedom in the lateral movements of the 
jaws, an indication confirmed by the strength of the pterygoid 
muscles; all of which, in short, points to a dentition more 
employed for chewing than for biting, and implies a vegetarian 
rather than a carnivorous diet. 

The teeth are strong, like the jaws which bear them 
(Fig. 138). They form a continuous series without intervals or 
diastemas, and all the crowns are at the same level. The 
canines do not project beyond the neighbouring teeth, and are 
in no way simian. The alveolar border, however, extends 
beyond the last molar in both upper and lower jaws ; so that not 
only were the wisdom teeth not cramped in their development, 
as in the jaws of civilized races, but there even remained space 
beyond them sufficient to accommodate a _ supplementary 
molar. 

An English anatomist, Sir A. Keith, regards as a dis- 
tinguishing characteristic of the teeth of Neanderthal Mana 
special development of the roots and of the pulp cavity. His 
observations have been made mainly on isolated teeth found in 
a cave in Jersey (see p. 192). The teeth found in position in 
the skull from La Ferrassie do not exhibit the character recorded 
by Sir A. Keith, a point on which I satisfied myself by means 
of X-ray photographs. 


THE DENTITION 213 


The teeth of Neanderthal Man became very rapidly worn, 
because of the coarseness of the food, mingled with earth, 
which they had to grind; so that study of the crowns can only 
be carried out in specimens of young individuals. Some 
specimens from Krapina are particularly helpful in this respect 
(Fig. 138). 

No important characteristic distinguishes the incisors, the 
canines, or the premolars from the corresponding teeth in 
modern Man. ‘The true molars were almost equally developed. 
They present the 
primitive human 
form so well described 
by Albert Gaudry 
ieee: 155). The 
upper molars had 
all four cusps, well 
developed. All the 
lower molars had 
five cusps, as in the 
jaw of Heidelberg 
Man and in the jaws 
of many modern 
savage races. 


‘hom'sum up, the 


dentition of Neander-  F16G. 138.—Portion of a Lower Jaw from Krapina, remarkable 
i df for the size and good preservation of the teeth. Natural 
thal Man oes not size. From a cast by Gorjanovic-Kramberger. 

differ in any im- 


portant character from that of the men of to-day; but, 
as was to be expected, the points of resemblance are 
with savage, and not with civilized races. ‘This similarity 
in character extends even to their pathology. The jaws 
of the Man from La Chapelle-aux-Saints bear numerous 
signs of diseases, which must have caused serious suffer- 
ing to their owner, due to inflammation of the gums 
(simple pyorrhcea) or to pathological growths on _ the 
socket-rims of the teeth (general pyorrhcea), But in 
not a single specimen have I observed a _ trace of 
caries. 





914 | NEANDERTHAL MAN 


The Trunk and Limbs. 


Until recent years, the study of other parts of the 
skeleton was somewhat neglected. The skeletons from La 
Chapelle-aux-Saints and La Ferrassie, which were almost 
complete and well-preserved, have enabled the study to be 
taken up afresh and completed. 

In general these skeletons, composed of relatively short 
thick bones, with large articular heads and powerful muscle 
attachments, give evidence of great strength. They have 
retained a large number of simian vestiges. 


CHIMPANZEE Py LA CHAPELLE 
Joe 1 





Fic. 139.—The three last Cervical Vertebrae, and the first Dorsal Vertebra, seen in 
profile, of a Chimpanzee, of the fossil Man from La Chapelle-aux-Saints, and of a 
European. One-half natural size. 


The vertebral column was short and massive. The first 

Vertebral overtebree are much more like those of a 

Column. Chimpanzee than those of a Man (Fig. 139). 
Their spinous processes are long, lying at right angles to the 
axis of the vertebral column, instead of inclining backwards, 
and they are not bifurcated at the end. The articular 
apophyses are remarkable for the slight obliquity of their 
facets. These peculiarities seem to indicate in the cervical 
region of the vertebral column either a complete absence of 
curves, or a slight curve, in a direction opposite to that 
in modern Man, prolonging the dorsal curve, as occurs in 
anthropoid apes, such as the Chimpanzee. If the reader bears 
in mind what has been said regarding the differences of the 
curves of the vertebral column in the Primate series (see p. 75), 
he will appreciate the interest of these observations. 


THE TRUNK AND LIMBS 215 


The vertebre of the other regions are not so well preserved. 
It would seem as if the lumbar curve were less pronounced than 
in the majority of modern men. The portions of the sacrum 
which we possess point to narrow sacral vertebra, slightly 
arched, and deeply set 
between the iliac bones. 
These are simian char- 
acters. 

The ribs are extra- 
ordinarily strong, de- 
noting a large thorax 
with very powerful 
intercostal muscles. 

The clavicles are 

Girdles and lon g, 

Limbs. slender, 
and much arched, like 
those of the Chimpan- 
gee) he shoulder= 
blades (scapulz) show, 
at their anterior or 
axillary margin, a 
special formation which 
I have not found in 
the skeleton of any 
modern Man.’ 

The upper - arm 


bones (humeri), which 
.F1IGc. 140.—Humerus seen full face. N., from Neanderthal ; 


pe : 
AR short, SAU and L.C.d., L.C.g., right and left Humeri from La Chapelle- 
POSSESS large articular aux-Saints. One-third natural size. 


heads, do not differ in 

any essential character from the humeri of modern Man. 
The right humerus is always a little stronger than the left: 
Moustierian Man was already right-handed (Fig. 140). Such 
observations are not surprising, as the forelimb provides one 
of the chief characteristics of the genus /fomo, acquired at an 
early stage in the evolution of our most distant ancestors. 








——— 


——— 





i 
i 
Wilt 
\ 
wv ‘ti 
WW 


———— 


iy Nt 






















































































































































































1 See my monograph, p. 121. 


216 NEANDERTHAL MAN 


The bones of the forearm are equally strong. All the 
known specimens of radius, instead of being almost straight as 
in modern Man, show a very pronounced curve. Hence the 
interosseous spaces for the muscles of the forearm, were greater. 
The bicipital tuberosity is situated a little lower than in modern 
Man, and lies on the prolongation of the inner crest of the bone, 
instead of being diverted 
to the anterior surface. 
These are altogether simian 
traits, which are reproduced 
in the radius of anthropoid 
apes (Fig. 141), Butgive 
must hasten to add that the 
lower end of the bone and 
the surface of the carpal 
articulations, corresponding 
to the region of the wrist, 
are very human. 

The ulna also shows 
certain peculiarities. But 
contrary to the case of the 
radius, it does not exhibit 
so much resemblance to the 
anthropoid apes as to the 
lower apes; that is to say, 
I consider that Neanderthal 
| Man has retained in his 
Fic. 141. — Radius, seen from inner surface. ulnar bones, as in the 

ee Gorilla ; N., Neanderthal Man ; Fr, French- majority of the other bones 
man. One-third natural size. 7£47., Bicipital : 5 
tuberosity. of his skeleton, some relics 
of a primitive state far 
distant from the point at which the various branches of 
the larger Primates split off. | 

When extended, the upper arm and forearm lay almost in 
line with each other, whilst in our case the forearm forms an 
angle with the upper arm scarcely ever exceeding 170°. On 
the other hand, the strong development of the olecranon 
process of the ulna must have impeded the full extension of 








ia ih i 
Mt. bi 
a 

iy 


























































































































THE LIMBS 217 


the forearm, as in the lower monkeys, whereas in the anthropoid 
species, complete extension is as easy as possible. 

The hand is already very human in character. The 
carpal, however, is relatively small, as in the great apes. 
The metacarpals are large and thick, that of the thumb 
being relatively shorter than is the rule in modern Man. 
The articulations of the metacarpals permitted of easy move- 
ment. All the fingers were comparatively short (Fig. 142). 

We already know that the 
pelvis of Man differs from that 
of all other Primates, because 
of its arrangement in correla- 
tion with the upright position 
and erect gait (see pp. 76, 77). 
We possess only portions of 
the pelvis of Neanderthal 
Man, but these portions are 
sufficient to allow a complete 
reconstruction to be made and 
to enable us to ascertain the 
persistence of certain vestiges 
of simian structure — great 
length in relation to breadth, 
flattened haunch (iliac) bones, 
-much reduced sciatic spine, 
more pronounced ischial 54, 549 -Right Hand of the Skeleton of 
tuberosity, etc. Woman from La Ferrassie. Half natural 

A priori, the osteology St Tani Gale, Fre 
of the lower limbs must of 
necessity be interesting, since it is so closely correlated 
with the more or less upright carriage of the body. 

The femora have massive shafts and large heads, and are 
much bent (Fig. 143). They thus resemble the femora of 
Gorillas and Chimpanzees, whereas modern Man has almost 
straight femora, like the Orangs and Gibbons. In the 
cylindrical form of their shafts they differ from the femora of 
anthropoid types and resemble those of Macaques, Dog-faced 
Monkeys, etc. There is often a ¢herd trochanter and suoé- 





218 


trochanteric fossa, osteological peculiarities related, it is said, 
to the development of the gluteal muscles and to muscular 


NEANDERTHAL MAN 






SHY 
=D 


S 


é os ee 
SS RNS JS 
LS” = 






































































































































LEG, 
fe 
YF 


es es i! i \ 
es 
Hy Wf} { | YYZ 



















































































FIG. 143.—Femora seen in profile, exterior surface. N., of Neanderthal Man ; 


S., of Spy Man; FR., of a Frenchman. 


activity adapted to movements 


Certain frictional surfaces seem to indicate that the owners of 


One-third natural size. 


in mountainous 


these femora habitually maintained a bent posture. 


country, 





THE LOWER LIMB 219 


The tibia were short but very strong (Fig. 144). The 
upper head is bent back, that is to say, curved towards the 
rear, which causes the plane of articulation with the femur to 
slope downwards and backwards. In this character, first 





























































































































































- =iage Bice = <= —— ee SSS SS SS — = WN 
SSS eee as —— 
——— ee ee 
i ee 
3 = —SSSS cg { 
ere ¥ 







































































—— 
= 
RS ee he ae cs 
SS esc —— = 
SSS 














| i a 
i; / i ) {) iy) , i 
Bid CU ! IA tH IN 
ZAP UN. 
fs fs cn \ ml) 
Mf lig S Vy S 


Fic. 144.—Tibia of Spy Skeleton, seen full face and in profile, 
external surface. One-third natural size. 


described by Dr Collignon and further observed by Fraipont 
and Manouvrier,’ the tibia of Neanderthal Man resembles that 
of the apes; only rarely is it present, even in much less 
pronounced form, in Man to-day. Presently we shall discuss 


1 Collignon, Dr, ‘Description des ossements fossiles humains trouvés a 
Bollviller” (Revue @Anthrop., 1880). Fraipont and Lohest in their memoir on 
Spy, Zoc. cit. Manouvrier, L., “Etude sur la retroversion de la téte du tibia” 
(Mém. de la Soc. @ Anthrop., 2nd series, vol. iv., 1893). 


220 NEANDERTHAL MAN 


the interpretation of this fact. At the same time, the general 
slope of the articular plane, from without inwards, is much more 
pronounced, as in the Gorilla. The lower head of the tibia 
bears one or two supplementary facets corresponding with 
analogous facets on the astragalus (Fig. 145), such as may be 
met with in certain native types which habitually maintain 
a bent position. They are likewise found in many apes. 

The fibula is strong. The 
arrangement of the articular facets 
shows that this bone played then a 
much more important part in the 
functions of the lower limb than 
it does to-day. To a much greater 
degree it must have shared in sup- 
porting the weight of the body. 

Up to a few years ago, only 
some isolated and more or less 
fragmentary bones of the foot of 
Neanderthal Man were available for 
study. The discoveries of MM. 
Capitan and Peyrony at La Ferrassie 
have put us in possession of skeletal 
aa VE remains of three almost complete 

feet (Fig. 146). These remains are 
FIG. 145.—Lower extremity of the : , 

Tibia and the’ Astragalus of Of exceptional” interest; matic mmame 

a Woman's Skeleton from La being one of the most distinctive 

Ferrassie. Two-thirds natural ie 

size, fa., supplementary facets’ Characteristics sof thes Sens magus 

The tarsal bones are _par- 
ticularly instructive, because their characters and variations 
depend on_ physiological conditions relatively easy to 
determine. 

The astragalus or ankle-bone is short, high, and broad. 
The head is much bent, denoting that the great toe was widely 
separated from its neighbours. ‘The articular surface for the 
scaphoid points to a much depressed instep. The malleolar 
facets for the tibia and fibula show a development comparable 
to that observed in apes (Fig. 147). In its extent, the facet 
for the fibula recalls that of anthropoid types. 


caravan cnrceasianansin ak 
a. z > ms 
‘ tee zB 


EL 






PaEs 


THE LOWER LIMB; THE FOOT 221 


These arrangements and some others, into the details: of 
which I need not enter here, teach us that the foot must have 
rested chiefly on its outside edge; and we understand how, in 
order thus to support the weight of the body, the fibula 
required to be of stronger structure. To sum up, the 
astragalus of our fossil Man is the astragalus of a walking 


gi 





Fic. 146.—Photograph of Right Foot of the Female Skeleton from La 
Ferrassie, still partially in its matrix. Half natural size. 


mammal, which, however, has retained many relics of a former 
climbing state. The example from the small skeleton of 
La Ferrassie is very remarkable for the prominence of these 
vestigeal simian characters, now effaced in the white races, 
but found in a transitory form in the newly born, a fact which 
confirms their phylogenetic significance. 

The heel-bone (calcaneum), no less robust, likewise recalls 





222 NEANDERTHAL MAN 


in-its structure the heel-bone of the newly born European 
child. It is remarkable for the extraordinary development of 





Fic. 147.—Photographs of the Astragalus or Ankle-bone seen from the upper 
surface. Half natural size. 


C., of a Chimpanzee; F.II., of the Female Skeleton from La Ferrassie ; L.C., of the Man from 
La Chapelle-aux-Saints ; FR., of a Modern Frenchman ; /4, tibial facet ; #2., fibular facet. 


the small apophysis (Fig. 148), a development comparable to 
that present in the great apes, especially the Chimpanzee and 





Fic. 148.—Photographs of the Heel-bone (Calcaneum) seen from below (upper 
row) and seen from above (lower row). Half natural size. 


G., Gorilla; LF., Man from La Ferrassie; FR., Frenchman; /.a., small 
apophysis ; s.@.7., anterior inner surface ; s.p.e., posterior outer surface. 


Gorilla. This kind of support, this sastentaculum talt, must 
have borne a large proportion of the weight of the body by 
way of the astragalus and tibia. 


THE LOWER LIMB; THE FOOT 223 


Another peculiarity of the heel-bone relates to what is 
termed its torsion. In apes, whose feet rest on the ground, 
mainly on the outer edge, the axis of the posterior surface of 
the heel-bone is much inclined from within outwards. In men 
of the civilized races, whose feet rest equally upon the whole 
sole surface, this axis oscillates on an almost vertical plane, 
the torsion being rather from without inwards. In our fossil, 





C. Eira Pipe 
Fic. 149.—Hind view of a part of the Leg and Foot; C., of a Chimpanzee; LF. I], of the 


Woman’s Skeleton from La Ferassie; FR., of a Frenchman. One-half natural size. 
The dotted lines represent the axis of the hind face of the heel-bone. 


then, as also in modern Veddahs, the torsion is intermediate 
(Fig. 149). 

The other bones of the tarsus and metatarsus do not 
exhibit any important peculiarity. But when their various 
components are brought together and articulated, we find a 
considerable separation of the first toe, a separation which 
the deviation in the neck of the astragalus had led us to 
expect. This arrangement has been described in the Negritos 
and Veddahs, whose feet, having become prehensile, readily 
lend themselves to the action of climbing. The forms of the 
articular facets of the majority of the bones also point to 
greater mobility of the other toes. 


224 NEANDERTHAL MAN 


The lower limb of Neanderthal Man was, then, not 
altogether like that of modern Man. Yet it differed much 
less in possessing new characters than in presenting the 
conjunction of certain morphological characters which, indeed, 
were already known, but were scattered amongst several living 
races still leading a life of savagery. The majority of these 
characters could be readily described as simian or pithecoid, 
but here we must use these terms in their widest sense. For 
it is not even with the anthropoid apes that the points of 
resemblance are most pronounced, but rather with the lower 
monkeys. This fact welds more closely those links of relation- 
ship which unite Man, not in this case to the anthropoids, 
but to a more generalized type of ape—a quadruped and a 
climber. : 

However this point of view may be regarded, and it 

Attitude ana Will be necessary to return to the matter 
Proportions of again, the differences between the skeleton 
the Body. of Neanderthal Man and that of modern Man 
are such that they necessarily imply certain differences in 
the general bearing and attitude of the body. ‘The great 
development of the face, the backward position of the foramen 
magnum which must have caused the body to incline forward, 
the slighter curve of the cervical and lumbar regions of the 
vertebral column, and the distinctly simian arrangement of the 
spinous processes of the cervical vertebre, all testify to this 
fact. With regard to the lower limb, it is clear that if the 
formation of the pelvis and the great development of the 
gluteal muscles indicate that a biped attitude had already been 
attained, the anatomical characters of femur and tibia, seen 
in profile in the upright position, show that the leg and 
thigh, when extended, could not have been in a precisely 
straight line with each other; that the femur must have 
sloped downwards and forwards, and that the tibia, sloping in 
a contrary direction, must have formed behind a wide angle 
with the femur. So that, without being mechanically 
impossible, the total extension of the knee could not have 
been normal, and the habitual attitude must have been one 
of semi-flexion (Fig. 150). 


ATTITUDE AND PROPORTIONS OF BODY 225 


The fibula, stronger in character, had a most important 
part to play as a support. The general appearance of the 
articulations of the foot indicates a greater degree of mobility 
and freedom. The foot, still only slightly arched, must have 


rested on the ground on its outer edge, 
and must have assumed naturally an in- 
toed position ; the wide separation of the 
great toe shows that it may have played 
the part of a prehensile organ. 

In general, the ordinary, normal 
carriage of Neanderthal Man must then 
have differed in some degree from our 
own. This fossil Man often exhibits an 
infantile morphology, that is to say, a 
morphology the most striking and sur- 
prising traits of which are found in either 
the newly born or unborn infant of 
Europeans. It has long since been noted 
that the child is not born with the faculty 
of walking upright: he first of all tries to 
walk ‘‘on all fours,” quite in the manner 
of a quadruped ape, and when he learns 
to walk in the biped position he places his 
foot on the ground on its outer edge. 
The crouching position, habitual to fossil 
Man and savage peoples, is likewise an 
ancestral survival. Here we have a 
case of individual evolution recalling and 
repeating the evolution of the race. 
Neanderthal Man represents a_ stage 
in this evolution certainly already far 
removed from the starting point, a 





Fic. 150.—Reconstruction of 
Skeleton of the Man from 
La Chapelle - aux - Saints, 
side view. About one- 
fifteenth natural size. 


stage closely. re- 


sembling the modern state of Man, but still quite distinct 


irom it. 


Now that we have studied separately each component part 
of the skeleton of Neanderthal Man, let us try to imagine, as 
precisely as possible, the general appearance of his whole 


body. 


P 


226 NEANDERTHAL MAN 


For long, anthropologists have sought to determine the 
stature of a being by means of the size of the long bones. 
The formule used to this end are not altogether beyond 
criticism, especially in their application to fossil Man. While 
quite appreciating the results attained through these formula, 
] have made use of a different and more direct method. 
Having drawn, in profile and life-size, each part or each bone 
of the skeleton of the Man from La Chapelle-aux-Saints, I cut 
out these drawings and fixed them upon a panel, one by one, 
according to their anatomical relationships and as exactly as’ 
possible. I thus obtained a kind of working-plan of the skeleton 
in orthogonal projection and of natural size (Fig. 150). The 
total height of this drawing, that is to say the height of the 
skeleton, is 1.52 metres [4 ft. 11.8 ins.| As we musteadd 
20 millimetres to obtain the height of the living subject, this 
must have been from 1.54 to 1.55 metres [5 ft. 1 an) |auene 
skeletons from La Ferrassie give somewhat different figures : 
the male skeleton, 1.60 metres [5 ft. 3 ins.|; themfemaley 
barely 1.45 metres | 4 ft. 9 ins.]. We may therefore look upon 
the figure 1.55 metres [5 ft. 1 in.] as an approximate average. 

The stature of Neanderthal Man was thus much lower than 
the average stature of modern Man—1.65 metres [5 ft. 4.96 ins. | 
according to Topinard. From Deniker’s tables’ we can com- 
pare in this respect the men of the Neanderthal type with the 
following ethnographical groups: the Ostiaks, the Veddahs, the 
Samoyeds, the Japanese of the lower classes, the Annamites 
of Cochin-China, and other Asiatic tribes; the Caribs of the 
three Guianas and Venezuela, the Labrador Esquimaux, the 
Fuegians in America; the Laps and the Voguls of Siberia 
among Europeans. 

We know that the genus //omo clearly differs from the 
whole group of the anthropoid apes with respect to the relative 
proportions of the upper and lower limbs. In our fossil 
specimens, these proportions are quite human, but the forearm 
is very short in relation to the upper arm, and the leg is 
extremely short in relation to the thigh, more so than in any 
living race. 7 


1 Deniker, J., Races ef feuples de la Terre, p. 659. 


RECONSTRUCTIONS. 227 


The reconstruction of the whole skeleton of the Man from 
Recon- La Chapelle-aux-Saints, carried out according 
structions. to the method I have just described, is repro- 
duced in Fig. 150. The general aspect here shown may be 
described as follows: a large head upon a short and massive 
trunk; short, thickset, and very strong limbs; and a peculiar atti- 
tude, due to the some- 
what different curve of 
the vertebral column 
and to the slightly bent 
lower limbs. 

Can we go still 
further and restore the 
plastic form? Can we 
present a portrait of 
Neanderthal Man as 
he was in life? The 
artist is at full liberty 
to attempt to produce 
works of imagination, 
original in character 
and striking in appear- 
ance; but men of science 
—and of conscience— 
know too well the diffi- 
culties of such attempts 
to regard them as any- 


thing but pastimes and Fic. 151.—Reconstruction of the Muscles of the Head 
recrea tio ns Certa in and Neck of the Neanderthal Man from La Chapelle- 


aux-Saints. About one-fourth natural size. 

accredited experts have 

published portraits in the flesh, not only of Neanderthal Man, 
whose skeleton is now sufficiently well known, but also of 
Piltdown Man, whose remains are so fragmentary; of Heidelberg 
Man, of whom we have only the lower jaw; and of P2thecan- 
thropus,of whom we only possess a fragment of skull and two teeth. 
At the best, such productions might find a place in works aiming 
at extreme popularity, but they singularly mar the books, estim- 
able in other respects, in which they have been introduced. 





228 NEANDERTHAL MAN 


In only one attempt did I feel justified in indulging, and it 
was as follows: I put into the hands of a young sculptor, 
M. Joanny-Durand, an enthusiast in anatomical studies, a cast 
of the skull of the Man from La Chapelle-aux-Saints. I 
requested him to model, in plasticine, the most important 
muscles, and to superimpose them one by one on this plaster 
cast, proceeding from the deep to the superficial layers, and 
carefully marking their points of insertion, the strength of which 
helps us to ee to a certain extent of the power of the 
muscles attached to them. The bust thus obtained, shown of 
course without skin, is represented in Fig. 151. Far from 
emphasizing in his work a simian or bestial tendency, an easy 
thing to have done, the artist has clung as far as possible to 
the ene feeling. Apart from the shape of the ears and 
of the extremity “ai the nose, for which we have no data, 
our reconstruction cannot differ greatly from the real appear- 
ance of the skinless head of our fossil Man. I leave the 
reader to study this physiognomy, to distinguish in it the 
basal structure of the skull, to compare it with the face 
of modern Man, and to enquire how the expression of 
this countenance might be modified by a covering of skin 
and hair, to say nothing of the more or less dramatic play 
of muscles represented here in a state-of rest. 


The Brain. 


The osteological studies I have just summarized have shown 
us very satisfactorily the physical attributes and various 
aspects of the physical life of Neanderthal Man. We shall 
now attempt to imagine his psychic attributes, his mental life. 
First of all we may appeal to archzological evidence. All the 
Moustierian handiwork known to us is very primitive and rude 
in character, and does not argue in favour of the superiority of 
the brain which conceived and created it. A second kind of 
evidence is furnished by the study of the brain itself, so far 
as it can be carried out under conditions which I shall presently 
describe, when I have said a few words regarding the brain 
capacity, that is to say, the volume of the brain. 


MENTAL ATTRIBUTES; BRAIN CAPACITY 229 


Several anthropologists, including some of the most dis- 
tinguished, Schaaffhausen, Huxley, Virchow, 
and Schwalbe, attempted to calculate the 
capacity of the Neanderthal skull, assuming that it was com- 
plete. The resultant figures varied from 1100-1300 cubic centi- 
metres, very much lower than that of the average human being. 

Measurements of the complete skull from La Chapelle-aux- 
Saints, obtained either by the use of the orthodox formule or 
by direct cubic measurements, lead to a very different result. 
The capacity of this skull may be fixed at about 1600 cubic 
centimetres. 

The relative size of this figure may well astonish those 
who regard cranial capacity as a zoological and anthropo- 
logical character of the first importance, directly related to the 
development of the intellectual faculties. Our fossil Man 
shows many signs of morphological inferiority, which somewhat 
lessen the gulf separating the human group from its nearest 
relatives, the anthropoid apes, and yet he clearly belongs to the 
human series. He even occupies one of the highest stages in 
it, as the following table shows :— 


Brain Capacity. 


Anthropoid apes (maximum) . ee 62 Tacs. 
Pithecanthropus (estimated) . : ESE 
Andamans (average of men) . : eel Spee 
Piltdown Man (estimated) —. Het 300'%, 
Australians (average of men) . é 40a 
African negroes LAW? & 
Parisians ; : ren C255 Qinss 
Auvergnese . ; eel Suet. 
Esquimaux. ; 7 L040), 


This result is all the more surprising in that it differs so 
greatly from the estimates suggested for the Neanderthal skull. 
Now, the dimensions of the skull-cap of the latter are so near 
those of the skull-cap of the skull from La Chapelle that the 
result obtained by direct cubing of the latter must cast the 
most serious doubt upon those earlier estimations. This we 
shall verify presently. 

However that may be, the Man from La Chapelle had a 
brain as large as that of the most civilized of modern races. 


230 NEANDERTHAL MAN 


But it must be remembered that we are dealing with the 
absolute value of this capacity. We must ask if the relative 
value is of the same order, and to discover this we must try to 
estimate the latter by taking into account the size of the head. 

Now it is easy to calculate, according to formule in current 
usage, what would be the capacity of a normal skull, the 
horizontal diameters of which would equal those of the skull 
from La Chapelle-aux-Saints, and whose vertical diameter 
would be in the same relation to the former as in a modern 
skull. We thus obtain a figure exceeding 2000 cubic centi- 
metres. Certain German skulls almost fulfil these conditions, 
such as that of Bismarck, whose cranial capacity was estimated 
at 1965 cubic centimetres. 

We have seen (p. 195, Fig. 119) that by superimposing the 
profiles of the skulls of a Chimpanzee, of the Man from La 
Chapelle-aux-Saints, and of a white Man, and taking care to 
make the axes of the three skulls uniform in length, a figure 
is obtained plainly showing the differences between the velatzve 
capacities of the brain-box. 

Thus there disappears, or is greatly lessened, the paradox 
seemingly indicated by the magnitude of the absolute volume 
of the La Chapelle skull, when due account is taken of the 
numerous signs of its structural inferiority. In reality, other 
things being equal, the brain is relatively rather less than the 
brains of modern large-headed men. 

Further, it would appear that the example of Neanderthal 
Man from La Chapelle-aux-Saints was an individual who was 
specially outstanding in this particular. We now possess casts 
of the brain-cavity of other examples, notably specimens from 
Neanderthal, Gibraltar, and La Quina; and comparative 
measurements of these casts have enabled me to determine 
their capacity and to obtain the following figures :— 


Neanderthal . : . , : » e408 ce 
La Quina , : ; : ; . 1207 
Gibraltar : ; : : : . 100mm 


_ The Man from La Chapelle, with his brain capacity of 
1600 c.c., therefore stands far above the others in this small 


MENTAL ATTRIBUTES; BRAIN CAPACITY 231 


series. We are justified in supposing that he approaches the 
maximum figure, while the Gibraltar skull perhaps represents 
the minimum of the same type. The difference between the 
maximum and the minimum is by no means abnormal, being 
only about 300 c.c., while in modern human races, savage or 
civilized, it varies from 400 to 500 c.c. 

The average brain-capacity of Neanderthal Man, calculated 
from the four individuals whose intracranial casts we possess, 
is about 1400 c.c., almost the same as that of the so-called 
inferior races of modern men. (See Appendix, p. 473.) | 

What do these figures signify? Do they give us the 
measure of the intellectual or psychic faculties of our fossil 
Man? Nothing could be more uncertain. 

We know, of course, that the brain-capacity may vary 
enormously in a series of recent men selected for their 
eminence, from 1320 c.c. (the anatomist Meckel) or 1420 c.c. 
(Raphael) to 1950 c.c. (La Fontaine), that is to say in the 
relation of 1 to 14. Considered by itself, then, this capacity 
cannot be taken as a criterion of the intellectual standard of a 
human being. There is an old saying: ‘A small chronometer 
is better than a big alarm clock,” and the large heads are not 
always the best heads. As Hlomo neanderthalensis belongs to 
a type very different from modern types, it would appear that 
one of his characteristics was the great size of his head rather 
than the volume of his brain, whatever may have been the 
guality of the latter. 

Further it must be enquired whether the organization, or 
more simply, the divisions of the brain substance do not also 
show certain differences. In some measure the study of the 
cast of the endocranial surface will answer this question. 

We cannot by means of such evidence claim to be able to 

Study ofthe penetrate all the secrets of the structure of the 
Brain. brain of any being. The results of such 
studies as can be carried out on casts of the cranial cavity 
may be likened to our idea of the form of a statue the 
covering of which we have been forbidden to raise, the 
covering being represented in the present case by the meninges 
which in the living body separate the brain substance from the 


232 NEANDERTHAL MAN 


bony surface of the brain cavity. Nevertheless, such casts, 
when made with the necessary skill and accuracy, enable us, 
on comparing them with similar casts made from skulls of apes 
or modern men, to arrive at some interesting conclusions. 
We now possess casts of the brain cavities of five individuals 
of Neanderthal Man: that from Neanderthal itself, from 
Gibraltar, from La Chapelle-aux-Saints, from La Quina, and 
from Le Moustier. Their general characters are remarkably 
uniform. The following description applies specially to the 
cast of the La Chapelle skull, which is the most complete and 
the most skilfully executed.’ 

The brain, the general form of which is reproduced in this 
cast, is, like the skull, long, broad and flattened. It presents 
a somewhat marked asymmetry; the left hemisphere of the 
brain was slightly more developed than the right, and this is 
in accord with the observation made on the inequality of the 
right and left upper arm-bones (humeri), 

One of the most remarkable characters of the cerebrum, as 
the casts show, is the simplicity and coarse appearance of the 
convolutions. Casts of the brain cavity of modern men 
generally show traces not only of more numerous but of much 
more complicated convolutions. In respect of this character 
the brain of Neanderthal Man more resembles the brains of 
the great anthropoid apes or of microcephalic man. 

The Sylvian fissure, which, in the brains of mammals, 
separates the frontal from the temporal lobe (Figs. 152 and 
153), is shown here gaping in front, a disposition which seems 
to indicate a certain degree of exposure of the striated body 
called the /sland of Rel. This arrangement is seen in modern 
Man in the course of embryonic development ; in the adult, the 
Sylvian fissure is closed by the encroaching of the cerebral 
matter on all sides. 

A study of the lobes of the brain reveals some important 
facts, first of all with regard to their relative development. 

To-day we are agreed in admitting that the lobes, within the 
orthodox limits ascribed to them by anatomists, are far from 


1 For further details, see Boule, M,, and Anthony, R., “L’encéphale de PHomme 
fossile de La Chapelle-aux-Saints” (L’ Anthropologie, xxii,, 1911). 


MENTAL ATTRIBUTES; BRAIN STRUCTURE 233 





Fic. 152.—Photograph of cast of Brain Cavity of Fossil Man from 
La Chapelle-aux-Saints. Left side. 





FIG. 153.—Topography of Surface of Left Side of Brain. Half natural size. 


B, bregma; i, lambda; 1, lateral sinus; 3, Breschet’s sinus; 4, 5, 6, medial meningeal 
vessels ; Fcc, cerebro-cerebellar fissure; \S, fissure of Sylvius, along which are the parietal fissures 
of Broca; Spa, anterior pre-Sylvian branch; Sf, posterior pre-Sylvian branch; Sfo, parieto- 
occipital fissure ; O/, olefactory groove ; O7, internal orbital groove ; Oe, external orbital groove ; 
par, parallel groove ; /u, sulcus lunatus. 


234 NEANDERTHAL MAN 


corresponding exactly to physiological regions. It is interest- 
ing all the same to measure, not the volume of these lobes, 
which would be impossible in the present case, but simply their 
external surfaces in relation to the total external surface of the 
cerebral hemisphere, and especially to compare the results of 
these measurements with those furnished by similar casts of 
anthropoid apes and modern Man. 

M. Anthony and I have thus obtained certain numerical 
data, discussion of which cannot be entered into here, but 
the significance of which may be summarized in the statement 
that the relative development of the lobes in our fossil Man 
was not that found in modern Man. ‘The difference is 
especially marked in the frontal lobe. In anthropoid apes the 
outer surface of this lobe forms about 32 per cent. of the total 
surface of the corresponding cerebral hemisphere. In modern 
Man the proportion averages about 43 per cent. In the Man 
from La Chapelle-aux-Saints it is about 36 per cent. From 
the point of view of the relative development of his frontal lobe, 
which is debased and slants backwards, fossil Man may thus 
be ranked between the anthropoid apes and modern Man, 
and even nearer to the former than to the latter. 

The frontal convolutions are fairly well marked, at least 
towards their lower portions. The third frontal convolution, 
which is very clear, had a large cap,’ but it was much simpler 
than in modern Man. It is noteworthy that it seems to have 
had no base (fzed), that is to say, no supplementary fold 
attaching the cap to the ascending frontal convolution, or that, 
if such a fold was present, it was much reduced in size. In 
consequence of the weak development of the frental lobe, the 
cap of the third convolution seems, as in the anthropoids, to 
occupy a much more forward position. These are primitive 
and simian characters, for an English anatomist, Cunningham, 
has affirmed that the great development of the third frontal 
convolution is more characteristic of apes than of Men. 

There is nothing of importance to describe relating to the 
temporal and parietal lobes. The occipital lobes, which are 


1 The caf is the part of the frontal lobe between the two anterior branches of the 
Sylvian fissure named the pre-Sylvian branches (Sa and S#/ in Fig. 153). 


MENTAL ATTRIBUTES; BRAIN FUNCTIONS 235 


relatively highly developed, exceed and overhang the cerebellum 
much more than is the case in modern Man. In the sum of 
their characters, and in particular because of the presence of 
a well-marked sz/cus /unatus or ‘Ape fissure,” they greatly 
resemble those of the anthropoid apes. 

The cerebellum is remarkable for the slight projection of 
the lateral cerebellar lobes, separated by a large fissure, at the 
bottom of which the median lobe, or vermis, must have been 
exposed as in the apes. In the anterior region, the cerebellum 
was, on the contrary, relatively more developed and more 
projecting than in Man, here again resembling that of the apes. 

The medulla oblongata must have been disposed in a 
much more oblique direction from front to back than in modern 
Man, but less oblique than in the apes, even the anthropoids. 
This character agrees with what we have learnt from a study 
of the skeleton, particularly from the direction of the cervical 
portion of the vertebral column. 

The anatomical facts here revealed enable us to some 

Functional C¢Xtent to obtain an idea of the brain functions 

Significance of of Neanderthal Man. 

Oe te If the great volume of the brain argues in 
favour of the intelligence of this Man, the coarse appearance 
and general simplicity of the design of the convolutions 
indicate, on the contrary, rudimentary intellectual faculties. 
The relative development of the different parts of the grey 
matter testify to this fact. 

Flechsig has shown that the different regions of the cortex of 
the brain may be divided, from a physiological point of view, into 
two groups. The one comprises the sensory-motor regions, 
correlated with the different peripheral organs of sensibility 
and movement ; the others comprise the ‘zones of association, | 
where sensations are condensed or diffused, and movement is 
regulated. Such would be the ‘intellectual centres and the 
true organs of thought.” 

In the lowest orders of Mammals, the centres of association 
are almost lacking. In the apes their importance is already 
considerable, and their development almost equals that of the 
sensory-motor centres. In Man, in whom intelligence reaches 


236 NEANDERTHAL MAN 


its highest point, they have come to occupy two-thirds of the 
cortex.’ 

On the external surface of the human brain, three principal 
centres of association, wedged in between four sensory-motor 
zones, have been approximately mapped out. Comparing 
these facts and those derived from the study of the lobes of 
the brain of Neanderthal Man, we find that the visual zone 
(occipital lobe) was relatively more developed, and that the 
first centre of association was very ill-conditioned, since this 
centre corresponds to the anterior region of the frontal lobe, 
here specially reduced. 

Now, if there is one assured fact in the physiology of 
the brain, it is that the anterior portions of the frontal lobes 
are indispensable to the intellectual life. Lesions in these 
parts affect neither sensibility nor powers of movement, 
but they give rise to intellectual disturbances; according to 
Dr Toulouse,’ bilateral atrophy of the frontal lobes always 
causes dementia or defective control known as gatism. 

‘In the development of the cerebral hemispheres throughout 
the geological periods,” Dr Houzé*® writes, ‘it is the frontal 
lobe, the seat of the most complicated associations and of the 
most perfectly adapted mental combinations, which has increased 
in size. In Man, it. has acquired such pre-eminence that it 
has done away with the necessity of adaptations for defence 
(fLomo nudus et tnermis). The frontal lobe has become the 
most formidable weapon for attack and defence.” 

It is probable, therefore, that Neanderthal Man must 
have possessed only a rudimentary psychic nature, superior 
certainly to that of the anthropoid apes, but markedly inferior 
to that of any modern race whatever. He had doubtless 
only the most rudimentary articulate language. On the 
whole, the brain of this fossil Man is already a human 
brain because of the amount of its cerebral matter; but 
this matter does not yet show the superior organization which 
characterizes Modern Men. 


1 See Gley’s excellent 7vaité de Physiologie, 4th ed., Paris, 1919, p, 1080. 
2 Toulouse, Dr, Le cerveau, Paris, 1901, p. 123. 
> Houzé, Dr, “Les étapes du lobe frontal” (Zrstitut Solvay, Soctologte, 1910). | 


CONCLUSIONS 237 


CONCLUSIONS. 


The long description the reader has just perused may be 
summed up in a concise form which may serve as a diagnosis 


of the Neanderthal type of fossil Man. 


Body of short stature, but very massive. Head very large, 
Diagnosis of the With facial region much developed in comparison 
Neanderthal with cerebral region. Cephalic index medium. 
cee: Skull much flattened ; orbital arches enormous, 
forming a continuous ridge; forehead very receding; occiput 
protuberant and compressed in a vertical direction. 

Face long and projecting, with flat and receding malar 
bones, upper jaws lacking canine fosse and forming a kind 
of muzzle. Orbits very large and round. Nose prominent 
and very large. Sub-nasal space extensive. 

Lower jaw strong and chinless, with large ascending rami, 
and truncated in the region of the angle. 

Detention massive, structure of back molars retaining 
certain primitive characters. 

Vertebral column and limb bones showing numerous simian 
characters and indicating a less perfect bipedal or upright 
carriage than in modern Man. Legs very short. 

Brain capacity averaging about 1450 cubic centimetres, 
_ (See Appendix, p. 473.) Brain formation presenting numerous 
primitive or simian characters, especially in the relatively great 
reduction of the frontal lobes and the general pattern of the 
convolutions. 


It is important to note that the physical characters of the 
Neanderthal type are quite in agreement with what archeology 
teaches us as to his bodily capacity, his psychology, and his 
habits. As we have already pointed out, there is hardly a 
more rudimentary or degraded form of industry than that of 
our Moustierian Man. His use of one simple material only, 
stone (apart probably from wood and bone), the uniformity, 
simplicity, and rudeness of his stone implements, and the 
probable absence of all traces of any pre-occupation of an 
eesthetic or of a moral kind, are quite in agreement with the 


238 NEANDERTHAL MAN 


brutish appearance of this energetic and clumsy body, of the 
heavy-jawed skull, which itself still declares the predominance 
of functions of a purely vegetative or bestial kind over the 
functions of mind. 

A comparative study of the morphology of various living 
Comparison uman groups confirms the idea that we are 
with Modern here concerned with an altogether special type, 

Le Dee very different not only from the so-called 
superior races, but also from the Esquimaux, the Fuegians, the 
Bushmen, the Pygmies, African or Asiatic, the Veddas, the 
Polynesians, the Melanesians, and even from the Australians, 
with whom attempts at comparison have often been made.’ 

The skeleton of the last-mentioned racial type is as dis- 

similar as possible from that of Neanderthal Man (Figs. 154 
and 155). It can no longer be asserted that the Australians 
are descended from our Moustierians ; indeed, the idea of this 
relationship would probably not have occurred to the mind of 
the early observers, if, in place of having only a mere skull-cap, 
they had had the opportunity of examining a complete skull 
with its facial portion. All that can be admitted in this 
respect, is that the Australian group of men, certainly one 
of the least developed groups of modern mankind, is less 
far removed than other races from the primitive forms, and 
that, in consequence, it ought to have certain characteristics in 
common with the Neanderthal type. Perchance our Mous- 
tierian led the same wandering life as the modern Australians. 

Neanderthal Man thus represents a new type in the human 

His Place family. Ought he to form a separate genus, 
in the Human or ought he to take a place in the genus (/omo? 

Nerles It was claimed, even at the time when we 
were acquainted with only a portion of his skull, that the fossil 
Man of Neanderthal differed generically from modern Man. 
Later, Sergi created the genus Palcoanthropus for this type, 
Bonarelli suggested the name Protanthropus, and Ameghino, 
regarding Neanderthal Man as the ancestor or forerunner of 
the genus //omo, called him Prothomo. 

In my opinion, the human being (Hominian) of the 


‘ These comparisons are detailed in my Monograph, Joc. c7¢. 


PLACE IN HUMAN SERIES 239 


Neanderthal type is certainly a Homo. After all we are 
discussing a creature who greatly resembles us, and so the 
opinion I have expressed is that generally adopted, even by 
naturalists who are inclined to multiply genera. It would 


Zo | 
Za 





Fic. 154.—Skeleton of fossil Fic. 155.—Skeleton, side 
Man from La Chapelle- view, of an Australian. 
aux-Saints, reconstructed, About one-fifteenth natural 
side view. About one- s1ze. 


fifteenth natural size. 


probably be a different matter if we were dealing with a feline, 
a ruminant, or a monkey ! 

It has still to be decided whether this fossil Man represents 
a distinct species, or race, or simply a variety of Man or of 
modern Men. The majority of anthropologists generally 


240 NEANDERTHAL MAN 


speak of the Meanderthal Race, but numerous specific names 
have also been created. One of them is of old standing, Homo 
neanderthalensts; others are more recent, HYomo primigentus, 
flomo europeus, FLlomo krapinensis, Flomo mousteriensis, Flono 
antiguus, etc. | 

If we argue from the multiple-genera point of view, it is 
at once clear that the Neanderthal type represents a new 
species, easily distinguished from all others. If, on the contrary, 
we believe in the specific unity of modern Man, this conclusion 
is not so evident; it may be deduced, however, from the 
following considerations. 

A first point is that the fossil type differs much more from 
all the types existing to-day, than these types differ amongst 
themselves. Between the extremes of the series of modern 
skulls we can discover all the transition forms, but this series 
is clearly separated from the group of fossil skulls by a kind of 
hiatus, corresponding to a real morphological break. 

A second point is that the osteological differences between 
our fossil Man and the mass of existing Men are much more 
important than the differences appealed to by mammalogists 
as a basis for separating the various species of mammalian 
genera. From this point of view, the Neanderthal type 
clearly represents a species different from /Zomo sapiens taken 
collectively, existing or fossil, because it presents a certain 
number of constant characters which are not met with, 
normally and in association, in any human race or species 
existing at the present day. The majority of these distinctive 
characteristics have a morphological value, and consequently 
a classificatory value, greater than the value of the characters 
made use of in mammalogy for classifying forms of the same 
genus. Each of them would be almost sufficient in itself to 
peetity a specific distinction, were it a question of a mammal 
not belonging to the genus //omo. y, 

We may consider the matter from yet a third point of view. 
Palzontologists, compelled to study beings simultaneously in 
space and in time, cannot have exactly the same conception of 
a species as zoologists who study them only in regard to space. 
Finding it impossible to designate by different names all the 


PLACE IN HUMAN SERIES 241 


fine degrees of evolutionary development which are revealed by 
the never-ending modifications of forms of life, and which they 
trace out throughout the ages, palzeontologists claim that new 
names should be reserved for those changes which mark a 
step, or, if I may be allowed the expression, a new rung in the 
evolutionary scale .of these forms, or a quite distinct ring 
amongst the links of their chain. 

Now the human fossil type which we have been studying 
corresponds ideally to the conception held by transformist 
paleontologists regarding species. No one can doubt that 
this type represents a degree in the human scale lower, 
morphologically speaking, than all the stages of modern 
humanity, and that it marks a step very distinctly separated 
from the step above it. The long series of primitive or simian 
traits which are imprinted on each constituent part of the 
skeleton, can only be interpreted as the marks of a more 
backward evolutionary stage than that reached by modern 
Mankind, and the difference is such that, according to the 
principles laid down, it fully justifies the distinction of a 
specific title. 

What name should be applied to this species? A name 
much in use is that of HYomo primigentus, which apparently we 
owe to Wilser,! and to which the fame of Schwalbe, the 
German anatomist, seems to have given some sort of sanction. 
It should be rejected. It has, to begin with, the very serious 
drawback of making an affirmation or suggestion which is 
certainly erroneous; for the Neanderthal type cannot be 
regarded as the absolutely primitive form of the genus 
Flomo. It recalls a similar egregious confusion which has 
led to the application of the absurd name Lephas primz- 
genius to the Mammoth, the last and most specialized of the 
Elephants. 

It ought to be abandoned for yet another reason. The 
rules established by the International Congress of Zoology lay 
down that the proper name of a species shall be that which is 
first applied to it. Now, as early as 1864, an English scientist, 


1 Wilser, ‘‘ Menschenrassen und Weltgeschichte” (Waturw. Wochenschr,, xiil., 1, 
1898). 
Q 


242 NEANDERTHAL MAN 


King,! created the expression Homo neanderthalensis for 
the skull-cap and other fossil bone-remains discovered at 
Neanderthal, and these remain the type specimens of the new 
species. In justice, then, this is the name which should be 
adopted. The terms /omo anteguus, etc., proposed by various 
authors, ought to be regarded as synonyms. 

That Homo neanderthalensis is a species with archaic 
An Archaic and characteristics is clearly evident from _ its 
Extinct Species. general morphology. The numerous simian 
traits which it has retained are so many relics, still strongly 
in evidence, of an ancestral state. 

Doubtless some of these characters are perhaps not 
altogether primitive traits; but rather the consequences of 
special physiological adaptations. The discrimination is often 
very difficult; but even if many of them may be regarded 
simply as the results of convergence, there is no doubt that 
the majority have a real genealogical value. 

There is every reason to believe that //omo neanderthalensis 
is a species even more archaic than the geological age of the 
remains in our possession would indicate. 

We know indeed that men of relatively higher organization, 
direct forebears of various forms of HZomo sapiens, existed from 
very early times in Europe simultaneously with the Neanderthal 
type. We have seen, in retracing the history of the principal 
discoveries in human paleontology, that several finds of less 
primitive skulls or skeletons have been regarded as belonging to 
avery remote geological age: such as those at Olmo, Galley 
Hill, Denise, Clichy, Grenelle, Ipswich, etc. I> Havewitet 
obliged to reject these discoveries, because they are not 
supported by satisfactory geological guarantees. But we have 
other proofs of the co-existence of //omo neanderthalensis with 
the ancestors of SYZomo sapiens. The early men of the 
Reindeer Age, the first Aurignacians, who abruptly followed 
the Moustierians in France, were men of the type known as 
Cro-Magnon, that is to say, men who were, as we shall see, 
very closely related to certain races of modern men, and who 


1 King, “The reputed Fossil Man of the Neanderthal” (Quart. Journ. of Science, 
1864, p. 96). 


AN ARCHAIC AND EXTINCT SPECIES 243 


differed from the Moustierians as much in their superior 
culture as in the superiority or diversity of their physical 
characters. Now these “ Crvo-JJagnons,’ who seem suddenly 
to replace the Neanderthal people in France, must previously 
have existed somewhere, unless we can imagine a mutation 
so great and so sudden as to be altogether out of question. 

The Grimaldi discoveries likewise prove that Homo 
neanderthalensis was not the sole form of humanity living 
on the earth about the middle of Pleistocene times, for the 
lower skeletons from the Grotte des Enfants could not differ 
greatly in geological age from the man from the Corréze. 
Now, the Grimaldi Negroids already definitely belong to the 
group of f/omo sapiens. Their existence in France at so 
distant a period, in close association with the much more 
primitive Neanderthal form, shows that /fomo neanderthalensts 
could not be the ancestor of //omo sapiens, since representatives 
of both species were contemporary. The origin of Homo 
sapiens must be sought for in a much more remote past than 
a priovt we could ever have supposed. 

As to Homo neanderthalensis, all the evidence leads us to 
believe that he dates from a geological period more remote than 
the Mid Pleistocene; that, contemporaneous with the ‘‘ Mam- 
moth fauna,” of which, in a way, he formed part, he occupied 
vast territories of western and southern Europe; but that, side 
by side with him, in other territories, and accompanied by 
probably a somewhat different fauna, there were already in 
existence human types, already in a higher stage of evolution, 
who represent the direct ancestors of modern Hlomo safzens. 
In contrast with the latter, HYomo neanderthalensts seems to us 
a belated form, a survival of ancestral prototypes. 

What do we know of these ancestral forms ? 

Unfortunately, there are very few of the more ancient types 
with which comparison can be made. The only human fossils 
from a geological period unquestionably prior to that of //omo 
neanderthalensts, are the Mauer jaw and the Piltdown bone- 
remains. 

The lower jaws of lomo neanderthalensts resemble the lower 
jaw of Homo hetdelbergensis (t.e., the Mauer jaw) in their 


244 NEANDERTHAL MAN 


general form, strength, and dimensions, so much so that if the 
Mauer jaw is articulated with the La Chapelle skull, the 
general aspect of the whole skull is but little altered. It 
is true that certain differences do exist, but the points of 
resemblance are so great that they lead us to believe in a close, 
if not direct, relationship between the ancient owners of these 
jaws. As the Neanderthal type can only be a survival, in some 
respects further evolved, of a still more primitive type, it is very 
possible that the Mauer jaw, froma much more remote geological 
period, may have belonged to a more primitive representative of 
this type, which would have been slowly modified in consequence 
of changes of environment, and perhaps, as Keith, Sera and 
Larger suggest, under pathological influences. 

As to the Piltdown bone-remains, there are no grounds for 
attributing to them the least affinity with those just discussed ; 
neither the jaw, which, as we have seen, is perhaps that of a 
Chimpanzee, nor the skull-cap, which from the generality of 
its characteristics—its prominent forehead, insignificant orbital 
ridges, and the structure of its temporal region—is more directly 
associated with the ancestors of Hfomzo sapiens than with those 
of Homo neanderthalensts. 

The latter species, whose origins are, from every aspect, 
extremely ancient, became extinct without leaving any posterity. 
It is fossil in a double sense; because it dates from a geological 
period prior to the present day, and because we are aware of 
rio descendant, from the Upper Pleistocene onwards. In the 
Moustierian period it represented a belated type existing side by 
side with the direct ancestors of (Jomo sapiens ; its relation to the 
latter was similar to that which exists at the present day between 
the races we call inferior and the superior races. Perhaps one 
might go so far as to say that it was a degenerate species. 

In the Moustierian period this survival must have come to 
an end, for the Neanderthal race seems to disappear abruptly. 
The Aurignacians and the Magdalenians, who succeeded it in 
Europe, differ from it in their much higher organization, and 
I do not think, contrary to what has sometimes been said, that 
true transition forms have been found either in the Upper 
Paleolithic or in the present period, 


AN ARCHAIC AND EXTINCT SPECIES 245 


Did there take place a simple substitution, or a migration, 
or even an extermination? I do not know. We have seen 
that it is impossible, among the modern ethnographical groups, 
to point to any single one which could be considered a 
descendant of the Neanderthal people. 

The chief objection to this point of view is the existence, 
frequently insisted upon, of ‘ Neanderthaloid” skulls found in 
prehistoric, historic, or modern burials in Europe. Numerous 
anthropologists have described and figured such specimens ; 
there is to-day no important collection which does not contain 
at least one specimen of this kind. Now the most ‘“ Neander- 
thaloid” of these skulls possesses only a very small number of 
the characters of the Neanderthal type, usually only a marked 
projection of the orbital ridges and a somewhat receding 
forehead. The face is always very different, the chin always 
well defined. In fact, all these ‘‘ Neanderthaloid” skulls are 
only pseudo-Neanderthal types, that is to say, are really [/omo 
sapiens, remarkable on account of the fortuitous presence of 
certain morphological traits, normally greatly developed in 
Neanderthal Man. 

The appearance or reappearance, in sporadic fashion, of 
these characters is generally looked upon as atavistic. But 
this is not to say that fZomo sapiens is descended in direct 
line from Homo neanderthalensis. It may be admitted that 
the characters in question are really primitive, that they formed 
part of a common inheritance from the remote ancestors of 
these two species. In Homo neanderthalensis they have been 
preserved at a stage much nearer to their origin; in the more 
highly developed /omo safzens they no longer reappear except 
by accident. 

Further, we cannot affirm that an infusion of Neander- 
thaloid blood, by way of hybridization, never entered into other 
human groups belonging to the branch, or to one of the 
branches, of /Zomo sapiens. But this infusion could only have 
been casual and had no great influence, as no modern human 
type can be considered as a direct descendant, even with 
modifications, of the Neanderthal type. 


Gi A PERS VelTa 
THE MEN OF THE REINDEER AGE 


WE know that from the geological and paleontological points 
of view, it is difficult to make a sharp distinction between 
the Upper Pleistocene and the Mid Pleistocene (see p. 53). 
But from the anthropological standpoint the distinction is 
relatively clear and easy, at least in France. 

From the prehistoric archzologist’s point of view, the Upper 

The Reindeer Pleistocene cefarequotil to the Upper Paleo- 
Age. {ithic, the implements of which are _ very 
different from those of the Lower Palzolithic; it is also the 
period of the Reindeer or Aezndeer Age. This latter term 
expresses an ethnographical rather than a_ paleontological 
fact, for the bones of the Reindeer are already numerous in 
Moustierian deposits. It means, first, that this animal has 
now become very abundant; it denotes, particularly, the age 
when the Reindeer played a great part in the life of man, for 
whom it provided food, clothing, and the raw materials for a 
large proportion of his industry. 

Weapons and implements are more abundant, much more 
varied, and more perfect than in the Moustierian period. 
Thus archzologists, with more data at hand, have long sought 
to establish definite divisions of the Reindeer Age, based upon 
the different fashions of making use of this material. We 
already know that they now distinguish three successive 
stages: the Aurignacian, the Solutrean, and the Wagdalenzan, 
which was followed by the Azzézan, a transition stage bordering 
on the WVeodzthzc period, that is to say, on the vecent times of 
geologists. 

In spite of the differences which serve as a basis for 


these divisions, the Reindeer Age presents a combination 
246 ; 


THE REINDEER AGE 247 


of characters which give it great unity, and which denote 
considerable progress beyond the Moustierian world. So 
there exists a striking contrast between Men of the old and of 
the new Paleolithic periods. 

Discoveries of human skeletons now bring us in touch with 
really superior types. The majority have a more graceful 
body, a finer head, and a large straight forehead. In the 
caves in which they lived, they have left so many evidences 
of their manual skill, of the resources of their inventive genius, 
of their artistic and religious pre-occupations, and of their 
powers of thought, that they truly merit the great name of 
fLlomo sapiens. 

Each one of these types has, indeed, its own particular 
physiognomy, but the peculiarities are only of the degree 
exhibited in the various races of the present day, and 
in general appearance the types of the Reindeer Age do 
not differ more from modern men than these differ among 
themselves. We have reached a point after which the 
physical evolution of Mankind may be considered as finished ; 
the problem of human origins loses its zoological character and 
becomes purely anthropological and ethnographical. 

Nothing could be more engrossing than the study of these 
Men of the Reindeer Age, of the relics they have left us, and 
of the manners and customs which these relics reveal or lead 
us to surmise. It has already furnished material for many 
works and memoirs of the greatest interest, but a summary of 
these cannot find a place in the present volume, written, as it 
is, especially from the palontological point of view. The 
essential facts must, however, be mentioned.’ 

The Men of the Reindeer Age lived by preference in 
Products of caves or rock-shelters. They were mainly 
Industry. devoted to hunting and fishing. They had 

widespread commercial relations. Their dressed stones are 


1 The large bibliography is essentially French. It will be found partly in the work 
by S. Reinach, already quoted several times, Antiéguiztés nationales: I., ‘Epoque des 
Cavernes”; in Déchelette, Manuel darchéologie préhistoriqgue, 1. Consult also, 
Mortillet, G, and A., Le Préhistoriqgue and Musée préhistoriqgue. Cartailhac, E., La 
France préhistoriqgue, and especially the Matériaux and L’ Anthropologie, See also, 
further on in this work, some notes relating to the art of the Reindeer Age. 


248 THE MEN OF THE REINDEER AGE 


neither so heavy nor so uniform as those of the preceding 
periods. Their weapons, intended to be hafted, are fine, 
graceful, sometimes beautifully worked with a most skilful 
technique (Figs. 156-158). Their implements are no less slender, 
very varied in form, and adapted to manifold purposes : knives, 
scrapers, piercers, gravers, saws, etc., new types of which were 
constantly being developed. Dressed flints are found by 
hundreds and thousands, mixed with kitchen debris, in their 
ancient settlements in caves and rock-shelters. 





Fic. 156.—Characteristic Objects of the Aurignacian Period. 


1, 2, Flint points with arched and retouched back, type known as “ Chatelperron”’; 3, flake 
of flint for cutting, formed by retouching, “La Gravette” type; 4, notched flake retouched 
along whole profile; 5, shaped flints retouched with a tang or tongue; 6, keeled scraper ; 
7, graver of arched type (“‘dusgué’’); 8, bone point of a dart, split at base; 9 and Io, bone 
objects. (After H. Breuil.) 


Stone is no longer the only raw material used. Our 
industrious cave-dwellers knew how to work in varied fashion 
the ivory of Mammoth tusks, the antlers of the Reindeer, and 
the bones of all kinds of animals. From these they made 
daggers, javelins, or arrow-heads for the chase, harpoons for 
fishing, shafts for projecting their darts, etc. They also made 
utensils for domestic use: spatule, smoothing implements for 
preparing the skins of animals, needles pierced with an eye to 
sew their garments of fur, etc. 


PRODUCTS OF THEIR INDUSTRIES 249 


From such archeological materials, archaeologists are 
enabled to establish their divisions.* 

In the lower layers (Auvzgnaczan), there still persist ancient 
Paleolithic forms, even amygdaloid flints. But 
new forms begin to appear. Elongated flakes 
become more frequent and are carefully retouched on their 
edges, which are often notched. There are gravers of a special 


Subdivisions. 





Fic. 157.—Solutrean flints, carefully dressed in shapes of laurel leaves and willow leaves, 
shouldered points (pointes a cran), and double piercers. One-half natural size. From Grotte 
du Placard in Charente. Palzeontological Gallery, French National Museum of Natural 
History. 

form known as “arched” (dusgwé), and thick massive scrapers 

known as “keeled” scrapers. Bone is now made use of to a 

great extent. Many shafts are to be found ornamented with 

striz, or with ‘‘ marks of the chase,” as well as flattened darts, 

often with split base, and various kinds of rude pins (Fig. 156). 
The Solutrean, which succeeds the Aurignacian in some 
1 See particularly Breuil, ‘H., “Les subdivisions du Paléolithique supérieur et 

leur signification” (Congres intern. de Généeve, 1912). Cartailhac and Breuil 


demonstrated the existence and the great importance of the Aurignacian period, 
also, it must be borne in mind, earlier foreseen by E. Lartet. 


250 THE MEN OF THE REINDEER AGE 


localities, is marked by extremely able and careful work in 
stone. The characteristic types are narrow points known as 
‘willow leaves,” larger points called ‘laurel leaves,” and 
shouldered points (poentes & cran). ‘These weapons are manu- 
factured with much art, by means of skilled retouches, long and 
regular, which often cover both surfaces of the flints (Fig. 157). 
These are beautiful objects, precursors of the wonderful 





Fic. 158.—Characteristic Magdalenian Objects. 


1, Flint flake, ending in double’ scraper ; 2, flake dressed as straight graver at upper end, and 
as scraper at lower end; 3, scraper and graver of ‘“ parrot-beak”” type; 4, small flint combining 
piercer and scraper; 5, flake of which one end has been trimmed by fine retouching, while its 
other edge bears a series of regular notches ; 6, small flake trimmed for cutting ; 7, javelin point 
with bevelled base ; 8, bone piercer; 9 and Io, bone needles with eyes ; 11, bone javelin point, 
bevelled and curved ; 12, harpoon of reindeer antler, with barbs not prominent (primitive type) ; 
13, harpoon with only one row of barbs ; 14, harpoon with double row of barbs. 


flints, lance-heads, arrow-heads, and daggers of the Scan- 
dinavian, Portuguese, and Egyptian Neolithic culture. The 
bone industry was further enriched by new forms of javelins 
with a pyramidal base and varied objects in ivory; the first 
needles with an eye appeared. 

During the W/agdalenian period, stone implements, far from 
attaining perfection, comprise countless flints generally small in 


PRODUCTS OF ‘THEIR INDUSTRIES 251 


size, and often hardly retouched at all, but varying greatly in form: 
flakes, scrapers, various gravers, piercers, saws, etc. Sometimes 
the same flint is adapted for different purposes; at one end it isa 
scraper, at the other a graver or piercer. The bone industry, on 
the other hand, is exceedingly diversified ; javelins are numerous 
and varied, often decorated with designs ; needles are abundant 
and also harpoons, which, to begin with, consist of simple notched 
bone sticks, and develop into barbed instruments, first with a 
single row, then with two rows of barbs (Fig. 158). 

We must be careful not to accept the naive idea of the 
prehistorians who are inclined to see in this sequence, established 
in these regions by means of data collated from numerous beds, 
the steady evolution of Upper Paleolithic industry. These 
subdivisions cannot have the general significance which they 
desire to attribute to them. On the contrary, all the evidence 
seems to show that the layers in each country, and even in 
each province, while possessing a common archzological basis, — 
exhibit in addition certain special ethnographical characteristics 
which are only of local significance. 

‘It becomes more and more evident,’ says one of the 
writers most familiar with the Upper Paleolithic, ‘that what 
has been at first regarded as a continuous series due to the 
evolution of a single population on one spot, is, on the contrary, 
the result of the successive collaboration of numerous tribes 
reacting to some degree upon each other, either through the 
influence of industry or commerce alone, or by a gradual inter- 
mingling, or a sudden and warlike invasion of alien tribes.” * 

The future of the science depends principally on the 
establishment of this racial paleogeography, which, however, 
is certainly far more complicated than at present we can 
imagine. Already, following Breuil’s guidance, we can discern 
two vast Upper Paleolithic regions, one of which we may call 
the Wedtterranean and the other the Adlantzc. 

The men of the Reindeer Age had also a taste for personal 

The First adornment; they used the teeth of wild animals 

Artists. killed in the chase (Fig. 171, p. 261), shells, ° 
pierced stones, etc., from which they made trophies, necklaces, 


1 Breuil, H., Les subdivisions, etc., p. 169. 


252 THE MEN OF THE REINDEER AGE 


bracelets and amulets. Endowed with a sincere and deep 
feeling for nature, and great sensibility to beauty, they were 
true artists, the first artists, existing 
thousands of years before the Chal- 
deans, the Egyptians or the A¢geans. 
It is in France, and by Frenchmen, 
that most of the wonderful evidences 
of this first blossoming of the plastic 
arts have been discovered. Next to 
the names of Edouard Lartet and 
Vibraye, that of Piette will always 
remain associated with the history of 
Quaternary art: Aftér the death jop 
Piette, the famous discoveries or 
labours of Riviére, Cartailhac, Capitan, 
Peyrony, Lalanne, Bégouen and par- 
ticularly of Breuil, have enriched 
prehistoric archeology with a mass of 
relics of the greatest interest, still insufficiently known to the 
artistic world or to the enlightened public.* : 





Fic. 159.—-Portrait of 
Edouard Piette. 





Fic. 160.—Reindeer carved in Ivory, from Bruniquel, now in the British Museum. 
About one-half natural size. (After H. Breuil.) 


All these productions, varying greatly in value, from inde- 
cipherable scrawls to true works of art, show that the men 


1 Apart from Manuals and Reviews, the most important works are: Lartet, E., and 
Chisty, H., Religuie aguitanice, 1865-1875. Girod, P.,and Massénat, E., Les stations de 
Lage du Renne dans les vallées de la Vézore et de la Corréze, 1888-1900. Piette, E., L’art 
pendant lage du Renne, 1907. The fine series of large monographs published by the 
Institut de Paléontoiogie humaine (founded by Prince Albert I. of Monaco), under the 
general title: Petntures et gravures murales des Cavernes paléolithiques, particularly : 
Altamira by Cartailhac, E.,and Breuil, H. ; Fomt-de-Gaume, by Capitan, L., Breuil, H., 
and Peyrony, D.; Cavernes cantaligues by Alcalde del Rio, Breuil and Lorenzo Sierra, 

etc. During the last few years, the Comision de Investigaciones paleontologicas y pre- 
historicas de Madrid has issued fine memoirs by Cabré, Pacheco and Obermaier on the 
art of the Spanish caves. Finally, S. Reinach has published a very useful Repertoire 
de Part quaternatre (Paris, 1913), with a complete bibliography of each production, _ 


THE FIRST ARTISTS 253 


of the Reindeer Age must have had ample leisure, like all 
populations engaged almost entirely in hunting. During this 
leisure, they practised every kind of art work, bent on repro- 










a 





nas 
1 
tn | ‘ Vi 


Af sf 
f il : 

0) yin jhyl a eat 
i ih! | \ ye i - 






Fic. 161.—Statuette of a Horse in Ivory. Grotte de Lourdes. About 4/3 natural size. 
Drawing by H. Breuil. 


ducing likenesses of the creatures living beside them, either 
by sculpture, by engraving, or by painting. 
The ivory of mammoth tusks and soft stone served them 





Fic. 162.—Head of Horse, carved in Reindeer antler, from the Cave at Mas d’Azil in Ariége. 
Piette Collection, in the Musée de Saint-Germain. About twice natural size. (After Piette.) 


as the raw material for sculpture; they knew also how to 
model in clay. They engraved on any kind of bone, on 
reindeer antlers, on rounded pebbles from the river nearby. 


254 THE MEN OF THE REINDEER AGE 


Often these objects may be likened to regular leaves of a sketch- 
book, whereon are grouped, mingled, or superimposed any 





Fic. 163.—Heads of Chamois and of Badger (?), engraved on a piece of Reindeer antler from 
the Cave of Gourdan. About five-sixths natural size. Piette Collection in the Musée de 
Saint-Germain. (After Piette.) 


number of sketches ; at other times they bear only one subject, 
or a number of small subjects, executed with special care. 
Almost all domestic objects in daily use were decorated with 





Fic. 164.—Red Deer and Salmon engraved round antler of a Stag from the Lorthet Cave in the 
Hautes Pyrénées. Piette Collection in Musée de Saint-Germain. Reduced by about 
one-fourth, and represented on the flat. (After Piette.) 

Notice above to the right two lozenges divided by a small vertical line in the centre, perhaps 
representing the signature of the artist. 


ornament or figures of living creatures. But coexistent with 
this mobile art, there was also a mural art. Our cave-dwellers 


’ 


THE FIRST ARTISTS 250 


sculptured, engraved, and painted large figures on the walls 
of dim caverns. The saucers and polychrome ochres of these 





Fic. 165.—Reindeer engraved on stone from the Limeuil Cave in the Dordogne. Two-thirds 
natural size. (Photograph kindly lent. by MM. Bouyssonie and Capitan.) 





Fic. 166.—Bison in act of leaping. Polychrome painting on the ceiling of the Altamira 
Cave in Spain. Length of animal 1:55 m. (After Cartailhac and Breuil.) 


primitive painters have been discovered, as well as primitive 
lamps by means of which they obtained light. 
A great many of these productions bear strong evidence 


256 THE MEN OF THE REINDEER AGE 





Fic. 167.—Hind in polychrome, with small black Bison, from the Altamira Cave. 
Length of hind 2.20 m. (After Cartailhac and Breuil.) 





Fic. 168.—Red and black Deer painted on a rock at Calapata, near Cretas, in Lower Aragon, 
Spain. About one-fifth natural size. (After Breuil and Cabré Aguila.) 


se 


THE FIRST ARTISTS 257 


9) 


of a real eesthetic sense, a masterly realism, skilled technique, and 
great strength of execution. They are frequently masterpieces 
full of life and movement, representations of Mammoths with long 
hair and bent tusks, Rhinoceroses of massive form, Horses of 
spirited bearing, bristly Boars, crowds of Ruminants of elegant 
build, Bears with bulging heads, Felines with supple body, and 
soon. ‘The frieze of Horses carved life-size on the rocky wall 
of the Laussel Cave in the Dordogne, the Bisons modelled in 
clay at Tuc d’Audoubert in Ariége (see Frontispiece), and the 
polychrome paintings in the Altamira Cave in Spain—the ‘Salon 
Carré” of palzolithic painting—are only a few extraordinarily 
striking evidences of the intellectual superiority and masterly 
skill of these very ancient artists. I have here grouped together 
some masterpieces of different kinds ; they will give an idea of the 
perfection of paleeolithic art. (/vontesprece and Figs. 160-168). 

Our cave dwellers, however, lived in the midst of unpromising 
surroundings. In some respects their material existence was 
very miserable: they knew nothing even of pottery. Brave 
in contact with Cave Bears and Lions, they were, nevertheless, 
peaceful and gentle in character; they possessed a sense of 
mystery, for their decorated caves seem to have served as 
sanctuaries, where they must have devoted themselves to 
practising the arts of magic’; they engaged in religious 

1 In agreement with M. Salomon Reinach, many prehistorians believe that the art 
‘of the Reindeer Age was by no means disinterested ; that it had especially a practical 
purpose related to their magical practices. I do not entirely share this view. 

The truthfulness of the drawings, the purity of the lines, the grace of the attitudes, 
cannot be accounted for by the simple practices of magic. Poor designs, childish 
drawings, and simple compositions, such as those of present day natives, would have 
sufficed for that. It is impossible that such figures, drawn with so great feeling 
for form, and really extraordinary certainty and delicacy in the manner of engraving, 
were not accomplished by the artist except for love’s sake; he could not have 
attained to such heights of perfection or to such mastery except by disinterested 
study. No one, having sufficiently practised the art of drawing and having devoted 
some time to the study of palzolithic masterpieces, could think otherwise. The 
hypothetical suggestion of the practices of magic may satisfy scholars, but I do not 
think that it would be wholly accepted by artists. I do not hesitate to confess 
that I believe in the theory of art for art’s sake, without at the same time refusing 
to allow a certain influence due to the practice of magic. But, in point of fact, 
diagrammatic and stereotyped art, better suited to this purpose, is more recent than 


true palzeolithic art, which, to begin with, is realistic only. In its real, and much 


earlier beginnings, art is probably only a special manifestation of the general spirit 
of imitation, already highly developed in the apes. 


R 


258 THE MEN OF THE REINDEER AGE 


practices, for their sculptures testify to funeral rites and to 
a true worship of the dead. We may therefore be proud of 
the spiritual and moral qualities of these distant ancestors of 
ours. We shall see that in their physical characters, also, 
they were as closely related to modern Mankind. 

To an English scientist falls the credit of having exhumed 
and placed in a museum the first human skeleton 
of the Reindeer Age. This skeleton, with 
bones coloured red, the famous Red Lady of Paviland, was 
excavated in the Paviland Cave in Wales by Buckland in 1823, 
and was placed in the Oxford Museum, where for long it 
remained forgotten. In recent years, Professor Sollas* has 
told us that the ‘‘ Red Lady” is probably a man, whose skull- 
less skeleton dates from the Aurignacian period, and exhibits 
the characters of the race known as Cro-Magnon, as de 
Quatrefages and Hamy thought. 

The skull discovered in 1833 by Schmerling, in the cave 
at Engis in Belgium, has been examined by the best anthro- 
pologists of last century, and is now generally attributed to 
Neolithic times. 

It may be that among the skeletons discovered in 1852, 
in the famous cave at Aurignac in the Haute-Garonne, there 
were human remains contemporary with the settlements of 
the Reindeer Age, as Edouard Lartet believed. But this we 
have now no means of ascertaining. 

The famous settlement at Solutré, in the Sadne-et- Loire, 
discovered in 1866, has yielded investigators a great number 
of human bone-remains. Unfortunately, in this case, we have 
to deal with burials dating from different periods, and it is not 
easy to separate Quaternary bone-remains from more recent 
skeletons. De Quatrefages and Hamy estimated at about 
fifteen the number of human skulls at Solutré which might 
have been contemporary with the Mammoth and Reindeer, 
but only six of these are fit for detailed examination.? Their 
morphology is not very homogeneous, and while they certainly 


1 Sollas, W. J., “ Paviland Cave” (Journal of the Royal Anthrop. Institute, 
vol, xliii., 1913). 

* For bibliography of former discoveries, see Cvania ethnica by these two 
scientists, 


Historical. 


HISTORY OF DISCOVERIES 259 


show some characters of Cro-Magnon type, they differ so 
much as to lead us, at the present day, more than ever to 
regard their age with certain reservations.’ The Solutrean 
deposits require new and more methodical investigation. 
But the following discoveries are of greater importance. 
Cro-Magnon is a place-name in the Commune of Tayac, 
Gromiaenbne veat © Lyzies win the Dordogne. «In, 1868, 
Laugerie. during the construction of the railway from 
Sapo ae ay: Périgueux to Agen, workmen found under a 
sheltering rock the remains of five human skeletons, placed 
upon floors of occupation containing numerous bone-remains 
of animals, dressed flints, 









and great quantities of CRO-MAGNON 
sea-shells. Informed in // 

time, an. experienced Yj R 

geologist, Louis Lartet, 

son of Edouard Lartet, fis Poe oka 4 
went to Eyzies to con- Be Wed Sacre kay ried 8. Chane me Cd 
tinue the excavations and ae iti eee . if 
to devote himself to the “Yfru rxyyyy yj, Oo 
scientific investigation of YJ YY"; 












Migr. EE ay Wyo Oe ome 


the bed.’ 

The human _ bones 
were grouped at the back 
of the shelter, in condi- 
tions suggestive of burial. Fic. 169.—Section of the Cro-Magnon Rock-shelter. 


: (After L. Lartet.) R, Cliffs of Cretaceous chalk 
Indeed, beside them there forming shelter. T, Former talus; A, Cave 


were collected numerous deposits; F, Floors of occupation of Reindeer 
shells pierced with a hole gma oe Garemuains ob tbe old) man. 

for using as pendants, and other objects prepared for making up 
necklaces or other ornaments. The skeletons, studied first 
by Broca and Pruner-Bey, and later by de Quatrefages and 
Hamy, were considered by the latter anthropologists as 
prototypes of a new fossil race—the race of Cro-Magnon.® 








1 Arcelin, A., “Les nouvelles fouilles de Solutré” (L’ Anthropologie, 1., 1890). 

* Lartet, L., “Une sépulture des troglodytes du Périgord” (Bull. de la Soc. 
ad Anthrop. de Paris, iii., 1868. Annales des Sctences naturelles, Ser. 5, vol. x.3 - 
Matériaux, 1869). 

3 Crania ethnica. 


260 THE MEN OF THE REINDEER AGE 


No doubt could be cast on the antiquity of this bed, which 
was definitely established by L. Lartet, for even a casual 
inspection of the section reveals the fact that the deposit of 
human bone-remains was necessarily prior to the formation of 
the enormous mass of fallen débris, covering, and so to speak 
sealing up, the prehistoric shelter (Fig. 169). Its age was, 
however, hotly disputed, especially by G. de Mortillet, who 
all along refused to believe that fossil men could have 
practised the veneration of the dead. And as his authority 
among prehistorians was considerable, almost all the latter 
rallied to his opinion, in spite of the protestations of a few 
scientists of the first rank, such as de Quatrefages and Hamy, 
and in spite also of a whole series of other discoveries testifying 
in the same sense. 

Thus in 1872, an archeologist from Brive, named Massénat, 
carrying out excavations at Laugerie-Basse, on the farther 
bank of the Vézere opposite Cro-Magnon, discovered in the 
depths of a great archeological deposit of Reindeer Age a 
human skeleton, accompanied by sea-shells. M. Cartailhac, 
summoned by Massénat, agreed that the man had been 
crushed by the falling of the rock under which he lay.* Since 
no question of burial arose, the palzeolithic age of the skeleton 
was not questioned. The bone-remains, which were in poor 
preservation, were examined by Hamy, who attributed them to 
the Cro-Magnon race (Fig. 170). 

Some months afterwards, Louis Lartet and Chaplain- 
Duparc, exploring the Duruthy rock-shelter at Sorde in 
Landes, found at the bottom of the deposit, in palzolithic 
surroundings, a human skeleton, the elements of which were 
scattered and crushed, and were accompanied by ornaments.’ 
On this occasion no shels were present, but about forty 
canine teeth of Bears and three canines of Lions were found, 
almost all pierced with a hole for suspension, ornamented with 


1 Massénat, E., Lalande, P., and Cartailhac, E., “‘Un squelette humain de l’Age 
du Renne a Laugerie-Basse” (Matériaux, vil., 1872). Hamy, E. T., “ Description 
d’un squelette humain fossile de Laugerie-Basse” (Bull. de la Soc. @Anthrop. de 
* Paris, 1874). 

2 Lartet, L., and Chaplain-Duparc, “Une sépulture des anciens troglodytes des 
Pyrénees ” (Matériaux, 1x., 1874). 


HISTORY OF DISCOVERIES 261 


engravings (Fig. 171), and “divided into two groups lying at 
unequal distances from the skull, as if one had formed a 
necklace and the other a girdle.” 
In spite of their poor state of 
preservation, Hamy was able to 
prove the resemblances of the 
human bones to those from 
Cro-Magnon. 

From the same year, 1872, 

date the first discoveries of 
The Grimalai fossil men in the 
Caves, caves which are 
variously known as the Mentone, 
B eh ; er ai Fic. 170.—Profile of Skull from Laugerie- 
aousse Ousse, OF rimaldat Basse. One-quarter natural size. (After 
Caves.’ Hamy.) 

These caves were nine in number, but one has been com- 
pletely destroyed. Except the 
Princes. Cave, they are re- 
latively shallow, and lie wide 
open towards the blue sea, in 
the midst of a charming land- 
scape (Fig. 172). Sothey have 
been frequently visited at all 
times, and, before 1872, numbers 
of archeologists carried out 
there excavations of a super- 
ficial kind. At this period, M. 
E. Riviere, living at Mentone, 
undertook more thorough in- 
vestigations. His observations 
and results were rendered easier 
Fic. 171.—Bear’s Teeth decorated with en- by the work executed in the 

gravings (arrow-heads, a fish and a seal) : 

and pierced by a hole for suspension. construction of the road from 

From the Duruthy Cave near Sorde [farseilles to Genoa, which, 

(Landes). (After Louis Lartet.) ee. . 

skirting the foot of the cliffs, 


1 The Baoussé Roussé, or Red Rocks, are indeed in the neighbourhood of 
Mentone, but they lie in Italy, in the territory of the Commune of Grimaldi, so that 
the most accurate name for the natural excavations into which the rocks have been 
hollowed, is the Grimaldi Caves. 








262 THE MEN OF THE REINDEER AGE 


cut into the talus of debris and pierced the Red Rocks 
by a tunnel. 

On the 26th March, 1872, M. Riviere discovered a human 
skeleton in the cave known as the Cavillon Cave, below a 
stalagmite floor. This is the famous “Mentone Man,” now 
exhibited in the Anthropological Gallery of the Paris Museum. 





Fic. 172.—The Red Rocks, or Baoussé Roussé, at Grimaldi, near Mentone. 
General view of the Caves. 


(Fig. 173). In the following year, three new skeletons were 
dug up in the cave known as the Cave of Laousso da Torre. 
In 1874 and 1875, M. Riviere extracted two skeletons of 
children from Cave No. 1, since called on this account the 
Grotle des Enfants (Fig. 174, p. 267). 

All these human spoils were found in conditions resembling 
those already observed in the Dordogne. Here as there, the 
skeletons were accompanied by a whole series of objects, 


HISTORY OF DISCOVERIES 263 


particularly by a quantity of shells which had been used for 
purposes of decoration or of dress. It is to Rivicre’s credit 
that he understood and affirmed that 
these were Paleolithic burials. His 
opinion was contested by the majority 
of prehistorians, headed by Gabriel de 
Mortillet. Later discoveries, which I 
shall presently discuss, have proved that 
Riviere was not mistaken.’ 

In 1888 two archeologists from Péri- 
gueux, Messrs Féaux and 
Hardy, excavated a rock 
shelter at Raymonden, a commune in 
Chancelade, near Périgueux, and found 
a human skeleton under the _ lower 
Magdalenian floors of occupation, that 
is to say, in the upper stages of the 
Reindeer Age. The doubled-up, un- 
natural posture of the skeleton pointed 
to deliberate burial. As at Mentone, 
the corpse must have been sprinkled 
with red ochre. The skeleton, exhumed 
with great care, was examined by Dr 
Testut,” who established it as the type 
specimen of a new race called the 
Chancelade race. It is now in the 
‘Museum at Peérigueux. 

The Quaternary silts on which is 

Briinn, Pred- situated the village of 


Chancelade. 





most. Briinn, in Moravia, have" aca Weer. 
: an,’’ found by M. Riviére. 
long been explored on account of their (Anthropological Gallery of 


the French Nat. Hist. 


rich animal remains and dressed flints. 
Museum, Paris.) 


In 1891 they yielded a human skeleton, 
lying 44 metres below the surface of the soil, along with some 
Mammoth and Rhinoceros remains. This skeleton, partly 


1 Riviere, E., De ?Antiqguité de 2 Homme dans les Alpes-Maritimes, Paris, 1887. 
2 Testut, L., “Recherches anthropologiques sur le squelette quaternaire de 
Chancelade” (Bull. de la Soc. @ Anthrop. de Lyon, viii., 1889). 


264 THE MEN OF THE REINDEER AGE 


destroyed at the time of its discovery, is said by Obermaier ' to 
have been richly decked with ornaments; round about it there 
were collected more than six hundred pieces of the Tusk Shell 
(Dentahum) once strung into a necklace or a breast ornament, 
several discs of stone pierced or decorated, and a tiny human 
figure wrought in ivory. Some bones still preserved traces of 
deep red coloration.” This again, then, was also a case of true 
burial. The skull, badly preserved, is dolichocephalic ; certain 
anthropologists refer it to the Cro-Magnon type, others regard 
it as distinct from that type. 

The locality of Predmost near Prerau, which also lies in 
Moravia, possesses an important Paleolithic settlement 
enclosed in a covering of gravels and clays surrounding the 
‘“Hradisko” rock. Excavations carried out from time to 
time since the year 1880 have revealed a cold climate 
Pleistocene fauna, so rich that the Mammoth is represented 
by remains of 800 to 900 individuals. In addition, this settle- 
ment has yielded a collection of flint implements comprising 
more than 30,000 specimens, a whole series of products of an 
industry in ivory, in bone and in Reindeer horn, and works of 
art, in particular a curious statuette in ivory representing a 
Mammoth. 

Some human remains have also been found at different 
times. In 1894 Maschka discovered a large burial containing 
forty complete skeletons, as well as the remains of six other 
individuals.* The bodies were protected by a sort of stone 
rampart. The skeleton of a child bore a necklace formed of 
forty small oval beads of ivory. This burial must have been 
prior to the main archzologftal layer, which belonged to the 
Solutrean period. The skulls are dolichocephalic; the male 
skulls have marked orbital ridges; the long bones point to 
great height (1.80 m.—5 ft. 10.8 ins.) They show no neander- 


1 Obermaier, H., ‘Les restes humains quaternaires dans Europe centrale” 
(L’ Anthropologie, xvi., 1905, and xvii., 1906). Numerous bibliographical references 
regarding Briinn, Predmost, and other similar localities. 

* Makowsky, A., Der Mensch der Diluvialzeit Mihrens, Brinn, 1899. 

3 Maschka, K., Der diluviale Mensch in Mihren, 1886. Kriz, M., Bettrage zur 
Kennints der Quartarzettin Mahren, 1903. 

4 DL Anthropologie, xii, 1901, p. 147. 


HISTORY OF DISCOVERIES 265 


thaloid character, as has been asserted. The ‘“‘ Predmost race” 
represents only a variety of ffomo sapiens; according to 
Szombathy,' it should be classified as belonging to the 
Cro-Magnon type. 

The “chronological order of the discoveries brings us back 
to France. In the Ain, at the ail of Les 
Hoteaux, near the village of Rossillon, there 
is a cave containing floors of occupation dating from the 
Reindeer Age. In 1894, Messrs Tournier and Guillon’ 
brought to light a burial in the most ancient of these 
settlements. The bones of the skeleton were covered with 
red ochre. The articles accompanying the burial consisted 
of a Red Deer’s tooth, pierced with a hole for suspension, 
dressed fflints, and a ‘baton de commandement” of 
Magdalenian Age. The skeleton is that of a youth of 
sixteen to eighteen years of age. The publication of these 
facts revived the discussions between the partisans and 
opponents of the theory of Palzolithic burials. Agreement 
could only be reached after further and conclusive discoveries ; 
and such were not long in forthcoming. 

The exploration of the Grimaldi and Mentone caves did 

The Grimalai Not cease with the labours of M. Riviere. 
Caves. Further Different archeologists undertook investiga- 

Explorations. tions, particularly in the fifth cave, known as 
Barma Grande. In 1884, one of the most energetic of 
collectors, Julien, found there a human skeleton. Unfortunately 
this skeleton was almost completely destroyed, in consequence 
of a dispute between its discoverer and the proprietor of the 
cave. It was found possible tO restore the skull, and it is 
now in the Mentone Museum. This Barma Cave seems to 
have been the richest and most interesting of the Grimaldi 
group. The proprietor of it, Abbo, the owner of the quarry, 
has partially destroyed it by exploiting it as a quarry for 
building stone. His work of excavation, unfortunately 


Les Hoteaux. 


1 Szombathy, J., “ Un crane de Cro-Magnon trouvé en Moravie” (L’ Anthropologie 
xii, 1901, p. 150). This skull, from a cave near Lautsch, certainly belongs to the 
Cro-Magnon race. But its age has been disputed. 

2 Tournier (Abbé) and Guillon, C., Les hommes préhistoriqgues dans Ain, 
Bourg, 1895. 


266 THE MEN OF THE REINDEER AGE 


lacking in any scientific method, has produced _ several 
human skeletons, which have been examined by Dr Verneau.* 

These finds of Abbo in the Barma Grande afforded material 
for fresh discussion, which would probably have continued 
to this day but for an intervention as generous as it was 
enlightened. 

The late Prince Albert I. of Monaco, whose noble spirit of 
scientific enquiry was so many-sided, had already taken a great 
interest in the Grimaldi caves. From 1883 onwards he had 
himself worked with great method in the Barma Grande Cave. 
In 1895, anxious at least to advance, if not to decide, the solution 
of the important problems arising out of the Baoussé Roussé 
investigations, the Prince gave orders for the carrying out 
of a systematic exploration. The excavations, conducted with 
rare skill and patience by M. the Canon de Villeneuve assisted 
by M. Lorenzi, were first of all directed to the large cave known 
as the Prince’s Cave, then almost untouched. They produced 
interesting results from the geological and palzontological points 
of view, thanks to which we now possess accurate information 
regarding the succession of events in Quaternary times in this 
part of the Cote d’Azur. Innumerable fossil bones of animals 
were recovered from about 4000 cubic metres of the deposits of 
this cave ; but not a single human relic was met with. Herein 
lay disappointment ; for everyone had counted on the Prince’s 
Cave to decide definitely the ages of the various skeletons of 
fossil men discovered in the neighbouring caves, concerning 
which there had been so much dispute. 

The Prince then decided to transfer his enterprise to other 
points. The Grotte des Enfants (Fig. 174) had only been 
imperfectly excavated. M. Riviere’s work had stopped at a 
depth of 2.70 metres, whilst below this level cave-deposits, 
nearly 8 metres deep, still remained untouched. Here the 
investigations met with the greatest success from the anthropo- 
logical point of view, for in the cave four human skeletons 
were discovered at three different levels. Since, at the same 
time, many bone-remains of animals were collected and the 


1 Verneau, R., “ Nouvelle découverte de squelettes préhistoriques aux Baoussé 
Roussé, prés de Menton” (L’ Anthropologie, 1i1., 1892). 


HISTORY OF DISCOVERIES 267 


stratigraphy of the cave could be accurately determined, the 
geological age of the skeletons was readily and indisputably 





Fic. 17.—View of the ‘‘Grotte des Enfants,”’ in the Baoussé Roussé, at Grimaldi. 


established. The Prince having confided to me the task of 
collaborating in his work, my geological and paleontological 
observations were able to furnish a firm chronological basis 


268 THE MEN OF THE REINDEER AGE 


for my friends, Messrs Cartailhac and Verneau, to whom was 
assigned the archeological and anthropological study of the 
layers.’ 

The main result of these observations was that all the human 
skeletons were really Pleistocene and dated from the earliest 
part of the Reindeer Age. Contrary to what was previously 
asserted, the Reindeer formed part of the Pleistocene fauna 
of the Céte d'Azur; I discovered its bones associated with 
those of its usual companions of the cold climate fauna, super- 
imposed, here as elsewhere, upon the more ancient warm 
climate fauna. 

The new skeletons exhumed from the Grotte des Enfants 
had been the objects of true burial, the articles deposited with 
them resembling those accompanying the skeletons previously 
discovered—perforated shells, objects of decoration, bones 
coloured red, and so on. Dr Verneau recognized the fact that 
the two skeletons from the lowest level represented a special 
race, which he called the Grvzmald: Race. The skeletons 
from the upper layers, like those discovered by Riviere, 
Julien, and Abbo, entirely agree with the Cro-Magnon 
type. These precious relics, along with all the results of 
the Prince of Monaco’s excavations, have been collected 
and are now exhibited to the public in the Anthropological 
Museum of Monaco under the directorship of M. de Villeneuve. 

In 1910, Hauser, the dealer in antiques, found a skeleton 

Combe-Capelle. Ofrnamented with sea-shells in a bed at Combe- 

Obercassel. Capelle in the Dordogne. ‘This skeleton was 
acquired by the Berlin Museum for which Hauser acted in the 
capacity of agent. An attempt has been made to establish it 
as the type specimen of a particular species under the name 
flomo aurignacensis, and the German anthropologist, Klaatsch, 
has propounded the most extravagant hypothesis with regard to 
it.” Asa matter of fact it also is nothing more than a variety 


1 Les Grottes de Grimaldi (Baoussé Roussé), Historique et Description, par L. de 
Villeneuve ; Géologie et Paléontologie, by M. Boule ; Anthropologie, by R. Verneau ; 
Archéologie, by E, Cartailhac. 2 vols., Monaco, 1906-19. 

2 Klaatsch, H., and Hauser, O., Homo aurignacensis Hausert (Prehtstorische 
Zeitschrift, 1. 1910). Klaatsch, H., “Die Aurignac-Rasse und ihre Stellung im 
Stambaum der Menschheit (Zertschrif/t fiir Ethnologie, 1910). 


HISTORY OF DISCOVERIES 269 


ad 


of the Cro-Magnon Race, exhibiting, according to Giuffrida- 
Ruggeri, certain Ethiopian characters (Fig. 175). 

In 1914, the German physiologist, Verworn, published an 
account of the discovery of a double burial, the skeletons of a 
man and a woman, from a settlement of the Reindeer Age at 
Obercassel, near Bonn. These skeletons, accompanied by some 
bones engraved in the Magdalenian manner, had been coloured 
red. They show the chief characteristics of the Cro-Magnon 
race, together with some features of the Chancelade skeleton.’ 





Fic. 175.—Skull from Combe-Capelle. (After Klaatsch.) 


_ Such are the principal data we possess for the study of the 
fossil men of the Upper Pleistocene. I might describe certain 
other discoveries, but either -they consist of bone fragments 
barely sufficient to provide any accurate information, or else 
some doubt exists as to the conditions of their deposition. 
We may mention those at Bruniquel (Tarn-et-Garonne), at La 
Madeleine (Dordogne), at Gourdan (Haute-Garonne), at Le 
Placard, near Vilhonneur (Charente), at Freudenthal and 
Kesslerloch, near Schaffhausen in Switzerland, and in the 
Prince John Cave, near Lautsch in Moravia. 


1 Verworn, M., Bonnet, R., and Steinmann, G., “ Diluviale Menschenfunde in 
Obercassel bei Bonn,” Wiesbaden, 1919. 


270 THE MEN OF THE REINDEER AGE 


To these osteological records we must now add evidences 
contributed by works of art depicting human beings, which we 
shall study separately. 

With regard to the skeletons, which we shall consider first 
of all, the opinions of anthropologists are somewhat at variance. 
In all these Men of the Reindeer Age, some anthropologists 
distinguish varieties of only one race of HYomo sapiens. Others 
are inclined to distinguish as many special types as there are 
specimens. I think that the truth lies between these two views. 
All this osteological material may, in short, be relegated to 
three types or races, closely akin to each other from the 
zoological point of view. We shall study them in succession 
and in their chronological order: the Grimaldi Negroids, 
belonging to the earliest part of the Reindeer Age; the Cro- 
Magnon Race and its varieties, to the Aurignacian period; the 
Chancelade type, to the Magdalenian period. 


The Grimaldi Race. 


As its name indicates, this race was established by 
Its Geological Professor Verneau upon evidences obtained 
Age. from one of the Grimaldi caves, the ‘‘Grotte 
des Enfants.” The human skeletons, found during this ex- 
cavation by M. de Villeneuve, lay at three different levels. 
The two upper skeletons, like the skeletons from the other 
caves and like the famous ‘‘Mentone Man,” belong to the 
Cro-Magnon race, which we shall presently study. The two 
skeletons of the Grimaldi race lay at a lower level. Discovered 
on 3rd June roor, they were carefully exhumed and conveyed 
to the Monaco Museum. 

It is important to study seek the conditions of their 
embedding. A section of the cave-deposits of the “Grotte des 
Enfants” is shown in Fig. 176, which I was enabled to make 
from M. de Villeneuve’s descriptions and my own observations. 
This cave-deposit consists of a whole series of layers, super- 
imposed to a depth of 10 metres, and chiefly composed of 
materials brought thither by human beings, and of cinders 
mixed with rock fragments accruing from the disintegration of 


THE GRIMALDI RACE 271 


the rocky walls; the floors of occupation distinguished by the 
excavators are merely zones showing more charring than the 
neighbouring zones. The whole of these cave deposits are 
Pleistocene, for bone-remains of the Reindeer are found even in 
the uppermost layers. This first conclusion, determined by 
a study of the fauna, is one of the most important from the 
point of view of a solution of the much discussed problem of 
the age of the human skeletons found in all the Grimaldi caves. 











The deepest layers, wy 
. xy 
resting on the rocky GRIMALDI yy Yj 
MYeuew@ U9 
floor of the cave and_ | SROTTE DES ENFANIS -~Y~Yyyyypyyy 
containing .Merck’s Yy Yyyyy j 
Mi pp tit fi OL, 
1 . 1 sf Up YUM / 
Rhinoceros, must, in my Vy YU 


opinion, be considered as 
forming a transition from 
the Lower Pleistocene to 
Mid Pleistocene. The 
skeletons of Negroids, 
situated at a depth of 
84° metres on a_ floor 
of occupation directly 
above these deposits, 
must then belong to the 
Moustierian period, and 
this is the conclusion at Fic. 176.—Section of the Grotte des Enfants. 

which I first arrived. N, original level of the soil ; F, layers of occupation ; 


ee titve here to, 3 oat oN ta Neral by +2, + 3 
deal with a human type 
which is quite distinct from that of Neanderthal and exhibits 
many characters common to certain African races of Homo 
sapiens, and this co-existence in Western Europe, at one and 
the same geological period, of two human forms so widely 
different would seem to be a fact of very great importance. 
But here we must make some reservations. M. de 
Villeneuve’s observations, contained in his diary of the ex- 
cavations, show indeed that the Negroids lay in a pit 0.75 
metre in depth. They were, therefore, contemporary, not 
with the layer of occupation at the level of which they were 


272 THE MEN OF THE REINDEER AGE 


encountered, and which I believe must be considered as dating 
from the Mid Pleistocene, but rather with a higher layer of 
occupation which marked the uppermost limit of the pit, and 
the products of which, according to M. Cartailhac, are already 
definitely Aurignacian in character. The Negroids are, there- 
fore, Aurignacian, like all the Cro-Magnon Men. In addition 
to the.somewhat abrupt change between the products of the 
Moustierian and the Aurignacian industries, now recognized by 
the best informed archeologists, there would seem also to 
have been a corresponding, and no less important, anthro- 
pological change, and this conclusion appears to be best fitted 
to meet the present case. 

We must not, for all that, be satisfied with mere words. It 
is none the less a fact that the Negroid skeletons date from the 
commencement of the Reindeer Age, a period bordering on 
the Moustierian, if not actually merging with it. The race 
revealed to us by these skeletons must therefore be much more 
ancient ; it must have flourished somewhere, in a different 
region from that occupied by Homo neanderthalensis, and in 
particular on the Cote d'Azur, whither HYomo neanderthalensts 
may never have found his way. The Aurignacian culture, 
probably of Mediterranean or African origin, is perhaps more 
ancient in this spot than in France. And though we may well 
discuss the Grimaldi race in this chapter devoted to Upper 
Pleistocene Man, with whom it forms the great mass of /Zomo 
sapiens fossilis, we might just as well have discussed it in 
connection with the Mid Pleistocene. 

We have just seen that the Negroid skeletons had been 
objects of burial. The first is that of an old 
woman, the second that of a young man of 
fifteen to seventeen years of age. They lay side by side, their 
bodies drawn up, their lower limbs much bent (Fig. 177), in 
the manner of Peruvian mummies. The skull of the young man 
was protected by a sort of cist, formed of undressed blocks of 
stone. There were also found the remains of a head-dress and 
bracelets of shell work made from Dog-Whelk (/Vassa) shells. 


According to Professor Verneau,’ whose important work 


The Skeletons. 


1 Verneau, R., loc. cit, Les Grottes de Grimaldt, vol.i., part 1., “ Anthropologie.” 


THE GRIMALDI RACE 273 





Fic. 177.—The two Skeletons of Negroids discovered by M. de Villeneuve in the Grotte 
des Enfants. Musée d’Anthropologie, Monaco. (After Verneau.) 


I shall here summarize, ‘‘these two ancient human beings 
differ appreciably from those who succeeded them [in the same 
cave, that is to say those of the Cro-Magnon type], and they 


5 


274 THE MEN OF THE REINDEER AGE 


exhibit the most striking points of resemblance to each other.” 
These two subjects, instead of attaining the great height of 
the other cave-dwellers of the Baoussé Roussé, scarcely exceed 
the average height of the French of our own day (1.56 metres 
[5 ft. 1.4 in.] in the case of the youth, 1.60 metres [5 ft. 3 ins. | 
in the case of the old woman). 

When we compare the dimensions of the bones of their 
limbs, we see that the leg was very long in proportion to 
the thigh, the forearm very long in proportion to the whole 
arm; and that the lower limb was exceedingly long relative 
to the upper limb. Now these proportions reproduce, but in 
greatly exaggerated degree, the characters presented by the 
modern Negro. Here we have one chief reason for regarding 
these fossils as negroid, if not actually negro. | 

The negroid affinities are likewise indicated by the 
characters of the skull. The heads are large; 
the skulls are very elongated, hyperdoli- 
chocephalic (indices 68 and 69), and, seen from above, they 
present a regular elliptically-shaped contour, with flattened 
parietal bosses (Fig. 178). The skulls are also very high, 
so that their capacity is at least equal to that of the average 
Parisian of our day: 1580 cubic centimétres in the case of 
the young man, 1375 cubic centimetres in the case of the old 
woman. ‘The mastoid apophyses are small. 

The face is large but not high, whilst the skull is excessively 
elongated from the front backwards; so that the head might 
be called unbalanced or disharmonic.* | 

The forehead is well developed and straight; the 
orbital ridges project only slightly. The orbits are large, 
deep and subrectangular; their lower border is everted 
towards the front. 

The nose, depressed at the root, is very broad (Platyrrhinian). 
The floor of the nasal fossz is joined to the anterior surface of 
the maxillary by a groove on each side of the nasal spine, as 
in Negroes, instead of being bordered by a sharp edge as in 
the white races. The canine fossz are deep. 


The Skulls. 


1 In order to have balance or harmony, vertical lengthening of the face should 
accompany the lengthening of the skull. 


THE GRIMALDI RACE 275 


The upper maxillary projects forwards in very marked 
fashion. This prognathism especially affects the subnasal or 





Fic. 178.—The Skull of the young Negroid from Grimaldi, seen in profile, in full face, 
and from above. Qne-third natural size. (After Verneau.) 


alveolar region. The palatal arch, though only slightly 
developed in breadth, is very deep (Fig. 179). 
The jaw is strong, its body very thick; the ascending 


276 THE MEN OF THE REINDEER AGE 


branches are broad and low. The chin is not greatly developed ; 
a strongly marked alveolar prognathism, correlated with the 
upper prognathism, gives it a pronouncedly receding appearance 
(Fig. 180). 





Fics. 179 and 180.—Upper and Lower Jaws of the young Negroid from Grimaldi. 
Natural size. (After Albert Gaudry.) 

The majority of these characters of the skull and face 
are, if not negro, at least negroid. Some of them may be 
regarded as indicating inferiority from the morphological 
point of view. 





THE GRIMALDI RACE 277 


The dentition of the young individual has been studied by 
Albert Gaudry. It strikes one at first sight 
by its unusual size. Its greatest resemblances 
are with the dentition of the Australian aborigines, which has 
retained many primitive characteristics. The dental arches 
are less widely divergent than in the superior races. The 
alveolar borders are more elongated; and the development of 
the teeth and of their cusps is in proportion to this prolongation. 


Dentition. 


French. 


Australian. 


Grimaldi 
Negroid. 





Fic. 181.—Comparison of the Upper Left Molars of the young Negroid, of an 
Australian, and of a Frenchman. Natural size. (After A. Gaudry.) 


Ia, 2a, 3a, first, second, and third true molars; I, inner cusp of the first 
lobe ; 7, inner cusp of second lobe, present in all the molars of the fossil. 


So we find that the morphology of the molars retains several 
simian characters like those found in the fossil types we have 
already examined, as is the case in the modern primitive races 
with large dentitions. All the upper true molars have four 
well-developed cusps, even the furthest back tooth, which in 
civilized races has only three (Fig. 181). All the lower molars 
have five quite distinct cusps, even the second and third, which, 
in the white races, usually have only four (Fig. 182). 

Albert Gaudry,’ when examining this dentition, was struck 
with the narrowing of the fore part of lower jaw at the level of the 


1 Gaudry, A., “Contribution & Histoire des Hommes fossiles” (L’>Anthropologie, 
X1V., 1903). 


278 THE MEN OF THE REINDEER AGE 


premolars and canines (Fig. 180). In this he sees an indication 
of inferiority in agreement with the marked prognathism of the 
lower jaw, the consequence of which was to leave less room for the 
development of the tongue and for its free forward movement. 
We have seen that the proportions of the limbs and of 
their several segments are negroid proportions. 
M. Verneau recognized that ‘in the vertical 
direction of the haunch bones, in the curve of the iliac crest, in 


Limb Bones. 


French. 


Australian. 


Grimaldi 
Negroid. 





Fic. 182.—Comparison of the Lower Left Molars of the young Negroid, of an 
Australian, and of a Frenchman. Natural size. (After A. Gaudry.) 


Ia, 2a, 3a, first, second, and third true molars; E, external cusp of first lobe ; 
e, external cusp of second lobe ; A, posterior cusp present in all the true molars of 
the Australian and of the fossil Man, and particularly well developed in the latter. 


the reduced dimensions of the great sciatic notch, the pelvis of 
the old woman differs from the pelvis of the modern European 
female, and resembles, contrariwise, that of the Negress.” 

The shaft of the femur is rather strongly bent, and the 
tibiz exhibit a certain degree of retroversion at the upper 
head. ‘These characters, which we have already studied in 
Neanderthal Man, are here, however, much less marked. - 

‘T’o sum up, in the most ancient skeletons from the Grotte 

Affinities and des Enfants we have a human type which 

Survivals. is readily comparable to modern types and 

especially to the negro or the negroid types. It would be 


THE GRIMALDI RACE - 279 


interesting to go further than M. Verneau, with a prudence 
that we can readily appreciate, ventured, and to endeavour to 
define even more closely his comparisons with present-day 
types. For my part, I have been greatly struck by the 
resemblances these Grimaldi Negroids bear to the group of 
South African tribes, the Bushmen and the Hottentots. 
Comparisons which I have been able to make with the material 
at my disposal, in particular with the skeleton of the Hottentot 
Venus, have led me to note, for instance, the same 
dolichocephalic character, the same prognathism, the same 
flattening of the nose, the same development in breadth of the 
face, the same form of jaw, and the same great size of teeth. 
The only differences are to be found in the stature, and perhaps 
in the height of the skull. Professor Sollas of Oxford has also 
made similar observations.’ 

This comparison between two groups of human beings, so 
widely separated at the present day both in time and in space, 
seems to be confirmed, as we shall presently see, by an 
examination of the steatopygian statuettes of women, which 
some of the oldest deposits of the Reindeer Age have yielded. 

M. Verneau has investigated the survivals of the Grimaldi 
race at different prehistoric periods. He has first of all 
compared this type with the Cro-Magnon, which succeeded it 
in place. ‘At first sight,” he says, ‘‘the two races appear to 
differ greatly from each other ; but on examining them in detail, 
we see that there is no reason why they should not have had 
some ties of kinship.” M. Verneau even declares that the 
Grimaldi Negroids ‘“‘may have been the ancestors of the 
hunters of the Reindeer Age.” 

My learned colleague and friend has devoted himself to a 
long and laborious enquiry for the purpose of discovering, in 
both prehistoric and modern races, any survivals or reappear- 
ances of the Grimaldi types. 

‘In Brittany, as well as in Switzerland and in the north of 
Italy, there lived in the Polished Stone period, in the Bronze 
Age and during the early Iron Age, a certain number of 
individuals who differed in certain characters from their 


1 Sollas, W. J., Azctent Hunters, 2nd ed., London, 1915. 


280 THE MEN OF THE REINDEER AGE 


contemporaries,” in particular in the dolichocephalic character 
of their skull, in possessing a prognathism that was sometimes 
extreme, and a large grooved nose. This is a matter of 
partial atavism which in certain cases, as in the Neolithic 
Breton skull from Conguel, may attain to complete atavism. 
Two Neolithic individuals from Chamblandes in Switzerland 
are negroid not only as regards their skulls but also in the 
proportions of their limbs. Several Ligurian and Lombard 
tombs of the Metal Ages have also yielded evidences of a 
negroid element. 

‘All these facts,” says M. Verneau, ‘“‘show that our two 
Grimaldi Negroids are really representatives of a race which 
played an important part in Western Europe. Were it merely 
a matter of chance individuals who had accidentally expired in 
the Baoussé Roussé, we should not see their influence making 
itself felt, by atavism, during the Neolithic period and during 
the first Metal Ages, from Brittany to Switzerland and through- 
out the north of Italy.” ? 

It is not only in prehistoric times that the Grimaldi race 
seems to have made its influence felt. MM. Verneau has been 
able to see, now in modern skulls and now in living subjects, in 
the Italian areas of Piedmont, Lombardy, Emilia, Tuscany, and 
the Rhone Valley, numerous characters of the old fossil race. 
The persistence or reappearance of these characters, which 
anthropologists have long recognized without arriving at any 
understanding of them, are explained by the facts of atavism. 
“That we may still find at the present day so many traces of 
a racial type having characters recalling those which I have 
observed in the Grimaldi race,” declares M. Verneau, ‘“‘ must of 
necessity have been due to the fact that this race was formerly 
represented in our country by a whole group.” And he adds: 
‘““We must therefore admit that an almost negro element lived 
in south-western Europe towards the Mid Quaternary period, 
between the Spy race and the Cro-Magnon race.” 


" Since the publication of M. Verneau’s work, other skeletons of Negroids have 
been described from the Neolithic of Illyria and the Balkans. The prehistoric 
statuettes from Sultan Selo in Bulgaria, dating from the Copper Age, seem to 
epresent figures of Negroids. (According to Zupanic in “Les premiers habitants 
des pays Yougo-Slaves,” Revue anthropologigue, 1919, p. 32.) 


THE CRO-MAGNON RACE 281 


Lhe Cro-Magnon Race. 


This race derives its name from the locality where, in the 
circumstances recounted above, the remains of five human 
bodies were found—an old man, two adult men, a woman 
and an unborn infant. These remains, first investigated by 
Broca and Pruner-Bey,’ represent the prototypes of that fossil 
human race, recognized, described and named by de Quatrefages 
and Hamy.’ 

We have seen how discoveries made in different regions 
have revealed the existence of this race throughout a great 
stretch of Europe, and in archzological conditions which 
indicate methods of burial and funeral rites of very great 
uniformity. Among these discoveries the most important 
is represented by the series of ten skeletons exhumed 
successively from the various caves of the Baoussé Roussé. 
The first few skeletons, discovered by Riviere, were studied by 
de Quatrefages and Hamy. The succeeding ones, discovered 
in the course of Abbo’s work and the excavations of the 
Prince of Monaco, form the subject of a masterly monograph 
by M. Verneau. 

It is now easy to define the Cro-Magnon race by certain 
general characters. Some readily observed differences accord 
with different beds or different regions, but such differences fall 
within the limits of those existing at the present day between 
individuals or, at most, between varieties of the same race. 

To begin with, let us take as types the original specimens 
The Cro-Magnon from Cro-Magnon, and in particular the 

Skeletons. skull of the old man, who exhibits the 
characters of the race in an especially clear, if not indeed even 
in a somewhat exaggerated degree (Fig. 183). 

The skull is dolichocephalic (cephalic index—73.7) and very 
large (cranial capacity—1590 cubic centimetres). The cranial 
vault is high, hypsecephahc. Seen from above the brain-box 
exhibits a pentagonal contour, due especially to the marked 
projection of the parietal bosses. This is the so-called 


1 In the “ Reliquize aquitanicee,” Bull. de la Soc. @ Anthrop. de Paris, 1868. 
2 Cranta ethnica. 


282 THE MEN OF THE REINDEER AGE 


dolichopentagonal form of certain anthropologists. Seen in 
profile, we observe the forehead rising above relatively 
slight superciliary ridges; then the vault is developed in a 





Fic. 183.—Skull of the “Old Man” from Cro-Magnon, seen in profile, from above, 
and full face. One-third natural size. Anthropological Gallery, French National 
Museum of Natural History, Paris. 


regular curve in the anterior and middle regions, whilst the 
parieto-occipital region forms a broad flattened area succeeded 
by the projection of the nape. ‘ Thus,” says de Quatrefages, 


im 


THE CRO-MAGNON RACE 283 


“in this savage contemporary of the Mammoth, the skull 
presents in a high degree all the characters regarded as 
indications of an intellectual development of the most 
advanced kind.” * 

The face, no less remarkable, is relatively flat and very 
broad, whilst the skull is narrow and long. The proportions 
of the head are disharmonious (see note, page 274). Below the 
wide high frontal bone, arched in the centre, open the orbits, 
likewise very wide, with almost rectilinear margins forming a 
quadrilateral contour. The cheek-bones are strong and 
prominent. On the other hand the nose is narrow, long 
and fine, /eptorrhinzan ; the nasal bones project forwards. The 
upper maxillary, withdrawn to the level of the dental arches, 
exhibits a somewhat pronounced prognathism. The roof of 
the palate is relatively narrow, is shallow, and bears a median 
projection. 

The long bones point to great height (1.82 metres [5 ft. 
11.6 ins.|) and an athletic physique; their muscle imprints 
are strongly marked. In the femur the “xea aspera is so 
developed as to forma kind of prominent column. The tibia 
is flattened like a sabre-blade, a Alatycnemic tibia. This 
characteristic, absent in Neanderthal Man, seems to be fairly 
general in the Cro-Magnon race. 

M. Verneau’s examinations of the fine series of skeletons 

The Grimaldi from the Baoussé Roussé have put him in 

Skeletons. possession of new facts. He was able to 
study nine skulls, eight male and one female, all belonging 
to the Cro-Magnon type (Fig. 184). These skulls exhibit a - 
certain degree of variation, but, according to M. Verneau, the 
differences do not exceed the individual variations to be met 
with in relatively homogeneous groups. 

All the skulls are remarkable for their great size, due partly 
to the great stature of the individuals. There exists a striking 
lack of harmony between the skull, which is dolichocephalic, 
and the face, which is both flat and broad. The flattened 
parieto-occipital area, found in the Cro-Magnon skulls, is 
always present. In all the specimens, the face shows the 


1 Quatrefages, A. de, Hommes fossiles e¢ Hommes sauvages, Paris, 1884, p. 65. 


284 THE MEN OF THE REINDEER AGE 


essential characteristics of the type: transverse enlargement 
due to the development of the cheek-bones and zygomatic 
arches, rectangular orbits, leptorrhinian nose, etc. The strong 
jaw has a prominent chin, triangular in shape. 

But to these general characters there fall to be added 
certain peculiarities constituting a variant of the type. The 
parietal bosses are less pronounced, and, in consequence, the 
pentagonal form of the skull, seen from above, is somewhat 





Fic. 184.—Skull of large Male Individual from La Grotte des Enfants, 
seen in profile. One-third natural size. (After Verneau.) 


different ; the occiput is less prominent, and the sub-nasal prog- 
nathism tends to disappear. ‘‘These peculiarities,” says M. 
Verneau, “can in no way justify us in separating the man from 
the Baoussé-Roussé from the Vézére type. . . . The old man 
from Cro-Magnon exhibits this type in exaggerated form. 
Amongst the skulls which anthropologists agree in classifying 
in the same group, some are met with which present the 
weaker characters I have just described.” 

Thanks to the numerous specimens at his disposal, Dr 
Verneau was able to re-examine the problem of the stature of 
the men of Cro-Magnon type. Broca had estimated the 
stature of the old man at 1.80 metres [5 ft. 10.8 ins.]. M. 
Riviere had calculated the height of the three adults whose 


THE CRO-MAGNON RACE 285 


skeletons he had found, as varying from 1.85 to 2.05 metres 
[6 ft.0.7 ins. to 6 ft. 8.7 ins.]. According to Verneau, these 
figures are too large. Those a eee 
obtained by him vary from 1.79 a ale 
to 1.94 metres [5 ft. 10.4 ins. to 
6 ft. 4.4 ins.] for five male adults, 
giving an average of 1.87 metres 
fomiceer 5 ins). “Che Grimaldi 
cave-dwellers must still be re- 
garded, even after this correction, 
as men of very great height 
(Fig. 185). 

My learned colleague has 
shown that they were also ex- 
ceedingly strong; that they 
exhibited a very marked elonga- 
tion of the forearm in relation 
to the whole arm, and particularly 
of the leg in relation to the thigh ; 
that their upper limbs were very 
long in contrast with their lower 
limos. that- the trunk was of 
remarkable breadth at the level 
of the shoulder. “In the pro- 
portions of their limbs,” writes 
M. Verneau, ‘‘as well as in the 
transverse development of the 
upper portion of their chest, the 
Grimaldi men differ from Euro- 
peans, and are more akin to the 
negro races.” 

On the other hand, the pelvis : 
has no negro characteristic. ‘On BOT Pie a wile rn: sar 

é y - de 
the contrary, the well-developed Villeneuve in the Grotte des Enfants. 
ae . Musée de Monaco. (After Verneau.) 
ili and the harmony of its 
curves render it as fine in form as that of the white races 
in which it is most highly developed.” 


The femora, as in those from Cro-Magnon, here show signs 





286 THE MEN OF THE REINDEER AGE 


of remarkable strength. The ridge (“nea aspera), broad and 
prominent, may really be described as a column, and is always 
accompanied by a hyfotrochanterian fossa. This structural 
arrangement gives rise to a certain antero-posterior flattening 
of the shaft below the trochanters, that is to say, to a 
platymeric femur. 

The tibiz are equally strong: their shafts are more or less 
flattened transversely. This character of platycnemia, less 





Fic. 186.—Hand of the large individua] from the Grotte des Enfants, and 
of a modern individual 1.67 metres [5 ft. 7.5 ins.] in height, photo- 
graphed to same scale. One-third natural size. (After Verneau.) 


marked in some bones, is, in the case of others, as marked as 
in the old man from Cro-Magnon. 

The hands are large, corresponding to the general build of 
the skeleton; the metacarpals are relatively longer and the 
fingers relatively shorter than in the case of a modern 
Frenchman (Fig. 186). These characteristics are exactly 
reproduced in the handprints in the Castillo cave, in the 
Cantabrian Pyrenees... The feet are remarkable for the 


length of the heel. 


1 Sollas, W. J., ‘‘Cro-Magnon Man; Imprint of his Hand” (Nature, 7th 
May 1914). : 


THE CRO-MAGNON RACE 287 


Bone-remains of the Cro-Magnon race have been collected 
Other Evidences. in many parts of Western Europe. To this 
Varieties of race de Quatrefages and Hamy attribute 
the Type. 4 large number of finds, apart from those at 
Cro-Magnon and Mentone; the skeleton from Paviland, in 
England; skulls from Engis and Engihoul, in Belgium ; and 
more or less complete skulls from Aurignac, La Madeleine, 
Grenelle, Bruniquel, Laugerie-Basse, Solutré, and Gourdan, in 
France. To these must now be added a skull from the Grotte 
du Placard, at Vilhonneur in Charente, the skeleton from Les 
Hoteaux in the Ain, that from 
Combe-Capelle in the Dordogne, 
skeletons from Briinn and Predmost - 
and the skull from Lautsch, in 
Moravia, as well as the skeletons 
from Obercassel, in Germany. 
This long list suggests several 
remarks. In the first place, the 
stratigraphical conditions of their 
beds and the true age of certain 
of these specimens are somewhat Fic. 187.—Profile of a Skull from the 
obscure, or have not been satis- Sates ta Fae ee oe 
factorily ascertained. In the second 
place, many of these finds consist simply of fragments of skulls 
or of lower jaws, and these, in my opinion, are insufficient to 
justify a classification within such narrow limits as those of a 
race. In the third place, the specimens of which the antiquity 
has been most clearly demonstrated and the state of preserva- 
tion is most satisfactory often differ quite markedly from 
the Cro-Magnon type itself, and thus indicate a very marked 
degree of variation in this type. Such is the skull from 
Le Placard (Fig. 187), which differs from it in possessing 
a cephalic index that is almost sub-brachycephalic.’ The 
Solutré skulls, regarded as authentic relics of the Reindeer 


Age, are even less homogeneous. The Obercassel skeletons 
are of smaller stature. 





1 Hamy, E. T., “Nouveaux matériaux pour servir 4 étude de la Paléontologie 
humaine” (Congres intern. a’ Anthrop., Paris, 1889). 


288 THE MEN OF THE REINDEER AGE 


The differences may be even still more marked. On this 
account several anthropologists regard the skulls or skeletons 
from Briinn and Predmost as representing a special race, the 
Solutrean race, which, towards the east, impinged upon the 
western and southern race of Cro-Magnon. Its skulls are 
remarkable for their marked orbital ridges, a feature in which 
they bear a resemblance, though a misleading one, to /fomo 
neanderthalensts, from whom in reality they differ greatly. 
According to Giuffrida- Ruggeri,’ the skull from Combe-Capelle, 
which is more dolichocephalic, more prognathic, and more 
platyrrhinian or flat-nosed, shows certain Ethiopian affinities. 

In short, from the osteological point of view, the true 
Cro-Magnons may be considered as a median type, around 
which there already gravitate variations, due probably to the 
influence of varying geographical environments, and perhaps 
also to racial intermixture. But as a whole they really form 
one stock, a fine race which, as de Quatrefages has said, played 
an important part over a considerable area and throughout 
a considerable period of time. 

This race did not come to an end in France with the 
termination of Quaternary times. As we shall 
see later, it not only survived during the 
Neolithic age, but, even in our own day, it still appears 
sporadically in different parts of France, especially, according 
to Dr Collignon, in the Dordogne (Fig. 188). M. Verneau has 
been able to trace the Cro-Magnon race throughout Spain ; 
it is found in burials, dating from more and more recent 
times the further one travels southwards. 

Broca had noted the presence of structural affinities between 
the Basques, the Kabyles, and the Guanchos. De Quatrefages 
and Hamy proved that a fair number of craniometric characters 
present in the cave-dwellers of Périgord are also to be met 
with in the pure-blooded Kabyles, and these characters have 
been noted in remains collected in prehistoric tombs in Algeria. 

But it is among the Guanchos of the Canary Islands that 
the Cro-Magnon type has been best preserved. This state- 


Survivals. 


1 Giuffrida-Ruggieri, ‘‘ Quatro crani preistorici dell’ Italia meridionale e l’origine 
del Mediterranei” (Arch. fer ?Anthr. e la Etnol., vol. xlv., 1916). 


THE CHANCELADE RACE 289 


ment, which we owe to de Quatrefages and Hamy, has been 
confirmed by Verneau’s researches in the Canary archipelago, 
where the foundations of the population are formed of the 
Guancho element; that this is derived from the Cro-Magnon 





Fic. 188.—Cro-Magnon type, still persisting in the Dordogne. 
(From photographs by Dr Collignon.) 


race is proved by resemblances in the skulls, which are 
sometimes identical. Verneau has even discovered among 
the modern islanders implements such as were formerly used 
by our ancient Dordogne hunters. 


The Chancelade Race. 


The discovery at Raymonden, near Chancelade, to which 
we have already referred, was made and carried through under 
excellent scientific auspices. The bed proved to be very 
rich in archeological and artistic objects. The fauna, 
identified by A. Gaudry, comprises, among other interesting 
species, the Greenland Seal. The human skeleton was examined 
by Professor Testut, of the University of Lyons. All this 
valuable material is preserved in the Museum at Périgueux, 
where it has been well arranged by M. Féaux, one of the 
fortunate investigators at Chancelade.’ 


1 Hardy, M., “La station quaternaire de Raymonden” (Bud. de la Soc, histor. et 
archéol. du Périgord, 1891). Testut, L., loc. cit, Féaux, M., Catalogue du Musée 
du Périgord, Périgueux, 1905. 

4% 


290 THE MEN OF 'THE REINDEER AGE 


The geological arrangement of the bed is extremely simple, 
consisting of three Magdalenian layers of occupation, alternating 
with gravels and silts, and forming a total thickness of 
1.60 metres in depth. The lower floor of occupation lies 
directly upon the rock-surface, and the human skeleton rested 
in the lower part of it (Fig. 189). 

The skeleton, found on the 1st October 1888, lay on its 
left side. The arms were raised; the left hand was placed 
under the head, the right hand 


















Kg “UJ under the left side of the lower 
\ Yj SY jaw; the lower limbs were bent ; 

I \ [oY the feet were, in consequence, 
pees est eer drawn up towards the lower part 
at. aes. 37-5 = ==3~—soof the pelvis, and the knees were 
= SS Ss2'2=3'| just touching the jaw. Such a 


constrained position recalls that of 
certain Peruvian mummies, and 
M. Testut has advanced the opinion 

























——- — =| that the Chancelade Man “might 
also have undergone similar treat- 


ment, and have been firmly tied 


Fic. 189.—Section of the Rock- yp with cords or flexible liane, and 


Shelter at Chancelade. (After 


Féaux.) 

R, rock, floor and roof of shelter ; 
FF, floors of occupation; +, human 
skull; S, stalactites. 


perhaps even been sewn in some 
kind of sack made of an animal's 
skin, all in order to reduce the 


body to the smallest size so that it 
should occupy the smallest possible space. A similar method 
of burial is found among a great many ancient and modern 
peoples, particularly in the case of modern Esquimaux.” 

As in the Mentone burials, the body seems to have been 
powdered over with haematite iron-ore, which had coloured red 
not only the bones but also the surrounding earth. 

Let us glance at the chief results of Dr Testut’s anthro- 
pological research. 

The skeleton is that of a man who had died between the 
ages of 55 and 65 years. This man was of 
small stature, 1.50 metres according to Testut, 
1.59 metres according to Rahon, or, let us say, about 1.55 


The Skeleton. 


THE CHANCELADE RACE 291 


metres [5 ft. 1 in.]. In this character, to begin with, he differs 
considerably from the Cro-Magnon type. 
The state of preservation of the skull leaves much to be 























Fic. 190.—The Chancelade Skull, seen in profile, full face, and from above. 
One-third natural size. (After Dr Testut.) 


desired, but it has been carefully reconstructed (Fig. 190). It 
is markedly dolichocephalic (cephalic index, 72), and remarkably 
high. Its capacity, estimated at 1710 cubic centimetres, greatly 
exceeds the average of present-day skulls, even of Europeans. 


292 THE MEN OF THE REINDEER AGE 


‘Seen in profile, the Chancelade skull exhibits all the 
characters belonging to the higher races.” Above the slight 
superciliary ridges, the broad, somewhat bulging forehead 
rises at first almost vertically; the line of the profile then 
slopes backwards and is continued in a regular curve. The 
parietal bosses are very marked. The occipital region presents 
an almost perpendicular surface. ‘The mastoid apophyses are 
remarkably well developed. 

Seen full face, the skull is characterized by the height of 
the forehead, and by the unusual height of its median area, 
which gives to the general aspect the appearance of a high 
and narrow arch, 

The face is very broad and very high, so that the skull 
appears to be well-balanced or harmonious. We may recall 
the fact that the ill-proportioned or disharmonic skulls of the 
Cro-Magnon type have a broad but squat face. 

The cheek bones are strongly developed and prominent ; 
the orbits are large and high; the nose is long and narrow 
(leptorrhinian), and the upper jaws show no subnasal progna- 
thism. The alveolar borders, lacking teeth, surround a 
relatively narrow palate, elliptic in form, instead of parabolic 
as in the Cro-Magnon type. 

The lower jaw is remarkable for its narrowness, correspond- 
ing to the general elongation of skull, for its strength, and for 
the breadth of its ascending branches. The chin forms a 
very broad and prominent projection. The whole external 
appearance testifies to a considerable development of the 
muscles of mastication. The molar teeth were strong; the 
last, a wisdom tooth, was greater in size than those in front 
and was separated from the ascending ramus by a considerable 
space. These, we know, are primitive characteristics, 

The upper limbs were relatively long, longer than those 
of modern Europeans, longer even than those of Negroes. 
Their bones, massive and thick-set, like the skeleton as a 
whole, indicate a vigorous frame and strong muscles; so that, 
to judge from their insertions, the supraspinatus, infraspinatus, 
deltoid, great pectoral, great dorsal, and great round muscles, 
all of which are attached to the humerus and play an 


THE CHANCELADE RACE 293 


important part in the act of climbing, were specially developed. 
The same applies to the lower limbs, to the gluteus maximus, 
the posterior muscles of the thigh, and, as a whole, to all the 
posterior muscles of the leg, which are the active factors in the 
erect position and in walking. 

The femora are a little more bent than in modern 
Europeans. Like those of Cro-Magnon, they have the linea 
aspera formed like a column or rod, and a hypotrochanterian 
fossa. The upper ends of the tibia are markedly bent back- 
wards, in consequence of which ‘‘in the upright position the 








Chimpanzee. Chancelade. Modern French. 


F1G. 191.—Skeleton of Foot of Chimpanzee, of Chancelade Man, and of a Modern Man, 
from Lyons. About one-fourth natural size. (After Testut.) 


knees must have projected more prominently forwards than 
in modern races.” These tibiae have the shaft flattened in 
a transverse direction: they are slightly platycnemic. 

‘The Chancelade Man had large feet, which in the usual 
position were turned inwards. The first metatarsal, corre- 
sponding to the great toe, was distinctly separated from the 
second toe, a little like that of the apes and exactly like that 
of Neanderthal Man. The foot of our fossil man, as in 
the case of some native races, could probably play the part 
of a grasper, able to grip objects between the first two toes 


(Fig. 191). 


29-4 THE MEN OF THE REINDEER AGE 


It would seem as though we were very poor in repre- 
sentatives of the fossil Chancelade race. 
Hervé has shown that we may attribute to it 
the skulls from Laugerie-Basse, classified by de Quatrefages 
and Hamy as Cro-Magnon in type. The skeleton of the 
cave-dweller from Sorde also exhibits these points of resem- 
blance. Even the female skull from Le Placard, in spite of its 
sub-brachycephalic character and its close relationships with 
the female skulls of the Cro-Magnon race, must, according to 
M. Hervé, be added to the small Chancelade group and must 
confirm the homogeneity of the Magdalenians.*. The skeletons 
from Obercassel, which are likewise Magdalenian, although 
they belong to the Cro-Magnon type seem to show some of 
the characteristics of the Chancelade skeleton. 

All this leads one to think that the two types, Cro-Magnon 
and Chancelade, do not differ greatly, an opinion, indeed, 
shared by many anthropologists. Dr Testut, however, has 
brought out certain differences. 

Whilst the Chancelade reindeer hunter was OF quite small 
stature, about 1.50 metres [4 ft. 11 ins.] in height, the famous 
old man from Cro-Magnon attained an almost gigantic height. 
The skulls have a broad face, but while the Cro- Magnon face is 
much reduced in height, that from Chancelade is remarkably 
high ; the difference is considerable. The orbits of the old Cro- 
Magnon man take the form of two rectangles, greatly elongated 
in a transverse direction; those of the Chancelade man have a 
quadrilateral shape, the height differing little from the breadth. 
It is evident that the general appearance of these two cave-— 
dwellers of the Upper Palzolithic must have been very 
different. 

Nevertheless it is also a fact that among the three types.we 
have just described, the Grimaldi Negroids, the Cro-Magnon 
Men, and the Chancelade Man, there is a certain number of 
common and fundamental characters, which bear witness, as I 
have already said, to the unity and at the same time to the 
variability of Lomo sapiens fossils. 


Comparisons. 


' Hervé, G., “ La race des troglodytes magdaléniens ”: (Revue de? Ecole d@ Anthrop., 
til, 1893) 


THE CHANCELADE RACE 295 


Dr Testut has clearly shown the resemblance of the 
Chancelade skeleton to the skeletons of the Eastern Esquimaux, 
who still live in a wild state amid the snows of Labrador and 
Greenland, and who, in all respects, represent a very ancient 
race. ‘‘ Like the Chancelade Man, the Esquimaux are decidedly - 
dolichocephalic; like him, they have a high skull, prominent 
sagittal ridge, a face at once very wide and very high, and orbits 
almost round in form. We also know that the Esquimaux 
have a large head and are of small stature... .” 

This comparison, drawn from anatomical anthropology, 
confirms that which the prehistorians, Hamy, Gervais, and 
Dupont, made long since on the strength of archeological and 
ethnographical evidences, and of the resemblances between the 
physical environments. As long ago as 1870, Hamy said of 
the modern Arctic peoples that they ‘‘seem to be akin to the 
Quaternary cave-dwellers of our countries. They carry on 
into our own times, in polar regions, the Rezndeer Age of 
France, of Belgium, and of Switzerland, with the same 
zoological and ethnographical characters, etc.” * 

This theory, shared by Pruner-Bey, Boyd-Dawkins, and 
Hervé, has recently been revived by Professor Sollas of 
Oxford. According to this scholar, a study of the modern 
Esquimaux, of their habits, their implements, and their artistic 
efforts, confronts one with an array of facts in favour of the 
existence of an actual relationship, which is so admirably 
confirmed by the Chancelade skeleton. The Cro-Magnon 
race may formerly have had relations with the Chancelade 
race, similar to those to be observed at the present day 
between the Algonquins and the Esquimaux. The Palzeolithic 
peoples seem to have gradually taken possession of the 
circumboreal regions by way of the Behring Straits and 
the Aleutian Islands.’ 

This is not the opinion of certain anthropologists in the 
United States, Boas and Chamberlain,*? who regard the 
Esquimaux as a race of American origin. Far from having 


' Hamy, E. T., Précés de Paléontologie humaine, p. 366. 

2 Sollas, W. J., Azctent Hunters, pp. 513-516. 

® Chamberlain, A. F., “Quelques problémes ethnographiques et ethnologiques 
de Amérique du Nord” (L’ Anthropologie, xxiii., 1912). 


296 THE MEN OF THE REINDEER AGE 


come from northern Asia, they may have formed part of 
an ancient centre of distribution in the interior of Canada, 
whence they spread towards the maritime regions they 
occupy in our own day. In which case it would appear that 
America had peopled or repeopled, at a certain time, a portion 
of the Old World. This is quite possible, but it does not 
explain the resemblances found between certain peoples of our 
Reindeer Age and modern Esquimaux. It would certainly 
seem, in a final analysis, that all the New World peoples may 
have come from the Old World, and that before becoming 
Americans the Esquimaux may first of all have been Asiatics, 
and perhaps even northern Europeans as well. De Quatrefages 
was fond of saying that the Cro-Magnons must have had the 
closest kinship with the Red Skins. 

Attempts have been made to explain such ethnographical 
resemblances by a similarity in the conditions of life and 
the use of the same materials, reindeer horn, bone and ivory. 
These similarities may indeed exhibit a simple case of 
convergence quite apart from all direct relationships. But 
how can we explain by the same theory physical and mental 
similarities ? 

I shall only mention, in passing, Girod’s* opposite theory 
of ‘the Esquimaux invasion,” but, to use a popular expression, 
that is a case of ‘“‘ putting the cart before the horse.” 


FHluman Figures. 


Let us now examine the works of art contemporary with 
the men whose skeletons we have studied. Judging from the 
accuracy of many of their animal drawings, this new source of 
information should be of great assistance to us. The artists 
of the Reindeer Age did, indeed, sometimes carve or engrave 
portraits of their fellows; but, unfortunately, they were 
unskilful in this form of art, and this is particularly true of 
the engravers. The sum total of the anthropomorphic figures 
of Quaternary art already forms a series of considerable 
importance from the point of view of the number and variety 


1 Girod, P., Les zxvasions paléolithiques dans ? Europe occidentale, Paris, 1900. 


HUMAN FIGURES 297 


of subjects dealt with ; but in its evident inaccuracy or lack of 
skill in drawing, this series is in contrast with the collection of 
animal figures, which are not only very numerous but amongst 
which real works of art abound. The majority of the engraved 
or sculptured portraits of fossil Man are most often simply 
childish caricatures, and many of these human personages 
seem to be dressed in animal masks which conceal their 
true features. In the absence of any work of art of really 
outstanding quality, on which we might consequently have 
relied, we must be cautious in the interpretation of certain 
characters or contours, which, far from representing real 
morphological characters, can only be the result of unskilful 
execution. 

With these reservations, let us examine the principal 
evidences. 

The Reindeer Age was of long duration, and in the course of 
it art, like industry, underwent an evolution ; this evolution has 
been studied by-Piette and Breuil.* The former thought that 
the sculpture of statues in full relief preceded sculpture in low 
relief, and that the latter itself preceded engraving. But 
Breuil has shown that this idea is correct only in a general 
way and in regard to the art of movable objects, while, so 
far as mural art is concerned, it applies with still less exactness. 
None the less, sculptures are more numerous during the most 
ancient period of the Reindeer Age (Aurignacian), and 
engravings attain their maximum development, in number 
as well as in quality, during the last phases of this age 
(Magdalenian). 

However this may be, Aurignacian deposits of different 

Aurignacian countries, far apart from each other, have 

Sculptures, yielded a certain number of very realistic 
statuettes or bas-reliefs. 

There are, first of all, objects in Mammoth ivory, taken 
by Piette* from the Brassempouy Cave in Landes, the most 
important of which are here reproduced (Fig. 192). 


1 Breuil, H., “ L’évolution de Vart quaternaire et les travaux d’Edouard Piette” 
(Revue archéol., 1909). 

* Piette, E., “La station de Brassempouy et les statuettes humaines de la période 
glyptique” (L’ Anthropologie, vi., 1895). 


298 THE MEN OF THE REINDEER AGE 


Here we see, along with the head of a young woman, 
known as the ‘hooded figure,” some mutilated statuettes 
representing torsos and bodies of men or women. One of 





Fic. 192.—Ivory Statuettes from the Brassempouy Cave. (After Piette.) 


Above, to the left, “hooded figure,” full face and profile, slightly reduced. Above, to the 
right, damaged female body, seen full face and in profile, about four-fifths natural size. Below, 
to the left, female body, known as a “dagger haft,” about four-fifths natural size. Below, in 
centre, the ‘‘Venus de Brassempouy,” reduced by one-fourth. Below, to the right, “ belted 
figure,” reduced by one-fifth. 


these statuettes, known as the Venus de LBrassempouy, or La 
Poire, must have been a fine specimen, if we may judge from 
the delicacy of the modelling of the portions remaining intact. 
Another, regarded by Piette as the haft of a dagger, is a 
female body, remarkable for the exuberance of its form. A 





pic IN| 


pan nei is! sinew. 





pba 


FIG. 193.—Statuettes in Steatite, from the Mentone or Grimaldi Caves. Natural size; from 
photographs. Musée de St Germain. Compare with photograph of Bushman Woman. 
1, Female figure, seen full face and in profile; 2, female figure, front and back view ; 
3, female figure, back view and profile ; 4, negroid head, full face and profile; 5, male figure, 
profile; 6, female figure, back view and profile; 7, modern Bushman woman, profile, 


300 THE MEN OF THE REINDEER AGE 


third ‘‘Venus” is more elegant in style. The “ belted figure” 
probably represents the lower part of the body of a man. 

There are, in the next place, the statuettes known as the 
“Mentone,” or better the Grimaldi statuettes. They were 
found at different times by the collector, Julien, in the Barma 
Grande cave; and although their authenticity was for long 
disputed, it is now admitted by all competent observers. The 
statuettes from this locality, instead of being made of ivory, 
are carved from a soft mineral—steatite or soap-stone.’ I here 
reproduce the most interesting of them, from photographs 
kindly lent me by M. S. Reinach (Fig. 193). Along with a 
very rude model of a head and a statuette of a man, there are 
five almost complete female statuettes, all remarkable for the 
great development of the breasts, the hips, and the genital parts. 

Two no less interesting discoveries were made about ten 
years ago. In 1909, Szombathy’ published the photograph of 
a curious figure from Aurignacian settlements in the Willendorf 
loess, 20 kilometres from Krems in Lower Austria. The 
statuette, 0.11 metre [44 ins.] in height, was carved from 
a piece of limestone, and its surface retained some traces 
of red painting. It represents a nude woman of massive — 
proportions, with enormous breasts, protruding belly, and full 
thighs (Fig. 194). The head is covered by a mop of hair, 
represented by concentric lines, and re-divided by markings 
at right angles to these primary lines. This coiffure almost 
completely conceals the face, no part of which is even indicated. 
The arms, which are extremely slender and are ornamented 
by bracelets, are folded over the chest. The thighs and legs 
are thick, short, and fat, and the genital region is distinctly 
portrayed. The general appearance is very realistic, the 
workmanship most skilful. 

Two: years afterwards,-in to1t1, Dr Lalanne,* who for 


1 Reinach, S, “Statuette de femme nue découverte dans une des grottes de 
Menton” (L’ Anthropologie, ix., 1898). Piette, E., “Gravure du Mas d’Azil et 
statuettes de Menton” (Bull. de la Soc. @ Anthrop. de Paris, 1902). 

2 Szombathy, J., ‘Die Aurignacienschichten im Loess von Willendorf” 
(Korrespondenzblatt der deutsch. Gesellsch. fiir Anthrop., x\., 1909). 

3 Lalanne, G., ‘“Bas-reliefs a figurations humaines” (L’Anthropologie, xxii., 
IQII, and xxill., 1912), 


AURIGNACIAN HUMAN FIGURES 301 


several years had been excavating the great deposit at Laussel 
in the Dordogne, discovered there a very curious bas-relief, 
representing two persons lying down and facing each other 
(a representation of birth or perhaps rather of mating). In the 
following year three other bas-reliefs were brought to light; a 
fourth was stolen from Dr Lalanne by his head workman, and 





Fic. 194.—Willendorf Statuette, front view and profile. Half 
natural size. -. Photograph from a cast. 


sold to the Berlin Museum through the agency of Professor 
Verworn of Bonn. I here reproduce the two finest of these 
sculptures. 

The first bas-relief is very skilfully executed. It measures 
0.46 metre [184 ins.] in height and represents a nude woman, 
holding in her right hand a bison’s horn (Fig. 195). The head 
is represented only by a vague outline, but, on the other hand, 
the remainder of the body is carefully treated. Here, again, 
we find enormous, elongated, and pendulous breasts, a 
prominent but well-modelled abdomen, with folds of fat and 
carefully drawn mons veneris. The hips are stout, with marked 
iliac and femoral prominences; the general appearance is 
fleshy and adipose. The thighs are full, the legs slender and 
short. The arms are slender and well modelled; the fingers 
on the hand are indicated. The whole surface of this bas-relief, 


302 THE MEN OF THE REINDEER AGE 





Fic. 195.—Bas-relief from Laussel, representing a Nude Female, seen full face. 
About one-quarter natural size. (After G. Lalanne.) 


apart from the head, which seems to have been crushed, is 
delicately worked and even polished, and some traces of red 
paint are still to be found upon it. 

The second, and more damaged figure, again represents 


AURIGNACIAN HUMAN FIGURES 303 


a nude woman. The head is vaguely worked, the hair is 
executed in the manner of the female statuettes from Brassem- 
pouy and Willendorf. The greatly enlarged breasts resemble 
those of the preceding bas-relief, while the prominent belly 
ends below in a triangular projection. The hips must have 
been very large, but they are very much abraded, as are also 
the upper parts of the thighs. A portion of the arms may still 
be distinguished. 

The third bas-relief, 0.4 metre [15% ins.] high, is a three- 
quarter length figure of a man, contrasting in its graceful form 
with the massive figure of the woman (Fig. 196). Unfortunately 
this work of art is also incomplete. The head is lacking, as 
well as the greater portions of the arms and the feet. The 
proportions are graceful. The trunk and loins are bent, the 
legs are placed as though the individual had been in the act 
of drawing a bow. Two parallel lines mark a belt around 
the body. 

In the summer of 1922, M. and Mme. de Saint-Périer dis- 
covered, in a cave in the Pyrenees, at Lespugue, a fine ivory 
statuette of Aurignacian age. It exhibits the general morpho- 
logical characters of the works of art just discussed, at the same 
time reproducing several of their peculiar features. (For details 
and illustrations, see Appendix, p. 473.) 

Brought together from districts far apart, and undoubtedly 
of one and the same age, corresponding to the most ancient 
phase of the Reindeer Age (Aurignacian), this small collection 
of artistic productions is remarkable for the association of 
characters which give it a general appearance of considerable 
uniformity, almost, indeed, a family likeness testifying to 
the sincerity of the artists. These statuettes or bas-reliefs 
must, therefore, translate with some fidelity the general 
characters of the form of their models. We may, then, place 
a certain amount of reliance on the information they contribute. 

I say ‘fa certain amount,” because occasionally writers have 

Their Inter- gone too far in the interpretation of them, 

pretation. as, for example, when Piette attempted to 
calculate the cephalic index of the “hooded figure” from 
Brassempouy. 


304 THE MEN OF 'THE REINDEER AGE 





Fic. 196.—Bas-relief of a Man, from Laussel. About one-third natural size. 
(After G. Lalanne.) 


AURIGNACIAN HUMAN FIGURES 305 


The following facts may be definitely recognized. 

In almost every case the head is scarcely blocked in; the 
hair is often represented, and always by the same method 
of criss-crossing strokes forming a chequered pattern, for 
example, at Willendorf as well as in the Dordogne, on the 
Cote d'Azur as well as in the Pyrenees. We may interpret 
this feature, also found in primitive Egyptian art, as a 
type of hair-dressing, an arrangement in narrow plaits, or. 
in short tresses or small tufts, such as are found in modern 
negro or negroid races, particularly of the Bushman and 
Hottentot tribes whose hair is grouped in little bunches. 
Or, on the other hand, the pattern may be looked upon 
as representing a net, similar to the hair-nets made of 
shells found on several of the Grimaldi skeletons. Perhaps 
both types were in use. 

The features of the face are always obliterated or roughly 
represented, even in the hooded figure from Brassempouy. 
Dr Lalanne thought he traced, on his bas-reliefs, elongated 
faces, with prominent cheeks and pointed chins. Such an 
interpretation may perhaps be admitted without difficulty, for 
in its vague terms it does not stand in any great contradiction 
with the osteological characters of contemporary skulls. On 
the other hand, however, the Grimaldi head has really a 
negroid appearance. 

The female bodies are short and massive ; the breasts very 
large, long, cylindrical, and pendulous ; the belly is prominent, 
with rolls of adipose tissue sometimes overhanging the pubes. 
The hips are greatly developed, fleshy enough even to 
amount to true steatopygia; the thighs are likewise fleshy, 
sometimes with projecting ridges of fat; they are supported 
by slender legs. The upper limbs, on the contrary, preserve 
a certain degree of delicacy. The sexual parts are always 
strongly emphasized ; the mons venerts is large and well defined. 
We can recognize in ‘‘ La Poire,” as Piette did, a development 
of the nymphe (/adza minora) similar to the “apron” of 
Bushman women. / 

On certain regions of the body, hair seems to have been 
well developed, where to-day it is much reduced. 

U 


306 THE MEN OF THE REINDEER AGE 


Several. authors, following Piette, have compared this 
Resemblance to association of characters with that now or 
the Bushmen. formerly exhibited by Bushmen women, in 

whom steatopygia has been regarded as classic since the work 
of Cuvier on the ‘“‘ Hottentot Venus” in the French National 
Natural History Museum. Quaternary male figures likewise 
agree in their general morphology with the male Bushman, 
in possessing a slender body. ‘Together with Dr Lalanne 
in France, Professor Sollas in England, Dr Péringuey at the 
Cape and others, I have several times had occasion to 
lay stress on this resemblance, which is of considerable 
interest. 

We now know that the ethnography of South African 
tribes presents many striking similarities with the ethnography 
of our populations of the Reindeer Age. Not to speak of their 
stone implements which, as we shall see later, exhibit great 
similarities, Péringuey tells us that in certain burials on the 
South African coast “associated with the Aurignacian or 
Solutrian type of industry,” rows of circular discs made from 
ostrich egg-shell, and round plates of bone or of shells, 
perforated for stringing, accompany the skeletons of women 
and of children; one of these necklaces, adds the learned 
Director of the Cape Museum, exactly resembles those found 
with the Mentone skeletons.’ 

Bushman mural art is extraordinarily like that of our caves. 
As in France and Spain, the pictures of animals are also of 
higher quality than the human figures, and many of the latter 
wear an animal mask and a long tail. The two centres are 
united by a long, connected series of works of art, from France 
to the Cape by way of Spain, North Africa, the Soudan, the 
Tchad States and the Transvaal. This almost uninterrupted 
series leads us to regard the African continent as a centre of 
important migrations, which at certain times may have played 
a great part in the stocking of southern Europe. Finally, 
we must not forget that the Grimaldi negroid skeletons show 
many points of resemblance with the Bushman skeletons. — 


1 Peringuey, L., “The Bushman as a Paleolithic Man” (Transactions of the Royal 
Society of South Africa, vol. v., 1915). 


MAGDALENIAN HUMAN FIGURES 307 


It is difficult in the present state of our knowledge to 
decide whether the Bushmen were descended from our 
Aurignacians or the latter from the ancestors of the Bush- 
men, who are considered by all anthropologists to be the 
survivals of a very ancient race. But, in my opinion, the 
relationship of these two groups cannot be denied, however far 
apart they may be in time and space. The most reasonable 
course, it would seem, is to admit that they are descended from 
a common primitive stock, which must have spread towards 
the centre or the north of the African continent, and whose 
branches have developed in different directions, morpho- 
logically and geographically, while retaining a common fund of 
ethnographical survivals. In any case, no explanation based 
simply on phenomena of convergence seems to be sufficiently 
far-reaching to cover such a mass of consistent data. 

Let us now glance at the anthropomorphic images belong- 
Magdalenian ing to a more recent period, the Upper or 
Sculptures. Magdalenian period of the Reindeer Age. 

Their value from an anthropological point of view is very 
small, as may be seen from the examples here reproduced, 
selected from the best or, let us say, the least bad specimens.* 

The two statuettes, one from Laugerie-Basse (Vibraye 
Collection in the French National Natural History Museum), 
the other from the Mas d’Azil (Piette Collection at Saint- 
Germain), resemble certain idols, fetishes, or amulets of savage 
tribes and could never be regarded as portraits. The first, 
known as Venus tmpudiqgue, is in ivory (Fig. 197, No. 3), and 
differs markedly from Aurignacian statuettes in its more slender 
outlines. The second, carved from the root of an incisor tooth 
of a horse, is an even coarser work (Fig. 197, No. 1). Piette 
has laid far too much stress upon the study of the features. 

Another production from Laugerie-Basse is an engraving 
in low relief on a sunk background, representing a pregnant 
woman beside the hind legs of a reindeer (No. 2). It is the 
“Woman with the Reindeer” of Abbé Landesque. The 
creator of this bas-relief was certainly very skilful, for the legs 
of the reindeer are perfectly rendered; but the drawing of the 


1 See Piette, L’art pendant Page du Renne. 


308 THE MEN OF THE REINDEER AGE 


woman’s body is quite mediocre. As it is highly probable that 
the two subjects were engraved by the same artist, we have 
here yet another proof of the lack of skill of the artists of the 
Reindeer Age in reproducing the human body. The woman is 
adorned with a necklace and bracelets. The only anthropological 
fact of interest relates to the development of an arrangement of 
hair, clearly indicated on all the abdominal surface. 

The line engravings are still poorer or more rudimentary ; 
that discovered by E. Lartet at La Madeleine, representing a 
man between two horses, may be taken as an example (No. 7). 
Such also is the famous ‘‘ Hunting the Aurochs,” discovered 
by Massénat at Laugerie-Basse, where the Aurochs is much 
better drawn than the man with the absurdly pointed skull 
(No. 6). G. de Mortillet, however, considered he possessed an 
“air aS gay as it was intelligent.” Other drawings are more 
grotesque still; such as the odd creature carved on a round 
bone disc from the Mas d’Azil, in which Piette attempts to see 
the figure of a monkey, because of its muzzle-like face (No. 5). 
It is probable that here, as at Gourdan (No. 4), at Marsoulas 
(No. 8), at Altamira and elsewhere, we have a man wearing a 
mask in the form of an animal’s head, either in order to indulge 
in dancing or in certain ceremonies, or more readily to stalk 
game, as certain native peoples still do or formerly did, such 
as the Australians, Bushmen, and others. There are also 
some simple caricatures recalling childish drawings. 

To the laborious investigations of Breuil and his disciples 
at Madrid,* Spain has yielded many human representations 

1 Breuil, H., and Cabré, feat Les peintures rupestres du bassin inférieur de l’Ebre” 
(L’ Anthropologie, xx., 1909). J/d., and Serrano, P., “ Les abris del Bosque a Alpéra” 


(L’ Anthropologie, xxiii, 1912).  Breuil, H., ‘Les roches peintes de Minateda, 
Albacete” (L’ Anthropologie, xxx., 1920). 





Legend, Fig. 197. 

1, Incisor of horse, the root of which has been carved into a female figure, from the Mas 
d’Azil in Ariége ; 2, engraving on reindeer antler, known as “ The Woman with the Reindeer,” 
from Laugerie-Basse in Dordogne; 3, the ‘‘ Venus impudique”’ in ivory, from Laugerie-Basse ; 
4, engraving on reindeer antler from Gourdan in the Haute-Garonne; 5, engraving on disc of 
bone from Mas d’Azil; 6, portion of an engraving on reindeer antler known as “ Hunting the 
Aurochs,” from Laugerie-Basse ; 7, engraving on reindeer antler from La Madeleine ; 8, engraving 
on the wall of Marsoulas cave in the Haute-Garonne. 

Nos. I, 2, 4 and 7 are after Piette; No. 3 is a photograph of the original in the French 
Nat. Hist. Museum ; No. 8 after Breuil. 


309 


MAGDALENIAN HUMAN FIGURES 





is 


L BPE 


Ss 
ee 


CR Sead 


s 


BON Te eR 


ations. 


Fic. 197.—Magdalenian Human Represent 


310 THE MEN OF THE REINDEER AGE 


painted on rock. The frescoes at Alpéra, Cogul, Minateda, 
etc. (Fig. 198), in many respects so curious, are more 
interesting from the ethnographical than from the anthro- 
pological point of view. Breuil asserts that they are the 
products of an art ‘‘ which evolved parallel to the development 
of our Reindeer Age,” and he notes their close resemblance to 
the rock paintings of South Africa. 

To sum up, in France the men of the Upper Pleistocene, 

af ; that is to say, of the Reindeer Age, belong 

Conclusions. : 

to a new type, greatly superior to the 
preceding types, and by its every characteristic, justifying 
its inclusion in the general mass of modern f/omo sapiens. 
Their general features are sufficiently uniform to induce 
certain anthropologists to group them under the common 
name of the Cro-Magnon race. But there is also a certain 
diversity of characters, and this agrees well with the long 
duration of the Reindeer Age, and with these movements 
of populations which variations in industry enable us also 
to envisage. 

We have been able to distinguish fairly easily, and without 
resorting to too subtle methods of analysis, three principal 
types which seem to have succeeded one another in France: 
the Grimaldi, the Cro-Magnon, and the Chancelade. These 
three types seem to us to be varieties, following each other in 
time, and more or less differentiated, of one general, widely- 
spread dolichocephalic form, of the origin or even the pro- 
venance of which we still know nothing. The extremely 
interesting fact is that they show affinities with each of the 
three great divisions of modern man: Negroes, Whites, and 
Yellows. To each of the populations which can be grouped 
thus, there correspond a fairly special industry and art, 
although, as a whole, the general aspect of the Reindeer 
Age forms a very homogeneous unit which appears, so far 
as latter-day knowledge extends, greatly isolated both in time 
and in space. 

At the present day, we cannot help making comparisons 
between the men of the early Reindeer Age, that is, the 
Aurignacians or at least the first of the Aurignacians, 


CONCLUSIONS 311 








Fic. 198.—Panel from the frieze at Minateda in Spain, representing a fight, and various 
subjects belonging to other, preceding and succeeding, periods. One-sixth natural size. 
(After H. Breuil.) 


312 THE MEN OF THE REINDEER AGE 


and certain modern groups, and in so doing we are led 
to admit that they are African in origin. The presence 
and the persistence of a plentiful Aurignacian. industry 
in Africa and particularly in North Africa (where it has 
been designated the Capszan or Getulian industry); the 
uninterrupted chain, across the whole of the Dark Continent 
from north to south, of an art developed on cave-walls 
or rocks; the really extraordinary resemblances between the 
art of the South Africans and our prehistoric art; the 
evidence, obtained by Breuil’s remarkable work and observa- 
tions in Spain of transition stages between Aurignacian 
-and Magdalenian art on the one hand and on the other the 
less naturalistic and more diagrammatic art of more southern 
regions, as well as the neolithic art of Susa;—all these 
facts plead in favour of our hypothesis, all are at one in 
breaking down the isolation of our Reindeer Age and 
leading us to admit the existence of broad relationships 
with countries and peoples whose prehistory has hardly yet 
begun to be unveiled. 

The Grimaldi Negroids are certainly African—a fact which 
is not in formal contradiction with the opinion of M. Verneau 
who considered them as indigenous, for indigenousness must 
necessarily have a beginning somewhere. 

The Cro-Magnons established themselves in the Medi- 
terranean countries, and spread widely throughout western 
and southern Europe. If they no longer correspond exactly 
to any living ethnographical group, their various characters 
are to-day still to be recognized, more or less clearly, scattered 
here and there among the populations of many countries. 
They seem to represent an ancient stock which is not yet 
exhausted. 

The Chancelades represent a group already evolved in a 
somewhat different direction, probably beneath more northern 
skies. Towards the end of Pleistocene times they seem 
gradually to have supplanted, more or less, the Cro-Magnon 
group, and later, at the dawn of modern times, to have 
withdrawn northwards at the same time as the Reindeer, 
under the pressure of new invaders. 


CONCLUSIONS 313 


We cannot hide from ourselves the fact that these con- 
clusions are still vague and uncertain. It will be necessary 
to submit them to the test of new excavations, and these 
must be undertaken with an absolutely clear understanding of 
the great anthropological problems to be solved, and not with 
the sole aim of making collections of archzological objects. 


Ciabewe IDI IP 
FROM FOSSIL MEN TO LIVING MEN 


Tue men of the Reindeer Age, as we have just seen, already 
belonged to modern mankind both in structure and in mental 
characteristics. So that even as early as the dawn of our 
present geological, or Holocene, period (see p. 50), modern Man 
was definitely established, and had been so fur a long period 
of time; and now the role of paleontology is ended. Hence- 
forth the task falls to anthropologists and archzologists to 
pursue the study of human groups throughout the countless 
migrations and changes which preceded the historical events 
related in ancient manuscripts. 
This linking-up of Palaeolithic times with Neolithic times, 
Difficulty of of Neolithic times with the Metal Ages or 
the Task. /Pyotohistoric times, and of these again with 
Historic times, is full of the most difficult problems. At the 
present time these problems can only be approached, and even 
that with hesitation, in central and western Europe, the one 
region regarding which sufficiently abundant data has been 
accumulated. Further, in regard to the relatively recent periods 
of our prehistory, as well as in regard to more ancient geological 
periods, we barely know more than the final results of events, 
the origins or starting points of which, at least in the majority 
of cases, are to be found in more distant countries, still almost 
unexplored from our point of view. The light which will one 
day illumine the great questions raised by a study of pre- 
historic times, will come only after we have gained sufficient 
knowledge of Asia and of Africa ; for to the palzontologist these 
two continents represent the great laboratories of life in the 
Ancient World. They must also have been the great centres 


of development of successive humanities, from those most 
814 


RACES AND PEOPLES 315 


primitive types which were still akin to the animal, to those 
which saw the dawn of the great civilizations.’ 

This book is essentially a paleeontological work, and I could 
now draw it to a conclusion, ignoring everything which relates to 
the Neolithic and Metal Ages ; for these, though to the historian 
they represent prehistory, are to the paleontologist only the 
conclusion of a history, that of the evolution of the human kind. 
It seems to me, however, that many of my readers might be 
disappointed did they fail to find here a summary of the known 
facts bearing on the transition from the vague Humanity of 
geology to the Humanity of history. And I decided to write 
this chapter in an attempt to join ‘the two ends of the chain,” 
without having fully weighed the many and diverse difficulties 
to be encountered. It is a relatively easy matter to make a 
catalogue or to arrange a scheme (more or less formal or 
artificial) of observed facts or of relics, to arrange them geo- 
graphically or in objective categories. But to give a synthetic 
account of all such scattered facts with a view to reconstruct a 
series of events, and that in the spirit of a naturalist, is a risky 
business. In excusing my effort, I wish to say that I myself 
am the first to realize the daring and the imperfection of the 
attempt I am about to lay before the reader. 

Before taking up again the chronological thread of human 

A Preliminary prehistory where we left it, I must, in order 

Study. Races to simplify the continuation of my account, 

and Peoples. summarize the state of our anthropological 
knowledge regarding the modern peoples of Europe with whom 
this account will finally land us. 

I have just written “anxthropological knowledge,” because, 
as a matter of fact, historians and geographers consider. only 
peoples or nationalities ; but anthropologists, who are first and 
foremost naturalists, must deal only with vaces. This word 


1 In thus expressing myself, I am viewing things broadly and from a naturalist’s 
point of view. The movements of the tides of humanity have been, at least in the 
blind alley of the European peninsula, movements of flux converging on a centre. 
These movements have sometimes been followed by a sort of backwash or drift 
from the centre, but such movements, more limited in extent, can only be directly 
observed in protohistoric or historic times, when the populations of Europe had 
reached a higher degree of culture. 


316 FROM FOSSIL MEN TO LIVING MEN 


I use, not in the literary sense, which is generally metaphorical 
in meaning, but in its true sense, the general biological sense 
and the physical sense, that of a variation of the species more 
or less fixed by heredity. 

For a long time now in France certain bright spirits in the 
historians’ camp, and in the naturalists’ as well, have laid 
stress on the extremely vexatious confusion which has arisen 
from the use of the words ‘race, people, nation, language, 
culture or civilization, but the distinctions and the appropriate 
uses of these different expressions have not yet penetrated into the 
minds even of the enlightened public. Even to-day the most dis- 
tinguished and most academic authors, when dealing with human 
classifications, use quite indiscriminately and in a completely 
wrong sense the word vace, when they would express them- 
selves more correctly in speaking of their horses or their dogs. 

We must really impress on our minds the fact that the 
race, by which wé mean the continuity of a physical type trans- 
mitting blood relationships, represents an essentially natural 
group, possibly having and, as a rule, actually having nothing 
in common with the people, the nationality, the language, and 
the customs, which correspond to purely artificial groupings 
of no anthropological significance and connected only with 
those historical events of which they are the products. Thus 
there is no Breton vace, but a Breton feople,; no French race, 
but a French zatzon ; no Aryan race, but Aryan danguages ; no 
Latin vace, but a Latin cevefzzatzon. De Quatrefages wrote: 
“A people changes its language, its customs, its crafts, 
sometimes in a relatively short period; it cannot with the 
same rapidity lose its stature, its colour, and the form of its 
skull.”’ The result is that maps, essentially multi-coloured 


1 An example of the extraordinary confusion which may result from a purely 
literary terminology is shown by the use of the word Ce/¢zc, which signifies to some 
people a language, to others a special civilization, and which is often used, rightly or 
wrongly, as synonymous with Gallic; to the mind of certain authors, it represents 
the blonde type, of great stature and elongated skull, found in the north ; according 
to others, it should be applied to the dark type, of small stature and round head, 
belonging to the central plateau or the Alps. Anthropologists agree that it 
would be best to leave this expression to the archeologists and _ historians. 
“Ethnographical names are the bugbear of anthropology,” said Salomon Reinach, 
and with good reason. 


RACES AND PEOPLES 317 


and changing, of peoples, of nations, or of languages, cannot 
bear and never do bear any resemblance to a map of races. — 

It is really very difficult to make a racial map, because of 
the multiple movements of peoples which have taken place over 
the whole of Europe since the end of Paleolithic times, and 
because of the innumerable crossings of every kind which have 
resulted.’ 

“The anthropologist who undertakes a history of the 
human races,” said de Quatrefages again,” ‘is faced with a 
task exactly similar to that of the zoologist who attempts to 
set forth the races of one of our domestic species.” It must be 
added that in the case of Man the problem is even more 
difficult, because crossings take place by chance and no longer 
under the influence of rational selection. The commingling of 
races has been both more intense and more haphazard. So it 
is that in anthropology, more than in systematic zoology, and 
more in Europe than elsewhere, the race can scarcely represent 
anything but an abstraction, a sort of ideal type, around which 
are grouped variations resulting from combinations, or rather 
from associations of characters borrowed from different 
primitive elements. ‘Neither the type nor the race, in the 
present state of mankind, are actual realities,’ said Topinard.® 
That is not to say, however, that the search for this ideal 
physical type is altogether an idle pursuit. We can still 
perceive individuals or groups of individuals who have remained 
more akin to their original stocks, either through having 
escaped, by isolation, from outside influences, or through 
possessing in themselves a combination of dominant characters 
similar to that of the ideal type.* 


1 There can be no doubt that great movements of peoples took place during 
Paleolithic times, and that in great part they were correlated with the migrations of 
faunas, for, in these remote ages, Man was less independent of the influence of 
physical phenomena than he later became. But we are unable to trace these move- 
ments. In Neolithic times, which are much less remote, the great migrations 
stand out more clearly. Thanks to the development of his industry, Man shook 
himself free more readily from physical conditions ; his massed movements hardly 
ever originate except from his own will or from that of his leaders. 

2 Quatrefages, A. de, Histoire générale des races humaines, p. 188. 

3 Topinard, P., L’Homme dans la Nature, p. 43. 

4 We must, however, distinguish permanence of type from permanence of 
characters, the latter being much more frequent than the former. 


318 FROM FOSSIL MEN TO LIVING MEN 


In practice, we may define as races those human groups 
which possess in common the same physical characters, taking 
as some of the most important, stature of body, form of skull 
and face, and colour of eyes and of hair. 

For half a century, anthropologists have devoted themselves 

The Races of to laborious investigations in an attempt 

Hurope. to rediscover or reconstruct those primitive 
physical types which represent in Europe the common stock, 
a stock now overlaid by successive ethnographical alluvials, 
reshuffled again and again. Thousands of living individuals 
and of skeletons have been examined, studied, measured, with 
a view to deciding the blood affinities and natural descent of 
each. In France, Broca, de Quatrefages and Hamy, Topinard, 
Collignon, and Deniker have published important works on 
this subject. England, Germany, Italy, and Scandinavia 
have been the centres of similar enquiries... The American 
anthropologist, Ripley, has written a book of the highest 
value, illustrated by many maps, on Zhe Races of Europe. 
These maps, like those of Deniker, present a medley of colours 
or of figures, which clearly reflect at first glance the extraordinary 
complexity of the human mosaic in the European region. 

The conclusions of our most eminent anthropologists differ 
from each other as regards the number of divisions or sub- 
divisions adopted, as well as in the terminology used and in 
certain other details of secondary importance; but they agree 
in distinguishing three main groups, which are likewise 
admitted by Retzius, the Swedish worker. These three great 
sub-divisions of the species or of the race of Whzte Man,’ 
the only divisions which we need examine for the purpose we 
have in view, are as follows: 


Dolichocephalic f{ Fair, of large stature . . 1. HOrdicus, 
Homo sapiens] (long-headed) l Dark, of small stature . . 2. medilerraneus, 


ALBUS. Brachycephalic (round-headed) Dark, of small 


Stature sas ‘ : 3. alpinus. 





' For bibliography, see Deniker, J., Races et peuples de la terre (Paris, 1900) ; and 
particularly Ripley, W. Z., Ze Races of Europe (London, 1900). 

* All Europeans are white, except the Laps. They all belong to Homo sapiens 
albus (see p. 72). It is this group, species, or race which we must sub-divide into 
races or sub-races. 


RACES OF EUROPE 319 


iy 





Fic. 199.—Representatives of the three Physical Types of Euryupe, full face and in profile. 
Above, Nordic race (Norwegian). In centre, Alpine race (Austrian). Below, 
Mediterranean race (Sicilian). (After Ripley). 





320 FROM FOSSIL MEN TO LIVING MEN 


The first of these types is characterized by having a long 
The Nordic dolichocephalic skull, long narrow face, straight 
Race. fine aquiline nose, large stature, blue eyes, fair 

hair, and rosy skin. 

At the present day it is widespread in the north of Europe, 
round the North Sea and the Baltic Sea, in Scotland, in the 
north and east of England, in the east of Ireland, in’ Flanders, 
Holland and Denmark, North Germany, the Baltic Provinces, 
Russia, the coasts of Finland, and especially in Norway and 
Sweden. It is also found, less pure or in sporadic groups, 
throughout a wide belt encircling the outer limits of the 
area we have just mentioned; so far as France is concerned, 
especially in the basin of the Seine, in Normandy, and in the 
south-west. 

This is the type which the great Swedish naturalist, 
Linnzeus, had in view when he referred to his Homo europaeus. 
Following the example of certain anthropologists, we might 
reserve this term for the small section of mankind I have just 
described. But for various reasons, I consider it better to use 
Deniker’s term xorvdicus. And if we wish accurately to define 
this first type, in a monogenistic sense, we must say: /Zomo 
sapiens albus nordicus. For convenience in speaking and 
writing, and without in any way prejudicing the question of 
monogenism or polygenism, we shall simply say HZomo nordzcus. 
It is useful to know, however, that the following terms also 
correspond more or less closely to this designation: the 
Scandinavian race, Ripley’s Zeutonzc race, or the Germanic 
race of numerous authors, the Aymvric race of Broca, the Homo 
wndo-europeus dolichomorphus nordicus of Giuffrida-Ruggeri, 
CtLG. 

The second type is also characterized by a dolichocephalic 
The Mediter- Skull and long and narrow face, but in this 
ranean Race. case the stature is small or medium, the body 

slender, the nose larger and often tiptilted, the eyes are very 
dark, the hair black or brown, and the skin swarthy. 

At the present day it occupies the whole surrounding area 
as well as the islands of the Mediterranean Sea: the Iberian 
Peninsula, the south of France, Provence, Corsica and Sardinia, 


RACES OF EUROPE 321 


Italy southward of Rome, Sicily, the shores of the A*gean Sea, 
and North Africa. Mixed or in a sporadic state, it is found on 
the Atlantic coast of France and in the west of the British 
Isles, particularly in Wales. 

It is often described by the very expressive name of /Zomo 
mediterraneus, which corresponds to the Mediterranean branch 
of Sergi, the //. meridionalis of Wilser, the Momo tndo- 
europeus dolichomorphus mediterraneus of Giuffrida-Ruggeri, 
the J/bero-znsular race of Deniker, and to the Iberians of 
historians.’ 

The third type is also of small or medium stature, but 

The Alpine thickset and round-headed. The face is broad 

Race. and round, the nose is rather large, the eyes 
are light or dark-brown, and the hair black or chestnut. 

Driven like a wedge between the two other races, it 
occupies at the present day the greater part of Russia, Asia 
Minor, the Balkans, Bohemia, Switzerland, the western Alps, 
the central massif of France, Brittany, the south-west and 
Cantabrian coast, and North Italy. 

This is the Homo alpinus of modern anthropologists, 
the Homo indo-europeus brachymorphus alpinus of Giuffrida- 
Ruggeri, the Occtdentale or Cévenole race of Deniker, the Ce/ézc 
or thetic, Celto-Slav, Arverne, Laponoid, and Armenotd races 
of other authors. 

Needless to say, this modern geographical distribution of 
the three principal physical types which we have succeeded in 
disentangling from the European ethnographical medley, is 
only diagrammatic. Their limits are far from being clearly 
defined ; there are imperceptible transitions from one region to 
the next; there are also intrusions of all sorts, islets all but 
swamped in a different mass. There are in particular innumer- 
able combinations of characters, producing gradual transitions 
from one type to the other, and we have seen that this could 
not but be so. But, in view of the goal we are striving to 


1 Along with Deniker, we can distinguish as a sub-race or sub-type, an Atlanto- 
Mediterranean group, mesocephalic and of large stature, limited-to certain points on 
the Atlantic and Mediterranean coasts of France, Spain, and northern Italy. I 
mention it here because it has been thought that in it may be seen a survival of the 
Cro-Magnon race. 

X 


322 FROM FOSSIL MEN TO LIVING MEN 


reach, we must treat the subject broadly. From this stand- 
point, I consider that the disentangling and elucidating of 
these three principal types is a veritable conquest of European 
anthropology. 

To sum up, as the accompanying map (Fig. 200) shows, 
the distribution of these races follows the general lines of 
the physical geography of our continent, while it is quite 
independent of its political geography. The three names 


tooRe) 


CS Re 6 bln 
a ae Cae 


° 
° 
o°, 
° 
° 


fe) 
° 
° 
° 
° 
° 


fo} 
{e) 
te) 
25° ° 


bat) 
° 

+ P90 
- 206 «5 

° 
[ome 

° 

° 
eye) 
° 
0° 0° 
0-0 

00 0 0.060 

(oe) 
0-0-0 
o-0 
0.0 

° 


(owe) 
20°00 

° 
ee oo 

ce) 

° 

fe} 
ioe ° ° 
fo} 


° 
° 
° 
OOOO OO OO OOOO OOO Ore, 


Cf eBO0D00000000000 000000000000 


(e} 


(oye) 
0° 0? 
0°06 
fe) 


fe) 
° 
° 
fo) 
° 
° 


0000000 
0°09 000% 
0°07 00% 
0.0.00 
00.00 
052 5525 
(o) 
00-00 
0-0.0.00.0.0 
0.0.0.0 
05°5% 25°, 
° 
° 


0.0 

fe) 

ooo 

° 

fe} 
00.00 (eRe) 


OOoO0O0 00000 


00090 000 0 
° 


020000 0 





0 0 0 
0°00 fe} 
UOC OOC OOOO 0000 0 





. 
e 
¢ 
e 
oS 


° e 
ovrooeceececeore ceodtoeoe OF", 


Nordic. Alpine. (*6°.°} Mediterranean. 


FIG. 200.—Very diagrammatic Map of the distribution of the three principal European 
human types. (After Ripley and Madison Grant.) 


which we have adopted, Nordic, Mediterranean, and Alpine, 
describe this distribution well. The Nordic is the man of 
the northern countries with their harsh climate, misty horizons, 
and long, pale nights; the Mediterranean type, of the southern 
countries, is also the product of his environment, of an easy life 
in a warm climate and bright sunshine; the Alpine type is the 
result of an age-long adaptation to mountainous and barren 
regions. Each one of these three physical types also possesses 


DIVISIONS OF HOLOCENE PERIOD 323 


psychical characters on which we shall not lay stress here, but 
which will emerge in the course of this account. 


* *K * 


After this digression, the utility of which the reader will 
readily perceive, let us return to our main subject. 

The olocene period, which we have now reached, well 
Holocene Period. deserves the other name of Lecent, also given 

Its Divisions. to it by geologists. Its topography is that of 
to-day ; it possesses the same wild animals and plants, to which 
are now added the domestic animals and cultivated plants. In 
the new civilization we actually see the dawn of the civilizations 
of history. It coincides with the arrival in Europe of the first 
Round-headed or Brachycephalic Men. 

The sub-divisions of the geologist, the paleontologist and 
the anthropologist are now in perfect agreement, and from the 
outset of prehistoric studies, as we have seen, they were clearly 
understood and established. The Pleistocene of the geologist 
is the Paleolithic of the prehistorian; the Holocene of the 
geologist begins at exactly the same time as the Neolithic 
of the archeologist. The Holocene period is divided in the 
following manner :— 


Historic times . . . Manuscripts. 
HOLOCENE OR . IRON Age. 
RECENT. bs OAR, BRONZE Age. 
Wark: # Metals. C is 
Prehistoric times. cites 


NEOLITHIC or Polished Stone 
Period. 


I should greatly exceed the limits of my subject were I to 
enlarge on the archeological characters and sub-divisions of 
the main stages of prehistoric times. For such information | 
refer my readers to special works on the subject, particularly 
Déchelette’s excellent J/anuel It will suffice if I draw 
attention to certain important points. 


1 (Or, for English readers, Sir John Lubbock’s Prehistoric Times ; Boyd Dawkins, 
Early Man in Britain; Rice Holmes, T., Ancient Britain and the Invasions of 
Julius Cesar, Oxford 1907, contains many references to apposite literature.] 


324 FROM FOSSIL MEN TO LIVING MEN 


At the outset it must be clearly understood that the 
Gomparative ©XPressions historic times and prehistoric 
Chronology of /2mes have a different chronological value in 
Prehistoric and different countries. We, in France, consider 
Historic Times. that history really begins only with Julius 
Czsar—that is to say, but a short time before the Christian 
era; in the northern countries, however, its beginnings are 
much later, while in the East, on the other hand, they date 
back for some 6000 years. 

So it comes about that, during the prehistoric stages of 
the Polished Stone and Metal Ages, there cannot be, even 
in Europe, chronological agreements between the successive 
archeological fashions of different countries, such as_ the 
correlations we have been able to allow, not, however, 
without the strictest reservations, in Paleolithic times. 
Thus in the East, the Neolithic Age, at” leastijinmmrrs 
beginnings, seems to be contemporary with the end of our 
Paleolithic. Copper, bronze, and iron had been known and 
made use of in Egypt thirty centuries before they were 
employed in Central Europe. Yet in the valley of the Nile, 
the Metal Ages overlap historic times, while with us their 
beginnings are lost in the darkness of prehistoric times. 

Facts of the same kind may still be observed or were 
formerly to be observed in various parts of the globe: in 
America, in the Oceanic Isles and in Australia, where 
European colonists were to be found settled among peoples who 
had sometimes remained at the Stone Age state of culture. 

The Neolithic represents an almost universal phase, which 
everywhere seems to have been of long duration. Montelius 
considers that it dated back 20,000 years in Egypt; Arthur 
Evans believes that in Crete its beginnings recede for 14,000 
years ; whereas, in our regions, we may place it at 7000 or 
8000 years ago. Here it persisted for 4000 or 5000 years, 
for the Metal Ages, which began in the East at least 4000 
years before our era, did not originate in the West till about 
2500 B.c. The Iron Age, also very ancient in the East, 
lasted in Gaul from goo B.c. till the Roman conquest. The 
accompanying table (Fig. 201), the dates in which have been 


PREHISTORIC AND HISTORIC TIMES 325 








ASIA-MINOR 

















































oe WESTERN CHALDEA SOME 

periods CRETE = ‘ “ 
“aris EUROPE EGYPT HISTORICAL FACTS 
sea 8 THE EAST 

fo) 





50. Conquest of Gaul by Cesar 


390. Capture of Rome by the Gauls 
Century of Pericles 






IRON 






600. Founding of Marseilles 


Period of Homer (about 800) 















1189-1180. Trojan War. 





1350. Current use of iron 








About f Rameses II. reigns in Egypt 
1400 \ Minos IJ. reigns in Crete 


BRONZE 








1945. Hammurabi reigns in Babylon 









Dy 


Current use of bronze 





























COPPER 
2500 (2) 
COPPER BRONZE i 
000 ° 
--3---- I So Se SSE ae ae P= Se aa See eee eS eRe eS 
ee First bronze objects 
Neolithic | 
| Swiss Sumero-Accadian 
lake- Copper in current use Empire 
dwellings | First iron objects Sargon the Old (about 3800) 
--4-----|------|-------- acy Ah ey) Sd pe ee ee ee ee ee 
Vv Menes, Ist King 
| of Egypt (about 4400) Vv 
a | COPPER 
| 
S S) Berets ee 
ey a ee rN -_—<—_$--—— 
al 
a | 
a | 
Z aa | 
-6----|------------------- See Sa Pr Ay pea be es Sa a ee 
eo) = UO 
(1) _ 
Z +] - 
-7----|------ Ne i ee et be ee ee Pee ak ps ee ee 
fe 
| o 2 
= ae oe 
a s 
TRANSITION 
FROM 
ls SS Soph E Ie pa Mera Shona ad a ae ed ee 
PALAOLITHIC | 
TO () 
NEOLITHIC | 
(AZILIAN) | Z. 
I 
| 





| 
| 
PALAOLITHIC 
| 
| 


1O YV 


Fic. 201.—Indication of the comparative chronology of Prehistoric, Protohistoric, and Historic 
times in Western Europe, the East, Egypt, and Chaldea. 


oe ee 


526 


FROM FOSSIL MEN TO LIVING MEN 


taken from the most reliable sources,’ summarizes the chief 
chronological facts relating to this subject.’ 

In all respects the close of the Palzeolithic Age differs from 

The Neolithic the Neolithic Age, as is shown in the following 


Age. 


END OF PALA‘OLITHIC. 


Climate colder than to-day. 

Fauna still comprising numerous extinct 
or emigrated species. 

Dolichocephalic 
hunters. 


men, nomads_= and 
Rudimentary social groups. 


Mainly cave-dwellers. 


No domestic animals nor cultivated 
plants. 
Stone industry 


pottery. 


simply dressed. No 
No stone erections. 
Strong artistic feeling, denoting con- 


templative mind. 
Primitive religious ideas. 


table, wherein the chief characteristics of the 
two periods are summarized :— 


NEOLITHIC. 


Climate like that of to-day. 
Fauna identical with that of present day. 


Dolichocephalic and brachycephalic men, 
herdsmen and_ cultivators. More 
advanced social life. 

Dwellers in the open. Huts and lake- 
dwellings. 

Domestic animals and cultivated plants ; 
cereals, textiles. 

Stone industry dressed and _ polished. 
Mines worked. Pottery. Cloth woven. 

Primitive architecture, megalithic monu- 
ments: dolmens, menhirs. 

Rudimentary artistic feeling. Practical 
utilitarian mind. 


More complicated religious ideas and 


burial rites. Graves more elaborate 
and monumental. 


The contrasts are many and striking. As, in archeological 
Transition from layers, the Neolithic levels are often separated 
Paleolithic from the Palzolithic by the intercalation of 
to Neolithic. 4 sterile bed, indicating a more or less lengthy 
period without occupation, all prehistorians from Edouard 
Lartet onwards have long maintained that the two great 


1 There are many bibliographical notes in Dechelette’s AZanuwel. Papers read at 
the Geneva and Monaco meetings of the Congres intern. ad’ Anthrop, et ad’ Arch. 
préhist., by Montelius (author of important works on the chronology of the Bronze 
Age), by A. Evans (the learned explorer of Crete), by Hcernes and others. Special 
mention must be made of the works of J. de Morgan, Recherches sur les origines 
de Egypte, Paris, 1896; Les premicres civilisations, Paris, 1909; L’Humanité preé- 
historique, Paris, 1921; and Dussaud, R., Les c¢évilisations préhelléniques, Paris, 1914. 

2 Beginning with the periods noted for knowledge of the metals, definite chrono- 
logical dates are provided by the historical documents of Egypt and Chaldea. 
Basing our investigation upon these, we can by degrees deduce the corresponding 
dates in other countries, by means of archzeological comparisons. 


PALAOLITHIC 'TO NEOLITHIC 327 


divisions of the Stone Age are separated by a blank, sometimes 
described as a gulf, corresponding to a complete transformation 
or revolution. More moderate opinion on the subject is content 
to regard it as a mere hiatus in our knowledge. “After the 
age of La Madeleine,” said M. Cartailhac, ‘‘there is—in our 
knowledge of the facts—a break in continuity, a very lengthy 
and as yet very obscure period of transition. And when we 
once more emerge therefrom into the light, great changes 
have taken place; progress of prime importance has been 
effected, the sum of introductions seems large. Thus the 
Reindeer has entirely disappeared; domestic animals are 
plentiful, the populations are settled and are engaged in 
agriculture; implements and weapons in stone are often 
polished, pottery is known . . . monuments are erected, and 
art no longer portrays living nature.” * 

In point of fact every one is right. It is clear that if 
the Neolithic Age shows a completely new order of things, 
particularly the arrival of peoples with quite different 
industries and customs from those of the last Palzolithic 
peoples, then, in accordance with the general principle of 
continuity, the break could not have existed everywhere; some- 
time or other the transition period will appear less obscure. 
Indeed the hiatus has been bridged, in great part at least, by the 
excellent researches of Piette in the Mas d’Azil Cave in Ariége. 

During the years 1887-1889, this eminent prehistorian 
explored a series of river deposits of archzological interest 
on the left bank of the Arize, a rapid stream which flows in 
a kind of exaggerated tunnel forming the Cave of Mas d’Azil. 
The accompanying figure illustrates a section of these deposits 
as I recorded it, along with Piette, in 1889. From top to 
bottom there is revealed (Fig. 202) :— 

5. Masses and blocks of rock detached from the roof of the cave. Here were 
found Gaulish objects, Bronze Age objects, and, towards the base of the layer, 
_ polished stone axes and Neolithic pottery. Depth varied from 2 to 3 metres. 

4. Banded masses of ashes, with beds of charcoal and innumerable snail- 


shells. Polished stone implements, pebbles worn with usage at the points. 
Fragments of pottery. Variable depth. 





1 Cartailhac, E., Les dges préhistoriques de ?Espagne et du Portugal (Paris, 
1886, - 47) 


328 FROM FOSSIL MEN TO LIVING MEN 


3. Bed of cinders, reddish incinerated earth, and charcoal, with modern 
wild fauna. Red Deer and Beaver abundant; not the slightest trace of Rein- 
deer. Flat perforated harpoons of deer-horn (Fig. 203). Painted pebbles 
(Fig. 204); some pebbles polished at ends, etc. The upper part consists of 
an ancient surface (as.) marked by a line of stones; in the lower part are beds 
of ashes (ch.). Depth, 0.10 metres to 0.80 metres. 

2. Great deposit of silt from the neighbouring river, made up of hundreds 
of laminze, and cut up by several ashy lines of incinerated earth. In these layers 
of occupation Red Deer are abundant, Reindeer rare ; harpoons of Red Deer and 
Reindeer antlers; needles and artistic engravings. Total depth about 3.50 metres, 

1. Earth mixed with pebbles, almost barren, resting on the calcareous 
rock (R) of the cavern. Depth, about 1.40 metres. 


The lower layers (1-2) represent the later Pleistocene 
deposits ; they belong to the end of the Reindeer Age, to the 
Magdalenian period. The upper 
formation (5) corresponds to the 
modern period, from Neolithic times 
to our own day. The intermediate 
layers (3 and 4) cover the well-known 
hiatus between Paleolithic and classic 
Neolithic times: layer 4 represents 
the dawn of Neolithic times, while 
layer 3, containing coloured pebbles, 
coer ois is really the transition layer. It 
Sones yee Op, corresponds to a particular period 

: well named by Piette’ the Azan 
period. 

To my mind the majority of 
archeologists are mistaken in wish- 
ing to place this Azilian period in 
es are & Paleolithic times, and in calling it 

. 202.—Section of archeological : a : 
layers in the left bank of the Mas Lpipatleolithie. Saul pointed out, 
d’Azil Cave. (For description of so long ago as the year 1880,” the 
the layers, see accompanying text.) a8 ir: 
Azilian, though not yet Neolithic, is 
no longer Paleolithic; it is a period apart, with a_ special 
facies, and the facies is that of transition. 


















































































































































1 Piette, E., “Un groupe d’assises représentant l’époque de la transition entre 
les temps quaternaires et les temps modernes” (Comptes rendus de Acad. des Sc., 
25th Feb. 1889) ; and numerous other papers, particularly in L’ Anthropologie, vii., xiv. 

2 Congrés intern. @ Anthrop. et @ Archéol. préhist. (Paris, 1889, p. 209). 


THE AZILIAN PERIOD 329 


From the geological or stratigraphical point of view, this 
transition is obvious; from the paleontological point of view 
it is no less clear, since the fauna of the Azilian layer, from 
which the Reindeer is absent, is identical with the wild fauna 
of the present day and does not yet contain any trace of 
domestic animals. Transition—I do not say direct succession 
—is also evident from the archeological point of view, for 
along with flint implements resembling those of the Magdelenian 
period, we find the first 
products of stone-polishing, 
Though harpoons of deer- 
antler still persist, their form 
and substance are different. 
There are no longer present 
products of artistic expres- 
sion, for the colouring of 
the pebbles has nothing in 
common with Paleolithic 
paintings. It would be 
difficult to imagine a set of 
conditions more expressive 
of transition than those | 
have just enumerated. All 
the evidence leads us to 


believe that we are here 


dealing with a contribution © Fic. 203.—Flat Harpoons of Red Deer Antler from 
. the Mas d’Azil Cave. Three-fourths natural 
from the Mediterranean size. (After Piette.) 


area. 
Piette’s conclusions were at first not well received by 


the prehistorians whose ideas they upset. It was not long, 
however, before these conclusions were confirmed. The 
characteristic fossils of the Azilian period, flat harpoons and 
coloured pebbles (Figs. 203 and 204), were soon after discovered 
in other deposits hailing from the Pyrenees, the Gard, the 
Dordogne, from Spain, Switzerland, Bavaria, and Denmark, 
even from Scotland and perhaps from Russia. 

Traces of the transition period are to be found elsewhere 
under a slightly different aspect. 





poate Mi rine 


330 FROM FOSSIL MEN TO LIVING MEN 


In France and other countries of Europe, in Asia and in 
Africa, certain settlements are characterized by an implement 
industry of small flints with geometrical outlines, known as 
pygmy flints (Fig. 205). Messrs de Mortillet considered that 
this industry, which they named Zardenoiszan (from Feére- 
en-Tardenois, where it is well represented), belonged to the 
Lower Neolithic." The most competent prehistorians now 





FIG. 204.—Coloured Pebbles from Mas d’Azil. (After Piette.) 


agree in regarding the Tardenoisian as almost contemporaneous 
with the Azilian period, or as slightly more recent. 

The close relationship which exists between these two 
archeological facies is shown in the curious settlement at 
Maglemose, in the island of Zeeland in Denmark, which has 
been studied by M. Sarauw. Here, along with Tardenoisian 
geometrical flints, were found deer-antler harpoons like those 
from Mas d’Azil, but no pottery or polished axes. As was 
the case in the Midi, this northern Azilian deposit may be 
placed, from the geological point of view, exactly between the 


' Mortillet, A. de, “Les petits silex taillés & contours géométriques” (Revue de 
? Ecole @’ Anthrop., 1896). 


THE AZILIAN PERIOD 331 


end of the Pleistocene period and the beginning of the 
Holocene.’ 


On the other hand, on the coasts of Denmark, France, and 





Fic. 205.—Tardenoisian Flints from Valle, Spain. Twice 
natural size. (After Breuil and Obermaier.) 


Portugal, we have long been familiar with artificial mounds, 
composed of earth, cinders, and floors of occupation containing, 
scattered everywhere, innumerable sea-shells, bones of animals, 
implements of flint, particularly “ chisels” 
(¢ranchets), and of bone, as well as pottery 
(Fig. 206). They are the sites of ancient 
settlements, to which Danish archzolo- 
gists, who carefully studied those in their 
own country, have given the name £70kken- 
moddings (or better, £7ékkenmiddinger), 

which is to say kitchen middens. The 

industry of these curious deposits is @&SXQs \\ 
already Neolithic, but it is characteristic \A\ACKua\ tt 
of very early Neolithic times, for domestic QQ wy 
animals, with the exception of the dog, ie, 206.—« Chisel” (éranchet) 
are not yet present.” from Campigny. Natural 

P : size. (After Capitan.) 
In France there is a special form of 

industry resembling that of the kitchen middens which we look 
upon as belonging to the most ancient Neolithic phase. This is 
the industry known as Camfiguzan, because it is well represented 
in the foundations of huts at Campigny, near Blangy-sur-Bresle, 






QF | 
\\ 
\ 










\\ 





1 Sarauw, G. F. L., “ Maglemose” (Prehistorische Zeitschrift, iii., 1911). See also 
L’ Anthropologie, xxiv., 1913, p. 64. 

2 Old works of Steenstrup, J.. and Worsaae. More recent and fine work by 
Madsen, Muller, S., Neergaard, Pétersen, Rostrup, Steenstrup, R. J. V., Winge, H., 
Affaldsdynger fra stenalderen t Danmark, Copenhagen, 1900. 


332 FROM FOSSIL MEN TO LIVING MEN 


in the Seine-Inferieure. The characteristic implements are 
chisels (¢vanchets) and picks; there are no polished axes, 
but coarse pottery is known.’ 

So prehistoric archeology can now bring forward many 
facts to prove the existence of a long transition period with 
many local aspects.” Sarauw distinguishes no fewer than six 
phases of industry in Denmark, from the end of the Reindeer 
Age to the classic Neolithic. All this seems to imply the 
introduction into France of new human elements, and in 
particular of Mediterranean contributions. 

Who then were the people or peoples of these intermediate 
Azilian Races, #g¢S? Unfortunately we have not sufficient 
Arrival of the Osteological evidence to answer this question. 
poke See, At Mas d’Azil, Piette and Cartailhac 

‘collected in the Azilian layer a few bones 
coloured red. They are too fragmentary to enable us to 
determine the chief characters of the race they represent. 

At Ofnet, near Nordlingen in Bavaria, an interesting cave 
was excavated in 1907 and 1908 by R. Schmidt. The deposits 
of this cave comprise a series of layers of the Reindeer Age, 
overlaid by a deposit of Azilian Age. Two shallow ditches 
or trenches contained a large number of human skulls, enveloped 
in a mass of red ochre, having their lower jaws intact, and 
arranged concentrically close to each other, as if in a nest, 
with their faces turned towards the west. The large trench 
contained twenty-seven skulls, the small one six (Fig. 207). The 
skulls of women and children, which were most numerous, were 
decorated with the canine teeth of deer and perforated shells, 
similar to those from the Mas d’Azil. Apart from some 
cervical vertebra, there was no trace of other portions of the 
skeleton, probably in consequence of special funeral rites.* 

It was possible to reconstruct twenty skulls, which already 
present an extraordinary mixture of types. There are doli- 


1 Salmon, P., d’Ault du Mesnil, G., and Capitan, L., “Le Campignien” (Revue 
de [Ecole ad Anthrop., 1808). 

2 J. de Morgan names this period the Mesolithic. 

3 Schmidt, R. R., “Die diluviale Vorzeit Deutschlands, Stuttgart, 1912; the 
third part containing anthropological nates by Schliz, A. See also Breuil, H., “ Le 
gisement quaternaire d’Ofnet” (L’ Anthropologie, xx., 1909). 


AZILIAN RACES 333 


chocephalic forms, brachycephalic forms, and intermediate 
forms (the cephalic index ranging from 70 to 89). The first 
have long faces, harmonious in their proportions; they thus 
differ from the dolichocephalics of the Cro-Magnon race. 
Schliz regards them as belonging to the group of Homo 
mediterraneus. The second represent the most ancient brachy- 
cephalics known with certainty, the first arrivals of Homo 
alpinus. The third are already products of crossing. 





Fic. 207.— Burial in the smaller trench at Ofnet. (After R. R. Schmidt.) 


The Maglemose settlement has yielded no human skeletons 
and we know very little of the men of the Danish kitchen 
middens. Osborn’s’ theory that the Maglemose men must 
have belonged to the tall fair race of the North, (Jomo noradicus, 
is so far quite without foundation, although very plausible. 

On the other hand, the kitchen middens at Mugem in 
Portugal, containing Tardenoisian products, are exceedingly rich 
in human skeletons, which have been studied by M. de Paula.’ 


1 Osborn, H. F., Aen of the Old Stone Age, p. 488. 
2 In Emile Cartailhac’s fine work, Les dges préhistoriques de L’ Espagne et du 
Portugal, Paris, 1886, 


334 FROM FOSSIL MEN TO LIVING MEN 


Two quite distinct types have been recognized. The 
first, much the more numerous, is dolichocephalic, small in 
stature (about 1.60 metres [5 ft. 3 ins.] in height), and of poor 
cranial capacity; the face is long, of harmonious proportions, 
with slight sub-nasal prognathism. This is the ‘‘Mugem 
race,” as de Quatrefages named it, but it would really seem that 
we have here simply very old representatives of /fomo mediter- 
raneus and in no sense descendants of the Cro-Magnon type 
(see Appendix, p. 474). 

Only a few skulls are brachycephalic; one of them, witha 
broad face, possesses Mongoloid features. 

Thus, from the anthropological as well as from all other 
points of view, the Azilian and Tardenoisian deposits present 
transition features in the persistence of physical types more or 
less related to the Men of the Reindeer Age, and in the appear- 
ance, at first rare then becoming more and more frequent, of a 
brachycephalic type, newly arrived in the countries of Europe. 
We already see unfolding a picture of the distribution of 
modern European races, especially through the diffusion of the 
Mediterranean type. Examination of Neolithic remains will 
help us to envisage the development of this new state of 
things, by showing us its increasing complexity, as well as 
an increasing diversity of types according to the country of 
their habitation. 

Unfortunately these evidences, although very numerous, are 
Neolithic Races, 2Ot 80 informative as we could wish. We 
Relationships of have in particular the skulls, but the indices of 

the Three _ these do not always allow of a precise definition 

Great Types. GF the race to which they belong. Complete 
skeletons, which would have enabled us to determine the 
stature of the peoples, are much rarer. And we can hardly 
learn anything of the characters founded upon the skin or 
nature of the hair. 

In a general review of the great accumulations of statistical 
data collected by anthropologists, but neglecting details and ad- 
hering only to the main lines, we find two general facts emerge:— 

1. In the first place, we note the simultaneous presence in 
every country of varied physical types, long heads, short heads 


NEOLITHIC RACES 335 





FIG. 208.—Dolichocephalic and Brachycephalic Skulls seen from above, in profile, and full 
face. From covered passage in the Mureaux (Seine-et-Oise). One-fourth natural size. 
(After Dr Verneau.) 


336 FROM FOSSIL MEN 'TO LIVING MEN 


(Fig. 208), and intermediate (or mesocephalic) forms of head. 
This emphasizes still more strongly the important change in the 
distribution of the human types, which was suggested in the 
deposits belonging to the period of transition from Palzeolithic 
to Neolithic times. 

2. The relative proportions of each of these elements vary 
with the regions examined, and these proportions are such that 
they really enable us to define the relationship of the chief 
modern physical types. And here again, notwithstanding that 
we take this new standpoint, the Neolithic appears as the dawn 
of modern times. Though, of course, new and important 
changes still follow, the main features of this primary division 
persist. Using asa basis purely anthropological grounds and 
avoiding a detailed consideration of archeological data, which 
would involve» us too deeply, we shall give here some facts 
relating to the different European countries. 

In France, the evidence is very abundant. More than 
twenty years ago, Salmon completed an enumeration of 688 
Neolithic skulls found in that country.’ Fifty-eight per cent. of 
those skulls are dolichocephalic, 21 per cent. are brachycephalic, 
and 21 per cent. are intermediate. ‘The dolichocephalics are 
thus greatly in the majority, but it becomes apparent that the 
number of brachycephalics begins to increase gradually from 
the beginning to the end of Neolithic times. These brachy- 
cephalic skulls, it is universally believed, are similar to the 
type of Hlomo alpinus which was found at Ofnet. 

What were the dolichocephalic skulls? Some clearly 
belong to the Cro-Magnon type, which, far from disappearing 
at the close of the Paleolithic, persisted for long in different 
regions. In the Cevennes, for example, numerous bones taken 
by Dr Pruniéres from certain burial caves in the Lozére show 
that, at the beginning of Neolithic times, the peoples of this 
region belonged exclusively to the Cro-Magnon type. In 
other caves, some brachycephalic skulls appear, as well as the 
products of the crossing of races. 


1 Salmon, P., “‘ Dénombrement et types des cranes néolithiques de la Gaule” (Revue 
de? Ecole d@ Anthrop., 1896). See also Hervé, G., “ Les brachycéphales néolithiques,”’ 
2bid., 1894 and 1895. 


NEOLITHIC RACES 337 


There can be no doubt regarding the contemporaneity of 
these brachycephalics and the old Paleolithic dolichocephalics, 
since several of the skeletons exhumed by Dr Pruniéres still 
bear, in their bones, the Neolithic arrows which pierced them 
(Fig. 209), and which show that they must have been the 
victims of the Neolithic invaders whose skulls are found in the 
dolmens.' But the invasion of these mountainous regions 
must have been slow and incomplete, for, speaking generally, 
Neolithic brachycephalic 
skulls are relatively rare 
in the Cevennes; they 
become numerous only 
in the Bronze Age. A 
little farther south, at 
Montouliers in Hérault, 
Neolithic skulls, accord- 
ing to M. Mayet, are still 
Cro-Magnon in type, with 
a slight brachycephalic 
admixture.” 





6 Saat et ee ae 
i 


| 


Fic. 209.—Human Vertebra pierced by a Neolithic 
Arrowhead, from a cave in the Lozére. Natural 


The artificial caves of size. Pruniéres’ collection in the Anthropological 
the Marne, explored by Gallery of the National Natural History Museum 
of France. 


M. de Baye, ‘show the 

same association of types. Among the skulls examined by 
Broca and de Quatrefages many still resemble the Cro-Magnon 
type, others are brachycephalic and these show mixed characters 
resulting from crossing.’ 

In the Duruthy cave at Sorde, in the department of Landes 
(see p. 260), the Neolithic skulls from the upper portion of the 
bed are similar to the skull from the base of the deposit of 
Reindeer Age; while at Monaco, the Neolithic skulls examined 

1 Dr Pruniéres has scattered his numerous notes throughout different publications, 
particularly those of the Association francaise pour Vavancement des Sciences. The 
anthropological material has been studied chiefly by Broca (Congrés intern. de 
Bruxelles, 1872, p. 182). See also Quatrefages, A. de, Hommes fossiles et Hommes 
sauvages pp. 99 and tos. | 

2 Mayet, L., “Les Néolithiques de Montouliers” (Z’ Anthropologie, xxiii., 1912). 

> De Baye, L’archéologie préhistorique, Paris, 1880. Contains a contribution by 
Broca on the skulls from Baye’s caves. See also Quatrefages, A. de, Hommes 


Sossiles et Hommes sauvages, p. 107. 
vi 


338 FROM FOSSIL MEN TO LIVING MEN 


by M. Verneau’ are mainly brachycephalic, accompanied by 
rare individuals still exhibiting affinities with the Cro-Magnon 
type, so well represented in this region in Paleolithic times. 

Along with dolichocephalic types having short faces (dis- 
harmonic), which may be regarded as more or less modified 
descendants of the Cro-Magnon race, other Neolithic doli- 
chocephalic types, with long faces, form in France a new 
contribution, which, as we have seen, commenced in the Azilian 
period. ‘These ought rather to be classified with the Mediter- 
ranean type, which seems from this period onwards to have 
predominated in the regions where it still holds sway. 

In Italy, Neolithic skulls are very mixed, sometimes the 
brachycephalic, sometimes the small-sized dolichocephalic type 
predominating. The latter case is particularly noticeable in 
the basin of the Po, where round heads are most numerous 
at the present day. But in Sicily and in Sardinia, a very large 
majority of Neolithic and Bronze Age skulls exactly resemble 
the skulls of modern Sardinians and Silicians.* From the 
most remote prehistoric times Malta and Crete were also 
peopled by the Mediterranean type and Sergi declares that 
the Ancient Egyptians, who were identical with the Libyans, 
are only a branch of the Mediterranean family.’ 

We have seen this same type appear in the Iberian peninsula 
at the period of the kitchen middens of Mugem. M. de Paula, 
already cited in this connection (p. 333), tells us, moreover, that 
in the caves and Neolithic burials of Portugal the dolichocephalic 
type of Mugem still predominates, with, however, very wide 
individual variations ; although in certain beds of the same age, 
the Cro-Magnon type is found. The brachycephalic type of 
Mugem likewise appears in certain Neolithic stations, where 
it shows all the characters of the Neolithic brachycephalics 
of France. 

On the other hand, M. Verneau has found representatives 
of the Cro-Magnon race in the Neolithic deposits of Oviedo 

1 Verneau, R., and Villeneuve, L. de, “La Grotte des Bas-Moulins” (L’ Anthro- 
pologie, xii. 1901). 
2 Ardu-Onnis, E., “Restes humains préhistoriques de la grotte de San 


Bartolomeo, prés Cagliari” (L’ Anthropologie, xv., 1904). 
3 Sergi, Congres de Moscou, ii., 305. 


NEOLITHIC RACES 339 


and Segovia, as well as of Andalusia. M. Jacques, on examina- 
tion of the material yielded by the excavations of M. Siret 
in the south-east of Spain,’ distinguished, in a series of Neolithic 
and Bronze Age skulls, a first group resembling the Cro- 
Magnon type, a second group composed of brachycephalics, 
a third group resembling the Mugem men (Mediterranean type), 
and finally a fourth group, resembling the Basque peoples of 
Spain. As a whole, the dolichocephalic Mediterranean type 
appears to predominate in the Iberian peninsula. 

In Belgium and Holland, there is the same mixture of 
round heads, long heads, and mixed forms produced by 
crossing (such as the Furfooz skulls). The dolichocephalics 
are classified by various authors as belonging sometimes to 
the Cro-Magnon type, sometimes to the Mediterranean 
type.’ 

In the British Isles a very clear distinction has long been 
recognized. The Neolithic burials in long barrows enclose 
only dolichocephalic skulls: ‘Long barrows, long skulls,” 
we say in England. As soon as bronze makes its appearance, 
the tumuli become round in form and the skulls found are 
brachycephalic: ‘“ Round barrows, round skulls.” Here, in 
the extreme west of Europe, for reasons readily understood, 
the first brachycephalic migrations were later in taking place. 
According to Sir William Turner,’ the Neolithic dolicho- 
cephalics, small in stature, with long faces and narrow noses, 
probably belong to the Mediterranean type. They still play 
an important part in the ethnographical constitution of Great 
Britain and Ireland. The brachycephalics, who may tempo- 
rarily have invaded them, were of variable stature, with broad 
faces; they belong to the Alpine stock. Nowadays, their 
traces have been almost wholly obliterated.’ 


1 Jacques, V., “Les races préhistoriques de Espagne.” Congres de Paris, 
1889, p. 451. 

* Houzé, “Les cranes néolithiques des cavernes d’Hastitres” (Bult. de la Soc, 
@ Anthrop. de Bruxelles, viii., 1890). Fraipont, J., “La Belgique préhistorique et 
protohistorique” (Bull. de P Acad. Roy. de Belgique, 1901). 

3 Turner, W., “A Contribution to the Craniology of the People of Scotland,” 
pt. ii. (Zvans. of the Roy. Soc. of Edinburgh, \i., 1915). 

* Keith, A., ‘The Bronze Age Invaders of Britain” (Journal of the Anthrop. 
Institute, xlv., 1915). 


340 FROM FOSSIL MEN TO LIVING MEN 


In Switzerland the facts are somewhat different.’ In 
the archaic Neolithic deposits, brachycephalics predominate 
almost exclusively. In the mid-Neolithic, the dolichocephalics 
or the mesocephalics gradually come to balance the brachy- 
cephalics. In the period of transition from the Polished Stone 
to the Bronze Age, the dolichocephalics, according to Schenk, 
predominate. The important series of burials at Chamblandes, 
near Lausanne, recalls the Cro-Magnon type, but the skeletons 
are of small size and in certain characters resemble the Grimaldi 
negroids. These burials, moreover, present a new element. 
Side by side with the skeletons of the small dolichocephalics, 
two skulls exhibit the characters of the northern race; and 
M. Pittard tells us that, towards the end of the Neolithic 
period, there arrived in Switzerland men of high stature, with 
elongated skulls and narrow noses, whom he is able to classify 
as belonging to the type of /fomo nordicus. It must also 
be added that there were found at Schweizersbild, near 
Schaffhausen, the bone-remains of some individuals of very 
small stature, almost pygmies, who Kollman would have us 
believe played a considerable part in the development of the 
human races,” but who are regarded by the majority of 
anthropologists as being only dwarfs whose skeletons lay side 
by side with those of other individuals of normal stature. 

Nevertheless, the fact remains that even in the Neolithic 
period or rather in the end of the Neolithic period, the 
anthropological complexity which now exists in Switzerland 
becomes clearly noticeable. Here, for the first time, we 
recognize the presence of representatives of the big dolicho- 
cephalic people of the North. These become more and more 
numerous as we pass towards Central and Northern Europe. 

In Germany, Neolithic human remains are generally 
dolichocephalic. In the south-west, according to Schliz, the 
dominant type is at first the long-faced, Nordic type, but later 


1 Pittard, E., “ Sur Pethnologie des populations suisses ” (Z’ Anthropologie, ix., 1898); 
*‘ Deux nouveaux cranes humains de cités lacustres” (/d7d., xvii., 1906). Schenk, A., 
“Les sépultures et les populations préhistoriques de Chamblandes” (Revue de ?Ecole 
@ Anthrop. de Paris, 1904); La Suisse préhistoriqgue, Lausanne, 1912. 

2 Kollman, J., ““Die Pygmaen und ihre systematische Stellung innerhalb des 
Menschensgeschlecht” (Vorhand. der Naturforsch. Gesellschaft in Basel, xvi., 1902). 


NEOLITHIC RACES 341 


we see the arrival of brachycephalics and dolichocephalics of 
Mediterranean type." In Bohemia and Silesia, the men of the 
Polished Stone Age usually belong to the Nordic race.* So it 
is also in Hungary. According to Giuffrida-Ruggeri, in the 
Illyrian and Danube regions, dolichocephalic skulls are very 
numerous in the most remote periods ; they gradually decrease 
in number and almost entirely disappear in many regions on the 
descent of the Alpine peoples from the mountains to the plains.® 

If we penetrate into Russia, we see that in the south-west, 
in Ukraine, Volhynia, and also in Poland, dolichocephalics of 
great stature are more or less dominant in the Neolithic 
“kourganes” or tumuli; and farther north and east, we find 
only dolichocephalics. Bogdanov has shown that the most 
ancient race of Central Russia (inhabitants of settlements on 
the shores of Lake Ladoga described by Inostranzeff) had 
long heads and faces like the modern inhabitants of Sweden.‘ 

Finally, in Scandinavia and Denmark, the phenomenon is 
still more marked. According to Montelius*® some skulls from 
Neolithic burials are brachycephalic and resemble in form the 
skulls of Laplanders, but the majority resemble those of 
modern Swedes. The skeletons indicate a high stature and 
robust frame. Scandinavia at this period was already 
populated by the direct forebears of the modern populations 
who best represent the ideal type of Tomo noradtcus. 

Thus, even at the end of the Neolithic period, it is 
possible to recognize, in its broad outlines, the geographical 
distribution of the three principal physical types which 
anthropologists have been able to distinguish by studying the 
numerous varieties or sub-races, the amalgamation of which 
forms the ethnographical constitution of present-day Europe. 


1 Schliz, A., “Die vorgeschichtlichen Schadeltypen der deutschen Linder” 
(Archiv fiir Anthropologie, vil., 1908). 

2 Reche, O., ‘Zur Anthropologie der jiingeren Steinzeit in Schlesien und 
Béhmen” (Archiv fir Anthrop., vii., 1908). 

§ Giuffrida-Ruggeri, V., “ Contributo all’ antropologia fisica delle regioni dinariche 
e danubienne.. .” (Archivio per 2Antrop. et la Etnol., xxxviii., 1908). 

* Bogdanovy, A., “Quelle est la race la plus ancienne de la Russie” (Congres intern. 
@ Anthrop., Moscow, 1912). 

5 Montelius, O., ““Les temps préhistoriques en Suéde.” French translation by 
S. Reinach, Paris, 1895. 


342 FROM FOSSIL MEN TO LIVING MEN 


Contemporaneous with the Metal Ages, whether they be 
protohistoric or historic, there occurred other 
movements of peoples and other interminglings, 
which have increased the complexity apparent to us to-day. 

We know very little of the Copper Age, or Exeolithic Age 
as the Italians term it, though many burials and monuments 
from the close of the Neolithic period must belong to it. 

In the Bronze Age the practice of cremation was gradually 
substituted in many regions for that of inhumation, and 
this practice is highly prejudicial to anthropological study. 
Speaking generally, the Bronze Age in Western Europe, 
particularly in France, may be characterized (from the point of 
view of our studies) by the arrival of new and extensive 
inundations of brachycephalic peoples. The bronze industry 
seems then to have been imported into our country by men of 
the Alpine type, though this does not necessarily mean that 
they were the inventors of it." These new floods of brachy- 
cephalic peoples penetrated at this period into the British 
Isles, where they are commemorated by round barrows, con- 
taining round-headed individuals. 

On the other hand, the tall dolichocephalics of the Nordic 
type survive in Russia and in the Scandinavian peninsula, 
which may already be regarded as their ancient fatherland, 
and in which tombs of Bronze Age still sometimes contain 
their fair hair. Furthermore, we see them penetrating in 
numbers into the Rhine valley, into Switzerland and Southern 
Germany, where already they are found in those Iron Age tombs 
which are arranged in rows, the so-called vezhengraeber. 

Towards the end of the Bronze Age, the brachycephalics 


The Metal Ages. 


1 The origin of metallurgy is one of the most controversial problems of prehistoric 
archeology. There is, a friorz,no reason to suppose that the discovery of metals 
and their alloys may not have been made independently at different periods and in 
different countries. But this hypothesis is not readily supported by our present 
knowledge. All the evidence seems to be in favour of an Asiatic origin (at Chypre 
and in the mountains of Eastern Asia, according to J. de Morgan and Déchelette). 
The dates of the appearance of the metals in the different countries of the East and 
in Europe (see p. 325) show that they spread, generally speaking, from the east 
westwards, and from the south northwards. Step by step with this diffusion, one 
after another the mining centres of each country, as it was invaded, contributed in 
their turn towards the new manufactures. (See Morgan, J. de, ‘‘ Note sur les origines 
de la métallurgie” (L’ Anthropologie, xxxil., 1922, p. 487). 


THE METAL AGES 343 


reappear in Switzerland and the north of Italy; there they 
are very pure, and from the outset they predominate. 

‘On the other hand, the Eastern Mediterranean region, 
Crete, where the A‘gean civilization flourished, Malta, Sicily, 
Southern Italy and the Iberian peninsula remain the strong- 
holds of the Mediterranean element, which continues largely 
to predominate there. 

The Iron Age’ corresponds to the maximum expansion of 
the Nordic race: “a new metal in the hands of a new race,” said 
Hamy,’ speaking of France, where the tall fair dolichocephalics 
imported with them the civilization of the first Iron Age, termed 
ffallstattian, from the name of the famous necropolis at Hallstatt 
in Austria. The Nordic peoples now penetrated everywhere 
along the great rivers, and thus hemmed back and isolated the 
massive brachycephalic mountain races. These warlike in- 
_vaders landed on the coasts of the British Isles, and spread 
over Belgium and the north of France; attracted by the sunny, 
wine-producing regions, they reached Spain by the valleys of 
the Loire and Garonne, and Northern Italy through Switzer- 
land. They prospered in the valley of the Danube, which they 
overflowed in various directions as far as Macedonia, Greece, 
Asia Minor, and perhaps even as far as Turkestan and India. 

On the other hand the brachycephalic peoples, thus bounded 
and constrained, annexed territory elsewhere, more especially 
in Russia, where they drove back the Nordic peoples, even 
reaching the Norwegian coast. And the Mediterranean races 
quite maintained their territories, in spite of some pressure 
from the Nordic advance guards. 

Up to this point, all these peoples remain nameless to us. 

The Ancient But now, by means of the oldest texts, con- 

Peoplesin fused and vague though these too often are, 

History. we can attempt to identify the first historical 
groups from an anthropological point of view. It must be 


‘ The origin of iron is no less obscure than that of bronze. G. de Mortillet 
regards it as African. The most ancient objects of iron we know of were yielded 
by a predynastic Egyptian tomb; so that they date from at least 4000 years before 
our era. But we have seen that, before 1500, there could be no question of the 
existence of an iron age in Egypt. 

* Hamy, E. T., “Les premiers Gaulois” (L’ Anthropologie, xvilt., 1907, p. 137). 


344 FROM FOSSIL MEN TO LIVING MEN 


clearly stated, however, that the ancient peoples whose names 
have come down to us, such as the peoples of ancient Gaul, 
were in many cases already highly mixed as regards physical 
type. Camille Jullian, in his excellent //zstozre de la Gaule, 
says eloquently: ‘Away behind the tribes of the seventh 
century [B.c.] there lies a great mass of human lives, of sex 
relationships, of formations and disintegrations of States, and 
of invasions by land and sea, a confusion of languages, types, 
and customs which baffles all analysis.” 

The task, therefore, is full of difficulties and pitfalls. And 
yet we may make some comparisons which both anthropo- 
logists and historians are able to accept, at least provisionally, 
as a result of their respective studies.’ 

We may consider as belonging to the type Homo nordicus 
the whole series of peoples who, during a long series of centuries, 
successively and periodically invaded Great Britain, France, and 
Central and Southern Europe. And, first of all, I think, come 
the great majority of Celts* or Gauls, who formed the powerful 
‘Celtic Empire” of prehistorians and dominated Europe. It 
was they who seized Rome in 390 B.c., who invaded Thrace, 
whence, though checked for a short period by Alexander, they 
soon invaded Macedonia and Greece, laying waste everything 
in their path, seizing the treasures of the Delphian temple 
under the leadership of their chief Brennus (in 279 B.c.), and 
who finally, ‘‘coveting Asia,” crossed the straits and installed 
themselves in Phrygia (Galatia). 

Later, the invaders came definitely from the north, and 
were called Belgians, Cimbrians and Teutons, Germans, 
Goths, Franks and Normans. ‘These peoples represent 
each a fresh thrust of that race in which may still be 


1 On the one hand, see Deniker, Races e¢ peuples de la terre. Ripley, 
The Races of Europe (copious bibliography). And, on the other hand, Arbois de 
Jubainville, D’, Les premiers habitants de ?Europe, 1894. Jullian, C., Wistotre de la 
Gaule,i. Dottin, G., Les anciens peuples de ?Europe, 1916. Mention must also be 
made of the curious work by Madison Grant, The Passing of the Great Race, New 
York, 1916. 

2 We must not forget that by the majority of French anthropologists the Celts 
are regarded as brachycephalic. I have already drawn attention to this confusion 


(see note, p. 316). But there is no doubt that Celt and Gaul are really synonymous 
from the historian’s point of view. 


ANCIENT HISTORICAL PEOPLES 345 


grouped the Umbrians, the Achzans, the Dorians, the 
Cimmerians, and the Scythians, the latter having penetrated 
far into Asia. 

To the type Hlomo mediterraneus must be attributed the 
old peoples of Northern Africa, the Egyptians and Libyans, 
as well as the Pheenicians, the Pelasgians, A‘ geans, Etruscans, 
the oldest Ligurians, the Phcoecians of Marseilles and the 
Iberians. 

To flomo alpinus belong the ancient peoples of Western 
Asia, the Accadians and Sumerians(?), and the Hittites, to 
whom perhaps may be added the Sarmatians; the Slavs, 
whose invasions took place from the fourth to the ninth 
centuries of our era, and who, along with the Mongols, 
have finally expelled the Nordic peoples from the greater 
part of the Russian region. 

Once more it must be recalled that these are and can only 
be approximate determinations, for the majority of the names 
just mentioned apply to ethnographical groups which are already 
intermixed, and which we can only describe from the anthropo- 
logical standpoint by the predominant element. We are all 
aware that, after the first Celtic invasions, there soon arose 
peoples known as the Celto-Iberians, Celto- Ligurians, 
Celto-Scythians, Celto-Thracians, Gallo-Greeks, and so on. 
Sometimes even the old ethnographical names signify a 
more complex mixture. It is clear, for instance, that the 
“Celtic Empire” of prehistorians was not composed solely 
of representatives of HYomo nordicus, and that, later on, the 
Gauls or Celts described by Cesar, included types other than 
those of the original Gauls; the armies of Vercingetorix were 
composed of very heterogeneous masses of humanity, and 
included in their ranks representatives, more or less pure or 
more or less mixed, of the three principal physical types now 
blended together in the French nation. 

The Mongoloid or MHunnish invasions on the one 
hand, arid the Arab or Saracen invasions on the other, 
occurred later, still further complicating this extraordinary 
human mixture, although they have left only relatively slight 
traces in France. 


346 FROM FOSSIL MEN TO LIVING MEN 


How much can we learn or hazard regarding the probable 
Origin of the Origin of the three great races? We have seen 
Three Great that, at the end of the Palzolithic period, the 

pores countries of Western and Central Europe 
were peopled by dolichocephalics, which are sometimes grouped 
under a general term as the ‘‘Cro-Magnon Race,” but which, 
in addition to possessing common morphological features, even 
already showed notable differences, such as we see in the 
Grimaldi Negroids and the types of Cro-Magnon, Chancelade 
and Combe-Capelle. In this stock close search must be made 
among characters still somewhat generalized, in order to dis- 
cover the ancestors of the two groups of dolichocephalics 
which subsequently become differentiated. 

Flomo nordtcus is a product of the north, but he can hardly 
have originated beyond Europe, or, at farthest, Western Asia. 
As a matter of fact, his centre of dispersal really appears to be 
Scandinavia; but this, none the less, is a pure illusion, for 
during the Paleolithic period, Sweden, being covered with 
ice, was inaccessible. The cradle of the Nordic race must 
be sought in countries which have always remained free of 
ice, and geological and palzo-geographical considerations 
lead us to confine our attention to Central, Southern, and 
Eastern Russia, which, with perhaps also Western Siberia, 
alone fulfil this condition. Beyond this area we come up 
against the masses of the yellow races. Some anthropologists 
have considered that the Cro-Magnons were the ancestors of 
the Nordic peoples." But these two groups have nothing in 
common apart from their great stature; in other respects they 
differ greatly, and must not be confounded. Giuffrida- Ruggeri 
believes that the great Neolithic dolichocephalics of Central 
Europe and Russia, who are the true ancestors of the modern 
Nordic peoples, represent “the Mediterranean type transported 
into the north,” and modified by environment. This is possible, 
but hardly probable. In the Reindeer Age men of the Nordic 
or pre-Nordic type must already have existed somewhere, and 
that can only have been in the regions indicated above. From 


' Wilser, L., “L’origine des Celtes” (L’Anthropologie, xiv.. 1903), and other 
publications by the same author. 


THE THREE GREAT RACES 347 


the Russian plains, where, during the Neolithic period, they 
seem to have held exclusive sway, they must, step by step, 
as the ice retreated, have reached the shores of the Baltic, 
Denmark, and the Scandinavian peninsula where they 
established themselves so firmly that this country now gives 
the mistaken impression of being their original home. It 
seems probable that the Aryan languages were transported 
by these men, and linguists, agreeing on this point with 
anthropologists, have replaced the old and abandoned 
Oriental theories by the theory of their European source. 
M. Jullian likewise regards what he calls “the religious 
centres of the Aryan languages”’ as being in the Baltic 
regions. It is interesting to note the agreement. 

Flomo mediterraneus of European countries is a product of 
the south; he belongs to the main mass of the dark dolicho- 
cephalic peoples who occupy North Africa, a large part of 
Europe in Asia, and the shores of the Mediterranean, and wha 
sometimes exhibit certain Ethiopian affinities where their regions 
border on those of the black races.” Related to the Aurignacian 
Cro-Magnon men, whose industry seems to be of African 
origin, they were not long in becoming differentiated according 
to their habitats; and from the period of transition from 
Paleolithic to Neolithic, we can testify to the presence in our 
part of the world of a type very much akin to the modern type. 
It is very probable that Europe owes the importation of 
Neolithic civilization, of megalithic structures, and perhaps also 
the discovery of primitive industries in metal, to Homo 
mediterraneus of North Africa and Asia Minor. According to 
Giuffrida-Ruggeri, fomo mediterraneus must have arisen 
through the crossing of an equatorial or proto-Ethiopian type 
with a more northern type like that of Cro-Magnon.*? This is 
pure supposition, for everything leads to a belief in the high 
antiquity of the Mediterranean type. 

Flomo alpinus can only be of Asiatic origin. He belongs 
to the great brachycephalic stock of Central Asia, which 


1 In conversation with the author. 

2 Sergi, G., Zhe Mediterranean Race, London, 1901. 

3 Giuffrida-Ruggeri, “ Quatro crani preistorici dell’ Italia meridionale e l’origine 
dei Mediterranei” (Archivio per 1 Antrop. e la Einol., \xv., 1916). 


348 FROM FOSSIL MEN 'TO LIVING MEN 


comprises both white and yellow races (Mongols). It is 
probable that the starting-point of the early brachycephalic 
peoples on their march to Western Europe was the Ural-Altai 
region. They then possessed certain mongoloid characters, 
which they seem gradually to have lost in their progress 
westwards. Their migration must have commenced after the 
end of the glacial period, at the same time as that of the fauna 
of the steppes of their native country. At first this migration 
took place slowly, rather by a gradual infiltration than by a 
regular invasion. Later, towards the end of the Neolithic 
period, it seems to have taken place in greater mass. Dark, 
round-headed men suddenly become very numerous in 
France in the» Bronze Age,» so much so that, in) themaweas 
they played the part of initiators and propagandists of the 
Mediterranean culture received from the south. Their present 
distribution, the result, as we have seen, of repeated migratory 
movements, clearly indicates their origin. They form, as it 
were, a vast procession, enormous at the point of departure, 
that is to say in Asia, but, on its way from East to West, 
gradually decreasing and tapering off altogether as it 
approaches French Brittany. Here is pitched the apex of 
the triangle, hemmed in between the region of the fair 
dolichocephalics from the North (lomo nordicus) and that 
of the dark dolichocephalics from the South (Homo 
meaditerraneus).” 

Such, reduced to its main features, is the picture which, 
with the slight resources at its disposal, modern 
anthropology has been enabled to sketch of 
the intermingling and transformations undergone by the groups 
of peoples who contended for the possession of the territories 
of Europe, from the end of Palzolithic times onwards. 


Conclusions. 


1 Hervé, G., “L’ethnologie des populations francaises” (Revue de TEcole 
@ Anthrop., iv., 1896). 

2 I must add that the views I have here expressed are not shared by all anthro- 
pologists. Certain workers consider the brachycephalic Europeans as indigenous. 
According to Bogdanow, Ranke, Lissauer and others, the form of the head may vary 
fairly rapidly under the influence of environment and geographical conditions. 
According to Giuffrida-Ruggeri, Homo alpinus did not come from Asia ; he developed 
on the spot, in mountainous regions. 


CONCLUSIONS 349 


This bird's-eye view, in spite of its sketchiness, is probably 
inaccurate in many points. But, if it has no other merit, at 
least it is exclusively based on the idea of race, in the true 
sense of that word, and not in the sense too often attributed to 
it by historians and even by certain anthropologists; it is 
drawn from the naturalist’s point of view, and so, being more in 
conformity with biological laws, it may perhaps also throw 
more light on the subject. 

We are thus led to view from another angle, from a stand- 
point presenting fresh perspectives, the succession of events 
which prehistory and history seek to reconstruct regarding 
humanity. So we can better appreciate, among the many 
factors which shape the evolution of peoples, those which arise 
directly from general biological principles, and in especial the 
double influence of heredity and environment, those profound 
and persistent forces which often remain concealed under an 
accumulation of influences more purely human in origin, 
perhaps of equal importance, yet undoubtedly more superficial 
and ephemeral. 


Cle bat db igi 0% 


FOSSIL MAN BEYOND EUROPE 


Now that we have discussed Fossil Man in Europe, it would 
seem that a still greater task remained to be accomplished, 
for the surface of our own continent is but a very smail portion 
of the total land surface of the globe. But the truth is that 
beyond our own country and its neighbours, the paleontology 
of mankind is miserably deficient. 

It is indeed the case that, all over the world, there have 
been collected archzological evidences of a remote past prior 
to historical times, often dating even from geological times, 
but, beyond Europe, no country has yielded a collection of 
facts comparable to that which has just been described. The 
majority of the archeological evidences found outwith Europe 
consist of isolated and sparse finds; and these come from 
deposits hardly studied at all from the stratigraphical point 
of view, so that their relative chronology is far from being 
established, except in certain rare localities. In such circum- 
stances, we must be doubly careful in interpreting ethno- 
graphical facts, and must keep in mind that resemblance’ does 
not always signify contemporaneity or descent. In certain © 
parts of a continent the Stone Age seems to date as far back 
into the past as in Europe; in other places, even in the same 
continent, this Age persists to the present day. 

Paleontological evidence is even less abundant than archzo- 
logical evidence—in fact, hardly any exists respecting Fossil 
Man. Fairly frequent discoveries of skulls or skeletons have 
been made, especially in the two Americas, but they possess 
neither the high antiquity nor the importance attributed to 


them. Indeed the majority have not been able to withstand 
350 


ASIA AND MALAYSIA oo1 


critical examination; so that, leaving Europe out of count, 
human paleontology can present only an extremely poor 
catalogue. 

I shall set out this catalogue on broad lines, examining, in 
turn, Asia, Australia, Africa and America. 


Asia and Malaysia. 


In all the habitable countries of the great continent of Asia 
we find mementoes of the Stone Age, and everywhere legends 
and superstitions are attached to them; just as in Europe, 
stone weapons are looked upon as products of the heavens, 
as residues of thunder, or are made use of in magic rites to 
cure diseases. 

The first scientific discoveries were made in Asia Minor, 
where the sea-board is simply a continuation 
of our Mediterranean sea-board, and where, 
consequently, it is not surprising to discover facts similar to 
those of the most ancient European prehistory. 

In 1864, Louis Lartet’ rediscovered in Libya a prehistoric 
settlement found thirty years before by Botta, the contents 
of which, animal bones and dressed flints, resembled exactly 
those of the Périgord settlements, which his father, Edouard 
Lartet, was just then beginning to make known. Since that 
time, Palestine and the whole of Syria have been visited by 
many archeologists. Excavations have been carried out in 
caves or in deposits in the open, and collections have been 
made. To-day we can number by hundreds the prehistoric 
localities already mapped out or described in this part of 
Western Asia by Richard, Cazalis de Fondouce, Morestin, 
Arcelin, Chantre, de Morgan, Zumoffen, Blanckenhorn, Arne, 
Desribes, Neophytus, and others. 

From the archeological point of view, all the forms of 
weapons and implements of our Stone Age have been found 
there: Chellean and Acheulean (Fig. 210), Moustierian, Aurig- 
nacian and even Magdalenian or Azilian types. The Neolithic 


Western Asia. 


1 Lartet, Louis, “ Note sur la découverte de silex taillés en Syrie” (Bu//. de la Soc. 
Géolog. de France, 2nd ser., vol. xxii., 1865). 


352 FOSSIL MAN BEYOND EUROPE 


deposits are no less rich in polished axes and arrowheads 
similar to our own.’ 

The undisturbed Paleolithic settlements, as in Europe, are 
accompanied by an ancient fauna, including extinct or emigrated 
species. The bone breccias, containing dressed flints, are 
sometimes composed of hard rocks, like those of our French 
caves, and in the days of classical antiquity these breccias were 





5 


~ 
Se 


x 





Fic. 210.—Dressed Flints from Syria. (After F. J. Arne.) 


used as building stones. The Romans constructed a road 
across the breccias from Ras el Kelb in Phcenicia. In the 
plain of Raphaim, to the south of Jerusalem, Chellean or 
Acheulean dressed flints were found in the ancient gravels. 
Their entire geological bearing points to the fact that the 
deposits date from Pleistocene times. 


1 Zumoffen, G., “ L’age de la pierre en Phénicie” (L’ Anthropologie, viii., 1897) ; 
La Phénicie avant les Phéniciens, Beyrout, 1900. Blanckenhorn, M., “ Ueber die 
Steinzeit und die Feuersteinartefakte in Syrien-Palestina” (Zeztschrift fiir Ethnologie, 
XXXVil., 1905. Neophytus, Frére, ‘La Préhistoire en Syrie-Palestine” (Z’ Anthropologie, 
XXVIll., 1917). 


CENTRAL ASIA AND SIBERIA 353 


At the commencement of the Neolithic period the physical 
conditions were those of the present day. Neolithic deposits, 
which are very abundant, are not always on the surface, but 
to find them at any depth, one must seek at the base of the 
tells, artificial hills formed by the rubbish of towns and villages 
of classic antiquity. These facts, and others besides, success- 
fully refute the obsolete ideas of classical archeologists, who 
declared that our Paleolithic could not be more ancient than 
the old Chaldean or Egyptian civilizations, 

Discoveries, at first localized in Syria, were not long in spread- 
ing and increasing in number. As early as 1878, Cartailhac* 
was able to compile an inventory of the Stone Age discoveries 
in Asia, and since that date the inventory has greatly increased. 
Here [ can describe only the most important facts. 

Asia Minor and Persia, with their mountains and high 
plateaux, in great part covered during the Pleistocene period 
with ice and snow, are very poor in Paleolithic remains. Here 
J. de Morgan has explored, without result, great quantities of 
ancient alluvial deposits carried down from the mountains. 
But he has been more fortunate in the low plains, where some 
settlements contain both Paleolithic and Neolithic remains. 
The latter are to be found everywhere, at Sinai, in Arabia, in 
Mesopotamia, and as far as Susa, where they have been 
discovered in the fine excavations made by J. de Morgan and 
Mecquenem.” 

In Turkestan, Pumpelly in his researches * discovered traces 

Central Asia. Of five successive civilizations, ranging from 
Siberia. Neolithic times to the present day. The most 
ancient dated from 8000 years before our era. In Eastern 
Turkestan, Dr Vaillant has described rock drawings and 
polished axes. 

Towards the north, we have to record the various dis- 
coveries made by Russian explorers in Siberia. The most 
important is that at Aphontova, near Krasnoiarsk, to the north 

1 Cartailhac, E., “L’age de la pierre en Asie” (Congrés des Orientalistes, 3rd 
meeting, Lyons, 1878). 

2 Morgan, J. de, Les premitres civilisations, Paris, 1909. 

$ Pumpelly, R., Explorations in Turkestan . . ., Washington, Carnegie Institute, 


1908. 
Z 


354 FOSSIL MAN BEYOND EUROPE 


of the Altai massif, a district rich in bone caves. The deposit, 
described by Savenkov, de Baye, and Volkov,’ is a Paleolithic 
settlement zz sztz on a high terrace of the Yenisei, 15 to 18 
metres above the river. The gravels of this terrace, used 
for ballast, are overlaid by a deposit of silt or loess, which 
contains a rich Pleistocene fauna, including the Woolly 
Rhinoceros, Mammoth and Reindeer. Worked stones are 
found in abundance at the bottom of the silt-deposits, where 
they lie upon the gravels; and these include implements 
fashioned of quartzite pebbles, dressed on one or both surfaces 








Fic. 211.—Scraper of Quartzite, from Aphontova-Gora. Natural size. 
(After de Baye and Volkov.) 


in the Moustierian or Chellean manner (Fig. 211). Along with 
these stone objects were others in bone, in reindeer antler 
and mammoth ivory. This layer, essentially Paleolithic in 
character, and similar, from a geological point of view, to our 
European alluvial beds, is quite independent of the Neolithic 
of that region, of which characteristic evidences may be found 
in the layers of vegetable soil covering the loess. Krasnoiarsk, 
situated in about lat. 56° N., seems to be the most northerly 
Pleistocene Palzolithic settlement known. Here the great 
ice-sheets did not spread so far south as in Europe. 


1 Savenkov, “Sur les restes de Vépoque paléolithique dans les environs de 
Krasnoiarsk” (Congrés intern. d’Anthrop. et @ Archéol. de Moscou, vol. i., 1892). 


Baye, Baron de, and Volkov, “Le gisement paléolithique d’Aphontova-Gora” 
(L’ Anthropologie, x., 1899). 


CENTRAL ASIA AND SIBERIA 355 


Savenkov recorded the occurrence, on rocks in Western 
Siberia, of curious engravings and paintings, which are some- 
times of fine workmanship recalling the products of our 
Palzeolithic art. 

Among other localities in Siberia, interesting from our 
present point of view, may be mentioned the neighbourhood of 
Tomsk, Irkutsk, and the shores of Lake Baikal. In the 
province of Irkutsk, Vitkovsky has excavated tombs with 
Neolithic relics of an archaic character, where the human 
skeletons were covered with red ochre, like those of our 
Reindeer Age. Farther north, in Eastern Siberia, near 
Olekminsk, the deposits bordering the Lena contain arrow- 
heads and implements in mammoth ivory, simple objects of 
a Stone Age which still exists or formerly existed among 
those circumpolar populations whose territories we have just 
reached. 

Returning towards the centre of the continent, we must 
record the researches of M. and Mme. Torii in Eastern 
Mongolia, a region covered with incredible quantities of 
remains and ruins. Here the stone objects, axes, knives, 
scrapers and arrows, are Neolithic. According to these 
authors, this region and also Manchuria, Korea, Japan and 
even China, seem to have no Paleolithic remains. In Asia, 
the Polished Stone Age seems to be less clearly separated from 
the older Age of Dressed Stone than it is in Europe.’ 

But all these countries are rich in prehistoric relics 
ranging from the Stone Age to the Iron Age. The sea- 
board of Manchuria (Port Arthur), of the Amur and of 
Japan have many shell-mounds and kitchen middens similar 
to those of Denmark. Sometimes raised high above the 
present sea-level, they contain Neolithic implements of a 
special character. 

These countries, as well as Korea, are dotted with many 
megalithic monuments. 

The Chinese prehistoric period is still almost unknown ; 
but we are aware that it includes a Neolithic phase. 


1 Torii, R., and Torii, Kimico, “Etudes archéologiques et ethnologiques ” 
(Journal of College of Science, xxxvi., Tokyo, 1914). 


356 FOSSIL MAN BEYOND EUROPE 


Southern Asia is much richer. The old stone ages are 
represented by many beds, some of which date 
from very remote geological times. 

An English geologist, Neetling, has recorded the presence 


Southern Asia. 





Fic, 212.—Dressed Quartzites from India. (After Ball.) 


of dressed flints in a Pliocene conglomerate from Central 
Burma. But these are probably only natural eoliths (see p. 128). 
Nevertheless, over almost the whole of India, stones dressed in 
the Palzolithic fashion are to be met with on the surface of the 
soil. In 1866, Foote* discovered dressed quartzites of almond 


1 Foote, R. Bruce, Various publications, principally in the Congres intern. d’ Arch. 
et @ Anthrop., 1868, p. 224. 


SOUTHERN ASIA 357 


shape in the laterite’ deposits of the suburbs of Madras, the 
formation of which dates at least from Pleistocene times. Since 
that time, many discoveries of this kind have been made. 
Seton-Karr puts the age of the quartzites from the laterite 
deposits at 250,000 years. 

Other dressed stones have been found zz sz¢z in the ancient 
alluvials of many streams, such as the Nerbudda, the Godavery, 
the tributaries of the Kistna and others, as well as in a cave 
in the Karnul district. The fauna accompanying the relics 
is for the most part composed of extinct species, several of 
which date from Pliocene times. Here the problem of the 
antiquity of Man confronts us under the same aspect as in 
Europe.’ 

In Banda, a mountainous district in the north-west of 
India, there are caves and rock shelters where stone im- 
plements have been found, particularly small flints of 
Tardenoisian form (see p. 331), as well as drawings in red 
ochre, similar to some of the productions of our Reindeer 
Age. Recently, prehistoric paintings, representing hunting 
scenes and extraordinarily like those at Cogul in Spain, 
have been discovered in a cave near Raigarh, in the Central 
Provinces of British India. (For further details and figure, 
see Appendix, p. 476). 

Neolithic relics are to be found throughout almost the 
whole of Southern Asia. In the north-east of Baluchistan 
there are artificial mounds containing stone implements and 
bronze weapons. Polished stone axes, arrow-heads, etc., have 
been collected in abundance in India, the Malay Archipelago, 
in Cambodia, Tonkin, and other parts. As for the many 
megalithic monuments in the Deccan, and those which are 
to be found even in the mountains of Assam, I shall do no 
more than record their presence in passing. 


1 Laterite is a red clayey earth, formed by the decomposition of underlying rocks, 
and is very widespread in tropical regions. 

2 Ball, V., “On the Forms and Geographical Distribution of Ancient Stone Imple- 
ments in India” (Proceed. of the Royal Irish Academy, 1878). Logan, Old Chipped 
Stones of India, 1906. Oldham, R. D., A Manual of the Geology of India, 2nd edit., 
Calcutta, 1893. Foote, The Foote Collection of Indian Prehistoric and Protohistoric 
Antiquities; Notes on their Ages and Distribution (Madras Museum, 1916). 


358 FOSSIL MAN BEYOND EUROPE 


The island of Ceylon has been studied from an anthro- 
pological standpoint by F. and P. Sarasin, who found in the 
caves where the wretched Veddas still live, or used to live, 
quartz implements resembling those of our own Magdalenian 
Paleolithic industry. According to Wayland the Paleolithic 
here comprises Chellean, Moustierian, and Aurignacian forms, 
and belongs to a period previous to the arrival of the Veddas.? 

The same explorers have carried out investigations in 
Celebes and Sumatra. Here again the caves have yielded many 
stone relics similar to those of Ceylon, and comparable to those 
of our Reindeer Age. These various islands would seem to have 
been inhabited, at a remote period, by a primitive race, small in 
stature, whose descendants, more or less mixed, form the relict 
groups of the Veddas of Ceylon, the Kubus of Sumatra, the 
Toalas of the Celebes, and the Senois of the Continent.? 

To sum up, the little we know of Asiatic prehistory 
enables us to state that it dates, at least at certain points, 
as far back as in Europe. The few facts 1 have just 
enumerated already show a diversity which indicates, in a 
general way, a succession of periods or phases comparable 
to that in Europe: Paleolithic, Neolithic, Bronze Age, and 
Iron Age. There is, perhaps, no exact time correlation or 
synchronism, but there is an affinity of similarity (Zomotaxza). 
The day will come when science will be able to establish, in each 
great tract of Asia, a more detailed succession with parallels 
and time correlations between one region and another. An 
Indian scholar, Mr P. Mitra, has most interestingly made such 
an attempt in connection with the prehistory of India from the 
most remote times.*® All the facts point to the belief that 
it is in Eastern and Southern Asia, so rich in Tertiary and 
Quaternary fossils, that the most valuable if not the most 
conclusive discoveries will be made. 

1 Spolia Zeylandica, vol. ii., pt. 41, 1919. 

2 Sarazin, Paul and Fritz, Exgebnisse naturwissenschaftlicher Forschungen auf 
Ceylon, vol. iv., “ Die Steinzeit auf Ceylon,” Weisbaden, 1908, Versuch einer Anthro- 
pologie der Inseln Celebes, 1905. Neue lithochrome Funde im Innern von Sumatra, 
Bale, 1914. 

3 Mitra, Panchanan, “ Prehistoric Cultures and Races of India” (The Calcutta 


University Journal of the Department of Letters, 1920). “Prehistoric Arts and 
Crafts” (Jdid., vol. 1i1., 1920.) 


ASIATIC BONE REMAINS 359 


The richness of the fossil deposits of the Himalayan foot- 

Osteological hills, known as the Siwalik Hills, in mammals 

Evidences. of all kinds and particularly in remains of 
anthropoid apes, is well known. It is surprising that there 
has not yet been found any bone remains which can be 
attributed to Man or to his immediate forerunner. Pilgrim, 
indeed, believed that Szvapzthecus was an ancestral form, but 
we have seen that this opinion was without foundation 
fsee p. 86). | 

It is to be hoped, and it is quite possible, that the future 





Fic. 213.—Human Sacrum from Loess at Ho-nan. Half natural size. (After Matsumoto.) 


may have fortunate surprises in store for us, for, at the present 
moment, with the exception of P2thecanthropus from Java, 
to which I have devoted a special chapter, there fall to be 
recorded only two discoveries of real paleontological value 
from the whole of Asia.’ 

Zumoffen extracted, from the Antelias Cave in Phcenicia, 
some human bones belonging to several individuals, and these 
are possibly of Aurignacian age. 

In 1915, the Japanese paleontologist, Matsumoto,’ described 
a human sacrum, found in a loess deposit at Ho-nan in China 


1 In one of M. Mitra’s memoirs, referred to above, mention is made, without 
details, of human remains found by M. Réa at Adichannanliu. 

2 Matsumoto, H., “On some Fossil Mammals from Ho-nan, China” (Scéence 
Reports of the Téhoku Imperial University, 1915). 


360 FOSSIL MAN BEYOND EUROPE 


along with bones of animals, particularly those of an elephant 
related to the Mammoth. The most remarkable features of 
this sacrum would seem to be its slight curvature and a gradual 
decrease in the size of the sacral vertebre from the first to 
the last (Fig. 213). In these respects it differs from the sacrum 
of modern Man and resembles that of Neanderthal Man. 
The main interest of this discovery lies in the anticipation 
it arouses of future discoveries. It proves that there ave 
human fossil remains in Pleistocene China. 

A certain number of the skulls collected in ancient tombs 
and prehistoric deposits have been described, but these relics 
do not seem to date further back than modern times. At 
most they belong to the Neolithic period. They nevertheless 
suggest the interesting theory, which archeology was able 
to anticipate, that Asia, like Europe, has been the theatre of 
great shiftings of the population. The majority of , these 
skulls actually belong to races differing from those now 
occupying the countries in which they have been discovered. 

Thus two skulls from prehistoric settlements in the region 
beyond Baikal are dolichocephalic ; they resemble skulls from 
the khurgans or tumuli of Southern Russia, and are entirely 
different from the modern brachycephalic types of the region. 

The khurgans of Siberia, of various ages, contain skulls 
differing greatly in form. Along with specimens resembling 
those of the Mongols and Ostiaks, there are dolichocephalic 
forms similar to those from the Russian khurgans.* The 
American anthropologist, Hrdlitka,’ is convinced that in the 
khurgans of Siberia, Mongolia, and Tibet, skeletons have 
been discovered representing the race which peopled America. 

Professor Verneau® described three skulls from deposits of 
Neolithic appearance in a cave in Tonkin. These skulls, in 
their lack of balanced development, or “‘ disharmony,” resemble 
those of our Cro-Magnon race. They did not belong to 
Mongols, and pertain rather to the white than to the yellow 
races. 


1 Zaborowski, Bull. de la Soc..@ Anthrop. de Paris, 1898. 

2 Hrdlicka, A., Congres intern. ad’ Anthrop, et a’ Archéol., Geneve, 1912. 

3 Verneau, Dr, “Les cranes humains du gisement préhistorique du Pho-binh-Gia, 
Tonkin” (L’ Anthropologie, xx., 1909). 


AUSTRALIA O61 


Lastly, according to the brothers Sarasin, Ceylon, Sumatra, 
and the Celebes seem to have been inhabited, at a remote 
period, by a primitive race, of small stature, probably a simple 
variety of the Negrito type, upon the antiquity and wide 
distribution of which, in ancient times, de Quatrefages has laid 
such stress in his writings. 

Dr E. Dubois has recently published illustrations and 
a description of two human skulls found at Wadjak in 
Wavaese Ohese he regards) as of Pleistocene Age. The 
skulls present, along with a rather more robust appearance, 
all the characters of Australian and Tasmanian skulls. For 
the first time such skulls have been recorded from beyond 
the confines of Australia. Homo wadjakensis is a Proto- 
Australian, whose origin must thus appear to have been 
in Eastern Asia. (For further details and illustrations of 
this find, and for more recent discoveries in Japan and 


the Phillipines, see Appendix p. 478.) 


Australia. 


Australia is the smallest, but most peculiar of the continents. 
Everything in it strikes the naturalist as 
strange and archaic in character. Its vege- 
tation, comprising tree-ferns, cycads, araucarias, palms, 
mimosas, eucalyptus and prickly scrub, recalls that of the 
Secondary era. In the seas surrounding it are found the 
corals, the Trigonias, and the Nautili of our Jurassic and 
Cretaceous seas. In its rivers still lives Cevatodus, that curious 
amphibious fish which was first discovered in the Triassic 
deposits of Europe. The dry land is peopled by a very 
peculiar mammalian fauna, which includes the Monotremes, 
belonging to a primitive and still reptilian type, and is almost 
wholly composed of forms ‘remaining at the Marsupial 
stage. This fauna, therefore, forms a legacy from Secondary 
times, which, nevertheless, has been considerably enlarged 
and diversified. The indigenous human populations like- 
wise belong to one of the most primitive of modern 
races. 


General Notes. 


362 FOSSIL MAN BEYOND EUROPE 


The majority of these general features of Australia may be 
explained by its geological and palazeogeographical history. The 
larger part of its land surface remained above water during 
the Primary and Secondary eras. At first Australia was 
united to a vast Antarctic continent, including South Africa, 
Madagascar, India, and what geologists call the contznent of 
Gondwana. ‘The latter soon began to break up; it seems 
that, during the Cretaceous period, there was still some 
temporary communication with Asia through the solid lands of 
the Malay Archipelago, but after the end of the Cretaceous 
period, or at the commencement of the Tertiary era, Australia 
became isolated in much its present form. Thus there have 
remained, imprisoned on an immense island, the flora and 
fauna which were then dominant throughout the world. As 
this isolation seems to have lasted, more or less completely, up 
to our own time, the organized life of Australia has been 
compelled to continue its own evolution in its own area, 
borrowing very little from the rest of the world, and gradually 
assuming its present aspect. This independent evolution, 
carried on in a very special direction, has produced the 
extraordinary diversity of marsupial mammals, some of which, 
not so long ago, attained to gigantic size. 

It is very difficult to explain the settlement of Australia by 

Modern Man, who can only have been one of the latest 

Australians. comers, unless we believe, with Schcetensack, 
that Australia is the place of origin of our species, a supposi- 
tion which seems hardly admissible.’ 

When the first European navigators disembarked in 
Australia and Tasmania, they found there men of strange 
and miserable appearance, cannibals, and they immediately 
compared them with monkeys: ‘“tailless Chimpanzees,” said 
the English. The Tasmanians no longer exist; they were 
annihilated by the “black war” waged upon them by the 
settlers, and also by alcohol, syphilis, and pulmonary phthisis. 
The Australians are still numerous. They have been carefully 
studied from every point of view, and appear to us now to be 


* Scheetensack, “ Die Bedeutung Australiens fiir die Heranbildung der Menschen 
aus einer niederen Form” (Zetéschrift fiir Ethnologie, xxxiii., 1901). 


——t—~*s 


AUSTRALIA 363 


far removed from the wild brutes spoken of by the first 
explorers.’ 
In spite of many points of difference, corresponding to the 





Fic. 214.—Different Types of the Tribe of Aruntas. (After Spencer and Gillen.) 


various regions of Australia, the common features of Australians 
are sufficient to stamp a type forming a very distinct sample 
of primitive humanity (Fig. 214). It would seem that the 


1 See particularly Spencer and Gillen, 7he Native Tribes of Central Australia 
London, 1899; Zhe Northern Tribes of Central Australia, London, 1904; Across 
Australia, London, 1912, 2 vols. Spencer, Wative Tribes of the Northern Territory 
of Australia, London, 1914. See also Brough Smith, 7ke Aborigines of Victoria, 
London, 1878. Thomas, Natives of Australia, London, 1906. Howitt, Madive 
Tribes of South-East Australia, London, 1904, etc. 


364 FOSSIL MAN BEYOND EUROPE 


Tasmanians were of purer race, more closely resembling the first 
arrivals. The Australians of to-day are probably Tasmanians 
intermingled with Papuan and Malay elements, and it is because 
of this intermixture that we have the very considerable diversity 
to be observed among the modern population. 

We can readily understand with what eager interest 
anthropologists have studied these men, for in certain of their 





Fic. 215.—Weapons from Central Australia (Warramunga tribe). 1. Stone axe fitted 
into the branch of a tree, split and tied by means of a thong of horsehair. 2. Stone 
knife with shaft of decorated wood, held together with resin. 3. Stone pick with 
shaft of wood, split and held together with resin. (After Spencer and Gillen.) 


physical characters they recall our fossil men, and they live in 
conditions similar to, if not the same as, those in which our 
Palzolithic peoples must have lived. Their stone weapons often 
resemble our dressed flints from Saint-Acheul and Le Moustier 
(Fig. 215); their throwing weapons resemble those of our 
hunters of the Reindeer Age (propellers) ; they use religious or 
magical objects, ‘‘churingas,” which may be compared to the 


AUSTRALIA 365 


coloured pebbles from the Mas d’Azil. They ornament their 
rock shelters or caves with paintings, not unlike those of our 
prehistoric caves; and similar drawings of hands, sometimes 
with the same mutilation of the fingers, are to be found 
(Fig. 216). These tangible evidences of a primitive culture 
are related to the -social customs, religious or magical, which 
may still be studied on the spot, and which, on the basis of 
analogy, have sometimes been attributed to our cave-dwellers. 





Fic. 216.—Australian Rock-paintings. Above, hands traced in white round the outline, 
and various signs. Below (Fig. 3) a Man, and (Fig. 4) red hands, joined by a 
line and a circle to a boomerang. (After Matthews.) 


Thus prehistorians have endeavoured to draw extremely 
interesting comparisons between our Paleolithic ancestors and 
the modern Australians. Professor Sollas has traced these 
analogies in a most vivid picture.’ 

1 Sollas, W. J., Amcient Hunters and their Modern Representatives, 2nd ed., 
London, 1915. Comparisons of this kind are always extremely interesting, but by 
themselves they are not sufficient to prove the close relationship of peoples who exhibit 


them. In fact, ethnographical resemblances often result simply from the fact that 
similar necessities everywhere require similar means to meet them. The Australians 


366 FOSSIL MAN BEYOND EUROPE 


The study of human paleontology in Australia ought 
therefore to be particularly informing. Unfortunately the 
data are still very meagre. 

Let us examine the matter first from the archeological 
standpoint. 

Products of a stone industry are not lacking in Australia ; 

Archeological on the contrary, they are very abundant. All 

Evidences. the museums, especially that at Melbourne, 
are rich in stone implements, some polished, others simply 
flaked. Among them are to be found most of the types upon 
which our European historians based their classifications, from 
“eoliths”! to large and beautiful polished axes, passing through 
the Chellean to the Moustierian forms, Aurignacian and 
Magdalenian blades and knives, and even pygmy flints. 

But in Australia these various forms are contemporary ; 
they were all in use at the time of the arrival of the first 
Europeans, and as they are collected on the surface, there is 
scarcely any method available for distinguishing recent from 
more ancient objects.” Perhaps examination of the patina 
‘would justify us in making some distinction, but I have not 
seen anything in the writings of investigators relating to this 
point. And in any case this method would only allow of 
vague evaluations. (See Appendix, p. 480.) 

One or two discoveries of axes from the depths of alluvial 
deposits have been announced, but the facts have been 
recorded very indefinitely, and there is ground for scepticism 
when, following Keane,® we consider that the exploration of 
auriferous gravels, carried out over hundreds of square miles, 
has not yet yielded any conclusive evidence. 

On the eastern and southern coasts of Australia, there are 
many shell- and ash-mounds similar to our kitchen middens. 
certainly resemble our Palzeolithic peoples in their implements and customs, but we 
now know, contrary to the opinion long held, that they differ completely in physical 
characters (see p. 238). 

1 Neetling, F., “Notes on the Tasmanian amorpholithes” (P~ Roy. Soc. Tasmania, 
1906-7, and L’ Anthropologie, xix., 1908, p. 645). 

2 Etheridge, R., Has Man a Geological History in Australia? 1890. Giglioli, 
E. H., Le Eta della Pietra nel? Australasia, 1894. Klaatsch, “Die Steinartefakte 


des Australier und Tasmanier” (Zeztschrift fiir Ethnologie, x\., 1908). 
3 Keane, Ethnology, Cambridge, 1896, p. 95. 


AUSTRALIA 367 


In them are found rudely worked stones and bones, but neither 
pottery nor arrowheads. And yet, since the extent and the 
bulk of these artificial mounds are sometimes considerable, we 
may suppose that their formation took some considerable time 
and that they date from a fairly remote period. 

The study of the art of the rock-paintings leads to the 
same conclusions. Engravings and paintings are very common 
in the districts where caves and rock-shelters are found. 
Many of these drawings, which represent all kinds of animals 
and men, sometimes grouped in definite scenes, are the work 
of the contemporary tribes. But there are some which are 
obviously more ancient, and Matthews’ believes it possible to 
distinguish two kinds of artistic productions, which must be 
attributed to two different races. According to Basedow,’ the 
rock paintings of the Flinders Mountains must be very. ancient, 
for they are as patinated as the rest of the rock upon which 
they are engraved. They have besides a special character, 
and the present native tribes of the region believe that they 
are the work of their ancestors. Having compared this patina 
with that of certain Egyptian monuments of 5000 years ago, 
Basedow finds it to be at least equally developed. Further, 
certain drawings represent foot-marks which can only be 
attributed to extinct animals: to Genyornis, a giant bird, 
to Diprotodon, a gigantic marsupial complete skeletons of 
which have been taken from the deposits of Lake Callabonna 
(Fig. 217). Here, then, is a very ancient geological record. 

Some of the discoveries are more definitely paleontological 
in character. 

At one time it was thought that there were undoubted 
traces of a fossil man, dating perhaps from Tertiary times. 
In 1898, Archibald, Director of the Varnambool Museum in 
Victoria, announced the discovery of footprints on slabs of 
sandstone of marine origin, obtained from a depth of 20 to 60 
metres. These concretionary sands represent an ancient beach, 
on which Kangaroos, Dingoes, and Emus had been wont to 


1 Matthews, “Rock Paintings and Carvings of the Australian Aborigines” 
(Journal of the Anthropological Institute, Xxiv., 1895 3 Xxvil., 1898). 

2 Basedow, H., “ Aboriginal Rock Carvings of great Antiquity in South Australia” 
(Journal of Anthropological Institute, xliv., 1914). 


368 FOSSIL MAN BEYOND EUROPE 


wander. Among the tracks of these animals there appeared 
others which, it seemed, could only have been those of a 
Man, who, walking and seating himself upon the yielding sand, 
had left upon it the imprints of his feet and buttocks. These 
imprints were studied later by the German paleontologist, 
Branco,’ who was struck by their narrowness. Some years 
afterwards, Noetling,’? while travelling in Tasmania, observed 
on the snow long tracks, arranged in pairs, and so closely 
resembling the supposed human tracks on the Varnambool 
sandstones that they might have been mistaken for them. 
But these tracks, which were remarkably narrow, had been made 
by Kangaroos. ‘This observation appears to be conclusive. 








Fic. 217.—Skeleton of Diprotodon australis. One-fiftieth natural size. Paleontological 
Gallery of the National Natural History Museum of France. 


For long it has been well known that in Australia there 
are fairly numerous deposits containing fossil animals, dating 
from Pleistocene and even from Pliocene times: bone caves 
such as the Wellington Caves, or alluvial deposits such as 
those of Lake Callabonna. These deposits have yielded 
a host of most curious creatures, particularly the giant 
marsupials, Mototherium, Duiprotodon (Fig. 217), and Thylaco- 
feo, but not the smallest dressed stone has ever accompanied 
the remains of these vanished creatures. 


1 Branco, W., “ Die fraglichen fossilen menschlichen Fussspuren . . .” (Zettschrift 
fiir Ethnologie, xxxvii., 1905). 
2 Noetling, F., “ Bemerkungen tuber die angebliche Menschenspur . . .” (Centra/- 


blatt fiir Mineralogie, 1907). 


AUSTRALIA 369 


Nevertheless, certain facts hold out grounds for hope. 
De Vis recognized on one side of Notothertum certain marks 
which may be attributed to human agency. The Dingo or 
native dog, which must have arrived in Australia at the same 
time as its master, has left fragments of its skeleton in these 
bone deposits. Finally, a human tooth has been obtained 
from cave deposits at Wellington.’ 

Matters stood at this unsatisfactory stage when, in 1914, 

The Talgai at the time of the outbreak of the Great War, 

Skull. the British Association for the Advancement 
of Science met at Sydney, and was thrilled by Messrs David 
and Wilson’s account of the discovery of a human fossil skull, 
found near Talgai, on the Darling Downs in Queensland. 
This fossil has since been the subject of various communica- 
tions ; it was recently described by A. S. Smith? in a memoir 
of which I here give a summary. 

The discovery of the. skull dates as far back as 1884. It 
was found by an old workman at a depth of about 24 metres. 
The deposit which contained it was laid down by a brook, 
the Dalrymple Creek, and is formed of two layers. The 
upper layer consists of black vegetable soil, and rests upon 
a layer of reddish brown clay containing calcareous nodules. 
It seems that the skull was taken from the top of this second 
layer. No other fossils were found there, but bones of 
Diprotodon, Notothertum, Megalania and others, have been 
obtained from similar formations laid down by other streams 
in the neighbourhood of Talgai. The remains of these extinct 
animals are in the same state of fossilization as the human 
skull, which was entirely encrusted with ferruginous calcareous 
matter, within as well as without. When freed from the soil, 
and after having been treated and prepared for examination, 
it still seemed much fossilized, and was badly cracked and very 
fragile. The facial portion is better preserved than the cerebral, 
which has the appearance of a mosaic of bone fragments 


(Fig. 218). The density of a fragment of the parietal bone 


1 Etheridge, R., Memoirs of the Australian Museum, 1916. 
2 Smith, A. S., “The Fossil Human Skull found at Talgai, Queensland ” 
(Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Soctety of London, Series B, vol. 208, 1918). 
2A 


370 FOSSIL MAN BEYOND EUROPE 


is 2.79, and it does not consist of more than 3.60 per cent. 
of organic matter. 

The skull belonged to a male, aged from 14 to 16 
years. The iene profiles superimposed upon the profiles 





2 
tt 


lB nebo aseee 


Fic. 218.—The Talgai Skull. A, seen in profile ; B, full face. One-third natural size. 
C, upper right canine tooth (enlarged). (After A. S. Smith.) 


of various modern Australian skulls, corresponded with 
extraordinary accuracy. The Talgai skull is, therefore, 


essentially an Australian skull. Smith declares that, had 
it been found without the facial portion, no one would 


AUSTRALIA 371 


have regarded it as of any importance from the anatomical 
point of view. 

The face also is Australian in type, but it presents more 
primitive features than modern skulls. The facial prognathism 
is striking. The forehead is receding, but has no pronounced 
superciliary ridges (probably on account of the youth of the 
subject). The orbit is large and quadrangular; the nasal 
bones arise from a deep hollow; the floor of the nasal fossz 
gradually merges in the supra-alveolar surface of the maxillaries, 
which are very large. 

The form of the palate is very primitive, and the molar 
series are almost parallel. The canines are enormous; the 
pointed summit of the crown exceeds by several millimetres 
the general level of the biting surface. Two worn facets have 
been produced by the contact of the canine with the lower 
premolar (Fig. 218). The arrangement of these facets differs 
from that normally seen in Man, and is more like that found 
in the skulls of young Orangs and young Gorillas, although 
there is no real diastema in the upper jaw to accommodate 
the lower canine. The premolars and true molars are very 
large. The majority of these characters may be encountered 
separately in some skulls of Tasmanians or modern Australians, 
but it would seem that they have never been observed 
simultaneously and developed to such ‘a degree, in any 
individual case. 

The Talgai Man is thus Australian and not Tasmanian in 
type; he represents a proto-Australian, who had long possessed 
a human brain, but whose face retained much more brute-like 
relics of his origin. Although the geological age of the skull 
is difficult to determine exactly from its condition of fossilization, 
it may be regarded as Pleistocene. It appears to be the first 
proof of the high antiquity of Man in Australia, apart perhaps 
from the human molar found in the Wellington cave in New South 
Wales. In association with the Wajak discovery it assumes 
fresh interest, since the origins of the ancient Tasmanian and 
Australian races become less obscure, but much yet remains to 
be discovered in Australia and Malaysia before the important 
anthropological problems they present can be solved. 


oO 
~T 
bo 


FOSSIL MAN BEYOND EUROPE 


Africa. 


Africa must have played as important a part as Eurasia in 
the origins and primitive history of the human 
kind. 

Evidences of a long extended past increase in number with 
the progress of exploration. In all those parts where the 
European has penetrated, he has found traces of a Stone Age ; 
in many places, he has collected weapons and implements 
similar to those of our most ancient Palzolithic. Furthermore, 
these objects are usually scattered on the surface of the soil. 
Yet in the regions which have long been colonized, or which 
have been more closely studied, deep beds have been found 
in stratigraphical or paleontological conditions allowing of 
chronological comparisons. Examination of these beds justifies 
this important conclusion, which may be applied to the whole 
continent, that the prehistory of Africa seems to be as old as 
that of Eurasia. 

I cannot, without digressing too far from the main subject 
of this book, describe even in summary the archeological 
discoveries already made. Such a task would require a volume 
in itself, a labour of very considerable interest and usefulness ; 
but a brief review of the principal facts known up to the 
present day must suffice. 

In every respect North Africa differs greatly from Central 
and Southern Africa, from which it is separated by the great 
desert region of the Sahara. It resembles Southern Europe in 
its flora, in its fauna, and in its human population belonging to 
the white race. North Africa is a Mediterranean territory 
rather than an African territory. ‘‘ Cross the desert solitudes,” 
said Hamy, ‘and everything changes, plants as well as 
animals, and the Negro makes his appearance. This is the 
true Africa, the great Dark Continent.” ? 

Geology, paleontology, and prehistory all tell us that there 
was a time when this division into Ffolarctzc and Ethiopian 
regions did not exist, or was less pronounced. It was only 
by degrees that the various regions of Africa assumed the 


General Survey. 


1 See Gsell, Stéphane, W7stotre ancienne del Afrique du Nord, vol. i., Paris, 1913. 


NORTHERN AFRICA 373 


different aspects they now present. Before it dried up the 
Sahara was no desert, that is to say a barrier, but a bridge ; 
the subtropical Ethiopian fauna extended over North Africa.) 
Man lived in every part: dressed stones, identical with those 
of the oldest European Paleolithic, are found exactly alike at 
a great many points, forming an almost continuous chain from 
the extreme north to the extreme south of the continent. 

Observations were first made in North Africa. Egypt has 
been studied by archeologists from the days 
when the idea of prehistory scarcely existed. 
In 1867 Worsaee recorded the first dressed flints, which 
Arcelin, Hamy, and Lenormant compared _ 
to European flints, confirming the ex- Ca a 
istence of an Egyptian Paleolithic phase, | ar: 
far older than the oldest monuments of 
classical Egypt. Delanoue, John Evans, 
and Haynes supported this conclusion, ; 
which was for a long time contested by a 
Egyptologists. The latter, unnecessarily /f,), 
impressed by the thousands of years of ) 
Egyptian history, a period which barely 
counts from the geologist’s point of view, 
retained their mistaken views regarding 
questions of origin. To refute the idea 
of the Paleolithic phase, they laid stress Fic. 219.—Dressed Flint from 
on the fact, quite accurate in itself, that Oe ke eine uaoey Sees 
the use of flint implements had lasted for Karr Collection. Musée 
a long time after the first dynasties. But em ares? 
there are flints and flints. To our dis- 
tinguished fellow-countryman, J. de Morgan, belongs the 
honour of establishing the distinction, and of proving definitely 
the existence, the importance, and the geological] antiquity of 
Phevotone Age in Egypt.’ 

It is true that the innumerable flints of Chellean, Acheulean, 


Egypt. 


























TH ONO 
Wy bi bf] > 


Wf 
A A 

Y | acc ats 
NN if i s < ‘ nas \ 
ATi Ny, Nee x 
HI by ste my SY 
ip}, He vy | 

yi) y} sae ist 

by Dia Ba AY of 





1 Boule, M., “Les Mammiféres quaternaires de Algérie d’aprés les travaux de 
Pomel” (L’ Anthropologie, x., 1899). 

2 Morgan, J. de, Recherches sur les origines de TE gypte: Lige de la pierre et 
des métaux, Paris, 1896. See also Cartailhac, “L’dAge de la pierre en Afrique” 
(L’Anthropologie, iii., 1892). 


374 FOSSIL MAN BEYOND EUROPE 


and Moustierian form from Africa have not so far been found 
in association with a fossil fauna, but their physical character, 
their patina, their topographical distribution or the geological 
bearings of their beds are sufficient to enable us to date them 
back to Pleistocene times. (See Appendix, p. 480.) At that 
period the Nile Valley had not yet been completely hollowed 
out; whereas the most ancient monuments of classical Egypt and 
even of Neolithic Egypt, those of Negadah and Abydos, 6000 
years old, correspond to a period relatively very recent, when 
the country had already exactly assumed its present-day aspect. 

Dressed stones, of quite as archaic an appearance and type, 
have been collected in the Libyan Desert and in Upper Egypt. 

Lesser Africa, or Barbary, has long yielded many clear 
evidences. In 1875, Bleicher’ discovered 
dressed stones after the type of Saint-Acheul 
in a Pleistocene alluvial deposit at Ouzidan, near Tlemcen. 
Some years afterwards, Pomel, Tommasini, and Pallary 
described the Palikao or Ternifine deposit in the region of 
Mascara.” In this area stones dressed by the hand of man, 
Chellean and Moustierian in form, are to be found, along with 
numerous bone-remains of vanished or emigrated mammals, 
especially those of the extinct species, Avephas atlanticus. 
The deposit at Aboukir, near Mostaganem, and the rich 
settlement on Lake Karar, also in the province of Oran, 
exhibit similar paleontological features.* 

In 1887, Dr Collignon * observed, in ancient alluvials in the 
neighbourhood of Gafsa, in Tunisia, several superimposed 
layers containing relics of various stone industries, the oldest 
of which is identical with our Chellean industry. 

Then and since, a great number of places, of caves, rock- 
shelters, or settlements in the open, have been investigated 
throughout the whole of North Africa. The literature on 
prehistory has become considerable. Among the works which 
have been published must be mentioned those of Flinders Petrie, 


Barbary. 


1 In Matériaux, x., 1875, p. 196. 

* Bull. de la Soc. géol. de France, 3rd series, vol. vii, 1878, p. 44; Budd. de la Soc. 
@ Anthrop. de Paris, 1883; Matériaux, 1888, p. 221. 

* Boule, M., “Station paléolithique du lac Karar” (L’ Anthropologie, xi., 1900). 

* Collignon, Dr, “ Les ages de la pierre en Tunisie” (AZatériaux, xxi., 1887). 


NORTHERN AFRICA 375 


Henri and Jacques de Morgan, Forbes, Bissing, Beadnell, 
Schweinfurth, Blanckenhorn, etc., in Egypt; those of R. Smith, 
in Libya; of Couillault, Schweinfurth, J. de Morgan, Capitan 
and Boudy, Dr Gobert, Raygasse, Latapie, etc., in Tunisia; of 
Pallary, Doumergue, Debruge, Flamand, etc., in Algeria; and 
of Pallary, Pinchon, Campardou, etc., in Morocco.’ Particular 
mention must be made of the work of a humble schoolmaster 
in Oran, Pallary, who after having explored the whole of 


i \ yy 
2) ae \ fi 
4 3 te Y £ 
4 ‘Nfs fit 
) YS WZ 
\\ / / "fi, 
4 / 
/ 
i 






\ 
\ an Hy 
ini W/ 
ES 


ie 
= 
Fe 
2 


/ 


i 
Ht 
q 


\ q i : 
| A 


f 
i 





YARN \ ») 
° Ce 





\ 
Kt 


Fic. 220.—Dressed Flint from Diabet, Morocco. Three-fourths natural size. (After Pallary.) 





Barbary, was able to collate the facts he had observed and 
put them forward in a comprehensive review.’ 

The oldest phase of Paleolithic culture in North Africa 
resembles in every feature that of the ancient Paleolithic of 
Europe and Asia. This would seem to indicate, if not a 
common race, at least the existence of a relationship between 
Africa on the one hand and Eurasia on the other, therein 
agreeing with geological and paleontological data. It is often 


1 For bibliography, see past numbers of L’ Anthropologie. 
* Pallary, P., /astructions pour les recherches préhistoriques dans le Nord-Ouest de 
LP Afrique, Algiers, 1909. 


376 FOSSIL MAN BEYOND EUROPE 


difficult to make a distinction in time between articles in the ~ 
Moustierian style and those fashioned in the Chellean and 
Acheulean manner. Even in the ancient alluvials of Gafsa, 
where the distinction seemed quite clear to Dr Collignon’s eyes, 
Couillault’s and de Morgan’s more recent researches have 
shown that these different forms are as “intimately” inter- 
mingled in the Pleistocene conglomerate as in the workshops 
on the surface. (See Appendix, p. 481.) This early archzo- 
logical stuff is found everywhere in the deep layers of cave 
deposits, especially in Algeria. It is contemporary with a 
fauna of mammals some of which are extinct and some of 
which have emigrated to the South; and it belongs to a 
more humid climate than that of to-day. 

Since that time great changes must have taken place. 
Inter-continental communication in the Old World became 
more difficult. Our Upper Paleolithic, with its many sub- 
divisions, is replaced in Africa by a general archeological 
facies, to which Pallary has given the name Ge¢tu/zan, and which 
J. de Morgan has called Capszax. Relics of the Getulian or 
Capsian are met with sometimes in cave deposits or rock shelters, 
and sometimes at the surface of the soil, as is the case 
especially in those curious settlements in Tunisia called snail- 
shell mounds (escargotzéres), artificial deposits consisting of 
snail-shells mixed with cinders, bone-remains of animals, and 
dressed flints. The latter recall the Aurignacian implements 
of France (Fig. 221), and the resemblance is sometimes so 
close as to imply a certainty of close relationship between 
Europe and Southern Africa during the Upper Pleistocene.' 
The great land bridges, particularly that uniting Tunisia to 
Sicily, had not yet been completely broken at the beginning of 
the Getulian period. It is probable that our Aurignacian 
period is African in origin. Aurignacian and Getulian are two 
geographical aspects of the same Mediterranean culture. 


1 Pallary, Joc. cit. J. de Morgan, Capitan and Boudy, “Etude sur les stations 
préhistoriques du Sud tunisien” (Revue de ? Ecole a’ Anthrop. de Paris, 1910). Gobert, 
Dr, “ Notes et recherches sur le Capsien” (Bull. de la Soc. préhist. de France, 1910). 
Id, “Uabri de Redeyef” (L’ Anthropologie, xxiii., 1912). Introduction & la paléon- 
tologie tunisienne, Tunis, 1914. Raygasse, M., “Etudes de palethnologie maghrébine ” 
(L’ Anthropologie, xxvii., 1916). 


NORTHERN AFRICA 377 


The extent of the Getulian industry, which at first seemed 
to be confined to Tunisia, is becoming daily more widely 
known, and is found to spread from the Libyan desert to 
Morocco. It is to be found, either in caves or on the surface, 
in many other regions of the continent and even in South 
Africa. 

It is succeeded in Barbary. by the /devo0-Moorish industry, 
so named by Pallary because it is found also in Spain. In 
addition to the Getulian implements there occur microlithic 






































Fig. 221.—Dressed Flints from Tunisian snail-shell mounds, comparable to our Aurignacian 
types. Two-thirds natural size. (After Pallary.) 


flints, grinders, and mullers indicating the use of colour 
materials. In the course of the Getulian and Ibero-Moorish 
periods, the fauna became impoverished by the disappearance 
of species ; but it still contained many species which have now 
migrated to the south. The climate was damp, the country 
less barren than now. 

The Ibero-Moorish phase passes imperceptibly into the 
Mauretanian phase, with many small geometrically shaped 
flints, similar to those of our Tardenoisian period. But already 
the presence of polished stones and of pottery indicates the 
commencement of the Neolithic phase. The latter was wide- 
spread, and was remarkable for the abundance and variety of its 


378 FOSSIL MAN BEYOND EUROPE 


stalked or hafted arrowheads. Sometimes, according to 
Cartailhac, it presents interesting points of resemblance with 





AN é 
BAD wo. 
Oy SN 

hin, Sua AM 
NAT i Nas } WD, 










( 
459). : r Al 


y 
Tir, ge 5 Upp 
VW OA eH TaN 
a tg AN PRN, 





} Sine AN ic ‘I , y He L/ \ AN 
oe 
a ATS PBA, 
Val \ \y mn aM, Sings 
vans!) ai) 


















i #5, WN | ( mR 
v ae rh ne . IN M 
Hay) AN As ayes ohn Wy fouls ANN ¥ nee 
\ \ \\ Pay i 4 . AWW \ wit 


W 
‘S 













<i ‘ (i f 
cs ay 
a MN ; \ 
} a 
\' \ 
ry Ml Cu 
; ga 


\\ 












Pe 
uM 
1 


3 
fi 


a 






f! 

4) 
ne 
an 
\\i Ve EN ‘N Wy it) 


AA le: 
a ¥y Wait oi 
PAG ~ 

f ii, Y 








ay 


\ 
abe i 
lp. és Se 
[tt 





af f ‘; 
7 . 


timétres. 


Fic. 222,— Flint Arrowheads from Fayoum in Egypt. Two-thirds natural size. 
(After J. de Morgan.) 


the Egyptian Neolithic, which partially merges with the early 
Metal Ages. 

The prehistory of North Africa may thus be divided into 
a succession of ages comparable to the European succession. 





AFRICA; THE SAHARA 379 


The Paleolithic exhibits several successive phases of long 
duration. Future researches will enable us to establish chrono- 
logical comparisons and relationships; but up to the present, 
North Africa, and Barbary in particular, seems actually to 
form part of the Mediterranean world, so far as concerns its 
ancient human populations, as well as its fauna, flora, and 
physical characters. In Egypt the succession is less assured. 
There a great blank still exists between the very old 
Paleolithic of the plateaux and the Neolithic of the valleys, 
which is remarkable for the exceptional beauty of its 
dressed flints (fashioned in the Solutrean manner), and 
which imperceptibly grades into the civilization of the first 
dynasties (Fig. 222). 

It is not without surprise that we find in the Sahara such 
extraordinary abundance of Stone Age anti- 
quities. Since Abbé Richard, more than half 
a century ago, recorded the presence of dressed flints in 
Southern Algeria, such finds have been repeatedly made. 
Féraud, Thomas, Largeau, Weisgerber, Rabourdin, Foureau, 
Flamand, Laquiere, E. F. Gautier, Mme. Crova, Arnon, de 
Zeltner, de Saint-Martin, Tarel, Roulet, Noél Cortier, Gruvel, 
Chudean, Aulner and other explorers have collected, in almost 
every part of this vast desert, innumerable stones shaped by 
flaking of various fashions, as well as polished axes, mortars, 
and very beautiful and delicate arrowheads (Fig. 223); worked 
ostrich eggs, cut into rings; pottery, etc. The deposits are 
chiefly found in the vicinity of springs, modern or ancient, and 
near river-beds now dried up, a fact which indicates that, in 
the Sahara, great changes of climate and of the conditions 
determining habitability have taken place at a relatively recent 
date. (For bibliographical references, see Appendix, p. 481.) 

The material with a Paleolithic facies evidently extends 
over a long period of time, although the most diverse forms 
are often found at the same place and in the same bed. 
Amygdaloid implements of Acheulean type, first recorded by 
Rabourdin in the Algerian Sahara, have been found in many 
other places. The Sahara collections also contain implements 
exactly like our Moustierian, Aurignacian and Tardenoisian 


The Sahara. 


380 FOSSIL MAN BEYOND EUROPE 


flints, and the Capsian types of North Africa. It is possible 
that implements of archaic form are sometimes contemporary 
with Neolithic implements, which seem to have persisted up 
to quite a recent period, for, according to Gautier, the Neolithic 
in the Sahara merges with the Iron Age. Nevertheless, 
certain conditions of deposit, supplemented by a study of the 
raw materials and of the patina, lead to the belief that the 
majority of the ‘‘Acheulean axes” must date from a past of 
true geological significance. Lastly, notwithstanding a few 
points of difference, the Stone Age of the Sahara is extra- 






C= 
2 










gs 
te 


ae 





Fic. 223.—Neolithic Arrowheads from the Sahara. Natural size. (After E. F. Gautier.) 


ordinarily like that of Lower Africa, and often presents points 
of resemblance with that of Egypt. 

West Africa and the Soudan have also yielded many relics.’ 
Hamy has recorded some objects, mainly of 
Neolithic workmanship, from French Guinea 
(Konakry Cave), Portuguese Guinea, the Ivory Coast, the 
Gold Coast and the Gaboon. 

Captain Duchemin has described tumuli and megaliths 
in the valley of the Gambia. In the Senegal valley in French 
Soudan, de Zeltner collected worked stones, some of Palaeolithic 
workmanship, in superficial but -usually clearly marked beds. 
Between Kayes and Timbuctoo, Dr Decorse has observed and 
recorded the site of many Stone Age settlements. The Central 
Nigerian plateau, explored by Lieut. Desplagnes, is rich in 
Neolithic monuments and relics. According to Welcome, the 
Southern Soudan seems to be no less rich. 


Central Africa. 


1 Bibliography may be found in F. de Zeltner’s “Notes sur le Buin se 
soudanais” (L’ Anthropologie, xviii., 1907). 





. 
: 


CENTRAL AND SOUTHERN AFRICA. 381 


Dupont, Cornet, Stainier, Taramelli, Jacques, Delisle and 
others have described many series of Stone Age implements 
found in the Congo basin.’ Here,asin the other great African 
territories, the raw material, the workmanship and the forms 
of the weapons or tools show the greatest diversity. Palzolithic 
types, especially the amygdaloid, are not absent, but up to 
the present, it has been found impossible to distinguish them 
chronologically from the great Neolithic collections containing 
polished axes and fine arrowheads. According to Taramelli,’ 
however, the character of the patina and the presence of dressed 
stones in the heart of alluvial beds seem clearly to prove the 
geological antiquity of the ruder material. Certainly, in the 
opinion of all the authors, even if the Stone Age came to an 
end in the Congo only five or six centuries ago, its beginnings 
are lost in the obscurity of time. 

In East Africa, we have to record the discoveries of 
Seton-Karr and Paulitchke in Somaliland. There dressed 
stones are abundant, and John Evans* has pointed out 
their resemblance to those of Saint-Acheul, Chelles, and Le 
Moustier (Fig. 224). Yet here again, even though these 
Specimens sometimes lie at a considerable depth in the 
soil, no fossils accompany them by which their age may 
be determined. 

On the plains of Ethiopia two missionaries, Revoil and 
du Bourg de Bozas, found products of a Neolithic industry. 
Weyland collected, in the Portuguese territory of Mozambique, 
stones shaped by large flakes. 

From the archeological point of view there still remain 
many blanks in the Dark Continent, particu- 
larly in the interior. South Africa, on the 
contrary, having been more thoroughly explored, is much 
richer. 

Here the first discoveries of dressed stones were made more 
than half a century ago, and since that time they have vastly 
increased. Among the many publications on the subject, those 


1 Stainier, X., “L’age de la pierre au Congo” (Aznales du Musée du Congo, 
Brussels, 1889), 

2 Taramelli, A., L’ Anthropologie, xii., 1901 p. 411. 

3 Evans, Sir John, Proc. Royal Society, \x., p. 19. 


Southern Africa. 


582 FOSSIL MAN BEYOND EUROPE 


of Péringuey, Director of the South African Museum, and of. 
the English geologist, Johnson,’ must be placed in the first 
rank, as being most comprehensive. 

Relics of the Stone Age have been collected in almost 





Than 
eG : “ B. oh ep 
aed ae Pig he 

” ; WA #, 4, 
yes 
















MY, sy 
h yf 
/\s io y 
fh “wih LY 
y} y, 
Ww) hy oe 
‘ AR : ij | Y 
J; Wii 2 i} 
ai i} 
4, ? a 
hy ie Ws "aw 
IY YAY ANG 
744 ae ? 
ae y ” 
y 
(] 


in Y 
‘ my 
ff tH . / 


a a iN % 







he 

pn fie 

Ly 4! Mis Ce A, 
yg 





Fic. 224.—Quartzite Implement from Somaliland. Two-thirds natural size. 
(After J. de Morgan.) 


every part of Rhodesia, of the Zambesi valley, the Transvaal, 
the Orange River State and Cape Colony. Some are of 
Paleolithic, others of Neolithic workmanship, among the 
former being many Chellean hand-hammers (coups de potng) 
(Fig. 225), almond-shaped Acheulean implements, and fiints 


1 Péringuey, L., “The Stone Ages of South Africa” (Annals of the South African 
Museum, 1911). Johnson, J. P., The Stone Implements of South Africa, London, 
1907, 2nd ed., 1908. The Prehistoric Period in South Africa, London, 1910, 2nd ed., 
1912. See in L’ Anthropologie, xxili., 1912, p. 513, a list, drawn up by Péringuey, of 
works on the Stone Age in South Africa. 


SOUTHERN AFRICA 383 


Or quartzites dressed in the Moustierian manner on one 
surface only. There are also implements more delicately 
worked which may be compared to Aurignacian or Getulian 
types, and even, according to Johnson, to Solutrean types. 

The beds are usually superficial, but some of them seem 
to indicate a high antiquity, using the term in the geological 
sense. Rupert Jones de- 
scribed stones, lanceolate 
in form, taken from gravels 
forming terraces above the 
present bed of the river 
Pimbalaan, in’ Swaziland. 
Leith has seen similar 
stones taken from the 
ancient gravels of the Vaal. 

Feilden has recorded 
the presence of many stone 
implements both above and 
below the famous Victoria 
Falls, in connection with 
the gravels of the great 
terraces of the Zambesi 
valley. The fact that these 
alluvials were laid down 
when the river flowed some 
130 to 150 metres above its 
present bed seems beyond 
dispute. Lamplugh and 
Balfour have confirmed these observations. All the evidence 
points to the belief that the worked stones, generally of some- 
what rude workmanship, often Chellean in character and highly 
patinated, date from a period prior to the protracted hollowing 
out of the gorge. But another English geologist, Codrington, 
does not believe in so great an antiquity. 

Johnson found implements at the bottom of a lake deposit 
exploited as a brick-earth, near Robinson, in the Orange River 
Colony. He showed that the Paleolithic deposits of the 
Orange River Colony are often connected with the old alluvial 






: ms) a 
aad oe 


st 
wy 





Fic. 225.—Quartzite dressed in the Chellean fashion, 
from Orange River. (After Hamy.) 


384 FOSSIL MAN BEYOND EUROPE 


terraces, and he saw, in the deep layers of a conglomerate in 
one of these terraces, implements which he was unfortunately 
unable to extract owing to the hardness of the matrix. At 
one point on the banks of a tributary of the Vaal, a low terrace 
contains Acheulean types in its basal gravels, while in its upper 
layers occur small implements of the : resell again ” Sroupame gee 
Appendix, p. 481.) 

According to Péringuey, Palzolithic implements have often 
been obtained from the diamond-bearing deposits of the Vaal, 
which contain bone-remains of extinct or migrated species, and 
in one case these implements were accompanied by the molar 
tooth of a Mastodon. Were it the case that this proboscidian 
genus had not a more protracted existence in Africa than in 
Europe, the fact recorded by Péringuey would place the date of 
the Stone Age in Africa as far back as the Pliocene period. 

Obermaier has described a typical ‘‘hand-hammer,” which 
was found zz sztu at a depth of 5 metres in the ancient 
alluvials of a river in Natal. During the last few years, cases 
such as these have multiplied. Broom obtained dressed stones 
from ancient alluvials which contained also bone remains of a 
horse (Zguus capensis) and of different ruminants of extinct 
species. During the Boer War, some of the trenches dug in 
the ancient gravels near Pretoria yielded at their base worked 
stones of Acheulean and Moustierian types. 

Relics of the Stone Ages are found elsewhere than in the 
open and in alluvial deposits. Leith described the caves and 
rock shelters of the Stormberg mountains in Cape Colony, 
where he found a stone implement: other caves, at Cape 
Saint-Blaize, near the sea, contain accumulations of pebbles, 
shells, bone-remains, and ashes, along with many dressed 
stones, often carefully worked. Elsewhere on the _ shore, 
fragments of breccia with bones and shells contain also dressed 
flints. Shell mounds have been found at different places on 
the south coast ; they are rich in dressed quartzites, in remains 
of ostrich eggs, bone needles, and shards of pottery. 

Mennel and Chubb examined the deposits in a cave in 
Rhodesia, and these contained both dressed stones and 
fossilized bones of animals, 


SOUTHERN AFRICA 385 


According to Johnson, the Stone Age in the Orange River 
Colony and in the whole of South Africa would seem to date 
from a period when the climate was more humid than it is 
to-day. Apart from some “‘eoliths” from Leijfontein, there 
seems to have been first of all an Acheulean type of industry, 
the products of which, worn and deeply patinated, are often 
found in gravels. A more recent phase, described as 
‘““Solutrean,” seems to be found in connection with superficial 
deposits containing finely worked flints, which include long 
blades, scrapers, and pygmy flints. Along with these fine 
stone implements, other settlements contain ostrich eggs, 
shaped, incised, and sometimes cut in rings, as well as 
perforated stones, etc. 

Péringuey also distinguishes several periods. To the first 
of these belong the Chellean, Acheulean, and Moustierian 
types, which in this case are absolutely contemporaneous, and 
can only have been produced by strong and vigorous men. It 
cannot be denied that some at least of these specimens are of 
an antiquity comparable to similar specimens from European 
deposits. The author believes that the Chellean type 
originated in Africa, whence it spread to Europe and Asia. 

The second group comprises implements frequently of a 
more primitive character, and sometimes of more finished 
workmanship, after the Aurignacian, Solutrean, Magdalenian, 
and Tardenoisian forms, these expressions, it must be under- 
stood, being used in this connection without any chronological 
significance. Other objects also occur, such as mortars, mill- 
stones, pottery, bone implements, and decorative objects often 
made of the shell of ostrich eggs. In its general type this 
industry has lasted until recent years; it may be described 
as the ‘‘ Neolithic industry of South Africa.” 

To the third group belong certain objects of workmanship 
similar to that of European Neolithic culture, especially small 
stalked arrowheads, laboriously retouched on both surfaces. 

In South Africa the problem of the age of the different 
cultures is difficult to solve because of the continuity of the 
climatic and faunistic conditions of the country. The two 


industries, Paleolithic and Neolithic, are partly contem- 
2B 


386 FOSSIL MAN BEYOND EUROPE 


poraneous. There is no hiatus comparable to that which 
we find in Europe. But, even in a single group sharing the 
same structural peculiarities, the later implements by no means 
possess the patina and ancient appearance of the early ones. 
There can be no doubt that the resemblances between our 
Paleolithic and that of South Africa are very great, and that 
they indicate an ancient and very close relationship between 
the two continents. Dr Péringuey is convinced that such 





Fic. 226.—Wall Engraving in Algeria, representing a Buffalo. (After Pomel.) 


relations must have existed between European peoples of the 
Reindeer Age, whether Aurignacian or Solutrean, and those 
of South Africa. On which side does the debt lie between 
the two continents? It really seems that we owe our 
Aurignacians to Africa (see p. 307). | 
Be that as it may, the Bushmen (or Boschimans) appear 
to be the descendants of men of the Upper Paleolithic, to 
whom they retained their resemblance even up to the time 
of their final extermination, which dates but from yesterday. 
This conclusion is strengthened by a group of facts which 
till now I have passed over in this rapid review of the Stone 


AFRICAN ROCK DRAWINGS 387 


Age in Africa, but regarding which I shall now say a few 
words. I refer to representations on rocks, engraved or 
painted, which have long been known to exist at certain points 
far distant from each other, in the South African continent, 
and which are now known to form an almost continuous 
chain from north to south. They occur in Barbary (recorded 
by many authors), in Upper Egypt, Nubia, and Arabia, all 
over the Sahara (recorded by Flamand and Gautier), to the 
north of Lake Tchad, in Mauretania, Nigeria (Desplagnes 
and Chudeau), in the Soudan (de Zeltner), Somaliland (Carette- 
Bouvet and Neuville), in the Victoria Nyanza region (Koch), 


co 


6 


) 





Fic. 227.—Rock Sculptures from different localities in the Sahara. One-twentieth 
natural size. (After E. F. Gautier.) 


and lastly all over South Africa (Christol, Holub, Stow, 
Moszeik, White, Péringuey, Johnson, Theal and others). 

The style of these more or less artistic works, their state of 
preservation, their patina, more or less deep, the kind of animals 
represented, and the relics found at the base of the engraved 
rocks, enable us to distinguish several periods. In North 
Africa there are engravings, large in outline and deeply cut, 
representing extinct species such as the Great Buffalo (Budalus 
antiguus) (Fig. 226), or species which have emigrated such 
as the Rhinoceros, the Elephant, the Giraffe and others. These 
designs are sometimes well drawn, and have been described 
as prehistoric and classified as belonging to the Neolithic 
period ; but there is no proof that they may not be even more 
ancient, and Flamand attributes the drawings of Buffaloes to 
Pleistocene times. Other drawings somewhat different in 


388 FOSSIL MAN BEYOND EUROPE 


character, less artistic, small in size, stippled and often accom- 
panied by inscriptions, are much more recent, and are described 
as Libyo-Barbaric. Many date from historical times. The 
distinction between the two sets is sometimes difficult, and 
they may have formed a continuous series. Flamand_ has 
pointed out the contemporaneity of a drawing of a herd of 
Buffaloes and of men armed with polished axes. The Neolithic 
period seems thus to be older in Africa than in Europe, and 
this, indeed, is not a matter for surprise. 

The best drawings in North Africa are far from possessing 
the qualities and beauty of our own drawings of the Reindeer 
Age. Comparison can only be made with the inferior periods 
in Europe, when productive art had become decadent, like 
much of that studied by Breuil in Spain. 

In South Africa, we find a somewhat different state of 
affairs. Here also, certain engravings are modern in appear- 
ance; but others are deeply patinated, and as many as five 
superimposed layers of paintings have been observed. Speaking 
generally, engravings and paintings are here superior in quality 
from the esthetic point of view, and, as we have said, much 
more like those of the French and Spanish caves; there are 
the same preferences in the choice of subjects, animals being 
most often made use of, the same realism, fidelity of attitude, 
skill in reproduction and technique, and even the same weakness 
in drawing the human figure. Sometimes these artistic pro- 
ductions of South Africa are arranged in pictures (Fig. 228) 
or assume a hieroglyphic, perhaps symbolic nature, like those 
recently discovered in certain Spanish localities. These works 
of art are usually attributed to the Bushmen. This opinion, 
however, is not held by Péringuey,’ who attributes them to 
a Hottentot tribe called the “Strand Loopers.” But no one 
has seen a modern native in the act of drawing them. 

Bone-remains of fossil men in Africa are as scarce as 

Human Bone- the products of their industries are abundant. 

Remains. The bone-remains of the primitive Africans 

are almost quite unknown. 


) 


1 Péringuey, L., “On Rock Engravings of Animals and the Human Figure . 
two papers in the 7rvans. South African Philos. Society, 1906 and 1909. 


AFRICAN HUMAN REMAINS 389 


In North Africa a fairly large number of skulls and 
skeletons have been exhumed from Stone Age deposits, but 
the majority of these specimens belong to the Neolithic period. 
It has never been proved that the skulls taken from the snail- 
shell mounds (escargotzéres) are really Getulian, that is to say, 
Paleolithic ; for these artificial heaps usually served as Berber 
cemeteries. 

Bertholon* believes it possible to distinguish a neander- 
thaloid type of skull in North Africa, particularly in Tunisia, 
whence it spreads into the region of the Sahara. Several 





Fic. 228.—Black and white painting in a Cave in Baroaland, representing 
Bushmen engaged in hunting, being attacked by Kaffirs. Length 
of picture 14 metres. (After Hamy.) 


skulls, from the deep layers of the snail-shell mound at Mechta- 
Chateaudun in Constantine, seem to be representative of this 
African neanderthaloid race.” But we need only examine the 
photographs of the best preserved of these specimens to learn 
that it is but a case of mere superficial resemblance, and that 
the Mechta skulls exhibit none of the essential characters of 
flomo neanderthalensts. 

Delisle, on the other hand, classified as Cro-Magnon a 
skull found by Debruge in the Palzolithic cave of Ali-Bacha, 
near Bougie. This record quite agrees with what we know 
of the wide distribution of the Cro-Magnon type in the 


1 Bertholon, Dr L., “La race de Néanderthal dans l’Afrique du Nord” (Revue 
tunisienne, 1895). 
_ ? Bertholon, Dr, in Mercier and Debruge, “La station préhistorique de Mechta- 
Chateaudun” (Soc. archéol. de Constantine, xl\vi., 1913). 


390 FOSSIL MAN BEYOND EUROPE 


Mediterranean basin, and of its persistence in Barbary in a 
more or less pure form. 

M. Pallary has kindly informed me that in the Faculty of 
Science at Algiers, there is a whole series of skulls and bone- : 
remains obtained by him from the rock shelters at La Mouillah, 
near Lalla Marnia on the frontiers of Morocco. These settle- 
ments are Ibero-Moorish, that is to say Upper Paleolithic, and 
according to Dr Weber, of the Faculty of Medicine at Algiers, 
the skulls are negroid in character. 

The museum at Oran contains several skeletons with 
skulls, obtained by Pallary and Tommasini from the 
Troglodytes’ Cave near Oran, dating from ancient Neolithic 
times. According to Dr Bloch, these also seem to be 
negroid. 

Bertholon* again found these “undoubtedly” negroid 
characters in skulls from snail-shell mounds at Tebessa, and 
especially in skulls which Dr Gobert obtained from Neolithic 
beds in the Redeyef rock-shelter. Here the men would seem 
to have been of small stature. 

Bertholon and Chantre? came to the conclusion that in 
Barbary the Negroids formed an ancient ethnographical stock, 
while Neolithic skulls belong sometimes to the Mediterranean, 
sometimes to the Negroid or Nubian type. 

In ancient prehistoric burial-places in Egypt, Fouquet 
recorded the existence of several types, which are again found 
at a later date among the Egyptians and Ethiopians. Elliot 
Smith’ tells us that these prehistoric Egyptians or Pre- 
Egyptians were small, dolichocephalic, and less negroid in 
type than some of their successors; in short, he classifies 
them as Sergi did, among the Mediterranean peoples, who, 
from Egypt to France and even as far as the British Isles, 
were related by close ties. On the other hand, I do not 
know on what facts Sir Harry Johnston bases his assertion 


1 Bertholon, Dr, Mole sur quatre crines humains trouvés par M. Debruge a 
Tebessa; no place of publication nor date, probably 1912.  Bertholon, in Dr 
Gobert’s paper, “ L’abri de Redeyef” (L’ Anthropologie, xxiii., 1912, p. 167). 

2 Bertholon, Dr, and Chantre, E., ‘“‘ Recherches anthropologiques dans la Berberie 
orientale,” Lyons, 1912. 

3 Elliot Smith, G., The Ancient Egyptians, London, 1911. 


AFRICAN HUMAN REMAINS 391 


that the valley of the Nile was populated, 20,000 to 30,000 
years ago, by men of the African pygmy type. 

To sum up, the main fact seems to be that Man really 
formed part of the mammalian fauna, and that he accompanied 
it during its distribution. It would appear that in the 
Pleistocene period, men of the white race, more or less akin to 
the Cro-Magnon in type, were already in possession of North 
Africa, which may perhaps have been their cradle, but that 
men of Negroid type, of true African origin, often pushed 
northwards, like their contemporary mammals, and may have 
succeeded in crossing the Mediterranean and landing on the 
shores at Mentone, taking with them their Capsian or Aurig- 
nacian industry. Of the precursors of these men, of the 
dressers of the Chellean stones, we know absolutely nothing. 

Many anthropologists, basing their arguments largely on 
linguistic grounds, have tried to unravel the peoples of Central 
and Southern Africa, and to discover the different ethno- 
graphical tides which here have succeeded each other. But 
the results are all somewhat uncertain, and do not bear on 
the problem of true Fossil Man, of whom we have only two 
evidences, and these of unequal value. 

Some months before War was declared, a number of 

The Oldoway German, English and French journalists 
Skull. announced the discovery of a very old human 
skeleton in the north-eastern region of German East Africa. 
Dr Hans Reck,! the discoverer, is a geologist-explorer from 
the Berlin Geological Institute. In the course of explorations 
carried out in the Oldoway Gorge, on the borders of the 
Seregenti plain, he found, together with many bone-remains 
of animals, an almost complete human skeleton lying in the 
midst of well-stratified volcanic tuffs at a depth of from 3 to 4 
metres. The skeleton and the mammal bone-remains lay in 
exactly the same circumstances ; like them it was enclosed in a 
tuff of such hardness and consistency that it was necessary to 
use hammer and chisel to free it. There could be no question 


’ Reck, Dr H., “Erste vorlaufige Mitteilung tiber den Fund eines fossilen 
Menschenskeletts aus Zentralafrica” (Sttzungsberichte der Gesellsch. naturforschender 
Freunde zu Berlin, 1914). 


392 FOSSIL MAN BEYOND EUROPE 


of a burial; the human bones are as old as the deposit which 
contained them. | 

The determination of the age of the skeleton is therefore 
simply a question for the geologist and the paleontologist. It 
does not appear that the mammals at the different levels of the 
fossil-bearing tuff differ from present-day African species. 
But, taking the deposit as a whole, differences in the fauna 
may be noted, and these correspond to differences in climate. 
The stratigraphical horizon which yielded the human skeleton, 
and where many bone-remains of the elephant, rhinoceros, 
hippopotamus, crocodiles, and fishes abounded, points to the 
existence of a wooded region, with a damp climate which might 
be regarded as contemporaneous with the last great Glacial 
Age in Europe. Dr Reck is convinced that this stratum 
dates from a geological period prior to that of the present 
geological era. 

As yet we have but few details regarding the characteristics 
of the skeleton. The skull would seem to be large, dolicho- 
cephalic, clearly of Negroid type. It was furnished with 
thirty-six teeth, several of which showed traces of filing 
similar to that still much practised by negroes at the present 
day. These are somewhat strange facts. We must await 
further and more detailed information in order to be able to 
judge of the antiquity of this discovery, and to determine, in 
consequence, its scientific value. 

In 1914 also, a friendly letter from Dr Péringuey, Director 

The Boskop of the Cape Museum, informed me of a 

Skull. discovery, made at Boskop in the Transvaal, 
of fragments of a human fossil skeleton, consisting of portions 
of the skull, of the lower jaw and of shafts of the long bones. 
This discovery was brought to the knowledge of the public 
through an article published in the English journal ature, 
on” 5th August <1915, ‘The author, FP. W.) )Pitesiiagees 
compared the Boskop skull-cap to that from Neanderthal. 
Examination of a cast, which Dr Péringuey was kind enough 
to send me, prevents me from adopting this opinion, which in 
any case was soon rejected by the naturalists of the South 
African Museum. In October 1915, one of these naturalists, 


AFRICAN HUMAN REMAINS 393 


Mr Haughton, communicated to the Royal Society of South 
Africa a paper on the subject, the text of which appeared 
in 1917." 

Unfortunately it is impossible to determine the age of the 


we 





FIG. 229.—Skull-cap from Boskop, seen in profile and from above. 
One-third natural size. (After Haughton.) 


Boskop human fragments. The bones, deeply impregnated 
with mineral matter, were found during the digging of a 
drainage trench in a field. The soil of the field merges 
gradually into a laterite? sub-soil containing no other fossils. 


1 Haughton, S. H., “ Preliminary Note on the Ancient Human Skull-Remains 
from the Transvaal” (Transactions of the Royal Society of South Africa, vi., 1917), 
followed by a note by Elliot Smith on the endocranial cast of the Boskop skull-cap. 

* For explanation of this word, see p. 357. 


394 FOSSIL MAN BEYOND EUROPE 


The exact bed of the skull-cap can no longer be definitely 
ascertained, and explorations subsequently carried out by the 
Cape Museum have yielded no bone-remains zz setu. Mr 
Haughton considers that the skull was found at a depth of 
about 4 feet 6 inches, but he does not know if this interment 
is due to natural causes or to human intervention. 

The brain-pan is remarkable for its flatness and great size 
(length, 205 millimetres; breadth, 154 millimetres). Its 
cephalic index is about 75. The total capacity of the whole 
skull is estimated at 1830 cubic centimetres, which is really 
enormous.’ 

According to Haughton, the Boskop skull-cap (Fig. 229) 
resembles in character the Cro-Magnon type: the form as a 
whole is pentagonal, with slight superciliary ridges, prominent 
glabella, straight forehead, the same kind of antero-posterior 
curve, and strong occipital prominence. From the Cro-Magnon 
type it differs mainly in possessing a depression, a kind of hollow, 
in the interparietal region, which I have noted on several negro » 
skulls in the Anthropological Gallery of the National Natural 
History Museum in Paris, especially in the Namaqua skull, 
well known to all specialists. 

The frontal bone is very narrow. The larger portion of 
the right temporal bone has been preserved; the mastoid 
apophysis is small but well separated; the petrus region is 
strongly developed ; the glenoid cavity is large and shallow; and 
there is a post-glenoid apophysis. The most striking feature 
of this bone is the marked development of the supra-mastoid 
crest. Here we have a simian structure, resembling that of 
Neanderthal Man, although, in its general form, the skull-cap 
may be compared to the Negroid, Bantou, and Cro-Magnon 
types. 

The Boskop find includes also the two horizontal rami of a 
lower jaw, unfortunately in a poor state of preservation. Their 
principal characters are their great strength, the presence of a 
slight chin and of small digastric fosse. Only one tooth is in 


1 According to the palzontologist, Broom, even these figures are too small: the 
skull should be 220 mm. in length, 160 mm. in breadth, 148 mm_ in height. 
Therefore Broom attributes it to a new species, which he calls Homo capensis 
(Anthropological Papers, American Museum, 1918). 


AFRICAN HUMAN REMAINS 395 


position, the second left true molar. Its crown is badly pre- 
served, so that it cannot be decided whether or not it possessed 
the posterior cusp characteristic of many primitive types. This 
jaw is already of the reduced dimensions which occur in 
modern Man; it is more highly evolved than the skull, and 
may be compared with that of the Bantous or of the Bushmen. 

Examination of the portions of shafts of long bones, which 
are deeply impregnated with a kind of laterite cement and 
which are much mutilated, yields no interesting results. 

Professor Elliot Smith has examined an intra-cranial cast. 
Its flattened shape and certain other characters suggest 
resemblances between the Boskop man and the Neanderthal 
type. But the appearance and great development of the 
frontal protuberances point to closer relationship with fossil 
men of the Upper Paleolithic in Europe, of whom the Boskop 
type might seem to be an immediate ancestor. 

Some pieces of sandstone, with sharp edges, found in the 
laterite in the vicinity of the human bones have been examined by 
Dr Péringuey. In spite of a few signs which seem to support 
the idea, no real trace of intentional working can be recognized. 

Here again we are confronted by an incomplete find, which, 
because of its incompleteness, it would be difficult, nay, rash, 
to interpret. If, as we may believe, the Boskop human 
remains are really Pleistocene, they reveal the existence in 
Africa of a generalized type, not lacking affinity with certain 
men of our own Paleolithic, but already quite definitely Negroid 
in character. At the same time they seem to furnish a new 
proof of the high antiquity of the human race, even in the 
countries it inhabits at the present day. 

Since the first French edition of this work appeared, some 
human remains have been found in the Broken Hill Cave in 
Rhodesia, Of these a skull, lacking its lower jaw, possesses 
morphological characters which are entirely different from 
those of any modern African type whatsoever, and which on 
the contrary bear an extraordinary resemblance to the skull 
characters of Homo neanderthalensis of our ancient European 
Paleolithic. It resembles the latter in its dimensions, and 
also in exhibiting orbital arches as prominent and a fore- 


396 FOSSIL MAN BEYOND EUROPE 


head even more bulging. This skull has been examined by 
‘Smith Woodward, who has named it H/omo rhodestensts. 
Unfortunately there are no data by which the age of these 
remains may be ascertained, and they themselves show no 
traces of fossilization. (For further details and illustrations, 
see Appendix, p. 481.) 


The Two Americas. 


The history of the New World begins only in the sixteenth 
century, but, on the other hand, it has an immense prehistory 
stretching far in time as well as in space. Apart from a few 
traditions, we find indications of it in monuments of all kinds 
distributed over vast areas. To the scientist, however, America 
still remains as great a mystery as it was at the time of 
the Conquistadores. In spite of considerable efforts, American 
anthropology, ethnography and archeology—which taken 
together now constitute a special group, Americanism—have 
not so far been able to elucidate any but minor points and 
matters of detail. None of the great problems they discuss 
has been definitely solved. 

Have we to deal with one or with several great American 
races? Were the populations of the New World before its 
discovery indigenous or immigrant? And if the latter, whence 
came they? Must we suppose that in America there existed 
one or several special centres of origin and evolution for a 
section of Mankind, or must we believe that the country was 
peopled from the Old World? If that be the case, at what 
period did this settlement take place ? 

I cannot here discuss these important problems, to the 
solution of which geology, paleontology, archeology, the 
study of language and ethnography must all lend their aid. 
The literature on these various branches of the subject already 
forms a bulky library. I shall touch only on such of it as 
deals with fossil Man, but I think it may be useful, as a pre- 
liminary, simply to enumerate a few theories which, without 
being actually established as fact, are shared by the majority 
of students of American history. 


THE TWO AMERICAS 397 


From the anthropological point of view, we may say that 
it is all but unanimously agreed that the prehistoric populations 
of America, that is those now known as the Amerindians, 
belonged to the main stem of the Yellow Races. And it would 
seem that all these peoples came from the Old World. But 
their distribution, which took place at such a remote period of 
time, over the whole extent of the two Americas, the physical, 
linguistic, and social differences they exhibit or which they 
previously exhibited, lead one to think that the stocking of the 
New Continent from the Old must necessarily date from a 
very remote period. 

Archeology teaches us indeed that the indigenous peoples, 
the Indians or Amerindians, who lived in such numbers 
in America at the beginning of the sixteenth century, must 
have descended from a long series of ancestors more or less 
distant, to whom all sorts of monuments must be attributed— 
the shell mounds and kitchen middens which are strewn upon 
the sea-shore everywhere, and sometimes occur even inland ; 
the earthworks, tumuli, and ramparts known as “ mounds,” 
scattered over all the great plains of the United States; the 
strange habitations of the ‘‘cliff-dwellers,”’ hollowed out or 
perched on the great steep cliffs of Colorado, Arizona, and 
New Mexico; the pueblos, stone or mud towns or villages of 
the same regions and also of Central America; the wealthy 
cities of Central America and of Peru rich in monuments.' 
The skulls and human skeletons exhumed from these various 
sources present the chief characters of the ‘‘Indians” of the 
same regions. | 

We now know that the general civilization of these 
Amerindians, which, if a comparison must be drawn, may be 
likened to that of our Neolithic (with many polished stone 
implements, finely dressed arrowheads, very varied pottery and 


1 For general works on the subject, see: Nadaillac, Marquis de, L’Amérigue 
préhistorigue, 1 vol. in 8vo, Paris, 1883. Cyrus Thomas, /atroduction to the Study 
of North-American Archeology, Cincinnati, 1898. Moorehead, W. K., Zhe Stone 
Age in North America, 1910. Beuchat, Manuel d@archéologie américaine, Paris, 1913. 
Joyce, South American Archeology, 1912; Mexican Archeology, 1914; Central 
American Archeology, 1916; Holmes, W. H., Handbook of aboriginal American 
Antiquities, Pt. 1 (Smiths. list. Bureau Amer, E-thn., Bull. 60, 1919). 


398 FOSSIL MAN BEYOND EUROPE 


an absence or scarcity of such metals as copper), lasted a very 
long time, for everywhere it has left behind countless traces ; 
and some shell-heaps and mounds are of such large size, or 
are found in such topographical circumstances, that they must 
date from a very ancient period, perchance from the end of 
Pleistocene times. 

Away beyond this period reigns the darkness of geological 
times. Here, as in the Old World, the question becomes a 
geological and paleontological problem, connected only with the 
natural sciences; thus it comes within the scope of this work. 

I cannot describe individually the great number of dis- 
coveries or finds brought forward to prove the existence of 
fossil Man in America. Many, indeed, are unworthy of note; 
I shall, therefore, describe only some of the most important, 
those which are worth discussing. 

It is curious to note that in 1840, even before it had been 
definitely settled in Europe, the question of the co-existence of 
Man with the large extinct animals, such as the Mastodon, 
had already been broached in the two Americas. 


North America. 


During Pleistocene times, North America curiously re- 
General sembled Europe. Glaciers, originating from 
Description. three main centres, the first in Labrador, the 
second to the west of Hudson Bay, and the third on the 
ridge of the Cordilleran Highland from Alaska in the north 
to Montana in the south, coalesced to form an immense 
continental ice-sheet, covering the whole of Canada and the 
north of the United States almost as far as lat. 37° N. The 
thickness of the ice varied in different regions, from 1200 to 
3000 metres. 

The Rocky Mountains, the Cascade Mountains, and the 
Sierra Nevada had also their own glaciers, the advanced 
moraines of which reached sometimes as far as the plains, just 
as in the case of the glaciers of the Alps or of the Pyrenees. 

In many places, the moraine formations alternated with 
deposits of different origin containing fossils. As in Europe, 


NORTH AMERICA; GENERALITIES 399 


so too in America several phases in the advance and with- 
drawal of the glaciers are to be observed ; according to different 
authors these phases varied in number from three to six. 

Thus Pleistocene times in America present a physical 
aspect akin to that in Europe. Does the same hold good in 
relation to the biological, and especially the human side? Let 
us note first of all that the fauna of large animals is very 
different in the two continents, except in the northern regions 
inhabited by circumpolar animals such as the Mammoth. 
Elsewhere, we meet with a Mastodon (Fig. 230), with several 





Fic. 230.—Skeleton of Azastodon amertcanus. Frankfurt Museum. 


genera of large Edentata, Megatherium, Megalonyx, and 
Mylodon from South America, and other mammals differing 
generically and specifically from European forms. These 
differences make it difficult to correlate the divisions of 
Quaternary times in European countries with those which 
American geologists and paleontologists have attempted to 
establish in their own country. 

As regards Man himself, discoveries put forward in support 
of his geological antiquity are very numerous. But many have 
no scientific value, and even with reference to those which 


400 FOSSIL MAN BEYOND EUROPE 


seem to have been found under the best conditions, opinion 
is far from being unanimous. At the present time in the 
United States there are several firm believers in the existence 

of American fossil Man, but 


a he has also many _ invincible 
; AY bs 

fi fl i it opponents. Let us examine the 
a ul principal material evidences. 






In the first place an attempt 
was made to establish the con- 
S temporaneity of Man with the 
“ . "a extinct animals. “The association 

Cae of axes and stone arrowheads 
NEC with the bones of more or less 
Nae eer complete skeletons of Mastodons 
‘ i ‘ or Elephants has been repeatedly 
recorded.’ The first observation 
of this kind dates from 1839. It 
was followed by several others, 
the value of which it is somewhat 
difficult to judge to-day. One 
of the latter, made by Clarke in 
1903, tendéd rather to prove 

that the Mastodon survived in 
Fie sat Flly Aneabea ford wie! America until the « dayaal 

a Pleistocene clay deposit in Kansas. modern times.” 

aoe Sri ent aR ne On several occasions human 

relics have been found inter- 
mingled with bones of AZega/onyx, particularly in the Big Bone 
Cavern in Tennessee. 

Professor Martin of Kansas University, exhuming skeletons 

of Bzson occrdentalts in a Quaternary deposit, collected a flint 


LL, 
a= 








“ AN 
vN) 


a 
\\ 
» cy he NM 





‘ a ip ae S \\ 


1 See Wilson, Th., “La haute ancienneté de ’Homme dans lAmérique ‘du 
Nord” (L’ Anthropologie, xii., 1901). Osborn, The Age of Mammals, 1910, p. 495. 

* This fact seems also to be confirmed, on the one hand, by the stratigraphical 
study of the deposits, often very superficial, where these bones are found, and on 
the other hand, by representations of this Proboscidian (confused with the Mammoth) 
on two engraved objects, one of which was found in Delaware, the other in 
Pennsylvania. The former is a fragment of a shell of /ulgur,; the other is a 
kind of stone pendant (Lenape Stone). It is true, however, that the authenticity 
of these engravings is not admitted by all archzologists. 


NORTH AMERICA; ARCHAOLOGICAL 401 


arrowhead (Fig. 231) which lay under and in contact with 
the right shoulder blade of one of these skeletons. According 
to the paleontologist Williston,’ this find proved that Man 
was contemporary with an extinct species of Bison. 

Now we turn to archeological evidence. Beside innumer- 
Archeological able stone objects: of Indian manufacture, 
Observations. strewn all over the surface of the soil of the 

United States, there are some objects of ruder manufacture 
and more ancient appearance, which are much more like the 
most ancient Paleolithic implements of the Old World. At 
first it was thought that they were of the same antiquity. 
Wilson* was convinced of the truth of this theory, basing his 
belief on an important collection of objects of this nature 
which he had gathered together at the Smithsonian Institution. 
The geologist Winchell*® recently came to the same conclusion 
after studying the ‘‘palaoliths” from Kansas, which he 
regards as belonging to four successive periods, two of which 
were Paleolithic. These distinctions he bases mainly on his 
study of the patina. | 

It must be admitted that discoveries of implements in 
the depths of geological layers would be more conclusive. 
Evidences of this sort do, indeed, exist, but they have been 
hotly disputed. 

There are, in the first place, mortars, pestles and other 
objects, found at a certain period in the auriferous gravels 
of California, about which much has been written. The true 
origin of these objects is so doubtful, the conditions of their 
deposit are so obscure, and they so exactly resemble the 
industrial products of present-day Indians, that American 
anthropologists are now all but unanimous in denying their 
high antiquity. 

Dressed stones have been found in various formations 
clearly of Pleistocene Age, such as the ancient alluvials of 
Mexico, the deposits of the ancient Lake Lahontan in Nevada, 

1 American Geologist, xxx., 1902, and Congrés des Américanistes, 1902. 

2 Wilson, Th., “La période paléolithique dans Amérique du Nord” (Congres 
intern. a Arch. et d Anthrop., Paris meeting, 1889). 

3 Winchell, N. H., 7d¢d., Geneva meeting, i1., p. 365, and Minnesota Historical 
Society, xvi., 1913. 
2C 


402 FOSSIL MAN BEYOND EUROPE 


the gravels or silts of Minnesota, Indiana, New Hampshire, 
Ohio, New Jersey and elsewhere; but the value of all these 
finds has been disputed, and it seems evident that the majority 
of them are very open to criticism. I do no more than 
mention them here.’ 

But there is a deposit of the same kind, at Trenton in New 

The Trenton Jersey, upon which we must dwell at greater 

Alluvials. length, for it has been and still is the subject 
of great discussion. In the year 1875, Dr Charles Abbott? 
collected, in the ancient alluvial deposits of the Delaware River, 
stone implements (quartzite and argillite) rudely worked in forms 
often similar to those of European Paleolithic flints. Soon 
afterwards he described this ‘‘ Primitive Industry,” attributing 
to it a very high antiquity. The Trenton gravels have been 
formed by the re-sorting of the moraines of the last glacial 
extension; they contain bones of fossil mammals; and they 
are therefore undoubtedly Pleistocene. The presence of 
dressed stones in the depths of these alluvial deposits proves 
the reality of the existence of an American Palzolithic Man. 
This result at which Abbott arrived seemed conclusive, and it 
was at first generally accepted. 

About 1890, a strong reaction in opinion became evident. 
Certain ethnographers of repute in the United States, Holmes, 
Brinton, and MacGee, declared that the supposed implements 
of Paleolithic Man, including those from Trenton, were only 
discarded products of manufacture, identical with those found 
in enormous heaps around old quarries worked by the Indians. 
They thus denied, at one and the same time, the antiquity of 
the dressed stones, and both the antiquity and the authenticity 
of the deposit in which they were found.® 

In 1893, two years after an expedition which I had the 
pleasure of making with Abbott and Wilson to the ballast pits at 


1 Wright, F., The Ice Age in North America, New York, 1889 (Supplement to 
the 3rd ed. 1891) ; Man and the Glacial Period, New York, 1912. . 

2 Abbott, C. C., The Stone Age in New Jersey, 1877; Primitive Industry, 
18381, etc. 

3 MacGee, W. J., “Paleolithic Man in America” (Popular Science Monthly, 
1888). Holmes, M. H., “Are there Traces of Man in the Trenton Gravels?” 
( Journal of Geology, 1893) ; Sctence, 1892, 1893, passim. 


NORTH AMERICA; ARCHAHOLOGICAL 403 


Trenton, I considered it advisable to publish the reasons which 
led me to believe in the authenticity and antiquity of the imple- 
ments of Paleolithic form collected by Abbott himself in the 
Trenton gravels. It seemed to me at that time that Abbott’s 
case somewhat resembled that of Boucher de Perthes.' 


















3 


¢ 
. 



















: 


| 


———S>= 


l 


cd 





\) 
r 


lt 


‘i Met Ne 
TIL 
fyi) yee n 


LEP 






Fic. 232.—Front and Side View of an Implement of Argillite found in the Trenton 
Alluvials, 2 metres below the surface. Natural size. (After Wilson.) 


Opposition was renewed more strongly than ever, so much 
so that in 1897 the geologist Chamberlin, playing the contrary 
part of Elie de Beaumont, went so far as to say that the 
existence of Paleolithic Man on American soil was not 
worthy of the honour of a discussion. 

But Abbott’s theory was supported by certain loyal 
partisans, first among whom must be ranked the late 
F. W. Putnam, Director of the Peabody Museum, Cambridge.’ 


1 Boule, M., “L’Homme paléolithique dans vAmérique du Nord” (L’Anthropo- 


logie, iv., 1893). 
2 Putnam, F. W., Numerous articles in his Reports as Curator of the Peabody 


Museum of Harvard University, 1876 to IgIo. 


404 FOSSIL MAN BEYOND EUROPE 


Interested from the first in Abbott’s researches, he com- 
missioned one of his fellow-workers, Mr Volk, to make 
observations and excavations, which were carried out during a 
period extending over twenty-two years, and the results of 
which have been published in a large volume which appeared 
in 1911.1. Abbott himself published a work summarizing the 
results of ten years’ work in the deposit.2. The two 
observers, independently of each other, arrive at practically 
the same conclusions, less simple than those first broached, but 
nevertheless explicit. 

The later geological formations of the Delaware valley are 
of three kinds :— 

1. A superficial black deposit or vegetable soil (d¢ack soz?), 
containing very abundant traces of the Neolithic culture of 
the Lenape Indians. 

2. This black earth covers a yellow deposit (yellow drtft), 
clayey and sandy in character, containing dressed quartzites and 
particularly dressed argillites, characteristic of this level, which 
corresponds to a pre-Lendfian culture, more primitive than 
that of the Lenape Indians. The peoples associated with 
these remains may already have been Indians, but they had 
no polished axes and they probably had no knowledge of the 
art of pottery. They must have been related to the Paleolithic 
Man of the gravels rather than to the Lenape Man of the 
surface soil. 

3. Below the “yellow drift” come the true and much- 
discussed “Trenton Gravels,”’ of fluvio-glacial origin and 
Pleistocene age. Here, and here only, are to be found not 
argillites alone, but also quartz and quartzites of very rude 
manufacture, manufacture so rude as to be in itself open to 
question, although the presence of these objects z sz¢tu can 
no longer be matter for doubt. Abbott gives the name 
Flomo delawarensis to the fossil man who manufactured these 
implements found in the Trenton gravels. 

The question of American Palzolithic Man cannot be cut 


* Volk, E., “‘ The Archzology of the Delaware Valley” (Papers of Peabody Museum, 
v., 1910), Cambridge, 1911. With bibliography. 
2 Abbott, C. C., “Ten years Diggings in Lenape Land,” Trenton, 1912. 


NORTH AMERICA; HUMAN REMAINS 405 


short by a blunt dismissal of the problem, for even if the 
artificial character of the quartzites in the gravels be not 
admitted, it is evident that the second deposit, with argillite 
implements and bones of the Musk-ox, dates at least from 
the end of the Pleistocene period. The only argument of 
any importance that can be brought against it, and it is only 
of indirect significance, is that the American caves, which 
are at once so rich in fossil animals and at the same time in 
Indian relics, have not yet yielded any trace of a true Paleolithic 
industry. This fact, however, may be explained in several 
ways. It forms but a negative argument, and a hundred 
reasons of this kind are not worth one positive fact like the 
Trenton finds. 
Before touching on the discoveries of human bone remains, 
Imprints of there must be mentioned the imprints of human 
Human Steps. steps, first seen at Carson in Nevada, and 
then near Lake Managua in Nicaragua. In the former locality 
the tracks were simply those of large Edentates; in the 
second the imprints would seem to have been left by feet 
shod in moccasins. This is all the more curious because the 
volcanic tuff on which these footprints were made, bears a 
layer of clay containing the bones of Mastodons.* 
Examination of the bone-remains is a difficult and compli- 
Osteological cated task, in the elucidation of which the 
Evidence. general studies of MHrdlitka’® will be of 
special assistance. This anthropologist has devoted himself 
to the re-examination of all the discoveries. None of them 
has been spared his criticism; in some cases it is the deposit 
which is questioned, sometimes the bones themselves are 
obviously modern; often the evidence is unsatisfactory in 
every respect. 
As regards the oldest discoveries, I shall do no more than 
simply remind the reader of their existence, for to us they 


1 Flint, Dr, in Putnam’s Report Peabody Museum, 1883 ; Science, 7th March 1884. 

2 Hrdlicka, A., “ Skeletal Remains suggesting or attributed to Early Man in North 
America” (Smithsonian Institution. Bureau of American Ethnology, Bull. 33), 
Washington, 1907. ‘“‘ Recent Discoveries attributed to Early Manin America” (/ézd., 
Bull. 66), Washington, 1918. These works contain the history and complete 
bibliography of each discovery. 


406 FOSSIL MAN BEYOND EUROPE 


are lost evidence, since it is now impossible to estimate their — 
value with full knowledge of the facts. Such, for instance, 
is the human skeleton from New Orleans (1884); the iliac 
bone from Natchez (Mississippi), which came from a deposit 
containing bones of Pleistocene animals, but which the dis- 
tinguished English geologist, Lyell, after examining it zx sztu, 
attributed to an Indian burial. The same thing applies to 
a skeleton found by miners at a depth of 22 feet at Soda 
Creek in Colorado; to a few human bones exhumed at 
Charleston in South Carolina; to a skull found in a crevice 
filled with earth and pebbles at Rock Bluff in Illinois, and 
so on. The circumstances connected with the famous skull 
from Calaveras are equally unfavourable (see p. 123). 

Other discoveries deserve more attention. 

There is first the series of bone remains collected at 
Trenton between 1879 and 1899, by Abbott 
and Volk. In 1891 I examined some of these 
relics at the Peabody Museum, A fragment of a right 
mandible (No. 33327), ‘found in the gravels at a depth of 
16 feet,” and water-worn in appearance, impressed me favour- 
ably, but a skull (No. 14635) labelled from the ‘‘Gas Work,” 
seemed to me to be quite modern. Hrdlitka indeed attributes 
it to an [ndian. 

There are two other skulls. The first, described as from 
Burlington County, was accidentally found in a field, and seems 
to have come from a superficial alluvial deposit. The second, 
labelled ‘‘ from Riverview Cemetery,” was recovered by a grave- 
digger at a depth of 3 feet, in a part of the cemetery still 
unused, The circumstances of the discovery are, to say the 
least of it, unsatisfactory. Now, these two skulls are equally 
remarkable from a morphological point of view. Not large, 
much depressed, with narrow face and large orbits, they 
indicate a human race very different from the Indians. 
Hrdlitka has shown that they closely resemble the ‘“‘ Batavian” 
skulls described by various German authors, which have — 
sometimes been compared with Neanderthal skulls; he does 
not hesitate to ascribe them to two old immigrants of Dutch 
origin. 


Trenton. Penon. 


NORTH AMERICA; HUMAN REMAINS 407 


In 1899, Volk himself took from the gravels a human 
parietal bone and a femur. If these bones are really con- 
temporary with the gravel, as Volk affirms, they must belong 
to the dresser of the quartzites ; they do not, however, present 
any noteworthy structural features. 

In 1884, a piece of skull and some other fragments of 
a skeleton were found in a calcareous tufa at Pefion, a valley 
in Mexico. By some this tufa is looked upon as of Pleistocene 
date, while to others it appears to have been recently formed 
by the hot springs which rise in the neighbourhood. 

In 1902, there were discovered at Lansing, in Kansas, the 

The “Loess skeleton of an adult man and the jawbone of 

Men.” a child, lying in a silt 20 feet below the 
surface of the soil. The locality has been examined by many 
expert geologists, some of whom regard the silt as a true 
Pleistocene Zoess ; others consider it of recent formation due to 
the flooding of the neighbouring river. The bones are, more- 
over, identical with those of modern Indians in this part of the 
United States. 

In 1894 and 1906, an earth mound at Omaha in Nebraska 
also yielded numerous human bones. The discoveries of the 
latter year, much the most important, comprise the remains 
of a dozen individuals. They have been examined by the 
originator of the excavations, Mr Gilder, and by various 
scientists, including Barbour the geologist, Osborn the 
paleontologist, and Hrdli¢ka the anthropologist. The bones 
are derived from different levels, ranging from 0.80 to 2 metres 
in depth. According to Professor Barbour those from the 
upper level belong to a burial, but the others must be as old 
as the mud in which they were embedded. ‘They represent 
‘Loess men.” 

Hrdlitka combated these conclusions. The conditions of 
the deposition of the skeletons, several of which retained their 
anatomical relations, indicated burials. At all the levels the 
bones showed the same coloration, consistency, and surface 
scratches. None present the slightest trace of fossilization. 
All exhibit, and at the same spots, incisions denoting certain 
funeral rites, such as have been found on similar specimens 


408 FOSSIL MAN BEYOND EUROPE 


from the tumuli in the region. It is true that certain skulls 
have somewhat unusual characters: great thickness of the . 
bones, strong orbital arches, and low and receding foreheads, 
features which have caused them to be compared, mistakenly 
however, to the Neanderthal and Pithecanthropus skulls. 
These characteristics certainly led to their being regarded as 
of very high antiquity. But Hrdlitka has shown that such 
skulls are fairly frequent in the mounds or tumuli of the region, 
and that in all the remaining features of their morphology the 
Omaha skulls are the skulls of Indians. 

At Rancho la Brea, near Los Angeles in California, there 
is a curious bed of Quaternary animals, 
probably the richest in the United States. 
This deposit is formed of beds of asphalt, pure or mixed with 
alluvial products. For several years, Professor Merriam, of the 
University of California, made in that spot rich paleontological 
collections of the skeletons of animals of extinct species, 
especially of Szzlodon (an animal akin to our Sabre-toothed 
Tiger, MJachatrodus), skeletons of which are found there in 
thousands. 

In 1914, the American newspapers made a great fuss about 
the discovery of a human skeleton in the asphalt deposits at 
Rancho la Brea. The news caused a lively sensation, for a 
human skeleton, contemporary with Swez/odon and_ other 
extinct mammals, seemed to be a relic of the first importance, 
capable of throwing much light on the still much-disputed — 
question of fossil Man in America. But soon after, a paper 
by Professor Merriam focussed the matter in its true light. 
Once more scientists were faced by a fact without satisfactory 
geological backing. Owing to the viscosity of the asphalt, 
layers of this material cannot really be accurately placed from 
a stratigraphical point of view. The human remains were 
found at a depth of -between 2 and 3 metres, in a sort 
of chimney filled with asphalt, originating from a great 
subterranean mass of the same substance, and opening upon 
the surface. Such infiltrations of cavities or of spaces, in the 
upper layers of the detritus of the region, may have happened 
at various periods, and may date from very different ages. 


Rancho la Brea. 


NORTH AMERICA; HUMAN REMAINS 409 


From the palzontological point of view, the facts are just 
-as unsatisfactory. The numerous animal remains, found at 
the same time as the human bones, do not belong to the now 
classic Pleistocene fauna of Rancho la Brea, but to the 
Californian fauna of the present day. From the anthropo- 
logical point of view, the high antiquity of the skeleton is not 
confirmed, for it does not differ from skeletons of Indians from 
Southern California. In this instance again, therefore, there 
can be no question of a fossil Man of the Pleistocene period. 

Finally, the most recent discovery, announced in 1916, and 

Discoveries in still much discussed, was that at Vero, in 

Florida. Florida. 

This is not the first time that the presence of fossil Man 
in Florida has been canvassed. A whole series of finds of 
human bone-remains were made, from 1852 to 1886, on the 
shores of Lake Monroe, and on the west coast of the peninsula, 
to the south of Sarasota, particularly in the neighbourhood of 
the little town of Osprey. 

The majority of these bone-remains were embedded in a 
hard rock, a kind of ferruginous sandstone, rich in limonite ; 
and chemical analysis indicates that they are deeply im- 
pregnated with mineral matter. But the geologist Vaughan 
has shown that, in spite of their appearance, the fossil-bearing 
deposits are post-Pleistocene, that the special conditions of 
fossilization are of no significance in this case, for they are due 
to the action of numerous iron springs, which consolidate 
recent sands and rapidly petrify all kinds of objects, particularly 
Indian pottery. Further, the bones, examined by Hrdlitka, do 
not differ from those of the Indians. 

_ The latest discovery, made by the State geologist Sellards 
at Vero on the east coast, has formed the subject of numerous 
reports by the most qualified specialists in the United 
States. 

The subsoil of the town and neighbourhood of Vero 
is composed from below upwards of the following com- 
ponents :— 

(1) Marls of marine origin, containing Pleistocene shells. 
These marls bear: (2) a marly sand, of river origin, with plant 


410 FOSSIL MAN BEYOND EUROPE 


remains and bones of Pleistocene terrestrial animals, notably 
of an Elephant (Z~ephas colomb:). Above comes (3) a super- 
ficial layer, likewise alluvial, but richer in organic matter 
(humus) and clearly separated from the two preceding ones. 
In excavating an irrigation canal through all these layers, the 
bone-remains of two human skeletons were discovered, at a 
depth of 0.80 metres, in the middle layer and at the base of the 
upper layer. The middle layer also yielded a blade of flint and 
some bones which seemed to be worked. The upper superficial 
layer is rich in shards of pottery, and in objects worked in 
bone or stone. According to Dr Sellards, the contemporaneity 
of Man and a Pleistocene fauna in Florida is definitely estab- 
lished by these discoveries. The paleontologist Hay entirely 
agrees with this opinion, while other specialists combat it more 
or less energetically. 

Of the geologists, Vaughan believes that the superficial 
layer is of recent age, and that the human remains of the 
middle layer have not been found zz sztu. Chamberlin at first 
thought the animal bone-remains of layers two and three had 
been re-sorted, and that they came from more ancient deposits. 
Later, he came to adopt the opinion of Berry, who classifies 
the fossil plants as Upper Pleistocene, while the animal remains 
seem to be more ancient. ‘This difference is readily explained 
by the fact of the later survival in Florida than in the northern 
countries, of the fauna comprising the large Pleistocene 
animals. Layers (2) and (3) may, then, be much less 
ancient than Sellards considers them, but Man may quite 
well have been contemporary with their deposition. MacCurdy 
seems to support the same explanation, the archeological 
relics having no character which may be regarded as definitely 
archaic. 

Hrdlitka is an uncompromising opponent of Sellards’ view. 
He does not believe in the antiquity of the human bones. 
Chemical analysis shows that they are still rich in organic 
matter; the conditions of the deposit support the theory 
of burial far better than any other theory; and in their 
anatomical characters, the bones do not differ from the 
bones of Indians. Hrdlitka admits, however, that they may 


NORTH AMERICA; CONCLUSION 411 


date from the early times of the Indian occupation of 
Florida. 

Such is the picture, almost complete, though somewhat 
summary, of the facts brought forward in 
support of the existence of Fossil Man in 
North America. As we have just seen, according to certain 
scientists the matter is proved, from the anthropological as 
well as from the archeological point of view. According 
to others, not one of the facts adduced can be regarded 
as conclusive: all the osteological or archeological material 
must be attributed to the indigenous populations before the 
Conquest. 

It is difficult for an outsider to take a firm stand on one 
side or the other, for he can only exercise his judgment on 
facts collated by others. It seems, however, that an opinion at 
least intermediate, if not actually capable of reconciling the 
conflicting views, may be based upon the mass of positive facts 
acquired up to date. Certainly, the opponents of the theory of 
the high geological antiquity of man in America have not 
found it difficult to show that much of the evidence appealed 
to is incapable of withstanding criticism, and has no scientific 
sanction; but there are other evidences which, so far, can 
hardly be disputed, unless by pure negation or a przort reason- 
ing. Thus Hrdlitka starts from the principle that, according 
to the laws governing the general evolution of mammals, fossil 
man must differ from living man. Without absolutely con- 
demning this view of the matter, it may be said that the 
absolute denial of the geological antiquity of human bone- 
remains because they resemble similar bone-remains of Indians, 
is going much too far; for such an assertion simply begs the 
question, and to give prime importance to this argument 
results in negation pure and simple. 

It would seem that the radical difference in opinion arises 
partly from a misunderstanding. It is not necessary that 
man or any other creature, in order to be regarded as fossil, 
should no longer be represented in living nature. This fact, 
indeed, is certain, that not the least trace of a man differing 
structurally from modern man has been found in America, 


Conclusion. 


412 FOSSIL MAN BEYOND EUROPE 


and yet this should not surprise paleontologists, who know 
well that America is not the land of origin of the higher 
Primates; but the resemblance of the old skeletons already 
discovered to the skeletons of Indians, does not prove that 
these old skeletons date from recent or Holocene times. If, 
in general, American Man presents a certain combination of 
common physical characters, this community must date. far 
back into the past; and admitting that America was populated 
by migrations, mainly if not entirely from the great stem 
of the Yellow Races, the importance and extent of these 
migrations, the settling and differentiation of the populations 
over the whole surface of the two Americas, must have 
required a great lapse of time. Now, it certainly appears 
that the dressed stones from Trenton and other localities 
witness to the existence of Man in America before the dawn 
of modern geological times. On the other hand, among all 
the discoveries of human bones, some have been discovered 
with well-founded guarantees of authenticity and high antiquity. 
It becomes a question of determining this antiquity, and here 
the extreme camps might come nearer agreement. Among 
all the relics, dressed stones or bone-remains, not one seems 
to me to date very far back in the Pleistocene. The impression 
forces itself upon one that the best of them can be referred 
only to a closing period in this epoch, something like our 
Upper Paleolithic, or like our transition period between 
Paleolithic and Neolithic. On this hypothesis, everything 
might be satisfactorily explained. The mass. immigrations, 
starting from Asia, could not take place while the ice-sheets 
covered the greater part of North America. They could 
have been possible only during an inter-glacial period, and 
more probably after the definite retreat of the glaciers. As 
soon as the ways were open, following on this event, Man was 
able to use them to invade step by step the American continent, 
where, for more than a million years, no animal of the Primate 
group had lived. In the present state of our knowledge, 
this explanation of the problem of the antiquity of Man in 
America seems to me the most rational. But we must not 
disguise the fact that this solution is very uncertain. 


SOUTH AMERICA 413 


South America. 


South America, with its very ancient central massif or 
General Brazilian plateau, with its immense river basins, 

Remarks. with the Cordillera mountain range gooo kilo- 
metres long, beaconed and crowned by enormous active 
volcanoes, forms, from the physical point of view, a very 
special and highly autonomous continental unit. 

This autonomy is no less marked from the point of view 
of living things. South America constitutes one of the chief 
biogeographical divisions of the globe, the Neo-tropical 
Region. Its virgin forests and grassy plains show special 
plant associations extended over vast areas; it has also its 
particular forms of insects, fishes, and reptiles; it is the 
home of a multitude of birds of gorgeous plumage, such as 
the humming-bird, parrots, cock-of-the-rock, and so on. It 
is the almost exclusive home of the marmosets, of monkeys 
with prehensile tails, vampire bats, opossums, peccaries, 
llamas, and particularly of the edentates—ant-eaters, sloths, 
and armadilloes. 

This special feature is a legacy from the past, a fact 
which we see confirmed when we retrace our steps through 
the geological ages. During Quaternary and Tertiary times, 
there were, besides enormous edentates such as MMegatherium 
(Fig. 233), WZylodon, and Glyptodon (Fig. 234), so amazing 
to the early paleontologists but in reality only giant forms 
of modern sloths! and armadilloes, a crowd of other mammals, 
so different from those of the northern hemisphere that special 
orders had to be created for them; such are 7yfotherium, 
Toxodon, Macrauchenta, and still earlier, Astrapotherium, 
Pyrothertum and others. On the other hand, there has never 
been found in the rich Tertiary fossil-bearing beds of Patagonia, 
the least trace of animals which could be likened to our 
proboscidians, artiodactyls, perissodactyles, placentary car- 


1 It was the great French scientist, Cuvier, who recognized the true nature of 
Megatherium on examining a skeleton sent to Madrid in 1789. The King of Spain, 
Charles III., then ordered officials in the colony to send him one of these animals 
alive or at least stuffed. It goes without saying that the royal command was 
unfulfilled ! 


414 FOSSIL MAN BEYOND EUROPE 


nivores and higher monkeys. Towards the end, during 
Pliocene and Pleistocene times, there were, however, mastodons, 
tapirs, horses, deer, and large felines, but these were not 
native animals; they had come from elsewhere, mainly from 
North America. Albert Gaudry was able to state that, after 
the beginning of the Tertiary era, the evolution of mammals 
did not proceed in these regions as in the northern hemisphere. 

This is a fact of considerable importance from the point 
of view of the paleontological history of Man. Since South 





FIG. 233.—Skeleton of Megatherium. Actual height 3-60 metres. Palzeontological 
Gallery, French National Natural History Museum. 


America has always lacked highly developed Primates and 
higher monkeys, we cannot expect to discover in this continent 
representatives of early Man or of his immediate ancestors. 
We shall see, however, that a naturalist of great merit, 
Ameghino, adopting exactly the opposite view, constructed a 
whole system of human genealogy. | 

South America was never buried beneath Quaternary 
ice-sheets. Even in the southern part of the continent they 
remained localized in the chain of the Andes or in the 





SOUTH AMERICA 415 


neighbouring regions. But the great climatic changes of the 
later geological periods have, none the less, played their part 
and left well-marked traces. First, there originated from the 
breaking down of the Cordillera range and spread out around 
the base of the range, great deposits laid down by glacial 
rivers and torrents. These gradually merge into formations 
which cover all the low portions of the continent with an 
immense coat of detritus: sands, clays, silts and so on, 
produced sometimes by streams, sometimes by the rush waters 
of floods, sometimes by the aerial transport of volcanic cinders, 
or by temporary encroachments of the sea, and often by the 
combined action of these different factors. 





FIG. 234.—Skeleton of Glypftodon. Actual length 2-90 metres. Palzeontological 
Gallery, French National Natural History Museum. 


The formations to which belong the Pampas deposits, very 

The Pampas Similar to our silts or loess, are of special 

Formations. interest to us since they have yielded the 
majority of the anthropological discoveries of which I must 
give an outline. 

All these deposits are rich in fossils. Unfortunately, 
because of differences in the faunas, which have in this region 
a special character of their own, it is difficult to establish any 
time correlations or synchronisms with North America, and 
still more difficult with Europe. Palzontologists were at first 
deeply impressed by the curious character and giant forms of 
the fossil animals discovered in the superficial deposits of 
South America, and, through remote analogy with Europe, 
they were led to regard these deposits as very ancient. This 
was the line followed by the Argentine scientist Ameghino. 


A16 FOSSIL MAN BEYOND EUROPE 


Nowadays the tendency is rather to regard them as more 
recent, and this is consistent with purely geological data. 
Many curious fossil beasts from the subsoil of the Pampas 
may have lived up to a period relatively not far distant from 
our own times. In the case of some of them this seems even 
to have been proved, as we shall see directly. 

The Pampas formations were at first regarded as a unit 
mass. Then an attempt was made to divide them, based on 
the one hand on their physical characters, and on the other, on 
their paleontological content. The division was carried to 
excess by Ameghino, who distinguished a dozen stages. But 
certain good geologists, like Roth, Steinmann, Burckhardt, 
Bailey Willis, far from following this example, only make a 
small number of divisions in the thickness of the Pampas 
formations. 

The early observers, d’Orbigny and Darwin, regarded 
these deposits as of recent formation. Ameghino dated them 
from much more remote times, regarding the oldest as belonging 
to the Miocene. At the present day, geologists and paleon- 
tologists seem to be agreed in regarding them as a complex, 
ranging from the Pliocene to the present period. Thus the 
superficial deposits of the Pampas may be divided into four 
stages, the characters of which are indicated below.’ 


HOLOCENE or RECENT . : : . : : Post-Pampean. 

PLEISTOCENE. . ©. |. , «. Pampeanl EPSh Cotmaage 
ower, Lnsenadean. 

PLIOCENE : : é . LPre-Pampean or Sermosean, 


Below these are to be found in Patagonia more ancient 
formations belonging to Miocene and Oligocene times. 

The Hermosean, readily seen at Monte Hermoso, near the 
Bay of Bahia Blanca, is sometimes referred to the Pampean as 
Lower Pampean or Pre-Pampean. It is formed of sandy or 
clayey layers of a ginger-bread-brown colour and of volcanic 
ashes. Ameghino regarded it as Miocene; most geologists 
attribute it to the Pliocene. 


1 The bibliography is large and too special to be given here. I simply recommend 
to anthropologists the clear summary to be found in a charming little book by Outes 
and Bruch, Los Aborigenes de la Republica Argentina, Buenos Aires, 1910. 


SOUTH AMERICA 417 


The true Pampas or Pampean deposit is superimposed upon 
the Hermosean, and almost everywhere forms the covering of the 
Argentine plain. It is essentially of sub-aerial origin, is warm 
brown in colour, and represents, with its calcareous concretions 
(¢osca), a formation similar to our loess; but occasionally there 
are to be observed fresh-water deposits, beds of volcanic ash, 
and, towards the shore, intercalated beds of marine sediments. 
It may be fairly easily divided into two stages. 


POST- PAMPEAN foie 
/a Pla “age! 






Rie se Tee ee 
Ce sr ees 
Ce Oa Sac tie a en Se Ye ea Se 
ere Gree se ee Ses. 6 es) eRe 16) eo is) 8. Oe se 8 ee OO Qt eo eee 
Tee [Op 0) a 8 tens. atlas sh oi hie Pie. G6) fe a? Wile cet 6: wis. 6: Tee) 0 
MO OD Oe Ce te 0 ee Oe a ee ee a ot a Ye On gee Sd Pe Th TL | 


ee) a 
Pe eee een 8) Soe le eS Sue © 6 Se ey 6 ee. lee 
eee a ee 6p ee a 6 6 ee iene eon © 6 @ 5S © areWuwws « 6 ¢ 8 © 6 6 © 8 @ we wn @ © 


gi CT Wa ee ee ne 

Ree wae ee ee cee Se ere see eee ela ©) es 16, 266 Meee es 2.8 8 S80 eine Ss Ss eee = 1° a ae e See s,s 6 6 16, 8)h° 
eee aha ieee ss 16, © oe a 616 fe im 860 elie) gS 6. 8.6) wie eam ee Bok we 2) oe me le eg eS wm Og ee ew 6 ee 6 Sy 

aes ees ee ee te Kee (0) 6 (eC (ele U9 ra Ne ie ee 8 Ole ke #6 6 be 8S 6) 6 Ser C6 b).e) ists. 0) 8 9 16 lee © © eee 6 ge 28 Sore ee 
ee are eis vee ee ea Ue ee 6) 8) Cane CO ee 60 8 Ones 6 Bue. 61S) CG ees ee 8 ss 6 8S kes ee ee ee ee me le OL ee 


ee cee eae eel viet ae Pe a) eT eee ee) 1@) 6 6s Ke SS OTe re ee Nee oS 6 Le Wee) ae 6 et pe, ese 8) eel oe Een Ue eee 6 8 


awh whe we alta Sale aeles diiat eis) 6b O26 (ev ella 6 4e 16 le 8 Sa oR 1856) (0) Cle tee © 6 6 € 0 6 & She 6) OL 8 6 Che 8 6 oye ae 88 


=== Lake deposits c0000 Marine deposits 








FIG. 235.—Diagrammatic Section of the Pampas Formations between Buenos Aires and 
La Plata. (After Outes and Bruch.) 


The lower stage, or Axsenadean, is formed of plastic clays, 
compact, light brown in colour, containing calcareous con- 
cretions with concentric layers or branched. It is from 15 to 
20 metres deep in the region of La Plata. 

The upper or Lonarean stage is formed by a less compact 
unstratified clay, a true air-borne loess, of yellow colour, 
containing concretions of fantastic shapes (‘fairy stones” 

‘“poupées”). This portion of the Pampas formations is 
most easily observed, as it crops up everywhere from under 
the humus. It, likewise, sometimes attains a depth of 20 
metres. 

Above the Bonarean at certain points are to be seen certain 
deposits which Ameghino regarded as still Pleistocene, but 
which may be correlated with the European Holocene, for they 
really represent modern times. They are sedimentary, grey in 
colour, formed in depressions of the soil, chiefly on the banks 
of water-courses. Some deposits show signs of slight en- 
croachments of the sea; and there are also coastal dunes. 

Paleontology shows an imperceptible transition between the 


different stratigraphic series, from the Pliocene fauna of the 
2D 


418 FOSSIL MAN BEYOND EUROPE 


Hermosean to the exclusively modern fauna of the Post- 
Pampean. 

After these general statements, we may now enter upon our 
main subject; and continuing the method I have hitherto 
followed, I will first examine the archeological discoveries and 
then the discoveries of human bone-remains. 

The whole of South America is rich in archeological relics. 

Archeological From the Antilles to Cape Horn, it is covered 

Evidences, with ancient monuments, more or less imposing 
in character, or strewn with objects of all kinds indicating a 
long period of human occupation. Here, as in North America, 
it is very difficult to separate what relates to the native tribes 
at the time of the Conquest from what belongs to their distant 
ancestors. 

Certain human settlements, however, seem to date from 
fairly far back in the past. Shell mounds and kitchen middens 
are numerous, both on the shores of the Pacific, in Chili? and 
Peru, and in Guiana, Brazil, the Argentine Republic, and 
Patagonia as far as Tierra del Fuego. In this region, where 
the present day natives are still in process of forming them, 
the shell mounds have been examined by Lovisato.” They are 
sometimes of considerable size (more than a kilometre in 
length); the shells they contain are stronger than those of the 
same species of living molluscs; and it would seem that since 
these mounds were formed, the level of the sea has altered. 
All these circumstances lead us to attribute to them a relatively 
high antiquity, a matter of considerable interest because of 
their position in the extreme south; but there is nothing to 
prove, as has been claimed, that they date from beyond the 
modern geological period. 

This also applies to the pavaderos, the sites of villages and 
burial mounds of the ancient Patagonians.* The archeological 
material belonging to them comprises numerous stone objects, 
but though some specimens resemble Palzeolithic work, the 
* 1 See Appendix, p. 486. 

2 Quoted by Keane, Ethnology, p. 96. 
3 Verneau, R., Les anctens Patagons, Monaco, 1903. Outes, F., ‘La edad de la © 


piedra en Patagonia” (Anales del Museo de Buenos Aires, 1905). With a summary in 
French, and a bibliography. 


SOUTH AMERICA; ARCHAOLOGICAL 419 


general character of the knives and scrapers, arrow-heads, 
mortars, polished stones, pottery, etc., clearly corresponds to 
the general Neolithic culture of the Indians before the 
Conquest. It is permissible, however, to adduce, as evidence 
in favour of a certain degree of antiquity, changes of climate 
which have supervened since these centres of habitation were 
abandoned, in a country now arid and desolate. 

Similar layers in Brazil, known as sambaguts, may also be 
very ancient, without, however, dating from the Pleistocene. 

These are surface deposits. Numerous finds have been 
made even in the depths of the Pampas formations. In the 
short description which I must give of them, I shall group 
them under four heads: (1) Stone objects; (2) Cinders and 
baked clay, said to be relics of hearths; (3) Bones, split, 
engraved, worked, burnt, and so on; (4) Other archeological 
facts of such a nature as to establish the contemporaneity of 
Man and of lost species of animals. 

Speaking generally, stone objects are rare in the depths of 
geological layers more ancient than the Post- 
Pampean or recent deposits. And this is a 
significant fact, when we contrast it with the abundance of 
human bones exhumed from the same deposits. Outes, in his 
fine work on ‘‘The Stone Age in Patagonia,” tells us that 
superficial layers containing stone implements of Paleolithic 
manufacture are fairly numerous in Patagonia. Ameghino is 
said to have taken two dressed pieces of quartz from a rather 
deep bed in the gravels of the brook Odservacion (Fig. 236), a 
fact which justifies one in attributing to the Pleistocene (Upper 
Pampean) the generality of this industry, with its oval stones, 
dressed on both surfaces and greatly resembling those from 
Trenton in the United States. The objection may be made that 
the Pleistocene Age of the gravels has not yet been proved, and 
that similar object sare numerous in Post-Pampean deposits. 

In addition to this discovery, which is by far the most 
important, there have been recorded a great number of isolated 
finds of quartzites and flints, apparently showing signs of 
intentional dressing, and sometimes even of real implements, 
in the Upper Pampean, the Lower Pampean, and even in the 


Stone Relics, 


420 FOSSIL MAN BEYOND EUROPE 


Hermosean. All this proves little; either we are dealing 
merely with formless stones, split by natural agencies, or 
with simple flakes, or even with objects identical with those of 
the Indians. Nowhere has there been found zz sz¢u a collection 
of stone objects belonging to a settlement.or factory. 
Ameghino described an industry of flaked or split stone, 
which he attributed to his Homo pampeus of the Lower 
Pampean, and which he declared to be more primitive than the 
European eoliths. In the Hermosean, considered by him, as 
we have said, to be of Miocene age, he found an industry of 










BER 


Vig 09 \ 
if 7X pe, 
5 
PARRAN oe \\ 
DA 
Waneee VM) 
Xie sy 
iy 
Y 
toned 
4, 
¥ 
608, 
ae, 
x 


¢ 
% 
* 
BH // 
LO 
ff 
i 
WH 
Q 


sstese. 


i 
oe 


", 
Ny 


$<5 
S&S 


e, 
S$ 


*, 
4, 


YY 


Un 
oe: a ee li 
Za 


SS 
SS 
eerssas 
\\\ 
IN 
ee 
ee 
A 
ol NY) 
x) 
a 


IQ 


ms 


Ss 
SSS xs 
SS sR C 
= 
ae 
TSS 


‘ 
YON LL, op 
lisse ST eae Yi ge ps 
iim BULE 
CS Bisse Wi Wer Wl 
’ Na eh Waly Z Me Y es « t 
S 4 - iat ae Z 9 
PEI Z iS BA 
CGE fee een, a itis ae 
a %B psi ieee 2% 
aa 


Fic. 236.—Dressed Quartz from the brook Observacién. 
Four-fifths natural size. (After Outes.) 


‘broken stone, the simplest that could possibly be imagined.” 
All these stones are not eoliths, as I had at first thought. 
Examinations made on the spot by Hrdlitka and Willis showed 
that the bed in which these pebbles rested was in recent sand- 
dunes, and that the pebbles themselves represent only the 
waste products of manufacture of an Indian industry barely a 
few centuries old—the authors put it at ‘“‘a century old!” 

I must add that Ameghino’ has recorded facts of the 


1 Ameghino, F., “Une nouvelle industrie lithique” (Azales del Museo de Buenos 
Aires, xx., 1910); “‘ Vestigios industriales in el Eocene, etc.” (Congreso cientifico 
internacional americano, Buenos Aires, 1910). 


SOUTH AMERICA; ARCHAOLOGICAL 421 


same kind from the much more ancient deposits of Patagonia, 
dating, according to him, from the Oligocene and even from 
the Eocene! They would seem to have been rudimentary 
implements manufactured and used by the small apes of these 
remote periods, the supposed ancestors of the human kind! 

There have long been known in the Pampas formations, 

Cindersand cinders and hard red rocks, resembling brick or 

Baked Clay. baked earth. They are usually in the form of 
little pebbles, often of large masses, sometimes forming actual 
beds or interstratified layers. 

They had hitherto been regarded either as materials of 
volcanic origin or as products of natural fires, when in 1875, 
Ameghino,’ affirming that the pieces of baked earth were 
sometimes associated with burnt or striated bones and stone 
implements, considered them as relics of ancient human hearths, . 
that is to say, as having “an anthropic origin.” Since that 
time, Ameghino has often returned to this subject; he has 
described a great number of localities where ashes and baked 
earth are to be found, at all levels in the Pampean and even in 
the Hermosean formations.’ 

Ameghino’s view has been keenly discussed. Appeal has 
been made for the co-operation of mineralogists of both 
continents in the solution of the problem. Here I cannot 
summarize this prolonged polemic,® but state only what seem 
to me to be the results of the different enquiries. 

The ordinary Pampas formations are very rich in minerals 
of volcanic origin, and this is not surprising, since these 
deposits have originated through the breaking down of the 
chain of the Andes. The cinders or scoria are clearly of 


1 Ameghino, F., “ Nouveaux débris de l’Homme et de son industrie” (Journal de 
Zoologie, iv., 1875). 

2 Ameghino, F., La antigiiedad del Hombre en el Plata,2 vols. Paris, Buenos 
Aires, 1880-1881 ; Contribuctén al conocimiento de los mamiferos fosiles de la Republica 
Argentina, Buenos Aires, 1889. And in particular, “ Productos piricos de origen 
antropico” (Anales del Museo de Buenos Aires, xix., 1909) ; “ Enumération chrono- 
logique et critique des notices sur les terres cuites et les scories anthropiques” 
(lbid., 1910). 

3 See especially: Outes, F., Ducloux, E. H., and Biicking, H., “Estudio de las 
supuestas e corias y tierras cocidas” (Revista del Museo de La Plata, xv., 1908). 
Bailey Willis, Wright, E., Fenner, N., and Hrdlicka zz Hrdlicka’s Early Man in 
South America, 1912. 


422 | FOSSIL MAN BEYOND EUROPE 


volcanic origin, but they have undergone more or less extensive 
transport. The burned earth is of exactly the same chemical 
composition as the Pampean silts ; apart from certain examples, 
which exhibit a case of fragments of loess becoming adherent 
or forming concretions, these baked clays must have been 
submitted to the prolonged action of great heat (800° to 
1000° C.). According to some authorities, they may be 
volcanic tuffs; according to others, they are produced by 
prairie or forest fires, plant and tree impressions being still 
noticeable on the baked earth. But do fires of this kind 
produce such results? Certain authorities deny it; other 
observers are strong in affirmation. In any case, the question 
to be answered is whether these fires were spontaneous, caused 
by lightning, or whether they were originated by Man. The 
latter theory has few. supporters among scientists who have 
studied the question on the spot. 

Apart from the resemblances of those specimens of ashes 
and baked earth which I have seen, to the re-sorted volcanic 
products from the Central Massif of France, I, for my part, 
am struck by the abundance of these substances at all levels 
of the great Pampas formations (Lehmann-Nitsche says that 
‘he found them at every step’), by the great extent of the 
layers in which they are found, and by the stratigraphical 
regularity of certain layers containing ashes or baked clay— 
all facts which scarcely agree with the theory of their human 
origin. To be sure, we have still to find satisfactory explana- 
tions of these facts, but it would seem that the theory of their 
‘anthropic origin” must now and henceforth be dismissed. 

The whole long series of bones, burnt, split, striated, 

Bones of Fossi] engraved, polished, or dressed, which have 
Animals, Used, been collected from the different levels of the 
Worked, or Cut. bampas formations, even from the Hermo- 
sean, and have been figured or described at length by 
Ameghino,’ do not seem to have any greater value as proof, 
and may in general be accounted natural objects.’ 


1 Ameghino, La antigtiedad del Hombre. 

* See Lehmann-Nitsche, R., “ Nouvelles recherches sur la formation pampéenne 
et Homme fossile de la République Argentine” (Revista del Museo de La Plata, 
X1V., 1907). 


SOUTH AMERICA; ARCHASOLOGICAL 423 


A certain number of observations have been advanced in 
support of the contemporaneity of Man with vanished species, 
About forty years have passed since Ameghino and Roth spoke 
of the carapaces of Glyptodons buried in an inclined or 
inverted position, which could only be explained by human 
intervention. Quaternary hunters, finding in the Pampas 
neither cave nor shelter of any sort, would make use of the 
carapace of a dead Glyptodon. They would empty it, place it 
in a horizontal or inclined position, then, hollowing out the 
earth beneath, they would obtain a shelter, uncomfortable but 
nevertheless valuable in that distant period. Ameghino saw 
that the soil was heaped up and hardened underneath some 
of these carapaces. Near by, he repeatedly found bones of 
different animals, intentionally broken, as well as charcoal, 
ashes, and flints apparently dressed. Finally, as we shall 
presently see, a human skeleton was found under one of the 
carapaces. 

On several occasions there have been collected, in more 
or less close association with the bones of large extinct 
animals, such as Glyftodon, Mylodon, and Toxodon, stones 
which might have been used to slay them, or teeth of these 
fossils shaped as implements. The majority of these finds, 
chiefly due to Ameghino, are of doubtful value. The last of 
them caused a great sensation, and is still the subject of 
lively discussion. 

In 1914, Carlos Ameghino,’ brother of the late palzon- 
tologist, while exploring, near Miramar, a layer of an age 
intermediate between the Hermosean and Lower Pampean, 
and regarded by him as Miocene, found a femur of Zoxodon 
which retained, actually in the body of the bone at the level of 
the great trochanter, a quartzite point which must have 
transfixed it. This point, of the modern form known as 
‘‘willow-leaf,” might have been the head of a lance used to 
attack the animal from behind. Shortly after, and not far 
from the spot of his first find, C. Ameghino and Dr Keidel 
found a portion of the vertebral column of TZoxvodon, with 


1 Ameghino, Carlos, “ El femur de Miramar” (Anales del Museo de Buenos Aires, 
xxvi., 1915). Articles in Physzs, ii. and iv., etc. 


424 FOSSIL MAN BEYOND EUROPE 


two dressed quartzite arrow-heads embedded between the 
vertebrae. These discoveries seemed at first sight to be 
perplexing. In Europe, we were debarred from criticism, 
through lack of having seen the specimens and their beds. 
But they were discussed in America. While the geologists in 
La Plata Museum affirm that the objects were found zm sztu 
in the ‘‘ Miocene” layer, and that they were indeed contemporary 
with this layer, Colonel Romero,’ though a warm admirer of 
Ameghino, declares that they came from the upper beds, which 
formed the site of a faradero or ancient Indian settlement, and 
that they were found to-day in the Tertiary bed only as a 
consequence of disturbances and re-sortings which that bed had 
suffered. The archeological data support this conclusion, for 
the same Tertiary bed yielded dressed and polished stones, 
bolas and boleadores, identical with those used as missiles by 
the Indians. An excellent ethnographer, Boman,’ recording 
these facts, wrote: ‘‘The chief difficulty lies in this: without 
exception, all the objects exhumed from the Chapalmalean bed 
at Miramar are absolutely identical with similar objects found 
everywhere on the surface and in the upper beds of La Plata 
and Patagonia. Could it be possible, then, that Man lived in 
the Pampas, from the Miocene to the Spanish Conquest, 
without changing his habits and improving his primitive 
industry in any way whatsoever?” 

On the other hand, the significance of the archzological 
fact, the presence of an arrow-head in a Toxodon vertebra, is 
not beyond all criticism. It may, perhaps, be a case of trickery, 
for Colonel Romero is of opinion that the arrow-head has 
been embedded in the bone after it had already become 
fossilized. And, even supposing it were true that the arrow 
and the vertebra were indeed contemporaneous, one would 
still wonder if the fact could not be better explained by 
post-dating the disappearance of the extinct species, than 
by attributing so extraordinarily high an antiquity to Man 
in America? 


"Romero, A., “El Homo pampeus” (Anales de la Soc. cientifica Argentina, 
Ixxxvi., 1918). 

2 Boman, E., “‘ Encore Homme tertiaire dans Amérique du Sud” (Journal de la 
Soc. des Américanistes de Paris, vol. x1., 1914-19). 


SOUTH AMERICA; ARCHAOLOGICAL 425 


The theory I have just mentioned can be supported by 
another discovery to which I have already 
referred, made in the extreme south of 
Patagonia. About 1899, various explorers, Ramon Lista, 
Moreno, Nordjenskidld and MHauthal, found at Ultima 
Speranza, in a cave named Cueva Eberhard, large shreds of 
skin full of ossicules and covered with the hair of an animal 
(Fig. 237) to which various names have been given (Géosso- 
theriumand Grypotherium), 
but which really seems to be 
the descendant of Mylodon 
of former times, that is to 
say a Veomylodon.' 

Even its excrement has 
been collected. All these 
remains are so well pre- 
served that they can only 
have belonged to animals 
quite recently dead. They 
were associated with human 
bone-remains in a layer of 
‘manure’ more than a 
metre thick, which led to the Eft: 
belief that Veomylodon was T2377 Pace of Skin of Noman with aie 
domesticated. Further- ontology Gallery, National Natural History 
more, the Indians have va eae ie 
preserved in their legends the tradition of a great shaggy 
animal armed with strong claws, and contemporary hunters 
allege that they have seen and followed it in its nocturnal 
wanderings. If so the monster may be still alive! One thing 
appears to be certain, that its bones bear traces of the hand 
of Man: ‘It would seem that the animals had been killed 
by blows upon the head, dealt with large stones. They would 
then be cut up and eaten, and this would explain the very 
broken condition of their bones.” 


1 Hauthal, R., Roth, S., and Lehmann-Nitsche, ‘‘ El mamifero misterioso de la 
Patagonia” (Revista del Museo de la Plata, ix., 1899). Lehmann-Nitsche, R., 
“Zur Vorgeschichte der Entdeckung von Gryfotherium” (Naturwissenschaftliche 
Abhandlungen, Heft 29, 1901). With bibliography. 


Neomylodon. 





426 FOSSIL MAN BEYOND EUROPE 


The same cave yielded burnt bones and pieces of skin of a 
horse belonging to an extinct species, Onxohippidium. Finally, 
Outes declares that in the neighbourhood of the river Salado 
and of the brook Tapalqué, the bones of a sort of Glyptodon 
(Dedicurus) and of the large Tiger, S7zlodon, are found in a 
state of remarkable preservation. 

If facts of this kind were to be multiplied, they would lead 
to a general and remarkable post-dating of the superficial 
deposits of South America, and notably of the Pampas forma- 
tions; and this would help to explain many of the facts which 
seem to be contradictory, and to reconcile to a certain extent 
the most divergent opinions. 

The palzo-anthropological discoveries in South America 
Human Bones. have been made, some in caves in Brazil, 
Lagoa-Santa. and others in the Pampas formations of the 

Argentine Republic.’ We shall study them in order.’ 

Lund, a Danish naturalist, devoted forty-eight years of his 
life to the study of the fossil fauna of Brazil. He claims 
to have explored more than 800 caves in the province of 
Minas Geraes. Between 1835 and 1844 he exhumed human 
bones from six of these caves. One of the caves, situated 
on the shore of Lake Sumidouro, near Lagoa-Santa, yielded 
the remains of about thirty individuals, young and old, lying 
mingled together with the bones of animals of living and 
extinct species. Lund at first regarded these discoveries as 
affording little proof of the contemporaneity of Man with the 
extinct species; the cave is subject to periodical flooding by 
the waters of the lake which might have resulted in the inter- 

1 Apart from these territories, I may record two more finds. First, that of a 


lower jawbone, found by Dr Montané under a stalagmite deposit in the cave of 
Sancti Spiritu in Cuba. This jawbone seems to lack a chin. Ameghino has named 
it Homo cubensis. 

Again there are the human bones taken from gravels near Cuzco in Peru, by 
a scientific expedition from Yale College, Newhaven. American scientists at first 
regarded these bones as of Pleistocene age. They then very loyally recognized the 
fact that they were simply relics of a burial. 

2 Hrdlicka, A., “ Early Manin South America” (S7ithsonian Institution. Bureau 
of American Ethnology. No. 52, Washington, 1912). In this work will be found 
the history and complete bibliography of all the discoveries, edited and critically 
reviewed with the collaboration of distinguished specialists, the archeeologist Holmes, 
the geologist Bailey Willis, and the mineralogists Wright and Fenner. 


SOUTH AMERICA; HUMAN REMAINS 427 


mingling of deposits, and furthermore really ancient layers, 
seemingly undisturbed, contained no human bones. He 
thought that the cave had served as a burial-place. Later, 
he became less hesitating. In 1844, he had become almost 
convinced: ‘‘The occupation of South America by Man frvo- 
bably dates back to geological times.” An examination of the 
skulls enabled him to add: ‘‘The race which then occupied 
this part of the world was already that which Europeans 
found here at the time of the discovery [of the continent].” * 

With the exception of a skull left in the Historical and 
Geographical Institute of Rio de Janeiro, the greater part 
of the human remains collected by Lund were sent to 
Copenhagen, where they may still be seen. ‘These relics 
have been examined by many anthropologists: Lacerda and 
Peixoto, Blake, Reinhardt, de Quatrefages, Kollmann, Soren 
Hansen,” and others. De Quatrefages* regarded the Sumi- 
douro skull as the type of a particular race, the Lagoa-Santa 
race, Clearly characterized by the shape of the head, which 
was both long and high. The present-day Botocudos originate 
from this type, which also enters into the constitution of many 
of the South American peoples. Later, Ten Kate recorded 
its presence in the Indians of Lower California, and _ its 
existence was likewise affirmed among the ‘sambaquis” 
[prehistoric tombs] of Brazil, and in the old cemeteries of 
Tierra del Fuego and of Patagonia (Verneau). In 1908, 
Rivet* again met with it in Equador, on the Pacific slope. 
This race has, then, played a great part in the early peopling 
of South America. 

Rivet thus summarizes the distinguishing features of the 
Lagoa-Santa type: small, dolichocephalic skull, very highly 
vaulted; face small, forehead broad, nose medium, orbits 
medium, palatal vault very large. Seen in full face, the 
skull presents a characteristic pyramidal appearance, due to 


1 Lund, P. W., “Lettre 4 Rafn, 28th March 1884” (Mém. de la Soctété royale des 
Antiquatres du Nord, 1845). Reproduced in part in Matériaux, xvii., 1882-1883. 
” Hansen, Soren, “ Lagoa-Santa Racen” (Museo Lundit, i.. Copenhagen, 1888). 
3 Quatrefages, A. de, /ztroduction a (étude des races humaines, Paris, 1887. 
_* Rivet, Dr, “La race de Lagoa-Santa chez les populations précolombiennes de 
’Equateur” (Bull. et Mém. de la Soc. d@ Anthropologie de Paris, 1908). 


A428 FOSSIL MAN BEYOND EUROPE 


the widely separated zygomatic arches (Fig. 238). Following 
de Quatrefages, Rivet lays stress on the points of resemblance 
between the Lagoa-Santa skulls and the Papuan skulls from 
Melanesia, resemblances which seem to him to indicate close 
relationship. He admits the possibility of Melanesian migra- 
tions to the Californian coast. 


renee cyanate near TORN TRS ATTRA fh RR Ape tm mom comemnnnn: cement 








saianssaissuaaaunereancresteme teen eee teeter ee 





LE REE OR IGE RGU LA aOR WAS ORES BARE OR ae Reg 





Fic. 238.—One of the Human Skulls from the Sumidouro Cave, seen in profile, in full 
face, from above, and from behind. One-fourth natural size. (After S. Hansen.) 


According to Hrdlitka, the presence of thirty individuals 
in a single bed seems to prove that it was a case of burial. 
The skulls possess all the fundamental characters of the 
‘American race.” The relationship with the Papuans, if 
it exists, can only be extremely distant. 

To sum up, in the present state of matters, and pending 
new investigations and discoveries in the Brazilian Caves 
which will bring forth clear and precise facts, it seems evident 





SOUTH AMERICA; HUMAN REMAINS 429 


that a certain antiquity must be granted to the Lagoa-Santa 
race, whose importance as an ethnical stock is beyond doubt. 
Does this antiquity date back to Pleistocene times? That 
is possible, but it has not been scientifically proved. 

Discoveries made in the Argentine Republic by different 

Argentine investigators are numerous, and still more 

Republic. numerous are the works published about these 
discoveries, particularly by Ameghino, Roth, Lehmann-Nitsche, 
Outes, Mochi, Hrdlitka, and others. 

Before describing the discoveries, I must introduce to the 
reader, in a few words, the scientist who has played the 
principal part in the study of Argentine paleontology, and 
whose discoveries and theories made a great sensation through- 
out the scientific world. 

Florentino Ameghino, who died in 1911, was Director of 
the Natural History Museum of Buenos Aires and a great 
worker. He early made himself known by publications on 
paleontology and prehistory. After having devoted a large 
work to the descriptions of the animals of the Pampas forma- 
tions, he turned his attention to the study of more ancient 
fossils, which his brother, the explorer Carlos Ameghino, 
excavated for him from the Tertiary deposits of Patagonia. 
In this field he has made important paleontological discoveries 
on which there is here no space to dwell. 

In the domain of prehistory, as we have already seen, 
Ameghino was no less active. From the commencement of his 
research work, about 1875, he devoted himself to the establish- 
ment of the existence of Fossil Man in South America. In 
1881, he published an important work in two volumes entitled 
La antigiiedad del Hombre en el Plata, in which he put forward 
a mass of facts and observations. He has since written a 
great number of papers on all kinds of discoveries, some of 
which we have already described and others we shall now 
discuss." 


1 Ameghino has himself summarized his various works in: Geologta, Paleogeo- 
grafia, Paleontologia, Antropologia de la Republica Argentina (special number of the 
newspaper La Wacion, 25th March gto). Ambrosetti, J.-B., has published a biography 
and complete list of Ameghino’s works (Amales del Museo de Buenos Aires, 
=Ki1., O12). 


430 FOSSIL MAN BEYOND EUROPE 

In the end Ameghino became convinced that South America 
was the land of origin of all the groups of mammals. Since Man 
himself could not appear simultaneously over the whole surface 
of the globe, said he, “he must have had a beginning anda 
starting-point. Now, as in other regions of the earth, no 
human bones of Tertiary Age have been found, we must 


HUMAN BEINGS 
OR 


HOMINIANS ANTHROPOID 
APES 
Homo Homo 
saprens = ater 


Homo Pseud homo 
primigentus /Pithecanthropus e/de/ber- 
/ Gensis 
Homo sapiens / 


/ 
/ 
4 


H 7 
omo hace seta 
4 
4 
4 


' 
6 
' 
' 
é 

' 

+ a 

Homo 


t 
! 
/ 
/ 
/ 
Prothomo / 
A ‘ 
4 / 
Diprothomos 
platensis 4 
’ / 
Triprothomo, 


Homo 
simtus ? 
7 





4 


¢ / 
Tetrapréthomo,’ 
argentinus ea 


/ 
primitive 
HOMINIANS 
H 
; 
- Anthropops 
HOMUNCULIDES 
Homunculus 


Fic. 239.—Human Genealogy according to Ameghino. 


conclude that Man’s place of origin and centre of dispersal is 
the southern portion of South America, where his fossil remains 
dating from the Tertiary are found in abundance.” This 
theory took definite shape in his mind, and he sought to bring 
to its support new observations of every kind, whether strati- 
graphical, paleontological, or archeological. Ameghino ended 
_by constructing a genealogical tree of human beings, starting 


SOUTH AMERICA; HUMAN REMAINS 431 


from his Homunculids, minute monkeys from the Lower 
Tertiary in Patagonia (see p. 80), and ending in the genus 
flomo, by way of several intermediate genera, Zetraprothomo, 
Triprothomo, Diprothomo and Prothomo (Fig. 239). Having 
conceived these transitional forms in his mind, Ameghino then 
set himself actually to discover them in the Pampas formations. 

Let us now review the discoveries of human bone-remains, 
proceeding from the most recent to the most ancient deposits. 

The deposits of the Upper Pampean or Lonarean which, 

Discoveries in 2S we have said, spread over almost the whole 
the Upper surface, yielded numerous discoveries of human 

Pampean. bones. 

In 1864, a naturalist-traveller, Séguin, found on the banks 
of the Azo Carcarazia, to the north of Rosario, in the province 
of Santa-Fé, the remains of four skeletons which, together 
with a collection of fossil bones of animals from the same 
source, he sold to the Paris Museum. Gervais’ described and 
figured nine separate human teeth and some dressed stones, 
identical, however, with those of Indians. This find is open 
to criticism. Moreno, Burmeister, and Hrdlitka deny its 
antiquity, while Ameghino, Roth, and Lehmann-Nitsche affirm 
the contemporaneity of the human bones with the extinct 
species of the Upper Pampean. Séguin’s discovery is the first 
of this kind which was made in the Argentine. 

The succeeding discoveries, due to Ameghino, were made, 
in 1870 and 1873, in a terrace of the little valley of the Arroyo 
de Frias, near Mercedes. They consist of human bones in a 
state of great deterioration, found in company with the remains 
of Glyptodon, and with pierced and incised bones of animals, 
dressed stones, charcoal, etc. 

In 1876, Santiago Roth first observed a human skeleton 
at Sa/adero near Pergamino, in circumstances which suggest 
a burial. Five years later, in 1881, Carl Vogt? announced 
that Roth had just taken from deposits at Fontezuelas or 
Pontimelo, near the Rio Arrecifes in the Province of Buenos 
Aires, an almost entire skeleton, of small stature, which lay 


1 Journal de Zoologie, ii., 1873. 
* Vogt, C., Bull. de la Soc. d’ Anthrop. de Paris, 1881. 


432 FOSSIL MAN BEYOND EUROPE 


under a well-preserved Glyptodon carapace, or at least close 
by. The skull belongs to the Copenhagen Museum. _ S. 
Hansen attributes it to the Lagoa-Santa race, and declares 
that we cannot regard as absolutely proved the contemporaneity 
of the Man and of the Glyptodon, as Roth related it.1 This 
opinion, shared by Hrdlitka, is not that of Lehmann-Nitsche, 
who believes in the antiquity of the Fontezuelas skeleton. 

In 1889, Ameghino recorded the discovery, in the same 
region and in the same deposit, of a skull known as the 
Arrecifes skull. The circumstances of its occurrence are 
insufficiently established; the skull, somewhat impregnated 
with mineral matter, is of the same type as the preceding.’ 

In the same year, Ameghino described the so-called 
Samborombon skeleton, found by a naturalist-traveller from the 
Museum of Buenos Aires in a lake deposit interbedded in the 
Pampean formations. Ata higher level, the remains of a large 
fossil edentate, Sce/dother1um, were collected. The human 
skeleton, now in the Museum of Valencia, Spain, presents the 
double peculiarity of having eighteen dorso-lumbar vertebrz 
and a perforated sternum. Kobelt has named it //omo 
plocenicus. 

The skeleton from Chocorz, described by Lehmann-Nitsche 
in 1907, was found nineteen years previously by an assistant 
from the La Plata Museum, near the Arroyo Chocort on the 
Atlantic coast. The only point, and that not a definite one, 
favouring a certain degree of antiquity, is the presence of some 
calcareous incrustations, 

Several series of human bones, collected from various places 
in the neighbourhood of Ovejero, in the province of Santiago 
del Estero, belong, according to Ameghino, to two distinct 
races, of which one is a pygmy race (1.30 metres [4 ft. 3.2 ins. ] 
high) akin to the Negritos of Africa and Asia. From an 
examination made on the spot by Hrdlitka and Willis, in the 
course of which the scientists themselves found another skeleton, 
it appears that these are burials of Indians whose descendants 


1 This account, both the original text and a French translation, is to be found in 
Lehmann-Nitsche’s Wouvelles recherches... . 

2 A bibliography of this, and also of the following discoveries in the Pampas 
formations, will be found in the works of Lehmann-Nitsche and Hrdlic¢ka. 


SOUTH AMERICA; HUMAN REMAINS 433 


are still living in the same spots. The bone-remains do not 
represent two races, and do not in any way resemble the 
Negritos. The deposit which contained them is a_ wind- 
borne formation of recent date. 

If we return to the Atlantic shore of the province of Buenos 
Aires, we come upon a new series of finds, which have become 
celebrated owing to Ameghino's interpretations of them. 

There is, first, the skeleton found in 1910 near the 
settlement of Villanueva in a davranca or steep bank of the 
Arroyo Stasgo, a tributary of the Rio Salado. According to 
Ameghino’s account, the skull of this skeleton, very small, very 
long, very low in front, and very high in the hinder portion, 
presents in these respects very primitive and even simian 
characters. Its possessor must have held his head bent 
downwards, whence the name Homo caputinclhinatus given by 
Ameghino to this new species, in which the Samborambon 
skull falls also to be included. Unfortunately, Mochi and 
Hrdlitka find this specimen to be only the skull of a child 
artificially deformed, and Willis declares it to be a case of 
burial in a recent deposit of wind-borne origin. 

Much farther to the south, on the Atlantic coast, to the 
west of Miramar and of the Arroyo Chocori, which I have 
already mentioned, there flows the Arroyo del Moro. On its 
desolate shores, in 1909, a sailor exhumed two human skeletons. 
Ameghino described them as belonging to a species distinct © 
from the various species he had already created, and he 
designated it Hlomo senemento. The El Moro Man seems to 
present a curious mixture of characters that are primitive and 
of characters in which its development surpasses that of //omo 
sapiens. Of small stature, and having a chinless lower jaw, 
he seems to have possessed a straight-jawed (orthognathic) 
dentition, without wisdom teeth. This species must be 
extinct. Now, as a matter of fact, anthropologists actually 
recognize these as being the skeletons of Indian women, with a 
chin, weak but still present. Willis regards the deposit in 
which the skeletons were buried as distinct from the true 
Pampean and of recent origin. 

On the whole, even according to Ameghino, all the human 

2E 


454. FOSSIL MAN BEYOND EUROPE 


species from the Upper Pampean seem to belong to the genus 
ffomo, but the latter seems already to be represented by several 
species. 

The Lower Pampean or Exsenadean is less rich in anthro- 

Discoveries in POlogical evidences, due evidently to the fact 
the Lower that its outcrops are much less extensive. 
aes There must first be recorded the skeleton 

exhumed by Roth in 1887, near Laradero, a locality on the 
Parana, about 1301 metres above Buenos Aires. This poorly 
preserved skeleton is in the Polytechnic School at Zurich. 
R. Martin finds that it does not differ from the skeletons of 
modern man in South America. The fact that its various 
parts have retained their anatomical relations favours the 
theory of a burial. 

Returning again to the Atlantic shore, we have to record 
the new discoveries which enabled Ameghino 
to establish still another new species of fossil 
man, Flomo pampeus. There is first a skull found accidentally 
in 1888 near the brook Z7zgra, south of Miramar. Next there 
are three skulls, accompanied by other bones, which were 
lying at no great depth near Necochea, in a deposit regarded 
by Ameghino as belonging to the Lower Pampean (and 
therefore Pliocene). //omo pampaus, characterized by a very 
low receding forehead, a character in which he differs greatly 
from lomo sapiens, might perhaps be a true Prothomo. 

Examination of these relics by expert anthropologists, 
Lehmann-Nitsche, Mochi, and Hrdlitka, revealed nothing of 
the sort. The skulls, artificially deformed after the fashion 
of recent Patagonian and Peruvian skulls, in other respects 
resemble those of Lagoa-Santa. They still contain much 
organic matter; their position in the layer rather indicates 
burials, and, according to Willis, these burials were carried 
out in a deposit of recent age, not Pampean at all. Momo 
pampeus has never existed but in Ameghino’s imagination. 

This scientist's imagination carried him still further. In 
the course of work carried out in 1896 in the 
port of Buenos Aires, during the making of 
a dry dock, the workmen found several human skulls. 


Prothomo. 


Diprothomo. 


SOUTH AMERICA; HUMAN REMAINS 435 


One of them, consisting of a portion of the vault only, 
was sent after long delay to Ameghino. The deposit from 
which it had been taken seemed to belong to the extreme base 
of the Pampean, and would thus, according to Ameghino, 
date from the Lower Pliocene. As to the bone fragment, it 
appeared to the Argentine palzontologist’s eyes so different 
from the types already known, that he saw in it the repre- 
sentative, not only of a new species, but even of his 
genus Diprothomo, till then merely a hypothetical genus, and 
he named his new fossil Dzprothomo platensis.* 

Here again Ameghino made a serious mistake. Owing 
to his having examined this fragment of skull with a wrong 
orientation, he found in it strange resemblances to that of one 
of the lower monkeys, Avrctopfethecus. When it is correctly 
posed, the brain-box has all the characters of a modern man. 
Numerous anthropologists? had no difficulty in proving this 
fact, and Schwalbe showed that the frontal bone of Dzprothomo 
can be exactly superimposed over that of an Alsatian! 

The exact age of the relic is more difficult to establish, 
for it passed successively from the hands of a navvy to the 
hands of a foreman, who handed it to his master, and only 
after three years did it come into Ameghino’s possession. 

I have now but to saya word regarding the still more extra- 
ordinary finds said to date from the Hermosean 
—the Miocene according to Ameghino. The 
La Plata Museum has long possessed an atlas bone, resembling 
a human atlas, of small size and thickset form. This bone is said 
to have been taken from the cliff at Monte Hermoso. In 1908, 
Ameghino* described it at length, and made it the type specimen 
of his Zetraprothomo argentinus. He was induced to do so by 
the sight of a small femur from the same locality, which he 
likewise attributed to the genus Zetraprothomo, found at last. 


Tetraprothomo. 


1 Ameghino, F., “Le Diprothomo platensis” (Anales del Museo de Buenos Atres, 
X1X., 1909.) 

2 See particularly: Mochi, A., ‘‘ Nota preventiva sul Difrothomo” (Revista del 
Museo de La Plata, xvii., 1910); “Appunti sulla Paleontologia argentina” (Arch. 
per ?Antrop. e [Etnol., xi. 1910). 

3 Ameghino, F., ‘‘Notas preliminares sobre el Zefrafrothomo argentinus, un 
precursor del Hombre” (Azadles del Museo de Buenos Aires, xvi., 1908). 


436 FOSSIL MAN BEYOND EUROPE 


It was but a fresh dream! Lehmann-Nitsche immediately 
recognized that the atlas bone was more human than simian, 
and attributed it to a primitive man of Tertiary Age, [lomo 
neogeus. Then Hrdlitka followed, and clearly proved, by means 
of numerous comparisons, that all the peculiarities shown by 
the atlas bone from Monte Hermoso clearly differentiate it 
from the atlas bone of apes, and do not surpass the limits of 
variation to be observed in the atlas bones of modern Indians. 

As to the femur, it could be attributed neither to a Man 
nor to a Primate; it was a femur of a Carnivore, and probably 
of a Feline. 

It is indeed pitiful to see a naturalist of Ameghino’s gifts 
end his scientific career, so meritorious in many respects, with 
a series of works which exhibit such a disordered imagination 
and an altogether fantastic interpretation of morphological 
facts. 

What conclusions may be drawn from the mass of facts 
which I have felt obliged to describe at some 
length? One reply is easy, that Ameghino’s 
theories are radically mistaken, and that there has never been 
found in South America the least relic of a fossil human being 
differing from modern men. Can we likewise deny the 
existence in the Pleistocene period of fossil men, the direct 
ancestors of these modern men? Yes, is the decided reply of 
many scientists, notably Hrdlitka and his fellow-workers in 
the United States. According to them, nothing, absolutely 
nothing, gives us any ground at the present time for affirming 
the existence of Fossil Man in South America. There is no 
more proof of it here than in North America. 

This opinion seems to me to be too absolute. In the 
contradictory state of the arguments, it is better to be less 
categorical, Yet, on the one hand, how can one but be struck 
by the contrast between the abundance of human skeletons in 
the Pampas formations and the poverty of the archzological 
finds made zz se¢w in the same deposits? This is exactly 
contrary to the case in Europe, where true fossil human bone- 
remains are most rare in comparison with the innumerable 
archeological relics. And how can one but be unfavourably 


Conclusions. 


SOUTH AMERICA ; CONCLUSIONS AST 


impressed by the statement that, apart from a few broken or 
splintered pebbles, and a few split or striated bones without any 
conclusive value, the industry of the alleged fossil men is 
identical with that of modern Indians? Such a fact seems 
incompatible with our knowledge of those other regions of the 
globe which have been most thoroughly studied, and in which 
industrial evolution seems to follow a general law throughout 
the ages. 

But, on the other hand, among so many finds there are 
some the criticism of which is not so easy, and for which 
reliable scientists can vouch. How can we deliberately reject 
them, just because they do not seem to conform to a prior 
notions ? 

What will be the outcome of all Ameghino’s “discoveries” ? 
Certainly much less than some of his warm admirers believe ; 
probably more than his ruthless detractors admit. It is greatly 
to be desired that young South American naturalists should 
bring a new and untrammelled spirit, free from all prejudice, to 
bear on the solution of those intensely interesting problems 
which their country contains. 

At the present moment my own conviction is that in South 
America, as in North America, Man would really seem to 
be much more ancient than many anthropologists believe, 
and that the peopling of the New World must be dated from 
at least the dawn of modern geological times. 


(ETA Pelee eae 
GENERAL CONCLUSIONS 


WE have just completed an inventory of the main contributions 
to knowledge made by human paleontology and _ prehistoric 
archeology. It is now our duty to summarize these facts, in 
an endeavour to construct a unified, if provisional story, so 
that we may see how far they illumine the great questions of 
the origin and evolution of Mankind. 


Naturalists, from Aristotle onwards, recognized at a very 
early stage that the human body showed great resemblances to 
the bodies of other mammals, and especially to those of the 
apes; they have not hesitated to classify Man along with the 
latter, while affirming that he is superior to all his fellows in 
the same zoological class, that he is premier amongst the 
Primates, that is to say the very “ First of the First.” 

Some scientists, it is true, regarding such company as 
humiliating to Man’s dignity, have desired, on the ground of 
the attributes of his intelligence and his religious nature, to 


place Man not only above but even quite apart from all other 


living beings, and create for the protection of his ‘“ threatened 
dignity” the ‘‘nebulous sphere” of a AYuman Kingdom. But 
it was easy to prove that nothing could be more irrational, and 
with Darwin one may say, that ‘if Man had not been his own 
classifier, he would never have thought of founding a separate 
order for his own reception.” 

With the progress of zoology and comparative anatomy, 
the morphological relationships between Man and the other 
Primates have become more accurately known. Buffon first 
taught us that, in his physical structure, Man differs less from 


the anthropoid apes than these differ from the lower monkeys. 
438 


a 


MAN, A PRIMATE 439 


This view, clearly expressed by Huxley a century later, and 
renewed and developed by Broca in his excellent work on 
L’ Ordre des Primates, has since been confirmed by numerous 
works, bearing not only on the skeleton, but also on the soft 
parts of the bprimates their muscular and nervous systems, 
their sense organs, viscera, dentition, genital organs, sperma- 
tozoids, hair arrangement, papillary lines of the extremities, 
and so on. 

It has become possible to estimate numerically the relative 
affinities of their various groups, and to establish a scale based 
on the number of the human characters presented by each 
group. According to Keith, the Chimpanzee presents the 
greatest number of points of resemblance to Man. The Gorilla 
closely follows the Chimpanzee; then comes the Orang and 
after it the Gibbon, but at greater distance. The other apes 
end the procession. 

Embryological studies, contributing their share, accentuate 
these resemblances and show that many differences shown by 
adult Men and apes are much less marked or may even be 
absent in the embryo." Thus we are led to admit descent 
from common ancestors. 

Other phenomena can be similarly explained only by 
admitting more or less direct genealogical relationships. 
There are, first, certain azomatlies, that is, certain structural 
arrangements which are occasionally found in Man, but which 
are, in the normal course of things, present in related animals. 
At first regarded simply as curiosities, they now appear, in the 
light of the theory of evolution, to be marks of retrogression, 
or, to put it otherwise, atavistic characters, that is to say, 
abnormal relapses to an ancient state of things which was 
normal in the case of the common ancestors. “These anomalies 
are countless, and concern all the organic systems; they have 
furnished anatomists with matter for many important works. 

Such are the true ‘rudimentary organs,’ structural 
arrangements which, normal and well-developed in other 


! To take only one example, such is the inter-maxillary bone, the existence of 
which in Man has for long been misunderstood, and which might pass for a distinctive 
character ; but embryology shows it to be present, with its simian features, in the 
human embryo less than two and a half months old. 


440 GENERAL CONCLUSIONS 


mammals where they fulfil a more or less important function, 
are reduced in Man to the point of becoming physiologically 
useless, The significance and importance of these rudimentary 
organs have been clearly brought out by Darwin. They 
furnish the strongest arguments that comparative anatomy, 
on its own authority, can bring forward in support of the 
transformist theory in general, and of the animal descent of 
Man in particular. 

Physiology likewise contributes evidence in its favour. 
There is now a science of comparative bio-chemistry, according 
to which each group of beings possesses a specific chemical 
constitution accompanying its specific morphology, and dis- 
tinguishing it, like the latter, from neighbouring groups. The 
very striking experiments made in the last few years by the 
method of serum precipitation by numerous physiologists, have 
enabled an accurate estimation to be made, in a marvellously 
delicate manner, of the degrees of consanguinity between the 
different Primates. The relationship of Man especially with 
the anthropoid apes, and with the Chimpanzee in particular, 
has been confirmed. With other monkeys of the Old World, 
such as the Macaque, his relationship is much less close and 
it is still more distant with the Flat-nosed (Platyrrhine) Monkeys 
of the New World. 

Comparative pathology also testifies in the same sense: 
these creatures are most closely akin to us, from the morpho- 
logical point of view, which take our infectious illnesses with 
the greatest readiness. } 

So much for the physical or bodily aspect. There is yet 
the moral or spiritual side, the extreme importance of which 
cannot be doubted, and regarding which some explanation 
must be given. 

Since psychology lost its scholastic character and became 
scientific, that is to say physiological, the great barrier it had 
sought to erect between Man and ‘“‘the beasts” has indeed 
been demolished. It can no longer be maintained that the 
mental faculties are essentially different in the various kinds of 
living beings. They exhibit only differences of degree, and 
their mechanism is everywhere the same. We now speak of 


MAN, A PRIMATE 441 


‘comparative psychology,” ‘‘animal psychology,” and even of 
‘cellular psychology” in a way which would have startled the 
majority of the professors of philosophy who prepared the 
youth of my time for his Arts degree. Most interesting books 
on the origin of the intelligence, on the psychic life of animals, 
and on mental evolution have appeared. We can observe 
the progressive development of the psychical phenomena in 
each of the great zoological groups, and this development takes 
place parallel with that of the nervous centres, the real psychic 
machinery. We can see a continuous chain of phenomena, 
from the first manifestations of a vague consciousness to the 
most complicated mental operations.’ 

Although the human brain is much larger than the brain of 
the highest anthropoid ape, although the human intelligence is 
much superior to that of the ape, yet all the manifestations of 
the former are to be found, merely in less degree, in the latter. 
And these differences become still less when our comparison is 
made between the most intelligent of modern apes and those 
living Men who most approach the natural state. Agassiz 
himself declared that he could not tell “wherein the mental 
faculties of an infant differ from those of a young Chimpanzee.” 

Human reason is not then a special creation ; it made no 
sudden appearance, but came gradually into being. Here 
again, in the kingdom of the spirit, as well as in the kingdom 
of the body, the close ancestral relationship between Man and 
the other Primates crops up. 

It has not gone so far as an articulate language, though the 
rudiments of such are to be found amongst many animals, 
particularly amongst birds, which are capable of associating 
certain sounds, that is to say certain vocal signs, with certain 
acts or objects. And in the case of our neighbours, the 
monkeys, the constitution of their brain, larynx, genio-glossal 


! For long, “human reason” and “animal instinct” were placed in irreconcilable 
opposition. But all psychological naturalists, along with Darwin, E. Perrier, Romanes, 
Bouvier and others, now recognize that we must of necessity place intelligent 
operations at the origin of instincts, and that the latter are only “hereditary habits,” 
a sort of automatic reasoning, examples of which are not lacking even in Man. This, 
after all, does not seem to me to be irreconcilable with Bergson’s theory of the duality 
and the independence of intelligence and of instinct. 


442 GENERAL CONCLUSIONS 


and genio-hyoid muscles is such that it may be safely affirmed 
that very little more is necessary, from the organic point of 
view, to secure the exercise of a function which must have 
gradually developed in Man along with his intelligence, after 
a mechanism which physiologists and linguists are now be- 
ginning to understand and to reconstruct. It was animal 
intelligence that prepared the way for the birth of language, 
and it is language that has made possible the wonderful 
development of the human intelligence. 

To sum up, the facts relating to modern Primates which 
have been acquired by the different branches of biology, may 
thus be expressed :— 

1. Man is a Primate, the highest of the Primates. He is 
much more akin to the anthropoid apes than the latter are to 
other monkeys. 

2. The individual development of Man shows that his 
various systems and organs pass through transitory phases 
corresponding to the final stage of lower animal forms 
(ontogeny repeats the stages of phylogeny). 

3. The anomalies of his various anatomical systems are 
very often only reappearances of morphological features of 
these lower types, and many organs called rudimentary can 
only be explained by the theory of evolution; they represent 
relics of ancestral states. 

4. Man is much superior to the highest apes in the size and 
organization of his brain. Asa result, the highest physiological 
product of this brain, that is intelligence, is likewise much 
higher in Man. But the difference is only one of degree and 
not of kind. We may say, paraphrasing and completing the 
sentence with which Darwin ends his admirable work on The 
Descent of Man, that Man still retains, in his spirit as well as 
in his body, the indelible seal of his lowly origin. 

Embryologists have sought to go still further; they have 
made an attempt to reconstruct the different stages of evolution 
in Man, on the basis of the parallel between ontogeny and 
phylogeny. Haeckel made himself notorious by the daring 
with which he launched upon and followed this course, which 
led to the production of his Anthropogenta. Praiseworthy as 


MAN, A PRIMATE 443 


his attempt is, it nevertheless seems foolhardy, especially in the 
eyes of paleontologists, who know, from the genealogical 
history of other zoological groups, how easy it is to err in 
attempting such reconstructions in the absence of sufficient 
material evidences.’ 

Further it must be noted that opinions expressed on the 
subject have themselves been very diverse. First, on the 
question of our knowledge as to whether Man’s origin be 
single or multiple: as to whether the genus //omo comprises 
only one species originating from a single ancestral form, or 
whether it comprises several species each one of which must 
have had its particular line of descent. And, secondly, 
on the degree of relationship which exists between the human 
branch, whatever may be its degree of ramification, and the 
other branches of the great stem of the Primates.° 

Differences of opinion even among equally expert scientists 
are very considerable. They evidently show that, in respect 
to the establishment of human genealogy, as in respect to 
everything relating to the evolution of organized beings in 
general, the last word must lie with paleontology when that 
science is in a position to give a clear pronouncement. The 
finest anatomical works, the most subtle, the most ingenious 
theories on the structure of living creatures, cannot have the 
conclusive value of relics extracted from the rock where they 


1 To prove how dangerous inductions on such a subject may be, compare the list 
of characters which Abel Hovelacque (“ Notre ancétre,” Revue ad’ Anthrop., vi., 1877, 
pp. 62-69) attributes on ‘theoretical grounds to fossil Men, with the list of characters 
which have since been recognized as actually theirs, particularly in the case of 
Neanderthal Man. The following are a few of the characters given by Hovelacque : 
small cranial capacity ; presence of a parieto-occipital crest ; division of the malar 
bone ; early fusion of the nasal bones; slightly developed nasal spine; pterions 
X-shaped or curved ; great alveolar subnasal prognathism ; strong canines ; incurved 
cubitus bone ; platycnemic tibia ; forearm very long in relation to upper arm.... 
This is all simply so much pithecomorphism. 

2 The most notable supporter of this theory to-day is G. Sergi, “Le origine 
umane,” 1913. ‘‘ L’evoluzione e le origine umane,” 1914, etc. 

3 Ts it worth while mentioning that the idea of a direct genealogical relationship 
between Man and modern apes has long since been abandoned, if indeed such an 
idea was ever entertained, by all true naturalists? It is now found only among 
writers totally ignorant of science, or in the sermons of a few country curates, But 
of necessity, a common origin must be attributed to apes and Man. Differences of 
opinion are confined only to modes of regarding the branching of the common stem. 


444 GENERAL CONCLUSIONS 


were deposited and embedded in their actual chronological 
order. Such evidences form a new kind of archive, such 
anatomical specimens, preserved for thousands or hundreds 
of thousands of years, represent in concrete, tangible, and 
measurable forms the transitory stages, the different links of a 
chain uniting a series of organized types, the extreme terms 
of which appear at first sight to be, and indeed are, so very 
different. 

The discovery of the remains and the study of ancestral 
fossil forms constitute the precise end of paleontology, and 
particularly, in the present case, of human _ paleontology. 
It cannot be too often repeated that the origin of Man 
is a problem the solution of which can only be looked 
for from paleontology. The prime importance of the study 
of fossils and the advantages to be derived from it are 
made evident by the fine results which have crowned the 
science of animal paleontology. 


* *K * 


It is true, as we have seen, that anthropology owes a great 
deal to zoology, but it must be confessed that the latter science 
shows Man’s place in Nature in a false light, since it presents 
him as a creature almost isolated among the Primates, in the 
same fashion as, though in less degree than, the horse among 
Perissodactyles, the elephant among Proboscidians, the camel 
among Ruminants, and so on. Since paleontology has 
broken down the isolation of these animals by relating them to 
others through intermediate forms, and by discovering their 
genealogy from generalized forms, there was reason to hope 
that it would also break down, or at least likewise diminish 
the isolation of Man, and that it would also enable us to 
discover the main evolutionary stages in human genealogy. 
Have these hopes been realized? 

Towards the end of last century, the naturalist-philosophers 
who studied the mystery of human origins derived little help 
from the study of fossils. Relics of the kind were too rare and 
too incomplete: only a few remains of apes closely akin to 
living species, a larger number of human remains which re- 


HUMAN EVOLUTIONARY STAGES 445 


vealed no difference of importance from modern Man, and only 
one human brain-box which, indeed, showed a few simian 
characters, but the antiquity of which was questioned, as well 
as its very nature, for by some it was regarded as normal and 
by others as pathological. 

Since then our paleontological knowledge has increased. 
But even now does it reveal to us the principal evolutionary 
stages of the human branch? To reply to this question, we 
must first recall the conclusions reached in the chapter in this 
book dealing with fossil monkeys. 

— First we have seen the order of the Primates take its rise, 
like all the other orders of mammals, at the commencement 
of the Tertiary era. The zoological group to which Man 
belongs is not, then, the slow and splendid crowning of a 
unique, and indeed imaginary, series in the whole range of the 
mammals. In the Lower Eocene its early representatives 
break away from a crowd of related creatures, which, however, 
themselves show tendencies towards other orders of mammals. 
It is not, as was long believed, because they are, taken as a 
whole, the most intelligent of the mammals that the Primates 
necessarily appeared latest. Their early differentiation, which 
took place in a particular direction, dates as far back into the 
past as the early differentiations, in different directions, of the 
Pachyderms, Ruminants, Perissodactyles, Carnivores, and so 
on. And this fact is of the greatest interest from the point of 
view of a philosophy of nature. 

We have next seen the representatives of the different 
modern groups succeed each other in chronological order, in 
an order conforming to their places in the animal kingdom: 
first the lemurs, then the tailed monkeys, followed by the 
anthropoids. Unfortunately, the scarcity and the fragmentary 
state of the palzeontological relics have not allowed, so far, of a 
comparative study sufficiently detailed to determine the ties of 
relationship which link together the various fossil apes. On 
this point only vague indications have been gained. It would 
seem, however, that the different branches of the tree of the 
Primates may have had very ancient origins, that they may 
have begun to differentiate early, at least from Oligocene 


446 GENERAL CONCLUSIONS 


times. Pyropliopithecus from Fayum may be taken as a 
generalized type of anthropoid, related to, if not in very truth, 
that synthetic form which theory demands should be placed at 
the base of the branch of the great apes, and from which 
present-day Gibbons seem to descend almost directly, through 
the intermediary of the Miocene Piopzthecus. 

While tailed monkeys in their various kinds increase till 
they spread over vast areas of the Old World, the anthropoid 
branch in its turn split into several branchlets, at first so close 
to one another as to be difficult to distinguish, judging by the 
few fragments we possess, and then becoming more and more 
distinct and increasing so as to produce, on the one hand, 
forms which are manifestly the ancestors of modern types, and, 
on the other, special forms, sometimes greatly differentiated © 
and very large, which have died out without leaving any 
descendants. The relative frequency of their remains in the 
fossil-bearing deposits of the Siwalik Hills leads us to believe 
that Southern Asia was, if not the chief, at least one of the 
chief centres of habitation, of multiplication, and of differentia- 
tion of those ancient anthropoids, some of which show affinities 
with modern Orangs, others with the Gorilla-Chimpanzee group, 
whilst others again represent independent and extinct forms. 
Among the latter, the curious Szvafzthecus is noteworthy for 
certain peculiar features which suggest a resemblance to the 
human group. In reality, up to the present we have either 
not found, or have not been able to distinguish in this series, 
which is unfortunately too short and consists of fossils too 
fragmentary in character, one which could be regarded as 
having belonged to a pre-human form. /2thecanthropus itself, 
on which some have been inclined to confer this dignity, 
because its skull really possesses characters exactly inter- 
mediate between those of the skull of a large anthropoid 
ape, like the Chimpanzee, and of a primitive Man, must, 
it seems to us, be considered rather as a large specialized 
form which belongs to a twig of the anthropoid branch 
independent of the true human branch. 

All that we can safely affirm, therefore, is that, thanks to 
Pithecanthropus, the history of the fossil monkeys, however 


HUMAN EVOLUTIONARY STAGES 447 


incomplete and disjointed it may be, greatly lessens the 
morphological gap separating modern monkeys from modern 
Man. 

On the other hand, the history of fossil Man helps in the 
same way to show a closer relationship between the human 
and the simian branches. Although it is but in its first youth, 
human paleontology has already made noteworthy progress. 
We now know at least two types of fossil man which, on 
account of their osteological characters, clearly take their 
place at a lower level than modern types, and which exhibit 
a combination of structural features separating them less 
markedly from the apes than from the generality of modern 
men.' 

There is first the Heidelberg Man, Homo hezdelbergensts, 
who dates from the dawn of Quaternary times. His lower jaw, 
the only relic known to us, exhibits an extraordinary mixture 
of human and simian characters. Had only the teeth of this 
jaw been found, they would certainly have been attributed to a 
man not differing, in any important character, from certain 
races of Homo sapiens. If, by some accident, the jaw had been 
found without its teeth, there would have been no hesitation in 
making it the type of a new genus of anthropoid ape. This 
example of the miscarriage of Cuvier’s famous law of the correla- 
tion of characters is particularly instructive, since it relates to 
a paleontological relic representing, in an almost ideal way, a 
form intermediate between the structure of an ape and of a 
human being. Unfortunately, these remarks refer only to 
the merest fragment of the skeleton. When the day comes for 
the discovery of a complete skull or limb-bones, palzeontologists 
will be called upon to make investigations and verifications of 
the greatest interest, perhaps with results entirely unforeseen. 

At first it was thought that LAoanthropus dawsoni, from 
Piltdown, represented a second very primitive type, not on 


1 After what I have said, in the course of this work, concerning 7etraprothomo, 
Diprothomo, and so on, I need not return to the reasons which lead me to reject the 
fossil men of S. America and Ameghino’s ideas on the subject. Certain specimens 
from the Pampas formations may indeed possess a certain antiquity, the word being 
used in an archeological rather than in a geological sense, but their morphology 
contributes nothing to the discussion of the problem in which we are interested. 


448 GENERAL CONCLUSIONS 


account of his skull, which scarcely differs from that of a 
modern man, but because of his lower jaw. But the simian 
characters of this bone are so different from those of the 
Heidelberg jaw and so like those of a Chimpanzee’s jaw, that 
zoologists and paleontologists come more and more to share 
the opinion that this jaw really belonged to a Chimpanzee. 

Further, and most important of all, there is Neanderthal 
Man, lomo neanderthalensis, descended perhaps from Heidel- 
berg Man, perhaps from an unknown and still more archaic 
form. We now know a good deal about his structure. We 
know that, in the organization of his skeleton and of his 
brain, he combined not only the majority of the rare simian 
characters present in certain representatives of modern man, 
but also several features of inferiority unknown in the latter. 

Human beings, the Hominians, have always been regarded 
as forming a family or an order, or even a class or separate 
kingdom, placed much higher in the scale than the other 
Primates. Up to the present time, this group of high degree 
corresponded to the genus //omo alone, and this genus itself 
comprised, in the opinion of many mneraaeetet only the 
single species [/omo sapiens. 

"Paleontological discoveries have lessened the distance 
separating Man from the animals most closely related to him, 
and in so doing have lessened the isolation in which some have 
always been inclined to place him. This isolation, which was 
looked upon as not the least of his attributes, seemed to 
augment his greatness and nobility in the eyes of those who 
regarded him from a religious or metaphysical point of view. 

At the present day, apart from the genus P2thecanthropus, 
classed by many scientists among the human beings, there has 
been created by Bonarelli, and perhaps rightly so, the genus 
Paleanthropus for the Heidelberg jaw, while the Neanderthal 
type likewise, according to several naturalists, represents a 
special genus. In any case, it is difficult to deny nowadays 
that there may have been several species of the genus Hlomo 
and that Homo hetdelbergensis and H. neanderthalensis may 
not be very distinct from the main mass of Homo sapzens, fossil 
or living. 


HUMAN EVOLUTIONARY STAGES 449 


This conclusion should not be surprising to naturalists 
who, believing in the theory of evolution, cannot refuse 
to apply it to all living beings, to Man as well as to his 
neighbours the apes and other mammals. But it is not 
theory that we are dealing with here. These are facts of 
conclusive value. Palaeontology contributes new concrete 
data to the natural history of the human zoological group, 
and these data clearly show that the evolution of this group 
proceeded in the same way as the evolution of other groups 
of mammals. 

The origin of mankind must be relegated to a much more 
distant geological past than is usually supposed. General 
palzontology hints as much, for the problem of the origins of 
the different forms of life is much oftener relegated than solved. 
Human paleontology teaches us, moreover, that, as early as 
Mid Pleistocene times at least, there existed other human 
types than those of Heidelberg and Neanderthal, and that 
these types already in striking degree resembled [lomo sapiens. 
It is probable that these fossil types represent the direct 
ancestors of modern Man; from times so remote they 
have formed an individual branch, long distinct from the 
branch of which /fomo neanderthalensts represents the now 
withered end. 

The fact that Neanderthal Man existed at the same time 
as the ancestors of certain types of HYomo sapiens, and the 
additional fact that he seems to have become extinct without 
leaving any posterity, agree with what is tending to become a 
paleontological law, namely that the development of creatures 
is not accomplished as simply as was believed in the early days 
of the science; that unilateral series appear to us as more and 
more rare; that, if they exist, it is extremely difficult to discover 
them or trace them for any distance. 

Each grouping of beings related to one another in the 
generality of their structural characters, whether it be a 
family, a generic, or a specific group, may be compared 
to a tree or a bush more or less branched, of which each 
branch, branchlet, or twig represents either a genus, a 


species, or a race. The development of each of these off- 
2F 


450 GENERAL CONCLUSIONS 


shoots has been more or less vigorous, its duration more or 
less long. Modern forms are only the developments, the 
latest blossomings of certain terminal twigs, the majority of 
which are dead and fossilized. 

The human group is no exception. At an early stage it 
must have divided into several branches, which must have 
borne branchlets, and these in their turn twigs. In terms of 
the polygenist theory, it might be said that several of these 
branchlets or twigs have survived up to the present period ; 
according to the monogenist theory, it is claimed that the mass 
of Homo sapiens, with its various races, forms but one single 
branchlet. Yet even a few years ago we did not know, and it 
was paleontology that taught us, that side by side with these 
branchlets which are still vigorous and full of sap, the human 
branch formerly gave rise to branchlets which are now withered, 
and of which we are just beginning to discover the fossilized 
blooms in the depths of the geological layers. 

So the original stock of the genus /Yomo must plunge its 
roots deep into a much more ancient past than a priovz was 
supposed. Sometimes I have been reproached, from certain 
quarters, for being a determined opponent of Tertiary Man; 
but such an accusation entirely contradicts what I have so 
often written. I am convinced that a being, already in 
possession of the main physical if not even the psychical 
attributes of Man, must have existed somewhere during the 
Pliocene and perhaps during the Miocene period. On the 
other hand, I do not regard as conclusive any of the concrete 
discoveries brought forward as evidence of his existence. No 
discovery of bones made in an alleged Tertiary deposit has yet 
been able to withstand criticism, a point on which, it must be 
acknowledged, almost everyone is agreed. I combated the 
eolith theory, not because it seemed to me improbable, but 
because long geological experience had shown me that it 
is often impossible to distinguish stones splintered, dressed, 
and retouched by purely physical forces from certain products 
of deliberate but rudimentary manufacture. To carry conviction 
in such a case, the evidence ought to be absolutely demonstra- 
tive. Now I hold that, up to the present day, there exists no 


RELATIONSHIPS OF MANKIND 451 


solid proof of the existence of a human being in our regions 
before the dawn of Quaternary times. To-morrow, perhaps, 
may bring forth irrefutable evidence. Let us bide our time. 

* * * 

So far I have singled out for special consideration only 
certain intermediate structural forms. Can we, in the present 
state of our knowledge, form a reasonable and accurate opinion 
regarding the paleontological origin of the human group? Or 
to put it otherwise: What genealogical relationships can we 
establish between the human branch and the other branches 
and trunk of the tree of the Primates? Replies to this new 
question are not lacking, but, from all that has previously been 
said, it is not difficult to foresee that they must be hesitating 
and incomplete. 

Of late years, several naturalists have drawn up ‘ Genea- 
logical trees” of the Primates, living and fossil, according to 
their morphological and chronological relationships. I would 
mention in particular the attempts of Gregory, Keith, Pilgrim, 
Sera, and Bonarelli.* A comparison of their diagrams is 
calculated to increase, if possible, our caution, for between the 
various diagrams there are such great, sometimes even 
fundamental differences. The human group is shown as 
having relationships so different that the wisest plan is to 
conclude that this group is still “in the air,” and that we do 
not know exactly the place where the human branch should 
be inserted among the branches or twigs round about it. The 
more authors, the more theories. 

Together with Gaudry, Dubois, Schlossen, Schwalbe, 
Osborn, Klaatsch, Friedenthal and others, Gregory would 
place Men in close relationship with the Anthropoids, both 
together forming a common branch, which had long been 
distinct from the neighbouring branch of the tailed monkeys 


1 Gregory, W. K., “Studies on the Evolution of the Primates” (Bull. Amer. 
Museum Nat. History, xxxv., 1916). Keith, A., “The Antiquity of Man,” London, 


1915. Pilgrim, E., “ New Siwalik Primates and their Bearing on the Questions of 
the Evolution of Man and the Anthropoidea” (Records of Geolog. Survey of India, 
xlv., 1915). Sera, G. L. “La testimonianza dei fossili di Antropomorfi per la 
questione dell’origine dell’Uomo” (Aéé della Soc. ttal. di Scienze naturalt, Wvi., 
1917). Bonarelli, G., “ Alcuni problemi d’Antropologia sistematica” (Am. de la Soe. 
ctentif. Argentina, \xxxv., 1918). 


452 GENERAL CONCLUSIONS 


(Fig. 240, H). We know that Darwin and Haeckel regarded the 
human group as forming an autonomous branch, early detached 
from the mother branch of the Catarrhinians or Dog-faced 
Monkeys (Fig. 240, H’). Carl Vogt, Ameghino, and Sera 
prefer to attach it to the older branch of the Platyrrhinians 
or Flat-nosed Monkeys (H”). Cope again would place it 
still lower, at the level of the most ancient of the Primates, 


Ww \ ANTH 
uk : ROp 


APE. Wy 






H Bim 
& H 
re 
a by; 
Ge 
2 
fe 
cI 
ce 
Oo. \\ CATARRHINE 





MONKEYS : 





Sunwa \ 


Primitive 
PRIMATES 


Fic. 240.—Diagram showing the different theories of the genealogical relationships 
of Mankind with the other groups of the Primates. For explanation sée text. 


the Lemurs (H”), and the anatomist, Wood-Jones,’ does not 
hesitate to regard the curious monkey, Tarsius, as the living 
animal most akin to Man. 

Each of these theories has been supported by good 
arguments, for the arguments are based on more or less 
common generalized structural features, which give a marked 
unity to the whole Primate group. According as the stress is 
laid on one or other special character, insistence on a particular 
comparison becomes necessary. 


1 Wood-Jones, F., Zhe Problem of Man’s Ancestry, London, 1918. Miller, 
G. S., “Conflicting Views on the Problem-of Man’s Ancestry” (Amer. Journ. Phys. 


Anthrop., 1920). 


RELATIONSHIPS OF MANKIND 453 


Morphology and physiology, including physiological psycho- 
logy, obviously support the first theory, and are strongly 
reinforced by recent facts in biochemistry. But there is room 
for discrimination. 

The views of Klaatsch, the German anthropologist, on the 
alleged close relationships between the different types of 
Quaternary Man and certain genera of modern anthropoids, 
views which have led him to conceive a group he has called the 
“Orang-Men of Aurignac,” along with another group, the 
‘‘Gorilla-Men of Neanderthal,” are not based on any reasoned 
argument. They are only a variation, under a kind of scientific 
guise, of the way in which the general public sums up its 
ideas on the question of our origin when it asks if ‘“‘ Man is 
descended from Monkeys.” 

The much more scientific views of Osborn, Gregory, and 
others, while attaching the human group to the anthropoid 
group so as to form a single whole, clearly separate the human 
branch from the neighbouring branch of the great apes, and 
only attribute to them a very distant common origin (dating 
from the Miocene) from which they must have diverged. 
This is somewhat the same as Keith’s view. It is, indeed, the 
view most easily vindicated, and we have seen that, to the 
weight of anatomical arguments in its favour, may be added 
the biochemical argument, the value of which apparently is 
undeniable.* 

This view is, however, open to serious objections, and | 
would be inclined to reconcile it with the second theory, that of 
a more ancient origin, starting from the great Catarrhinian 
stock. For this purpose it would be enough to admit that 
the anthropoid form leading up to Man very early became 
separated from the neighbouring forms leading up to modern 
anthropoid apes; that its point of insertion on the ancestral 

1 We should like to know if phenomena of convergence, on a par with those of 
structural convergence, may be admitted in biochemical characters; whether a 
similar morphological evolution in two different groups may not be accompanied, 
from the physiological point of view, by a similar evolution of biochemical phenomena; 
in other words, whether the morphological resemblances resulting from convergence 
under the influence of the same factors do not involve corresponding resemblances 


in the molecular constitution of the elemental substances. The future of biochemistry, 
so full of promise, will certainly shed light on this point. 


454. GENERAL CONCLUSIONS 


parent-branch of the Catarrhine Monkeys was independent of 
the points of insertion of those other forms which led by 
evolution to the fossil or modern types of anthropoid apes. 

Zoologists who are specialists in the comparative anatomy 
of the Primates, have long since observed that many human 
characters cannot be explained by direct descent from one 
single stock of large apes. ‘It would be necessary to merge 
in one,” said Carl Vogt, long ago,’ “the anthropoid characters 
of the ¢kvee anthropoid apes and even of several other monkeys, 
to obtain the combination from which Man could have 
descended.” This is the view which paleontology seems to 
confirm. 

A study of Neanderthal Man, especially of the skeleton of 
his limbs, shows that, in many osteological characters, it is 
easier to associate this fossil Man with the lower monkeys 
than with the various forms of living anthropoids. Without 
creating too serious difficulties, then, we may place the insertion 
point of the human branch upon the branch of the dog-faced 
Catarrhinians, at a lower level than the starting-point of the 
anthropoid branch. 

It would perhaps be wiser, without going so far as the 
Lemurs, as Cope proposes, to descend still lower, even to the 
common stem of the Monkeys. Paleontology, indeed, teaches 
us that the various types of modern monkeys are very ancient, 
and that the independence of each of the groups massed about 
these types has been acquired at a very early period.* The 
same must have been the case with the human group, the 
ancestral forms of which must have possessed, from the 
Catarrhinian stage and perhaps even from the Platyrrhinian 
stage, certain features of organization different from those of 
neighbouring types ; and the progressive development of these 
forms must have attained to a distinct anthropoid stage, 


1 Congres internat. @ Anthrop. et @ Archéol. préhistor., 2nd meeting, Paris, 1867, 
P. 442. 

2 Do we not find, even in the Lower Eocene, that quite small-sized Primates, 
Anaptomorphus for example, exhibit the main characters of the modern Tarsius, 
remarkable for its development of brain-pan, its shortened face, its combination of 
lemurian and simian features, and even for many human characters? (See Wood- 
Jones, loc. cit.) 


RELATIONSHIPS OF MANKIND 455 


the actual forerunner of the prehuman and human stages. 
‘The recent discoveries at Fayum to a certain extent confirm 
this view, for Propliopithecus seems to present a mixture of 
characters both very archaic and yet specialized in the 
direction of a higher evolution. 

Paleontology and zoological paleogeography also teach us 
that if our very remote ancestors must have passed through a 
Platyrrhinian stage, at least as regards their dental formula, 
it would be impossible to maintain now, like Ameghino, that 
the human branch only represents an exceptional development 
of certain elements of the Platyrrhinian branch.’ From Upper 
Eocene or Oligocene times, the latter have been confined to 
South America; there they developed and diverged, but their 
progressive evolution seems to have stopped at an early stage. 

These first conclusions are not purely imaginary con- 
ceptions; they are scientific theories, having the advantage of 
being based on paleontological observations, or of being in 
agreement with these observations. 

We must not deceive ourselves, however. Weare still far 
from knowing accurately the main stages of the human line, 
from its commencement with the original lowly forms. So far 
it is quite impossible to establish a progressive series, based 
on concrete evidences, as has already been done for many 
mammals, such as the horse, the elephant, the bear, and 
others. 

It is very probable that our most distant ancestors early 
became distinguished from the mass of other Primates by 
certain characters, which we may describe as fundamental, 
characters which already exhibited a tendency towards human 
superiority and by which these distant ancestors are recogniz- 
able. But it is only by slow degrees that the relationship can 
be established and traced with certainty. The solution of the 


1 M. Sera, in a paper entitled J caratteri della facia e tl polifiletismo det Primati 
(1918), takes up Ameghino’s theory, the main ideas of which he adopts, and he 
expounds his personal views regarding the group of the Primates, basing them 
mainly on the comparative study of certain facial characters. He divides the 
Primates into six fundamental groups, each of these branches of the great primary 
trunk comprising both simian forms and a human form. There would thus be as 
many human types as large simian types. This exaggerated multiple phylogeny 
forms a new system which runs directly counter to accepted notions. 


456 GENERAL CONCLUSIONS 


problem of our origin and especially the accurate determination 
of the different elements in our descent, demands fresh dis- 
coveries of fossils, and indeed of many fossils, 

We must confess then, however damaging the confession 
may be to our amour propre, that we are still too ignorant to 
give a direct answer to Huxley’s “supreme question,” or to 
solve in full the perplexing problem of our origin. And this 
ignorance, I cannot refrain from repeating, is due to the great 
blanks in our paleontological evidence, these blanks which 
Darwin deplored, which made my old teacher Gaudry say that 
paleontology was at once splendid and poverty-stricken, and 
which can be filled in only with painful slowness. The dis- 
coveries of these later years, however, give us the right to place 
great faith in a future perhaps not far distant. 

It must be recognized, indeed, that science has made real 
progress since the last discoveries of human paleontology were 
made. Alongside of all that we are yet ignorant of, we must 
place all that we have already learned, all that we have securely 
laid hold of. 

The human type is no longer isolated. We know that 
there have been several species, and probably several genera 
of the human kind, and that these ancient human beings 
were structurally much lower in type than living men; 
that they exhibited numerous characters in which they 
were less distantly related than we are to the other Primates, 
particularly to the highest representatives of these, the 
Anthropoid Apes. In our museums we possess actual remains 
of these structurally intermediate forms; but before these 
discoveries were made, such intermediate forms were only 
imaginary or theoretic. | 

We know that there was a human évanch, and that this 
branch was divided into many more branchlets than had been 
supposed; the human branch now assumes in our eyes the 
same character as the other branches of the Primates or of 
other groups of mammals. Its evolution, as we are now 
beginning to perceive, in every way resembles the evolution of 
these groups. The science of paleontology is a wuzty, whether 
it concerns itself with Men or with animals. 


PLACE OF ORIGIN OF MANKIND A457 


So much then we know to-day, with certain knowledge. It 
is, indeed, little in comparison with what still remains to be 
learned; but it is a great deal in comparison with our former 
ignorance, or our very imperfect knowledge of not so long ago. 


* * * 


The unsatisfactory nature of paleontological evidence still 
makes it difficult to decide exactly in what countries the 
human kind originated. ‘The first idea to occur quite naturally 
to the minds of anthropologists, was that the present habitat 
of the races which we call ‘“‘primitive’’ must be regarded as 
their place of origin; and hence arose an extraordinary number 
Mimeecenttes Of creation or “centres of appearance,’ This 
was the convenient solution, naturally suggested by such 
adherents of the polygenistic theory as Agassiz. But de 
Quatrefages rightly pointed out that this zz/za/ cosmopoli- 
tanism was opposed to the general facts of zoological 
distribution. It is also contrary to our present understanding 
of the conditions and causes of the migrations of mammals in 
general, as paleontology has revealed them.* 

Next there have been suggested in turn the northern 
countries, the central massif of Asia, subtropical regions, 
Africa, South America, the Antarctic continent, and Australia. 
These propositions are, for the most part, mere conjectures. 
It is likely that this new problem is also much more difficult 
and more complex than we suppose; that the immediate 
ancestors of the human kind, or the first of the human beings, 
were often displaced in the course of their long evolution 
corresponding to geological ages the vicissitudes of which, 
along with the other mammals, they must have kept pace with 
and endured. The main fact which paleontology seems to 
have firmly established is that, starting from very primitive 
stages, the Lemurian and Platyrrhinian stages, the evolution 

1 Giuffrida-Ruggeri (Rzvista ztaliana di Sociologia, xix., 1915, and Rzvista Ztal, 
di Paleontologia, xxiv., 1918) has revived and modified this first theory. In his 
opinion there is good reason for admitting the existence of as many “cradles” as 
there are elementary species, Whites, Yellows, and Blacks, without necessarily 
imagining as many geographical regions far distant from each other. He 


admits, however, at the foundation of all, one single “phylum” of ancestral 
representatives. 


458 GENERAL CONCLUSIONS 


of that group which potentially comprised the human branch 
did not take place either in North America, whence all 
Primates seem to have disappeared since the Upper Eocene, 
nor in South America, where the Platyrrhinian branch has 
dominated exclusively. It is therefore in the Ancient Continent 
that we must seek our “cradle.” Mankind is a product of the 
Old World. 

Does the present state of our knowledge enable us to make 
a more definite statement? The part played by Asia, and 
especially by Southern Asia, must have been considerable. 
The Siwalik fossils show that in that region, about the Upper 
Miocene and Lower Pliocene periods, there was a most 
extraordinary flux of life, especially among the higher Primates. 
In view of the number and the diversity of form of the great 
fossil apes already described, the impression arises that, at 
this time, Asia was the laboratory where the differentiation 
of the ancestors of Mankind must have been in process 
of elaboration. 

The American paleontologist Matthew,’ in a very sugges- 
tive memoir, states the reasons which lead him to believe that 
the centre of dispersal of Mankind should be placed farther to 
the North, towards the great central Asiatic plateau. He lays 
stress ona statement, frequently made previously, that the living 
human races regarded as the most primitive are found in 
regions farthest from this centre: the Australians, Andamans, 
Veddahs, African Negritos and Negroes, Bushmen, the 
Fuegians in the extreme south of South America, and the 
Esquimaux in the far north. But his theory is confronted by 
a difficulty connected with the probable coolness, if not indeed 
actual rigour, of the climate of Central Asia at this period. 
Yet the hypothesis, often suggested, that early Men were first 
of all adapted to a tropical climate can only be partially true. 
It is more reasonable to consider the loss of hair in the human 
race as due to the wearing of clothes than to attribute it to 
simple climatic changes. 

Matthew's theory agrees with that which de Quatrefages 


1 Matthew, W. D., “Climate and Evolution” (Aznals of the New York Academy 
of Science, xxiv., 1915). . 


RACES OF MANKIND 459 


long since put forward and ably supported, arguing both from 
the study of modern human populations and the correlated dis- 
tribution of the three great linguistic groups, the monosyllabic, 
the ageglutinative, and the inflected languages! But the 
speculations of de Quatrefages bear on anthropological facts 
very near to us in time, and on circumstances probably very 
different from the original conditions. So that, even if we admit 
that Asia must have played a great part in the diffusion and 
distribution of very ancient human groups, we are much less 
justified in declaring that Asia was the scene of the transfor- 
mation from the pre-human anthropoid stage into the human 
stage. There is no justification for excluding, in this respect, 
the continent of Africa, still so full of mystery, and perchance 
even some continent now buried beneath the ocean waves. 


Prehistoric anthropology is still too poor in osteological 
evidences to be able to reconstruct the genealogies and 
migrations of the human beings who have peopled the different 
continents, starting from the centre of development and 
dispersal of the first human beings. The rare skeletons or 
fragments of skeletons of our most distant ancestors which we 
possess have been exhumed from the soil of Western Europe. 
Now this region, I cannot too often repeat, is but an advanced 
point of Eurasia, a sort of cul-de-sac, into which successive 
waves of many human tides have broken; it is in no respect 
a continental centre where, any more for Man than for 
the other mammals, we may watch the scene of an unbroken 
evolution. 

The great antiquity. of the Heidelberg jaw obliges us 
to admit a still more unbelievable antiquity for the first 
representatives of Mankind, and this view agrees with those 
geological observations which lead to the belief that certain 
layers in India containing dressed flints perhaps date from the 
Tertiary era. It is impossible to relate Heidelberg Man to 
one of the great human types, from which it entirely differs, 
judging at least from the jaw-bone, the only relic of it we 


! Introduction a l'étude des races humaines, p. 131. 


460 GENERAL CONCLUSIONS 


possess. For it, it is necessary to make a special species, the 
ins and outs of which so far we do not know, but which is 
still very simian. 


Countless centuries separate Heidelberg Man _ from 
Neanderthal Man, for geology and paleontology teach us 
that the archeological periods called by prehistorians Pre- 
Chellean, Chellean, and Acheulean, correspond to a long series 
of physical and biological events, and, in consequence, to an 
immense lapse of time—much greater than that of all the more 
recent archeological periods added together. 

The distribution of amygdaloid implements extends not 
only in the direction of Europe; it occurs also over the whole 
of Africa, as well as in Australia and America, and this 
presupposes a past of vast duration, provided we admit the 
single origin of these primitive industries rather than the 
spontaneous and independent origin in every continent, a 
possible but improbable occurrence. It may be that this 
origin was rather African than Asiatic, for it would really seem 
as if our oldest European Paleolithic industry had come from 
Africa, by way of land-bridges which then united that continent 
with Europe. 

However that may be, we know nothing or almost nothing 
of the bodily structure of the men who lived in our country 
during the long periods of time which separate the deposit of 
the Mauer sands from the cave deposits whence the skeletons 
of Moustierian Man were exhumed. 


On the contrary, we have good grounds for affirming that 
Neanderthal Man, the successor in Western Europe of these 
men, is still an isolated type compared with the various 
representatives of modern Mankind. Perhaps he is descended 
from Heidelberg Man, perhaps he represents a new type, 
entirely different from those of the warm fauna, a type which 
may have come to us from the North with the glaciers and the 
cold fauna which accompanied him. In any case, he represents 
a peculiar species, the terminal bloom of a twig, now withered 
and dead, of the human branch. : 

We begin to suspect that there existed other contemporary 


RACES OF MANKIND 461 


twigs. The Grimaldi Negroids are of a geological age equal 
to that of the majority of our Moustierian skeletons, and these 
Negroids, inhabitants of warmer countries, already form part 
of the great group of modern forms. The origin of the latter 
must be lost in a still more distant past, as the Piltdown 
discovery seems to show, and perhaps as do also certain other 
finds, of which we have purposely not taken much account 
because their origins are not sufficiently authenticated. 


Only when we come to the Upper Pleistocene, the Reindeer 
Age, relatively much less distant in time, can we affirm, 
positively and indisputably, that there existed on our soil human 
forms higher in every respect and now readily comparable to 
living types in various parts of the globe. And it is interesting 
to observe that even if these Men, grouped around the type 
known as ‘‘Cro-Magnon,” are already Whites, they occasionally 
exhibit many points of resemblance, on the one hand, with the 
Yellow, and on the other with the Black races. 

The differentiation of human types was, then, already far 
advanced before the end of Quaternary times. Evidences 
collected by prehistoric anthropology enable us, very imperfectly 
it is true, to follow the progress of this differentiation under 
manifold influences, first of a physical and geographical and 
later of a political kind, and to see it result in the extraordinary 
medley of ethnical groups which correspond to prehistoric, proto- 
historic, and modern times. 


Sparse and fragmentary as they are, our European 
evidences may be looked upon as rich compared with those of 
the other great regions of the earth’s surface. And no attempt 
at synthesis, even of a rudimentary kind, can be attempted 
until Asia and Europe reveal some of the secrets they now 
withhold. 

We know almost nothing of Asiatic human palzontology, 
apart from a few archeological facts, which are, nevertheless, 
of great interest. But, from the point of view which is of 
particular interest to us, great efforts still remain to be made 
on this continent. If, by some magic art, we could divest it 
of its great covering of superficial deposits, what discoveries 


462 GENERAL CONCLUSIONS 


of prime importance we should be called upon to record. 
According to the latest work of geologists, the great continental 
formation of ‘yellow earth,” or loess, is not simply the result 
of recent wind action. Like the Pampas formation of South 
America, it represents a complex formation of layers of different 
origins, the earliest of which, dating-from beyond Quaternary 
times, contain abundant remains of various mammalian faunas.’ 
There is every reason to hope that these faunas comprise 
human or prehuman beings which, one day or other, science 
will be able to study. 

From Africa, apart from the very doubtful skeleton from 
Odolway and the very curious Broken Hill skull with its recent 
appearance, the Boskop fragments are the only osteological 
human evidences we can attribute to a geological period 
previous to the present. But is it not interesting to observe 
that here already we have an African type? 

The same remark applies to the skulls from Talgai ‘and 
from Wadjak, which, in all their characters, may be recognized 
as those of pre-Australians, 

Finally, the most ancient skulls from the two Americas, 
whatever their degrees of antiquity, already possess the main 
features of the skulls of Americans or rather of Amerindians. 

From these relics, so few in number, so scattered, so 
widely separated from each other, it would seem that a fact 
of the utmost interest may be gathered, namely that the 
differentiation and the geographical distribution of the 
principal human types everywhere date very far back into 
the past. From this new point of view, Mankind appears 
more immensely old than ever; its development is bound up 
in a great series of events which we cannot yet follow nor 
even picture in complete sequence, either from a geological or 
from an anthropological point of view. 


Our knowledge of the physical evolution of Mankind is still 


very rudimentary ; and here care must be taken to distinguish 
physical evolution from moral and intellectual evolution. The 


1 Anderson, J. G., “ Preliminary Description of a Bone-deposit at Chow-Kou-Tien 
in Fang-Shan-Hsien, Chili Province” (Geografiska Annaler, 1919). | 


MORAL AND INTELLECTUAL EVOLUTION 463° 


study of the latter is rather more advanced, owing to the 
vast accumulation of facts revealed by prehistoric archeology 
in every country. In this case also, however, only a partial or 
regional synthesis can be attempted. As J. de Morgan’ has 
said, ‘‘ The unfortunate thing is that the majority [of countries | 
where the first civilizations developed present conditions which 
make research there particularly difficult.” 

In Western Europe, which is specially favoured in this 
respect, it is possible to trace a general and fairly accurate 
picture, at least so far as the foreground is concerned, that 
is to say so far as the prehistoric ages which lie nearest to 
us. Thus, away beyond the times corresponding to the 
ancient history of historians, which is in reality only ultra- 
modern history to the prehistorian and even more so to the 
paleontologist, we are fairly well acquainted with the habits 
of Neolithic Man and of the Men of the Reindeer Age. 

Their intellectual and moral development and their culture 
can be readily compared with the state of certain peoples still 
living, or but lately living, in more or less pronounced 
conditions of savagery. Parallelisms can be drawn even in a 
great number of details relative to their psychic and moral life 
as well as to their material life. A whole series of ethno- 
graphical facts clearly reveals the same mentality and the same 
level of intellectual development. Mankind in the Reindeer 
Age of our country was already a superior Mankind, essentially 
resembling modern Mankind, and endowed with the same intel- 
ligence, the same inventive genius, and the same sentiments. 

Our Moustierian Men, much more ancient, lived in a state 
more primitive in every respect. Nevertheless it is possible 
to compare them, if not from the physical aspect, at least from 
the moral point of view, with some specially retrograde 
peoples in certain portions of the globe, which lead a life 
extraordinarily like that which /lomo neanderthalensis must 
have led. Already, in spite of the structural inferiority of his 
brain, the latter is a Man, a //omo, and in nowise a pre- Man, for 
accompanying his skeleton, lie in confusion the stone implements 


1 Les premicres civilisations, p. 39. See also, by the same author, L’Humantté 
prthistorigue, Paris, 1921. 


464 GENERAL CONCLUSIONS 


which he knew how to make, along with charcoal and cinders 
from the hearth-fires he knew how to light and feed. 
Already his methods are those of certain modern savages. 
And were naturalists, abandoning their general methods, to 
give prominence to intellectual characters in classifying the 
creatures they study, there would be no occasion to separate 
flomo neanderthalensts from Modern Man in a specific sense, 
although, as we have seen, we cannot refuse him this 
distinction on account of his physical characters. 

We know very little of the ethnography of the peoples 
who for so long a time, in the Acheulean and Chellean periods, 
occupied our own land and a great part of the surface of the 
globe. We can, however, affirm that they also were true 
Men, in the full sense of the word, in habit as well as in 
physique; for, with selected materials, they knew how to 
make implements, indeed very fine implements; already an 
eesthetic feeling accompanied their spirit of invention. They 
knew how to make fire, that distinctive human accomplishment 
which lay at the foundation of all future progress, which 
contained the potentiality of all civilization, and the discovery 
of which “constitutes the most characteristic act of genius of 
which Mankind can boast.” } 

Indeed, the invention of primitive implements and the 
production of fire result from intellectual qualities as marvellous 
as the greatest modern inventions they made possible of 
achievement. And in this respect we cannot but admit 
Rémy de Gourmont’s law of the intellectual constant, and, up 
to a certain point, the doctrine of ‘psychic unity” held by 
certain philosophic anthropologists. 

As for Heidelberg Man, fH/omo hetdelbergensis, he was 
possibly only a pre-Man, a forerunner. It may, indeed, be 
possible, though we are not justified in saying so, that he spoke 
an articulate language, that he knew how to light a fire and to 
dress flints, that he already represented Bergson’s Homo fader.” 


' Rémy de Gourmont, Promenades philosophiques, 2nd series, 1908, p. If. 
2 “Were we able to divest ourselves of all pride ; were we, in order to define our 
species, to adhere strictly to what history and prehistory show to be the constant 
characteristic of Man and of intelligence, perhaps we would not say Homo sapiens, 


but Homo faber” (Bergson, H., L’évolution créatrice, 22nd edition, 1920, p. 151). 


MORAL AND INTELLECTUAL EVOLUTION A65 


To fix the main point in the evolution of Mankind, it 
would be most important to know the exact moment when the 
pre-human anthropoid, attaining at a single bound the dignity 
of the human status, for which his physical and mental 
evolution had prepared him, on the one hand learned how to 
kindle and maintain a fire, and on the other, passed from 
the habit of using rude stones to the manufacture of an 
implement. 

Regarding the invention of fire, we have only very vague 
ideas. The oldest archeological cave deposits, beds in which 
only Acheulean and even Chellean industries are represented, 
already contain pieces of charred wood and cinders. But we 
are not sure that certain still more ancient deposits, likewise 
attributed by prehistorians to their Chellean or pre-Chellean, 
do not afford similar evidences. The invention of the first 
implements constitutes a problem of which the scientific explana- 
tion may still perhaps be long delayed, for reasons I have 
explained in connection with the fascinating “eolith” theory. 


i i € 


Such, to my mind, are the principal conclusions to be drawn 
meantime from our knowledge of human paleontology. The 
day will come when much more abundant material, collected 
from nearly all parts, will make the history of early Man less 
obscure and less discontinuous. At the present moment, it 
is possible to state that the human group is more branched 
and more diversified than had been supposed, and that the 
evolution of this group obeyed the biological laws regulating 
all creatures, from the lowliest to the highest. 

Already certain writers have been able to disentangle, 
from the mass of historical facts, certain causes of a general 
character, independent of and dominating the more artificial 
factors. Dimly they have perceived the link between human 
history and natural history, the close relations between the 
laws of empire and those of organized beings. As Edgar 
Quinet in particular remarked: ‘“ ‘There are points in common 
between the revolutions of the globe and the revolutions of the 
human kind, as if they both belonged to one single plan which 

2G 


466 GENERAL CONCLUSIONS 


unfolds from age to age... . All the elementary laws of 
Paleontology are to be found and can be verified over great 
fields in the history of human society. Words change, but the 
principle remains the same in fossil nature and in the world of 
Mankind.” * 

In showing that Mankind has steadily progressed during 
the few thousands of years which it records, history has taught 
us that this progressive evolution is not effected in a continuous 
manner, that is, that it is not brought about by the whole of 
Mankind acting simultaneously or on the same spots, but by 
different and successive groups acting in different countries. 
From history we have likewise learnt that the purely ethno- 
graphical groups have, like the more natural groups, only a 
limited duration of life, that they are born, grow, and die, and 
that often, if not always, their final decline follows very soon 
after the climax of their development has been reached. Such 
disappearances, however, do not entail the stoppage of the 
progressive movement of Mankind as a whole. The movement 
is renewed by other groups, which have hitherto remained in 
the background, and which, taking advantage of the results 
acquired by their predecessors, develop more or less rapidly, 
and in their turn add riches to the common intellectual 
treasure, before succumbing like the rest. The general 
perfection of the human race, in historic times, may be 
represented as the sum total of the partial advances made 
through the repetition of this kind of cycle. 

This succession of relays in time and in space, which, once 
again, confirms the great solidarity of Mankind (a familiar 
idea in history), is not peculiar to history alone. Human 
paleontology teaches us that it acted in the same manner 
in prehistoric and even in geological times. It is only a 
special aspect of the mechanism of evolution which general 
palzontology reveals in its reconstruction of the genealogy 
of any group of animals. 

Obvious progress has indeed been made from the Lower 
to the Upper Paleolithic, thence to the Neolithic Age, from 
the Neolithic to the Ages of Metals, and from the latter to 


' Edgar Quinet, Za Creation, vol. ii., p. 227. 





THE PROGRESS OF MANKIND 467 


historical times. But this progress is the collective work of 
peoples very different from each other and inhabiting various 
countries. 

The continuity of the gradual perfecting of Mankind, since 
the use of the first flints and the use of the first fire, cannot, 
therefore, be represented by a straight ascending line, but by a 
succession of broken lines, the different segments of which are 
joined together like the branchings of certain plants. This 
continuity is thus only the apparent result of partial and 
discontinuous progress, which projects itself into the terminal 
branch, the highest of all. This branch, to continue the 
metaphor, is formed of a succession of different components, each 
of which has served as a basis of progress at a given moment, 
but not one of which can claim to have been the exclusive 
factor. At all periods and in every group of creatures, there 
are individuals which have advanced and others which have 
been left behind. The latter yield under pressure from the 
former, biding the time when these new masters of the moment 
shall undergo the same fate. How striking are the examples 
of this truth which the great events of prehistory reveal to us: 
the quick succession from the Reindeer Age to the Moustierian, 
from the Neolithic to the Reindeer Age, and so on. 

In the long series of changes and transformations, the final 
result of which is to raise higher and higher the terminal twig 
of our branched system, many components of the system have 
disappeared never to return. There has been the extinction of 
certain groups, such as that of Neanderthal Man. Their place 
has been taken by other groups, whose development, until then 
latent, suddenly sprang into fresh life and vigour. 

This is true, not only of the successive representatives of 
the genus //omo, but also of those forerunners of his who 
link Mankind genealogically to the great trunk of the Primates. 
The ramifications of the latter took place in the same way, by 
divisions into branches, branchlets, and twigs; some of these 
simply vegetated before dying, while others gave rise to finer 
products and then withered in their turn, to be replaced by new 
shoots still higher in the scale, whose vigour, nevertheless, 
lasted or will last only for a time. 


468 GENERAL CONCLUSIONS 


Man, in spite of his superior attributes, thus takes his place 
in the scheme of general organization, and forms no exception 
among living creatures. In stepping backwards from history 
to prehistory and from prehistory to geological times, we see 
that always he is subject to the laws which regulate the 
evolution of every living thing. And it is because of this that 
human paleontology and general paleontology are alone found 
to be capable of guiding us to a full understanding of the true 
place of Man in nature. His true superiority, of a purely 
intellectual order, gradually acquired in the course of a slow 
and laborious evolution, now enables him to raise a corner of 
the veil which conceals from him both the lowliness of his 
origin and the glory of his ascent. 





APPENDIX 


Recentty Mr Reid Moir has collected in many places among 
The Problem the Pliocene deposits of the Ipswich region 
of Tertiary numerous flints which he considers were 

ates dressed by the hand of man.’ In particular, 
the new specimens which he obtained in the Red Crag layers 
at Foxhall seem to have clinched the opinions of several 
naturalists and historians, who up to that time had remained 
doubtful or undecided. 

The most important of these conversions is that’ of my 
learned collaborator, M. Breuil, to whom Mr Moir showed, 
in the upper portion of the Red Crag, a level where “ flints 
are scattered, sparse, sharp cornered and not large, as in the 
case of a level presenting a true industry,” where “the flaking 
is well defined, accompanied by trimming and retouching ” ; 
where he noted that “the cutting was produced by successive 
parallel strokes,’ and where “burnt flints are not lacking.” * 

While I am quite prepared to admit the great interest 
of these observations, and quite recognize the fact that they 
bring forward new arguments in favour of the theory of human 
handiwork, I cannot share the opinion of certain of my fellow- 
workers, more enthusiastic than critical, that they definitely 
settle the question. On the one hand, indeed, the intrinsic 
characters of the new finds, convincing though they appear, 
seem to me to be not incapable of an interpretation other 
than that of intentional dressing; on the other hand, I am 
still under the influence of the unfavourable impression regarding 
the human hypothesis produced in 1911 by my studies of the 

Sa5eei p. 11-37, 

* Among Mr Reid Moir’s numerous papers, see especially Pre-paleolithic Man, 
Ipswich, 1919; “Further Discoveries of Humanly Fashioned Flints in and beneath 
the Red Crag of Suffolk” (Proc. Prehist. Soc. of East Anglia, 1920-23). 

3 Breuil, M., “Les industries pliocénes de la région d’Ipswich” (Revue anthro- 


pologique, July-August, 1922, p. 228). 
469 


470 APPENDIX 


geology of the layers zz sztw. Many of the objections explained 
in the preceding pages are still valid, and constrain me to main- 
tain, at least until new evidence is forthcoming, the caution which 
is imposed in such a matter on those who have learnt prudence 
through long acquaintance with science. As Pascal said, “It 
is necessary to know how to doubt when doubt is necessary.” 
In 1916, two years after the discovery at Ehringsdorf of 
The Weimar the jaw described by Schwalbe, a few bones 
Fossils.’ of. the skeleton of a child aged about ten 
years, in particular a lower jaw and some isolated teeth, were 





Fic. 241.—Lower Jaw of a Child from Weimar, seen from above and in profile. 
Two-thirds natural size. (After Virchow.) 


collected at the same level. These new relics were studied 
by Hans Virchow,”’ according to whom the lower travertine 
here contains, along with dressed flints consisting of points 


isSee p.l4ys 
2 Die menschlichen Skeletreste aus dem Kampfe’schen Bruch im Travertin von 
Ehringsdorf bet Wetmar, Jena, 1920. 





APPENDIX A71 


and scrapers of a Moustierian type, bones of Merck’s 
Rhinoceros, of the Brown Bear, of a Horse, Red Deer, and 
Elk, shells of molluscs and imprints of plants, all denoting 
a climate similar to that of Thuringia at the present day. 

This child’s jaw (Fig. 241) is of the same type as the 
adult jaw described by Schwalbe, except that certain characters 
are less pronounced. The alveolar arch is relatively larger, 
the dental prognathism less marked. It is remarkable for 
the same absence of chin, the same thickness of the lower 
border, the same horizontal arrangement of the digrastic 
muscle insertions (see p. 153). In this case, one of the ascend- 
ing rami, in good preservation, resembles the ascending rami 
of jaws of Neanderthal Man. The teeth are intact; the canine 
does not rise above the level of the neighbouring teeth; in 
all their structural details the molars are essentially human, 
and the last true molar is not reduced in size. 

After long hesitation I reached the conclusion, which I 
Is Hoanthropus ©XPressed in the first edition of this book that 

an Artificial the remains of Hoanxthropus included those of 

and Composite two creatures, a Man and a Chimpanzee. This 

Creature ? ! : : 

conclusion was based on anatomical facts, but 
I recognized, nevertheless, that the conditions of the bed 
pointed to a contrary conclusion. It is certainly difficult to 
imagine the presence, in the same spot in the depths of an 
ancient alluvial formation, of remains belonging to two species 
of large Primates, and to explain that, by a freak of chance, 
these remains present the same physical characters, belong to 
beings of the same stature, and supplement and complete 
similar portions of the skeleton. 

The discovery of 1915, found at a distance of two miles 
from the original site, seems to reinforce this argument. It 
consists of (1) a fragment of a frontal bone and a fragment 
of an occipital, similar to the corresponding bones in the 
individual first discovered; (2) a first molar, which also is 
similar to the first molar found in position in the jaw. This 
association, which exactly repeats that of the first discovery, 
is regarded as “ providential” by the American paleontologist, 


BOCE Ds 177; 


472 APPENDIX 


Osborn, and has brought about his conversion to Smith 
Woodward's views.’ 

On the other hand, a new reconstruction of the Piltdown skull 
seems to have enabled Elliot Smith and Hunter’ to note that in 
its occipital region, which is more vertical in direction than had 
been supposed, this skull presents characters resembling those 
of the skulls of young anthropoid apes. The new reconstruction 
would seem to be more in keeping with the structure of the 
jaw, and this should eliminate or at least greatly lessen the 
‘anatomical paradox” which has been so much discussed. 

In face of these new facts, I am not inclined to be so 
positive as formerly. I recognize that the balance inclines 
somewhat more to the side of Smitii Woodward's theory, and 
I am glad of this, for I esteem both the knowledge and 
personal attributes of this scientist. But I must add that my 
doubts have not been completely laid to rest, and that the 
arguments for and against do not seem to me decisive; it is 
still permissible to suppose that the Piltdown skull and lower 
jaw may have belonged to two different beings. 

The fine discovery, recently made at La Quina, of the well- 

Neanderthal Preserved skull of a child (see p. 192) justifies 
Man: the Child’s the statement that the majority of the very 
Skull from La snecial facial characters of Neanderthal Man 

Quina.* : : 
which I have described (p. 202), seem to be 
present in Neanderthal individuals even from youth (Fig. 242). 
According to H. Martin * the skull of the child from La Quina, 
aged about eight years, presents an ovoid appearance and a 
cephalic index of 77 (sub-dolichocephalic), whilst modern children 


1 Osborn, H. F., “The Dawn Man of Piltdown” (Natural History, Nov.-Dec., 
1921, p. 581). The fact does not seem to me to possess the importance attributed to 
it by Osborn, for the opinion of the authors who attribute the Piltdown jaw to a 
Chimpanzee is chiefly based on the structure of the jaw. Now, no such specimen 
was found on the second occasion in association with fragments of the human skull ; 
a tooth only was found, and a tooth particularly difficult to identify in that it was the 
first lower molar, which of all the true molars in Man is most difficult to distinguish 
from those of anthropoid apes. 

2 Nature, 3rd June 1922, p. 726, and personal communications from Prof. Elliot 
Smith to the author. 

* See pp. 102 and 205. 

* Martin, H., “Un crane d’enfant néanderthalien du gisement de la Quina” 
(L’ Anthropologie, xxxi., 1921, p. 331). 


APPENDIX 473 


are generally brachycephalic. The general outline is depressed. 
It has a receding forehead, without frontal bosses ; the orbital 
arches are already continu- 
ous and projecting. The 
occipital region is beginning 
to protrude in chignon-like 
form. The mastoid apo- 
physes are rudimentary, 
almost negligible. The 
face is Neanderthal in 
type, both on account of 
its muzzle-like appearance 
due to the absence of 
canine fosse, as well as 
on account of its immense 
rounded orbits and broad 
nose. 

This skull therefore 
differs greatly from the 
skulls of children of AYomo 
sapiens. It shows that 
the cranial morphology of 
Flomo neanderthalensis isa ©& 
very ancient morphology, “a> 
dating from a very distant Fic. 242—Child’s Skull from La Quina, seen full 
past, and that it is really Be ey, fee One-third natural size. 
specific in character. 

The intracranial cast of the Man from La Ferrassie which 
Neanderthal | have just had made, is at least as large as 
Man: Brain that of the specimen from La Chapelle-aux- 
Capacity.’ Saints. This new addition to the little series 

raises the average figure to 1450 cubic centimetres. 

In August 1922 a discovery of a new human figure was 
Aurignacian made by M. and Mme. de Saint-Périer* in the 

Human Figures.’ Grotte des Rideaux, at Lespugue in the Haute- 
Garonne. It consists of a statuette in mammoth ivory, well 
+ See p. 231. eee De 305. 


3 Saint-Périer, Dr René de, “Statuette de femme stéatopyge découverte a 
Lespugue (Haute-Garonne),” L’ Anthropologie, xxxil., 1922. 





474 APPENDIX 


preserved, almost complete and of such beauty as to establish 
it as a queen amongst the Aurignacian ‘‘ Venuses” (Fig. 243). 
It is 147 millimetres in height. In general outline its graceful 
form takes the shape of an all but regular lozenge, the upper 
apex occupied by the small head, the lower by the attenuated 
legs. It presents the general structural characters of the works 
of art already described, as well as their peculiar features. 
Thus the head, covered with rather short hair, which partially 
hides a face without features, possesses the graceful outline of 
certain heads from Mentone and Brassempouy. The slender, 
well-defined neck and the flat chest are also found in the 
Mentone specimens. The arms, standing out slightly from the 
body, are slender like those of the Willendorf statuette, and 
are posed and executed in exactly the same fashion. The long, 
full breasts, shaped like leather bottles, hang over the abdomen 
and recall one of the Brassempouy ivories. The buttocks are 
enormous, not specially prominent behind but greatly enlarged 
sideways. The lower part of the abdomen is damaged, so that 
the sexual parts are absent. Thighs and legs are tapered as 
in the Willendorf and Laussel specimens; the feet are barely 
indicated by slight forward projections. But what distinguishes 
this statuette from all others is the presence of a sort of 
garment, a waist-cloth, covering the back of the thighs below 
the buttocks. This rudimentary garment seems to be made of 
vertical strips or straps starting from a transverse cord and 
ending below in a fringe. 

M. and Mme. Saint-Périer have been so good as to offer 
this superb specimen of Paleolithic art to the Paleontological 
Gallery of the French National Natural History Museum. 

The study of the human skeletons from the kitchen-midden 

Azilian Human ©f Mugem has been taken up again in recent 

Remains at years by Mendes Corréa.* In these skeletons, 

Mugem." to the characters of which, as indicated on 
p- 334, may be added the facts that the cranium is high 


17See p. 334. 
* Mendes Corréa, A. A., “A propos des caractéres inférieurs de quelques cranes 
prehistoriques du Portugal” (Archivio de Anatomia e Anthropologia, vol. ili., 1917) 3 


“Origins of the Portuguese” (American Journal of Physical Anthropology, vol. 
li., I91Q). 


APPENDIX 








Fic. 243. The “ Venus” from Lespugue, front view, profile, and back view. Above, the statuette 
as found. Below, the statuette restored (plaster cast), Half natural size. 


476 APPENDIX 


and narrow (hypsistenocephalic), the superciliary arches are 
projecting and the nose is of medium breadth, Corréa finds 
what he regards as archaic characters, Negroid and Australian, 
and has named the race Homo afer, var. taganus. We may 
still, however, regard them as very ancient representatives of 
Homo mediterraneus, possessing ethiopian traits; and look 
upon them as a race which may have evolved progressively 
during the Neolithic Period under the influence of higher 
peoples more closely related to the modern Portuguese, 
amongst whom traces of this race may occasionally be 
discovered as survivals. 

The museums in the chief towns of India already 
Fossil Man in possess rich collections of prehistoric objects 
Southern Asia.’ of all sorts, catalogues of which have been 

published.’ 

Products of stone industries exactly similar to those of our 
Chellean, Acheulean, Moustierian, Aurignacian, and even 
Solutrean periods are widespread on the surface soil, especially 
in South-East India. The neighbourhoods of Madras and of 
Cuddapah, which are particularly rich in this respect, constitute 
a region where the technique was gradually perfected, and 
which became a great centre of dispersal for Palzolithic culture.’ 

The caves in the Karnul region, still imperfectly explored, 
have yielded implements resembling those of our Magdalenian, 
although they seem to date from a more ancient period. 
There can still be distinguished in India a late Palzolithic 
phase—represented by pygmy flints, Tardenoisian in form 
(see p. 330), from Banda and the Vindhyan Hills—which 
passes without break into the Neolithic period. 

Discoveries of cave paintings and engravings are now 
relatively numerous, and of a most interesting nature. Red 

Aisi Oh yh 

2 Foote, R. Bruce, Catalogue raisonné of the Foote Collection in the Madras 
Museum, 1914. Notes on the Age and Distribution of the Foote Collection of Prehistoric 
and Protohistoric Antiquities in the Madras Museum, 1916. M.A. Rea’s Catalogue of 
the Prehistoric Antiquities from Adichannallur and Perumbair, 1915. Brown, J.Coggin, 
Catalogue raisonné of the Prehistoric Antiquities in the Indian Museum, Calcutta, 1917. 

3’ Mitra, Panchanan, “Prehistoric Cultures and Races of India” (Calcutta 


University Journal of the Department of Letters, vol. i.. 1920; “ Prehistoric Arts and 
Crafts” (Zd¢d., vol. ili., 1920). 


APPENDIX ATT 


paintings on rocks situated near Singanpur, in the Raigahr 
district, represent hunting scenes and dances with masked 
figures, resembling those at Cogul in Spain. One of them 
depicts Kangaroos, animals now restricted to Australia. Wall 
engravings at Ghatsila, in the Singbhurn district, are remark- 
able for their Australian character. According to Mitra, these 
facts point to the existence of an ancient Indo-Australian 
culture extending from the Upper Palzeolithic to the Neolithic. 





Fic. 244.—Painting from a Cave in the Mirzapur district, representing a Rhinoceros Hunt. 
(After Mitra.) 


Cockburn discovered numerous paintings in the caves in 
the Mirzapur district. Here hunting scenes show men, armed 
with harpoons having stone shaftheads, attacking Rhinoceroses 
(Fig. 244). They may be attributed to the end of the Palao- 
lithic period, represented in this area by Capsian and Azilian 
industries. In the Bellary district, more than twenty groups 
of animal drawings and hunting scenes with men armed 
with javelins and shields are known, and these are probably 


Neolithic. 


478 | APPENDIX 


Skeletons recently exhumed from accumulations in Japanese 
Human Remains Kitchen-middens exhibiting a Neolithic industry, 
from Japan according to Matsumoto,” present (with certain 
and the peculiarities pointing to at least three types) 

Philippines.! : 

a common stock of characters which relate 
them to the skeletons of the Ainos, but which, more than 
these, recall certain skeletons of men from the recent Paleolithic 
and European Neolithic. 

D. Sanchez y Sanchez has just described a human skull 
found in the town of Manila in the Philippines at a depth 
of 2.50 to 3 metres in the subsoil, which is formed by the 
alluvial deposits of the river Pasig. He finds certain Negrito 
characters in it, and attributes it to a pre-negrito race, naming 
it /Zomo mantllensis. Unfortunately, it is impossible to date 
this bone relic. 

Dr Eugéne Dubois recently made an important communica- 

The Wadjak tion to the Academy of Amsterdam regarding 
(Javan) Skulls.’ two human skulls found at Wadjak in Java 
in a deposit of rubble and alluvium.* | This discovery dates 
as far back as 1890; it was therefore prior to the discovery 
of Pithecanthropus which Dubois made at Trinil a short time 
afterwards. : 

The skulls, found in a fragmentary condition, are sufficiently 
fossilized to be considered of Pleistocene age, in spite of the 
absence of other proofs of their geological antiquity. 

The first, Wadjak I., is that of a female; the second, 
Wadjak Il., is that of a man. They are both dolicho- 
cephalic, very different from the Malay type, and though 
of more robust appearance, have all the characters of 
Australian and Tasmanian skulls: keeled cranial vault, 
scaphocephalic ; receding forehead; superciliary ridges promi- 
nent ; low orbits, etc. (Fig. 245). 


Teer D. ps0. 

* Matsumoto, H., “Notes on the Stone Age People of Japan” (American 
Anthropologist, vol. xxiil., No. I, 1921). 

See Disb is 


* Dubois, Eug., “ The Proto-Australian Fossil Man of Wadjak, Java” (Proceedings 
of the Academy of Amsterdam, vol. xxiii., No. 7, 1921.) English translation of 
a paper first published in Dutch in the Vers/agen of the Amsterdam Academy. 


APPENDIX 479 


The skull, Wadjak I., is exceptionally large for a 
woman (length 200 mm.; breadth 145 mm.); its cranial 
capacity may be reckoned at 1550 cc., a figure larger 


--—-= 
a= 





Fy ry aren 


-. ‘ ’ are = 
sess ‘ Arend ‘ 
- Mh Se 






a 


5 SS 


Nt ae pie es 


Fic. 245.—Skull, Wadjak I., seen in profile, full face, and from above. One-third natural size. 
In the drawing of the profile (above) there has been superimposed the outline of a typical 
Javanese skull to show the differences. (After Dubois.) 


than the maximum capacity for Australians and Tasmanians, 
and also Jarger than the average for European women. 
The palate is immense; the upper dental arch overlaps the 
lower arch. 

The jaws, fashioned after the Australian type, are massive 


480 APPENDIX 


(Fig. 246), as strong, according to Dubois, as the jaw of 
Heidelberg Man. 

For the first time skulls of such character have been recorded 
outside Australia. Dubois’ discovery supplements very happily 
the Talgai discovery. Momo wadjakensts is a proto-Australian 
whose origin thus appears to be East-Asiatic. In his work, 
Dubois absolutely confirms what I have sought to establish, that 
Flomo neanderthalensis and Homo sapiens (the latter here repre- 
sented byavery primitive form) are twovery different human types. 





Fic. 246.—Upper Jaw and Lower Jaw of the Skull Wadjak IT., seen in profile 
and full face. Half natural size. (After Dubois.) 


Recently Professor Howchin’ has described a collection 
of quartzites, rudely dressed and bearing a 
resemblance to the products of the Tasmanian 
stone industry. The bed from which they 
were obtained is situated in the desert to the south of the 
MacDonnell Ranges, exactly in the centre of Australia, and 
it occurs in conditions which seem to indicate great antiquity. 
Dressed flints, principally showing Moustierian characters, 
are to be found zz sz¢tu in the ancient and 
conglomerated alluvials, which are certainly 
of Pleistocene age, in the neighbourhood of 


Thebes in Upper Egypt. On this subject the reader should 


Australian 
Archeology.! 


Stone Age in 
Egypt.° 


225e8 p, 360: 

2 Howchin, W., ‘On the Occurrence of Aboriginal Stone Implements of Unusual 
Types.in the Tableland Regions of Central Australia,” (7vans. and Proc. Roy. Soc. 
of South Australia, vol. xlv., 1921). 3 Sée p.37a- 


APPENDIX 481 


consult C. G. Seligman’s ‘The Older Paleolithic Age in 
Egypt” (Journ. Roy. Anthrop. Institute of Great Britain and 
Ireland, vol. li., 1921). 

In recent years, in the southern portion of the Constantine 
feeeated, wis Reygasse> “has explored: certain 
Stone Relics in . : 

iperia isolated and homogeneous stations where the 

_ typical Moustierian industry is accompanied by 
tanged or hafted flints, such as are ordinarily attributed to the 
Neolithic Age. One of these beds, situated in the heart of a 
geological formation, at the wady Dyjebbana, contains also 
bones of animals, the examination of which has not. yet 
been completed. M. Reygasse is of opinion that another 
industry, with a Solutrean facies, originating directly from 
the Acheulean industry, may be contemporaneous with this 
Moustierian. 

For a recent discussion of the meteorological changes 
which have taken place in the Sahara, see 
R. Chudeau’s ‘“L’hydrographie ancienne du 
Sahara, ses conséquences biogéographiques” (Aevue screntifique, 
23rd April 1921); and as regards the ‘‘Oueds fossils,” see 
E. F. Gautier’s account in Annales de Géographie, 15th 
January 1921. 

Reginald A. Smith has reported observations, similar to 

those from Robinson, Orange River Colony, 
eee. which he has made at Victoria West and at 
Vosburg, where an ancient conglomerated 

alluvium contains stones dressed in almond shape. 

The latest discovery in Southern Africa was recently brought 
Human Remains © the knowledge of the public in November 

in Southern 1921 by Zhe 7zmes and The [llustrated London 

eat Te News. The first purely scientific papers on the 
' subject are by Dr Smith Woodward.° 

In Northern Rhodesia there is a hill, known as Broken 


The Sahara.?® 


Eee p. 376. 
2 Reygasse, Maurice, Mouvelles études de palethnologie maghrébine, Constantine, 
1921. EP Sea 1p.85 70. eaSEE D.2304. RISE: D: 395. 


® Woodward, A. S., “A New Cave Man from Rhodesia, South Africa” (ature, 
17th November 1921). “A Guide to Fossil Remains of Manin the British Museum,” 
3rd edition. 


eM | 


482 APPENDIX 


Fill, where the minerals lead and zinc are mined. It is 
tunnelled by a long cave long known in the district for its 
decorative stalactites, and for the abundance of animal bone- 
remains, more or less fossilized and mineralized, which it 
contains. 

The work of mining, carried on in the open air, has 
already partially demolished the hill, thus exposing the great 
subterranean recess. Towards the end of the summer of 1921, 
at the further end and lowest depths of this cave, a skull and 
other human remains were found in association with stone 
and bone implements and broken bones of animals which had 
evidently been used as food. The implements hardly differ 
from those of modern Bushmen. The broken bones all belong 
to species still living in Rhodesia. Their appearance is very 
fresh, although the surface is incrusted with a fine layer of 
silicate of zinc (hemimorphite). 

The human remains consist of a skull, unfortunately lacking 
the lower jaw, a portion of the upper jaw of a somewhat 
smaller skull, a sacrum, and portions of femora and of a tibia. 
They present exactly the same physical characters as the 
animal bones found along with them; they have not lost their 
organic matter and are not fossilized. 

The skull is totally different from that of any other type of 
modern African whatsoever. On the contrary, it resembles 
in an extraordinary degree the skulls of the Neanderthal 
Man of our old European Paleolithic. It has an even more 
brutish or simian aspect (Fig. 247). 

Its length is 210 mm., its greatest breadth 145 mm. It 
is therefore elongated in form, dolichocephalic. The height 
of the cranial vault is 131 mm. These various figures agree 
remarkably closely with those of the skull of the Neanderthal 
Man from La Chapelle-aux-Saints. But the brain must have 
been much smaller. The cranial capacity of the skull from 
Broken Hill was only about 1280 c.c. 

The orbital arches are as prominent as in Neanderthal 
Man; the forehead is even more receding. The face thus 
greatly resembles the well-known French fossil: it has the 
same large flat maxillary bones, without canine fossz, and 


APPENDIX 483 


consequently the same muwuzzle-lke appearance, still further 
accentuated by the size of the sub-nasal space. The large 
nasal aperture merges insensibly in the face, as in the Gorilla. 

The palate is immense; the dentition is quite human; the 
canines are normal; the wisdom teeth are reduced in. size. 
All the teeth are affected with caries; this pathological 
feature has never so far been observed in truly fossil European 
skulls. The lower jaw must have been very massive. 


soem tte 





3 


ee cs 


ace cesses SRSA ASE NS sc RS IC oor escee 


Fic. 247.—Broken Hill Skull, seen in profile. (After Smith Woodward.) 


According to Elliot Smith, who has studied an endocranial 
cast, the brain of this Man is of quite a low type; its prefrontal 
and lower temporal regions are reduced in size, but it shows 
an unexpected prominence of the auditory region. 

A glance at Fig. 248 suffices to show that the Broken Hill 
Man is much more like Homo neanderthalensis than any other 
race or variety, living or fossil, of Hfomo sapiens. Smith 
Woodward recognizes these points of resemblance, but he 
has given a special name to the skull he has studied, //omo 
rhodestensts, because, while in Neanderthal Man the foramen 
magnum occupies a more backward position at the base of the 
skull than in modern Man—which is in keeping with the 
general attitude of the body, still not absolutely upright—in 


484 APPENDIX 


Flomo rhodestensts the foramen magnum occupies a more forward, 
more central position, so that. the skull must have rested with 
perfect ease and in perfect equilibrium on the vertebral column. 


Tae 
Sa 
he 


+. ageignensmeteae se mamaencncntcamamentatetcatenente ntti tt 





ae PE Ei le ia aS ea 


Fic. 248.—Skull from Broken Hill (above) and from 
La Chapelle-aux-Saints (below), three-quarters view, 
at almost the same angle to enable comparisons to 
be made. 











The other bones found 
with the skull likewise 
bear out this fact. /fomo 
rhodestensts, though 
possessing so coarse and 
bestial a skull, must 
therefore have been able 
to attain a perfectly up- 
right attitude. 
According to Du- 
bois,’ the resemblance 
borne by the Broken 
Hill skull to Neander- 
thal skulls is only 
superficial, There are 
numerous differences. 
The points of resem- 
blance, according to 
him, are rather with the 
Australians, in which 
case [lomo rhodesiensis 
would represent a type 
of Homo sapiens akin 
to the Australian type, 
but even more primitive 
than it. Even more 
than the Australoid 
skull from Wadjak 


(see p. 478), the Broken Hill skull deserves the title of ‘ proto- 


Australian.” 


In an attempt to draw any conclusion from the structural 
details, the age of the relics obtained from the Broken Hill 


1 Dubois, E., “On the cranial form of Homo neanderthalensis and of Pithecanthropus 
erectus determined by mechanical factors,” (Proceedings of the Academy of Amsterdam, 


vol. xxiv., Nos. 6 and 7). 


, ir oe 


APPENDIX 485 


Mine must be taken into account. The depth at which the 
discovery was made, and on which so much stress has been 
laid in the newspapers, has not in the present case any great 
value, as the human skull was taken from a cave into the 
depths of which it might have found its way in various 
diverse manners and at any period. 

The skull was contained in a superficial deposit covering 
the floor of the cave, which had yielded ‘‘tons” of animal bones. 
Now these bones, accompanied by rude implements of stone 
and bone, resemble, as we have said, species still living in the 
country. The occupation of the cave by these animals and the 
filling up of the opening by bone-bearing deposits could not, 
it seems, date back to the Pleistocene period. The excellent 
state of preservation of the skull, and the absence of fossiliza- 
tion also argue in the same sense. 

How can these facts be reconciled: on the one hand, the 
likeness between /lomo rhodestensts, Homo neanderthalensts, and 
modern Australian Man; on the other hand, the presence in 
Africa, almost in the centre of the Dark Continent, 900 
kilometres from the nearest shore, of a human being of 
relatively recent age (in the geological sense of the word, be it 
understood), so different from all the races and varieties of 
African Negroes? The following conclusion may be drawn, 
at least provisionally. 

Neanderthal Man, Rhodesian Man, and the modern 
Australian race present a common stock of primitive characters. 
In spite of differences which distinguish them, it may be 
admitted that the three forms have a common origin; they 
must have spread and lived for a long period over vast extents 
of territory. In our country, Neanderthal Man seems to dis- 
appear somewhat abruptly after the Glacial Period, but perhaps 
it was not a total extinction. He may have continued to live 
in other regions. Indeed, it seems that f/omo rhodeszensis 
reveals to us the persistence in Africa of a human type, long 
since become fossil in France. This type seems to have 
preserved in his skull and in his face the primitive features 
of brutishness, but, in the course of ages, he seems finally to 
have attained a perfectly upright attitude. We are thus led 


486 APPENDIX 


to think that he must have survived for a long time in the 
Dark Continent, as the last representative of a very ancient 
human form, now obsolete, in the midst of the modern black 
races, several of whom are themselves archaic in type and 
on the point of extermination. 

The physical and pathological characters of the skull from 
Broken Hill seem to indicate that the owner of the skull did 
not die very long ago. And perhaps there may be still, in 
some unexplored corner of Africa, living examples of the last 
representatives of /omo neanderthalensis or his variety 
rhodestensis. To discover them would not be more extra- 
ordinary than the discovery of the Okapi, the large and 
strange ruminant whose ancestors we have long known from 
bones obtained from the Miocene deposits of Europe. 

Dr Uhle, in the first volume of the Pudcaciones del Museo 

_ . ae Etnologia y Anthropologia, of Chili, has 

Stone Relics in . . ° 

Chili recently described two sites of the kind 

referred to (p. 418), one near the port of Taltal, 

the other near Constitucion. The lower beds contain only 

implements of Paleolithic character, notably amygdaloids ; 

arrowheads of Neolithic fashion are found only in the 
superficial beds. 

IF DCe p.walos 


ta NPD EEX 


A 
Abbeville, ro 
Abbo, 185, 265, 266, 268 
Abbott, Dr C. C., 402, 404, 406 
Aboukir, 374 
Abydos, 374 
Accadians, 345 
Achzans, 345 
Acheulean period, 49, 
464, 465 
@Acy, 37, 138, 139 
A dapis, 79 
AE geans, 345 
Africa, 372-95, 459, 460, 461, 480 
Central, 380 
East, 381 
Lesser, 374 
North, 372, 373, 480 
South, 381, 481-486 
.West, 380 
Agassiz, 457 
Agricola, 3 
Ainos, 478 
Aix, 8 
Albert I., Prince of Monaco, 25, 185, 252, 
266 
Alcalde del Rio, 252 
Aldrovandus, 4 
Algeria, 374, 376, 386, 390, 481 
Algiers, 390 
Algonquins, 295 
Ali-Bacha cave, 389 
Alluvial deposits, ancient, 36 
deposits, Chellean, 37, 38 
terraces, 37, 38, 51 
Alpéra, 310 
Alpine race, 321, 336, 345, 348 
Altai massif, 354 
Altamira caves, 252, 256, 257, 308 
Ambrosetti, J. B., 429 
Ameghino, Carlos, 423, 429 
mimegnino, i .; 27,.80,:123,.238, 414, 415, 
416, 417, 420, 421, 422, 423, 426, 429 
430, 432, 433-36, 437, 452, 455 
487 


2, 140, 141, 460, 


America, 324, 395-97, 458, 460, 462 
Central, 397 
North, 397-412 
South, 413-37, 486 
Amerindians, 397, 462 
Amiens, 12 
Amur, 355 
Amygdaloid implements, 460 
Anaptomorphus homunculus, 78, 80, 454 
Andaman islanders, 166, 229, 458 
Anderson, J. G., 462 
Andes, the, 414, 421 
Andrews, C. W., 81 
Andrews, E., 60 
Annamites, 226 
Antelias Cave, Phoenicia, 359 
Anthony, R., 232 
Anthropodus, 84, 90 
Anthropoid apes, 65, 69, 70, 71, 208, 210, 
214, 217, 224, 229, 234, 439, 440, 451, 


453, 454 
Anthropopithecus, 71, 116 


Anthropops, 80, 452 

Apes, fossil, 14, 51, 78-92. See also 
Anthropoid Apes and Monkeys 

Aphontova-Gora, 353, 354 

Arabia, 353, 387 

Arbois de Jubainville, H. d’, 344 

mrcelinaf00. 320.01 33. 260;°351,.373 

Archzean period, 28, 31, 35 

Archeolemur, 108, 109 

Archibald, 367 

Arctopithectde, 69 

Arcy-sur-Cure, jaw from, 179 

Ardu-Onnis, E., 338 

Arezzo, Tuscany, 142 

Argentine Republic, 418, 426, 429, 436 

dArgenville, 7 

Aristotle, 16, 438 

Arizona, 397 

Agnes F. [553351 

Arnon, 379 

Arrecifes skull, 432 

Arroyo del Moro, 433 


488 


Art. See also Painting, Engraving, 
Sculpture, etc. 
Bushman, 306, 307 
palzeolithic, 252-60 
Aruntas, tribe of, 363 
Aryan languages, 347. 
Asia, 351, 354-63, 458, 461 
Central, 353 
Minor, 325, 343, 353 
Southern, 356 e¢ seg., 476 
Western, 351 
Asphalt deposits of California, 408 
Assam, 357 
A strapotherium, 413 
Aubert, cave at, 183 
Audoubert, Tuc d’, 
frontispiece 
Aulner, 379 
Ault du Mesnil, G. d’, 126, 332 
Aurignac, cave of, 15, 17, 55, 258, 287 
“ Orang-men” of, 453 
Aurignacian period, 49, 55, 246, 297 e¢ 
S€9., 376 
sculpture, 297-307, 473 
Australia, 324, 361-71, 457, 460, 480 
Australians, 103, 126, 153, 155, 166, 204, 
212, 229, 238, 239, 277, 278, 308, 362, 
371, 408, 478, 479, 485 
proto-, 361, 371, 480, 484 
Auvergnese, 229 
Azilian period, 49, 55, 246, 332-34, 474, 
477 
races, 334 


See also 


an. 


B 


Bagford, 5 

Bahia Blanca Bay, 416 

Baikal region, 360 

Balenotus, 125 

Balfour, 383 

Ball, V., 356, 357 

Baluchistan, 357 

Banda, 357, 476 

Banolas, jaw from, 193 
Bantous, the, 394, 395 
Baoussé-Roussé rocks, 261, 262 
Baousso da Torre cave, 262 
Baradero, 434 

Barbary, 374, 374-379, 379, 387, 390 
Barbary Ape, 44, 70 

Barbour, Prof., 407 


INDEX 


Bardon, Abbé, 26, 186, 187 

Barma Grande cave, 265, 266 

Baroaland, 389 

Basedow, H., 367 

Baye, de, 337 

Beadnell, 375 

Bears, Cave, 40, 43, 52, 471 

Beaumont, Elie de, 10, 12 

Beaver, 148, 160 

Becker, 60 

Bégouen, 252 

Belgium, 339, 3435 344 

Bellary, 477 

Bergson, H., 441, 464 

Bernard Pallissy, 3 

Berry, R. J. A.,.94, 105, 410 

Bertholon, Dr L., 389, 390 

Beuchat, 397 

Big Bone Cavern, Tennessee, 400 

Bimana, 66 

Biochemistry, 453 

Bismarck, skull of, 230 

Bison, 54, 255, 256, 401. 
piece 

Bison occidentalis, 400 

Bissing, 375 

Black races, 457 

Blake, 427 

Blanckenhorn, 
375 

Bleicher, 374 

Bloch, Dr, 390 

Blumenbach, 71 

Boas, 295 

Boetius de Boot, 4 

Bogdanov, A., 341, 348 

Bohemia, 341 

Bollviller, 219 

Boman, E., 424 

Bonarean, 417, 431 

Bonarelli, J., 151, 238, 448, 451 

Boncelles, 128 

Bone-breccias, 40 

Bone-caves, 40 

Bones, worked, engraved, or carved, 125, 
176, 177, 252-57; 264, 297, 309, 400 

Bonnet, 269 

Boskop skull, 27, 462 

Boucher de Perthes, 9-13, 22, 137 

Boudy, 375, 376 

Boué, Ami, 6, 19 

Bougie, 389 


See frontis- 


M., 95, 98, 351, 352; 


INDEX 


Boule, M., 26, 28, 47, 88, 112, 128, 130, 
136, 139, 141, 144, 170, 185, 186, 192, 
194, 232, 268, 373, 374, 403 

Bourgeois, Abbé, 114, 126 

Bouvier, 441 

Bouyssonie, Abbés, 26, 186, 187, 255 

Bovide, 45, 54 

Boyd Dawkins, Prof., 18, 47, 130, 143 

Brain of Zoanthropus, 163 

of Homo neanderthalensis, 
473 

of Homo rhodestensis, 482 

of Pithecanthropus, 101 

Branco, W., 368 

Brassempouy cave, 297, 298, 305 

Brassempouy statuettes, 297, 2098, 
474 

Brazil, 418, 419, 426, 427, 428 . 

Bréchamps (Eure-et-Loire), 183 

Breuil, H., 47, 55, 128, 131, 132, 183, 249, 
251, 252, 255, 256, 2975 308-12, 331, 
332, 388, 469 

British Isles, races in, 339 

Broca, 21, 24, 72, 206, 259, 281, 284, 288, 

. 318, 320, 439 

Broken Hill discovery, 27, 395, 481- 
486 

Brongniart, Al., 10 

Bronze Age, 4, 50, 323, 324, 325 

Broom, 384, 394 

Brown, J. C., 476 

Bruch, 416 

Bruckner, E., 36 

Bruniquel, 41, 252, 269, 287 

Briinn, Moravia, 263, 287 

Briix, Bohemia, 181 

Bubalus antiquus, 387 

Biicking, H., 421 

Buckland, 8 

Buenos Aires, 431, 433, 434 

Buffalo, Great, 387 

Buffon, 4, 66, 438 

Burckhardt, 416 

Burlington County, 406 

Burma, 128, 356 

Burmeister, 431 

Bury St Edmunds, 181 

Bushman art, 306, 307 

Bushmen, 166, 207, 238, 279, 305, 
306, 307, 308, 310, 386, 388, 395, 
458 

Busk, G., 180 


228-36, 


393; 


489 


C 


Cabré, A., 252, 259, 308 
Cacciamali, G. B., 122 
Calaveras skull, 114, 123, 406 
California, 123, 401, 408, 427 
Callabonna, Lake, 367, 368 
Cambodia, 357 
Campignien, 332 
Campigny, 331 
Cannstadt, 6, 39, 141, 178 
race, 141, 180 
skull, 141 
Cape Colony, 382, 384 
Capellini, Prof., 114 
Capitan, Dr, 26, 126, 190-191, 220, 252 
255, 258, 332, 375, 376 
Capsian period, 376, 380, 390, 477 
Carcharodon, 124 
Carette-Bouvet and Neuville, 387 
Caribs, 226 
Carson, Nevada, 405 
Cartaihace lg 2.3.4, Gals bowed 7 ilo, 
185, 247, 249, 255, 256, 260, 268, 272, 
327; 332, 333, 353, 373 378 
Castenedolo, 122 
Castillo cave, 286 
Cataclysmic theory, 15, 16 
Catarrhine monkeys, 69, 70, 452, 453, 
454 
Caves, 45, 53 
Cavillon cave, 262 
Cazalis de Fondouce, 351 
Cebian monkeys, 69, 70 
Cebus capucinus, 67 
Celebes, 358, 361 
Celle-sous-Moret, La, 39 
Celts, 316, 344, 345 
Cephalic index, 99 
Ceratodus, 361 
Ceraunia, 2, 3 
Cercopithectde, 69, 85 
Cercopithecus brazzat, 67 
Cerigo, 6 
Ceylon, 358, 361 
Chaldea, 56, 325, 326, 353 
Chamberlain, A. F., 295 
Chamberlin, 403, 410 
Chamblandes, 280, 340 
Chamois, 45, 54, 176 
Chancelade race, 49, 263, 289-96, 312 
Chantre, E., 351, 390 


b] 


490 


Chapelle-aux-Saints, La, 26, 186-89, 191 
et S€9., 245 
Chaplain-Duparc, 260 
Chellean Man, 139-75 
period, 49, 51, 138, 460, 464, 465 
Chelles, 37, 51 
Chili, 418, 462, 486 
Chimpanzee, 67, 69, 71, 73, 76, 100-01, 
145, 152, 153, 155, 168, 169, 170, 171, 
195, 197-202, 204, 205, 207, 209, 214, 
217, 222, 223, 293, 439, 440, 441, 446 
China, 359 
Chocori skeleton, 432, 433 
Christol, de, 8, 387 
Chisty,tb, a7, 252 
Chronology, 28-64 
absolute, 55 
comparative, 324-26 
relative, 28 
Chubb, 384 
Chudeau, 379, 387, 481 
*“* Churingas,” 365 
Cimbrians, 344 
Cimmerians, 345 
Clarke, 400 
Clermont (Haute Garonne), 11 
(Oise), 128,'132 
Clichy, 23, 142, 143, 242 
Cocchi, 142 
Cockburn, 477 
Codrington, 383 
Cogul, 310, 477 
Collignon, Dr, 288, 318, 374, 376 
Colorado, 397, 406 
Combe-Capelle, 268, 287, 288 
Commont, V., 131, 140, 177 
Congo, the, 381 
Constantine, 389, 481 
Constitucidén, 486 
Continental deposits, 38 
Conyers, 5 
Cope, E., 78, 196, 452, 454 
Copper Age, 4, 51, 323, 324 
Cordillera mountains, 413, 415 
Corréa, M., 474 
Cortier, 379 
Couillault, 375, 376 
“Coups de poings,” 139, 382, 384 
Crag, Red, at Foxhall, 137, 469 
Suffolk, 120, 121, 469 
Crete, 324, 325, 338, 343 
Croll, 57, 60 


INDEX 


Cro-Magnon period, 23, 259, 338, 339, 340 
old man, 294 
race, 281-89. See also under Races. 
in N. Africa, 391 
Crova, Mme., 379 
Cuba.i426 28" 
Cuddapah, 476 
Cunningham, 106 
Cuvier, G., 6, 8, 19, 66, 71, 91, 306, 413 
447 
Cuzco, Peru, 426 
Cynomorphic monkeys, 69, 70 


D 


Dana, 60 

Darwin, Charles, 21, 23, 66, 416, 440, 
441, 442, 452, 456 

David, 369 

Dawkins, Prof. Boyd, 18, 47, 130, 143, 
295 

Dawson, Charles, 157-162 

De Baye, 354 

Debruge, 375, 389 

Deccan; ther357 

Déchelette, 125, 247; 323, 326 

Decorse, Dr, 380 

Deer, 254, 256, 328, 329, 471 

Delanoue, 373 

Delaunay, Abbé, 114 

Delaware River, 402, 404 

Delisle, Dr, 381, 389 

Deniker, 70, 71, 226, 318, 320, 321, 344 

Denise skull, 42, 141, 242 

Denmark, 330, 331, 341 

Dentition of man and of apes, 74. See 
also Teeth 

Desnoyers, 114 

Desplagnes, Lieut., 380, 387 

Desribes, 351 

De Vis, 369 

Dewlish, 125 

Diabet, Morocco, 374 

Dingo, the, 369 


Diodorus, 2 


Diprothomo, 81, 431, 435, 447 
Diprotodon, 108, 367, 368, 369 
Djebbana, wady, 481 
Dolichopithecus, 89, 91 
Dordogne, 329 

Dorians, 345 

Dottin, G., 344 


INDEX 


Doumergue, 375 

Dryopithecus, 14, 83, 84, 85, 86, 88, 90, 
QI, 92, 103, 108, 129, 154 

Duan, 128 

Dubois, E., 25, 93,94, 104, 105, 107, 361, 
451, 478-480, 484 

Du Bourg de Bozas, 381 

Duchemin, Capt., 380 

Duckworth, W. L. H., 104, 105, 143, 145, 
156 

Ducioux, KE. H., 421 

Dumas, E., 8 

Dupont, E., 18, 22, 180, 295, 381 

Duruthy cave, 260, 337 

Diisseldorf, 178 


E 


Eberhard cave, 425 
Eccard, 4 
Egypt, 56, 325, 326, 343, 373-74, 380, 
387, 390, 480 
Egyptians, 338, 345 
Ehringsdorf jaw, 146-47, 174 
Elephant, 387. See also Elephas. 
Elephas antiquus, 43, 44, 49, 50, 373 
atlanticus, 374 
colombt, 410 
meridtonalts, 43, 44, 48, 49, 125 
primigentus. See Mammoth 
Elliot, Dr G., 69 
Emerson, 60 
Eneolithic Age, 342 
Enfants, Grotte des, 185, 266, 270, 271, 
273) 284, 285 
Engihoul skull, 287 
Engis skull, 258, 289 
Engravings, African, 306, 386 
Aurignacian, 297-307 
Australian, 367 
Magdalenian, 308 
palzolithic, 17, 255-61, 264 
Siberian, 355 
Ensenadean, 417, 434 
Eoanthropus dawsont, 51, 89, 157-75, 447 
Eocene Age, 32, 35, 78, 79, I11, 445, 454, 
455 
Eoliths, 111, 117, 121, 127-37, 356, 366, 
385, 450, 464 
Epipaleolithic, 328 
Equus capensts, 384 
slenonis, 148 


491 


Escargotiéres, 376 
in W. Africa, 389, 390 
Escheu, 128 
Esquimaux, 226, 229, 238, 295, 296, 458 
Etheridge, R., 366, 369 
Ethiopian regions, 372, 381 
Ethiopians, 390 
Etruscans, 345 
Europe, during glacial period, 35 
Neolithic Man in, 463 
races of, 318 
Evans, A., 326 


ckevans, john; 3; 6-11, 18; 22) 137, (143, 


373, 381 
Eyzies, caves at, 259 


EF 


Falconer, I1 
Favraud, 185 
Fayum, 446, 455 
Féaux, M., 263, 289 
Feilden, 383 
Fenner, 426 
Féraud, 379 
Feére-en-Tardensis, 330 
Ferrassie, La. See La Ferrassie 
Ferry, 60 
Filhol, H., 79, 92, 183 
Fire, invention of, 464 
Fischer, P., 14 
Fisher, O., 125 
Fitzsimons, F. W., 392 
Flamand, 375, 379, 387 
Flechsig, 235 
Flinders Mountains, 367 
Flint, Dr, 405 
Flints, Aurignacian, 249-50, 366, 377, 385 
Barbary, 374 
Campignian, 331 
Capsian, 376, 380 
Chellean and Acheulean, 5, 6, 11, 46, 
112, 113, 138-41, 351, 352, 3545 358, 
366, 376, 380 
cracked, from Thenay, 126 
Egyptian, 373, 480 
Indian, 356, 476 
Ipswich, 469 
Kansas, 400 
keeled or rostro-carinate, 120, 121 
Magdalenian, 250 
Moroccan, 375 


492 


Flints, Moustierian, 127, 176, 177, 188, 
354, 381, 383, 385, 471, 481 

Sahara, 379, 481 
Solutrean, 249, 384, 385, 481 
Tardenoisian, 330, 357, 379, 476 
Tertiary, 115-22, 126, 127-37 
Tunisian, 377 

Florida, 409 

Flower, W. H., 11, 69 

Fontezuelas, 431, 432 

Foot of man and of ape, 77 

Foote, R. Bruce, 356, 357, 470 

Forbes, 375 

Forel, 60 

Forest-bed of Norfolk, 50, 

T49 

Fossil Men. See Man and Homo. 

Fossils, Quaternary, 43-5 

Fouquet, 390 

Foureau, 379 

Fox, Blue, 44, 53 

Foxhall, 137, 469 

Fraas, 131 

Fraipont, J., 25, 182, 193, 219, 339 

Franks, 344 

Frere, John, 5 

Freudenthal, 269 

Friedenthal, 451 

Fuegians, 226, 238, 458 

Fuhlrott, 178 

Furfooz, Belgium, 339 


Isl Fpl 20, 


G 


Gaboon, 380 

Gafsa, Tunisia, 374, 376 

Galatia, 344 

Galley-Hill skeleton, 143, 242 

Gambia, 380 

Gard, 329 

Gargas, cave at, 41 

Garonne Vailey, 37 

Gaudry, Albert, 12,°21, 255933, 64, 85; 
154, 155, 213, 277, 278, 289, 414, 451, 
456 

Gaul, 344, 345 

Gauls, the, 316, 344, 345 

Gautier, E. F., 379, 380, 387, 481 

Geer, de, .60, 61 

Geikie, J., 36, 46, 60 

Genyornis, 367 


INDEX 


Geoffroy Saint-Hilaire, Etienne, 14 
Isidore, 65, 71 
Geological periods, 28-30 
duration of, 55-64 

Geology, 28 

Gerboas, 54 

Germans, 344 

Gervais, P., 18, 69, 83, 295, 431 

Gresnerjs3 

Getulian, 376, 389 

Ghatsila, 477 

Gibbons, 69, 70, 99-I0OI, 104, 108, 109, 
152, 217, 439, 446 

Gibraltar skull, 180, 193, 205, 230, 232 

Giglioli, E. H., 366 

Gilbert, 60 

Gilder, 407 

Gillen, 363, 364 

Giraffe, 387 

Girod, P., 252, 296 

Giuffrida-Ruggeri, 71, 288, 320, 321, 341, 
346, 347, 348, 457 

Glacial deposits, 34 

Glaciers, 34, 36, 398, 414 

Gley, 236 

Glossotherium, 425 

Glutton, 44, 53 

Glyptodon, 108, 413, 415, 423, 426, 431, - 
432 

Gobert, Dr, 375, 376, 390 

Godavery, 357 

Godwin-Austen, 9 

Goguet, 4 

Gold Coast, 380 

Gondwana, continent of, 362 

Gorilla, 71, 74, 75; 202, 204, eosgagaus 
217, 220, 222, 439, 446, 453 

** Gorilla-men,” 453 

Gorjanovic-Kramberger, K., 184, 213 

Gosse, 60 ' 

Gosselet, J., 9 

Goths, 344 

Gourdan Cave, 182, 269, 287, 308 

Gourmont, Rémy de, 464 

Grandidier, G., 80 

Grant, Madison, 322, 344 

Gratiolet, 193 

Greece, 343, 344 

Greenland, 36 

Gregory, W. K., 78, 86, 88, 103, 108, 145, 
169, 171, 451, 453 

Grenelle, 142, 143, 242, 287 


INDEX 


Grimaldi caves, 23, 25, 33, 41, 42, 185, 
265-68 
Negroids, 461 
race, 49, 185, 268, 270-80, 312 
Grottos. See Caves 
Gruvel, 379 
Gryphopithecus, 84 
Grypotherium, 425 
(S501L) 3.,.372 
Guadeloupe, 6 
Guanchos, 288 
Guiana, 418 
Guillon, C., 265 
Guinea, French, 380 
Portuguese, 380 
Gunzian phase, 50 


H 


fladropithecus, 109 

Haeckel, E., 24, 106, 442, 452 

Flalitherium, 125 

Hallstatt, 343 

Hamy, E. T., 3, 17, 19, 24, 25, 141, 178, 
LOl,i1o2, 260, 261,281, 287)288, 280, 
294, 295, 318, 343, 372, 373, 380, 383, 
389 

Hand-hammers, 139, 382, 384 

Hansen, A. M., 60 

Hansen, Soren, 427, 428, 432 

Hapale jacchus, 67 

Hapalides, 70 

Hardy, M., 131, 263, 289 

Harpoons, Azilian, 329 

Magdalenian, 250, 251 

Hartmann, R., 70, 193 

Hassus, 4 

Haug, E., 33 

Haughton, S. H., 393, 394 

Hauser, O., 189 

Hauthal, R., 425 

Haward, F. N., 131 

Hay, 410 

Haynes, 373 

Heidelberg discovery, 26, 147, 157 

man. See Homo heidelbergensis 

Heim, 60 

Flelix hispida, 38 

Hermosean, the, 416, 420, 421, 422, 423, 


435 
Hervé, G., 294, 295, 336, 348 


493 


Hicks, 60 
Hittites, 345 
Holarctic regions, 372 
Holland, 339 
Holmes, W. H., 123, 397, 402, 426 
Holocene period, 323 
Holst, 60 
Holub, 387 
Hominians, 66, 71, 448, 456, 462 
Fflomo ethiopicus, 72. See also Man. 
afer, var. taganus, 476 
albus, 72 
alpinus, 318, 321, 336, 345, 348 
antiguus, 240, 242 
aurignacensis, 268 
capensts, 394 
caputinclinatus, 433 
CaUucasicus, 72 
cubensis, 426 
dawsont, 49, 51, 171 
delawarensis, 404 
ailuvit testis, 7 
europeus, 240, 320 
Saber, 464 
flavus, 72 
heidelbergensis, 49, 51, 148, 157, 169, 
205-07, 213, 227, 243, 447, 448, 449, 
459, 460, 464 
tndo-europeus, 72, 321 
krapinensts, 240 
mantllensis, 478 
mediterraneus, 318, 320, 321, 333, 334, 
345, 347, 348, 476 
meridtonalis, 321 
mongolicus, 72 
mousteriensis, 189, 240, 242 
neanderthalensis, 49, 52, 176-245, 448, 
449, 460, 463, 464, 467, 480, 482, 
483, 485, 486 
an archaic and extinct species, 242 
attitude and proportions of body, 224 
brain, 228-36, 473 
classification, 238, 480 
comparisons with modern types, 238, 
480 
face, 202 
girdles and limbs, 215 
lower jaw, 205 
teeth, 210 
reconstructions, 227 


skull, 194, 472, 473 
vertebral column, 214 


494 


Homo neogeus, 436 
niger, 72 
nordicus, 318, 329-23, 333, 340, 341-48 
Pampeus, 420, 434 
liocenicus, 432 
primtigenius, 240 
rhodestensts, 396, 481-486 
sapiens, 49, 71, 72, 313, 318, 320, 448-50, 
464, 480, 484 
sinemento, 433 
wadjakensts, 361, 478 
Hlomosimius, 116 
Homunculids, 431 
FHlomunculus patagonicus, 80, 90 
Ho-nan, 359 
Horace, 2 
Horse, remains of, 45, 148, 384, 471 
Hoteaux, grotte des, 265, 287 
‘*Hottentot Venus,” 207 
Hottentots, 279, 305, 306, 388 
Houllevigue, 56 
Houssaye, F., 126 
Houzé, M., 94, 106, 236 
Hovelacque, A., 443 
Howchin, Prof., 480 
Howitt, 363 
Hrdlicka, A., 123, 360, 405, 406, 407, 408, 
409, 410, 411, 420, 421, 426, 428, 429, 
431, 433, 434, 436 
Hungary, 341 
Huns, 345 
Hunter, 171 
Huxley, 21, 22, 179, 196, 197, 229, 439, 456 
Llyena spelaa, 41, 44, 53 
fTylobates, '70 


Iberians, 321, 343 
Ibero-Moorish industry, 376 
settlements, 390 
Ibex, 45, 54, 176 
Ichthyosaurus, 7 
Ightham, 117 
Illinois, 406 
Imprints of human steps, 367, 368, 405 
India, 117, 119, 343, 356-359, 459, 476 
Indiana, 402 
Industries, Acheulean, 140, 481 
Aurignacian, 246 
Azilian, 332 
Campignian, 331 


INDEX 


Industries, Capsian or Getulian, 376 
Chellean, 138-42 
Ibero-Moorish, 376, 377 
Magdalenian, 250 
Mauretanian, 377 
Moustierian, 139, 176, 177, 481 
Neolithic, 326 
pre-Chellean, 141 
Solutrean, 249, 481 
Tardenoisean, 330, 357, 476 
Inostranzeff, 341 
Invertebrates, 43 
Ipswich discovery, 26, 137, 143, 242 
Ireland, 339 
Irkutsk, 355 
Iron, origin of, 343 
Age, 4, 50, 234, 323, 343 
Issel, A., 114, 122 
Isturitz, 183 


Italy, 338, 342, 343 
Ivory Coast, 380 


J 


Jacques, V., 339, 381 
Japan, 355, 360, 478 
Japanese, 226 
Java, discoveries in, 93, 95-97, 361, 478- 
480 
Jaw-bones from Arcy-sur-Cure, 179 
Banolas, 193 
Ehringsdorf, 146-47, 174, 470 
Isturitz, 183 
La Ferrassie, 211 
La Naulette, 22, 180 
Malarnaud, 183, 193, 207 
Mauer, 26, 144, 147-57) 174, 207, 208 
Moulin-Quignon, 22, 142 
Ochos, 185 
Petit-Puy-Moyen, 185 
Piltdown, 26, 144, 166-68, 471, 472 
Jersey, teeth from, 212 
Joanny-Durand, 228 
Johnson, J. P., 382, 383, 385, 387 
Johnston, Sir Harry, 390 
Jones, Rupert, 382 
Jugo-Slavia, 280 
Joyce, 397 
Julien, 265, 268, 300 
Jullian, C., 344, 347 
Jussieu, A. de, 4 


INDEX 


K 


Kabyles, 288 

Kangaroos, 367, 477 

Kansas, flints from, 400, 401, 407 

Karar, Lake, 374 

Karnul, 357, 476 

Kate, Ten, 427 

Keane, 366, 418 

Keidel, Dr, 423 

Keith, Sir A., 100, 105, 108, 142, 143, 158, 
170, 180, 192, 212, 244, 339, 439, 451, 
453 

Kent’s Cavern, 9 

Kentish plateau, 117, 128 

Khurgans, 341, 360 

Kistna River, 357 

Kitchen middens, 331, 333, 366, 478 

Kjékkenmoddings. See Kitchen middens. 

Klaatsch, H., 189, 268, 366, 451, 453 

Knowles, F., 192 

Kobelt, 432 

Koch, 387 

Kollmann, J., 340 

Konakry Cave, 380 

Korea, 355 

Krapina discovery, 25, 184, 193, 213 

Krasnoiarsk, 353, 354 

Krause, 106 

Kubus, the, 358 


L 


La Celle-sous- Moret, 39 
La Chapelle-aux-Saints Cave, 26, 186- 
189, I9I 
man from, 26, 186, 245 
La Fére-en-Tardenois, 330 
La Ferrassie discovery, 26, 190, 206, 207, 
aa 07 220,221) 222223)479 
La Fontaine, 231 
La Gravette, 248 
La Madeleine, 17, 55, 269, 287, 308, 312 
La Mouillah caves, 390 
La Naulette discovery, 22, 180, 181, 193, 
206 
La Quina skeleton, 27, 191, 230, 232 
child’s skull, 472 
La Plata, 417 
Lacerda, 427 
Ladoga, Lake, 341 


495 


Lafitau, 4 
Lagoa-Santa, 426 
race, 427, 432, 434 
Lahontan, Lake, 4o1 
Lahr skeleton, 6, 178 
Lalande, P., 260 
Lalanne, Dr, 300, 302, 304, 305, 306 
Lamarck, 21, 24, 66 
Lamplugh, 383 
Landesque, Abbé, 307 
Lankester, Prof. Ray, 121 
Lansing, Kansas, 407 
Lapparent, A. de, 28 
Laps, 226 
Laquiére, 379 
Largeau, 379 
Larger, 244 
Lartet, Edouard, 13-18, 44, 47, 54, 82, 83, 
85, 249, 252, 261, 308, 326 
Lartet, Louis, 18, 23, 259, 260, 351 
Latapie, 375 


 Laterite deposits, 357 


Laugerie-Basse, 260, 287, 294, 308 
Laussel, rock shelter at, 257, 301 
Lautsch, 287 
Ledieu, A., 9 
Lehmann-Nitsche, R., 423, 425, 429, 432, 
434, 436 
Leijfontein, 385 
Leith, 383, 384 
Lemmings, 44, 53 
Lemur varius, 07, 73 
Lemurs, 66, 73, 452, 454, 457 
fossil, 78, 79, 108, 109 
Lena, 355 
Lenape Indians, 404 
stone, 400 
Lenormant, 373 
Lespugue, 303 
Libya, 374 
Libyans, 338, 345 
Libyo-Barbaric, 388 
Ligurians, 345 
Limeuil cave, 255 
Linnzeus, 65, 71, 320 
Lions, Cave, 40, 44, 53 
Lissauer, 348 , 
Lista, Ramon, 425 
Loess, 38, 51, 462 
“Loess Men” of Kansas, 407 


Logan, 357 
LohestM.,:26, 18159182, 219 


496 


Lorenzi, 266 

Lorthet Cave, 254 

Lourdes, Grotto of, 253 
Lovisato, 418 

Lozére Caves, 336 

Lubbock, Sir John, 18, 60, 323 
Lucretius, I 

Lund, P. W., 426, 427 
Lydekker, R., 69, 85, 106 
Lyelly C.iL 1,57; 00,400 


M 


Macaque monkeys, 82, 84, 85, 89, 217, 440 
MacCurdy, 410 
Macedonia, 344 
McEnery, 9 
MacGee, W. J., 402 
Machairodus, 43, 50, 408 
Macrauchenta, 413 
Madeleme, La, 17, 55, 200;4287,)300,0312 
Madras, 357, 476 
Madsen, 331 
Mafflian industry, 119 
Magdalenian period, 49, 54, 55, 246, 250, 
294, 307 
Maglemose, Denmark, 330, 333 
Mahoudeau, P. H., 126 
Mahudel, 4 
Makowsky, A., 264 
Malarnaud, jaw from, 183, 193, 207 
Malay Archipelago, 357, 362, 364 
Malta, 338, 343 
Mammals, extinct or emigrated, 43 
Quaternary, 43 
Tertiary, 31-2 
Mammoth, 17, 43, 44, 49, 52, 53, 176, 264, 
354 
Man, fossil, 6, 19, 26, 447-468. 
under Homo. 
beyond Europe, 26, 350-437, 461, 476- 
486 
Chellean, 
464 
Moustierian, 176-245, 448, 449, 460, 463 
of Reindeer Age, 246-313, 461, 463, 
467 
Tertiary, 14, 111-137, 450, 469 
Man, modern races, 314-349 
neolithic, 334-341 
Managua, Lake, 405 


See also 


138-75, 447-449, 459, 460, 


INDEX 


Manchuria, 355 

Manilla, 478 

Manouvrier, L., 94, 105, 183, 219 

Mantes, eolith factory at, 132-36 

Marcilly (Eure), 181 

Marett, R., 192 

Marine deposits, 34 

Marmosets, 67, 70 

Marmot, 54, 175 

Marsh, O. C., 94, 105, 174 

Marsoulas Cave, 308, 309 

Martin, ‘H:,'26,9192;:472,,473 

Martin, R., 94, 106, 400, 434 

Mas d’Azil Cave, 41, 55, 253, 308, 309, 327, 

328, 329, 332 

Mascara, 374 

Maschka, K., 264 

Massénat, E., 252, 260, 308 

Mastodon, 398, 399, 400 

Matsumoto, H., 359, 478 

Matthew, W. D., 78, 458 

Matthews, 365, 367 

Mauer Jaw, 26, 144, 147-57, 174, 205-07 
sands, 148, 149, 150 

Mauretania, 377, 387 

Mayet, L., 128, 337 

Mechta-Chateaudun, 389 

Meckel, 231 

Mecquenem, 353 

Mediterranean region, 33 
race, 320, 333, 334, 345, 347, 348, 390 

Megaladapis, 68, 80, 108 

Megalania, 367 

Megalonyx, 399 

Megatherium, 399, 400, 413, 414 

Melanesia, 428 

Melanesians, 238 

Mennel, 384 

Mentone Caves, 23, 25, 33, 41, 42, 1855 

261, 265, 266 

Man, 23, 263 

Mercati, Michel, 2, 3 

Mercedes, 431 

Merriam, Prof., 408 

Mesolithic period, 332 

Mesopithecus, 84, 85, 90, 91 

Mesopotamia, 353 

Mesvinian industry, 119 

Metal Ages, 4, 5, 50, 323, 342-43, 466 

Metallurgy, 342 

Meunier, S., 131 

Meunier, V., II, 12 


INDEX 


Mexico, 401, 407 
Mies, 207 
Miller, G. S., 145, 171, 452. 
Milne-Edwards, A., 18 
Minas Geraes, 426 
Minateda, 310, 311 
Mincopie, 126 
Mindelian phase, 48 
Minnesota, 402 
Miocene period, 32, 82, III, 112, 113, I14, 
116, 119, 124, 128, 420, 435, 486 
Miramar, 423, 424, 433, 434 
Mirzapur Cave, 477 
Mitra, Panchanan, 358, 359, 476, 477 
Mochi, 429, 433, 434) 435 
Moir, J. Reid, 120, 121, 137, 143, 144, 469 
Monaco, 337 
Mipertsl., Prince of, 25, 185, 252, 266, 
268, 281 
Mongolia, 355, 360 
Mongols, 345, 348, 360 
Monkeys, Catarrhine or long-nosed, 69- 
79, 217, 452, 454 
Cebian, 69, 70 
fossil, 51, 78-92 
Platyrrhine or flat-nosed, 69, 440, 452, 
454, 457 
Monotremes, 360 
Monroe, Lake, 409 
Montané, Dr, 426 
Monte-Aperto, 114 
Monte-Hermoso, 80, 416 
Montelius, 326, 341 
Montseron (Ariége), 183 
Montouliers (Hérault), 337 
Moorehead, W. K., 397 
Moraines, glacial, 35 
Moreno, 425, 431 
Morestin, 351 
Morgan, J. de, 326, 332, 342, 351, 353, 373, 
375, 376, 463 
Moro, Arroyo del, 433 
Morocco, 375, 390 
Mortullet, G. de, 18, 46, 47, 54, 60, 116, 
fi72120, 127, 138,142, 144, 260, 263, 
308, 343 
Mortillet, G. and A. de, 46, 116, 247, 330 
Mosbach, 149 
Mosean, the, 119 
Moszeik, 387 
Moulin-Quignon jawbone, 22, 142 
Moustier, Le, 52, 189, 232 


497 


Moustierian Man, 189, 232, 463 
period, 49, 52, 176, 187, 189, 467, 480 
Muds, 39, 51 
Mugem, Portugal, 333, 338, 339, 474 
Mureaux, Les, 335 
Musk Ox, 176, 405 
Mya truncata, 34 
Mylodon, 399, 413, 423 


N 


Nadaillac, Marquis de, 123, 397 
Namaqua skull, 394 
Natal, 384 
Natchez, 406 
Neanderthal Man, 21, 145, 176-245, 448, 
449, 453, 454, 460, 463, 464, 467, 
472, 473, 482. See also Homo 
neanderthalensis 
Neanderthal race, 193, 240 
Neanderthaloid skulls, 245, 389 
Nebraska, 407 
Necochea, 434 
Necrolemur, 79 
Neergaard, 331 
Negritos, 223, 361, 458, 478 
Negroes, 207, 229, 372, 458, 485 
Negroid race in North Africa, 390, 392 
Negroids, Grimaldi, 243, 271-80, 461 
affinities and survivals, 278, 288, 312, 
399, 394 
dentition, 277 
limb-bones, 278 
skeletons, 272 
skulls, 274 
Nehring, A., 54, 106, 145 
Neolithic period, 46, 50, 323, 324-26, 467 
in Africa, 377 
in Asia, 353, 357) 477 
in Europe, 463 
in Sahara, 380 
in S. Africa, 385 
transition from palzeolithic, 326-32 
Neolithic races, 334-41 
Neolithic skulls and skeletons in France, 
334 ef Seg 
Neomylodon, 425-26 
Neophytus, Frére, 351, 355 
Nerbudda, 357 
Neuville, 387 
Nevada, 402, 405 
New Hampshire, 402 


498 


New Jersey, 402 

New Mexico, 397 

New Orleans skeleton, 407 

Newton, E. T., 142 

Nicaragua, 405 

Nigeria, 380, 387 

Nile Valley, 374, 391 

Noel, 379 

Noetling, F., 356, 366, 368 

Nordic race, 320-23, 333, 340, 341-48 
Nordjenskidld, 425 

Norfolk forest bed, 50, 117, 128, 149 
Normans, 344 

Notharctus, 78 

Notothertum, 368, 369 

Noulet, Dr, 11 

Nubia, 387 

Nubian type, 390 

Nuesch, 60 





O 


Obercassel, 268, 287, 294 

Obermaier, H., 136, 141, 178, 193, 252, 
264, 331, 384 

Oceanic Isles, 324 

Ochos Cave, 185 

(Eningen, 8 

Ofnet, Bavaria, 332 

Ohio, 402 

Okapi, 

Oldham, R. D., 357 

Oldoway skull, 391, 462 

Oleminsk, 355 

Oligocene period, 32, 79, 81, 82, III, 114, 
128, 455 

Olmo skull, 142, 242 

Omaha, 407 

Onohippidium, 426 

Oran, 390 

Orang-outangs, 70, 103, 152, 202, 205, 
217, 446 

“ Orang-men,” 453 

Orange River State, 358, 382, 383, 481 

d’Orbigny, 416 

Oreopithecus, 83, 90 

Osborn, H. F., 60, 78, 105, 108, 333, 400, 
407, 451, 453, 472 

Osprey, 409 

Ostiaks, 226, 360 

Otta, Portugal, 115, 116, 119, 128 

Outes, F., 418, 419, 420, 421, 426, 429 

Outes and Bruch, 416, 417, 418 


INDEX 


Ouztdan, 374 
Ovejero, 432 
Oviedo, Spain, 338 
Owen, 70 

Owl, Snowy, 53 


ie 


Pacheco, E.ooy 193,252 
Paidopithex, 84 
Paintings, African, 306, 387-389 
Asiatic, 357 
Australian, 365, 367 
Indian, 357, 477 
palzeolithic, 252 
Spanish, 308-11 
Paleoanthropus, 151, 238, 448 
Palzolithic period, characters of, 326 
classification of, 49, 50-6 
definition, 46 
in Africa, 372 
in Asia, 351 
in Australia, 361 
in North America 
in South America, 413 
transition to Neolithic, 326 
Palzeolithic art, 252 ef seg. 
Palzontology, 443, 444 
Paleopithecus, 86, 87, 90 
Palaeosimia, 86 
Palestine, 351 
Palikao deposit, 374 
Pallary, P., 374, 375, 377) 390 
Pampas formations, 415-18, 419, 421, 426, 
431, 434, 447, 462 
Pan vetus, 89, 171 
Pangolin, giant, 108 
Papuans, 364, 428 
Paraderos, 418, 424 
Parisians, 229 
Pascal, 470 
Patagonia, 413, 418, 419, 425, 427, 429 
Paula, de, 333, 338 
Paulitchke, 381 
Paviland discovery, 258, 287 
Peat-bogs, 38, 39, 54 
Pebbles, coloured, 329, 330 
Pech de PAzé, 191 
Peixoto, 427 
Pelasgians, 345 
Pelvis, in Man and in Apes, 76 
Pelycodus, 78 
Penck, A., 36, 46, 51, 60, 131 


INDEX 


Pefnon, 406 
Peoples, ancient, 343 
Percussion bulb, 127 
Peringuez, Dr L., 305, 382, 384, 385, 386, 
387, 388, 392, 395 
Permian Age, glacial and tension in, 35 
Perrier, 441 
Persia, 353 
Perthes, Boucher de, 9-13, 21, 22, 137 
Peru, 397, 418, 426 
Petersen, 331 
Petit-Puy-Moyen, 185 
Petrie, Flinders, 375 
Peyrony, 26, 190-91, 220, 252 
Philippines, 361, 478 
Pheecians, 345 
Pheenicia, 359 
Phoenicians, 345 
Piette, Edouard, 18, 47, 252, 297-98, 308, 
328-30, 333, 340 
Pig, 45 
Pilgrim, G. E., 83, 85, 86, 88, 359, 460 
Pilgrim, L., 60 
Piltdown discovery, 26, 144, 157-175, 227, 
229, 447, 461, 471 
Pinchon, Dr, 375 
Pit-traps, pseudo, 125 
Pithecanthropus, 25, 93-110, 227, 359, 446, 
448, 484 
age, 98 
brain, IOI 
deposit, 95 
femur, 103 
genealogical relationships, 
446, 448 
teeth, 102 
skull-cap, 99 
Pittard, E., 340 
Placard, Grotte du, 127, 249, 269, 287 
Platyrrhine (Flat-nosed) Monkeys, 69, 
452, 454, 455, 457, 458 
Pleistocene period, divisions of, 48, 50-56, 
Age in America, 398 
Plestadapis, 79 
Pliny, 2 
Pliocene period, 32, 38, 48, 49, 89, 112-14, 
128, 466 
Pliohylobates, 84 
Pliopithecus, 13, 82, 92, 446 
Podbaba, 181 
Poland, 341 
Polynesians, 238 


105, 200, 


499 


Pomel, 374, 386 
Pontimelo, 431 
Porcupine, 44 
Port Arthur, 355 
Portugal, 331, 333, 338 
Post-glacial period, 53 
its duration, 61 
Pouancé, 114 
Pre-Chellean period, 141, 460, 465 
Predmost, 263, 287 
Prestwich, J., 11, 60, 117 
Pretoria, 384 
Prévost, Constant, 9, 10 
Primary Age, 30 
Primates, 31, 445, 450 
classification of, 65-78 
Eocene, 79 
evolution of, 444 
relationships and affinities, 438, 452 
Prince’s Cave, 261, 266 
Prince Jean Cave, 269 
Prince of Monaco, 25, 185, 252, 266, 268, 
281 
Pronyctictbus, 79 
Propliopithecus, 82, 83, 90, 446, 455 
Protanthropus, 238 
Prothomo, 81, 238, 431, 434 
Protoadapts, 79 
Pruner-Bey, 181, 193, 259, 281, 295 
Prunieres, Dr; 336, 337 
Pumpelly, R., 353 
Pupa muscorum, 38 
Putnam, F. W., 403, 405 
Puy Courny, 115-16, 119, 128 
Puydt, M. de, 181 
Pygmies, 238, 340, 390, 432 
Pyrenees, 329 
Pyrotherium, 413 


Q 

Quadrumana, 66 
Quartzites from Africa, 282, 283 

from Australia, 480 

from India, 356 

from Trenton, 402 
Quaternary beaches, 33 

formations, 33 

invertebrates, 43 

mammals, 43 

period, 29, 47, 48 

period, duration of, 59-64 

period, classification of, 42-55 


500 INDEX 


Quaternary period, fossils of, 43-5 
period, Man in, 453 
period, plants of, 43 
Quatrefages, A. de, 8, 19, 24, 65, 71, 112, 
- 116, 128; 141, 179, 258, 259, 260, 281, 
283, 287, 288, 289, 294, 318, 334, 337, 
427, 428, 455, 458, 459 
Ouina, lia, 27,101,230, 2327-472 
Quinet, Edgar, 465 


R 


Rabourdin, 379 
Races and peoples, 315-49, 458 
Alpine, 318, 321, 345 
Armenoid, 321 
Arverne, 321 
Azilian, 334 
Cannstadt, 180 
Celtic, 321 
Celto-Slav, 321 
Cévenole, 321 
Chancelade, 49, 263, 289-96, 312 
Cro-Magnon, 49, 242, 259, 28I-9I, 310, 
312, 336, 337, 338; 339) 349, 391, 461 
European, 318 
Germanic, 320 
Grimaldi, 49, 185, 268, 270-81, 312 
Ibero-insular, 321 
Kymric, 320 
Lagoa-Santa, 427 
Laponoid, 321 
Mediterranean. See Mediterranean 
Mugem, 333, 338, 474 
Negrito, 361 
Negroid, 390 
Neolithic, 334-41 
Nordic, 320, 344 
occidental, 321 
Rhetic, 321 
Scandinavian, 320 
Solutrean, 287 
Teutonic, 320 
Yellow, 397 
Yellows, Whites, and Blacks, 457, 461 
Ragazzoni, 122 
Rahon, 290 
Raigarh, 357, 477 
Rames, J. B., 116, 128 
Ramstrom, M., 166 
Rancho la Brea, 408 
Ranke, 106, 348 
Raphael, 231 


Ras el Kelb, 352 

Raymonden Cave, 263, 289 

Réa, M., 359, 476 

Recher! 7 341 

Réck rely 301,1302 

Red Rocks, 261, 262, 267 

Redeyef Cave, 390 

Redskins, 296 

Regnault, F., 183 

Reid, Clement, 160 

Reinach, Salomon, 3, 116, 178, 247, 257, 

316, 373 

Reindeer, 45, 53, 54, 55, 176, 255, 354 
Age, 44, 45-55, 246-58, 461, 463 

Reinhardt, 427 

Renaissance, 3 

Retouching, I19, 127 

Reutelian, 118, 119 

Revoil, 381 

Reygasse, M., 375, 376, 481 

Rhine valley, 19 

Rhinoceros etruscus, 48, 49 


merckt, 43, 45, 48, 49, 50, 184, 471 
tichorhinus, 43, 44, 49, 52, 53, 176, 354, 
387 

Rhinoceros hunt, painting of, 477 

Rhodesia, 382, 384, 395, 481-86 

Ribeiro, C., 116, 128 

Richard, Abbé, 351, 379 

Rigollot, D., 11 

Ripley, W. Z., 318, 319, 320, 322,341 

Rissian glacial phase, 50 

Ristori, 83 

Rivet, Dr, 427, 428 

Riviére, E., 23, 185, 252, 266, 268, 284 

Robertson, R. W. D., 94, 105 

Robinson, Orange River Colony, 383, 481 

Rock Bluff, Illinois, 406 

Rock sculptures. See Engravings. 
shelters, 41 

Romanes, 441 

Romero, A, 424 

Rosario, 431 

Rostro-carinate flints, 120, 121 

Rostrup, 331 

Roth, S., 416, 423, 425, 429, 431, 432, 434 

Roule, L., 183 

Roulet, 379 

Russel, 60 

Russia, 329, 341, 342, 346, 360 

Rutot, A., 60, 117-19, 128, 135, 136 

Rzehak, 185 


—_—-- 


INDEX 


S 
Sahara, 373, 387 
Stone Age in, 379 ef seq. 
Saiga antelope, 54 
Saint-Acheul, 12, 52, 112, I13, 140, 464. 
See also Acheulean. 
Saint-Blaize, Cape, 384 
Saint-Hilaire, E. Geoffroy, 14 
Saint- Hilaire, Isidore Geoffroy, 65, 71 
Saint-Martin, de, 379 
Saint-Périer, M. and Mme., 303, 473 
Saint-Prest, 48, 114, 149 
Saladero, 431 ‘ 
Salado River, 426, 433 
Salamander, 7 
Salléles-Cabardés Cave, 183 
Salmon, engraving of, 254 
Salmon, P., 332, 336 
Sambaquis, 419, 427 
Samborambon skeleton, 432 
Samoyeds, 226 
Sanchez y Sanchez, 478 
Sansan (Gers), 13, 14, 82 
Santa-Cruzian, 80 
Saracens, 345 
parasin,.F. and P:, 358, 361 
Sarasin, P., 131 
Sarauw, 60, 331, 332 
Sarmatians, 345 
Saulcy, de, Io 
Savenkov, 353-55 
Savona, I14, 122 
Scandinavia, 342, 346 
Scelidothertum, 432 
Schaaff hausen, 21, 178, 22 
Schaffhausen, 269 
Schenk, A., 340 
Scheuchzer, 8 
Schipka Cave, 181 
Senliz, A., 333, 341 
Schlosser, M., 81, 451 
Schmerling, 9, 258 
Schmidt, R., 332, 333 
Schoetensack, Otto, 26, 147, 148, 
156, 362 
Schwalbe, G., 94, 106, 146, 178, 229, 435, 
451, 479, 471 
Schweinfurth, 375 
Schweizersbild, 340 
Scoriz in Pampas formations, 421 
Scotland, 329 
Screes, 40 
Sculpture, Aurignacian, 297-307 


PSi, 


501 


Sculpture, Magdalenian, 307 
Scythia, 345 
Secondary Age, 29 
Séguin, 431 
Seine valley, 23, 39 
Selenka, Mme., 71, 94 
Seligman, C. G., 481 
Sellards, Dr, 409, 410 
Semnopithecus, 84, 85, 89, 90 
Senegal, 380 
Senois, the, 358 
Sera, G. L., 86, 180, 244, 451, 452, 455 
Serot;, Givisioe, 1222142. 236,.921, 338, 
347, 399; 443 
Serrano, P., 308 
Serres, Marcel de, 8 
Seton-Karr, 357, 381 
Shells, Quaternary, 34, 38 
Shell-mounds in S. America, 418 
Siamang, 70 
Siberia, 353, 355-60 
Sicily, 338, 376 
Silesia, 341 
Silurian glacial extension, 35 
Stmia satyrus, 70, 86 
Simians, 66, 68 
Szmtide, 69 
Sinal, 354 
Singanpur, 477 
Singhburn, 477 
Siret, M:, 339 
Stvapithecus, 86-89, 90, 359, 446 
Siwalik Hills, 84, 85, 98, 359, 446, 458 
Skeletons from Aurignac, 258, 287 
Boskop, 392 
Brinn, 263, 287 
Castenedolo, 122 
Chancelade, 263, 287, 289-96 
Charleston, 406 
Chehiy92355142,.143, 242 
Combe-Capelle, 268, 287 
Cro-Magnon, 23, 260, 281 
Duruthy or Sorde, 260, 294, 337 
Florida, 409 
Galley-Hill, 142, 143, 242 
Gourdan, 182, 287 
Grenelle, 23, 142, 143, 287 
Grimaldi, 23,25, 185,260, 265, 272,283-88 
Guadeloupe, 6 
Ipswich, 143, 242 
Krapina, 25, 184, 213 
La Chapelle-aux-Saints, 26, 186, 194- 
234 


502 


Skeletons, La Ferrassie, 26, 190, 191, 206, 
207, 211, 220:23 

from La Quina, 26, I9gI 
Lagoa Santa, 426-29 
Lahr, 6, 19, 178 
Lansing, 407 
Laugerie- Basse, 260, 287, 294 
Le Moustier, 189 
LeGseUreais acohete? 
Mugem, 333, 338, 474 
Natchez, 406 
Neanderthal, 21, 178, 214, 215 e¢ seg. 
Obercassel, 268, 287, 294 
Oldoway, 391 
Omaha, 407 
Paviland, 287 
Penon, 406 
Predmost, 264, 287 
Rancho la Brea, 408 
Savona, 122 
Soda Creek, 406 
Solutré, 258, 287 
S. America, 426 
Spy, 24, 181, 193, 218, 219 
Trenton, 406 

Skulls. See also Skeletons 
from Asia, 360 
Boskop, 392, 462 
Bréchamps, 183 
Broken Hill Mine, 395, 482-86 
Bruniquel, 287 
Brix, 181 
Calaveras, 123 
Cannstadt, 141, 178 
Chancelade, 291 
Combe-Capelle, 268, 287, 288 
Cro-Magnon, 282, 287 
Denise, I41 
Engihoul, 287 
Engis, 258, 287 
Gibraltar, 180, 193, 205, 230, 232 
Grimaldi negroid, 274-78 
Japan, 478 
Java, 99-103, 478-85 
La Chapelle-aux-Saints, 186, 194-205, 

207 

La Madeleine, 287 
La Mouillah, 390 
La Quina, 191, 472 
Laugerie- Basse, 260, 287 
Lautsch, 287 
Le Moustier, 189 
Le Placard, 287, 294 


INDEX 


Skulls, Namaqua, 394 
Neanderthal, 21, 178 e¢ seg. 
Neanderthaloid, 389 
Ofnet, 332, 333 
Oldoway, 391, 462 
Olmo, 142, 243 
Pech de PAzé, I91 
Penon, 407 
Piltdown, 26, 163-66 © 
Pithecanthropus, 99-103, 478 
Podbaba, 181 
Rock Bluff, 406 
Talgai, 27, 369, 462 
Tonkin, 360 
Trenton, 406, 407 
Wadjak, 361, 478-480 

Skullsand skeletons, Neolithic, in Belgium 

and Holland, 339 
in Bohemia, Silesia, and Russia, 341 
in British Isles, 339 
in Germany, 340 
in Iberian peninsula, 338 
in Italy, 338 
of Metal Ages, 342-43 
from Monaco, 337 
from New Orleans, 406 
from Pampean, 431, 434 
from Penon, 406, 407 
from Rock Bluff, Illinois, 406 
of Scandinavia and Denmark, 341 
from S. Africa, 388 
from S. America, 405 e¢ seg. 
in Switzerland, 340 

Slavs, 345 

Smtlodon, 408, 426 

Smith, A. S., 369, 370 

Smith, Brough, 363 

Smith, Prof. G. Elliot, 101, 109, 158, 159, 

171, 390, 393) 395) 472, 483 

Sith cise Tet 

Snail-shell mounds, 376, 389, 390 

Soda Creek, Colorado, 406 

Solilhac, 48, 149 

Sollas, W. J., 60, 105, 121, 131, 180,)25e5 

286, 295, 306, 365 

Solutré, 55, 258, 287 

Solutrean period, 49, 55, 249, 481 

Somaliland, 381, 382, 387 

Sorde cave, 260, 294, 337 

Soudan, 380, 387 

South Africa, 381, 385, 481-486 

Spain, 329, 331, 339, 343, 388 

Spencer, 363, 364 


INDEX 


Spy skeleton, 24, 181, 182, 193, 218, 219 
Squirrels, prairie, 54 
Stainier, X., 331 
Statuettesfrom Brassempouy, 297, 298, 303 
from Laugerie-Basse, 307, 308 
from Lespugue, 303, 473 
from Mas d’Azil, 307, 308 
from Mentone, 300, 305 
Steenstrup, J., 331 
Steenstrup, R. J. V., 331 
Steinmann, 269, 416 
Steppe fauna, 54 


Stone Age in Africa, 372, 373 ez seg., 480 


in Asia, 353-361 

in Australia, 361, 364, 366 

in Central Africa, 380 

in Egypt, 480 

in Europe, 138-141, 176, 177, 247, 323, 

332 

in the Sahara, 379 

in Siberia, 355 

Inis. Africa, 331, 385 

in S. America, 418, 419 
Stormberg Mountains, 384 
Stow, 387 
Strabo, 2 
“Strand Loopers,” 388 
Strombus bubonius, 34 
Suffolk Crag, 120, 12: 
Sultan-Selo, 280 
Sumatra, 358, 361 
Sumerians, 345 
Sumidouro Cave and Lake, 426, 428 
Susa, 353 
Stussenborn, 50, 149 
Swaziland, 383 
Switzerland, 329, 340 
Syria, 351, 353 
Szombathy, J., 265, 300 


de 


Talgai skull, 27, 369-71, 462 

Taltal, 486 

Taramelli, A., 381 

Tardenoisian industry, 330, 331 
flints from India, 357 

Tarel, 379 

Tarsius, 78, 452, 454 

Tarsier apes, 78 

Tasmania, 362, 368 

Tasmanians, 155, 362, 364, 366, 368, 478, 

479 


503 


Taubach discovery, 144-46 
Tchad, Lake, 387 
Tebessa, 390 
Teeth of Australians, 103 
of Grimaldi negroids, 277-78 
from Jersey, 192, 212 
of Mauer jaw, 154, 155 
of Neanderthal Man, 210-13 
from Piltdown, 168-70, 471 
of Pithecanthropus, 103 
from Taubach, 144, 145 
from Wellington Cave, 369, 371 
Teilhard de Chardin, P., 159, 168 
Tells, 353 
Tennessee, 400 
Ternifine deposit, 374 
Terraces, alluvial, 37, 38, 51 
Tertiary Age, 29, 445, 459 
period, mammals of, 31-2 
Man, 14, 15, 111-38, 450 
Ameghino’s theories of, 430 
Testut, L., 263, 289, 290, 291, 293 
Tetraprothomo, 80, 430, 431, 435, 447 
Teutons, 344 
Theal, 387 
Thebes, 480 
iPhenay, lit, 115) 110, £10,126, 127, 126 
Thomas, Cyrus, 363, 379, 397 
Thomsen, 4 
Thylacoleo, 368 
Tibet, 360 
Tierra del Fuego, 427 
Tilloux, 113 
Timbuctoo, 380 
Toalas, 358 
Toldt, 207 
Tommasini, 374, 390 
Tomsk, 355 
Tonkin, 357, 360 
Topinards, Py 6G, 72, 1062438) 107, 200, 
226,317, 418 
Torii, M. and Mme., 355 
Toulouse, 8, 37, 113, 236 
Tournal, 8 
Tournier, Abbé, 265 
Toxodon, 413, 423 
Transvaal, 382, 383, 392 
Trenton gravels, 402, 406, 412, 419 
Trinil, 95-7 
Triprothomoa, 81, 430, 431 
Troglodytes dawsont, 89, 170, 171 
niger, 67, 72 
Troglodytes’ Cave, Oran, 390 


504 


Trogontheriuzit, 108 
‘Tufas, caleareous, 38, 39 
Tumuli, 341 

Tundras, fauna of, 53 
Tunisia, 374, 375, 376, 389 
Turkestan, 343, 353 
Turner, W., 106, 204, 339 
Typotheriumt, 413 


U 
Uhle, Dr, 486 
Ultima Speranza Cave, 425 
Umbrians, 345 
Ursus etruscus, 148, 149 
Spele@us, 43, 52 


V 

Vaal, the, 383, 384 

Vaillant, Dr, 353 

Valle, Spain, 331 

Varnambool, 367, 368 

Vaughan, 409, 410 

Veddahs, 223, 226, 238, 358, 458 

Venus, Hottentot, 279, 306 

Venus from Lespugue, 473, 474, 475 

‘Venus impudique,” 307, 309 

Verneau,: R.,°105,.155,1200,)208, 2724275. 
278-81, 284, 288, 289, 312, 335, 338, 
360, 418, 427 

Vero, Florida, 409 

Vertebra pierced by arrow, 337 

Vertebral column in Man and in Apes, 74 

Vertebrates, order ofappearance, 29, 31, 32 

Verworn, Prof. M., 128, 269, 301 

NVezere Valley. 17, 23 

Vianna de Lima, A., 72 

Vibraye, de, 18, 179, 252 

Victoria Falls, 383 

Victoria Nyanza, 387 

Vilhonneur, 287 

Villanueva, 433 

Villeneuve, L. de, 185, 266, 268, 270, 338 

Vinci, Leonardo da, 3 

Vindhyan Hills, 476 

Virchow, R., 22, 94, 106, 145, 179, 189, 
229, 470 

Vis, de, 369 

Vitkovsky, 355 

Vogt, C., 21, 72, 431, 452, 454 

Voguls, 226 

Volcanic formations, 41 

Volk, E., 404, 406, 407 


INDEX 


Volkov, 354 


Volz, W., 108 
Vosburg, 481 
W 

Wadyjak, Java, 361, 478-480, 484 

Walcott, 60 ; 

Waldeyer, 106 

Walkhoff, 207 

Waeramunga tribe, 364 

Warrens> stints 

Warren, Upham, 60 

Waterston, Prof., 170 

Weber, Dr, 390 

Weimar fossils, 144, 470 

Weisgerber, 379 . 

Weiss, Dr, 145 

Welcome, 380 

Wellington Caves, 368, 369, 371 

Weyland, 381 

White, 387 

White races, 457 

Whitney, 123 

Willendorf, 300, 301, 303, 305, 474 

Willis, Bailey, 416, 420, 421, 426, 432, 
433, 434 

Williston, 401 

Wilser, 321, 346 

Wilson, Th., 123, 369, 400, 4oI 

Winchell, N. H., 60, 4or 

Winge, H., 331 

Wolf, Cave, 53 

Wood-Jones, F., 452, 454 

Woodward, Prof. Smith, 26, 60, 157-59, 
162, 164, 166, 167, 169-75, 396, 472, 
481, 483 

Worsaae, 331, 373 

Wright, E., 421, 426 

Wright, F., 402. 

Wurmian phase, 51 


Y 
Yellow Races, 397, 457 


Z 
Zaborowski, 360 
Zambesi terraces, 383 
Zeltner, F. de, 379, 380, 387 
Zumoffen, 351, 352, 359 
Zupanic, 280 














i y ¥ iy 
iy a ats ee mh 





Nii 





3011 037929673 





evry
