Historical Studies in Philosophy
Émile Boutroux (Fred Rothwell, trans.) (1912)
========================================================================

PROVENANCE NOTE (Tower of Babel staging): Boutroux's Études d'histoire de la philosophie — historical studies in philosophy. Rothwell's 1912 translation.

========================================================================

UNIVERSITY  OF  ILLINOIS
LIBRARY.


Class


MrlO-20M


on  or  before
-  stamped  below,
charge  is  made  on  all
books.

U.  of  I.  Library


OCT  8'37

JUNt5'3i
OCT  £U|S4
L  29


JW.  27 1346


OC!  88H943


-2


31


SEf>  2  0  1989
08


11148-S


HISTORICAL STUDIES IN  PHILOSOPHY


MACMILLAN  AND  CO.,  LIMITED

LONDON  •  BOMBAY  •  CALCUTTA
MELBOURNE

THE  MACMILLAN COMPANY

NEW  YORK  •  BOSTON  •  CHICAGO
DALLAS  •  SAN  FRANCISCO

THE  MACMILLAN  CO.  OF  CANADA,  LTD.

TORONTO


HISTORICAL  STUDIES


IN


PHILOSOPHY

BY

EMILE BOUTROUX

MEMBER OF THE INSTITUTE
PROFESSOR OF THE UNIVERSITY OF PARIS


AUTHORIZED  TRANSLATION

BY

FRED ROTHWELL, B.A.


MACMILLAN AND CO., LIMITED
ST. MARTIN'S STREET, LONDON

1912


COPYRIGHT


AUTHOR'S PREFACE

THIS  book,  which  a  careful  and  exact  translation  now
introduces  to  English  readers,  is  a  collection  of  studies,
independent  of  one  another,  and  written  mostly  at  the
express  invitation  of  my  pupils  or  colleagues.  As  I
had  devoted  numerous  lectures  at  the  fccole  Normale
Superieure  and  the  S or  bonne  to  a  minute  analysis  of
various  philosophical  systems,  and  as  I  was  unable  to
find  time  to  set  them  forth  in  detail,  the  suggestion  was
made  that  I  might,  at  all  events,  publish  a  resume  of
the  conclusions  at  which  I  had  arrived.  My  first
impulse  was  to  decline  a  task  which  seemed  somewhat
ingrate  and  risky.  Indeed,  it  is  no  easy  matter  to  act
upon  the  mind  of  the  reader,  unless  you  lead  him,
to  some  extent,  along  the  paths  you  have  already
traversed,  on  to  the  position  you  yourself  have  reached.
And  even  though  he  may  not  feel  inclined  to  make
your  conclusions  his  own,  he  will  regard  them  with  a
certain  amount  of  indulgence  if  he  sees  that  you  have
been  at  considerable  pains  to  reach  them.  Frequently,
too,  quite  apart  from  your  results,  he  will  fully

V


26630


vi  STUDIES  IN  PHILOSOPHY

appreciate  the  investigations  you  have  made.  As
Victor  Hugo  said  :

.  .  .  Dieu  benit  1'homme
Non  pour  avoir  trouve,  mais  pour  avoir  cherche.

It  may  be  that  there  are  critics  good  enough  to  be  less
severe  than  God,  but  if  scarcely  anything  beyond  results
are  set  forth,  the  reader  will  not  feel  inclined  to  show
you  much  indulgence  !

In  spite  of  these  scruples,  the  reason  I  consented  to
write  these  short  studies,  almost  devoid,  as  they  are,  of
the  critical  basis  on  which  they  are  constructed,  is  that
I  cannot  accustom  myself  to  the  idea — often  tacitly
admitted  if  it  be  not  openly  avowed — that  in  dealing
with  the  history  of  philosophy  all  inquiry  into  the  true
and  inmost  thought  of  a  master  can  never  be  other
than  premature,  and  that  a  genuine  savant  should
concentrate  his  attention  upon  the  search  after  texts,
their  comparison  with  one  another,  and  the  discussions
to  which  they  give  rise.  I  am  aware  that  Fustel
de  Coulanges,  one  of  our  great  historians,  has  said  that
a  single  hour  of  synthesis  presupposes  centuries  of
analysis.  His  own  admirable  generalisations,  however,
form  a  magnificent  contradiction  of  this  formal,  abstract
doctrine.  Perhaps  we  should  regard  as  more  truly
in  conformity  both  with  the  conditions  of  scientific
research  and  with  the  method  actually  adopted  by
Fustel  de  Coulanges,  the  following  maxim  of  an
eminent  geographer,  Professor  W.  M.  Davis,  of


PREFACE  vii

Harvard  University  :  Invention  may  advisedly  go  hand
in  hand  with  observation.  The  analytical  study  of  the
texts  suggested  to  me  a  certain  interpretation  of  the
works  of  the  masters,  just  as  certain  previous  hypo-
theses as  to  the  meaning  of  these  works  had  served  me
as  heuristic  principles  in  the  analytical  study  itself:
some  of  the  best  established  results  are  given  in  the
present  volume.  I  am  disposed  to  regard  them  as
nothing  more  than  starting-points  for  subsequent
research,  ideas  to  be  tested  anew  and  revised  by  a  com-
parison with  facts  ;  still  they  form,  in  some  measure,
the  living  synthesis  of  several  of  my  previous  studies.

Moreover,  I  do  not  think  it  will  ever  be  possible,
in  setting  forth  a  system  of  philosophy,  to  content
oneself  with  collecting  extant  documents,  manipulating
them,  and  finally  extracting  their  substance,  by  quite
mechanical  processes,  after  the  fashion  of  a  chemist.
One  of  our  cleverest  linguists,  M.  Michel  Breal,  in  his
famous  work,  Essai  sur  la  Stmantique,  is  altogether
opposed  to  the  opinion  that  language  possesses  an
existence  of  its  own,  and  is  capable  of  being  studied
per  se,  independently  of  the  living  mind  of  man  who
is  continually  building  it  up  and  perfecting  it.  "  Under-
neath the  phenomena  presented  by  language,"  he  con-
cludes, "  we  feel  the  action  of  a  thought  releasing
itself  from  the  form  to  which  it  is  chained  down  .  .  .
Mens  agitat  molem"

A  fortiori  is  this  the case  with  systems  of  philo-


Vlll


sophy,  which,  assuredly,  are  something  more  than
a  blind  impulse,  an  enthusiastic  aspiration  of  the  mind  :
they  represent  the  methodical  effort  of  an  intelligence
employing  all  its  knowledge  and  dialectic  power  in
an  attempt  to  confine  reality  within  clear  and  well-
connected  formulas.  Still,  the  living  mind  of  the
philosopher  is  never  absent  from  his  work ;  the
system  should  never  be  conceived  as  separate  from
its  creator,  like  fruit  as  distinct  from  the  tree  on
which  it  has  grown.  Consequently,  in  order  to  under-
stand an  author's  work  in  the  way  he  meant  it  to  be
understood,  i.e.  to  understand  it  aright,  we  must  make
it  our  constant  endeavour  not  merely  to  search  into  the
visible  letter  of  the  text  and  all  the  details  of  docu-
ments, but  also  to  think  and  live  with  the  author
himself,  to  enter  into  his  spirit.  In  reality,  it  is  this
interior  principle  of  development, — which,  in  truth,
cannot  be  isolated  from  the  visible  forms  but  rather
governs  them  and  gives  them  their  particular  aspect,—
it  is  the  active,  ever-present  soul  of  the  author,  that
the  historian  should  endeavour  to  set  before  us,
enabling  us  to  enter  intuitively,  as  it  were,  into  that
soul  and  attain  to  direct  participation  therewith.

If  this  effort  be  made,  our  understanding  of  the
work  becomes  as  profound  and  adequate  as  we  can  make
it.  Nor  is  this  all.  Just  as  we  must  enlarge  our  own
mind,  if  we  would  thus  comprehend  thoughts  greater
than  our  own,  so  it  would  seem  that  to  cultivate  the


PREFACE  ix

history  of  philosophy  in  this  way  is  not  only  to  learn  to
know  philosophers  but  also  to  become  more  capable  of
philosophizing  ourselves.  To  what  heights  might  we
not  aspire,  what  claims  might  we  not  make,  if  some-
thing of  the  genius  of  the  masters  could  really  live
again  within  us  and  enter  into  our  thought  !  "  Das  ist,"
said  Goethe,  "  die  Eigenschaft  des  Geistes,  dass  er  den
Geist  ewig  anregt."  Is  not  this  submission — in  a  happy
blend  of  effort  and  abandon — to  the  potent  influence  of
the  masters,  this  attempt  to  carry  on  their  work  and
message,  the  natural  and  legitimate  object  and  end  of
our  historical  investigations  ?

£MILE  BOUTROUX.

PARIS,  March  7,  1912.


TRANSLATOR'S NOTE

THE  word  science  throughout,  and  especially  in  the
essays  on  Socrates  and  Aristotle,  has  been  frequently
used  both  in  this  translation  and  in  the  original  work,
to  render  the  word  a-o<j>ia,  as  being  preferable  to  wisdom
and  to  sagesse  alike.  It  is  therefore  to  be  interpreted
as  connoting  the  highest  branches  of  learning  and
philosophy.


CONTENTS

PAGE

THE  HISTORY  OF  PHILOSOPHY ...... I

SOCRATES,  THE  FOUNDER  OF  MORAL  SCIENCE  ... 8

ARISTOTLE  . . . .  . . . .74

JACOB  BOEHME,  THE  GERMAN  PHILOSOPHER  . . . .169

DESCARTES. . . . . . . . . .234

KANT .  . 255

INDEX ...  ...... 331


THE HISTORY OF  PHILOSOPHY

i  rb  iSiov.  —  ARISTOTLE,  Eth.  Nic.  i.  7.  1097  b  35.


THE  more  historical  works  on  every  subject  multiply,
the  more  difficult  does  it  become  to  find  agreement  as
to  the  object  of  history  itself.  Can  the  science  studied
by  a  Renan,  when  investigating  the  moral  laws  of  man-
kind and  the  universe,  be  the  same  as  that  studied  by
a  Fustel  de  Coulanges,  who  is  ignorant  as  to  the  very
existence  of  historical  laws,  and  whose  sole  ambition  is
to  connect  a  few  facts  with  their  immediate  causes  ?

The  history  of  philosophy  cannot  escape  this  con-
dition of  things.  Hegel  understands  it  in  a  far  different
fashion  from  Grote.  In  turn,  it  is  philosophical,
psychological,  social,  philological  and  naturalistic,  nor
do  we  clearly  see  what  definite  form  it  tends  to  assume.
It  has  become  necessary  for  any  one  who  undertakes
this  study,  unless  he  wishes  to  confine  himself  to  some
particular  current  of  thought,  to  reflect  upon  the  end
of  this  science  and  examine  the  various  definitions  that
may  be  given  thereof.

What,  then,  is  the  proper  object  of  the  history  of
philosophy  ?  What  is  the  most  suitable  method  to
adopt  ?

Have  we  simply  to  collect  and  classify,  geographic-
ally and  chronologically,  such  facts  as  may  rightly  be
called  philosophical  ?


2  STUDIES  IN  PHILOSOPHY

Once  this  selection  is  effected,  have  we  to  connect
each  of  these  facts  with  the  particular  environment  in
which  it  happened,  and  also  with  its-  conditions  or
causes  ?

Or  rather,  if  we  consider  that  philosophy,  up  to  a
certain  point,  has  an  existence  and  development  of  its
own,  and  constitutes  a  kind  of  organism,  shall  we  un-
ravel, as  it  were,  and  follow  up  this  autonomous  de-
velopment through  the  apparently  capricious  inventions
of  individuals  ?  Shall  we  consider  each  philosopher  as
the  more  or  less  docile  instrument  of  an  immanent  and
universal  spirit?  Has  our  task  to  consist  in  finding
and  completing  those  parts  of  each  thinker's  work  which
are  productive  and  likely  to  live,  and  neglecting  those
which,  sooner  or  later,  time  must  destroy?  Is  it  not
expected  that  a  historian  should  read,  study  and  criticise
everything,  so  that  he  may  relegate  to  the  waters  of
oblivion  such  events  as  have  no  claim  upon  the  memory
of  mankind  ?

But  if  we  have  scruples  about  thus  judging  of
philosophical  productions  in  the  name  of  the  more  or
less  mystical  idea  of  an  eternal  philosophy,  should  we
not  like,  at  all  events,  to  distinguish  those  conceptions
of  a  man  of  genius  in  which  he  is  really  himself  and
is  introducing  innovations  or  preparing  the  future,  from
those  in  which  he  shows  himself  nothing  more,  at  that
stage,  than  an  echo  of  his  predecessors  ?

In  short,  is  there  not  a  conception  of  the  history  of
philosophy — a  very  plausible  one  by  reason  of  its  con-
nection with  the  positive  sciences — according  to  which
it  seems  to  be  the  historian's  task  to  take  philosophers,
not  philosophy,  as  the  object  of  his  investigations  ;  and,
by  a  process  of  psychological  analysis,  to  show  with
reference  to  each  of  them,  the  line  of  evolution  he  has


THE  HISTORY  OF  PHILOSOPHY 3

of  necessity  had  to  follow — taking  into  consideration
his  temperament,  his  education  and  the  circumstances  of
his  life — in  the  production  of  the  ideas  he  has  given  to
the  world  ?

Evidently  each  of  these  points  of  view  has  an  interest
and  importance  of  its  own,  but  none  of  them  seems
to  be  the  special  point  of  view  of  the  historian  of
philosophy.

To  confine  oneself  to  the  collection  and  chronological
arrangement  of  philosophical  manifestations  would  be
too  modest  a  task  ;  for  though  we  may  somewhere  find
a  logical  concatenation  of  facts  along  with  the  facts
themselves,  still  it  is  in  doctrines  and  systems  that
philosophy  finds  its  realisation.

On  the  other  hand,  he  would  be  a  bold  man  who
would  affirm  that  some  particular  conception  has  a  future
before  it,  whereas  some  other  has  had  its  day.  In
Voltaire's  time,  metaphysics  was  an  utterly  exploded
doctrine.  Now,  that  was  the  very  period  when  German
philosophy  was  beginning  to  become  known.

And  what  an  ambition,  to  find  the  historical  and
unconscious  origins,  the  mechanical  genesis  of  a  thinker's
ideas  !  Which  of  us,  even  the  most  wide-awake  and
skilled  in  analysing  mental  states,  could  correctly  explain
the  origin  of  his  opinions  and  doctrines  ?  Amongst  the
many  influences  under  which  our  increasingly  complex
life  is  continually  bringing  us,  how  can  we  set  apart
those  that  have  been  deep  and  lasting,  or  state  exactly
in  what  direction  they  have  been  exercised  ?  Besides,
why  do  we  so  strongly  insist  that  our  ideas  spring  only
from  external  influences  and  that  we  ourselves  have
nothing  to  do  with  their  production  ?

Apart  from  these  various  conceptions  of  the  history
of  philosophy — conceptions  in  turn  excessively  timid  and


4  STUDIES  IN  PHILOSOPHY

boldly  venturesome — there  is  one  of  a  less  striking
nature,  from  the  fact  that  it  does  not  seem  to  be  so
scientific,  though  perhaps  it  is  more  in  accordance  with
the  nature  of  the  subject  under  investigation.  It  is
also  the  one,  unless  I  am  mistaken,  generally  applied  by
writers  whose  distinctive  object  is  to  take  up  the  history
of  philosophy,  without  troubling  about  anything  else.

It  consists  in  regarding  as  the  subject  of  investigation
from  the  very  outset,  what  to  us  are  immediate  data,
to  wit,  any  particular  doctrine  that  is  one  in  its  greater
or  less  complexity,  any  collection  of  ideas  set  forth  by
the  philosopher  as  forming  a  whole.  Where  this  con-
dition is  not  fulfilled,  we  may  indeed  be  dealing  with  a
shrewd  moralist  or  a  profound,  original  thinker,  but
certainly  we  are  not  dealing  with  a  philosopher.  The
problem  to  be  solved  is  that  of  finding  out  what  logical
connection  the  philosopher  has  really  set  up  between  his
ideas,  which  he  has  taken  as  principles,  and  in  what
order  and  fashion  he  makes  the  rest  depend  on  the  main
ideas.  A  philosopher  is  a  man  who  sets  up  men's
knowledge  over  against  their  beliefs,  and  tries  to  find
their  relations  to  one  another.  We  want  to  know  how
a  Plato  or  a  Leibnitz  conceived  of  these  relations.  And
since  the  philosopher  is  not  a  seer  to  whom  truth  is
revealed  in  a  flash,  but  rather  a  patient  seeker  who  re-
flects and  criticises,  doubts  and  hesitates,  and  listens  to
reason  alone,  we  want  to  know  the  methods,  observations
and  reasonings  by  which  our  author  has  reached  his
conclusions.  We  are  not  now  dealing  with  the  uncon-
scious, mechanical  work  of  his  brain,  but  with  his
conscious,  determined  efforts  to  overcome  the  limits  of
his  individuality,  to  think  in  an  all-embracing  manner,
and  to  bring  the  truth  to  light.

If  such  be  the  case,  it  is  neither  philosophy  in  general,


THE  HISTORY  OF  PHILOSOPHY 5

throughout  its  development,  nor  the  psychological
evolution  of  each  philosopher  in  particular,  that  is  the
immediate  object  of  the  history  of  philosophy  :  it  is  the
doctrines  that  have  been  thought  out  by  philosophers.
To  know  and  understand  these  doctrines  well,  to  explain
them — to  the  extent  of  one's  capacity — as  the  author
himself  would  do,  to  set  them  forth  in  the  spirit  of  that
author,  and  to  some  extent,  in  his  style  :  this  is  the  one
essential  task,  to  which  all  the  rest  must  be  subordinated.

It  is,  indeed,  useful  to  consider  the  man,  and  not
the  work  only,  but  it  is  so  because,  in  most  cases,  the
man  helps  us  to  understand  the  work.  Cartesianism  is
indebted  for  more  than  one  of  its  characteristics  to
Descartes,  the  man.  And  yet,  what  a  mistake  to  insist
on  regarding  Cartesianism  as  nothing  more  than  the
history  of  an  individual  mind  !

It  is  likewise  an  interesting  question  to  ask  oneself :
What  becomes  of  philosophy  fer  se  throughout  the
succession  of  systems?  Does  it  advance  or  remain
stationary  ?  This  general  study  of  philosophy,  however,
cannot  replace  that  of  the  doctrines  considered  in  them-
selves from  each  author's  point  of  view  :  rather  it  pre-
supposes it.

Let  it  not,  then,  be  said  that  some  particular  portion
of  a  philosopher's  doctrines  may  be  neglected,  under  the
plea  that  it  is  to  be  found  in  the  writings  of  some
earlier  philosopher.  That  is  an  insufficient  reason.  A
great  mind  does  not  seek  after  novelty  or  originality  ;
it  seeks  after  truth.  Why  should  it  refuse  any  portion
thereof  under  the  plea  that  it  was  discovered  by  some-
one else  ?  In  the  classic  ages  of  literature,  authors  did
not  feel  themselves  bound  to  create,  ex  nihilo,  after  the
fashion  of  God.  A  Corneille  and  a  Moliere  make  lavish
use  of  the  works  of  their  predecessors.  No  one  finds


6  STUDIES  IN  PHILOSOPHY

fault  with  their  lack  of  originality  when  they  take
advantage  of  this  material  in  writing  fine  and  noble
works.  With  still  more  reason,  an  Aristotle,  a  Leibnitz
and  a  Kant  carefully  retain  whatever  those  who  have
gone  before  have  found  to  be  of  advantage.  In  reality,
they  make  it  their  own  by  the  way  in  which  they  use  it.
"  When  two  men  are  playing  tennis,"  said  Pascal,  "  both
play  with  the  same  ball,  but  one  of  them  places  it  better
than  the  other."  It  often  happens  that  the  most  common-
place idea  assumes  a  new  aspect  by  reason  of  the  new
relations  in  which  it  finds  itself.

On  the  other  hand,  some  idea  destined  at  a  later
period  to  prove  an  important  and  fruitful  one,  may
have  played  only  a  secondary  or  eclipsed  part  in  the
system  in  which  it  first  appeared.  Though  picking  it  up
as  a  chance  find,  so  to  speak,  or  regarding  it  as  an  interest-
ing presentiment,  we  must  be  careful  not  to  place  it  in
the  foreground  under  pretence  of  serving  the  author  by
giving  him  a  more  modern  aspect.  It  is  not  Descartes
as  one  would  imagine  he  would  be  at  the  present  time,
but  the  Descartes  of  1 644,  referring  every  problem  to  the
one  of  certainty,  whom  it  is  our  object  to  make  known.

The  task  in  hand  determines  exactly  the  means  it
behoves  us  to  put  into  operation.  In  the  ulterior
developments  a  system  may  have  gone  through,  the
doctrines  to  which  it  has  given  birth,  the  appreciations
and  interpretations  of  contemporaries  and  successors,  or
even  the  historical  and  biographical  information  regard-
ing the  author's  person  and  works,  we  ought  not  to
look  for  anything  else  than  sign-posts  of  the  problems
we  must  set  before  ourselves,  or  material  data  which
determine  the  ground  on  which  to  work.  The  spring
and  origin  of  the  history  of  philosophy  can  be  found
only  in  the  monuments  left  by  philosophers  themselves.


THE  HISTORY  OF  PHILOSOPHY 7

Each  philosophical  work  requires  to  be  considered
both  as  a  whole  and  in  detail.  The  work  of  the  mind
is  one  continual  oscillation  from  the  whole  to  the  parts
and  from  the  parts  to  the  whole.  Such  is  the  method
applied  in  the  understanding  of  a  drama,  a  poem,  or  a
work  of  art.  This  alternate  movement  of  induction  and
deduction  is  the  origin  of  the  sciences.  In  the  same
way,  if  we  explain  the  author  by  himself,  his  general
ideas  by  his  particular  doctrines  and  his  particular
doctrines  by  his  general  ideas,  the  probabilities  are  that
we  shall  thoroughly  grasp  his  meaning  and  enter  into
his  thought.

It  is  not  enough  to  discover  curious — even  un-
published— texts.  Which  of  us  can  enter  completely
into  all  an  author  says  ?  What  likelihood  is  there  that
a  letter  written  to  some  correspondent  or  other,  how-
ever ill  fitted  he  be  to  understand  the  philosopher,
should  prove  of  greater  importance  than  treatises  that
have  been  slowly  matured  and  are  destined  for  posterity  ?
The  historian,  whose  aim  it  is  not  to  make  a  collection  of
anecdotes,  but  to  form  a  correct  appreciation  of  a  great
man's  work,  will  be  less  anxious  to  marshal  and  array
an  imposing  number  of  disconnected  texts  than  to
become  increasingly  imbued  with  the  author's  thought,
by  reading  the  whole  of  his  works  not  once,  but  many
times.  His  aim  will  be  to  see  things  from  the  author's
point  of  view,  following  him  along  the  winding  by-
paths of  meditation,  sharing  in  his  emotions  as  a  philo-
sopher, and,  along  with  him,  enjoying  that  harmony
wherein  his  intelligence  has  found  repose.

Systems  of  philosophy  are  living  thoughts.  It  is  by
seeking  in  the  written  word  for  the  means  of  reviving
these  thoughts  within  ourselves  that  we  may  hope  to
hear  them  deliver  their  message.


SOCRATES,
THE  FOUNDER  OF  MORAL  SCIENCE l

"  Les  memes  pens6es  poussent  quelquefois  tout  autrement  dans
un  autre  que  dans  leur  auteur." — PASCAL.


AFTER  the  keen  rivalry  that  has  existed  amongst  those
most  capable  of  dissipating  the  clouds  and  mists  that
hang  about  the  figure  of  Socrates,  inquiring  men  of
letters,  shrewd  moralists,  philosophers  of  penetrating
intellect,  learned  historians,  and  even  doctors,  whose
object  it  has  been  to  collect  and  interpret  such  docu-
ments as  are  calculated  to  make  him  known  to  us,  is
there  anything  left  to  say  about  him  ?  Is  not  the
writer  on  such  a  theme  compelled  to  repeat  mere
commonplaces  if  he  is  determined  to  say  only  what  is
true,  to  give  expression  to  paradoxes  if  he  claims  to
have  anything  new  to  advance  ?

In  this  connection  it  would  seem  as  though  a  dis-
tinction must  be  made. Doubtless,  all  possible  light

1  The  present  essay  deals  less  with  the  feelings  and  the  soul  of  Socrates
than  with  his  philosophy  and  his  work.  In  one  aspect  Socrates,  as  a  man,
is  an  enthusiast  in  the  literal  meaning  of  the  word,  almost  a  mystic.  He
is  Apollo's  messenger,  and  feels  within  himself  the  divine  afflatus.  His
unique  originality  consisted  in  introducing  religious  zeal  into  the  preach-
ing of  rational  morals.  Here  we  confine  ourselves  to  the  consideration  of
the  doctrine  which  Socrates  taught  his  disciples  and  bequeathed  to  man-
kind.

8


SOCRATES  9

has  been  shed  on  most  of  the  details  of  the  life  and
teaching  of  Socrates,  but  it  is  not  so  certain  that  this
could  be  said  concerning  the  ensemble  of  the  man  and
his  doctrine.  The  reader  is  astonished  when  he  com-
pares with  one  another  those  works  of  our  contemporaries
that  deal  with  Socrates.  If  we  would  know  of  his
life,  the  causes  of  his  condemnation,  the  meaning  of
maieutics,  the  doctrines  of  virtue,  or  some  other
portion  of  Socratic  philosophy,  each  of  these  authors
gives  almost  identical  answers.  But  if  we  ask  what
Socrates  was  in  himself,  the  basis  of  his  character  and
the  root  idea  of  his  teaching  :  regarding  this  question
— in  which  all  the  rest  culminate — opinions  are
contradictory.

Thus,  according  to  Zeller,1  ancient  physics  having
finally  disappeared  beneath  the  action  of  sophistic,
Socrates  regenerated  philosophy  by  founding  it  upon  a
new  principle  :  the  general  or  concept,  regarded  as  the
object  of  science.  The  work  of  Socrates,  then,  was
the  invention  of  a  principle  of  theoretical  logic.

Grote,  in  a  series  of  life-like  sketches,  presents
Socrates  as  a  religious  missionary,  appointed  by  the
oracle  of  Delphi  for  putting  the  would-be  wise  on  the
rack  and  inducing  them  to  confess  their  ignorance.
Socrates  is  the  god  of  debate,  "  an  elenchtic  or  cross-
examining  god."  2  His  work,  religious  in  its  inspira-
tion, is  a  living  dialectic  in  itself.

Fouillee  regards  Socrates  as  a  speculative  philosopher,
who  substitutes  final  causes  for  physical  ones  in  the
explanation  of  all  phenomena,  both  physical  and  moral.
He  is  the  creator  of  spiritual  metaphysics.

Leveque considers that Socrates endeavoured to

1  Die  Philosophie  der  Griechen,  3rd  edit.  vol.  ii.  p.  93-94.
2  History  of  Greece,  vol.  viii.  p.  566.


io  STUDIES  IN  PHILOSOPHY

bring  about  the  moral  and  political  reform  of  Athens,
and,  with  this  end  in  view,  established  morals  as  a
science  independent  of  the  physical  sciences.

Janet's  brief  though  important  sketch  in  the  Dic-
tionnaire  philosophique  shows  us  Socrates  as  a  philo-
sopher above  all  else  ;  he  mentions  two  main  char-
acteristics of  his  :  the  moral  sentiment,  which  dominates
his  personality  and  appears  throughout  his  doctrine ;
and  maieutics,  from  which  the  Platonic  dialectic  was
to  originate.

In  a  short  work,  published  in  1881,  Gustave
d'Eichthal  considers  the  outstanding  feature  of  the
Socratic  doctrine  to  be  religious  instruction.  Socrates,
he  says,  with  a  view  to  checking  the  evils  he  saw
ravaging  his  country,  wished  to  give  his  fellow-citizens
what,  to  him,  was  the  principle  of  all  virtue  and  the
first  condition  of  every  reform,  namely,  religious  faith,
especially  faith  in  divine  Providence.

Finally,  Franck,  in  an  article  that  appeared  in  the
Journal  des  savants  on  d'Eichthal's  book,  likewise
admits  that  Socrates  was  not  only  a  reasoner  and  a
philosopher,  but  more  than  all  else  a  profoundly
religious  soul,  in  the  real  meaning  of  the  word,  a  soul
in  whom  faith  in  God,  admiration  of  his  works,  the
certainty  of  his  kingdom  throughout  nature  and  of  his
providence  over  men,  were  tinged  with  a  certain  degree
of  mysticism.

All  these  interpretations,  moreover,  are  based  on
texts  of  the  greatest  importance.  Thus,  confining
ourselves  to  the  three  of  our  contemporaries  who  have
written  most  about  Socrates,  Zeller,  in  support  of  his
position,  quotes  that  clear,  precise  passage  in  Aristotle *
where  it  is  mentioned  that  Socrates  seeks  the  ri

1  Met.  xiii.  4.  1878  b  23  sqq.


SOCRATES  ii

the  general  essence,  though  without  regarding  this
essence  as  existing  apart,  as  Plato  did.  Grote  draws
his  conclusions  from  the  Apology?  which,  indeed,
mainly  shows  us  Socrates  as  having  received  from  the
gods  the  mission  of  convincing  men  of  their  ignorance.
And  lastly,  the  statement  of  Fouillee  2  appears  inspired
by  those  luminous  passages  of  the  Phaedo?  in  which  we
find  Socrates  reproaching  Anaxagoras  for  omitting  to
take  into  account,  in  his  explanation  of  the  details  of
the  world,  that  ordaining  and  regulating  intelligence  he
had  so  wisely  proclaimed  to  be  the  universal  cause  ;
considering,  for  his  part,  that  any  purely  mechanical
explanation  was  superficial  ;  and  satisfied  only  with  such
explanations  as,  in  the  ultimate  analysis,  were  given  by
final  causes.4

But  why  is  it  that  each  of  these  authors  has  taken
up  some  particular  text  in  preference  to  others  ?  In
all  likelihood,  personal  preoccupation  or  different  mental
habits  may  give  a  partial  explanation.  An  old  Hegelian
like  Zeller,  whose  object  above  all  is  to  find  out  the
place  occupied  by  men  and  doctrines  in  the  general
development  of  the  human  mind,  was  bound  to  take,
as  his  main  guide,  Aristotle,  who  emphasises  in  his
predecessors  just  those  ideas  that  have  paved  the  way
for  his  own.  Grote,  the  historian,  who  would  point
out  the  part  played  by  famous  men  throughout  the
entire  social  and  political  life  of  their  times,  was  bound
to  rely  mainly  on  the  Apology^  a  life-like  picture,  it
would  seem,  of  Socrates  as  he  appeared  to  his  fellow-
citizens.  Lastly,  Fouillee,  the  eloquent  and  profound
interpreter  of  the  theory  of  Ideas,  was  naturally  disposed

1  Grote,  History  of  Greece,  viii.  565.
2  La  Philosophie  de  Platan,  vol.  i.  p.  17  sqq.

3  Ch.  xlv.  sqq.
*  Phaedo,  ch.  xlvi.  p.  97  B.


12  STUDIES  IN  PHILOSOPHY

to  regard  Socrates  as  the  precursor  of  Plato,  and  to
find  in  his  doctrines  the  germ  of  Platonic  metaphysics.
It  is  not  surprising  that  he  should  take  as  his  starting-
point  those  passages  in  which  Plato  himself  connects
his  theory  of  Ideas  with  the  speculations  of  his  master.

In  these  investigations  into  the  real  character  of
Socrates,  Zeller  appears  to  have  adopted  the  standpoint
of  absolute  mind,  Grote  that  of  a  cultured  Athenian  of
the  fifth  century,  and  Fouillee  that  of  Plato.  What
would  be  the  result  were  we  to  adopt  the  standpoint
of  Socrates  himself,  asking  ourselves  what  Socrates
must  have  been,  not  in  the  eyes  of  others  but  in  his
own  ?  The  apostle  of  the  yv&Oi  o-avrov  must  have
been  acquainted  with  himself.  We  should  regard  our-
selves as  having  sufficient  knowledge  of  him  were  we
acquainted  with  him  to  the  same  extent.

But  then,  how  can  we  enter  into  the  soul  of  Socrates,
since  he  left  nothing  in  writing?  Is  it  not  this  very
difficulty  of  adopting  his  point  of  view  which  induces
historians  to  seek  one  from  without  ?

Perhaps  the  difficulty  is  partly  artificial.  It  showed
itself  most  prominently  when  Schleiermacher  advanced
the  principle  that,  for  an  exposition  of  the  Socratic
doctrine  to  be  a  faithful  one,  it  must  above  all  else
explain  how  Plato  came  to  regard  Socrates  as  the
promoter  of  his  philosophic  activity.  From  this  stand-
point a  comparison  was  made  between  the  Socrates  of
Xenophon  and  the  Socrates  of  Plato  and  Aristotle,  and
the  two  were  found  to  differ  widely.  Naturally,  the
followers  of  Schleiermacher  adopted  the  views  of  Plato
and  Aristotle,  and  so  the  authority  of  the  only  one  of
our  witnesses  who  was  a  historian  by  profession,  and
who  had  made  it  his  business  to  tell  us  what  Socrates
had  really  been  in  his  own  person,  was  discredited.


SOCRATES  13

A  change,  however,  has  come  about  since  then.
Whilst  the  champions  of  Xenophon  and  Plato  were
wrangling  over  Schleiermacher's  theory,  a  less  biassed
criticism  compared  the  testimonies  of  Xenophon,  Plato
and  Aristotle  with  one  another.  Now,  these  testimonies
have  been  found  to  agree  as  regards  the  main  issue.1
Henceforth,  to  an  impartial  critic,  the  authority  of
Xenophon  was  restored.  The  charge  might  still  be
brought  against  him  that  he  set  forth  the  person  and
teachings  of  his  master  more  or  less  incompletely,  though
not  that  he  presented  them  in  a  wrong  light.  If  such  be
the  case,  the  historian  of  the  present  day  has  the  right,
not  only  to  invoke  the  testimony  of  Xenophon,  along
with  those  of  Plato  and  Aristotle,  but  even  to  assign
the  greatest  importance  to  this  testimony,  for  Xenophon
is  the  only  one  of  the  three  who  does  nothing  more
than  repeat  what  he  personally  knew.  True,  the
immediate  object  of  his  work  would  appear  to  have
been  to  refute  the  harangue  of  Polycrates,  the  rhetor,
about  the  year  393  B.C.  ;  none  the  less,  Xenophon
must  have  brought  to  his  task  those  qualities  of  fidelity
and  impartiality  that  distinguish  his  strictly  historical
narratives.

Of  course,  we  must  not  repeat  the  mistake  made  by
the  historians  of  old,  who,  reading  Xenophon  in  a  very
superficial  manner,  saw  depicted  only  the  account  of  a
simple-minded  moralist  ;  we  must  allow  Plato  and
Aristotle  to  breathe  life  into  and  complete  the  picture
sketched  by  Xenophon.  Still,  it  would  be  wise  to  use
the  contributions  of  the  two  former  only  as  a  scholar
uses  a  hypothesis,  that  is,  in  stating  or  asking  questions,
not  in  solving  or  answering  them.  To  analyse  the
data  of  Xenophon,  interpreting  and  developing  them

1  Such  is  the  opinion  of  Zeller,  Grote  and  Fouiltee.


i4  STUDIES  IN  PHILOSOPHY

according  to  a  scientific  induction  whose  leading  ideas
are  to  be  supplied  by  Plato  and  Aristotle  :  such  seems
to  be  the  method  we  must  pursue,  if  we  would  know
Socrates  in  a  really  historical  fashion.

Along  with  Xenophon's  Memorabilia  we  must  con-
sider Plato's  Apology,  which  most  critics1  look  upon  as
trustworthy  with  regard  to  facts  ;  also  certain  portions,
difficult  to  define,  it  must  be  confessed,  of  the  Crito,
Phaedo,  Laches  and  The  Banquet.

Now,  what  is  the  root  thought  of  Socrates,  regarded,
as  far  as  possible,  from  his  own  point  of  view  ?

II

The  first  result  we  obtain,  if  we  take  the  Memorabilia
as  the  main  source  of  the  history  of  Socratic  thought,  is
a  confession  of  ignorance  as  to  what  happened  previous
to  the  last  ten  years  of  the  philosopher's  career.  The
temptation  is  almost  irresistible  to  seek  in  other  works
for  some  means  of  going  back  to  an  earlier  year  in
Socrates'  life  than  the  Memorabilia  allow.  For  instance,
Fouillee  believes  he  has  found,  in  the  famous  passage  of
the  Phaedo  on  the  early  philosophical  reflections  of
Socrates,2  and  the  coincidence  of  this  text  with  the
Clouds  of  Aristophanes,  the  proof  that  Socrates,  before
devoting  himself  to  moral  research,  passed  through  a
previous  stage,  in  which  he  was  engaged  in  speculations
on  nature.  Disappointed  in  this  direction,  he  would
appear  to  have  fallen  back  on  morals  for  a  solution
of  the  very  problem  of  ancient  Greek  philosophy  :  that
of  the  explanation  of  the  universe.  Besides  the  fact,
however,  that  the  Memorabilia  contain  no  indication

1  Schleiermacher,  Zeller,  tlberweg  and  Grote.
2  Ch.  xlv.  sqq.


SOCRATES  15

whatever  of  such  a  starting-point,  the  statement  of  the
Socrates  of  the  Phaedo  contradicts  the  formal  declara-
tions of  the  Socrates  of  the  Apology,  where  it  is  affirmed
that  he  never  studied  physics.1  The  objection  may  be
urged  that  the  character  of  Socrates  in  the  Clouds  must
rest  upon  some  historical  basis.  But  it  is  precisely
when  speaking  of  the  Clouds  that  Socrates  makes  this
solemn  declaration  in  the  Apology.  True,  the  question
is  decided  by  dismissing  the  Apology ,  under  the  pretext
that  it  is  a  speech,  and  alleging  that  the  text  of  the
Phaedo  itself  gives  one  the  impression  of  historical
reality.  Such  preference,  however,  is  unjustified.  As
it  is  the  object  of  the  text  of  the  Phaedo  to  show  us  the
origin  of  the  theory  of  ideas,  which  theory,  moreover,
is  likewise  attributed  to  Socrates,  it  is  best  to  attribute  to
Plato  himself  the  reflections  with  which  this  exposition
commences.  The  Apology  is  certainly  possessed  of
historical  value,  as  is  proved,  along  with  other  details,
by  the  strange  prediction  Socrates  made  to  the  judges,2
that,  when  he  was  dead,  the  Athenians  would  find  a  far
greater  number  of  censors  (eXey^oi/re?)  rising  up  against
them,  and  these  would  be  all  the  more  unpleasant
because  they  would  be  younger.  .  This  prediction,
which  does  not  appear  to  have  come  to  pass,  would
certainly  have  been  omitted  in  an  apology  invented  by
Plato  himself.  But  if  Socrates  indeed  challenged  his
listeners  to  prove  that  he  ever  even  mentioned  physics,3
how  could  we  affirm  the  contrary  ?  Shall  we  set  the
fiction  of  a  comic  poet  above  the  testimony  of  Socrates
himself  ?

Consequently,  we  will  abandon  the  attempt  to  dis-
cover what  ideas  Socrates  held  in  youth  and  even  in

1  Ch.  iii.  p.  19  c  D.  2  Ch.  xxx.  p.  39  c  D. Cf.  Grote.

3  Ch.  iii.  p.  19  D.


1 6  STUDIES  IN  PHILOSOPHY

mature  age.  Besides,  we  have  ground  to  suppose  they
were  in  conformity  with  those  he  held  at  the  end  of  his
life,  for  Socrates,  in  the  Apology^  tells  his  listeners  that
the  reason  they  are  prejudiced  against  him,  and  look
upon  him  as  a  physicist  and  a  sophist,  is  that  ever
since  they  were  children  they  have  been  deceived  by
his  enemies  regarding  himself.1  At  all  events,  to
claim  to  throw  light  on  the  Socrates  of  his  latter  years
by  the  Socrates  of  the  Clouds  period  is  trying  to
explain  the  known  by  the  unknown.

The  starting-point  of  the  established  doctrine  of
Socrates  we  shall  find  in  his  critical  reflections  on  the
two  disciplines  which  then  occupied  men's  minds  :
physics  and  sophistic.

Socrates  never  applied  himself  to  physics.  The
testimony  of  Plato  2  and  Aristotle  3  is  a  proof  of  this,
without  mentioning  that  of  Xenophon.  There  can  be
no  doubt,  however,  that  he  had  studied  the  subject,
though  it  was  principally  as  a  philosopher  that  he
was  interested  in  it.  It  was  not  the  details  of  the
science,  the  particular  theories  which  in  all  probability
were  the  main  object  of  research  on  the  part  of  the
ancient  physiologists,  that  he  cared  about,  but  rather
those  general  principles  that  controlled  all  the  rest,  the
mechanical  or  dynamical  conceptions  of  nature  which
led  philosophers  to  explain  everything  without  having
recourse  to  supernatural  powers.  Is  being  one  or
multiple  ;  is  it  in  motion  or  at  rest ;  is  it  subject  to  a
state  of  becoming  and  destruction,  or  is  it  exempt  from
generation  and  corruption  ?  Such  were  the  philosophical
questions  that  physiologists  asked  themselves.4

Socrates  wasted  no  time  in  examining  one  by  one

1  Ch.  ii.  p.  18  c.  3  Met.  i.  6.  987  b  i.

2  Apol.  ch.  iii.  p.  19  D.  4  Xenophon,  Mem.  i.  i.  14.


SOCRATES  17

the  different  doctrines  to  which  the  idea  of  natural
physics  had  given  birth.  He  condemned  them  en  bloc,
as  being  useless,  barren  and  sacrilegious.

Physics  was  useless,  for  physicists  were  unable  to
agree  on  a  single  point.  Some  maintained  that  being  is
one,  the  rest  that  it  is  infinitely  multiple  ;  some  that
everything  is  in  motion,  the  rest  that  everything  is  for
ever  motionless,  and  so  on.1  Now,  contradiction  is  a
sign  of  ignorance.

And  it  was  barren  as  well.  Do  those  who  trouble
about  such  matters,  said  Socrates,  imagine  that  when
they  have  discovered  the  law  of  necessity  according  to
which  everything  is  produced,  they  will  be  able  to  make
the  winds,  waters  and  seasons  at  their  own  pleasure  ? 2

And  these  two  features  were  themselves  the  result
of  a  radical  vice  :  to  wit,  the  sacrilegious  nature  of
the  task.  All  that  is,  said  Socrates,  may  be  divided
into  two  categories,3  human  things  (ra  avOpaTreia),  such
as  pious  and  impious,  beautiful  and  ugly,  just  and
unjust,  matters  dealing  with  civic  life  and  authority,4
and  divine  things  (&u/*owa),  such  as  the  formation  of
the  world,5  or  even  the  distant  and  final  consequences
of  our  actions.6  Now,  the  gods  have  given  us  power
to  know  the  former  by  reasoning  ;  the  latter  they  have
reserved  for  themselves.7  Physicists,  when  speculating
on  things  divine  and  neglecting  the  human,  invert  the
order  set  up  by  the  gods  themselves  :  they  disdain
knowledge  which  the  gods  have  placed  within  our
reach,  and  try  to  acquire  that  knowledge  the  gods  have
reserved  for  themselves.

It  is noteworthy  that  Pascal  makes a  similar  dis-

1  Xenophon,  Mem.  iv.  2.  4  Ibid.  i.  i.  16.

2  Ibid.  i.  i.  z5.  6  Ibid.  i.  i.  n.

3  Ibid.  i.  i.  12.  °  Ibid.  i.  i.  8.

7  Ibid.  i.  i.  7-8.


i8

tinction.  He  also1  divides  things  into  human  and
divine,  and  accuses  men  of  having  perverted  the  order
established  by  God  when  they  use  profane  things  as  they
ought  to  use  sacred  ones,  and  vice  versa,  that  is  to  say,
when  they  consider  profane  things  with  the  heart  and
divine  ones  with  the  mind.  To  Pascal,  however,  it  is
physical  things  that  are  profane  and  moral  ones  that  are
divine.

Both  this  resemblance  and  this  difference  enable  us
all  the  better  to  understand  the  thought  of  Socrates.
The  same  religious  spirit,  both  in  Socrates  and  Pascal,
sets  a  limit  upon  human  reason.  To  the  Hellene,
however,  man  himself  is  his  own  master  ;  it  is  nature,
with  its  mysteries  and  remoteness,  that  is  divine.  To
the  modern  man  and  the  Christian  it  is  the  infinitude  of
the  interior  life  that  is  divine,  and  nature,  brute,  passive
matter,  that  is  the  object  set  before  human  activity.

The  original  cause  of  Socrates'  condemnation  of
ancient  physics  may  be  found  in  the  stock  or  fund  of
ideas  peculiar  to  his  nation.  Greece  could  not  wholly
adapt  herself  to  those  speculations  on  the  principles  of
things  into  which  physiologists  had  plunged.  Doubt-
less the  power  of  reasoning,  the  ingenious  subtilty  and
wonderful  sense  of  harmony  displayed  by  these  pro-
found investigators,  were  a  good  thing,  but  the  imme-
diate application  of  these  mental  qualities  to  material
objects  most  foreign  to  mankind  was  opposed  to  the
genius  of  a  race  that  was  essentially  political,  and
mightily  enamoured  of  fine  speeches  and  noble  deeds.
Besides,  how  could  one  reconcile  a  philosophy  which
undertook  to  explain  physical  phenomena  by  perfectly
natural  causes  with  a  religion  which  everywhere  intro-
duced the  immediate  action  of  the  gods?  Certainly

1  De  I' Esprit  giom.  2nd  frag.


SOCRATES  19

they  were  Greeks  who  had  planned  these  beautiful
systems  in  which  nature  was  subject  to  the  laws  of
thought ;  still,  they  were  citizens  of  the  colonies,  and  had
dealings  with  the  Egyptians,  Phoenicians  and  Babylonians.
They  had  created  the  form  :  the  East  had  supplied
them  with  the  matter.  To  detach  human  affairs  from
the  totality  of  things,  to  make  them  the  proper  domain
of  man's  activity  and  intelligence,  and  at  the  same  time  to
restore  physical  phenomena  once  more  to  the  gods,  was
to  place  oneself  again  in  the  position  of  the  Hellene  :
more  especially  of  the  Athenian.  This  was  quite
natural  for  the  philosopher  who  never  left  Athens  except
to  fight  in  the  ranks  of  his  fellow-citizens.

Socrates' judgment  on  physics,  therefore,  is  no  for-
tuitous accidental  fact ;  it  is  not  the  outcome  of  a  posi-
tive, a  prosaically  utilitarian  mind.  It  is  not  even
altogether  that  depreciation  of  the  past,  habitual  to
innovators,  that  antagonism  to  a  rival  idea  :  the  condi-
tion of  the  realisation  and  development  of  the  new  idea
which  claims  the  right  to  exist.  Socrates'  objections  to
physics  are  the  philosophic  expression  of  that  antipathy
of  a  religious,  artistic  people  to  a  mechanical  explana-
tion of  things,  whereof  Aristophanes  set  himself  up  as
the  interpreter  in  the  Clouds.  The  real  Socrates  flouts
the  Socrates  of  Aristophanes,  as  do  the  people.  The
only  difference  is  that  he  knows  better  why  he  does  so.

But  this  very  discernment  of  his  prevents  him  from
altogether  condemning  the  work  of  the  physicists.
Though  declaring  it  useless,  barren  and  sacrilegious,  he
yet  discovers  in  it  a  principle  which  he  is  jealously
anxious  to  adopt.  This  principle  is  the  form  and
mould,  so  to  speak,  of  Hellenic  thought  into  which  the
physiologists  cast  the  matter  they  borrowed  from  the
East :  it  is  the  consciousness,  henceforth  acquired  by


20  STUDIES  IN  PHILOSOPHY

the  human  mind,  of  its  need  of  unity  and  harmony  ;
the  notion  of  an  impersonal  truth,  distinct  from  opinion
and  fancy  ;  the  abstract  idea  of  science.  When
Socrates  asks  the  physiologists l  if  the  reason  they
undertake  to  speculate  on  divine  things  lies  in  the  fact
that  they  think  they  know  enough  of  human  things,  he
evidently  retains  of  ancient  physics  the  general  idea  of
science  as  being  a  special,  a  superior  mode  of  know-
ledge, whilst  leaving  on  one  side  the  object  to  which  this
idea  has  hitherto  been  applied.

And  so  the  general  idea  of  science  does  not  spring
forth  all  at  once  in  the  mind  of  Socrates,  with  the  intui-
tion of  genius,  as  one  might  imagine  from  Schleier-
macher's  profound  though  abstruse  dissertation.  Nor
is  it  the  reaction  of  subjectivism  against  objectivism,  a
reaction  which  was  evidently  determined  by  the  excesses
of  objectivism  itself,  in  accordance  with  the  general  law
of  the  development  of  the  human  mind,  as  appears  to
be  admitted  by  the  former  Hegelian,  Zeller.  This  idea
of  science  is  nothing  else  than  the  proper  share  of  the
Hellenic  genius  in  the  formation  of  ancient  physics.
Socrates'  work  lies  in  freeing  it  from  the  foreign
elements  with  which  it  was  confused,  owing  to  a  subtle
distinction  between  matter  and  form  which  the  different
opponents  of  the  physiologists  had  been  unable  to  draw.
In  this  he  was  doubtless  aided  by  his  power  of  inven-
tion, as  well  as  by  his  singularly  Hellenic  turn  of
mind.  In  him  the  Greek  genius  recognised  its  own
good  fortune  through  the  scientific  form  that  the
physiologists  had  given  to  the  practical  knowledge  or
astronomical  speculations  of  the  Orientals.

Though  Socrates  concerned  himself  with  physics,  he
paid  even  more  attention  to  sophistic.  Here  he  dis-

1  Mem.  i.  i.  12.


SOCRATES  21

tinguished  two  things :  the  end  and  the  means.  In  his
opinion,  the  end  or  object  of  sophistic  was  to  make
men  capable  of  speaking  and  acting  well,  of  managing
efficiently  the  business  of  city  and  home,  in  a  word,  of
being  useful  to  others  as  well  as  to  themselves.1  The
means  consisted  solely  of  exercise  and  routine,  the
immediate  practice  of  that  action  the  capacity  for
which  it  is  one's  object  to  acquire,  and  so  the  Sophist,
in  the  mind  of  Socrates,  is  the  man  who  identifies  the
means  with  the  end,  who  considers,  for  instance,  that,
in  order  to  learn  to  speak  well,  all  that  is  necessary  is
to  hear  others  speak  and  to  speak  oneself,  without
taking  the  trouble  to  study  theoretically  the  conditions
of  eloquence.  Practice  is  sufficient  in  itself.  Talent  is
like  some  physical  aptitude  which  men  acquire  by  being
shaped  and  drilled  to  acquire  it.

Socrates  approved  of  the  object  of  this  discipline,
though  he  condemned  the  method  employed.

It  was  not  ironically  that  he  called  the  sophistic  art
the  finest  and  greatest  of  them  all,  a  truly  royal  art.2
If  we  consider  nothing  but  the  end  set  up  for  human
activity,  we  find  that  Socrates  is  not  only  in  agreement
with  the  Sophists,  he  is  himself  one  of  them.  Like  the
Sophists,  he  considers  that  man  should  trouble  himself
about  none  but  human  affairs.  Like  them,  he  thinks
that,  apart  from  and  above  men  engaged  in  special  pro-
fessions and  trades,  carpenters,  pilots,  and  doctors,  etc.,
there  is  man,  pure  and  simple,  who  calls  for  and
deserves  distinct  culture  and  training.  Evidently
Socrates  does  not  limit  philosophy  to  the  study  of
human  things  for  the  same  reason  as  do  the  Sophists.
The  latter  extolled  mankind  because  they  denied  the
existence  of  the  gods.  Socrates  sees  the  proof  of  the

1  Mem.  iv.  3.  i  ;  iv.  2.  n.  2  Ibid.  iv.  2.  ti.


22  STUDIES  IN  PHILOSOPHY

existence  and  greatness  of  the  gods  in  the  very  limits
imposed  on  man.  Socrates  and  the  Sophists  arrive  at
the  same  conclusion,  though  along  different  paths.

In  this  comparison  between  Socrates  and  the  Sophists
there  is  nothing  disparaging  to  our  philosopher  if  we
form  a  correct  idea  of  sophistic.  The  Sophists  were
something  more  than  the  destroyers  of  whom  Zeller
speaks,  something  more  than  that  impersonal  echo  of  the
prevailing  morals  that  Grote  would  have  us  believe.  It
fell  to  the  creators  of  sophistic,  men  like  Protagoras  and
Gorgias,  to  be  the  first  to  conceive  of  the  legitimacy
and  utility  of  intellectual  culture  of  a  general  nature,
applied  not  to  some  particular  faculty,  but  to  the  man  him-
self, in  such  a  way  as  to  make  him  capable  of  acting  nobly
under  all  circumstances.  To  gymnastics  the  national
education  had  now  added  music,  or  the  teaching  of
knowledge  which  moulds  the  intelligence.!  The  Sophists,
however,  rose  to  a  loftier  conception  of  education,  the
end  of  which  they  regarded  as  being  not  only  the  intro-
duction into  the  mind  of  more  or  less  determined
knowledge,  but  also  the  creation  of  universal  aptitudes.
In  doing  this  it  may  be  said  that  they  brought  within
the  sphere  of  consciousness  the  principle  which  had
long  controlled  the  practical  life  of  the  Hellene^  and
which  showed  itself  in  a  strange  admiration  for  men
fertile  in  expedients,  and  skilled  in  getting  out  of  a
difficulty  under  all  circumstances  j  men  like  Ulysses,
Themistocles  or  Alcibiades.  The  special  form  the
Sophists  gave  to  their  principle  indicates  even  more
clearly  its  Hellenic  nature,  for  it  was  essentially  in  the
ability  and  skill  to  speak  and  debate  that  they  placed  a
man's  peculiar  wortrj  it  was  to  develop  this  virtue  in
their  pupils  that  they  established  what  might  be  called
intellectual  gymnastics.


SOCRATES  23

No  wonder  Socrates  approved  of  whatever  there  was
in  sophistic  that  was  lofty  and  in  conformity  with  the
genius  of  the  race.  But  he  did  not  therefore  accept  the
principles  of  the  Sophists.

Indeed,  the  thought  came  to  him  to  find  out  if  per-
formance came  up  to  promise,  and  if  the  Sophists  really
carried  out  that  intellectual  and  moral  education  the
excellence  of  which  they  well  understood.  It  must  be
confessed  that  the  process  he  adopted  to  assure  himself
thereof  was  that  of  a  man  prepossessed  in  favour  of  a
contrary  doctrine,  rather  than  that  of  an  impartial  critic
who  unreservedly  sees  things  from  the  point  of  view  of
his  interlocutors.  He  did  not  trouble  about  seeing
people  at  work,  or  trying  to  discover  if  the  pupils  of
the  Sophists  behaved  as  clever  politicians,  just,  clear-
sighted men.  He  started  with  the  idea  that  the  proof
of  ability  was  knowledge,  and  that  the  proof  of  know-
ledge was  the  power  to  explain  to  others  what  one
knows.1  Then  he  went  about  the  town,  questioning
the  Sophists  and  their  pupils,  calling  upon  them  to  tell
him  what  piety,  justice,  courage  and  virtue  were,  and
satisfactorily  to  answer  all  possible  questions  thereon,
without  ever  contradicting  themselves.  Not  one  came
successfully  out  of  this  test ;  so  Socrates  concluded  that,
though  the  Sophists  made  fine  promises,  their  perform-
ances were  not  in  conformity  with  them.

Now,  what  but  the  method  employed  by  the  Sophists
could  be  the  cause  of  their  failure  ?  This  method  con-
sisted of  practice  left  to  itself  and  rejecting  all  theory
as  vain  and  useless  ;  it  was  art  considered  as  its  own
means  and  end.

Here  Socrates  saw  a  double  error.  In  the  first  place,
art  cannot  be  an  end  unto  itself.  Consider  bodily

1  Mem.  iv.  6.  i  ;  iii.  3.  n. Cf.  Laches,  190  C.


24  STUDIES  IN  PHILOSOPHY

gymnastics.  If  you  admit  this  to  be  an  absolute  end,
you  will  be  led  to  attach  as  much  importance  to  tricks
of  strength  which  deform  the  body  as  to  the  well-
planned  exercises  which  make  it  supple  and  strong.
It  is  the  same  with  intellectual  gymnastics.  In  itself
it  is  quite  as  likely  to  make  men  more  unjust  and
wicked  as  to  make  them  more  just  and  noble.1  Will  it
have  the  same  value,  then,  in  both  cases  ?

There  is  more  than  this,  however.  Not  only  cannot
art  be  an  end  unto  itself;  it  cannot  come  into  being
from  exercise  and  practice  alone.  If  art  for  art's  sake
is  dangerous,  art  by  means  of  art  is  impossible.  Is  it
imagined,  as  Aristotle  says  later  on,  that,  according  to
Socrates'  meaning,  in  teaching  a  man  the  trade  of  a
shoemaker,  it  is  sufficient  to  place  in  his  hands  a  collec-
tion of  ready-made  shoes  ? 2  To  call  forth  art  itself  is
a  very  different  thing  from  imparting  the  products  of
art.  A  pupil  trained  by  external  means  can,  more  or
less  faithfully,  reproduce  whatever  he  has  seen  his  master
do,  but  he  has  not  within  him  that  general,  self-sufficing
ability  which  constitutes  true  art.  Art  is  independence,
whereas  such  a  pupil  is  his  master's  slave.3

Art  by  means  of  art  is,  in  a  word,  routine,  ignorance,
chance.  Now,  a  man  must  be  very  simple-minded  if
he  thinks  that,  whereas  it  is  impossible  to  become  a
carpenter,  pilot,  or  general  unless  one  possesses  special
knowledge  of  these  different  professions,  all  the  same,
skill  in  the  general  conduct  of  life  can  spring  up  within
us  as  the  result  of  mere  chancel  Take  any  mental
quality  you  please,  if,  in  acquiring  it,  you  restrict  your-
self to  practice  alone,  you  can  never  be  certain  you  will

1  Mem.  iv.  3.  i.  2  Arist.  Soph.  Elench.  184  a  i.

3  Mt'm.  iv.  7.  i  :  a&TdpKeis  iv  rcus  7rpocnr;Koij<rais  Trpd^effiv.

4  I*>id.  iv.  2.  2  sqq.  ;  iii.  5.  21  sqq.


SOCRATES  25

not  end  in  the  very  opposite  of  what  you  are  aiming  at.
Take  justice,  for  instance.  The  man  who  has  learnt  it
by  nothing  but  practice  and  routine  will  regard  it  as
consisting  of  certain  determined  modes  of  action  :  e.g.
never  stealing  or  deceiving  another.  Deceit  is  just,  when
you  are  dealing  with  enemies  ;  and  so  is  pillage,  when
it  is  the  foe  you  are  plundering.1

But  if  art  is  insufficient  unto  itself,  where  can  it  find
the  rule  and  principle  it  needs  ?  Nowhere  but  in  just
ideas  on  the  use  of  mental  qualities,  and  on  the  con-
ditions of  these  very  qualities  :  in  a  word,  it  can  find
them  only  in  science.  \The  Sophists  missed  their  goal
because  they  were  too  eager,  and  made  straight  for  it,
instead  of  proceeding  along  the  winding  path  which
alone  could  have  led  them  to  it.  Before  laying  claim
to  skill  in  practical  speech  or  deed,  one  must  acquire
that  theoretical  knowledge  which  alone  confers  general
ability.2  We  are  good  at  the  things  with  which  we  are
acquainted,  and  bad  at  those  we  know  nothing  about.3
Art  implies  science :  a  thing  the  Sophists  did  not  see.

Such  were  the  views  of  Socrates  regarding  physics
and  sophistic.  One  judgment  was  the  reverse  of  the
other.  He  blamed  the  physiologists  for  not  having
that  sense  of  human  affairs  which  he  praised  the
Sophists  for  possessing  :  he  blamed  the  Sophists  for
being  without  that  conception  of  science  which  he
found  in  the  physiologists.  The  latter  had  applied  the
form  of  science  to  something  that  goes  beyond  it:  the
Sophists  had  omitted  to  apply  it  to  the  thing  that  re-
quires and  admits  of  it.  Physics  was  science  isolated
from  art  and  practical  life,  losing  itself  in  empty  specu-
lations; sophistic  was  art  isolated  from  science  and  so
reduced  to  dangerous  routine.

1  Mem.  iv.  2.  14  sqq. 2  Ibid.  iv.  3.  i  ;  iii.  9.  4. 3  Laches,  194  D.


26  STUDIES  IN  PHILOSOPHY

Such  an  appreciation  of  physics  and  sophistic  natur-
ally led  Socrates  to  collect  and  combine  the  principles
which  to  him  appeared  viable  in  each  of  these  two
disciplines,  i.e.  scientific  form,  on  the  one  hand,  and
exclusive  preoccupation  about  human  things,  on  the
other.  By  applying  to  the  object  of  sophistic  the  scien-
tific form  invented  by  the  physiologists,  there  would  be
established  a  wisdom  as  useful  as  art  and  as  universal
and  communicable  as  science,  capable  of  moulding  man
and  influencing  his  morals,  capable  also  of  being  self-
sufficient  and  defending  itself  against  objections,  in  a
word,  proportioned  to  the  forces  and  the  needs  of
human  nature.

iThis  idea  of  a  union  of  science  and  art  is  the  very
germ  of  Socratic  philosophy.)  Socrates  does  not  first
cultivate  science  and  art  separately,  and  make  them
serve  each  other  afterwards.  To  his  mind,  each  strays
from  the  path  whenever  it  claims  to  be  journeying  alone.
In  their  close  co-operation,  their  mutual  penetration,  lies
the  condition  of  their  existence  and  success.

Here  we  find  determined  the  general  object  of
Socrates'  investigations.  This  object  is  the  domain  he
clearly  discerned  and  circumscribed  between  things  divine
and  the  mechanical  arts,  i.e.  human  nature  in  what-
ever it  offers  of  a  general  and  definable  character  ; l  it  is
real  and  substantial  human  happiness,  as  distinct  from
imaginary,  fragile  and  delusive  happiness  ; 2  it  is  the  art  of
using  men  and  human  things  well,  not  only  under  certain
circumstances  and  by  chance,  but  with  certainty  and  under
all  circumstances ; 3  in  a  word,  it  is  all  that  is  necessary
and  sufficient  for  the  making  of  an  honest  man.

Such  was  his  idea  when  he  went  about  repeating
the  Apollonian  maxim  :  Tif&Ot  a-avrov.  According  to

1  Mem.  i.  i.  16.  2  Apol.  36  D.  3  Mem.  iv.  i.  2.


SOCRATES  27

Socrates  to  know  oneself  was  not  simply  to  be  con-
scious, under  all  circumstances,  of  what  one  is  or  is  not,
capable.  It  meant  entering  deep  into  one's  own  soul,
beyond  the  particular  and  the  fleeting,  to  find  the  one
identical,  permanent  substratum.  It  meant  finding  that
secret  nature  we  carry  about  everywhere  with  us,  and
which  contains  within  itself  the  conditions  of  our  wisdom
and  happiness  far  more  than  do  external  things.  In  a
word,  the  Socratic  maxim  is  an  exhortation  to  become
conscious  of  whatever  in  us  is  general.

Socrates  does  not  consider  the  Tvwdt  <ravrov  as  simply
the  first  step  in  the  search  after  the  whole  of  truth.  He
does  not  mean  that  knowledge  of  self  is  the  condition  of
attaining  to  all  other  knowledge,  and  that  once  it  is
acquired  we  shall  be  in  a  position  to  enter  upon  the
search  for  all  the  rest.  The  TvwOt,  a-avrov  is  the  end
as  well  as  the  beginning  of  science  ;  there  can  be  no
other  science  for  man  to  acquire  than  that  of  himself.

True,  we  read  in  the  Phaedrus  of  Plato l  that  Socrates
regards  it  as  ridiculous  to  trouble  about  other  things,
when  one  is  still  ignorant  of  oneself ;  this  passage  would
seem  to  indicate  that  Socrates  merely  postpones  physical
and  theological  research,  not  that  he  rejects  it.  Here,
however,  he  is  speaking  ironically.  To  his  mind,  the
time  will  never  come  for  taking  up  the  science  of
universal  being,  because  man  will  never  know  himself
completely.  Probably  no  one,  before  the  time  of  Socrates,
was  as  conscious  as  he  was  of  the  infinite  complexity  and
the  unfathomable  profundity  of  man's  moral  nature,  as
we  see  from  the  passage  just  quoted  in  the  Phaedrus  :
"  I  am  trying  to  find  out,"  he  says,  "  whether  I  am
more  complicated  and  wicked  than  the  serpent  Typhon,
or  if  I  am  of  a  simple  nature,  participating  in  divinity."

1 229  E.


28  STUDIES  IN  PHILOSOPHY

How  could  Socrates  recognise  research — even  so  far  as
to  postpone  it — which  had  not  man  for  its  object  ?  Apart
from  human  things,  there  are  none  but  physical  or  divine
things  and  the  mechanical  arts.  Now,  the  former  are
beyond  man's  reach,1  and  the  rest,  such  as  the  art  of  the
shoemaker,  the  carpenter,  the  wrestler,  and  the  pan-
cratiast,  are  practised  very  well  by  special  men,  without
the  aid  of  theoretical  science.2

Moreover,  wisdom,  when  thus  restricted  to  man,  is
that  which  is  of  the  greatest  interest  to  him.  Indeed,
what  most  dignifies  human  nature  if  it  be  not  freedom,
independence  with  regard  to  other  men  and  external
matters,  and  the  possession  of  everything  necessary  for
good  conduct  and  happiness  ?  Now,  what  kind  of
occupation  is  capable  of  conferring  on  us  this  divine
independence  ?  Not  the  mechanical  arts,  subjected  to
the  needs  of  the  body  ;  not  advanced  astronomy  and
geometry,  difficult  and  useless  sciences,  whose  object
is  quite  foreign  to  the  human  soul.3  Close  investiga-
tion will  reveal  to  us  the  fact  that,  under  all  circumstances,
it  is  one  and  the  same  thing  that  makes  man  dependent
and  a  slave,  to  wit,  ignorance  of  real  good  and  evil,
ignorance  of  himself.4  Therefore,  what  is  to  set  man
free  and  enable  him  to  be  sufficient  unto  himself,  under  all
circumstances,5  is  science,  not  any  particular  science,  but
the  knowledge  of  what  we  are  and  of  what  tallies  with
our  nature.

(Thus,  Socrates  regards  the  science  of  human  things
as  the  object  most  worthy  of  man's  powers^  Great  is
the  distance,  however,  between  the  idea  of  such  a  science
and  its  realisation.  The  scientific  form,  as  we  find  it  in
ancient  physiology,  is  not  adapted  to  things  dealing  with

1  Mem.  iv.  7.  6.  2  Ibid.  iii.  5.  21  ;  iv.  2.  12.

3  Ibid.  iv.  7.  2. 4  Ibid.  iv.  2.  22-23  ;  i.  i 16. 6  Ibid,  iv,  7 i.


SOCRATES


29


the  moral  life,  nor  does  art,  as  the  Sophists  conceived  it,
lend  itself  to  scientific  development.  For  the  physicists
science  consisted  in  knowing  the  generation  of  things,
in  being  able  to  say  whether  there  is  only  one  substance
or  several,  whether  everything  is  immovable  or  in
motion.  How  can  these  categories  be  applied  to
intellectual  and  moral  things?  (On  the  other  hand,
for  the  Sophists  there  is  nothing  fixed  or  universal  in
human  nature,  good  and  happiness  are  entirely  relative
to  individuals)  Human  things  offer  for  our  study  only
an  infinite  number  of  particular  cases  unconnected
with  one  another.  How  can  such  material  be  an  object
of  science  ?

The  idea,  then,  of  a  moral  science  such  as  Socrates
had  conceived  it,  called  forth  a  double  task.  On  the
one  hand,  the  idea  of  science  had  to  be  elaborated  so
that  it  might  be  adapted  to  moral  things  ;  on  the  other,
moral  things  had  to  be  looked  upon  from  such  a  bias,
so  to  speak,  as  to  make  them  appear  fit  to  become
objects  of  science.  A  mould  suited  to  the  matter  had
to  be  made,  and  the  matter  rendered  capable  of  flowing
into  the  mould.  The  mind  of  Socrates  was  directed  to
the  solution  of  this  double  problem.  The  results  of
his  reflections  on  both  points  may  be  grouped  together
under  the  terms  dialectic  and  ethic.  Still,  we  must
not  attribute  to  Socrates  a  dialectic  and  an  ethic  distinct
from  each  other.  The  characteristic  of  his  dialectic  is
that  it  is  built  up  with  a  view  to  his  ethic,  and  the
characteristic  of  his  ethic  is  that  it  is  the  working  out
of  his  dialectic.  They  are  only  two  phases  of  one  and
the  same  discipline  :  the  more  or  less  artificial  duplica-
tion of  the  "  Moral  Science."

In  this  sense,  in  what  do  the  dialectic  and  ethic  of
Socrates  consist  ? In  the  details  of  his  philosophy  shall


30  STUDIES  IN  PHILOSOPHY

we  find  those  characteristics  that  seem  to  us  to  have
indicated  his  general  conception  of  human  wisdom  ?


Ill

Both  Zeller  and  Schleiermacher  maintain  that
Socrates,  far  from  being  a  merely  popular  moralist,
does  not  limit  himself  to  moral  philosophy  :  he  follows
after  true  science,  the  science  of  the  essence  of  things.
First  of  all,  he  forms  a  universal  conception  of  science,
regarding  it  as  consisting  of  the  methodical  determina-
tion of  the  concept  or  the  expression  of  the  general
element  of  the  things  given.  Then,  in  accordance  with
the  law  of  the  human  mind,  he  applies  this  universal
form  to  the  particular  incomplete  object  with  which
experience  supplies  him.  This  object  happens  to  be
human  life.  The  subsequent  task  of  the  Socratics
consists  in  applying  this  very  form  to  the  other  domains
of  reality.1

According  to  this  interpretation,  the  Socratic  theory
of  science  would  appear  to  have  a  distinct  existence.
Logically,  if  not  chronologically,  it  would  seem  to  be
anterior  to  and  independent  of  the  Socratic  ethic  ;  a
system  of  symbols  which  the  philosopher  had  created
from  quite  an  abstract  point  of  view,  and  without  con-
sidering the  peculiar  nature  of  the  things  he  had
undertaken  to  investigate.

It  cannot  be  denied  but  that  this  interpretation
accords  with  the  destiny  of  Socratic  philosophy.  Indeed,
we  find  Plato  and  Aristotle  applying  to  the  whole  study
of  nature  a  method  analogous  to  the  one  employed  by
Socrates  in  the  investigation  of  moral  questions.

1  Schleiermacher, Werke,  iii. 2,  p. 300  sqq.  ;  Zeller,  Phil.  d. Gr.  3rd
edition,  vol.  ii.  93  sqq.


SOCRATES  31

But  does  an  interpretation  need  only  to  be  in
agreement  with  the  historical  fortune  of  a  philosophy
for  us  to  regard  it  as  the  faithful  expression  of  the
thought  of  the  philosopher  himself?  To  find  out  what
a  thing  is  in  its  true  nature  by  what  it  subsequently
becomes  is  a  method  dear  to  Hegelians.  Indeed,
to  their  mind,  creation  is  being  itself.  It  does  not
seem,  however,  to  be  without  reason  that  Pascal  said  :
"Sometimes  the  self-same  thoughts  develop  quite
differently  in  others  from  the  way  in  which  they
develop  in  their  author."  How  many  principles
expand  or  shrink,  become  modified  or  transformed,
when  they  pass  from  one  mind  to  another  which
examines  them  from  its  own  point  of  view !  We
could  not  say  with  Schleiermacher  and  the  Hegelians  :
u  To  know  what  Socrates  was,  we  must  above  all  find
out  how  Plato  came  to  regard  him  as  his  master."
For  Plato  may  have  applied  the  Socratic  method  to
objects  for  which  it  was  not  meant.

Now,  if  we  consider  the  main  elements  of  this
method,  one  by  one,  we  shall  find  that,  in  the  form
in  which  they  appear  in  Socrates'  speeches,  they  can
be  explained  only  by  a  continual  preoccupation  upon
the  moral  object  to  which  they  are  to  be  applied.  We
shall  not  find  Socrates  determining  the  idea  of  science
for  itself,  and  afterwards  applying  it  to  morals.  Science,
he  imagines,  can  be  separated  from  morals  only  in  a
totally  abstract  manner,  in  language,  if  you  will,  never
in  the  nature  of  things.  In  a  word,  we  shall  find
Socrates  stating  the  logical  problem  in  the  following
terms  :  of  what  should  science  consist,  in  order  that
virtue  and  happiness  may  become  objects  of  science  ?

First  of  all,  the  criterion  of  science,  in  the  mind  of


32  STUDIES  IN  PHILOSOPHY

Socrates,  is  agreement  with  itself,  and  the  power  to
get  accepted  infallibly  by  all,  what  one  thinks  he
knows.1  Socrates  does  not  show  himself  anxious  to
confront  philosophical  doctrines  with  the  nature  of
things  as  this  nature  is  capable  of  existing  in  itself,
independently  of  the  conceptions  of  the  human  mind.
According  to  him,  the  necessary  and  all-sufficient  con-
dition of  certainty  lies  in  the  double  agreement  of  man
with  himself  and  with  the  rest  of  mankind  ;  in  other
words,  in  the  agreement  of  the  human  mind  with  itself.

Now,  this  principle,  new  to  philosophy,  would
indeed  be  strange  were  the  knowledge  of  being  and
of  the  universal  principles  of  nature  the  object  of
philosophy.  In  that  case,  if  we  would  understand
Socrates'  doctrine,  we  should  have  to  infer  that  he  was
already  identifying  human  thought  with  the  principle
of  being  in  general.  But  such  identification  was
possible  only  when  several  regions  had  been  distin-
guished in  the  human  mind,  and  the  existence  of  an
eternal  reason  had  therein  been  found.  Such  an
analysis  was  the  distinctive  work  of  Plato  and  Aris-
totle. Socrates,  for  his  part,  clearly  distinguishes
opinion  from  reasoning,  but  he  goes  no  farther  ;  he
considers  that  our  power  of  reasoning  cannot  claim  to
know  the  first  principles  and  final  ends  of  things.

On  the  other  hand,  it  may  well  be  understood  that
the  agreement  of  the  human  mind  with  itself  should  be
looked  upon  as  the  criterium  of  truth,  if  we  are  dealing
only  with  truth  in  moral  affairs.  For  it  is  quite
natural  to  admit  that,  innate  in  the  human  mind,  there
is  the  general  idea  of  what  is  suitable  for  man,  and  that
this  intellectual  substratum  is  the  same  in  all  individuals.
It  is  this  that  is  called  common  sense,  a  sure  guide  so

1  Alcibiades  I.  iii.  D-E  ;  Mem.  iv.  6.  i  and  15.


SOCRATES  33

long  as  we  are  concerned  with  the  conduct  of  life,  but
pregnant  with  error  when  dealing  with  the  knowledge
of  the  laws  of  the  universe.

Now,  to  what  object  must  one  apply  oneself  to
realise  that  agreement  with  oneself  and  the  rest  of  the
world  which  forms  the  condition  of  certainty  ?  In
other  words,  what  is  the  matter  proper  to  science  ?

Here  we  find  what  constitutes  the  essence  of  the
logical  doctrine  of  Socrates,  that  original  and  fruitful
principle  which  was  to  remain  the  guide  of  the  human
mind  for  two  thousand  years.  Science,  asserted  Socrates,
has  for  its  object  that  which  is  general.  There  is  no
science  of  the  individual,  of  the  accidental,  of  particular
things  as  they  are  presented  to  us.  The  object  of  the
science  of  courage,  for  instance,  is  not  courageous
deeds,  it  is  that  which  is  common  to  all  courageous
deeds,  it  is  the  answer  to  the  question  :  rL  ea-rcv  q
avSpeia ;  it  is,  as  Plato  says  later  on,1  TO  Bia  Travrav
Trepl  avSpeias  7r€(f>v/c6<;.2

This  maxim  is  the  very  one  advanced  to  prove  that
Socrates  considered  science  in  itself,  apart  from  the
matter  to  which  it  must  be  applied.  But  though  it
is  true  that  the  maxim  of  Socrates  became  after  his
time  a  logical  and  even  metaphysical  doctrine  superior
to  any  particular  domain,  it  does  not  therefore  follow
that  it  was  so  to  himself.  This  will  be  evident  if,
instead  of  considering  it  separately,  it  is  replaced  in
the  ensemble  of  the  Socratic  philosophy.

The  whole  work  of  Xenophon 3  clearly  shows  that
Socrates  never  sought  the  general  except  in  human  things.

Consequently  the  matter  at  issue  has  less  bearing  on
the  question  of  fact  than  on  that  of  right.

1  See  Mem.  i.  i.  16.  2  Laches,  192  E.

3  See  principally  Mem.  i.  i.  16.


34  STUDIES  IN  PHILOSOPHY

What  was  it  that  Socrates  meant  by  the  general,  and
why  did  he  see  in  it  the  only  object  that  admitted  of
scientific  knowledge  ?

By  the  general,  Socrates  did  not  mean  the  simple
permanent  element  which  may  lie  hidden  in  the  com-
pound things  that  strike  our  senses.  In  reality,  that
is  not  the  general  ;  it  is  rather  substance,  that  is  to  say,
the  very  object  which  physicists  had  considered  and
which  Socrates  regards  as  inaccessible.  On  the  other
hand,  the  general  is  not  yet  to  him  what  it  will  be  to
Plato  and  Aristotle  :  the  normal  type  of  a  species,  the
natural  being  as  it  would  be  if  the  cause  peculiar  to  it
were  acting  alone  without  being  opposed,  as  happens
in  the  sensible  world,  by  outer  influences.  The  general,
of  which  Socrates  speaks,  is  not  related  to  the  material
world,  nor  even  to  an  intelligible  world  :  strictly
speaking,  it  is  the  common  substratum  of  men's
speeches  and  actions.  Socrates  starts  with  the  idea
that  the  reason  we  use  one  and  the  same  word,  justice,
to  designate  quite  different  modes  of  action,  such  as
doing  good  to  one's  friends  and  doing  evil  to  one's
enemies,  lies  in  the  fact  that  we  have  in  mind  a  certain
notion  which  is  single  in  its  nature,  and  the  object  of
which  we  find  in  the  various  actions  we  designate  as
just.  And  as  men,  when  they  talk  to  one  another  in
good  faith,  come  sooner  or  later  to  agree  as  to  the  use
of  their  words,  the  ideas  represented  by  these  words  are
bound  to  be  identical  in  the  minds  of  all.

And  now,  why  does  Socrates  make  the  general,  thus
understood,  the  proper  object  of  science  ?

Because  he  finds  in  it  the  necessary  and  sufficient
condition  of  that  agreement  with  oneself  and  others
which,  in  his  mind,  is  the  mark  of  knowledge.

Apart  from  these  determined,  fixed  notions,  which


SOCRATES  35

form  the  foundations  of  words,  there  is  no  guiding-
mark  for  the  mind  in  its  reasonings,  and  therefore  no
means  of  coming  to  an  understanding  with  oneself  and
others.  On  the  other  hand,  it  is  sufficient  to  make
one's  discourse  conform  to  those  general  notions  on
which  all  men  are  agreed,  to  be  sure  of  obtaining  the
assent  of  one's  interlocutors.  Why  does  Homer  call
Ulysses  an  orator  sure  of  success?  Because  Ulysses,
in  his  discourse,  is  guided  by  ideas  which  all  men
accept  :  Sia  rwv  SOKOVVTOW  dvdpcorroi^.1

Francis  Bacon,  the  modern  legislator  of  the  sciences
of  nature,  said,  not  without  reason,  that  from  human
language  one  can  deduce  only  words,  not  things,  if  we
would  know  the  nature  of  the  external  world  ;  but
human  language  is  certainly  the  first  testimony  that
must  be  consulted  if  it  is  desired  to  become  acquainted
with  the  thoughts  and  wishes  of  the  human  mind.
There  is  nothing  to  indicate  that  the  categories  of
language  reproduce  those  of  things  ;  but  it  is  evident
they  are  an  image  of  the  categories  of  our  thoughts
and  actions.  The  discourse  of  men  can  supply  the
physicist  only  with  an  altogether  provisional  ensemble
of  signs  and  conjectures.  Such  language,  when  dealing
with  moral  philosophy,  is  the  very  thing  we  have  to.
fathom.

If  we  now  consider  in  detail  the  method  of  Socrates,
we  find  that  it  consists  of  two  parts  which  may  be
designated  by  the  names  of  exterior  form  and  logical
substratum.  The  former  consists  of  dialogue  along
with  certain  features  peculiar  to  Socrates,  such  as  irony
and  maieutics,  as  well  as  the  leading  rble  assigned  to
self-possession  and  love.  Logical  substratum  consists

1  Mem.  iv.  6.  15.


36  STUDIES  IN  PHILOSOPHY

of  definition  and  induction. Each  of  these  parts,  accord-
ing to  Socrates,  has  a  special  aspect.

Zeller  says  that  the  reason  Socrates  makes  use  of  the
dialogue  form  is  that  he  is  conscious  of  his  own  ignor-
ance, because  of  the  contradictions  he  finds  in  the
various  systems  of  philosophy,  and  that  it  is  his  desire
to  escape  from  this  state  of  ignorance.  Hence,  accord-
ing to  Zeller,  his  disposition  to  appeal  to  others,  with
the  object  of  discovering  if  perchance  they  are  in
possession  of  the  very  science  he  lacks.

This  explanation  is  not  altogether  satisfactory.  In
the  first  place,  Socrates  does  not  consult  his  interlocutors
on  things  in  general,  but  only  on  what  concerns  man-
kind :  he  expects  to  learn  nothing  from  the  dialogue
form — any  more  than  from  any  other  method  of  in-
vestigation— about  physical  things.  Then,  too,  Socrates
does  not  see  in  the  dialogue  form  merely  a  convenient
and  suggestive  method  of  philosophising ;  to  his
mind  dialectic  cannot  be  distinguished  from  wisdom
itself.

Though  investigation  into  the  causes  of  the  world  is
a  matter  of  solitary  speculation,  it  is  not  the  same  with
investigation  into  the  conditions  of  human  life.  How
can  man  be  known,  except  by  conversing  with  men  ?
And  if  science  consists  in  discovering  the  points  on
which  all  men  are  agreed,  and  which  form  the  substratum
of  all  their  judgments  (ra  fiaKicrra  opoX.oyovfjieva),  what
shorter  and  more  certain  method  can  one  have  than  to
bring  together  men's  opinions  and  compare  them  with
one  another  ?  In  a  word,  if  science  must  be  used  for
instructing  men  and  persuading  them  of  things  of  which
we  have  become  certain,  once  for  all,  is  not  methodical
conversation,  from  its  beginning  right  on  to  its  end,
an  integral  part  of  philosophy  and  wisdom  ?


SOCRATES  37

Consequently,  it  is  not  from  modesty,  from  deference
to  the  science  of  others,  that  Socrates  constantly  speaks
of  examining  things  in  common,  Kotvfj  (3ov\€ve<r0ai,,1
Koivrf  a-KeTTTecrOai,,  tcoivf)  tyreiv,  (rvtyrelv  :  this  form  of
investigation  is  implied  in  the  very  object  he  has  in
view.  For  a  dissertation  on  the  principles  of  nature,
writing  is  sufficient ;  but  to  know  men  and  succeed  in
convincing  them,  one  must  converse  with  them.

Socratic  dialogue  frequently  assumes  the  form  of
irony.  Socrates  puts  his  questions  without  ever  answer-
ing them,2  and  thus  brings  his  interlocutor  either  to  the
point  of  contradicting  himself  or  coming  to  a  dead  stop,
and  acknowledging  his  ignorance  of  the  very  things  he
thought  he  knew.3

Now,  the  use  of  such  a  method  is  far  more  compre-
hensible when  dealing  with  the  knowledge  of  human
things  than  when  dealing  with  that  of  nature.  How,
when  dealing  with  external  things,  can  a  man  confine
himself  to  questioning  others  without  bringing  their  asser-
tions face  to  face  with  reality  itself?  In  order  profitably
to  undertake  such  questioning,  would  not  a  man  need
previously  to  have  shown  himself  competent  in  both
physics  and  metaphysics  ?  And  again,  would  not  the
listeners  also  need  to  be  specially  competent  if  their
judgment  on  the  discussion  is  to  be  of  any  value  ?  But
when  dealing  with  human  things,  every  one  is  competent,
for  he  bears  within  himself  just  the  touchstone  needed
for  the  testing  of  opinions.  In  conversation  itself,  the
questioner  may  find  all  that  is  needed  for  proving  that
his  interlocutor  is  not  only  in  flagrant  contradiction  with
himself,  but  with  the  very  nature  of  things  as  well.
Moreover,  is  it  not  especially  such  human  qualities  as

1  Mem.  iv.  5.  12.  2  Arist.  Soph.  el.  ch.  xxxiii.

3  Plat.  Repub.  i.  337  A  E  ;  Sophistes,  183  B.


38  STUDIES  IN  PHILOSOPHY

piety  and  justice,  courage  and  virtue,  with  whose  nature
every  man  thinks  he  is  acquainted,  though  really  such
is  not  the  case  ?  The  physiologists  would  not  have
accepted  the  contest  to  which  Socrates  invited  his  inter-
locutors. Only  such  men  as  were  occupied  in  moral
affairs  could  submit  to  such  a  mode  of  questioning  :
only  they,  in  fact,  did  so.

It  is  the  same  with  maieutics.  Socrates  would  have
us  think  that  he  is  barren  as  regards  wisdom  ;  but  by
his  questions  he  helps  others  to  bring  to  birth  what  they
bear  in  their  own  mind,  and  that  unconsciously.  Then,
after  thus  eliciting  the  secret  ideas  of  his  interlocutors,
he  carefully  examines  whether  the  offspring  of  their  soul
is  nothing  but  fancy,  or  fruit  that  is  real  and  capable  of
living.1  What  must  we  think  of  such  a  method  ?

Socrates,  we  are  told,  considers  himself  barren  as
regards  wisdom.  What  kind  of  wisdom  is  here  meant,
if  not  practical  wisdom,  which  indeed  has  the  strange
characteristic  of  being,  in  one  aspect,  incapable  of  com-
munication, of  existing  within  us  only  if  it  is  ourself,
of  being  produced  within  our  person  only  if  it  springs
forth  from  our  own  inmost  nature  ?

How  is  Socrates  able  to  generate,  in  the  minds  of
his  interlocutors,  ideas  likely  to  be  true  and  capable  of
living  ?  This  doctrine  is  a  very  strange  one,  if  we  are
dealing  with  physical  or  metaphysical  truths.  That
audacious  doctrine  which  identifies  the  mind  of  man
with  the  principle  of  things  is  nowhere  to  be  found  in
Socrates  :  if  it  happens  that  he  predicts  the  future 2  it
is  not  by  the  might  of  his  intelligence  alone,  but  owing
to  a  mysterious  and  quite  supernatural  revelation.
Maieutics,  however,  is  a  very  reasonable  and  legitimate
method,  if  our  object  is  to  bring  moral  truths  before

1  Theaet.  149,  157  c.  2  Mem.  i.  i.  5.


SOCRATES  39

men,  for  these  truths  are  nothing  but  the  expression
and  reflective  knowledge  of  human  nature  :  and  human
nature  is  what  every  man  has  within  himself.  The
fiction  of  Meno  is  a  Platonic  and  paradoxical  extension
of  Socratic  maieutics.  Socrates,  for  his  part,  elicits
from  the  minds  of  his  listeners  only  knowledge  that
relates  to  piety,  justice,  temperance,  courage,  urban
government,  and  everything  that  goes  to  make  up  an
honourable  man.1

Finally,  how  can  Socrates,  who  professes  to  be  ignor-
ant, rightly  estimate  the  true  value  of  the  fruit  which
he  assists  human  intelligence  in  bringing  forth  ?  Are
we  not  here  dealing  exclusively  with  those  moral  and
practical  ideas  upon  which  every  man,  in  his  human
capacity,  is  competent,  when  in  forming  his  judgments
he  imposes  silence  on  his  distinctive  tastes  and  passions
and  puts  himself  just  at  that  point  of  view,  superior  to
the  individual,  which  Socrates  had  defined  ?

Dialectic,  besides,  possesses  two  very  remarkable
moral  conditions  :  self-possession  and  love  :  eyKpdreia
and  6/9o>9*

"  To  those  who  are  self-possessed,  and  to  them  only,
is  it  given  to  investigate  the  best  in  everything,  and,
distinguishing  things  by  a  dialectic  of  actions  and  words,
according  as  they  belong  to  the  good  or  the  evil,  to
choose  the  one  and  abstain  from  the  other." 2  It  is
because  dialectic  has  for  its  object  the  determination  of
the  value  of  things,  from  the  moral  and  human  point
of  view,  that  self-possession  is  its  essential  condition.
Indeed,  the  true  moral  value  of  things  lies  in  the  interest
they  offer  to  human  nature  in  general,  not  to  the  indi-
vidual, regarded  from  the  standpoint  of  his  tastes  and
passions,  which  are  superficial  and  fleeting.  Now,  it  is

1  Mem.  i.  i.  16.  2  Ibid.  iv.  5.  n.


40  STUDIES  IN  PHILOSOPHY

owing  to  self-control  that  man,  in  his  judgments,  lays
his  individual  and  accidental  preferences  on  one  side.

And  finally,  love,  epw?,  plays  an  important  part  in
the  dialectic  of  Socrates.  The  same  may  be  said  regard-
ing all  the  Socratics.  Not  only  Xenophon  and  Plato,
but  also  Euclid,  Crito,  Simmias  and  Antisthenes,  have
written  on  the  subject  of  love.  What  is  the  love\that
is  here  meant  ?  Doubtless  Socrates  does  not  mean
friendship,  pure  and  simple,  but  rather  affection  mingled
with  sense  attraction.  It  is  a  kind  of  spiritual  ardour
that  enters  the  whole  man,  causing  in  him  an  emotion
that  has  nothing  to  do  with  mere  friendship.  Evidently
Socrates  disparages  physical  love,  though  not  in  all  its
elements.  He  retains  its  soul-uplifting  charm,  which
is  lacking  when  the  intelligence  alone  is  at  play.
He  keeps,  one  might  say,  its  vital  impulse,  if  not  its
object.1

This  love,  moreover,  could  not  go  to  the  point  of
passion  and  frenzy,  like  the  love  of  which  Plato  speaks  in
Phaedrus.  Even  here  self-possession  is  still  a  superior,
inviolable  duty.  The  Platonic  distinction  between  good
and  evil  frenzy  would  have  been  rejected  by  Socrates,
to  whom  all  frenzy  is  slavery.

How  is  the  rule  that  governs  such  a  mental  state  to
be  explained  ?

Certainly  Socrates  does  not  dream  of  investing  love
with  the  rble  that  Plato  assigns  to  it,  and  which  consists
in  introducing  us  into  the  world  of  beauty,  as  into  the
vestibule,  as  it  were,  of  divine,  transcendent  truth.  In
order  that  love  might  appear  as  endowed  with  such
power,  it  would  have  to  be  a  state  of  rapture  and  ecstasy,
whereas  Socratic  love  is  inseparable  from  self-possession.
Already  Socrates  condemns  poets  for  writing  poetry

1  Xen.  Banquet,  ch.  viii.


SOCRATES  41

not  by  science  but  by  enthusiasm,  a  kind  of  divine
inspiration.1  With  all  the  more  reason  would  he  have
condemned  as  sacrilegious  the  claim  that  the  secrets
the  gods  have  removed  from  our  mental  grasp  could
be  reached  in  a  state  of  frenzy.

In  investigations  upon  human  things  there  is  room
for  a  kind  of  love  which  combines  sense  attraction  and
self-possession.  In  accordance  with  the  principle  of
maieutics,  the  soul  must  bring  forth  its  wisdom  from
itself,  just  as  the  body  brings  forth  from  itself  the  fruit
to  which  it  gives  birth.  Therefore  the  soul,  as  well  as
the  body,  must  be  impregnated.  Love  here  intervenes
for  the  purpose  of  playing  a  part  similar  to  that  it
plays  in  physical  procreation.  Intelligences  impregnate
each  other,  as  bodies  do.  By  the  influence  of  noble
love  the  soul  becomes  big  with  noble  thoughts  and
feelings.  "  Orestes  and  Pylades,  Theseus  and  Pirithous,
and  several  other  demi-gods  are  famous  .  .  .  because,
admiring  one  another,  they  performed  together  the  most
glorious  deeds." 2  Moreover,  it  was  a  familiar  idea
amongst  the  Greeks  that  the  mutual  love  of  youths
exalted  their  courage,  and  made  them  capable  of  mighty
actions.

And  so  we  find  that  dialogue,  irony,  maieutics,  self-
possession  and  love,  all  of  which  are  elements  of  the
Socratic  method,  if  regarded  not  as  abstract  formulas
but  rather  in  their  historical  aspect,  testify  to  a  reflective
and  exclusive  preoccupation  to  establish  the  science  of
morals.  But,  so  far,  these  are  nothing  but  the  externals
of  the  method.  What  must  we  think  of  that  which
constitutes  their  basis,  to  wit,  of  the  process  of  refu-
tation which,  in  some  way,  makes  up  the  negative
method,  and  of  the  processes  of  definition  and  induction

1  Plat.  Apol.  22  B-C.  2  Xen.  Banquet,  ch.  viii.


42  STUDIES  IN  PHILOSOPHY

of  which  the  positive  method  consists  ?  Does  it  not
appear  that  here,  at  all  events,  we  have  to  do  with
instruments  that  are  really  of  universal  importance,  and
with  conditions,  not  merely  of  the  science  of  morals,
but  of  science  in  general,  whatever  be  its  object  ?

Of  what  does  the  Socratic  refutation  consist  ?  Socrates
begins  by  eliciting  or  drawing  forth  from  the  problem
in  question  the  very  datum  he  presupposes.1  For
instance,  if  he  is  told  that  any  one  man  is  a  better
citizen  than  another,  he  asks  his  interlocutor  what,  in
his  mind,  constitutes  a  good  citizen.  When  the  other
man  has  replied,  Socrates  asks  him  additional  questions,
dealing  with  cases  to  which  the  term  "  good  citizen  "  is
generally  applied.  By  this  method  he  makes  him  give
answers  that  are  incompatible  with  the  original  reply  :
the  result  being  that  the  definition  put  forward  was
either  too  restricted  or  too  wide,  or  defective  in  some
other  way.2

Socrates  applies  this  method  of  refutation  to  the
judgments  either  of  ordinary  men,  politicians,  poets  and
artists  of  renown,3  professors  of  eloquence  and  virtue,
or  of  sophists  ;  in  a  word,  he  applies  it  to  all  ideas  that
deal  with  morals  ;  but  we  do  not  find  that  he  made  use
of  it  to  refute  physical  or  metaphysical  doctrines.  As
regards  the  latter,  he  contents  himself  with  emphasising
the  contradiction  that  prevails  between  the  various  ideas
of  philosophers.

Naturally,  the  Socratic  method  of  refutation  may  be
employed  under  all  circumstances,  but  its  most  legitimate
use  is  in  regard  to  morals.  If  we  carefully  notice,  we  find
that  Socrates  bases  the  truth  of  any  given  particular  asser-

1  Mem.  iv.  6.  1 3  :  tvl  rrjv  vir&deffw  fTravrjyev  &v  Trdvra  rbv  \6yov.

2  For instance, Mem. iv. 2  : Conversation between Socrates and
Euthydemus.

3  Apol.  ch.  vi.  to  viii.


SOCRATES  43

tion  on  knowledge  of  the  general  principle  relating  to
that  assertion.  Now,  such  a  method  is  incomprehensible,
if  we  are  dealing  with  the  order  of  physical  realities,  where
the  particular  is  given  before  the  general.  Is  it  con-
ceivable that,  when  affirming  we  see  the  sun  turning
round  the  earth,  we  should  be  interrupted  and  asked
whether,  before  expressing  ourselves  in  this  way,  we
have  assured  ourselves  that  we  know  what  sight  and
movement  are  ?  All  philosophies — even  ancient  philo-
sophy— have  necessarily  subordinated  knowledge  of  the
principles  of  physics  to  the  facts  and  appearances  that
have  to  be  explained,  not  the  existence  of  facts  or
appearances  to  a  knowledge  of  the  principles.  In  the
moral  order  of  things,  however,  the  particular  is  not
"  given "  :  it  is  to  be  sought  for.  Aristides  is  not
"  given  "  to  me  as  a  virtuous  man  :  I  ask  myself  if  I
ought  to  declare  him  to  be  so.  The  conduct  I  should
observe  if  I  would  practise  piety  is  not  "  given  "  :  it  is
to  come,  it  is  only  possible.  And  how  can  it  be  deter-
mined except  by  starting  from  the  general  idea  of  piety?
Socrates  is  therefore  right  in  subordinating  the  truth  of
particular  judgments  to  the  knowledge  of  the  general,
if  he  is  specially  considering  the  moral  domain  ;  for
here  the  particular  is  nothing  more  than  we  make  it ;
and  we  make  it  of  such  or  such  a  nature  only  by  virtue
of  the  ideas  inherent  in  our  own  mind.  Now,  universal
principles  exist  in  most  men  only  under  the  form  of
habits  or  blind  instincts  ;  hence  the  principitancy  and
inconsistency  noticed  in  their  judgments.  It  is  the
very  object  of  the  method  of  Socrates  to  substitute
deliberate,  resolute  maxims  for  these  blind,  wavering
opinions.

But  we  have  not  yet  entered  upon  the  two  Socratic
processes,  which,  more  than all others,  appear  to be


44  STUDIES  IN  PHILOSOPHY

of  universal,  theoretical  application :  definition  and
induction  ; l  definition,  the  supreme  object  of  dialectic  ;
induction,  the  methodical  march  leading  to  definition.

Definition  is  the  adequate  expression  of  that  general
essence  which  is  the  object  of  science.  The  Socratic
definition  possesses  this  in  particular  :  it  does  not  con-
fine itself  to  offering  a  distinctive  sign  of  things  ;  it
claims  to  set  forth  the  necessary  and  all  -  sufficient
condition  of  their  existence.  It  not  only  states  what
the  thing  is,  seen  from  without,  it  even  tries  to  discover
what  is  capable  of  producing  it.  For  instance,  to  call
a  just  man  the  one  who  does  just  things  is  not  to
define  him.  It  is  possible  to  do  just  things  by  chance,
not  by  justice ;  and  one  may  be  just  without  mani-
festing justice  within  oneself.  On  the  other  hand,  to
say  that  the  just  man  is  he  who  knows  what  the
laws  ordain  with  reference  to  men,  is  to  offer  a  true
definition.  For  we  do  not  find  that  men  ever  do
anything  else  than  what  they  'think  they  ought  to  do,
and  those  who  know  justice  will  necessarily  do  just
things  under  all  circumstances.2  They  have  within
themselves  the  universal  capacity  for  justice.

Thus  the  Socratic  definition  consists  of  the  declara-
tion of  the  inner  capacity,  of  which  the  thing  to  be
defined  is  the  outer  manifestation.

Now,  where,  in  the  first  place,  is  this  distinction
between  the  concrete,  particular  thing  and  the  invisible,
general  power  to  be  found,  if  not  in  man  ?  And  does
not  this  search  after  a  metaphysical  essence — justified,
if  we  are  dealing  with  the  human  soul,  by  consciousness
itself — become  extremely  rash  and  dangerous  if  we
claim  to  practise  it  with  regard  to  the  outer  phenomena
of  nature.

1  Arist.  Met.  xiii.  4.  1078  b  25.  2  Mem.  iv.  6.  6.


SOCRATES  45

Why,  too,  does  Socrates  regard  the  capacity,  or
total  principle  of  the  action  as  reposing  in  an  idea,  in
the  knowledge,  pure  and  simple,  of  the  conditions  of
action,  leaving  aside  the  force  necessary  to  realise  it?
The  reason  is  that,  in  man,  force  or  activity  is  ever
present,  and  is  always  determined  conformably  with
knowledge.  Such,  at  all  events,  is  the  opinion  of
Socrates  regarding  will.  Will  is,  as  it  were,  a  constant
datum  which  it  is  practically  needless  to  mention.
It  would  not  be  so  were  we  dealing  with  the  pro-
duction of  physical  phenomena,  for  in  the  latter  case
the  nature  of  the  generating  causes  and  their  mode
of  action  are  unknown  and  inaccessible.

To  arrive  at  definition,  thus  regarded,  the  method
Socrates  uses  is  induction.  This  operation  consists  of
two  parts,  which  may  be  called  invention  and  discussion.

To  discover  the  general  essence,  Socrates  takes  as
his  starting-point  a  certain  number  of  instances  of  the
thing  to  be  defined.  These  instances,  however,  do
not  consist  of  natural  facts,  directly  observed  :  Socrates
takes  them  exclusively  from  human  discourse.  Language,
opinions,  ordinary  judgments  or  even  nature  seen
through  man  :  such  is  the  material  of  which  his
induction  is  formed,  such  the  ground  in  which  it
must  germinate.  From  the  outset  Socrates  interests
himself  preferably  in  the  feelings  of  men  regarding
paltry  matters  and  commonplace  pursuits.1  Initiation
into  the  lesser  mysteries,  he  says,  must  precede  initiation
into  the  greater.  This  is  the  reason  he  is  constantly
speaking  of  shoemakers  and  smiths,  carpenters  and
drovers :  a  reproach  brought  against  him  by  his
enemies.2

To  observation,  as  thus  understood,  Socrates  adds

1  Gorgias,  ch.  li.  p.  497  B-c.  2  Mem.  i.  2,  37.


46  STUDIES  IN  PHILOSOPHY

analogy.  He  appeals  to  things  his  interlocutor  knows ;
and,  showing  him  the  resemblance  between  these  things
and  those  that  form  the  subject  of  conversation,  he
draws  him  on  to  the  discovery  that  even  the  latter
were  not  really  unknown  to  him.1  What,  for  instance,
constitutes  a  just  man  ?  We  know  that  a  carpenter
is  a  man  who  knows  carpentry  ;  a  musician  is  one  who
knows  music ;  a  doctor,  one  who  knows  medicine.
Our  conclusion,  by  analogy,  will  be  that  the  just  man
is  the  man  who  knows  justice.2  The  usual  and,  as  it
were,  essential  theme  of  these  analogies  consists  in  the
transition  from  mechanical,  special  arts  to  moral  and
general  art ;  in  a  word,  the  transition  from  things  of
the  body  to  those  of  the  soul.

Still,  observation  and  analogy  give  only  provisional
results  :  discussion  alone  affords  decisive  ones.  Having
once  invented  a  general  formula  by  means  of  carefully
chosen  cases,  Socrates  considers  the  greatest  possible
number  of  cases  and  applies  his  formula  to  all  these
instances,  retaining  it  unmodified  if  it  emerges  success-
fully from  the  test,  and  suitably  modifying  it  if  it  docs
not.  Not  only  does  he  vary,  he  even  reverses  the
experiment,  trying  to  find  a  definition  for  the  contrary
object,  and  ascertaining  whether  this  new  definition
is  to  the  former  what  negation  is  to  affirmation.

Such  is  Socratic  induction.  Now,  all  the  details  of
this  process  are  applicable  to  human  things,  whereas
they  are  inapplicable  to  physical  or  metaphysical  things.

To  take  as  one's  starting-point  the  language  and
discourse  of  ordinary  life,  and  not  external  facts,  is  a
method  that  may  rightly  be  regarded  as  meaningless
and  fantastic  if  our  object  is  to  know  the  absolute
essence  of  being  and  of  things  ;  but  it  is  a  very  natural

1  Xen,  Economicus,  19.  15.  2  Gorgias,  460  B.


SOCRATES  47

and  legitimate  method  if  our  object  is  to  find  out  what
lies  at  the  bottom  of  human  judgments.  It  is  also
quite  conceivable  that  the  philosopher  should  bestow
particular  attention  upon  common  and  ordinary  things,
if  his  express  purpose  is  to  know  man,  for  it  is  in  this
order  of  things  that  human  nature  appears  as  it  really
is,  stripped  of  the  mask  of  convention  and  false
knowledge.

The  complaisant  use  of  the  method  of  analogy  and
the  fact  that  this  mode  of  reasoning  is  regarded  as
proof,  would  indicate  anything  but  a  scientific  mind
if  one's  investigation  were  compelled  to  cover  every
domain  of  reality.  But  if  we  are  to  move  in  one  and
the  same  domain  only,  and  that  the  domain  of  human
things,  then  analogy  is  a  useful  method  to  follow.
For  then,  its  action  is  limited  to  passing  from  one
species  to  another  in  the  same  genus,  and  that,  too,
in  the  order  of  things  most  familiar  to  us,  in  which  we
need  only  retire  within  ourselves  to  find  points  of
reference  at  each  step.

In  short,  the  Socratic  process  of  discussion  and
control  is  a  very  uncertain  and  inadequate  method,
if  we  would  have  knowledge  of  the  things  of  nature.
Socrates  endeavours  to  verify  his  induction  by  examin-
ing every  instance  that  offers  itself.  But  how  can  one
gather  together  all  the  instances  of  one  and  the  same
genus  in  the  order  of  physical  and  material  things?
How  can  we  call  up  at  will  the  manifestations  of  the
essence  contrary  to  the  one  whose  definition  we  are
seeking  ?  Doubtless  modern  experimentation  must
have  realised  these  conditions  to  some  extent ;  but
the  ancients  had  no  idea  whatever  of  such  a  method
of  investigation.  On  the  other  hand,  they  must  have
thought  that,  in  human  things,  the  conditions  in


48  STUDIES  IN  PHILOSOPHY

question  were  quite  realisable.  Though  it  is  foolish
to  claim  to  know  all  the  different  cases  in  which  cold
and  heat,  generation  and  destruction  may  be  met  with,
it  would  seem  easier  to  set  forth  a  complete  list  of
such  actions  as  we  call  just  and  of  those  we  call  unjust.
The  number  of  names  representing  these  actions  is
limited  and  they  are  all  at  the  disposal  of  man,  for
they  are  his  work.  This  possibility  of  comprehending
the  entire  domain  of  moral  things  must,  above  all,
have  been  recognised  in  a  nation  where  the  conditions
of  human  life  were  relatively  simple,  where  the  totality
of  human  duties  naturally  clustered  round  a  few  pre-
cise, concordant  ideas,  and  there  was  entire  ignorance  of
those  conflicts  between  the  individual  and  society,  con-
science and  public  interests,  family  and  country,  country
and  humanity,  physical  comfort  and  lofty  culture,  that
have  introduced  inextricable  confusion  into  the  moral
life  of  modern  nations.

The  logical  method  of  Socrates  is  limited  to  in-
duction and  definition  as  thus  understood.  Aristotle
finds  fault  with  this  dialectic,  which  is  carried  on
exclusively  by  a  process  of  questioning,  because  it  pins
its  faith  to  common  opinion,  and  goes  no  farther  than
probability.  His  appeal  is  to  special,  direct  intuition,
the  indispensable  condition  of  a  complete,  infallible
demonstration.  Aristotle's  reproach  is  comprehensible,
if  our  object  is  to  go  back  to  the  first  principles  of  all
things.  But  if  we  have  only  to  find  in  human  nature
a  rule  for  human  judgment  and  conduct,  to  discover  and
set  forth  the  principles  applied  by  human  reason  when
tranquil  and  free  from  routine  and  passion,  with  the
object  of  discovering  in  these  principles,  which  are  now
objects  of  clear  consciousness,  a  weapon  against  routine
and  passion  themselves  ;  in  a  word,  if  we  have  to  set


SOCRATES  49

man  free  by  enabling  him  to  know  mankind,  we  can
understand  why  Socrates  contented  himself  with  the
observation  of  human  phenomena,  and  made  no  attempt
to  pierce,  by  metaphysical  intuition,  into  the  mysteries
of  absolute  thought.

IV

Thus  we  see  that  the  nature  and  import  of  the
Socratic  method  are  in  exact  proportion  to  the  object
Socrates  had  in  view,  which  was  nothing  less  than  the
constitution  of  ethics  as  a  science.  Conversely,  the
concrete  doctrine  of  Socrates,  his  conclusions  on  things
and  on  man  himself  are  exactly  what  might  have  been
expected  from  the  use  of  such  a  method.  Matter
responds  to  form  as  form  responds  to  matter.

It  may  seem,  if  we  cast  a  general  glance  at  the
teaching  of  Socrates,  that  the  science  of  which  it  con-
sists does  indeed  go  beyond  the  limits  marked  out  by
his  method,  and,  in  a  sense,  includes  not  only  human
but  also  physical  and  divine  things.

Is  not  his  reason  for  throwing  overboard  the
mechanistic  physics  of  the  ancient  philosophers,  that  he
wishes  to  substitute  therefor  a  teleological  system  of
physics  ? l  Though  he  condemns  cosmological  theology,
the  investigation  into  the  way  in  which  the  gods
formed  the  universe,  does  he  not  extol  what  may  be
called  moral  theology  in  his  endeavour  to  demonstrate
the  existence  of  a  divine  intelligence  and  providence  ?
The  considerable  importance  given,  in  the  Memorabilia,
to  speculations  of  this  kind,  the  originality  of  Socrates'
views  on  these  matters,  have  induced  several  critics
to  regard  them  not  only  as  significant  parts  of  his

1  Mem.  i.  4,  iv.  3.


50  STUDIES  IN  PHILOSOPHY

philosophy,  but  even  as  its  very  centre  and  ground-
work. Thus,  to  Fouillee,  Socrates  is  essentially  the
promoter  of  a  system  of  teleological  metaphysics,
whereas  to  Franck1  he  is  above  all  else  a  theological
philosopher.

But  in  order  to  discover  if  teleology  and  moral
theology  form  an  integral  part  of  the  object  of  science
according  to  Socrates,  it  is  not  sufficient  to  examine  and
see  whether  Socrates  advanced  profound  ideas  on  these
subjects  or  not.  We  must  also  ask  ourselves  what
relation  these  ideas  bear  to  the  fundamental  principles
of  his  philosophy.

Now,  one  can,  it  would  appear,  divide  the  teleo-
logical and  the  theological  ideas  of  Socrates  into  two
parts  ;  the  one  overstepping  the  limits  of  ethics,  though
at  the  same  time  offered  us  as  the  fruit  of  supernatural
inspiration  superior  to  science  ;  the  other,  of  a  more
scientific  nature,  though  connected  with  ethics  as  its
source  and  raison  d'etre.  When  Socrates  speaks  of  his
daemonic  sign  and  of  the  power  it  sometimes  affords
him  of  foreseeing  the  future  ; 2  when  he  speaks  of  the
divinity  that  is  not  far  from  each  one  of  us  and  is
ready  to  utter  a  warning  call  to  the  man  who  listens  in
silence  ;  when  he  declares  that  to  fear  death  is  to  believe
oneself  wise  without  really  being  so,  for  it  is  to  believe
that  one  knows  what  one  does  not  know,3  he  is  evi-
dently speaking  of  those  things  which,  as  they  are
beyond  our  power  to  control,  are  also  beyond  the  reach
of  our  science.4

When,  on  the  contrary,  he  deals  with  physical  and
divine  things  in  a  scientific  method,  we  see  him  pre-
occupied about  considering  things,  not  in  themselves,

1  Journal  ties  Savants,  October  1881.
2  Mem.  i.  i.  3-5.  3  Apol.  29  A.  *  Mem.  i.  i.  9.


SOCRATES  51

but  from  without  and  with  reference  to  man.  Thus,
he  constantly  tends  to  substitute  for  the  gods  the
daemons,  who  are  nearer  to  ourselves,  and  for  the
daemons  the  mere  daemonic  phenomena  or  visible  signs
of  the  gods,  perceived  directly  by  man.1  He  believes
that  we  cannot  see  the  gods  ;  that  we  see  nothing  but
their  manifestations  to  us.2  The  order  and  harmony
the  gods  have  introduced  into  things  consists  in  the
appropriation  of  these  things  to  our  needs.3  In  this
way,  physical  or  teleological  objects  are  brought  within
the  compass  of  moral  and  human  ones.

These  conjectures  on  the  adaptation  of  the  outer
nature  to  the  needs  of  man,  besides  the  fact  that,  in  the
case  of  Socrates,  they  spring  naturally  from  a  very
sincere  and  deep  religious  sentiment,  are  called  for,  or
required,  by  his  ethical  doctrine,  in  accordance  with
which  the  happiness  of  man  depends  on  himself,  on
nothing  whatever  but  self-knowledge.  Since,  in  spite
of  his  efforts  to  suffice  unto  himself,  man  cannot  free
himself  from  physical  nature,  he.  must  admit,  if  he
claims  to  be  good  and  happy  without  occupying  himself
with  externals,  that  the  gods  are  occupied  with  them  on
his  behalf,  and  control  them  so  as  to  meet  his  needs.
Teleology  and  the  doctrine  of  providence  were  the
necessary  postulates  of  Socratic  morals.

This  very  role  shows  us  that  they  are  complementary,
not  essential  parts,  of  the  philosophy  of  Socrates.

The  proper  object  of  this  philosophy,  not  only  in
theory  but  in  fact,  is  the  one  that  the  Sophists  had
brought  into  credit ;  that  is,  art,  or  practical  skill,
understood,  however,  in  an  original  manner,  which  we
have  now  thoroughly  to  investigate.

Art,  in  the  mind  of  Socrates,  is  not  the  search  after

1  Apcl.  27  B,  E.  2  Mem.  iv.  3.  13.  3  Ibid.  iv.  3.  i,  4.


52  STUDIES  IN  PHILOSOPHY

absolute  good,  the  power  to  regulate  our  actions  by
the  whole  of  the  consequences  which  must  result  there-
from, so  as  to  perform  only  those  whose  consequences,
even  the  most  far-reaching,  are  in  conformity  with  our
wishes.  The  gods  have  reserved  to  themselves  the
knowledge  of  the  final  result  of  our  actions.  Does  the
man  who  plants  an  orchard  know  who  will  gather  the
fruit  thereof?  Does  he  who  builds  a  house  know  who
will  dwell  in  it  ? 1

On  the  other  hand,  however,  art  worthy  of  the
name  resembles  no  special  profession  such  as  that  of
the  carpenter,  the  shoemaker,  or  the  armourer.  These
men  have  in  mind  the  realisation  of  some  particular
material  object ;  whereas  art  pursues  a  general,  im-
material end,  viz.  the  happiness  and  good  of  man.
This  is  what  the  Sophists  had  already  taught,  and
rightly  taught.  But  though  they  had  the  idea  of  what
may  be  called  the  moral  end,  they  were  mistaken  as  to
the  manner  of  attaining  to  it.  They  imagined  this
could  be  effected  by  regular  practice,  similar  to  that
which  proves  successful  in  special  professions.  But,
even  in  these  latter,  regularity  or  routine  is  far  from
being  sufficient.  Every  good  artisan  possesses  not  only
the  practice  but  also  the  science  of  his  trade,  in  so  far
as  his  trade  is  capable  of  being  an  object  of  science.  A
well-drawn  analogy  will  lead  us  to  think  that  moral  art
also  must  be  a  science,  according  to  the  acceptation  of
this  word  in  the  moral  domain.

To  sum  up,  moral  art,  occupying  a  position  midway
between  religion  and  the  special  professions,  art  which
has  for  its  aim  the  present  good  and  happiness  of  man,
and  for  its  province  the  science  of  human  things  :  such
is  the  object  of  Socrates'  reflections.

1  Mem.  i.  i.  8.


SOCRATES  53

'It  is  this  object  that  exactly  answers  to  his  idea  of
science.  Science  tries  to  discover  that  which  is  general,
and  which  forms  the  material  for  the  discourse  of  men  ;
i.e.  the  categories  in  which  they  place  particular  things.
But  is  it  not  in  moral  things  that  we  find  a  perfect
instance  of  that  relation  of  genus  to  species,  of  principle
to  application,  of  latent  to  manifest  knowledge,  which
such  an  idea  of  science  implies  ?  Moral  things  do  not
contain  within  themselves  the  absolute,  the  one  in  itself,
the  supreme  principle  of  being  and  knowing  ;  but  then,
Socratic  science  does  not  aim  so  high  as  that.  On  the
other  hand,  however,  and  in  contradistinction  to  the
opinion  of  the  Sophists,  in  human  nature  itself  there
are  certainly  fixed,  solid  points,  which  enable  one  to
gain  a  satisfactory  science  of  the  general.

Moreover,  is  it  not  moral  things  that  form  the  usual
matter  of  human  discourse  ?  Is  it  not  on  these  questions
that  each  man  has  acquired  experience  and  is  capable  of
advancing  an  opinion  worthy  of  consideration?  If  so,
then  it  is  along  this  line  that  there  will  be  the  best
chance  of  success  for  a  science  that  seeks  its  various
elements  in  the  discourse  of  men,  even  of  the  humblest
and  most  ignorant.

When  considered  with  a  view  to  the  knowledge  of
moral  principles  the  Socratic  method  thus  reacts  on  the
conception  of  moral  things  themselves.  In  the  light  of
the  idea  of  science,  Socrates  found  in  human  nature  that
substratum  of  common  and  invariable  notions  that  had
escaped  the  notice  of  the  Sophists  ;  thereupon,  every-
thing human  was  invested  with  new  dignity  in  the  mind
of  the  philosopher.

This  reaction  of  method  on  object  appears  no  less
clearly  in  the  details  of  Socratic  morals.

Here  two  essential  parts  may  be  distinguished  :  ist,


54  STUDIES  IN  PHILOSOPHY

the  general  principle  :  all  virtues  are  sciences  ; l  2nd,
the  deduction  of  the  virtues,  which  deduction  is  supplied
by  this  principle.

In  what  sense  did  Socrates  claim  that  all  virtues  are
sciences  ?

According  to  Zeller,2  the  science  here  in  question  is
evidently  science  in  general,  the  science  of  the  nature  of
things.  But  in  none  of  the  texts  dealing  with  our
question  do  we  find  this  abstract  expression  :  science.
They  all  state  more  or  less  explicitly :  the  virtues  are
sciences.8

Consequently,  virtue  is  not  identified  with  science  in
general,  but  with  some  particular  science.  Now,  what
is  this  science  ?

Fouillee4  says  that  the  science  of  which  Socrates
speaks  is  probably  the  science  of  good  in  itself,  i.e.  the
science  of  the  real  and  absolute  worth  of  things.

Such  an  object,  however,  would  go  beyond  the  end
aimed  at.  When,  says  Socrates,  one  is  thinking  of
becoming  a  good  shoemaker,  or  pilot  or  musician,  the
science  each  man  regards  as  indispensable  is  that  of
shoemaking,  ship-management  or  music:  that  special
science  alone,  in  each  category,  makes  the  man  com-
petent. Now,  competency  is  also  what  Socrates  extols
in  moral  matters.  The  analogy  he  is  constantly  drawing
between  the  special  professions  and  the  practice  of
virtue  shows  that  he  places  the  condition  of  this  new
competency  not  in  a  universal  and  necessarily  vague
science,  but  in  the  science  of  virtue  itself.  Though
Socrates  does  not  agree  with  the  Sophists,  who  made  too
close  a  comparison  between  moral  art  and  the  mechanical

1  Aristot.  Eth.  Nic.  vi.  13.  1144  b  28.  2  ii.  (3rd  edit.),  93,  117.

3  Mem.  iii.  9.  5,  iv.  2.  22,  iv.  6-7  ;  Aristot.  Eth.  Nic.  vi.  13.  1144  b  17.
*  La  Phil,  de  Socrate,  i.  177,  281,  285.


SOCRATES  55

arts,  he  yet  does  not  go  so  far  as  to  abolish  all  analogy
between  these  latter  arts  and  the  former.  Virtue  is  still
a  special,  determinate  art ;  just  men  as  well  as  artisans
have  their  own  distinctive  work.1

Science,  thus  determined,  i.e.  the  special  science  of
virtue,  is,  according  to  Socrates,  the  very  definition  or
essence  of  science.  Socrates  means  thereby  that  it  is
its  necessary  and  all-sufficient  condition.

It  is  the  necessary  condition  of  virtue.  If  com-
petency is  necessary  in  mechanical  arts,  how  can  it  be
superfluous  in  an  art  that  is  surely  more  delicate  and
complicated,  since  it  has  to  work  upon  things  that  are
invisible,  accessible  to  the  understanding  alone  ?  The
masses  are  wrong  when  they  think  that  nature  in  moral
matters  is  all-sufficient.  In  vain  did  the  Sophists  substi-
tute practice  for  nature.  He  who  is  ignorant  of  the
definition  of  good  may,  by  a  happy  chance,  sometimes
meet  with  it,  but  he  will  never  be  certain  that  he  has
not  altogether  passed  it  by.  He  will  even  run  the  risk
of  taking  evil  for  good,  and  vice  versa.  For  instance,  if
one  does  not  possess  a  definition  of  justice,  one  may  regard
it  invariably  as  unjust  to  deceive  and  injure  others,
whereas  it  is  just  to  deceive  the  enemies  of  the  State,  and
to  reduce  an  unjust  nation  to  a  state  of  subjection.2
Again,  if  one  is  without  this  definition,  one  will  stop  to
examine  such  a  question  as  the  following  :  "  Who  is  the
more  unjust  :  the  man  who  wittingly  deceives,  or  the
man  who  unwittingly  deceives  ?  "  One  will  be  astonished
at  finding  arguments  in  support  of  both  positions,
whereas,  at  bottom,  the  question  is  an  absurd  one,  since
the  terms  "  unjust  "  and  "  unwittingly  "  immediately
exclude  each  other.  Science  renders  certain  actions  good,
which,  without  it,  would  be  indifferent  or  even  evil ;  for

1  Mem.  iv.  2.  12.  2  Ibid.  iv.  2.  14-15.  3  Ibid.  iv.  2.  19.


56  STUDIES  IN  PHILOSOPHY

instance,  the  use  of  money.  By  science  and  science
alone  does  skill  in  speech  and  action  become  a  virtue  :
this  skill,  if  left  to  itself,  might  readily  cause  men  to
become  more  unjust  and  maleficent  than  nature  made
them.1

Science  is  not  only  necessary,  it  is  all-sufficient  for  the
engendering  of  virtue.  This  doctrine  is  what  may  be
called  the  Socratic  paradox.  Perhaps  the  paradox  is  not
so  pronounced  as  it  at  first  seems.

It  would,  indeed,  be  strange  for  Socrates  to  attribute
such  efficacy  to  science,  if  we  were  dealing  with  a
purely  theoretical  science,  or  even  with  the  science  of
good  in  itself  and  of  the  rational  value  of  things.  At
the  outset  the  objection  will  be  made  that  such  know-
ledge supplies  a  law  to  the  intelligence,  but  that  it  does
not  determine  the  will.

The  science,  however,  of  which  Socrates  speaks,  is
distinctly  the  science  of  the  suitability  and  utility  of
things  from  the  human  point  of  view  ;  it  is  the  know-
ledge of  the  relation  that  exists  between  things,  and  the
end  that  man  follows  of  his  own  accord,  naturally  and
of  necessity.  u  In  order  to  be  obeyed  by  my  sub-
ordinates," said  a  cavalry  officer  to  Socrates,2  "  will  it
suffice  if  I  show  them  that  I  am  their  superior  ?  "  "  Yes,"
was  the  answer,  "  provided  you  prove  that  obedience
to  you  is  safer  and  more  beautiful  for  them  than
the  contrary  (/caXXtoi/  re  ical  awT'rjpKOTepov  aurot?)."
Socrates  reasons  in  this  fashion  :  it  is  acknowledged  that
men  invariably  do  what  they  believe  they  ought  to  do,
i.e.  what  they  look  upon  as  most  profitable  to  them-
selves. If,  then,  it  is  demonstrated  to  them  that  virtue
is  most  profitable,  they  will  infallibly  practise  virtue.
In  a  word,  our  philosopher  transfers  to  the  science  of

1  Mem.  iv.  3.  i.  2  Ibid.  iii.  3.  10.


SOCRATES  57

the  good  the  practical  efficacy  he  usually  notes  in  the
mere  opinion  of  the  good.  More  than  this  :  the  science
of  the  good  seems  to  him  as  though  it  must  be  even
more  efficacious  in  determining  the  human  will  than
the  mere  opinion  of  the  good  can  be,  because  science  is
immovable,  whereas  opinion  is  at  the  mercy  of  circum-
stances.

Fouillee  l  considers  that  the  Socratic  paradox  consists
essentially  in  the  negation  of  free-will.  It  rather  con-
sists in  the  claim  to  demonstrate  that  virtue  is  always
that  which  is  most  advantageous  to  man.

(As  regards  free-will,  Socrates  neglects  to  take  it
into  consideration  rather  than  denies  it)  And,  indeed,
free-will  is  almost  useless  in  a  doctrine  which  only
requires  man  to  decide  in  the  way  he  considers  most
beautiful  and  advantageous.  This  method  of  determi-
nation, according  to  Socrates,  is  that  of  the  masses  ;  it
is  quite  spontaneous,  and  does  not  imply  the  conscious-
ness of  being  able  to  determine  in  favour  of  the  opposite
course  of  action.

True,  the  objection  may  be  advanced  that,  for  a  man
to  regard  as  insufficient  the  mere  opinion  of  good,  and
try  to  discover  the  constituents  of  real  good,  he  must
make  an  effort  which  involves  the  intervention  of
free-will.

Socrates  is  far  from  denying  the  necessity  of  such  an
effort  ;  though  he  connects  it  with  self-control  and
temperance,  which  latter  is  itself,  in  his  mind,  a  science,
and  the  most  important  of  them  all.2  The  obligation
of  self-control  and  temperance  is  demonstrated  in  the
same  fashion  as  that  of  all  the  other  virtues  :  by  its
useful  effects.  It  by  no  means  follows  that,  in  acquir-
ing this  virtue,  the  first  condition  of  all  the  rest,  free-will

1  La  Phil,  de  Socr.  i.  173.  2  Mem.  i.  5.  4.


58  STUDIES  IN  PHILOSOPHY

has  no  part  to  play.  The  negation  of  free-will  might
be  deduced  from  the  doctrine  if  Socrates  distinctly  set
up  self-control  (eyre  pare  to)  between  science  (cro^ta)  and
temperance  (a-atfypoa-vvrj)  as  being  a  consequence  of  the
former  and  nothing  more,  as  Fouillee l  states.  Socrates,
however,  regards  self-control  as  both  a  condition  and  a
result  of  science.  "  Do  you  not  think,"  he  says,  "  that
lack  of  self-control  (arcpaa-ia)  turns  men  away  from
science  (<ro<£ia),  the  greatest  of  all  things,  and  drives  them
to  its  opposite  ?  "  "  Only  to  such  as  are  self-possessed,"
he  says  in  another  place,  "is  it  given  to  practise
dialectic."  3  It  is,  therefore,  no  abstract  science,  but  a
living  science,  action  and  knowledge  combined,  which
is  the  root  of  virtue.

Thereby  we  find  clearly  determined  the  relation
Socrates  sets  up  between  science  and  practice.  He
maintains  that  science  engenders  virtue  to  which  it  plays
the  part  of  an  efficient  cause  ;  but  he  also  maintains
that  the  search  for  science  has,  for  its  province,  the
desire  to  attain  to  virtue,  and  thus  virtue  plays  the  part
of  final  cause,  as  regards  science.  Science  is  both  cause
and  means,  virtue  both  end  and  result.  Between  the  two
terms  there  is  solidarity,  mutual  action.  It  must  be
granted  that  such  a  relationship  raises  difficulties  for
him  who  would  understand  it  thoroughly.  Socrates,
however,  must  have  found  it  tolerably  clear,  at  a  period
when  neither  the  efficient  nor  the  final  cause  had  yet
been  studied  for  themselves  and  no  clear  line  of  demar-
cation drawn  between  will  and  intelligence.

Though  such  is  the  Socratic  doctrine  as  to  the
relation  between  science  and  virtue,  Socrates,  doubtless
explicitly,  went  beyond  the  stand-point  of  ordinary

1  La  Phil,  de  Socr.  i.  173.  2  Mem.  ix.  5.  6.

3  Ibid.  iv.  5.  n.


SOCRATES  59

morals  which  merely  sets  forth  isolated  precepts  without
connecting  them  with  any  principle.  He  also  went
beyond  that  of  the  ancient  sages,  as  well  as  of  the  great
writers  of  his  time,  who  confined  themselves  to  deriving,
direct  from  their  own  consciousness,  maxims  that  were
frequently  profound,  without  attempting  to  demon-
strate them  scientifically.  He  was  the  first  to  make
science  an  integral  element  of  morals ;  the  first  to
bring  action,  which  appears  as  individual,  within  the
compass  of  true  knowledge,  which  is  universal.

But  this  does  not  mean  that  he  applied  to  morals
the  universal  idea  of  science,  and  not  merely  that  idea
of  a  science  of  man  which  appears  as  the  term  of  his
dialectic.  Where  can  Socrates  obtain  the  rational
knowledge  of  good  and  virtue,  which  is  all  that  he  here
means  by  science,  except  in  the  discourse  of  men,  that
immediate  testimony  of  their  desires,  their  needs  and
experience  ?  What  more  certain  method  of  giving  a
practical  definition  of  things,  expressing  the  interest
they  offer  to  man,  than  that  of  using  the  analogy  and
induction  which  take  human  facts  themselves  for  their
basis,  and  interpret  them  in  the  light  of  human
reason  ?  Likewise,  what  science  will  have  most  chance
of  acting  upon  the  will,  what  science  will  better
merit  those  bold  words  of  praise  :  ovSev  lo-^vporepov
ffrpovrjcrews,1  than  that  truly  living  science  which  Socratic
maieutics  evolves  from  our  soul,  and  which  is,  at  bottom,
only  the  consciousness  of  our  own  nature  ?  If  care  be
taken,  the  details  of  the  doctrine  of  the  relations  that
exist  between  virtue  and  science,  coincide,  step  by  step,
with  the  details  of  dialectic  ;  in  such  fashion  that,  the
latter  being  posited,  the  former  necessarily  follows.

Dialectic,  sprung  from  the  general  and  still  vague

1  Eth.  Eud.  vii.  13.


60  STUDIES  IN  PHILOSOPHY

idea  of  moral  science,  reacts  upon  this  idea  and
determines  it.  Moral  science  is  but  dialectic  in  action.

We  reach  a  similar  conclusion  if  we  examine  the
second  part  of  Socratic  morals,  to  wit,  the  deduction  of
the  virtues,  supplied  by  the  general  principle  of  morals.

What  are  the  chief  maxims  of  this  science  of  good
which  is  the  necessary  and  all-sufficient  condition  of
virtue  ?

In  this  connection  Socrates  distinguishes  between
good  in  general  and  particular  good.

Good  in  general  is  the  truly  useful  as  distinguished
from  the  pleasant.1  The  whole  of  morals  consists  in
distinguishing  what  distinctly  constitutes  our  own  good
from  what  seems  to  do  so,  though  in  reality  giving  us
only  passing  pleasure,  perhaps  even  loss.  Why  is  in-
temperance evil  ?  Because,  says  Socrates,  it  turns  man
aside  from  useful  things  (w^eXoOz/ra)  and  inclines  him
towards  pleasant  things  (^Sea).2

Though  Socrates  makes  a  broad  distinction  between
what  is  good  in  appearance  and  what  is  good  in  reality,
we  do  not  find  that  he  is  thinking  of  an  absolute  good,
of  which  the  good  of  man  would  seem  to  be  only  one
particular  manifestation.  He  appears  to  have  com-
pletely identified  the  good  with  the  useful,3  and  the
reason  he  recommends  the  acquisition  of  science,  the
practice  of  justice,  soul-culture  and  the  attainment  of
the  loftiest  virtues,  is  that  he  regards  them  as  useful  for
man's  happiness.  Even  when  he  prefers  death  to
shame,  the  reason  he  gives  is  that,  in  the  absence  of  the
daemonic  sign  which  usually  warns  him  whenever  he  is
about  to  do  something  destined  to  injure  him,  he  is
convinced  death  will  do  him  no  harm.4

1  Mem.  iv.  6.  8.  2  Ibid.  iv.  5.  6.  3  Ibid.  iv.  6.  8.

4  Apol.  CC.  xxix.  sqq.


SOCRATES  6 1

Clearly,  this  doctrine,  in  the  Socratic  philosophy,  is
the  reaction  of  form  on  matter.  Matter  was  first  the
vague  idea  of  pleasure  and  well-being,  as  found  in  the
reasonings  of  the  Sophists  concerning  the  goal  of  our
actions.  Now,  science,  according  to  Socrates,  is  the
search  after  the  general.  Therefore,  when  brought
into  contact  with  the  idea  of  science,  the  idea  of  well-
being  becomes  two-fold,  engendering,  on  the  one  hand,
the  idea  of  pleasure,  pure  and  simple,  or  a  chance,  fleet-
ing enjoyment,  incapable  of  becoming  an  object  of
science,  and,  on  the  other  hand,  the  idea  of  true  utility
and  happiness,  corresponding,  in  its  generality,  with  the
conditions  of  dialectic.  True  utility  is  that  object,  at  once
stable  and  human,  the  type  and  standard  of  which  each
of  us  bears  within  himself  and  which  it  is  for  maieutics,
induction  and  definition  to  find  out  and  determine.

Now,  what  is  the  teaching  of  Socrates  regarding
particular  good  ?

Socrates  is  sometimes  represented  as  deducing  a
priori  particular  good  from  the  idea  of  absolute  good,  and
judging  custom  and  legality  in  the  name  of  reason  and
justice.  This  is  by  no  means  his  method  of  procedure.
Instead  of  criticizing  tradition  and  the  positive  law
in  the  name  of  reason,  it  is  in  the  traditional  and  the
positive  that  he  seeks  the  expression  of  the  rational.
According  to  Socrates,  particular  good  consists  of  those
things  that  men  are  agreed  in  regarding  as  good  :
health  and  strength  of  body  and  soul,1  easy  domestic
circumstances,2  useful  knowledge,3  family  and  friendly
relations,4  civil  society  and  the  country's  prosperity,5
good  repute,6  and,  speaking  generally,  skill  in  the
management  of  life.

1  Mem.  in.  12.  4,  6.  2  Ibid.  ii.  17.  3  Ibid.  iv.  2.  23-35.

4  Ibid.  ii.  3.  19.  6  Ibid.  iii.  7.  9.  °  Ibid.  ii.  i.  31.


62  STUDIES  IN  PHILOSOPHY

Socrates  distinctly  identifies  justice  with  legality,  and
piety  with  the  observance  of  the  religious  laws  of  one's
country.  <f>r)fu  yap  eyo> l  TO  vofupov  Si/caiov  elvai  .  .  .,
TO  avro  vofit/jiov  re  ical  Siiccuov  :  "  I  say  that  justice  con-
sists in  the  observance  of  the  law  ;  that  the  just  and
the  legal  are  both  the  same  thing."  After  all,  what  is
law  ?  It  is  what  the  citizens,  gathered  together,  have
decreed,  in  writing,  as  something  that  must  either  be
done  or  avoided.2  Piety  itself  is  nothing  else  than  the
knowledge  and  practice  of  those  laws  of  one's  country
which  refer  to  the  gods  :  TO,  frepl  rov<s  0eou?  vofupa.3

True,  Socrates  also  speaks  of  divine,  unwritten
laws.4  By  these  he  means  not  laws  of  an  abstract,
universal  nature,  but  laws  that  are  quite  as  positive
(yofiL^ov)  as  human  laws.  These  laws  are  written  in
the  soul,  though  they  may  not  be  found  on  material
tablets.  When  Socrates  wishes  to  cite  examples  thereof,
he  speaks  of  the  recommendation  to  honour  the  gods,
the  prohibition  from  marrying  one's  own  children :
maxims  that  partake  of  the  nature  of  particular  and
positive  statutes.  In  his  own  words  :  "  In  the  divine
as  in  the  human  order  of  things  justice  is  identical  with
legality."6

The  doctrine  of  Socrates  regarding  particular  good
is,  however,  not  limited  to  this.  To  common,  tradi-
tional morals  as  matter  he  connects  the  idea  of  science
as  form ;  and,  by  contact  with  this  new  element,
morals  is  completely  transformed  without  this  appearing,
externally,  to  be  so.

The  first  function  of  science  is  to  justify,  to  deduce
what  common  sense  and  tradition  offer  to  us  only  as
independent  facts.

1  Mem.  iv.  4.  12.  2  Ibid.  iv.  4.  13.  3  Ibid.  iv.  6.  4.

4  Ibid.  iv.  4.  19.  6  Ibid.  iv.  4.  25.


SOCRATES  63

This  deduction  is  effected  by  demonstrating  that  all
actions  which  common  sense  and  tradition  prescribe  to
us  are  calculated  to  procure  advantages  for  us,  whereas
the  opposite  of  these  actions  must  sooner  or  later  do
us  harm.  For  instance,  temperance  is  a  good  thing,
because  it  is  the  condition  of  pleasure,  helps  us  to  bear
privation,  and  makes  us  esteemed  by  our  fellow-beings.
If  a  general,  a  tutor,  or  a  steward  is  wanted,  the
temperate  man,  not  the  intemperate,  is  the  one  who
will  be  chosen.1  The  observance  of  civil  laws  is  a  good
thing,  for,  under  all  circumstances,  those  who  observe
the  laws  are  the  ones  best  treated  in  the  State  ;  in
public  or  private  life  it  is  they  who  inspire  most  confi-
dence.2 The  same  reasoning  holds  regarding  unwritten
laws.  It  is  good  to  observe  them,  for  the  man  who
violates  them  is  punished  :  thus,  parents  who  marry
their  own  children  have  misshapen  offspring.3  In  this
sense  Socrates  affirms  that  what  is  legal  is  likewise
just.  A  law  is  just,  in  so  far  as  its  observance  procures
advantages,  whilst  its  violation  has  disastrous  conse-
quences.4

Science  thus  deduces  and  justifies  the  established  laws.
Nor  is  this  all.  As  the  wise  man,  by  means  of  science,
searches  into  and  understands  the  rational  value  of
tradition  and  legality,  and  thus  learns  to  conform
with  the  laws  of  his  country,  not  blindly,  as  do  the
masses,  but  by  reflection  and  reason,  he  regards  action
inspired  by  science  as  superior  to  that  emanating  from
instinct  or  custom.  Science  no  longer  seems  to  him
merely  to  confirm  the  positive  rules  of  morals  :  it
becomes  itself  an  indispensable  condition  of  virtue,  the
root  of  all  virtue  :  virtuepar  excellence.  To  act  under  the

1  Mem.  iv.  5.  2  Ibid.  iv.  4.  17.  3  Ibid.  iv.  4.  19  sqq.

4  Ibid.  iv.  4.  25.


64  STUDIES  IN  PHILOSOPHY

influence  of  nature  alone,  like  prophets  and  soothsayers,1
means  not  only  exposing  oneself  to  continual  failure  in
some  direction  or  other,  it  likewise  means  having
nothing  but  the  mask  of  art  or  virtue.  He  alone  who
is  virtuous  through  science  (o-o^ta)  truly  merits  the  title
of  virtuous.  Nothing  blind  or  inconsiderate  could  be
really  good  :  on  the  other  hand,  once  a  man  acquires
self-possession,  his  actions  are  of  necessity  good.  And
so  Socrates,  when  accused,  refuses  to  move  his
listeners  to  compassion,  because  compassion  is  a  blind
sentiment.2  On  the  other  hand,  he  declares  that,  as  he
has  never,  willingly  and  knowingly  (e/e&>i>),  done  wrong,
he  is  certain  he  has  never  really  done  wrong  at  all.3

The  mental  state  which  immediately  corresponds  to
science,  because  it  is  both  its  condition  and  first  result,
is  self-control  (ejicpdreia)  or  freedom  (e^evOepLa}.  f  Self-
control  thus  becomes  the  first  of  all  virtues^  the  one
whose  possession  is  both  necessary  and  all-sufficient  for
the  performance  of  good  under  all  circumstances.  To
know  how  he  ought  to  act,  the  wise  man  has  definitively
only  one  question  to  ask  himself:  is  this  particular
line  of  conduct  seemly  in  a  free  man,  or  not  ?

On  several  puzzling  occasions,  this  doctrine  explains
^jhe  line  of  conduct  adopted  by  Socrates.]  The  reason
he  refused  to  accept  money  from  his  listeners,  was  not
liberality  on  his  part  or  the  fear  of  slanderers,  it  was
because  he  considered  that  to  receive  money  from
another  was  equivalent  to  acknowledging  that  man  to
be  one's  master.5  The  reason  he  extolled  manual  work
was  not  from  sympathy  with  the  occupations  of  the
humble,  but  because  he  saw  in  such  work  a  source  of
independence  and  easy  circumstances  from  a  material

1  Apol.  22  B.  2  Ibid.  35  B.  3  Ibid.  37  A.

4  Mem.  i.  5.  4.  5  Ibid.  i.  5.  6.


SOCRATES  65

point  of  view.1  If  it  is  true  that,  on  one  occasion,  he
walked  barefoot  on  the  ice,  and  on  another,  remained
standing  for  a  whole  day  and  night  in  the  self-same
spot,2  this  was  not  done  in  a  spirit  of  folly  or  boasting,
though  it  might  have  been  an  instance  of  mystic  con-
templation ;  perhaps,  too,  these  experiments  were  made
for  the  purpose  of  seeing  how  far  his  independence  of
the  external  world  could  be  carried.  Again,  the  reason
he  endured  the  peevish  temper  of  Xanthippe  his  wife,
was  not  from  resignation  or  good  temper,  it  was  be-
cause his  wife  offered  him  a  splendid  opportunity  for
practising  self-control.  The  reason  he  delighted  in
banquets  and  feasts,  conversed  in  perfect  freedom  with
Tljeodota,  the  courtezan,8  considered  it  quite  right  that,
in  the  relations  between  the  sexes,  one  should  obey
the  promptings  of  nature,  provided  one  is  caused  no
embarrassment  thereby,4  acknowledged  so  strange  and
dangerous  a  kind  of  love  between  young  men  ;  was  to
be  found  in  the  fact  that  he  saw  nothing  in  all  this,
irreconcilable  with  self-possession,  nothing  but  a  witness
to  or  an  instrument  of  freedom.

In  this  dignified  conception  of  life,  the  positive  and
traditional  rules  of  morals  are  by  no  means  neglected  ;
but  from  the  role  of  principles  they  descend  to  that  of
matter  or  external  conditions.  The  wise  man  has •  self-
possession,  and  that  is  enough  for  him  ;  after  all,  he
speaks  and  acts  like  the  rest  of  mankind.  He  is  con-
scious of  his  freedom  in  the  very  act  of  observing  the
laws  and  customs  of  his  country.  These  laws  govern
his  outward  actions,  just  as  science  governs  his  inner
disposition,  and  harmony  between  the  two  disciplines
is  all  the  better  established  in  that  self-possession,  the

1  Mem.  ii.  7.  4.  2  Plat.  Banquet,  c.  xxxv-xxxvi.

3  Mem.  iii.  n.  4  Ibid.  i.  3.  14.

F


66  STUDIES  IN  PHILOSOPHY

supreme  command  of  the  inner  law,  becomes  reconciled
of  itself  with  the  most  multiple  and  diverse  modes  of
outer  action.  Besides,  it  is  evident  that  amongst  the
various  positive  disciplines  conceivable,  the  wise  man
will  decide  for  that  of  his  own  nation.  What,  indeed,
could  be  more  favourable  to  the  inner  freedom  after
which  he  aspires,  than  to  live  in  harmony  with  those
around  him  ?  What,  on  the  other  hand,  could  be  more
prejudicial  to  quiet  and  self-possession  than  that  dis-
turbing, harassing  conflict  with  things  which  makes  us
lose  control  of  ourselves  ?

The  whole  of  this  doctrine  was  summed  up  in  two
famous  aphorisms  :  "  Virtue  is  one  in  JUself."  and
"  Virtue  can  be  taught."

o

By  the  oneness  of  virtue,  Socrates  did  not  mean,
after  the  fashion  of  the  mystics,  the  elimination  of  all
particular  virtues  in  favour  of  some  transcendent
perfection.  He  simply  meant  that  all  virtues  have  one
common  root,  to  wit,  the  science  of  good,  as  he  under-
stood it.  To  the  wise  man,  the  diversity  of  virtues
held  in  honour  amongst  men  is  nothing  but  the
multiplicity  of  the  aspects  shown  forth  by  the  one
sovereign  virtue,  according  to  the  various  objects  to
which  it  applies.  Thus,  virtue  was  neither  absolutely
one  nor  altogether  multiple  :  it  was  unity  in  multiplicity,
self-possession  and  the  science  of  good  realised  in  the
virtues  sanctioned  by  tradition.

Socrates  claimed  that  virtue  is  taught,  but  he  by
no  means  meant  thereby  that  it  is  taught  by  purely
theoretical  teaching  or  speculation,  like  the  doctrines
of  the  physiologists.  Nor,  in  his  opinion,  is  it  taught
by  practice  alone,  as  the  Sophists  had  imagined.
Virtue  is  taught,  said  Socrates,  by  instruction  combined
with  exercise  or  practice  (fidd^cn^  and  /ueXen?).  All  the


SOCRATES  67

texts  dealing  with  this  doctrine J  clearly  show  that
Socrates  invariably  employs  these  two  words  together.
This  is  the  natural  outcome  of  the  intimate  union  of  a
theoretical  and  a  practical  element  in  the  very  science
which  is  the  principle  of  wisdom.

If  such  is  the  doctrine  of  Socrates  upon  particular
good,  it  bears  the  impress  of  the  Socratic  dialectic,  as
does  his  doctrine  of  the  good  in  general.  Scrupulous
respect  for  tradition  and  for  the  laws  of  one's  country
is  in  conformity  with  this  method,  which  places  the
starting-point  of  knowledge  not  in  pure  reason,  but
rather  in  general  ideas.  The  philosopher,  without
contradicting  himself,  could  not  turn  against  these
ideas  the  very  principles  he  extracted  from  them.

On  the  other  hand,  the  dialectician  must  go  back  as
far  as  possible  into  antiquity  when  seeking  the  general
principles  implied  in  human  discourse.  Now,  in  the
accomplishment  of  this  task,  Socrates  comes  to  regard
the  essence  of  virtue  as  existing  not  in  external  acts
that  conform  with  legality  but  in  self-possession  and
the  science  of  good,  which  form  the  common,  permanent
substratum  of  these  acts.  Self-possession  and  the  science
of  good  bear  the  same  relation  to  good  actions  that
definition  does  to  the  class  of  objects  to  be  defined.

In  short,  the  special  sense  in  which  Socrates  teaches
that  virtue  is  one  and  can  be  taught,  exactly  answers  to
the  nature  of  the  general  in  Socratic  dialectic.  This
"  general,"  indeed,  has  by  no  means  a  distinct  existence,
it  is  only  what  is  continually  assumed  in  human
discourse  ;  and,  since  it  is  drawn  from  the  common
ideas  relating  to  social  and  private  life,  it  possesses,
of  necessity,  both  a  practical  and  a  theoretical  nature.

1  Mem.  m.  9.  2  ;  iv.  i.  3  ;  i.  2.  19. Cf.  Laches,  190  E.


68  STUDIES  IN  PHILOSOPHY


Thus  do  Socratic  dialectic  and  ethic  interpenetrate
and  determine  each  other.  yThe  idea  of  moral  things
as  an  object  of  science,  leads  Socrates  to  invent  a
scientific  method  applicable  to  such  an  object.)  On  the
other  hand,  the  use  of  this  method  reacts  on  the  object
itself,  giving  it  a  new  aspect.  From  the  elaboration  of
the  form  with  a  view  to  the  object  arose  the  theory  of
practical  induction  and  definition  ;  from  the  elaboration
of  the  object  by  means  of  the  form  arose  the  doctrine
of  virtue,  dwelling  in  the  free  and  deliberate  observance
of  positive  laws  and  maxims.

\  The  expression  "  moral  science  "  thus  would  seem
to  characterize  the  invention  of  Socrates  exactly  and
fully,  provided  we  mean  by  these  words,  not  morals
founded  on  the  science  of  things  in  general,  but  rather
an  effort  of  the  human  mind  to  build  up  a  science
without  leaving  the  circle  of  moral  facts  themselves,
and  confining  itself  to  the  fertilisation  of  moral  ex-
perience by  an  appropriate  mode  of  reflection.

Here,  indeed,  is  the  centre  of  Socrates'  doctrine,  the
principal  mobile  of  his  thought.

It  is  because  he  institutes  a  new  order  of  investiga-
tion that  he  rejects  and  dismisses  the  investigations  of
his  predecessors.  All  innovators  possess  this  disdain  of
the  past  :  it  forms  part  of  their  faith  in  their  own
mission.

Because  his  conception  of  science  is  exclusively
calculated  with  a  view  to  the  reasoned  knowledge  of
human  things,  he  says,  along  with  Protagoras,  that
science  does  not  attain  to  things  divine.  Stricter  in
his  reasoning,  however,  he  has  not  the  impertinence  to


SOCRATES  69

suppress  a  given  object,  under  the  'pretext  that  our
intelligence  cannot  grasp  it  :  on  the  contrary,  he
acknowledges  the  limits  of  our  faculties  as  soon  as  he
discovers  their  powers  ;  and,  faithful  to  his  country's
religion,  he  trusts  to  the  gods  in  regard  to  everything
beyond  the  reach  of  human  understanding.

The  belief  of  Socrates  in  an  Apollonian  mission  and
in  the  supernatural  warnings  of  a  protecting  divinity
can  be  perfectly  reconciled  with  this  doctrine,  which
both  respects  the  domain  of  the  gods  and  takes
possession  of  that  of  men.

flThat  it  was  the  ambition  of  Socrates  to  restore  the
political  fortunes  of  his  city  by  a  moral  reformVwas
only  natural  and  legitimate  for  one  able  to  distinguish
the  principles  of  virtue  and  of  success  in  human  things,
and  whose  very  philosophy  gave  him  a  fresh  motive  for
gratitude  and  attachment  to  his  country.

Finally,  that  Socrates  submitted  to  death  rather
than  renounce  the  testing  of  the  Athenians  for  the
purpose  of  convincing  them  of  their  ignorance,  is,  as
he  says  himself,  the  logical  consequence  of  a  doctrine
which  looks  upon  self-examination  as  the  principle  and
condition  of  all  things  good,  and  expects  the  gods  to
complete  what  human  wisdom  began.

Of  Socrates'  many  preoccupations,  the  idea  of  setting
up  morals  as  a  science  is  the  principal  one  ;  for  it  alone
brings  harmony  and  light  into  this  apparently  strange,
contradictory  character.  It  alone  explains  how  Socrates
is  both  a  believer  and  a  free  thinker  ;  positive  and
speculative  ;  a  man  of  his  own  age  and  country,  ever
disposed  to  adapt  himself  to  his  environment,  and  yet
one  who  retired  within  himself,  was  ever  master  of
himself,  obstinately  jealous  of  his  freedom  and  independ-
ence ;  an  aristocrat  attached  to  the  past,  contemptuous


yo  STUDIES  IN  PHILOSOPHY

towards  popular  caprice,  and  at  the  same  time  a
revolutionist,  demanding  that  the  functions  of  the  State
be  given  to  the  best  instructed  citizens  ;  in  a  word,  to
sum  up  everything  perhaps,  it  alone  explains  how  he
was  both  a  philosopher  and  a  man  of  action.

The  idea  of  Socrates  is  not  only  novel  and  original,
it  has  occupied  a  prominent  place  in  the  intellectual
and  moral  history  of  mankind.  This  r6le  has  been  a
double  one  :  showing  itself  both  in  the  order  of  the
practical  and  in  that  of  the  theoretical  sciences.

In  vain  did  Socrates  scrupulously  confine  himself  to
the  study  of  human  things  ;  the  productiveness  of  his
method  in  this  domain,  and  its  conformity  with  the
Greek  genius,  quickly  caused  it  to  be  regarded  as
applicable  to  all  objects,  physical  and  metaphysical.
Plato  and  Aristotle  set  forth  the  principle  of  Socrates  :
"  The  only  science  is  that  of  the  general,"  as  including
not  merely  the  science  of  human  things  but  also
universal  science.

The  syllogism,  or  deductive  reasoning  in  qualitative
matter,  the  final  definitive  form  of  the  Socratic  method,
was  regarded  as  the  expression  of  the  connection
between  things  in  nature  herself.  From  Aristotle  this
method  passed  on  to  the  Schoolmen,  who  misinter-
preted it,  substituting  for  the  living  discourse  of  men
which  the  Greeks  had  taken  as  the  starting-point  of
their  discussions,  the  mute,  rigid  text  of  some  particular
book,  which  was  looked  upon  as  being  truth  itself.
Nevertheless,  positive  science  gradually  developed.
On  attaining  to  self-consciousness,  so  to  speak,  it
declared,  with  Bacon,  that  syllogistic  science  was  nothing
but  a  science  of  words  ;  and  with  Descartes,  that  the
general  essences  of  the  Socratics  were  only  empty


SOCRATES  71

fiction,  that  science  had  as  its  object  not  quality  or
the  general,  but  quantity  or  the  relations  of  dimension.
The  progress  of  science  has  proclaimed  Descartes  to
be  more  and  more  in  the  right,  and  one  is  nowadays
tempted  to  ask  oneself  whether  the  Socratic  principle  :
"  The  only  science  is  that  of  the  general,"  when  applied,
as  it  has  been,  to  the  investigation  of  the  laws  of  nature,
has  not  rather  bewildered  and  unsettled  the  human
mind  than  helped  it.

Even  were  such  to  be  the  case,  Socrates,  who  de-
nounced all  investigation  into  moral  causes,  and  claimed
only  to  build  up  moral  science,  would  not  be  responsible
for  it.  This  extension  of  the  Socratic  method,  how-
ever, was  by  no  means  an  aberration  of  the  human
mind.  Before  knowing  things  in  themselves,  they
must  be  known  in  their  relations  to  us,  and  it  is  this
indispensable  provisional  knowledge  that  we  obtain
from  Socratic  induction  and  definition.  It  may  be  that
in  all  things  the  element  of  quantity  is  the  ultimate
object  for  which  science  ought  to  look.  But  it  could
not  attain  to  this  all  at  once  :  it  must  first  define  the
qualities  which  form  its  support.  In  every  department
of  knowledge,  classification  and  induction  must  precede
the  application  of  mathematical  analysis.

Anyhow,  the  Schoolmen  with  their  syllogistic
science,  even  Plato  and  Aristotle,  in  so  far  as  they
place  being,  strictly  so  called,  in  forms  expressed  by
our  concepts,  are  not  the  true  successors  of  Socrates.
Those  he  would  have  recognised  as  such,  are  the
philosophers  who,  taking  as  their  starting-point  the
observance  of  the  moral  facts  of  human  nature,  have
endeavoured  to  set  up  morals  as  a  distinct  and  self-
sufficient  science.  tThe  purest  and  finest  fruit  of  the
Socratic  method  consists  of  the  Nicomachean  Ethics,


72  STUDIES  IN  PHILOSOPHY

in  which,  without  appealing  to  the  physical  sciences  or
demanding  of  metaphysics  anything  else  than  an  ardent
flow  of  the  mind  and  general  views  on  finality  and
activity,  Aristotle  condensed  in  a  series  of  maxims
the  very  thought  of  those  who  have  experience  of  life
think  vaguely  regarding  the  conditions  of  virtue  and
happiness.

Nor  is  the  influence  of  Socrates,  along  this  line  of
investigation  confined  to  antiquity.  When  the  Christian
religion,  after  proving  adequate  to  the  moral  needs  of
men  for  fifteen  centuries,  began  to  lose  its  power
over  their  souls,  the  Socratic  study  of  man  was  restored
to  favour.  They  were  not  content  with  finding  the  secret
springs  of  human  actions  in  any  particular  case,  after
the  fashion  of  the  moralists.  Morals  was  proclaimed
anew  as  a  distinct  and  separate  science,  with  an  object
and  a  method  of  its  own.  So  great  an  advance  was
made  in  this  direction  that  a  daring  system  of  philo-
sophy, that  of  Kant  and  Fichte,  not  content  with  claim-
ing a  place  for  moral  science,  began  by  making  a  clean
sweep  of  the  whole  of  metaphysics,  in  order  that  morals
might  establish  itself,  unchecked,  in  its  own  fashion  ;
nor  would  this  philosophy  acknowledge  that  theoretical
reason  had  any  other  rights  than  those  admitted  by
moral  science,  thus  organised.  And  soon  afterwards,
just  as  in  former  times  Plato  and  Aristotle  had  built  up
a  metaphysical  philosophy  on  the  basis  of  Socratic
morals,  we  find  Fichte,  Schelling,  and  Hegel  founding  a
new  philosophy  of  the  absolute  on  the  morals  of  Kant.

Moral  science,  though  for  a  brief  space  compromised
by  the  excess  of  its  claims,  now  that  it  has  been  restored
within  the  limits  marked  out  for  it  by  Socrates,  has
acquired  fresh  precision  and  vitality  at  the  present  time.
Even  nowadays,  there  are  many  who  consider  that  the


SOCRATES  73

time  has  not  yet  come — if  it  is  ever  to  come — for  morals
to  assume  the  same  scientific  form  as  physics  or  even
the  natural  sciences,  and  yet  they  consider  that  it
admits  of  something  else  than  the  particularities,  in
which  the  moralist  confines  himself,  or  the  oratorical
developments  that  suffice  for  the  man  of  action.  The
truth  in  this  matter  would  seem  to  be,  even  nowadays,
that  morals  has  a  distinct  domain,  i.e.  the  sum  total  of
the  moral  facts  of  human  nature,  a  method  proper  to
itself,  to  wit,  qualitative  induction  and  definition,  and
that,  by  modestly  confining  itself  to  its  own  domain
and  scrupulously  adapting  its  means  of  investigation  to
the  object  under  study,  it  can  attain,  more  certainly
than  by  any  other  means,  to  the  twofold  end  it  has  in
view  :  the  knowledge  and  the  direction  of  human
activity.  ^The  man  whose  ideas  are  most  instinct  with
life  in  contemporary  society!  is  Socrates.


ARISTOTLE

Tb  irpwrov  ov  anrepfia  CCTTLV,  dAXa  TO  reAaov.

ARISTOT.  Met.  xii.  7.  1073  a  i.

IF  it  be  true  that  the  genius  of  a  people  is  sometimes
incarnated  in  certain  men,  and  that  these  mighty,  com-
prehensive minds  form,  as  it  were,  the  act  and  perfection
in  which  a  whole  world  of  virtualities  finds  its  goal  and
completion,  then  Aristotle,  more  than  any  one,  was  such
a  man  :  in  him  the  philosophic  genius  of  Greece  found
its  universal,  its  perfect  expression.  It  is  therefore
something  more  than  the  thought  of  a  single  individual,
far-reaching  and  profound  though  it  be,  that  we  now
summon  forth  ;  it  is  the  spirit  of  Greece  itself,  which
has  reached  the  highest  pitch  of  its  intellectual  great-
ness. It  will  be  conformable  to  the  analytical  tempera-
ment of  the  philosopher  with  whom  we  are  now
dealing,  and  also  practically  indispensable  to  set  up
numerous  divisions  in  so  vast  a  subject,  and  consider
its  different  parts  one  after  another.

I. — BIOGRAPHY  *

Aristotle was born at Stageira, a Greek Ionian
colony  of  Thrace,  situated  on  the  coast  of  the  peninsula

1  The  ancient  writers  who  deal  with  the  life  of  Aristotle  are  the  follow-
ing :  (i)  Diogenes  Laertius,  v.  1-35  ;  (2)  Denys  of  Halicarnassus,  letter  to
Ammaeus,  1.5;  (3)  the  anonymous  author  of  a  biography  of  Aristotle,

74


ARISTOTLE  75

of  Chalcidice,  in  the  year  384  B.C.  He  died,  aged
sixty-two,  at  Chalcis,  in  Euboea.

His  father,  Nicomachus,  was  a  doctor,  as  also  were
his  ancestors.  They  traced  their  descent  back  to
Machaon,  son  of  Aesculapius  ;  and,  like  many  others,
were  called  Asclepiads.  Nicomachus  was  physician  to
the  king  of  Macedonia,  Amyntas  II.,  Philip's  father.
This  circumstance  may  have  brought  it  about  that
Aristotle  was  summoned  to  the  court  of  the  king  of
Macedonia  to  undertake  the  education  of  Alexander.
It  is  probable  that,  as  an  Asclepiad,  Aristotle  was
instructed  in  anatomy  at  an  early  age.

When  about  seventeen  years  old,  he  lost  his  parents.
Being  now  independent  an£  in  possession  of  a  large
fortune,  he  was  attracted  to  Athens.  He  went  to  this
city  the  following  year.  Plato,  who  had  founded  his
school  there  about  387  B.C.,  was  then  absent ;  he  had
started  for  Syracuse,  368  B.C.,  left  that  town  three  years
later,  and  returned  about  360  B.C.  Aristotle  joined
Plato's  pupils,  remaining  with  them  for  twenty  years,
until  the  master's  death.  Here  we  find  refuted  the
story  of  a  quarrel,  which  was  alleged  to  have  arisen
between  the  master  and  the  disciple  long  before  the
death  of  Plato,  and  to  have  been  caused  by  Aristotle's
ingratitude  and  lack  of  consideration.  It  is  said  that
Plato,  having  remarked  Aristotle's  zeal  and  keenness  of
mind,  called  him  "  the  reader,"  and  "  intelligence."  In

published  by  Menage  in  the  second  volume  of  his  edition  of  Diogenes
Laertius  ;  (4)  the  Pseudo  -  Ammonius  ;  (5)  the  Pseudo  -  Hesychius  ;
(6)  Suidas,  under  the  article,  'Apto-roT-A^s.  These  texts  may  almost  all  be
found  in  vol.  i.  of  the  edition  of  Aristotle's  works  undertaken  by  Buhle,
between  1791  and  1800.  The  relative  importance  of  these  different
sources  cannot  be  determined  a  priori.  All  that  is  possible  is  the  separate
examination  of  each  hint  or  indication  from  the  standpoint  of  its  internal
and  external  probability.


76  STUDIES  IN  PHILOSOPHY

all  probability  he  studied  not  only  Platonism  at  Athens,
but  also  the  other  systems  then  in  vogue.

Long  previous  to  the  death  of  Plato,  he  gave  proof
of  his  independence  of  thought  and  action.  Quite
possibly,  as  a  member  of  the  Platonic  school,  he  had
already  taught  on  his  own  account.  At  all  events,  he
began  to  write  at  that  period,  and  though  his  early
works  were  Platonic  in  form  and  substance,  none  the  less
did  they  contain,  even  then,  objections  to  the  theories
of  ideas  along  with  the  affirmation  of  the  eternity  of  the
world.  He  tells  us  that  it  is  with  regret,  and  because
of  his  zeal  for  the  superior  interests  of  truth,  that  he
thus  opposed  his  master.  Moreover,  he  set  an  example
of  respect  for  the  genius  of  Plato.  In  a  poem  which
has  come  down  to  us,  he  celebrates  his  master  as  one
whom  the  wicked  have  no  right  to  praise,  and  who
showed,  both  by  his  life  and  his  teachings,  how  a  good
man  is  also  a  happy  man.

The  death  of  Plato  (347  B.C.)  begins  a  new  period
in  the  life  of  Aristotle.  He  left  Athens,  accompanied
by  Xenocrates,  and  went  to  Atarnea,  in  Mysia,  to  his
friend  and  fellow-disciple,  Hermias,  the  ruler  of  that
town,  whose  sister,  or  niece,  Pythias,  he  subsequently
married.  Later  on,  he  married  a  woman  named  Her-
pyllis.  After  the  fall  and  death  of  Hermias  (345  B.C.)
Aristotle  went  to  Mytilene.  From  there  he  would  seem
to  have  returned  to  Athens  and  opened  the  school  of
rhetoric,  in  which  he  set  up  as  an  opponent  to  Isocrates.
In  342  B.C.,  he  responded  favourably  to  the  summons
of  Philip,  king  of  Macedonia,  who  requested  him  to
undertake  the  education  of  his  son  Alexander,  at  that
time  about  fourteen  years  of  age.  He  remained  at  the
court  of  Macedonia  until  Alexander  undertook  his
expedition  into  Asia  (334  B.C.).  Without  losing  him-


ARISTOTLE  77

self  in  pursuit  of  an  ideal  too  far  removed  from  the
conditions  of  practical  life,  Aristotle  appears  to  have
instilled  generous  qualities  in  the  mind  of  his  pupil.
Throughout  his  life  Alexander  retained  feelings  of
respect  and  love  for  his  master,  though  after  the  death
of  Callisthenes,  Aristotle's  nephew,  in  325  B.C.,  all
relations  between  the  two  were  discontinued.

In  335  B.C.  or  334  B.C.,  Aristotle  returned  to  Athens,
and  at  Lycaeum  opened  what  was  called  the  Peripatetic
School,  probably  on  account  of  the  master's  habit  of
walking  about  with  his  disciples  as  they  talked  of  science
and  philosophy.  In  the  mornings,  relates  Aulus-Gellius,
Aristotle  gave,  to  a  chosen  body  of  hearers,  acroamatic,
or  esoteric,  instruction,  dealing  with  the  most  difficult
portions  of  philosophy,  mainly  dialectic  and  the  philo-
sophy of  nature.  In  the  evenings  he  gave  exoteric
instruction  to  all  who  offered  themselves,  dealing  with
rhetoric,  topics  and  politics.  His  teaching  took  the  form
both  of  classes  and  lectures  ;  and  his  school,  like  that
of  Plato,  was  a  band  of  friends  who  assembled  on  fixed
days,  and  took  their  meals  in  common.

Wealthy  himself,  and  able  to  rely  on  the  assistance
of  the  king,  Aristotle  was  in  a  position  to  obtain  all  the
scientific  resources  the  society  of  the  times  could  offer.
It  is  said  that  Alexander  sent  him  eight  hundred  talents
to  enable  him  to  complete  his  Historia  animalium.  It
is  even  related  that  he  placed  at  his  disposal  millions  of
men,  whose  duty  it  was  to  seek  out  animals  of  every
kind,  especially  fishes,  to  maintain  in  perfect  order
aviaries  and  gardens  filled  with  animals,  and  to  keep
the  philosopher  informed  on  such  observations  and  dis-
coveries as  were  calculated  to  advance  science.  These
are,  doubtless,  mere  inventions,  though  facts  were  at  the
bottom  of  them.  Certainly  Aristotle  gathered  together


78  STUDIES  IN  PHILOSOPHY

all  the  documents  of  every  kind  it  was  possible  for  him
to  obtain.  He  was  the  first  to  form  a  large  collection
of  books.

Although  Aristotle  had  broken  off  all  relations  with
Alexander  in  325  B.C.,  none  the  less  did  the  king's
death,  two  years  afterwards,  prove  an  occasion  of  peril
for  him.  When  the  Lamian  war  broke  out,  he  was
looked  upon  as  a  friend  of  the  kings  of  Macedonia  and
Antipater,  and  was  prosecuted  on  the  charge  of  atheism.
He  left  Athens,  so  that  the  Athenians,  as  he  said,  might
not  a  second  time  be  guilty  as  regards  philosophy.
He  fled  to  Chalcis,  in  Euboea,  where  he  fell  sick  and
died  in  the  summer  of  322  B.C.,  a  few  months  before
Demosthenes,  who  was  born  in  the  same  year  as  himself.
He  was  sixty-two  years  of  age.

Though  early  attacked  by  his  political  and  scientific
opponents,  he  would  appear  from  his  writings  to  have
been  of  a  noble,  humane,  and  loyal  nature,  and  we  are
acquainted  with  no  actual  proved  fact  to  the  contrary.
His  life  bears  the  impress  of  moral  philosophic  dignity.
Aristotle  was  both  a  creative  and  a  universal  genius,  and
an  indefatigable  worker.  He  is  devoid  of  the  ardent
buoyancy  of  Plato.  With  mind  bent  on  the  reality
presented  to  him,  whatever  bears  no  relation  thereto  he
looks  upon  as  fantastic  ;  he  does  not  bury  himself  in  the
facts  of  the  sensible  world,  however,  but  is  always  look-
ing for  the  intelligible.  In  all  things  he  recommends
moderation,  the  golden  mean.  A  moderate  fortune,
government  by  the  moderate  classes :  such,  to  his  mind,
is  the  best  condition  both  for  the  individual  and  for
society.

We  are  told  that  he  was  short  and  thin,  with  small
eyes  and  an  ironical  expression  playing  about  his  mouth.
By  Pythias,  his  first  wife,  he  left  a  daughter  of  the  same


ARISTOTLE  79

name  ;  and  by  his  second  wife,  Herpyllis  of  Stageira,
a  son  Nicomachus,  whose  name  we  find  in  the  Nico-
machean  Ethics.  In  his  will  he  speaks  affectionately  of
both  his  wives  and  of  his  two  brothers  and  their  children  ;
he  also  refers  in  sympathetic  terms  to  his  friends  and
distant  relatives.


II. — ARISTOTLE'S  WRITINGS

The  story  of  the  preservation  of  Aristotle's  works  is
but  little  known.  According  to  Strabo  and  Plutarch,
the  writings  of  Aristotle  and  Theophrastus,  after  the
latter's  death,  fell  into  the  hands  of  Neleus,  who  took
them  to  his  home  in  Skepsis,  Mysia.  There  they  would
appear  to  have  been  hidden  away  in  a  cellar,  where  they
were  discovered  by  Apellicon,  in  the  time  of  Sylla.  The
latter  is  reported  to  have  had  them  transferred  to  Rome.
Whatever  degree  of  truth  there  may  be  in  these  anec-
dotes, the  texts  that  had  been  preserved  were  revised  and
classified  in  the  first  century  before  Christ  by  Andronicus,
a  Peripatetic  philosopher  of  Rhodes,  who  published  a
complete  edition  about  60-50  B.C.  It  is  this  text  of
Aristotle,  more  or  less  remodelled,  that  we  now  possess.
In  all  probability  our  collection  contains  everything
authentic  that  existed  in  the  time  of  Andronicus,  and
we  have  good  grounds  for  regarding  as  apocryphal  the
works  mentioned  by  Diogenes  Laertius,  that  are  absent
from  this  collection.  Most  likely,  however,  all  that  is
contained  in  the  so-called  Andronicus  edition,  is  not  by
Aristotle  ;  even  the  authentic  works  themselves  are  not
free  from  additions  and  changes.  There  have  also  come
down  to  us  the  titles  of  works  that  are  certainly  authentic,
and  yet  are  lacking  in  our  collection,  having  apparently
been  lost  at  the  time  of  Andronicus.  All  the  same,  it


8o  STUDIES  IN  PHILOSOPHY

would  appear  that  the  most  important  works  on  Aris-
totelian philosophy  and  science  have  been  preserved.

Which  of  the  works  we  possess  are  to  be  laid  aside
as  unauthentic  ?  In  many  cases  the  question  cannot  be
answered  with  any  degree  of  precision  or  certainty.  The
following  are  the  results  reached  by  Zeller  in  his  Philo-
sophic der  Griechen,  3rd  vol.  3rd  edition.  The  authen-
ticity of  the  following  works  is  either  inadmissible  or
very  doubtful  : — De  Xenophane,  Zenone  et  Gorgia ;  De
animalium  motu ;  De  plantis ;  De  coloribus ;  De  audi-
bilibus ;  De  mirabilibus  auditis  •  Physiognomonica ;  Me-
chanica  problemata  ;  De  indivisibilibus  lineis  ;  De
mundo  ;  De  respiratione ;  De  virtutibus  et  vitiis  ;
Oeconomica  ;  Rhetorica  ad  Alexandrum.  The  Eudemian
Ethics  and  the  Great  Ethics  are  alterations  of  the  Nico-
machean  Ethics.  Such  fragments  of  letters  as  we  possess
have  undergone  considerable  additions  and  changes.

The  works  left  by  Aristotle  may  in  all  probability  be
placed  in  the  three  following  categories  : —

I  st.  Books  of  instruction  and  science  properly  so
called  :  summaries  and  treatises  of  which  he  made  use
in  his  classes.  He  did  not  publish  them,  but  merely
imparted  their  teachings  to  his  pupils.

2nd.  Published  writings  :  intended  for  the  masses
of  the  people.  They  were  written,  we  are  told,  with
considerable  fluency  and  charm,  and  were  partly  in  the
form  of  dialogues.

Using  Aristotle's  own  terms,  the  unpublished  writ-
ings have  been  called  acroamatic  or  acroatic,  and  the
published  ones  exoteric.  These  expressions  clearly
answer  to  a  fundamental  distinction  in  Aristotle's
philosophy.  In  his.  mind,  there  are  two  modes  of
instruction,  proportioned  to  the  two  degrees  of  know-
ledge. That  which  is  cognizable  as  necessary  and


ARISTOTLE  81

absolutely  certain  is  a  matter  of  demonstration  strictly
so  called  ;  that  which  is  cognizable  as  being  only  likely
is  a  matter  of  dialectic.  In  his  classes  Aristotle  taught
complete  science  ;  he  gave  demonstrations  ;  the  pupil
had  nothing  to  do  but  to  listen.  Apart  from  these  classes,
however,  Aristotle  directed  dialectic  conversations,  in
which  reasoning  from  probabilities,  and  from  considera-
tions more  or  less  foreign  to  the  subject  in  question,  was
carried  on  ;  to  these  conversations  others  were  admitted
as  well  as  pupils.  Such  is  the  significance  of  the  words
acroamatic  and  exoteric,  used  with  reference  to  the
teaching  of  Aristotle.  He  himself  does  not  apply
them  to  his  works,  though  such  application  may  well
be  made.

3rd.  To  these  two  categories  must  be  added  a  third,
viz.,  notes  intended  for  the  personal  use  of  Aristotle.
These  latter  writings  may  be  called  hypomnematic.

Last  of  all,  Aristotle  left  behind  him  speeches,  letters
and  poems.  Of  these  three  classes,  only  the  first  have
come  down  to  us,  and  a  few  fragments  of  the  second
and  third.  Amongst  the  lost  works,  the  most  important
are,  in  the  first  category  :  the  Treatise  on  Plants,  Anatomy,
Astrological  Theorems ;  in  the  second  :  the  Dialogues,
and  the  History  of  Rhetoric ;  in  the  third :  extracts  from
some  works  of  Plato,  and  writings  on  the  Pythagoreans
and  other  philosophers.  In  this  third  category,  evidently,
we  must  place  the  Constitutions  (HoXtretai),  in  which
were  to  be  found  all  kinds  of  information  about  158
Greek  and  foreign  cities,  a  lost  collection  of  which  we
possess  many  very  interesting  extracts.  The  treatise
entitled  The  Constitution  of  the  Athenians  was  recently
discovered  on  a  papyrus,  and  published  in  1891.

We  may  classify  as  follows  the  scientific,  properly
so  called,  or  unpublished  writings,  in  our  possession,

G


82  STUDIES  IN  PHILOSOPHY

representing,  in  a  probably  complete  manner  as  regards
essentials,  the  philosophical  work  of  Aristotle  :

i  st.  Works  on  logic,  collected  at  the  Byzantine
period  only  under  the  name  of  opyavov  :  Karyyopiat
(categories),  partially  added  to  and  altered  ;  Hepl
eppyveias  (on  speech  or  propositions)  —  this  appears
to  be  the  work  of  a  Peripatetic  of  the  third  century
before  Christ ;  'AvaXim/ca  Trporepa  (Prior  Analytics),
dealing  with  syllogism  ;  'AvaXvTiKa  wrepa  (Posterior
Analytics),  dealing  with  demonstration;  Tom/cd  (Topics),
dealing  with  dialectic,  or  reasoning  in  probabilities.
The  ninth  book  of  this  work  is  usually  given  as  a
special  work,  entitled  Hepl  a-ofaa-Tiicwv  eKeyxwv  (On
Sophistical  Refutations).

2nd.  Works  on  natural  philosophy  :  Qvaiicr)  a/cpoacr^
(Physics),  in  eight  books,  the  seventh  of  which,  though
edited  from  Aristotelian  notes,  does  not  appear  to
have  been  written  by  Aristotle ;  Hepl  ryeveaeax;  KOI
<f>0opas  (On  Generation  and  Destruction)  ;  Hepl
ovpavov  (On  the  Heavens)  ;  MerewpoKoyt/cd  (Meteoro-
logies) ;  Hepl  ^/ru^5  (On  Soul),  and  divers  treatises
referring  thereto,  entitled  Parva  Naturalia ;  Hepl
ra  %wa  iaroplai  (Animal  History),  in  ten  books,  a
work  that  has  undergone  considerable  changes  and
the  tenth  book  of  which  is  not  authentic  ;  Hepl
fjbopiwv  (The  Parts  of  Animals)  ;  Hepl  Tropelas
(The  Motor  Organs  of  Animals)  ;  ITe^l  tyw
(On  the  Generation  of  Animals),  a  work  that  has  been
considerably  changed.

3rd.  So-called  metaphysical  works,  dealing  with  what
Aristotle  calls  first  philosophy  (TT/JCOTT;  ^tXoo-o^ta)  :
the  work  called  Metaphysics,  in  fourteen  books,  is  a
collection  made,  in  all  probability,  shortly  after  the
death  of  Aristotle  ;  it  comprises  all  that  his  papers


ARISTOTLE  83

contained  referring  to  first  philosophy.  These  writings
owe  their  present  name  (Ta  /tera  ra  <j>v<ritca)  to  their
position  after  physics  in  the  edition  of  Andronicus.
The  substance  of  these  writings  is  comprised  in  Books
i.,  iii.,  iv.,  vi.  to  ix.,  x.  (numbers  of  the  Berlin  edition).
Book  ii.  and  Book  xi.,  from  chapter  viii.,  1065,  a,  26,
are  unauthentic.

4th.  Works  on  the  practical  sciences  :  'HOnca
Nt/co/ia^em  (Morals  addressed  to  Nicomachus,  or  Nico-
machean  Ethics)  ;  IIo\m/ca  (Politics),  an  unfinished
work.  According  to  Zeller,  Books  vii.  and  viii.  of
the  Politics  ought  most  probably  to  be  inserted  between
Books  iii.  and  iv.  ;  Te^v^  pyropiicij  (Rhetoric)  ;  Hepl
TroiriTucfy  (On  Poetry).

With  regard  to  the  didactic  works,  the  question  of
chronology  is  only  of  moderate  importance.  Indeed,
they  were  all  written  during  the  last  twelve  years  of
the  philosopher's  life  (335-322),  they  make  references
to  each  other,  and,  in  their  ensemble,  offer  us  the  com-
pleted system,  without  any  proof  of  progress.  So  far
as  can  be  judged  by  the  paltry  indications  that  may  be
obtained  from  historical  testimony  and  the  examination
of  the  works  in  themselves,  Aristotle  first  wrote  the
works  on  logic  (except  the  notes  from  which  the  liepl
epWveLas  were  compiled,  and  which  appeared  after  the
Hepl  ^v%^?).  Then  the  writings  on  natural  history
appeared,  followed  by  the  physiological  and  psycho-
logical works  and  those  relating  to  the  practical
sciences  ;  last  of  all,  most  probably  and  in  any  case
subsequent  to  the  physics,  the  collection  called  meta-
physics. Thus  Aristotle  appears  to  have  proceeded
from  the  abstract  to  the  concrete,  and,  in  the  domain
of  the  concrete,  from  changing  being  to  immutable
being.


84  STUDIES  IN. PHILOSOPHY

III. — THE  ENSEMBLE  OF  ARISTOTLE'S  WORK

As  indicated  by  the  very  title  of  his  writings,
universality  is  the  first  characteristic  of  Aristotle's
work.  Theory  and  practice,  metaphysics  and  the
science  of  observation,  erudition  and  speculation,  his
philosophy  includes  everything.  It  is,  or  would  like
to  be,  knowledge  in  its  totality.  The  idea  of  science,
considered  as  the  loftiest  object  of  activity,  stands  out
in  Aristotle  as  more  precise  than  in  Plato  and  more
general  than  in  Anaxagoras  and  Democritus.  It  is
not  the  curiosity  of  a  scholar,  it  is  the  ambition  to  enter
into  the  very  essence  and  cause  of  things.  Without
exception,  everything  that  is,  even  what  appears  mean
and  insignificant,  calls  in  this  sense  for  the  philosopher's
investigations.  He  knows  he  will  find  the  divine  and
the  intelligible  in  all  the  productions  of  nature,  even
those  that  are  apparently  the  humblest.

It  was  thus  that  he  approached  everything  accessible
to  human  intelligence  ;  and,  provided  with  all  the  positive
knowledge  it  was  at  that  period  possible  to  acquire,  a
philosopher  of  penetrating  intuition  and  strict  reasoning
power,  he  either  created  or  constituted  most  of  the
sciences  which  the  genius  of  mankind  was  subsequently
destined  to  develop.  The  list  of  the  sciences  he  thus
organised  is  but  the  list  of  those  he  himself  studied  :
the  history  of  philosophy,  logic,  metaphysics,  general
physics,  biology,  botany,  ethics,  politics,  archaeology,
literary  history,  philology,  grammar,  rhetoric,  poetics
and  the  philosophy  of  art.  In  each  of  these  sciences
Aristotle  is  at  home  ;  for  each  of  them  he  lays  down
special  and  appropriate  principles.  A  pure  ethicist  when
dealing  with  justice  and  friendship,  he  is  a  professional
naturalist  when  dealing  with  zoology.


ARISTOTLE  85

Are  we  then  to  conclude  that  Aristotle  comprises
many  human  beings  in  himself,  so  to  speak  ;  is  his
vast  work  nothing  but  the  juxtaposition  of  the  most
diverse  labours,  such  as  might  result  from  the  collabora-
tion of  many  learned  men  ?  Such  an  appreciation
would  certainly  be  a  superficial  one.  First  and  foremost,
there  is  community  of  spirit  and  method  between  the
different  works  of  Aristotle.  This  common  substratum
might  be  defined  as  a  harmonious  blend  of  idealism,
observation  and  logical  formalism.  Aristotle  always
seeks  for  the  idea  in  the  fact ;  for  the  necessary  and
the  perfect  in  the  contingent  and  the  imperfect ;  every-
where he  endeavours  to  substitute  fixed  conceptions
and  definitions  for  the  fleeting  data  of  sensible  observa-
tion. Nor  is  this  all  ;  according  to  him,  the  different
parts  of  knowledge  hold  a  fixed  relation  to  one  another,
and  this  relation  he  very  clearly  defines.  Speaking
generally,  the  superior  is  known  only  after  the  inferior,
and  that  only  by  the  help  of  the  knowledge  of  this
inferior  ;  at  the  same  time,  however,  the  true  cause  and
raison  d'etre  of  the  inferior  is  to  be  found  in  the  superior.
For  instance,  the  soul  can  be  known  only  after  the
body,  which  is  its  basis  and  the  condition  of  its  exist-
ence. But  the  body  exists  only  for  the  soul ;  from
this  latter  it  obtains  the  regulated  movement  which  con-
stitutes its  being.  This  principle  of  Aristotle's  will
assist  us  in  classifying  the  many  forms  of  his  philo-
sophical activity.

IV. — CLASSIFICATION OF  THE  SCIENCES

Without  attaining  to  precision  or  even  permanence
in  detail,  Aristotle  was  none  the  less  the  first  to  con-
ceive of  science  from  an  encyclopaedic  point  of  view


86  STUDIES  IN  PHILOSOPHY

and  to  endeavour  to  discover  a  principle  for  the  com-
plete classification  of  knowledge.

In  the  first  place,  science  stands  clearly  out  from
the  very  things  to  which  it  relates.  It  consists  of  the
conception  of  things  as  necessary,  and  admits  of  different
degrees  according  as  the  object  under  consideration
itself  admits  of  necessity  or  only  of  probability.

Science,  in  its  ensemble,  follows  a  double  line  of
direction,  according  as  the  human  mind  adopts  as  its
starting-point  that  which  is  first  from  its  own  point  of
view,  or  that  which  is  first  absolutely.  These  two
steps  are  the  very  opposites  of  each  other  :  for  facts
are  what  is  first  to  us,  and,  in  the  internal  order  of
nature,  facts  are  what  exists  in  the  last  resort ;  and  vice
versa,  what  is  first  in  itself  consists  of  principles,  and
principles  are  the  last  thing  to  which  we  can  attain.

Philosophy,  in  the  broad  sense  of  the  word,  is  science
in  general.  In  the  first  place,  it  comprises  first  philo-
sophy or  the  science  of  unconditioned  principles  ;  in
the  second  place,  the  totality  of  the  particular  sciences,
the  chief  of  which  are  :  mathematics,  physics,  ethics
and  poetics.  Philosophy  is  one,  thanks  to  first  philo-
sophy, which  is  the  common  reservoir  whence  all  par-
ticular sciences  draw  their  principles.

This  division,  although  fundamental,  does  not  always
reappear  in  Aristotle's  classifications  of  the  sciences.
In  certain  places  he  divides  the  propositions,  after  the
fashion  of  the  Platonists,  into  ethical,  physical  and
logical,  these  latter  comprising  the  very  propositions
that  refer  to  first  philosophy.

More  frequently  he  divides  the  sciences  into  theo-
retical, practical  (or  relating  to  action)  and  poetical
(or  relating  to  production  by  means  of  matter)  ;
placing,  from  the  logical  and  absolute  point  of  view,


ARISTOTLE  87

theory  before  practice,  and  practice  before  poetics.
Then  he  subdivides  the  theoretical  sciences  into  theo-
logy, mathematics  and  physics.  Theology  may  be
brought  under  first  philosophy,  of  which  it  forms  the
summit.  Mathematics  deals  with  essences  still  stable
though  not  separable  from  matter,  except  by  abstraction.
Physics  deals  with  sensible — i.e.  movable  and  perishable
— substances.  The  practical  sciences,  or  sciences  of
human  things,  are  subdivided,  if  we  proceed  from
potency  to  act,  i.e.  from  that  which  is  first  for  us  to
that  which  is  first  in  itself,  into  ethics >  economics  and
politics.  In  fact,  economics  is  often  given  by  Aristotle
as  included  in  politics.  Rhetoric  is  more  particularly
set  forth  as  an  auxiliary  science  to  politics.  Poetics
includes  all  the  arts,  the  most  important  of  them  being
poetry  and  music.  No  mention  is  made  of  logic  in
this  classification,  doubtless  because  the  latter  embraces
only  the  sciences  dealing  with  realities,  whereas  logic
deals  with  concepts.

V. — METHOD  AND  THE  POINT  OF  VIEW

The  object  Aristotle  has  in  view  is  essentially  theo-
retical. To  know  in  order  to  know,  to  understand,  to
adjust  things  to  the  intelligence  :  such  is  the  end  of  all
his  efforts.

All  men,  he  says,  have  a  natural  desire  to  know.
We  love  science  quite  apart  from  any  advantage  to  be
gained  thereby.  Wisdom  is  independent  of  utility  ;
in  fact,  the  greater  it  is.  the  less  useful  it  is.  The

o  -

highest  science  is  that  of  the  goal  or  end,  in  view  of
which,  beings  exist.  This  science  alone  is  truly  free,
because  it  alone  exists  solely  in  view  of  knowledge
itself.  It  is  the  least  necessary  of  all  sciences,  and


88  STUDIES  IN  PHILOSOPHY

therefore  the  most  excellent.  Science  enables  us  to
become  acquainted  with  the  intelligible  reasons  of  things.
The  ignorant  man,  who  all  the  same  observes,  is
astonished  that  things  are  as  they  are,  and  this  very
astonishment  is  the  beginning  of  science  :  the  wise  man
would  be  astonished  were  things  otherwise  than  as  he
knows  them.

How  does  Aristotle  proceed  in  order  to  acquire
science,  thus  understood  ?  Aristotle  is  neither  the
dogmatic  idealist  that  Bacon  supposes,  building  up  the
world  with  nothing  but  the  categories  of  language,  nor
the  empiric  that  many  moderns  see  in  him.  •  He  is  both
an  observer  and  a  constructor :  speaking  generally,  he
closely  allies  and  combines  the  scrupulous  study  of  facts
with  the  effort  to  make  them  intelligible.  For  him,
facts  are  the  starting-point,  but  he  does  not  stop  there  :
he  tries  to  distil  from  them  the  rational  truths  he  knows
beforehand  to  be  contained  therein.  The  end  he  has
in  view  is  the  knowledge  of  things  in  demonstrative
form,  i.e.  in  the  form  of  a  deduction  in  which  the
properties  of  the  thing  are  known  by  its  very  essence.

Most  frequently,  and  especially  when  dealing  with
metaphysical  or  moral  matters,  before  entering  upon
the  study  of  things  in  themselves,  he  investigates  and
discusses  all  the  opinions  of  others  thereon.  This  is
the  dialectic  method  ;  drawing  its  arguments  not  from
the  essence  of  the  thing,  but  rather  from  the  admissions
of  one's  interlocutor,  it  does  not  go  beyond  proba-
bility. In  using  this  method,  Aristotle  frequently  begins
with  popular  conceptions  :  he  finds  a  philosophical
meaning  in  them  and  utilises  it  in  constructing  his
theory.  He  also  starts  with  language  which,  for  him,
is  a  sort  of  intermediary  between  things  and  reason.
He  pays  special  attention  to  the  doctrines  of  his  pre-


ARISTOTLE  89

decessors,  carefully  going  over  all  the  opinions  they  have
upheld  ;  and  even  when  rejecting  these  opinions,  he  tries
to  find  out  the  reason  they  were  held  and  the  degree
of  truth  in  them.  His  philosophical  dissertations  are
generally  composed  as  follows:  ist,  he  determines  the
object  of  investigation,  so  as  not  to  be  exposed  to  mis-
understanding, as  is  the  case  with  Plato ;  2nd,  he
enumerates  and  estimates  the  indications  and  opinions
held  on  the  matter  in  hand  ;  3rd,  he  investigates  and
examines  as  completely  as  possible  the  difficulties  or
airopiai  offered  by  the  question  asked  ;  4th,  considering
things  in  themselves,  and  utilising,  in  his  reasonings,  the
results  of  the  foregoing  discussions,  he  seeks  for  the
solution  of  the  problem  in  the  determination  of  the  one
eternal  essence  of  the  object  in  question.

VI. — ARISTOTLE,  THE  HISTORIAN

We  see  from  the  preceding  that  Aristotle  is  a  his-
torian above  all  else.  He  began  by  learning  as  much
as  possible.  According  to  report,  Plato  called  him
the  reader.  But  history  was  not  a  final  end  for  him,
although  he  manifested  extraordinary  curiosity  regarding
facts ;  it  was,  however,  an  indispensable  means  to  an  end.
It  supplied  the  mind  with  materials  without  which  it
would  have  nothing  to  work  upon.  Aristotle  gave
himself  up  to  profoundly  historical  studies  in  every
domain  of  science.

As  regards  the  history  of  philosophy,  he  wrote  mainly
on  Platonism  and  the  Pythagoreans.  The  whole  of
the  first  book  of  the  Metaphysics  is  full  of  historical
research:  it  is  a  summary  of  the  principles  set  forth
from  the  time  of  Thales  to  that  of  Plato.  But  as  the
object  he  has  in  view  is  dogmatic,  he  makes  previous


9o  STUDIES  IN  PHILOSOPHY

systems  fit  into  the  framework  of  his  own  philosophy.
He  tries  to  find  their  perfect  form,  the  idea  within
each,  their  end  and  completion  ;  he  is  determined  to
understand  them  more  profoundly  than  even  their
authors  did,  and  he  summarises  them  into  rules  created
by  himself,  which  rules  are  used  as  stepping-stones  to
his  own  system.  When  he  classifies  doctrines,  he  does
so  according  to  the  resemblances  and  differences  they
offer  from  his  own  point  of  view,  not  according  to  the
influence  they  have  had  upon  one  another.  Thus,  the
summary  contained  in  the  first  book  of  the  Metaphysics
is  intended  to  prepare  the  ground  for  the  Aristotelian
theory  of  the  four  causes.  Aristotle  shows  that,  before
his  time,  the  material,  motive  and  formal  principles  were
more  or  less  discerned  and  rightly  estimated,  but  that
the  final  cause  was  spoken  of  as  though  by  accident,  as
something  unessential.  Anaxagoras,  who  had  caught  a
glimpse  of  the  final  cause,  stands  out,  says  our  author,
as  a  sensible  man  amongst  men  who  speak  at  random.
Chronological  investigations  have  little  to  do  with  these
considerations.  Aristotle,  likewise,  troubles  himself
little  with  the  relations  of  master  to  disciple.  He  notes
the  services  rendered  by  each  of  his  predecessors  to
philosophy  in  general,  as  he  conceives  it ;  he  points  out
anything  of  a  lasting  nature  that  each  thinker  has  found,
and  mentions  the  inventors  and  promoters  of  ideas  that
have  played  some  part  in  the  development  of  science
and  appear  to  him  deserving  of  examination.  In  a  word,
making  no  attempt  to  find  out  the  historical  origins  of
the  systems,  he  all  the  same  elicits  from  the  crude  mass
of  facts,  the  logical  formation  of  definitive  philosophy.

With  political  history  are  connected  the  famous
TroTuretat  in  which  Aristotle  set  forth  the  constitutions
of  158  Greek  and  foreign  cities.  This  collection


ARISTOTLE  91

of  treatises  belonged  to  what  we  call  archaeology  and
the  history  of  civilisation.  In  them  were  to  be  found
many  a  striking  national  custom,  and  even  the  proverbs
and  popular  songs  of  different  peoples.  According
to  certain  Greek  commentators,  the  order  of  the  con-
tents was  alphabetical.  Diogenes  says  that  the  con-
stitutions were  classified  according  as  they  resembled
democracies,  oligarchies,  aristocracies  or  tyrannies.  We
can  nowadays  form  some  idea  of  the  iro\Lrela^  thanks
to  the  recently  discovered  treatise  on  the  Constitution  of
the  Athenians.  The  first  part  of  this  treatise  is  an
explanation  of  the  political  transformations  of  Athens
from  its  historical  beginnings.  The  second  describes
the  political  and  administrative  organisation  of  Athens
about  the  time  of  the  Crown  trial  (330  B.C.).

In  the  literary  order  of  things,  Aristotle  had  written
the  history  of  rhetoric  and  poetry.  This  history,  which
has  not  come  down  to  us,  was  greatly  praised  by  Cicero.
"  Aristotle,"  he  said,  "  had  noted  down  all  the  precepts
given  by  the  rhetors,  and  that,  too,  with  such  a  degree
of  perfection  that  these  precepts  were  found  to  be  more
clearly  set  forth  by  him  than  by  their  authors  them-
selves ;  so  that  when  one  wished  to  become  acquainted
with  them,  it  was  in  Aristotle's  works  that  search  was
made."

He  had  also  drawn  up  chronological  lists  of  dramatic
performances  as  well  as  lists  of  the  victors  in  the  Olympic
and  Pythian  games.  These  works  are  lost.

As  may  be  seen,  Aristotle's  curiosity  is  insatiable  and
embraces  every  department  of  nature.  Still,  he  is
determined  to  know  and  understand,  not  to  amuse  him-
self with  the  mere  statement  of  facts  :  history  for  him
is  nothing  but  an  instrument  of  science,  and  a  fact  has
no  value  except  as  the  vehicle  of  an  idea.


92  STUDIES  IN  PHILOSOPHY

VII.— LOGIC

Aristotle  is  determined  to  become  acquainted  with
facts,  not  only  as  regards  what  they  are,  but  as  regards
what  they  ought  to  be  ;  he  wishes  to  resolve  the  con-
tingent into  the  necessary.  First,  then,  he  has  to  find
out  under  what  conditions  the  mind  conceives  some-
thing as  necessary  ;  in  other  words,  he  has  first  to
consider  science  in  its  form,  putting  on  one  side  its
content  :  this  is  the  object  of  logic.

Logic  is  the  determination  of  the  laws  of  reasoning
and  of  the  conditions  of  science.  In  knowledge  Aristotle
makes  a  distinction  between  form  and  matter,  he  regards
form  as  possessed  of  an  existence  and  laws  of  its  own.
Its  existence  lies  in  the  reality  of  stable  concepts,  or
general,  single  ideas,  exactly  determined  both  as  regards
their  comprehension  and  their  extension.  Its  funda-
mental law  is  the  principle  of  contradiction  :  "  It  is
impossible  for  one  and  the  same  attribute  to  belong
and  not  to  belong  to  a  given  subject,  regarded  in  one  and
the  same  connection."  Moreover,  according  to  Aristotle,
there  is  proportion  as  well  as  agreement  between  thought
and  being ;  consequently,  our  philosopher  does  not
object  to  the  introduction  into  his  logic  of  many
elements  of  a  metaphysical  nature.

Aristotelian  logic  is  the  rational  analysis  of  the  condi-
tions which  any  reasoning  must  satisfy  for  its  conclusion
to  be  regarded  as  necessary.  The  thing  is  not  to  know
how,  as  a  matter  of  fact,  we  reason  in  ordinary  life,  but
rather  how  reasoning  must  be  built  up  in  order  that  the
necessity  of  the  connection  it  establishes  may  appear
immediately  and  irresistibly  evident.  This  is  why  the
problem  of  the  psychological  analysis  of  natural  reason-
ing, indicated  by  Locke,  could  be  substituted  for  that


ARISTOTLE  93

of  Aristotle  only  by  admitting  the  reduction  of  the
necessary  to  the  contingent,  the  ideal  to  the  real,
precept  to  fact,  and  art  to  nature.

It  is  advisable  to  distinguish  between  :  ist,  the
instruments  of  thought ;  2nd,  the  role  and  value  of
these  instruments  in  the  constitution  of  science.

The  instruments  of  thought  are  :  notions,  proposi-
tions and  reasoning.

The  general  heading  of  notions  includes  the  predic-
ables,  the  categories  and  the  notions  of  logical  relations.

The  predicableSy  which  Aristotle,  it  would  seem,  calls
the  genera  of  problems,  are  the  universal  notions  that
relate  to  the  general  modes  according  to  which  one
thing  may  be  enunciated  with  reference  to  another.
These  are  what  are  called  the  universals,  viz.  genus,
species,  difference,  property  and  accident.

The  categories  are  the  irreducible  genera  of  words,
and  consequently  of  things,  for  classes  of  words  are  the
classes  of  the  things  themselves.  These  are  the  ultimate
genera.  The  categories  are  ten  in  number  :  ist,  essence,
for  instance,  man,  horse  ;  2nd,  quantity  :  two  ells  long  ;
3rd,  quality  :  white  ;  4th,  relation  :  double,  half ;  5th,
place  :  at  school ;  6th,  time  :  yesterday  ;  yth,  position  :
to  be  seated,  lying  ;  8th,  possession  :  to  be  shod,  armed  ;
9th,  action  :  to  cut,  to  burn  ;  loth,  passivity  :  to  be  cut,
burnt.  The  categories  are  divided  into  two  classes,
essence  alone  forming  the  first,  and  the  nine  other
categories  constituting  the  second.

This  table  of  categories  seems  to  have  been  drawn
up  empirically  by  comparison  of  the  words  with  one
another.  It  differs  fundamentally  from  Kant's,  which
sets  forth  the  different  ways  of  connecting,  a  priori  and
necessarily,  the  various  elements  of  an  intuition  in  general,


94  STUDIES  IN  PHILOSOPHY

i.e.  of  bringing  this  scattered  matter  under  the  unity  of
transcendental  apperception.

The  different  logical  relations  of  terms  to  one  another
are  identity  and  opposition,  the  latter  including  con-
trariety, contradiction  and  the  relation  between
deprivation  and  possession.

The  general  principle  with  regard  to  opposition  is
that  two  terms  opposed  to  each  other  always  depend  on
one  and  the  same  science.

Propositions  result  from  the  union  of  concepts.
They  are  affirmative  or  negative,  universal  or  particular.
They  alone  admit  of  truth  or  error,  whereas  isolated
concepts  are  neither  true  nor  false.  The  result  is  not
the  same,  when  two  judgments  are  contradictory  to
each  other,  as  when  they  are  simply  contrary.  Two
contrary  judgments  cannot  both  be  true,  though  they
may  be  false,  whereas  one  of  two  contradictory  judg-
ments is  of  necessity  true  and  the  other  false  :  this
results  from  the  principle  of  excluded  middle,  a  par-
ticular expression  of  the  principle  of  contradiction.

Propositions  admit  of  conversions  or  inversions  of
subject  and  predicate,  the  rules  of  which  are  determined
by  Aristotle.

Reasoning  consists  essentially  of  syllogism.  The
theory  of  syllogism  and  of  demonstration,  or  perfect
syllogism,  is  called  by  Aristotle  analytics.  Aristotle
claims  to  have  invented  it.  He  affirms  that,  previous
to  his  time,  there  existed  nothing  on  this  subject,  that
he  had  not  merely  to  improve  but  to  invent,  and  that
he  attained  his  end  by  dint  of  laborious  attempts.
Kant  said  regarding  the  theory  of  the  syllogism  that,
ever  since  the  days  of  Aristotle,  it  had  not  moved  a
step,  either  backwards  or  forwards.

The  syllogism  is  a  process  of  reasoning  in  which,


ARISTOTLE  95

certain  things  being  posited,  something  different
necessarily  results.  The  property  of  the  syllogism  is
that  it  makes  evident  the  necessity  of  the  conjunction.
This  result  is  obtained  by  the  use  of  elements  adapted
to  an  exact  application  of  the  principle  of  contradiction.
These  elements  are  terms  regarded  as  holding  to  each
other  the  relation  of  the  part  to  the  whole.  Granted
that  A  contains  B  and  B  contains  C,  it  necessarily
follows,  in  accordance  with  the  principle  of  contradiction,
that  A  contains  C.  This  is  the  type  of  the  syllogism,
and  the  three  terms  it  implies  are  therefore  called
major,  middle  and  minor.  This  relation  of  extent  is
regarded  by  Aristotle  as  equivalent  to  the  relation
between  general  and  particular.  The  genus  is  a  kind
of  definite  circle,  containing  the  various  species.

The  syllogism  is  perfect  or  imperfect,  according  as
it  conforms  immediately  to  the  type  we  have  just  in-
dicated, or  becomes  conformable  thereto  only  by  the
aid  of  transformations  or  reductions.

The  origin  of  this  theory  may  be  found  in  mathe-
matics. It  consists  in  an  adaptation  to  the  qualitative
notions  of  the  relations  of  dimension.  It  was  natural
that  Aristotle  should  seek,  in  an  analogical  imitation  of
mathematics,  for  the  means  of  demonstrating  necessarily
in  qualitative  matter  ;  since  it  was  acknowledged  by  all
that  mathematics  realised  that  necessity  in  the  con-
catenation of  the  terms,  which  he  had  in  view.  In  the
syllogism  the  instrument  of  necessary  connection  is  the
middle  term.

Of  the  particular  cases  of  syllogism,  the  most  im-
portant is  induction,  or  the  reasoning  which  proceeds
from  particular  to  general.  The  following  is  an  in-
stance of  this  reasoning  :  "  The  man,  the  horse  and  the
mule  live  long.  Now  the  man,  the  horse  and  the  mule  are


96  STUDIES  IN  PHILOSOPHY

animals  devoid  of  gall.  Therefore,  all  animals  devoid
of  gall  live  long."  The  condition  of  the  legitimacy  of
the  conclusion  lies  in  the  convertibility  of  the  minor
premise.  Here,  for  instance,  for  the  proposition  :
"  The  man,  the  horse  and  the  mule  are  animals  devoid
of  gall,"  we  should  have  to  be  permitted  to  substitute  :
"  All  the  animals  devoid  of  gall  are  man,  the  horse  and
the  mule."  The  legitimacy  of  this  substitution  is  no
longer  a  matter  of  logic.  In  fact,  the  series  of  animals
devoid  of  gall  is  an  infinite  one.  But  the  essence  of
the  animal  devoid  of  gall  is  entirely  in  each  animal
devoid  of  gall.  The  question  is  to  discern  this
essence,  to  find  the  type  of  the  animal  devoid  of  gall,
so  as  to  distinguish  the  characteristics  belonging  to
animals  devoid  of  gall,  in  this  particular  condition  of
being  devoid  of  gall,  and  separate  them  from  the
characteristics  belonging  to  them  independently  of  this
condition.  To  effect  this,  we  consider  a  certain  number
of  animals  devoid  of  gall,  compare  them  with  one
another,  find  out  what  they  have  in  common,  and  so
what  there  is  in  them  that  is  essential  and  necessary.
In  other  words,  we  consider  the  beings  of  nature  not
only  with  the  senses,  but  with  the  vovs — the  seat  of  the
essences — which  is  capable  of  finding  and  recognising
them  in  the  data  of  the  senses.

Aristotle's  induction  thus  aims  at  the  classification
of  beings  and  facts,  and  also  at  a  natural  classification.
In  so  far  as  it  is  applied  in  distinguishing  necessary
relations  from  contingent  ones,  it  makes  prediction
possible,  and  thus  supplies  us  with  true  laws,  in  the
modern  sense  of  the  word.  This  possibility  of  pre-
diction, however,  is  restricted  to  the  facts  that  proceed
immediately  from  a  determined  essence  ;  it  does  not
extend  to  the  facts  that  result  from  the  mingling  of


ARISTOTLE  97

several  essences.  There  is  no  necessary  reason  for
the  mingling  of  the  essences  ;  this  is  something  purely
contingent.  The  genera,  according  to  Aristotle,  are
radically  separated  from  one  another  ;  each  of  them  is
an  absolute.  In  this  doctrine  of  the  independence  of
genera,  the  Aristotelian  theory  of  induction  is  opposed
both  to  Cartesianism,  which  reduces  physical  laws  to
mathematical  determinations,  the  heterogeneous  to  the
homogeneous ;  and  also  to  evolutionism,  which  re-
cognises the  present  existence  of  species,  though
attributing  to  them  a  natural  genesis  in  the  past,
starting  from  one  common  origin.

Syllogism,  properly  so  called,  and  induction  are
to  each  other,  says  Aristotle,  as  the  order  of  nature
and  that  of  human  knowledge.  In  itself,  syllogism  is
the  more  intelligible  ;  to  us,  induction  is  the  more
distinct.  A  syllogism  starts  from  the  general.  Now,
it  is  impossible  for  us  to  have  knowledge  of  the
general  except  by  induction.  Not  that  general  prin-
ciples rest  on  sensation  and  induction  as  their  founda-
tion ;  it  is  rather  that  induction  discovers  these  principles
for  us  and  supplies  us  with  the  intelligible  elements
which  the  i/oO?  acknowledges  to  be  both  necessary  and
true.

Such  are  the  instruments  of  science.  How,  by
means  of  them,  is  science  formed  ?

Science  is  the  knowledge  of  things  in  so  far  as  they
are  necessary.  A  thing  is  known  scientifically  when
we  know  that  it  could  not  be  otherwise  than  it  is.
Now,  this  knowledge  is  realised  when  we  succeed  in
connecting  the  given  thing  with  its  cause.

In  nature  there  are  three  kinds  of  connections  :  ist,
conjunctions  that  are  always  realised,  for  instance  :  the

H


9  8  STUDIES  IN  PHILOSOPHY

relations  of  astronomical  phenomena  ;  2nd,  conjunctions
that  are  usually  realised,  for  instance  :  the  relations  of
physical  things  to  one  another,  and,  even  more  so,  of
moral  things  ;  3rd,  chance,  i.e.  the  coincidences  that  are
but  seldom,  or  never,  reproduced.  The  first  kind  of
connection  admits  of  perfect  science  ;  the  second,  of
imperfect  science,  limited  to  probability  ;  the  third  is
outside  of  the  domain  of  science.  There  is  no  science
of  what  is  passing  away.

Neither  opinion  nor  sensation  can  produce  science,
for  as  they  are  both  incapable  of  perfect  determination
and  finity,  they  cannot  grasp  the  finite  and  immovable.
Platonic  dialectic,  too,  is  powerless  to  afford  us  science,
for  as  it  consists  of  questions  and  answers,  it  relies  only
on  the  consent  of  the  opponent,  not  on  truth  in  itself.
Starting  from  hypothesis,  it  does  not  go  beyond  a
purely  formal  and  logical  inference.  It  is  by  demon-
stration that  we  arrive  at  science.  Apodeictic,  or  the
theory  of  demonstration,  differs  essentially  from
dialectic.

Demonstration  is  effected  by  direct  syllogism  of  the
first  figure.  Reductio  ad  absurdum  and  syllogisms  of
the  second  and  third  figures  are  not  yet  demonstration,
which  has  its  starting-point  in  a  principle  that  is  not
only  granted  by  the  opponent,  but  is  necessary  in
itself.  This  is  how  the  mathematician  reasons.

Demonstration  comprises  three  elements  :  ist,  the
subject ;  2nd,  the  predicate,  which  has  to  be  linked  to
the  subject  by  a  bond  of  necessity  ;  3rd,  the  general
principles  on  which  demonstration  is  based.  These
latter  are  the  principle  of  contradiction  and  its  de-
rivatives. Though  indispensable,  they  are  empty
and  insufficient  in  themselves.  It  is  in  the  nature
of  the  subject  that  the  basis  of  demonstration  lies.


ARISTOTLE  99

There  are,  in  effect,  principles  proper  to  the  subject,
for  instance  the  continuous,  inherent  in  extent ;  and
the  discontinuous,  inherent  in  number  :  it  is  these
special  principles  that  have  a  content  and  are  productive.
On  these  principles  it  is  good  to  rely,  and,  in  deduction,
we  should  never  pass  from  one  genus  to  another  unless
the  one  is  properly  subordinated  to  the  other.  Thus,
geometry  could  not  be  explained  by  arithmetic ;  it
would  be  impossible  to  adapt  to  dimensions  of  ex-
tension demonstrations  proper  to  number.  When
this  rule  is  violated,  we  have  for  our  guidance  none  but
the  principles  common  to  all  sciences  ;  and  so  the  con-
nections established  are  known  only  as  accidental  and
contingent,  not  as  essential  and  necessary  :  we  have
been  proceeding  by  analogy,  not  by  demonstration.  The
impossibility  here  seen  by  Aristotle  was  at  a  later  date
removed  by  Descartes  and  Leibnitz.

Proper  principles  cannot  be  proved  like  common
ones.  To  claim  to  demonstrate  everything  would  be
to  condemn  oneself  either  to  progress  ad  infinitum  or
to  the  argument  in  a  circle.  Thus  each  science  has  its
special  irreducible  principles.

Whence  come  these  principles?  They  are  neither
innate,  nor  received  purely  and  simply  from  without.
There  is  within  us  a  disposition  to  conceive  them  ;
and,  as  the  result  of  experience,  this  disposition  passes
into  action.  It  is  in  this,  after  all,  that  induction  con-
sists, and  so  it  is  by  induction  that  we  know  the  first
principles  proper  to  each  science.

Demonstration  implies  definition.  There  must  be
undemonstrable  definitions  :  otherwise  we  should  pro-
ceed ad  infinitum.  There  is  no  definition,  either  of  the
individual  or  of  the  accident — or  the  indeterminate
general — but  only  of  intermediate  species  between  the


ioo  STUDIES  IN  PHILOSOPHY

general  and  the  individual.  Definition  is  effected  by
indicating  the  next  genus  and  the  specific  differences.
In  order  to  constitute  a  definition,  we  must  proceed
from  the  particular  to  the  general  and  verify  this  induc-
tion by  a  deduction  proceeding  from  genus  to  species.

To  sum  up,  a  thing  is  known  as  necessary  when
connected,  by  deduction,  with  a  specific  essence.

Below  apodeictic,  which  teaches  how  one  comes  to
know  a  thing  as  necessary,  stands  dialectic,  or  the  logic
of  the  probable  :  we  find  it  set  forth  in  the  Topics.
The  domain  of  dialectic  is  opinion,  a  mode  of  know-
ledge admitting  of  truth  or  of  falsehood.  The
dialectician  takes,  as  his  starting-point,  not  definitions
necessary  in  themselves,  but  opinions  or  theses  pro-
pounded either  by  philosophers  or  by  common  sense  ;
he  tries  to  discover  which  of  these  divers  opinions  is
the  most  probable.  Proceeding  by  means  of  questions
and  answers,  he  contradictorily  examines  the  yes  and
the  no  regarding  each  subject.  Thus,  he  arranges  his
questions  in  such  fashion  as  to  present  first  a  thesis,
then  an  antithesis  ;  afterwards  he  discusses  both  pro-
positions. This  discussion  consists  in  examining  the
difficulties  that  arise,  when  we  wish  to  apply  the  pro-
position to  particular  instances.  The  dialectician
reasons  syllogistically,  though  he  starts  with  the  pro-
bable. The  probable,  taken  as  the  given,  is  in  reality
the  purely  generic  essence,  not  yet  determined  by  the
specific  difference.  Only  by  the  addition  of  the  specific
principle  to  the  generic  principle  could  the  conclusion
be  made  necessary.  The  specific  principles,  however,
cannot  be  deduced  from  the  generic  ones,  for  every
genus  admits  alike  of  different  species.

The  rble  of  dialectic  is  important  :  it  is  the  only
possible  mode  of  reasoning  in  things  which  do  not


ARISTOTLE  101

admit  of  necessary  definitions.  And  in  the  search  after
necessary  truths  themselves,  dialectic  is  the  indispensable
preliminary  of  demonstration.

What  dialectic  is  in  logic,  rhetoric  is  in  morals.
If  the  former  seeks  after  the  probable,  the  object  of
the  latter  is  to  commend  it  to  acceptance.  And  so
rhetoric  and  dialectic  go  well  together,  or  rather,  as
practice  is  to  theory  what  the  particular  is  to  the  general,
so  rhetoric  is  a  part  of  dialectic.  The  mode  of  reason-
ing proper  to  rhetoric  is  the  enthymeme,  a  syllogism  in
which  one  of  the  three  propositions  is  left  unexpressed,
and  the  reasons  are  not  obtained  from  the  essence  of
things,  but  from  probabilities  and  signs.  The  main
element  of  the  enthymeme  that  rhetoric  uses,  is  analogy,
or  the  induction  which  proceeds  from  particular  to
particular.

Finally,  a  distinction  must  be  made  between  dialectic
and  eristic.  Whereas  the  former  has  to  deal  with
things  that  are  general  and  ordinary,  without  being
necessary,  the  latter  deals  with  pure  accident,  and  that
deliberately.  Eristic  contents  itself  with  a  probability
that  is  accepted  by  the  hearer ;  consequently  eristic
reasonings  are  pure  sophisms.  Aristotle  minutely
exposes  and  describes  them.

Below  things  that  always  happen,  which  depend  on
an  essence  both  generic  and  specific  and  are  capable  of
being  known  as  necessary,  even  below  things  that
usually  happen,  which  depend  on  a  simply  generic
essence  and  are  capable  of  being  known  as  probable,
there  are  those  that  happen  accidentally,  apart  from
any  rule  at  all.  As  things  that  usually  happen  result
from  the  mingling  of  species,  so  isolated  phenomena
result  from  the  mingling  of  genera  ;  but  whereas  that
which  is  not  determinable  by  species  is  still  determin-


102  STUDIES  IN  PHILOSOPHY

able,  to  some  extent,  by  genus,  the  common  substratum
of  several  species,  that  which  is  not  even  determinable
by  genus  is  no  longer  determinable  at  all,  since,  above
genera,  there  are  none  but  universal  principles,  which,
as  they  apply  to  everything,  determine  nothing.  There
is  no  science,  then,  of  hazard,  as  such,  the  meet-
ing with  the  two  genera.  Only  the  elements  of  which
the  fortuitous  phenomenon  consists  can  be  known  as
necessary  or  possible,  in  so  far  as  they  are  connected
with  their  respective  specific  or  generic  essences  :  the
union  of  these  elements,  which,  properly  speaking,
constitutes  the  fortuitous  phenomenon,  is  without
reason,  because  genera,  as  such,  are  without  mutual
connection.

Aristotelian  logic  held  undisputed  sway  down  to  the
time  of  Bacon  and  Descartes.  From  the  beginning  of
modern  philosophy,  it  has  been  attacked  and  battered
on  every  side  ;  either  reproached  for  being  the  logic  of
exposition,  and  not  that  of  invention,  or  else  regarded
as  artificial  and  illegitimate.  Discussion  bears  mainly
on  the  value  of  the  concept  or  general  idea,  the  basis  of
the  theory.  The  empirics,  in  particular,  to  whom  ideas
are  only  traces  of  sensation,  estimate  the  value  of
generalities  by  the  number  of  ascertained  facts  they
represent ;  they  maintain  that,  as  the  truth  of  the
major  premise  of  a  syllogism  implies  that  of  the  con-
clusion, the  syllogism  is  necessarily  an  argument  in  a
circle.

Here  the  thing  to  discover  is  whether  a  concept
is  anything  else  than  a  collective  idea,  or  a  static  or
dynamic  unity,  valid  for  an  indefinite  series  of  past,
present  and  future  facts.  But  even  should  the  Aris-
totelian concept  not  exactly  coincide  with  the  nature
of  things,  as  would  be  the  case  were  continuity  the


ARISTOTLE  103

fundamental  law  of  being,  the  logic  of  Aristotle  would
none  the  less  retain  real  value.  Not  only  would  it
subsist  as  an  analysis  of  the  conditions  of  ideal  know-
ledge for  the  human  mind,  but  it  would  be  legitimate
in  proportion  as  there  exist  species  in  nature.  Now,
these  do  exist,  if  not  in  an  eternal,  primitive  fashion,
perhaps,  at  all  events  in  actuality  and  at  the  present
time.  Superior  beings,  especially,  form  relatively  stable
groups.  Even  though  continuity  were  the  fundamental
law,  none  the  less  would  it  be  necessary  to  recognise  in
nature  a  tendency  to  discontinuity  and  specification.
Aristotelian  logic  would  answer  to  that  part  or  side  of
nature  which  is  governed  by  the  law  of  specification.
Deprived  of  the  metaphysical  and  absolute  value  its
founder  attributed  to  it,  it  would  retain  a  relative  and
experimental  value.

VIII. — METAPHYSICS

Whereas  each  science  considers  some  particular
species  of  beings  ;  physics,  for  instance,  considers  being
in  so  far  as  it  has  matter  and  motion  ;  mathematics,  the
form  of  mobile  being  in  so  far  as  it  is  isolated  by
abstraction  from  the  matter  in  which  it  is  realised  ;
first  philosophy,  as  Aristotle  calls  it,  considers  being,  in
so  far  as  it  is  being,  TO  ov,  y  ov,  and  in  this  way  tries  to
discover  its  principles.

Aristotelian  metaphysics  has  been  set  up  as  opposed  to
Platonic  philosophy.  Thus,  we  find  Aristotle  beginning
his  exposition  by  a  criticism  of  his  master.  Plato,  he
says,  seeks  both  the  object  of  science  and  being,  in
so  far  as  it  is  being,  in  the  general  essences  conceived
of  as  existing  apart,  outside  of  things  and  also  outside
of  one  another.  Now,  here,  the  true  is  confounded  with


io4  STUDIES  IN  PHILOSOPHY

the  false.  Plato  clearly  saw  that  the  general  alone  can
be  an  object  of  science  and  that  the  sensible  world  as
such  cannot,  therefore,  be  known  scientifically.  But  he
was  mistaken  in  thinking  that  genera  can  exist  apart,  that
they  are  themselves  principles  and  substances.  Genera
•exist  only  in  individuals.  We  get  entangled  in  in-
extricable difficulties  if  we  insist  that  they  exist  per  se.
Under  this  hypothesis,  what  will  be  the  relation  of
things  to  their  respective  genera  ?  Will  it  be  one
of  participation  ?  Then  how  can  this  participation
be  conceived  ?  Besides,  how  many  substantial  genera
will  there  be  ?  How  can  the  idea,  the  one  substance,
be  met  with  in  an  infinite  number  of  individuals  ?  If
the  general  idea  is  substance,  either  there  are  no
individuals  or  there  is  only  one.  In  addition,  the
general  cannot  be  principle  and  substance,  because  it
is  devoid  of  force  and  cannot  exist  per  se.  The  general
is  always  an  attribute,  a  predicate  :  substance,  on  the
other  hand,  is  a  subject,  a  thing  existing  apart.  There-
fore, it  is  quite  true  that  the  general  alone  is  an  object
of  science  ;  substance,  on  the  contrary,  can  be  only
individual.

Here,  however,  a  difficulty  arises.  If,  on  the  one
hand,  all  science  rests  on  the  general,  and,  on  the  other,
substance  can  be  only  something  individual,  how  can
there  be  a  science  of  substance  ?  Does  not  our  theory
end  in  the  following  result  :  a  science  whose  object  is
not  in  being  ;  a  being  which  cannot  be  an  object  of
science  ?

To  solve  this  difficulty,  we  must  enlarge  our  notion
of  science.  All  science  does  not  rest  on  the  general.
Science  has  two  modes,  two  degrees.  There  is  science
in  potency  and  there  is  science  in  act.  The  former  has
the  general  for  its  object,  but  it  is  not  so  with  the


ARISTOTLE  105

latter,  which  has  for  its  object  the  perfectly  determined
being,  the  individual.

In  this  doctrine  we  find  the  central  idea  of  Aris-
totelianism.  The  general  is  not  the  constitutive  prin-
ciple of  being,  it  is  nothing  but  the  matter  thereof.
Though  determined  in  one  direction,  it  is  indeterminate
in  another  :  every  general  type  may  be  realised  in
divers  ways.  A  real  being,  a  substance,  is  a  completed
being,  which,  in  every  respect,  is  this  and  not  that  :
consequently,  in  any  real  being  whatsoever,  there  is
something  more  than  in  any  general  idea.  The  entire
science  of  the  general  could  not  build  up  the  in-
dividuality of  Socrates.  There  are  necessarily  two
things  outside  of  this  abstract  science  :  accidents,  be-
cause they  are  below  the  general ;  individuals,  because
they  are  above  it.  The  knowledge  of  individuals  is
effected  by  an  intuition,  which,  immediately,  grasps  the
x  substantial  unity  that  could  not  be  deduced.

This  irreducibleness  of  the  individual  to  the  general
will  be  seen  through  the  philosophy  of  Aristotle.  By
virtue  of  this  principle,  abstract  speculation  will  be  power-
less to  enable  us  to  know  nature  ;  to  do  this,  experience
will  be  necessary.  And  in  the  moral  order  of  things,  laws
will  be  inadequate  to  bring  about  the  reign  of  justice  ;
the  magistrate  must  be  brought  in,  empowered  by  law
to  apply  general  rules  to  the  endless  diversity  of
individual  cases.

What  are  the  principles  of  being  ?  Being,  which  is
given  to  us,  is  subject  to  a  process  of  becoming.  Now,
becoming,  in  so  far  as  it  exists,  implies  principles  that
have  not  been  generated  :  a  halt  must  necessarily  be
made  in  the  retrogression  towards  causes,  when  we
have  to  find  out  what  are  the  integral  elements  of
'present  existence.


io6  STUDIES  IN  PHILOSOPHY

What  are  the  principles  required  in  order  to  explain
becoming  ?  They  are  four  in  number  :  ist,  a  sub-
stratum or  matter,  the  scene  of  change,  i.e.  of  the
substitution  of  one  mode  of  being  for  another  ;  2nd,
a  form  of  determination  ;  3rd,  a  motor  cause  ;  4th,  an
aim  or  end.  For  instance,  the  principles  of  a  house  are  :
the  timber,  as  matter  or  material,  the  idea  of  the  house,
as  form,  the  architect,  as  motor  cause,  and  the  dwelling
to  be  realised,  as  object  or  end.

These  four  principles,  in  turn,  may  be  reduced  to
two  :  matter  and  form.  In  fact,  the  motor  cause  is
nothing  more  than  form  in  an  already  realised  subject  :
thus,  the  motor  cause  of  the  house  is  the  idea  of  the
house,  as  conceived  by  the  architect.  And  the  final
cause  is  also  the  form,  for  the  final  cause  of  each  single
thing  really  consists  of  the  perfection  or  form  towards
which  it  is  tending.

And  so  matter  and  form  are  definitely  the  two  non-
generated  principles  that  are  necessary  and  sufficient  to
explain  becoming.  Matter  is  the  substratum.  It  is
neither  this  nor  that ;  it  is  capable  of  becoming  this  or
that.  Form  is  that  which  makes  of  matter  a  deter-
minate (roSe  rt)  and  real  thing.  It  is  the  perfection,
activity  or  soul  of  the  thing.  As  Aristotle  interprets
it,  the  word  form  has  quite  a  different  meaning  from
ours.  For  instance,  in  Aristotle's  phraseology,  a
sculptured  hand  possesses  the  figure  and  not  the  form
of  a  hand,  because  it  cannot  perform  such  functions  as
are  proper  to  the  hand.

There  is  a  scale  of  existences  from  lowest  matter,
which  has  no  form  at  all,  to  highest  form,  which  is
devoid  of  matter.  Absolutely  indeterminate  matter  is
non-existent.  Form  without  matter  is  outside  of
nature.  All  the  beings  of  nature  are  compounds  of


ARISTOTLE  107

matter  and  form.  The  opposition  of  matter  and  form
is  relative.  That  which  is  matter  from  one  point  of
view  is  form  from  another.  Timber  is  matter  in
relation  to  the  house,  and  form  in  relation  to  uncut
wood.  The  soul  is  form  with  regard  to  the  body,
matter  the  intelligence.

Aristotle  does  not  content  himself  with  this  reduction
of  the  four  principles  to  matter  and  form  ;  he  attempts
to  bring  together  these  two  principles  themselves.  To
effect  this,  he  brings  them  within  the  scope  of  potency
and  act.  For  him,  matter  is  not  mere  receptivity,  as  it
is  for  Plato  :  it  has  a  propensity  to  receive  form,  it
desires  form.  The  latter  is  not  something  hetero-
geneous as  regards  matter  :  it  is  its  natural  completion.
Matter  is  potency,  potency  that  is  capable  of  two
determinate  contraries.  The  logical  mechanism  of  the
substitution  of  forms  in  inert  matter  thus  resolves  itself
into  a  metaphysical  dynamism.  There  is  an  inner
action  in  the  transition  from  potency  to  act.  This  is
no  longer  a  juxtaposition  or  separation  of  inert,  pre-
existing elements  :  it  is  a  spontaneous  creation  of  being
and  perfection.  If  a  force  of  determinate  quantity,
says  Aristotle,  is  needed  to  produce  a  certain  effect,  the
half  of  this  force,  applied  separately,  does  not  produce
this  effect  at  all.  Were  it  not  so,  given  a  ship  which
several  men,  with  united  effort,  set  in  motion,  a  single
man  would  be  able  to  communicate  a  certain  amount
of  motion  to  the  ship,  but  this,  as  we  know,  is  contrary
to  experience.  Any  particular  part,  which  produces
motion  when  united  with  the  whole,  if  taken  separately
and  acting  alone,  becomes  altogether  powerless.  Truth
to  tell,  the  part  has  no  existence  as  a  part  in  what  is
really  a  whole  :  a  part  exists  only  potentially  in  the
whole  from  which  it  may  be  taken.


io8  STUDIES  IN  PHILOSOPHY

As  we  see,  the  Aristotelian  concept  of  potency  and
act  is  very  empirical.  Aristotle  takes  it  for  granted
that  the  effort  of  a  single  man  produces  no  result  on  a
ship,  because  he  does  not  know  that  the  work  which
does  not  become  manifest  in  the  form  of  movement,  at
all  events,  generates  heat.  None  the  less  is  the  push  of
a  single  man  really  ineffective,  so  far  as  actual  removal
from  one  place  to  another  is  concerned.  Even  at  the
present  time,  there  is  a  school  of  chemists  who  reason
like  Aristotle,  and  do  not  regard  hydrogen  and  oxygen
as  existing  in  water  in  act,  but,  relying  on  experience,
these  scientists  say  that  hydrogen  and  oxygen  exist  in
water  in  potency,  in  this  sense  that,  if  water  is  subjected
to  certain  conditions,  hydrogen  and  oxygen  may  be
obtained.

To  sum  up,  becoming,  according  to  Aristotle,  origin-
ates neither  in  absolute  being  nor  in  absolute  non-being ;
it  originates  in  being  in  potency,  midway  between  being
and  non-being.

From  this  being  in  potency,  or  matter,  proceeds  all
that  is  indetermination  and  imperfection  in  the  world.
Matter  is  the  principle  of  brute  necessity  or  dvdy/cr),
which  is  mechanical  and  blind  causality,  in  contrast  with
the  motor  cause  which  acts  with  a  view  to  an  end.  If
such  necessity  exists,  it  is  because  nature  is  compelled
to  employ  material  causes  in  its  creations.  Now,  in  a
sense,  matter  is  resistant  to  form.  That  is  why  the
creations  of  nature  are  invariably  imperfect ;  there  are
even  produced  many  things  that  are  devoid  of  purpose,
in  so  far  as  they  come  into  being  by  the  action  of
mechanical  forces  only.  Slaves,  for  instance,  whose
actions  are  regulated  often,  nevertheless,  act  on  their
own  account,  quite  apart  from  regulations.  Matter
is  the  principle  of  the  contingence  of  future  events.


ARISTOTLE  109

As  regards  the  future,  the  position  of  a  determinate
alternative  is  alone  necessary  :  the  realisation  of  either
term  of  this  alternative  is  indeterminate.  From  matter
proceeds  hazard.  In  any  given  being,  those  phenomena
are  fortuitous  which  do  not  spring  from  the  essence  of
that  being,  but  are  the  result  either  of  its  imperfection
or  of  the  influx  of  extraneous  causes.  Hazard  manifests
itself  by  the  rarity  of  the  event.  The  fortuitous  event
is  mechanically  necessary,  though  necessary  only  from
this  point  of  view  :  in  relation  to  finality  it  is  indeter-
minable and  uncognisable.  Matter  is  the  cause  of  the
imperfection  of  beings  as  well  as  the  cause  of  evil.
It  is  likewise  the  cause  of  the  multiplicity  of  species,
for,  in  all  their  infinite  variety,  the  beings  of  nature
are  only  more  or  less  complete  realisations  of  one  and
the  same  type  supplied  by  the  form.  Animals  are  only
incomplete  men,  arrested  at  a  certain  stage  of  their
natural  development.  From  the  presence  of  matter  in
natural  things,  it  follows  that  these  things  cannot  be  the
object  of  perfect  science,  i.e.  they  cannot  be  known  as
fully  determined.  In  itself,  the  material  element  of
things  does  not  admit  of  science.

Such  are  the  proximate  causes  of  being  when  sub-
mitted to  a  process  of  becoming.  We  could  not  have
a  full  explanation  of  this  being,  however,  were  we  to
confine  ourselves  to  a  consideration  of  its  elements.
Being  in  process  of  becoming  finds  its  ultimate  explana-
tion only  in  an  eternal  being.

The  existence  of  God  is  already  proved,  in  a  popular
way,  by  the  gradual  perfection  of  beings  and  the  finality
that  reigns  throughout  nature.  Scientifically  it  is  proved
by  the  analysis  of  the  conditions  of  motion.  This  is
what  is  called  the  argument  of  the  prime  mover.


no  STUDIES  IN  PHILOSOPHY

Motion  is  change,  the  relation  of  matter  to  form.
In  this  sense,  the  motion  of  the  world  is  eternal.  In-
deed, time  is  necessarily  eternal ;  now,  without  motion  or
change,  time  could  not  exist.  But  motion  implies  both
something  movable  and  a  moving  principle.  Motion,
then,  in  so  far  as  it  is  eternal,  presupposes  something
eternally  movable  and  an  immovable  first  mover.
The  "  eternally  movable "  moves  in  a  circle  ;  this  is
the  first  heaven,  the  heaven  of  the  fixed  stars.  The
immovable  first  mover  is  what  men  call  God.

This  proof  may  be  generalised  as  follows.  The
actual  is  always  previous  to  the  potential.  The  first,
in  the  absolute,  is  not  the  germ,  but  rather  the  com-
pleted being.  Besides,  actuation  could  not  take  place
were  not  pure  act  already  in  existence.  God  is  this
pure  act.

In  a  word,  demonstration  of  the  existence  of  God
is  based  on  the  following  dual  principle  :  ist,  act,  from
the  point  of  view  of  the  absolute  nature  of  things,  is
anterior  to  potency  ;  2nd,  the  conditioned  presupposes
the  unconditioned.

What  is  God?  His  nature  is  determined  by  his
rtle  as  first  mover.  God  is  pure  act,  i.e.  he  is  exempt
from  indetermination,  imperfection  and  change.  He  is
both  immovable  and  immutable.  He  is  thought  which
has  thought — and  nothing  else — as  its  object  (rj  vorja-is
z/oTjcreo)?  vori<n<^.  He  sees  not  the  world,  for  when
we  are  dealing  with  imperfect  things,  not  to  see
them  is  better  than  to  see  them  :  the  dignity  of  an
intelligence  is  gauged  by  the  perfection  of  its  object.
He  is  eternal,  all-excelling  life,  and  therefore  supremely
happy.

To  this  thought  which  thinks  itself  the  world  is
suspended,  as  a  thought  which  does  not  think  itself


ARISTOTLE  1 1 1

and  tends  to  do  so.  This  is  how  God  moves  the
world.  What  is  desired  and  thought  moves  without
oneself  moving.  It  is  the  intelligible  that  determines
intelligence,  not  intelligence  that  determines  the  intel-
ligible. Now,  God  is  the  supremely  desirable  and  the
supremely  intelligible.  God,  therefore,  moves  the
world  as  final  cause,  without  himself  moving.  God  is
not  the  ultimate  product  of  the  world's  development ;
logically,  he  is  anterior  to  the  world.  Nor  is  he
immanent  in  the  world,  as  order  is  immanent  in  an
army  :  he  is  out  of  the  world,  as  a  general  is  distinct
from  his  army.

The  immediate  effect  of  divine  action  is  the  rotatory
motion  of  the  whole  universe,  which  gives  rise  to
the  motions  or  changes  of  perishable  things.  The
world  is  one,  because  God  is  one.  Because  God  is
intelligent,  the  world  is  a  harmonious  whole,  a  well-
composed  poem.  Everything  therein  is  arranged  with
a  view  to  a  single  end.  The  relation  of  the  various
beings  to  the  whole  is  all  the  closer  from  the  fact  that
these  beings  are  higher  in  the  scale  of  nature  ;  just  as,  in
a  well-ordered  house,  the  actions  of  free  men  are  more
regulated  than  those  of  slaves.  God,  moreover,  to
whom  the  world  is  as  though  it  did  not  exist,  intervenes
in  no  single  detail  of  his  own  events.

This  theology  is  an  abstract  monotheism.  All  the
beings  and  facts  of  nature  are  wholly  referred  to  natural
causes.  It  is  only  nature,  regarded  in  its  entirety,  that
is  made  contingent  on  divinity.  There  is  neither  special
providence  nor  supernatural  reward  in  another  life.  The
only  thing  in  popular  religion  that  Aristotle  admits  to
be  true  is  the  general  belief  in  divinity  and  in  the
divine  nature  of  the  sky  and  the  stars.  To  his  mind,
the  rest  consists  of  nothing  but  mythical  additions,  the


ii2  STUDIES  IN  PHILOSOPHY

explanation  of  which  a  philosopher  finds  either  in  the
tendency  of  men  towards  anthropomorphic  conceptions,
or  in  the  calculations  of  politicians.

IX. — GENERAL  PHYSICS

The  object  of  first  philosophy  was  immovable  and
incorporeal  being  ;  the  object  of  physics,  or  second
philosophy,  is  movable  and  corporeal  being,  in  so  far
as  the  latter  has  within  itself  the  principle  of  its  motion.
<&vo-i,<s  is  spontaneous  motion,  in  opposition  to  that  which
results  from  compulsion.

Does  nature  exist  as  such  ?  Is  there,  in  the  universe,
an  internal  principle  of  motion,  a  tendency  to  an  end  ?

According  to  Aristotle,  it  is  the  fundamental  principle
of  physics  that  God  and  nature  do  nothing  in  vain  ;  that
nature  always  tends  towards  something  better  ;  that,  as
far  as  possible,  it  always  brings  to  pass  what  is  to  be
the  most  beautiful.  The  existence  of  finality  in  the
universe  is  proved  by  observation.  In  the  smallest  as
in  the  largest  things,  if  we  take  notice,  we  find  there
is  reason,  perfection,  divinity.  Nature  converts  even
its  own  imperfections  to  good.

But  if  order  and  harmony  exist  throughout  the
universe,  does  it  follow  that  the  universe  is  the  product
of  a  <£vo-£9  properly  so  called,  a  divine  creative  power  ?
Is  not  there  some  other  possible  explanation  of  this
order  and  harmony  ?  Why,  for  instance,  should  we
not  say  :  Jupiter  does  not  send  the  rain  in  order  to
make  the  corn  grow  ;  the  corn  grows  because  it  rains.
Necessity  makes  the  rain  fall,  and  when  this  pheno-
menon takes  place,  the  wheat  profits  thereby.  Necessity
likewise  makes  the  organs  of  animals,  and  of  these  they
make  use.  Whereas  everything  appears  to  take  place


ARISTOTLE  113

with  a  view  to  an  end,  it  is  really  only  things  that
survive,  because  they  happen  to  have  been  constituted
by  chance  so  as  to  conform  with  their  conditions  of
existence.  And  those  things  which  did  not  happen  to
be  constituted  in  that  way,  die  out,  and  have  always
died  out,  as,  according  to  Empedocles,  happened  in
the  case  of  the  oxen  with  human  faces.

A  vain  explanation,  replies  Aristotle,  for  the  organs
of  animals  and  the  majority  of  the  beings  with  which
nature  brings  us  in  contact  are  what  they  are,  to  wit,
harmonious  compounds,  either  in  every  case,  or  in  most,
at  all  events.  Now,  it  is  never  so  with  things  produced
by  chance ;  here,  fortunate  occurrences  are  never  any-
thing but  exceptions.

But,  we  shall  be  told,  there  exist  monsters.
Monsters  are  but  incomplete  pieces  of  work,  the
results  of  effort  which  is  incapable  of  realising  the
perfect  type.  Nature,  as  well  as  art,  may  make
mistakes,  by  reason  of  the  obstruction  which  the  very
matter,  on  which  it  is  working,  sets  up  against  it.

Finally,  will  the  objection  be  raised  that  we  do  not
see  the  mover  deliberating  and  choosing  ?  That  matters
little,  for  art  does  not  deliberate  either ;  it  acts
intelligently,  without  giving  account  of  what  it  does.

Nature,  then,  is  a  cause,  and  a  cause  that  acts
with  a  view  to  an  end.  It  must,  however,  be  recog-
nised that  it  is  not  the  only  cause  in  the  universe.
Its  action  is  only  possible  owing  to  the  co-operation
of  the  material  or  mechanical  cause,  which,  though
yielding  to  its  attraction,  never  allows  itself  to  submit
completely.  .  Along  with  finality,  then,  we  find  every-
where throughout  the  universe,  a  certain  proportion  of
brute  necessity  and  chance.

This  explains  why,  on  the  one  hand,  the  principle


n4  STUDIES  IN  PHILOSOPHY

of  the  best  may  legitimately  be  employed  in  explaining
the  things  of  nature  ;  though,  on  the  other  hand,  the
things  of  nature  can  never  come  within  the  domain  of
perfect  science,  wherein  everything  seems  wholly  deter-
mined from  the  point  of  view  of  the  intelligence.
The  science  of  nature  is  always  imperfect  in  some
direction  ;  it  admits  of  degrees,  as  do  the  parts  of
nature  itself.  In  accordance  with  these  principles,  the
cause  of  natural  things  may  be  found,  either  in  their
matter,  or  in  their  form  or  destination.  And,  as  far  as
possible,  the  teleological  explanation  should  complete
the  mechanical  one,  which,  however  finished  it  be,
leaves  things  indeterminate  in  the  sight  of  reason.
Such  is  the  method  Aristotle  is  to  pursue  in  his
investigations  into  natural  things.

Motion  or  change  is  the  realization  of  a  possible.
There  are  four  kinds  of  change  :  ist,  substantial  change,
which  consists  in  being  born  and  in  perishing.  This  is
motion  which  proceeds  from  relative  non -being  to
being,  and  from  the  latter  to  the  former.  There  is
no  such  thing  as  absolute  generation  and  destruction.
Individuals  alone  are  born  and  die  :  genera  remain.
2nd,  quantitative  change  :  increase  or  diminution  ;  3rd,
qualitative  change,  or  the  transition  from  one  sub-
stance to  another  ;  4th,  spatial  change,  or  displacement.

All  modes  of  change  are  conditioned  by  motion  in
space.  Aristotle  makes  a  profound  study  of  this
motion.  He  brings  against  the  arguments  of  the
Eleatics,  who  deny  the  possibility  of  motion,  the
doctrine  that  the  infinite  exists  only  in  potency,  not  in
act.  The  infinite  consists  only  in  the  possibility  of  an
indefinite  increase  of  numbers  and  in  the  indefinite
divisibility  of  dimensions  :  it  cannot  be  the  given.


ARISTOTLE  115

When,  therefore,  we  reason  about  the  real,  we  should
presuppose  only  finite  quantities.

As  regards  space,  Aristotle  investigates  the  nature
of  place.  The  place  of  a  body  is  not  something  in
itself,  it  is  the  interior  limit  of  the  surrounding  body.
It  is  like  a  motionless  vase  which  contains  the  body.
Consequently,  all  bodies  are  not  in  a  place,  but  only
those  enclosed  in  other  bodies.  The  sky,  the  universal
container,  is  not  itself  in  a  place.  Space,  or  rather  the
extent  of  the  world,  is  limited.

Time  is  the  number  of  motion  as  regards  before  and
after.  It  is  limitless  in  both  directions.

Continuousness  is  the  characteristic  of  time  and  space.
It  is  divisible  ad  infinitum,  though  in  dimensions  that
are  themselves  continuous  :  not,  as  Zeno  supposed,
in  indivisible  points.  All  dimension  is  divisible  into
dimensions.  Moreover,  continuousness  is  an  imperfect
notion,  and  relates  to  sensible  things,  for  it  is  divisible
ad  infinitum,  and  consequently  is  indeterminate  as
regards  the  number  of  its  elements.

From  these  principles  Aristotle  concludes  that,  out-
side the  world,  there  is  neither  space  nor  time,  that  the
vacuum  of  the  atomists  is  inconceivable,  that  all  motion
takes  place  in  the  plenum  by  a  process  of  substitution,
and  that  time,  which  is  a  number,  presupposes,  as  does
every  number,  a  soul  which  counts  its  units.  Motion
in  space,  the  condition  of  all  other  motions,  is  the  only
one  that  is  continuous.  And  circular  motion  is  the
only  kind  that  is  capable  of  being  both  one  and  con-
tinuous, without  beginning  or  end.

Aristotle  does  not  regard  it  as  possible  to  explain  all
changes  by  motion  in  space  alone.  He  looks  upon
qualities  as  realities,  and  admits  that  qualitative  change
is  incapable  of  being  reduced  to  motion  in  space.  This


n6  STUDIES  IN  PHILOSOPHY

theory  he  sets  up  in  opposition  to  the  mechanism  of
Democritus  and  the  mathematisme  of  Plato.  He  raises
two  objections  to  the  doctrines  of  these  philosophers  :
1st,  Democritus  and  Plato  reduce  dimensions  to  in-
divisible points  :  now,  all  dimension  is  divisible  ad
infinitum  ;  2nd,  however  we  set  about  it,  it  is  impossible
to  extract  quality  from  quantity,  pure  and  simple.

It  is  for  this  reason  that  Aristotle  lays  down  the
principle  of  a  qualitative  distinction  in  substances.

And,  just  as  there  is  a  qualitative  nature,  there  is
likewise  a  qualitative  transformation.  One  substance,
acted  upon  by  another,  becomes  modified  in  its  inner
nature.  This  phenomenon  is  possible  when  two  bodies
are  partly  alike  and  partly  unlike,  that  is  to  say,  when
two  substances  are  opposed  to  each  other  within  one
and  the  same  genus,  and  it  is  possible  only  in  this  case.
The  changing  of  one  of  these  substances  into  the  other
is  no  mere  mechanical  displacement,  in  which  the
elements  remain  identical  throughout  the  change  in  the
compound  substance  :  it  is  really  the  formation  of  a
new  substance,  fundamentally  different  from  the  former.
The  given  substance  bears  the  same  relation  to  the
substance  resulting  from  the  qualitative  change  that
potency  bears  to  act.

X. — MATHEMATICS

Mathematics  considers  relations  of  dimension,
quantity,  and  continuousness,  neglecting  the  other
physical  qualities.  Thus,  it  deals  with  things  that  are
immovable  without  existing  apart,  essences  intermediary
between  the  world  and  God.  By  a  process  of  abstrac-
tion the  mathematician  isolates  form  from  matter,  in
sensible  things.


ARISTOTLE  117

Mathematics  is  either  pure  or  applied.  Geometry
and  arithmetic  constitute  pure  mathematics.  Mathe-
matics may  be  applied  either  to  the  practical  arts,
geodesy,  for  instance,  or  to  natural  sciences,  such  as
optics,  mechanics,  harmonics,  or  astrology.  In  the
latter  case  the  question  of  fact  is  the  business  of  the
physicist,  the  why  or  wherefore  is  the  business  of  the
mathematician.

Mathematics  makes  use  of  the  notions  of  the  good
and  the  beautiful,  because  order,  symmetry,  and  deter-
mination, all  of  which  are  pre-eminently  mathematical,
are  some  of  the  most  important  elements  in  the  good
and  the  beautiful.

None  of  Aristotle's  mathematical  works  have  come
down  to  us.  His  principal  ones  were  treatises  on
mathematics,  unity,  optics,  and  astronomy.  In  the
works  we  possess  we  frequently  come  across  examples
taken  from  mathematics.

XI. — COSMOLOGY

From  the  eternity  of  form  and  matter  follows  the
perpetuity  of  motion,  as  well  as  that  of  the  existence  of
the  world.  Species  in  themselves  are  eternal,  and  there
have  always  been  men  :  individuals  alone  are  born  and
perish.  As  the  world  is  eternal,  the  science  of  the
world  is  not  a  cosmogony,  but  rather  a  cosmology.
Aristotle  has  not  the  formation  of  the  universe  to
explain,  but  only  its  system.

The  world  is  one,  finite  and  well  regulated.  It  is  a
work  of  art,  as  beautiful  and  good  as  the  resistance  of
the  material  element  permits.  It  has  a  perfect  form,
the  spherical,  the  only  one,  moreover,  that  enables  the
whole  to  move  without  causing  a  vacuum  outside  itself.


n8  STUDIES  IN  PHILOSOPHY

It  consists  of  two  unequal  halves:  ist,  the  supra-
lunar  or  celestial  world,  the  vault  to  which  the  fixed
stars  are  attached  ;  2nd,  the  infralunar  or  terrestrial
world.

The  celestial  world  is  animated  with  a  rotatory
motion  produced  directly  by  God.  The  imperishable
nature  of  the  stars  and  the  unchangeable  regularity  of
their  motions  prove  that  they  differ,  as  regards  matter,
from  terrestrial  things,  which  are  subject  to  continual
change.  The  matter  composing  the  stars  is  ether,  or
the  fifth  element  (quint-essence),  the  body  that  is  with-
out a  contrary,  and  is  therefore  incorruptible,  admitting
of  no  other  change  than  that  of  place,  and  no  other
motion  than  a  circular  one.  The  other  elements,  on
the  contrary,  being  formed  of  terrestrial  bodies,  are
corruptible  and  admit  of  motion  from  below,  upwards,
and  from  above,  downwards,  that  is  to  say,  from  centre
to  circumference  and  from  circumference  to  centre.
The  heaven  of  the  fixed  stars  is  the  abode  of  being,  of
perfect  life,  and  of  unchangeable  order.  The  stars  are
beings  which  are  not  subject  to  old  age,  beings  that  live
a  life  of  happiness  whilst  exercising  eternal  and  inde-
fatigable activity.  They  are  far  more  divine  than  man.
Our  ancestors  had  a  vague  intuition  of  the  truth  when
they  regarded  the  stars  as  being  gods.

Within  the  heaven  of  the  fixed  stars  is  the  region  of
the  planets,  including,  says  Aristotle,  the  sun  and  the
moon,  as  well  as  the  five  planets  known  to  the  ancients.
In  the  middle  of  the  world  is  the  earth,  spherical  in
form.  The  heaven  of  the  planets  is  made  of  a  sub-
stance that  is  less  and  less  pure  in  inverse  ratio  to  its
distance  from  the  heaven  of  the  fixed  stars.  In  contra-
distinction to  the  first  heaven,  which  is  a  single  sphere
bearing  all  the  stars,  the  heaven  of  the  planets  consists


ARISTOTLE  119

of  a  multiplicity  of  spheres,  for  the  movements  of  the
planets,  being  relatively  irregular,  presuppose  a  multi-
plicity of  movers  whose  actions  combine  with  one
another.

Beings  other  than  the  fixed  stars  are  made  of  the
four  elements.  Each  element  has  a  motion  of  its  own,
the  rectilineal  march  towards  the  place  natural  to  it.
Hence  we  obtain  weight  and  lightness.  Weight  is
the  tendency  of  each  body  to  follow  its  own  direction.
It  is  not  possible  to  say,  with  Democritus,  that  all
motion  is  simply  the  result  of  impacts  ad  infinitum.  A
halt  in  retrogression  must  be  made,  in  the  logical  order
of  things,  at  all  events.  The  motion  that  results  from
compulsion  presupposes  spontaneous  motion.

It  is  the  property  of  the  terrestrial  element  to  in-
cline towards  the  centre,  hence  the  position  of  the  earth,
immovable  in  the  centre  of  the  universe.  The  earth  is
spherical.  Its  elements  are  in  double  opposition — of
weight  and  quality — to  one  another.  On  the  one
hand,  they  are  heavy  or  light ;  on  the  other,  they  are
hot  or  cold,  dry  or  moist.  The  result  of  this  opposi-
tion is  that  the  elements  of  the  earth  are  constantly
changing  into  one  another.  Heat  and  light  are
generated  by  the  friction  to  which  the  air  is  subjected
owing  to  the  extreme  velocity  of  the  celestial  spheres.
By  reason  of  the  inclination  of  the  ecliptic,  light  and
heat  are  produced  in  different  degrees  in  different
regions  of  the  earth  and  at  different  times  of  the  year.
This  is  the  origin  of  the  circulus  of  generation  and
destruction,  that  image  of  eternity  in  perishable  nature.
Action  proceeds  from  periphery  to  centre  ;  the  heaven
of  the  fixed  stars  representing  highest  form,  the  earth
representing  lowest  matter.  The  various  mineral  and
organised  bodies  are  formed  by  the  mutual  action  of  the


120  STUDIES  IN  PHILOSOPHY

two  active  potencies,  heat  and  cold,  and  of  the  two
passive  potencies,  moisture  and  dryness.

Terrestrial  beings  form  a  hierarchy,  extending  from
the  being  which  is  nearest  to  brute  matter  up  to  the
male  human  being.  Each  lower  form  is  the  basis  of
the  higher  ones  ;  each  higher  form  the  relative  comple-
tion of  the  lower  ones.  The  principal  stages  in  the
hierarchy  are  represented  by  lifeless  bodies,  plants,
animals,  and  man.

XII. — ASTRONOMY

Aristotle  made  much  study  of  astronomy.  Simpli-
cius,  so  Porphyry  tells  us,  relates  that,  with  a  view  to
investigations  in  this  science,  he  instructed  Callisthenes
to  collect  the  astronomical  observations  made  by  the
Chaldaeans  in  Babylon,  especially  those  that  dated  back
nineteen  hundred  years  before  the  time  of  Alexander.
Aristotle  himself  tells  us  that  he  utilised  the  observa-
tions of  the  Egyptians  and  Babylonians,  dating  back  to
a  very  distant  age.  He  wrote  an  'Ao-rpovofurcov,  which
is  lost.

All  the  celestial  beings,  according  to  Aristotle,  are
spherical.  The  first  heaven,  that  of  the  fixed  stars,  is  a
sphere.  The  planets  are  moved  by  spheres  ;  the  earth
is  spherical.

All  simple  motion  is  rotation  round  an  axis.  The
heaven  of  the  fixed  stars  has  only  one  motion.  The
heaven  of  the  planets  (Saturn,  Jupiter,  Venus,  Mercury,
Mars,  the  Sun,  the  Moon)  has  several  for  each  planet.
The  earth  is  without  motion.

Aristotle  maintains  the  doctrine  of  the  sphericity  of
the  earth,  and  gives  the  correct  explanation  of  the
phases  of  the  moon.


ARISTOTLE  121

He  worked  with  the  astronomer  Callipus  in  com-
pleting and  rectifying  the  theory  of  the  spheres  formed
by  Eudoxus,  the  first  astronomer  of  his  day,  as  well  as
the  theory  of  Callipus  himself.  His  theory  may  be
summed  up  as  follows  : —

We  must  admit,  said  Aristotle,  along  with  Plato —
who  in  this  matter  followed  the  lead  of  Eudoxus  and
Callipus — the  number  of  spheres  and  their  mode  of
motion,  necessary  for  the  explanation  of  the  revolutions
of  the  planets,  as  they  appear  under  observation,  with
no  other  elements  than  uniform  rotatory  motions.
Presenting  the  problem  in  this  way,  Eudoxus  inferred
that  there  were  twenty-six  spheres,  Callipus  thirty-
three.  Aristotle  accepts  the  latter  figure.  But  since,
in  his  philosophy,  the  exterior  spheres  are  to  the
interior  what  form  is  to  matter,  he  is  obliged  to  add
antagonistic  spheres,  in  order  that  each  exterior  sphere
may  not  communicate  its  motion  to  all  the  spheres
interior  to  itself,  as  does  the  sphere  of  the  fixed  stars.
For  each  planet,  then,  there  are  as  many  antagonistic
spheres  as  are  needed  to  counteract  the  action  of  the
exterior  planetary  spheres.  The  supplementary  spheres
are  twenty-two  in  number,  and  these,  added  on  to  the
thirty-three  of  Callipus,  make  fifty-five  spheres.  But  if
we  consider  that  the  sun  and  the  moon,  being  far  away
from  the  rest  of  the  planets,  have  no  need  of  antagonistic
spheres,  the  total  number  of  the  spheres  will  be  reduced
to  forty -seven.  This,  says  Aristotle,  is  probable
enough.

To  each  of  these  spheres  motion  must  be  communi-
cated, as  it  was  to  the  first  heaven,  by  an  incorporeal
substance,  a  spirit,  or  a  god.  The  constellations,  the
object  and  end  of  the  motions  of  the  spheres,  are
moreover,  for  that  reason,  their  true  causes.  Conse-


122  STUDIES  IN  PHILOSOPHY

quently  the  constellations  are  animated  beings,  endowed
with  reason  and  superior  to  man.

XIII. — METEOROLOGY

Meteorology  had  been  much  studied  since  the  time
of  Thales.  Aristotle  profited  by  the  labours  of  his
predecessors,  though  he  also  made  original  investigations
in  this  science  along  the  lines  of  his  own  philosophy.

Meteorological  phenomena  are  the  result,  he  says,  of
the  action  of  the  four  elements  upon  one  another.  In
accordance  with  the  nature  of  these  elements,  the  results
of  their  mutual  action  are  less  determined  and  obey  less
strict  laws  than  the  phenomena  that  take  place  in  the  first
element :  the  ether.  It  is  for  this  reason  that  Aristotle,
when  considering  meteors,  seeks  after  explanations
that  are  mainly  of  a  mechanical  and  empirical  nature.
He  attributes  a  preponderating  influence  to  heat.  In
this  way  he  explains  comets,  the  Milky  Way,  clouds,
fogs,  winds,  the  relations  between  seas  and  continents
and  the  formation  of  the  sea.  His  explanations  often
testify  to  exact  observation  and  skilful  reasoning.
Winds,  for  instance,  are  explained  by  the  motion  of
vapours,  as  a  result  of  their  differences  of  tempera-
ture. Earthquakes  are  due  to  the  action  of  subterranean
gases.  The  rainbow  is  but  a  phenomenon  caused  by
reflection  :  in  the  sun's  light,  the  spray  composing  the
clouds  acts  as  a  mirror.

These  investigations  are  purely  theoretical :  Aristotle
does  not  dream  of  using  them  for  the  purpose  of  pre-
dicting phenomena.

XIV. — MINERALOGY

Minerals  are  homogeneous  bodies  which  remain  so,
without  becoming  organised  into  individuals  consisting


ARISTOTLE  123

of  different  parts.  These  bodies  are  formed  by  cold
and  heat,  combining  or  disintegrating — in  so  far  as
they  are  active  properties — the  moist  and  the  dry,  which
play  the  rtk  of  passive  properties.

XV. — GENERAL  BIOLOGY

Biology  forms  a  considerable  portion  of  Aristotle's
scientific  work.  He  probably  utilised  many  of  the
works  of  his  predecessors,  mainly  those  of  Democritus,
but  he  went  so  far  beyond  the  rest  that  he  stands  out
as  the  true  founder  of  biology  in  Greece.  He  works
mainly  by  observation,  the  determination  of  phenomena
being  made  to  precede  the  investigation  of  causes.  To
simple  observation  he  would  appear  to  have  added
dissection.  He  proceeds  from  anatomy  to  physiology
and,  speaking  generally,  regards  biology  as  the  ground-
work of  physics,  basing  it  on  a  knowledge  of  the
four  elements.  He  deals  not  only  with  every  conceiv-
able problem  of  his  own  times,  but  also  with  almost  all
the  problems  that  engage  the  attention  of  modern
scientists.  The  solutions  he  offers  are,  for  the  most
part,  carefully  set  forth  ;  and,  considering  the  state  of
knowledge  at  the  time,  his  reasonings  are  correct
and  ingenious.  It  must  be  confessed,  however,  that  his
explanations  are  frequently  arbitrary  or  rather  meta-
physical ;  at  times,  even,  he  appears  to  have  given
demonstrative  value  to  mere  legends.

Life  is  motion.  Now,  all  motion  presupposes  a
form  that  moves  and  matter  that  is  moved.  The  form
is  the  soul ;  matter  the  body.  The  soul  is  neither  body
nor  without  body.  It  moves  without  moving  ;  it  is
immovable,  not  self-moving,  as  Plato  imagined.  As
being  the  form  of  the  body,  it  is  its  goal ;  the  body


i24  STUDIES  IN  PHILOSOPHY

is  nothing  but  the  instrument  of  the  soul,  and  its
structure  is  guided  by  this  destination.  Aristotle
correctly  defines  the  soul  as  the  first  entelechy  of  an
organic  physical  body.  This  means  that  the  soul  is
the  permanent  force  which  moves  the  body  and  deter-
mines its  constitution.

It  is  natural  for  the  finality  of  nature  to  appear  in
living  beings  more  clearly  than  anywhere  else,  because
everything,  in  them,  at  the  outset,  is  calculated  with
a  view  to  the  soul.  But  just  as  form  only  gradually
overcomes  the  resistance  of  matter,  so  there  are  degrees
in  the  psychic  life,  and  these  are  essentially  three  in
number  :  nutritiveness,  sensibility,  and  intelligence.
Nutritiveness  is  the  fundamental  quality  of  living
beings  ;  from  it  proceed  vital  development  and  death.
It  exists  both  in  plants  and  in  animals.  The  latter
possess  sensibility  in  addition.  Man,  a  superior  animal,
possesses  all  three  :  nutritiveness,  sensibility,  and
intelligence.

Aristotelian  biology  deals  principally  with  animals.
The  body  of  an  animal  consists  of  homoeomerous
substances  :  a  mixture  of  elementary  substances.  The
immediate  matter  of  the  soul  is  breath  (Trvevpa),  the
principle  of  vital  heat,  a  body  akin  to  ether,  along  with
which  the  soul  is  transmitted,  in  the  semen,  from  father
to  child.  The  principal  seat  of  heat  is  the  central
organ,  that  is  to  say,  the  heart,  in  animals  endowed  with
blood.  In  the  heart  the  blood  is  cooked,  after  being
formed  of  the  nutritive  substances  introduced  by  the
veins,  and  blood,  as  final,  definite  nourishment,  feeds
and  sustains  the  body.  It  becomes  flesh  and  bone,  nail
and  horn,  etc.  The  nutritive  power  of  foods  is  not
the  result  of  their  containing  particles  of  flesh,  bone,
and  marrow,  which  would  go  to  unite  directly  with  like


ARISTOTLE  125

substances  existing  in  the  body,  it  is  rather  owing  to  the
food  being  cooked  several  times  that  it  reaches  a  state
enabling  it  to  be  assimilated  by  the  organism.  Though
very  precise  on  the  matter  of  assimilation,  Aristotle
would  appear  never  to  have  thought  of  disassimilation.

XVI. — BOTANY

Aristotle's  works  on  botany  are  lost,  but  he  certainly
gave  an  impetus  to  the  investigations  made  on  plants
in  his  school ;  he  seems  to  have  largely  contributed  to
the  creation  of  scientific  botany.

XVII. — ANIMAL  ANATOMY  AND  PHYSIOLOGY

A  distinction  must  be  made  between  general
anatomy  and  physiology  and  comparative  anatomy  and
physiology.

The  parts  of  the  animal  organism  are  of  two  kinds  :
the  homogeneous,  such  as  the  tissues  ;  and  the  hetero-
geneous, such  as  the  organs.  Each  organ  has  a
function,  the  tongue,  hand,  etc.  The  tissues  have
properties.  Aristotle  studies  first  the  homogeneous,
then  the  heterogeneous  parts.

The  homogeneous  parts  are :  ist,  veins,  bones,
cartilages,  nails,  hair,  horn,  etc.  ;  2nd,  fat,  grease,
blood,  marrow,  flesh,  milk,  semen,  membranes.  In
many  cases,  Aristotle's  explanations  regarding  these
parts  are  finalistic,  and  derive  the  nature  of  the  part
from  its  function.  For  instance,  he  says  the  incisors
appear  before  the  molars,  because  food  must  first  be
cut  up  or  torn  to  be  in  a  fit  state  to  be  ground.

The  anatomical  study  of  the  heterogeneous  parts  is
not  distinct  from  their  physiological  study.


126  STUDIES  IN  PHILOSOPHY

The  first  of  all  the  organs  is  the  heart.  Aristotle
has  no  notion  of  the  circulation  of  the  blood,  as  we
understand  the  word,  nor  does  he  say  anything  of  the
two  kinds  of  blood  ;  he  acknowledges,  however,  that  it
is  carried  throughout  the  body  by  the  veins,  as  by
canals.  The  heart  is  the  centre  of  the  living  being,  the
seat  of  the  forhiation  of  the  blood,  and  the  source  of  its
heat.  All  animals  possess  a  heart  and  blood,  or  substi-
tutes for  these  primary  conditions  of  life.  Those
animals  that  can  be  divided  or  cut  up  without  the  parts
immediately  ceasing  to  live,  are  not  simple  animals,  but
rather  aggregates  of  animals.  The  degree  of  unity  is
the  standard  of  the  perfection  of  the  being.  No
mutilated  animal  recovers  from  its  injuries  as  does  the
plant,  in  which  the  life  principle  is  dispersed  throughout
the  entire  being.

The  other  heterogeneous  parts  are  :  the  diaphragm,
the  sense  organs,  the  organs  of  motion,  the  encephalon,
the  lungs,  the  abdominal  viscera,  and  the  sex  organs.

Aristotle  enlarges  on  the  senses.  Sensation  consists
in  being  moved,  in  experiencing  some  change.  There  are
two  kinds  of  senses  :  the  mediate,  which  act  through  the
medium  of  the  atmosphere,  as  sight,  hearing,  and  smell ;
and  the  immediate,  which  act  by  contact,  as  touch  and
taste  ;  the  latter  being  more  important  for  the  preserva-
tion of  the  individual.  The  mediate  senses  estimate
either  differences  in  the  nature  of  objects,  or  else
distances  ;  consequently  we  must  make  a  distinction
between  their  acuteness  and  their  sphere  of  action.

The  eye  is  not  a  mere  mirror  :  the  presence  of  an
image  would  not  suffice  to  produce  vision  :  there  is
required  a  psychic  property,  which  a  mere  mirror  does
not  possess.  The  inmost  recesses  of  the  eye  not  only
reflect  the  image,  they  have  the  property  of  seeing  as  well.


ARISTOTLE  127

Indirectly,  hearing  is  the  most  intellectual  of  all  the
senses,  for  it  enables  ideas  to  be  communicated  by  means
of  language.  Speech  is  nothing  but  a  sequence  of  sounds
that  have  entered  the  ear  ;  it  is  one  and  the  same  motion
diffused  from  ear  to  throat.

Touch  differs  from  the  rest  of  the  senses  in  that  the
latter  supply  us  with  oppositions  or  contrasts  of  a  single
kind  only,  whereas  touch  enables  us  to  distinguish  hot
and  cold,  dry  and  moist,  hard  and  soft.

Aristotle  is  acquainted  with  no  other  organs  of
motion  than  the  tendons,  and  these  he  calls  nerves.
He  tries  to  discover  the  principle  thereof,  not  in  the
limbs  themselves,  but  in  a  central  organ  of  motion.
The  principle  of  motion  is  the  heart,  or,  in  the  case  of
animals  that  have  none,  the  corresponding  organ.
Motions  are  of  two  kinds,  voluntary  and  involuntary.
The  beating  of  the  heart,  for  instance,  belongs  to  the
second  type  of  motion.

As  the  heart  is  a  calorific  organ,  so  the  encephalon
and  the  lungs  are  refrigerant  organs.

Of  the  abdominal  organs,  Aristotle  carefully  studies
the  stomach,  giving  remarkably  correct  descriptions  as
regards  ruminants,  birds  and  the  organs  of  sex  upon  which
his  observations  are  frequently  very  apt  and  successful.
His  investigations  lead  him  to  discuss  the  part  played
by  both  sexes  in  the  production  of  the  new  being.

He  also  applies  himself  to  the  question  of  heredity.
He  rejects  pangenesis  (which  states  that  the  parents
contribute  germs  resembling  themselves),  alleging  that
there  are  products  which  do  not  resemble  their  parents  :
for  instance,  caterpillars  born  of  butterflies.  According
to  Aristotle,  the  material  that  goes  to  the  formation  of
the  new  being  is  made  up  of  substances  different  from
that  of  the  parents  themselves.  There  is  a  male  seminal


128  STUDIES  IN  PHILOSOPHY

fluid,  the  sperm,  and  a  female  one,  the  menstrua.  From
the  blending  of  these  two  elements,  as  from  the  union
of  form  with  matter,  results  the  germ.  Thus,  from  the
man  there  is  born  the  soul,  and  from  the  woman  the
body,  of  the  child  resulting  from  their  union.

The  difference  in  the  sexes  may  be  reduced  to  a
difference  in  degree.  In  the  woman  food  has  not
received  so  complete  an  elaboration  as  in  man,  the
creative  power  has  not  finished  its  work.

In  like  manner  Aristotle  explains  instances  of  tera-
tology. Monstrosities  are  only  greater  or  less  dis-
similarities, the  result  of  excess  or  defect.  They  deviate
from  the  ordinary  course  of  events,  though  having  their
basis  in  natural  forces.

In  the  same  spirit  Aristotle  dealt  with  embryogeny.
Interpreting  the  results  of  his  delicate  observations  in
accordance  with  the  principles  of  his  philosophy,  he  admits
that  the  development  of  the  germ  is  an  epitome  of  the
general  progress  of  life  in  nature.  First,  the  life  of  the
germ  is  comparable  to  vegetable  life  ;  afterwards,  the
embryo  is  in  a  state  that  may  be  compared  to  sleep  :
sleep,  however,  from  which  there  is  no  awakening.  The
foetus  becomes  animal  when  it  acquires  feeling  ;  then
only  is  it  capable  of  genuine  sleep.  The  order  in  which
the  organs  appear  is  determined  by  their  utility  and  by
the  share  they  have  in  the  formation  of  the  other  organs.
Thus,  the  heart  is  the  first  organ  to  be  developed.

In  Aristotle  we  find  numerous  aphorisms  and  biolo-
gical considerations  resulting  from  what  we  call  com-
parative anatomy  and  physiology.  He  makes  a  careful
study  of  organic  resemblances  and  differences.  Organs
may  resemble  one  another  in  form.  Organs  apparently
different  may  be  only  more  or  less  complete  develop-
ments of  one  and  the  same  type,  so  that,  at  bottom,


ARISTOTLE  129

excess  or  deficiency  really  constitutes  the  whole  differ-
ence. There  may  be  resemblance  by  analogy ;  for
instance,  the  feather  is  to  the  bird  what  the  scale  is  to
the  fish.  There  is  the  same  relation  between  the  bones
of  land  animals  and  those  of  fishes,  between  nails  and
horns,  etc.  Different  species  may  have  the  same  organs
diversely  situated.  Different  organs  may  perform  the
same  function.

Aristotle  determines  numerous  organic  correlations.
For  instance,  all  animals  have  blood,  or  its  equivalent.
Animals  with  no  feet  at  all,  and  those  with  two  and  four
feet,  possess  blood  ;  in  those  with  more  than  four  feet
lymph  takes  the  place  of  blood.  In  ruminants  there  is
a  correlation  between  the  possession  of  horns  and  the
lack  of  canine  teeth.  The  lateral  movements  of  the
lower  jaw  are  found  only  in  such  animals  as  grind  their
food.  All  truly  viviparous  animals  breathe  in  air,  etc.

The  law  regarding  division  of  work  is  clearly  formu-
lated. Nature,  says  Aristotle,  if  there  is  nothing  to
hinder,  always  employs  two  special  and  distinct  organs
for  two  different  functions.  When  this  cannot  be  done,
the  same  instrument  is  used  for  several  purposes  ;  though
it  is  preferable  that  the  same  organ  should  not  be  used
for  several  functions.

The  influences  of  environment  are  shown  to  con-
tribute to  the  determination  of  animal  forms.  In  hot
climates,  says  Aristotle,  it  is  principally  animals  which
are  cold  by  nature,  such  as  serpents,  lizards  and
those  covered  with  scales,  that  grow  to  considerable
dimensions.

Aristotle  also  studied  physiognomy,  or  the  relation
which  the  physical  bears  to  the  moral.  In  all  probability
the  Physiognomonica  is  not  an  authentic  work,  though
doubtless  it  owes  its  origin  to  his  teaching.  In  the

K


130  STUDIES  IN  PHILOSOPHY

Historia  animalium  we  find  him  trying  to  find  out  to
what  moral  differences  the  physical  differences  in  the
human  face  correspond.

According  to  our  philosopher,  the  species,  properly
so  called,  are  stable  and  separated  from  one  another.
Along  with  the  absolute,  however,  Aristotle  recognises
the  existence  of  the  contingent.  Consequently,  there
is  a  certain  freedom  of  action  in  nature,  and  organic
forms  and  faculties  admit  of  restricted  variability.  An
apparently  insignificant  difference,  found  in  small  parts,
may  suffice  to  produce  considerable  differences  in  the
ensemble  of  the  animal's  body.  For  instance,  only  a
small  portion  of  an  animal's  body  is  removed  by  castra-
tion, and  yet  this  removal  changes  its  nature,  bringing
it  into  closer  resemblance  with  the  other  sex.  When
the  animal  is  in  the  embryonic  state,  a  very  slight  differ-
ence will  cause  it  to  be  either  a  male  or  a  female.  The
difference  between  the  terrestrial  and  the  aquatic  animal
results  from  the  different  arrangement  of  small  parts.
In  a  word,  says  Aristotle,  in  nature  there  is  unity  of
composition  and  progressive  continuity.  Man  himself,
who,  as  far  as  we  know,  is  at  the  top  of  the  ladder,  is
only  separated  from  the  animals,  physically  speaking,
by  more  or  less  pronounced  differences.  The  transition
from  one  kingdom  to  another  is  imperceptible.  Thus,
in  the  sea  we  find  beings  at  a  stage  intermediate  between
animals  and  plants,  e.g.  sponges.  The  principal  types
and  stages  of  growth,  as  it  were,  are  none  the  less
determined  and  mutually  irreducible.

XVIII.— ZOOLOGY

Aristotle  was  the  first  classifying  zoologist. Truth
to  tell,  he  does  not  appear  to  have  had  any  intention  to


ARISTOTLE  131

set  up  a  zoological  classification,  and  his  attempts  in
this  direction  are  offered  only  as  examples.  Nor  did  he
make  any  sharply-drawn  distinction  of  animals,  distri-
buting them  in  a  hierarchy  of  genera  and  species  ;  he
merely  assigned  limits  to  the  principal  groups.  He
clearly  saw,  however,  that  the  criterion  of  species  is
obtained  through  reproduction — interfecundity.  He
regards  as  of  the  same  species  only  such  animals  as
spring  from  common  parents.  His  classification  aims
at  being  natural,  that  is  to  say,  it  tends  to  bring  together
those  animals  that  have  a  fundamental  resemblance  to
one  another.  Here,  as  elsewhere,  his  object  is  to
distinguish  essence  from  accident.

The  first  division  is  that  between  animals  that  have
blood  (our  vertebrates)  and  those  that  have  no  blood
(our  invertebrates).  The  divisions  between  sanguineous
animals  are  mainly  based  on  embryogeny  and  a  considera-
tion of  the  element  in  which  they  live.  Sanguineous
animals  are  divided  into  true  vivipara,  ovovivipara  and
ovipara.  Animals  devoid  of  blood  are  divided  into
mollusks  (corresponding  to  our  cephalopoda),  Crustacea,
testacea  (corresponding  to  our  mollusks,  with  the  excep-
tion of  the  cephalopoda)  and  insects.

In  his  description  of  the  species — he  mentions  about
four  hundred  of  them — Aristotle  shows  that  he  pos-
sesses extensive  knowledge.  Amongst  other  things,  he
deals  with  the  mental  and  moral  faculties  of  animals.
Bees  he  calls  the  wise — the  well-behaved — ones.

As  regards  the  first  origin  of  man  and  of  the  other
sanguineous  animals,  he  is  inclined  to  think  that  they
proceed  from  a  sort  of  scolex  (head  of  the  tapeworm),  or
else  from  a  perfect  egg,  in  which  only  a  portion  becomes
the  germ,  developing  at  the  expense  of  the  rest.  He
considers  the  spontaneous  production  of  a  perfect  egg


1 32  STUDIES  IN  PHILOSOPHY

as  not  at  all  likely,  since  we  never  meet  with  an  instance
of  it.  Testacea  and  worms,  on  the  contrary,  have
spontaneous  birth.

XIX. — PSYCHOLOGY

That  which  differentiates  man  from  the  rest  of  the
animal  kingdom  is  the  1/01)9,  which,  in  him,  is  united
to  the  animal  soul.  He  possesses  faculties  common
to  himself  and  the  animals,  and  faculties  peculiar  to
himself.  In  common  with  the  animals,  man  has  sensa-
tion and  the  faculties  derived  therefrom.

Sensation  is  the  change  effected  in  the  mind  by  a
sensible  object,  as  by  a  contrary,  through  the  agency
of  the  body,  and  consisting  in  the  form  of  the  object
that  is  sensed  being  communicated  to  the  subject  that
senses.  Thus,  sensation  is  the  common  act  of  a
sensible  objec^and  a  sensing  subject.

Each  sense  gives  us  exclusive  information  regarding
the  properties  of  those  things  with  which  it  specially
deals  ;  what  it  tells  us  of  these  properties  is  always
true.  General  properties  are  known  by  the  sensorium
commune,  in  which  all  sensible  impressions  meet.  Here,
too,  sensations  are  compared  and  related  to  objects  as
causes,  and  to  ourselves  as  conscious  subjects.  The
organ  of  the  sensorium  commune  is  the  heart.  Its  data
may  be  either  true  or  false.

Sensation  is  the  basis  of  animal  psychic  life.  Both
from  the  theoretical  and  the  practical  standpoint  it  is
capable  of  a  development  which  brings  several  other
faculties  into  being.

When  motion  in  the  sense-organ  continues  beyond
the  duration  of  the  sensation,  extends  to  the  central
organ,  and  there  causes  a  new  appearance  of  the  sensible


ARISTOTLE  133

image,  we  have  imagination.  The  products  of  this
faculty  may  be  either  true  or  false.  When  an  image
is  recognised  as  the  reproduction  of  a  past  perception,
we  have  memory.  Aristotle  adds  to  the  study  of  these
faculties  investigations  as  to  the  nature  of  sleep,  death
and  dreams,  from  the  psychological  point  of  view.

Looked  upon  from  the  practical  standpoint  of  good
and  evil,  sensation  admits  of  development  along  the
lines  just  mentioned.  From  the  sole  fact  that  an
animal  is  endowed  with  sensation,  it  is  capable  of
pleasure  and  pain.  When  its  activity  is  unchecked,
we  have  pleasure  ;  in  the  contrary  event,  pain.  Plea-
sure and  pain,  in  beings  fully  susceptible  to  them,  are
really  judgments  upon  the  true  value  of  things.  Con-
sequently, beings  capable  of  pleasure  and  pain  have
desire,  which  is  nothing  but  the  seeking  after  what  is
agreeable.  They  also  have  passions.

All  these  functions  already  appertain  to  animals,
though  they  are  realised  to  perfection  only  in  man.
Man  possesses  intelligence  in  addition  to  the  rest.
Hitherto  we  have  seen  that  there  has  been  continual
development  and  progress.  Between  the  animal  soul
and  the  i/oi)?,  however,  there  is  a  break  of  continuity.
The  vovs  is  the  knowledge  of  first  principles.  It  has
no  birth,  but  is  eternal.  Exempt  from  passivity,  it
exists  in  act.  Being  without  organ,  it  is  not  the  result
of  the  development  of  sensation,  but  comes  from
without,  and  is  separable.

Human  intelligence,  however,  is  not  merely  this  com-
plete, immovable  z/ov?.  It  learns,  becomes  acquainted
with  perishable  things,  things  capable  of  being  as  they
are  or  otherwise.  The  z/ofc,  therefore,  in  man  blends
with  the  soul  :  there  is  a  lower  intellect,  intermediary
between  the  absolute  vovs  and  the  animal  soul.  This


i34  STUDIES  IN  PHILOSOPHY


intellect  may  be  called  vovs  Tra^ri/co?,  passive  intellect,
in  opposition  to  1/01)9  airadr)?,  or  active  intellect.  This
lower  i/oi)?  is  the  subject,  but  not  the  object  ;  perishable
things  are  its  object.  Depending  on  the  body,  it
perishes  with  the  body.  There  are  rudiments  of  this
passive  intellect  in  certain  animals,  e.g.  in  bees,  but
only  in  man  is  it  fully  developed.

The  I/oik  7ra077Tt/co5  has  two  kinds  of  functions,
theoretical  and  practical.

From  the  theoretical  point  of  view,  the  1/01)5  7ra^7/Tt/co5,
at  first,  is  1/01)5  only  in  potency.  It  is  a  tabula  rasa  on
which  nothing  has  yet  been  written.  The  z/ov5  ira&prMcof
thinks  only  by  the  aid  of  images,  and  under  the
influence  of  the  higher  1/01)5.  It  thus  deduces  from
sensation  the  general  contained  therein,  and  which
sensation  reaches  only  by  accident  :  it  gradually  becomes
determined  by  reason  of  these  general  essences.  Per-
fect science,  however,  belongs  only  to  the  z/o£>5  OewprjriKos,
the  higher  1/01)5,  which,  starting  from  causes,  proceeds
a  priori.

The  i/ou5,  as  regards  its  practical  use,  has  no  prin-
ciples of  its  own  :  practice  consisting  only  of  the
application  of  theoretical  ideas.  This  realisation  comes
about  in  two  ways  :  ist,  by  production  (Troielv)  ;  2nd,
by  action  (Trpdrreiv).

With  regard  to  action,  Aristotle  offers  a  theory  of
will,  the  spring  of  action.  Will  is  the  combination  of
intellect  and  desire.  As  desire,  it  posits  ends  to  be
realised  ;  as  intellect,  it  determines  the  means  that
correspond  to  these  ends.  \The  objects  of  will  are
determined  with  reference  to  two  principal  ends  :  the
good  and  the  possible.

Free-will  is  connected  with  the  existence  of  will.
In  beings  devoid  of  reason,  desire  can  only  spring  from


ARISTOTLE  135

sensation.  In  man,  it  may  be  engendered  either  by
sensation  or  by  reason.  Engendered  by  sensation,  it  is
appetite  ;  engendered  by  reason,  it  is  will.  Between
appetite  and  will  we  have  free-will  :  the  faculty  of  self-
determination.  Virtue  and  vice  depend  on  ourselves  ;
each  man  is  the  principle  of  his  own  actions.  The  reality
of  free-will  is  proved  by  moral  imputability,  which
legislation,  praise  and  blame,  exhortation  and  prohibi-
tion imply.  .The  essence  of  free-will  is  spontaneity^  in
more  precise  language,  that  spontaneity  which  mani-
fests preference  ;  for  children  and  animals  show  con-
siderable spontaneity,  but  man  alone  is  truly  free,  for
he  alone  is  capable  of  choice.

\J

XX. — MORALS

In  the  case  of  beings  without  intelligence,  ends
are  attained  immediately  and  of  necessity.  Man  has
a  loftier  end,  which  is  not  only  realised  by  the  sole
operation  of  natural  forces,  but  also  by  using  his  free-
dom. The  problem  is  to  find  out  how  to  organise
one's  life  in  order  to  realise  the  human  idea,  to  act
according  to  one's  own  essence,  and  not  from  necessity
or  chance.  Hence  the  idea  of  practical  philosophy  :
the  philosophy  of  human  affairs.  The  aim  of  this
philosophy  is  to  find  out  what  are  the  end  and  the
means  of  that  activity  which  is  proper  to  mankind.

Practical  philosophy  comprises  three  parts,  corre-
sponding to  the  three  spheres  of  action  that  open  out
to  man  :  ist,  ethics  >  or  the  rules  of  individual  life  ;  2nd,
economics,  or  the  rules  of  family  life  ;  and  3rd,  politics,
or  the  rules  of  social  life.  In  chronological  order,
ethics  precedes  economics  which  itself  precedes  politics.
In  the  order  of  nature  and  perfection,  the  relation  is


136  STUDIES  IN  PHILOSOPHY

inverted.  Politics,  indeed,  is  the  completion  of  econo-
mics, which  itself  determines  human  activity  with
greater  precision  than  ethics,  pure  and  simple.

We  will  begin  with  ethics  or  morals.  Morals  may
be  divided  into  general  and  particular  morals.

In  Aristotle  morals  does  not  bear  the  same  relation
to  physics  as  in  Plato.  The  good  is  not  transcendent ;
nature  is  not  hostile  or  simply  passive  when  brought
in  contact  with  the  ideal.  As  form  exists  in  potency
in  matter,  so  nature  is  inclined  to  virtue,  which  is  only
the  normal  development  of  natural  tendencies.  We
may  not  be  born  virtuous,  but  of  ourselves  we  tend
to  become  so  :  culture  and  art  are  the  completion  of
nature.  Moreover,  we  must  distinguish  between  good
in  itself  and  good  for  mankind.  The  good  which  is
taken  into  consideration  by  morals  is  not  good  in  itself,
but  only  so  far  as  it  deals  with  human  nature.

What  is  moral  good  ?  (  Since  all  action  has  an  object,
there  must  be  a  supreme  object,  and  this  can  only  be
that  good  which  is  superior  to  all  other  good,  the  best.
What  is  this  best  ?  The  general  impression  is  that  it
is  happiness,  but  there  is  no  agreement  as  to  the  defini-
tion of  happiness.  We  must  try  to  find  out  in  what
it  really  consists.

For  every  living  being,  good  consists  in  the  perfec-
tion or  full  realisation  of  the  activity  peculiar  to  itself.
Such  is  the  distinctive  mark  of  true  happiness.  This
happiness,  then,  cannot  be  said  to  be  either  in  the
enjoyment  of  the  senses,  which  is  common  to  man  and
animal,  nor  in  pleasure,  which  is  not  an  end  in  itself
but  is  pursued  only  with  a  view  to  happiness,  nor  in
honour,  which  does  not  lie  within  our  power  and  comes
from  without.  Perhaps  even  virtue  alone  does  not


ARISTOTLE  137

afford  happiness,  for  we  could  not  designate  as  happy
a  virtuous  man,  hindered  in  his  activity  or  suffering
acutely.  Happiness  consists  of  the  constant  exercise
of  our  strictly  human,  i.e.  intellectual,  faculties.  Happi-
ness is  action  guided  by  reason,  in  circumstances
favourable  to  that  action.

If  such  be  the  case,  the  element  that  constitutes
happiness  is  doubtless  virtue  or  the  self-realisation  of
the  higher  part  of  the  soul :  virtue  plays  the  part  of
form  and  principle  as  regards  happiness.  But  happiness
has  also,  as  material  to  work  upon  or  condition  of
existence,  the  possession  of  external  forms  of  good  :
health,  beauty,  birth,  fortune,  children  and  friends  ;
although  it  is  true  that  even  the  greatest  of  misfortunes
cannot  make  a  virtuous  man  really  miserable.

Pleasure,  regarded  as  an  end,  is  not  an  integral
element  of  happiness ;  since,  however,  it  naturally
accompanies  action,  being  its  complement,  it  is  closely
allied  to  virtue.  Pleasure  is  inherent  to  action  as
vigour  is  inherent  to  youth.  It  is  the  consciousness
of  activity.  The  value  of  pleasure  may  thus  be  gauged
by  that  of  the  activity  it  accompanies.  Virtue  carries
with  it  a  special  kind  of  satisfaction,  necessarily  pos-
sessed by  the  virtuous  man.  Pleasures  are  admissible
in  so  far  as  they  spring  from  virtue  or  can  be  reconciled
therewith.  Coarse  or  violent  pleasures,  which  disturb
the  soul,  ought  to  be  spurned.  In  a  word,  pleasure
has  its  place  in  happiness  not  as  an  end,  but  ratKer
as  a  result.

Finally,  happiness  implies  leisure,  one  condition  of
activity.  This  latter,  indeed,  needs  relaxation  ;  it  is
not,  however,  leisure  that  is  the  end  of  work,  but  work
that  is  the  end  of  leisure.  Leisure  should  be  devoted
to  art,  science,  and  above  all,  philosophy.


138  STUDIES  IN  PHILOSOPHY

And  what  is  virtue,  the  principle  of  happiness?
What  are  the  principal  virtues?  Virtue  is  a  habit
whose  characteristic  is  the  complete  realisation  ot  the
powers  of  man.  Now,  human  nature  is  two-fold,  to
wifTTntellectual  and  rnoraL  The  intellectual  element
has  thenecessary  for its""object,  and  is  immovable  ;  the
moral  element,  in  so  far  as  it  is  connected  with  the  con-
tingent, desires  and  acts.  Thus  there  are  two  kinds  of
virtues  :  the  dianoetic  or  intellectual,  and  the  ethical  or
moral.

The  dianoetic  virtues  are  the  higher  of  the  two
kinds  ;  they  can  only  be  acquired  by  instruction,  not
by  an  effort  of  the  will.  The  virtue  that  affords  the
greatest  felicity  is  science  or  contemplation.  This  is
the  noblest  of  all  human  occupations,  for  the  vovs,  its
organ  or  instrument,  is  the  most  divine  of  all  things.
It  is  the  most  disinterested  activity,  the  one  that  causes
least  fatigue,  and  most  readily  admits  of  continuity.
And  it  is  the  calmest,  the  one  that  best  suffices  unto
itself.  It  is  by  science  that  man  draws  nearest  to  divinity.
Therefore  we  must  not  follow  the  advice  of  those  who
maintain  that  we  should  have  only  human  feelings
because  we  are  men,  and  only  aspire  after  the  destiny
of  a  mortal  creature  because  we  are  mortal.  As  far
as  in  us -lies,  we  should  do  our  best  to  make  ourselves
worthy  of  immortality.

Supreme  felicity,  however,  joined  to  the  possession
of  perfect  science,  falls  but  seldom  to  the  lot  of  man.
It  is  the  ethical  or  moral  virtues  that  are  truly  congenial
to  him  and  adapted  to  his  condition  as  spirit  joined  to
a  body.  Ethical  virtue  is  a  mental  habit  or  disposi-
tion which  tends,  in  all  things,  to  choose  the  golden
mean  suitable  to  our  nature,  and  is  determined  by  the
practical  judgment  of  the  intelligent  man.


ARISTOTLE  139

It  is  a  habit,  a  mode  of  the  will.  Socrates,  who
made  a  science  of  it,  forgot  that,  in  considering  virtue,
we  have  nothing  to  do  with  the  knowledge  of  moral
rules,  but  only  with  their  realisation.  Moreover,  to
constitute  virtue,  there  is  needed  not  only  a  present
determination  of  the  will,  but  rather  a  habit,  a  lasting
mode  thereof.

Again,  all  virtue  is  a  mean  between  two  vices,  and
this  mean  varies  in  different  individuals.  Virtue  in
a  man  is  different  from  virtue  in  a  woman,  a  child
or  a  slave.  Time  and  circumstance  must  likewise  be
taken  into  account.  Thus,  courage  is  the  mean  between
rashness  and  cowardice ;  magnanimity  is  the  mean
between  insolence  and  baseness,  and  so  on.

Finally,  it  is  the  good  man  who  is  the  rule  and
standard  of  the  good  in  each  particular  instance.
Indeed,  abstract  rules  determine  only  what  is  good  in
a  general  way.  In  each  instance  that  offers  itself  there
is  something  unique  which  these  rules  neither  could
nor  must  have  foreseen.  The  living,  universal  judg-
ment of  the  highly  gifted  man  makes  up  for  their
insufficiency.

Aristotle  studies  in  detail  the  different  virtues,  both
dianoe"tic  and  moral.

The  dianogtic  virtues  are  the  perfect  habits  of  the
intelligent  part  of  the  soul.  Now,  the  intellect  is  of
two  kinds :  scientific  and  logistic.  The  virtues  of
the  scientific  intellect  are  :  ist,  the  1/01)9,  which  knows
the  principles  of  things ;  2nd,  science,  which,  from
these  principles,  deduces  particular  truths.  The  union
of  the  z/o£/s  and  science  constitutes  wisdom  (<ro<£ia).
The  virtues  of  the  logistic  intellect  are  :  the  art  or
capacity  of  producing  with  a  view  to  an  end  ;  2nd,
judgment,  or  practical  intelligence.


140  STUDIES  IN  PHILOSOPHY

The  moral  virtues  are  as  numerous  as  the  different
relations  in  human  life.  Since  the  number  of  these
relations  is  indeterminate,  no  complete  list  of  the  moral
virtues  is  possible  ;  a  fortiori^  these  virtues  cannot  be
reduced  to  a  single  principle,  as  Plato  insists  upon.
Aristotle  investigates  the  most  important  of  the  moral
virtues.  His  dissertations  are  very  remarkable,  abound-
ing in  keen  psychological  and  moral  observations.  His
analyses  of  justice  and  friendship  are  particularly  deserv-
ing of  mention.

Justice,  he  says,  is  the  restoration  of  true  or  pro-
portional equality  in  social  life.  Equity  is  more  perfect
than  justice,  for  whereas  the  latter  takes  actions  into
consideration  only  from  a  general  and  abstract  point  of
view,  equity  takes  account  of  the  particular  element  in
each  separate  action.  It  is  the  completion  of  justice,
demanded  by  reason,  since  the  law  cannot  provide  for
every  individual  case.  It  is  concrete,  actual  justice
superposed  on  abstract,  and  still  indeterminate  justice.

Friendship  is  supreme  justice,  delicate  and  perfect,
wherein  a  blind,  dead  rule  is  entirely  replaced  by  the
living  intelligence  of  the  good  man.  Friendship  has
three  sources :  pleasure,  interest  and  virtue.  Virtue
alone  creates  firm  and  lasting  friendships.

XXI. — ECONOMICS

Man,  in  family  life,  attains  to  a  degree  of  perfection
superior  to  that  of  which  individual  life  admits.  The
family  is  a  natural  society.  It  comprises  three  kinds  of
relation  :  that  between  man  and  wife,  that  between
parents  and  children,  and  that  between  master  and  slave.

The  family  relation  between  man  and  wife  is  a  moral
one,  based  on  friendship  and  mutual  service.  The  wife


ARISTOTLE  141

has  her  own  will,  her  own  virtue,  different  from  the
man's  :  she  ought  to  be  treated  not  as  a  slave,  but  as
a  free  person.  Still,  as  the  wife  is  less  perfect  than  the
man,  the  latter  ought  to  have  authority  over  her.  The
family  is  an  aristocracy  or  community  of  free  beings,  to
whom  different  attributions  are  assigned.  The  wife,
man's  free  companion,  ought  to  have  in  the  home  her
own  sphere  of  influence,  with  which  man  does  not
interfere.

The  relation  between  parents  and  children  is  that
between  a  king  and  his  subjects.  Parents  and  children
form  a  monarchy.  As  regards  his  father,  the  child  has
no  rights  whatsoever,  for  he  is  still  a  part  of  the  father ;
it  is  the  father's  duty,  however,  to  watch  over  his
child's  best  interests,  for  the  child  also  has  a  will  and
a  virtue  of  his  own,  imperfect  though  they  be.  The
father  should  transmit  his  own  perfection  to  his  son,
and  the  latter  appropriate  to  himself  the  former's  per-
fection.

Aristotle  makes  a  special  study  of  slavery,  showing
its  necessity  and  justifiableness,  and  determining  the  way
in  which  slaves  ought  to  be  treated.  Slavery  is  neces-
sary, for  the  home  has  need  of  living  and  intelligent
workers.  And  slavery  is  justifiable.  Given,  indeed,  a
being  fit  only  for  bodily  labour,  such  a  being  is  the
justifiable  possession  of  one  who  is  capable  of  intellectual
activity  ;  the  relation  of  the  former  to  the  latter  being
that  of  matter  to  form.  Now,  such  a  relation  actually
exists  between  the  Barbarians  and  the  Greeks.  Thus,
the  free  man  is  owner  of  the  slave.  None  the  less
ought  he  to  look  upon  the  slave  as  a  human  being,  and
treat  him  as  such.


1 42  STUDIES  IN  PHILOSOPHY

XXIL— POLITICS

Aristotle's politics deals  : ist, with the State in
general ;  2nd,  with  the  Constitutions.

Politics  is  the  end  and  completion  of  economics,  as
the  latter  is  the  proximate  end  of  morals.  The  indi-
vidual, of  himself,  cannot  attain  to  virtue  and  happiness.
Now,  the  tendency  towards  social  life  lies  in  the  very
nature  of  man.  This  kind  of  life,  which  is  one  of  the
conditions  of  human  existence,  is  likewise  a  means  of
moral  improvement.  Politics,  which  sets  forth  the  ideal
and  the  rules  relating  to  human  communities,  is  thus
intimately  linked  with  morals  :  it  is  the  whole,  whereof
morals  and  economics  are  but  parts ;  the  act,  of  which
they  are  the  potency.  Politics  is  the  true  name  of  all
practical  science.  Philosophy  should  set  forth  the
ideal  of  politics ;  but  just  as  morals,  in  its  application,
takes  individuals  into  account,  so  applied  politics  will
take  circumstances  into  account.

How  is  political  society  formed  ?  In  the  order  of  time,
the  family  is  the  first  society  to  be  formed.  Then  we
have  the  union  of  several  families,  or  the  K^^TJ.  Finally
comes  the  State,  or  city  (-TroXt?)  :  the  highest  society  of
all.  This  is  the  chronological  order ;  from  the  stand-
point of  nature  and  truth,  however,  the  State  is  before
individuals,  family  and  village,  as  the  whole  is  before  its
parts  :  the  latter  having  in  the  former  their  final  cause
and  loftiest  realisation.

The  end  of  the  State  is  the  highest  that  can  be
conceived,  for  the  State  is  the  most  perfect  expression
of  the  social  tendency.  This  end  is  neither  the  mere
satisfaction  of  physical  needs,  the  acquisition  of  wealth
commerce,  nor  even  the  protection  of  the  citizens  by
means  of  laws.  It  should  consist  in  the  happiness  of


ARISTOTLE  143

the  citizens.  It  is  the  mission  of  the  State  to  see  that
its  citizens  possess,  first,  inner  good,  or  virtue,  and
afterwards,  outer  good.  The  State  completes  the  pro-
gress of  human  nature,  rising  from  potency  to  act.

Although  in  agreement  with  Plato  as  regards  the
final  good  of  politics,  Aristotle  is  none  the  less  led
to  criticise  his  master  in  things  that  concern  the  rights
and  duties  of  the  State.  He  opposes  the  Platonic
doctrine  that  tends  to  dower  the  State  with  the  greatest
possible  unity,  from  which  doctrine  resulted  the  necessity
of  sacrificing  property  and  family  to  the  State.  Unity
belongs  only  to  the  individual.  Already  the  family  has
ceased  to  be  a  unit.  By  nature,  the  city  is  a  plurality,  and
a  heterogeneous  one.  The  Platonic  theories  of  property
and  the  family  cannot  be  admitted.  Not  only  are  they
inapplicable  ;  they  even  misunderstand  both  the  tendency
of  nature  and  the  interests  of  the  State.  Property  and
the  family  are  by  no  means  artificial  products,  they  are
the  objects  of  natural  tendencies.  Besides,  they  are
useful  to  the  State,  procuring  for  it  advantages  it  could
not  obtain  by  any  other  means.  The  State,  therefore,
ought  to  regulate  property  and  the  family,  not  to  do
away  with  them.  In  practice,  of  course,  Aristotle  often
agrees  with  Plato,  whom  he  opposes  in  theory  ;  but  the
conclusion  could  not  therefore  be  drawn  that  there  is
no  difference  between  Platonic  and  Aristotelian  politics.
The  importance  assigned  to  nature  in  the  latter  turns
it  in  quite  another  direction.

The  following,  then,  is  the  essential  tendency  of
Aristotle's  politics.  As  supreme  good  lies  in  intellectual
leisure,  the  useful  professions  are  incompatible  with  the
title  of  citizen  :  farmers,  business  men,  workmen,  cannot
be  members  of  the  city ;  of  an  ideal  one,  at  all  events.
The  rtle  of  the  State  is  to  educate  its  citizens ;  its  efforts


i44  STUDIES  IN  PHILOSOPHY

are  directed  to  regulating  their  actions.  The  worst  of
States  is  that  which  allows  every  man  to  live  as  he
pleases.  The  State  regulates  the  age  and  the  season  for
procreation,  fixes  the  number  of  the  population,  orders
that  abortion  be  practised,  in  case  this  number  is  likely
to  be  exceeded,  and  likewise  the  exposing  and  abandon-
ing of  crippled  children.  Education  should  be  public,
ever  keeping  in  view  the  good  of  the  intellect  through
the  attention  bestowed  on  sensibility,  and  that  of
the  soul  through  the  attention  bestowed  on  the  body.
It  includes  grammar,  gymnastics,  music  and  drawing.
In  all  things,  its  aim  is  to  form  the  moral  habits  of  the
child.  It  is  essentially  liberal ;  such  arts  and  sciences
as  are  of  a  mechanical  and  utilitarian  nature  being
eliminated.  The  essential  virtue  of  the  State  is  justice,
i.e.  the  order  by  virtue  of  which  each  member  of  the
State  occupies  the  post  and  condition  of  life  suitable
to  him,  and  is  entrusted  with  the  function  he  is  able  and
worthy  to  exercise.

The  maxim  by  which  the  Constitutions  ought  to  be
regulated  is  as  follows  : — the  realisation  of  the  end  of
the  State  presupposes  two  instruments :  laws  and  the
magistracy.  The  true  sovereign,  the  only  ruler,  is  reason,
order.  As  this  sovereign  or  ruler  is  invisible,  reason,  in
practice,  must  be  represented  by  laws.  But  laws  are,
of  necessity,  set  forth  in  general  formulae.  Now,  how-
ever comprehensive  a  formula,  Tt  necessarily  allows  of
an  infinity  of  particular  cases  escaping  through  its  toils.
Hence  the  necessity  of  the  magistrate.  He  is  sovereign
arbiter  whenever  the  law  is  unable  to  solve  a  difficulty,
owing  to  the  impossibility  of  specifying  all  the  details
of  the  case  under  general  regulations.

Aristotle  does  not,  like  Plato,  lay  down  one  form  of


ARISTOTLE  145

government  as  being  good,  and  all  others  bad.  He  says
that  the  Constitutions  ought  to  fit  in  with  the  character
and  the  needs  of  the  nations  for  whom  they  are  framed ;
that  the  one  which  is  worst  in  itself  may  be  the  best
under  certain  circumstances.  He  also  examines  how
bad  governments  may  be  utilised,  when  they  alone  are
possible.  With  these  reservations,  he  classifies  the
different  forms  of  government.

There  are  three  kinds  of  government,  differing  in
the  number  of  those  who  govern  :  power  may  be  in  the
hands  either  of  one,  of  several,  or  of  the  majority  of  the
nation.  Each  of  these  has  two  forms,  the  one  just,  the
other  corrupt,  according  as  those  who  govern  have  in
view  the  general  interest  or  their  own  private  interest.
To  the  just  forms  of  government,  Aristotle  gives  the
names  of  royalty,  aristocracy  and  polity ;  the  corrupt
forms  he  calls  tyranny,  oligarchy  and  democracy.

The  best  Twm  of  government  is  a  republic  which
combines  order  with  freedom.  This  is  an  aristocracy.
All  the  citizens  are  allowed  to  participate  in  public
functions ;  only  those,  however,  are  citizens,  whose
position  and  culture  enable  them  to  fulfil  civic  duties.
All  corporal  toil,  especially  agriculture  and  the  various
industrial  arts,  must  be  done  by  slaves  or  half-
breeds.

Lower  than  this  ideal  form  of  government  we  have
forms  less  perfect,  though  justifiable  according  to  cir-
cumstances. The  most  practical  of  these,  under  ordin-
ary conditions,  is  a  temperate  republic,  a  mean  between
democracy  and  oligarchy.  Democracy  is  characterised
by  freedom  and  equality,  as  well  as  by  the  fact  that  the
government  is  in  the  hands  of  the  majority  of  free  men
and  of  the  poor.  In  an  oligarchy  the  government  is
carried  on  by  a  minority  of  the  wealthy  and  the  noble.


146  STUDIES  IN  PHILOSOPHY

A  temperate  republic  bestows  power  on  the  middle
classes.  It  is  the  political  equivalent  of  moral  virtue,
which  is  the  mean  between  two  extremes.

Evidently  Aristotle's  political  ideas  are  often  only
the  putting  into  theory  of  the  facts  that  fall  under  his
observation  ;  still,  it  would  be  an  exaggeration  to  see
in  them  nothing  else.  Though  the  means  he  advocates
are  frequently  the  result  of  a  necessarily  restricted  ex-
perience, the  ends  he  has  in  view  are  determined  by
reason  and  philosophy,  and  even  nowadays  Aristotle's
politics  is  a  mine  of  information  for  statesmen  and
historians.

XXIII.— RHETORIC

In  rhetoric,  Aristotle  tells  us,  he  had  nothing  to
create,  for  this  science  had  been  developed  before  his
time  by  Tisias,  Thrasymachus,  Theodorus  and  many
others.  These  authors,  however,  confined  themselves
to  the  particular,  never  going  beyond  the  empirical
point  of  view.  To  Aristotle  belongs  the  idea  of
scientific  rhetoric,  and  more  particularly  the  determina-
tion of  a  close  connection  between  rhetoric  and  logic.
Plato  had  unsuccessfully  endeavoured  to  base  rhetoric
on  science.  Aristotle,  thanks  to  his  logical  theories,
finds  in  dialectic,  as  distinguished  from  apodeictic,  the
very  basis  of  rhetoric.  Rhetoric  is  the  application  of
dialectic  to  politics,  i.e.  to  certain  practical  ends.  Logi-
cally, dialectic  is  anterior  to  rhetoric ;  it  is  the  whole
of  which  rhetoric  is  only  a  part.  In  the  order  of  time,
rhetoric  is  anterior  to  dialectic  ;  but  in  the  order  of
science,  it  is  the  contrary  that  holds  good.

Rhetoric  teaches  persuasion  by  likely  reasons.  Thus,
the  essential  part  of  rhetoric  is  the  doctrine  of  oratorical


ARISTOTLE  147

means.  These  are  of  three  kinds  :  ist,  those  referring
to  the  object ;  2nd,  those  referring  to  the  speaker  ;
3rd,  those  referring  to  the  listener.

The  first  consist  in  making  affirmations  appear  true.
They  are  based  on  proof.  Proof  is  thus  the  main
element  in  rhetoric  ;  it  is  also  the  one  on  which  Aristotle
insists  most.  As  dialectic  proves  by  means  of  syllogism
and  induction,  so  rhetoric  proves  by  means  of  enthy-
meme  or  imperfect  demonstration,  and  by  example  or
imperfect  induction.  There  is  no  kind  of  proof,  it
would  appear,  that  cannot  be  reduced  to  these  two
arguments.  The  enthymeme  is  a  syllogism  in  which
reasoning  is  carried  on  by  probabilities  or  signs.  Ex-
ample, like  induction,  consists  in  judging  of  a  thing  by '
other  particular  things  similar  to  the  one  in  question,
but  example  does  not  proceed  from  the  part  to  the
whole,  it  proceeds  only  from  the  part  to  the  part.
Rhetoric  determines  the  points  of  view  that  give  rise
to  enthymemes  and  examples  :  this  determination  is  the
object  of  oratorical  topic.

Aristotle  distinguishes  three  kinds  of  speech  :  the
deliberative,  the  legal  and  the  epideictic  ;  he  also  lays
down  the  rules  governing  each.

Such  are  the  oratorical  means  relating  to  the  object.
The  speaker's  rtk  is  to  have  himself  regarded  as
intelligent,  upright,  and  benevolent.

Finally,  the  means  relating  to  the  listener  consist  in
being  able  to  rouse  passion  and  to  lull  it  to  sleep.
Aristotle  dwells  at  length  on  this  part  of  his  subject,
giving  proof  of  a  very  shrewd  psychological  sense.
He  makes  an  interesting  study  of  the  influence  of
age  and  environment  on  character  and  disposition.

Following  on  these  theories,  which  constitute  the
basis  of  rhetoric,  come  studies  on  elocution  and  dis-


148  STUDIES  IN  PHILOSOPHY

position,  denoting  a  considerable  degree  of  truth  and
sagacity  in  judgment,  along  with  a  profound  knowledge
of  the  matter  in  hand.


XXIV. — ESTHETICS

Aristotle  divided  philosophy  into  three  parts  :  the
theoretical,  the  practical  and  the  poetical,  or  the  one
relating  to  art.  Though  he  made  no  attempt  to  develop
this  latter,  the  proofs  and  examples  he  gives  show  him
to  be  the  founder  of  esthetics.

Aristotelian  esthetics  does  not  proceed  so  much  from
the  concept  of  the  beautiful  as  from  that  of  art  ;  all  the
same,  a  theory  of  the  beautiful  is  therein  outlined.
According  to  Aristotle,  coordination,  symmetry  and
precision  form  the  essential  characteristics  of  the
beautiful.  Sensible  manifestation  is  not  an  essential
element  of  the  beautiful,  which  shows  forth  as  being
realised  more  especially  in  the  mathematical  sciences.
The  beautiful  dwells  in  the  general.  Poetry,  which
bears  upon  the  general,  is  more  beautiful,  more  serious
and  philosophical  than  history,  which  is  contained  in
the  particular.

Aristotle,  like  Plato,  regards  imitation  as  the  essence
of  art.  Art  results  from  man's  tendency  to  imitate
and  the  pleasure  he  thereby  obtains.  What  man
imitates  is  nature,  that  is  to  say,  according  to  the
Aristotelian  philosophy,  not  only  the  outer  appearance,
but  the  inner,  the  ideal  essence  of  natural  things.  Art
is  capable  of  representing  things  as  they  are  or  as  they
should  be.  The  representation  is  all  the  more  beautiful
in  proportion  as  the  artist  proves  himself  able  to  com-
plete, in  the  way  in  which  nature  herself  was  going,  the
work  she  necessarily  leaves  unfinished.  All  art  tends


ARISTOTLE  149

to  represent  the  general  and  the  necessary.  This  is
true  even  of  comic  poetry,  the  real  aim  of  which  is  the
representation  of  characters.

The  arts  include  more  than  one  kind  of  utility,  or
service.  They  produce  distraction,  moral  culture,  intel-
lectual enjoyment,  and  that  particular  effect  which
Aristotle  calls  cleansing,  or  purification  (/edBapo-is).
Purification  is  the  proprium  of  the  highest  arts,  more
especially  of  serious  poetry.

What  is  this  famous  purification  ?  It  is  not  exactly
moral  improvement,  but  rather  the  suppression,  by
homeopathic  treatment,  of  some  passion  that  troubled
and  domineered  over  the  soul.  Moreover,  it  is  im-
portant to  note  that  not  all  excitation  to  passion  is
capable  of  producing  this  curative  effect.  Excitation
of  a  salutary  nature  is  that  which  comes  from  art,  it  is
subject  to  law  and  propriety,  and,  by  magnifying  the
object  of  the  passions,  detaches  them  from  the  circum-
stances of  individual  life  in  order  to  apply  them  to  the
destiny  common  to  all  men.

Aristotle  gives  no  systematic  classification  of  the
arts,  the  highest  of  which,  according  to  him,  are  music
and  poetry.

XXV.— POETICS

Almost  all  that  is  left  of  Aristotle's  Poetics  deals
with  the  study  of  tragedy,  though  he  is  known  to  have
dealt  fully  with  poetics.

Poetry  arises  from  the  tendency  to  imitation.  A
tragedy  is  the  imitation  of  a  serious  and  complete
action,  of  a  certain  extent,  in  noble  language  and
a  dramatic  form  devoid  of  narrative  :  an  imitation
that  excites  terror  and  pity,  thereby  cleansing  the  soul


150  STUDIES  IN  PHILOSOPHY

of  these  passions.  In  the  persons  and  destinies  of  his
heroes,  the  tragic  poet  offers  us  general  types  of  nature
and  human  life.  He  shows  us  immutable  laws  which
dominate  and  control  apparently  accidental  events.
Hence  the  efficacy  of  tragedy  in  cleansing  the  soul  of
all  its  inordinate  affections.

The  most  important  part  of  tragedy  is  action.
Action  ought  to  be  natural.  Not  that  the  author
should  simply  set  forth  what  has  happened,  he  ought
also  to  show  what  might  have  happened,  what  is  pos-
sible either  according  to  the  laws  of  probability  or
according  to  those  of  necessity.  Action  ought  to  be
one  and  complete.  It  should  be  impossible  to  disturb
or  curtail  any  part  of  the  work  without  disuniting  and
spoiling  the  ensemble.  For,  in  any  whole,  that  which
can  be  added  or  taken  away,  without  the  change  being
noticed,  forms  no  part  of  that  whole.

The  only  unity  on  which  Aristotle  insists  is  that  of
action.  He  does  not  mention  unity  of  place,  and,  as
regards  unity  of  time,  merely  states  that,  speaking
generally,  in  tragedy  an  effort  is  made  to  confine  the
action  within  a  single  day  or  to  go  beyond  that  limit
but  slightly.

He  determines  the  rules  that  refer  to  the  parts  of
the  action,  to  the  characters,  which  ought  to  be  more
finished  and  beautiful  than  they  are  in  real  life,  and  also
to  composition  and  elocution.

He  regards  tragedy  as  superior  to  epic  poetry
because  its  unity  is  more  strict  and  confined,  whereas
an  epic  poem  includes  parts,  each  one  of  which  would
suffice  to  form  material  for  a  tragedy.


ARISTOTLE


XX  V  I. GR  A  M  M  A  R


151


In  ancient  times  Aristotle  was  looked  upon  as  the
founder  of  grammar  and  criticism,  for  he  had  written
works — now  lost — on  the  subject  of  poetical  explana-
tion and  the  criticism  of  poets.  Such  indications  with
reference  to  grammar  as  we  possess  are  not  given  for
themselves,  but  only  as  they  affect  something  else.
None  the  less  are  they  important  in  the  formation  of
the  science  of  grammar.  Aristotle  applied  his  usual
powers  of  observation  to  the  subject  of  grammar  ;  but
the  theory  of  language  was  then  in  its  infancy  :  hence
the  vagueness  and  obscurity  frequently  met  with  in  his
assertions.

He  recognises  three  parts  of  speech  :  noun,  verb
and  conjunction.  The  two  former  are  subject  to
inflection.  Nouns  are  divided  into  masculine,  feminine,
and  neuter.

Words  are  based  rather  on  mutual  agreement
amongst  men  than  on  nature.  Subsequently,  in  their
formation,  it  is  less  the  principle  of  analogy  than  the
arbitrary  that  dominates.

XXVII. — SPEECHES  AND  POEMS

Several  speeches  of  Aristotle  are  mentioned,  includ-
ing a  ^0705  SiKaviicos  or  Apology,  in  which  he  defends
himself  against  the  accusation  of  impiety,  a  Eulogy  of
Plato,  a  Eulogy  of  Alexander ;  but  the  authenticity  of
these  works — now  lost — has  been  much  disputed.

He  also  composed  poems,  a  few  authentic  lines  of
which  remain,  though  many  fragments  are  of  very
doubtful  authenticity.  The  most  important  of  these
is  a  portion  of  a  scolion  in  honour  of  Hermias  of


152  STUDIES  IN  PHILOSOPHY

Atarnea,  his  friend.  Aristotle  here  sings  of  virtue,
to  which,  like  the  ancient  heroes  of  Greece,  Hermias
has  sacrificed  his  life.  Mention  may  also  be  made  of
a  few  distachs  of  an  elegy  to  Eudemus,  composed  in
honour  of  Plato,  "  a  man  whom  the  wicked  may  not
even  praise."

The  following  is  the  fragment  of  the  Scolion  to
Hermias  : —

Virtue,  object  of  effort  on  the  part  of  the  race  of  mankind,
supreme  reward  of  life  !  For  thee,  O  virgin,  for  thy  beauty,
the  Greeks  are  ready  to  brave  death,  to  endure  terrible,  never-
ending  toil.  So  beautiful  is  the  fruit  thou  dost  engender  in
the  heart,  immortal  fruit  more  precious  than  gold,  nobility  or
soft-eyed  slumber  !  For  thee,  Hercules,  the  son  of  Zeus,  and
the  sons  of  Leda  bore  many  a  trial,  for  they  were  noble  hunters
in  pursuit  of  the  power  thou  bestowest.  Through  love  of  thee,
Achilles  and  Ajax  entered  the  abode  of  Hades.  Thou,  too,
wert  ever  the  object  of  the  love  of  Atarnes'  son  ;  for  the  sake
of  thy  beauty  he  deprived  his  eyes  of  the  glorious  light  of  the
sun.  That  is  why  he  is  praised  in  song  for  his  noble  deeds  ;
the  Muses  shall  magnify  his  name  and  make  it  immortal,  the
Muses,  Mnemosyne's  daughters,  who  honour  the  majesty  of
Jupiter  the  protector  of  hospitality,  and  who  likewise  honour  the
glory  of  faithful  friendship.

XXVIII.— LETTERS

Aristotle's  letters  have  been  celebrated  by  Demetrius
and  other  authors  as  being  models  of  epistolary  style.
Simplicius  states  that  the  style  of  these  letters  com-
bined clearness  with  charm  of  diction  to  a  degree
attained  by  no  other  known  writer.  Diogenes  men-
tions letters  to  Philip,  the  letters  of  the  Selymbrians,
four  letters  to  Alexander,  nine  to  Antipater,  and  others
to  Mentor,  Ariston,  Philoxenes,  Democritus,  &c.  As
the  fragments  that  have  come  down  to  us  are  for  the


ARISTOTLE  153

most  part  unauthenticated,  we  are  unable  to  judge
for  ourselves  of  either  the  contents  or  the  form  of
Aristotle's  letters.


XXIX. — ARISTOTLE  AS  A  WRITER

Aristotle  wrote  in  the  Attic  language  of  his  age.
The  multitude  of  new  ideas  he  undertook  to  express,
however,  had  a  considerable  influence  upon  the  instru-
ment he  used.  The  consideration  of  things  in  their
individuality,  the  clear  delimitation  of  scientific  domain,
the  effort  to  form  concepts  exempt  from  every  sensible
element,  are  all  reflected  in  his  language  and  style.
As  Aristotle's  logical  analysis  only  ceases  when  it  has
grasped  the  final,  specific  differences,  so  also,  in  Aris-
totelian language,  apparent  synonyms  are  distinguished
from  each  other  and  defined  with  great  preciseness.

Aristotle  had  two  ways  of  defining  terms  :  the
scientific  determination  of  the  meanings  of  traditional
words,  and  the  creation  of  new  terms.  He  used  both
methods,  especially  the  former.  He  mainly  starts  with
an  ordinary  term ;  and  then,  sometimes  restricting,
sometimes  extending  its  meaning,  he  makes  it  the  exact
expression  of  a  logical  concept.  Traditional  language,
however,  was  full  of  gaps.  To  fill  them  up,  Aristotle
coined  words,  always,  as  far  as  possible,  seeking  a  basis
to  work  upon  in  tradition  itself.  Owing  to  the  perfec-
tion of  the  terminology  thus  constituted,  he  proved
himself  the  true  founder  of  the  language  of  science
throughout  the  world.

The  following  are  instances  of  expressions  coined  by
Aristotle  : aSialperos  (individual)  ;  aireia-Qat  TO  ev
(petitio  principii, begging of the question)  ;
(immediate)  ;  avd\va-t,<s  (analysis)  ;  avo/j,oiopepr)s  (hetero-


154  STUDIES  IN  PHILOSOPHY


geneous)  ;  dvrtyacris  (contradiction)  ;  dTroSeircriKos  (de-
monstrative) ;  a7ro^)aa-49  (affirmation)  ;  yevirco?  (generic)  ;
SiXOTopia  (dichotomy)  ;  e'yu/Tret/H/co?  (empiric)  ;  evavnor^
(opposition)  ;  evepjeta  (energy)  ;  every?  (unity)  ;  eWe-
Xe^eta  (entelechy)  ;  egwrepiKos  (exoteric)  ;  e7ra/cTt/co9
(inductive)  ;  erepor^  (alterity  or  otherness)  ;  rj0uc6s
(morals)  ;  0eo\ojtK^  (theology)  ;  KariyyopiKos  (categori-
cal) ;  \oytKos  (logical)  ;  opyaviicos  (organic),  &c.

The  following  instances  may  be  quoted  in  which
Aristotle  confined  himself  to  a  scientific  determination
of  the  meaning  of  the  term  :  avrlOea-is  (antithesis)  ;
aglmjua  (axiom)  ;  evavrios  (contrary)  ;  ewTrdp^eiv  (to  be
immanent)  ;  eTraywyij  (induction)  ;  ea-^arov  (last)  ;
iSiov  (characteristic  property  of  a  species)  ;  o-vfifiefirjKos
(accident)  ;  crv\\oY%ecr0ai  (to  reason)  ;  a-vve^?  (con-
tinuous) ;  crvve^eta  (continuity)  ;  crvv6\ov  (whole)  ;
v\t)  (matter)  ;  v-rrofceifjievov  (substratum).

Finally  we  will  take  a  few  instances  of  the  distinc-
tions he  draws  between  concepts,  by  means  of  analysis
and  opposition  :  761/05  (genus)  ;  etSo?  (species)  ;  /az^o-t?
(movement)  ;  evepyeia  (act)  ;  dvTi<j>ao-i<;  (contradiction)
and  evavriov  (opposition)  ;  iroietv  (to  make)  and
(to  do)  ;  Svva/Mi?  (potency)  and  evepyeia  (act)  ;  eT
(induction)  and  o-v\\oyia-fj,6<;  (deduction)  ;  ovo-ia  (essence)
and  <rv/j,{3€{3r)tc6Ta  (accidents)  ;  StaXe/crt/co?  (dialectic)  and
aTToBeiKTiKos  (demonstrative)  ;  irporepov  ry  fyvaei  (anterior
per  se)  and  Trporepov  Trpb?  ^a?  (anterior  from  our
standpoint).

Aristotle's  style  is  no  less  personal  than  his  language.
The  ancients  extolled  his  fluency  and  charm  ;  the
words  flowed  from  his  lips,  said  Cicero,  in  a  golden
stream.  Such  praise  evidently  applies  to  his  dialogues,
his  published  works.  In  his  didactic  works  (Trpay-
which  alone  have  come  down  to  us,  we  note


ARISTOTLE  155

the  exactness  of  his  definitions,  inimitable  clearness,
precision  and  brevity,  a  strictness  and  exactness  in  the
meaning  of  words,  suggestive  of  the  language  of
mathematics.  In  a  word,  Aristotle's  style  is  dis-
tinguished by  an  exact  appropriation  of  form  to  content.
Frequently,  however,  especially  in  such  of  his  works  as
are  incomplete,  Aristotle  writes  with  a  certain  degree  of
aridity  and  carelessness.  Not  only  are  the  sentences
not  arranged  in  periods,  but  there  are  numerous  anaco-
lutha  and  parentheses,  which,  in  no  small  measure,
militate  against  clearness.  At  times,  too,  in  these
abstract  dissertations,  we  come  across  passages  that  are
not  lacking  in  fire  and  eloquence.  Of  such  a  character
is  the  end  of  chapter  7,  book  10,  of  the  Nicomachean
Ethics  :

The  life  of  the  statesman  and  of  the  soldier,  then,  though
they  surpass  all  other  virtuous  exercises  in  nobility  and  grandeur,
are  not  leisurely  occupations,  but  aim  at  some  ulterior  end,  and
are  not  desired  merely  for  themselves.

But  the  exercise  of  the  reason  seems  to  be  superior  in
seriousness  (since  it  contemplates  truth),  and  to  aim  at  no  end
beside  itself,  and  to  have  its  proper  pleasure  (which  also  helps
to  increase  the  exercise) ;  and  its  exercise  seems  further  to  be
self-sufficient,  and  leisurely,  and  inexhaustible  (as  far  as  anything
human  can  be),  and  to  have  all  the  other  characteristics  that
are  ascribed  to  happiness.

This,  then,  will  be  the  complete  happiness  of  man,  i.e.
when  a  complete  term  of  days  is  added  ;  for  nothing  incomplete
can  be  admitted  into  our  idea  of  happiness.

But  a  life  which  realised  this  idea  would  be  something  more
than  human  ;  for  it  would  not  be  the  expression  of  man's
nature,  but  of  some  divine  element  in  that  nature — the  exercise
of  which  is  so  far  superior  to  the  exercise  of  the  other  kind  of
virtue  (i.e.  practical  or  moral  virtue),  as  this  divine  element  is
superior  to  our  compound  human  nature.1

1  I.e.  our  nature  as  moral  agents,  as  compounds  of  reason  and  desire.


156  STUDIES  IN  PHILOSOPHY

If,  then,  reason  be  divine  as  compared  with  man,  the  life
which  consists  in  the  exercise  of  reason  will  also  be  divine  in
comparison  with  human  life.  Nevertheless,  instead  of  listening
to  those  who  advise  us  as  men  and  mortals  not  to  lift  our
thoughts  above  what  is  human  and  mortal,  we  ought  rather,
as  far  as  possible,  to  put  off  our  mortality  and  make  every
effort  to  live  in  the  exercise  of  the  highest  of  our  faculties  j
for  though  it  be  but  a  small  part  of  us,  yet  in  power  and  value
it  far  surpasses  all  the  rest.1


XXX. — ARISTOTLE'S  INFLUENCE

The  first  effect  of  Aristotle's  teaching  was  to  bring
into  being  the  Peripatetic  school,  which  flourished  for
a  period  of  from  two  to  three  centuries,  and  whose
principal  representatives  are  :  Theophrastus  of  Lesbos
(372.^287  ?  B.C.),  Eudemus  of  Rhodes  (fourth  century),
Aristoxenus  of  Tarentum  (born  about  350  B.C.),  sur-
named  the  Musician,  Decearchus  of  Messena  (flourished
320  B.C.)  and  Strato  of  Lampsacus  (flourished  287  B.C.).
Critolaus,  a  member  of  the  embassy  sent  to  Rome
in  156  B.C.,  by  which  philosophy  was  introduced  into
the  Roman  world,  was  a  Peripatetic  philosopher.  The
school  was  distinguished  for  its  minute  investigations  in
logic,  morals  and  natural  science,  but  the  naturalistic
tendency  gradually  prevailed  over  the  metaphysical.
Strato  even  went  so  far  as  to  identify  divinity  with  the
<f>va-is  which  acts  unconsciously  throughout  the  world,
and  to  substitute  for  the  Aristotelian  teleology  an
altogether  mechanical  explanation  of  things,  based  on
the  properties  of  heat  and  cold.

With  the  publication  of  Aristotle's  works  by
Andronicus  of  Rhodes,  about  70  B.C.,  began  the  long
list  of  interpreters  and  commentators  of  the  Stageirite,

1  F.  H.  Peter's  translation.


ARISTOTLE  157

including  Boethus  of  Sidon,  Nicolas  of  Damascus,
Alexander  of  Aphrodisias  in  Cilicia,  surnamed  the
Exegete  far  excellence  (icar  egoxtfv),  Porphyry  of  Bat-
anaea,  the  Neoplatonist,  Themistius  of  Paphlagonia,
Philopon  of  Alexandria  and  Simplicius  of  Cilicia.

Though  the  Peripatetic  school  consists  mainly  of
disciples  not  very  advanced  in  metaphysics  or  of  purely
erudite  commentators,  still,  the  master's  doctrines  are
very  vigorous  and  instinct  with  life  in  philosophies
which  did  not  originate  with  him  but  were  largely
inspired  by  his  influence.  The  principle  of  the  Stoics,
intermediary  between  potency  and  act,  and  limited  by
tension,  immanent  in  all  things,  the  intelligent  and
supreme  final  cause,  would  indeed  appear  to  be  nothing
else  than  the  <f>v<n,s  of  Aristotle,  into  which  the  vovs  would
seem  to  be  absorbed.  Through  the  precise  distinction
he  made  between  mechanism  and  finality,  between  the
physical  and  the  metaphysical  order  of  things,  between
chance  and  intelligent  action,  Aristotle  rendered  possible
Epicureanism,  which  seems  largely  to  be  made  up  of
the  doctrines  which  Aristotle  defined  or  created  for  the
purpose  of  refuting  them.  Neoplatonism  itself,  in  the
matter  of  its  doctrine  regarding  the  vovs,  is  greatly
indebted  to  Aristotle.  The  Neoplatonists  endeavoured
to  reconcile  Plato  and  Aristotle  ;  and  Plotinus  main-
tained that  his  doctrine  of  the  transcendent  one  from
which  the  vov?  emanates,  was  the  inevitable  consequence
of  Aristotelian  teaching.

After  defending  ancient  philosophy  to  the  very  end,
Aristotelianism,  becoming  embodied  in  the  beliefs  of
the  Middle  Ages,  transformed  them  into  philosophical
doctrines.  It  was  mainly  owing  to  the  influence  of
Aristotle  that  there  developed,  in  that  period  of  religious
mysticism,  the  spirit  of  logic  and  of  rational  speculation.


158  STUDIES  IN  PHILOSOPHY

Tardily  and  indirectly  did  Aristotle's  writings  pene-
trate into  the  western  world.  Even  in  the  middle  of
the  twelfth  century,  only  small  portions  of  the  Organon
were  known,  to  wit,  the  Categories  and  the  Hermeneia,
in  the  Latin  translation  of  Boetius.  These,  along  with
the  EtVo7&>y?7  of  Porphyry  and  the  Timaeus  of  Plato,
formed  almost  the  entire  possessions  of  philosophical
antiquity.  From  A.D.  1150  to  1210,  the  other  works
of  Aristotle  appeared  in  the  form  of  a  Latin  version  of
Arabic  translations,  which  in  their  turn  had  been  trans-
lated by  Christian  Syrians,  from  Syriac  translations,  in
the  ninth  century.  Shortly  afterwards  (thirteenth  cen-
tury), the  Greek  text  was  communicated  to  the  scholars
of  the  West,  mainly  by  Greeks  from  Constantinople  ;
and  a  translation  direct  from  the  Latin  was  substituted
for  the  indirect  translations.  Robert  Greathead,  Albert
le  Grand  and  Saint  Thomas  were  the  principal  persons
engaged  in  this  refining  process  of  translating  into  Latin.

As  showing  how  dependent  on  his  will  is  man's
intelligence,  people  of  the  most  diverse  opinions,
strangely  enough,  found  in  Aristotle  a  rational  basis
for  their  beliefs  and  aspirations.  There  could  be
nothing  apparently  more  one  than  the  Middle  Ages,
for  Aristotle  was  invoked  by  everybody,  though,  as  a
matter  of  fact,  there  were  as  many  Aristotles  as
philosophers.  There  were  even  Aristotles  who  had
only  the  name  in  common  with  the  Stageirite.

It  was  Aristotle's  Organon  that  gave  rise  to  the
famous  quarrel  between  the  universities,  which  lasted
from  the  ninth  to  the  end  of  the  eleventh  century.
About  this  time,  complete  systems  of  Aristotelian
philosophy  grew  up  amongst  the  Arabs  and  Jews,  who
had  possession  of  all  the  master's  writings.  The  Arabs,
who  were  naturalists  and  monotheists,  were  captivated


ARISTOTLE  159

by  Aristotle's  teachings  about  God  and  by  his  investi-
gations into  natural  history.  AverroSs,  of  Cordova
(A.D.  1126-1198),  regards  himself  as  a  true  Aristotelian
when  maintaining  that  active  understanding  is  an
emanation  from  God,  that  it  is  one  for  all  men  and
alone  is  immortal.  Moses  Maimonides,  a  Jew  of
Cordova  (A.D.  1135-1204),  finds  no  difficulty  in  re-
conciling miracles  and  the  creation  of  matter  with
Aristotelianism.

The  most  brilliant  period  of  Christian  scholasticism
is  also  that  during  which  Aristotle's  authority  is  at  its
highest.  Though  his  doctrines  on  physics,  which  are
regarded  as  advocating  the  eternity  of  the  world  and  of
time,  are  for  a  certain  period  regarded  with  suspicion,
from  the  year  A.D.  1230,  the  whole  of  his  works  begin
to  be  used  as  text-books  for  lessons  in  philosophy.  Just
as  the  truths  of  faith  are  the  expression  of  supernatural
illumination,  so  the  Aristotelian  doctrine  is  the  ex-
pression of  natural  illumination.  Reason  does  not
coincide  with  faith,  but  it  is  moving  towards  it.
Aristotle,  as  representing  reason,  is  the  forerunner  of
Christ  in  the  things  of  nature,  as  Saint  John  the  Baptist  is
his  forerunner  in  those  of  grace.  Thus  defined,  circum-
scribed and  subordinated,  Aristotelianism  becomes  the
origin  of  what  has  since  been  called  deism  and  natural
religion.  At  that  time  there  was  found  in  it  all  that
theology  required.  Naturally  it  cannot  demonstrate
the  truth  of  the  dogmas,  for  that  would  be  contradictory  ;
still,  it  refutes  objections  brought  against  them  and
establishes  their  probability.  In  particular,  it  sets  up  a
theory  of  substantial  form  and  of  real  and  separable
accidents,  which  makes  transubstantiation  conceivable
in  the  persistence  of  the  same  sensible  elements  in  the
Eucharist.


i6o  STUDIES  IN  PHILOSOPHY

And,  indeed,  Aristotelianism  is  as  favourable  to  dis-
sent as  it  is  to  orthodoxy.  Amaury  of  Chartres  and
David  of  Dinant  (thirteenth  and  fourteenth  centuries)
claim  that  it  upholds  pantheism,  for  the  one  identifies
the  God  of  the  Stageirite  with  form,  the  other  with
universal  matter.  The  German  mystics,  too,  Theodoric
of  Freiburg  and  "  Meister  Eckhart  "  (thirteenth  and
fourteenth  centuries),  present  their  doctrine  of  the
substantial  union  of  the  soul  with  divinity,  as  the
development  of  the  Aristotelian  theory  of  the


And  lastly,  Aristotle  is  not  only  the  master  of
philosophers  in  the  Middle  Ages  ;  he  is  even  regarded
as  the  patron  of  those  who,  in  opposition  to  the  Church
and  the  philosophy  of  the  times,  claim  to  harness  and
control  the  mysterious  forces  of  nature.  These  re-
probates look  upon  Aristotle  as  a  magician.  He  is
credited  with  having  written  alchemical  treatises  on  the
occult  philosophy  of  the  Egyptians,  and  is  placed,  with
Plato,  at  the  head  of  the  list  of  oecumenical  alchemists.
Alchemists  called  themselves  the  new  commentators  of
Plato  and  Aristotle.

Thus  we  find  Aristotle,  in  the  Middle  Ages,  every-
where stirring  up  the  minds  of  men  and  regarded  as  an
authority  :  his  main  work,  however,  was  undoubtedly
the  organisation  of  that  Christian  philosophy  which  was
so  complete  and  detailed,  so  logical  and  firmly  based
throughout,  that  it  seemed  destined  to  last  for  ever.  This
philosophy  held  sway  in  the]  colleges  of  the  University
of  France  up  to  the  eighteenth  century.  In  the  Sorbonne,
in  1624,  it  was  forbidden,  under  penalty  of  death,  to  pro-
pound doctrines  opposed  to  those  held  by  the  ancients.
Even  in  1671,  the  professors  were  called  upon  to
respect  Peripateticism  under  penalty  of  exclusion.  Only


ARISTOTLE  161

at  the  beginning  of  the  eighteenth  century  did  scholastic
Aristotelianism  make  way  for  new  ideas.

It  was  from  faith,  not  from  reason,  that  the  first
really  savage  attack  came.  Not  only  did  Luther
note  how  important  were  the  differences  that  divided
Aristotelian  philosophy  from  Christianity,  he  even  re-
garded it  as  impious  to  seek  for  a  reconciliation
between  God-given  faith  and  sin-stained  reason.  Aris-
totelian philosophy,  the  work  of  man,  with  its  claim  to
deal  with  things  divine,  could  be  nothing  else  than
error  and  sacrilege  ;  religion,  once  reconciled  thereto,
could  only  become  distorted  and  misrepresented.  Aris-
totle was  an  arch-heretic  :  religion  would  only  be  safe
on  condition  his  doctrines  were  utterly  abolished.

Opposed  in  the  name  of  the  Christian  religion,
Aristotelianism,  in  spite  of  its  glorious  revival  by  the
scholars  of  the  Renaissance,  Pomponatius,  Scaliger,
Vanini,  Gennadius,  and  George  of  Trebizond,  speedily
became  an  object  of  attack  by  science  and  philosophy.
Bacon  saw  in  the  Aristotelian  method  nothing  but
deduction  applied  to  the  data  of  opinion  and  language  ;
in  his  eyes,  Aristotelian  metaphysic  was  only  the  claim
to  explain  things,  exclusive  of  mechanical  causes,  by
supernatural  and  divine  actions.  He  therefore  con-
demned the  philosophy  of  Aristotle,  as  being  contrary
to  the  conditions  of  science,  which  latter  seeks
mechanical  explanations  and  proceeds  by  induction.
Descartes  looked  upon  Aristotelianism  as  the  doctrine
that  realised  sensible  qualities,  and  explained  phenomena
by  these  chimerical  entities.  Barren  and  obscure  ideas,
these  abstractions  could  not  possibly  be  the  principles
of  things.  In  direct  opposition  to  Aristotle,  Descartes
restores  quality  to  quantity,  not  quantity  to  quality.

It  appeared  as  though  the  Aristotelian  doctrine  would

M


1 62  STUDIES  IN  PHILOSOPHY

have  definitely  lived,  when  Leibnitz  triumphantly  re-
stored it  to  philosophy,  declaring  that  in  the  theory  of
substantial  forms  and  entelechy,  when  rightly  under-
stood, there  was  more  truth  than  in  the  entire  philo-
sophy of  the  moderns.  Following  in  the  steps  of
Aristotle,  Leibnitz  placed  substance  in  a  principle  of
action,  relegated  extent  and  matter  from  the  class  of
substance  to  that  of  phenomenon,  and  reconciled  final
with  efficient  causes  by  making  mechanism  dependent  on
finality.  Aristotelianism,  since  the  time  of  Leibnitz,
has  maintained  a  place  of  its  own  in  philosophy,  more
particularly  playing  an  important  part  in  the  formation
of  the  Hegelian  system.

However  great  his  place  in  history,  can  it  be  said
that  Aristotle,  even  at  the  present  time,  is  one  of  the
masters  of  human  thought  ?

As  regards  philosophy  strictly  so  called,  there  can
be  no  question  as  to  the  answer  that  must  be  given.
It  appears  as  though  Aristotelianism  responds  particu-
larly to  the  preoccupations  of  modern  times.  The
two  doctrines  that  until  recently,  have  occupied  the
largest  place  in  the  world  of  philosophy  were  Kantian
idealism  and  evolutionism.  Now,  Aristotle's  system
may  without  disadvantage  be  set  up  against  these  two
systems.

It  is  opposed  to  Kantism.  As  a  matter  of  fact,
Kant  rejects  the  dependence  of  the  mind  in  respect  of
being,  the  ontological  value  attributed  to  the  laws  of
the  mind,  the  theoretical  unconditioned  and  the  sub-
ordination of  practice  to  theory  ;  all  of  which  belong  to
the  very  essence  of  Aristotelianism.  The  philosophy  of
Kant  has  been  set  up  in  direct  opposition  to  dogmatic
philosophy,  of  which  Aristotle  is  the  representative


ARISTOTLE  163

par  excellence.  But  if  Kant  discovered  a  new  conception
of  things,  a  conception  which  must  henceforth  be
examined  by  all  interested  in  philosophy,  it  cannot  be
affirmed  that  he  fully  succeeded  in  getting  his  hypo-
thesis accepted  universally.  If  this  hypothesis  has
on  its  side  the  testimony  of  conscience,  which,  by  the
way,  it  undertakes  to  satisfy,  it  cannot  obtain  the
frank,  complete  approval  of  the  intellect.  This  latter
persists  in  saying,  with  Aristotle  :  "  Everything  has  a
reason  of  its  own,  and  the  first  principle  must  be  the
final  reason  of  things.  Now,  explanation  implies  deter-
mination, and  the  final  reason  cannot  be  anything  else
than  fully  determined  being.  When  we  consider  the
infinite  and  the  finite,  it  is  the  finite,  in  so  far  as  it  is
intelligible,  that  is  the  principle  ;  the  infinite,  in  so
far  as  it  is  unintelligible,  can  only  be  phenomenon."  As
regards  Aristotle  and  Kant,  what  we  have  to  do  is  to
find  out  whether  the  supremacy  must  be  attributed  to
the  will  or  to  the  intellect ;  now,  even  at  the  present
time,  this  question  does  not  appear  to  have  been
answered  once  for  all.

The  position  of  Aristotelianism  as  compared  with
evolutionism  is  quite  different.  Not  only  does  it  not
oppose  the  latter,  it  even  recognises  and  includes
it,  at  the  same  time  affording  the  means  of  going
beyond  it.  Historically,  it  is  one  of  the  most  direct
antecedents  of  evolutionism.  Whether  in  nature  or  in
man,  Aristotle  shows  that  everywhere  we  have  con-
tinuity— a  process  of  development  from  the  lower  to
the  higher.  Plants  imply  minerals,  animals  imply
plants,  man  implies  animals,  and  man  is  nothing  but
the  completion  of  the  being  roughly  outlined  in  the
lower  productions  of  nature.  Even  in  man,  imagination
springs  from  sensation,  memory  from  imagination,  and


1 64  STUDIES  IN  PHILOSOPHY

the  intellect  cannot  think  without  images.  We  can  find
no  scientific  thesis  of  evolutionism  that  would  be  in-
compatible with  the  natural  philosophy  of  Aristotle.
But  is  this  mechanical  order  of  things  the  absolute
order  ?  Do  these  explanations  fully  satisfy  the  in-
telligence ?  This  is  the  question  Aristotle  asks,  a
question  he  finds  it  impossible  to  answer  along  the
lines  of  spiritualistic  metaphysics.

To  our  philosopher,  the  order  which  proceeds  from
the  indeterminate  to  the  determinate,  from  genus  to
species,  cannot  be  regarded  by  the  intellect  as  the
absolute  order  of  the  generation  of  things,  for  the  in-
determinate always  admits  of  other  determinations  than
those  it  receives  in  the  real  world.  Though  man  is  the
completion  of  the  animal,  still,  the  animal  admitted  of
other  determinations  than  those  that  made  it  into  a  man.
Why  do  genera  find  their  realisation  in  certain  species
rather  than  in  others  ?  The  reason  of  this  choice  from
amongst  all  possible  developments  can  be  found  only
in  the  very  being  which  is  the  term  of  the  development.
The  perfection  of  this  being  must  be  a  force  controlling
the  evolution  of  the  matter  from  which  it  is  to  be  born.
In  this  way,  the  order  which  proceeds  from  the  inde-
terminate to  the  determinate  does  not  exclude  ;  it  calls
for  a  symmetrically  contrary  order,  the  hidden  principle
of  its  direction  and  realisation.  And  so  Aristotle
reconciles  the  evolutionistic  mechanism  with  finality  by
making  a  distinction  between  the  order  of  things  in
time  and  that  of  things  in  the  absolute.  Evolutionism
is  truth  from  the  standpoint  of  the  senses  ;  from  that
of  the  intellect,  however,  the  imperfect  exists  and  is
determined  only  with  a  view  to  the  more  perfect.
The  finalistic  explanation  is  the  justifiable  and  indis-
pensable complement  of  the  mechanistic  one.


ARISTOTLE  165

Thus  Aristotelianism  still  has  a  place  of  its  own  in
philosophy.  But  has  it  not  become,  for  the  future,
banned  and  barred  from  science  ?

Here  a  distinction  must  be  made  between  the
moral  sciences,  on  the  one  hand,  and  the  mathematical
and  physical  sciences  on  the  other.  Aristotle's  ethics,
and  even,  in  many  important  respects,  his  politics,  far
from  being  forgotten,  are  in  greater  vogue  than  ever
nowadays.  The  recommendation  to  live  as  a  man
when  one  is  born  a  man,  and  to  attribute  real
sovereignty  in  politics  to  reason  and  law,  are  by  no
means  on  the  point  of  sinking  into  oblivion.  But  the
sciences  dealing  with  nature,  all  henceforth  positive,
seem  to  have  little  in  common  with  the  natural  philo-
sophy of  the  great  metaphysician.

In  order  to  express  a  fair  judgment  on  this  subject,
it  should  at  once  be  stated  that  a  man  may  have  exercised
great  influence  on  the  development  of  the  sciences
without  any  of  his  ideas  being  recognised  in  present-
day  teachings.  The  sciences  are  built  up  stage  by
stage  ;  and  though  some  particular  ancient  theory  may
not  be  recognised  in  modern  theories,  it  may  well  have
played  its  part  in  paving  the  way  for  their  reception.
Now,  merit  of  this  kind  may  certainly  be  attributed  to
Aristotle.  He  advanced  theories  and  concepts  which
may  be  vastly  different  from  modern  methods  and
principles,  and  yet  have  none  the  less  controlled  the
formation  of  these  very  principles.  For  instance,  we
have  the  Aristotelian  theory  of  induction  which  doubtless
determines  rather  the  end  to  be  attained  than  the  means
to  be  employed,  and  prefers  to  regard  this  end  as  being
the  discovery  of  types  and  not  that  of  laws,  but  which
is  none  the  less  very  important  because  of  the  precision
with  which,  in  induction,  it  shows  how  we  have  to  set


1 66  STUDIES  IN  PHILOSOPHY

free  the  necessary  from  the  contingent,  the  universal
from  the  particular.  Such  also  are  the  ideas  of  genus
and  species,  potency  and  act,  mechanical  blending  and
qualitative  combination,  chance,  in  reference  to  the  con-
junction of  causes  independent  of  one  another,  con-
tinuity in  the  scale  of  beings,  classification  of  the
sciences,  etc.

But  the  simple  acknowledgment  that  Aristotle  has
supplied  science  with  many  starting  -  points  is  not
sufficient.  Many  of  his  principles  may  still  quite  well
be  recognised  in  the  spirit  of  contemporary  science
itself.  His  great  principle  that  there  are  laws  in
nature  and  that  they  can  be  discovered  only  by  deducing
them  from  experience  by  the  aid  of  reflection,  his
constant  wish  to  investigate  things  in  their  details,  to
understand  them  not  by  means  of  vague  formulae,  but
in  themselves  with  their  own  characteristics,  his  definition
of  cause  as  existing  in  that  element  which  makes  pro-
duction known  as  necessary,  his  doctrine  of  biological
continuity  and  of  the  solidarity  of  the  higher  with
respect  to  the  lower ;  all  these  essential  features  of
Aristotelian  philosophy  may  be  met  with  in  modern
science.  Though  an  authority  belonging  to  the  past,
Aristotle  has  not  ceased  to  be  a  master,  even  in  these
days.

The  objection,  however,  will  be  urged  that  Aristotle
is  finalistic  and  that  science  does  not  now  trouble  itself
with  the  consideration  of  ends.

Perhaps  there  is  some  misunderstanding  here.
Aristotelian  finality  is  not  the  building  up  of  the  world,
as  though  it  were  a  watch,  by  an  artisan  who  sets
before  him  an  idea  and  calculates  how  to  realise  it.  It
consists,  we  may  say,  of  the  three  following  principles  :
ist,  throughout  the  world,  order  is  the  rule,  disorder


ARISTOTLE  167

the  exception  ;  this  is  equivalent  to  saying  that  the
combinations  of  phenomena  which  result  immediately
from  the  laws  of  nature,  harmoniously  united  in  types,
and  consequently  normal  in  their  development,  are  far
more  numerous  than  the  combinations  due  to  the
fortuitous  conjunction  of  laws  independent  of  one
another  ;  2nd,  in  every  individual  there  is  an  organising
force  or  Averts  by  virtue  of  which  it  tends  to  be  and  to
realise  a  certain  form  ;  3rd,  the  specific  types  are  strictly
determined,  separated  from  one  another,  and  immut-
able. Is  it  quite  certain  that  finality,  thus  interpreted,
is  altogether  absent  from  modern  science  ?

The  first  of  these  three  principles  signifies  that  it  is
possible  to  obtain  knowledge  of  fundamental  laws  by
means  of  observation  and  induction.  In  contrast  with
this  theory  we  have  the  mathematical  theory  of  Descartes,
according  to  which  there  are  really  no  qualitative  and
multiple  laws  of  nature,  but  only  various  determina-
tions of  homogeneous  and  mathematical  quantity.
But  though  we  have  the  Cartesian  conception  as  an
ideal  representing  complete  science,  the  Aristotelian
method  of  advance  is  still  the  one  best  suited  to  our
means  of  knowledge.  The  only  thing  in  which  Aristotle
erred  was  in  imagining  that  by  the  process  of  induction
we  could  arrive  at  simple  and  absolute  laws  which
presuppose  nothing  anterior  to  themselves.

The  second  principle  bears  a  striking  resemblance
to  that  of  the  struggle  for  life.  Here,  too,  we  pre-
suppose in  every  individual  a  tendency  to  exist  and
develop  along  fixed  lines.  It  is  true  that  modern
science  would  like  to  reduce  life  itself  to  a  mechanism  ;
all  the  same,  it  acknowledges  that  life,  as  we  find  it,
plays  the  part  and  possesses  the  characteristics  that
Aristotle  attributed  to  it.  The  entire  difference  con-


1 68  STUDIES  IN  PHILOSOPHY

sists  in  regarding  as  derived  what  Aristotle  looked  upon
as  primitive  ;  but  until  this  reduction  is  effected,  we  do
not  think  we  are  wrong  in  saying:  everything  takes
place  as  though  there  were  in  each  living  being  a
tendency  to  exist,  and  that  in  some  determinate  manner.
Finally,  the  third  principle,  which  still  counts
adherents  amongst  scientists  themselves,  is  not,  as
Aristotle  understood  it,  in  absolute  contradiction  to  the
teachings  of  the  evolutionists,  from  the  physical  point
of  view.  What  is  it  that  Aristotle  means  ?  He  does
not  wish  to  affirm  that  the  history  of  the  beings  of
nature  began  in  time,  with  the  creation  of  separate
species :  he  means  that  the  realisation  of  a  certain
number  of  types,  both  distinct  from  and  in  harmony
with  each  other,  is  the  end  and  rule  of  the  productions
of  nature.  He  admits  that  nature,  for  the  most  part,
succeeds  in  realising  this  end  ;  but,  apart  from  the
perfectly  regular  productions  of  nature,  he  acknow-
ledges productions  partly  regular,  partly  irregular.
Now,  if  we  leave  the  past  out  of  account,  and  also  any
beginning  in  time,  about  which  Aristotle  did  not  trouble
himself,  we  shall  find  no  very  great  divergence  between
this  point  of  view  and  that  of  evolutionism.  In  contra-,
distinction  to  materialism  and  the  doctrine  of  chance,
evolutionism  recognises  that  species  exist,  at  the  present
time,  at  all  events.  It  also  recognises  the  tendency  in
nature  towards  an  increasingly  complete  specification.
The  principle  of  Aristotle,  then,  subsists,  even  in  these
days,  in  the  hypothetical  form  at  any  rate,  the  only
form  a  principle  can  admit  of  in  science  ;  everything
takes  place  as  though  there  were  a  hierarchy  of  ideal
forms,  distinct  from  one  another,  and  which  the  beings
of  nature  tend  to  realise.


JACOB BOEHME, THE GERMAN
PHILOSOPHER

"  Gott  ist  von  der  Natur  frei,  und  die  Natur  ist  doch  seines
Wesens." — J.  BOEHME  (Vom  dreifachen  Leben  des  Menschens).

I

IT  is  not  the  custom,  even  in  Germany,  to  assign  a
place  of  importance  in  the  history  of  philosophy  to
Jacob  Boehme,  the  shoemaker  theosophist  of  the  Renais-
sance. Along  with  Hegel,  he  is  recognised  as  a  man  of
powerful  mind  ;  but  whilst  it  is  admitted  that  from  the
whole  of  his  obscure,  involved  writings  a  certain  number
of  doctrines  capable  of  being  understood  to  some  extent
by  the  intellect  can  be  evolved,  these  doctrines  are
regarded  as  coming  under  the  category  of  theology  and
Christian  edification  rather  than  as  monuments  of  profane
and  rational  science.  Such  appreciation  is  natural  in
France  where  philosophy,  in  the  spirit  of  Descartes,
mostly  depends  on  the  understanding,  and  is  suspicious
of  anything  resembling  mysticism.  In  Germany,  how-
ever, philosophy  has  not  adopted  the  rationalistic  form
in  so  constant  a  fashion.  Alongside  of  Leibnitz,  Kant,
Fichte,  and  Hegel,  the  Schoolmen,  so  to  speak,  of
modern  Germany,  we  find  philosophers  of  belief,  religion,
or  feeling,  such  as  Hamann,  Herder,  Jacobi,  Schelling
the  theosophist,  and  the  famous  Christian  philosopher
Franz  von  Baader.  These  latter,  as  against  the  former,

169


170  STUDIES  IN  PHILOSOPHY

are  mystical  dissidents,  just  as,  in  former  times,  Eckhart
and  Tauler  were  opposed  to  Thomist  rationalism.  Even
the  German  philosophers  of  concept  and  reflection,  the
followers  of  Kant  and  Hegel,  if  we  consider  the  basis
and  spirit  of  their  teaching,  and  not  the  form  in  which
they  set  it  forth,  are  not  so  free  from  mysticism  and
theosophy  as  would  seem  to  be  the  case,  or  even  as  they
state.  For  they  too  look  upon  the  veritable  absolute  as
being  not  in  space  or  thought,  but  rather  in  spirit,  which
is  regarded  as  superior  to  the  categories  of  the  under-
standing ;  they  too  endeavour  to  base  nature  on
this  absolute.  Now,  taking  into  consideration  this
element  of  mysticism  and  theosophy,  set  forth  in
Germany  not  merely  by  a  whole  series  of  important
philosophical  systems,  but  even  by  the  preeminently
classical  systems,  if  we  inquire  into  the  origins  of
German  philosophy,  we  can  hardly  fail  to  bestow  con-
siderable attention  upon  the  shoemaker  theosophist.  We
will  seriously  ask  ourselves  whether  he  did  not  deserve
the  name  of  German  philosopher  given  him  during  his
lifetime  by  his  admirer  and  friend,  Dr.  Walther.

True,  at  first  sight,  the  name  scarcely  seems  to  suit
him.  Boehme  is  neither  a  scientist,  a  dialectician,  nor
even  a  disinterested  investigator.  The  son  of  peasants,
his  first  occupation  was  that  of  a  cowherd.  Then  he
became  a  shoemaker  at  GOrlitz,  the  town  adjoining  his
birthplace,  and  here  he  conscientiously  practised  his  trade
in  the  fear  of  the  Lord.  He  married  the  daughter  of
a  worthy  butcher  living  in  the  town,  Catharina  Kuntz-
schmann,  by  whom  he  had  four  sons,  and,  it  is  said,
two  daughters.  He  brought  up  his  sons  in  his  own
station  of  life  and  made  workmen  of  them.  He  lived
in  piety,  simplicity,  and  Christian  meekness,  and  was
ever  engaged  in  meditation  on  religious  things.  But


JACOB  BOEHME  171

it  was  his  continual  desire,  he  tells  us,  to  seek  in  the
heart  of  God  for  a  refuge  from  divine  wrath  and  the
wickedness  of  the  devil.  He  wrote  a  considerable
number  of  books.  But  what  was  the  source  of  his
inspiration  ?  He  had  read  neither  the  classic  authors
nor  the  Schoolmen,  and  was  acquainted  only  with
mystical  and  theosophical  writings.  And  even  for
what  he  knows  he  is  indebted  to  personal  and  super-
natural revelations.  Four  times  the  heavenly  light  was
revealed  to  him,  when  he  saw  either  Christ  or  the
eternal  Virgin  ;  during  the  few  moments  these  visions
lasted  he  learned  more  than  he  would  have  done  had  he
attended  classes  for  years.  At  the  beginning  of  each  of
his  books  we  find  the  words  geschrieben  nach  g'ottlicher
Erleuchtung,  written  by  divine  enlightenment.

The  work  corresponds  with  the  conditions  under
which  it  was  composed.  It  is  a  mixture  of  abstruse
theology,  alchemy,  speculations  on  the  undiscernible,
and  the  incomprehensible,  fantastic  poetry  and  mystic
effusions  ;  in  fact,  a  dazzling  chaos.  His  first  book  is
entitled,  The  dawn  at  its  rise,  or  the  root  and  mother  of
-philosophy r,  astrology,  and  theology  considered  in  their  true
principle :  a  description  of  nature,  in  which  is  seen  how  all
things  were  in  the  beginning,  etc.  Boehme  herein  sets
forth  the  genesis  of  the  holy  Trinity,  the  creation  and
fall  of  the  Angels,  the  creation  and  fall  of  man,  the
redemption  and  the  end  of  the  world.  He  sees,  and
would  have  others  see,  far  more  than  he  demonstrates  ;
his  science  is  a  metaphysical  hallucination.  Accord-
ingly he  is  constantly  doing  violence  to  language,  requir-
ing it  to  express  the  inexpressible.  He  uses  the  terms
of  ancient  mysticism,  of  alchemy  and  philosophy  ;  he
imposes  on  them  meanings  of  extraordinary  subtilty,
and  insists  on  there  being  the  infinite  and  the  mysteri-


172  STUDIES  IN  PHILOSOPHY

ous  at  the  base  of  all  thought.  Is  it  possible  that  from
such  a  work  anything  can  be  gleaned  by  the  historian
of  philosophy,  unless  by  an  arbitrary  interpretation  he
transforms  into  concepts  what,  on  the  part  of  the  author,
is  pure  intuition  and  imagination  ?

In  forming  an  opinion  of  this  man,  whose  sole  aim
was  to  set  the  spirit  free  from  the  letter,  it  would  be
unbecoming  to  judge  by  appearances.  In  reality,  Boehme
is  not  the  simple,  ignorant  man  he  tells  us  he  is.  He
was  open-minded  and  possessed  of  a  keen  intellect,  as
his  first  teachers  immediately  recognised.  He  lived  in
a  country  and  at  an  epoch  in  which  the  greatest  of  all
problems  were  being  discussed.  The  mysticism  of  old
was  still  flourishing  in  Germany  during  the  times  of
Schwenckfeld  and  Sebastien  Franck.  At  the  same  time,
ever  since  Nicolas  de  Cusa,  there  had  been  developing,
beneath  the  influence  of  Italian  naturalism,  a  profound
and  brilliant  theosophy  represented  by  Agrippa  von
Nettesheim  and  Paracelsus,  the  rehabilitation  and  deifica-
tion of  that  nature  which  the  mystics  of  the  Middle
Ages  were  destroying.  In  another  direction,  over  against
the  moral  optimism  of  Eckhart  and  his  disciples,  Luther
had  recently  set  up  the  doctrine  of  a  positive,  radical
evil,  rising  up  to  oppose  God  and  incapable  of  being
brought  within  the  compass  of  mere  diminution  or
deprivation.  The  new  principles  had  early  entered
either  into  connection  or  into  conflict  with  the  principle
of  ancient  mysticism.  Protestantism  was  already  attempt-
ing that  reconciliation  of  its  mystical  with  its  Pauline
origins,  its  spiritualistic  monism  with  its  moral  dualism,
and  its  principle  of  liberty  with  that  of  discipline,  which
she  is  still  following.  Theosophy  was  united  with
mysticism  in  Valentin  Weigel,  who  submitted  as  matter
for  the  subjective  reflection  of  Eckhart,  the  man  of


JACOB  BOEHME  173

Paracelsus,  a  resume  and  perfection  of  the  three  natures,
the  terrestrial,  sidereal,  and  the  divine,  of  which  the
created  universe  consists.

From  his  youth  onwards,  Boehme  eagerly  took  an
active  part  in  this  movement  of  ideas.  In  his  wander-
ings to  and  fro  as  a  journeyman  before  becoming  a
master-shoemaker,  he  conversed  of  things  religious  and
theosophical ;  he  observed,  read,  and  reflected.  Though
he  read  but  little,  what  he  did  read  was  important  and
full  of  profound  thought.  The  Bible  was  for  him  the
book  of  books,  that  thrilling,  deep  word  which,  especi-
ally since  the  days  of  Luther,  has  ever  been  the  most
powerful  incentive  to  reflection.  But  Boehme  read  the
writings  of  many  other  masters  besides.  He  read
Schwenckfeld,  noting  his  objections  to  that  doctrine
of  vicarious  atonement  which  tends  to  replace  by  ex-
ternal and  accidental  action  the  internal  working  of
grace,  the  only  possible  source  of  essential  conversion.
He  read  Paracelsus,  and  was  delighted  to  find  in  him
an  enthusiastic  apostle  of  life,  a  revealer  of  the  magic
power  of  imagination,  a  seer  who  finds,  in  the  world
and  in  natural  man,  that  image  of  God  which  mystics
had  ceased  to  find  therein.  He  studied  alchemy,  trying
to  discover  its  true,  its  spiritual  meaning.  To  him,
transmutation  was  the  symbol  of  the  new  birth  to  which
man  is  called  ;  the  philosopher's  stone  found  its  realisa-
tion for  him  in  the  power  of  faith  and  of  surrender  to
God.  He  read  Valentin  Weigel,  and  became  imbued
with  the  spiritual  mysticism  this  pious  pastor  inherited
from  Tauler,  from  German  theology,  from  Schwenckfeld,
and  from  Sebastien  Franck  ;  thanks  to  him,  also,  he  con-
ceived the  idea  of  combining  mysticism  with  theosophy.

Boehme  read  not  only  books  of  written  characters,
he  also  read  the  book  of  nature. Every  manifestation


174  STUDIES  IN  PHILOSOPHY

of  nature  is  instruction  for  him  ;  matter  is  not  a  being
apart,  foreign  to  spirit  ;  it  is  spirit  itself,  revealed  and
visible.  The  stars,  the  sun,  the  elements  of  the  earth,  life
everywhere,  in  its  origin  and  in  every  one  of  its  phases,
the  growing  tree,  the  animal  with  its  desires  and  dis-
interested instincts,  man  with  his  inner  life,  his  struggle
with  evil,  his  defeats  and  triumphs — all  these  things
Boehme  contemplates  and  meditates  upon,  and  in  this
immediate  and  religious  communion  with  nature,  waits
for  her  to  infuse  into  him  her  own  spirit  and  reveal  the
mysteries  of  being.

It  is  eternal,  interior,  and  living  being  that  he  seeks
everywhere  and  in  all  things.  Thus,  the  phenomena  of
nature,  like  the  teachings  set  forth  in  books,  are
signs  for  him  to  decipher,  not  the  object  about  which
knowledge  is  sought.  The  reason  why  he  reads  and
observes  is  to  have  matter  on  which  his  spirit  may
dwell  for  reflection.  It  is  Boehme's  endeavour  to  set
the  spirit  free  from  the  letter,  to  find  out  the  force
which  works  at  the  heart  of  inert  phenomena,  and  to
penetrate  to  the  very  source  of  all  reality.  Therefore
inner  experience  and  reflection  are,  once  for  all,  his  true
means  of  investigation.  True,  he  was  an  illuminate  ;
his  meditation  was  a  prayer  ;  his  discoveries,  divine
revelations.  Still,  what  matters  the  explanation  the
individual  himself  gives  of  the  channel  along  which
his  ideas  entered  his  consciousness  ?  Is  Descartes'
analytical  geometry  any  the  less  true  because  he  claimed
that  he  owed  its  invention  to  the  assistance  of  the  holy
Virgin  ?  It  may  be  because  of  the  way  in  which  the
human  mind  is  constituted  that  he  at  first  attributed  to
supernatural  revelation  the  new  ideas  that  arose  within
him,  impressing  him  by  their  beauty  and  illuminat-
ing power,  and  that  he  regarded  them  as  entering  his


JACOB  BOEHME  175

mind  from  without.  Plato's  essences,  the  z/oOs  of  Aris-
totle, the  Christian  ideal,  the  supreme  principles  of
knowledge  and  action,  were  looked  upon  as  beings  and
things  in  themselves,  before  they  came  to  be  explained
by  the  laws  of  the  human  mind.  The  natural  has  first
been  supernatural ;  for  the  genius  does  not  know  how
he  arises  ;  to  himself  he  appears  as  a  god  visiting  his
creature.  Boehme,  indeed,  is  not  content  to  receive
into  his  own  intelligence  the  revelations  of  divine
intelligence  ;  he  is  a  seer  of  visions.  Increate  wisdom,
the  eternal  Virgin,  appeared  to  him  several  times.
But  enthusiasm,  even  when  of  a  somewhat  sickly
nature,  is  just  as  likely  to  strengthen  as  it  is  to
weaken  the  powers  of  the  human  mind,  and  a  shock  to
the  organism  is  nothing  but  the  result  of  the  excessive
tension  to  which  the  mind  has  had  to  subject  the  body
for  the  realisation  of  its  creations.  The  thinking  reed1
bends  beneath  the  effort  of  thought,  even  more  than
beneath  the  weight  of  matter.  After  all,  there  is  only
one  interpretation,  only  one  standard  of  either  a  thinker's
or  an  artist's  work,  and  that  is  the  work  itself.  The
author  is  the  mould  which  is  broken  that  the  statue
may  be  made  visible.

II

What  is  it,  then,  that  we  find  in  the  work  of  Boehme
when  considered  in  itself,  both  in  its  spirit  and  inner  mean-
ing, as  the  author  would  have  it  studied,  and  in  its  real
and  objective  content,  as  history  would  have  it  studied  ?

First  of  all,  what  is  the  motive  of  the  theosophist
shoemaker's  reflections  ?

1  Pascal  in  his  Pens&s  (Edition  Ha<vet,  i.  6)  says  :  "  L'homme  n'est  qu'un
roseau  le  plus  faible  de  la  nature,  mais  c'est  un  roseau pensant."  (Translator's
note.)


1 76  STUDIES  IN  PHILOSOPHY

"  From  my  youth  up,"  he  tells  us,  "  I  have  sought
only  one  thing  :  the  salvation  of  my  soul,  the  means  of
gaining  possession  of  the  kingdom  of  God."  Here,
apparently,  is  nothing  more  than  an  altogether  practical
and  religious  object ;  but  in  Boehme's  mind,  this  object
is  destined  to  raise  the  most  profound,  metaphysical
speculations.

He  learnt  from  the  mystics  what  it  means  to  possess
God.  One  must  take  care,  so  these  masters  teach,  not
to  liken  the  possession  of  God  to  the  possession  of  any-
thing material.  God  is  spirit,  i.e.  for  the  man  who
understands  the  meaning  of  the  term,  a  generating
power  previous  to  all  essence,  even  the  divine.  God
is  spirit,  i.e.  pure  will,  both  infinite  and  free,  with
the  realisation  of  its  own  personality  as  its  object.
Henceforward,  God  cannot  be  accepted  by  any  passive
operation.  We  possess  him  only  if  he  is  created
within  us.  To  possess  God  is  to  live  the  life  of
God.

On  the  other  hand,  Boehme  learnt  from  Luther
that  the  natural  man  is  not  simply  a  son  separated
from  his  father,  that  between  God  and  his  creature
there  is  something  more  than  inert  space,  unresisting
non-being.  The  natural  man  has  rebelled  against  his
creator  :  between  him  and  God,  sin  raises  its  head,
like  a  real,  positive  power,  endeavouring  to  defeat  the
divine  action.  Evil  is  not  non-being,  it  is  a  real  being
that  combats  the  principle  of  good.  Everywhere  in
nature  Boehme  finds  that  effective  warfare  being  waged,
which  Luther  enabled  him  to  see  in  the  human  con-
science. Whether  he  beholds  sun  and  stars,  clouds  or
rain  or  snow,  creatures  with  reason  or  creatures  without
reason,  such  as  wood,  stones,  earth,  or  elements ;
no  matter  in  which  direction  he  turns,  he  sees  every-


JACOB  BOEHME  177

where  evil  over  against  good,  anger  opposing  love,
affirmation  opposed  to  negation.  Even  justice,  here
below,  is  at  grips  with  its  contrary.  For  the  godless
are  as  prosperous  as  the  god-fearing,  barbarous  nations
possess  the  richest  lands  and  enjoy  the  good  things
of  earth  more  than  do  the  servants  of  God.  Observing
these  things,  Boehme  tells  us,  I  fell  into  a  state  of  deep
melancholy  and  my  spirit  was  troubled.  Not  a  single
book,  of  all  those  with  which  I  was  acquainted,  brought
me  any  consolation.  And  the  devil  was  there,  watching
for  me,  and  filling  my  mind  with  heathenish  thoughts
such  as  I  should  be  ashamed  to  express  here.  Is  it  true
that  God  is  love,  as  Christianity  teaches,  that  God  is
omnipotent,  that  there  is  nothing  which  has  reality
in  his  presence  ?  Such,  doubtless,  are  the  questions
Boehme  felt  starting  to  life,  deep  in  his  consciousness.
Gladly  would  the  devil  have  seen  him  give  up  all
hope  of  fathoming  the  mystery  and  sink  to  sleep  in
indifference.  Boehme,  however,  guessed  his  designs
and  determined  to  foil  them.

How  was  he  to  reconcile  the  end  of  human  activity,
of  which  mystics  had  so  noble  a  conception,  with  the
reality  of  things,  so  concisely  stated  by  the  founder
of  Protestantism  ?  If  mankind  and  the  whole  of  nature
have  radically  rebelled  against  God,  how  can  one  main-
tain the  possibility  of  the  birth  of  God  within  the
human  soul  ?  If  man,  like  a  decayed  tree,  can  will
and  do  nothing  but  evil,1  there  is  no  middle  course
to  adopt,  it  would  appear,  between  leaving  the  tree  to
rot,  and,  after  uprooting  it,  flinging  it  into  the  fire.
If  nature  is  absolutely  opposed  to  God,  either  God
has  no  power  over  her,  or  he  ought  to  destroy  her.

To  maintain  the  spiritual  and  optimistic  ideal  of  the

1  According  to  Luther's  expression.

N


178  STUDIES  IN  PHILOSOPHY

mystics,  whilst  at  the  same  time  regarding  nature  from
the  pessimistic  standpoint  of  Luther,  and,  in  a  more
general  way,  from  a  realistic  standpoint  :  such  is  the
task  Boehme  sets  himself.  This  task  determines  itself
in  his  mind  as  follows.  Whereas  the  mystics  wished  to
know  how  God  can  be  born  in  that  which  is  not  himself,
Boehme  asks  himself  how  God  can  be  reborn  in  that  which
has  violently  separated  from  him.  Now,  he  imagines
he  can  solve  this  problem  if  he  is  able  to  discover  both
the  source  of  divine  existence  and  the  origin  of  the
world  and  of  sin.  This  science  will  be  regeneration
itself.  For  knowledge,  when  it  penetrates  to  its  source
and  origin,  blends  and  unites  with  action  and  reality.
To  see  things  from  the  standpoint  of  God  is  to  be
reborn  to  divine  life.

The  following,  therefore,  is  to  be  the  fundamental
division  of  Boehme's  system :  ist,  How  does  God
engender  himself?  2nd,  Why  and  how  did  God
create  the  world  and  how  did  evil  enter  therein  ?
3rd,  How  can  God  be  reborn  in  the  heart  of  the
corrupt  creature,  and  what  is  the  final  end  of  all
beings  ?

As  we  see,  this  is  the  question  of  the  beginning  and
the  end,  stated  in  all  its  generality  and  dominating  all
others.  Whereas  the  ancients  tried  to  discover  a
posteriori  what  stable,  determinate  principles  lie  hidden
beneath  the  movement  and  indetermination  of  pheno-
mena, and  knew  no  mean  between  an  altogether
illusory,  indeterminate  absolute  such  as  chance,  and  a
full  and  perfected  absolute  such  as  intelligence,  our
philosopher,  for  whom  the  whole  of  nature  is  the  result
of  an  action,  tries  to  find  out  how  the  absolute  itself
came  into  being,  in  so  far  as  it  is  this  and  not  that ;
even  as  regards  God,  he  descends  from  infinite  power


JACOB  BOEHME  179

to  the  production  of  determinate  being.  The  philosophy
of  the  ancients  was  a  classification,  more  than  anything
else,  that  of  Boehme  is  to  be  a  construction.  The
problem  of  the  genesis  of  things  has  been  substituted  for
that  of  their  essence.  And  as  the  being  whose  genesis  is
here  sought  and  whose  internal  movement  should  explain
nature  is  distinctly  the  conscious,  free  and  acting  person,
the  system  we  are  about  to  study  appears  before  us  as
the  dawn  of  a  new  philosophy,  which  may  be  called  the
philosophy  of  personality,  considered  in  itself  and  in  its
connection  with  nature.

What  method  does  Boehme  recommend  in  this
enquiry  ?

The  problem  now  before  us,  we  must  remember,  is
to  see  being  proceed  from  its  primary  source,  that  is,
to  apprehend  the  transition  from  nothing  to  something.
Now,  the  means  at  the  disposal  of  ordinary  philosophy
are  powerless  for  such  a  task.  What  will  erudition
give  us,  except  opinions,  abstract  ideas  ?  The  Bible
itself,  if  we  seek  enlightenment  therein  without  going
farther  back  in  time,  is  nothing  but  a  dead  letter,  a
symbol  that  cannot  be  explained.  It  is  the  same  with
the  senses  and  the  reason  as  it  is  with  erudition.  The
senses  enable  us  to  know  only  the  cut-and-dry  appear-
ances of  things  and  their  products,  not  their  real  nature
and  inner  life.  Exterior  reason,  or  the  natural  elaboration
of  the  data  of  experience,  is  as  dead  as  the  materials  it
brings  together.  It  analyses  and  separates  ;  and  the
objects  it  considers,  thus  snatched  from  the  living
whole  of  which  they  formed  part,  are  no  more  than
fictitious  beings,  incapable  of  telling  us  anything  of
their  origin  and  true  nature.  It  is  this  exterior  reason,
which,  seeing  the  wicked  in  this  world  of  ours  prosper
equally  with  the  good,  insinuates  to  man  that  evil  is  the


180  STUDIES  IN  PHILOSOPHY

equal  of  good,  and  consequently  that  the  existence  of
the  God  of  religion  is  problematical.

All  these  methods  have  the  same  flaw  :  they  are
passive  and  dead.  They  presuppose  a  given,  realised
object,  and  set  the  mind,  like  a  motionless  mirror,
opposite  that  object.  A  living  method,  alone,  enables
us  to  penetrate  into  the  mysteries  of  life.  Being,  alone,
knows  being  ;  we  must  generate  with  God  in  order  to
understand  generation.  Therefore  the  true  method
consists  in  witnessing,  or  rather  taking  part  in  the
divine  operation  whose  end  is  the  blossoming  and
dominion  the  rule  of  the  personality  ;  it  is  knowledge  as
consciousness  of  action:  a  method,  indeed,  which  proceeds
from  cause  to  effect,  whereas  any  purely  logical  method,
limited  to  the  working  out  of  the  data  of  experience,
is  and  can  be  nothing  more  than  a  vain  effort  to  rise
from  effect  to  cause.

But  then,  how  can  man  thus  place  himself  at  the
standpoint  of  God  ?  It  is  impossible  for  him  to  ascend
to  God  :  there  is  no  transmutation  of  creature  into
creator.  Still,  though  man  cannot  ascend  into  God,
God  can  descend  into  man.  Not  that  God  can  be
evoked  and  materially  constrained,  as  it  were,  by  the
practices  of  false  magic  or  outward  devotion,  but  rather
that  God  descends  into  man,  when  man  dies  to  his
corrupt,  inborn  nature,  to  give  himself  up  to  divine
action.  Christ  said  that  you  "  must  be  born  again,"  if
you  would  see  uthe  kingdom  of  God."  The  conversion
of  the  heart  opens  the  eye  of  the  intelligence.  Just
as  the  exterior  man  sees  the  exterior  world,  so  the  new
man  sees  the  divine  world  in  which  he  is  living.  And
this  return  to  God  is  possible  for  man,  since  man  was
created  in  the  image  of  God.  He  has  only  to  go  down
to  the  deepest  recesses  of  himself  and  set  free  the  interior


JACOB  BOEHME  181

man  from  the  exterior  man  in  order  to  participate  in
divine  life.  "  Reflect  on  thyself,  search  thyself,  find
thyself:  this  is  the  key  of  wisdom.  Thou  art  the
image  and  child  of  God.  Such  is  the  development  of
thy  being  ;  eternal  birth  in  God.  For  God  is  spirit,
and  likewise  in  thee  that  which  commands  is  spirit  and
is  the  creation  of  divine  sovereignty."

Once  man  thus  adopts  the  eternal  standpoint  of
universal  genesis,  everything  which  at  the  outset  was
only  veil  and  mist  interposed  between  himself  and  the
light,  becomes  a  transparent  symbol,  a  faithful  expres-
sion. Erudition,  the  Bible,  tradition,  concepts,  the
phenomena  of  nature,  all  these  things,  though  dead  in
themselves,  become  animated  and  living  when  regarded
with  the  eye  of  the  spirit.  The  eternal  word,  speaking
within  ourselves,  tells  us  the  true  meaning  of  the  written,
the  sensible  word.  Nor  is  this  all,  for  between  the
within  and  the  without  there  is  reciprocity  of  action.
Of  a  surety,  the  sight  of  exterior  things,  in  itself  alone,
would  never  have  revealed  to  us  the  principle  which
these  things  manifest,  this  principle  wills  to  be  under-
stood in  itself.  Primary  being,  however,  is  to  us
nothing  but  empty  form  ;  it  is  by  the  correct  inter-
pretation of  phenomena  that  it  assumes  body  and  is
determined.  All  the  same,  it  could  never  find  adequate
expression  in  phenomena.  Being  infinite,  spirit  could
not  be  wholly  manifested,  for  all  manifestation  takes
place  by  means  of  the  finite.  Spirit  is  eternal  mystery
in  its  essence.  Therefore  not  only  should  we  make
use  of  phenomena  in  order  to  catch  a  faint  glimpse  of
the  details  of  divine  perfection,  but  we  should  also
remember  that  phenomena  are  never  anything  else  than
an  imperfect  manifestation  of  this  perfection.  And
when  we  speak  of  the  origin  of  God  and  of  things,  we


1 82  STUDIES  IN  PHILOSOPHY

ought  to  appeal  to  all  the  images  with  which  our  senses
and  reason  supply  us,  and  always  look  upon  these  images
as  but  clumsy  metaphors  which  should  be  understood  in
spirit  and  in  truth.  The  wisdom  of  God  is  beyond  all
description.

Ill

This  maxim  meets  with  its  application  at  the  very
first  step  theosophy  attempts  to  take.  To  begin  with,
we  have  to  set  forth  the  birth  of  God,  the  way  in  which
God  generates  himself.  To  speak  of  the  birth  of  God,
however,  taking  these  words  literally,  is  to  speak  the
devil's  language  ;  it  is  saying  that  eternal  light  flashed
out  of  darkness,  that  God  had  a  beginning.  Still,  I  am
compelled  to  employ  this  term  :  the  birth  of  God  ;
otherwise,  thou  couldst  not  understand  me.  Restricted
as  we  are,  we  speak  only  by  parcelling  things  out,  by
breaking  the  unity  of  the  whole.  In  God  there  is
neither  Alpha  nor  Omega,  neither  birth  nor  develop-
ment. I,  however,  am  compelled  to  place  things  one
after  the  other.  The  reader  must  by  no  means  read
me  with  the  eyes  of  flesh.

Eternal  nature  generates  itself  without  any  begin-
ning. How  does  this  generation  come  about  ?

Boehme  here  sets  himself  the  famous  problem  of
self-originated  existence — of  aseity.  Whereas,  however,
by  this  term  the  Schoolmen  understand  a  mere  property
of  perfect  being,  a  property,  too,  that  is,  above  all,
negative  ;  Boehme  insists  that  the  strange  expression,
"  God  self-caused,"  shall  have  a  precise,  concrete  and
positive  meaning.  To  fathom  the  mystery  it  contains
is,  to  him,  the  first  and  main  question,  the  solution  of
which  will  throw  light  on  all  other  questions.  Nor  does
he  think  he  ought  to  abandon  the  search  until  he  has


JACOB  BOEHME  183

reconstructed  in  thought  the  logical  sequence  of  the
operations  by  which  God  rises  from  a  state  of  nothing-
ness to  one  of  fulness  of  existence.

What,  then,  was  there  in  the  beginning  ?  From
what  germ  did  God  generate  himself?

In  the  beginning  was  being  which  presupposes
nothing  anterior  to  itself;  in  which,  consequently,
nothing  is  essence,  or  nature,  or  finite,  determinate
form  :  for  everything  that  exists  as  a  determinate  thing
demands  a  cause  and  a  reason.  We,  for  our  part,  can
conceive  of  this  being  only  as  the  eternal  no-thing,  the
infinite,  the  abyss,  the  mystery.  Boehme  uses  the  word
Ungrund  to  designate  this  first  source  of  things,  mean-
ing thereby  that,  beneath  God,  there  is  nothing  to  serve
him  as  a  foundation,  and  also  that  in  the  first  being
the  ground  or  reason  of  things  is  not  yet  manifested.
Thus,  the  primordial  infinite  in  itself  is  nothing  but
silence,  rest  without  beginning  or  end,  absolute  peace
and  eternity,  unity  and  identity.  In  it  is  neither  goal,
nor  place,  nor  even  the  impulse  to  seek  and  find.  It
is  free  from  suffering,  that  companion  of  desire  and
quality.  It  is  neither  light  nor  darkness.  It  is  an  un-
fathomable mystery  unto  itself.

Such  is  the  initial  condition  of  divinity.  Is  it  also
its  fulfilment?  If  the  answer  is  in  the  affirmative,
God  is  reduced  to  being  nothing  more  than  an  abstract
property,  wanting  in  force,  intelligence  and  science  ;  he
is  rendered  incapable  of  creating  the  world  in  which
the  very  perfections  he  lacks  are  to  be  found.  But  it
is  impossible  that  God  should  be  an  inert  being,  dwell-
ing somewhere  beyond  the  skies.  The  Father  is  omni-
potent and  omniscient  ;  he  is  the  essence  of  gentleness
and  love,  pity  and  blessing.  The  world,  too,  derives
from  him  all  the  perfections  to  be  found  therein.  Then


1 84  STUDIES  IN  PHILOSOPHY

how  is  the  transition  to  be  brought  about  from  God,
who  is  nothingness,  to  God  the  person  and  creator  ?

Here  we  come  to  the  main  point  in  Boehme's
system.  The  solution  of  the  problem  of  eternal
generation,  given  by  our  theosophist,  is  the  distinctive
task  he  set  himself;  it  opens  up  a  new  path  along
which  many  philosophers  were  subsequently  to  proceed.

Of  course,  the  mystics  of  old  had  already  taken  up
this  line  of  research.  Eckhart  asked  himself  how
merely  potential,  motionless  and  inactive  divinity,  which
is  the  first  being,  becomes  the  living  and  personal  God,
who  alone  is  true  God.  He  explained  the  transition
from  the  one  to  the  other,  by  considering  the  part
played  by  the  image  or  idea  of  God,  which  emanates
spontaneously  from  primordial  power,  just  as  from
each  of  our  tendencies  there  goes  forth  an  idea  that
makes  it  objective  and  manifest.  Beholding  itself  in
its  own  image,  absolute  substance  became  conscious  of
itself  and  was  constituted  a  person.

Boehme  is  inspired  by  this  doctrine,  but  he  does
more  than  return  to  and  continue  it ;  with  that  sense
of  concrete  existence,  of  life  and  nature,  which  char-
acterises him,  he  can  find  no  satisfaction  in  the  abstract
God  of  the  mystics  of  old.  Eckhart  had  almost  ex-
plained how  God  becomes  conscious  of  himself ;  con-
sciousness of  self,  however,  is  no  more  than  the  shadow
of  existence.  In  order  then  that  God  may  really  be
a  person  and  that  nature  may  find  in  him  the  elements
of  a  positive  existence,  divine  generation  must  be  some-
thing different  from  what  Eckhart  teaches.

Boehme  starts  with  the  principle  that  God,  who  is
mystery,  wills  to  reveal  himself  in  all  the  fulness  of  his
being,  i.e.  to  manifest  himself  as  a  living  person,  capable
of  creating.  In  so  far  as  he  pursues  the  revelation  of


JACOB  BOEHME  185

himself,  God  wills  and  posits  all  the  conditions  of  this
revelation.  Now,  according  to  Boehme,  there  is  one
supreme  law  which  governs  all  things,  both  divine  and
human  :  that  all  revelation  calls  for  opposition.  As
light  is  visible  only  when  reflected  by  a  dark  body,
so  anything  whatsoever  is  posited  or  constituted  only
by  being  set  over  against  its  opposite.  That  which
meets  with  no  obstacle  always  goes  forward  and  never
returns  within  itself,  never  manifestly  exists,  either  for
itself  or  for  another.  Two  moments  may  be  distin-
guished in  the  relation  of  the  given  principle  to  its
contrary.  The  mere  presence  of  the  negative  principle
over  against  the  positive  principle  manifests  the  latter
only  as  a  potency  or  a  possibility.  If  it  is  desired  that
this  potency  become  reality,  it  must  act  upon  the
negative  principle,  discipline  it  and  make  thereof  its
instrument  and  expression.  This  law  of  opposition
and  reconciliation  governs  divine  genesis.  If  the  divine
spirit  is  to  be  revealed,  it  will  not  remain  within  itself,
it  will  create  its  contrary.  Nor  is  this  all ;  for,  acting
on  this  contrary,  it  will  assimilate  it  to  itself  and
spiritualise  it.  And  so  we  find  that  Boehme  is  to
involve  God  in  a  series  of  oppositions.  In  proportion
as  contradictions  and  reconciliations  come  about,  in  like
proportion  will  divine  personality  be  realised.  The
contrary  essence  or  nature  on  which  God  will  rely  in
order  to  personify  himself,  will  constitute,  within  God
himself,  the  eternal  basis  of  our  created  nature.

Such  are  the  ideas  that  govern  Boehme's  system
and  give  it  its  distinctive  character.  They  have  their
centre  in  a  principle  which  may  be  formulated  as
follows  :  being  is  constituted  as  potency  by  opposing
itself  and  as  reality  by  reconciling  to  itself  that  which
is  opposed  to  it.  These  general  ideas,  however,  are  not


1 86  STUDIES  IN  PHILOSOPHY

so  much  formulated  in  one  special  place,  as  employed
in  the  development  of  the  system.

In  the  beginning  was  no-thing.  This  no-thing  is  not
absolute  nothingness.  On  the  contrary,  it  is  being
itself,  eternal  Good,  eternal  gentleness  and  eternal  love,
but  still,  being  in  itself,  i.e.  non-manifested.  And  so
in  this  no-thing  there  dwells  an  internal  opposition.  It
is  nothing,  and  it  is  all  ;  it  is  indifference  and  it  is
excellence.  That  is  the  reason  this  no-thing  must
appear  to  us  as  unstable  and  living.  It  will  move
itself,  in  order  to  become  reconciled  with  itself.

The  first  result  of  the  opposition  just  noticed  is  the
scission  of  the  primordial  infinite  into  two  contraries  :
desire  (Sucht)  and  will  (Wille).  No-thing  is  desire,
because  it  is  mystery,  and  mystery  tends  to  manifest
itself;  no-thing  is  the  desire  to  become  some-thing.
But  the  object  to  which  it  tends  is  not  an  indeterminate
one  :  it  is  the  manifestation  and  possession  of  oneself.
And  so  the  infinite  is  desire  on  the  one  hand,  and  what
is  called  will  on  the  other.  Unconscious  and  un-
assuaged  desire  generates  will ;  but  will,  to  which
belong  knowledge  and  understanding,  regulates  and
determines  desire.  The  one  possesses  motion  and  life  ;
the  other,  independence  and  power  of  command.  Will
is  greater  than  the  power  which  gave  it  birth.
This  duality  is  the  origin  of  all  the  oppositions  which
the  march  of  divine  revelation  will  arouse.  Will  is
the  germ  of  divine  personality  and  the  basis  of  all
personality  ;  desire,  the  essence  and  body  of  will,  is
the  germ  of  eternal  nature  and  the  basis  of  sensible
nature.

And  so  will  is  manifested  because  of  the  presence  of
desire,  with  which  it  is  contrasted. Yes  and  no,  how-


\

\


JACOB  BOEHME  187

ever,  are  not  two  things  outside  of  each  other  ;  they
are  one  and  the  same  thing,  divided  only  to  allow  the
yes  to  reveal  itself.  That  is  why  separation,  in  its  turn,
is  an  unstable  condition.  The  yes  which,  in  this
separation,  is  per  se  devoid  of  essence  and  looked
upon  as  no-thing,  endeavours  to  make  itself  concrete
by  absorbing  the  no  and  reconstituting  unity  to  its  own
advantage.  On  to  the  two  opposite  terms,  desire  and
will,  there  is  now  added  a  third,  the  idea  of  a  recon-
ciliation of  the  first  with  the  second.  The  production
of  this  third  term  is  the  work  of  imagination.  Speak-
ing generally,  this  faculty  of  imagination  is  desire,
applied  to  an  image  and  tending  to  absorb  it — as
hunger  absorbs  food — and  then  to  produce  it  in  the
outer  world,  transformed  into  a  living  reality  by  the
action  of  the  subject  itself.  Now,  the  will  which  is  mind,
and  whose  object  is  the  revelation  of  itself,  unites  with
desire,  in  order  to  imagine  this  revelation  ;  and,  in
doing  so,  become  capable  of  realising  it.  Imagination
makes  the  will  into  a  magician.  What  the  will  wills  is
determined  in  the  very  effort  it  makes  to  represent  it
to  itself.  It  wills  to  find  and  lay  hold  upon  itself ;
consequently,  to  form  an  interior  mirror  of  itself ;  and
as  desire  is  the  matter  on  which  it  works,  it  wills  that
infinite  desire,  fixing  itself  on  the  Good,  shall  become
this  mirror.

The  task,  then,  before  God  or  the  will  is  the  follow-
ing :  the  regulating  of  desire  according  to  the  law  of
the  Good,  and  hence,  the  forming  of  an  object  which  is
a  mirror  of  the  will,  and  wherein  the  latter  can  con-
template and  recognise  itself.  In  accomplishing  this
task,  divine  will  is  to  issue  from  a  state  of  nothingness
and  attain  to  reality.

God  wills  to  manifest  himself,  to  form  a  mirror  of


1 88  STUDIES  IN  PHILOSOPHY

himself.  He  can  do  this  only  in  a  threefold  manner.
First,  he  must  posit  himself  as  indeterminate  will,
capable  of  willing  good  or  evil.  Such  a  will,  however,
is  neither  good  nor  bad  :  God  must  come  out  of  this
indifference.  He  does  this  by  generating  within  him-
self the  one,  eternal  Good,  or  determinate  will.  This
good,  which  is  God,  is  not  an  object  or  a  thing  ;  it
remains  will,  though  strong,  infallible  will.  With  the
generation  of  this  will,  a  beginning  has  been  constituted
in  the  infinite,  a  foundation  has  been  formed  in  the
abyss,  and  a  reason  for  things  has  been  superposed  upon
the  eternal  mystery.  Nevertheless,  the  first  will  has
not  exhausted  itself  in  the  generation  of  determinate
will  :  it  retains  its  infinite  fecundity.  Thus,  from  the
conjuncture  of  infinite  will  and  determinate  will  springs
a  third  will,  to  wit,  will  that  goes  forth  of  itself  to
produce  an  object.  The  object  resulting  from  this
threefold  action  is  none  other  than  the  mirror  of  will
itself,  eternal  wisdom.  This  image  is  not  God,  it  is
only  the  image  of  God.  Still,  by  it,  God  is  henceforth
self-revealed,  he  sees  himself  as  a  will  that  is  threefold
and  one  at  the  same  time.  These  three  moments  of
divine  activity  may  be  characterised  by  the  names  of
willy  strictly  so  called,  reason  and  force.  They  may
also  be  named  Father,  Son  and  Spirit.  These  are  not
three  gods,  for  each  of  the  three  is  a  spiritual  being,
and  separation  of  substances  exists  only  in  the  material
world.  Nor  are  they  even  three  persons  ;  for  will,  as
against  its  image  or  idea,  is  only  knowledge  and
consciousness  of  itself,  it  does  not  yet  exercise  that
empire  over  a  thing-being,  which  is  the  condition  of
personality.  In  truth,  God  is  person  only  in  Christ.
In  the  generation  that  has  just  been  considered,  there  is
nothing  else  than  a  threefold  action  of  the  one  will.


JACOB  BOEHME  189

Eternal  wisdom,  whose  production  is  the  result  of
this  action,  in  which,  too,  the  Trinity  sees  and  finds  itself
acting,  is  not  a  fourth  will,  but  is  set  over  against  the
Trinity  as  its  representation  or  object.  It  is  this
reconciliation  of  desire  with  will  that  the  latter  had
undertaken  to  effect.  Like  every  mirror,  it  is  passive  and
does  not  generate  at  all.  It  is  the  eternal  virgin.  In  it
are  all  the  divine  perfections,  though  rather  as  ideas  and
paradigms  than  forces  and  living  beings.  For  these
perfections  are  objects  of  will,  not  wills  themselves  :  and
life  could  not  exist  without  will,  on  which  it  is  founded.
Life  and  fruitfulness  belong  not  to  ideas  or  generalities,
but  to  persons  only,  in  so  far  as  they  act  in  accordance
with  ideas.

Such  is  the  divine  genesis  following  the  appearance
of  desire  and  will  in  the  heart  of  the  primordial  infinite.
Here,  indeed,  we  have  God  far  removed  from  a  state
of  nothingness.  He  knows  himself  as  will,  and  even
good  will.  But  is  he  God  the  Father,  omnipotent  and
omniscient,  love  and  pity,  light  and  joy,  of  whom  we
try  to  catch  a  glimpse  and  whom  we  seek  ?

This  God,  if  we  note  well,  by  no  means  realises
personality  yet.  He  is  intelligence  ;  he  knows  himself.
But  intelligence,  such  as  we  see  it  within  ourselves,  is
not  something  concrete,  something  we  can  grasp.  It  is
not  an  essence,  but  rather  the  potency  or  germ  of  an
essence.  The  God,  whose  action,  altogether  interior,
has  no  other  object  than  himself,  is  still  a  hidden,  an
incompletely  revealed  God.  He  is  God  as  far  as  possi-
bility will  allow  :  the  divine  ideal.  In  order  that  this
ideal  may  be  realised  and  God  be  the  living  person,  will
must  continue  the  work  of  eternal  generation,  which,  so
far,  has  only  been  begun.  God  must  have  a  second  birth.

Here,  more  especially,  the  law  of  contraries  will  find


1 9o  STUDIES  IN  PHILOSOPHY

its  application.  If  we  consider'  all  the  things  that  really
exist  in  this  world,  we  find  they  are  made  up  of  yes  and
no  :  In  Ja  und  Nein  bestehen  alle  T)inge.  Day  could
not  be  without  night,  nor  night  without  day  ;  cold  is
the  condition  of  heat,  and  heat  of  cold.  Do  away  with
opposition  and  struggle,  and  everything  will  return  to
silence  and  immobility,  everything  will  revert  to  a  state
of  nothingness.  The  one,  in  so  far  as  it  is  one,  has
nothing  that  it  can  will.  For  it  to  will  and  live,  it  must
divide  into  two.  In  the  same  way,  unity  cannot  sense
itself,  but  in  duality  sensation  is  possible.  For  a  being,
then,  to  be  posited  as  real,  it  must  be  opposed  against  its
contrary,  and  the  degree  of  opposition  is  the  measure  of
the  degree  of  realisation.

Now,  in  the  development  of  the  divine  activity  just
considered,  God  was  not  opposed  against  anything  which
might  rightly  be  called  his  contrary.  The  power  of
objectivation  in  whose  presence  he  has  found  himself  and
which  he  determined  and  limited  so  as  to  form  his  true
image  of  it,  differed  from  him  only  as  idea  differs  from
intelligence.  In  this  passive  principle,  there  is  nothing
to  oppose  divine  action  :  a  mirror  reflects — without
resisting — the  rays  that  fall  upon  it.  In  this  altogether
ideal  opposition,  God  could  acquire  only  an  ideal
existence.  In  order  that  he  may  assume  bodily  form,
as  a  person,  he  must  be  engaged  in  strife  with  a  real
contrary,  i.e.  with  a  positive  power  whose  action  is
opposed  to  his  own.  Therefore  God  must  raise  up
such  a  contrary,  become  connected  with  it,  oppose  it
and  finally  discipline  and  permeate  it ;  only  thus  will
the  work  of  divine  generation  be  accomplished.  How
is  this  new  development  to  be  effected  ?

The  will  that  has  realised  itself  in  the  evolution
through  which  we  have  just  passed,  and  which  may  be


JACOB  BOEHME  191

called  reason,  is  still  pure  spirit,  infinitude,  a  mystery.
But  mystery,  whilst  it  continues  such,  calls  for  revela-
tion which  alone  determines  it  as  mystery. Like all
contraries, mystery  and revelation imply each other.
Therefore,  the  will  could  not  remain  the  obscure  dark
potency  it  still  is  (Finsterniss). Within  its  murky  gloom
is  kindled  a  new  desire, the  desire  to  exist  in  a  real,
concrete,  that  is  to  say,  corporeal  fashion. But  it  is  not
of  itself  that  darkness  glows  and  becomes  fire,  or  that
motionless  reason  is  changed  into  the  desire  to  live. The
term  or  goal  to  which  divine  will  tends  is  the  realisation
of  the  personality,  the  excellent  form  of  life. At  the  basis
of  reason,  then,  there  was  light  as  well  as  darkness,  the
dawn of  perfect life as well as the dim  desire of
life  in  general ;  and  it  was  by  contact  with  the  new-
born light  that  the  dark  was  kindled  and  became  fire.
The  desire  to  live  is,  at  bottom,  the  will  to  live  well.
And  so  the  possible  God  divides  himself  into  desire
of  life in general and will to realise perfect life.
These  are  no  longer  two  abstract,  ideal  entities,  but
rather  two  forces,  alike  positive  and  living. And  these
forces  first  appear  as  two  rival  energies,  ready  to  enter
upon  a  struggle  with  each  other. For  the  love  of  life,
when  left  to  itself,  impels  the  being  to  exist  in  every
possible  manner  : it  makes  no  distinction  between  good
and  evil,  the  beautiful  and  the  ugly,  the  divine  and  the
diabolical. On  the  contrary,  the  will  to  live  well  and
be  a  person  requires  a  choice  from  amongst  all  possible
forms  of  life,  and  excludes  those  that  do  not  conform
with  the  ideal. The  dividing  of  the  eternal  no-thing
into  passivity  and  activity,  desire  and  will,  had  produced
only  the  logical  opposition  of  subject  and  object. The
dividing of  will into negative and affirmative will,
fire  and  light,  force  and  love,  results  in  a  real  opposition


192  STUDIES  IN  PHILOSOPHY

and  the  beginning  of  internal  warfare  within  the  heart
of  divinity.  The  first  of  the  two  rival  powers,  force  or
life  in  general,  is  the  principle  and  the  mother  ;  the
second,  love  or  enlightenment,  is  the  law  and  the  end.
The  one  is  the  substratum  of  real  nature,  the  other  that
of  divine  personality.

In  this  second  opposition,  God  awakes  to  personal
life  ;  set  over  against  nature,  however,  as  against  some
inimical  power,  he  is  at  first  nothing  more  than  latent
energy,  mere  capacity  for  love  and  light.  In  order
that  this  energy  may  be  displayed  and  realised,  love
must  enter  into  relation  with  force,  imposing  its  law
on  this  latter.  And  so  the  progress  of  divine  revelation
demands  a  reconciliation  of  the  two  contraries  that  have
sprung  up  in  the  heart  of  will.  Now,  that  this  recon-
ciliation may  come  about,  it  must  in  the  first  place  be
posited  as  both  idea  and  goal  :  afterwards,  the  divine  will
must  work  to  realise  this  idea.  But  the  reconciliation
of  force  with  love,  or  of  fire  with  light,  is  nothing  else
than  the  realisation  of  that  eternal  wisdom,  which  divinity
has  formed  as  a  mirror  wherein  to  contemplate  and  know
itself.  Thus,  what  has  to  be  done  is  to  bring  down  the
idea  from  the  empty  heights  of  a  transcendent  heaven,  in
order  to  blend  it  with  living  forces  and  manifest  it  in
a  corporeal  nature.  Ideal  wisdom  as  an  object  to  be
realised  :  that  is  the  third  term  superposed  on  the  two
contraries  into  which  divine  will  has  divided  itself.

How  will  the  new  task  resulting  from  the  position
of  these  three  terms  be  accomplished  ?  Here  we  are  on
the  plane  of  life  :  matter,  agent  and  end  are,  each  of
them,  beings  endowed  with  force  and  activity.  It  is  by
the  cooperation  of  these  three  principles  that  reconcilia-
tion will  be  brought  about.  If  love  is  an  action  that
tends  to  temper  force,  force  is  an  unconscious  impulse


JACOB  BOEHME  193

towards  love  ;  and  the  idea  itself,  ideal  wisdom,  seized
with  the  desire  to  live,  tends  to  its  own  realisation  :
the  virgin,  God's  companion,  aspires  after  the  mani-
festation of  the  divine  wonders  slumbering  within  her.
From  these  elements,  eternal  magic  forms  God  in
person.  Will  is  linked  in  imagination  to  the  idea  it  pur-
poses to  realise  ;  contemplating,  it  becomes  enamoured
of  it ;  and,  eagerly  desiring  union,  seizes  upon  and
absorbs  it.  It  absorbs  it  in  order  to  generate  it  within
itself  and  produce  it  in  the  form  of  a  reality.  On  its
side,  too,  the  idea  is  active  and  desires  existence  :  it  is
a  soul  seeking  for  itself  a  body.  It  goes  to  meet  the
will  that  is  calling  to  it.  The  idea  is  accordingly
realised,  beneath  the  generating  action  of  imagination
and  desire  :  spirit,  by  a  wholly  interior  operation,
devoid  of  any  pree"xistent  corporeal  reality,  takes  to
itself  a  nature,  an  essence  and  a  body.

This  realisation  of  divine  wisdom  is  a  wonderful  and
complex  work  which  it  is  important  to  consider  in
detail.

God  effects  it  by  means  of  seven  organising  spirits
which  he  generates  with  a  view  to  this  task.  These
spirits  are  the  forces  born  in  the  heart  of  the  dark
element  beneath  the  influence  of  the  light  element,  forces
whose  mission  it  is  to  transform  the  will  which  says
"  no "  into  the  will  which  says  "  yes "  ;  to  discipline
and  deify  nature.  Boehme  here  resumes  and  adapts  to
his  system  the  ancient  kabbalistic  doctrine  of  the  seven
natural  essences,  the  last  of  which  is  the  divine  kingdom.
According  to  Boehme,  the  seven  spirits  are  born  in
succession  from  one  another,  and  their  succession  marks
the  progress  of  nature  in  the  direction  of  God.  The
first  three  bring  nature  or  the  dark  element  to  the  point
at  which  contact  will  be  possible  between  itself  and  the

o


1 94  STUDIES  IN  PHILOSOPHY

light  element.  The  fourth  realises  this  contact,  and  the
last  three  cause  light  and  love  to  reign  over  nature,  now
prevailed  upon  and  induced  to  follow  spontaneously.

First,  there  springs  up  in  the  will,  desire  properly
so  called,  or  the  egoistic  tendency.  The  will  wills  to
be  something.  Now,  there  is  nothing  over  against  it,  the
possession  of  which  is  capable  of  determining  it.  There-
fore it  takes  itself  as  object  and  wills  everything  for
itself.  It  then  imagines  itself  to  be  something,  though
it  is  still  nothing  but  hunger  and  emptiness.  This  first
essence  is  the  dark,  the  solid,  the  force  of  contraction,
the  salt  of  the  alchemists.

Then  there  comes  about  motion,  as  the  second  essence
or  second  natural  spirit.  For,  as  it  is  infinite  and  void,
the  will  cannot  find  any  satisfaction  in  taking  itself  as
object.  Therefore  it  turns  without  and  becomes  the
acute,  the  bitter  ;  pain  :  that  spur  of  sensibility,  the
force  of  expansion,  the  mercury  of  the  philosophers.

Meanwhile  the  two  forces  thus  produced  are  in  con-
flict with  each  other.  The  first  directs  being  towards
itself,  the  second  directs  it  towards  something  else.  The
result  of  this  opposition  is  the  third  essence,  restlessness,
the  incessant  motion  of  a  soul  that  cannot  find  its  good
within  itself  and  knows  not  where  to  look  for  it.  The
two  forces  in  the  soul,  the  forces  of  contraction  and
expansion,  are  contradictory,  and  yet  they  cannot  be
separated  from  each  other.  The  soul,  void  in  itself,
cannot  remain  fixed  in  egoism  :  moved  by  ego'fsm  even
when  it  goes  forth  from  itself  and  seeks  its  good  without,
it  cannot  attain  to  abnegation  and  love.  It  is  con-
tinually fleeing  from  and  seeking  itself.  This  restless
motion  is  that  of  a  wheel,  a  motion  which  reaches  no
goal  and  yet  is  in  perpetual  pursuit  of  itself.  Thus,
the  third  essence  has  for  its  expression  :  rotation,  or


JACOB  BOEHME  195

the  combination  of  the  centripetal  and  the  centrifugal
forces.  It  forms  the  base  of  the  sulphur  of  the
alchemists.

Nature  rises  to  this  point  of  herself,  but  here  her
power  stops.  She  has  shaken  off  the  dull  slumber  and
ignoble  ease  of  ego'fsm,  and  sought  without  for  the
thing  she  could  not  find  within.  To  the  eye  of  the
body,  however,  the  exterior  infinite  is  just  as  void  as
the  interior  infinite  ;  and  the  soul  has  done  no  more
than  abandon  itself  to  two  contradictory  impulses  and
bring  itself  into  a  state  of  embarrassment,  placing  itself
before  a  spinning-wheel,  as  it  were.  This  interior  con-
tradiction in  a  being  which  seeks  for  rest  by  means  of
agitation,  is  an  intolerable  torture ;  but  nature,  of
herself,  cannot  put  an  end  to  it.  She  has  exhausted
all  her  resources  :  nothing  within  will  extricate  her  from
the  state  in  which  she  is.  Salvation  can  come  only
from  what  is  above  nature,  i.e.  from  God  or  eternal
freedom.  But  how  will  these  two  contrary  powers
succeed  in  reuniting  with  each  other  ?

The  restlessness  with  which  nature  is  tortured  has
this  advantage,  that  it  manifests  her  weakness  and  cries
out  to  her  that  she  cannot  suffice  unto  herself  and  form
a  whole.  The  man  who  knows  his  wretchedness  is  not
so  wretched  as  he  who  is  ignorant  of  it.  Under  the
influence  of  the  spirit  hovering  above  nature,  the  latter
soon  feels  an  anxious  desire  for  freedom.  Something
tells  the  soul  that  it  must  give  itself  to  that  which  is
superior  to  it,  that  in  self-sacrifice  it  will  find  itself,  that
in  dying  unto  itself  it  will  be  born  in  very  truth.  On
the  other  hand,  spirit  and  freedom  need  nature  in  order
to  manifest  and  realise  themselves.  If  nature  has  a  dim
consciousness  of  her  own  law  and  harmony  in  spirit,
the  latter  seeks  in  nature  his  own  reality  and  body.


196  STUDIES  IN  PHILOSOPHY

Spirit  wills  to  exist,  as  nature  tends  to  free  herself  from
suffering.  Thus  impelled  in  the  direction  of  each  other,
spirit  and  nature  approach  each  other.  Nature,  how-
ever, has  her  own  distinctive  motion,  and  her  force
of  inertia.  The  new  desire  she  feels  only  just  shows
itself,  it  does  not  modify  her  wonted  course.  And
so  nature  comes  into  collision  with  spirit  whom  she  is
seeking  and  who  now  comes  down  to  her  ;  from  the
impact  a  new  phenomenon  is  born  :  the  lightning  flash.
This  is  the  fourth  moment  in  the  march  of  existence,
the  fourth  essence.  This  moment  is  the  manifestation
of  the  contact  of  nature  and  spirit.  In  the  flash  of  the
lightning,  the  dark,  the  coarse  and  the  violent,  all  that
makes  up  the  ego'lstic  tendency  of  nature,  is  swallowed
up  and  reduced  to  nothingness.  The  darkness  is  illu-
mined and  becomes  living,  manifest  fire,  the  centre  of
light.  Henceforth,  nature  is  subject  to  and  capable  of
realising  spirit.  There  has  come  to  pass  a  divine  law
which  will  henceforth  apply  to  all  beings.  All  life,  accord-
ing to  this  law,  implies  a  dual  birth.  Suffering  is  the
condition  of  joy,  only  through  fire  or  by  way  of  the
cross  do  we  attain  to  light.  Per  crucem  ad  lucem.  Both
in  the  intellectual  and  the  physical  order  of  things,
parturition  is  preceded  by  a  state  of  unrest  and  anxiety.
Nature  labours  and  suffers,  feeling  she  has  not  the
strength  necessary  to  bring  forth  the  fruit  she  has  con-
ceived. Suddenly,  however,  a  supernatural  effort,  as  it
were,  takes  place  ;  suffering  and  joy  clash  together  in
one  indivisible  instant,  the  lightning  flashes  forth  and
the  new  being  passes  out  of  darkness  into  light.  Hence-
forth the  child  of  flesh  is  in  possession  of  his  own  form
and  will  develop  by  himself  in  accordance  with  his  con-
trolling idea  ;  the  fruit  of  intelligence  is  no  longer  a
chaos  of  vague,  incoherent  ideas,  it  is  a  conscious  thought,


JACOB  BOEHME  197

sure  of  itself,  entering  unhesitatingly  into  the  expression
which  manifests  it.

With  the  appearance  of  the  lightning  flash,  the  first
existence  of  divine  nature,  the  development  of  the
negative  triad,  comes  to  an  end.  At  the  same  time
there  begins  the  development  of  a  positive  triad,  repre-
senting the  second  and  definitive  existence  of  nature.
Contraction,  expansion  and  rotation,  will  be  found  in
the  march  of  this  regenerate  nature,  though  in  a  new,
a  supernatural  sense.

The  new  concentration  is  the  work  of  love  :  the  uni-
fying power  of  the  spirit.  Beneath  its  influence,  forces
abandon  all  their  violence  and  take  delight  in  each  other.
Ego'fstic  passions  die  away,  and  in  place  of  the  unity
of  individuals,  each  one  of  whom  claims  to  exist  alone,
there  is  substituted  a  unity  of  penetration  where  each
seeks,  in  its  accord  with  the  whole,  a  participation  in
true  unity.  Thus,  love  is  the  fifth  spirit,  the  fifth
essence.  Its  symbol  is  water,  which  extinguishes  the
fire  of  desire  and  confers  second  birth,  birth  according
to  the  spirit.

Still,  beings  ought  to  do  more  than  simply  melt
into  each  other.  Their  unification  cannot  be  absorption
and  annihilation.  The  march  of  revelation  ought  to
make  multiplicity  perceptible,  even  to  that  profound
spiritual  unity  conferred  by  love.  And  so  there  appears
a  sixth  spirit,  which  releases  the  elements  of  the  divine
symphony  and  causes  them  to  be  heard  in  their  indi-
viduality as  well  as  in  their  relation  to  the  general  effect.
This  sixth  spirit  is  the  intelligent  word,  or  sound,  by  means
of  which  voices  cease  to  be  indistinct  noises,  for  they
acquire  that  determination  which  makes  them  discern-
ible and  comprehensible  in  themselves.  As  love  was
the  unification  of  the  multiple,  so  the  sixth  essence  is


198  STUDIES  IN  PHILOSOPHY

the  perception  of  the  multiple  in  the  heart  of  unity
itself.

All  that  now  remains  to  be  done,  in  the  completion
of  the  task  of  realising  God,  is  to  collect  and  coordinate
all  the  forces  that  have  successively  created  each  other.
If  the  higher  is  to  govern  the  lower,  it  is  not  to
substitute  itself  therefor  and  annihilate  it,  for  the  lower
is  its  reality  and  its  very  existence  ;  deprived  of  this
support,  the  higher  element  would  be  dissipated  in  the
void  of  transcendent  space.  Light  can  only  exist  with
darkness  as  its  background.  Therefore  there  appears
a  seventh  spirit  which,  winning  over  the  lower  to  the
higher  by  persuasion,  and  bringing  down  the  higher
into  the  lower  by  grace,  summons  the  whole  of  nature,
great  and  small,  first  and  last,  to  the  manifestation  of
the  divine  will.  This  essence  is  body  or  the  spirit  of
harmony.  By  its  action  the  revelation  of  the  Eternal
is  finally  accomplished.  Wisdom  is  no  longer  an  idea.
It  is  a  kingdom  of  living  beings,  the  kingdom  of  God
or  of  Glory.

Thus  Boehme  regards  as  a  reality  and  an  essential
condition  of  divine  life,  this  uncreated  heaven,  the
kingdom  of  the  Father,  the  glory  of  God,  of  which
the  Scriptures  speak  in  so  many  places  though  the
language  used  is  often  interpreted  metaphorically.  The
lily  is  clad  in  beauty,  a  beauty  surpassing  the  splendour
of  Solomon.  Man  has  his  vesture  of  glory  :  his  wealth
and  his  home,  power  and  honours,  all  that  manifests  his
invisible  personality.  God,  too,  reveals  himself  in  a
phenomenon  that  has  no  other  content  thaa  himself,  and
yet  is  distinct  from  him.  The  Glory  of  God  is  his
vesture,  his  outer  form,  his  body  and  reality  :  it  is  God
seen  from  without.

To  describe  the  harmony  and  beauty  of  this  kingdom


JACOB  BOEHME  199

of  Glory  is  impossible.  It  sums  up  all  we  see  on  earth,
though  in  a  state  of  perfection  and  spirituality  to  which
the  creature  cannot  attain.  Its  colours  are  more  brilliant,
its  fruits  more  savoury,  its  sounds  more  melodious,  and
its  whole  life  more  happy.  Along  with  purity  of  spirit,
divine  beings  possess  the  full  reality  of  body.  Their
life  is  not  an  imperfectly  satisfied  desire  :  it  is  being
in  all  its  fulness  and  completion.  Above  all  else  it  is
harmony,  reconciled  with  the  free  and  perfect  growth  of
all  individuals.  Consider  the  birds  in  our  forests :  each
praises  God  in  its  own  fashion,  in  all  keys  and  modes.
Do  we  find  God  offended  by  this  diversity,  does  he
impose  silence  on  the  discordant  voices  ?  All  forms  of
being  are  precious  in  the  sight  of  Infinite  Being.  But  if
divine  gentleness  is  manifested  in  our  world,  a  fortiori,
beings  in  the  kingdom  of  Glory  are  free  from  all  restraint,
since  all  in  that  kingdom,  each  according  to  its  nature,
not  only  seek  God  but  also  possess  and  manifest  him.

Such,  in  its  completion,  is  eternal  nature,  the  revela-
tion of  the  divine  mystery.  She  carries  within  herself
three  principles,  the  three  reasons,  as  it  were,  or  bases
of  determination,  born  of  primordial  no-thing.  The
first  principle  is  the  substratum  of  the  first  three  qualities,
or  of  nature  left  to  herself.  It  is  darkness,  or  latent
fire,  waiting  for  the  spark  in  order  to  become  manifest.
Boehme  generally  calls  it  fire.  The  second  principle  is
the  substratum  of  the  last  three  qualities,  i.e.  of  the
form  or  expression  of  ideal  wisdom.  This  is  the  prin-
ciple of  light.  Each  of  these  principles  is  eternal  ;  and,
in  a  sense,  they  exclude  each  other.  Fire  admits  of  no
limit,  it  devours  everything  with  which  it  is  brought
into  contact.  Light  is  the  absolute  of  sweetness  and
joy,  the  negation  of  darkness,  the  goal  of  all  aspiration.
The  former  is  the  life  of  the  all  or  of  the  inde-


200  STUDIES  IN  PHILOSOPHY

terminate  infinite  :  the  latter  is  the  life  of  God  or  of
the  excellent,  the  determinate  one.  Still,  neither  of  these
two  principles  can  suffice  unto  itself.  In  vain  does  fire
will  to  be  the  whole,  it  is  only  a  part.  In  vain  does
light  scorn  darkness  :  it  is  realised  only  when  reflected
from  the  dark.  That  is  why  a  third  principle  is  neces-
sary, which  will  unite  the  first  to  the  second,  in  such  a
manner  as  to  produce  real  existence.  This  third  principle
is  body.  By  it,  spirit  incarnates  in  matter  and  becomes
real  and  living.  This  union  of  the  first  principle  with
the  second  is,  after  all,  not  a  complete  absorption,  and
the  three  principles  remain  irreducible.  Indeed,  the
operation  which  places  fire  under  the  laws  of  light  does
not  annihilate  even  the  basis  of  fire.  Infinitude  of  life
subsists  beneath  the  form  of  perfection  that  determines
it.  The  divine  command  is  not  addressed  to  slaves  ;
it  wills  to  have  free  beings  and  finds  them.  Fire,  light,
body,  i.e.  life,  good  and  their  union  in  one  real  being  ;
such  are  the  three  principles  of  divine  nature.

We  must  now  take  care  not  to  identify  this  nature
with  the  true  God.  However  excellent  she  be,
divine  nature  exists  neither  in  herself  nor  for  her
own  benefit.  She  is  the  realisation  of  the  perfections
comprised  in  the  idea  of  wisdom.  She  is  the  eternal
virgin,  who,  at  the  voice  of  God,  has  come  down  from
the  limbo  of  the  possible  into  the  paradise  of  actual
existence.  Nature  will  now  return  thanks  to  her
creator,  handing  over  to  him  her  life  and  her  bodily
existence.  The  eternal  virgin,  fecundated  by  spirit,
henceforth  brings  to  birth,  and  the  fruit  of  her  womb
is  God  the  person,  i.e.  the  God  who  not  only  knows
and  possesses  himself,  but  also  projects  himself  with-
out, in  love  and  action.  Whereas  the  latter,  God  the
person,  set  before  himself,  as  a  mirror  of  his  infinite


JACOB  BOEHME  201

will,  eternal  wisdom  or  the  idea  of  divinity,  God  con-
stituted himself  only  as  ideal  trinity,  a  possible  person-
ality. By  giving  himself  in  nature  a  living  contrary,
and  bending  this  contrary  to  the  laws  of  his  good  will,
God  enters  upon  a  differentiation  which  is  real  and  no
longer  ideal,  and  hence  attains  to  effective  personality,
that  of  the  Christian  trinity.  Self-knowledge  confers
only  existence  for  self;  action  alone  generates  absolute
existence  and  completes  personality.

Now,  this  action  is  threefold  :  it  posits  three  per-
sons corresponding  to  the  three  principles  of  nature.
In  the  first  place,  God  is  the  will  that  presides  over
life  in  general,  or  over  eternal  fire.  In  this  sense  he  is
the  Father,  power,  justice,  divine  wrath  :  he  is,  as  it
were,  the  consciousness  of  infinite  vital  activity.  God,
however,  does  not  desire  life  for  life  itself.  His  will
is  to  have  life  as  a  realisation  of  idea,  to  generate  the
living  word.  This  is  why  the  Father  gives  birth  to
the  Son,  who  is  the  consciousness  of  the  second  prin-
ciple or  of  light,  and  wills  the  subordination  of  life  to
good,  its  raison  d'etre.  By  the  Son,  the  God  of  love
and  compassion,  the  fire  of  wrath  is  for  ever  appeased.
Accordingly,  the  Son  is  greater  than  the  Father.  Still,
the  existence  of  the  good  will  as  against  the  universal
will  to  live  is  not  sufficient  to  realise  the  good  ;  these
two  wills  must  come  together  and  become  reconciled,
and  this  is  what  takes  place  in  a  third  consciousness
and  a  third  person,  whence  proceeds  the  third  principle
called  the  Holy  Ghost.

Thus,  whilst  forming  eternal  nature,  and  by  reason
of  the  very  activity  expended  in  forming  it,  God  truly
constitutes  himself  Father,  Son,  and  Spirit,  without  on
that  account  abdicating  his  unity.  Because  the  three
realisations  of  God  are  indeed  persons  and  not  things,


202  STUDIES  IN  PHILOSOPHY

they  do  not  come  under  that  law  of  time  and  space
which  insists  that  unity  is  incompatible  with  multi-
plicity. Personality  admits  of  mutual  penetration  :
further  than  that,  it  implies  it.  Only  in  its  union
with  other  persons  can  a  personal  being  be  constituted
as  such.  In  so  far  as  a  being  is  conceived  as  external
to  other  beings  it  is  constituted  in  space  and  attributes
to  itself  individuality,  that  enemy  of  true  personality.
Ego'fsm  is  the  basis  of  individuality  :  it  is  the  gift  of
oneself  that  makes  the  person.

The  generation  of  God  is  now  accomplished.  God
is  perfect  personality  realised  in  three  persons,  each  of
which  is  the  part  and  the  whole,  at  one  and  the  same
time.  These  three  persons  are  the  Father,  or  the  con-
sciousness of  force  ;  the  Son,  or  the  consciousness  of
good  ;  and  the  Spirit,  or  the  consciousness  of  the
harmony  set  up  in  God  between  force  and  good.  And
over  against  God,  as  being  his  work  and  his  glory,
stands  arrayed  eternal  nature,  in  whom  all  possibilities
are  realised,  in  proportion  as  they  express  divine  per-
fection.

Such  is  the  teaching  of  Boehme  regarding  the  birth
of  God.  Through  the  theological  and  alchemical
symbols  in  which  this  teaching  is  clothed  for  the  pur-
pose of  self-manifestation  is  it  not  clear  that  it  pos-
sesses a  philosophical  meaning  and  import  ?  The  main
idea  of  the  teaching  is  that  the  person  is  the  perfect
being  and  must  exist  ;  consequently,  that  all  the  condi-
tions of  the  person's  existence  must  themselves  be
realised.  From  this  principle  all  else  follows.  Per-
sonality, says  Boehme,  implies  thought  and  action  ;
now,  in  order  to  think  and  act,  one  must  be  in  rapport
with  something  opposed  to  oneself.  Thought  must
have  some  object  to  consider  and  resolve  into  itself ;


JACOB  BOEHME  203

action  must  have  matter  which  it  may  subdue  and
spiritualise.  This  law  is  universal ;  absolute  person-
ality itself  could  not  escape  from  it  without  contradic-
tion. On  the  other  hand,  absolute  being  must  be  self-
caused,  must  depend  on  nothing  foreign  to  itself.  Thus
if  absolute  being  wills  to  become  person,  it  must  draw
from  itself  an  object  opposed  to  itself,  to  which  its  in-
telligence applies,  and  which  its  activity  modifies.  It  is
necessary  that  the  one  infinite  divinity  be  transformed
of  itself  into  a  duality,  one  of  whose  terms  will  be  the
true  God,  and  the  other  will  be  nature,  of  whom  this
God  has  need.  Thus  conceived  of  as  being  subject
and  agent  as  against  object  and  matter  springing  from
his  own  inmost  being,  God  has  a  task  to  perform  :  the
solution  of  the  antinomy  he  has  created  within  him-
self; and  by  the  accomplishment  of  this  task  he  realises
himself  qua  person.  His  action  and  thought,  life  and
existence,  are  henceforward  something  else  than  the
shadow  of  human  life  and  activity  :  they  are  perfect
types  of  which  the  existence  of  creatures  affords  us
nothing  but  feeble  images.

Now,  what  is  this  system  wherein  God  generates
himself  by  positing  and  rising  above  his  contrary  ?  Is
it  not  that  ancient  doctrine  of  Night  as  a  first  principle
which  Aristotle  had  already  repudiated  in  his  prede-
cessors ?  The  first  being,  said  Aristotle,  is  not  the
imperfect,  but  the  perfect ;  in  the  order  of  phenomena,
the  perfect  is  subsequent  to  the  imperfect ;  but  in  the
order  of  being,  it  is  the  perfect  that  is  first  and
absolute.  Boehme's  doctrine,  like  that  of  the  old
theologians,  appears  to  be  only  an  anthropomorphism
or  a  naturalism.  He  noticed,  we  may  say,  that  in  the
case  of  man,  indetermination  precedes  determination  ;
that  struggle  is  the  condition  of  life  and  progress  ;


204  STUDIES  IN  PHILOSOPHY

that  an  image  is  necessary  for  the  understanding,  and
matter  for  the  will ;  that  the  action  of  our  faculties
consists  in  assimilating  to  oneself  external  objects  ;  and
he  transferred  to  God  this  condition  of  human  existence.

Even  were  this  judgment  well  founded  we  could  not
regard  it  as  a  condemnation  of  the  doctrine,  purely  and
simply.  Though  Boehme's  system  were,  in  reality,  to
apply  only  to  finite  beings,  it  would  not,  on  that
account,  be  without  importance.  We  must  forgive
our  theosophist  for  his  imperfect  teaching  as  to  the
history  of  the  divine  trinity,  if,  when  thinking  he  is
speaking  to  us  of  God,  he  is  really  speaking  of  our-
selves, and  that  with  much  sagacity.  The  great  prin-
ciple that  will  is  the  basis  of  life  and  existence,  and
that,  in  its  turn,  life  finds  in  freedom  its  end  and  raison
d'etre^  will  lose  none  of  its  interest  by  being  concerned
only  with  the  created  world  instead  of  being  applied  to
the  Creator  as  well.  This  strange  system,  whose  very
opulence  is  utter  confusion,  and  whose  glory  is  dazzling
lightning,  contains  many  a  delicate,  modest,  and  psycho-
logical observation,  many  a  wise,  practical,  and  moral
reflection.  As  Boehtne  tells  us,  it  is  in  the  depths  of
his  consciousness  that  he  seeks  after  divinity  ;  it  is
because  God  generates  himself  in  man  that  man  can
be  made  acquainted  with  divine  generation.  What
wonder  if  his  knowledge  of  God  is,  above  all,  knowledge
of  ourselves  ?

Moreover,  it  does  not  follow  that  Boehme,  from  the
metaphysical  point  of  view,  is  a  mere  naturalist.  With-
out delighting,  as  he  does,  in  speculations  that  we
cannot  possibly  verify  regarding  the  birth  and  develop-
ment of  God,  at  all  events  we  can  see  the  difference
between  his  teaching  and  that  rejected  by  Aristotle.
According  to  the  ancient  philosophy  of  chaos  and  the


JACOB  BOEHME  205

infinite,  the  generation  of  the  perfect  by  the  imperfect
was  the  absolute  reality  of  things.  To  Boehme  there  is
no  before  or  after  in  God,  the  absolute.  It  is  our  con-
dition as  finite  and  belonging  to  nature  that  forces  us
to  regard  God  from  the  standpoint  of  nature,  and  to
picture  to  ourselves  his  life  as  being  progressive.

This  is  not  all,  however.  The  chaos  of  the  ancients
was  a  given  nature,  a  thing,  and  that  the  most  confused
and  indeterminate  conceivable  ;  and  from  this  thing,  by
a  necessary  process  of  development,  determinate  and
perfect  being  was  brought  forth.  The  standpoint  of
the  ancients  was  an  objective  one.  Aristotle,  under  the
name  of  pure  action,  contrasts  the  thing  that  is  wholly
determinate  with  the  thing  that  is  wholly  indeter-
minate ;  whereas  Neo-Platonism,  returning  to  the  idea
of  progress,  posits,  as  first  being,  a  unity  which,  superior
or  inferior  to  intelligence  and  life,  unnamable  and
unintelligible,  still  seems  to  be  only  the  thing,  stripped
of  the  last  of  its  qualities  by  the  final  effort  of  abstrac-
tion. The  principle  of  our  theosophical  mystic  is
something  quite  different.  A  Christian  and  a  spirit-
ualist, he  assigns  the  first  place  to  personality  in  its
most  perfect  form.  From  the  point  of  view  at  which
he  is  placed,  indetermination,  infinitude,  no-thing  have
quite  different  meanings  from  those  contained  in  ancient
philosophy.  No  longer  is  no-thing  the  lack  of  quality
and  perfection  in  a  thing  that  can  exist  only  if  it  is
determinate  ;  it  is  the  infinite  fecundity  of  a  spirit
which  is  by  its  very  potency,  and  is  exhausted  by  none
of  its  productions.  Negative,  from  the  outer  stand-
point of  objectivity,  Boehme's  principle  is  altogether
positive  from  the  inner  standpoint  of  life  and  genera-
tion. In  itself  this  principle  is  not  the  imperfect,  it  is
the  perfect ;  and  the  progress  admitted  by  Boehme,


206  STUDIES  IN  PHILOSOPHY

though  in  a  way  relative  to  the  human  mind,  is  pro-
gress in  manifestation,  not  in  the  intrinsic  perfection  of
God.  The  system  of  the  metaphysical  world  has  been
inverted  ;  no  longer  is  it  intelligence  that  depends  on
the  intelligible,  it  is  the  intelligible  that  depends  on  in-
telligence. It  is  no  longer  the  subject  that  derives  its
existence  from  the  object,  it  is  the  object  that  exists  by
the  subject.  The  reason  this  substitution  has  come
about  is  that  man  has  discovered  in  that  which  consti-
tutes the  foundation  of  the  subject,  in  mind  and  will,
something  irreducible  that  baffles  description,  and  which
he  regards  as  more  real  in  its  indetermination  and
nothingness  than  all  the  tangible  realities  of  given  sub-
stance.

Thus,  Boehme's  course  is  by  no  means  that  of
the  Pythagoreans  or  even  of  the  Neo-Platonists.  The
progress  which  proceeds  from  will  to  its  workings
cannot  be  assimilated  to  the  progress  which  proceeds
from  the  indeterminate  thing  to  the  determinate.
The  theology  of  Boehme  is  not  an  evolutionistic
monism.

Nor,  on  the  other  hand,  is  it  a  system  of  dualism  :
Does  it  not,  indeed,  appear  as  though  Boehme  escapes  one
danger  only  to  fall  into  an  opposite  one  ?  How  does
Boehme  maintain  the  perfection  of  the  divine  principle
unless  it  be  by  positing,  outside  of  God,  as  a  subject  of
evil,  a  hostile  and  coeternal  principle  ?  And,  accord-
ing to  him,  God  himself  is  one  with  and  responsible  for
this  latter  principle.  Per  crucem  ad  lucem  :  this  is  both
the  divine  and  the  human  law.  No  light  without  dark-
ness, no  action  without  matter,  no  subject  without  object,
no  God  without  nature.  Is  it  not  just  this  universal
and  necessary  coexistence  of  two  principles,  the  one
positive,  the  other  negative,  that  is  called  dualism  ?


JACOB  BOEHME  207

It  cannot,  indeed,  be  denied  that  Boehme  sees  in
matter  the  condition  of  the  manifestation  of  spirit  ;  this
is  even  an  essential  part  of  his  system.  But  Boehme
does  not  regard  himself  as  a  dualist  on  that  account.
In  his  eyes  it  is  monstrous  to  make  evil  the  equal  of
good,  and  nature  the  equal  of  God.  The  negative
principle  does  not  exist  in  itself,  but  only  by  the  action
of  the  positive  principle,  which  creates  it  in  order  to
manifest  therein.  God  alone  is  sovereign  ruler,  and
it  is  the  internal  motion  of  divine  will  that  posits
matter,  outside  of  God,  as  the  condition  of  this  very
motion.  Matter  is  the  exterior  aspect,  the  phenomenon
of  the  invisible  action  of  spirit.  It  fixes  in  dead  forms
the  continuous  flashing  forth  of  living  light.  Dependent
on  spirit  as  regards  her  origin,  nature  is  subject  to
spirit  as  regards  her  final  purpose.  Her  end  is  to  supply
spirit,  by  manifesting  it,  with  the  object  it  needs  in
order  to  lay  hold  of  and  personify  itself.  She  resists
spirit  only  in  order  to  afford  it  an  opportunity  to  display
its  might,  her  instinct  is  an  intelligence  that  is  ignorant
of  itself ;  her  passion,  an  unconscious  desire  for  freedom.
Far  from  nature  being  the  equal  of  God,  it  is  at  God's
summons  that  she  begins  to  exist,  and  the  limit  of  her
development  is  her  exact  adaptation  to  the  will  of
spirit.

Thus  Boehme's  theology  borders  on  dualism  as  it
did  on  evolutionism  without  running  counter  to  it  or
foundering  therein.  At  bottom,  Boehme  purposes  to
find  a  middle  term  between  these  two  doctrines.  In
his  opinion,  the  mystics  of  old  were  in  the  wrong  when
they  rejected  dualism  altogether.  This  was  the  reason
they  could  not  realise  the  philosophy  of  personality  that
they  had  conceived.  Their  God  lacks  the  conditions
of  real  existence,  he  does  not  outstep  the  limits  of  ideal


208  STUDIES  IN  PHILOSOPHY

existence.  It  is  only  by  borrowing  from  dualism
the  idea  of  the  eternal  existence  of  matter  as  contrary
to  spirit  and  giving  this  matter  as  a  body  to  divine
spirit,  that  divine  personality  can  be  conceived  of  as
really  existing.  But,  on  the  other  hand,  God  the
person  must  remain  infinite  being  outside  of  which
nothing  exists  in  itself.  Dualism  is  repugnant  to
religious  thought  which  would  have  God  not  only  a
form  and  an  ideal,  but  also  omnipotent  and  independent
being.  Thus,  matter  must  not  be  a  first  being  for  the
same  reason  that  God  is,  its  very  existence  must  result
from  the  working  of  divine  power.  How  can  matter
issue  from  God  and  yet,  at  the  same  time,  be  the  con-
trary of  God  ?  Boehme  solves  the  difficulty  by  saying
that  God,  in  order  to  reveal  himself,  makes  himself
objective  and  real,  and  that  this  object  and  this  exterior
reality,  though  posited  by  God,  are  not  confounded
with  him,  because  will,  which  is  the  basis  of  his  being,
is  infinite  ;  its  efforts  cannot  possibly  be  wasted.  Thus
God  has  a  nature  or  body  that  is  not  himself  and  that
forms  his  real  existence  ;  but  this  body  is  posited  by
God  and  is  none  other  than  his  will  itself,  seen  from
without.  In  this  phenomenon  of  God,  the  eternal
mystery  is  revealed,  without  the  revelation  ever  dispelling
the  mystery.  Nature  is  of  the  essence  of  God  but  God
is  independent  of  nature.  This  system  is  a  kind  of
concrete  or  naturalistic  spiritualism.

IV

The  knowledge  of  divine  genesis  is  the  first  we  need,
in  order  to  attain  to  the  possession  of  God.  But  this
knowledge  is  not  enough.  It  was  a  mistake  on  the
part  of  the  mystics  to  believe  that  all  science  was  com-


JACOB  BOEHME  209

prised  in  the  science  of  God.  Nature  and  man  cannot
be  explained  by  a  mere  diminution  of  perfect  essence.
In  creatures  there  is  something  peculiar  to  themselves
that  distinguishes  them  from  God  and  even  allows  them
to  rebel  against  him.  Evil,  the  work  of  creatures,  is
not  a  non-being,  it  is  a  being  that  says  no  ;  hatred  that
would  destroy  love  ;  violence  that  would  break  the  law.
Accordingly,  there  is  a  science  of  nature,  apart  from
the  science  of  God.  The  difficulty  consists  in  account-
ing for  this  distinction  whilst  maintaining  that  relation
of  dependence  which  should  link  all  science  with  that  of
absolute  being.

The  first  problem  raised  by  the  existence  of  nature  is
that  of  creation.  On  this  point  Boehme  cannot  adopt
the  doctrine  usually  called  theism.  According  to  this
doctrine,  it  would  appear  that  God  made  the  world
from  absolute  no-thing,  i.e.  created  it  by  his  infinite
will  alone,  without  using  any  matter  at  all,  either
sensible  or  suprasensible.  But  such  a  world  would  have
no  true  reality,  for  its  reality  would  not  be  founded  in
God.  It  would  be  simply  a  possible  and  ideal  world,
like  the  very  principle  to  which  it  would  owe  its  birth  :
intelligence  without  matter  creates  only  ideas.  There-
fore there  is  no  true  personality  in  creatures.  The
reason  some  are  good  and  others  bad,  some  predestined
to  happiness  and  the  rest  given  up  to  damnation,  is  not
because  there  are  living  and  opposite  energies  in  the
souls  of  creatures,  it  is  because  it  has  so  been  willed
by  the  God  who  transcends  all  arbitrary  wills.  Idealism
and  fatalism  are  the  consequences  of  the  doctrine  of
theism.

Still,  if  Boehme  rejects  theism,  will  he  not,  as  a  con-
sequence, sink  into  pantheism  ?  We  know  that  he
recognises  in  God  the  existence  of  a  nature.  Is  it  not

p


210  STUDIES  IN  PHILOSOPHY

this  nature  that  is  to  constitute  the  substratum  of
visible  nature  ?  Can  the  latter  be  anything  else  than  a
development  of  the  former  ;  and  must  we  not  say,  with
the  pantheists,  that  the  world  is,  if  not  God  himself,  at
all  events  the  body  and  manifestation  of  God  ?

Certainly  such  an  interpretation  would  be  contrary
to  Boehme's  plan,  which  is  even  more  energetically
opposed  to  pantheism  than  to  theism.  Surely,  he  says,
in  one  sense  God  is  everything,  heaven  and  earth,  spirit
and  world ;  for  everything  has  its  origin  in  him.  But
then,  what  becomes  of  his  glorious  immensity  if  the
world  is  the  standard  of  his  perfection  ?  Doubtless  he
created  the  world  by  his  wisdom  and  might  :  but  he  did
not  form  it  so  that  he  himself  might  become  more
perfect.  His  perfection  is  complete  independently  of
all  creation.  God  formed  the  world  so  as  to  be  mani-
fested in  a  manner  that  would  be  sensible.  Let  not
sophists  tell  me  that,  in  my  doctrine  of  the  divine
nature,  I  am  confounding  God  with  the  world.  I  am
not  confounding  exterior  with  interior  nature.  The
latter  is  truly  living  and  is  perfect.  The  other  has
nothing  but  a  derived  life,  and  remains  imperfect.  No,
the  exterior  world  is  not  God,  nor  could  it  without
blasphemy  be  called  God.  To  say  that  God  is  all,  that
God  is  himself  and  heaven  and  earth  and  the  outer
world,  is  to  speak  as  the  heathen,  to  make  profession  of
the  devil's  religion.

Boehme's  problem,  therefore,  is  to  derive  matter
from  spirit  and  yet  not  sink  into  theism,  and  to  base
sensible  nature  on  divine  nature  without  falling  into
pantheism.  How  does  he  solve  the  problem  ?

Whereas  the  birth  of  God  was  a  mere  generation,
i.e.  a  magical  production  accomplished  by  spirit  through
its  two  powers  at  once  homogeneous  and  contrary,


JACOB  BOEHME  211

and  without  any  pre-existing  matter,  the  birth  of  the
world  is  a  creation,  or  production  brought  about  by  a
spiritual  agent  through  matter.  The  spiritual  agent  is
the  one  God  in  three  persons.  Matter  is  eternal
nature.  Neither  of  these  two  principles  is  the  world,  or
contains  it.  God  the  person,  as  such,  is  pure  spirit.
Eternal  nature  is  perfect  harmony,  in  which  beings,
although  distinct,  interpenetrate  :  it  is  a  multiplicity
each  part  of  which,  in  its  own  way,  expresses  the  unity
of  the  whole.  These  perfections  radically  distinguish
God  and  the  divine  nature  from  the  sensible  and
created  world,  which,  on  the  one  hand,  is  material,  and
on  the  other  consists  of  parts  and  fragments  exterior  to
one  another.  But  though  God  the  person  and  eternal
nature  are  not  the  world,  they  contain  its  elements  ;  the
world  has  its  own  mobility  and  reality  so  far  as  there  is
in  it  something  of  the  divine  perfection.  And  first  ,God,
seeing,  from  all  eternity,  in  wisdom,  the  ideas  of  things,
formed  the  design  of  creating  the  world,  i.e.  of  causing
to  exist  in  corporeal  fashion  what  existed  in  him  in
essential  fashion,  or  rather  of  causing  to  appear  separate
what,  in  him,  was  together.  He  formed  this  design
from  love  alone,  without  being  constrained  or  forced
thereto  in  any  way.  There  is  not  the  slightest  reason
for  creation.  Its  wherefore  is  a  mystery  and  admits  of
no  revelation  whatsoever.  If  creation  had  its  first
origin  in  the  manifested  God  and  not  in  the  primordial
abyss,  it  would  be  explained,  it  would  be  necessary,  and
would  force  itself  upon  God.  But  God  wills  to  have
children,  not  masters.  Though  the  world  depends  on
God,  God  has  no  need  of  the  world.

The  world  was  not  made  from  some  thing,  i.e.
brute  matter,  the  absolute  contrary  of  a  person.  It  was
made  of  the  divine  nature,  in  the  sense  that  the  seven


212  STUDIES  IN  PHILOSOPHY

spirits  constituting  this  nature  realised  in  the  form  of
bodies  the  ideas  contained  in  wisdom.  The  productions
of  these  spirits  in  the  world  of  Glory  were  figures  with
floating  contours,  instinct  with  life  and  spirituality :  the
infinite  visible  in  the  finite.  The  same  spirits  now
fix  the  idea  in  hard  compact  matter  which  conceals
the  infinite  that  it  realises.  In  the  world  of  Glory  the
real  and  the  ideal  balance  each  other  :  in  the  created
world,  it  is  the  real  that  predominates.

Such  is  the  portion  of  God  the  person,  such  the
portion  of  the  divine  nature  in  creation.  A  third
worker,  however,  intervenes  in  order  to  realise  the
world,  this  worker  is  the  creature  itself.  Just  as  when
the  artist  is  working,  the  work  itself,  that  wills  to  be,
furthers  by  its  distinctive  life  the  efforts  of  will  and
intelligence  ;  so  the  creature,  when  brought  to  the
threshold  of  existence  by  the  union  of  spirit  and  increate
nature,  endeavours  to  cross  this  threshold  and  display
itself  in  fulness  of  light.  All  spirit  is  a  soul  which  desires
a  body.  Now,  the  creative  word  had  the  effect  of
breaking  the  bond  that  held  together  the  spiritual  forces
in  union  and  harmony.  Each  of  them,  thenceforward,
wills  to  exist  for  itself,  to  become  manifest  in  accordance
with  its  distinctive  tendency.

What,  then,  is  creation  ?  It  is  the  introduction  of
space  and  time  into  the  world  of  particular  wills.  Deep
in  the  heart  of  eternity,  wills,  individual  in  themselves,
were  universal  in  their  object.  Realised  in  bodies
separated  from  one  another  by  time  and  space,  wills  are
thereby  detached  from  the  all  and  thrown  back  upon
themselves.  Thus,  space  and  time  are  the  special
foundation  of  the  reality  of  the  sensible  world.  Here,
there  is  nothing  that  does  not  come  from  God,  but
nothing  that  was  in  God  could  produce  this  form  of


JACOB  BOEHME  213

existence  by  mere  development  :  it  is  by  a  free,  original
act,  a  veritable  creation,  that  God  causes  the  world  of
discontinuity  and  exteriority  to  appear.

God,  then,  is  by  no  means  swallowed  up  in  his
creation,  any  more  than  the  intelligence  of  man  is
exhausted  by  being  manifested.  The  divine  will  is  as
tenuous  as  a  no-thing.  No  given  solid  being  is  capable
of  enclosing  it  within  itself  and  making  it  immovable.
Besides,  the  world  does  not  issue  from  God  himself,  but
from  his  glory,  i.e.  his  exterior  form.  And  this  very
glory,  the  periphery  of  divinity,  remains  after  creation
what  it  was  before.  For  if  the  less  is  included  in  the
more,  the  more  is  not  included  in  the  less  ;  a  fortiori^  the
different  cannot  be  included  in  the  different.  Neither
as  subject  nor  as  object  is  divinity  absorbed  in  its
sensible  manifestation.  Creation  is  not  at  all  a  trans-
formation of  force.

Thus  God  creates,  at  the  same  time,  from  nothing
and  from  matter.  God  the  person  creates  with  the
divine  nature  as  matter,  but  personality  and  the  divine
nature  alike  have  their  root  in  the  primordial  no-thing,
in  the  mystery  of  infinite  will.

Now  what  is  it  that  God  creates,  what  are  the
essential  parts  of  the  world  system  ?  The  model  and
instruments  of  creation  are  found,  under  the  form  of
eternity,  in  the  divine  wisdom  and  nature.  Creation  is
to  be  the  realisation  of  this  wisdom  and  nature  under  the
form  of  time  and  separation.  And  so  there  is  a  relation
between  created  things  and  eternal  things,  and  it  is
to  a  certain  extent  possible  to  deduce  from  the  latter
the  knowledge  of  the  former,  by  placing  oneself  at  the
standpoint  of  God.  This  deduction  is  what  is  called
the  philosophy  of  nature,  a  speculation  destined  later
on  to  assume  a  considerable  degree  of  development


2i4  STUDIES  IN  PHILOSOPHY

in Germany, and rudiments of which we find in
Boehme's  theosophy.

The  construction  of  the  exterior  world  is  brought
about  in  a  manner  similar  to  that  of  the  interior,  divine
world.  In  sensible  bodies  as  in  eternal  nature,  it  is
personality  that  seeks  manifestation  for  itself  :  the  only
difference  is  that  this  manifestation,  which  is  fully
effected  in  eternal  nature,  remains  of  necessity  incom-
plete in  sensible  nature.  In  the  world  there  will  then  be
three  principles  corresponding  to  the  three  divine  prin-
ciples :  fire,  light,  and  the  union  of  these  two  principles
in  corporeity.  Of  the  first  and  second,  without  appeal-
ing to  the  third,  God  forms  the  angels,  who  are  still
as  near  to  divine  perfection  as  the  created  condition
permits  of.  The  angels  are  spirits  only.  They  do  not
exist  of  themselves,  however,  and  their  body,  though
spiritual,  is  harder  and  more  compact  than  the  glorious
body  of  divinity.  The  angels  are  not  yet  placed  in
time  ;  they  enjoy  a  derivative  eternity  intermediary
between  absolute  eternity  and  the  succession  of  parts
independent  of  one  another.  At  the  same  time  that
God  formed  the  angels  from  the  first  two  principles,  he
formed  from  the  third  a  terrestrial  nature,  more  concrete
and  material  than  the  divine  though  still  subject  to  spirit
and  relatively  harmonious.  This  nature  is  governed  by
the  angels.  All  these  beings  were  created  in  order  that
divine  light,  reflected  from  harder  surfaces,  might
appear  more  shining,  that  sound  might  have  a  clearer
ring,  and  the  kingdom  of  joy  extend  beyond  the  circle
of  divine  glory.  Not  that  the  manifestation  of  God
might  thereby  become  more  perfect,  for  it  is  at  the  cost
of  a  diminution  of  harmony  that  any  particular  quality
thus  becomes  more  vivid,  but  rather  that  it  was  ex-
pedient for  infinite  power  and  love  to  realise  possibilities


JACOB  BOEHME  215

which,  though  they  had  no  place  in  the  divine  nature,
still  showed  forth  the  signs  of  perfection.

To  fulfil  their  destiny,  the  angels  must  proceed  from
Father  to  Son,  from  wrath  to  love,  after  the  fashion  of
God  himself.  Besides,  they  were  created  free,  and,  like
God,  determine  themselves,  without  compulsion  from
without.  They  are  masters  of  their  determinations.
Now,  whereas  one  portion  of  the  angels  made  their  own
freedom  of  will  conformable  with  the  divine  will,  another
portion  rebelled  against  God.  Lucifer  was  the  chief  of
these  rebel  angels  and  the  first  author  of  evil  :  he  sinned
freely  in  accordance  with  his  own  will  and  without
compulsion.

Sin  came  about  in  the  following  manner.  A  com-
pound of  nature  and  spirit,  Lucifer,  employing  his  own
free  will,  fixed  his  imagination  on  nature.  Beneath  the
gaze  of  this  magician,  nature  was  transformed;  from
being  dark  she  became  shining  ;  full  of  defects,  she
decked  herself  with  all  simple  perfections  ;  from  being
a  part  she  became  so  puffed  up  as  to  appear  like  the  all.
The  soul  of  the  angel  became  enamoured  of  this  idol,
desiring  it  exclusively.  In  doing  so,  it  rejected  God
and  separated  from  him.

Then  hell  was  created.  Lucifer  obtained  what  he
wished  for  :  separation.  This  result  he  obtained  not
by  the  transcendent  intervention  of  God,  but  by  the
immediate  effect  of  wrath  or  nature  to  whom  he  had
devoted  himself.  Hell  is  the  principle  of  darkness,
nature,  force,  life  pure  and  simple,  given  up  to  itself
and  henceforth  contradictorily  opposed  to  love  and  light,
and  so  deprived  of  all  direction,  control,  and  harmony.
Hell  is  life  that  has  no  other  end  than  to  live.  Thanks
to  Lucifer,  it  was  now  let  loose.

Nor  was  this  all ;  Lucifer  was  created  eternal. The


2i 6  STUDIES  IN  PHILOSOPHY

desire  for  life  and  the  desire  for  good,  which  God  had
implanted  within  him,  had  not  as  their  common  support
a  sensible  body  subject  to  succession  and  consequently
capable  of  breaking  with  its  past  habits.  The  free  will
of  a  mere  spirit  is  exhausted  in  a  single  act.  Lucifer's
fault,  therefore,  is  irremediable.  No  conversion  is
possible  for  him,  for  he  is  nothing  more  now  than  fire  and
wrath,  and  light  has  no  longer  any  hold  upon  him.  The
hell  he  has  created  is  as  eternal  as  his  own  will  itself.

And  yet,  the  terrestrial  nature  ruled  by  the  angels
suffers  from  the  effects  of  their  wrongdoing.  Con-
fusion finds  its  way  into  this  nature.  Love,  being  exiled
therefrom,  the  bond  uniting  the  forces  is  broken,  and  each
of  these  latter  escapes  and  goes  wherever  it  pleases.  We
no  longer  have  personal  unity,  in  which  the  parts  are
the  organs  of  a  whole  ;  but  individual  multiplicity,  in
which  each  part  regards  itself  as  the  whole  to  the
exclusion  of  the  rest.

Such  now  is  nature  :  the  earth  is  formless  and  void,
darkness  covers  the  face  of  the  deep.  The  spirit  of
God,  however,  hovers  above  his  shattered  work,  and
the  Father  resolves  to  effect  a  new  creation  by  drawing
nature  out  of  the  darkness  into  which  she  has  fallen.
This  creation  is  the  one  related  by  Moses.  God  said,
"  Let  there  be  light !  "  and  the  light  was  separated  from
the  darkness.  In  seven  days,  in  accordance  with  the
number  of  divine  spirits,  God  restored  nature  to  a
state  of  harmony.  He  did  not,  purely  and  simply,
destroy  Lucifer's  work  ;  he  gave  nature  a  weapon
against  evil  and  an  instrument  of  regeneration,  to  wit,
time.  Thanks  to  succession  in  time,  to  conceive  is  no
longer  to  act ;  will  may  halt  at  the  very  brink  of  the
precipice.  Even  when  accomplished,  the  act  no  longer
exhausts  activity.  Henceforth,  the  good  are  neither


JACOB  BOEHME  217

fixed  in  good  nor  the  evil  in  evil.  To  time  is  attached
space,  which  makes  individuals  relatively  independ-
ent of  one  another.  Life  in  space  and  time  has
for  its  object  sensible  matter,  i.e.  matter  properly  so
called.

The  term  and  perfection  of  creation  is  man,  the
excellent  and  harmonious  concentration  of  the  three
principles.  There  are  in  man  three  parts  :  soul  or  the
infinite  power  of  good  and  evil ;  mind  or  intelligence
and  sound  will ;  and  body,  or  concrete  reality.  The
first  of  these  three  parts  corresponds  to  the  principle
of  fire,  the  second  to  that  of  light,  and  the  third  to  that
of  essence  or  reality.  The  three  principles  are  mani-
fested in  man  with  all  the  perfection  that  existence  in
time  and  space  implies.

Man's  duty  is  to  subordinate  within  himself  two  of
these  principles  to  the  third,  i.e.  will  and  action  to
the  law  of  good,  and  his  end  is  to  generate  the  king
of  nature,  whom  God  has  resolved  to  create  in  order
to  dethrone  Lucifer.  As  God  the  Father  eternally  wills
to  generate  his  heart  and  his  Son,  so  the  soul  ought  to
fix  its  will  in  the  heart  of  God.  Adam  is  to  be  the
seed  of  the  Christ.  The  task  that  has  fallen  to  man,
however,  is  by  no  means  a  purely  spiritual  one.  The
paradise  in  which  he  is  placed  and  which  he  must  cause
to  blossom  forth  is  a  sensible  nature.  It  is  by  working
to  draw  out  of  this  nature  all  the  treasures  she
contains,  and  bring  them  to  light,  that  man  prepares
for  the  coming  of  the  Son.  The  world,  developing  in
time  and  space,  consists  of  individuals  separated  from
one  another  :  these  individuals  have  to  be  united  in  one
common  homage  paid  to  the  Eternal,  and,  without  their
distinctive  characteristics  being  effaced,  these  latter  must
be  raised  to  participation  in  absolute  personality.


2i 8  STUDIES  IN  PHILOSOPHY

This  is  the  destiny  prescribed  for  man,  though  not
imposed  upon  him.  His  will  is  free.  In  him  there  is
fire  and  light,  violence  and  gentleness,  egoism  and  self-
denial.  In  addition,  as  the  result  of  his  terrestrial
nature,  there  is  a  temporal  will,  set  between  these  two
principles  and  capable  of  being  turned  in  the  direction
of  the  one  or  the  other.  Man,  therefore,  possesses  all
the  conditions  of  freedom,  and  is  able,  as  he  pleases,
either  to  be  lost  himself  or  to  find  himself  effectively  by
self-renunciation.

How  has  he  used  this  power  ?  That  is  a  question
of  fact,  it  finds  an  answer  in  tradition  and  experience.
Now,  we  know  that  man,  following  the  example  of
Lucifer,  disobeyed  God  and  fell  from  his  original  state
of  nobility.  The  fall  of  man,  according  to  the  Mosaic
account,  when  interpreted  in  the  light  of  the  spirit,
was  brought  about  in  the  following  manner.

Giving  reins  to  his  imagination,  man  began  to  con-
template and  admire  nature,  in  preference  to  God.  By
degrees,  he  attributed  to  his  idol  every  imaginable  per-
fection, making  her  the  all,  including  even  divinity
itself.  Then  he  grew  enamoured  of  her  and  ardently
longed  to  engender  her  as  he  saw  her  in  his  imagination.
Forgetful  of  the  rights  of  spirit,  he  wished  nature,
untrammelled,  to  be  all  she  was  capable  of  being.
Soon  afterwards,  in  accordance  with  the  law  of  being,
the  idea  of  image  and  desire  became  a  body  ;  nature
proclaimed  her  autonomy,  and  man  fell  beneath  the
sway  of  the  violent,  egoistic  forces  he  had  let  loose.
Such,  abridged,  is  the  story  of  the  fall.  The  sacred
text,  however,  enables  us  to  distinguish  its  different
phases  and  note  its  various  stages.

The  starting-point  was  the  desire  to  know  things,
no  longer  in  their  union  and  harmony,  as  God  had


JACOB  BOEHME  219

made  them,  but  by  separating  and  analysing  them,
attributing  to  them  a  fictitious  individuality.  Man
was  determined  to  know  what  hot  and  cold,  moist
and  dry,  hard  and  soft,  and  all  the  other  qualities,
taken  separately,  were  in  themselves.  In  death,  the
congealer  and  disperser,  he  was  determined  to  dis-
cover the  secret  of  life,  the  organiser.  No  longer  had
that  divine  fruit,  concrete  knowledge,  any  savour  or
attraction  for  him :  he  was  determined  to  taste  of
abstract  knowledge,  parcelled  out,  the  fruit  of  terrestrial
nature.  Nature,  thereupon,  responded  to  his  desire  by
making  this  latter  objective  in  the  form  of  the  tree
of  the  knowledge  of  good  and  evil.  This  tree  of
temptation  is  none  other  than  the  sensible  realisation
of  the  will  to  know  good  and  evil  separately,  in  so
far  as  they  are  opposite  and  contradictory.  Through
it,  man  sees  good  and  evil  as  two  things  exterior  to
each  other,  according  to  the  condition  of  objects  set
in  space  :  he  is  able  to  choose  the  latter  to  the  exclusion
of  the  former.  The  fact  of  having  raised  up  the  tree
of  analytical  science  is  the  first  sin,  that  of  under-
standing. This  is  a  dangerous  declivity,  for  man  now
conceives  evil,  and,  consequently,  is  capable  of  willing
it;  still,  this  does  not  yet  constitute  the  fall,  since  he
possesses  the  power  to  choose  between  good  and  evil.

A  second  temptation  follows  the  first.  Hitherto,
Adam  has  had  the  eternal  virgin  for  his  companion  ;
hitherto,  the  ideal  or  the  image  of  God  has  been  the
object  of  his  thought.  Having  begun  to  look  upon
things  from  the  view-point  of  analysis,  in  their  ter-
restrial form,  he  became  enamoured  of  the  world  of
forces  and  instincts  which  henceforth  appeared  before  his
gaze.  He  wished  to  live  an  animal  life,  to  reproduce
himself  after  the  fashion  of  the  beasts.  The  image  of


220  STUDIES  IN  PHILOSOPHY

God  was  effaced,  the  virgin  fled  before  the  passion
kindled  within  him.  Then  Adam  fell  asleep  :  for  the
image  of  the  world  is  not  of  like  nature  to  the
image  of  God.  The  latter,  which  slumbers  not,  con-
stantly keeps  awake  the  spirit  contemplating  it.  But
the  image  of  the  world,  being  subject  to  succession
in  time,  tires  the  sight  and  engenders  sleep.  A  change
of  condition  was  then  brought  about.  Man  had  fallen
to  sleep  in  the  world  of  angels,  the  world  of  eternity  :
he  awoke  in  time,  in  the  exterior  world.  Before  him
he  saw  the  human  objectivation  of  his  earthly  desire  in
the  form  of  a  woman  created  by  God  during  his  sleep.
Aware  that  the  woman  came  from  himself,  man  sought
to  unite  with  her,  to  unite  with  her  in  body.  This  is
the  second  sin,  the  sin  of  sensibility.  Man  has  taken
another  step  towards  perdition.  Still,  he  is  not  fallen,
for  carnal  desires,  in  themselves,  do  not  deprive  man
of  self-possession  ;  his  will  still  remains  his  own.

The  fall,  that  neither  the  perversion  of  the  intelli-
gence nor  that  of  sensibility  has  brought  about,  is  to
be  effected  by  the  perversion  of  the  will.  The  devil
breathed  into  man  the  desire  to  live  by  his  own  distinctive
will,  to  suffice  unto  himself,  to  make  himself  God.  Man
consented  to  the  temptation,  and,  by  disobedience,  set
himself  over  against  God  as  his  equal.  From  that
time  he  was  not  only  inclined  towards  evil,  he  plunged
therein.  He  became  what  he  had  willed  to  be,  though
in  a  way  contrary  to  what  he  had  imagined.  He
became  god,  not  the  god  of  love,  light,  and  life,  the
only  true  God,  but  the  god  of  wrath,  darkness,  and
death,  who  is  nothing  more  than  the  sacrilegious  and
diabolical  personification  of  the  mysterious  substratum
of  divinity.

Thereupon,  man  was  cursed  ;  or  rather,  he  declared


JACOB  BOEHME  221

himself  to  be  the  child  of  the  devil.  His  will,  evil  in
itself,  separated  him  from  God,  and  dedicated  him  to
wrath.  Following  on  this  curse,  the  world,  of  which
man  was  both  the  resume  and  the  mover,  passed  from
a  condition  of  harmony  to  one  of  individual  dispersion.
Each  human  being  claimed  to  live  in  the  world  for
himself  alone,  and  to  effect  his  own  development  with-
out any  thought  for  his  neighbours.  The  struggle  for
life  became  the  world's  only  law.

Still,  man  was  not  condemned  by  God  for  all
eternity  as  Lucifer  had  been  ;  the  conditions  of  the
fall  were  different.  The  devil,  of  himself  alone,  was
the  entire  cause  of  the  sin  he  had  committed.  Before
him,  indeed,  evil  was  non-existent,  there  was  only  the
possibility  of  evil.  Of  this  possibility,  Lucifer  had
formed  evil  with  all  that  it  comprises,  its  matter  as
well  as  its  form  :  he  was  the  author  of  the  motives
that  had  tempted  him,  as  well  as  of  the  determination
he  had  arrived  at  in  accordance  with  these  motives.
The  position  of  man  was  quite  different.  Before  him,
evil  was  already  in  existence  as  a  given  reality,  and,
along  with  evil,  a  downward  tendency  to  new  falls.
It  was  at  Satan's  solicitation  that  man  sinned.  Though
the  decision  he  came  to  was  his  own,  the  motives  of
this  decision  were  not  at  work.  They  were  within  him
as  instincts,  a  pre-existing  nature.  Man  is  thus  respon-
sible for  his  own  determination  alone,  not  for  the
motives  to  which  he  has  yielded.  This  is  the  reason
why  the  fall  of  Adam,  which  indeed  would  be  a  mortal
one  were  man  left  to  himself,  is  not  irremediable.  It
is  possible,  if  not  for  justice,  at  all  events  for  divine
mercy,  to  set  the  tendency  towards  good,  deep  in  the
human  soul,  in  opposition  to  evil  solicitations,  and  to
give  man's  will,  which  is  temporal  in  its  nature,  the


222  STUDIES  IN  PHILOSOPHY

power  to  retract  its  resolution.  Will  God  now  come
to  the  aid  of  man,  who  has  rebelled  against  him  ?
Will  he  send  man  a  redeemer  and  saviour  ?  This  is
what  no  necessity  either  commands  or  excludes,  it  is
something  to  be  decided  in  the  mysterious  depths  of
infinite  will.


God,  having  already  restored  harmony  to  the  world,
harmony  that  had  been  disturbed  by  Lucifer,  resolved
to  summon  man  to  regeneration.  Good  and  evil  were
now  in  the  presence  of  each  other,  not  only  in  eternity
but  also  in  time  :  God  decided  to  bring  about,  as  far  as
possible,  the  reconciliation  of  these  two  principles.  In
accordance  with  the  divine  decrees  anterior  to  the  fall
of  man,  the  Son  was  some  day  to  be  born  in  human
form,  so  that  the  word  might  be  manifested  in  time.
As  man  was  given  up  to  wrath  and  the  devil,  God
decreed  that  the  coming  of  the  Christ  should  be  not
only  the  coming  of  one  who  would  compass  human
perfection,  but  also  that  of  a  redeemer  and  saviour.
He  prepared  for  this  coming  by  the  series  of  events
related  in  the  Old  Testament,  and  finally  gave  up  his
Son  to  the  world  to  be  crowned  with  thorns  and
crucified.  Per  crucem  ad  lucem !  The  Christ  is  a
human  creature,  and  he  is  the  Son  of  the  eternal  Virgin.
In  him  death  is  overcome.  He  who  suffers  with  him
is  also  glorified  with  him.

Still,  we  must  examine  more  closely  and  see  how
man's  salvation  is  realised  by  Jesus  Christ.

When  the  reason  hears  mention  of  God,  of  his
nature  and  will,  it  imagines  that  God  is  something
foreign  and  far  away,  living  outside  this  world  and
above  the  stars,  ordaining  things  mechanically  after  the


JACOB  BOEHME  223

manner  of  a  force  situated  in  space.  Hence  reason,
assimilating  God  to  his  creatures,  attributes  to  him  a
mode  of  thought  and  action  analogous  to  that  of  man.
It  believes  that  God,  before  creation,  deliberated  within
himself  as  to  the  place  he  should  assign  to  each  creature.
It  also  implies  that  God  decided  to  summon  a  portion
of  mankind  to  heavenly  joy,  in  order  to  manifest  his
grace,  and  condemned  the  rest  to  damnation,  in  order
to  manifest  his  wrath.  Thus,  God  would  appear  to
have  made  a  difference,  for  all  eternity,  between  men,
for  the  purpose  of  manifesting  his  power  in  the  direction
both  of  wrath  and  of  love.

Most  certainly  there  is  an  election  of  grace,  though
it  could  not  come  about  in  the  way  reason  imagines.
Were  God  to  deliberate  and  come  to  a  decision  as  we
do,  were  he  to  govern  things  from  without,  he  would
be  divided  against  himself,  he  would  be  changeable,
not  eternal.  Besides,  how  could  God  will  to  condemn
a  portion  of  his  creatures  ?  God  is  love  ;  he  wills  the
good  of  all  beings.  Election  and  damnation  are  not
the  act  of  a  will  exterior  to  man.  Man  is  free,
absolutely  free  ;  for  the  root  of  his  being  is  plunged
in  the  eternal,  infinite  substratum  of  things.  There
is  nothing  behind  the  human  will  capable  of  constraining
it.  Itself  is  the  first  beginning  of  its  own  actions.
Election  or  damnation  is  the  result  of  this  very  freedom.
By  it,  man  can  turn,  as  he  pleases,  towards  light  or
towards  darkness,  towards  love  or  towards  egoism  :
man  can  make  either  an  angel  or  a  devil  of  himself.
Within  himself  he  bears  his  own  paradise  and  hell  :  the
exterior  paradise  and  hell  are  nothing  but  symbols  of
good  and  evil  will.  Not  that  man  is  sufficient  unto
himself  and  can  do  without  divine  grace.  His  good
will  is  but  a  prayer,  unavailing  without  the  help  of


224  STUDIES  IN  PHILOSOPHY

God  ;  God  has  foreseen  from  all  eternity  that  he  either
would  or  would  not  offer  up  this  prayer.  Free  actions,
however,  remain  free  in  divine  foreknowledge,  which,
sunk  in  the  primordial  deep,  cannot  be  distinguished
from  the  common  substratum  of  all  wills.

The  first  sign  and  the  first  effect  of  election  is  faith.
Like  election,  faith  is  often  misunderstood.  Every  one
boasts  of  having  faith.  Where  is  it  in  reality  ?  Present-
day  faith  is  nothing  but  a  story  learnt  by  heart.  Where
is  the  man  with  a  child-like  faith  in  the  birth  of  Jesus  ?
Did  he  really  believe  it,  he  would  draw  nigh  to  the  Infant
Jesus  whom  he  would  welcome  and  tenderly  nurture
within  himself.  No  :  he  is  acquainted  only  with  the
historic  child,  deceiving  his  conscience  with  vain  erudi-
tion. Never  has  there  been  so  much  talk  of  faith,  and
never  was  real  faith  more  lacking.  Would  you  have  a
proof  of  this  ?  Never  before  has  there  been  so  much  dis-
puting, so  much  judging  and  condemning  of  one  another.
Does  God  judge  and  condemn  the  birds  of  the  forests
because  each  of  them  praises  him  in  his  own  way,  and
in  a  different  tone  from  the  rest  ?  Does  not  the
infinite  might  of  God  admit  of  an  infinite  variety  of
expressions  of  homage  ?  You,  who  persecute  your
brothers,  are  more  useless  than  the  flowers  of  the  fields,
more  foolish  than  beasts  lacking  in  intelligence.  You
are  the  birds  of  prey  that  affright  the  other  birds,
preventing  them  from  chanting  the  praises  of  God.
To  believe  in  Jesus  Christ  from  an  historical  point  of
view  is  no  more  helpful  than  believing  a  fable.  How
many  Jews  and  Turks  are  more  Christian  than  those
sham  Christians  who  know  what  Jesus  did  and  yet  do
what  the  devil  does  !  But,  the  answer  will  come,
we  believe  in  the  word.  Then  we  must  try  to  under-
stand what  the  true  word  is.  The  Scriptures  are


JACOB  BOEHME  225

helpful,  but  they  are  not  the  word,  they  are  only  its
mute,  obliterated  signs.  The  word  is  living,  for  it  is
the  vehicle  of  the  spirit.  No  formula  can  define  it,
for  it  is  infinite  as  God  himself.  That  is  why  true
faith  is,  in  fine,  a  righteous  will,  freely  subject  to  the
law  of  the  spirit.  It  consists  in  renewing  within
oneself  the  birth  and  life  of  Christ,  his  baptism  and
temptations,  sufferings  and  death.  The  imitation  of
Christ  is  the  distinctive  mark  of  the  children  of  God.
Consequently,  the  true  Christian  is  of  no  sect ;  he  may
live  in  one,  but  he  does  not  belong  to  it.  His  religion
is  interior,  it  cannot  be  confined  within  any  form.

Faith,  when  thus  understood,  is  the  beginning  of
regeneration.  What  is  to  be  thought  of  the  exterior
means  and  methods  that  the  Churches  add  on  to  it?
Speaking  generally,  works  are  nothing  in  themselves,
and  the  Roman  Catholic  Church,  which  attributes  value
thereto,  is  the  Babel  of  the  Christian  world.  Erroneous
also  is  it  to  believe  that  faith  saves  us  because  through
it  the  merits  of  Christ  would  be  attributed  to  us  from
without,  just  as  a  new  form  may  be  given  to  passive
matter.  Such  an  operation  would  not  change  the  root
nature  of  the  soul,  it  would  not  be  a  second  birth.
Faith  could  not  save  us  by  some  theurgic  operation
that  compelled  divine  justice  to  benefit  us  :  it  saves  us
only  by  the  sanctifying  grace  it  bears  within  itself,  and
which,  from  without,  engenders  within  us  both  penitence
and  the  redeeming  Christ.  Justification  is  sanctifica-
tion.  It  is  not  the  object  of  faith  that  regenerates  us,
it  is  faith  itself.

For  this  reason  no  particular  means  of  regeneration
is  efficacious  if  faith  be  not  the  soul  thereof.  True
prayer  is  not  a  passive  request  for  divine  assistance,  it
is  the  humble  action  of  the  will  that  recognises  its

Q


226  STUDIES  IN  PHILOSOPHY

need  and  goes  to  God  as  for  food  ;  it  is  the  soul
beseeching  and  receiving  sanctifying  grace.  True
preaching  is  not  the  teaching  specially  given  by  the
priest  or  even  by  the  Bible.  The  faithful  who  see  and
hear  with  the  spirit  learn  from  all  creatures.  Sacraments
are  not  aids  granted  to  man  without  himself  contributing
thereto.  The  true  sacrament  consists  of  divine  grace
descending  upon  the  soul,  which  can  appropriate  it  only
by  faith.  And  regeneration,  the  object  of  prayer,  of
sermons  and  sacraments  alike,  is  not  a  new  nature
grafted  on  to  the  old :  it  is  the  spirit,  awakening  and
expanding,  deep  within  the  nature  ;  it  is  the  person
creating  himself  by  renunciation  of  the  individual  I,
the  interior  man  who  is  substituted  for  the  exterior  man.
Now,  of  what  nature  is  the  life  of  the  regenerate
man  ?  Is  it  only  apathy  and  indifference,  mere  reflec-
tion of  the  spirit  upon  itself,  annihilation  deep  in
primordial  no-thing  ?  Spirit,  we  know,  is  not  this  inert
no-thing  at  the  conception  of  which,  by  suppressing
differences,  human  logic  arrives.  All  interior  being  tends
to  become  exterior,  all  infinitude  is  the  desire  to  take
form,  all  mystery  is  an  effort  to  reveal  itself,  all  spirit
is  the  will  to  become  a  body.  So  also  is  it  with  the
Christian  virtues.  They  do  not  remain  abstractions  ;
they  develop  and  become  manifest.  They  become
manifest  by  complete  renunciation  of  self,  by  total
abandonment  to  the  will  of  God,  by  meekness,  by
human  love,  by  communion  of  souls  in  spite  of  all
outer  differences,  by  mastery  over  nature,  i.e.  over
earthly  desires,  and  by  joy,  that  foretaste  of  eternity.
The  new  man  does  not  destroy  the  old,  the  outer  man,
though  he  takes  care  not  to  forget  himself  therein.
Thou  art  in  the  world,  Christian  !  Thou  art  engaged
in  an  honourable  trade.  Remain  in  it,  work,  act,  earn


JACOB  BOEHME  227

the  money  thou  need'st,  make  the  elements  produce
all  they  are  capable  of  producing,  dig  in  the  ground  for
silver  and  gold,  make  them  into  works  of  art,  build
and  plant.  All  this  is  well  and  good.  Listen,  however,
to  the  A  B  C  of  wisdom  :  Put  not  thy  soul  into  this
exterior  life.  Chain  not  thy  free  spirit  down  in  this
prison.  If  thou  retainest  thy  freedom,  all  that  thou
do'st  in  the  world  will  prosper.  For  everything  sings
forth  the  praises  of  God  to  him  who  has  ears  to  hear.
Even  the  backslidings  of  thy  earthly  companion  shall
not  harm  thy  soul,  but  they  will  be  beneficial  to  him.
A  single  action  is  not  a  habit ;  a  powerful  tree  stands
erect  before  the  raging  storm.  When  thou  see'st  the
exterior  man  offend,  thou  wilt  the  better  understand
the  frailty  of  nature,  the  greatness  and  might  of  divine
mercy.  Let  not  man,  however,  imagine  that  in  his
life  on  earth  he  can  ever  dispense  with  prayer  and  effort.
Man  is  and  remains  free ;  consequently,  he  is  never
established  in  good.  Time  cannot  hold  eternity.  How-
ever strong  be  our  link  with  God,  we  remain  in  the
devil's  power.  Resistance  to  evil  is  our  condition
in  this  world,  right  on  to  the  end.  If  we  grow
remiss,  nature  once  more  lays  hold  upon  us  :  the  form
in  which  the  spirit  is  manifested  binds  and  imprisons
this  latter  as  soon  as  it  ceases  to  act.  Each  moment
we  must  correct  ourselves,  revive  our  new  birth,  create
God  anew  within  ourselves.  Only  when  life  comes  to
an  end  does  the  tree  of  faith,  hope  and  love,  nurtured
by  our  own  unremitting  efforts,  stand  erect  and  in-
capable of  being  uprooted.

And  so,  in  the  world  of  time,  there  is  being  prepared
the  rapprochement  of  the  good  and  the  evil  principle,
and  the  conscious,  definitive  reconstitution  of  primor-
dial unity.  All  end  has  a  tendency  to  rejoin  its  beginning,


228  STUDIES  IN  PHILOSOPHY

though  on  a  higher  plane,  ascending  right  to  the  fixed
point  on  which  this  beginning  depends.  As  long  as  man  is
a  terrestrial  body,  he  can  and  ought  to  choose.  Along
with  his  temporal  nature,  however,  disappears  the  con-
tingency of  his  actions.  Death  introduces  him  to  eternity.
The  fruit  of  his  free  determinations  is  now  ripe  :  he
detaches  himself ;  that  which  he  is,  he  is  once  for  all.
Man,  then,  according  to  the  nature  he  has  created
within  himself,  henceforward  belongs  either  to  God  or
to  the  devil.  His  free  will  has  become  changed  either
into  freedom  and  love  or  into  caprice  and  violence.

And  so  the  final  end  of  things  is  the  definitive
dualism  of  good  and  evil,  so  far  as  they  are  the  products
of  a  will  that  is  free.  In  the  beginning,  God  engendered
good  and  evil  considered  as  possibilities,  i.e.  he  created
the  conditions  and  materials  of  good  and  evil  actions.
From  the  way  in  which  free  beings  acted,  there  resulted,
in  fact,  the  realisation  of  the  two  possibilities  God  had
formed.  On  both  sides,  being  has  passed  through
three  phases  :  possibility,  the  contingent  fact,  definitive
determination.  It  was  by  thwarting  conscious  will  that
idea  became  thing  ;  and  possibility,  necessary.  The
kingdom  of  God  is  the  harmony,  henceforth  inde-
structible, between  spirit  and  nature.  Individuals  subsist
therein,  and  continue  to  be  distinguished  from  one
another,  otherwise  there  would  be  no  more  nature  ;  but
they  live  without  strife,  each  according  to  his  character  :
they  subsist  by  love  alone  and  have  nothing  to  do  with
hatred.  They  have  attained  true  unity  which  is  not
an  exterior  rapprochement  practised  with  a  view  to  the
satisfaction  of  egoistic  interests,  but  rather  the  common
participation  of  individual  souls  in  divine  personality.
In  the  kingdom  of  the  devil,  on  the  other  hand,  the
will  to  live  has  definitively  thrown  off  all  law  and


JACOB  BOEHME  229

direction.  It  has  what  it  willed :  life  as  the  sole  end
of  life.  Henceforward,  there  is  no  harmony,  goodness
or  love.  Ego'fsm  and  anarchy  reign  without  a  rival.
The  individual  is  his  own  master  ;  and  this  sovereignty,
which  rests  on  rebellion,  not  on  obedience,  is  the  endless
struggle,  infinite  torment.


VI

Boehme's  doctrine  concludes  with  an  exposition  of
the  final  ends  of  all  things.  This  doctrine  presents
itself  to  us  as  the  metaphysical  history  of  Being,  apper-
ceived  by  intuition  deep  within  its  physical  history.
Starting  from  the  eternal,  we  have  come  back,  through
time,  to  the  eternal.  The  circle  is  closed  again  :
revelation  is  accomplished.

Now,  what  is  this  doctrine  which  is  called  by  its
author  Aurora  or  the  Morning  Redness,  the  explanation
of  the  celestial  and  terrestrial  mystery,  the  setting  forth
of  the  genesis  of  God  and  of  all  things,  and,  speaking
generally,  Christianity  interpreted  after  the  spirit  ?

There  can  be  no  doubt  but  that  it  is,  first  of  all,  a
religious  doctrine,  and  it  is  only  natural  that  Boehme's
disciples  should  mainly  be  found  amongst  theologians.
But  would  it  be  legitimate  to  abide  by  the  letter  of  the
doctrine  in  judging  one  who  ever  affirmed  that  truth
is  in  the  spirit,  not  in  the  letter,  and  that  it  is  the
characteristic  of  the  spirit  to  be  for  ever  impossible  of
expression?  Evidently,  by  this  theory  alone,  Boehme
relegates  to  a  second  place,  religion  properly  so  called,
religion  that  is  inconceivable  without  some  given  reve-
lation, some  positive  fact,  and  puts  in  the  first  place
philosophy,  or  rather,  religion  so  far  as  it  is  allied  with
philosophy.  Indeed,  whoever  reads  Boehme's  works


230  STUDIES  IN  PHILOSOPHY

in  the  way  he  himself  recommends  us  to  read  them,
trying  to  discover  the  spiritual  meaning  in  sensible  and
intellectual  images,  finds  that  doctrines  of  a  philosophical
character  appear  at  each  step  beneath  his  religious
outpourings.

The  theological  mysteries  of  the  Trinity,  the  Fall
and  the  Redemption  are,  of  a  certainty,  the  promptings
that  cause  him  to  reflect.  But  beneath  these  mysteries
he  sees  the  problem  of  the  reconciliation  of  evil  and  the
finite,  as  positive  realities,  with  infinite  personality  as
the  first  and  only  source  of  being.  And  the  way  in
which  he  solves  this  problem  is  certainly  metaphysics
under  the  cloak  of  theology.  From  the  finite  and  evil,
to  whose  existence  our  senses  testify,  the  suprasensible
conditions  of  finite  nature  and  evil  action  are  distin-
guished, and  these  conditions  are  deduced  from  the
divine  will,  in  so  far  as  that  will  wills  to  be  manifested
and  posited  as  a  person.  No  manifestation  without
opposition.  And  so  God  posits  his  contrary  in  order
to  lay  hold  upon  himself,  by  distinguishing  himself  from
this  contrary  and  imposing  on  it  his  law.  This  contrary,
or  eternal  nature  bound  to  the  very  existence  of  God,
without  itself  being  the  finite  and  evil,  is  the  foundation
of  their  reality.  The  finite  is  the  dissemination — freely
effected  by  God,  by  means  of  time — of  the  essences
contained  in  the  divine  nature.  Evil  is  nature,  which
is  only  a  part,  posited  as  the  all  by  the  untrammelled
will  of  created  beings.  The  finite  and  evil,  after  all,  as
regards  their  matter,  are  deduced  from  the  conditions
of  existence  of  the  personality,  whereas  in  their  sensible
form  and  realisation  they  result  from  the  free  initiative
of  the  will.  Consequently  the  world  is  something  quite
different  from  mere  non-being  or  the  unstable  effect
of  an  act  of  arbitrary  will :  it  possesses  reality,  a  true,


JACOB  BOEHME  231

internal  existence  :  though  founded  on  God  it  is  not
God  :  it  is  based  upon  the  very  nature  God  needs  in
order  to  become  manifest.

It  cannot  be  denied  that  in  these  ideas,  clearly  ex-
pressed by  Boehme  in  all  his  metaphors,  are  the  germs
of  a  philosophic  system.  But  what  is  the  value  and
signification  of  this  system  ?  Is  it  not  an  isolated  work,
without  any  important  relation  to  the  general  history  of
philosophy  ?

It  must  be  confessed  that — with  the  exception  of
Louis  Claude  de  Saint-Martin  (the  "  Unknown  Philo-
sopher"), Baader  the  Catholic  theologian,  and  Schelling
in  the  final  phase  of  his  philosophy — the  philosophers
by  profession,  after  reading  and  forming  an  opinion  on
Boehme,  are  rather  inclined  to  bestow  on  him  vague
encomium  than  to  attempt  to  assimilate  his  doctrines.
Saint-Martin's  ideas  have  scarcely  been  mentioned  in
France  except  by  historians  ;  and  the  Germans  have
developed  more  especially  the  intellectualist  philosophy
born  of  Leibnitz,  Kant  and  Spinoza,  which  rejects  the
absolute  reality  of  nature  and  the  freedom  of  the  will,
those  essential  elements  in  Boehme's  system.

On  this  point,  nevertheless,  we  must  guard  against
judging  by  appearances  or  details.  Two  traits,  in  a
word,  mainly  characterise  the  speculations  of  our  theo-
sophist :  spiritualism,  posited  as  a  fundamental  truth  ;
and  realism,  admitted  on  the  faith  of  experience  and
connected  by  way  of  deduction  with  the  spiritualist
principle.  On  the  one  hand,  Boehme  holds  that  spirit
alone  is  the  first  and  true  being  :  spirit,  i.e.  infinite
freedom,  that  creates  for  itself  objects  and  forms,  and
remains  infinitely  superior  to  all  its  creations,  imper-
ceptible being  that  is  everywhere  in  action  and  itself
incapable  of  being  realised  and  becoming  an  object  of


232  STUDIES  IN  PHILOSOPHY

experience  ;  the  perfect  person,  in  word,  living  and
truly  metaphysical  existence,  of  which  all  given,  deter-
minate existence  can  be  nothing  but  an  imperfect  mani-
festation. But,  on  the  other  hand,  Boehme  is  a  realist.
He  does  not  admit  that  the  multiple  and  the  diverse
may  be  a  vain  image  of  the  imagination,  or  the  purely
phenomenal  effect  of  a  transcendent  cause  ;  he  does  not
acknowledge  that  evil  may  only  be  a  lesser  good.
Nature  has  her  own  principle  of  existence,  contrary  to
that  of  spiritual  existence.  Evil  is  a  living  force  that
tends  to  destroy  good.  To  posit  spiritualism  as  a  thesis
and  realism  as  an  antithesis,  and,  in  a  synthesis,  to
reconcile  the  reality  of  the  objects  of  experience  with
the  supremacy  of  spirit :  such  is  Boehme's  task.

Such,  too,  in  fine,  is  the  ground  of  the  principal
German  systems.  With  Leibnitz,  Kant,  Fichte,  Schelling
and  Hegel  it  is  spirit  that  is  being,  and  spirit  is  the
living  infinite  that  no  form  can  contain.  For  all  these
philosophers,  however,  the  world  has  a  reality  of  its
own,  a  reality  that  is  a  stumbling-block  to  spirit  and
yet  must  be  deduced  from  the  nature  of  spirit.  It  is
in  this  antinomy  of  spirit  as  principle,  and  matter  as
reality,  that  German  philosophy  flounders  ;  and  monad-
ology,  transcendental  idealism,  the  philosophy  of  the
absolute,  and  absolute  idealism  are  only  different  solu-
tions of  one  and  the  same  problem.  Nor  is  this  all.
Idealism,  realism,  and  the  search  after  the  reconciliation
of  the  latter  with  the  former,  are  traits  of  German
philosophy  that  are,  it  would  seem,  to  be  met  with  in
the  nation  itself;  so,  at  all  events,  historians  have
observed.  Thus,  whatever  may  have  been  the  exterior
link  between  the  German  philosophers  and  Jacob  Boehme,
they  are  united  to  him  by  a  stronger  and  closer  bond
than  mere  influence,  they  are  his  brothers,  at  least,  if


JACOB  BOEHME  233

not  his  sons,  children  of  one  and  the  same  genius,
expressions  of  one  and  the  same  aspect  of  the  human
mind.  Was  he,  then,  a  false  prophet,  who,  in  1620,
after  reading  the  Psychologia  vera  of  Jacob  Boehme,
greeted  its  author  by  the  unexpected  name  of  "Philoso-
phus  teutonicus  "  ? J

1  "He  is  known,"  says  Hegel,  "as  the  Philosophus  Teutonicus,  and
in  reality  through  him  for  the  first  time  did  philosophy  in  Germany  come
forward  with  a  characteristic  stamp.  The  kernel  of  his  philosophizing  is
purely  German"  (Gesch.  Ph.  iii.  1836,  p.  300)  (Translator's  note).


DESCARTES

REGARDING  things  only  from  the  historical  standpoint,
Cartesianism  dominates  the  entire  development  of  modern
philosophy.  Amongst  others,  the  German  savants,
intent  on  finding  the  internal  principles  of  historical
developments,  took  delight  in  discovering,  in  Cartesian
problems,  the  starting-point  of  all  the  great  questions
that  have  stirred  the  minds  of  modern  philosophers.
More  particularly,  they  saw,  in  the  Cogito,  the  living
germ  from  which,  by  immanent  dialectic,  all  the  great
systems  that  have  so  far  appeared  were  to  blossom
forth.  Thus,  Kuno  Fischer  distinctly  regarded  Cartes-
ianism, and  the  antinomies  into  which  it  enters  as  it
develops,  as  the  origin  or  necessary  condition  of  the
occasionalism  of  Malebranche,  the  monism  of  Spinoza,
the  monadology  of  Leibnitz,  the  sensualism  of  Locke,
the  materialism  of  La  Mettrie,  the  idealism  of  Berkeley
and  the  criticism  of  Kant.  In  most  of  the  German
historians  of  philosophy  similar  deductions  may  be
found.

Speaking  generally,  it  may  be  said  that  the  central
problem  of  Cartesian  metaphysics  was  the  transition
from  thought  to  existence.  Thought  alone  is  indis-
solubly  inherent  in  itself:  how,  then,  by  what  right
and  in  what  way,  can  we,  in  our  judgments,  affirm
existences?  There  is  one  case,  and  only  one,  wherein
existence  is  immediately  connected. with  thought  in  the

234


DESCARTES  235

intuition  of  the  understanding  :  and  that  is  when  we
say  :  "  Cogito,  ergo  sum."  How  and  in  what  way  can
we  extend  to  other  existences  the  certainty  we  directly
attribute  to  that  of  thought  ?  This  is  the  knotty  point
in  the  Cartesian  philosophy.  Now,  this  problem  of
existence  controlled  the  investigations  of  Locke,  Hume,
Reid  and  Kant,  as  it  did  those  of  Malebranche,  Spinoza
and  Leibnitz.  Existence,  which,  to  the  ancients,  was
a  thing  given  and  immediately  apprehensible,  and  that
had  only  to  be  analysed,  is  here  something  far  away,
which  has  to  be  attained  to,  if  that  be  possible.  There
we  find  the  distinctive  characteristic  of  modern  as
compared  with  ancient  philosophy,  and  this  characteristic
is  the  mark  of  Cartesianism  itself.

Not  only  does  Cartesianism  thus  control  the  progress
of  modern  philosophy,  it  is  also  of  considerable  im-
portance in  the  general  history  of  the  human  mind.
Doubtless,  our  seventeenth  century  in  France  largely
drew  upon  Christian  and  classic  sources,  but  science
developed  alongside  of  literature  ;  and  science,  in  those
days,  was  the  Cartesian  conception  of  the  world  :  it  was
the  control  of  the  mathematical  mechanism  over  all  that
was  not  thought  strictly  so  called,  the  condition  of  this
very  mechanism.  As  Huyghens  wrote  on  the  occasion
of  the  death  of  Descartes  :

Nature,  prends  le  deuil,  et  pleure  la  premiere
Le  grand  Descartes  ! .  .  .
Quand  il  perdit  le  jour,  tu  perdis  la  lumiere  :
Ce  n'cst  qu'a  sa  clarte  que  nous  t'avons  su  voir.

And  when  Newton  reformed  Cartesianism,  did  he  not
do  so  by  adopting  this  very  basis  of  natural  philosophy,
treated  mathematically,  which  Descartes  had  discovered
and  assured  ?

Nor  is  this  all  : as  Descartes  is  a  dualist  and  looks


236  STUDIES  IN  PHILOSOPHY

upon  all  blending  of  philosophy  with  religion,  corporeal
with  spiritual  philosophy,  as  spurious,  so  too  the
seventeenth  century  is  simultaneously  religious  and
rationalistic,  partaking  both  of  the  moralist  and  of  the
scientist,  without  these  various  disciplines  interpenetrat-
ing or  being  weakened  by  one  another.  Pascal  the
mystic  does  no  harm  to  Pascal  the  physicist,  and  vice
versa.

^  In  a  word,  Descartes  regards  thought  as  without  an
equal ;  he  sees  in  it  alone  the  principle  of  certainty.
The  seventeenth  century,  likewise,  considers  that  in
thought  lies  human  dignity,  that  by  it,  and  not  by
material  greatness,  can  we  rise  to  our  true  stature.  The
conviction  of  the  power  of  reason  creeps  into  the  minds
of  men  to  such  a  degree  that  the  obstacles,  both
provisional  and  even  definitive,  which  Descartes  had  set
up,  are  speedily  overthrown.  Social  and  political  ques-
tions which  could  not,  for  a  long  time,  in  his  opinion,
be  accessible  to  science  ;  religious  questions  which  went
altogether  beyond  it,  were  submitted  to  the  examination
of  reason.  The  eighteenth  century  dedicated  itself  to
this  work ;  it  has  even  been  said  that  the  French
Revolution  had  its  origin  in  the  Discours  de  la  Methode.
A  false  statement,  if  it  means  that  Cartesianism  contained
such  a  consequence  ;  and  yet  an  assertion  capable  of
being  upheld,  if  the  statement  is  taken  as  signifying
that  it  was  in  the  name  of  the  Cartesian  principle  of
rational  evidence  that  society  was  revived  in  1789.

And  so  we  see  that  Cartesianism  is  an  essential
element  in  the  philosophical  and  moral  history  of  modern
times.  But  does  it  belong  only  to  history  ?  Has  it  no
longer  anything  to  teach  us  ?

Huxley,  the  English  philosopher  and  scientist,
affirmed  that  Descartes'  system,  far  from  being  a


DESCARTES  237

subject  of  scholarly  curiosity,  was  the  very  soul  both  of
contemporary  philosophy  and  science.  Our  philosophy
is  idealistic,  and  it  is  the  Cogito  of  Descartes  that  is  the
principle  of  this  idealism.  Our  science  is  mechanistic,
and  it  is  the  Cartesian  reduction  to  extent  of  all  that  is
not  spirit,  which  has  founded  this  mechanism.

Independently  of  these  general  tendencies,  many
questions  more  especially  connected  with  contemporary
speculation  have  been  bequeathed  to  us  by  Descartes'
philosophy.

Such,  in  metaphysics,  are  the  problem  of  existence,
that  of  the  relations  between  will  and  understanding,
that  of  certainty,  that  of  the  relations  between  science
and  metaphysics,  and  that  of  the  relations  between
spirit  and  matter.  The  philosophy  of  science  is  specially
concerned  nowadays  with  the  question  of  the  relation
between  mathematics  and  experience.  How  and  in
what  sense  can  that  which  is  proved  by  demonstration
agree  with  that  which  is  known  by  perception  ?  How
comes  it  to  pass  that  physics  can  be  treated  mathe-
matically ?  Now,  this  is  the  very  question  Descartes
first  asked  himself,  and  he  may  be  said  to  have  con-
structed his  system  of  metaphysics  for  the  purpose  of
answering  it.

As  regards  science,  the  alliance  between  geometry
and  analysis,  the  mechanical  interpretation  of  phenomena,
the  exclusion  of  final  causes,  mathematical  mechanism
applied  not  only  to  the  systematisation  of  phenomena
but  also  to  the  explanation  of  the  genesis  of  the  world  ;
not  only  to  the  study  of  inorganic  bodies  but  also  to
that  of  life  itself,  are  all  to  be  found,  as  so  many  essential
elements,  in  the  Cartesian  philosophy.  It  is  also  the
Cartesian  spirit  that  has  brought  into  existence  certain
special  modern  sciences,  such  as  experimental  psychology


23 8  STUDIES  IN  PHILOSOPHY

and  positive  sociology,  which  attempt  to  examine
psychical  or  social  facts  in  their  elements  or  mathematic-
ally measurable  equivalents.

Moreover,  let  it  not  be  said  that,  in  order  to  possess
these  leading  ideas,  it  is  enough  to  receive  them  from
present-day  savants  in  the  form  they  have  assumed  as
the  result  of  two  centuries  of  discussion.  It  is  not  the
same  with  ideas  as  with  facts,  the  knowledge  of  which
almost  inevitably  becomes  more  and  more  perfect.
What  advantage  is  it  for  a  man  to  acquire  a  rough
measurement  of  some  phenomenon  when  he  can
become  acquainted  with  an  exact  one  thereof?  An
idea,  however,  is  a  mysterious  plant  which  does  not
always  develop  in  another  in  the  same  way  as  it  does
in  its  originator,  without  counting  the  fact  that  it  may
have  long  to  wait  before  encountering  soil  favourable
for  its  perfect  fruition.  This  is  the  reason  it  is  so
important  to  consider  ideas  as  they  appeared  to  the
genius  who  gave  birth  to  them.  How  often  have  they
thus  shown  themselves  to  be  greater  and  more  fertile  than
they  had  seemed  as  interpreted  by  disciples  incapable  of
thoroughly  understanding  them  !  "  Philosophia  duce
regredimur  "  was  a  profound  motto  of  the  Renaissance.

Is  it  necessary  to  call  to  mind  Descartes'  excellence
as  a  writer  ?  From  this  standpoint,  too,  his  importance
could  not  be  exaggerated.  As  regards  the  part  he
played  in  history,  Desire  Nisard  has  shown  that  he  was
the  first  to  offer  a  perfect  model  of  French  prose.  The
language  of  Descartes  is  the  fabric  on  which  the
style  of  our  great  writers  is  woven.  Considered  in
itself,  this  language,  stamped  with  the  philosopher's
method,  possesses  in  the  highest  degree  the  noblest
qualities  of  every  language  :  propriety  of  terms,  and  the
expression  of  order  in  ideas.  Cartesian  intuition  and


DESCARTES  239

deduction  have  left  their  impress  on  the  style  of  the
Discours  de  la  Mtthode.  Not  that  this  language  is
abstract  or  impersonal.  Descartes'  reason  is  a  living,
enthusiastic  reason  ;  it  does  not  merely  put  acquired
truths  in  the  form  of  syllogisms,  but  rather  endeavours
to  discover  and  create,  to  communicate  its  creative
activity  to  men's  intellects.  This  life  of  thought
animates  the  style  itself,  which,  in  a  surprising  way,
unites  to  precision  and  demonstrative  order,  motion,
accent,  originality,  colour,  wit,  and  even  charm,  or
irony  or  pride,  according  to  the  intellectual  passion
which  is  pouring  into  the  soul  of  this  lover  of  truth.
Whatever  impression  may  at  first  be  felt,  when  one
at  times  becomes  bewildered  with  those  long  sentences
which  demand  an  alert  reader,  capable  of  making  his
own  deductions,  one  speedily  comes  under  the  charm
and  power  of  this  masterly  style.  Even  nowadays,  if
an  author's  manner  merely  suggests  that  of  Descartes
in  some  respect  or  other,  people  vie  with  each  other  in
praising  its  superiority  and  austere  seductiveness.

In  a  word,  why  should  we  not  call  to  mind  the
special  motives  which  cause  us  to  desire  that  the  works
of  Descartes  should  be  read  by  as  large  a  circle  of
readers  as  possible,  both  in  France  and  abroad  ?

Descartes  is  one  of  the  purest  and  finest  expressions
of  the  genius  of  our  race  :  the  diffusion  of  his  thoughts
represents  our  life  and  influence.

We  love  reason,  a  middle  path  between  the  spirit
of  positivism,  which  contents  itself  with  facts,  properly
so  called,  and  the  spirit  of  mysticism,  which  tends  to
believe  without  demanding  proof.  Of  all  intellectual
qualities,  the  one  we  most  prize  is  the  faculty  of
judgment,  in  whose  sight  even  experience  and  reasoning
are  sources  of  truth  only  on  condition  they  have  been


24o  STUDIES  IN  PHILOSOPHY

submitted  to  the  control  of  the  mind.  It  is  in  this
direction  that  we  seek  after  clarity  and  order  in  ideas.
For  a  system  to  be  well  constructed  and  consistent  is
not  sufficient  for  us,  we  want  every  part  of  it,  taken
separately,  to  be  intelligible  and  true,  and  we  would
rather  hold  separately  the  two  ends  of  the  chain  of
reasoning  without  apperceiving  the  intermediary  links,
than  let  slip  the  truths  we  have  won  in  order  to
grasp  the  hypothetical  connection  between  them.  Qne
•ofL_ih£^dences.-  in.  which-JBce -~exceL  is... mathematics.
Our  sense  of  clarity  and  logic  is  here  afforded  un-
restrained activity.  In  the  moral  order  of  things,
we  love  reason  with  an  ardent,  enthusiastic  love,
that  has  at  times  gone  astray  or  formed  a  striking
contrast  with  the  very  object  of  that  love  ;  but  through
all  our  fluctuations  the  goal  of  our  endeavours  is
clearly  a  harmonious  blending  of  individual  freedom
and  rational  law,  in  which  neither  would  be  sacrificed.
And  whilst  seeking,  in  a  practical  spirit,  for  what  suits  our
own  nation,  it  is  impossible  for  us  to  separate  in  thought
the  happiness  of  others  from  our  own,  or  to  desire  good
in  any  other  than  the  universal  form  which  reason  ordains.

Now,  we  find  in  Descartes  these  different  traits,
which  are  amongst  the  principal  ones  in  our  nature.
A  clear-headed  and  profound  philosopher  and  mathe-
matician, excelling  in  finesse  and  in  geometrical  precision
alike,  jealous  of  independence  though  obedient  to  reason,
solicitous  of  the  practical  ends  of  life  and  ambitious  to
work  for  the  happiness  of  all  mankind,  he  offers  us,  pre-
eminently, the  model,  and,  as  it  were,  the  archetype  of
the  qualities  we  aspire  to  show  forth.

To  study  Descartes  and  make  him  better  known  is
to  work  for  the  fulfilment  of  the  scientific  and  civilising
mission  of  France.


DESCARTES  241

ON  THE  CONNECTION  BETWEEN  MORALS
AND  SCIENCE  IN  THE  PHILOSOPHY  OF
DESCARTES

Mirum  mihi  videtur,  plerosque  homines  plantarum  vires,  siderum
motus,  mctallorum  transmutationes,  similiumque  disciplinarum
objecta  diligentissime  perscrutari,  atquc  interim  fere  nullos  de  bona
mente  .  .  .  cogitare,  quum  tamen  alia  omnia  non  tarn  propter  se
quam  quia  ad  hanc  aliquid  conferunt,  sint  aestimanda. — DESCARTES,
Reg.  ad  dir.  ing.  Reg.  i .

That  portion  of  Descartes'  writings  referring  to
morals  is  not  insignificant,  though  neither  in  form  nor
content  does  it,  at  first  glance,  appear  to  belong  to  his
philosophical  work,  properly  so  called.  It  consists
mainly  of  the  letters  to  the  Princess  Elizabeth  and  the
Queen  of  Sweden  ;  in  them  Descartes  visibly  adapts
himself  to  the  needs  and  desires  of  his  illustrious
correspondents.  True,  a  sketch  of  practical  morals
forms  part  of  the  Discours  de  la  Mtthode.  According
to  a  document  published  in  1896,  by  Ch.  Adam,  it
would  appear  that  Descartes  added  these  rules  some-
what against  his  will,  because  of  the  pedagogues  and
others  of  the  same  type  who  were  quite  ready  to
accuse  him  of  having  neither  religion  nor  faith,  and  of
wishing  to  destroy  both  the  one  and  the  other  by  his
method.  As  regards  the  contents  of  these  writings  on
morals,  they  are  certainly  very  dignified  and  lofty  in
thought  and  admirable  in  form,  though  evidently
possessed  of  little  in  common  with  the  philosopher's
doctrine  itself.  Borrowed  from  St.  Thomas,  as  Baillet
says,  and  intended,  according  to  Descartes  himself,  to
reconcile  the  teachings  of  Aristotle,  Zeno  and  Epicurus1
with  one  another,  they  seem  to  have  been  particularly

1  OEuvres  philos.  de  Descartes,  edit.  Gamier,  iii.  184-5.

R


242  STUDIES  IN  PHILOSOPHY

stamped  with  the  impress  of  stoicism.  Now,  stoicism
was  then  a  well-known  and  popular  philosophy.  Des-
cartes is  a  stoic,  as  the  heroes  of  Corneille  are  stoics.
His  mathematics  has  nothing  to  do  with  his  stoicism.
It  would  therefore  seem  either  that  Descartes,  so  far  as
he  personally  was  concerned,  had  no  interest  in  moral
research,  or  that,  if  he  did  make  profession  of  moral
maxims,  they  resulted  rather  from  individual  feelings  or
outer  influences  than  from  the  logical  development  of
his  philosophy.

I

It  is  worthy  of  note  that  this  appreciation,  which  the
first  rapid  examination  of  Descartes'  moral  writings
induces  us  to  make,  by  no  means  conforms  with  the
continually  repeated  declarations  of  the  philosopher
concerning  the  object  of  philosophy.

What,  according  to  the  Regulae?  is  the  earnest  way
of  seeking  after  truth  ?  It  is  to  think  solely  of  increasing
the  natural  light  of  reason,  not  for  the  solving  of  any
particular  scholastic  difficulty,  but  rather,  at  every
conjuncture  in  life,  for  the  purpose  of  making  the
understanding  capable  of  prescribing  to  the  will  the  line
of  action  it  ought  to  choose.  The  reason  Descartes  is
keenly  desirous  of  learning  to  distinguish  the  true  from
the  false  is,  as  he  tells  us  in  the  Discours  de  la  Mhhode?
because  he  knows  this  to  be  the  means  of  seeing  clearly
into  his  own  actions  and  going  through  life  with  calm
assurance.  Again,  in  the  Preface  to  the  Principes?  he
defines  philosophy  as  the  study  of  wisdom,  which,  he
says,  consists  of  a  perfect  knowledge  of  everything  a
man  is  capable  of  knowing,  both  in  the  conduct  in  life,
the  preservation  of  health  and  the  invention  of  all  the

1  i.  i.  2  i.  14.  3  Baillet,  La  Vie  de  M.  Descartes,  i.  115.


DESCARTES  243

arts.  This  study,  he  adds,  is  more  necessary  for  the
regulation  of  our  morality  than  the  use  of  our  eyes  for
the  guidance  of  our  steps.

And  indeed,  according  to  Clerselier,  who  appears  to
have  known  him  most  intimately,  morals  was  the  object
of  his  most  frequent  meditation.1  True,  he  did  not
like  writing  about  such  matters,  but  that  is  from  a
feeling  of  prudence,  as  he  himself  explains.2  In  physics,
also,  he  more  than  once  preferred  silence  to  the  risk  of
persecution.

All  the  same,  we  may  ask  ourselves  whether,  in  the
work  he  has  left  us,  the  moral  ideas  and  the  physical
doctrines  really  form  part  of  one  and  the  same  system,
or  whether  they  are  not  like  two  streams  which  flow
parallel  to  each  other,  without  their  waters  ever  mingling.
Certainly  Descartes  offers  us  the  rules  of  his  provisional
system  of  morals  as  being  deduced  from  his  method.
But  then,  of  what  use  is  it  to  affirm  this,  if  he  intro-
duced these  rules  only  to  throw  pedagogues  off  the
scent  ?  In  themselves,  they  appear  anything  but  part
and  parcel  of  his  philosophy.  It  is  also  true  that,  in
the  Preface  to  the  Prmcipes5  he  speaks  of  a  definitive
system  of  morals  which  presupposes  a  complete  know-
ledge of  all  other  sciences.  Many,  however,  consider
that  he  did  not  even  outline  this  system  of  morals,
and  that  it  is  his  provisional  system  which  is  in  reality
his  final  one.4

The  question  is  a  puzzling  one.  It  would  be  unfair
to  judge  Descartes  solely  by  those  portions  of  his  work
which  his  prematurely  curtailed  life  enabled  him  to
complete.  In  creations  of  thought  the  inner  tendency
and  the  living  principle  of  development  are  frequently

1  Baillet,  La  Vie  de  M.  Descartes,  i.  115.  2  ii.  282.

3  Edition  Gamier,  i.  592.  4  Cf.  e"d.  Gamier,  iii.  179.


244  STUDIES  IN  PHILOSOPHY

more  important  than  the  immediately  observable  results.
The  reality  of  a  Cartesian  system  of  morals  would  be
satisfactorily  proved  if  it  were  shown  that  the  philo-
sophy of  Descartes  contained  within  itself  the  germs  of
such  a  system.

II

There  can  be  no  doubt  but  that  this  philosophy,
speaking generally, deals with practical experience.
Although  fond  of  withdrawing  into  solitude  and  seclu-
sion for  the  purpose  of  meditation,  Descartes  is  anything
but an armchair philosopher. He  possesses in  the
highest  degree  the  sense  of  reality,  interests  himself  in
the  doings  of  his  times,  converses  with  men  of  divers
stations  and  temperaments,  and  listens  attentively  to
the  remarks  of  each  on  his  own  particular  subject. He
considers  that  our  highest  duty  is  to  bring  about  the
general  good  of  all  men,  to  the  best  of  our  ability >-j
Consequently  his  chief  grievance  against  the  scholastic I
philosophy  is  that  it  is  purely  speculative  and  gives  no^l
results. Instead of  this philosophy of  arguers and
disputants,  he  seeks  after  a  practical  system  of  philo-
sophy calculated  to  place  at  man's  disposal  the  power
and  action  of  fire,  water,  air  and  all  the  other  bodies
around  us,  and  which  will  make  him,  as  it  were,  master
and  owner  of  nature.1 It  is  his  dream to  preserve
mankind  from  illness  and  disease,  perhaps  even  from
the  debility  of  old  age. His  death  was  announced  in
the Gazette  d'  Anvers  in the  following terms  : 2 "In
Sweden  there  has  just  died  a  fool,  who  said  that  he
could  live  as  long  as  he  wished."

Descartes, like  Bacon,  following  the traditions  of

1  Mfth.  vi.  2.

2  Adam, GOttingen MS. (Revue bourgnignonne de I'Enseignement
suptneur,  1896).


DESCARTES  245

the  magicians  and  alchemists,  was  inspired  with  the
ambition  to  dominate  that  nature  which  the  ancients
had  contented  themselves  with  gazing  upon.

The  alchemists,  however,  believed  that  in  order  to
make  nature  act  as  they  pleased,  all  that  was  needed
was  to  set  it  going  by  an  altogether  external  and
empirical  imitation  of  its  processes.  The  magicians
regarded  nature  as  a  mysterious,  perhaps  diabolical,
power,  whose  will  had  to  be  chained  down  by  means
of  formulas.  Bacon  himself,  in  his  immediate  search
after  an  active  philosophy,  can  find  no  reason  for
admitting  that  nature  will  respond  to  human  promptings,
except  that  such  response  is  necessary  in  order  that  man
may  be  able  to  act  upon  her.  His  science  remains
blind  because,  confounding  the  means  with  the  end,  it
recognises  no  other  principles  than  the  rules  that  admit
of  being  applied,  just  as  they  stand,  to  practice.1

Descartes'  originality  consisted  in  regarding  the
legitimacy  of  the  problem  of  man's  rule  over  nature  as
uncertain,  and  its  solution  doubtful,  as  long  as  no
attempt  was  made  to  discover  by  what  internal  mode  of
working,  nature  really  brings  about  any  particular  effect  -
from  any  particular  cause.  He  considered  that  practice
implied  theory  in  the  real  sense  of  the  word  ;  the
knowledge  of  the  interior  of  things.  To  his  mind  it
was  from  this  standpoint  that  nature  must  be  considered,
if  we  would  succeed  in  becoming  master  of  her.  So,
too,  in  the  past,  dealing  with  the  moral  order  of  things,
Socrates  had  taught  that  the  practical  skill,  quite  legiti-
mately sought  after  by  the  Sophists,  could  only  be
attained  in  a  roundabout  way,  viz.  by  a  rational  know-
ledge of  the  essence  of  virtue.  And  since,  to  Descartes,
the  very  type  of  theory,  the  king  of  sciences,  was

1  Nov.  Org.  i.  4.;  ii.  1-5.


246  STUDIES  IN  PHILOSOPHY

mathematics,  he  made  it  his  object  to  demonstrate  that
everything  in  nature  is  brought  about  mathematically  ;
hence  his  metaphysical  speculations.  He  proves,  both  by
the  perfections  of  God  and  by  the  clear,  distinct  nature
of  the  idea  of  extent,  that  we  are  entitled  to  consider
mathematical  qualities  as  the  essence  of  material  things.

Consequently,  he  studies  mathematics,  and  his  whole
work  is  dominated  by  this  science ;  only,  however,
because,  according  to  him,  it  is  by  considering  things
from  this  point  of  view  that  we  can  really  make  them
our  own.1  And  it  is  this  practical  end,  ever  present
in  his  mind,  that  determines  the  general  line  of  his
investigations.  He  does  not  dwell  upon  the  develop-
ments of  science,  which  would  be  merely  of  speculative
interest.  He  is  content  with  setting  up,  in  mathematics,
the  few  general  principles  which  will  enable  him  to  base
mechanics  and  physics  on  this  discipline.  These  two
sciences,  in  turn,  need  to  be  developed  only  in  the
direction  and  degree  necessary  to  make  possible  the
science  of  life.  His  object  is  to  prove  that  life  itself
is  nothing  but  a  mechanism,  and  is,  consequently,  subject
to  our  control.  Whilst  studying  one  science,  Descartes
is  thinking  of  the  science  which,  in  the  nature  of  things,
is  to  come  after,  and  bring  him  nearer  to  practice.
The  idea  of  the  goal  in  view,  which  never  leaves  him,
controls  and  restrains  his  efforts.  Semper  ad  eventum
festmat.

This  method  enabled  him  to  conceive  the  possibility
of  carrying  through,  alone,  his  project  of  instituting  a
universal  science.  In  1637  ne  came  to  the  conclusion
that  the  truths  he  had  found  in  the  various  sciences
were  nothing  but  the  consequences  of  five  or  six  main
difficulties  he  had  overcome,  on  which  they  depended  ;

1  Baillet,  ii.  227.


DESCARTES  247

and  he  imagined  he  needed  only  to  win  two  or  three
other  like  battles  to  bring  his  plans  to  a  successful  issue.1

Here,  too,  is  the  explanation  of  his  apparently
capricious  passing  from  one  science  to  another.  From
1623  he  began  to  neglect  geometry,2  and  six  years
afterwards  plunged  into  metaphysical  meditation,  to
which,  however,  he  devoted  only  nine  months.  A  year
afterwards  he  reminds  Mersenne  that  he  has  long  ago
abandoned  the  study  of  mathematics,  anxious  not  to
waste  his  time  any  longer  in  unproductive  effort.  From
1629  to  1633  he  is  mainly  occupied  with  physics.  At
the  end  of  the  Discours  de  la  Methode  he  announces
his  intention  to  spend  the  rest  of  his  life  in  wresting
from  physics  a  more  certain  medicine,  or  art  of  curing
disease,  than  the  one  in  vogue.

This,  in  short,  is  the  explanation  of  that  particularity
of  his  system  for  which  Newton  reproached  him  so
strongly,  viz.  hypothesis,  regarded  in  certain  cases  as  a
sufficient  explanation  of  phenomena.  A  strict  adherent
of  the  principle  of  following  the  line  of  least  resistance
in  his  own  method  of  work,  Descartes  contents  himself,
in  his  theories,  with  what  is  indispensable  for  practice.
Now,  from  this  point  of  view,  provided  it  be  possible
to  make  a  forecast  of  the  result,  it  matters  little  that
the  mechanism  of  nature,  in  detail,  should  be  in  every
respect  what  it  has  been  conceived  to  be.  Well  aware
that  in  mathematics  several  solutions  are  often  possible,
Descartes  comes  to  regard  it  as  sufficient,  even  in  physics,
if  he  obtains  one.  He  believes  he  has  done  everything
necessary  if  the  causes  he  has  explained  are  such  that
all  the  effects  they  are  capable  of  producing  are  similar
to  those  we  find  in  the  manifested  world.  He  considers
it  useless  to  inquire  whether  the  effects  are  really  brought

1  Mfth.  iv.  4.  2  Baillet,  i.  in.


248  STUDIES  IN  PHILOSOPHY

about  by  these  causes  or  by  others.  He  thinks  it  is  as
useful  in  life  to  know  causes  thus  imagined  as  to  know
the  real  ones.1  On  this  point  he  is  satisfied  with  moral
certainty.2

In  the  progress  of  knowledge,  as  thus  understood,
morals  cannot  fail  to  find  a  place,  all  the  more  so
because,  according  to  Descartes,  the  root  and  trunk  of
a  tree  are  mainly  held  in  esteem  on  account  of  the  fruit
they  should  produce,  and  it  is  mostly  on  the  sciences
which  should  come  last,  medicine,  mechanics  and  morals,
that  the  primary  utility  of  philosophy  depends.3  And
Descartes  does  not  despair  of  satisfying  himself  as
regards  these  ultimate  objects,  in  spite  of  the  shortness
of  human  life  and  the  limits  of  our  intelligence,  for  the
very  reason  that  he  is  able  to  economise  his  strength
and  demand  of  each  science  only  what  it  can  and  should
give  him  for  the  carrying  out  of  his  plans.  The  pro-
ductiveness of  knowledge  lies  not  in  its  extent,  but
rather  in  its  clearness  and  precision.

Ill

But  now,  what  is  the  nature  of  the  morals  to  which
this  progress  will  lead  ?  Does  it  not  merely  tend  to
enable  us  to  dispose  of  human  nature,  by  means  of  the
science  of  man,  just  as  we  dispose  of  the  corporal  nature,
by  means  of  the  science  of  the  body  ?  Is  not  psychical
mechanics  all  that  Descartes  has  in  view  ?

As  a  matter  of  fact,  Descartes  laid  the  foundations
of  some  such  morals  in  his  Traite  des  Passions,  in  which,
expounding  the  principle  governing  these  mental
activities,  he  teaches  us  to  modify  and  control  them.

1  Prindpes,  iv.  104.  2  Baillet,  ii.  227-8.

3  Pref.  of  the  Prin.  Gamier,  i.  192.


DESCARTES  249

As,  moreover,  this  study  shows  us  how  far  the  mind
depends  on  the  temperament  and  arrangement  of  the
organs  of  the  body,  Descartes  distinctly  concludes  that,
if  it  is  possible  to  find  any  means  whereby  men,  gener-
ally, may  be  made  wiser  and  more  skilful,  this  means
must  be  sought  for  in  medicine.

Thus  would  appear  to  be  completed  the  edifice
planned  by  our  philosopher.  Its  culminating  point  is
a  system  of  morals,  though  how  different  from  that
indicated  in  the  Discours  de  la  Methode  and  the  Lettres  \
This  latter,  instinct  with  the  spirit  of  antiquity  or
with  Christian  influences,  was  either  an  exhortation,
a  metaphysic  or  a  religion.  That  of  the  Principcs  and
the  Traite  des  Passions  was  only  the  final  and  most
immediately  practical  application  of  modern  science.
According  to  the  Lettres,  man  ought  to  seek  outside
of  the  world,  in  those  perfections  that  depend  solely
on  free-will,  resignation,  constancy,  and  the  mystical
love  of  God  and  men,  for  those  things  to  which  he  is
to  bend  his  will.  According  to  the  Traite  des  Passions,
man,  a  mere  part  of  nature,  could  aim  at  nothing
else  than  maintaining  the  integrity  of  his  existence
by  utilising  the  mechanism  of  the  universe  for  his
own  advantage.  Now,  it  is  easy  to  see  how  these
scientific  morals  are  the  fruit  of  the  Cartesian  philo-
sophy, whereas  the  former  seem  to  remain  outside  the
logical  development  of  this  philosophy.

And  yet,  is  it  right  to  content  oneself  with  this
result,  and  declare  that  Descartes,  as  a  philosopher,
knows  no  other  morals  than  applied  science  ?

It  is  unnecessary  to  have  recourse  to  such  of
Descartes'  writings  as  deal  specially  with  morals  in
order  to  see  how  narrow  and  incomplete  such  an  inter-
pretation would  be.  Speaking  generally,  it  is  not


250  STUDIES  IN  PHILOSOPHY

science  that  is  the  centre  of  the  Cartesian  philosophy  ;
it  is  man,  or  rather  the  reason  within  man.  Even  when
studying  the  sciences  of  nature,  it  is  not  science  itself
that  our  philosopher  has  in  view,  it  is  the  formation
of  the  judgment  by  science.  Judgment  is  the  power
to  distinguish  the  true  from  the  false  in  all  things
without  hesitation  or  uncertainty.  To  do  this  we
must  develop  within  ourselves  a  kind  of  sense  of  truth.
Mathematics,  especially  algebra,  is  a  wonderful  help  in
this  respect.1  By  accustoming  the  mind  to  feed  upon
truth  and  never  be  satisfied  with  false  reasons,  mathe-
matics compels  it  to  quit  its  natural  indifference  and
leads  it  in  the  direction  of  its  own  perfection.  It  is
this  mental  culture,  not  the  knowledge  of  particular
truths,  that  forms  the  real  utility  of  the  sciences.2
They  cannot  be  detached  from  reason,  as  the  fruit  is
detached  from  the  tree,  for  it  is  in  reason  that  they
have  both  their  principle  and  their  end.

Descartes,  however,  does  more  than  train  his  reason
mechanically  by  exercise  and  habit ;  he  uses  the  intel-
lectual force  thus  gained  in  studying  the  nature  of
reason  itself,  analysing  its  content,  gauging  its  power
and  trying  to  discover  its  purpose.  He  rises  above
science  to  metaphysics.  Not  that  this  makes  it  neces-
sary that  he  should  free  himself  from  the  requirements
of  science.  Rather  is  it  science  which,  properly  inter-
preted, opens  up  the  path  leading  to  this  higher  know-
ledge. He  remarks  that  the  mathematical  method,
however  perfect  it  be,  is  nothing  but  the  outer  cover
of  the  true  method.3  The  latter,  apart  from  the  parti-
cular form  given  to  it  by  geometricians,  is  of  universal
import,  and  allows  of  the  truths  contained  in  any  sub-
ject being  obtained.  By  the  use  of  this  method,  then,

1  Regulae,  i.  2  M/th.  iii.  5.  3  Regulae,  iv.  20.


DESCARTES  251

one  may  succeed  in  strictly  demonstrating  the  truths
of  metaphysics  as  well  as  those  of  geometry.  To
attempt  thus  to  know  God,  oneself  and  the  first  prin-
ciples of  the  science  of  nature,  is  the  main  use  man
ought  to  make  of  his  reason.1

If,  therefore,  it  is  conceived  that  a  purely  natural
philosophy  has  for  its  ultimate  object  the  supremacy  of
man  over  nature,  a  more  complete  philosophy  sees  in
this  very  supremacy  only  a  means  at  the  service  of  a
loftier  end.  No  longer  is  it  merely  a  question  of
governing,  but  of  doing  so  in  the  name  of,  and  with
a  view  to,  reason.  To  moderate  the  influence  of  the
body  by  medicine  is  indeed  the  most  practical  external
means  of  helping  men  to  become  wise  ;  but  medicine  is
not  wisdom,  any  more  than  the  tool  is  the  work  upon
which  it  is  used.2  In  the  same  way,  to  control  one's
passions,  owing  to  our  knowledge  of  their  mechanism,
is  not  the  same  as  directing  them  to  their  true  use.
Not  any  thought  we  please  should  we  attempt  to  sub-
stitute for  those  which  passion  suggests,  but  rather  the
thoughts  which  really  free  the  soul,  those  of  which  the
reason  approves.  For  it  is  the  duty  of  reason  to
examine  the  correct  value  of  the  various  benefits,  the
attaining  of  which  depends  on  ourselves.3  And  even
above  the  right  use  of  the  passions,  which  concerns  the
soul  from  the  standpoint  of  its  union  with  the  body,
Descartes  places  the  benefits  of  the  soul  itself  from  the
standpoint  of  its  own  life.  There  is  a  joy  that  is  purely
intellectual.4  The  soul  can  have  its  own  pleasures
apart  from  all  else.5  The  practice  of  virtue,  to  which

1  Letter  to  Mersenne,  i5th  April  1630,  Garn.  iv.  303.

2  Baillet,  ii.  11-12.

3  Passions,  art.  144. Cf.  Letter  to  the  Princess  Elizabeth,  ist  June  1645,
Gamier,  iii.  189.

4  Passions,  art.  91.  5  Ibid.  art.  212.


252  STUDIES  IN  PHILOSOPHY

these  pleasures  are  linked,  is  not  only  a  sovereign
remedy  against  the  passions,1  it  is  also  the  greatest
perfection  to  which  one  can  lay  claim,  for  it  is  the
genuine  action  of  a  will  that  is  free.2

Above  the  morals  of  means,  then,  which  is  hardly
anything  but  applied  physics,  Descartes  conceives  of
a  morals  of  ends  which  is  founded  directly  on  the
loftiest  elements  of  metaphysics.  Both  of  these  morals
are  based  on  science,  if  this  word  is  taken  in  its  Cartesian
sense,  i.e.  as  signifying  the  clear,  distinct  knowledge
both  of  corporeal  and  of  spiritual  things.  The  second,
however,  cannot  be  derived  solely  from  the  science  of
nature,  whose  domain  does  not  include  reason  and  will.

Now,  when  Descartes  undertakes  to  define  this
superior  morals,  it  is  only  natural  that  he  should  again
come  into  touch  with  the  Stoics  and  other  philosophers
of  antiquity,  to  whom  the  culture  of  reason  formed
the  main  interest  in  life.  Human  reason  has  not
changed  its  nature,  from  the  time  of  Aristotle  to  that
of  Descartes.  The  most  perfect  expressions  it  has  met
with,  ever  since  men  have  been  able  to  reflect,  thus  find
their  place  in  the  Cartesian  system,  and  that  not  as
mere  patchwork,  but  as  integral  parts  thereof.

They  have  not,  however,  been  transferred  into  that
system  just  as  they  were.  Stoic  morals,  in  particular,
is  for  Descartes  nothing  but  a  provisional  system  of
morals.  To  try  to  conquer  oneself  rather  than  fortune
is  surely  the  wisest  decision  to  arrive  at,  as  long  as  we
are  powerless  to  modify  the  outer  world.  But  it  is  this
very  power  that  the  Cartesian  philosophy  confers  upon
us  ;  therefore,  in  place  of  morals  inculcating  abstention
it  substitutes  positive  and  active  morals.  Likewise,
to  endeavour  to  find  the  rules  of  conduct  in  the  outer

1  Passions,  art.  148.  2  Ibid.  art.  17-18.


DESCARTES  253

order  of  things  themselves  is  the  best  course  to  follow,  as
long  as  we  are  ignorant  of  the  first  principles  of  which
this  order  is  a  continuation.  But  when,  as  the  result
of  a  methodical  culture  of  reason,  man  has  come  to
know  the  principal  truths  from  which  the  laws  of  nature
are  derived,  he  substitutes — -and  that  in  a  precise  and
positive  sense  of  which  the  ancients  knew  nothing —
for  the  maxim  :  "  Follow  nature,"  that  other  maxim  :
"  Follow  true  reason."  *

The  doctrine  of  a  proper  content  of  reason,  and  of
man's  possibility  to  conform  things  thereto,  gives  an
original  stamp  to  Cartesian  morals.  When  brought  in
contact  with  a  mysterious,  inflexible  nature,  the  ancients
could  only  contemplate  and  acquiesce  in  it,  or  else
retire  within  themselves.  In  the  case  of  Descartes,
reason,  grounded  on  a  science  which  opens  out  things
for  its  consideration,  becomes  an  efficient  power,  a
natural  force  ;  it  assumes  the  task  of  employing  in  its
own  perfecting  the  mechanism  of  external  things.
And  so,  whereas  Socrates  regarded  the  claim  to  investi-
gate the  causes  of  physical  phenomena  as  vain  and
sacrilegious,  and  the  Stoics  looked  upon  resignation  and
detachment  from  the  world  as  the  principle  and  the
goal  of  all  felicity,  Descartes  can  see  no  limit  to  the
conquests  that  science — and  by  means  of  science,  human
reason — will  achieve  over  the  world.  Whereas  the
Stoics  only  condemned  passion, — in  which  they  recog-
nised the  violence  and  indiscipline  of  brute  nature, —
Descartes,  by  the  aid  of  a  science  which  penetrates  to
the  causes  of  passion,  subjugates  and  converts  it  into
an  auxiliary  of  reason.  Man  is  no  longer  crushed  by
nature,  he  makes  use  of  her.  The  soul,  no  longer  a

1  Letters  to  the  Princess  Elizabeth,  ist  and  i5th  May  1645,  Gamier,
Hi.  181,  183.


254  STUDIES  IN  PHILOSOPHY

prisoner  of  the  body,  guides  and  controls  it.  Morals
is  no  longer  the  art  of  retiring  from  the  world  and
being  sufficient  unto  oneself;  it  is  the  command  to
make  of  reason — which  is  our  very  essence — a  living,
sovereign  reality,  the  queen  of  nature.

And  this  very  sovereignty  of  reason  over  things  is,
to  Descartes,  nothing  but  the  means  it  has  for  pursuing
the  ends  proper  to  itself,  such  as  the  love  of  God,
and  interest  in  the  all,  of  which  one  forms  part.1  Car-
tesian metaphysics,  by  its  method,  enables  us  to  know,
with  certainty  these  ultimate  truths  which  are  the
indispensable  illumination  of  the  will.  This  gives
us  another  originality  of  Descartes'  morals.  Most
certainly  the  ancients  raised  the  virtues  to  a  lofty  pitch  ;
but  as  they  were  ignorant  of  true  metaphysics  they
could  not  possibly  become  well  acquainted  with  the
virtues,  and  what  was  called  by  so  fine  a  name  was
frequently  nothing  more  than  an  aberration  of  the  will.2

Thus  it  is  really  for  its  close  union  with  science  that
Cartesian  morals  is  distinguished  throughout.  Still,
the  pure  and  simple  statement  that  it  is  derived  from
science,  especially  the  science  of  natural  things,  could
not  be  made.  In  all  its  phases  it  makes  use  of  science
for  the  attainment  of  its  object :  the  complete  deter-
mination of  will  by  reason.  The  full  realisation  of
reason  is  the  end  :  all  else  is  but  the  means.  In  all
things,  said  Descartes,3  what  we  must  seek  after  is
the  bona  mens ;  nothing  else  deserves  to  be  taken
into  consideration  except  in  so  far  as  it  contributes
thereto.

1  Letter  to  the  Princess  Elizabeth,  i5th  June  1645,  Gamier,  iii.  192-3.

2  Mtth.  i.  10.  3  Reg.  i.


KANT

"Was  uns  zu  thun  gebtihrt,  dess  sind  wir  nur  gewiss." — KANT  (1782).

THE  philosophy  of  Kant  is  one  of  the  most  important
facts  in  the  history  of  the  human  mind.  Kuno  Fischer,
the  well-known  historian  of  modern  philosophy,  affirmed
that  it  represents  nothing  less  than  a  revolution  of  like
nature  to  that  wrought  by  Socrates  when  he  brought
mankind  back  from  the  study  of  the  world  to  the  study
of  self ;  indeed,  it  sets  before  the  human  mind  the  task,
not  of  discovering  the  principles  of  being  and  forming
a  conception  of  the  universe,  but  rather  of  looking  for
the  conditions  of  knowledge  itself,  the  origin  of  our
representations  and  judgments,  and  their  importance.
Windelband  shrewdly  said  that  the  rationalism  of  Kant
is  the  concentration  in  a  living  unity  of  all  the  motor
principles  of  modern  thought.

Kant's  philosophy,  in  fact,  was  the  beginning  of  the
development  of  German  philosophy,  strictly  so  called.
From  Fichte  or  Schelling  on  to  Wundt  or  Riehl,  there
is  not  a  single  German  philosopher  who  does  not  either
continue  or  elaborate  Kantian  ideas.  But  even  outside  of
Germany,  Kantianism  exercises  an  influence  that  grows
greater  and  greater  the  better  it  is  known.  Though
refuted  by  some,  it  is  accepted  by  the  rest  and  is  one
of  the  essential  factors  of  contemporary  philosophic
thought.  In  France,  particularly,  it  attracts  not  merely
a  keen  historical  interest,  but  a  theoretical  one  as  well.

255


256  STUDIES  IN  PHILOSOPHY

There  exists  a  very  flourishing  French  neo-criticism  and
scarcely  a  single  philosophic  dissertation  appears  in  which
Kant's  point  of  view  is  not  discussed,  whilst  its  action
makes  itself  felt  even  in  literature  and  social  life.

It  is  no  easy  task  to  set  forth  the  true  nature  of  a
doctrine  dealing  with  present-day  preoccupations  and
controversies.  The  safest  course  to  pursue  will  be  to
leave  on  one  side  the  many  developments  it  may  have
undergone,  and  look  upon  it,  as  far  as  possible,  from
the  philosopher's  own  standpoint.

I. — BIOGRAPHY

Kant  was  a  contemporary  of  Frederick  the  Second  and
the  French  Revolution.  His  principal  works  appeared
between  1770  and  1797.  Though  he  valued  the
triumphs  of  right  more  highly  than  those  of  might,
yet  he  would  never  agree  to  separate  freedom  from
order  and  discipline.  The  moral  environment,  in  which
his  thought  developed,  was  Pietism  on  the  one  hand,
and  the  philosophy  of  the  eighteenth  century  on  the  other.
Pietism,  which  is  opposed  to  abstract,  theological  Pro-
testantism, set  practice  before  dogma ;  it  extolled  feeling
and  the  spirit  of  devotion,  interior  piety  and  the  private,
individual  interpretation  of  the  Scriptures.  The  philo-
sophy of  the  eighteenth  century,  the  philosophy  of  en-
lightenment (Aufklarungsphilosophie),  as  it  was  called  in
Germany,  teaches  that  all  the  evil  from  which  mankind
suffers,  is  the  result  of  ignorance  and  of  the  bondage  that
succeeds  it,  and  also  that  the  progress  of  enlightenment,  in
itself  alone,  procures  happiness  and  its  ensuing  liberation.

The  life  of  Kant  may  be  divided  into  three  main
periods,  that  correspond  to  the  different  phases  of  his
philosophic  development  :  ist,  childhood  and  youth


KANT  257

from  1724  to  1755,  a  Peri°d  °f  study  and  preliminary
essays  ;  2nd,  the  years  he  spent  as  Privatdozent,  from
1755  to  1770,  immediately  preceding  his  critical  work;
3rd,  his  professorship,  from  1770  to  1797,  devoted  to
criticism  and  the  development  of  his  teachings.

Immanuel  Kant  was  born  in  KOnigsberg  on  the
22nd  of  April  1724.  This  town,  in  which  the  whole
of  his  life  was  destined  to  be  spent  almost  without  a
break,  was  a  large  commercial  centre  to  which  there
flocked  a  considerable  number  of  Jews,  Poles,  English
and  Dutch.  Here  the  philosopher  found  ample  material
for  psychological  and  moral  observations.  KOnigsberg,
a  university  town,  was  likewise  the  centre  of  intellectual
and  political  life  in  the  Duchy  of  Prussia.

The  family  of  Kant  was  of  Scotch  origin.  His  name
was  spelt  Cant,  which,  as  it  was  pronounced  tsant  in
German,  he  changed  to  Kant.  His  father  was  a  saddler,
poor  and  of  stern  morality.  His  mother,  Anna  Regina
Reuter,  says  our  philosopher,  was  a  woman  of  consider-
able intelligence  and  lofty  ideals  ;  she  was  an  earnest
and  devout  Pietist,  though  her  religion  was  free  from
both  mysticism  and  fanaticism.  Kant  was  the  fourth  in
a  family  of  eleven  children.  The  importance  of  and
respect  for  everything  that  was  religious  and  moral  was
inculcated  on  him  from  his  earliest  years.  He  quietly
acquiesced  in  this  influence  and  retained  a  keen  and
pious  memory  thereof  throughout  life.

At  the  age  of  nine  he  entered  the  Collegium
Fredericanum,  the  master  of  which  was  Franz  Albert
Schulz,  professor  of  theology  at  the  University  of
KOnigsberg.  Schulz  was  Kant's  first  master.  An
ardent  Pietist,  he  put  his  entire  soul  into  his  teachings.
From  him  Kant  learnt  to  regard  interior  piety  as
superior  to  reasoning,  and  practice  as  more  important

s


258  STUDIES  IN  PHILOSOPHY

than  dogma.  It  may  be  noted  that  he  invariably  spoke
with  respect  and  gratitude  of  his  Pietist  masters.  Was
it  the  philosopher,  or  was  it  the  former  Pietist,  who,  in
1782,  wrote  in  the  epitaph  of  Lilienthal,  the  minister
who  had  married  his  parents,  the  line  :

Was  uns  zu  thun  gebiihrt,  des  sind  wir  nur  gewiss  ? l

Kant  spent  seven  years  at  the  Collegium  Fredericanum.
He  was  devoted  to  Latin  and  to  Roman  stoicism,  which
he  looked  upon  as  the  religion  of  discipline.  Right  to
the  end  of  his  life  he  adopted  as  his  motto  these  lines
of  Juvenal :

Summum  crede  nefas  animam  praeferre  pudori
Et  propter  vitam  vivendi  perdere  causas.

In  1740,  at  the  age  of  seventeen,  he  entered  the
University  of  Konigsberg,  intending  to  study  theology.
His  idea  at  the  time  was  to  become  a  minister,  but  he
quickly  changed  his  mind.  At  first  he  attended  the
classes  of  Martin  Knutzen,  professor  of  mathematics
and  philosophy.  Knutzen  was  his  second  master,  and
he  too  was  a  Pietist.  Although  a  disciple  of  Wolf  in
philosophy,  he  was  opposed  to  dualism,  and  came  round
to  the  genuine  teaching  of  Leibnitz,  according  to  which
representative  and  motor  force  participate  in  and  imply
each  other.

Kant  was  indebted  to  Knutzen  for  his  acquaintance
with  the  works  of  Newton,  who  may  be  called  his
third,  and  perhaps  his  principal  master.  The  New-
tonian philosophy  was  to  Kant  an  experimental  proof
of  the  possibility  of  an  a  priori  knowledge  of  nature.
Henceforth  it  was  his  object  to  explain  this  possibility,
and  along  that  line  to  become,  in  a  way,  the  Newton
of  metaphysics.

1  What  duty  calls  upon  us  to  do,  of  that  alone  are  we  certain.


KANT  259

Knutzen  did  much  to  turn  Kant  from  theology  to
philosophy.  And,  by  degrees,  he  dropped  the  strict
orthodoxy  of  his  Pietism,  retaining  nothing  but  its
moral  rigidity.

Unable  to  obtain  a  living  on  the  fees  from  his
lessons,  Kant  became  a  private  tutor  in  1746,  in  which
capacity  he  remained  for  nine  years.  He  was  thus
brought  into  connection  with  foreigners  and  the
nobility,  and  began  to  take  considerable  interest  in
foreign  literature  and  politics.  He  went  into  society,
anxious  to  show  himself  a  worthy  citizen.

This  the  first  period  of  his  life  concluded  with  the
anonymous  publication  of  his  Universal  History  of  Nature
and  Theory  of  the  Heavens  (1755),  a  work  that  prepared
the  way  for  the  theory  of  Laplace  on  the  formation  of
the  heavenly  bodies.

After  obtaining  promotion  by  the  writing  of  a  dis-
sertation on  fire,  and  habitation  by  one  on  the  first
principles  of  metaphysical  knowledge,  he  was  appointed
Pr'matdozent.  He  taught  mathematics,  physics,  the
theory  of  fortification,  pyrotechnics,  logic,  morals,  and
philosophical  Encyclopedism.  His  teaching  was  full  of
life.  Whatever  his  subject,  he  spoke  as  one  possessed
of  special  knowledge,  the  result  being  that  he  met  with
considerable  success.  Between  1760  and  1769  he  also
lectured  on  natural  theology,  anthropology,  criticism  of
the  proofs  of  the  existence  of  God,  and  the  doctrine
of  the  beautiful  and  the  sublime.

Here  we  find  the  influence  of  Rousseau,  whose
works  were  then  becoming  known  and  being  consider-
ably discussed.  Kant  devoured  Rousseau's  books  and
was  thus  brought  to  take  a  passionate  interest  in  moral
problems,  the  combat  against  prejudice,  and  the  return
to  nature  and  reason.  Rousseau  taught  him,  he  tells


260  STUDIES  IN  PHILOSOPHY

us,  not  to  despise  man's  natural  tendencies.  Physical
science  a  priori  as  a  fact  was  what  he  had  found  in
Newton  ;  Rousseau  now  made  him  see  morality  as  a
fact.  These  facts  he  purposed  to  analyse.

With  the  object  of  thoroughly  investigating  moral
questions,  he  read  the  English  moralists  :  Shaftesbury,
Hutcheson and Hume. Shortly afterwards, about
1762,  he  became  acquainted  not  only  with  the  moral
but  also  with  the  metaphysical  theories  of  Hume. This
initiation  proved  to  be  a  psychological  moment  in  the
development  of  his  thought. "  Hume  was  the  first,"
he  says,  "  to  shake  me  out  of  my  dogmatic  indolence
and  start  me  on  a  fresh  line  of  investigation  in  the
domain  of  speculative  philosophy." He  adds  immedi-
ately afterwards  : "  Of  course, I  was  careful  not  to
accept  his  conclusions." To  his  mind,  Hume's  skepti-
cism was  adequately  refuted  by  the  reality  of  moral
action. His object was to do  justice to Hume's
criticisms  in  so  far  as  they  were  well  founded  without
agreeing  with  his  conclusions,  to  steer  his  course  safely
between  the  Scylla  of  skepticism  and  the  Charybdis  of
dogmatism. A  slight  clue  which  he  found  in  Locke
(book  4,  chap.  3,  §  9,  etc.)  proved  the  starting  point
of  his  own  theory. And  so  Hume's  influence,  though
certainly  considerable,  manifested  itself  in  Kant  as  a  note
of  warning  or  a  stimulus  for  reflection. There  is  no  proof
that  Kant  passed  through  a  phase  of  skepticism  ;  it  was
to  escape  from  Hume's  skepticism  that  he  sought  to
take  a  stand  outside  traditional  dogmatism.

It  may  be  that  his  transcendental  idealism  drew  its
inspiration  from  the  teaching  of  Leibnitz,  now  set  forth
in  all  its  purity  in  the  New  Essays,  which  appeared  in
1765.  Leibnitz  demonstrated  how  the  principle  of
innateness  may  be  held,  whilst  considering  experience


KANT  261

as  indispensable  to  the  formation  of  knowledge.  Kant's
forms  and  categories,  however,  are  quite  different  from
the  Leibnitzian  virtualities.

To  become  an  ordinary  professor,  Kant  wrote  and
defended  a  dissertation  in  Latin  on  the  form  and  prin-
ciples of  both  the  sensible  and  the  intelligible  worlds
(1770).  He  was  appointed  to  the  University  of
KOnigsberg  by  Frederick  II.,  at  a  salary  of  400  thalers
(60  pounds  sterling).  From  that  time  he  refused  all
invitations  from  other  Universities.  He  now  lectured
publicly  only  on  logic  and  metaphysics,  and  privately
on  natural  law,  morals,  natural  theology,  anthropology
and  physical  geography.  His  ability  as  a  professor  was
wonderful ;  he  did  not  teach  his  pupils  philosophy,  he
rather  trained  them  to  become  philosophers.  His  lessons
were  simple,  clear  and  attractive ;  he  reserved  all
abstruse  deductions  and  special  terminology  for  his
books  intended  for  scholars.  On  moral  subjects  he
spoke  with  warmth  and  conviction  ;  his  eloquence  was
virile,  leaving  a  profound  impression  on  the  souls  of  his
hearers.

The  problem  of  the  criticism  of  human  knowledge  was
not  long  before  it  captivated  him.  How  can  we  explain
why  ideas,  conceived  of  a  priori,  conform  with  things
that  exist  outside  of  ourselves  ?  At  first  he  thought  he
would  be  able  to  answer  the  question  in  a  few  months  :
he  spent  twelve  years  on  it.  Even  then  he  allowed
himself  only  four  or  five  months  to  put  his  thoughts
into  words,  for  fear  of  delaying  the  solution  too  long.
It  was  at  Riga,  in  the  beginning  of  178 1,  that  the  Critique
of  Pure  Reason  appeared,  one  of  the  pillars  of  human
thought.  Kant  was  then  fifty-seven  years  of  age.  The
originality  and  purport  of  his  book  were  not  at  first


262  STUDIES  IN  PHILOSOPHY

understood.  No  one  cared  to  regard  him  as  anything
else  than  a  Platonic  dreamer  or  a  Cartesian  idealist;
Hamann  called  him  a  Prussian  Hume.  Kant  stoutly
explained  his  position  in  a  treatise  entitled  :  Prolegomena
to  all  Future  Metaphysic  that  may  present  itself  as  Science
(1783),  and  also  in  the  preface  to  the  second  edition  of
the  Critique  (1787).  Sure  of  his  principles,  he  con-
centrated his  efforts  more  and  more  exclusively  on
developing  their  consequences,  finishing  his  work  of
criticism,  and  establishing  on  this  basis  a  complete
doctrine  of  speculative  and  moral  philosophy.  His
writings  devoted  to  this  task  appeared  between  1785
and  1797.

His  reputation  began  to  increase.  In  1790,  Fichte,
then  quite  a  young  man,  forwarded  him  his  Aphorisms
on  Religion  and  Deism,  along  with  an  enthusiastic  letter.
Schiller  studied  his  teachings  on  esthetics  and  induced
Goethe  to  do  the  same.  J.  P.  Richter  recorded  his
opinion  that  Kant  was  not  so  much  a  light  of  the
world  as  an  entire  system  of  dazzling  suns.  His  fame
spread  to  Holland  and  England.  His  dissertation  on
eternal  peace,  published  in  1795,  was  translated  into
French.

The  government  accorded  him  its  esteem  and  pro-
tection. Once  only  was  he  near  receiving  a  check  in
the  promulgation  of  his  doctrines  :  when  writing  on
religious  subjects.  In  1792  he  had  sent  an  article  on
the  root  evil  in  human  nature  to  the  Berlin  Monthly
Review,  and  the  Board  of  Censors  had  authorized  its
insertion.  A  second  article,  however,  on  the  struggle
between  the  good  and  the  evil  principles,  was  not
accepted.  Now,  Kant  had  still  two  more  to  bring  out.
Refused  by  the  Board,  he  applied  to  the  Faculty  of
Theology,  who  granted  the  imprimatur.  The  four


KANT  263

dissertations  appeared  under  the  title,  Religion  within
the  Limits  of  Reason  alone  (1793).  The  government
grew  alarmed  at  the  success  of  the  book,  and  on
the  ist  of  October  1794  Kant  received  a  letter  asking
for  an  explanation  and  commanding  him  never  again
to  write  on  the  subject  of  religion.  Outwardly  Kant
yielded,  and  gave  a  written  promise  not  to  teach  or
write  on  religion  "  as  a  loyal  subject  of  His  Royal
Majesty."  When  the  king,  however,  died  in  1797,
he  regarded  himself  as  released  from  his  promise.

In  other  respects  he  lived  quietly  enough,  though  he
was  very  sympathetic  towards  the  French  Revolution.
This  sympathy  is  a  special  characteristic  of  his  moral
make-up.  He  looked  upon  the  Revolution  as  an  effort
to  establish  the  organisation  of  human  societies  on
reason.  Even  after  1794  he  persevered  in  his  political
convictions  though  he  despaired  of  a  favourable  issue  to
events  in  France  itself.  To  the  very  end  he  believed
in  the  justice  and  practical  value  of  theory  ;  in  right,  as
a  principle  ;  and  in  eternal  peace,  as  the  practicable  goal
of  politics.  Behind  personal  disputings  he  saw  the
conflict  between  history  and  philosophy,  between  the
positive  and  the  rational ;  in  all  things  he  relied  on  the
triumph  of  reason.

After  the  year  1790  his  intellectual  powers  began  to
decline,  and  in  1797  he  resigned  his  professorship.  All
the  same,  he  continued  to  work  right  on  to  the  end.
The  book  on  which  he  was  engaged  was  to  be  his
chef-d" ceuvre,  his  object  being  to  explain  the  transition
from  the  metaphysics  of  the  science  of  nature  to  physics.
This  work,  which  he  left  unfinished,  was  lost ;  it  has
been  found  recently.  Kant's  last  year  of  life  was
marked  by  ever -increasing  feebleness  of  body.  He
died  on  the  I2th  of  February  1804.  His  last  words


264  STUDIES  IN  PHILOSOPHY

were  :  Es  ist  gut  (It  is  well).  His  funeral  took  place
amid  universal  homage  and  admiration.  The  body  was
interred  beneath  the  arcades  of  Konigsberg  Cathedral.
Several  statues  were  erected  in  his  honour,  the  most
famous  being  the  one  by  Rauch  in  Konigsberg.  Kant
was  a  man  of  small,  short  stature,  only  a  little  over  five
feet  in  height,  with  poorly  developed  bones  and  muscles,
a  narrow,  almost  concave  chest,  the  right  shoulder  joint
slightly  displaced,  high  forehead  and  fine  blue  eyes.  A
cast  of  his  head  was  taken  by  Knorr,  and  his  remains
were  exhumed  in  1880.

Kant  lived  for  philosophy  alone.  He  held  no
political  office  and  never  married.  All  the  same,  he
did. not  consider  it  possible  to  be  a  philosopher,  without
at  the  same  time  being  a  man,  and  so  regarded  it  as
necessary  to  come  into  contact  with  the  realities  of  life
before  attempting  to  understand  and  regulate  them.
In  his  loftiest  aspirations  he  was  careful  not  to  overstep
the  limits  of  this  terrestrial  world  of  ours.  His  object
was  to  live  here  below  in  accordance  with  his  own
principles,  which  he  looked  upon  as  absolute  and  followed
out  to  the  letter.  To  his  mind,  the  reconciliation  of
law  and  independence  was  to  be  found  in  reason  ;  by
it  he  determined  to  form  his  opinions  and  control  his
life.  In  politics  he  professed  liberalism,  but  would
not  admit  of  any  separation  between  liberty  and  order,
whilst  he  maintained  a  conscientious  respect  for  estab-
lished power.  In  religion  he  was  a  rationalist,  though
he  deemed  it  right  to  uphold  the  spirit  of  Christianity,
and  valued  the  work  done  by  the  positive  religions.  In
philosophy  he  attacked  dogmatism,  though  rejecting
skepticism.  In  morals  he  repudiated  all  exterior  laws,
though  obeying  an  interior  command  of  greater  severity


KANT  265

than  the  laws  he  rejected.  Boldness  in  speculation,
respect  towards  practical  life  and  the  material  order  of
things  :  such  were  his  distinguishing  traits.

Kant  was  a  thinker  more  than  a  writer.  Some  of
his  earlier  works  such  as  the  Observations  on  the  Beautiful
and  the  Sublime ',  the  Methodology  of  the  Critique  of  Pure
Reason,  and,  speaking  generally,  the  passages  in  which
he  expresses  his  moral  convictions,  manifest  a  facile,
pleasing  and  vigorous  style.  In  metaphysical  analysis,
however,  his  style  is  complicated,  laboured  and  redun-
dant, and  often  only  the  more  obscure  from  the  fact  that
the  author  has  made  every  effort  to  be  clear.  Kant's
work  is  a  thought  seeking  its  form.  In  more  finished
shape,  would  it  have  stirred  the  human  intellect  to  the
same  degree  ?

The  following  is  a  chronological  list  of  Kant's
principal  works,  written,  for  the  most  part,  in  German  :

Thoughts  on  the  True  Estimate  of  Living  Force  (Vis  Fiva}^
and  an  Investigation  into  the  Proofs  of  Leibnitz  and  other
Mechanical  Philosophers  thereon  (1747).  Kant,  in  this
work,  reconciles  the  doctrines  of  Descartes  and  Leibnitz
with  each  other,  as  regards  the  measurement  of  the  force
of  a  moving  body.

Has  the  Earth^  from  its  Origin^  undergone  any  Modifications  in
its  Rotatory  Motion  ?  (magazine  article,  1754).  Relying
on  Newton's  principles  Kant  clearly  shows  that  the  speed
of  the  earth's  rotation  must  have  diminished.

Is  the  Earth  growing  Old  ?  A  research  made  from  the  physical
standpoint  (article,  1754).

A  Universal  History  of  Nature  and  Theory  of  the  Heavens^
dealing  with  the  System  and  Mechanical  Origin  of  the
Universe^  in  accordance  with  Newton's  Principles  (1755),  a
famous  work  that  appeared  anonymously,  with  a  dedica-
tion to  Frederick  II.,  and  serving  as  a  kind  of  prelude  to  the
exposition  of  the  world-system,  published  by  Laplace  in  1 796.


266  STUDIES  IN  PHILOSOPHY

Brief  Account  of  some  "Thoughts  on  Fire  (in  Latin)  (1755).
Heat,  like  light,  is  a  vibratory  movement  of  the  ether.

A  New  Explanation  of  the  First  Principles  of  Metaphysical
Knowledge  (1755),  a  thesis  in  Latin;  written  to  obtain
the  right  to  be  appointed  privatdocent.  It  deals  with  the
principles  of  contradiction  and  determinative  reason.

Three  dissertations  On  Earthquakes  that  took  place  at  £>uito  and
Lisbon  in  1755.

Physical  Monadology  (1756),  Latin  thesis;  Kant  defended  this
thesis  with  a  view  to  a  professorship  which  he  did  not
obtain.  In  it  he  transformed  the  monad  of  Leibnitz  into
a  physical  atom.

Explanatory  Remarks  on  the  Theory  of  the  Winds  (1756),  a
precise  explanation  of  periodical  winds.

A  New  Conception  of  Motion  and  Rest  (1758).

A  Few  Thoughts  on  Optimism  (1759).  Kant  claims  that
everything  is  good  if  we  regard  things  as  a  whole.  At
the  end  of  his  life  he  repudiated  this  work,  inspired  by
Leibnitz.

The  False  Subtlety  of  the  Four  Syllogistic  Figures  (1762).  The
first  figure  alone,  he  affirmed,  was  pure  and  primitive.

An  Attempt  to  Introduce  into  Philosophy  the  Notion  of  Negative
Quantities  (1763).  Real  opposition,  in  which  the  two
terms  are  equally  positive  in  themselves  cannot  be  reduced
to  logical  opposition,  in  which  one  of  the  terms  contradicts
the  other.

The  only  possible  Foundation  for  a  Demonstration  of  the  Exist-
ence of  God  (1763).  The  possible,  regarded  not  in  its
form  but  in  its  matter  or  data,  presupposes  existence,  and,
in  the  final  analysis,  the  existence  of  a  necessary  being.

An  Essay  on  the  Evidence  of  the  Fundamental  Propositions  of
Natural  Theology  and  Ethics  (1764),  a  work  written  for  a
competition  inaugurated  by  the  Berlin  Academy.  Kant
obtained  only  the  accessit^  the  prize  being  awarded  to
Mendelssohn.  Both  contrast  philosophy  with  mathe-
matics, and  Kant  concludes  that  the  methods  employed  in
the  latter  are  not  suitable  for  the  former.

Observations  on  the  Sentiment  of  the  Beautiful  and  the  Sublime
(1764) ;  a  work  on  morals  and  criticism.


KANT  267

Programme  of  Classes  for  the  Winter  Session  (1765-17  66).  The
education  of  the  various  faculties  of  the  mind  should
precede  the  acquiring  of  knowledge.  In  this  treatise  a
critical  propensity  begins  to  show  itself.

Dreams  of  a  Spirit-seer  (or  Clairvoyant]  explained  by  the  Dreams
of  Metaphysic  (i  766,  anonymous).  This  work  was  inspired
by  Swedenborg's  visions.  Kant  here  appears  in  a  skeptical
and  somewhat  inconsiderate  vein,  a  la  Voltaire.  The
only  difference  between  illuminism  and  metaphysics,  to  his
mind,  is  that  the  former  is  the  dream  of  sentiment,  the
latter  that  of  reason  ;  one  is  no  better  than  the  other.
Let  us  not  claim  to  know  the  unknowable.

Grounds  for  distinguishing  Positions  in  Space  (1768).  A  refuta-
tion of  the  Leibnitzian  theory  which  posits  things  before
space,  this  latter  being  reduced  to  nothing  but  a  concept.
According  to  Kant,  we  must  admit  the  existence  of
universal,  absolute  space.

Form  and  Principles  of  the  Sensible  and  the  Intelligible  Worlds
(1770),  a  dissertation  in  Latin,  written  in  order  to
obtain  the  right  of  being  appointed  professor  of  logic
and  metaphysics.  Kant  breaks  away  from  dogmatism  as
regards  sensible — though  not  intelligible — knowledge.

Letters  to  Marcus  Herz^  from  1770  to  1781.  Kant  endeavours
to  find  some  mean  between  idealism  and  realism.

The  Different  Human  Races.  The  races  are  varieties  that
have  become  stable.  A  true  history  of  natural  beings
would  doubtless  reduce  many  so-called  species  to  the
position  of  simple  races,  the  offshoot  of  one  common
species.

The  Critique  of  Pure  Reason  (1781).  Theoretical  knowledge
implies  both  intuition  and  necessary  connection.  As  we
can  realise  the  first  condition  only  with  regard  to  sensible
things,  these  latter  are  the  only  ones  we  can  know
theoretically.  In  1787,  Kant  published  a  second  edition
of  the  Critique.  Whether  the  changes  in  this  second
edition  refer  to  the  substance  or  only  to  the  form  is  a
much-disputed  question.  Rosenkranz,  Schopenhauer  and
Kuno  Fischer  agree  that  a  thorough  modification  took
place,  tending  to  restore  the  "  thing-in-itself,"  which,


268  STUDIES  IN  PHILOSOPHY

they  alleged,  the  first  edition  had  abolished.  According
to  Kant  himself,  the  second  edition  merely  emphasises
the  realistic  side  of  the  doctrine,  an  aspect  that  had  been
disregarded  by  certain  readers.  Kant's  affirmation  may
very  well  be  maintained.  The  first  edition  did  not  abolish
the  "  thing-in-itself,"  but  rather  the  theoretical  knowledge
of  the  u  thing-in-itself,"  a  very  different  matter.

Prolegomena  to  all  Future  Metaphysics  which  may  present  itself
as  Science  (1783).  This  short  work  gives  an  analytical
exposition  of  the  doctrine  which  the  Critique  of  Pure
Reason  had  set  forth  synthetically,  and  rectifies  the  mistakes
made  with  reference  to  certain  points  in  this  doctrine.

Notion  of  a  Universal  History  in  a  Cosmopolitan  Sense  (magazine
article,  1784).

Answer  to  the  question :  What  is  enlightenment  ?  (magazine
article,  1784).  Enlightenment,  says  Kant,  is  the  emanci-
pation of  the  intelligence.

An  Account  of  Herder  s  work  entitled :  Ideas  on  the  Philosophy  of
the  History  of  Mankind  (magazine  article,  1785).  Kant
rejects  the  doctrine  of  the  essential  unity  of  nature  and
freedom.

Foundations  of  the  Metaphysics  of  Morals  (1785;  4th  edition,
1797).  Here  Kant  determines  and  affirms  the  funda-
mental principle  of  morality.

Metaphysical  Elements  of  Natural  Science  (1786  ;  3rd  edition,
1800).  In  this  work  the  axioms  of  pure  physics  are  given.

Conjectures  on  the  Beginning  of  Human  History  (1786).

Corporeal  Medicine  in  so  far  as  it  comes  under  Philosophy ',  a
discourse  in  Latin  (1786  or  1788).

The  Employment  of  Teleological  Principles  in  Philosophy  (article,
1788).

Critique  of  Practical  Reason  (1788;  6th  edition,  1827).  A
determination  of  the  nature  of  the  moral  law,  and  of  the
kind  of  adhesion  that  practical  principles  allow  of.

Critique  of  Judgment  (1790;  3rd  edition,  1799).  Here  Kant
deals  with  the  basis  and  value  of  the  ideas  of  beauty  and
finality.

Illuminism  and  the  Remedies  against  it  (1790).  Dissertation  on
Cagliostro.


KANT  269

The  Failure  of  all  Philosophic  Effort  in  Theodicy  (1791).

Religion  within  the  Bounds  of  Reason  only  (1793  ;  2nd  edition,
1794).  The  deduction  or  legitimation  of  religion.  Only
what  relates  to  morals  is  founded  on  religion.  We  must
tend  to  make  religion  purely  rational.

The  Commonplace  Remark :  "  That  is  all  Right  in  Theory  but
Worthless  in  Practice"  (magazine  article,  1793).  Kant
rejects  this  well-known  aphorism  not  only  as  regards
morality,  but  also  with  reference  to  political  and  human
right.

The  Influence  of  the  Moon  upon  the  Weather  (article,  1 794).

Eternal  Peace,  a  Philosophical  Essay  (1795).  Eternal  peace
Kant  regards  as  the  goal  of  the  historic  development  of
mankind,  and  that,  not  from  sentiment,  but  from  the  idea
of  justice.

Metaphysical  Principles  of  the  Theory  of  Right  (1797  ;  2nd
edition,  1798).  The  theory  of  right  or  legality  as  deduced
from  the  criticism  of  practical  reason.

Metaphysical  Principles  of  the  Theory  of  Virtue  (1797  ;  2nd
edition,  1803).  The  theory  of  morality,  also  as  the  result
of  criticism.  These  two  latter  works  bear  the  title  :
Metaphysics  of  Morals.

Contest  of  the  Faculties  (to  this  work  is  added  an  article  that
appeared  in  1797  :  The  Power  of  the  Mind  to  Master  its
Morbid  Feelings  by  Will  alone]  (i  798).  This  was  the  conflict
of  the  Faculty  of  Philosophy,  representing  rational  truth,
with  the  three  other  Faculties :  Theology,  Law,  and
Medicine,  representing  the  positive  disciplines.

Anthropology  Treated  from  the  Pragmatic  Point  of  View  (1798  ;
2nd  edition,  1800).  Pragmatic  anthropology  is  the  art  of
using  men  for  one's  own  purposes.

Logic,  a  work  published  by  Jasche  (1800).

Physical  Geography,  published  by  Rink  (1802-1803).

Paedagogics, published  by  Rink  (1803). Notes taken  from

several  lectures  delivered  by  Kant  on  this  subject.
Transition  from  the  Metaphysical  Principles  of  the  Science  of
Nature  to  Physics,  an  unfinished  work,  written  between
1783  and 1803,  first  published  by  Reicke  between  1882
and 1884  in  the  Altpreussische  Monatsschriften,  and  then,


270  STUDIES  IN  PHILOSOPHY

more  completely,  by  Albrecht  Krause  (1888).  Here  we
have  the  progress  of  deduction  proceeding  from  the  meta-
physics of  material  nature  to  experimental  physics  regarded
as  a  science,  i.e.  as  a  system.

Kant's  Reflections  on  Critical  Philosophy^  published  by  Benno
Erdmann  (1882-1884).

Letters.  About  a  hundred,  nineteen  of  which  were  addressed
to  Marcus  Herz.


II. — THE  ANTECRITICAL  PERIOD

On  the  2Oth  of  August  1777  Kant  left  it  on  record
that  his  investigations,  hitherto  professional  and  frag-
mentary, had  finally  taken  systematic  form  and  brought
him  to  the  idea  of  the  whole.  Thus,  in  the  first  place,
the  development  of  Kantian  thought  shows  a  long
period  of  formation,  during  which  works  of  different
kinds  were  undertaken  for  themselves  alone  without
reference  to  a  general  standpoint,  and  afterwards
brought  together  with  a  view  to  being  reconciled  with
each  other.  And  so  Kant's  thought  progresses  from
the  parts  to  the  whole.  His  main  idea  is  arrived  at  by
a  process  of  synthesis.  This  first  period  extends  to
the  time  of  his  elaboration  of  criticism,  i.e.  up  to  and
including  the  year  1770.

The  starting-point  of  Kantian  thought  is,  on  the
one  hand,  a  substratum  of  Christian,  and  more  especi-
ally of  Pietistic  beliefs,  faith  in  duty,  the  cult  of  moral
intention,  conviction  of  the  superiority  of  practice  over
dogmatism  ;  on  the  other,  a  very  clear,  keen  sense  of
science,  the  determination  to  be  guided,  so  far  as  a
knowledge  of  nature  is  concerned,  only  by  the  evidence
of  experience  and  mathematical  reasoning.  Hence-
forth Kant  is  principally  concerned  with  the  connec-
tion between  science  and  religion  ;  this,  too,  after  both


KANT  271

have  been  developed  in  his  mind  independently,  each
according  to  its  own  method.

During  the  antecritical  period  Kant  meditates  in
turn  on  the  divers  objects  presented  both  by  his  studies
and  by  the  circumstances  of  life.

From  1747  to  1755  he  is  a  Leibnitzo-Wolfian,
though  with  a  tendency  to  accentuate  the  difference
between  the  mathematical  and  the  real.

With  Newton,  he  studies  the  mechanism  of  the
heavens,  from  1754  to  1763.  Like  him,  he  determines
to  employ  experience  only  in  conjunction  with  mathe-
matics. Newton,  however,  did  not  state  the  problem
of  origins.  Kant  believes  that  the  method  which  has
established  the  present  system  is  capable  of  going
back  to  the  genesis  of  this  very  system  :  the  forces  that
preserve  must  also  be  the  forces  that  have  created.
He  undertakes  to  trace  not  only  the  possible  but  the
real,  the  actual  history  of  the  formation  of  the  world.

In  the  beginning  was  one  homogeneous,  elementary
matter,  moved  by  forces  of  attraction  and  repulsion  :  a
gaseous  chaos.  This  matter  was  maintained  in  a  state
of  extreme  tenuity  by  being  kept  at  a  very  high
temperature.  In  obedience  to  the  forces  contained
within  itself  this  chaos  is  subjected  to  a  movement  of
rotation.  Purely  as  the  result  of  these  physical  condi-
tions the  homogeneous  becomes  differentiated.  Rota-
tion occasions  the  formation  of  nebulae,  which  themselves
acquire  a  rotatory  movement.  In  turn  these  nebulae,
as  the  result  of  the  centrifugal  force,  produce  rings,  and
these  rings  represent  the  orbits  of  future  planets.  Then
the  rings  break,  and  collect  together  again  in  planets.
Satellites  are  formed  in  the  same  way.

The  scientific  value  of  this  theory  is  now  recognised
even  by  such  men  as  Helmholtz  (Mdmoire  sur  la  conser-


272  STUDIES  IN  PHILOSOPHY

vation  de  la  force •,  1847)  anc^  Fave  (Revue  scienttfique^
1884).

The  theory  was  the  result  of  purely  scientific  con-
siderations. Kant,  however,  at  once  confronts  it  with
the  teachings  of  religion.  Religion,  he  says,  has
nothing  to  fear  from  a  doctrine  which,  though  dis-
missing accidental  and  extrinsic  finality,  as  met  with  in
the  works  of  men,  implies,  on  the  other  hand,  a  fruitful
and  essential  finality,  which  alone  is  truly  worthy  of
God.  Besides,  who  will  ever  be  able  to  say,  "  Give
me  matter  and  motion  and  I  will  make  a  snail  "  ?  At
its  very  lowest  stage  life  is  immeasurably  superior  to
mechanism  ;  it  is  a  witness  to  God.

Following  on  Wolf,  Kant  studies  the  relations
between  possibility  and  existence  (1755).  The  prin-
ciple of  contradiction  is  the  law  of  the  former  ;  the
principle  of  determining  reason,  irreducible  to  that  of
contradiction,  is  the  law  of  the  latter.  Determining
reason  is  either  antecedently  determining  and  a  reason
of  existence,  or  subsequently  determining  and  a  reason
of  knowledge.  Antecedently  determining  reason  alone
gives  us  complete  science.  From  these  principles  Kant
deduces  the  impossibility  of,  explaining,  solely  by  the
analysis  of  their  distinctive  essence,  either  change  or
the  real  connection  between  substances*  All  rela-
tions between  substances  must  come  from  without.
Thus,  succession  has  its  foundation  in  an  external
action  which  constitutes  the  reality  of  the  world,  whilst
coexistence  is  based  on  an  extrinsic  connection  which
implies  the  existence  of  God.  And  so,  speculating
on  Wolr's  metaphysics,  Kant  ends  in  a  deduction  of  the
principles  of  Newtonianism.  His  system  at  this  period
may  be  defined  as  realistic  mechanism  dependent  on
natural  theology.


KANT  273

Dealing  with  the  relations  between  philosophy  and
mathematics,  as  did  his  contemporaries  (1756-1764),
Kant  neither  admits  that  the  concepts  of  the  mathema-
ticians, infinite  divisibility,  an  absolute  plenum,  the
exclusive  mechanism  of  all  notion  of  force,  are  intel-
ligible to  the  understanding,  nor  that  these  concepts
are  meaningless  and  devoid  of  real  value.  Though  a
stumbling-block  to  the  logician,  mathematics  is  none
the  less  the  key  of  the  science  of  nature,  as  Newton
proved.  The  problem  is  to  reconcile  mathematics
with  transcendental  philosophy,  not  to  sacrifice  the  one
to  the  other.  Now,  if  we  analyse  the  conditions  of
mathematical  speculation,  and  those  of  philosophic
speculation,  we  find  that  in  both  cases  the  object  is  a
synthesis,  but  that  in  the  former  it  is  built  up  by  the
mind,  and  in  the  latter  it  is  given  to  the  mind.  Hence,
the  method  that  suits  the  one  is  useless  for  the  other.
Everything  referring  to  dimension  will  be  dealt  with
mathematically,  but  if  we  would  know  qualities  and
existences,  we  shall  use  experience  and  metaphysical
systematisation,  along  with  Newton.  There  are  two
certainties,  two  outlooks  upon  nature  :  that  of  mathe-
matical proof  and  that  of  experience.  These  two
paths  of  knowledge,  starting  from  opposite  poles,  can
never  meet.

Yielding  to  the  influence  of  the  aesthetician  Baum-
garten,  Rousseau  and  the  English  philosophers,  Kant
takes  up  the  questions  of  taste  and  morals  (1763-1766).
His  method  consists  in  taking,  as  his  starting-point,
an  impartial  observation  of  human  nature.  We  must
proceed,  he  says,  from  what  is  to  what  ought  to  be.
His  observation,  however,  in  spite  of  himself,  is  tinged
with  metaphysical  analysis.  In  the  given  he  is  about
to  discover  the  absolute.  What  he  thinks  he  ought

T


274  STUDIES  IN  PHILOSOPHY

to  observe  is  not  so  much  ideas  and  things  as  the  inner
movements  of  sensibility.  Taking  this  point  of  view,
he  is  led  to  make  a  profound  distinction  between  the
beautiful  and  the  sublime.  This  distinction  introduces
enlightenment  and  precision  into  literature  and  art.
Thus,  it  is  the  province  of  tragedy  to  be  sublime,  that
of  comedy  to  be  beautiful.  The  distinction  likewise
applies  to  morals.  True  virtue  is  sublime  ;  good  quali-
ties :  a  kind  heart,  the  sense  of  honour,  modesty,  are  only
beautiful.  The  spring  of  virtue  is  the  sentiment  of  the
beauty  and  dignity  of  human  nature,  regarded  as  a
motive  of  action.  This  principle  must  be  understood
in  a  formal  sense :  it  consists  essentially  of  an  obligatory
rule.  This  principle,  too,  is  impossible  of  demonstra-
tion ;  and  it  is  good  that  it  should  be  so.  Providence
has  not  willed  that  knowledge  indispensable  to  our
happiness  should  depend  on  subtle  reasoning  ;  it  has
entrusted  such  knowledge  to  natural  common  sense.

Swedenborg's  claim  that  he  held  direct  communica-
tion with  spirits,  affords  Kant  an  opportunity  to  examine
the  value  of  metaphysics,  so  far  as  it  also  affirms  the
possibility  of  becoming  acquainted  with  suprasensible
existences  (1763-1766).  Metaphysics  seems  to  meet
with  unexpected  confirmation  in  the  facts  affirmed  by
illuminism.  It  is  apparently  justified  by  the  theory  it
advances  thereof,  as  Newtonianism  is  justified  by  the
explanation  it  affords  of  the  experimental  laws  of  motion.
Unfortunately,  illuminism  can  be  explained  in  a  far
simpler  and  more  satisfactory  manner,  as  hallucination
caused  by  certain  organic  disturbances.  Might  it  not
then  possibly  happen  that  metaphysics  had  a  like  origin  ?
What  if  it  were,  after  all,  a  mere  hallucination  of  the
understanding,  endowing  the  phantoms  of  sensible
hallucination  with  an  apparently  logical  existence  ?  All


KANT  275

the  same,  we  must  beware  of  leaping  to  the  conclusion
that  metaphysics  is  altogether  inane.  In  one  scale  of
the  balance  it  places  the  hope  of  a  future  life.  Now,
we  could  not  will  that  this  weight  remain  actionless  on
our  mind.  What  we  do  know,  is  that  we  can  expect
nothing  from  experience  calculated  to  confirm  our  moral
and  religious  beliefs.  But  these  beliefs  need  no  experi-
mental confirmation  ;  they  both  will  and  ought  to  be
free.  In  a  word,  the  result  of  our  examination  is  that
we  must  offer  the  following  new  definition  of  meta-
physics, one  alike  favourable  to  practice  and  imposed
upon  theory  :  metaphysics  is  the  science  of  the  limits
of  human  reason.

Kant,  like  Leibnitz,  studies  the  nature  of  space  and
time  (1768-1770).  Several  facts  of  experience,  includ-
ing the  real  existence  of  symmetrical  figures,  prove  that
geometrical  space  is  no  mere  consequence  of  the  relations
between  things  in  point  of  position,  but  rather  the  basis
of  the  possibility  of  these  relations.  The  reality  of
absolute  space  being  thus  established,  Kant  asks  himself
how  space  is  possible,  i.e.  conceivable  without  contra-
diction. Space  and  time  are  known  a  priori ;  at  the
same  time  they  are  intuitions.  How  can  these  two
characteristics  be  reconciled  ?  The  only  way  of  doing
so,  is  to  regard  space  and  time  as  the  conditions  imposed
on  the  human  mind,  by  its  very  nature,  for  the  percep-
tion of  sensible  objects.  Space  and  time  do  not  concern
things  as  they  are  in  themselves,  but  only  as  they
appear  to  our  sensibility.  The  "  critique "  idea  has
come  to  birth,  but  Kant  applies  it,  so  far,  only  to
sensible  or  mathematical  knowledge.

It  was  through  Hume's  influence  that  Kant's  thought,
which  had  hitherto  wandered  over  all  kinds  of  subjects,
was  finally  to  become  concentrated  and  steadied  (1762-


276  STUDIES  IN  PHILOSOPHY

1780).  Hume's  dialectic  made  such  an  impression  on
Kant's  mind  that  he  soon  thought  of  nothing  else  than
solving  the  difficulties  raised  by  the  famous  skeptic.  In
this  task  his  true  originality  was  shown,  and  there
blossomed  forth  the  idea  which  was  to  be  the  soul  of  his
philosophy.  Kant  had  long  ago  pondered  on  the  rela-
tion between  cause  and  effect,  he  soon  saw  the  element
of  strangeness  in  a  connection  which  could  not  be
analytical,  and  yet  was  necessary.  Still,  he  did  not
think  of  criticising  its  legitimacy.  It  was  Hume  who
roused  him  out  of  his  dogmatic  calmness,  proclaiming
that  the  concept  of  causality — a  concept  foreign  to
reason,  formed  by  nothing  but  imagination  on  the  occa-
sion of  a  mere  habit  and  under  the  influence  of  some
obscure  instinct — could  have  no  object  outside  of  our-
selves. Kant  refused  to  follow  Hume  in  the  deductions
the  latter  claimed  to  found  on  this  analysis  of  his.
Indeed,  what  would  become  of  the  freedom  of  the  will,
the  condition  of  moral  determination,  if  there  existed
for  us  nothing  but  phenomena ;  and  what  would  become
of  science  itself,  the  knowledge  of  things  as  necessary,
if  causality  were  nothing  more  than  a  subjective  con-
nection ?  In  Kant's  mind,  science  and  morals  are  given,
as  are  also  the  characteristics  peculiar  to  them  ;  it  is
the  part  of  philosophy  to  explain  their  possibility  or
conditions,  not  to  discuss  their  reality.

And  so  Hume's  thesis  was  not  a  doctrine,  but  rather
a  problem,  a  starting-point  for  Kant.  How  comes  it
to  pass  that  a  relation,  the  terms  of  which  are  hetero-
geneous, should  also  be  posited  as  necessary  as  valid
for  things  ?  This  was  the  question  to  be  answered.

First,  he  had  to  satisfy  himself  that  the  principle  of
causality  did  not  proceed  from  experience,  for  in  that
event  its  necessity  would  have  been  radically  unintelli-


KANT  277

gible.  Having  noticed,  however,  that  many  other
concepts,  such  as  those  of  substance,  mutual  action,  etc.,
held  the  same  position  as  the  one  with  which  Hume  had
grappled,  and  having  succeeded  in  determining  the  exact
number  of  these  concepts  by  means  of  a  single  principle,
a  thing  impossible  in  the  case  of  concepts  of  experience,
Kant  from  that  time  regarded  it  as  established  that  the
concept  of  cause  may  be  acknowledged  to  have  an  origin
a  priori.  And  yet,  can  there  conceivably  be  concepts
that  are  at  once  a  priori  and  synthetical !  Have  we
not  here  two  incompatible  characteristics?  This  was
Hume's  idea,  and  so  he  gave  up  the  problem,  discarding
causality  in  favour  of  experience.  The  reason  was  that
he  shared  a  prevailing  error  of  the  age  upon  an  im-
portant point  closely  connected  with  the  question  :  the
nature  of  mathematical  judgments.  These  latter  he
regarded  as  analytical,  and  so  refused  to  consider  them.
In  reality,  they  are  synthetical  ;  and  as  their  character
of  necessity  and  apriority  is  indisputable,  and  even  un-
disputed, they  afford  an  instance  of  the  effective  union,
within  our  knowledge,  of  apriority  and  synthetic  con-
nection. There  is  nothing,  therefore,  to  prevent  the
judgment  of  causality  from  being  both  synthetic  and
necessary.

Nevertheless,  it  is  not  enough  for  it  to  be  necessary
in  the  sense  that  mathematical  judgments  are  necessary.
Necessary,  in  the  sense  of  causal  connection,  means  :
applicable  a  priori  to  real  things.  How  is  such  a
property  possible  ?  If  objects  were  produced  by  the
understanding,  or  ideas  by  objects,  the  agreement  between
concepts  and  things  would  afford  no  difficulty ;  but  such
is  not  the  case  :  mind  and  things  form  two  distinct
worlds.  Then  how  does  the  mind  come  to  have  the
right  to  dictate  laws  for  things  ?  It  acquires  this  right,


278  STUDIES  IN  PHILOSOPHY

answers  Kant,  from  the  conditions  of  experience  itself,
both  inner  and  outer  :  no  other  explanation  is  possible.
This  view,  the  origin  of  transcendental  deduction,  is
the  goal  of  the  regressive  movement  occasioned  by
Hume's  criticism.  It  includes  the  formula  of  Kant's
criticism,  and  the  central  idea  of  the  system  he  is  now
to  build  up.

III. — CRITICISM

The  Kantian  criticism  of  pure  reason  is  strictly  a
theory  of  science.  As  Newton  sought  for  the  principle
governing  the  system  of  celestial  bodies,  so  Kant  seeks
for  the  principle  governing  the  system  of  our  knowledge.
Science  is  given,  just  as  the  universe  is  given  ;  philosophy
does  not  ask  whether  it  is  possible  or  not,  but  how  it
is  possible,  i.e.  conceivable  without  contradiction.

Science  consists  of  two  disciplines,  mathematics  and
physics,  and  the  union  of  the  two  ;  we  must  take  these
facts  into  account.  Mathematics  consists  of  a  priori
synthetic  judgments,  i.e.  judgments  in  which  the  subject
is  attached  a  priori  to  a  predicate  not  contained  in  it.
It  is  the  same  with  physics.  Ever  since  the  time  of
Newton,  the  certainty  of  physics,  which  deals  with
things  themselves,  is  in  no  way  inferior  to  that  of
mathematics,  which  deals  only  with  relations  of  dimen-
sion. How  are  these  characteristics  intelligible,  whence
do  they  proceed,  and  what  is  science,  considered  in  its
generating  principles  ?  It  is  the  object  of  Kant's  in-
vestigations to  answer  these  questions.

And  it  is  the  province  of  philosophy  to  institute
these  investigations.  Now,  the  inviolable  principle
philosophy  gives  us  in  this  matter,  is  the  following  :
all  our  knowledge  has  its  starting-point  in  experience.
We  have  to  discover  if,  from  this  principle,  there  can


KANT  279

be  deduced  the  theory  of  science,  as  given  to  us.
Thus,  the  problem  resolves  itself  into  the  following
question  :  "  What  is  experience  ?  Is  it  an  irreducible
unity,  or  can  analysis  discern  different  elements  in  it  ?
Of  these  elements,  are  there  any  a  'priori  ?  Will  these
a  priori  elements  account  for  the  necessity  proper  to
the  judgments  of  science,  and  in  what  way  ? "

In  experience,  an  object  is  first  given,  secondly
thought.  How  is  that  possible  ?

For  an  object  to  be  given  to  us,  it  must  be  presented
in  space  and  time.  Are  the  notions  of  space  and  time
supplied  by  experience  ?  No,  for  before  experience,
we  know  that  the  objects  given  will  be  given  in  space
and  time.  Consequently,  they  are  a  priori  elements.
What  is  their  nature  ?  Are  they  concepts  ?  No,  for
space  and  time  are  objects  that  are  integral,  homo-
geneous, and  infinite,  characteristics  opposed  to  those
offered  by  the  objects  of  the  concepts.  Space  and
time  are  substrata  of  the  things  and  objects  of  intuition.
Then,  are  they  suprasensible  realities  outside  of  our-
selves ?  No,  for  the  conception  of  two  infinite  non-
beings  as  substances  is  impossible.  After  all,  the
representation  of  space  and  time  can  only  be  an  intuition
resting  on  the  form  of  our  sensibility.  Space  and  time
are  our  way  of  seeing  things.

But  then,  if  such  is  the  case,  are  not  our  ideas  of
place  and  duration  purely  subjective  ?  With  such
a  doctrine,  what  is  to  become  of  the  truth  of  mathe-
matics ?

The  objection  is  groundless,  for,  as  a  matter  of  fact,
it  is  in  dogmatic  theories,  isolating  the  sensible  from
the  mathematical,  that  the  agreement  of  the  one  with
the  other  is  undemonstrable.  Mathematics  is  justified
if  regarded  in  its  true  nature  as  a  system  of  a  priori


280  STUDIES  IN  PHILOSOPHY

synthetic  judgments,  when  once  objects  are  capable  of
affecting  us  only  by  becoming  subject  to  the  laws  of  time
and  space.  Doubtless  we  cannot  say  that  things,  in
themselves,  possess  modes  of  being  that  we  can  only
explain  as  forms  of  our  power  to  feel.  But  we  know,
a  priori^  that  every  object  of  our  sensibility  will  con-
form with  mathematics,  and  that  is  sufficient  to  insure
the  objectivity  of  this  science.  Transcendental  ideality
and  empirical  reality  are  the  two  characteristics  of  time
and  space.  They  explain  and  determine  the  possibility
of  mathematics.

This  is  the  explanation  of  the  first  condition  of
experience  :  there  is  a  second.  For  an  object  to  be
given  is  not  sufficient,  it  must  also  be  thought.  Does
thought  imply  a  priori  elements  ?

Thought  consists  in  setting  up  between  two  terms
an  objective  relationship  of  subject  and  predicate,  i.e.  in
affirming  that  the  one,  really  and  of  necessity,  belongs
to  the  other.  This  is  what  takes  place,  for  instance,
when  we  say  that  one  thing  is  the  cause  or  substance
of  another.  Such  a  connection  cannot  be  supplied  by
experience,  which  gives  nothing  necessary.  There-
fore, it  is  known  a  priori,  though  in  what  way  ?  If  we
consider  logic  as  it  has  been  conceived  of  ever  since  the
time  of  Aristotle,  we  note  that  it  supplies  many  necessary
connections,  but  yet  is  unable  to  determine  one  term  as
being  a  real  subject  regarding  the  other.  In  every
declaration  relative  to  existence,  there  is  something
more  than  simple  logic.  To  affirm  of  an  object  that  it
is  a  cause,  is  to  go  beyond  the  limits  of  its  concept.
Now,  we  are  without  that  intellectual  intuition  of  the
whole,  which  alone  would  enable  its  parts  to  be  dis-
closed by  a  process  of  analysis.  We  proceed,  in  discur-
sive fashion,  from  the  parts  to  the  whole.  On  what


KANT  281

principle,  then,  do  the  different  relations  that  constitute
thought,  depend  ?

Apart  from  those  we  have  had  to  reject,  there
remains  only  the  understanding  itself,  or  the  faculty
of  judging.  As  relations  of  dimension  are,  at  bottom,
only  the  forms  of  our  sensibility,  so  qualitative  relations
of  things  cannot  be  anything  else  than  the  categories  of
our  understanding.

If  this  is  so,  the  logical  function  of  the  under-
standing will  enable  us  to  detect  and  systematise  all
the  concepts  that  control  judgments  of  existence.  For,
on  both  sides,  it  is  the  province  of  the  understanding
to  unify  ;  the  extent  of  this  unification  alone  causes
difference.  The  table  of  the  modes  of  logical  unification
thus  supplies  a  model  for  the  table  of  categories.

The  following  is  the  logical  table  of  judgments  :
ist,  from  the  standpoint  of  quantity  :  universal,  par-
ticular and  individual  propositions ;  2nd,  from  the
standpoint  of  quality  :  affirmative,  negative  and  in-
determinate propositions ;  3rd,  from  the  standpoint
of  relation  :  categorical,  hypothetical  and  disjunctive
propositions  ;  4th,  from  the  standpoint  of  modality  :
problematical,  assertorial  and  apodeictic  propositions,

The  following  is  the  transcendental  table  of  the
concepts  of  understanding  :  ist,  from  the  standpoint  of
quantity  :  unity,  multiplicity,  universality  ;  2nd,  from
the  standpoint  of  quality  :  reality,  negation,  limitation  ;
3rd,  from  the  standpoint  of  relation:  inherence  and
subsistence,  causality  and  dependence,  reciprocal  action  ;
4th,  from  the  standpoint  of  modality  :  possibility  or
impossibility,  existence  or  non-existence,  necessity  or
contingency.

This  is  the  system  of  concepts  or  categories  by  whose
aid  we  unite  our  representations  of  things.  As  these


282  STUDIES  IN  PHILOSOPHY

concepts  are  only  the  modes  of  action  of  our  under-
standing, in  themselves  they  are  devoid  of  all  content.
They  can  find  a  use  only  if  they  are  supplied  with
matter,  and  the  only  matter  at  our  disposal  is  sensible
intuition.  Have  concepts,  then,  only  a  subjective
value ;  and  whereas  transcendental  esthetics  or  the
analysis  of  sensibility  may  have  pronounced  for  mathe-
matical realism,  will  the  analysis  of  the  understanding
or  transcendental  logic  have  to  confine  itself  to  that
logical  idealism  which  resolves  things  into  modes  of
thought  ?

Here  we  have  the  famous  transcendental  deduction
whose  object  is  to  establish  the  objective  value  of  the
categories,  i.e.  the  possibility  of  obtaining,  by  means
of  the  categories  as  they  have  been  determined,  the
knowledge  not  only  of  our  way  of  thinking,  but  of  the
things  themselves.  This  possibility  will  be  demon-
strated if  it  can  be  proved  that  the  categories  are  them-
selves the  condition  of  the  existence  of  realities,  from
our  standpoint.  Categories  apply  to  things,  if  things,
to  us,  are  possible  only  by  their  means.

According  to  our  condition,  in  order  that  there  may
be  knowledge  of  a  thing,  there  must  be  distinction
between  subject  and  object :  "  I  think  "  should  accom-
pany all  our  representations.  For  such  a  condition  to
be  possible,  however,  there  must  exist  between  the
two  terms  a  relation  analogous  to  that  between  positive
and  negative  quantities  in  mathematics,  a  relation  of
opposition  on  a  common  ground.  The  subject  being
a  unifying  action,  the  object  must  be  a  unified  multiple.
And  so  it  is  because  things  are  unified,  and  unified  for
the  subject,  that  they  can  be  presented  as  an  object.

Now,  how  could  this  condition  be  satisfied,  were
not  the  multiple  unified  by  the  subject  itself?  Doubt-


KANT  283

less  the  empirical  consciousness  does  not  perceive  this
formation  of  the  object.  The  operation  takes  place  in
the  depths  of  transcendental  apperception  implied  by  the
empirical  consciousness  ;  and  when  the  particular  I  is
posited,  it  finds  the  object  ready  formed  before  it,  and
takes  it  for  a  brute  thing.  This  thing,  however,  is  the
work  of  thought,  therefore  thought,  in  each  of  us,
recognises  its  own  laws  therein.  Thus  the  categories
are  necessarily  applied  to  the  things  themselves,  so  far
as  they  exist  for  us ;  consequently  they  have  an
objective  value.

Again,  as  the  only  intuitions  at  the  disposal  of  our
understanding,  for  the  forming  of  objects  thereof,  are
our  sensible  intuitions,  and  as  the  latter  do  not  represent
things  as  they  are  in  themselves,  but  only  the  exigencies
of  our  sensibility,  one  consequence  of  our  human  con-
dition is  that  even  our  intellectual  knowledge  is  unable
to  attain  to  the  absolute,  it  remains  confined  to  the
world  of  experience.  Empirical  realism,  and  trans-
cendental idealism  are  allied  and  correlative  terms.

Thus,  on  the  other  hand,  we  find  a  place  reserved
for  the  suprasensible  itself.  Indeed,  the  concept  of  the
"  thing-in-itself,"  whilst  limitative  of  the  claims  of  our
science,  enables  us  to  conceive  of  a  world  other  than
the  one  with  which  we  are  acquainted,  and  there-
fore susceptible  of  being  freed  from  the  conditions
of  our  knowledge,  and  especially  from  the  necessary
connection  which  is  opposed  to  freedom.^  We  are
permitted  to  superpose  the  noumenon  on  to  the  pheno-
menon.

It  is  essentially  this  doctrine  that  contains  the  philo-
sophic revolution  wrought  by  Kant.  Instead  of
admitting,  as  appearances  would  seem  to  indicate,  that
thought  gravitates  around  things,  Kant,  like  a  modern


284  STUDIES  IN  PHILOSOPHY

Copernicus,  causes  things  to  gravitate  around  thought.
From  this  point  of  view,  he  says,  the  disorderly  and
the  inexplicable  give  way  to  the  orderly  and  the  intel-
ligible. The  agreement  between  the  laws  of  nature
and  the  laws  of  our  mind  is  no  longer  either  an  in-
soluble problem  or  an  object  of  faith  :  it  is  a  scientifi-
cally demonstrated  truth.  And  this  revolution,  which
guarantees  the  objective  value  of  science,  is  equally
favourable  to  morals,  which  latter,  in  the  field  opened
up  by  criticism,  can  now  be  developed  unhindered,  in
conformity  with  the  laws  proper  to  itself.  "  It  was
only  by  abolishing  learning,"  says  Kant,  with  reference
to  the  so-called  knowledge  of  the  suprasensible,  "  that
I  could  find  room  for  belief."

It  is  not  enough,  however,  to  lay  down  that,  in
order  to  be  thought  of  and  to  become  objects,  the
divers  elements  of  intuition  must  be  brought  under  the
concepts  of  the  understanding.  How  will  concept,  the
one  and  universal,  unite  with  phenomenon,  the  diverse
and  particular  ?  How  shall  we  be  brought  to  apply
to  intuition  any  one  category  rather  than  any  other  ?
A  middle  term  is  here  necessary.

This  middle  term  is  supplied  by  a  faculty  inter-
mediary between  understanding  and  sensibility  :  viz.
imagination.  In  the  form  of  the  inner  sense,  i.e.  in
temporal  intuition,  imagination  traces  out,  a  priori^
frames  into  which  phenomena  are  capable  of  fitting,
and  which  indicate  under  what  category  they  are  to
be  brought.  Kant  calls  these  frames  schemata  of  the
concepts  of  pure  understanding.  Each  category  has  its
own  schema.  The  schema  of  quantity  is  number,  that
of  substance  is  the  permanence  of  the  real  in  time  ;
that  of  causality,  the  regular  succession  of  phenomena,
and  so  on.  The  observance  of  regular  succession,  for


KANT  285

instance,  is  a  signal  to  us  that  the  category  of  cause  is
being  employed.

Still,  the  schemata  are  not  yet  sufficient  to  objectivise
phenomena,  because  they  only  call  forth  the  employ-
ment of  a  given  category,  without  justifying  this
operation.  But  they  make  possible  a  priori  synthetic
judgments  which  complete  the  elimination  of  the
subjective.  These  judgments  are  the  principles  of  pure
understanding.  Understanding  forms  them  a  priori^
by  determining  the  conditions  of  an  objective  employ-
ment of  the  schemata.  They  are  :  the  principle  of
quantity  :  "  All  intuitions  are  extensive  dimensions  "  ;
the  principle  of  quality  :  "  In  all  phenomena,  sensation,
as  well  as  the  real  which  corresponds  thereto  in  the
object,  possesses  an  intensive  dimension,  a  degree  "  ;
the  principle  of  relation :  "  All  phenomena  have  a
necessary  connection  in  time."  The  principle  of
modality  indicates  the  way  in  which  a  thing  should
agree  with  the  conditions  of  experience,  in  order  to  be
possible,  real,  or  necessary.  The  proof  of  these  prin-
ciples consists  in  showing  that,  without  them,  the
meaning  of  the  schemata  remains  indeterminate  ;  that
the  sensible  can  be  determined  and  objecti vised  only  by
the  intellectual.  Thus,  succession,  for  instance,  instead
of  itself  founding  causality,  can  be  regarded  as  objective
only  if  it  is  founded  thereon.

On  reaching  this  stage,  Kant  was  enabled  to  accom-
plish the  second  of  the  two  tasks  he  had  set  himself :
that  of  justifying  physics  and  its  alliance  with  mathe-
matics. The  first  two  principles — so-called  mathema-
tical— establish  the  application  of  mathematics  to  the
science  of  nature.  The  second  two — so-called  dynamic
— establish  the  physical  laws  strictly  so  called.  In
their  entirety,  the  principles  of  pure  understanding


286  STUDIES  IN  PHILOSOPHY

constitute  the  first  distinctive  features  of  natural
philosophy.  This  theory,  whilst  being  the  meta-
physical justification  of  Newtonian  science,  was  the
starting-point  of  that  speculation  which,  with  Schelling,
enjoyed  so  dangerous  a  renown,  under  the  name  of  the
philosophy  of  nature.

Up  to  this  point,  Kant  has  analysed  sensibility  and
understanding.  There  remains  reason,  properly  so
called,  the  object  of  which  faculty  is  the  complete
unification  of  knowledge.  Its  syllogisms  infer  the
unconditioned  as  their  starting-point.  So  we  see  that
reason  is  the  faculty  of  the  ideas,  or  concepts,  of  the
total  synthesis  of  the  conditions.

From  what  precedes,  we  find  that  the  ideas  of
reason  have  no  real  object.  Going  beyond  all  possible
experience,  they  can  be  nothing  but  regulative,  non-
constitutive  principles  of  knowledge.  The  illusion,
however,  which  makes  us  believe  in  their  objectivity,  is
natural,  as  is  that  of  the  man  who  believes  the  moon  to
be  larger  at  its  rise  than  at  its  meridian.  To  destroy
this  illusion  it  is  not  enough  to  demonstrate  the  falsity
of  our  opinion  ;  its  origin  must  be  disclosed,  it  must
be  shown  that,  in  this  domain,  in  contradistinction  to
what  takes  place  when  dealing  with  objects  of  possible
experience,  it  is  wholly  illegitimate  to  pass  from  the
logical  to  the  real ;  and  that  the  dialectic  which  lies  deep
hidden  in  dogmatic  metaphysics  must  be  denounced.

Reason  thinks  it  can  build  up :  ist,  a  rational
psychology,  on  the  idea  of  the  soul-substance  ;  2nd,  a
rational  cosmology,  on  the  idea  of  the  world  as  absolute
reality  ;  3rd,  a  rational  theology,  on  the  idea  of  God  as
the  absolute  basis  of  the  possibility  of  being  in  general.
In  each  of  these  domains  it  is  mistaken  regarding  its
own  power.


KANT  287

When  inferring  the  existence  of  an  absolute  subject
from  the  reality  of  the  thinking  being,  it  illegitimately
passes  from  a  unity  of  form  to  one  of  substance,  and
commits  a  paralogism.

When  attempting  to  determine  the  absolute  existence
it  attributes  to  the  world,  reason  becomes  involved  in
insurmountable  antinomies.  Indeed,  it  proves,  with
like  rigour,  by  the  absurdity  of  the  contradictory
proposition,  that  the  world  both  has,  and  has  not,
limits  ;  that  it  consists  of  simple  parts,  and  is  divided
ad  infinitum  ;  that  freedom  exists  and  that  nothing  free
exists  ;  that  there  is  a  necessary  being,  and  that  there
exist  only  contingent  beings.  The  very  production  of
these  antinomies  proves  the  illegitimacy  of  the  point  of
view  that  gives  birth  to  them,  that  is,  of  the  supposition
of  a  world  existing  in  itself.  In  the  first  two  anti-
nomies, thesis  and  antithesis  are  alike  false.  In  the
latter  two,  they  become  true  of  each  other  if  we  have
recourse  to  that  distinction  between  phenomenon  and
noumenon  called  forth  by  analysis  of  the  understanding.
The  free  and  the  absolute  are  possible  in  the  world  of
noumena,  whereas  natural  causality  and  contingency
hold  sway  in  that  of  phenomena.

Finally,  when  reason  speculates  on  perfect  being,
it  gratuitously  converts  into  a  reality,  a  substance,  a
person,  the  ideal  in  which  it  unites  all  the  modes  of
being  possessed  by  finite  things.  Consequently,  the
reasonings  it  forms  to  prove  the  existence  of  this
supreme  person  will  not  hold  together.  The  onto-
logical  argument,  the  basis  of  all  the  rest,  wrongly
considers  existence  as  a  predicate,  which  can  be  obtained
from  a  concept  by  analysis  :  existence  is  the  position  of
a  thing  outside  of  thought  and  is  absolutely  inaccessible
to  analysis.  To  this  error  the  cosmological  argument


288  STUDIES  IN  PHILOSOPHY

adds  the  affirmation  of  a  first  cause  in  the  name  of
the  principle  of  causality,  and  this  principle,  just  in
so  far  as  it  is  vouched  for,  excludes  the  possibility  of
a  first  cause.  Lastly  the  physico-theological  argument,
or  the  argument  of  final  causes,  adds  to  the  defects  of
the  first  two  the  false  comparison  of  the  world  to  a
work  of  man,  and  the  arbitrary  transition  from  an
"  architect "  God  to  a  perfect  "  creator  "  God.

The  general  cause  of  this  dialectic  of  our  reason  is
our  natural  disposition  to  believe  that  the  conditions  of
our  thought  are  also  the  conditions  of  being,  that  the
laws  of  our  knowledge  are  the  laws  of  reality.  Criti-
cism alone  can  dispel  this  illusion  ;  but  the  necessity
of  criticism  is  seen  only  in  the  consequences  of  this
very  illusion.  The  ideas  of  our  reason  correspond  to
nothing  real :  none  the  less  are  they  useful  as  excitative
and  regulative  principles.  They  forbid  our  halting  in
our  search  after  causes.  We  cannot  begin  with  God,
but  our  efforts  should  tend  in  his  direction.

And  so  criticism  is  established,  wherein  Kant  sees
the  goal  of  the  education  of  reason.  The  human
mind  began,  and  was  compelled  to  begin,  with  dog-
matism, or  a  blind  belief  in  the  absolute  existence  of
the  objects  of  our  thoughts  :  Leibnitzo-Wolfianism  is
the  complete  expression  thereof.  Then  came  skepticism,
excellently  represented  by  Hume,  who  inferred,  from
the  vices  of  dogmatism,  the  impossibility  of  knowing
reality  and  the  absolute  subjectivity  of  knowledge.  But
skepticism  is  only  a  warning  to  mistrust  dogmatism.
Criticism,  or  the  science  of  our  ignorance,  forbids  us  to
speculate  on  the  nature  of  things  as  they  are  in  them-
selves ;  at  the  same  time,  it  withdraws  experience  from
imagination  and  the  individual  sense,  to  make  it  an
object  common  to  all  human  intelligences  and  conse-


KANT  289

quently  substantial  and  real  to  ourselves.  At  the  same
time,  criticism  frees  being  in  itself  from  the  fatum
which  the  presumption  of  the  understanding  caused  to
lie  heavy  on  it ;  it  makes  conceivable  a  world  wherein
freedom  and  the  moral  laws  would  hold  undivided
sway.  The  advantage  is  twofold,  being  both  practical
and  speculative  ;  it  attests  to  the  providential  harmony
of  our  needs  with  our  powers  of  knowing.

The  "  critique "  of  pure  reason  has  explained  the
possibility  of  science  ;  in  the  same  way,  the  possibility
of  morals  must  now  be  explained.  We  are  not  trying
to  find  out  if  morality  is  possible,  since  it  exists,  but
rather  on  what  it  rests  and  what  its  meaning  is.  Here,
too,  a  sane  philosophy  can  recognise  no  other  starting-
point  for  knowledge  than  experience,  but  this  ex-
perience must  be  analysed.

The  general  idea  afforded,  in  this  connection,  by
common  reason,  is  the  concept  of  good  will.  Is  this
concept  altogether  empirical  ?

When  examined,  it  is  found  to  imply  the  idea  of  a
law  which  ought  to  be  observed  for  itself,  without
regard  for  the  consequences  of  the  actions  it  enforces.
This  law  is  not  a  hypothetical  imperative,  dependent
on  such  or  such  an  end  to  be  attained  :  it  is  a  categori-
cal imperative.  It  can  be  formulated  only  in  the
following  terms  :  act  in  such  a  way  that  you  would
wish  the  maxim  of  your  action  to  be  set  up  as  a  uni-
versal Jaw.  Now,  such  a  principle  does  not  proceed
from  experience,  it  is  known  a  priori.

Can  we  find  its  origin  ?  If  we  try  to  discover  under
what  conditions  a  practical  principle  may  be  universally
obligatory  upon  us,  we  shall  find  that  it  ought  to  imply
no  object  or  matter  as  a  mobile  of  the  will.  Indeed,

u


290  STUDIES  IN  PHILOSOPHY

given  the  faculties  we  possess,  there  are  none  other  than
empirical  objects  as  far  as  we  are  concerned,  the  only
matter  at  our  disposal  in  the  practical  order  of  things
is  pleasure  or  the  satisfaction  of  the  love  of  self ;  and
pleasure  cannot  supply  a  universal,  obligatory  prin-
ciple. The  intention  of  our  will,  alone,  depends  entirely
on  ourselves  and  fulfils  the  requisite  conditions.  Law,
then,  is  a  purely  formal  principle  which  implies  nothing
else  than  itself  and  a  will  free  to  accomplish  it.  It  has
its  root  in  the  autonomy  of  the  will.

But  even  in  this,  is  it  not  illusory  ?  Detached  from
things  and  referred  to  the  subject,  is  it  not  purely  sub-
jective ?  Can  we  escape  from  idealism  in  the  practical,
as  we  have  done  in  the  theoretical  order  of  things  ?

To  deduce  the  moral  law  from  the  conditions  of
experience  is  impossible,  since  every  object  of  experience
ought  to  be  separated  from  moral  determination  ;  but,
on  the  other  hand,  the  moral  law  itself  establishes  a
deduction  from  freedom.  If  I  ought  to,  it  is  because
I  can.  Moreover,  if  speculative  reason  has  had  to
be  debarred  from  knowing  freedom,  it  has  none  the
less  regarded  it  as  possible,  even  theoretically  ;  and
thus  the  moral  law  has  a  basis  in  the  reality  of  things,
as  this  reality  is  theoretically  known  to  us,  viz.  in  that
region  of  existence  to  which  the  knowledge  of  things  as
phenomena  refers  us.  If  the  moral  law  is  the  ratio
cognoscenti  of  freedom,  the  latter  supplies  the  former
with  its  ratio  essendi.

So  far,  however,  we  have  only  reached  a  principle,  a
formal  law.  Now,  morality  also  offers  us  concepts,  the
two  principal  of  which  are  those  of  good  and  evil.  Can
we  search  into  and  understand  these  concepts  ?  After
eliminating  all  empirical  matter,  we  have  to  deduce  fresh
matter  from  a  principal  posited  as  purely  formal.


KANT  291

The  course  we  must  take  is  apparently  paradoxical.
Is  it  not  duty  that  is  deduced  from  good,  and  not  good
that  is  determined  by  duty?  The  ancients,  in  their
search  after  the  sovereign  good,  constantly  followed  the
first,  the  dogmatic  course.  Now,  willingly  or  unwillingly,
it  came  about  that  they  founded  morals  on  empirical
data.  It  could  not  be  otherwise.  From  good,  one
cannot  deduce  duty,  unless  this  good  is  already  moral
good,  and  it  is  only  moral  if  there  has  previously  been
instilled  into  it  the  very  duty  it  is  desired  to  deduce
therefrom.  On  the  other  hand,  it  is  possible,  by  means
of  duty,  to  determine  good  ;  it  is  possible  for  law
posited  as  primary,  to  find  a  suitable  object  in  the
sensible  world  itself,  the  only  one  we  can  affect.  For
this  sensible  world  not  only  does  not  clash  with  the
universality  characterising  the  moral  law,  but  is  itself
subject  to  universal  laws.  Good,  therefore,  is  the  realisa-
tion in  the  sensible  world  of  a  form  of  universality
capable  of  being  the  symbol  of  practical  reason.

This  doctrine  of  Kant's  rejects  mysticism  as  well  as
empiricism.  Though  the  principle  of  determination
ought  to  be  obtained  from  the  world  of  noumena,  it  is
in  the  world  of  phenomena  that  morality  will  be  realised
and  practised.  And  the  very  principle  of  determina-
tion will  not  remain  unrelated  to  nature.  There  exists
a  feeling  which  is  within  nature  and  which  likewise
goes  beyond  it,  and  that  is  respect,  a  special  affection
aroused  by  the  idea  of  law  in  a  soul  endowed  both  with
sensible  tendencies  and  with  reason.  Respect  is  the
moral  mobile.  The  inclination  it  enshrouds,  and  which
comes  from  the  will,  does  no  harm  to  the  disinterested
practice  of  duty.

And  so  the'given  morality  is  explained  and  defined
in  all  its  elements  :  mobiles,  concepts,  and  principles.


292  STUDIES  IN  PHILOSOPHY

Here,  too,  we  had  only  to  go  back  from  experience  to
its  conditions,  in  order  to  explain  whatever  is  absolute
in  our  knowledge,  without  detracting  from  the  general
principle  of  modern  science  and  philosophy.

And  not  only  does  criticism  thus  insure  the  founda-
tions of  morals,  it  also  discloses  the  spring  and  reason
of  religious  beliefs  from  the  very  point  to  which  this
investigation  has  brought  it.  Reason  requires  the  full
performance  of  duty,  it  exacts  the  union  of  virtue  with
happiness.  How  can  such  an  object  be  realised  ?

The  necessity  of  answering  this  question  leads  us  on
to  theoretical  propositions  that  cannot  be  demonstrated
as  such,  but  are  inseparably  bound  to  practical  truths
of  an  absolute  character.  These  propositions  Kant
calls  postulates.  They  are  three  in  number  :

1.  Freedom  : necessary in order that man may
determine himself, apart  from all  sensible attraction,
in accordance with the  laws of  a  purely intelligible
world. Doubtless,  freedom  does  not  intervene  in  the
course  of  phenomena,  which  would  cease  to  be  objects
of  possible  experience  if  the  law  of  cause  and  effect
were  violated  in  them. It  is  complete  and  entire,  how-
ever, in  the  world  of  noumena,  in  which  it  establishes
personality  and  creates  within  each  of  us  an  intelligible
character,  of  which  our  empirical  character  is  the  symbol.

2.  Immortality  : necessary  in  order  that indefinite
progress  may be  realised, without  which  the perfect
adaptation  of  our  will  to  the  moral  law  is  inconceivable.

3.  God  :  necessary  in  order  that  we  may  establish
that  agreement  which  reason  demands,  between  morality
and  happiness,  and  the  principle  of  which  is  contained
in  neither  the  one  nor  the  other.

Thus,  morality  leads  to  religion,  not  as  to  some
theoretical  science  explaining  the  nature  of  things,  but


KANT  293

rather  as  to  the  knowledge  of  our  duties  in  so  far  as  they
are  divine  commands.

And  so  criticism,  continuing  its  progress,  gradually
re-establishes  all  the  suprasensible  existences  it  had
overthrown.  Is  it  self-contradictory  in  doing  this?
By  no  means  ;  since  it  no  longer  regards  these  exist-
ences in  the  same  manner.  The  criticism  of  pure
reason  has  demonstrated  that  such  objects  cannot  be
known  theoretically,  i.e.  by  the  aid  of  intuitions  which
determine  them.  This  result  subsists.  The  criticism
of  pure  reason,  however,  did  not  prevent  our  conceiving
of  objects  above  experience,  on  the  contrary  it  allowed
and  invited  this.  On  the  other  hand,  the  criticism  of
practical  reason  in  no  way  shows  us  the  world  shut  out
from  us  by  the  criticism  of  pure  reason,  it  does  not
give  us  an  intuition  thereof,  but  offers  us,  as  connected
with  the  existence  of  duty,  the  objects  on  which  theo-
retical reason  could  not  declare  itself.  It  brings  us  to
say,  not  :  It  is  certain  there  is  a  God  and  immortality  ;
but  rather  :  I  will  there  to  be  a  God,  I  will  my  being,
in  one  aspect,  to  be  free  and  immortal.  That  is  not
a  matter  of  science,  it  is  a  practical,  pure,  and  rational
belief.  We  can  neither  see  the  object  nor  deduce  it
from  what  we  see  ;  we  can  only  conceive  of  it.  How
fortunate  this  inability  !  For  were  we  in  possession  of
the  missing  faculty,  instead  of  duty  tempering  and
ennobling  our  will,  God  and  eternity,  with  all  their
awful  majesty,  would  ever  be  before  our  eyes,  and
would  reduce  us,  through  fear,  to  the  condition  of
marionettes,  making  the  proper  movements  but  devoid
of  life  or  moral  worth.  "  The  mysterious  wisdom  by
which  we  exist  is  no  less  admirable  in  the  gifts  it  has
refused  than  in  those  it  has  granted  to  us"  (Critique  of
Practical  Reason,  Part  i.  Book  ii.  Chapter  ix.).


294  STUDIES  IN  PHILOSOPHY

Criticism  has  explained  the  existence  of  science  and
morals.  To  complete  the  different  orders  of  our  know-
ledge, it  remains  for  us  to  examine  the  notions  of  taste
and  finality.  Will  experience  be  able  to  supply  us
with  their  principle  and  their  limits  ?

The  experimental  datum  here  considered  is  judg-
ment ;  not  determining  judgment,  which  proceeds  from
the  general  to  the  particular,  but  reflecting  judgment,
which  rises  from  the  particular  to  the  general.  This
judgment  is  that  which  affirms  the  existence  in  nature,
not  only  of  laws  in  general,  but  of  certain  determinate
laws.  It  calls  for  a  special  principle  which  can  be  only
the  following  :  just  as  the  universal  laws  of  nature  are
based  in  our  understanding,  which  prescribes  them  to
nature,  so,  as  regards  empirical  and  particular  laws,
everything  takes  place  as  though  they  also  had  been
dictated  by  an  understanding  that  purposed  to  make
intelligible  and  objective  the  very  details  of  the  pheno-
mena. This  reason  of  particular  laws  may  be  sought
for,  either  in  the  agreement  of  things  with  our  faculty
of  knowing,  i.e.  in  the  beautiful,  or  in  the  agreement
of  things  with  themselves,  i.e.  in  finality.

Appreciation  of  the  beautiful  cannot  be  explained
by  sensation  alone,  as  Burke  would  have  it.  The
beautiful  is  not  the  agreeable  ;  it  is  disinterested,  the
object  of  a  real  judgment.  Nor  is  it  explained  by
reason  alone,  according  to  Baumgarten  the  Wolfian.
The  beautiful  is  not  the  perfect  :  it  dwells  only  in  the
form,  not  in  the  matter,  of  the  object,  and  it  pleases
without  aiming  at  pleasing  but  solely  by  reason  of  its
harmony,  by  a  kind  of  endless  finality  :  in  a  word,  it
has  something  of  feeling  in  its  nature.  Formed  a
priori  and  being  subjective  at  the  same  time,  what  is
the  origin  of  the  judgment  of  taste  ?


KANT  295

It  can  only  be  explained  as  the  working  of  an
aesthetic  common  sense,  or  the  faculty  of  perceiving
some  agreement  between  our  sensible  faculty  of  know-
ing and  our  intellectual  faculty.  Those  objects  are
beautiful,  before  which  our  imagination  finds  itself,  of
its  own  accord,  satisfying  our  understanding.  The
beautiful  is  the  feeling  that  our  faculties  are  at  play,
somewhat  analogous  to  a  physical  pastime,  wherein  the
spontaneous  observance  of  a  rule  freely  laid  down  in
no  way  trammels  the  free  expression  of  activity.  Con-
sequently, the  beautiful  dwells  only  within  ourselves  ;
it  has  no  other  origin  or  rule  than  the  special  sense  in
which  sensibility  and  understanding  meet  each  other.

From  the  beautiful,  properly  so  called,  that  we  are
now  analysing,  we  must  distinguish  the  sublime,  as
being  another  species  of  the  same  genus.  Whereas  the
beautiful  object  is  the  adequate  sensible  realisation  of
the  idea,  the  sublime  object  utterly  routs  the  imagina-
tion, which  spends  itself  in  vain  attempts  to  represent
an  idea  transcending  it.  There  are  no  images,  but  only
symbols,  of  the  infinite.  The  substratum  of  the  sub-
lime and  the  beautiful  alike  can  therefore  be  nothing
else  than  our  suprasensible  nature,  and  the  need  of
agreement  between  that  nature  and  our  sensible  nature.

But  then  does  not  this  analysis  result  in  the  judg-
ment of  taste  being  denied  all  objective  value  ?  Such
would  be  the  case,  had  the  objectivity  of  the  beautiful
to  consist,  in  our  mind,  of  some  property  of  things  in
themselves  :  such  an  objectivity,  however,  is  an  illusion.
The  sense  of  taste  that  we  have  found,  has  an  objec-
tive import,  in  so  far  as  it  alone  makes  intelligible  the
characteristic  of  beauty  that  we  attribute  to  objects,
and  in  so  far  as  this  very  sense  should  be  considered
identical  in  all  beings  capable  of  sensibility  and  dis-


296  STUDIES  IN  PHILOSOPHY

cursive  understanding.  The  universality  of  the  faculty
is  sufficient  to  establish  the  objectivity  of  the  operation.

But  if  we  now  consider  things  of  taste,  especially  art,
whose  existence  is  given,  our  doctrine  will  supply  die
theory  thereof.  Art  is  a  product  of  intelligence,  and
ought  to  appear  a  product  of  nature  ;  it  has  an  object
and  ought  to  seem  not  to  have  one  ;  it  punctually
observes  rules  and  does  this  without  manifesting  effort.
All  these  characteristics  are  explained  as  soon  as  man
possesses  a  faculty  wherein  the  understanding,  which
thinks  and  rules,  coincides  with  the  imagination,  which
sees,  feels,  and  invents.  The  spring  of  genius  is  dis-
covered in  the  general  essence  of  man.  And  it  is  also
seen  that  the  more  human  the  object  of  an  art,  the
more  sublime  that  art  is.

Moreover,  the  ideality  of  the  beautiful  is  the  only
doctrine  that  enables  us  to  solve  the  antinomy  to  which
the  judgment  of  taste  gives  rise.  We  discuss  about  the
beautiful,  and  yet  we  cannot  account  for  it  by  demon-
stration. This  would  be  incomprehensible,  did  the
beautiful  belong  to  things  in  themselves.  But  then,  on
the  other  hand,  the  beautiful  could  not,  like  time  and
space,  be  enclosed  within  the  sensible  world.  We
discuss  about  the  beautiful  and  yet  we  cannot  demon-
strate anything,  because  the  judgment  of  taste  is  based
on  a  principle  connected  both  with  concept  and  intuition,
on  an  indeterminate  concept :  that  of  a  suprasensible
substratum  of  phenomena.  The  beautiful  is  the  symbol
of  moral  good,  and  it  is  towards  this  good  that  taste
dimly  leads  us.

The  second  principle  of  particular  natural  laws  is
derived  from  finality.  Do  there  really  exist  in  nature
harmonies  that  cannot  be  explained  by  mechanism  or
the  system  of  causes  and  effects  ?


KANT  297

Wherever  finality  is  only  exterior,  consisting  only  in
the  utility  of  one  being  with  reference  to  another,  the
mechanical  explanation  is  sufficient,  for  this  agreement
of  different  beings  with  one  another  is  far  from  being
the  rule  in  nature.  But  there  is  one  case  in  which
finality,  being  internal,  cannot  be  explained  by  the
hazards  of  mechanism :  the  case  of  organised  beings.
That  which  is  living  produces  itself,  both  as  species  and
individual,  and  the  parts  thereof  are  conditioned  by  the
very  ensemble  which  is  to  result  therefrom.  The  effect
here  is  the  cause  of  its  cause  ;  the  cause  is  the  effect  of
its  effect.  Such  a  relation  goes  beyond  mechanism,  such
a  being  is  an  end,  as  well  as  a  product  of  nature.  How
is  that  possible  ?

In  vain  does  dogmatism  attempt  to  reply  either  by
hylozoism,  which  looks  upon  nature  as  intelligent,  or
by  theism,  which  weaves  the  action  of  intelligence  into
the  tissue  of  phenomena :  the  former  attributes  to
matter  qualities  opposed  to  its  essence  ;  the  latter  vainly
claims  to  pierce  the  designs  of  God.  Organisation,
the  internal  finality,  is  not  cognisable  in  its  cause.
Finality,  to  us,  can  be  nothing  but  ideal :  it  is  our  way
of  looking  upon  a  certain  class  of  phenomena.

Is  such  a  doctrine  a  purely  negative  result  ?  By  no
means.

Some  knowledge  of  nature  is  implied  if  we  simply
know  that,  in  certain  of  its  products,  nature  cannot  be
known  by  us.  This  principle  is  instructive,  either  in  its
restrictive  or  its  positive  bearing.  It  is  regulative,  not
constitutive.  In  this  capacity  it  serves  science.  Though
it  does  not  make  the  production  of  things  more
intelligible,  all  the  same,  it  supplies  anticipations  by
which  we  are  enabled  to  discover  the  particular  laws  of
nature.  It  sets  up  beacon-lights  throughout  infinity.


298  STUDIES  IN  PHILOSOPHY

So  far  as  metaphysics  is  concerned,  only  such  a  con-
ception of  finality  enables  one  to  escape  from  the
traditional  antinomy  of  mechanism  and  teleology.  On
the  ground  of  being  in  itself,  wherein  both  systems  are
placed,  neither  the  first  is  able  to  explain  what  it  calls
the  illusion  of  finality,  nor  the  second  to  prove  that  the
transcendent  explanation  of  it  is  necessary.  On  the
other  hand,  the  principle  of  final  causes  becomes  unas-
sailable when  there  is  only  one  point  of  view  upon
things.

And  it  opens  up  to  our  conception,  if  not  to  our
knowledge,  a  perspective  upon  the  absolute  itself.
Indeed,  how  do  we  come  to  posit  the  idea  of  an  end
as  the  cause  of  a  phenomenon  ?  The  impossibility  of
deducing  the  particular  from  the  universal  comes  from
the  fact  that  understanding  and  intuition  are  separate
in  us  ;  our  concepts  are  void,  our  intuitions  powerless
to  connect  themselves  into  laws.  Then  how  can  we
affirm  the  existence  of  particular  laws  ?  The  problem
is  solved  as  follows.  We  can  conceive  that  the  difficulty
in  our  way  would  be  non-existent  to  a  mind  in  which
understanding  were  one  with  sensibility  :  to  an  intuitive
understanding.  Such  a  mind,  instead  of  proceeding
from  the  parts  to  the  whole,  as  does  our  discursive
understanding,  and,  consequently,  seeing  a  contingent
result  in  the  whole,  would  proceed  from  the  whole  to
the  parts,  and,  in  a  flash,  would  see  the  latter  in  their
necessary  connection.  To  this  mind,  mechanism  and
finality  would  coincide.  Now,  once  the  idea  of  such
an  intelligence  is  conceived  of,  our  understanding,  in
order  to  approach  it  in  its  own  way,  substitutes  for  the
whole  the  idea  of  the  whole,  and  posits  this  idea  before
its  intuitions  as  the  cause  of  the  special  relations  that
unite  them.  To  the  employment  of  the  notion  of  an


KANT  299

end  is  thus  linked  on  the  conception  of  an  intuitive
understanding,  as  a  possible  foundation,  in  the  absolute,
of  the  sum  total  of  the  harmonies  of  nature.

This  deduction  from  teleological  judgment  deter-
mines the  use  we  ought  to  make  of  it.

As  regards  the  explanation  of  the  phenomena  of
nature,  we  have  the  right,  as  far  as  possible,  to  assume
the  mechanical  point  of  view,  but  we  cannot  do  this  on
all  occasions  with  like  success.  In  the  fact  of  life  we
are  brought  in  opposition  against  an  invincible  barrier.
We  cannot  picture  to  ourselves  living  bodies  as  capable
of  coming  from  inorganic  matter.  Doubtless,  it  is  not
inconceivable  that  from  one  common,  originally  organ-
ised, matter,  all  living  bodies  might  have  issued  by
purely  mechanical  changes.  In  this  way,  the  explana-
tion of  things  would  be  the  province  of  mechanism  ;
their  origin,  that  of  teleology.  Indeed,  the  comparison
of  organic  forms  enables  us  to  conjecture  the  relation-
ship of  all  that  lives,  and  encourages  us  to  hope,  however
feebly,  that  it  will  be  possible  to  refer  them  to  one
common  origin.  Then  one  could  picture  to  oneself
the  womb  of  the  earth  as  giving  birth,  first  to  creatures
ill-suited  to  the  conditions  of  their  existence,  and  then
to  these  same  creatures  as  becoming  more  perfect,  gener-
ation after  generation,  until  finally  the  creatress,  in  a
state  of  congealed  ossification,  so  to  speak,  limited  her
productions  to  a  certain  number  of  clearly  defined  and
henceforth  immutable  species.  This  is  a  brilliant  hypo-
thesis of  reason,  but  apart  from  the  fact  that  so  far
experience  does  not  seem  to  warrant  it,  instead  of
excluding,  it  would  imply  as  a  condition  of  its  con-
sistency the  primordial  life  of  the  universal  womb.

As  regards  the  general  conception  of  the  world,  we
have  the  right  to  complete  by  thought  the  unification


300  STUDIES  IN  PHILOSOPHY

to  which  teleological  concepts  tend,  provided  we  place
this  ultimate  end  outside  the  sphere  of  sensible  pheno-
mena. And  as  this  end  can  be  only  a  being  that  has
within  itself  the  object  of  its  activity,  and  consequently,
is  capable  of  positing  ends  and  using  nature  as  a  means,
man  alone,  not  as  a  part  of  nature,  but  as  intelligence
and  will,  can  be  the  end  of  the  universe.  We  must
not,  like  Rousseau,  expect  nature  to  satisfy  our  longings,
to  give  us  happiness  ;  that  is  out  of  her  province,  and
she  will  play  us  false.  But  she  will  not  belie  the
expectations  of  the  man  who,  through  her,  endeavours
to  realise  moral  good.

Finally,  in  the  matter  of  our  conception  of  God  as
the  principle  of  finality,  it  has  not  been  without  purpose
that  men,  at  all  times,  have  been  influenced  by  the
argument  of  final  causes.  This  argument  well  expresses
man's  impression  when  he  sees  the  order  of  nature  :
the  aspiration  towards  something  that  goes  beyond
nature.  We  must  always  speak  of  this  argument  with
respect,  for  it  is  the  most  persuasive,  popular,  and  potent
one  of  all.  To  be  really  solid  and  sound,  however,  the
argument  must  be  understood  in  its  true  meaning.  Not
as  an  architect  is  God  revealed  to  us  by  the  world,  but
rather  as  the  condition  of  an  agreement  between  nature
and  morality.  In  trying  to  discover  the  attributes
needed  to  play  this  part,  we  shape  for  ourselves  a  moral
theology  which  leads  us  on  to  a  moral  religion.

IV. — THE  METAPHYSICAL  DOCTRINE

Criticism  is  not  the  abolition  of  metaphysics,  it  is
the  introduction  to  metaphysics  as  a  science.  In  realising
the  plan  it  here  marks  out,  the  method  to  be  followed  is
the  one  inaugurated  by  the  famous  Wolf.  We  know  that


KANT  301

transcendental  logic  does  not  break  through  the  frame-
work of  general  logic  :  it  fills  it  in.  We  shall  find  meta-
physics changing  its  meaning  without  changing  its  form.
Human  reason  is  legislative  in  two  ways  :  by  its
understanding,  in  the  domain  of  nature  ;  and  by  its
will,  in  the  domain  of  freedom.  Hence  the  idea  of  a
double  metaphysics  :  of  nature  and  of  morals.  There
are  no  others.

Kant  deals  first  with  the  metaphysics  of  the  science
of  nature.

Corporeal  matter,  being  alone  lasting,  can  alone  give
rise  to  metaphysics.  The  latter  seeks  amongst  the
sensible  data  or  properties  of  matter,  for  some  object
to  which  the  synthetic  laws  of  understanding  are
applicable,  and  this  it  finds  in  motion.  Once  this
single  result  has  been  obtained  from  experience,  meta-
physics pursues  its  course,  proceeding  a  priori.

Determined  solely  by  the  notion  of  quantity,  motion
is  nothing  but  dimension  in  time  and  space :  it  does  not
yet  imply  cause  of  production  or  of  modification.  In
this  connection  it  gives  rise  to  phoronomics,  which  we
now  call  kinematics.

Determined,  besides,  by  the  notion  of  quality,  it
envelops  an  intensive  dimension  or  force,  as  the  cause
of  its  existence  and  of  our  sensible  affections.  The
theory  of  force  is  dynamics :  the  essential  element  in
this  portion  of  Kantian  metaphysics.  We  admit  as
many  simple  forces  as  it  is  necessary  to  posit,  in  order
to  distinguish  movements  in  a  straight  line,  conse-
quently we  admit  a  force  of  repulsion  and  one  of
attraction.  From  the  first,  there  results  divisibility
ad  infinitum ;  from  the  second,  a  limitation  of  the  first.
These  two  forces  are  solidary  :  solidity,  which  the


302  STUDIES  IN  PHILOSOPHY

Newtonians  found  themselves  compelled  to  add  on  to
attraction,  unless  it  be  an  occult  quality,  implies  a
repulsive  force.  Matter  results  from  the  equilibrium
of  the  two.

Determined  by  the  notion  of  relation,  matter
assumes  properties  which  are  investigated  by  mechanics,
properly  so  called.  Here,  Kant  establishes  the  law  of
the  persistence  of  material  substance,  the  law  of  inertia
and  that  of  action  and  reaction.

Finally,  regarding  modality,  we  have  to  find  out
the  rules  followed  by  the  mind  when  distinguishing
possible,  real,  or  necessary  motion  :  this  is  phenomenology.
Rectilinear  motion  is  only  possible,  it  appertains  to
phoronomics  ;  curvilinear  motion  is  real,  and  appertains
to  dynamics  ;  motion  conceived  of  as  communicated  by
a  mover  to  something  movable  is  of  necessity  deter-
mined as  regards  existence  and  speed  ;  it  appertains
to  mechanics.

From  these  metaphysical  principles  Kant  en-
deavoured to  pass  on  to  physics  itself.  Physics
would  evidently  be  constituted  as  a  science,  if  only
we  could  determine  a  priori  the  forces  that  produce
sensation.  Now,  we  see  from  the  Critique  that  these
forces,  being  bound  to  the  life  of  the  mind,  must,  after
all,  be  of  the  same  nature  as  the  mind.  They  can  be
nothing  else  than  the  action  exerted  upon  our  empirical
I  by  our  spontaneity,  i.e.  our  understanding.  And
it  is  because  this  action  is  transcendental  that,  in  our
endeavours  to  picture  to  ourselves  the  cause  of  our
sensations,  we  imagine  things  outside  of  ourselves  in
space.  Henceforth,  the  principle  of  the  deduction  of
material  species  is  in  our  hands  :  it  is  none  other  than
the  principle  of  the  functions  of  the  subject  itself.
It  is  in  this  way  that  Kant,  by  the  light  of  the  cate-


KANT  303

gories,  undertakes  the  deduction  of  the  different  kinds
of  forces,  of  first  matter  or  ether,  of  bases  or  specific
matters.  In  all  probability,  he  would  have  reached  a
rational  deduction  of  the  system  of  the  world  itself,
such  as  Newton  had  constituted  it.

The  second  and  last  part  of  metaphysics  is  the
metaphysics  of  morals.

In  the  moral  as  in  the  physical  order  of  things,  it  is
the  task  of  method  to  bring  the  given  empirical  condi-
tions under  the  laws  of  reason,  and  thence  deduce  the
complete  system  of  fundamental  laws.  Moral  legisla-
tion has  a  double  object  in  view  :  action  and  its  mobile.
Harmony  of  action  with  the  law  is  legality ,  that  of  the
mobile  is  morality.  This  distinction  results  in  the
division  of  the  metaphysics  of  morals  into  the  theory  of
right  and  the  theory  of  virtue.

Right  consists  of  the  whole  of  those  conditions  that
are  universally  required  in  order  that  the  free-will  of
each  individual  may  be  reconciled  with  that  of  the  rest.
External  free-will  commands  respect,  because  it  is  the
form  of  moral  freedom,  the  latter  being  realised  only
by  action  and  action  implying  a  connection  with  some-
thing external.  Consequently  the  science  of  right  is
distinct  from,  though  dependent  on,  morals.

There  are  two  essential  principles  that  control  the
development  of  the  theory  of  right  :  1st,  right  is  alto-
gether based  on  the  suprasensible  nature  of  man  so  far
as  it  is  manifested  in  time,  i.e.  on  personal  dignity  ;
2nd,  legal  restraint  is  legitimate,  so  far  as  it  is  neces-
sary for  suppressing  the  obstacles  that  one  will  may
arbitrarily  set  up  against  the  development  of  the  rest.
The  consequences  of  these  principles  are  as  follows  : —

So  far  as  private  right  is  concerned,  there  belongs  of
necessity  to  each  man  such  a  portion  of  freedom  as  is


304  STUDIES  IN  PHILOSOPHY

compatible  with  the  freedom  of  the  rest  of  mankind.
But  here  we  can  deal  only  with  freedom  regarded  in  its
external  existence.  This  external  expression  of  freedom
is  what  is  called  possession.

There  are  as  many  kinds  of  rights  as  there  are  of
possessions.

The  first  has  reference  to  things,  and  gives  rise  to
real  right.  This  right  is  not  a  relation  between  the
owner  and  the  thing,  it  is  rather  one  between  persons.
How  can  its  realisation  be  legitimate  ?  On  the  one
hand,  possession  in  common  is  the  primitive  right ;  on
the  other,  the  given  fact  is  individual  property.  Here
we  should  have  an  insoluble  antinomy,  if  possession  in
common  were  regarded  as  a  fact  that  has  existed  histori-
cally. It  is  not  a  fact,  however,  it  is  the  command  of
reason.  Consequently,  the  actual  fact  does  not  go  against
a  previous  realisation  of  justice.  Till  further  orders,
it  is  the  only  effective  realisation  of  the  principle  that
attributes  things  to  persons.  None  the  less  should  it
be  sanctioned  by  a  contract  between  wills  for  it  to
become  juridical ;  all  appropriation,  in  the  state  of
nature,  is  only  provisional.

The  second  kind  of  possession  refers  to  the  actions
of  persons,  and  creates  personal  right.  This  is  realised
by  contract,  the  value  of  which  lies  in  the  stability  and
simultaneity  of  suprasensible  wills.

The  third  kind  of  possession  refers  to  persons
themselves  and  creates  real  personal  right.  Its  domain
is  the  family.  How  can  a  person  become  a  thing  ?
Here  we  should  have  an  intolerable  contradiction,  if
the  owner  of  the  person  did  not  restore  that  person's
dignity,  by  also  giving  himself,  re-establishing  by  an
act  of  freedom  the  moral  order  which  is  threatened  by
nature.  Thus,  marriage  is  the  only  legitimate  relation-


KANT  305

ship between  the  sexes, for it alone safeguards the
dignity  of  the  woman.

As  regards  public  or  civil  right^  Kant  lays  it  down
as  a  principle  that,  since  the  natural  state  of  mankind
is  war,  it  is  necessary  to  constitute  a  civil  society  in
order  to  make  possible  a  regime  of  right.  The  laws
that  create  such  a  regime  are  divided  into  -political  right^
the  right  of  nations  and  cosmopolitical  right.

Political  right  rests  exclusively  on  the  idea  of
justice.  Sovereignty  originally  belongs  to  the  people  ;
the  State  can  only  be  the  result  of  a  contract,  by  which
men  give  up  their  natural  freedom,  to  recover  it  intact
under  a  legal  regime.  But  this  contract  is  not  an
historical  fact,  it  is  an  idea  of  reason  :  this  is  the
point  of  view  that  both  citizens  and  legislator  must
adopt,  in  the  performance  of  their  respective  tasks.
Consequently  power  must  be  obeyed  without  inquiring
into  its  origin.  However  vicious  a  social  form  may
be,  it  is  not  a  falling  away  from  a  primordial  state  of
justice  :  it  is  the  degree  of  reality  that  the  idea  of  right
has  been  able  to  reach  in  the  world  of  time.  To  amend
it  by  reform  is  legitimate,  but  not  to  overthrow  it  by
revolution.

If  such  is  its  principle,  the  State  has,  for  its  mission,
to  guarantee  the  natural  rights  of  man.  It  will  trouble
itself  about  morals  only  in  so  far  as  they  interest  public
order.  It  will  respect  religious  beliefs,  but  will  resist
political  influence  on  the  part  of  the  Churches.  It  has
the  right  to  abolish  all  privileges  which  are  only  facts
devoid  of  rational  foundation.

The  realisation  of  the  idea  of  the  State  requires  the
division  of  power  into  legislative,  executive  and  judicial
power.  The  most  important  of  these  is  the  legislative,
which  ought  to  be  the  full  complete  expression  of  the


306  STUDIES  IN  PHILOSOPHY

collective  will.  Government  is  more  or  less  despotic
in  proportion  as  it  departs  from  the  representative
system.  The  republic,  an  ideal,  rational  form,  is  a
government  that  is  representative  in  its  three  powers.
In  practice,  Kant,  as  became  a  loyal  subject  of  Frederick
II.,  recognises  an  autocratic  regime,  wherein  power,
thanks  to  the  generosity  of  the  prince,  is  in  conformity
with  the  philosophical  principles  of  right.

Ever  relying  on  the  idea  of  justice,  Kant  regards
penal  right  as  based  not  on  utility  but  on  reward  ;  he
defends  the  death  penalty  against  the  sentimentality  of
Beccaria.

The  right  of  nations  extends  to  States — with  certain
modifications — the  relations  which  public  right  sets  up
between  individuals.  Their  original  condition  is  war, —
not  a  regime  of  right.  In  order  that  juridical  relations
may  be  established  between  them,  they  must  form  and
maintain,  in  accordance  with  an  original  contract,  an
alliance  or  federation,  by  which  they  undertake  not  to
intervene  in  internal  discords,  and  also  to  unite  for
mutual  protection  against  external  attacks.

Finally,  cosmopolitical  right  insures  for  each  man
the  power  to  enter  into  communication  with  all.
Nations  should  allow  foreigners  access  to  their  terri-
tories. Colonisation  is  a  right ;  all  the  same,  it  should
not  violate  any  acquired  right  :  injustice  is  not  per-
mitted, even  with  the  object  of  extending  the  domain
of  justice.

Right  comes  indefinitely  near  to  morals,  without
being  able  to  attain  to  it.  It  requires  that  it  be
possible  for  the  rule  of  our  external  actions  to  be
set  up  as  a  universal  law  :  morals  puts  forward  the
same  demand  as  concerns  the  maxim  itself,  the  internal
principle  of  our  actions.  Thus,  the  duties  of  virtue


KANT  307

differ  from  those  of  right,  both  in  their  object, — for
they  determine  the  intention,  not  the  act,  whereas  the
duties  of  right  determine  the  act  and  not  the  intention  ;
this  is  expressed  by  saying  that  the  latter  are  strict
and  the  former  accommodating  ; — and  in  their  motive,
for  the  subject  imposes  them  upon  himself,  whereas
duties  of  right  are  imposed  by  external  compulsion.

What  are  the  ends  that  are,  at  the  same  time,
duties  ?  There  can  only  be  two  :  one's  own  perfection,
and  the  happiness  of  others.  I  ought  to  aim  after  my
own  perfection,  not  happiness  :  whereas,  I  ought  to  aim
after  the  happiness,  not  the  perfection  of  others.  As  a
matter  of  fact  I  can  neither  make  myself  happy,  nor
can  I  work  out  the  will  of  others  ;  whereas  the  deter-
mination of  my  will  does  concern  me,  as  also  the
condition  of  the  rest  of  mankind.

The  detailed  list  of  duties  will  comprise  nothing
referring  to  family  or  State.  Kant  sees  in  these  com-
munities only  juridical  relationships,  so  he  has  already
said  all  he  wished  about  them,  in  the  theory  of  right.
Morals  will  be  essentially  individual  and  social.

We  have  duties  only  towards  ourselves  and  other
men,  not  towards  God  or  the  animal  world.  For  we
can  be  under  obligation  only  towards  persons  who  are
objects  of  experience  to  us  :  and  one  or  the  other  of
these  two  conditions  falls  through,  in  the  case  of  beings
superior  or  inferior  to  ourselves.

Respect  for  human  dignity,  in  oneself  and  in  others,
is  the  one  preeminent  duty.  This  duty  admits  neither
of  conditions  nor  of  temperament  :  it  is  absolute  and
immutable.  Love  of  one's  neighbour,  and  benevolent
feelings  in  general,  can  become  duties  only  in  so  far
as  we  are  dealing  with  active  benevolence,  not  with  the
sympathy  of  complaisance  or  pathological  love.


3o8  STUDIES  IN  PHILOSOPHY

From  these  principles  proceed  such  maxims  as  the
following  : — Allow  no  one  with  impunity  to  trample
your  right  under  foot.  Never  incur  a  debt,  without
giving  security.  Lying,  whether  to  others,  or  more
especially  to  oneself,  is  moral  suicide.  Meanness  is
unworthy  of  man  ;  he  who  crawls  like  a  worm  cannot
complain  if  he  is  trampled  upon.  The  violation  of  the
duty  of  love  is  only  a  sin,  that  of  the  duties  of  respect
is  a  vice  ;  for  in  the  latter  case  man  is  insulted,  in  the
former  he  is  not.  Moral  gymnastics  is  not  mortifica-
tion, it  is  the  will  practising  to  overcome  one's  inclina-
tions so  as  not  to  be  hindered  by  them,  and  joyfully
exulting  in  its  regained  freedom.

Naturally  following  on  the  metaphysics  of  morals,
comes  religion,  not  as  implied,  but  as  demanded  by
morality.  Religion  consists  in  looking  upon  moral  laws
as  though  they  were  divine  commandments.  It  cannot
increase  our  knowledge  either  of  God  or  of  nature  ;  it
ought  not  to  aim  at  this.  Its  sole  object  is  to  extend
the  ascendency  of  the  moral  law  over  the  will.

Thus  understood,  it  is  in  conformity  with  and
sanctioned  by  reason.  But  the  positive  religions  add
on  to  the  moral  postulates  and  the  law,  traditional  and
statutory  elements  :  it  is  important  for  us  to  find  out
how  far  this  addition  can  be  justified  by  reason.

If  we  examine  the  Christian  religion  :  an  excellent
form  of  religion,  we  find  four  essential  ideas  in  it  :  that
of  original  sin,  that  of  Christ,  that  of  the  Church,  and
that  of  worship.  What  value  have  these  ideas  ?

In  the  dogma  of  original  sin  lies  concealed  a  phil-
osophic truth.  There  are  two  characters  in  each  of  us :
the  empirical  and  the  intelligible.  The  vices  of  the
one,  whilst  attesting  an  innate  tendency  towards  evil,
indicate  a  radical  failing  in  the  other.  This  failing


KANT  309

consists  in  reversing  the  order  which  ought  to  regulate
the  relations  between  sensibility  and  reason  ;  in  placing
the  latter  at  the  service  of  the  former.  Morality,  to
the  one  who  has  been  guilty  of  this  failing,  cannot  from
that  time  be  anything  else  than  conversion,  a  new  birth,
as  it  is  called  in  Christian  theology.  In  this  sense,  dogma
is  justified.

The  idea  of  Christ,  too,  is  accepted  by  criticism,  if
by  Christ  we  mean  the  ideal  of  the  human  person.
This  ideal  descends  from  heaven  to  earth,  not  historic-
ally, of  course,  but  in  the  sense  that,  whilst  belonging
to  the  intelligible,  it  is  manifested  in  the  sensible  world.
This  ideal  redeems  us,  for  whereas  punishment  affected
the  guilty  man,  it  is  the  man  who  is  converted  by  the
conception  of  the  ideal,  the  new  man,  who  suffers  and
struggles  in  order  to  free  the  former  man  from  evil.
The  good  man  takes  upon  himself  the  sins  of  the
wicked,  and  stands  in  his  place  before  the  judge.

The  Church,  also,  is  recognised  by  reason,  so  far  as
it  is  an  association  whose  members  mutually  fortify
themselves  in  the  practice  of  duty,  both  by  example
and  by  the  declaration  of  a  common  moral  conviction.
In  itself,  it  is  one,  like  rational  faith,  but  human  weak-
ness demands  that  there  be  added  to  this  faith,  in
order  to  make  it  sensible,  various  historical  dogmas
that  claim  a  divine  origin.  Hence,  a  multiplicity  of
churches,  and  antagonism  between  heretics  and  ortho-
dox. The  history  of  the  Church  consists  entirely  of
the  struggle  between  rational  and  positive  faith  ;  and
the  goal  to  which  it  is  advancing  is  the  effacement  of
the  latter  by  the  former.

Finally,  worship  itself  is  a  rational  matter,  provided
it  be  assigned  a  place  in  moral  intention  and  in  the
realisation  of  that  intention.  All  that  man  thinks  he  can


310  STUDIES  IN  PHILOSOPHY

add  on  to  virtue  in  order  to  honour  God  is  but  false
worship  and  vain  observance.  The  consequence  of  the
illusory  value  attributed  to  this  false  worship  is  the
subordination  of  the  laity  to  the  Church,  and  all  the
evils  to  which  this  subordination  gives  rise,  such  as
hypocrisy  and  fanaticism.  The  positive  faith  the  Church
enjoins  has,  for  its  true  object,  to  make  itself  super-
fluous. This  faith  has  in  the  past  been  necessary  as  a
vehicle  ;  it  remains  useful  until  mankind  comes  of  age.
Once  this  time  arrives,  however,  the  leading  strings
of  tradition  become  mere  fetters.  The  very  ecclesiastic
who,  as  a  minister  of  religion,  is  bound  down  to  symbols,
as  a  scholar  has  the  right  to  examine  dogmas  :  to  decree
the  unchangeableness  of  statutory  faith  would  be  an
outrage  on  human  nature.

V. — APPLICATIONS  OF  THE  METAPHYSICAL  DOCTRINE

It  is  Kant's  constant  preoccupation  to  unite  concrete
reality  to  practice.  His  principles,  obtained  by  meta-
physical analysis  from  the  given  itself,  ought  rationally
to  reconstitute  and  govern  the  given.  In  the  material
order  of  things,  he  sought  the  transition  from  meta-
physics to  physics  ;  so  also  in  the  moral  order  he  again
descends  from  idea  to  action.

In  this  connection,  the  history  of  mankind  is  his
principal  theme.  He  purposes  deducing  its  main  phases,
not  describing  them.  Here,  too,  he  makes  a  distinc-
tion between  the  natural  and  the  moral  history  of  man  ;
the  latter  having  its  beginning  in  the  former.

On  the  subject  of  natural  history,  Kant  deals  with
the  question  of  races.  Is  there  a  distinction  amongst
the  human  races,  of  such  a  kind  that  one  of  them


KANT  311

should  have  the  right  to  claim  for  itself  alone  the
dignity  of  manhood  and  reduce  the  rest  to  a  state  of
slavery  ?  The  question  is  answered  by  a  consideration
of  origins.  Fecundation  is  possible  between  human
beings  of  all  races ;  consequently  they  have  one  identical
origin  and  form  only  one  species.  Races  are  stable
varieties  ;  unalterable  by  intermixture  and  transplanta-
tion. They  have  become  differentiated  by  adapting
themselves  to  climatic  conditions.  As  there  are  four
climates,  so  there  are  four  races  :  the  white,  the  yellow,
the  black  and  the  red.  In  the  formation  of  these  races,
external  causes  have  played  an  indispensable  role,  but
these  alone  could  not  have  brought  about  stable  changes ;
they  merely  developed  the  internal  dispositions  of  the
species.  The  real  cause  of  the  existence  of  races,  is
man's  capacity  for  adapting  himself  to  external  con-
ditions.

In  answer  to  the  attacks  of  Forster,  who  would
explain  life  by  none  but  geological  causes,  Kant,  from  the
year  1788  onwards,  affirmed  the  necessity  of  a  special,
immaterial  principle  as  alone  conforming  to  the  require-
ments of  criticism.  To  attribute  to  matter  a  power  of
organisation  which  observation  could  not  find  in  it,
is  to  reject  the  guiding  clue  of  experience.  Doubtless
Forster's  explanation  is  neither  absurd  nor  impossible,
but  it  goes  beyond  our  means  of  knowing.  The  only
finality  we  can  grasp  is  in  ourselves,  in  our  conscious
activity  ;  nothing  authorises  us  to  admit  that  an  uncon-
scious thing  has  the  power  of  acting  with  a  view  to  an
end.  We  do  not  know  what  causes  life,  but  we  explain
it  by  finality  :  this  is  the  point  of  view  taken  by
criticism.

Whereas  the  natural  history  of  man  goes  back  to
his  origin,  moral  history  considers  his  end.  The  philo-


3i2  STUDIES  IN  PHILOSOPHY

sophy  of  history  finds  its  principle  in  the  idea  of  this
end,  as  natural  philosophy  does  in  the  idea  of  attraction.
Now,  the  development  of  reason,  the  essence  of  man,
cannot  tend  to  anything  else  than  the  establishment  of
a  regime  of  freedom,  i.e.  to  the  realisation  of  justice.
Consequently  the  historian  ought  to  find  in  facts  the
various  phases  of  the  realisation  of  justice.

History  begins  when  man  becomes  a  moral  being,
i.e.  when  he  acts  by  will  instead  of  by  instinct.  His
primitive  state  was  one  of  innocence  ;  his  abode,  paradise.
He  formed  one  with  nature,  wherein  his  will  was  buried.
The  awakening  of  his  will  showed  itself  by  a  desire
for  rule,  an  act  of  pride,  rebellion  against  the  nature
to  which  he  was  united.  Original  sin  is  freedom's
first  step.  From  that  time,  a  new  life  begins  for
man.  In  order  to  dominate  nature,  he  must  work.
From  work  there  arise  discord,  society,  property,  civil
inequality  :  civilisation  has  succeeded  a  state  of  nature.
What  does  this  new  condition  stand  for  ?  Had  human
activity  no  other  end  than  individual  happiness,  then
Rousseau  would  be  quite  right  in  longing  for  a  return
to  the  paradise  of  innocence.  But  what  man  wills  is
to  be  free,  and  effective  freedom  can  be  found  only  in
the  disinterested  agreement  of  wills,  on  the  ground  of
reason.  Now,  civilisation,  the  conflict  of  wills,  is  the
necessary  antecedent  of  their  reconciliation.  The  reign
of  justice,  the  source  of  moral  harmony,  is  the  third
phase  of  universal  history.

In  the  realisation  of  this  progress  of  freedom,  the
will  is  not  left  to  itself.  It  is  aided  by  nature  ;  con-
sequently, progress  is  constant  and  has  the  character  of
a  natural  law.  A  law  beneficent  and  necessary,  for
were  man  to  believe  that  his  works  perish  wholly  with
himself  how  could  he  keep  alive  an  earnest  desire  to


KANT  313

work  for  the  good  of  mankind  ?  Nature  stirs  up  man
to  quit  nature  ;  she  stimulates  his  freedom.  She  is  an
artist,  a  providence,  capable  of  bringing  forth  good  out
of  evil.  She  makes  men  selfish  and  violent,  and  violence
engenders  war  ;  but  war  calls  a  judicial  regime  into
existence.  She  separates  men  through  differences  in
constitution,  language  and  religion  ;  but  these  differ-
ences render  universal  domination  impossible.  Whilst
evil  succumbs,  sooner  or  later,  to  the  contradiction
within  itself;  good,  which  reason  substitutes  therefor,
when  once  established,  continues  and  increases,  because
it  is  in  harmony  with  itself.  For  logic  is  the  one
supreme  force.  At  first,  man  wills  union,  and  believes
himself  wise  ;  but  nature  knows  better  what  is  suitable
for  him,  she  wills  a  state  of  war.

The  first  object  of  this  collaboration  between  nature
and  will,  is  the  establishment  of  the  rational  State,  a
combination  of  freedom  and  legality.  The  second
object  is  the  establishment  of  an  Amphictyonic  council
of  nations,  ensuring  the  maintenance  of  peace.  Without
such  an  institution,  mankind  cannot  advance  to  its  goal.
War  is  a  return  to  a  state  of  nature.  In  the  ideal  of
reason  is  implied  the  idea  of  eternal  peace.  If  this
object  is  unreal isable,  then  Rousseau  is  right  in  advocat-
ing a  return  to  a  savage  state.  Better  barbarism  than
culture  without  morality.

But  is  not  this  a  purely  theoretical  conception  ?
Will  real  humanity  accept  such  views  ?  Has  not  Hobbes
shown  that  the  real  man  is  influenced  only  by  interests,
not  by  ideas  ?  Such  a  doctrine  must  be  utterly  rejected  ;
the  belief  must  not  gain  ground  that  what  is  good
in  theory  can  ever  be  impossible  or  evil  in  practice.
What,  indeed,  is  not  practical  is  that  unlimited  power
Hobbes  confers  on  sovereigns,  and  the  rebellion  he


STUDIES  IN  PHILOSOPHY

admits  of  in  subjects.  Interests,  certainly,  in  the  State,
should  have  a  place  of  their  own,  but  does  it  follow
that  principles  should  be  excluded  ?  Can  one  not  be
both  as  wise  as  the  serpent  and  as  harmless  as  the
dove  ?  To  the  man  who  guards  against  both  idealism
and  empiricism,  the  real  and  the  ideal,  instead  of  ex-
cluding, include  each  other,  and  politics  ceases  to  be
incompatible  with  morals.  There  is  a  practical  means
of  bringing  the  former  into  harmony  with  the  latter  :
publicity.  Whosoever  thinks  he  can  be  useful  to  his
country  ought  to  seek  publicity.  Now,  only  what  is
in  conformity  with  justice  can  bear  publicity.  Here
as  elsewhere,  universality  is  the  point  of  contact
between  the  real  and  the  rational,  the  form  and  token
of  truth.

According  to  this  theory,  what  is  the  present  phase
of  the  history  of  the  human  species  ?  It  is  the  phase
of  enlightenment  {Aufkl&rung),  and  its  characteristic  is
the  emancipation  of  the  intelligence.  Man,  reflecting
upon  himself,  finds  that  there  is  a  contradiction  between
his  reasonable  nature  and  his  position  as  a  minor  : '  he
makes  an  effort  to  liberate  his  reason.  Sapere  aude  is
his  motto.

The  progress  of  enlightenment  cannot  be  realised  by
overthrowing  political  institutions,  by  revolution,  which
has  no  other  result  than  the  substitution  of  new  for  old
prejudices.  Personal  reflection  alone  can  truly  enlighten
a  man.  Consequently  freedom  to  think  and  make
known  his  thoughts  is  the  condition  of  the  progress  of
enlightenment.

How  can  this  freedom  be  reconciled  with  the  rights
of  the  State  ?  Here,  a  distinction  must  be  made  between
man  as  a  citizen  of  a  limited  community,  and  man  as
a  citizen  of  the  whole  world.  In  his  dealings  with  the


KANT  315

members  of  his  community,  man  is  bound  to  submit  to
the  statutes  by  which  it  is  governed  ;  but  as  a  citizen
of  the  world,  he  is  free.  As  such  a  person,  indeed,  he
speaks  from  the  summit  of  reason,  for  the  generality
of  reasonable  beings,  whereas  as  a  citizen  of  a  State,
he  limits  his  action  to  some  particular  place  and  time.
Only  by  identifying  itself  with  the  universal  does  the
will  attain  to  freedom.  Therefore  each  citizen  will
unresistingly  pay  taxes,  though  retaining  the  right  to
dispute  such  payment.  The  teacher,  as  an  official,  will
respect  such  symbols  as  are  recognised  in  his  own
country  ;  but  as  a  scholar,  he  will  have  the  right  to
criticise  all  doctrines.  In  accordance  with  these  prin-
ciples, the  rights  both  of  legislators  and  of  citizens  are
clearly  defined.

And  so,  fully  maintaining  the  harmony  of  nature
and  of  freedom  in  the  moral  history  of  man,  Kant
guards  against  asserting  that  progress  is  a  mere  develop-
ment of  natural  powers.  To  his  mind,  the  Leibnitzian
theory  of  Herder  is  radically  erroneous.  In  nature
dwells  the  means  ;  but  the  end,  which  is  the  spring  of
progress,  can  come  only  from  moral  reason,  superior  to
nature.  This  is  why  the  moral  ideal  can  never  be
expressed  by  the  individual  as  such ;  it  cannot  be
represented  except  in  the  whole  of  mankind.  True
history  is,  of  necessity,  universal.  Certainly,  the  indi-
vidual is  a  reality,  but  in  the  whole,  there  is  something
that  goes  beyond  it,  and  only  by  union  with  the  whole
can  it  attain  to  freedom.

Not  content  with  expounding  his  general  views  as
to  the  ends  of  human  activity,  Kant,  in  some  things,
deals  with  practice  proper.  We  here  refer  to  his  ideas
on  education  and  university  instruction.


316  STUDIES  IN  PHILOSOPHY

It  is  impossible  for  education,  in  its  present  state,
to  satisfy  him.  It  neglects  the  will,  drills  and  over-
burdens the  mind  instead  of  moulding  it  for  reflection.
Here  a  radical  reform  is  necessary.  The  pedagogic
theories  of  Rousseau,  the  practical  attempts  of  Basedow
come  just  at  the  right  time  to  support  his  criticism.
He  is  passionately  in  favour  of  these  innovators,  and
demands  the  organization  of  elementary  schools  as  the
indispensable  condition  of  reform.  But  he  remains
himself,  even  on  this  ground,  subordinating  all  authori-
tative direction  to  moral  ends.

The  body,  he  tells  us,  ought  to  be  hardened  and
exercised,  subjected  to  such  discipline  as  will  make  it
the  powerful  and  obedient  auxiliary  of  the  mind.  Let
the  child  grow  up  in  perfect  freedom,  but  at  the  same
time  teach  him  to  moderate  his  movements  :  one  can-
not accustom  oneself  too  early  to  live  according  to  rule.

As  regards  the  intellect,  a  sane  education  awakens
and  guides  the  mental  faculties  instead  of  loading  the
memory  with  facts.  There  are  two  exercises  of  the
faculties  :  the  one,  which  is  free,  is  play  ;  the  other,
which  is  imposed  from  without,  is  work.  The  latter
is  obligatory  in  itself,  and,  in  instruction,  it  could  not
be  replaced  by  the  former.  The  faculty  of  intuition
should  be  formed  before  the  understanding.  Thus,  all
instruction  will  at  first  be  intuitive,  representative,  tech-
nical. A  beginning  may  be  made  with  geography.  So
far  as  it  has  the  cultivation  of  the  understanding  for  its
object,  instruction  will  be  Socratic  and  catechetical.  It
will  go  to  the  root  of  things,  and  make  the  pupil  really
master  of  his  knowledge.  A  robust  intellect  is  the
condition  of  a  will  that  is  free.

Paedagogics  has  the  formation  of  the  moral  per-
sonality as  its  end.  Here  education  is  needed,  for


KANT  317

virtue  is  not  innate.  This  education  comprises  moral
instruction  and  its  corresponding  practice.

Moral  instruction  is  catechetical.  Aiming  at  demon-
strating obligatory  laws,  it  proceeds  by  principles,  not
examples  :  if  examples  come  in,  that  is  only  in  order
to  prove  the  principles  to  be  really  applicable.  Kant
left  in  writing  a  fragment  of  moral  catechism,  wherein
the  pupil,  prompted  by  questions,  discovers  for  himself
moral  conceptions  of  life.

Practice,  or  moral  ascetics,  cannot  create  morality,
which  must  come  from  ourselves  ;  it  does,  however,
produce  in  man  the  disposition  that  favours  morality.
It  aims  at  a  hardening  process,  for  effeminacy  or  indol-
ence is  opposed  to  virtue.  Instead  of  destroying  the
will,  it  strengthens  it.  It  makes  us  masters  of  ourselves,
contented  and  happy.  Moral,  education  tends  to
develop  the  inner  aversion  to  evil,  self-esteem  and
dignity,  the  domination  of  reason  over  the  senses.
It  does  not  reward,  but  it  punishes.  It  never  humiliates,
lest  it  make  the  child  despise  himself,  except  when  he
has  been  guilty  of  that  one  fault  which  effectively  degrades
mankind,  to  wit :  falsehood.  In  all  things  it  puts  for-
ward the  moral  motive,  the  law  of  duty  itself,  certain
that  this  motive,  when  set  forth  in  all  its  purity,  will
be  more  powerful  than  any  material  stimulus,  any
assurance  of  benefit  or  harm.

With  paedagogics  we  may  compare  the  question  of
university  instruction.  On  this  point,  too,  the  Critique
throws  fresh  light.  A  University  consists  of  four
Faculties :  Theology,  Law,  Medicine,  the  so-called
superior  Faculties,  and  Philosophy,  the  so-called  inferior
Faculty.  Between  the  first  three  and  the  fourth,  con-
flict naturally  arises.  The  object  of  the  latter,  indeed,


3i 8  STUDIES  IN  PHILOSOPHY

does  not  differ  from  those  of  the  former,  but  the  one
studies  from  a  universal  and  theoretical  point  of  view
what  the  others  study  from  a  special  and  immediately
practical  one.  This  gives  rise  to  jealousy  and  rivalry.
Each  of  the  two  sides,  claiming  the  whole  realm  of
knowledge,  repels  the  other  as  a  usurper.  The  title  of
superior,  borne  by  the  first  three  Faculties,  is  nothing
less  than  the  superiority  that  tradition  attributes  to  the
positive  over  the  rational.  Is  this  hierarchy  justified  ?

The  conflict  between  theologians  and  philosophers
is  based  upon  the  use  to  be  made  of  the  holy  Scrip-
tures. The  Critique  does  not  deny  the  legitimacy  and
utility  of  the  sensible  vehicle  of  religious  truth  ;  but  it
claims  for  reason  the  right  to  distinguish,  in  the  Scrip-
tures, between  the  moral  and  eternal  substratum,  and
the  sensible  outer  form,  made  up  of  narratives  and
contingent  circumstances.  To  understand  the  Scrip-
tures is  to  interpret  them  in  a  moral  sense.  Theology
presupposes  this  mode  of  interpretation,  and  so  cannot
condemn  it.  How,  indeed,  does  it  distinguish  true
from  false  revelation,  except  by  the  rational  idea  of
God.  How  can  it  maintain  the  divine  character  of
consecrated  texts,  in  detail,  except  by  making  frequent
use  of  an  allegorical,  moral  interpretation  ?

The  conflict  between  philosophers  and  jurisconsults
is  based  on  respect  for  law :  the  Critique  shows  that
legality  has  a  good  foundation,  consequently  it  condemns
the  revolutionary  spirit.  But,  in  addition,  it  claims  the
right  to  examine  existing  laws.  And  who  can  refuse  it
this  right?  Jurisconsults,  in  order  to  attain  to  their
practical  ends,  need  to  know  whether  mankind  is  going
backwards  or  forwards,  or  remaining  stationary.  Now,
this  is  a  question  that  cannot  be  solved  empirically  :  it
concerns  reason.  And  reason  answers  it  by  postulating


KANT  319

indefinite  progress  in  the  name  of  the  moral  law.  But
what  if  the  commandment  is  only  an  idea  incapable  of
realisation  !  Experience,  under  the  guidance  of  reason,
removes  the  doubt.  Beneath  our  very  eyes,  we  can  see
where  reason  and  history  coincide.  There  is  one  fact
which  is  at  the  same  time  an  idea.  This  fact  is  the
French  Revolution.  Whatever  comes  of  this  enter-
prise, writes  Kant  in  1798,  whether  it  succeeds  or  fails,
it  stirs  up  a  sympathy  that  is  akin  to  enthusiasm  in  all
who  witness  it  by  reason  of  the  object  it  has  in  view  :
now,  a  purely  moral  ideal  is  alone  capable  of  affecting
the  soul  of  man  in  this  way.  The  Revolution  is  the
effort  of  man  to  create  a  rational  State,  it  is  the
eternal  entering  into  time.  Such  a  phenomenon,  once
witnessed,  can  never  be  forgotten.

The  problem  for  philosophers  and  doctors  to
solve,  is  whether  the  art  of  healing  depends  on
experience  alone,  or  whether  reason  has  any  share  in  it.
Now,  the  Critique  demonstrates  that  reason  may  be
will,  and  that  will  bears  some  relation  to  phenomena.
Reason,  then,  must  also  possess  a  healing  virtue.  And,
indeed,  man  can  do  a  great  deal  in  modifying  his
physical  condition  by  the  sole  exercise  of  his  will.
Here,  Kant  relates  his  personal  experience  :  by  moral
force,  he  is  able  to  keep  himself  free  from  hypochondria,
and  even  to  master  spasmodic  states.  Once  the  disease
has  entered,  the  will  may  be  unequal  to  the  task  before
it,  but  at  all  events  it  can  do  much  to  prevent  it,  and
keep  the  body  in  a  state  of  health.  The  will  is  the
first  condition  of  health.  Far  from  reason  ever  being
the  servant  of  experience,  it  is  the  latter  that,  under  all
circumstances,  borrows  from  the  former  its  truth  and
possibility.


320  STUDIES  IN  PHILOSOPHY

VI. — KANT'S  INFLUENCE

The  Kantian  philosophy  had  difficulty  in  making  a
way  for  itself  in  the  field  of  thought  already  occupied
by  the  Leibnitzo-Wolfian,  the  English,  French  and
popular  philosophies,  without  counting  the  increasingly
flourishing  positive  sciences.  Kant  did  not  deceive
himself  as  to  the  strange  novelty  of  his  work,  which
met  with  its  first  favourable  reception  at  lena,  thence
spreading  by  degrees  all  over  Germany  and  finally
throughout  the  world.  Not  only  was  metaphysical
speculation  renewed,  as  it  were,  thereby  :  most  of
the  departments  of  intellectual  activity  felt  its  in-
fluence.

In  Germany,  the  history  of  Kantianism  forms  an
important  element  in  the  general  history  of  ideas  and
sciences.

Amongst  its  first  opponents  may  be  cited  :  Selle  and
Weishaupt,  followers  of  Locke ;  Feder,  Garve  and
Tiedemann,  electics ;  Platner,  Mendelssohn,  Nicolai
and  Meiners,  representatives  of  popular  philosophy  ;
Ernst  Schulze,  the  skeptic  ;  Jacobi,  the  philosopher  of
belief,  and  along  with  him,  Hamann  ;  Herder,  who
reconciled  nature  with  history.  The  main  reproach
these  philosophers  bring  against  Kant  is  that  the
affection  or  action  of  things  on  sensibility,  implied  by
his  system,  is  made  impossible  by  the  abolition  of  all
casual  connection  between  "  things-in-themselves  "  and
the  feeling  subject.  Consequently,  the  system  was
alleged  to  be  fundamentally  contradictory.

Among  Kant's  immediate  disciples  may  be  mentioned
Johannes  Scultz,  the  first  commentator  on  the  Critique
of  Pure  Reason  ;  Karl-Leonhard  Reinhold  ;  Krug  ;
Fries,  who  attempted  to  give  criticism  a  psychological


KANT  321

basis ;  Salomon  Maimon,  who  deduced  from  con-
sciousness both  the  matter  and  the  form  of  our  re-
presentations and  so  abolished  the  "  thing-in-itself "  ;
Beck,  and  Bardili.

Whether  in  the  way  of  development  or  by  combining
with  foreign  elements,  Kantianism  gave  birth  to  a
number  of  important  systems.  The  philosophies  of
Fichte,  Schelling  and  Hegel  are  so  many  stages,  as  it
were,  in  a  connected  line  of  thought  dealing  with  the
problems  he  raises.  The  subjective  idealism  of  Fichte
deduces  the  theoretical  from  the  practical  I,  regarded
as  originally  unconscious,  and  so  makes  of  none  effect
the  concept  of  the  "  thing-in-itself."  Schelling  objects
to  call  I  this  first  principle  of  Fichte,  for,  in  reality,
it  is  neither  subject  nor  object  :  to  his  mind,  the
principle  is  absolute  identity,  no  less  superior  to  the
I  than  to  the  not-I,  an  identity  that  is  first  realised
as  nature  and  afterwards  as  spirit :  his  system  is  ob-
jective idealism.  Hegel  establishes,  defines  and
methodically  develops  the  principle  of  this  new
idealism.  The  absolute  cannot  be  absolute  identity,
otherwise  it  would  be  immovable  :  it  must  of  necessity
be  spirit.  Its  movement  is  the  methodical  effort  it
makes  to  remove  the  ever-recurring  contradictions
developed  by  reflection  deep  in  its  own  nature.  The
philosopher's  dialectic  gives  itself  up  to  the  objective
movement  of  concept  and  thus  brings  forth  in  suc-
cession :  logic,  the  philosophy  of  nature  and  the  philo-
sophy of  spirit.  Idealism  has  become  absolute.

Apart  from  this  somewhat  organic  development,
several  German  systems  sprang  from  a  fusion  of  Kant-
ianism with  other  doctrines.

Schleiermacher,  placing  Spinoza,  Plato  and  Christianity
alongside  of  Kant,  compares  being  and  thought,  and


322  STUDIES  IN  PHILOSOPHY

regards  space,  time  and  causality  as  forms  both  of
things  and  of  knowledge.  God  becomes  the  unity  of
the  universe.  Supreme  good,  the  unity  of  the  real  and
the  ideal  is,  in  morals,  substituted  for  the  purely  formal
principle  of  Kant.

Herbart  draws  upon  Kant,  the  Eleatics,  Plato  and
Leibnitz.  Like  Kant,  he  sees  in  philosophy  the
criticism  of  experience.  According  to  him,  however,
the  "  thing-in-itself "  is  not  inaccessible.  It  is  obtained
in  its  true  form,  if  we  eliminate  from  the  data  of
experience  all  the  self-contradictory  and  consequently
subjective  elements  found  therein.  It  consists  of  a
plurality  of  simple  beings  with  no  real  relation  to  one
another :  it  is  we  ourselves  who  introduce  relations  and
a  process  of  becoming.

Like  Kant,  Schopenhauer  limits  space,  time  and
causality,  to  phenomena  ;  but  instead  of  considering
the  independent  reality  of  our  representation  as  in-
capable of  being  known,  he  places  it  in  will,  as  given  by
internal  perception.

All  the  same,  the  difficulties  inherent  in  these
divers  systems,  more  particularly  the  foolish  claim —
set  up  by  absolute  idealism — to  build  up  in  detail  the
laws  of  nature,  very  quickly  brought  these  developments
of  Kantianism  into  disfavour.  It  was  considered  that
Kant's  system  of  thought  had  been  perverted  by  his
successors,  and  that  the  line  of  reflection  must  be
picked  up  just  where  Kant  had  dropped  it.  Such  was
the  idea  of  an  important  school  of  philosophers,  called
the  Neo-Kantian,  especially  after  a  famous  lecture  by
Zeller  on  the  theory  of  knowledge,  published  in  1862.
They  proposed  either  to  defend  Kant's  own  principles,
or  to  develop  them — without  considering  the  great
metaphysical  systems  that  have  sprung  therefrom — in  a


KANT  323

manner  strictly  suited  to  the  spirit  of  our  times.  The
principal  members  of  this  school  were :  Lange,  Cohen,
Liebmann,  Bonna  Meyer,  Paulsen,  Krause,  Stadler,
Riehl,  Windelband,  Schultze.  Most  of  them,  along  with
Lange,  insisted  especially  on  the  distinction  between
knowledge  and  belief,  corresponding  to  that  between
phenomena  and  "  things-in-themselves,"  so  far  as  this
distinction  guaranteed  the  possibility  of  science,  whilst
at  the  same  time  limiting  it.  Philosophy  ought  to  be
a  theory  of  knowledge,  not  a  conception  of  the  world.
Moral  things  may  be  a  matter  of  faith,  not  of  science.
With  few  exceptions,  including  Paulsen,  these  philo-
sophers put  in  the  background,  or  even  neglected
the  moral  and  religious  part  of  Kant's  work,  and
emphasised  the  critical  and  antimetaphysical  part.

Apart  from  philosophy,  Kantianism  in  Germany
has  long  since  left  its  mark  on  the  majority  of  in-
tellectual disciplines.

Following  on  Kant,  Schiller  entered  into  philosophic
speculations  on  esthetics,  endeavouring  to  define  the
connection  of  beauty  with  nature  and  morality.

In  theology,  Kant  initiated  a  moral  rationalism  that
long  held  sway.  Even  of  recent  years,  Ristchl,  the
theologian,  has  returned  to  Kant,  protesting  against
the  metaphysical  fancy  which  claims  to  know  the
suprasensible.

In  jurisprudence,  the  Kantian  theories  of  natural
right  are  found  as  leading  ideas  in  the  works  of
Hufeland,  Schmalz,  Gros,  Feuerbach,  Rehberg  and
Zachariae.

In  science,  Kantianism  has  exercised  a  varied  in-
fluence according  to  the  way  in  which  it  has  been
understood.  Radically  idealistic  in  interpretation —
though,  truth  to  tell,  this  interpretation  was  repudiated


324  STUDIES  IN  PHILOSOPHY

by  Kant — there  came  into  being  the  famous  philosophy
of  nature,  which,  bringing  matter  entirely  within  the
compass  of  unconscious  thought,  boldly  deduces  the
phases  of  its  development  from  the  laws  of  the  for-
mation of  consciousness  itself.  On  the  other  hand,
the  Kantian  theory  of  experience,  as  the  sole  origin  of
knowledge,  is  accepted  by  many  modern  scholars  in
quest  of  a  rational  justification  of  their  own  methods.

In  mathematics,  the  Kantian  point  of  view  is  char-
acterised by  the  admission  of  synthetical  a  'priori
principles,  or  extralogical  rational  principles,  and  in
particular  by  the  negation  of  the  metageometrical
space  of  the  Leibnitzians,  as  an  object  of  possible
intuition.

In  the  psycho-physiology  of  the  senses,  the  negation
of  Johannes  Muller,  who  maintains,  in  opposition  to
empiricism,  the  primitive  character  of  the  representation
of  space,  is  based  on  transcendental  esthetics.

Finally,  Kantianism  exercises  considerable  influence
over  the  political  life  of  Germany.  It  represents  the
idea  that  reason,  even  in  politics,  is  the  true  norm,  and
commands  man  to  act  in  accordance  with  the  universal
idea  of  duty  and  humanity  :  a  highly  philosophical
doctrine,  which  has  certainly  not  altogether  given  way
to  that  of  historic  right  and  an  exclusively  national  ideal.

In  other  countries  besides  Germany,  the  influence
of  Kant's  philosophy  is  still  great,  though  more  tardy
in  making  itself  felt,  and  less  profound  in  the  im-
pression it  has  made.

In  1773,  Kant  began  to  be  appreciated  in  Stras-
bourg. In  1796,  the  translation  of  his  works  into  French
was  begun.  In  1799,  Degerando  sets  forth  his  system.
Mme.  de  Stae"!  speaks  enthusiastically  of  the  man  she
looks  upon  as  an  apostle  of  sentimental  spiritualism.


KANT  325

In  1818,  Victor  Cousin  lectures  on  Kant's  morals;
in  1820  he  expounds  on  the  Critique  of  Pure  Reason.
In  his  own  theory  of  reason,  he  is  indebted  to  Kant
for  several  of  his  ideas.  After  being  thus  utilised  in
doctrines  based  on  other  principles,  such  as  electicism,
positivism,  and  independent  morals,  Kantianism  was
studied  and  developed  for  its  own  sake,  especially  by
Renouvier,  Janet,  Lachelier,  and  Pillon.  Renouvier,
Pillon,  and  Dauriac  advocate,  under  the  name  of
criticisme,  a  doctrine  which,  in  contradistinction  to
German  Neo- Kantianism,  emphasises  the  excellence
of  Kantian  morals.  They  directly  subordinate  theor-
etical to  practical  reason,  looking  upon  the  will
as  the  first  principle  of  all  certainty  ;  and  not  only
that,  but,  doing  away  with  the  noumenon,  they  set
up  natural  laws  as  ultimate  reality,  and,  following  on
phenomena,  they  prepare  a  place  for  the  initiative  of
freedom.  Under  Kant's  inspiration,  also,  M.  Secretan,
of  Lausanne,  limits  the  rights  of  science,  and  places
above  it  belief  in  freedom.  In  divers  forms  and
degrees,  Kantianism  even  now-a-days  is  to  be  found  in
most  of  the  doctrines  whose  aim  it  is  to  reconcile  science
with  morals,  without  injuring  either.

In  England,  Kant's  influence  was  mainly  felt  by
Hamilton  and  the  agnostics.  Combining  Kant's
doctrine  with  that  of  Reid,  Hamilton  maintained  that
the  representation  of  the  absolute  was  impossible  for  a
mind  limited  to  human  knowledge.  Spencer's  agno-
sticism, also,  though  dependent  on  positivism,  owes
much  to  the  Kantian  antinomies.  In  the  realm  of
psychology  the  revolutionist  school  claims  to  be  the
reconciler  of  Kantian  apriorism  with  Locke's  empiricism.
At  the  present  time,  Kant  is  scrupulously  studied  for
his  own  sake.  In  the  translation  of  the  Critique  of


326  STUDIES  IN  PHILOSOPHY

Pure  Reason  which  Max  Miiller  published  in  1 8  8  i ,  he
declares  the  work  to  be  an  Aryan  monument  as  precious
as  the  Vedas,  and  says  that  throughout  all  time  it  may
be  criticized  but  never  ignored.

In  Italy,  the  Critique  of  Pure  Reason  was  translated
in  1821-1822,  and  Jose  del  Perojo  translated  it  into
Spanish  in  1883.

Looking  at  the  matter  from  a  general  point  of  view,
what  was  the  historical  role  of  Kant  ?  What  relation
has  his  philosophy  with  present-day  speculation  ?

Kant's  main  purpose  was  analogous  to  those  of
Socrates  and  Descartes.  Socrates  undertook  to  show
that  practice,  even  regarded  as  the  end  of  human
activity,  cannot  exclude  science,  because  in  reality  it
implies  this  latter.  Descartes  grants  that  a  commence-
ment be  made  with  universal  doubt  :  this  doubt  does
not  abolish  certainty,  but  rather  creates  a  foundation
for  it.  Kant,  in  turn,  declares  that  experience  is  the
starting  point  of  all  our  knowledge.  Are  we  to  conclude
that  reason  is  a  mere  word  ?  By  no  means,  for
experience  is  based  on  reason.  And  in  the  very
development  of  the  doctrine,  analogy  follows  its  course.
Deduced  from  practice,  the  science  of  Socrates  is
limited  to  morals  and  the  objects  connected  therewith.
Cartesian  certainty  at  first  extends  only  to  thought,  the
condition  of  doubt ;  it  restores  the  objects  that  doubt
had  overthrown,  only  in  so  far  as  they  are  capable  of
being  connected  with  thought.  Kantian  criticism,  like-
wise, allows  to  persist  only  that  in  a  priori  notions
which  is  required  for  experience ;  it  makes  the  possi-
bility of  this  latter  the  norm  of  the  entire  use  of  pure
reason.

Like  Socrates  and  Descartes,  Kant  contends  that  his


KANT  327

method  is  constructive  rather  than  destructive.  Science,
limited  as  regards  "  things-in-themselves,"  is  at  all  events
the  abode  of  certainty.  Idealism  melts  away  before
empirical  realism.  Nor  is  this  all  :  criticism  is  to  give
even  better  results.  The  very  deduction  that  establishes
science  allows  morals  to  stand  by  its  side,  without  risk
of  offending  it.  True,  morals  also  must  put  up  with
limitation.  It  must  be  based  on  an  exclusively  formal
principle,  the  simple  notion  of  duty.  But  here  again,
criticism  restrains  only  in  order  to  secure.  Morality
may  be  absolute  and  remain  practical,  if  it  has  no  other
object  than  the  determinations  of  the  will  that  is  free.
The  insoluble  antinomy  of  mysticism  and  eudemonism
vanishes  in  the  system  of  rational  autonomy.

Indeed,  throughout  Kant's  philosophy,  it  is  reason
that  creates  as  well  as  destroys,  that  supplies  principles
to  replace  those  it  has  abolished.  In  Descartes,  it  had
already  discovered  within  itself,  in  its  faculty  of  intuition,
that  principle  of  certainty  which  it  found  neither  in  the
senses  nor  even  in  demonstrations.  Kant  shows  us
reason  making  an  inventory  of  its  content,  and  finding,
in  its  very  constitution,  all  the  principles  necessary  for
science  and  morals.  Naturally,  it  does  not  suffice  unto
itself,  the  absolute  goes  beyond  it.  Its  science,  con-
sequently, is  relative  ;  its  morals,  in  application,  limited
to  endless  progress.  None  the  less  does  reason  offer
man  all  the  resources  he  needs  to  realise  the  ideal  of
mankind,  for  it  is  freedom  and,  at  the  same  time,  law.

Such  being  the  essential  elements  of  Kantianism,  this
philosophy  stands  at  the  term  of  the  rationalistic
development  which  began  with  Descartes.  Reason,
according  to  Kant,  drives  to  the  utmost  limits  both  its
renunciation  of  the  comprehension  of  absolute  being
and  its  efforts  to  provide,  by  the  principles  it  finds


328  STUDIES  IN  PHILOSOPHY

within  itself,  for  the  intuition  in  which  it  is  lacking.
One  more  step  in  either  direction,  and  rationalism  will
lose  itself  either  in  skepticism  or  idealism.  Kant,  whilst
shutting  himself  up  in  the  world  of  time,  claimed  that
he  found  in  the  heart  of  reason,  which  forms  part
thereof,  a  means  of  converting  this  world  into  a  symbol
of  eternal  being.

Such  is  the  historical  signification  of  his  work.
Regarded  theoretically,  it  is  of  supreme  interest,  even
in  our  days.

The  human  mind,  influenced  by  the  positive  sciences
and  by  philosophy  alike,  asks  itself  more  than  ever
what  is  our  relation  to  the  reality  of  things,  and  whether
or  not  it  is  possible  to  know  that  reality.  Now,  tran-
scendental idealism  has  an  answer  to  give  to  this
question.  Beyond  phenomena,  according  to  Kantianism,
we  can  yet  grasp  the  laws  of  thought  by  which
phenomena  are  conditioned,  and  constitute  philosophy
as  a  theory  of  knowledge  ;  but  as  for  forming  an
ontological  theory  of  the  universe,  as  the  ancients  did,
we  must  give  up  all  ambition  in  this  direction  :  a  plain
solution,  and  one  of  grave  consequence,  finding  much
support  in  present-day  science.

On  the  other  hand,  the  progress  of  the  positive
sciences,  in  extent  and  in  certainty,  makes  us  wonder ,
if  whatever  interests  man  cannot  at  least  be  dealt
with  according  to  the  methods  of  these  sciences,  and  if
morals  itself  cannot  be  assimilated  thereto.  Kant
answers  this  question  with  his  stern  dualism,  limiting
science  in  order  to  give  it  a  basis,  and  establishing  morals
in  the  domain  opened  up  by  this  very  limitation.  Now,
neither  the  sovereignty  of  science  in  the  practical  order
of  things,  nor  the  theoretical  impossibility  of  freedom,
are,  even  in  these  days,  sufficiently  clearly  demonstrated


KANT  329

for  it  to  be  possible  to  relegate  to  the  past  the  Kantian
solution.

As  regards  the  philosophy  of  science,  Kantianism
deals  just  with  those  problems  that  increasingly  occupy
the  modern  mind.  How  can  experience  alone  afford
certainty,  how  can  the  knowledge  of  a  law,  in  the  exact
meaning  of  the  word,  be  purely  experimental  in  its
origin  ?  Aristotle  taught  that  the  general,  so  far  as  it
is  known  by  experience  alone,  necessarily  includes  excep-
tions, and  that  only  intellectual  knowledge  can  have
universal  value.  And  this  has  been  the  classic  doctrine
up  to  the  present.  Descartes,  however,  had  already
declared  that  there  is  a  true  science  of  phenomena,  that
what  is  transitory  in  its  nature  may  be  reduced  to
immutable  essence  ;  and  science,  in  its  onward  march,
has  been  increasingly  unconscious  of  Aristotle's  objec-
tion. And  yet,  what  right  have  we  to  reject  a  doctrine
which  seemed  to  be  evidence  itself  ?  How,  and  in  what
sense,  can  a  fact  be  a  law  ?  Kant  accepted  this  question
as  modern  science  states  it  ;  it  is  the  object  of  his
doctrine  of  forms  and  categories  to  answer  it.  The
solution  is  a  profound  one  ;  it  cannot  be  avoided  by  any
who  persistently  determine,  without  fearing  contradic-
tion, to  unite  experience  with  certainty.

Kant's  system  of  morals,  too,  is  far  from  having
become  foreign  to  us.  We  are  at  present,  as  regards
action,  in  a  position  similar  to  that  in  which  science
places  us  as  regards  being.  We  accept  only  facts,  and
yet  we  cannot  renounce  certainty,  law,  belief  in  duty.
We  are  determined  to  reject  every  motive  of  action
adopted  from  the  idea  of  a  suprasensible  world,  and  yet
we  claim  to  maintain  a  system  of  absolute  morals,  a
doctrine  of  obligation.  Are  we  not,  then,  almost
prepared  to  appreciate  a  philosophy  which  actually


330  STUDIES  IN  PHILOSOPHY

brings  duty  out  of  the  very  heart  of  experience,  and
holds  aloof  from  mysticism  and  utilitarianism  alike  ?

And  if,  in  social,  religious  and  political  questions,
we  are  troubled  by  the  conflict  between  history  and
reason,  between  what  is  and  what  ought  to  be,  between
form  and  idea,  between  fact  and  right,  between  the
national  ideal  and  the  human  one,  do  we  not  thereby
find  ourselves  somewhat  in  the  same  position  as  Kant
when  he  was  investigating  the  relations  between  theory
and  practice  and  reconciling  the  necessity  of  nature
with  the  sovereignty  of  reason  in  his  doctrine  of  moral
progress  ?

Not  in  vain,  then,  was  it  that  Kant  endeavoured,
both  in  the  sphere  of  action  and  in  that  of  knowledge,  to
adopt  that  point  of  view  of  the  universal,  at  once
real  and  ideal,  which  is  also  the  point  of  view  of  reason  :
his  doctrine  thereby  receives  a  lofty,  positive  character,
such  as  could  not  be  met  with  either  in  the  pure
generalisations  of  experience  or  the  dreams  of  imagina-
tion. It  is  not  the  mirror  of  a  single  epoch,  nor  even
the  expression  of  a  nation's  thought  :  it  belongs  to
the  whole  of  mankind.


INDEX


Acroamatic,  instruction,  77,  80,  8 1

Adam,  217-221

Adam,  Charles,  241-244

Aesculapius,  75

Alexander,  75-78,  120,  151,  152

Alexander  of  Aphrodisias,  157

Alexandria,  157

Amaury  of  Chartres,  1 60

Amphictyonic  council,  313

Amyntas  II.,  75

Anaxagoras,  n,  84

Andronicus,  79,  156

Antipater,  152

Antisthenes,  40

Apellicon,  79

Apodeictic,  98

Apollo,  69

Arabs,  158

Aristides,  43

Ariston,  152

Aristophanes,  14,  19

Aristotle,  6,  175,  203,  204,  205,  241,
252,  280,  329;  biography,  74-79;
writings,  79-83  ;  ensemble  of  his  work,
84,  85  ;  classification  of  sciences,
85-87 ;  method  and  point  of  view,
87-89;  historian,  89-91;  logic,  92-
103;  metaphysics,  103-112;  general
physics,  112-116;  mathematics,  116,
117;  cosmology,  117-120;  astro-
nomy, 120-122  ;  meteorology,  122  ;
mineralogy,  122,  123  ;  general  bio-
logy, 123-125  ;  botany,  125  ;  animal
anatomy  and  physiology,  125-130;
zoBlogy,  130-132;  psychology,  132-
135;  morals,  135-140;  economics,
140,  141 ;  politics,  142-146  ;  rhetoric,
146-148  ;  esthetics,  148,  149  ;  poetics,
149,  150;  grammar,  151  ;  speeches
and  poems,  151;  letters,  152;  lan-
guage, 153-156  ;  influence,  156-162;
Aristotle's  system  compared  with
Kantian  idealism  and  with  evolution-
ism, 162-164;  the  essential  features


of  Aristotelianism  retained  in  modern
science,  164-166  ;  the  three  principles
of  Aristotelian  finality,  166-168

Aristoxenus,  156

Asclepiads,  75

Aseity,  182

Atarnea,  76,  152

Athenians,  69

Athens,  75-78

Aufkl'drungsphilosophie,  256,  314

Aulus  Gellius,  77

Aurora,  229

Averroes,  159

Baader,  231

Babylon,  120

Bacon,  35,  70,  88,  102,  161,  244,  245

Baillet,  241,  242,  243,  246,  247,  248,251

Barbarians,  141

Bardili,  321

Basedow,  316

Batanaea,  157

Baumgarten,  273,  294

Beccaria,  306

Beck,  321

Berkeley,  234

Bible,  173,  226

Boehme,  Philosophus  Teutonicus,  169-170.
His  first  book,  Aurora,  171  ;  Pro-
found influence  of  the  Bible,  173  ;
Meditation  on  the  phenomena  of
nature,  174;  his  life-aim,  the  enter-
ing into  the  Kingdom  of  God,  175-
1 76  ;  the  nature  of  evil,  1 77  ;  his
task :  to  enquire  into  the  genesis  of
things,  178  ;  threefold  division  of  his
system,  178  ;  methods  of  ordinary
philosophy  useless,  179,  180;  man
must  adopt  the  standpoint  of  God,
181  ;  problem  of  aseity,  182;  exami-
nation of  Eckhart's  doctrine,  184 ;
revelation  requires  opposition,  185  ;
expose  of  Boehme's  teaching  on  the
birth  of  God,  186-202;  comparison


331


332


STUDIES  IN  PHILOSOPHY


of  his  philosophy  with  that  of  the
ancients,  202-206  ;  his  theology
neither  monism  nor  dualism  ;  per
crucem  ad  lucem :  the  human  and
divine  law,  206-208  ;  opposition  to
pantheism  and  to  theism  ;  solution
of  problem  of  creation,  definition
of  creation,  208-215  ;  origin  of  sin
and  hell,  215-217  ;  man's  three  parts,
soul,  mind,  and  body,  correspond  to
the  principles  of  fire,  light,  and
essence  or  reality,  217-218  ;  spiritual
interpretation  of  the  Fall  of  Man,
218-222  ;  reconciliation  of  good  and
evil  ;  realisation  of  man's  salva-
tion by  Christ,  election  by  grace  ;
faith,  the  sign  of  election  and  the
beginning  of  regeneration ;  contrast
between  faith  and  works,  prayer  and
sacraments,  222-226  ;  life  of  the  re-
generate Christian,  226-228;  Aurora:
the  spiritual  interpretation  of  Chris-
tianity, 229-231  ;  spirit,  i.e.  infinite
freedom,  alone  is  true  being  ;  evil  is
not  a  lesser  good  but  rather  a  living
force  that  tends  to  destroy  good,  231,
232  ;  characteristics  of  German  philo-
sophy, 232,  233

Boethus,  157

Boetius,  158

bonk  metis,  254

Br£al,  Michel,  quoted,  vii

Buhle,  75

Burke,  294

Cagliostro,  268

Ca  ili  pus,  121

Callisthenes,  77,  120

Cartesianism,  5,  97,  326

Chalcis,  75-78

Chaldaeans,  120

Christ, 159, 171, 188,  217,  222,  225,

308,  309
Christian, 224, 225, 226, 235, 270,

308,  309
Christianity, 72, 160, 169, 175, 177,

201,  205,  229,  264,  321
Church,  305,  308,  309,  310
Cicero,  91,  154
Cilicia,  157
Clerselier,  243
Cogito,  234,  235,  237
Cohen,  323

Collegium  Fredericanum,  257,  258
Copernicus,  284
Cordova,  159
Corneille,  5,  242
Cousin,  Victor,  325
Criticisme,  325


Critique  of  Pure  Reason,  261,  262,  302,

3X7>  3l8»  3J9»  325»  326
Crito,  40
Critolaiis,  156

Damascus,  157

Dauriac,  325

David  of  Dinant,  160

Davis,  Prof.  W.  M.,  quoted,  vi

Decearchus,  156

de  Coulanges,  Fustel,  I,  vi

de  Cusa,  Nicolas,  172

Degerando,  324

d'Eichthal,  Gustave,  10

del  Perojo,  Jose,  326

Demetrius,  152

Democritus,  84,  116,  119,  123,  152

Demosthenes,  78

Denys  of  Halicarnassus,  74

Descartes,  5,  6,  161,  167,  174,  265,
326,  327,  329  ;  The  Cogito,  the  living
germ  from  which  have  sprung  all
great  modern  systems  of  philosophy  ;
problem  of  transition  from  thought
to  existence,  234-236 ;  in  thought
alone  lies  human  dignity  and  the
principle  of  certainty,  236  ;  Cartesian-
ism  was  the  soul  of  contemporary
philosophy  and  science,  affirmed  Hux-
ley, 237  ;  Descartes'  style,  a  perfect
model  of  prose,  238-240;  relation
between  morals  and  science,  241-244  ;
everything  in  nature  is  brought  about
mathematically  ;  life  itself  is  a  mech-
anism and  is  subject  to  our  control,
245,  246  ;  purpose  and  aim  of  the
Discours  de  la  Methode,  the  Lettres,  the
Principes,  and  the  Traite  des  Passions,
248-252  ;  no  limit  to  the  conquests
of  science  over  nature  ;  the  sovereignty
of  reason  ;  Cartesian  morals  closely
united  with,  though  not  derived  from,
the  science  of  natural  things ;  the
full  realisation  of  reason  is  the  goal
of  life  ;  the  bona  mens  is  the  supreme
aim,  253,  254

de  Stagl,  Madame,  324

Dialectic,  100

Diogenes  Laertius,  74,  75,  79,  152

Discours  de  la  Methode,  236,  239,  241,
242,  247,  249,  250,  254

Dynamics,  301

Eckhart,  160,  170,  172,  184

Egyptians,  120,  160

Eleatics,  113,  322

eX^7%o^res,  15

Elizabeth,  Princess,  241 251,  253,  254

Empedocles,  113


INDEX


333


Encyclopedism,  259

Epicureanism,  157

Epicurus,  241

Eristic,  101

Eucharist,  159

Euclid,  40

Eudemus,  152,  156

Eudoxus,  121

Exoteric  instruction,  77,  80,  8 1

Fall,  230

Faye,  271

Feder,  320

Feuerbach,  323

Fichte,  72,  169,  232,  255,  262,  321

Finsterniss,  191

Forster,  311

Fouillee,  9,  II,  14,  50,  54,  57,  58

Franck,  10,  50,  172,  173

Frederick  II.,  256,  261,  265,  306

French Revolution, 236, 256, 263,

3'9

Fries,  320

Garve,  320

Gazette  <f  Anvert,,  243

Gennadius,  161

George  of  Trebizond,  161

God,  no,  in,  112,  116,  118,  159,  171,
173,  176-193,  195,  198-231,  246,
249,  251,  254,  259,  272,  286,  288,
292,  293,  297,  300,  307,  308,  310,
318,  322

GSrlitz,  170

Goethe,  262  ;  quoted,  ix

Gorgias,  22

Greeks,  141

Gros,  323

Grote,  i,  9,  n

Hamann,  169,  262,  320

Hamilton,  325

Harvard  University,  vii

Hegel,  i,  31,  72, 162, 169, 170,  232,

233.  3ZI
Helmholtz,  271
Herbart,  322
Herder,  268,  315,  320
Hermias,  76,  151,  152
Herpyllis,  76,  78
Herz,  Marcus,  267,  270
Hhtoria  animalium,  77,  130
Hobbes,  313
Homer,  35
Hufeland,  323
Hume,  235,  260,  262,  275,  276,  277,

278,  288
Hutcheson,  260
Huxley,  236


Huyghens,  235
Hypomnematic  writings,  81

lena,  320
Isocrates,  76

Jacob!,  169,  320
Janet,  10,  325
Jesus,  222,  224
Jews,  158,  159
John  the  Baptist,  159
Jupiter,  112

Kabbah,  193

Kant,  162,  163,  169,  170,  231,  232,  234,
235  ;  the  influence  of  Kantianism,
255;  biography,  256-264;  his  poli-
tics, religion,  morals,  264 ;  chrono-
logical list  of  works,  265  -  270  ;
theory  of  actual  history  of  the  forma-
tion of  the  world,  271  ;  relations
between  possibility  and  existence,
philosophy  and  mathematics,  272,

273  ; how  far can one become ac-
quainted with  supra-sensible  existences  ?

274  ;  nature  of  space  and  time,  275  ;
principle  of  causality,  276-278  ; ex-
planation of the conditions of  ex-
perience, 278-288  ;  what  is  morality
and on what does it rest  ? Kant's
categorical  imperative,  289-291  ;  his
postulates,  292.,  293  ; the notions of
taste and finality, 294-300 ; meta-
physics of  the  science  of  nature,  301,
302  ;  the  metaphysics  of  morals,  the
various  kinds  of  rights  and  possessions,
303-306  ;  duties,  307  ;  maxims,  308  ;
the  four  essential  ideas  of  the  Chris-
tian religion, 308-310; applications
of  the  metaphysical doctrine  to  the
natural  and  the  moral  history  of  man  ;
Aufktirung, the present phase of
human history, 310-314; freedom
to  express  thought,  the  condition  of
the  progress of enlightenment ; re-
conciliation of freedom with the
rights of  the State; taxation,  315;
reform  needed  in  methods  of  educating
will,  intellect,  and  body ;  the  goal  of
education  is  the  formation  of  virtue,
316,  317;  university  instruction,  the
conflict between philosophers and
(i)  theologians,  (2) lawyers,  (3) doc-
tors, 318,  319;  influence  of  Kantian
philosophy,  systems  born  of  it ;  various
developments in esthetics, theology,
jurisprudence, science, mathematics,
sense  psycho-physiology,  and  German
politics, 320-324; appreciation in


334


STUDIES  IN  PHILOSOPHY


France,  England,  Italy,  and  Spain,
325,  326  ;  the  historical  role  of
Kant's  philosophy  ;  experience,  based
on  reason,  the  starting  point  of  all
knowledge  ;  reason  creates  as  well  as
destroys,  it  is  both  freedom  and
law,  326-328  ;  world-wide  scope  and
import  of  Kant's  doctrines,  329,

33°

KdBapffis,  149
Knorr,  264
Knutzen,  258,  259

KUl/JLTj, 142

K8nigsberg,  257,  258,  261,  264

Krause,  323

Krug,  320

Kuno,  Fischer,  234,  255,  267

Kuntzschmann,  Catherina,  170

Lachelier,  325
La  Mettrie,  234
Lamian  war,  78
Lampsacus,  156
Lange,  323
Laplace,  259,  265

Leibnitz,  6,  99,  162,  169,231,232,234,
235,  258,  260, 261,  265, 266, 275,

3i5»  3"
Leibnitzians,  324
Leibnitzo-Wolfian,  271,  288,  320
Lesbos,  156
Lettres,  249
L6v6que,  9
Liebmann,  323
Lilienthal,  258
Lisbon,  266

Locke,  92,  234,  235,  260,  320,  325
Lucifer,  215,  216,  217,  218,  221,  222
Luther,  161,  172,  176,  177,  178
Lycaeum,  77

Machaon,  75
Macedonia,  75,  76
Maieutics,  38]
Maimon,  Salomon,  321
Malebranche,  234,  235
Martin,  Saint,  231
Mechanics,  301
Meiners,  320
Mendelssohn,  266,  320
Mentor,  152
Mersenne,  247,  251
Messena,  156
Meyer,  Bonna,  323
Milky  Way,  122
Moliere,  5
Moses,  216

Moses  Maimonides,  159
Miiller,  Johannes,  324


Miiller,  Max,  326
Mytilene,  76

Neleus,  79

Neo-Kantianism,  322,  325

Neo-Platonism,  205

Neo-Platonist,  157,  206

Newton,  235,  247,  258,  260,  265,  271,

^73>  *78>  303

Newtonianism,  258,  272,  274,  286,  301
Nicolai,  320
Nicolas,  157

Nicomachean  Ethics,  71,  79,  155
Nicomachus,  75,  79
Nisard,  D£sir6,  238
vovs,  96,  97,  132, 133, 134, 138,  139,

157,  160,  175

Olympic  games,  91
Orestes,  41
Organon,  158

Paphlagonia,  157

Paracelsus,  172,  173

Pascal,  6,  8,  17,  18,  175,  236

Pauline  origin,  172

Paulsen,  323

Peripatetic  school,  77,  79,  82,  156,  157,

160

Phenomenology,  302
Philip,  76,  152
Philopon,  157
Philoxenes,  152
Phoronomics,  301
$&ris,  112,  157,  167
Physiognomonica,  129
Pietism,  256,  259,  270
Pietist,  257,  258
Piety,  Socrates'  definition  of,  62
Pillon,  325
Pirithous,  41
Plainer,  320
Plato,  11-16,  27, 30-34,  40,  70,  71,  75,

78,  84,  89,  103,  104,  116,  123,  140,

143,  H4,  146, 148,  IS1.  152.  !57»

158,  160,  175,  321,  322
Plenum,  115,  273
Plotinus,  157
Plutarch,  79

7r6Xts,  142
Polycrates,  13
Pomponatius,  161
Porphyry,  120,  157,  158
Postulates,  Kant's,  292
Principes,  242,  243,  248
Protagoras,  22,  68,  89
Protestantism,  177,  256
Pseudo-Ammonius,  75
Pseudo-Hesychius,  75


INDEX


335


Pylades,  41
Pythagoreans,  206
Pythian  games,  91
Pythias,  76,  78

Quintessence,  118
Quito,  266

Rauch,  264
Redemption,  230
Regulae,  241,  242,  250,  254
Rehberg,  323
Reid,  235,  325
Reinhold,  320
Renaissance,  161,  238
Renan,  I
Renouvier,  325
Reuter,  Anna  Regina,  257
Rhetoric,  101
Rhodes,  79,  156
Richter,  262
Riehl,  255,  323
Riga,  261
Ristchl,  323

Roman  Catholic  Church,  225
Rome,  79,  156
Rosenkranz,  267

Rousseau,  259,  260,  273,  300,  312,  313,
316

Satan,  221

Scaliger,  161

Schelling, 72, 169,231,  232,  255,  286,321

Schiller,  262,  323

Schleiermacher,  12,  13,  20,  30,  321

Schmalz,  323

Schoolmen,  70,  71,  171

Schopenhauer,  267,  322

Schultze,  323

Schulz,  257

Schulze,  Ernst,  320

Schwenckfeld,  172,  173

Scolion,  152

Scotland,  257

Scriptures,  318

Selle,  320

Selymbrians,  152

Sensor mm  commune^  132

Shaftesbury,  260

Sidon,  157

Simmias,  40

Simplicius,  120,  152,  157

Skepsis,  79

Socrates,  245,  255,  316,  326;  modern
writers'  accounts  of,  9-12  ;  testimony
of  Xenophon,  Plato  and  Aristotle,  13-
14  ;  judgment  of  physics  and  sophistic,
16-26;  "Know  thyself,"  26-29;
science  and  morals,  30-34  ;  method  :


maieutics  and  irony ;  definition  and
induction,  self-  possession  and  love  ;
refutation,  35-46  ;  teleology  and  moral
theology ;  virtue  and  the  science  of
good  ;  <ro(pta  the  virtue  par  excellence,
49-65  ;  "Virtue  is  one  and  can  be
taught,"  fj.d6r]ffit  and  fj.e\frri,  66-67  5
"  moral  science  ":  the  central  fact  of
his  teaching  ;  science  does  not  attain  to
things  divine  ;  belief  in  an  Apollonian
mission ;  philosopher  and  man  of
action  alike,  68  -  70  5  "  The  only
science  is  that  of  the  general  " ;  the
Nicomachean  Ethics  ;  influence  on
modern  philosophy,  71-73

Socratics,  70

ffcxpla.,  ix

Sophists,  21,  22,  23,  25,  29,  51-55,  61,
66,  245

Sorbonne,  160

Spencer,  325

Spinoza,  231,  234,  235,  321

Stadler,  323

Stageira,  75

State,  305,  306,  307,  313,  315,  319

Stoics,  157,  252,  253

Strabo,  79

Strasbourg,  324

Strato,  156

Sucht,  1 86

Suidas,  75

Sweden,  241,  244

Swedenborg,  267,  274

Sylla,  79

Syracuse,  75

Tarentum,  156

Tauler,  170,  173

Thales,  89,  122

Themistius,  157

Theodoric  of  Freiburg,  160

Theodorus,  146

Theodota,  65

Theophrastus,  79,  156

Theosophist,  169,  184,  231

Theosophy,  172,  173,  182

Theseus,  41

Thomas,  Saint,  241

Thomists,  170

Thrasymachus,  146

Tiedemann,  320

rl  tffrl,  10

Tisias,  146

Traite  des  Passions,  248,  251,  252

Trinity,  189,  230

Ulysses,  35
Ungrund,  183
University  of  France,  160


336


STUDIES  IN  PHILOSOPHY


Vacuum,  115

Vanini,  161

Vedas,  326

Victor  Hugo,  quoted,  vi

Virgin,  the  Eternal,  174,  175,  189,  219,

222

Voltaire,  3

Von  Baader,  Franz,  169

Von  Nettesheim,  Agrippa,  172

Walther,  Dr.,  170
Weigel,  Valentin,  172,  173
Weishaupt,  320


Wille,  1 86

Windelband,  255,  323
Wolf,  258,  272,  300
Wundt,  255

Xanthippe,  65
Xenocrates,  76
Xenophon,  12,  13,  33,  40

Zachariae,  323

Zeller,  9,  II,  20,  22,  30,  36,  54,  80,  83,

322
Zeno,  241


THE END


Printed  by  R.  &  R.  CLARK,  LIMITED,  Edinburgh


By Dr. F. C. S. SCHILLER

HUMANISM. Philosophical  Essays. 8vo. 8s.  6d.  net.
STUDIES  IN HUMANISM. 8vo. los.  net.

RIDDLES  OF  THE  SPHINX.  A  Study  in  the
Philosophy  of  Humanism.  New  and  Revised  Edition.
8vo.  i  os.  net.

FORMAL  LOGIC.  A  Scientific  and  Social  Problem.
8vo.  i  os.  net.


IDOLA  THEATRI  :  A  Criticism  of  Oxford  Thought
and  Thinkers  from  the  Standpoint  of  Personal  Idealism.
By  HENRY  STURT.  8vo.  xos.  net.

PERSONAL  IDEALISM.  Philosophical  Essays.  Edited
by  HENRY  STURT.  8vo.  los.  net.

THE  PRINCIPLE  OF  INDIVIDUALITY  AND
VALUE.  Being  the  Gifford  Lectures  for  1911.  By
BERNARD  BOSANQUET,  LL.D.,  D.C.L.  8vo.  los.  net.

THE  MEDIEVAL  MIND.  A  History  of  the  Develop-
ment of  Thought  and  Emotion  in  the  Middle  Ages.  By
HENRY  OSBORN  TAYLOR.  Two  vols.  8vo.  2is.net.

THE  ORIGIN  AND  DEVELOPMENT  OF  THE
MORAL  IDEAS.  By  EDWARD  WESTERMARCK,  Ph.D.
Two  vols.  8vo.  145.  net  each.

A  SHORT  HISTORY  OF  ETHICS— GREEK  AND
MODERN.  By  REGINALD  A.  P.  ROGERS,  Fellow  and
Tutor  of  Trinity  College,  Dublin.  Crown  8vo.  35.  6d.  net.

MACMILLAN  AND  CO.,  LTD.,  LONDON.


THE  IDEALISTIC  CONSTRUCTION  OF  EXPERI-
ENCE. By  Prof.  J.  B.  BAILLIE,  M.A.,  D.Phil.  8vo.
8s.  6d.  net.

THE  ORIGIN  AND  SIGNIFICANCE  OF  HEGEL'S
LOGIC.  By  Prof.  J.  B.  BAILLIE,  M.A.,  D.Phil.  8vo.
8s.  6d.  net.

THE  PHILOSOPHY  OF  GASSENDI.  By  G.  S.
BRETT.  8vo.  xos.  net.

HISTORY  OF  PHILOSOPHY.  With  Especial  Refer-
ence to  the  Formation  and  Development  of  its  Problems
and  Conceptions.  By  Dr.  W.  WINDELBAND.  Translated
by  J.  H.  TUFTS.  8vo.  1 75.  net.

HISTORY  OF  THE  PROBLEMS  OF  PHILO-
SOPHY. By  PAUL  JANET  and  GABRIEL  SEAILLES.  Trans-
lated by  ADA  MONAHAN  and  Edited  by  HENRY  JONES,  LL.D.
Two  vols.  8vo.  i  os.  net.  each.


THE SCHOOLS OF PHILOSOPHY

A  HISTORY  OF  THE  EVOLUTION  OF

PHILOSOPHICAL  THOUGHT

BY  VARIOUS  WRITERS

EDITED BY

SIR  HENRY  JONES

PROFESSOR OF MORAL PHILOSOPHY IN THE UNIVERSITY  OF GLASGOW

Ready.

THE  EVOLUTION  OF  EDUCATIONAL  THEORY.
By  Professor  JOHN  ADAMS,  M.A.,  B.Sc.,  LL.D.  8vo.
i  os.  net.

In  Preparation.

THE  HISTORY  OF  GREEK  PHILOSOPHY  FROM
THALES  TO  ARISTOTLE.  By  Professor  JOHN
BURNET,  LL.D.

THE HISTORY OF MODERN PHILOSOPHY
FROM  HOBBES  TO  REID. By  Professor  G.  F.  STOUT.
Other  -volumes  to  follow.

MACMILLAN  AND  CO.,  LTD.,  LONDON.
