Natural Law in Science and Philosophy
Émile Boutroux (Fred Rothwell, trans.) (1914)
========================================================================

PROVENANCE NOTE (Tower of Babel staging): Boutroux's De l'idée de loi naturelle (1895) — natural law in science and philosophy. Rothwell's 1914 translation.

========================================================================

it£i  CULpILIUUJIii


NATURAL LAW IN SCIENCE  AND
PHILOSOPHY


NATURAL  LAW

IN

SCIENCE  AND  PHILOSOPHY


By

EMILE BOUTROUX

(Member  of  the  Academy)


Authorized  Translation  by
FRED ROTHWELL


NEW  YORK
THE  MACMILLAN COMPANY

1914


PREFACE BY THE AUTHOR

MORE  than  twenty  years  have  elapsed
since  these  lessons  were  delivered
at  the  Sorbonne.  In  the  interval,  science
has  advanced  with  giant  strides  ;  and  there
can  be  no  doubt  but  that  I  should  have  to
examine  many  a  scientifico-philosophical  theory
of  which  this  work  makes  no  mention,  were
I  now  to  recommence  the  course  I  then
gave.  All  the  same,  I  do  not  think  that
the  problem  raised  in  my  classes  during  the
session  1892-3  has  been  solved  or  that  it
has  ceased  to  elicit  the  keenest  interest.  Our
object  is  to  discover  whether  the  idea  of
natural  law  is  the  same  for  the  scientist  as  it  is
for  the  philosopher.

Science  proposes  to  explain  things  scien
tifically.  And,  in  these  days  more  espe
cially,  the  concept  of  scientific  explanation
has  received  precise  definition.  It  comprises
neither  the  knowledge  of  the  intrinsic  nature
of  things,  nor  that  of  their  origin  or  value.

5


NATURAL  LAW  IN  SCIENCE  AND  PHILOSOPHY

It  implies  the  possibility  of  extracting,
from  the  given  reality,  sensibly  constant
rapports,  and  it  declares  that  such  a  rap
port  is  explained,  when  it  has  been  possible
to  reduce  it  to  some  other  rapport  already
known  and  recognized  as  permanent  and
general.  Science  is  reduction.  Mathematics
is  its  ideal,  its  form  par  excellence,  for  it  is  in
mathematics  that  assimilation,  identifica
tion,  is  most  perfectly  realized.  The  uni
verse,  scientifically  explained,  would  be  a
certain  formula,  one  and  eternal,  regarded
as  the  equivalent  of  the  entire  diversity  and
movement  of  things.

The  philosopher  asks  himself  whether
natural  law  as  assumed  by  science,  wholly
coincides  with  law  as  really  existing  in  nature  ;
whether  science  and  reality  are  so  alike
that  science  may  be  regarded  as  exhaust
ing  everything  intelligible  and  true  that
the  real  contains.

The  theory  upheld  in  the  present  work
is  that  no  absolute  coincidence  exists  be
tween  the  laws  of  nature  as  science  assumes
them  to  be,  and  the  laws  of  nature  as  they
really  are.  The  former  may  be  compared
to  laws  proclaimed  by  a  legislator  and  im-

6


PREFACE BY  THE  AUTHOR

posed  a  priori  upon  reality.  The  latter  are
harmonies  towards  which  we  ascertain  that
the  actions  of  different  beings  really  tend.
The  former  are  abstract  rapports,  the
elements  of  which  are  themselves  rapports;
the  latter  are  concrete  rapports,  the  terms
of  which  are  real  subjects,  true  beings.

Now,  the  doctrine  here  set  forth  consists
in  regarding  scientific  intelligibility  as  the
most  objective  form,  but  not  as  the  sole
type,  of  intelligibility.  Science  acquires
that  perfection  which  characterizes  it,  by
setting  aside,  sending  about  their  business,
as  Plato  would  say  (e'«  ^a>LPeLV\  indivi
duals,  natural  beings.  The  philosophy  with
which  our  doctrine  is  connected  admits
that  between  individuals  themselves,  be
tween  concrete  realities  as  such,  there  may
be  found  relations  which,  though  they  can
not  be  reduced  to  mathematical  relations,
nevertheless  exhibit  a  certain  order  which
satisfies  the  intelligence.  There  exist  in
telligible  relations  other  than  those  of  re-
ducibility  and  identity :  it  is  the  purpose
of  philosophy  to  reveal  and  define  such
relations.  In  Plato,  for  instance,  we  have
the  commonalty,  or  mutual  participation

7


NATURAL  LAW  IN  SCIENCE  AND  PHILOSOPHY


;  in  Aristotle,  finality  ;  in  Des
cartes,  evident  connexion  ;  in  Leibnitz,  har
mony  ;  and  in  Hegel,  rational  synthesis.
Thus,  philosophy  both  widens  and  renders
flexible  —  without  destroying  —  the  concept  of
intelligibility.

The  present  doctrine  regards  as  both  con
tingent  and  intelligible  those  relations  be
tween  beings  that  it  discovers  in  the
relations  between  relations  ;  it  sees  in  the
mechanically  necessary  rapports  implied  by
science,  an  abstraction,  that  consists  in
isolating  the  relations  from  their  living  sub
jects,  and  looking  upon  them  as  self  -sufficient.
In  the  reality  of  things,  the  rigid,  eternal,
mathematical  order,  which  science  considers
from  its  own  point  of  view,  serves  to  obscure
an  order  that  is  invisible,  supple  and  un
trammelled,  and  therefore  all  the  more
beautiful  :

lri  d<pavri$ (paveprjs KpeiTTWi-  (Heraclitus).

EMILE  BOUTROUX.


Contents

PAGE

PREFACE  BY  THE  AUTHOR 5

I
THE  PROBLEM  OF  THE  MEANING  OF  NATURAL

LAWS ....  .11

II
THE  LOGICAL  LAWS  .  .21

III

THE  MATHEMATICAL  LAWS .... 35

IV

THE  MECHANICAL  LAWS .  .46

V
THE  MECHANICAL  LAWS  (continued] .  .61

VI

THE  PHYSICAL  LAWS  . 79

VII

THE  CHEMICAL  LAWS  . • 94

VIII

THE  BIOLOGICAL  LAWS .  . 109

9


CONTENTS

PAGE
IX

THE  BIOLOGICAL  LAWS  (continued) . . . 127

X

THE  BIOLOGICAL  LAWS  (continuation  and  end) . 143

XI
THE  PSYCHOLOGICAL  LAWS .... 158

XII

THE  PSYCHOLOGICAL  LAWS  (continuation  and  end) 175

XIII
THE  SOCIOLOGICAL  LAWS 188

XIV
CONCLUSION 204


10


NATURAL  LAW  IN
SCIENCE  AND PHILOSOPHY


THE  PROBLEM OF  THE  MEAN
ING OF NATURAL LAWS

IT  is  our  purpose  to  study  the  idea  of
natural  law  as  presented  in  modern
times,  to  interpret  it  philosophically  and
determine  its  metaphysical  and  moral  signi
fication.  In  order  to  state  the  problem
with  the  requisite  precision,  we  shall  rely
on  the  results  of  the  speculations  of  the
seventeenth  and  eighteenth  centuries, — specu
lations  closely  connected  with  the  develop
ment  of  modern  science.

Bacon  and  Descartes,  the  founders  of
modern  philosophy,  regarded  science  as
having,  for  its  object,  to  arrive  at  laws  which
should  possess  the  dual  characteristic  of


NATURAL  LAW  IN  SCIENCE  AND  PHILOSOPHY

universality  and  reality.  It  was  the  ambi
tion  of  both,  in  spite  of  appearances  which
are  often  wrongly  interpreted,  to  supersede
the  ancient  point  of  view,  in  accordance
with  which,  laws  were  only  general  and
ideal,  to  rise  beyond  the  probable  and  the
possible,  and  to  obtain  a  sure  knowledge
of  the  real.  But  though  their  object  is
identical,  their  methods  of  attaining  it  are
different :  Bacon  takes  the  path  of  empiri
cism  ;  Descartes  that  of  rationalism.

The  Cartesians  consider  that  it  is  possible
to  find  the  principles  of  universal  and  real
laws  in  certain  mental  operations,  which
have  not  yet  been  sufficiently  investigated.
Descartes  analyses  the  matter  immediately
given,  i.e.  ideas,  and  in  them  finds  elements
the  specific  characteristic  of  which  is  that  they
are  obvious  when  compared  with  intellectual
intuition.  These  elements,  according  to  him,
are  the  principles  sought  after.  And,  indeed,
they  seem  calculated  to  supply  universal
laws ;  but  as  it  is  from  the  mind  that  they
have  been  drawn,  will  they  allow  of  real
laws  being  discovered  ?  This  is  the  pro
blem  with  which  Descartes  is  immediately
confronted.  In  his  Cogito,  ergo  sum,  what

12


PROBLEM  OF  THE  MEANING  OF  NATURAL  LAWS

is  the  meaning  of  ergo  ?  Even  now  it  is
no  easy  matter  to  connect  personal  exis
tence  with  the  Cogito  ?  But  the  existence
of  God,  and  in  particular  of  things  corporeal,
will  call  for  a  real  deduction,  one  of  ever
increasing  complexity.  After  Descartes,  Male-
branche  considers  it  necessary  to  distin
guish  the  laws  of  action  or  of  existence
from  those  of  essence ;  and  so  he  con
ceives  his  theory  of  occasional  causes.
Spinoza  proves  that  a  similar  distinction
may  be  drawn  between  internal  and  exter
nal  causality ;  he  endeavours  to  connect  the
laws  of  existence  with  those  of  essence.
According  to  Leibnitz,  these  various  systems
cannot  supersede  possibility.  It  is  indis
pensable  that  a  new  principle,  equally  abso
lute,  the  principle  of  sufficient  reason,  be
added  to  that  of  contradiction,  the  only
one  with  which  they  are  acquainted.  This
will  be  the  distinctive  principle  of  the  real.
Again,  deep  within  existing  things,  separa
tions  become  marked.  Everything  is  not
reducible  to  mathematical  order ;  substances
govern  it;  and  in  this  higher  order,  we
must  consider,  on  the  one  hand,  physics,
the  domain  of  efficient  causes,  and  on  the

13


NATURAL  LAW  IN  SCIENCE  AND  PHILOSOPHY

other  hand,  ethics,  the  domain  of  final  causes.
In  the  case  of  Kant,  these  distinctions  be
come  separations,  which,  to  us,  are  radical  and
absolute.  Again  deep  within  the  real  world  and
coming  between  the  physical  and  the  moral
laws,  he  sets  up  the  biological  laws,  which,
to  our  mind,  at  all  events,  are  incapable  of
being  reduced  to  the  former,  and  presuppose
finality.  And  lastly,  Schelling  and  Hegel
regard  the  laws  of  essence  and  of  existence
as  inadequate  :  to  account  for  the  real,  we
must  posit  laws  of  development,  deter
mine  a  process  which  precedes  all  essence
and  all  existence  alike,  and  is  the  repro
duction,  in  thought,  of  the  very  creation  of
things.

Thus,  rationalistic  philosophy,  starting  with
unity,  has  found  itself  compelled  to  recog
nize  different  types  of  laws.  It  has  been
confronted  with  experience,  and,  when  its
principles  have  been  compared  with  facts,
has  been  forced  to  enlarge  its  scope.
Truth  to  tell,  rationalistic  philosophy  ex
pected  to  reduce  this  diversity  and  make
it  intelligible.  Only  apparently,  however,
and  by  continually  modifying  the  con
cept  of  intelligibility,  did  it  effect  this.


PROBLEM  OF  THE  MEANING  OF  NATURAL  LAWS

Descartes,  by  his  intuition,  actually  modifies
the  idea  of  intellectualism  which  the  ancients
had  set  up.  Spinoza  places  in  the  fore
ground  a  new  notion,  that  of  the  infinite,
which  the  ancients  regarded  as  the  very
essence  of  unintelligibility.  Leibnitz  boldly
affirms  the  actual  realization  of  this  infinite.
Kant  effects  a  revolution  in  the  doctrine  of
intelligibility  by  recognizing  two  kinds  of
logic :  the  old  logic  of  Aristotle,  which  is
purely  formal  and  incapable  of  establishing
anything ;  and  transcendental  logic,  which
proceeds  by  synthetic  judgments  d  priori.
Finally,  Schelling  and  Hegel,  who  even
affirm  the  identity  of  contradictories,  openly
reject  the  standpoint  of  the  old  logic.  The
latter,  then,  has  been  regarded  as  inade
quate  to  explain  existence,  and  intellectualism
has  almost  been  compelled  to  abrogate  it
entirely,  in  attaining  to  a  comprehension
of  the  real.

But,  say  the  empiricists,  what  is  the  use
of  troubling  about  the  d  priori  principles
of  intellectualism  ?  There  is  no  need  to  de
part  from  nature  in  order  to  understand  her.
Observation  and  induction,  if  properly  ap
plied,  are  sufficient  to  realize  the  modern

15


NATURAL  LAW  IN  SCIENCE  AND  PHILOSOPHY

idea  of  science.  Still,  a  difficulty  here  arises,
the  very  opposite  of  that  which  the  rational
ists  encountered.  In  the  case  of  Descartes,
the  problem  was  to  link  on  the  real  to
the  universal ;  the  problem  for  Bacon  is  to
link  on  the  universal  to  the  real.  The
latter  philosopher,  indeed,  looks  upon  the
mind  as  absolutely  passive ;  or  rather,  in
order  to  establish  science,  the  mind  must
make  itself  truly  passive,  a  veritable  tabula
rasa  on  which  the  events  of  the  outer
world  are  impressed.  Bacon,  however,  be
sides  being  still  embarrassed  by  the  scholastic
conception  of  quality,  rather  expresses  a
desideratum  than  demonstrates  the  possi
bility  of  realizing  valid  inductions.  Locke
clearly  sees  that  the  thing  which  needs
explanation  is  the  connexion  of  ideas ;  he
maintains  that  we  connect  our  ideas  by
means  of  faculties  innate  within  ourselves.
Mere  passiveness  is  inadequate  as  an  ex
planation  :  experience  traces  innumerable
characters  on  a  tabula  rasa  ;  but  the  soul,  of
itself,  unites  together  the  simple  ideas  with
which  this  external  influence  supplies  it.
Still,  of  what  worth  are  laws  thus  created
by  human  faculties  ?  What  sort  of  universality

16


PROBLEM  OF  THE  MEANING  OF  NATURAL  LAWS

can  they  claim  ?  Hume  comes  along  and
explains  that  we  have,  deep  within  our
selves,  the  power  to  join  together  the  ideas
of  phenomena  in  relations  of  resemblance,
contiguity  and  causality.  As  regards  causa
lity,  which,  of  itself,  would  never  obtrude
upon  us,  habit  replaces  the  intuition  lacking,
makes  association  practically  indissoluble,
and  so  inclines  us  to  look  upon  the  laws  of
nature  as  really  universal  and  necessary.

Therefore,  just  as  intellectualism,  in  order
to  comprehend  reality,  has  had  to  extend  and
perhaps  to  violate  its  principle,  so  also  em
piricism,  to  attain  to  universality,  has  found
itself  compelled  to  deviate  from  its  original
direction,  either  by  recognizing,  with  Locke,
mental  faculties  that  cannot  be  reduced
to  experience,  or,  as  Hume  does,  regard
ing  external  laws  as  the  result  of  internal
laws,  of  innate  potencies.

Thus  it  would  appear  very  difficult  for  the
human  mind  to  conceive  the  laws  of  nature
as  being  both  universal  and  real  at  the  same
time.  When  we  explain  to  ourselves  univer
sality,  reality  slips  out  of  our  grasp,  and  vice
versa.  Must  we  then  conjoin  rationalism
and  empiricism,  purely  and  simply  ?  The

17  B


NATURAL  LAW  IN  SCIENCE  AND  PHILOSOPHY

conjunction  of  these  two  opposite  points  of
view  will  give  only  a  juxtaposition,  not  a
synthesis.  Now,  what  to  philosophy  was
only  an  ideal  and  a  problem,  has  been
realized  by  science,  which  has  succeeded  in
effecting  a  union  between  mathematics  and
experience,  and  supplying  laws  that  are
both  concrete  and  intelligible.  Its  method
has  been  to  try  to  discover  an  appropriate
positive  principle  for  each  order  of  realities.
Newton  supplied  the  type  of  scientific  ex
planation  by  basing  celestial  mechanics  on
the  law  of  gravitation,  which  is  radically
distinct  from  purely  geometrical  laws.  The
sciences  have  thus  been  emancipated,  one
after  the  other ;  they  have  been  set  up  as  auto
nomous,  with  the  aid  of  special  principles
regarded  as  irreducible ;  for  instance,  a
distinction  has  been  made  between  physi
cal  principles  and  those  that  are  purely
mechanical,  between  chemistry  and  physics,
between  vital  properties  and  physical  and
chemical  properties.  No  doubt  attempts
are  made  to  liken  every  science,  mutatis
mutandis,  to  the  mathematical  sciences  ;
but  certain  sciences  are  no  longer  looked
upon  as  a  mere  extension  of  the  rest ;  the

18


PROBLEM  OF  THE  MEANING  OF  NATURAL  LAWS

special sciences are allowed to have their
own  specific  principles.

Therefore,  in  order  to  study  the  idea  of
natural  law,  we  must  start  with  the  various
sciences,  at  the  same  time  appealing  to
philosophy  for  hints  as  to  the  manner  of
interpreting  their  principles  and  results.  We
will  take  the  laws  just  as  the  sciences  offer
them,  divided  into  distinct  groups,  study
each  group  separately  and  ask  ourselves
questions  regarding  each  of  them  :

1.  Their  nature. — How far and in what
sense  are  these  laws  intelligible  ? Are  there
not  differences  in  generality  and  complexity,
or  does  the  appearance  of  a  new  group  really
mark the introduction of a new  principle
which  is  philosophically  irreducible  ?

2.  Their objectivity. — Do we regard  these
laws  as  forming  the  substance  of  things,  or
do they govern only the mode in which
phenomena appear  ? Are they true abso
lutely  or  only  relatively  ? Are  they  elements
or merely symbols of reality  ?

3.  Their meaning. — Does determination
really  exist  in  nature,  or  does  it  simply  represent
the  way  in  which  we must  connect  things
in  order  to  make  of  them  objects  of  thought  ?


NATURAL  LAW  IN  SCIENCE  AND  PHILOSOPHY

In  this  way,  we  shall  attempt  to  answer,  from
the  present-day  standpoint,  the  old  question
as  to  whether  there  are  things  that  depend
on  ourselves,  whether  we  are  really  capable  of
acting,  or  whether  action  is  pure  illusion.


II

THE LOGICAL LAWS

THE  logical  laws  are  those  that  govern
all  scientific  research.  By  logical  laws
we  usually  mean  those  of  syllogistic  logic,
as  formulated  by  Aristotle  ;  but  there  are
logical  laws  of  a  still  more  general  nature,
to  wit,  the  three  principles  of  identity,  con
tradiction  and  excluded  middle.

The  principle  of  identity  may  be  expressed
thus :  A  is  A .  I  do  not  say  Being,  but
simply  A,  i.e.  anything  whatsoever  that  is
capable  of  being  conceived  ;  nor  do  I  say
A  =  A,  for  the  sign  =  is  a  mathematical
sign,  actually  limiting  the  very  relation
which  has  to  be  established.  The  prin
ciple  of  identity,  thus  defined,  represents  the
type  of  possibility.  The  principle  of  contra
diction,  on  the  other  hand,  represents  the
type  of  the  false,  of  logical  impossibility  :
its  expression  is  A  is  not- A.  This  affirma-

21


NATURAL  LAW  IN  SCIENCE  AND  PHILOSOPHY

tion  is  impossible,  i.e.  A  and  not- A  cannot  be
presented  or  posited  together.  The  prin
ciple  of  excluded  middle  means  that  there  is
no  middle  term  between  A  and  not- A.  It
may  be  called  the  principle  of  indirect  possi
bility,  for  the  new  element  in  what  it  enun
ciates  is  that  if  not-A  is  excluded,  A  is
posited.  Two  negatives  make  an  affirmative :
such  is  the  essence  of  this  latter  principle.
Suppose  there  is  a  middle  term  between  A
and  not-A,  this  middle  term  will  be  both
not-A  and  not-not-A.  Now,  if  not-not-A  =  A,
the  middle  term  will  be  both  not- A  and  A,
which  lands  us  in  a  contradiction.  Just
as  the  second  principle  prevents  two  contra
dictories  from  being  posited  together,  so  the
third  prevents  them  from  being  abolished
together.

These  strictly  logical  laws  are  intelligi
bility  itself,  they  appear  as  the  type  of  evi
dence  ;  but,  of  themselves  alone,  they  do  not
constitute  the  whole  of  logic.  Ordinary,
so-called  syllogistic,  logic,  is  not  content
with  these  three  principles.  Consider  the
principle  of  contradiction  as  formulated  by
Aristotle ;  it  contains  elements  which,  mani
festly,  are  not  included  in  the  strictly  logi-

22


THE  LOGICAL  LAWS

cal  laws.  "It  is  impossible  for  one  and  the
same  thing  to  belong  and  not  to  belong  to
one  and  the  same  subject  at  the  same  time
and  in  the  same  connexion."  Pure  logic
does  not  say  of  what  nature  A  must  be ;
whereas  in  the  case  of  Aristotelian  logic,
A  is  not  anything  whatsoever  :  it  is  concept,
i.e.  a  determinate  thing.  Besides,  the  ex
pressions  :  "  at  the  same  time  and  in  the  same
connexion/'  are  not  found  in  the  formulae
of  pure  logic,  From  this  standpoint,  let  us
examine  concept,  the  arrangement  of  con
cepts  into  propositions  and  the  arrangement
of  propositions  into  syllogisms.

What  is  concept  ?  It  is  not  absolute
unity,  for,  in  order  to  explain  things,  it  must
involve  multiplicity.  Nor  is  it  absolute  mul
tiplicity,  for  it  reduces  diversity  to  unity.
It  thus  represents  a  certain  conjunction  of
elements  of  a  certain  nature,  a  relation  not
merely  of  homogeneity  but  of  heterogene
ity,  at  least  relative,  between  modes  of
being.

Nor  can  proposition,  any  more  than  con
cept,  be  strictly  conformable  to  the  formula
A  is  A.  A  is  A  teaches  us  nothing.  Now,
a  proposition  must  always  teach  some-

23


NATURAL  LAW  IN  SCIENCE  AND  PHILOSOPHY

thing,  and  thus  admit  of  the  formula  A  is  B.

And,  lastly,  the  reasoning  which  links
propositions  to  one  another  is  not  an  exact
identity,  either ;  it  is  to  propositions  what
propositions  are  to  concept.  Thus,  we  have
not  simply  deduced,  from  the  laws  of  pure
logic,  matter  appropriate  to  the  application
of  these  laws  ;  we  have  composed  the  syllo
gism  with  the  aid  of  the  laws  of  pure  logic
and  of  a  superadded  matter.

Does  this  matter,  at  all  events,  exactly
harmonize  with  the  logical  form  supplied
by  the  three  fundamental  principles  ?  Can
the  pure  logical  form  be  applied  to  it  with
out  being  weakened.  The  history  of  philo
sophy  teaches  us  that  Aristotelian  logic
has  had  many  adversaries.  The  English
school,  for  instance,  regards  it  as  a  vain
sport  of  the  mind,  and  intellectualist  philo
sophers,  such  as  Herbart,  make  ineffectual
attempts  to  establish  logically  the  legitimacy
of  the  idea  of  connexion.  In  syllogistic  logic,
there  is  something  not  only  new,  but  also
strange,  when  compared  with  pure  logic.

Concept,  in  fact,  must  express  a  unity  in
volving  a  multiplicity.  But  then,  what  idea
are  we  to  form  of  this  conjunction  ?  If  we

24


THE  LOGICAL  LAWS

say  that  multiplicity  is  potentially  in  con
cept,  we  introduce  an  element  of  obscurity.
If  we  say  that  concept  contains  its  parts
as  a  vase  contains  whatever  is  put  into  it,
we  are  the  victims  of  a  physical  conception,
we  pre-suppose  the  confused  idea  of  space.
Frequently  we  think  we  form  a  clear  idea  of
space  because  we  reduce  it  to  a  collection
of  elements.  But,  when  unity  has  vanished,
concept  is  non-existent,  and  to  bring  reason
ing  to  bear  on  facts  themselves,  as  immediate
matter,  would  imply  the  suppression  of  logic
altogether.

And  so  judgment  contains  something
obscure.  What  is  the  connexion  it  sets  up
between  subject  and  predicate  ?  Is  it  a
relation  of  determination  ?  For  instance,
does  the  judgment  :  Paid  is  a  man  mean
that  mankind  is  matter  of  which  Paul  is  a
specification  ?  To  understand  judgment  in
this  fashion  is  to  relapse  into  the  obscure
metaphysical  notions  of  potency  and  act,
form  and  matter.  Will  it  be  urged  that  the
predicate  is  analytically  drawn  out  of  the
subject  ?  But  that  is  only  a  sensible  image,
obscure  to  the  understanding.

Finally,  syllogism  also  lends  itself  to  objec-
25


NATURAL  LAW  IN  SCIENCE  AND  PHILOSOPHY

tions  that  have  never  been  clearly  refuted  :
either  tautology  or  the  vicious  circle  is  the
danger  it  has  to  face.  All  men  are  mortal:
this  major  premise  implies  the  conclusion.
Every  man  is  mortal :  this  expression,  indeed,
does  away  with  the  vicious  circle  ;  but  the
word  Every  (Touf),  whether  expressing  a
metaphysical  essence  or  indicating  the  exist
ence  of  a  genus,  raises  insoluble  difficulties.
Speaking  generally,  syllogistic  logic  pre
supposes  the  distinction  between  the  implicit
and  the  explicit,  a  distinction  which  cannot
be  cleared  up.

Not  only,  then,  do  the  laws  of  syllogistic
logic  contain  something  more  than  do  the
laws  of  pure  logic,  they  also  deviate  from
them,  to  some  extent.

What,  now,  is  the  origin  of  Aristotelian  logic?
This  origin  is  not  wholly  a  priori,  since  it
cannot  be  resolved  exactly  into  pure  logic.
Must  we  say,  along  with  the  empiricists,  that
it  is  wholly  d  posteriori  ?  To  maintain  this
doctrine  is  to  affirm  that,  strictly  speaking,
there  are  no  syllogistic  laws,  but  only  special
laws  applicable  to  future  events,  in  so  far  as
they  are  demonstrated  by  experience  and
induction.  Such  was  the  opinion  of  Stuart

26


THE LOGICAL  LAWS

Mill.  Quite  logically  Herbert  Spencer  main
tained  that  in  reality  there  were  only  reasonings
by  analogy,  and  no  syllogisms  at  all.  And  yet,
the  answer  might  be  urged,  this  syllogistic  ex
actly  represents  the  reasoning  process  of  reflec
tive  consciousness.  Indeed,we  cannot  do  with
out  it ;  whatever  we  do,  it  is  implied  in  every
demonstration  which  carries  conviction  with
it.  It  has  not  the  full  evidence  of  pure  logic,
though  it  shares  therein  ;  consequently,  it  is
not  wholly  a  posteriori  but  seems  rather  a
blend  of  d  priori  and  a  posteriori.  The  human
mind,  we  may  say,  bears  within  itself  the
principles  of  pure  logic ;  but  since  the  matter
offered  to  it  does  not  seem  to  conform  ex
actly  with  these  principles,  it  endeavours
to  adapt  logic  to  things  so  as  to  interpret  the
latter  in  a  way  that  approaches  perfect  intelli
gibility  as  nearly  as  possible.  Syllogistic
logic  may  therefore  be  regarded  as  a  method,
an  ensemble  of  symbols  by  which  the  mind
is  rendered  capable  of  thinking  things,  a
mould  into  which  it  will  introduce  reality
to  make  it  intelligible.  It  is  in  this  way
that  we  would  answer  the  question  of  the
nature  and  degree  of  intelligibility  of  the
logical  laws.

27


NATURAL  LAW  IN  SCIENCE  AND  PHILOSOPHY

At  first  sight,  it  may  appear  useless  to
question  the  objectivity  of  these  laws,  for
there  is  nothing  that  seems  more  certain,  more
beyond  all  dispute,  than  this  objectivity.
And  yet  logic  has  been  attacked  quite  as
frequently  as  it  has  been  extolled.  No  doubt
it  is  a  grave  reproach  against  a  person  to  say
that  he  is  not  logical ;  as  a  rule,  we  admire
those  who  are  capable  of  organizing  a  vast
mass  of  material  after  the  type  of  the  principles
of  identity  and  contradiction.  But  then,  at
times,  we  blame  those  who  are  looked  upon
as  stubbornly  logical  and  systematical :
every  system,  it  is  alleged,  is  artificial ;  to
try  to  find  some  shade  of  difference  even
at  the  risk  of  encountering  contradiction,
is  the  way  to  grasp  reality.  This  diver
gence  of  opinions  seems  as  though  it  might
be  explained  by  the  distinction  established
above.  Pure  logical  laws  are  indisputable,
but  they  concern  not  at  all — or  but  very
slightly — the  inner  nature  of  things ;  the
laws  of  syllogistic  go  deeper  into  the  nature  of
things,  but  a  certain  amount  of  discretion
must  be  used  in  applying  them.

The  former  we  regard  as  absolutely  neces
sary  :  it  does  not  lie  within  our  power  to

28


THE  LOGICAL  LAWS

conceive  of  them  as  aught  but  purely  sub
jective  and  unrealized  by  nature  ;  we  do  not
even  see  how  experience  could  contradict
them,  since  all  they  do  is  to  declare  that  if
something  is,  it  is.  But  that  which  constitutes
their  strength  also  constitutes  their  weakness  :
they  leave  indeterminate  the  very  things  to
which  they  apply.  When  I  say,  A  is  A,  I
lay  no  prohibition  upon  myself  from  implying
that  A,  in  itself,  is  devoid  of  identity.  We
have  therefore  to  discover  whether  the  very
nature  of  things  also  is  in  conformity  with
these  principles.  The  Eleatics  maintained
that  being,  in  effect,  expresses  identity,
and  is  exempt  from  contradiction,  but  over
against  such  a  system  the  history  of  philo
sophy  sets  that  of  Hegel,  who,  on  the  other
hand,  regards  contradiction  and  necessary
strife  as  in  the  inmost  nature  of  things.
There  is  no  difference  between  these  two
systems,  as  regards  the  laws  of  pure  logic.
They  both  conform  to  these  laws.  For
Hegel  did  not  say  that,  in  stating  a  proposi
tion,  you  could  also  state  the  contradictory
proposition.  He  thought  that  if,  in  the
formula  A  is  A,  we  replace  A  by  its  real
value,  we  have,  from  the  very  outset,  being

29


NATURAL  LAW  IN  SCIENCE  AND  PHILOSOPHY

identical  with  non-being.  Which  is  the  true
doctrine,  the  Eleatic  or  that  of  Hegel  ?
Neither  of  them,  probably.  At  all  events,  it
is  not  the  consideration  of  logical  laws  in
themselves,  but  only  the  consideration  of  the
concrete  laws  of  nature,  that  can  teach  us
to  what  extent  real  beings  essentially  partici
pate  in  identity  and  contradiction.

It  is  less  hazardous  and  more  customary
to  regard  the  laws  of  syllogistic  as  the  expres
sion  of  the  universal  conditions  to  which
the  laws  of  nature  are  subject.  According
to  this  view,  dogmatists  are  inclined  to
assimilate  logic  to  reality.  They  base  their
opinion  on  what  they  call  the  natural  harmony
between  thought  and  things,  a  principle
they  look  upon  as  necessary  and  innate.
This  principle,  however,  is  nothing  but  a
wish,  a  desire,  a  mere  postulate.  Moreover,
even  if  it  were  certain,  it  would  not  guarantee
the  objectivity  of  syllogistic  logic,  if  this
latter,  as  we  have  endeavoured  to  show,  is
not  thought  itself  but  rather  a  misrepresenta
tion  of  the  principles  of  thought  resulting
precisely  from  the  opposition  between  thought
and  things.

Must  we  then  altogether  renounce  the
30


THE LOGICAL  LAWS

objectivity  of  this  logic,  and,  with  the  empiri
cists,  maintain  that  there  are  only  facts,
and  that  these  facts  create  within  us  habits,
imperious  enough,  no  doubt,  but  purely
subjective  ?  It  would  appear  that  the  logical
laws  cannot  be  regarded  as  derived  exclusively
from  experience :  this  latter  presents  no
groupings  analogous  to  concepts,  and  concept
is  not  a  tardy  acquisition  of  the  mind.  In  spite
of  a  prejudice  handed  down  to  us  from  Locke,
it  is  with  general  concepts  that  the  child  begins,
and  it  is  precisely  the  function  of  experience
to  contradict  and  break  them  up.  Concept,
then,  originates  in  the  mind.  No  doubt  it
is  formed  on  the  occasion  of  experience  and
with  materials  borrowed  from  experience,
but  it  is  the  mind  that  forms  it.  Now,  it  is
beyond  dispute  that  our  reasonings  are  sus
ceptible  of  being  in  harmony  with  facts  ;
when  they  are  out  of  harmony,  we  do  not
consider  that  reasoning  is  a  vicious  instru
ment,  but  rather  that  we  have  insufficient
data,  that  our  field  of  operations  is  too  limited.
Consequently,  things  possess  relations  which,
in  a  measure,  correspond  to  syllogistic  con
catenation.  In  nature,  there  is  something
resembling  classes  of  beings  or  species,  and

3*


NATURAL  LAW  IN  SCIENCE  AND  PHILOSOPHY

something  resembling  classes  of  facts  or  laws.
Still,  we  cannot  know,  d  priori,  how  far  this
condition  is  realized  ;  nothing  but  the  develop
ment  of  science  can  tell  us  that.  Perhaps  the
following  is  all  we  can  conjecture  a  priori.
Man,  to  all  appearance,  is  not  a  monster  in
nature ;  the  intelligence  that  characterizes
him  must  bear  some  relation  to  the  nature
of  beings  in  general.  Therefore,  at  the  root
of  things,  there  must  be,  if  not  an  intelligence
similar  to  the  human,  at  all  events  properties
and  dispositions  that  bear  some  analogy  with
this  intelligence.  It  is  reasonable  to  admit
in  nature  a  sort  of  tendency  towards  intelligi
bility.  If  this  be  the  case,  reasoning  repre
sents  a  mode  of  interpretation,  of  interroga
tion  which  may  legitimately  be  employed
in  dealing  with  nature.

What,  now,  is  the  signification  of  the  logical
laws  ?  Logic,  certainly,  is  the  most  perfect
type  of  absolute  necessity,  but  it  offers  a
minimum  of  objectivity.  It  governs  the
surface  of  things  but  does  not  determine
their  nature  ;  it  remains  true,  whatever  be
that  nature.  The  necessity  it  implies  will  be
safeguarded,  even  if  beings  are  to  be  considered
as  endowed  with  spontaneity,  even  if  beings

32


THE  LOGICAL  LAWS

are  free.  It  is  an  absolute  master,  though
infinitely  remote  from  ourselves;  an  insur
mountable  barrier,  though  between  it  and
ourselves  there  is  more  space  than  we  shall
ever  be  able  to  compass.

If  syllogism  is,  in  reality,  but  a  symbol
invented  by  the  human  mind,  it  cannot  be
regarded  as  self-evident  that  the  necessity,
proper  to  it,  is,  in  effect,  found  realized  in
things.  This  necessity  is  the  relationship
implied  in  the  notions  of  species  and  genus.
The  special  sciences  alone  will  inform  us  if
there  are  genera  and  species  in  nature.  How
ever,  as  man  is  not  an  empire  within  an  empire,
as  not  only  are  our  reasonings  successful,
but  it  is  natural  that  they  should  be  successful,
we  have  reason  to  infer  that  in  things  there
is  a  tendency  to  order  and  classification,  to
the  realization  of  species  and  laws.  And  so
already  we  dimly  foresee  that  in  the  being
all  around  us  there  might  exist  a  duality
analogous  to  that  which  we  acknowledge
within  ourselves.  Besides  intelligence,  we
possess  a  mass  of  faculties  grouped  under
the  heading  of  activity.  Intelligence  is  the
rule  of  activity ;  but  we  cannot  say  d  priori
how  far  activity  realizes  intelligence.  Per-

33  c


NATURAL  LAW  IN  SCIENCE  AND  PHILOSOPHY

haps  the  same  thing  happens  in  nature.
There  is  a  principle  of  necessity,  but  this
principle  is  only  the  rule,  not  the  basis  of
things.  The  knowledge  of  particular  laws
alone  will  give  us  some  idea  as  to  how  far
necessity  is  realized.


34


Ill

THE MATHEMATICAL LAWS

AFTER  the  logical  laws,  the  mathema
tical  laws  are  those  that  appear  most
general.  It  would  seem,  at  the  outset,  as  if
they,  too,  were  perfectly  clear,  and  that  it
was  superfluous  to  question  their  intelligibi
lity.  Was  it  not  to  these  laws  that  Descartes
appealed,  when  seeking  after  the  type  of
evidence  ?  And  yet,  in  order  to  establish
the  effective  value  of  mathematics,  this
same  Descartes  regarded  it  as  necessary
to  fall  back  upon  divine  immutability  and
truth.  On  the  other  hand,  the  entire  em
piric  school  calls  in  question  the  certainty
proper  to  mathematics.  It  may  also  be  said
that  the  distinction  between  logic  and  mathe
matics  is  a  fact  of  ordinary  life  ;  judging
by  the  mathematical  inaptitude  of  certain
dialecticians  who,  in  other  matters,  are
exceedingly  subtle,  and  vice  versa,  there

35


NATURAL  LAW  IN  SCIENCE  AND  PHILOSOPHY

would  appear  to  be  two  ways  of  reasoning,
quite  distinct  from  each  other.  These  con
siderations  call  upon  us  to  examine  the
nature  of  mathematical  certainty.

For  one  school  of  philosophers,  mathematics
is  a  mere  application,  a  special  development
of  general  logic.  So  thought  Leibnitz.  If
this  be  the  case,  the  difference  between  the
mathematical  and  the  logical  laws  is  not  an
essential  one  :  the  latter  are  simply  more
general  than  the  former  ;  there  is  nothing
in  mathematics  that  cannot  be  reduced  to
logic.  For  other  schools,  on  the  contrary,
in  conformity  with  the  doctrine  of  Kant,
these  two  kinds  of  law  are  irreducible  to  each
other  ;  in  the  mathematical  there  is  some
thing  more  than  in  the  logical  relationship.
Now,  speaking  generally,  the  speculations
of  mathematicians  seem  more  favourable  to
the  second  theory  than  to  the  first.

What  is  there  new  in  mathematics,  when
compared  with  logic  ?  In  a  general  way  :
intuition.  Then  what  is  it  that  character
izes  mathematical  intuition  ?

Logic,  if  we  consider  the  matter  closely,
presupposes  a  given  whole,  a  concept
which  it  purposes  to  analyse ;  in  this

36


THE  MATHEMATICAL  LAWS

concept,  it  admits  elements  set  alongside  of
each  other,  and  does  not  determine  the  bond
that  unites  them.  Mathematics,  on  the  other
hand,  does  an  essentially  synthetic  work ;
it  posits  the  relations  which  logic  supposits,
creates  a  link  between  the  various  parts  of  a
multiplicity,  proceeds  from  the  simple  to  the
compound,  itself  generates  the  compound
instead  of  taking  it  as  given.  Thus,  mathe
matical  intuition  is  really  something  new,
though  in  what  way  ?

In  conceptual  logic,  in  so  far  as  it  is  dis
tinguished  from  really  pure  logic,  the  notion
of  the  general  actually  embarrasses  the  under
standing  which  is  trying  to  arrive  at  perfect
intelligibility.  In  mathematics,  there  is  more
than  this.  Fundamental  definitions  are  not
mere  propositions.  An  infinite  number  of
definitions  are  frequently  condensed  in  a
mathematical  definition.  For  instance,  in
numeration,  the  unit  is  taken  as  the  starting-
point,  and  the  following  definitions  are  formed :
2=i+i;3  =  2  +  I ;  4  ==  3  +  I,  etc.,  or,  in
a  general  way,  0  +  2  =  (a  +  i)  +  I ;  a  +
3  =  (a  +  2)  +  i  •  a  +  4  =  =  (a  +  3)  +  i.
After  thus  forming  the  definitions  of  the
first  few  numbers,  we  add  :  etc.  What  is

37


NATURAL  LAW  IN  SCIENCE  AND  PHILOSOPHY

this  etc.  but  the  idea  of  an  endless  number
of  definitions,  analogous  to  those  we  have
created  ?  Now,  the  arithmetician  reduces  this
infinity  to  the  following  formula  :  a  +  b  =
a  +  (b  -i)  +  i,  a  definition  which  in  itself  con
tains  an  infinite  number  of  definitions.  Such
a  concept  is  more  than  a  novelty,  in  relation
to  the  purely  logical  concept  :  it  is  already
a  deviation  from  perfect  intelligibility.

It  is  the  same  with  demonstrations.  Mathe
matics  frequently  calls  for  a  mode  of  reasoning
different  from  logical  deduction,  and  which
consists  in  generalizing,  with  demonstrative
force,  the  result  of  a  particular  demonstration.
This  we  see  in  the  theory  of  addition,  on
which  the  whole  of  mathematics  is  based.
Suppose  we  have  to  demonstrate  that  a  +  i
=  1+0.  First  we  make  a  =  i,  then  we
have  1  +  1  =  1+1,  by  identity.  Then
we  adopt  a  roundabout  method,  and  say  :
suppose  (a  --  i)  +  i  =  i  +  (a  --  i).  If  this
supposition  is  granted,  adding  i  to  each  of
the  two  members,  we  have  (a  --  i)  +  i  +  i
=  i  +  (a  —  i)  +i,  which,  on  crossing  out  the
terms  that  cancel  each  other,  gives  a  +  i  =
i  +  a.  We  have  supposed  that  (a  --  i)  +  i
=  i  +  (a  —  i).  But  if  we  call  (a  --  i)  :  a,

38


THE  MATHEMATICAL  LAWS

we  are  brought  back  to  the  preceding  prob
lem.  We  may  continue  in  this  way  until  we
come  to  the  case  in  which  0  =  1.  This  mode
of  demonstration  is  called  reasoning  by  re
currence.  As  we  see,  it  is  a  demonstration
that  contains  as  large  a  number  of  demon
strations  as  we  please,  since  a  may  be  sup
posed  as  large  as  we  please.  The  same  kind
of  reasoning  takes  place  in  a  great  number  of
cases,  for  instance,  in  demonstrating  that  the
sum  of  several  consecutive  odd  numbers
from  i  upwards  is  equal  to  the  square  of
their  number.  This  reasoning  is  a  kind  of
apodeictic  induction.  There  is  induction,  for
in  this  case  demonstration  deals  first  with  the
particular,  and  generalization  comes  only
afterwards.  And  the  induction  is  apodeic
tic,  since  it  extends  to  all  possible  cases.
Now,  from  the  logical  point  of  view  :  it  is
strange  that  a  generalization  can  thus  be
conceived  as  necessary ;  and  the  reason  we
are  here  compelled  to  bring  together  these
two  words,  which  might  almost  be  said  to
repel  each  other,  lies  not  only  in  the  fact  that
mathematics  is  not  a  simple  development  of
logic,  but  that  it  does  not  even  simply  differ
from  it,  as  synthesis  differs  from  analysis.

39


NATURAL  LAW  IN  SCIENCE  AND  PHILOSOPHY

Mathematical  intelligibility actually  implies
some  modification  of  logical  intelligibility.

If  this  is  so,  what  is  the  origin  of  the  mathe
matical  laws  ?  If  they  were  wholly  known
d  priori,  their  intelligibility  would  be  perfect.
As  it  is,  they  imply  elements  that  cannot
be  fathomed  by  thought.  We  are  compelled
to  acknowledge  them  :  we  cannot  say  we
find  them  clearly  springing  from  the  funda
mental  nature  of  the  intellect.  Nor  can  they
be  connected  with  knowledge  d  posteriori,
for  they  deal  only  with  limits.  A  limit  cannot
be  understood  empirically,  since  it  is  the
purely  ideal  term  towards  which  tends  a
quantity  supposed  to  increase  or  decrease
indefinitely.  The  mathematical  laws  pre
suppose  a  very  complex  elaboration.  They
are  not  known  exclusively  either  d  priori  or
d  posteriori,  but  are  a  creation  of  the  mind ;
and  this  creation  is  not  an  arbitrary  one,  but,'
owing  to  the  mind's  resources,  takes  place
with  reference  to  experience  and  in  view  of  it.
Sometimes  the  mind  starts  with  intuitions
which  it  freely  creates ;  sometimes,  by  a
process  of  elimination,  it  gathers  up  the
axioms  it  regards  as  most  suitable  for  pro
ducing  a  harmonious  development,  one  that

40


THE  MATHEMATICAL  LAWS

is  both  simple  and  fertile.  Thus,  mathe
matics  is  a  voluntary  and  intelligent  adapta
tion  of  thought  to  things,  it  represents  the
forms  that  will  allow  of  qualitative  diversity
being  surmounted,  the  moulds  into  which
reality  must  enter  in  order  to  become  as
intelligible  as  possible.

Such  is  the  nature,  such  the  degree  of
intelligibility  of  the  mathematical  laws.  What
follows,  as  regards  their  objectivity  ?  Accord
ing  to  Descartes,  mathematics  is  realized  as
such  deep  within  the  sensible  world ;  it
constitutes  the  very  substance  of  material
things.  After  Descartes,  this  point  of  view
became  more  and  more  limited  and  disputed,
and  the  positivism  of  Auguste  Comte  summed
up  the  results  of  criticism  by  declaring  that
the  higher  is  not  reducible  to  the  lower,  and
that,  the  more  we  would  account  for  a
loftier  reality,  the  more  we  must  introduce
new  laws  which  have  a  specificity  of  their
own  and  cannot  be  reduced  to  the  preceding
ones.

The  mathematical  laws,  considered  in
themselves,  appear  inapt  for  realization,
since  they  imply  infinite  number ;  now,  an
actual  infinite  number  is  altogether  incon-


NATURAL  LAW  IN  SCIENCE  AND  PHILOSOPHY

ceivable. Every system of mathematical
realism  splits  on  this  rock.

But  then,  the  idealist  will  say,  what  makes
inconceivable  the  reality  of  infinite  number,
is  that  we  insist  on  actualizing  it  as  substance.
If  mind  is  the  only  reality  and  things  but  the
projection  and  representations  of  its  acts,
the  mathematical  laws  may  be  conceived  as
real,  in  so  far  as  they  form,  within  the  mind
itself,  the  groundwork  of  the  world  of  repre
sentations.  Our  answer  to  the  idealist  will
be  that  his  system  has  no  justification.  In
order  that  we  may  find,  in  mathematics,
thought  itself  rendered  objective,  the  laws  of
mathematics  would  have  to  be  perfectly
intelligible  ;  now,  the  mind  cannot  assimilate
them  without  a  certain  effort.  Moreover,  our
mathematics  represents  a  particular  form  of
mathematics ;  others  are  possible,  but  the
reason  we  keep  to  our  own  is  solely  because  it
is  more  simple  or  convenient  for  our  com
prehension  of  external  phenomena.  How  will
the  idealist  distinguish  what  is  absolutely
necessary  from  what  might  be  different  in  the
development  of  mathematics  ?

There  exists,  it  would  appear,  a  means  of
maintaining  the  absolute  objectivity  of  mathe-

42


THE MATHEMATICAL  LAWS

matics,  in  spite  of  the  difficulties  which  the
intellect  experiences  in  realizing  the  infinite  ;
and  that  means  consists  in  saying  that  the
law  of  the  real  is  actually  the  radical  incon
sistency  or  illogism  and  even  the  identity  of
the  contradictories.  But  what  would  then  be
conceived  as  realized  would  be  something
different  from  mathematics  as  such,  since  the
latter  was  instituted  for  the  very  purpose  of
removing,  as  far  as  possible,  the  contradictions
offered  by  phenomena.

According  to  others,  the  substance  of  things
eludes  us,  but  the  mathematical  laws  represent
their  forms  and  relations  ;  these  laws  are  the
common  element  between  ourselves  and  ex
ternal  reality.  Such,  for  instance,  was  the
doctrine  of  Ampere.  This  is  a  simple  and  clear,
though  artificial,  conception  ;  for  the  form  and
the  substance  of  things  cannot  thus  be  radi
cally  separated.  When  the  form  of  a  thing  is
perfectly  known,  it  is  no  longer  possible  for
us  to  say  that  we  are  altogether  ignorant  of
its  nature.  The  separation  between  matter
and  form  is  only  a  logical  one,  it  cannot  be
a  real  separation.  Not  only,  then,  are  the
mathematical  laws  unreal,  both  in  the  sub
stantial  and  in  the  idealistic  sense,  but  they  do

43


NATURAL  LAW  IN  SCIENCE  AND  PHILOSOPHY

not  even  express  a  form  of  things  that  is  really
separable  from  their  matter.  All  the  same,
mathematics  cannot  be  regarded  as  a  mere
convention,  a  simple  sport  of  the  mind.  It  is
a  fact  that  mathematics  does  apply  to  reality.
How  far  and  in  what  way  cannot  be  deter
mined  a  priori.  All  we  are  permitted  to  say
is  that,  since  man,  apparently,  is  no  anomaly
in  nature,  that  which  satisfies  his  intellect
must  not  be  unrelated  to  the  rest  of  things.
We  may  therefore  conjecture  that  there  exists
a  correspondence  between  the  mathematical
laws  and  the  laws  of  things  ;  but  it  is  the
study  of  the  particular  concrete  laws  of  nature
that  will  teach  us  how  far,  in  effect,  the  mathe
matical  laws  govern  reality.

What,  in  short,  is  the  meaning  of  mathe
matics  as  regards  the  necessity  which  may
be  ruling  throughout  the  world  ?  These
laws  are  still  closely  bordering  on  absolute
necessity ;  but  they  are  also  very  far  from
things  and  from  reality.  And  though  they  evi
dently  have  a  closer  connexion  with  being  than
the  logical  laws  have,  still,  we  cannot  say  that
they  introduce  absolute  necessity  into  being,
for  they  actually  admit  of  a  strict  deduction
only  through  imperfectly  intelligible  axioms

44


THE  MATHEMATICAL  LAWS

which  the  mind  has  combined  with  a  view
to  this  very  deduction.  How  far  does  the
necessity  peculiar  to  them  rule  in  things  ?
This  we  shall  learn  by  comparing  the  physical
with  the  mathematical  laws.  We  must  now
apply  ourselves  to  investigating  them.  In  the
next  chapter,  we  shall  take  up  the  mechani
cal  laws  and  the  idea  of  force.


45


IV
THE MECHANICAL LAWS

OUR  present  object  is  to  examine  critically
the  idea  we  have  of  the  laws  of  nature,
in  the  hope  of  extracting  information  as  to
the  relation  these  laws  bear  to  reality,  and  the
position  of  the  human  individual  in  nature
herself.  It  is  our  ultimate  end  to  know
whether,  in  the  present  state  of  the  sciences,
we  may  yet  regard  ourselves  as  possessed
of  any  power  to  act  freely,  any  reality  as
persons.  Along  these  lines,  we  have  ex
amined  the  logical  and  mathematical  laws,
which,  after  all,  are  more  than  laws  and
express  the  most  general  relations,  the  con
ditions  of  all  the  rest.  We  have  shown  that
the  laws  of  real  logic  cannot  actually  be
reduced  exactly  to  the  only  principle  most
certainly  known  a  priori,  namely  A  is
A,  and  that  concept,  judgment,  syllogism,
all  imply  a  new  element :  the  many  as  con-

46


THE  MECHANICAL  LAWS

tained  in  the  one,  or  again  the  relation
of  the  explicit  to  the  implicit.  Mathematics
also  introduces  new  elements  which  the  mind
cannot  thoroughly  assimilate  :  it  creates
relations  of  adjustment ;  it  diversifies  the
identical  with  the  aid  of  intuition  ;  more  than
that,  in  its  generalizations,  it  cannot  dispense
with  a  mode  of  reasoning  which  may  be  called
apodeictic  induction.  If  both  the  mathe
matical  and  the  logical  laws  do  not  proceed
immediately  from  the  nature  of  the  mind,
neither  are  they  deduced  from  experience.
Indeed,  were  this  the  case,  they  would  have
to  coincide  with  parts  or  aspects  of  reality  :
now,  this  is  not  so.  Neither  the  universals  of
logic  nor  the  infinite  number  of  mathematics
are  given  to  us.  We  cannot  even  conceive
how  they  could  be.  Thus,  logic  and  mathe
matics  are  solely  derived  neither  from  know
ledge  d  priori,  nor  from  knowledge  d  posteriori  :
they  represent  the  work  of  the  mind  which,
incited  by  things  to  exert  itself,  creates  a  mass
of  symbols  in  order  to  subject  these  things  to
necessity  and  thus  make  them  capable  of  be
ing  assimilated  by  itself.  The  logical  and  the
mathematical  laws  testify  to  the  mind's  need
of  conceiving  things  as  being  necessarily  deter-

47


NATURAL  LAW  IN  SCIENCE  AND  PHILOSOPHY

mined  ;  but  it  cannot  be  known  d  priori  how
far  reality  conforms  with  these  mind-imagined
symbols :  we  must  appeal  to  observation
and  analysis  of  the  real  if  we  would  know
whether  mathematics,  in  effect,  rules  through
out  the  universe.  All  that  can  be  admitted,
previous  to  this  experimental  study,  is  that
there  is  probably  a  certain  analogy  between  our
intellectual  nature  and  the  nature  of  things.
Were  it  not  so,  man  would  be  isolated  in  the
universe.  This,  however,  is  but  conjecture.
A  consideration  of  the  concrete  sciences  will
alone  enable  us  to  say  what  degree  of  reality  we
must  attribute  to  logic  and  to  mathematics.

The  laws  of  reality  given  to  us  as  approach
ing  nearest  to  mathematical  relations,  are  the
mechanical  laws.  The  essential  and  char
acteristic  element  of  these  laws  is  the  notion
of  force.  In  order  to  understand  the  forma
tion  and  the  present  state  of  this  notion,  we
will  now  study  its  historical  evolution.

In  antiquity,  and  especially  in  the  times
of  Plato  and  Aristotle,  what  seems,  above  all
else,  to  strike  the  human  mind,  is  the  differ
ence  between  motion  and  rest.  This  opposi
tion  is  made  the  point  of  departure,  and  it
is  admitted  that  matter,  in  itself,  is  in  a  state

48


THE  MECHANICAL  LAWS

of  rest.  What  has  then  to  be  explained  is  the
transition  from  rest  to  motion.  To  solve  the
question,  the  production  of  motion  in  man  is
considered.  Now,  motion  appears,  in  man,
as  resulting  from  the  action  of  the  mind  on
the  body.  Thus,  above  matter,  there  is
assumed  a  separate  force,  resembling  a  soul
more  or  less,  and  as  such,  suited  for  acting
upon  bodies.  This  view  may  readily  be
connected  with  the  teleological  conception,
in  virtue  of  which  God  rules  and  moves  the
totality  of  things ;  thus,  it  shows  itself
favourable  to  ethics  and  religion.  On  the
other  hand,  it  opposes  the  progress  of  science.
How,  in  effect,  are  we  to  gauge  and  foresee
the  action  of  an  immaterial  force,  called
upon  to  exert  itself  from  aesthetic  and  ethical
reasons  ?  As  a  matter  of  fact,  the  science
of  the  real  made  little  progress,  so  long  as  it
regarded  things  from  this  point  of  view.

At  the  time  of  the  Renaissance,  a  totally
different  conception  grew  up.  Instead  of  con
trasting  motion  with  rest,  Galileo  looked  upon
them  as  analogous  :  matter  is  self-sufficient,
both  in  motion  and  in  rest.  Of  itself  and  apart
from  supernatural  intervention,  it  continues
indefinitely  in  a  uniform,  rectilinear  motion  ;

49  D


NATURAL  LAW  IN  SCIENCE  AND  PHILOSOPHY

of  itself,  it  can  pass  neither  from  rest  to  motion
nor  from  motion  to  rest :  it  is  the  principle
of  inertia.  No  doubt,  if  we  wish  to  bring
before  the  mind  the  first  origin  of  motion,  we
must  presuppose  a  first  impulsion,  a  fillip,
— chiquenaude,  as  Pascal  called  it ; — but  as
regards  its  present  state,  which  alone  is  the
object  of  science,  matter  contains  within  itself
the  explanation  both  of  its  motion  and  of  its
rest.  From  this  idea  of  inertia,  it  was  at
first  thought  possible  to  infer  the  abolition
of  force  as  a  separate  idea.  Thus,  Descartes
thought  he  could  explain  all  physical  pheno
mena  by  the  one  law  of  the  conservation  of
the  quantity  of  motion,  a  corollary  of  the  prin
ciple  of  inertia.  Force,  as  such,  is  banished
from  his  system.  This  philosophy  might
have  been  developed  deductively,  like  mathe
matics,  of  which  it  formed  the  continuation  ;
but  there  came  a  time  when  it  was  confronted
with  facts  and  then  found  to  be  inadequate.
Newton,  in  order  to  account  for  the  motions  of
the  heavenly  bodies,  regarded  it  as  necessary
to  re-establish  the  idea  of  force.  He  started  with
the  principle  of  inertia,  according  to  which  a
body  retains  its  uniform,  rectilinear  motion
for  an  indefinite  period.  The  heavenly  bodies,


THE  MECHANICAL  LAWS

however,  moved  in  a  curvilinear,  non-uniform
fashion.  To  explain  this  modification  of
motion,  we  must  admit  that  some  external
force  acts  upon  the  moving  body.  This
reappearance  of  the  idea  of  force,  moreover,
is  not  the  restoration  of  the  ancient  con
ception.  The  ancients  regarded  force  as
dwelling  in  a  higher,  metaphysical  form  ;  it
acts  from  above,  after  the  fashion  of  a  soul ;
it  is  God  Himself,  who,  by  His  perfection,
produces  the  motions  of  the  heavenly  bodies.
Newton,  on  the  other  hand,  attributed  force
to  matter ;  an  atom  has  not  the  power  to
modify  its  own  motion,  but  it  can  modify
the  motion  of  other  atoms.  Thus,  without
leaving  matter,  we  come  to  explain  modifica
tions  in  the  speed  and  direction  of  motion.
God  is  eliminated  from  the  world,  in  so  far,
at  least,  as  He  is  considered  to  be  an  artist
who  produces  by  separate  acts  every  detail
of  His  work.

Are  we  not,  however,  restoring  the  occult
powers  of  the  Schoolmen  if  we  admit
the  existence  of  such  a  force  ?  Newton,  as
we  know  by  his  own  declarations,  does  not
regard  attraction  as  a  metaphysical  force,
analogous  to  a  soul's  activity,  To  him,  this


NATURAL  LAW  IN  SCIENCE  AND  PHILOSOPHY

is  but  an  expression,  a  kind  of  metaphor,
pointing  to  a  phenomenal  relationship.  Force,
as  he  interprets  it,  is  none  the  less  the  cause
of  motion.  Now,  cause  must  be  prior  to
effect.  If,  then,  this  is  not  an  occult  power,
at  least  it  is  something  metaphysical  and
invisible,  which  logically  precedes  phenomena.
Mathematicians  have  taken  it  into  account,
and  so  we  find  them,  nowadays,  endeavour
ing  to  transform  the  relation  between  force
and  motion  into  a  simple  mutual  dependence,
a  mere  relation  of  solidarity.  It  is  in  this
way  that  force  is  defined  as  the  product  of  the
mass  into  the  velocity.  Here,  force  and
motion  are  two  data  related  to  each  other,
without  there  being  any  necessity  to  inquire
whether  it  is  force  that  is  the  cause  of  motion,
or  motion  that  is  the  cause  of  force  :  just  as,
in  geometry,  we  have  the  relation  of  diameter
to  circumference.

Is  force,  as  thus  conceived,  reduced  to  a
purely  mathematical  notion,  or  does  it  contain
some  new  element  ?  Doubtless,  abstract
mechanics  does  not  differ  from  mathematics
and  consists  solely  of  substitutions  of  formulae.
But  abstract  mechanics  does  not  suffice  for
the  realization  of  the  science  of  nature.  This

52


THE  MECHANICAL  LAWS

was  clearly  seen  by  Newton  ;  he  tried  to  find
in  experience  the  mathematical  principles
of  his  natural  philosophy.  Now,  what  is
that  element  which  cannot  be  found  in
mathematics  and  which  only  experience  can
give  us  ?  It  is  the  measure  of  the  action
which  bodies  exercise  upon  one  another.
In  mathematics,  consequences  are  analytically
deduced  from  definitions ;  we  start  with  the
identical  and  then  diversify  it.  But,  in
nature,  we  start  with  things  foreign  to  one
another,  such  as  the  sun  and  the  planets,
an4  set  up  a  definite,  constant  dependence
between  these  things.  We  are  really  dealing,
then,  with  a  mathematical  connexion,  though
it  can  neither  be  affirmed  nor  known  d  priori.
Thus,  what  there  is  new  in  the  notion  of  force,
is,  in  short,  the  idea  of  physical  causality,  or,
in  more  precise  terms,  the  idea  of  natural  law,
strictly  so  called.  Force  is  a  uniform  depend
ence,  experimentally  known,  between  things
exterior  to  one  another.  Consequently  it
contains  an  extra-mathematical  element.

But  then,  may  it  not  be  said  that  the
affirmation  of  the  natural  laws  results  from  a
special  necessity  of  the  mind  ?  Following
on  Kant,  profound  philosophers  maintain,

5v


NATURAL  LAW  IN  SCIENCE  AND  PHILOSOPHY

even  nowadays,  that  the  notion  of  law  is  the
result  of  our  mental  make-up,  and  consists
of  a  synthetic,  d  priori  judgment.  These
philosophers  justify  their  theory  by  setting
forth  how  such  an  idea  of  causal  law  is  neces
sary  in  order  to  think  phenomena,  i.e.  to
reduce  them  to  unity  within  a  consciousness.
Phenomena,  in  themselves,  are  heterogeneous
with  regard  to  one  another.  The  notion  of
law,  by  establishing  universal  and  necessary
relations  between  them,  gives  them  the  only
unity  of  which  a  heterogeneous  multiplicity
admits.  This  theory,  to  our  mind,  is  open
to  objections.

At  the  outset,  is  it  clear  that  we  have  an
irresistible  need  to  think  phenomena,  to
reduce  them  all  to  unity,  to  set  up  between
ourselves  and  them,  in  an  absolute  sense,
the  metaphysical  relationship  of  subject  and
object  ?  No  doubt  we  have  need  of  unity ;
but  it  is  difficult  to  prove  that  this  need  takes
precedence  of  all  others  and  governs  the
whole  of  our  intellectual  life.  Indeed,  the
history  of  philosophy  offers  us  not  only  minds
that  aim  at  an  explanation  of  the  uniform
by  the  multiple  and  the  changing,  but  also
logicians  enamoured  of  a  reduction  to  unity.

54


THE  MECHANICAL  LAWS

Now,  if  unity  in  the  conception  of  being  is
not  necessary,  neither  are  the  means  of
obtaining  it.

But  we  may  go  farther.  Even  granting
that  we  feel  this  absolute,  imperious  need  to
think  things,  is  it  certain  that  the  categories
of  the  understanding  realize  the  end  assigned
to  them,  viz.  the  assimilation  of  things  by  the
mind  ?  It  would  appear  as  though  this
point  had  been  too  readily  granted  to  the
Kantian  doctrine.  Indeed,  to  think  things
is  to  understand  their  particular  affinities
and  connexions,  to  see  how  they  unify  and
group  together  of  themselves.  Kant's  cate
gories,  however,  leave  things  as  they  find
them,  exterior  and  alien  to  one  another.
They  bring  them  together  artificially,  as  stones
are  brought  together  in  building  a  house.
They  reconcile  nature — which  unites  beings
according  to  their  consanguinity  or  kinship
— with  art — which  brings  them  together  in
accordance  with  its  own  ideas  of  fitness.  Is
a  bundle  of  sensations  a  thought  taking
possession  of  things  ?

This  is  not  all,  and  we  may  enquire  whether
the  position  adopted  by  Kant  can  be  main
tained  as  ultimate,  or  whether  it  must  not

55  •


NATURAL  LAW  IN  SCIENCE  AND  PHILOSOPHY

of  necessity  be  transcended  in  one  direction
or  the  other.  The  objection  is  frequently
urged  that,  if  Kant's  categories  are  purely
subjective,  it  is  inexplicable  that  nature
should  conform  to  them.  Stated  thus,  the
objection  is  perhaps  not  well  founded;  for,
in  Kantianism,  what  we  call  nature  is
already  the  work  of  the  mind,  not  perhaps  of
the  individual  thought,  but  of  the  universal
human  thought  identical  in  each  individual
consciousness,  and  the  individual  mind  only
recognizes  empirically  and  successively  that
which  reason  builds  up  and  unifies  a  priori.
But  it  would  seem  that  a  somewhat  similar
objection  might  be  raised.  Either  the  laws,  we
may  say,  that  the  mind  brings  forward,  will  find
analogous  matter,  obedient  to  their  action,  in
which  case  how  shall  we  know  that  the  notion
of  these  laws  comes  from  ourselves  rather
than  from  the  observation  of  things,  that
they  are  known  to  us  a  priori  rather  than  a
posteriori  ?  Or  else  things  will  not  conform
to  these  laws,  and  in  that  case  shall  we  claim
that  it  is  ourselves  who  are  right  and  nature
who  is  wrong  ?  It  is  clear  that,  as  soon  as
it  is  proved  that  facts  do  not  fit  in  with  the
limits  we  wish  to  impose  upon  them,  we  shall

56


THE  MECHANICAL  LAWS

make  it  our  object  to  free  ourselves  of  these
limits  and  form  conceptions  more  in  accord
with  facts.

Thus,  the  mechanical  laws  are  not  an  ana
lytical  succession  of  mathematical  truths ;
neither  do  they  rest  on  synthetic  d  priori
judgments.  Are  they  derived  from  experi
ence  ?  The  ancients  claimed  to  obtain  from
experience  only  the  general  and  the  probable,
i.e.  what  happens  in  the  ordinary  way  of
things,  o)?  e-jri  TO  TTO\V  •  what  they  wanted
it  to  give  them  was  universal  and  necessary
rules,  not  laws.  For  the  moderns,  however,
induction  is  a  kind  of  magic  word,  in  virtue
of  which,  fact  is  transmuted  into  law.  By
so-called  scientific  induction,  which  evi
dently  has  scarcely  anything  in  common
with  ancient  induction,  it  is  claimed  that
the  universal  can  be  deduced  from  the
contingent,  the  necessary  from  the  particu
lar.  Still,  however  productive  and  methodical
modern  induction  may  be,  it  will  never
succeed,  without  superseding  experience,
in  bringing  us  to  true  laws.  For  instance,
we  cannot  possibly,  by  experience,  become
acquainted  with  inertia  and  force ;  to  do
this,  we  should  have  had  to  be  present  at  the

57


NATURAL  LAW  IN  SCIENCE  AND  PHILOSOPHY

creation.  We  never  observe  the  exactly
uniform  and  rectilinear  motion  of  a  moving
body,  removed  from  all  extraneous  influence,
any  more  than  the  continuance  in  rest  of  a
body  that  has  received  no  impulsion.  The
duality  of  inertia  and  force,  the  action  of
multiple  forces,  and  the  composition  of  these
forces,  are  abstractions  that  cannot  be  verified.
We  may  go  even  further  and  say  that
induction  cannot  even  account  for  the  most
general  characteristics  of  the  mechanical  laws.
In  fact,  we  observe  only  moments  separate
from  one  another,  i.e.  discontinuity,  and  yet
our  laws  give  us  continuity.  Secondly,  these
laws  imply  precision,  whereas  experience
gives  us  only  approximations.  Afterwards,
we  assume,  as  fundamental,  definite  relations
between  such  and  such  phenomena,  whereas
experience  offers  us  an  infinite  number  of
relations  between  which  there  is  neither
priority  nor  separation.  Finally,  we  attri
bute  to  our  laws,  fixity,  as  an  essential
characteristic.  Now,  in  this  we  cannot  say
that  we  are  judging  the  future  by  the  past,
for  only  to  an  insignificant  extent  do  we
know  the  past.  It  is  most  seriously  alleged
nowadays  that  species  are  not  eternal,  but

58


THE  MECHANICAL  LAWS

have  a  history  of  their  own.  Why  also
should  not  laws,  those  types  of  the  relations
that  exist  between  phenomena,  be  subject
to  change  ?  The  fixity  we  attribute  to  them
is  a  characteristic  that  we  add  on  to  the  data
of  experience,  one  that  cannot  be  revealed  to
us  from  without.

Nevertheless,  if  the  mechanical  laws  are
known  neither  a  priori  nor  a  posteriori,  in  their
distinctive  form,  it  does  not  therefore  follow
that  they  are  fictitious.  The  concept  of  law
results  from  the  effort  we  make  to  adapt  things
to  the  mind.  Law  represents  the  characteristic
we  must  attribute  to  things  in  order  that
they  may  be  expressed  by  the  symbols  at
our  disposal,  the  matter  that  physics  must
offer  to  mathematics,  so  that  mathematics
may  unite  with  it.  And  the  result  proves
that  certain  phenomena  of  nature  comply
with  this  requirement,  the  consequence
being  that  the  notion  of  mechanical  law
dominates  the  whole  of  scientific  research,
as  a  guiding  idea,  at  all  events.

We  have  inquired  into  the  nature  of  the
mechanical  laws ;  now  we  must  examine
their  objectivity  and  signification,  i.e.  we
must  see  how  far  we  are  justified  in  believing

59


NATURAL  LAW  IN  SCIENCE  AND  PHILOSOPHY

that  things  realize  mechanism,  and  to  what
extent  we  are  included  in  this  mechanism.
These  questions  will  be  dealt  with  in  the
next  chapter.


60


V
THE MECHANICAL LAWS

(Continued}

WE  have  seen  that  the  mechanical  laws
are  not  a  mere  development  and
complication  of  mathematics ;  in  reality,
they  imply  a  new  element  which  cannot  be
reduced  to  mathematical  intuition,  viz.  the
solidarity  of  fact,  the  regular,  constant  depen
dence,  empirically  given  and  unknowable  a
priori,  between  two  different  magnitudes.
We  have  shown  that  these  laws  are  not  purely
experimental  truths  either.  They  result  from
the  collaboration  of  mind  and  things ;  they
are  products  of  mental  activity  and  apply
to  extraneous  matter ;  they  represent  the
effort  which  the  mind  makes  to  set  up  a  coin
cidence  between  things  and  itself.  Now  we
must  inquire  in  what  way  the  mechanical
laws  may  be  regarded  as  realized  in  nature.
The  first  step  taken  by  the  creators  of
61


NATURAL  LAW  IN  SCIENCE  AND  PHILOSOPHY

scientific  mechanism  was  to  grant  objective
existence  to  those  laws  that  enable  us  to
explain  things  in  so  rigorous  a  fashion,  and
the  first  doctrine  we  find  on  this  subject
is  dogmatism.  According  to  this  doctrine,
the  mechanical  laws,  as  such,  are  inherent
in  things  considered  per  se,  apart  from
the  mind  at  work  upon  them.  Descartes
teaches  this  metaphysical  mechanism ;  he
regards  matter  and  motion,  which  are  them
selves  capable  of  expression  in  terms  of  space,
as  representing  the  entire  essence  of  things
other  than  mind,  and  so  the  mechanical  laws
exist  as  such  in  nature  ;  more  than  this,  they
are  the  fundamental  laws  of  the  whole  of
nature.

Still,  Cartesianism  lends  itself  to  serious
objections.  On  what  is  it  grounded  ?  On
the  clearness  peculiar  to  the  idea  of  extension.
But,  given  that  clearness  of  the  idea  of
extension,  does  it  follow  that  extension  is
the  essence  of  matter,  as  Descartes  states
it  to  be  ?  Descartes  himself  succeeds  only
by  having  recourse  to  divine  truth,  as  to
some  deus  ex  machina.  But  how  are  we  to
see  in  motion  a  thing  that  exists  per  se  ?
Motion  is  not  self-sufficient.  Common  sense

62


THE  MECHANICAL  LAWS

tells  us  that  it  presupposes  something  that
moves,  and  common  sense  is  right.  To  estab
lish  a  connexion  between  the  different  posi
tions  of  which  motion  consists,  we  must  have
either  a  permanent  subject  such  as  matter,
or  a  mind  that  contains  the  representations  of
these  positions  in  one  and  the  same  con
sciousness.  In  a  word,  motion,  of  itself,  does
not  involve  the  principle  of  unity,  of  which
it  stands  in  need  in  order  to  be  real.

Newton  corrected  Descartes'  mechanism,
though  he  remained  dogmatic.  When  he  says
Hypotheses  non  fingo,  he  means  that  he  is  not
satisfied,  as  Descartes  is,  with  merely  possi
ble  explanations,  but  that  he  aspires  to  find
out  the  real,  effective  causes  of  things,  the
laws  which  God  himself  had  in  mind  when  he
created  and  planned  the  universe.  Newton
introduces  into  nature  that  material  subject
which  was  lacking  in  Cartesian  mechanism  ;
he  admits  of  bodies,  endowed  with  forces,  as
a  condition  of  motion,  and  thereby  thinks  he
is  securing,  far  better  than  Cartesianism  did,
the  objectivity  of  the  mechanical  laws.  And
so  he  acknowledges  the  existence  of  real
motion,  whereas,  according  to  Descartes,
there  existed  only  relative  motions.  We  must

63


NATURAL  LAW  IN  SCIENCE  AND  PHILOSOPHY

carefully  distinguish  between  Newtonianism
as  science  and  Newtonianism  as  metaphysics.
Newtonianism  as  science  is  satisfied,  as  far,
almost,  as  the  human  mind  can  be,  with  ex
perimental  or  mathematical  notions.  But  if
we  would  convert  this  science  into  a  knowledge
of  nature  as  existing  per  se,  we  must  realize
space,  mechanical  causality,  force,  atoms,  and
even  attraction,  or  any  other  mode  in  which
the  cause  of  motion  operates.  And  here
arise  the  difficulties  so  well  demonstrated  by
Berkeley,  whose  system,  from  the  very  outset,
is  a  refutation  of  Newtonianism  regarded
as  metaphysics.  If  space,  matter,  atoms,
mechanical  causality,  force,  attraction  and
repulsion,  says  Berkeley,  are  looked  upon  as
objective  realities,  we  must  first  acknowledge
that  they  are  things  which  the  human  mind
is  incapable  of  knowing.  It  is  only  by
a  process  of  artificial  abstraction  that  we
detach  them  from  the  sensations  of  which  we
are  conscious.  They  are  never  presented  to
us  in  themselves  ;  they  cannot  be.  Nor  is
this  all.  Not  only  are  such  things,  for
us,  if  they  exist,  as  though  they  were  not,
but  we  cannot  even  conceive  that  they
do  exist,  in  themselves.  In  fact,  these  con-

64


THE MECHANICAL  LAWS

cepts,  set  up  as  things  per  se,  become
contradictory.  Infinite  and  homogeneous
space  devoid  of  quality,  the  extended,  indi
visible  atom,  mechanical  causality,  wherein
that  which  is  powerless  over  itself,  possesses
power  over  something  else,  resulting  in  pro
gression  ad  infinitum,  the  action  of  one  crude
body  upon  another,  in  whatever  way  this
action  is  brought  before  the  mind  :  all  these
symbols,  taken  as  absolute  realities,  become
unintelligible  ;  nor  need  we  be  surprised  if
we  remember  that  these  concepts,  when
analysed,  present  elements  with  which  thought
cannot  deal.

A  third  form  of  dogmatism  is  that  pro
fessed  by  Leibnitz.  According  to  him,  there
is  everywhere  at  the  same  time  both  the
mechanical  and  the  metaphysical ;  the  me
chanical  laws  exist,  though  not  separately  and
in  themselves,  as  the  mechanician  conceives
them.  Their  reality  consists  in  the  fact  that
they  are  well  founded,  i.e.  supported  by  a
reality  distinct  from  themselves,  but  one  that
really  exists  and  contains  the  requisite,  of
mechanical  action.  This  subject  of  mechani
cal  phenomena  is  force,  i.e.  a  metaphysical
essence  which,  at  bottom,  offers  a  certain

65  E


NATURAL  LAW  IN  SCIENCE  AND  PHILOSOPHY

analogy  with  our  souls.  But  this  system
also  raises  difficulties.  The  mathematical
formulae  of  the  mechanicians,  from  the  time
of  Descartes  right  on  to  our  own,  have  been
so  purged  of  all  psychological  or  metaphysical
content,  that  we  no  longer  see  any  connexion
between  force  as  metaphysics  understands  it
and  force  as  assumed  by  science.  The  latter  is
nothing  but  a  measure  of  motions.  It  might
with  equal  justice  be  conceived  both  as  aeon-
sequence  and  as  a  condition  of  motion.  The
transition,  then,  from  scientific  to  metaphysi
cal  force  is  lacking.  Leibnitz's  metaphysics
is  superimposed  from  without  upon  science
strictly  so  called.  True  or  false,  it  is  no
longer  scientific  mechanism  that  it  sets  up
as  a  reality.

The  mechanical  laws,  therefore,  cannot  be
considered  realized,  as  such,  in  the  nature  of
things.  The  concepts  of  which  they  are
constituted  become  unintelligible  when  con
verted  into  beings.  Must  they  therefore  be
denied  all  genuine  reality,  and  regarded,  along
with  idealism,  as  nothing  else  than  a  symbolical
expression,  a  projection  of  the  laws  of  mind
itself  ?

Interpreted  idealistically,  the  concepts  of
66


THE  MECHANICAL  LAWS

which  the  mechanical  laws  consist,  avoid  the
contradictions  that  appear  when  they  are
interpreted  realistically.  Thus,  space,  a
form  of  sensibility,  is  no  longer  contradictory,
like  space  that  exists  per  se.  Mechanical
causality,  connecting  representations  with  one
another,  no  longer  lends  it  self  to  the  objections
raised  by  this  causality,  conceived  as  con
necting  things.  But  idealism  is  unable  to
stand  its  ground ;  and,  the  more  closely  it
pursues  the  problem,  the  more  it  is  compelled
to  recognize  destructive  elements  within
itself.  As  a  principle,  idealism  consists  in
explaining  the  unconscious  by  the  conscious,
things  by  thought.  But  the  history  of  philo
sophy  shows  us  that,  in  order  to  explain  the
given,  idealism  is  forced  to  appeal  to  the
unconscious  and  allot  this  latter  a  place  along
side  of — or  even  above — the  conscious.  In
the  case  of  Kant,  deep  within  the  mind  appears
the  synthetic  judgment  d  priori,  which  the
intellect  is  compelled  to  accept  as  a  sort
of  metaphysical  fact,  without  really  under
standing  it.  Beneath  the  conscious  self,  Fichte
places  the  absolute  self,  the  activity  of  which
precedes  the  intellect,  and  it  is  this  activity
which,  when  subjected  to  an  inexplicable

67


NATURAL  LAW  IN  SCIENCE  AND  PHILOSOPHY

impact,  explains  the  self  as  the  not-self.  In
Schelling,  the  absolute  becomes  the  identity  of
the  self  and  the  not-self  ;  in  Hegel,  it  becomes
the  identity  of  the  contradictories,  that  offence
and  stumbling-block  to  thought.  Thus  the
self  is  more  and  more  driven  to  leave  itself
and  have  recourse  to  some  heterogeneous
principle  ;  idealism  more  and  more  abjures
itself  and  approaches  realism.

If  then  the  mechanical  laws  do  not  exist
objectively,  neither  are  they  mere  projections
of  the  conscious  mind.  They  witness  to
the  existence  of  something  different  from
mind,  and  yet  which  must  not  be  altogether
separated  from  it.  We  are  foiled  when  we
try  to  determine  the  substantial  nature  of
things  ;  all  the  same,  we  cannot  abolish  them.
All  we  can  say  is  that,  in  things,  there  is  a
mode  of  being  which  suggests  to  our  minds
the  invention  of  the  mechanical  laws.  In
reality,  how  do  things  act  in  nature  ?  We  can
form  a  conjecture  of  this  only  by  analogy,  when
we  consider  what  takes  place  within  ourselves.
In  short,  consciousness  is  the  only  sense  of
being  that  we  have  at  our  disposal.  Now,  the
phenomena  which,  in  man,  affect  the  mind  in
its  most  intimate  union  with  the  body,  are  the

68


THE  MECHANICAL  LAWS

phenomena  of  habit,  and  it  would  really  seem
as  though  its  effects  bore  a  certain  resemblance
to  mechanical  causality.  At  first  we  have
mental  activity,  in  certain  cases,  at  all  events  ;
actions  are  related  to  thought,  as  their
generating  cause.  By  degrees,  they  fall  away
from  thought,  and  jostle  one  another,  as  it
were.  Thus,  in  certain  cases  and  with  certain
men,  words  follow  one  another  without  being
determined  by  thought ;  and  so  we  find
inertia  and  mechanical  force  in  the  persistence
of  our  states  of  consciousness  and  in  their
mutual  influence.  This  view  may  not  follow
from  an  induction  based  on  the  results  of
science,  it  is  but  a  simple  analogy  ;  still,  it
constitutes  the  only  way  in  which  we  can
point  to  the  reality  of  mechanical  action.  To
our  mind,  it  is  the  degradation  of  true  action,
it  is  activity  as  represented  by  a  link  between
its  products,  and  thereby  released  and  set
free  for  new  tasks.  If  such  actions  exist,  the
mechanical  laws  are  the  form  we  attribute  to
them,  for  the  purpose  of  subjecting  them
to  mathematical  calculation.  And  so  we  see
that  the  scientist  can  nowhere  find  the
conditions  of  science  accurately  realized  in
phenomena.


NATURAL  LAW  IN  SCIENCE  AND  PHILOSOPHY

One  final  question  :  do  the  mechanical  laws
establish  an  absolute  determinism  ?

There  are  few  men,  even  amongst  meta
physicians,  who  accept  mechanical  deter
minism  as  absolute.  It  is  generally  believed
that  man  can  produce  movements  in  con
formity  with  his  volitions.  In  the  very
countries  where  determinism  is  professed  by
eminent  philosophers,  teachers  and  all  who
appeal  to  conscience  and  claim  to  regulate
conduct,  affirm  the  existence  of  free-will
and  of  its  power  over  things.  We  find  this
the  case  in  England  as  well  as  in  Germany.
It  is  more  difficult,  however,  to  prove  one's
opinion,  than  to  convince  oneself  of  its  correct
ness.

How  do  we  reason  when  we  attempt  to  lay
aside  mechanical  necessity  ?  Common  sense
acknowledges  that  the  soul  is  capable  of
producing  movements ;  but  that  is  simply
appearance  which  will  not  bear  investi
gation.  The  soul,  it  is  said,  is  a  force  ;
but  this  is  a  much  abused  word.  We  pass —
without  saying  what  right  we  have  to  do  so — •
from  the  notion  of  moral  or  metaphysical
force  to  that  of  mechanical  force.  If  the  soul
is  a  force,  in  the  sense  in  which  it  must  be  for

70


THE  MECHANICAL  LAWS

imparting  motion  to  a  body  by  virtue  of
the  principle  of  inertia,  it  must  modify  the
quantity  of  force  wherever  it  intervenes.
But  this  in  itself  is  strange  and  contrary  to
experience  and  induction,  which  show  us
that  the  quantity  of  force  in  nature  is  constant.
Are  we  to  say  that  the  soul  cancels  a  quantity
of  force  exactly  equal  to  that  it  produces  ?
Such  a  conception  would  appear  an  entirely
arbitrary  one.

We  find  philosophers  offering  us  a  subtler
explanation  :  that  the  action  of  the  soul  upon
the  body  is  real,  although  of  a  metaphysical,
not  a  mechanical  nature.  Descartes  acknow
ledges  that  the  quantity  of  motion  remains
constant  throughout  nature,  but  that  the
soul  may  change  the  direction  of  the  motion.
The  mechanical  laws  remain  secure,  since,
according  to  Descartes,  they  do  not  determine
direction,  which  latter  must  come  from  some
other  source.  In  spite  of  the  objections  of
Leibnitz,  which  in  all  probability  are  not
decisive,  this  expedient,  interpreted  in  more
or  less  complicated  ways,  has  frequently  been
reproduced.  Of  recent  years,  M.  Cournot,
ascertaining  that  the  amount  of  power
necessary  for  the  starting  of  a  machine  may


NATURAL  LAW  IN  SCIENCE  AND  PHILOSOPHY

be  indefinitely  diminished,  recognizes  a  limit
where  this  power  would  be  nil.  Then  it
would  be  replaced  by  a  guiding  force,  belong
ing,  for  instance,  to  organisms  or  to  thought.
M.  Boussinesq  admitted  that  there  were
cases  in  which  the  initial  state  of  a  system
does  not  wholly  determine  the  course  which  the
phenomenon  must  take.  There  would  then
be  a  greater  or  less  number  of  bifurcations,
making  possible  the  intervention  of  a  guiding
force.  Here  the  action  attributed  by  Claude
Bernard  to  life  as  a  guiding  idea,  would  find  a
place  ;  life  does  not  violate  the  mechanical
laws,  but  it  communicates  to  movements  a
direction  they  would  not  of  themselves  have
taken.

This  extremely  seductive  theory  was  up
held,  as  we  see,  by  scientists  of  the  first  rank.
It  cannot  be  said,  however,  that  it  succeeded
in  becoming  adopted.  As  regards  passing  to
the  limit,  that  is  an  expedient  which  offends
the  reason,  and  one  which,  in  spite  of  appear
ances,  does  not  seem  to  be  authorized  by
mathematics.  This  latter  declares  A  equal  to
B — in  so  far  as  their  difference  may  be  made
smaller  than  any  given  quantity — only  when  A
and  B  are  both  given  as  fixed,  determinate

72


THE  MECHANICAL  LAWS

quantities.  A  distinction  is  made  between
the  true  and  the  false  use  of  the  method  of
limits.  Now,  however  small  the  force  neces
sary  for  starting  a  machine  may  be  conceived
as  being,  this  force  is  always  required,  it
never  becomes  nil.  The  strange  solutions
of  M.  Boussinesq  have  been  disputed  by
several  mathematicians,  and  it  would  seem
rash  to  regard  the  efficacy  of  freewill  as
depending  upon  speculations  the  proof  of
which  is  not  perfectly  evident.

An  important  distinction,  however,  appears
to  dominate  the  whole  question.  As  long
as,  with  Descartes  and  even  Leibnitz,  we
confine  ourselves  to  laying  down  laws  of
invariability  or  constancy  regarding  quantity
in  general,  there  is  necessarily  room  for
indetermination.  The  constant  as  a  rule
may  always  be  secured  in  several  ways.
Newton,  however,  looked  upon  the  me
chanical  laws  as  eliminating  this  element
of  indetermination.  Indeed,  Newton  is  not
satisfied  with  an  abstract  law,  he  deter
mines  the  quantity  and  direction  of  the
motion  which  is  to  be  realized  in  each  case.
He  envelops  the  law  of  conservation  in  a
concrete  law  which  indicates  the  mode  of  its

73


NATURAL  LAW  IN  SCIENCE  AND  PHILOSOPHY

application.  If  motion,  then,  is  modified,
it  can  only  be  by  a  formal  derogation  of  law,
by  a  miracle.

There  is  a  particularly  metaphysical  way  of
escaping  mechanical  determinism,  and  that
consists — whilst  admitting  this  determinism
for  external  phenomena — in  breaking  the
bond  which  links  to  these  phenomena  the
higher  forms  of  existence.  We  are  given  a
relation  between  organic  movements  and
intellectual  states.  Now,  if  a  determinate
movement  corresponds  with  each  thought,  and
if  movements  are  necessarily  linked  to  one
another,  the  consequence  is  that  thoughts
also  are  necessarily  linked  to  one  another.  It
is  this  dependence  of  thought  as  regards
movement  that  certain  philosophers  endeavour
to  weaken  or  to  destroy  altogether.  Accord
ing  to  this  view,  Descartes  acknowledged  that
when  a  passion  is  brought  into  being  within  us
as  the  result  of  some  external  action,  we  are
not  condemned  to  become  wedded  to  the
thoughts  called  up  by  this  passion.  He
maintained  that  we  have  the  power  to  summon
before  the  mind  different  thoughts,  and  to
hold  them  there  by  means  of  attention.  For
instance,  when  the  physical  body  impresses

74


THE  MECHANICAL  LAWS

on  us  an  impulse  of  anger,  we  can  summon
before  the  mind  ideas  of  justice,  moderation  and
duty,  to  replace  ideas  of  vengeance.  Thought,
then,  is  not  indissolubly  connected  with  the
physical  organism.  In  one  sense,  Leibnitz
goes  much  farther  than  Descartes  ;  he  breaks
off  all  communication  between  body  and
soul,  and  maintains  that  the  life  of  souls  would
remain  the  same  even  if  all  bodies  were
annihilated.  On  the  other  hand,  he  recog
nizes  that  there  exists  pre-established  harmony
and  exact  parallelism  between  bodies  and
minds.  The  mind,  however,  is  not  therefore
made  dependent  on  the  body.  It  is  the
contrary  to  this  that  Leibnitz  has  in  view,
for  he  regards  efficient  causes  as  dependent
on  final  causes.  Kant  simply  abolishes
all  connexion  between  the  moral  subject
and  the  world  of  motion ;  he  regards  the
noumenon,  which  is  entirely  free  from  the
fetters  of  mechanism,  as  having  power  to
determine  itself  in  an  absolutely  autonomous
fashion.

These  various  theories  are  either  ingeni
ous  or  profound,  still,  hypothesis  has  a
large  share  in  them.  In  the  first  place,
how  is  it  known  that  the  bond  between

75


NATURAL  LAW  IN  SCIENCE  AND  PHILOSOPHY

the  mechanical  order  and  the  higher  orders
is  loose,  or  liable  to  be  broken  ?  Then,
too,  who  is  to  guarantee  that  the  orders  of
things,  thus  superimposed  on  the  mechanical
order,  will  not  themselves  also  be  deter
minisms,  different,  it  may  be,  but  equally
inflexible  ?  Still,  even  though  this  system
were  admitted,  it  would  give  us  but  little
satisfaction,  for  it  would  leave  quite  out  of
our  control  the  world  of  motion  in  space,  i.e.
the  world  in  which  we  are  living,  after  all,
and  on  which  it  is  primarily  important  that
we  should  be  able  to  act.

Mechanical  conjunction,  it  must  be  recog
nized,  is  the  most  perfect  form  of  determin
ism,  for  it  represents  the  coincidence  of  experi
mental  reality  with  mathematics.  But  what
we  have  to  discover  is  whether  this  deter
minism  should  be  transferred  from  the  explan
ation  of  the  phenomena  it  governs  to  the  very
beings  whose  manifestations  we  are  endea
vouring  to  systematize.  When  we  ask  our
selves  if  the  mode  in  which  bodies  act  on  one
another  compromises  our  freedom,  we  are  mis
stating  the  question.  Bodies  do  not  act  on
one  another.  It  is  by  a  process  of  artificial
construction  and  abstraction  that  we  isolate

76


THE  MECHANICAL  LAWS

a  world  of  atoms  and  mechanical  forces,  and
regard  it  as  self-sufficient.  In  reality,  this
world  is  not  self-sufficient.  Not  only  cannot
atoms  and  mechanical  causality  be  conceived
without  a  mind  to  think  them,  but  mechanical
movements  themselves  cannot  be  isolated  from
the  physical  and  organic  phenomena  that  exist
in  nature.  Do  we  know  whether  the  mechan
ical  laws  are  the  cause  or  the  consequence
of  the  other  laws  ?  If,  by  chance,  they  were
the  consequence,  could  we  still  affirm  that  they
are  rigorous  and  immutable  ?  If  there  really
are  activities  in  nature,  they  are  quite
different  from  the  so-called  action  of  one  body
on  another,  which  is  nothing  but  a  numerical
relation.  And  as  there  is  nothing  to  prove
that  the  real  support  of  so-called  mechanical
phenomena  is  itself  mechanical  and  subject  to
determinism,  there  is  no  chain  to  be  broken  in
order  to  enable  a  moral  influence  to  permeate
what  is  called  the  world  of  matter  and  motion.
Bodies,  in  their  reality,  resemble  us  already,
otherwise  they  are  not  for  us.  The  distinc
tion  between  laws  or  relations  and  phenomena
or  elements,  copied  from  that  between  precepts
and  will,  is  a  mental  artifice  for  the  reduction

77


NATURAL  LAW  IN  SCIENCE  AND  PHILOSOPHY

to  ideas  of  the  greatest  possible  amount  of
given  reality.  In  being  itself,  this  distinction
disappears,  and  with  it  the  determinism
which  implies  it.


78


VI
THE PHYSICAL LAWS

WE  have  seen  that  experience  inter
venes,  as  an  essential  element,  in  the
establishing  of  the  mechanical  laws.  And
yet  these  laws  have  a  strictly  mathematical
form.  If  they  could  exactly  realize,  without
any  sacrifice  on  either  side,  the  synthesis
of  the  rational  and  the  experimental,  they
would  express  a  really  necessary  determinism.
The  two  elements,  however,  are  not  so
much  blended  with,  as  set  alongside  of,  each
other :  the  mathematical  element  in  the
mechanical  laws  does  not  apply  exactly  to
reality,  and  the  experimental  element  in
them  remains  unknown  as  regards  its  nature
and  cause.  Anyhow,  the  harmony  between
mathematics  and  the  experimental  borders
near  enough  on  coincidence,  in  the  mechanical
laws,  for  these  latter  to  be,  in  practice,  the
most  perfect  model  we  possess  of  necessary

79


NATURAL  LAW  IN  SCIENCE  AND  PHILOSOPHY

determination.  We  will  now  look  into  the
nature  of  the  physical  laws,  and  see  whether
they  are  but  one  particular  instance  of
mechanical  determination,  or  possess  an
originality  and  meaning  of  their  own.

Man's  first  feeling  was  a  consideration  of
the  physical  qualities  which  our  senses  reveal
as  inherent  in  bodies  themselves  ;  evidently,
when  thus  regarded,  physical  phenomena
cannot  be  reduced  to  mechanical  phenomena.
From  this  point  of  view,  change  implies  a
destruction  and  a  production  of  substantial
forms  that  is  opposed  to  the  homogeneity
and  continuity  of  strictly  mechanical  pheno
mena.  This  method  of  enquiry,  however,  is
very  unfavourable  to  science  ;  for  things,  when
envisaged  in  this  light,  lend  themselves  but
feebly  to  the  application  of  mathematics.
Consequently,  the  revolution  that  Descartes
effected  was  useful  in  that  it  divested  things  of
sensible  qualities,  which  latter  it  attributed  to
the  knowing  subject.  Descartes  regarded  clear
ness  of  ideas  as  indicative  of  their  truth.  Now,
sensible  quality  is  not  an  object  of  clear  ideas  ;
consequently,  it  cannot  exist  as  it  appears  to
us.  On  the  other  hand,  extension  and  mo
tion  are  objects  of  clear  ideas.  Besides,  we

80


THE  PHYSICAL  LAWS

have  a  natural  tendency  to  refer  our  sensa
tions  to  things  in  extension  as  being  their
cause.  In  virtue,  then,  of  divine  truth,
this  tendency  must  be  a  law  unto  us,  and
so  we  will  affirm,  d  priori,  that  exten
sion  and  motion  must  suffice  to  explain
all  the  phenomena  of  nature.  Physics  is
thus  nothing  more  than  a  continuation  of
mechanics.

This  theory  could  not  be  applied  off-hand
to  facts  ;  and  so,  in  the  eighteenth  century,
special  physical  agents  were  superimposed  on
motion.  Electricity  was  explained  by  two
contrary  fluids  ;  light,  heat,  and  magnetism
were  explained  by  distinct,  separate  fluids.
Still,  the  Cartesian  principle  was  never  alto
gether  abandoned  :  it  continued  to  indicate
the  ideal  of  perfect  science.

At  the  present  time,  we  are  once  again
tending  to  eliminate  qualities  and  reduce  the
physical  to  the  mechanical.  This  is  proved
by  the  mechanical  theory  of  heat.  In  con
formity  with  the  Cartesian  tradition,  many
scientists  regard  motion  as  an  all-sufficient
explanation  of  every  physical  phenomenon ;
as  Tyndall  said  :  heat  is  motion.  Still,  the
most  recent  works  of  contemporary  physicists

81  F


NATURAL  LAW  IN  SCIENCE  AND  PHILOSOPHY

show  a  certain  mistrust  of  this  theory.  The
reproach  is  made  that  it  leads  the  scientist
too  much  to  reason  deductively  and  to  be  too
metaphysical.  When  we  say  that  heat  is
motion,  are  we  not  actually  pronouncing  on
the  very  nature  of  heat  ?  Recognizing
this,  Lippmann  was  careful  to  substitute
for  the  expression  "mechanical  theory  of
heat/'  that  of  "  thermodynamics/'  which
does  not  forejudge  the  nature  of  heat ;
he  also  endeavoured  to  discover,  not  the
essence  of  calorific  phenomena,  but  simply
their  laws.  We  ought,  then,  to  enquire
whether,  in  accordance  with  the  conclusions
of  modern  science,  there  would  appear  to  be
in  physics  some  element  that  cannot  be  re
duced  to  mechanics,  or  whether,  in  the  object
of  these  two  sciences,  there  is  anything  more
than  a  difference  in  complexity  and  degree.
The  essential  character  of  a  mechanical
phenomenon  is  reversibility.  In  abstract
or  theoretical  mechanics,  a  moving  body
which  has  just  gone  over  the  path  A  B  must
return  exactly  along  the  same  positions,
from  B  to  A,  if  the  direction  of  the  motion
is  changed.  The  conditions  of  abstract
mechanics  being  sensibly  realized  in  celestial

82


THE PHYSICAL  LAWS

mechanics,  it  is  possible  to  say  that  if  the
direction  in  which  a  heavenly  body  moves
were  to  be  changed,  this  heavenly  body  would
return  exactly  along  the  same  points ;  it
would  describe,  for  instance,  an  identical
ellipse.  But  in  concrete  mechanics,  which  is
actually  physics,  since  all  power  generates
heat,  reversibility  is  hindered  or  impeded  by
friction.  Now,  this  difference  is  a  general
one  :  no  physical  phenomenon  can  be  repro
duced  in  identical  fashion  if  its  direction  is
changed.  For  instance,  in  the  ordinary
atmosphere,  a  pendulum  going  from  A  to  B,
will  have  a  certain  resistance  to  overcome  ;
to  do  this,  it  will  have  to  produce  power ;
in  producing  power,  it  will  lose  a  portion  of
its  energy.  If,  then,  the  direction  of  the
motion  is  changed,  this  moving  body  will  not
return  to  the  starting-point,  since  it  has
already  lost  energy  on  the  outward  track
and  will  again  lose  energy  on  the  return
track.  It  may  be  set  down  as  a  rule  without
exception,  that  wherever  there  is  expenditure
of  effort,  there  is  both  production  of  heat  and
irreparable  loss  of  the  original  condition.
TJiis  law  introduces  into  physics  an  element
quite  different  from  those  of  mechanics.  In

83


NATURAL  LAW  IN  SCIENCE  AND  PHILOSOPHY

mechanics,  we  are  considering  a  force  which
always  maintains  the  same  nature  and  the
same  quality  ;  in  physics,  on  the  other  hand,
the  quality  is  different  :  the  expenditure  of
effort  is  higher  in  quality  than  heat,  heat  at
100°  is  higher  in  quality  than  heat  at  99°.
Heat  never  wholly  reconstitutes  the  expendi
ture  of  effort  which  gave  birth  to  it ;  the
amount  of  energy  is  continually  decreasing,
according  to  the  principle  of  Clausius  ;  the
phenomena  are  irreversible,  the  ultimate
result  is  always  a  falling  off.  What  does  all
this  mean,  if  not  that  physics  cannot  leave
quality  out  of  account,  quality  as  thus
understood,  at  all  events  ?  This  was  Cornu's
maxim  :  in  physics,  he  said,  we  have  to
consider  not  only  the  quantity  of  energy,  but
also  its  quality.  The  physical  laws,  then,
cannot  be  reduced  to  the  mechanical  laws  ;
a  new  element  intervenes ;  quality.  Of
course,  this  is  no  longer  scholastic  quality  ;
still,  it  is  an  element  of  differentiation  and
heterogeneity.

Let  us  now  try  to  discover  what  it  is,  in
reality,  that  corresponds  to  the  physical
laws,  and  how  far  we  may  regard  them  as
existing  objectively.

84


THE PHYSICAL  LAWS

When  the  mechanical  theory  of  heat  was
established  in  science,  philosophers  thought
they  could  turn  it  to  considerable  account.
The  law  of  the  equivalence  of  effort-expendi
ture  and  heat  was  regarded  as  an  instance  of
the  general  law  governing  the  transformation  of
natural  forces.  They  thought  it  would  estab
lish  continuity  between  the  most  seemingly
heterogeneous  things.  Indeed,  if  motion  can
be  changed  into  heat,  why  should  heat  not
be  changed  into  vital  force,  and  this  latter
into  thought  ?  All  can  be  changed  into  all,
and  the  dream  of  Heraclitus  is  realized ;
transmutation,  which  the  alchemists  sought
after  in  metals  alone,  becomes  the  universal
law  of  nature.

Renouvier,  with  considerable  precision,
showed  the  superficiality  of  this  interpreta
tion.  The  law  in  question,  instead  of  prov
ing  the  possibility  of  transformations,  ex
cludes  them.  Indeed,  it  is  obtained  only  by
eliminating  the  heterogeneous  and  consider
ing  the  homogeneous  side  of  things.  The
physicist  lays  aside  the  best  part  of  the
essence  of  physical  phenomena,  leaving  it
to  the  physiologist,  the  psychologist  or
the  metaphysician ;  the  laws  he  positsdeal

85


NATURAL  LAW  IN  SCIENCE  AND  PHILOSOPHY

only  with  the  quantitative  relations  which
may  be  found  on  the  surface  of  these
phenomena.  Instead  of  there  being  any
transformation  in  physical  production,  as
the  scientist  considers  to  be  the  case,  there
is  a  passing  from  the  same  to  the  same,  a
passing  from  one  distribution  of  energy  to
another  equivalent  distribution.

And  yet,  what  is  it  that  is  conserved  in
nature  if  not  a  force  capable  of  assuming
all  kinds  of  forms  ?  Spencer  regarded  the
reality  of  such  a  force  as  no  less  assured  than
the  impossibility  of  becoming  acquainted
with  its  essence ;  to  establish  this  dual
characteristic  of  universal  force,  he  invoked
the  conditions  of  our  consciousness  and  mental
constitution.  The  force  of  which  we  assert
persistence  is  that  Absolute  Force  we  are
obliged  to  postulate  as  the  necessary  correlative
of  the  force  we  are  conscious  of.  .  .  .  In
asserting  it,  we  assert  an  Unconditioned
Reality,  without  beginning  or  end.  Thus,
quite  unexpectedly,  we  come  down  once  more
to  ...  the  continued  existence  of  an  Unknow
able  as  the  necessary  correlative  of  the  Know-
able  (First  Principles,  §  62,  etc.).  But  then,  as
Dauriac  stated  in  his  remarkable  work  Des

86


THE  PHYSICAL  LAWS

notions  de  matiere  et  de  force  dans  les  sciences
de  la  nature,  if  that  which  is  conserved  is
unknowable,  how  do  we  know  that  it  persists  ?
Either  this  transcendent  principle  has  no
thing  in  common  with  the  forces  with  which
science  deals,  and  its  so-called  persistence
explains  nothing ;  or  else  it  is  the  substance
of  the  forces  with  which  we  are  acquainted,
and,  in  affirming  its  persistence,  we  are  really
affirming  that  transmutation  of  forces  which
there  is  nothing  in  science  to  warrant  us  in
admitting.

According  to  Renouvier,  that  which  is
conserved  is,  strictly  speaking,  kinetic  energy.
But  then,  as  we  have  seen,  physicists  nowa
days  are  diffident  of  reducing  phenomena  to
motion.  There  are  even  mathematicians
who  consider  the  two  principles  of  thermo
dynamics  as  incompatible  with  mechanism.
The  energy,  that  is  conserved,  at  the  same
time  changes  its  nature,  and  its  quality  is
continually  diminishing.  In  reality,  the
principle  of  the  conservation  of  energy  is
rather  a  mould  or  matrix  of  law  than  a
single,  determinate  law.  Whenever  we  con
sider  a  "  closed-in  "  system,  there  is  some
thing  conserved  in  it.  This  something  will

87


NATURAL  LAW  IN  SCIENCE  AND  PHILOSOPHY

vary,  according  as  the  system  is  conceived  as
being  formed  of  mechanical,  of  physical  or
of  chemical  forces.

There  remains  to  be  explained  the  concept
of  permanence.  In  this  connexion,  Helm-
holtz  says  that  the  question  is  not  whether
all  the  facts  can  really  be  reduced  to  constant
causes,  but  rather  that  science,  in  so  far  as  it
insists  on  conceiving  nature  to  be  intelligible,
must  admit  the  possibility  of  such  reduction,
if  only  in  order  to  acquire  the  unexception
able  certainty  that  our  knowledge  is  limited
(Mem.  sur  la  conservation  de  la  force,  Introd.).
The  principle  of  the  conservation  of  force,
therefore,  is,  for  science,  a  guiding  idea,
necessary  in  a  way.  But  there  is  nothing  to
warrant  that  this  law,  as  such,  is  inherent
in  the  nature  of  things.  In  its  profitable
form,  it  is  not  known  d  priori,  nor  does  it
obtrude  upon  the  mind.  It  was  discovered  by
means  of  experiments  and  analyses,  and  conse
quently  is  essentially  experimental  and  induc
tive.  There  is  something  artificial  about  it,  like
all  induction,  and  it  is  difficult  to  conceive
of  it  as  being  absolute.  Indeed,  given  an
ensemble  of  forces,  either  this  system  offers
solutions  of  continuity,  or  it  is  shut  in  on  all

88


THE  PHYSICAL  LAWS

sides.  If  it  is  open  to  external  influences,
these  may  thwart  the  law,  which,  in  that
case,  will  be  realized  only  in  so  far  as  the
external  influences  are  feeble  and  negligible.
On  the  other  hand,  if  the  system  is  "  closed-
in,"  the  law  of  conservation  is  conceived  only
as  co-existing  with  some  cause  of  change.
In  order  that  energy  may  be  conserved
through  the  changes,  then  changes  must
take  place.  And  if  we  would  conceive  things
in  their  reality,  we  cannot  separate  conserva
tion  and  change  from  each  other,  as  we  do
the  ingredients  of  a  purely  physical  mixture.
True,  along  with  the  laws  of  conservation  we
have  laws  of  change,  such  as  the  principle
of  Clausius.  These  laws,  however,  are  neither
reducible  to  the  law  of  conservation  nor
adequate  for  determining  the  phenomena  with
any  degree  of  precision.  The  negative  form
of  the  principle  of  Clausius  actually  prevents
this  principle  from  generating  a  complete
determination.

What,  in  short,  as  regards  the  problem  of
necessity,  is  the  meaning  of  the  physical
laws  ?  To  answer  this  question,  let  us  return
to  the  distinction  drawn  between  the  laws  of
conservation  and  those  of  change.  The  for-

89


NATURAL  LAW  IN  SCIENCE  AND  PHILOSOPHY

mer  are  built  up  on  the  type  of  the  mathema
tical  laws ;  they  are  absolute,  they  set  forth
precise  conditions,  they  are  or  they  are  not.
They  establish  only  a  negative  necessity,
however.  They  are,  in  our  opinion,  barriers
analogous  to  those  formed  by  the  logical  laws,
only  closer  and  nearer  to  things  :  they  leave  the
phenomena  partially  indeterminate.  Indeed,
we  must  guard  against  confusing  determinism
with  necessity  :  necessity  expresses  the  im
possibility  of  a  thing  being  different  from  what
it  is ;  determinism  expresses  the  sum  total
of  the  conditions  which  make  it  necessary
for  the  phenomenon  to  be  stated  just  as
it  is,  with  all  its  modes  of  being.  The  law
of  conservation  is  one  of  abstract  necessity,
not  a  law  of  determinism ;  on  the  other
hand,  any  law  which,  like  the  principle  of
Clausius,  governs  the  distribution  of  force,
is  really  a  law  of  determinism,  though  it  is
and  remains  exclusively  experimental.  Such
a  law  is  no  longer,  like  the  law  of  conserva
tion,  a  condition  of  intelligibility.  There
would  be  nothing  shocking  to  the  mind  if
bodies  were  to  attract  one  another  in  inverse
ratio  to  their  distance,  instead  of  doing  this
in  inverse  ratio  to  the  square  of  the  distance.

90


THE PHYSICAL  LAWS

The  laws  of  determinism,  purely  experi
mental  as  they  are,  do  not  claim  to  be  abso
lutely  exact  and  rigid.  Of  themselves,  they
cannot  denote  a  necessary  concatenation.
They  would  become  laws  of  necessity  only  if
they  were  reducible  to  the  laws  of  conserva
tion,  and  finally  to  the  formula  A  is  A  ;  or,
at  all  events,  if  we  had  solid  grounds  for
believing  that  they  could,  by  right,  be  reduced
thereto.  This  reduction,  however,  to  unity,
of  the  experimental  and  the  logical,  we  find
impossible.  Either  necessity  without  deter
minism  or  determinism  without  necessity ;
such  is  the  dilemma  confronting  us.

Still,  it  will  be  urged,  since  our  laws  can  be
verified,  it  is  at  least  natural  and  morally
necessary  to  regard  them  as  immutable.
Such  a  conclusion,  most  certainly,  super
sedes  experience.  We  do  not  know
whether  the  physical  laws  are  fundamental
and  primal  or  whether  they  are  merely  resul
tants.  When  questioned  on  this  point,  the
physicists  would  either  refuse  to  answer  or
would  incline  to  the  latter  view.  The  very
law  of  gravitation  itself  was  not  regarded  by
Newton  as  a  primary  law.  He  refused,
however,  to  investigate  its  causes,  alleging

9*


NATURAL  LAW  IN  SCIENCE  AND  PHILOSOPHY

that  he  had  no  hypotheses  to  set  up.  We
isolate  these  laws  for  convenience  of  study,
and  because  experience  obviously  authorizes
us  to  do  so.  But  how  are  we  to  know  that
they  form  an  absolute,  that  thus  we  have  a
self-sufficient  side  of  nature,  one  that  is  not
influenced  by  the  rest  ?  Are  all  these  ele
ments  of  reality,  the  qualities  and  forms  of
being,  which  have  had  to  be  eliminated  in
establishing  physics  as  a  science,  really
inactive,  high  above  the  measurable  magni
tudes  isolated  by  science,  like  the  gods  of
Epicurus,  far  above  this  world  of  ours  ?  Does
not  thought,  as  well  as  the  sense  of  reality,
require  that  the  different  elements  of  the
world  should  condition  one  another,  for  the
world  to  be  a  unity  ?  And  if,  in  reality,  the
physical  laws  are  not  independent  of  the
other  laws  that  may  lie  concealed  in  nature,
how  can  we  affirm  that  they  are  immutable
and  inflexible  ?  Possibly  they  are  formed  by
evolution,  as  is  said  nowadays  regarding  animal
species  ;  possibly  their  fixity  is  a  contingent
state  of  things,  not  a  necessity.  It  is  not  legiti
mate  to  take  literally  this  determinism,  which
recognizes  no  cause  for  a  physical  phenomenon,
other  than  some  equally  physical  phenomenon,

92


THE PHYSICAL  LAWS

since  such  phenomena  are  but  abstractions,
and  true  action,  if  it  does  exist  in  nature,  is
something  very  much  more  complex.

To  sum  up,  consideration  of  the  physical
laws,  when  compared  with  that  of  the  purely
mechanical  laws,  marks  a  certain  progress
in  determinism,  in  the  sense  that  modes  of
being  which  mechanics  left  indeterminate,
are  now  explained  according  to  laws.  In
becoming  narrower,  however,  determinism
becomes  more  complex  and  obscure,  and  less
reducible  to  that  analytical  relationship  which
alone  would  appear  to  constitute  necessity.


93


VII
THE CHEMICAL LAWS

THE  sciences  with  which  we  have  hitherto
dealt  had  all,  though  in  differing  de
grees,  an  abstract  object ;  they  considered
existing  properties,  but  not  beings  of  nature.
Chemistry,  on  the  other  hand,  takes  account
of  concrete  bodies  existing  in  themselves.
The  result  would  seem  to  be  that  this  science,
from  the  philosophical  point  of  view,  has  a
wider  range  than  the  former  ones,  and  that
the  determinism  of  the  chemical  laws  pene
trates  more  deeply  into  the  essence  of  things.
Let  us  now  see  if  this  is  really  so.

Chemistry  is  a  comparatively  recent
science.  As  shown  in  the  profound  and
learned  work  of  Berthelot  on  Les  Origines
de  FAkhimie,  the  transformations  of  bodies
were  first  explained  by  the  spontaneous
action,  either  of  supernatural  powers,  or  of
a  (frua-is  which  again  was  a  kind  of  divine
instinct,  working  apart  from  the  mechanical

94


THE  CHEMICAL  LAWS

laws.  We  find  alchemy  intervening  between
this  more  or  less  theological  period  and
the  present  scientific  period.  According  to
the  alchemists,  man  must  be  permitted,  by
every  human  and  divine  law,  to  utilize  the
forces  of  nature,  and  this  is  possible  for  him.
The  way  to  do  it  is  to  rely  on  nature  her
self  :  Natura  a  natura  vincitur.  Their  theory
is  as  follows.  On  the  one  hand,  the  corporeal
elements  are  susceptible  of  transmutation ;
on  the  other,  this  transmutation  admits  of
rotation,  a  circular  process  which  returns  to
its  starting-point.  A  serpent  biting  its  tail
is  the  symbol  adopted  by  the  alchemists.
The  former  of  these  two  principles  may  be
confirmed  by  immediate  experience ;  in  a
chemical  transformation,  we  note  a  complete
change  of  qualitative  properties.  But  the
alchemists,  confining  themselves  to  immediate
observation,  were  mistaken  as  regards  the
simple  and  the  compound.  They  looked  upon
the  simple  as  that  which  is  given,  and  the
compound  as  that  which  is  formed  from  the
given.  This  identification  of  the  given  with
the  simple  is  an  error  identical  to  that  which  we
find  in  the  philosophy  of  Locke,  for  whom
the  simple  was  the  given  sensation,  and  the

95


NATURAL  LAW  IN  SCIENCE  AND  PHILOSOPHY

compound  the  idea  resulting  from  it.  The
second  principle  of  the  alchemists  also  con
forms  with  crude  experience.  Indeed,  start
ing  with  metallic  oxide,  metal  can  be  ob
tained  ;  and,  in  the  same  way,  if  we  heat  the
metal,  the  latter  becomes  an  oxide  once  again.
It  was  Lavoisier  who,  when  tracing  the
real  principles  of  chemistry,  brought  this
science  to  its  present  condition  (see  Berthe-
lot's  Notice  historique  sur  Lavoisier^).  In  the
first  place,  he  established  the  fact  that,  in
chemical  transformations,  not  only  does
matter  generally  remain  constant  in  quantity,
but  that  even  the  special  bodies  on  which  the
chemist  operates  remain  unchanged  in  weight.
Showing  that  the  calcination  of  metals  re
sulted  from  the  union  of  the  metal  with  a  por
tion  of  the  surrounding  air,  and  not  from  a  loss
of  phlogiston,  he  proved  the  metal  to  be  the
simple  and  the  oxide  the  compound,  thus
changing  the  very  foundations  of  the  science.
And  in  the  second  place,  according  to  Lavoi
sier,  special  simple  bodies,  defined  by  their
weight,  must  suffice  to  explain  the  forma
tion  of  compounds.  He  offered  a  notable
instance  of  this,  explaining  the  composition
of  water  by  the  combination  of  hydrogen

96


THE  CHEMICAL  LAWS

and  oxygen.  Such  mysterious  substances
as  phlogiston  were  altogether  eliminated.
Thus,  the  so-called  simple  bodies  set  a
limit  on  the  decomposition  and  suffice  for  the
reconstitution  of  the  given  bodies.  And  so
chemistry  transfers  to  the  species  of  bodies
that  permanence  which  mechanics  attributed
only  to  force  considered  generally.

The  result  is  a  most  important  difference
between  physics  and  chemistry.  Is  this  irre-
ducibility  an  absolute  one  ?  The  different
theories  aim  at  lessening  it  as  much  as
possible.  According  to  the  atomic  theory,
atoms,  differing  simply  in  weight,  form  and
valence,  by  their  various  arrangements
suffice  to  account  for  chemical  phenomena.
But  these  differences,  especially  that  of
valence,  still  constitute  specific  differences.
This  latter  difference,  which  concerns  the
number  of  atoms  susceptible  of  associating  to
form  a  molecule,  cannot  be  reduced  to  physical
or  mechanical  properties.  For  instance,  in
gravitation,  a  mechanical  force,  mass  and  dis
tance  alone  enter  into  account.  Moreover,
the  atomic  theory  of  itself  is  powerless  to
reproduce  the  variety  and  complication  of
nature.  Its  complications  are  all  to  no  pur-

97  G


NATURAL  LAW  IN  SCIENCE  AND  PHILOSOPHY

pose  :  the  possibility  of  atoms  exchanging
semi-valences  with  one  another,  of  atoms
possessing  four  dimensions  (that  of  azote,
for  instance),  the  mutual  incommensurability
of  their  weights.  There  is  continually  hover
ing  above  the  atomic  theory  that  dim  mist
of  approximation  which,  according  to  Berthe-
lot,  casts  a  shadow  over  the  whole  system.
For  the  present,  we  may  conclude  that  chemis
try  is  really  distinct  from  physics,  in  so  far
as  it  admits  of  distinct  species  of  bodies,  the
substratum  of  that  profound  chemical  change
which  observation  distinguishes  from  mere
physical  change.

What  is  the  objective  value  of  the  chemical
laws  ?  If  some  day  chemistry  comes  to  be
wholly  reducible  to  physics,  the  reproach  to
which  this  latter  lays  itself  open,  that  it  is  an
abstract  science  when  regarded  as  a  science
of  being,  will  be  brought  against  the  former
also.  But  the  atomic  theory  claims,  as
interpreted  by  some  philosophers  who  have
adopted  it,  to  explain,  as  regards  its  general
form,  the  real  constitution  of  matter.  Let  us
examine  if  such  a  claim  can  be  made  for  it.

Modern  atomists  take  for  their  starting-point
Newton's  principle  :  "  By  effects  to  come  to  know

98


THE CHEMICAL  LAWS

causes"  and,  basing  their  conclusions  on  ex
perience  and  induction,  they  think  they  can
proceed  from  phenomena  to  being.  But  then,
the  atomic  theory  would  first  have  to  be  pre
cise  and  homogeneous  for  it  to  be  capable  of
being  regarded  as  a  doctrine  of  being  itself.
Now,  the  difficulties  we  have  mentioned  above,
especially  as  regards  valence,  show  that  the
very  idea  of  atom  has  not  been  definitely
established.  Stallo,  the  author  of  a  learned
work  on  La  matiere  et  la  physique  modeme,
shows  that  chemists  cannot  guarantee  the
homogeneity,  hardness  and  inertia  of  the
atom,  though  these  are  all  essential  elements
in  its  definition.  Chemists  also  tell  us  of  an
energy  of  position,  distinct  from  kinetic  energy,
and  the  reality  of  which  it  is  no  easy  matter  to
reconcile  with  the  principles  of  atomism.  The
truth  would  appear  to  be  that  this  theory
has  been  of  great  service,  that  it  is  valuable
as  a  symbolic  representation  and  doubtless
the  best  we  possess,  but  that  it  has  no  claim
to  determine  metaphysically  the  nature  of
things.

We  may  go  further  and  say  :  even  were
there  a  more  complete  coincidence  between
facts  and  theory,  we  should  still  have  no  right

99


NATURAL  LAW  IN  SCIENCE  AND  PHILOSOPHY

to  regard  atomism  as  a  theory  of  being.  In
deed,  the  principle  ab  effectibus  ad  causa s
never  offers  anything  but  a  subjective  expla
nation.  The  atom  cannot  be  known  by  the
senses  :  it  is  conceived  of  only  by  the  aid  of
hypothetical  reasoning.  Now,  such  reasoning
never  attains  to  anything  more  than  pos
sibility,  the  sufficient,  or  apparently  sufficient
condition,  given  the  facts  at  our  disposal ;  it
never  reaches  the  necessary  condition.  Speak
ing  of  the  objections  to  which  the  atomic
theory  may  give  rise,  M.  Friedel  alleges  that
no  physicist  is  as  yet  disposed  to  throw  over
board  the  undulatory  theory  of  light,  on
account  of  the  grave  difficulties,  and  even  con
tradictions,  which  the  conception  of  luminous
ether  offers.  In  the  same  way,  he  said,  it  is
better  to  continue  to  use  a  theory  which  has
enabled  a  vast  number  of  facts  to  be  grouped
together,  and  which  daily  leads  to  the  discovery
of  fresh  ones.  Such  language  is  a  tolerably
clear  indication  that  there  is  no  intention,  in
the  name  of  science,  of  setting  up  atomism  as
absolute  truth.

Metaphysics,  however,  supports  this  theory,
and  claims  to  bring  it  the  aid  which  science
neither  can  nor  will  afford.  In  a  general

100


THE  CHEMICAL  LAWS

way,  it  is  maintained  that  the  atom  is  the
element  which  unites  reality  and  intel
ligibility  in  the  highest  possible  degree.
The  atom,  it  is  said,  is  real,  for  it  is  determi
nate,  both  in  bulk,  in  magnitude  and  in
shape  ;  it  is  intelligible,  for  it  is  denned  by
the  qualities  we  conceive  most  clearly  :  the
geometrical  qualities.  Moreover,  we  need  only
conceive  of  the  sensible  qualities  as  connected
with  the  properties  of  atoms,  to  explain,  by
means  of  these  latter,  the  changes  which
seem  to  be  effected  in  the  nature  of  bodies.
The  atom,  then,  is  both  intelligible  and  a
principle  of  intelligibility.

But  these  affirmations  are  open  to  criti
cism.  First  of  all,  we  cannot  explain  the
endless  variety  of  things  by  means  of  the
atom,  without  making  of  this  latter  a  more
or  less  extra-scientific  notion.  Thus,  some
scientists  consider  that  the  extended  atom
cannot  be  reconciled  with  the  centrifugal
force  implied  in  the  relations  between  atoms
at  short  distances  from  one  another ;  they
reduce  the  atom  to  nothing  more  than  a
centre  of  force,  devoid  of  extension  and  yet
situated  in  space.  Such  was  the  hypothesis  of
Boscovich,  revived  by  scientists  like  Ampere,

10 1


NATURAL  LAW  IN  SCIENCE  AND  PHILOSOPHY

Cauchy  and  Carnot  (see  Pillon's  fine  article
on  "  1'Evolution  historique  de  ratomisme,"  in
the  Annee  philosophique  for  1891).  On  the
other  hand,  in  order  to  explain  by  the  combi
nation  of  atoms  the  phenomena  of  sensation
and  thought,  certain  metaphysicians  endow
the  atom  with  psychic  as  well  as  with  mechani
cal  and  physical  properties.  For  instance,  in
the  system  of  Epicurus,  we  find  the  clinamen,
which,  after  all,  is  no  more  than  an  ebauche
of  free-will.  In  modern  times,  atomism
entered  on  a  new  phase  with  Locke,  as  Pillon
has  shown  in  the  above-mentioned  article.
God  is  omnipotent,  says  Locke,  and  therefore,
without  contradicting  himself,  he  can  endow
the  atom  with  both  extension  and  thought.
Following  the  lead  that  Locke  gave  to
atomism,  Maupertuis  attributes  to  the  atom
a  rudiment  of  sensibility  and  thought,  apart
from  physical  qualities.  This  point  of  view
is  also  seen  in  a  scientist  like  Haeckel,  who
regards  the  atom  as  animated,  and  looks
upon  the  elective  affinity  of  bodies  as  a
manifestation  of  tendencies,  sensations  and
volitions.

And  so,  by  varying  at  will  our  idea  of  the
atom,  we  have  come  to  regard  it  as  explain-

102


THE CHEMICAL LAWS

ing  everything ;  though  at  the  same  time  we
have  made  this  explanation  anything  but  con
vincing.  Speaking  generally,  atomism  can
give  a  reason  for  everything,  provided  it  endow
the  atom  with  the  very  thing  that  has  to  be
explained.  Now,  this  way  of  developing  ato
mism  contradicts  its  principle,  which  is  essen
tially  one  of  economy,  in  more  precise  terms,
the  idea  of  explaining  the  higher  by  the  lower,
the  appearance  of  finality  by  mechanism,
mind  by  matter.

To  return  to  atomism  strictly  so  called,
i.e.  to  geometrical  atomism,  are  we  certain
that  it  reconciles  intelligibility  with  reality  ?

The  starting-point  of  modern  atomism  is
the  Newtonian  distinction  between  space  and
bodies.  Space  is  nothing  else  than  a  vacuum,
and  a  vacuum  is  unthinkable.  Bodies  are
magnitudes,  but  they  cannot  be  measured
absolutely,  for  we  have  no  absolute  unit  of
measurement  and  we  cannot  compare  the
atom  with  the  point  in  mathematics,  without
falling  into  the  insuperable  difficulties  of  the
infinite.  Extension  is  never  anything  but  a
relation.  It  is  the  same  with  weight  :  weight
is  a  relation  depending  on  terrestrial  attrac
tion.  In  a  general  way,  we  only  make  use  of

103


NATURAL  LAW  IN  SCIENCE  AND  PHILOSOPHY

experience  in  order  to  determine  the  size  or
the  mass  of  atoms. Now,  experience  can  offer
us  no  more  than  the  relative. Thus,  doubt
less,  the  notion  of  the  atom  is  clear  and  evi
dent, so  long  as  we are  dealing  with the
abstract,  but  when  we  wish  to  determine  the
atom  with  reference  to  its  location  in  space,
its  form,  extension  or  weight,  thought  finds
itself  faced  with a mere  relationship, pro
ceeding  from  an  insuperable  indetermination.
After  all,  the  atomic  theory  offers  us  no
thing  else  than  the  imaginative  scheme  of
the  notion  of  law,  just  as  a  curve  represents
to  the  eye  the  variations  in  temperature  or
the  increase  or diminution  of  the  popula
tion. By  definition,  a  natural  law  is  a  con
stant  relation  between  two  definite,  immu
table  terms  ;  a  couple  of  atoms  whose  mutual
action  depends  solely  on  their  distance  well
represents  this relation. Adequately  deter
mined,  the  atom  supplies  schemes  that  cor
respond  to  the  physical  and  chemical  laws,
which  are  conceived  after  the  model  of  the
mechanical  laws. This  representation  is  a  very
natural  and  convenient  one, though  relative
to our  imagination,  for  which  it  has been
constructed. A  metaphor  is  not  a  being.

104


THE  CHEMICAL  LAWS

What,  in  short,  is  the  meaning  of  the  prin
ciples  of  chemistry  as  regards  determinism  ?
It  is  noteworthy  that,  in  antiquity,  atomism
was  a  doctrine  of  atheism,  or,  at  all  events,
of  the  non-intervention  of  the  gods  ;  whereas,
in  the  case  of  the  moderns,  it  does  not,  as
a  rule,  exclude  religious  beliefs.  Newton
closely  connects  the  idea  of  God  with  the
nature  of  space  and  of  the  mechanical  laws  of
the  universe.  Boscovich  is  a  spiritualist ;
he  subordinates  the  existence  of  the  world,
which  he  regards  as  contingent,  to  the  will
or  arbitrament  of  an  infinite  power.  This
difference  would  appear  to  result  from  the
notion  that  has  been  formed  of  inertia.  In
deed,  the  atomists  of  old  admitted  that  matter
possesses  within  itself  a  principle  of  motion  :
therefore  they  had  no  need  of  the  workings
of  a  God.  The  moderns,  on  the  other  hand,
consider  mass  and  motion  separately,  and
look  upon  them  as  independent  of  each  other.
Therefore  their  union  may  seem  to  require
the  intervention  of  a  supernatural  power.
A  God  is  needed  to  give  a  start,  an  impetus.

In  spite  of  numerous  examples  of  recon
ciliation  between  atomism  and  religious  be
liefs,  it  seems  correct  to  say  that  atomism,

105


NATURAL  LAW  IN  SCIENCE  AND  PHILOSOPHY

speaking  generally,  remains  hostile  to
ideas  of  providence  and  freedom.  Indeed,
its  tendency  is  to  explain  the  more  by  the
less  ;  and  so  it  endows  atoms  with  the  fewest
possible  qualities,  those,  too,  that  are  farthest
removed  from  mind  ;  and  in  this  philosophy,
even  when  it  is  thought  that  God  must  be
appealed  to  for  an  explanation  of  the  exis
tence  of  atoms,  divine  action  is  reduced  to  a
minimum  ;  it  is  admitted  only  in  so  far  as  it
cannot  be  dispensed  with.

Still,  let  us  consider  not  atomism  but
simply  the  general  idea  of  the  chemical  laws,
to  wit,  the  principle  of  the  permanence  of  the
weight  of  bodies.  Physics  and  chemistry
show  us  everything  seemingly  permanent  in
nature,  mass  and  energy  alike.  What  is
this  permanence  ?  We  are  inclined  to  think
that  everything  we  attribute  to  permanence
we  withdraw  from  contingence  and  free
dom.  But  this  may  be  no  more  than  a  pre
judice,  the  origin  of  which  would  seem  to
date  back  to  antiquity.  The  ancients  re
garded  fixity,  immutability,  as  the  ideal.
Epicurus  considers  the  gods  as  being  eternally
unoccupied,  for  work  is  a  change  of  state,  it
implies  fatigue.  But  these  ideas  are  not  so

106


THE  CHEMICAL  LAWS

current  amongst  the  moderns  as  they  were
amongst  the  ancients.  Many  of  us  look
upon  motion  as  superior  to  repose.  For
aesthetic  and  moral  reasons,  perhaps,  as
well  as  scientific,  our  conception  of  being  and
of  the  ideal  has  changed ;  nowadays,  it
admits  of — even  if  it  does  not  exact — pro
gress,  improvement,  flexibility.  And  there
fore  immutability  is  no  longer  the  mark  of
the  absolute,  but  rather  of  the  relative.
Mass  and  energy  are  immutable,  therefore
they  are  only  phenomena.  We  conceive  of
permanence  either  as  a  state  or  as  a  limit,
no  longer  as  a  necessity  inherent  in  being.
Moreover,  we  may  note  that  determinism
becomes  obscure  the  more  it  contracts.
Mechanics  has  actually  had  to  substitute
for  mathematical  intuition  a  relation  of
simple  phenomenal  causality,  incapable  of
being  reduced  to  this  intuition.  Physics
has  complicated  this  relation  by  introduc
ing  a  notion  of  quality,  that  of  energy.
Chemistry  adds  the  idea  of  special  bodies,
relatively  permanent  in  nature.  Progress
takes  place  from  the  homogeneous  to  the
heterogeneous,  consequently  from  the  intel
ligible  to  the  obscure.

107


NATURAL  LAW  IN  SCIENCE  AND  PHILOSOPHY

On  the  other  hand,  every  one  admits  that
physico-chemical  determinism  may  act  upon
mechanical  determinism  without  the  former
being  reducible  to  the  latter.  A  priori,
then,  there  is  nothing  to  prevent  physico-
chemical  determinism,  in  its  turn,  from  ad
mitting  of  the  intervention  of  some  superior
determinism,  biological  determinism,  for  in
stance,  if  it  were  to  happen  that  it  could  not
be  reduced  to  physico-chemical  determinism.


108


VIII
THE BIOLOGICAL LAWS

IN  his  Nouveaux  Elements  de  Physiologic
humaine,  M.  Beaunis  reduces  the  biological
laws  to  two  principles  :  first,  the  correlation
of  physical  with  vital  movements ;  second,
the  evolution  of  living  beings.  Conformably
with  this  division,  we  will  now  study  the
relations  between  physiology  and  physics ;
and,  in  the  next  chapter,  take  up  the  rela
tions  of  species  with  one  another,  and  the
question  of  evolution.

Are  the  general  laws  of  life  reducible  to
the  physico-chemical  laws  ?  Let  us  first
examine  the  matter  from  the  historical  point
of  view.

Descartes  declared  that  every  science,  the
science  of  life  as  well  as  those  of  matter,
must  be  reducible  to  mechanics ;  he  him
self  made  attempts  in  physiology,  along

109


NATURAL  LAW  IN  SCIENCE  AND  PHILOSOPHY

these  lines.  Modern  science,  however,  did  not
originate  immediately  in  this  synthetic  view.
M.  Gley 1  dates  the  beginnings  of  modern
physiology  from  the  English  doctor,  Glisson.
Now,  the  latter  bases  this  science  on  the
notion  of  irritability,  which  he  regards  not  as
reducible  to  mechanism,  but  as  a  special
property,  peculiar  to  living  beings ;  a  lower
form  of  the  very  faculties  that  constitute
the  human  mind :  appetition  and  per
ception.  In  a  second  period,  comprising
Haller  and  Bichat,  vital  phenomena  are
clearly  distinguished  from  physical  ones,  but
more  attention  is  bestowed  on  their  analysis
and  division  into  categories  than  on  the
inquiry  as  to  whether  or  not  they  have  any
special  basis.  This  analytical  period  offers
a  striking  analogy  with  the  psychological
period  mainly  represented  by  Jouffroy.  A
third  period  begins  with  Broussais  :  its
main  representative  is  Claude  Bernard.
We  work  up  from  phenomena  to  their  prin
ciples  ;  we  ascend  from  vital  faculties  to
irritability,  doing  away,  however,  with  the
idea  of  mysterious  powers  and  attempting

1  Dictionnaire  encyclopedique  des  sciences medicales,
article  on  "  Irritability."

HO


THE  BIOLOGICAL  LAWS

to  reduce  this  very  irritability  to  mechanism,
in  accordance  with  the  Cartesian  principle.
Thus  we  introduce  a  strict  determinism  into
physiology.  In  examining  what  this  reduc
tion  consists  of  essentially,  we  will  base  our
argument  on  the  Elements  de  Physiologie  of
M.  Beaunis  and  on  Dr.  Gley's  remarkable
article  just  mentioned.

Present-day  science  teaches  that  in  the
living  being  :  i,  there  is  no  spontaneity ;
2,  reaction  is  equal  to  action.  Protoplasm
is  the  common  element  of  all  tissues.  It
enters  into  motion  only  when  subjected  to
some  particular  mechanical,  physical  or  chem
ical  excitant.  What  is  true  of  the  element
must  be  true  of  the  compounds.  Again,  in
living  beings  and  in  the  organic  world  alike,
there  is  equality  between  action  and  reaction.
Of  this  we  become  more  and  more  conscious,
as  we  consider,  with  increasing  precision,
the  amount  of  material  supplied  and  of  effort
and  heat  expended,  in  the  case  of  living  beings.
The  law  of  the  mechanical  equivalent  of
heat  applies  to  living  beings.  The  reason
they  appear  to  expend  more  force  than  they
receive  is  that  they  have  reserve  forces  of
tension  which  are  suddenly  released  beneath

in


NATURAL  LAW  IN  SCIENCE  AND  PHILOSOPHY

the  influence  of  the  exciting  agent.  Strictly
speaking,  they  are  machines  capable  of  stor
ing  force.  No  doubt  every  kind  of  tissue
appears  to  have  special  irritability,  but  this
difference  in  manifestation  results  from  the
complexity  of  the  tissues  and  the  different
way  in  which  their  cells  are  arranged.
The  final  reason  for  irritability  lies  in  the
nature  of  the  substances  which  compose
protoplasm ;  these  admit  of  a  great  variety
of  combinations  :  carbon,  for  instance,  which
is  tetravalent.  Impermanence  of  protoplas
mic  substance  is  the  essential  condition  of
irritability.  And  the  progress  of  organization
is  nothing  but  the  increase  of  this  very  mi-
permanence.  It  would  thus  appear  that  the
reduction  of  physiology  to  physico-chemis-
try,  if  not  actually  effected  in  detail,  is  at
all  events  certain  in  principle  and  assured
in  the  future.

Still,  if  we  consider  the  usual  language  of
the  physiologists  who  are  labouring  to  justify
this  induction,  it  would  seem  that  results
have  not  yet  come  up  to  intentions.  Claude
Bernard  wrote  :  "  It  is  clear  that  this  evolu
tive  property  of  the  egg,  which  will  produce
a  mammifer,  a  bird  or  a  fish,  belongs  neither

112


THE BIOLOGICAL  LAWS

to  physics  nor  to  chemistry."  1  And  M.
Beaunis  said  :  "  There  is  always  a  certain
constancy  in  the  outer  form  of  living  beings.
Each  organism  is  built  up  according  to  a
morphological  type,  from  which,  in  the
course  of  its  existence,  it  can  only  deviate
within  restricted  limits." 2  M.  Gley  said  :  "  Not
only  does  the  being  or  the  tissue  react,  when
affected  by  an  excitation  in  its  environment,
but  it  appropriates  its  elements  to  this  reac
tion  ;  for,  under  penalty  of  deposition,  perhaps
of  death,  it  is  compelled  to  adapt  its  physical
nature  and  chemical  constitution  to  this
change  in  the  conditions  of  existence."  3
Do  not  such  words  as  these  seem  to  indicate
that  the  living  element  tends  to  subsist  in
its  individuality  and  employs  the  appro
priate  means  of  realizing  this  end  ?  Still,
it  is  quite  possible  that  these  scientists
merely  continue,  as  a  matter  of  habit,  to
use  ordinary  language,  just  as  the  astronomer
speaks  of  the  sun's  motion  round  the  earth,
or  of  its  rising  and  setting.  Let  us  consider
things  in  themselves.

1  Claude  Bernard,  La science  experimental,  p.  210 ;
Gley,  art.  "  Irritabilite,"  p.  487.

2  Beaunis,  Traite  de  Physiologic,  2nd  ed.,  17.

3  Gley,  article  on  "  Irritability"  p.  489.

113  H


NATURAL  LAW  IN  SCIENCE  AND  PHILOSOPHY

It cannot be doubted  but that life,  to
Claude Bernard, is really a "  controlling
idea/'  distinct  from  mechanism. He  regards
this  theory  as  playing  too  important  a  role
for  it  to  be  looked  upon  as  only  a  metaphor,
a  way  of  speaking. Claude  Bernard  attri
butes  to  living  beings,  in  their  own  right,
the  following  characteristics  : organization,
generation,  evolution,  nutrition,  decay,  sick
ness  and  death. These  phenomena  he  regards
as  inexplicable  apart  from  life  as  a  special
principle. "  Vital force/' he says, "  con
trols  phenomena  which  it  does  not  produce  ;
physical agents produce phenomena which
they  do  not control."  * M. Marey  writes  :
"  For  myself,  I  am  not  acquainted  with  the
phenomena  of  life  ;  I  acknowledge  only  two
kinds  of  manifestations  of  life  : those  intelli
gible to us,  which are all of a physical
or  chemical order ; and those that are
unintelligible/'  2 There are gaps, then, in
mechanism ; certain aspects of the living
being,  in  the  present  state  of  science,  appear
to  be  unintelligible,  i.e.  irreducible  to  physico-

1  Claude Bernard,  Lecon  sur  les phenom&nes  de  la
vie,  i.  51.

2  Marey,  Du  mouvement  dans  les  fonctions  de  la  vie,
3rd  lesson. — Gley,  article  on  "  Irritabilite,"  p.  486.

114


THE BIOLOGICAL  LAWS

chemical  forces.  What  is  it  that  shrinks  from
mechanical  explanation  in  this  way  ?  It  would
seem  to  be  a  principle  of  finality,  inherent,  in
spite  of  everything,  in  the  most  elementary
vital  phenomenon.  The  living  being  is  re
duced  to  protoplasm,  whose  function  it  is
to  react  under  the  influence  of  external
activities.  In  it,  we  say,  spontaneity  is  nil,
reaction  is  equal  to  action.  But,  it  may  be
remarked,  this  reaction  is  not  any  kind  of  a
reaction ;  it  is  incompletely  characterized
when  defined  from  the  sole  standpoint  of
quantity,  for  it  possesses  the  unexpected
property  of  favouring  not  only  the  conserva
tion,  but  also  the  development  and  propaga
tion  of  the  very  individual  that  reacts.  The
exercise  of  irritability  is  expressed  by  losses ;
now,  organic  matter  reacts  exactly  in  such
a  way  as  to  make  good  these  losses.  Besides,
it  reacts  so  as  to  adapt  itself  to  environment,
to  make  life  possible  for  itself  in  the  various
conditions  in  which  it  happens  to  be  placed.
In  short,  by  a  process  of  reproduction,  it  en
sures  the  perpetuity  of  the  form  it  represents.
It  has  frequently  been  said  that  life  is  essen
tially  a  vicious  circle.  The  organ  makes  the
function  possible,  and  the  function  is  the

"5


NATURAL  LAW  IN  SCIENCE  AND  PHILOSOPHY

condition  of  the  organ  ;  muscular  contraction
accelerates  the  circulation  of  the  blood,  and
the  circulation  of  the  blood  keeps  up  muscular
contraction.  In  every  important  physiological
phenomenon  we  find  the  vicious  circle.  In  the
living  being,  then,  there  would  appear  to  be
an  internal  finality.  The  living  being,  re
garded  as  an  individual,  makes  use  of  that
which  is  around  it  to  ensure  its  own  subsis
tence.  The  reflex  action  that  characterizes
it  offers  two  aspects  :  the  one,  which  con
cerns  physics  and  chemistry ;  the  other,
which  has  no  analogy  in  the  objects  of  these
sciences.

There  is  one  phenomenon  which  emphasizes
this  difference,  and  that  is  death.  Death
finds  no  explanation  in  mechanism  :  this
was  why  Descartes  dreamt  of  an  indefinite
development  of  human  life  ;  and  those  who
maintained  the  theory  of  mechanism,  for
the  most  part,  saw  no  radical  impossibility
in  the  immortality  of  the  living  being,  repara
tion  always  exactly  making  up  for  the  wear
ing  away  of  tissue.  M.  Sabatier x  thinks
that  death  is  intimately  connected  with  the

1  Essai  sur  la  vie  et  la  mort',  1892.
116


THE BIOLOGICAL  LAWS

use  made,  by  the  living  being,  of  the  cells
of  which  it  consists.  At  first,  the  living
being  had  no  other  function  than  to  continue
to  live.  It  was  then  very  slightly  differ
entiated.  To  render  higher  faculties  possi
ble,  the  cells  have  become  differentiated  and
have  acquired  complicated  structures.  Loss
of  their  potential  immortality  has  been  the
consequence  of  this  progress.  At  the  pre
sent  time,  only  the  reproductive  cells,  which
are  relatively  simple,  retain  comparative
immortality,  which  is  realized  either  imme
diately  by  scissiparity  and  gemmation  ;  or  in
directly,  by  way  of  a  plasmocaryogamic  reju
venation.  The  cause  of  death  is  dual.  There
is  an  internal  cause,  the  aspiration  to  rise,  to
supersede  life  pure  and  simple  in  order  to
attain  to  knowledge  and  feeling  :  it  was  to
satisfy  this  tendency  that  differentiation  of
tissues,  the  origin  of  their  mortality,  came
about.  There  is  also  an  external  cause :
the  outer  appeals  beneath  the  influence  of
which  the  tendency  is  realized.  The  biblical
account  of  how  man  loses  immortality  when
he  tastes  the  fruit  of  the  tree  of  knowledge
is,  according  to  M.  Sabatier,  an  exact  sym
bol  of  the  cause  of  death.  Thus,  when

117


NATURAL  LAW  IN  SCIENCE  AND  PHILOSOPHY

Pascal  proclaimed  that  man  is  greater  than
nature  because  he  knows  that  he  dies,  he  was
propounding  a  view  which  was  not  only
metaphysical  and  moral,  it  was  also  scientific.
The  best  men  in  a  nation,  said  Renan,  are
those  it  crucifies.  Martyrdom  is  the  ransom
of  superiority.  Death,  then,  is  a  witness  to
the  effort  made  by  the  living  being  to  rise
above  the  environment  in  which  he  was
born.  Defeat  is  the  mark  of  his  greatness.
All  these  considerations  are  both  poetical
and  religious ;  and  yet  scientists,  as  well  as
the  rest  of  mankind,  are  influenced  by
them.  Then  what  is  the  relation  between
vital  faculties  and  physico-chemical  proper
ties  ?

Can  physiology  be  established,  like  chemis
try,  by  eliminating  purely  and  simply  every
thing  that  does  not  appear  susceptible
of  strictly  scientific  determinations  ?  The
chemist  does  not  deny  that  there  are  sen
sible  qualities,  but  he  relegates  them  either  to
physiology  or  to  metaphysics  :  he  finds  a
relatively  isolable  object  of  science  in  the
relations  of  molecular  composition.  In  the
same  way,  it  may  be  alleged,  when  studying
living  beings,  we  distinguish,  on  the  one

118


THE  BIOLOGICAL  LAWS

hand,  physico-chemical  phenomena,  and,  on
the  other,  an  indescribable  something  which
resembles  finality :  this  latter  element  is
relegated  to  psychology  or  metaphysics,  or
even  to  the  unknowable ;  and  physiology
is  established  as  a  science,  no  account  being
taken  of  any  but  physico-chemical  manifest
ations.

But  is  the  separation,  that  was  possible
in  chemistry,  possible  also  in  physiology  ?
It  would  appear  that  this  triumphant  adap
tation  to  the  conditions  of  existence,  this
choice  of  means  suited  to  ensure  the  persis
tence  of  the  individual,  this  tendency  to  expand
and  rise  that  we  have  remarked,  here  form
one  with  the  object  of  science.  The  amceba,
one  of  the  simplest  of  beings,  a  homogeneous
—and  almost  diffluent — substance,  has  these
properties  to  a  striking  extent.  If  an  amceba
is  plunged  into  a  liquid,  and  it  there  encoun
ters  a  foreign  body  on  which  it  is  able  to  feed,
for  instance,  a  particle  of  vegetation,  we  find
its  prolongations  gradually  extend  around  the
grain,  finally  surrounding  it  completely  and
uniting  with  it,  so  that  the  latter  forms  one  with
its  own  bulk.  Then  follows  a  certain  period
during  which  digestion  takes  place.  In  the

119


NATURAL  LAW  IN  SCIENCE  AND  PHILOSOPHY

end,  the  useless  portion  of  the  foreign  body
is  expelled,  by  a  process  the  inverse  of  that
by  which  it  entered.  This  is  not  a  mere
chemical  combination.  Still,  the  amoeba
is  a  very  elementary  organism.  It  is  not
given  to  us  to  see  the  physico-chemical  pro
perties  become  vital  properties  by  a  process
of  simple  particularization.

Such  is  the  present  state  of  our  knowledge  ;
but  it  may  seem  as  though  the  future  were
destined  to  realize  this  exact  reduction,  which
is,  so  far,  only  an  ideal.  M.  Sabatier,  in  the
above-mentioned  work,  makes  a  strong  effort
to  compare  living  substance  with  inorganic
substances.  He  regards  the  essential  pro
perty  of  protoplasm,  by  which  it  effects  self-
restoration  and  communicates  life,  as  being,
after  all,  only  a  "  baiting "  kind  of  power.
Now,  we  have  instances  of  similar  powers  in
inorganic  matter.  Such  is  the  phenomenon
of  superfusion.  Phosphorus  melts  at  40°
Centigrade  ;  its  temperature  may  gradually
be  diminished  below  40°  without  any  cessation
of  its  liquid  state  ;  but  if  a  solid  piece  of
phosphorus  is  introduced,  the  entire  mass
immediately  becomes  solidified.  We  find  that
a  similar  thing  happens  in  the  case  of  syn-

120


THE  BIOLOGICAL  LAWS

chronous  oscillations.  If  any  one  string  of
a  violin  is  set  vibrating  and  a  second  violin
happens  to  be  near  the  first,  the  correspond
ing  string  of  the  second  instrument  vibrates
in  unison.  In  like  fashion,  the  explosion  of  a
dynamite  cartridge  provokes  the  explosion
of  other  cartridges  in  the  neighbourhood.
But  these  are  only  comparisons,  since  living
matter  must  always  be  presented  as  such.
And,  in  a  general  way,  the  intercalation  of
intermediaries  could  not  be  mistaken  for
proof  of  identity  or  of  causality.  Ascending
by  shorter  stages  is  by  no  means  a  cessation
of  ascending.

In  reality,  there  is  but  one  possible  demons
tration  of  this  reduction  :  the  artificial  pro
duction  of  an  organic  substance  from  inorganic
matter  and  physico-chemical  forces ;  but
such  a  process  is  still  far  from  being
realized.  Pasteur  declared  most  emphati
cally  that  the  living  never  springs  from  any
thing  but  the  living.  No  doubt  this  refers
to  the  present  state  of  things.  It  must
be  considered,  however,  that  in  itself  the
proof  in  question  is  very  difficult  to  rea
lize  ;  for  we  must  be  very  certain  that  the
materials  from  which  we  think  we  see  life

121


NATURAL  LAW  IN  SCIENCE  AND  PHILOSOPHY

emerging  are  really  inorganic.  If  matter,
says  M.  Sabatier,  produces  life,  then  it  is
not  matter,  pure  and  simple.  Life  is  every
where,  he  thinks,  in  so-called  inanimate
matter  as  well  as  in  living  matter.

Still,  from  the  philosophical  point  of  view,
can  we  adhere  to  these  assertions  ?  The  mind
pursues  the  reduction  to  the  universal  of
everything  that  appears  as  new  and  hetero
geneous.  Now,  finality  is  heterogeneous
to  mechanism.  However  indispensable  it
seem,  may  not  the  finalistic  point  of  view
be  relative  to  our  intellectual  constitu
tion  ?  This  was  the  opinion  of  Kant,  and
it  is  a  very  tenable  one.  We  must  remark,
however,  along  with  Kant  himself,  that  the
extension  of  mechanism  to  everything  that
is,  is  not  philosophically  imperative.  How
is  this  extension  brought  about  ?  We  note
the  extreme  fertility  of  mechanism  which,  by
degrees,  explains  the  phenomena  for  which,
moreover,  it  was  thought  right  to  infer  occult
qualities,  and  we  are  inclined  to  believe  that,
in  time,  everything  will  have  a  kind  of  mechani
cal  appearance.  But,  admitting  that  every
thing  must  some  day  be  reducible  to  unity,
what  is  there  to  prove  that  absolute  science

122


THE  BIOLOGICAL  LAWS

will  be  only  an  extension  of  mechanical
science,  and  not  a  superior  science,  into
which  mechanism  itself  enters,  as  a  species
into  a  genus  ?  At  bottom,  it  is  here  implied
that  all  is  in  all,  that  a  given  phenomenon
contains  all  the  laws  of  nature,  and  that,  if
there  exists  a  science  whose  form  is  henceforth
perfect,  that  science  must  contain  all  the  rest  in
embryo.  Mechanics,  or  the  science  of  motion,
possesses  this  relatively  perfect  form ;  there
fore,  it  is  hoped  that  mechanics  will  succeed
in  explaining  everything.  Our  mechanics,
however,  is  not  absolutely  intelligible,  as  it
is  believed  to  be  ;  indeed,  applied  mechanics
must  be  considered  apart  from  rational
mechanics.  Now,  experience  is  indispen
sable  in  applied  mechanics,  and,  since  all
experience  is  limited,  the  results  it  gives  us
are  nothing  but  approximations.  In  the
final  analysis,  our  reason  for  believing  in
universal  mechanism  is,  as  Descartes  saw,
our  confidence  in  the  truth  of  clear  ideas  and
in  their  connexion  with  reality.  We  claim
that  the  mind,  freed  from  the  influence
of  the  senses,  is  the  standard  by  which  we
measure  things ;  we  also  consider  that,  if
everything  is  motion,  we  have  power  over

123


NATURAL  LAW  IN  SCIENCE  AND  PHILOSOPHY

everything,  since  we  can  produce  motion.
But  Descartes  clearly  saw  also  that,  if  we
would  prove  for  ourselves  the  legitimacy  of  this
point  of  view,  we  must  fall  back  on  the  idea
of  a  powerful,  benevolent  God,  who  has  pro
portioned  things  to  our  means  of  knowledge
and  action.

And  so,  the  more  we  wish  to  rise  from
phenomenon  to  being,  the  more  we  are  com
pelled  to  find  room  for  feeling  :  it  has  a
part  in  the  affirmation  of  universal  mechan
ism.  But  feeling  also  supplies  us  with  data
opposed  to  mechanism.  For,  though  con
sciousness  may  not  have  arrived  at  physico-
chemical  forces,  it  actually  does  lay  hold  upon
life.  We  are  conscious  of  living ;  a  purely
illusory  consciousness,  if  mechanism  is  truth ;
for,  to  mechanism,  the  elements  alone  exist  and
their  rapprochement  is  nothing.  Now,  life
shows  forth  as  the  effective  synthesis  of  an
extremely  rich  multiplicity.  To  believe  the
testimony  of  consciousness  on  this  point  is
to  doubt  the  absolute  value  of  mechan
ism.

But,  it  will  be  urged,  how  are  we  to  look
upon  the  relation  between  life  and  physico-
chemical  phenomena  ?  Either  life  will  break

124


THE BIOLOGICAL  LAWS

the  chain  of  movements,  or  it  will  find  itself
banished  to  intermundane  spaces.  We  seem
to  have  escaped  from  Cartesian  mechanism
only  to  fall  back  upon  miracles  or  a  state
of  pre-established  harmony.  It  may  be  that
this  difficulty  in  our  way  of  representing  life
and  its  relation  to  mechanism  arises  from
the  fact  that  the  question  is  imperfectly
stated.  Life  and  mechanism  are  both  re
garded  as  being  things  per  se.  Between
life  and  mechanism  we  endeavour  to  find
some  relation  which  is  still  mechanical.
The  two,  however,  have  no  existence  sepa
rate  from  each  other ;  they  are  artificial
entities ;  and  the  struggle  which  seems  to
result  from  their  opposition  is  due  to  the
fact  that  the  human  mind  is  incapable  of
grasping  reality  in  its  unity.

To  sum  up,  the  laws  of  physiology  appear  to
be  irreducible.  Physiological  determinism,  con
sidered  in  itself,  differs  from  physico-chemical
determinism,  just  as  the  latter  differed  from  a
purely  mechanical  determinism.  It  is  stricter,
for  it  governs  phenomena  which  the  physico-
chemical  laws  left  indeterminate.  It  is  based,
however,  on  a  more  complex  and  obscure
idea  of  law  :  the  relation  of  one  fact  not  only

125


NATURAL  LAW  IN  SCIENCE  AND  PHILOSOPHY

to  another,  but  to  a  fact  presented  as  an  end,
an  object  to  be  realized.  Determinism,  as  it
contracts,  becomes  more  impenetrable,  more
irreducible  to  necessity.


126


IX
THE BIOLOGICAL LAWS

(Continued)

IN  the  last  chapter,  we  saw  that  the  reflex
act  to  which  contemporary  science
endeavours  to  reduce  all  physiological  pheno
mena  is  a  sort  of  dual-faced  phenomenon  :  on
the  one  hand,  it  comes  within  the  scope  of
physico-chemistry ;  on  the  other,  presenting
strictly  the  physiological  aspect,  it  shows  forth
characteristics  that  are  irreducible.  Each
order  of  science  thus  implies  postulates  proper
to  itself.  We  will  now  study,  not  the  living
being  taken  by  itself,  but  rather  the  re
lations  which  living  beings  have  with  one
another,  that  is  to  say,  the  laws  which  bind
organic  forms  together.  We  will  simply  set
forth  an  historical  statement  of  the  main
phases  through  which  zoology  has  passed,
disentangling  the  philosophical  ideas  that
have  guided  its  development.

127


NATURAL  LAW  IN  SCIENCE  AND  PHILOSOPHY

Aristotle  is  the  founder  of  natural  history ;
and  his  scientific  conceptions  may  be  traced
back  to  the  general  principles  of  his  philosophy.
Speaking  generally,  he  made  it  his  business
to  investigate  the  first  causes  of  order  in  the
world.  Now,  according  to  the  Aristotelian
doctrine,  the  world  consists  of  two  elements  :
matter,  whose  distinctive  nature  is  a  lawless
mobility  ;  and  a  principle  which  fixes  and
regulates  this  impermanent,  capricious  matter.
As  species  present  a  striking  permanence  and
harmony,  they  must  depend  on  principles
superior  to  matter.  These  principles  are
metaphysical  entities,  immutable  types,  per
fect  forms,  acting  on  matter  as  final  causes,
as  models  to  be  realized,  in  so  far  as  the  nature
of  the  elements  permits.

From  these  principles  result  the  grada
tions  of  living  beings.  There  is  not  exactly
amongst  them  unity  of  composition  and  a
simple  difference  in  degree ;  they  rise  in
tiers,  so  to  speak,  one  above  the  other,  the
upper  ones  possessing  more  qualities  and
greater  perfection  than  the  lower.  The  more
implies  the  less,  but  it  does  so  by  adding  to  it.
Thus,  the  lower  orders  of  living  beings  possess
nutritiveness  ;  animals  possess  nutritiveness

128


THE  BIOLOGICAL  LAWS

and  sensibility  ;  man  possesses  nutritiveness,
sensibility  and  intelligence.  At  the  same
time,  however,  nature,  through  the  continu
ous  matter  at  her  disposal,  multiplies  the
intermediate  stages  between  these  forms  and
proceeds  from  one  to  the  other  by  scarcely
perceptible  transitions.

Are  species  fixed  ?  Not  altogether ;  ideal
types,  indeed,  neither  are  nor  can  be  exactly
realized  by  matter  ;  they  represent  models
round  which  nature  gravitates,  which  she
tends  to  reach  but  never  perfectly  realizes.
Fixity  of  species,  then,  is  an  altogether  ideal
immobility,  permitting  and  even  requiring  a
real  and  in  a  sense  indefinite  variability,
whilst  opposed  to  any  being  altogether  over
stepping  the  limits  of  the  species  to  which  it
belongs.

In  this  doctrine,  even  teratological  cases
can  be  explained  by  natural  causes.  These
are  extreme  dissimilarities,  the  result  of
excess  or  defect.  They  are  connected  with
the  dualism  of  end  and  of  conditions,  and  with
the  capricious  mobility  of  matter.  Matter
never  fully  realizes  form  ;  at  times  it  deviates
considerably  from  it.

If  this  was  the  doctrine  of  Aristotle,  was  it
129  l


NATURAL  LAW  IN  SCIENCE  AND  PHILOSOPHY

owing  to  the  fact  that  he  had  no  idea  of  a
mechanical  explanation  in  zoology  ?  To  con
vince  ourselves  that  this  was  not  so,  we  need
only  quote  a  few  lines  from  the  Physics :

"  QTTOV  /mev  ovv  aTravTacrvve/Br],  co<T7rep  KO.V  el  eVe/cct  TOV
eyiveTO,  Tavra  /mev  ecrcoOy,  CLTTO  TOV  avTOjuLarov  trvcTTavTa
eTTiTrjSelw  o<ra  <$e  /uLtj  OI/TW?,  aTrcoXero  Kat  aTroXXv-
Taiy  KaOoLTrep  'E/XTre^o/cAJJ?'  Xeyei  TO.  fiovyevrj  avfipo-

Trpapa."  !  Here  we  have  the  idea  of  natural
selection  in  all  its  preciseness.  The  reason
Aristotle  rejects  it  is  that,  in  nature,  he
considers  order  to  be  the  rule,  not  the  excep
tion,  and  that  chance  may  well  account  for
a  few  isolated  cases  of  fitness  and  har
mony,  though  not  of  a  general,  constant
order.

Thus  we  see  that  Aristotle  regarded  the
zoological  laws  as  being  of  an  essentially
teleological  character.

For Descartes, science, in its ensemble,

1  Where  everything  came  about  in  such  fashion  that
creation  seems  to  have  been  controlled  or  guided  by  inten
tion,  in  reality,  there  was  nothing  more  than  the  survival
of  those  beings  which,  by  mere  chance,  were  best  adapted
to  survive  :  those  that  did  not  possess  this  adaptation
were  utterly  destroyed  and  perish,  as  Empedocles  says
was  the  case  with  the  human-faced  beings  that  sprang
from  oxen.— ARISTOTLE  :  Physics,  viii,  198,  b.  30.

130


THE  BIOLOGICAL  LAWS

assumes  an  altogether  different  aspect.  The
logical  point  of  view  of  systematization  is
substituted  for  the  metaphysical  one  of
explanation  by  generating  causes.  No  longer
does  Descartes  seek  an  explanation  of  the
nature  of  things  in  aesthetic  and  moral  ends.
Not  along  these  lines,  he  thinks,  can  a  scienti
fic  explanation  be  found.  God  is  infinite  and
he  transcends  us  infinitely ;  his  ways  are
inscrutable,  and  therefore  it  would  be  rash
and  fruitless  to  attempt  to  fathom  them.
What  is  both  possible  and  profitable,  is  the
explanation  of  phenomena  by  the  essences
immanent  in  them,  the  accounting  for  nature
by  exclusively  natural  principles.  Hence,
nature  appears  as  a  system,  a  structure
whose  unity  and  explanation  lie  in  the
conjunction  of  the  various  parts.  More
over,  this  idea  of  logical  systematization  is
determined  in  two  different  ways,  as  we
see  in  the  naturalists  of  the  eighteenth
century.  There  is  the  Cartesian  method,
which  distinguishes,  separates  and  analyses,
as  well  as  the  Leibnitzian  method,  which
tends  to  compare,  to  seek  resemblances  or
analogies,  to  establish  continuity.  In  one
way  or  another,  modern  science  no  longer

131


NATURAL  LAW  IN  SCIENCE  AND  PHILOSOPHY

attempts  to  find  laws  of  finality,  as  did  Aristo
telian  science,  but  rather  laws  of  relations
and  of  co-existence.  We  are  no  longer  dealing
with  metaphysical  origin,  nor  are  we  yet
dealing  with  historical  origin  ;  our  business
is  to  analyse  the  present  state  of  things,
to  attain  to  the  conception  of  it  as  a
system.

If  we  consider  the  development  of  zoology
in  the  eighteenth  century  and  the  first  part
of  the  nineteenth,  we  find  it  dominated  by
the  ideas  here  indicated.  Linnaeus,  the  cele
brated  Swedish  naturalist,  takes  as  his  start
ing-point  the  maxim  of  Leibnitz  :  Natura  non
facit  saltum.  His  opinion  is  that  the  beings  of
nature  must  form  a  chain,  as  our  thoughts
do,  and  that  each  species  must  be  exactly
intermediate  between  two  others.  It  is  the
object  of  science  to  arrange  beings  so  that
this  condition  may  be  fulfilled.  Such  a
classification  is,  of  necessity,  a  unique  one :
it  is  the  natural  classification,  and  represents
the  very  thought  of  the  Creator.  Species,
moreover,  are  fixed  and  distinct.  They  can
not  be  classified  with  exactness,  unless  they
are  clearly  defined.  With  this  end  in  view,  we
must  take  into  consideration  all  the  character-


THE BIOLOGICAL  LAWS

istics  which  may  be  offered  by  animals :
external  characteristics,  anatomical  struc
ture,  faculties,  kind  of  life  ;  and  from  these
elements  we  must  form  the  irreducible  types
realized  by  nature.

The  principle  of  Linnaeus  called  forth  clearly
determined  investigations,  the  very  progress
of  which  imperilled  it.  The  number  of
species  increased  unexpectedly,  and  those
who  described  them  accused  one  another  of
exercising  a  fanciful  imagination.  There  had
to  be  found  for  species  a  definition  which
was  not  open  to  the  charge  of  being  arbitrary.
They  fell  back  upon  Aristotle's  definition  :
interfecundity,  a  crude  fact  rather  than  an
intelligible  notion.

Many  philosophers,  however,  both  rational
istic  and  empirical,  protested  against  the
claim  to  reduce  the  infinite  variety  of  nature
to  the  separations  and  oppositions  of  our
clear  ideas  ;  the  very  difficulties  experienced
by  the  classifiers  brought  forth  investigations
conceived  in  a  sense  opposed  to  that  of
Linnaeus.

To  Buff  on,  there  are  no  species  in  nature  ;
there  are  only  individuals.  His  watchword
is  :  ' '  War  upon  systems,"  that  is  to  say,  upon

133


NATURAL  LAW  IN  SCIENCE  AND  PHILOSOPHY

classifications  within  which  the  mind  thinks
it  can  confine  the  productions  of  nature.
Buffon's  views,  in  this  respect,  are,  above  all
else,  negative.  It  was  Etienne  Geoffroy  Saint-
Hilaire,  who,  combining  the  idea  of  continuity
with  that  of  order,  substituted  for  classifica
tion  a  philosophy  based  essentially  on  the
consideration  of  resemblances.  The  principle
dominating  his  theories  is  the  unity  of  plan
on  which  all  organized  beings  are  built  up.
Nature,  according  to  this  thinker,  has  formed
all  living  beings  after  a  single  plan,  the  main
features  of  which  are  essentially  the  same,
though  its  details  vary  considerably.  Here,
again,  we  are  dealing  not  with  laws  of  descent,
but  with  laws  of  co-existence  ;  we  are  not
seeking  the  cause  which  produces  beings  but
rather  those  relations  of  resemblance  which
connect  them  with  one  another.  The  princi
pal  laws  enunciated  by  Geoffroy  Saint-Hilaire
may  be  more  or  less  closely  traced  back  to  the
principle  of  the  unity  of  the  plan  of  composi
tion,  as  thus  understood.  These  are  (i)  the
law  of  the  equilibrium  of  organs  :  animals
differ  from  one  another  only  in  the  degree  in
which  their  parts  are  developed  ;  when  certain
parts  are  considerably  developed,  others,  by

134


THE BIOLOGICAL  LAWS

the  law  of  compensation,  become  rudimen
tary  ;  (2)  the  principle  of  analogous  organs  :
though  considerably  modified  as  to  their
form  and  function,  organs  may  be  said  to
remain  analogous,  so  long  as  both  their
position  and  their  relation  to  the  other  organs
remain  the  same  ;  (3)  the  principle  of  con
nexions  :  whatever  their  variations  in  volume
and  diversity  of  function,  the  parts  always
retain  the  same  relative  positions.  An  organ
is  rather  perverted,  atrophied  or  destroyed,
than  transposed.  In  accordance  with  these
principles,  Geoff roy  decidedly  regarded  mor
phology  as  an  advance  on  physiology.  He
affirmed  that  differences  in  function  and
form  resulted  from  the  conditions  in  which
the  animal  happened  to  be  placed.  In  short,
he  reduced  monstrosities  to  general  laws,
showing  that  they  are  based  on  assignable
physical  causes ;  and  so  he  established
teratology  as  a  science.

Geoffroy  Saint-Hilaire  is  opposed  by  Cuvier.
The  former  started  with  the  idea  of  continuity  ;
the  latter  declares  that  he  deals  with  facts  alone ;
he  is  in  favour  of  discontinuity.  He  tries  to
find  in  anatomy  the  basis  of  natural  classifica
tion,  and  lays  down  the  principle  of  ruling

135


NATURAL  LAW  IN  SCIENCE  AND  PHILOSOPHY

characteristics.  In  accordance  with  these
guiding  ideas,  he  rejects  the  doctrine  of  a
unity  of  division  and  recognizes  four  funda
mental  planes  :  that  of  Vertebrata,  that
of  Mollusca,  that  of  Articulata  and  that  of
Radiata.  He  looks  upon  interfecundity  as
the  distinguishing  mark  of  a  species,  though
he  does  more  than  simply  try  to  find  a
method  of  classification.  His  principle  of
the  subordination  of  characteristics  goes
beyond  simple  description.  He,  too,  seeks
for  laws  of  solidarity  and  of  relations.
Such  is  his  principle  of  the  correlation  of
forms,  in  virtue  of  which  :  (i)  no  part  can
change  without  the  rest  changing  also  ;  (2)
given  the  form  of  one  organ,  it  is  possible  to
calculate  that  of  the  other  organs.  Such,  also,
is  his  principle  of  the  conditions  of  existence,
in  virtue  of  which  every  animal  possesses
exactly  what  it  needs  to  ensure  its  existence
under  the  conditions  in  which  it  is  placed.

Hitherto,  we  have  seen  that  nature  is  con
sidered  as  a  system.  Still,  from  the  heart  of
the  Cartesian-Baconian  philosophy  there  arose
doctrines  the  tendency  of  which  was  to  regard
the  supreme  object  of  natural  science  as
existing  not  in  immutable  order,  but  in  the

136


THE BIOLOGICAL  LAWS

history  and  genesis  of  beings.  Kant,  in  his
Universal  History  of  Nature  and  Theory  of  the
Heavens,  actually  infers  the  genesis  of  the  world.
In  the  eyes  of  the  philosopher,  Schelling  and
Hegel  glorify  investigation  into  historical
development,  assuming  the  identity  of  the
logical  with  the  historical  order.  In  France,
Condillac  sets  forth  his  system  of  the  transform
ation  of  sensation  as  both  historical  and  logical.
They  go  so  far  as  to  attribute  to  the  past,  not
merely  an  influence  over  the  present,  but  real
causality  with  regard  to  it.  Hence  we  have
the  doctrine  of  progress,  brilliantly  expounded
by  Condorcet  in  bisEsquisse  dyun  tableau  his-
torique  des  pr ogres  de  I' esprit  humain.  Hence
also  the  idea  of  historical  laws,  strictly  so
called,  laws  which  no  longer  bind,  necessarily,
the  simple  elements  of  things,  but  the  various
phases  they  present  in  time.  These  ideas  came
to  light  in  zoology,  in  so  far  as  they  were
favoured  by  the  results  of  philosophy  which
was  inclined  towards  an  explanation  of  the
system  of  nature.  Philosophers  wedded  to
the  idea  of  continuity  are  disposed  to  say  that
identity  of  origin  gives  identity  of  type.  On
the  other  hand,  partisans  of  the  discontinu
ous  are  also  classifiers.  Consequently,  they


NATURAL  LAW  IN  SCIENCE  AND  PHILOSOPHY

admit  that  species  are  not  wholly  sepa
rated,  but  that  they  resemble  one  another
in  certain  of  their  characteristics.  The  ideal
of  classification  is  the  reduction  of  the  diverse
to  a  single  principle.  But  then,  may  it  not
happen  that  beings  countenance  such  a  distri
bution  because  they  have  one  common  origin
and  have  gradually  become  diversified,  like
a  tree  whose  trunk  is  divided  into  branches
more  or  less  distant  from  one  another  ?

Buffon  actually  builds  up  the  history  of  the
earth.  Not  only  that,  but  when  comparing
with  one  another  the  fauna  of  different  coun
tries,  he  puts  forth  the  hypothesis  that  numer
ous  species  may  be  reduced  to  a  small  number
of  principal  stocks  from  which  all  the  rest  have
arisen.  It  is  Lamarck,  however,  who  launches
the  idea  of  a  genetic  explanation  of  the  variety
of  beings,  clearly  conceived  for  the  first  time
in  all  its  generality  and  means  of  realiza
tion.

Lamarck  starts  by  investigating  the  lower
organisms  ;  here  we  have  the  origin  of  his
philosophy.  He  conceives  the  higher  forms
as  having  sprung  from  these  lower  ones,
and  seeks  the  explanation  of  these  trans
formations  in  the  action  of  environment.

138


THE BIOLOGICAL  LAWS

Environment  makes  a  demand  upon  the  living
being,  and  the  latter  adapts  itself  to  environ
ment.  Lamarck  invokes  need  and  habit,  as
links  between  cause  and  effect.  The  de
mand  gives  rise  to  a  need,  the  need  deter
mines  a  habit,  and  the  habit  creates  the  organ.
Modifications  are  perpetuated  by  heredity,
and  so  the  present  diversity  of  species  is
explained.  The  changes  that  have  come
about  in  environment  are  the  original  cause
of  this  diversity.

Darwin  takes  the  opposite  course.  He
starts  with  the  present  fact  of  the  discon
tinuity  of  species,  and  purposes  to  account  for
this  discontinuity  by  mechanical  causes.  In
contradistinction  to  Lamarck,  he  lays  it
down  as  a  principle  that  every  species  is,  in
itself,  plastic.  Indeed,  it  is  one  of  the
characteristics  of  heredity  that  children  are
never  exactly  like  their  parents.  Again,
the  disproportion  between  propagation  and
the  amount  of  food  sustenance  produces
the  struggle  for  life.  This  latter,  in  turn,
produces  natural  selection  which,  thanks
to  heredity,  acts,  in  time,  like  our  arti
ficial  selection.  And  so  Lamarck  explains
variability  by  adaptation,  whereas  Darwin


NATURAL  LAW  IN  SCIENCE  AND  PHILOSOPHY

explains  adaptation  by  variability  ;  though
both  are  alike  bent  upon  finding  an  explana
tion — and  that  a  mechanical  one — for  the
genesis  of  beings.

At  first,  no  one  paid  any  attention  to
Lamarck's  system.  Darwin's  speedily  met
with  huge  success,  but  it  was  not  long
before  gaps  were  evident.  His  system  does
not  go  back  to  the  causes  of  the  varia
tions  upon  which  selection  is  exercised.
It  does  not  explain  why  organisms  which
were  found  side  by  side  grew  up  along
different  lines,  instead  of  proceeding  along
the  same.  Contemporary  science  attempts
to  fill  up  these  gaps  ;  M.  Espinas,  in  Societes
animates,  and  M.  Edmond  Perrier,  in  Colon
ies  animates  as  well  as  in  his  Traite  de
Zoologie,  aim  at  ascending  to  the  very  origin
of  organisms,  to  the  formation  of  original
characteristics,  which  selection  may  emphasize
or  obliterate.  Attempts  are  also  made  to
discover  the  law  of  succession  itself,  or  the
evolution  of  forms.  With  this  idea,  Haeckel
put  forward  the  principle  of  the  parallelism
of  ontogenetic  and  phylogenetic  develop
ment,  a  principle  which  scientists  are  inclined
to  regard  as  true,  in  theory,  at  all  events,  i.e.

140


THE BIOLOGICAL  LAWS

basing  their  conclusions  on  normal  embryo-
genetic  development.

To  sum  up,  whereas  Aristotle  tried  to
discover  laws  of  finality,  and  Linnaeus,  Geoffroy
Saint-Hilaire  and  Cuvier  laws  of  co-existence,
the  modern  doctrine  of  evolution  seeks  after
laws  of  causality ;  it  claims  to  reach
origins,  not  merely  relations  of  solidarity ;
this,  too,  apart  from  all  metaphysical  con
siderations.  It  looks  upon  origin  as  generation
in  time.  Its  arguments  are  :  (i)  the  refutation
of  the  doctrine  of  separate  creations,  as  being
connected  with  finality  and  powerless  to
make  out  a  definite  list  of  species  ;  (2)  in
ductions  based  on  comparative  palaeonto
logy,  anatomy  and  embryogeny ;  (3)  the
effective  reconstruction  of  more  or  less
considerable  portions  of  the  genealogical  tree.
Still,  the  opposite  school  does  not  regard  itself
as  beaten.  It  invokes  facts,  and  alleges  :
(i)  that  it  is  the  evolutionists  who  introduce
metaphysics  into  science  ;  (2)  that,  scientifi
cally,  the  system  is  only  a  hypothesis  ;  (3)
that,  as  a  matter  of  fact,  the  links  that  are
sought  for  are  lacking  in  a  number  of  cases  ;
(4)  that  the  only  experimental  proof  of  a  con
vincing  nature,  viz.  inter-fecundity  changed

141


NATURAL  LAW  IN  SCIENCE  AND  PHILOSOPHY

into  inter-sterility,  or  vice  versa,  is  altogether
lacking.

In  the  next  chapter,  we  shall  inquire  into
the  philosophical  meaning  of  this  conten
tion.


142


X

THE BIOLOGICAL  LAWS

(Continuation  and  End}

THE  preceding  chapter  was  given  up  to
an  enquiry  into  the  various  phases
through  which  zoological  philosophy  has
passed.  In  antiquity,  it  was  the  meta
physical  point  of  view  that  dominated ;
species  are  connected  with  the  principle  which,
to  the  mind,  accounts  for  their  existence,
and  this  principle  is  type,  as  a  final  cause.
The  illustrious  scientists  of  the  eighteenth
and  the  beginning  of  the  nineteenth  century
abandoned  all  investigation  into  first  prin
ciples,  and  purposed  more  particularly,  in
their  systems  of  nature,  to  offer  a  survey  of
the  logical  relations  which  connected  species
with  one  another.  In  more  modern  times,
the  followers  of  Lamarck  and  Darwin  have
again  taken  up  the  question  of  origin,  from
the  historical — not  the  metaphysical — point

143


NATURAL  LAW  IN  SCIENCE  AND  PHILOSOPHY

of  view,  and  they  are  endeavouring  to  draw
up  the  genealogical  tree  of  species.  What  is
the  philosophical  meaning  of  the  contention
referring  to  species  ?

Here  we  must  beware  against  confusing
the  scientific  with  the  philosophical  problem.
Have  species  a  common  origin,  and  do  they
descend  from  one  another  by  way  of
generation  ?  Thus  stated,  the  question  is  an
exclusively  scientific  one.  Nor  let  it  be
said  that  questions  of  origin  belong  to  the
realm  of  metaphysics,  and  not  to  that  of
science.  This  is  true  of  the  absolute  origin
of  being,  not  of  the  chronological  origin  of  the
phenomenon,  and  it  is  the  latter  with  which
we  are  here  dealing.  It  may  be  that  the
problem  is  practically  an  insoluble  one  ;  that,
however,  is  owing  to  insufficient  data,  not  to
the  nature  of  the  question.  Whenever  we
are  concerned  with  facts  which  either  have
been  or  might  have  been  observed,  it  is  the
business  of  the  scientist  to  try  to  discover  or
infer  them.  Thus,  it  is  the  province  of
science  alone  to  solve — so  far  as  it  can  be
solved — the  problem  of  production  by  evolution
or  of  the  original  separation  of  species.  Philo
sophy  has  no  part  in  the  solution  of  this

144


THE BIOLOGICAL  LAWS

question,  its  business  is  to  investigate  the
nature  of  the  laws  regarded  as  controlling
either  the  transformation  or  the  permanence
of  species,  and  to  find  out  if  these  laws  elimin
ate  all  metaphysical  ideas,  or  if  they  involve,
in  a  greater  or  less  degree,  some  element  that
cannot  be  reduced  to  experimental  mechanism.
On  this  question  there  are  certain  current
opinions  that  are  almost  prejudices.  It  is
frequently  said  that  to  concede  fixity  of
species  is  to  appeal,  for  an  explanation  of
nature,  to  the  supernatural  action  of  a
providence  that  is  the  transcendent  per
sonification  of  finality.  On  the  other  hand,
it  is  often  declared  that  to  maintain  vari
ability  is  straightway  to  repudiate  any
doctrine  of  finality,  to  adhere  to  causality
strictly  so  called,  and  to  conform  to  the  true
scientific  spirit.  But  it  does  not  seem  at  all
necessary  that  the  doctrine  of  fixity  should
imply  belief  in  Providence,  or  that  trans-
f ormism  should  do  away  with  every  principle
of  finality.  It  might  even  be  affirmed  that
there  is  something  unexpected  in  these  inter
pretations.  Speaking  generally,  is  it  not
the  principle  of  immutability  that  is  invoked
to  show  that  things  are  self-sufficient  and

i5  K


NATURAL  LAW  IN  SCIENCE  AND  PHILOSOPHY

have  no  need  of  God  ?  Eadem  sunt  omnia
semper,  was  the  motto  of  Lucretius,  when  he
maintained  that  the  gods  do  not  trouble
about  the  world.  To  those  who  ask  :  Who
made  things  ?  the  answer  comes  :  They
were  not  made,  for  in  essence  they  are
eternal  and  change  not.  According  to  this
view,  Newton  thought  that,  if  the  laws
allowed  of  no  exception,  Providence  would
cease  to  be  demonstrated.  Fortunately  the
system  called  for  revision,  the  realization
of  which  testified  to  the  workings  and
presence  of  God.  Such  is  the  general
thought  on  the  matter.  But  when  we  are
dealing  with  natural  history,  everything
changes  :  fixity  becomes  a  sign  of  finality,
and  it  is  change  that  is  regarded  as  denoting
the  absence  of  providential  action.

The  proof  that  the  interpretation  here
made  of  fixity  and  variability  is  not  in
evitable,  is  that  Lamarck,  who  first  advanced
the  idea  of  transformism,  purposely  con
nected  his  doctrine  with  belief  in  a  supreme
principle  of  order  and  harmony.  The  scale
of  beings  represents,  he  said,  "  the  order  be
longing  to  nature  and  resulting,  as  do  also
the  objects  which  this  order  brings  into

146


THE BIOLOGICAL  LAWS

existence,  from  the  means  she  has  received
at  the  hands  of  the  supreme  Author  of  all
things.  .  .  .  Through  these  means,  which  she
genuinely  continues  to  use,  (nature)  has  given
and  is  perpetually  giving  existence  to  her
productions  ;  she  is  continually  varying  and
renewing  them,  and  thus  everywhere  pre
serves  the  whole  order  resulting  therefrom. "*
Again:  "Thus,  by  such  wise  precautions,
everything  is  maintained  in  the  established
order  .  .  .  ;  the  progress  acquired  in  im
proving  organization  is  by  no  means  lost ;
everything  that  seems  to  be  disorder  and
anomaly  is  continually  reverting  to  the
general  order  and  even  contributing  thereto  ;
at  all  places  and  times,  the  will  of  the  supreme
Author  of  nature  and  of  all  existence  is
invariably  being  done/'2

How  has  the  habit  come  about  of  connecting
with  the  question  of  variability  the  idea  of  a
purely  natural  causality  ?  To  begin  with,
there  would  appear  to  be  a  somewhat  futile
cause  for  this  prejudice.  We  read  in  Genesis

1  Lamarck,  Philosophic  zoologique,  1. 1,  p.  113,  quoted
by  Perrier,  La  philosophic  zoologique  avant  Darwin,  p.  83.

2  Idem,  p.  84.

147


NATURAL  LAW  IN  SCIENCE  AND  PHILOSOPHY

that  the  plants  and  trees,  animals  and  birds
were  created,  each  bearing  seed  after  its  own
species  or  kind.  This  text  has  been  inter
preted  literally,  and  the  irreducibility  of
species  has  been  regarded  as  one  with  the
doctrine  of  creation.  To  uphold  fixity,  then,
was  to  acknowledge  a  creator  ;  to  deny  fixity
was  to  overthrow  the  foundations  of  meta
physics  and  religion,  by  convicting  the  writer
of  Genesis  of  being  scientifically  at  fault.
Nevertheless  the  opinion  in  question  is  based
on  other  foundations  also.  The  Greeks  looked
upon  immobility  as  being  perfection ;  the
reason  they  thought  of  God  as  apart  from  the
world,  was  that  the  world,  to  their  mind,
was  essentially  subject  to  motion.  The
doctrine,  therefore,  which  connected  the
fixed  with  the  divine,  was  a  classic  one,  and
it  is  quite  conceivable  that  this  point  of  view
is  also  that  of  many  thinkers.  Still,  speaking
generally,  the  moderns  are  not  of  this  opinion  ;
they  extol  motion,  life  and  progress,  and
consider  immobility  as  akin  to  stagnation
and  death.

In  a  word,  neither  fixity  nor  variability,
of  themselves,  denote,  nor  do  they  exclude,
finality.  We  must  determine  more  closely

148


THE BIOLOGICAL  LAWS

the  conditions  of  this  latter,  and  see  if  these
conditions  are  to  be  found,  either  in  the  laws
laid  down  by  the  partisans  of  conservation,
or  in  those  laid  down  by  the  partisans  of
transformism.

By  what  sign  may  we  recognize  finality  and
distinguish  it  from  simple  causality  ?  When
ever  past  facts,  strictly  observable,  suffice
fully  to  explain  a  phenomenon,  the  explana
tion  is  a  causal  one.  If  the  past  facts  are
inadequate  and  appeal  has  to  be  made  to
something  which  has  not  been  realized,  does
not  yet  exist,  will  never  perhaps  be  fully  real
ized,  or  which  must  be  so  only  at  some  future
time,  and  thus  appears  only  as  possible,  then
the  explanation  is  more  or  less  finalistic.

On  the  whole,  the  doctrine  of  the  fixity
of  species,  as  supported  by  its  representa
tives,  sets  up  fewer  philosophical  claims  than
the  contrary  doctrine.  It  is  based  solely
on  observation  and  experiment,  and  consists,
essentially,  in  affirming  that  up  to  the
present,  no  single  fact  of  the  creation  or  the
blending  of  species  has  been  established.  The
explanation  of  this  fixity  by  the  operation
of  Providence  is  rather  an  addition  to  the
doctrine  than  an  integral  part  of  it.  No

149


NATURAL  LAW  IN  SCIENCE  AND  PHILOSOPHY

doubt  the  order  and  harmony  with  environ
ment  which  we  find  in  species  may  make  one
think  of  some  guiding  intelligence ;  but
then,  they  may  be  affirmed  as  facts,  without
any  attempt  to  explain  them.  Certainly  no
great  value  can  be  attributed  to  the  explana
tion  offered,  so  long  as  the  consideration  of  the
present  state  of  things  is  insisted  on,  without
inquiring  if  this  state  may  be  indefinitely
extended  to  past  and  future.  This,  indeed,
is  the  attitude  of  the  antitransformist  school.
It  abides  by  present  facts,  troubling  neither
about  origins  nor  future  possibilities.  And
this  is  why  it  can  give  a  philosophical
bearing  to  its  doctrines  only  by  modifying
their  character  and  spirit.  Finalistic  beliefs,
though  frequently  connected  with  antitrans-
formism,  form  no  part  of  it.

Transformism,  on  the  other  hand,  usually
shows  itself  as  a  philosophy  pregnant  with
metaphysical,  religious  and  moral  conse
quences  ;  what  it  purposes  to  do  is  to  explain
the  existence  and  order  of  species,  apart  from
any  finalistic  hypothesis.  It  is  this  system
more  particularly  that  we  have  to  examine.
As  we  have  seen,  it  assumes  two  forms :
Darwinism  and  evolutionism.  Let  us  examine

150


THE  BIOLOGICAL  LAWS

Darwinism,  the  first  in  point  of  time  and  also
the  more  rigorous  of  the  two,  from  the  scienti
fic  aspect.

We  begin  by  establishing  the  present
existence  of  species  and  their  adaptation  to
environment ;  but  instead  of  generalizing
this  fact  ad  infinitum,  in  time  and  space,  an
attempt  is  made  to  explain  it,  and  that
historically,  by  the  action  of  the  past  on  the
present,  in  conformity  with  the  law  of  inertia.
Heredity  offers  a  succession  of  beings  relatively
similar  to  one  another  ;  though,  on  the  whole,
they  admit  of  a  few  slight  variations.  These
variations  are  looked  upon  as  the  starting-
point  of  the  present  diversity  of  species.  In
cattle-breeding,  nature,  by  the  aid  of  blind
forces,  effects  the  same  results  as  man  brings
to  pass  by  his  skill.  The  struggle  for  life  is
nature's  substitute  for  intelligence.  Through
this  struggle  there  mechanically  comes  about
a  natural  selection,  analogous  to  artificial
selection.

Darwinism,  accurately  stated,  considerably
restricts  the  part  played  by  finality,  since  the
struggle  for  life  on  which  it  is  based  results
from  the  disproportion  between  the  number
of  living  beings  and  the  means  they  have  of


NATURAL  LAW  IN  SCIENCE  AND  PHILOSOPHY

supporting  life  :  a  disproportion  that  is
altogether  opposed  to  harmony  and  fitness.
Still,  the  struggle  for  life  itself  implies
that  every  individual  has  a  tendency  to  live
and  grow,  and  that  it  uses  the  right  means  to
attain  this  end ;  and  heredity,  established
as  a  fact,  though  its  principle  is  unknown,
possesses  the  remarkable  characteristic  of
ensuring  the  perpetuity  of  the  type,  through
the  disappearance  of  its  individual  members.
Nor  must  it  be  forgotten  that  finality  may
well  be  realized  by  means  of  very  general
and  constant  laws.  The  main  objection  to
Darwinism,  however,  is  that  it  offers  a  gap ;
for  it  identifies  natural  with  artificial  selec
tion.  Now,  this  identification  is  possible
only  if  the  useful  accidental  characteristics
reach  a  sufficient  stage  of  development  to
be  capable  of  being  used.  At  the  outset,
they  are  scarcely  noticeable  and  altogether
lacking  in  consistence.  Who  sustains  and
fosters  them,  between  the  time  when  they
first  appear,  and  the  time  when  they  become
capable  of  ensuring  the  survival  of  the  beings
endowed  therewith  ?  Does  not  everything
take  place  as  though  beings  possessed  an
instinct  which  makes  a  more  or  less  vague

152


THE BIOLOGICAL  LAWS

choice of  the means  fitted  to  ensure their
existence  ?

However  it  be,  Darwinism  is  a  system  that
is  mainly  scientific.  It  does  not  claim  to
explain  everything  or  to  be  exempt  from
gaps.  Evolutionism,  on  the  other  hand,
offers  itself  as  a  complete  system,  both
scientific  and  philosophical,  in  which  finality
must  be  wholly  replaced  by  mechanism.  The
means  employed  is  the  establishment  between
all  beings  of  a  dual  relationship  of  continuity
and  efficient  causality.  It  is  thought  that  this
will  be  done  by  picturing  to  oneself  the  scale
of  beings  as  follows  :  (i)  At  the  lowest  stage,
we  find  protoplasm,  endowed  with  irritability.
When  subjected  to  excitation,  it  becomes
modified,  forming  colonies  and  organisms.

(2)  The physical and social conditions,  in
which  living  matter  has  been  historically  found,
have  determined  all  the  forms  it  has  assumed.

(3)  All  beings  come  into  existence,  by  way  of
generation,  from  protoplasm,  and  science  will
build up this  genealogical tree  with  ever-
increasing  completeness,  and  thus  explain  the
compound  by  means  of  the  simple,  after  the
fashion  of  the  physical  sciences.

This  system,  being  conceived  as  complete,
153


NATURAL  LAW  IN  SCIENCE  AND  PHILOSOPHY

is  all  idea  of  finality  thereby  rendered  illusory  ?

We  have  succeeded,  it  would  appear,  in
getting  rid  of  external  finality.  But  there  is
also  immanent  finality,  another  form  of  it,
which,  even  in  Aristotle,  by  no  means  ex
cluded  but  rather  required  a  certain  degree  of
variability.

We  invoke  continuity ;  but  apart  from
the  fact  that  we  do  not  see  why  continuity,
which  is  by  no  means  identity,  should  exclude
final  causes,  we  are  here  dealing  only  with  a
very  rough  kind  of  continuity  which  always,
when  more  accurately  observed,  resolves  itself
into  discontinuity.  Indeed,  discontinuity
is  explained  by  discontinuity :  the  degree
alone  differs  in  elements  and  compounds.
Still,  when  dealing  with  the  organic  world,  a
slight  difference  may  be  very  serious.

The  sign  of  efficient  causality  would  be  to
explain  specification  and  adaptation,  which
seem  to  imply  finality,  by  principles  in
themselves  devoid  of  these  two  character
istics.  But  here  the  element  is  actually  an
individual,  and  reproduces,  by  heredity,  its
very  individuality.  In  addition,  it  possesses
within  itself  an  evolutive  force,  by  means  of
which  it  adapts  itself  more  and  more  to  the

154


THE  BIOLOGICAL  LAWS

conditions  in  which  it  must  live.  The  result  is
that  the  characteristics  it  is  proposed  to  ex
plain  are  presupposed  in  the  very  elements
taken  for  granted.  The  difference  is  only  one
of  degree.  In  reality,  we  ascribe  to  ourselves
the  power  of  specification  and  adaptation,
and  show  how,  if  circumstances  permit,  this
power  passes  into  action,  and  realizes  the
species  we  have  before  our  eyes.  Finality
is  presupposed  by  the  entire  system.

The  zoological  laws,  therefore,  are  not  actu
ally  reduced  to  the  physico-chemical  laws.  In
the  very  systems  in  which  they  come  nearest  to
them,  they  remain  separate  and  original.  In
deed,  they  regulate  the  order  of  things  in  time.
The  physical  laws  regulate  only  relations  of
cause  and  effect,  one  of  the  two  terms  being
assumed  as  given.  Evolutionism  transfers  to
succession  of  beings  in  time  the  notion  of  physi
cal  causality,  which,  of  itself,  relates  only  to  a
couple  of  phenomena  taking  place  at  any  par
ticular  time.  It  introduces  the  historical  idea
of  law.  According  to  this  system,  nature
may  be  compared  to  a  man  who  is  acquiring
experience  and  advancing  more  and  more
directly  towards  his  goal.  By  means  of
this  new  type  of  law,  we  may  conceive,  as

155


NATURAL  LAW  IN  SCIENCE  AND  PHILOSOPHY

determinate,  relations  which  the  purely  static
sciences  left  indeterminate.  But  we  are  going
farther  and  farther  away  from  the  type  of
necessity.  According  to  the  idea  of  necessity,
indeed,  the  nature  of  things  is  immutable,
and  laws  are  the  relations  that  result
therefrom.  Here  the  nature  of  things  is
variable,  and  laws  unite  to  one  another
terms  that  are  always  modified.  More  than
this :  they  connect  the  less  perfect  with
the  more  perfect.  These  are  laws  of  pro
gress.  Is  it  still  necessity,  and  nothing  else,
that  gives  a  new  aspect  to  these  laws  ?
Science  answers  neither  in  the  affirmative
nor  in  the  negative,  for  it  by  no  means
reduces  the  biological  to  the  mechanical  laws.
Here  we  are  left  to  the  intuitions  of  our
mind.  If  we  believe  that  the  word  progress
has  indeed  but  a  relative  meaning,  and  that,
in  essence,  everything  is  as  good  as  every
thing  else,  we  shall  believe  that  matter  must
have  produced  life,  which,  in  this  case,  is
nothing  more  than  a  word.  If  we  believe
that  the  progress  of  organization  possesses
real  worth,  we  shall  also  attribute  worth  to
the  human  intellect,  which  insists  on  good
being  an  end,  and  it  will  cost  us  no  more  to

156


THE BIOLOGICAL  LAWS

regard  nature,  from  which  man  must  issue,  as
a  step  in  the  direction  of  human  nature,  than
to  regard  man,  the  offshoot  of  nature,  as  a
grouping  together  of  material  elements.  If
then,  when  dealing  with  biology,  determinism
becomes  more  confined  and  restricted,  less
and  less  does  it  coincide  with  necessity  and
mechanism.  Contemporary  philosophy  is  at
fault  in  having  confused  the  two  terms :
necessity  and  determinism.1

1  Compare  the  following  lines  of  Huxley  :  "  It  is
certain  .  .  .  that  the  notion  of  necessity  is  something
illegitimately  thrust  into  the  perfectly  legitimate  con
ception  of  law.  .  .  ."  Huxley's  Lay  Sermons,  p.  158.

In  his  work  on  Evolution,  Professor  Calderwood,  of
the  University  of  Edinburgh,  expressed  himself  as
follows  :  "  There  is  a  Power  operating  continually  in
Nature,  which  does  not  come  within  range  of  the  obser
vation  possible  to  scientific  modes  and  appliances,  yet
to  which  Science  is  ever  indirectly  bearing  wit  ness.  "-
PROF.  CALDERWOOD  :  Evolution  and  Mans  Place  in
Nature,  London,  1893,  p.  341.


157


XI
THE PSYCHOLOGICAL LAWS

THERE  is  not  the  same  degree  of  precision
and  clearness  in  the  concepts  of  psycho
logy  as  in  those  of  the  physical  or  natural
sciences :  consequently,  before  examining
the  notion  of  psychological  law,  we  will  go
over  the  main  phases  through  which  psycho
logy  has  passed,  and  thus  the  more  easily
investigate  its  object  and  spirit.

At  the  present  time,  psychology  is  mainly
concerned  with  scientific  interests.  This  re
mark,  however,  calls  for  an  explanation,  for
the  word,  science,  has  changed  its  meaning
from  the  one  it  had  in  antiquity.  The  ancients
defined  science  as  the  knowledge,  d  priori,
of  that  which  is,  i.e.  of  that  which  consti
tutes  the  substratum  of  things  and  subsists
throughout  all  change.  According  to  them,
this  substratum  of  things  consisted  in  perfect
form  and  final  cause.  To  investigate  the

158


THE PSYCHOLOGICAL  LAWS

science  of  the  soul,  along  these  lines,  was
to  determine  the  idea  which  psychic  mani
festations  tend  to  realize.  The  moderns
adopt  a  different  standpoint ;  they  deter
mine  the  idea  of  science  not  a  priori,  but
from  the  sciences  actually  realized.  Thus,
in  Bacon,  we  come  across  the  idea  of  pheno
menal  law  or  the  constant  relation  between
heterogeneous  things.  Science,  in  his  view,
must  be  practical  and  establish  the  maxim
that  governs  production,  i.e.  it  should  teach
us  what  phenomenon  must  be  laid  down  in
order  that  the  one  we  have  in  view  may
appear.  Here,  there  is  nothing  to  compel
the  two  phenomena  to  be  reduced  to  each
other  in  mind  :  there  may  be  no  logical
connexion  between  them.  Descartes,  on
the  other  hand,  taking  as  his  type  not
material  production,  but  rather  mathematics,
or  ideal  production,  thinks  that  exact
science  consists  in  starting  with  rationally
simple  elements,  and  composing,  from  these
elements,  by  rational  deduction,  wholes
which,  as  regards  essentials,  are  simi
lar  to  the  objects  offered  us  by  experi
ence.

Now,  whether  we  take  Bacon  or  Descartes
159


NATURAL  LAW  IN  SCIENCE  AND  PHILOSOPHY

as  our  guide,  it  would  seem  a  difficult
matter  to  set  up  psychology  as  a  science.
Will  the  Baconian  laws,  which  consist  of
constant  relations  of  co-existence  or  of  succes
sion,  be  included  in  manifestations  whose  com
plexity  seems  infinite,  and  their  impermanence
essential  ?  On  the  other  hand,  can  a  mathe
matical  explanation,  such  as  Descartes  re
quires,  be  applied  to  what  does  not  seem  amen
able  to  measurement  ?  Seeing  that  Science  is
looked  upon  as  either  an  ensemble  of  physical
laws  or  a  chain  of  mathematical  demonstra
tions,  it  is  a  paradox,  so  to  speak,  to  expect
to  set  up  psychology  as  a  science.  And  yet
the  moderns  have  done  all  they  could  to  effect
this.  Let  us  look  at  the  results  of  these
efforts.

It  is  in  the  philosophy  of  Descartes  himself
that  we  find  the  first  elaboration  of  psychology
as  a  science.  Descartes  makes  a  distinction
between  the  domain  of  science  and  that  of
extension.  This  latter  is  the  peculiar  object
of  science,  whereas  mind  is  its  artisan.  To
become  an  object  of  science,  therefore,  the
mind  must  be  regarded  from  the  standpoint
of  extension.  If  we  are  dealing  with  the
essence  of  the  soul,  this  condition  is  impossible

1 60


THE PSYCHOLOGICAL  LAWS

of  realization.  Apart  from  thought  and
extension,  however,  Descartes  admits  of  the
union  of  soul  and  body  as  an  irreducible
reality.  From  this  union,  there  result,  in
the  soul,  accidental  modes  relating  to  exten
sion,  and  which  may  be  regarded  from  the
standpoint  of  extension.  Knowledge  of  these
modes  may  be  scientific  in  the  same  way
as  knowledge  of  sensible  phenomena.  This
knowledge  relates  to  physiology,  which  is  no
more  than  a  complex  aspect  of  physics.

The  Cartesian  conception  is  a  very  clear
one,  though  it  gives  rise  to  difficulties  that
were  soon  noticed.  In  the  first  place,  it  re
moves  from  science,  strictly  so  called,  under
the  name  of  pure  thought,  a  considerable
portion  of  psychic  life.  Then  it  raises  the
question  as  to  the  right  by  which  there  is
substituted  for  the  psychical  phenomenon,
strictly  so  called,  i.e.  for  the  modification
of  which  we  are  conscious,  a  wholly  hetero
geneous  external  phenomenon.  The  solution
of  this  difficulty  takes  up  the  whole  of  Car
tesian  metaphysics,  culminating  in  confidence
in  divine  truth.  It  is  this  problem  of  the
relation  between  soul  and  body,  implied  in
the  claim  to  make  the  latter  the  standard

161;  L


NATURAL  LAW  IN  SCIENCE  AND  PHILOSOPHY

of  the  former,  that  finds  a  response  in  the
learned  though  transcendent  hypotheses  of
occasional  causes,  unity  of  substance,  pre-
established  harmony.  Here  science  is  justi
fied,  though  really  by  belief.  Thus,  the
correspondence  postulated  by  Cartesianism
could  be  neither  rigorously  defined  nor  demon
strated  ;  it  remained  founded  upon  the
God,  the  common  principle  of  soul  and  body,
to  which  Descartes  had  appealed.  But  whilst
the  Cartesians  were  using  their  utmost  efforts
to  find  in  the  body  the  faithful  expression  of
the  soul,  others  tried  to  discover  in  the  soul,
considered  apart,  the  elements  of  a  scientific
psychology.  These  were  the  English  philo
sophers.  They  started  with  the  Baconian
idea  of  natural  law  and  combined  this  idea
with  Cartesian  principles.

Locke  regards  a  distinctively  psychic  ele
ment,  the  idea,  as  lying  at  the  root  of  the
science  of  the  soul.  Ideas  form  the  counter
parts  of  material  atoms.  They  are  definite,
impenetrable  units,  external  to  one  another,
and  are  brought  into  the  understanding  by
experience,  without  the  intervention  of  any
intellectual  activity.  They  cannot  collect  of
themselves  any  more  than  atoms  can  ;  but

162


THE PSYCHOLOGICAL  LAWS

whereas  the  collecting  of  the  latter  takes
place  by  means  of  natural  forces,  that  of
ideas  is  artificial ;  being  due  to  the  activity  of
the  human  mind.  Combining  or  separating
the  ideas  that  come  to  it,  the  understanding
converts  them  into  a  structure  which  forms
the  fabric  of  our  knowledge.

In  Locke,  we  have  dualism  :  the  arrange
ment  of  ideas  or  materials  comes  about,  not  of
themselves,  but  through  the  activity  of  mind  :
the  architect.  As  it  developed,  this  philosophy
became  dual :  two  groups  of  doctrines  corre
spond  to  the  two  elements  of  knowledge,
distinguished  by  Locke.

The  first  direction  it  took  is  represented
by  the  philosophers  who  may  accurately  be
termed  Ideologists.  They  attempt  to  build
up  the  whole  of  psychology  from  ideas  alone.
Their  concern  is  to  render  of  none  effect  all
that  Locke  did  with  the  object  of  grouping
ideas.  To  discover  more  and  more  com
pletely  in  ideas  themselves  the  cause  of
their  connexion  :  this  is  the  direction  of
the  progress  of  these  doctrines.  For  in
stance,  Berkeley  shows  that  there  exist
distinctively  psychic  laws  :  the  visual  per
ception  of  distance  cannot  be  explained

163


NATURAL  LAW  IN  SCIENCE  AND  PHILOSOPHY

by  a  necessary  inference  obtained,  without
having recourse to experience,  by means
of  visual  geometry. It  consists  of  the  sug
gestion of  tactile perceptions  produced by
visual perceptions, within the imagination
and  through  experience. The  various per
ceptions  have  thus  the  property  of  suggest
ing one  another, in spite of their mutual
irreducibility  ; consequently,  this  suggestion
is  contingent. Here  is  an  instance  of  a  psychic
law  conceived  in  an  ideological  sense. This
idea  of  psychic  law,  as  a  substitute for  the
spiritual  activity  of  Locke,  forms  the  ground
work  of  Hume's  philosophy. By  the  aid  of
mental impressions and the laws inherent
in  them,  Hume  thinks  that  the  entire  system
of  our  knowledge  can  be  explained. Impres
sions,  as  they  weaken,  become  ideas. These
ideas  associate of  themselves, according  to
relations  of  resemblance,  contiguity  and  causa
tion,  causation  being  nothing  but  the  tendency
of  an  idea  to  call  forth  a  heterogeneous  idea
with  which  it  has  frequently  been  associated.
Bodies,  likewise,  according  to  Newton,  attract
one  another  in  accordance with  a  law  by
which  only  their  mass  and  their  distance  are
taken  into  account. Here  we  have  no  longer

164


THE PSYCHOLOGICAL  LAWS

a  duality  of  mind  and  idea,  as  in  the  case  of
Locke,  since  the  psychological  laws  are  but
relations  that  result  from  the  nature  of  the
ideas  themselves.  And  yet,  the  notion  of
tendency,  i.e.  of  the  habit  of  imagination,  to
which  Hume  appeals,  has  something  mysteri
ous  about  it.  Whilst  founding  or  basing  this
habit  upon  kindly  nature,  Hume  endows  it  with
a  kind  of  objective  value.  John  Stuart  Mill
endeavours  to  eliminate  even  more  completely
every  trace  of  activity.  By  the  mere  force  of
ideas,  an  association  becomes  inseparable,  if
it  has  often  been  reproduced  and  never  con
tradicted.  Association,  taken  literally,  that
is  to  say,  a  law  analogous  in  all  points  to
the  physical  laws,  must  explain  all  those
concepts  and  processes  which  it  has  been
deemed  necessary  to  attribute  to  spontaneity
of  mind  :  viz.,  causality,  first  truths,  reason
ing,  will,  morality,  exteriority,  body  and
mind.

Such  is  the  development  of  Locke's  philo
sophy,  conceived  in  an  ideological  sense.  It
raises  a  certain  number  of  difficulties.  What
is  this  given  :  the  starting-point  of  the  ideolo
gists  and  the  thing  by  which  they  endeavour  to
explain  the  entire  psychic  life  ?  The  atom-idea

165


NATURAL  LAW  IN  SCIENCE  AND  PHILOSOPHY

is  no  clearer  a  concept  than  the  material  atom.
Is  it  true  that  there  may  be  psychic  indivisibles,
when  we  are  unable  even  to  find  a  corporeal
indivisible  ?  And  if  we  analyse  this  pre
tended  given  :  the  idea  of  the  ideologists,  do
we  not  always  find  in  it,  along  with  an  element
that  has  been  introduced  from  without,  that
very  mental  activity  we  purposed  to  eliminate  ?
What  is  the  value  of  a  doctrine  if  its  principles
take  for  granted  the  one  thing  it  claims  to
dispense  with  ?  Thus  reason  the  second
category  of  Locke's  followers,  whom  we  may
designate  as  the  "  dynamist  "  psychologists.
Moreover,  amongst  the  dynamists,  we  may
distinguish  those  who  proceed  by  analysis
and  those  who  proceed  by  simple  observa
tion.

Condillac  may  rightly  be  included  amongst
the  representatives  of  analytical  dynamism.
Indeed,  the  sensation  which  he  posits  as
primal  and  fundamental  is  no  mere  indivisible,
inert  datum  ;  it  is  a  faculty,  and  develops
by  reason  of  the  activity  proper  to  it.  This
activity  consists  in  analysing  itself,  and
thereby  becoming  diversified  and  transformed
into  higher  and  more  special  faculties.  The
greatest  representative  of  analysis,  however,

166


THE PSYCHOLOGICAL  LAWS

is  Kant.  He  regards  it  as  impossible  to
explain  the  judgment  of  existence,  implied
in  all  experience,  unless  we  admit  that
the  mind  is  originally  active.  In  spite  of
everything,  then,  this  activity  is  to  be  found
at  the  root  of  all  that  is  called  given.
The  given,  pure  and  simple,  is  nothing  but  a
chimera.  The  only  given  is  what  the  mind
gives  itself  when  it  assimilates  the  materials
supplied  by  the  outside  world.  Thus  was
formed,  by  the  use  of  the  analytical  method,
the  so-called  "  faculty "  doctrine.

Along  another  path,  by  interior  observation
followed  out  as  far  as  it  could  possibly  be
carried,  the  Scottish  philosophers  reach  similar
results.  Reid  discovers,  by  a  process  of  in
trospection,  that  external  perceptions,  which
Locke  interpreted  as  simple  ideas,  possess  three
elements :  sensation,  the  conception  of  an
external  object  of  which  sensation  is  the  sign
or  mark,  and  immediate  belief  in  the  present
existence  of  this  object.  Now,  this  belief
is  a  primitive  judgment  formed  in  virtue
of  fundamental  psychic  laws,  called  the
principles  of  common  sense.  Following  on
Reid,  Jouffroy  thinks  he  perceives,  beneath
phenomena,  the  faculties  that  are  the  govern-

167


NATURAL  LAW  IN  SCIENCE  AND  PHILOSOPHY

ing  factors  in  them  ;  and  beneath  the  faculties,
the  very  substance  which  possesses  these  facul
ties.  He  arrives  at  apriorism  by  observation
pure  and  simple.  Whether  it  be,  then,  by  the
method  of  observation  or  by  that  of  analysis,
something  besides  facts  is  obtained.  Over
against  associationism  stands  apriorism  in  the
development  of  Locke's  philosophy.  The
two  principles  this  philosophy  had  brought
together  have  become  dissociated  and  anta
gonistic  to  each  other.

We  have  seen  that  the  mathematical
psychology  of  the  Cartesians  was  incap
able  of  firmly  establishing  its  position.  Will
the  psychology  of  introspection,  which
originated  with  Locke,  suffice  for  modern
philosophy,  which  investigates  the  science
of  the  soul  ?  Dynamists  and  associationists
are  engaged  on  a  problem  which,  on  the
ground  of  interior  observation  alone,  seems
impossible  of  solution.  Experience  pre
supposes  principles  a  priori,  say  Kant's
followers.  I  can  explain  your  principles  d
priori  by  experience  itself,  replies  Mill.  Both
sides  accuse  each  other  of  arguing  in  a  circle.
Besides,  neither  doctrine,  in  itself,  really
fulfils  the  conditions  of  science.  The  dyna-

168


THE PSYCHOLOGICAL  LAWS

mists  are  reproached  for  an  apriorism  which
goes  beyond  the  bounds  of  science  and  admits
of  no  definite  relation  to  facts.  On  the  other
hand,  when  associationism  itself  comes  to  be
completely  formulated,  it  acknowledges  its  own
inadequacy.  The  self  indeed,  according  to
this  doctrine,  would  appear  to  be  only  a
series  of  conscious  states,  a  series  that  knows
itself.  But  then,  how  can  a  series  know  itself,
i.e.  unify  itself  ?  Whence  comes  the  bond
between  them  ?  Mill  himself  agrees  that  this
unity  cannot  be  a  simple  product  of  the  laws
of  thought,  and  so  he  appeals  to  the  Self.
On  the  other  hand,  the  connexions  between
psychic  phenomena  which  can  be  discovered
by  interior  observation  remain  extremely
loose  and  indeterminate.  The  ideologists
postulated  that  ideas  form  a  world  apart,  one
which  has  its  own  laws,  like  the  world  of
bodies.  But  is  the  psychic  thus  self-sufficient  ?
This  does  not  seem  to  be  the  case,  and  so
associationism,  which  deals  only  with  states
of  consciousness,  may  well  be  descriptive,
though  not  explanatory ;  or,  anyhow,  it
can  offer  none  but  the  vaguest  and  most
general  explanations.

In  presence of  the  gaps,  irremediable,  it
169


NATURAL  LAW  IN  SCIENCE  AND  PHILOSOPHY

may  be,  in  the  psychology  of  introspection,
the  Cartesian  idea  of  the  explanation  of  the
soul  by  the  body  has  again  been  advanced.
Has  man  any  other  means  of  knowing
scientifically  than  through  matter  ?  May
not  matter  be  just  the  form — and  nothing
else — that  mind  gives  to  things  when  at
tempting  to  attain  to  a  knowledge  of  them  ?
To  try  to  find  in  external,  measurable  things,
the  expressions  and  substitutes  of  mental
affections  :  such  is  to  be  the  spirit  of  the
investigation  we  now  have  to  examine.  But
the  psychologists  will  endeavour  to  avoid
the  difficulties  which  compromised  Cartesian-
ism.  This  latter  evidently  wished,  off-hand
and  once  for  all,  to  ensure  that  the  psychic
corresponded  with  the  physical ;  to  do  this,
it  plunged  into  the  most  difficult  metaphysical
investigations.  The  moderns,  gradually  and
in  the  light  of  experience,  will  endeavour
to  set  up  a  series  of  relations  between  physical
phenomena  and  psychic  phenomena,  con
sidered  in  detail.

Bain  remained  a  Scotchman,  in  many
respects.  All  the  same,  he  assimilated
the  new  tendency,  when  he  conceived  of
observation  in  a  way  that  combines  external

170


THE PSYCHOLOGICAL  LAWS

with  internal  observation.  According  to  him,
if  we  would  attain  to  the  real,  and  not  merely
to  something  abstract,  we  must  consider  the
psychic  fact  in  its  natural  totality,  and
never  isolate  the  internal  element  from  its
physiological  and  physical  concomitants.  To
study  both  terms  in  their  conjunction,  is
the  method  to  be  followed.

Spencer,  in  one  vast  synthesis,  appealed
to  the  infinite,  and  intercalated,  between  the
psychic  and  the  physical,  an  infinity  of  inter
mediaries,  which  enabled  the  former  to
be  conceived  as  a  product  of  the  latter.  He
considered  that  the  psychic  has  its  explana
tion  in  the  physical,  in  so  far  as  even  the  most
complicated  mental  phenomena  are  gradually
reducible  to  reflex  action  and  in  so  far  as  this
evolution  itself  has  for  its  principle  the  growing
correspondence  of  the  organism  with  its  en
vironment.  Adaptation  to  external  conditions
is  thus  the  common  characteristic  both  of  the
life  of  the  soul  and  of  that  of  the  body.  The
laws  of  the  body  are  simpler  ;  those  of  the
soul,  more  complicated.  Again,  whereas
changes  in  the  body  are  both  simultaneous
and  successive,  in  the  soul  they  are  only
successive.  The  essential  constitution  of  the

171


NATURAL  LAW  IN  SCIENCE  AND  PHILOSOPHY

soul  is  the  property  of  perceiving  a  difference  ;
it  is  the  specification  of  this  property  that
causes  all  its  faculties  to  appear.

Thus,  whereas  Spencer  regards  as  legitimate
the  point  of  view  of  external  observation  in
psychology,  professional  scientists  enter  upon
the  problems  in  detail,  after  the  fashion  of  the
physicist  or  the  naturalist.  The  question
with  them,  as  with  Descartes,  is  to  find  the
exact  angle,  so  to  speak,  from  which  things
may  be  known  scientifically.

It  was  with  this  idea  that  Fechner  sought
for  the  mathematical  relation  between  ex
citation  and  sensation.  His  law  is  strictly
scientific  in  form,  but  it  is  difficult  to  bring
it  into  perfect  accord  with  minutely  ob
served  facts,  and  so  to  determine,  with
certainty,  their  psychological  signification.
He  brought  the  psychical  into  direct  contact
with  the  mathematical.  It  is  more  prudent
to  intercalate  intermediaries,  and  these  are
supplied  by  physiology.  Hence  we  get  experi
mental  physiological  psychology.  In  accord
ance  with  this  discipline,  the  psychic  ele
ment  is  grasped — and  will  be  for  a  long  time
yet — only  by  consciousness  ;  still,  we  are
entitled  to  acknowledge  that  it  corresponds

172


THE PSYCHOLOGICAL  LAWS

to  a  physiological  process  which  is  connected,
according  to  the  general  laws  of  physiology,
with  observable  physiological  processes.  In
deed,  the  phenomena  of  nerve-transmission,
which  are  undoubtedly  phenomena  of  material
motion,  are  not  known  by  consciousness.  It
may,  then,  be  the  case  that  thought  also  is
accompanied  by  movements,  without  our
being  aware  of  them.  And  so,  between  the
impression  from  without  and  the  correspond
ing  visible  action,  it  is  natural  to  admit  of
a  continuity  of  physical  phenomena.  The
psychologist,  then,  seeks  to  become  acquainted
with  psychic  acts  through  their  observable
physical  and  physiological  antecedents  and
consequents.  He  sets  up  relations  of  cause
and  effect  between  physical  phenomena  and
states  of  consciousness,  until  these  latter
are  themselves  known  in  their  immediate
material  substratum.  And,  according  to
Descartes'  method,  experimental  psychology
proceeds  from  the  simple  to  the  com
plex  :  at  first,  it  purposes  to  measure  the
duration  of  psychic  acts,  from  the  most
elementary,  which  is  simple  reaction,  to  the
most  advanced,  such  as  the  perception  of
difference,  the  action  of  counting  and  naming,


NATURAL  LAW  IN  SCIENCE  AND  PHILOSOPHY

and  the  increasingly  complex  process  of
reasoning.  Thus,  it  gradually  extends  its  do
main  ;  and,  where  experimentation  cannot  yet
find  scope,  it  is  content,  for  the  time,  to  be
descriptive,  as  Bain  meant  it  to  be,  when
taking  into  consideration  not  only  sane  states
but  more  particularly  morbid  ones,  which
are,  as  it  were,  experimental  decompositions
of  the  phenomena  wrought  by  nature  her
self.  What  is  it  that  this  psychology  desires  ?
Its  founders,  Helmholtz  and  Wundt,  without
mentioning  Fechner,  do  not  profess  to  elimin
ate  all  d  priori  elements.  Helmholtz  admits
causality  in  the  Kantian  sense.  Wundt  super
imposes  on  the  mechanism  of  the  lower  func
tions  an  intellectual  activity  which  uses  this
mechanism  to  realize  ends  proper  to  itself.
Several  are  inclined  to  go  further  in  this
direction.  Beaunis,  however,  is  of  opinion
that,  for  the  time  at  all  events,  we  must
neglect  moral  phenomena  and  all  that  seems
to  be  the  special  characteristic  of  man,  and
confine  ourselves  to  a  consideration  of  the
psychic  phenomena  common  to  man  and
animal  alike.

It  now  remains  for  us  to  examine  the  philo
sophical  signification  of  the  psychological  laws.

174


XII

THE PSYCHOLOGICAL LAWS

(Continuation  and  end]

AFTER  reviewing,  in  the  last  chapter,  the
various  methods  relating  to  the  deter
mination  of  the  psychological  laws,  we  have
now  to  estimate  the  results  to  which  these
methods  may  lead.  Of  the  two  main  types  of
psychological  laws  which  we  have  recognized,
the  first,  the  ideological  type,  is  analogous  to
the  physical  laws,  mutatis  mutandis,  i.e.  it  sets
up  a  connexion  between  terms  of  the  same
nature,  these  terms  being,  in  the  present
instance,  states  of  consciousness.  This  con
ception  of  the  psychic  law  dates  back,  more
especially,  to  Locke.  The  laws  of  the  second
kind,  those  that  have  their  first  model  in  the
Cartesian  doctrine,  set  up  a  relation  between
a  psychic  phenomenon  and  a  physical  one.
From  this  point  of  view,  it  is  hoped  not  only
to  constitute  psychology  as  a  science  analogous

175


NATURAL  LAW  IN  SCIENCE  AND  PHILOSOPHY

to  the  physical  sciences,  but  also  to  bring  it
expressly  within  the  domain  of  the  sciences  of
nature.

Now,  of  what  do  these  two  kinds  of
laws  consist  ?  Are  they  really  of  the  same
nature  as  the  laws  of  the  sciences  that  deal
with  matter  ?  Can  they  comprehend  psychic
reality  without  appealing  to  any  notion  of
activity  ?  In  what  way  is  a  soulless  psycho
logy  possible  and  how  far  does  its  influence
extend  ?

Let  us  first  consider  the  ideological  laws,
or  the  laws  of  psychic  associations.  To  estab
lish  such  laws,  Locke  and  his  followers  must
have  brought  psychic  facts  before  their  mind
in  an  altogether  artificial  manner.  To  them,
these  facts  are  indivisible  elements  bound
to  one  another  from  without,  like  the  ele
ments  of  matter  in  atomism.  But  how  is  it
possible  to  bring  before  the  mind,  to  conceive
of  an  indivisible  psychic  element  ?  In  this
order  of  things,  where  are  fixed,  definite
materials  to  be  found,  set  alongside  and  yet
distinct  from  each  other,  like  the  stones  of
a  building  ?  Properties  of  this  kind  are
shown  by  words  and  letters.  The  associa-
tionist  psychology  takes  the  data  of  Ian-

176


THE PSYCHOLOGICAL  LAWS

guage  for  the  elements  of  the  inner  life,  of
which  they  form  only  a  rough  image.

But,  it  will  be  urged,  do  not  the  most
perfect  sciences  presuppose  artifices  and  sym
bols  ?  Certainly,  and  these  latter  are  justified
by  the  services  they  render.  For  instance,
in  chemistry,  the  atomic  hypothesis  leads
to  consequences  which  can  be  confronted  with
facts,  by  means  of  definite  experiments.  In
psychology,  there  is  nothing  of  the  kind,  for
it  is  not  possible  to  build  up  a  mechanical
collection  of  ideas  and  compare  with  facts
the  results  of  a  strict  deduction.  Here,
synthesis  merely  reproduces  a  more  or  less
exact  and  searching  analysis.  Demonstration
is  never  anything  else  than  illusory.

Taken  for  what  they  are,  i.e.  for  simple
metaphorical  interpretations  of  psychological
relations,  the  laws  of  association  have  the
disadvantage  of  being  strangely  vague.  They
seem  to  be  realized  because  they  imply  ob
jects  of  knowledge  to  but  a  slight  extent.
One  idea  is,  speaking  generally,  preceded  by
another ;  and  as  associationism  requires
not  the  faintest  logical  connexion  between
two  ideas  for  one  of  them  to  be  proclaimed
the  cause  of  the  other,  so  we  are  always  en-

177  M


NATURAL  LAW  IN  SCIENCE  AND  PHILOSOPHY

titled  to  set  up  the  antecedent  as  the  cause,
and  explain  by  simple  association  the  appear
ance  of  an  idea.  The  system  supplies  tables
of  cases  in  which  a  relation  of  causality  takes
place,  but  it  neglects  to  do  so  in  cases  where
this  relation  does  not  take  place.  How  many
ideas  are  contiguous  in  consciousness  without
being  associated  with  one  another !  We  must
also  assure  ourselves  that  explanations  by
association,  which  we  all  like  to  give,  are  not
simple  products  of  the  imagination,  inventing,
in  accordance  with  its  tastes  and  habits,  some
romantic  episode,  the  denouement  of  which
coincides  with  the  state  of  consciousness  to  be
explained.

Again,  not  only  do  the  laws  of  association  re
main  vague  and  hypothetical,  but  cases  happen
in  which  they  are  clearly  inadequate  to  explain
the  phenomena.  These  are  the  cases,  evi
dently  numerous,  in  which  unconscious  or
physical  influences  are  intercalated  between
the  states  of  consciousness.  For  instance,
consider  the  ideas  due  to  impulsions.  Are
they  to  be  explained  by  other  ideas  ?  Is
not  the  reason  for  them  rather  to  be  sought
in  organic  conditions  ?  If  the  unconscious
and  the  physical  play  a  role  in  the  produc-

178


THE PSYCHOLOGICAL  LAWS

tion  of  our  ideas,  consciousness  can  grasp
only  scattered  fragments,  it  lacks  middle
terms  to  connect  them  with  one  another.

The  laws  of  association,  artificial  and
hypothetical,  vague  and  superficial,  are  incap
able  of  founding  a  system  of  determinism.
Even  when  successful,  they  cannot  go  so  far
as  this.  It  is  a  mistake  to  think  that  an
action  is  known  to  be  necessarily  determined
solely  because  it  can  be  foreseen.  Why
should  not  habit  and  character,  feeling  and
even  will  produce  mechanical  uniformities  ?
The  inhabitants  of  Konigsberg  were  wont  to
set  their  watches  to  the  time  of  Kant's  usual
daily  walk.

In  an  attempt  to  fill  up  the  gaps  inseparable
from  associationism,  physical  psychology
considers  the  soul  in  its  relation  to  the  body.
It  expects  to  superimpose  a  truly  scientific
psychology  on  to  descriptive  psychology  by
studying  the  psychic  phenomenon  in  all  its
elements  and  conditions,  and  trying  to  ex
plain  the  conscious  by  the  mechanical.

Let  us  first  consider  the  negation  implied
in  this  method.  Physical  psychology  denies
the  efficacy  of  the  will-act  as  such.  Is  this

negation  legitimate  ? It offers  itself  before

179


NATURAL  LAW  IN  SCIENCE  AND  PHILOSOPHY

us,  at  the  outset,  as  a  plea  in  bar.  Physical
psychology,  it  is  declared,  proceeds  like  chem
istry  or  physics  :  it  neither  affirms  nor  denies
free-will ;  it  ignores  it  as  being  outside  its
domain.  We  have  to  find  out,  however,
whether  this  voluntary  ignorance  is  as  legiti
mate,  in  psychology,  as  in  the  preceding
sciences.  The  latter  deal  with  phenomena
very  far  removed  from  mind,  and  perceptibly
isolable  from  the  manifestations  of  will.
Their  domains  are  fixed  by  definitions  that
retain  something  of  the  freedom  of  mathe
matical  definitions.  If  the  physicist  meets
with  facts  which  do  not  come  within  the  circle
he  has  traced  for  himself,  he  relegates  them
to  other  seekers.  Can  we  likewise,  when
entering  upon  the  study  of  the  soul,  announce
that  we  will  trouble  ourselves  about  nothing
that  manifests  a  will  which  is  free  ?  Are
we  not  running  the  risk  of  imposing  on
nature  a  delimitation  it  does  not  admit  ?
As  regards  the  sciences  that  deal  with  mat
ter,  events  have  shown  the  legitimacy  of
the  method.  Physical  psychology,  however,
is  not  sufficiently  advanced  to  call  for
such  an  argument.  We  must  possess  satis
factory  proofs  that  free-will  does  not  in-

180


THE PSYCHOLOGICAL  LAWS

tervene in the production of phenomena.

True,  it  is  believed  that  we  possess  these
proofs.  The  impossibility  of  the  effective
existence  of  free-will  has  often  been  very
powerfully  demonstrated.  All  these  demon
strations  rest,  ultimately,  on  Spinoza's  argu
ment,  which  regards  consciousness  as  being,
in  reality,  nothing  but  the  faculty  of  trans
forming  into  final  causes  the  efficient  and
mechanical  causes  unperceived  as  such.  This,
however,  is  rather  a  very  ingenious  hypo
thesis  than  a  genuine  demonstration.  In
order  really  to  reduce  free-will  to  mechan
ism,  it  would  be  necessary  to  offer  a  mechani
cal  explanation  of  the  sense  of  free-will ;
and,  in  order  to  be  in  a  position  to  offer  such
an  explanation,  all  the  less  complicated
psychic  phenomena  implied  in  the  sense  of
free-will  must  have  been  explained  mechani
cally.  These  demonstrations  also  would  have
to  be  based  on  brain  knowledge,  not  on  meta
physical  hypotheses.  Still,  if  even  the  most
elementary  sensations  cannot  yet  be  com
pletely  explained  by  the  brain,  how  can  such
be  the  case  with  the  sense  of  free-will  ?

This  is  all  we  can  say  with  regard  to  the
negations  implied  by  any  physical  psychology

181


NATURAL  LAW  IN  SCIENCE  AND  PHILOSOPHY

that  claims  to  go  to  the  root  of  the  matter.
Let  us  now  look  at  the  positive  side  of  the
doctrine,  viz.  the  type  of  law  which  it  has  in
view.  This  type  of  law  consists  in  the  depen
dence  of  the  moral  on  the  physical.  This
dependence,  however,  may  be  understood  in
two  ways.  In  the  first  place  the  law  connects
a  mental  with  a  physical  phenomenon,  linking
together  two  heterogeneous  terms  by  a  con
nexion  of  constancy  or  invariability  and  of
necessity.  A  law  of  this  kind  has  been  quite
conceivable  ever  since  Hume  formulated  the
famous  principle  :  "Any  thing  may  produce  any
thing."  But  if  both  terms  are  entirely  distinct
in  nature,  their  conjunction  is  to  us  a  simple
concomitance;  and,  a  priori,  we  have  no
ground  for  affirming  that  the  physical  cannot
depend  on  the  psychic,  as  well  as  the  psychic  on
the  physical.  Consequently,  the  enunciation
of  such  laws  is,  speaking  generally,  nothing
more  than  a  stage  that  we  hope  to  transcend.
By  the  dependence  of  the  moral  on  the
physical,  we  really  mean  the  reduction,  as  com
pletely  as  possible,  of  the  moral  to  the  physical.
This  reduction  would  be  realized  by  showing
that  to  each  psychic  phenomenon  there
corresponds  a  determinate  physical  one,  and

182


THE PSYCHOLOGICAL  LAWS

that  this  latter  can  wholly  be  explained  by
physical  causes.  The  psychic  would  thus
be  no  more  than  an  expression,  a  translation,
in  a  special  language,  of  certain  physical
phenomena.

To  bring  about  this  reduction,  the  psycho-
physical  measures  mental  states,  and  at
tempts  to  discover  the  law  of  their  corre
spondence  with  certain  physical  phenomena.
Compelled,  however,  to  substitute,  for  the
sensations  themselves,  the  smallest  percep
tible  differences,  it  takes  for  granted  that
differences  as  small  as  possible  are  equal.
Now,  there  is  nothing  less  evident  than  this  ;
we  look  in  vain  for  psychic  units  susceptible
of  addition  or  subtraction  like  mathematical
units.

Still,  this  criticism  is  not  decisive.  It  is
not  necessary  that  psychic  phenomena  should
be  treated  as  quantities  for  them  to  be  redu
cible  to  physical  phenomena.  It  is  sufficient
if  each  of  them,  however  heterogeneous  with
regard  to  the  rest,  is  connected  with  a  deter
minate  physical  phenomenon.  But  here  we
encounter  certain  difficulties  set  forth  above.
If  we  insist  on  some  particular  mechanical
equivalent  representing  each  mental  state,

183


NATURAL  LAW  IN  SCIENCE  AND  PHILOSOPHY

we  admit  that  the  latter  are,  in  a  way,  fixed
and  rigid  entities,  immutable  atoms  ;  a  state
of  things  which,  as  we  have  seen,  is  not  really
the  case.  Qualities  cannot  be  set  outside
of  one  another  like  material  things.  It  is
impossible  for  us  to  say  where  one  ends  and
another  begins  :  they  are  insuperably  complex
and  fluid.

This,  then,  is  the  dilemma  which  confronts
the  psycho-physical :  either  the  psychological
laws  connect  heterogeneous  terms  with  one
another,  and  then  there  is  no  reason  why  the
former  should  depend  on  the  latter  rather
than  the  latter  on  the  former ;  or  they  bear
only  upon  homogeneous  and  quantitative
terms,  and  in  this  case  it  is  impossible  to
establish  the  correspondence  between  these
objective  laws  and  the  subjective  phenomena
of  the  soul.

The  fact  is  that  the  problem  before  physical
psychology  is  a  paradoxical  one.  The  positive
sciences,  from  mathematics  to  natural  history,
could  be  constituted  only  by  dividing  reality
into  two  parts  :  the  one  capable  and  the  other
incapable  of  being  quantified.  Since  the
second  part  excludes  precision  and  calcula
tion,  it  may  be  neglected  ;  the  first  alone  will

184


THE PSYCHOLOGICAL  LAWS

be  the  object  of  science. Now,  this  residuum,
which  the  preceding  sciences have  had  to
eliminate  in  order  to  become positive,  viz.
the  sum  total  of  the  subjective  elements,  is
what  physical  psychology  insists  on  knowing
scientifically. This point of view is the
reverse  of  that of the  sciences. There  are,
then,  two  alternatives  :  either  we  mean  abso
lutely  to  reduce  the  within  of  the  phenomena
— which the  sciences  had  held  in  reserve —
and  this  reduction  will,  metaphysically,  have
a  retroactive  influence  on  the  sciences. It
will convert their objects into baseless
abstractions. Scientific  concepts,  intelligible
as  a  measure  of  reality,  will  lose  all  meaning,
if  we  insist  on  the measure finally  measur
ing  nothing  but  itself. We  shall  thus  land
ourselves in nihilism. Or, as the second
alternative,  we  shall  follow  the  solution  only
up  to  a  certain  point,  as  the  sciences  do. In
this  case,  the  science  that  will  be  built  up,
will  be  as  legitimate  as  the  rest. Like  these,
however,  it  will  leave  spirit  subsisting,  and
with it the possibility of a spiritualistic
metaphysics.

In  conclusion,  psychology  will  be  singularly
restricted  and  limited,  if  it  really  eliminates

185


NATURAL  LAW  IN  SCIENCE  AND  PHILOSOPHY

all  notion  of  soul,  and  refuses  to  accept
a  special  postulate.  Indeed,  the  notion  of
soul  is  constantly  intervening  in  the  so-called
mechanical  explanations  of  phenomena  that
are  offered.  In  effect,  the  reactions  we
attribute  to  psychic  being  are  not  simple  re
flexes,  fitted  to  realize  life.  They  are  calculated
to  bring  science  into  being,  and,  through
science,  the  rule  over  things.  The  being  that  is
endowed  with  a  soul,  is  not  simply  a  given  end,
like  the  being  that  is  endowed  with  life  ;  it  is
capable  of  proposing  an  end  for  itself  and  ima
gining  means  fitted  to  realize  it.  It  may  pro
pose  as  an  end,  not  only  its  own  existence,  but
an  infinite  number  of  objects  which  have
little  or  nothing  to  do  with  it.  It  may  go  so
far  as  to  propose  absurd  ends,  such  as  a  state
of  nothingness.  If  this  be  so,  there  are  two
psychologies,  as  it  were,  though  the  distinc
tion  between  them  is  not  very  definite.  There
is  the  distinctively  human  psychology,  which
cannot  leave  out  of  account  the  faculty  of
reflection  that  constitutes  man.  And  there
is  also  animal  psychology,  within  the  sphere  of
which  enter  the  psychic  manifestations  of  man
himself,  in  so  far  as  he  allows  the  forces  within
him  to  act,  without  directing  them.  And

186


THE  PSYCHOLOGICAL  LAWS

the  mechanism  which  this  second  psychology
determines  is  not  unconnected  with  the  free
dom  revealed  by  the  first.  It  represents  the
instrument  upon  which  freedom  is  immediately
exercised,  and  which  brings  it  into  relation
with  nature.


187


XIII
THE SOCIOLOGICAL LAWS

HOW  has  sociology  been  established  ?
What  are  the  principal  stages  of  its
historical  development  ?  Greek  antiquity,
along  with  Aristotle,  declared  man  to  be  a
political  animal.  In  what  sense  ?  Modern
naturalism  is  only  too  ready  to  criticize  the
definition.  Aristotle,  however,  gave  it  a
meaning  related  to  the  whole  of  his  philosophy
and  to  Grecian  ideas.  To  him,  TroX*?  means
"  city-state/'  not  society  in  general.  More
over,  nature  does  not  signify  causality,  pure
and  simple,  the  necessity  immanent  in  things,
but  rather  finality,  i.e.  the  perfect  form,  the
finished  type,  towards  which  beings  tend  to
move  :  7f7^oyweV^(7ro\f?  understood)  rov  ty


ovara <^e  TOV eu *C*jv. A*o Tracra TTO\I? <pvcrei
. . . *]  $e  <pvcri$  reXo?  €<TTIV'  olov yap eKacrrov  e
T??  yevecrews reXecr^e/cr^?, TavTtjv  (pajmev TV\V (fivcriv

/caVrou.1 Thus,  instead  of  Aristotle  re-
1  As  the  "  city-state  "  came  into  being  for  the  sake
188


THE SOCIOLOGICAL  LAWS

garding  nature  as  the  opposite  of  art,  as
contemporary  naturalism  supposes,  nature
and  art  form  but  one  at  the  root  of  things ;
nature,  the  artist,  tends  to  realize  an  ideal :
the  "  city-state/'  and  the  forms  that  human
society  assumes  are,  in  effect,  the  result  of
this  tendency,  more  or  less  gratified  or
opposed.

Amongst  the  moderns,  of  whom  Descartes
is  the  pioneer,  the  scientific  spirit  holds  sway.
Even  social  questions  are  to  be  dealt  with
in  a  strictly  rationalistic  sense.  Descartes
dismisses  them  as  irreducible  to  mathemati
cal  evidence.  But  Hobbes  finds  the  way  to
deal  with  society  from  a  scientific  point  of
view  and  in  accordance  with  the  mathemati
cal  method  itself.  He  starts  with  the  idea
that  social  organization  is  a  reflective  work
(artefact]  of  the  human  reason,  analogous  to
material  machines.  Once  then,  we  have  de
termined  the  precise  object  of  social  or
ganization,  this  latter  may  mathematically

of  life,  so  it  continues  in  being  for  the  sake  of  good  life.
Wherefore  every  "  city-state  "  is  in  being  by  nature
itself.  .  .  .  But  its  nature  proper  is  a  perfection  or  com
pletion.  For  what  every  thing  is  when  it  has  reached
its  perfection,  that,  we  say,  is  its  true  nature. — ARIS
TOTLE,  Politics,  I,  2,  1252,  b.  29,  etc.

189


NATURAL  LAW  IN  SCIENCE  AND  PHILOSOPHY

be  deduced  from  human  reason.  Now,  accord
ing  to  Hobbes,  it  is  the  property  of  man
to  be  intelligent ;  his  intellect  makes  an
egoistic  being  of  him  :  homo  homini  lupus.
Hence  we  have  war  waged  by  all  upon  all.
When  this  phenomenon  happens,  human  reason
necessarily  has  a  conception  of  the  general
good.  Then  it  is  confronted  with  the  problem
of  realizing  the  general  good  by  taking,  as
agents,beings  whose  essence  is  egoism .  Hobbes
solves  this  problem  deductively.  Observation
and  reason  have  supplied  the  principles,the  ma
thematical  method  deduces  the  consequences.
Montesquieu's  method  is  also  largely  mathe
matical.  His  starting-point  is  the  nature  of
man  in  a  pre-gregarian  state  of  existence.
This  nature  inclines  men  to  unite.  As  soon
as  they  form  societies,  however,  they  lose
the  sense  of  weakness  which  they  had  at
first ;  the  equality  that  existed  amongst
them  ceases,  and  a  state  of  warfare  begins.
The  problem  consists  in  organizing  society
so  as  to  regain,  within  this  new  state,
the  primitive  state  of  peace  and  freedom.
Deduction  determines  the  conditions  re
quired  for  the  attainment  of  this  result.

It remains  to  apply these  principles  to  the

190


THE SOCIOLOGICAL  LAWS

various  cases  that  present  themselves  in  the
world,  just  as  the  mechanician  applies  the
principles  of  his  science  to  the  various  forces
offered  him  by  nature.

Rousseau  starts  with  the  state  of  society
in  his  time ;  in  it  he  sees  nothing  but  oppres
sion.  Man,  he  says,  is  born  free  ;  and  he
must  be  free.  Whence  comes  the  actual
contradiction  ?  In  all  probability,  says  Rous
seau,  men  had  to  defend  themselves  against
causes  of  destruction,  and  in  presence  of  these
difficulties  and  drawbacks  individuals  felt
themselves  too  weak.  Possessing  no  capacity
whatsoever  for  generating  new  forces,  but  only
for  uniting  and  controlling  the  existing  ones,
their  only  means  of  self-preservation  was  to
form,  by  a  process  of  aggregation,  a  sum  total
of  forces  capable  of  overcoming  the  opposing
force.  This  collective  force,  in  turn,  could
only  be  constituted  in  accordance  with  a  tacit
contract,  by  which  each  member,  in  order  to
preserve  his  existence  and  freedom,  trans
ferred  all  his  rights  into  the  hands  of  the  com
munity.  Some,  however,  diverted  the  force  to
their  own  advantage.  The  problem  consists
in  really  organizing  society  on  the  idea  of  the
original  contract.

191


NATURAL  LAW  IN  SCIENCE  AND  PHILOSOPHY

From  Hobbes  to  Rousseau,  then,  we  find
society  regarded  as  a  work  of  art,  art  being
clearly  distinguished  from  nature.

From  the  eighteenth  century  onward,  a
third  point  of  view  is  met  with.  Those
who  maintain  the  doctrine  of  progress  pur
pose  to  show  that  the  natural  course  of
things  brings  about,  of  itself,  the  progress
of  knowledge,  and  that  the  latter  is  inevi
tably  followed  by  the  progress  of  morality
and  of  happiness.  This,  according  to  Condor-
cet,  is  the  effect  of  a  natural  law,  indepen
dent  of  the  human  will.  Rousseau,  on  the  con
trary,  maintained  that  the  progress  of  science,
when  pursued  for  its  own  sake,  diminishes
happiness  and  corrupts  mankind;  this  it
does  by  a  law  of  nature.  The  Economists
assume  that  men,  in  a  state  of  nature,  were
in  possession  of  freedom  and  property  as
indefeasible  rights.  Governments  have  more
or  less  robbed  them  of  these  rights  under  the
pretext  that  individual  freedom  would  be
incompatible  with  public  interests.  The
Economists  purpose  to  show  that,  according  to
the  laws  of  nature,  private  and  public  interests,
far  from  being  opposed,  take  each  other  for
granted.  Here,  then,  we  have  the  idea  of

192


THE SOCIOLOGICAL  LAWS

natural  law  present  in  social  science  ;  but
the  publicists  just  mentioned  have  assumed
beforehand,  in  accordance  with  their  desires,
the  very  laws  they  require  to  discover  in  the
natural  course  of  things.

Auguste  Comte  was  the  first  who  clearly
hit  upon  the  idea  of  a  sociology  analogous
to  the  rest  of  the  sciences.  He  regards  a
social  law  no  longer  as  the  expression  of  a
pious  wish,  but  rather  as  the  expression  of
impartially  observed  facts.  Society,  how
ever,  in  Comte's  mind,  retains  a  nature  of
its  own,  one  that  is  irreducible  to  the  lower
forms  of  being.  To  Herbert  Spencer,  on
the  other  hand,  human  society  is  nothing
but  one  particular  instance  of  animal  so
ciety.  Still,  why  does  Spencer  uphold  in
dividualism  as  an  end  for  society  ?  Is  it
not  that  he  makes  synthesis  follow  too
closely  upon  analysis ;  that  he  is  gov
erned  by  personal  preferences  ?  Many,  nowa
days,  maintain  that  the  true  method  is
impartially  to  study  the  lesser  facts,  trace
their  laws  in  accordance  with  the  general
rules  of  induction,  and  rise  to  general  views
only  by  degrees.  This  is  the  completion
of  the  third  conception  :  society  considered

193  N


NATURAL  LAW  IN  SCIENCE  AND  PHILOSOPHY

as  a  natural  work,  to  the  total  exclusion
of  the  idea  of  art.

Let  us  now  examine  the  notion  of  sociologi
cal  law  as  resulting  from  this  evolution,  and
enquire  whether  it  corresponds  exactly  with
the  nature  of  things  themselves.

We  first  note  that  naturalist  sociology
runs  parallel  with  an  exclusively  experi
mental  psychology.  Just  as  the  latter  would
explain  psychological  facts  by  leaving  the
soul  out  of  account,  so  the  former  would
account  for  sociological  facts  by  elimina
ting  man.  It  refuses  to  have  recourse  to
a  strictly  human  faculty,  to  conscious,  re
flective  finality.  To  explain  phenomena,  it
is  declared,  is  to  condition  them  to  the  law
of  efficient  causes.  If  sociology,  then,  would
be  a  science  like  the  rest,  it  must  connect
facts  with  conditions,  not  with  ends.

Admitting  that  sociology  must  be  a
science,  in  the  narrow  acceptation  of  the
word,  what  form  will  it  take  ?  At  the  time
when  the  mathematical  sciences  were  most
developed,  it  was  required  that  this  form
should  be  a  mathematical  one.  At  the
present  time,  when  the  natural  sciences
are  soaring  to  wonderful  heights,  it  is  they

194


THE SOCIOLOGICAL  LAWS

that  are  set  up  as  models.  In  this  we  see  a
historical  influence,  rather  than  a  necessary
phenomenon.  Why  should  not  sociology
demand  particular  postulates  and  a  method
of  its  own,  as  Auguste  Comte  required  ?  It
is  not  sufficient  to  say :  sociology  must
assume  such  or  such  a  form;  only  on  this
condition  will  it  be  science.  Is  science  a
single  indivisible  entity,  and  may  there
not  be  really  different  sciences,  each  with
an  originality  of  its  own  ?

Now,  what  is  the  nature  of  the  laws  in
which  sociology  culminates  ?  To  assume  so-
called  historical  laws  appears  to  be  the  least
hazardous  attempt  in  this  direction.  It  is
the  characteristic  of  these  laws  that  they
connect  the  present  with  the  past  along  the
lines  of  efficient  causality.  The  idea  is  clear
enough,  but  when  we  pass  from  theory  to
practice,  we  encounter  difficulties.  The
method  consists  in  explaining  social  facts
by  their  historical  antecedents,  whilst  elimina
ting  all  human  initiative  ;  but  the  question  of
causality,  human  or  mechanical,  is  propounded
anew  with  regard  to  these  very  antecedents,
and  so  on  ad  infinitum.  From  the  fact
that  I,  for  my  own  part,  merely  follow  the

195


NATURAL  LAW  IN  SCIENCE  AND  PHILOSOPHY

impulsion  given  me  by  my  ancestors,  it  by
no  means  follows  that  my  ancestors  were
as  passive  as  myself.  Speaking  generally,
the  necessity  of  the  consequences  does  not
forejudge  that  of  the  origin.

But  if  we  waive  the  question  of  origin
and  consider  the  so-called  historical  law  in
itself,  we  find  that  such  a  law  is  not  regarded
by  men  as  necessitative.  Quite  the  contrary,
we  hear  them  say :  such  or  such  a  nation,
under  conditions  analogous  to  our  own,  has
been  afflicted  in  such  or  such  a  fashion  :
let  us  see  to  it  that  a  like  misfortune  does
not  befall  us.  In  questions  of  this  kind
the  antecedent  is  never  considered  as  neces
sarily  compelled  to  entail  any  one  conse
quent  to  the  exclusion  of  any  other.  An
antecedent  is  regarded  as  an  influence,  not
as  a  cause  strictly  so  called.

We  may  go  further  and  enquire  whether
there  really  are  historical  laws.  It  is
noteworthy  that  professional  historians  find
some  difficulty  in  affirming  this.  Fust  el  de
Coulanges  was  wont  to  say  that  in  history
it  is  sometimes,  though  very  seldom,  possi
ble  to  determine  causes,  but  that  all  idea  of
discovering  laws  must  be  abandoned,  In-

196


THE  SOCIOLOGICAL  LAWS

deed,  according  to  his  view,  a  law  implies
the  reappearance  of  one  and  the  same  ante
cedent.  Now,  where  do  we  find  history  re
peating  itself  ?  The  essential  feature  of  the
historical  mind,  Jules  Zeller  was  fond  of
saying,  is  the  discernment  of  the  charac
teristics  peculiar  to  each  epoch ;  we  are
generally  mistaken  when  we  judge  the  past
by  the  present,  or  vice  versa.  Historical
facts  are  too  complex  and  unstable  intermix
tures  to  be  reproduced  as  they  are.  If  they
exhibit  laws,  it  is  in  their  elements,  not  in  their
concrete  sequence,  that  we  must  seek  them.

Hence  we  have  a  second  point  of  view,
which  may  be  called  the  physico-sociologi-
cal :  we  endeavour  to  connect  social  facts,
not  with  their  equally  social  antecedents,
but  with  external  conditions  that  are  capa
ble  of  being  observed  and  measured,  such
as  geographical  circumstances,  density  of
population,  amount  of  sustenance.  Here,
however,  a  distinction  must  be  made.
Population  and  amount  of  sustenance  are
not  crude  facts  like  climatic  conditions.
Man,  the  social  human  being,  intervenes
in  the  former  class  of  conditions  :  therefore
they  are,  to  a  certain  extent,  social  facts ;

197


NATURAL  LAW  IN  SCIENCE  AND  PHILOSOPHY

to  demand  from  society  an  explanation  of
them  is  partly  to  take  for  granted  what  we
purpose  to  explain.

Nor  is  this  all ;  we  require  that  social
phenomena,  as  well  as  physical  phenomena,
should  derive  from  external  conditions ;
but  it  is  very  difficult  to  demonstrate  this
derivation.  Suppose,  for  instance,  we  ex
plain  the  development  of  the  division  of
labour  by  the  progress  of  social  density,  the
interdependence  of  the  members  of  a  so
ciety.  The  saying  of  Darwin  is  recalled,
that  different  beings  live  side  by  side  more
easily  than  similar  beings :  they  inconve
nience  one  another  in  a  less  degree  and  the
struggle  for  life  amongst  them  is  not  so
keen.  Man  obtains  this  salutary  diversity
by  developing  division  of  labour,  and  so  this
division  of  labour  shows  itself  as  the  necessary
result  of  the  struggle  for  life.  Vital  com
petition  :  a  physical  cause,  thus  explains
division  of  labour  :  a  social  fact.

But  does  the  law  stated  by  Darwin  neces
sarily  apply  when  we  are  dealing  with  man  ?
Is  it  correct  to  say  that,  in  a  human  society,
diversity  of  functions  is  invariably  a  principle
of  mutual  tolerance  ?  Look  at  capital  and

198


THE  SOCIOLOGICAL  LAWS

labour : the  difference  that  separates  them
does not prevent them from combating
each other. It often happens that diver
sity of education and occupation inclines
men  to  misunderstand  and  despise  one  ano
ther. If  men  are  to  agree,  it  is  not  enough
that  they  cannot  understand one  another.
Let  us  admit, however, that division of
labour  is  a  solution  of  the  struggle  for  life.
In  what  way  will  this  antecedent  determine
this  consequent  ? Have  we  here  some  rela
tion  of  necessity,  similar  to  that  which  con
nects the attraction of bodies to their
mass  and  their  distance  from  each  other  ?
Division  of  labour  appears  to  be  necessary,
if  men  are  to  live  at  all. But  here,  necessary
means  indispensable,  i.e.  a  condition  of the
realization  of  a  certain  end,  viz.  the  cessa
tion of the struggle for life. This is by
no  means  a  mechanical  and  inevitable  neces
sity. Must  we  even  translate,  in  this  case,
the  word necessary by indispensable  ? The
struggle for life, indeed, admits of other
solutions,  the  simplest  of  which  is  the  eat
ing of one another. That is really the
law  of  nature,  and  division  of  labour  is  in
stituted  for  the  very  purpose of  impeding

199


NATURAL  LAW  IN  SCIENCE  AND  PHILOSOPHY

the  fulfilment  of  this  law.  Indispensable,
then,  in  turn,  really  means,  preferable,  i.e.
more  in  conformity  with  the  idea  of  human
ity,  responding  more  completely  to  that
sympathy  with  the  weak  which  we  assume
to  exist  in  man.  As  Aristotle  said,  we  do
not  wish  merely  <^,  but  <£  tyv.  Division
of  labour  is  a  more  or  less  intelligently  con
ceived  means  of  realizing  this  ideal.  What
does  this  mean,  except  that  what  we  took
to  be  a  crude  law  of  causality  involves  a
relation  of  finality,  and  that  we  are  assum
ing  the  intervention  of  the  human  intellect
and  will  where  we  think  we  are  bringing
into  action  none  but  external  and  material
conditions  ?

Thus  the  physico-social  law  does  not  satisfy
the  conditions  of  a  strictly  positive  science.
To  bring  sociology  really  within  the  sphere
of  the  physical  sciences,  we  should  have  to
discover,  for  social  facts,  legitimate  substi
tutes,  in  their  mechanical  equivalents.  The
physicist  therefore  looks  upon  physical  agents
only  in  their  measurable  manifestations.  But
do  such  equivalents,  so  difficult  to  find  in
psychology,  exist  in  sociology  ?  We  imagine
that  statistics  will  supply  them,  but  do  not

200


THE  SOCIOLOGICAL  LAWS

statistics  constantly  need  to  be  supple
mented  by  judgment  ?  Where  do  we  meet
with  figures  that  admit  only  of  one  inter
pretation,  and  immediately  express  the  social
reality  with  which  we  are  dealing  ?  Is
the  number  of  persons  who  can  read  and
write  a  faithful  standard  by  which  to  judge
of  the  development  of  instruction  in  a  coun
try  ?  Can  religious  feeling  be  gauged  by  the
business  carried  on  in  the  various  articles  used
in  public  worship  ?  It  is  a  fact  that,  in
this  order  of  things,  men  of  tact  and  experi
ence,  by  means  of  literary  descriptions  and
without  using  figures,  often  hit  upon  a  truth
which  cannot  be  acquired  by  mathemati
cal  quantification.  If  some  day  we  succeed
in  bringing  social  facts  within  the  scope
of  physical  facts,  it  will  be  by  intercala
ting  between  the  latter  and  the  former  an
infinite  number  of  intermediaries  of  whose
existence  we  have  now  not  the  faintest  sus
picion.

At  present,  mathematics  and  society  form
two  extremes  with  an  abyss  between  them;
by  attempting  to  make  them  coincide,  we
run  the  risk  of  dwarfing  and  distorting  the
social  reality.

201


NATURAL  LAW  IN  SCIENCE  AND  PHILOSOPHY

In  the  determination,  then,  of  the  socio
logical  laws,  we  cannot  possibly  leave  man
out  of  account,  he  must  be  included  as  an
agent,  with  his  own  nature,  his  powers  of
intellect  and  will.  These  are  perhaps  data
that  are  partially  irreducible  and  impossi
ble  of  analysis ;  but  when  we  look  more
closely,  the  inferior  sciences  actually  imply
such  data.  Moreover,  there  are  degrees  in
the  social  laws.  Some  of  them  express  the
conditions  of  a  society  in  which  man  scarcely
acts  at  all  as  a  man  and  does  little  more
than  follow  the  promptings  of  his  animal
nature.  Others  have  reference  to  the  more
strictly  human  societies,  wherein  man  makes
a  greater  or  less  use  of  his  reason  and  energy.
The  former  are  in  existence  before  the
second,  they  form  the  substratum,  so  to  speak
upon  which  human  activity  works.  The
animal  state  is  first  necessary  before  one
can  become  a  man.  Man,  however,  in  a
certain  measure,  controls  the  animal  on
which  his  human  nature  is  based.  No  doubt
this  view  takes  for  granted  that  an  idea,
as  such,  may  be  efficacious.  Still,  though
the  immediate  sway  which  an  idea  holds
over  matter  may  be  unintelligible,  is  it  so

202


THE  SOCIOLOGICAL  LAWS

with  activity  exercised  through  an  infinite
number  of  intermediaries,  affecting  mind
on  the  one  hand,  and  matter  on  the  other  ?
Let  us  not  forget  that  pure  mind  and  pure
matter  are  but  abstractions  and  fancies.
When  thoroughly  understood,  mechanism,
instead  of  shutting  us  in  on  every  hand,
constitutes  the  means  at  our  disposal  for
acting  upon  things  and  for  obtaining  power
over  them.

Through  the  psychic  and  sociological
mechanism,  which  depend  on  ourselves,  we
have  a  hold  on  the  physical  mechanism.  A
knowledge  of  the  laws  of  things  enables
us  to  control  them ;  consequently,  instead
of  checking  our  freedom,  mechanism  makes
it  efficacious.


203


XIV

CONCLUSION

WE  have  analysed  the  various  types
of  natural  laws  offered  us  by  the
sciences,  from  the  standpoint  of  these
sciences  themselves.  In  the  physical  laws,
we  have  seen  the  data  supplied  to  philoso
phy  by  the  sciences,  just  as  science  sees  in
facts  the  data  supplied  to  it  by  nature.  In
conclusion,  we  ask  ourselves  what  becomes
of  human  freedom  and  responsibility,  over
against  these  laws,  which,  to  us,  represent
the  nature  of  things.  The  problem  is  a  more
urgent  one  now  than  it  was  a  century  ago.
When  the  domain  of  science,  strictly  so-
called,  was  not  so  wide-spread,  it  was  pos
sible  to  admit  that,  outside  this  domain,
there  was  room  for  freedom.  Science,  how
ever,  is  daily  gaining  both  in  precision  and
in  extent  of  influence.  It  is  bringing
under  its  sway  the  very  manifestations
which  seemed  most  hostile  to  its  influence.

204


CONCLUSION

May  it  not  be,  then,  that  everything,  de
jure,  belongs  to  it ;  that  everything,  con
sequently,  is  determined  and  rendered  neces
sary  ?  As  the  sense  of  freedom,  in  spite  of
this  progress  on  the  part  of  science,  exists,  de
facto,  in  the  human  soul,  it  is  expedient  to
find  out  whether  there  is  any  contradiction
between  these  two  facts,  and  whether  the
second  must  be  attributed  to  illusion  resulting
from  ignorance.

There  are  weighty  reasons  why  determin
ism  should  nowadays  appear  more  limited
than  it  must  have  seemed  to  the  men  of
the  past.  No  doubt  the  latter  saw  above
them  a  Destiny  which  was  crushing  them  ;
but,  as  Pascal  says,  even  though  he  suc
cumbs,  man  is  still  nobler  than  that  which
slays  him,  because  he  knows  that  he  dies.
Ancient  philosophy,  in  its  classic  manifes
tations,  is  based  on  a  dualism  which  prevents
determinism  from  being  absolute.  Being
consists  of  two  elements  :  truth,  the  abode
of  the  eternal  and  the  necessary ;  and
phenomenon,  impermanent  matter,  incapable
of  being  definitely  fixed  in  any  form.  This
quality  of  being  ensures  the  possibility  of
the  contraries,  the  condition  of  freedom.

205


NATURAL  LAW  IN  SCIENCE  AND  PHILOSOPHY

And  so,  even  in  the  case  of  the  Stoics,  who
were  rationalistic  pantheists,  the  wise  man
retains,  deep  in  his  soul,  the  free  power  to
acquiesce  in  destiny  or  to  resist  it.  There
fore  the  ancients  maintain  that  there  are
two  sciences,  the  second  of  which  cannot
be  included  in  the  first  :  the  science  of  being,
strictly  so-called,  perfect  and  permanent  like
its  object,  and  the  science  of  becoming,
imperfect  and  impermanent  like  becoming
itself.

Now,  the  essential  characteristic  of
modern  science  is  a  tendency  to  do  away
with  this  duality.  Its  fundamental  idea,
formulated  by  Descartes,  consists  in  admit
ting  that  there  is  a  point  at  which  the  sensible
coincides  with  the  mathematical,  and  becoming
coincides  with  being  ;  that  things  are  not  more
or  less  imperfect  copies  of  transcendent  para
digms,  but  rather  particular  determinations
of  the  mathematical  essences  themselves.
Hence,  we  have  an  altogether  new  compass  or
range  attributed  to  inductive  reasoning.  In
Aristotle's  mind,  no  empirical  knowledge,
as  such,  might  lay  claim  to  universality
and  necessity.  Experience  was  inevitably
limited  to  the  relative.  But  if  all  the  pro-

306


CONCLUSION

perties  of  things  are,  in  their  essence,  mathe
matical,  even  experience  may  attain  to  the
necessary,  provided  it  succeeds  in  discerning
and  unravelling  or  extricating  this  interior  warp
and  woof  of  reality.  Distinct  as  they  were  in
the  minds  of  the  ancients,  mathematics  and
experience  remained,  the  former,  transcen
dent  ;  the  latter,  uncertain.  Closely  united,
they  are  the  foundation  of  a  complete  science
of  sensible  reality  itself.  Mathematics  im
parts  to  science,  necessity ;  experience  im
parts  conformity  with  facts.  Such  is  the
root  of  modern  determinism.  We  believe
everything  to  be  necessarily  determined,
because  we  believe  everything,  in  essence,
to  be  mathematical.  This  belief  is  the
spring,  manifest  or  unperceived,  of  scien
tific  investigation.  What  we  have  to  find
out  is  whether  this  is  a  truly  constitu
tive  principle,  or  simply  a  regulating  prin
ciple  and  a  guiding  idea.  Does  science
prove  that  the  basis  of  things  is  exclusively
mathematical,  or  does  it  only  assume  this  ?

Modern  determinism  is  based  on  the  two
following  assertions  :  (i)  mathematics  is  per
fectly  intelligible  and  is  the  expression  of
an  absolute  determinism ;  (2)  mathematics

207


NATURAL  LAW  IN  SCIENCE  AND  PHILOSOPHY

applies  to  reality  in  the  most  precise  manner ;
de  jure,  at  all  events,  and  in  the  essence  of  things.

Let  us  begin  with  the  first  of  these  two
theories.  It  regards  mathematics  as  simply
a  special  development  of  logic.  Now,  logic,
real  logic,  at  any  rate,  including  the  theory
of  concept,  judgment  and  reasoning,  actu
ally  presupposes  data  that  are  irreducible
to  a  strictly  analytical  relationship :  the
only  type  of  perfect  intelligibility.  Concept,
judgment  and  syllogism  have  ever  given  rise
to  controversy.  The  reproach  of  barren
tautology,  as  regards  their  importance,  is
removed  only  by  the  introduction  of  con
siderations  that  have  nothing  to  do  with  pure
logic.  Such  is  the  notion  of  the  implicit
and  the  explicit,  which  meets  the  difficulty,
in  a  fashion,  though  only  by  appealing  to  the
obscure  metaphysical  distinction  between  act
and  potency.

While  logic  contains  elements  that  cannot
be  reduced  to  pure  thought,  mathematics  con
tains  a  greater  number  of  these  elements.
In  spite  of  all  their  efforts,  mathematicians
have  not  succeeded  in  bringing  mathematics
within  the  compass  of  simple  logic.  Descartes,
by  means  of  his  theory  of  intuition  and  deduc-

208


CONCLUSION

tion  makes  a  radical  distinction  between
mathematical  method  and  syllogistic  reason
ing.  Mathematical  knowledge,  to  his  mind,
compasses  principles  that  have  a  content  ;
it  proceeds  from  the  simple  to  the  com
pound,  which  logic  does  not  do.  Under  the
various  names  of  synthetic  d  priori  judg
ments,  postulates,  definitions,  axioms  and
fundamental  facts,  philosophical  mathema
ticians  admit,  either  as  coming  from  experi
ence  or  from  the  intellect,  given  and  in
scrutable  principles.  In  effect,  mathematics
has  been  established  and  is  moving  towards
perfection  by  a  process  of  generalization  which
consists  in  imagining  axioms  and  definitions
that  allow  of  the  development  of  demonstra
tions  with  the  utmost  possible  continuity
and  the  fewest  possible  gaps.  How  are  we
to  affirm  that  principles  thus  received  for
the  needs  of  the  cause  are  all  necessary
and  perfectly  intelligible  ?  The  philoso
phical  analysis  of  principles  and  of  mathe
matical  methods  reveals  therein  many  a  contin
gent  determination,  many  an  artifice  accepted
mainly  because  it  is  successful.

And  so  mathematical  necessity  itself  is  no
longer  unconditioned  in  our  minds,  as  it  may

209  o


NATURAL  LAW  IN  SCIENCE  AND  PHILOSOPHY

have  been  in  the  minds  of  the  ancients,  who
regarded  mathematics  as  entirely  d  priori.
On  the  other  hand,  this  necessity  has  lost
the  aesthetic  character  it  possessed  for
the  Pythagoreans  and  the  Platonists.  To
us,  it  is  a  blind  and  brutal  necessity  which
goes  straight  ahead,  without  either  goal  or
check.  Is  this  necessity,  such  as  it  is  con
ceived  to  be,  really  part  and  parcel  of
things  ?  Is  the  complete  fusion  of  mathe
matics  and  experience,  the  object  of  modern
science,  effectually  realized  ?  Does  it  appear
as  though  some  day  it  will  have  to  be  realized  ?

To  enable  mathematics  and  experience  to
become  closely  united,  it  has  been  assumed
that  everything  given  may  be  split  up  into
two  elements  incapable  of  permeating  each
other :  movements  and  states  of  consciousness ;
and  that  the  first  of  these  two  elements  is,  as
regards  knowledge,  the  legitimate  substi
tute  of  the  second.  In  so  far  as  things  may
be  looked  upon  as  consisting  of  movements,
they  fulfil  the  conditions  of  a  mathematico-
experimental  science.

Can  this  separation — so  precise  and  strict
in  philosophy — between  quantity  and  quality,
be  accurately  realized  in  the  sciences  ?  This

210


CONCLUSION

is  more  than  we  can  affirm.  Mechanics,  the
concrete  science  which  must  be  the  basis  of
all  the  rest,  offers  elements  that  are  irre
ducible  to  pure  mathematical  determina
tions  ;  it  is  incapable  of  entirely  transform
ing  its  experimental  data  into  rational  truths.
Known  by  experience  alone,  the  most
general  connexions  between  things  remain,
so  far  as  we  are  concerned,  radically  con
tingent,  as  Newton  said.  Why  are  bodies
attracted  to  each  other  in  the  ratio  of  their
mass  and  not  of  the  square  of  their  mass  ?
This  is  a  fact,  nothing  more.  Celestial
mechanics,  after  all,  implies  the  very  idea  of
natural  law,  in  so  far  as  this  law  is  distinct
from  purely  mathematical  relations,  i.e.  in
so  far  as  it  brings  together  two  terms,  one
of  which  can  in  no  way  be  deduced  from  the
other.

Moreover,  it  would  be  incorrect  to  say
that  mechanics,  of  itself  alone,  de  jure,  at
all  events,  constitutes  the  entire  science  of
the  real.  For,  in  the  present  state  of  our
knowledge,  science  is  not  one,  it  is  multi
ple.  Science,  regarded  as  including  all
the  sciences,  is  but  an  abstraction.  That
which  is  given  consists  of  sciences,  each

211  o*


NATURAL  LAW  IN  SCIENCE  AND  PHILOSOPHY

of  which,  whilst  remaining  connected  with
the  rest,  has  its  own  distinctive  aspect  and
evidence.  In  proportion  as  we  advance
from  the  study  of  the  motions  of  the
heavenly  bodies — the  most  external  reality
with  which  we  are  acquainted  —  to  the
study  of  life  and  thought,  the  postulates
required  are  the  more  numerous  and  in
accessible.

Physics,  by  regarding  work  as  superior  to
heat,  actually  makes  an  open  appeal  to  the
notion  of  quality.  Chemistry  is  based  upon
the  postulate  that  elements  of  different  kinds
exist  and  are  maintained  in  existence.  The
reflex  act  of  biology  is  no  simple  mechani
cal  reaction,  for  it  has  the  property  of  en
suring  the  conservation,  evolution  and  re
production  of  a  determinate  organization.
Psychic  reaction  is  something  more,  since  it
tends  to  provide  an  individual  with  the
science  of  things,  i.e.  the  knowledge  of  laws,
and  thereby  with  an  indefinite  power  to
utilize  them  for  ends  laid  down  by  himself.
To  sum  up,  in  sociology,  the  action  of  en
vironment  is  not  sufficient  to  explain  pheno
mena  ;  we  must  introduce  man,  with  his  know
ledge  and  prejudices,  his  power  of  sympathy

212


CONCLUSION

with  other  men,  and  his  ideas  of  happiness
and  progress,  justice  and  harmony.

Thus,  the  objects  of  the  various  sciences  are
not  wholly  permeated  by  mathematics,  and
we  look  upon  the  fundamental  laws  of  each
science  as  the  least  defective  compromises  that
the  mind  has  succeeded  in  finding  for  bring
ing  together  mathematics  and  experience.
Moreover,  we  must  distinguish  between  the
physical  sciences,  which  readily  unite  with
mathematics,  and  the  biological  sciences,
for  which  this  union  is  far  more  artificial.
In  the  former,  man  himself  limits  his  field
of  investigation ;  he  purposes  to  take
into  consideration  only  a  certain  order  of
manifestations  of  nature — that  which  is
amenable  to  measure  and  number — and  to
neglect  the  rest.  Owing  to  this  partially
arbitrary  delimitation,  we  have  to  deal  with
something  that  sensibly  admits  of  mathe
matical  determination.  In  the  biological
sciences  this  method  may  still  be  employed ;
but  here  we  are  manifestly  leaving  out  of  our
investigation  the  best  and  most  character
istic  part  of  the  phenomena.  The  more  we
resolve  to  grasp  or  understand  being  in  its
concrete  reality,  the  more  we  must  be  con-

213


NATURAL  LAW  IN  SCIENCE  AND  PHILOSOPHY

tent  with  observing  and  inferring,  and  must
refrain  from  using  mathematical  analysis.
Thus  the  mathematical  form  gives  the  sciences
a  certain  character  of  abstraction.  The  con
crete  living  being  refuses  to  be  confined  therein.
In  a  general  way,  then,  there  are  two
kinds  of  laws :  the  first,  which  are  more
akin  to  mathematical  conjunction  and  imply
considerable  elaboration  and  purification  of
concepts  ;  the  second,  which  are  nearer  to
observation  and  induction,  pure  and  simple.
The  former  express  a  rigorous,  if  not  absolute,
necessity,  but  they  remain  abstract  and  in
capable  of  determining  the  details  and  the
mode  of  effective  realization  of  the  phenomena.
The  latter  treat  of  the  details  and  the  rela
tions  which  complex  and  organized  wholes
have  with  one  another  :  consequently  they  are
far  more  determinative  than  the  former  ;  but
as  they  have  no  other  basis  than  experi
ence  and  connect  together  wholly  hetero
geneous  terms,  they  cannot  be  regarded
as  necessitative.  Possible  prediction  does  not
imply  necessity,  since  free  acts  may  admit
of  it.  Thus,  necessity  and  determination
are  distinct  from  each  other ;  our  science
cannot  blend  them  into  one.

214


CONCLUSION

To  sum  up,  on  the  one  hand,  mathema
tics  is  necessary  only  with  reference  to  pos
tulates  whose  necessity  cannot  be  demon
strated,  and  so  is  only  hypothetical  after
all.  On  the  other  hand,  the  application  of
mathematics  to  reality  is  only  approxi
mate,  and  seems  as  though  it  could  be
nothing  else.  Under  these  conditions,  what
is  the  doctrine  of  determinism  ?  It  is  a
generalization  and  a  passing  over  to  the
limit.  Certain  concrete  sciences  approach
mathematical  rigidity  ;  the  inference  is  that
they  are  all  destined  to  attain  to  the  same  per
fection.  The  distance  that  separates  us  from
the  goal  may  be  increasingly  lessened:  the
inference  is  that  it  may  become  nil.  This
generalization,  however,  is  a  theoretical  view.
As  a  matter  of  fact,  the  distance  between
mathematics  and  reality  is  not  on  the
point  of  being  abolished  ;  and,  if  it  is  les
sening,  the  number  of  intermediaries  which
would  have  to  be  intercalated  to  effect  the
junction  of  the  two,  appears  more  and  more
to  be  infinite.  Historically,  the  idea  of
reducing  the  real  to  the  mathematical  is
due  to  ignorance  of  this  incommensurability
of  the  real  and  of  the  mathematical ;  ignor-

215


NATURAL  LAW  IN  SCIENCE  AND  PHILOSOPHY

ance,  in  this  case,  has  had  good  results ;  for  less
eagerness  would  have  been  shown  in  making
for  a  goal  known  to  be  inaccessible.  The
application  of  the  Cartesian  idea  not  only
demonstrated  its  fertility,  it  also  transformed
into  a  transcendent  ideal  what,  to  Descartes,
was  a  principle  and  a  starting-point.

But  if  we  compare  with  the  present  state
of  science  the  testimony  of  consciousness
in  favour  of  freedom,  we  shall  find  this  testi
mony  far  more  acceptable  now  than  it  was
in  Cartesian  dualism,  for  instance.  When
things  were  reduced  to  matter  and  thought,  to
assume  man  to  be  free  and  his  freedom  to  be
efficacious,  was  to  admit  that  spirit,  as  sub
stance,  moves  matter,  as  discrete  substance.
Now,  this  is  incomprehensible,  whether  we
assume  that  spirit  creates  motor  force,  or
admit  that  what  is  not  itself  motion  can
directly  determine  motion.  Science,  how
ever,  by  no  means  establishes  the  reality
of  this  dualism.  It  rather  shows  us  a
hierarchy  of  sciences,  a  hierarchy  of  laws,
which  we  can  compare  with  one  another
but  not  blend  into  a  single  science  of  exter
nal  things  and  into  a  single  law.  It  shows  us,
besides,  along  with  the  relative  heterogeneity

216


CONCLUSION

of  laws,  their  influence  upon  one  another.
The  physical  laws  involve  living  beings,  and
the  biological  laws  combine  their  action  with
that  of  the  physical  laws.  In  presence  of  these
results,  we  are  led  to  enquire  whether  thought
and  motion,  along  with  the  abyss  that  separ
ates  them,  might  not  be  our  mode  of  bring
ing  things  clearly  before  the  mind,  rather
than  their  real  mode  of  being.  Motion,
per  se,  it  would  appear,  is  but  an  abstrac
tion,  as  also  is  thought,  per  se.  What
exists  are  beings,  whose  nature  is  inter
mediate  between  the  pure  idea  of  thought
and  of  motion.  These  beings  form  a  hier
archy,  and  action  moves  amongst  them
from  above,  downwards,  and  from  below,
upwards.  Spirit  moves  matter  neither  im
mediately,  nor  even  mediately.  There  is  no
crude  matter,  however,  and  what  constitutes
the  being  of  matter  is  in  communication  with
what  constitutes  the  being  of  spirit.  That
which  we  call  the  laws  of  nature  is  the  sum
total  of  the  methods  we  have  discovered
for  adapting  things  to  the  mind,  and
subjecting  them  to  be  moulded  by  the  will
In  the  beginning,  man  saw  nothing  but
supernatural  caprice  and  arbitrariness  every-

217


NATURAL  LAW  IN  SCIENCE  AND  PHILOSOPHY

where.  Consequently,  the  freedom  he  attri
buted  unto  himself  had  nothing  on  which  it
could  lay  hold.  Modern  science  showed  him
physical  law  everywhere,  and  he  imagined  he
saw  his  freedom  being  engulfed  in  universal
determinism.  A  correct  idea,  however,  of  the
natural  laws,  restores  him  to  true  self-posses
sion,  and  at  the  same  time  assures  him
that  his  freedom  may  be  efficacious  and
control  phenomena.  Of  things  without  and
things  within,  the  latter  alone,  said  Epictetus,
depend  on  ourselves,  and  he  was  right  at
the  time  he  spoke.  The  mechanical  laws
of  nature,  revealed  by  modern  science,  form,
in  reality,  the  chain  that  binds  the  without
to  the  within.  Instead  of  being  a  necessity,
they  set  us  free  ;  they  enable  us  to  supple
ment,  by  active  science,  that  state  of  contem
plation  in  which  the  ancients  were  plunged.


THE END


Printed  by  BUTLER  &  TANNER,  Frame  and  London.
218


Fn

P

University  of  Tort

K

Library

vD (0,

Xf 0

vD W

—  _

Cxi O

tO H

'&

(i

DO  NOT

-d

o

C2

Q

Q)

cc

0

0

0

w

•H

Jg

0

2

•H

3  *

•H oj

*W
H
•N  cd •

-  s  ^s

^

O -P Q)

__

POCKET

•g ^ ^

O O

PQ PH

eJ

(Q

a

ny

^^r^

O -H

1

rn
•H  00 ^

P-< CQ •
