The Contingency of the Laws of Nature
Émile Boutroux (Fred Rothwell, trans.) (1916)
========================================================================

PROVENANCE NOTE (Tower of Babel staging): Boutroux's De la contingence des lois de la nature (1874) — the thesis that natural laws are contingent: a founding text of French spiritualism. Fred Rothwell's 1916 translation.

========================================================================

THE CONTINGENCY OF
THE LAWS OF NATURE


BY

EMILE BOUTROUX

Member of the Acadtaiie Fraii9aiie


AUTHORISED TRANSLATION BY

FRED ROTHWELL


" E&at KM IvravOa tfcovg."

Aristotle, Dtpart, anim., i, 5.


CHICAGO AND LONDON

THE OPEN COURT PUBLISHING COMPANY

1920


•• • -'

• • •


Copyright in Great Britain under the Act of 191 1


PREFACE

Mr Fred Roth well, who has made a careful
translation of several of my writings, now offers
the English-speaking public a translation of the work
entitled : JDe la Contingence des Lois de la Nature.
May I be permitted to say, without false modesty, that
when in 1874 I presented this thesis at the Sorbonne
for my doctor's degree, I had no conception that it
would create attention after so long an interval, all the
more so as the idea I set forth at that time seemed
paradoxical and very unlikely to be taken into con-
sideration ? As it happens, this idea is now attracting
the attention of philosophers in various countries, and,
in spite of the important development of scientific
philosophy that has since come about, it is regarded by
benevolent critics as a question of the day. It may,
then, be interesting to state what are the two leading
thoughts of this work.

The first is that philosophy should not confine itself
to going over and over again the philosophical con-
cepts offered us by the systems of our predecessors
with the object of defining and combining them in
more or less novel fashion : a thing that happens too
frequently in the case of German philosophers. Phil-


vi Contingency of the Laws of Nature

osophy should put itself in direct touch with the
realities of nature and of life ; more particularly it
should be grounded on the sciences, for these are the
clearest and most faithful image we have of the aspect
presented to us by these realities. It has been my
endeavour to replace a philosophy essentially con-
ceptual by one that is living and is moulded on reality.

In the second place, philosophical systems appeared
to me as though they might be summed up, speaking
generally, in three types, which all had the same draw-
back : the idealist, the materialist, and the dualist or
parallelist types. These three points of view have
this in common : they force us to regard the laws of
nature as a chain of necessity, rendering illusory all
life and liberty.

Analysing the notion of natural law, as seen in the
sciences themselves, I found that this law is not a first
principle but rather a result ; that life, feeling, and
liberty are true and profound realities, whereas the
relatively invariable and general forms apprehended by
science are but the inadequate manifestation of these
realities.

And so I have restored to man, qua man, to his
thoughts and feelings, his will and action, that reality
and affective influence over the course of things which
common sense attributes to them, but which purely
intellectualist or voluntarist philosophies, like those of
Germany for the most part, declare to be inconceivable
and illusory. Man is able to act on nature because
nature itself is neither a brute force nor a lifeless


Prefiice


Vll


thought, but rather a veritable being, which, even now,
in its own way, tends to exist and develop, to create
and transcend itself. If they were actually necessary,
the laws of nature would signify the immutability and
rigidity of death. If they are contingent, they dignify
life and constitute points of support or bases which
enable us constantly to rise towards a higher life.

6MILE BOUTROUX.


i


/


CONTENTS


MAP.

Introduction ....


PAGE
I


I. Necessity


7


II. Being


17


III. Genera


33


IV. Matter


49


V. Bodies


71


VI. Living Beings ....


. . . . 87


VII. Man ......


III


Conclusion ....


. 150


IX


THE

CONTINGENCY OF THE
LAWS OF NATURE


INTRODUCTION

At his first appearance on this globe, man is wholly
engrossed in the sensations of pleasure or pain that
come to him ; he does not think of the outer world,
does not even know of its existence. In time, how-
ever, through these very sensations, he distinguishes
two elements : the one, relatively simple and uniform,
is the sense of self; the other, more complex and
changing, is the representation of extraneous objects.
Then there arises within him the need to escape
from self and consider the things around, the need
to know. He does not ask himself what standpoint
he must adopt in order to see things, not as they
appear to him, but as they are in reality. His eyes,
on opening, have discovered a delightful perspective
and boundless horizons. Here he takes up his post
as on some observation spot ; he undertakes to be-
come acquainted with the world as he perceives it
from this point of view. This is the first phase of


\


2 Contingency of the Laws of Nature

science, that wherein the mind relies on the senses
in the task of establishing universal knowledge.
And, indeed, the senses afford a primary conception
of the world, which they show to be a mass of facts,
endless in their variety, Man may observe, analyse,
and describe them with ever-increasing exactness : it
is this description that constitutes science. We are
not dealing with any fixed order between facts : the
senses show nothing of the kind. It appears to be
chance or destiny, or a mass of capricious volitions,
by which the universe is governed.

For a certain period of time, man is content with
this conception. And, indeed, is it not even at so
early a stage a very fertile one ? All the same, whilst
observing facts, the mind notes that there is a con-
stant relation between them. It sees that nature
f consists not of isolated objects but rather of inter-
related phenomena. It notes that the contiguity of
the phenomena, from the point of view of the senses,
is no certain indication of their actual correlation.
It would like to set out phenomena, not in the order
in which they appear to it, but in that in which
they really depend on one another. Henceforth, it
regards purely descriptive science as inadequate, and
V even inexact, in that it perverts the relations of things.
The mind would add explanatory knowledge thereto,
but this the senses are unable to procure ; for, to
efiect this, observed relations must be noted and
compared together, so as to distinguish between
those that are constant and those that are general.


Introduction 3

Then, once these limits or schemes have been
made, the particular relations we purpose to explain
must be fitted into them. Now, the senses only
arrive at those relations that are immediately given
by things themselves. The understanding, however,
intervenes and shows the mind a higher point of
view, from which things are really perceived in their
general aspect. The mind, then, sets the under-
standing to interpret, classify, and explain the data
of the senses.

The understanding, thus set above the senses, at
first attempts to dispense with them, and to build
up, unaided, the science of the world. The only
thing needed seems to be to take as starting-point
those ideas that appear to it self-evident and to
develop them in accordance with its own laws. It
is difficult to say how far it succeeds in doing this
without appealing to the senses. Anyhow, it culmin-
ates in a science all of whose parts are rigidly inter-
connected, and which is therefore strictly a unity;
though, on the other hand, it shows a divergefice
from real things which the progress of deduction
renders increasingly manifest. Now, the order of
the idea is valueless except when it explains the
order of the phenomena.

Finding it impossible, of itself alone, to constitute
science, the understanding agrees to collaborate with
the senses, and they work together in concert in
order to acquire knowledge of the world. The senses
are to take note of facts ; the understanding, to build


4 Contingency of the Laws of Nature

them up into laws. Following this method, the mind
tends to a. wider conception of the world than former
conceptions have been. \The world is an endless
variety of facts, linked together by necessary and
immutable bonds. Variety and unity, contingency
and necessity, change and immutability, constitute
the two poles of things. The law accounts for the
phenomena; the phenomena realise the law. This
conception of the world is alike synthetical and har-
monious, since it admits of the contraries without
any restriction, and yet reconciles them with one
another. . Moreover, as experience shows, it admits
of our explaining and anticipating phenomena with
ever greater precision. Impressed by these advan-
tages, the mind views them with increasing coni-
placency, and judges of everything in consequence.

Now, is this conception itself of a lasting nature ?
Is that science, which the understanding, acting
upon the data of the senses, brings info existence,
susceptible of completely coinciding with the thing
to be known?

In the first place, is not this absolute reduction of
multiplicity to unity, of the changing tO' the im-
mutable, which is suggested by the understanding,
the interchange or blending together of contra-
dictories ? And, if the absolute is the intelligible, is
this blending justifiable ? Again, is it sufficient that
the understanding should admit the concurrence of
the senses, for the mind to take up a central point
of view ? In reality, this concession concerns only


Introduction 5

investigations into the laws of nature; it does not
imply any change in the conception of the world
itself. As the understanding imposes on science its
category of necessary relation, it does not matter,
theoretically at least, whether the senses participate
or not in the production of knowledge. A perfect
intellect would derive the* whole of science from
itself, or, at all events, from the knowledge of a
single fact considered in the totality of its elements.
The world remains a perfectly single whole, a system
whose parts necessarily require one another.
n Now, is this category of necessary relation, in-
i herent in the understanding, actually met with in
/ things themselves ? Are causes mistaken for laws,
as is implied in the doctrine which defines law as
an immutable relation?

This is a question that concerns both metaphysics
and the positive sciences. The doctrine that re-
gards the understanding as the final point of view
of knowledge has the effect of relegating all par-
ticular spontaneity to the world of illusion, of seeing
in finality only an internal reproduction of the
necessary order of efficient causes, of attributing the
sense of free will to ignorance of the causes of our
actions, and of leaving in existence only one genuine
cause, which produces and governs everything by a
single, immutable act. Moreover, this doctrine does
not take sufficiently into account the absolute neces-
sity of observation and experiment in the positive
sciences; it also introduces fatalism, in a more or


6 Contingency of the Laws of Nature

less disguised form, not only into the study of all
physical phenomena without distinction, but even
into psychology, history, and the social sciences.

To discover whether there are causes really distinct
from laws, we must inquire how far the laws that
govern phenomena are necessary laws. If con-
tingency, after all, is only an illusion due to a more
or less total ignorance of the determinative conditions,
cause is but the antecedent set forth in the law, or
rather, it is the law itself in its general aspect ; and
the autonomy of the understanding is a legitimate
one. But if the given world were to manifest a
certain degree of genuinely irreducible contingency,
there would be grounds for thinking that the laws
of nature are not self-sufficient but have their reason
in causes that govern them : the standpoint of the
understanding, therefore, is manifestly not the ulti-
mate standpoint of the knowledge of things.


r\


CHAPTER I


NECESSITY


By what sign do we recognise that a thing is neces-
sary ? What is the criterion of necessity ?

If we attempt to define the concept of an absolute
necessity, we are led to eliminate therefrom every
relation that subordinates the existence of one thing
to that of another as a condition. Hence absolute
necessity excludes all synthetic multiplicity, all possi-
bility of things or of laws, and so there is no occasion
to inquire if it holds sway throughout the given
universe, which is essentially a multiplicity of things
that depend, more or less, upon one another.

'In reality, the problem under investigation is the
following : by what sign do we recognise relative
necessity, i.e. the existence of a necessary relation
between two things?

- The most perfect type of necessary concatenation
is the syllogism, in which we have a particular pro-
position shown to result from a general one because
it is contained in it and consequently was implicitly
affirmed the very moment the general proposition
itself was affirmed. The syllogism, after all, is but
the proof of an analytical relation that exists between

7


8 Contingency of the Laws of Nature

genus and species, the whole and the part. Conse-
quently, where there exists analytical relationship,
we find necessary concatenation. This concatenation,
however, per se^ is a purely formal one. If the general
proposition is contingent, the particular one deduced
from it, as such, at all events, is equally and neces-
sarily contingent. It is impossible, by syllogism, to
obtain demonstration of real necessity, simply by
connecting all the conclusions with a major neces-
sary in itself. Is this process compatible with the
conditions of analysis?

From the analytical point of view, the only pro-
position wholly necessary in itself is that which has
for its formula A = A. Any proposition in which the
attribute or predicate is different from the subject, as
is the case even if one of the two terms results
from the decomposition of the other, leaves behind
a synthetical relationship as a counterpart of the
analytical relationship. Can syllogism reduce syn-
thetically analytical propositions to purely analytical
ones?

At the outset, we find a difference between the
propositions on which syllogism works and the one
we have to reach. In the latter, the terms are con-
nected by the sign =; in the others, by the copula
is. Is this a radical difference ?

The copula is, used in ordinary propositions, is
perhaps not unrelated to the sign =. From the
standpoint of the extension of the terms — the stand-
point of reasoning — it means that the subject ex-


Necessity 9

presses only a part of the predicate, a part whose
relative magnitude is not indicated. The proposi-
tion '*A11 men are mortal" signifies that the species
"man" is a part of the genus "mortal," and leaves
the relation between the number of men and the
number of mortals an indeterminate one. Were this

relation known, one might say : "All men = - mortals."

ft

The progress of science, it may be added, consists in

determining with greater accuracy and completeness

the species contained in the genera, so that, in a

perfect science, the sign = would everywhere have

replaced the copula zs. The formula of this science

would be A = B + C + D+ . . .; B^a + 6 + c . . .,

etc. Substituting their values for B, C, D, etc., we

should finally obtain: A = a + ^ + ^+ . . . Now, is

this a purely analytical formula?

No doubt the relation between A and its parts
is analytical, but the reciprocal relation between the
parts and the whole is synthetical ; for multiplicity
does not contain the reason of unity. And there is
nothing to be gained by alleging that when we
replace a + 6 + c+ . . . by their values we obtain
A = A, for what science does is to consider A as a
decomposable whole and to divide it into its parts.

Still, the objection will be raised, the ideal ana-
lytical form, towards which science tends, may be
conceived otherwise. The effect of interposing a
middle term M between two given terms S and P
is to divide in two the interval resulting from their


lo Contingency of the Laws of Nature

difference of extension. Middle terms will likewise
be interposed between S and M, between M and
P, and so on, until all the gaps are completely
filled up. The passing from S to P will then be
imperceptible. Continuing in this way, we come
back to the final essence A, with which everything
will be connected by a chain of continuity.

This point of view, indeed, admits of the reduc-
tion of all propositions to the formula A is A. But
this time the copula ts cannot be replaced by the
sign =, for the interposition of any number what-
soever of middle terms cannot entirely fill up the
interval between the particular and the general.
The transitions, though becoming less sudden, are
none the less discontinuous ; and so there is always
a difference of extension or denotation between
subject and predicate.

It is therefore impossible to reduce particular
relations to the formula A =■ A, t.e. by analysis to
arrive at the demonstration of radical necessity.
Analysis and syllogism demonstrate only derivative
necessity, t.e. the impossibility of a certain thing
being false if a certain other thing is admitted to
be true.

Where analysis is wrong, in so far as it professes
to be self-sufficient, is that it admits of nothing
beyond an identical proposition as a final explana-
tion, and is unable to reduce to such a formula the
propositions that have to be explained. It is useful
only if an identical proposition, made up of hetero-


Necessity 1 1

geneous elements, is supplied as its point of depart-
ure ; it demonstrates necessity only if it develops a
necessary synthesis. Do such syntheses exist?

Experience, which offers no universal knowledge
whatsoever in time and space and simply makes
known the external relations between things, may
reveal constant though not necessary relations.
Thus, above all else, that ' it may be necessary, a
synthesis must be known a priori. True, we might
have to find out whether such a synthesis is neces-
sary from the standpoint of things, as it is for the
mind. At the outset, however, it is sufficient that
it be necessary for the mind for there to be no
occasion to discuss its objective reality, since this
discussion could only take place in accordance with
the laws of the mind. If, perchance, the course of
things did not exactly conform to the principles
laid down a priori by the mind, we should have to
conclude, not that the mind is mistaken, but that
matter betrays its participation in non-entity by a
feeble revolt against order.

How are we to recognise that a judgment is a
priori ?

For a judgment to be regarded as a priori^ its
elements, terms, and relation must not be derived
from experience. That the terms may be considered
as not coming from experience, it is not enough
for them to be abstract. Experience, after all, gives
us no datum which does not present both a con-
crete and an abstract aspect. I cannot gather up


\

V


12 Contingency of the Laws of Nature

in a single intuition both the colour and the odour
of one and the same object. The boldest abstrac-
tions may be no more than the extension, per-
formed by the understanding, of the subdivision
outlined by the senses. Moreover, experience itself
sets us on the path of this extension by giving us
more or less abstract data about things, according
to distance, duration, or intensity. That a term,
therefore, may be considered as laid down a priori^
it must proceed from experience neither directly,
by a process of intuition, nor indirectly, by a pro-
cess of abstraction.

Similarly, for a relation to be considered as laid
down a priori, it is not enough that it should set
up any kind of systematisation between intuitions,
as though experience supplied nothing that re-
sembled a system. To suppose an intuition abso-
lutely devoid of unity is to depart from the condi-
tions of reality. The most immediate perceptions
imply the grouping together of similar parts and
the separation of dissimilar objects. A multiplicity,
pure and simple, is something altogether incon-
ceivable; if it offers nothing upon which thought
may lay hold it cannot be a datum of experience.
Actually, then, in the very objects perceived, there
is a certain degree of systematisation; and so,
before affirming that a relation of dependence, set
up between two terms, is not due to experience,

we must find out if this relation is radically distinct
from those we are privileged to set up. This rela-


Necessity 1 3

tion must radically differ from those which experi-
ence offers us or which we can read in the data
of experience.

The field of experience, besides, may be clearly
defined: it consists of facts and their observable
relations. Facts may be divided into external and
internal facts, those proper to the being which is
their subject. By the senses we can become ac-
quainted with the former ; by empirical conscious-
ness, or the inner sense, we can apprehend the
latter within ourselves. Observable relations consist
of relations of resemblance or contiguity, whether
simultaneous or successive.

A synthetical judgment is subjectively necessary,
if stated a priori \ but in order that it may be a
sign of necessity, from the standpoint of things, it
must in addition affirm some necessary relation
between the terms it compares. A major which
stated a contingent relation would pass on this
character to all its consequents. Now, the objective
relations that may efxist between •two terms are
reducible to four : the relations of cause to effect,
of means to end, of substance to attribute, and of
whole to part. The relations of substance to attri-
bute and of whole to part may be reduced to
causality and finality. In the last issue, then, there
remain only these relations of causality and finality.

We cannot say regarding any end that it must
necessarily be realised, for no event, of itself alone,
is the whole of what is possible. On the contrary,


14 Contingency of the Laws of Nature

there are infinite possibilities apart from the event
under consideration. The chances, then, of realis-
ing this event compared with the chances of realis-
ing something else are as one to infinity ; and so
>^he realisation of any given end, such as the
uniformity with which phenomena succeed one an-
other, is, in itself, infinitely improbable and far from
being necessary.") Besides, even if an end is laid
down as one that must be realised, the means to
be used with a view to this result are not deter-
mined at the same time. Any end may equally
be realised by different means, just as any goal
may equally be reached along different roads.
True, the means will not all be alike simple or
good in themselves. The end, however, as such,
is not interested in these differences ; and the
reason we take this into account is that we exalt
the means itself into a secondary end. ' The real-
isation of the end by the means presupposes an
agent capable of knowing, preferring, and accom-
plishing ; and so it is not necessary per se.

It is not the same in the production of an effect
by its cause, if the word cause is given its strict
meaning as a productive force.

The cause, strictly so called, is only such if it
produces an effect. Moreover, it^ acts solely by
virtue of its nature; it cares nothing for the
aesthetic or moral value of the result. Thus, there
are no grounds for admitting any degree of contin-
gency in the simple relation of cause to effect.


Necessity 1 5

This relation is the perfect though unique type of
primordial necessity.

And so it is only to a priori causal syntheses
that necessity, alike objective and subjective, apper-
tains : they alone are capable of producing wholly
necessary analytical consequences.

To sum up, the criterion of the necessity of a
relation is the* possibility of reducing it analytically
to a subjectively and objectively necessary synthesis.
The principle of the necessary conjunction of things,
the magnetic stone whose virtue is transmitted to
every link, can only be the a priori causal
synthesis.

Now, if it happened that it were impossible to
establish the legitimacy of like syntheses as con-
stitutive or regulative principles of the knowledge
of given things, would all necessity become delusive
or fallacious?

Assuredly* we should no longer be dealing with
a radical necessity, as prevailing throughout the
given world, since, even though certain syntheses
implied in experience were necessary per se, the
mind, in the case in question, would not be in a
position to ascertain this. Nevertheless, the com-
bination of experience and analysis might still
manifest a certain kind of necessity : the only one,
indeed; usually followed by the positive sciences.
It may, in fact, be conceived that particular syn-
theses empirically given may be reduced to more
general syntheses, and these latter to still more


1 6 Contingency of the Laws of Nature

general ones, and so on, until we come to a more
or less restricted number of practically irreducible
syntheses. The ideal would be to reduce every-
thing to a single synthesis, one supreme law which
would contain all the laws of the universe as
particular cases. No doubt these general formulae,
founded on experience, would retain the character
of this latter, which is to make known what is,
not what is incapable of not being. Nothing could
prove them to be necessary per se. They would,
however, set up a necessary relation between all
particular facts, as such. The slightest change in
detail would imply the overthrow of the universe.
We may therefore accept the possibility of a
necessity of fact along with the necessity of theory.
The latter is present when the synthesis developed
by analysis is stated a priori by the mind and
unites an effect to a cause. When this synthesis,
without being known a priori, is implied in a
totality of known facts and is constantly being
confirmed by experience, it manifests, if not the
necessity of the whole, at all events the necessity
of each part, on the supposition that all the other
parts are realised.


CHAPTER II


BEING


Does the world, as given in experience, bear the
distinctive marks of necessity in the various phases
of its development?

On the lowest rung of the ladder of things given,
we find simply being or fact^ as yet indeterminate.
Can we say that it exists necessarily?

Since an absolute necessity is unintelligible as
regards given things, the necessity of being can
consist only in the link connecting it with what is
posited before it, i.e, with the possible.

What is the nature of this link? Is the realisa-
tion of being the inevitable consequence of the
existence of the possible ?
/ In the first place, can one deduce being from
the possible, as the conclusion of a syllogism is
deduced from the premisses? Does the possible
contain everything required for the realisation of
being? Is analysis, pure and simple, sufficient to
explain the transition from the one to the other?

In one sense, no doubt, there is nothing more in
being than in the possible, since all that is was
possible before being. The possible is the stuff of

17 2


1 8 Contingency of the Laws of Nature

which being is made. Being, however, thus reduced
to the possible, remains purely ideal ; to obtain real
being, a new element must be admitted. Indeed, of
themselves, all possibles lay equal claim to being,
and there is no reason, along these lines, why
one possible should be realised in preference to
the rest. No fact is possible without its contrary
being equally so. If, then, the possible is left to
itself, everything will be eternally hovering between
being and non-being, nothing will pass on from
potency to act. Thus, instead of the possible con-
taining being, it is being that contains the possible
and something besides: the realisation of one con-
trary in preference to the other, the act, strictly so
called. Being is the synthesis of these two terms,
and this synthesis is an irreducible one.

But perhaps this is a syntheses necessary per se ;
it may be that the mind affirms beforehand that the
possible must pass into the /act, that something
must be realised. /

It is worth noting that here we are dealing not
with being /^r se but with beiiig as regarded by the
positive sciences, i.e. facts presented in experience.
The synthesis of the possiple and the act must
therefore be interpreted in such a way as to enable
it to apply to the given objects. To establish the
origin a priori of this principle, by attributing to it
such a meaning as would be incompatible with
science, would be proving something with which we
are not now dealing.


Being 1 9

The possible, then, in the present synthesis, is not
potency, which is and remains in being both before,
during, and after the act ; for potency, as thus con-
ceived, does not belong to the domain of the positive
sciences. It is simply a mode of being, susceptible.:
of being presented — though not yet presented — in
experience. Similarly, the act is not the change that
takes place in potency when it creates an object, the
transformation of potency into a generating cause. It
is simply the appearance of the fact, of that which is
multiple and diverse, in the domain of experience.

Still, even, according to this view, the concepts
of the possible and of the act seem as though they
could be conceived only a priori^ for the possible is
not given in experience, and, speaking generally,
the act is the whole of the given. There is no
real experience capable of reaching the one or the
other of these two objects.

But is it sufficient that the possible should not be
given as such to enable us to regard the conception
of it as experimental? Looking upon the endless
variety and change of things, noting the contradic-
tions in the data of the senses amongst different
individuals and even in a single person, the mind is led
to regard what seemed relative from its point of view
as different from what would appear to it from another
point of view. The more observations multiply, the
more abstract becomes the idea of the possible, until it
is finally stripped of all distinctly imagined content.

If the concept of the act signified the whole of


20 Contingency of the Laws of Nature

the given, it could not be admitted that it was
derived from experience. The expression "the
y whole of the given," however, is unintelligible,
whether we regard the given things, past, present,
and future, as forming a definite quantity, or as
forming an indefinite one. The act, or the fact,
speaking generally, is therefore a term of indeter-
minate extension, the abstract existence of a world
capable of being perceived. Thus defined, the concept
of the act may be explained by the existence of experi-
ence itself, as well as by the perpetual change we

\( notice in things. T he more we find one mode of be ing
s ucceed anot her mode of being, the more fixed be-
comes. in^ us the Jdea_of_ihfi-a£t, of which we have
an example in each distinct experimental datum ;
whereas the idea of the particularities proper to each
fact disappears of itself, by reason of the infinite
multiplicity and variety of the experimental data.

It is not the terms, then, of which being
consists, i.e. the possible and the act, which must
be considered as posited a priori. There remains
the relationship set up between these terms. This
relationship, however, which would be essentially a
metaphysical one if we were dealing with the passing

. from the creative power to the act by which it creates,
loses this character when the two terms are reduced
to their scientific meaning. Thus it is no more than
the abstract relation between the present experience
and past ones, with respect to which the present
experience was simply possible. After this, it


Being 2 1

doeq not go beyond the scope of experience,
raised by successive abstractions to its highest point
of generality.

Nor is this all. The elements of being allow of an
indetermination which prevents us from seeing in the
one (the possible) the cause of the other (the actual).
It is not contrary to reason to admit that the possible
should never pass into the act, or that the actual should
exist from all eternity. Thus, not only can the know-
ledge of being, qua reality, be derived from experi-
ence, but it cannot have any other origin ; it cannot
be attributed to a synthetic judgment a priori.

Experience cannot induce us to attribute a necessity
of fact to this passing, at all events, since we find that
a host of things which have existed, and consequently,
are in themselves possible and susceptible of passing
into the act, remain in the future as pure and simple
possibles, without, it may be, anything authorising us
to suppose that they will again be realised.

Is it to be admitted that all possibles are, in their
essence, eternally actual ; that the present is made up
of the past and is big with the future ; that the future,
instead of being contingent, already exists in the mind
of the one supreme purpose or understanding ; and
that the distinction between being and the possible
is but an illusion caused by the interposition of time
between our point of view and things in themselves ?

This doctrine is not only unwarranted and im-.
possible of proof, it is also unintelligible. To say
that each thing is actually all it is capable of being


9

4


22 Contingency of the Laws of Nature

is to say that it unites and reconciles, within itself,
contraries, which, from the knowledge we have of
them, can exist only by replacing one another. But
how can we conceive of these essences as formed
of elements that are mutually exclusive? Again,
how can we admit that all forms share alike in
eternity, as though they all possessed the same
\ value, the same right of existence ? Finally, things, as
considered in time, are not all realised in the same
degree. One gradually becomes all it is capable of
being ; another is done away with just when it was
beginning to develop. This difference must pre-exist
in the eternal actuality attributed to the possibles.
Accordingly, they are not all actual to the same
extent. In other terms, the ones are relatively actual ;
the others, in comparison, are only possible.

/ Actually given being, then, is not a necessary
sequel of the possible : it is a contingent form
thereof. Still, although its existence is not necessary,
can this be said of its nature ? I n its own distinctive
development, is it not subject to an inviolable law?
Does it not bear within itself that necessity from which
it is released in its connection with the possible ?

The law of being, given in experience, may be
expressed in several formulae, which all have the
same meaning, at bottom : " Nothing happens with-
out a cause," or "All that happens is an effect : an
effect proportioned to its cause," z.e. containing
nothing more than this latter ; or " Nothing is lost,


Being 2 3

and nothing created," or, finally, "The quantity of
being remains stationary."

This law cannot be considered as given with being
itself, for the idea of uniformity and immutability- is
foreign to being, given as such, which consists essen-
tially of a multiplicity of various changing phenomena.
The law of causality is the synthesis of two mutually
irreducible elements, change and identity; it is not
sufficient that one of the two terms, change, should
be accepted as realised, in order that the adjunction
of the other should follow analytically.

Perhaps, however, this law is necessary as the
spontaneous affirmation of reason. ) Perhaps it is
conceived a priori, and, by virtue thereof, imposed
on being?

Where, we may ask, in the data of experience,
can there be found an object corresponding to the
term "cause," which means ** creative power," and
a relation corresponding to the link of "generation"
which the mind sets up between cause and effect?

If the question is stated in these terms, the prin-
ciple of causality is certainly a priori. It is not in
this sense, however, that it is implied in the know-
ledge of the given world. The idea of it generat-
ing cause could be of no service to the one who,
as a strict scientist, investigates solely the nature and
order of phenomena. In reality, the word "cause,"
when used scientifically, means " immediate condition."
According to this view, the cause oj[ one phenomenon
is still a phenomenon, and can be Nothing else ; other-


I


24 Contingency of the Laws of Nature

wise, investigation into causes would not come within
the domain of the positive sciences ; all the same, it
is a phenomenon which must previously exist if a
fcertain other phenomenon is to be brought about.

But, it will be urged, it is really erroneous to
regard the cause as having, in the first place, been
conceived as a metaphysical entity contained in the
phenomena : it is no more than their determining
condition. It has no bearing on being in itself, but on
the knowledge of phenomena ; it implies solely what
is needed to make this knowledge possible. It is right
. to say that causality is but a relation and a link set up
between phenomena ; it must be added, however, that
it is a link of necessity, set up a priori.

Thus understood, there is no doubt but that the
principle of causality is nearer to the conditions of
science than when it implies the hypothesis of a
thing in itself. Nevertheless, it still contains an
element which science does not demand : the idea
of necessity. It is enough that relatively . invariable
relations should exist between phenomena if investi-
gation into causes is to be both justifiable and fruitful.
. j Again, it is contrary to the essence of phenomena to
be necessarily linked to one another. The mode in
which they follow one another, dependent on the
mode of action of things in themselves, can have
only a relative character. , To regard causality as a
link of absolute necessity between phenomena is to
fall into the error^we wished to avoid, though now
exalting phenomeit^ into things per se.


f


I


Being 2 5

The exact meaning of the principle of causality,
as far as it applies to the study of the given world,
is as follows: any change that occurs in things is
invariably connected with another change, as a
condition, not with any change, but with a fixed
one, of such a nature that there is never anything
more in the conditioned than in the condition.
Now, the elements of this principle would all seem
to be taken from experience. A priori, man was
disposed to admit absolute beginnings, changes from
nothingness to being and from being to nothing-
ness, successions of indeterminate phenomena. It is
experience that has abolished these prejudices. It is
the march of observation and comparison, of reflection
and abstraction, i.e. of experience interpreted, though
not replaced or supplemented, by understanding,
which has shown that a change is never something
wholly new; that any change is the correlative of
another change that has come about under the condi-
tions in which it happens, and that the relation between
such change and some other is an invariable one.

It cannot, then, be said that the principle of causality
governing science is a law imposed on things by the
mind. In the terms by which the mind would impose
it on things, the given being, i.e. phenomena, would
be unable to realise it ; and, on the other hand, the
formula that applies to phenomena contains only
elements derived from experience.

All the same, this formula sets forth the existence
of an invariable relation between a particular change


26 Contingency of the Laws of Nature

and some other. Now, whereas invariability per se
is not tantamount to internal necessity, on the one
hand it does not exclude it but is even its external
symbol, on the other hand it sets up between modes of
being what may be called a necessity of fact. Does it
not follow that the principle of the necessary relation of
phenomena is deserving of all confidence from the prac-
tical point of view, and that, even from the theoretical
point of view, it is more probable than its contrary ?

It cannot be denied that the idea of this principle
has been the very life-blood of scientific knowledge.
Science came into being when man conceived of the
existence of natural causes and effects, i.e. of invari-
able relations between given things; when, instead
of asking itself what was the suprasensible power
that produced phenomena and why it produced
them, it asked itself what was the phenomenon of
nature on which the thing to be explained depended.
All advance in science confirms this conception, and
to imagine a real world in which phenomena came
about unceasingly, i.e. without invariable antecedents,
would be quite improbable.

Still, we must not forget that experience itself has
introduced to the human mind the scientific idea of
natural cause and has gradually clarified this idea.
The latter is not the idea of a principle a priori
which governs the modes of being, it is the abstract
form of the relation existing between these modes.
We cannot assert that the nature of things has its
derivation Jn the law of causality. To us, this law


Being 27

is but the most general expression of the relations
arising from the observable nature of given things.
Let us suppose that things, capable of changing, never-
theless do not change : the relations will be invariable
without necessity actually holding sway. Thus science
has for its object a purely abstract and exterior form
which does not prejudice the inmost nature of being.

Is it not likely, however, that the exterior is the
faithful representation of the interior? Is it ad-
missible that the acts of a being may be contingent,'
if it is established that the manifestations of these
acts are linked to one another by immutable relations ?
If the shadows passing through the cave of Plato
follow one another in such fashion that, after closely
observing them, one can foretell exactly the appear-
ance of the shadows that are to come, this is because,
to all appearance, the objects that project these
shadows themselves follow one another in invariable
order. No doubt it would be possible for the totality
of the manifestations and acts not to be given ; but
if, one of these manifestations being given, the others
are given likewise, the simplest hypothesis is to
admit that the acts themselves are similarly con-
nected with one another. To have the right, then,
to question the internal necessity of things, it appears
as though we must be able to contest the absolute
regularity of the course of phenomena and to assume
the existence of some disharmony, however slight,
between the postulate of science and the law of
reality. Experience may not supply us with the


28 Contingency of the Laws of Nature

means of doing this, but can we affirm that it pro-
nounces in favour of the contrary theory ?

All experimental finding is reduced, in the end, to
confining within as close limits as possible the value

^ of the measurable element of phenomena. We never
reach the exact points at which the phenomenon
really begins and ends. Moreover, we cannot affirm
that such points exist, except, perhaps, in indivisible
instants ; a hypothesis which, in all probability, is
contrary to the nature of time itself. Thus we see, as
it were, only the containers of things, not the things
themselves. We do not know if things occupy, in
their containers, an assignable place. Supposing that
phenomena were indeterminate, though only in a certain
measure insuperably transcending the range of our rough
methods of reckoning, appearances would none the less
be exactly as we see them. Thus, we attribute to
things a purely hypothetical if not unintelligible deter-
mination when we interpret literally the principle by
which any particular phenomenon is connected with
any other particular phenomenon. The term **any
particular phenomenon " does not strictly express an
experimental concept, and perhaps implies contradic-
tion with the conditions of experience itself.

Is it, then, in conformity with experience to admit ?

N of a proportionality, an equality, an absolute
equivalence between cause and effect.*^ No one
regards this proportionality as constant if things are
considered from the point of view of utility, of
aesthetic and moral value, in a word, of quality. On


Being 29

the* contrary, from this point of view, it is generally
admitted that great effects may result from small
causes, and vice versa. The law of equivalence, then,
can be regarded as absolute only if we are dealing
with pure quantities, or else with relations between
quantities of the same quality.

Where, however, are we to find a consequent
which, as regards quality, is exactly identical with its
antecedent? Would this also be a consequent, an
effect,^ a change, if it differed from its antecedent
neither in quantity nor in quality?

The march of observation increasingly reveals a
profusion of properties : variety, individuality, life,
where appearances have shown only uniform and
undistinguishable masses. Hence, is it not , likely
that the simple repetition of the same quality, a
thing devoid of beauty and interest, exists nowhere
in nature, and that homogeneous quantity is but the
ideal surface of beings? The stars, for instance,
seen from afar, appear but as geometrical figures,
whereas in reality they are worlds made up of a
thousan4 various substances. The change of in-
tensive quantity, i.e. the increase and diminution of
the same quality, may also be reduced, in the end,
to a qualitative change ; since, when carried to a
certain point, it culminates in the transformation of
a quality into its opposite, and the property mani-
fested in the case of a considerable intensive change
must necessarily pre-exist in the changes of detail,
of which it is the sum total.


30 Contingency of the Laws of Nature

True, there remains the hypothesis of a quantity
devoid of all quality ; but what idea can one form of
such an object ? A quantity can be no more than
a dimension or degree of something, and it is this
something that constitutes quality, the physical or
moral mode of being. Whereas quality may very
well be conceived as the substance of quantity, the
latter, regarded as the substance of quality, is unin-
telligible ; it acquires signification only as a limit, a
point of intersection ; and all limit presupposes a
thing that is limited.

If, then, even in the most elementary forms of
being, we find something qualitative, the indispens-
able condition of existence itself; the recognition
that the effect may be disproportionate to the cause,
from the point of view of quality, is an admission
that nowhere in the real, concrete world can the
principle of causality be rigidly applied.

Indeed, how can we imagine that the. cause, or
immediate condition, really contains all that is
needed to explain the effect ? It will never contain
that wherein the effect is distinct from itself, that
appearance of a new element which is the indis-
pensable condition of a relation of causality. If the
effect is in every respect identical with the cause,
it simply forms one with it and is not a true effect.
If it is distinct from it, this is* because it is, to a
certain extent, of another nature; and in that case,
how are we to set up, not an equality, strictly so
called, a thing that is unintelligible; but even a


Being 3 1

proportionality between the effect and the cause ;
how are we to measure qualitative heterogeneity,
^ and establish the fact that, in identical conditions, it
always happens in the same degree?

Finally, if we are enabled to reduce changes in
detail to permanent general relations, so that the
reciprocal heterogeneity of particular facts does not
exclude their relative necessity, does not the pro-
gress of the various science^ show us that these
general relations themselves, a summing up of par-
ticular relations, are also amenable to change? Is
it not the most probable induction that we cannot
reach an absolutely fixed law, however simple the
relations considered, however wide the bases of
observation? And if the whole varies, must there
not be in the details some rudiment of contingency ?
Moreover, is it strange that we cannot discern in the
infinitely small the causes of change in the infinitely
great, since, even in this infinitely great, the change
is almost imperceptible ?

The reality of change is no less evident than that
of permanence ; and if two changes, working in
opposite directions, can be conceived as producing
permanence, it is unintelligible that absolute per-
manence should give rise to change. Change, then,
is the principle ; permanence is but a result ; and so
things must admit of 'change, even in their most
immediate relations.

But, while there is no fixed point on which the
variations of things can be based, the law of causality.


1

i

t

I

i

1


32 Contingency of the Laws of Nature

which affirms the absolute conservation of being and
of the nature of things, does not apply actually to
the data of experience. No doubt it expresses an
extremely general mode of being ; but, in setting
forth this mode of being as altogether independent
of its opposite, which, nevertheless, is equally real
and primordial ; in positing determination and per-
manence before change and life, it discloses the
original intervention of the understanding, which,
instead of simply observing reality, endows it with
a form adapted to its own tendencies. The law of
causality, in its abstract and absolute form, may thus
rightly be the practical maxim of science, whose object
it is to follow, one by one, the lines of an endless
plan ; but it does not appear as anything more than
an incomplete and relative truth, when we attempt
to bring before the mind that universal intertwining,
that interpenetration of change and permanence,
which makes up life and real existence. The world,
considered in the unity of its real existence, presents
a radical indetermination, doubtless too faint to be
apparent if we observe things only for a very short
period, though sometimes distinct enough when we
compare facts separated from one another by a long
series of intervening links. There is no equivalence,
no relation of causality, pure and simple, between a
man and the elements that gave him birth, between
the developed being and the being in process of
formation.


CHAPTER III


GENERA


All things presented in experience are based on
being, which is contingent, both in its existence and
in its law. Everything then is radically contingent.)
Nevertheless, necessity would still have a very con-
siderable part to play, if the contingency inherent in
being, qua being, were the only one in the world ;
if, once being is posited, everything proceeded from it
analytically, without the addition of any new element.

Judging by appearances, being is not only pre-
sented to us qtm being, i.e. as a series of causes and
effects ; the modes of being also show forth re-
semblances and differences, which permit of their
being arranged in groups called genera or laws,
enabling them from small groups to form larger
ones. Every mode contained in a lower group is,
a foriioriy contained in the higher one of which this
lower group forms part. In this way the particular,
or the less general, finds its explanation or reason
in the general, or the less particular. Thus the modes
of being may be systematised, unified, and thought.

Is this property inherent in being, qua being, or
is it, with respect to being, something new?

83 . ^


34 Contingency of the Laws of Nature

Of course, logical organisation does not increase
the quantity of being. Similarly, a bronze statue
contains no more matter than the metal of which it
is made. Still, in logically ordered being, there is
a quality which did not exist in being, pure and
simple, and of which being supplied only the material
condition : explicableness. This quality is connected
with the existence of types, or formal unities, under
which is included the discrete multiplicity of indi-

/ viduals. It has its origin in the existence of notion^: ^
Now, notion is unity within multiplicity, resemblance
within differences. Through the degrees of which it
admits, it sets up a hierarchy amongst causal con-
nections; it gives to some, along with a general
relativity, the preponderance over the rest, and thus
makes, of the world of causes and effects, an antici-
pated symbol of organisation and life. Notion is both
one as genus and multiple as a collection of species.
Thus, it is not contained in strict being, the essence
of which, so far as we are dealing with the given
being, is diversity and multiplicity. Superior to
being, it causes to proceed therefrom, amongst all
the modes of which being is susceptible, those that
will supply it with appropriate elements, i.e. forms
that to some extent are similar, amid the diversity
on which their separateness is based ; it is realised
by becoming the centre of the system it has thus

• organised. One in essence, it is not confounded'
with the multiple forms whose appearance it deter-
mines, but is incorporated and becomes visible and


Genera 3 5

concrete in them. Because it is thus closely united
to things, it would seem to form an integral part of
them. It might disappear, however, without things
ceasing to be. No doubt, things would lose that
harmonious aspect which results from the union of
similars and the separation of opposites, and which
is the expression of idea; they would be nothing
but an absolutely barren chaos. All the same,
they would subsist ; just as matter, from which the
life has been taken away, subsists in a state of
disintegration.

It is not indispensable, however, that notion should
be analytically due to being, for the existence of
genera to be regarded as necessary. It is enough
for mind to declare, apart from all experience, that
being must assume an explicable, that is to say, a
rational form, and must conform to the laws of
thought which demands relations of extension in the
terms that it considers. In a word, it is sufficient
that the synthesis " being + notion '' should be posited
a priort^zs a causal synthesis. Now, is this the case ?

The solution of this question depends on the
meaning we attribute to the word ** notion." If we
regard notion as an immutable type which really
exists distinct from given things, a model whereof
given things are but imperfect copies, then we cannot
accept notion as a term supplied by experience.
Similarly, the thijc of participation which connects
particular things with notion as thus conceived can
only be affirmed a priori. It is really in this way


36 Contingency of the Laws of Nature

that the explicableness of things is implied in the

study of nature?

No doubt it would be profitable to know that

there exist suprasensible ideas or forms, types of

given genera, if we could become acquainted with

these ideas in themselves. Again, once possessed
of these perfect models, the mind would disdain —

and not without reason — any acquaintance with de-
fective copies, and would neglect experience, which
has no other object than these copies themselves.
It cannot, however, be proved that the mind is
capable, without the aid of experience, of giving a
content to notion or idea regarded as the metaphysical
type of sensible things. Here the original is known
only by the copy. The function of mind consists
in transfiguring the abstract type of given things
by giving it the form of perfection and eternity. In
these conditions the conception of metaphysical types
has no purpose in the study of phenomena. The
synthesis of being and notion, thus interpreted, may
be knowledge a priori^ but it is not this synthesis
with which we are dealing.

Will it be said that the element known a priori
is in no way the content of notion, the sum total of
the characters it comprises, but consists of the link
of necessity set up between these characters, and
therefore that the concept of notion, while not pre-
supposed by things themselves, is at all events
presupposed by an acquaintance with things?

This way of conceiving notion is not exactly the


Genera 3 7

one that controls the positive sciences. It is calcu-
lated to render the scientist either presumptuous or
discouraged. Convinced that things allow themselves
to be confined within definitions, the scientist exalts
into final truth, into absolute principles, the formulae
in which these investigations have culminated. This
is the origin of systems, those vain, rigid trunks,
from which the sap is gradually being withdrawn,
and which are given up to death. If, with greater
circumspection, the scientist waits until his formulae
are adequate to reality before he sets them up as
principles, he sees disappear before him the object
of his investigations in proportion as he approaches :
the very perfection of the methods and of the instru-
ments of investigation only convinces him more and
more of the purely approximate character of the
results he obtains. This is the origin of that scien-
tific scepticism which insists on seeing in nature only
individuals and facts, because it is impossible to find
therein absolute classes and laws. The object of
science is the study of phenomena; it is false to
itself if it begins by adopting such an idea of phe-
nomena as transforms them into things per se.

In its application to the study of nature, notion,
instead of being a distinct entity, is but the sum.
total of the characteristics common to a certain
number of beings. It is not immutable, but rela- /
tively identical in a total of given things. Nor is it
perfect, a positive characteristic ; it is comparatively
devoid of accidental elements, a negative character-


38 Contingency of the Laws of Nature

istic. Similarly, the link between notion and being
is not some mysterious participation, a translation of
pure thoughts into images accessible to the senses,
a symbolical analogy between phenomenon and
noumenon. It is not even an immutable correlation
between sensible elements, a necessary systematisa-
tion of phenomena. It is simply the relation of the
part to the whole, of the content to the container.
In this way, the synthesis of being and notion, in
its scientific acceptation, may be known by experi-
ence and abstraction, for experience shows us the
resemblances and the differences between things,
whilst abstraction gradually eliminates the variable
and accidental characteristics, retaining only those
that are constant and essential. The idea of a
class, ue. of a whole, being thus formed, experience
teaches us that this or that being presents charac-
teristics which are the distinctive signs of the class.
Consequently we compare this being with its fellow-
beings ; we bring it into the relative whole of which
these latter are composed.

The union, then, between being and notion, the
existence of genera, is .not only a synthesis, it is
even a synthesis a posteriori. It is therefore not
necessary in theory, though it would seem impossible
to deny that it is necessary in reality. For the
march of science has increasingly proved that 'every-
thing has its reason as well as its cause ; that every
particular form comes under a general form ; that
everything that is n forms part of a system. The


Genera 3 9

fact that it is impossible for us logically to connect
any detail with the whole proves our own ignorance,
not the lack of order in the things themselves.

It may, nevertheless, be remarked that the grouping
of things as notions is always more or less approxi-
mative and artificial. On the one hand, the real
comprehension of notions can never be exactly de-
fined. On the other hand, there are always beings
that do not come exactly within the limits set up.
Even the most general and fundamental notions 6r
categories have been finally tabulated, as though being
could not tolerate absolute immobility even in its
profoundest depths. The march of science will un-
doubtedly define more or less precisely the compre-
hension and extension of genera, but who would dare
affirm that this definition can ever be complete and
final .^ Who would dare affirm that there exists in
nature a determinate number of genera radically
separated from one another by the presence or the
absence of precise characteristics, and that all beings,
without exception, fall exactly into these general
types .i^ It is impossible to affirm that, in addition to
being, disciplined by notion, there does not remain a
certain quantity of being, more or less ill-adapted to
its ordaining influence ; or even that being is always
intelligible to the same extent or that the distribution
of beings into genera is not sometimes less and some-
times more profound, definite, and harmonious.

And so it is contingently that notion and all the


4© Contingency of the Laws of Nature

determinations of which it admits are superposed on
being. The modes of notion, regarded externally,
from the point of view of being, do not come about
inevitably. But does not the development of notion
itself, i.e the decomposition of the general into the
particular, obey a necessary law, and is not external
contingency then reduced to an internal necessity ?

The law of notion is the principle of identity,accord-
ing to which^ notion remains identical with itself, is
preserved as it is, and undergoes neither increase
nor diminution through all the logical functions it is
destined to fulfil. This is, we might say, the per-
manence of notion itself. By virtue of this law, what
is contained in a partial notion is, a fortiori^ neces-
sarily contained in a notion as a whole.

This formula does not analytically result from the
concept of notion itself, for we may conceive that
a whole can acquire or lose parts, without on that
account ceasing to be a whole. A type can change,
without thereby ceasing to be a type.

The law of notion, then, is a synthetical proposition.
Is it affirmed a priori}

The terms of this law may be interpreted in many
ways.

According to dne of these interpretations, there are
in nature a fixed number of real general types which
hold the same position, with regard to individuals,
as substance holds with regard to accidents. The
identity of notion, then, throughout its various func-
tions, is really due to the fact that it is one and the


Genera 4 1

same being that supports the individuals of one and
the same species, and these have only the vain appear-
ance of a distinct existence.

According to another interpretation, the principle of
identity does not concern things in themselves, but
only the knowledge of things ; it is only an a priori
condition of experience, and its true signification is
determined by the needs of thought. This view
affirms that, however it may be with transcendent
types, it is always exactly the same immanent notions
that are represented in the various phases of the
explanation of things; consequently, the total notion
contains exactly the entire content of the partial
notions. Moreover, the permanence of all particular
notions is explained by the permanence of one supreme
notion which contains all the rest ; the genera of a
lower order all come exactly under a smaller number
of higher genera, and so on, until everything is re-
duced to unity. Lastly, and for this very reason,
the link that unites the particular to the general, the
conditional to the condition, the thing explained to the
reason that explains, is an absolutely necessary one.

Manifestly, in either of these acceptations, the
principle of identity is posited a priori^ since nature
offers us no two things that are exactly identical,
and we are continually finding ourselves brought
up against irreducible characteristics. It is not
these absolute maxims, however, that are demanded
by science. Used as a framework for reasoning,
they would produce only sophisms, because the


42 Contingency of the Laws of Nature

concrete terms supplied by experience would never
satisfy the exact conditions of identity and exten-
sion which they demand. They would impose on
scientific investigation — as regards the nature of
genera and their relations to one another — a point
of view that might not be permissible and might
warp observation. How, indeed, are we to dis-
cover contingent elements in the world, granted
that they exist, if it is previously affirmed that all
relations between things must strictly be reduced to
the relation between substance and accident, or
between the whole and the part, if we state the
scientific problem in terms which, a priori, exclude
contingency and regard it as a necessity in dis-
guise ? Every question asked of the given world is
undoubtedly permissible, but only on condition that
the postulate it contains is not first set up as an indis-
putable truth. On the other hand, we must be ready
to question this very postulate and begin things from
farther back, in case experience should disprove the
previsions or forecasts that have been formed.

In its application to the positive sciences, the
principle of identity does not take for granted the
existence of substantial archetypes. How might
phenomena be logically connected with these hetero-
geneous essences ? Nor does the principle of iden-
tity absolutely presuppose the identity of the
generic element in species, the reduction of all
notions to a single one, or the necessary connection
between the particular and the general.


Genera 43

Undoubtedly, in a syllogism, it is the same generic
term that is applied to the species and to the individual
contained in that species. The identity, however, is
only one of words, for it is impossible to find a charac-
teristic that is exactly the same in two individuals, and
it is unlikely, judging by the law of analogy from which
the existence of species follows, that, if two individuals
were identical in one point, they would be so in all.
Nature never gives us anything but resemblances, »/
not identities ; from observed resemblances syllogism
can only infer non-observed resemblances. It could
not lay claim to a rigidity incompatible with the experi-
mental data which, alone, are capable of supplying
it with material.

Similarly, positive science does not require the
possibility of reducing all notions to unity. It
simply exacts a relative hierarchy of more or less
general notions. Whether, at bottom, there are
one or more systems of notions ; whether, in the last
analysis, these systems have a single basis or not ;
whether all species are exactly distributed in genera
or not ; or whether there exist intermediate species,
concrete reasoning will not be any the less possible.

In short, the character of absoluteness is simply
apparent, alike in the form of the syllogism and in its
matter. One cannot claim to set up exact relations of
extension between wholes and parts which, in them-
selves, are not exactly circumscribed. When we say
that Paul, forming part of the species ** man," forms
part, a fortiori^ of the genus ** mortal," which contains


44 Contingency of the Laws of Nature

the species "man," we simply mean that, if Paul
resembles, in many directions, other beings already
compared with one another and united under the notion
** man," it is extremely probable, practically certain,
that he will also resemble them in whatsoever concerns
mortality. Now, for such a deduction to be possible,
we need only admit that there are, in nature, bundles
of resemblances of such a kind that, given certain
groups of resemblance, it is extremely probable that
certain others will also be manifested : this, strictly
speaking, is the law of analogy.

If this is so, the principle of identity in its
scientific usage offers no characteristic incompatible
with an origin a posteriori. Experience is capable
of supplying us with ever more definite notions of
genera, with ever more general resemblances, and
with ever more constant conjunctions of resemblances.

Born of experience, the principle of identity can-
not be regarded as necessary de jure, as imposed
on creation or on our knowledge of things.

Is it not, however, imposed on the mind by the
very form of science, by the ideal it pursues, and
to which, in fact, it is ever drawing nearer? Is it
not the principle of logic whose jurisdiction is
accepted by all the sciences? Is it not therefore
practically recognised as necessary?

It must be noted that logic, in spite of the in-
dispensable part it plays in knowledge, is but an
abstract science. It does not determine the degree
of intelligibility presented by real things. It considers


Genera 45

^ the notion, in general, under the most precise form
that experience, modified by abstraction, can give it,
and deduces its properties by a method appropriate
to the understanding, i.e. according to the idea of the
permanence of this notion itself. Logic develops the
system of laws that apply to any notions whatsoever
placed in rapport with one another, granted these
notions remain identical. It forms frames or limits
within which experience is called upon to place a con-
tent, at the risk of straining, even of breaking them.
The reason it offers considerable practical certainty
is that it develops an extremely simple concept, the
middle type, as it were, of an infinite number of experi-
ences, and thus its definitions of words are almost
definitions of things. So, in statistics, probability
approaches nearer and nearer to certainty in proportion
as the basis of observation becomes wider ; for then
particularities increasingly cancel one another, to allow
the general fact to emerge in all its purity. Logic,
however, would prove false to science instead of
serving it, if, after artificially completing for the benefit
of the human mind the crystallisation outlined by
experience, and giving to the generic form a rigidity
of contours which nature did not impose upon it, it
then claimed to set up this abstraction as an absolute
truth, a creative principle of the reality which gave it
birth. Laws are the channel along which rushes the
stream of facts: these latter have hollowed it out,
although they follow its track. ^ And so the im-
perative character of the formulae of l6gic, although


46 Contingency of the Laws of Nature

practically justified, is but an appearance. In reality,
objective logical relations do not precede things : they
spring from them. They might vary, if things them-
selves happened to vary, so far as their fundamental
differences and resemblances are concerned.

But can it be said that such variations take
place? Does not the attempt to explain pheno-
mena bring us, sooner or later, in presence of
what is called the nature of things, i.e. -of immut-
able relations and properties? Though the stream
hollows out its own bed, does it, at the outset, of
itself flow in any particular direction? Beneath the
laws that result from change, do we not find those
that determine it ? Are these latter still variable ?
And is not this the last thing we can say : "Every-
thing changes, except the law of change " ?

Assuredly it is legitimate that the human mind
should be strongly linked to that idea of the nature
of things to which it owes its victory over destiny
and the powers of caprice, its entrance and progress
in the career of science. But this idea, in turn, must
not hold exclusive sway, and, in another form, reduce
belief to fatality. Whilst the first glance, from this
point of view, cast upon the universe, may have given
rise to the belief that things really had immutable
properties and an eternal nature in which reason was
to be found behind all their vicissitudes, a closer
investigation shows that what had been regarded as
the immutal)le substratum of things was no more than
a shifting and superficial layer; and, the farther we


Genera 47

enter into the heart of reality, the more this steady
foundation which was to support everything retreats
before us. Strong in the idea of genera and laws, the
human mind hoped to replace artificial classifications
by natural ones. With the advance of observation,
however, any particular classification which was looked
upon as natural in its turn appeared artificial ; and the
question is asked if it would not be a good thing to
substitute for all rational systematisation the simple
design of a genealogical tree. Now, if it is impossible
to find in nature a perfectly constant relation ; if the
most essential laws and properties seem to some extent
indeterminate, is it not likely that the very principle of
the distribution of phenomena into genera and species
(which, in its scientific use, after all, is but the most
general and abstract form of the laws of nature, after
the principle of causal conjunction) is also somewhat
contingent and indeterminate?

Thus, both reasoning a posteriori and speculation
a priori afford ground for the idea of a radical
contingency in the production of resemblances and
differences from which the genera and species of
nature result, i.e. in the existence and the law of
notion. Nothing proves that there are genera the
comprehension and extension of which are exactly
determined and immutable. It may happen that
notion, in the things that express it, may receive
an ever closer definition ; that subjects fall with
ever greater exactness under determinate predicates,
abandoning those characteristics that partook of


48 Contingency of the Laws of Nature

collateral notions. Sprung from being, as from matter
in the line of creation, logical form in its turn is
capable of reacting on being and permeating it more
profoundly. On the other hand, it is possible to
conceive that being, marshalled by notion under
strange laws, should endeavour to return to its prim-
ordial state of dispersion and chaos ; and that, conse-
quently, the importance of logical order, of the dis-
tribution of things into species and genera, should
diminish throughout nature.

True, these changes would remain as ideal possi-*
bilities or illusive appearances were the principle of
causality accepted in all its rigour, for then the nature
of the antecedent would wholly and of necessity decide
the nature of the consequent and there would be no
room for harmony, the germ of which did not pre-
viously exist in the given conditions. Now, cause, as
such, is indifferent alike to harmony and to disorder :
causes, left to themselves, only oppose one another
and give results identical with those of chance. Thus,
disorder would be eternal and irremediable did not
the forces of which the world is made up, inevitably
producing their effects, admit of any superior inter-
vention throughout their entire activity. Still, if cause
is susceptible, to some extent, of submitting to direc-
tion, the virtue of notion becomes efficacious. In the
world of forces, it determines a productive conver-
gence, leading them to produce things instead of eter-
nally tossing about in a void without succeeding in
peopling it.


CHAPTER IV


MATTER


It is contingently that being receives logical form ;
and that form itself, in its proper development, offers a
certain scope to contingency. Are these the only prin-
ciples that we have the right to exact from necessity ?
Once being and notion are posited, have we only to
deduce their inevitable consequences in order to ex-
plain all things?

Logical order is not only presented in its elementary
form; it appears before us in things that may be
counted and measured, in extended and movable
essences, in what is called matter. Is this new form
of being analytically derived from the former?

It may seem, at the outset, that material form is but
an accident, regarding which logical determinations
play the part of substance : are not extension, duration,
motion, after all, notions, general ideas in which we
include certain given things? Here there is confusion,
however : if mathematical properties are notions, it does
not therefore follow that they are nothing but notions.
It is one thing to say that an essence is thought, it is
quite a different thing to say that it is a thought.

The elements of matter may be reduced to ex-
tension and motion, for motion implies duration and

40 4


50 Contingency of the Laws of Nature

produces diversity, whence results number. Now, to
be in a position to reduce extension and motion to
purely logical essences, we must regard the former as
only a coexistence of notions, and the latter only a
succession of states which themselves, at bottom, are
made up of different notions. Is this purely logical
conception of extension and motion justified?

The property of a notion, that which constitutes its
essence and perfection, is that it should be exactly
circumscribed, and consequently separated, by an
interval, from specific notions of the same order as
itself ; also that it should entirely come under relative!/
generic notions. The generic element is identical in
two notions of the same genus, and the specific
difference consists of the presence or the absence of
one and the same characteristic. Consequently,
notions can be only exterior or interior to one another.
Two contents of the same order are mutually exterior ;
they are interior as regards their common container.
Thus the world of notions is essentially discontinuous.

Now, the category of discontinuity, applied to
extension and to motion, makes of the former an
infinite number of infinitely small points, and of the
latter a series of positions that correspond to an infinite
number of infinitely short instants. But infinitely small
points either touch one another and then form but one
whole, or they are distinct from one another, and are
then separated by intervals which, however small they
may be regarded, can never be wholly filled by other
points of the same nature. Similarly, infinitely short


Matter 5 1

instants either coalesce or leave between one another
gaps impossible to fill. Hence it follows that, in the
hypothesis in question, a species, even of finite magni-
tude A .... B, cannot be traversed by a moving
body M. For there is an indefinite number of points
between A and B. Likewise, a moving body, which
is supposed to move from A to B, is, in reality, motion-
less. For at each indivisible instant it is at an
indivisible point ; and the law of notions requires that
there should not be in the whole, ie. in total duration,
anything which there is not in the parts.

In this system, after all, extension and motion are
but relations. Things are wholly defined and solely
distinguished by internal properties which are pre-
existent to these sensible appearances. This doctrine
is not a satisfactory one, since it has for its consequence
the identification and blending together of certain
things which, in reality, are distinct. Symmetrical
figures that are not superimposable belong to this class.
The distinction of these figures is not a purely abstract
one ; it finds its application in the experimental sciences,
and explains, more particularly, the differences in
chemical properties shown by certain crystals.

Extension is not a multiplicity co-ordinated by a
unity : it is a multiplicity and a unity blended together
and identified, as it were. These are not parts ex-
terior to one another, qua parts of the same order, and
interior, qua contained in parts of a higher order :
they are similar parts, devoid of hierarchical order,
both interior and exterior to one another. In a word,


52 Contingency of the Laws of Nature

we are dealing with something continuous. Similarly,
time is a continuous duration, and motion a continuous
passing over from one place to another. This idea of
continuity, restored to the concept of extension, time,
and motion, brushes aside the sophisms into which one
is led when attributing to these concepts a purely
logical signification.

The mathematical properties, then, are not an analy-
tical synthesis of the logical properties, a combination
/ the logical properties of which contain alike the
elements, law, and raison cFetre, They involve a new
element, heterogeneous and irreducible : continuity.

Nevertheless, it does not immediately follow that
the existence of the mathematical properties is con-
tingent. Cannot they be considered, indeed, as con-
ceived a priori, and therefore imposed on the nature
of things ? Does not the knowledge of continuity in
coexistence and succession, i.e. the knowledge of space
and time, offer the characteristics of a rational intuition ?
May not our idea of motion be due to an elaboration
of space and time, wrought by the mind itself?

Unquestionably this is a legitimate doctrine if we


are dealing with space and time regarded as things
per se, one and infinite, capable of subsisting, even
though the phenomena should be done away with, and*
if we are also dealing with motion, regarded in its
absolute beginning, as an act of primordial spontaneity.
Experience and abstraction can furnish us with nothing
similar. It is not in this way, however, that the
sciences which deal with the given world consider


- "%


Matter 5 3

space, time, and motion. To them space is but ex-
tension indefinitely prolonged ; time is but indefinite
duration ; motion is but the change in position of one
thing with reference to another.

If this is so, experience is sufficient to account for
the scientific concepts of space, time, and motion.
Indeed, it offers us a series of extended and movable
objects whose end we never see, however great our
range of vision.

Will it be alleged that in extension, duration, and
motion, unity already exists, and that a concept which
implies unity, in whatsoever degree, cannot be derived
from experience? In that case, we must deny the
very existence of knowledge a posteriori^ for given
things necessarily form a distinct whole with reference
to what is not given. Besides, if, in order to circum-
scribe exactly the r61e of experience, we remove from
the empirical concepts of extension, duration, and
motion, the connection of the parts with one another,
as having been added by the mind, what remains?
A something difficult to define, and which has no hold
either on the mind or even on the imagination and the
senses. By removing from the distinctive domain of
experience all that in any degree implies unity we
end in making of the given elements an eternally
unimaginable, inconceivable, and indefinable unknown,
which is the same thing as denying its existence.
Everything, then, comes from mind ; experience is not
a distinct mode of knowledge, it is a less rigorous
systematisation than that of thought; mind has no


54 Contingency of the Laws of Nature

other laws with which to become acquainted than
those essentially its own. Dualism, however, which
we thought we had abolished, soon reappears within
mind itself in the necessary distinction between the
a priori intuitions of sensibility and the a priori notions
of the understanding ; and now, we have not to find
out whether the former, which involve mathematical
properties, are to be reduced to the latter, or whether
they have their origin in sensibility itself, as in some
heterogeneous faculty. The terms of the problem
have changed, though the problem itself is essentially
the same.

We should even be restricting immoderately the
range of experience were we to remove from it the
forms of space and time because to us they appear
indefinite. Immediate experience, assuredly, affords
us nothing similar. A series of experiences, however,
may well give us the idea of an endless succession,
unless we eliminate from experience all intellectual
activity, all participation of the understanding, which
would make it an inconceivable process, not only in its
object but even in its nature. For knowledge to be
experimental, it is sufficient that it should have an
object, the matter and form of which are contained

»

in the data of the senses or of the empirical conscious-
ness. The operation by which the understanding
extracts, from the data of. the senses, the more or less
hidden elements which they contain, does not trans-
form these data into an element a priori.

Thus^ the concepts of extension, duration, and


Matter 5 5

motion, as presupposed by the knowledge of the given
world, do not need a metaphysical origin.

But it may be objected that we are not dealing only
with these concepts in their indeterminate acceptation,
we are also dealing with their determinations; the
latter, at all events, can only be known a priori, and
are therefore necessary. Is it not a priori that the
mind constructs the triangle, the circle, the sphere,
uniform motion, parallel forces, and, speaking generally,
the mathematical and mechanical definitions? Can
these exact, complete, adequate definitions be derived
from existence? If mind did not create matter, it
created form, for these are models that nature cannot U
equal. There is no real straight line, no real circle,
no real equilibrium.

Assuredly it is impossible to explain by experience
the exactness of mathematical determinations, if we
regard this exactness as a positive and absolute charac-
teristic, testifying to superior perfection. 1 1 would seem,
however, as though it were rather a negative character-
istic resulting from the elimination of relatively acci-
dental properties. A straight line is but the trajectory
of a moving body going from one point to another,
and to that other only ; equilibrium is but the state in
which a body finds itself when the resultant of the forces
that act upon it is nil. Now, experience itself invites
us to eliminate the accidents that disturb the purity
of mathematical determinations. The trunk of a tree,
which a close view shows to be crooked or tortuous,
.fieems more and more straight, the farther one recedes.


56 Contingency of the Laws of Nature

What need have we of notions a priori to complete
this task of simplification, and, in thought, eliminate all
accidents and irregularities? True, we do not thus
obtain the idea of some object superior to reality : the
object we reach is rather an impoverished, fleshless,
skeleton-like reality. But is it so evident that geo-
metrical figures are superior to reality, and would the
world be more beautiful, were it made up of perfectly
regular circles and polygons only ?

The form and matter, then, of the mathematical

elements are contained in the data of experience. The

continuity that is measurable in coexistence, succession

and displacement, is the object bf knowledge a

posteriori.

True, there remains the link which connects this
term with the lower forms of being ; the relation of
mathematical form, strictly so called, to logical form.
But does the mind affirm a priori that every fact
capable of being explained happens in time and space
and implies the existence of motion } This is doubtful ;
for we have the idea of psychological facts as not being
in space and as involving no change of place. Such a
doctrine rashly prejudices a question which should
remain open to scientific investigation. Indeed, it is
by no means inconceivable that movable extension

may not be the necessary form of all that is given. ^

Thus it seems impossible to establish a priori,
analytically or synthetically, that figure and motion are
essential and necessary properties of being. But will
it not be affirmed that the positive sciences themselves


Matter 5 7

testify to this by the demonstrations and discoveries
they owe to this doctrine ? Is it not by seeking in all
things a mathematically measurable element, by taking
for granted that figure and motion are everywhere,
that physics has been revived, and, more especially,
that the mechanical theory of light and heat has been
set up? Is not the progress of the various sciences
measured by the degree to which mathematical notions
are applied to them ?

Undoubtedly, considerable probability must be
attributed to so fertile an idea; but, on the other
hand, one cannot forget its origin. It is experience
that has made us acquainted with figure and motion.
It has also enabled us to discover these modes of
being in a great number of cases, in which we had no
suspicion of their existence. Now, experience cannot
prove to us that these properties are inherent in all
that is. Since it happens that we are more struck
by unexpected facts than by ordinary ones, we are
inclined always to admit the mechanical substratum
we have discovered beneath things which do not
appear susceptible thereof, such as heat and light
Nevertheless, there still exist a considerable number
of forms which we cannot reduce to motion, and
which do not even seem capable of being found in
a movable subject. Such are the intellectual faculties.
That movable extension is inherent in being, by /
right of essential and universal property, remains a
hypothesis, in spite of the r61e this idea is capable
of holding in science.


58 Contingency of the Laws of Nature

Besides, even though it were proved that figure
and motion might be found in all that is, it would
still not be possible to set up these modes of being
as necessary, eternal, and absolute essences; the
mind is plunged into insoluble difficulties when it
attempts to develop such a doctrine.

Sometimes, supposing that extension and motion
possess limits and form a circumscribed whole, the
mind cannot conceive how these limits can exist
without a limitrophe extension or an antagonistic
motion. For, as regards distant extension or
motion, it sees no reason to admit other laws than
those governing extension near at hand or present
motion. Its function being to affirm of the species
what it knows of the genus, the mind judges that
one motion can only take place after another, that
one extension can only be limited by another.
Moreover, even though, in order to avoid progress
ad infinitum, it recognised a term in regression or
in progression, it would not know where to place this
term, because, to it, all points in empty space and
time are identical.

Again, on the other hand, supposing that extension
and motion are limitless, the mind concludes that
they are never complete and finished, that they are
unceasingly making and unmaking themselves, that
they are and are not. Then, however, it cannot
regard as absolute that inapprehensible thing which
is ever in course of realisation but never realised,
which is neither in the past nor the future byt only


Matter 59

in the present moment, an infinitely small point be-
tween two abysses of nothingness.

T

Thus, extension and motion are, for being, contin-
gent forms. Consequently, all modes of extension and
motion are themselves new and contingent elements
as regards lower forms. Is not the production, how-
ever, of these modes governed by a law inherent in
material essence itself, and is not this law inflexible ?

The fundamental law of mathematical determina-
tions is the permanence of measurable quantity
through all the decompositions and recompositions
of extension and motion. Its concrete expression is
seen in the formula of the conservation of force. Is
this law necessary.'^

We cannot say that it is to be deduced a priori
from the definition of extension and motion, for these
two latter do not appear to change their nature : to
increase, the one in magnitude, and the other in
speed or duration.

Is it posited a priori by the mind as a necessary
synthesis ?

Undoubtedly, if we regard measurable quantity as
the symbol of a metaphysical essence like active
force, it is manifest that the law in question cannot be
known a posteriori. We are not dealing with any-
thing of this kind, however. Mathematics considers
only observable realities ; figure and motion come
imder the senses. The concept of measure is reduced
to that of coincidence, regarded as independent of


6o Contingency of the Laws of Nature

place, of the meaning of the figures, and of the way
in which they are superimposed ; i.e. it is reduced
to data that can be explained by experience. In
mechanics, force, mass, and weight are sensible magni-
tudes, capable of being measured numerically. The
scientific formula of the amount of energy conserved
consists of terms devoid of any metaphysical character.

Indeed, it was not all at once that man discovered
the first principles of mathematics. He groped about
and felt his way, using observation and experiment,
abstraction and induction. Certain fundamental prin-
ciples, now unchallenged, such as the law of the
independence of motions discovered by Galileo, at
first caused numerous objections to be raised by
persons who regarded them as irrational.

Will the suprasensible character of the mathematical
laws be attributed to the sign =, which connects all
formulae with one another }

But then, equality, which after all presupposes differ-
ences and as such is distinct from absolute identity,
may be regarded as simply a limit, which the mind
gradually conceives, by observing objects which show
smaller and smaller differences in magnitude and by
leaving out of account those that nature inevitably
permits to subsist. Now, this process implies no
knowledge a priori. If we affirmed that the mind
intuits the essences it thus creates, if we considered
geometrical figures, groups of forces, in their mathe-
matical form, as objects of imagination, we should
have to admit that they are known a priori by a sort


Matter 6 1

of metaphysical sense, for experience supplies us with
no model of them. If, however, these objects are
pictured only in a rough form ; if, in their precise
form, they are simply conceived, nothing prevents us
from admitting that they are derived from experience
elaborated by abstraction.

Finally, will it be affirmed that the principle of the
conservation of force is related to the production of
motion throughout the universe, that it implies the
absolute impossibility of an initial impulsion, and there-
fore infinitely transcends experience, which can make
us acquainted only with a part, a fragment of things ?

Thus understood, this principle would still demand
a metaphysical origin ; though it is not so used in the
positive sciences. (The formula to which we endea-
vour to bring all tne particular laws of motion simply
implies the conservation of force in a finite system of
mechanical elements^ Now, such notions come within
the range of experience ; more than this, they can
have no other origin than experience itself.

The principle of the conservation of measurable
quantity, then, through the transformations of exten-
sion and motion, is not imposed by reason on things,
or on our knowledge of things : it is but a r^sumi of
experience.

But is it not, on this very account, invested with
unquestioned authority ? Is it not practically placed in
the same category as a principle a priori ? Does it not
form the starting-point of a strictly analytical develop-
ment in pure mathematics and rational mechanics ?


62 Contingency of the Laws of Nature

The deductive form of these sciences must not
deceive us : their conclusions and their data alike are
purely abstract. They determine what will happen
if certain movable figures are produced and their
measurable quantity remains constant. We cannot,
without moving in a vicious circle, regard the facts as
necessary, in the name of a principle whose legitimacy
is based on nothing but the observation of the facts.
Experience, to which the mathematical principle owes
its value, itself limits the scope of the principle. We
have no right to set up this principle as an absolute
truth, and drag it along, so to speak, through all the
sciences, and even through morality, blindly over-
throwing everything with which it meets. This
algebraical formula does not create, or even govern
things : it is nothing but the expression of their
exterior relations.

Still, even according to this view, does it not render
unlikely the existence of the slightest degree of con-
tingency in the production of motion ?

One would like to be able to reconcile the two
principles, and, at first sight, it would appear as
though this were possible. Does the conservation
of force exclude a contingent use of this force ? If
contingency is not to be found in quantity, may it not
be found in direction ?

This distinction, however, is useless in the present
instance ; for, in order to change the direction of a
motion by the laws of mechanics, either a new motion
must be introduced, or one of the component motions


Matter 63

suppressed, Le. the amount of force must be either
increased or diminished.

Are we to distinguish motion, strictly so called,
the motion of translation, from hidden or molecular
motion ; and shall we say that the law of the con-
servation of force really determines the amount of
molecular motion capable of resulting from a given
motion of translation, and vice versa^ but not the
transformation of the one into the other, and that this
transformation, at least, may be contingent ?

Molecular motion, however, is, at bottom, only a
number of internal motions, which differ from the
motion of translation only in being without a resultant.
As such, it cannot change into a motion of translation
except by a change effected in the direction of the
elementary motions, i.e. by introducing once more a
new force, by an increase or a diminution of the
amount of motion.

Are we to restrict the possibility of contingent
motion in case the concurring forces determine a state
of equilibrium, and say that the introduction of an
infinitely small quantity may sometimes suffice to
upset the balance, as happens in the case of unstable
equilibrium ?

But is that ideal equilibrium ever realised ? Again,
however small the acfditional force is regarded as
being, must it^not have measurable intensity if it is
to produce an effect?

Will it be affirmed that there may take place, in
nature, cases similar to the hypdtheses of problems


64 Contingency of the Laws of Nature

which admit of several solutions indifferently, because
all the conditions that would be necessary fully to
determine the result are not met with in the data ; and
that, in these cases at all events, the realisation of one
resultant, in preference to the rest, is contingent ?

This would be misjudging the law by which, when
there is no reason why one of two opposites should
come about rather than the other, nothing results.

Will it be alleged that calculation of probabilities
makes conceivable a relative permanence of the
ensemble in spite of the contingent variability of the
details, and that the discovery of the determination in-
herent in the whole cannot turn against the primordial
hypothesis of absolutely fortuitous particular cases ?

But it is not true that particular cases are ever alto-
gether fortuitous. The number of balls contained in
a bag, for instance, is an element of determination ;
and it is the very existence of this element that in-
volves the existence of a constant mean. As for the
apparent indetermination of particular cases, does not
this disappear if we admit the existence, in nature, of
two kinds of causes : some convergent, permanent and
universal, those that produce the law ; the rest, in-
significant and fleeting, devoid of convergence, which
perceptibly cancel one another and are thus practically
equivalent to the chance which the mathematician pre-
supposes? Calculation of probabilities comes under
the case of those problems the data of which are in-
complete. Now, is not this an artificial abstraction ?

Finally, can we divide the given world and admit


Matter 65

that the law of the conservation of force, a necessary
and salutary law, in those cases to which it applies, is
after all not universal, and that a portion of the beings
in the world are not subject to it ? Is it possible to
distinguish different sources of motion, some purely
material, the rest living or even thinking, and restrict
to the former the application of the principle of living
forces ?

This distinction would seem to be illegitimate if
we consider that there are an infinite number of
intermediaries between the thought considered as
directing and the motion perceived, and that distinct
experience never reaches the beginning of a
mechanical series. In reality, the doctrine in
question conforms to the conditions of a scientific
explanation in the one case and is exempt from
them in the other. What will be the measure of
the force at the disposal of these superior agents,
which are heterogeneous as regards mechanical
agents? Moreover, where do we find that an
amount of force stored away in the nerves pro-
duces more work — including the passive work in
both cases — than the same amount of force stored
away in a purely mechanical apparatus .'^

In a word, it is impossible to reconcile any degree
of contingency in the production of motion with the
law of the conservation of force, regarded as
absolute. Such a contingency can be conceived
only if this law, as regards the mechanical world
itself, is not the necessary expression of the nature

5


66 Contingency of the Laws of Nature

of things. Now, is such a doctrine really contrary
to experience?

We must not deceive ourselves as to the import
of the sign = used to express the relation which,
by virtue of this law, links together convergent
forces and their resultant. In the first place, man
can never prove absolute equality. Next, in spite
of this equality, the resultant is something new as
regards the antecedents. There were several forces ;
now there is no more than one. These forces took
certain directions ; the direction has changed. Some-
thing was which is no longer; something was not
which now is. It is true that particular and com-
plicated transformations may be reduced to general
and elementary transformations and thus appear as
necessary, if not in themselves, at least as regards
these superior principles. But however simple and
immediate be the transformations of motion set
forth in the general principles, they always imply an
annihilation and a creation. Now, is it intelligible
that a motion should be the self-sufficient reason of
its own annihilation and of the appearance of a new
motion? Can we recognise a link of necessity
between what has ceased to be and what is, between
what is and what is to come, between being and
non-being?

The law of the conservation of force presupposes
a change it does not explain, which it would even
make unintelligible were it regarded as possessing
undivided sway over the primordial modes of matter.


Matter 67

It is not absolute, therefore, and has no control over
this initial change, which must take place if the law
is to apply.

But the various elements, it will be alleged, are
simply the qualities of things, they are not their
substance : this latter consists of figure and motion,
i.e. of that very quantitative element whose conserva-
tion is affirmed by mathematical law.

The consequence of this doctrine is to reduce
qualitative change to simple appearances, and along
with this change, everything nature offers us that is
most abstract, without the possibility of conceiving
any possible relationship between the immutable
element of which the substance of things is made
and the qualitative change * which becomes the
phenomenon thereof.

Finally, of what exactly consists that element the
permanence of which is affirmed throughout all
qualitative changes?

Is it quantity pure and simple? Quantity is but
a measure, an abstraction, an ideal limit, not a reality.

Is it the quantity of several qualities ? We can
compare with one another only measures that refer
to one and the same quality.

Is it the quantity of one and the same quality,
which would actually be figurate and movable exten-
sion ? In this case, which of the two is substance :
quantity, which never succeeds in being realised, in
obtaining the determination and the fixity it demands ;
or quality, which imposes on quantity this perpetual


68 Contingency of the Laws of Nature

fluctuation, so opposed to its essence? Is not
quantity subordinated anew to an element of another
nature ; consequently, does it act just the same as
though it existed per se? Even in a quality so
elementary as figurate and movable extension, do
we find that determination and identity which are
presupposed by abstract mathematics? Is not this
quality closely linked with the rest, and should it not
be connected therewith by imperceptible gradations,
just as, in higher regions, physical and chemical
properties gradually become united to life? Does
not vibratory motion, for instance, represent one of
these intermediate stages ? Hence, is there perfect
identity of nature between all real motions? Are
not some more calculated than the rest to produce
vibratory motions ; and, in that case, does an ensemble
of component forces form a perfectly homogeneous
whole ?

To consider quantity with relation to a homo-
geneous quality, or to leave quality altogether out of
account, is to place oneself outside the conditions of
reality itself. ^ Everything that is possesses qualities,
and consequently participates in that radical indeter-
mination and variability which belong to the essence
of quality. Thus, the principle of the absolute per-
manence of quantity does not apply exactly to real
things : these latter have a sujbstratum of life and
change, which never becomes exhausted. The
singular certainty presented by mathematics as an
abstract science does not authorise us to look upon


Matter 69

mathematical abstractions themselves, in their rigid
monotonous form, as the exact image of reality, j

Experience, moreover, however broad its founda-
tions, nowhere shows us mechanical ensembles that
are altogether permanent. Even the revolutions of
the heavenly bodies, which seem so uniform, do not
take place in absolutely identical periods of time.
Before the observer, fixed law retreats farther and
farther into the distance. He imagines that it would
be attainable, could he but observe the whole. But
then, in the realms of space and time, what is
the whole? The indetermination which inevitably
subsists in the mean proportionals, relative to the
greatest mechanical ensembles^ most probably finds its
rationale in the contingency of the details.

If, however, general revolutions are extremely slow
and almost imperceptible, how must it be with the
variations in detail which determine them? For
instance, nature, to a momentary glance, seems
motionless, whereas in reality everything is moving,
living, growing. And if the contingent advance of
the mechanical world comes about by continuous
transitions, as is probable; if elementary variations,
when they do not cancel one another, act by their
number, duration, and convergence, rather than by
their intensity ; one does not see how man, who can
only study things with any degree of precision by
analysing them, could verify their existence directly.
Moreover, there are certain cases in which variations,
in themselves insignificant and imperceptible, suffice


i


^y


7© Contingency of the Laws of Nature

to bring about considerable results, by a sequence of
purely mechanical contre-coups. Such, at times, are
breaks of equilibrium. The seed that falls from the
beak of a bird on to a snow-clad mountain may
occasion an avalanche which will submerge the
valleys below.

The appearance, then, of matter and its modes,
is a fresh victory of things over necessity : a victory
due to the superior importance of matter and also to
the elasticity of the tissue of causes and of species,
which has enabled this new form to spring and
develop therein.


CHAPTER V


BODIES


Is it possible to create the world without employing
anything else than matter and motion ? Once these
concepts are admitted as indispensable and irreducible
data, can everything else be explained ?

Above matter, strictly so called, are the physical
and chemical essences, i.e. bodies, within which figure
and motion appear before our eyes. Is the adequate
reason thereof to be found in the existence of hiotion
and its laws, or do they contain something more that
is incapable of reduction? If it happens that matter
does not explain bodies, a fortiori it could not explain
life and thought*

But why should nob matter explain bodies? Here
we are not dealing with what there may be relative
to man in the idea he forms of physical and chemical
objects, nor are we dealing with the subjective
element of sensations, but simply with their external
cause. Now, why should not the part which things
play in sensation be reduced to motion?

Assuredly, it is impossible to regard our states of
consciousness as properties of external matter. What
objectively distinguishes bodies from matter cannot

71


72 Gontingency of the Laws of Nature

be the fact that they are susceptible of sensation.
But does it follow that there is nothing more in the
substance of sound or of light than in matter pure and
simple ? Has the descriptive part of physical science
no object at all.'^

If a mode of being need only be set forth in a state
of consciousness for no element thereof to appertain
to things, then motion itself does not appertain
thereto. For it is presented to us only in tactile or
visual sensations of which we are aware. If we
eliminate touch, motion becomes altogether inconceiv-
able ; consequently, nothing could be more obscure

than the doctrine which regards motion, according

'i

to the immediate idea we have of it, as the exterior
element par excellence. The motion with which- we
are acquainted, i.e. perceived motion, like all percep-i
tion, can be nothing else than the sign of the thing
given : it is not its image. Nevertheless, if we
attribute it to things, we cannot argue that, because
consciousness intervenes in the knowledge of bodies,
they cannot therefore possess real physical properties.
The objection, however, will be urged, that we
must not multiply beings needlessly. It has been
proved that the various physical properties all have
one and the same external cause, and that this cause
is motion. The same agent, applied to the organs of
the different senses, produces different sensations ; and
agents that appear different, if applied to the organ of
a single sense, all produce ' th^ same sensation. The
different physical agents, then, are but varieties of a


Bodies 7 3

single one. Moreover, it is known that sound, heat,
and probably light may be reduced to motion. All
physical agents, then, are reducible to motion.

This demonstration is not a rigorous one.

In the first place, the law of the mechanical equiva-
lent of heat by no means implies the reduction of heat
strictly so called to motion, but simply the existence of
a molecular motion in the body which determines in
us the sensation of heat.

Than again, if everything is only motion, why does
consciousness, in the presence of bodies, experience
different kinds of sensations? Are there several
consciousnesses differing in nature, corresponding to
several categories of motions, and creating qualitative
differences, on the occasion of these relatively quanti-
tative differences.*^ But consciousness is essentially
one and the same, it cannot understand this passing
from the one to the many, from the similar to the
diverse. Besides, manifestly we are not here dealing
with purely exterior diversity, with varieties of a single
type. The sensation of heat is radically heterogeneous
from that of sound. Since this heterogeneity cannot
find its explanation in the nature of consciousness, it
must have its origin in the nature of things themselves, "
and matter must have the property of assuming forms
that cannot be reduced to one another. Now, hetero-
geneity is foreign to the essence of figurate and
movable extension, i.e. of real matter. Vibratory
motion itself cannot be called heterogeneous from the
motion of translation. These are simply magnitudes.


74 Contingency of the Laws of Nature

>

directions, intensities, diverse modes of one and the
same phenomenon. It must therefore be admitted
that sensible objects, even eliminating that which con-
sciousness may introduce of itself into sensation, cannot
be reduced to matter in motion. Disturbed matter
seems, in them, to be but the vehicle of superior pro-
perties, which are the real physical properties. This
new essence consists of our power to supply conscious-
ness with heterogeneous sensations.

If one and the same agent happens to impress the
Various senses differently, perhaps this is because,
though apparently simple, it is in reality complex, and
comprises as many distinct agents as it causes diverse
sensations. Heat, light, and electricity, foY instance,
may accompany one another, in more or less constant
fashion, without on that account being confounded in
one and the same agent. Perhaps, also, the fact in
question, and along with it the contrary fact, would find
their explanation if we admitted that the organs of
those senses whose nature is fitted to the sensations
they are to receive, retain latent within themselves a
certain sum of real physical impressions, supplied by
the exterior objects ; and that, in obedience to certain
stimulations, these impressions pass from latency into
manifestation. This is what evidently takes place, for
instance, In the case of imaginary sensations and in
dreams.

Thus, physical and chemical elements, bodies, in so
far as they are capable of heterogeneity, are not inter-
changeable with matter pure and simple. They cannot


Bodies 7 5

be derived from it along the lines of analytical develop-
ment, but imply the addition of a new element.

Is this addition the effect of a causal synthesis
posited a priori by reason ?

Here we are not dealing with the particular concepts
that relate to the matter of physical phenomena, i.e, to
heat, electricity, chemical combination, etc., etc. These
properties are evidently known only by experience.
But we might perhaps regard as given a priori the
general form of these properties, Le. the transformation
of matter into heterogeneous substances. No sooner
is being subjected to the conditions of time and space,
as matter is, by definition, than it seems incapable of
realising all its potentialities except by a process of
infinite diversification. A sunbeam passing through a
prism conserves all the light it held only by becoming
split up into a thousand different colours.

Thus interpreted, the concept of heterogeneous quali-
ties manifestly presents the characteristics of a concept
a priori. But it does not enable us to understand
why the forms of matter are reduced to a small number
of classes, such as sound, heat, or the chemical elements,
instead of being infinite in number. Moreover, it takes
for granted that everything that is in time thereby
assumes a physical form, and this is by no means certain.

The scientific definition of bodies does not imply
these metaphysical ideas : it simply contains the idea
of heterogeneous material things which come under
the senses, and so it does hot transcend the range of
experience.


76 Contingency of the Laws of Nature

Will it be affirmed that, in defining bodies, the
sensible qualities are not regarded as pure phenomena
but as properties, i.e. as generating causes, and that
such essences are of a suprasensible nature ?

This would be departing from the scientific accepta-
tion of the terms ** properties, affinities, cohesion," etc.
These expressions mean simply the uniformity with
which, certain sensations being given, certain others are
also given. A property is never anything more than an
observable relation between two groups of phenomena.

The passing over of mathematical properties to
physical ones, of matter to bodies, cannot therefore be
regarded a priori as imposed on things. But do not
things themselves offer us this synthesis as necessary
/ in reality ? Can one not say, for instance, that every-
thing that is possesses physical properties }

A great number of things to which there were
originally attributed none but properties inferior or
superior to real physical properties, for instance, the
heavenly bodies and living matter, we now regard as
possessed of physical properties superimposed on the
former, the mathematical, and implied in the latter, the
vital. But does it follow that everything that is
possesses physical properties .f* For instance, is it
certain that everything, in man, is corporeal ^ On the
other hand, do we not find science itself, for the purpose
of explaining certain phenomena, taking for granted
an extremely simple substance, called ether, which
evidently possesses only mechanical properties, and is,
so to speak, devoid of real physical properties ?


Bodies 7 7

Nevertheless, while it is impossible to affirm that
everything that is possesses physical properties, is not
the inevitable character of the appearance of these
properties, where they exist, sufficiently manifest from
the very law which governs this appearance? Are
physical properties anything else than transformed
motions ; and does not this transformation take place
in accordance with necessary laws ?

There is confusion implied in this reasoning.
Physics does not show that heat, in the full sense of
the term, is only a transformed motion, ue, that motion
disappears to give place to a physical phenomenon
which is non-mechanical. It simply shows that,
beneath heat, beneath light, etc., phenomena which, to
all appearance, are purely physical, there are move-
ments of a special nature, and that these movements
are the condition of real physical phenomena. Hence
motion is not transformed into heat but into motion
of another kind : molecular motion ; and it is solely
by association of ideas that this motion itself is
called heat by physicists. Real heat is distinct
from molecular motion ; and so its appearance is not
explained immediately by the law which explains
the passing of the motion of translation into mole-
cular motion.

But do we not find the physical phenomenon con-
stantly being produced when certain mechanical con-
ditions are. realised ? Is it not likely that these
mechanical conditions are produced by virtue of the
mechanical laws ; and does it not follow that mathe-


78 Contingency of the Laws^ of Nature

matical necessity itself guarantees the necessary
existence of the physical world?

This is a purely abstract deduction ; for, as regards
real things, absolute necessity is not certain, and there
is nothing to prove that the realisation of the
mechanical conditions of physical phenomena is not
actually one of the cases in which the contingency of
motion is manifested. These conditions almost
infinitely transcend in complexity every combination
that man is capable of imagining by bringing together
a finite number of determinate mathematical elements.
Thus, the application of mathematics to concrete
physics never gives other than approximate results.
True, it is thought that if we knew all the mechanical
conditions of physical phenomena, we might foresee the
latter with absolute certainty. But the thing to find
out is whether the concept **all the conditions" corre-
sponds to anything real, whether there exists, for
physical phenomena, a finite number of wholly deter-
mined mechanical conditions. Afterwards, even if the
physical phenomenon could thus be deduced from its
immediate mechanical conditions, is it certain that this
could be done for the conditions themselves, and so on
indefinitely ? Could we be sure that, in the regressive
series of mechanical causes, there is nowhere to be
found the slightest deviation ?

This hypothesis might seem gratuitous if motion
everywhere offered the same appearance, and never
existed except for itself.. But whereas in the case of
ordinary mechanical phenomena, motion, the manifesta-


Bodies 79

tion of a resultant, is purely and simply a change that
has come about in the relations in which several
extended masses are placed, in those cases with which
we are here dealing, motion, hidden away within the
folds of matter, remains without a resultant, but
sustains new and superior properties. Whilst relatively
simple in the former case, in the latter it is almost
infinitely complex. Moreover, it is impossible to
conceive how any motion whatsoever could find its
all-sufficing reason in another motion ; a very slight
variation in elementary motions might suffice to bring
about considerable changes in far-distant consequences.
I f this is so, is it not likely that there is an element of !
contingency in the production of the mechanical con-
ditions of physical phenomena, and that the appear-
ance of these latter, even though they may still be
uniformly linked to their mechanical conditions, is
itself contingent?

The physical world, as such, also has a law of its
own. Phenomena do not happen by chance. If this I
law is absolute, the intervention of the physical in the
mechanical world, contingent as regards this latter,
will be governed by an inner necessity proper to the
physical world itself; and consequently, that which
was partly indeterminate from the strictly mathematical
point of view will appear as wholly determinate when
we take account of the purely physical actions which
influence the course of mechanical phenomena. Thus
the planet Uranus seemed to be wandering through


8o Contingency of the Laws of Nature

space by chance, so long as nothing was known of the
existence of Neptune.

But how are we to determine the law proper to the
physical world as distinct from the mechanical world ?
Positive science is more and more relinquishing the
descriptive point of view, which is incapable of supply-
ing precise data, and, as far as possible, is reducing
physical phenomena, which are relatively qualitative,
to mechanical phenomena, which are relatively quantita-
tive. For instance, it does not study heat itself, but
rather heat in its mechanical equivalent. It likewise
seeks after the mechanical equivalent of electricity and
of the other physical agents. And so, to mathematics
falls the task of determining scientifically the law of
physical phenomena.

If the parallelism presupposed by this method is
absolute, there can be no question of a contingency
proper to the non-mechanical element of physical
phenomena : the mechanical physical law supplies the
exact measure of the strictly physical law. Now, is
the mechanical order literally implied in the physical
order, its equivalent ?

In one sense, the expression "equivalence" may be
a perfectly legitimate one : it may be true that any
physical phenomenon, regarded separately, is always
accompanied by a certain mechanical phenomenon.
In this sense, however, the mechanical equivalence of
physical phenomena cannot supply the law fitted to
these latter, because we have to discover whether
there is not action and reaction between the two orders


Bodies 8 1

of phenomena, and whether the strictly physical
element does not act upon the mechanical element.

For the mechanical law to be regarded as the trans-
lation o( the strictly physical law, there must be
equivalence not only between the two orders of facts,
but also between the two orders of relationships,
between the concatenation of physical facts and that
of their mechanical conditions. Now, this second
equivalence would seem to be unintelligible, because,
whereas the variable is homogeneous, the element which
must be a function thereof is heterogeneous. Motion
is susceptible of changing continuously ; it is not so
with the transformation from one physical or chemical
state to another. What are the intermediate physical
states between the electric state of the poles of the
battery and the luminous state of carbon? Can
strictly physical states vary as little as we wish, like
their mechanical conditions? Lastly, are there not
cases where the parallelism seems actually violated, as
when the addition of a slight amount of motion trans-
forms a chemical phenomenon into a luminous one
and the latter into a calorific phenomenon, or causes a
body to pass from one state to another, ie. suddenly
produces quite a new phenomenon ?

Thus there is no complete equivalence between the
order of strictly physical phenomena and that of their
mechanical conditions ; and the law of the one set of
phenomena is not prejudiced by that of the others.

In order to judge of the inner necessity of the

purely physical world, we are thus brought to examine

6


82 Contingency of the Laws of Nature

it in itself, t.e. to lay aside the mathematical part of
the physical sciences and consider their descriptive
part. Manifestly, from this point of view, we cannot
reach precise results analogous to those obtained by
considering solely the mechanical phenomena involved
in physical phenomena. Apparently, however, mathe-
matical science is not the only type of knowledge.
According to this view, then, what will be the law of
the physical world .'^

In spite of appearances, it is not likely that the heat
which manifests or disappears, when a motion of trans-
lation changes into a molecular motion, and vice versa,
springs from nothing or is reduced to nothing. It
may be admitted that there exists a latent state, if not
of mechanical heat (which is nothing but molecular
motion) at all events of the physical heat super-
imposed ; and that the physical heat remains in this
state, when it is not sensible. In a wori-ihe physical
world persists like the mechanical world. The same
agents subsist with the same properties; and the amount
of chemical matter remains perceptibly the same. We
may, then, ask ourselves whether there is not, within
the physical world, a principle of necessity which
consists of the persistence of physical action itself ?

It may seem, at the outset, that by admitting this
law, all approach to contingency in the physical world
is not shut off. Undoubtedly this law implies the
equality of the consequent state with the preceding
one, from the physical point of view ; but it does not
immediately require that the passing from the latter to


Bodies 8 3

the former should be necessary; it determines the
intensity, not the mode, of the phenomena ; it measures
the force, but does not state how it is to be used.
May we not, then, regard the law as simply setting
forth the condition under which otherwise contingent
transformations take place ?

For change of state, however, to be explained
physically, one or more physical circumstances must
be added on to the given conditions, or certain of
these conditions must have disappeared ; this pre-
supposes the disappearance of a certain amount of
physical action. Modes are but vague abstractions,
unless they are of a certain intensity. In vain, then,
should we look to the physical world for marks of con-
tingency if the persistence of physical action were to
be admitted absolutely. But is this law evident ?

First, it does not even result from the definition of
physical phenomena, since the idea of a potentiality of
change existing in the body manifestly does not deter-
mine the intensity of this potentiality.

Second, it cannot be referred to a synthetic principle
a prioriy since it is relative to a form of being we
should certainly never think of, were we confined to
pure reason.

If it is necessary, this can be only a necessity of
fact, established by experience and induction. But
from this point of view also, probability is on the side
of contingency.

No doubt the theory of latent states is a plausible
one, if it is not admitted that strictly physical states


84 Contingency of the Laws of Nature

are metamorphosed motions. It guarantees but im-
perfectly, however, the equality of the antecedent and
consequent physical actions. Indeed, it is improbable
that a latent state should involve the same amount of
action as the corresponding manifested state. True,
one may suppose that, whilst some physical property
is passing into the latent state, some other is being
manifested, and vice versa^ and that, in this way,
equilibrium is maintained throughout the universe, by
a process of perpetual compensation. But this hypo-
thesis on the totality of things transcends the field of
experience. By it, we cannot even know if the totality
of things is a finite quantity.

In itself, the law of the conservation of physical
action is but ill suited to experimental verification. It
implies a unity of measure in the real physical order.
Now, the reciprocal heterogeneity of physical states is
opposed to quantitative comparison. The amount of
change is greater than that of permanence, because
the qualitative element now has an important part to
play. The most elementary and general physical and
chemical laws set forth relations between things so
heterogeneous that it is impossible to say that the con-
sequent is proportionate to the antecedent and thus
results from it, as effect results from cause. The
common fundamental element between antecedent and
consequent, the condition of necessary conjunction,
almost completely eludes us. Here we have only
conjunctions given by experience, and which, like it,
are contingent.


Bodies 8 5

Thus it may be admitted that there is something
contingent in the fundamental relations of real physical
phenomena ; and, if the laws proper to the mechanical
world are not absolutely necessary, it may be conceived
that physical agents so intervene in the course of
mechanical phenomena as to bring about the conditions
of their realisation or of their contingent variations.

If this is so, the physical world is not immutable.
The amount of physical action may increase or
diminish throughout the universe or in parts of the
universe. Indeed, is not this what seems to have
taken place all down the centuries, if an elementary
cosmic matter, almost as uniform as space itself, has
gradually become aggregated so as to form stars
endowed with light and heat, and that from these stars
has come an infinite variety of bodies, ever more rich
in physical and chemical properties? Is it not the
opposite of this which seems to be taking place be-
neath our very eyes, if indeed certain stellar systems
are gradually losing their brilliancy and their heat,
and advancing to a state of dissolution which will
bring them back to indiscriminate dust ?

And, if like revolutions take place in certain parts of
the universe, who can affirm that there happen elsewhere
exactly contrary revolutions to restore the balance ?

The particular laws appear necessary because they
necessarily come under the general laws ; but then, if
the most general laws, the framework of the particular
laws, are capable of even the slightest variation, the
entire edifice of destiny crumbles away.


86 Contingency of the Laws of Nature

The totality is but the sum of all the details. The
form of the whole can be contingent only if there is
an indeterminate element in the parts. But if the
contingencies of the general laws occasion only feeble
variations for immense masses during considerable
periods of time, how would the elements of these
variation3 appear to the experimenter who operates
for a few moments on a few particles of matter ?


CHAPTER VI


LIVING BEINGS


If we pass without a break from the study of inorganic
bodies to that of the higher types of the animal and
vegetable kingdoms, we do not see how the former
could produce the latter, and we refuse to believe that
the physical and the chemical laws suffice to explain
physiological phenomena. But when, descending the
scale of living beings, we gradually find functions be-
coming blended, organisms simpler, and conformation
more fluctuating or uniting with geometrical figures ;
when, finally, we come to those rudimentary beings
intermediary between animal and vegetable, or rather
which so far are neither animal nor vegetable and
scarcely consist of more than a homogeneous and
shapeless mass of albuminoid matter wherein life is
manifested only by the process of nutrition ; or again,
when, going back to the phases preceding the perfect
state of superior beings, we find a certain analogy
between these phases and the permanent state of
inferior species ; when we see the most diverse organs
originate in parts almost exactly alike, and these very
parts become identified with and finally reduced to a
microscopic element consisting solely of a solid layer,

87


88 Contingency of the Laws of Nature

a soft layer, and a liquid layer : then we may ask
ourselves whether the living world, in its inferior
extremity, at all events, is not connected with the
inorganic world ; and whether the simple play of
physical and chemical forces is incapable of producing
complex organisms, perhaps not immediately, but first,
the elementary living matter, and then, through that
matter, the entire hierarchy of organic forms.

Moreover, on analysing the principles of life, we
appear to find therein no single element which does
not already exist in the inorganic world.

The albuminoid matter of cells consists mainly of
carbon, oxygen, hydrogen, and nitrogen. As regards
the manner in which these elements combine and the
extreme instability of the organised body, these char-
acteristics may be explained by relations of number,
weight, form, and position, by the mode of molecular
motion, or even by some physical property of one of
the components, carbon, for instance, a property which,
usually latent, would here manifest itself by reason
of the special conditions in which it is placed. In
inorganic chemistry, do we not find that the most
varied compounds result from a combination of the
same elements, used in different proportions ?

The functions of the cells also have their analogues
in the inorganic world. They produce new cells by
converting elementary substances into protoplasm.
At first, in the cells that are not yet supplied with
membranes, this conversion takes place without intus-
susception: now, a crystal placed in a solution of a


Living Beings 89

chemical nature identical with its own, in the state of
supersaturation, causes the salt contained in this liquid
to crystallise. The cells assume fixed forms and thus
become differentiated : it is the same with the crystals,
which may diflFer in form without differing in chemical
composition ; we find some of tHem which, when
slightly impaired, regain their form if placed in the
proper saline solution, though at the expense of this
solution itself.

Finally the cells combine and form systems, just as
droplets of mercury blend in one large drop.

It would therefore seem as though, between the
living world and the physical world, there were only
a difference of degree : a greater diversity in the
elements, a greater power of differentiation, more
complex combinations.

Does the observation of living beings, considered
from the standpoint of their actual nature, wholly
confirm these inductions founded on their genesis ?

One thing is to be noted, that while, in the mathe-
matical world, movable matter at first seems posited
anterior to motion, and, in the physical world, simul-
taneously with motion ; here, appearances themselves
show us motion posited as anterior to the corre-
sponding matter, change as preceding being, organising
work as preceding organism. The word *'life"
signifies ** automatic motion" above all else. The
living being is in a state of continual transformation :
it feeds itself, develops, produces other beings; it is
of unusual impermanence and flexibility. A drop of


90 Contingency of the Laws of Nature

water threatens its existence; it is modified in every
way ; it employs innumerable devices to enable it to
pass unimpeded, if possible, through the numerous
shoals with which its *path is strewn. There is a
striking disproportion, in the living being, between
the r61e of function and that of matter, whatever be
the origin of function. Life, even with a more re-
stricted number of elements than that used by physical
force, produces far more powerful results, seeing that a
blade of grass can find its way through a rock.

In what does the vital act, organisation, consist?
Evidently it is not sufficiently defined by the term
combination. It does not consist in the formation of an
aggregate analogous to a piece of sulphur or a drop of
mercury, but rather in the creation of a system wherein
certain parts are subordinated to certain others. In a
living being, there are agent and organs, a hierarchy.

Is there adequate reason for this hierarchical order
in the property, possessed by the anatomical elements,
of acquiring forms different from one another ? Un-
doubtedly not, for differentiation must not take place
by chance, if certain parts are to be subordinate to the
rest ; the cell must act differently from purely chemical
matter, which matter, in all the various forms it
assumes, does^ not succeed in creating hierarchical
systems.

But perhaps this appropriate differentis^tion is ex-
plained by the different conditions of production and
existence of the different cells. Still, the cdls must be
capable of appearing and subsisting in the exact condi-


Living Beings 91

tions demanded for determining differences of value.
Such flexibility is not found in inorganic matter.

Finally, can we say that the principles which explain
all organisation are the inner ibondit ions, the chemical
composition of elementary materials, i.e. of cells?
The cell, however, supposing every living element to
be reduced thereto, is a being which actually possesses,
to some extent, the very characters which have to be
resolved into physical properties : the hierarchy of the
parts and the power to create new cells, between whose
parts the same hierarchy will be set up. In the cell,
protoplasm is a controlling part. It creates the liquid
nucleus and the rigid membrane, and so gives birth
to a distinct being, until, in its development, it
produces other beings which, also, will make for
themselves a separate existence. The reduction of
organisms to cells simply postpones the difficulty.

In a word, vital function seems to be a creation,
without either beginning or end, of systems whose
parts show not only heterogeneity but also a
hierarchical order. The living being is an individual,
or rather, by continual action, it creates for itself an
individuality and produces beings themselves capable
of individuality. Organisation is individualisation.

Now, this function does not seem to exist in
inorganic matter. Chemical substances, however
compound they may be, offer only similar parts for
mechanical division, and consequently do not admit
of differentiation, division of work, and a hierarchical
order. There are no individuals in the inorganic


92 Contingency of the Laws of Nature

-- world, nor is there any individualisation. The atom,
if it exists, is not an individual, for it is homogeneous.
A crystal is not an individual, for it is divisible, per-
haps indefinitely, into similar crystals actually existing.
Will it be said that the heavenly systems, consisting
of a central star and planets dependent thereon, offer
us the analogy of individuality ? True, these systems
admit of a kind of apparent hierarchy ; they are not,
however, like living beings, decomposable, as regards
their ultimate elements, into systems capable of
individuality. Physical force would seem to be
attempting, in the infinitely great, what life realises
even in the infinitely small. It can, however, attain
only to an external resemblance.

Thus the living being contains a new element, one

m

incapable of being reduced to physical properties :
progress towards a hierarchical order, individualisation.
The relation, then, between physical properties and
vital functions is not immediately necessary, as would
be the case if the latter were previously contained in
the former. Still, even as a link between things
radically distinct, this relation is necessary if affirmed
in a causal synthesis a priori. Now, is this so ? Is
the concept of life built up by pure understanding ?

If we mean by life a simple immaterial principle,
which co-ordinates means with a view to an end, the
idea of life cannot originate in the observation of
living beings. For we do not find that these evei;;^
possess absolute unity. True, they are organisms ;

but their parts are themselves organisms, gifted, to

Ik.


Living Beings 93

some extent, with a life of their own, until we come
to the cell, which, on splitting up, produces several
cells, and, consequently, is not radically a unit. The
idea, likewise, of organic finality certainly does not
come from experience, which undoubtedly shows us
organisms in harmony with their functions; it does
not, however, tell us whether the organ was created
with a view to the function, or whether the function
is simply the result of the organ.

And so the idea of a vital principle, single and
intelligent, is really an idea a priori ; but this idea is
in no way presupposed by the knowledge of living
beings. If it can be admitted, it is as the meta-
physical interpretation of facts, not as the starting-
point of experimental research. We do not see what
help can be given in the direction of the scientific
observation and explanation of phenomena by the
concept of an essence which is not of the same kind
as themselves, and which, therefore, could not supply
a rule applicable to the cases supplied by experience.
These transcendent principles, applied to science, are
liable to warp and hinder observation.

Biology, however, is at all events dominated and
controlled by the two following ideas. In the first
place, life is the realisation of a type, and, as such, is
a connecting link between the parts : when one organ
is given, the connected organ should also be given,
even though it is in a rudimentary state. The living
being is a whole. Afterwards, life is one common
activity and the organs are constrpcted so as to be


94 Contingency of the Laws of Nature

able to contribute thereto : there is correlation be-
tween their functions, and, consequently, between
their forms. According to this view, the living being
is a harmonious system.

True, these two principles are implied in biology,
but they do not transcend the range of experience,
and it is this science that has revealed them. Unity
is here conceived as a constant relation of juxta-
position, and harmony only as a reciprocal influence.

The conjunction or link, moreover, is regarded as
absolute neither in the law of connections nor in that of
correlations ; the more so as each of these laws, taken
absolutely, might injure the other. The conservation
of the type might necessitate the existence of organs
otherwise useless; the conservation of the individual
might necessitate derogations from the typical form.

And so life, regarded as a totality and a harmony,
as a static and dynamic unity, is not the object of
a notion a priori. The relation connecting it with
physical properties is given by experience and shares

«

its characteristics.

But, even if this relation is not necessary in theory,
may it not be^ maintained, from the standpoint of
experience itself, that it is necessary in fact ? Is there
not life everywhere in nature ; and does the immo-
bility of inorganic matter differ from torpor and sleep ?
Since this matter is transformed into living substance,
must it not actually share in vital properties ?

Doubtless this theory may be upheld if we pervert
the definition of life, and reduce it, for instance, to the


Living Beings 95

idea of simple growth and conformation, properties
actually inherent in so-called brute bodies. Con-
sidered as a whole, however, both in its form and in
its matter, life, or the creation of a hierarchical order
between parts, does not appear in the purely physical
world. This world offers us nothing analogous to a .
cell. Shall we be told that life is there found in a
state of potentiality, and that it is only awaiting favour-
able conditions to become manifest ? It is precisely
manifested life, however, with which we are here deal-
ing. For while manifestation may be a matter of
indifference to the logician, who considers only con-
cepts, it is the main thing to the naturalist, who
considers things themselves.

Nevertheless, for the appearance of life to be re-
garded as necessary in fact, is it not sufficient that this
appearance always comes about if certain conditions
are realised?

Here we are considering none but purely physical
conditions. It would be arguing in a circle to deduce
life, even heterogenetically, from actually organised
matter. To maintain this doctrine, one must be able
to affirm that the conditions amid which life constantly
appears — if it is true that life thus possesses invariable
antecedents — are purely physical, both as regards their
elements and their mode of combination. Nor is this
all. As a state of things, in itself purely physical, may
be the more or less distant result of an extraneous
intervention, which, after effecting in the order of
phenomena a greater or less deviation, would have


96 Contingency of the Laws of Nature

allowed things to resume their normal course, it must
be proved that the conditions in which life has mani-
fested itself have been brought about, however far
,back we go in the region of causes, by purely physical
circumstances. A laboratory experiment would not
suffice to demonstrate the physical origin of life, be-
cause we should have to find out if the physical world,
of itself, is capable of creating conditions analogous
to those set up by an intelligent experimenter.

The living matter, too, whose appearance is thus to
be explained, is not simply some particular non-organ-
ised organic product, such as urea, ethers, sugars,
alcohols, acetic acid, formic acid, etc. ; it is the simple
active body, the element capable of assimilation and of
disassimilation, protoplasm, that creates for itself both
envelope and form, becomes a cell, grows and develops,
and produces other cells. For manifestly the living
being possesses the faculty of creating products which
are not living like itself, and of doing acts partially
and even wholly physical or mechanical ; just as the
physical and chemical world produces a multitude of
purely mechanical phenomena. The whole of a cause
is not necessarily found in its effects. Even though
the organic product, the origin of which had been
explained physically, happened to be one of those to
whose formation life, as such, contributes nothing, and
which are but a distant and purely mechanical conse-
quence of the vital impulsion, it would be illegitimate
to extend this physical explanation to all physiological
acts without exception.


Living Beings 97

Finally, these difficulties overcome, it remains to be
shown that, the cell being given, all living beings are
also implicitly given, uc^ all spring from the cell by a
law of necessity, and that the most complex struc-
tures and functions find their all-sufficient reason in
this elementary organism.

Now, all these demonstrations would seem to tran-
scend the range of experience. How are we to trace
back or connect, by a necessary link, the physical
conditions of living beings, mainly superior beings, to
the phenomena of the purely physical world ? How
are we to prove that physical phenomena are nowhere
turned aside from their proper course by superior
intervention ? Manifestly, from the point of view of
complexity, there is considerable disproportion between
the highest inorganic bodies and even the most
elementary organised bodies. Besides, this singular
physical complication coincides with the presence of
new qualities of quite a different order and certainly
more perfect. Is it not probable that the revolution
which has taken place in unorganised matter in the
forming of these unexpected combinations has actually
been determined by superior essences; that life has
itself laid down its physical conditions } According to
this doctrine, there would indeed be a relation of cause
and effect between physical conditions and life, but it
is life that would be the cause.

Moreover, it is unnecessary to state that the influ-
ence of life makes itself felt suddenly, whereas progress

comes about intermittently. The action of the superior

7


9 8 Contingency of the Laws of Nature

principle may be more or less imperceptible to the man
who considers moments of evolution very near each
other. It may seem, then, that the physical forces are
acting alone. It may also be conceived that, in certain
cases, the superior principle leaves to the physical
forces,, so to speak, the task of completing, by them-
selves, what it has once prepared, when these forces
are adequate to this object. In such cases, the passing
from the conditions to the conditioned would be purely
physical, even though life, as such, were a special
principle.

If this is so, the elements, which form the matter of
Jife, are exclusively physical and chemical forces ; but
these materials do not remain raw or unelaborated :
they are ordered, harmonised, disciplined, as it were,
by superior intervention. According to this view, life
is a genuine creation.

Still, if life is not chained down to physical agents,
does it not in a way contain necessity within itself ?
Does it not obey special so-called physiological laws,
which leave no room — or but little — for contingency ?

Is there not exact correspondence between the
physiological and the physical phenomena? Conse-
quently, is there not, within the living world, some
principle of conjunction analogous to that in the
physical world ? And, although life may not be a
physical phenomenon, is not that element of contin-
gency which it recognises exactly measured by that
which the purely physical world admits?


Living Beings gg

No doubt it is probable that every physiological
modification is connected with some fixed physical
modification. Still, while it is difficult to compare
with one another the physical phenomena, from the
standpoint of quantity, and we are compelled, when
seeking a scientifically determinable element, to gauge
or measure its mechanical conditions, is it not even
more difficult to find a physiological unity of measure-
ment, which will enable us to set up a correspondence
between the living and the physical world, as regards
the respective relations of the phenomena of both
orders ? How are we to reduce the diversity of forms
and vital functions to one and the same specific unity ?
And yet the respective variations of two quantities
must have been measured, for us to be able to regard
the one as a function of the other.

Moreover, is not life frequently a struggle against
physical forces; and could this phenomenon be con-
ceived if the vital functions were no more than the
simple translation of the physical phenomena into
another language?

In short, is there not an infinite disproportion,
especially in superior beings, between the physiological
changes and the corresponding physical changes ; for
instance, between the physiolggical transition from life
to death and the physical conditions of this transition ?
If every malady is a modification, not only physio-
logical but also physical, is this modification, which is
disorder from the standpoint of life, also disorder from
the standpoint of matter ?


• • • J 3 O


loo Contingency of the Laws of Nature

We cannot argue from the correspondence existing
between the vital and the physical phenomena, and
say that the former possess the degree of necessity
that subsists in the law of the latter. If the order of
the vital phenomena is necessary, it is in themselves
that the reason and measure of this necessity abide.

The essential laws of life seem to be, like the
physical and mathematical laws, an appropriate ex-
Ni pression of the formula : Nothing is lost, nothing
created.

The law of organic correlations presupposes, be-
tween the partial functions and the total function, a
relation analogous to that between concurrent forces
and a determinate resultant. If one of the concurrent
forces is modified, the resultant can remain the same
only through correlative modifications experienced by
the other concurrent forces. In physiology, likewise,
if a partial function is modified, the rest will also be
modified, so that the total function remains possible.
The law of correlations may therefore be reduced to
a simpler law : the permanence of ths^ total function
throughout all the changes which the partial functions
may undergo.

The total function, however, is not only an end in
itself, it is also the means by which there is realised
either a certain form or a certain organised matter.

Now, organic form and matter would also appear to
have a law of their own.

With form there is connected the law of relations.
"jM^This law, which has for its corollary the balancing of


Living Beings loi

the organs, presupposes, between the partial forms
and the totali form called the type, a connection
analogous to that between partial volumes and a
determinate total volume. If one of the partial
volumes is modified, the total volume is capable of
remaining the same only if the other partial volumes
are correspondingly modified. In physiology, like-
wise, if one organ is modified, the rest will be, not
suppressed, but modified also, so that the type may be
preserved. Thus, the law of relations is reducible to
the permanence of the form or of the type.

What connection have these laws with each other ?

If the law of relations were absolute, i.e. if form
existed for itself, this law, in certain cases, might
conflict with the law of correlations, by necessitating
the presence of organs otherwise useless. But, if
form exists only as the result of functions, if the law
of relations is subordinated to that of correlations,
the organs must tend to follow the variations of the
functions, to decrease in proportion as these weaken,
to atrophy when they disappear. Now, this is exactly
what happens ; and so we may grant that the law of
relations, after all, comes under that of correlations.

In short, the production of organised matter seems
to be subject to a law analogous to that of crude
matter. There would seem to exist a determinate
quantity of living matter, which quantity remains in-
variable, throughout the vital vortex. Perhaps, indeed,
assimilation and disassimilation balance each other in
a sufficiently large totality. The wider the bases on


I02 Contingency of the Laws of Nature

which statistics work, the more constant, the nearer
to equality, are the averages they give for births
and deaths. Even in the case of the individual,
old age and youth under normal conditions seem to
balance each other: decay comes along and restores
the equilibrium which growth had broken.

This law, regarded absolutely, still seems radically
distinct from that of correlations, because it may imply
or exclude functions otherwise useless, or else necessary
from the standpoint of general action. But, if we
admit that organised matter exists only by virtue of
the organising act itself, the law regarding its pro-
duction also comes under the law of correlations.

In a word, the first of these three laws is the best
established and the most permanent ; and if perchance
the other two seem to oppose it and exist for them-
selves, we may admit that these divergencies, in the
final analysis, are due to lack of unity and homogeneity
in the total function ; to the blend, in more or less
unequal proportions, of diverse modes of organisation.

The supreme law of the living world would seem,
then, to be the permanence of the total functions, t.e.
of the degree of organisation, and consequently the
permanence of the types and of organic matter itself ;
in a word, the conservation of life.

Can it be maintained that this law does not imply
the absolute necessity of biological phenomena, by
pleading that the conservation of vital energy does not
prejudice the mode in which this energy is employed ?

This interpretation of the law of conservation seem^


Living Beings 103

to be based on physiology scarcely more than on
physics or on mechanics. Things are never given
except in a determinate form, and their determinations
and mode of employment may be modified, according
to the law of conservation itself, only by the inter-
vention of new conditions of the same order, which
would lower the average, did they not originally form
part of the same system.

The problem of the necessity of laws, so diverse in
its applications, remains identical in its general form.
In physiology, as in physics or mathematics, we are
compelled to state it as follows: Is the permanence
of the given quantity necessary ? Now, as regards
life, what answer are we to give to this question ?

We cannot rely on the definition of life itself to
affirm that there is necessarily maintained the same
amount of vital energy throughout the universe ;
for this definition leaves indeterminate the number
of 4iving beings and permits of a very large number
of degrees of organisation.

Nor can we invoke a rational synthetic principle,
enabling us to build up physiological science a priori,
for the impossibility of such a structure is evident ; and
the terms composing this principle, though apparently
metaphysical, would never, from a scientific point of
view, be anything more than experimental data.

It only remains for us to consult experience itself,
and see if it really guarantees the permanence of the
amount of life. This does not appear to be the case.
V- Vital energy — even reduced to such experimental


\


I04 Contingency of the Laws of Nature

data as complexity of organism, or division of labour,
anatomical form, and the properties of organised
matter — is a thing almost impossible to calculate.
Into this concept there enters an idea of quality,
of perfection, which does not seem amenable to
number. Indeed, one could not say that the amount
of vital energy would remain constant, if, the same
number of cells being retained, complex organisms
all made way for rudimentary ones.

Besides, while a great number of facts really mani-
fest the permanence of functions and organisms, it
must also be recognised that other facts seem to^
imply more or less profound physiological variations.
Is it not ^in the power of man to modify, more or

^» less, certain vegetable and animal species and pro-
duce in them permanent varieties? Does not the
possibility of even an artificial education show that
functions and organs, in their essence, do not imply
absolute immobility, and that consequently the amount ^
of life, while remaining sensibly the same in its
totality, does not remain so necessarily .-^

And if we consider living beings left to themselves,
does it not seem as though, in certain facts, such as
the existence of rudimentary and actually useless
organs, the disappearance of certain species, the in-
creasing perfection of the fossils in soils of ever
more recent formation, we were brought in contact

^ with a force making for change, decay, or progress,
remaining deep within nature herself, alongside of and
at the root of the force making for conservation ?


Living Beings 105

This variability exists, we shall be told, but it does
not imply any contingency whatsoever ; it leaves
necessity still subsisting. Not that it has its origin
and basis in the laws of the inorganic kingdom : the
latter supplies only the materials and conditions of
organic development, and this development has its
cause in the distinctive nature of living beings them-
selves. Self-modification, however, so far as the
nature of the organism will allow, by setting itself in
harmony with the environment in which the organism
has to live, and preserving, accumulating within this
latter, and even handing over to its descendants the
modifications that have thus come about, is a law
inherent in all organisms. In living beings, there is
an hereditary power of habit and of adaptation. They
are subject both to permanence and to change, a
necessary change determined by an immutable law of
accommodation, and are fixed in habit, which also is
fatality. These two laws explain all organic variations
that have been or may be realised. They assign to
each of them a constant antecedent ; so that the
greatest transformations would seem fully determined,
if we but knew all the circumstances in which they
take place. Thus, necessity has sway both in the
living and in the inorganic world. The only difference
is that in the latter the fundamental law is one of essen-
tial identity, and in the former one of radical change ;
in the one a static, in the other a dynamic law.

Is it admissible that a radical variability should be
one with a necessary concatenation?


\


1 06 Contingency of the Laws of Nature

If it is an unfounded assumption to maintain that
change, which is a sign of contingency in the inorganic
world, is but an illusion, and that the mathematical
formula which remains the same amid all the variety
of phenomena is the only reality, it is an equally un-
founded assumption to reduce change to necessity,
when, matter being scarcely anything and act becom-
ing almost everything, we dimly feel we should be
releasing our hold on reality itself, did we persist in
regarding change as wholly phenomenal. The for-
mulae by whose aid we expect to demonstrate the
necessary concatenation of biological phenomena are
less exact than those which set forth the conservation
of a given amount of mechanical force. Calculation
applies but inadequately to measuring flexibility and
habit, and we do not see how, on such foundations, we
could establish a deductive science indicating really
necessary relations between facts. In reality, these
principles, which are made to appear as necessary laws
by flinging them violently into the mould of mechanical
and physical formulae, lack the conditions requisite to
constitute a positive law or a constant relation between
facts ; they express relations of another nature.

According to the law of adaptation, the living being
becomes modified in such a way as to be capable of
subsisting in the conditions in which it finds itself
Now, the concept " in such a way as to " is somewhat
indeterminate. From the positive point of view, there
may be several ways of realising an end set forth with
given materials ; the method is a matter of indifference,


L.


Living Beings 107

provided the end is realised. True, according to the
number or nature of the conditions, the number of the
methods between which a choice may be made will
be increasingly restricted. But the expression **in
such a way as to " is less correct the more our choice
is limited ; it would lose all justification did it remain
no more than a possible expedient ; for then it would
be simply by virtue of the conditions stated that
the phenomenon would be realised : the idea of the
result to be obtained would no longer intervene as
a determining condition.

If now, taking into account the considerable number
of means implied in all finality, we invoke, in explana-
tion of the preference given to some one of them, such
considerations as the principle of lesser activity, or the
instinct of beauty, or the general good, we leave the
ground of positive science to pass into that of meta-
physics or aesthetics, and are no longer in a position
to allege the authority of experience.

Nor is this all. The concept ** in such a way as to "
sets up a bond between the conditions in which a living
being finds itself, on the one hand, and the continued
existence of this being in these conditions, on the other
hand, i.e. between things that are given and one thing
that is simply possible. Now, the ideal character of
this second term still prevents our admitting that the
law of adaptation is a truly positive law, and implies
necessity in the sense in which the laws of physics or
chemistry may imply it

In short, the concept " exist " itself leaves room for


io8 Contingency of the Laws of Nature

some degree of indetermination. A complex being has
several modes of existence, according as it develops
such or such of its faculties in greater or less degree.
Harmony itself may be interpreted in several ways,
according as all the faculties are placed on the same
level, or certain are placed above the rest. Which,
of all these modes of existence, is the one that will
constitute the aim and object of adaptation ?

Nor does the principle of hereditary habit satisfy the
conditions of a positive law. According to this prin-
ciple, purely accidental modifications may, under the
influence of certain circumstances, such as physical en-
vironment, the struggle for life, sexual selection, and, in
the last analysis, the energy, continuity, or repetition of
certain acts, become at last essential and pass over from
the individual to the species. Without examining the
nature of the circumstances mentioned as determining
habits, and which are probably not all purely physical, it
may be remarked that habit is not a fact but rather
a disposition to realise certain facts, and consequently
can find no place in the formula of a positive law.

In addition, habit is here regarded as bringing about
a modification in the very nature and essence of the
individual. Now, the real positive laws are relations
which spring, in the final analysis, from the nature of
things, considered as constant. They do not precede
beings, but simply express the consequences of their
reciprocal action. Undoubtedly, In scientific demon-
stration, they 'may be considered as governing facts of
detail, in so far as they are linked to the nature of beings,


Living Beings 109

i.e. to general facts ; but they really remain subordinate
to general facts, which are their basis. To admit that I
the most general facts themselves vary is to admit that
laws vary; or rather, if we think we possess a law
which explains these variations themselves, it is no
longer a positive law, since it is stated anterior to all the /
facts. The only means of justifying the assimilation of '
the hereditary habit to the positive laws, would be to
trace back the formation and conservation of this
tendency to the more general laws of physics and
chemistry. In this way, physiological variability would
be based on a relatively permanent foundation. Pre-
sented apparently anterior to the phenomena, in so far
as these latter would be regarded as strictly physio-
logical, this law would, in reality, be subsequent to
their fundamental conditions, in so far as the physio-
logical phenomena came, as a particular case, under
the heading of the physical phenomena. The very
object of the hereditary habit, however, is to make up
for the inadequacy of the strictly physical laws in
physiology ; and indeed, the property it sets forth is
directly opposed to the fundamental principles of
physics and chemistry, by which the nature of a body
is determined once for all. No doubt one particular
case may be the negation of another particular case,
as such, though not the negation of the general case
itself. It is therefore as a strictly physiological law,
and a fundamental one, that the hereditary habit should
help in explaining the living world ; and according to
this view it cannot be regarded as a positive law.


no Contingency of the Laws of Nature

To sum up, the mode of organisation seems to vary,
not only in the individual, but even, to a certain extent,
in the species. These variations are not a matter of
indifference, they constitute either a decline, or, more
frequently perhaps, a development We may therefore
reflect that the quantity of life does not remain con-
stant throughout the universe, and that the nature of
physiological phenomena is not wholly determined by
the laws proper to them.

And, indeed, if the concatenation of real physical
phenomena, which are the conditions of physiological
phenomena, is not inevitable, is it inadmissible that
the living world should gain by this indetermination,
that organised beings, self-endowed with a certain
degree of mobility, with the power to develop and
progress, should come to profit by these gifts of nature
and expand in every direction, by reason of the very
elasticity of the fabric of physical conditions ?

Moreover, it is possible to conceive that the inter-
vention of life in the course of physical things may not
be sudden and violent, but imperceptible and con-
tinuous; so that it is practically impossible to de-
termine exactly where physical phenomena cease to
exist solely by and for themselves, and begin to be
elaborated by higher forms, whose instruments they
become.


CHAPTER VII

MAN

It is a rule in science to assume the fewest causes
possible, and, when we meet with new facts to be ex-
plained, to compare them with already known causes,
in order to see whether they depend thereon, before
admitting the existence of a new cause. Now, once in
possession of the concepts and laws of being, genera,
matter, bodies, and life, is not the mind in a position to
explain everything, and has it not completed the list —
already too long — of the postulates of science ?

Everything the world offers to the mind is capable,
indeed, of being explained by these principles, if man
can return to them. For, apart from the forms of being
to which they immediately apply, there is no other
object than human nature given in experience.

Undoubtedly our first feeling is that there exists a
radical difference between man, endowed with reason
and language, and all other living beings. Do not com-
parison and induction, however, invalidate this belief?
Do we not find human nature, both in past and present,
showing forth a series of degradations which assimilate
it to the lower beings? May we not say that, in the

highest human being, the qualities we admire, if we

111


\.''


112 Contingency of the Laws of Nature

inquire into their genesis, do not appear as irreducible
qualities, but rather originate in simpler faculties, and
are finally reduced, in accordance with a natural law
which it is perhaps not impossible to conjecture, to
elementary powers inherent in every living being, such
as the faculty of response by automatic reflex action to
the influence of external things? Is sensation any-
thing else than the clash of external influences against
our own tendencies, more or less incompletely adjusted
to these influences ? Does it not appear when adapta-
tion is complete, as in habit, or when excitation is very
feeble, as in sleep? Is thought anything more than
the inner reproduction of outer phenomena, classed
according to the constancy of their relations ? And is
not this reproduction the product of the phenomena
themselves, which come one by one and make their
stamp on an impressionable surface sufficiently firm to
receive and retain it^In short, is will anything else
than the totality of our tendencies, whether original or
acquired, entering into activity under the influence of
an outer stimulus, and setting their mark on things in
their turn ?>Is the consciousness of freewill anything
different from the sense that we ourselves are the
cause of our own actions — a well-founded sense, for
our tendencies are ourselves — added to the perception
that there is conflict between our desires, and to our
ignorance of a portion of the causes which determine
the issue thereof?

All psychological activity, then, seems as though it
might be reduced to reflex action. But does not this


Man 113

latter actually exist in the physiological world ? Is not >
reflex action the function of all organisms ? Especially
in higher organisms, is it not subject to strange com-
plexity, co-ordination, and the power of adaptation ?

Is it necessary, then, to admit a new principle in
order to explain man ? Are not even his loftiest
faculties, in their essence, physiological properties that
have become more and more specialised, by virtue of
the general law of differentiation ? Must we not appeal
to physiology for the explanation of psychological phe-
nomena ? Is it not useless, illegitimate, and dangerous
to profess to set .up psychology as a distinct science,
having no other connections with physiologfy than
those which may exist, for instance, between physi-
ology and physics ?

No doubt it seems to be established that every
psychological phenomenon, in the present life, has its
condition of existence in determinate physiological
phenomena ; and so it is legitimate to inquire into the
physiological conditions of psychic life, as well as into
the psychic conditions of organic life or the mechanical
conditions of physical transformations. But can this
inquiry, however advanced we suppose it to be, end in
psychology being absorbed into physiology ?

In all psychological phenomena we find, in different
degrees, an element which the theories of reflex action
or even of transformed sensation take for granted with-
out explaining it : self-consciousness, reflection on one's
own modes of being, personality. Every psychological

phenomenon is, or may be, a state of consciousness.

8


114 Contingency of the Laws of Nature

Sensation actually contains this element; conse-
quently, to build up the faculties of the soul by means of
sensation is to take for granted what is here in question.

Is reflex action capable of producing consciousness
by analytical development? By decomposing con-
sciousness into its elements, can we show that they are
all contained in reflex action and that this latter also
contains the law of their combination ?

Shall we say that the act of consciousness is the
perception of difference ? But perception presupposes
a thinking subject

Shall we affirm that consciousness differs from
physical phenomena only by the absence of simul-
taneity in states ; that the successive order, moreover,
common to psychological and physiological phenomena
alike, includes both in the same genus? But why
should succession pure and simple imply consciousness
of oneself, whereas succession combined with simul-
taneity would exclude it ?

Is consciousness an accumulation of vital force due
to excitations from without and to the centralisation of
the organic system? But how could vital force, by
being accumulated, acquire a property which it does
not manifest in the slightest degree when in a state of
dispersion ?

Is consciousness no more than the conflict of ex-
ternal forces with the tendencies of the organism?
But why does this conflict produce consciousness,
whereas the clash of one body against another does
not produce it?


Man 115

In a word, we cannot escape from this alternative :
either consciousness is artificially introduced into the
organic fact from which we have to extract it ; or else,
taking consciousness first of all as it is, we find our-
selves incapable of reducing it, by a wholly analytical
process, to a purely organic fact.

In reality, what we are here analysing under the
name of consciousness is not consciousness itself, but
either its conditions or its object. Its conditions form
a complex ensemble^ reducible, it may be, either wholly
or partially, to physiological and physical elements.
Similarly, its object (sensations, thoughts, desires),
considered in itself, forms a complex ensemble which
may offer a more or less exact parallelism to the
succession of physiological facts. Consciousness itself,
however, is an irreducible datum which explanation
obscures and analysis destroys. To try to find the
detailed elements of consciousness for the purpose of
contrasting or connecting them with the elements of
the lower functions, is to lose sight of consciousness
itself and to consider its materials or its product. Con-
sciousness is not a phenomenon, a property, or even a
function': it is an act, a transformation of external
data into internal data, a kind of living mould in which
phenomena undergo a process of successive meta-
morphoses and the whole world may find exercise for
activity, by losing its own distinctive substance and
form, and assuming an ideal form, one both unlike and
analogous to its real nature. Consciousness is the
principle of so profound an elaboration of phenomena.


1 1 6 Contingency of the Laws of Nature

that no acquaintance with previous transformations
could ever give an idea of it. In one sense, it adds
nothing to being, since things would none the less be,
even if they were not perceived in consciousness. In
another sense, it is consciousness that makes being;

u for the conscious person, an exalted form of being,
attributes reality only to what enters, or is capable of
entering, into his consciousness. On the one hand,
reflex action loses nothing of its essence through not
being the object of an inner apperception ; and the
most complex combinations of different reflex actions
may be conceived, without introducing consciousness
as an integral element. In dealing with reflex actions,
we are dealing with things known, not with persons
who know. On the other hand, consciousness, when
it appears, throws no light on reflex actions them-
selves; for it does not reveal what is taking place
within our organism, in the strict sense of the word.
It gives rise to phenomena wholly heterogeneous, and
which, though in some way linked with physiological

^ phenomena, and reproducing in their own fashion and
more or less exactly the order in which they exist,
none the less form within themselves a world apart,
and — what could not be foreseen by considering only
the complexity of reflex actions — 3l world shut out from
other consciousnesses.

Moreover, it matters little that we are able to find,
in sensation, thought, and desire, elements which
enable them to be compared with physiological phe*
nomena. That to which there is no analogy in


Man 117

physiology, is the consciousness of sensation, thought,
and desire. Similarly, the existence of degrees of,
consciousness is here a matter of indifference. The'
connection between phenomena and a self is all that
must be understood by real consciousness. It is this
connection that gives to sensation, thought, and desire
a new and special form.

To attempt, therefore, to understand consciousness
by the method of analytical construction and com-
bining reflex actions in accordance with their own
distinctive laws, is to go against its very essence.
Along these lines, nothing would seem to be more
complex than consciousness. On the other hand,
nothing would appear simpler, and nowhere else does
nature approximate so closely to that ideal term : >^
unity in perfection. Consciousness is not a specialisa-
tion, a development, or even a perfecting of the physio-
logical functions. Nor is it, either, a phase or a
resultant of these functions. It is a new element, a
new creation. Man, endowed with consciousness as
he is, is more than a living being. In so far as he is
a person, in so far at least as his natural development
culminates in personality, he is endowed with a degree
of perfection to which those beings that are only
individual organisms cannot rise. The form in which
consciousness is superimposed on life is an absolute
synthesis, an addition of radically heterogeneous ele-
ments : the relation it implies is therefore contingent, ^
from the logical point of view, at all events.

Can we now affirm that this relation is an act of


^


1 1 8 Contingency of the Laws of Nature

reason itself, which, starting from the concept of life
and enriching it in accordance with a transcendental
law, forms its consciousness as a necessary effect ?

This recourse to reason would be justified, were we
dealing with a consciousness absolutely one^ both in its
subject and in its object, consequently irreducible to
the data of experience. The consciousness, however,
with which psychology deals is individual and recog-
nises plurality of subjects ; again, in each individual,
it branches out, as it were, according to the multi-
plicity of the things to which it applies, and every-
where permeates the varied field of experience. Now,
the existence of consciousness, as thus understood,
cannot be revealed by the understanding a priori^
which does not recognise the distinction between
individuals and the endless variety of phenomena ; on
the contrary, it is the immediate object of the em-
pirical consciousness itself; in other terms, it still
belongs to experience. We cannot, then, argue from
the way in which we become acquainted with the
nature of consciousness, and go on to consider its
realisation as necessary in theory.

Finally, relying on experience itself, can we main-
tain that the connection of consciousness with life is
necessary in fact.^

To prove this proposition, it is not sufficient to show
that consciousness constantly shows forth when certain
conditions, which we are more or less able to define,
are realised in the organism. For we have to find out
whether or not these conditions have been created by


Man 119

consciousness itself : an admissible hypothesis, if the
laws of life are contingent. Uniformity of co-existence,
even if it manifests a causal relation, does not indicate
which of the two terms is the cause of the other.

We should therefore have to be in a condition to
explain, by the laws of general physiology alone, all
those nervous phenomena which seem to be the con-
ditions of consciousness ; now, this would seem to be
a rash attempt. A profound study of innervation -
appears to regard this function as more and more
unique. Nervous excitation and discharge, the
property, inherent in the nerve cells, of retaining for
a certain time the impression of the external agents ;
the transmission of that phosphorescence, as it were,
to cell-groups non-impressed by the object itself and
which begin to vibrate harmoniously, in their turn
spreading the excitation : all these facts are generally
regarded as disproportionate to such elementary vital
properties as nutrition, development, and generation,
and even the power of contraction, which, however,
already supersedes the general properties. Between
innervation and the elementary physiological pro-
perties there seems to be a connection analogous to
that existing between the mechanical conditions of
physical and chemical phenomena and purely mathe-
matical forms. An attentive examination reveals the
existence of a quasi-insurmountable chasm between
the most complex analytical syntheses of a given form
existing only for itself and the particular cases in
contact with which we find ourselves when observing


I20 Contingency of the Laws of Nature

phenomena which, whilst being modes of this form,
play the r6le of conditions as regards a higher form.
The observer, dwelling on the actual generic identity
of both sets of phenomena, instinctively takes for
granted that they have one and the same origin ; and
yet all explanation of the matter distinctive of a
superior form, attempted along the lines of this
hypothesis, is found to be superficial, inadequate, and
anything but searching. Error is inevitable if some
higher intervention diverts things from the course
proper to them, and that, not suddenly, but imper-
ceptibly, not from one end of evolution to the other,
but only at the origin.

Still, there would be grounds to believe that this
divergence of nervous functions as regards general
physiological properties is but apparent, if beings
possessed of a nervous system differed only in degree
from those deprived of one. The presence of such a
system coincides with the appearance of consciousness,
a faculty superior to all the vital functions. Hence,
may we not reflect that the reason why consciousness
always appears when certain physiological conditions
are given, is that consciousness itself projects these
conditions, without which it could not manifest itself?
The reason why the dawn is the harbinger of the sun
is that itself emanates therefrom.

It may, however, be that certain physiological
conditions are not specially set apart to make
consciousness possible. Perhaps, a beginning of
consciousness is actually connected with the essential


Man 121

vital properties, so that there is but a difference in
degree between lower and higher organisms. Thus
there would seem to be some consciousness even in
the cell; and, in order to create a human conscious-
ness, we should only have to specialise, diversify,
organise the consciousnesses peculiar to cells.

Even though a rudimentary consciousness belonged
to each cell, consciousness, or the sense of its own
existence, would still be irreducible to the truly
physiological properties, and would not have its origin
in them. In the cell, as in the higher organisms, the
presence of consciousness appears to be contingent.
Are we justified, however, in believing that such a
faculty exists in the lower organisms?

In support of this theory, there may be advanced a
great number of facts, obtained by observation of the
infusoria and plant life. The fresh-water polypus, for
instance, attracts to itself the living infusoria and the
plants by producing a sort of eddy with its arms ; it
pays no attention to dead or inorganic beings. We
find that plants choose supports for themselves ; they

m

are seen to quiver at the touch of insects and to catch
them. Innumerable facts of this kind appear to prove
that, in the most elementary organisms, external
action may produce internal excitation, and that this
excitation may generate a reflex motion adapted to
the needs of the living being. Now, are not excita-
tion and the choice of a suitable course of action, signs
of consciousness ?

It is doubtful whether excitation and reflex motion


1

122 Contingency of the Laws of Nature

are invariably found along with consciousness, for
there take place within us many excitations and reflex
actions which do not affect the self. The suitability
of the act constitutes what is called finality. Now,
does finality — admitting, in the facts alleged, that it
cannot be reduced to mechanism — necessarily pre-
suppose consciousness in the being in which it is
manifested ? Are we conscious of the act by which
the physical, chemical, and physiological constitution
of our organs applies to the functions they have to
carry out ?

But, it will be said, the kind of consciousness
which seems absent from the physiological functions
consists of a clear distinction between subject and
object. Now, this is too restricted a way of interpret-
ing consciousness. Consciousness admits of infinite
degrees, from the perfect state which characterises
reflex life right on to its apparent abolition, which
takes place in sleep. As a general rule, on waking,
our mind is not empty; it is frequently busy with
ideas more or less different from those with which it
'was occupied before falling asleep. Attention and
accumulation render distinct perceptions which at
first are insensible. That which, when multiplied,
becomes manifest, was not zero. It is actually a dim
consciousness of this kind that is found in the lower
beings.

This deduction implies a striking change of the
concept of consciousness.

So long as we are dealing with man, consciousness,


Man 123

even if reduced to its minimum of intensity, is invari-
ably the act by which a multiplicity and a diversity of
states can be traced back to a self, and to one only :
the appropriation of phenomena to a permanent
subject. Clearness of perception, not unity of self, ^
is what varies.

When dealing with inferior beings, however, with
their irritability and the finality of their acts,
consciousness neither is nor can any longer be the
attribution of different sensations to a single self ; for
comparison between sensations is the condition of
unity of consciousness, and this comparison, in its
turn, presupposes a centre in which culminate the
impressions caused by different objects. The con-
sciousness we attribute to the lower beings can be
nothing else than sensation, thought, and tendency
pure and simple, considered as susceptible of existing
without being perceived by a self.

Now, when thus reduceci to its real value, the con-
sciousness we attribute to the lower beings presents
more than one difference in degree from human con-
sciousness. It is no longer a self, comparing and
concentrating within ' itself a multiplicity and a
diversity : it is an aggregate of conscious sensations,
without anything to bind them together. Whereas
human consciousness admits of only one sensation at '
a time, these aggregates admit of sensations both
successive and simultaneous. As regards the cell, or
the simple anatomical element, the kind of unity that
its consciousness is capable of possessing is radically


124 Contingency of the Laws of Nature

distinct from real unity of consciousness ; for, by
virtue of its organic simplicity, the cell can have none
but sensations of one and the same quality. The
only differences capable of taking place in this con-
sciousness are differences of quantity, of intensity.
Now, unity of consciousness is that very attribute of
yy the subject which compares different qualities with
one another. Only in this comparison is the subject
conscious of self and contrasted with external things.

After this, how are we to conceive of human con-
sciousness as having its origin in the consciousness
attributed to the cell.?

Are we to say that personal consciousness is but a
final resultant of elementary consciousness ; that these
latter consist of sensations, thoughts, and desires, and
that, once their combination has produced a resultant
or a personal consciousness, the new sensations are
within or without the self, i.e. become perceptions or
remain sensations, according as they are or are not
brought into relation with this resultant?

As elementary consciousnesses, however, do not
even possess the germ of unity which characterises
personal consciousness, one does not see how the
latter could result from the combination of the former.
Besides, one does not understand how several con-
sciousnesses could thus become blended in ever higher
consciousnesses. It would seem as though it were
part of the definition of consciousness that it is
excluded from other consciousnesses. If the objec-
tion is made that this property belongs exclusively to


Man 125

the consciousness of a self, but not to consciousnesses
devoid of unity, the concept of these elementary con-
sciousnesses is made indiscernible, and their hetero-
geneity, as regards the personal consciousness,
becomes even more radical.

Shall we say that the personal consciousness is an
aggregate of elementary consciousnesses?

In that case, we abandon all explanation of their
unity. Besides, if the elements of the total conscious-
ness belong to each cell in its own right, as this
totality of lower consciousnesses is wholly renewed
after a certain number of years, one cannot under-
stand why the consciousness which is supposed to
summarise them continues to exist.

In short, will it be alleged that it is the conscious-
ness inherent in a single cell that is raised to a high
degree of development through its relations with the
other cells?

This explanation might suffice were we dealing
only with a difference of intensity, whereas we are
dealing with a difference of nature and also with the
permanence of consciousness throughout the vital
vortex. Now, in spite of their r61e as general
recipient, the cells of the brain, compared with the
other cells, offer only a difference of degree, inade-
quate to account for the generic difference which,
according to this hypothesis, would exist between
their properties and those of the other cells. In
presence of almost similar anatomical elements
engaged in functions so disproportionate, we can


126 Contingency of the Laws of Nature

regard matter as only an instrument, controlled by
irregular powers.'

In a word, the consciousness attributed to the cells
only nominally resembles the personal consciousness.
Radically devoid of subjective unity, it cannot, how-
ever complicated it be regarded, account for percep-
tion of qualitative differences, which is the attribute
of the self. Hence, it is advisable to avoid using a
word which may cause confusion, and to say that we
are simply dealing with sensations, thoughts, and
unconscious tendencies. How far such phenomena
are conceivable ; what remains of sensation, thought,
and desire, exclusive of that self which, in man,
appears to form their substance ; how these uncon-
scious modes of being are distinct from simple excita-
tion, reflex motion, and adaptation : are all points of
only secondary importance when the self is no longer
concerned and we are dealing only with properties
radically inferior to strictly psychological phenomena.

It is thus proyed that the personal consciousness is
not inherent in all living beings, but exists only where
we find a special physiological organisation. If this
organisation has come about in accordance with the
physiological laws alone, without the intervention of
any higher principle, it certainly does not follow that
consciousness is an effect thereof, since it contains
something more than life; but, in that case, the
appearance of consciousness is necessary just in so far
as it is connected with (he physiological phenomena
accompanying it. If, on the other hand, we may


Man 127

admit that the vital properties which are the condi-
tions of consciousness cannot wholly be explained by
the general laws of life, it is likely that consciousness
itself intervenes in the realisation of these properties,
and that, along these lines, it is realised contingently,
although connected, in the actual world, with deter-
minate physical ' conditions.

Thus we see that the creation of man, a conscious
being, cannot be explained simply by the operation of
the physical and physiological laws. His existence and
actions impose on nature modifications which she her-
self cannot understand, and which appear as contingent,
if we adopt the standpoint of the physical and the
physiological worlds.

Still, what does the varying disposition of things
matter to man, if he recognises fatality within himself ;
if his feelings, his ideas, his resolves, his inmost life,
in a word, are governed by a special law, which deter-
^ mines them necessarily ? Can the independence of
the thinking world in its relation to the lower worlds
affect the individual, if all his acts are fatally implied
in the system of physiological facts ; if, as regards this
system, he is but a drop of water borne along by an
irresistible torrent ?

m

Now, has not every being its own law, and should not
the phenomena of consciousness, like other orders of
phenomena, exhibit relations of mutual dependence ?

Unquestionably one is at first inclined to consider
the soul as a wholly spontaneous power ; each of its
acts seems to find in itself alone/ and not in the con-


s/


128 Contingency of the Laws of Nature

cotnitant phenomena, both its purpose and its cause.
Do not psychological phenomena defy calculation ? Is
it possible to predict what such or such a person will
do in such or such circumstances?

Soon, however, a more attentive study reveals uni-
form psychological successions; at least, so far as
feelings arid thoughts are concerned.

The will long remains refractory to science; over
against the doctrine of contingency it sets up a barrier
which seems impregnable. The march of observation
and comparison, however, reveals the existence of
political and social laws of nature. History shows us
various societies coming into being, developing and
decaying alike. From the many literatures and insti-
tutions, it extracts a general form of human activity
which appears constant. The exact sciences in turn
demand a share in the study of social and moral
phenomen a^ in this connection they determine an
average type which remains perceptibly immutable.
Statistics submit to calculation, and that successfully,
the products of the human will, as well as the products
of physical forces, when dealing with large masses.

Here one would like to set up a distinction between
the whole and the individuals, and declare the spon-
taneity of the latter, alleging that in abstract mathe-
matics we find fixed laws— those of the large numbers^
as they are called — for totalities of cases, each of which,
taken separately, is supposed to be fortuitous, and con-
cluding therefrom that the determination of the totality
does not prejudice that of the details. Chance,


Man 129

however, of which the mathematician speaks, is but a
fiction. In reality, everything has its reason for
existence. Why human actions, taken one by one,
seem to happen by chance, is because there is an
infinite number of particular causes which oppose the
general causes whose influence is being studied, and,
as these particular causes are wholly lacking in con-
vergence, there is no law governing their combined
action. It is this very cancelling or mutual annulling
of certain causes that sets free and manifests certain
others. Moreover, the direct observation of particular
groups and individuals increasingly limits the amount
or the degree which statistics seems to leave to chance.
It is likely that a constant mean might be found for the
acts of an individual as well as for those of a society.
The better a man is known, the more certainly, as a
general rule, can his conduct be explained and foreseen.
If there is any uncertainty, we might say that this is
because data are lacking. Are we to admit that the
state of the weather happens contingently, because we
cannot foresee it with any degree of certainty ?

What is the general formula of the psychological
laws?

The most scientific process of determining this
formula is, at first sight, that of reverting to the physical
and mechanical conditions of the states of conscious-
ness. May it not be said, for instance, that experience
manifests a constant relation between the physical
modifications of the body and the modifications of the

soul : that both orders of phenomena exist, increase

9


130 Contingency of the Laws of Nature

and decrease at the same time and in the same pro-
portions ? Applying to the soul the general law of the
correlation of forces, may it not be conjectured that
there is a mechanical equivalent of sensation, thought
and will, as well as of heat or chemical action ? Thus,
physical necessity would seem to be the basis of
psychological necessity.

The analogy which may exist between psychological
development and physical development would not

+ justify the hypothesis of a transformation of mechanical
into psychological phenomena, since motion is not
even transformed into heat, strictly so called, but
simply constitutes the condition, the material basis of
this latter. This analogy, however, seems to indicate
that the thinking world is but a sort of inner lining of
one part of the mechanical world. It leads one to
suppose that, in reality, there is an exact parallelism
between thought and the concomitant movements.
It inclines to ihe belief that there might be found for-

V mulse enabling us to explain and foresee psychological
phenomena simply by considering their mechanical
conditions.

This would be quite legitimate, could we compute in
themselves the physical variations corresponding to
the mechanical ones.

Now, fully to compute the manifestations of the
soul, it would be necessary to convert the diversity of
psychological phenomena into homogeneous quantities,

^ i.e. for instance, into quantities of psychic energy. Is
it possible, however, thus to reduce to one and the


Man 131

same unit of computation the various qualities of the U
soul ?

Before entering upon this problem, we should mani-
festly have to begin by studying the mechanical
variations that correspond to the variations of one and
the same psychic quality. Suppose we study recollec- ,
tion or memory from this point of view. We should
have to draw up the following table, S being a quantity
of memory and Q a quantity of motion ; S^, Sg being
particular given values of S, and Qj, Qg the corre-
sponding values of Q :

Si Qi

So Q2


The deduction would be that S =y(Q).

But how are we to procure S^, Sg, etc. ? Memory is
not a simple quality, any more than is the soul itself.
It includes clearness, keenness, complexity, exactness,
precision, remoteness in the past, the sense of personal
identity, the consciousness of having already conceived
the idea in question, etc. The very thing that deter-
mines the value of memory is the presence, absence,
and degree of these various qualities. We should
first have to forgo measuring so complex a whole as^
memory, the values of which, by reason of this very
complexity, are not quantities of the same nature. It
would be necessary to look for simple and exactly
defined qualities, analogous to extension and motion ;
to determine the mechanical equivalent of each of


132 Contingency of the Laws of Nature

these qualities, and then find a numerical relation
between these qualities considered separately, and the
results of their combinations. Now, to do this scien-
tifically would be impossible without appealing to tact,
judgment, feeling ; in other words, without that direct
^ appreciation of quality which is the very thing we have
to supply. Besides, there is nothing to prove that
psychic qualities can be decomposed into simple ele-
ments, identical through all their changes of intensity.

^ A fortiori, these remarks apply to the moral qualities

of the soul, the most important of all.

If now, inversely, we deduced from the variations of
the physical phenomena, the corresponding variations
of the psychological phenomena, we should be caught
in a vicious circle. Were we to measure the latter by
the former, in order to set up a constant relation be-
tween these two series of variations, it must previously
* "^ihave been possible to measure them separately.

V This method of investigation, then, seems as though

' it ^uld have no result, even approximate, unless it be

appi^d to a very restricted aspect of the psychological

Xworld,"^ that aspect through which the soul comes in
>contact,\s it were, with matter, and is not yet itself,
obnsidereifl^in its distinctive essence, the psychological
world cannijit be regarded as a duplication of or sub-
stitute for the physical world, for then we should be
unable to explain the great disproportion, from the
moral point of view, between actions which have
expended almost the same amount of physical energy
and consumed almost the same weioht of carbon. Do


Man 133

we know the cost of intellectual work if we are aware
that its mechanical equivalent is a little greater than
that of average muscular work of the same duration ?
Is one to judge of the value of a pleasure, the truth of
a thought, the merit of an act, from the weight that
could have been raised by means of the carbon oxidised
on the occasion of this pleasure, this thought, or this act ?

In vain, then, do we invoke the parallelism of
psychological and physical phenomena for converting ^
the soul into a function of motion. Psychological
phenomena cannot be measured as motion can, and, in
so far as degrees can be set up between them, these
variations, in the higher regions of the soul, hold no
assignable relation to variations in amount of physical
force.

This may also be affirmed, though less absolutely, of
the doctrine which regards psychological phenomena as
only the inner reproduction, not of mechanical, but of 7
nervous phenomena. Here, too, the parallelism is only
partial, although it certainly extends over a greater
portion of psychological life. Indeed, it matters little
that modifications of the nervous system correspond
to each modification of the soul ; the main thing is to* .
find out if the one set of modifications is the measure
of the other. Now, there is no proportion between
the physiological difference and the psychological
jiifference which distinguishes, let us say, insanity from
genius ; and when we judge the soul by the body, we are
inclined to identify these two states. Again, whereas,
in comparing psychological phenomena with mechanical


134 Contingency of the Laws of Nature

phenomena, one of the two terms, at all events, —
the mechanical phenomena — was exactly measurable ;
here, neither of the terms is scarcely more measurable
than the other, so that there must inevitably be great
uncertainty as to the degree of correspondence.

In short, the only really practical thing to do is to
seek, not correspondence between relations, but corre-
spondence between phenomena considered separately.
Then we can obtain definite and instructive results ;
but these do not reveal the law of psychological
phenomena, because, since the law of physical deter-
mination is not absolute, they leave unsolved the
question whether the physical conditions are not
partially determined by the soul itself, and what,
according to this view, is the degree of psychic influence
on the production of these conditions. ^

Still, while it is impossible to deduce the necessity of
the psychological phenomena froip their correspondence
with the lower phenomena, do we not find in the
psychological world considered per se the proof that its
foundations are immutable and its evolution necessary ?

The possible and fruitful application of statistics to
the study of the psychological phenomena, the discovery
of constant moral averages, seem to indicate that these
phenomena are subject to a fundamental law analogous
to the laws of the lower worlds, and that this law
consists of the permanence of the same amount of
psychic energy.

Again, the law of the conservation of force, in
mechanics, is only practically true for a sufficiendy


Man 135

large totality of movements, such as the solar system.
In physics and chemistry, the application of the law of
conservation is particularised ; each form of matter
tends strongly to retain its properties. In living beings,
the conservation of form is even more particular; it
applies to the specific essence. The typical organism,
constantly impaired by extraneous forces, makes use of
these very forces to repair the breaches made upon it.
In the thinking being, energy is personified. In each
of us it is aware of its permanence and feels an irre-
sistible inclination to claim for itself eternal duration.

No doubt the soul has its own growth and vicissi-
tudes. But if we admit the existence of latent psychic
forces, if we note the gradual weakening of certain
faculties whilst others are growing, if we observe that
each man, speaking generally, possesses a maximum
of psychic progress, and that after reaching it, the
average man instead of remaining there enters upon a
phase of decadence as though to restore the equili-
brium ; if, in short, we understand the external influ-
ences, the relations of men to one another, which
modify the evolution of the distinctively human nature ;
then in all probability we shall conclude that psychic
energy, even throughout the whole of an individual
life, tends in the direction of a determinate average,
that law is on the side of determination and perman-
ence, and that facts to the contrary are but exceptions.

Even in a given phase of the psychological life of
an individual, the amount of mental energy seems to
be determined. If one of the faculties of the soul is


136 Contingency of the Laws of Nature

highly developed, as a general rule, it is to the detri-
ment of the rest If a feeling, an idea, a resolve
acquire considerable force, the weakening of the other
modes of activity restores the balance. Thus, present
feelings end in effacing past feelings, more or less
completely. Thus, also, sensible impressions, driven
back by new impressions which absorb the best part of
the mind s energy, become thereby less keen and pass
from the state of sensations to that of images ; then,
before the ever-rising flood of new sensations and
images, the former fade away in the distance, gradually
lose their colour, their distinguishing characteristics
and their life, to become vague, abstract, and dead
ideas: a useful metamorphosis, whereby the most
diverse ideas of things gradually combine and mingle
with ideas of a more and more general nature which
bring before our mind the framework of the pheno-
mena. Thus, in short, within the sphere of the will,
energetic resolves are frequently followed by dejection,
despair accompanies heroism, and constancy in effort
is the most difficult virtue to attain.

For all that, the soul has the power to restore to its
dead feelings, its effaced ideas and its languishing
resolves, their pristine energy ; at times, even, an
energy they have never had before. But in this case
also, there is no creation of psychic energy. This
resurrection does not come about of itself. It is
determined by a present state analogous to the past,
and it is the life of the present that is communicated
to the phantom of the past.


Man 137

This law of conservation seems £resupposed in
every inquiry that tends to explain states of conscious-
ness, considered by themselves, in the way in which
physical phenomena are explained ; it is implied in
every attempt of positive psychology.

And now, if the amount of psychic energy remains ^
the same in the thinking being, can human actions be *
regarded as contingent ?

It is no more plausible in psychology than in
mechanics to allege, in guaranteeing the contingency
of phenomena, the distinction between indeterminate
force and direction, and to admit that the permanence
of the one does not bring about the determination of
the other. Mental actions, sensations, ideas, tenden-
cies, are never given in an indeterminate state. The
direction of the antecedents, as well as their energy,
must be included in the consequents, and, to obtain in
the consequents a different direction from that resulting
from the combination of the antecedents, there must
be introduced a new direction ; this necessarily implies
a new energy of a certain intensity. Thus, a change
of direction, or, in dealing with the soul, a change
of quality, always presupposes a change of quantity.
This new quantity may have been borrowed by the
given being from other beings of the same order ; but
the change that has come about in these beings must
also itself have had a determining reason ; and if, in
the totality, the quantity of action remains constant,
the phenomena can be no more than a ctrculus, in
which contingency will have no place. The soul


/


138 Contingency of the Laws of Nature

considered in general, no more explains the particular
character of any particular feeling, conception, or
intention, than force, considered in general, explains
the direction of motion.

It would seem, then, as though we must abandon all
contingency in the order of mental phenomena, if we
admit absolutely the law of the conservation of psychic
energy, the proportionality of sensations, ideas,
resolves, with their psychological antecedents. But is
this law necessary ?

It cannot be regarded as given analytically a priori,
since the idea of psychological operations does not
imply a determinate degree of energy as the condition
of their existence.

Nor is it a synthetic judgment a priori, since, on the
other hand, man is inclined to regard himself as master
of his own actions. This law is an experimental cogni-
tion ; it cannot claim to be more than a necessity of
fact.

Now, is this very necessity inherent in the law }

If we pierce the first covering of things, we certainly
find that the endless variety offered by the surface of
the psychological world does not exist in reality.
Even in the moral order of life, beneath changing
externals, there are strata ever more and more solid.
Beneath the disposition of the moment is individual
character ; beneath individual character are the man-
ners and customs of the time ; then follows national
character, and, finally, human nature itself. Now,
human nature remains perceptibly unchanged.


Man 139

This IS the result generally reached by the psycho-
logist. The historian, however, is disposed to see
things in another aspect. For him, everything is in a
condition of change ; there are no two epochs exactly
alike. The assimilations set up between past and
present are never more than approximate. And it
would really seem as if the precise and short defini-
tions, stated as ultimate, whereby the philosopher
loves to crown historical generalisations, inevitably
leave out a portion of reality ; as though that which
lives were, in essence, incompatible with the exactness,
unity, and immutability of a formula. Is there a man
anywhere whose character is really invariable or con-
stant ? Is there a nation whose entire history is the^
expression of one and the same idea? Does human
nature itself involve an immutable basis ? Are we to
neglect changes which may take place, even in the
principles of things, under the plea that, in themselves,
they are at first very slight and imperceptible? In
drawing an angle, no modification in the divergence
between the two lines is a matter of indifference.

Are we now to pursue analysis and abstraction until
we come to a truly identical principle? In that case,
what will remain of the soul at the end of the process ?
Of what does human nature consist when reduced to
such features as are absolutely common to all men ?
Manifestly, when undergoing this successive elimina-
tion of all particular elements, it will gradually lose
everything that constitutes its greatness. In short,
generalisation, the curtailment of specific character-


yf


V


140 Contingency of the Laws of Nature

istics, culminates in ever poorer and emptier concepts,
which are also less and less calculated to explain real
life. It is wrong to regard beings as having their
substance in an immutable element, and impossible
fully to explain change by the nature of things, this
nature being considered as the immediate and equally
immutable expression of substance as thus understood.
Where do we find, especially in man, a primordial
nature which does not presuppose action ? Is not
character the result of instinctive or reflex actions ?
Would the faculties of man develop, would they even
exist, if they were not exercised ? What is the soul
prior to action .f^ Has primordial matter, especially in
this case, if such matter exists, a rdle that can be com-
pared with that of the artist who moulds and organises
it, gives it life, form and beauty ? In spite of appear-
ances, no individual, nation, or even man is ever
wholly the slave of his character, for this latter is born
of action, and consequently depends thereon. The
predominant mark of human nature is not immobility :
it is change, progress, or decline; and history, from
this point of view, is the necessary corrective of static
psychology. Passing from one state to another is
always the real condition of man ; the most general
psychological laws refer to some phase of humanity.

This doctrine, moreover, does not contradict the
data of psychology, when the latter is not actually com-
pelled to reduce everything to exact, immutable for-
mulae. A psychological consequent never finds in the
antecedent its complete cause and all-sufficing reason.


Man 141

This disproportion in the two terms is particularly
evident in voluntary actions. In the resolve that
follows a consideration of motives, there is something
more than in the motives themselves : the consent of
the will to some particular motive in preference to
some other. The motive, therefore, is not the com-
plete cause of the action. Still, is it the all-sufficing
reason thereof? Undoubtedly it is always the
strongest motive that prevails, but only just so far as
we subsequently give this title to the very motive
chosen by the will. It would have to be proved that
the will invariably chooses the motive which, of itself,
exercised beforehand the strongest influence on the
soul. Now, does it not happen that the will practically
renders predominant a motive which, theoretically,
was not the resultant of the forces that appealed to the
soul ? When, from without, we observe the conduct
of our fellow-beings and even our own conduct, we
find that the same actions are uniformly connected
with the same motives. But does it follow that the
actions are determined by the motives considered in
themselves, and will not this law be equally well
exemplified, if it is the will itself that brings forward
and emphasises the conditions of its action ?

If this is so, it will be said, the act is doubtless
explained ; but the relation between the predominant
motive and the totality of the determinations of the
soul contradicts the principle of causality. True, and
it might be that a free act would indeed be inadmis-
sible were the principle of causality to be admitted as


142 Contingency of the Laws of Nature

absolute. But it might also be that this principle, in
its application to facts, is not so rigid as abstract
science alleges, and admits of some contingency in the
transformation from an antecedent into a consequent.
What deceives one is that the proximate causes of the
given act are linked — or appear to be linked — together
in a way that exactly conforms with the principle of
causality. But how could one prove that, by ascend-
ing the series of causes, one would not reach a point
at which this principle would no longer suffice to
explain the phenomena, so far at least as these could
be completely analysed? Possibly the controlling
power does not intervene at all places and times with
the same energy, and, after supplying the impulse,
leaves things more or less to their natural course,
when that suffices for the completion of the action.
This impulse, in itself, may be extremely feeble; but
when applied at the right moment and the appropriate
point, it may determine great phenomena by its
consequences.

Assuredly also, in a general way, the superior agents
do not dispose of the inferior forces at their pleasure.
It is more especially when the latter are struggling
with one another, and are as it were balanced, that the
superior agent intervenes easily and effectively. When
the soul is torn between various desires, the will
makes a way for itself without any effort, deliberates
and pronounces judgment. On the other hand, when
the will finds itself in the presence of passions which,
converging towards pne and the same end, become


Man 143

mutually strengthened, what happens is that it forgets
itself and surrenders. But even then it may awake
and act ; it may struggle against the stronger passions,
either indirectly by bringing over against them other
passions of like intensity, or by diverting them im-
perceptibly towards other objects, or even directly by
rising alone against its adversaries. Even in the most
unfavourable circumstances, the will may make use of
the very laws that govern the soul in order to direct it.

While the production of the voluntary determinations
is that order of psychological phenomena in which con-
tingency is best manifested, the other orders are not
entirely devoid thereof ; for feelings or ideas, however
simple or general the relation we are considering,
never find a complete explanation in their psycho-
logical antecedents. They always appear as being
something other than these antecedents, as containing
new qualities ; and so they do not come under the
law of proportionality between cause and effect.

Thus we find variability even in the deepest depths ,
of human nature. Hence, is it likely that the amount
of psychic energy is exactly determined, remains ex-
actly the same ? To have the right to affirm such a
law, we should have to be able to reduce all psycho-
logical successions to an exactly determined mode of
elementary succession, the permanence of which would
be demonstrated. Now, it is just this term that
eludes the investigator.

But perhaps the radical change itself finds its neces-
sary law in an immutable dynamic principle antecedent


^^-


144 Contingency of the Laws of Nature

to all phenomena ; perhaps the psychological world is
a uniform evolution in which the very essence of the
soul is implicated.

May we not say, for instance, that the line of advance
of the psychological phenomena must necessarily be the
resultant of two elements : on the one hand, an ensemble
of the faculties that constitute the nature of a given
person ; and, on the other, one or more tendencies, such
as the search after happiness, the life instinct, the
adaptation of internal faculties to external conditions ?
U There are several objections to this doctrine. We
may ask if it is possible to bring all human actions
under these formulae or even under any kind of formula,
since man feels himself capable of deeds of hero-
ism and self-sacrifice, of actions that overpower the
strongest opposition in his nature.

Admitting its possibility, at all events it is difficult to
determine exactly the formula we intend to adopt ; for
^ the formulae in question, each of them correct to a
certain extent, cannot be reconciled with one another.

The desire of happiness, for instance, may make us
detest and flee from a life which happens to be one of
continual suffering.

The love of physical and moral life, by inducing us
to develop our strength and faculties as far as possible,
occasions innumerable difficulties and conflicts with
the outside world, numberless sufferings which do not
exist for inactive natures.

The more tendencies become adapted to things, the
feebler becomes consciousness, which needs a shock in


Man 145

order to manifest itself, and replaces keen, pleasant or
unpleasant sensations by a state of indifference or
apathy. More than this, the conflict between man
and the physical world is owing to the fact that man
pursues ends which things do not spontaneously realise,
ends superior to those of things. To stop this con-
flict, there must be a cessation of the pursuit of these
superior ends. Man, who makes adaptation to ex-
ternal conditions the object of his life, will thus have
to descend once more the ladder of being, one step
after the other, to submit to and identify himself with
the things whose impact he dreads. Hence, he will
no longer see anything but evil in conscience, intellect,
feeling, life, even in existence, for all these tendencies
are opposed by the external world ; finally, he will
regard absolute annihilation as the one supreme boon.

Moreover, even though it were demonstrated that
all man's actions can be explained by these dynamic
formulae or by others of the same kind, it would not
therefore follow that necessity controls psychological
life ; for these formulae do not fulfil the conditions of a
positive law or relation between experimental data.

First, there is something vague and indeterminate
about the second term of the dynamic law : the end
offered to human activity. What is happiness ? Do all
men form the same idea of it? What is the kind of
happiness that is regarded as the universal end of human
actions ? Similarly, of what does the harmonious de-
velopment of our powers and faculties consist.*^ In

what way must they be subordinated to one another ?

10


146 Contingency of the Laws of Nature

Will it be admitted — to remain as far as possible within
the realm of facts — that the highest faculty is that which
supplies the greatest force ? Even then, it is by no
means evident that moral greatness comes under the
category of force, and that it does not deserve to bq
sought for its own sake. Is the proportionate develop-
ment of our innate powers a clear principle, calculated
to be understood in the same way by all men ? And
may not the adaptation of tendencies to things also be
conceived in several ways ? Are we to set in the
same category the man who seeks to conform to
external conditions without any sacrifice of his human
prerogatives and the man who allows his higher
faculties to decline under the plea that they check
adaptation ? What is the kind of adaptation that we
are to look upon as the natural end of human actions ?

Second, can one say that a tendency is a positive
reality ? Does the tendency exist only when it is
manifested ; is it no more than a sum total of past or
present actions ? Assuredly it may exist, even though
it should not be manifested. Is it a sum total of
possible actions ? Onp of two things must be true :
either these actions will certainly be realised, and then
they are not simply possible, they are future : but it
is not necessary that a tendency should be realised for
the possibility of its existence to be admitted ; or these
actions are truly possible, i.e. will either be realised or
not : but in this case they cannot be regarded as a
positive reality, i.e. as given in experience.

Similarly, the precise direction, the intensity and in-


Man 147

telligence shown by the tendency cannot be regarded as
given. For the tendency is the being itself ; and who
can affirm that the being has not the power to act upon
its tendencies and modify them spontaneously ? Is
this impossibility given, or capable of being given, in
experience ?

It would appear, then, that it is as .^impossible to
establish scientifically a law of necessary radical change
as one of radical conservation. Indeed, change exists
in the soul simultaneously with permanence, even
before permanence. On the other hand, a law of
change which is not reducible to one of conservation,
a law that absolutely precedes things, a principle
anterior to concepts, cannot be resolved into the
positive laws and so lay claim to necessity.

If this is the case, we have a right to admit that
physiological phenomena are not absolutely deter-
mined, but that they contain a radical contingency
beneath the uniformities of succession which they still
offer to the observer.

The character, also, proper to the law of permanence
governing man s actions proves that the amount of
indetermination in them must be greater than in all
other phenomena.

Indeed, in the lower regions, the fundamental laws
of permanence are immediately connected with more
or less considerable totalities, such as a mechanical
system, a form of matter, a living species. Each
particular agent is thus, as it were, absorbed into the
whole to which it belongs. The law governing it


148 Contingency of the Laws of Nature

enables it to act only in concert with the totality.
Hence, how can a contingent action come about ?
Will it be by finding its point of support in the very law
of its action ? This law, however, plunging it into the
infinite, is wholly antagonistic; its initiative can be
displayed only on condition that the whole of the
system to which it belongs is modified. Will this
come about by absolutely resisting this hostile destiny
which regards it as of no account? But would the
being which could act upon things without finding in
them its point of support still be a creature ?

To exist solely as part of the whole would thus be
equivalent to subjection to absolute fatality. In truth,
nothing real shows forth this character, which is in-
compatible with existence : it is found only in the
purely ideal object of a wholly abstract science. And
the reason why beings inferior to man actually show
forth, in a collective form, some degree of contingency,
is because the systems they constitute are, to some
extent, already distinct worlds, outside of which there
are both space and points of support.

Now, the human person, more than all other beings,
has an existence of his own, is his own world. More
than other beings he can act, without being compelled
to include his actions in a system which transcends
him. The general law of the conservation of psychic
energy is parcelled out, as it were, into a multitude of
distinct laws, each of which is proper to each indi-
vidual. It is these individual laws that are immediate :
the general law is no more than mediate. Besides this.


Man 149

it would appear that, for one and the same individual,
the law is again subdivided and resolved into laws
of detail proper to each phase of psychological life.
The law tends to become one with the fact. Hence,
the conservation of the whole no longer determines
the acts of the individual : it depends on them. The
individual, having become in himself alone the whole
genus to which the law applies, is master of this law.
He turns it into an instrument, and dreams of a state
in which, at every moment of his existence, he would
thus be the equal of the law, and possess, within
himself, all the elements of his own action.


CONCLUSION

When man, in ancient Greece, became conscious of
himself and reflected on his condition, he believed
himself the sport of an external, impenetrable, and
irresistible power, which he called destiny. In
accordance with this belief, it was his duty to obey
mysterious orders, and he was condemned to expiate
inevitable crimes. After bewailing his servitude, he
found courage to pronounce judgment upon this
inflexible power, finding it cruel and iniquitous, and
regarding himself as superior to it He was astonished
that he had submitted to this shameful yoke without
examining it. He attempted to escape from and
break it : and he did break it. No longer did the
world dictate laws to him ; he dictated laws to the
world. He became aware of his freedom.

Soon, however, there arose within him fresh ground
for uneasiness. In order to be free in reality, was
it sufficient that he should be free as regards i the
external world? Did he not feel within himself
impetuous stirrings, irresistible forces, analogous to
that destiny in which he had formerly believed.^
Was he then mistaken only as to where this sovereign
power had its abode ? Though outside of the world,
did it dwell within himself ? Was he the slave of his

150


Conclusion 151

passions, his ideas, and his nature? Was fatality
gripping him again, just when he thought he was
escaping from it ? Undoubtedly, this new fatality was
not so brutal and stupid as the former ; all the same,
was it less absolute ? Is a chain any the lighter from
not being perceived by the outer world ? Under the
sway of this outer world, there was one liberty man
still retained : that of protesting inwardly against the
violence of which he was the victim. Beneath the
sway of his own nature, to believe himself free was
to be his own dupe. What value does dominion
over the outer world possess to a being who is con-
scious of fatality within himself? In short, destiny
was undoubtedly no more than a figure ; still, it was
a true one.

Greek genius did not stop there. It perceived
that the different parts of human nature had not all
the same dignity. It succeeded in making the lower
faculties yield to the higher ones. It thus saw that
this inner fatality governing human actions was not
so inflexible as it had at first imagined. Each new
effort confirmed it in this idea, this faith in itself;
and gradually it found courage to aspire to the per-
fection of a god who should be master of himself as
well as of the universe.

Such, along different lines, seems to be the con-
dition of all beings.

In the universe, there can be distinguished several
worlds, forming, as it were, stages superposed on one
another. These are — above the world of pure neces-


v


152 Contingency of the Laws of Nature

sity, of quantity without quality, which is identical
with nonentity, the world of causes, the world of
notions, the mathematical world, the physical world,
the living world, and lastly the thinking world.

Each of these worlds appears, at first, to depend
strictly on the lower worlds, as on some external
fatality, and to receive from them its existence and
laws. Would matter exist without generic identity
and causality, bodies without matter, living beings
without physical agents, man without life?

Nevertheless, if we examine and compare the con-
cepts of the principal forms of being, we see that it
is impossible to connect the higher forms with the
lower ones by a link of nec^ity.

Do we reason a priori} J rN^ cannot deduce the
higher forms from the lower by way of analysis,
because the higher contain elements that cannot be
reduced to those of the lower. The first find in the
second only their matter, not their form. The link con-
necting the two seems to be a radically synthetic one. ij

And yet, this would be a necessary link, were it laia
down by the mind, apart from all experience, in a
causal synthetic judgment a priori. The formulae,
however, which would seem to presuppose an origin
a priori are not those that apply to given things, or
even to the knowledge of these things ; whereas the
formulae that really explain the nature of given things
have their origin in experience itself.

Thus, the existence of the various degrees of being
is not necessary in theory.


/


Conclusion 153

Does reasoning a posteriori prove that it is neces-
sary in fact ?

Even though science may have assumed the deduc-
tive form, it does not follow that its conclusions are
objectively necessary. The value of the conclusions
is precisely that of the fundamental principles ; and,
if these latter are contingent, their contingency is
necessarily transmitted to all the propositions that
syllogism deduces from them. Now, all purely de-
ductive science possesses an abstract and subjective
character. Only on these terms are exact definitions
possible. Such definitions are artificial syntheses of
concepts, impoverished to the point of becoming wholly
unintelligible. We cannot, then, apply to things them-
selves the determination inherent in the definitions
of the deductive sciences.

Facts, nevertheless, seem sufificiently * to testify to
the necessary character of the appearance of each new
essence, for this appearance coincides constantly with
a certain state of the corresponding matter. But what
is the meaning of this coincidence ? On which side is
the agent, and on which side the patient ? Is it the
lower principle that determines the appearance of the
higher, or is it the higher principle itself which, in
being realised, sets up the conditions of its realisation ?
On the one hand, an absolutely determining phe-
nomenal cause is unintelligible, for it presupposes
quantity devoid of all quality, and no such essence
can exist : the lower, then, cannot determine absolutely
the appearance of the higher. On the other hand,


154 Contingency of the Laws of Nature

for each progress on the part of being, we are unable
wholly to explain, by the laws of the lower principle,
the complication shown by this principle, when it
becomes the stepping-stone of the higher principle;
it it thus legitimate to admit that it is form itself
that fashions matter for its use.

Each given world, then, possesses a certain degree of
independence as regards the lower worlds. To a certain
extent, it may be an element in their development,
may exploit the laws peculiar to them and determine
therein forms which were not required by their essence.

But does not each world bear within itself, as an
inner fatality, a law which governs its phenomena ;
and so is not the contingency of the phenomena,
after all, pure illusion ?

First, is there not an exact correspondence between
a given higher world and the lower worlds, so that the
law of the higher world is but the translation, in another
language, of the fatality peculiar to the lower worlds :
the inner sense, as it were, of a symbolical destiny ?

This correspondence has no such meaning, because
it does not exist between the two orders of relations,
there frequently being no proportion between the vicis-
situdes of form and those of matter ; and also because,
even were it to exist between the two categories of
facts considered separately, there is nothing to prove
— unless we consider as absolute the fatality inherent
in the lower world, i.e. unless we take for granted the
very thing in question — that the higher phenomenon
has not influenced the realisation of its conditions.


Conclusion 155

But do not observation and reasoning show that
phenomena occur in a constant order ; that uniformities
in detail are reducible to general uniformities ; and
that, finally, each world is governed by a special law,
which consists in the conservation of the very essence
of which that particular world is the realisation ?

Unquestionably these laws of permanency exist;
but are they necessary ?

Considered a priori, they cannot be deduced from
the essence of the things to which they apply, because
they relate to extensive quantity, and all essence,
being above everything else a quality, admits of an
infinity of degrees, from this point of view.

Nor can it 'be said that these fundamental laws are
posited a priori by the mind itself.- The formulae
which require a rational origin, bearing upon things
per se or else upon relations that cannot be verified,
do not apply to given things or to the knowledge
of given things; and the formulae which admit of
experimental usage contain no term that cannot be
explained by experience itself

It is not exact, then, to say that laws govern phe-
nomena. They are not posited anterior to things,
but presuppose them. They express only the relations
that are due to their previously realised nature.

But does not science itself, especially when it has
assumed deductive form, prove a posteriori that the
very nature of things does not change ?

On the one hand, we cannot identify with the
nature of things an empirical principle, however


J


156 Contingency of the Laws of Nature

general it may be, however fruitful it may appear.
Deductive science is radically abstract. It determines
the relations of things, once it is granted that their
nature remains immobile or fixed.

On the other hand, the world everywhere offers us
— along with conservation, which, of itself, practically
excludes the idea of contingency — change, progress,
or decline, which admits this idea, and that, not only
in superficial detail, but even, though probably indefi-
nitely, in the general laws that sum up the laws
of detail.

In essence, there is no real relation of antecedent
and consequent, however general it may be regarded,
which cannot be conceived as necessary, for necessity
can only consist in the quantitative rdation of ante-
cedent to consequent. Now, quantity can be con-
ceived only as the measure of, and as subordinate to,
quality ; this latter, since it is indefinitely perfectible
and becomes really different when passing from one
degree of perfection to another, however near they
may be to each other, and since it finds in the ex-
tensive quantity of the barren repetition of one and
the same thing no element of improvement, can accept
the homogeneity and permanence demanded by the
category of quantity only as accidental and relative,
not as essential and absolute. Consequently, the law
of the conservation of being is contingent.

Besides, it is impossible to find or conceive of a law
of qualitative change, anterior to things, that does not
imply finality. Now, finality transcends experience,


Conclusion 157

Thus, such a law does not fulfil the conditions of a
positive law ; it can be no index of physical necessity.

The beings of the given world, then, are not in a
state of absolute dependence as regards their own
nature. It is conceivable that, in their essence, they
do not remain eternally similar to themselves, and that
the order in which their manifestations succeed one
another leaves scope for a greater or less degree of
contingency. This indetermination would even enable
the higher forms to be grafted on to the lower, by
placing the latter in the conditions necessary for the
birth of a new germ.

Is it by a series of creations isolated from one
another, or by continuous progress, that nature thus
rises from the empty barren forms of the ontological
and logical worlds to the rich fertile forms of the
living and thinking worlds ? After all, this is of but
little importance, for the higher elements, though
spiritualising matter by imperceptible gradations, will
none the less remain irreducible to the lower elements
and superposed on these latter as an addition, an
absolute creation. Do we say that a ship sails of
itself, because,, from without, we see that it proceeds
along a continuous track ?

To discover the intermediate forms which would set
up an imperceptible gradation between all the beings
of nature, would be to determine how the principle of
improvement works ; it Mrould not be the reduction of
improvement to immobility, of higher forms to lower
ones. To express the idea of improvement by that of


158 Contingency of the Laws of Nature

development pure and simple is, firstly, illegitimate,
because all development is not improvement ; and,
secondly, useless, in the present case, because this very
development presupposes the intervention of a higher
principle which draws out matter from the enveloping
state, and compels it to reveal that which it holds
hidden. Moreover, the doctrine of pre-existence and
preformation seems gradually, in science, to be giving
way to that of epigenesis, which, without excluding the
principle of development, expressly presupposes a
principle of addition and of improvement.

An initial glance at natural phenomena may have
given rise to the idea of a universal transmutation,
without the addition of higher forms. There may
have been a belief that water, by its fluidity, or fire,
by its mobility, was the sole principle capable in itself
of assuming all the forms with which we are acquainted.
There may long have been a persistent belief in the
transmutation of metals. Even in a highly scientific
age, there may have* been admitted the simple trans-
mutation of forces ; it may have been thought possible
that motion could literally be transformed into heat,
life, and thought. Closer investigation has shown that
the water or heat which maintain life work themselves
into the living body without changing their nature ;
that base metals remain base in spite of being com-
bined and fused together in all sorts of ways; that
motion subsists wholly as motion under the very heat,
life, and thought with whose appearance it is associated.

The universe, then, is not made up of elements


•


\

\


Conclusion 159


equal to one another, susceptible of being transformed
into one another, like algebraical quantities. It is
made up of forms superposed on one another, although,
perhaps, bound together by gradations, i.e. additions,
that are altogether imperceptible.

And just as each world contains something more
than the worlds below it, so within each world the
amount of being is not absolutely determined. There
is a possible improvement, as also a decline ; and the
contingency of the degree of perfection takes away
that of quantitative measure.

If this is so, the old adage, " Nothing is lost,
nothing created," possesses no absolute value. The
very existence of a hierarchy of worlds irreducible to
one another without being co-eternal is the first
derogation from this adage ; and the possibility of
improvement or of decline within these worlds them-
selves is the second.

Now, the positive sciences are based on this
postulate. They study change, in so far as it is
reducible to permanency. They consider things from
the standpoint of the conservation of being. What,
then, is the value of the positive sciences }

Assuredly, stability is not simply an abstract
category, a mould into which the understanding casts
things ; it reigns throughout the given world. Facts
are particular cases of general laws, the world is
intelligible ; and so it is not ideal possibilities, but
reality itself, of which science gives us a systematic
picture. Stability, however, has not undivided sway


i V >- •■


1 60 Contingency of the Laws of Nature

In the very heart of its empire there appears, as an
original primitive element, the working of a principle
of absolute change, of creation, strictly so called ; and
it is impossible to draw a frontier line between the two
domains. We may say that some human beings or
some aspects of things are governed by laws, whereas
the other beings or the other aspects of things are not
subject to necessity. The truth is that in the lower
worlds law occupies so wide a field that it may almost
be substituted for being ; in the higher worlds, on the
other hand, being almost causes law to be forgotten.
Thus, every fact depends not only on the principle of
conservation, but also, and in the first instance, on a
principle of creation.

Being, then, at none of its stages, is known in its
entirety when the positive sciences have completed
their work. Its nature and permanent laws are objects
of knowledge ; what remains to be known is its creative
origin. Of what does this principle, so inaccessible to
observation, consist ?

It would seem as though the only legitimate way to
form an idea of it is to consider its effects. But then,
it will be alleged, what are these effects, if not deroga-
tion from laws, incoherence and disorder ? Subject to
necessity, the world might, at least, be comprehended
in one single thought : permeated by contingency, it
is only intelligible approximately and in fragmentary
fashion ; it offers nothing but the scattered limbs of a
disintegrated organism. What, then, in itself, is the
principle of contingency, if it be not chance, that word


c ». - -


Conclusion 1 6 1

behind which we hide our ignorance, and which, far
from explaining things, implies the very abandonment
of all attempt at explanation, and, in a way, the
abdication of thought?

Perhaps it is not necessary to admit that this prin-
ciple is known only in its effects. Still, in order to be
in a position to apprehend it in itself, it would evi-
dently be necessary to quit the sphere of experience.
But if, remaining on the ground of facts, we contem-
plate the general trend of. things without regarding
scientific classification as the only type of order, we
shall perhaps find that, even in the doctrine of contin-
gency, the world appears as bearing the impress of
simplicity, harmony, and greatness.

At the lower stage, even below indeterminate being,

is necessity or quantity, pure and simple, the essence

of which is unity. This is the emptiest form it is

possible to conceive. This form, however, in so far

at least as it aspires to separate itself from absolute

nonentity, is not altogether immutable. Though

affording infinitely small scope to contingency, it does

not remain useless. It prepares the realisation of

being. Now, being, as given in experience, is fact

causing fact, i.e. the one determining the other. It is

a totality of acts bound to one another by a relation of

causality. The essence of being, then, is the relation

of the one and the other, multiplicity resulting from

differentiation. Multiplicity, in turn, allowing a certain

range to contingency, becomes the matter to which the

system of genera and species, or the classification of

II


1 62 Contingency of the Laws of Nature

the multiple, is applied as a form. Now, the general
idea, the notion, is multiple, on the one hand, in so far
as it can be decomposed into several more particular
notions different from one another ; on the other hand,
it is one, in so far as it consists of an essence common
to these various notions. Notion, then, is harmony
introduced hierarchically into the multiple, the com-
bination of unity and multiplicity.

Unity, multiplicity, hierarchy, or unity in multiplicity,
such are the lower stages of being, abstract forms, sus-
ceptible of being conceived, though not yet of being felt.

Thanks to a certain degree of contingency, to a sort
of free play permitted to logical limits, there is intro-
duced a new form of being : matter, a thing extended
and movable, the essence of which is continuity. Now,
the continuous is nothing else than the blend, the
mutual permeation, the unification of the one and the
many. Matter, in turn, lends itself to the creation of
physical and chemical forms, the essence of which is
heterogeneity. Now, the heterogeneous is to the
continuous what multiplicity is to unity, being based
on the relation of the one to the other. Besides, the
physical world makes possible the living world, which
has for its essence individualisation, the harmony
introduced into the heterogeneous by the predominance
of a central element, by hierarchy. The hierarchical
distribution of functions, in this second period, corre-
sponds to the third term of the first period, to the
combination of unity and multiplicity in the notion.
^ Continuity, heterogeneity, hierarchical organisation :


Conclusion 163

these are the concrete sensible forms of being which
are superposed on the abstract forms.

Finally, above life itself, and on the foundations it
supplies, rises consciousness, where the world is felt,
known, and dominated. Sensibility is the condition of
the person who is under the influence of things and
cannot yet distinguish himself therefrom ; who, as it
were, forms one with them. Intelligence is the rela-
tion of the person to the things from which he is dis-
tinguished, because they appear to him as other than
himself. Will is the act of the person who, by virtue
of his superiority, co-ordinates, organises, and reduces
to unity the multiplicity both of his modes of being
and of objects.

Moreover, the conscious form of being is both ab-
stract, in that it does not exist apart in the actual world,
and concrete, in that it is given in itself. Still sub-
ordinate to conditions and thus dependent on the
interior worlds, consciousness yet possesses a large
degree of existence of its own. In its material condi-
tions, it finds an instrument even more than a link.
It asks itself if this instrument will always be indis-
pensable to it, and aspires after ^ condition in which
it would be self-sufficient, possessed of life and action,
as well as of independence.

And so each form of being is the preparation of a
higher form ; and things thus multiply and become
diversified, so that they may culminate in that hier-
archical form which gives to the whole its utmost
possible power and beauty.


164 Contingency of the Laws of Nature

If this progress of being excludes, to some extent,
that order which consists of uniformity, does it there-
fore follow that it is simply disorder and confusion ?
Is it, not rather that the monotonous order of necessity
has partially been sacrificed to a higher order? Is it
not an admirable thing that beings should support
each other, the lower not only existing on their own
account, but also supplying the higher with their
conditions of existence and improvement ; the latter,
in turn, raising the lower to a stage of perfection they
could not have reached of themselves? Is it not
conformable with order that each being should have
an end to realise, and that there should be harmony
between the ends of the different beings ?

But could this higher order exist if necessity ruled
the world, and the formula, ** Nothing is lost, nothing
created," were applied literally? Does one inquire
about the purpose of an action imposed by constraint ?
Are there differences in value, i.e, in quality or in
merit ; is there progress or improvement in the pro-
ducts of one and the same necessity ? Can degrees
of value, if an attempt is made to establish them in
such a world, be other than conventional differences,
relative to the interests or feelings of some being
arbitrarily taken as a standard? If contingency, up
to a certain point, did not govern the series of deter-
mining causes, chance would govern that of final
causes, for it is finality itself that implies a certain
contingency in the succession of phenomena. To
posit uniformity of succession as absolute would be to


Conclusion 165

sacrifice a higher to a lower order : to subordinate it
to finality is to make the true order possible. The
most external surface of things and the one farthest
from the living centre, marshalled in exact order, to
all appearance, because its successions are uniform,
really implies that qualitative indetermination which
is the genuine indetermination ; but, as we plunge into
reality, we find the increase of qualitative determina-
tion, of value, merit, genuine order, proportionate to the
decrease of abstract and inevitable order. After this,
can one regard as chance that invisible, ever-present
soul which sets the very springs of the world in motion ?

Still, does not the doctrine of contingency, though
perhaps offering an aesthetic interest, do injury to the
positive sciences ?

It reduces to an abstract value the sciences exclu-
sively based on the principle of the conservation of
being, i.e. those which are exclusively static. But
these sciences, after all, seem to have no other r6le
than to deduce consequences from stated conditions,
under the hypothesis that these conditions should be
exactly determined and the quantity of being should
undergo no variation : they do not claim, in them-
selves, to be exactly conformable to objective reality.
No doubt, were every science to come under the static
sciences, the doctrine of contingency would reverse
the value of the positive sciences. But if it is legiti-
mate to set up dynamic sciences alongside of and
above the static sciences ; if objective science actually
consists of these higher sciences, then the doctrine of


1 66 Contingency of the Laws of Nature

contingency is conformable to the conditions of science.
The only thing is that this doctrine imposes observa-
tion and experiment as the ever indispensable method
of the dynamic sciences, the sciences of being. If
indeed, along with a principle of conservation there is
also one of contingent change, the abandonment of
experiment is always dangerous and illegitimate. No
longer is experiment a confused thought, a chrono-
logical starting-point of separate thought ; no longer is
it even the totality of the data amongst which induc-
tion discerns law, and which, once thus summed up in a
general formula, render new observations ineflFectual :
it is the eternal source and rule of science, in so far as
this latter would know things in truly objective fashion,
t.e. in their history as well as in their nature, which,
after all, is but one of their states. According to the
doctrine of contingency, it is erroneous and chimerical
to attempt to reduce history to a simple deduction.

From this point of view, the study of the history of
beings is of singular importance. As it happens, in-
stead of departing from the principle of things, as
would be the case if their history were contained
germinally in their nature and were but their analytical
and necessary development, dynamic science unites
itself with this principle, even more than does static
science. It is act that explains essence, far more than
essence can explain act. It is not, then, the nature
of things that should be the final object of our
scientific investigations, it is their history. Moreover,
these two points of view differ unequally, according


Conclusion 167

as the amount of contingency is greater or smaller in
the things to be known. And so, in the lower forms
of being, history lies hidden beneath extreme stability.
But as we take higher beings into consideration,
essence appears less and less as something prim-
ordial ; it becomes more and more evident that it has
its principle in the action of being itself. Man is the ?
maker both of his character and of his destiny.

It is not scientific investigation, then, but simply
the claim that one can finally dispense with experience,
that is condemned by the doctrine of contingent varia-
tions ; we cannot have the reduction of the historic to
the static sciences. Rather do the former become the
truly concrete sciences, whereas the rest, in various
degrees, are but abstract sciences.

In short, the doctrine of contingency adds a practical
to an aesthetic and a scientific interest. Indeed, were
it admitted that the existence of the world and the
laws of succession manifested therein are absolutely
necessary, freedom would appear to be an idea without
an object. Perhaps the world, thus conceived, would
still admit of development; but as this development
would be a system of modes necessarily linked to one
another, it would not answer to the idea which the
mind forms of freedom. Deduction, which develops
for itself the consequences of a mathematical definition,
is not a type of freedom but of necessity; although
this purely internal necessity is logically distinct from
external necessity or fatality, strictly so called.

In order to find scope for freedom, without abandon-


1 68 Contingency of the Laws of Nature

. ing the necessity of the laws of nature, would it be
sufficient to consider the world given in experience as
a pure phenomenon, in which being would in no way
be involved ? Is it a matter of indifference to hand
over to necessity, at such a cost, the world in which
we are living ?

This doctrine is certainly less opposed to freedom
than the former one, in which being was not really
distinct from phenomena. As it posits an intelligible
world apart from the sensible world ; as this world,
which is that of being per se^ is devoid of laws that
have no meaning except when applied to phenomena,
the doctrine in question would appear to set up in this
higher world the very freedom it eliminates from the
lower. In this way, freedom and necessity are
mutually reconciled ; being is free in the absolute, and
the order of its manifestations is necessary. As, more-
over, there is no phenomeiK>n given in experience
which does not correspond to some act of being, we
nowhere find necessity which is not added on to
freedom. No doubt, from one aspect, everything is
necessary, but from another, everything is free. More
than this : as necessity is absolute, on the side of
phenomena, so freedom is infinite, on the side of
beings. In this reconciliation, then, neither freedom
nor necessity is diminished.

Is it really possible so far to reconcile freedom with
necessity ?

The sensible world being considered, according to

this doctrine, as the phenomenon, symbol, expression


Conclusion 1 69

of the intelligible world, the same necessity that links
phenomena together also links together the acts of
being. Consequently, in a human life, there could be
no one internal determination which would not neces-
sarily be linked to all the rest. A single action deter-
mines the entire conduct. Each man's character, the
series of his mental determinations, forms a system
wherein appeal is made to each part by the whole. It
would be wrong to say that such or such an action of
ours is free ; given our previous life, it can be no other
than it is. That which is free is solely the creation of
our character, or the system of inner acts exhibited by
the network, so to speak, of our external feelings. Our
freedom spends itself in a single act ; its work is a
whole no part of which can be changed. A strange
doctrine, one that regards change of life, ameliora-
tion or perversion, repentance, conquests of self,
struggles between good and evil, as but the necessary
events of a drama the issue of which has been decided
upon beforehand !

But it is still a delusion to believe that, in this
doctrine, the issue, or at all events the general idea of
our actions, remains under our control. If the supra-
sensible actions of each of us are necessarily linked to
one another, they are linked in the same way to the
suprasensible actions of other beings, the inner aspect
of other phenomena. The same reasoning that sets
up the necessary correlation of all the determinations
of one and the same will, sets up the necessary correla-
tion of all th6 systems of voluntary determinations.


170 Contingency of the Laws of Nature

Our personal character is an indispensable element of
the intelligible world ; it cannot be detached therefrom,
cannot modify itself, without breaking the unity and
harmony of the whole. In its existence and nature,
the act which creates our moral life is an inevitable
consequence of the acts of all other wills.

Moreover, it would be useless to allege that, even
though we can make no change in the physical and
psychological phenomena, at all events we can will
them in such or such a spirit, and that, in this purely
formal and metaphysical sense, our intentions remain
free. This hypothesis would take away the entire
purpose of the existence of the sensible world, since
our intentions have only ideas for their object, and,
from the point of view under consideration, the objec-
tivity of these ideas would be indifferent to ^morality.
Furthermore, this hypothesis, by refusing to the world
of facts all possibility of expressing the moral side of
actions, would in a way deprive it of the part it plays
as a phenomenon of the metaphysical world, since the
moral element is in all probability the essence of the
metaphysical worldr is this very world itself. Hence
this hypothesis would prevent us from passing any
moral judgment either on others or on ourselves. It
would place morality in a sphere inaccessible to human
consciousness. In a word, by removing from the, will
everything not previously comprised in the system of
phenomena, it would regard its own perfection as con-
sisting not in dominating things, but in conforming to
them and making itself of no account.


Conclusion 171

Upon the whole, in this doctrine there is super-
posed on a world of phenomena in which all
things are necessarily linked together, a world of
actions in which also all things are necessarily
linked together. For particular beings, then, there
can be no personal freedom. There exists nothing
except a free being, and everything that is not
this supreme being is absorbed in the system of its
determinations.

But is this being itself really free ?

Undoubtedly it has been able to create or refrain
from creating, to choose one world rather than another.
And yet its choice has been subjected to the following
restriction : that it must deal only with a world in
which everything is linked together, in which every-
thing is reduced to logical unity. Again, the act of
this being is one and immutable ; it is forbidden to
make any special intervention in the production of
phenomena. Its very work is henceforth enjoined
upon it as "an inexorable fate.

The reason, then, that the doctrine of reconciliation
admits of a limitless freedom, is that by setting it in
regions so lofty, so far removed from things, its
activity is lost in sheer emptiness.

Such are not the consequences of the doctrine of
contingency. This doctrine does more than throw
open to freedom, apart from the world, a field that is
infinite, though void of objects which it can contact.
It shatters the postulate which makes inconceivable
the intervention of freedom in the field of phenomena,


172 Contingency of the Laws of Nature

the maxim which states that nothing is ever lost and
nothing created. It shows that this postulate, if
admitted absolutely, would bring into being a purely
abstract science. Even in the details of the world, it
reveals marks of creation and change. Thus it lends
itself to the conception of a freedom coming down
from suprasensible regions to mingle with phenomena
and direct them along unforeseen paths.

Hence, freedom does not meet with the fate of the
poet whom Plato crowned with a wreath of flowers,
though he banished him from his Republic.

God is not only the creator of the world : He is
also its providence and watches over the details as
well as over the whole.

Mankind is not only possessed of a collective
freedom : human societies also possess a freedom of
their own ; and within these societies even individuals
dispose of their persons. In a word, the individual
is not only the creator of his character, he can also
intervene in the events of his life and change their
course ; every moment he can strengthen his acquired
tendencies or endeavour to modify them.

In his relations with the world, man is not a
spectator, compelled to maintain things just as they
happen of necessity ; he can act, set his stamp on
matter, make use of the laws of nature to create works
that transcend nature. His superiority over things is
not a mere figure, an illusion born of ignorance, the
barren consciousness of a higher value : it finds
expression in an effective rule over other beings, in


Conclusion 173

the power to mould them, more or less, according to
and even by virtue of his ideas.

Hence, external acts, while they are not the whole
of man and are not equivalent to the soul itself, that
model which matter is incapable of imitating, may at
all events be a manifestation, a more or less faithful
interpretation of the intention of the will, and give
experimental support to moral judgments. And, if the
order of things can be modified contingently, in order
to be good it will not be sufficient to have conceived,
desired, and willed the good : it will be necessary to
have acted, or at all events tried to act ; for the moral
consciousness regards possible good as obligatory.

Such are the metaphysical objects which the doctrine
of contingency makes possible ; consequently, this
doctrine would seem to be propitious to the beliefs of
human consciousness. Of itself, however, it is power-
less to exalt these possibilities into realities, because
freedom, which is its basis, and of which the contin-
gency of things is here regarded as the outer sign, is
not and cannot be, either directly or indirectly, given
or set forth in experience. Experience apprehends
only things actually realised. Now, we are here
dealing with a creative power, prior to action.

And yet experience itself, by proving the contingent
character of everything it brings within our knowledge
and leaving this contingency unexplained, invites us to
discover if there may not be some other source of know-
ledge, capable of supplying us with the reason of this
contingency. By showing us that the different parts


174 Contingency of the Laws of Nature

of the world, although contingent in their existence and
laws, manifest a certain order which gains in beauty what
it loses in uniformity, experience suggests to us the
superior nature of the beings revealed to our senses by
their manifestations. Finally, as these superior beings,
if their intervention is to explain the contingency of
phenomena, must not live apart, without direct relation
to the world of experience, or without intervening,
more or less frequently, in the course of things, but
must be the immediate authors of each phenomenon,
devoid, in short, of all real dependence on concomitant
phenomena, it is impossible to admit that knowledge
of the world, as given by the senses and the under-
standing, i.e. knowledge of phenomena and laws, ex-
clusive of generating causes, can ever be self-sufficient.
The senses show us changes but do not explain
them. The understanding reveals to us the conserva-
tion of certain forms and modes of action through
these changes, and explains the latter by the former.
The purely relative character, however, of this perma-
nence prevents us from seeing, in the forms and modes
of action in which it is manifested, the principles of
things themselves, i,e. of causes strictly so called, as
well as of essences and laws. It appears to devolve
upon metaphysics to fill up the void which the philo-
sophy of nature has left, by trying to discover if it
might not be possible for man to know, by some
other path than that of experience, not essences and
laws, but true causes endowed both with a faculty
of change and with one of permanence.


Conclusion 175

To know things in the order of their creation, would
be to know them in God ; for a cause can only be
recognised as such if connected by a link of participa-
tion to the first cause. If the series of causes has no
limit there are no true causes ; activity and passivity
in all things have the same right of existence ; the one
no more than the other is the absolute foundation of
being. But can the mind attain to this supreme
essence ?

It may be said that the positive sciences, through
the study of phenomena, are even now seeking God,
for they try to find the first principle of things. The
various concepts to which we attempt to reduce all
that is given in experience are, in a sense, nothing
else than definitions of God.

It would be most rash, for the purpose of explaining
the universe, to attempt to dispense with all postulates,
and identify God with absolute necessity which pre-
supposes nothing previous to itself. This idea, which
after all is practically interchangeable with that of non-
entity, is so meaningless that it explains nothing.
We must resign ourselves to the introduction of an
inexplicable principle in the idea of God ; and this
principle, if it is to be fertile, must be synthetical. In
any case, we should like to reduce to a minimum what
is taken for granted, and an attempt has been made to
define God as ** Being" or **the supreme genus."
These concepts, however, though they do explain
something, are still far tod inadequate to explain the
universe. We think we take the unfathomable


176 Contingency of the Laws of Nature

sufficiently into consideration by attributing to God,
as irreducible elements, extension and force, i.e. by
identifying Him with matter. But matter is still
powerless to explain everything. To add to these
attributes, as new postulates, the physical and chemical
forces, human life and even human consciousness, is
doubtless to obtain an increasingly wider idea of God,
and therefore an increasingly fertile one ; but this is
still not the conception of a God capable of explain-
ing everything ; for the nature and laws of bodies, of
living beings and of human consciousness, are not
immutable and do not, of themselves, account for the
changes which they admit Are we to imagine, as
final postulate, an irreducible synthesis which would
comprise not only all the essential attributes of things
known but also all those of things unknown and of
things possible ? Such a synthesis would be an arbi-
trary conception, for there is no reason why there
should be any term to the scale of attributes. The
syntheses which, like those in which science culmin-
ates, are made up of the hierarchical organisation of
a multiplicity, may be indefinitely complicated without
ever reaching a final form. Besides, these formulae
will never explain everything, for they cannot be ex-
plained themselves, but are simply given or presented
by observation and abstraction, and yet, as being
complex and contingent, they xall for explanation.

And so the positive sciences would attempt in vain
to apprehend the divine essence or ultimate reason of
things. This essence does not consist of a synthesis


Conclusion 177

of attributes, however rich it is supposed to be. There
enters into the concept of perfection not only an idea
of richness, and plenitude, wherein it is infinitely far
removed from indeterminate quantity, but also one of
unity, completion, and absoluteness, wherein it is wholly
distinct from the richest and most harmonious synthesis.

Neither experience, nor any logical elaboration of
experience, could supply the true idea of God. But is
the world, as given in experience, the whole of reality?

It is worthy of note that the concept of necessity or
of absolute existence, which is, as it were, the form of
the understanding, does not find its exact application
in the given world, so that the understanding cannot
govern science as it pleases, but must confine itself to
conserving the sensations and their connections, with-
out giving the character of absoluteness to the abstract
principles and concepts resulting from this very con-
servation. Is it likely that the idea of necessity,
inherent in the understanding, finds no legitimate
application ?

As we ascend the scale of beings, we see the
development of a principle which, in a sense, resembles
necessity : attraction for certain objects. The being
would seem to be led necessarily. It is not, however,
driven by something already realised, it is attracted by
a thing not yet given, and one which, perhaps, never
will be.

If we consider man, we find that he becomes

acquainted with necessity in a form even farther

removed from the conditions of experience : the form

12


178 Contingency of the Laws of Nature

of desire. He feels simultaneously that he should ^,ci 1
in a certain way and that he can act in another way. j

Relations of this kind are scientifically unintelligible,
and man would be led to consider them as illusions,
born of ignorance, had he no other point of view, as
regards things, than that of speculation. It would be
rash, however, from this point of view, to attempt to
comprehend all that is. The mode of knowledge
should be suited to the object to be known ; and, just
as, in order to see the sun, there is needed an organ
which, as it were, holds light, in the same way, to know
the relation between the sensible and the suprasensible,
there is needed a faculty for which both fact and idea,
sign and thing signified, cease to be radically distinct.
Man exhibits and becomes conscious of this faculty
when working for the realisation of an attractive or an
obligatory idea. Action, imparting its own virtue to
the intellect, introduces this latter to a higher .world,
of which the visible worlds were but the dead product.
On the one hand, it reveals to the intellect the reality
of power or of cause, as the creative and spontaneous
principle which exists before, during, and after its
manifestation. On the other hand, it shows the
intellect that this power cannot pass over into action
and be what it wills to be, unless connected, as with a
principle of life and perfection, so to speak, with an
end looked upon as necessary, i.e. as good, worthy to
be pursued and realised.

The concept of necessity, then, acquires a real value,
though in a new sense, if we reg^d the matter from


Conclusion 179

the practical point of view. It even becomes possible
to conceive the existence of an absolutely necessary
object, provided we admit, at the same time, the
existence of an absolute freedom capable of realising it.
Now, abandoning the external point of view where
things appear as fixed and limited realities, so that we
may fathom our deepest self and, if we can, apprehend
our being in its true origin, we find that freedom is
an infinite power. We are conscious of this power
every time we truly act. Our actions do not, cannot
realise it, and so we are not this power ourselves.
It exists, nevertheless, since it is the root of our
very being.

Thus, the understanding, through its category of
necessity, is the middle term between the world and
God : but we need a superior faculty to see in God
something other than an ideal possibility and to give
its true content to the abstract idea of necessity. This
faculty we find in reason, or the practical knowledge of
good. The moral life, in which it functions, appears
to us with ever greater clearness — the more we force
ourselves to practise it in all its purity and so become
better acquainted with its essence — ^as the effort of the
free being to realise an end which, in itself, absolutely
merits realisation. But how can we help believing
that this superior end, which imparts strength and light
to him who seeks it, is not itself a reality, the first of
realities ?

God is that being, of whose creative activity we are
conscious deep within ourselves, in all our efforts to


i8o Contingency of the Laws of Nature

draw nearer to Him. He is the one perfect and
necessary being.

In Him, power or freedom is infinite ; it is the
spring of His existence, which consequently is not sub-
ject to the constraint of fatality. The divine essence,
co-eternal with power, is actual perfection. It is
necessary with a practical necessity, i.e. it absolutely
merits realisation, and can be itself only if realised
freely. At the same time, it is immutable, because it
is realised completely; and, in these conditions, a
change could only mean a decline. In short, the state
that results from this excellent and immutable act, the
spontaneous product of infinite might, is one of
changeless felicity.

No one of these three natures precedes the others.
Each of them is absolute and primordial, and they
form but one.

God is the creator of the essence and existence of
beings. Moreover, it is His activity. His incessant
providence, that gives the higher forms the faculty of
employing the lower ones as instruments. Nor is
there any reason to regard a special providence as
more unworthy of Him than the creation of a manifold
and changing universe ?

The contingency shown in the hierarchy of the
general laws and forms of the world finds its explana-
tion in this doctrine of divine freedom.

And now, maj^^not a knowledge of tTie first cause
throw light on our knowledge of the lower beings ?

Human nature, the higher form of the creature, is


Conclusion i8i

not without analogy with divine nature. In feeling,
thought, and will, it possesses a sort of image or
symbol of the three aspects of divinity. The lower
beings, in their nature and progress, successively recall
the attributes of man after their own fashion. The
whole world, then, would seem to be a rough imitation
of divine being, a symbolical imitation, however, such
as is involved in the essence of the finite.

Is not God the supremely good and beautiful ?
And, if the beings of nature offer some analogy with
Him, does He not appear as their ideal, and not
simply as their creative cause ? Still, if each being in
nature has thus an ideal, in accordance with which it is
fashioned beforehand, though the ideal infinitely trans-
cends it, must there not exist in each of these beings a
spontaneous power greater than itself.^ Is it not in
conformity with divine goodness to summon all beings,
each according* to its own dignity, to do that which
is good, and also to instil in them that spontaneous
activity which is the indispensable condition thereof?

The progress of the events of life may be likened
unto a sea voyage. While the main concern of the
sailors is to avoid hidden reefs and come safe out of
storms, their efforts do not stop there. They have a
goal to reach, and, however circuitous the routes they
may have to traverse, they constantly aim for this
goal. To advance is not to avoid, more or less com-
pletely, the dangers along the track, it is to draw
nearer the goal. But though t;he sailors have a
mission, they also have the freedom of action neces-


1 82 Contingency of the Laws of Nature


'4.


for its accomplishment ; and those whose duty it
is more especially to steer the vessel are entrusted
with greater authority. Of course the power of these
men is nothing compared with the might of the ocean ;
but then, it is an intelligent and organised power ; it
is put into action at the right moment. By means of
a series of manoeuvres and contrivances which do not
appreciably change the outei; conditions, but are all
calculated to make use of them in view of the goal to
be attained, man succeeds in making the winds and
waves obey his will.

Similarly, it is not the sole end of the beings of
nature to continue in existence, amid the obstacles
surrounding them, and to yield to outer conditions :
they have an ideal to realise, and this ideal consists
in drawing nearer to God, in resembling Him^ each
after its kind. The ideal varies with the different
beings, since each has a special nature and is capable
of imitating God only in and through its own dis-
tinctive nature.

The perfection for which creatures were born en-
titles them to a certain degree of spontaneity, necessary
in order to transcend themselves. The higher the
mission of a being, t.e. the more its nature admits of
perfection, the wider is its liberty, the means of attain-
ing its end. Nor is it necessary that these liberties
should unsettle things in order that these latter may
give them effective help. The world is so arranged
that an imperceptible though appropriate intervention
may turn into auxiliaries the most hostile of forces.


Conclusion 183

This doctrine, applied to the diflferent forms of
being, seems as though it would explain, to the entire
exclusion of chance, the contingency which may be
manifested in their history.

There is for man an ideal, which the understanding
determines by placing the idea of human nature in
presence of the idea of God, and fashioning the former
in the likeness of the latter ; not, of course, simply by a
method of imitation but by one of interpretation, transla-
tion, symbolical equivalence ; for while the assigning of
a limit to human perfectibility is unwarranted, on the
other hand, it is contrary to the practical conditions of
amelioration to attempt to reach the end without pass-
ing through all the intermediary stages, one by one.

The perfection of will would be the goodness and
love that reach the stage of self-sacrifice. The per-
fection of intellect would be the complete knowledge
that enables the course of things to be foreseen
and controlled. The perfection of sensibility would
be the happiness that accompanies the intelligent and
efficacious practice of love.

This ideal, the relation of which with the supreme
end, Le, with divine perfection, man clearly sees, thus
appears to him as a binding object of pursuit. It is
what he calls the good.

On the other hand, this same ideal, so far as it
participates in human nature, which is an imperfect
form, is not interchangeable with the good in itself ; it
is but a symbol, a translation into the language of
humanity ; it is a figure which has a meaning of


184 Contingency of the Laws of Nature

itself, independently of the higher meaning it contains.
From this second point of view, the ideal is what is
called the beautiful ; it acts .by attraction.

In order to accomplish obligatory good and follow
after the lure of the beautiful, man is endowed with
intelligent spontaneity, the highest form of which is
free will or the power to choose between good and
evil, between those actions that draw near to God and
those that separate from Him. Owing to this power,
man is able to influence the current of his desires, ideas,
and induced states, and transform them into ever higher
wills, thoughts, and sources of satisfaction. Thus, too,
he dominates nature, because his soul is capable of
acting on his body and his body on matter. He con-
sequently possesses ^both an inner and an outer freedom.

This free spontaneity, however, enamoured of its
acts, so to speak, as though they at first realised the
ideal, allows itself to be determined by them and is
transformed into a habit. This metamorphosis is the
product of metaphysical understanding, or the instinct
of immutability, which, gazing upon the . immutable
essence of God, attributes the form of the absolute to
that aspect of human operations which concerns the
divine ideal. This would be a legitimate position,
were the works of human spontaneity ever to show
forth all the perfection of which they are capable, were
the human ideal ever realised. Free spontaneity,
however, in the conditions of the actual world, can do
no more than increasingly approach this ideal. It
never reaches the end of its task.


Conclusion 185

Human activity, nevertheless, more and more de-
termined by the exclusive repetition of the same acts,
gradually degenerates into a blind, inevitable, and
uniform tendency, and produces phenomena whose
order of succession is perceptibly constant. Seen
from without, these phenomena appear to be nothing
but the expression of a positive law or a necessary
relation between objects of experience. We may then
attempt to systematise and explain all man's acts,
even those that come under the head of judgment and
moral consciousness, without considering the existence
of an intercurrent spontaneity. Statistics makes a
legitimate invasion of the ground left abandoned by
free will, and its conclusions are perceptibly confirmed
by facts when it operates over wide areas, because the
men who break through the thick layer of habit to
awake and exert their free will are few in number
compared with those who are swayed by habit. It is
the former, however, who are really the rulers of the
world : the mechanical activities of the many are but
the reactions of the impulse which the few have
initiated ; this, in a word, is why we cannot find two
historical periods exactly alike. The initial impulse,
imperceptible during a period which it determines in ,
every detail, is revealed to the observer who compares
together systems that have sprung from different
impulses. Those who simply go with the stream are
vaguely conscious, deep within their soul, of a power
to alter their course. If they attempt to exercise this
power, its reality will 'become manifest to their con-


1 86 Contingency of the Laws of Nature

sciousness; it will be so strengthened by the very
exercise as to produce effects that will baffle all
reckoning. Heredity and instinct, character and habit
cease to be absolutely inevitable laws when they are
found, in essence, to be no more than the reaction of
acts upon spontaneity. The very will that has created
for itself a habit can modify it in order to rise higher,
and also to descend again; it can keep its habits
active, so that they may become stepping-stones to
higher development, just as it can also forget itself in
passive habits which paralyse it more and more.

The uniformity of succession which characterises
the psychological laws is thus but one phase of human
activity. By increased energy, the soul can perfect
its habits, its character, its inmost nature. It would
deceive itself, however, if, in order thus to increase its
freedom of action, it found its point of support solely
in human nature or in 'the nature of the lower beings, if
it had no other basis than love of self, or adaptation to
unintelligent forces. The man who pursues nothing
but his interests is the slave of his own nature. The
man whose will is but the expression of outer in-
fluences is the slave of things. It is by going back to
the source of freedom that man is able to increase
his own freedom. Now, this source is perfection, a
practical end which demands a free agent. And so,
after all, it is by finding his point of support above
himself, in the idea of the end for which he was born,
that man will be able to rule both his own nature and
the world in which he lives.


Conclusion 187

But this end set before human nature is not a simple
idea, of which man has no visible expression before
his eyes. It Bnds a beginning of its realisation in
organised societies, wherein laws, custom, and public
sentiment bestow honour upon virtue and cast a
stigma upon moral abasement It is by living for
society, then, and connecting himself with it, that man,
in practical life, can develop and increase his freedom.
Society is the visible support of human freedom.

There are two ways, however, of comprehending
the social bond. It may be a purely external bond,
founded on mutual distrust and on more or less
learned combinations : in this case, the social form
possesses rather a coercive than an educative influence.
But it may also be an internal and direct bond be-
tween wills themselves, a reciprocity of confidence and
devotion. Now, it is more particularly when thus
realised that the social form is capable of contributing
powerfully to the moral improvement of man. Do we
not find that example, by appealing direct to the will
and neglecting the reason, acts far more surely and
convincingly than the most conclusive of proofs.^
Life cannot be a product of mechanical forces.

Spontaneously subordinated to society, human free-
dom effectively works on nature and the soul. It
represses those egoistic passions which take away a
man's self-possession. It co-ordinates the desires and
thoughts, between which an inner struggle would rage,
were not an end, higher than individual good, set
before them. Man is conscious of becoming better


i


1 88 Contingency of the Laws of Nature

when he works for the good of his fellow-beings. At
the same time, his dominion over nature increases.
By convergence of effort and by science, man in-
creasingly transforms obstacles into instruments ; and,
whilst doing so, he attributes new beauties to these
lower beings. While powerless to create forces
analogous to those of nature, he is able, by a series
of mysterious operations, the possibility of which is
doubtless connected with the inner analogy of beings,
to extend into matter the aspiration of his soul towards
the ideal, and not only to bring about a reconciliation
between the lower beings and himself but also -to
awaken in them such a degree of progress as nature
could not have eflfected.

Now, from the distinctively human standpoint of
improvement, man needs to possess such dominion
over the world. The influence of the body and of
external things upon his affections, desires, and
thoughts is so profound, that he really modifies his
moral nature only by the aid of these lower powers.
He must recede from condition to condition and
modify psychological phenomena, some by chemical
and physical, others by mechanical phenomena: the
work of regeneration will be all the more permanent
if it be set up on stronger foundations. For instance,
if we would check a flood, we do not simply protect
the threatened plains by means of dykes, we go back
to the very source of the stream and divert its course.

The human race is powerful when displaying the
faculty of union and harmony, of moral and spon-


Conclusion 189

taneous hierarchy witU which it is endowed in superior
measure. Power appertains to the union of soul with
soul. It is because the living world, apparently so
frail, possesses, in organisation, an ibauchcy so to
speak, of this harmony, that it bends to its own
purposes the inorganic world, over which reign uni-
formity, division, and isolation. And, in the human
person, it is because the psychic powers are reduced
to unity by consciousness that the soul is mistress
of the body, wherein ea9h organ claims a separate
life. It is because the will is subordinated to an end,
which in turn communicates to it its own unity, that
it is able to rule over the passions, each of which
would fain absorb all the forces of the soul, and which,
consequently, oppose and weaken one another. In
short it is because society is a moral hierarchy and so
possesses superior unity, that it is capable of extending
the power of man and of increasing indefinitely, so to
speak, his rule over things and over himself.

And, while man is powerful by means of society
which co-ordinates his forces, on the other hand, the
more he isolates himself, devoting his life to a lower
object, the less becomes his inner and outer freedom.
In the depths of his own nature he encounters passions
which sway him in every direction and which he has
no longer the power to overcome. Important aids so
long aS; they were kept in subordination, they reduce
man to a state of powerlessness when they struggle to
obtain possession of him. Human nature bears within
itself the signs of a higher destination or purpose than


190 Contingency of the Laws of Nature

the individual life. Similarly, the isolated individual is
powerless in the presence of nature. This latter regains
its sway, once man abdicates the privilege of a loftier
harmony which had raised him above nature.

If man really possesses in free will an image of
divine freedom, we cannot wonder that the order of
psychological phenomena shows some degree of con-
tingency. The contingent element is the exterior
effect of progress or of moral decadence, of the inter-
vention of freedom for the purpose of modifying a
habit, whether good or bad The fixed laws, on the
other hand, are the expression of whatsoever element
the soul has passed on to habit

Is the doctrine of spontaneity, so plausible in things
that concern man, inapplicable to beings devoid of
consciousness ?

Undoubtedly these beings cannot possess that higher
form of spontaneity which is called free will, and
which consists in pursuing distant ends, while con-
scious, when making one decision, of the power to
make some other. Undoubtedly also it is impossible
to assign how far spontaneity may distinctively be
attributed to them, and how far it differs from the
creative activity of God. But then, on the other hand,
would the lower beings really be beings at all, if they
existed only as phenomena ; if they were nothing in "
themselves.^ When we find in ourselves that the
physiological and physical phenomena correspond to
inner activities not wholly devoid of analogy with our
own soul, since they either help or thwart it, why not


Conclusion 191

admit the existence of an inner power wherever we
see a phenomenon?

The lower forms are, like man, susceptible of im-
provement, to a certain extent at least. They also
have an ideal : that of resembling, in their own way,
the higher forms ; in a word, of resembling God Him-
self. How can nature and mountains, sea and sky,
resemble man ? Poets know that they do, and so they
translate into human language the mysterious har-
monies of things. Moreover, it is not by effecting a
metamorphosis, by changing their nature, that the
lower beings can thus express increasingly lofty ideas.
The radical metamorphosis of a natural kingdom
would be such a revolution as would deprive the
universe of one of its ornaments, one of its pillars, so
to speak. Besides, instead of becoming more beautiful,
a lower being becomes more ugly when it imitates the
aspect of a higher one without interpreting it according
to its own powers. The symbol is an object of "admira-
tion only if its form is natural, as well as expressive.
Thus, there is a particular ideal for every being in nature.

In the descending series of the lower forms, the
ideal, or degree of perfection compatible with the
nature of beings, becomes farther and farther removed
from absolute perfection, and therefore its realisation
appears less and less indispensable ; hence, it is no
longer the obligatory good, it is the beautiful, a symbol
whose mysterious meaning becomes increasingly lost,
whose visible side develops, and which, consequently,
exercises an ever more immediate attraction.


192 Contingency of the Laws of Nature

Because beings of every stage have an ideal to
pursue, there must exist in all of them a degree of
spontaneity, a power of change, proportioned to the
nature and value of this ideal. The spontaneity of
the lower beings, however blind and incapable of
mediate tendencies, submits far more than does that
of man to the reaction from the very changes it
generates; it is determined, limited, absorbed in things
to an extent of which human habit gives but a faint
idea. Animal instinct, life, physical and mechanical
forces are, as it were, habits that have penetrated
more and more deeply into the spontaneity of being.
Hence, these habits have become almost unconquer-
able. Seen from without, they appear as necessary
laws. Still, this fatality is not of the essence of being;
it is accidental to it. This is why the intervention
of the higher spontaneities, or perhaps the direct
influence of the ideal, is capable of drawing out of
their state of torpor the most imperfect of creatures,
and arousing their power of action.

On the one hand, then, there is for all beings an
ideal, a model, perfect of its kind, which the under-
standing adjusts, transfiguring the natural essences by
the aid of a divine ray ; on the other hand, there is in
all beings a^ spontaneity adapted to the pursuit of this
ideal.

Thus in every department of being essences and
laws present two aspects.

In the physiological world, life cannot be reduced to
a number of observable functions. At bottom, it is an


Conclusion 193

inner power, tending to produce, within the heart of
each species, the forms not only most useful to the
beings themselves but also the most beautiful of which
that particular species admits.

In the physical world, properties are the true
potentialities of a change of state, of combination
and decomposition, tending to produce not only the
most permanent, but also the most beautiful forms
that the nature of the bodies will allow.

In the mechanical world, force is not only the ex-
pression of relations observable between movements,
it is also a practical pQtentiality, tending to produce
the beautiful by translating it into the language of
extension, figure, symmetry, and motion.

Thus, the principles of physiology, physics, and
mathematics have manifestly not only a material sense
and an origin a posteriori ; they have also an aesthetic
sense, and from this point of view an origin a priori.

In short, it may be that spontaneity is not wholly
absent even in the abstract forms of being.

Logical order, or the subordination of facts to

notion, holds concealed, it may be, the spontaneous

activity of inner reason or the final cause, the notion

of which is evidently nothing else than the logical sign.

Individuals thus have their reason for existence in

the species. Although relatively motionless, type,

or the final cause, possesses the spontaneity necessary

for the pursuit of the most beautiful forms. Hence,

the experimental logical laws are, after all, based

upon aesthetic principles a priori.

13
