The Boy of Bilson (1622)
=========================
R. B. (Richard Baddeley). The boy of Bilson: or, A true discouery of the late notorious impostures of certaine Romish priests in their pretended exorcisme — the exposure of William Perry's feigned possession and the priests' exorcism fraud, with the boy's confession (1620). Text: 1622 edition, via EarlyPrint (non-TCP source). Public Domain.

The boy of Bilson: or, A true
discouery of the late notorious
impostures of certaine Romish
priests in their pretended
exorcisme, or expulsion of the
Diuell out of a young boy, named
William Perry, sonne of Thomas
Perry of Bilson, in the county of
Staﬀord, yeoman Vpon which
occasion, hereunto is premitted a
briefe theologicall discourse, by
way of caution, for the more easie
discerning of such Romish spirits;
and iudging of their false
pretences, both in this and the
like practices.

The boy of Bilson: or, A true
discouery of the late notorious
impostures of certaine Romish
priests in their pretended
exorcisme, or expulsion of the
Diuell out of a young boy,
named William Perry, sonne of
Thomas Perry of Bilson, in the
county of Staﬀord, yeoman Vpon
which occasion, hereunto is
premitted a briefe theologicall
discourse, by way of caution, for
the more easie discerning of
such Romish spirits; and iudging
of their false pretences, both in
this and the like practices.
Table of contents
Title page

TO THE CHRISTIAN READER.
THE GENERAL HEADS of this Book.
Faults escaped in some Copies.
1. A DISCOURSE CONCERNING Popish Exorcizing.
1.1. The rst Advertisement; Against a false Proposition of the
Romanists, who make the use of Miracles to be a perpetual and
necessary note of the Catholic Church.
1.2. The second Advertisement; Showing the false Assumption of the
Romanists, in challenging to themselves the power of Miracles, as a
perpetual gift peculiarly belonging to their Roman Church.
1.3. The third Advertisement; Showing that it hath been a custom
among Romish Priests, willingly to deceive the people by counterfeit
Acts and Reports.
1.4. The fourth Advertisement; Showing, that Romish Priests haue
thought it lawful for them, to delude men by forged Miracles, and
feigned Relations or Reports, under some religious pretences.
1.5. The ft Advertisement; Showing the falsehood of their former
Presumption: and proving, that no pretext of good intention, or
purpose whatsoever, can justify any lying wonder, or yet any false
Report thereaf.
1.6. The sixth Advertisement; Discovering their doctrine of Mental
Reservation, which we may justly suspect to be the art of concealing
their deceits, whensoever they abuse men by their false reports,
1.7. The seventh Advertisement; Showing that Mental reservation is
no better than lewd lying.
1.8. The eight Advertisement; Showing the means to discern false
Miracles, lie understanding the properties of those that are true.
1.9. The ninth Advertisement; Showing the falsehood of such
Romish practices; because they are not done by a transcendent power.
1.10. The tenth Advertisement; Showing (for the better discerning of
false Miracles) the II. and III. Properties, which is, to be done
Presently and Perfectly.

1.11. The eleventh Advertisement; Showing the last note of false
Miracles, by want of the fourth property of true works, to wit,
religious Sincerity without Superstition.
1.12. The twelfth Advertisement; Showing their Superstition by their
forms.
1.13. The thirteenth Advertisement; Showing their second point of
Superstition, in respect of the ordinary instruments of working,
which in these latter times are Images.
1.14. The fourteenth Advertisement; Showing the second point of
their Superstition, by their impious and abominable Consultation
with Devils in their Exorcisms, for resolution in points of Religion.
1.14.1. That they use to consult with Devils about doctrinal
points in Religion.
1.15. The fteenth Advertisement; Showing the falsity of their
Reasons, for their consulting with Devils, by their Exorcisms, in
questions of Religion.
1.15.1. The particular Confutation of their rst Reason,
whereby they use to prove the lawfulness of consulting with
Devils, by the manner of Adjuration; which they collect from
the example of Christ against the Devil.
1.16. The sixteenth Advertisement. Showing the falsebood of their
second Reason, for the proofa of their power of Adjuration, to
constrain the Devil to speak truth, taken from the Devils adjuring of
Christ; with the particular confuration thereof.
1.17. The seventeenth Advertisement. Showing their second ground,
taken from an Oath, by virtue of the band of an Oath of Stipulation
(the Priests imposing a formal Oath upon the Devil, ) and the
falsehood thereof.
1.18. The eighteenth Advertisement. Showing the falsehood of this
piece of nice learning, in imposing a formal Oath of Stipulation upon
the Devil, and the impiety thereof, the Devil being no way capable of
a formal Oath.

1.19. The nineteenth Advertisement; Showing the Confutation of
their profession of consulting with Devils in general, by manifesting
the infatuation thereof.
1.20. The twentieth Advertisement; Showing the falsehood of their
doctrine, for consulting with Devils; rst from the examples of Christ,
and of his Disciples.
1.21. The one and twentieth Advertisement; Showing the falsehood
of the same doctrine, concerning consultation with Devils in
questions of Religion, by testimonies of Fathers, and necessary
Reasons.
1.22. The two and twentieth Advertisement, Showing the Reasons
which may be produced against this persuasion of the Devil; arising
aswell from the Cause itself, as from the Events.
1.22.1. Reasons of the rst kind.
1.23. The 23. and last Advertisement Is to demonstrate the Romish
falsehood, in Exorcizing, by the Events: which is particularly
exempli ed in a discovery of their Impostures, about the Boy of
Bilson; not inferior unto any of the rest of their pranks in this kind.
1.24. Hear we then the Priests speak.
2. THE EGREGIOUS CUNNING OF THE BOY OF Bilson, in
counterfeiting himself to be bewitched, and possessed of the devil.
2.1. The means of discovering his dissimulation.
2.2. THE FIRST EXAMINATION, AND CONFESSION OF
THE BOY OF BILSON, NAmed William Perry, taken before the
Reverend Father in God, Thomas L. Bishop of Coventry and
Lich eld, at Eccleshall Castle, 8. Octob. 1620. touching his
counterfeit practices, etc.
2.3. THE SECOND EXAMINATION, AND ANSWER of the said
William Perry, made unto certain other questions, which (upon just
and special presumptions) were propounded unto him by the
Reverend Father in God, THOMAS, Lord B. of Coventry and
Lich eld, taken at Eccleshall Castle, the 13. day of Octob. Anno
Dom. 1620.

2.4. THE BOY OF BILSON, his private and public
Acknowledgement, etc.
2.5. THE EXAMINATION AND ANSWER OF THOMAS
NECHILS of Nechils', in the County of Sta ord, Gentleman (a
Recusant) taken upon oath before the R. Reverend Father in God
THOMAS L. Bishop of Coventry and Lich eld, at Eccleshall Castle,
the 17. of Octob. Anno 1620. touching the aforementioned Relation
of the Priests, of their proceed with the Boy of Bilson.
Appendix A §

§
§
THE BOY OF BILSON: OR, A TRUE DISCOVERY OF THE
[Page 1b]
LATE NOTORIOUS IMPOSTURES OF CERTAIN ROMISH Priests in
their pretended Exorcism, or expulsion of the Devil out of a young Boy, named
WILLIAM PERRY, son of THOMAS PERRY of Bilson, in the County of
Sta ord, Yeoman.
Upon which occasion, hereunto is premitted A brief Theological Discourse, by
way of Caution, for the more easy discerning of such Romish spirits; and judging
of their false pretences, both in this and the like Practices.
2. Thes. 2.10, 11.
Because they received not the love of the truth, that they might be saved. For
this cause God shall send them strong delusion, that they should believe a lie.
AT LONDON, Imprinted by F. K. for William Barret. 1622.

TO THE CHRISTIAN READER.
BEing acquainted with the mind and purpose of the Author of this [Page 2b]
ensuing Treatise, and having thereunto added those other Pieces (unto which I
am no stranger, ) to make the Narration complete, as concerning the Boy of
Bilson: I thought it my duty, after much solicitation, to communicate the whole
in print; and so to make it iuris publici. And this (as I thought) these very times
did exact. For now the Popish Priests have so cauterized their consciences, and
rubbed their foreheads, as that they take delight, and blush not, daily to forge
and coin most monstrous * untruths; all to support
* Witness (among many others)
their drooping and dropping Cause. Since therefore their fresh Master-lye, touching
the supposed Apostasy of the late
their appetites are so well whetted and set on edge (by L. Bishop of London.
what * Stone we may easily guess, it being their due
* Perhaps the same that one of
reward, ) as that they make no bones of whatsoever is them hanged about the Boy's
neck. vid. pag. 63.
set before them; to stay their stomacks a while, let
them be chewing this bit, (which otherwise they shall
not now eschew, ) Vt quam falsa dicendo & scrthendo voluptatem ceperint,
eandem vera legendo & audiendo amittant.
Here then (good Reader) in the rst place thou hast a Treatise professedly
written for a Discovery of, and a Caution against the enueagling projects of
Romish Priests, chief in that one particular, viz. their pretended Priestly
Exorcizing and expolling of Devils out of bodies possessed. By which thou mayst
judge, whether these Mirabularies deserve not the reputation of the
[Page 3a]
varest Mountebanks of these times. Next follows, A faithful Relation (for so
they name it) made by these Priests, touching their proceed with the Boy: which
they did purposely write and disperse, ‘To the end (as Vide pag. 45.
they profess)that all indiﬀerent minds may magnify
and praise Almighty God, that hath left such power to men, etc. ’such (for sooth)
as they had, in Exorcizing and conjuring the Devil within that Boy, being their
supposed desperate Demoniac. Which glorious work of theirs when these

Roman Aruspices shall, at their next interview, recognize, Mirabor si non
riserint. And that so much the rather, after they have cie.
perused the Remain of this Book, in which the Event
and success of the whole business is truly related; and their formidable Mormo
proved no other than an Apish Cobalus. Whereby it will also come to pass that
these Catholic Gentlemen (for so they style themselues, albeit by their * outward
garb one would rather suspect than for Serning-men * See their descriptions in this
& attendants on such persons, nè quid gravius) shall Book. pag. 63.64. etc.
be so clearly convinced of palpable Quacksalving, as that a very mean Herald,
knowing the house they come of, may blazon their Arms; and so expose them
unto shame and laughter.
But I will not entertain thee (gentle Reader) with any longer parley in the
entrance, after that I shall put thee in mind of that sound advice, which an
Heathen Philosopher long since prescribed (but never so necessary as now, when
Popish impostures are so rife, ) viz. 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 Ipicharmus.
Which may be thus englished; Be wise, and be not
hasty to believe. which precious Amulet I commend unto thee, and All of us to
the rich mercy of our most gracious God.
Ryc. Baddeley.

THE GENERAL HEADS of this
Book.
I. A Discourse, by way of Caution, concerning Popish Exorcizing [Page 3b]
of unclean spirits. Pag. 1
II. A Relation made by certain Romish Priests, and by one of them
dispersed; wherein they magnify the power of their Exorcism over the devil,
in the Boy of Bilson. Pag. 41
III. A description of the admirable guile and cunning of that Boy, in
counterfeiting himself possessed of the devil. Pag. 55
IU. The means and manner used by the R. Reverend Father in God
THOMAS Lo. Bishop of Coventry and Lich eld, for discovering his
dissimulation. Pag. 56
V. The two examinations of the Boy, taken before the said Reverend Father;
together with his plain and direct Confession of the whole Complot and
Practice. Pag. 61, 69
VI The Success and event of all, showed in the Boys ( rst) private, and
(after) public Acknowledgement made before the whole County, in the
Summer-Assizes held at Sta ord this present year 1621. Pag. 72

Faults escaped in some Copies.
Pag. 14. lin. 2. read, will you so. p. 25. l. 11. r. the third point. p. 28. l. 14. [Page 4a]
r. Adjuration. p. 33. l. 6. r. to prove. Besides, mend the numbers of the Pages, in
the letters E. H. I.

1. A DISCOURSE CONCERNING
Popish Exorcizing.
A Miracle being (as Divine learning doth teach) a Work of
[Page 4b]
Omnipotency, far exceeding all natural power of any Creature, is the broad Seal
of Almighty God, for the con rmation of Truth: which whosoever shall dare to
counterfeit, must needs be guilty of no less than high Treason against the
supreme Majesty. Necessarily therefore will it concern, as in special those that
take upon them the O ce of working Miracles in these times, to fear and
tremble at such dangerous impiety; so also in general every Christian and
religious Soul to beware, that he be not circumvented by any forgery in this kind,
and thereby drawn to admire and esteem, as the ﬁnger of God, the lewd and
ridiculous jugglings of wretched men. For which end I have adventured to set
down certain Advertisements, whereby others may be reasonably directed how
to discover & avoid such kind of Popish delusions.
[Page 5a]
1.1. The ﬁrst Advertisement; Against a false
Proposition of the Romanists, who make the use of
Miracles to be a perpetual and necessary note of the
Catholic Church.
THe Proposition much insisted upon and pressed by Bellarmine, Coster,
Valentian, and other jesuites, is, that the use of Miracles is a necessary, perpetual,
and proﬁtable Character and Note of the true Church of Christ, aswell in these
Times as it was in the Days of the Apostles. This we are warranted to call a false
Proposition. First, because that Gift cannot be called perpetual, which ceased by
little and little; insomuch that Saint chrysostom and Chrysost. Aug.
Saint Augustine, could say of their own times (which
bordered near upon the Days of the Primitive Church) that diverse kind of
Apostolical Miracles were then ceased. How much less therefore can this Power

be expected in these latter Times, of which the Romanists own Bishop (who
Rued in the days of King Henry the eight, and whom they have magni ed with
the Title of a Martyr, that is, a Witness of the Truth) did avouch, saying, The
promise of God touching Miracles, God would not have Ich. Roﬀens. Episcop. cor. Luth.
de Capt. Bab. c. 10.
to be perpetual in his Church.
Secondly, if they were necessary (especially) for the con rmation of the
Doctrines of Faith, as the Romish Priests do in their Exorcisms profess; then
would not S. Gregory, the rst and greatest Pope of that name, have held them
necessary only for the rst begetting, breeding, and nourcing of the
[Page 5b]
Church: Even as (saith he) the watering of plants is
Greg. hom. 49. in evang.
necessary, when they are ﬁrst planted, which, after they
be come to growth, will be of no use. Which sentence of S. Gregory, did
peradventure draw the like Assertion from the quill of the jesuit Delrio, saying
(although somewhat mincing it) For the establishing Delrio Ics. Disq. Mag. Tem. 2. l.
of the Faith, there is now little necessity of Miracles, or 4.
none at all. But more thorrowly their said Bishop, who holdeth them not
necessary, but for the time of the birth and breeding of the Church. Whereunto
(to forbear any further search after Witnesses) their
Roﬀens. sup.
jesuit Acosta accordeth; There being a diﬀerence (saith Acosta Ies. de salut. judor. l. 2. c.
he) between the primitive Times and these Days
〈◊ 〉
wherein we live, for what need we any conﬁrmation by
Miracles? So he.
Thirdly, touching the proﬁtableness of Miratles in the latter Ages of the World,
Saint chrysostom durst say, that it is more proﬁtable to want them; it being a
matter of greater worthiness to believe without them.
Chrysost. as he is alleged by
Acosta. ibid. c. 2.
Yea, their own Preacher, entering into this
contemplation, taught publicly, that Miracles now
Stella in Lue. 11
would be rather an hindrance unto Faith. And I
cannot believe he spoke without book, seeing that our Saviour Christ (as Saint
Augustine observeth) hath given us a caution, against Aug. Tract. 13. in loh. 3.
these Miracle-mongers, willing us to take heed that we Mar. 13.5.

be not deceived. Whereof their jesuit will give us some reason, even, Because that
in the time of Antichrist it will be hard to discern true Acosta Ies. de temp. noviss. l. 2. c.
Miracles from false. Where then shall a Christian cast 19
Anchor in so great danger of seducement by Antichristian Miracles? the true
answer to this will give us full satisfaction; and this we have confessed [Page 6a]
by the mouth of the same jesuit, as absolutely as any Protestant can profess. Our
strongest hold (saith he) must be the holy Scriptures,
Acosla ibid. l. 1. cap. 10.
which are of more strength than any Miracles: nor can
the Servant of Christ have a stronger Fort against the power of Antichrist. Which
Tenet, concerning the security of Christians by Scriptures, was anciently held
before the days of Antichrist, as we read in the ancient Author of the work,
passing under the name of S. chrysostom: True
Hom. 49. in Matth.
Christians (saith he) were discerned in former times by
Miracles, but now by Scriptures. This is the Fort which will defend us, and
therefore we above all things ought to defend it.

1.2. The second Advertisement; Showing the false
Assumption of the Romanists, in challenging to
themselves the power of Miracles, as a perpetual gift
peculiarly belonging to their Roman Church.
ALthough the jesuit Turselline talketh and boasteth of many marvelous
Miracles, daily done in Italy, Which (as he saith) are Hist. Domus Lauret.
no less glorious than those miracles in the days of old:
yet doubt we not to call this Assumption a merely vain presumption. For if we
require them to show us in their Church the power of Prophecy, they might take
(I think) a Lantern to seek throughout all Italy, and not nd any one whom they
can point out to be professedly a Prophet. If we inquire after the gift of [Page 6b]
Tongues, to speak strange languages, where can they show this? Miracles (saith
the Apostle) are for unbelievers, or In dels: and no
1. Cor. 14.22.
Miracle more necessary for the conversion of In dels
in the Indies than to be able to speak the languages of those Nations, because

Faith cometh by hearing, and hearing of a known
Rom. 10.17. 1. Cor. 14.
language. Yet we know that the Priests, who daily
labour for the conversion of those In dels, confess that they are glad to labour
and study Months and Years, to learn the languages of those Countries.
But, to speak more generally, How can this be said to be a perpetual Badge of the
Roman Church, whereof a famous Bishop (living but about fourscore years
since) being posed by Luther, to show in all Europe where there was any that
could profess himself endowed with that Gift; answered plainly, and without
any Parable (speaking of the power of Miracles) Cuius Roﬀens. in Luth. de Capt.
Babyl. cap. 11.
(saith he) eﬀectum nunc nullum cernimus: Whereof
we see no eﬀect in our days.
When we further insist, and ask, concerning this great sign of the ordinary work
of Miracles, where this Star doth appear? surely, not at their jerusalem, the City
of Rome; nor yet in Europe, their jury, for they send us to seek it in the
newfound World, in the conversion of Pagans; professing (as it may seem) and
that justly with their Espencaeus, that Miracles are no Espen. in 2. Tim. 3
where necessary, but among Inﬁdels. Here then, if any
where, we are to seek it, to wit, in the Indies; where behold Bellarmine, [Page 7a]
and their other Magis do see it rising (as it were) in the East-Indies, and setting in
the West-Indies. No question therefore, but we are like to nd it in those Indies;
that which is their ordinary Assumption.
For confutation whereof we need not to travel so far, to try this; two famous
jesuites, who have been most conversant there, and taken (as is said) most pains
for the converting of In dels to the Faith of Christ, come unto us by their
Books, and tell us, the one, that this Assumption is false, the other, though
avouched by them, yet not saying that it is true. For of the East Indies, their
jesuit Acosta saith asseverantly; Prodigia nulla
Acosta Ics. de salute Indor. l. 4.
facimus, signa nulla edimus: We work no Wonders,
we show no Miracles. In the West Indies, who more resident than their jesuite
Xavier, whom they report to have been their Thaumaturgus, and to have healed

lame, dumb, deaf, blind, yea and to have raised the
Ballar. l. 4. de Not is Eccles. c.
dead to life. Notwithstanding, when we consult with 14.
Francis Xavier himself, in his Volume of Epislles, directed unto the Fathers of his
own Society, unto Cardinals, and others of best esteem; he maketh no mention
there of these miraculous works. Which we doubt not but he would have done,
if any such Acts had been wrought. For we may not think that jesuites would
profess more modesty, in this kind, than the holy Apostles of Christ, who, to the
glory of God, and comfort of his Church, did profess to reveal and report
(speaking of their Miracles) Magnalia Dei; The wondrous works of God.
Therefore we take this his not verifying the [Page 7b] Act. 2.11.
report of his Miracles, so commonly suggested, and so
greedily entertained by others, to amount to no less than the denial of them to
be true.
Let me add unto Francis Xavier their Francis de Victoria, Professor of Divinity
in Spain, who discussing this great point, whether
Fra. de Vict. Relect. 5. sect. 2.
that the Doctrine of Christ were so su ciently
revealed unto the In dels of these times, by Word, or Miracles, that they, which
would not be converted, mightiustly be condemned of so unpardonable
obstinacy, as to deserve to be persecuted by Sword; after his deliberate and
earnest search to satisfy himself and others in this, answereth (concerning
Miracles) Signa nulla audio: I hear of no Miracles.

1.3. The third Advertisement; Showing that it hath been
a custom among Romish Priests, willingly to deceive the
people by counterfeit Acts and Reports.
HOw shall this be news to Any, who hath been acquainted with some of their
own Authors? One confessing, that People are
Lyrain Dam.
deceived by false miracles, devised by Priests, and such
as adhere unto them. A second, remembering (as he
Melchior Canus loc. Theol.
himself saith) with grief some Historians, abusing the

credulity of the people, by relating the miracles of Saints. A third inveighing
against the prodigality of some vain Reports of false miracles. A fourth, and also a
ft partly scorning, and partly abhorring
[Page 8a] Eras. ante lib. Confess. Aug.
their fabulous relations, and vain forgeries of Miracles. Agrippa de Vanit. scient. Viucs
These confessions may serve for the present.
in Aug. de Civit. Dei, l. 22. c. 8.
We need not be inquisitive into Examples fetcth from other Countries,
concerning the juggling tricks of the Friars of former times, which have been
detected to their shame; nor yet of a late * Admirable * Histoire admirable de la
possession & conversion d'vne
History (as they call it) of notable Exorcisms,
Penitent, seduite par un
performed at Saint Baume in France, which will
Magicien, etc. conduit a la S.
Baume poury estre exorcizee,
hereafter bewray itself by its own contradictions:
l'An 1610. soubz l'autorite du
because our own half Isle, even little England, will be R.P. F. Sebaslien Michaelis,
Prieur de covent Royal de la S.
found to abound as much with variety of false
a S. Maximin, etc.
Miracles, as Africa with Monsters. For here hath been Magdaleine
A la Reyne Regente, Paris 1613.
seen a Maid with a miraculous Apron, casting little
avec priuilege du Roy. It was
ashes of lightning in the dark (for this also was a work translated into English,
according to the original Copy,
of darkness) and easily done by an arti cial tincture of by W.B. and printed, Anno
1613. which Edition is here after
Sulphur. Not long after (which the World gazed at)
observed. Printed, Anno Domini
they produced the Image of Garnet the jesuite in a
1603.
straw: wherein there was nothing more wonderful,
than that any should account it miraculous, it being (by the confession, upon
oath, of such Recusants as had kept it) no more like Garnets' face than any other
man's; and so little exceeding the power of man (therefore no Miracle, ) as that a
young youth addicted to the art of limbing did then draw (and that more
perfectly) a number of such like, in the husks of ears of Wheat, in one day.
The Book entitled, A Declaration of egregious Impostures practised by Romish
Priests, setteth forth whole Pageants of counterfeit Exorcisms; one upon Sara
Williams, another upon her sister, Friswood Williams, a third upon [Page 8b]
Anne Smith, a fourth upon Richard Maine Gentleman, a ft upon one
Marwood, the servant of that Babington, who was executed for treason. The
Priests, who are reckoned as Agents in these feats, are named to have been

Master Dibdaile, Master Sherwood, Master Cornelius, Master Stamp, Master
edmond's, alias Weston, Master Dryland, Master Terrill, Master Tallice, Master
Ballard, with others; and in conclusion, all miraculous Exorcists, by the
confessions (upon oath) of four of the parties themselves that were exoreized:
albeit it was proved to be nothing but deceitful cunning, and plain cozenage.
Although these and the like pranks have been often hissed of the Stage, for
stolen and gross forgeries, yet notwithstanding have they adventured to publish
that, which they call A faithful Relation of their proceed, in exorcizing the Boy of
Bilson, as possessed of the Devil. Which Relation who See this Relation whole, in the
end of this Treatise.
so readeth, shall think that he hath seen a Comedy,
wherein the Actors, which present themselves, are these; A crafty old man,
teaching the feats and pranks of counterfeiting a person demoniacal and
possessed of the Devil; the next, a most docible, subtle, and expert young Boy,
far more dextrous in the Practic part, than his Master was in the Theory; after
him appear three Romish Priests, the Authors of seducement, conjuring their
only imaginary Devils, which they brought with them; and lastly, a Chorus of
credulous people easily seduced, not so much by the subtlety of those Priests, as
by their own sottishness; which will hereafter be better manifested.
[Page 9a]
1.4. The fourth Advertisement; Showing, that
Romish Priests haue thought it lawful for them, to
delude men by forged Miracles, and feigned Relations or
Reports, under some religious pretences.
IF in practice of unlawful things they were not persuaded that they may do them
lawfully, there might be some hope that they would at length be brought to
detest their dissimulations: but now that they varnish their godless forgeries with
the colour of Godly intentions, how can we ever expect that they will renounce
their custom of lying? And that it is so, in some Romish Priests, their own
Canus will witness, where he inveigheth against some, eanus loc. Theol. l. 11. c. 6.
Qui pietatis loco duxerunt mendacia pro religione

ﬁngere, that is; Who hold it a point of godliness to lie for the advantage of
Religion. As also Erasmus, complaining of others who endeavour to excite men
to their Religion, Fabulisvanis, & ﬁctis miraculis, that Eras in censura ante lib.
is, By vain fables, and feigned miracles. Yea, and their Confess. Aug.
Agrippa putteth this in the Catalogue of vain sciences, and not without
indignation; Qui piè nonnihil admentientes supponunt reliquias, fabricant
miracula, conﬁngunt terribiles fabulas, that is, Who Agripsa de van. scient. c. 97.
by the mixture of some godly lies device supposititious
relics, forge miracles, and fain fearful fables. The like complaint made their
Vives against their devout lies.
Vives in Aug. de Civit. Dei l. 22.
We may justly recount among these the Romish Doctrine of Indulgences, which
(since the Council of Trent) is by Pope Pius Quartus added unto the [Page 9b]
Roman Creed; albeit, at the time of their rst
Pius Quarlus in forma
Inramene.
invention, they were judged by men learned and
professed in the Roman Religion, to be no better than piae frauds, that is, Godly
deceits. And what shall we say of their History called As Greg. de Valent. reports.
Tract de Indu'g. cap. 2.
the Legend, graced with no less a Title than Aurea,
Golden; which it was lawful to translate into any language, that it might lie open
unto all people, for their instruction in the fundamental points of Popery, when
as yet the written Word of God, and the saving Gospel of jesus Christ, was
purposely shut and locked up in a strange tongue? Notwithstanding, it cannot
be denied, if we believe their own Doctors, that there is not a more absurd book
than it: Or thus, By the fables and fooleries whereof the Espen. in Tim. Digress. 1.
Truth itself is overthrown: Or thus, Wherein there are Royard praef. ante, Hom. de
more Monsters than Miracles.
festo Sanct.
Canus loc. Theol. l. 11. c. 6.

And the counterfeit Miracles, by Exorcisms, wrought
by Priests in France and England, have (as their own Relations do manifest) a
double intention, to wit, of gaining estimation unto the Priests, and belief unto
that which they call their Catholic Cause. Nor may any object, that such
forgeries are wrought by some obscure men, of small judgement, or less
conscience; for these are Priests who have their mission, and commission from

Rome, being sent (as they say) to su er persecution for the Roman Cause: for
the which some of them are in the Catalogue of their Martyrs, as namely,
Dibday, Ballard, Harrington; who, with the other Priests, in acting these parts,
were of the same Faith with their fellow Priest Thomson, who held [Page 10a]
those their practices to be good, and the credulity
Declar. of Impost.
thereunto Godly.

1.5. The ﬁft Advertisement; Showing the falsehood of
their former Presumption: and proving, that no pretext
of good intention, or purpose whatsoever, can justify
any lying wonder, or yet any false Report thereaf.
WE have seen what masks these deceivable Miraculists do put on, not only for
covering, but even also countenancing their own deceitfulness, to wit, their
pretence of Devotion, Religion, Godliness: in all which there is a good intent,
which is to them the soul of such actions. Surely, if this kind of dealing were
lawful, then might it be used, especially for the gaining of men's souls, for the
credit of the Messengers of God, and his Christ, or for the supreme end of all,
which is the glory of God.
But none of these so gracious and glorious pretences can excuse them. First, not
the gaining of men's souls, because it is written, The Wisd. 1.11.
mouth that lieth slayeth the soul. Now Charity, by
God's Law, beginneth at a man's self; and can it then consort with Charity, that,
for the saving of another, any man may murder himself? And secondly, neither
will it su er to intent the credit of God's Ministers, and the establishing of their
message of Faith, because this must needs be not only damnable in [Page 10b]
itself, but also damageable to the Faith both of the Preachers and Hearers. The
rst the Apostle proveth, by reproving them that should say of the Apostles, that
they taught men to do evil, that good might come
Rom. 3.8.
thereof: of which Calumniators he concludeth, saying,
Whose damnation is just. And if it be damnable to say that of any unjustly, then

is it twice damnable for any to do evil that good may come thereof. Concerning
the second, the same Apostle is as direct. If we (saith 1. Cor. 15.14.
he) preaching Christ to be risen from the dead, Christ
be proved not to be risen, then is our preaching in vain, as being false witnesses;
and then is also your faith in vain. Noting, that the preaching, and consequently
writing of falsehood doth gain nothing but loss of credit to the Preacher, and
engender in delity in him that was a believer: which are due wages, the one of
wilful lying, the other of light credulity. Nor yet will it prevail, that for the
honour of Christ, whose attribute is Truth, they
joh. 14.6. I . 8.44.
practise to deceive by a Lie, the right cognizance of the
Devil, who is a Liar from the beginning: for what society then can there be
betwixt Christ and Satan?
●

Lastly, the end of all goods ends, the glory of God, cannot privilege any man's lie.
The friends of job disputed against him, though ignorantly, thinking him to be
an Hypocrite; and their whole scope was to magnify the justice of God upon
him: but job, holding nothing to be more dishonourable to God than to plead
for him by a lie, stands at de ance with them that sought to plead after that
manner; answering, with detestation of that Error, Will you
[Page 11a]
spwickedly for God, and talk deceitfully for him? will job 13.7.
you accept his person? will you yet contend for God? do
you so mock him? shall not his excellency make you afraid? What refutation can
be more emphatical, or yet more just? for it is written, Heb. 6.18.
It is impossible for God to lie; and as impossible must
we think it for God to approve or justify any lie, how much less wilful lying?
What then are they to forfeit, who stamp a feigned pretence, as it were a false face
upon a Miracle, the act of God's omnipotency, which should therefore have
engraven on it Truth, the rst attribute of the Godhead, the perfect Image of the
God of Caesar (that is) that it be a true Miracle?

1.6. The sixth Advertisement; Discovering their doctrine
of Mental Reservation, which we may justly suspect to

be the art of concealing their deceits, whensoever they
abuse men by their false reports,
THeir Mental Reservation is (as they de ne it) a mixed Proposition, part in
speech, and part in mind: as when a Priest, being in any danger to be discovered,
is examined whether he be a Romish Priest? who notwithstanding doth answer;
I am no Romish Priest, (retaining in his mind this clause) To tell it unto you; (or)
that you may know, or the like: and the latter clause of the mind (say [Page 11b]
they) maketh the words, I am no Priest, (otherwise false in themselves) to be
true, as it were one Proposition. And thus they think to avoid the guilt of a lie.
This Sophistry did Master Garnet teach in writing, and practised it egregiously
in the Tower: and this Master Parsons did vehemently defend, which other
Priests used as a Gygas Ring, to become invisible to men; that no Examiner
could espy any of their Priesthoods.
If they think it lawful thus cunningly to equivocate, for the preservation of their
own bodies, and the bodies of others, will they not judge it necessary, for the
gaining of men's souls, trow we? What credit then shall we give unto such
reports, which they shall falsely invent, to draw men unto their Religion, by
saying (as they have most falsely done) such a Protestant Bishop died in the
Romish faith; or such a Boy was exorcized and dispossessed of the Devil, by the
help of a Romish Priest? Or such a vision of our Lady appeared unto me, telling
me that I cannot take the Oath of Allegiance, without mortal sin? To these men
we object, Are you so unconscionable as to lie thus? They readily will answer us,
we lie not, for we did equivocate. As for example, He died a Catholic, (reserving)
for aught that you shall know: and the Boy was dispossessed by a Priest (reserving)
if dispossessed: And the blessed Virgin appeared unto me, (reserving) but only in
my conceit. This being the professed guile and deceit of these kind of men, we
have just cause not to believe them.

1.7. The seventh Advertisement; Showing that
Mental reservation is no better than lewd lying.

[Page 12a]

THis trick of Mental reservation hath been su ciently proved to be not only a
lie, but even the black Art of lying. As for example; If a jesuite, being asked
whether he be the true Subject of the King of Great Britain, shall answer,
contrary to their meaning, I am, (but reserving in his mind this negative particle)
not; can this make one Proposition? Is it not rather a Contradiction, and
consequently a at lie? Let Truth itself speak, Let your Mat. 5.37. james 5.12.
yea be yea (saith Christ, ) and your nay be nay:
wherein as rash swearing is forbidden, so is true speaking commanded. Now I
suppose that none can deny but, I am, is yea, and, I am not, is nay; and
consequently that their, I am, is alewde lie. And that indeed all such
Reservations (as cannot be quali ed with some circumstance of speech, which
unto the intelligent hearer can no way import that he is no Priest) are
undoubtedly a lie, hath been evinced from the testimonies of the learned men of
their own Schools, in a Treatise purposely not long since writ upon that subject.
Only I add for this present, that this Art of Mental Reservation transcendeth all
the wit, not only of Heathen men, but even the practice of Devils in their
Equivocations. For the Heathen, in saying,
Cic. Oﬃc.
juravilinguâ, mentem iniuratam gear, were so far
from execusing this from a lie, that they called it false; only they
[Page 12b]
thought it (but erroneously) lawful for them to lie in such case of necessity;
when they had to deal with Pirates and Outlaws. But it never entered into the
Moral or Logical apprehensions of these great Masters of Learning, to conceive
otherwise of such Romish secret Notions, than as of very lies.
The Devils, we know, did Equivocate in their Oracles, but only by a verbal
Equivocation, consisting of an ambiguity of words of double and doubtful
signi cation: wherein although there were deceit, yet was it not by a at lie, but
by an indirect truth. For example, To speak to a man, denying that he hath any
money, and to say, yes fellow, thou hast a crown (meaning, the crown of his

head; ) the verbal Equivocation is in the word, Crown, whereby the man is
deceived by the indirect, but yet true sense of the same word. Nevertheless these
(we confess) were called lying Oracles, not because of their verbal Equivocations,
but because thereby they did seduce men into Errors. But Mental Reservation is
such a Cacus' den as neither Man, or Devil by any circumstance of speech can
possibly spy out.

1.8. The eight Advertisement; Showing the means to
discern false Miracles, lie understanding the properties
of those that are true.
THere are four observable properties of divine Miracles: I. is that the work of
the Miracle be done Transcendently, by exceeding all power of Nature [Page 13a]
or Art; II. Presently, without delay; III. Perfectly, without defect; The iv is in
respect of the form, Sincerely, void of idle Superstition. These are the true
Characters of divine working, by which if the Acts of Romish Priests be duly
examined, they will be found exorbitant in all.

1.9. The ninth Advertisement; Showing the falsehood of
such Romish practices; because they are not done by a
transcendent power.
ALthough the power of false Miracles, prophesied of by our Saviour Christ,
shall sometimes work such great wonders, as are able to deceive, if it were
possible, the very Elect; so that we must confess (with Mar. 13.22.
their own jesuite) that False Miracles are sometimes so
like unto true, that they can hardly be discerned; which Acoﬂa Ies. de temp. noviss. lib.
2.6.19. Bellar. l. 3. de Pant. c.
(as another of them acknowledgeth) The Devil
15.
worketh by secret, but natural means, yet such as
deceive the sight and judgements of men: Notwithstanding many others are done
only by either natural, or else arti cial workings. As namely all that are not done
either presently or perfectly, as shall be showed. But be it that the works done by

these Priests, could seem to be done as perfectly as they would have them, yet can
they savour of nothing but man's craft.
To instance but only in that one thing, wherein (as it seemeth) they [Page 13b]
jointly glory, which is the adoration done by bruit
Bellar. Bozius, and the
Admirable Hist.
beasts, as namely by a Mule, a cade Lamb, and a
Masti Dog, unto the Host in the Sacrament. Why have you never seen Apes
and Babions so disciplined, as to kneel down, and make curtsy? Did not Banks
teach his Horse the like feats; When to acquit himself of the suspicion of dealing
with the Devil, he made his Horse Morocco to kneel down before a Cruci x in
France?
Come we nearer to our Exorcists, and see their doings, and we nd (by the
confessions of their own Patients) that if there be any disease, as suppose the
Mother, than they call this a Devil; and if there be none, yet through violent and
untemperate working by their hallowed fumes and sulphurous odours, which
they use in their Exorcisms, they make a Devil, that is, some disease; and after, by
su ering their supposed Demoniac to take a little rest, O then behold a Miracle!
forsooth, they have stilled the Devil. I should but take pains foot repentance to
busy myself, or my Reader with ripping up the frivolous Wonders, which they
have registered, touching the power of expelling of Devils. If any man's appetite
serve him for these junkets, let him read their Legend, touching such Marvels,
and he may soon satisfy, yea, and surfeit himself.

1.10. The tenth Advertisement; Showing (for the [Page 14a]
better discerning of false Miracles) the II. and III.
Properties, which is, to be done Presently and Perfectly.
THe second, which is Presently, their own Bishop Abulensis hath observed;
Nullum miraculum successiuè esse factum, sed statim, Abulen. in Mat. 8. q. 15.
quandò Christus illud ﬁeri voluit: that Christ wrought
no Miracle by piecemeal, but out of hand, so soon as he would have it done, What
can be objected against this, but only the cure of him Mark. 8.24, 25.

that was blind, whom Christ made rst to see, and
after to see perfectly? To this the same Bishop answereth most tly, that This
may be said to have been done presently, because
A'nden. ibid.
suddenly, and as soon as he would have it done.
The third, to do it Perfectly, is as well acknowledged to be a proper character of a
true Miracle, whereby divine Miracles are distinguished from those that are
Devilish: and that When they that are cured relapse
Anastas Cochelet. Palaest
into their former diseases, it is a certain sign that it is honour. cap. 31. Delrio Ies. disq.
Mag. l. 1. c. 3.
not the gift of God, whose works are perfect. Now let us
weigh the Priests practices in these scales, and their works will be found too light,
as not being done Presently: for these Exorcists labour always upon their parties
possessed, as Physicians do upon their Patients, consuming months in practising
their Art, before they can seem to have nished their cure. So it fell out with the
Exorcists at Saint Baume in France, at Denham in Bucking hamshire, [Page 14b]
at Hackney near London, and at Bilson in Sta ordshire.
Then that they are not so Perfectly helped, doth
See hereafter.
appear by the Exorcists often boasting, how they drive
the Devil (as though it were a running gowtish spirit, itting from one joint to
another) sometime into the Tongue, sometime into the Toe, and sometime into
places, for modesty not to be named. Wherein they play with the Devil only as
idle fellows do with their Apes, making them skip from one place to another;
when as the power of divine Exorcism was instantly and absolutely to expel the
Devil, but not to dally and sport with him in his hold of possession.

1.11. The eleventh Advertisement; Showing the last note
of false Miracles, by want of the fourth property of true
works, to wit, religious Sincerity without Superstition.
AGainst this they err both in their manner, instruments, and end of working.
The manner is by using some set form of words.

1.12. The twelfth Advertisement; Showing their
Superstition by their forms.
THat is worth our observation, which hath fall'n from the pen of their own
jesuite, namely, that Holy men of former times [non sunt usi formis [Page 15a]
conceptis, etc.] did not use any set forms of words, but De'lrio Ies. disq. Magic. in
sometime one manner, and sometime another, such as quest. var. de morb. sanand.
the Spirit of God did suggest unto them: nor did God grant unto them the gifts of
healing under the condition of using any form of speech. Which is no more than
that which their Espencaeus will have us to observe in the practice of Christ and
of his Disciples. Christ (saith he) used not any peculiar Ceremonies, but simply
commanding the Devil, by his invisible power did drive Espen. in Tim. Digress. l. 1. c.
15.
him out. Neither yet do we read that the Apostles of
Christ did use any set form, or ceremony. If we shall bring the practices of their
Priests to be tried by this test, we shall nd that their formal Exorcisms di er but
little from Magical Incantations. For (to omit others) our Exorcists at Bilson did
profess at their rst coming to the Boy that they could do nothing, for
dispossessing of the Devil out of him, before that they See hereafter.
had obtained a Book called Thesaurus Exorcismorum,
which (said they) is now at London. Do you not now see the distance betwixt the
Spirit and the power of the Priest to be as much as from Bilson to London, that
is, an hundred miles at least? are these Exorcists? And although we know that the
Devil is a great Scholar, yet did ever the manner of exorcizing anciently consist in
Booke-formes? is not this gross Superstition? So likewise are their other
Circumstantial Acts, of almost, sti ing their Patients with sulphureous Fumes;
bu etting them with their Priestly stoles; besprinkling them with pale fools of
Holy-Water, and Herbs; yea, and (whereof notwithstanding some
[Page 15b]
have not been ashamed to boast o , as worthy of the dignity of a Miraculist)
Daemonem podicis crepitu, aut recentis stercoris foetore depellere: that is, The
repelling of the Devil with the blast of such a wind, and See in their Cosmus Philiarch.
de oﬃce sacerd. lib. 3. cap. 11.
the stench of such an herb which I shame to english.
Which if it were possible for a man to believe, yet might they consider the vanity

of these fooleries; and understand that the Devil, that nimble Antique, doth but
dally with them, passing and repassing as Boys do in their sports, when and how
he listeth: as was discerned in a young Monk obsessed of the Devil, which Devil
endured the application of holy-Water and other
Gerard. Nazareth. apud
hallowed things, but yet refused to departed from the Zuinger. theat. hum. vit. lib. 4.
in Tit. de Daemoniacis.
party obsessed until such time as this Novice was sound
lashed with a Whip; whereupon the Devil gave place, and then he was delivered.

1.13. The thirteenth Advertisement; Showing their
second point of Superstition, in respect of the ordinary
instruments of working, which in these latter times are
Images.
THe Patriarch Tharasius in that latter Synod of Nice (which was the great
Patroness of the worship of Images, but after contradicted by the Council of
Frankford) did confess in the presence of all the Bishops there assembled, that
No Miracles were then wrought by Images among Christians, for their belief. But
he that shall now travel thorough either
[Page 16a] Surius Tom. 3. Conc. Act. 4.
Romish Countries, ' or Books shall be stored with any
Miracles, of whatsoever sort, (put them all together) more than those which are
done by the Images of the blessed Virgin, as at Loretto, at Hales, at Sichem;
where with the Books of Tursellinus, Lipsius, and Costerus are so fraught.
But because their Patriarch durst say in so great and general a presence of
Bishops and Divines, that no Miracles were wrought by Images, except among
In dels, what can any collect from thence but either that Images were not so
miraculous in those former times, when notwithstanding, ifever, (that being the
time wherein they most of all contended for the worship of Images) they were to
be expected: or else that the people of these times, which are so addicted to such
Miracles, are more In dels. How soever it must needs savour of much
Superstition that the vulgar people (as appeareth by the complaint of their own
Authors) Adoring Images most idolatrously, should be nourished in their

Idolatrous fancies by the pretended Miracles wrought by Images. In all which
marvels nothing seemeth more marvelous than the fascination of men, in
beeleeving them.
This place required that I should speak of their diverse Ceremonies in their
Exorcisms, to show their numeral Cross, Relics of false Saints, their Holy-Water,
which they consecrate both to drive away Devils, and to purge venial sins;
besides other forms of their practice, which are altogether superstitious, if not
also sacrilegious. For (to instance in the last) what greater sacrilege can [Page 16b]
there be, than to assume power to ordain any element, for conferring of a
spiritual grace of remission of sins? What is this else than to institute a
Sacrament, an act properly and solely belonging to the authority of him, who is
the Creator of souls? But these things being obvious unto all men, I took hereby
occasion to insert the former observation, concerning Images, albeit without
Exorcisms.

1.14. The fourteenth Advertisement; Showing the second
point of their Superstition, by their impious and
abominable Consultation with Devils in their
Exorcisms, for resolution in points of Religion.
COncerning this I will rst manifest that they usually practise it; and secondly,
propound their Reasons for so doing, and confute them.

1.14.1. That they use to consult with Devils about doctrinal points in
Religion.
LEt any man read the Books, or hear the Relations of the Romish Exorcists of
these latter times, and he shall nd that there is nothing more ordinary with
them than their familiar conference with the Devil, touching questions of
Religion. Cotton the jesuite his Interrogatories put to the Devil to
[Page 17a]
resolve o , concerning Purgatory for his Catholics, and Hell for us Protestants,
with many other curious questions, are more than notorious. The Priests at

Denham in their Adjurations were frequent, by which they sought to satisfy
their Adherents about the truth of the Immaculate Conoeption of the Virgin
Mary, of Pope Gregory XIII. his being a Saint in
See the Declaration of
Impostures, etc.
Heaven, of the Sacrament of the Altar, and Christ's
bodily presence therein. The jesuite Tursellin contendeth by all the strength of his
wit to give satisfaction to his Reader, concerning the Tursellin. Hist. Dom. Laeuret.
truth of the miraculous Transmigration of the blessed
Virgin's house from jury to Loretto in Italy. Which one Idem Epist. dedic ante Hist.
house of the Virgin excelleth (as they say) all others that justus Baronius Epist.
ever were dedicated unto her. Whereunto there is daily concourse from all Nations
of the World, especially from France, Spain, the Indies, and most remote parts by
Kings, Princes, and other people. yet was not the truth of this History so absolute
in all points until an horrible Devil, called Arcto● was Tursellin. quo supia.
consulted with, who a rmed that That house was the
very same place, wherein the Angel Gaebriel saluted the blessed Virgin.
Our Romish Priests at Bilson are desirous that their Disciples should know
(which is their main question) whether the Protestants or Romanists are more
safe in their Religion: to this purpose they advise with their faithful Doctor the
Devil, and set the resolution down in that which they call A faithful Relation,
(and that to use their marginal phrase) as a Markable thing. ‘I (saith the Priest)
commanded the Devil to show how he would [Page 17b] See hereafter Pag. 51.
one dying out of the Roman Church: which he did by
violent pulling and biting of the clothes. Then I would know of him how he did use
Luther,calvin and john Fox,which he did after the same manner, but in aﬁercer
sort. Then I asked what power he had over a Roman Catholic dying out of mortal
sin? He than thrust down his head trembling, and did no more. ’In all which they
su ciently manifest that their profession is upon such like doubts, to take their
resolution from the Devil.
But of all stories of this kind that (I think) was ever committed to Print, that
which was published in France is most famous: and so the Romanists will have
us to know, intituling it an Admirable History of their Exorcisms, and dedicating

it to the then Queen Regent. Wherein they bring in, for proof of many Articles
of their Roman faith, a Devil named Verrine, constrained (as they say) by the
power of God to say and swear by the living God, that Christ is in the Chalice
after Consecration; bload, and bones, as when he was Admire. Hist. pag. 52. & 98.
cruciﬁed upon the Gross. And so he proceedeth in that
Book, preaching both 〈◊ 〉 oral and Theological points of Religion unto the end;
and all to this end that the hearts of people might receive satisfaction by the
Devil's Sermons. Where also F. Michaelis the Exorcist himself, in the Epistle to
the Reader before the Book, further saith, and professeth as followeth. We are in
good hope that this History will be no less useful and proﬁtable in France, than
that was of Laon, printed Anno 1566. which greatly conﬁrmed the Catholic faith,
and converted many Heretics, who heard the Devils say many times in [Page 18a]
an high voice, that these Her etikes were his friends and confederates. So that we
cannot but see that it is their profession to receive assurance of their faith from
the Devil; which may be yet more evident unto us, in as much as that they do
reason for the justifying of themselves in so doing, which is the next point.

1.15. The ﬁfteenth Advertisement; Showing the falsity of
their Reasons, for their consulting with Devils, by their
Exorcisms, in questions of Religion.
THe Adinration, which they defend to be so powerful, is of two sorts, the one is
of an absolute command, the secondis of stipulation or obligation, by a formal
Oath.
The Adjuration by absolute command they contend to prove rst by the
example of Christ against the Devil; the next by the example of the Devil against
Christ. The second they labour to make good by virtue of the band of a formal
Oath. My part and o ce will be to confute them in all, as well particularly as
generally.
[Page 18b]
1.15.1. The particular Confutation of their ﬁrst Reason,
whereby they use to prove the lawfulness of consulting with Devils, by the

manner of Adjuration; which they collect from the example of Christ
against the Devil.
THe rst foundation, which they lay for this, is that the Devil is constrained by
the power of God to speak truth: and therefore they may interrogate the Devil, and
receive from him an assurance of the same truths. This power of God the
Admirable French History doth obsorue in their Devil Verrine, whom rst they
acknowledge to have been sent immediately from God, by whose power he was
compelled to instruct men in the truth, to confound Belzebub, and other Devils:
and, as if there had been di erence of religion among the Devils in hell, and that
this Verrine (yet by constrant) had been a Catholic Devil, he con rmeth to the
world many points of Romish faith; insomuch that the Priests and Exorcists do
put an Eoce upon him, saying, Behold a miracle unheard oﬀ, that a Devil should
convert souls! We may rather say, Behold souls
Admire. Epist. pag. 7.
Christian never read of before, that would be covert
by the Devil!
But to the matter. Their rst ground they take from the confession of the Devil,
when he acknowledged Christ to be the Son of God.
Matth. 8.29. Mark. 5.7. Luke
8.28.

We easily grant, that Christ could as easily compel the
devil to speak truth, as he could ask him the question concerning any truth; and
that therefore the devil could no more conceal that his Confession, [Page 19a]
concerning the Godhead of Christ, acknowledging him to be the Son of God,
than he could deny his name to be Legion. But this being granted, that Christ
could so constrain the Devils, yet what can the Priests collect from hence? Their
rst collection is, that Christ did enforce the devil to make this Confession. But
Saint chrysostom will deny this, saying, That Christ See this after.
was so far from desiring this Confession of the devil,
that he did abhor the Confessor, and presently enjoin him silence. Their second
collection from hence is this; If (say they) Christ did Admire. Hist
extort truth from the devil, Why not we? Which if it
were spoken of them universally, as if they had absolutely the same power in
Miracles, that Christ had, it were an inference very blasphemous; because as all

divinity doth teach, Christ had in him, potestatem excellentiae (that is) divine
power to the full, as the Sun hath light; and all others have it but derivatively from
Christ, as is the light of the Moon. But to understand these men in their more
moderate sense, that whatsoever concerneth the authority of commanding or
countermanding devils, they may presume to have received it from Christ, yet is
it most false; because Christ went out of his own accord into the Wilderness to
combat with the devil: will you therefore say, Why not we likewise? Doth not the
Lords Prayer teach you not to follow, but to y temptations? To come nearer to
you. Christ, at the time of his questioning the devil, concerning his name,
(whereof you have spoken) had in himself a power of dispensation [Page 19b]
and permission to su er the Devils (they requesting as much) to go into the Hogs
of the Gadarens, and to carry them headlong into the Sea; an Act of his own
omnipotent justice. Dire you assume this power unto yourselves, of permitting
the devil, if he should ask you, to enter into other men's Oxen, or Hogs, upon
the rm presumption of Why not we?
Furthermore, to show you why not you, Christ had the wisdom of discerning of
spirits, to know what spirit he had to deal with, and that infallibly: but the devil,
how easily may he deceive you or others, when transforming himself into an
Angel of light, and pretending himself an Author of 2. Cor. 11.14.
truth, he shall become but a Messenger of lies;
whereof the jesuit Del'rio, and other Authors can satisfy you by manifold
Examples. Lastly (to pose you a little) tell us, when did Disq. Mag.
ever Christ interogate the devil concerning any
doctrine of truth, either Theological or Moral points of Faith, or precepts of life?
The only question he asked him was, What is thy name? and the devil answered,
Legion, for we are many; even troops of devils. Which Mark. 5.7. Luk. 8.30.
Christ did to manifest the power of his God heard
against the whole hoast of infernal powers. You therefore that thus arrogate his
power should rather imitate his wisdom, who never conferred with the devil
touching any doctrinal or dogmatical truth.

1.16. The sixteenth Advertisement. Showing the [Page 20a]
falsebood of their second Reason, for the proofa of their
power of Adjuration, to constrain the Devil to speak
truth, taken from the Devils adjuring of Christ; with the
particular confuration thereof.
THey set this down for an undoubted Maxim, that the Devils must necessarily
speak truth, Whensoever the Exorcist shall exact an oath of the Devils, compalling
them to swear, according to the meaning of God and
Admire. Hist. pag. 131.
his Church. They do not deny (neither do we charge
them with it) that the Devil, when bee speaketh of himself, is a liar, and the father
of lies: but only say, that being adjured to tell the truth, he is then compelled to
speak truth. Their proof is thus grounded. The Devil Epistle to the Reader, before the
said unto Christ, Mark. s. [I charge thee by God, that History.
thou do not torment us, but suﬀer us to enter into the herd of Swine: ] Wherein 〈◊
〉 may observe (saith he) a remarkable point, that Christ being adjured by the
name of God, although it was done by the Devil, yet condescended to the Devil's
tequest. And thus they would persuade us, that by virtue of this band of an Oath
the Devil is tied infallibly to confess the truth. And hence it is that these Priests
in France, and they at Denhom, and at Bilson, together with others, in then
questioning with Devils, do rely altogether upon the coaction of them by an
Oath.
But, concerning the example which they have urged, of the Devils adjuring of
Christ in the name of God, it cannot but prove to be either an illogical [Page 20b]
argument, or else blasphemous. For we demand, whether the Devil, adjuring
Christ in the name of God, did constrain Christ to speak truth, or no? If they say
that he did not, then is it no small absurdity, to prone a compulsory charge of a
Priest, against the Devil, by Christ's voluntary answer to the Devil. But if they
say, that the alliuration, used by the Devil, had power to constrain Christ, by
virtue of the name of God, to make an answer, then is it altogether blasphemous,
for what is it else, than to make the Devil the Exorcizer of Christ? It had been

well that these men, that thus urge and press their power of Exorcisation, had
remembered that which is recorded in the Acts 19 of the runagate Exorcists, the
sons of Sceva a jew, when they took upon them to adjure evil spirits, saying, [〈◊〉
〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉, ] We adjure you by jesus: but what? It Acts 19.13. etc.
followeth, The Devils in the possessed party did
violently fall upon those Exorcists, and made them run away; then might they
have learned rather to reason thus, That if Exorcism was not of power in itself by
the name of jesus (who is God blessed for ever) to drive away the Devils; how then
could we say that it had power from the mouth of devils, in the name of God, to
move Christ jesus himself? And infer thereupon, saying to themselves, Why do
we not now blush that we have argued so fond?

1.17. The seventeenth Advertisement. Showing [Page 21a]
their second ground, taken from an Oath, by virtue of
the band of an Oath of Stipulation (the Priests imposing
a formal Oath upon the Devil, ) and the falsehood
thereof.
FOr in their Admirable French History the Exorcists say, that the Devils, when
they are constrained by the Name of God, and by the
Admire. Hist. pag. 186.
authority of the Church to take an Oath, the Oath
bindeth them. And as if, by virtue of the same Oath, the Exorcists themselves
were bound to believe the Devil, they put the Devil to an Oath, saying, It was
thought ﬁt, that Vetrine the Devil should solemnly
Pag. 206.
swear upon the blessed Sacrament, for conﬁrmation of
that which he had above spoken. But did ever the Devil take such an Oath? Yes
(say they) he swore by the living God, that he was
Pag. 95, 〈◊ 〉 239.
constrained to say the truth; And, he moke a solemn
Oath, with all the properties of an Oath.

1.18. The eighteenth Advertisement. Showing the
falsehood of this piece of nice learning, in imposing a
formal Oath of Stipulation upon the Devil, and the
impiety thereof, the Devil being no way capable of a
formal Oath.
THe word [〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉, I exorcise, ] in the use of Divines, in Christian
Schools, is not taken for the Imposition of a formal
Exorcizare dicuntur, hoc est, per
Oath upon Devils, but an allegation of the [Page 21b] divina Diabolum ad urande
expellere. Aug. de beat. vita.
powerful Name and authority of God, to command
the Devils; as we see not only in the example of the Apostles, but even by the
Acts of those devilish Exorcists, Act. 19 saying unto the spirits, We adjure you by
jesus. Now the form of an Oath is of two kinds; and Acts 19.13.
accordingly the Band and Obligation is twofold. The
rst kind is a simple Invocation of God, by calling him to witness; and thus the
Devil swore, saying, By the living God, etc. The second is a mixed Oath, by an
oppignoration and pledge; pawning some precious thing unto God: thus the
Devil, they say, did swear By the Sacrament, and by the Gospel. And we make no
question but the Devil was able to swear by God, and by the Gospel of Christ,
thereby seeming to seek God's glory. For what cannot he swear to do, who can
change himself into the seeming shape of an Angel of light? But our only
problem is, whether the Devil be capable of the band of an Oath, or no? We
think we may swear he is not; neither of the band of an Oath, made only by
Invocation and Testi cation, in calling God to witness; nor yet of oppignoration
and pledge, which is a second and more solemn tye in an Oath.
For the band of an Oath of Invocation consisteth, between the justice of God,
and man's conscience, being bound by that law
Rom. 2.15.
written in his heart, his conscience bearing witness, and
thoughts accusing or excusing him before God. This is the band of conscience
towards God, whereby the party swearing acknowledgeth himself obliged to
speak a truth, lest that he become gulitie of transgression against God. [Page 22a]

Therefore to impose an Oath upon the Devil, is to suppose him being a
damnable Reprobate, whose property is to be most, maliciously obstinate
against God and godliness, to be capable of such a Conscience, which is required
in an Oath, and consequently a conscionable honest Devil.
The mixed Oath is not only the invocation of the supreme judge and avenger, in
a general manner, but the addition also (for more specialty and solemnity) of
some thing else, by way of pledge, which is called an Oath by oppignoration; as if
a Christian should in solemn protestation, swear by God his Saviour, and by the
Sacrament, or by the holy Gospel: intending thereby the engagement of his own
portion of comfort and blessing by and in them; and forfeiture thereof if he
violate his Oath (as in all Oaths is implied a voluntary Execration upon default)
by loss of those precious bene ts, which he might otherwise enjoy in those
pawns and pledges. Now as for the Devils, what interest can they have in the
promises of Christ belonging to salvation revealed in the Gospel of Christ, and
sealed by his Sacraments, who are forlorn of all interest in Christ himself, crying
unto him and saying, What have we to do with thee,
Mark. 5.
jesus, thou Son of the highest God? etc. what forfeiture
can they fear of losing their pledge, which they have irrevocably lost, when they
rst apostated from God, and thereupon did eternally lose all hope of happiness;
being reserved (as the Apostle speaketh) to the chains of darkness, for [Page 22b]
evermore?
jude v. 6.
Moreover, an Oath being that high part of religious service belonging unto God,
which he appropriateth to himself, saying, Thou shalt serve the Lord and swear
by his name (where, in the LXX. it is 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 Deut. 6.13.
〈◊〉; and 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉, by the confession of the
Romanists, is proper only unto God himself, as a supreme part of his worship)
let them, who presume of such familiar conference with the Devil, consult with
him upon this question, whither he can be capable of the o ce of 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉
〈◊〉. Howbeit we think it no less than a Diabolical profanation of the name of
God to impose upon those damned spirits the band of an Oath, whereof they
cannot be any way capable, to perform it truly and internally, by reason of the

obstinacy of their wills, and the desperateness of their state and condition. Thus
far of our particular confuration of their particular Reasons.

1.19. The nineteenth Advertisement; Showing the
Confutation of their profession of consulting with
Devils in general, by manifesting the infatuation thereof.
LEt Romish Priests imagine what they please, of the power which they have over
the Devil, to compel him to speak truth; yet this we hold for a truth [Page 23a]
infallible, that it was never permitted to any to advise with the Devil, about
questions of Religion, to receive any satisfaction from him, but directly the
contrary.

1.20. The twentieth Advertisement; Showing the
falsehood of their doctrine, for consulting with Devils;
rst from the examples of Christ, and of his Disciples.
THe Priests, for the establishing of their authority, in Interrogating the Devil in
questions of Religion, and power of constraining him to answer the truth, have
pitched upon the confession of the devil, when he
Mark. 5.7.
called Christ, The Son of God: And then, adjuring
Christ not to torment him: And after upon Christ's ask the devil his name. From
whence their collections are in e ect these. First, Christ asked the devil a
question: Ergo, we may interrogate the devil. Secondly, The devil said, thou art
the Son of God: Ergo, he was constrained to speak a truth. Thirdly, The devil
adjured Christ, saying, I adjure thee; and Christ condescended: Ergo their
Adjuration of the devil doth enforce him to speak truth: and consequently they
have licence to demand questions of the devil, concerning Religion; authority to
adjure the devil, to answer; and power to enforce him to answer nothing but
truth. Whence it must follow that men may receive their resolution, [Page 23b]
in Theological points of Religion, from the devils.

I marvel what Devil gave them these grounds of thus reasoning, sure I am they
have no foundation in the Gospel of Christ. For (to answer orderly) rst, the only
question that ever Christ asked the devil was this, What is thy name? never any,
concerning any matter of doctrine; whereof we have showed the reason before.
Secondly, the devil's Confession, that Christ is the Son of God, was neither
extorted, nor embraced by Christ, which we are now to prove. Thirdly, the
Adjuration, which the devil used to Christ, our Saviour condescended not unto,
but repelled; for the devil said, I adjure thee that thou torment me not. But why
said he thus? it followeth in the next words, Because Christ had said to the devil,
come out of the man: therefore the devil adjuring Christ, that he himself might
keep his possession, and Christ notwithstanding expelling him out of his hold, it
is evident that Christ condescended not to the devil's adjuration. Thus by way of
Answer.
We are now to retort their Arguments, and to drive their weapon to their own
pates, by proving, from the example of Christ, that we are not to admit of any
colloquy with the Devil in Exorcisms, about matter of Christian Learning. The
rst place is Mark. 1. Where one devil confessed
Mark. 1.24, 25.
Christ to be the holy one of God; a blessed confession,
but, because a damned Confessor, instantly jesus (as the Text showeth) did
rebuke the devil, saying, hold thy peace, and come out of the man. In [Page 24a]
Mark. 3. diverse impure spirits when they saw jesus,
Mark. 3.11, 12.
cried out and said, Thou art that Son of God. but
what? it immediately followeth, And jesus straitly charged them not to make him
known. What may we justly infer from all this? I had Espen. in Tim. digress. l. 1. c. 14.
rather your own Espencaeus should tell you. Christ
would not suﬀer the devil to speak, no not the truth; to teach us that we give not any
credit at all unto the devil, although it may be he speak a truth. And to this end
he produceth the judgement of Origen, concluding
Orig. hom. in Exod.
from the same Scriptures that We are not to
interrogate devils, nor to entertain any colloquy with evil Spirits, but to dispel
them by Prayer and Fasting. We nd the same Father thus reproving and
condemning the Heathen Enchanters. God (saith he) Orig. in Num. c. 23. hom. 16.

will not have us to be the disciples of devils; it is better to be ignorant than to be
taught by them: for this cause our Lord jesus did not vouchsafe to receive any
testimony from the devil, but saith to him, hold thy peace thou foul spirit, and
departed out of the man. We need no other Comment upon these Texts than that
which hath been received from the golden mouth of chrysostom. Christ saith to
the devil, Mar. 3. Hold thy peace, and come out of the Chrysost. tom. 2. hom. 5. in
man: As if Christ had said (saith he) I came not to seek Mar.
my approbation from thy testimony, but to cast thee out of my creature? no
commendable commendation can proceed out of the mouth of a Sinner: I need not
the testimony of him, whose torment I desire: let thy silence be my praise, hold thou
therefore thy peace, get thee out of the man; what dost, thou in my House [Page 24b]
and Inn? etc. So Saint chrysostom, even so plainly, that for me to make any
collections from him were but to comment upon a Comment.
Yet may we not omit that when Christ (if ever) had conference with the Devil in
the Wilderness, the Devil was still the Opponent, and Mat. 4.
Christ never objected or interrogated, but answered:
to the rst it is said, Christ answered, it is written, Man, etc. to the second
likewise Christ answered, It is written, Thou shalt not Ver. 4.
etc. & to the third Christ answered, Get thee hence
Verse 7.
Satan. Wherefore, as Christ, so every Christian may
make answers to the devil, never seek answers from
Verse 10.
him; and allow no use of Conference with him but
that which may put him to silence.
The Apostles of Christ were the Disciples of their Master, as well in practice as
knowledge, which we may observe in the example of Saint Paul. and Silas, Acts
16. For Saint Paul (to use the words of Origen) imitating Christ, turning himself
to the Spirit of divination, said, [I command thee in
Orig. hom. 16. ni Acts 16.
the Name of jesus Christ go out of her. ] Wherein
though some may peradventure ask why Saint Paul should in such vehemency
rebuke that Spirit; What, did the devil speak any Blasphemy? [The Woman (saith
the Text) having a Spirit of divination followed Paul and them that were with

him, and cried saying, These men are the Servants of God most High, who show
the way of salvation. Whence it is manifest that Paul was not oﬀended at any
words of blasphemy, but that he held it an indignity unto his preaching [Page 25a]
to receive any testimony from such a spirit. So Origen. And indeed Saint Paul and
Silas did not spend any time of conference with that spirit, but instantly
discharge their o ce of Exorcizing, commanding the spirit to come out of the
Maid, and he went out at the same hour. An Act altogether repugnant to the
practice of Romish Priests, who professedly ask questions, compelling (as they
say) the devils to testify that which may best serve for the dignity of their
Priesthood: whereas the Apostle did not deign, but rather abhor, and was
grieved at this so specious a testimony, that they were the Servants of the Highest.
On the contrary, these Priests do greatly glory in such Testimonies; as among
others, the French Priests rejoice to hear the devil Verrine aver, saying, of them;
You are Priests, it is no oﬀence if a man neglect and
Admire. hist. p. 133
turn from an Angel of Heaven, and do honour and
reverence unto you. Compare those di erent examples, the one holding it an
indignity, the other a dignity to receive testimony of their o ces from the devil;
and the distance will appear to be little less than between a Professor Apostolical
and Apostatical.
[Page 25b]
1.21. The one and twentieth Advertisement;
Showing the falsehood of the same doctrine, concerning
consultation with Devils in questions of Religion, by
testimonies of Fathers, and necessary Reasons.
WE have already heard the testimonies of Origen, and chrysostom, concerning
this point; absence from our Adversary Papers will
Thyraeus Ies. de locis infestie,
part. 1. Maldon. Ies. Com. in
not su er me to inquire exactly into other Fathers:
Matth. Chrysost hom. vlt. de
nor shall I greatly need it, especially seeing the jesuites Lazare. Tere. de anima. Athan.
themselves do acknowledge, that ancient Fathers, such ad Antioch q. 11. & 13 Theophy.
in Mat. 8. Isidor. Etym. lib. 8. c.
as were chrysostom, Tertullian, Athanasius,
9
Theophilact, Isidore, do all deny that the souls of men

departed do at any time appear 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉, that is, in their own persons;
but that they who take their semblance upon them are very devils, who seek to
seduce us. And therefore these Fathers advise us not to have any business with
them, or to give any credit to their testimonies, but to content ourselves with
direction from holy Scriptures. Which they should not have done, if that those
spirits might, by the power of Adjuration, be compelled to show that they were
devils; and that, being known, they would confess nothing but truth.
All which notwithstanding, the Romish Priests ordinarily seek to be informed of
them concerning Purgatory, Indulgences, worshipping of Images, and other
Mysteries of Romish Superstition; which Bellarmine and other jesuites do
endeavour to con rm by Apparitions of the dead: when as (according [Page 26a]
to the judgement of ancient Fathers) the soul that it conversant in holy Writ will
re-resolue, that though the Devil (as in the petition of 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉.
* Deliver us from evil) may come into his Paternoster,
* Not to omit (which is elsewhere
yet that he shall never enter into his Creed.
forgotten) that the Boy of Bilson
did fayne himself to abhor, and
to be aﬀected with this Petition
as with the ﬁrst verse of Saint
john's Gospel. Vide pag. 58. 59

Not to stand any longer upon Antiquity, I would but
desire any one Example of any one Father, in the space
of ve hundred years after Christ; or History, in the
same compass of time, recording and approving any Conference with the Devil,
by way of Exorcism, or otherwise for satisfaction of any Christian in points of
Religion. Let us at last reason the matter with these men.

1.22. The two and twentieth Advertisement, Showing the
Reasons which may be produced against this persuasion
of the Devil; arising aswell from the Cause itself, as from
the Events.
1.22.1. Reasons of the ﬁrst kind.
Two reasons may su ce, if they be pregnant. The rst thus. If such be the power
of Exercists, that they constrain the Devil in the Name of God; and by the

warrant of the Church, to confess any truth that shall be demanded of them, by
Adjuration; then should there need, for our satisfaction in matter of Religion,
no other Questionists than Exorcists; no other Catechists than Devils; no other
Tradition, Council, Scripture, or Gospel than the confession of
[Page 26b]
Devils; yea and then the Decrees of Popes, which are held as Oracles in that
Church, must now (for many of them have erred) give place to the testimonies
of Deutls.
I may not except their Council of Trent, which would Conc. Trid. Sessio 5. cap. 1.
not determine the question concerning the natural
Conception of the blessed Virgin, whether she were originally immaculate; for
either great was the ignorance of those Fathers, that could not; or else obstinacy,
that they would not set it down for an Article in their Roman Creed (as they
have done many other Articles, as far repugnant from truth) seeing that Verrine
the Devil, by power of Exorcism, was brought to swear Admire. Hist. pag. 205.
upon the blessed Sacrament, and did answer upon that
Oath, that she was originally immaculate. Albeit Bernard, Thomas Aquinas,
Bonaventure, and many hundreds in the Romish Church would herein have
given the devil the lie. It had been good, before they had given credit to this devil,
to have sought some certain resolution, how to reconcile the di erent revelations
made to Saint Bridget & Saint Katherine, concerning the same question:
Katherine being told by revelation, that the Conception of the blessed Virgin was
immaculate; but Saint Bridget informed of the contrary. And because such
contradictions will admit no reconciliation, it would become them to learn how
to discern, whether these Revelations came from the deaill, as from the lying
Angel; whereof we think the devil Verrine can be no competent judge.
Secondly, you that question the devil, su er yourselves to be
[Page 27a]
questioned in a few words. If the devils be made (as you say) Messengers of divine
truths, by the power of your Exorcisms, why do you endeavour to expel them?
Are they but lying Oracles? Why do you then confer with them, and not
presently expel them?

Many other reasons might be added, to convince these Priests, by the devil's
contradictions in their own stories, even then, when he was adjured to speak
truth: But to labour to prove, that the devil cannot lie when he list, and that he
will also, whensoever he can, for a mischief, were to deny him to be a devil,
whose property is vel falsum, vel ad falsum dicere: either to speak that which is
false, or else to a false end. What a dangerous thing it was in our rst Mother, to
entertain and maintain parley with the devil, concerning our religious duty to
God, all mankind feel by that woeful experience of original corruption, which
they must carry with them to their graves, That which no Adversary shall ever be
able to refute, is, that the power of Exorcism was given unto the Church of God
for expulsion of the devil, never for consultation with him, in matters of
Conscience.
Thus have I endeavoured to dispel this doctrine of conferring with devils, in
such cases, with the same zeal as I would wish to dispel the devil himself; and
hold it a good resolution not to believe those Priests, for direction, in matters of
Religion, who make the devil their ghostly Father. We choose rather to conclude
with the sentences of the holy Fathers of the Church; one directing us [Page 27b]
how to avoid such fascinations, saying, Non statim,
Cyprian.
etc. We ought not presently to admit, of such Acts as are
done in the Name of Christ, except they be done in the Truth of Christ: The other
detesting them, saying, Removeantur illa vel ﬁgmenta August.
mendacium hominum, vel portenta fallacium
spirituum. Away with those works which are either the ﬁgments and devices of
lying men, or else the deceitful acts of prodigious spirits.

1.23. The 23. and last Advertisement Is to demonstrate
the Romish falsehood, in Exorcizing, by the Events:
which is particularly exempli ed in a discovery of their
Impostures, about the Boy of Bilson; not inferior unto
any of the rest of their pranks in this kind.

But before we come to lay down the naked truth of the matter, touching that
Boy, and how things stood de facto; let us rst su er the Romish Priests to boast
themselves a while of their miraculous power, in Exorcizing this Child; whom
for a while you must imagine be really bewitched and possessed of the Devil:
that afterwards, by the the event, may be veri ed of these Miraculists, that
Scripture, which saith, Whose glory is in their shame. Phil. 3.19.

1.24. Hear we then the Priests speak.
[...] help the child was, if they had sought medicine still in Israel, and [Page 28a]
not at Endor, and of Belzebub.
First then to show how the Child grew thus to be tormented, as I have
understood it of his Parents, and have heard the Child con rm it himself. The
Boy returning homeward, from school, to Bilson in Sta ordshire where he
dwelled, an old woman, unknown, met him, and taxed him, in that he did not
give her good time of the day, saying that he was a foul thing, and that it had
been better for him if he had saluted her. At which words the Boy felt a thing to
prick him to the very heart. In ne, the Boy came
How the Boy came ﬁrst to be
home, languished some days, and at length grew into possessed.
extreme ts, that two or three, (though he was a child of 12. years of age) could
hardly hold him. The Parents of the Child, seeing the extremity of the ts, and
the misery and imminent danger of death every hour the Child did lie in, moved
with tender compassion, sought help of Catholics, and with cap and knee, by
the means of some friends, did solicit a zealous Gentleman; who overcome with
their earnest suit, did use some prayers and lawful exorcisms allowed by the
Catholic Church, with whose prayers the Child was eased something, and the
force of the spiritual Enemy abated. The Gentleman insisting to know how
many was in him; to his thinking he said, Three. He (good Gentleman) called
away partly by the danger of the place, as also by his urgent business, they sought
and sent for a zealous Gentleman, whose zeal and
Two others meddied with him
virtues are su ciently known, yea and
[Page 28b] ere Jcame.
acknowledged by God's enemies themselves. He moved with compassion came

thither, used his best prayers and means that at that time he thought convenient;
very much weakened the devil's force, and quelled the extreme erceness of the
ts. Yet he, within a day or so, withdrew himself for the same cause; yet though
absent in person, was most mindful of his misery. In so much as he did negotiate
with me, in that I had been present many times in the like occasions, that I
would see him, and make trial whether he were possessed, or obsessed. I was very
unwilling, yet overcome by his entreaty, and the former motives, I promised him
to do my best, and to see him within the space of one month: yet so I disposed of
my businesses, that I came thither in the space of a week, about Thursday before
Corpus Christi day, where I did nd the Gentleman that requested me to come:
and nding that they had used Sorceries of Witches, which made the Child o er
violence to himself, we would not meddle with him, till they had burned those
Sorceries applied to him, which they forthwith did ful l. Whereupon we using
the reading of the Litanies, and the holy Gospels, together with the Exorcism of
Saint Ambrose, when I came unto those words that showed the power that Saint
Peter had over Simon Magus, and Saint Paul on the
The devil could not seduce Saint
Magician Bariesus, the Child would be so tormented, Peter and Saint Paul.
that three or four could hardly hold him; which words took e ect in manner as
often as they were used. The other Gentleman called away, I was left alone, till it
pleased God the Gentleman that had rst meddled with him, by great [Page 29a]
chance came thither. He and I both did our best, till Saturday about two of the
clock, at which time, urgent occasions, though diverse ways, called us away: yet
we left holy water, also water properly against
The virtue of holy water, and of
Witchcraft, and holy oil: the rst having that power, holy oil.
that it would make him speak, though dumb, and his tongue turned into his
throat; and the second that force, that being applied in a little quantity unto his
legs and arms most grievously contracted, that a strong man could hardly unfold
them, only with the force of the holy oil they would be stretched forth as they
were want. We entreated them in our absence, to use the holy waters and oil in
his extremities, and that we absent, would assist him the best that we could in
our prayers; which they continued: on Saturday, Sunday, and Monday, with
extreme ts and heavings he brought up pins, wool, Strange things voided.
knotted thread, thrums, rosemary, walnut leaves,

feathers, etc. the which he still drinking of the blessed water, brought up: and
when he could not speak, he would make signs for that water, with the letting
down of which, presently he recovered his speech. Well, on Thursday, being
Corpus Christi day, about three or four of the clock I came again, found the
Child in great extremities, continually heaving up, and in this time he had
brought up 11. pins, and a knitting needle folded up in diverse folds. On Friday
next, he brought up the last pin. I told them that I was glad that he brought up
most of those things in my absence, that well they might see that
[Page 29b]
really they came from him, and that it was no collusion of us. On Saturday night
nding the Boy to my thinking somewhat obstinate; I, before the Parents,
wished him not to be deluded by the Enemy, but that if he spoke any thing
within him, he would impart it to us, that we might counsel him for the best. A
great while the Child would not hear us, yet at length he said, he would not tell
us before all the company. I ask then to whom he would tell it, he answered, to
yourself, so the others would leave you: he gave me leave after to signify unto his
Parents, sisters, and brothers thus much: First, that
The Boy tells what the devil and
the spirit bade him not to hearken to me in any case. Witch say in him.
Secondly, that the Witch said, that she would make an end of him, and that she
would bring in othergates things into him, if it were not for me, whom she called
a Roguish P. Thirdly, she said I destroyed all her good things. Fourthly, she said,
that though I should help him, yet she would have a saying to his brothers and
sisters. Fifthly, he desired me to tarry with him until Monday, for when I should
leave him, he said he should be torn in pieces: whereupon I, according to the
prescript of the Thesaurus Exorcismorum, did bless re, and did burn those
male cialias, Sorceries, those lthy things that came from him; at smoke of
which, and the re thereof being temperate only, and in a Cha ng-dish, and the
smoke only of Frankincense, he would vehemently cry out that he was killed,
burned, and choked; though my own self, and diverse others were
[Page 30a]
nearer to all then himself. At length he seemed greatly to rejoice, and with great
eagerness drank up the smoke, saying that he saw his Enemies tormented. I
wished him then to pray for the Witch, and for her conversion from that wicked
life; which he did: then the Child did declare that now The markable devotion of the
he was perfectly himself, and desired that his books, Child.

pens, ink, clothes, yea that every thing he had might be blessed; wishing his
Parents, sisters, and brothers to bless themselves, and to become Catholics; out
of which faith, by God's grace, he said he would never live or dye. On Sunday
also I exorcised him, but diverse Puritans resorting to him, I could not have
conveniency to come till towards night. All which day he had many ts, and I
coming to him, learned of him that still while the Puritans were in place on
Saturday, as also at other times, he saw the devil
The force of ill company.
assault him in form of a Black bird. Well, I persisted in
exorcizing him, left him very well speaking and merry, retired myself, having seen
his meat and drink blessed. They then after giving him a Syllibub, the sugar
whereof being not blessed, he presently at the taste thereof began grievously to
be tormented. Yea, though he loved owers, yet if
The power of blessed things.
unblessed, he would tear them in pieces, and
distinguish them from other; and unmblessed Raisins he would say were too big
for his mouth. I was sent for, and I had not charged him long, but at each charge
I did nd the devil very much to tremble: I hoping of God's especial assistance at
that time, made the devil to swell in his mouth, in sign of his
[Page 30b]
presence, and to express rst by sign, how many were in him: which he did,
holding up three ngers. I caused them then, one by one, to descend into the
great toe of the right foot, and at the entering thereof to shake it, and to stir the
leg; all which they did higher and higher, to signify how one was greater than
another: then I caused the Boy to speak, who did acknowledge that he would live
and dye a Catholic, wishing father, mother, and all his friends to serve God: then
I called up the chief Fiend, and did demand him to show himself, who presently
puts forth the Child's tongue, and swollen the end thereof. Then I (all being
Protestants, saving one Catholic) commanded the
A markable thing.
devil to show by the sheet before him, how he would
use one dying out of the Roman Catholic Church? who very unwillingly, yet at
length obeyed, tossing, plucking, haling, and biting the sheet, that it did make
many to weep and cry forth. Then I commanded him to show how he did use
Luther, john Caluin, and john Fox; which unwillingly he did perform after the
same manner, but in a ercer sort. Then I commanded him to show what power
he had on a good Catholic that died out of mortal sin? he thrust down his arms,

trembled, holding down his head, and did no more. Hereupon the Parents were
instant with me, presently and out of hand to help the Child. I told them that I
did not doubt but by the power of God's Church (on which I did only rely, and
not on any personal virtue of mine own) to cast them out presently. [Page 31a]
But I said, I did fear that the innocent Child was
A conjecture why the Child
punished for the sins of his Parents, which might be might be possessed.
for their lack of belief; which is a sin great enough, since without faith it is
impossible to please God. Yet hereupon I said to his mother, Good woman, will
you promise me that you will become a Catholic, if in your sight I cast out these
devils in form of re? she answered, that she must consider of that: then said I, I
am afraid this Child will not have help; for, fearing the Child was punished for
her lack of belief, I doubted that the cause remaining, the e ect also would
remain. Hereupon the Child gave a great shriek, began to be vehemently
tormented, grew obstinate, in so much that I feared another devil was entered. I
exorcized him also a long time: but the devil with the Child's voice cried, The
Lord in heaven, the Lord in heaven. A long time I exorcized him, but still he was
obstinate, crying out, Father, mother, help me, help me, saying that I killed him:
and when I gently strooke him on the head with a soft ribbon blessed, he yelled
forth that I killed him, cursing me, saying, A pox of God light on the P. saying
moreover, I will never be converted; to which word a Protestant then by, that
had seen all, replied, Thou wilt then do worse. Here I commanded the devil that
spoke, to show himself in the tongue, who coming
The Child being himself, denies
forth as out of a trance, I asked him gently, whether he all the devil had uttered by his
tongue.
had uttered any of these words? he utterly denied to
have spoken them, ask forgiveness, saying, that it was not he that spoke them;
and a rming, by God's grace, that he would be constant in the
[Page 31b]
Roman Catholic faith till death. Then I called up the wicked spirit, took his
oath, that with trembling he tendered to be obedient in all to lawful Exorcists,
and not to hinder the eating, drinking, or sleeping of the Child. Then it being
almost three of the clock in the morning, I retired to bed: the next day, being
Monday, I came and told the Parents, that I had tarried there as long as I had
promised, and as long as I well durst for danger, and as my promise to others
would permit, but promised them to come again as soon as I could. The father

than o ered me the Child to dispose of as I would. I told him I had no
convenient place for that purpose; but I said, that if he would not deal with
Witches and Sorcerers, I would come as often as I
The reason why I lest to come
could. The father said, he would seek of Witches, or any more.
of any other for help. I being sorry to hear his bad resolution, told him that I
would not mingle God and the devil together: and then got his promise that he
would not use holy water and oil blessed, if they meddled with Witches. Yet I
hear, that he hath not complyend with his promise, in extremities of the Boys
ts, having recourse to blessed things, saying, he will coarse him with them. Well,
the substance of all this I have here written, at my coming away I declared before
three Protestants, and the Child's Parents, desiring them, that if I did not say
truth in all things, that they would challenge me therein. Then the Child being
〈◊ 〉 a sounding t, anointing him with holy oil, 〈◊ 〉 bring him unto [Page 32a]
himself, in so much that with a sta he walked up and down; and since, he did
eat, drink, sleep, and walk, having only short ts, as I am faithfully informed, yea
till shortly after they entertained many Witches and Sorcerers; notwithstanding
whose help sought in vain, he is more grievously tormented then ever before.
Here before my departure, the Parents of the child o ering me money and gold,
I refused it, thanking them, saying, If they would give me 20. pound, I would
not have one penny: Charging them that they should not endanger their own
souls, and the soul of the poor Boy, in seeking unlawful means. And thus on
Monday was fortnight I left him: and the truth of this I must say with S. Paul,
that God knows in all this I do not lie.
Thus desiring that all may succeed to God's glory, the good of the Child, and the
confusion of all Sorceries and Charms, which in my heart and soul I detest, I
leave the Parents, Child, and thee, Christian Reader, to the mercy of God.
Non nobis Domine, non nobis, sed Nomini tuo da Gloriam.
Yours in charity, love, or in any good o ce, J. W.

july the ﬁrst. 1620.

This Relation was published by the Priests themselves, and delivered by one of
them, called Master Wheeler, into the hands of Master Thomas Nechils Gent. a

Recusant dwelling near the aforenamed town of Bilson: as appeareth by his owner
confession, upon oath, taken before the L. Bishop of Coventry and Lichﬁeld; and
added in the end of this Book.

2. THE EGREGIOUS CUNNING
OF THE BOY OF Bilson, in
counterfeiting himself to be
bewitched, and possessed of the
devil.
THis Boy, being about thirteen years old (but for wit and subtlety far [Page 32b]
exceeding his age) was thought by diverse, to be possessed of the Devil and
bewitched, by reason of many strange ts, and much distemper, wherewith he
seemed to have been extremely a ected. In those ts he appeared both deaf and
blind, writhing his mouth aside, continually groaning and panting, and
(although often pinched with men's ngers, pricked with needles, tickled also on
his sides, and once whipped with a rod, besides other the like extremities) yet
could he not be discerned by either shrieking or shrinking, to bewray the least
passion or feeling. Out of his ts he took (as might be thought) no sustenance
which he could digest, but together with it, did void and cast out of his mouth,
rags, thread, straw, crooked pins, etc. Both in, and out of his ts, his belly (by
wilful and continual abstinence defrauding his own guts) was almost [Page 33a]
as at as his back, beside, his throat was swollen and hard, his tongue sti and
rolled up towards the roof of his mouth, in so much that he seemed always
dumb, save that he would speak once in a fortnight or three weeks, and that but
in very few words.
Two things there were which gave most just cause of presumption that he was
possessed and bewitched; one was, that he could still discern when that woman
(which was supposed to have bewitched him) was brought into any room where
he was, although she were very secretly conveyed
jone Cock.
thither, as was one time tried before the grand jury at
Sta ord: the second, that though he would abide other passages of Scripture, yet

he could not endure the repeating of that text, viz. In the beginning was the
Word, etc. joh. 1. vers. 1. but instantly rolling his eyes, joh. 1.1.
and shaking his head, as one distracted, he would fall
into his usual ts of groaning, panting, distraction, etc. In which plight he
continued many months, to the great wonder and astonishment of thousands,
who from diverse parts came to see him. Thus much of his cunning.

2.1. The means of discovering his dissimulation.
AT the summer Assizes held at Sta ord, the tenth of Summer Assizes held at
Staﬀord, xviij. jacobi R. 1620.
August, Anno Dom. 1620. the afore-mentioned
woman, supposed to have been the Witch, was brought to her trial, before the
R. Worshipful Sir Peter Warberton, and Sir john Davies Knights, than [Page 33b]
his Majesty's justices of Assize for that County: before whom appeared some
slender circumstances, which were vulgarly esteemed strong proofs of
Witchcraft; but after some speech, manifesting the idleness of such fantastical
delusions, the woman was freed by the Inquest. At what time the judges were
pleased to commit the care and (if it might so be) the cure of the Boy unto the L.
Bishop of Coventry and Lichﬁeld, then, and there present.
When he had been with him at the Castle of Eccleshall, about a month (much of
which time his Lo. was necessarily absent from home) although diverse
symptoms gave just cause to suspect that he did but counterfeit; as namely, the
easy and equal beating of his pulse in his strongest ts, his quiet rest and sleep,
commonly the whole night long, his clear complexion, and (which plainly tells
every beholder that his tongue lied in saying nothing) his swallowing of whole
morsels of bread without chewing, his spitting forth from him as naturally and
perfectly as ever he could do in his best health, (neither of which could possibly
be done with a tongue turned upwards, and doubled towards his throat, as he
would seem to have it, ) besides, his ordinary coming forth of his ts always with
one kind of loud and large tunable groan: yet notwithstanding his usual casting
up of his meat, his much fasting, and lank belly, his patience, or (as it might
rather seem) senseless stupidity, in enduring those many prickings and violent

extremities, without any sign of feeling, did argue some bodily disease [Page 34a]
and in rmity.
Therefore it was, that no experiment was used on him, until that the judgement
of some well approved Physician might be had, to deliver in what state his body
then was: nevertheless, after a longsome expectation of such an one, an occasion
o ered itself, which required and exacted a more speedy and present trial.
The Father of the Boy (an honest Husbandman of su cient ability, innocent
and ignorant of any practice in his child) came with an Aunt of his to see him:
when, being out of his t, the Father earnestly demanded what might be
thought of his son's case, and whether he were possessed, or not? Whereto it was
purposely answered, that nothing seemed so marvelous, or so much to betoken
any such thing, as that at the hearing of those words of the holy Gospel of Saint
john, [In the beginning was the Word, etc.] he still
john 1.1.
used to fall into his ts. For further proof whereof,
then presently in the Father's hearing those words were repeated; and
accordingly upon the repetition thereof the Boy fell instantly into his t. Lo
(quoth his Father then) do you see? what think you of this? This (said the
Bishop) do I like very well; for upon this must I begin to work.
The same day in the afternoon (when word was brought that the Boy did speak)
diverse resorting unto him, the Bishop calling for a Greek Testament, said unto
him; Boy, it is either thou, or the devil, that abhorrest those words of the Gospel:
and if it be the devil, he (being so ancient a scholar as of almost 6000. [Page 34b]
years standing) knoweth and understandeth all languages in the world, so that he
cannot but know when I recite the same sentence in the Gospel out of the Greek
text: but if it be thyself, than art thou an execrable wretch, who playest the devil's
part, in loathing that part of the Gospel of Christ, which (above all other
Scriptures) doth express the admirable union of the Godhead and manhood in
one Christ and Saviour; which union is the arch-pillar of man's salvation.
Wherefore look to thyself, for now thou art to be put unto trial; and mark

diligently whether it be that same Scripture which shall be read unto thee; at the
reading whereof thou dost seem to be so much troubled and tormented.
Then was read unto him, in Greek, the twelfth verse of the rst Chapter of Saint
john's Gospel, [〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉, etc.] which he supposing to be the rst verse,
did accordingly, as he was formerly wont, fall into the passion of a trance.
This t being quickly passed over, next was read unto him, in Greek, the rst
verse, being indeed the aforesaid text [〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 etc.] yet he suspecting
that it was not the same text, was not any whit troubled therewith.
By this means was his notable fraud, in a manner, fully discovered, in so much
that he seemed to be greatly confounded here with: notwithstanding, staring
with his eyes, and casting his head on both sides the bed, whereon he lay, that he
might dissemble his dissimulation the better, he told the company y he was
troubled at the sight of 2. mice.
After this discovery, (to the end that 〈◊ 〉 might be freed from further [Page 35a]
trial, and be sent home again to his father) he complained of extreme sickness,
and by writing, as well as he could, did signify that he had a great pain in his
belly: and the morning following, making water in an Urinal, his water was as
black as Ink; for there were some that writ very legibly therewith. And in the like
sort, two days following he seemed to make water of the same colour. Which
that he might the more cunningly dissemble, he, in the making thereof
vehemently groaned; and thereupon one coming into the room to him, the Boy
did show him his manner of making water, whereof a little remain came then
from him, of the same black tincture, which he purposely had reserved within
the skin, to make semblance that it so came immediately from him.
But the third day following (which was the Lord's day) by diligent watchfulness,
and other means which was used to observe him, he was espied mixing Ink with
his Urine, and nimbly conveying the Inkhome into a private place. When being
suddenly deprehended in this his conveyance, after an earnest, but loving
exhortation made unto him, this deaf began to hear, and dumb to speak: and at

the sight of his ungracious and godless practices, he burst out into plentiful
tears, confessing all, to his own shame, and God's glory. Which confession
(before he had heard of the aforesaid Relation of the Priests) he made the same
day, in manner following.
[Page 35b]
2.2. THE FIRST EXAMINATION, AND
CONFESSION OF THE BOY OF BILSON, NAmed
William Perry, taken before the Reverend Father in God,
Thomas L. Bishop of Coventry and Lich eld, at
Eccleshall Castle, 8. Octob. 1620. touching his
counterfeit practices, etc.
BEing examined how long since, and of whom he had learned such tricks and
cozening devices? The Boy recollecting himself, answered as followeth: In Lent
last (said he) there met me, not far from my father's house, an old man, who
called himself Thomas (but his surname I cannot remember) having a grey
beard, russet apparel, and carrying a cradle of glasses or pots on his back, who
said unto me after this manner: ‘Now, pretty Boy, where dwellest thou? dost thou
go to school? If thou wilt do as I shall teach thee, thou shalt not need to go to school;
for (said he)I can teach thee such tricks and feats, that the people that see thee, shall
believe that thou art bewitched, and so shall lament and pity thee. ’Whereupon I
being willing not to come at school, for fear of whipping, was desirous [Page 36a]
to learn such tricks. By and by this old man began to teach me, rst, how to
groan and mourn; next, to roll and cast up my eyes, so that nothing but the
white of the eye should be seen, after that, to wrest and turn my neck and head
both ways towards my back, then to gape hideously with my mouth, & grate
with my teeth, to cling and draw in my belly and guts, to stretch out my legs, and
clutch my hands: after that, to put crooked pins, rags, and such like baggage,
into my mouth, that I might seem to vomit them up. And although (said he)
that some folk shall put thee to pain, by pricking, and pinching thee, yet thou

must endure all patiently. After this sort he taught and learned me some six
several times privately in a Close, where none could see us.
And further, that old man made me believe, that a body possessed could not
endure to hear the rst verse of the rst Chapter of S. john's Gospel, (viz. In the
beginning was the Word, etc.) and that therefore
john 1.1.
whensoever I heard it, than I should fall into my ts.
Besides, he willed me that I should begin to do these feats, when it should next
happen that I should be sicke: and that then I should accuse some one body or
other (whom I had heard to be accounted a Witch) to have bewitched me. And
thereupon afterwards, of myself, I did accuse one jone Cox, and was once
minded to have made my picture in clay, and to have conveyed it into her house,
for the better proof of her bewitching me.
Being examined how long after it was that he began to put these
[Page 36b]
things into practice, and upon what occasion? He answered; Not long after,
(which was about the Easter following) I began to be sick, and my father sought
help for me in diverse places: and then some Papists did persuade him to seek for
help at the hands of some Catholic Priests. But my mother did rather desire to
have some learned scholar or Divine that was no Papist. Yet at length, by their
persuasions, there was rst brought unto me a Priest, I. Priest.
of an indi erent tall stature, with long black hair, in a
greenish suit, his doublet opened under the armpits with ribbons.
As soon as he came to me, he drew a stone out of his pocket, and hanged it
about my neck, saying some Latin prayers over me, putting also his nger into
my mouth: whereupon I seemed to come out of my t. After that, he made holywater, and witch-water, saying certain prayers over them, and putting salt into
the witch-water. Then he gave me a bottlefull of the one of those waters, (but of
which I do not remember) and willed me now and then to cast some of it over
my bed; and himself, with a little Isop, did besprinkle me therewith also. Before
he went away, he said certain other Latin words or prayers over those waters,

(which to my remembrance) did thus sound, Eggse eggs atque famulo Dei
Gulihelmo ante damnando, and more there of I cannot remember.
The next morning (as I remember) this Priest came again, at which time
(because I lay in a lower room, where many people thronged in to see [Page 37a]
me) they removed me into an upper room, more private and t for them to pray
in, where they continued and used the like means towards me, as they had done
before, betwixt a fortnight and three weeks' space, during which time I
continued my wont ts. Then at last, this Priest said that he could not help me,
because he wanted a book, which he sent for up to London: but after that the
book was brought, he then said that he could not help me, without the aid of
another Priest, whom after that he brought with him. II. Priest.
He was a short big fat man, with blackish long curled
hair, in a kind of russet coloured suit, with a sword by his side. As soon as he saw
me, he said, that by the help of God and our Lady, and the holy Saints of heaven,
he would either cast the Devil out of me that night, or else it should go hard.
And rst, he drew out a little book of the bigness of a Pueriles, in which he
continued praying, till about 11. a clock. of the night, and casting holy-water on
me.
Then both these Priests went away, but came again unto me in the morning, and
then they made as much holy-water as a pale could hold. But in the end they
confessed that they could do me no good, without the help of a third Priest,
whom they did send for by a Weaver of our town.
About a week after came the third Priest, being a
III. Priest.
reasonable tall old man, in a horseman's coat, with
long head-haire: before he came to our house, he did say to the man that fetched
him (as I did hear) that if the spirits came to me, than I was obsessed; [Page 37b]
but if they were within me, than I was possessed. The big fat Priest came in with
this last Priest, and rst he put his nger into my mouth, and said, that I was
bewitched at the tongues end: wherefore he bade me drink three or four
draughts of holy-water, which I did: he taught me also to pray to the Virgin

Mary, and to my good Angel, and to all the Saints in heaven to help me. Then he
washed my head, feet, and belly with the same water, saying now and then to me,
Thou art now somewhat better, Boy? and I would say, Yes, a little better.
About the same time, my father coming one day home before supper, he asked
me what I had seen in my ts? and I told him that a thing came to me in the
likeness of a Blackbird. And now the Priest that came last unto me, went out of
town, these three Priests having been with me about three weeks, but could do
me no good.
About a week after, came the big fat Priest again, and II. Priest.
held on his former course, saying, that by. God's grace
he would help me. About which time he made a Sermon to certain Catholics
which were with me, having a white Surplice on him, with a stole (as I remember
they called it) about his neck: his Text was, My ﬂesh is bread indeed, and my
blood is drink indeed. After his Sermon, he prayed with me as he had used to do:
and then made another paleful of holy-water, wishing them to boil certain herbs
in water, to wash me withal; as Time, Isop, and such like.
Upon the Sunday following, people came in so thick to see me, that [Page 38a]
the Priest durst not preach; and he intended to be gone the next day.
His fashion was, to bless and cross all the meat which both themselves and I did
eat: so that when my mother once gave me some of a Syllabub, which the Pr. had
not crossed in the same manner, he told them that there was a Puritan spirit
entered into it.
These three Priests dealt with me at sundry times, that I should confess my sins
unto them: which I did sometimes, when I listed to speak, but that was but now
and then. They wished me also to turn to their religion, and that then I should
have help.
Upon that Sunday night before that this fat Priest was to go away, he said, that
by the help of the blessed Virgin, and the Angels and Saints in heaven, he would

cast the Devil out of me.
A little after, he began to ask certain questions of the spirit within me; as rst,
what should become of the Puritans when they died? and he told me, that if
they went to hell, than the spirit should tug and shake the bed-clothes: which I
did do after the same manner he bade me. Next, he asked what should become
of the Roman Catholics, and if they should go to heaven? that then, in sign
thereof, I should lift up my hands, which I did also.
Then the Priest said, Come out of thy ﬁts, Will, in the name of the Father, and of
the Son, and of the holy Ghost: whereupon I seemed to come out of a t, and then
he prayed by me, and said, that he would cast three devils out of me that night.
And so he hanged about my neck, and put under mine arm a ne
[Page 38b]
stole, wrought with great siver letters: and with the one end thereof, being very
hard, he did beat me about the head and face, until to my thinking he made me
black and blue; cha ng & rubbing my neck with that stole, which was so rough,
that it made my neck very sore: and still he spoke to the spirits within me, thus;
Come out, you Rogues, you Villains, I charge you by God and the blessed Virgin,
and by all the Angels and Saints in heaven, that you suﬀer the Boy to eat, and
sleep: and withal, he stamped with his feet, as he spoke those words.
Then he told my father that he would throw out those three spirits one after
another, so that they should plainly see them come forth. And if he should do
so, he asked my mother whether she would become a Catholic, or no? She
answered him that she would consider of it. Then, said he, will I also consider
whether I will help your son, or no.
But yet the Priest continued as he had begun, and said unto me, If there be three
Devils in thee, then give three knocks, in sign thereof; and so I did: but at the
biggest Devil he willed me to give the greatest thump, which I did at the last.
And still the Priest did beat me with his stole, & so continued with me till about
three of the clock in the morning: during which time, certain Papists were sent
to pray with me, bringing hallowed candles with them.

At the same time, the Priest took such * things as I had seemed to vomit, and
* Viz Crooked pins, rags, straw,
burning them with Frankincense, he took an old rusty etc. and such things as the Boy
sword, and said a Latin prayer, resembling [Page 39a] could ﬁnde and steal, into his
mouth; as he did once halfe a
it to the sword wherewith Peter did cut o Malchus knitting-needle.
his ear: he also did beat the same things with an
hammer, betokening that hammer which nailed Christ to the Cross.
The morning being come, the Priest was to be gone, and then my father said
unto him, Sir, I see you can do my Child no good, and therefore I must seek for
some other help. Yes (said the Priest) you will go seek for help at witches to ease
his body, but you care not for damning his soul. But yet before he went away, he
did hollow more water, and then he departed.
And here the Boy was su ered to pause, and repose himself, by reason of his
weakness; and was not then further examined till the next time.

2.3. THE SECOND EXAMINATION, AND [Page 39b]
ANSWER of the said William Perry, made unto certain
other questions, which (upon just and special
presumptions) were propounded unto him by the
Reverend Father in God, THOMAS, Lord B. of
Coventry and Lich eld, taken at Eccleshall Castle, the
13. day of Octob. Anno Dom. 1620.
FIrst, it was demanded of him, that seeing the old man (called Thomas)
persuaded him that at length he should be cured by some Popish Priest; whether
he meant not accordingly in the end to seem to be dispossessed by some, or one
such of them?
He answereth, yes; and further, that thereupon he meant to become a Papist.

Secondly, being asked, that if he did mean so, why then he would not, after so
long a time, and so great pains taken about him by those Priests, yield to their
Exorcisms, and seem to be dispossessed by their means?
He answereth, because that much people did resort unto him, and
[Page 40a]
brought him many good things; as also for that he was not willing to go to
school again: yet that in the end his meaning was to be helped by them.
Thirdly, being asked that after he saw himself half discovered, whether in his
grief and fear that all should come to light, he had not an intent to do himself
some bodily mischief?
He answereth, that he had; for (saith he) the Devil had * steeled my heart, so that
I cared not to hang myself; and had purposed to do so * It was his own word.
one night, but that I was watched, and hindered.
Fourthly, being asked how it could be thought that he should be moved by any
Papist, to charge a woman for bewitching him, which was herself an obstinate
Recusant? He answereth, that he was moved by Thomas the old man, to lay it
on some woman so suspected: but that only of himself, without the persuasion
of any other, he named this * woman; because she was * jone Cock.
a woman ill thought of, and suspected for such like
things.
Being here put in mind of the desire, which formerly before his discovery he had
to be prayed for, as was accordingly then done, but (as at the same time was told
him) not to drive the Devil out of his body, but only out of his soul, wherein the
Devil had possessed him, by a devilish obstinacy of his heart, in feigning himself
to be bodily possessed of the devil: And being further wished to remember how
that after those prayers he writ on a paper, that he had found much ease thereby:
He was hereupon demanded, whether he did not as then intent and [Page 40b]
resolve with himself to make an end of his former course, and counterfeit
practices; and seem to be dispossessed by such prayers?

He answereth, that it was indeed in his mind to do so, because he had then
wearied himself with dissembling so long, and was also in fear to be discovered
and found out.
And albeit this was easily discerned to have been his resolution, yet (as was at
that time told him) it became not the Professors of truth to imitate the Popish
Priests in such cases, who falsely arrogated to themselves such an Apostolical
power, by Exorcizing to expel Devils, although it might (in man's opinion)
much work for the glorifying of God, edifying of Christian people in our
Church, and also for the converting of Romish Recusants unto our true
Religion; because this aught to be the profession of Christians, to seek to glorify
Him only by truth, who will be worshipped in spirit and truth.
And here was an end made of examining the Boy any further.
Examinat'. coram praefat'. R do Patre dictis diebus, anno, & loco; Praesente Ryc.
Baddeley, Notario Publico.

2.4. THE BOY OF BILSON, his private and
public Acknowledgement, etc.

[Page 41a]

NOw after those Popish * Priests were departed, and * Bilson in Staﬀordshire, is a
had left the Boy (as before is confessed, and set down) chapelry within the peculiar
jurisdiction of
his Father sought for further help by the means of
Wooluerhampton, where
sacrilegious impiely hath
Witches, (but as wickedly, so all in vain) until such
produced such eﬀects, that it is
time as he was brought from the town of Bilson
much infected with Popery, &
infested with Popish Priests,
aforesaid, unto Lich eld, before Doctor Master
ordinary Rendezvouz it is.
Chancellor of the Diocese; where he continued until whose
No marvel therefore if they
he was carried to the Assizes at Sta ord, and there by made choice thereof, as the ﬁllest
nest wherein to lay and exclude
the judges referred and left unto the abovenamed
their addle and supposititious
Reverend Father in God, the I. Bishop of the Diocese; eggs of politic impostures and
who after a very short time sent to Bilson for him, and godly deceits. But this Cockatrice
was crushed in in the shell, and

after his arrival did deal with him, as formerly in this
discourse hath been related.

their viperous disseine thereby
defeated.

Since which time, the Boy, upon laying to his charge the heinousness of that his
o ence, as being blasphemous, in respect of Christ, whose words in the Gospel
he feigned himself to abhor; and devilish, in respect of the Devil, whose person
he would seem to be possessed of; and also murderous, in respect of the poor
Woman, whom he willingly occasioned to be brought (as much as in him lay) to
the point of death: He hath earnestly bewailed these his sins, and (as [Page 41b]
after his rst Examination) by prayer coneived by himself, to such purpose,
craved forgiveness at God's hand for the same.
So having continued at Eccleshall Castle aforesaid, until he was perfectly
recovered of his former weakness, and benumbed limbs, and that his Parents
were willing to dispose of him otherways, he was nally brought again to the last
Summer-Assizes held at Sta ord, the 26. of july, Anno Summer Assizes held at
Staﬀord, 19 jacobi R. 1621.
1621. where before Sir Peter Warburton, and Sir
Humphrey Winch Knights, his Majesty's justices of Assize, and the face of the
County and Country there assembled, the Boy craved pardon rst of Almighty
God, then desired the Woman there also present, to forgive him; and lastly,
requested the whole Country, whom he had so notoriously and wickedly
scandalised, to admit of that his so hearty Confession, for their satisfaction.
And thus it pleased God to open the eyes of this Boy (that I may so say) luto,
with the clay of the Romish Priests lewd impostures; and sputo, with the spittle
of his own infamy, to see his errors, and to glorify the God of truth.
Gloriasoli Deo.

2.5. THE EXAMINATION AND ANSWER [Page 42a]
OF THOMAS NECHILS of Nechils', in the County of
Sta ord, Gentleman (a Recusant) taken upon oath
before the R. Reverend Father in God THOMAS L.

Bishop of Coventry and Lich eld, at Eccleshall Castle,
the 17. of Octob. Anno 1620. touching the
aforementioned Relation of the Priests, of their proceed
with the Boy of Bilson.
BEing examined whether he knew a written discourse then showed unto him,
touching the Boy of Bilson, entitled and beginning thus; A faithful Relation of
the proceed of &c. and ending in these words, Yours in charity, love, or any good
oﬃce? He answereth, that he doth very well know, and remember the same.
Being examined how he came rst by that discourse, or Relation, and from
whom he had it? He answereth, that it was delivered unto him by a Gentleman,
whom he met journeying on the way towards Lich eld, whose name was Master
Wheeler, as he told this Examinate. And, being further demanded, he saith that
he was as a man of a reasonable stature, round faced, about fty years [Page 42b]
old, and of a blackish complexion.
Being examined what further discourse did at that time pass betwixt them two,
touching the said Boy, called William Perry? He answereth that the said Master
Wheeler then told this Examinate, that he would acquaint him with the whole
business, concerning that Boy: whereupon he gave this Examinate a copy of the
aforenamed discourse or Relation (having two copies at the same time about
him) and willed this Examinate to get it copied out, and to give one copy thereof
unto one Philip Higgins of Westbromage Yeoman (as he this Examinate
remembers. ) And further, that the said Master Wheeler said unto this
Examinate, that was no matter who should see it.
Being further examined what the said Master Wheeler did at the same time
acquaint this Examinate with, touching himself? He confesseth that he told him
how that he did often use to resort unto the French Ambassador: that he did
know the Bishop of Coventry and Lichﬁeld; and further, that he was known to
the Lord Archbishop of Canterbury.

Tho. Nechils.

Appendix A §
Appendix A §
Examinat'. coram praefat'. R do Patre dictis die, anno, & loco; Praesente Ryc.
Baddeley Notario Publ.

Information about this book
Title statement
The boy of Bilson: or, A true discouery of the late notorious impostures of
certaine Romish priests in their pretended exorcisme, or expulsion of the
Diuell out of a young boy, named William Perry, sonne of Thomas
Perry of Bilson, in the county of Staﬀord, yeoman Vpon which occasion,
hereunto is premitted a briefe theologicall discourse, by way of caution,
for the more easie discerning of such Romish spirits; and iudging of their
false pretences, both in this and the like practices.
R. B. (Richard Baddeley)

Edition statement
This text is an enriched version of the TCP digital transcription
A68096 of text S120841 in the English Short Title Catalog (STC
1185). Textual changes and metadata enrichments aim at making the
text more computationally tractable, easier to read, and suitable for
network-based collaborative curation by amateur and professional end
users from many walks of life. The text has been tokenized and
linguistically annotated with MorphAdorner. The annotation includes
standard spellings that support the display of a text in a standardized
format that preserves archaic forms ('loveth', 'seekest'). Textual changes
aim at restoring the text the author or stationer meant to publish.
This text has not been fully proofread: .

Publication
Publisher

EarlyPrint Project
Place of publication
Evanston,IL, Notre Dame, IN, St. Louis, MO
Date
2018
ID [DLPS]
A68096
ID [STC]
STC 1185
ID [STC]
ESTC S120841
ID [EEBO-CITATION]
99856034
ID [PROQUEST]
99856034
ID [VID]
21548
ID [PROQUESTGOID]
2264218981
Availability
This keyboarded and encoded edition of the work described above
is co-owned by the institutions providing nancial support to the
Early English Books Online Text Creation Partnership. Searching,
reading, printing, or downloading EEBO-TCP texts is reserved for
the authorized users of these project partner institutions.
Permission must be granted for subsequent distribution, in print
or electronically, of this EEBO-TCP Phase II text, in whole or in
part.

Series

Early English books online.

Notes
(EEBO-TCP ; phase 2, no. A68096)
Transcribed from: (Early English Books Online ; image set 21548)
Images scanned from micro lm: (Early English books, 1475-1640 ;
651:1, 1565:3, 1616:8)

Source
— The boy of Bilson: or, A true discouery of the late notorious impostures
of certaine Romish priests in their pretended exorcisme, or expulsion of
the Diuell out of a young boy, named William Perry, sonne of Thomas
Perry of Bilson, in the county of Staﬀord, yeoman Vpon which occasion,
hereunto is premitted a briefe theologicall discourse, by way of caution,
for the more easie discerning of such Romish spirits; and iudging of their
false pretences, both in this and the like practices., R. B. (Richard
Baddeley), Wheeler, Mr..
Extent
[6], 47, [1], 45-75, [1] p.
Imprinted by F[elix] K[ingston] for William Barret,. At London ::
1622.. ("To the Christian reader" signed: Ryc. Baddeley.) (A reprinting
of and reply to "A faithfull relation of the proceedings of the
Catholicke gentlemen with the boy of Bilson" attributed to a Mr.
Wheeler, of which no copy survives.) (Printer's name from STC.)

(Reproduction of the originals in Cambridge University Library, the
Henry E. Huntington Library and Art Gallery, and the British Library.)
(Appears at reel 651 (Cambridge University Library copy), at reel 1565
(Henry E. Huntington Library and Art Gallery copy), and at reel 1616
(British Library copy).) (Reel 651: some pages missed in lming. Reel
1565: some print show-through; an improved lming over reel 651.)