i


E
i
i


W., 10,000—20/9/98.


Croydon Public Libraries.


CENTRAL REFERENCE LIBRARY.


Accession No..


u | ey
| IT CN
Q j re oe


EU


Besides the class topic, other topics treated of in this
book are as follows :—


Toric No.


PAGES.


Topic No.


PAGES.


This Volume is presented by the


up, be returned to the Controller of Her Majesty's


| Stationery Office, Westminster.


/ BROMLE
- DANI


iil


3 0128 019


IBRARIES r
HUI
97 8637


MAS TTC
UI


íi"


zi
y
ai :
Se KEP) “sa
ams
8^
w: ;
“


3 RERUM BRITANNICARUM MEDII EVT
- SCRIPTORES, .


OA IL Of


3) MEMORIALS OF GREAT BRITAIN.
AND IRELAND |


Meum ‘DURING


THE MIDDLE AGES,


eer


THE CHRONICLES AND MEMORIALS


GREAT BRITAIN AND IRELAND
DURING THE MIDDLE AGES.


PUBLISHED BY THE AUTHORITY OF HER MAJESTY’S TREASURY, UNDER
THE DIRECTION OF THE MASTER OF THE ROLLS.


On the 26th of January 1857, the Master of the Rolls
submitted to the Treasury a proposal for the publication
of materials for the History of this Country from the
Invasion of the Romans to the reign of Henry VIII.


. The Master of the Rolls suggested that these materials
should be selected for publication under competent
editors without reference to periodical or chronological
arrangement, without mutilation or abridgment, prefer-
ence being given, in the first instance, to such materials
as were most scarce and valuable.

He proposed that each chronicle or historical docu-
ment to be edited should be treated in the same way as
if the editor were engaged on an Editio Princeps; and
for this purpose the most correct text should be formed
from an accurate collation of the best MSS.


To render the work more generally useful, the Master
of the Rolls suggested that the editor should give ar
account of the MSS. employed by him, of their age and -
their peculiarities; that he should add to the work a
brief account of the life and times of the author, and
any remarks necessary to explain the chronology; but
no other note or comment was to be allowed, except
what might be necessary to establish the correctness of


the text.
a 2


4;


The works to be published in octavo, separately, as
they were finished; the whole responsibility of the task
resting upon the editors, who were to be chosen by the
Master of the Rolls with the sanction of the Treasury.


The Lords of Her Majesty’s Treasury, after a careful
consideration of the subject, expressed their opinion in a
Treasury Minute, dated February 9, 1857, that the plan
recommended by the Master of the Rolls “was well
calculated for the accomplishment of this important
national object, in an effectual and satisfactory manner,
within a reasonable time, and provided proper attention be
paid to economy, in making the detailed arrangements,
without unnecessary expense."


They expressed their approbation of the proposal that
each Chronicle and historical document should be edited
in such a manner as to represent with all possible correct-
ness the text of each writer, derived from a collation of
the best MSS., and that no notes should be added, except
such as were illustrative of the various readings. They
suggested, however, that the preface to each work should
contain, in addition to the particulars proposed by the
Master of the Rolls, a biographical account of the author
so far as authentic materials existed for that purpose.
and an estimate of his historical credibility and value.


Rolls House,
December 1857.


HENRICI DE BRACTON


LEGIBUS ET CONSUETUDINIBUS


ANGLIA.
LIBRI QUINQUE


IN VARIOS TRACTATUS DISTINCTI,


AD DIVERSORUM ET VETUSTISSIMORUM CODICUM
COLLATIONEM TYPIS VULGATI,


EDITED


BY


SIR TRAVERS TWISS, Q.C., D.C.L.


PUBLISHED BY THE AUTHORITY OF THE LORDS COMMISSIONERS OF HER MAJESTY'S
TREASURY, UNDER THE DIRECTION OF THE MASTER OF THE ROLLS.


VOL. VI.


LONDON:
LONGMAN & Co., Paternoster Row; TRÜBNER & Co., LupcATE Hirt
ALSO BY
PARKER & Co., Oxrorp; anb MACMILLAN & Co., CAMBRIDGE:
A. & C. BLACK, anp DOUGLAS & FOULIS, EDINBURGH ;
AND A. THOM, DUBLIN.


BOWEN”
PUBLIC |
as


AGG.


ree 3047 |


: |. by
EYRE and SPOTTISWOODE, Her Majesty’ s Printe
For Her Majesty's Shationcry, OMe ;


REATISE


4


ES


m


E
z
2
E
2
G
c
m


INTRODUCTION.


PL PI PDIP DI


THE present volume comprises two treatises, the first
of which, being on the subject of Warranty, links the
then existing system of English law to the waning
institutions of feudalism, whilst the second, which treats
of Exceptions, connects the same system with the equit-
able defences of the Roman Procedure, and at the same
time marks a considerable advance in the jurisprudence
of the English courts. Both treatises form part of one
and the same fifth book, in which Bracton, having pre-
viously treated of, actions de jure possessorio in other
portions of his work, concludes his labours by discussing
the legal incidents of actions de recto, in other words
the nature of actions in which the ownership of the
thing claimed, as distinguished from the right of posses-
sion, is put in issue. With this object in view he has
already discussed in the first treatise of the fifth book
the nature of a Writ of Right, and in the second and
third treatises the various essoins allowable to the par-
ties and the mode of dealing with defaults. These three
treatises form a- portion of the fifth volume. He now
proceeds to discuss in the fourth and fifth treatises cer-
tain formal defences as it were of the tenant, which
sometimes baffle effectively the plaintiffs attack. The
first of these defences consists in vouching a warrantor,
in virtue whereof the tenant is able to transfer. the
defence of his title to the party, from whom he has
derived the property. The second consists in raising
an exception to the plaintiff's right to sue, in other words,


vill INTRODUCTION,


in alleging some matter, which disqualifies him from
suing, or operates as an answer to the plaintiffs claim
in such a way, that his action fails of itself either
entirely or partially. After having disposed of these
two subjects it would seem to have been Bracton’s
intention to have treated of the substantial defences of
the tenant on the joining of the issue, as may be inferred
from what he says in chapter 28 § 5, secundum quod
inferius dicetur in litis contestutione. Unfortunately,
as may be gathered from this and other passages, Brac-
ton’s work has either never been completed in accord-
ance with the author’s original design, or a portion of
it has been suppressed or lost. We ineline to the former
view and think that the non-completion of the work
may be accounted for by a circumstance which is men-
tioned in Madox's History of the Exchequer, vol. ii.,
p. 257, viz, that in the year 1259 (42 H. IIL) Henricus
de Bratton was required to return to the Archives the
Rolls of Martinus de Pateshell and of Wilhelmus de
Radleye, who are the two justiciaries of the Bench, with
whose judgments Bracton seems to have been most
familiar, and whose authority he invokes most fre-
quently in support of his exposition of legal prineiples
and of the mode of their application by the king’s jus-
ticiaries,

This opinion derives some confirmation from the in-
ternal evidence, which the work supplies by its silence
as to any changes in the law made after 42 H. III., and
by its statement of the law on the subject of actions
concerning dower and advowsons, as well as on the
subiect of homicide per infortunium, without noticing
the important changes made in the law upon both these
subjects by statutes passed in the 43 H. IIT. On the
other hand it appears from a passage in the Treatise de
Defaltis, c. 5 $ 4, that Bracton had a well considered
purpose in using the well known but much disputed
phrase of the Roman Law Procedure, “Cum autem per


INTRODUCTION, ix


^
A


errorem aliquando fiat mentio de tempore indebito,
‘ si ipse petens erraverit, poterit intentionem suam
mutare et errorem revocare, et loqui de tempore
alterius regis usque ad litis contestationem, scili-
cet quousque fuerit precise responsum intentioni
petentis, et ita quod tenens se posuerit in magnam
assisam vel defenderit per duellum." Of other cir-
cumstances, which may have contributed to prevent
 Bracton from completing his work, we may speak here-
after; it may be suflicient for the present to allude to
the fact that Bracton’s intended work has been left
incomplete, and that none of the subsequent legists, who
undertook to abridge it in its original Latin tongue, or
to paraphrase it in the French tongue of the Edwardian
Law Courts, have attempted to complete it. We allude
more particularly to the authors of the treatises entitled
respectively Fleta and Britton.

We have spoken of the first of the two treatises of
the present volume, which deals with Warranty, as
linking the then existing system of English law to the
waning institutions of feudalism. It may be a question,
however, whether the obligation of warranty in its
application to sockage tenures, as distinguished from
military fiefs, was not derived from a system of law of
an earlier date than the feudal system. We do not find
in any of the Teutonic Codes a recognition of the prin-
ciple, which was approved in England at the time when
the treatise attributed to Glanville was drawn up, and
which had received a fuller development in Bracton’s
time, namely, that there was in all cases of sale an
implied warranty on the part of the vendor of his title
to sell, and further that where the obligation of war-
ranty was established, the party vouched to warrant
was bound to make compensation to the party who
vouched him, if he could not make good his warranty
and had the means wherewith to compensate him.
This alternative was in accordance with the Roman law.


^
^


PS
^


^
^


^
^


x INTRODUCTION.


On the other hand a penalty on a fraudulent sale is a
feature of the few barbaric codes, which treat of the sale
of land, such for instance as the code of the Bavarians
and the eode of the Visigoths, in both of which we find
provisions on the subject of vendors and purchasers.
There is, for example, in the Lex Baiuvariorum, Tit. xv.,
ch. iv., a provision that, if a person should have sold to
another a thing which was not his own, he was bound
to return to the purchaser the price of the thing and
to pay to the true owner double of the price! Of a
similar character was. the law of the Visigoths, Lib. v.,
Tit. iv., § viii? Further it would appear from the Bur-
gundian law, Tit. lxxxiv., that no one was allowed to
sell his land, unless he had other land in some other
place. We have here indeed the preliminary condition
which was necessary to give effect to the English law
of compensation (excambium), but we find no trace of
any analogous restraint upon the sale of land in England,
on the contrary the case is provided for, where the
vendor has no other land, and the purchaser has been
ousted at law by the true owner. In such a case the
purchaser had to wait until the vendor should have
inherited other property sufficient to make him compen-
sation. Weare disposed to think that the justiciaries
of the Curia Regis in England under the Angevin
monarchs, through the circumstance of there being no
settled custom of the realm, were enabled to mould the
jurisprudence of the English courts on this subject after


1 * Et domino is, qui alienam ven- , donare quemcunque constiterit, nul-
“ dere preesumpsit, duplum cogatur | lum emptori prejudicium fieri po-
* exsolvere, nihilominus emptori, | terit, sed ille, qui alienam fortasse
* qui accepit, pretium redditurus." | rem vendere aut donare presump-
Corpus Juris Germaniei Antiqui. | serit, duplum rei domino cogatur
Walter, Tom i., p. 282. Svo. Be- | exsolvere. Emptori tamen precium
rolini, 1824. quod accepit redditurus, et poenam,

3 Quotiens de vendita vel donata | quam scriptura continet, impleturus;
re contentio commoveatur, id est, | &c. Ibid, p. 519;
si alienam fortasse rem vendere vel


INTRODUCTION. xi


the best models of Roman jurisprudence. We speak of
the jurisprudence of Rome as distinguished from its
written law.

It may be reasonably asked from what source did the
barbarie codes derive the rule of an obligation on the
part of the vendor to warrant a good title to the pur-
chaser, or in the alternative to make him conpensation
if he should be evicted for want of a rightful title. - It
is evident that this obligation was not a tradition of
feudalism as regards England, although the particular
obligation which arose from accepting homage from a
tenant may have been so. Bracton (ch. ii.) lays it down
that a person is bound to warrant through homage and
through a fine having been made and through the obli-
gation of charters and other instruments. In the pre-
ceding chapter he has stated that any person who has
received from another person on the ground of a dona-
tion, or a sale, or an exchange, or such like, any land
or tenement with an express charter of warranty and
- sometimes of homage, may vouch him to warrant, ex-
cept it be expressed in the same charter, that notwith-
standing the homage the donor is not bound to warrant
nor to make compensation, and thus à convention con-
trols the law, “Likewise,” he says, “a person is bound
* to warrant sometimes on account of homage even
* without a charter.” It may be admitted that the
obligation of warranty arising upon homage was a tra-
dition of feudalism, but are we to suppose that in the
case of a donation, or of a sale, or of an exchange, there
was no obligation of warranty, unless the obligation was
expressed in the charter of conveyance? If this were
so; it is difficult to say whence this absence of obligation
was derived, except that it has a savor of conquest as
the source of title. Neither the Roman law nor the
barbarie codes sanctioned the principle, that a vendor
without a title beyond that of possession de facto could
communicate to a purchaser a good title against all the


xii INTRODUCTION.


world. The Roman law implied warranty, but it might
be specially repudiated, and so far it would seem that
the king's justiciaries in the reign of Henry.III. en-
grafted a principle of the Roman law upon feudalism,
in allowing that a lord, who had accepted homage from
a purchaser of land, might repudiate all obligation to
warrant his title. For instance it is impossible to read
the third book of Glanville upon * Warrantors ” without
tracing a Roman hand in its provisions, although the
final resource of the Duel was of barbaric origin. On
the other hand no mention is made of the warranty of
land in the Liber de Legibus Amglic, which is of con-
temporaneous origin with the appointment of Glanville
as great justiciar, and was probably compiled by that
eminent lawyer, if we believe the account of Roger de
Hoveden, his contemporary.!

The obligation of warranty under the feudal system
seems to have been limited in the earler times to two
cases, in the first of which, the lord having granted land
in fee and the feudatory having done homage for the
land, the lord in return was bound to defend the tenant's
title to the fee. The second case was where dower
having been charged on the land the heir took the land
under the obligation of warranting to the widow her
dower. These are the only two cases of warranty speci-
fied in the earliest collection of Norman laws and cus-
toms, which were in force before the separation of the
duchy of Normandy from the crown of England. It
is clear, therefore, that the English courts in the reign
of Henry II. were not indebted to the usages of Nor-
mandy for their law as to the warranty of land, which
had passed by donation, or by sale, or by exchange from
one owner to another, nor can we discover in any of
the barbarie codes the germs of the English law of
warranty. We are disposed, therefore, to regard the


! Chronica Magistri Rogeri de Hovedene, Rolls Edition, vol. ii, p. 215.


INTRODUCTION, xiii


English law of warranty in Bracton's time as judge-
made law, which had grown up out of the decisions of
the justiciaries of the Bench, the principles of whose
decisions were applied by the justiciaries itinerant to
cases as they arose on their circuits, and by the viscounts
in their county courts whenever they were empowered by
a royal writ to entertain a plea of right. The history
of this early period of English law remains still to be
written, but: we fear that much of that history must
ever remain obscure froin the circumstance that legal
principles were the subjects of oral tradition and the
records of the doms or judgments, in which they were
applied to cases as they arose, are but fragmentary.
For instance much of the legal history of a reign so
modern as that of Henry III. must for ever remain
unknown because there are no continuous records of
the judgments of the Curia Regis, nor are there in fact
any Year Books of an earlier date than the reign of
Edward I. On the other hand the Authoritative Roll of
our statute law extends no further back than the Statute
of Gloucester 6 Edw. I. a9 1278. There is reason, how-
ever, to believe from the appearance of the Great Roll
of the Statutes, which is preserved in the Public Record
Office, that at some time or other there were membranes
containing laws of an earlier date, which have been
detached from the Roll. We have alluded to this fact
in the introduction to vol. v., and we feel the more
called upon to repeat the observation, inasmuch as Brac-
ton in his chapter on Warranty has preserved to us the
record of a lost statute of the reign of Henry IIL, which
was of no slight importance in its bearing upon the
practice of vouching the king in those days as a war-
rantor. There is no trace of this statute to be dis-
covered in the Public Record Office. Mr. William
Hardy, the Deputy-keeper of the Public Records, has
courteously directed search to be made in the various
collections of records under his charge, but there is a
R 2657. b


xiv INTRODUCTION.


gap in the Close Rolls for the year 1251 as well as in
the Abbreviatio Placitorum for that year, and in some
years the Rolls are so decayed as to be illegible. .The
circumstances under which the Statute in question was
made are as follows. /

Bracton introduces the subject of the king being bound
in certain cases to warrant by instancing the case of a
tenement, which may have been specially charged with
a warranty, passing as an escheat into the hands of the
lord the king, and respecting which the tenant alleges
that he cannot answer without the king. He further
instances other cases, where the king himself is in seisine
of the tenant’s homage and service, or where the tenant
is in possession of a charter of confirmation from the
king. It seems to have become a frequent practice in
Bracton’s time for a tenant, whose object it was to pro-
tract a suit in a plea of right, to avail himself without
any just grounds of the excuse that he could not answer
‘without the king, in which case the pleasure of the king
would have to be awaited, in like manner as in an assise
of Novel Disseysine (fol. 212), or in an assise of Mort-
Daneester (fol. 218). Witha view therefore to put an end
to this abuse of the forms of justice Bracton states in his
description of the dedication of the Church of the Abbey
of Hayles in Gloucestershire (fol. 382 b.), that it was
provided and granted in the presence of the king and in
the presence of nine bishops and of earl Richard and of
several other earls, “That no one henceforth shall name
the king in a judgment (as above stated) unless it be
so, that the king is bound to make compensation, if
the tenant shall lose, and according to what was then
adjudged between the earl of Gloucester and the abbot
of St. Edmunds, because the charters of the abbot,
through which he said that he could not answer
without the king, said only that the king rendered,
granted, and confirmed, and spoke of no warranty
whereby he was bound to make compensation, if the


INTRODUCTION, XV


“ abbot should lose. . And it is to be known that to say
* that I connot answer without the king is nothing else
* than to vouch him to warranty, although it is by other
* words."

Upon this passage Mr. Reeves in his History of the
English Law, vol. 1. ch. vii. p. 424 (edition of 1869),
observes that “ this provision was an act of the legislature,
* andis one of those many Acts of Parliament which are
“ now lost. The date of this provision is not mentioned
* by Bracton."- `

We are able, however, with the help of Matthew Paris,
to fix the date of the dedication of the church of Hayles,
which had been built by Richard earl of Cornwall as a
votive offermg to commemorate his escape from ship-
wreck. It took place on the Nones of November (5
Nov.) A.D. 1251, according to a brief notice in Matthew
Paris’ Historia Anglorum, vol. iii. p. 115. Rolls edition.
The same author has also given us a very full account of
the ceremony observed at the dedication of the church
of Hayles, as wellas of the expenses incurred on that
occasion by earl Richard, which he. narrates upon the
authority of earl Richard himself.

* Eodem quoque anno (A.D. 1251) nonis Novembris,
* vigilia scilicet sancti Leonardi, comes Ricardus sollemp-
* piter et magnifice nimis fecit dedicari ecclesiam de
* Hales, quam magnis fundaverat sumptibus, et zedificia
* construxerat prout in mari voverat, quando a Was-
* conia rediens in mari suborta tempestate. periclita-
* batur, vix portum attingens in Cornubia. Erant
* autem in memorata dedicatione presentes dominus
“rex et regina, et fere omnes Anglie magnates et
* prelati, episcopi vero tredecim, qui omnes missam
' « die dedicationis celebrarunt, quilibet vero ad suum
* altare, Lincolniensisque ad majus altare missam
« sollempniter valde decantavit. Erat autem dies
« Dominiea, in qua splendide et ordinate optimates


cum episcopis et aliis carne vescentibus coepulabantur,
b 2


^


PN


xvi INTRODUCTION.


* religiosi vero piscium multitudine et varietate re-
* fieiebantur, seorsum collocati. ^ Erantque ibidem
* milites plus quam trecenti. Istius nempe' festi
* sollempnis et convivii magnitudinem ad plenum si
* describerem; limites transgredi dicerer veritatis. Mihi
* autem Matthzeo Parisiensi super hoc edoceri cupienti,
* ne falsa huie libro insererem, sub indubitata certitu-
* dine Comes significavit, quod omnibus sumptibus
* computatis in ipsius ecclesie constructione decem
“ millia marcas exposuerat, addens quoddam verbum
* memorabile, immo et commendabile: utinam Deo
* complaceret, ut omnia, quz in castro de Walingeford:
* expendi, tam sapienter et tam salubriter expendissem.”
Chronica Majora, vol. v., p. 262, Rolls edition, a° 1251.

We obtain from the same author the further informa-
tion in his Historia Anglorum, vol. iii. p. 65, under the
year 1249, that the church of the abbey of Beaulieu was
dedicated in that year in the presence of the king and
of his brother earl Richard and of many other magnates
and prelates, and that the abbot of Beaulieu. consented
on that occasion to establish a new house of Cistercian
monks at Hayles, so as to enable earl Richard to fulfil
his vow, and that he supplied it with twenty monks and
thirty brethren. This new establishment became the
nucleus of the famous abbey of Hayles, in the erection
of which earl Riehard ineurred what Matthew Paris
deemed to be a lavish expenditure, and whither the
mortal remains of the founder himself were brought as
to their last home in the month of March in ihe year
1272. Of this latter fact a record is preserved in the
Chronieles of the mayors and sheriffs of London in the
Liber de Antiquis Legibus, p. 144, of which the MS. is
preserved in the archives of the Guildhall of the city of
London. ;

That a statute of the tenor set forth by Bracton was
in force in Fleta’s time may be inferred from a passage
in Fleta, L. vi, cap. 23, § 18, which is to this effect. .


INTRODUCTION. xvi


^ Poterit etiam rex inter alios obligari, vocari tamen
non potest de recto, nec summoniri et quo casu
dicendum est quod sine rege respondere non poterit,
eo quod cartam suam habet de confirmatione vel
de donatione, et si amitteret, rex ei teneretur per
cartam illam ad escambium: et nisi rex teneatur
ad escambium, provisum est, quod pretextu talium
cartarum prolatarum in judicio non supersedeant
“ justiciarii ad procedendum."


There is no trace of any such provision having been
made in any of the early statutes of the reign of Ed-
ward I., which dealt with the subject of vouching to
warranty, so as to allow us to suppose that Fleta had
in his mind legislation of a date later than the reign of
Henry IIL It is allowable therefore to conclude that
Fleta had in view the identical Statute of Hayles, of
which Bracton has preserved for us the text. It de-
serves to be noted that at the time when the church of
the abbey of Hayles was consecrated king Henry TII.
was ruling without a justiciar, or à chancellor, or a
ireasurer, and it is possible that there may have been
an omission to embody the new provision made on that
occasion in a royal writ directed to the sheriffs through-
out the realm, and to the justiciaries in. Eyre, ordering
the latter to publish it in their Iter. Such a circum-
stance would also serve to account for the careless observ-
ance of the statute by the justitiaries in Eyre, inasmuch
as in the year 1258 the barons of the realm formally com-
plained in their schedule of grievances presented to the
king in the parliament of Oxford that the king's jus-
titiaries failed to give effect to the law, where a tenant
claimed not to answer without the king.


“§ 12, Item petunt remedium de hoe, quod dominus
* rex aliquando pluribus dat per cartam suam aliena
* jura, dicens illa esse eschzeta sua, unde tales dicunt,
“ quod non debent nee possunt respondere sine domino


xvili INTRODUCTION.


* rege. Et cum justitiarii hoc ostendunt domino regi,
* nihil justitie in hac parte factum est.”

We are ignorant as to the authorship of Fleta, beyond
what is disclosed by the author himself in his Prooemium,
which he seems to have borrowed nearly verbatim from
Glanville, and to which he has appended the following
passage: “ Tractatus autem iste, qui Fleta merito pote-
* yit appellari, quia in Fleta de Jure Anglicorum fuit
* compositus; in tres partes dividitur principales."
Selden, however, in his Dissertatio ad Fletam has shown,
that there is good reason from the evidence supplied by
the work itself to believe that Fleta was composed
shortly after 20 Edw. L, if not in that year; and
further from the reference therein to proceedings in the
court of the steward of the king's house (Seneschallus
Aule), that the writer of the work was personally
familiar with the Steward's Rolls. Further the writer's
familiarity with the law as laid down by Bracton has
led Selden to conjecture that he was one of the king's
justiciaries, who had been committed to the Fleet prison
in 1288 for corrupt practices. On the other hand the
Fleet prison is mentioned in Fleta, p. 83, as the prison
to which the marshall of the king's exchequer was em-
powered to transmit prisoners, who had been committed
by the barons of the exchequer for debts due to ‘the
king, and on this ground it is not unreasonable to sup-
pose that the author may have been a lawyer employed
in the household of king Edward L, who had been com-
mitted to the Fleet prison for some irregularity in his
accounts.

That the law as settled by the Statute of Hayles on
the subject of vouching the king as a warrantor was in
foree in the reign of Edward I. may be gathered from
the French treatise, which passes under the name of
Britton, and whieh was probably completed in its pre-
sent form subsequently to the completion of Fleta. The
internal evidence in support of this hypothesis is partly


INTRODUCTION. XiX


affirmative and partly negative. The affirmative evi-
dence is of this kind. The writer of Britton cites the
Statute of Westminster the Third (Quia emptores ter-
rarum) which was passed in 18 Edw. L, as “a new
“ Constitution.” No subsequent change in the law is
noticed by him, and as he states that the penalty for
breaking out of prison was death, it may be presumed
that he made this statement prior to the enactment of
the 23 Edward L, by which the penalty of death for
that offence was abolished. These two landmarks serve
to guide us to the conclusion that the treatise of Britton
was completed sometime between 18 Edw. I. and 23
Edw. L, notwithstanding that Chief Justice Prisot in
the reign of Henry VI. has stated that the treatise of
Britton was written two years after the Statute of West-
minster the First (3 Edw. L). Lord Chief Justice Coke,
however, was not infallible in some of his criticisms
upon Bracton, so it may be pardonable for Lord Chief
Justice Prisot to have passed too hasty a judgment
upon Britton's work, if the reporter has not done the
Lord Chief Justice of the Common Pleas some injustice
in writing deux ans instead of douze ans. The cir-
cumstance, that in his chapter on Charters Fleta has
abridged the text of Bracton without modifying it in
accordance with the changes in the law introduced by
the Statute of Westminster the Third (Quia emptores
terrarum), makes rather against Selden's suggestion that
he was one of the king’s justiciaries. Mr. F. M. Nichols
in his excellent edition of Britton has gone very fully
into the question of the authorship of that work, and has
pointed out that the passages, in which reference is
made to the later statutes of Edw. L, have not the
appearance of being interpolations. He is disposed to
think that the author of the work was one of the royal
clerks. There is also some reason to think that the
author of Britton was acquainted with Fleta, and that
he has deserted the guiding hand of Bracton in a


XX INTRODUCTION.


matter of ecclesiastical law, on the question of a vicar-
age merging in a parsonage notwithstanding the living
had been taxed by the ordinary for the reasonable
support of a vicar.  Bracton, fol 241 b. Fleta; l. v.,
c.14, § 9. Britton, l. iv., ch. iii, § 7. It is possible on
the other hand that Britton may have been misled by
an inaccurate MS. of Bracton’s text. Under any cir-
cumstance we consider this misstatement of a cardinal
point of ecclesiastical law to be conclusive against the
opinion that the author of Britton was John le Breton,
Bishop of Hereford.

If it be assumed that Britton was completed a few
years after Fleta, although it would be a bold conjecture
to suppose that the author of Britton was acquainted
with the MS. of Fleta, we find the law as to vouehing
the king to warrant thus laid down, that, where a party
simply vouched the king to warrant in virtue of a
charter, the assise should not be stayed (l. iii, ch. xi,
$ 22), but where the tenant produced a charter whereby
the king was bound to warrant and to exchange (à la
' garrauntie et as eschaunges) the assise should stand over,
but not otherwise (l. ii, ch. xxii, § 7). No reference
however is made to any constitution on the subject, but
the ruling of the king's court seems to have been in full
accordance with the Statute of Hayles of 1251.

We have been enabled through the courtesy of Mr.
Wilham Hardy, Deputy Keeper of the Public Records
to ascertain that there is no record in the Coram Rege
Roll of 35 H. ILI. (Tower Series) of the judgment in the
case of the abbot of S. Edmunds vouching the king as
a warrantor against the earl of Gloucester, of which


! Bracton’s reading is, * et hoe ? The authority for this opinion
dico msi taxata fuerit per ordi- | is a passage which occurs in some
* narios ad rationabilem sustenta- | of the MSS. of the Flores Historize
* tionem vicarii.” Fleta reads, | of Matthew of Westminster but
* et hoc ubi taxata fuerit." which is wanting in others. ;


[17


INTRODUCTION. XXI


Bracton has preserved a notice, as taking place on occa-
sion of the dedication of the church of the abbey of
Hayles. There is indeed an entry in the Roll, which
passes in the printed list as the Coram Rege Roll of
35 H. IIT. This entry is of considerable interest, as it
has reference to the limitation imposed on suits of mort-
dancester by the Statute of Merton, but this Roll from
its internal evidence must be assigned properly to
42 H. IIL, and the error of the printed catalogue shows
how desirable it is that the contents of the Coram Rege
Rolls themselves should be printed.


PrAcrTA CoRAM REGE [Queen's Bench, Crown side]
M. 14., 35 Henry III. (Tower Series.)
[Zhis Roll is evidently the Roll of 49 Henry 3.]
Adhuc de Quindena sèi Michis.

Norff § Si$ Banyard petit vsus Barthñň Banyard
duas carucat tre t dimid cum ptit in Ristoñ ut jus sui
Yc. Et unde quidam Rogus antecessor suus fuit seisit?
in dñico suo ut de feodo t jure tempe H. regis avi avi
dii regis qui nüc est anno t die quo idem Rex fuit
vivus t mortuus capiens inde explet ad valené ‘tc. Et
de ipo Rogo descendit jus pdče (re cuidam Fulconi ut
fit heredi. Et de ipo Fulcone cuidam Rogo ut fif t
heredi. Et de ijo Rogo isti Sif qui nic petit ut fit t
heredi. Et qd tale sit jus suü të. off?t të.

Et Barttis venit t dic qd non debet ei inde respon-
dere. Quia dié qd p pvisione fcam apd Mertoü pvisü
fuit t constituti qd nullus, implacitatus de aliquo
tenefito, tehletur respondere de tam longa seisina scit
de tépe H. regis avi avi te. ni aliquis antecessor petentis
vi ipe petens movet placitü infra annü quo pdéa pvisio
de M?tofi fca fuit. Et desicut ipe in narracone sua men-
Coem facit de tepe pdci H. ř. avi avi. cu ipe n° aliquis
antec suo; infra annü quo anno ista constituto fca fuit
aliquod placitü movebat v eü vt antec suos pet judi


xxil INTRODUCTION.


Et Sim dié qd quidam Fulco avus suus infra annu
quo pdéa pvisio de M?toñ féa fuit inplacitavit quenda
Bartim Bany anteé ipius Barthi de pdéa ?ra in Cur
Robti ft Walli p quoddam bie de reto. Et postea in
Com Norwié in quo Com responsü fuit qd idem Barttis
nich juris clamabat in pdéa tra ni noie custodie ci
Robto Banyard qui tie fuit infra etate t in custodia
sua ob quod bre ipius Fulconis cassatü fuit. Et qd ita
sit petit qd inquiratur p priam.

Et q pdés Sif nicli ostendit p quod ipe vi aliquis
antecessos suog ung implacitavit ipm Barthm vt antec
suos nip simplex dictu suü n° potest ostendere quo anno
pdém placitü fuit in Com vt eoram quali vieecofi ne
ostendit aliquod bře p quod placitavit. Consiđatū est
qd Bdés Barths t li sui teneat in pace quiet de pdéo
Sim qt hed suis imppetuu. Et Sim in mia.

Thus much for the Statute of 35 H. III. regulating the
right of the subject to vouch the king as a warrantor, of
which Bracton alone has preserved to us a record. It
appears that on this occasion the king held a court
previous to the dedication of the. church of Hayles, in
which he gave judgment in a cause between the earl of
Gloucester and the abbot of St. Edmund’s, wherein the
abbot had alleged that he could not make answer with-
out the king, who had granted and confirmed to him the
land in dispute. The king’s court decided adversely to the
abbot’s exception, and it was with a view to prevent in
future any such defence being set up, except in cases
where the king had undertaken to make compensation,
if his grantee should be ousted by a claimant of superior
right, that the Statute of Hayles was passed. If a con-
jecture may be hazarded in explanation of the fact that
a statute was superadded to a judgment Coram Rege on
this occasion, it may have been so provided by way of
precaution, as the judgment touched the rights of an
abbot, that the assent of a large body of prelates should
be obtained to a provision, which should be binding in


INTRODUCTION. xxili


the ease of royal grants made to ecclesiastical bodies
equally as to lay persons.

We have already mentioned a peculiarity- of the
English legal system of warranty, under which, if the
purchaser of land should be ousted in a suite De Recto
by a rightful owner, and the vendor should have no
other land wherewith to make the purchaser compensa-
tion, the purchaser would have to wait until the vendor
should have acquired other property. We find, however,

a statement of another mode of proceeding (fol. 386 b.),
as applieable both to Christians and to Jews, who had
noland. After reciting the terms of an alternative writ
for the caption of the land of a warrantor up to the
value of the compensation to be made to a purchaser,
who has been ousted by a claimant of superior right, the
chapter is thus continued: “Si Christianus vel Judeus,
“ qui terram non habuerint, de qua distringi possint,
“ eum vocati fuerint ad warrantizandum, precipiatur
* vicecomiti quod habeat corpora eorum, quia ibi non
* poterit captio terre fieri ad valentiam. Judeeus vero
“nihil proprium habere potest, quia, quiequid acqui-
* yit, non sibi acquirit sed regi, quia non vivunt
* sibi ipsis sed aliis, et sie aliis acquizunt et noh sibi
* ipsis," p. 50. Both of these passages are omitted in
the two Rawlinson MSS., C. 159 and C. 160, and in the
two Bodleian MSS., Corbet and Fletewood. On the other
hand, the first passage occurs in the Harleian MSS. 656,
763, 817, 3416, and 3422, whilst the second passage is
omitted in them all. In contrast to the above MSS.
both passages occur in the Harleian MSS. 653 and 1242,
and in MS. Reg. 9 E. 15.

As none of the above MSS. can claim to be of an
origin coeval with the life of Bracton himself, we cannot
appeal to any of them as conclusive that either passage
is an interpolation. It is necessary, therefore, to con-
sider what is the æ prior? probability of one or both of
the passages being part of Bracton’s original text. It


XXIV INTRODUCTION.


has been shown in the introduction to vol. ii. that
Bracton’s death may with good reason be assigned to
the year 1268. His work therefore must have been
completed before the statute of 51 H. IIL (ae 1271)
forbade the Jews to hold freehold property, more par-
ticularly as in Chapter v. § 7 of his First Book, “de
* Acquirendo Rerum Dominio” (fol. 13), he says, “ Like-
“ wise a donation may be made to men under religious
“ vows, as well as to others to whom gifts may be made.
* Likewise to Jews as well as to Christians, unless the
* mode of donation imports the contrary ;" and he re-
peats the same observation in Chapter xix., § 4, of the
same book (fol. 47 b.). It seems from these passages, that
Bracton himself contemplated the possibility of a Jew
equally as of a Christian having land wherewith to
make compensation, and accordingly he felt called upon
to deal with the contingency of the Jew as well as of
the Christian not having any such land. That the pas-
sage is part of the original text of Bracton derives sup-
port from what he states further on in paragraph 13 of
the same chapter, p. 57: * When a person who has
* been vouched to warrant is a Christian or a Jew, and
* has no land in fee, which ean be taken into the hand
* of the lord the king, or upon which a distress can be
* made, let it be enjoined to the viscount that he present
* their persons on the first day. And on this matter a
* ease will be found in Holy Trinity term in the fourth
* year of King Henry, concerning Isaac, the Jew of
* Norwich, and in Hilary and in Easter terms about the
^ beginning." It is clear from this passage that Bracton
held it to be settled law in his day, that a Jew might
possibly be in possession of land, upon which a distress
might be made, and that, if he had no such land and was
vouched to warrant, the viseount might seize his person
and compel his appearance in court. If it be assumed
then for the moment that the first of the two passages is
in all probability part of the original text of Bracton, it


INTRODUCTION. XXV


being in harmony with other passages in his work, let
us examine the second passage commencing * Judzus
“ vero, &c., which has somewhat the look of a side-note
that has found its way into the text, and which seems
rather to conflict with what precedes. The passage is in
fact descriptive of the normal status of the Jews in
England, as described in the Collection of Leges Angli-
 eans, which Roger de Hoveden has inserted in his
Chronieles as having been published by Ranulf de Glan-
ville after he had been appointed Great Justiciar of
England, a» 1180. The text of the law applicable to
Jews, as set out in the Royal Manuscript in the British
Museum, which is in a handwriting of that period (MS.
Reg. 14. C. 2.) is as follows :


De Judeis in regno constitutis,
“Sciendum est quoque, quod omnes Judæi, ubicun-
que in regno sint, sub tutela et defensione domini
regis debent esse, nee quislibet illorum alicui diviti
“ se potest subdere sine regis licentia. Judæi et om-
“ma sua Regis sunt. Quod si quispiam detinuerit
“ eis, pecuniam eorum perquirat rex tanquam suam
* propriam." § 25. t

There is therefore no diffieulty in supposing that the
second passage, “Judæus vero, &c." is also part of the
original text of Bracton. The MS. Reg. 9 E. 15, in
which it occurs, is the work of a superior class of scribe,
and has been copied after a good original, as it will be
found to clear up one or two difficult passages, in
which the scribe of the best of the two Rawlinson
MSS. has been confused. A strong argument also in
favour of both the passages being part of the original
text of Bracton is derived from the fact, that within
three years after Bracton’s death the Statute of 51
H. III. (a° 1271) was passed, of which the text is pre-
served in the Appendix to the Liber de Antiquis Legi-
bus, p. 235, already referred to as being in the Archives


XXV1 i INTRODUCTION.


of the Guildhall of the City of London, and which is
as follows :

* Ordinavimus et statuimus pro nobis et heredibus
* nostris, quod nullus Judzeus liberum tenementum
* habeat in maneriis, terris, tenementis, feodis, red-
* ditibus vel tenuris quibuseunque per cartam, do-
* num, feoffamentum, confirmationem seu quameunque
* obligationem, vel quocunque alio modo.” It is hardly
reasonable to suppose that the passage commencing
with the words “Judzus vero" has been interpolated
after this Statute of 51 Henry III. prohibited Jews
from possessing land even as a donation, and it is still
more diffieult to suppose that it was interpolated after
Edward I. came to the throne in 1272, for he treated
the Jews far more harshly than his predecessor had
done, and he banished them altogether from the realm
of England in 1290. It is rather to this latter circum-
stance that we incline to attribute the omission of the
passages, which we have been discussing, from the
majority of the extant MSS., of which the handwrit-
ing may with good reason be assigned to the latter part
of the thirteenth century, or to the early part of the
fourteenth century. It deserves note that Fleta, which
was written shortly after 1290, makes no mention of
the Jews in the portion of the work, which treats of
warrantors under a writ of right. It would be a
curious problem, if any of the numerous abridgments of
Braeton, which are preserved in private libraries, could
be shown to be identical with the abridgment of
Bracton’s work made by Gilbert de "Thornton; to ascer-
tain whether the passages in question concerning the


! Selden, informs us that at the | coloured and gilt letters, and within
commencement of Thornton’s | it was an illuminated drawing, re-
abridgment, which, like the original | presenting a king seated on his
work of Bracton, began with the | throne with six judges standing on
words, “in Rege qui recte regit," | his left side in their robes of office
the first word was written in large | and coiffed,


INTRODUCTION. xxvil


Jews have found a place in his abridgment. Gilbert
de Thornton was Chief Justiciary Gone 1289 to 1295.
He was therefore Chief J usticiary when the Jews were
expelled from England in 1290. That measure was
determined upon in the May Session of the Parliament
preceding the Session in which the Statute of Quia
Emptores was enacted on 8th July 1290. We might
therefore expect that the Chief Justiciary would omit
from his abridgment, which according to Selden was
made in 20 Eds; I. (ae 1292), the passages in question,
which referred to the Jews, as obsolete. Selden informs
us that the Chief Justiciary did not insert into his abridg-
ment any of the Statutes made since Bracton’s time, but
he has omitted many things, for instance, many of the
judgments cited by Bracton. On the. other hand
although the MS. of the Chief Justiciary, which Selden
had in his possession, was much impaired by time and
many folios of it mutilated, Selden has preserved to us
the titles of the eight parts into which it was divided,
and the subject of warranty is not specified in any of
them.

Bracton before leaving the subject of warranty dis-
cusses the case where the king is bound to warrant, and
he makes the observation that the king cannot be
vouched as private persofis are vouched, because he
cannot be summoned by writ (ch. ii, § 9.. He has
already mentioned, in treating of an assise of Mortdan-
cester (fol. 270 b.), that where the tenant objects that
he cannot answer without the king, because he holds
his land from the king's gift as in serjeanty or as his
escheat, that the pleasure of the king will have to be
requested. This is in accordance with what he has
previously observed in treating of the dignity of the
king, that the proper mode of proceeding in a case in
whieh the king is concerned is by way of petition, since
a writ does not run against him (fol 5b.). The liability,


xxviii INTRODUCTION.


however, of the king to warrant in respect of a feoff-
ment of his ancestors did not, extend to feoffments made
by the kings who reigned before the Conquest, for the
king himself was not their heir, and accordingly he was
not bound to warrant their feoffments, unless he had by
an act of his own confirmed them. But even in cases
where the king was bound to warrant, his pleasure had
to be awaited, since necessity could not be imposed
upon him,

Bracton in Cap. xiv. De Warrantia, fol. 395 b., discusses
the question of a tenant vouching a warrantor, who is not
resident within the realm, and therefore cannot be dis-
trained if he does not appear. In such.a case, if the
vouchee should be resident in France or in Germany
and will not come, the tenant was not to expect any aid
from the king's court, and judgment would have to be
pronounced against the tenant, if the party vouched to
warrant failed to appear. It was otherwise, however,
if the vouchee, though absent from the realm of Eng-
land, should be resident in Ireland, where the king's
writ runs. In such a case the tenant might sue out a
writ from the Crown to the king's justiciary in Ireland,
commanding him to summon the party vouched by the
tenant in England as a warrantor, to show cause why
he should, not warrant, and likewise to return under
seal a record of the trial concerning the warranty. And
if it should appear that the party vouched by the tenant
ought to warrant, and he should fail to come to England
and to defend his tenant, so that judgment should go
against the tenant, the tenant was to have compensation
from the land of the vouchee in Ireland. The converse
course was to be observed, where a tenant in Ireland
should have vouched a warrantor who was resident in
England.


: INTRODUCTION. ` ; XXIX


The treatise on Exceptions, which is the concluding
- treatise of the fifth and last book of Tottell’s edition of
Bracton’s work, introduces us unexpectedly to many
questions of which the decision appertained to the
Ecclesiastical Courts, and to certain questions respect-
ing which there was a conflict between the Crown of
England and the Holy See, and in which the barons of
England asserted and successfully maintained the supre-
macy of the Crown.

An exception is defined by Bracton as actionis elisio,
a phrase somewhat difficult of translation, but which we
have rendered in English “the parrying of an action.”
He has elsewhere described an exception as a kind of
shield, for as plaintiffs are armed with actions, and are
girt as it were with swords, so defendants on the con-
trary are fortified with exceptions, and are defended as
it were with bucklers (fol. 399 b.). It is in dealing with
an exception against the jurisdiction of a court that
Bracton is led to the consideration of the subject of
jurisdiction generally, and of the divisions of it as
exercised by the ecclesiastical or by the secular forum,
as well as of the mode whereby the Court of Christianity
may be restrained from meddling with a lay feud, not-
withstanding it has the authority of letters from the
lord the Pope. In such cases a royal writ of prohibition
is to be directed to the party proceeding as well as to
the judges of the Court of Christianity, forbidding them
to entertain the suit; and after this writ has been issued,
the viscount will do nothing to enforce their judgment.
One of these writs deserves more especial notice, which
was directed to the prior and convent of Rochester
during the vacancy of the see of Rochester, and in which
the king prohibits the prior and convent of Rochester
from suing Edmund, the then Archbishop of Canter-
bury, in virtue of letters from the lord the Pope for an
account of certain payments due from the royal manor
to the.see of Rochester, but to which the said arch-

R 2657. c


XXX INTRODUCTION.


bishop was entitled as having the custody of the said
bishoprie during the vacancy of the see (fol. 403 b.).
Another writ of prohibition may be also alluded to,
which is of a totally different character, where a husband
has claimed to hold for his life per legem Anglice land
which belonged to his wife, upon the pretext that the
sons whom he had by his said wife were legitimate, not-
withstanding they were born before matrimony was
contracted with his said wife. In this case, notwith-
standing the party suing in the Court of Christianity
has obtained letters from the lord the Pope in order to
legitimate his sons in accordance with the Canon Law,
a writ of prohibition might be issued to the court on
the ground, that no ecclesiastical judge could duly pro-
ceed to hold cognizance concerning legitimacy as regards
an inheritance and succession to property, unless a trial
had been previously commenced in the King’s Court, and
bastardy had been there objected. In such a case a
mandate would be sent to the Ordinary of the place to
hold cognizance as to the legitimacy of the claimant
(fol. 405.). Bracton further observes that in all such cases
where a writ of prohibition has been transmitted to the
Court of Christianity, it is the duty of the ecclesiastical
judge to consult the king’s justiciaries as to the manner
in which he should proceed, and the king’s justiciaries
are to draw up a writ in answer to the consultation
advising the ecclesiastical judges to entertain the suit or
not, as the circumstances of the case may warrant.

After considering in detail the exceptions which may
be raised against the writ itself, Bracton proceeds to
discuss the exceptions which may be raised against the
person of the claimant, some of which are peremptory,
and others only dilatory. Of the latter perhaps the
most remarkable is the exception against the person of
the claimant on the ground of a defect of nationality
propter defectum nationis (fol. 415 b.), as if he has been
leagued with the enemies of the king, or if he be of fealty


INTRODUCTION. XXXI


to the king of France, until at least the realms become
once more common. This objection he treats more fully
in Chapter xxiv. (fol 427 b), where he. says, if an
alien by birth (alienigena) who is of fealty to the king
of France brings an action against one who is of fealty
to the king of England, no answer shall be made to such
a person, at least until the territories become common,
nor even if the king has allowed him to plead, because
as an Englishman (Anglicus) is not heard, if he implead
any one concerning lands and tenements in France, so
ought not a native of France (Francigena) and a born
alien (alienigena) who is of fealty to the king of France
to be heard, if he impleads any one in England. Bracton
then goes on to say what is deservingeof note: “But
still there are some native Frenchmen in France who
are of fealty to both kings, and have always been so
before Normandy was lost, and afterwards, and who
implead both here and there for the reason that they
“ are of fealty to both kings, such as William the Earl
Marshall resident in England, and M. de Feynes resi-
dent in France, and several. others, and so, however,
“ that if it should happen that war should arise between
“ the kings, each of them should personally remain with
* him to whom he has done allegiance, and let him do
* due service to him with whom he does not personally
“ array himself.”

Fleta, in discussing the same exception in its applica-
tion to a partner in a claim, says, “vel dicere poterit,
“ quod nihil juris clamare poterit tanquam particeps,
* eo quod est ad fidem regis Francie, quia ablieni-
* gene repelli debent in Anglia ab agendo, donec
* fuerint ad fidem regis Anglis, qui EU in Francia
* ad successionem non admittuntur, donec fuerint ad
* fidem regis Francis,” l vi, c. 48, $ 4. Fleta, how-
ever, does not follow up the subject to the extent, to
which Bracton does, in recognising instances of fealty
due from one and the same individual both to the king

e 2


xxxil INTRODUCTION.


of France and to the king of England. The instances
were perhaps rare in Bracton’s time and were relics of
the period, when the kings of England were also dukes
of Normandy, but the principle of the common law
seems to have been clear during that period, that in
order to be entitled to the privilege of English na-
tionality it was not necessary for a person to have been
born within the realm of England, provided he was born
within the king's allegiance. Such seems also to have
been Lord Coke's opinion in commenting on Littleton,
although he overdraws upon Bracton as an authority,
if the text of his Institute has not been misrendered in
the print of it.

Having defined an alien as one born in a strange
country under the obedience of a strange prince or
country, Lord Coke goes on to say “and therefore
* Bracton saith that this exception propter defectum
* nationis, should rather be propter defectum sub-
* jectionis, or as Littleton saith (which is the surest)
* out of the ligeance of the king. Note here Littleton
* saith not out of the realme, but out of the ligeance,
“ for he may be born out of the realme of England, yet
“ within the ligeance.” A difficulty, however, might
. arise, if an exception had been taken by a tenant against
a claimant born out of the realm but within the king's
allegiance, on the grounds that he was a bastard, as to
the proper Ordinary to whom the question of his parents
having been lawfully married should be remitted, and
this question seems not to have received any legislative
determination before the 25 Edw. IIL, the true" purport
of which statute does not seem to have been fully
appreciated by any of the various writers, who have
treated of the character of the children of British sub-
jects born out of the realm.


But before considering the question as to who would
be the proper Ordinary to determine the question of the


INTRODUCTION. XXXI


lawful marriage of the parents of a British subject born
out of the realm but within the king of England’s
allegiance, whose legitimacy has been impeached when
he has set himself up as the true heir in England of
his deceased father, it may be as well to consider what
was the bearing of the Statute of Merton of 20 Henry III.
upon such questions. There seems, according to Brac-
ton’s account (fol. 416 b), to have been a distinct question
entertained by the king in his court sitting judicially from
the question settled by the king in a great council purport-
ing to have been held some months afterwards, and by
which a new procedure in the king’s court in certain ques-
tions of bastardy was formally sanctioned. The difficulty
was not of modern origin, although it seems to have
reached a crisis under the archbishopric of Edmund Rich,
who had been appointed to the see of Canterbury in 18
H. ITT. (A.D. 1234). According to the Tower Roll of
the Placita coram Rege of that year, a copy of which
has been printed in the Appendix to the present volume,
a constitution was made on Thursday after the Festival
of St. Denis (9th October A.D. 1234), under which “it
“ was provided and granted that thenceforward, when
^ bastardy should have been objected to a claimant in
* the court of the lord the king on the ground tbat he
* was born before matrimony had been contracted be-
“ tween his father and mother, a case should be trans-
* mitted to the bishop of the place to inquire whether
“ such person was born before or after the marriage of
* his parents. And that in such an inquest no appeal
* should lie out of the realm." There can be no doubt
as to the authenticity of this Roll, which is preserved
in the Public Record Office, and which is identical, as
regards the names of the members of the king's great
council subscribed to it as witnesses, with Bracton's Roll.
The presumption is accordingly that the date assigned
to this law in Bracton's text is not correct, although
Bracton may be perfectly correct in stating “that on
4 the morrow of St. Vincent’s Day, to wit the 23rd day


XXXIV INTRODUCTION.


* of January in 20 H. IIL, the bishops, with the vene-
* rable father Edmund archbishop of Canterbury at
* their head, protested that they could not answer any
* such question without prejudice to the ecclesiastical
* dignity, and that they requested the king and the
* magnates to give their consent to this, that children
* born before matrimony might be legitimate in all
* respects as children born after it, to which all the
* earls and barons, as many as were there, answered
« with one voice that they were unwilling to change
* the laws of England, which up to that time had been
* jn use and approved." According to this account of
what took place on the morrow of St. Vincent's Day
A.D. 1236 the episcopal body were innovators, and the
barons of the realm were the supporters of the ancient
customs of the realm of England. Such, however, is not
. the view, which Bishop Grosseteste of Lincoln took of
the issue raised on that occasion between the bishops and
the barons, and which must be taken into account, if we
would understand the meaning of the struggle, in which
the barons refused on that occasion to give way. It
would seem from two letters of the famous bishop of
Lincoln addressed to William de Ralegh, treasurer of
Exeter Cathedral and one of the king's justiciaries, that
before the time of Richard de Luci, the great justiciar
of Henry II. and the stern opponent of Archbishop
Becket, a custom had prevailed in England, of which
Bishop Grosseteste gives an account in these words:
“ Et ut seniorum relatione didici, consuetudo etiam in
“hoe regno antiquitus obtenta et adprobata tales
* (natos ante matrimonium) legitimos habuit et hære-
“ des, unde in signum legitimationis nati ante matri-
* monium consuerunt poni sub pallio super parentes
^ extento in matrimonii solemnizatione.”! This ancient
practice, however, seems to have been overruled by
Richard de Luci, according to William de Ralegh's


! Roberti Grosseteste Epistolam. Rolls’ Edition p. 89.


INTRODUCTION, XXXV


statement, who cites in reply to the bishop a judgment
of Richard de Luci’s: * Quod bastardus sub pallio super
^ parentes nubentes extento positus surgit bastardus."
Richard de Luci filled the office of Great Justiciar from
1154 to 1179, and it is probable that this judgment of .
Richard de Luci’s was delivered shortly after the death
of Archbishop Becket, A.D. 1170, and that it accounts for
the decretal letter of Pope Alexander III., which was
addressed to the Bishop of Exeter in 1172, and in which
the Pope says that the effect of marriage is to legitimise
all children born prior to it. “ Tanta vis est matrimonii,
* ut, qui antea sunt geniti, post matrimonium contrac-
“ tum legitimi habeantur" That Richard de Luci’s
judgment was held to be conclusive as to the law and
custom of England, notwithstanding that the letter of
Pope Alexander III. was followed up by a decree of the
Lateran Council of 1179, may be gathered from the
work attributed to Ranulf de Glanville, the successor
of Richard de Luci, who writes thus: “Circa hee au-
* tem orta est quzestio, si quis, antequam pater matrem
* suam desponsaverit, fuerit genitus vel natus, utrum
* talis filius sit legittimus heres, cum postea matrem
* desponsaverit. Et quidem licet secundum canones
“et leges Romanas talis filius sit legittimus heres,
* tamen secundum jus et consuetudinem regni nullo
* modo tanquam heres in hereditate sustinetur, vel
* hereditatem de jure regni petere potest.”

It would also appear from a further passage in Glan-
ville, that the praetice in the king's court in his time
was, when the objection of bastardy had been raised on
the ground of the claimant having been born before
the marriage of his parents, to send the question to
the ecclesiastical court for its determination, and accord-
ing to its decision to adjudge the inheritance to the.
claimant or to reject his claim. The change now made
in the procedure under the Statute of Merton would
seem to have been called for by an objection raised by


-


XXXVl INTRODUCTION.


the bishops themselves to make a return, that the party
was a bastard on the ground that it appeared that the
marriage of his parents took place after his birth ; and
they requested the king and the magnates to consent
that the children born before matrimony might be in
all respects as legitimate as the children born after it.
The magnates, however, refused to make this concession
to the bishops, and although it cannot well be doubted
that this portion of Bracton's work has not received
from its author a final correction, it may, I think, be
gathered from it that the king obtained on this occasion
from the great council of the realm its consent, that
the king might exercise the option of committing an
inquest to the Ordinary, or of making the inquest in
his own court, in cases where the exception taken
against the claimant was that by the law and custom
of England he was a bastard, inasmuch as he was born
before the espousals and matrimony of his parents;
and still further, that in cases where the inquest has
been committed to the Ordinary, and the Ordinary has
answered obscurely by reason of legitimacy according
to the statutes of the church being diverse from legi-
timacy according to the laws and customs of England,
the king’s court should be at liberty to hold a further
inquest, whether the claimant was born before or after
the matrimony of his parents.

To what extent we are justified in believing that
Bishop Grosseteste was correct in saying, that before the
time of Richard de Luci the marriage law of England
was identical with tle civil law as regards the legitima-
tion of ante-nuptial offspring, it is difficult to decide,
Bishop Grosseteste was a very remarkable prelate. Canon
Stubbs in his History of England describes him as the
most learned, the most acute, the most holy man of his
time, the most devoted to his spiritual work, the most
trusted teacher and confidant of princes, and at the same
time a most faithful servant of the Roman Church


INTRODUCTION. xxxvii
(vol. ii. p. 325, library edition, 1880). He appears from
his letters to William de Ralegh to have thrown himself
heart and soul into the struggle to obtain a reversal of
Richard de Luci’s judgment. That there had been
such a judgment seems to be admitted by William de
Ralegh, and that it bore hard upon the humbler classes
may be inferred from the conduct of Bishop Grosseteste,
who was essentially a man of the people, who, according
to Matthew Paris, Hist. Anglorum ii. p. 376, Rolls edition,
declined on his election to the see of Lincoln to be pre-
sented to the king, and who took the side of Simon de
Montfort against the Crown. But there are other reasons
for believing that Bishop Grosseteste’s account of the early
English custom may have been correct. The custom was
general amongst the Teutonic nations, who used the ‘phrase
(mantelkinden) mantlechildren, as descriptive of children
legitimised by their parents at the time of their mar-
riage. It was also general amongst the Franks, amongst
whom the phrase “ Mettre les enfants du marriage
* sous le poesle,” or “le paisle” (pallium) is stated in
the Institutes Contumiéres of Antoine Loysel to be “la
* maniere de legitimiser les enfants nés avant le mariage.”
At the same time mantlechildren were debarred under
the German feudal law from succession to great fiefs.”
Further that the barons were interested as a body in the
rejection of the rule of the civil law cannot be doubted,
for it undermined many portions of the feudal law, for
instance, the system of escheats, of wardships, of dower,
&c., whilst it favoured marriages of disparagement, But
how are we to account for the Scotch nation adopting


National de Bescherelle ainé.


Paris, 1862.


1 Mettre un enfant sous le poéle,
se dit en parlant d'un enfant né


avant le mariage et sur lequel on
étend la po?le à la cérémonie
nuptiale, pour marquer qu'on le
reconnait et qu'on le légitime à
la face de l'Eglise. Dictionnaire


* Oh. F. Schorcht, die Unfahig
Keit der Mantelkinde zur Léhus
folge, Jena, 1797.  Heffter, Die
Erbfolge der Mantelkinde. Berlin,
1836.


xxxviii INTRODUCTION.

the rule of the canon law in this particular matter,
which they have maintained till the present day, whilst
the English barons stiffly rejected it*? Selden recounts
an amusing story which he had read somewhere, that
when John of Gaunt solemnised his marriage with
dame Catherine Swynford in 20 R. IL, and their ante-
nuptial progeny were legitimised, the children who
were intended to be legitimised were placed under a
cloak or mantle extended over the heads of the parents
in the Parliament House.

It was thought, however, necessary on that occasion
to have the antenati legitimised in the first place by the
pope, and their legitimation recognised in letters patent
of the Crown, and subsequently ratified and confirmed
by authority of Parliament. The text of these letters
patent is recited by Sir Harris Nicolas in his Excerpta
Historica, p. 152, and he likewise gives an account of
the method whereby Henry IV., a son of John of Gaunt
by a previous marriage, endeavoured after he came to
the throne to bar any future claim on the part of the
children of dame Catherine Swynford to the Crown, as
heirs through their father.

Bracton in discussing the mode of trial where bas-
tardy has been objected to the claimant of an inheritance,
or where the claimant has impugned the title of the
tenant on the ground of bastardy, says that a writ
should go to the Ordinary of the place (ordinario loci)
on the part of the king, if the Ordinary be within the


!Sir Thomas Craig in his Jus
Feudale, which he dedicated to
King James I., says that the feudal
law at first rejected legitimation,
but in Scotland the Church had
sufficient influence to bring about a
change by introducing the canon
law. De Successionibus L. ii. Die-


gesis 13. I have not found any |


trace of * mantelkinden ” in Scot-
land, but as the liberty of legitima-
tion in Scotland exceeds that
which was allowed by the canon
law, it seems rather to have derived
its origin from the Roman civil law.
Novella constitutioDivi Justiniani,
Ixxxix.


INTRODUCTION, XANIK


realm under the power of the king. But if the Ordinary
who ought to hold cognisance be beyond the realm and
not under the power of the king, and he is not bound to
obey unless he is willing, nor can he inquire unless it
be committed to him, then the action of the claimant
may abate on account of a default of proof (fol. 419).
Bracton does not here state in what sense he uses the
term Ordinary of the place, but he elsewhere in his
treatise, De Actione Dotis, vol. iv., p. 499, states that
Martin de Pateshull, on being consulted by Peter de la
Roche, bishop of Winchester, answered that in what-
ever diocese the party making the exception had his
domicile, there should be notice given to him by the
Ordinary, that, if he wished, he should come to state
anything against the marriage, according to what should
appear to him to be expedient, on the day which the
Ordinary should appoint beforehand.  Braeton so far
furnishes us with a key to interpret the proceedings in
the Parliaments of 17 Edw. III. and 25 Edw. III. A
difficulty seems to have arisen in 17 Edw. III. with
respect to children born abroad of parents in the service
of the king, and against whom bastardy was objected
as having been born before matrimony was contracted
between their parents, to what Ordinary the king’s court
should remit the case for the purpose of deciding at
what time lawful matrimony was contracted between
the parents. The Archbishop of Canterbury appears
to have brought the question generally before the.
Parliament of 17 Edw. IIL, on which occasion it was
resolved that there was no manner of doubt that the
children of our lord the king wheresoever born, either
within or beyond the sea, were entitled to the in-
heritance of their ancestors, but with regard to the
children of others, it was the opinion of the aforesaid
prelates and magnates, and of the lawyers there present,
that by reason of diverse doubts and difficulties which
might arise in proving that they were true heirs (ver-


xl INTRODUCTION.


rois heirs), if a dispute or impediment should be raised
against their inheriting, it would be convenient to think
much before any certain law should be ordained on this
subject. That this matter had been previously recited
in the presence of our lord the king, and the said
prelates and magnates, and also the Commons, and by
them unanimously accorded and agreed as above, that
concerning the children of our lord the king there is no
doubt or difficulty that they will be heirs in whatever
part they may have been born, and as regards the right
of other children it was accorded in this Parliament that
they were also heritable, in whatever part they should
be born in the service of the king?

The question was left in this incomplete state for
seven years, during which the continued prevalence of
the plague prevented the assembly of a parliament. At
last à parliament was assembled in 25 Edw. III., and a
statute was passed which is generally entitled “ De Natis
“ ultra Mare,” and to which is prefixed in Ruffhead’s
edition of the statutes the heading “In what place bas-
“ tardy pleaded against him that is born out of the
^ realm shall be tried.” It will be seen that this statute
contains no new legislation (Novel Ley) until we come to
the sixth section, which provides as follows: “ (6.) And if it


! Qil ny ad nulle mancre de | Si fu ceste matière autre foitz re-
doute que les enfants nre Seigneur | citóe en la presence nre Seigneur
le Roi queu parte qu'ils soient neez, | le Roi et des ditz Prelatz et
par decea la miére ou par delà | Grantz et aussint les Comunes et
porteront l'eritage de lour aun- | per eux touz uniement acordez
cestres, mais quant as enfantz des | et assentiez come desus, qe des en-
autres il est avis a$ ditz prelatz et | fantz de nre Seigneur.le Roi il n'y
grauntz et as gentz di Leiilloeques | ad doute ou difficultée qu'ils ne
presentz qe pur divers doutes et | seront enheritez, queu parte qu'ils
difficultees qui purront avenir de | soient neez. Et en droit des autres
prover que tieux solent verrois | enfantz acordez est en ce Parle-
heirs, si debatz ou empeschementz | ment qu'ils soient aussint enheritez,
solent mys en lour heritages, il | quen part q'ils soient neez en
covendroit molt penser avant que | service le Roi. Rot. Parl E. iii.
certeyne Lei sur ce soit ordeignée. | p. 139.


INTRODUCTION. xh


be alleged against any such born beyond the sea that
he is a bastard, in case where the bishop ought to have
cognisance of the bastardy, it shall be commanded to
the bishop of the place, where the demand is to certify
the king’s court where the plea thereof hangeth, as of
old time has been used in case of bastardy alleged
against them which were born in England.”! It is
obvious that this provision affords a solution of the
doubts which are referred to in 17 Edw. III. as to how
the exception of bastardy should be dealt with if raised
against a person born beyond the sea of parents in the
service of the Crown, and how the difficulty should be
surmounted in proving him to bea true heir, that is,
legitimate.

We have spoken of this statute as containing no
Novel Ley until we come to the last paragraph of it, by
which we mean, in other words, that the provisions of
the statute, prior to those of the last paragraph, would
stand with the laws in force, and did not tend to change
or alter any statute then in being. There was, however,
introduced a proviso in the preceding paragraph by way
of restriction upon the mothers of such as were born
abroad, namely, that they should have passed the sea by
the licence and wills of their husbands. Barrington in his
observations on this statute remarks that this restriction
had its origin most probably in an instance of this sort
in a family of consequence. At all events it was a
restriction hitherto unknown to the common law, and
was very probably devised to prevent the recurrence of
a scandal, of which the incidents are now forgotten.

The barons of England, however, do not appear to
have objected to certain other provisions of the canon


1 Et si alleggee soit contre nul | est de certifier la Court le Roi ou
tiel nee par dela qil est bastard, | le ple est pende, si comme auncien-
en cas ou Levesque doit avoir | nement ad este usee en cas de bas-
conissance de bastardie, soit maunde | tardie alegge contre ceux, qui nas-
a Levesque du lieu laou la demande quirent en Engleterre.


xlii INTRODUCTION.


law as to legitimacy being received in England, inasmuch
as we find that the marriage law of England had been
accommodated since Glanville’s time to the ordinances
of the church in respect of putative marriages. Thus
Bracton in his treatise, De acquirendo rerum dominio,
(fol. 63) vol. i, p. 499, says, as to who ought to be styled
a legitimate heir, “ But a legitimate heir and son is he,”
he says, “whom marriage demonstrates to be legitimate,
as, for instance, he who is born of a legitimate mar-
riage, or he who inthe face of the Church is reputed
legitimate, although in truth there may not have been
a marriage, when both, as well the husband as the
wife, have been united in good faith, believing them-
selves to be coupled lawfully, when they are in truth
conjoined in consanguinity, or in affinity, or in some
other way, so that the marriage may not stand good,
or provided only one of them believes so." This was
in accordance with the. Decretal, ch. 2, 4, 17, which
Bracton cites as supporting the law of England,’ which
was still further accommodated to the canon law, C. 3,
$1 X, 4, 3, in holding that the offspring of such a
marriage were to be regarded as illegitimate, if both
parents, whilst knowing that there was a legal impedi-
ment to their marriage, should, in spite of every inter-
dict, presume to contract marriage in the face of the
Church, Bracton seems to have had before him the
text of the canon law, as he follows in this matter the
Decretal verbatim. |

Bracton makes us acquainted with a fraud upon jus-
tice, which ecclesiastical judges were accustomed to
practice in his time with a view to elude a prohibition
from the king’s court, to wit, they would summon a
party before them upon the declaration of a ground of


! Fleta 1. 1, c. 14 follows Bracton, and cites the words of the Decretal,
ch. 2, 4, 17.


INTRODUCTION. xlii


action having been made by another party, without any
writing, and would serve three monitions on the first day
| on the party summoned, and thereupon declare him forth-
with to be contumacious for not appearing, and proceed at
once to excommunicate him. After forty days the bishop
would signify to the king that the party was persisting
in his excommunication, and was contemning the keys
of the church, and thereupon the bishop would sue out
from the king a writ to seize the party. The object,
where a fraud of this kind had been practised, would be
for the most part to prevent the party excommunicated
from successfully prosecuting a civil suit in the king’s
court, for an excommunicated person was interdicted
from every legal act as a plaintiff, and the defendant
would at once take an exception to the person of such a
plaintiff on the ground that he was an excommunicated
person. It appears from the writ which the king on such
occasions was accustomed to sendto the viscount (fol. 427),
that according to the custom of England a party who
was really guilty of contumacy towards a court of
Christianity, and persevered in his contumacy for forty
days, was liable to be imprisoned until he made com-
petent satisfaction to God and to the Church (fol. 408 b.).
But after such satisfaction had been made, the Ordinary
was bound to release him, otherwise the king would set
him free. -

The Statute of 5 Elizabeth ch. 23 would thus appear
to be in substance little more than the affirmation of the
common law, for the writ which Bracton recites as
directing the viscount to enforce justice according to the
custom of England, by imprisoning the offender until
satisfaction had been made by him to Holy Church for
his contempt as well as the injury caused to her (fol. 427),
vouches the common law as the warrant of the writ.
Bracton further informs us that a party, who has once
been committed by the viscount to prison for a contempt
against an ecclesiastical court, can only be set free at the


xliv INTRODUCTION.


mandate of the lord bishop, and after the bishop has
certified that the party has satisfied the church, unless
he should have been imprisoned on a false suggestion, in
which case a writ may go forthwith to the viscount for his -
deliverance out of prison. This is one amongst the many
instances in which the recitals in the king’s writ are the
best evidence of the common law; so likewise it is not
unusual to find a special reference to the custom of the
realm in writs which initiate proceedings in prohibition
against a Court of Christianity. For instance, Bracton
states, fol. 405, that no ecclesiastical judge can duly pro-
ceed to hold cognisance concerning legitimacy as regards
an inheritance and succession to property unless a trial
has been commenced in the king’s court and the excep-
tion of bastardy has been there taken, and thus we find
in the writ of prohibition, which may be sued out, in case
that a Court of Christianity under plea of letters from
the Pope should commence such an inquest without a
mandate from the Crown, a special recital that to origi-
nate such a proceeding in the Court of Christianity is
contrary to the custom of the realm. In order also that
a sentence of excommunication should be enforced by
the civil arrest of an excommunicated party it was in-
cumbent that the sentence should issue under the autho-
rity of a, bishop, and that the king’s chancellor should
receive a letter of request from the bishop or his official.
The viscount was not at liberty to seize a party upon the
mandate of judges delegate or of an archdeacon (fol..
427). The reason for this limitation is explained more
fully in a passage in which Bracton treats of the mode
in which the king has to proceed in a case in which the
defendant is a clerical person, who has no lay fee by
which he can be distrained, and who is privileged
from personal arrest on the part of the king’s officer .
(fol 422 b). In such a case the king can issue a man- .
date to the Ordinary of the place, who has a barony, as,
for instance, to an archbishop or bishop within whose


INTRODUCTION. xlv


diocese the party is residing or has an ecclesiastical
benefice, requiring such Ordinary to cause such person to
appear before him, and the king may exercise coercion
against such Ordinary by means of his barony. In such
a case, if the clerk has a lay fee, for instance, a prebend,
through which he may be distrained, and he has refused
on appearing before the Ordinary to find sureties, the
king may issue a special precept to the bishop to distrain
the party through his prebend, and if the bishop should
fail to do so, the king may distrain the bishop himself
through his barony. And here Bracton uses a favourite
expression, speaking of the jurisdiction of the king and
of the bishop, that the spiritual sword ought to aid the
temporal sword. The bishop, however, may have a valid
excuse for not producing the clerk, for he may say that
he has no benefice in his diocese where he can be dis-
trained, or he may say that although he has such a bene-
fice he is a scholar, and is studying in the schools of Paris
or elsewhere, and that he has meanwhile done all that
he could by sequestrating his benefice, whereupon pro-
ceedings are to be superseded it seems until the clerk
has returned, so that he may be apprehended and
coerced.


That the king’s justiciaries sometimes differed from
one another in their exposition of the common law of
England is evident from more than one instance cited
by Bracton. Amongst the chief justiciaries Stephen de
Segrave is mentioned, fol. 36, as differing from William
de Ralegh on a question of petty serjeanty, and as dif-
fering from Martin de Pateshull upon a question of for-
feiture in a case where a husband has been outlawed
for felony, and his wife is an heiress in her own right.
Stephen de Segrave was of opinion that the wife in
such a case ought to forfeit her inheritance and should
never be restored to it during the lifetime of her hus-
band, but Martin de Pateshull held that the wife ought

R 2657. d


xlvi INTRODUCTION.


not to be ejected on account of the act of her husband,
neither during the life nor on the death of her husband
(fol. 130 b)  Braeton evidently holds to the opinion of
Martin de Pateshull in this case, for he proceeds to state .
the reasons of Martin’s judgment. “Martin,” he says,
* was accustomed to say that the wife ought not to be
* ejected from her inheritance on account of her hus-
“ band's felony, unless she has been convicted of having
* harboured her husband after his outlawry, or per-
* chanee if she has been from the commencement a
consenting party to the felony ; but if not, she might
well supply her husband with necessaries, if he were
beyond the realm." The last case in which Bracton
cites a judgment of Stephen de Segrave, which was at
variance with the views of his brother justiciaries, is
on the subject of the Lex Angliw, or, to use a more
modern phrase, on the subject of tenancy by curtesy,
under which a husband having married an heiress or
having received with his wife a marriage portion or
some land by way of donation, and having had children
by her, was entitled, if she predeceased him, to possess
the land during his own lifetime, whether the children
had survived their mother or not. About the case of
a first husband there was no discrepancy of opinion
amongst the king's justiciaries, but with respect to a
second. husband, who upon the death of his wife claimed
to enjoy the land during his lifetime to the exclusion
of her children by her first marriage, Stephen de Se-
grave held the practice to be unjust, and maintained
that the law of England in this matter was ill under-
stood and ill practised, for it ought to be understood
of the tirst husband and his common heirs, and not of
the second, especially when there were heirs apparent
by tho first husband. From Bracton’s statement (fol.
438) it may be inferred that William de Ralegh did
not accept ‘Stephen de Segrave’s view, but held that
the second husband could retain all that accrued during


INTRODUCTION. xlvii


the lifetime of his wife, but everything which fell into
her estate subsequently to her death appertained to her
heirs. Such also seems to have been the law in Glan-
villes time: *Si vero seeundum ceperit virum mulier
“ ipsa, idem judicium erit de secundo, quod dictum
“est de primo, sive heredem reliquerit primus, sive
“non.” L.vii,cap.18, § 4. Glanville, however, applies
the principle only to land which had been granted to
a woman as a marriage portion, subject to a service due
to a chief lord, whereas Bracton applies it to a husband
who has married a woman habentem hereditatem, vel
maritagium, vel aliquam terram ex causa donationis,
so that the principle involved in the so-called Lex
Anglic had received a more extensive application in Brac-
ton's time. This principle, however, had apparently un-
dergone considerablerestriction, when Fleta was composed,
as Fleta thus describes the Lex Anglie: * Lex quidem
^ Anglie est, ut si quis uxorem hereditatem habentem
* duxerit, vel aliam terram habuerit in feodo ratione
* maritagii vel alia causa donationis quod feodum
* habeat et liberum tenementum, si liberos inter se
* habuerint ex justis nuptiis procreatos, si ipsa præ-
* moriatur remanebit viro terra mulieris tota vita ip-
“ gius viri, sive superstites fuerint liberi, sive mortui,
* dum tamen sonum aut vocem emiserint aut clamorem
* qui audiatur inter quatuor parietes, si hoc probetur
* Lex tamen ista ad secundos viros nullo modo exten-
* ditur, eo quod palam inhibetur per statutum." L. vi,
ch. 55, § 4 and 5. Such seems to be the view which :
Fleta took of the operation of the statute of Westmin-
ster the Second, 13 Edw. L, De donis conditionalibus,
whereby it was provided that where land was given in
liberum maritagium, which sort of gift had an implied
condition, that upon the death of the husband and wife
without any heir begotten between them, “the land
* ghould revert to the donor and his heirs, the second


* husband of any such woman should not have any-
d 2


xlviii INTRODUCTION.
* thing from henceforth in the land so given condi-
tionally, after the death of the wife, by the law of
England, nor should the issue of the second husband
and wife succeed in their inheritance ; but immediately
* after the death of the husband and wife, to whom
* the land was so given, it shall come to their issue,
or return to the giver and his heir as aforesaid."
Britton also states as law in his time, that those who
were not first husbands could not successfully claim to
hold tenements by the law of England (par la Ley de
Engleterre) l ii, ch. xii, $ 3. It will have been ob-
served, that Bracton represents the Lex Anglis; as con-
stituting the second husband equally as the first hus-
band the usufructuary for his life of any land conveyed
to the wife howsoever, whereas the statute De donis
conditionalibus enabled land to be entailed on the off-
spring of the first marriage, so as to preclude the
usufruct of the said land being claimed by a second
husband; in other words, this statute withdrew such
land from the operation of the so-called Lex Angliæ.
I confess to having felt some embarrassment in dealing
with a document which is printed in the Appendix to
Ruffhead's edition of the Statutes, vol ix., and which
is also printed in the Revised Edition of the Statutes
lately published by authority, and is there entitled, “ A
“ statute concerning tenants by the curtesy of Eng-
* land.” This document has been allowed to take a
place amongst the Statuta Incerti Temporis, but it ap-
pears that in Rastall’s Collection of the Statutes, anno
1603, the following note is subjoined : * But this seemeth
* to be no statute, but only one man's opinion." As,
however, it has been inserted in the Revised Edition
of the Statutes after the Statutes of Edward IL, the
reader may be disposed to regard it as a stray statute
of that period, the effect of which would have been to
modify the earlier legislation of the preceding reign,
more particularly the statute De donis conditionalibus.


^


€


[14


ce


«


INTRODUCTION, xlix
It does not speak well for the antiquarian research of
the editors of the Revised Statute Book that they
should not have discovered that this so-called statute
is neither more nor less than a verbatim extract
from the seventh book of Glanville,’ chapter 18, para-
graphs 3 and 4, and that it contains a statement of the
law of tenancy by curtesy as allowed in the reign of
Henry II. It should be observed, however, that Glan-
ville does not designate the law by the title of “Lex
^ Angliv,” nor have we any certain knowledge when
that title came into use, unless it may be referred to the
reign of Henry L, when according to the author of the
Mirroir des Justices, *it was granted by the curtesy of
* King Henry L, that all those who survived their
“ wives, and by whom their wives had conceived, should
“ possess the inheritance of their wives for ever.” ? We
are not, however, disposed to regard this royal grant of
Henry L, if it be correctly recorded, as the introduction
of a novel law, but rather as the amendment or modi-
fication of an existing law. The Normans, for instance,
recognised the principle of the husband becoming the
tenant by curtesy of his wife’s estate, but the husband
was liable to forfeit it after her death, if he married a
second time? The Lex Anglie on the contrary allowed
the husband to marry a second time and to keep the


1 Glanville is little known and zc fut dca eurtesie. te
not sufficiently appreciated in its | * Roy Henry le primier, que touts
bearing on the early history of | “ ceux qi survivissent lour femmes
English law from the fact, that the | “ dount elles ussent conceives
English editions of the book are | “ tenussent les heritages lour fem-
scarce and not attractive in form, | “ mes a touts jours.” Chai;
being in duodecimo, without any | Sect. ITI. Mirroir des Justices.
index or table of contents. We
have ourselves had to make use of
a German edition published as an
appendix to the Englische Reichs
und Rechtsgeschichte von Dr.
George Phillips. Berlin, 1828.


3 L'Aneienne Coutume de Nor-
mandie par William Laurence de
Gruchy. Jersey, 1881, ch. xxi., De
Impeditione viri viduati.


l ; INTRODUCTION.


guardianship of the children by his first marriage as
well as the usufruct of their inheritance during his life-
time, and in this respect the Lex Angliæ followed the
rule of the civil law as laid down in a constitution of
the Emperor Leo A.D. 468. “ Patres igitur usumfructum
« maternarum rerum, etiam si ad secundas migrave-
* rint nuptias, sine dubio habere debebunt, Cod. 1. vi.,
« Tit. lix, $ 4.” Ifit is permissible to conjecture what
may have been the origin of the tradition preserved in
the Mirroir des Justices, we venture to suggest that
King Henry I. may have modified the Norman law by
engrafting on it the more liberal provision of the Roman
law in respect of the husband enjoying for his life the
usufruct of his first wife's property, notwithstanding he
should marry a second time. On the other hand if we
seek for light in the Barbarie Codes !, they seem to have
given to the husband who has married an heiress and
has had offspring by her, a right of succession in full
property to the inheritance of his wife, whereas the
Lex Angliz had a feudal element in it, from which it
derived its name of “Curialitas Anglica." Sir James
Craig? discusses the motive of the law, * Curialitas ob
“ reverentiam prioris matrimonii, quod quis cum uxore
* herede contraxerit, ne ea mortua ad egestatem
* maritus reducatur. Angli Curialitatem Anglicam vo-
* eant, quasi ea apud solos Anglos locum haberet, sed
* falluntur, nam apud nos et Normannos huie curia-
* litati locus est, imo ejus origo ex Jure Civili non
* incommodo deduci potest, ex Constantini enim re-
“ scripto sancitum est, ut hereditatis materne pater
* usumfructum, filii proprietatem haberent, cum antea
* libera permitteretur patri dispositio de omnibus eis
“ bonis, que per matrem ad liberos devenissent.” We


! Lex Alemannorum Tit. xcii. ?Jus Feudale L. ii, ch. 19,
(93), Corpus Juris Germanici An- | $4.
tiqui. Walter. Berolini, Tom. I,
p. 228.


INTRODUCTION, li


have here also a clue to the source of the law of the
Alemanni, which was founded on the Code of the
Western Empire as it -existed before the legislation of
Constantine. But neither the Theodosian Code nor
the Code of Justiniam supply us with.a clue to explain
the origin of the term “curialitas.” We must have
recourse to the institutions of feudalism, if we would
understand the meaning of the phrase * tenens per
“ curialitatem,” or as it has been rendered in English,
^ tenant by curtesy.” Curialis was a term borrowed
from the Roman.law, and inasmuch as “curia” was the
feudal designation of the lord's court, so * curialis " was
the designation of a member of it. It would appear
that under the feudal law system it was one of the first
duties of a husband who had married an heiress to attend
fhe lord's court as the representative of his wife, and to do
. suit and service to the lord in respect of his wife's estate,
and thus he came to be recognised as the tenant of that
estate, and was designated as “tenens per curialitatem."
How the term “ curialitas” has come to be rendered by
the English word * curtesy " belongs to another inquiry,
which we do not propose to undertake, but the word
*eurialitas" is employed by Bracton in the present
volume (p. 20). Thus Bracton in his treatise on war-
ranty says of a person, whom the king ought to warrant
* et ideo dicere poterit ille, cui rex warrantizare
* debet, cum quzdam curialitate, sic quod sine rege
* respondere non poterit, &c" We have rendered the
word “ curialitas” in this passage by the English word
* courtliness " to distinguish it from the “curtesy” of
the feudal law, which contained an element of respect
or reverence in its original meaning, which has been
discarded in the ordinary use of the word in the present
day. It may be worth while for the reader to compare
what Bracton says in his treatise de aequirendo rerum
dominio in the fourth paragraph of the seventh chapter,
with the statute 13 Edw. L, De donis conditionalibus,


lii INTRODUCTION.


as Bracton’s text foreshadows the legislation of Edw. I.
whereby limitations might be set to the operation of
the Lex Anglize at the will of the donor of a maritage.
(vol.i,p. 177. Sir William Blackstone represents the
introduction of tenancy by curtesy to be a consequence
of feudal tenure. “For if,’ he says, “a woman seised of
* lands hath issue by her husband, and dies, the hus-
* band is the natural guardian of the child, and as such
* is in reason entitled to the profits of the land in order
* to maintain it, for which reason the heir apparent of
* a tenant by the curtesy could not be in ward to the
* lord of the fee, during the life of such tenant. As
* soon, therefore, as any child was born the father
^ began to have a permanent interest in the lands, he
* became one of the pares curtis, did homage to the lord,
* and was called tenant by the curtesy initiate, and this
* estate being once vested in him by the birth of the
* child was not suffered to determine by the subsequent
* death or coming of age of the infant.” The author of
the Commentaries of the Laws of England has, however,
failed in the above passage to distinguish between doing
fealty to a lord, and doing homage to him. It was a
cardinal principle of the feudal law that homage should
not be done for a tenement not held in fee, but an oath
of fealty might be taken for it, and services might be
done for it, without homage being exacted.

It has been observed by Selden in his Dissertatio ad
Fletam, C. iii, that in many of the quotations, which
Bracton has made from the digest of Justinian, there are
errors, which are sometimes to be referred to the scribe
of the MS. which has been followed by the printer, and
sometimes to the compositor who has misread the MS.
We have also remarked, vol iii, p. 174, note 1, that the
misrecital of a passage on the Codeor Digest may be atttri-
butable in some places to the fact that Bracton had
before him a text differing somewhat from the Florentine
text of the Corpus Juris. There is however in the trea.


INTRODUCTION. li


tise on Exceptions, ch. xiii., $ 5., p. 236, an instance of a
quotation from the Digest, the text of which is so cor-
rupt, that we can only account for it by the supposition,
which we have ventured to make elsewhere, that this
treatise still awaited from the master’s hand a final
revision of the text, which for other reasons must be re-
garded as incomplete. In this particular instance Bracton :
cites the Roman procedure in a cause of adultery as
furnishing a principle by analogy which should govern
the procedure in a cause of prohibition, viz., that it does
not follow, because the ecclesiastical judge has improperly
allowed a party to institute a cause in his court, that
the party so instituting the cause is to be punished, or if
there be more than one judge and one has failed to
purge himself, that the others ought to be thereby dam-
nified so as to be prevented from defending themselves
and their cause. The analogy set up by Bracton would
seem to be rather strained. But by the Roman law asa
simultaneous prosecution of an adulterer and of the
married woman, with whom he was charged with com-
mitting adultery, was not permitted, the prosecutor had
his option as to which he would first prosecute, or pro-
ceedings might be instituted against the parties sepa-
rately by different prosecutors. Bracton accordingly cites
the provision of the Lex Julia de Adulteriis, under which
the man charged with adultery might be condemned
before a careless judge on false evidence, whilst the
woman being tried before a more scrupulous judge might
be acquitted, and so he argues that the ecclesiastical
judges might be condemned for contemning the king’s
letters of prohibition, without their condemnation pre-
judicing the defence of the party, who may have brought
his case into their court. The passage as it stands in
Tottell’s text is not quite intelligible, but we have sup-
plied in the note a text which is evidently that which
Bracton intended to cite in support of his position, that
the party who has brought his suit into an ecclesiastical


liv INTRODUCTION,


court ought not to be punished, because the judge has
with knowledge entertained it improperly.

Another very singular reading occurs in Tottell’s text
in the course of Chapter xii. about the middle of the third
section. The passage is as follows: “Item incipit tale
* tenementum esse laicum feodum et non ante, quod
* non erit de decimis, cum. semel efficiantur esse laicum
* feodum, nunquam reincipient esse decimee, et hzec vera
* gunt secundum Biastos f. 409 b." If it be assumed for
the moment that the editor of Tottell's text has followed
accurately the text of a particular MS. we are here intro-
duced to a writer on a delicate point in the conflict of law
between the ecclesiastical‘and the civil courts of the realm,
whom Bracton seems to regard as of high authority, but
whose name would have been lost to posterity, ifit had not
been preserved in this passage. We may be unreasonably
sceptical as tothe existence of any such writer as “Biastos,”
and from a comparison of the readings of various MSS.
we are disposed to think that the reading of the MS.
which Tottell’s editor had before him was “secundum B.
* et alios.” Other MSS. present other readings. Thus
MS. Rawl. C. 159 has “versus B. et alios" whilst MS.
Reg.9. E. xv. has “versus R. et alios." - On the other
hand the Glastonbury MS., which is No. 21,614 amongst
the additional MSS. in the British Museum, has the
reading *secundum regem et alios," which is also the
reading of MS. Hobhouse,in Lincoln's Inn library. Fleta
unfortunately afford us no assistance. None of the read-
ings, however, which are for the most part rendered
obscure by contractions, are altogether satisfactory, and
after all we may be endeavouring to give life to a phan-
tom in suggesting a possible explanation of a supposed
reading “secundum B. et alios.” Assuming, however
that Bracton may have made such a reference, it
would be an interesting fact, inasmuch as Azo, whom
Bracton deservedly regarded as a master of high authority, |
frequently quotes passages from the Gloss writers denot-
ing them simply by the letter B. meaning thereby Bul-


INTRODUCTION. ly


- garus, who was one of the famous four doctors of the
University of Bologna and perhaps the most illustrious
of them, as may be inferred from his surname of * Os
aureum.” Bulgarus was a pupil of Irnerius, who founded
the school of the Glossatores, and he as well as Martinus,
another of the four doctors, are frequently cited by
Azo, in his Summa on the Code, with which work Brac-
ton has avowed himself to be familiar. We are indebted
to Savigny for the further information, that Bulgarus in
his glosses frequently cited the Decretum Gratiani, a
remarkable fact, inasmuch as the Legists and the Canon-
ists were already separated into two different schools,
and that the glosses of Bulgarus are always signed with
the initial letter B. in distinction from the glosses of other
jurists, whilst the glosses of Martinus were distin-
guished by the letter M. Bulgarus died in 1166.
That both Bulgarus and Martinus were quoted as autho-
rities in the law school of the University of Oxford may
be inferred from the glosses appended to the work of
Magister Vacarius, which was composed by that eminent
teacher of law for the use of the poor students at Oxford.
At what precise period Vacarius composed his work “in
* usum pauperiorum " cannot be laid down with cer-
tainty further than that it was subsequent to A.D. 1149,
in which year according to the chronicle of Robertus de
Monte Vacarius commenced his lectures in the University
of Oxford. At the same time the fact that the Decretum
Gratiani is frequently quoted in the glosses of Vacarius
points to à period later than 1151 as the time, after which
his work was completed. “Vacarius is believed to have
died in England at an advanced age. He is mentioned in
a Decretal letter of Pope Alexander III. of the year 1164
as a commissioner to examine a question of marriage, and
in another Decretal letter of 1170 he is mentioned as
one of two canons of Canterbury Cathedral, who were
in attendance on Archbishop Becket, so that it is not
improbable that after the death of King Stephen in 1154,
who had proscribed the professor’s lectures at Oxford


lvi INTRODUCTION.


Vacarius may have resumed them. On this hypothesis
his work, which was entitled “liber ex universo enu-
* cleato jure exceptus et pauperibus preesentim destina-
* tus,’ may have been completed sometime after the De-
cretum Gratiani had been in cireulation. However this
may be, there is no doubt that the traditions of the
teaching of Vacarius were still preserved in the law
school of Oxford when Bracton himself frequented them,
if he did not at one time himself assume the professor's
hood which Vacarius had worn. It is thus possible
that in the present passage, whilst drafting his treatise
on Exceptions, Bracton may have noted down a reference
to Bulgarus as an authority, that the tithes of crops after
they had been severed and sold ceased to be a subject of
ecclesiastical cognizance, and became chattels over which
a lay court might properly exercise jurisdiction. Bracton
in a passage a little further in Chapter xvi., p. 253, says
that jurisdiction is sometimes changed from jurisdiction,
thus, when things have been tithed, chattels become from
lay things spiritual things, and so the secular jurisdiction
is changed into a spiritual jurisdiction. Likewise con-
versely when tithes have been sold and transferred to
another person, they recommence to be a lay chattel.
We now approach the end of Bracton’s work, respect-
ing which we have already said that it has evidently
not been completed in accordance with the- author's
original design, inasmuch as he has promised (fol. 394 b.)
to treat in a future chapter of trial by battle or by the
Great Assise, which he has omitted to do, and which
subjects would in due course have been discussed, after
the chapter on Exceptions. Weare not disposed to go so
far as Mr. F. M. Nichols, in his introduction to his
excellent edition of Britton, p. xlv., where he says that
the three last chapters of the printed book of Bracton
appear to be a fragment not connected with the matter
immediately preceding. The thirty-third chapter, which
is the last, is we think justly open to this observation.


INTRODUCTION. lvii


But the thirty-first and thirty-second chapters seem
rather to be of a supplemental character, each of them
being connected by an introductory phrase with matter,
if not immediately preceding, at least to be found ina
preceding part of the fifth book. They have for
instance reference to the subject of Defaults, and would
properly be introduced prior to discussing the litis con-
testatio. The last chapter however upon mixed actions
has but a very slight relation to the preceding chapters,
and has as little logical connexion with them as the chap-
ter ^ de officio judicis " at the end of the fourth book of
the Institutes of Justinian has with the preceding portion
of the Institutes. In fact the subject of mixed actions
hasbeen discussed in its proper place in the third book of
Bracton, of which the first treatise is entitled * De actioni-
bus,” and in which the subject of *actiones mixte ” is
treated of in Chapter iii., $5. It may indeed be justly
said, that the first paragraph of this last chapter of
Bracton’s work is but a repetition of what he has
already more fully discussed in the chapter above
referred to of his third book. It is, however, a singular
coincidence that Bracton’s work, as it has come down to
us in the most complete MSS., should end with a chapter,
which marks in an especial manner the influence of the
Roman jurisprudence in developing the law of England,
and in releasing it from the coils of feudalism in spite of
the preponderating power of the Barons, who in many
respects kept in check both the Crown and the clergy.
The reader will carefully bear in mind that we make a
clear distinction between the Roman jurisprudence and
the Roman law. The Barons of England may have
with reason declined to bend their necks to the yoke of
a law, to which they were not consenting parties, but
they could not with equal reason object to the judges of
the Crown, aequiring at the best sources a knowledge of
what was just or unjust, that they might themselves
award in the King's name justice to those, who sought


]viii INTRODUCTION.


it at their hands “juris enim prudentia agnoscit, et
* justitia tribuit cuique quod suum est.” i
Bearing in mind the contents of the two first books of
Bracton’s work and the Roman element of the last
chapter of his last book, we need not be surprised that
the learned M. Houard ! in his well known Treatises on
the Norman Customs published in England between the
eleventh and the fourteenth centuries, has omitted
Bracton’s work from his collection, as being the work of
a writer who had corrupted the law of England, but we
may justly feel astonished after such a declaration on
his part to find that M. Houard has admitted Fleta and
Britton into his collection, the former treatise being little
more than an abridgement of Bracton, whilst the latter
has recoined, as it were, the most useful portions of
Bracton, and where it differs from Bracton, departs even
further from the feudal law-system then Bracton’s own
work. There is, it may be admitted, a principle more
than once enunciated by Bracton under the form of the
phrase “Conventio vincit legem,’ or as it has been
Anglicised * covenant conquers law,” which was calculated
to sap the foundations of Feudal Tenure, and which was
embodied in the legislation of King Edward I., whose
most trusted advisers were lawyers. The English
Justinian, as he has been termed, with the aid of his
successive chancellors Robert Burnell and John Langton,
and his successive chief justices Ralph de Hengham and
Gilbert de Thornton, resolved to sanction by statutory
enactments the larger liberty of donation in respect of
land, which had been affirmed by the judgments of the
king’s justiciaries during the reign of his predecessor, and
he further thought it wise to substitute the letter of
written law for the flexible spirit of unwritten custom.
Edward I. had in fact to secure by legal definitions the


1 Houard (David), Traités sur les coutumes Anglio-Normandes, &c.
4 vols., 4to. Paris, 1776.


INTRODUCTION. lix


ground which had been won from feudalism by the
king’s justiciaries since the reign of Henry II. and to
establish throughout the kingdom a symmetrical adminis-
tration of justice between his subjects. There can be little
doubt that the labours of Bracton must have facilitated
very much the work of codification, which Edward I.
initiated. It may be the fact that the legislation during
the reign of Edward I. was dictated by motives of self
interest on the part of the Crown, but it was founded
on an enlightened view of the Crown’s interest, and
whilst his legislation tended to restrict the action of the
manorial courts and even of the county courts, he
improved both the law and the procedure of the king’s
courts, and secured to his subjects a regular and settled
judicature, which more than compensated them for any
increased expenses on the part of the suitor. We have
already in the introduction to vol. v. explained the
process of change, by which questions of proprietary
right were gradually withdrawn from the cognisance of
the manorial courts and came to be heard in the first
instance in the county courts. On the other hand the
jurisdiction of the county courts was in its turn limited
by statute, and it was also competent for the claimant
or the tenant in any plea of right to petition the Crown
for a writ to transfer the cause from the court of the
county to the king’s court. It must not, however, be
supposed that the improvement of the procedure of his
inferior courts was neglected, whilst the procedure of the
king’s court underwent such great amendment. There
are two treatises which are little known in the present
day, but which are printed as an appendix to Lord
Chancellor Fortescue’s work De laudibus legum Anglic.
They are entitled respectively Hengham Magna and
Hengham Parva, of which the former treatise, unfortu-
nately only a fragment of a larger work, was composed
after 54 H. III. (A.D. 1270). We may observe by the


lx INTRODUCTION.


way that Hengham Magna supplies us with a confirma-
tion of the view, which we have expressed in the intro-
duction to vol. v., p. lviii, that the so called Statute of
Leap Year, which is contained in Liber Scacc. Westmon x.,
fol. 226, with a testimonium clause * Quarto die Junii
* Anno regni nostri quinquagesimo quarto,’ was a
royal writ addressed to the king’s justiciaries. It is cited
p. 18, * Teste consilio domini Henrici Regis ac brevi suo
* inde directo justitiariis suis de Banco anno regni
* regis Henrici," 1. iii, and probably led to the appoint-
ment of its author, Ralph de Hengham, to the office of
Chief Justice of England in the first year of the reign of
Edw. L, when he had only attained his thirtieth year.
We have alluded in the introduction to vol. iv., p. xxxiii,
to the circumstances, under which Ralph de Hengham

was deprived of his office of Chief Justice of England.
. If his offence was simply that of having altered a record
of his court whereby a poor defendant was ordered to pay
a fine of 6s. 8d. instead of 13s. 4d., we can understand
his deposition from his office to have been an excusable
act of severity in a reign in which it was thought to be
of the highest moment to enforce a strict respect for the
letter of the law, although its disregard might not have
been prompted by any corrupt motive. Such we con-
ceive to be the explanation of the deposition of the
Chief Justice, if he was not sacrificed to popular clamour
or to political intrigue, for on no other explanation can
we account for his restoration to the king’s favour, and
his re-elevation to the office of Justice Itinerant,
and ultimately to the office of Chief Justice of the
Common Pleas in 29 Edw. L, which office he continued
to hold in the reign of Edward II. That Ralph de
Hengham had been brought up at the feet of judges of
the same school of law as Bracton may be inferred from
the fact, that acccording to the print of his work he
quotes on three occasions the opinion and on one occasion


INTRODUCTION. ]xi


a judgment of Henrieus de Bathonia, with whom
Bracton was associated as a Justice Itinerant on several
assises.

Selden, however, seems to think that on three of
these occasions he has quoted passages from the work of
Henricus de Bracton himself, a suggestion which may
be well founded, if it should happen that in the original
manuscript the name of the justiciary in question was
` written in a contracted form. Selden had several MSS.
of Hengham Magna before him, and he found various
readings in them, some of which were evidently interpo-
lations by a hand.more recent than Hengham's. This
suggestion of Selden’s gives rise to another question,
namely, at what time the Latin Summa of Bracton was
recognised as his work. We use the term Summa, as it is
under that modest title that Bracton describes his work,
no doubt after the example of Azo, whose * Summa"
he quotes under that name. Ralph de Hengham also
entitles his first work “Summa Magna.” His second
work, “Summa Parva,” is a work of minor importance,
and was composed after the Statute of Westminster
the Third (18 Edw. L). It is remarkable from its mode
of citing authorities, as instead of citing judgments of
the king’s justiciaries, as Bracton does, it cites on all
occasions statutes of the king’s reign, as if it were
intended to familiarize the reader with the statutory
modifications, which the Common Law had recently
undergone. If Selden’s conjecture should be well
founded, Ralph de Hengham’s Summa Magna contains
an earlier recognition of Bracton’s authorship than the
letter, which preserves the history of the loan of his
work having been made by the Lord Chancellor Burnell
to the Archdeacon R. de Scardeburgh on Candlemas Day
(2nd Feb.) 1277. The archdeacon’s letter of acknow-
ledgment styles it “librum quem dominus Henricus
* de Breton composuit" It would thus appear that
the mode of writing the name of the author, which in

R 2657. ; e


Ixii INTRODUCTION.


the legal records of the reign of Henry III. is spelt Bracton
or Bratton, was in the early years of Edward the First's
reign giving way to the softer form of Breton, which
the Lord Chancellor Burnell, who was more familiar
with the French tongue than with the dialect of the
West of England, seems to have countenanced, if he did
not introduce it. It is by no means improbable that the
French treatise, known in the present day as Britton,
was drawn up under the eye of the Lord Chancellor
Burnell himself by one of the clerks employed in the
legal service of the Crown, and that it was originally en-
titled * Brettoun” or * Bretoun," with the accent on the
last syllable, for so the name is spelt in two of the most
ancient MSS.! to which. a title is either prefixed or
appended in the French language. On the other hand
Gilbert de Thornton, of whom little is known, except
that he succeeded to the place of Chief Justice of Eng-
land after the deposition of Ralph de Hengham in 1289,
and that he outlived Lord Chancellor Burnell, appears
to have made or caused to be made after the Lord
Chancellors death a Latin abridgment of Bracton’s
work, to which Selden vouches that he saw prefixed the
title “Summa de legibus et consuetudinibus Anglise a
“ magistro Henrico de Bryctona composita tempore
* regis Henrici filii regis Johannis" It was no doubt
after Thornton's example that the numerous Latin
abridgments of the original work of Bracton have been
made, some of which observe the arrangement of the
treatises which Tottell has followed, and which we are
disposed to think was the earliest arrangement of his
work, whilst others are divided into capitula, of which
the Ashburnham MS. may be taken as a striking
instance, or into centwrie, of which we havean example


! Cambridge University MS., Gg. V. 12, and Harleian MS. No. 324 in
the British Museum.
? Now in the British Museum.


INTRODUCTION. Ixiii


in the Fletewood MS. in the Bodleian Library, Oxford.
That there is no MS. now in existence which can claim
to be in the handwriting of Bracton himself hardly
requires to be asserted, for we now know that Bracton
was dead in 1268, whilst there is good reason to believe
that he ceased to write after 1258, when he was required
to return to the Archives of the Exchequer the Rolls of
Martinus de Pateshell, and Willielmus de Radleye.
We may here take notice of a correction which .we have
been enabled to make in the text of Tottell’s edition
(fol. 419), where he cites a certain judgment as delivered
by William de Ralegh in a Nottingham Iter, in 30
Henry II. (A.D. 1246). It was difficult at first sight
not to suppose that there had been here either an error
on the part of the printer of Tottell’s edition or an error
on the part of the scribe of the MS. which Tottell’s
editor has followed, inasmuch as William de Ralegh
ceased to act as a justiciary of the Crown after his
consecration to the see of Norwich in 1239. Still
further, after his subsequent election to the see of Win-
chester in succession to Peter de Roches, in 1243, Wil-
liam de Ralegh was most obnoxious to the Crown, and
died abroad in 1250, having failed to regain the favour
of the king, who had destined the bishopric of Win-
chester for William de Valence, the uncle of Queen
Eleanor. Two of the best manuscripts, which we have
consulted, namely, MS. Rawl. C. 159, in the Bodleian
Library, and MS. Reg. 9 E. XV., in the British Museum,
agree in the reading “ut de itinere R. de Turkeby, (or
* R. de Thurkeby,) anno regni regis xxix. in comitatu
* Nottingh." (fol. 419.) Roger de Thurkelby is evidently
the proper reading in this place. He was an eminent
judge, and held circuits in 28, 29, and 30 Edw. I., and
he is the only one of the king's justiciaries, with the
exception of Henricus de Bathonia already alluded to,
whose name is mentioned by Chief Justice Hengham in


his Summa Magna (p. 72).
e 2


Ixiv INTRODUCTION.


We have alluded to the Ashburnham and Fletewood
MSS. as exceptional MSS. as regards the arrangement
of their contents. The Fletewood MS. has already been
described in the Introduction to Vol I. We have
recently had an opportunity of inspecting the Ashburn-
ham MS, which was formerly in the Stowe Collection,
and is described in O’Connor’s Catalogue of the MSS.
at Stowe under No. 722 as differing considerably from
the print of Bracton. It is a folio of 202 leaves,
measuring 131 x 8l inches, written on parchment in
double columns in a court hand of the latter part of
the 13th century, with a table of contents prefixed to
it. Some leaves of the MS. are deficient, and the text
ends with the words, “sed habebit alium diem per
* spacium xv. dierum ad minus ad capiendum ciro-
* graphum suum, ut infra totum illud tempus possit,
* qui jus —" On referring to the text of the present
volume, p. 444, it will be found that these words occur
near the end of Chapter xxix. $ 1, and that the ad-
dition of the words * habuerit, apponere clameum suum,"
as in Tottell’s text, completes the sense of the inter-
rupted paragraph. The table of contents is apparently
in the same handwriting as the text, commencing with
the title, ^Capitula de eo quod dicitur que sunt regi
* necessaria." This table of contents is divided into
seventy sets of capitula, each set being again subdivided
into paragraphs. There have also been introduced in
red ink at the top of each page of the text Roman
numerals, which divide the work into xvi. books, of
which division, however, no notice is taken in the table
of contents, and it may be presumed that this division
into books has been made by a later hand. The six-
teenth book, which corresponds with the seventieth
capitulum, commences with the subject of Exceptions,
and according to the table of the contents of the capi-
tula must have contained sixty paragraphs, but it breaks
off, as already stated, near the end of the forty-second


INTRODUCTION. Ixv


paragraph, which is headed, * De exceptione que com-
“ petit tenenti ex taciturnitate ipsius petentis vel ali-
“ eujus antecessorum suorum." This heading is some-
what fuller than the heading of the corresponding
paragraph of the print of Bracton, viz, * Exceptio ex
“ taciturnitate, quod clameum non apposuerit.”

The conclusion to which an examination of the various
MSS. seems to point is that they may be classed under
three general heads :—( 1.) MSS. of which the text fol-
lows the division into books and the arrangement of the
subjects adopted in Tottell’s print of Bracton. (2.) MSS.
of which the text is abridged, but in other respects follows
the order adopted in the print. (8. MSS. in which the
writer has adopted an independent arrangement of the
subjects, although he has kept in view Bracton’s treat-
ment of them. We are also disposed to think that
there is internal evidence in the text of the print, that
the arrangement of the subjects, as there adopted, was
contemplated by the writer of the work. The fact,
which we have contributed to bring to light, that Hen-
ricus de Bracton died in the autumn of 1268, enables us
to reject with confidence certain interpolations in the
text, as, for instance, the interpolation in the writ of
mortdancester, fol. 253 b, which refers to an alteration -
made in the writ in the reign of Edward I., and could
not have been made by Bracton's hand. On the other
hand, the same fact is not equally conclusive against
other interpolations, as, for instance, the case of Peter of
Savoy, fol. 159, eited in the print of Bracton as having
been heard before the king at Westminster in the Ex-
chequer in 46 H. IIL, but which does not appear in
several of the earliest MSS. We have already men-
tioned the circumstance of Bracton having been required
to send back to the archives of the Exchequer the Rolls
of Martinus de Pateshell and Willielmus de Radleye in
-1258, and that he probably on that account and for
other reasons discontinued his work in that year, other-


Ixvi INTRODUCTION.


wise it is difficult to account for his silence as to the
alteration made in the law as to homicide per nfortu-
nium by a statute of 43 H. II. (1259), to which. he
makes no allusion in fol. 135, where he states that in
certain parts of the realm it was customary to punish
homicide per infortunium as murder, which he considered
not to be just, and which in fact was subsequently for-
bidden by the statute above mentioned. This is more
especially deserving of note, inasmuch as the statute of
1259 was subsequently published in a Close Roll of 1260
and in a Patent Roll of 1262, and its provisions were
re-enacted in the Statute of Marlbridge (1267), when
Henricus de Bracton was discharging the duties of a
justice itinerant. No notice has been taken by Bracton
of this important alteration in the law, which is noted,
however, in the later text of Britton (L. i. ch. vii).

A volume of the Year Books of the reign of king
Edward III. (years xi and xii) has very recently been `
issued, being the last of the works undertaken by the
late Mr. Alfred J. Horwood, as part of the Rolls series,
which he did not however live to complete, and which
has been carried through the press by Mr. Luke Owen
Pike, of Lincoln’s Inn. Mr. Pike, in his preface, has
noted several cases illustrating the changes which had `
been worked in the English law of marriage since the
time of Bracton, more particularly as regards the rule of
the canon law that divorce for consanguinity or affinity
was not allowed to bastardize the issue of the marriage
born prior to the divorce. This rule, which was recog-
nised by the king’s courts in Bracton's time, seems to
have been first undermined by judicial decisions in the
reign of Edward IIL, and to have been finally. over-
thrown by a judgment in the reign of Edward IV.
(Year Book, Hil 18 Edw. IV. No. 28) Littleton,
amongst others on that occasion, doubts, but he inclines
to the opinion that where there had been a divorce for
consanguinity the issue was bastard, but although he


INTRODUCTION, Ixvii


had doubts in the matter, his great commentator, Lord
Coke (Coke upon Littleton, 935 a.), seems to have for-
gotten that the earlier lawyers aecepted the canon law
on the subject as the law of the land. Mr. Pike has
noted two other cases, which illustrate the collateral
effects of the statute of Merton, A.D. 1236, as regards
the bastardy of children born prior to the marriage ot
their parents, namely, that the king's courts ceased to
refer such cases to the court of the ordinary for its
determination whether the offspring was bastard or
legitimate, and that the king's courts thenceforward
exercised exclusive jurisdiction in such matters, inas-
much as the question involved in the inquiry was to be
decided in conformity with the law and custom of
England, and not in pursuance of the canon law. Mr.
Pike, in accordance with the prevalent notion on the
subject, considers that the bishops of England attempted
at the council of Merton to introduce into England for
the first time the canon or civil law on the subject of
the legitimation of offspring by the subsequent marriage
of their parents. The Editor, however, has ventured to
suggest a more reasonable explanation of their conduct,
namely, that they were endeavouring to restore a con-
dition of things, which had been the law of England in
the reign of Henry IL, and had been superseded by a
judgment of Richard de Luci, the Great Justiciar (supra,
p. xxxiv), and that upon the refusal of the magnates to
entertain their proposal, the bishops resolved to abandon
their jurisdiction in such cases, rather than to make a -
return to the king’s writ, which would be inconsistent —
with the rule of the canon law, confirmed as it had
recently been by a decretal letter of pope Alexander UI.
addressed to the bishop of Exeter. |

The Editor has to. thank Dr. W. H. Stevenson, the
author of “ The Records of the Borough of Nottingham,"
for calling his attention to two facts, namely, that the
custom of the borough of Nottingham confirms his


lxviii INTRODUCTION.


remark that the liberty of bequeathing their tenements
by will was enjoyed generally by the burgesses of our
ancient boroughs ; and, secondly, that the Scandinavian
law-system furnishes us with a clue to explain the
mysterious “sachabor,” or “sakaber,’ of Bracton, which
occurs in vol. ii, pp. 510, 540 (fol. 150 b., 154 b.).
- Neither Britton, 1. 1, ch. xvi, who renders into French
the word as “sakebere,” nor Fleta, l. i, ch. 38, who
renders it into Latin as “sacborgh,” nor the Year Book
of 30 and 31 Edw. L, Appendix IL, p. 545, which ex-
hibits *sacrabare," throw any real light upon the origin
of the word or upon its true meaning, and the Year
Book is an instance how rapid had been the corruption
of the word after the lawyers had lost touch of its
original sense. The Editor has already, in a note to
vol. ii., p. 511, called attention to Grimm’s interpretation
of the old German word * sachibaro," which was used to
denote a kind of local legal assessor, whose business it
was to advise the unlearned members of the court, and
has observed that Bracton employs the word “ sacha-
* bor" in quite another sense. Dr. Johannes C. H. R.
Steenstrup, in the fourth volume of his valuable work
on the Laws of the Northmen, published in Copenhagen
in 1882, gives us reason to believe that we are to look
to the Scandinavian codes for an explanation of the
word in the sense in which Bracton uses it in the above
passages. In the Norse Icelandic law-language a plain-
tiff in a suit is said “bera sakar â einum;"! and the
plaintiff is called * sakarabéri" Dr. Steenstrup quotes
passages from various Sagas in illustration of this use
of the word *sakarabérij and observes that we have
evidently in the word *sakarabéri" not merely a word


1Cf. Cleasby and Wigfusson’s | * sakar ” is the genitiv of “sok,”
Icelandic Dictionary. In Danish | and “sakaraberi” means literally
* sog" has still the meaning of an | the bearer of a suit.
action or a suit. In Icelandic


INTRODUCTION, lxix


that resembles the English term * sakaber,” or “ sacha-
* bor," as used by Bracton, but a word that fulfills the
meaning assigned to it by him, namely, a prosecutor to
whom the thing stolen had belonged, “et insecutus
“ fuerit per aliquem, eujus res illa fuerit, qui dicitur
“ sachaber," fol 150 b. Dr. Steenstrup is disposed to
think that the same word may also be traced in the
Scotch law, * Quoniam attachiamenta sunt principia et
“ origo placitorum de wrang et unlaw, que prosecuta
sunt per sacreborg, ideo de attachiamentis est incho-
* andum." Acta Parliament, I. 283, Record Commission.
The identity of sacreborg with the *sachabor" of
Braeton is also suggested by an ancient fragment of
Scotch law edited by the same Commission, p. 379,
which under the head of “De Foro ubi aliquis atta-
* chiatus est," provides “Quod ubi aliquis attachiatus
“est per sectam partis et debitum fuerit contractum
* sive commissum, ibi debet pati judicium."

The Editor has also to thank Mr. A. S. Wait, of
Newport, New Hampshire, in the United States, for
calling his attention to an inadvertence on his part in
the rendering into English of a passage in Bracton’s
treatise “De acquirendo rerum dominio,” where Tot-
tell’s edition (Lib. IL, c. ii, § 4) exhibits the text, “E
* contrario autem, si quis de suo in alieno solo ædifi-
* caverit mala fide, materiam presumitur donasse, si
* autem bona fide, solvat dominus soli precium ma-
* teri, et mercedem fabricatorum.” The Editor has
by inadvertence translated the latter portion of the
sentence as if it had been written “solvat domino
* goli precium materie et mercedem fabricatorum.’
The correction of the translation is fortunately obvious,
but the sense of the translation when so corrected is not
equally obvious, for there can be little doubt, as already
intimated by a side-note, that Bracton had before him
on this occasion the text of the “Summa of Azo,” which
he quotes by its title in the next following paragraph,


[11


lxx INTRODUCTION.


On referring then to Azo, p. 1066, § 39, it seems probable
that an entire line has dropped out of Bracton’s text.
Azo writes thus: “Et e contrario, qui ædificat in alieno
* solo de sua materia, siquidem malà fide, praesumitur
* donasse, licet M. distinxerit an habuit animum donandi
* an non. Si vero bona fide, habet doli emceptiomem,
* mec aliter tenetur restituere, nisi dominus soli precium
* materie solvat et mercedes fabrorum." The corre-
sponding passage in the Institutes of Justinian, l ii,
tit. 1., $ 30, enters into more detail, and supposes that
the builder of a house is in possession of the ground,
and has built his house upon it in good faith, believing
the ground to be his own, whilst the rightful owner
of the ground has looked on in silence until the house
has been completed, and then has made a claim to the
ground and the house upon it. The passage in Azo in
which he cites a distinction made by Martinus, one of
the famous four doctors of the University of Bologna,
simply denoting him by the capital letter M, illustrates
what has been already stated, p. lv., with regard to
Bulgarus, another of the famous four doctors, that it was
customary for civilians to cite the Glosses of Martinus
and of Bulgarus, simply under the initial letters M.
and B.

The Editor has once more to express his great obliga-
tions to Mr. E. Maunde Thompson, the keeper of the
manuscripts in the British Museum, for his courteous
assistance on all oceasions in facilitating his collation
of the MSS. of Bracton in the British Museum, more
particularly when it was necessary to compare certain
contractions in them with the corresponding contractions
in the Bodleian MSS. It is not too much to say that
in some of these instances the scribes themselves of
the MSS. have most probably been themselves per-
plexed as to the meaning of what they had to copy.
The Editor has also to repeat his thanks to Mr.
William Hardy, the Deputy Keeper of the Public


INTRODUCTION. lxxi


Records, who ‘has from time to time allowed searches to
be made in various Rolls in the hope of finding evidence
to confirm Bracton’s references. The result, however,
has been to show that Bracton is our sole authority in
some cases for a judgment of the king’s court, and in
others for an ordinance of the king’s council. Lastly,
the Editor has to record his grateful appreciation of the
liberality of the Curators of the Bodleian Library in the
University of Oxford, who have permitted him to havé
the uninterrupted use of three of the MSS. of that
Library, one of which, written in a curial hand, has been
of the greatest service to him, whilst the other two have
also been highly useful as representative manuscripts.
One of these latter MSS. is written in a monastic hand,
having formerly belonged to St. Augustine’s Monastery,
Canterbury, and being, perhaps, the most ancient of the
three. On the other hand, the third MS. exhibits the
name of Bracton both at the commencement and in
the text of the first chapter, whilst, although it maintains
the division of the original work into five books, it is
evidently an abridgment in many places of the text.


. In conclusion the Editor hopes that he may have con-
tributed to dispel some of the obscurity in which the
career of Bracton was involved at the time when Lord
Chancellor Campbell composed his Lives of the Lord
Chief Justices of England. No higher panegyrie can
well be pronounced upon the Great Justiciary than what
is expressed in the eloquent language of the Lord Chan-
cellor, which has been set forth at length in the Intro-
duction to Vol. IL, p. Ixxiv. A portion of his encomium
may here be fitly repeated, as it contirms the view which
the Editor has from time to time suggested. “ Whilst
* we have," he says, “a minute account of the military
* exploits of those who were employed in desolating the
« world, we have no information whatever of the origin,
* and very little of the career, of a man, who explained


Ixxii INTRODUCTION.


* to his savage countrymen the benefits to be derived
* from an equitable system of laws defining and protect-
* ing the rights of every class of the community,—who,
* drawing his sentiments from the rich fountain of the
* Roman Jurisprudence, expressed them in the Latin
* tongue with a purity seldom reached by the imitators
. * of the Augustan age, and who was rivalled by no
* juridieal writer till Blackstone arose five centuries
* later.”


The Temple, 1883. TRAVERS Twiss.


lxxiii


INDEX.


]xxiv


INDEX


RERUM OMNIUM, QU IN HOC OPERE


CONTINENTUR.


TRACTATUS QuARTUS LIBRI QUINTI IN QUO TRACTA-


Oe 09


D


TUR DE WARRANTIA.


Cap. I. fol. 380 b.


De warranto vocato post visum


. Quid sit warrantizatio .


Quis possit warrantum vocare et de qua
causa


. Quare debeat ane $

. Quis vocari debet ad warrantizandum .

. Si minor vocatus fuerit ad warrantum

. Maritus vocat uxorem ad warrantum quan-


doque


CAP. STD fol 38 lab:


. Quibus modis obligatur quis ad warrantizan-


dum .


. Si minor vocatus fuerit EM cuando ice.


chartam vel aliud


. Aliquando sine charte ostensione .
. Aliquando per homagium :
. Si vocatus ad warrantum MCN S SERA


verit .


. Per chirographum et S cn ues


lxxv


TABLE


OF ALL THINGS WHICH ARE CONTAINED IN


THIS WORK.


THE FOURTH TREATISE OF THE Firra Book, WHICH


tec


o j


SIS ove


TREATS OF WARRANTY,


CHAPTER I. leaf 380 b.


SOf calling a warrantor after a view


What is warranting à

Who can vouch a ME End on hal
ground i

Wherefore a person pani to SOS


. Who ought to be vouched to warrant
. If a minor be vouched to a warranty
. A husband vouches his wife to warrant some-


times .


CHAPTER II. leat 381 b.
In what modes a person is bound to warrant .
If a minor be vouched, let the tenant forthwith
exhibit the charter or other document


‘Sometimes without the exhibition of a charter


. Sometimes through homage
If the person enced to warrant Wes jur


the homage
Through a ehirograph seti he seis of a


fine


bax yr INDEX.


oak


10.


Or


6.


Item tacite vel expresse : ; s :

Si dominus capitalis, ad quem terra pervene-
rit ut eschaeta, vel alio modo, cum non
sit heeres, quia res transit cum onere

Si rex debeat warrantizare, dicere poterit
quod sine rege respondere non poterit

Quod nullus vocat regem ad warrantum, nisi
teneatur ad escambium . : : :


Cap, II.” fol. 382 b.


Quod warrantus debet designari proprio no-
mine, si possit, vel quod tantundem valet

Si warrantus de dote feloniam fecerit, et
inter duos capitales dominos de eschaeta
contentio habeatur


Cap. IV. fol. 388.


Si quis warrantum vocaverit, qui sit sub
potestate sua, licet auxilium petierit, non
habebit auxilium i : : : :

Item si talem, qui non fuerit sub potestate
regis, sed ipsum producat, si possit .

Si warrantus fuerit infra libertatem alicujus,
ubi non currit breve regis : :

Breve, si sine auxilio produci non possit

Si minor vocatus fuerit ad warrantum de
dote vel in placito de recto, tune sum-
moneatur custos ejus : : : 3

Si hæres, qui vocatus sit ad warrantum,
nihil teneat de hæreditate materna, sed
paraster suus, tune summoneatur uterque,
sive heres fuerit major vel minor


Page


18


20


24


30


TABLE. lxxvii


Page
7. Likewise tacitly or expressly . ; 19
If the chief lord, to whom the land ie come
as an escheat or in any other manner, when
he is not the heir, because the thing passes
with the charge . —
9. If the king abe to warrant, ke may n that
he cannot warrant without the king . ee
10. That no one should vouch the king to warrant
unless he be bound to make compensation . — —


p


CHAPTER III. leaf 382 b.


1. That the warrantor ought to be designated by
his proper name, if possible, or what is equi-
valent ; : 21
2. If a warrantor of dower has an s
and there be a contention between two chief
lords concerning the escheat : : SN 2D


CHAPTER IV. leaf 383


1. If a person shall vouch a warrantor, who is
under his power, although he may have
sought the eus of the court, he shall not
have it ;

2. Likewise, if such a een ote is Poot us
the power of the king, but let him produce
him if he can

3. If a warrantor be eu the Taie of E
one, where the king's writ does not run . 27

4, A writ, if he cannot be produced without help —

5. If a minor be vouched to warrant concerning
dower or in a plea of right, then let his
guardian be summoned

6. If the heir, who is vouched to Sinan, Tone
nothing of the maternal inheritance, but
his stepfather, then let each be summoned,
whether the heir is of full age or a minor . 31

R 2657. f


29


lxxviii INDEX.


[—^


9.


10.
ig


Car. V. fol 384,


Quod quis potest se essoniare


Si defaltam fecerit, oper de terra in manum
domini regis : ; :

Breve ad eapiendam terram in manum donum
regis per defaltam ad valentiam super
warrantum. Magnum cape


. Si terra petita fet in uno foem 3


terra warranti in alio, tune fiat extensio
per tale breve


. Breve de capiendo terram pro e :
. Si de advocatione eeclesie vocetur warrantus,


tune capiatur terra ad valentiam et es-
timetur advocatio, ut sciri Aue. quantum
capi debeat


. Breve quod capiat tantum fore, ante E dé


hæreditate .


. Si mulier dotem petierit at minor NONE


ad warrantum: et custos defaltam fecerit,
capiatur de terra rainoris pro defectu cus-
todis . 1

Si minor vocatus UD ad Me Ey cum
parastre, et uterque eorum defaltam fece-
rit, vel alter eorum tantum, capiatur de
terra minoris ad valentiam terre petito .

Si plures warranti defaltam fecerint

Si warranti manentes fuerint in diversis
comitatibus, et pro ea parte, quam quili-
bet tenuerit, facta prius estimatione


Page


36


38


40


42


=


Cx


10.
AT.


TABLE.


CHAPTER V, leaf 384.


. That à person may essoin himself .
. If he has made default, let the land be taken


into the hand of the lord the king,


. A writ to take land into the hand of the ba


the king through default up to the value
against a warrantor. <A great cape


. If the land claimed þe in one county and the


land of the warrantor in another, then let
there be made an extent by a writ of this
kind .


. A writ for taking iad for default :
. If a warrantor Be vouched concerning the ad-


vowson of a church, then let land be taken


Ixxix


Page


33


up to the value, and let the advowson be .


estimated, that it may be known how much
ought to be taken


. A writ for taking so much land, Sh is M


of the inheritance


. If the woman has claimed dover a ihe


minor summoned to warrant and the guar-
dian have made default, let there be taken
of the land of the minor for the default of
the guardian


. If a minor be vouched ES oru ui his


stepfather, and each of them has made de-
fault, or the one or the other of them only,
let there be taken of the land of the minor
up to the value of the land claimed

If several warrantors have made default .

If the warrantors are resident in different
counties, and for that part, which each may
hold, an estimate having been first made


39


lxxx INDEX.


Or


o%


(hk


12.


Cap. VI. fol. 385 b.


.Si warrantus ad secundam summonitionem


post captionem nec primo die nec secundo
nec tertio nec quarto comparuerit


. Quod petens recuperabit seysinam per de-


faltam


. Cum tenens amiserit, quia re uS non


potest eum defendere in seysina sua, si
warrantus tenementum habuerit in eodem
comitatu, statim fiat ei excambium ad
valentiam .


. Si plures sint warranti E aT iwc


fecerint, et quidam non


. Cape de terra warranti ad valentiam
. Aliud breve de eadem captione, sed alio modo
. De viro et uxore, cum simul vocati fuerint


ad warrantum, et alter ipsorum defaltam
fecerit ;

Cum warrantus nullam joe dun ums
cum defaltam fecerit primo die, secundo,
tertio, vel quarto


. Breve secundum judicium preden
. Quod poterit quis amittere per defaltam,


quam fecit primo die, sicut secundo, ter-
tio, et quarto
Ubi quietus recedit de A, et euo
petita capiatur in manum domino regis .
Si petens defaltam fecerit offerentibus se liti
quario die tenente et warranto, uterque
quietus recedet .


Page


42


44


50


54


56


LE


12.


TABLE.


CHAPTER VI. leaf 385 b.


. Ifthe warrantor upon the second summons after


the caption has not appeared on the first,
nor on the second, nor on the third, nor on
the fourth day


. That the claimant shall recover ds by


default


. When the tenant has it aT the warran-


tor cannot maintain him in his seysine, if
the warrantor has a tenement in the same
county, let there be forthwith made com-
pensation up to the value


. If there be several warrantors, and some ee


made default and others not


. A cape of the land of the warrantor up to the


value .


. Another writ for a same cst but ina


different manner


. Of a husband and wife, sius d mes hese


vouched together to warrant, and one or
other of them has made default .


. When a warrantor has no excuse, when he has


made default on the first, the second, the
third, or the fourth day 1


. A writ according to the judgment Bos Send
. That a person may lose by a default, which he


has made on the first day as on the PG
the third, and the fourth

Where a person withdraws released from a
warranty, and the land claimed is taken into
the hand of the king . ;

If the tenant has made SOUS iin ate
tenant and the warrantor are present on
the fourth day to join issue, let both of
them withdraw released ; ; ;


lxxxi


Page


43


45


47


49


| &


Ixxxil INDEX.


Page
13. Si warrantus Christianus vel Judeus terram
non habuerint, per quam distringi possunt
ad warrantum, vicecomes habeat corpora
eorum : ; : : s : P PO


Car. VII. fol 387 b.


1. Post essonia et dilationes presentibus in ju-
dicio petentibus et warranto, si warrantus
gratis warrantizaverit et in se susceperit
defensiones, tune remaneat tenens, donec
discussum fuerit inter petentem et war-
rantum  . : . : AUT Do
2. Proposita vides versus warrantum . =
3. Breve de facienda seysina, et sic de manu
in manum de pluribus sicut de uno, s.


quod fiat escambium. : 145560
4. Si warrantus nihil habeat, unde rere pos-
sit escambium . 3 : 62


5. Cum unus vel plures ex under: MATE
fuerit, et ex pluribus tenentibus qui diver-
sis temporibus feoffati fuerint, quod melior
erit conditio ejus quoad escambium, qui
primo feoffatus fuit, si uno tempore fue-
rint implacitati, aliud si diversis  . 64
6. Cum warrantus nihil habeat unde Pe
faciat, de hæreditate ejus, cujus nomine
vocatus fuerit ad warrantum . : ©. —
7. Si ille, qui feoffavit, tempore feoffationis sa-
tis habuit, res illa, quam tune habuit,
tacite obligatur vel expresse facta per
modum donationis . : ; : . 66


13.


bo


On


TABLE. Ixxxiii


If a Christian or Jewish warrantor have no
land, through which a distress can be made
for a warranty, let the viscount produce
them in person .


CHAPTER VII. leaf 387 b.


. After essoins and delays the claimant and the


warrantor being present in judgment, if
the warrantor has gratuitously warranted
and taken upon himself the defences, then
let the tenant remain at home until the
discussion has been had between the claim-
ant and the warrantor


. The declaration having been propounded Ju


the warrantor


. À writ to give seysine, and so om id to


hand a several as from one, to wit, that
compensation may be made


. If the warrantor has nothing, wherewith n


can make compensation


. Where one or more- of several have pn en-


feoffed, and of several tenants who have been
enfeoffed at different times, that the con-
dition of him, who was first enfeoffed, will
be better as regards compensation, if they
should be impleaded at one time, otherwise
if at different times


. When a warrantor has nothing Boni lich i


can make compensation fes the inherit-
ance of him, in whose name he has been


vouched to warrant


. If he, who has enfeoffed, had at the tbe of the


enfeoffment sufficient, the estate which he
‘then had is tacitly charged or expressly
made through the mode of donation . :


Page


57


59


61


63


67


]Ixxxiv INDEX.


l.


Cap. VIII. fol. 388 b.


Si warrantus dicat quod warrantizare non
debeat, quo casu oportet quod qui eum
vocavit rationem ostendat, quare war-
rantizare debeat, si warrantus contendere
velit . : : :

Confirmatio heredis, cum jus ei eee
facit primam chartam convalescere, que
ab initio fuit invalida * . ; ;

Finis factus . : : : : - ;

Homagium  . : : : :


. Homagium factum capitali domino de con-


cessione medii . > ; A n


Car. IX. fol. 389.


Cum warrantus warrantizaverit, suspenditur
prosecutio contra tenentem, donee placi-
citum de warrantia terminetur. i

Non tenebitur warrantus ad majus excam-
bium quam ad id, ad quod vocatus est
ad warrantum : ;

Si rex vocetur ad Suc de Shut ante-
cessoris, quis sit antecessor regis viden-
dum . . : : : : : :

Si privata persona vocatur ad warrantum
ratione chartz sus, vel antecessorum suo-
rum. : : : : :

In quibus cU non E warrantizare .

Exceptio quod donator nunquam fuit in sey-
sina . ; : : : :

Quod non est sss nec suus seo s

Non tenetur aliis hzredibus warrantizare
quam illis, qui sunt in charta comprehensi
secundum modum donationis quet.

Uhi quis remisit et quietum clamavit .


Page


68


70


42


A c5


Lo


00 NT


TABLE. Ixxxv


CHAPTER VIII. leaf 388 b.


. If the warrantor says that he ought not to


warrant, in which case it is incumbent for
him who has vouched him to show reason
why he ought to warrant, if the warran-
tor wishes to dispute .


. The confirmation by an heir, ES ue roli


has descended to him, causes the first char
ter to become valid, which was from the
begininng invalid


. A fine made
. Homage .
. Homage to a anes lord by the concession of


ee intermediate one .


CHAPTER IX. leaf 389.


. When à warrantor has warranted, the suit


against the tenant is suspended, until the
plea concerning the warranty is terminated

The warrantor shall not be bound to a greater
compensation than to that to which he has
been vouched to warrant


. If the king is vouched to warrant B ane


donation of his ancestor, it is to be seen who
is the ancestor of the king .


. If a private person be OU led to warrant by


reason of his own charter or that of his
ancestors


In what cases he is not fond to RD
. An exception that the donor was never in


seysine


. That he is not the Lon nor hid feoffoe
. Heis not bound to warrant to other heirs than


to those, who are comprised in the charter
according to the mode of the donation


. Where a person has released and quitclaimed .


Page


69


73


Ixxxvi INDEX.


Page
10. Si salvo jure cujuslibet . s ; : at OU.
11. Si non tenuerit nisi ad vitam, vel si certi i
homines excepti sunt : oo
12. Si modus in donatione contentus Quod do-
nator non teneatur ad warrantiam, et quod
conventio vincit legem . : e E89
13. Propter variationem, si tenens semel cogno-
verit, quod non tenuit tenementum nisi
ad vitam vel ad voluntatem domini, qui
vocatur ad warrantum  . ROUES Sd
14. Non tenetur quis ad warrantiam nec excam-
bium de feoffamento et incumbratione
tenentis sui, vel de injuria et injusta


detentione . F m
15. Non tenetur quis de Laud Vnus

Sul aa 3 88
16. De excambio schien si faea fuerit 12290


Cap. X2." fol 392;


1. Suspenditur quandoque warrantia ad tempus
propter minorem statem vel propter
mortem  . A 90

2. Fallit hoc quandoque propter ance flum
vel si suecessor minoris obiit seysitus ut
de feodo, quia minor respondebit ad
finem : : ; : ' : v (09

3. Cum minor warrantizaverit propter finem,
non respondebit petenti ante setatem ^ . 94

4. Videtur quod teneatur respondere de quibus

antecessor non obiit seysitus ut de feodo,

si vice versa non teneatur respondere de

quibus obiit seysitus ut de feodo  . C
. Suspenditur quandoque per mortem warranti- 96


or


10.
LE


12.


13.


15.


16;


TABLE. Ixxxvji


If saving the right of any one 1

If he has not “held except for his Um or if
certain persons are excepted

If à mode be contained in the donation, tliat
the donor is not bound to warrant, and that
a convention overrides the law .

On account of a variation, if the tenant lias
once acknowledged that he has only had
the tenement for his life or at the will of
the lord, who is vouched to warrant .


. A person is not bound to a warranty nor to


make compensation for the feoffment and
encumbrance of his tenant, or for his wrong-
doing and unjust detention :
A person is not bound respecting the encum-
brances of his tenant .
Of recovering land, if it has been given in
compensation


CHAPTER X. leaf 392.


. A warranty is sometimes suspended for a time


on account of minority or on account of
death


. This, however, fails SOT GL on Saunt hea a


fine having been made, or if the ancestor
of the minor has died seysed as of fee,
because a minor shall answer to a fine


. When a minor has warranted on account of a


fine, he shall not answer to the claimant
whilst he is under age


. It seems that he is bound to answer concern-


ing tenements of which his ancestor did
not die seysed as of fee, if on the reverse
he is not bound to answer concerning tene-
ments, of which he died seysed as of fee


. It is suspended sometimes through the death


of the warrantor à à 4


Page
81


83


89


91


91


95


97


Ixxxviil INDEX.


6. Si quis duos vel plures vocaverit ad warran-
tum, ut si virum et uxorem . : :
7. Ubi plures vocantur ad warrantum succes-
sive, refert quis prius moriatur, et in
persona cujus debeat placitum warranti
suscitari, et unus ex principalibus : per-
sonis moriatur t
8. Quod remanebit totum eus ad mi-
norem etatem unius warranti et post


seysinam :
9. Si plures warranti vocantur, sicut unus
heeres :


10. Suspenditur hou. propter t even-
tum, propter partum qui in utero est
11. Si warrantus vocatus appellatus sit de vita


et membris : ; 1 : :
12. De eo qui debet esse loco USER ut de
escheta  . ; : :


13. Refert utrum warrantus, qui vi tenuit in
feudo vel ad vitam .

l4. Poterit quis intrare gratis ad besos si
non vocetur, ad proprii juris tuitionem


Car. XI. fol. 393 b.


1. Cum warrantus se de warrantia defendere
non possit, vel cum gratis vel per judi-
cium, tune reincipiet petens principale
placitum, sicut fecit versus tenentem, et
eodem modo proponat intentionem


Page


96


98


100


104


106


10.


11,


12.


13.


14.


TABLE. Ixxxix


If a person has vouched two or more persons
to warrant, as for instance a man and his
wife .


. Where several are vouched to warrant succes-


sively, it is of importance, who dies first,
and in whose person the plea of warranty
ought to be revived, and one of the principal
persons dies ! :


. That the entire plea shall be stayed on the


minor age of a single warrantor and after
seysine  . :


. If several warrantors are vouehed as a single


heir . : : : : : :
The warranty is suspended on account of a
doubtful event, on account of an offspring
which is in the womb : 5
If a warrantor, who has been vouched, is
accused of a crime entailing loss of life or
of members PAY D : : : E
Concerning him who ought to be in the place
of an heir, as in an escheat ;
It is of importance whether the warrantor,
who has died, held in fee or for life
A person may enter gratuitously into a war-
ranty, if he be not vouched, for the protec-
tion of his own right .


CHAPTER XI. leaf 393 b.


When a warrantor cannot defend himself from
a warranty, or when he warrants either
through a judgment or gratuitously, then
let the claimant recommence the principal
plea against the warrantor, as he did
against the tenant, and let him in the same
manner propound his declaration


Page


97


99


101


103


105


107


XC


3.


INDEX.


. Si ille, qui warrantizaverit, ulterius vocat


-warrantum, tune fiat ei tale breve pro
auxilio suo


. Si ille, qui vocatur ad warrantum, non


tenuit nisi ad vitam, quando feoffavit, et
mortuo eo qui vocatus est


. Cum ultimus warrantus ulterius warrantum


vocare noluerit, tune statim defendat jus
petentis


Cap. XII. fol. 394 b.


. Proposita intentione contra warrantum, si


warrantus visum petat, denegabitur ei


. Si warranto competat alia exceptio, que


primo non competierit principali tenenti,
proponatur illa incontinenti ;


Cap. XIII. fol. 394 b.


Si nulla sit exceptio vel defensio de escambio
rehabendo, et cum warrantus tenentem
suum defendere non possit ;

Non tenetur quis factum patris warranti-
zare, vel escambium facere de hæreditate
matris, vel e contrario :

Si warrantus tenuerit de doeet rege per
warrantiam

Si da escambio fieri debel ENE O :

Casus, ubi quis habere possit ipsam rem
principalem, et nihilominus escambium


Page


110


112


112


TABLE.


. If he, who has warranted, further vouches a
warrantor, then let a writ of this kind be
issued to him for his aid

. If he, who is vouched to warrant, did fos Bold
except for life when he enfeoffed, and he
who is vouched, is dead

. When the last warrantor has not wistisd i
vouch further a warrantor, then let him
contest forthwith the right of the claimant


.CHAPTER XII. leaf 394 b.


. The declaration having been propounded
against a warrantor, if he claims a view, it
shadi be denied to him .

. If another exception is available for ilie war-
rantor, which may not have been at first
available for the principal tenant, let it be
propounded immediately


CHAPTER XIII. leaf 394 b.


. If there be no exception nor defence against
recovering compensation, and when the
warrantor cannot defend his tenant

. A person is not bound to warrant the act je
his father, or to make compensation from
the inheritance of his mother, or the con-
trary . :

. If the warrantor hatt is om the ota the Eine
by a warranty . :

. If an extension should be PU concerning
the compensation

. A case, where a person may have the Shea
estate itself, and nevertheless compensation


Page


111


113


113


xcii


[^11


~J


INDEX.


Car: XIV. fol. 395 b.


. Si tenens warrantum vocaverit, qui manens


sit extra regnum, et nihil habuerit in
regno per quod distringi possit


. Breve, si implacitatus in Anglia warrantum


vocaverit, qui manet in Hibernia


. Si .warrantus non venerit, nee tenentem


suum warrantizaverit -


. Si implacitatus in Hibernia warrantum vo-


caverit qui manens sit in Anglia


Cap. XV. fol. 396.


. Si warrantus contenderit de warrantia, et


charta producatur calumniata, et petens
se posuerit super patriam et testes in
brevi nominatos :

Summoneantur testes, sed "s si TS
in diversis comitatibus ?


. Si charta bona sit in se et AT pro


bona, sed cum donator non fale compos
sul nec sanee mentis, quando fecit donum
illud .


. Inquisitio, si fuit sans side
. Si per testes de consensu partium :
. Si res una data fuerit duobus, tune in-


quiratur de prioritate


. Si advoeatio data fuerit duobus
. Si inquisitio fieri debeat per testes et ne


patriam  . : ;
Si fieri debeat Bann in Wn » non
coram justiciariis : : : e :


Page


120


122


124


[2v]


ex


0o N


TABLE.


CHAPTER XIV. leaf 395 b.


. If a tenant has vouched a warrantor, who is


resident out of the kingdom, and has
nothing in the kingdom, which can be
BEA


. A writ, if a person vc ils in Bagind nes


vouched a warrantor, who remains in
Treland


. If the warrantor has ae come and s dd


warranted .


. If a person impleaded in liess nt quib


a warrantor, who is resident in England


CHAPTER XV. leaf 396.


. If the warrantor disputes a warranty, and a


charter is produced which is impeached,
and the claimant has put himself upon the
country and the witnesses named in the
charter


. Let the witnesses be TANI But xi if


they be resident in different counties ?


. If the charter be good in itself and is recognised


as good, but when the donor was not master
of his faculties, nor was of sound mind,
when he made the gift


. Àn inquest, if he was of sound mind ;
. If by witnesses with the consent of the parties
. If one thing has been given to two persons,


then let an inquest be held as to the
priority


. If an advowson has p given js D persons
. If the inquest ought to is made through wit-


nesses and through the country .


. If an inquest ought to be made in the B


court, and not before the justiciaries .
R 2657. g


xelil


Page


119


xeiv INDEX.


bo


bo


Cx


Si testes manentes sint in diversis comi-
tatibus


. Si in comitatu, breve iudi En s
. Si testes et recognitores non venerint ad


primum diem


. Quod variantur hujusmodi inquisitiones Se-


cundum varietatem placitorum


. Cum comparuerint testes et recognitores


Cap. XVI. fol. 398 b.


. Probari poterit charta alio modo quam per


testes, scilicet per collationem signorum,
et de vitiis chartarum :
Probatur sigillum per UE :


. Si plura proferantur instrumenta


Cap. XVII. fol. 399.


. Aliud genus warrantie, sicut de warrantia


chartae


. Breve de warrantia charts :


Si non venerit attachiatus ODSOEZA SUE Oris
attachiamentorum


. Si summonitus ad EUR REM vexa-


verit tenentem suum erga dominum feof-
fatorem :

Si tenens in brevi dt us bs WS
warrantum, quem vocare possit vel velit,
tune ad elidendam actionem petentis
tenens proponat exceptionem, si quam
habuerit, et illam probet cum quodam
modo actor sit in hae parte


140
142
144


148


i)


h9


TABLE.


If the witnesses are resident in different
counties


. If in a county, an nd uu
. If. the witnesses and recognisors have not


come on the first day


. That inquisitions of this kind are SN ac-


cording to the variety of the pleas


. When us witnesses and the recognisors have


appeared


CHAPTER XVI. leaf 398 b.


. A charter may be proved in another manner


than by witnesses, to wit, by a comparison
of signatures, and concerning the vice of
charters


. A seal is proved ju uen
. If several instruments are produced


CHAPTER XVII. leaf 399.


. Another kind of warranty, as eee the


warranty of a charter


. A writ concerning the warranty of: a ess ,
. If the person attached has not come, let the


order of attachments be observed


, If, when summoned to warrant, he has harassed


his tenant with regard to his lord, the
feoffor


. If the tenant in a writ of Hut HA no war-


rantor, whom he is able or tins to vouch,
then in order to parry the action of the
claimant let the tenant propound an excep-
tion, if he has any, and let him prove it,
since he is in a certain manner a plaintiff
in this part


(oje)


141
143


149


xcvi


INDEX.


TRACTATUS QUINTUS LIBRI QUINTI, IN QUO TRACTATUR


D =


DE EXCEPTIONIBUS.


Cap. I. fol. 399 b.


. Quid sit exceptio, et de divisione excep-


tionum, quzdam dilatoriz, B gene-
rales, quaedam speciales


. Quando proponendee sint, et quando non


Queedam ante visum, et quzdam post.

Contra exceptionem competit replicatio

Ad replieationem competit triplicatio

Qusedam sunt perpetue, qusedam ipn tem-
porales


. Quod quis potest pluribus a


Probari poterit exceptio multis modis .


. Non. per sectam
. Non per simplicem vocem : :
. De exceptione, que ponitur contra juris-


dietionem .


Cap. II. fol. 400 b.


. Quid sit jurisdictio, et de ejus divisione
2. Quale forum actor sequi debet, et qua per-


‘tineant ad forum seculare


. Ratione criminis et ratione contractus
. Si quis elegerit unum judicem, ad alium


recurrere non potest de facili, et debet
estimare, si sit sui judicis

Quas pertinent ad forum curisus =
qua ad forum seculare


Page


160


164


TABLE.


xevil


THE FIFTH TREATISE OF THE FIFTH Book, WHICH


bo


eS TOT Oe Cs


rm LR


ej»


ex


TREATS OF EXCEPTIONS.


CHAPTER I. leaf 399 b.


. What is an exception, and concerning the divi-


sion of exceptions, that some are dilatory,
some are general, some are special


. When they are to be FADE: and ics


LOCA:
Some before ilie Mw. aud some d da à
À replication is available against an exception
A triplication is available against a replication
Some are perpetual, and some are temporary .


. That a person may use several exceptions
. An exception may be proved in many modes .


Not by a sect
Not by a single voice
Of an exception, which ls od aie ite


jurisdiction


CHAPTER Il. leaf 400 b.


What is jurisdiction, and concerning the divi-
sion of it


. What forum a plaintiff ‘ought A sue in, EN


what things pertain to the secular forum .

By reason of “the crime, and by reason of the
contract

If a person has ETE one judge, he Suv
easily have recourse to another, and the
judge ought to weigh well, whether he is
under his jurisdiction

What things pertain to the ecelewnatical yor wn,
and what to the secular forum .


Page


161


xevlli INDEX.


(Je)


Quod laicus non est conveniendus coram
judice ecclesiastico de aliquibus, quee per-
tinent ad coronam et dignitatem regis


. Quod quis possit renuntiare iis, quse pro se


introductz sunt, sed non in prejudicium
alterius . : : ; ; :


Cap. III. fol 402.


. De prohibitionibus domini regis. Item dic-


tum est si per consensum, nunc autem
si contra voluntatem : : :


. Breve ad prohibendum, si contra coronam


et dignitatem domini regis, judicibus, ne
teneant placitum de catallis, que non
sunt de testamento vel matrimonio. :


. Breve judicibus, ne teneant de laico feodo .
. Breve parti, ne sequatur  . : :


Car. IV, fol. 402 b.


. De prohibitionibus et advocationibus ecclesise
. Prohibitio de advocationibus. Indicavit jus


cibus : i ;


. Prohibitio, si aren i ecclesiarum E rae


inter se sine patronis


. Prohibitio, si clericus, præsentatus ab eo doi


obtinuerit, implacitatus fuerit a clerico
ipsius, qui amisit in curia regis  .


Page


168


176


ie)


Noe


m


TABLE.


. That a laic is not to be convened before an


ecclesiastieal judge concerning any matters,
which pertain to the crown and to the
dignity of the king `.


. That a person may renounce iu Eu


which have been introduced on his own
behalf, but not to the prejudice of another


CHAPTER III. leaf 402.


. Concerning the prohibitions of the lord the


king. Likewise *if by consent" has been
discussed, now indeed we must discuss “if
* against one's will”


. À writ to prohibit, * if against an crown


“and the dignity of the king,” to the
judges that they should not entertain a
suit concerning chattels, which are not
testamentary nor matrimonial


. A writ to the judges not to entertain a suit


concerning a lay fee .


. A writ to the party not to sue >.


CHAPTER IV. leaf 402 b.


. Concerning prohibitions and the patronage of


churches . : , :

A pn concerning advowsons, “ Indi-
* eavit" to the judges

A. prohibition, if the rectors of the churches
contend with one another without the
patrons

A prohibition, if the dicis coe Ps sr
who has prevailed, shall have been im-
pleaded by the clerk of him, who has lost in
the court of the king . : ;


Xeix


Page


167


169


173


175


177


[U INDEX.


5. Breve prohibitionis (Ostendit nobis) forma-
tum a justiciariis secundum querelam  . 176
6. Breve prohibitionis contra eum, qui sequitur
contra judieium factum in curia domini


regis . : ; , ; : RUS
To Prohibitio si fiat IS ea, quae in curia
domini regis rite acta sunt. : a 50


8. Si de iis, quz pertineant ad laicum feodum.
ratione alicujus advocationis, sicut de ex-
enniis et redditibus, que pertinere pos-
sunt ad coronam i ; : TEIS?

9. Si minus idoneus fuerit dre: et idoneus
admissus, ad querelam breve formatum a
justiciariis ; : : Do

10. Prohibitio judicibus, si JERE ad D
tionem regis vel antecessoris admissus
implacitetur in curia Christianitatis . 184


Cap. V. fol. 404 b.


1. Prohibitio, si clericus implacitaverit ballivum
vel alium ministrum, eo quod arrestavit
eum pro pace regis vel pro latrocinio . 186


CAP. VI. fol. 404 b.


l. Prohibitio de eo, qui dicebat se tenere per
legem Anglie, et in curia Christianitatis
probare voluerit pueros suos legitimos, qui
revera bastardi sunt : : : TISS


TABLE.


5. A writ of prohibition (Ostendit nobis) drawn


up by the justiciaries in accordance with
the complaint


6. A writ of prohibition against aes n sues


8.


UA


If


against a judgment ludo in the court of
the lord the king

prohibition, if any thing is cde ds
to those things, S have been duly
transacted in the court of the king :
concerning those things, which pertain to a
lay feud by reason of a certain advowson,
as concerhing certain payments and rents,
which may pertain to the Crown


9. If an inefficient person has been rejected digi


10.


T:


A


A


a fit person admitted, upon his complaint a
writ drawn up by the justiciaries $
prohibition to the.judges, if a clerk ad-
mitted on the presentation of the king or
of his ancestor, should be impleaded in the
court of Christianity .


CHAPTER V. leaf 404 b.


prohibition, if a clerk has impleaded a
bailiff or other officer, on the ground that
he has arrested him on behalf of the king’s
peace or for robbery


CHAPTER VI. . leaf 404 b.


1. A prohibition against him, who says that he


holds by the law of England, and in the
court of Christianity seeks to prove that
his sons are legitimate, who are in truth
bastards


Page


183


185


187


189


cii


oo


INDEX.


Si quis voluerit in curia Christianitatis legi-
timationem suam probare, antequam in-
quisitio esset judicibus per curiam regiam
demandata per Willielmum Muschet


. Si petens tenenti vel e contrario bastardiam


objecerit, et mortuo eo, cui fuit objectum,
velit judex inquirere de legitimatione
filii, cum hoe non sit ei demandatum


Cap. VIL fol 405 b.


. Quibus fieri debet prohibitio : .


Car. VIII. fol. 405 b.


. Si judices prohibitionem admittere recusa-


verint, et superveniat illa prohibitio, esti-
mare debent an eorum sit jurisdictio, et
si dubitaverint, debent consulere justi-
ciarios, et de hujusmodi consultationibus
dicatur .


. Breve ad respondendum  consultationi ju-


dieum per justiciarios de nova garba


. Aliud breve et alterius modi, si clericus cle-


rieum de eodem ^ ; :


. Car. IX. fol 406 b.


. Ubi et quando et quibus modis locum habet


prohibitio ratione personarum et rei


. Ratione contractus . : 5 ; ; :
. Ratione delicti


Page


194


TABLE.


2. If a person seeks to prove his legitimacy in


3.


bo


eo to


the court of Christianity, before an inquest
has been ordered in the king’s court, in the
case of William Muschet :

If a claimant has objected to a ioni bas-
tardy, or the converse, and the person having
died, against whom the objection has been
raised, the judge seeks to inquire into the
legitimaey of the son, when this has not
been committed to him


CHAPTER VII. leaf 405 b.


. To whom a prohibition ought to be directed


CHAPTER VIII. leaf 405 b.


. If the judges have refused to admit a pro-


hibition, and a prohibition supervenes, they
ought to weigh well whether the juris-
diction is theirs, and if they doubt, they
ought to consult the justiciaries, and we
must speak of such consultations

A writ to answer to a consultation of the
judges by the justiciaries concerning a new
sheaf .

Another writ and A: cus E if a dork
sues a clerk for the same


CHAPTER IX. leaf 406 b.


Where and when and in what matters a pro-
hibition has a place by reason of the per-
son or of the thing


. In respect of a contract .


In respect of an offence .


197


199


201


civ


Ov E c5


c5


INDEX.


Cap. X. fol. 407.


. Quando et in quibus locum non habet pro-


hibitio, sicut de re sacra, vel quasi .


. Quod ratione accessus locum non habet pro-


hibitio


. Quod actiones legari non WU
. Item non in causa testamentaria . :
. Si de facto suo effectus sit alterius juris-


dictionis


. Non habebit prohibitionem de Wed mee


tione.


. Item in causa ioshoutionis


Cap. XI. fol. 408.


De judieibus, qui fraudulenter simul faciunt
suas comminationes, ut facilius procedant
ad excommunicationem


. Breve de capiendo excommubieato desee


regi per episcopum directum


. Si episcopus vel alius ordinarius fraudulenter


procuraverit captionem


4. Cum quis juste fuerit excommunicatus


Or


[9]


. Cum juste excommunicatus paratus sit satis-


facere Deo et ecclesie, breve ad delibe-
randum eum qui captus fuerit.


Cap. XII. fol. 409.


De judicibus attachiandis, si pu con-
tra prohibitionem

Breve de judicibus ottachiandn si irae
literarum. domini pape


. Item quod attachiet per meliores pito


3.


TABLE.


CHAPTER X. leaf 407.


. When and in what matters a prohibition has


not a place, as concerning a thing sacred, or
as it were sacred


. That a prohibition has not a ieee in D


of accession


. That actions cannot be ASI
. Likewise a probibition has no place in a testa-


mentary cause


. If by his own act he has (ous est subject to


another jurisdiction


. He shall not have a prohibition concerning a


recent spoliation


. Likewise in a cause of TEM ;


CHAPTER XI. leaf 408.


. Of judges, who fraudulently make three moni-


tions at once, that they may the more easily
proceed to excommunication


. A writ for seizing a person mesurer


directed to the lord the king by the bishop


. If a bishop or other ordinary has procured


fraudulently the seizure of a party


. When a person has been justly excommuni-


cated


. When a person justly UE Ud is pre-


pared to satisfy God and the church, a writ
to set free him who has been seized


CHAPTER XII. leaf 409.


Of attaching the judges, if they proceed con-
trary to a prohibition


. A writ for attaching judges, if by AMNIS us


letters of the lord the pope
Likewise that he should attach by PLE


sureties


CV


evi


me © b» LE


INDEX.


CAP. XE fol--4.09%b.


. Cum partes comparuerint in judicio .
. De probatione intentionis


De legis vadiatione, si defendat


. Qualiter formantur verba legis :
. Quod refert, quis eorum prius purgaverit
. De responsionibus judicum


Car. XIV. fol. 411.


. Qualiter procedendum sit contra jurisdic-


tionem alicujus judicis


Cap. XV. fol. 411 b.


. De exceptione contra personam justiciarii, et


de causa recusationis


. De jurisdictione majorum judicum, sieut


Pape


. Quod judex debet examinare, et estimare, an


sua sit jurisdictio


Cap. XVI. fol 412.


. Quod quandoque mutatur jurisdictio in juris-


dietionem, et quandoque de persona in
personam, mutato nomine rerum


. An privatus consensus mutare possit juris-


dietionem .


. Quod mutat jurisdietionem aliquando con-


tractus, aliquando delictum


252
254


256


moo bo n


TABLE.


CHAPTER XIII. leaf 409 b.


. When the parties have appeared in court
. Of the proof of the declaration


Of the wager of law, if he defends


. In what manner the words of the law are


formed


. That it matters, who of them RE ant pss


himself


. Concerning the answers of tho més Aa


CHAPTER XIV. leaf 411.


. How proceedings are to be taken against the


jurisdiction of any judge


CHAPTER XV. leaf 411 b.


. Of an exception against the person of the jus-


tielary, and concerning the cause of the
refusal


. Concerning the REEE of the aA


judges, as of the pope


. That a judge ought to examine aad LL


whether it be his jurisdiction


CHAPTER XVI. leaf 412.


. That the jurisdietion is sometimes changed


from jurisdiction to jurisdiction, and some-
times from person to person, the name of
the things having been changed


. Whether the consent of private persons can


change the jurisdiction
That a contract sometimes changes the Aire
diction, and sometimes an offence does.so .


evii


243


cviil INDEX.


10.


Cap. XVII. fol. 413.


. De exceptionibus contra breve, et ubi eadem


competere debet, et ubi non


. Que sunt brevia originalia, et quee sunt ma-


gistralia


Cap. XVIII. fol. 415 b.


. Si competat exceptio ex persona petentis,


unde quzdam dilatoria, quedam peremp-
toria multis rationibus


. Exceptio contra petentem ex parte doen.


Cap. XIX. fol 416.


. De exceptione bastardiz in casibus bastardis,


quod nulla bastardia simplex, sed quz-
libet causam habet certam

De mittendo ad curiam Christianitatis ES
ante vel post matrimonium, constitutio
concessa et approbata coram rege et con-
silio suo clericis et laicis .


. Quis possit opponere bastardiam
. Contra quem competat .


Inter quas personas


Cum objecta fuerit cum causa, oportet quod
sequatur probatio


. Quod mittitur inquisitio ES ad curiam


Christianitatis per breve .


. Forma brevis


Oportet quod ille, cui MAS UNIS
probet se esse legitimum .


Breve, quod opponitur ei bastardia, in ot
in seysina


Page


256


260


284


C» Ox me co


[99]


10.


TABLE.


CHAPTER XVII. leaf 418.


. Of an exception against the writ, and where it


ought to be valid, and where not


. What writs are original,and what are magis-


terial


CHAPTER XVIII. leaf 415 b.


. If an exception is available against the person


of the claimant, whereof one is peremptory,
and another is dilatory in many ways


. Àn exception against the claimant upon the


personal status of the claimant .


CHAPTER XIX. leaf 416.


. Of the exception of bastardy in cases of bas-


tardy, because no bastardy is simple, but
each has its certain cause


. A constitution concerning the sending io the


court of Christianity a question “ UTE
* before or after matrimony,” conceded and
approved in the presence of the king and
his council, clerics and laics


. Who can object bastardy
. Against whom it is available .
. Between what persons


When it has been objected uu à cause, it
is incumbent that proof should follow


. That an inquest of bastardy is sent to the


court of Christianity .


. The form of the writ


It is requisite that he, to ve ORUM m is ob-
jected, should prove himself to be legiü-
mate .

A writ to object UE io (s ays is in


seysine ; 5
R 2657. h


cix


279


283


285


311


Gx


11.
12.
13.


14.


15.


16.


17.


[dU


INDEX.


Quod pater nunquam desponsavit matrem

Breve, quod natus ante matrimonium

Cum loquela transmissa fuerit ad curiam
Christianitatis, remanebit placitum in curia
regis donee veniat MT

De vit ordinarii

Facta inquisitione, breve ds quod SUUS
resummoneatur loquela :

Quod ad diem summonitionis Wt esse
essoniatus, si voluerit ‘

Quis sit effectus legitimationis, cum prone
fuerit


Car. XX. fol. 420 b.


. Exeeptio competens ex persona petentis, si


fuerit non sans mentis, id est, furiosus,
et sunt plures peremptorize

Exceptio ex persona petentis, si facet sur-
dus et mutus naturaliter .


. Exceptio propter morbum pier Ton


de leproso .


. Exceptio ex se ubi quis se ee


ad villanum


. Exceptio, si de crimine XM faerit T


felonia, vel aliquis antecessorum


. Exceptio per mortem civilem, si quis con-


tulerit se religioni et habitum religionis
susceperit .


Car. XXL fol 421 b.


. De exceptionibus, quee competunt ex persona


petentis et quse peremptorive sunt, sicut
de minori eetate


328


LE
12.
13.


16.


Le


TABLE.


That the father never espoused the mother

A writ, that he was born before marriage

When the trial has been sent to the court of
Christianity, the plea shall be stayed in the
court of the king, until the inquest is re-
mitted


4. Concerning the office of many
5. The inquest having been held, a writ, ese s


a trial may be forthwith summoned .
That on the day of resummons he may be
essoined, if he wishes. .
What is the effect of legitimation uxo i ia
been proved


CHAPTER XX. leaf 420 b.


. An available exception against the person of


the claimant, if he shall be not of sound
mind, that is, a madman, and there are
several which are peremptory


. An exception against the person of the dite


if he be deaf and dumb naturally


. An exception on account of an incurable disease,


as leprosy .


. An exception from an EAE vios


a person has acknowledged himself to be a
villein


. An exception, if i or one of i E


have been convicted of the crime of felony


. An exception through a civil death, if a person


has entered into religion and has adopted
the religious habit


CHAPTER XXI. leaf 421 b.


. Of exceptions, which are available against the


person of the claimant, and which are


peremptory, as concerning minority :
h 2


327


329


exii INDEX.


Page
2. De quibus minor ante ætatem debeat re-
spondere, et de quibus non : : 352
3. Breve, ne minor respondeat infra statem Bs
libero tenemento suo, donec sit talis


ætatis : : : : . 338
4. Si plures sunt hæredes, ues quidam in-

fra zetatem et quidam non 3 . 340
5. Exceptio ratione adjuncti, sicut de participe

et uxore . : xe
6. Si mulier cum JR de fuerit. mi-

nori vel e contrario . : : PL,


7. Status minoris mutari non debet nec de
tenementis nec de servitio et consuetu-
ditibus  . ; ; ; : : . 944

8. Replicatio, si in assisa mortis antecessoris
vel in placito per breve de recto objicia-
tur minori, quod placitare non possit, quia


minor est . : : : . . 350
9. De probatione setatis ex bean one per

aspectum corporis . : . 352
10. Si justiciarii dubitaverint, cum eno . B54


11. Qualiter probatur ætas per patriam, cum per
aspectum corporis vs non possit, et
per quos . ©. —

12. Ex præsumptione, ut si quis alton placita-
verit, sicut major :

- 13. De resummonendo loquelam ad curiam, quse
remansit sine die propter minorem eta-
tem : ; ues. ; : . 358

14. Breve, cum seysinam recuperaverit jam major
faetus versus dominum capitalem, et simi-
liter de'vasto facto in uno brevi


10.


12.


13.


- 14.


TABLE.


. Concerning what things a minor ought to an-


swer when under age, and concerning what
things not


. À writ, “that a minor shall is answer p


age concerning his freehold, until he be of
such an age


. If there be AMET (AT of ERA some SE


under age, and some not


, An exception by reason of an adjunct m n


as concerning a co-parcener and his wife


. If a woman with an inheritance has béen mar-


ried to a minor, or the converse .


- The status of a minor ought not to be Gaanged.


neither concerning tenements nor concern-
ing service or customs


ZA replication, if in an assise of moreno


or in a plea by a writ of right it be objected
to the minor, that he cannot plead because
he is a minor


. Concerning the proof of a age is the Tooke a the


body :
If the une e deabied: cies qs
. have come .


. How the age is to be nol by the ae .


when it cannot be proved. by the look of
the body, and through whom

From a presumption, as if a person has ied
others, as if of full age -

Concerning the resummoning of the cause for
hearing, which has been stayed without a
day on account of minority

A writ, when a person arrived at majority ee
recovered seysine against his chief lord,
and at the same time concerning waste in
the same writ


359


exiv INDEX.


Cap, XXII. fol. 425 b.


Page

1. De loquela ad curiam resummonendam, quee
posita fuit sine die , «^, 360

2. Breve de resummonendo um ahi re-

mansit sine die propter zetatem minoris,
qui vocatus fuit ad warrantum : -_ —

3. Item propter iter pacer et pro ser-
vitio regis : 362

4. Item propter peregrinationem in TOM Su
tam . : . : so o

5. Item si ad curiam oes quaecunque
de causa, vel 1n placito dotis . ; A

6, Si in partes transmarinas in servitio regis,
de advocatione . ‘ ; : . .- 364

7. Si generalis fieri debet resummonitio ad
bancum  . : . —
8. Breve vicecomiti, T a Qu : . 366


Cap. XXIII. fol. 426 b.


1. Exceptio ex persona petentis propter ok
vel propter excommunicationem . 366
2. Si vir uxoris appellatus sit de felonia, non
cadit actio ante convictionem instituta . 368
3. Si quis rite excommunicatus fuerit, et exti-
terit in excommunicatione per quadra-
ginta dies. . : . 970
4. B de p Sud
5. Si appellatus de felonia ad appellum decli-
nandum falso dedit intelligi episcopo,
quod appellans Bc: fuit, et
captus fuit, breve ad deliberandum eum 372


B


TABLE,


€


CHAPTER XXII. leaf 425 b.


. Concerning the resummons to the court of a


cause for hearing, which has been stayed
without a day ea:

A writ to resummons a cause is hearing,
where it has been stayed without a day on
account of the age of a minor, who has
been vouched to warrant


. Likewise on account of the iter of the boo


ciaries, and for the service of the king


. On account of a journey to the Holy Land
. Likewise if it has been transmitted to the


court of Christianity for ay cause, or in
a plea of dower

If he is in parts beyond the sea in che service

. of the king, concerning an advowson

If a general resummons ought to be made to
the bench .


. A writ to the viscount, hae ie e


CHAPTER XXIII. leaf 426 b.


An exception against the person of the
claimant on account of leprosy, or on ac-
count of excommunication


. If the husband of a wife is accused of (OS


an action instituted before conviction does
not abate


. If a person has been dip. xtA EUR


and has persisted in his excommunication
for forty days : : ;

A writ to seize an Eid xoa

If a person accused of felony in order to frus-
trate the charge has falsely led the bishop
to understand that the accuser has bcen
excommunicated, and he has been seized, a
writ to set him free


CXV


367


373


exvi


bo


D


10.


LE


INDEX.


Car. XXIV. fol. 427 b.


Exceptio, quod sine assensu superioris .


Page

. Exceptio ex persona petentis, quia alieni-
gena et ad fidem regis Francie 374

Bis contra petentem propter dA
dubium multis rationibus 376
Exceptio ex delicto spoliationis, donec fuerte
restitutus . . 378
Cap. XXV. fol. 428.

. Exceptio dilatoria, quia jus commune, ita
quod sine aliis respondere non potest, vel
quia in parte tangit alios sine quibus, &c. 378

. Exceptio quod participes habet, sine quiu
Qe x ; 380

. Exceptio quod particeps est p iE da
Francie _ : : 382

. Cum particeps sine participe Wien um
fraudem, et per fraudem sequi noluerit 388

. De summonendo participes oo

. Si unus de participibus moriatur, cu om-
nes in brevi nominentur —

. Cum unus ex participibus totam teneat fec
ditatem 3 390

. Si hereditas partita sit Ue participes —

Sunt qui tenent terram in communiy sed
‘non ut participes E =

Exceptio, quod viro non tes. SUR
heereditas sit terra 392


Or


10.


Tl.


TABLE.


CHAPTER XXIV. leaf 427 b.


. An exception against the person of the claimant


that he is an alien by birth, and of fealty
to the king of France


. Àn exception against a claimant on een of


his doubtful status for many reasons


. An exception on account of the offence of


spoliation, until he has had restitution


CHAPTER XXV. leaf 428.


. A dilatory exception, because the right is com-


mon, so that he cannot answer without the
others, or because in part it touches others
without whom, &e.


. An exception that he has perius without


whom, &e.


. An exception that the dote is of fealty


to the king of France


. When a co-parcener, without a felle co- ar:


cener, has obtained through fraud, and
through fraud is unwilling to sue


. Of summoning co-parceners ;
. If one of the co- parceners dies, when all are


named in the writ


. When one of the co-parceners holds the E


inheritance
]f the inheritance has m parted rene
the co- parceners


. There are persons who hold iu in common,


but not as co-heirs : ;
An exception that an answer is not given to
the husband, whose inheritance the land
may. be
An exception, that SES the eee of a
superior


exvil


Page


375
377


379


379


381


c5
eo
oo


cxviii INDEX.


TN


Or


bo


Cap. XXVI. fol. 429 b.


. De exceptionibus, quia competunt tenenti ex


persona propria


. Quod oportet, quod omnes homitienur pe-


tentes, licet respondere possunt, quod
quidam sunt bastardi, et quidam. villani,
et hujusmodi


. Si particeps surdus fuerit M n
. Si tenenti competat exceptio ex ipso re
. Oportet quod petens designet rem, quam


petit, cum pertinentiis


Cap, XXVII. fol. 431 b.


. Proposita intentione videre poterit tenens, an


totam teneat vel non, et unde oportet
quod visum habeat, vel quod tantundem
valeat


. Cum visum habuerit, mud Se
. Oportet designare qus vel qualis sit, quam


petit, res mobilis vel immobilis; et certa
designatio .


Eu quod nihil free et Sus. quae


sequitur, si inde convineatur


. Exceptio quod tenementum non teneat, nx


alius tenet de pertinentiis


. Quod aliquando fuit de aaa sed


postea desiit esse


. Inquisitio utrum totum est vel non


Page


418
420


Or


bo


TABLE.


CHAPTER XXVI. leaf 429 b.


. Of exceptions, which are available to the


tenant upon his own person


. That it is incumbent that all the uen D


named, although they may answer that
some are bastards, and some villeins, and
such like


. If a co-parcener be ear or Sum :
. If an exception as regards the thing itself is


available to the tenant


. It is incumbent that the malt uld


designate the thing, which he claims, with
its appurtenances ; : :


CHAPTER XXVII. leaf 431 b.


. The declaration having been propounded, the


tenant may see whether he holds the whole
or not, and whereupon it is incumbent that
he should have a view or what is equi-
valent


. When he has had a view, ra is A m dons
. It is incumbent to designate what and of


what quality is the movable or immovable
thing which he claims, and a certain
ARA


. An exception that he holds sedes and the


penalty which follows, if he be un
thereof


. An exception that he Mods riot hold the. tene-


ment, because another holds some of the
appurtenances


. That it was once on a time bd dd hoe


purtenances, but it afterwards ceased to be
SO


> An «I whether he holds the eiue or. not


exix


409


4199


CXX


8.
9.
10.


1l.
12.


13.


INDEX.


Si tenens dicat, quod nihil teneat, et alias
cognovit quod totum teneat .

Si cognoverit quod totum non tenuerit in
feodo, sed partem : :

Si quis manerium petat cum hse jor
nentiis, ad quod pertineat advocatio

Replieatio super hoc :

Si dicat quod nihil tenuerit We ers des.
de priore de Weylocke et W. de Insula

Si tenens dicat quod totam terram non
teneat, et petens quod totam, et sic fiat
res dubia per negationem, aut locus erit
joco partito, aut inde inquisitio de perti-
nentiis, et sunt pertinentiz pertinen-
tiarum


Cap. XXVIII. fol 434.


. In exceptione, quam habetis, ex errore in


nomine villarum. Item quid sit villa, PUDE
mansio, quid manerium


. Exceptio ad hoe, quod dicit E meum, 4


quod diversa sunt jura


. Ad quos descendit hereditas, et ih jure,


et plures possunt jus. habere, et unus
majus, et alius minus


. Quod poterit impedire descensus dn pc


commissam per aliquem antecessorum


. Competit. exceptio tenenti ex ipsa editione


actionis, si omnino nom vel obscure .


424


426


428


430


13.


TABLE.


. If the tenant says that he hold nothing, and


at another time has recognised that he .


holds the whole :
If he has acknowledged that he hare not

hold the whole in us but a part :
If any one claims a manor with all its appur-

tenances, to which an advowson pertains


. A replication upon this .
. If the tenant says that he holds En. E


ing what is false, as concerning the prior of
Weyloche and W. de Insula

If the tenant says that he does not hold E
whole land, and the claimant that he does
hold the whole, and thus there is a dubious
matter through the denial, either there will
be place for an alternative wager, or there-
upon there will be an inquest concerning
the appurtenances, and there are appur-
tenances of appurtenances


CHAPTER XXVIII. leaf 424.


. Of the exception, which you have upon an


error in the name of the vills. Likewise
what is a vill, what a mansion, what a
manor


. An exception ares gen that he SACS of


“my right,” and that there are divers
rights


. To whom descends an ‘inheritance, al by


. what right, and several persons may have
right, and one more and one less


. That the descent may be impeded MAE &


felony committed by one of the ancestors

An exception is available to a tenant upon the
edition itself of the. action, if it be alto-
gether null and obscure


425


427


429


437


exii


6.


a9


INDEX.


Exceptio ex variatione narrationis, dicendo
modo unum, et modo aliud a contra-
rium


. Item competit tenon an rel ONE


Car. XXIX. fol. 435 b.


. Exceptio ex taciturnitate, ee clameum non


apposuerit


. Cui preejudicatur de clameo non opposito
. Qualiter fuerit excusatus quis, -qui clameum


non apposuerit


. Exeusatur, si in prisona (inc fv
. Item si infirmitate detentus vel ultra mare


Si finis eontineat falsitatem, sicut de war-
rantia charte, ubi ille, qui dicit se fuisse
in seysina, nullam habuit seysinam tem-
pore confectionis cyrographi


TS tempore placiti nee ipse nec T


suus jus habuit


. Si finis faetus fuit in vL m tempus


legitimum, vel si non tenuerit nisi ad
vitam


. Item excusatur s si foqustur dd TED


Sua propria


Car. XXX. fol 437.


. In quibus casibus non excusatur . ;
. Si quis dixerit se esse impeditum, hoe pro-


bare debet, ut si dixerit se fuisse in par-
tibus transmarinis vel in  prisona, et
hujusmodi


. De exceptione finis facti


Page


436
438


448


450


450


TABLE.


. An exception upon a variation in the declara-
tion in saying at one time one thing, at
another time another thing IESU to the
first :
. Likewise there is crees io: a tenant an ex-
ception of a prior judgment


CHAPTER XXIX. leaf 435 b.


. Àn exception on the ground of taciturnity
that he has not advanced a claim

. Who is prejudiced from a claim not suas
been entered à

. In what way he may be d is has met
entered his claim

. He is excused, if he was mne in ase à :
. Likewiseif detained by illness or DUE the
sea ;
. If the fine M 8 Que as concerning
the warranty of a charter, where he, o
says that he was in seysine, had no seysine
at the time of the making of the chiro-
graph

. If at the time of AN s doni he himself
nor his ancestor had any right

. If a fine was made in secret before the lawful
time, or if he held only for life .

. Likewise a person is exeused, if he speaks of
his own seysine .


CHAPTER XXX. leaf 437.


. In what. cases he is not excused ; :
. If a person should have said that he was hin-
dered, he ought to prove.it,as if he has
said that he was in parts beyond the sea,
or in prison, or such like ;

. Of an exeeption of a fine having been made


exxlii


Page


431


439


449


451


exxiv INDEX.


4.


12.


SJ SS Or


Exceptio de defectu probationis per lapsum
temporis, quod tam longinquo tempore
quod excedat memorias hominum, vel
propter immutationem ;

Exceptio, si tenens fuerit a avons UE
tatus, quia nemo de duabus rebus simul
respondere potest l : :

Exceptio contra petentem jus merum per
breve de recto, ut si ipse tenens teneat
ad vitam quacunque ratione


. De tenente per legem Anglize
. Quid retinere possit, si tenuerit per legem


Anglize


. De partu supposito
. De forma et monstro
. Si inutilia, natura reddidit Os a3 si


curvus fuerit, vel gibbosus, vel membra
" tortuosa

Si omnino nullus bs PAD. et ient
per vim se tenuerit in seysina


Car. XXXI. fol. 439.


Qualiter procedendum sit contra contumaces
in actione personali . |

In actione criminali

Irrotulatio post defaltam i

Breve de attachiando aliquem pee vade
et plegios in actione qur cum fecerit
defaltam


. Breve de attachiando per ANS plezos ;


. Qualiter et quando plegii sint amerciandi
. Breve quod distringatur quis per terras et


catalla, et ESSE per ordinem


Page


452


462


E


2.


23
4.


5.
6.


7.


TABLE,


. An exception from defect of proof through


lapse of time, that it isat so distant a time
that it exceeds the memories of men, or on
account of a change .


. An exception, if a tenant has heen paded


by two ‘parties, bècause no person can
answer concerning two things at the same
time .


. An exception Bu a Penn V estes the


mere right by a writ of right, as if the
tenant himself holds for life in whatever
manner i


. Concerning a tenant ender the law oi Beni
. What he may retain, if he shall hold by the


law of England : à : : .


. Of a supposititious offspring .
. Concerning a deformity and a monster ,
. If nature has rendered its limbs useless, or it


is erooked, or humpbacked, or has twisted
EMPS >", . o


. If no heir at all exists ‘and ihe tenant keeps


himself by force in seysine ' ;


CHAPTER XXXI. leaf 439.


How proceedings are to be had against contu-
macious persons in à oq action

In a eriminal action 2 ‘ ^

An enrolment after default '

A writ to attach and to put E bail ju
sureties a certain person in a personal ac-
tion, when he has made default . ‘

A writ to attach under better sureties

In what manner and when the sureties are to
be amerced

A writ*that’a person be donandi ue his
lands and chattels, and further in order

R 2657. i


CXXV


Page


453


455


exxvi INDEX.


Cap. XXXII. fol. 441.


1. De returnis vicecomitis, eb si vicecomes neg-


ligens fuerit u j : ; 5

2. Pone, sicut alias . : s :

3. De fraude vicecomitis

4. De imperitia vicecomitis : et d

5. Breve de attachiando ulterius, sicut alias xel


plures, ubi vicecomes negligens fuerit
6. De excusatione vicecomitis
7. Breve, quod vicecomes non omittat oes


libertatem .
8. Si clericus decem eue uou
propter privilegium ordinis é


9. Breve ad episcopum vel alium, quod Cus


venire clericum, cum non habeat per dA


distringat .

10. Breve, si episcopus vel alius conan non
habuerit clericum ad primum diem, quod
episcopus distringatur : : ~


Cap. XXXIII., fol. 443 b.


1. De rebus communibus inter vicinos dividen-
dise. : . ,

2. Quod solennitas Bill E non sit
ubique et in omni casu tenenda  ,

3. Si statim venire debeat reus propter privi-
legium actoris . i . . . ;


APPENDIX.


Placita apud Westmonasterium coram domino
rege in octavis Sancti Michaelis anno
regni ejusdem decimo octavo , .


494


498


500
502


506 .


510


[um


ox ® O5 hb


10.


. À Pone as before

. Of the fraud of a viscount
. Of the inexpertness of a viscount . . .
. À writ to attach further, as once or repeatedly


TABLE. exxvil


CHAPTER XXXII. leaf 441.


. Of the returns of the viscount, and if the


viscount has been neglectful


before, where the viscount has been neglect-
ful


. Of the excuse of a wiceount
. A writ, that the viscount should not omit on


account of a franchise


. If a cleric has refused to find US on


account of the privilege of his order .


. A writ to the bishop or other ordinary, that he


should produce a clerie, when he has nothing
wherewith he can be distrained .

A writ, if the bishop or other ordinary Bas i.
produced*a cleric on the first day, that the
bishop should be distrained a


CHAPTER XXXIII. leaf 443 b.


. Of dividing common things between Py


pours .


. That the solemn order of d Cache tS: is nf


to be observed DC and in ay
case


. If the defendant rum jo dote ee on


aecount of the privilege of the plaintiff


APPENDIX.


Pleas at Westminster before the lord the king in


the octaves of Saint Michael in the eigh-
teenth year of the reign of the same .


Page-


481


. 483


. 499


501 ©
503


507


510


HENRICI DE BRACTON


DE


LEGIBUS ET CONSUETUDINIBUS ANGLIA.


HENRICUS DE BRACTON -


ON THE


LAWS AND CUSTOMS OF ENGLAND.


R 2657. Wt, 5265. A


HENRICI DE BRACTON


DE


LEGIBUS ET CONSUETUDINIBUS ANGLLZE,


f. 380.


1.
De war-
ranto


TRACTATUS QUARTUS LIBRI QUINTI,
IN QUO TRACTATUR DE WARRANTIA,


PLE DPD LPL LP LLL L LISP ILLS


Cap. I.


Cum autem tutius sit warrantum voeari! tenenti

d

uàm in propria persona subire defensionem, cûm ex
q prop >


vocato post persona sua propria ad actionem omnino elidendam,


visum.


Britton vi.
ch. iv. § 12.


f. 380 b.


vel ad tempus differendam non competit ei.exceptio
peremptoria vel dilatoria, tune si warrantum habuerit,
ilum statim vocet, aliquando per auxiliu curis, ali-
quado sine, seeundum quod warrantus fuerit sub potes-
tate vocantis, & ita q illü sine auxilio habere possit,
vel secundum q fuerit sub alterius potestate q illum
sine auxilio pducere no possit. Sub alterius potestate
dico, sicut sub potestate dfi regis, sive in regno An-
gli, sive in Hibernia, sive in Walla, in aliqua pte
que sit sub potestate & dominico dii regis. Si auté
fuerit qui vocatus est extra potestate dii regis, in
vanum vocabitur per auxilium, quia tune necesse habet
habet tenens illum pducere per se, si possit, alioquin
amittet.


! «í vocare,” MS, Rawl. C. 160,


V rhe


xy
leo


THE FIFTH BOOK


HENRICUS DE BRACTON


ON THE


LAWS AND CUSTOMS OF ENGLAND,


Since, however, it is safer for a tenant to vouch a


THE FOURTH TREATISE,
WHICH TREATS OF WARRANTY,


AAR RADDA PUn PS m P P


CHAPTER I. f. 380.


L
Of calling


warrantor than to undertake a defence in his own a warran.
person, when he is not competent in his own person to a cA 2
raise a peremptory or a dilatory exception with a view `

to parry the action altogether or to defer it for a time,

then if he has a warrantor, let him vouch him forthwith,
sometimes with the help of the court, sometimes with-

out it, according as the warrantor may be under the

power of the person vouching him, and so that he can f. 380 b.
produce him without help, or according as he may be

under the power of another person so that he cannot
produce him without help. I mean under the power of
another person, as for instance under the power of the

lord the king, either in the realm of England or in
Ireland, or in Wales, in some part which is under the

power and within the domain of the lord the king.

But if he, who has. been vouched, is beyond the power

of the lord the king, he will be vouched in vain with

the help [of the court], because then the tenant is under

the necessity to produce him through his own means, if

he can, otherwise he will lose.


A Z2


4 DE WARRANTIA.


2. Inprimis videndum erit quid sit warrantizatio. Et
Quid sit : = `} : ae : ^ x
warrant. SCiendū quód warrantizare, nihil aliud est, quàm de
zatio. fendere, & aequietare tenente, qui warrantu vocavit,


in seysina sua, quia quamvis warratus warrantizaverlt,
non tamen ppter hoc transfertur seysina ad warrantu,
nec aliquid aliud nisi defensio rei petite, q quidem
defensio, cüm semel ad warrantum translata fuerit,
postmodum resumi non poterit à tenente, sed omnia
peedent sub nomine warranti, nec cim  warrantus
warrantizaverit, rem warrantizatà reddere potest petenti
contra voluntate tenentis, vel sine juditio, quia defen-
dere non est reddere sine voluntate tenentis, quin ei
fiat disseysina. Sed cùm voluntas tenentis vel judiciu
intervenerit, tunc statim & non ante transfertur sey-
sina rei petitze ad petentem, & tenens de re warranti
excambium habeat ad valentiam.


3. Videndum etiam quis posset! warrantum vocare,
Quis possit j +) - gt
We nee qua de causa. Et sciendu, q warrantu vocare
vocare et poterit omnis qui non prohibetur, sicut ille qui rem
de qua T : :

EO aliquam corporalem habuerit, sicut terram, et tene-
metu ab aliquo ex quocunque justo titulo vel justa
causa acquirendi, sicut eX causa donationis vel vedi-
tionis vel pmutationis et hmoi, eum charta de war-
rantia expressa & homagio aliquando, nisi in eade
charta exprimatur, q nō obstante homagio si donator
ad warranti vocat? fuerit no teneat ad warrantia, nec
ad excabit, et sic vincit conventio lege.


4 lté tenet quis warrantizare quandog ppter homagii,


uare . . 5 . . e» .
ud etiam sine charta, & sive sit major sive minor, dum


warranti- tamen ante «etate minor qui vocatus fuerit nō respon-
zare.


! ** possit," MSS. Rawl. C. 159 et 160.


-


OF WARRANTY. 5


We must see in the first place what is warranting.
And itis to be known that to warrant is nothing else
than to defend and to acquit in his seysine a tenant,
who has vouched a warrantor, because although the war-
rantor has warranted, the seysine is not on that account
transferred to the warrantor, nor anything else except
the defence of the thing claimed, which defence indeed,
when once it has been transferred to the warrantor,
cannot be afterwards resumed by the tenant, but all
things shall proceed under the name of the warrantor;
nor when the warrantor shall have warranted, can he
restore the thing warranted to the claimant, against the
will of the tenant, or without a judgment, because to
defend is not to restore without the assent of the tenant,
so as not to cause to him a disseysine. But when the
assent of the tenant or a judgment has intervened, then
forthwith and not before the seysine of the thing claimed
is transferred to the claimant, and let the tenant have
an equivalent in compensation from the estate of the
warrantor.


We must see, who can call a warrantor and on what
grounds. And it is known. that every person who is
not prohibited may call a warrantor, as for instance he
who has received any corporeal thing, as land for in-
stance, or a tenement from any person upon any just
title whatsoever or upon any just grounds of acquiring
it, as on the ground of donation or of sale or of exchange
or such like, with an express charter of warranty
and sometimes of homage, except it be expressed in the
same charter that notwithstanding homage, if the donor
be vouched to warrant, he is not bound to a warranty,
nor to make compensation, and so a convention controls


the law.
Likewise a person is bound to warrant sometimes on


account of homage, even without a charter, and whether
he be of full age or a minor, provided that if a minor


2.
What is
warrant-
ing.


Who can
vouch a
warrantor
and on
what
grounds.


4.
Who ovght
to war-
rant,


9.
Quis
vocari
debet ad
warranti-
zandum.


Fleta 1. vi.


c. 21 § 6.


f. 381.


6.
Si minor
vocatus


6 DE WARRANTIA.


deat ad warrantia. Et idem dici poterit de juribus,
sicut de custodiis & maritagiis & hujusmodi. De hoc
auté quod dicitur omnis qui non phibetur, quia non
potest quis warrantu vocare in poenali actione, ubi
quis convincendus fuerit ex delicto, vel injuria ppria,
& ubi fuerit pcena corporalis infligenda, cùm poena
suos tenere debeat actores, & non alios.


Ite videndü est, quis vocari possit ad warrantu? Et
sciendum. quód tam masculus quàm foemina, tam minor
quàm major, dum tamen (ut predietü est) si minor
vocetur remaneat placitum de warrantia in suspeso
usque ad statem, nisi causa fuerit ita favorabilis, quód
setas expectari non debeat, sicut ex causa dotis. Item
non solum vocandus est ad, warrantü ille qui dedit
vel vendidit, verum etiam vocandi sunt eorum hæ-
redes descendentes in infinitum, propter verba in
chartis contenta. Ego & heredes mei warrantizabi-
mus tali & heredibus suis &c. Et in quo casu, ten-
entur hseredes warratizare, sive sint ppinqui sive
remoti, remotiores vel remotissimi Et q de hæredi-
bus dicitur, idem dici poterit de assignatis, & de illis
qui sunt loco illorum hszredum,! sicut sunt capitales
domini qui tenentibus suis quasi succedunt, vel ppter
aliquem defectum, vel ppter aliquod delictum, sicut de
eschaetis dominorum. Et q assignatis fieri debet
warrantia per modum donationis: pbatur in itinere
W. de Ralegh in com Wari circa finem rotuli, et
hoc maximé, si primus dominus capitalis, & primus
feoffator, ceperit homagium & servitium assignati.


Si aute minor fuerit vocatus ad warrant de aliqua
libertate, sive per se, sive cum aliis, semper inquiratur


! *]oco heredum," MS. Rawl. C. 160.


OF WARRANTY. 7


be called, he need not answer the warranty before he is
of full age. And the same may be said of rights, as of
wardships and maritages,and such like. Butconcerning
this which is said *every person who is not prohibited, »
because a person cannot vouch a warrantor in a penal
action, where a person will have to be convicted of a
misdemeanor or of injury of his own doing, and where
corporeal punishment will have to be inflicted, since
punishment ought to attach to the real actors, and not
to others.


Likewise we must see who can be vouched to warrant. ^ 5.
And it is to be known that a male as well as a female, aye onan
a minor as well as a person of full age, provided, how- to warrant.
ever (as aforesaid) if a minor be Sees the plea con-
cerning the warranty must remain in suspense until he
is of full age, unless the cause should be so favourable
that his full age ought not to be awaited, as in a cause
of dower. Likewise not only he who has given or sold
a thing is to be vouched to warrant, but likewise their
heirs descending in perpetuity by reason of the words
contained in the charters; “I and my heirs will war-

* rant to so-and-so and his heirs &e.,” and in which case
the heirs are bound to warrant whether they be near or
remote, more remote or most remote; and what is said
concerning heirs, may likewise be said concerning as-
signs, and concerning those persons who are in the place
of heirs, as for instance, chief lords who succeed as it f. 381.
were to their tenants, either on account of any default
on their part, or on account of any delict, as by
reason of an escheat to the lord. And that a warranty
by means of a donation ought to be made to assignees
is proved in an iter of Wiliam de Ralegh in the
county of Warwick near the end of the roll, and this
more especially, if the first chief lord and first feoffor has
received the homage and service of the assignee.


But if a minor be vouched to a warranty concerning Yt ed
some franchise, whether by himself or with others, let ye youchea


fuerit ad
warran-
tum.


Th
Maritus
vocat ux-
orem ad
warrantum
quando-
que.

Fleta 1. vi.
c. 23, § 9,
Britton, vis.
ch. x. § 5.


8 DE WARRANTIA.


inprimis utrum antecessor minoris seysitus fuit de tali
libertate ut de feodo anno et die quo fuit vivus &
mortuus, ad hoe q detur dilatio warrantiz vel non
detur. ltem vocari poterit ad warrantum, et vocare
tam ille qui tenet ad vitam, sicut ille qui tenet in
feodo, et eodem modo ille qui tenet ad terminum
annorum. Et q ille potest qui tenet ad terminum,
quamvis ratio se habeat in contrarium, pbatur in itinere
W. de Ralegh in cof Wart de quadam Sibilla, q
dotem petiit circa finem rotuli.


Maritus uxoré recte vocat ad warrantum etiam sine
auxilio curie, (nisi ita sit q fcemina, q de costa viri
sumpta fuit, caput excedens, viro suo dominetur) si
uxor in brevi non nominetur, ut si recognitum fuerit
vel convietum, q vir nihil teneat nisi nomine uxoris
suge, quamvis secundum quosdam potius deberet cadere
breve illud: aliud tamen erit (ut videtur) si dona-
tiones facte fuerint ante matrimonium cum seysina et
usu per aliquod tempus, quod secus est constante matri-
monio. Et quo casu, vir recte vocat uxorem sieut
aliam quacunque personam, et cùm warrantizaverit, et
vir amiserit, uxor tenebitur ad excambium, q non est
in primo casu. Si aute è contrarió, si vir uxori dona-
tionem fecerit ante matrimonium, & uxor per se sine
viro implacitetur, non magis sine viro respondebit
quàm de alia hereditate sua, & ipsum (ut videtur)
vocare poterit ad warrantum, et si amiserit, q vir tene-
atur ad excambium, secundum q dicitur de uxore.
Cùm aute vir & uxor simul implacitaverint & petant,
& vir attornatus fuerit uxoris, & ille qui tenet post-


OF WARRANTY, 9


it always m inquir ed in the first place whether the Ci
ancestor of the minor has been seysed of such a franchise "7Y
as of fee in the year and on the day on which he was
alive and died, for the purpose of allowing or not a delay

of the warranty. Likewise a person EN is a tenant

for life may be vouched or may vouch to warrant, as
well as he who holds in fee, and in the same manner he
who holds for a term of years. And that he who holds

for a term of years may do so, although reason suggests

the contrary, is proved in an iter of William de Ralegh

in the county of Warwick, concerning a certain Sibilla,
who claimed dower, near the end of the roll.


S


A husband vouches his wife to warrant rightly even 7.
without the help of the court, (unless it be that the EA


woman, who was taken from the rib of the man, being his wife to
taller by the head, domineers over her husband,) if the r
wife be not named in the writ, as if it be recognised
and proved that the husband holds nothing except in
the name of his wife, although according to some the
writ ought more properly to abate; it will be other-
wise, however (as it seems), if donations have been
made before matrimony, with the seysine and use for
some time, which is otherwise during matrimony. And
in which case the husband rightly vouches his wife as
any other person whatsoever, and when she has war-
ranted and the husband has lost, the wife will be bound
to make compensation, which is not so in the first case.
If however, on the contrary, the husband has made a
donation to his wife before marriage, and the wife alone
by herself be impleaded without her husband, she shall
no more answer without her husband than for the rest
of her inheritance, and she will be able to vouch him,
as it seems, to warrant, and if she shall lose, her husband
is bound to make her compensation, according to what
is said concerning the wife. But when both the husband
and the wife have pleaded together and claimed, and
the husband has been the attorney of his wife, and he


f. 381 b.


IE
Quibus
modis
obligatur
quis ad
warranti-
zandum.


10 DE WARRANTIA.


modum uxorem vocaverit ad warrantum, oportebit q
ipsa iterum compareat in curia, & attornatum faciat
virum suum vel alium in placito warrantiz, quia vir
non est attornatus in placito illo quamvis in placito
principali: secundum q videri poterit de itinere M. de
Pateshull in com Eborum anno regni regis Henrici
decimo de Petro de Malo Lacu & Izabella uxore ejus,
& Johanne de Besacre. Et sic fiat in omni placito, cùm
tenens warrantum vocaverit, q petens faciat attornatum
de novo, q quide non est de tenente.


Cap. II.


Ité quis vocare! debeat & warratizare & cui dictu
est. Nune videdü qualiter et quibus modis quis
obligetur ad warratia, sive major sive minor. Et
Sclendü q per homagiü, et fine factu? et per chartaru
sive per alioru instrumétorum obligatione. Per instru-


‘métorum obligatione, verbi gratia, A. vocat B. ad


warrantü. versus C. B. sumonitus petit q A. ostendat
el qua ratione vocaverit eum ad warrantü. Et si A.
statim pferat chartam ipsius B. vel patris sui, vel
alterius antecessoris sui cujus hæres ipse fuerit, & que
dedici non possit. Et si A. talis sit hæres q ei war-
rantizari debeat, ut si sit hæres ejus qui feoffatus est
per chartà illam, vel ejus assignatus, vel hæres assig-
nati, cám charta de assignatis fecerit mentione. Et
eodem modo si de illis quibus feoffatus dare voluerit,
vendere vel legare, et charta fecerit mentione de war-


! * vocari," MS. Rawl. C. 160. | ? per finem factum," MS. id.


OF WARRANTY. 11


who is the tenant afterwards has vouched the wife to
warrant, it will be incumbent that she should appear
again in court and constitute her husband her attorney,
or another person in a plea of warranty, because the
husband is not her attorney in that plea although he is
so in the principal plea, according to what may be seen
in the iter of Martin de Pateshull in the county of
York in the tenth year of the reign of king Henry,
concerning Peter de Malo Lacu and Isabella his wife,
and John de Besacre. And so let it be in every plea,
when the tenant has vouched a warrantor, that the
claimant should constitute an attorney anew, which is
not the case with the tenant.


CHAPTER II. f. 381 b.


Likewise what person ought to be vouched and to war- — 1.
rantand to whom has been discussed. Now we must see E
how and in what modes a person is bound to warrant, person is
whether he be of full age or a minor. And it is to be eee
known that [he is bound] through homage and through
a fine having been made, and through the obligations of
charters or of other instruments. Through the obliga-
tions of instruments, for example’s sake, A. vouches B. to’
warrant against C. B. having been summoned claims
that A. should show for what reason he vouches him to
warrant. And if A. forthwith produces a charter of B.
himself or of his father, or of some other ancestor of
his, whose heir he is, and which cannot be denied: and
if A. be such an heir, that a warranty ought to be
made to him, as if he be the heir of him who was
enfeoffed by that charter, or his assignee, or the heir
of his assignee, when the charter has made mention of
assignees: and in the same way, if he has wished to
give or to sell or to bequeath any portion of those
things of which he had been enfeoffed, and the charter
has made mention of the warranting and of the pure


2.
Si minor
voeatus
fuerit,
statim
ostendat
chartam


vel aliud.


12 DE WARRANTIA.


rantizatione et puro feoffamento, tunc. oportebit q idem
B. statim warrantizet, et incontinenti ad melius q
poterit respondeat. Et idem q dicitur de charta, dici
poterit de confirmatione, si confirmatio ad warrantiza-
tioné obligaverit confirmante.


Si auté minor infra setate existens vocatus fuerit
ad warrantü, et costiterit q minor sit, ne frivola sit
vocatio, ille qui vocat statim in ipsa vocatione ostendat
chartas suas vel aliud, per q psumi possit g minor
teneatur ad warrantiam sive prwsens fuerit sive absens,
quia hee poterit esse ratio, cüm sint nonulli de jure
suo diffidétes, cùm aliud remediü non haberent ad lite
ptrahendam, nisi minore ad warrantü vocarent. Quod
etiam de quolibet majore dici posset! warrantü vocante
majorem vel minore. In assisis vero omnibus ubi,
si voeans de warranto suo defecerit, nulla alia subse-
quetur pcena in odiü defaltæ, nisi q per defalta capia-
tur assisa. Cùm auté à vocante warrantü ostenss
fuerint charte & instruméta, tic videndü erit utrü
pater vel alius antecessor minoris (si servitiu petatur)
fuerit in seysina de servitio illo anno & die, quo fuit
vivus et mortuus. Et siita fuit seysitus, tunc statim
warratizet suo feoffato, sed loquela principalis iuter
petente et minore qui warrantizavit tenenti usi ad
wtate warranti remanebit sine die: secundü q pbatur
de itinere abbatis de Radinge & M. de Pateshull in
com Wari de Aigidio de Erdington qui sumonitus fuit
ad warratizandu W. de Norf Et quia pater ipsius
Aigidii obiit seysitus de servitio ipsius W. post4m ipse
E. warrantizavit ipsi W. remansit loquela principalis


— ——


,| © possit," MS. Rawl. C. 160.


OF WARRANTY. 13


enfeoffment, then it will be incumbent that the said B.
should forthwith warrant and immediately answer in
the best way he can. And the same which is said of
a charter, may be said of a confirmation, if the confirma-
tion has bound the confirmer to a warranty.


If, however a minor being below age has been 2.
: ; ; If a minor’
vouched to warrant and it be established that he is a ye vouched


minor, in order that the vouching him may not be let the
frivolous, let him who vouches him forthwith at the ANE
vouching exhibit his charters or other document exhibit the
through which it may be presumed that the minor is UE ^r
bound to warrant, whether he be present or be absent, document.
because this may be the reason, since there are some so
distrustful of their right, when they have no other
remedy to prolong the suit, unless they vouch a minor

to warrant. Which also may be said of any person of

full age vouching as à warrantor a person of full age or

a minor. But in all assises, where, if the voucher fails

of his warrantor, no other penalty follows in hatred of

his default, except that the assise shall be held by
default. But when by the person vouching a warrantor

the charters and instruments have been exhibited, then

it is to be seen whether the father or other ancestor of

the minor (if a service be claimed) has been in seysine

of that service in that year and on that day on which

he was alive and died. And if he has been so seysed,

then let him forthwith warrant the feoffee, but the
principal argument between the claimant and the minor,

who has made warrant to the tenant, shall remain
without a day until the full age of the warrantor ;
according to what is proved in the iter of the abbot

of Reading and Martin de Pateshull in the county of
Warwick, concerning Egidius of Erdington, who had

been summoned to warrant William of Norfolk. And
because the father of Egidius himself died seysed of

the service of William himself, after Egidius himself

had warranted to William himself, the principal argu-


3.
Aliquando
sine chartæ
ostensione.


f. 382.
4.
Aliquando
per homa-
gium,


14 DE WARRANTIA.


sine die versus petente us ad setate E. et sic minor
infra setatem warrantizabit suo feoffato & tenenti ppter
seysina antecessoris de servitio, q recepit à suo feoffato
anno et die quo obiit. Si aute antecessor seysitus no
fuit anno et die &c. tune minor infra :zetate nee ad
warrantia nec ad principale placitu respondebit.


In casu tamé poterit minor vocari ad warratu et
sumoniri sine chartæ ostesione, si infra setate vocatus
fuerit ad warrantum ab aliquo suo tenente, ratione
alicujus teneméti de quo infra setate feoffatus fuerit
tenens, quia in utroq placito tam warrantie qm prin-
cipali respodebit. Et unde cum minor sie vocatus
fuerit ad warrantu, inquirendü erit utrü tenementum
ratione cujus vocatus est ad warrantū, sit heereditas
descendens vel perquisitu, & q dicitur de servitio dici
possit de homagio.


Per homagiu vero capti obligatus est dominus ad
warrantia qui homagiü cepit, quia esto q tenens nulla
chartà habuerit, vel cùm habuerit, illam non habeat
ad manum, sive feoffamentu illud fuerit novum vel
vetus, sicut à coquestu Anglie, de quo raro contingit
q charte pferantur, si homagiu intervenerit, & hoc
pbari possit, capitalis dominus sine charta warrantiza-
bit. Et si forte dicat q sine charta warrantizare non
debeat, responderi poterit à tenente sic: Tu teneris
michi terram petitam warrantizare, quia ego sum inde
homo tuus, & tu inde homagiü meu recepisti, & in
seysina es de servitio meo, & pater meus et anteces-
sores patris mei inde fuerunt homines antecessorü
tuorum, Et q ita sit, pducat sectam sufficientem,


OF WARRANTY. : 15


ment against the claimant remained without a day until
the full age of Egidius; and so a minor under age shall
warrant to his feoffee and tenant on account of his
ancestor’s seysine of a service, which he received from
his feoffee in the year and on the day on which he
died. But if the ancestor has not been seysed in the
year and on the day, &c., then the minor under age
shall answer neither to the warranty nor to the princi-
pal plea.


But a minor may be vouched to warrant and may | 3.
be summoned without the exhibition of a charter in a E.
case, if he be vouched under age to warrant by some the exhi-
tenant of his by reason of a certain tenement, with Rises
which the tenant has been enfeoffed under age, because
he shall answer in either plea, that of warranty or the
principal plea. And hence if the minor be thus vouched
to warrant, it wil have to be inquired whether the
tenement by reason whereof he has been vouched to
warrant, is an inheritance or an acquisition, and what


is said of a service may be said of homage.


But the lord, who has taken homage, is bound to a £382.

warranty through the homage taken by him, for let it z E
i . ometimes

be that the tenant has had no charter, or if he has had through
a charter, he has it not at hand, whether the enfeoffment homage.
has been new, or ancient, as from the conquest of Eng-
land, concerning which charters are rarely produced, if
homage has intervened, and this can be proved, the
chief lord shall warrant without a charter. And if by
chance he should say that he ought not to warrant
without a charter, an answer of this kind may be made
by the tenant: You are bound to warrant to me the
land claimed, because I am thereof your man, and you
have thereof receiyed my homage, and are in seysine of
my service, and my father and the ancestors of my
father were thereof the men of your ancestors. And
that it is so let him produce a sufficient sect, a living


16 DE WARRANTIA.


vivam voce, vel alidm qui paratus sit hoc disrationare
p corpus sui si opus fuerit. Et si ille qui vocatus
est hoe dedicere non possit, sine charta warrantizabit,
et hoc nisi ille qui vocatus est docere possit homagium
esse conditionale, s. salvo jure cujuslibet in suo casu.


ND: Si auté vocatus homagium ilud omnino negaverit
Aa ed et defenderit, tune justic. audiant pbationes tenentis,
tum homa- quj se pbare possit q sit homo talis, & quód ipse
iea ait talis homagium suü ceperit, vel antecessorum suorum
in forma pdicta, per juditium warrantizabit. Sed cu
ppter homagium vocetur aliquis ad warrantum q dedici
non possit, nunquid poterit dominus p voluntate sua
homagium tenentis sui wayviare & sic de warrantia
evadere? no, quia ex hoc tale sequeretur incoveniens,
q p minimo servitio magnum quid warrantizaret te-
nenti suo. Poterit tame tenens quando voluerit tene-
mentum suum wayviare, vel illud dno suo restituere


simul eum homagio et ex causa.


6. Obligatur etiam quis ad warratiam p cyrographum
Per cyro- = 3 : 3

fapa & fine factum, ita q si A. pferat cyrographum de fine

et tinem facto in curia düi regis inter ipsum & B. vel eorum

factum. x MS T

antecessores quoru heeredes ipsi sunt, tune secundü

illud eyrographum (q de facili dedici non poterit) fiet

juditia de warrantizatione, in forma tamen supradicta

de minore, si minor ad warrantü vocatus fuerit, s. si

anno & die &c. Sed nonne tenet minor infra setate

ad fine factū respodere etià etsi no ano & die? & de


infra, fol. hoe dicetur inferius de exceptionibus.
421 b.


OF WARRANTY. 17


voice, or some one who is ready to deraign this by his
own body, if it shall be necessary. And if he, who is
vouched, cannot gainsay this, he shall warrant without
a charter, and this unless: he who is vouched can show
that the homage is conditional, that is saving the right
of each person in his own case.


But if the person vouched has altogether denied the 5.
homage and defended himself, then let the justiciaries oe
hear the proofs of the tenant, who, if he can prove that vouched to
he is the man of so-and-so, and that so-and-so himself doc T
has taken his homage or that of his ancestors in the form the
aforesaid, he shall warrant through the judgment. But Murs d
when a person is vouched to warrant on account of
homage, which cannot be gainsaid, will the lord forsooth
be able according to his pleasure to waive the homage
of his tenant and to escape from the warranty? Not so,
because therefrom would follow this inconvenience, that
he might warrant to his tenant something great in return
for a trifling service. The tenant, however, will have
the power whenever he may wish to waive his tenement,
or to restore it to his lord together with his homage and


for cause shown.


A person also is bound to a warranty through a chiro- — €.
graph and the making of a fine, so that if A. produce a eie
chirograph of a fine having been made in the court of and the
thelord the king between himself and B. or the ances- A e p
tors of those whose heirs they are, then according to-
that chirograph (which cannot well be gainsaid) judg-
ment shall be made concerning the warranting, in the
form however above stated in the case of a minor, if a
minor has been vouched to warrant, to wit if in the year
and on the day &e. But is not the minor bound to
answer upon a fine having been made, even if not in
- the year and on the day &e.? And of this mention will
be made in treating of exceptions.

R 2657. B


18 DE WARRANTIA.


7 Non soli obligatur persona feoffatoris (ut pdictu est)
one & rationibus fdictis, poterit etia tenemétii obligari cu
prese. — psona tacite vel expresse. Expressé, ut si quis ita

dicat, in charta donationis, q ipse & hæredes sui war-
ratizabit donatione sua ex tali certo tento q tunc
tenent ad Gmcung postmodü pvenerit, & sie remanebit
res expresse obligata ad warrantia, ut pbat in rotulo
de term P. añ regis H. decimosexto in com Midd, de
Alic. de War? & de R de Renge, ubi Alic.warranti-
zavit p judieiü cuf, qui? habuit tefitu literaliter &
specialiter oblipatü. Tacite, ut si feoffator tepore
donationis. satis habuit unde warrantizet etià sine
expressione, id qd’ tue habet remanet obligatu, quia
no valet obligatio psone, nisi habeat si opus fuerit
unde possit excabiu facere. Et p hoc sie obligatur
tenemetü tacite.


8.

Si dominus X i e $ : H "

capitalisad Sed quid si tenemetum sic obligatu tacite vel ex-
quem terra > ; R 5 4 ic 1&
pervenerit Presse, ppter defectum vel ppter delictum feoffatoris
ut eschæta tanquam eschaeta deveniat in manum domini regis
vel alio . . CR wt . . 2

f 382p, Vel capitalis domini superioris? Quæro an ille tenea-
modo, cum tur ad warrantiam cùm ad warrantū vocetur ? et videtur


non sit : . Be ; 2
hæres, quia 9 Sic, quia res cum homine? transit ad quemeuni.
res transit


cum


onere,

? 9. Poterit etiam ipse rex inter alios ad warrantiam
ÐI rex . . . . . . E

debeat  Obligari rationibus supradictis, sed tamen nō potest


warranti- vocari sicut vocantur private persons, quia sumoneri
zare, dicere test = Pare li é 2 :
potert . Don potest per breve, et ideo dicere poterit ille cui


quod sine rex warrantizare debeat, cum quadam curialitate, sic:
rege re-


1 « Ricardo,” MS. Rawl. C. 160. 3 * onere," M8. id.
2 quia,” MS. id.


OF WARRANTY. 19


The person of the feoffor is not alone obliged (as has. 7.
been above stated) and for the reasons above stated, the ee ce
tenement also may be bound together with the person ¢xPrssly.
tacitly or expressly. Expressly, as if a person should
say thus in the charter of donation, that he himself
and his heirs will warrant his donation out of a certain
tenement, which they then hold, to whomsoever it
may come hereafter, and so the thing will remain
expressly bound to a warranty, as is proved in the
roll of Easter term in the sixteenth year of king
Henry in the county of Middlesex, concerning Alice de
Warrenne and concerning R. de Renge, where Alice war-
ranted through a judgment of the court, because she had
a tenement literally and specially bound. Tacitly, as if
the feoffor at the time of the donation had sufficient out
of which to warrant even without an expression of it,
that which. he then had remains bound, because a per-
sonal obligation does not avail, unless he have where-
with to make compensation, if it shall be necessary.

And through this a tenement is thus tacitly bound.


8.
If the chief


But what if a tenement thus bound tacitly or expressly MM


on account of the default or of the delict of the feoffor has land has
come as an


passed as an escheat into the hand of the lord the king escheat or

or of a superior chief lord? I ask whether he is bound f 382 b.
. -, Nan

to the warranty, when he is vouched to warrant? and it p.


seems that it is so, because the thing passes to every one manner,


with the charge. not the
heir,
because
the thing
passes
with the
charge.


Even the king himself amongst others may be bound ,, iiie


to warrant for the reasons above stated, but he cannot be ought (e
z ^ warrant he
vouched as private persons are, because he cannot be Bis.


summoned by a writ, and therefore he, whom the king that he


: e : cannot
ought to warrant, may say with a certain courtliness
B 2


20 DE WARRANTIA.


spondere q sine rege respondere non poterit, eo quód habet
nonpoterit chartam suam de donatione vel confirmatione, per
P EE f: quam si amitteret, rex ei teneretur ad escambium, vel
Britton, iii. alia ratione, q ipse rex est in seysina de homagio &
cxi $2? servitio suo et hujusmodi & quonia ita fieri solet
&7. multotiens, q tenens side rege respondere non poterit,
ut litem ptraheret, ratione cujuslibet charte quam
pferret in juditio de confirmatione, pvisum fuit et
concessum coram ipso rege in dedicatione abbathis
de Hayles in presentia ix. episcoporü, & coram com.
Richardo & aliis pluribus comitibus sic:


10. Quód nullus de czetero regem nominet in judicio
as t dict t) nisi ita sit q rex teneatur ad
meme (ut preedictum est) nisi ita sit q re
vocat escambium, si tenens amiserit, & secundum q tune judi-


regem ad UM Se Nm 9 :
warran. cata fuit inter comitem Gloc. et abbatem S. Edmundi,
tum wsi q Quia charte abbatis p quas dicebat q sine rege respo-
e ur a A os a . 4°

escam- dere non potuit, loquebantur tantū q rex reddidit,


pium; concessit & confirmavit, et de nulla warrantia p qua
Matth. E . : :
Paris-Hisc, beneretur ad escambium si abbas amitteret. Et scien-


Anglorum dum q nihil aliud est dicere, non possum sine rege
5 Nov. a°


1951. respondere, qm vocare ipsum ad warrantu, licet p alia
verba.
1. Car. IIT.
Quod war- e X 3
rantia Cum auté quis warrantum vocaverit, debet warran-
debet


: í 10° l 1 - : . =
e tum suum designare pprio nomine, si possit, si fuerit


proprio in reru natura. Si autem in utero matris, aliud erit
nomine, si 34: : coe : : : :
possit del dicendum, quia si in nomine erratum fuerit sive in


quad tan- persona, tenens de facili poterit amittere, vel si ita
tundem


UE vocaverit: voco filium talis sine expressione nominis,


OF WARRANTY, Pf


s that he cannot answer without the king, because he answer
has his charter of donation or of CURATE through ees
which, if he should lose, the king is bound to him to EXE.

him compensation, or for another reason, that the king
himself is in seysine of his homage and his service, and
such like, and since it is accustomed so to be done very
often. that the tenant cannot answer without the king,
that he may prolong the suit, by reason of a certain
charter which he produces in court concerning a con-
firmation, it has been provided and granted in the
presence of the king in the dedication of the abbey of
Hayles in. the presence of nine bishops and in the
presence of Earl Richard and several other earls :


That no one henceforth shall name the king ina 1.
judgment (as above stated) unless it be so, that the ea
king is bound to make compensation, if the tenant vouch the
shall lose, and according to what was then adjudged "ELA
between the earl of Gloucester and the abbot of St. unless he


Edmunds, because the charters of the abbot, through Ps lier cde
which he said that he could not answer without the compensa-
king, said only that the king rendered, granted, and "^"
confirmed, and spoke of no warranty whereby he was

bound to make compensation, if the abbot should lose.

And it is to be known that to say that I cannot answer

without the.king is nothing else than to vouch him to


warrant, although it is by other words.


r


` CHAPTER III.


it
When, however, a person vouches a warrantor, he ‘phat the


ought to designate the warrantor by his proper name, if eA
he can, if he exists in the nature of things. But if he be pe desig-
in the womb of his mother something else must be said, pe
because if there be an error in the name or in the person name, if
the tenant may easily lose; or if he should vouch him possible, or
thus, I vouch the son of so- ds -so without the expression equivalent.


of a name, such a vouching does not avail, when so-and-


f. 383.


29/924 DE WARRANTIA.


non valet talis vocatio, cùm talis plures habuerit filios
valet tamen, si non nisi unum. Si autem ita voca-
verit: voco talem filium & heredem talis, valet talis
vocatio, licet heredes plures habeat remotos & propin-
quos, quia hoe de propinquiore erit intelligendum.
Sed quid si plures appareant, qui se faciunt heredes,
nee appareat quis eorum propinquior, videtur quod
sub disjunetione vocandus erit warrantus, ut si dicatur:
Voco talem vel talem quicunque eorum heres fuerit
talis, vel si haeres in utero fuerit sie, & ubi uxor peti-
erit mitti in possessioné nomine ventris, ut si dicatur:
voco talem pprio nomine qui apparens est, vel illum
qui in utero est, nisi ad monstru declinaverit, vel in
utero mortuus fuerit, & semper exprimi debet causa
q dubitationé inducit, vel incertitudine : ut si dicat
istum vel ilu quicung istorü obtinuerit, sicut inter
avunculü & nepote legitimum, & bastardu et hujus-
modi. Sufficit enim si tantu faciat quantum facere
potest, cùm uterqué se gerat pro herede. Et hoc fieri
possit (ut videtur) ad similitudinem exheredationum,
quia si quis debeat exheredari nominatim debet ex-
heredari, et eodem modo warrantus nominatim vocari.
Ut si dicatur: Titius filius meus exheeres esto. Item
valet exheredatio, et sufficit si dicatur, Filius meus
exheres esto, non adjecto pprio nomine, maximé si
alius filius non existat, quia no refert utrum quid fiat
vel q tantundé valeat. Ctm aute sit aliquis qui se
facit heredem et heereditatem petierit, et mulier simi-
liter si petat mitti in possessione nomine ventris, vel
cám plures se faciant hseredes, nec cóstare poterit quis -
eorü heres ppinquior et rectior sit ppter dubium
eventum, et cüm nullus warrantizare teneatur ante
heereditatis additione,! tutius et melius est warrantiam


! * aditionem,” MS. Rawl. C. 160,


OF WARRANTY, DO


so has several sons ; it avails, however, if he has only one.
But if he should vouch him thus, I vouch so-and-so the
son and heir of so-and-so, such a vouching avails, although
he may have several heirs remote and near, because this
will have to be understood of the nearest; but what if
several appear, who make themselves out to be heirs, and
itis not apparent which of them is the next heir? it seems
that the warrantor ought to be vouched disjunctively, as
if it be said : I call so-and-so, whichever of them is the heir
of so-and-so ; or if the heir is in the womb thus: and when
the mother has claimed to be put into possession in the
name of her belly, as if it be said: I vouch so-and-so in
his proper name, who is apparent, or him who is in the
womb, unless he turns out to be a monster, or has died
in the womb, and there ought to be always expressed
the cause which induces doubt or uncertainty, as if he
shall say this or that person, whichever of them has pre-
vailed, as between an uncle and a lawful nephew, and a
bastard and such like. For it is sufficient if he does as
much as he can, when each of them holds himself out as
the heir; and this may be done as it seems after the
likeness of disherisons, because if a person ought to be
disherited, he ought to be disherited by name, and in
the same way a warrantor ought to be vouched by name.
As if it be said, Let Titius my son be disherited. Like-
wise the disherison is valid, and it is sufficient, if it be
said, let my son be disherited, without adding his proper
name, especially if another son does not exist, for it does
not matter whether a thing is done or what is equiva-
lent. But when there is some one who holds himself
out to be the heir and claims the inheritance, and a
woman likewise if she claims to be put into possession
in the name of her belly, or when several persons hold
themselves out to be heirs, nor can it be established
which of them is the nearer and more rightful heir on
account of a dubious event, and when no one is bound
to warrant until he has entered on the inheritance, it is
safer and better to suspend the warranty until a certainty


f, 383.


24 DE WARRANTIA.


suspendere quousq inde haberi poterit certitudo et
costiterit de veritate ad similitudine istius casus.


- 2. Quia esto q quis implacitatus fuerit de duabus
1 warran- . . . oe - . wis
tus de dote partibus alicujus manerii, et mulier de ttia pte qm


feloniam tenet nomine dotis et unde talis est warrantus de dote
fecerit, et i A : : :
inter duos Sua, et pendete placito q ille qui tenuerit duas ptes


eee feloniam fecerit, et utlagatus fuerit anteqm mulier de

de eschata tertia pte eum ad warrantü vocaverit, et cùm ille

peus dus ptes ratione termini sui fuerint in manu dii
regis, et inter duos dominos de eschaeta contentio
habeatur, nec sciri posset quis eorü debeat obtinere,
loquela mulieris ponitur et remanebit sine die, vel ad
diem diffusum et in suspenso, quosj inde habeatur
certitudo: ut de itinere ultimo W. de Ralegh in com
Wari circa fine rotuli. Et ita (ut videtur) fieri deberet
de pmissis. ltem cüm plures vocati fuerint ad war-
rantü erratü fuerit in nomine unius vel plurium, per-
inde habendum erit (ut videtur) cùm sint quasi unum
corpus, ac si erratum esset in nominibus omnium, sic-
ut videri poterit de pluribus petetibus vel pluribus
tenentibus.


JR
Si quis Cap. IV. A

warrantum

Qui ded Cum autem quis vocatus fuerit ad warrantiam, qui
potestate fuerit sub potestate vocantis, licet auxilium curiæ
sua, licet S ane : : e
"uxium petierit, auxilium non habebit, quem quidem si non
petierit, ^ produxerit, amittere poterit de facili.

non habe-

bit aux-

ilium

curiz. :

9. Si autem warrantus extra suam potestatem fuerit,
Biss di et in potestate regis ubicunque, auxilium habebit. Si
non fuerit autem extra potestate regis, cüm rex ipsum pducere
sub potes-
tate regis,


1 * diffusum in suspenso,” MS. Rawl. C. 159,


OF WARRANTY. 25


thereon can be attained, and it can be established concern-
ing the truth after the likeness of this case.


For let it be that a person has been impleaded for two- , 2-
odzo a E If à war-
thirds of a manor, and a woman for one third, which she rantor of
holds in the name of dower, and whereby so-and-so is the Babes
; . committe
warrantor of her dower, and pending the plea he who is felony and


the tenant of the two parts has committed felony, and there bea
contention


has been outlawed before the woman has vouched him between


as a warrantor for her third part, and when the two- two chief
2 lords con-


thirds in respect of his term have been seized into the cerning
hand of the king, and a contention arises between two ee
lords respecting the escheat, nor can it be known which
of them ought to prevail, the argument of the woman is
put off and will remain without a day, or to a day
diffused and in suspense, until certainty thereon is ob-
tained, as in the last iter of William de Ralegh in the
county of Warwick, about the end of the roll. And so
(as it seems) it ought to be done in the premises. Like-
wise, when several persons have been vouched to war-
rant, if an error has been made in the name of one or of
several, it will have to be accounted the same (as it


T:
appears), since they are as it were one body, as if an ue sae
error had been made in the names of all of them, as may vouch a
~ be seen concerning several claimants or several tenants. WEPeton
" under his
power,
although
CHAPTER IV. he may

have


. ught th
When indeed a person has been vouched to warrant, help of the


who is under the power of the voucher, although he shall Cale E
claim the help of the court, he shall not have that help, have it,


and if he has not produced him, he may easily lose. 2.
Likewise,
if such a `

d person,
But if the warrantor be beyond his power, and in the who is not


power of the king anywhere, he shall have help. But if ud e


he be beyond the power of the king, since the king can- T king,
not produce him, he shall not have help, and let him who yee E


sed ipsum
producat,
si possit.

3.
Si warran-
tus fuerit
infra liber-
tatem
alicujus ubi
non currit
breve regis.


f. 383 b.


Breve, si
sine aux-
ilio pro-
duci non
possit.


26 DE WARRANTIA.


non possit, auxilium non habebit, et ideo producat
eum qui vocavit, vel rem petitam amittat.

Si autem sit aliquis qui talem libertatem habeat, q
breve, regis ibi non currat ppter dominum regem, qui
sibi libertatem concessit, mandetur domino libertatis
quod warrantum distringat, q si non fecerit, distringa-
tur ipse per terras suas extra libertatem q warrantum
pducat. Si aute terras extra non habuerit, tunc non
obstate libertate apponat rex manum in defectum
ipsius, ita q jus no deficiat, cüm aute warrant? sine
auxilio pduci no possit, tic fiat bie de sumonédo
warratum in hae forma:


Rex vic. salute. Sumoneas p bonos sumonitores A.
q sit coram justic. &c. tali die ad warrantizandu B.
tantü tre cu ptinétiis in tali villa qm E. in eade
curia corà eisdé justic. &c. clamat ut jus suü versus
pdietu B. et unde ide B. in eade curia nostra cora
eisde justic. nostris vocavit ipsu A. ad warrantü versus
pdictum E. et habeas ibi sumonitores et hoc breve.
Teste &c. vel aliter: ad warratizandum B.. custodia
tre d fuit. E. & qm D. in curia nostra &c.. clamat
versus eunde B. ratione filii & heredis ipsius E. qm
habet in custodia sua de dono Johannis regis patris
nostri, ut dicit. Et unde idem B. vocavit ipsu A. ad
warrantu versus ipsü D., et habeas &c. vel aliter: ad
warratizadu tantu tre B. &c. et unde ide B. sumonitus
est in curia nia coram nobis ad respddédum nobis, quo
warranto tenet tantü tre vel quid tale q nos clama-
mus ut jus nostru vel eschaetà, et hujusmodi, & in
omni casu generaliter ubi jacet warranti vocatio, fiat


OF WARRANTY. 27
has vouched him produce him, or let him loge the thing produce
claimed. ~ him, if he

But if there be any one who has such a franchise, that xe

the king's writ does not run there on account of the en
king himself, who has granted to him such a franchise, vithin the
let a mandate go to the lord of the franchise, that he redd
should distrain the warrantor, which if he fail to do, let where the
him be himself distrained by his own lands outside his SS CON
franchise, that he should produce the warrantor. But if"
he should not have any lands outside his franchise, then
notwithstanding his franchise let the king apply his
hand upon his default, so that justice shall not fail;
when, however, the warrantor cannot be produced with-
out the help [of the court], then let a writ issue to sum- f. 383 b.


mon the warrantor in this form :


The king to the viscount greeting. Summon by good 4 .
summoners A. that he should be before our justiciaries eO
on such a day to warrant to B. so much land with its be pro-
appurtenances in such a vill, which E. in the said court A N
before our said justiciaries, &c. claims as his right against help.
the said B., and whereof the said B. in our said court
before our said justiciaries has vouched the said A. to
warrant against the aforesaid E., and have there the sum-
moners and this writ. Witness, &c.: or otherwise: to
warrant to B. the custody of the land, which was Es,
and which D. in our court, &c. claims against the said B.
by reason of the son and heir of the said E., whom he
has in his wardship by the gift of king John our father
as he says, and whereof the said B. has vouched the said
A. to warrant against the said D., and have there, &e., or
otherwise to warrant so much land to B., &c., and whereof
the said B. has been summoned in our court before us to
answer to us by what warrant he holds so much land,
and something of such kind, as we claim to be our right
as an escheat, and such like, and in all cases generally
where the vouching of a warrantor lies, let mention be
made in the writ of summons concerning the form of the


(28 DE WARRANTIA.


métio in brevi de sumonitione de forma placiti, & de
modo petitionis in brevi originali cotento, sive tetitü
petatur sieut tra vel redditus, vel q ad teütum ptineat,
sicut advocatio ecclesie, jus pascendi, sive pastura,
rationabile estoveriü, iter vel actus, et hujusmodi, vel
q ad aliqm ptineat ratione tefiti, sicut servitiu, rele-
vium, custodia, & maritagiü.


5. Si auté minor vocandus sit ad warrantü in placito


Si minor aliquo, sive sup recto ipso sive sup dote, tunc fiat
vocatus


fueritad breve de sumonendo custodem, q sit ad certü die, et


ee ne ibi habeat heredé ad  warrantizandü. Rex vic.
in placito salute. Suimoneas p bonos sumonitores A. custode B.
E filii ét hæredis C., & D. custode terre ejusdé hæredis,
moneatur , q sit corā justic. nostris tali die, & ibi habeat hæredē
a pdictu ad warrantizandum E. tantü terre cü ptinentiis


in tali vilia q pdietus A. in curia nostra &c. clamat
ut jus suum. vel in dote versus eunde B. & unde idé
A. in eade curia nostra corà justic. nostris vocavit
pdictti heredé ad warrantu versus eum, Si aute unus
& ide habeat tam custodia tre qua heredis, tune
sumoneatur sine aliis, q sit & habeat heredem. Si
autem heeres aliquis teneatur ad warrantiam qui nihil
tenuerit de heereditate matris, ratione cujus vocatus
est ad warrantum, sed paraster vel antecessor suus ad
vitam suam per legem Anglie, et cùm heres in curia
respondit post summonitionem ei factam q nihil tenet
de preedicta hsereditate matris suze, sed paraster suus,
 ppter hoc non differatur warrantia ad vitam parastri,
sed sumoneatur paraster, q sit &e. ad audiendum con-


OF WARRANTY. 29


plea and eoncerning the mode of petition contained in
the original writ, whether the tenement be claimed as. a
land or a rent, or something appertaining to a tenement,
as the advowson of a church, the right of feeding or a
pasture, a reasonable estover, a path or a bridle way and
such like, or something which appertains to a person in
regard of a tenement, as a service, a relief, wardship and
maritage.


If, however, a minor is to be vouched to warrant in 5.
any plea, whether upon the right itself or upon dower, iue
then let à writ of summons go to the guardian, that he to warrant
be present on a certain day and there have the heir (ovo or”
present to warrant. The king to the viscount greeting. in a plea of


Summon by good summoners A. the guardian of B. the A UAM
son and heir of C., and D. the guardian of the land of guardian
the said heir, that he be present before our justiciaries ronda
on a certain day, and there produce the heir aforesaid

to warrant to E.so much land with its appurtenances

in such a vill, which the aforesaid A. in our court &c.
claims as his right or for dower against the said B., and
whereof the said A. in our court before our justiciaries

has vouched the aforesaid heir to warrant against him.

But if one and the same person has the custody of the

~ land as well as of the heir, then let him be summoned
without the others, that he be there and produce the

heir. But if an heir be bound to warrant, who has
nothing of the inheritance of his mother, by reason
whereof he is vouched to warrant, but his step-father

or ancestor has it for life through the law of England,

and when the heir has answered in court after the
summons made to him that he holds nothing of the
inheritance aforesaid of his mother, but his step-father

does, let not on that account the summons be deferred

for the life of his step-father, but let his step-father be
summoned that he be present, &c. to hear the consi-
deration of the court concerning the aforesaid warranty,


30 DE WARRANTIA,


siderationem curie de pdicta warrantia, vel: ad war-
rantizadum cum fdicto hserede per tale breve:
6. Rex vicecom salutem. Sumoneas per bonos sumoni-


Si hæres, tores A. q sit coram justic. &c. ad audiendum con-
qui voca- , A a » 5
tus sitad siderationem ejusdem curie nostre, de warrantia tantæ


warrantum, ; Es iis in: AE ria nostra
nihilteneat terre cum pertinentiis in N. qm B. in curia


de hære- &c. clamat ut jus suum versus E. vel sic: Ad war-


EN rantizandum B. simul cum C. filio & hserede talis
b ,


sed paras- mulieris, scilicet tantam terram cum ptinentiis in N.
ter suus . : C . 6 2
vapor UE quam B. in eadem curia nostra coram eisdem justici-


oe arlis nostris &e. clamat ut jus suum versus Edwardu,
uterque > d . : .
vd CM et unde ide Edwardus in eadem curia nostra &c.


uenit , eoram eisdem justiciariis vocavit inde ad warrantum
major vel . . md m
minor. pdietum B. versus eundem E. Et unde ide C. dicit q


f384. nihil tenet de heereditate talis matris sue, nec ad warran-
tia illam respondere potest, sine preedicto A., qui heere-
ditatem illam tenet ad. vitam suam per legem Angliee.


Cap.- V.


`


Ad diem verò summonitionis legitimæ quindecim
Quod quis dierum poterit quilibet eorum se essoniare si voluerit,


PE petens, tenens, & warrantus simul, vel vicissim, ita q
quilibet eorum habeat unicum essonium seeundum q
superiüs dicitur de essoniis.

9. Et si ad diem summonitionis fecerit petens defaltam,


mi Alem psente tenente, & se liti offerente, recedet tenens
capiatur quietus de brevi illo, secundùm q superius plenius
inan dieitur de defalta. Et eodem modo si tenens, tunc
domini capiatur terra in manum domini regis ut supra. Si
Igi. autem  warrantus defaltam fecerit presentibus tain

petente, quàm tenente, et antequàm warrantus in curia

comparuerit, capiatur de ‘terra warranti in manum


domini regis ad valentiam tre petite, si warrantüs


OF WARRANTY, 31


or to make warrant together with the aforesaid heir,
by à writ of this kind :
The king to the viscount greeting. Summon by good ,, | €-

3 OO MM If the heir,
summoners A. that he be present before our justiciaries, who is
&c. to hear the consideration of our said court con- vouched to

3 : N warrant,
cerning a warranty of so much land with its appurte- holds
nances in N., which B. in our court &e. claims as his gus e,

z s e mater-
. right against E.: or thus: to warrant to B. together nalinheri-
with C. the son and heir of such a woman, to wit, so aient
much land with its appurtenances in N., which B. in father,then


let each


our said court before our said justiciaries claims as his X Sam.


right against Edward, and whereof the said Edward moned,
in our said court, &c. before our said justiciaries has sie a ds
called to warrant thereon the aforesaid B. against the said of full age
E., and whereof the said C. says that he holds nothing X Su
as heir of so-and-so-his mother, nor can he answer to `
the said warranty without the aforesaid A., who holds


that land for his own life by the law of England.


CHAPTER V.


But upon the day of the lawful summons of fifteen 1.
days any one of them, the claimant, the tenant or the war- nr
rantor may essoin himself, if he pleases, at the same time may essoin
or in turns, so that each of them may have a single iel,
essoin according to what is said above concerning essoins.

And if the claimant has made default on the day of TE.
summons, the tenant being present and presenting him- made de-
self for trial, let the tenant withdraw acquitted of AE
that writ, according to what is said above more fully taken into
concerning default. And in the same way if the tenant Pos qu S
[has made default], then let the land be taken into the the king.
hand of the lord the king, as above. But if the warran-

tor has made default, the claimant as well as the tenant

being present, and before the warrantor has made de-

fault, let there be taken of the land of the warrantor


into the hand of the lord the king up to the value of


3.
Breve ad
capien-
dam ter-
ram in
manum
domini
regis per
defaltam,
ad valen-
tiam super
warran-
tum, mag-
num cape.


f, 384 b.


32 DE WARRANTIA.


terram habuerit in eodem comitatu. Et idem si tenens
se essoniaverit, & sic fiat irrotulatio: A. tenens scilicet
vel A. essoniator tenentis optulit se quarto die versus
B. de placito, q idem B. warrantizet ei tantum terræ
cum pertinentiis in tali villa, quam C. clamat ut jus
suum versus eum, et unde idem A. in curia &e. voca-
vit ipsum B. ad warranta versus pdictum C., & præ-
dietus B. non venit & summonitio &e. Juditium.
Capiatur terra in manum domini regis de terra ipsius
B. ad valentiam &c. et dies &e. & B. summoneatur
q sit tali die responsurus & ostensurus &e. ut supra
de defaltis. Idem dies datus est tali . petenti in
banco.


Rex vicecom salutem. Cape in manum nostram per
visum legalium hominum de comitatu tuo de terra.in
balliva tua pro defalta ipsius A. ad valentia tante
terree cum ptinentiis in tali villa, q B. de N. in curia
nostra &e. clamat ut jus suum versus C. & unde idem
C. in eadem curia nostra coram justic. &e. vocavit
eunde A. ad warrantum versus eunde B. & diem
captionis &c. Et summoneas per bonos summonitores
predictum A. quód sit &c. ut supra. Et idem dies
dabitur tam petenti quà tenenti, si presentes fuerint
personaliter, vel per attornatos vel per essoniatores, si
se essoniaverint. Si autem in eodem coñ, ubi terra
petitur, non habeat warrantus terram, cüm defaltam
fecerit, de qua capi possit ad valentiam, sed in alio,
nec constare poterit quantum terre vicecoii capere
debeat in suo com in manum díi regis, quia nescit


OF WARRANTY. S.


the land claimed, if the warrantor has land in the same
county. And the same, if the tenant has essoined him-
self, and let the enrolment be made in this manner, A.
the tenant, to wit, or A. the essoiner of the tenant, has
presented himself on the fourth day against B. on a plea
that the said B. should warrant to him.so much land
with its appurtenances in such a vill, which C. claims
as his right against him, and whereof the said A. in the
court, &c. has vouched the said B. to warrant against
the aforesaid C., and the aforesaid B. has not come, and
the summons, &c. Judgment: Let there be taken into
the hand of the lord the king of the land of the said B.
up to the value, &. and days, &c., and let B. be sum-
moned that he be present on a certain day in order to
answer and to show, &c. as above concerning defaults.
The same day is given to the said claimant in the
Bench.


The king to the viscount greeting. Take into our 3.
hand by the view of loyal men of your county of land in A
your bailiwick on account of the default of the said A. into the
up to the value of so much land with its appurtenances made
in such a vill which R. of N. in our court, &c. claims as the king
his right against C., and whereof the said C. in our said Md
court before our justiciaries, &c. has vouched the said A. to ve
to warrant against the said B., and the day of the cap- aot :
tion &c. And summon by good summoners the afore- y.
said A. that he be, &c. as above. And the same day Cape:
shall be given to the claimant as to the tenant, if they
be present personally, or by their attorneys, or by their
essoiners if they have essoined themselves. But if the
warrantor has not any land in the same county, where
the land is claimed, when he has made default, from
which there may be taken land up to the value, but in
another county, nor can it be established how much land
the viscount ought to take in his own county into the
hand of the lord the king, because he does not know f. 384 b,
the value of the land claimed in the other county, it is


R 2657, Cc


4.
Si terra
petita
fuerit in
uno comi-
tatu et
terra war-
ranti ia
alio, tunc
fiat exten-
sio per tale
breve.


5


Breve de
capienda
terram pro
defectu.


34 DE WARRANTIA,


de valore terre petite in alio com, oportet igitur q
prius fiat extensio de terra petita, & facta extensione
mandetur vicecom de alio com quantū terre capere
debeat p defaltam warranti per tale breve, per q fiat
extensio.


Rex vicecoñ salutem. Præcipimus tibi, q assumptis
tecum duodecim tam militibus quàm aliis liberis, lega-
libus et discretis hominibus de visneto tali, in ppria
persona tua accedas ad tale locum, et per eorum sacra-
mentum extendi facias et appreciari tantam terram in
tali villa &c. vel aliter & breviùs. Præcipimus tibi q
per sacramétum pborum & legalium hominum de com
tuo extendi facias & appreciari tantam tram cum pti-
nentiis in tali villa, qm talis in curia nostra clamat We.
Et unde idem talis vocavit tale ad warrantum We.
Et extensionem illam & appreciationem scire facias
tali die vel sine dilatione evidenter, distincte & aperte
per literas tuas sigillatas & per duos legales & dis-
cretos homines ex illis, per quos extensio illa et appre-
ciatio facta fuit. Et habeas ibi hoc breve et nomina
eorum, per quorum sacramenta extensione et apprecia-
tionem illam feceris. Teste &e. Etcüm per extensionem
constiterit de valore, tune primüm precipiatur vicecoñ
ubi warrantus terram habet, quód capiat in manum
domini regis ad valentiam per hoc breve.


Rex vicecom salutem. Cape in manum nostram per
visum &e. de terra talis per defectum ipsius talis ad
valentiam centum solidatarum terre p una carucata
terree cum ptinentiis in tali villa in tali comitatu,
quam talis in curia nostra &c. clamat ut jus suum


OF WARRANTY. 35


incumbent therefore that there ought to be first made an
extent of the land claimed, and upon the extent having
been made, let a mandate be given to the viscount of
the other county how much land he ought to take
through the default of the warrantor by such a writ,
whereby an extension may be made.


The king to the viscount greeting. We enjoin you, 4
that having taken with you twelve as well knights as vcr
other freeholders, loyal and discreet men of your visne, in one
you go in your own person to such a place, and by their ihe Tad E
oath cause to be extended and appraised so much land the war-
in such a vill, &e. : or otherwise and more briefly: We jux inm
enjoin you that by the oath of honest and loyal men of d
your county you cause to be extended and appraised so made an
much land with its appurtenances in such a vill, which $9175 i
so-and-so in our court claims, &e. And whereof the this kind.
said so-and-so has vouched such a person as a warrantor.

And cause that extent and appraisement to be made
on such a day without delay evidently, distinctly, and
openly by your sealed letters and by two loyal and dis-
creet men of those, through whom that extent and
appraisement have been made. And have there this
writ and the names of those by whose oaths you have
made that extent and appraisement. Witness, &. And
when through the extent the value has been ascertained,
then for the first time let it be enjoined to the viscount
where the warrantor has land, that he take into the
hand of the lord the king up to the value through a


writ of this kind.


The king to the viscount greeting. Take into our, .* for
hand by the view, &c. of the land of so-and-so through taking
the default of the said so-and-so up to the value of one DNE
hundred shillingsworths of land for one carucate of
land with its appurtenances in such a vill in such a
county, which so-and-so in our court, &c., claims as his
right against such a person, and whereof such said

e 2


36 DE WARRANTIA.


versus talem, et unde idem talis vocaverit &c. et diem
&c. et sumoneas talem q sit ad talem diem Ge. Teste
&e. Quandoque tamen sine tali inquisitione facienda,
estimetur terra que petita est secundam solam asser-
tionem petentis, et capiatur in alio comitatu ad valen-
tiam, ut si tenens retinuerit, non erit necesse ulteriüs
pcedere, si autem amiserit, tunc procedatur ad veram
inquisitionem, quod prius non erit necesse, ut de term
Paschz añ regis Henrici decimo quarto.


0 6. Cüm petatur advocatio et tenens warrantum voca-
eee; verit, qui defaltam fecerit, tune de terra warranti
ecclesie capiatur ad valentiam in manum domini regis, sive
Dae warrantus manens fuerit in eodem comitatu, sive in
mue os diversis. Sed quoniam incertum erit quantu capi
ad valen- debeat de terra warranti, nisi prius constiterit de
puc valore advocationis, inprimis estimanda erit ecclesia,
advocatio, et per consequens sciri poterit quantu valeat advocatio.
UR Extensio quidem advocationum talis esse debet in
quantum  partitionibus faciendis inter eohzredes, q si ecclesia
rue valeat viginti marc., plus vel minus, p qualibet marca

in extensione facienda computetur redditus duodecim

denarioř, sicuti p viginti marc. viginti solid, et facia

sic extensione, capiatur p defalta warranti ad valen-


tiam per hoc breve.


7 Rex vicecom salute. Cape in manum nostram per
quod visum &e. de terra talis mulieris in balliva tua, d sit
capiat tan. de hzereditate ejus, cùm forte aliam terram habuerit
tum terre —; roe aS E AE 3
dude simul cum hæreditate, sicut nomine dotis, pro defectu
heredi- ipsius mulieris, ad valentiam viginti solidatarum red-


tate. : . m : . ;
ditus cum pertinentiis pro advocatione talis ecclesize


OF WARRANTY, 37


person has vouched, &c., and the day, &c., and summon
so-and-so that he be present on such a day, &e. Wit-
ness, &ce. Sometimes without making such an inquest,
let the land which is claimed be estimated according to
the simple assertion of .the claimant, and let there be
taken in another county up to the value, and if the
tenant has retained it, it will not be necessary to proceed
any further, but if he has lost, then let proceedings be
had to a true inquest, which before was not necessary,
as in Easter term in the fourteenth year of king Henry.


When an advowson is claimed and the tenant has | €
vouched a warrantor who has made default, then let eae
there be taken of the land of the warrantor into the hand vouched
of the lord the king up to the value, whether the war- tbe adven
rantor is resident in the county or in different counties. pH
But since it will be uncertain how much ought to be then let
taken of the land of the warrantor, unless an estimate ates
has first been made of the value of the advowson, 1n to the
the first place the church will have to be estimated, and 14 and
as a consequence it will be possible to know how much vowson be
the advowson is worth. An extension of advowsons be
ought to be of this kind in making partitions amongst bI
coheiresses, that if the church is worth twenty marks, ought to
more or less, for each mark in making the extension a be taken. `
rent of twelve pennies should be computed, as for
instance, for twenty marks twenty shillings, and the
extension having been so made, let there be taken for
the default of the warrantor up to the value by a
writ of this kind.

The king to the viscount greeting. Take into our n in
hand by a view, &c. of the land of such a woman in taking so
your bailiwick, which is of her inheritance, if per- rd E
chance she should have other land besides her inheri- part of the
tance, as in the name of dower, for the default of the Que
said woman, up to the value uf twenty shillings of rent


with the appurtenances for the advowson of such a


38 DE WARRANTIA.


quam <A. in curia nostra &c. clamat ut jus suum

f, 385. versus B. Et unde ide B. in eadé curia vocavit ipsam
ad warrantu versus pdictü A. et diem &c. Sumoneas
&e. Teste &c. Cùm auté mulier dote petierit vel
aliud tenementü, vel quid tale, ut jus suü versus
aligm, qui minorem vocaverit ad warrantu, si minor
vel ejus custos defaltam fecerit, ubicund terra fuerit,
habita tame extensione (ut prædictū est) capiatur de
terra minoris pro defectu custodis ad valentiam terre
petite per tale breve.


8. Rex vieecomi salute. Cape in manü nostra p visum


PP uod &e. de terra talis fili & heredis talis qui est infra
petierit et setate et in custodia talis pro defectu ipsius custodis
dc ad valentià tantz terre cum pertinentiis, vel tertize
waran- partis tante terree cum pertinétiis in tali villa, vel in


tumet (com tali, quam tertiam ptem, talis, que fuit uxor talis,


custos de-

faltam in curia nostra &c. clamat in dotem versus A., & unde
fecerit, : : ; : :
tue idem <A. in eadem curia nostra coram &c. vocavit


de terra eundé talem qui est infra setatem ad warrantum versus
minoris
prodefectu Cum et die &e. sumoneas &e. Teste &c.


custodis.
9. Si autem vocatus fuerit ad warrantum (ut pdictum


bee est) ille, qui nihil habuerit de heereditate materna,


fueritad nec sine parastre respondere poterit, sive uterg defal-
warrantum t fi ea tee lt . = ;
cum paras. AM fecerit sive alter ipsoru, capiatur de hereditate


fey x. materna ad valentia terre petite p defaltam per tale
eorum de- breve. Sed! refert utrum per parvum cape vel per


faltam magnum, cüm unus in curia co i i z
: Oparueri
fecerit, vel © , paruerit & alius no.


alter Sed videtur q per magni, ubi ambo defaltam fecerint,


eorum tan- 1 S ^: = : :
cum Jpse ul in url c B S d
tum, capia- p q (6 a copar uerit se efendere possit


1“ Sed refert utrum.” The pas- | interpolation, and it is not found in
sage so commencing down to | MS. Rawl. C. 160.
* quasi custos est," seems to be an


OF WARRANTY, 39


church, which A. claims in our court as his right against f. 385.
B. And whereof the said B. in the same court has
vouched her to warrant against the aforesaid A., and
the day, &c. Summon, &c. Witness, &e. But when
the woman has claimed her dower, or another tenement,
or something of the like sort against some one, who has
vouched a minor to warrant, if the minor or his guardian
has made default, wherever the land may be, after an
extension however has been made (as aforesaid), let
there be taken of the land of the minor for the default
of the guardian up to the value of the land claimed by
a writ of this kind.

8.
The king to the viscount greeting. Take into our re? Nas
hand by a view, &c. of the land of such an one, the son claimed
and heir of so-and-so, who is under age and is in the ward- d0ver and


the minor


ship of so-and-so, for the default of the said guardian summoned
up to the value of so much land with its appurtenances, t9 arent


or of the third part of so much land with its appur- guardian
; c . c .., have made
tenances in such a vill, or in such a county, which third gefautt, let


part so-and-so, who was the wife of so-and-so, claims in E br
. ake
our court, &c. as her dower against A., and whereof the the Jana


said A. in our said court before, &e. has called the said of the


: 7 > minor for
so-and-so, who is under age, to warrant against him, and the de-
: Tes fault of

the day, &. Summon, &e. Witness, &c. dE


But if a person has been vouched to warrant (as es
aforesaid) who has had nothing of his maternal inheri- I» mino
tance, and who cannot answer without his step-father, to warrant
whether each of them has made default or the one or Werde
the other only of them, let there be taken of the ma- and each


ternal inheritance up to the value of the land claimed um
through the default by a writ of this kind. But it default, or


` the one or
matters whether by a little cape or a great cape, when ihe other


one has appeared in court and the other not. But it ofthem
1 only, let
seems by a great cape, when both have made default, there be


i in court may defend himself teken of
since he who has appeared in y DONE


by his law, and since odious proceedings are to be re- the minor


40 DE WARRANTIA.


turdeterra per legem, & cûm sint odiosa restringenda. Cùm auté


minoris ad
valentiam
terre
petite.


10.
Si plures
warranti
defaltam
fecerint.


unus eorum tantum defaltam fecerit, tunc utrum sit
vel sie, certü erit q terra heredis. Si autem unus
sit custos terre et heredis simul, vel unus custos
terre & alius custos heredis, in quo casu ultimo,
omnes suinonendi sunt in uno brevi quotquot sunt
custodes & habeant heredé. Si aute paraster, per
legé Anglie quasi custos est. Rex vicecoíi salute.
Cape in manum nostra per visum &c. de terra quam
A. tenet ad vitam suam per legem Anglie & que est
de haereditate B. filii & heredis talis mulieris, & ad
ipsum reverti debet post mortem preedicti A. ad
valentiam tante terre cum pertinentiis in [dicta villa,
quam C. in curia nostra &e. clamat ut jus suum
versus D. Et unde idem D. in eadem curia nostra
&c. vocavit inde ad warrantü pdictum A. simul cum
predicto B. versus eunde C. & q idem B. dicebat
quód nihil tenuit de hsereditate preedicta matris sus,
sed preedictus A. per legem Angliz, sine quo de præ-
dicta warrantia non potuit respondere & diem Ne. et
summoneas &e. Teste &c.


Quod autem de uno warranto dicitur, dici potest
de pluribus, si plures defaltam fecerint, secundum
quod terras habuerint in uno com vel diversis, & ubi,
si in diversis com, sumoneantur sic. Rex vicecom
salutem. Sumoneas p bonos suinonitores A. quód sit
coram justic. &c. ad warrantizadum B. de N. simul
cu C. de tali com tantu terre cü ptinentiis in tali
villa &e. ut supra. Et sie de tribus vel pluribus
warrantis, et si omnes defalta fecerint, de terris omnia
capietur ad valentià, secundü q tenuerint p diviso vel
p indiviso, & facta extensione, secundu q fuerint
omnes in uno com vel diversis.


OF WARRANTY. 41


strained. But when one of them only has made de- up to the
fault, then whether it be in this way or in that, it will be äle of
certain that the land of the heir is to be taken. But if claimed.
one person be the guardian of the land and of the heir
jointly, or one the guardian of the land and the other

the guardian of the heir, in which last case all are to

be summoned in one writ, however many may be the
guardians, and let them produce the heir. But if there

be a step-father, he is by the law of England as it were,

the guardian. The king to the viscount greeting. Take

into our hand by a view, &c. of the land, which A. holds

for his life by the law of England, and which is of the
inheritance of B. the son and heir of such a woman,

and ought to revert to him after the death of the said

A., up to the value of so much land with its appur-
tenances in the aforesaid vill, which C. in our court, &e.
claims as his right against D. And whereof the said D.

in our said court, &e. has vouched thereon to warrant

the aforesaid A. together with the aforesaid B. against

the said C. and because the said B. has said that he held
nothing of the inheritance of his said mother, but the
aforesaid A. by the law of England, without whom he

could not answer concerning the said warranty, and the

day, &e., and summon, &c¢. Witness, Xe.


But what has been said of one warrantor may be said s Pee
of several, if several have made default, according as they warrantors
_ may have lands in one county or in divers counties, and aliases
when, if they have land in divers counties, let them be
summoned thus. The king to the viscount greeting.
Summon by good summoners A. that he should appear
before our justiciaries &c. to warrant to B. of N. together
with C. of such a county so much land with its appurte-
nances in such a vill &c. as above. And so of three or
more warrantors, and if they have all made default, let
there be taken of the lands of all up to the value, accord-
ing as they may hold their land divided or undivided.


49 DE WARRANTIA,


11. Si auté unus ex pluribus warrantis defaltam fecerit
Si war- ante apparationem, & alii comparuerint, absentia unius
£385 b. non erit dànosa aliis, q no est in viro et uxore, sed
nentes — illi qui psentes fuerint defendant causam suam, sed p
dieit defectu absentis capiatur de terra ipsius in manu diii
i ED regis ad valentia pro ea parte, d ipsum cótigerit de
ea parte, warrantia facienda, facta tamen  priüs estimatione
s qu. quanti valeat terra q petita est à tenete, & fiat tale
erit, facta bre. Rex vicecom salute. Cape in manu niam (per
os omnia ut supra) usq ad clausulam illam, scilicet: Et
tione: unde talis in eadé curia vocavit tale ad warrantum

versus tale petente cu A. B. C. coheredibus & pticipi-
bus suis. Teste &c. Et si talis ad secundu die no
venerit, amittet terrà sua capta in manü dñi regis p
juditiu, et salve erunt aliis exceptiones & responsiones


Sue.


Cap. VI.


QOL Cum autem warrantus ad secundü suinonitioné post
Si warran- ee 3 : A
anis on captione nec primo die, nec secundo, nec tertio, nec


secundam quarto coparuerit, petente se offerente liti contra te-
VR MER. nentem, et tenente contra warrantu, recuperabit petens
post oa pii- terram versus tenente, et tenens versus warrantum
primo de excambiu ad valentiam. Et fiat talis irrotulatio, A.
a prie petit versus B. tanta terrà cum ptinentiis in tali villa
nec tertio ut jus suum, et ita q pdictus B. venit in eadé curia
crite nostra et vocavit inde ad warrantum C. ita q sumoni-

tus fuit q esset ad talem diem, ad quem dié non venit


nec se essoniavit, & ita de terra ipsius C. per juditium


OF WARRANTY, 43


But if one out of several warrantors has made default 11.
before the appearance, and the others have appeared, the I the war-
absence of the one will not be hurtful to the others, Qo m
which is not so in the case of husband and wife, but let resident in
those who are present defend their own cause, but as different
regards the default of the absentee, let there be taken of M RE
his land into the hand of the lord the king up to the DE
value in proportion to that part which belongs to him may hold,
in respect of the warranty to be made, an estimate how- 2? exten-
ever having been previously made as to how much the having
land is worth, which is claimed from the tenant, and let ve RA
a writ of this kind go. The king to the viscount greet-
ing. Take into your hand (throughout as above) up to
that clause, to wit; and whereof so-and-so in the said
court has called such person to warrant against so-and-so
the claimant with A. B. C. coheiresses and his parceners.

Witness &c. And if such person shall not have come on
the second day, he shall lose his land taken into the hand
of the king by a judgment, and there shall be reserved


to the others their exceptions and their answers.


CHAPTER VI.


But when the warrantor on the second summons after | 1.
: : If the war-
the caption has not appeared, neither on the first, nor on jantor


the second, nor on the third, nor on the fourth day, the mE ne
E . eh 8 . . secon
claimant presenting himself to join issue with the tenant, summons


and the tenant to join issue with the warrantor, the êfter the
: 1 caption
claimant shall recover the land against the tenant, and has not
the tenant shall recover against the warrantor compensa- RE
tion in land up to the value. And let the enrolment be fist, nor
s 2 - NE : :,, on the
of this kind, A. claims against B. SO much land with its AIT
appurtenances in such a vill as his right, and so that the on the
aforesaid B. has come into our court and has vouched "tro
thereon C. to warrant, so that he was summoned to pre- fourth day.


sent. himself on a certain day, on which day he neither
came nor essoined himself, and so of the land of C. him-


2;
Quod pe-
tens recu-
perabit
seysinam
per defal-
tam.


3.
Cum te-
nens ami-
serit, quia
warrantus
non potest
eum defen-
dere in
seysina


44 DE WARRANTIA.


capta fuit in manum domini regis ad valentiam pdictæ
terre. Et preceptum fuit vic. quod mandaret justic.
diem captionis, & q iterum sumoneret preedicta D. q
esset ad tale diem responsurus de principali placito,
et de defalta.. Et ad quem diem non venit, nec primo,
nee secundo, nec fertio,.nec quarto die, nec terra ad
horam fuit replegiata, et ideo cosiderandum est q præ-
dictus A. recuperet terram suam versus predictum B.
per defaltam B., et B. in misericordia, et habeat de
terra ipsius C. in loco competenti excambiu ad valen-
tiam. Et quod dietü est de uno warranto, dici possit
de pluribus si defaltam fecerint. Breve de faciendo
seysina petenti tale erit.


Rex vic. salutem. Scias q A. in curia nía cora jus-
tic. &c. recuperavit seysina sua versus B. per defalta
ipsius B. de tata terra cum ptinétiis in tali villa.
Et ideo tibi peipimus, q eide A. de pdicta terra cum
ptinétiis sine dilatione plenaria seysinam habere fa-
cias T. &c. Post breve istud fiat aliud tenenti de
escambio habendo facta prius extesione ut supradictü
est, si warratus terrà no habuerit in eode com sed in
in diversis. Si aute in eodem com, tunc fiat breve
sic.


Rex vic. salute. Scias q cùm A. de N. in curia
nostra cora justic. &e. peteret versus B. tantam terram
cum pertinentiis in tali villa ut jus suum, idem B.
venit in eadem curia nostra coram eisdé justic. et
vocavit inde ad warrantü E. de N., qui cùm sumonitus
esset, postea defaltam fecit in eadé curia, per qm idem


OF WARRANTY. 45


self there was taken by a judgment into the hand of the
lord the king up to the value of the aforesaid land. And
it was enjoined to the viscount, that he should send to
the justiciaries the day of the caption, and that he should
summon a second time the -aforesaid D. that he should
be present on a certain day in order to answer concern-
ing the principal plea and concerning the default: and on
which day he has not appeared, neither on the first, nor
on the second, nor on the third, nor on the fourth day,
nor was the land replevined at the hour, and accordingly
it was resolved that the aforesaid A. should recover his
land against the aforesaid B. through the default of B.,
and B. should be amerced, and should have of the land
of the said C. in a suitable place compensation up to the
value. And what has been said of one warrantor may
be said of several, if they have made default. The writ
of giving seysine to the claimant will be of this kind.

The king to the viscount greeting. Know that A. in d
our court before our justiciaries &c. has recovered his claimant
- seysine against B. through the default of the said B. of ed
so much land with its appurtenances in such a vill And sine by `
accordingly we enjoin you that you cause the said A. to default.
have plenary seysine without delay of the said land with
its appurtenances. Witness &e. After that writ let
another writ be issued to the tenant concerning the
making compensation, an extent having first been made f, 386.
as said above, if the warrantor has not land in the same
county, but in divers counties. Butif in the same county,
then let a writ issue of this kind.

'The king to the viscount greeting. Know that, when eae
A. de N. in our court before our justiciaries &c. has tenant has
claimed against B. so much land with its appurtenances eter
in such a vill as his right, the said B. came into our said warrantor
court before our said justiciaries and vouched thereon to Lae
warrant E. de N., who when he was summoned afterwards him in his


made default in the said court, whereby the said A. has aes


sua, si
warrantus
tenemen-
tum ha-
buerit in
eodem
comitatu,
statim fiat
ei excam-
bium ad
valentiam.


4.
Si plures
sint war-
ranti, et
quidam
defaltam
fecerint et
quidam
non,


46 DE WARRANTIA.


A. seysina sua recuperaverit de pdicta terra versus
eundem B. Et ideo tibi peipimus quód de terra ipsius
E. in com tuo propinquiore tali terree ipsius B. eide
B. excambiü ad valétiam sine dilatione habere facias.
T. & Cùm aute plures. sint warranti vocati &-
quidam illorum defaltam’ fecerint et quidam no, tune
fiat breve in hae forma.


Rex vie. saluté. Scias q, chm A. in curia nostra
&e. (ut supra) idem B. venit (ut supra) et vocavit
inde ad warranta C. & D. qui cim sumoniti essent
in eade curia nostra coram pfatis justic. nostris, ide
C. defaltam fecit versus eundem B. ita q pdictus A.
coram pfatis justic. We. recuperavit seysinà sua versus
eude B. p defaltà de medietate totius terree cum pti-
nentiis Et ideo tibi peipimus q de terra ipsius C.
in balliva tua ppinquiore terre ipsius B. escabiu ad
valetiam  pdictzte medietatis eide B. sine dilatione
habere facias. Teste &e. Si post sumonitiones &
essonia cü tenés se forte essoniaverit & warratus co-
paruerit vel quida ex pluribus, & sie diem in banco
habuerint & postea defaltam fecerint, capiatur de terra
ipsorü &e. et fiat talis irrotulatio. Si aute cotingat
quód warrantus semel post sumonitionem vel essonium
suum faetum, cu tenes se forte essoniaverit, in juditio
comparuerit, vel cùm plures warranti vocati fuerint
simul vel vicissim se essoniaverint, quidam illorü in
juditio cdparuerint, & sie die habuerint in banco, et
postea defaltam fecerint, capiatur de terra illorum p
defalta ad valentiam terre petite, vel ptis ipsius,
secundi quod plures warrati vocati fuerint vel unus,
per parva cape in forma superius dicta, de petente et


OF WARRANTY. 47


recovered his seysine of the aforesaid land against the rantor has
said B. And accordingly we enjoin you that of the land AE
of the said E. in your county which is next to the said same
land of the said B. you cause compensation to be made D R
to the said B. up to the value without delay. Witness, forthwith
&c. But when several warrantors have been called, and eR e :
some of them have made default and some not, then let iP to the


alue.
a writ be issued in this form.


The king to the viscount greeting. Know that, when 4.

A. in our court as above, the said B. came (as above) pe Be
and vouched thereon to warrant C. and D., who when warrantors,
they were summoned in our said court before our justi- HUM
ciaries aforesaid, the said C. made default towards the default and
said B., so that the aforesaid A. before our justiciaries ee
aforesaid, &c. recovered his seysine against the said

B. by default of the mediety of the said land with its
appurtenances. And accordingly we enjoin you that of

the land of the said C. in your bailiwick, which is

nearest to the land of the said B., you cause the said

B. to receive compensation up to the value of the said
mediety without delay. Witness, &e. If after the sum-

mons and the essoins, when the tenant has by chance
essoined himself and the warrantor has appeared, or

some out of several and so they have had a day at:

the Bench, and have afterwards made default, let there

be taken of their lands, &c., and let there be an enrol-

ment of this kind. But if it happens that the war-

rantor has appeared in judgment once after the sum-

mons or after his essoin, when the tenant by chance

has essoined himself, or when several warrantors have

been vouched and have essoined themselves together or

— in turns, some of them have appeared in judgment, and

so had a day at the Bench, and afterwards have made

default, let there be taken of their land for the default

up to the value of the land claimed or of the part

itself, according as several or one warrantor have been

called, by a little cape in the form above said, concern-


Ds
Cape de
terra war-
ranti ad
valentiam.


f. 386 b.
6.
Aliud
breve de


- eadem cap-


tione, sed


alio modo.


48 DE WARRANTIA.


tenente, cüm tenens defaltam fecerit postqm semel in
juditio cōparuerit, et fiat sie irrotulatio in persona
warrati, B. optulit se quarto die versus C. de placito
q warrantizet ei tantam terram cum ptinentiis in tali
villa, quam A. de N. in curia &e. clamat ut jus suu
versus eundé C. vel quam talis mulier clamat ut
dotem suam versus eundem B. et unde ide B. in
curia nostra vocavit &. (ut supra) et idem C. non
venit, et habuit diem in banco postquam comparuerat
in curia nostra &e. iuditium  &c. Capiatur de terra
ipsius C. ad valentiam, et ipse C. sumoneatur quód
sit ad talem diem auditurus juditium suum per parvum
cape quod tale est.


Rex vie. salute. Cape in manu nostram de terra
C. in balliva tua pro defectu ipsius C. ad valentiam
tantze terre cum pertinentiis suis in tali villa qm A.
de N. in curia nostra &e. coram justic. &c. clamat ut
jus suü versus B. et unde idem B. in eadem curia
nostra coram justic. &c. vocavit ipsum C. ad warran-
tum versus predictum A. et summoneas per bonos
sumonitores predictum C. g sit coram justic. nostris
ad talem diem auditurus inde juditium suum, et
habeas ibi sumonitores et hoc breve. T. &c.


Ad qm diem si non venerit, amittet ad valentiam
terra petite p defaltam versus D. qui tenet, et A.
recuperabit versus B. terram petita, & fiat talis irrotu-
latio, A. optulit se quarto die versus C. de placito q
warrantizet ei tantam terram cum pertinentiis in tali
villa, quam A. clamat &e. (ut supra) versus B. & unde


OF WARRANTY. ; 49


ing the claimant and the tenant, when the tenant has
made default after he has once appeared in judgment,
and let the enrolment be made thus in the person of
the warrantor. B. has presented himself on the fourth
day against C. concerning a plea that he should warrant
to him so much land with its appurtenances in such a
vill, which A. de N. in our court, &c. claims as his right
against the said C., and which such a woman claims as
her dower against the said B., and whereof the said B.
in our court has vouched, &e. (as above), and the said
C. has not come and has had a day in the Bench after
he had appeared in our court, &c. Judgment, &. Let
there be taken of the land of the said C. up to the
value, and let C. himself be summoned that he be pre-
sent on such a day in order to hear his judgment by
a little cape, which is of this kind.

The king to the viscount greeting. Take into our 5.
hand of the land of C. in your bailiwick for the default a
of the said C. up to the value of so much land with the war-
its appurtenances in such a vill, which A. de N. in our eed E
court, &c. before our justiciaries, &. claims as his right value.
against B., and whereof the said B. in our said court
before our justiciaries, &c. has vouched the said C. to
warrant against the aforesaid A., and summon by good
summoners the aforesaid C. that he be present before
our justiciaries at a certain day in order to hear there-
upon his judgment, and have there the summoners and


this writ. Witness, &c.


At which day, if he has not come, he shall lose up to f. Bs b
the value of the land claimed through his default Another
towards D. who holds it, and A. shall recover against B. mit for, the
the land claimed, and let there be an enrolment of this tion, res
kind: A. has presented himself on the fourth day a different

manner.
against C. concerning a plea that he should warrant
to him so much land with its appurtenances in such


a vill, which A. claims, &c. (as above) against B., and
R 2657. D


50 DE WARRANTIA.


idem B. vocavit ad warrantum ipsum C. et C. non
venit sed aliàs fecit defaltam postquam in curia com-
paruerat, ita q terra capta fuit in manum diii regis,
et ipse C. sumonitus ad audiendum juditium suum.
Et ideo consideratum -est q A. recuperet seysinam
suam versus B. et B. in misericordia, et habeat ex-
cambium ad valentiam de terra ipsius C. et fiat utriq
eorum seysina, scilicet A. de re petita et B. de
eschambio in forma supradicta. Si Christianus! vel
Judeus qui terra no habuerint de qua distringi pos-
sint cùm vocati fuerint ad warrantizandum, preecipiatur

C£ Liber vicecofü q habeat corpora eorum, quia ibi non poterit

un captio terre fieri ad valentiam. Judsus vero nihil

1270. pprium habere potest, quia quiequid acquirit non sibi
acquirit sed regi, quia non vivant sibi ipsis sed alis,
et sic aliis acquirunt et nō sibi ipsis.


2 Quid autem dicetur de viro et uxore cüm simul
eae vocati. fuerint ad warratum, et unus illorum defalta
cum simul fecerit, tunc fiat ac si uter defaltam faceret, vel per
fucrint ad parvum cape vel per magnum cape, secundü q defalta
alt facta fuerit antequam coparuerint vel post. Sed cüm
alter ip. Vicissim se essoniaverint, et unus diem in banco re-
E WERL ceperit cùm alius se essoniaverit et postqm ambo
fecerit.  defaltam fecerint, tunc pro defectu utriusj capienda

erit terrà in manu diii regis. Sed refert utrum per
parvum cape vel per magnum cape, quia ratione ejus
qui non comparuerit videtur, q locum habet magnum
cape, et ratione ejus qui coparuerit, q parvum locum
habebit. Sed cám sint loco unius nec jura eorü divi-


sioné recipiunt, nec utrūğ bie simul copetere possit,


1 Si Christianus vel Judeus. This | and 160, and in various other MSS,
passage down to “sibi ipsis," is | See Introduction.
omitted in MSS. Rawlinson C. 159


OF WARRANTY. 51


whereof the said B. has vouched to warrant the said C.,
and C. has not come but otherwise has made default
after he had appeared in court, so that the land was
taken into the hand of the lord the king, and the said
C. was summoned to hear his judgment. And accord-
ingly it was resolved that A. should recover his seysine
against B. and B. should be amerced, and should have
compensation up to the value of the land of the said C.,
and let seysine be made to each of them, to wit, to A. of
the thing claimed, and to B. of the compensation in the
form above said. If a Christian or a Jew, who has no
land upou which a distress may be made, when they
have been vouched to a warranty, let it be enjoined to
the viscount that he seize their persons, because there
cannot be there made a caption of land up to the value,
But a Jew cannot have anything of his own, because
whatever he acquires, he acquires not for himself but for
the king, because they do not live for themselves but
for others, and so they acquire for others and not for


themselves.

But what shall be said of a husband and wife when 7.
they have been vouched together to warrant, and one of oe En
them has made default, then let it be done as if both wife, when
of them had made default, either by a little Cape or by ME Bus
a great Cape, according as the default has been made vouched
before they have appeared or afterwards. But when re T £
they have essoined themselves in turns and one has pia or
received a day at the Bench, when the other has essoined them has
himself, and after both have made default, then on ac- PR de-
count of the default of both the land will have to be
taken into the hand of the lord the king. But it matters
whether by a little Cape or a great Cape, because in
regard of him who has not appeared it seems that the
great Cape has place; and in regard: of him who has
appeared, that the little Cape will have place. But
since they are in the place of one person nor do their
rights admit of division, nor can both writs be applied

D 2


8.
Cum war-
rantus
nullam
habeat ex-
cusatio-
nem, cum
defaltam
fecerit
primo die,
secundo,
tertio, vel
quarto.


9.
Breve
secundum
judicium
preedic-
tum.

A GINI


52 DE WARRANTIA.


si ad juris rigore habeatur respectus, et cüm lites
restringedze sunt et ea tenenda que magis ligant, tunc
ad parvum cape erit recurrenda, si aute ad ptem
benignioré ubi defendi possunt sumonitiones, sursisæ,
et essonia, tune locum habebit magnum cape, q melius
est. Cüm autem unus illorum defaltam fecerit, in hoc
casu fiat magnum cape vel parvum, secundum q ille
qui defaltam fecerit in juditio prius coparuerit vel
non.


Cùm autem warrantus nullam habuerit excusationem
cùm venerit, quam pretendere possit et sanare defal-
tam q ad primu die non venerit, nec secundum, nec
tertiu, nec quartum : tunc fiat irrotulatio sic: A. petit
versus B. tantu terre cum pertinentiis, et ita q ide
B. vocavit ad warrantum C. qui postquàm in curia
coparuerit et die habuerit in baco, vel postqm warra-
tizavit defalta fecit, ita q terra capta fuit in manu
dni regis, et ipse sumonit? ad audiedu juditiu suum
ad hune die. Et ipse C. venit sed nō potuit sanare
defalta, et ideo cosideratu est q A. recuperet seysina
sua versus B. et B. in misericordia, et habeat excabit
ad valentiam de terra ipsius C. Breve de faciendo
seysinam ipsi A. tale est.


Rex vicecom salutem. Scias quód cüm A. in curia
nostra &c. peteret versus B. tantam terram &e. ut jus
suum, vel mulier ut dotem suam, vel aliud secundum
formam brevis originalis, idem B. venit in eadem
curia coram eisdé justice. &c. et vocavit inde ad war-
rantü C. & qui similiter venit in eade curia, et eidem
B. terra illa warrantizavit, et postea in eadé curia
nostra terra illà amisit per defaltam quam fecit versus


OF WARRANTY, 59


together, if regard is to be had to the rigour ot the law,
and since litigation is to be restrained and those things are
to be maintained which are most binding, then recourse
wil have to be had to the little Cape; but if to the
more benignant part, where summonses, adjournments,
and essoins may be maintained, then a great Cape shall
apply, which is better. But when one of them has made
default, in their case let either a great Cape or a little
Cape be employed, according as he who has made default
has appeared in judgment previously or not.


But when the warrantor has no excuse when he has s.
come, which he can hold out and cure his default that eee
he has not come on the first day, nor on the second, nor has no
on the third, nor on the fourth, then let the enrolment Reo
be thus, A. has claimed against B. so much land with has made
its appurtenances, and so that B. has vouched C. to eM
warrant, who when he has appeared in court and has the second,
had a day at the Bench or after he has warranted has ED
made default, so that the land was seized into the hand fourth day.
of the lord the king, and he was himself summoned to
hear his judgment on this day. And the said C. has
come, but could not cure his default, and therefore it
was resolved that A. should recover his seysine against
B., and B. should be amerced and have compensation up
to the value from the land of the said C. The writ to


give seysine to the said A. is of this kind.


The king to the viscount greeting. Know that when K s
A. in our court, &c. claimed against B. so much land, &e. according
as his right, or a woman as her dower, or something eon
else according to the form of the original writ, the said gforesaid.
B. appeared in the said court before our said justiciaries £. 387
and vouched C. to warrant thereon, and who appeared
in like manner in our court, and warranted to the
said B. that land, and afterwards in our said court lost


that land through a default which he made towards |


54 DE WARRANTIA.


eundem A. Et ideo tibi peipimus q eidem A. de
prædicta terra cum pertinentiis sine dilatione plenariam
Seisinam habere facias, & de terra ipsius C. in balliva
tua habere facias eidem B. escambium ad valentiam
preedictee terre sine dilatione per visum legalium
hominum. Teste &c.


10. Et quód quis amittere poterit per defaltam, quam
ede fecerit ad primum diem, hoe est si primo die non
amittere coparuerit, ac si secundo die, tertio vel quarto defaltam
iu fecerit, si sumonitioné cognoverit vel si eam dedicere
fecit primo nd possit, cùm die habuerit in baco postqm semel in
c EE curia cóparuerit: pbatur de terii S. Michaelis anno
tertioet regis H. xvi. incipiente xvii in com Midd de W. de
ee Ralegh et quodà tenente suo Johanne Pigon, qui tenuit

de quadam pbenda S. P. Et etiam quód defalta facta
primo die, et secundo die placiti nocet, pbatur de
term S. Hilarii anno regis H. vii. in com Berk. de
Henry de Queynt qui se tenuit ad defaltam, quia
tenens non venit primo die, nec secundo, sed postea
remisit tenenti defaltam p xv. marc, argenti. Sed
quid si primo die coparuerit tenens coram aliquo jus-
ticiario, et secundo, tertio, vel quarto die defaltam
fecerit? idem erit dicendü q prius, cüm vocatus non
coparuerit. Et eodem modo si uno die de licentia
absens fuerit & per alium diem se absentaverit sine
licentia. Et notandum, quód si quis implacitatus sit
per breve de recto et per defalta amiserit, vix seysinam
suam rehabebit per consimile breve, nisi majus jus
habuerit in ira illa petita ille qui amisit, quàm ille
qui petit. Si autem minus vel nihil, nunquam recu-
perabit, sieut esse posset inter fratrem antenatum et
postnatum, si postnatus per defaltam amitteret.


OF WARRANTY, 55


the said A. And accordingly we enjoin you that you
cause the said A. to have without delay plenary seysine
of the said land with its appurtenances, and of the land
of the said C. in your bailiwick you cause the said B.
to have compensation up to the value of the afore-
said land without delay by the view of loyal men.
Witness, &c.


And that a person may lose by a default which he 1o.
has made on the first day, that is if he has not appeared I
on the first day, and if on the second day, on the third, may lose
or on the fourth he has made default, if he has known E. E
of the summons, or if he cannot gainsay it, when he which he
has had a day i in the Bench after he has once appeare xui
in the court, is proved in St. Michael's term concerning day, as on
William de Ralegh and a certain tenant of his jan a ee
Pigon, who held of a certain prebend S. P. And also and the
that default made on the first day, and on the second te
day of the plea is hurtful, is proved from Hilary term
in the eighth year of king Henry in the county of
Berks, concerning Henry de Queynt, who kept himself
to the default, because the tenant did not come on the
first day nor on the second, but afterwards he remitted
the default to the tenant for fifteen marks of silver.

But what if the tenant has appeared before a justiciary
and on the second, third, or fourth day has made default ?
the same will have to be said as before, when a vouchee
has not appeared. And in the same manner if on one
day he has been absent by leave, and on another day
he has absented himself without leave. And it is to
be noted, that if a person has been impleaded through
a writof right and has lost by default, he will scarcely
recover his seysine by a similar writ, unless he who has
lost has a greater right in the land claimed than he who
claims. But if he has less or no right he will never
recover, as may happen between a first-born and an after-


born brother.


56 DE WARRANTIA.


ll. Sed quid si tenens defaltam fecerit cùm petens
PEN [sens sit et warrantus, ilis se liti offerentibus, si
de war- warrantus nondum warrantizavit, statim recedat quietus


rantia et : : : : GE
terra peti- de warrantia, et terra petita capiatur in manum dii


ta capia- regis per parvum cape, & tenens summoneatur q sit
tur in A . : .. . oye
manum ad alium diem auditurus inde juditium suum, ad quem


domini diem si non venerit, vel si cum venerit sanare non


regis. 3 : : à
possit defaltam, amittet seysinam suam, eo quód non
est secutus versus warrantum suum, quem vocavit per
auxilium curie vel sine. Et de hac materia inveniri
poterit de term S. Michaelis anno regis H. quarto
incipiente quinto. ]

12:

Si petens

defaltam

fecerit A 3 :

offerenti- Cüm autem petens defaltam fecerit offerentibus se


bus se liti Jiti quarto die tenente & warranto, recedet uterque
quarto die


tenente et quietus de brevi illo.
warranto, : :
uterque
quietus
recedet.


_ 13. Cùm quis ad warrantum vocatus fuerit Christianus
Si warran- AE : S ce ~ :
tus Chris. Vel, Judaeus, qui terram non tenuerit in feodo, ğ capi


tianus vel possit in manum dii regis vel per quam distringi
Judæus t 5


terram non Possunt, preecipiatur vicecomiti q habeat corpora eorum
d primo die. Et de hae materia inveniri poterit de
distringi term S. Trinitatis anno regis H. quarto de Isaac
ide ip Judzeo de Northwico, & de term S. Hilarii & Paschee
tum, vice- Circa principium.

comes

habeat

corpora

eorum.


OF WARRANTY, 57


But what, if the tenant has made default, when the 11.
claimant is present and the warrantor, they offering to Mc »
join issue, if the warrantor has not yet warranted, let withdraws
him withdraw forthwith released from his warranty, pasea


and Jet the land claimed be taken into the hand of the warranty,
lord the king by a little Cape, and let the tenant be pee exe


summoned that he be present on another day to hear ed is E
judgment thereon, on which day if he shall not have paca of


appeared, or if, when he has appeared, he cannot cure the king.
his default, he shall lose his seysine, inasmuch as he has

not sued his warrantor whom he vouched either with

the help of the court or withoutit. And on this matter

a case will be found in St. Michael's term in the fourth

and fifth years of king Henry.


12.
If the
claimant
has made
default,
7 when the
But when the claimant has made default when the tenant and
tenant and the warrantor present themselves on the in AE
fourth day to join issue, both of them shall withdraw present on
k : the fourth
released from that writ. 15213
join issue,
let both of
them with-
draw re-
leased,


When a person, who has been vouched to warrant, isa 184.
Christian or a Jew, and has no land in fee, which can pna Pe:


be taken into the hand of the lord the king, or upon Jewish
which a distress can be made, let it be enjoined to the erue


viscount that he present their persons on the first day. d
u


And on this matter a case will be found in Holy Trinity which a
term in the fourth year of king Henry, concerning none
Isaac the Jew of Norwich, and in Hilary and in Easter made for a
innl warranty.
term about the beginning. pee
viscount
present
them in
person.


f. 387 b.
1l.


Post es-
sonia et
dilationes
presenti-
bus in
judicio
peten-
tibus! et
warranto,
$i warran-
tus gratis
warranti-
zaverit et
in se sus-
ceperit de-
fensiones,
tune
remaneat
tenens,
donec dis-
cussum
fuerit inter
petentem
et warran-
tum.


2.
Proposita
intentione
versus
warran-
tum.


58 DE WARRANTIA.


Car. VII.


Post essonia et districtiones et dilationes legitimas
sentibus in juditio tam petente quàm tenente et
warranto, aut statim  warrantizat aut de warratia
cotédit q warrantizare nó debeat. Si auté sine con-
tétione gratis warratizaverit et in se defensioes sus-
ceperit in placito principali, incipiet placitu esse prin-
cipale inter petente et ipsum  warrantu, et ex tunc
remaneat tenens cui warratizatu est domi, donec
eostiterit quis eorü, petetis vel warranti, possit in
placito obtinere, et pponat petens intetionem suam
versus warrantu sieut primó  pposuit versus ipsu
tenente, quia de cetero pcedant omnia sub psona
warranti sicut pcedere deberet sub psona tenentis,
nec poterit de czetero tenes pdere, quia si warrantus
ipsü in seysina sua defendere no possit, habebit tenes
de terra warranti, si qm habuerit, escambiü ad valen-
tia tre qm tenes amiserit.


Proposita igitur intétione petétis versus warranti,
statim respodeat warratus intetione,? et defendat jus
petentis, p duellü vel per magna assisam si voluerit,
nisi exceptiones habeat copetétes, quas versus petétem
pponat, vel nisi forte warratü habeat vel defensorem
qui ipsü versus petente defendere debeat, unü vel
plures, qm incontineti vocet per auxiliü curie, vel
sine, sicut superius paulatim dictü est. Et eode modo
peedatur (ut pdictü est) de warrüto in warrantü usi
ad plures suecessivo, donee nō sit aliquis ulterius qui
vocari possit ad warrantü, et unde cüm plures vocati


1“ petentibus," this is evidently ? * warrantum," MS. Rawl. C.
an error for * tam petente quam | 160.
* tenente," 3 * intentioni,” MS. id.


OF WARRANTY. 59


CHAPTER VII, f. 387 b.


After the essoins and distraints and legitimate delays ^j.
there being present in judgment as well the claimant as After es-
the tenant and the warrantor, either he warrants forth- A ae
with, or he contends respecting the warranty that he ee
ought not to warrant. But if without any contention he warrantor
has gratuitously warranted and taken upon himself de- utu
fences in the principal plea, the principal plea shall begin judgment,
to be between the claimant and the warrantor himself, mie
and thereupon let the tenant, to whom the warranty has gratuitous-
been given, remain at home, until it has been ascertained y de
which of them, the claimant or the warrantor, can prevail taken upon
in the plea, and let the claimant propound his declara- pi Er
tion against the warrantor as he at first propounded it nu >
against the tenant, because henceforth all things should remain at
proceed under the person of the warrantor as they would d
have to proceed under the person of the tenant, nor can gion has
the tenant henceforth lose, because if the warrantor can- Hs eee
not maintain him in his seysine, the tenant will have of the claim-
the land of the warrantor, if he has any, compensation atone DS
up to the value of the land which the tenant shall have


lost.


The declaration therefore of the claimant having been _ 2,
propounded against the warrantor, let the warrantor e
make answer to the declaration, and let him contest the having
right of the claimant by a duel or by a great assise if he E Lee
wishes, unless he has competent exceptions to raise, against the
which he can propound against the claimant, or unless b reae
by chance he has a warrantor or a defender who ought
to defend bim against the claimant, one or several, who
should immediately vouch with or without the help of
the court, as has been said a little above. And in the
same manner let proceedings be had (as said above) from
warrantor to warrantor up to several successively, until


there be no one further who can be vouched to warrant,


3.


Breve de .


facienda
seysina et
sic de
manu in
manum de
pluribus
sicut de
f. 888.
uno, S.
quod fiat
escam-
bium.


60 DE WARRANTIA.


fuerint de warrato in warratii, et ultimus warrantus
p defaltam vel p juditiü amiserit, ipse tenebitur escabiü
facere, et illud ide escābiū quasi de manu in manu,
et warranto in warrantü usj ad tenente, cui primó
fuit warrantizat?, et fiat talis irrotulatio. A. petiit
versus B. tantam tram in tali villa cum ptinétiis ut
jus suu, vel talis mulier ut doté suam, et hujusmodi.
Et ide B. venit in eadé curia et vocavit ad warrantü
C. qui venit et ei warratizavit et in eadé curia cora
eisdé justic. vocavit inde ad warrantü D. qui postmodü
p juditiü vel p defaltam tram illam amisit versus
pdictu A., et ideo cosideratü est q pdictus A. recuperet
seysinam suam versus pdictü B. de pdicta tra cum
ptinetiis et q B. habeat de tra D. escambium ad
valentiam, sed p mani ipsius E. et ita fieri potest de
pluribus warrantis in infinitü, et erit tale bře de
seysina facienda.


Rex vie. salute. Scias q cùm A. in curia nia &c.
peteret versus B. tantu tre &c. ut jus suu, ide B.
venit in eade curia nia coram justic. niis, et vocavit
inde ad warrantü C. & qui venit in eade curia et
iram illam eidé B. warrantizavit, et vocavit inde ad
warrantü D. qui postea in eade curia ei warrantizavit,
& postea terram illam p defaltam vel p juditium
amisit, ut pdietü est. Et ideo tibi peipimus q eide
A. de fidicta terra cum pertinentiis sine dilatione
plenariam seysinam habere facias, & de terra ipsius
D. in balliva tua eidé C. escambiū habere facias ad
valentiam fdictw terre sine dilatione, et illud idem
escambium p manus ipsius C. sine dilatione habere
facias ĵdicto B. Teste &c. vel si plures sint ibi war-


OF WARRANTY. 61


and whereupon, when several have been vouched from war-
rantor to warrantor, and the last warrantor has lost by
default or by a judgment, he shall be bound to make com-
pensation, and to pass that compensation as it were from
hand to hand and from warrantor to warrantor down to
the tenant, to whom the warranty was first given, and let
an enrolment be made in this manner: A. claims against
B. so much land in such a vill with its appurtenances as
his right, or such a woman as her dower, and such like..
and the said B. appeared in the said court and vouched
C. to warrant, who came and warranted to him and in
the said court before the said justiciaries vouched there-
upon D. to warrant, who afterwards by a judgment or
by default lost that land against the aforesaid A., and
thereupon it was resolved that the aforesaid A. should
recover his seysine against the aforesaid B. of the afore-
said land with its appurtenances, and that B. should have
of the land of D. compensation up to the value, but by
the hand of the said E.: and so it may be done with
several warrantors to infinity, and the writ for giving
seysine shall be of this kind.


The king to the viscount greeting. Know that, when a.
A. in our court, &c. has claimed against B. so much land, Born
&c. as his right, the said B. came into our said court sine, and
before our justiciaries and vouched C. to warrant there- $° fom
on, who came into the said court and warranted that hand from
land to the said B., and vouched thereon D. to warrant, y onc.
who afterwards in our said court warranted the laud to to wit, that
him, and afterwards he lost that land through default or Nur
through a judgment as above said. And accordingly we be made.

de : f. 388.
enjoin you that you cause the said A. to have plenary
seysine without delay of the said land with its appur-
tenances, and you cause the said C. to have compensation
from the land of the said D. in your bailiwick, and you
cause the aforesaid B. to have that same compensation
through the hands of the said C. without delay. Wit-


ness, &e. Or if there be more warrantors than two there


4,
Si warran-
tus nihil
habeat,
unde facere
possit es-
cambium,"


62 DE WARRANTIA.


ranti vocati qm duo, ut si dieitur, À. petit versus B.
tantam terram &c. et ide B. venit & vocavit inde ad
warrantum C. & qui ei warrantizat & qui inde vocat
ad warrantum D. & qui ei warrantizat & vocat ad
warrantu E. et qui ipsi wárrantizat, & cùm ipsu D.
feoffatü suum et tenente suum defendere non possit
& per juditiü amiserit vel per defaltam, idem A.
recuperet versus pdietum B. et D. faciet escambium de
terra sua eidem B. ad valentiam, & illud idem escam-
bium fiet predicto A. quasi per manum ipsius D. nulla
faeta mentione de ipso C. nisi tantum de ultimo
warranto, scilicet de E. & de D. suo tenente, chm
idem C. de suo nihil attribuit, & ideo dieatur sie in
brevi de seysina facienda, de terra ipsius E. in balliva
tua eidem B. escambium ad valentiam pdictz terre
sine dilatione habere facias, & illud ide escambiü sine
dilatione habere facias eide B. Et eodem modo fiat
si plures vocentur successive, usq ad x. vel amplius
in infinitü. Sed quid erit si E. ultimus warrantus,
qui in se defensione suscepit et amisit, nihil habeat
unde facere possit escambit, & D. habet ad sufficien-
tiam qui warrantizavit C. & omnes alii usque ad B.
qui warrantum vocavit, & iniquum esset q B. esset
sine escambio? zequum esset (ut videtur) q de terra
ipsius D. fieret escambium ipsi B. & quód D. expecta-
ret tempora meliora versus ipsum E. & tune dici
posset in brevi de seysina.


Et quia idem E. nihil habet unde escambiu facere
possit ipsi D. ideo de terris ipsius D. in balliva tua
eide C. escambium ad valentiam prædictæ terre, sine
dilatione habere facias, donec idem E. aliquid habeat


OF WARRANTY. 63


vouched, as if it be said, A. claims against B. so much
land &e., and the said B. came and vouched to warrant
thereon C., who warranted it to him, and thereupon
vouched D. to warrant,and who warranted it to him
and thereupon vouched E. to warrant, and who war-
ranted it to him, and who since he could not defend D.,
his feoffee and tenant, and lost it through a judgment or
through a default, let the said A. recover against the
said B. and D. shall make compensation from his land
to the said B. up to the value, and the said same com-
pensation shall be made to the aforesaid A. as if through
the hand of the said D., no mention having been made of
the said C. except only of the last warrantor, to wit, of E.
and of D. his tenant, since the said C. contributes no-
thing of his own, and accordingly let it be stated thus in
the writ for giving seysine, cause to be made of the land
of the said E. in your bailiwick compensation to the said
B. without delay up to the value of the aforesaid land,
and cause that same compensation to be made to B.
without delay. And in the same manner let it be done,
if several are vouched successively up to ten or more to
an infinite number. But what shall happen if E. the
last warrantor, who has taken upon himself the defence
and has lost, should have nothing wherewith he can
make compensation. And D. who has warranted C. has
a sufficiency and all the others up to B. who vouched a
warrantor, and it would be inequitable that B. should
have no compensation. It would be equitable (as it
seems) that of the land of the said D. compensation
should be made to the said B., and that D. should ex-
pect better times against the said E., and then it may be
stated in the writ of seysine:


And because the said E. has nothing wherewith he can 4.
make compensation to the said D., therefore cause with- Es sae


out delay compensation to be made to the said C. from the nothing
lands of the said D. in your bailiwick up to the value of Y? Bug


the aforesaid land, until the said E. has something from n
pensation,


64 DE WARRANTIA.


unde escambium facere potest, & illud idé escambium
sine dilatione habere facias predicto B. et sie fieri
debet de pluribus warrantis de warranto in warrantu
ab ultimo usi ad primum, & ide fiat si ultimus war-
rantus escambium facere no possit ad plenum, quód
id q defuerit suppleatur de terris aliorum qui medii
sunt de warranto in warrantum, ordine tamen obser-
vato ab ultimo usque primu.


5 Cùm aute unus à pluribus qui diversis téporibus


Cum un 1S 5 s . = F
s ities feoffati fuerint vocatus fuit ad warrantu, & cùm de-


parus fendere no posset amisit, & omnibus teneatur ad
eoiratus D . . . .
fnerit etex Escambia, si omnibus satisfacere non possit, semper


Veios melior erit conditio ipsius qui primo fuit feoffatus,
enentibus . . ~ . .
qui diver- Ut ipse, escambium suum pdeducat in parte vel in


EE toto, & alii expectent tempora meliora, et sic omnes
u E . . = eS IN .
feofati  secundū  prioritate feoffameti habebunt privilegium


fuerint, escābii, & hoc dico, si omnes simul et semel ipsü


alles erit Vocaverint ad warrantu, & de omnibus redditü sit
So tad juditia uno et eode die de warrantia, et omnes simul
escam- cùm implicitati fuerit unü warrantü vocaverint. Et
PER 4" de hac materia inveniri poterit in ultimo itinere M.
feoffatus de P. in com Suff. de Matilda q fuit uxor Mathie de
ae o ^ Thurfenne! in placito dotis, secus tamé est (ut videtur)
fuerint si diversis teporibus fuerint implacitati et diversis


implaci- = : i 1 l

(USC AM teporibus warrantus vocatus qui amiserit.

si diversis.

n 6. Sed quid si warrantus cüm warrantizaverit & ami-
um war- : SR AN :
rantusnihil 8€rit nihil habeat unde escabium facere possit, nec


habeat, — alienaverit re obligata ad  warrantiam tacite vel ex-


unde es- ` dol : : . d
cambium Presse, nec dolo fecerit quo minus habuerit, vel nihil,


faciat de non erit ppter hoe absolv i zh
; en 3
ir de pP dus omnino de escabio


! * Mathie de Thurstone,” MS. Rawl. C. 160,


d


yw Ww vn


OF WARRANTY. 65


which compensation can be made, and cause the said B.
to have that same compensation without delay, and so
it ought to be done with several warrantors from war-
rantor to warrantor, from the last up to the first, and so


let it be done, if the last warrantor cannot make full


compensation, that the deficiency may be supplied from
the lands of the others, who are intermediate, from war-
rantor to warrantor, order however having been ob-
served from the last up to the first.


But when one out of several who have been enfeoffed WE 5.
. . en one
at different times has been vouched as a warrantor, and or more of


has lost, when he could not defend, and he is bound to several
have been


all to make compensation, if he cannot satisfy all, the enfeoffed,


condition of him who was first enfeoffed wil always be V oF


better, that he should deduct in priority his compensa- tenants
tion in part or in whole, and the others should expect KoT
better times, and so all according to priority of feoff- feoffed at


TNS : different
o m j ; :
ment should have the privilege of compensation ; and uc D


this I say, if all have together and at one time vouched the condi-


‘ : tion of hi
the said person to warrant, and judgment has been Pyro Um»


rendered to ali concerning the warranty on one and the first en-
same day, and all when they have been impleaded have fof


at the same time vouched one warrantor. And on this Dur as
matter a case will be found in the last iter of Martin xe
de Pateshull in the county of Suffolk, concerning Ma- tion, if

5 : : e they should
tilda, who was the wife of Mathias de Thurfenne, in a peim-
plea of dower: it is otherwise however (as it seems) if arene
they have been impleaded at different times, and the otherwiseif


warrantor who has lost has been vouched at different ET
times.


But what if the warrantor, when he has warranted d
and lost, has nothing wherewith he can make compen- warrantor
sation, and he has not alienated the estate charged with Teu M
a warranty tacitly or expressly, nor has practised by which he
deceit how not to have it, or nothing, he ought not on ac
that account to be absolved altogether from making tion from


R 2657. E


66 DE WARRANTIA,


ejus cujus faciendo, imo q faciat escabium si quid ad eum per-
nomine rib t 1 1 h dit t it DE i t . l
vocatus  Venerit postea! de hereditate patris vel matris ve
fuerit ad alterius antecessoris, ratione cujus vocatus fuerit ad
warran P x : BC PR be eto
n warrantü, ut de term S. M. anno regis H. xiii. incipi-


ente xiv. in com Hertf, de B. que fuit uxor R.
Russel?


..7. . ke q ili qui primo feoffati fuerunt progativam
Papen habent, ppter prioritate feoffaméti, cum ille qui feoffa-


tempore — vit tépore feoffamenti satis habuit, unde posset esca-
feoffationis , . £ E li zug dosi ES
satis ba: blam facere. t q lieet illud postmodu alenaret, re
m res quasi tacite obligata relinquit, ad quencunqd postmodu
illa quam e OM ne ps e

tuncha- pervenerit: inveniri poterit in rotulo de termi S. M.
Dus al regis H. ix. incipiéte x. in cof Kanc. de Rosia
velex- que fuit uxor Roberti de Goldingford, ubi qusedam
pense mulier petiit dotem versus quenda & uxore suam, &
faeta per


modum ipsi vocaverint ad warrantü quenda qui fuit infra
donations. etatem, & que respondit q nihil habuit de hzreditate
patris ratione cujus vocata fuit ad warrantü, de quo


posset warrantizare & escabium facere, responsum fuit


ex adverso q tempore quo ipsi feoffati fuerüt, habuit
eorum feoffator, scilicet. vir mulieris petentis, quandam
terram in manu sua que plené sufficere posset ad
warrantiam & escambium, et postea illam dedit cuidam
qui præsens fuit & hoc cognovit, & unde consideratum
fuit. quód mulier petens recuperaret de terra ipsius,
qui ultimo feoffatus fuit, escambium suum, & q post?
feoffati tenerent in pace.


! * postmodum pervenerit," MS. 3 * post," omitted MS. Rawl. C.
Rawl. C. 160. 160.


? « Russell,” MS. id. -


Tu


I RW TTI LL


OF WARRANTY. 67


compensation, on the contrary he shall make compensa- the inheri-
tion if any estate shall have come to him from the in- f2nce *
heritance of his father or of his mother or of any other whose
ancestor in regard of whom he has been vouched to pareke
warrant, as in Michaelmas term in the thirteenth and vouched to
fourteenth years of the reign of king Henry in the SA
county of Hertford, concerning B. who was the wife of


R. Russel,


Likewise that those who have been first enfeoffed p
have a prerogative claim on account of the priority of Eb e
their enfeoffment, when he who enfeoffed had at the fed, had
time of the enfeoffment sufficient, wherefrom he might ws m
make compensation. And that although he has subse- feoffment,
quently alienated it, he leaves the estate as it were m mut
tacitly charged, to whomsoever it may subsequently have EAE
come; a case may be found in the roll of Michaelmas is tacitly’
term in the ninth and tenth years of king Henry in FE
the county of Kent, concerning Rosia who was the made
wife of Robert de Goldingford, where a certain woman LI
claimed dower against a certain man and his wife, of dona-
and they vouched as a warrantor a certain person who "°™
was under age, and who answered that she had nothing
from the inheritance of her father by reason whereof
she had been ealled to warrant, with which she could
warrant and make compensation, ib was answered on
the opposite side at what time the said persons were
enfeoffed, their feoffor, to wit, the husband of the woman
claiming, had a certain land in his hand, which would
fully suffice to warrant and to compensate, and after-
wards he gave it to a certain person who was present
and acknowledged it, and thereupon it was resolved that
the woman claiming could recover her own compensa-
tion from the land of him who was last enfeoffed, and
that those subsequently enfeoffed should keep their land
in peace.

E 2


68 DE WARRANTIA.


Cap. VIII.


i Dictum est supra quid juris, cùm warratus gratis
Ud warratizaverit. Nic autem dicendt, si de warrantia
quod war- cotendat, & dicat q warrantizare no debeat, & quo


ranae casu oportet eum qui warrantü vocavit rationé osten-


beat, quo dere quare vocatus warrantizare debeat, cum à vocato
casu opor- Si ie y op : e :
tet quod. fuerit sup hoe requisitus. Et unde videndü qualiter


quieum warratus teneatur ad warrantizandü, & quibus modis,
vocavit


rationem & quando no. Et sciendi q ad omnes chartas de


M coca simplici donatione cópetit tenenti warrantizatio, et
quare war-


rantizare tenentur donatores & eorum hæredes ad warrantiā, si


rid hora cógrua, & modo debito, cum psecutione copetenti,

contendere vocati fuerint ad  warrantü, nisi forte in charta de

vent feoffaméto cotrariü exprimatur, scilicet q donator ad
warrantiam no teneatur nec ad escambium, si vero
charta fuerit de confirmatione, nō sequitur inde war-
rantizatio nisi in se cotineat donatione. Ut si dicatur,
do & confirmo tali & hsredibus suis vel cuicung dare,
assignare, vedere, vel legare voluerit, tanta terrà &c.
et sive procedat charta sive non de donatione, talis
charta sufficit ad warrantiam.

2, Sufficit etiam charta de confirmatione quandod per
Ra se, quandoq cum charta pcedente ubi ab initio invalida
oe fuit donatio, eo q donatorius seysinà rei donate non

,


nois habuit in vita donatoris, quia ex charta de confirma-


um tione subsequente facta ab hserede ciun ei jus descen-
facit pri- : E . . . ~ de onc
mam ehar. derit, covalescit prima charta de donatione d ab initio


tam con- fuit invalida, et sic queelibet illarü juvat aliam. Item
valescere,


IU valet charta quoad warrantiam, si specialiter faciat


OF WARRANTY. 69


CHAPTER VIII.


It has been stated above what the right is when 1


the warran o i P Ifthe war-
tor has gratuitously warranted. Now we Eid


must treat the case if the warrantor disputes about the that he


warranty, and says that he ought not to warrant, and o


in which case it is incumbent that he who has vouched in which
a warrantor should show reason why the vouchee ought EAT


to warrant, when he has been required so to do by the for him

voucher. And hence we must see in what manner the M

warrantor is bound to warrant and by what means, and him to
DEA show rea-

when not. And it is to be known that upon all son why

charters of simple donation the tenant is entitled to a pees

warranty, and the donors and their heirs are bound to if the war-

a warranty, if they have been vouched to warrant ata mer,

suitable hour and in due manner with a suitable request, dispute.

unless by chance the contrary is expressed in the charter

of feoffment, to wit, that the donor is not bound to war-

rant nor to make compensation, but if it be a charter of

confirmation a warranty does not follow thereupon,

unless it contains in itself a donation. As if it be said,

I give and confirm to so-and so and his heirs, or to

whomsoever he may wish to give, or assign, or sell, or

bequeath, so much land, Ge. and whether or not the


charter proceeds to a donation, such a charter suffices
for a warranty.


For a charter of confirmation suffices sometimes by 2.
itself, sometimes coupled with a preceding charter, „i 359.


where the donation was from the beginning invalid, firmation
A Ns c by an heir,
inasmuch as the donatory had not seysine of the thing hen the
given in the lifetime of the donor, because from the right has
. - descended
subsequent charter of confirmation made by the heir,, P


when the right has descended, the first charter of causes the
first char-


donation, which was from the commencement invalid, ter to


becomes valid, and so each of them assists the other. pecan
: valid,


Likewise the charter is valid as regards a warranty, if which was


initio fuit
invalida.


3.
Finis
faetus.


D.
Homa-
gium
factum
capitali
domino
de con-
cessione
medii.


70 DE WARRANTIA.


mentioné de warrantia, ut si dicatur: Et ego et
haeredes mei warrantizabimus &e. Ite valet etsi no
exprimatur, dum tamé homagiü et servitiu intervenerit,
sive servitiü factü fuit donatori p mani donatorii,
sive capitali diio donatoris pro donatore p manu
donatorii.


Ité sufficit finis factus in curia dñi regis, licet
expressa warrantia, vel homagium et servitium nō
intervenerit, dum tamen costiterit p finë et cyrogra-
phum, q ille, qui tenet, tenere debeat de eo qui vocatur
ad warrantum.


Est etiam casus specialis, ubi quis tenetur ad war-
rantiam ét excambiū, quāvis alius in seysina fuerit
de homagio et servitio tenentis sui, sieut capitalis
dominus donatoris, ubi vz, tenens cum domino suo
homagium suum obtulerit et servitit, et dominus suus
ea recusaverit sine justa causa, poterit tenes impune
ad capitale düum donatoris ire, et facere ei homagiü
et servitium p defectu dii sui, et idem dominus suus
nihilominüs tenebitur ei ad warrantiam.


Ite tenetur dominus ad warrantiam, ratione homagii
p se, licet nullum servitiü de tenente suo receperit;
ut cûm quis districtus fuerit p servitio q dio capitali
debetur, p defectu diti sui qui medius est, et totum
servitium percipit, et. pprie burse infundit, et idem
tenentem suum erga suum feoffatorem non acquietat,
p defectu domini sui cum ptestatione pborum hominum
poterit domino capitali de servitio suo acapitare et se
attornare! p defectu ipsius dñi sui, & dominus suus
nihilominus tenebitur ad warrantiam.


1 * et se attornare," omitted MS. Rawl, C. 160.


OF WARRANTY. (1


it specially makes mention of a warranty, as if it be from the
said: And I and my heirs will warrant, &c. Likewise MORE
itis valid even if it be not expressed, provided homage

and service have intervened, or if service has been made

to the donor by the hand of the donatory, or to the

chief lord of the donor instead of the donor by the hand

of the donatory. ;


Likewise a fine made in the court of the lord the | 3.
king, although an express warranty or homage and Midi
service has not intervened, provided however that it has
been established by a fine and a chirograph, that he,
who holds, ought to hold from him who is vouched to
warrant.


There is also a special case, where one is bound to à 4.
warranty and to make compensation, although another side
person has been in seysine of the homage and service of
his tenant, as the chief lord of the donor, where, to wit,
the tenant has offered to his lord his homage and
service, and his lord has refused them without just
eause, the tenant will be able with impunity to go to
the chief lord of the donor, and to do him homage and
service on account of the default of his own lord, and
his said lord will nevertheless be bound to him for a
warranty.


Likewise a lord is bound to warrant by reason of _ 5.
homage to himself, although he has received no service Sie :
from his tenant; as when a person has been distrained chief lord
for a service, which is due to a chief lord, on account of ee F
the default of his lord who is intermediate, and who the inter-
receives the whole service and pours it into his own purse, ar nii
and does not discharge his tenant towards his feoffor, on
account of the default of his lord, having called honest
men to witness, he may pay a relief to the chief lord
for his service, and may attourn himself to him on
aecount of the default of his own lord, and his own


lord shall notwithstanding be bound to a warranty.


AD DE WARRANTIA.


Car. IX.

» Post essonia & dilationes, de quibus satis dictum
Tire Sse est supra, comparentibus in juditio tam petente qm
warranti- tenente, qm warranto, & vicecomi miserit breve de
zaverit, n8 . ; S E
suspendi- Sümmonitione warranti, suspenditur placitum princi-


tur prose- pale, donec placitum de warrantia terminetur, & audito
cutio con- . . . :
tra tenen. brevi excipere poterit warrantus contra breve de war-


f.389 b. rantia, si forte ibi fuerit error in nominibus persona-


Ea rum, vel villarum, ad breve de warrantia prosternendu,
de war- et secundü q alias pleniüs dicitur de erroribus.


rantia


terminetur.
9; Visum autem petere non potest, quia satis sufficit
Non tene- p visu id quod dicitur, ad warrantizandü tantam terra


rantus ad qm talis petit, sed statim inquirat warrantus à tenente,
majus ex- SM M» : eae
cambium, ®2 aliquid habeat ppter quod teneatur ad warratiam,


quamad chartam, vel aliud: & si chartas, vel instrumétum
euh See habeat, illud statim ostendat, instructus enim venire
euo. debet ad pbanda intétionem sua, no est enim ei
} tempus indulgendü nisi ex causa, ut si instruméta
ita deposita sint q copiam inde habere non possit,
nisi ad tépus, & quo casu dabitur ei dilatio legitima
ad exhibendü & pferendum instruméta. Si- autem
dieat q instrumenta habuit, sed tamen casu deperdita
sunt vel aliud simile, nihil aliud video, nisi quód
pbet casum. Cùm aute tenens instrumenta exhibuerit,
& ostendat rationem quare vocatus ad warratum war-
rantizare debeat, (secundum quod superius dictum est
in pte,) respodeat vocatus, et doceat quare warrantizare

non debeat.


d 3: Inprimis si ipse rex vocetur ad warrantum, secundü
ÐI Tex = ES =
vocetur aq SUUM modum, et de puro feoffaméto antecessorü suorü,


OF WARRANTY. ré


CHAPTER IX.


After essoins and delays, concerning which we have 1.
said enough above, upon the claimant as well as the SUN RA
tenant appearing in judgment, as well as the warrantor, has war-
after the viscount has sent a writ for summoning the SN
warrantor, the principal plea is suspended, until the plea against the
concerning the warranty is terminated, and upon the Bd
writ having been read in court the warrantor may except until the
against the writ concerning the warranty, if by chance T
there has been there an error in the names of the persons the war-
or of the vills, in order to overthrow the writ concerning decem
the warranty, and according to what is said elsewhere f.389 b.


more fully concerning errors.


But he cannot claim a view, because it suffices for a 2.
view what is said “to warrant so much land which so- d ORE
* and-so claims,’ but let the warrantor forth with inquire shall not
from the tenant, whether he has anything to show "s Pus
wherefore he should warrant, a charter or anything else: compensa-

, me ^ ,, tion than
and if he has a charter or instrument, let him show it to that to
at once, for he ought to come prepared to prove his e E
declaration, for he is not to he indulged with time vouchea —
except for cause shown, if the instruments are so de- $° Warrant.
posited that he cannot have the use of them except at
a certain time, and in which case there shall be allowed
to him a legitimate delay to exhibit and to produce the
instruments. But if he should say that he has had instru-
ments, but by accident they have been lost or something
similar, I see no other course but that he should prove
the accident. But when the tenant has exhibited the
instruments, and shown reason wherefore the person
vouched to warrant ought to warrant (according to
what has been partly stated above) let the vouchee
answer and show why he should not warrant.

In the first piace, if the king himself should be vouched T pe
to warrant according to his own. manner and concerning i, FRE


warrantum
de dono
anteces-
soris, quis
sit ante-
cessorregis
videndum.
Britton, l.
iii. e. xi.
Sct aCe
YORE SS)


e


4.
Si privata
persona
vocetur ad
warrantum
ratione
chartae
sue, vel
anteces-
sorum
suorum.


74 DE WARRANTIA.

videndum erit qui sunt antecessores sui. Non enim
tenetur warrantizare donatione & feoffamenta regum
qui regnaverunt ante coquestü, ipse enim rex no est
eorum hæres, et perinde ad warrantia non tenetur,
nisi de facto suo, si se ad warrantiam obligaverit per
confirmationé. Si aute de puro feoffamento suo, vel
antecessorum suorum, warrantizare tenetur, nisi con-
ditio vel modus aliud inducat, sed semper erit sua
voluntas expectanda, cùm non possit ei necessitas
imponi Si aute de puro feoffamento antecessorum
suorum, et de sua pura confirmatione, tunc warranti-
zare tenetur, Si auté pura sit donatio, & cofirmatio
coditionalis, vel modalis ut si dicatur, secundü q
charta talis regis antecessoris nostri rationabilis testa-
tur, tunc prajudiciale erit istud. Ideo illud imprimis
debet inquirere, utrum donatio prima rationabiliter
facta sit vel non, et secundum hoc terminare nego-
tium: & cùm quis dim regem ita warrantum nomina-
verit, solet hoc aliquando cum ptestatione fieri, q si
hoe non sufficeret, tenens diceret aliud, quód quidem
modo recessit ab aula, quia vocatio illa aliquado frivola
inventa fuit et quasi nulla.


Si autem privata persona vocetur ad warrantum
ratione chartze suse vel antecessorü suorum, contra
chartas poterit multipliciter responderi Inprimis q
charta viciosa est in se, vel ppter rasuram in loco
suspecto habitam, vel ppter signum falsum quod appo-
situm est, quorum unum pbari potest per aspectū, &
aliud per collationem signorum. Item q si charta
sufficiens sit & bona, excipi poterit contra illam q
valere non debeat, quia confecta fuit dum donator


OF WARRANTY. 75


an absolute feoffment of his ancestors, it will have to be for the
seen who are his ancestors, For he is not bound to eration,
warrant the donations and feoffments of the kings who cestor, it is
reigned before the Conquest, for the king veya is not m
their heir, and accordingly is not eoi to warrant ancestor of
except concerning his own act, if he has bound himself puni
to warrant by a confirmation. But if he be vouched
concerning an absolute feoffment of his own or of his
ancestors, he is bound to warrant, unless a condition or

a mode induces otherwise, but his pleasure will always

have to be awaited, since necessity cannot be imposed

upon him. But if concerning a pure feoffment of his
ancestors and a pure confirmation of his own, then he is

bound to warrant. But if the donation be pure and the
confirmation conditional or modal, as if it be said, ac-
cording to what a reasonable charter of such a king our
ancestor testifies, then that will be prejudicial. Accord-

ingly he ought in the first place to inquire whether the

first donation has been reasonably made or not, and
according to this to determine the business, and when

one has thus named the king as a warrantor, this is
sometimes accustomed to be done with a protestation,

but if it should not suffice, the tenant would say another

thing, that he has lately withdrawn from the Hall,
because that vouching has sometimes been found to be
frivolous and as it were null.


But if a private person has been vouched to warrant: 4.
by reason of his own charter or that of his ancestors, a um
multifarious reply may be made against the charters. son be
In the first place that the charter is defective in itself, ur to
either on account of an erasure having been made in a by reason

of his own
suspicious place, or on account of a Falso signature which charter or
has been applied to it, whereof one may i proved by ed ig
the aspect of it, and the other by a comparison of signa- `
tures. Likewise that if the charter be sufficient and
genuine, it may be objected to it that it ought not to


avail because it was made when the donor was not in


Infra, ch.
15229.


9.
In quibus
casibus
non tene-
tur war-
rantizare.


f. 330.


6.
Exceptio
quod dona-
tor nun-
quam fuit
in seysina.


76 : DE WARRANTIA.


non fuit compos sui, nec bone memorize, q quidem
pbari potest per testes in charta nominatos, et per
patriam, & qualiter hoe pbari debeat, dicetur infra
plenius in titulo de warrantia charte.


Item excipere poterit warrantus contra tenente qui
vocávit, q licet charta de feoffaméto sufficies sit in se,
tamen dont illud est insufficiés: quia donatorius qui
charta pfert, vel ejus antecessor, cui donü fieri debuit,
niigm seysina habuerit de tra data in vita donatoris,
nisi post mortem ejus per intrusionem, & ppter q ille
qui vocatus est ad warrantü, intendit petere illa in
dominico de seysina antecessoris sui qui inde obiit
seysitus ut de feodo.


Ite excipere poterit, q antecessor, qui donum fecisse
debuit, nunqm in seysina fuit de tali terra, q dona-
tione facere potuit. Poterit quidem charta esse sufii-
cies, qua no est nisi vestimentü donationis, et dont
illud insufficiens p defectu seysine, & e cotra, dont
sufficiens, & charta vitiosa: & aliquado utriqg vitiosu
et insuffieies, & sic utrum nullum. Et unde si charta
de donatione pferatur, oportet q warrantus utrum
defendat, scilicet charta et donü, et ex hoc habet
tenes necesse pbare utrüd ppter copulativa cojunctione
(&) interjecta: unde si in pbatione unius defecerit,
perinde haberi debet ac si in pbatione utrius defe-
cerit, no enim sufficit probare chartà sufficiente, si
dont sit insufficiens. Ité quicunq dont cognoverit,
warrantizare tenetur, quavis ostendere possit charta
esse vitiosam vel falsa, quia donü valere possit, etiam
si charta no intervenerit, ut de itinere W. de Ralegh


OF WARRANTY, V


possession of his faculties, or not of good memory, which
may be proved by the witnesses named in the charter,
and by the country ; and in what manner this ought to
be proved, will be said below more fully in the title
concerning the warranty of a charter.


Likewise the warrantor may except against the tenant 5.
who has vouched him, that although the charter ofl» "ht.
feoffment bo sufficient in itself, nevertheless the gift is not bound
insufficient, because the donatory who produces the ‘° Varant-
charter, or his ancestor, to whom the gift ought to have
been made, never had seysine of the land given in the
lifetime of the donor, except after his death by intrusion,  f.290.
and by reason whereof he who has been vouched to
warrant, intends to claim it as his domain from the sey-


sine of his ancestor, who died seysed of it as of fee.


Likewise he may except that the ancestor, who ought |^ 6.
to have made the donation, never was in seysine of so id
much land, so that he could make a donation of it. The the donor
charter may indeed be sufficient, which is nothing more ieee des
than the vesture of the donation, and the donation itself
may be insufficient from default of seysine, and on the
contrary, the donation may be sufficient and the charter
faulty, and sometimes both of them faulty and insufficient,
and so both of them null And hence if a charter of
donation be produced, it is incumbent that the warrantor
defend both, to wit, the charter and the donation, and
from this the tenant is under the necessity to prove
both on account of the copulative conjunction (“and ”)
being interposed, whence if he fail in the proof of one,
it ought to be the same asif he had failed in the proof
of both, for it is not sufficient to prove the charter suffi-
cient, if the donation be insufficient. Likewise whoever
has acknowledged the donation is bound to warrant,
although he may show that the charter is faulty or
false, because the donation may be valid, even if à
charter has not intervened, as in the iter of William de


(fe
Quod non
est hæres,
nec suus
feoffatus.


78 DE WARRANTIA.


in com Buck., de Alicia de Rupella. Ité etsi donatio
ab initio invalida fuerit ppter no seysina, poterit
postmodü cdvalescere ex facto heredis: ut si cùm
donatorius quocū modo in seysina fuerit, cùm jus
ad heeredé descéderet, recognoscat heres charta patris
sui & dont, et homagiu donatorii ceperit, vel dont
patris cofirmaverit, terra illà petere non poterit in
dominico, sed illà warratizare tenetur cotra alios: ut
de itinere M. de P. & sociorum suorü in diversis com
post guerram, de loquelis d remanserunt ad judiciu, si
Wilhelm de Grebale.


Excipere etia poterit vocatus ad  warrantü cotra
tenente qui vocavit, q ipse tenens no est feoffatus
suus, nec heres ejus qm feoffavit, & cüm charta dona-
tionis métioné no faciat nisi tantu de suo feoffato, et
ejus heredib?: et unde si su? feoffat? vel ej? hæres
alios feoffaverit, ipse talib? imediate warrantizare no
tenetur, eu charta de talib? no faciat métioné: ut de
term P. anno regis Henr nono in com Midd, de quada
Juliana d petiit dote versus quenda Henr, qui vocavit
inde ad warrati quenda W. fihu Herewardi, & qui
respondit q warrantizare no debuit, quia nec ipse nec
pater suus eundé Henricū feoffaverint, sed cognovit q
pater suus feoffavit qndam Thoma, & ipse Thomas
feoffavit ipsum Henricu, et desicut ipse Héricus no
fuit heres ipsius Thome (quavis ab eo feoffatus) nec
ipse Wilhelm fuit in seysina de homagio & servitio
ipsius Hérici, nec ipse Héerieus chartà habuit de ipso
Wilhelm, nec aliud per q ei warrantizare deberet, ideo


OF WARRANTY, 79


Ralegh in the county of Bucks, concerning Alicia de
Rupella. Likewise although the donation may have
been invalid from the beginning on account of a want of
seysine, it may subsequently have been made valid by
the act of the heir, as if when the donatory has been in
seysine howsoever, when the right has descended to the
heir, the heir has acknowledged the charter of his father
and the gift, and has accepted homage from the dona-
tory, or has confirmed the gift of his father, he cannot
claim that land in domain, but he is bound to warrant
it against others, as in the iter of Martin de Pateshull
and his associates in the different counties after the war,
‘concerning the causes which remained for judgment, if
Wilhelmus de Grembale.


The person vouched to warrant may also except
against the tenant, who has vouched him, that the
tenant is not his feoffee, nor the heir of him whom he
has enfeoffed, and since the charter of donation does
not make mention of any one but his feoffee and his
heirs: and hence if his feoffee or his heir has enfeoffed
others, he is not bound to warrant such persons imme-
diately, since the charter does not make mention of
them, as in Easter term in the ninth year of the reign
of king Henry in the county of Middlesex, concerning a
certain Juliana who claimed dower against a certain
Henry, who vouched thereupon to warrant a certain
William the son of Hereward, and who answered that
he ought not to warrant, because neither he nor his
father had enfeoffed the said Henry, but he acknow-
ledged that his father had enfeoffed a certain Thomas,
and the said Thomas had enfeoffed the said Henry, and
since the said Henry was not the heir of the said Thomas,
(although enfeoffed by him,) and the said William was
not in seysine of the homage and service of the said
Henry, and the said Henry had not a charter from the
said William nor anything else; wherefore he ought to


ile
That he is
not the
heir, nor
his feoffee.


8.
Non tene-
tur aliis
heredibus
warranti-
zare quam
illis, qui
sunt in
charta
compre-
hensi se-
cundum
modum
donationis,


97
Ubi quis
remisit et
quietum
clamavit.


f. 390 b.


10.
Si salvo
jure cujus
libet.


n1
Si non
tenuerit


80 |J. DE WARRANTIA.


cosideratum fuit quód Wilhelmus quietus esset de
warrantia.


Item ad warrantiam non tenetur quis aliis hsredi-
bus quàm illis qui in charta comprehensi sunt per
modum. donationis, ut si cui facta fuerit donatio,
scilicet sibi & hæredibus suis, quos de carne sua &
uxore desponsata sibi procreatos haberet, vel de certa
uxore tali.


Item non tenetur quis ad warrantiam ratione ali-
cujus quiet? clamantize: ut si quis terram petat versus
aliquem ut jus suum, et postea illam remiserit &
quietum clamaverit, ex hoc autem vocare non poterit
ad warrantum illum, à quo jus fuerit remissum: ut
de itinef abbatis de Rading et M. de P. in com Gloc.
anno regis H. quinto, de Radulpho Chandos.


Ite non tenetur ad warrantiam quis ratione homagii
q ab aliquo ceperit salvo jure cujuslibet: ut si dubi-
tetur an alius sit hæres, nec sit alius heres appares,
ut si dicatur: capio homagium vestrum salvo jure
cujuslibet. Vel sie: Capio homagiu vestru de jure
vestro, cüm quasdam tras de pluribus tris teneat, de
quibus ali jus habet, & quas ipse warrantizare no
debeat. Si aute nullü sciat esse herede, vel dubitet
an sit alius heeres, quia bastardus forte se gerat p
heerede, & se domino offert sicut hæres, vel si dominus
petat versus tenenté sicut eschaetam suam, & per
cosequens nulla esse heeredé.


Ité non tenetur hæres alicui, qui cognovit in curia,
q no tenuit tenementü de quo vocat warrantü nisi ad


OF WARRANTY. 81


warrant him, therefore it was resolved that the said
William should be acquitted of the warranty.


8.
He is not
. E - : bound to
Likew ise a person is not bound to a warranty to other warrant to
heirs than to those who are comprised in the charter sther heirs,
: à : than t
through the mode of the donation, as if the donation has those who
been made to any one, to wit, to himself and to the heirs are com-
h h b fr i . prised in
whom he may have begotten from his own flesh and his the charter
espoused wife, or from a certain wife. marge
mode of
the dona-
Likewise a person is not bound to a warranty by "^"
reason of any quit-claim: as if a person claims land Where a
TW ARET ; va. person has
against any one as his right, and subsequently has T6* relented
leased it and quit-claimed, he cannot thereupon call him and quit-
to warrant, by whom the right has been released, as in ee
the iter of the abbot of Reading and Martin de Pates-
hulle in the county of Gloucester in the fifth year of f.390 b.


king Henry, concerning Randolph Chandos.


Likewise a person is not bound to a warranty by _| 10.

: If saving

reason of homage, which he has accepted from any per- the right

son, saving the right of such an one : as if it be doubted of any one.

whether another person be the heir, and there is no

other heir apparent, as if it should be said: I accept

your homage, saving the right of such an one; or thus:

I aecept your homage of your right, when he holds

certain lands of several lands, concerning which others

‘have a right, and which he himself ought not to warrant.

But if he does not know that there is any heir, and he

should doubt whether another person be the heir, be-

cause a, bastard perhaps holds himself out to be the heir,

and presents himself to the lord, as if he were the heir,

orif the lord claims against the tenant as it were his


escheat, and consequently that there is no heir.


Likewise the heir is not bound to any one, who has Wut
e nas


acknowledged in court that he has not held the tenement, not hela
R 2657. F


82 DE WARRANTIA.


nisiad  vitā antecessoris ejus Gm nune vocat ad warrantu.


EAS It8 nó tenetur quis ad warrantiam p modü donationis


homines contra certas psonas in donatione exceptas, ut si


de dicatur: Ego & heredes mei warrantizabimus contra
1 B AN = = a coi
omnes gétes, pterquàm cotra tale & tale: ut de itinere
abbatis de Radinge & M. de P. in com Warf, assisa
mortis antecessoris, si Wilhelmus Trussell.
12. Ité no tenetur quis ad warrantiam, quamvis homa-


mee giü intervenerit, p modi donationis ex cosensu dona-
tione con- torii, ub si quis donationé fecerit aliqui p homagio &
pee ee servitio, & dicatur in charta p se & heredibus suis,
non tenea- q si donatoriü contingat implacitari q nec ipse nec
Ss Tie heeredes sui ad excambium teneantur nec ad warrantia,
tiam, et sicut de: Wilhelmo de Bruere in multis chartis suis,
quod cou & sic vincit summa! conventio legem, sicut in multis
cit legem. aliis locis & casibus supradictis. Sed quid si, cùm
donatorius implacitatus fuerit ppter homagit, (q pbari
poterit,) feoffatorem suum vocaverit ad warrantum, &
cùm ipse feoffator excepit q ad warrantiam no teneatur
per modum donationis, donatorius noluerit chartam
exhibere, cum faciat cótra ipsum: queeritur an ad hoc
copelli possit? & si copellatur, respondeat q chartam
non habuerit: & si habuerit, q illam casu amisit: sic
videtur q deficiat pbatio, licet jus non deficiat, nisi
sit qui dieat hoc p patriam esse dirimedum. Consulte
igitur faceret donator, si per scriptum aliq de tali


conventione in initio donationis sibi cautius pspiceret.


! * summa,” omitted, MS. Rawl. C. 160.


OF WARRANTY, 83


for which he vouches a warrantor, except for the life of except for
the predecessor of him, whom he now vouches to war- aay
rant. Likewise a person is not bound to a warranty by cM
the mode of the donation against certain persons ex- 9*cePted.
cepted in the donation, as if it should be said, I and my

heirs will warrant against all people, except against so-

and-so, as in the iter of the abbot of Reading and

Martin de Pateshull in the county of Warwick, an as-

sise of mortdancester, if Wilhelmus Trussell.


Likewise a person is not bound to warrant, although 12.
homage has intervened, through the mode of the donation i eg
with the consent of the donatory, as if a person has tained in
made a donation to any one for his homage and service, DONE
and it be said in the charter for him and his heirs, but the donor
ifit should happen that the donatory should be sued, ER i
that neither he himself nor his heirs should be bound to warrant,

* 5 and that a
make compensation nor to warranty, as in the case of convention
Wilhelm de Bruere in many of his charters, and thus a eoru
convention over-rules the law, as in many other places 1
and cases above said. But what if, when the donatory
has been sued, he shall have vouched his feoffor to war-
rant on account of his homage (which can be proved),
and when the feoffor himself has excepted that he is not
bound to a warranty through the mode of donation,
the donatory should be unwilling to exhibit his charter,
since it makes against himself, it is asked if he can
be compelled to do this? and if he should be com-
pelled, he shall answer that he has not the charter,
and if he has had it, that he has lost it by accident; it
thus seems that the proof fails, although the right is not
deficient, unless there be some one who says that this
ought to be decided by the country. The donor would
thus act prudently, if he should more cautiously provide
for himself by some writing concerning such a conven-
tion at the commencement of the donation.

F 2


84 DE WARRANTIA.


13. Ite nec ad excambiü tenetur nec ad warrantiam
PRA quis ppter variationé, ut si quis semel cognoverit q
tionem, si terram non tenuerit nisi ad voluntatem talis dii sui,


tenens : . ; . . .
Beisel cone Oboe! postea dieat q in feodo, cadit ab intentione sua


noverit,  ppter variatione: ut de termino Sancti Hilarii anno
de es regni regis Henrici octavo. Et eodem modo no ad-
mentum mittitur variatio, ut si quis fuerit requisitus in placito
nisi ad `
vitam vel de pparte, an teneat pro hærede, & confiteatur quòd
ad volunta- sic, et postea dicat q inde feoffatus sit, & warrantum
ni, qui vo- vocaverit, non audietur propter variationé, cùm ista
Fo eg variatio sit contra breve, & contra intentionem petentis,
tum. cui primó consensit: sed si primó cofiteretur quód
teneret sieut feoffatus, & non heres, & sic contra
breve: & postea variaret, & confiteretur se esse hære-
dem, talis variatio admittenda esset, quia non in
pjudicium petentis, prima autem non, quia in præ-
judicium.
Aerea Item non tenetur quis ad warrantiam de injuria &
tur quis ad injusta detentione tenentis sui versus feoffatum à suo
£391. tenente. Ut si A. feoffaverit B. de aliquo tenemento,


warran- L ^ . 5 *
Hye & idem B. de eodem feoffaverit C. et C. relictis hære-


excam- dibus infra setate existentibus decedat, & B. ratione
bium de ; : : z
feoffa- CUstodiæ ceperit tenementum illud in manum suam,


mener & cùm heres ad :etatem pervenerit tulerit assisam
incumbra-


tione ten- Super ipsum B., & B. inde ad warrantu vocaverit ipsum
PUE A., idem ad warrantià non tenebitur de injuria et
juria et injusta detentione tenentis sui, quia ex hoe sequeretur
XR q si ipse hæres recuperaret tenementum suum, q idem
£391, A. teneretur B. ad escambium, et de hac materia
inveniri poterit in rotulo de term S. Hilarii, anno


regni regis Henrici decimoquarto, assisa mortis ante-


oe.


OF WARRANTY. 85


Likewise a person is not bound to make compensation 13,
nor to a warranty on account of a variation, as if a per- On ac-
son has once acknowledged that he has not held that eae ase
land except at the will of so-and-so his lord, and if he i n im
should afterwards say that he holds it in fee, he is cast GAY
from his declaration on aecount of the variation, as in pi
St. Hilary term in the eighth year of the king. And thathe has
in the same way a variation is not admitted, as if any oe ae
one has been required to answer in a suit for an appor- ment for
tionment, whether he holds as the heir, and he confesses PS He or
that he does so, and afterwards should say that he has of thelord,
been enfeoffed therewith and should have vouched a vouched
warrantor, he shall not be heard on account of the varia- to war-
tion, since that variation is against the writ and against es
the declaration of the claimant, to which in the first
place he assented ; but should he at first confess that he
held as a feoffee and not as an heir and so against the
writ,and afterwards should vary and admit himself to
be the heir, such à variation would have to be allowed,
for it is not to the prejudice of the claimant, but not the


first variation, because it is to his prejudice.


Likewise a person is not bound to a warranty for the 14.


wrong-doing and unjust detention of his tenant against a vue


feoffee of his tenant. Asif A. has enfeoffed B. with a bound to


certain tenement, and the said B. has enfeoffed C. with £. 391.
. . . . P rant
it, and C. dies having left heirs under age, and B. on the yr ig


ground of wardship has taken the tenement into his own make aes
2 ensation
hand, and when the heir has come of age he has brought for the


an assise against B., and B. has thereupon vouched the E |
said A. as a warrantor, the said A. is not bound to a prance of
warranty for the wrong-doing and unjust detention on m bar
the part of his tenant, because it would follow there- wrong-
from that, if the said heir should recover his tenement, ee
the said A. would be bound to B. to provide him com- detention.
pensation, and on this matter a case will be found in the

roll of St. Hilary’s term in the fourteenth year of the reign


of king Henry, an assise of mortdancester if Godfrey the


chat. 875 D.


56 DE WARRANTÍA.


cessoris, si Galfridus pater Gilberti, & quam iram
prior de Colum tenuit, et qui vocavit inde ad war-
rantü ndam Warinum de Monte Caviso! versus fdictum
Gilbertum, et ubi idem Warinus venit et cognovit q
domus illius prioris de Colum feoffata fuit per ante-
cessores suos de tenemento unde assisa arramata fuit,
sed decessores ipsius prioris feoffaverunt pdictum
Galfridum, de cujus morte assisa arramata fuit, et
unde ibi consideratü fuit q Warinus non tenebatur
ad warrantia ppter ineumbramentum pdecessoris ipsius
prioris. Et sic videtur q sive feoffatus medius fuit
detentor injustus sive alios inde feoffaverit et sic tene-
mentü ineübraverit, sive ipse implacitatus fuerit per
assisam, sive vocatus ad warrantum à tenente suo et
facto pprio, q feoffator suus non tenebitur ad warran-
tiam, licet teneatur contra extraneas psonas de war-
ranto in warrantum us ad plures, contra extraneas
psonas que jus habuerint in re data ante feoffamen-
tum suum, quod primum fuit et principale, & in quo
casu tenet warrantizatio ab ultimo feoffato usq ad
primu feoffatorem, et quilibet tenetur suo feoffato
warrantizare per ordine, cüm feoffati fuerint sibi et
heredibus suis. Si autem sie, sibi et heeredibus suis,
vel eui dare vel assignare voluerit, tune habebit assig-
natus vel donatorius electionem, utrum velit vocare
ad warrantum suum feoffatorem, vel feoffatoré sui
feoffatoris ppter modu prim:e donationis imediaté, et
sie cosiderare oportet utrü quis feoffatus fuerit sic vel
sic. Item esto quód A. primo feoffaverit B. et B.
relicto haerede infra szetatem moriatur, et cùm A, in
manum suam ceperit haereditatem ratione custodie,
feoffaverit C. qui inde seysitus moriatur relicto heerede


t * Monte Caniso," MS, Rawl. C. 160.


OF WARRANTY. 87


father of Gilbert, and which land the prior of Colum
held, and who vouched to warrant thereon a certain
Warinus de Monte Caviso against the aforesaid Gilbert,
and where the same Warinus came and acknowledged
that the house of the said prior of Colum had been
enfeoffed by his ancestors from the tenement whereon
the assise had been instituted, but the predecessors of
the said prior had enfeoffed the aforesaid Godfrey, upon
whose death the assise had been instituted, and where-
upon it was there resolved that Warinus was not bound
to warrant on account of the encumbrance of the pre-
decessor of the said prior. And so it seems that, whether
the intermediate feoffee has been the unjust holder (of
the tenement) or has therewith enfeoffed others and
encumbered the tenement, whether he has been im-
pleaded through means of an assise or has been vouched
to warrant by his tenant and by his own act, that his
feoffor will not be bound to a warranty, although he be
bound against outside persons from warrantor to war-
rantor as far as several, against outside persons. who
had right in the thing given before his enfeoffment,
which was the first and the principal, and in which case
the warranty binds from the last feoffee to the first
feoffor, and each person is bound to warrant to his
feoffee in order, when they have been enfeoffed for
themselves and their heirs. But if thus, to themselves
and their heirs or to whomsoever they may choose to
give or to assign it, then the assignee or donatory shall
have his election whether he wishes to call his feoffor
to warrant, or the feoffor of his feoffor, on account of the
mode of the first donation immediately, and so it is
incumbent to consider whether a person has been
enfeoffed in this or in that manner. Likewise let it be
that A. has in the first place enfeoffed B., and B., having
left an heir, dies under age, and when A. has taken into
his hand the inheritance by reason of guardianship, he
has enfeoffed C. who dies seysed thereof leaving an heir


88 DE WARRANTIA.


infra setatem, et A. eodem modo ceperit terram in
manum suam ratione custodis, et cùm uter heredum
assisam mortis antecessoris proferat super ipsum A.,
idem A. de incumbramento suo warrantum vocare non
poterit, propter factum & proprium incumbramentum
suum, sed assisa ultimi feoffati pcedet primó. super
ipsum A., & cùm recuperaverit, tunc cadit assisa primi
feoffati impetrata super ipsum A. et reincipiet super
ultimum feoffatum, ut ipse ad warrantum vocet ipsum
A.; & chm heeres primi feoffati recuperaverit versus A.,
habeat hæres ultimi feoffati ad valentiam de terra
warranti. Et q dicitur de uno feoffato erit observan-
dum in pluribus feoffatis, & eorum heredibus in
infinitum, ut si A. feoffaverit B., & B. C, & C. D, &
D. E, & E. F., sic in infinitum. Si aliquis capitaliü
dominoru us ad primi feoffatore juste sicut ex causa
donationis, vel nomine custodie, vel aliqua alia justa
f.391b. de causa: vel injusté, sicut per intrusioné vel dissey-
sina, sive tenemétum tenuerit in manu sua & inde
implacitatus fuerit, sive alios feoffaverit à latere unum
vel plures, & ipse alios unum vel plures, simul vel
suecessive, et ipse talis vocetur ad warrantü, nunquam


de facto et incumbraméto suo suum feoffatorem vocare
poterit ad warrantum,


15. Item esto q quis de pprio facto et incumbramento
PE feoffatorem suum vocaverit ad warrantum, et cùm ipse
incumbra- Warrantizaverit, et excambium fecerit, qualiter et p q
dus breve debeat excambium revocari: verbi gratia, A.
sui. feoffat B., B. vero feoffat C. amitam D.; mortua C.


D. pfert assisam versus B. capitalem dominum qui
feoffavit C., B. vocat inde ad warrantum A. A. venit
et warrantizat, D. recuperat seysinà suam versus A


*y


OF WARRANTY. 89


under age, and A.in the same manner has taken his
land into his hand by reason of guardianship, and when
each of the heirs brings an assise of mortdancester
against the said A., the said A. cannot call a warrantor
concerning his incumbrance, on account of his own act
and his own incumbrance, but the assise of the latest
feoffee shall proceed in the first place against A. himself,
and when he has recovered, then the assise of the first
feoffee sued out against the said A. falls and shall begin
again against the latest feoffee, so that he should vouch
the said A. to warrant, and when the heir of the first
feoffee has recovered against A., let the heir of the latest
feoffee have an equivalent from the land of the war-
rantor. And what is said of one feoffee will have to be
observed in several feoffees and their heirs to infinity, as
if A. has enfeoffed B., and B. C., and C. D., and D. E.,
and E F. and so on to infinity. If one of the chief
lords up to the first feoffor justly as in a cause of dona-
tion or in the name of guardianship or for some other
just cause; or unjustly, as by intrusion or by disseysine, f. 391 b.
whether he has kept the tenement in his own hand and
has been impleaded thereon, or has enfeoffed others col-
laterally, one or more, and he himself one or more,
together or successively, and the said so-and-so himself
should be vouched to warrant, he will never be able to
call his feoffor to vouch to warrant concerning his act
and encumbrance.


Likewise let it be that a person has vouched his feoffor eae A
to warrant concerning his own act and encumbrance, is not
and when he has himself warranted and made compen- ncs
sation, in what manner and by what writ ought the the encum-
compensation to be revoked ? For instance, A. enfeoffs B., eee
B. then enfeoffs C. the aunt of D. ; upon the death of C.

D. brings an assise against B. the chief lord who has
enfeoffed C., B. then vouches A. to warrant thereon, A.
comes and warrants. D. recovers his seysine against A.,


A. gives land in compensation to the said B. up to the


16.
De ex-
cambio
rehabendo,
si factum
fuerit.


f. 392.
l.
Suspendi-
tur quan-
doque war-
rantia ad


90 DE WARRANTIA.


A. facit excambiü ipsi B. ad valentiam. Ad querelam
igitur ipsius A. restituetur ei excambiu per breve q
tale erit.


Rex vicecom salutem.  Precipimus tibi q venire
facias coram nobis vel justiciariis nostris apud West-
monasterium ad terminü talé Benedict ad respondendu
Ade quare excambium cepit de tra ipsius A. ad
valentiam tante tre cum pertinentiis in tali villa,
quam D. in curia nostra coram justiciariis nostris
talibus recuperavit versus eunde B. p assisam mortis
antecessoris inde captam inter pdictum D. et eunde B.,
& unde idem B. vocavit ad warrantum dictum A.
versus pdictum D., & qui venit et ei warrantizavit
terram illam quam pater suus dederat ipsi B., sed
excambiu inde facere non debuit (ut dicit) eo q ©.
amita predicti D., de cujus morte predictus D. tulit
assisam illam, feoffata fuit de preedicta terra à pde-
cessoribus preedicti B. postquam pater predicti A.
eande terram dederat ipsi B. ut ide A. dicit. Et
habeas ibi summonitorüi nomina et hoc breve. Teste
&e. Et unde cùm idem Benedictus convictus fuerit
tale recepisse excambium, illud restituet quasi injuste
receptum. Et q ita sit, inveniri poterit de termino
S. Hilari anno regni regis Henrici decimoquinto in
com Berkshire de priore de. Bradley et Wilhelmo de
Cyfrewast.


OAR OC


Suspenditur quandoque warrantia ad tempus propter
minorem etatem, quando ppter mortem warranti, &
quandoq ppter casum fortuitum superveniente, & no


OF WARRANTY. 91


value. Upon the complaint therefore of the said A. the
compensation will be restored to him through a writ,
which will be of this character.


The king to the viscount greeting. We enjoin you
that you cause to come before us or our justiciaries at
Westminster at such a term Benedictus to answer to
Ada, wherefore he has taken compensation of the said A.
up to the value of so much land with its appurtenances
in such a vill, which D. in our court before so-and-so
our justiciaries recovered against the said B. through an
assise of mortdancester thereupon held between the
aforesaid D. and the said B., and whereof the said B.
vouched the aforesaid A. to warrant towards the afore-
said D., and who came and warranted to him that land
which his father had given to the said B., but he ought
not to have made on that account compensation (as he
says), inasmuch as C. the aunt of the aforesaid D., con-
cerning whose death the aforesaid D. brought that
assise, was enfeoffed of the aforesaid land by the pre-
decessors of the aforesaid B. after the father of the
aforesaid A. had given that land to the said B. as the
said A. says. And have there the names of the sum-
moners and this writ. Witness &c. And whereupon when
the said Benedictus had been proved to have received
such compensation, he shall restore it as unjustly
received by him. And that it is so may be seen ina
case in St. Hilary term in the fifteenth year of the
reign of king Henry in the county of Berkshire,
concerning the prior of Bradley and Wilhelmus de
Cyfrewast.


CHAPTER X.


A warranty is sometimes suspended for a time on
account of minority, and sometimes on account of


16.
Of recover-
ing land, if
it has been
given in
compen-
sation.


f. 392,


Ie
A ware


ranty is


death, and sometimes on account of a fortuitous sometimes


accident supervening, and the principal action is


suspended


tempus
propter
minorem
etatem vel
propter
mortem.


9
Fallit hoe
quandoque
propter
finem fac-
tum, vel si
antecessor
minoris
obiit seysi-
tus ut de
feodo, quia
minor re-
spondebit
ad finem.


99 DE WARRANTIA,


perimitur sed durat actio principalis, cùm adhue durat
fundamentum, scilicet placitum principale super quod
construi poterit eedificium, ut si durantibus partibus
principalibus, petente vz. et tenente, moriatur war-
rantus, Si autem aliqua partium vel ambe partes
principales moriantur, sie cadit causa principalis et
totum fundamentü, et per consequens placitum ineidens
de warrantia. Suspenditur autem warrantia ad tempus
propter minorem etatem ipsius warranti in placito
proprietatis: ut si pater vel mater, vel alius antecessor,
de aliquo tenemento obiit seysitus ut de feodo, quo
casu, ille qui minor est, sive unus sive plures, ante
plenam zetaté non respondebit, licet petere possit ali-
quando in causa proprietatis ante plenam statem
viginti et unius anni, secundum quod tenementum
fuerit socagium vel feodum militare, et cùm warrantia
propter statem suspendatur, merito debet esse in
suspenso usque ad plenam statem placitum princi-
pale.


Falht tamen istud in casibus tum propter finem
factum in curia domini regis, tum quia antecessor
minoris non obiit seysitus ut de feodo de re, de qua
vocatus est ad warrantum, in dominico nec in servitio,
sed forte ad terminum annorum vel ad vitam, vel ut
de vadio vel nomine custodi», & hujusmodi: propter
finem factum, quia esto quód A. petat versus B.
tantam terram cum pertinentiis &c. et B. vocet inde
ad warrantum C. qui nolit respodere infra etatem,
quia antecessor suus obiit inde seysitus ut de feodo.
Si B. proferat cyrographum vel finem factum in curia
domini regis inter ipsum & predictum C. vel inter
eorum antecessores, tune quamvis idem C. infra ætatem
existat, respondebit ad finem illum, quod de facili
reprobari non poterit, & pcedetur ad judicium de
warrantizatione, licet ad simplicé chartam, vel ad


OF WARRANTY. 93


not perempted, but it lasts, when the foundation fera time
still lasts, to wit, the principal plea, upon which may oe minors
be constructed a building, as if, when the principal ae
parties, to wit, the claimant and the tenant last, the death.
warrantor dies. But if any of the parties or both the
principal parties dies, the principal cause falls and the

entire foundation, and consequently the incidental plea
concerning the warranty. But a warranty is suspended

for a time on account of the minority of the warrantor
himself in a plea of property, as if a father or mother,

or other ancestor, has died seysed of a tenement as of

fee, in which case the minor, whether he be one or
several, shall not answer before he is of full age,
although he may claim sometimes in a cause of property

before the full age of twenty-one years, according as the
tenement is a socage tenement or a military fee, as

when a warranty is suspended on account of age, the
principal plea ought to be deservedly suspended until


full age.


This, however, fails in cases, as well on account of a T 2.
d ` . 1s NOW-
fine having been made in the court of the lord the king, syer fails


as because the ancestor of the minor has not died seysed sometimes
as of fee of the estate, concerning which he is vouched to ot A pak Ses
warrant in domain or in service, but by chance for NAE ve
term of years or for life, or as for a security or in the or ifthe `
name of guardianship and such like: on account of po
fine having been made, because let it be that A. claims has died
against B. so much land with its appurtenances, &c.. and mios e
B. thereupon vouches C. to warrant, who is unwilling to because a
answer, being under age, because his ancestor died my De
seysed of it as of fee. If B. produces -a chirograph or a fine.

a fine made in the court of the lord the king between

himself and the aforesaid C. or between their ancestors,

then although the said C. be under age, he shall answer

to that fine, which cannot well be repudiated, and pro-
ceedings shall be had to a judgment concerning the


warranting, although to a simple charter or to homage


94 DE WARRANTIA.


homagium, vel servitium infra ætatem non teneatur
respondere, sed in hoc casu respectum habebit respon-
dendi tam de warrantizatione versus B. gm de princi-
pali placito versus A.


3. Sed si finis & cyrographü intervenerit, ætas ipsius
amm = IINE Us B e M UR
warranti. C. nō expectabitur versus B. qui ipsum vocavit a
zaverit warrantü ppter fine illü, quin statim warrantizet, no
eus tata ætate s ia ad fine factü debit
finem, non expectata state sua, quia ad fine factu respondebi
UN quilibet minor, etsi non esset nisi unius anni, et cüm
ebD1 ~ . . . . . .
petentiante C. sic warrantizaverit ipsi B. expectabitur ætas sua
etatem. versus ipsum A. qui petit de placito principali, &

sic videtur prima facie q in uno et eode placito
expectatur ætas & no expectatur, q quide verü est,
sed tamen secundum diversos respectus, cùm hic sint
duo placita, unum vz. principale, q est inter ipsum
A. & B, & alud incidens, q est inter B. et C. de


warrantia.


ale x Ite ci minor no teneatur de aliquo respodere, de
1detur . ee .
quod tene- QUO pater vel mater vel alius antecessor obiit seysitus


atur ae ut de feodo in dominico vel in servitio, ante plenam

spondere DN oe K h

de qui. setate, pterquàm ad finem factum (ut predictum est),
E


bus ante- videtur à contrario sensu quód respondere debeat tam
cessor non


obiit seysi- Ad warrantiam, quàm ad principale placitum, de omni-


tus ut de | : sis zm 2
feodo, si bus de quibus non obiit seysitus ut de feodo nec in


vice versa servitio nee in dominico, sieut sunt ea de quibus pauld


po ee ante dictum est. Et unde sive placita sint per breve
. 892 b. à A : : N :
Suec de recto, sive assise sicut mortis antecessoris, et alis


ds hujusmodi in quibus ostendi poterit quod antecessor
epit seysi- Minoris, qui vocatus est ad warrantum, non obiit sey-
De de situs de re petita ut de feodo, nec in dominico nec
` in servitio, ad warrantia respondere tenebitur, & post
warrantiam ad placitum principale, non obstante minori


state. Si aute inde seysitus obiit ut de feodo, in


OF WARRANTY. 95


or to service he shall not be bound to answer whilst
under age, but in this case he shall have regard to
answer as well concerning the warranting to B. as con-
cerning the principal plea towards A.


But if a fine and a chirograph have intervened, the 3.


2 : 1 : „Ja When a
full age of the said C. shall not be awaited as regards UE


the said B., who has vouched him to warrant on account warranted


of that fine, so that he should not warrant immediately, °F eco he
e ,


without awaiting his full age, because any minor can shall not
answer to a fine having been made, although he should to the
not be more than one year old; and when C. has so claimant.
warranted to B., his full age shall be awaited as regards pe E
the said A., who claims in the principal plea, and so it

seems at first sight that in one and the same plea full

age is awaited and is not awaited, which indeed is true,

but nevertheless in different respects, since there are

here two pleas, one, to wit, the principal which is
between A. and B. and the other incidental, which is


between B. and C. concerning a warranty.


Likewise since a minor is not bound to answer concern- 4.
ei . . 2t 2 s , lt seems
ing any tenement of which his father or mother or other Jat he is


ancestor died seysed as of fee in domain or in service bound to
H f : answer
before he is of full age except upon a fine having been concerning


made, as aforesaid, it seems in a contrary sense that he tenements
- of which
ought to answer as well to the warranty as to the prin- his ances-


cipal plea, concerning all tenements of which he did not Pa d i
die seysed as of fee, neither in service nor in domain, as ag or dee,
are those tenements of which we have before spoken. E NE
And hence whether they be pleas by a writ of right Or reverse he
assises of mortdancester or others of that kind in wbich ae »
it can be shown that the ancestor of the minor, who has answer.
been vouched to warrant, did not die seysed of the (Cums
estate claimed as of fee, neither in domain nor in ser- of which he
vice, he will be bound to answer to the warranty, and Do
after the warranty to the principal plea, notwithstanding


his minority But if he died seysed thereof as of fee, in


Infra, fol.
491 b.


5.
Suspendi-
tur quando -
que per
mortem
warranti.


6.
Siquisduos
vel plures
vocaverit
ad warran-
tum, ut si


96 DE WARRANTIA.


dominico vel in servitio, aliud erit. Et de hae materia
dicetur plenius infra de exceptionibus, ubi dicitur ad
que debet minor respodere, et ad que non.


Suspenditur autem quandoq warrantia per mortem
warranti, ubi scilicet quis vocatus fuerit ad warrantum
et obierit antequàm warrantizaverit, vel postqm war-
ratizaverit, vel quadocung, dum tamen ante juditiu et
loquelà terminatam inter ipsum et principalé dominü
petenté. Et quo casu, sive hæres ejus infra statem
fuerit sive non, non ppter hoc cadit loquela, nec ex
toto erit reincipienda per mortem warranti, chm semel
warrantizaverit, & in se süsceperit defensione: et p
hoe fit quasi tenens, cüm adhue duret fundamentum,
scilicet petens et tenens, ut supradictum est, inter
quos vertitur contentio, eb ideo de novo vocetur heres
ejus ad warrantum, qui obiit. Et q heres vocari
debeat, pbatur in rotulo de term Pasche, anno regni
regis Henrici decimosexto in comitatu Kanc., de Alicia
de Bendenges. Ad idé facit q habetis de term Trini-
tatis anno regni regis Henrici octavo in principio
rotuli Et q dicitur de hærede, observari debet de
successore, sicut episcopis, abbatibus et prioribus: ut
de term Pasch: anno regni regis Henrici septimo in
comitatu Devoh de Wilhelm Paynel & abbate de Do-
neckswell, & sic non peribit lis, quamvis pereat in-
stantia litis.


Item esto quód quis duos vel plures vocaverit ad
warrantum, sieut virum & uxorem, verbi gratia: A.
petit versus B. terram, B. vocat inde ad warrantum
C. & D. uxorem ejus, qui veniunt et warrantizant, &
vocant inde ad warrantü E., & pendente placito war-


OF WARRANTY. 97


domain or in service, it will be otherwise. And con-
cerning this there will be a fuller statement below con-
cerning exceptions, where it is stated to what things a
minor ought to answer and to what things not so.


But the warranty is sometimes suspended through io:
the death of the warrantor, where a person has been ae
vouched to warrant and has died before he has war- sometimes
ranted, or after he has warranted, provided it be before xc
the judgment and the termination of the trial between of the
him and the principal lord claiming. And in which "?"*^ter
case, whether his heir be under age or not, the trial
does not on that account fall nor will it have to be
entirely recommenced through the death of the war-
rantor, when he has once warranted and has taken upon
himself the defence, and has thereby become a kind of
tenant, since the foundation stil endures, to wit, the
claimant and the tenant, as abovesaid, between whom
the contest turns, and therefore let the heir of him who
has died be vouched anew to warrant. And that the heir
ought to be vouched is proved in the roll of Easter
term in the sixteenth year of the reign of king Henry
in the county of Kent, concerning Alicia de Bendenger.

To the same effect is what you have in Trinity term in
the eighth year of the reign of king Henry at the com-
mencement of the roll. -And what is said of the heir,
ought to be observed in the case of a successor, as
bishops, abbots, and priors: as in Easter term in the
seventh year of king Henry in the county of Devon,
concerning Wilhelm Paynel and the abbot of Donecks-
. well, and so the suit will not perish, although the in-


stance of the suit perishes.


Likewise let it be that a person has vouched two or tfa oe


more persons to warrant, as a man and his wife, for in- d dos.
stance: A. claims against B. so much land; B. vouches two or
thereon C. and D. his wife to warrant, who come and ep pot
warrant, and vouch thereon E. to warrant, and pending warrant,


R 2657. G


virum et
uxorem.


ffc
Ubi plures |
vocantur
ad warran-
tum suc-
cessive,
refert quis
prius mo-
riatur, et
in persona
eujus
debeat
placitum
warranti
suscitari,


f. 393.


et unus ex
principali-
bus perso-
nis moria-
tur,


98 DE WARRANTIA,


rantie inter eos, moritur C. vir ipsius D. quo casu
oportebit q D. uxor C. de novo vocet ad warrantum
ipsum E. & per novum bie, & qui non respondebit
nisi ad warrantiam sine nova sumonitione: ut de term
Pasche anno regis Hērici decimosexto in com Lince.,
de Richardo de Elings. Sed quid si uterj moriatur
tam C. quàm D. tune sumoneatur heeredes ipsius D.
Tte esto q warratus cùm vocatus fuerit ad warrantu
warratizaverit et amiserit, sed excabiü no fecerit in
vita sua, hæres ipsius (sine alio brevi) tenebitur exca-
bium facere: ut de term S. Trinitatis añ regis H.
octavo, de Hugone de Bailol.


Refert tame utrü ex pluribus primus moriatur, ubi
plures successive vocati fuerint ad warratizandi, de
warranto in warrantum, et warrantizaverint usd ad
ultima, et ille qui ultimo vocatus fuerit ad warranti,
sive warrantizaverit sive no, et sive ad placitum prin-
cipale respondet sive no, dum tame moriatur ante
judieiü in principali, & quo casu erit placitum war-
rantiz reincipiendum in persona heredis ex nova
sumonitione. Si autem judicium redditum sit, sine
nova summonitione et novo brevi erit executio judicii
facienda de bonis hzredis, quoad excambium. Si aute
ille primus qui warrantizavit moriatur, vel tenens cui
warrantizatu est, vel illi qui sunt medii, pendente
placito warrantiz inter ultimos warrantos, et aliquis
ipsorü emiserit:! fiat escambiü heeredibus ipsius ultimi
warranti et illud ide tenenti, si superstes fuerit: si
aute no, tune cadit principalis loquela, et erit de novo
reinciplenda. De warratis vero qui medii sunt, si
moriantur pendente placito warrantie inter ultimos


1 « amiserit," MS. Rawl. C. 160.


OF WARRANTY. 99


the plea of warranty between them C. the husband of as for in-
D. dies ; in which case it will be incumbent that D. the a
wife of C. should vouch anew the said E. to warrant his wife.
and by a new writ, and who will not answer except to

the warranty without a new summons: as in Easter

term in the sixteenth year of king Henry in the county

of Lincoln, concerning Richard de Elings. But what if

both die, as well C. as D. ? then let the heirs of the said

D. be summoned. Likewise let it be that a warrantor,

when he has been vouched to warrant, has warranted

and has lost, but has not made compensation in his life

time, his heir (without another writ) shall be bound to^
make compensation, as in Trinity term in the eighth

year of king Henry, concerning Hugo de Bailol.


It is of importance whether out of several the first 7.
dies, where several have been successively vouched to DE ae
warrant, from warrantor to warrantor, and have war- vouched to
ranted up to the last, and he who has been last vouched rere
to warrant, whether he has warranted or not, and sively, it is

CES of impor-
whether he answers to the principal plea or not, pro- ince" who
vided only he dies before judgment in the principal HA
plea, and in which case the plea of warranty will have whose per-
to be recommenced in the person of the heir upon ee
new summons. But if judgment has been rendered, warranty
without a new summons and a new writ, execution of Cea po
the judgment will have to be made against the goods and one cf
of the heir, as regards compensation. But if the first dud
one who has warranted dies, or the tenant, to whom the sons dies.
warranty has been made, or those who are intermediate, XE
pending the plea of warranty between the last war-
rantors, and one of them has lost, let compensation be
made to the heirs of the said last warrantor, and the
very same to the tenant, if he be surviving; but if not,
then the principal trial falls and will have to be recom-
menced anew. But concerning the warrantors who are
intermediate, if they die pending the plea of warranty
between the Jast warrantors, this is not much to be cared

G 2


100 DE WARRANTIA.


warratos, non est multü curandü, quia eorü heredes
no versantur nec in lucro nec in damno suo quoad
escambiü, ex quo ultimó vocatus non respondet ad
warrantiam, sed hæres mortui qui vocavit, & qui aliis
warrantizaret, si plene setatis fuerit sumonitus ad war-
rátizandü in statu quo pater fuit, et si fuerit infra
cetatem, expectetur ætas.


8. Si aute ibi sint plures warranti vocati, qui sunt
doe quasi unus heeres de feoffamento antecessorum suorum,
manebi E Sp. =
totum quorü unus fuerit infra etatem, ppter ætatem sua
placitum


Pô. remanebit placitum warrantie usque ad statem, ac si

rem æta- Omnes essent infra setatem, cum distinctione supra-

e dieta. Si auté unus vel plures moriantur, et heredes

post sey- habuerint de corpore suo qui sunt infra statem, vel

mm plene statis, tiie sumoneantur hæredes in forma supra-
dieta, & fiat ut supra. Si aute alios non habuerit
nisi cohsredes quibus descendit jus defunctorum per
jus accrescendi, iniquum esset et onerosum si pro parte
ila, d eis de novo accreverit, essent omnes summonédi
de novo, non allocatis essoniis et dilationibus suis præ-
habitis: cùm lites et dilationes potius restringedee sunt
quam laxande. Igitur non erit de novo sumonitio
reincipienda, sed teneat pcessus secundü quod inceptus
est.


9. Item si plures warranti simul vocentur qui sunt
Ni l S è Li . LI
P pures quasi unus hæres, tunc refert utrum ptitio facta sit


vocentur, inter eos vel non: Si aute non, omnes simul nominandi

sicut unus : : . :

PASS sunt et vocandi quasi unum corpus, et nullus sine alio
respondebit. Si autem partita fuerit, tune refert utrum
feoffamentum, de quo unus vocatus est ad warrantü,
faetum sit à participe post partitione, vel ante à cómuni


antecessore omniü. Si autem tantü à participe sine


OF WARRANTY. 101


for, because their heirs are not concerned neither in their
gain nor in their loss as regards the compensation, since
the last vouchee does not answer to the warranty, but
the heir of the deceased person who vouched him, and
who would warrant the others, if he was of full age, and
was summoned to warrant in the state in which his
father was, and if he should be under age, let his full
age be awaited.

But if there be several warrantors vouched, who are 8.
as it were a single heir upon the feoffinent of their sie
ancestors, one of whom is under age, the plea of war- shall be |
ranty shall be stayed on account of age until full age, ee
just as if all were under age, with the distinction afore- minor age
said. But if one or more die, and have heirs of their 1° Single
bodies, who are under age or of full age, then let the and after
heirs be summoned in the form above said, and let it be ^-^
done as above. But if they have no other heirs but co-
heirs, to whom the right of the deceased has descended
by the right of accretion, it would be inequitable and
onerous if on account of that part which has accrued to
to them anew they were all to be summoned anew,
without allowing them essoins and their delays being
anticipated, since law suits and delays are rather to be
restrained than relaxed. Therefore a summons will not
have to be recommenced anew, but let the process hold


according as it has been commenced,


Likewise if several warrantors are vouched who are T 9.
Severa


as it were a single heir, then it is of importance whether warrantors
a partition has been made amongst them or not. But x ud
if not, all are to be named and vouched as if one body, ELI hor:
and none shall answer without the other. But if there
has been a partition, then it is of importance whether
the feoffment, concerning which one has been vouched
to warranty, has been made by a parcenary after the
partition, or before by the common ancestor of all. But
if only by a varcenary without the others, let him alone


102 DE WARRANTIA.


aliis, ipse solus vocetur & respondeat de facto suo
proprio. Si auté à communi antecessore, tunc omnes
vocentur: nec expedit tantü unum nominare sed omnes,
licet unus posset respondere quód sine participibus ad
warrantum non teneretur respondere, nisi sumonerentur
ad warrantizandum cum eo.


10. Suspenditur autem warrantia ppter dubium eventum
eee de warranto, ut si duo se gerant pro herede, de
rantia quibus ante judicium constare non possit, quis eorum
PES sit heres legitimus. Item si mulier habens in utero
eventum, partum, de quo constare non possit utrum nascatur


ne nd vivus vel mortuus, vel cùm sit natus, utrum sit homo
in utero vel declinet ad monstrum.
est.

11. Item remanet warratia in suspenso. si quis vocatus
Si war-


Cane fuerit ad warrantia qui appellatus sit de vita & mébris,

vocatus donec costiterit utrum se defedere- possit vel no de

haan felonia: quia nó magis tenetur respondere ad warratia

etmem- pendéte accusatione, qm tenetur ad placitü principale,

rg quia subsequete codénatione, omnia q cum ipso facta
essent post felonia facta, sunt irritanda et revocada,
et etia generatio sua suscepta post felonia exheredada,
& ideo paci warrantia donec constiterit, gus ei
succedere debeat post delictü.


1.3995.  Ité ide erit, si warrantus obierit pendente placito


12. Berens tris CURL z
De ok warrantiz, donee constiterit ad qm terra sua debeat


debet esse reverti si obierit sine herede, cùm talis esse debeat


loco hzre- a EE .: : 4
ade ad loco hzeredis, ut de donationibus factis ante feloniam.


escheta. Et si talis forte suspensus fuerit pendente warrantia


OF WARRANTY. 103


be vouched and answer for his own act. But if by the
common ancestor, then let all be vouched; nor is it
expedient to name one only, but all, although one only
may answer that without his coparceners he is not
bound to answer to the warranty, unless they be sum-
moned to warrant together with him.


But à warranty is suspended on account of a doubt- 10.
ful event concerning the warrantor, as if two persons im e
hold themselves out to be the heir, concerning whom suspended


. . ; : E : on account
it cannot be established before a judgment, which of 2? ^m


them is the legitimate heir. Likewise if a woman hav- ful event,
noH ff RS 1 ^ b RUN hs: h ib on account
ing an offspring in her womb, concerning which it ofan of-


cannot be established whether it will be born alive or spring


- : : which is
dead, or when it shall be born, whether it shall be ain the
human being or shall turn into a monster. womb.


Likewise the warranty remains in suspense, if a per- ir.
son has been vouched to warranty who is accused of a E
crime entailing loss of life or of members, until it has has been
been ascertained whether he can defend himself or not uc
from the felony ; because he is not more bound to an- a crime
swer to the warranty during the accusation than to the [es en
principal plea, because if condemnation follows, all x of mem-
things, which have been done together with him atter WE
the felony has been committed, are to be made void and
revoked, and even his generation, which has sprung up
after the felony, is to be disinherited, and therefore the
warranty is suspended until it has been ascertained, who


ought to succeed to him after the offence.


Likewise it wil be the same, if the warrantor has f.393 b.
died pending the plea of warranty, until it has been , 77


ascertained to whom that land ought to revert, if he ing him


1 1 iT. gj ; ht who ought
had died without an heir, since such à person ought DAE.


to be in the place of an heir, as concerning donations place of an
j qus X heir, as in
made before a felony. And if sach person shall have tut


been hanged pending the warranty or outlawed, then


104 DE WARRANTIA.


vel utlagatus, tune eodé modo reincipiatur loquela, &
in eodem statu in quo fuit quando tenens primó war-
rantum vocavit, cum constiterit cujus eschaeta debeat
esse heereditas talis: ut de itinere W. de Ralegh in
com Wart, de quodam Wilhelmo filio Roberti.


13. Videndum est etiam utrü warrantus, qui obiit, tenuit
VAL UMOR in feodo vel ad vitam tantum, sicut nomine dotis, vel
ratus, — alio modo sicut liberum tenementum, quod post mortem
Do ipsius warranti reversurum est ad dominum pprietatis.
feudo vel Si aute in feodo, fiat ut supradictum est, si aute ad
ad vitam. Vita, & dominus pprietatis implacitaverit, tune non

cadit breve nee loquela principalis, sed tantum placitum
de warrantia, quod in personis hzredum reincipere
non potest: & peedet placitum principale, ac si tenens
ab initio warrantu non vocasset.
" p Poterit etiam quis intrare in warrantia, etsi non
oterl


dus intrare VOCOUUL ad warrantum, ad pprii juris tuitionem : ut si
gratisad quis tenuerit ad vitam suam, sicut mulier nomine
a aay dotis, vel alio modo, vel ad terminum terram aliquam
vocetur ad d post vitam vel terminum reversura esset ad domint
Pen pprietatis si se in fraudem & exhæredationem ipsius
tionem. permiserit implacitari ab aliquo, & cùm posset dominum
pprietatis inde vocare ad warrantū ad defensionem
suam, hoc omiserit: bene poterit dominus ille pprie-
tatis, cùm sibi viderit exinde periculum iminere, com-
parere per se, & si non vocetur, intrare in warrantiam
ad sui proprii juris defensionem : cùm melius & utilius
sit in tempore occurrere, quàm post causam vulneratam
quærere remedium, & sic malitiis hominum obviare.
Quia cùm mulier, vel alius qui tenet ad vitam, sine


warranto suo placitare vel respondere nō possit, statim


OF WARRANTY. 105


in the same matter let the trial be recommenced, and
in the same state in which it was when the tenant first
vouched a warrantor, when it has been ascertained
whose escheat that inheritance ought to be, as in the
iter of William de Ralegh in the county of Warwick,
concerning a certain Wilhelm the son of Robert.


It is to be seen whether a warrantor, who has died, | 13.
held in fee or for life only, as in the name of dower, onan
or in any other manner as a free tenement, which after whether
the death of the warrantor is about to revert to the ae, od
lord of the property. But if he held in fee, let it be he nee
done as aforesaid, but if for life and the lord of the in fee or
property has impleaded, then neither the writ falls nor fer tfe-
the principal trial, but only the plea about the war-
ranty, which cannot recommence in the persons of the
heirs; and the principal plea shall proceed as if the
tenant from the commencement had not vouched a
warrantor. 2


A person may also enter into a warranty, although 14.
he be not vouched to warranty, for the protection of WE due


his own right; as if a person holds for his own life, gratuitous-
as a woman in the name of dower, or in some other RAD
manner, or for a term a certain land, which after his if he be
life or after the term is to revert to the lord of the aa, oe
property, if he has allowed himself to be impleaded by aes
some one in order to defraud and disinherit himself, right.
and when he might thereupon vouch the lord of the
property to warrant in his defence, he has omitted this:

the lord of that property may well, when he sees danger

. to himself imminent, appear of himself, and if he be not
vouched, enter into a warranty for the defence of his

own right, since it is better and more useful to oppose

in time, than to seek a remedy after the cause has been
wounded, and so to meet the malice of mankind. Be-

cause when a woman or another person, who holds for


life, cannot plead or answer without her warrantor


A


106 DE WARRANTIA.


cum implacitata fuerit de aliquo ad dote suam pti-
nente, q in corpore vel in jure cosistat, vocare debet
warrantü sui: ut de term S. H. & P. anno regis H.
iv. circa fine, & si-hoe in fraudem omiserit, vel forte
defaltam facere voluerit, ille cujus interest intret in
warrantiam etiam si non vocatus. Si aute, cùm war-
rantus vocatus fuerit, defaltam fecerit, petens recupera-
bit rem petitam, et tenens escambiü. Si aute tenens,
& warrantus non, tunc amittit tenens, & escambium
non habebit.


Cap, XI.


cates Cum autem warrantus de warrantia defendere se


rantus se non possit, quin per judicium warrantizat, vel si gratis
de war- . . Lj E .

be: hoe fecerit, tune reineipiet petens placitum suum prin-
fendere cipale versus ipsum qui warrantizavit, & proponat


non possit, = : Edi 5 i
veleum  ©odé modo intentionem suam versus ipsum warrantum,


f.394, Sicut proposuit versus ipsum principalem tenentem, &
gratis vel. dicat sic, q injusté intrat in warrantiam, quia terra,
per judi- COURS S = > í
aaa tine, Erede qua agitur, est jus suum, quia talis ante
reincipiet cessor suus inde obiit seysitus ut de feodo & jure,
petens . 7 . DA : . E . = =
principale & sic per omnia sicut versus ipsum principalé tenenté,
placitum & sic incipit placitum esse inter petentem et warran-


versus war- . oe . m .
rantum, ‘um, & sie tenens et alii warranti medii quibus war-


sicut fecit rantizatum est remaneant in pace, donec constiterit .
versus . . .
tenentem, Quid actum sit inter petentem & warrantum: & quo


Soe casu bene poterit warrantus warrantum ulteriüs vocare,
do pro-


ponat ins Sl warrantum habuerit, unum vel plures, simul vel
tentionem,


OF WARRANTY. 107


immediately when she has been impleaded concerning
something, which pertains to her dower, and which
consists either in substance or in right, she ought to
vouch her warrantor : as in St. Hilary term and in Easter
term in the fourth year of king Henry about the end,
and if she has omitted this fraudulently or by chance
has wilfully made default, let him, who is interested,
enter forthwith into a warranty, even if he be not
vouched. But if, when he has been vouched as a war-
rantor, he has made default, the claimant shall recover
the thing claimed, and the tenant shall have compen-
sation. But if the tenant has made default, and the
warrantor not, then the tenant loses and shall not have
compensation.


CHAPTER XI.


But when the warrantor cannot defend himself from "i rm
. ien e
a warranty, but that he must through a judgment war- yarrantor


rant, or if he has so done gratuitously, then let the e
e -


claimant recommence his principal plea against him self from a
who has warranted, and let him propound in the same m
manner his declaration against the warrantor himself, warrants
as he has propounded it against the principal tenant, f 394.

é : : either
and let him say thus, that he enters unjustly into 8 throngh-a
warranty, because the land or the thing which is in judgment
? . . : : : , or gratul-
question is his right, because so-and-so his ancestor ions


died seysed of it as of fee and of right, and so through- n n
. . . . e claim-
out as against the said principal tenant, and so the ant recom-


plea commences to be between the claimant and the moe the
tenant, and so let the tenant and the other intermediate Sn P
warrantors, to whom a warranty has been made, remain iru Aa
in peace, until it has been ascertained what has been as he avit
settled between the claimant and the warrantor, and DE ate
in which case the warrantor may well call a further let him in
warrantor, if he has a warrantor, one or more, together the same


manner
or successively, and in which case, if the warrantor


108 DE WARRANTIA.


successive: & quo casu, si warrantus sumoniri debeat,
nulla fiat mentio in sumonitione de tenente nec
de warrantis mediis, quibus warrantizatum est, sed


dicatur.


2. Rex vicecomiti salute, Sumoneas per bonos sum-
Siillqui monitores A. q sit coram justitiariis &e. ad warranti-


warranti- erie 3 : : :
zaverit — Zandum B, scilicet warranto qui ultimó warrantizavit,


ulterius — tantam terram, &e. qm C. in curia nostra coram jus-
vocat war Xp S E S 3 x 5
rantum, ticiariis &c. clamat ut jus suü versus ipsum B. &


ae unde B. in eadem curia &c. vocavit ipsum A. ad
> a LI LI .

breve pro Warrantum versus ipsum O0.: & qualiter ulterius de
auxiliosuo. warrantis sit procedendum, si vocati fuerint, satis


perpendi poterit ex pmissis.


3. Item esto quód ille, qui vocatus est ad warrantum,


Si ille qui non tenuit rem petitam nisi ad vitam suam, & ante-
voeatur ad


warrantum quam warrantizaverit moriatur, & terra reverti debeat


an Hun ad dominu pprietatis qui petit, non cadit breve prin-
vitam, cipale, nec warrantia, sed reineipiat placitum warrantize
quando 7 s
ure in persona heredis, si ille qui ad vitam tenuit feoffa
mortuo eo vit in feodo. Si autem ad vitam suam, tune cadit


i tus S : . : Mord .:
XL omnind warrantia & tenebit placitum principale. Si


est.
aute ad vitam tenentis, tune tenebit warratia: & de
hac materia supra de donationibus.
: 4 Cùm aute ille, qui ultimó warrantizavit, warrantü
ae lees ulterius vocare voluerit) vel non possit, tic aut statim


ranus defendit jus ipsius petentis & seysinam & totum p


ulterius : : ss :
warrantum Corpus liberi hominis sui, et per duellum, vel ponat


vorar ct. po in magnam assisam, vel rem petitam recognoscit
noluerit,
tune statim petenti cum voluntate tenentis, nisi exceptiones habeat


erc contra petentem quas pponat. Et sunt exceptiones

ten- as .

tis, comunes que competunt tam tenenti quam warranto,
et quas ipse warrantus proponat si voluerit. Sunt


etiam quedamexc eptiones 4 cdpetunt tantum tenenti


1 « noluetit * MS; Rawl. C. 160.


OF WARRANTY. 109


ought to be summoned, let no mention be made in the propound
i S : his de-

summons concerning the tenant nor concerning the daret

intermediate warrantors, to whom a warranty has been

made, but let it be said :


The king to the viscount greeting. Summon by good ə,
summoners A. that he present himself before justiciaries eee
&c. to warrant to B., to wit, the warrantor who has last ranted,
warranted, so much land &c. which C. in our court before ee E


justiciaries &c. claims as his right against the said B. and warrantor,
: : : 4 then let a
whereon B. in our said court Xe. has vouched the said rit of this


A. to warrant against the said C.: and in what manner MD

2 : issued to
further proceedings are to be had concerning the war- him for
rantors, if they be vouched, may be sufficiently under- the aid of


: the court.
stood from the premises.


Likewise let it be, that he who is vouched to warrant A a
did not hold the land claimed except for his life, and he i; 5 nea


dies before he has warranted, and the land ought to re- to warrant,
vert to the lord of the property who claims it, the prin- Perea
cipal writ does not fall, nor the warranty, but the plea of RR ;
warranty should recommence in the person of the heir, enfeoffea,
if he who held for life, has enfeoffed it in fee. But if for oe tne
his own life, then the warranty fails altogether and the is deaa,
principal plea shall hold. But if for the life of the

tenant, then the warranty shall hold ; and on this matter


we have spoken above concerning donations.

But when he, who has last warranted, is unwilling or e
is unable to vouch further a warrantor, then he either Jast war-
forthwith contests the right of the claimant himself, and ec ien
his seysine and the whole by the body of his free man En
and by a duel, or let him put himself on à great assise, E
or he acknowledges the thing claimed to belong to the then let
claimant with the consent of the tenant, unless he has n e
exceptions against the claimant which he may propound. the right
And there are common exceptions, which are appropriate as
to the tenant as well as to the warrantor, and which the
warrantor may propound,if he will. For there are some


exceptions which are appropriate only to the claimant


f. 394 b.


16
Proposita
intentione
contra war-
rantum, si
warrantus
visum
petat,
denegabi-
tur ei.


110 DE WARRANTIA.


et non warranto, quas quidem non pponat warrantus,
& e contrario, quia etsi aliquando cdpetat exceptio
contra aliquem, non pertinet ad omnes qui illam pro-
ponant, nisi ad ipsum tantum cujus interest. Et unde
videtur, quód ad illum cui warrantizavit non copetant
exceptiones, quie propositze fuerint à principali tenente,
& per judicium eassatz, vel quibus ipse tenens tacite
renuntiavit, vocando warrantum scilicet antequam illas
pponeret, sicut contra breve de errore & hujusmodi,
si ita sit quód tacita renuntiatio tenentis principalis
nocere possit warranto.


Cap, XII.


Proposita autem intentione petentis (ut pdictum est)
si warratus visum petat, denegabitur ei: quia aut scit
aut scire debet qm terram tenenti suo warrantizavit,
et de qua tra homagiü ceperit & servitiu. Si excipiat
& dicat q totam iram petitam no teneat, de qua
vocatus est ad  warrantü, no valebit ei quia non
tenetur ei ad majus escambin. Et visu ei denegato,
si dieat q totam terram illam petitam nō teneat, de
qua vocatus est ad  warrantum, sive tenens primó
illam pposuerit sive non, & licet tota warrantizare
debeat, quamvis tenens totam no teneat, tale excep-
tionem pponendo no audietur, cùm ad majus es-
cambium nou teneatur principali tenenti, quàm ipse
tenens tunc tenuerit, quando warrantus per judiciü
amisit, licet ista exceptio ab initio competeret ipsi
tenenti contra petente.


OF WARRANTY. 111


and not to the warrantor, which indeed the warrantor
should not propound, and on the contrary, because al-
though an exception is sometimes appropriate as against
a person, it does not pertain to all persons to propound
it, except only to him who has an interest in the case.
And hence it seems that exceptions are not appropriate
to him who has warranted, which have been propounded
by the principal tenant and which have been overruled
by a judgment, or which the tenant himself has tacitly
renounced, by vouching a warrantor before he has pro-
pounded them, as against the writ on the ground of error
or such like, if it be so that the tacit renunciation of the
principal tenant can be prejudicial to a warrantor.


CHAPTER XII. f. 394 b.


But upon the declaration of the claimant having been —— 1.
propounded (as said above), if the warrantor claims a. De
view, it shall be denied to him, because he either knows having
or he ought to know what land he has warranted to his een
tenant, and of what land he has received homage and against a
service. If he should except, and say that he does not ioter
hold all the land claimed, concerning which he is vouched claims a
to warrant, it will not avail him, because he is not bound DE
to make him a greater compensation. And upon a view e to
having been denied to him, if he should say that he does
not hold all that land claimed, concerning which he is
vouched to warrant, whether the tenant has at first pro-
pounded it or not, and although he ought to warrant the
whole, although the tenant does not hold the whole, con-
cerning which he is vouched to warrant, he shall not be
heard inpropounding such an exception, since he is not
bound to a greater compensation towards the principal
tenant, than the tenant himself held at the time when
the warrantor lost by a judgment, although that excep-
tion from the commencement was available for the tenant


himself against the claimant,


119 DE WARRANTIA.


ee Si aute sint exceptiones vel defensiones, d cópetant
pM ipsi warranto, & d prius no copetierunt ipsi principali
De tenenti, tune illas pponat warrantus, ut si finis in
que primo Curia diii regis et cyrographum factum fuit inter ipsum
teen warrantum et petente, vel eorü antecessores, per quem
prineipali finem ipse petens vel ejus antecessores remiserunt, vel
tenent, — qujetü clamaverüt ipsi warranto, vel ejus antecessori-
proponatur :
illa incon- bus totū jus suü q habuit in fra illa petita, vel si
tment. ^ antecessores petētis, vel ipse petens feloniam vel quid
tale fecit, ppter q terra illa fuit eschaeta ipsius war-
ranti vel antecessorum suorum. Item si recognitio, &
redditio, donatio vel venditio, cum warrantia expressa,
vel p homagio & servitio intervenit, vel si forte ante-
cessores ipsius petentis terram illam amiserint versus
warrantü per judiciū, vel per magna assisam vel per
duellum vel ejus hzredes. Et plures possunt esse
hujusmodi exceptiones warranto copetentes, qG non
competunt principali tenenti, & unde cám warrantus
per hujusmodi exceptiones vel per duellum vel p
magna assisam, vocantem legitim? defenderit, retinebit
tenens seysinam suam, & petens in misericordia rema-


nebit.


: Car. XIII.


Si nulla sit

exceptio x à ^ A 3

vel defen- Si autem non sit exceptio, nec defensio, sicut duel-
Nd ? E

sio de : 4 “ :
REE lum vel magna assisa per quam possit warrantus
rehabendo, tenentem suum defendere, secundum quod inferius
et cum : On ms 3

warrantus “ucebur, amittet tenens terram petitam, & warrantus
tenentem ei tenebitur ad escambium, quatenus habuerit de


suum de- : . c È 3
fendere  heereditate ejus, ratione eujus vocatus fuerit ad war-


non possit. rantum,


OF WARRANTY. : 113


But if there be exceptions and defences which are 2.
available for the warrantor himself, and which were not in)
previously available for the principal tenant himself, let is available


the warrantor then propound them, as if a fine in the Amd
court of the king and a chirograph has been made be- which may
tween the said warrantor and the claimant, or between mn 2
their ancestors, by which fine the said claimant or his frst avail-
ancestors have remitted or quit-claimed to the said war- a. ent
rantor or to his ancestors all his right, which he had in Pa! tenant,
the land claimed, or if the ancestors of the claimant or ne oes
the claimant himself has committed a felony or some- eee
thing of the kind, on account whereof that land has 3
been an escheat of the said warrantor or of his ancestors.
Likewise if a recognition and surrender, a donation or a’

sale with an express warranty or for homage and ser-

vice has intervened, or if by chance the ancestors of the

said claimant have lost that land to the warrantor through

a judgment, or through a great assise or through a duel,

or to his heirs ; and there may be several exceptions of

this kind available for the warrantor, which are not
available for the principal tenant, and hence when the
warrantor by exceptions of this kind or by a duelor by

a great assise has legitimately defended the voucher, the

tenant will retain his seysine and the claimant will be


liable to be amerced.


12
CHAPTER XIII. Tethers Bo
no excep-


But if there be no exception nor defence, as a duel or fen or
defence


a great assise, through which a warrantor may defend against re-
hie tenant, according to what will be said below, the covering
compensa-
tenant shall lose the land claimed, and the warrantor eer
shall be bound to him to make compensation, as far as when the
war r
he may have land of the inheritance of the person, by cannot
reason of whom he has been vouched as a warrantor. ee his


R 2657. H


114 DE WARRANTIA.


2 Non enim tenetur quis factum patris, vel matris,
i ei vel alterius antecessoris (cujus hæres ipse fuerit) war-
factum  rantizare, vel escambium facere de suo perquisito. Ite
pene nec de hsereditate matris warrantizare debeat quis,
ze, vel vel escambium facere de heereditate patris, vel écon-
RA verso de hzreditate patris warrantizare debet quis, vel


hereditate escambium facere de hereditate matris. Ut de itinere

e der) episcopi Dunholm & M. de P. in cof Eborum anno

f.395. regis H. iii cirea medium rotuli. Et quod donum

patris warrantizare debeat de hereditate patris, inve-

niri poterit in eodem rotulo de eodem itinere, de

Wilhelmo de Vavasour: ubi heeres satis habuit ad

warrantizandum de hereditate patris. Si aute no

habeat unde totum, sed partem, fiat excambium qua-

tenus fieri possit, & de residuo expectet tenens tempora

meliora. Si aute nihil, non erit omninó absolvendus

de escambio, dum tamen sit aliquid q ei accidere possit

de heereditate ejus, ratione cujus vocatus fuerit ad
warrantum.


es Ité quamvis quis teneatur ad warrantiam, ad escam-
Si warran- q: : : :
tustenuerit Plum tamen non tenetur ratione rei quam tenet, licet


de domino ei hzereditarie descendat, ut si teneat de dio rege in

rege per it , j iti d di idi -

warran. Capite per servitium quo 1Ividi no potest, ut per

tiam. serjeantiam, ne dominus rex cogatur servitium suum
& officium servientis recipere per particulas, chm par-
tieularis solutio multa habet incomoda, & & revocari
& coadjuvari debet si fuerit dispersa, nisi ita sit q
ille, qui serjeantiam vel ejus partem alienaverit, tantum
retinuerit q sufficere possit ad plenum servitium. Et


q dietum est de serjeantia, dici poterit de aliis feodis


Tad t er ve


OF WARRANTY. 115


For a person is not bound to warrant the act of his 2.
father or of his mother or any other ancestor (whose a Len
heir he may be) or to make compensation from his own bound to
acquired property. Likewise he is not bound to warrant ARR
for the inheritance of his mother, or to make compensa- his father,
E . . . or to make
tion from the inheritance of his father, or conversely to compensa-
warrant for the inheritance of his father and to make o
compensation from the inheritance of his mother, as in tance of
the iter of the bishop of Durham and Martin de Pates- Be
hull in the county of York, in the third year of king contrary.
Henry, about the middle of the roll. And that he m f. 395.
to warrant the donation of his father from the inheri-
tance of his father, may be found in the same roll of the


same iter concerning Wilhelmus de Vavasour, where the


heir had enough to warrant for the inheritance of his


father. But if he have not wherefrom to warrant for the
whole, but only for a part, let there be compensation as
far as 1t ean be made, and for the residue let the tenant
await better times.. Butif he should have nothing, he will
not however have to be altogether absolved from com-
pensation, provided however there be something which
may descend to him from the inheritance of the person,
in respect of whom he has been vouched to warrant.


Likewise although a person may be bound to a war- E 5
1 : t war-
ranty, he is not however bound to make compensation PT *


in respect of that which he holds, although it may de- badhi
scend to him by inheritance, as if he Sicul hold of the the king
king in chief by a service, which cannot be divided, as By a war-
by serjeanty, lest the king should be obliged to receive eat
the service or the duty of the person serving by parts,
when the performance of it in parts would be incon-
venient, and which ought to be revoked and united
together if it has been dispersed, unless it so be that
he, who has alienated the serjeanty or a part of it, has
retained so much as may be sufficient for a complete
service. And what has been said of serjeanty, may be
said of other feuds which are held in chief of the crown.

H 2


4.
Si de es-
cambio
fieri debet
extensio.


5.
Casus, ubi
quis habere
possit ip-


116 DE WARRANTIA.


que tenentur de domino rege in capite. Si autem
de excambio fieri debet extensio & estimatio, estimari
debet res que admittitur in eo statu, in quo fuit
quando primó data fuit. Item nec si ille, qui war-
rantum vocavit, aliquid adjecit de alterius feodo, no
enim admittitur melioratio tenentis qui amisit: ut si
post feoffamentum suü ipse vel antecessores sui ibi
ampla construxerit edificia, sicut castra, parcos vel
vivaria. Et si plures sint warranti qui amiserint,
quilibet contribuat ad escambiü p portione virili, & fiat
excambiü & extensio per hoc breve.


Rex vie. salutem. Scias q cùm A. in curia nia Se.
peteret versus B. tantam terram cum pertin &c. ut
supra. Idem B. venit in eade curia & vocavit inde
ad warratum C. et qui venit in eade curia et ei war-
rantizavit, et postea p judicium ejusde curie nostre
terram illam amisit versus pdictum A., G quide per
rationabilem extensione inde factam p peeptum nostrum
in com tali, valet per anni x. 3. Et ideó tibi peipi-
mus q de terra ipsius C. in comitatu tuo eidem B. in -
excambium pdiete terre sine dilatione habere facias
et assignari x. libratas terre p visum legaliü hominü
de comitatu tuo, & per rationabile extensione, et quid
et ubi et p quas ptieulas terram illam ei assignaveris,
nobis scire facias per literas tuas sigillatas, et per
duos ex illis, p quorü sacramentum extensio illa et
assignatio facta fuit, & habeas ibi hoe breve et nomina
eorum per quorü &c. Teste &c. Et si eausetur ex-
tensio, fiat sieut alibi de extensionibus.


Poterit etiam quis in casu habere ipsam rem prin
cipalem, & nihilominus escambiü, verbi gratia. Do-
minus capitalis, cü in possessione fuerit alicujus tre

4


OF WARRANTY. ll


But if there ought to be an extent and an estimate of
the compensation, the estate which is admitted ought to
be estimated in that state, in which it was when it was
first given. Likewise neither if he who has vouched a
warrantor has added anything from another person's
feud, for the amelioration of the tenant who has lost is
not admitted; as if after his own enfeoffment he or his
ancestors have built there ample edifices, such as castles,
parks, or fish ponds. And if there be several warrantors
who have lost, let each contribute a portion for his own
share towards the compensation, and let there be made
a compensation and an extent through a writ of this
kind.

The king to the viscount greeting. Know thou that 4
when A. in our court, &c., claimed against B. so much "Baie.
land with its appurtenances, &c., as uS the said B. should be
came into our said court and Ped thereon C. to war- aie
rant, and who came into our said court and warranted to er
him, and afterwards by a judgment of the said court lost `
that land to the said A., which indeed by a reasonable
extent made thereof penne our precept in our county
is worth forty pounds by the year. And therefore we
enjoin you that from the land of the said C. in your
county you cause compensation for the aforesaid land
to be made without delay to the said B.,and ten pounds
worth of land to be assigned to him by the view of loyal
men of your county, and by a reasonable extent, and
what and where and by what parts you will have assigned
that land to him cause us to know by your sealed letters
and by two of those persons, by whose oath that extent
and assignment has been made, and have there this writ
and the name of those by whose oath, &c. Witness, &c.
And if the extent be called in question, let it be done as
in other extents.

A person may also in a case have the principal estate ie
itself and nevertheless compensation, as for instance: where a
A chief lord, when he is in possession of a certain land Persen


5.


118 DE WARRANTIA.


samrem ratione custodie de duobus fratribus, feoffat postnatu
la»et^ de eadé terra, primogenitus pfert assisam mortis sup
nihilo- fratre postnatum, & ipse vocat ad warrantum capitale


ques dominum, & cüm ipse warrantizaverit recuperet ante-
natus seysinam versus eum, & ipse dominus capitalis
facit postnato excambium, mortuo autem antenato sine
hsrede de se seysiat dominus capitalis terram in
manü suam, frater postnatus petit illà versus eum per
assisam mortis antecessoris de morte fratris sui, objicit

£395b. ei dominus suus capitalis q non potest petere terram,
cùm inde habeat excambiü: revera poterit diversis
respectibus, terram in dominico ppter descensum, &
escambium similiter retinere ppter feoffamentum, & sic
utrumq, tamen ex diversis causis.


Car. XIV.
jh Dictum est de illis qui warrantum vocant per auxi-
Sitenens ]um curiæ infra regnum, & ubi dominus rex distric-
warrantum S $


vocaverit, tionem habeat, ut vocatus veniat ad warrantizandum.
Jtexta Nunc autem dicendum si tenens warrantum vocaverit,
regnum, et qui sit manens extra regnum, & nihil habuerit in
nihil habu- X A e d di t a t t t 7 f b :
etim  Tegno Angie per quod distringatur, et tune refert si
regno per extra regnum, is rex habuerit potestate vel non ad
quod dis- dist d 1 Sga 1 : .
tringi pos- Cstringendum talem, quód si nullam, sieut in potestate
sit. regis Francie, vel Alemaniz, vel hujusmodi, licet
auxilium tenenti concedatur, non valebit: sed oportebit
tenentem talem pducere si voluerit, quia auxilium non
habebit, alioquin in defaltam remanebit, debet etiam
illos pducere sine auxilio curie, quos habuerit sub
potestate sua, quamvis infra regnum manentes sint,


& sub regis coercione, sient uxoré ppriam, & liberos


OF WARRANTY. 119


by reason of the wardship of two brothers, enfeoffs may have
the after-born of the said land, the elder-born brings an ES p
assise of mortdancester against his after-born brother, itself and
and vouches the chief lord to warrant, and when he has pier
warranted let the elder-born recover the seysine against pensation.
him, and let the lord himself make compensation to the
after-born, but upon the death of the elder-born without
an heir of his body, the chief lord seizes the land into
his own hand, the after-born brother claims that land
against him by an assise of mortdancester upon the
death of his brother, the chief lord objects to him that f.395 b.
he eannot claim the land, since he has compensation for
it: in truth he can claim the land in different respects, in
domain on account of the descent, and in like manner
retain the compensation on account of the enfeoffment,


and so both, nevertheless for different causes.


CHAPTER XIV.


We have spoken of those who vouch a warrantor by , !-
If a tenant


the aid of the court within the kingdom, and where the nas vouch-
lord the king has a distraint, that the vouchee may come Ee
to warrant. Now however we must speak if a tenant is resident
has vouched a warrantor, who is resident out of the DUM
kingdom, and has nothing in the kingdom of England and has |
through whieh he may be distrained, and then it is of NE F
importance, if he be out of the kingdom, if the king has du
power or not to distrain such a person, but if he has pained.
none, as being in the power of the king of France or of
Germany or such like, although aid be granted to the

tenant, it will not avail; but it will be incumbent upon

the tenant to produce such person, if he wishes, because

he will not have aid, otherwise he will remain in default,

he ought also to produce without the aid of the court

those whom he has under his power, although they may

be resident within the kingdom, and under the coercion


ET hae ee : 3 E
of the king, as his own wife and his own children


120 DE WARRANTIA.


pprios, & alios quibus possit imperare. Esto etiam q
cùm tenens implacitatus fuerit in Anglia, warrantu
vocaverit qui manens sit in Hybernia, vel in Walla,
sub potestate regis, & ubi brevia sua currunt, et hoc
per auxilium curie. Videtur q ei dari debet auxi-
lium, et placitum principale in suspenso manere, &
sine die, quousi in Hybernia! discussum fuerit de
placito warrantie, et q tenens sequatur placitum de
warrantia, vel q per defaltam amittat, & fiat breve
düi regis justiciariis suis in Hibernia in hae forma.


Breve si salute, Scias q cùm A. in curia nostra coram justici-
implacita- or : ~
Jus da ariis nostris apud Westm peteret versus B. tantam


9. Rex dilecto & fideli suo tali justic. Hybernise"?


ee terra &e. ut jus suum, idem B. venit in eadem curia
vocaverit, nostra &e. et dixit q terram illam tenvit de dono C.
qu manet vel alicujus antecessoris ipsius C. cujus heres ipse C.
in Hiber : : P :
nia. est per chartam suam quam obtulit & ibi ostendit, &


vocavit inde ad  warrantum predictum C. versus
eundem A. per auxilium ejusdem curie nostre, &
quia idem C. manens sit in Hybernia! sub potestate
nostra, et nullam terram habet in Anglia ubi sumoniri
possit & distringi, vobis mandamus quód summoniri
faciatis predietum ©. certis die & loco secundum quod
videritis expedire, ad  warrantizandum predicto B.
preedictam terram, vel ad ostendendum quare war-
rantizare non debeat, & recordü illius loquele de præ-
dieta warrantia, secundum quod coram vobis deducta
fuerit, nobis sine dilatione scire faciatis per literas
vestras sigillatas, & remittatis nobis breve istud simul
cum recordo. Et si prædictus C. warrantizare debeat,
detis ei diem coram nobis ad audiendum recordum et
judicium suum de warrantia predicta, & ad respon-
dendum eidem A. in placito principali. T. &c.


! * Hibernia," MS, Rawl. C; 160. | ?*Hibernie,? MS. id.


OF WARRANTY. 121


others whom he can command. Let it be also that
when the tenant has been impleaded in England, he has
called a warrantor who is resident in Ireland or in
Wales under the power of the king and where his writs
run, and this by the aid of the court. It seems that aid
ought to be given to him, and the principal plea ought
- to remain in suspense, and without a day, until it has
been discussed in Ireland concerning the plea of war-
ranty, and that the tenant should follow up the plea of
warranty, or that he should lose by default, and let a
writ of the lord the king issue to his justiciaries in
Ireland in this form.


The king to his beloved and faithful so-and-so, justi- ^ 2.
ciary of Ireland, greeting. Know that when A. in our dut
court before our justiciaries at Westminster has claimed impleaded
against B. so much land &c. as his right, the said B. came j^ Frend
into our court &c. and said that he held that land from ed a war-
the gift of C. or some ancestor of the said C. whose heir DE
C. is, by his charter which he produced and there ex- Ireland.
hibited, and he vouched thereon to warrant the aforesaid
C. against the said A. through the aid of our said court,
and because the said C. is resident in Ireland under our
power, and has no land in England where he can be sum-
moned and distrained, we command you that you cause
to be summoned the aforesaid C. on a certain day and at
a certain place according as you shall see it to be ex-
pedient, to warrant to the aforesaid B. the aforesaid land,
or to show wherefore he ought not to warrant, and cause
us to know by your sealed letters without delay a record
of the trial concerning the said warranty, according as it
has been brought before you, and remit to us this writ at
the same time with the record. And if the aforesaid C.
ought to warrant, give him a day before us to hear the
record and his judgment concerning the aforesaid war-
ranty and to make answer to the said A. in the principal


plea. Witness Se.


f. 396.
3.

Si war-
rantus non
venerit,nec
tenentem
suum war-
rantiza-
verit.


4.
Si implaci-
tatus in
Hibernia
warrantum
vocaverit,
qui manens
sit in
Anglia.


1
Si war-
rantus con-
tenderit de
warrantia,
et charta
producatur
calumniata,
et petens se
posuerit
super
patriam et


122 DE WARRANTIA.


Et quo casu si ©. in Angliam nō venerit, nec
tenente suü defenderit versus A., A. recuperet terram
petitam versus B., & B. de terra ipsius C. in Hybernia '
habebit escambiū ad valentiā. Sed si cùm C. venerit
in Anglia & defenderit B. versus A., B. tenebit in
pace, & C. quietus erit de escambio. Sed esto quód
cùm Č. in Anglia warrantizaverit forte warrantü voca-
verit in Hybernia? & qui nihil habet in Anglia per
q distringi possit, tune fiat breve eodem modo quo
supra, et q contineat totum recordum cum utraq war-
rantia, et sic in infinitum.


Et vice versa fiat de Hybernia? in Anglia, nisi sit
qui dieat q imediaté distringi debet warrantus, q veniat
in Angliam ad warrantizandi cum suis dilationibus.
Sed si sit aliqua libertas ubi non currat breve diii
regis, mandetur eodé modo dio libertatis, ut preedictum
est, vel distringatur q faciat eum venire ad warranti-
zandü p terras suas, infra libertate vel extra no refert,
quia rex qui libertate dat, potestate regiam servituti
non supponit, quamvis illam de gratia in parte
restringat.


Cap. XV.


Item cüm ille qui ad warrantum vocatus est con-
tendere velit de warrantia, & ille qui vocavit chartam
pferat p se in judicio, et contra qué exceptum sit, q
minus sufficiens sit vel falsa, oportebit eum qui pfert
chartam docere illam esse sufficientem & veram. Ut
si scripture et signo contradicatur, & defendatur dont
illud, & ille qui chartam pfert dicat esse donum rité
factum, & chartam esse validam, et inde ponat se


1“ Hibernia," MS. Rawl. C. 160. 3 * de Hibernia,” MS. id.
2 in Hibernia,” MS. id.


OF WARRANTY. 123


And in which case if C. has not come to England nor f. 396.
has defended his tenant against A.,let A. recover the land |, 3-
claimed against B., and B. shall have an equivalent com- Ha
pensation from the land of C. in Ireland. But if when EPA Ser
C. has come into England and has defended B. against not war-
A. B. shall hold in peace and C. shall be acquitted of "ated.
compensation. But let it be that when C. has come
into England, he has by chance vouched a warrantor in
Ireland, and who has nothing by which he can be dis-
trained, then let a writ issue in the same manner as
above, and which shall contain the entire record with
each warranty, and so to infinity.


And conversely let it be done from Ireland to England,
unless there be some one who says that the warrantor bon UM
ought to be forthwith distrained that he should come PE
into England to warrant with his delays. But if there vouched a
be any franchise, where the writ of the king does not De
run, let it be commanded in the same manner to the lord sident in
of that franchise, as aforesaid, or let him be distrained Breland.
that he may cause him to come to warrant through his
own lands, whether within the franchise or without it
does not matter, because the king, who grants the fran-
chise does not subject the royal power to a servitude,


although he restricts it partially of grace.


CHAPTER XV.


Likewise when he who is vouched to warrant desires ije


5 smn Ifthe war-
to dispute a warranty, and he who has vouched him -intor dis-


produces a charter on his behalf in judgment, and against putes a

s 2 NEC 2 AO warranty
whom an exception, is taken that itis insufficient or false, ppd a char-
it will be ineumbent upon him who produces the charter ter is pro-


2 SAG d,
to show that it is sufficient and true. As if the writing Shish is


and signature be contradicted and the gift be denied, d


and he who produces the charter says that the gift has claimant
been rightly made and that the charter is valid, and p m A
thereon puts himself upon the country and upon the thecountry


testes in
brevi
nominatos.


f. 896 b.
2
Summone-

antur
testes, sed
quid, si
manentes
in diver-
sis comita-
tibus.


3.
Si charta
bona sit in
se et re-
cognita pro


124 DE WARRANTIA.


sup patriam & super testes in charta nominatos. Et
tunc fiat inde inquisitio & per tale breve. Rex vic.
salutem, suf&oneas per bonos sumonitores A. B. C.
testes in charta nominatos qua D. in curia nostra
coram justiciariis nostris &c. pfert sub nomine E. de
tanta terra cum pertinentiis in tali villa, et pterea
xii tam milites quàm alios legales, liberos & discretos
homines de visneto tali, q sint coram justic. nostris,
tali loco, tali die, ad recognoscendum super sacramen-
tum suum, si pdietus E. terram illam dedit predicto
D. et chartam sua ei inde fecit, et homagium suum
inde cepit, & ipsum D. inde in seysinam posuit, sicut
idem D. dicit, vel non, quód tam predictus D. quàm
ipse E. posuerunt se inde in juratam illam, et ita se


inde interim certificent, q prefatos justic. nostros ad `-


pfatum terminum pleniüs inde certificare possunt, &
habeas ibi nomina militi et hoc bie. Teste &c.


Si vero testes fuerint in diversis comitatibus ma-
nentes, tunc fiat bie interlaqueatum singulis vic. in
hae forma, ita q milites assumantur de com illo ubi
terra sita est. Rex vicecomiti salute. Sumoneas per
bonos sumonitores A. B. C. testes nominatos ut supra.
Et prseterea octo tam milites qm alios &e. ut supra,
q sint tali die & ad recognoscendum super sacra-
mentum suum simul cum D. E. F. aliis testibus nomi-
natis in eade charta, et simul eum octo vel duodecim
liberis et legalibus hominibus de alio tali com (et sie
de pluribus com si testes & milites sint evocadi) ad
recognoscendü super sacramentii suum We. ut supra.


Item eodem modo si charta recognita fuerit, scilicet
scriptura & signum, sed contra chartam excipiatur q
valere non debeat, quia facta fuit dü donator fuit


OF WARRANTY. 125


witnesses named in the charter. And then let there be and the
an inquest held thereon and by a writ of this kind: The Ce
king to the viscount greeting. Summon by good sum- the charter.
moners A. B. C. the witnesses named in the charter which

D. produces in our court before our justiciaries &c. under

the name of E. concerning so much land with its appur-
tenances in such a vill, and besides twelve as well knights

as other loyal men, free and discreet, of such a visne,

that they be before our justiciaries at such a place on

such a day to recognise in their oath, if the aforesaid E.

has given that land to the aforesaid D. and made a char-

ter thereof for him, and taken his homage thereof, and

had put the said D. into seysine thereof, as the said D.

says, or not so, that as well the aforesaid D. as the said

E. have put themselves thereon on that jury, and so let

them in the mean while ascertain for themselves, that

they may be able to certify more fully thereon our justi-

ciaries at the aforesaid term, and have there the names

of the knights and this writ. Witness &c.


But if the witnesses be resident in different counties, f. 396 b.
then let an interlaced writ be issued to the individual T i
viseounts in this form, so that knights be assumed from witnesses
the county where the land is situated. The king to the Ene
viscount greeting. Summon by good summoners A. B. what if
C. the witnesses named as above. And besides eight as ate A
well knights as others &c. as above, that they be on such different E
a day &e. to recognise upon their oath together with D. ^"""***
E. F. the other witnesses named in the said charter and
together with eight or twelve free and loyal men of such
other county (and so of several counties if the witnesses
and knights are to be called out of it) to recognise upon
their oath &c. as above.

Likewise in the same manner if the charter shall have 7 A
been recognised, to wit, the writing and the signature, charter be
but exception be taken against the charter, that it ought fd A
not to avail, because it was made whilst the donor was is recog-


bona, sed
cum dona-
tor non
fuitcompos
sui nec
sane men-
tis, quando
fecitdonum
illud.


4.
Inquisitio,
si fuit sane
mentis.


126 DE WARRANTIA.


impotens sui, vel nō sane métis, vel postqua memoriam
amisit in infirmitate qua obiit, vel dum donator fuit
infra setate constitutus, vel dü fuit in vinculis detentus
donator, fuit charta illa per vim & per metum extorta,
& ubi ipse donator reclamavit, cum potuit. Ite si per
dolü, ut si donatorius fecit sibi chartam de feoffa-
mento, ubi fecisse debuit cyrographum de term. Ité
ubi charta fieri debuit ad vitam, fecit illam in feodo
& hujusmodi. Dum tamen nihil sit q imputari possit
imperitiz su: vel negligentiæ, ut si sigillum suum
seneschallo suo vel uxori traderet, q cautiüs custodiri
debuit, cùm uxor & sigilla ad paria judicentur, &
hujusmodi secundum varietatem recordorum, et quo
casu oportebit ipsum qui chartam pfert, docere cotra-
riam et pbare, scilicet q donator fuit compos mentis
sue, & bon: memorie, et plenz setatis, et hujusmodi,
et exempli causa fiat inquisitio in singulis casibus in
hae forma. :


Rex vicecomiti salutem. Summoneas per bonos
summonitores A. & B. testes nominatos &c. & pterea
octo tam milites &e. ut supra, ad recognoscendum
super sacramentum suum si predictus C. in ligea
potestate sua, et dum fuit compos sui, vel bone me-
morie, vel sans métis et copos sui, dedit fdicto B.
tantam terram cum ptinetiis in tali villa, vel advoca-
tione talis ecclesise, vel aliud quid tale, et chartam
suam ei inde fecit vel no. Et unde E. filius & heres
pdicti C. (versus quem pdictus B. in curia nostra &c.
clamavit pdietam terram, vel pdictam advocationé,
vel aliud quid tale) dicit quód prædictus talis pater
suus, vel alius antecessor, nunquam dedit pdictam
terram, advocatione, vel quid tale predicto B. et si
hoc unquam feeit, hoe fuit in infirmitate sua, de qua
idem talis antecessor obiit, et postquam  memorià


OF WARRANTY. 197


not master of his faculties or not of sound mind, or after nised as
5 c A 5 : ood, but
he had lost his memory in an infirmity under which he vi the


died, or whilst the donor was still under age, or whilst he donor was
was detained in chains, the charter was extorted from him pin e
through force and fear, and where the donor has reclaimed, faculties,
as soon as he was able. Likewise if through deceit, as if eee
the donatory has made a charter of feoffment, when he mete P
ought to have made a charter for a term. Likewise, when made the
the charter ought to have been made for life, he has made 8ift-

it of the fee and such like. Provided however there be
nothing that can be imputed to his unskilfulness or neg-

ligence, as if he delivered his seal to his steward or to

his wife, which ought to have been kept in more secure
custody, since a wife and seals are judged on a parity,

and such like according to the variety of records, and in

which case it will be incumbent upon him who produces

the charter, to assert the contrary and to prove, to wit, .

that the donor was master of his faculties and of good
memory and of full age and such like, and for example's

sake let an inquest be made in this form.

The king to the viscount greeting. Summon by good 4.
summoners A. and B. the witnesses named &c., and besides M if he
eight as well knights We. as above, to recognise upon be of sound
their oath, if the aforesaid C. in his liege power and when ks
he was in his full senses and of good memory and of
sound mind and master of himself gave to the aforesaid
B. so much land with the appurtenances in such a vill,
or the advowson of such a church, or something else of
the same kind, and made a charter thereof to him or not.

And whereupon E. the son and heir of the aforesaid C.
(against whom the aforesaid B. in our court &c. has
claimed the aforesaid land or the aforesaid advowson or
something else of the same kind) says that his aforesaid
father or other ancestor,never gave the aforesaid land
advowson, or other thing of the same kind to the afore-
said B., and if he ever did so, it was during his infirmity,
of which such ancestor died, and after he had lost his


5.
Si per
testes de
consensu
partium.


f. 397.


128 DE WARRANTIA.


amiserit, & dum aut non fuit sane mentis vel dum
fuit infra state in custodia ipsius antecessoris, ut
idem C. dieit, quia tam pdict? C. quàm fdictus D.
posuerunt se &c. ut supra.


Et quandoque fit inquisitio tantum per testes, et
quandoque per alios quam per testes si partes hoc
voluerint, hoe tamen observato, quód si per alios
quàm per testes fieri debeat inquisitio, semper in fine
addatur hee clausula: & interim terram illam videant,
ecclesiam illam, vel aliud quid tale. Item aliter: Ad
recognoscendü &c. Si pdietus C. in bona voluntate
sua & sponte dedit ipso! D. terram illam vel quid
tale, ut idem D. dicit, vel si hoe fecit coactus et per
metum sieut idem C. dieit, & si hoe fecit coactus &
per metum, tune diligenter inquiras qualem metü et
quale coactioné ide talis ad hoc exhibuit, et inquisi-
tioné &c. Item aliter: Ad recognoscendum &e. Si
A. pater B. dedit C. tantam terram cum pertinentiis
in tali villa, et eum inde in seysinam posuit, et ita
q per donum illud fuit inde in seysina positus in vita
ipsius A. per tantum tépus. Et si idem C. postea
dimisit terram illam pdicto A. patri ipsius B. ad
firmam vel ad vitam, vel si idem A. semp fuit inde
seysina,” et inde obiit seysitus ut de feodo absq aliqua
seysina quam idem C. inde haberet in vita ipsius A.
vel non, quia tam fjpdictus B. quàm pdictus C. inter
quos contentio est de pdicta tra posuerunt se inde in
inquisitionem illam. Et notandum q hujusmodi inqui-
sitiones locü habent generaliter et ubiq ubi contentio
habita est de chartis et donationibus factis per
chartas.


1 jpsi," MS. Rawl. C. 160. |  ?seysitus, MS. id.


OF WARRANTY. 129


memory and whilst either he was not of sound mind, or
whilst he was under age in the guardianship of the said
ancestor, as the said C. asserts, because the aforesaid C.
as well as the aforesaid D. have put themselves &c. as
above.


And sometimes let there be an inquest only through — 5
the witnesses, and sometimes through other persons if Dc E.
the parties wish it, this however being observed that if the con-
the inquest is to be made through others than the wit- in
nesses, there should always be added at the end this
clause : “and meanwhile let them view the land, or the
“church, or anything else of the kind.” Likewise other-
wise : to recognise We. if the aforesaid C. in his good will
and of his own accord has given to the said D. the land
or something of the kind, as the said D. says, or if he
did thus under compulsion and fear as the said C. says ;
and if he did it through compulsion and fear, then do
thou diligently enquire as to what sort of fear and what f. 397.
sort of compulsion the said so-and-so used for this pur-
pose, and the inquest &c, Likewise otherwise; to recog-
nise &e. if A. the father of B. gave to C. so much land
with its appurtenances in such a vill, and put him into
seysine thereof, and so that he was put into seysine
thereof in the lifetime of the said A. during such a time.

And if the said C. afterwards demised the said land to
the aforesaid A. the father of the said B. for a term or
for life, or if the said A. has always been in seysine
thereof,and died seysed thereof as of fee without any
seysine which the said C. had thereof in the lifetime
of the said A., or not, because the aforesaid B. as well as
the aforesaid C., between whom the contention is con-
cerning the said land, have put themselves upon the said
inquest. And it is to be noted that inquests of this sort
have place generally and in all cases wherever a contest
arises concerning charters and donations made through


charters.
R 2657. I


6.
Si res una
data fuerit
duobus,
tune in-
quiratur de
prioritate.


Si advo-
catio data
fuerit
duobus.


180 DE WARRANTIA.


Si quis auté unicam rem dederit duobus, et con-
tentio habeatur de prioritate, quis eorum habuerit
prima seysinam, vel si quis dederit advocationem
alicui, post donationem illam dieat donator se psen-
tasse ad ecclesia illam, et donatorius q non, tunc
fiat inquisitio tam de prioritate doni quàm de fsenta-
tione p hoc breve.


Rex vicecom salute. Preecipimus tibi, q venire facias
coram justiciariis nostris &c. tali die, tali loco duo-
decim tam milites qm alios liberos et legales homines
de visneto tali, per quos rei veritas &c. et tales qui
non sunt essoniabiles, ad recognoscendum &c. Si A.
antecessor B. uxoris talis postqua ide A. dederit C.
advocationem illius ecclesiz, et postquàm chartam suam
(qm inde habet) ei fecit, psentavit D. ad eande eccle-
siam ita q ad psentationem suam fuit admissus, et
ultimó obiit in eadem ecclesia psona, vel non, quia
tam talis quàm B. uxor ejus qm idem C. inter quos
contentio est de eadem advocatione, posuerunt se inde
in juratam illam, et similiter ad recognoscendum super
sacramentum suum simul cum D. E. F. testibus nomi-
natis in charta, quam preedictus A. fecit tali abbati
de eadem advocatione, et simul cum G. et H. testibus
nominatis in charta, quam idem A. fecit tali abbati
de eadem advocatione, videlicet utrum predictus A.
prius dedit advocationem illam predicto tali & B.
uxori sue vel predicto abbati. Et interim ecclesiam
illam videant, & se ita inde interim certificent, q
pfatos justiciarios nostros &c. et habeas ibi nomina
recognitorum et hoc breve. Teste &c. Si autem fieri


OF WARRANTY. T31


But if any one has given a single thing to two per- e.
sons, and a contention arises concerning priority as to est
Which of them has had the first seysine ; or if any person been given
has given an advowson to a certain person, and after the bene
donation the donor says that he has presented to the said then let an
church, and the donatory that he has not done so, then jJ 4253: be
let there be an inquest concerning the priority of the the prio-
donation, as concerning the presentation by a writ of "^
this kind.

The king to the viscount greeting. We enjoin you, 7.
that you cause to come before our justiciaries &c. on such tH
a day at such a place twelve as well knights as other been given
free and loyal men of such a visne, through whom the ae
truth of the thing &c. and such as are not essoinable,
to recognise &e. If A. the ancestor of B. the wife of so-
and-so after the said A. has given to C. the advowson of
the said church, and after he made for him his said char-
ter (which he has thereof) presented D. to the same church
so that he was admitted upon his presentation, and
ultimately died the parson of the said church, or not,
because so-and-so as wellas B. his wife as well as the
said C. between whom a contention exists concerning the
said advowson, have put themselves thereon upon the
said jury, and similarly to recognise upon his oath to-
gether with D. E. F. the witnesses named in the charter,
which the aforesaid A. made to abbot so-and-so concern-
ing the said advowson, and together with G. and H. the
witnesses named in the charter, which the said A. made
to the said abbot concerning the said advowson, to wit,
whether the aforesaid A. previously gave that advowson
to so-and-so aforesaid and to B. his wife or to the afore-
said abbot. And in the meantime let them view that
church and certify themselves thereon in the meantime
in such a manner that they may certify our aforesaid

justiciaries &c., and have there the names of the recog-


nisors and this writ. Witness &c. But if the inquest
172


8.
Si inquisi-
tio fieri
debeat per
testes et
per pa-
triam.


T3997 ab:
9

Si fieri
debeat in-
quisitio in
comitatu,
et non
coram jus-
üelariis.


T32 DE WARRANTIA.


debeat inquisitio de prioritate per testes, et per
patriam, tunc fiat sic.

Rex vicecomiti salutem. Præcipimus tibi q venire
facias coram justic. &e. A. & B. testes nominatos in
charta quam C. fecit priori & canonicis talibus de
advocatione talis ecclesiæ, ad recognoscendum super
sacramentum suum simul cum xii. tam militibus qm
alis &c. Et simul cum E. F. G. testibus in charta
nominatis quam idem C. fecit tali abbati & conventui
de eadem advocatione, utrum scilicet praedictus C.
prius dedit advocationem illam predicto priori, &
chartam suam ei inde fecit, vel predicto abbati, &
interim &c. ut supra. Et sie sit aliquando inquisitio
de prioritate donationis, & aliquando de seysina et
prima preesentatione. Cám autem fieri debet aliquando
inquisitio in comitatu & non coram justiciariis, tunc
fiat breve in hac forma.


Rex vicec. salute. Praecipimus tibi q venire facias
coram te & custodibus placitorum corons nostre in
pleno com tuo A. B. C. testes nominatos in charta
&c. ut supra. Et pterea xii. tam milites &c. ut supra
de visneto tali p quos rei veritas &c. et qui D. & E.
nulla affinitate attingant, & qui nullo modo sunt
essoniabiles, & per eorü sacramétum diligenter inquiras,
si pdictus E. &e. ut supra, quia tam fdictus D. quam
pdietus E. posuerunt se inde in juratam illam, et
inquisitione inde feceris, scire facias justic. &c. ad tale
terminum, evidenter, distincte et aperte p literas tuas
sigillatas sigillo tuo, et sigillis pdietorü custodum pla-
citorum corone nostre, et per quatuor vel duos legales
et discretos homines ex illis, p quorum sacrametü
inquisitione illà feceris, & habeas ibi hoc breve et


OF WARRANTY. 133


concerning priority ought to be made through witnesses
and through the country, then let it be thus:

The king to the viscount greeting. We enjoin you that s.
you cause to come before the justiciaries &e. A. and B. x
the witnesses named in the charter, which C. made to ought to
the prior and canons of such a place concerning the ad- aeos
vowson of such a church, to recognise upon their oath witnesses
together with twelve as well knights as others &e. And theóugh the
at the same time with E. F. G. the witnesses named in county.
the charter, which the said C. has made for such abbot
and convent concerning the said advowson, whether for-
sooth the aforesaid C. has previously given that advowson
to the aforesaid prior, and has made his charter thereof for
him, or to the aforesaid abbot, and meanwhile &c. as above.

And so sometimes an inquest is made concerning the
priority of the donation, and sometimes concerning the
seysine and first presentation. But when the inquest
ought to be made sometimes in the county court and not
before the justiciaries, then let a writ issue in this form.


The king to the viscount greeting. We enjoin you f.397 b.
that you should cause to come before you and the |, thee
keepers of the pleas of our crown in your full county quest
court A. B. C. the witnesses named in the charter, &e. ca ae
as above, and besides twelve as well knights &c. as inthe
above, from such a visne, through whom the truth of ee


the matter, &c. and who do not touch D. and E. by any not before
affinity, and who in no manner are essoinable, and DON
through their oath you should diligently inquire if the
aforesaid E. &c. as above, because as well the aforesaid
D. as the aforesaid E. have put themselves on that jury,
and that you have held an inquest thereon make
known to the justiciaries &c. at such a term evidently,
distinctly, and openly by your letters sealed with your
seal and with the seals of the aforesaid keepers of the
pleas of our crown, and by four or two loyal and dis-
creet men of them, by whose oath you will have made
that inquest, and have there this writ and the names


10.
Si testes
manentes
sint in
diversis
comitati-
bus.


11.
Si in comi-
tatu, breve
interlaque
atum.


134 DE WARRANTIA.


nomina eorum, p quorü sacramentum inquisitionem
illam feceris. Teste &e.

Si vero testes degentes sint in diversis com, oportet
q omnes testes conveniant cora vic. cui demandata
fuerit inquisitio facienda, et tunc fiat breve interla-
queatü ut supra in hae forma. Rex vie. Essex salute.
Precipimus tibi q venire facias cora te et custodibus
placitorum eoronsz nostre ad dié certü et locü secun-
dum q videris magis expedire quado ad hoc intendere
possis A. B. C. testes nominatos in charta, quam D.
in curia nostra coram justic. nostris &c. profert sub
nomine E. et pterea octo vel xii. tam milites quàm
alios liberos et legales homines &c. et p eorum sacra-
mentü &c. et similiter p sacramentu F. et G. testium
nominatorum in eadem charta de com Sussex, et simi-
liter xi. tam militü qm alioru &e. de eode com quos
vic. noster Sussex coram te venire faciat, & etiam
per sacramentum H. et I. testium nominatorum in
eade charta de com Surrey, & pterea vii. tam militum
quàm aliorum &c. de eodem com quos vic. noster
Surrey coram te venire faciat, diligenter inquiras si
pdictus & ut supra. Et inquisitionem quam inde
feceris scire facias & c. ut supra. Mandavimus enim
prefatis vie. nostris Sussex et Surrey q pfatos testes
et recognitores coram te venire faciant ad die et
locum quem eis scire feceris, et habeas ibi hoe breve
et nomina eorum &c ut supra. Breve aute quod
sequitur fiet in hac forma,


Rex vic. Sussex vel Surrey salute.  Precipimus
tibi qad die et locum, Gm vie. noster Essex tibi scire
faciet, venire facias coram eo A. et B. testes - nomi-
natos in charta qm D. in curia nia coram justic, &c.


OF WARRANTY. 135


of those persons, through whose oath you have made
that inquest. Witness, &c.

But if the witnesses are resident in different counties, If s :
SITE AMI. 1e wit
it is incumbent that all the witneses should be convened nesses are
before the viscount to whom the holding of the inquest ne
has been committed, and then let an interlaced writ counties.
issue as above in this form. The king to the viscount
of Essex greeting, We enjoin you that you cause to
appear before yourself and the keepers of the pleas of
our crown on a certain day and at a certain place,
according as you may see it to be most expedient when
you can attend to this, A. B. and C. the witnesses
named in the charter, which D. in our court before
our justiciaries, &c. produces under the name of E., and
besides eight or twelve as well knights as other free and
loyal men &c., and by their oath &c., and in like manner
by the oath of F. and G. the witnesses named in the
said charter from the county of Sussex ; and in like man-
ner of twelve as well knights as others and of the said
county, whom our viscount of Sussex should cause to
appear before you; and also by the oath of H. and I.
witnesses named in the said charter from the county of
Surrey, and besides of eight as well knights as others
&e. of the said county, whom our viscount of Surrey
has eaused to appear before you, you should diligently
inquire if the aforesaid &c. as above. And make known
the inquest which you shall have made thereon. We
have likewise commanded our said viscounts of Sussex
and of Surrey that they should cause the aforesaid
witnesses and recognisors to come before you on a day
and at a plase which you shall have made known to
them, and have there this writ and their names, &c. as
above. But let the writ which follows be in this form.


The king to the viscount of Sussex or of Surrey 11.
i joi that on a day and at a place, Don?
greeting. We enjoin you that on a day and at a place, county an
which our viscount of Essex shall make known to you, interlaced
you cause to come before him A. and B. the witnesses


named in the charter, which D. in our court before our


19;
Si testes et
recogni-

f. 398.
tores non
venerint
ad primum
diem.


18.
Quod vari-
antur,
hujusmodi
inquisi-
tiones se-
cundum
varietatem
pheeitorum.


14.
Cum com-
paruerint
testes et
recogni-
tores.


136 DE WARRANTIA.


pfert sub nomine E. &e. ut supra, pterea octo vel xii.
tam milites quàm alios &e. de com tuo p quos rei
veritas &c. ad recognoscendi sup sacramentü suum
simul cum F. et G. de cofi Surrey aliis testib?
nominatis in eadé charta, et simul cum octo tam
militibus &e. de eodem ‘com, & sic de pluribus com,
si testes fuerint in diversis et pluribus com degentes
sic: dictus E. &c. ut supra. Et ita se inde interim
certificent, quod prefatum vie. nostrum Essex inde
plenius certificare possunt, et habeas &c. Teste Se.
Et consimilia brevia fiant alias’ vic. Si autem testes
et recognitores non venerint ad diem eis datum, tunc
peipiatur vic. sicut prius p breve quód sie incipiat.


Rex? vie. salute. Bene recolimus alias tibi prz-
cepisse, quód ad diem et locum quem vic. noster talis
tibi scire faceret venire faceres &c. Et p omnia ut
supra. Et in fine brevis addatur istud cominatorium,
s. et ita te habeas in hoc negotio, ne nos ad te gra-
viter capere debeamus.


Variatur aute hujusmodi inquisitiones multipliciter,
secundum varietatem placitorum, et partium respon-
siones, sicut ssepius contingit in assisis et in brevibus
de ingressu, ut si unus dicat q terrà teneat in feodo,
et alius q no nisi ad terminu vite vel annorü et
hujusmodi, secundü q superius dicitur in tractatu de
ingressu.


Cùm auté in curia coparuerint testes et recognitores,
et facto sacramento dicant se interfuisse ubi donatio
facta fuit, et sub eorü psentia charta donationis lecta
et audita, et homagiü captü et seysina donatorio legi-
time facta in eorü fsentia et cum debita solennitate,


1 & aliis vicecomitibus MS. ? * tali vicecomiti," MS. id.
Rawl. C. 160.


OF WARRANTY. NBC


justielaries &e. produces under the name of E. &c. as
above, besides eight or twelve as well knights as others
&e. of your county through whom the truth of the mat-
ter &c., to recognise on their oath as well with F. and G.
of the county of Surrey other witnesses named: in the
same charter, and together with eight as well knights
&e. of the same county, and so of several counties, if
the witnesses are resident in several different counties,
as the aforesaid E. &e. as above. And let them so certify
themselves thereon in the meanwhile, that they may be
able the more fully to certify our said viscount of Essex,
and have there, &c. Witness &c. And let there be simi-
lar writs issued to the other viscounts. But if the
witnesses and recognisors have not come on the day
given to them, then let it be enjoined to the viscount
as before by a writ which shall begin thus.

The king to the viscount greeting. We well recollect | 12.
to have otherwise enjoined you that, on a day and at a pees
place which so-and-so our viscount would make known pei es
to you, you should cause to come &c., and throughout not come
as above. And at the end of the writ let there be added 2n the first
this comminatory, to wit, and so conduct yourself in this E E
business that we should not be obliged to take grave


notice of you.


But inquests of this kind are varied in manifold ways 13. |
c That inqui-
according to the variety of the pleas, and the answers of sitions of


the parties, as often happens in assises and in writs of Rae
entry, as if one should say that he holds the land in fee, according
and another that he only holds it for a term of life or n dee T
of years or such like, according to what has been said ihe pleas.


above in the treatise on entry.


But when the witnesses and recognisors have appeared, m dd
en e
and having taken an oath say that they were present witnesses


when the donation was made, and that in their presence and the

= recornisors
the charter of donation was read aloud, and homage was ee
taken from and seysine given to the donatory in their peared.


presence and with due solemnity, the charter will be


138 DE WARRANTIA.


valida erit charta et donatio erit legitima. Si aute
sie dicant et loquatur de auditu, q audiverint dici q
charta facta fuit et homagiü captum, sed nullus eorum
tune ibi præsens fuit, sed preesentes fuerint ubi sey-
sina facta fuerit donatorio per seneschallum, vel per
nuntium, per fusti, vel per baculum, vel per haspam,
et q donatorius inductus fuit in vacuam possessionem,
ita q nullus ibi remansit ex parte donatoris, valebit
donatio ut supra. De hae materia inveniri poterit de
term Sancti Hilarii anno regni regis Henrici decimo
quarto de Rogero de Danudeser et Matilda uxore ejus,
qui per judicium warrantizaverit in cosimili casu. - Si
aute dicant se interfuisse ubi donatio facta fuit et
charta, et homagium captum, sed de seysina nihil
sciverint, pbatur charta legitima, sed donatio erit
invalida, quia nihil pbant de seysina. Et vice versa
fieri poterit, si seysinam  probaverint legitimam, q
donatio erit valida, licet nihil pbaverint de homagio
capto, nec de charta: ut si testes et juratores dicant,
q charta illam nunqua antea viderunt, nec unquam
audita fuit in com nec hundredo, licet dicant q rogati
fuerint q essent testes, tamen non valebit charta: ut
de termino Paschz añ regni regis Henrici duodecimo
in com Hunt de /Egidio de Merk. Item erit si dicant
se nunquam interfuisse confectioni charte, nec recita-
tioni, hoe enim multum derogat charte et ipsius fidei:
ut de ultimo itinere M. de P. in com Suffolk, assisa
novee disseysinze si Mabilla. Ite si omnes testes dicat,
vel si omnes pter unum vel duos dicant se nihil scire
de charta et charte: eofeetione, et unus vel duo dicant
q nihil sciant de charta nee de donatione, sed dicant.


OF WARRANTY. 139


valid and the donation will be legitimate. But if they
say and speak thus of the hearing, that they have heard
it said that the charter was made and the homage taken,
but none of them were there present, but they were
present when seysine was given to the donatory by
the seneschal or by a commissioner, by a staff, or a rod,
or by a hasp, and that the donatory was inducted into
a vacant possession, so that no’ one remained there on
behalf of the donor, the donation will avail as above.
On this matter a case will be found in St. Hilary term
in thé fourteenth year of the reign of king Henry, con-
cerning Roger de Danudeser and Matilda his wife, who
by a judgment warranted in a similar case. But if
they say that they were present when the donation and
the charter were made and homage taken, but they know
nothing about the seysine, the charter is proved to be
legitimate, but the donation will be invalid, because they
prove nothing concerning the seysine. Andthe converse
may result, if they have proved a legitimate seysine,
that the donation will be valid, although they can prove
nothing concerning the taking of homage or concerning
the charter: as if the witnesses and jurors should say
that they never saw that charter before, nor had it ever
been read in the county court or in the hundred court,
although they may say that they were asked to bé wit-
nesses, notwithstanding the charter will not be valid:
as in Easter term in the twelfth year of the reign of
king Henry in the county of Huntingdon, concerning
Egidius de Merk. The same will result, if they should
say that they were never present at the making of the
charter nor at the reading of it, for this derogates much
from the charter and its credit, as in the last iter of
Martin de Pateshull in the county of Suffolk, an assise
of novel disseysine, if Mabilla. Likewise if all the
witnesses should say, or if all but one or two should
say, that they know nothing about the charter or the
donation, but they say that they were present when the


f. 398 b.


1.
Probari
poterit
charta alio
modo,quam
per testes,


140 DE WARRANTIA.


q interfuerunt ubi cdfirmatio charte facta fuit, adhue
non valebit charta, ex quo nihil pbant de principali,
s. de charts confectione, ut de term Sancti Hilarii
anno regni regis Henrici octavo in com Norff de
Radulpho de Lerlinge et priore de Thefford de advo-
catione ecclesie de Russeworth. Si aute dicant testes
q presentes fuerint confectioni note, in qm utraq pars
cosentit donator & donatorius, hoc sufficit ad pbatione,
licet psentes no essent ubi charta scripta fuit et assig-
nata: ut de itinere M. de P. ad assisam nove dissey-
sine capienda et gaolas deliberadas in com Norf,
jurata de consensu partium p Johanne de Wanton ai
regis H. octavo, et sie poterit charta esse valida et
donatio nulla vel @ contrarió. Si aute null? testis ap-
paret, quia omnes mortui sunt, vel extra regnu, de
fide charte erit de necessitate ad patriam recurrenduü.
Sed quid si, chm testes appareant, dicant q de charta
nihil sciant, vel inde dubie respondeant, & ille qui
chartam pfert suspectus habeatur q p fraudem chartam
acquisiverit, quia fuit camerarius donatoris, vel p
fraude uxoris, vel sit alia vehemens psumptio q faciat
contra ipsum, non valebit charta nec donatio ppter
psumptionem, et maximé quia nihil pbat.


Cap X VL


Probari etiam poterit charta illo modo quàm p
testes et p patria, sicut p collatione signorü, ut si
forte charte contradicatur, coferant alia signa d ali-


quado in judicio plata et approbata fuerint, et à


OF WARRANTY. 141


confirmation of the charter was made, still the charter
will not be valid, since they prove nothing about the
principal fact, namely, the making of the charter, as in
St. Hilary’s term in the eighth year of the reign of king
Henry in the county of Norfolk, concerning Ralph of
Lerlinge and the prior of Thefford concerning the ad-
vowson of the church of Russeworth. But if the wit-
nesses should say that they were present at the making
of the note to which both parties, the donor and the dona-
tory, agreed, this suffices for proof, although they were
not present when the charter was written and assigned,
as in the iter of Martin de Pateshull to hold an assise
of novel disseysine and of gaol delivery in the county
of Norfolk, a jury with the consent of parties for John
de Wanton in the eighth year of king Henry, and so a
. charter may be valid and the donation null, or the
contrary. But if no witness appears, because all are dead
or out of the realm, it will be necessary to have recourse
to the country concerning the faith to be given to the f. 398 v.
charter. But what if, when the witnesses appear, they
should say that they know nothing about the charter,
or should answer doubtfully thereon, and he who pro-
duces the charter is a person under suspicion that he has
acquired possession of the charter through fraud, because
he was the chamberlain of the donor, or through the
fraud of his wife, or if there be any other strong ‘pre-
sumption which makes against him, the charter will not
avail nor the donation on account of the presumption,
and chiefly because it proves nothing.


CHAPTER XVI.


à l.
A charter may be proved in another manner than by JN re


witnesses and by the country, as by a comparison of sig- may D.
: ; : proved i5
natures, as if by chance a charter be contradicted, they nother


may compare other signatures which have been produced pane
: than
and approved in court, and have been acknowledged by Bie


scilicet per
collatio-
nem sig-
norum, et
de vitiis
chartarum.


2.
Probatur
sigillum
per com-
paratio-
nem.


142- DE WARRANTIA.


donatore recognita, et si modis omnibus conveniant
et p omnia, ita q nulla in eis appareat differentia :
hoc solum sufficit ad pbationem chartæ, & omnia in
ea contenta erunt tenenda, nisi forte aliquid in charta
inveniatur q manifestam suspicionem inducat, ut si
rasura faeta fuerit in ‘loco suspecto, s. in narratione
facti, secus tamé si in narratione juris. Jura autem
ubiq scribi possunt, quia non variantur nec mutantur
p rasuram. Apparere autem debet charta in prima
sui figura absă omni vituperatione, rasura, vel cancel-
latura, quia calumpniosam scripturam inde in judicio
obtinere nō convenit. Sunt tamen in scripturis quæ-
dam que levem inducunt fsumptionem, que quidem
convinci possit per veram testiu pbationem in con-
trarium, et p patriam, ut si in scriptura inveniatur
diversitas calami, & diversitas scribendi, et diversa
manus, aliter enim scribit unus, & aliter alius, aliter
juvenis & aliter senex: item diversitas incausti &
atramenti, ut si in una pars scribatur incausto nigro,
et altera pars incausto rubro, non atramento.


Item cum sigillum pbari debeat per collatione, et
signa plura pferantur sub nomine ejus confecta, qui
ad pbationé tenetur, non erit eis fides adhibenda, quia
omnes possüt esse adulterina, nisi ita sit q alig illoru
prius in judicio pbatü sit, et à donatore recognitu,
vel à pferente pbatum, ut si quis forte tram aligm
ab initio alicui concesserit ad terminü et ad firmam,
et inde coficiatur instrumentü et signatü, et firmarius `
postmodum dieat se inde esse feoffatum et inde pferat
charta vel instrumentum, cui ab eo qui dimisit fuerit


OF WARRANTY. 143


the donor, and if they agree in every respect and through- to wit
out so that no difference be apparent therein, this alone e ert
suffices for proof of the charter, and all things contained of signa-
in it will have to be observed, unless by chance there oe
be something found in the charter which induces mani- the vice of
fest suspicion, as if an erasure has been made in a sus- rca
pected place, to wit, in a narration of fact, otherwise

if in a narration of law. For law may be written every-

where, because it is not varied nor changed by an era-

sure. But a charter ought to appear in its original figure
without any defect, erasure or cancellation, for it is not

proper that an impeachable writing should prevail in

a judgment. There are however certain things in a
writing which induce a light presumption, that can

be confuted by a true proof of witnesses to the con-

trary, and by the country, as if in the writing there

be found a diversity of the pen, and a diversity of .
writing, and a different hand, for one writes one way,

and another another way, a youth in one way, and old

men in other ways: likewise a diversity of the mor-

dant and of the black ink, as if one part be written

with a black mordant, and the other with a red mor-


dant, not with black ink.


Likewise when the seal ought to be proved by a 2
comparison, and many signatures are produced made cr "
under the name of him, who is bound to prove, faith compari-
is not to be given to them, because all may be adul- °°”
terine, unless it be that some one of them has been
previously proved in court, and has been acknowledged
by the donor, or proved by the producer, as if by chance
a person has granted a certain land from the com-
mencement to a certain person for a term and for a
ferm, and an instrument thereof has been made and
signed, and the fermor afterwards says, that he was
enfeoffed of it, and produces a charter thereof or an
instrument, which has been contradicted by him who
has demised the land, if he has acknowledged the term


3.
Si plura
proferan-
tur instru-
menta.


f. 399,


1
Aliud
genus war-
rantie,
sieut de
warrantia
charte.


144 DE WARRANTIA.


contradictum, si terminum recognoverit et instrumentu
de termino confectum & sigillum recognoverit, si in
omnibus coveniant sigilla tam de tmino quàm de
feoffamento, chartam de feoffamento contradicere non
poterit ppter convenientiam sigillorum, nisi ita sit
quód excipere possit contra chartam vel instrumentum
de dolo vel metu: et sie pbantur charte & instrumenta
per collationem sigillorum.


Si vero cùm ex parte probantis plura prolata fuerint
instrumenta & signa, nec sit aliquod eorum priüs à
parte adversa recognitum, vel à proferente probatum,
tune de necessitate recurrendum erit ad instrumenta
aliorum eodem sigillo signata vel sigillata, & que qui-
dem prius recognita fuerunt vel probata, cüm utraque
in se possent esse vitiosa, & sufficit si unum probetur,
dum tamen utraq sint convenientia.


Cap. XVII.


Est etiam aliud genus warrantizationis, que dicitur
warratia charte, ubi quis de facto vel feoffaméto suo
pprio vel antecessorü suorü tenetur alium defendere
et acquietare in seysina sua, per servitiu in charta sua
nominatum, cùm ab aliis, sicut à düis capitalibus dis-
trietus fuerit & vexatus fuerit ad faciendum plura
servitia qm in charta exprimatur, et ubi ipse no im-
placitatur de tenemto q tenet, sed vexatur ut pdictum
est: ubi hoc sit in com & nisi warrantum vocaverit


. cûm fuerit implacitatus, & quo casu currendü est ad


2
Breve de
warrantia
charte.


curiam dfi regis, & sumonitur ille qui warrantizare
tenetur p tale breve.


Rex vic. salute, Præcipe tali q juste & sine dila-
tione warrantizet tali tantum terre cum ptinentiis


OF WARRANTY. 145


and the instrument made concerning the term and has
acknowledged the seal, if the seals concerning the term
and concerning the enfeoffment agree in all respects, he
cannot contradict the charter of enfeoffment on account
of the agreement of the seals, unless it be that he may
except against the charter or the instrument on the
ground of deceit or fear: and thus charters and instru-
ments are proved by the comparison of seals.


But if several instruments and signatures are pro- 2 =
= severa
duced on the part of the prover, and there is not any ipai.
of them previously recognised on the adverse side nor ments are
d by the producer, then it will b ry to have Pr eon"
proved by the producer, then it will be necessary to have p, com-
recourse to the instruments of others signed or sealed parison.
with the same seal, and which have been previously
acknowledged or proved, since both may be vicious, and f. 399.


it is sufficient if one be proved, provided both agree.


CHAPTER XVII.


There is also another kind of warranting, which is ^ 1.
called the warranty of a charter, where a person is edet
bound by the act or the feoffment of himself or of his warranty,
ancestors to defend another, and to acquit him in his coming the
seysine by a service named in the charter, when he beer
shall have been distrained by others, as by his chief ter,
lords, and has been harassed to perform more services
than are expressed in the charter, and where he himself
is not impleaded concerning the tenement which he
holds, but is harassed as aforesaid ; where this is in the
county, and unless he has vouched a warrantor, when he
was impleaded, and in which case he must have recourse
to the court of the lord the king, and he who is bound


to warrant is summoned by a writ of this kind. ^s
; ; j ee A writ
The king to the viscount greeting. Enjoin so-and-so concerning


that justly and without delay he should warrant to such the war-


e : 3 4, ranty of a
an one so much land with its appurtenances in such a vill, charter.


R 2657. ~ K


146 DE WARRANTIA.


in tali villa q tenet, & de eo tenere clamat, et unde
chartà suam habet ut dicit; vel sie, et unde charta
talis patris vel matris, fratris vel sororis, avunculi vel
amite, avi vel avis, pavi vel pavie talis, quamvis
ipse qui queritur heres sit valde remotus, et tunc
dicatur eujus hseres ipse est ut dicit, & nisi fecerit, &
talis fecerit te securum de clamore suo psequendo,
tune sumoneas p bonos sumonitores pfatum tale q sit
coram justic. nostris apud Westm tali die, vel coram:
justie. nostris ad primam assisam cüm in ptes illas
venerint, ostensurus quare non fecerit, & habeas ibi
sumonitores et hoc breve. Teste &e. Ad tale vero
sumonitionem bene jacebit essonium unicü, antequam
copareat suinonitus si voluerit.


3. Et si no venerit, nec se essoniaverit, ppter defalta
Si fxpe 5 : : cen :
venerit Suam NO erit aliqua terra capienda in manü diii regis,
attachiatus, sicut in warrantiis supradictis, sed attachietur p vadium
observetur . . . . =
uis & salvos plegios q sit ad certum diem ad warrantizadu
attaehia- vel ad ostendendu quare non, eode modo quo dietum
mentorum. : E =
est, & observetur ordo attachiamentorü secundū q
alibi observatur de attachiamētis donec coparuerit;
cùm auté comparuerit in judicio, respondere poterit
contra chartā, et q warrantizare nō debeat secundum
formā brevis: vel quia querens terram no tenet de
qua petit warrantia, vel quia charta nō ostenderit nec
aliud quare sumonitus warrātizare debeat, vel quia
ipse querens nō est hæres ipsius, sub cuius nomine
petit warrantiam ppinquus nec remotus. Et plures
aliæ sunt responsiones, secüdü q superius videri poterit


per exemplum de vocatione warranti.


OF WARRANTY. 147


which he holds and claims to hold of him, and whereof
he has his charter as he says; or thus, and whereof he
has the charter of so-and-so his father or mother, brother
or sister, uncle or aunt, grandfather or grandmother,
great-grandfather or great-grandmother, although he who
complains is à very remote heir, and then let it be said
whose heir he is as he says, and unless he has done 80,
and so-and-so has given you security to pursue his claim,
then summon by good summoners so-and-so aforesaid
that he be before our justiciaries at Westminster on such
& day, or before our justiciaries at their first assise when
they have come into those parts, in order to show where-
fore he has not done it,and have there the summoners
and this writ. Witness &c. But to such a summons a
single essoin before the party summoned has appeared, if
he wishes it, will well lie.


And if he has not come, nor essoined himself, his land a
shall not on account of his default be taken into the hand Ee te
of the lord the king, as in the warranties above men- ed has not
tioned, but let him be attached by bail and safe sureties the se
that he should appear on a certain day to warrant or to ee
show wherefore not, in the same manner as above men- observed.
tioned, and let the order of attachments be observed
according to what is elsewhere observed concerning
attachments, until he has appeared, but when he has
appeared in judgment, he may answer contrary to the
charter, that he is not bound to warrant according to the
form of the writ, either because the complainant does
not hold the land concerning which he claims a warranty,
or because the charter does not show nor any other
instrument, wherefore the party summoned ought to
warrant, or because the complainant. himself is not the
heir of him under whose name he claims a warranty,
neither near nor remote. And there are many other
answers, according to what may be seen above by the
example concerning the vouching of a ID

K


4,

Si sum-
monitus ad
warranti-
zandum
vexaverit
tenentem
suum erga
dominum

f. 399 b.


feoffa-
torem.


5.
Si tenens
in brevi de
recto nul-
lum habu-
erit war-
rantum,
quem vo-
care possit
vel velit,
tunc ad
elidendam
actionem
petentis
tenens
proponat
excepti-
onem, si
quam ha-
buerit, et
illam pro-
bet, cum
quodam-~'
modo actor
sit in hac
parte.


148 DE. WARRANTIA.


Si auté ille, qui ad warrantizandum sumonitus est,
tenentem suü cotra chartam suam vexaverit, & grava-
verit, exigendo alia servitia vel plura qm deberet
facere, sunt qui dicunt q loci non habet erga dominü
bie de warratia chartze, sed bře de recto de servitiis
& consuetudinibus p q pervenire possit ad duellum
vel magna assisam, quamvis objici poterit et sustineri,
q ille qui contra alios tenetur defendere tenerte suu,
ipse illum eontra chartam suam gravare non debet,
nee ei injuriam facere, et ideo videtur q teneatur de
injuria per tale breve, quia qui tenetur defendere no
debet destruere, & quia, cùm quis ex officio suo alios
prohibere necesse habet, idipsum in psona sua com-
mittere non debet.


Ad diem summonitionis post dilationes & essonia
revertamur, ad quam cüm partes comparuerint, si non
habeat tenens warrantum quem vocare potest, vel si
habuerit et nullum vocat, proposita in judicio coram
justie. ut praedictum est intentione petentis, et fundata,
et illo eam probare offerente, ad elidendam actionem
proponat tenens exceptionem si quam habuerit et illam
probet, et doceat quód exceptio ad illum pertineat,
secundum quod dicitur de actionibus, et eodem modo.
Exceptiones enim loco actionum sunt. Nam qui ex-
cipit, videtur agere, quantum ad onus probationis, et
respectu actionum dieuntur exceptiones, unum enim
alterum impugnat, et sicut actores armantur actionibus
& quasi accinguntur gladiis, ita rei e contra muniuntur
exeeptionibus, & defenduntur quasi clipeis.


OF WARRANTY. 149


But if he who has been summoned to warrant, has 4.
TDisrasded d tenet d S 5 If when
arassed and aggrieved his tenant against his charter, by summoned


exacting other services or more than he ought to do, te hes
E e nas
there are those who say that a writ of warranty of 8 harassed


charter has no place with regard to the lord, but a writ his tenant. *
with regard


of right concerning services and customs, by means to his
whereof he may arrive at a duel or a great assise, although feoffor.
it may be objected and maintained that he who is bound f. 399 b.
to defend his tenant against others, ought not himself to
aggrieve him contrary to his charter, nor to do him a
wrong, and accordingly it seems that he is liable to a pro-
ceeding for a wrong by a writ of this kind, because he

who is bound to defend ought not to destroy, and be-
cause when a person is under a necessity as of duty bound

to prohibit others, he ought not himself in his own per-

son to do the act.


Let us revert to the day of the summons after the de- a m
lays and the essoins, upon which day when the parties jut, &-


have appeared, if the tenant has not a warrantor whom writ of
right has


he can vouch, or if he has one, but vouches none, the de- ho warran-
claration of the claimant having been propounded as S
aforesaid before the justiciaries, and having been ground- or willing
ed, and upon his offering to prove it, let the tenant with UT
a view to parry the action propound an exception, if he order to


have any, and let him prove it, and show that the excep- i:


tion pertains to him, aecording to what has been said ue cuim
. . L ant ie e
concerning actions, and in the same manner. Forexcep-fT * jns


tions are in lieu of actions. For he who excepts, seems pound an
o m 3 4 exception
to be a plaintiff as far as regards the burden of proof, and iE,


exceptions are so called with respect to actions, for the sap sures
im prove


one impugns the other, and as plaintiffs are armed with it since he


actions and are girtas it were with swords, so defendants is in a cer-
aim man-


on the contrary are fortified with exceptions and are de- ner a plain-


fended as it were with bucklers. = i this


TRACTATUS QUINTUS
LIBRI QUINTI,


IN


QUO TRACTATUR DE EXCEPTIONIBUS.


Cap. I.


SAT Inprimis videndü quid sit exceptio, & qualiter
E pd et dividatur, et sciendü q exceptio est actionis elisio, p
de divi- gm actio perimitur vel differtur. Exceptio quidem sic
iso dividitur.  Exceptionü queda sunt dilatori e, queda
jae due" peremptoriz, et hzc est prima et brevis divisio. Ite
torie,que- dilatoriarum queeda sunt peremptorie jurisdictionis, &
Ebor dilatorite actionis, et non peremptorie. Et eodem
quedam modo alie pemptorie brevis et dilatori e actionis. Ite
speciales. Gueda exceptiones ‘sunt generales ad omnia placita
sive actiones, et quædā speciales, qus cdpetunt et
datur cotra actiones singulares: dlibet enim actio
habet suas exceptiones appropriatas, secundum forma,
actionü: ut supra videri poterit de assisis et placitis
de ingressu. Generales vero sunt d se habet generali-
ter ad oia placita, sicut exceptio cott jurisdic, excep-
tio cotra psona agentis, exceptio cotf bie, exceptio d
pvenit ex tépore secudu diüsa geña plitorü: et excep-
- £400. tio q copetit ratioe loci p erroré impetrationis, secundü
q superiüs dietü est, et (j sunt dilatoriæ actiones! et
quasi extra actione, et ideo actione non pimunt, quam-

vis illam ad tépus differant.


! * actionis," MS. Rawl. C. 160.


THE FIFTH TREATISE


OF THE


FIFTH BOOK,
WHICH TREATS OF EXCEPTIONS,


CHAPTER I.


In the first place we must see what is an exception, |).
geo : Dar E What is
and in what manner it may be divided, and it is to be an excep-
known that an exception is the parrying of an action, tion, and
: z . concerning
whereby an action is stayed or delayed. An exception the divi-
indeed is thus divided. Of exceptions some are dilatory, ee
some are peremptory, and this is the first and brief divi- that some
. : : $ : are dila-
sion. Likewise of dilatory exceptions some are peremp- tory, some
tory against the jurisdiction, and are dilatory as regards are gene-
a al, some
the action, and not peremptory. And in the same manner 4, special
others are peremptory against the writ and dilatory as
regards the action. Likewise some exceptions are general
against all suits or actions, and some are special, which
are available and are given against single actions; for
each action has its own appropriate exceptions according
to the form of the actions, as may be seen above concern-
ing assises and pleas of entry. But general exceptions
are such as are applicable generally against all pleas, as
an exception against the jurisdiction, an exception against
the person of the plaintiff, an exception against the writ,
an exception which arises extemporaneously according to
the different kinds of pleas, and an exception which is £, 400.
available by reason of the place through an error in the
suing out, according to what has been said above, and
that they are dilatory as regards the action and as it were
outside the action, and accordingly they do not stay the


action although they delay it for a time.


152 DE EXCEPTIONIBUS.


2. Ité sunt Gdam exceptiones pponendz in initio litis,
es et in pparatoriis judiciorü, et ante visum petendi, ad
de sint,et perimendum judiciü ne peedat: sicut sunt ille q pro-
eras ponuntur contra jurisdictionem, et contra psonas judi-
cantiü, quibus deficit autoritas judicandi. Ité excep-
tiones ille d copetunt. cotra psonam petentis. Ite
exceptiones ille ğ copetunt contra breve, que quide
exceptiones si in initio litis omittantur, et ad petendü
visum pcedatur, si tenens illas post visum petitu velit
alias? pponere, non audietur: quia per petitionem visus
videtur tenens hujusmodi exceptionibus tacite renun-
ciasse, et in jurisdictionem judicatis cocessisse, & q
omnia quoad judicium ratificandum rite peesserunt.


3. Süt etiam (dam, que visum sequuntur et de quib*

Quedam = certificari poterit tenens antequam petens ei visum

ante visum, a p q P

et quedam- fecerit, & certa res in judicium deducatur, de qua

post. DA : .: À
debeat tenens respondere, ut tune sciri possit si totam
rem petitā tenuerit, vel ejus ptem vel etiam nihil, et
sic fiat de ptinentiis. Ite post visum competit excep-
tio, si error fuerit in loco ubi res sita est, de qua
agitur, iste [cedunt contestatione. Et quid si nullus
visus petatur, tune p ordine proponi debent & suo
loco et erit à digniori incipiendum, sieut à jurisdic-
tione judicatis, & psona justic. cüm justic. sit pars
principalis judicii. Postea vero cotra psonam petentis,
si qua copetat cotra ipsam ex psona sua propria.
Postea contra breve, si qua competat ex persona te-


! * alias ” omitted, MS. Rawl. C. 159.


OF EXCEPTIONS, 153


Likewise there are some exceptions to be propounded 2.
at the beginning of the suit, and in the preparatory stages M je uu
of the judgments, and before claiming a view in order to propound-
abate the judgment that it should not proceed: such as MERGE
are those which are propounded against the judgment,
and against the persons judging, on the ground that they
are dini in the authority to judge. Likewise those
exceptions which are available against the person of the
claimant. Likewise those exceptions which are available
against the writ, which exceptions indeed, if they be
omitted at the beginning of the suit, and proceedings
be had to claim a view, if the tenant wishes to propound
other exceptions after a view has been obtained, he shall
not be heard, because by claiming a view the tenant
seems to have tacitly renounced exceptions of this kind,
and to have consented to the jurisdiction of the person
judging, and because all things as far as regards the
ratification of the judgment have proceeded rightly.


There are also some exceptions, which follow a view, Tue
and concerning wbich the tenant may be certified before Peto
the claimant has given him a view and a thing certain is i eu
brought into frie ane concerning which the tenant it,
sae to answer, that it may be then known if he has
held the. whole of the land claimed, or a part of it, or
even none of it, and let it be so done concerning appur-
tenances. Likewise after a view an exception is admis-
sible, if there has been an error in the place where the
estate is situated, which is the subject of the action, and
these contestations proceed. And whatif no view be
claimed, then they ought to be propounded in order and
in their own place, and a commencement will have to be
made with the more important, for instance with the
jurisdiction of the judge and the person of the justiciary,
since the justiciary is a principal part of the judgment.
After this indeed against the person of the claimant, if
any objection is applicable to the party himself as re-
gards his own person. After this against the writ, if


154 DE EXCEPTIONIBUS.


nentis contra petentem, & postmodum si qua copetat
ex ipsa re, ub si nihil inde teneat, vel non nisi ejus
ptem, & idem de ptinentiis, & post modum si qua
competat ratione loci, et cüm nulla pdictarü competat,
vel si illis tacité renuntietur (ut pdictum est), tune
pponatur illa d cdpetit. ratione juris, d multiplex est,
ut si nihil juris descédere posset ad petente. Et sicut
fit ordo petendi, sic debet fieri ordo excipiendi: ut si
diceretur cora talibus justic. A. petit versus B. tantam
iram ptinentiis! in tali vila ut jus suü. Ite sunt
duæ exceptiones G proponi possunt omni tépore et
post judieiü, sieut judicis non sui, et falsi pcuratoris,
cum quibus nullü judicium, controversia nulla. Et
sicut necesse est actionem pponere et fundare et pbare
(ut pdietum est) ut prima facie justa videatur, ita
oportebit exceptione, ut p hoe sciri possit.an ptineat
ad excipiente exceptio, sicut ad agente ptinet actio,
quia cùm aliqàdo cotra actione ptineat exceptio, tame
(ut supradictū est) no semper ptinet ad omnes ut illam
pponant.


4. Contra exceptione vero, licet ab initio copetens
ennai videatur, subveniri poterit petenti ope replicationis,
competit Ut Si quis petat, excipere poterit tenens de pacto postea
replicatio. interveniente ne petat, contra qm replicari poterit à

petéte de pacto posterius interposito q petat, ut si
dicatur. Pact” ne peteret postea cdvenit ut peteret,


quo casu, primü pactü p posteri? eliditur, non quidem


1 eum pertinentiis," MS. Rawl, C. 160. -


OF EXCEPTIONS. 155


any exception is available as regards the thing itself, as
if he holds none of it, or only a part of it, and in the
same manner concerning the appurtenances, and after-
wards if any exception is available by reason of the
place: and when none of the exceptions abovesaid are
available, or if they be tacitly renounced (as aforesaid),
then let that objection be propounded which is available
on the ground of right, which is manifold, as for instance
if no right could descend to the claimant. And as there
is observed an order of claiming, so there ought to be
observed an order of excepting, as if it be said against
such justiciaries: A. claims against B. so much land
with its appurtenances in such a vill as his right. Like-
wise there are two exceptions which may be propounded
at all times and after judgment, as against the judge as
not being the proper judge, and against the procurator
as being false, with whom there is no judgment, no con-
troversy. And as it is necessary to propound and to
found and to prove the action (as said above) that it
may seem at first view to be just, so it will be incumbent
to do as regards the exception, that it may be thereby
known whether the exception appertains to the excep-
tor, as the action appertains to the plaintiff, because
sometimes when the exception is pertinent against the
action, nevertheless (as said above) it does not always
belong to every body to propound it.


But against an exception, although at the beginning
it may seems applicable, a claimant may derive help by
means of a replication, as if a person claims, the tenant
may except on the ground of a compact having after-
wards intervened, that he should not claim, against
which a replication may be made by the claimant on the
ground of a compact having been subsequently interposed
that he may claim, as if it be said: After a compact not
to claim it was afterwards agreed that he might claim,
in which case the first compact is parried by the later
one, not indeed by operation of law, but by the help ofa


4,
A replica-
tion is
available
against an
exception. `


f. 400 b.


5.
Ad repli-
cationem:
competit
triplicatio.


6.
Quadam
sunt per-
petue,
quedam
sunt tem-
porales.


potest
pluribus
uti.


156 DE EXCEPTIONIBUS.


ipso jure sed ope replicationis, & sic de similibus de
modis & céditionibus in cdtractibus appositis, ut si
covenerit in initio cotract^ q quid fiat vel ne quid
fiat, et fiat! vel non fiat, q tüc liceat contrahenti sic
facere vel non sie, vel si tali modo no fiat, q tune sic
fiat ut supra de donationibus.


Ad replicationé vero sequitur triplicatio, et ad tri-
plicationem quadruplicatio ex causa, & sic ulterius in
infinitum, et ita poterit ad initio? cocedi quód actio
bona sit prima facie, elisa tame p exceptione, & eode
modo quód exceptio bona, elisa tamen p replicatione
et sie deinceps.


Exceptiones vero ppetuz sunt, quamvis ex tempora-
libus actionibus descédant, quia non erit in voluntate
tenentis quando velit excipere, licet in voluntate actoris
sit quando velit agere. Et talis ordo (secüdum q
pdietum est) necessarius est ad pponendu exceptiones,
quamvis quidam illum non observat, quia forte credunt
q dum unà ante tépus vel non suo loco pposuerint


‘cum ptestatione, salvum sibi fore beneficium ceterarum


indistinete, & si in pbatione unius defecerint, q possint
ad alias habere recursum.


Pluribus aute poterit quis uti exceptionibus dilatoriis,
variis & diversis, dum tamen suo loco. Sed si plures
peremptorie actionü concurrant, unam debet tenens
pponere & pbare, sicut cotingit superius de actionibus:
ut si alieui plures competant actiones, unam debet
experiri, quia si tenens, cüm duas peremtorias pro-
poneret vel plures exceptiones, in pbatione unius defi-


1“ et si fiat," MS. Rawl. C. 160. | ?* ab initio,” MS. id.


OF EXCEPTIONS. 157


replication, and so of similar modes and conditions ap-

plied to contracts, as if it be agreed at the commence-

ment of a contract that a certain thing should be done

or should be not done, and if it should be done or should

not be done, that it should then be lawful for the con-

tracting party to do so or not to do so, or if it be not f.400 b.

done in such a manner, that it should be done in such a

manner, as above concerning donations.

But upon a replication a triplication follows, and upon | 5.

a triplication a quadruplication upon cause, and so fur- D

ther to infinity, and so it may be conceded from the available

commencement that the action may be at first sight good, cien

but may be parried by an exception, and in the same

manner that. the exception may be good, but may be par-

ried by a replication, and so on in succession.

But exceptions are perpetual although they descend ^ 6.

ome are

from temporary actions, because it will not be at the will perpetual

of the tenant to except when he pleases, although it may aus fete

be at the will of the plaintiff to bring an action when he porary,

pleases. And the said order (according to what has

been stated above) is necessary in the propounding of

exceptions, although some persons do not observe it,

because they believe perhaps that when they have pro-

pounded one exception before its time or not in its pro-

per place with a protestation, the benefit of the remain-

ing ones will be open to them without distinction, and

if they should fail in the proof of one, they may have


recourse to the others.


A person likewise will be able to use various and di- ee 7.
verse dilatory exceptions, provided he uses them in their Supe ^
proper place. But if several which are peremptory Be MT
against actions, concur, the tenant ought to propound p
and prove one, as happens above concerning actions: as
if several actions are available to a certain person, he

ought to try one, because if the tenant, when he pro-
pounds two or more peremptory exceptions, should fail


8.
Probari
poterit
exceptio
multis
modis.


9.
Non per
sectam.


10.
Non per
simplicem
vocem.


ll.
Dé excep-
tione, quæ
ponitur
contra ju-
risdictio-
nem.


158 DE EXCEPTIONIBUS.


ceret, posset recursum habere ad alias, & pbare sieut
posset se pluribus baculis defendere, quod esse non
debet, cùm ei sufficere debeat tantum probatio unius.


Probari aute poterit exceptio multis modis, tum per
vocem mortua, sicut per instrumenta: tum per vivam,
sicut per patriam, & inquisitiones, no per familiares
et domesticos & alia ratione suspectos, sed per tales
qui neutram partem aliqua affinitate attingant.


Ité non per sectam, que fieri poterit p domesticos
& familiares, secta enim probatione non facit, sed
levem inducit psumptione, & vincitur per pbationem
in contrarium, & p defensionem per legem.


Ite non per simpliee vocem, quia vox simplex nec
pbationem facit nec presumptioné inducit. Si quis
autem in pbatione exceptionis vel replicationis et sic
ulterius defecerit, amittet p judicium.


Item inprimis dicatur de una illarum, q generalis
est ad omnes actiones, scilicet de illa à apponitur
contra jurisdictione. Et nihil aliud est jurisdictio
quam habere auctoritaté judicandi sive jus dicédi inter
ptes de actionibus psonarü & rerü, secüdü q deducte
fuerint in judiciü p autoritatem ordinaria vel delegatà,
de quibus supradietü est de potestate judicatiü.


OF EXCEPTIONS. 159


in.the proof of one of them, he might have recourse to
others and prove by them, as a person may defend him-
self with several cudgels, which ought not to be, since
the proof of one ought to suffice.


An exception likewise may be proved in many modes, 8.
as well through a dead voice, as for instance by instru- er
ments, as through a living voice, as through the country be proved
and through inquests, not through members of one’s modes”
household and intimate friends and persons for other
reasons open to suspicion, but through such persons who


are connected with neither party by any afinity.

Likewise not by a sect, which may be made through ^ 9.
members of one's household and intimate friends, for a eee x
sect does not constitute a proof, but it raises a slight
presumption, and it is overcome by a proof to the con-
trary, and by a defence at law.

Likewise not by a single voice, for a single voice does ^ 10.
not make a proof nor found a presumption. But if a d :
person shall have failed in the proof of his exception or voice.
replication and so further on, he shall lose by a judg-
ment.

Likewise let us speak in the first place of one of the | 11.

. . : MAP. : : f an ex-
exceptions which is general in its application to all ac- ception,
tions, namely, concerning that which is advanced against uc is
the jurisdietion. And jurisdiction is nothing else than against the
to have the authority of judging, that is of pronouncing du ue
judgment between parties in actions against persons or
things, according as they have been brought into judg-
ment by an authority either ordinary or delegated, con-
cerning which we have spoken above concerning the


powers of those who judge.


jte
Quid sit
jurisdictio
et de ejus
divisione.


f. 401.


25
Quale
forum ac-
tor sequi
debet, et
quæ per-
tineant ad
forum
seculare.


3.
Ratione
criminis et
ratione
contractus.


160 DE EXCEPTIONIBUS.


Cap. IL


Est etiam jurisdictio quedam ordinaria, qusedam
delegata, quz pertinet ad sacerdotium et forum eccle-
siasticum, sicut in causis spiritualibus & spiritualitati
annexis. Est etiam alia jurisdictio crdinaria vel dele-
gata, į pertinet ad coronam et dignitatem regis et ad
regnum in causis & placitis rerum téporalium in foro
seculari, & unde videndü cujus judicium & forum aetor
adire debeat, & verum est q sive laicum sive clericum
velit quis covenire, debet adire judicem & sequi forum
rei & judicé habebit illum, apud qm reus habet domi-
cilium, sive domicilium habuerit sub jurisdictione unius
vel duorum.


Et licet generaliter verum sit q actor fori rei sequi
debeat, fallit tamen in casibus ppter diversitate juris-
dictionum & causarum de rebus spiritualibus & tem-
poralibus et earum sequela, sicut in causa matrimoniali,
& rebus praemissis ob causam matrimonii, que in foro
ecclesiastico terminari debét, quia cujus juris, i. juris-
dietionis est principale, ejusdem juris erit accessorium.
Et eodem modo sieut, si in foro seculari agatur de
aliquo placito quod pertineat ad coronam & dignitatem
regis, & fides fuerit apposita in cótractu, non ppter
hoc ptinebit cognitio super principali ad judicem eccle-
siasticum.


Item fallit in causa testamentaria, & aliis pluribus
causis ecclesiasticis. Item ratione criminis convenitur
quis ubi deliquit, ut si quis crimen comiserit in terra


TE


OF EXCEPTIONS. 161


CHAPTER II.


There is a certain jurisdiction ordinary, and a certain, 1.
jurisdietion delegated, which pertains to the priesthood ce
and to the ecclesiastical forwm, as in spiritual causes and tion, and
in causes connected with the spirituality. There is like- Bea
wise an other jurisdiction ordinary or delegated, which sion of it.
pertains to the crown and to the dignity of the king as  f.401.
regards his kingdom in causes and pleas of temporal
things in the secular forum : and hence it is to be seen to
which judgment and forwm a plaintiff ought to apply,
and it is true, that whether a person wishes to convene a
laic or a cleric, he ought to apply to the judge and sue
in the court of the defendant, and he shall have that
person for his judge, in whose district the defendant has
his domicile, whether he have his domicile under the
jurisdiction of one or of two persons.

And although it is generally true that the plaintiff 2.
ought to sue in the forum of the defendant, it fails how- amt a
ever occasionally on account of the diversity of jurisdic- plaintiff
tions and causes concerning spiritual and temporal mat- Aue
ters and their sequels, as in a cause of matrimony and what
in the premises of a cause of matrimony, which ought to ED
be determined in an ecclesiastical court, because to whose secular
right, that is, to whose jurisdiction the principal matter
appertains, to the same person’s jurisdiction the accessory
matter belongs. And in the same manner as, if in a
secular court proceedings are instituted concerning any
plea, which pertains to the crown and to the dignity of
the king, and faith has been pledged in the contract, the
cognisance of the principal matter will not oa that


account belong to the ecclesiastical forum.


. . . . % 3.
Likewise it fails in testamentary causes and several py reason

other causes ecclesiastical. Likewise with regard to a of the
; neh heh tt eand
crime, a person is convened where he has committed py reason
the offence, as if a person has committed a crime in an- of the con-


tract.
R 2657. L


162 DE EXCEPTIONIBUS.


f.154b. poterit de utfang gthef per exéplum. Item ratione

Fleta, vi. cdtractus, quia coveniendus ubi cotraxit ille qui co-

ME traxit. Item ratione rei petite, ut si clericus petat
versus clericum vel laicum debitum q non sit de testa-
mento vel de matrimonio, sequi debet forum laicale,
et eodem modo si petat laicum feodum, sub domino
feodi erit actio, sicut petitio hereditatis per breve de
recto erit tractanda coram domino feodi, vel coram
vicecom si dominus negligens fuerit, quia ratione .
negligentiee pprii judicis, videlicet domini, transfertur
loquela ad comitatu, et sic cora rege & suis justiciariis,
multis et variis de causis.


n m PE Item si quis unum judicem de voluntate sua ele-
gerit unum gerit, ad alterius audientiam recurrere non debet volū-
E tate propria, cum talis p consensum effectus sit suus
eurrerenon Judex, quamvis generaliter verum sit, q sententia à
rU non suo judice jata non teneat, et hoc verū est, nisi
debet esti- hoc faciat regia prohibitio, quia jurisdictionem regis
RA non poterit quis mutare per renuntiationé in præjudi-
tium regiæ dignitatis, secundum quod inferius dicetur:
quamvis expediat aliquando actori convenire reum sub
judice de cujus factus est jurisdictione per consensum,
magis quàm sub eo cui subest domicilii ratione, quia
si proprius judex fuerit negligens, alius judex (licet
non suus) poterit esse diligentior, dum tamen coertioné
habeat q possit judicium suum demandare executioni.
Et unde cùm diverse sint hine inde jurisdictiones, et


diversi judices & diversæ causæ, debet quilibet ipsorum


OF EXCEPTIONS. 163


other person’s land, because where he has committed the
offence, there he is subject to the law, as may be seen in
the case of utfangthef for example. Likewise with re-
gard to a contract, because the contractor is to be con-
vened there, where he has made the contract, Likewise
with regard to the thing claimed, as if a cleric claims
against a cleric or a laic a debt, which is not concerning a
testament or concerning a marriage, he ought to sue in
the lay forum, and in the same manner if he claims a lay
feud, the action will be before the lord of the feud, as the
claim of an inheritance by a writ of right will have to be
treated before the lord of the feud, or before the viscount,
if the lord be negligent, because by reason of the negli-
gence of the proper judge, to wit, the lord, the trial is
transferred to the county court, and so before the king
and his justiciaries, for many and various causes.


Likewise if a person has elected a judge of his own 4,
choice, he ought not to have recourse to the audience of re pon
another of his own will, since the person has been made one judge

. : : ^ he eannot
his proper judge by his own consent, although generally Eas
it may be true, that a sentence passed by one, who is recourse to

: D Te ww another,
not the proper judge, is not binding, and this is true, PUE
unless a royal prohibition makes it so, because no one can judge
i CARa E Jane ought to
change the jurisdiction of the king by a renunciation to welch EXT
the prejudice of the regal dignity, according to what will whether he


be explained below: although it may be expedient some- SU Me
times to the plaintiff to convene the defendant before ation.
judge, under whose jurisdiction heis brought by his own
consent, rather than before him, to whom he is subject

by reason of his domicile, because if his proper judge be
negligent, another judge (although not his own) may be
more diligent, provided however that he has coercive
power, so that he can enforce execution of his judgment
And hence since there are on this side and on that
side divers jurisdietions and divers judges and divers
causes, each of the said judges ought in the first place to

L 2


5


Que perti-
nent ad
forum ec-
elesiasti-
cum, et quee
ad forum
seculare.


f. 401 b.


164 EX EXCEPTIONIBUS.


inprimis estimare an sua sit jurisdictio, ne falcem
videatur ponere in messem alienam.


Quia clerieus in nullo conveniendus est coram judice
seculari, q pertineat ad forum ecclesiasticum, sicut in
causis spiritualibus vel spiritualitati annexis, ut si pro
peccato vel transgressione fuerit pcenitentia injungenda,
et quo casu judex ecclesiasticus habet cognitionem,
quia non pertinet ad regem injungere poenitentias, nec
ad judicem secularem, nec etiam ad eos pertinet cog-
noscere de iis que sunt spiritualibus annexa, sicut de
decimis et aliis ecclesiz pventionibus. Item nec de
catallis d sunt de testamento vel matrimonio. Ité nec
de pecunia pmissa ob causam matrimonii que est
quasi sequela matrimonii, ut superius dictü est, et
hujusmodi, quia judex ecclesiasticus in iis omnibus
habet jus revocadi dont, & quàvis in omnibus aliis
actionibus sive placitis ad forü seculare ptinentibus
videatur q clericus sequi debeat forum seculare, et ibi
agere et respondere ratione rei vel cotractus, ubi agitur
realiter vel [sonaliter, sicut in actione injuriarum vel
criminis, dum tamen civiliter agatur, secundü q videri
poterit tota die, q si clericus coveniendus, quia laicum
feodum non habet, sumonitionem suscipere noluerit,
nec plegios invenire, mandabitur episcopo vel ordinario
loci q faciat talé venire coram rege vel justiciariis
suis, ad respondendum & satisfaciendü de quocunq
placito ad intentioné petétis vel querentis: quamvis
sunt qui dicant, q de nullo placito tenentur respodere,
nee ratione rei contractus vel delicti coram judice
seculari, et salva pace eorü, videtur q fit in omnibus
actionibus et placitis civilibus & criminalibus, pterquim
in executione judicii in causa c-iminali, ubi laicus!


1“ clericus " seems to be here required by the context.


OF EXCEPTIONS. 165


weigh well whether it be under his jurisdiction, that he
may not seem to put his reaping hook into another’s
harvest.


Because a clerie is not to be convened before a secular d
judge in any matter, which belongs to the ecclesiastical things per-
Jorum, as in spiritual causes or causes connected with ees
the spirituality, as if for a sin or a transgression penance eal forum,
is to be enjoined, and in which case the ecclesiastical eC
judge has the cognisance, because it does not belong to lar forum.
the king to enjoin penances, nor to the secular judge,

nor does it even belong to them to hold cognisance of

those matters which are connected with spiritual things,

as concerning tenths and other revenues of the church. f.401 b.
Likewise neither concerning chattels, which are testa-
mentary or matrimonial Likewise neither concerning

money promised by reason of matrimony, which is as it

were a sequel of matrimony, as said above, and such like,
because the ecclesiastical judge in all these matters has

the right to revoke the gift, and although in all other
actions and pleas pertaining to the secular forwm it seems

that a cleric ought to sue in the secular forum, and there

to sue and answer by reason of the thing or the contract,

when the proceedings are had against the thing or the
person, as in an action of injury or of crime, provided
however itis a civil action, according to what may be

seen every day, but if a cleric, who is to be convened,
because he has not a lay feud is unwilling to accept a
summons, or to find sureties, a mandate shall be sent to

the bishop or to the ordinary of the place, that he should

cause the said person to appear before the king or his
justiciaries to answer and to make satisfaction upon any

plea to the declaration of the claimant or of the plaintiff:
although there be some who say, that they are not bound

to answer to any plea, neither by reason of a thing nor of

a contract nor of an offence, before a lay judge, and sav-

ing all respect for such persons, it seems that it is done so

in all actions and civil and criminal suits, except in the
execution of a judgment in a criminal cause, where a


6.
Quod i
laieus non
est conve-
niendus
coram
judice ec-
clesiastico
de aliqui-
bus, que
pertinent
ad coro-
nam et
dignitatem
regis.


(fa
Quod quis
possit re-
nuntiare
lis, quze
pro se in-
troductee
sunt, sed


166 DE EXCEPTIONIBUS.


condemnandus esset ad amissionem vite vel membro-
rum, et quo casu, quamvis judex secularis habet cogni-
tionem ut cognoscat de crimine, tamen non habet
potestatem exequendi judicium sieut in causis civilibus,
non enim possit degradare clericum, magis quàm ad
ordines promovere, et ideo ppter ejus defectum habet
ordinarius executione judicii, licet aliter observetur q
in causa criminali, ubi poena capitalis infligenda est,
habet ordinarius utramque, videlicet cognitionem et
judicii executionem.


Vice versa non est laicus conveniendus coram judice
ecclesiastico de aliquo, qd ptineat ad corona et regiam
dignitatem et ad regnum, quod in foro seculari termi-
nari potest et debeat, sicut nec de laico feodo vel eis
pertinentiis, ratione supradicta, ut si jura pertineant,
sieut advocatio, jus pascendi, eundi, agendi et hujus-
modi. ltem nee de debitis, nee catallis, nisi sunt de
testamento vel matrimonio et hujusmodi, quia rex jus
habet revocandi donum propter suum privilegium,
quàmvis ipse, qui convenitur coram judice ecclesiastico
de placitis, que pertinent ad coronam et dignitate
regiam, per se effectus sit per cosensum de alterius
foro et jurisdictione.


Poterit enim quis renuntiare iis, pro se introducta
sunt, sed tamen non in fjudieium aliorü, sieut in
prejudieium regize dignitatis, quia injuste non trahitur
ad alienum forum, ex quo renütiando privilegio suo
hoe voluit, injust? tamen ppter privilegium ipsius


nonin præ- regis. Et unde si quis se obligaverit p scripturam ad


judicium
alterius. ?


respondendum in foro vetito, non obstante suo privi-
legio, i. regia phibitione, seipsum obligat et non regem,


OF EXCEPTIONS. 167


clerie would have to be condemned to the loss of life or
of members, and in which case, although the secular
judge has cognisance, that he should take cognisance of
the crime, nevertheless he has not power to execute his
judgment as in civil causes, for he cannot degrade a cleric
any more than promote him to orders, and accordingly
on account of his defect the ordinary has the execution
of the judgment, although it be otherwise observed, that
in a criminal cause, where capital punishment is to bé
inflieted, the ordinary has both, to wit, cognisance and
the execution of the judgment.

Conversely a laic is not to be convened before an KE ue
ecclesiastical judge concerning any matter, which per- is not to be
tains to the crown or to the regal dignity and to the oss
kingdom, which can be determined in the secular forwm ecclesiasti-
and ought so to be, as for instance neither concerning a Selene
lay fee nor its appurtenances, for the reason above said, as any mat-
if rights appertain to it, as the right of advowson, the V pen
right of pasture, of a pathway, of a bridle-way and such the crown
like. Likewise neither concerning debts nor chattels, PE
unless they are concerning a testament or matrimony or the king.
such like, because the king has the right of revoking a
gift on account of his own privilege, although he who is
convened before an ecclesiastical judge concerning pleas,
which pertain to the crown and to the regal dignity, may
be made through himself by his own consent subject to


the forwm and jurisdiction of the other one.


For a person may renounce those things which have x e A
been introduced on his own behalf, but not however to son may
the prejudice of others, for instance to the prejudice of the renounce


E 0
regal dignity, for a person is not drawn unjustly to a things,
: ! i : 3 a Drivi which have
foreign forum, inasmuch as by renouncing his privilege he fers tro,
has been willing, unjustly however on account of the duced on


privilege of the king himself. And hence if any one has m.


bound himself by a writing to answer in a forbidden 2 the
. . * NL . preju ice
forwm, notwithstanding his own priv ilege, that is, the ^e snother.


168 DE EXCEPTIONIBUS.


et unde si ille idem postmodum phibitionem impetra-
verit quod judices no pcedant, et cotra factü suü
multipliciter delinquit, delinquit enim p hoe q placita
que pertinent ad coronam et dignitatem regis trahit
ad alienum fori. Delinquit enim ex hoc quód venit
contra factum suum proprium, et unde cüm judices
et partes comparuerint, judices puniuntur, eo quód
post prohibitionem contra prohibitionem processerunt,

£409. et si convincantur, gaole committantur, et poena
pecuniaria graviter puniantur, et ille eodem modo de
quo queritur qui hoe peuravit, sed non propter quere-
lam querentis et injuriam ei factam, sed propter in-
juriam factam ipsi regi, non est enim ei aliqua injuria
facta propter consensum, quia trahi voluit ad alienum
forum, & quia sie voluit, puniatur ut primi, & quia
venit contra factum suum, et p impetratione suam jam
rediit ad forü debitum, ut ibi respondeat de placito
principali etiam sine alio brevi, et judices et ille de
quo queritur quanti ad placitum phibitionis recedant
versus eum sine die, et ipse in misericordia versus eos
pro falso clameo.


Car. III.


x i; A Dictum est qualiter per consensum fit de alterius
e ro. 1l- . . . . . LI
bitienibu > Jurisdietione : nune autem dicendum, si contra volun-


Dou) à tatem trahatur in placitum coram judice ecclesiastico
regis. Item ORG S PET

dictum est le placitis, que pertinent ad coram et dignitatem
si per con- regis, unde eüm quis ita tractus fuerit coram judice


sensum, EE :
eeclesiastico contra voluntatem suam, qui estimare


OF EXCEPTIONS. 169


royal prohibition, he binds himself and not the king, and
hence if the very same person has afterwards sued out
a prohibition, that the judges should not proceed, he
offends in many ways against his own act, for he offends
in this respect that he drags to another forwm pleas,
which belong to the erown and to the dignity of the king.
He offends also in this respect that he goes against his own
act, and hence when the judges and the parties have ap-
peared, the judges are punished, inasmuch as after a pro-
hibition they have acted against the prohibition, and if f 402.
they are convicted, let them be committed to gaol, and let
them be heavily punished with a pecuniary penalty, and
the party in the same manner, concerning whom complaint
is made, that he has procured this, but not on account of
the complaint of the complainant and of the wrong done
to him, but on account of the wrong done to the king
himself, for to the former no wrong has been done by
reason of his consent, because he was willing to be
brought before another forwm, and because he was so
willing let him be punished as the first, and because he
has gone against his own act, and through his own re-
quest has now returnedto his due forwm, that he may
there answer concerning the principal plea even without
another writ, and let the judges and the party of whom
he complains, as far as concerns the plea of prohibition,
withdraw as regards him without a day, and let him be
amerced as regards them for his false claim.


CHAPTER III.


We have discussed in what manner a person by con- UE i
sent becomes under anothers jurisdiction. Now we ing the


must discuss if contrary to one’s will one is drawn into apes
a suit before an ecclesiastical judge concerning pleas, the lord
` which in to tl d the dignity of the king, the king.
which pertain to the crown an gnity E» Likewise
whence, when a person has been so drawn before an “if by con-


. D . . . . sent » has
ecclesiastical judge against his will who has been un- peen


170 DE EXCEPTIONIBUS.


nunc au- noluerit an sua sit jurisdictio, sed jurisdictionem regis
FA sibi usurpaverit, & delinquunt tam judices qui placitum
tatem. — tenent quam ille qui sequitur, ad querelam illius qui
sic ad non suum judicem trahitur, fiat breve domini
regis judieibus ne procedant, & ei qui sequitur ne
sequatur, in hae forma. Et si judicassent, judicium
exequi non possent, quia vicecom nihil faceret ad


mandatum ipsorum.


a 2. Rex talibus judicibus salutem. Prohibemus vobis, ne
brohibens placitum teneatis in curia Christianitatis inter A.


dum,si ^ petentem & B. tenentem de tanta terra cum perti-
contra co- s : On E . <
ronamet nentiis, vel de laico feodo ipsius B. in tali villa, vel


dignitatem aliter; de catallis vel debitis quæ non sunt ex testa-


regis, judi- mento vel matrimonio, & unde pdictus B. queritur
n: quód preedictus A. eum injuste trahit in placitu coram
placitum vobis, quia placita de laico feodo & de debitis &


de catallis catallis G non sunt de testaméto & matrimonio spec-


que non H s ge 2 A ait
sunt detes- tant ad coronam & dignitaté nostra. Et hujusmodi
t t seat = vds us id : f
uem phibitio locü habet, cùm scribitur judicibus qui ordi-
monio. maria habet jurisdictione. Si aute delegatam, ut si
delegati fuerunt à dio papa, vel alio ordinario tune

sic.
3. Rex talibus judicibus salute. Prohibem? vobis, ne
dE d teneatis placitü in curia Christianitatis de laico feodo


teneant de A. in tali villa, & unde ide A. ritur q B. de N.

laico feodo. trahit eum in plaeitü corà vobis in curia Christiani-

Glanville,l. n E EO li E diüi d 1 .

xii. cap. 23, tatis autoritate iterarü dni pape de laico feodo suo
vel debitis et catallis &c. ut supra. Et idé dici poterit
de advocationibus ecclesiayi vel de aliis placitis 4
pertinent ad coronam et dignitatem domini regis, &
tune sie: ne teneatis placitum in curia Christianitatis


de advocatide ecclesize de tali loco, unde talis ritur


pem, WV


OF EXCEPTIONS. 171


willing to weigh whether the jurisdiction was his own, discussed,
but has usurped to himself the jurisdiction of the king, RUE e"
both the judges who entertain the plea as well as he who discuss * if
sues offend, then upon the plaint of him who is drawn HT
before a judge who is not his own, let a writ of the lord

the king be issued to the judges that they should not
proceed, and to him who sues that he should not sue,

in this form. And if they have judged, they should not

be able to execute their judgment, because the viscount

would do nothing upon their mandate.


The king to certain judges greeting. We prohibit you, A Ss. e
that you should not entertain a suit in the court of prohibit, if
Christianity between A. the claimant and B. the tenant separ Te
concerning so much land with its appurtenances, or con- the dignity
cerning the lay feud of the said B. in sucha vill; or F A une
otherwise, concerning the chattels or debts which are not judges that
testamentary nor matrimonial, and whereof the aforesaid ey should
B. complains, that the aforesaid A. draws him unjustly tain a suit
into a suit before you, because pleas concerning a lay fag chat-
feud and concerning debts and chattels, which are not tels, which
testamentary nor matrimonial, belong to our crown and aes
our dignity. And this kind of prohibition has place aru
when the writ is sent to judges who have ordinary juris- pial,
diction. But if they have delegated jurisdiction, as if
they have been delegated by the lord the pope, or by


some other ordinar y, then in this form.


The king to such and such judges greeting. We pro- , *,
hibit you, that you should not entertain a suit in the the judges
court of Christianity by authority of letters from the lord zot to en-
the pope concerning a lay feud, or concerning debts and suit con-
chattels as above said. And the same may be said con- boe. a
cerning the patronage of churches or concerning other '
pleas which pertain to the crown and to the dignity of
the lord the king, and then thus: that you should not
entertain a plea in the court of Christianity concerning


the patronage of a church in such a place, whereof so-


i 402 b.


4.
Breve
parti, ne
sequatur.
Glanville,
l. xii. cap.


1
De prohi-
bitionibus
et advoca-
tionibus
ecclesia.


172 DE EXCEPTIONIBUS.


&c. ut supra, quia placita de advocationibus ecclesiarum
spectant ad corona et dignitate nfm. T. &e. Et sic
fiet de omni jure q pertinere potest ad laicü feodum,
de quo rex habere debet cognitionem. Et eode modo
scribatur parti adverse, ne sequatur in hae forma.


Rex tali salute. Prohibemus tibi, ne sequaris placitü
in euria Christianitatis de laico feodo tali in villa vel
de debitis, catallis vel advocatione ecclesiz et hujus-
modi, et unde pdict? talis queritur q tu trahis eum
in placiti in curiam Christianitatis corà tali judice,
ordinario videlicet, vel corà talib? judicibus, videlicet
delegatis autoritate literarum diüi papse, vel autoritate
literarü alieujus alterius ordinarii, vel autoritate literaru
alterius subdelegati à judicib? à düo papa delegatis,
quia hujusmodi placita &c. ut supra, & ita q hujus-
modi brevia semper conveniant brevibus ad judices
transmissis.


Cap. IV.


Sunt etiam alia genera phibitionu qm plura &
diversa, quaru Gdam sunt de advocationibus ecclesiarü,
ubi no agitur directe inter patronos ut hie, sed in-
directe : ut si inter rectores, qui tenet ecclesias de
advocatione et donatione diversorum patronorü, inter
se cotendant de decimis, oblationibus, & obventionibus
ecclesiarum, et ita quod si petens obtineret, posset
patronus jactura sue advocationis incurrere, fit judici-
bus ne pcedant phibitio in hac forma, si de tota
advocatione fiat cotentio.


OF EXCEPTIONS. 173


and-so complains &c. as above, because pleas concerning f. 402 b.
the patronage of churches belong to our crown and dig-

nity. Witness &. And so it shall be done concerning

every right, which may pertain to a lay feud, concerning

which the king ought to have cognisance. And in the

same way let a writ go to the adverse party, that he

should not sue.

The king to so-and-so greeting. We prohibit you, that , 4
you should not prosecute a suit in the court of Christia- ne
nity concerning a lay feud in such a vill, or concerning not to sue.
debts, or chattels, or the patronage of a church, and such
like, and whereof the aforesaid so-and-so complains that
you are drawing him into a suit into the court of Christi-
anity before such a judge, the ordinary, to wit, or before
such judges, delegated, to wit, by the authority of letters
from the lord the pope, or by the authority of letters
from some other ordinary, or by the authority of letters
from some other sub-delegate of certain judges delegated
by the lord the pope, because pleas of this kind &e. as
above, and so that writs of this kind should always agree
with the writs transmitted to the judges.


CHAPTER IV.


There are also other kinds of prohibitions both nu- : 1.
merous and various, of which some are concerning the ee:
patronage of churches, where proceedings are not had eee
directly between the patrons as here, but indirectly: as age of
if rectors who hold churches of the patronage and dona- churches.
tion of different patrons dispute with one another con-
cerning the tithes, oblations, and obventions of the
churches, and so that, if the plaintiff prevails, the patron
might incur the loss of his advowson, a prohibition is
issued to the judges, that they should not proceed, after


this form, if the contention is about the entire advow-


son.


9
Prohibitio
de advoca-
tionibus,
Indieavit
judicibus.


f. 408.


3.
Prohibitio,
si rectores
ecclesi-
arum con-
tendant
inter se
sine pa-
tronis.


174 DE EXCEPTIONIBUS.


Rex talibus judicibus salutem. Indicavit nobis A.
q cüm B. talis clerieus vz. tenet ecclesia de tali loco
de advocatione sua, C. talis clericus vz. clamans ea de
advocatione D. trahi! eü in placitü cora vobis in curia
Christianitatis autoritate literari diii papse. Quia vero
manifestü est q pfatus A. jacturà advocationis suze
incurreret, si Ddietus C. in causa illa optineret, vobis
phibemus ne in causa illa pcedatis, donee discussum
fuerit in curia nostra ad que illorü, s. A. vel D,
ptineat ejusdem ecclesia advocatio, quia placitu de
advocatione &c. ut supra. Teste &c. Est & alia
phibitio de eode, ubi agitur indirecte de parte sicut
de toto, ut si agat rectores de medietate alicuj? eccle-
sie vel de tertia parte inter se de ecclesia q divisa
fuit ab antiquo inter patronos & de advocatione
ratioe diversorü feodorü, & tüc fiat phibitio in forma
supradicta. Si autem cotentio fuerit inter rectores de
aliquib? decimis q estimari possunt usd ad quartam,
quintam, vel sextam parte advocationis, et ultra quam
parte non extéditur phibitio ut videtur, tune fiat
judicibus phibitio in hac forma.


Rex talibus judicibus salute. Indicavit nobis A. q
cùm B. teneat de advocatione sua sextam ptem eccle-
sie de N. talis abbas clamas pdictam sextam ptem de
advocatione B. trahit eum in placitum coram vobis
in curia Christianitatis, quia vero manifestii est quód
pdietus A. jacturam advocationis pdictee sextc partis
illius ecclesiz incurreret, si predictus abbas in causa
ila obtineret, vobis phibemus ne in causa illa proce-
datis, donec diseussum fuerit ad quem illorum pertineat
predietee sextæ partis advocatio, quia placitum &c.


1 * trahit," MSS. Rawl. C. 160 and 159.


x oo


OF EXCEPTIONS. : Ens
The king to so-and-so judges greeting. A. has indi- 9,
cated to us that when B. such a cleric, to wit, holds the A prohibi-


3 2 1 tion con-
church of such a place upon his presentation, C. such a cerning ad-


clerie, to wit, claiming it upon the presentation of D., e Trdiba-
draws him into a plea before you in the court of Chris- vit ” to the
tianity by authority of letters from the lord the pope. "42e
Since however it is manifest that the aforesaid A. would
incur the loss of his advowson, if the aforesaid C. should
prevail in that suit, we prohibit you that you may not
proceed in that cause, until it has been settled in our
court, to which of them, to wit, A. or D., the advowson

of that church pertains, because a plea concerning an
advowson, &e. as above. Witness, &c. There is also
another prohibition concerning the same thing, where
proceedings are had indirectly concerning a part just as
concerning the whole, as if the rectors of the mediety of

a certain church, or of the third part, proceed against

one another concerning a church which has been divided

from olden time between the patrons, and concerning the
advowson by reason of divers feuds, and then let a pro-
hibition issue in the form abovesaid. But if there be a
contention between the rectors concerning certain tithes,
which may be valued up to a fourth, or a fifth, or a
sixth part of the advowson, and beyond which part the
prohibition is not extended, as it seems, then let there
issue to the judges a prohibition after this form.


The king to such and such judges greeting. <A. has f. 403.
indicated to us that when B. holds of his patronage the , Eer.
sixth part of the church of N., abbot so-and-so claiming tion, if the
the aforesaid sixth part as of the patronage of B. draws recano
him into a suit before you in the court of Christianity, contend
but because it is manifest that the aforesaid A. would Tone
incur the loss of the patronage of the sixth part of that without
church, if the aforesaid abbot were to prevail in that [he P%
suit, we prohibit you that you should not proceed in
that cause, until it has been settled to which of them


the patronage of the aforesaid sixth part belongs, be-


4.
Prohibitio,
si clerieus,
presenta-
tus ab eo
qui obti-
nuerit, im-
placitatus
fuerit a
clerico
ipsius qui
amisit in


curia regis.


9.
Breve pro-
hibitionis
(Ostendit
nobis) for-
matum a
justiciariis
secundum
querelam.


176 DE EXCEPTIONIBUS.


ut supra. Et fiat clerico phibitio qui sequitur in forma
@ consona sit phibitioni factze judicibus. Poterit ali-
quando sine preejudicio alicujus de cosensu patronorum,
ad breve quod dicitur Indicavit, si contingat quód
decimæ petantur in foro ecclesiastico que sunt de
alterius advocatione sive in toto sive pro parte majore,
fieri inquisitio in curia düi regis tanquam de advo-
catione ppter estimationem decimarum, ubi ecclesia
enormiter lesa est, ut si ecclesia recenter spoliata
fuerit in hac forma: utrü vz. talis presentatus à tali
patrono recenter fuerit in seysina de talibus decimis
tanquam spectantibus ad ecclesia suam, qm tenet de
psentatione talis patroni sui, vel si talis alia psona
inde fuit in seysina tali tepore ut de decimis spectanti-
bus ad ecclesiam suam talé, qm tenet de advocatione
talis patroni sui.


Est & aliud genus phibitionis, ut cium inter patronos
cotentio fuerit aliquádo de jure psentationis & quilibet
eorü clericü sua psentaverit et pendente psentatione
unus obtinuerit, ad cujus psentatione clericus admissus
fuerit, si clericus qui ab aliquo alio patrono psentatus
fuerit clericü ita admissu cora judicib? ecclesiasticis
implacitaverit ratione psentationis ejus qui amisit, fiat
eis phibitio talis in hac forma.


Rex tali priori & cojudicibus suis salute. Ostédit
nobis A. q cùm ipse ad ecclesia tale vacantem ali-
quado psentasset B., C. geres se patronu illius ecclesie
ad eade ecclesia psentavit clericu suu, s. D., & cü ide
A. seysina psentandi in curia nia &c. recuperasset
versus ipsu C., et B. clericus ad psentationé suwr ad


et e LUE rud
di Tut y ». a =
: es x


OF EXCEPTIONS. 177


cause a suit, &e. as above. And let there be issued a pro-
hibition to the cleric who sues in a form, which is conso-
nant to the prohibition issued to the judges. Sometimes
also without prejudice to any one with the consent of
the patrons upon the writ which is called “Indicavit,”
if it happens that tithes are claimed in the ecclesiastical
court, which belong to the advowson of another person,
either in their entirety or for the greater part, an inquest
may be held in the court of the lord the king, as if con-
cerning the advowson, respecting the estimate of the
tithes, where the church has been enormously wounded,
as for instance if the church has been recently spoiled, in
this form : whether so-and-so presented by such a patron
was recently in seysine of such tithes as belonging to
his church, or if such other person was in seysine thereof
at such a time, as of tithes belonging to his church,
which he holds of the presentation of so-and-so his
patron.

There is also another kind of prohibition, as when A prohi-
there has been a dispute betweens patrons at a certain pe
time concerning the right of presentation, and a certain presented
one of them has presented his clerk and pending the d
presentation one of them has prevailed, upon whose CUM
presentation a clerk has been admitted, if a clerk who in Du
has been presented by some one else as patron shall pedes bp
have impleaded before ecclesiastical judges the clerk ofhim, who
who has been so admitted, let a prohibition issue to ne aun.
them in this form. : of the


king.
The king to the prior of so-and-so and his associate F
judges greeting. A. has shown to us that when he had = nae af a
presented B, to his church of so-and-so which was (Ostendit
vacant, C. pretending to be the patron of such church D ip
had presented to that church his clerk, to wit, D., and by the jus-
when the said A. had recovered the seysine of the pre- RER
sentation in our court &c. against the said C., and B. his with the
clerk upon his presentation had been so admitted under complaint.


R 2657. M


178 DE EXCEPTIONIBUS.


mandatum nostri sie admiss?, idé D. trahit eu in
placitü in curia Christianitatis cora vobis ratione
psentationis de se facte, autoritate literaru diii papse,
& quia ea ğ in curia nia rite acta sunt irritari non
debét, vobis phibemus, ne in causa illa pcedatis ad
irritanda ea d in curia nfa rite acta sunt. Teste &c.
Ité alia forma de eode & quasi p breve de Indicavit.


nuni Rex tali priori et cojudicibus suis salute. Ostedit
hibitionis Dobis A. prior de N. q cùm nup in curia nia cora
contraewm, justice, niis &c. recuperasset versus B. priore de tali
tur contra loeo advocationé capelle de N. ut ptinété ad matrice
ue um ecclesia ipsius A. prioris p recognitione magnze assise
actum in ; : :3- :
curia inde ibi inter eosdé priores captā, & idé A. prior de
Sie tali loco teneat eandé capella in pprios usus p ordi-
nariu loci, cui p cosiderationé curie nřïřæ mandavimus
peessum illius loquele, ut q suü esset inde exequere-
tur, C. s. clericus de N. trahit ipsu A. priore de tali
loco in placitu coram vobis, petens capellam illam ut
psona ejusdem ex advocatione & donatione predicti
B. prioris de tali loco, qui advocatione illam in curia
nia amisit p recognitione magne assise, & tangm inde
f 403b. spoliatus desicut nugm fuit in eade institutus, ut
pdictus A, prior de tali loco dicit. Et quia pdietus
B. prior de tali loco (de cujus advocatione dictus C.
petit eapellà illa) nihil juris habet in illa sicut recog-
nitu est p assisam, & ea que in curia nostra rite acta
sunt no debeant in foro ecclesiastico ab aliquo in-
firmari, vobis mandamus, quód si ad mandatü dicti
ordinarii vobis constiterit, q dietus C. clericus nungm


fuit in eade capella institutus tepore, quo fpdietus


OF EXCEPTIONS. 179


our mandate, the said D. draws him into a plea in the
court of Christianity before you by reason of a presenta-
tion made of himself by the authority of letters from the
lord the pope, and because such matters as have been
duly transacted in our court ought not to be set aside,
we prohibit you, that you should not proceed to set aside
those matters which have been duly transacted in our
court. Witness &c. Likewise in another form concern-
ing the same, and as it were by a writ of “ Indicavit.”


The king to such a prior and his associate judges 6.
greeting. A, the prior of N. has shown to us that when RUN 4
he has lately recovered in our court before our justici- EER S
aries against B. the prior of such a place the advowson S
of the chapel of N. as belonging to the mother church of judgment
the said prior A. through the recognition of a great xr
assize held thereon between the said priors, and the said of the lord
A. the prior of such a place holds the said chapel for his ares
proper uses through the ordinary of the place, to whom
by a resolution of our court we have sent the process
of that trial in order that he might perform whatever
was his proper duty, C., to wit, the clerk of N., draws the
said A. the prior of such a place into a suit before you,
claiming the said chapel, as parson of the same, under
the presentation and donation of the aforesaid B. the
prior of such a place, who lost the advowson of it by the
recognition of a great assise, and as if spoiled of it was
consequently never instituted to the same, as the afore- f. 403 b.
said A. the prior of such a place says. And because the
aforesaid B. the prior of such a place (upon whose pre-
sentation the aforesaid C. claims that chapel) has no
right to it, as was recognised by the assise, and those
matters which have been duly transacted in our court
ought not to be impeached by any one in an ecclesias-
tical court, we command you that, if it be ascertained
by you, that the aforesaid clerk C. was never instituted
to the said chapel at the mandate of the said ordinary at
the time, at which the aforesaid A. the prior of such a

M 2


180 DE EXCEPTIONIBUS.


A. prior de tali loco nec ante recuperavit in curia nia
predictam advocationé, vobis phibemus, quod in causa
ila d est cora vobis (ut dicitur) non peedatis, quia
hoe esset manifeste contra coronam & dignitate nfam.
Teste &c. Ite q ea que in curia domini regis rite
acta sunt irritari non debent; & ubi consensum est in
aligm clericum eo q hæres alicujus fuerit infra setate,
si clerici primo psentati velint institutum implacitare,
tune fiat phibitio in hac forma.


ae Rex talibus judicibus saluté. Prohibemus vobis, ne

e: teneatis placitü in curia Christianitatis de ecclesia de

tra ea, que N. de cujus advocatione nuper placitum fuit in curia

domi  DOostra coram justic. &c. inter A. querentem & B.

registrite custode C. filii & heeredis A. impediétem ratione juris

acta sunt. q idem B. dicebat eundé C. habere in pdicta advoca-

tone, & unde inter eosde A. & B. convenit in curia

nfa coram justic. nostris, q uterq illorum cosensit in

E. cancellariü talé eo q judiciu pcedere non potuit,

quia pdietus C. (de quo dicitur q jus habet in pdicta

advocatione) ad chartas antecessoris sui vel hujusmodi

respondere no potest cüm sit infra setate. Et quia si

placitum q est coram vobis in curia Christianitatis

peederet, ide C. dum infra state fuerit jacturam advo-

cationis sus posset incurrere, et placita de advoca-

tionibus ecclesiarum pertinent ad coronam & dignitate

nostram &c. Teste &c. Est ad aliud genus prohibi-

tionis ratione rerum temporalium quz ad ipsum regem

pertinere possunt ratione custodie archiepiscopatuum

& episcopatuum vacantium, & que occasionem inducunt

prohibendi sieut pro sancto Edmundo archiepiscopo
Cantuar, & fit prohibitio in hac forma.


OF EXCEPTIONS. 181


place, and not before, recovered in our court the said
advowson, we prohibit you, that you should not proceed
in that cause which is before you (as is said), for this
would be manifestly against our crown and dignity.
Witness &c. Likewise because those things which have
been duly transacted in the court of the lord the king
ought not to be made void, and where a certain clerk
has been agreed upon, inasmuch as the heir of some one
is under age, if the clerks first presented wish to sue the
person instituted, then let a prohibition issue in this
form.


The king to such and such judges greeting We 7. -
prohibit you, that you should not hold a plea in the pede
court of Christianity concerning the church of N., con- thing is
cerning the advowson of which there has been lately a ES ee
suit in our court before our justiciaries &c., between A. these
the plaintiff and B. the guardian of C. the son and heir ey e
of A., impeding him by reason of the right which the said poen ud
B. alleged that the said C. has in the said advowson, in the court
and whereupon it has been agreed between the said A. Vires
and B.in our court before our justiciaries, that both of
them have agreed upon E. the chancellor of such a place,
inasmuch as the judgment could not proceed, because
the aforesaid C. (concerning whom it is said that he has
the right to that advowson) cannot answer, since he is
under age,as to the charters of his ancestors and such
like. And because if the suit, which is before you in the
court of Christianity, were to proceed, the said C. since
he is under age might incur the loss of his advowson,
and pleas concerning the advowsons of churches pertain
to our crown and dignity &e. Witness &e, There is also
another kind of prohibition by reason of temporal things,
which may pertain to the crown by reason of the cus-
tody of vacant archbishoprics and bishopries, and which

bring on an occasion of prohibiting, as on behalf of
Saint Edmund archbishop of Canterbury, and a prohi-


bition issues in this form.


182 DE EXCEPTIONIBUS.


UA Rex priori & convétui Roff. salute. Ex relatione
RUE quorunda nuper didicimus q cùm venerabilis pater E.
tinentad Cantuait archiepiscopus habeat custodia episcopatus
E n Roff. nune vacantis cum omnibus exitibus & pficuis
ne alicujus ad dictum episcopatum spectantibus, vos trahitis in
advocatio- b : 4 So ROTE E CMS
nis, sicut placitum in curia Christianitatis eundé archiepiscopum
edes , Autoritate literarum domini papz super quibusda exen-
ditibusque niis! quse prestanda sunt de maneriis nostris, et
nti q codem modo consuetudo? quo alii annui redditus reddi
coronam. Solent episcopo si viveret, eo q idem archiepiscopus ea
sibi reddi postulat ratione custodie ejusdem episcopa-
tus tempore vacationis. Et quoniam si vos in causa
ila obtineretis, manifestum esset nobis inde damnü
incurrere, si contingeret aliquado archiepiscopü Cantuat
simul ci episcopatu Roff. vacare & utrüdj in manu
nia existere, vobis phibemus ne placitum illud sequa-
mini in curia Christianitatis, quia hoc esset contra
corona et dignitatem nostram & ad damnum nostrum
& pjudicium libertatis nostre, quam habemus de epi-
scopatibus vacantibus in regno nostro. Teste &c. Et
fiat aliud breve in eadem forma judicibus, ne procedant.
f.404. Est & aliud genus prohibitionis, ubi quis clericus psen-
tatus ad ecclesiam p dominü regem ppter insufficientia
reeusatus fuerit & alius idoneus institutus, si velit
inquietare institutum, & tune fiat phibitio in hac
forma.


E Rex talibus judicibus salutem. Satis meminimus
S1 minus 6 . ~ onn . 2
idoneus NOS jam pridem psentasse venerabili patri E. Cantuar


fnerit x. archiepiscopo A. de N. ad ecclesiam talé tunc vacantem,
cusatus e E 2 » = > =
idoneus quem quidem cùm idem archiepiscopus minus idoneum


pU: invenisset, ipsum ad eandem admittere recusavit, et


lam breve Cum idem archiepiscopus à nobis licentiam obtineret


! * exhenniis,” MS. Rawl. C. 160. |  ? * consueto,? MS. id,


OF EXCEPTIONS. 1838


The king to the prior and convent of Rochester, Up- .&
on the report of certain persons we have lately learnt If co-
that, whilst the venerable father Edmund, archbishop of Pur
Canterbury, has the custody of the bishopric of Roch- PES |
ester, which is now vacant, with all the issues and profits tain ut
belonging to the said bishopric, you draw into a suit in e
the court of Christianity the said archbishop by the ofa certain
authority of letters from the lord the pope concerning Wear y
certain payments which are to be made from our manors, cerning


and in the same accustomed manner in which other SOS end
annual rents are usually rendered to the bishop, if he and rents
were alive, inasmuch as the said archbishop claims the rir
same to be rendered to him by reason of his custody of the crown.
the said bishopric during the time of the vacancy. And

since if you were to prevail in that suit it is manifest

that we should incur loss, if it should happen at any

time, that the archbishopric of Canterbury together with

the bishopric of Rochester should be vacant, and both
should be in our hand, we prohibit you, that you should

not prosecute that suit in the court of Christianity, be-

cause that would be against our crown and dignity and

to our loss and to the prejudice of our franchise, which

we have concerning vacant bishoprics in our kingdom.
Witness &e. And let there issue another writ in the

same form to the judges, that they should not proceed.

There is also another kind of prohibition, where a cer- f, 404.
tain clerk presented to a church by the lord the king

has been rejected for insufficiency, and another fit person

has been instituted, if he seeks to disturb the person in-
stituted, let a prohibition issue in this form.


The king to so-and-so judges greeting. We well re- , 9.
. an in-
member that we have some time ago presented to the sufficient


venerable father Edmund, archbishop of Canterbury, a pen hes


certain A. de N.to such ‘a church then vacant, whom jected and


indeed when the said archbishop found him to be in- HR end


sufficient, he refused to admit him to the said church, ted, upon


: : : hi B
and when the said archbishop had obtained from us a HAM


formatum
a justici-
arlis.


10.
Prohibitio
judicibus,
si clericus
ad præ-
senta-
tionem
regis vel
anteces-
soris ad-
missus im-
placitetur
in curia
Christiani-
tatis.


184 DE EXCEPTIONIBUS.


de idonea psona eidé ecclesia pvidenda, illam B. de N.
viro pvido & honesto & laudabilis conversationis con-
tulit, cujus collationi et ordinationi de eadem facte
regium adhibuimus assensum & favore. Et cum ide
A. jam pristine psentationi ad dictam ecclesiam de
persona sua per nos factee adhereat, & de qua nihil
consequi potuit ppter suam insufficientiam, trahit ipsum
B. in placitum de eadem ecclesia coram vobis autori-
tate literarum dfii pape, et quoniam injustum est &
contra dignitatem nostram q ide A., cui fuit ppter
suam insufficientiam institutio denegata, ipsum B.
implacitet et inquietet, qui per ipsum archiepiscopum
sicut persona idonea ad eandem admissus & canonice
institutus nostro interveniente assensu & favore, vobis
phibemus, q de czetero placitum illud non teneatis.
Teste &c. Et fiat bře in consimili forma clerico ne
pcedat. Est et aliud genus prohibitionis, cùm ipse
rex vel aliquis antecessor suus, ratione alicujus vaca-
tionis alicujus episcopatus, abbatie, vel prioratus, &
in manu sua existentis, psentaverit clericum, & qui ad
presentationem suam fuerit institutus: & episcopus,
vel abbas, vel prior substitutus veniat cotra psenta-
tionem regis vel patris sui, tunc fiat phibitio in hac
forma.


Rex talibus judicibus salutem. Monstravit nobis
A. de N. q cum teneat advocationem talis ecclesie
de donatione J. regis patris nostri, quam ei contulit
ratione talis prioratus vacantis & in manu sua exis-
tentis, prior ilius loci jam infirmare nititur institu-
tionem illius A. de pdicta ecclesia, quam sic ad psen-
tationem dieti patris nostri canonice est adeptus, &
gravans, & inquietans eum multipliciter, trahit eum
coram vobis in curiam Christianitatis, autoritate litera-
rum düi papse de eadé ecclesia. Et quoniam hoc est
manifeste in opprobrium et pjudicium regiw dignitatis,


OF EXCEPTIONS. 185


license to provide a fit person for the said church, he writ drawn
collated to it B. de N., à man prudent and honest and MAE
of laudable conversation, to whose collation and ordina-
tion to the said church we have given our royal assent
and favour. And since the said A. adheres to the former
presentation made by us of his person to the said church,
and from which he could derive no effect on account of
his insufficiency, he draws the said B. into a suit con-
cerning the said church before you by authority of let-
ters from the lord the pope, and since it is unjust and
contrary to our dignity that the said A., to whom insti-
tution was denied on account of his insufficiency, should :
implead and disquiet the said B. who has been admitted
as a fit person to the said church and canonically insti-
tuted, our assent and favour intervening, we prohibit you,
that henceforth you should not entertain that suit. Wit-
ness, &c. And let a writ issue in similar form to the
clerk, that he should not proceed. There is also another
kind of prohibition, when the king himself or some one
of his ancestors by reason of a vacancy of a bishopric,
abbey or priory, which is in his hand, has presented a
clerk, who on his presentation has been instituted: anda
bishop or abbot or prior substituted comes against the
presentation of the king or his father, then let a prohi-


bition issue in this form.

The king to so-and-so judges greeting. A. de N. has A ue
shown to us, that when he holds the advowson of such n aa
a church upon the donation of John our father, which He judges,
he conferred on him by reason of such a priory being admitted
vacant and being in his hand, the prior of that place now one Pes
strives to invalidate the institution of the said A. to the of the king
aforesaid church, which he has canonically obtained cee
upon the presentation of our said father, and grieving eels es
and disquieting him in many ways, draws him before ya court
you into the court of Christianity, by the authority of of Christi-
letters from the lord the pope concerning the said church. *?'»


And as it would be manifestly to the disgrace and pre-


f. 404 b.


le
Prohibitio!
si clericus
implacita-
verit
ballivum
vel alium
ministrum,
eo quod
arrestavit
eum pro
pace regis
vel pro
latrocinio.


186 DE EXCEPTIONIBUS.


si dietus prior in causa illa obtineat: vobis phibemus,
ne in causa illa pcedatis, chm vobis & universis de
regno nfo notorium sit & esse debet, q ecclesie
vacantes & ptinentes ad collationem episcoporum,
abbatum, & priorum sede non vacante dum viverent,
ptinere debent ad nos, ratione custodie tempore vaca-
tionis. Teste &. Et q dictū est de episcopatibus,
abbatiis, prioratibus, dici poterit de baroniis & aliis,
dum fuerint in custodia díü regis.


Cap. V


Est etia inter alias phibitiones dam  phibitio, ubi
videlicet clericus implacitaverit ballivü dñi regis in
curia Christianitatis aliqua de causa, eo forte quód ide
ballivus eù arrestavit p aliqua transgressione, & p
pace düi regis, & de quo petita fuit curia Christiani-
tatis p episcopum: & forma phibitionis talis est. Rex
talibus judicibus salute. Mostravit nobis talis vic.,
major, ppositus talis ville, vel ballivus quilibet, q cùm
A. clericü. tanqm malefactoré & rettatü de roberia &
societate latronü, vel inventum tali loco in convétu &
societate latronü, & certa suspicione notatum, p officii
sui debito, & p pace nta p legem terre secundü regni
nostri consuetudine nuper arrestari fecisset, quonia
etiam postmodü tali episcopo, qui ipsum petiit sibi
liberari tanqm clericü à carcere & custodia nia, fecimus
liberari. Idem A. clericus pfatum ballivü nostri, oc-
casione pdieta trahit in placitü coram vobis autoritate


1 A rubric, which precedes herein | matter of the preceding chapter :
Tottell’s edition, and has no bearing | * De donationibus que pertinent
on the subject matter of this chap- | “ ad regem in vacationibus episco-
ter, has been designedly omitted. | * patuum, abbatiarum, prioratuum
It has the appearance of a side note | “ et hujusmodi."
and has reference to the subject


OF EXCEPTIONS. 187


judice of our royal dignity, if the aforesaid prior should
prevail in that cause, we prohibit you, that you should
not proceed in that cause, since it is and ought to be no-
torious to you and to every person of our realm, that
vacant churches which pertain to the collation of bis-
hops, abbots, and priors, whilst their see is not vacant
during their lifetime, ought to belong to us by reason of
our guardianship in the time of a vacancy. Witness,
&c. And what is said of bishoprics, abbeys, priories,
may be said of baronies and other offices, whilst they
are in the custody of the lord the king.


CHAPTER V. f. 404 b.


There is likewise amongst other prohibitions a certain E.
prohibition, to wit, where a clerk has sued a bailiff of BE
the lord the king in the court of Christianity for a M Ice:
certain cause on the ground that the said bailiff has a bailiff or
arrested him for some transgression, and for the peace ee
of the lord the king, and concerning whom the court grouna,
of Christianity was applied to by the bishop. The form that he
of the prohibition is of this kind : rested him

The king to judges so-and-so greeting. So-and-so our °p pene
viscount, or mayor, or provost of such a vill, or bailiff king’s
of such a place, has shown to us that when he had Pr.
lately caused to be arrested a clerk A. as a malefactor bery.
and accused of robbery and of associating with robbers,
or found in such a place in a meeting and society of
robbers, and marked with a certain suspicion, according
to the duty of his office and on behalf of our peace by
the law of the land according to the custom of our realm,
since likewise we have afterwards caused him to be
delivered up to bishop so-and-so, who claimed him to be
. delivered up to him, as being a clerk, from our prison
and our custody. The said clerk A, draws our afore-


said bailiff upon the occasion aforesaid into a suit


1.
Prohibitio
de eo, qui
dicebat se
tenere per
legem
Angliæ, et
in curia
Christiani-
tatis pro-
bare volu-
erit pueros
suos legi-
timos, qui
revera
bastardi
sunt.


188 DE EXCEPTIONIBUS.


literarü dfi papæ, & quoniā hoc est manifestè contra
corona & dignitatē- nostram, & etiam contra pace
nostram q aliquis ballivus noster occasione ministerii
sui, vel p aliquo q ad coservatione pacis nostre per-
tineat, vel p justicia facienda, trahatur in placitum
in curia Christianitatis, cùm eorü facta nia reputemus
in hae pte, vobis phibem?, &e. ut supra. T. &e. Et
cosimile bře fiat clerico qui sequit, & qui poti? capi
debeat et in prison mitti.


Car. VI.


Est etiam breve phibitionis in casu ubi quis tenere
se dicebat p legem Angliæ, & cùm disseysitus esset
et tulisset breve de nova disseysina ad seysinam re-
cuperanda, objectum esset ei q recuperare no potuit,
eo q pueri! ratione quorü ad vitam suam  tehere
debeat? cim in curia Christianitatis illos pbare velit?
ad legitimos, q facere no debuit, secuta fuit phi-
bitio in hae forma. Rex tali episcopo salute. Os-
tensum est nobis ex parte A. q cum B. nuper in
curia nostra &c. nuper arramaverit assi no. diss.
versus eundé A. de tenefáto in tali villa, qd ide B.
dicebat se tenuisse p lege Angliz, et ide A. p cosidera-
tione ejusde curie nize ide recessisset sine die versus
eüde B. eo q pueri quos habuerat de uxore sua tali,
cujus hereditas tenement illud fuerat, & ratione quorü
puerorü ide B. clamavit tenere illud tenemétü ad
vitam sua p lege Anglie secundü regni nostri con-
suetudinem, nati fuerunt ante matrimonium contractum


! * pueros non habuit, MS. debuit, MSS. Rawl 10-160 and


Rawl. C. 159. is
* vellet," MS. Rawl. C. 160.


OF EXCEPTIONS. 189


before you by the authority of letters from the lord
the pope, and since it is manifestly against our crown
and our dignity, and also against our peace, that any
bailiff of ours upon any occasion of his office or on
account of anything which pertains to the preservation
of our peace or for executing justice should be drawn
into a suit in the court of Christianity, since we ac-
count their acts as our own in this part, we prohibit
you &e. as above. Witness, &c. And let a similar writ
issue to the clerk who sues, and who ought rather to
be seized and committed to prison.


CHAPTER VI.


There is likewise a writ of prohibition in the case — 1.
where a person says that he holds by the law of Eng- A P'^h
land, and when he has been disseysed and has brought againsthim
a writ of novel disseysine to recover seysine, it has that he”
been objected to him that he could not recover, inas- FAP EE :
much as his sons, in respect of whom he is entitled to Tisai:
hold for his life [are bastards], when he seeks to prove i
in the court of Christianity that they are legitimate, Christianity
which he ought not to do, a prohibition has followed Rien
in this form: The king to the bishop greeting. It his sons.
has been shown to us on the part of A. that when B. ca
has lately in our court, &e. instituted an assise of novel are in truth
disseysine against the said A. concerning a tenement pd
in such a vill, which the said B. said that he held by
the law of England, and the said A. by a resolution
of our said court withdrew thence without a day against
the said B., inasmuch as the sons, whom he had by
so-and-so his wife, whose inheritance that tenement
was, and in respect of which sons the said B. claimed
to hold that tenement for his life by the law of Eng-
land aecording to the custom of our realm, were born


before matrimony was contracted between the said B.


f, 405.


190 DE EXCEPTIONIBUS.


inter ipsum B. et talem uxorem suam, sicut in eadem
curia nostra recognitum fuit per confessionem ipsius
B. et etiam cotra eum presumptum, eo quód idem B.
prius fuit in curia nostra! cum preefatali? quam nune
dicit uxorem, et cùm in probatione esset in curia
nostra, idem B. venit cum ea sicut serviens, et non
ut maritus, nec aliqua facta fuit mentio in brevi, per
quod ipsa placitaret, quod virum haberet, predictus B.
postea ad deceptioné curiz nřæ et ad infirmandü judi-
ciü in curia nfa factü trahit ipsum A. in placitum
cora vobis in curia Christianitatis, autoritate literarü
dii pape, ad pdictos pueros legitimandos, ut sic p
aliam viam rehabere posset tenementü qd amisit, & q
pueri sui sie succedere valeant in bonis paternis &
maternis. Et cum no possint judices aliqui de legiti-
mitate cognoscet quoad heereditaté & successione ha-
bendam, nisi fuerit. loquela prius in curia nia incepta
per bre, et ibi bastardia objecta, et postea ad curia
Christianitatis trasmissa, vobis phibemus q in placito
illo ulteriüs no pceedatis, nos enim, cùm pdicti pueri
ad nos venerint, in pdicta curia nfa de pdicto tene-
mento eis justiciam exhibeamus,® secundü consuetudine
regni nostri, ubisi eis bastardia objecta fuerit, manda-
bimus ordinario loci ut de ipsorü legitimatione cog-
noscat, si ad ipsum fuerit in hae parte cognitio
demandanda. ^ Est etiam  phibitio huie cosimilis, &
magis aperta, de quodam Waltero Muschet, q non
valet cognitio de legitimitate quoad successione, nisi
sic fuerit a curia regia demadata, et est phibitio
talis.


! * in eadem curia nostra," MS. ? * eum preefata tali," MS, id.


Rawl. C. 160. | 3“ exhibebimus,” MS. id.


OF EXCEPTIONS. 191


and his said wife, as has been recognised in our said
court by the confession of the said B. and has also been
presumed against him, inasmuch as he has appeared
previously in our court with the aforesaid so-and-so
whom he now asserts to be his wife, and when a
matter was in course of proof in our court, the said B.
came with her as her serving man, and not as her
husband, nor was any mention made in the writ, by
which she sued, that she had a husband, the aforesaid
B., afterwards to the deception of our court and to
invalidate the judgment made in our court, draws the
said A. into a plea before you in the court of Chris-
tianity by the authority of letters from the lord the
pope in order to legitimate the aforesaid sons, that so
by another road he might recover the tenement which
he has lost, and that his sons may so succeed to their
paternal and maternal goods. And since no judges can
duly proceed to hold cognisance concerning legitimacy
as regards an inheritance and succession to property,
unless a trial has been previously commenced in our court
and bastardy has been there objected, and the cause has
been thereupon transmitted to the court of Christianity,
we prohibit you that you should not proceed further
in that suit, for we also, when the aforesaid boys shall
have come to us, will administer to them justice in our
aforesaid court concerning the aforesaid tenement, where,
if bastardy be objected to them, we shall send a mandate
to the ordinary of the place, that he should hold cog-
nisance concerning their legitimacy, if the cognisance
ought to be committed to him on this behalf. There
is a prohibition like this, and more open, concerning a
certain Walter Muschet, that the cognisance concerning
legitimacy with respect to a succession is not valid,
unless it has been ordered by the royal court, and the
prohibition is of this kind.


f. 405.


192 DE EXCEPTIONIBUS.


2. Rex talibus judicibus saluté. Ostensum est nobis
Si quis é : ; z PES toO ote E
"olent in eX Parte A. q cùm in cura nra corani Justiciarns HOS
curiaChris- tris pximo itinerantibus in tali com arramavit qua-
tianitati . : ;
leith dam assisam mortis antecessoris versus B. de quadam
tionem terra in N., idem B, timens sibi posse opponi notam
suam pro- . ° - . ~ ge = . .
bare, e bastardie in eade assisa, et ante pdictu adventu Justi-


iod ciariof, et anteqm ei bastardia opponatur in curia nia
esset judi- IN eadé assisa, et antegm fuerit p nos ordinario loci
cibus Per inquisitio de legitimitate pbanda secundu regni nti
regiam  cosuetudiné demádata, literas dfi papse ad vos di-
aie rectas impetravit, ut de legitimitate sua cognoscatis,
lidmum & ad pbationé illius testes admittatis, ut p hoe re-
Muschet^ maneat hereditas & successio cotra cósuetudiné regni
nostri d hucusq obtinuit, ut approbata et à Sede
Apostolica cofirmata, q in causa successionis & hære-
ditatis petitione debet prius placitü moveri in curia
nostra, & cū ibi objecta fuerit bastardia, tune deinde
trasmitti debet recordü loquele et cognitio bastardize
ad eurià Christianitatis, ut ibi ad mandatum nim de
legitimitate inquiratur, qd quide no est in hac pte
observatü. Et cū hoc sit manifeste cotra cosuetudine
regni nfi, q habita vel habenda inter alios? cotentione
de jure successionis debeatis ad inquisitione de legiti-
matioe pcedere, anteqm à nobis hoe fuerit vobis de-


madat, vobis phibemus, &c. ut supra.


8. Est etia alterius modi phibitio, ci petés tenéti


Si petens Sa . C : - . v 5 Ob
tenenti ve. Dastardia objecerit, & ordinario -loci fuerit inquisitio


: eontrario demadata, si mortuo petéte vel tenéte velit ordinarius
astar- . = : . . doe.
diam ob. Sine novo madato in psona heredis ad inquisition


jicerit, et pcedere. Rex tali ordinario salute. Ostédit nobis A.


1 * Willielmum Muschet,” should | C. 160, and accords with Bracton's
be written Walterum  Muschet, | text.
which is supported by MS. Rawl. ? * aliquos," MS. Rawl. C. 159.


OF EXCEPTIONS. 193


The king to judges so-and-so greeting. It has been 9.
shown to us on the part of A. that, when in our court If person
before our justiciaries in their last iter in such a county pom lis
he has instituted a certain assise of mortdancester EAT
against B. concerning a certain land in N., the said B. TE
fearing that there should be objected to him the brand Ea l
of bastardy in the same assise, and before the aforesaid COME.
arrival of our justiciaries, and before that bastardy had dels p
been objected to him in our court in the same assise, and the king’s
before that an inquest concerning the proof of his legiti- vr er
macy had been committed to the ordinary according to William
the custom of our realm, sued out letters from the lord the ras
pope directed to you, that you should hold a judicial
inquiry into his legitimacy and admit witnesses to the
proof of it, that thereby he should retain an inheritance
and succession contrary to the custom of our realm,
which has hitherto prevailed, as approved and confirmed
by the apostolic see, that in a cause of succession and a
claim of inheritance a plea ought first to be moved in
our court,and when bastardy has been there objected,
then there ought thereupon to be transmitted a record
of the argument and the cognisance of the objection of
bastardy to the court of Christianity, that upon our
mandate inquiry be there made concerning legitimacy,
which has not been observed in this behalf. And since
it is manifestly against the custom of our realm that, if
a contention has been raised or is about to be raised
between others concerning the right of succession, you
should proceed to an inquest concerning legitimacy before


a mandate has been sent to you, we prohibit you, &c. as
above.


There is likewise another kind of prohibition, when a AS
a claim-


claimant has objected bastardy to a tenant, and an in- j, has
quest has been committed to the ordinary of the place, eei
if upon the death of the claimant or of the tenant the bastardy,
ordinary seeks without a new mandate to proceed to an z ne.
inquest in the person of the heir. Tho king to such an gna the


R 2657. N


mortuo eo,
cui fuit ob-
jectum,
velit judex
inquirere
de legiti-
matione
filii, cum
hoe non
sit ei de-
mandatum.


f, 405 b.


Ls
Quibus
fieri debet
prohibitio.


194 DE EXCEPTIONIBUS.


filius & heres B. q, ca C. in curia nia cora justic.
ultimó itinerütibus in com tali peteret versus eude B.
tantü tre &e. p assisa mortis antecessoris inde ibi
inter eos sumonita, & ide B. objecerit eide C. bas-
tardia in eade curia, & cognitio vobis esset demadata,
& pédéte iquisitioe illa, ide B. die clausit extrem,
vos pfatu A. filii & hsrede pdicti B. vocari fecistis
in judieiü pdieta occaside, ut in psona heredis de-
functi pceedat inquisitio sine alio madato, et quia si
cotingat q altera ptiū inter quas agitur in cur nia
decedat, tota loquela illa cadit & remanet, nec super
eode peedi poterit contra heredé defuncti, nisi p bre
nostri de novo cotra ipsum ppetratü, vobis manda-
mus q in cognitione ĵdictæ cause cotra pfatum A. de
estero no peedatis, donec à nobis aliud inde habue-
ritis mandatum. Teste &c.


Car. VII.


Quibus fieri debet phibitio videndü, & sciendü q
tam ei qui tenet placitü gm ei qui sequitur, sive
plures sint judices delegati sive subdelegati, sive
unus, sieut ordinarius quicüj, si unus qui sequitur
sive plures, licet prima facie videat q sufficere debeat
si tantü judici fiat phibitio, quia si judex pcedere
noluerit, non valebit, quavis querens sequi velit, quia
non ibi erit judiciti quasi deficiéte judice, si aute pti
tantu & ipse sequi voluerit? nullu erit judiciū ratioe
supradieta, quia non valet si judex tenere vellet, si


1* mpetratum," MS. Rawl. C. ? * noluerit,” MS. id.
16^,


OF EXCEPTIONS, 195


ordinary greeting. A. the son and heir of B. has shown person

to us that, when C. in our court before our justiciaries on 4:8
their last iter in such a county claimed against the said against
B. so much land &e. by an assise of mortdancester sum- MR
moned there before them, and the said B. objected to the has been.
said C. bastardy in the said court, and the cognisance pto
was committed to you, and whilst the inquest was pro- fo inquire
ceeding the said B. closed his last day, you have caused pues
the aforesaid A. the son and heir of the said B. to be ofthe son,
called into judgment on the aforesaid occasion, that the dee E
inquest should proceed in the person of the heir of the been com-
defunet without another mandate, and because if it hap- in *
pens that one of the parties between whom proceedings

are taken in our court should die, the whole trial falls

and is stayed, nor can proceedings be taken on the same f. 405 b.
subject against the heir of the defunct, except through

our writ sued out afresh against him, we command you

that you proceed no further in the cognisance of the
aforesaid cause against the aforesaid A. until you have


another mandate thereon from us. Witness &c.


CHAPTER VII.


We must see to whom a prohibition ought to be 1.
To whom


directed, and it is to be known that it should be directed , MR.
as well to him who holds the plea, as to him who sues, tion ought
whether there be several judges delegate or sub-delegate d
or one as an ordinary, and if there be one who sues or
several, although at first sight it seems that it ought to

be sufficient if a prohibition be issued to the judge alone,
because if the judge should not be willing to proceed, it

will be of no avail, although the claimant wishes to sue,
because there would not be there a judgment inasmuch

as a judge would be asit were wanting, but if to the

party alone and the judge sought to proceed, there

would not be any judgment for the reason aforesaid, for


it does not avail if the judge wishes to persist, if there
N 2


ia
Si judices
prohibi-
tionem ad-
mittere re-
cusaverint
et super-
veniat illa
prohibitio,
estimare
debent an


196 DE EXCEPTIONIBUS.


non sit qui sequatur, & sic nō erit judiciū. Melius
tamen erit q omnibus fiat generaliter, ne judices vel
querens impunè posset pcedere. Sed quid si judices
delegati alios sibi subdelegaverit, & qui cognoverint
de causa, videndum quibus fieri debeat phibitio, utrū
vz. principalibus vel subdelegatis, & tune refert utrū
ita subdelegaverint, vz. ad certum diem, vel sic quod
sibi reservaverint principalia judiciorum, videlicet
principium, medium, & finem, scilicet contestationem
et dispensationem super contestationibus & diffinitivam
sentētiam, et quo casu videtur q locum habere debet
phibitio, cü sie sibi aliquid reservaverint, & ipsi auto-
ritate subdelegatis pstiterint, cum ipse facere videtur
cujus autoritate fit. Si aute se ad tota causam excu-
saverint & nihil sibi reservaverit, tuc refert utru hoc
fecerint ante phibitione, vel post. Si aute ante phibi-
tione, no credentes aliqua intervenire posse phibitioé,
tüc sufficit si phibitio fiat subdelegatis. Si vero post
phibition, tune psumi possit q hoc fecerit per fraudem.
Et ideo tenebit phibitio facta in personis eoru, quasi
nulla facta subdelegatione.


Car. VIII.


Proposita sie exceptione cotra jurisdictione (ut pdietü
est) & cùm illam admittere recusaverint, superveniat
prohibitio, et faeta examinatione an eorura sit juris-
dictio vel non, decreverit supersedendum, tune remaneat
querentis prosecutio. Si autem dubitaverint utrum


1 € yeservaverint," MS. Rawl. C. 160.


OF EXCEPTIONS. 197


be no one who sues, and so there will not be a judgment.
Tt will be better that a prohibition should issue to them
all generally, lest the judges or the plaintiff might proceed
with impunity. But what if judges delegate have sub-
delegated others, who have held cognisance of the cause,
it is to be seen to whom the prohibition ought to go,
whether to the principals or to the sub-delegates, and
then it matters whether they have sub-delegated. them
for a certain day, or on such conditions that they have
reserved to themselves the principal parts of the judg-
ments, to wit, the commencement, the middle and the
end, to wit, the settlement of the issue and the dispen-
sation of certain issues and the definitive sentence, and
in which case it seems that a prohibition ought to issue
to them, since they have thus reserved something for
themselves, and they have themselves furnished autho-
rity to the sub-delegates, since he seems to do a thing
by whose authority it is done. But if they have ex-
cused themselves for the whole cause and reserved no-
thing for themselves, then it is of importance whether
they have done this before or after the prohibition. But
if before the prohibition, not believing that any prohi-
bition could intervene, then it is sufficient, if the pro-
hibition issue to the sub-delegates. But if after the
prohibition, then it may be presumed that they have
done it through fraud. Therefore a prohibition made in
their persons will bind them, as if no sub-delegation had
been made.


CHAPTER VIII. l.
If the


Upon an exception having been thus propounded ipm


against the jurisdiction (as aforesaid), and when they fasea to
have refused to admit it, let a prohibition supervene, and E
upon an examination having been made whether the anda pro-
E AD : . eol hibition

: x lecree
jurisdietion is theirs or not, if it should be decreed to uo


supersede it, then let the suit of the plaintiff be stayed. they ought


eorum sit
jurisdictio,
et si dubi-
taverint,
debent
consulere
justicia-
rios, et de
hujusmodi
consulta-
tionibus
dicatur.


2.
Breve ad
responden-
dum con-
sultationi
judicum
-per justi-
ciarios de
nova
garba.
Cod. 1. ii.
tit.11, § 3.
De edendo.


198 DE EXCEPTIONIBUS.


supersedendum sit vel non, solent judices aliquando
justiciarios cdsulere utrü pcedere possent vel necesse
haberent supersedere, & utrum ad eos ptinet cognitio
vel non ptinet, & quo casu fuit eorü consultationibus
per judices multis modis responsum, secundum q pro-
hibitio locü habere debet vel non habere, & fit bie
hujusmodi de resposione faciéda sub nomine justici-
ariorü.


Viris venerabilibus, vel dilectis sibi in Christo tali
& cojudicibus suis salute. Literas vestras suscepi,
cotinentes q cùm dam causa, d vertitur coram vobis
inter A. prioré et coventu tale et B. talé clericu vel
laicü, facta vobis editione (ut dicitis) super nova garba
tree ipsi? B. pdietis A. priori et coventui quondà in
ppetua eleemosina collata, autoritate literarü dii pape
examini vestro sit comissa, & cùm ex earundé autori-
tate literarum, in eadem causa jam inceperitis peedere,
idé B., ne de laico feodo suo in curia Christianitatis
peedatis, vobis literas díü regis phibitorias porrexerat,
unde à nobis consilia requiritis vel petitis, utrü in
causa illa peedendü sit vel supersedendü, ad q vobis
vel eosultationi vestre duxim? respodendü, vel aliter
sic. Desiderio igitur vestro satisfacere cupiétes vel
voletes, cdosultationi vestre in hae parte sic duximus
respodendü, q si pdictus A. prior & cóventus, novam
garbam illa aliquo tépore perceperüt, et inde in posses-
sione pacifica fuerint p aliquod tépus, et inde spoliati


OF EXCEPTIONS. 199


But if they doubt whether it should be superseded or PRERA
not, the judges are accustomed sometimes to consult the whether


justiciaries whether they may proceed, or whether they us
hold it to be necessary to supersede the proceedings, and theirs, and


i a + if they
whether the cognisance belongs to them or not, and in Tobe they


which case answers are made in many ways to the ought to
EE : consult the

consultations of them on the part of the judges, accord- gu

ing as a prohibition ought to have place or not, and a aud we


2 c : : : 2 must speak
writ of this kind issues concerning the making of an ofeuck —
answer in the name of the justiciaries. ela

ions.


To the venerable men, or to his. beloved in Christ 2.
so-and-so and his associated judges greeting. I have ches i
received your letter, containing that since a certain a consulta-
cause, which is controverted before you between A. the Sabe.
prior and the convent of such a place and a certain by the jus-
B. a clerk or laic, a declaration of the ground of action e
having been made to you as you say concerning a new aes
sheaf of the land of the said B. conferred formerly in’ ~~
perpetual alms upon the aforesaid A. the prior and con-
vent, has been committed to your examination by the
authority of letters from the lord the pope, and since upon
the authority of those letters you have already began to
proceed in the said cause ; the B. has exhibited to you
prohibitory letters from the lord the king, that you
should not proceed in a court of Christianity concerning
a lay feud, whereupon you require or seek counsel from
us, whether you should proceed in that cause or should
supersede further proceedings, upon which we have
thought it right to reply to you or to your consultation ;
or otherwise thus: Desiring therefore or being willing
to satisfy your desire, we have thought it right to reply
to your consultation on this behalf, that if the aforesaid
A. the prior and the convent have gathered there a new
sheaf for some time back, and have been in peaceful
possession thereof during some time, and have been
spoiled of it unjustly, you may proceed securely in the
ecclesiastical court, notwithstanding the royal prohi-


2


[22
Aliud
breve et
alterius
modi, si
clericus
clericum de
eodem.


200 DE EXCEPTIONIBUS.
injuste, super restitutide illius novee garbe, (si vobis
hoe céstiterit in veritate) in foro ecclesiastico secure
potestis peedere nd obstante regia phibitione. Si aute
in possessione inde nō fuerint nec inde recéter spoliati
injuste, tic magis expedit vobis supersedere qm pcedere,
quia si pcederitis, hoe esset in pjudiciü regie digni-
tatis. Fiat quandog resposio cosultationibus sub nomine
regis, quadoq sub noine justic.: brevi? tame et rectius
poterit cdsultationib’ respoderi examinata judiciü!
cosultatioe hoe modo. Talibus judicibus salute. In-
spectis literis vestris, quas nobis transmisistis, et plenius
intellectis (sine pjudicio melioris sententie) consulta-
tioni vestree duxim? respodedum, g si res ita se habet
sieut in cosultatione vestra nobis exposuistis, videtur
nobis q in causa ista bene potestis pcedere, non obstante
regia phibitione. Est etia alius modus consultationis
& responsionis per M. de P. q phibitio locü non habet
inter ecclesiasticas psonas, ut si viri religiosi teneantur
alicui clerico in annuo redditu p chartam et sub psta-
tione sacramenti, si clericus velit agere in foro eccle-
siastico.


Tali N. et cdjudicibus suis talibus salute. Literas
cosultationis vestras benigné suscepi, & qua decuit
diligentia inspexi, & quibus inspectis et intellectis,
vobis et cosultationi vestra si? duximus respodenduü,
q cum juri canonico sit contrariü, q si clericus elericü
et maximé viros religiosos covenerit corà judice eccle-
siastico, quod iidem religiosi quasi religionis suse ime-
mores, et de ecclesia (salva pace eoru) male scientes,
ut negotii peessu impediant, et judiciü ecclesiasticu
subterfugiat, et maxime super annuo redditu p eoru


———— ÓÁ—M a a  R EE EEE


1“ judicum,” MS. Rawl: C. 160. | ?* sie duximus," MS. id.


OF EXCEPTIONS. 201


bition concerning the restitution of that new sheaf (if
you have been satisfied of the truth of it). But if they
have not been in possession thereof nor have been
recently spoiled thereof unjustly, then it is more expe-
dient to supersede the proceedings than to continue
them, because if you should proceed, it would be to the
prejudice of the royal dignity. Sometimes the answer
may be made in the name of the king to the consulta-
tions, sometimes in the name of the justiciaries. A reply,
however, may be made briefly and more correctly after
an examination of the consultation of the judges in this
manner: To judges so-and-so greeting. Upon an in-
spection of your letter, which you have transmitted to
us, and upon full consideration of its contents (without
prejudice to a better opinion), we have thought fit to
reply to your consultation, that if the matter be of such
a kind as you have expounded to us in your consulta-
tion, it appears to us that you may well proceed in that
cause, notwithstanding the royal prohibition. There
is also another mode of consultation and reply made by
Martin de Pateshull because a prohibition has no place
between ecclesiastical persons, as if persons under
religious vows are bound to a certain clerk for an annual
rent by a charter, and under the sanction of an oath, if
the clerk wishes to proceed in an ecclesiastical court.


To so-and-so N. and so-and-so his associate judges dubie
greeting. I have received favourably your letters of writ ana
consultation and have inspected them with becoming pe en:
diligence, and having inspected them and well considered clerk anes
them, we have thought that this reply should be given Mania
to your consultation, that, since it is contrary to the
canon law, if a clerk should sue a clerk and especially
clerks under religious vows before an ecclesiastical judge,
that the said clerks under religious vows, as if forgetful
of their religious vows and ill-disposed towards the
church (saving their peace), that they may encumber
it with a process, and may escape from an ecclesiastical


judgment, and particularly being bound to pay an


f. 406 b.


im
Ubi et
quando et
quibus re-
bus locum
habet pro-
hibitio,
ratione
persona-
rum et rei,


202 DE EXCEPTIONIBUS.


chartà et juraméto obligati, ad phibitione regia mali-
close recurrat, advertat discretio vestra, q in casu
pposito no obstat regia phibitio, et peedatis secure, ne
subterfugiédi detur pniciosa occasio, quia si ipsi cõ-
veniantur in seculari judicio, se ibi tueretur fori
privilegio, quia forte diceret q clerici essent, et ideo
q non tenerentur respondere in foro seculari ratione
ordinis clericalis et psone sue, & sic videtur q causa
secularis et res trahitur ad forum ecclesiasticum ppter
privilegium psonz ecclesiastice, q esse non deberet
(ut videtur) quia, si illud privilegium haberet pro se
ne responderet in foro seculari, merito illud contra se
haberet ne ei in eodé foro responderetur. Nec etiam
valere deberet (ut videtur) illud quod superius dictu
est, quód propter recentem spoliationem mutari debet
jurisdictio de re temporali, non magis de redditu quàm
de laico feodo, ubi remedium habere posset in foro
seculari per assisam nove disseysine, vel hujusmodi,
secundum q redditus fuerit talis vel talis.


CAP. IX.


Ut auté consultationibus judicu meliüs possit respo-
deri, videre non est inutile, ubi & quando locum
habere debeat phibitio, & de quibus rebus, et quando
no. Et si non in toto, in pte tame p exceptione. Et
sciendum, q locum habet phibitio ne judieiu pcedat in
foro ecclesiastico, quadod ratione psonarum & rei de


bo


OF EXCEPTIONS. 203


annual rent in virtue of a charter and their oath, should
have recourse maliciously to a prohibition from the king,
your discretion may observe that in the proposed case
the royal prohibition is not an obstacle, and you may
proceed securely, lest a pernicious occasion for escaping
judgment should be afforded, because if they were to be
convened before a secular judge, they would defend
themselves by their privilege of a tribunal, because they
would perhaps say that they were clerks, and accordingly
that they were not bound to answer in a secular court
by reason of their clerical order and character, and so it
seems that a secular cause and matter is drawn into an
ecclesiastical forum on account of the privilege of the
ecclesiastical character, which ought not be (as it seems),
because if he should have that privilege on his own
behalf not to answer in a secular court, he would de-
servedly have the converse against him that no one
should answer to him in a secular court. Further it
ought not to avail (as it seems) what has been observed
above, that the jurisdiction should be changed on account f. 406 b.
of a recent spoliation, no more concerning a rent than
concerning a lay fee, where he may have a remedy ina
secular court through an assise of novel disseysine or
such like, according as the rent is of this or of that


character.


E


CHAPTER IX.


va jetter ei i
But that an answer may be the better given to the n E


consultations of the judges, it is not unprofitable to con- when and
sider, where and when a prohibition ought to have ain SEA
: = matters a
place, and concerning what things, and when not so. prohibition
And if not in the entire matter, nevertheless in part e
through an exception. And it is to be known that a ofthe x
ibiti ; iude sons or o
prohibition has a place to prevent, a judgment proceed- quere
ing in an ecclesiastical court, sometimes by reason of the


persons and the matter which is the subject of the action,


204 DE EXCEPTIONIBUS.


qua agitur, ut ibi cognitio meré ptinet ad coronam &
dignitate regiam, ut si laicus laicü implacitaverit coram
judice ecclesiastico de aliquo laico feodo, vel de aliquo
q ad laieü feodum ptineat, quia jurisdictionem regiam
in hac pte mutare nd poterit alig privilegium, sicut
privilegium cruce signatorü, vel alicujus alterius, etiam
etsi rex hoc vellet, dissimulat. tamen hoc quandod,
quavis hoe sit cotra privilegium corone & dignitatis
sue. Ité jurisdictioné suam non mutat fidei inter-
positio, sacrameétü pstitum, nec spontanea renuntiatio
ptium, quamvis sibi ipsis in hac parte pjudicent p
consensum. Et illud ide dicendum erit de debitis &
catallis, que no sunt de testamento, vel matrimonio,
vel eorü sequela. Ite locum habet phibitio ratione
psonarum vel rei, ut si clericus laicum, vel laicus
clericu, in foro ecclesiastico traxerit de aliquo przedieto-
rum. te ratione rei tantü, ut si de aliquo pdictoru
clericus in foro ecclesiastico clericü traxerit in placitu,
quia si judex ecclesiastic? inter tales judicaverit,
judicium suü executioni mandare no poterit, quia no
est vicecom nec alius minister, qui in executione
facienda ei obteperet, et si ipse exequi voluerit, locü
habebit cotra ipsum assisa nove disseysine, et cotra
eum qui sequitur, de laico feodo dico ad differentiam
liberae eleemosinz, quee magis pprié dicitur libera cùm
sit quasi Deo dedicata, sicut tra data ecclesiæ nomine
dotis tempore dedicationis, G magis privilegiata est, et
cujus cognitio ad forü spectat ecclesiasticum, quàm !
sit pura & libera eleemosina data ecclesiis & viris
religiosis, et de qua jurisdictio & cognitio ptinet ad


1 * quum sit pura," MS. Rawl. C. 160.


OF EXCEPTIONS. 205


where the cognisance pertains absolutely to the crown
and the dignity of the king, as if a layman has im-
pleaded a layman before an ecclesiastical judge concern-
ing a lay feud or concerning something which pertains
to a lay feud, because a privilege cannot change the
king’s jurisdiction in this behalf, as for instance the privi-
lege of those who are under the vow of a crusade or of
any other person, even although the king so wishes, he
dissembles however sometimes in this matter, although
it be against the privilege of his crown and his dignity.
Likewise neither the interposition of a promise nor the
taking of an oath, nor the spontaneous renunciation of
parties changes his jurisdiction, although the parties
may prejudice themselves by consent. And the same
thing will have to be said concerning debts and chattels,
which are not testamentary nor matrimonial, or the
sequel of them. Likewise a prohibition has place by
reason of the persons or of the thing, as if a clerk has
drawn a layman or a layman has drawn a clerk into the ec-
clesiastical court concerning any of the aforesaid matters.
Likewise by reason of the thing, as if a clerk has drawn
a clerk into an ecclesiastical forum into a suit on any of |
the aforesaid matters, because if the ecclesiastical judge
has judged between the said parties he cannot put his
judgment into execution, because there is no viscount or
other officer who would obey him in putting it into exe-
eution, and if he should seek to put it into execution by
himself, an assise of novel disseysine will lie against him
and against the party who sues, I speak of a lay feud in
distinction from free alms, which is with more propriety
called free, since it is dedicated as it were to God, like
land given to the church in the name of dower at the
time of dedication, which is more privileged, and of
which the cognisance belongs to the ecclesiastical court,
since it is pure and free alms given to churches and to
men under religious vows, and concerning which the
jurisdiction and the cognisance pertains to the secular


2
Ratione
contractus.


9
DI


Ratione
delieti.


f. 407.


li
Quando et
in quibus
locum non
habet pro-
hibitio,


206 DE EXCEPTIONIBUS.


forum seculare. Ité locu habet phibitio ratione rel,
sicut de laico feodo q alicui descédit ex causa succes-
sionis, ut si judex ecclesiasticus cognoscere vellet de
suecessione, ad querelam clerici vel laici locum habet
prohibitio ratione rei.


Item & eodé modo ratione cotractus, ut si clericus
cotrahat cum laico in causa alicujus emptionis et ven-
ditionis de aliqua re seculari, de qua cognitio ptineat
ad forum seculare.


Ité & eode modo locum habet phibitio ratione
delieti, ut si clerieus delinquat contra clericum vel
laicum, vel laicus contra laicum in re temporali, ratione
delicti, vel facti, pertinet cognitio ad forum seculare,
tam in actione injuriarum quàm criminis, dum tamen
civiliter agatur, & in quibus casibus omnibus judex
secularis habet cognitionem & cohercioné, et judex
ecclesiasticus nō nisi p dissimulatione. Si autem cri-
minaliter agatur & super crimine, judex ecclesiasticus
no habebit jurisdictione, licet habere debeat judicii
executione. In casu enim sanguinis judicare non potest
nec debet, ne comittat irregularitatem. Pertinet igitur
(ut videtur) ad judice secularem cognitio, & ad judicé
ecclesiasticü judicii executio, quia judex secularis de-
gradare non potest, non magis quam ad ordines pmo-
vere, sicut superius dictum est in parte.


Cap, X.


Quando & in quibus loci non habeat phibitio
dieendu. Et sciendü q locu mno habebit phibitio in
curia Christianitatis de aliquo spirituali vel spirituali-
tati annexo, sive agatur inter clericos sive inter clericü


OF EXCEPTIONS. 207


forwm. Likewise a prohibition has place by reason of
the thing, as concerning a lay feud which descends to a
certain person by way of succession, as if an ecclesias-
tical judge seeks to hold cognisance of a succession, upon
the complaint of the clerk or the laic a prohibition has
place in regard of the thing.


Likewise in the same manner also in respect of a con- 2.
tract, as if a clerk should contract with a laic in a cause n II
of buying and selling concerning a certain secular thing, tract.


the cognisance of which pertains to the secular forwm.


Likewise in the same manner a prohibition has a ,

place in respect of an offence, as if a clerk has com- In respect
mitted an offence against a clerk or a laic, or a laic SE ss
against a laic in a temporal matter, in respect of the
offence or the act the cognisance belongs to the secular
forwm.:as well in an action of tort as of crime, pro-
vided the proceedings are of a civil character, and in
all of which cases the secular judge has cognisance and f. 407.
coercion, and the ecclesiastical judge not so, except
through dissimulation. But if the proceedings be crimi-
nal and respecting a crime, an ecclesiastical judge shall
not have jurisdiction,although he ought to have the execu-
tion of the judgment. For in a cause of blood he cannot
and ought not to judge, lest he commit an irregularity.
The cognisance therefore pertains (as it seems) to the
secular judge, and the execution of the judgment to the
ecclesiastical judge, for the secular judge can no more
degrade than he can promote to orders ; as has been said
in part.


CHAPTER X.


When and in what matters a prohibition has no D


place we must now discuss, And it is to be known When and

that a prohibition will not have a place in the court matters a
E OE e : * t rohibition

of Christianity concerning anything spiritual or annexed pto n von


to the spirituality, whether the proceeding be between place as


sicut de
re sacra
vel quasi.


208 DE EXCEPTIONIBUS.


et laicū, vel ubi agatur ex causa testamentaria vel
matrimoniali, vel de aliquo de quo sit pcenitentia
injungéda p peccato. Item loci non habebit phibitio
si in euria Christianitatis agatur de aliquo tenemeto
quod si! sacru, et p pontifices Deo dedicatü, sicut sunt
abbatis, prioratus, & monasteria, & hori ceemiteria.
Item quasi sacra, quia spiritualitati annexa, sicut sunt
tre date ecclesiis tepore dedicationis, ci ædificiis in
eadem contentis, & in ptinentiis eoru. Unde si ecclesia
vel monasterii de hujusmodi fra in dotem data, vel
de ejus ptinentiis sicut de comunia pasture & hujus-
modi fuerit spoliata, si in foro ecclesiastico de restitu-
tione agatur, locu non habebit phibitio, quod quide
no est intellipendu de libera eleemosyna quamvis sit
pura. Nota qno jacet phibitio in dote ecclesiz, jacet
tame in libera & pura eleemosyna. Et de hac materia
habetis de term P. añ regis H. xv. in com Som de
Richardo psona de Hideford. Et ad hoc facit expresse
q habetis de term S. H. anno regis H. vii. in com
Bedf de Gylberto psona de Denha. Ite nec locum
habebit phibitio si in foro ecclesiastico agatur, & hoc
ratione psonaru, sieut de catallis clericorū eis violenter
ablatis, ut de term S. H. añ regis H. vii. in com
Cornubie de Ewerino de le Lind. Ite locu non habe-
bit phibitio si de decimis agatur, vel si erratu fuerit
in forma phibitionis, ut si fiat phibitio de debitis ubi
fieri debet de catallis, vel e contrarió: ut de term
S. H. añ regis H. vi. in cof Wari de quoda fcentore


! «© quod sit sacrum,” MS. Rawl. C. 160.


OF EXCEPTIONS. 209


clerks or between a clerk and a laic, or where the pro- concerning
ceeding is in a testamentary or a matrimonial cause, a thing e
or concerning any matter for which penance is to be as it were
enjoined for a sin. Likewise a prohibition will have €
no place, if there be a proceeding in the court of Chris-
tianity concerning any tenement, which is sacred and
dedicated to God by pontiffs such as are abbeys, pri-
ories, and monasteries, and their cemeteries. Likewise
tenements as it were sacred, because they are annexed

to the spirituality, such as lands given to a church at

the time of its dedication, with the buildings contained

on them and their appurtenances. Hence if the church

or the monastery has been spoiled of this kind of land
which has been given in dower or its appurtenances, as

of common of pasture and such like, if proceedings are

had in the ecclesiastical court for restitution, a prohibition

shall not have place, which is not indeed to be understood

of land in free alms, although it be pure. Note, a pro-
hibition does not lie in the dower of a church, but it

lies in free and pure alms. And in this matter you
have a case in Easter term in the fifteenth year of
king Henry in the county of Somerset, concerning
Richard the parson. And upon this bears expressly
what you have in St. Hilary’s term in the seventh
year of king Henry in the county of Bedford concern-

ing Gylbert the parson of Denham, Likewise a pro-
hibition will not lie, if proceedings are had in the
ecclesiastical court and this by reason of the persons,

as concerning the chattels of clerks violently taken
from them, as in St. Hilary’s term in the eighth
year of king Henry in the county of Cornwall, con-
cerning Ewerin de le Lind. Likewise a prohibition
will not lie, if the proceedings are concerning tithes,

or if there has been an error in the form of the pro-
hibition, as if the prohibition has been for debts when

it ought to have been for chattels, or the converse: as

in St. Hilary's term in the sixth year of king Henry

R 2657. (0)


-f 407 b.


210 DE EXCEPTIONIBUS.


Lyncolü, Sed contra de decimis q loci habet phibitio,
si decime petantur, vel earu pcium si vendatur ex
véditione: ut de term S. M. añ regis H. ix. incipiente
x. in com Eborü de Richardo psona de Mapeldon.
Sed hoc solvitur sic, q in primo casu covent? fuit
primus & principalis debitor, ubi loci no tenuit phibi-
tio, & in secundo casu coventi fuerint fidejussores &
implacitati, chm ipse principalis debitor solvendo esset,
& ubi post phibitionem judicatū fuit in foro seculari
q psona se caperet ad principale debitore, qui solvendo
fuit, & fidejussores inde quieti: Et unde videtur q si
principalis debitor solvendo no esset, quód psona agere
posset in foro ecelesiastico cotra fidejussores, no obstante
phibitione. Ite locü non habebit phibitio in causa
testamentaria vel matrimoniali, quia hujusmodi genera
plaeitorü specialiter excipiuntur, cùm sint spiritualia
vel spiritualibus annexa. Ite nec de aliquibus que
sunt eis accessoria, vel annexa: accessoria dico, sicut
est obligatio fidejussonis, ut in venditione decimaru,
de qua superius dietum est. Ite de pmissionibus factis,
de pecunia danda ob causam matrimonii in initio
cotractus nomine maritagii. Sects aute si tenementi
pmittatur. Et g hujusmodi pecunia peti possit no
obstante phibitione, inveniri poterit de term S. M.
an. regis H. xiv. incipiente xv. in com Suff, de Hugone
de Monte Causa? Ad idem faeit q habetis de term
S. T. anno regis H. xv. in com Oxofi, & unde prior


! * fidejussionis," MS. Rawl. C. ? * Monte Caniso,” MS. id.
160. .


OF EXCEPTIONS. 211


in the county of Warwick, concerning a certain pre-
centor of Lincoln, But on the contrary concerning
tithes that a prohibition has place, if tithes are claimed
or their price after a sale if they should be sold, as in
St. Michael’s term in the ninth and tenth years of
king Henry in the county of York concerning Richard
the parson of Mapeldon. But this is solved in this
manner, that in the first place the first and principal
debtor was convened, where a prohibition did not main-
tain its place, and in the second case the sureties were
convened and impleaded, when the said principal debtor
was solvent, and where after the prohibition it was
adjudged in the secular court, that the parson should
have recourse to the principal debtor, who was solvent,
and the sureties should rest quiet: and from this it
seems that if the principal debtor were not solvent,
that the parson may proceed in the ecclesiastical court
against the sureties, notwithstanding a prohibition.
Likewise a prohibition will not have place in a testa-
mentary or in a matrimonial cause, because those kinds
of suits are specially excepted, since they are spiritual
matters or annexed to spiritual matters. Likewise not
concerning any matters which are accessory to or an-
nexed to them, such as the obligation of a surety as
in the case of tithes, concerning which we have spoken
above. Likewise concerning promises which have been
made concerning money to be given with the object of
matrimony at the commencement of the contract in
the name of a maritage. Otherwise however if a tene-
ment should be promised. And that money of this
kind may be sued for notwithstanding a prohibition
may be found in St. Michaels term in the fourteenth
and fifteenth years of king Henry in the county of
Suffolk concerning Hugo de Monte Caniso. To the
same effect is a case which you have in Holy Trinity
term in the fourteenth year of king Henry in the
county of Oxford, and whereof the prior of EE
o


f. 407 b.


2
Quod
ratione
accessionis
locum non
habet pro-
hibitio.


3.
Quod
actiones
legari non
possunt.


212 DE EXCEPTIONIBUS
de Berneestre! fuit judex. Et séper videndu erit,
ppter quid aliquid faetü sit vel pmittatur.


Ité ratione accessionis in causa testamétaria non
habet loci phibitio & pecunia legetur, & petatur ut
debitü in foro ecclesiastico ex causa testamentaria.
Ite nec loci habebit phibitio, si testator pecunia sibi
debita legaverit, dum tame debitu in vita testatoris
recogniti sit & pbatü, quia hujusmodi pecunia inter
bona testatoris cónumeratur, & pertinet ad executores.
Si auté petatur debitü p executores, de quo debitores
in vita testatoris confessi nō fuerint nec covicti, vel nec
post morte gratis recognoverint, hujusmodi debitu inter
bona testatoris no conumeratur, et si ab executoribus
vel ab herede in foro ecclesiastico petantur, locum
habebit phibitio, et in foro seculari oportebit agere,
hujusmodi enim actiones hereditarie sunt & pertinent
ad haeredes, & ideo legari non possunt, & sicut datur
heredibus eontra debitores et non executoribus, ita
dantur actiones creditoribus cotra heredes & non cotra
executores.


Et q actiones legari no possunt, nec judices ecclesi-
astici inde recognoscere, nec executores petere debitü
q in vita testatoris nō est recognitu, pbatur de term
S. H. anno regis H. vi in com North. de Radulpho
psona de Irclinbourghe. Et q actiones legari nō pos-
süt, nee inter bona testatoris conumerantur, maxime
de antiquo debito, pbatur de term P. añ regis H. xv.
in com Essex de Gervasio de Aldermabury. Ad ide
facit q habetis ‘de term P. añ regis H. xvi in com
South. de Engelardo de Cygoiny.


1 * Dernecestre," MS. Rawl. C. 169.


OF EXCEPTIONS. ^ 213


was judge. And it will always have to be considered on
account of what any thing has been done or is permitted.


Likewise in respect of aécession in a testamentary ^ 2.
cause a prohibition has not a place, if money be be- Sera
queathed and it be sued for as a debt in an ecclesi- has not a
astical court as in a testamentary cause. Likewise Sao net
prohibition will not have a place, if a testator has accession,
bequeathed money due to himself, provided however
the debt has been recognised and proved in the tes-
tator’s lifetime ; because money of this kind is reckoned
amongst the goods of the testator, and belongs to his
executors. But if a debt is sued for by executors,
concerning which the debtors during the life of the
testator have not made a confession nor undergone a
conviction, nor after his death have made a spontaneous
acknowledgment, a debt of this kind is not reckoned
amongst the goods of the testator, and if it be sued
for in an ecclesiastical court by the executor or by the
heir, a prohibition shall have place, and he ought to
proceed in a secular court, for actions of this kind are
heritable and pertain to heirs, and therefore cannot be
bequeathed, and as they are allowed to heirs and not
to executors against debtors, so actions are allowed to
debtors against heirs and not against executors.


And that actions may not be bequeathed, nor eccle- 3.

siastical judges hold cognisance of them, nor executors Thatae
sue for a debt which has not been acknowledged in not be
the life of the testator, is proved in St. Hilary’s term peace
in the sixth year of king Henry in the county of Nor- `
folk, concerning Ralph the parson of Irclinbourghe.
And that actions cannot be bequeathed nor are reck-
oned amongst the goods of a testator, especially in the
case of an ancient debt, is proved in Easter term in
the fifteenth year of king Henry in the county of Essex
concerning Gervase de Aldermanbury. To the same
effect is what you have in the sixteenth year of the
reign of king Henry in the county of Southampton,
concerning Engelard de Cygoiny.


214 DE EXCEPTIONIBUS.


4, Ité nec locum habet phibitio in causa testamentaria,
Rene si catalla legentur et inde agatur in foro ecclesiastico.
testamen- [te nec, si in civitatibus & burgis legentur domus vel
du eedificia, d habuit testator de pquisito, cu sint quasi

catalla testatoris. Secus tamen est in quibusdà locis
si pveniant ex descensu antecessoris, in quibusdam locis
sicut in civitate Lond, ubi locu habet phibitio, si inde
agatur. Ité loci non habet phibitio, si legetur usus
fructus alicujus tre, ut si testator aliquam tram tenuerit
ad terminu annorü, et usu fructu legaverit, quia usus
fructus inter catalla conumeratur, teneméto in suo
statu duraturo, sicut laicum feodum. Sed cùm terra
ad terminum ita alicui data fuerit, refert utrum testa-
tori tantum, vel testatori et hseredibus suis. Si autem
testatori tantum, tunc poterit testator in vita dare et

1.408, in morte legare sine prejudicio hseredum. Si aute
sibi et heredib? suis, nO sie, nisi in vita dederit, ubi
heredes tenentur ad warrantia, et eode modo si lega-
verit expressó, si aute nulla métioné inde fecerit, tune
transit usus fructus ad heeredes.


-" d A Ité locw non habet phibitio ubi quis de facto &
1 de facto - . . . . . D .
suo effec- CÖSensu suo pprio effect? est alterius jurisdictionis,


ae sit — scilicet quanti ad se ipsü, sed no quanti ad regé ad
rus ~ B . E . . xz DEN . a

jurisdic- Gm ptinet jurisdictio, secundü q superiüs dictü est: &
tionis. ibi judicia de renuciatione, q no potest quis in pjudiciu


alterius renüciare, factü tamen fuit contrariü, ut in
rotulo de term P. anno regis H. xvi in com Devoti
de Thoma de Buttyler, Alfrido! in Cottone, q renü-


1 * et Alfrido,? MS. Rawl. C. 160,


OF EXCEPTIONS. 215


Likewise a prohibition has no place in a testamen- 4
tary cause, if chattels are bequeathed, and thereon pro- ae
ceedings are taken in an ecclesiastical court. Likewise tion has
not, if in cities or in boroughs houses or buildings are ade
bequeathed, which the testator has acquired for himself, mentary
since they are as it were the chattels of the testator, "5€
It is otherwise however in some places, if they are
derived by descent from an ancestor, in certain places
as in the city of London, where a prohibition has place,
if an action is brought there. Likewise a prohibition
has not place, if the usufruct of any land be bequeathed,
as if the testator has held any land for a term of years
and has bequeathed the usufruct, because usufruct is
reckoned amongst chattels, when the tenement is likely
to endure in its state, as a lay fee. But when land has
been so conveyed to any body for a term, it is of impor-
tance whether it has been conveyed to the testator alone
or to the testator and his heirs. But if to the testator
alone, then the testator will be able to give it in his
lifetime and on his death to bequeath it without pre-
judice to his heirs. But if to himself and his heirs, f. 40s.
not so, unless he has given it in his lifetime, when
the heirs are bound to a warranty, and in the same
way, if he has bequeathed it expressly, but if he has
made no mention of it, then the usufruct passes to his


heirs.


Likewise a prohibition has not a place, where a person S =
by his own act and with his proper consent has been jy. act.


made subject to another’s jurisdiction, to wit, as far as us has o»
regards himself but not as regards the king, to whom sabject to
the jurisdiction belongs according to what has been said a
above, and there a judgment was given on the subject of los

. renunciation, that a person cannot renounce to the pre-

judice of another. The contrary however was done, as

in the roll of Easter term in the sixteenth year of king

Henry, in the county of Devon, concerning Thomas de


Buttyler and Alfridus in Cottone, because a renunciation


6.
Non habe-
bit prohi-
bitionem
de recenti
spoliatione.


1.
Item in
eausa re-
.Stitutionis.


216 DE EXCEPTIONIBUS.


ciatio aliis pjudicat qm renütianti. Ité et eodé modo
nd habebit locū phibitio si quis effectus fuerit de
alterius jurisdictione de facto suo pprio p appella-
tionem, ut si implacitatus fuerit corà judice ecclesiastico
et nd suo, appellaverit ad alia judicé no sui, si ad
phibitioné regia convolaverit ratione rei secularis q
petitur, quanti ad psona suam audiri non debet, licet
no quanti ad psonà regis, ut supra dietü est, quia
quos semel approbavit eos post reprobare no potest.


Ité loci non habebit phibitio de recéti spoliatione,
ut si clericus clerieü spoliaverit de decimis vel aliis,
de quibus cognitio ptinet ad forü ecclesiastict, quia
de hujusmodi restitutione no generatur pjudiciü patro-
nis, quantü ad jus advocationis.


Item nec loeū habet phibitio in causa restitutionis,
cüm ecclesia recenter spoliata fuerit de aliqua libertate
ğ ei concessa fuerit tempore dedicationis, sicut habendi
rationabile estoveriü in bosco patroni, sicut ad housbote
& heybote et ad ardedü, et hmoi Ité habédi comunia
pasture ratione tre date ecclesie in doté: recéter
dicitur, quia si no est recenter, aliter erit. Ite nec
locü habebit phibitio ubi quis negligens & juris sui
conteptor tardiüs sibi pspexerit qm deberet, quia tüc
primo tulit phibitioné cüm pventum esset ad sententia
diffinitivà ferenda, vel forte cùm lata esset sentétia,
quia extuc no esset qui sequeretur placitum, quia prius
fuit placitü, vel judex qui placitü teneret, q post


1 * placitatum," MS, Rawl. C. 160.


OF EXCEPTIONS. OIT


prejudices others besides the party who renounces. Like-
wise also in the same manner a prohibition will not have
place, if a person has been made subject to another's
jurisdiction of his own proper act on account of an
appeal, as if he has been impleaded before an ecclesias-
tical judge not his own, and he has appealed to another
judge not his own, if he has betaken himself to a royal
prohibition by reason of a secular thing, which is sued
for, he ought not to be listened to as far as regards his
own person, although not so as regards the person of
the king, as said above, because those whom he has once
approved, he cannot afterwards disapprove.


Likewise a prohibition shall not have a place concern- 6.
: E lati : ; He shall
ing a recent spoliation, as if a clerk has spoiled a clerk of not have a
tithes or of other things, concerning which the cognisance Prohibition
2 : É concerning
appertains to the ecclesiastical court, because concerning a a recent ~
restitution of this kind a prejudice is not created against *Poliation.


the patrons as far as regards the right of advowson.


Likewise a prohibition has not a place in a cause of |. 7.

p ea : Likewise
restitution, when a church has been recently spoiled of jn a cause
some franchise which has been granted to it at the time quo
of its dedication, as of having reasonable estovers in the —
wood of the patron, as for howsebote and heybote and for
burning and such like. Likewise the liberty of having
common of pasture by reason of land given to the church
in dower: it is said recently, because if it be not re-
cently, it will be otherwise.. Likewise a prohibition
will not have a place, where one has been negligent and
has contemned his right, and has taken thought of his

own interest more tardily than he ought, because he has
then for the first time brought a prohibition, when the
cause had arrived at the passing of a definitive sentence,
or perhaps when a sentence has been passed, because
from that time there would not be any one to prosecute
the suit, because the suit was previously pleaded, nor a
judge to entertain a plea, because after the prohibition it


218 DE EXCEPTIONIBUS.


phibitione no fuit secutü, qd quide querens ppriæ
poterit imputare negligentie, q si tempestive fecisset,
non esset ei implacitandü, et q judicibus non sit
negligentia querentis imputanda, habetis de term S. H.
anno regis H. x. in com North. de Richardo Olive.


Car. XI.


1. Sunt revera judices qui, cum citatus coparuerit de
ee re ad cognitioné suam non ptinente, ut phibitione

? LI . . . LI LI
fraudulen- evadere possint, facta editione sine scriptis, & denegato
ter simul . : : CS ats > E NE
EI beneficio deliberationis, faciūt ei tres comonitiones,
commina- quamlibet post alia primo die litis, & ubi satisfecerit
tiones, ut z Y o E : = : VN.
faclus  Corū voluntat, innodat eum vinculo excomunicationis,
procedant et pendéte phibitione, cùm talis in hujusmodi excomuni-
ad excom- o E dee ] tdi iabsltonib wes
municatio- Catione pstiterit p xl. dies, ut phibitionibus psecutione
nom evadat, ad impetratione eorundé judicū significat ordi-
£408p, narius regi q talis in excOmunicatione extitit per


tantü tempus, & pcurat captionem p hoc breve.


2. Excellentissimo dño suo H. Dei gratia &c. talis N.
oie by permissione divina Exoiü episcopus salute in eo qui
excom- dat salute regibus: serenitati regize presentibus inti-
meato mamus q A. de N. ppter ipsius contumaciam mani-
domino EES tle eni : a. .
regi pr festam excomunicationis vinculo inodatus p xl. dies &
duecthm. amplius in excomunicatione perseverans ecclesiastice

negligit parere censure, claves ecclesi] contemnendo.


Quia vero regia majestas eorü solertiam reprimere con-


1 * imputandum," MS. Rawl. C. 160.


OF EXCEPTIONS. 219


has not been prosecuted, which indeed the complainant
may impute to his own negligence, because if he had
done it seasonably, fault would not have been imputed
to him: and that the negligence of the complainant is
not to be imputed to the judges, you have a case in St.
Hilary’s term in the tenth year of king Henry, in the
county of Northampton, concerning Richard Olive.


CHAPTER XI,


"There are forsooth judges, who when the party cited __. 1:

. 5 Of judges,
has appeared before them in a matter not belonging to who frau-
their cognisance, in order that they may evade a pro- dulently .—
hibition, upon the declaration of the ground of action three moni-
having been made without writing ; and having denied Rae num
to him the benefit of deliberation, apply three admoni- they may
tions to him one after the other on the first day of the Bane
suit, and when he has satisfied their will, entangle him ceed to
with a chain of excommunication, and whilst a prohibi- omm
tion is pending, when the said party has persisted in
this sort of excommunication during forty days, that
they may evade a prosecution by prohibitions, the
ordinary at their request signifies to the king, that the
said party has remained in a state of excommunication r, 40g b.
during such a length of time, and he procures his seizure


by a writ of this kind.


To the most excellent lord Henry by the grace of A A .
Wi 1 1 1 writ ror

God, &c., so-and-so N., by divine permission bishop of canes
Exeter, greeting in him who gives health to kings. We pe s
; . X 3
intimate to your royal serenity by these presents that A. nicated,
de N. having been fettered with a chain of excommuni- ceased to
cation during forty days on account of his manifest con- the king
tumacy, and persevering further in his excommunication y int
neglects to obey ecclesiastical censure, contemning the
keys of the church. Because however your royal majesty


has been accustomed to repress the subtlety of those,


3.
Si epi-
scopus vel
alius or-
dinarius
fraudulen-
ter procu-
raverit cap-
tionem.


220 DE EXCEPTIONIBUS.


suevit, qui ecclesiasticis prasceptis obedire negligunt
& mandatis, celsitudinis vestre brachii invocamus,
rogantes attensiüs quatenus Dei et honoris ecclesiw
intuitu, q minus valet ecclesia in hae pte, dignetur
regia supplere majestas. Conservet vos Altissimus. Si
autem sit qui conqueratur domino regi, q ordinarius
judex vel delegatus ita maliciosé procuraverit captione
quo minus sequi possit suam prohibitione, statim fiat
breve vicecofü de non capiendo talem in hae forma.


Rex vie. salutem. Ostendit nobis A. q cüm B.
psona de tali loco implacitasset eum in curia Christia-
nitatis coram archidiacono tali, & officiali tali, de
quodam prato, vel aliquod tale quód est laicum feodü
ipsius A. et idem A. tulisset eidem archidiacono et
officiali suo breve nostrum de phibitione ne placitum
illud teneret, et eidem B. persone aliud breve nosti
ne illud. sequeretur, & postmodum resistere voluerit,
tulisset breve nostrum de attachiando eos, ipse archi-
diaconus & officialis & persona, ut peessum phibitionis
nostre quam idem A. secutus est fraudulenter impe-
dirent, suggesserunt tali episcopo q idem A. excomuni-
catus fuit, & per xl. dies & amplius in excomunicatione
ila contumaciter perseveravit, ad quora fraudulentam
suggestionem idem episcopus impetravit à nobis breve
nostrum de capiendo ipsum A. pdicta occasione. Et
quia no debet fraus sua alicui patrociniari nec valere,
tibi peipimus q ipsum A. occasione brevis nostri q
tibi venit de capiendo eum non capias quo magis
impediat in causz su prosecutione, & si occasione
predicta captus fuerit, ipsu sine dilatione facias deli-
berari. Et si pdietus archidiaconus officialis & psona


OF EXCEPTIONS. 221


who neglect to obey the precepts and the mandates of
the church, we invoke the arm of your highness, request-
ing earnestly that from respect towards God and the
honour of his church your royal majesty may deign to
supply the strength which is wanting to the church in
this behalf May the Most High preserve you. But if
there be any one who complains to the lord the king that
the judge ordinary or delegate has so craftily procured
his seizure in order that he may not be able to sue out
a prohibition, let a writ issue forthwith to the viscount
not to seize the said party in this form.


The king to the viscount greeting. A. has shown to
us that when B, the parson of such a place has im-
pleaded him in the court of Christianity before such an
archdeacon and such an official concerning a certain
meadow, or something of a kind which is a lay feud of
the said A., and the said A. has served upon the said
archdeacon and his official our writ of prohibition that
he should not entertain that plea, and upon the said B.
the parson another writ of ours that he should not pro-
secute that plea, and after he has wished to resist, has
served upon them our writ to attach them, the said
archdeacon and his official and the parson, that they
might fraudulently impede the process of our prohibi-
tion, which the said A. has sued out, have suggested to
the said bishop that the said A. had been excommuni-
cated and had persisted for forty days or more contuma-
ciously in that excommunication, upon which fraudulent
suggestion the said bishop has sued out from us our writ
to seize the said A. on the aforesaid occasion. And
because a fraud ought never to benefit its author nor to
prevail, we enjoin you that you do not seize the said A.
on the occasion of our said writ, which has been sent
to you to seize him in order to impede him in the
prosecution of his suit, and if on the said occasion he
has been seized, you shall cause him to be set free with-
out delay. And if the aforesaid archdeacon and his


3.

If a bishop
or other
ordinary

as pro-
cured frau-
dulently
the seizure
of a party.


222, DE EXCEPTIONIBUS.


laicum feodü habuerint in balliva tua, & ide A. fecerit
te securü de clamore suo psequendo, tüc illos ponas p
vadiü et salvos plegios q sint cora nobis tali loco, tali
die, inde responsuri, et habeas ibi &e. T. &c.


T Cum auté quis meritis suis exigétib? juste excomu-
Mies fus, Nicat? fuerit, & ad mādatū ordinarii capt? et impri-
excom- — sonat?, no erit p dim rege nec p aliu deliberad?,
SIE QM anteqm Deo et ecclesie satisfecerit copetéter. Sed si,

ci hoc fecerit vel caution pstiterit de paredo juri et
satisfaciédo copeteter, et ordinarius ulterius ipsu mali-
ciose in prisona detineri fecerit, extüc ptinebit ad
rege deliberatio ppter malicià, du tame pcedat satis-
factio vel sufficiés cautio de satisfaciedo (ut pdictū est)
qd pri? fieri no deberet, nisi tuc demu ca ipse rex
literas ordiü de satisfactioe reciperet, et in hoc casu
fiat bře vic. in hae forma.


5. Rex vie. salut. Ostésii est nobis ex pte A. de N.,


Spe qui meritis suis exigétib?, vel ppt manifesta cotumacià
municatus sua excomunicat? fuerit, et ad pceptii ntm capt? et in
paratas Sf prisona nia detétus, eo q p xl dies et amplius in

f.409. excommunicatione illa contumaciter pseveravit, donec
Ed Deo et ecclesiz satisfecerit competéter, parat? sit Deo
breve ad et ecclesie satisfacere, talis ordinarius facit eum mali-


dose) tiosè in prisona detineri ad gravamé & damnit ipsius
qui captus A. non modieu. Et quonià in hac pte ppter malitiam
fuerit. ^ ipsius ordinarii ad nos ptinet deliberatio, tibi peipim?

9, si idem A. eidem ordinario tali sufficiente fecerit


OF EXCEPTIONS. 229


official and the parson have a lay fee within your baili-
wick, and the said A. has given you security to prosecute
his elaim, then place them under.bail and safe sureties
that they should appear before us at such a place and
on such a day to answer thereon, and bring with you
this writ, &c. Witness &c.


But when a person upon his deserts requiring it has 4.
been justly excommunicated, and at the mandate of the MN
ordinary has been seized and imprisoned, he will not been justly
have to be set free by the king or by any other person, red. —
before he has made competent satisfaction to God and
to the church. But if, when he has done this or given
security to obey the law and to make competent satis-
faction, the ordinary shall maliciously cause him to be
further detained in prison, thereupon it shall pertain to
the king to set him free on account of the malice, pro-
vided however satisfaction or a sufficient security for
satisfaction has preceded, as said above, which ought not
however to take place until the time when the king
himself has received the letters of the ordinary concern-
ing the satisfaction, and in this case let a writ issue to


the viscount in this form.


The king to the viscount greeting. It has been shown 5.


is Wh
to us on the part of A. de N., who upon his deserts tatg


requiring it or on account of his manifest contumacy justly ex-
. communi-
has been excommunicated and upon our precept has 40


been seized and detained in our prison, inasmuch as he prepared
had contumaciously persevered forty days and more in eed
that contumacy, until he should make competent. satis- the Shan
faction to God and to the church, that he is prepared idi
to make satisfaction to God and to the church, and so- him who

j 5.5 . : has been
and-so the ordinary maliciously causes him to be detained seized.
in prison to the no slight grievance and damnification of f. 409.
the said A., and since on his behalf on account of the
malice of the said ordinary his deliverance appertains


to us, we enjoin you that if the said A. has given to


224 DE EXCEPTIONIBUS.


securitate de parendo juri & satisfaciédo copetenter
Deo et ecclesie, tune illa A. sine dilatione facias
deliberari. Et si ordinarius hoc recusaverit, tue tu
ipse vice nia capta securitate (ut pdictu est) illu sine
dilatione deliberari facias. Cùm auté ad. phibitione
judiees supersedere noluerint, nec ille qui psequitur à
psecutione desistere, attachientur omnes q sint coram
rege, vel justie. suis de banco, vel itinerantibus, p tale
bře, ad respondendu quare &c.


Cap. XII.


Ve Rex vic. saluté. Si A. fecerit te securu de clamore
De judici- Es :
bus atta. SUO psequendo, tune pone p vadiü et salvos plegios
chiandis, si B. tale. ordinariü q sit cora nobis vel justic. nostris
Ponta po. apud Westm. vel cord justic. nostris ad primà assisam
hibitionem. &e, ostesurus quare tenuerit placitu in curia Christia-
nitatis de laico feodo ipsius A. in tali villa contra
phibitioné níam, vel de advocatioe talis ecclesiz, vel
de debitis & catallis d no süt de testaméto vel matri-
monio, et hujusmodi. Pone p vadiu et salvos plegios
E. q tune sit ibi ostesurus, quare secutus est ide
placitü in eade curia Christianitatis contra phibitione
nostram, et habeas ibi nomina plegioru et hoc bie.
Teste &c. Et ita fiat brevia de attachiaméto, con-
veniant cu brevibus de phibitione. Si aute fieri debeat
attachiamentu de judicibus delegatis vel subdelegatis,
tune fiat breve in hae forma.


2. Rex vie. salute. Si A. fecerit te securü de clamore


Breve de a ICE :
judicibus SUO psequendo, tune pone p vadiü et salvos plegios


attaehian- D., C., D. (nominibus ppriis expresse, videlicet B


OF EXCEPTIONS, 225


the said ordinary sufficient security as to obeying the
law and making competent satisfaction to God and to
the church, thou shouldst thereupon cause the said A.
to be set free without delay. And if the ordinary has
refused this, then do thou in our place having taken
security as aforesaid cause him to be set free without
delay. But if upon a prohibition the judges have been
unwilling to supersede proceedings, or he who prosecutes
has been unwilling to desist, then let them all be attached
to appear before the king or his justiciaries at the bench
or on their iter, by a writ of this kind, to answer where-
fore, &c.


CHAPTER XII.


The king to the viscount greeting. If A. has given _ 1.
you security for prosecuting his claim, then place under 7a
bail and safe sureties B. the ordinary of such a place, judges, if
that he should be present before us or our justiciaries at n ee
Westminster or before our justiciaries at the first assise, MADE
&c. in order to show wherefore he has held a plea in the Hon 3
court of Christianity concerning a lay feud of the said
A. in such a vill contrary to our prohibition, or concern-
ing the advowson of such a church, or concerning debts
and chattels which are not testamentary nor matrimonial
and such like. Place under bail and safe sureties E.
that he be present there in order to show wherefore he
has prosecuted the said plea in the said court of Christi-
anity against our prohibition, and produce the names of
the sureties and this writ. Witness, &c. And let
writs of attachment be issued, which are in accordance
with the writs of prohibition. But if an attachment
must be made of judges, delegate or sub-delegate, then


let a writ issue in this form.


The king to the viscount greeting. If A. has given 2. ,

. . . . E writ Or

you security for prosecuting his claim, then place under attaching
bail and safe sureties B. C., D. (their proper names judges, if


R 2657. P


dis, si
autoritate
literarum
domini


pape.


3.
Item quod
attachiet
per me-
liores
plegios.


f. 409 b,


226 DE EXCEPTIONIBUS.


episcopü, vel abbatem, vel priorem talem, C. archi-
diaconü talem, & D. officialem talem) quod. sint coram
nobis vel justic. nostris &c. ut supra, ostensuri, quare
tenuerüt placitü in curia Christianitatis de laico feodo
et hujusmodi &e. (ut supra) autoritate literarü diii
pape, et hujusmodi, contra phibitionem nostram. Pone
etiam per vadium & salvos plegios C. q tune sit ibi
ostensurus, quare secutus est idem placitum in curia
Christianitatis contra prohibitionem nostram, & habeas
ibi &e. (ut supra) Et ita fiat attachiamentum, si
judices et ille qui sequitur manentes fuerint in eode
com. Si autem in diversis, tune fiant brevia diversa
singulis vie. p se.


Si autem ad diem non venerit, tunc aut vicecomes
mandat q attachiati sunt, in quo casu attachientur
per meliores plegios & q distringantur per ommes terras
&c. quod sint ad alium diem, & observetur ordo
attachiamentorum, sieut observatur in aliis actionibus
psonalibus. Si autem mandaverit vicecomes q clerici
sint, & plegios invenire noluerint, nec laicum feodum
habuerint per quod possint distringi, tunc mandetur
ordinariis & episcopo quód faciant eos venire, sieut
alibi in aetionibus personalibus observatur. Regulari-
riter verum est,’ q judex clericus cognitionem non
habet de laico feodo alicujus. Sed quid dieitur de
tenementis que sunt in civitatibus & villis, que legari
possunt sieut catalla sive tenementa sicut de perquisito,
vel hzreditas descendens, an locum habeat prohibitio ?
videtur quód non, quia de voluntate testatoris, qui
legare potest hujusmodi de jure comuni, effecta sunt
hujusmodi tenementa quasi catalla testatoris, & ideo
non habet locum phibitio. ltem de hoe quod dic. de


1 ** Regulariter verum est," down | and Chertsey; also in MS. Harl.
to * ab initio," is omitted in MS. | 653.
Rawl. C. 160, and in MSS. Crewe,


OF EXCEPTIONS. 2297


being expressed, to wit, B. the bishop or the abbot or by autho-
the prior of such a place, C. the archdeacon of such a] 9.
place, and D. the official of such a place), that they be thelord
present before us or our justiciaries &c. as above, in she hopes
order to show wherefore they have entertained a suit in

a court of Christianity concerning a lay feud and so on,

&e. (as above) by authority of letters of the lord the

pope and so on contrary to our prohibition. Place also

under bail and safe sureties C. that he be there pre-

sent in order to show wherefore he has prosecuted the

said suit in the court of Christianity contrary to our
probibition, and produce there,.&c. as above. And let

the attachment be made in this manner, if the judges

and he who prosecutes are resident in the same county,

But if in different counties, then let different writs issue

to each viscount separately.


But if he has not come on the day, then either the s,
viscount orders that they should be attached, in which Mp
case they shall be attached by better sureties and they should
shall be distrained by all their lands to be present on an- rae by
other day, and let the order of attachments be observed, as sureties.
is observed in other personal actions. But if the viscount
shall have sent word that they are clerks and are unwilling
to find sureties, and have no lay feud by which they can
be distrained, then let a mandate be sent to the ordinaries
and to the bishop that they shall cause them to come
as is elsewhere observed in personal actions. It is asa f. 409 b.
rule true, that a clerical judge has no cognisance of the
lay feud of any one. But what is said of tenements
which are in cities and in vills which may be bequeathed
as chattels or tenements which have been purchased, or
are a descending inheritance, whether a prohibition has
a place. It seems that it has not so, because by the
will of the testator, who can bequeath things of this
kind under the common law, tenements of this sort are
made as it were the chattels of the testator, and there-
fore a prohibition has no place. Likewise concerning

pee


Fleta vi. c.
37 § 3.


228 DE EXCEPTIONIBUS.
laico feodo talis, oportet quód ille qui queritur, doceat
laicum tenementum illud esse suum. Et unde si quis
teneatur alicui domino suo ad redditum aliquem, tenens
phibitionem non habebit, quia redditus erit ipsius
domini, non tenentis. Si autem de hujusmodi non
fiat prohibitio! cùm ‘sint quasi catalla vel pecunia
promissa ob causam matrimonii, non habet locum
phibitio, cum illud quod principale est trahat ad se
debitum & catalla, quasi accessoria testamento vel
matrimonio. Item si fiat prohibitio ut de laico feodo,
non valet de jure nec quantum ad petentem redditum,
nec quantum ad tenentem tenementum de quo pvenit,
quia laicum feodum versum est in catallum & causa
testatoris, ut cum legaretur ex tali causa, obtinuerit.
Item incipit tale tenementum esse laicū feodum &
non ante, quod non erit de decimis, cüm semel effici-
antur laicü feodü, nunquam reincipient esse decim:e,
& hæc vera sunt secundü Biastos:? sed contra de
termino S. Michaelis, anno regis H. fili regis J.
secundo incipiente tertio in com Kanc., de Matilda filia
Simonis, que attachiata fuit quia secuta fuit placitu,
& abbas Sancti Augustini & prior S. Trinitatis Can-
tuariensis, & prior Sancti Gregorii judices, quia tenue-
rint placita de quadam domo, quam Matilda petiit ex
causa testamentaria in London. Et unde Simon filius
Simonis questus fuit q laico feodo suo ibi defenderunt


2 e


| * $i autem de hujusmodi fiat
* prohibitio, de hujusmodi eatallis,
* eum sint quasi catalla, videlicet
de pecunia promissa," MS. Rawl.
C. 159. ** Si autem de his catallis
* fiat prohibitio, eum sunt quasi
“ catalla, vel de pecunia promissa,"
MS. Reg. 9, E. xv.


(K


ex causa testamentaria, et
“ tunc legatarius ex tali causa ob-
* tinuerit,” Rawl. C. 160.

3 * versus R. et alios," MS. Rawl.
C. 159 ; “versus R. et alias," MS.
Reg. 9, E. xv. ; “secundum Regem
“et alos" MS. Glastonbury


| neenon, MS. Hobhouse.


OF EXCEPTIONS. 229


this which is said “concerning a lay feud of so and so,"
it is necessary that he who complains should show that
the tenement in question is his own. And hence if
any one is bound to his lord for a certain rent, the
tenant shall not have a prohibition, because the rent
belongs to the said lord, and not to the tenant. But
if a prohibition issues! in such a case when there are
as it were chattels or money promised hecause of
matrimony, a prohibition has no place, since that
which is the principal draws to itself the debt and
chattels, as being as it were accessory to a testament
or to a marriage. Likewise if a prohibition issues as
concerning a lay feud, it does not avail of right, neither
as regards the party claiming a rent, nor as regards the
party holding the tenement from which it is derived,
because the lay feud is converted into a chattel, and
the cause of the testator, when it has been bequeathed
on that ground, has prevailed. Likewise such a tene-
ment begins to be a lay feud and not before, which
will not be the case with tithes, which, when once they
are made a lay feud, will never recommence to be
tithes, and these are true against the king and other
persons; but contrariwise in St. Michael’s term in the
third and*fourth years of king Henry the son of John
in the county of Kent concerning Matilda the
daughter of Simon, who was attached because she pro-
secuted her suit, and the abbot of St. Augustine and
the prior of Holy Trinity, Canterbury, and the prior
of St. Gregory the judges, because they entertained
pleas concerning a certain house, which Matilda claimed
upon a testamentary cause in London. And whereof
Simon? the son of Simon complained that they were


| down to the end of the Chapter,


1 I have followed the text of MS.
and it is omitted from most of the


Reg. 9, E. xv.
2 The text is evidently corrupt | MSS.
after «Simon the son of Simon,”


1
Cum partes
comparu-
erint in
judicio.


f. 410.


2.
De proba-
tione in-
tentionis.


250 DE EXCEPTIONIBUS.

omnes, & adjudicatee fuerunt leges sed remisse, cùm
ad petit legari? & judices securitatem preestiterunt
quód ulterius non procedant;? sed quale remedium
habebit legatarius in foro laicali. Et sciendum quod
semper locum habet prohibitio, quousque diseussum
fuerit in curia regis ütrum^ legata fuerit vel non.
Et? tune primó procedant judices de licentia, quia
ipsi non possunt estimare ab initio.’


Cap. XIII.


Cum autem partes comparuerint in judicio, tam
querens quàm ille de quo queritur & judices vel
quidam illorum, proponat querens intentionem suam
in hune modum. Ego A. conqueror de B. quód me
injuste vexavit & gravavit trahendo me in placitum
in euria Christianitatis de laico feodo meo, scilicet
tali, & exprimat qualitatem terre, vel hujusmodi, vel
alterius tenementi, vel si de debitis & catallis que
non sunt &c. tune exprimat cujusmodi debita & cujus-
modi catalla de quibus implacitatus fuerit, & .quód
hoc fecerit contra prohibitionem & unde damnum ad
valentiam We.


Item ad intentionem suam confirmandam & juvan-
dam, proferat seditionem ? ei factam in judicio & in
scriptis redactam, si possit, & dicat quód porrexit ei?
prohibitionem domini regis tali loco, tali die in pleno


1“ quod laicum feudum suum
* defenderunt omnes," MS. Reg. 9,
E. xv.


* bilem esse tune primo procedant
* judiees," MS. Hobhouse, which
introduces a text totally at variance


2“ adjudicati fuerunt plegii, sed
* yemisse misericordie ad petiti-
* onem legatari," MS. Rawl. C.
159.

3 € procederent," MS, id.

^* peg legata," MS. id.; “res
* fuerit legabilis," MS. Hobhouse.

5“ et tune convento rem lega-


with the received text of Bracton.

6 * essoniare," MS. Rawl. C. 159. «

7 * ab initio,” omitted MS. Reg.
Oy ORS eu

8 * editionem," MSS. Rawl. C.
159 and 160.

? * eis," MS. Reg. 9, E. xv.


OF EXCEPTIONS, 231


all intermeddling with his lay feud, and sureties
were adjudged, but the fines were remitted at the
petition of the legatary, and the judges gave security
that they would proceed no further, but what remedy
shall the legatary have in a lay forum. And it is to
be known that a prohibition has always place, until
it has been decided in the court of the king whether
there has been a legacy or not, And let the judges
then proceed for the first time, because they cannot
form an estimate from the commencement.


CHAPTER XIII.


i
But when the the parties have appeared in judgment When the
as well the plaintiff as he of whom he complains, and ae ap-
the judges or some of them, let the plaintiff propound Pora ip
his declaration in this manner. I A. complain of B.
that he has vexed me unjustly and has aggrieved me by
drawing me into a plea in the court of Christianity con-
cerning my lay feud, to wit, such a feud, and he describes
the quality of the land or such like, or of another tene-
ment; or if concerning debts and chattels which are not
&e, then let him express what sort of debts and what
sort of chattels they are, concerning which he has been
impleaded, and that he has done this against a prohibi-
tion, and whence damages to the value &e. have resulted. £, 410.


Likewise to confirm and to assist his declaration let 2,
him produce the statement of the ground of action made Of the ,
to him in court and reduced into writing, if he can, and the de-


~~ Jet him say that he exhibited to him the prohibition of claration.


the lord the king in such a place on such a day in a full


292 DE EXCEPTIONIBUS.


consistorio tali, & ipsi nihilominus processerunt ad
prosecutionem ipsius de quo queritur, ita q admiserunt
pbationes testiü et hujusmodi, vel quia ipse querens
noluit obtemperare judicatis, excomunicaverit eu non
obstate phibitione sua, & inde statim pducat sectam
sufficientem, duos ad minus vel tres vel plures, si possit.
Et si de veritate dubitetur, examinentur diligéter de
die & loco et aliis circumstantiis, secüdum q observatur
de testibus pducendis, qui si in examinatione facienda
inventi fuerint discordes, perinde erit ac si nullam
sectam pduxerit, & unde ad simplicem vocem querentis
non habent judices necesse, nec pars de qua queritur,
defendere se per legem. Sed quoniam deficere possit
pbatio, licet jus non deficiat, cùm tales fuerint absoluti
forte pro defectu probationis, dicatur eis: quod quic-
quid actum. fuerit, non procedant de aliquo placito,
quod pertinet ad coronam et dignitate regiam. Si aute
in omnibus inveniantur cocordes, audire debet justic.
resposiones judicü et partis. Respondere itad poterunt
multis modis, vel q locü habere no potuit phibitio,
quia res que acta est mere spiritualis est vel spiritu-
alitati annexa, & hoc docere possunt per seditione!
facta, ut si causa fuerit testamentaria vel matrimoni-
alis, in quo casu in nullo psumptü est contra regiam
dignitatem, et sie absolvi poterunt ab observatione
judicii. Si vero per seditionem? vel p confessionem
constiterit q res, de qua actü fuerit, mere fuit tem-
poralis, ita quód cognitio pertinet ad regem, bene
poterunt defendere contra querentem & sectam suam,


1 * editionem," MSS. Rawl. C. ? «* editionem," MSS. eadem.
159 et 160.


OF EXCEPTIONS. 200


consistory of such a kind, and the said persons neverthe-
less proceeded to prosecute him, concerning which he com-
plains, so that they admitted the proofs of witnesses and
such like, or because he the plaintiff was unwilling to
obey their adjudication, they excommunicated him not-
withstanding his prohibition, and let him forthwith pro-
duce a sufficient sect, two at least or three or more, if he
can. And if there be doubts as to the truth, let them be
examined concerning the day and the place and the
other circumstances, according to what is observed in
produeing witnesses, who if they be found in making
the examination to be discordant, it will be the same as
if he had produced no sect, and hence against the single
voice of the complainant neither the judges of whom he
complains, nor the party concerning whom he complains,
will be under any necessity to defend themselves by
their law. But since proof may be deficient, although
right be not deficient, when such persons have been
absolved for deficiency of proof, let it be said to them,
that whatever may have been done, they are not to
proceed in any plea, which pertains to the crown orto
the royal dignity. But if the witnesses be found to
agree in all things, the justiciaries ought to hear the
answers of the judges and of the party. They may
aecordingly answer in many ways, either that the pro-
hibition could not be applicable, because the matter
which was in suit was purely spiritual or was an-
nexed to the spirituality, and this they may show by
the statement of the ground of action, as if the cause be
testamentary or matrimonial, in which case nothing is
presumed against the royal dignity, and so they may be
absolved from any further observation of the judgment.
But if it be established by the statement of the ground
of action or by the confessicn of a party, that the matter
which was in suit was purely temporal, so that the cog-
nisance of it pertains to the king, they may well main-
tain against the plaintiff and his sect, that they have


3.
De legis
vadiatione,
si defendat.


4,
Qualiter
formantur
verba
legis.


f. 410.


284 DE EXCEPTIONIBUS.


q nunquam pseeuti fuerint post prohibitionem, si quam
inde habuerint, vel q nullam habuerint omninó pro-
hibitionem. s


Et quo casu vadiet legem quilibet se xii manu,
qua vadiata & plegiis inventis de lege facienda, dabitur
eis dies ad legé facienda, ad quam si voluerint, possunt
se essoniare, & habebunt alia diem p essoniatores
suos. Et si ad diem sibi datü non venerint, nec se
essoniaverint, p cdvictis habebütur, judiciü habebüt,
et dana querenti restituent. Cùm autem coparuerint
et pducant copurgatores suos, quavis familiares et
amicos, secundü q secta pducta fuerit de familiaribus
& amicis, facilius enim admittuntur purgatores! ali-
cujus ad lege & defensionem ppriam, qm recognitores
ad recognitione, et non est necesse q omnes sint ejus-
dem ordinis, conditionis, vel dignitatis, cujus est ille
qui legem vadiat, sufficit enim si fideles sint & bon:
opinionis, ut si episcopus, abbas, vel prior ad legem
teneatur, non oportebit q omnes compurgatores sint
episcopi abbates, vel priores, nec si clerici sint ordi-
nati, milites, vel conjungati? di tame alio modo sint
idonei, ut pdictü est.


Formantur autem verba legis secundü formam recordi
sieut in omnibus aliis legibus faciendis observatur, in
qua si quis eorum defecerit, si laicus fuerit, pro con-
victo habeatur de eo quod imponitur, & gaole comit-
tatur sieut psumptor contra regiam dignitate ac si
crimé lesz majestatis comisisset. Si auté clericus,
aliquando ci eo mitiüs agitur de gratia ob reveren-
tiam ordinis clericalis. Si aute convicti, dana restituent


1“ eompurgatores," MS. Rawl. 2 « conjugati," MS. id. ,
Creo:


OF EXCEPTIONS. 235


never proceeded after the prohibition, if they have had
any, or that they have never had at all a prohibition.


And in which ease he shall wage his law with the 3.
twelfth hand, which having been waged and sureties SUM of
having been found for making his law, a day shall be law, if he
given to him to make his law, at which, if they wish, gerengs:
they may essoin themselves, and they shall have another
day through their essoiners. And if they have not come
upon the day given to them, nor have essoined them-
selves, they shall be taken to be convicted, and shall
have judgment against them, and shall make good to
the complainant his damages. But when they have ap-
peared and have produced their compurgators, although
relatives and friends, according as a sect of relatives
and friends may have been produced, for. compurgators
of any one for his own law and defence are more easily
admitted, than recognisors for a recognition, and it is
not necessary that all should be of the same order, con-
dition or dignity, of which he is who wages his law, for
it is sufficient if they be loyal and of good report, as
if a bishop, or abbot, or prior is bound to prove his
law, it will not be incumbent that all the compurgators
should be bishops, or abbots, or priors, nor if they be or- .
dained clerks or knights or married persons, provided
however they be in other respects fit persons, as afore-
said.

But the words of the law are formed according to the 4.
form of the record, as is observed in making all other sees
laws, in which if any one of them has failed, if he be a beans
layman, let him be taken to be convicted of that which are formed.
is imputed to him, and let him be committed to gaol
as a presumer against the royal dignity, as if he had
committed the crime of high treason. But if he be a
clerk, he is sometimes dealt with more mildly of grace, f. 410,
. out of reverence for the clerical order. But if they be
convicted, they shall make good to the complainant his


5.
Quod
refert, quis
eorum
prius
purgaverit.


Dig. 1.
xlviii. tit.
v-00751526:


236 DE EXCEPTIONIBUS.


querenti, adhibita tamen taxatione aliquando debita
secundum q justic. viderint justi.


Refert (secundü quosda) quis prius se purgaverit,
judex, vel ille de quo queritur. Dicunt quidà q si
judex se purgaverit prius, unus vel plures, q ille qui
secutus est non ppter hoc liberabitur, & q quilibet
in hoe casu defendat causam ppriam, licet videatur
prima facie q non est qui sequatur, cùm non sit qui
teneat placitum (q non est veri secundü quosdam)
sed vice versa, si ille qui sequi debeat se purgaverit,
judiees per hoe liberantur, cùm non sit qui teneat
placitum, chm non sit qui sequatur, quod non est in
ipso casu, ubi quis sequi poterit de facto suo & volun-
tate: licet judex in probatione defecerit; ille qui
sequitur non est propter hoc condemnatus, nec eodem
modo, si unus ex pluribus judicibus, quia quilibet in
hoe casu defendet causam suam propriam secundum
quod legitur ff. ad legem Julianam de adulterinis lege
ult. Denunciasse,” C. Quare: ubi dicitur “quod expecta-
* bit mulier sententiam de adultero prolatam, qui si
* absolutus fuerit, mulier p eum vincet, nec ultra
* accusari possit? Si aute condemnatus fuerit, mulier
“non est condemnanda, sed aget causam suam, &
* fortassis obtinere vel gratia vel justicia poterit vel
“legis auxilio. Quid enim si adulter ab inimicis
* oppressus sit, aut similibus argumentis testibus


1“Ttem esto quod judex in pur- 3 The Florentine text of the
* gatione defecerit." MS. Reg, 9, | Digest ad legem Juliam de adul-
E. xv. teris, Lex 17, Denunciasse, $ 6,

2 « secundum quod legitur ff. ad | Queritur, is as follows: “ Expectabit
* legem in libro de adult., L. de- | ** igitur mulier sententiam de adul-
* nunciasse, ubi dicitur quod ex- | * tero latam. Si absolutus fuerit,
* pectabit mulier, &c." MS. Reg. | * mulier per eum vincet, nec ultra


9, E. xv, * accusari potest.”


OF EXCEPTIONS. USAT


damages, a due taxation of them having been sometimes
made according as the justiciaries have deemed just.


It matters (according to some) who has first purged 5.
himself, the judge or he by whom complaint is made. ed
Some say that if the judge has first purged himself, one who of’
or more, that he who has prosecuted shall not on that Nees: d
account be set free, and that each in this case should himself.
defend his own cause, although at first sight it may
seem that there is no one to prosecute, when there is no
one to entertain a suit (which is not true according to
some), but conversely, if he who ought to prosecute has
purged himself, the judges are thereby set free, since
there is no one to entertain a suit, when there is no
one to sue, which is not the case where a person can
prosecute of his own act and will: although the judge
shall have failed in his proof, he who prosecutes is not
on that account condemned, nor in the same way, if one
out of several Judges, because each in this case shall de-
fend his own cause, aecording to what is read in the
Digest upon the Julian law on adultery, the last law
commencing with *Denunciasse, the sixth paragraph
* Quzeritur," where it is said, that the woman shall await
the sentence pronounced upon the adulterer, who if he be
acquitted, the woman through him shall prevail, nor can
she be further accused. But if he be condemned, the
woman is not to be condemned, but will plead her own
cause, and perhaps will be able to prevail through favour
or justice or with the help of the law. For what if
the adulterer be oppressed by enemies or be aggrieved


1 The translation follows the | Tottell’s text is evidentlly corrupt.
Florentine text of the digest, as


Cee


238 DE EXCEPTIONIBUS.


* subornatis, apud presidem gravatis, quia aut voluit?
* aut non potuit (mulier) provocare judicem religio-
* sum. Mulier veró sortita pudicitiam suam defendat,
* sed hoe antequàm fuerit condemnata,"? quod quidem
(ut videtur) melius esset observare in omnibus casibus
supradietis, ut si unus judex se purgaverit, q hoe
prodesse debet conjudicibus suis & parti. Si aute in
purgatione defecerit, q hoe aliis non noceat, quin se
defendere possit & causam suam.


Ité respondere possunt judices, secundum q superius
in parte dietum est, quód quamvis res de qua agitur
temporalis sit, & cognitio pertineat ad forum seculare,
ipse querens expresse renunciavit privilegia ^ fori in
scriptura & regie phibitioni, et q convenir possit
ubicung creditor vellet, & in quocūğ foro. Et ideo q
ipse Grens audiri non debet propter renunciatione, ex
quo gratis trahi voluit ad forum vetitt, et judicem
non suum, Et cüm judices super hoc, & creditor,
instrumentum ptulerunt de renunciatione, q querens
dedicere non possit, statim & ante omnia in judicio
seculari compellatur ipse querens q reddat illud q
debet, vel faciat q convenit, et sic in misericordia p
injusta detetione versus suü creditore, etià sine alio
brevi, sieut supradietü est, ppter dolu & malitia sua,
quia p se reversus est ad judieiu regiü, cui prius
renuciavit in ipsius regis pjudicium. Et iis ita peractis,


! * gravatus," MS. Rawl. C. 160. ( ** argumentis, testibusque suborna-
? « poluit," MS. id. * tis apud presidem gravatus: qui
?'The Florentine text of the | “ aut noluit, aut non potuit provo-
Digest continues as follows: “Si | * care? Mulier vero judicem reli-
* condemnatus fuerit, mulier non | “ giosum sortita, pudicitiam suam
“ est condemnata, sed aget causam | ** defendet? § 7. Sed si, antequam
* suam; fortassis et obtinere, vel | “ condemnetur?"
“ gratia, vel justitia, vel legis auxi- * « privilegio," MS. Rawl. C. 160
* ]io possit. Quid enim si adulter | et Reg. 9, E. xv.
* inimicitiis oppressus est, vel falsis


OF EXCEPTIONS. 239


by false arguments and suborned witnesses before the
president, and he was either unable or unwilling to ap-
peal? But the woman having a religious judge shall
maintain her chastity, but this before she has been con-
demned t: which indeed, as it seems, it would be better
to observe in all the aforesaid cases, as, if one judge has
purged himself, this ought to benefit his fellow judges.
But if he has failed in purging himself, this ought not
to damage the others, so as to prevent them defending
themselves and their cause.


Likewise the judges may answer, according to what ^ 6..
has been said above in part, that although the matter eer
which is in action is temporal, and the cognisance be- miden of
longs to a secular forum, the plaintiff himself has re- ^ 198°.
nounced the privilege of the forwm in writing and the
king's prohibition, and that he might be convened where-
ever his creditors wished and in any forwm whatsoever,

And accordingly that the plaintiff himself ought not to be
heard on account of his renunciation, since he has been
willing gratuitously to be drawn into a forbidden forum,
and before a judge who is not his own. And when the
judges on this matter and the creditor have produced an
instrument of renunciation, which the plaintiff cannot
gainsay, forthwith and before all things let the plaintiff
himself be compelled in the secular court to restore that
which he owes, or to do that which he has agreed to do, and
so let him be amerced for his unjust detention against his
creditor, even without another writ, as said above, on
account of his deceit and malice, because of his own
accord he has returned to the king’s court, which he had
formerly renounced to the prejudice of the king. And
when these things have been thus concluded, then at


1 The translator has of necessity | text of the Digest. The latter part
‘not followed the text of Bracton, | of Bracton’s text is unintelligible,
which is corrupt, but has adhered | but Tottell may have had authority
to it as far as he could reconcile it | for it in several MSS.
with the sense of the Florentine


f. 411.


240 DE EXCEPTIONIBUS,


tune demum pcedatur in eausa prohibitionis, et si con-
vietum sit quod aliquando gratis pcessit in foro eccle-
siastico, tune prosecutione & renunciatione concurrenti-
bus aggravetur poena propter multiplicem injuriam,
& debitor in causa prohibitionis puniatur propter
renunciationem eum poena precedenti propter injustam
detentionem, & propter fraudem in veniendo contra
factum suum proprium. Judices vero puniantur, quia
tenuerunt placitü in pjudicium dñi regis, et similiter ł
creditor, quia debitorem traxit ad forum vetitum. Et
secundum quod dicitur, quód laicus non poterit renü-
ciare foro seculari in pjudicium regie dignitatis, eode
modo videtur q nec clericus, si velit in causa criminali
vel alia eujus cognitio ptineat ad ecclesiasticam digni-
tatem & ordinem clericalem, & est eade fere ratio
habita inde. Judex vero ecclesiastic? si judicaverit
de laico feodo, non poterit sententiam demandare
executioni quia si illam demandaverit vicecomiti exe-
quendam, non erit ei parendus? Si autem illam legem
per ipsum vel suos exequatur, locus erit novze dissey-
singe. Eodem modo videtur q si laicus cognoverit in
causa criminali de clerico, ubi sequatur degradatio, si
judicium faciat contra clericum, sive se gratis posuerit
in inquisitionem sive non, q non valebit quod actum
est: quia episeopus nunquam ad mandatum judicis
secularis sine se^ procedet ad degradationem. Igitur
alia convictione opus erit in foro ecclesiastico, ut ipse
cognoscat & judicet, qui poterit judiciü demandare
executioni. Igitur quandocung petatur clericus in tali
actione ab episcopo, erit illi deliberandus, quia non
habebit rex prisonam de eo, quem judicare non poterit.


1« Judices vero puniantur." ? 'The text of some MSS. breaks
These words and the subsequent | off here, as for instance MS. Har-
text down to “ delicti " are omitted | leian 653, and MS. Hobhouse.
in MS. Rawl. C. 160, and in several 3 parendum MS. Reg. 9, E. xv.
other MSS. but they oceur in MS. | 4 “sine rege," MS. id.
Reg. 9. E. xv. |


OF EXCEPTIONS. 241


length let proceedings go on in a cause of prohibition,


and if it be proved that he has gratuitously proceeded


in the ecclesiastical court, then as the suit and the re-
nunciation are concurrent, let the penalty be aggravated
on account of the multiplied injury, and let the debtor
in the cause of prohibition be punished on account of
his renunciation with the penalty preceding on account
of the unjust detention, and on account of the fraud in
coming against his own act. But let the judges be
punished, because they have entertained a suit to the
prejudice of the lord the king, and in like manner the
creditor because he has.drawmn his debtor to a forbidden
forum. And according to what is said that a laic can-
not renounce the secular forwm to the prejudice of the
regal dignity, in the same manner it seems that neither
can a cleric, if he wishes in a criminal cause or any
other, in which the cognisance belongs to the ecclesiasti-
cal dignity and the clerical order, and there is almost
the same reason had thereon. But an ecclesiastical
judge, if he has judged concerning a lay feud, cannot
command his sentenee to execution, because if he has
ordered the viscount to execute it, he will not obey
him. But if he executes that law by himself or by his
own people, it will be a case of novel disseysine. In


the same manner it seems that if a laic has held cog-


nisance in a criminal cause concerning a cleric, where
degradation follows, if judgment has gone against the
cleric, whether he puts himself gratuitously or not upon
the inquest, that what is done will not avail, because
the bishop will never at the mandate of a secular judge
proceed without him to degradation. Therefore there
will need be another conviction in an ecclesiastical
court, that he himself may take cognisance and judge,
who can order the judgment to be executed. There-
fore whenéver a cleric is claimed in such an action by
a bishop, he will have to deliberate, because the king
will not have a prison for him, whom he cannot judge.
R 2657. Q


RHET


1.
Qualiter
proceden-
dum sit
contra
jurisdic-
tionem
alicujus

' judicis.


242 DE EXCEPTIONIBUS,


In causis vero civilibus ubi non agitur ad degrada-
tionem, videtur quód clerici se tueri non possunt, quin
respondeant in foro seculari in placitis quee pertinent -
ad coronam & dignitatem regis, quia rex poterit judi-
ciū demandare executioni sine fjudicio ecclesiastice
dignitatis, maxime si voluerit, quod clericis in hujus-
modi actionibus civilibus in foro seculari respondeatur,
q hujusmodi placita ptinent ad dignitatem et coronam
regiam ratione rei et ratione dilecti!


CAPR: XIV,


Superius dietum est qualiter revocatur jurisdictio,
cüm quis tractus fuerit in placitum ad judicium veti-
tum, & ad judieem non suum, s. ad forum ecclesiasti-
cum in placitis & actionibus quarü cognitio pertinet
of? corona & regiam dignitatem, p exceptione opposi-
tam cotra jurisdictione. Nunc aute dicendum est
qualiter excipiendum est cotra jurisdictionem alicujus
judicis, qui se facit judicem de placitis & actionibus
qua pertinent ad coronam et regia dignitate, cüm
quis tractus fuerit in placitum coram eo. Et sciendum
q imprimis, ad hoc q rata sint judicia, videre oportet
an justic. warrantum habeat à rege q judicare possit,
quia si warrantum non habuerit, non valebit quod
coram eo actum fuit, quasi coram non suo judice, quia
primó legi debet breve originale, & postmodum breve
per quod justic. constitutus est, & si nullum omnino
habuerit, vel si habuerit non tamen ad manum, non
erit ei parendum, nisi forte ita sit quód breve originale
de justiciaria sua faciat mentionem. Item mee est ei


!Cdelieti^ MS, Reg. 9. E. xv. | ? ad," MS. Rawl. C. 160.


OF EXCEPTIONS. 243


But in civil causes where proceedings are not taken
for degradation, it seems that clerics cannot defend
themselves from answering in a secular forum in pleas,
which pertain to the crown and to the dignity of the
king, because the king can order his judgment to be
executed without any prejudice to the ecclesiastical dig-
nity, especially if he has willed that an answer should
be given to clerics in civil actions of this kind in a
secular forwm, that such suits pertain to the dignity and
to the crown of the king by reason of the thing and
by reason of the offence.


CHAPTER XIV.


lt has been stated above how jurisdiction is revoked, E E
ow pro-


when a person has been drawn into a plea in a for- ceedings
bidden court and before a judge not his own, to wit, * t° Us
into an ecclesiastical court in pleas and actions, whereof against the
the cognisance belongs to the crown and to royal dig- Cau Id
nity, through an exception opposed to the jurisdiction. judge.
Now we must diseuss in what way exception is to be
taken to the jurisdiction of any judge, who makes him-
self judge upon pleas and actions which belong to the
erown and to the royal dignity, when a person has been
drawn into a plea before him. And it is to be known
in the first place that, in order to secure that judgments
should be ratified, it is ineumbent to see whether the
justiciary has a warrant from the king, so that he may
judge, because if he have not a warrant, it will not
avail that the action has been tried before him as
being as it were not the judge of the party, because
in the first place the original writ ought to be read,
and afterwards the writ whereby he has been consti-
tuted a justiciary, and if he should have none at all,
or if he have it not at hand, obedience will not be
due to him, unless by chance it happens that the ori-
ginal writ makes mention of his justiciarship. Like-

Q 2


f. 411 b.


244. DE EXCEPTIONIBUS,


parendum si contra jurisdictionem suam excipiatur,
quód fuit ob! eo subdelegatus, qui judicé dare non
posset, ut si justic. sub se justie. fecerit ad totam
causam, non magis quàm si procurator faceret pro-
curatorem. Item nec erit ei obtemperandum cüm
contra eum excipiatur, licet warrantum ostendat, ubi
p ipsum qui se delegavit translata fuerit jurisdictio &
cognitio ad aliü, quia si quis diversis téporibus duos
dederit judices, posteriorem dando videtur phibuisse
priori. Ité nec est ei parendü si excipiatur, licet
legatus? fuerit & warrantü habuerit, si sub ptextu
unius placiti velit cognoscere de aliis ad d non exten-
ditur sua jurisdietio, vel si chm habeat jurisdictione
ad unu placitu, fines mandati excedat & jurisdictione
extendat ad alia, G sequuntur assisam, post captionem
assisee, cùm sit functus officio suo sieut ad certifica-
tione & convictioné, cum generale non habeat jurisdic-
tione sibi delegatam, sicut habent justic. itinerantes
in comitatu ad omnia placita, vel sicut justic. capitales.
Ite excipitur contra jurisdictione inferioris justiciarii,
ubi pfertur jurisdietio jurisdictioni, ut si quis implaci-
tatus fuerit de una et eadem re, ab uno vel diversis,
in diversis curiis, sicut in curia dii regis, curia baroii,
vel alterius alicujus inferioris, quo casu majus auditoriu
preferri debet minori. Et si in majori curia ostende-
rit tenens q de eadem re in minori curia implacitatus
fuerit, phibebitur ex pte regis quód de placito illo in
inferiori curia non procedatur, et quamvis pcessum


1 “ab,” MS. Rawl. C. 160. | ?*delegatus," MS. id.


OF EXCEPTIONS. 245


wise obedience is not due to him if an exception be
raised against his jurisdietion, that he has been sub-
delegated by him who could not appoint a judge, as
if a justiciary has appointed a justiciary subordinate
to himself for the whole cause, no more than a pro-
curator can appoint a procurator. Likewise obedience
will not have to be paid to him when an exception is
raised against him, although he may show a warrant,
when the jurisdiction and cognisance have been trans-
ferred by him, who has delegated him, to another,
because if a person has at different times appointed
two judges, by appointing a second he seems to have
prohibited the former one. Likewise obedience is not
to be shown to him, if he be excepted against, although
he be delegated and have a warrant, if under the pre-


text of one plea he wishes to hold cognisance of
others, to which his jurisdiction is not extended, or if


when he has jurisdiction for one plea, he exceeds the


limits of his mandate and extends his jurisdiction to


other things, which follow the assise, after the holding
of the assise, after he has discharged his duty as
regards the certificate and conviction, when he has not
a general jurisdiction delegated to him, as the justi-
ciaries itinerant in a county to hear all pleas, or as
chief justiciaries. Likewise an exception is raised
against the jurisdiction of an inferior justiciary, where
one jurisdiction is preferred to another jurisdiction, as
if a person has been impleaded of one and the same
thing by one or by different persons in different courts,


as in the court of the lord the king, in the court of


a baron, or some other inferior lord, in which case the
superior tribunal ought to be preferred to the inferior.
And if the tenant has shown in the superior court,
that he has been impleaded concerning the same thing
in an inferior court, a prohibition shall issue on the
part of the king that proceedings shall not be taken
on that plea in the inferior court, and although pro-


f. 411 b.


Fleta, vi.
c. 37 § 8.


Britton, vi.
leh. ay. Sub7.


246 DE EXCEPTIONIBUS.


fuerit, quandod sive phibitio intervenerit sive no,
omnia que acta sunt in minori curia revocabuntur.
Tte datur exceptio cotra jurisdictione ppter privilegium
implacitati, ut si quis respondere non debeat de aliquo
placito nisi coram ipso rege vel capitali justic. suo,
quale habent Hospitalarii, Téplarii, & plures alii. Ité
datur exceptio contra jurisdictionem ppter privilegium
proveniens ex concessa libertate, ut si universitas vel
comunitas civitatis alicujus, sicut Londoñ, respondere
non teneatur de aliquo placito extra civitatem, quale
habent barones civitatis London, qui de nullo respon-
debunt extra civitate, nisi tantum de tenuris & co-
tractibus forinsecis. Ite exceptio datur contra juris-
dictioné ppter libertate alicujus universitatis, q de
nulló placito respondebit nisi certo loco, qualem habet
barofi de quing portibus qui non respondebut de aliquo
nisi apud Shypwey. Item datur exceptio contra juris-
dietionem ppter utilitatem alicujus universitatis, s. ne
trahantur extra com ad facienda assisam nove dissey-
sine & mortis antecessoris. Ite datur exceptio contra
jurisdietione sieut in curia Baron, qui placitu de recto
tenere nolunt vel nó possunt, vel si jurisdictione remi-
serint in curia sua, & eam velint postmodu repetere.
Item datur exceptio contra jurisdictionem ratione con
tractus, ratione delicti, & ratione renunciationis, de
quibus superius dictum est. j


OF .EXCEPTIONS, 247


ceedings have sometimes been taken, whether a pro-
hibition has intervened or not, every thing which has
taken place in the inferior court shall be revoked.
Likewise an exception is allowed against the jurisdic-
tion on account of the privilege of the party impleaded,
as if a person ought not to answer upon any plea
except before the king himself or his chief justiciary,
such as the Hospitallers, the Templars, and several
others. Likewise an exception is allowed against a
jurisdiction on account of a privilege arising from the
grant of a franchise, as if a corporation or a community
of any city, such as London, is not bound to answer
to any plea outside the city, such as the barons of the
city of London have, who shall answer upon nothing
outside the city, except only concerning foreign tenures
and contracts. Likewise an exception is allowed against
a jurisdiction on account of the franchise of a corpo-
ration, that it shall answer nowhere but in a certain
place, such as the barons of the Cinque Ports have,
who shall not answer upon any thing except at Ship-
wey. Likewise an exception is allowed against a juris-
diction on account of the interests of a certain corpo-
ration, that it should not be drawn out of the county
to make an assise of novel disseysine or of mortdan-
cester. Likewise an exception is allowed against a
jurisdiction as in the court of barons, who are unwil-
ling or unable to entertain a plea of right, or if they
have renounced their jurisdiction in their own court,
and wish afterwards to resume it. Likewise an ex-
ception is allowed against a jurisdiction by reason of
a contract, by reason of the offence, or by reason of
a renunciation, concerning which we have spoken above.


248 ; DE EXCEPTIONIBUS.


Gap, XV.


1. Dictum est de exceptionibus ( copetunt cotra juris-
VP EE dietioné: nune videndum si sit aliqua ü competere
tra per- possit contra psonam justic. ut si aliqua ratione
saetik „į habeatur suspectus, timore, odio vel amore, & non
et de causa video quare non debeat recusare,! quia si male judica-
roosa — verit ex certa scientia, litem suam facit, & tenebitur

ad restitutione dānorū, cfm de hoe per superiorem
f.412, fuerit convictus. Si auté per imperitia, nec sic sed
sumoniri poterit q veniat & faciat recordum, ut ea q
Fleta,l vi correctione indigent, corrigantur, & in stati debitu
i. reformentur. Melius tamen est (ut videtur) in tepore
occurrere, quà post cauem? vulnerata remediū qrere:
ut suspectus amoveatur et ei substituatur no suspectus,
cū nihil detur gratius inimico quàm si detur ei quis
adjudicand?, quem damnificare intendit, et valde meti-
culosa res est sub justic. litigare suspecto, quia ssepius
tristissimum sortitur eventum. Justiciarius potest re-
cusarl ex causa, causa vero recusationis unica est sus-
picio, que eosurgit multis ex causis, s. si justic. sit
consanguineus petentis, homo vel subditus, parens vel
amicus, vel inimieus tenentis, affinis vel familiaris, vel
comensalis, consiliarius, vel narrator suus extiterit in

causa illa, vel in alia, & hujusmodi. ;


$ RA In fine notandū de jurisdictione majori & minori,
e juris- . . . . a " B aros .

dicüone - imprimis sicut dominus papa in spiritualibus super
malonia omnibus habeat ordinariā jurisdictioné, ita habet rex
judicum, . : : : A :

sieut papa, 12 regno suo ordinariam in téporalibus, & pares non


habet, neq superiores; & sunt qui sub eis ordinariam


! * reeusari," MS. Reg. 9. E. xv., | * peritiam, nec sic, summoniri
et Harl. 653, et Rawl. C. 159. * poterit," MS. Harl. 653.
2 “si autem per imperitiam non 3 * causam,” Tottell's edition of


* sit, sed summoniri poterit," MS. | 1569, MS. Reg. 9. E. xv.; MS.
Rawl. C. 159. “si autem per im- | Harl. 653; Rawl. C. 159.


OF EXCEPTIONS. 249


CHAPTER XV.


We have spoken concerning exceptions which lie 1.
against the jurisdiction. Now we must see if there M AS
are any which lie against the person of the justiciary, against the

: "e person of
as if he be for any reason regarded as suspected of Hie UNS
fear or of hatred or of love, and I do not see where- ciary, and


fore he should not refuse, because if he has judged ill Macs
from certain knowledge he makes the suit his own, ofthe
and he will be bound to make good the damages, when ee
he shall have been convicted by a superior. But if from £ 412.
inexperience, not so, but he may be summoned to come

and make a record, that those things which require
correction may be corrected, and be reformed into their

due state. It is better however, as it seems, to oppose

in time, than to seek a remedy after the cause has been
wounded, in order that the suspected person may be
removed and a person free from suspicion be substituted,

since nothing more agreeable can be afforded to a pri-

vate enemy than that there should be placed before him

a person to be judged by him, whom he intends to
damnify, and it is a very formidable thing to litigate
before a suspected justiciary, because it often has a very

sad ending. A justiciary may be refused for good cause,

but the only cause for refusal is a suspicion, which arises

from many causes, as if the judge be a blood relative of

the plaintiff, his vassal or subject, his parent or friend,

or an enemy of the tenant, his kinsman or a member

of his household, or a table-companion, or he has been

his counsellor or his pleader in that cause or in another,

. and in any such like capacity.

Finally it is to be noted concerning the jurisdiction of 2 2.
superior and of inferior courts, and in the first place as ig the
the lord the pope has an ordinary jurisdiction over all D aeon
things in spirituals, so the king has in his realm ordinary superior
authority in temporal things, and has no peers, nor judges, as


. e
superiors ; and there are persons who bave ordinary pope.


250 DE EXCEPTIONIBUS.


habent in multis, sed non ita meram sicut papa vel
rex. Et pares esse poterunt illi qui inferiores sunt
in jurisdictione sua multis rationibus, sed par in
parem non habebit jurisdictioné no magis quàm im-
perium, & multo fortius nec in superiorem.


5; Item sieut à papa poterit quis habere jurisdictionem
o delegatam in spiritualibus, ita poterit quis à rege
debet ex- in temporalibus, sicut justic. majores vel minores, vel
Wir ali qui sunt quasi justic. vz. quibus rex concessit
an suasit libertates aliquas d pertinent ad corona & libertate
jurisdictio. suam, & ideo quamvis in temporalibus sicut in spiri-

tualibus debet rex estimare vel justice. sui. an sua sit
jurisdictio an non, ut sciri possit utrum sumonitus
venire debeat an non: tamen si judex ecclesiasticus
falcem ponens in messem alienam aliquid praesumpserit
cotra corona & dignitatem regiam, sicut de laico feodo
vel de catallis, cum phibitione à rege susceperit, super-
sedere debet in omni casu, saltem donee constiterit in
curia regia, ad que ptineat jurisdictio, quia si judex
ecclesiasticus estimare posset an sua esset jurisdictio,
in omni casu indifferenter pcederet no obstante regio!
phibitione. Debet igitur vel omnino supersedere, vel
cüm attachiatus fuerit, venire vel mittere, q examinato
placito in curia regia de consilio curie supersedeat,
vel peedat, q si non fecerit, pcena debita puniatur ut
supra.


! “regia,” MS. Rawl. C. 159.


OF EXCEPTIONS, 251


jurisdiction under them, but not so absolute as the
pope or the king. And they who are inferior in
Jurisdiction are peers in many ways, but a peer has
not jurisdiction any more than empire over his peer,
and much more not over a superior.


Likewise as a person may have from the pope a dele- s.
gated jurisdiction in spiritual matters, so he may have That a
E : SMS eripe judge
from the king a delegated jurisdiction in temporal mat- ought to
ters, as superior and inferior justiciaries, or others who 9X?mine
and weigh,


are as it were justiciaries, to wit, to whom the king whether
has granted certain franchises which pertain to his end
crown and his franchise, and aecordingly although in tion.
temporal matters as in spiritual matters the king or
his justiciaries ought to weigh whether it be his juris-
diction or not, that it may be known whether a per-
son summoned ought to appear or not; nevertheless

if an ecclesiastical judge, putting his reaping hook into
another’s harvest, has presumed any thing against the
crown and the king's dignity, as concerning a lay fee

or chattels, when he has received a prohibition from
the crown, he ought to supersede proceedings in every
case, at least until it has been established in the court

of the king to whom appertains the jurisdiction, be-
cause if the ecclesiastical judge could estimate whether

it be his jurisdiction, he would in all cases proceed
indifferently notwithstanding a royal prohibition. He
ought therefore either altogether to supersede proceed-
ings, or when he shall have been attached, to come or

to send in order that, the plea having been examined

in the king’s court, he may upon the advice of the
court supersede proceedings or may proceed, which if

he fail to do, let him be punished with the due penalty


as above.


15
Quod
quandoque
mutatur
jurisdictio
in juris-
dictionem,
et quando-
que de
persona in
personam,
mutato

f. 412 b.


nomine
Terum.


22 DE EXCEPTIONIBUS.


Cap. XVI.


Mutatur quandóque jurisdictio de jurisdictione in
jurisdictionem mutatis rerum nominibus, ut si de laico
catallo fiat spirituale: ut cüm res fuerint decimatee, ©
fiunt de laico catalla' res spirituales, & sic mutatur
jurisdictio secularis in spiritualem. Item è converso
cüm decim:s vendite fuerint, & ad alium translate,
reincipiunt iterum esse laicum catalla. Eodem modo
diei poterit de laico feodo, quód mutato nomine in
causa testamentaria fit laicum feodum quasi res spiri-
tualis secundum quosdam, sieut videri poterit in
domibus, tris, & tenemtis legatis in civitatib?, burgis,
& villis, & iterum redeunt in laicum feodü executo
testamento, Eodem modo fieri deberet (ut videtur)
de reb? datis vel promissis ob causam matrimonii
principaliter, et illud idem de rebus quæ accidiit de `
matrimonio, ut si pecunia pmissa fuerit ob causam
matrimonii Et quia ejusdem juris, i jurisdictionis
esse deberet accessorium, eujus juris fuerit principale,
& quàvis pdietorum ptineat cognitio ad judicem &
forü ecclesiasticum, tamen ad i regiam erit
supersedendum. Sed revera locum habet phibitio, quia
si in burgo domus vel pdium legatum fuerit, in foro
seculari terminabitur negotium, sicut de assignatione
fieri oportet. Et si legatatius fuerit in seysina, habe-
bit exceptionem contra heredem & assisam nove
disseysine, si fuerit ejectus. Si autem extra seysinam,
tune habebit actionem in foro seculari per modum
donationis versus omnes.


1 *eatallo," MS. Reg. 9. E. xv. et Rawl. C. 159.


jr


OF EXCEPTIONS. 253


CHAPTER XVI.


The jurisdiction is sometimes changed from jurisdie- x es
tion to jurisdiction, the names of the things having jurisdiction
been changed, as if from a lay chattel it nes become i5 anm
a spiritual thing, as when things. have been tithed, changed
chattels become from a lay thing spiritual things, and from juris-

PS EC EG diction to
so the secular jurisdiction is ad into a spiritual jurisdic-
jurisdiction. Likewise conversely when tithes have 59» and
J 2 à sometimes
been sold and transferred to another person, they re- from per-

son to
commence again to be a lay chattel. In the same way TORON
it may be Sem of a lay feud, that the name having the name


been changed a lay feud in a testamentary cause be- ES
comes as it were a spiritual thing according to some e
persons, as may be seen in houses, lands and tenements changed.
bequeathed in cities, boroughs and townships, and they f. 412 b.
again return to the condition of a lay feud when the
testament has been executed. In the same manner it
ought to take place (as it seems) concerning things
given or promised in view of matrimony principally,

and the same concerning things which happen concern-

ing matrimony, as if money has been promised in view

of matrimony. And because the accessory ought to be
under the same law, that is, under the same jurisdic-

tion as the principal, and although the cognisance of

the things aforesaid pertain to the ecclesiastical judge

and forwm, nevertheless proceedings must be superseded
upon a prohibition from the king. But in truth a pro-
hibition has a place, because if in a borough a house

or land has been bequeathed, the business will be de-
termined in a lay forwm, as ought to be done in the

case of an assignment. And if the legatee shall have
been in seysine, he shall have an exception against the

heir and an assise of novel disseysine, if he should be
ejected. But if he be out of seysine, then he shall
have an action in a lay forum after the manner of a


donation against every body.


254 DE EXCEPTIONIBUS.


2. Item videndum est, an privatorum consensus com-
m pva mutare possit regiam jurisdictionem in contractibus
sus mutare privatis, ut si quis sie consentiat ad alterius jurisdie-
dns tionem ad vetitum examen convolando non obstante
nem. prohibitione, & verum 'es& quod non, quia imponi non

potest necessitas regi quód suam jurisdictionem amittet,
seeundum quod superius dictum est in parte. ltem
nec mutari poterit per modum donationis sive per
conventionem privatorum, licet ipse qui modü imposu-
erit sibi & suis pjudicet, ut si privata psona bastardo
dederit & suis heredibus, vel cui dare vel assignare
voluerit, & si hseredes non habuerit reversura esset
terra ad donatorem, sed quia donator modu adjicit,
quia dare possit & assignare, valebit donatio & assig-
natio q alids non valerent. Eode modo videtur, q
adjicere possit q bastardus legare possit, sed per hujus-
modi modum adjectum non mutatur jurisdictio regis,
sed in curia regis terminabitur negotium, si legatarius
fuerit extra seysinam, & p tale breve. Precipe &c.
Et que ad talem reverti debent per modum donationis
quam talis ei fecit, quod illam dare potuit, legare &
assignare, quia eadem ratione qua bastardus per modum
donationis dare potest & assignare, licet hseredes non
habuerit: eadem ratione poterit legare, & ita quód res
data nec ad se, nec ad heredes suos reverti possit,
quia nulla ex hoc fit eis injuria, quia donator hoc
voluit, & nihilominus tenentur heeredes factū illud
warrantizare legatario, licet hzeredes bastardi defecerint,
& quod dicitur de bastardo idem observari poterit de
legitimo, quia poterit in persona omnium lex imponi


OF EXCEPTIONS, 255


Likewise it is to be seen, whether the consent of ee
private persons can change the king’s jurisdiction in the con-
. private contracts, as if a person ld so consent to Sins
another's jurisdiction, by betaking himself to a forbidden persons
inquiry notwithstanding a sce and. 10 is) true o. ane =
that he cannot do so, because a necessity cannot be diction.
imposed upon the king that he should lose his juris-
diction, according to what has been said above in part.
Likewise it cannot be changed by a mode of donation
or by a convention between private persons, although
the person who has imposed the mode should preju-
dice himself and his relatives, as if a private person
has given to a bastard and to his heirs, or to whom-
soever he has been pleased to give or to assign, and
if he shall not have heirs the land will have to revert
to the donor, but because the donor has added a mode,
inasmuch as he can give and assign, the donation and
assignment will avail, which otherwise would not be
valid. In the same manner it seems that he may add
that the bastard may bequeath, but the jurisdiction of
the king is not changed by the addition of a mode of this
kind, but the business shall be determined in the court
of the king, if the legatee shall be out of seysine, and by
a writ of this kind: Enjoin, &c. And which things
ought to revert to so-and-so by the mode of donation,
which so-and-so has made to him, that he may give,
bequeath and assign the land, because for the same reason
that a bastard may give and assign by a mode of do-
nation, although he may not have heirs, for the same
reason he may bequeath, and so that the thing given
ean not revert to himself nor to his heirs, because no
injury is done thereby to them, because the donor has
so willed, and nevertheless the heirs are bound to war-
rant that act to the legatee, although the heirs of the
bastard have failed: and what is said concerning a
bastard, the same may be observed concerning a legi-
timate person, because a law and a mode may be


3.
Quod
mutat
jurisdic-
tionem
aliquando
contractus,
aliquando
delictum.


f. 413.


J
De excep-
tionibus
contra
breve, et
ubi eadem
competere
debet et
ubi non.


256 DE EXCEPTIONIBUS.


& modus, sive donatorius liber sit vel servus, legiti-
mus vel bastardus, quia oportet utrumquè, tam dona-
torē quam donatorium facere q convenit, ex quo uter
ab initio hoc voluit.


Item mutat aliquando jurisdictionem contractus, &
aliquando delictum. Ut si clericus contraxerit aliquo
modo cum laico, conveniendus est ubi contraxerit, &
aliquando ubi deliquit, dum tamen civiliter agatur &
non ad poenam corporalem. infligendam, nisi degradatio
vel alia capitis diminutio imponatur. Itē mutat ali-
quado jurisdictionem, privilegiü ordinis clericalis, ut
si clericus clericü cOvenerit in actione injuriz, vel de
rebus spiritualibus, sicut de decimis, vel alüs rebus
mobilibus vel hujusmodi clericorü, sicut de catallis
& debitis, ubi ad vetitum examen covolare non debent.
Si aute de laico feodo agatur, aliud erit nisi fuerit
dedicatum & Deo sacratü, & efficiatur res sacra, q
quidé dici nō poterit de re in liberam & ppetuam
eleemosyna datam.! 3


Cap. XVII.


Confirmata sic jurisdictione judicis, consequenter
audiatur bie per q expediri & exponi debet jus
actionis, quo audito, perpendere poterit tenens an ex
ipso brevi ei competere poterit exceptio, quia multe
sunt exceptiones que copetunt tenenti cotra bie.
Oportet quide q breve conveniat actioni, & q in suo
casu impetratum sit, alioquin non valebit, verbi gratia.
Si magnum bře de recto patens impetratum fuerit


! * data," MS. Rawl. C. 159; MS. Reg. 9. E. xv.


OF EXCEPTIONS. 25.


imposed in the person of all, whether the donee be of
free or of servile condition, legitimate or a bastard,
because it is incumbent that both, as well the donor
as the donee, should do what is suitable, since both
from the beginning have desired this.


Likewise a contract sometimes changes the jurisdic- :
tion, and sometimes an offence does so. As if a cleric ree
has contracted with a laic in any manner, he is to be sometimes

5 changes
convened where he has contracted, and sometimes the juris-
where he has offended, provided however that the pro- diction,
ceedings are civil, and not for the infliction of bodily times an
punishment, unless degradation or some other loss of RE
personal status. Likewise the privilege of the clerical
order sometimes changes the jurisdiction, as if a cleric
has convened a cleric in an action of injury, or concern-
ing spiritual things, as concerning tithes, or other move-
ables or such like things of clerics, as concerning chattels
and debts, when they ought not to betake themselves to
a forbidden test. But if the proceeding be about a lay
feud, it will be another thing, unless it has been dedi-
cated and consecrated to God, and is rendered a sacred

thing, which cannot be said concerning a thing given


into free and perpetual alms.


f. 413.


CHAPTER XVII.


The jurisdiction of the judge having been thus con- 13
firmed, let there be read aloud in due course the writ, yoa
by which the right of action ought to be set forth and a ve
expounded, which having been read aloud the tenant where it
may consider carefully, whether upon the writ itself an oueht to
exception may be available, because there are many ana where
exceptions which may be available to the tenant against not.
the writ. It is incumbent indeed that the writ should
be suitable to the action, and that it should have been
sued out in a proper case, otherwise it will not avail, for
instance, if a great open writ of right has been sued


R 2657. i R


258 DE EXCEPTIONIBUS.


ubi parvi bre clausum impetrari deberet in dominicis
dñi regis secundum consuetudine manerii, & sic cadit
breve, licet actio non cadat vel e contrariò, & nihilo-
minus redire poterit ad aliud bre de recto q competit
casui, non obstante eo quod prius. egit cum brevi
quod non competit, quod pro nullo computatur: ut
de itinere W. de Ralegh * anno regni regis Heny trice-
simo in eom Not. Item si ordo brevium non obser-
vetur, ut si alicui plures competant actiones, et primó
agere incepit per breve de recto super ipsa proprietate,
vel super ipso jure & possessione simul, non poterit
postmodum descendere ad inferiores actiones de ipsa
possessione, quod si fecerit, cadit actio simul de ipsa
possessione cum brevi. Sed lieet processum sit per
bie de recto quousque visus petatur, ex penitentia
poterit petens reverti ad inferiora placita sicut ad
assisam nove disseysinæ, mortis antecessoris, & alia
plura: ut de termino Pasche anno regni regis Henrici
duodecimo in comitatu Berk. de Henrico de Siccario,
quia ibi descensum est ad assisam nove disseysinz
post breve de recto. De ordine brevium satis perpendi
possit per ea quse supradicta sunt. Item cadit breve
si super modo & qualitate alicujus facti impetratum
fuerit breve, ubi impetrari deberet super ipso facto,
per quod terminari potest uirum tam ipsum factum
quàm modus & qualitas, quia séper debet prius termi-


1“ut de itinere R. de Turkeby | * regis Henrici xxix. in com. Not-
* anno regni regis xxix. in com. | “ ingh." MS. Reg. 9, E. xv. See
* Notingh." MS. Rawl. C. 159; | Introduction.
* deitinere Rog. de Thurkeby anno


OF EXCEPTIONS. 259


out, where a small close writ ought to be sued out in
the demesnes of the lord the king according to the
custom of the manor, and so the writ abates, although
the action does not abate, or the converse, and never-
theless he will be able to return to another writ of
right, which is applicable to the case, notwithstanding
the fact that he has previously proceeded with a writ
which was not applicable, which is reckoned for nothing,
as in the iter of William de Ralegh! in the thirtieth
year of the reign of king Henry in the county of Not-
tingham. Likewise if the order of the writs be not
observed, as if any one is entitled to bring several
actions, and he has commenced to proceed by a writ of
right about the property itself, or about the right itself
and the possession at the same time, he will not be
able afterwards to descend to inferior actions concern-
ing the possession itself, which if he should have so
done, the action concerning the possession itself abates
together with the writ. But although proceedings
have been had through a writ of right until a view
be claimed, the plaintiff may upon repentance return
to inferior pleas as to an assise of novel disseysine, of
mortdancester, and several others; as in Easter term
of the twelfth year of the reign of king Henry, in the
county of Berks, concerning Henricus de Siccario, be-
cause there a descent was made to an assise of novel
disseysine after a writ of right. Concerning the order
of writs it may be sufficiently understood through what
has been said above. Likewise the writ abates, if a
writ has been sued out concerning the mode and quality
of any act, where it ought to have been sued out con-
cerning the act itself, whereby it might have been
determined whether as well the act itself as the mode
and quality of it, because the principal ought always


1 The reading of several MSS. | that of William de Ralegh, is pro-
which speak of the circuit of Roger | bably the more accurate. See Tn-
de Turkeby (Thurkelby) instead of | troduction.

R 2


f. 413 b.


2.


Que sunt 4,


brevia


260 DE EXCEPTIONIBUS.


nari principale, cum quo terminari possit aecessorium.
Verbi gratia. Si quis disseysitus fuerit de aliquo
tenemento cum violentia & armis, & impetraverit
breve, Quare vi & armis, valere non debet breve,
quia per hoc agitur de qualitate disseysine, & non
de ipsa re, vz. de ipso tefito, p quo fiat violentia, nec
acquirit querens aliquid de ipso tefito, sed si plura
brevia impetrata fuerint de uno facto contra aliquem
quod sub se contineat plures actiones, sicut plures
disseysinas, & in uno brevi & in una actione terminari
possit, si sic agatur, tamen propter hoc alia brevia
non cadunt nee actiones, sed terminantur, & extunc
erunt hujusmodi brevia supervacua. Et notandum
quód esse poterit exceptio peremptoria brevis, & non
juris, quia quandói vertitur una actio in aliam [pter
privilegiü heredis ad rem cosequendam, et cadit omnino
bie super ipsa possessione, et retorquetur ad ipsum
jus, sicut assisa mortis antecessoris no jacet inter
cohseredes & psonas sanguine cojunctas, sed breve de
recto. Ite pemptoria esse poterit, tam brevis quàm
ipsius juris, p exceptionem rei judicatæ, recognitiones,
et remissiones et quietü clamantie, & in omni casu
ubi perimitur actio perimitur bie, sed non e contrario,
ut pdictü est.


Breve quide, cùm sit formatum ad similitudinem
egule juris, quia breviter et paucis verbis intentione


originalia, pferentis exponit et explanat, sicut regula juris, rem


et que
sunt magi
tralia.


, d est breviter enarrat. Non tamé ita bře esse debeat
quin ratione et vim intentionis contineat. Et sunt
(dam brevia tormata super certis casibus, de cursu!


! *de eursu et de consilio totius | * consilio totius regni," MS. Reg.
* regni, MSS. Rawl. C. 159 and | 9, E. xv.
160; “et de cursu et de communi


OF EXCEPTIONS. 261


to be first determined, with which the accessory may
be determined. For the sake of explanation. If any
person shall have been disseysed from any tenement
with violence and arms, and he has sued out a writ,
Quare vi et armis, the writ ought not to avail, because
through it proceedings are taken concerning the quality
of the disseysine, and “not concerning the thing itself,
that is, concerning the tenement, for which violence
has been done, nor does the plaintiff acquire any thing
of the tenement itself; but if several writs have been
sued concerning one act against any one, which con-
tains under it several actions, as several disseysines,
and may be determined in one writ and in one action,
if proceedings are so had, nevertheless on account of
that action the other writs and actions do not abate,
but are determined, and thenceforth the other writs
will be superfluous. And it is to be noted that there
may be a peremptory exception to a writ and not to
the right, because sometimes one action is turned into f. 413 b.
another on account of the privilege of an heir to ob-
tain the thing, and the writ upon the possession itself
abates altogether, and recourse. is had to the right itself,
as an assise of mortdancester does not lie between
coheirs and persons conjoint in blood, but a writ of
right. Likewise the exception may be peremptory
against as well the writ as the right itself, through
the exception of a judgment already given, recognitions
and remissions and quitclaims, and in every case where
the action is perempted the writ is perempted, but not
the converse, as said above.


A writ indeed, when it has beeu drawn up after the is
likeness of a rule of law, because it expounds and ex- we E
plains the declaration of the party producing it, Just as PALARI
a rule of law, narrates briefly the thing which is. It magis-
ought not however to be so brief as not to contain the terial.
reason and force of the declaration. And there are


some writs drawn up on certain cases, granted and


262 DE EXCEPTIONIBUS.


et de comuni codsilio totius regni concessa et appro-
bata, i quide nullatenus mutari poterint abs consensu
et voluntate eorum. Sunt etiam brevia ex eis sequentia
ğ dicuntur judicialia, & seepius variantur secundü varie-
taté placitorü pponentis et respondentis, petentis, et
excipientis, secundü varietaté responsionu. Sunt etiam
(dam que dicuntur magistralia et seepius variantur
secundum varietaté casuü et querelarum, et qusedam
sunt psonalia queda mixta secundum qd sunt actiones
diverse et varie, quia tot erunt formule brevium quot
sunt genera actionum, quia non potest quis sine brevi
agere, cùm non teneatur alius sine brevi respondere nisi
gratis voluerit, et ex hoc ei no injuriatur, cüm scienti
et volenti non fit injuria. Item cùm de eadem re
alicui plures competant actiones, eodem modo compe-
tunt ei plura brevia, sed uno oportet experiri sicut
una actione, ordine tamen (ut convenit) observato.
Breve quidem domini regis in se nullam continere
debet falsitatem. Item nullum errore, Apparere etia
debet in prima sui figura! non vitiosum, maxime si
fuerit patens sive apertum, quia originalium qusdam
aperta, qusdam clausa, et sive aperta sive clausa
apparere debent non abrasa, no obolita? et si invenia-
tur abrasio, tune refert quo loco, et à quo, et quado.
du Quo loco, utrū vz in narratione facti vel juris, si
ge,  8uté in narratione facti, cadit bře quasi suspectum,
facta enim et nomina mutari no debet, sed jure? ubid
scribi possunt. Item à quo, utrum vz per ipsum
cancellarium vel ausu temerario per alium, sicut per


1 * Item nullum errorem apparere ? * abolita," MSS. eadem.
* debet in prima sui figura, maxime
* si fuerit patens sive apertum," 3 * jura," MSS. eadem.


MS. Rawl. C. 159, Reg. 9 E. xv.


OF EXCEPTIONS. 263


approved of the course and of the common counsel of the
whole kingdom, which cannot be changed in any manner
without their consent and assent. There are other writs
following out of them, which are called judicial, and are
repeatedly varied according to the variety of the pleas,
of the proponent and of the respondent, of the claimant
and of the exceptor, according to the variety of the
answers. There are also certain writs which are called
magisterial, and are often varied according to the variety
of the cases and complaints, and some are personal and
some are mixed according as the actions are diverse and
varied, because there will be as many formulas of writs
as there are kinds of actions, because a person cannot
bring an action without a writ, since another person is
not obliged to make answer to him without a writ,
unless he has gratuitously been willing to do so, and
thereupon no injury is done to him, as to a person who
is knowing and willing no injury is done. Likewise
when a person is entitled to bring various actions on the
same subject, in the same way he is entitled to several
writs, but he ought to feel his way with one writ as
with one action, due order however being suitably
observed. A writ indeed of the lord the king ought not
to contain in itself any falseness. Likewise no error,
It ought also to appear in its first outline not defective,
especially if it be patent or open, because of original
writs some are open, some are close, and whether they
are open or close, they ought to appear free from erasure
or from obliteration ; and if an erasure be found, then it
is of importance in what place and by whom and at
what time. In what place? whether for instance in a
count of fact or of law, but if in a count of fact the writ
abates as open to suspicion, for facts and names ought
not to be changed, but law may be written anywhere.
Likewise by whom, whether for instance, by the chan-
cellor himself, or with rash audacity by another person,
as by the clerk of a justiciary or of the viscount at the


f. 414,


264 DE EXCEPTIONIBUS.


clericum justic. vel vie. ad peurationem alicuj? partis,
ubi omnes tam agétes quám cdsentientes de omnibus
bonis suis sunt in misericordia et voluntate diii regis,
et ipsi tanqua falsarii nihilominus puniantur. Et quód
tales argui possunt de falsitate: pbatur de term S. M.
anno regni regis H. quarto incipiente quinto in comi-
tatu Hereford de Radulpho Harang. ltem quando,
videlicet utrum hoc fiat antequam breve fuerit in -curia
recitatum & publicatum vel post, et sic breve suspec-
tum & cadit,si hoc fuerit à petente impetratum. Item
cadit breve, si in se contineat talem falsitatem, q
signum appositum sit adulterinum ipsius dii regis,
sive omninó falsum sive vert, falso tamen appositum
per industria falsariorum. Et quo casu committitur
crimen læsæ majestatis, & puniuntur tales ultimo sup-
plicio si laici fuerint, si vero clerici, poenam degrada-
tionis sustinebunt cum perpetua infamia, nisi warrantu
habuerint: secundü. q inveniri poterit in itinere M.
de P. in com Eborü anno regis H. decimo de Rogero
de Fanborne et Agnete uxore ejus, qui protulerut
quoddam breve de recto, cui signum verum appensum
fuit falso brevi et per industriam falsarii, & ubi ipse
Rogerus suspensus fuit, quia warrantum no habuit, sed
uxor sua liberata, sive conscia sceleris sive non, quia
fuit sub virga viri sui Item cadit breve simul cum
actione ad damnit ipsius impetrantis, q impetratu fuit
per falsam suggestione vel per veri suppressione. Per
falsi suggestionem : ut si dicat quis se esse heredem
cum non sit: ut de term S. Trinitatis anno regni regis
H. quarto in com Midd de Hamond! de Brood. Idem
erit, si quis- dicat se tenere in feodo, cum no teneat


!*de Hamone de Brood,’ MS. Rawl. C. 160; Hamone Broud,
Reg. 9 E. xv.


_OF EXCEPTIONS. 205


procurement of any party, in which case all ‘persons as
well the agents as the parties consenting are at the
mercy and pleasure of the lord the king for all their
goods, and they may be themselves punished as falsifiers.
And that such persons may be convicted of falsification
is proved in Michaelmas term in the fourth and fifth
year of the reign of king Henry, in the county of Here-
ford, concerning Ralph Harang. Likewise at what time ?
to wit, whether this was done before the writ was read
and published in court, or afterwards, and so the writ is
suspicious and abates, if it has been sued out by the
plaintiff. Likewise, the writ abates, if it contains such
a falsification, that the seal affixed to it is a counterfeit
of the seal of the lord the king, whether altogether false,
or true and fraudulently attached to it by the contrivance
of falsifiers. And in which case the crime of high trea-
son is committed, and such persons are punished with
extreme severity, if they are laics, but if they are clerics,
they shall undergo the punishment of degradation with
perpetual infamy, unless they shall have a warranty:
according to what may be found in the iter of Martin
de Pateshull in the county of York in the tenth year of
king Henry, concerning Fanborne and Agnes his wife,
who produced a certain writ of right, to which a true
seal was attached to a false writ and through the con-
trivance of a falsifier, and where Roger himself was
hanged because he had no warrantor, but his wife was
set free, whether privy to the crime or not, because she
was under the rod of her husband. Likewise the writ
abates together with the action to the damage of the
party suing it out because it has been sued out through
a false suggestion or a suppression of the truth. By the
suggestion of a falsehood, as if a person should say that
he was the heir, when he was not so, as in Holy Trinity
term in the fourth year of the reign of king Henry, in
the county of Middlesex, concerning Hamo de Brood.


The same thing will happen, if a person should say that.


f. 414.


Cf. f. 427 b.


266 DE EXCEPTIONIBUS.


nisi ad termina et hujusmodi, vel si mulier cùm dote
petierit ptem dotis habuerit, cùm dicat se nihil habere,
& sic breve de dote impetravit & hujusmodi Ite p
veri suppressione, ut si quis dicat se ingressu habere
per aliü quàm per illum, per Gm ingressus fuerit. Item
cui! talis dimiserit qui nunquam dimisit, eo q inde
nullam seysinam habuit, vel si aliquem gradu impe-
trando omiserit. Et de hac materia inveniri poterit
inter placita quz sequuntur rege Hent anno tricesimo
primo inter Michaelem abbatem Glaston et Rogeru
episeopu Bathofi. Et unde idem abbas dixit regi,’ q
episeopus non habuit ingressum nisi per episcopu J.
cui prior Eustachius terras illas dimisit, qui nunquam
inde seysinam habuit. Et illud ide dici poterit in
brevi de warrantia charte, ubi impetrator impetrando
dixerit se tenere terram, quam non tenuerat, & sic
impetraverat, quo expresso non impetrasset et hujus-
modi. Et cüm bye ita in se fuerit vitiosum in aliqua
parte, in nulla pte valebit quantü ad unam actionem,
secus esset si plures sint ibi actiones ratione plurium
tenentiu. Et si unus petat per unum breve feodu
unius militis in una villa et versus alium in eodem
brevi feodu alterius militis in eade villa vel in diversis,
quamvis cadat bie de feodo unius militis, nihilominus
stabit de feodo alterius militis versus eundé, quia ibi
sunt diverse actiones ppter diversitates tenementorum
quavis bre unieü. Item eodem modo erunt actiones
plures ratione diversarum psonarum & rerum, ubi
plures sunt tenentes. Et de hae materia inveniri


! * quod talis," MS. Rawl. C. 160.
2 “regi,” omitted MS. Rawl. C. 160.


OF EXCEPTIONS. 267


he held in fee, when he only held for a term and such
like, or if a woman when she claims dower has had a
part of her dower, when she says that she has had no-
thing, and so she has obtained a writ of dower and such
like. Likewise through a suppression of the truth, as
if a person should say, that he has had entry through
another person than him, through whom he has had
entry. Likewise that so-and-so has demised, who has
never demised, inasmuch as he has never had seysine
thereof, or if he has omitted any step in suing out.
And on this subject there will be found something
amongst the pleas which follow the king in the thirty-
first year of [king] Henry, between Michael abbot of
Glastonbury and Roger bishop of Bath. And whereon
the said abbot said to the king, that the bishop had
had no entry except through bishop J. to whom the
prior Eustachius demised those lands, who never had
seysine of them. And the same thing may be said in
a writ concerning the warranty of a charter, where the
suer out in suing out said that he held the land which
he had not held, and so he had sued out [the writ],
which if it had been expressed, he would not have
sued it out, and such like. And when the writ is thus
faulty in itself in any part, it will be valid in no part
as regards one action: it would be otherwise if there
were several actions there by reason of several tenants.
And if one person claims by one writ the feud of one
knight in one vill and against another party in the
same writ a feud of another knight in the same vill
or in divers, although the writ may abate concerning
the feud of the one knight, nevertheless it shall stand
concerning the feud of another knight against the same,
because there are divers actions on account of the diver-
sity of tenements, although only one writ. Likewise in
the same manner there will be several actions by reason
of divers persons and things, where there are several
tenants, And on this subject there will be found a


268 DE EXCEPTIONIBUS.


poterit de term S. Hilarii anno regni regis H. octavo
in com Hereford, de Richardo filio Godfrey. Et sic vel
cadit breve omninó, vel stabit quantum ad quosdam,
et cadet quantum ad alios. Item cadit breve quantum
ad morte unius partis sive petentis sive tenetis, simul
cum actione. Item si plures sint petentes vel plures
tenentes qui sunt coheeredes et participes et unt jus
habentes, morte unius vel plurium cadit breve, sed
non actio, quia quandoque cadit breve, sed non actio,
et quadoq stat bie simul cü actione sed corrigitur
ppter erroré vel defectu, quadoq cadit bre simul cu
actione, quia ubi cadit actio ibi cadit bre. Ite quadoq
tenet bře et differtur actio, quia ubiciq tenet actio
ibi & bie, licet corrigat quadoq ppter errore. Ite
quandod cadit bře sed mutat petitio in alia actione
de eade re, sed p aliud bie, secüdü qd superi? dicit in
parte. super possessione & pprietate. De hoc autem
f 414b. qd dicit, q quadod stat breve simul eum actione, sed
corrigatur ppter errore vel defectü de errore impetran-
tis, videndū est & sciendü quod error multiplex esse
poterit, s. in personis, & in nominibus & cognominibus
personarum. Item in rebus & in locis, sicut in comi-
tatu & vilis & eorum nominibus, secundum quod
Supra f, Superius dicitur in tractatu de .seysina! Sed esto q
188b. ^ quis sumoneatur in alio con quàm in quo res est de
qua agitur, & ubi sumonitus nullü tenementum habet
nec feodum, in actione reali, licet vicec. psit duobus
com, sicut dici poterit de vic. Essex & Hereford et


! * de disseisinis," MSS. Rawl. C. 159 and 160, Reg. 9 E. xv.


- OF EXCEPTIONS. 269


case in St. Hilary's term in the eighth year of the
reign of king Henry, in the county of Hereford, con-
cerning Richard the son of Godfrey. And so either
the writ abates altogether or it will stand as far as
regards some, and it. will abate as far as regards others.
Likewise the writ abates as regards the death of one
of the parties, whether it be the plaintiff or the de-
fendant, together with the action. Likewise if there
be several claimants or several tenants who are coheirs
and coparceners and having one right, by the death of
one or more the writ abates, but not the action, be-
cause sometimes the writ abates but not the action,
and sometimes the writ stands together with the action,
but it is corrected on account of an error or defect;
sometimes the writ abates together with the action,
for where the action abates, there the writ abates.
Likewise sometimes the writ holds and the action is
deferred, for wherever the action holds there also the
writ holds, although it be corrected sometimes on
account of an error. . Likewise sometimes the writ
abates but the claim is changed into another action
concerning the same thing, but through another writ,
according to what is said above in part upon posses-
sion and: property. But concerning this which is said,
that the writ sometimes stands together with the action,
Jut is corrected on account of an error or defect from
the error of the party suing it out, we must see and
know that error may be manifold, to wit, in the persons
and in the names and in the surnames of the persons.
Likewise in the things and the places, as in the county
and the vills and their names, according to what has
been said above in the treatise concerning disseysines.
But let it be, that a person is summoned in a county
other than that in which the thing is, which is the
subject of an action, and where the party summoned
has no tenement nor feud, in a real action, although
the viscount presides over two counties, as may be said


f. 414 b.


Supra, f.


105 b.


270 DE EXCEPTIONIBUS.


nominatur tantu in brevi vic. Essex, & res petita
fuerit in comitatu Hereford, cadit bre. Si aute uterğ
com nominetur, valet. Si aute actio fuerit personalis,
videtur tamen adhue q valere debeat, licet sumonitus
iram non habeat in com expresso. Item cadit bře, si
impetratu fuerit cotra jus et regni consuetudine &
maxime cótra chartam libertatis, sicut bre q vocatur
(preecipe in capite)! per quod liber homo posset curiam
amittere. Si autem preter jus fuerit impetratum,
dum tamen fuit rationi consonum et non juri cotra-


.rium, erit sustinendu, dum tamen à rege concessu et


à consilio suo approbatu. Sed esse debet personale,
sed non debet concedi nisi de gratia speciali, nec refert
utrü magnates expresse non pbuerint assensum, dum
tamen expresse non dissentiverint, nec ostensa ratione
sufficienti quare valere no debeat, ptinet enim ad
regem ad quamlibet injuriam copescendu? remedium
competens adhibere, brevia tamen comunia inter omnes
p jure generaliter debet observari, cùm sint originalia
& actionibus originem pstent. Item cadit breve si
tenens minus teneat quàm petens petat, secus tamen
si plus teneat. Item cadit breve si tempore impetra-
tionis "nulla subfuit causa impetrandi, quia tempore
date impetrationis nulla petenti copetiit actio nec
causa petendi. ltem nec causa coquerédi, quia tüc


1“ quod vocatur preeipe," MS. | in MSS. Rawl. C. 159 and 160, has
Rawl. C. 160. been misread by the scribe of the
? “ compescendam ” is no doubt | MS. which Tottell’s editor has fol-
the proper reading. The contracted | lowed.
form of “compescend,” which occurs


OF EXCEPTIONS. 271


of the viscount of Essex and of Hereford, and the
viscount of Essex is only named in the writ, and the
thing claimed is in the county of Hereford, the writ
abates. But if both counties are named, it is valid.
But if the action should be personal, it seems however
that it ought to be valid, although the party summoned
has no land in the county expressed. Likewise the
writ abates, if it has been sued out contrary to the
right and custom of the realm, and especially contrary
to the charter of liberty, as the writ which is called
Procipe im capite, through which a free person may
lose his court. But if it be sued out beyond right,
provided it be consonant to reason and not contrary
to right, it will have to be supported, provided that
it has been granted by the king and approved by his
council. But it ought to be personal, and it ought not
to be granted except of special grace, nor does it
matter whether the magnates have expressly given
their assent, provided however that they have not
expressly dissented from it, and no sufficient reason
having been shown wherefore it ought not to be valid,
for it appertains to the king to apply a suitable remedy
to restrain every injury whatsoever, but common writs
ought to observed generally amongst all persons as of
right, since they are original and afford an origin to
actions. Likewise a writ abates, if the tenant holds
less than the claimant seeks, otherwise however if he
holds more. Likewise a writ abates if at the time of
suing it out there was no substantial cause for suing
it out, because at the time of the writ being granted
the claimant was not entitled to bring an action nor
was there any cause of claim. Likewise no cause of


1 Under the 34th clause of the | * homo amittere potest curiam
Magna Charta of king John it was | * suam." Stubbs’ Select Charters,
provided: “ Breve quod vocatur | p. 202, and Taswell-Langmead’s


* * Præcipe de czetero non fiatalicui | Constitutional History, p. 118.
* de aliquo tenemento, unde liber


Supra, f.
114.


f. 415.


212 DE EXCEPTIONIBUS.


nulla fuit disseysina nec aliqua injuria. Item nec
valet breve, quia ille, qui nune tenet, tepore impetra-
tionis non fuit in seysina de tota re petita vel aliqua
ejus pte, licet statim visum petat ci nihil teneat vel
no totum, tamen ppter hoc no amittet exceptione suam
contra bie. Et hsc vera sunt, licet post impetrationem
incipiat tenens totum possidere, quavis videatur q actio
pervenerit in eum casum à quo incipere poterit. Ite
cadit bře si cui plures c5petant actiones de eade re &
plura brevia, & una actione agere incipiat facta elec-
tione & per unum bie, si pendente actione in brevi
illo ad aliam actionem convolaverit, cadit bre posteriüs
impetratu, quia à prima non est recessu: ut de placitis
ğ sequuntur regem anno tricesimo primo, in loquela
inter Petru de Solandia! & abbatem de Ryvall in
forgiis de foresta de Glaxtoll? & hoc vert est si se
tepestive retraxerit ante judiciü, post judiciu vero non
poterit? Sed gro an quis poterit retrahere se à qui-
busdam articulis brevis & de quibusda non? Item
videndum utrü ita sint connexi, q un? sine alio ter-
minari possit vel no, & secüdü hoc pcedatur vel no.
Item cadit breve mortuo eo qui impetravit, vel depo-
sito, si forte episcopus fuerit, abbas vel prior vel
hujusmodi, sed non è contrarid, si episcopus, abbas vel
prior tenentes fuerint, quia dependet actio cum brevi
donec fuerit alius ei substitutus, maximé si actio
fuerit civilis et non pcenalis, Si autem civilis sit et
peenalis, durabit actio quantü ad poena & quantü ad


l «c Petrum de Sabaudia," MS. | cited in the treatise De Actionibus,


Reg. 9, E. xv. supra fol. 114, where the parties are
? «de foresta de Glan,” Reg. 9, | described as Abbas de Ryvall, and
E. xv. Petrus de Sabaudia ; see Introduc-


3*'ühe same case seems to be | tion.


OF EXCEPTIONS. 273


complaining, because at that time there was no dissey-
sine nor other injury. Likewise the writ is not valid,
because he, who now is tenant, was not in seysine of
the whole thing claimed, or of any part of it, at the
time of the suing out, although he should immediately
claim a view, when he holds nothing or not the whole
thing, nevertheless on that account he shall not lose his
exception against the writ. And these things are
true, although after the suing out the tenant should
begin to possess the whole, although it may appear
that the action has arrived at a stage from which it
may commence. Likewise the writ abates, if any per-
son is entitled to several actions concerning the same
thing and to several writs, and he begins to proceed
by one action having made a choice and through one
writ, if pending the action upon that writ he has
betaken himself to another action, the writ last sued
out abates, because he has not withdrawn from the
first, as in the pleas which follow the king in the
thirty-first year in the trial between Petrus de Solandia
and the abbot of Ryvaulx, in forges belonging to the
Forest of Glaxtoll, and this is true, if he has with-


drawn himself seasonably before the judgment, but.


after the judgment he will not be able. But I ask if
a person can withdraw himself from some of the arti-
cles of the writ, and from some not? Likewise it is
to be seen whether they are so connected that one
cannot be determined without the other, or not so, and
aecording to this let the proceedings go on or not.
Likewise the writ abates, if he, who has sued it out,
has died, or has been deposed, if perchance he be a
bishop, an abbot, or a prior, or such-like, but not con-
versely, if a bishop or abbot or prior be the tenant,
because the action together with the writ is pending
until another be substituted for him, especially if ihe
action be civil and not penal. But if it be civil and
penal, the action will continue as regards the penalty
R 2657. S


f. 415.


Supra, f.
113 b.


274 DE EXCEPTIONIBUS.


restitutionem quādiu depositus vixerit. Si autē depo-
situs mortuus faerit vel ante depositionem, extinguitur
poena cum psona, sed durabit in psona substituti quoad
restitutionem, sed tamen p aliud bre. Item cadit bie,
sed non actio, p mortem tenentis in actione psonali sive
mortuus fuerit morte civili vel naturali, dum tamen p
fraudem se non dimiserit post impetrationem, si mortuus
fuerit morte civili. Item cadit bre mortuo eo; qui man-
davit vel peepit re integra. Item si quis p eade re duo
brevia impetraverit, et utrog simul et semel agere incepit
tam super jure qm super possessione, & differtur actio
super ipso jure, & pendet bie donec discussum fuerit
super possessione: ut de term S. Trinitatis añ regis
Hent decimoquarto in com Surf de priore de Novo
Loco, et hzc sive brevia impetrata fuerint ab uno vel
duobus vel pluribus. Idem erit,si mulier dotem petat
p bře de dote alqm pte & alius petat totum in
actione pprietatis, suspenditur actio dotis donec de
pprietate constiterit. Item si duo unum implacita-
verint de una et eadem re, una et eadem actione et
eodem brevi, ille pfertur qui prius incepit agere, et
aliud bre simul cum actione in suspenso remanebit,
sive hoc sit in eade curia sive in diversis exceptis
curiis dñi regis, ubi nulla attenditur prioritas propter
majoritatem et dignitatem suam, et ubi fallit regula,
Qui prius incepit agere, ille aliis pferatur, ut supra
de actionibus. Item cadit bre, ubi quis clamat tenere


1 aliqm parte” omitted, MS. Rawl. C. 160; “aliquam partem,"
MS. Rawl. C. 159. i


OF EXCEPTIONS. 275


and as regards the restitution as long as the deposed
person shall live. But if the deposed person should die,
or he should die defore deposition, the penalty is ex-
tinguished with his person, but [the action] shall con-
tinue in the person of his substitute as regards resti-
tution, nevertheless however through another writ.
Likewise the writ abates, but not the action, through
the death of the tenant in a personal action, whether
he be dead by a civil or by a natural death, provided
however that he has not fraudulently demised himself
after the writ has been sued out, if he is dead by a
civil death. Likewise the writ abates when he is dead,
who sent it or enjoined it when the matter was fresh.
Likewise if any one has sued out two writs for the
same thing, and has begun to proceed with both together
and at the same time as well upon the right as upon
the possession, and the action upon the right [is de-
ferred and the writ is suspended until it has been set-
tled concerning the possession, as in Holy Trinity term
in the fourteenth year of the reign of king Henry in
the county of Surrey, concerning the prior of New
Place, and these whether the writs have been sued out
by one person or by two or by three. The same will
happen, if a woman claims dower by a writ of dower
from some part and another claims the whole in an
action for the property, the action for dower is sus-
pended until the action for the property is settled.
Likewise if two persons have impleaded one person con-
cerning one and the same thing by one and the same
action and with the same writ, he is preferred who
began first to proceed, and the other writ together with
the action will remain suspended, whether this be in
ihe same court or in different courts, except the courts
of the lord the king, where no priority is attended to
on account of their superiority and dignity, and where
the tule fails, “he who first began to proceed, let him be


* preferred to the others,” as above concerning actions.
s 2


276 DE EXCEPTIONIBUS.


de rege, et alius ab alio quàm de rege. Item eodem
modo si duo tenere clamaverint de rege p certum
servitium, quorum unus p minus servitium et alius
p majus bře illus cadit, qui per minus servi-
tium, ppter utilitatem regis. Item cadit bře, si quis
impetraverit super certa re et certa actione, & post-
modum se retraxerit & in alio judicio velit agere
de eodem. Item qusdam exceptio. contra bie sub-
stantiam capit ex tempore. Sunt autem quzdam
brevia limitata infra certa tempora, sicut sunt actiones
ultra quas non extenditur bře non magis quàm actio
ppter defectum pbationis, secundum q actio fuerit pdita
super possessione vel super pprietate, sicut assisa novae
disseysinze, mortis antecessoris, assisa de utrum, bre de
ingressu, aut breve de recto ut supra. ltem cadit
breve, ut si quis per narrationem in judicio factam
recesserit de brevi suo, excedendo virtutem & naturam
brevis, ut si agatur in causa possessionis per bie de
consanguinitate, & petens in narratione sua mentione
fecerit de ipso jure, vel si unum ore petat, & per bie
diversum nisi ita sit cùm dicat diversum q dicat q
tantudem valet. Et fere omnes exceptiones que cope-
tunt alieui, licet vel contra aliquem, connumerari pote-
runt inter exceptiones contra breve, quia cùm termina-
tur actio finitur bre, & ubi cadit actio cadit & bie, &
ubi differtur actio vel suspenditur vel mutatur, ita &
bre. Cùm autem plures competant exceptiones contra |
bře, non possunt (secundum quosdam) proponi tem-
poribus diversis, sed in potestate judicis erit arctandi
tenentem q simul et semel uno die pponat omnes


OF EXCEPTIONS. 277


Likewise a writ abates where a person claims to hold
from the king, and another from a different person from
the king. Likewise, in the same way, if two claim to
hold from the king for a certain service, of which one
claims by a less service and the other by a greater
service, the writ abates of the person, who claims by a
less service, on account of the king’s interest. Like-
wise a writ abates, if a person has sued it out upon a
certain thing and in a certain action, and has afterwards
withdrawn himself, and wishes in another court to proceed
for the same thing. Likewise a certain exception against
a writ takes substance extemporaneously. There are
however certain writs limited within certain times, as
there are actions beyond which a writ does not extend any
more than an action on account of a defect of proof, ac-
cording as the action has been brought concerning the
possession or concerning the property, as an assise of novel
disseysine, of mortdancester, an assise of Utrum, a writ
of entry, or a writ of right as above. Likewise a writ
abates,as if any one in the pleadings argued in court
has receded from his writ, by exceeding the virtue and
nature of the writ, as if the proceeding be in a cause
of possession through a writ of cosinage, and the claim-
ant in his pleadings has made mention of his right of
property, or if he claims one thing orally and a dif-
ferent thing by his writ, unless it be that when he
says a different thing he says what is equivalent.
And almost all exceptions to which a person is entitled,
although against a person, may be enumerated amongst
the exceptions against the writ, because when the
action is terminated the writ is finished, and when the
action abates the writ also abates, and where the action
is deferred or is suspended or is changed, the writ is so
likewise. But when several exceptions are available
against a writ, they cannot (according to some) be pro-
pounded at different times, but it is in the power of
the judge to confine the tenant that he should pro-


278 DE EXCEPTIONIBUS.


£415. exceptiones competentes contra breve, & sie preecludi
poterit via pponendi ulterius exceptiones contra breve.
Sed cùm tenens unam pposuerit q rem petitam tota
non tenuerit, sed alius, illa terminata ulterius non
redibit ad consimilem, ut infra dicetur plenius. Et
notandum q cùm breve éeciderit per defectum & erro-
rem, si corrigatur, consimile erit correctum & eadem
erit actio que prius & ide bře sed correctu, licet aliud
pgamenü et aliud ineaustum, & ideo nec mutari debet
narratio prius facta in judicio, nec attornatus qui
prius! fuerit, chm eadem sit hine inde actio & breve
idem.


Car. XVIII.


ET. Cum autem nihil sit quod excipi possit contra bre,
PE tune videndü si sit exceptio quee competat tenenti ex


ceptioex persona, ipsius petentis, quod omnino petere non possit,
Potens, Vel nō nisi post tempus omnino, ut si petens servus
ane san fuerit vel bastardus vel seculo mortuus, sicut ille qui
toria, quo. habitii religionis assumpsit. Ité ppter defectum scientise,
E ut si furiosus & nō sanæ mentis, Itë ppter defectum
mulisra. Sensuum, ut si fuerit naturaliter surdus vel mutus.
tionibus. Item ppter morbum incurabilé, ut si leprosus fuerit
&. à comunione hominum separatus. Ité q ei non
competat actio, cám sit amotibilis, sicut monachus vel
canonicus non ppetuus. Item ppter feloniam ppriam
vel antecessorum. Item si non nisi post tépus, quia


minor infra ætatem agere no potest in causa pprietatis,


! “qui prius factus fuerit," MSS. Rawl. C. 159 and 160, Reg. 9 E. xv.


OF EXCEPTIONS. 279


pound at the same time and together on one day all
the exceptions available against the writ, and so the ¢, 415 p.
way for propounding further exceptions against the writ
may be barred. But when the tenant has propounded
one exception that he does not hold all the thing
claimed, but another person, upon that being termi-
nated he shall not return to a similar exception, as
will be explained below more fully. And it is to be
noted that when the writ has abated through a defect
and an error, if it be corrected, the corrected writ will
. be of a similar character, and it will be the same action
as before, and the same writ but corrected, although a
different parchment and a different ink, and therefore
pleadings already made in court ought not to be changed,
nor the attorney who was previously appointed, since
the action is the same on either side, and the writ the
same.


CHAPTER XVIII.


But when there is no exception to be raised against 1.
the writ, then we must see if there be an exception, x
that is available to the tenant against the person of available
the claimant himself, that he cannot be a claimant at Jim
all or not until after a certain time, as if the claimant MENS a
be a serf or a bastard, or dead to the world, as a per- whereof
son who has assumed a religious habit. Likewise on = a
account of defect of knowledge, as if he be mad or of and ano-
unsound mind. Likewise on account of defect of the a
senses, as if he be naturally deaf or dumb, Likewise in many
on account of an incurable disease, as if he be a leper "?5*
and separated from all communion with mankind.
Likewise because he is not entitled to bring an action,
as he is removable, as a monk or a canon not perpetual,
Likewise on account of his own felony or that of his
ancestors. Likewise if not until after a certain time,


because a minor cannot bring an action in a cause of


Infra, fol.
497 b.


280 DE EXCEPTIONIBUS.


licet agere possit in causa possessionis, & hoc ppter
defectum scientie, cùm non multum distet à furioso,
nec furiosus à bruto. Item ppter dubium rei eventum,
ut si quis fuerit in statu dubio dignitatis vel corporis,
& sie in pendenti donec quid fiat vel non fiat: ut si
quis appellatus sit de vita & mébris in causa crimi-
nali, in civili causa agere no potest antequam defendit
se in criminali, non magis quàm tenens tenetur re-
spondere in cosimili dignitates! ut si abbas vel prior
vel alius à dignitate depositus, & ad tuitione status
sui ad superioré appellaverit, quia si cum talibus
ageretur vel ipsi agerent contra alios, sic possent
judicia esse delusoria, cüm à tali casu omnia possent
revocari Item competit exceptio tenenti ex psona
petentis ppter defectü nationis, ut si petens copula-
verit se? inimicis dii regis, ut si fuerit ad fidem dii
regis Francie, salte donec terre & regna comunia
extiterint, actio talibus denegatur. Item copetit tenenti
exceptio ppter lepram anims petentis, ut si fuerit
excomunieatus nominatim, sed non in genere, quia
sicut lepra esse poterit in corpore ita et in anima, &
sicut leproso interdicitur comunio gentium, sic et ex-
comunicato, & q plus est, omnis actus legitimus. Item
copetit tenenti exceptio non tantü ex psona petentis,
sed ratione coheredti & pticipt, sine quibus agere no
possit, quia tantunde juris habent quanti ille qui
petit, vel aliüde: quia ille qui petit nihil juris habet


“in consimili dignitate," MS. | Rawl. C. 160 ; ^ copulaverit se ini-
Rawl. C. 159 and 160. * micis," MS. Reg. 9 E. xv.
2 “ complacitaverit inimicis," MS.


OF EXCEPTIONS. 281


property whilst under age, although he may bring an
action in a cause of possession, and this on account of a
defect of knowledge, since he does not differ much from
a madman, nor a madman from a brute. Likewise on
account of the doubtful result of a matter, as if a person
should be in a doubtful state of dignity or of personalty,
and so be in a pending state until a certain thing be
done or be not done: as if a person has been charged
in a criminal cause with an offence touching life or
members, he cannot proceed in a civil cause until he
has cleared himself in the criminal cause, no more
than a tenant is bound to answer in a similar state of
dignity, as if an abbot or prior or any other person
has been deposed from a dignity, and has appealed to
-a superior for the protection of his status, because
if actions were brought against such persons or they
were to bring actions against others, the judgments
might be illusory, since everything might be revoked
by such an accident. | Likewise an exception is avail-
able to the tenant against’ the person of the claimant
on account of a defect of nationality, as if the
claimant has become an accomplice with the enemies
of the lord the king, as if he be of fealty to the lord
-the king of France, at least until the lands and the
realms have become common, an action is denied to
such persons. Likewise the tenant is entitled to an
exception against the leprosy of the soul of the claimant,
as if he has been excommunicated by name, but not
generally : for as leprosy may exist in the body, so it
may exist in the soul; and as a leper is interdicted from
all communion with mankind, so likewise is an excom-
municated person, and what is more, he is interdicted
from every legal act. Likewise a tenant is entitled to
an exception not only against the person of the claimant,
but in respect of coheirs and coparceners, without whom
he cannot bring an action, because they have as much
right as he has who claims; or for another reason, be-


f. 416,


2.
Exceptio
contra
petentem
eX persona
petentis.


282 DE EXCEPTIONIBUS.


sed ali?, vel cùm alius plus juris habeat, & sic quod
petens sine aliis agere non potest vel omnind non.
Item competit tenenti exceptio ratione petentis vel
ratione adjuneti, ut si vir agere velit de re uxoria
sine uxore, et quo casu non magis audietur qm uxor
sine viro, sed non eadit breve si vir sine uxore, quia
vocare poterit uxorem ad warranti, sed non è con-
trarió. Ite cdpetit exceptio tenéti cotra petente ratione
superioris Gm res tangit in aliquo, sieut sunt priores
ppetui & quando amotibiles sine abbate vel priore,
clerici et canonici? sine episcopo et patrono. Ité
fratres alicujus domus: sine curatore domus, & aliquado
nec sanctimoniales? sive sorores sicut sorores de Bock-
land sine priore hospitalis, et quo casu vocadi sunt
curatores ad sequēdū, sine quibus fratres et sorores se-
qui non poterüt. Exceptione vero servitutis pposita
cotra petente, satis ppendi poterit quid fieri oporteat
tà in causa possessionis qm pprietatis p ea, d superius
dicta sut in tractatu de assisa novse disseysine, ubi
respodetur cotra assisam.


Ite copetit exceptio tenéti cotra petété ex psona
ipsius petentis peremptoria, ut excludat eum ab actione
imperpetuü, eo quód nihil juris habeat, cùm sit bas-
tardus, & aliquando opponitur in modü exceptionis,
secundü q hie dieitur, et cùm pponatur -à tenente,
quandoi cadit loeo actionis quasi pponitur? à petente


l* ye] canonici,” MS. Rawl. C. | * quasi proposita," MS. Rawl. C.


160. 160 ; “ quandoque cedit loco actionis
? «aliquando sanctimoniales sive | * quum proponatur, MS. Rawl.
** sorores," MS. Rawl. C. 159. C. 159.


3 * quandoque cadit loco actionis


OF EXCEPTIONS. 283


cause he who claims has no right but another has, or
when another has more right, and so that the claimant
cannot bring an action without the others, or not at
all. Likewise the tenant is entitled to an exception
with regard to the claimant or with regard to an
adjoint person, as if a husband should wish to bring f. 416.
an -action concerning a matter of his wife's with-
out his wife, and in which case he shall not be heard
any more than his wife without her husband; but the
writ does not abate, if the husband should proceed
without his wife, because he may call his wife to war-
rant, but not the converse. Likewise an exception is
available to a tenant against a claimant by reason of
a superior lord whom the matter concerns in some
respects, such as are priors perpetual and sometimes
removable without an abbot or prior, clerks and canons
without a bishop and patron. Likewise brethren of
any religious house without the curator of the house,
and sometimes devout women or sisters such as the
sisterhood of Bockland without the prior of the Hos-
pital, and in which case the curators are to be called
to sue, without. whom the brethren and the sisterhood
cannot sue. But upon an exception of serfdom having
been propounded against the claimant, it can be suffi-
ciently ascertained what ought to be done as well in
a cause of possession as in a cause of property, through
what has been said above in the treatise concerning
an assise of novel disseysine, where an answer is made
against the assise.


Likewise the tenant is entitled to raise a peremptory ə.
exception against the claimant upon the personal status MER
of the claimant, so as to exclude him in perpetuity against the
from bringing an action, on the ground that he has no md
right, since he is a bastard, and it is sometimes objected personal
in the manner of an exception, according to what is iins
here said, and when it is propounded by a tenant, it claimant.


sometimes abates in the place of the action as if it


284 DE EXCEPTIONIBUS.


cotra tenente, ut ita à possessione amoveatur. Et unde
videndü inprimis qualiter opponi debeat Ge. & cui, &
â quo & in qua actione, & qualiter cotra exceptione
respodeatur alii, cám fuerit opposita. Ité qualiter pbari
debeat, et ubi opponi, et ubi terminari, & ad dm sequi
ptineat, & q sit officiü' judicis ecclesiastici, & quod
sit officiu secularis. Item quis legitimus diei debeat
et quis bastardus, quoad successione secundü legé et
cosuetudiné Anglie. Ite quid juris si uteri bastardus,
tam petens qm petens. Ite quid juris si, cám legiti-
matio pbata fuerit, moriatur ille qui pbaverit anteqm
ad curia regia” pvenerit cū pbatioe.


Cap. XIX.


1: Qualiter opponi debeat bastardia inprimis vidédum.

De rep = Proponi quidé solet aliquando cum adjectione cause
tardie in. quare bastardus sit, et quandoque sine causa, sed
SE THEE quoniam ubi causa non adjicitur sub tali responsione
quod nulla poterit esse obscuritas & incertitudo, quia cüm sciri
oe ‘non poterit ad quod forum pertinere debeat cognitio,
sed queli- non refert utrum quis omninó non respondeat vel
per causam obscure: ut si dicat tenens simpliciter quod petens
certam. nihil juris habet in re petita. quia bastardus est, &
f416b. paratus est probare bastardiam, ubi et quando debue-
rit, si phibitio ex tali pbatione & resposione statim
mittatur ad curiam Christianitatis, ita poterit quidem

phatio dlibet indifferent fieri in curia Christianitatis,


q in quibusdà cotraria est legi & cosuetudini Anglis?


1 * Anglicanam," MS. Reg. 9. E. 3 * Anglicane," MS. Rawl.-C.
xv. 160 et Reg. 9. E. xv. :
2 “ regiam " omitted, Rawl. C. 160. :


OF EXCEPTIONS. 285


were propounded by the claimant against the tenant, so
that he may be removed from the possession. And hence
it is to be seen in the first place in what way it ought
to be objected, &c., and to whom,.and by whom, and in
what action, and how an answer is to be made to another
person against the exception, when it has. been raised.
Likewise how it ought to be proved and when to be
objected to, and when to be determined, and to whom
it pertains to sue, and what is the office of the judge
ecclesiastical, and what is the office of the secular
judge. Likewise who ought to be called legitimate,
and who a bastard, as regards succession according to
the law and custom of England. Likewise what is the
right when each is a bastard, the claimant as well as
the tenant. Likewise what is the right, if, when legi-
timation has been proved, he shall have died, who bas
proved it, before he has arrived at the court of the
king with the proof.


CHAPTER XIX.


We must first see in what way bastardy is to be


F3
Of the ex-


objected. It is usually propounded with the addition ception of


of a cause wherefore he is a bastard, and sometimes
without a cause, but since where a cause is not added
there may be under such an answer obscurity and un-
certainty, because when it cannot be known to what


bastardy in
cases of
bastardy,
because no
bastardy is
simple,
but each


forum the cognisance ought to belong, it does not matter has its
whether a pèrson answers not at all or obscurely : as if certain


the tenant shall say simply that the claimant has no
right to the thing, because he is a bastard, and he is
prepared to prove bastardy, where and when he ought
to do so, if a prohibition upon such a proof and answer
should be immediately sent to the court of Christianity,
a proof indeed might so be made indifferently in the
court of Christianity, which in some cases is contrary
to the law and custom of England, which ought not to


cause.


f. 416 b.


286 DE EXCEPTIONIBUS.


q esse non debet, cum nihil aliud sit sub tali obscuri-
tate transmittere inquisitionem de bastardia faciendā
ad curiā Christianitatis, qm venire cotra legem &
cósuetudinem Anglia! Ad talem igitur errorem tol-
lendü, necesse est causam -addiscere,? ut si dicat tenens,
Frater, nihil juris? habes in tra petita quia bastard?
es, quia pater tuus nügm desposavit matrem tua, talis
cognitio bastardiz recte ptinet ad judicem ecclesiasticü,
ex quo peise dedietü est matrimoniü, quia nō ptinet
ad judicem secularem discussio utrü sit ibi matrimoniü
vel no, cū ipse cui objicitur dicat cotrariü. Idem erit
si dicat, Frater, nihil juris habes in ira illa, licet matri-
moniü intervenerit, quia inter patrem tui & matre
tua cotractü fuit matrimoniü illegitimü, ex quo prius
cotraxit cü quada, d vixit tempore quado cotraxit cum
matre tua. Est igitur ad curia Christianitatis inquisi-
tio in hoe transmittenda, quia ad judicem secularem
no ptinet discussio quis eorü &* d illaru sit legitima
uxor & dà no. Ite opponi poterit bastardia, ci adjec-
tione causc ut supra, sed no erit ad curiam Christi-
anitatis inquisitio demadanda, quia nihil ptinet ad
judicem ecclesiasticü cognoscere de prioritate vel pos-
terioritate nativitatis ejus cui opponitur bastardia, cü
sposalia vel matrimoniü hine inde concessa sint, no
magis qm si quis ita diceret, Frater, nihil juris habes
. in terra illa, & si jus haberes petere non potes, quia
petis de tempore regis Hent senis, vel ulterius q
omnem excludit actionem, vel si dicat tenens sic:


Frater, nihil juris habes in ira petita quia bastardus,


! Anglieanam, MS. Rawl. C. 160 3 « juris," omitted, MS. Rawl. C.
et Reg. 9 E. xv. EUG

? adjicere," MSS. Rawl. C.159 4 “quis eorum et,” omitted, MSS.
and 160, Rawl, C. 159 and 160,


OF EXCEPTIONS. 287


be, since to transmit an inquest to determine bastardy
under such obscurity to the court of Christianity would
be nothing else, than to go against the law and custom
of England. To remove therefore such an error it is
necessary to add a cause, as if the tenant should say,
“ Brother, thou hast no right to the land claimed be-
“ cause thou art a bastard, because thy father never
espoused thy mother," such a cognisance of bastardy
rightly belongs to an ecclesiastical judge, since a mar-
riage has been precisely denied, because it does not
belong to the secular judge to determine whether there
has been there a marriage or not, when he to whom the
objection has been raised asserts the contrary. It will
be the same as if he said, * Brother, thou hast no right
* to that land, although a marriage has intervened,
* because an illegal marriage was contracted between
* thy father and thy mother, since he had previously
* contracted a marriage with a certain woman, wbo was
* alive at the time, when he contracted à marriage with
- * thy mother" An inquest is therefore to be trans-
mitted to the court of Christianity in this matter,
because it does not belong to the secular court to
decide, which of them is the legitimate wife and which
not. Likewise bastardy may be objected, with the
addition of the cause as above, but the inquest will
not have to be committed to the court of Christianity,
because it does not pertain to the ecclesiastical judge
to take cognisance concerning the priority or poste-
riority of the birth of him to whom bastardy is ob-
jected, when espousals or matrimony have been con-
ceded on either side, no more than if a person should
say thus, “Brother, thou hast no right to that land,
* and if thou hast a right, thou canst not claim it, be-
* cause thou claimest from the time of the old king
* Henry, or further back, which excludes any action,”
or if the tenant should say thus, “Brother, thou hast

* no right to the land claimed by thee, because thou


[27


Math.
Paris,
Chronica
Majora.

23 Jan.
A.D. 1236.


f. 417.


288 DE EXCEPTIONIBUS.


quia natus fuisti p tantum temp? ante sponsalia vel
matrimoniü contraetü inter patre tuum & matre tuam.
Et quia hine inde conceditur matrimonium, bene poterit
rex in curia sua inquirere sine alicujus pjudicio utrü
talis, cui objiciatur, natus sit ante matrimoniü vel post,
sieut inquirere poterit ia aliis casib? utrü natus in
tempore regis H. vel regis J., & maxime in defectu
episcoporü, quia cotrarii sunt legibus & consuetudini-
bus Anglie, nec etiam magis injuriosum est quàm si
rex in placito dotis in curia sua fieri faciat inquisi-
tione utrum mulier dotem petens dotata sit ad ostium
ecclesie vel alibi vel utrum sponsalia vel matrimonium
publieum sit vel clandestinum. Et cüm in curia
domini regis anno regni sui vicesimo in crastino saneti
Vincentii apud Merton coram venerabili parte? tunc
Cantuat archiepiscopo, & coram suffraganeis suis omni-
bus, & eoram majore parte comitum & baroü Anglie
tune & ibidem existentium p coronatione regis &
reginz, pro qua omnes vocati fuerunt, generaliter trac-
tatum esset de communi utilitate totius regni super
pluribus articulis regem & veginam tangentibus, inter
alia tractatum esset de hujusmodi objectione bastardise,
utrü vz. quis natus ante sponsalia & matrimonium
haberi possit p legitimo sicut ille qui post matri--
monium natus fuit. Ad quod omnes episcopi respo-
derüt q omnes illi qui nati fuerunt ante sposalia vel
matrimonium, ita erunt legitimi sicut illi, qui nati
erunt post matrimonium, quoad Dim Det et quoad
ecclesia, nec voluerunt nec potuerüt sine pjudicio eccle-
siasticee dignitatis respodere ad bie super hujusmodi
inquisitione facienda de bastardia sic objecta, rescribere


1“ Anglieanis," MSS. Rawl. C. 2 “natre E.," MSS. Rawl. C. 159
160, et Reg. 9 E. xv. et 160.


OF EXCEPTIONS. 289
“ art a bastard, because thou wast born so long a time
“ before that espousals or a marriage was contracted
“ between thy father and thy mother.” And inasmuch
as a marriage is conceded on either side, the king may
well inquire in his court without prejudice to any one
whether so-and-so, against whom the objection is raised,
was born before matrimony or afterwards, as he may
inquire in other cases whether he was born in the time
of king Henry or of king John, and especially in the
default of bishops, because they are opposed to the laws


and customs of England: nor is it more against right


than if the king in a suit for dower in his court should
cause an inquest to be held, whether the woman claim-
ing dower was endowed at the church door or elsewhere,
or whether the espousals or marriage was publie or
clandestine. And when in the court of the lord the
king in the twentieth year of his reign, on the morrow
of St. Vincent's day at Merton, in the presence of the
venerable father Edmund the then archbishop of Canter-
bury and in the presence of all his suffragans and in the
presence of the greater part of the counts and barons of
England then and there present for the coronation of
the king and of the queen, for which all had been sum-
moned, it was generally treated of matters concerning
the common interest of the whole kingdom upon several
articles touching the king and the queen, it was amongst
other things treated of bastardy, to wit, whether a per-
son born before espousals and matrimony could be held
to be legitimate as he who was born after matrimony.
To which all the bishops answered that all who were
born before espousals or matrimony were as legitimate
as those who were born after matrimony as regarded the
Lord God, and as regarded the Church, nor were they
willing or able without prejudice to the ecclesiastical
dignity to make answer to a writ upon an inquest of
that kind to be made upon an objection of bastardy so


raised, (namely) to write back to the lord the king, to


R 2657. io


f. 417.


2.


De mitten- anno eodem
do ad curi-


290


DE EXCEPTIONIBUS.


dfio regi, vz. utrü ante vel post, quia hoc esset in
pjudicia S. Ecclesiæ, ut dicebat, sed rogabant rege et
magnates q ad hoe consensum pberent, q nati ante
matrimoniü quoad omnia legitimi esse possent, sicut
illi qui post, et omnes comites et baron, quotquot
fuerüt, responderunt una voce q noluerunt leges Anglie
mutare, Q usi ad tépus illud usitate fuerunt & appro-


batee.


Postea verd die Jovis pximé post festum S. Dionisii


1 eoram ipso dño rege & subscriptis, con-


am Chris- vocato consilio pvisum fuit & concessum ab ipso dio


tianitatis
utrum ant
vel post
matrimo-
nium con-
stitutio


concessa et


approbata


e


rege coram venerabili patre E. Cantuariensis archiepi-


scopo, R. Cycestt episcopo düi regis cacellario, R.
Dunoli episcopo, H. Eliens. episcopo, episcopo Norwic.,
episcopo Londofi, episcopo Bathon, episcopo Exon, epi-


scopo Karleol episcopo Hereford et episcopo Roffeñ.


coram rege Tte. corà baronibus subscriptis:? Richardo com Corubize
¿et Petro? G. eom Marr, J. com Line, W. com Warha,*
J. com Cest#, W. com Ferr, T. com Warr, H. com Kac.
H. de Ver? com Oxon, H. com Hereford, Simo de
Monte Forte com Leic.® Ite cora baronibus subscriptis,
Radulpho de Tony, Philippo de Albinaco, R. filio
Michaelis, H. filio Machute, J. Marescalt, G. de Lucy,
R. de Argento, H. dispensatore, W. de Say, W. Bar-
dolph, W. de Cantelupo seniore & W. juniore, R.
Sylkard, W. de Bromich,* A. de S. Amando, B. Curiall,?.


et consilio
suo clerici:
et laicis.


1“anno eodem," according to
the Tower series of the Placita
coram Rege, this constitution had
been enacted in the eighteenth year
of the reign of king Henry. See
Introduction.

?* coram omnibus subscriptis,"
MS. Rawl. C. 159; “coram comi-
* tibus subscriptis," MS. Reg. 9
E. xv.

3 * et Petro," this is an evident
miswriting for *et Pietav.," which


is the reading of MS. Rawl. C. 160.
Gilbert was the single Christian
name of the earl Marshall, who was
appointed marshall on June 11
1234, in succession to his brother
Richard.

* * com Warrenn.,” MS. id.

5 «H. de Veer,” MS. id.

ë «com, TLeycestrio," MS. id.
See Introduction.

7 * Godefroi de Bromich,” MS. id

3 « Bertin de Curiel,” id.


OF EXCEPTIONS. 291


wit, “whether before or after,’ because this would be

to the prejudice of Holy Church, as they said, but they

requested the king and the magnates that they should

give their consent to this, that children born before

matrimony might be legitimate in all respects as chil-

dren born after it, and all the counts and the barons, as

many as were there, answered with one voice that they

were unwilling to change the laws of England, which up

to that time had been in use and approved.

But afterwards on Thursday next after the festival of 2.

St. Denys in the same year, in the presence of the lord pn
on con-

the king and the undersigned, a council having been cerning

Lor di it was provided and conceded by the lord the enn

king himself in the presence of the venerable father court of

Edmond archbishop of Canterbury, Ralph bishop of age

Chichester the chancellor of the lord the king, Richard question

bishop of Durham, Hugh bishop of Ely, the sbishon of abe

Norwich, the bishop of London, the bishop of Bath, the after ma;

bishop of Exeter, the bishop of Carlisle, the bishop of pees

Hereford, and the bishop of Rochester. Likewise in 9nd ap-

the presence of the undersigned earls, Richard earl of den

Cornwall and Poitiers, Gilbert earl Marshall, John earl ae

of Lincoln, William earl of Warren, John earl of Chester, and his

William earl of Ferrars, Thomas earl of Warwick, PUE ONE

Hubert earl of Kent, Hugh de Vere, earl of Oxford, laics,

Humphrey earl of p Simon de Montfort, earl

of Leicester. Likewise in the presence of the under-

signed barons, Ralph de Tony, Philip de Albinaco,

Richard Fitz-Michael, Henry Fitz-Machute, John

Mareschal, Geoffrey de Lucy, Reginald de Argenton,

Hugh Despenser, William de Say, William Bardolf,

William de Cantilupe senior, and William junior,

Richard Sylkard, William de Bromich, Almeric de 8.

Amando, Bertram Curiall, Engelard de Syngoy, Robert


292 DE EX CEPTIONIBUS.


E. de Syngoy, R. de Mussengoy,! B. de Pancy, G. de
Lucy, R. filio Hug. & & aliis qm pluribus tune ibide
psentibus, q de estero cùm bastardia objecta fuerit
alicui de tali causa in curia diii regis q bastardus sit,
& ideo bastardus quia natus ante sponsalia vel matri-
moniü cótractum inter patrem sua & matre suam,
mittatur loquela ad ordinariü loci & fiat inquisitio p
heee verba, utrü videlicet talis natus fuerit ante spo-
salia sive matrimonium vel post, & rescribat ordinarius
p eadé verba domino regi sine aliqua cavellatione. Et
in inquisitione illa facienda cesset omnis appellatio,
sicut in omni alia inquisitione de bastardia, de qua
inquisitio demadada fuerit alicui ordinario facieda, &
maxime q nulla fiat appellatio extra regnü, si de
necessitate cotingat appellari, & tic pceptum fuit q
ita teneretur & observetur in futuro ta de illis qm
de quibus judiciū extunc faciendü esset in curia düi
regis, tam de placitis inceptis qm incipiendis, cüm
hujusmodi bastardia objiciatur ex tali causa. Et q
assisa mortis antecessoris pcessit in curia dñi regis
super hujusmodi bastardia infra setate petentiü, & ubi
jurata dixit q no fuerunt heredes ppinquiores, quia
nati fuerunt in adulterio ante matrimoniü: pbatur in
itinere M. de Pateshull in com Cant, anno regis H.
filii J. undecimo, assisa mortis antecessoris, si Henricus


! * R. de Mushegros," MS. Rawl. ? * Daldewyno de Pansy,” id.
C. 160.


OF EXCEPTIONS. 293


de Mussengoy, Baldwin de Pancy, Geoffrey de Lucy,
Richard Fitz Hugh, and several others then present,
that henceforth when bastardy has been objected to any
one for such a cause in the court of the lord the king,
that he is a bastard, and a bastard for this reason be-
cause he was born before espousals and before mar-
riage was contracted between his father and his mother,
the trial should be committed to the ordinary of the
place and an inquest be held under these words, whether
forsooth so-and-so was born before espousals and mar-
riage or afterwards, and let the ordinary report under
the same words to the lord the king without any cavil.
And in holding that inquest let all appeal cease, as in
every other inquest concerning bastardy, concerning
which it has been committed to any ordinary to hold
an inquest, and especially that no appeal be made out
of the kingdom, if of necessity there has happened to be
an appeal, and then it was enjoined that it should be
so held and observed in future as well in those matters
concerning which judgment was then to be given in the
court of the lord the king as concerning suits already
commenced as well as those to be commenced, when
bastardy of this kind is objected for such a cause.
And that an assise of mortdancester proceeded in the
court of the lord the king upon bastardy of this kind
of claimants under age, and where a jury said that
they were not the nearest heirs, because they were born
in adultery before marriage, is proved in the iter of
Martin de Pateshull in the county of Kent in the
eleventh year of the reign of Henry the son of John,
an assise of mortdancester, if Henry Pamsore in the


Laa‘ a nnn EEE


1 It is probable that this case, asit | day after 9th October 1234 regu-
isnot cited in the best manuscripts,is | lated the issue to be sent to the
an interpolation. Bracton, however, | court of the ordinary, whenever bas-
may have cited itin evidence of the | tardy was alleged by reason of the
practice of the Curia Regis before child having been born before the
the king in a council held on Thurs- | marriage of its parents,


f. 417 b.


294 DE EXCEPTIONIBUS.


Pamsore decefi Norlington.  Rationib^ igitur supra-
dictis & ex tali comuni cdsensu, in electioe diii regis
esse poterit utrü velit iquisitione illaà facieda dema-
dare ordinariis vel illà facere in cuf sua, quia si illa
in cuf sua fecef, cü exceptio ei data fuerit et apta et
ex cert causa, no debet resposio esse obscura, sed sicut
opponit exceptio q secudü lege et cosuetudine Angt
bastard? est, eo quód natus ante sponsalia vel matrimo-
niü, & sic ex tali causa replicare debet petens et dicere
q legitimus est ex causa contraria, quia natus est post
sponsalia vel matrimoniü, & sic contradicere intentioni
tenentis, quia non contradicit, sed dicit simpliciter q legi-
timus sit & paratus pbare se legitimum ubi debuerit,
quia ad causam non respondet? Debet igitur dicere
causam q legitimus, quia natus post sponsalia vel matri-
monit. Si autem ex tali obscura responsione mittatur
ad curiam Christianitatis, et rescribatur obscure q
legitimus, vel si causa objecta fuerit & non rescri-
batur p eadem verba, sed q legitimus sit, in defectu
curiz Christianitatis fiat inquisitio in curia dii regis
utrum ante matrimoniü vel post, quia videtur p hoc
q ibi possit esse fallacia, & verum rescribatur- et
falsum, sed diversis respectib?, quia poterit esse legi-
timus secundu statuta ecclesiz quantum ad ordines,
et quatum ad dignitates, et quanta ad leges et cdsue-
tudines Anglieanas bastardus quantü ad successiones,
quia ibi licet? legitimus ad pdicta,! sive ante sive
post. Et cüm taliter objecta fuerit bastardia ex causa
tali, si petens obscure respondeat, denegetur ei actio
ac si nihil respondisset, & tenens se teneat in pace.
Si aute tenenti objecta fuerit et sic obscure respon-


1«Et quod assisa” down to!  ?*quiaautem licet," MSS. Rawl.
* Norlington," omitted, MS. Rawl | C. 160 & 159.
C. 160 et 159. * “quantum ad predicta," MS.


? * respondere debet," MS. Rawl: | Rawl. C. 159.
C. 160.


OF EXCEPTIONS. 295


tything of Norlington. For the reasons above said and
from such a common consent, it may be in the choice of
the lord the king whether he chooses to commit the
making of that inquest to the ordinaries or to make it
in his court, because if he shall make it in his own
court, when an exception has been taken against him
both open and from a certain cause, the answer ought not
to be obscure, but as the exception is raised that accord-
ing to the law and custom of England he is a bastard
inasmuch as he was born before espousals and matri-
mony, and so upon such a cause the claimant ought to
reply and say that he is legitimate from a contrary
cause, because he was born after espousals or matrimony,
and so to contradict the declaration of the tenant, be-
cause he does not contradict, but says simply that he
is legitimate and prepared to prove that he is legitimate,
when he ought to do so, because he does not reply upon
the cause. He ought therefore to state the cause why
he is legitimate, because he was born after espousals or
matrimony. But if upon such an obscure answer it be
sent to the court of Christianity, and it be reported by
it obscurely that he is legitimate, or if the cause be ob-
jected and it be not reported in the same words, but that
he is legitimate, in the default of the court of Christianity
let an inquest be held in the court of the king whether
before or after matrimony, because it seems thereby that
there may be here a fallacy, and the report may be
true and false, but in different respects, because he may
be legitimate according to the statutes of the Church
as regards orders and as regards dignities, and with
respect to the laws and customs of England a bastard
in what regards successions, although legitimate for the
aforesaid purposes, whether before or after. And when
bastardy has been objected from such a cause, if the
claimant answers obscurely, let the action be denied to
him as if he had made no answer, and let the tenant
keep himself in peace. But if it has been objected to


f. 417 b.


296 DE EXCEPIIONIBUS.


derit, quasi indefensus rem possessam amittat, quia
non omninó respondere vel obseur ad paria judi-
cantur. Ad papam et ad sacerdotia quidem ptinent
ea quz spiritualia sunt, ad regem vero et ad regnum
ea que sunt temporalia, juxta illud, Coelum coeli
Domino, terram autem dedit filiis hominum. Et unde
ad papam nihil pertinet ut de teporalibus disponat
vel ordinet, non magis qm reges vel principes de
spiritualibus, ne quis.eorum falcem imittat in messem
alienam. Et sieut papa ordinare potest in spirituali-
bus quoad ordines et dignitates, ita potest rex in
temporalib? de heereditatibus dandis vel heeredibus
constituendis secundum consuetudinem regni sui.
Habet enim quodlibet regnum suas consuetudines et
diversas, poterit enim una esse cdsuetudo in regno
Anglie, et alia in regno Francie quantum ad suc-
cessiones, | Et notandum quód, si quis opponendo
bastardiam mentionem non faciat de hac dictione
(bastardus), amittet per judicium : ut si dicat, Frater,
nihil juris habes in terra illa quia natus fuisti ante
matrimonium, nulla facta mentione de bastardia: ut
in itinere W. de Ralegh, in comitatu Warř, assisa
mortis antecessoris, si Willhelmus de Munworth! pater
Thome. Opponi etiam poterit bastardia multis de
causis instituta actione, aliquando in judicio, ali-
quando ad querelam ejus qui dicit se esse verum
heredem, & de quibus non oportet transmittere loque-
lam ad curiam Christianitatis vel inquisitionem, ut si
partus nascatur post mortem patris (qui dicitur post-
humus)? per tantum tempus, quód non sit verisimile
quód possit esse defuneti filius, & hoe probato, talis


! * Munewortb," MS. Rawl. C. ? € postumus," MS. Rawl. C. 160.
159.


OF EXCEPTIONS. 297


the tenant, and he has thus answered obscurely, let him
lose the thing which he holds as if he were without a
defence, because to answer not at all and to answer ob-
scurely are judged alike. To the pope and to the priest-
hood, indeed, appertain the things which are spiritual,
but to the king and to the realm those things which are
temporal, according to the saying, the heaven to the
to the Lord of heaven, but the earth he has given to
the sons of man. And hence it does not pertain to the
pope in any way to dispose of and to order temporal
matters, no more than to kings to dispose of and to order
spiritual matters, lest either of them should put his
reaping hook into another’s harvest. And as the pope
may order in spiritual matters as regards orders and
dignities, so may the king in temporal matters as regards
granting inheritances or constituting heirs according to
the custom of his kingdom. For every kingdom has
its own customs and different ones, for there may be
one custom in the kingdom of England and another in
the kingdom of France as regards successions. And it
is to be noted that, if a person in objecting bastardy does
not make mention of this very phrase (bastard), he shall
lose by the judgment, as if he should say, “Brother,
* thou hast nothing in that land, because thou wast
* born before matrimony,” no mention being made of
bastardy, as in the iter of William de Ralegh in the
county of Warwick, an assise of mortdancester, if William
de Munworth the father of Thomas.  Bastardy may also
be objected for many causes after an aetion has been
instituted, sometimes in court, sometimes at the com-
plaint of him who says that he is the true heir, and
concerning which it is not requisite to send the trial of
an inquest to the court of Christianity, as if an offspring
be born after the death of the father (who is termed a
posthumous child) after such an interval of time, that
itis not probable that he is the child of the deceased
person, and upon this having been proved, such a person


f. 418.


298 DE EXCEPTIONIBUS.


dici poterit bastardus. Item dici poterit bastardus &
ilegitimus et partus alienus falsó suppositus & nu-
tritus ad exhseredationem veri hæredis, ubi mulier
fecerit se preegnantem, cûm non sit. Item si inqui-
ratur p quantum tempus natus fuerit post humatione
patris, cujus filius esse . debuit, ita quod non possit
esse verisimile quód sit fihus talis. Idem dici poterit
bastardus partus suppositus mortuo vero hærede sub
custodia, ut supra de qualitate & differentia hæredis
de ptu supposito. Item dici poterit bastardus ab alio
quàm à patre pgenitus, ubi non sit verisimile aliqua
ratione q possit esse heres mariti ut si pater abfuerit
p longum tépus in Terra Sancta, quod veritas vincere
possit psumptionem. Sed aliud erit, si vir in patria
vel extra patriam prope quod accessum habere possit
ad.uxorem occulte, et maximé si maritus eum dead-
vocaverit omnino, nisi psumptio faciat cotra ipsum
quod partus possit esse heres, ut supra, et ibi de hac
materia, ubi perpendi poterit quis sit legitimus & quis
bastardus. Et sciendum q liberorum quidam possunt
esse legitimi et quidam  bastardi, et aliquando omnes
legitimi et aliquando omnes bastardi, vel unus ex
pluribus legitimus, et alii omnes bastardi, et è con-
irarió, ut supra perpendi poterit de qualitate hære-
dum. Item notandum, q cùm quis partum suppositum
semel advocaverit, non poterit illum ulterius read-
vocare! si hoc pbari poterit, et erit talis filius et
heredes? de quocunque antecessore tenuerit. Et cùm
capitales domini vel quidam illorum heereditatem tali
restituerint et quidam restituere contradixerint, oppo-
sita bastardia non valet contradictio, nec erit in hoc


1 * deadvocare,” MS. Rawl. C. 160. | ? “hæres,” MS. id.


OF EXCEPTIONS. 299


may be called a bastard. Likewise he may be called a
bastard and illegitimate and a strange offspring falsely
set up and nursed to disinherit the true heir, where the
woman has made herself out to be pregnant when she
was not so. Likewise if an inquest be made as to how
long he was born after the burial of the father whose
son he is represented to be, so that it is not probable
that he is the son of such a person. Likewise he may
be called a bastard who is a supposititious offspring, the
true heir having died under guardianship, as above con-
cerning the quality and the difference of an heir from a
supposititious offspring. Likewise he may be called a
bastard who has been begotten by another person than
the asserted father, where it is not likely upon any
grounds that he can be the heir of the husband, as
where the latter has been absent for a long time in
the Holy Land, so that the truth may overcome the
presumption [of law]. But it will be otherwise, if the
husband has been within the country or out of the
country but so near that he could have had access
to his wife secretly, and especially if the husband
has disavowed him altogether, unless the presumption
makes against him that the offspring may be the heir,
as above, and there concerning this matter, where
it may pe considered who is legitimate and who is
a bastard. And it is to be known that of children
some may be legitimate and some bastards, and some-
times all legitimate, and sometimes all bastards, or one
out of several legitimate, and the others all bastards,
and contrariwise, as may be above considered concerning
the quality of heirs. Likewise it is be noted, that when
once a person has avowed a supposititious offspring he
cannot further disavow him, if this can be proved, and
such a son will be the heir from whatever ancestor he
may hold. And when the chief lords or some of them
have restored the inheritance to such a person and some
of them have refused to restore, a refusal upon the ob-
jection of bastardy does not avail, nor will an inquest


f. 418.


3.


Quis possit
opponere


bastar-
diam.


300 DE EXCEPTIONIBUS.


casu inquisitio demandanda ad forum ecclesiasticum,
vel mittenda ad curia Christianitatis: ut de itinere
R. de Leinton! de quoda Adamo de Aston, qui in tali
casu voluit transmittere loquelà ad curiam Christiani:
tatis, q quidem revocatum fuit & correctu p M. de
Pateshull.


Item videndum quis bastardiam opponere potest, et
sciendum q ab eo ad quem pertinet, sicut à vero
heerede contra eum, qui se facit hseredem cùm non
sit, sive petens sit qui opponit sive tenens. Item ille
qui loco heredis est, sieut dominus capitali, cüm in
seysina fuerit hzereditatis sicut de eschaeta sua propter
defectum heredum tenentis sui, cùm non sit alius
nisi ille qui petit, et sit bastardus. Si aute plures
sunt qui se faciant heredes, tune non ptinebit ad
dim capitalem | bastardiam objicere, quia quamvis
competat contra heredem, tamen non ptinet ad domi-
num capitalem ut illam opponat. Et quód ad capi-
talem dominum non ptineat, pbari poterit de term
Paschee anno regis Hent duodecimo in com Berk. de
Roberto Hachard, ubi terra esse debuit eschaeta sua:
ut de itinere Martini de Pateshull in com Eborü anno
regis Henr decimo, assisa mortis antecessoris si Ra-
dulphus de Bully, sed cùm capitalis dominus bastar-
dum semel cognoverit ad herede, vel si reddiderit ei
aliquam ptem hereditatis ut legitimo, si postmodum
ei velit bastardiam objicere, non audietur ut illam
opponat: ut de term S. Hilarii anno regis Henrici
decimoquarto in com Midd, de abbate S. Albani &
Wilto filio Radulphi Sed copetit vero heredi contra
fratre et aliü, qui se facit heredem, cám sit bastardus,
sive unus eorü sit heres sive plures legitimi, vel
unus vel plures bastardi qui se faciunt heredes, sive


1«*R, de Lexinton," MS. Rawl. C. 160 and 159.


OF EXCEPTIONS, 301


in this case have to be remitted to the ecclesiastical
forum, or to be sent to the court of Christianity, as in
the iter of R. de Lexinton concerning a certain Adam
de Aston, who in such a case wanted to transmit the
trial to the court of Christianity, which was revoked
and corrected by Martin de Pateshull.


Likewise. it to be seen who can object bastardy, and
it is to be known that it may be objected by him to
whom it appertains, as by a true heir against him, who
holds himself out to be the heir when he is not, whether
it be the claimant who objects or the tenant. Likewise
he who is in the place of the heir, as a chief lord, when
he is in seysine of the inheritance as of his own escheat
on account of the default of heirs of his tenant, when
there is no other heir than the claimant, and he is a
bastard. But if there are several who set themselves
up as heirs, then it will not appertain to the chief lord
to object bastardy, because although it is feasible against
an beir, nevertheless it does not appertain to the chief
lord to make such an objection. And that it does not
appertain to a chief lord, may be proved from Easter
term in the twelth year of king Henry in the county of
Berks, concerning Robert Hachard, where the land ought
to have been his escheat, as in the iter of Martin de
Pateshull in the county of York, in the tenth year of
king Henry, an assise of mortdancester if Ralph de
Bully, but when a chief lord has once acknowledged a
bastard as heir, or if he has restored to him any part
of the inheritance as to the lawful heir, if he wishes
afterwards to object to him bastardy, he shall not be
heard to object it, as in Saint Hilary term in the
fourteenth year of king Henry in the county of Middle-
sex, concerning the abbot of St. Albans and William
Fitz-Ralph. But it is allowable to the heir against his
brother, and any other who sets himself up as the heir,
when he is a bastard, whether one of them be heir or
there be several legitimate, or one or several bastards
who set themselves up as heirs, whether they be tenants


3.
Who can
object
bastardy.


f. 418 b.


4.
Contra
quem
competat.
Britton, 1.
iii. c. xxii.


$5.


5.
Inter quas
personas.


309 DE EXCEPTIONIBUS.


tenentes sint sive petentes. Et si uterj bastardus
fuerit tà petes qm tenes, et petes bastardia objecerit
tenenti, si tenes replicado dixerit petété esse bastardi,
oportet petéte se docere legitimu, alioquin nihil capiat,
cū melior sit in hoc casu conditio possidentis, & tune
capitalis di? petat, & ptinet ad ipsum exceptio:


Ite contra Gm copetat, & sciendü q contra dmlibet
tam maseulü qm fceminà, ta cotra minore qm majore,
du tame, si infra setate sit minor cui opponitur, no
pcedat inquisitio de bastardia ante setate, dū tamen
minor tenens fuerit, quia nó magis tenetur respondere
ad exceptioné de bastardia ante setate, qm ad assisam,
cum exceptio bastardiz tà in causa possessionis qm
pprietatis tminet negotiü, ut de itinere M. de P. in
com Kane. ad festü S. M. an regis Herici undecimo
incipiente duodecimo, assisa mortis antecessoris si
Wilhelm de Herst, ubi assisa venit super custode,
qui dixit q nihil habuit nisi nomine custodie cum
quodà qui fuit infra state, & de quo responsu fuit q
bastardus erat. Si aute à majore contra minore
petente, pcedat assisa, ut in eodem itinere, assisa
mortis antecessoris si Hent  Paufurerej quibus à
petentibus objecta fuit bastardia, & de quibus dixe-
runt juratores q bastardi fuerunt, quia nati ante
matrimoniü, et processit assisa mortis antecessoris in
curia regis.


Ite non eopetit exceptio bastardiz nec locum habet
inter conjunctas psonas, sed inter extraneas, in causa
possessionis, nec in placito de cosanguinitate, nd magis


! € Paunferer," MS. Rawl. C. 160.


OF EXCEPTIONS. 303


or claimants. And if both be bastards, the claimant as

well as the tenant, and the claimant has objected to the

tenant bastardy, if the tenant in replying has said that

the claimant is a bastard, it is requisite that the claimant

should show that he is legitimate, otherwise he will take
nothing, since the condition of him in possession is in

this case the stronger, and then let the chief lord claim, f 418 b.
and the exception appertains to him.


Likewise against whom it is available, and it is to be 4.
known that it is available against any person male as Aint.
well as female, minor as well as of full age, provided that, available.
if he be a minor against whom the objection is raised,
the inquest concerning bastardy shall not proceed before
. he is of full age, provided however the minor is a tenant,
because he is no more bound to answer to an exception
of bastardy before his full age, than to an assise, since an
.exeeption of bastardy as well in a cause of possession
as of property terminates the affair, as in an iter of
Martin de Pateshull in the county of Kent at the festival
of Saint Mary in the eleventh and twelfth year of king
Henry, an assise of mortdancester, if William de Herst,
where the assise was brought against the guardian, who
said that he held nothing except in his character of
» guardian with a certain person who was under age, and
concerning whom it had been answered that he was a
bastard. But if the exception be made by a person of
full age against a minor claimant, let the assise proceed
as in the same iter, an assise of mortdancester if Henry
Paufurere, to whom bastardy was objected by the
claimants, and concerning whom the jurors said that they
were bastards, because born before matrimony, and the
assise of mortdancester proceeded in the court of the king.


Likewise an exception of bastardy is not allowable nor 5.
: NM Between
has it a place between persons who are relatives, but vat oe
between strangers in blood, in a cause of possession, nor sons.


in a plea of cosinage, no more than in an assise of


6.
Cum ob-
jecta fuerit
cum causa,
oportet
quod
sequatur
probatio.


304 DE EXCEPTIONIBUS.


qm in assisa mortis antecessoris, quia ubi eadé ratio ibi
erit & idem jus, inter tales psonas agitur de ipso jure,
& non de aliqua possessione, si fuerit heereditas de-
scendens à comuni stipite, quia si inter eos teneretur
hujusmodi exceptio, sic terminari posset pprietas ipsa
in placito possessionis: licet objici posset q bastardus
sit tanquà extraneus quantü ad verti heredé. Sed
tamen inter eos non pcedat ista exceptio, non magis
qm assisa, quia adhuc in pendenti est utrum ille cui
objicitur bastardia se pbare posset legitimu vel non.


Cüm aute sic objecta fuerit bastardia adjecta causa,
non valet exceptio nisi pbetur q tenens dicat peten-
tem esse bastardum, et idem petens replicando dicat
se esse legitimum vel e contrarió. Videndum ad qm
ilorum ptineat pbatio bastardie vel legitimationis, &
videtur q ad ipsum ptinebit in omni casu qui est
extra seysina, cùm ille qui est in seysina no habeat
necesse pbare nec exceptione si ipse exceperit de
bastardia, neq replicationé de legitimitate si bastardia
objecta fuerit cotra ipsum, ppter comodum  posses-
sionis: quia cùm tenens objecerit exceptione bastardice
cotra petente, petens arctatur ad pbationé legitimi-
tatis, tenens ad pbationem bastardie pcedat &! ex-
cipiendo, oportebit petente docere legitimü esse repli-
cando, alioquin. cadit à causa, & tenenti remanebit
possessio. Si auté e contrarid à petenti tenéti op-
ponatur bastardia, & q nihil juris habeat in tra qm
tenet, quia bastardus: responderi poterit à tenente q
ipse est in seysina, sicut hæres legitimus, unde opor-


1 “et,” omitted, MSS. Rawl. C. 160 and 159.


OF EXCEPTIONS. 305


mortdancester, because where there is the same reason
there will be the same right, between such persons pro-
ceedings are concerning the right itself and not concern-
ing a certain possession, if it be an inheritance descending
from a common stock, because if an exception of this
kind would hold good between them, the property
itself might so be determined in a plea of possession;
although it may be objected that a bastard is as it were
a stranger as regards the true heir. But nevertheless
that exception should not proceed between them any
more than an assise, because it is still pending, whether
he against whom bastardy is excepted can prove himself
_ to be legitimate or not.


But when bastardy has been thus objected with the ^ c.
addition of a cause, an exception does not avail, un- aed
less it be proved that the tenant says that the claimant objected
is a bastard, and the said claimant in his replication heed T
says that he is legitimate or the converse. It is to incumbent
be seen to which of them the proof of bastardy or DUE
of legitimacy appertains, and it seems that in all cases follow.
it appertains to him who is out of seysine, since he
who is in seysine has no necessity to prove neither
the exception if he has raised an exception of bastardy,
nor his replication of legitimacy if bastardy has been
objected against him, on account of the advantage of
possession: because when the tenant has raised an objec-
tion of bastardy against the claimant, the claimant is
confined to the proof of his legitimacy, whilst the
tenant may proceed to the proof of bastardy by ex-
cepting, and it will be incumbent that the claimant
should show himself to be legitimate in his replication,
otherwise he is cast in his cause, and the possession will
remain to the tenant. But if on the contrary bastardy is
objected by the claimant against the tenant, and that
he has no right in the land which he holds, because he
is a bastard, it may be answered by the tenant that he
is in seysine, as the legitimate, heir, whereupon it will be

R 2657. U


Ms
. Quod mit-
tatur in-
quisitio
bastardia
f. 419.
ad curiam
Christiani-
tatis per
breve.


306 DE EXCEPTIONIBUS.


tebit petente replicare q bastardus, & sic replicando
pbare bastardiam, & sic oportet petentem sequi, quia
tenens nunquam sequeretur, & sic in utroqué casu in-
cumbit pbatio replicationis ipsi petenti, vel q pbet se
legitimum sicut in primo casu, vel quod tenentem
probet bastardum sicut in secundo casu.


Cùm igitur in suo casu aliquando transmitteda sit
loquela. ad curià Christianitat in casu licito, modo
cdsueto & debito, quia cognitio bastardie et inquisitio
fieri debeat in curia Christianitatis: tunc fiat bie
ordinario loci sub hac forma. Ex pte regis, infra
regnü si ordinarius fuerit sub potestate regis. Si
autem extra regnum fuerit ordinarius qui cognoscere
debuit & non sub potestate regis, & non teneatur
obedire nisi velit, nec inquirere possit nisi fuerit ei
demandatu, eadere poterit actio petentis ppter defectum
pbationis, Et notandu q, anteqm loquela & inquisitio
bastardie transmittatur ad curiam Christianitatis,
oportebit q visus fiat de ira q petitur, quia cüm p
inquisitionem sic factam tota causa decidatur, et nihil
supersit post inquisitionem nisi judiciu reddendü in
curia dii regis, pposteré ageretur si tune primó visus
peteretur. Et ideo necesse est q prius fiat visus, ut
justic. de re certa certum dare possit judicii. Et cùm
remissa fuerit inquisitio ad. ordinariu dio regi! non
erit ulterius aliqua exceptio opponenda, p qua minus
peedat judicium.


! * ab ordinario domino regi," MS. Rawl. C. 159.


OF EXCEPTIONS. 307


necessary for the claimant to reply that he is a bastard,
and so in his replication to prove the bastardy, and so
it is requisite that the claimant should follow it up,
because the tenant should never follow it up; and so in
either case the proof of the replication rests with the
claimant either that he should prove himself to be legiti-
mate as in the first case, or that he should prove the
tenant to be a bastard as in the second case.


When therefore in his case the trial is sometimes to z,
be transmitted to the court of Christianity in an allow- That an
able ease, in the usual and due manner, because the m
cognisance of bastardy and the inquest ought to be imme
made in the court of Christianity, then let a writ go to Christi-
the ordinary of the place in this form. On the part of ?9*Y bya
the king, if the ordinary be within the kingdom under £419.
the power of the king. But if the ordinary who ought
to hold cognisance be outside the kingdom and not
under the power of the king, and is not bound to obey
unless he is willing, nor can he inquire unless it be com-
mitted to him, the action of the claimant may abate on
account of the default of proof. And itis to be noted
that, before the trial and inquest of bastardy is trans-
mitted to the court of Christianity, it will be requisite
that a view should be had of the land which is claimed,
because since by an inquest so held the whole cause is
decided, and nothing remains after the inquest but to
pronounce judgment in the court of the lord the king, it
would be a preposterous transaction if then for the first
time a view was claimed. And accordingly it is neces-
sary that a view should be first had, that the justiciary
may give a certain judgment concerning a certain matter.

And when the inquest shall have been remitted by the
ordinary! to the lord the king, no other exception will be
allowed to be made, wherefore the proceedings should


not be had to judgment.


l The reading in the Rawlinson MS. is required by the context.
U 2


308 DE EXCEPTIONIBUS.


8. Rex venerabili in Christo patri A. eadem gratia
Du Londofi episcopo salute. Sciatis q chm A. in curia
Glanville, nostra coram nobis, vel coram justic. nřis peteret
vii. c. 14. yersus B. tanta tram cum ptinentiis in tali villa, idem

B. venit in eadem curia coram &c. et objecit eidem
A. quod nullum jus habuit in terra illa, eo quod
bastardus est, quia natus antequam talis pater ipsius
A. desponsavit matrem ipsius A. Et ideo vobis man-
damus, quod convocatis coram vobis convocandis, rei
veritatem inde diligenter inquiratis, videlicet utrum
preedictus A. natus fuit antequam preedictus talis de-
sponsavit talem matrem ipsius A. vel post. Et inquisi-
tionem qm inde feceris scire facias nobis vel justiciariis
nfis talibus per literas vestras patentes. Teste We.
Et cùm in voluntate regis sit trasmittendi hujusmodi
inquisitionem ad curiam Christianitatis vel non, no
dicatur in brevi  & quoniam hujusmodi inquisitio
ptinet ad forum  ecclesiasticü, sicut in aliis causis
sequentibus ubi ptinet ad forum ecclesiasticum,’ et
non ad forum seeulare, et in hoe easu cüm à tenente
proponatur exceptio bastardize versus petentem, oporte-
bit quód petens sequatur et probet se legitimu repli-
cando cotra exceptionem bastardis.


9. Henricus Dei gratia &c. venerabili &e. vel tali offi-
ME ciali salute. Sciatis q cùm A. de N. in curia nostra
cui opponi- coram &c. peteret versus B. et C. uxorem ejus, tantam
tur bas-
tardia pro- terram cum pertinentiis in tali villa, p assisam mortis
betseesse antecessoris inde ibi inter eos sumonitam & captam
legitimum, . .

& preedicta C. diceret se esse propinquiorem haeredem
D. de cujus morte A. tulit assisam illam, idem A.
objecit eidem C. quód nullum jus habere potuit in


terra illa eo quód bastarda est, quia nata fuit ante-


1 « Henricus Dei gratia rex | “bus ubi pertinet ad forum ec-
* venerabili in Christo patri A. | “ clesiasticum," omitted, MS. Rawl.
* eadem gratia," MS. Rawl. C. 160. | C. 160.

? «sieut in aliis causis sequenti-


OF EXCEPTIONS. 309


The king to the venerable father in Christ A., by the — &.
same grace bishop of London, greeting. Know ye that leo form.
when A. in our court before us, or before our justiciaries,
claimed against B.so much land with its appurtenances
in such a vill, the said B. came into our court before &c.
and objected to the said A. that he had no right in that
land, inasmuch as he is a bastard, because he was born
before so-and-so the father of said A. espoused the mo-
ther of the said A. And accordingly we. command you
that, having convoked those persons who ought to be
convoked, you should inquire diligently into the truth
thereof, to wit, whether the aforesaid A. was born before
so-and-so aforesaid espoused the said mother of A. or
afterwards. And make known to us or to our justi-
ciaries by your letters patent the inquest which you
shalt have made thereon. . Witness &c. And since it is
at the pleasure of the king to transmit an inquest of
this kind to the court of Christianity or not, let it not
be said in the writ, “and since an inquest of this kind
* appertains to the ecclesiastical forum,” as in the other
following cases where it does appertain to the ecclesias-
tical forum, and not to the secular forum; and in this
"ease when an exception of bastardy is propounded by
the tenant against the claimant, it will be requisite that
the claimant follow it up and prove that he is legitimate
by a replication against the exception of bastardy.

9.


Henry by the grace of God &e. to the venerable &c., reel
or to such an official, greeting. Know ye that when A. site that he,
de N. in our court, before &c., claimed against B. and his Sici :
wife C. so much land with its appurtenances in such a objected,
vill, by an assise of mortdancester summoned thereon at para
that place and held between them, and the aforesaid C. self to be
said that she was a nearer heir to D., concerning whose /sitimate.
death A. brought that assise, the said A. objected to the
said C. that she could have no right in that land inas-


much as she was a bastard, because she was born before


f. 419 b.


10.
Breve,
quod op-
ponitur ei
bastardia,
qui est in
seysina.,


310 DE EXCEPTIONIBUS.


quàm pater suus desposavit matrem suam, et ideo
vobis mandamus &c. ut supra, & in hoe casu quia
petens opponit exceptionem bastardiz versus C. que
tenet replicando contra eam, que dicit se esse legiti-
mam & heredem & in seysina esse excipiendo, oporte-
bit petentem probare bastardiam replicando illam esse
bastardam. Et q dietum est supra de bastardia ejus
qui natus est ante sponsalia, idem dici poterit de eo
qui natus est post mortem antecessoris sui per tantum
tempus, quód non possit esse verisimile quód possit
esse filius & heres. Item aliud breve consimile de
eodem contra tenentem masculum vel foeminam qui
natus est de illegitimo matrimonio, sicut de adultera,
scilicet ubi quis duas habuerit uxores, unam videlicet
de jure et alia de facto, et ille partus qui de legitimo
fuerit in seysinà:! & hujusmodi cognitio ad forum
pertinet ecclesiasticum et non ad forum seculare.


Rex tali episcopo salute. Sciatis q cum A. peteret
versus B. tantam terram cum ptinentiis in tali villa
ut jus suum, et idé B. veniret in eade curia, et diceret
q fuit in seysina de eadem ira sicut de illa q ei
heereditarié descendit de quodam C. patre suo, cujus
hæres ipse est ut dicit, idem A. objecit eidem B. in
eadem curia nra q nihil juris potuit habere in terra
ila petita quia bastardus est, & natus de adultera,
asserens se esse filium legitimum ipsius C. & heredem,
& quoniam hujusmodi cognitio ad forum pertinet
ecclesiasticum, vobis mandamus quód convocatis con-
vocandis &c. (ut supra). Est etiam alia exceptio
bastardie, q ad curiam Christianitatis transmittenda
est, et non terminanda in curia regia, sive pponatur
à petente tenéti, vel à tenente petenti, adjecta tali


! “et ille qui partus de legitimo fuerit in seysina," MS. Rawl. C. 160.


OF EXCEPTIONS. 311


her father had espoused her mother, and therefore we
command you &e. as above, and in this case because the
claimant objects an exception of bastardy against C.
who holds the land, in his replication to her, who says
that she is legitimate and the heir and by excepting that
she is in seysine, it will be requisite that the claimant
prove bastardy by replying that she is a bastard. And
what is said above concerning the bastardy of him who has
been born before espousals, the same may be said of him
who has been born after the death of his predecessor at
such an interval of time, that it cannot be likely that he
can be his son and heir. Likewise another similar writ
on the same subject against a male or female tenant who f 419 v,
is born of an illegitimate marriage, as of an adulteress
to wit, where a person has had two wives, one forsooth
of right, the other in fact, and the offspring of the legi-
timate marriage is in seysine, and the cognisance of such
a case appertains to the ecclesiastical forum, and not to
the secular forum.


The king to such a bishop greeting. Know ye that 10.
when A. claimed against B. so much land with its ap- E
purtenances in such a vill as his right, and the said B. ene
-came into the said court and said that he was in seysine ise
of the said land, as of land which descended to him by sine.
inheritance from a certain C. his father, whose heir he
is as he says. The said A. objected to the said B. in our
said court that he could have no right in the land claimed,
because he is a bastard and born of an adulteress, asserting
himself to be the legitimate son and the heir of the said
C.; and since the cognisance of this matter appertains to
the ecclesiastical forwm, we command you that having
. convoked the persons who ought to be convoked &c. as
above. There is another exception of bastardy, which is
to be transmitted to the court of Christianity, and is not
to be determined in the king's court, whether it be pro-
pounded by a claimant to a tenant or by a tenant to a
claimant, with this cause added, that so-and-so the father


DE EXCEPTIONIBUS.


causa, q pater talis nunquam desponsavit matré talis
petentis, vel tenentis, et tune fiat tale bře.


11. Rex tali episcopo salute. Sciatis q cü A. in curia
cue nia coram &c. peteret versus B. tantam terram cum
despon- — ptinentiis in tali villa.ut jus suum, ide B. venit in
savit x D RC ~g go kes a
matrem.  €àde curia et dixit q ĵdictus A. nihil juris clamare

poterit in terra illa, quia bastardus est eo q C. pater
suus, cujus hæredem se facit, nunquam desponsavit
matrem suam. Et quoniam hujusmodi cognitio de tali
bastardia objecta ad forum pertinet ecclesiasticum,
vobis mandamus q convocatis convocandis coram vobis
&c. ut supra. ltem si quis crediderit alium esse bas-
tardum, quia natus fuit tempore interdicti, adhibita
solennitate que tunc potuit adhiberi sive solennitas
fuerit adhibita in facie ecclesie, sive non, talis cogni-
tio transmittenda est ad forum ecclesiasticum p tale
breve.


19. Rex tali episcopo saluté. Sciatis q chm A. in curia:
PE nia &c. peteret versus B. tantu terre cum  ptinentiis
matrimo- in tali villa ut jus suu, ide B. venit in eadé curia
nium. ^^ et objecit eidē A. q nihil juris inde clamare potuit,

quia bastardus est, eo q natus fuit per tantum tempus
ante matrimoniü cdtractum solenniter in facie ecclesize
inter talé patrem ipsius A. & talem matre ipsius A.,
responsum fuit à pdicto A. q legitimus est, et natus
post matrimonium contractü.inter patrem et matrem
suam tempore interdicti, adhibita omni solénitate que
tune potuit adhiberi Et quonià hujusmodi cause
cognitio ut supra.


OF EXCEPTIONS. _ 313


never espoused the mother of so-and-so the claimant, or
of the tenant, and then let a writ of this kind issue.


The king to bishop so-and-so greeting. Know yethat 11.

when A. in our court &c. claimed against B. so much Rue
land with its appurtenances in such a vill as his right, never es-
the said B. came into the said court and objected to dtum
the said A. that he could claim no right therein, because
he was a bastard, inasmuch as his father, whose heir he
makes himself out to be, never espoused his mother.
And since the cognisance of this matter when such
bastardy has been objected belongs to the ecclesiastical
forum, we command you that having convoked those
who ought to be convoked before you &c. as above.
Likewise if any one has believed another to be a bastard,
because he was born in the time of the interdict, such a
solemnity only as was then possible having been adopted,
whether that solemnity was adopted in the face of the
church or not, the cognisance of such a matter is to be
transmitted to the ecclesiastical forum by a writ of this
kind.

The king to such a bishop greeting. Know ye that ale
when A, in our court &c. claimed against B. so much land that he -
with its appurtenances in such a vill as his right, the was bom
said B. came into the said court and objected to the said marriage.
A. that he could claim no right therein, because he is a
bastard, inasmuch as he was born so long a time before
marriage was solemnly contracted in the face of the
church between so-and-so the father of the said A. and
so-and-so the mother of the said A., it was answered by
the aforesaid A. that he was legitimate and born after a
marriage had been contracted between his father and
mother in the time of the interdict, every solemnity that
was then possible having been adopted. And since the
cognisance of a cause of this kind belongs to the church


&e. as above.


314 DE EXCEPTIONIBUS.


G a Cùm auté loquela et hujusmodi inquisitio trans-
um 10- . ü D 2 re . . .
quela missa fuerit ad curia Christianitatis, remanebit pla-


oneri: citum in curia díi regis sine die, quous venerit
curiam inquisitio ad curiam, postqm discussum fuerit de bas-
MEL LE tardia in curia Christianitatis.
atis, re-
manebit
placitum
in curia
regis,donec
veniat
inquisitio. v e 3 " f ^ ) z i E
14! Offieiü vero ordinarii erit, q covocatis ptib?, in earü
Eee psentia si interesse voluerint, fiat dilgés et sumaria
Inari. 5 T IDE = kd . . = .
inquisitio secmndü forma brevis, et si sposalia vel
matrimoniü sint cdtracta, vel oninó nullu, vel si
matrimonit, tame illegitimi:  videdu igit erit de
matrimonio de quo supradict est in tractatu, quis
heres sit legitimus, et ubi dicit q heres est legitimus
Gm juste nuptiae demostrat, sive cladestinu fuerit
matrimoniü sive publieum, sive per verba de psenti
f.420. sive per verba de futuro, sive sub conditione con-
tractu, dum tamen dissolvi no possit, nec in vita con-
trahentiü fuerit dissolutum, cùm sposalia sive matri-
monium sit conjunctio maris et foemine individuam
vitæ retinens cosuetudinem. Et p hoc de facili ppendi
poterit quis legitimus fuerit & quis bastardus. Cùm
aute judex ecclesiasticus inquisitione fecerit, no erit
ab eo appellandum ab aliquo, nec à petente nec à
tenente: à petente no, quia tale jurisdictione et talem
judicé elegit; à tenente non, quia sic posset causam
in infiniti ptrahere de judice in judice us ad papa,
et. sic posset papa de laico feodo indirecte cognoscere.
Ité notandü, q tantü operatur tenentis absentia qm


OF EXCEPTIONS. oe


But when the trial and the inquest of this kind has 13.
been transmitted to the court of Christianity, the plea D
shall be stayed in the court of the lord the king without a sent
a day, until the inquest has been remitted to the court, n
after it has been determined respecting the bastardy in Christi-

x OA ; anity, the
the court o ristianity. plea shall
be stayed
in the
court of
the king,
until the
inquest is
remitted.


But the office of the ordinary will be, that after the 14
parties have been convened, there be carried on in their Concern-


: jas AM S ing the
presence, if they are willing to take part in it, a diligent office of


and summary inquest according to the form of the writ, "x du
and if espousals or marriage has been contracted, or
none at all, or an illegitimate marriage, if any, it must
be seen concerning the marriage, which has been the
subject of discussion in the treatise, who is the legiti-
mate heir, and where it is said, he is the heir whom a
legitimate marriage indicates, whether the marriage has
been clandestine or public, whether by words de præ-
senti, or by words de futuro, or whether contracted f. 420.
under a condition, provided however it cannot be dis-
solved, nor has been dissolved in the life of the contracting
parties, since espousals or marriage is the union of the
male and the female retaining an indivisible custom of
life. And through these means it may be easily ascer-
tained who is legitimate and who is a bastard. But
when the ecclesiastical judge has made an inquest, no
appeal from him is to be made by any one, neither by
the claimant nor by the tenant: not by the claimant
for he has elected such a jurisdiction and such a judge;
not by the tenant, for he might so protract the cause to
infinity from judge to judge up to the pope, and so the
pope might indirectly hold cognisance of a lay fee.
Likewise it is to be noted that the absence of the tenant
works the same effect as his presence, but from a dele-


316 DE EXCEPTIONIBUS.


psentia, sed â delegato et ab officiali si dicatur errasse
vel collusionem fecisse potest appellari ad episcopü,
vel aliü ordinariü, quia ordinarius errore taliü et sen-
tentià poterit revocare vel corrigere, licet no possit
ppriü, nisi ca difficultate. Facta igitur inquisitione
secundu q pdietü est, cum pars sequens venerit ad
curia cü inquisitione, statim sumoneatur loquela q
remasit sine die & sumoneatur tenes p hoc bre.


15. Rex vic. salute. Summoneas p bonos sumonitores
Baca in; B. tenent it cor justic. ntis apud tale loca
quisitione, P. tenenté q sit coram justic. ntis ap e loe
mod per auditurus recordü & judiciū suai de loquela q fuit in
uod sta- 5 . as = . A = E
am reenn cade curia nia cora &c. inter A. petente et eundé B.
WES tenenté, de tanta tra ct ptinentiis in tali villa, qua
quela L |. : i : z .: —
ide A. in eadé curia nia clamat ut jus suu versus
eundé B. et unde idem B. dixit q idé A. nullu jus
habuit in terra illa eo q bastardus fuit, quia pater
suus nungm desponsavit matrem suam, vel alia tali
de causa: & unde inquisitio bastardiz transmissa fuit
ad curia Christianitatis, & habeas ibi sumonitores et


hoe bie. Teste &e.


16. Ad primum vero diem sumonitionis bene poterunt
Quodad se essoniare tam petens qm tenens si voluerint, simul
summoni- Vel vicissim, quousque habuerint essonium. Si autem
quu ad primum diem vel post essonium tenens defaltam
esse esso- fecerit post resummonitionem, cùm summonitione pven-
Daws Si tus sit, statim testata summonitione capiatur terra in

manum díi regis per defaltam per parvum cape, &
tenens ille sumoneatur q sit ad alium diem auditurus


inde judicium suum. Et ad quem diem sive venerit


OF EXCEPTIONS. 317


gate or an official if he be said to have erred or to have
acted collusively there may be an appeal to the bishop
or other ordinary, because the ordinary upon the error
of such persons may even revoke and correct their sen-
tence, although he cannot his own, except with difficulty.
And inquest having been held according to what has
been said above, when the party suing has come into the
court with the inquest, let the trial be summoned which
has been stayed without a day, and let the tenant be
summoned by this writ. i


The king to the viscount greeting. Summon by good ^ 15
summoners B. the tenant that he present himself be- aoe
fore our justiciaries at such a place in order to hear having
the record and judgment in his case concerning the trial E ens


which was in our said court before &c., between A. the whereby a
claimant and the said B. the tenant, concerning $o much eed
land with its appurtenances in such a vill, which the elo
said A. in our said court claims as his right against the i
said B., and whereof the said B. alleged that the said A.

had no right in the said land inasmuch as he was a bas-

tard, because his father never espoused his mother, or

for some other such cause, and whereupon an inquest of
bastardy was transmitted to the court of Christianity,


and have there the summoners and this writ, Witness


&e.


On the first day indeed of the summons the claimant EA
as well as the tenant may essoin themselves, if they ihe day of
wish, at the same time or in turns, until they have had M UM
an essoin. But if on the first day or after an essoin the essoined, if
tenant has made default after a resummons, when he he wishes.
has been anticipated by a summons, forthwith upon the
summons having been testified let the land be taken
into the hands of the lord the king through the default
by a little cape, and let the said tenant be summoned
that he be present on another day to hear the judgment


on his case. And on which day whether he come or not,


"17.
Quis sit
effectus
legitima-
tionis, cum
probata
fuerit.


f. 420 b.


318 DE EXCEPTIONIBUS.


sive non, amittet seysinam suam per defaltam, sive
inquisitio fecerit pro eo sive contra ipsum, nisi docere
possit rationem sufficientem quare nō venerit. Si
autem summonitione præventus non fuerit, sed mali-
tiosè ante resummonitioné pendente inquisitione co-
tumaciter se transtulerit ad ptes transmarinas & extra
regnū absentaverit, ita q sequi noluerit nec interesse
inquisitioni cùm episcopus vel ordinarius justiciariis
hoc mandaverit, nihilominüs faciant justic. eu sumoneri
ac si in regno esset, q sit auditurus recordū & judi-
cium sui, ut supra. Et ita pcedant quousq talis
amiserit p defaltam: ut de itinere M. de P. in com
Norff. de Henry de la Stoke.


Effectus vero legitimationis pbatz hic est, q cùm
semel pbata fuerit & judicium p tali reddatur in curia
regis, semper quoad omnes legitimus erit, nisi in pba-
tione intervenerit fraus, no erit itad ad plures curias
Christianitatis trasmitted?, objecta ab aliquo tali excep-
tide, quia si ad diversos mitteret episcopos, posset cuf
regiæ cotraria vel diversa rescribere. Sed fraudulenter
posset fieri inquisitio hoe modo, ut si quis plures iras
vel amplas heereditates peteret à diversis, pcurare
poterit petens p fraude q ab aliquo ipsorü ei oppone-
retur bastardia, & ita pacisci cü eo, ne quid diceret
in testes & cotra testificata, et sic fraudulenter pbare
possit legitimatione, & sie obtinere versus omnes, q
quide esset iniquum. Ité esto q quis, cum legitima-
tione sua pbaverit corà quibuscung judicibus, anteqm
ad curià venerit cum inquisitione moriatur, si talis


OF EXCEPTIONS. 319


he shall lose his seysine through his default, whether the
inquest has made for him or against him, unless he can
show sufficient cause wherefore he has not come. But
if he has not been anticipated by a summons, but mali-
ciously before the resummons pending the inquest has
contumaciously transferred himself to parts beyond the
sea and has absented himself out of the kingdom, so that
he has not been willing to sue or to be present in the
inquest when the bishop or the ordinary has remitted it
to the justiciaries, nevertheless let the justiciaries cause
him to be summoned as if he were in the kingdom, that
he be present in order to hear the record and the judg-
ment in his case, as above. And so let them proceed
until the said person has lost his suit by his default, as
in the iter of Martin de Pateshull in the county of Nor-
folk concerning Henry de la Stoke.

The effect indeed of legitimation having been. proved = Ik
is this, that whenever it has been proved and judgment the E
is rendered for such an one in the courts of the king, he QURE OR
will be always legitimate as regards all persons, unless it has been
fraud has intervened in the proof, it will therefore not Proved.
have to be transmitted to several courts of Christianity,
if an exception to such person has been objected by any -
one, because if it were sent to divers bishops, they might
remit to the court of the king contrary or divers reports.

But an inquest might be made fraudulently in this f. 420 b.
manner, as if any one claimed several lands or ample
inheritances from divers persons, the claimant might
proeure through fraud that bastardy should be objected
to him by one of them, and he might bargain with him,
that he should allege nothing against his witnesses nor
against the matters testified, and so he might fraudu-
lently prove his legitimacy, and so might succeed against
all, which would be inequitable. Likewise let it be so
that a person, when he has proved his legitimacy before
certain justiciaries, dies before he has come into court
with the inquest, if such a person has had heirs begotten


320 DE EXCEPTIONIBUS.


heredes habuerit de carne sua pereatos, tales habendi
sunt p legitimis, et aliis pferendi in successione, et ex
tali inquisitione erit judicium reddendum p herede, q
p antecessore redderetur si viveret, quia legitimitas
antecessoris pbata, extenditur ad hzredes quoad omnia,
videlicet successiones, ordines, et dignitates. Et notandu,
q post mortem no valet talis exceptio pposita contra
eum qui mortuus est, cùm ad exceptionem talem re-
spondere non posset, inquiri tamen poterit p patriam
utrum talis fuerit necne, secundum q inquiri poterit
utrum quis libere tenuerit, vel in villenagio, licet. de
statu talis inquiri non potest post mortem, ut de term
S. M. anno regis H. vi incipiente vii.


CAPY POX:


1. Competit etia exceptio peréptoria tenenti ex psona
Exceptio petétis, si petes furiosus fuerit vel nd sans metis q
competens ^ = oe m : . =
ex persona discernere nesciat, vel omnind nulla habeat discretione.
pue. Tales em non multü distat à brutis q ratione carent,
sane men- hee valere debet q cū talibus agitur durate furore,
ee: possunt enim quida dilucidis gaudere intervallis, &
sunt plures quidam habent furorem ppetuü. Quod auté actum
ere fuerit cü talibus tepore quo dilucidis gaudent inter-

vallis, ratu erit ac si cum aliis ageretur, sive furorein
simulaverint sive non. Acquirere quidem non poterunt
in ipso furore, vel cùm non fuerint sanz mentis aliqui,
quia consentire no possüt, nec acquisita alienare vel
dare, quia alienationi non magis consentire possunt


quàm acquisitioni, sed seysinam retinent, quia animum


OF EXCEPTIONS. 321


of his own body, such persons are to be taken to be legi-
timate and are to be preferred to others in the succes-
sion, and from such an inquest judgment will have to be
rendered for the heir, which would be rendered for his
ancestor if he were living, because the legitimacy of the
heir having been proved is extended to his heirs in all
matters, to wit, successions, orders, and dignities. And
it is to be noted, that such an exception if propounded
against one who is dead does not avail after death, since
he cannot make an answer to such an exception, an
inquest however may be made through the country
whether such an one was legitimate or not, according
to what may be inquired whether a person has been
a free tenant or has held in villenage, although an
inquest cannot be held as to his status after his death,
as in Michaelmas term in the sixth and seventh years
of king Henry.


CHAPTER XX.


A peremptory exception is available to the tenant 1.


1 1 1 1 A avail-
against the person of the claimant, if the claimant should diserta


be a madman or not of sane mind, so that he cannot tion
discern, or has no discretion at all For such persons ae
do not much differ from brutes who are without reason, ofthe  .
nor ought that to avail which is transacted with such ener
persons during their madness, for some may enjoy lucid De
intervals, and some have perpetual madness. But what mina, that
has been transacted with such persons at a time when ie ^ eee
they enjoy lucid intervals, shall be ratified as if it were there are


transacted with others, whether they have simulated RR
madness or not. They cannot acquire whilst they are peremp-
in a state of madness, or when they are not of sane tY:
mind, because they cannot consent, nor alienate nor give

their acquisitions, because they can no more consent to

the alienation than to the acquisition, but they retain


the seysine, because they cannot change the intention,


R 2657. X


f. 421.


Q4
Exceptio
ex persona
petentis, si
fuerit sur-
dus et
mutus
naturaliter.


922 DE EXCEPTIONIBUS.


mutare non possunt, quem acquirendo dum essent
sane mentis habuerint, et furor superveniens nihil
adimit non magis quàm morbus incurabilis sicut lepra,
secundum quod dicitur quód multa impediunt contra-
hendo, que non dirimunt contractum, & ita sunt multa
quie impediunt pmovendo, que non dejiciunt jam pro-
motum. Et talibus de necessitate dandus est tutor
vel curator. Sed quid dicendum erit de fatuo: Fatuus
quidem acquirere poterit, non tamen in aliquo discre-
tionem habet, & talibus similiter datur curator, nisi
autem expresse renunciaverit, quia contra voluntatem
expressam non acquirit, sicut contingit coram ipso
rege & fratre & herede Herberti filii Petri, qui publice
renunciavit hereditati, & ita quód successit ei Regi-
naldus frater minor. Si autem ita fatuus fuerit, quod
nihil sciat discernére inter teneméta nec inter jura,
talis nunqm acquirit, quia no cosentit. Sed discussio
hujusmodi exceptionis discretioni judicis relinquatur.


Competit aute tenenti exceptio peréptoria ex persona
petentis ppter defectu nature: ut si quis fuerit surdus
& mutus naturaliter, s. q onino loqui no possit nec
audire, no tame si tardé audiat, vel loqui fuerit ali-
quàtulü ipeditus. Et talis cùm naturaliter surdus
fuerit & mutus, acquirere non potest, quia no potest
cosetire, quia verba stipulatis audire no potest omninó,
et cū Onind audire non possit nec omnino loqui, volun-
tate & cosensu exprimere no potest, nec verbis nec
signis, Naturaliter dico, hoc est à nativitate, sicut
dieitur de cæco, qui cæcus fuit à nativitate, quia si
hoc aliter alicui evenerit à casu, inquirendu erit qualis
fuerit ante hujusmodi infortuniü, quia, si loqui potuit


OF EXCEPTIONS, 323


which they had, when they were of sane mind, and super-
venient madness does not take away anything any more
than an incurable disease such as leprosy, according to
the saying that many things are impediments to con-
tracting which do not set aside a contract, and so there
are many impediments to promotion, which do not cast
down a person who has been promoted. And to such
persons of necessity a tutor or a curator is to be assigned,
But what shall we say of a silly person? A silly person
can acquire, he has not however discretion in some
things, and to such persons a curator is assigned, unless
however he has expressly renounced, because he does
not acquire against his express will, as happened before
the king and the brother and heir of Herbert Fitz Peter,
who publicly renounced his inheritance, and so that
Reginald his younger brother succeeded to him. But if
he be so silly, that he cannot discern any thing between £. 421.
tenements nor between rights, such a person never
acquires, because he does not consent. But the discus-
sion of an exception of this kind should be left to the
discretion of the judge.


An exception is also available to the tenant of ne zr T
peremptory nature against the person of the claimant abn Paint
on account of a natural defect, asif a person should be gs
deaf and dumb naturally, to wit, so that he cannot claimant,
speak nor hear at all, not indeed if he hears slowly or prea
has some slight impediment in speaking. And such a dumb
person when he is naturally deaf and dumb, cannot module
acquire because he cannot consent, for he cannot hear
the words of a stipulator at all,and when he cannot
hear them at all, nor speak at all, he cannot express
his willingness and consent, neither by words nor by
signs. I say naturally, that is from birth, as is said of
a blind person, who has been blind from his birth,
because if this has happened to any one by an accident,
it will have to be inquired of what manner he was
before such a misfortune, because if he could from the

x 2


3.
Exceptio
propter
morbum
incurabi-
lem, sicut


de leproso.


4,
Exceptio
ex cogni-
tione, ubi
se cogno-
vit ad
villanum.


324 DE EXCEPTIONIBUS.


ab initio & audire & cósentire, p se & p peuratore
acquirit, & acquisita retinet, sed tamen de facili non
transfert ad alium acquisita, sed cu surdus et mutus
naturaliter acquirere non possit, p offidiü judicis in-
venienda sunt ei necessaria quoad vixerit p qualitate
psonze & hereditatis quantitate, si heres esse debuit,
& si semel autoritate curatoris acquisierit, si faerit
inde ejectus, recuperabit p assisam sicut minor.


Datur etiam exceptio tenenti ex psona petentis
peremptoria, ppter morbü petentis ineurabilé & cor-
poris deformitate, ut si petens leprosus fuerit & tam
deformis q aspectus eum sustinere non possit, & ita
q à comunione gentium sit separatus, talis quide
placitare non potest, nec hereditate petere: ut de
term S. T. aü regis H. xi in com Hereford de Agnete
d fuit uxor Johannis de Westwikam petéte dote ejus.
Hujusmodi vero morbus repellit petentem ab agendo,
sed heereditatem jam habitam non adimit morbus
superveniens, sed habenda


Datur exceptio tenenti ex psona petentis peremptoria,
p cofessioné & cognitione petentis sive liber sit sive
servus, ut si quis in curia díü regis semel cognoverit
se esse villanu, licet liber sit, semper obstabit ei ex-
ceptio villenagii, ut supra in pluribus locis: et simi
liter de itinere M. de P. de loquela & fuerit super
Judicia in diversis com añ regis H. iii. in com Dors. de
Hamelino filio Radulphi.


ee


OF EXCEPTIONS. 325


beginning speak and hear and consent, he acquires
through himself and through an agent, and he retains
his acquisitions, but he cannot easily transfer his acqui-
sitions to another person: but since a person who is
naturally deaf and dumb cannot acquire, through the
office of the judge necessaries are to be found for him
as long as he shall live in proportion to his personal
quality and the quantity of the inheritance, if he ought
to be an heir, and if he has once acquired by the autho-
rity of a curator, if he shall have been ejected, he shall
recover by an assise as a minor would.


A peremptory exception is also available to the tenant 3.
against the person of the claimant on account of an in- jon on |.


curable disease and a personal deformity of the claimant, account
as if the claimant be a leper and so deformed that the AS
sight of him is insupportable, and such that he has been ms as,
separated. from all communion with mankind, such a is
person indeed cannot plead nor claim an inheritance, as

in Holy Trinity term in the eleventh year of king Henry

in the county of Hereford, concerning Agnes, who was

the wife of John de Westwikam, claiming her dower.

This kind of disease indeed debars a person from bring-

ing an action, but a supervening disease does not take

away an inheritance already enjoyed, but only one to be


enjoyed.


A peremptory exception is also allowed to a tenant 4.
against the person of the claimant, whether he be free or ACER
a serf, as if any person in the court of the lord the king an acknow-
has once acknowledged himself to be a villein, as above rd
in many places, and in like manner in the iter of Martin person has
de Pateshull in a trial, which took place upon a judgment uA 3


in different counties in the third year of king Henry in himself
; ing Hamelinus the son of 9ps
the county of Dorset, concerning Ham vei


Radulphus.


5:
Exceptio,
si de cri-
mine con-
victus
fuerit de
felonia vel
aliquis
anteces-
sorum.


f. 491 b.


6.
Exceptio
per mor-
tem civi-


326 DE EXCEPTIONIBUS.


Datur etia exceptio tenenti ex psona petentis perep-
toria, ex crimine & delicto petétis, de quo p judiciu
fuit cdvict? vel utlagat?, vel si trà abjuraverit &
postea p regé fuerit restitutus ad pace, & d eodem
modo competit tenenti ex psona antecessori petentis,
sicut ex psona sua ppria, ita q hzreditas vel tene-
mentü petitü descendere no possit ad petente, ut si
ipse petens felonia fecit, pater vel mater, frater vel
soror, à quo vel p dm jus descédere deberet ad petente,
refert tamé qualiter quis fuerit utlagat?, & qualiter
restitutus, utrü utlagatus fuerit p lege tre, vel cotra
legem tre & p volütatem: et cotra ista exceptionem
respodere poterit petes multis modis, q no est secüdü
legé tre. Ité q no in loco debito, sicut in com. Ite
q no interrogat? de com in com, sed in mercatis et
in aliis publicis locis clamat?, vel utlagat?! p bře dii
regis & p sola volitat düi regis, ordine juris no obser-
vato: ut de term S. M. añ regis H. xv. in com Salop
de Falcon filio W. Et qualit & quado talis exceptio
valere debet videri poterit de placit coronz de utla-
gatione utlagatorü, & eoru inlagatione, & ad q resti-
tuatur & ad d non.


Copetit exceptio tenenti ex psona petentis peremp-
toria, ppter morte civile, ut si quis se religioni cotu-
lerit, et postea ad seculü reversus agere velit &


lem, si quis hereditaté petere, non audietur. Cùm semel quis se


contulerit


se religioni religioni contulerit, renunciat omnibus d seculi sunt,
et habitum habita distinctione, utrü habitü pbationis susceperit,


1 * clamatus utlagatus," MS. Rawl. C. 160.


OF EXCEPTIONS. 327


A peremptory exception is also allowed to a tenant ^ 5
against the person of the claimant, out of a crime and medi
offence of the claimant, concerning which he has been by or one of
a judgment convicted or outlawed, or if he has abjured AA
the land and has been afterwards restored by the king been con-
to his peace, and it is allowable in the same manner to n
the tenant against the person of the ancestors of the of felony.
claimant justas against his own proper person, so that
the inheritance or tenement claimed cannot descend to
the claimant, as if the claimant himself has committed a
felony, his father or mother, brother or sister, from whom
or through whom the right ought to descend to the
claimant; itis of importance however in what way a
person has been outlawed, and in what way restored,
and whether he has been outlawed through the law of
the land or against the law of the land and arbitrarily; :
and against this exception the claimant may answer in
many ways that it is not in accordance with the law of
the land. Likewise that it was not in a due place as in
a county. Likewise that he was not sought after
from county to county, but was proclaimed in markets
and other public places, or was outlawed by a writ of
the king and by the sole pleasure of the king, the order
of law not having been observed, as in Michaelmas
term in the fifteenth year of king Henry in the county
of Salop, concerning Fulk the son of W., and in what
way and when an exception ought to avail may be seen
amongst the pleas of the crown concerning the out- f. 421 b.
lawry of outlaws and their inlawry, and to what things


they are restored and to what things not.

A peremptory objection is available to a tenant against n ie
the person of a claimant, as if à person has entered into tion
religion, and afterwards, having returned to the world, E
wishes to proceed and to claim an inheritance, he shall death, if a
not be heard. When a person has once entered into peor ue
religion he renounces every thing which is of the world, into reli-


a, distinction being observed whether he has adopted the Eo sane


religionis
susceperit.


Ile
De excep-
tionibus,
quee com-
petunt ex
persona
petentis et
que per-
emptorie
sunt, sicut
de minori
eetate.


328 DE EXCEPTIONIBUS.


vel habitü pfessionis, & ciun sie objecta fuerit hujus-
modi talis exceptio, inquisitio curiæ Christianitatis
demandabitur facienda, cü contra exceptione talem
fuerit replicatü, et secundü illà inquisitione in foro
seculari erit judicadü, sieut cdtigit de W. Burdo de
Deseburgh, qui uxoré duxit quanda, postqm effecta
fuit monialis. Est etia mors civilis in servo in servi-
tute sub potestate dii costituto. Hujusmodi vero
servitus mortalitati cdparatur, quia fuit aliquado in
manu díü vita et mors, sed modo no, ppter severi-
tatem dominorü, sed in manu dii regis, sed cùm tales
potestatem dii sui effugerint, quasi resuscitati ad
vitam aliquatulum respirant, secundum q superius
ppendi poterit de exceptione servitutis.


Cap, XXI.


Dictum est in pximo superius de exceptionibus d
copetüt teneti ex psona petentis, & q peréptoriz sunt
ppetue: nune auté dicendi est de exceptionib? ğ
copetunt eide ex psona ejusde, d dilatorie sunt &
teporales, Et inprimis de illa 4 peteti opponitur, qui
ante tepus agere no potest eo q est minor & infra
state, maximè in causa pprietatis, nec etiam coveniri,
qua objecta, si costiterit ipsü esse minore, differtur
actio quousq major effect? fuerit, sed non cadit bie,
sed resumoneatur loquela cü pvenerit ad setate, nisi
forte talis sit actio ad qm infra state respondere
teneatur. Et quonia diverse sunt etates et diversi-


OF EXCEPTIONS. 329


habit of probation or the habit of profession, and when opted the
an exception of this kind has been objected, an inquest MM
will have to be committed to the court of Christianity

to be held by it, when a replication has been made
against such an exception, and according to that inquest

it will have to be adjudged in the secular forwm, as
happened concerning William Burdon of Deseburgh, who
married for his wife a woman after she had become a:

nun. There is likewise civil death in the case of a serf
established in servitude under the power of a lord. But

this kind of servitude 1s compared to mortality, for once

on a time life and death were in the hand of the lord,

but now not so, on account of the severity of the lords,

but in the hand of the lord the king ; when such persons
however have escaped from the power of their lord they
breathe a little, as if they had been resuscitated to life,
according to what may be ascertained above under the
exception of servitude.


CHAPTER XXI.


We have spoken in the next chapter above concerning __ 1.

f ; : : ^ Of excep-
exceptions, which are available to the tenant against the tions,
person of the claimant and which are peremptory and oca
perpetual: now indeed we must speak of exceptions against the
which are available to the tenant against the person of EN
the claimant, which are dilatory and temporary. And ant and
in the first place of that which is objected to the WEE.
claimant, who cannot bring an action before a certain tory, as


time inasmuch as he is a minor and under age, especially minority. ^
in a cause of property, nor can he be convened, which
having been objected, if it has been established that he
is a minor, the action is adjourned until he has attained
his majority, but the writ does not abate, but let a
resummons for the trial be issued when he has come
of age, unless the action be of such a character that he


is bound to make answer to it under age. And since


f. 492.


330 DE EXCEPTIONIBUS.


mode judicade secūdū diversitate actiont, psonarü &
tenementorü, ideo de setatib? qualiter inter se differat
videam?: sed de hae materia & differentia ætatū
dieitur in pte supra in tractatu de custodia minoru
qui esse debent sub custodia et cura dominorü & p
quantum tépus. Sed quonia minor quandoq infra
minorem :etaté agere poterit & covenire majorem, &
quadoq cùm fuerit in seysina tenetur respondere infra
minorem zetatem in quibusda casibus tam minori qm
majori in quibusdà autem nec majori nec minori ante
plenà statem, videndü inprimis I quib? casibus infra
statem agere possit & petere, & que, & qua actione.
Et sciendü q in qualibet :etate petere poterit seysina
ppria, si fuerit disseysitus, p assisam nove disseysinz,
quandocung & qualitercunG fuerit disseysitus. Ite
seysina antecessorü cujuscü( p assisam mortis anteces-
soris, sed cum ita recuperaverit, no respondebit inde
ante plenà setate ad aliquod bře impetratu super pos-
sessione vel pprietate, sed liberü socagiü petere no
poterit ante tepus de seysina antecessoris p bře de
recto, ante setatem xiv. annoru, non magis qm feodu
militare anteqm effect? fuerit zetatis xxi. anni, hoc
est anteqm ipleverit xxi annu et xxii attigerit. Et
cu sic p bre de recto séysina pprià recuperaverit de
socagio, inde non respondebit ante plena setate, nec de
feodo militari, nee minori nec majori. Ité nec feodü
militare petere poterit ante tempus fpfinitü, sed tue
cùm recuperaverit p breve de recto & major effect?
fuerit, respondebit inde cuilibet majori cùm fuerit im-


OF EXCEPTIONS. 331


ages are divers and are to be judged in divers ways
according to the diversity of the actions, the persons,
and the tenements, therefore let us see concerning the
ages in what manner they differ from one another: but
concerning this matter and the difference of ages it has
been partly discussed above in the treatise concerning
the custody of minors, who ought to be under the cus-
tody and care of their lords, and for what length of
time. But since a minor may sometimes bring an action
whilst under age and may convene a person of full age,
and sometimes when he is in seysine he is bound to
answer whilst within minority in certain cases as well
to a minor as to a person of full age, but in certain
cases neither to a person of full age nor to a minor
before full age, we must see in the first place in what
cases he may bring an action and make a claim, when
under age, and what things, and by what action. And
it is to be known that at any age he may claim his own
seysine, if he has been disseysed, by an assise of novel
disseysine, at whatever time and in whatever manner
he may have been disseysed. Likewise the seysine of
any of his ancestors by an assise of mortdancester, but
when he has so recovered it, he shall not answer thereon
before full age to any writ sued out concerning the
property or the possession, but he cannot claim before
a given time a free socage tenement from the seysine of
an ancestor, by a writ of right, before the age of four-
teen years, no more than a military fief before he is
twenty-one years of age, that is before he has completed
twenty-one years and has reached the twenty-second.
And when he has thus by a writ of right recovered his
own seysine of a socage tenement, he shall not answer
thereon before he is of full age, nor concerning a military
fief, neither to a minor nor to a person of full age. Like-
wise he cannot claim a military fief before a definite
time, but then when he has recovered it by a writ of
right and has become of full age, he shall answer thereon


f. 422.


D
De quibus
minor ante
eetatem
debeat re-
spondere,
et de qui-
bus non.


332 DE EXCEPTIONIBUS.


placitatus, minori tamē non nisi in causa possessionis.
Sed esto q ipse minor vel custos suus alienaverit,
ğritur an minor ante ætatë possit revocare factu
ppriū vel custodis ? videtur q factū ppriū revocare no
possit ante ætatē, quia cùm ad setate pvenerit ratifi-
care poterit donū suu & facere validū, q ab initio non
valuit. Eodé modo nec factū custodis sui, cùm alie-
natio illa non multü noceat minori ante state, & tūc
recuperare suü habebit p breve de ingressu, nisi sit
qui dieat q facta alienatione statim possit minor per
assisam nove: disseysinee infra eetaté sibi pvidere. Si
auté plures sint minores non pticipes qui in causa
possessionis petant unicam rem versus eundé majore,
non possunt simul agere nec simul recuperare, sed
semper de ultima seysina erit judicandu, ut supra in
tractatu de assisa mortis antecessoris plenius.


Cu aute minor fuerit in seysina, videndum de quib?
teneatur respondere infra statem, et de quibus non.
Et sciendü q respondere tenetur, non obstate eetate,
majori in omni casu tam super pprietate qm super
possessione, & minori in causa possessionis, si fuerit
feoffatus in minori setate, et fere omnia habebit reme-
dia in exceptionibus et essoniis tam de malo veniedi
qm de malo, lecti, & in warranti vocatione, pterqm in
hoc q attornatü facere non possit. Et si hoc, sequitur
q essonia de malo lecti habere non poterit, ut si
languor ei fuerit adjudicatus & post languore venire
non possit, responsalé pro eo mittere non poterit non


OF EXCEPTIONS, DOO


to any one of fall age whenever he shall be impleaded;
but to a minor not unless in a cause of possession. But
let it be that a minor himself or his curator has alienated
a tenement, it is asked whether a minor can revoke the
act of himself or of his guardian before he is of full age,
it seems that he cannot revoke his own act before he is
of full age, because when he has attained his full age
he can ratify his gift and make it valid which was not
valid before. In the same manner he cannot revoke the
act of his guardian, since that alienation does not much
hurt the minor before he is of age, and then he may
recover his own by a writ of entry, unless there be some
one who says, that upon the alienation having been
made the minor may forthwith provide for himself by
an assise of novel disseysine whilst under age. But if
there be several minors not coparceners, who in a cause
of possession claim a single thing against the same
major, they cannot bring an action simultaneously nor
recover simultaneously, but judgment will always have
to be made concerning the last seysine, as above in the
treatise concerning an assise of mortdancester has been
more fully stated.


But when a minor is in seysine, it is to be seen con-
cerning what things he is bound to answer whilst under
age, and concerning what things not so. And it is to be
known that he is bound to answer, notwithstanding his
age, to a major in every case as well upon property as
upon possession, and to a minor in a cause of possession
if he has been enfeoffed during his minority, and he
shall have almost every remedy in exceptions and in
essoins as well for sickness on the way as for sickness
in bed, and in the vouching of a warrantor, except that
he cannot appoint an attorney. And if he does this, it
follows that he cannot have an essoin for bed-sickness,
as if languor has been adjudged to him and after his
languor he cannot come, he cannot send a person to
answer for him any more than appoint an attorney.


2;
Concern-
ing what
things a
minor
ought to
answer
when
under age,
and con-
cerning
what
things not.


Cf. fol. 45
b.


f. 422 b.


334 DE EXCEPTIONIBUS.


magis qm facere attornatü. Respondebit etia in minori


`ætate de facto suo & injuria sua ppria, tà in causa


criminali qm civili, du tamé civiliter agatur: ut si
minor disseysinà fecerit, ad assisam nove disseysinze
respodebit. Respddebit etia non obstate minori zetate
mulieri doté petéti ppter favore dotis. Fallit tame
in casu speciali, scilicet ubi avus alicuj? minoris dotavit
uxoré suam & ipsa mortuo viro suo dotem non
petiit p longum tempus, scilicet, x. xx. vel xxx.
annos in vita heredis viri sui, & mortuo heerede
illo ante assignatione dotis, herede suo infra setate
relicto, si mulier tüc petere poterit ex causa dotis,
talis heres non ita respodebit ei ante zetate suam,
sed obstabit ei exceptio minoris setatis usq ad statem
heredis, et eo q p tantü tépus tacuit, psumi poterit
q inter ipsa & heredem antecessoris intervenit pactum
de non petendo, vel quód remisit, & hujusm. Item
respondebit infra setate aliquando si res tangat ipsum
rege, quia infra setate inquiri poterit, salvo jure
minoris & salvo jure cujuslibet, utrum antecessor hære-
dis qui rem tenuit obiit inde seysitus ut de feodo vel
non, sicut de Wilhelmo Lungesper comite Sarum &
Elena uxore ejus d fuit infra setate, & ubi facta fuit
inquisitio de castro Sart cora Simone de Pateshul &
sociis ejus, utrü castrü illud cai com ptineret ad rege
scilicet vel ad pdietu Wilhelñ ratione Elenz uxoris
ejus, & ubi rex Henr postmodu retinuit p pdictam
inquisitione. Ite respodebit minor ad finem factü no
obstate setate, si implacitetur. Si autem alius fuerit
implacitatus & p finem factum minorem vocaverit ad


OF EXCEPTIONS, 335


He shall answer also during his minority concerning his
own act and any injury committed by him as well in
a criminal as in a civil cause, provided however the
proceedings are of a civil nature, as if a minor has made
a disseysine, he shall answer to an assise of novel dis-
seysine. He shall answer also notwithstanding his
minority to à woman claiming her dower on account
of the favour shown to dower. It fails however in a
special case, to wit, where the grandfather of a minor
has endowed his wife, and she after the death of her
husband has not claimed dower for a long time, to wit,
ten, twenty, or thirty years in the lifetime of the heir
of her husband, and upon the death of that heir before
the assignment of dower, his heir having been left a
minor, if the wife then can claim on account of dower,
such an heir shall not answer to her before he is of age,
but the exception of minority shall be an obstacle to her
until the full age of the heir, and inasmuch as she has
been silent so long, it may be presumed that between
herself and the heir of the ancestor there was an agree-
ment not to claim, or that she released it and such
like. Likewise he shall answer under age sometimes,
if the matter touches the king, because an inquest may
be made, saving the right of the minor and saving the
right of everybody, whether the ancestor of the heir who
held the property died seysed of it as of fee or not, as
concerning William Lungesper in the county of Sarum
and Elena his wife who was under age, and where an
inquest was held concerning the castle of Sarum before
Simon de Pateshull and his associates, whether that
castle with the county belonged to the king forsooth,
or to the aforesaid William by reason of Elena his wife,
and where king Henry afterwards retained it through
the aforesaid inquest. Likewise a minor shall answer
to a fine made notwithstanding his age, if he be im-
pleaded. But if another has been impleaded and
through making a fine has called a minor to warrant,


f. 422 b.


336 DE EXCEPTIONIBUS.


warrantü, in placito warrantize respondebit ppter fine
factum, sed cùm  warrantizaverit petenti non respon-
debit in principali placito ante szetatem: ut pbatur de
terfi S. Michaelis anno regni regis Hent xv. incipiente
xvi in com Essex de Alicia, quz fuit uxor Luce
Brokenhed. Ad idem facit in rotulo de term S. M.
anno regis H. xvi incipiente xvii in com Suff, de
Juliana, quse fuit uxor Alani de Giseham. Item infra
ctatem respodebit petenti ad assisam mortis anteces-
soris et ad alia brevia & ad alia placita, sive res cor-
poralis sive jura petantur, de omni de quo antecessor
minoris non obiit seysitus in dominico ut de feodo.
Ite si minor in minori zetate amiserit p assisam in
placito possessionis, sicut p assisam mortis antecessoris,
recuperabit major factus p breve de recto in placito
pprietatis. Ite infra setate respondebit minor tam de
facto alieno quàm pprio quoad restitutione, licet non
quoad pcenam, si pater vel alius antecessor suus (cujus
hæres ipse fuerit) disseysinam fecerit, cùm immediate
succedat in rem vitiosam, si contra ipsum agatur post
morte antecessoris per breve de ingressu. Quia vice
versa de nullo respondebit, de quo antecessor minoris
in seysina obiit seysitus in dominico suo ut de feodo.
Item infra ætatem respondebit quandoq ex obligatione
antecessorum facta in curia dñi regis de consilio curie,
ut si antecessor obligavit se ad respondendü alicui
certo die vel heredes suos, sive fuerit, plens setatis
sive infra state, si de eo humanitüs cotigerit, sicut
de heredibus Johannis de Monumew versus regem.
Minor etia cùm placitatus fuerit ante setate non respo-


OF EXCEPTIONS. Oot


he shall answer in the plea of warranty on account of
a fine having been made, but when he has warranted
to the claimant he shall not answer in the principal


: plea before he is of full age, as is proved in St. Michael's


term in the fifteenth and sixteenth years of the reign
of king Henry in the county of Essex, concerning ies
who was the wife of Luke Brokenhed. . To the same
effect is a case in the roll of St. Michael’s term in the -
sixteenth and seventeenth years of king Henry in the
county of Suffolk, concerning Juliana, who was the wife
of Alan de Giseham. Likewise he shall answer whilst
under age to a claimant in an assise of mortdancester
and to other writs and to other pleas whether corporeal
things or rights are claimed, concerning the whole of
which the ancestor of the minor did not die seysed in
domain as of fee. Likewise if a minor in his minority
has lost through an assise in a plea of possession as
through an assise of mortdancester, he shall recover
when he has come of age by a writ of right in a cause
of property. Likewise a minor shall answer when under
age as well concerning another’s act as concerning his own,
as regards restitution, although not as regards a penalty,
if his father or some other ancestor (whose heir he may
be) has caused a disseysine, since he immediately suc-
ceeds to a vicious title, if an action be brought against
him ‘after the death of his ancestor by a writ of entry.
Because conversely he shall answer for nothing, in sey-
sine of which the ancestor of the minor died seysed in
his own domain as of fee. Likewise he shall answer
when he is under age at any time upon an obligation of
his ancestors made in the court of the lord the king
upon a resolution of the court, as if an ancestor has
obliged himself or his heirs to answer to a certain person
on a certain day whether he shall be of full age or under
age, if he should go the way of all flesh, as in the case
of the heirs of J cm de Monumew against the king. A
minor likewise when he shall be impleaded before full
R 2657. i


f. 423.


3.
Breve, ne
minor re-
spondeat
infra æta-
tem de
libero
tenemento
suo donec
sit talis
etatis.


338 DE EXCEPTIONIBUS.


debit de aliquo, de quo antecessor suus (cujus hæres
ipse est) obiit seysitus ut de feodo, & quia (ut præ-
dictum est) quandoQ tenetur respondere infra setatem
& quandog non, ideo sine pjudicio suo fieri poterit
inquisitio infra statem; utra antecessor seysitus obiit
ut de feodo sibi & heeredibus suis, vel tantu ad ter-
mint vite vel annorü, vel ut de vadio vel in custodia
vel hujusmodi, ut de W. Lungesper. Et si forte infra
statem de hujusmodi aretatus fuerit ad respondendum,
suecurritur ei p tale, breve ne respondeat ante statem,
quia status minoris mutari non debet. Et facta sic
inquisitione aut remanebit placitum aut procedet. Rex
vicecomiti salute. Precipimus tibi quód non implacites
vel implaeitari permittas tale, qui est infra setate (ut
dieitur) de libero tenemento suo in tali villa, donec
idem talis talis sit setatis, q possit & debeat secundum
legem & consuetudii Anglize de tenemento respondere.
T. &c. ltem si aliquis minor! vocaverit ad warrantu
in com, ne tenens cogatur petenti in principali placito
respondere, vel ne ulterius pcedat in principali ante
ætatë fiat ei tale breve.


Rex vic. salut. Preecipim? tibi q nd pmittas q A.
implacitet B. de tanta terra cü ptinentiis in tali villa,
unde idé A. trahit ad warrantü C. qui est infra state
& warrant? ejus esse debet ut dicit, donee idem C. sit
talis plenz setatis, q possit et debeat secundü lege &
cosuetudiné Anglie terram warrantizare. Et hoc locum
habet si minor in com vocetur ad warrantü. Et ci
minor non teneatur respondere de aliquo, de quo ante-


! * minorem," MS. Rawl. C. 160.


OF EXCEPTIONS. 339


age shall not answer concerning anything, concerning
which his ancestor (whose heir he is) has died seysed
as of fee, and because (as said above) he is sometimes
bound to answer under age and sometimes not, therefore
without prejudice to him an inquest may be held whilst
he is under age, whether his ancestor died seysed [of a
tenement] as of fee for himself and his heirs, or only for
the term of his life or a term of years, or as a security
or by right of guardianship or such like, as in the case
of W. Lungesper. And if by chance whilst under age
he be constrained to answer to such like questions, he
is succoured by a writ of this kind, that he shall not
answer before he is of ace, because the status of a minor
ought not to be changed. And the inquest having been
so made either the plea shall be stayed or it shall pro-
ceed. The king to the viscount greeting. We enjoin
you that you do not implead or allow to be impleaded
so-and-so, who is under age (as it is said), concerning his
free tenement in such a vill, until the said so-and-so is
of such an age, that he can and ought to answer con-
cerning the tenement according to the law and custom
of England. Witness, &. Likewise if any one has
vouched a minor to warrant in a county court, let a writ of f. 423.
this kind issue to him, that the tenant shall not be com-
pelled to answer to the claimant in the principal plea,
or that he shall not proceed further in the principal plea
before he is of age.


The king to the viscount, health. We enjoin you that 3.
you do not permit that A. should implead B. concerning that a


j its appurtenances in such a vill, minor shall
so much land with i pp i Lane aa


whereof the said A. vouches as a warrantor C., who is under age
under age and ought to be his warrantor, as he says, EE
until C. be of such full age that he can and ought ac- hold until
cording to the custom of England to warrant the land. eee
And this has place if a minor should be vouched in- a age.
county to warrant. And since a minor is not found to

answer concerning any tenements of which his ancestor


Varo,


4,
Si plures
sunt heere-
des, quo-
rum qui-
dam infra
ætatem et
quidam
non.


Ds
Exceptio
ratione
adjuncti
sicut de


340 DE EXCEPTIONIBUS.


cessor suus seysitus obierit ut de feodo, à cdtrario
sensu videtur q respddere debeat de omni, de quo
antecessor suus non obiit seysitus ut de feodo, facta
prius inquisitione, sive res corporales petatur sive jura.
Seysiri aute poterit quis de re corporali in qua jus
habet, sive de jure ad rē vel ad psonam ptinente.
Et unde si de re corporali agatur et fuerit seysitus
afi et die quo fuerit vivus et mortuus, locü habet q
dicitur. Si aute jura sint, et in seysina fuerit añ &
die quo moriebatur, licet non fuerit usus aii & die
quo moritur, di tame no sit deusus, hoc est, q non
amittat p non usü, sicut dici poterit de servitutibus,
de pastu pecoris, et aliis cosimilibus.


Ite cùm nullus teneatur respodere ante plena setate,
tame si plures sint unü jus habétes quasi unu corpus,
licet plures süt plenz setatis & unus vel duo infra,
ili qui plene setatis sunt exceptione dilatoriam habe-
būt ex psona taliü quousq omnes plena setate habu-
erint, et sie exceptione cosequantur ex personis aliorü,
qm ex psonis ppriis non habebunt. Et q dicitur de
tenente, dici poterit de petente, ut si tenes sine pti-
cipibus suis qui sunt infra state respondere non tenea-
tur, viee versa tenenti à petente sine pticipibus non
debet respoderi, ut infra dicetur plenius de pticipibus.


Ite exceptione poterit habere quis ratione adjuncti,
q ex se ipso habere no poterit, sicut inter virum et
uxore, ut si vir plenae etatis existens ducat in uxore
aliqua cum heereditate q fuerit infra state, et implaci-


OF EXCEPTIONS. 341


died seysed as of fee, in a contrary sense it seems that
he ought to answer concerning everything of which his
ancestor did not die seysed as of fee, an inquest having
first been held, whether corporeal things or rights are
claimed. But a person may be seysed of a corpcreal
thing in which he has a right, whether of right pertain-
ing to the thing or to the person. And hence if the
action be concerning a corporeal thing and he has been
seysed in the year and on the day on which he was
living and died, what is said has place. Butif there are
rights and he has been in seysine in the year and on the
day on which he died, although he did not use them in
the year and on the day on which he died, provided how-
ever he had not disused them, that is that he does not
lose them on account of non-user, as may be said of
servitudes, of the pasture of sheep, and other like
things.


Likewise, since no one is bound to answer before full 4,
age, nevertheless if there be several who have one right pe
as if one body, although several be of fullage and one or eee
two below it, those who are of full age shall have a dila- Some are
tory exception founded on the person of the said minors ep
until all shall attain to full age, and so they shall obtain not.
an exception founded on the personal status of the others,
which they shall not have founded on their own per-
sonal status. And what issaid of a tenant may also be
said of a claimant, as if a tenant is not bound to answer
without his coparceners who are under age; conversely
the claimant is not bound to answer without his copar-
ceners to the tenant, as will be explained below more


fully concerning coparceners.


Likewise a person may have an exception by reason ^ 5.


: e ?LI An excep-
of an adjunct person, which he would not have of him- Mons P


self,as between husband and wife, as if the husband, ao of
e - 1 t
being of full age, should take to wife some one with an TEUR


inheritance who was under age, and they should be im- concerning


342 DE EXCEPTIONIBUS.


participe et tati fuerint de re uxoria ppter minore setatem uxoris


uxore.


6.
Si mulier
cum heere-
ditate
nupta
fuerit
minori vel
e con-
trario.


f. 428 b.


remanebit loquela sine die, quousd uxor (de cujus jure
agitur) effecta fuerit plenæ setatis. Si aute vir tenes
fuerit infra ztatem, & uxor plens setatis, cum impla-
citati fuerint, no remanebit loquela sine die ppter
minore statem viri sive ` nupta sit ante impetrationé
brevis vel post, quia mulier implacitata de jure suo
si ppter minorem etatem viri posset differre juditiu,
ita posset ülibet mulier in fraudé nubere viro minori
cu ptieipes haberet vel non, q esset iniquum, et sive
hereditas ptita esset sive no. Et ide dici poterit si
qua mulier nuberet villano, cùm fraus talibus patroci-
nari non debeat. Et de hac materia inveniri poterit,
s. de uxore majoris setatis et viro minoris, in rotulo
de term S. H. apud West. aii regis H. xv. in com
North, de W. Lungesper minore & Idonea uxore ejus
majore.


Si aute vir & uxor, vel è econtrario! hereditate et
rem uxoria simul petat, quorü unus eorü sit infra
etatem, si vir plenz setatis fuerit & uxor infra, sive
ante bre impetratum sive post contraxerint, remanebit
loquela sine die usi ad etatem uxoris Qd fuerit infra
ætatë, et hoc si nupserit ante bre impetratum. Si
autem post, cadit omnino bře si tenens voluerit, vel
differtur actio usq ad statem uxoris, de cujus jure
agitur. Si vero maritus fuerit infra setate et uxor
plens setatis, non remanebit loquela ppter minoré
ætate viri (ut supra) si cotraxerint ante bre. Si aute
minor petat contra minoré, vel major cotra majore,


! * ve] e contrario," omitted MS. Rawl. C. 160.'


OF EXCEPTIONS. 343


pleaded concerning a tenement of the wife’s, on account a copar-


of the minority of the wife the trial shall be stayed
without a day, until the wife, whose right should be at
Stake, has attained full age. But if the tenant husband
Should be under age and his wife should be of full age
when they have been impleaded, the trial shall not be
stayed without a day on account of the minority of the
husband, whether she has been married before the suing
out of the writ or after it, because a woman who is im-
pleaded concerning her own right, if she could delay the
judgment on account of the minority of her husband,
any woman could so fraudulently marry a minor when
she had coparceners or not, which would be inequitable,
and whether her inheritance was claimed or not. And
the same thing may be said if any woman married a
villein, since fraud ought not to protect such persons.
And on this subject a judgment will be found, namely,
concerning a wife of full age and a husband in his
minority, in the roll of St. Hilary’s term at Westminster,
in the fifteenth year of the reign of king Henry, in the
county of Northampton, concerning William Lungesper
a minor, and Idonea his wife of full age.


But if a husband and ‘wife, or contrariwise, claim


cener and
a wife.


6,


If a woman


simultaneously the inheritance and estate of the wife, with an


one of whom shall be under age,if the husband be of


inheritance
has been


full age and the wife under age, whether they have con- married to


tracted marriage before the writ was sued out or after


a minor or
the con-


it, the trial shall be stayed without a day until the verse.


majority of the wife who shall be under age, and this if
she shall have married before the writ was sued out.
But if after, the writ falls altogether if the tenant chooses,
or the action is deferred until the wife, whose right is at
stake, is of full age. But if the husband be under age
and the wife of full age, the trial shall not be stayed (as
above) on account of the minority of the husband, if
they have contracted marriage before the writ. But if
a minor claims against a minor, or a major against a


f, 423 b.


Ue
Status
minoris
mutari non
debet, nec
de tene-
mentis

nec de
servitio et
consuetu-
dinibus.


344 DE EXCEPTIONIBUS.


vel è cotrarid in causa possessionis, quid fieri debeat
satis dictum est supra in tractatu de ass. mor atec.
Si auté in causa pprietatis, nec petés petere poterit,
nee tenés tenebit ei respondere, sive petés major fuerit
sive minor ate plena setate.


Status enim minoris mutari nd debet no magis de
servitio & cosuetudine qm de teneméto, ut si de
minori petatur servitia & cósuetudines, de quib? pater
vel alius antecessor suus quietancià habuit aii et die
quo fuit vivus & mortuus, minor ante setate peteti
no respódebit. Ité nec mutari debet status suus, ut
si servitia & cdsuetudines debite exigatur à minore,
& pater vel alius antecessor illa fecerit alii dio capi-
tali, gm ei qui nune petit, aii et die quo fuit vivus
et mortu?, minor petéti no respodebit ante setate, quia
ab eo cui antecessor solvit recedere no potest ante
wtate: & sic no mutatur status minoris ante setate,
sive sit tenemétii, sive servitiü, sive libertas, sive quid
tale; dum tame p inquisitione costiterit de veritate,
cü tali ptestatione, q salvü sit jus minoris cùm ad
eetaté pvenerit, no obstantib? chartis vel instrumentis
antecessoru in cótrariü facietib?, ci minor ad chartas
infra setate respodere non possit, ut si custos nomine
minoris e;suetudines & servicia petat de quibus pater
vel alius antecessor minoris seysit? obiit, licet. tenétes
chartas sufficictes vel alia instruméta ostenderint, q
aliter tenere debeant & p alia servitia, p seysina
antecessoris & p minore judicabitur, quia ad chartas
respondere no potest. Et vice versa, si minor indebita
petat servitia & cosuetudines, & tenentes sui quie-


OF EXCEPTIONS, 345


major, or contrariwise in a cause of possession, what
ought to be done has been sufficiently explained in an
assise of mortdancester. But if in a cause of property,
neither the claimant can claim nor shall the tenant be
obliged to answer to him, whether the claimant be in his
majority or minority, before he is of full age.


For the status of a minor ought not to be changed "uo ers
concerning a service or a custom any more than concern- of a minor
ing a tenement, as if services or customs are claimed ong mo
from a minor concerning which his father or other an- changed,
cestor had an acquittance in the year and on the day on HE
which he was alive and dead, the minor before he is of tenements
age shall not answer to the claimant. Likewise, neither putet
ought his status to be changed, as if due services and service or
customs be required from a minor, and his father or St
other ancestor has done them to another chief lord than
to him, who now claims, in the year and on the day on
which he was alive and dead, the minor shall not answer
to the claimant before he is of age, because he cannot
before he is of age withdraw himself from him to whom
his ancestor paid them: and thus the status of the minor
is not changed before he is of age, whether it be a tene-
ment, or a service, or a franchise, or something of that
kind, provided however it be ascertained concerning the
truth by an inquest, with a protest of this kind that the
right of the minor shall be preserved when he comes of
age, notwithstanding charters or instruments of his an-
cestors making to the contrary, since a minor cannot
answer to charters whilst he is under age, as if a guar-
dian in the name of a minor claims customs and services,
of which the father or other ancestor of the minor died
seysed, although the tenants exhibit sufficient charters
and other instruments, that they ought to hold otherwise
and by other services, judgment shall be given for the
seysine of the ancestor and for the minor, because he
cannot answer to the charters. And conversely, if the
minor claims undue services and customs, and the tenants


f. 424,


346 DE EXCEPTIONIBUS.


tancià allegaverint q die & aii &e. ante state minoris
no respodebit. Eodé modo si dius capitalis minoris
indebita servitia, consuetudines et incosuetas petat à
minore. Idé eti& erit q status minoris mutari no
debet, ut si pater vel alius antecessor minoris alidm
tenenté suum acquietaverit de servitio illo versus
superiores dominos capitales anno, die &c. ille minor
eundé sine aliqua conditione acquietabit. Quod quide
dici poterit de illo qui terra aliquam dederit alicui
domui religiosee in liberam, puram et ppetuam elee-
mosynam, si abbas vel prior distringatur pro aliquo
servitio forinseco vel alio, si anno & die, quo ante-
cessor minoris donator obiit, fuit talis drens in sey-
sina de acquietancia, ita q antecessor minoris eum
acquietaverit, heres quamvis minor eum acquietabit :
ut de term S. Michaelis anno regni regis Henrici
nono incipiente decimo in comitatu Kane. de priore
de Merton & Nigello de Mumbrey. Et idem erit licet
warrant? nihil solverit nec acquietaverit, cùm à capi-
tali dio anno & die nihil sit petitum. Ité si de
maritagio alicujus vel de alia re agatur, unde minor
vocatus fuerit ad warrantü, si anno et die quo ante-
cessor minoris fuit vivus & mortuus, fuit ide ante-
cessor seysitus de maritagio illo, minori infra setate
respodebitur: ut de term S. Michaelis anno regni
regis H. nono incipiente decimo in com Eborü de W.
de Carleton & R. de Percy. Item casus de minore
quod si quis pepigerit cum dño capitali ne heres
suus sit in custodia cùm fuerit infra setate, vel ne
releviü det cùm plenam setate habuerit, & talis domi-
nus capitalis superiore capitale habeat dominü, si


! * indebita servitia et inconsueta petat a minore," MS. Rawl. C. 160,


OF EXCEPTIONS. 347


allege an acquittance of themselves that on a day and in
a year, &c., he shall not answer before the full age of the
minor. In the same manner if the minor's chief lord
claims undue services and unusual customs from the
minor. The same thing will happen that the status of
the minor ought not to be changed, as if the father or
other ancestor of the minor has acquitted a certain
tenant of his of the said service towards his chief lords
in the year and on the day, the said minor shall acquit
him without any condition. Which, indeed, may be
said of him who has given a certain land to a certain
religious house as free, pure and perpetual alms, if an
abbot or prior be distrained for some forinsie or other
service, if in the year and on the day, on which the an-
cestor who was the donor died, the said claimant was in
seysine of an acquittance, so that the ancestor of the
minor acquitted him, the heir although a minor shall
acquit him, as in St. Michael's term in the ninth and
tenth years of the reign of king Henry,in the county
of Kent, concerning the prior of Merton and Nigel de
Mumbrey. And the same thing will happen although
the warrantor has neither paid nor acquitted anything,
when nothing has been claimed by the chief lord for a
year anda day. Likewise if proceedings are had con-
cerning the maritage of a certain person, or some other
thing, whereof the minor has been vouched to warrant,
if in the year and on the day when the ancestor was
alive and died, the said ancestor was seysed of that mari-
tage, an answer shall be given to the minor whilst under
age; as in St. Michael's term in the ninth and tenth
years of the reign of king Henry, in the county of York,
concerning W. de Carleton and R. de Perey. Likewise
the case of a minor, that if any one has made a pact
with his chief lord that his heir shall not be in his guar-
dianship when he is under age, or that he shall not give
a relief when he comes of age, and such chief lord has a
superior chief lord, if it happens that both tenants die,


f. 424.


348 DE EXCEPTIONIBUS.


cotingat utrum tenété mori, heredibus eorü infra
etatem existentib?, & custodia heredis tenentis medii
devenerit in manü superioris capitalis diii, non possit
heres tenentis inferioris liberari quin fit in custodia
superioris capitalis dñi, vel quin relevium det si
major fuerit, non obstante charta vel cóventione facta
cum tenente medio, nisi talis heres ostendere poterit
q charta sic usitata fuerit q alius heres pcedens
quietanciam habuerit, q per talé conventionem sub
custodia superioris capitalis diüi non extiterit, vel q
releviü non dediderit, ut de comitissa de Insula capi-
tali domina, & W. de Crecure tenente suo, & W. de
Honywell tenente W. de C, & unde idem W. de
Crecure fuit medius inter comitissa & W. de Hony-
well Quod aute dicitur q status minoris mutarr non
debet in rebus corporalibus, sic nec in juribus nec in
libertatib?, ut si alicui concedatur libertas de faciendo
aliquid in alieno, vel in proprio, vel de utedo fruendo
in alieno, vel de habendo in alieno, vel in pprio: de
faciendo gurgite, stagnü, molendinü, piscariam, vel
hujusmodi, de utendo fruendo, sicut eundi, agendi,
aquam ducendi, faleandi, fodiendi, vel hujusmodi.
Item de habendo in pprio ferias, mercata, furcas, vel
hujusmodi, tol & theam, licet ille cujusmodi jura
conceduntur statim non utatur, tunc est quasi in
seysina, & jus illud transmittit ad heredem suum
majorem vel minorem, & semper videtur uti, donec
amiserit per non usum, hoe est donee omminó eject?
fuerit & disseysit?, vel q comode uti non possit, & sic
nihil transmittit ad heredé nisi tantü actione de sey-
sina sua vel quasi recuperanda, quam in vita sua


OF EXCEPTIONS. 349


their heirs being under age, and the guardianship of the
intermediate tenant shall have come into the hand of
the superior chief lord, the heir of the inferior tenant
cannot be released from being in the guardianship of the
superior chief lord, or from giving a relief if he should
become of age, notwithstanding a charter or convention
made with the intermediate tenant, unless the said heir
can show that the charter was so usual that another pre-
ceding heir had an acquittance, that through such a con-
vention he was not under the guardianship of a superior
chief lord, or that he did not give a relief, as in the case of
the countess de l'Isle, a chief lady, and W. de Crecure
her tenant, and W. de Honywell the tenant of W. de
Crecure, and whereby W. de Crecure was intermediate
between the countess and W. de Honywell. But as to
what is said that the status of the minor ought not to be
changed in corporeal things, so neither in rights nor in
franchises, as if there be granted to a certain person the
liberty of doing something in another person's tenement
orin his own: or of enjoying a certain usufruct in
another's tenement, or of having something in another's
tenement or in his own of making a waterfall or a pool,
or a mill, or a fishery, or something of the like kind, of
using and enjoying, to wit, a pathway, a bridleway, an
aqueduct, a right of reaping or digging, or such like. Like-
wise of having on one's own land fairs, markets, gallows,
and such like, tol and theam, although he, whose rights
are granted, does not immediately use them, he is then
as it were, in seysine of them, and transmits that right
to his heir, whether he be in his majority or his
minority, and he seems always to use it, until he shall
have lost it by non-user, that is until he has been alto-
gether ejected and disseysed, or because he cannot con-
veniently use them, and so he transmits nothing to his
heir except only an action concerning his seysine or the
recovery of it, as it were, which he has lost in his life-
time, which his heir, although he be a minor, shall


8.
Replicatio,
si in assisa
mortis
anteces-
soris vel
in placito
per breve

f. 424 b.
de recto
objieiatur
minori


350 DE EXCEPTIONIBUS.


amisit, qua hæres, licet minor sit, in minori eetate re-
cuperabit per bře de ingressu: quia sicut minor ad.
tale bře de ingressu infra statem respondere tenetur,
sic à fortiori ratione ei in consimili casu respodebitur.
Cüm auté quis hujusmodi jura ex donatione regis vel
alterius, vel ex costitutione dominorü fundi & liber-
tatis talis habuerit & illis usus fuerit, seysina & usti
trasmittit ad herede, et eandé seysina habebit hæres,
sive major fuerit sive minor, qua habuit antecessor.
Et cü semel in seysina fuerit, status suus mutari non
poterit, secundü q antecessor suus obiit seysitus vel
quasi. Et in hujusmodi non amittit quis, licet statim
no utatur, lieet uti possit, donec fuerit disseysitus, vel
cüm statim uti no possit quia casus non evenit q uti
posset. Sed si casus evenerit q uti posset & tune non
utatur, sed alius, vel cùm uti velit, impediatur q uti
no possit, vel non comodé, & sie disseysitus, in minore
state heeredis non poterit status antecessoris mutari,
nisi ex nova actione p heredé de seysina. Sed si
hæres in seysina fuerit, nemini infra ætatem respon-
debit. Et sie status suus mutari non poterit.


Cùm autem minori opposita fuerit exceptio minoris
setatis, quód petere non possit per breve de recto, vel
seysinam antecessoris sui versus custodem, respondere
poterit & replicare & dicere, major sum & plenæ
statis, et hoc bene patet, quia omnes domini mei, de
quibus teneo prseter te, reddiderunt mihi hereditaté
meam, et me habent p majore, vel respondere poterit,
q state suam pbavit coram talibus Et quoniam ali-


quod placi- quando de setate dubitari poterit, videndu erit qualiter


tare non


pbatur stas, quia respondere poterit tenens replica-


OF EXCEPTIONS. 351


recover in his minority by a writ of entry, for as a
minor is bound to answer whilst he is in his minority
to such a writ of entry, so, for stronger reasons, he is en-
titled to obtain an answer in a similar case. But when
a person has had these rights from a donation of the
king or another person, or from a constitution of the
lord of the estate and of the said franchise, and has used
them, he transmits the seysine and the use to his heir,
and the heir shall have the same seysine, whether he be
in his majority or his minority, which his ancestor had.
And when he has been once in seysine, his statws cannot
be changed, according as his ancestor has died seysed
or as it were seysed. And in this sort of right a per-
son does not lose it, although he may not immediately
use it, notwithstanding he may be able to useit, until
he has been disseysed, or when he cannot use it forth-
with, because the occasion has not arisen that he could
use it. But if the occasion has arisen that he could
use it and then he does not use it, but another, or when
he wishes to use it, he is impeded so that he cannot
use it, or not conveniently, and so is disseysed, during
the minority of the heir the status of the ancestor can-
not be changed except by a new action through the heir
concerning the seysine. But if the heir should be in
seysine he shall answer to no one whilst he is under age,
And so his status will not be able to be changed.


But when an exception of minority has been opposed s.

T 1 : A replica-
to a minor that he cannot claim by a writ of right, or the fons in
seysine of his ancestor against a guardian, he may an assise

OECD of mort-
answer and reply and say, I am of majority and of.
full age, and this is very evident, because all my lords, ora

. à ea a
“from whom I hold besides yourself, have restored to b oP
me my inheritance and treat me as of majority, or he 424.
may answer, that he has proved his age before so-and- right it be
c E T x objected to
so. And since sometimes it may be doubted concerning Me or
his age, we must see how full age is proved, because that he can


the tenant may answer to his replication, that he is ™™ plead,


352 DE EXCEPTIONIBUS.


possit quia tioni sua q non est plene etatis, quia si restituta sit

minor est ci heereditas hoc fuit in fraude, nec illi debet pju-
dicare fraus illa. Item si respondeat petens q plenz
setatis sit, q setate suam pbaverit per inquisitionem &
per patria, responderi poterit à tenente quod hoc ei
nocere non debet, quia juratores male juraverint, vel
q justieiarii male decepti fuerint, si pbata fuit setas
per aspectum corporis. Item responderi poterit q non
est plen: etatis quantum ad socagiü, nec quantum ad
feodum militare. Item licet quantum ad socagiü, non
tamen ad feodum militare. Item si dicat q major sit
quia in curia domini regis placitavit, sicut ille qui
plenz setatis est, et ibi p judicium recuperavit.


9. Sed omnis talis responsio plenam & sufficiente proba-
Damen tionem setatis non inducit, nisi tantum una, d sit per
expre- parentes & testes sufficienter examinatos, et omnes
T ot alie inducunt psumptiones, sicut aspectus corporis &
tum cor- alie. Sed tamen dam admittunt pbationem in con-
iss trarium & qdam nullam, sicut p aspectum corporis p

visum justiciaril, ut si appareat talis q psumi possit
de eo vehementer q plenæ etatis fuerit, ut si fuerit
barbatus, statura magnus, vel hujusmodi, et cùm
justiciarii talem adjudicaverint p majore, p majore
habebitur quantum ad omnes, et non erit ulteriüs
contra eorum judicium disputandu. Sed quoniam
appareat ssepius quód aliquis major sit cùm sit minor,
et è contrarió cùm minor sit apparet esse major, et
ex hoe dubitaverint justiciarii, de necessitate recur-
rendum est ad pbationem patrie & parentü, sive minor
petat sive petatur ab eo. Sed qualiter hoc fieri debeat
videndu.


OF EXCEPTIONS.


Q2


-9
99


not of full age, because if his inheritance has been because he
restored to him it has been restored fraudulently, nor epu
ought that fraud to prejudice him. Likewise if the
claimant should answer that he is of full age, that he

has proved his age by an inquest and by the country, it

may be answered by the tenant that this ought not to

hurt him, because the jurors have sworn badly, or be-

cause the justiciaries have been badly deceived, if age

has been proved by the look of the body. Likewise

it may be answered that he is not of full age as regards

socage, nor as regards a military fief. Likewise although

he may be of age as regards socage-tenure, he is not so
however as regards a military fief. Likewise if he shall

say that he is of majority because he has pleaded in the

court of the lord the king, just as he who is of full age,

and he has there recovered by a judgment.


But every answer of this kind does not induce a full | 9.
and sufficient proof of age, except one kind only, which Ta
is made through parents and witnesses sufficiently exa- Proof of
: : ; 5 age by the
mined, and all the others give rise to a presumption, look of the
such as the look of the body and others. But notwith- body.
standing this some persons admit a proof to the contrary,
and some persons not, so as by the look of the body by
the view of the justiciaries, as if a person should appear
such that a strong presumption arises concerning him
that he is of full age, as if he should be bearded, great
in stature, or such like, and when the justiciaries have
. adjudged such a person to be of majority, he shall be
held to be of majority as regards all persons, and no
further dispute is to be raised against their judgment.

But since it is repeatedly apparent that a person is of
majority when he is a minor, and on the contrary when
he is a minor he appears to be of full age, and thereupon
the judges have doubted, of necessity recourse must be
had to the proof of the neighbours and of the relatives, if
either a minor is the petitioner or a petition is brought
against him. But how this is to be done ought to be seen.
R 2657. Z


10.
Si justi-
ciarii dubi-
taverint,
cum vene-
rint,


ine
Qualiter
probatur
ætas per
patriam
cum per
aspectum
corporis
probari
non possit,
et per
quos.


f. 425,


12.
Ex præ-
sumptione,
ut si quis


954 DE EXCEPTIONIBUS.


Et sciendü q per duodecim legales homines vel
plures si opus fuerit, quorum quidam de parentela
ejus qui dicit se esse majorem, et quidà qui non sunt
de parentela cjus, p quos rei veritas melius sciri poterit,
et qui examinati nulla ràtione inveniantur suspecti, sed
certis judiciis manifesti: & est forma sacramenti.


Jurare enim debent, q talis habet ad minus viginti
et unum annum & plus, vel q non sit viginti et unius
anni.  Jurare autem debet primus sie, quód habet
viginti & unum annum et amplius si fuerit masculus.
Si autem fcmina quód habet quatuordecim vel quin-
decim annos et amplius, sie me Deus adjuvet & sancta
Dei Evangelia, &c. Et post primum alius sic: Et illud
sacramentum q talis fecit verum est, sicut me Deus
adjuvet, et sic alii omnes. Et sic admittetur minor
ad agendü vel respondendü seeundü diversitatem tene-
mentorum, vel si dixerit contrarium non admittetur,
Et quód ita pbari debeat ætas, habetis de termino
Sancti Michaelis anno regni regis Henrici tertio incipi-
ante quarto in comitatu Sussex de Johanne de Bruse
et Reginaldo Bruse, quia justiciarii per aspectum. cor-
poris non possunt esse certi de etate pdicti J. Et
ideo consideratum fuit, quod fierev pbatio per patriam
et p parentes. Sed hic quód assumi debeant parentes,
videndum erit utrum fieri debet pbatio pro minori
vel eontra minorem, quia sive sie sive sie, in omni
casu possunt parentes esse testes suspecti. Alize vero
responsiones omnes quia leve inducüt psumptioné ad-
mittunt pbationem in contrariu.


Probatur quandod stas ex psumptione etiam in-
directe, & sine corporis aspectu, & sine testium pduc-
tione, ut si quis agat cotra alium & gerat se p majore,


OF EXCEPTIONS, 355


And it is to be known that through twelve loyal men 10.
or more if it be necessary, some of whom shall be of the hn
relatives of him who says that he is of full age, and some have |
who are not of his relatives, through whom the truth of See
the matter may be better known, and who on examina- have come.
tion have been found to be in no manner suspect, but
manifest by certain judgments, and there is a form of


oath.


For they ought to swear that so-and-so has at least 11.
twenty-one years and more, or that he is not of the age PU
of twenty-one years. But the first ought to swear in proved by
this manner, that he has twenty-one years and more, if a E
it bea male. But if it be afemale, that she has fourteen it cannot
or fifteen years and more, so may God help me and the > eee
holy gospels of God, &c. And after the first then another of the
thus: and the oath which so-and-so has made is true, so hea à
may God help me, and so all the others. And so a minor whom.
shall be admitted to proceed and to answer aecording to
the diversity of tenements, or if he has said the contrary,
he shall not be admitted. And that full age ought to be so
proved, you have a case in St. Michael's term in the third
and fourth year of king Henry, in the county of Sussex,
concerning John de Bruse and Reginald Bruse, because
the justiciaries could not be certain from the look of the
body concerning the age of John. And therefore it was
held that proof should be made through the neighbours
and the relatives. But in this matter that the relatives
should be called in, it will have to be seen whether the
proof ought to be made in behalf of a minor or against a
minor, because whether so or whether soin every case the f. 425.
relatives may be suspected. But all other answers,
because they induce a slight presumption, admit of proof


to the contrary.


Full age is sometimes proved from a presumption 12.


even indirectly, and without a look of the body and From AS


without the production of witnesses, as if a person pro- tion, as if
Z 2


alios pla-
citaverit,
sicut
major,


356 DE EXCEPTIONIBUS.


sive major sit sive non, aliis agentibus cotra se re-
spondebit, si forte contra pcessum & factum suum dicat
se esse minorem, quia ex quo semel se fecit majorem
& p se, contra se habeatur p majore. Item ex psump-
tione, ut si aliquis alios implacitaverit sicut major,
aliis respondebit ut major. Item pbari poterit quando
ætas p assisam, et p juratores assise tantum, quando
exhibitis aliis ex causa parentibus et vicinis, ut si
quis qui in custodia extiterit petat hsereditate suam
versus capitalem dominü p assisam mortis antecessoris,
et objiciatur ei q non sit plens setatis, et quo casu,
cüm sie pbata fuerit :etas, sufficit, nec in contrarium
admittitur convictio, vel alia pbatio propter consensum,
maxime quantum ad illum qui hujusmodi exceptione
objecit, licet (secundum quosdam) non teneat quantum
ad alios, quia hujusmodi juratores falli possunt vel
falsum facere sacramentü prece vel precio corrupti.
Si autem minorem se dieat quis, ciun sit major, et ad
tuitione sui pretendat minorem etatem q non respon-
deat, sufficit quód probetur ætas quocunque modo, ut
sic respondeat petenti, et per hoe tenebitur respondere
omnibus aliis. Item ubi et quando debeat ætas probari
videndü, & sciendum quód in curia domini regis sine
resummonitione, ubi ille cui objicitur minor ætas petens
fuerit per assisam mortis antecessoris versus dominum
capitalem. Si autem objecta fuerit pro se ne respon-
deat ante setatem, vel contra se à tenente ne ei re-
spondeatur, tune post resummonitionem fiat probatio


OF EXCEPTIONS. 357


ceeds against another and holds himself out to be of full
age, whether he be of full age or not, he shall answer to
others proceeding against him, if by chance in contra-
diction to his proceeding and his act he should say that
he was a minor, for from the time when he has once
made himself out to be of full age and for his own
advantage, he shall be held to be of full age as against
himself. Likewise from a presumption, as if a person
has sued others as if he were of full age, he shall answer
to others as if he were of full age. Likewise full age
may sometimes be proved by an assise, and by the jurors
of an assise alone, others being sometimes produced upon
cause shown who are relatives or neighbours, as if a
person who has been under a guardian claims his inherit-
ance against his chief lord by an assise of mortdancester,
and it be objected to him that he is not of full age, and
in which case, when his age has been so proved, it is
sufficient, nor is a conviction admitted to the contrary or
any other proof on account of consent, especially as regards
him who has raised an objection of this kind, although
(according to some) it does not hold good as regards
others, because jurors of this kind may be deceived or
make a false oath corrupted by entreaty or by money.
But if a person says that he is a minor when he is of
full age, and for his own protection pretends minority,
that he may not answer, it is sufficient that his age
should be proved in any manner whatsoever, that he
may so answer to the claimant, and he shall be thereby
bound to answer to all others. Likewise it is to be con-
sidered where and when full age ought to be proved,
and it is to be known that in the court of the lord the
king without a resummons, where he, to whom minority
is objected, is the claimant by an assise of mortdancester
against his chief lord. But if it has been objected on
his behalf that he should not answer before he is of
full age, or against him by a tenant that he may not be
required. to make answer to him, then after a resummons


a person
has sued
others as if
of full age.


358 DE EXCEPTIONIBUS.


statis si inde dubitetur, et fiat resummonitio ad in-
stantiam petentis per hoc breve.


13. Rex vicecomiti salutem. Summoneas per bonos
De resum- : x T : Sen qt 55 4
monendo Summonitores A. quód sit coram justiciarlis nostris


loquelam apud &c. auditurus recordum & judicium suum de
ad curiam — TA E e 3 s =
que re- loquela (fuit in eade curia coram &c. inter B. petente
dM sine et Pdictum A, tenente, de tanta terra cum  ptinentiis
le propter , : 3 ‘ . é yx is
minorem in tali villa, ita q loquela illa tune sit ibi in eodem
etatem. — statu in quo fuit quando remasit sine die, eo q pdictus
A. tune fuit infra setatem, & nune habet setate ut
dieitur. Et habeas ibi sumonitores & hoc breve. Teste
&e. Cùm autem ad curiam venerit, si de state dubi-
tetur, fiat pbatio ut supra. Si autem constiterit q
plenee setatis fuerit, tune pcedat loquela inter partes.
Si autem nondum plenz setatis, tune inquiratur infra
q tempus plenz setatis esse possit, et fiat inde mentio
in rotulis, Cùm autem probata fuerit setas contra
dominü capitalem eum petens recuperaverit seysinam,
tune si vastum faetum fuerit, vel destructio, fiat bie
de seysina facienda & de inquisitione de vasto simul
& in uno bii in hae forma.


14. Rex vic. salute, Scias q A. filius & heres B. in


Breve,cum : nde. ex een j
ds curia nostra coram &c. per judieiü ejusdé curiz nostr,
recupera- Sicut ille qui in eadem curia nostra zetatem suam
verit jam 5 BAe E *

DES fae. pbaverit, legitime recuperavit seysinam suam versus


an versus C. de terris & tenementis quæ fuerunt pdicti B. patris
ominum ae .

capitalem, SUi in balliva tua, quarum terrarum et tenementorü
f.495 5». Idem C. habuit custodiam de concessione nostra. Et


et similiter ideo tibi pcipimus q eidem A. de omnibus terris &


OF EXCEPTIONS. 5 359


let there be proof made of bis full age, if it be doubted
thereon, and let a resummons be made at the instance of
the claimant by a writ of this kind.

The king to the viscount greeting. Summon by good _ 13.

summoners A. that he present himself before our jus- uem
ticiaries &c., in order to hear the record and his judgment resummon-
concerning the cause which was in the same court before eS
&c., between B. as claimant and the aforesaid A. as hearing,
tenant, concerning so much land with its appurtenances eur d
in such a vill, so that the said cause shall then be in the uerbo. E
same state in which it was when it was stayed without day on
a day, inasmuch as the aforesaid A. was then under age, ud
and now he has full age as it is said. And have there
present the summoners and this writ. Witness, &oc.
But when he has come to the court, if there be doubt
as to his full age, let there be proof made as above.
But if it be established that he is of full age, then let
the cause be argued between the parties. But if it be
established that he is not yet of full age, then let it be
inquired within what time he may be of full age, and
let mention be made thereof in the rolls. But when full
age has been proved against a chief lord, when the
claimant shall have recovered seysine, then if waste has
been made or destruction, let a writ issue for making
seysine and for an inquest concerning waste at the same
time and in one writ in this form.

The king to the viscount greeting. Know that A. 14.
the son and heir of B. in our court before &e. by ge
judgment of our said court, just as he who has proved person
in our said court his full age, has legitimately recovered i
his seysine against C. of the lands and tenements which jority has
belonged to the aforesaid B. his father in your baili- HACIA
wick, of which lands and tenements the said C. had the against his

d : - + chief lord,
custody from our grant. And accordingly we enjoin ¢ 425p,
you that you cause the said A. to have plenary seysine and at the
without delay of all the lands and tenements which same time


360 DE EXCEPTIONIBUS.


de vasto tenementis que fuerunt pdicti B. patris sui, vel que

ue fuerüt in manu [dieti C. de eadé cdcessione nřa in
balliva tua, sine dilatione plenarià seysina habere facias.
Et quonià testatü est cora pfatis justic. nostris q
pdietus C. dū terra illa fuit in manu sua de pdicta
concessione nfa magnü inde fecit vastü & exiliu, in
domibus, gardinis, boscis, et aliis ad exheeredationem
ipsius A., tibi peipimus q assumptis tecum xii. tam
militibus quàm aliis liberis & legalibus hominibus &c.
ut supra, accedas ad pdictam terra et per eorum sacra-
mentum &c. Et unde idem A. qritur q pdictus C.
vastum fecit et destructionem ad valentiam tanti, et
inquisitionem mittas &c.


Cap. XXII.


E Quoniam vero multis de causis et rationibus. possunt
es loquela poni sine die in curia domini regis, et cessanti-
resummo- bus vel terminatis causis illis necesse sit loquelas illas
RDUM resummonere, ideo videndum qualiter. fieri debeant
fut sime  resummonitiones ex causis diversis, et de aliquibus
2o dietum est supra, videlicet qualiter debet resummoneri

loquela que ppter bastardiam transmittatur ad curiam
Christianitatis, et sic in curia regis remansit sine die.
Item si propter minorem statem, si minor petat vel
ab eo petatur: nune autem dicendum si remanserint
sine die eo q minor vocatus sit ad warrantum, et
tunc sic.


` A Rex vicecom salutem. Summoneas per bonos sum-
reve de


resummo- Monitores A. q sit &e ut supra, auditurus recordum


nendolo- et judicium suum de loquela que fuit in eadem curia
quelam, ubi b


remansit Da inter D. petente et C. tenentem de tanto terre


OF EXCEPTIONS. 361


belonged to his said father B., or which were in the concerning
hand of the aforesaid C. from our said grant in your ador
bailiwiek. And since it has been testified before our writ.
aforesaid justiciaries that the said C., whilst that land

was in his hand from our aforesaid grant, has made great

waste and exile in houses, gardens, woods and other

things to the disherison of the said A., we enjoin you

that having assumed to yourself twelve as well knights as

other free and loyal men, &c. as above, you visit that land

and by their oath &e. And whereof the said A. com-

plains that the aforesaid C. has made waste and destruc-

tion to the value of so much, and send an inquest, &c.


CHAPTER XXII.


Since indeed for many causes and reasons hearings may T
be put down in the court of the lord the king without a Now
day, and the causes ceasing or having been terminated resummons
: ; 1 CP EO NE
it becomes necessary to resummon them for hearing, Surt of a
we must accordingly see in what manner resummonses cause for
Er a : hearing
ought to be made from divers causes, and concerning wy: has
some it has been treated above, forsooth in what manner beenstayed
: . without a
a cause ought to be resummoned for hearing, which duy.
on account of bastardy is transmitted to the court of
Christianity, and so has been stayed without a day in:
the court of the king. Likewise if on account of
minority, if a minor claims or a claim is made against
him; but now we must treat of the case where they
have been stayed without a day,inasmuch as a minor


has been vouched to warrant, and then thus.


The king to the viscount greeting. Summon by good n 2.

: “fl writ to
summoners A. that he be &c. as above, in order to hear MEA MEE
the record and his judgment concerning the cause which a cause for

: : z : hearing
stood for hearing in our said court between B. the "7^8


claimant and C. the tenant concerning so much land has been
1 i ; stayed
with its appurtenances in such a vill, and whereof the 4, bTA


862 DE EXCEPTIONIBUS.


sine die Ca ptinentiis in tali villa, et unde idem C. (qui tenens
I) vocavit ad warrantuü pdictum A. et ita q loquela
minors, llla tune sit in eodem statu quo fuit quando remansit
"D cce sine die, eo q idem A. tune fuit infra setate, et qui
warran- nunc habet zetatem ut dieitur. Et sumoneas per bonos
rue sumonitores pdietum A. q tune sit ibi ad warrantizan-

dum predicto C. terram illam, vel ad ostendendum

quare warrantizare nd debeat, et habeas ibi sumoni-


tores et hoc bre. Teste &e.


a Si aute remanserit sine die propter iter justie. tune
eee mee sic: sumoneas &c. ut supra, ita q loquela illa tune
justiciario- sit ibi in eodé statu in quo fuit quando remansit sine
rm Pt die ppter iter justieiariorü p singulos com, vel sie:
regis. quando posita fuit coram justiciariis ad primam assisam

cüm ad partes illas venissent, ad quas nondü venerint
sicut pvisum fuit, vel aliter: si remansit sine die p
servitio dni regis, tunc sic: Ita q loquela illa tunc sit
in eodé statu, in quo fuit quando remansit sine die, eo
q predictus talis profect? fuit in partes transmarinas
in servitio nostro, vel alibi per preceptum nostrum, et


f.426, de quibus idem talis reversus est ut dicitur.


ý 4. Item aliter, si in Terram Sanctam, et tune sic. Ita
em prop- 5 H . H H å
ter boots q loquela illa tune sit in eodem statu in quo fuit die


nationem quo remansit sine die, eo q fpdictus talis profectus
in Terram


Sanctam. fuit in Terram Sanctam, de qua nune reversus est ut


dicitur.
5. Item si placitum dotis in curia dñi regis remanserit
Item siad .: 2 ° * DET : :
cuia Sime die ppter inquisitionem transmissam ad curiam


Christiani- Christiana et tune sie. Sumoneas per bonos sumoni-


tatis qua- ues : pes
cunque de bores A. q sit ad respondendum B. mulieri quare non


OF EXCEPTIONS. 363


said C. (who is the tenant) has vouched the aforesaid A. day on

to warrant, and so that the cause should stand for PEDE
hearing in the same state in which it was when it was a minor,
stayed without a day, inasmuch as A. was then under jobs
age, and who is now of full age as it is said. And sum- vouched to
mon by good summoners the aforesaid A. that he be "rant
there present to warrant to the aforesaid C. that land,

or to show why he ought not to warrant it, and have

there the summoners and this writ. Witness, &c.

„But if it has been stayed without a day on account of | 3.
the iter of the justiciaries then thus: Summon &c. as nm
above so that the cause may stand for hearing there of the iter
in the same state in which it was when it was stayed e
without a day on account of the iter of the justiciaries and for the
through the several counties; or thus, when it was euer
placed before the justiciaries at the first assise when
they should have come into those parts, to which they
have not yet come as was provided : or otherwise, if it
has been stayed without a day for the service of the
lord the king, then thus: So that that cause shall stand
for hearing in the same state in which it was when it
was stayed without a day, inasmuch as so-and-so afore-
said had set out for parts beyond the sea in our service
or elsewhere through our command, and from which the £, 426.


said so-and-so has returned as it is said.


Likewise otherwise, if he has set out for the Holy 4.
Land, then thus: So that the cause shall stand for hear- ae
ing in the same state in which it was on the day on joumey to
which it was stayed without a day, inasmuch as so-and- nem
so aforesaid had set out for the Holy Land, from which


he has now returned as itis said.


Likewise if a plea of dower in the court of the lord * QUEM
the king has been stayed without a day on account of ode
an inquest transmitted to the court of Christianity, and Tami
then thus: Summon by good summoners A. that he be court of


present to answer to the woman B. wherefore he does not Christi-


364 DE EXCEPTIONIBUS.


causa vel reddit ei dotem suam, quae eam contingit de libero

nup tenemento suo, q fuit talis viri sui &c. ita q loquela
illa tune sit ibi in eodem statu, in quo fuit quando
remansit sine die, eo q predictus A. objecit eide B.
quód non debuit inde dotem habere, eo quód predictus
talis vir suus, p quem ‘dotem petiit, vivus fuit. Et
unde pdicta B. coram pdictis justic. nostris sectam
sufficientem pduxit q mortuus est, et sic de aliis, ubi
inquisitio facienda est in foro secular. Si autem
facienda sit inquisitio in curia Christianitatis in suo
casu in placito dotis, tune sie: et ita quód loquela
ila, vel: unde loquela illa transmissa fuit ad curiam
Christianitatis eo q pdictus A. objecit eidem B. q non
debuit inde dotem habere, quia nunquam fuit tali
viro suo desponsata, vel aliter: videlicet legitimo
matrimonio copulata.


6. Item si de advocatione ecclesiz fuerit loquela, et
dd ds remanserit sine die propter servitium dii regis, tunc
rinasin flat resumonitio ut supra. Si autem de assisa ultima
ue psentationis, tune sie: Auditurus recordum et judicium
advoca- suum de assisa ultime psentationis ( summonita fuit
Cone: coram eisdem justiciariis nis &c. inter A. petentem et

eundem B. deforciatorem, ita q assisa illa tune sit in
eodem statu in quo fuit quando remansit sine die, eo
( pdietus B. profectus fuit ad partes transmarinas in
servitio nostro per peeptum nostrum. Et ex fdic-
tis sumi poterit exemplum qualiter in casibus consimi-


libus fieri debeat resumonitio.


ia Si autem generalis fieri debeat resummonitio ad


Sigeneralis E í
fai debet Pancum, eo q omnes loquelee de banco posite sunt


OF EXCEPTIONS. 365


render to her her dower, which pertains to her from her anity for
free tenement which belonged to so-and so her husband MEE
&c., so that the cause shall then stand for hearing there of dower.
in the same state in which it was when it was stayed
without a day, inasmuch as the aforesaid A. has objected

to the said B. that she ought not to have the said dower
therefrom, inasmuch as so-and-so her aforesaid husband,
through whom she claims dower was alive. And where-

upon the aforesaid B. before our said justiciaries pro-

duced a sufficient sect to prove that he is dead, and so
concerning other things where an inquest is to be held

in a secular court. But if an inquest is to be held in a

court of Christianity in its own case in a plea of dower

then thus: and so that the cause for hearing, or where-

upon the cause for hearing was transmitted to the

court of Christianity, inasmuch as the aforesaid A. ob-

jected to the said B. that she ought not to have dower
therefrom, because she was never espoused to so-and-so

her husband, or otherwise, to wit, coupled in lawful


matrimony.


Likewise if the cause for hearing should be concern- ie Roe s
ing the advowson of a church, and it has been stayed parts
without a day on account of the service of the lord the a
king, then let a resummons be made as above. But if service of
concerning an assise of last presentation, then thus: in PEU OM
order to hear the record and his judgment concerning the an advow-
assise of last presentation which was summoned before *°™
our said justiciaries &c. between A. the claimant and B.
the deforceor, so that the assise be in the same state in
which it was when it was stayed without a day, inas-
much as the aforesaid B. had set forth to parts beyond
the sea in our service by our command. And from the
instances aforesaid an example may be derived in what
manner a resummons ought to be made in similar cases.


But if a general resummons to the bench ought to be FONT


made, inasmuch as all the causes for hearing before resummons
the bench are placed without a day on account of the 9"Bhtíohe


366 DE EXCEPTIONIBUS.


resummo- gine die ppter itinerationem justic. in diversis com,


ee tune fiat resumonitio in diversis com in hac forma.
8. Rex vie. salute: peipimus tibi q sine dilatione cla-


es mare facias in com tuo, et per com tuum in diversis
quod hundredis, et mercatis, et p omnes ptes de com tuo, q
xe omnia placita q per brevia nostra, vel per pceptum
justie. nostrorü de banco atterminata fuerunt apud
West. infra octabas S. Hilarii ultimó pteritas et Paschze
pxime sequentes, et 4 per pceptum nostrum posita
fuerunt sine die occasione itinerationis talis, vel occa-
sione exercitus nii in Walliam, vel alterius, sint co-
ram justic. nostris &c. apud W. ad talem termini in
eodem statu in quo fuerunt quando remanserunt sine
die per peeptum nostrum occasione pdicta, tam de es-
soniis faciendis et non faciendis, quam de omnibus
alis cireumstantiis eorundem  placitorum. Alia vero
placita, quee per preceptum nostrum vel peeptum pdic-
torum justic. nostrorum itinerantium posita fuerunt
post certum diem ad talem terminum apud talem lo-
cum ad talem terminü et talem, ibi deducantur, & tene-
antur sieut ibi posita fuerunt, et habeas ibi hoe bie,
. et alia brevia omnia que penes te habes pertinentia
ad pdieta placita. Teste &c.


f. 496 b. Cap, XXII.


155 1 S 3 - L L .
Erei Competit ctiam tenenti exceptio dilatoria ex persona


ex persona petentis, eo q separatus est à comunione gentium ppter
POE lepram d est in anima, ut si fuerit specialiter ex-
lepram vel comunieatus, quia sieut quis poterit habere lepram in
propter . : > aS : : .

excommu. COrpore, ita et in anima. Excomunicato enim inter-
nicationem. dieitur omnis act? legitimus, ita q agere non potest


nec aliquem convenire, licet ipse ab aliis possit cove-


OF EXCEPTIONS. 367


itineration of the justiciaries in the different counties, made to
then let a resummons be made in the different counties "€ bench.
in this form.

The king to the viscount greeting. We enjoin you , &
that without delay you cause proclaniation to be made we ix
in your county court and throughout your county in the count that
different hundreds and AUC and through all parts Wikis
of your county, that all the pleas which through our
writs or through the order of our justiciaries of the
bench were put off at Westminster between the octaves
of St. Hilary last past and those of Easter next following
and which through our precept were set down without a
day on the occasion of the said itineration, or on occasion
of our army marching into Wales or of something else,
shall be held before our justiciaries &c. at W. at such a
term in the same state in which they were when they
were stayed without a day through our precept on the
aforesaid occasion, as well concerning the making of
essoins and the non-making of them, as concerning all
other circumstances of the said pleas. But let the
other pleas, which through our precept or the precept
of our aforesaid justiciaries itinerant were set down after
a certain day for such a term at such a place for such
and such a term be brought forward and entertained,
as they were there set down, and have there this writ,
and all the other writs which are in your possession per-
taining to the aforesaid pleas. Witness, &c.


CHAPTER XXIII. f. 496 b.


The tenant is also entitled to a dilatory exception An a


against the person of the claimant, on the ground that roana
ne person
D is separated from the communion of men on account et m


of leprosy which is in his soul, as if he has been spe- element dM
cially excommunieated, because as a person may have of leprosy
leprosy in his body, so he may have it also in his F SUA
soul. For an excommunicated person is interdicted from exeommu-
every legal act, so that he cannot bring an action nor nication.


convene any person, although he may be convened by


Britton, ii.
ch. xviii.
Sls
Fleta, vi.
c. 45, 8 L


2;
Si vir
uxoris
appellatus
sit de
felonia,
non eadit
actio ante
convic-
tionem
instituta.


368 DE EXCEPTIONIBUS.


nir. Qui aute hujusmodi exceptione opposuerit,
oportebit eum habere pbationem, quia simplici voci
tenentis non erit fides adhibenda, nee etiam cujuslibet
de populo testimonio, quia oportebit eum qui excipit
in hoe casu, habere literas ordinarii, sicut archiepi-
scopi, vel episcopi, vel alterius judicis ordinari, vel
delegati, rei veritate testificantes q talis nominatim
excomunicatus sit, et ex tali causa, vel si ordinarius
psens sit & hoe testificetur vivà voce. Funestam enim
vocem interdici oportet, potius qm audiri, nec solum
vox eorum interdicitur, sed si quid ab ipsis fuerit im-
petratum, firmitatem non obtinebit. Cum excomunicato
autem nec orare, nec loqui, nec palam nec abscondite,
nec vesci licet, exceptis quibusdam psonis.


Conveniri aute potest (sicut pdictum est), ne me-
lioris conditionis sit qm non excommunicatus, vel ne
de malitia sua possit lucrum deportare. Ut si vir &
uxor implacitati fuerint de heereditate uxoris, si vir
de felonia appellatus fuerit & convictus, tamen ppter
hoe non cadit actio prius ante cdvictionem instituta, et
sic ex malitia lucru non reportant, q «cadere possit
actio, licet differri possit ad tepus ppter dubium even-
tum appellati, dum tamen convictus non fuerit con.
demnatus ad morte naturalem vel civile. Naturale,
ut si suspensus fuerit, quo casu cadit actio. Si aute
civile, eodem modo, ut si utlagatus fuerit. Si aute tale
fuerit crimé, q ultimü non inducat suppliciü, sed tanta
membrorü amissione, sicut oculos, aut testiculos, vel
utruq, ppter hoe non cadit actio prius instituta : ut de
itinere M. de P. in com Lync., de Thomas de Rasue,


OF EXCEPTIONS. 369


others. But he who has raised an objection of this
kind, must have the necessary proof, because faith is
not to be given to the simple voice of the tenant, nor
indeed to the testimony of any one of the publie, be-
cause it will be incumbent for him who excepts in
this case, to have letters from the ordinary, as from the
archbishop or a bishop or some other judge ordinary or
delegate, testifying the truth of the matter, that so-and-
so by name has been excommunicated, and for such a
cause, or if the ordinary be present and testifies this
orally. For an unlucky voice ought to be interdicted
rather than heard, and not only is their voice interdicted,
but if any writ has been obtained by them, it shall not
have validity. For it is not allowable to pray with nor
to speak with, either in public or in secret, nor to eat
with an excommunicated person, except to certain per-
sons.


He may be however convened (as stated above), lest


he should be in a better condition than a person not Ifth
band of a


2
e hus-


excommunicated, or lest he may derive gain from his wife is
own wickedness. As if a husband and wife have been 2¢cused of


felony


impleaded concerning the inheritance of the wife, if the before -
husband has been accused of felony and has been con- conviction.


victed, on that account the action does not fall, having
been previously instituted before the conviction, and so
they do not derive gain from their wickedness, that the
action should fall, although it may be put off for a time
on account of the doubtful event of the accused party,
provided however the convicted party be not condemned
to a natural or a civil death. A natural death, as if he
should have been hanged, in which case the action falls.
But if a civil death, in the same manner as if he had been
outlawed. But if the crime be such that it does not en-
tail an extreme punishment, but only the loss of members,
as of eyes or testicles or both, on that account an action
previously commenced does not fall, as in the iter of
Martin de Pateshull in the county of Lincoln, concerning


R 2657. AA


9
[5]


Si quis rite
excommu-
nicatus
fuerit et

f. 427.
extiterit in
excommu-
nicatione
per quad-
raginta
dies.


4.
Breve de
excommu-
nicato
capiendo.


370 DE EXCEPTIONIBUS.


&e. A petente vero in contrarium sie poterit respon-
deri, Frater, si essem excomunieatus, absolut? sum à
tali superiore judice ordinario vel delegato, ad qm ap-
pellavi. Item dicere ‘poterit, q si excomunicatus fui,
hoe fuit de facto, quia nulla subfuit causa alia, nisi q
judici ecclesiastico obtéperare noluit cognoscéti de lay-
co feodo, vel de catallis et debitis G no sunt de testa-
méto vel matrimonio, et unde hora eogrua exhibui eis
literas dii regis phibitorias ne pcederent, et quib?
Ddieti judices differre noluerüt. Ite respoderi poterit
q excomunicatio nulla fuit, vel injusta, quia à tali
setetia rite fuit appellatü, et plures alias ptedere poterit
résposiones ad tuitione stat? sui, sed ad manü statim
habeat pbationé, quia ci costiterit de excommunica-
tione, de absolutione constare oportebit.


In fine vero notandum, quód ubi quis fuerit rite
excommunicatus, et in ea pertinacia & excommunica-
tione pertinaciter perseveraverit per xl. dies, claves Ec-
clesize contemnendo, tune (ut gladius gladium adjuvet)
ad mandatum episcopi vel ejus officialis capiatur exco-
municatus. Sed nunquam capietur aliquis ad mandatü
judieum delegatorum, vel archidiaconum, t vel alterius
judieis inferioris, quia rex in episcopos coercionem habet
ppter baroniam. Cùm autem talis capi debeat ratio-
nabili de causa, cám cancellarius literas episcopi rece-
perit, fiat breve in hae forma.


Rex vicecomiti salute. Significavit nobis venerabilis
pater N. p literas suas patentes, quód talis ob mani-
festam contumaciam suam excommunicatus est, nec se


1 * archidiaconi " MS. Rawl. C. 160.


OF EXCEPTIONS. 371


Thomas de Rasue &e. But by a claimant an answer to
the contrary may be thus given, Brother, if I have been
excommunicated, I have been absolved by such a superior
judge ordinary or delegate, to whom I appealed. Like-
wise he may say, that if I have been excommunicated,
this was in fact, because there was no other cause,
except that I was unwilling to obey the ecclesiastical
judge holding cognisance of a lay feud, or of chattels or
debts which were not testamentary nor matrimonial,
and whereon at a suitable hour I exhibited to them
letters of the lord the king prohibiting them from pro-
ceeding, and to which the aforesaid judges were un-
willing to defer. Likewise it may be answered that the
excommunication was null, or unjust, because an appeal
was duly made from the sentence, and he may bring
forward several other answers to defend his status, but
let him have immediately at hand the proof, because if
the excommunication be established, it will be incumbent
that the absolution be established.
But in the end it is to be noted, that when a person ,, 3r
é a person

has been duly excommunicated and has persevered has been
obstinately in that obstinacy and excommunication ToT A
throughout forty days, contemning the keys of the cated, and
church, then (that sword may aid sword) let the excom- f 427.
municated person be seized upon the mandate of the UES
bishop or his official. But no one shall ever be seized his excom-

. munication
upon the mandate of judges delegate or of an archdeacon for forty
or any other inferior judge, because the king has coercion days.
over bishops on aecount of their barony. But when
such a person ought to be seized for a reasonable cause,
when the chancellor has received the letters of the
bishop, let a writ issue in this form.


The king to the viscount greeting. The venerable T4 e


father N. has signified to us by his letters patent, that seize an
so-and-so has been excommunicated on account of his eat
manifest contumacy, nor is he willing to submit himself person.


AA 2


D.
Si appella-
tus de felo-
nia ad
appellum
declinan-
dum falso
dedit in-
telligi
episcopo,
quod ap-
pellans
excommu-
nicatus fuit,
et captus
fuit, breve


ote DE EXCEPTIONIBUS.


vult per cesuram ecclesiasticam justiciare. Quia vero
potestas regia sacrosancte ecclesie in querelis suis
deesse non debet, tibi peipimus quód pdictum talem
per corp? suum (secundum consuetudinem Anglis) jus-
ticies, donee sacrosancte ecclesiz tam de conteptu,
quàm de injuria ei illata ab eo fuerit satisfactum. Teste
meipso apud Westmonasteriu &c. Qui cám captus
fuerit & ecclesie satisfecerit, deliberabitur ad manda-
tum episcopi per tale bre. Rex vicecomiti salutem.
Quia venerabilis pater talis episcopus significavit no-
bis, quód talis quantum ad mandatum suum, vel ad
mandatum talis venerabilis patris talis episcopi, à
te capi et per corpus suum tanquam cotemnentem
claves ecclesie justiciari pceperimus, beneficium abso-
lutionis impedit, tibi pcipimus q à prisona nostra qua
detinetur ipsum deliberari facias quietum &c. Et no-
tandum q ad nullus mandatum deliberari debet, nisi
ad mandatum dii episcopi nec antequà ipse man-
daverit quód ecclesiz sic satisfecerit, nisi captus fuit
per falsam suggestionem ordinari, vel aliorum plato-
rum, vel si per malitiam adversarii, ut eum excludat
ab actione quam versus eum instituit. Et si ita, tunc
fiat tale breve ad ipsius deliberationem.


Rex vicecomiti salutem. Ostensum est nobis ex
parte talis, d cùm aliquando appellasset quendam ta-
lem in comitatu tuo de roberia & hujusmodi, & tibi
à nobis peeptum esset quód talem appellatum attachi-
ares: Idem appellatus, ut ipsum tale appellanté gra-
varet, & appellum suum adnihilaret, falsó suggessit
episcopo tali, quód idem appellans in quadam excom-
municatione perseveravit contumaciter p quadraginta
dies et amplius, & ita g literas ab eodem episcopo im-
petravit ad nos directas q extenderemus brachium


seculare, per eujus deceptionem idem appellans cap-


OF EXCEPTIONS. 249


to ecclesiastical censure. Because the regal power ought
not to fail holy church in its complaints, we enjoin you
that you enforce justice against him personally (accord-
ing to the custom of England) until satisfaction has been
made by him to holy church for his contempt as well as
the injury caused to her. Witness myself at West-
minster, &c. Who, when he has been seized and has
satisfied the church, he shall be delivered upon the
mandate of the bishop by such a writ. Because the
venerable father bishop so-and-so has signified to us
that to so-and-so, whom at his mandate or at the mandate
of the venerable father so-and-so the bishop so-and-so
we enjoined that he should be seized by you and have
justice personally enforced against him as contemning
the keys of the church, he has granted the benefit of
absolution, we enjoin you that you cause him to be set
free and quit from our prison in which he is detained.
And it is to be noted that he ought not to be set free
upon the mandate of any one, except at the mandate of
the lord bishop, nor before he has sent word that he
has satisfed the church, unless he has been seized through
a false suggestion of the ordinary or other prelates, or
through the malice of an adversary, that he might ex-
clude him from an action which he had brought against
him. And if so, then let a writ of this kind issue for his


delivery.


i i reeti 5.
The king to the viscount greeting. It has been shown epee
to us on the part of so-and-so, that when he had accused accused of
a certain person in your county court of robbery and such payee:


like and we had enjoined you to attach such accused fees
» . 2 t
person, the said accused party, that he might aggrieve P


the said accuser and annihilate his charge, has falsely led the
; : SP bishop to
suggested to bishop so-and-so, that the said accuser has pnderstand


: days and more in a certain excom- that the
persisted for forty day accuser


munication, and so that he obtained from the said bishop has been


letters directed to us that we would stretch out our as


secular arm, through whose deception the said accuser and he has


374 DE EXCEPTIONIBUS.


ad delibe- tus est, & in prisona nostra detentus, ut dicit. Et

E quia nemini debet fraus sua patrocinari, tibi peipi-

Fleta, vi mus g si pd. talis appellans fecerit te securum de cla-

ch. 45,§ 2. more  &c. tune pone p vadium &c. pdictum talem
appellatum, qudd sit coram &e. inde responsurus. Et
interim facias p dictum talem appellanté deliberari à
prisona nostra, nisi captus fuerit alia occasione quare
deliberari non debeat. Teste &c. Si aute forte captus
non fuerit, & judex aliquis malitiosé suggesserit epi-
scopo, q quis excomunicatus fuerit, fiat breve vic. de
non eapiendo talem, ut supra, de phibitionibus.


f. 427 b. Cap. XXIV.


1. Est etiam et alia exceptio q tenenti competit ex
Exceptio


ex persona Persona petentis ppter defectum nationis, d dilatoria
petentis, est et non perimit actionem, ut si quis alienigena qui
uas fuerit ad fidé regis Francie, et actione instituat ver-
dun ind sus aligm qui fuerit ad fidem regis Anglie, tali non
' respondeatur, saltem donec tre fuerint comunes, nec
eliam sive rex ei concesserit placitare, quia sicut An-

glicus non auditur in placitando aligm de terris et
tenementis in Francia, ita nec debet Francigena &
alienigena, qui fuerit ad fidem regis Francie, audiri

Supra, fol placitando in Anglia. Sed tamen sunt aliqui Franci-
455. — gene in Francia, qui sunt ad fide utrius, et semper
fuerunt ante Normannia deperditam & post, & qui
placitant hic et ibi ea ratione qua sunt ad fide utriusd,

sicut fuit W. comes Mart et manens in Anglia, et M.

de Feynes manens in Francia, et alii plures, et ita

tamen, si contingat guerra moveri inter reges, rema-


OF EXCEPTIONS, 375


was seized and detained in our prison, as he says. been
And because nobody ought to be benefited by his own $ed Ev
fraud, we enjoin you that if the aforesaid accuser has him free.
given you security concerning his complaint &c., then

place such accused party under bail, &c., that he should
present himself to us, &c, in order to answer thereon.

And meanwhile cause the aforesaid so-and-so the accuser

to be delivered out of our prison, unless he shall have

been seized upon some other occasion wherefore he

ought not to be set free. Witness &c. But if by chance

he has not been seized, and some judge has maliciously
suggested to a bishop that he has been excommunicated,

let a writ go to the viscount not to seize the said person,


as above concerning prohibitions.


CHAPTER XXIV. f. 427 be


There is likewise another exception,to which the tenant ne ae ae


is entitled against the person of the claimant, on account tion
of the defect of his nation, which is dilatory and does not aaa
perempt the action, as if he be an alien by birth who is the claim-
of fealty to the king of France, and he brings an action xs
against some one who is of fealty to the king of England, alien by
no answer shall be made to such a person at least until or feat to
the lands shall be common, nor even if the king has the king of
allowed him to plead, because as an Englishman is not ^
heard, if he implead any one concerning lands and tene-

ments in France, so ought not a native of France and a

born alien who is of fealty to the king of France to be heard,

if he impleads any one in England. But still there are

some Frenchmen in France, who are of fealty to both,

and have always been so before Normandy was lost and
afterwards, and who implead both here and there for the

reason that they are of fealty to both, such as William

the earl Marshall resident in England, and M de Feynes

resident in France, and several others, and so however


that, if it should happen that war should arise between


2.
Exceptio
contra
petentem
propter
statum
dubium
multis
rationibus.


376 DE EXCEPTIONIBUS.


neat psonaliter quilibet eorü cum eo cui fecerit ligean-
tid, et faciat servitum debitü ei cum quo non steterit
in persona.


Competit etiam tenenti exceptio ex psona petentis
ppter statü dubiu, & dubium rei eventu. Status qui-
dem hominis dubius esse poterit multipliciter, tum
ppter dignitatis mutationem, ut si quis fuerit in ali-
qua dignitate constitutus, et electus fuerit vel postu-
latus ad aliam dignitate, & cum consensum pbuerit,
pendet status suus quousq, fuerit confirmatus, et sic
ratü esse non poterit, quod cum eo actum fuerit pen-
dente statu suo. Ité dici poterit si quis fuerit in ali-
qua dignitate constitutus, et fuerit in causa deposi-
tionis, et meritis suis exigentibus vel non exigentibus,
et cüm fuerit depositus juste vel injuste appella-
verit, pendente appellatione non valet q cüm eo
actu fuerit, quia si teneat depositio omnia erunt revo-
canda, & sic judiciü delusoriu. Item poterit status
esse dubius ppter causam criminalem impositam alicui,
ubi vertitur periculum vite vel membrorü, in causa
civili respondere non tenetur nec ei respondebitur, an-
tequam se defenderit vel non defenderit in causa
criminali, quia si prius in causa civili ageretur, con-
victo crimine retrotrahendum erit tempus usi ad
tempus comissi criminis, & sic quiequid actum fuerit
in medio tempore inter convictionem et crimen comis-
sum erit revocandü: et ita cum talibus agi non po-
terit donee status confirmetur, ut supra de placitis
coronæ pleniüs de hac materia. De causa vero depo-


OF EXCEPTIONS. 377


the kings, each of them should personally remain with
him to:whom he had made allegiance, and let him do
due service to him with whom he does not personally
array himself.


The tenant is also entitled to an exception against the re 2
person of the claimant on account of his doubtful status, R
and the doubtful event of a matter. The status of a aes,
man may be doubtful in many ways, as well on account of his
of a change of dignity, as if a person has been established UN
in à certain dignity, and has been elected or demanded many
for another dignity, and when he has given his consent, "0^5.
his status is in suspense until it has been confirmed, and
so whatever proceedings have been had with him, whilst
his status was in suspense, cannot be ratified. The same
thing may be said, if a person has been established in a
certain dignity, and is involved in a cause of deposition,
his merits either requiring it or not requiring it, and
when he has been deposed, whether justly or unjustly, he
has appealed, pending the appeal what has been trans-
acted against him does not avail, because if the deposi-
tion binds him, every thing will have to be revoked, and
so the judgment will be illusory. Likewise his status
may be doubtful on account of a criminal cause imposed
on a person, where there is risk of life or members ; in a
civil cause he is not bound to answer nor shall an
answer be given to him before he has defended or failed
to defend himself in the criminal cause, because if pro-
ceedings were previously had in the civil cause, if he
was convicted of a crime the time would have to be
referred back to the time of the committal of the crime,
and if any proceedings should have been taken in the
intermediate time between the conviction and the com-
mission of the crime, they would have to be revoked:
and so proceedings cannot be taken against such parties
until their status be confirmed, as above concerning the
pleas of the crown in such matters. Concerning a cause of


378 DE EXCEPTIONIBUS.


Supra, f. sitionis sumi poterit exéplum de episcopo Bathonensis


ai & abbate de Glasto coram justiciar. de banco.

Se Competit etiam exceptio tenenti ex psona petentis
a ee et ex delicto dilatoria, ut si tenens spoliatus fuerit a
spolia. ^ petente et non restitutus in toto vel in parte, non
Aue respondebit tenens ante restitutionem, quia nudi con-
fuerit tendere, nec inermes nos inimicis debemus ! opponere,


restitutus. : : on : s = s
nec videtur quis restitui qui non in totü restituitur,


sicut nec videtur res reddita que deterior facta red-
ditur, seeundum quod superius videri poterit de spo-
liatoribus & disseysinis & restitutionibus.


f. 428. CAP. XXV.


il Competit etiam exceptio tenenti peremptoria ex
Exceptio s RF 1
dilatoria, Persona potenti et quandoğ dilatoria tam ex psona
quia jus alterius quàm petentis, quia sine alio agere non po-
commune s : 1 1 à 1 1
I oq terit per se, qui tantundem juris habet quàm ipse qui
sine petit, ut sunt plures participes, vel quia nihil juris
d RN habet sine alio sicut vir de re uxoria sine uxore, vel
vel quia gq uxor agere no poterit sine viro de re ppria, cüm
in parte : : : : ° : M
tangit alios Vir sit ei adjunct? et caput uxoris, vel quia petés ac-
"A quibus tionem non habet aliquam g rem deducere possit in
judicium sine aliis, sicut sunt canonici et monachi
simplices vel amotibiles sine abbate vel priore. Item
decanus & capitulum sine episcopo. Item si petens
jus habeat cûm sit cohzres justus et ppinquus, alius
tame majus jus habet quia ppinquior: sieut videri
poterit supra in tractatu de assisa mortis antecessoris.


1 * non debemus," MS. Rawl. C. 160.


OF EXCEPTIONS. 379


deposition an example may be taken concerning the
bishop of Bath and the abbot of Glastonbury before the
justiciaries of the bench.


A tenant is also entitled to a dilatory exception 3.
against the person of the claimant and on account of eves RT
an offence on his part, as if the tenant has been spoiled account
by the claimant and has not had restitution in whole or AE of
in part, the tenant shall not answer before restitution, HD
for we ought not to contend naked nor to oppose our- has had
selves unarmed against our enemies, nor does a person restitution.
seem to have bon who has not entire restitution,
just as a thing does not seem to have been given back,
which is given back in a deteriorated state, according to
what may be seen above concerning spoilers, and dis-


seysines, and restitutions.


CHAPTER XXV. f. 498.


The tenant is also entitled to a peremptory exception pl

against the person of the claimant, and sometimes also exception,
to a dilatory exception against the person of another ae
than the claimant, because he cannot proceed by himself is ee
without another, who has as much right as the claimant Sea 3
himself, as there are several co-parceners, or because he without
has no right without another person, as a husband con- pees
cerning the property of his wife without his wife, or in part it
because a wife cannot proceed without her husband con- ore
cerning her own property, since the husband is joined without
to her and is the head of the wife, or because the claim- "hom &
ant has no right of action which can bring the thing
into judgment without other persons, such as are canons
and simple monks who are removable without an abbot
or prior. Likewise a dean and canons without a bishop.
Likewise if the claimant has a right, when he is a right
and near co-heir, but another person has a greater right
because he is nearer, as may be seen in the treatise con-


cerning an assise of mortdancester.


2.
Exceptio,
quod par-
ticipes
habet sine


quibus &c.


380 DE EXCEPTIONIBUS.


Sed inprimis dicendum erit de exceptione illa, que
cópetit tenenti eo q participes qui tantundem juris
habent in brevi nō nominantur. Et sunt plures par-
ticipes quasi unum corpus in eo q unum jus habent,
et oportet quód corp? sit integrum, et q in aliqua
parte non sit defectus. -Et sunt participes quasi par-
tem capiétes, sicut partis capaces, ut supra de quali-
tate et differentia hseredum, eo q communis est inter
eos res ratione plurium psonarum, vel ratione vicini-
tatis, vel ratione ipsius rei q partibilis est, et non
ratione psonarü, que non sunt quasi unus heres &
unum corpus, sed diversi haeredes, ubi tenementü pti-
bile est inter plures coheeredes petentes qui descedut
de eode stipite, et semper solet dividi ab antiquo.
Possunt auté plures ptieipes esse et cohsredes pe-
tentes, & plures tenentes coheredes et pticipes, vel unus
petens sine pticipe, et plures tenétes pticipes, vel unus
tenens pticeps vel plures, et plures coheredes qui ni-
hil inde tenent nec in pparte nec in compensatione,
et alii qui in pparte, et alii in compensatione p pte
sua. ltem possunt esse plures petentes pticipes, vel
unus sine participe, et unus tenens sine pticipe, vel
plures tenentes qui omninó sibi sunt extranei & non
coheeredes, sed pticipes ut vicini. Item plures petentes
sine pticipe, vel unus sine pticipe tota hereditate, sive
ibi sint plura maneria sive no, sive versus plures
pticipes vel extraneas psonas, vel versus unt vel duos
participes, et unü extranet non pticipé, totam heredi-


OF EXCEPTIONS. 381


But in the first place we must speak of that exception ——
which is allowable to the tenant on the ground that An excep-
part-holders who have as much right are not named in PEA
the writ. And several part-holders are as it were one paas
body, inasmuch as they have one right, and it is incum- ones:
bent that the body should be entire and that there
should not be a defect in any part. And part-holders
are as it were holding a part, as. part-capable, as
above concerning the quality and the difference of heirs,
inasmuch as the thing is common amongst them in
respect of several persons, or in respect of vicinity, or
in respect of the thing itself which is partible, and not
in respect of the persons, who are not as it were one
heir and one body, but divers heirs, where the tenement
is partible between several co-heirs as claimants who
descend from the same stock, and is always accustomed
to be divided from ancient time. But there may be
several co-parceners and co-heirs claimants, and. several
tenants co-heirs and co-parceners, and one claimant
without a co-parcener, and several tenants co-parceners,
or one tenant co-parcener or several, and several co-heirs
who hold nothing thereof neither in proportion nor in com-
pensation, and others who hold in proportion and others
who hold in compensation for their own part. Likewise
there may be several claimant co-parceners, or a single one
without a co-parcener, and a single tenant without a co-
parcener, or several tenants, who are altogther strangers
to one another and not co-heirs, but co-parceners as
neighbours. Likewise several claimants without a co-
parcener or a single one without a co-parcener to the
entire inheritance, whether there be there several manors
or none, whether against several co-parceners or strangers
to one another, or against one or two co-parceners, and
one stranger not a co-parcener, claimants to the entire


1 The Latin text allows of a play | capientes, and partis capaces, which
upon the words, participes, partem it is difficult to render into English.


f. 428 b.


Exceptio,
quod par-
ticeps est
ad fidem
regis
Francie.


382 DE EXCEPTIONIBUS.


taté vel ejus parté. Ctm auté plures sint pticipes
coheredes, vel pticipes no coheredes petentes, oportet
d omnes qui petunt & qui capere debent de re pe-
tita nominetur in bii: unde cùm dieat tenens excipi-
endo, Frater, non teneor ad hoe bře respondere, quia si


jus haberes, participes habes qui tantundem juris ha-


bent in re quantum et vos, vz A. & B. Ad quod
poterit petens replicare & dieere, q omnes qui jus
clamare poterunt, vel ptem de tenemento petito, vel
de re petita nominati sunt in hoc brevi, & nihil juris
ptinet nec ad A. nec ad B. q participes esse possunt,
quia A. bastardus est, & B. de servo progenitus, licet
de libera participi & conjugata. Et unde A. nullo te-
pore capere possit cùm sit bastardus, nec B. cüm sit
de servo pgenitus. Ité nec talis particeps fcemina
petere non possit ante tempus, cùm sit servo suo co-
pulata. Ite talis foemina particeps ptem de re petita
capere non potest, quia de comuni hereditate tenet
quandam ptem in maritagiü suum, nec vult maritagium
suum in ptem ponere, ut partem suam per totü ha-
beat de comuni heereditate.


Item respondere poterit, q particeps de quo dicitur
nihil capere potest, quia est ad fidem regis Francie,
& nihil capere poterit anteqm fiat fides regi Anglie,
& cùm terre sint comunes et concordes, & ideo non
est necesse q in bii nominentur. Item q particeps
qui non nominatur, vel aliquis antecessorum suorum
feloniam fecerit, ita q particeps esse non possit. Item
respondere potest q particeps de quo fit mentio mor-
tuus est sine herede de se; vel si hseredes habuit,
omnes mortui sunt. Item q ille qui pticeps esse de-
buit totum jus suum q inde habuit cohzredibus suis


OF EXCEPTIONS. 383


inheritance or to a part. But when there are several
claimant co-parceners who are co-heirs, or co-parceners
who are not co-heirs, it is incumbent that all who claim
and who expect to take some part of the thing claimed
should be named in the writ; whereupon when the
tenant says in excepting, “Brother, I am not bound
“ to answer to this writ, because, if you have the right,
“ you have co-parceners who have as much right in the
“ thing as you have, to wit, A. and B." to which the
claimant may reply and say, that all who can claim a f. 428 b.
right or a part of the tenement claimed, or a part of the
estate claimed, have been named in this writ, and no right
pertains neither to A. nor to B. that they can be co-par-
ceners, because A. is a bastard and B. was begotten
by a serf, although of a free woman a co-parcener and
married. And wherefore À. can at no time take since
he is a bastard, nor B. since he is begotten by a serf.
Likewise such female co-parcener cannot claim before
a certain time, since she is coupled to a serf. Likewise
such female co-parcener cannot take a part of the thing
claimed, because she holds a certain part of the common
inheritance as her marriage portion, nor is she willing
to put her marriage portion into partition, that she may
have her part of the whole as of a common inheritance.


Likewise he may answer that the co-parcener who is 3.
spoken of ean take nothing, because he is of fealty to conde
the king of France, and he will be able to take nothing the co-par-
before he has sworn fealty to the king of England, and Creenity
when the lands shall be common and concordant, and to the king
accordingly it is not necessary that they should be ee
named in the writ. Likewise that the co-parcener who
has not been named or some one of his ancestors has
committed felony, so that he cannot be a co-parcener.
Likewise he may answer that the co-parcener of whom
mention is made has died without an heir of his body,
or if he had heirs they are all dead. Likewise that he


who ought to be a co-parcener has released and quit-


384 DE EXCEPTIONIBUS.


remisit, & quietum clamavit. Ad primam vero repli-
cationé petentis, q pticeps nd nominatur quia bastardus
est, triplicari poterit à tenente q sit nominandus, quia
incertum est adhuc utrum se possit pbare legitimu
vel non. Eadem vero responsio esse poterit replicando
de servo non nominato. Ad hoc auté q dicit q fcmina
partieeps nominari non debet cu sit servo copulata, ad
hoc poterit triplicari q nominari debet, quia si ad
psens capere non possit, capere possit ad temp?, quia
servus mori poterit. Ad hoc autem q dicitur, q fœ-
mina particeps non nominata tenet quandam ptem
hereditatis in maritagium, nec vult maritagium ponere
in ptem, ad hoc poterit à tenente replicari q adhuc in
voluntate sua est & electione utrü hoc facere voluerit
vel non, & ideo in brevi nominanda. De hoe aute
quod dicit de participe qui est ad fidem regis Fran-
cie, triplicari poterit à tenente quód nominadus est,
quia terre possunt. esse comunes. Ad hoc autem q
dieitur, quód particeps mortuus est sine liberis, vel si
liberos habuerit, omnes mortui sunt, quia dubitari pos-
sit an ita sit vel non, detur alius dies ut fiat certifi-
catio, & seeundum hoe aut cadat breve aut stet: de
hoe autem quod dicit quód particeps remisit, quia de
hoe dubitari poterit, detur alius dies ut supra, & sum-
moneatur particeps quód sit ibi ad ostendendum, si
quid juris clamet cum aliis partieipibus de tali here-
ditate, quia si talis remisit participibus, pars illa 'ac-
crescet aliis. Et illud idem (secundum quosdam)
posset dici de bastardo & servo petentibus non nomi-
natis, quod quidam non admittunt. Et notandum, q


OF EXCEPTIONS. 9985


. Claimed to his heirs all the right which he had therein.
But to the first reply of the claimant that the co-parcener
is not named because he is a bastard, it may be rejoined
by the tenant that he ought to be named, because it is
uncertain at present whether he can prove himself to
be legitimate or not. But the same answer may be
made in replying concerning a serf not having been
named. But to this which is said that a female co-
parcener ought not to be named since she is coupled to
a serf, to this it may be rejoined that she ought to be
named, because if she cannot take at present, she may
take at some future time, because the serf may die. But
to this which is said that a female co-parcener not
named holds some part of the inheritance as a marriage
portion, and is not willing to put her marriage portion
into partition, to this it may be replied by the tenant
that it is still at her own option and choice whetlier she
will do this or not, and therefore she is to be named in
the writ. But to this which is said concerning a co-
parcener who owes fealty to the king of France, it may
be rejoined by the tenant that he ought to be named,
for the territories may become common. But to this
which is said, that a co-parcener has died without
children, or if he had children, they are all dead, because
it may be doubted whether it be so or not, let another
day be granted that a certificate may be produced, and
according to this let the writ stand or fall: but concern-
ing this which is said that the co-parcener has released,
because there may be doubts about this, let another day
be granted as above, and let the co-parcener be sum-
moned that he be present there to show if he claims any
right with the other co-parceners in such inheritance,
because if the said person has released to his co-par-
ceners, his part will accrue to the others And the
same thing (according to some) may be said concern-
ing a bastard or a serf as claimants and not named,
which some do not admit. And it is to be noted that
R 2657. B B


Fleta, vi.
c. 48, § 4.


f. 429,


386 DE EXCEPTIONIRUS.


sunt quidam participes qui statim agere possunt &
capere, & alii qui statim agere sed nihil capere pos-
sunt ante tempus, sieut fcemina copulata servo, & ille
qui fuerit ad fidem regis Francie, & nominari debent
omnes, Et sunt quidam qui aliquando capere pote-
runt & nune capere non poterunt, quia ex delicto &
felonia facti sunt non capaces, sicut p crimine danati,
et tales nominare nō oportet. Sed omnes nominandi
sit de quibus certü est vel dubiü utrü capere pos-
sint vel non, quia in dubio in benigna ptem erit
interptadü, vz. q capere possint, donee pbetur in co-
trariu. Si autem certü sit q capere no poterit sicut
videt de felone, nec pars illius aecrescere poterit ptici-
pibus, sed diis capitalibus, et ideo de eo nihil ptinet
ad pticipes. Ite nihil accrescet participibus de pte
eorü qui post tépus capere poterint, sed cum tenete
capitali vel capitali dio remanebit pars talium quous-
que capere possunt (secüdum quosda), sed (secüdum
alios) videt q no, quia cim oporteat eos in bii nomi-
nare et pcedat loquela et judicii sub nomine eorü,
videt q recuperare debeat inter alios, & cu judiciü red-
ditü sit p eis, oportebit q in psonis eorü fiat executio,
et sic poni debét in seysina sicut et ali. Sed cùm
seysina habuerint, quis ejiciet eos? quia si sine judi-
cio ejiciant à pticipib? vel ab aliis, de jure seysina
recuperabut. Si vero à pticipibus implacitentur, cadit
actio de jure, quia pticipibus nihil potest accrescere,
& ita nihil juris habent nee aliquid petere poterüt
ratione custodie. Sed quid ergo fiet videndü est in
sequetib?.


OF EXCEPTIONS. 387


there are some co-parceners who can forthwith proceed
and take, and others who can forthwith proceed but can
take nothing for some time, as a woman coupled to a
serf, and he who may be of fealty to the king of France,
and they ought all to be named. And there are some
who will be able to take at a certain time and now
are not able to take, because from an offence and a
felony they have been made incapable, such as persons
condemned for a crime, and such persons ought to be
named. But all ought to be named, concerning whom
it is certain or doubtful whether they can take or not,
because in a doubtful case the interpretation should be
on the benignant side, namely that they can take, until
it be proved to the contrary. But if it be certain that
he cannot take, as seems to be the case with a felon, his
part will aecrue not to his co-parceners but to his chief
lords, and accordingly nothing of it pertains to the co-
parceners. Likewise nothing will accrue to the co-par-
ceners of the share of those, who will be able to take
after a time, but their parts will remain with the chief
tenant or with the chief lord until they are able to take
(according to some), but (according to others) it appears
that it is not so, because since it is incumbent that they
should be named in the writ and the argument and the
judgment should proceed in their name, it seems that they
ought to recover amongst the others, and when judg-
ment has been rendered for them, it will be incumbent
that execution should be made in their persons, and so
they ought to be placed in seysine just as the others.
But when they have got seysine, who shall eject them ?
Because if they be ejected without a judgment by their
co-parceners or by others, they shall of right recover
seysine. But if they be impleaded by their co-parceners,
the action falls of right, because nothing can accrue to
co-pareeners, and so they have no right, nor can they
claim anything on the grounds of guardianship. But
what then shall be done is to be seen in what follows.
BB2


1549907


4.
Cum par-
ticeps sine
participe
obtinuerit
per frau-
dem, et
per frau-
dem sequi
noluetit.


D.
De sum-
monendo
participes.


6.
Si unus de
participi-
bus moria-
tur, cum
omnes in
brevi
nominen-
tur.


388 DE EXCEPTIONIBUS.


Sed quid ci pticipes plures extiterint et capaces, et
quida eorü petat & obtineant sine aliis qui nd nomi-
nantur in bii, no nominatis cosuli poterit p officiü
judicis ppter fraude. Ité chm plures sint pticipes &
omnes nominati & quidà sequi noluerint, nihilominus
tenebit bie, quia satisfactü est impetrationi, & tales
qui no venerint sumoneatur, q sint ad sequedü cü pti-
cipibus si voluerint. Si aute sequi noluerint, alii
nihilominüs sequatur de pte sua, bře sumonitionis tale
erit.


Rex vie. saluté. Sumoneas p bonos sumonitores A.
& B. q sint corà justic. niis tali die et loco, ad sequedu
cu C. & D. de tata tra cum ptinétiis in tali villa, &
unde pdicti D. & C. clamat duas ptes versus E. ut
rationabile pte sua, G eos cotingit de hereditate talis
cujus haeredes ipsi sut. Et unde fdictus E. dicit q no
vult pdietis C. & D. respodere sine pdictis A. & B. ut
dieit, & habeas ibi sumonitores & hoe bre. Teste
&c.


Ité cùm očs nominati sit & agere inceperint simul,
et unus eoru moriatur, cadit bie, & de novo incipere
oportet p aliud bie in psona heeredis statim vel post
tepus, secüdu qd heres fuerit infra etaté vel no. Sed
quid si unus ex pticipib^ eu agere inceperit felonia
fecerit, vel leprosus devenerit, furiosus, vel no sans
mentis, videndu utrü remanere debeat loquela vel
pcedere, sive fuerit petes vel tenens.


OF EXCEPTIONS. 389


But what if when there are several co-parceners cap- 4.
able of suing, and some of them claim and obtain with- ee
out the others who are not named in the writ, the without
interest of those who are not named may be consulted ee 3
through the office of the judge on account of the fraud, bas obtain-
Likewise when there are several co-parceners and all are ee
named and some are unwilling to sue, nevertheless the through
writ will hold good, because the suing out of it is satis- seeing
fied, and let such as have not come be summoned, that fo sue.
they should attend tosue with their co-parceners, if they
are willing. But if they shall be unwilling to sue, let
the others nevertheless sue for their share. The writ of


summons will be of this nature.


The king to the viscount greeting Summon by _ 5.
good summoners A. and B. that they present themselves Har
before our justiciaries on such a day and at such a place, co-parce-
in order to sue with C. and D. concerning so much land ^^^
with its appurtenanees in such a vill and whereof the
aforesaid D. and C. claim two parts against E. as their
reasonable part, which belongs to them from the inheri-
tance of such a person whose heirs they are. And
whereof the aforesaid E. says that he does not choose to
answer to the aforesaid C. and D. without the aforesaid
A. and B. as he says, and have there the summoners and
this writ. Witness &c.


Likewise when all are named and have commenced 6. :
: : <, If one o
proceedings together, and one of them dies, the writ the "o


abates, and they must commence again afresh by another ceners dies,
writ in the person of the heir forthwith or after a time, Td
according as the heir is under age or not. But what if in ie
one of the co-parceners when he has commenced proceed- eas

ings should commit felony, or have become leprous, or

mad, or of unsound mind, it is to be seen whether the

hearing should be stayed or should proceed, whether it


be the claimant or the tenant.


7:
Cum unus
ex parti-
cipibus
totam
teneat
heeredi-
tatem.


Fleta, vi.
e. 48. $ 5.


8.

f. 499 b.
Si hzere-
ditas par-
tita sit
inter par-
ticipes.


SE
Sunt qui
tenent
terram in
communi,
sed non ut
participes,


390 DE EXCEPTIONIBUS.


Cü auté plures sint cohæredes & pticipes, & un?
vel plures totā teneāt hæreditatē, & pticeps un? vel
plures petat versus unū pticipem tenenté vel plures,
si plures petāt, nō est necesse očs nominari in uno bfi,
quia diverse süt actiones, quia quilibet petat pte sua,
pprià, d eū cdtingit sine: alio pticipe, ac si un? pticeps
peteret versus uni vel plures pticipes una erit actio,
& quo casu tenens! pticeps visu non habebit, quia
divinare no poterit G pars ei accidere poterit de com-
muni hereditate, poterit tamé ei fieri qd tantundem
valet, ut si dieat, rationabile peto ptem mea q me
contingit de tota heereditate, unde talis antecessor meus
obiit seysitus ut de feodo.


Cotingit aute quadod qm divisa sit hsereditas inter
participes, & cum quis ptem suam habuerit, à posses-
sione sua ceciderit, vel q donationem fecerit sub con-
ditione aliqua, per qm post tempus esse poterit q ad
ipsum sit reversura, et cüm per conditionem ad ipsum
reverti debeat, alius injuste se ponat in seysinam, &
tenens ei objecerit q participes habuerit, exceptio illa
non valebit, quia postquam pticeps in seysina fuerit,
& terra de facto suo incumbravit, nihil de hoe ad co-


haredes vel participes, non magis de dàno quàm de
lucro.


Sunt etiam qui tenent in comuni rem aliquam de
comuni consensu sicut pticipes & capaces sed non
tamen ut coheredes, ut si de communi consensu aliquam
vastitatem p comuni comodo reliquerint ad pastura vel
aliud comodum vel alium usum, si forte petant, eadem
erit exceptio contra ipsos  & contra heredes, q nullus


1“ petens ” seems to be required by the context, but * tenens" is the
reading of the MSS.


OF EXCEPTIONS. 209591]


But when there are several coheirs and co-parceners, — 7.
and one or more hold the entire inheritance, and one or Mo oan
more co-parceners claim against one or more tenant-co- parceners
parceners, if several claim, it is not necessary that they RE
Should all be named in one writ, because there are divers heritance.
actions, because any one may claim for his own proper
part, which belongs to him, without another co-parcener,
as 1f one co-parcener should claim against one or more co-
parceners there will be one action, and in which case the
tenant co-parcener will not be allowed a view, because
he cannot divine which part ought to fall to him from the
common inheritance, there can however be done for him
~ what is equivalent, as if he should say, I claim my
reasonable part of the entire inheritance, whereof my
ancestor died seysed as of fee.

It happens however sometimes that, when the in- 8.
heritance has been divided amongst the co-parceners, Pi E
and when a person has had his part, he has fallen from has been

: : : parted
the possession of it, either because he has made a dona- amongst
tion of it under a condition, in virtue of which after a the co-par-
time it may happen that it will revert to him, and when hors :
in accordance with the condition it ought to revert to him, ^
another person unjustly puts himself into seysine, and
the tenant has objected to him that he has co-parceners,
that exception will not avail, because after a co-parcener
has been in seysine and has encumbered the land by his
own act, nothing of this regards his eoheirs or co-par-


ceners, no more for loss than for gain.


There are also persons who hold an estate in common 9.
of their common consent as co-parceners and capable, but ed
not however as coheirs, as if of their common consent who hold
they have left a quantity of waste land for their com- ee
mon advantage for pasturage or for some other advantage but not as
or for some other use, if they by chance claim, there will ^? heirs.
be the same exception against them as against coheirs,


that no one of them can sue or answer without the


392 DE EXCEPTIONIBUS.


sine alio agere possit nec respondere. Res quidem
comunis esse poterit inter plures multis rationibus, ut
supra, sicut sunt divisi et heeredes.


10. Datur etià exceptio dilatoria tenéti, no ex psona
Exceptio, : . : B E
quod viro petentis q agere non possit, sed ex psona adjuncti sine
non re- quo petere no potest, et qui non sunt pticipes quasi
spondetur,


cujus hære- ptem capientes, quia res ( petitur inter petentes cum

ditassit evicta fuerit non capit divisione, sicut inter virum et

poo uxorem qui sunt quasi unica psona, quia caro una. &
sanguis unus. Res tamen ppria uxoris, et vir ejus
custos, cüm sit caput mulieris, et in quo casu no re-
spondebitur viro sine uxore nec è contrario. Item
datur exceptio tenenti peremptoria quoad petente, sed
non ad eum qui jus habet, ut si quis petat nomine
suo rem, qui petere deberet rem nomine alieno, ut si
servus fructuarius qui non habet actione, et sicut sim-
plex canonicus vel simplex monachus, quia amotibiles
sunt et ppetuitatem non habent, et in quo casu cadit
actio & bre in psona talis, et tenet actio in psona
alterius p aliud breve.


Mi Ite datur exceptio dilatoria tenenti contra petente,
E licet actio tota ad ipsu ptineat, ppter autoritate superi-
assensu oris, sine cujus assensu & autoritate petere non possit,
fais Supe sicut decanus & capituli trasigere non possunt nec
pacisci nec mutare statü sui, sicut nec rectores eccle-
sic de rebus ecclesiz sine cósensu episcopi: et plures
sunt exceptiones alie, q copetunt tenenti cótra petente
pdietis rationibus, et de quibus ad fpsens no recoli-

tur.


OF EXCEPTIONS. 393


other. An estate may be common amongst several per-
Sons In many ways, as above stated, just as heirs like-
wise are divided.


A dilatory exception is also allowed to a tenant, not 1o.
against the person of the claimant that he cannot sue, S ies
but against the person of an adjoint, without whom he an e
cannot claim, and who are not part-holders as it were s
holding a part, because the estate which is claimed, band,
when it has been recovered by the action, does not yhesein-
admit of division, as between a husband and his wife, the land
who are as it were one person, being one flesh and one DAS
blood. But it is the proper estate of the wife, and the
husband is the guardian of it, since he is the head of
the woman, in which case an answer shall not be made
to the husband without the wife, nor contrariwise.
Likewise a peremptory exception shall be allowed to
the tenant as regards the claimant, but not against him
who has the right, if any one claims in his own name
a thing which he ought to claim in another’s name, as if
a serf-steward who has no right of action, and as a
simple canon or a simple monk, who are amovable and
have no perpetuity, and in which ease the action abates
and the writ in the person of such an one, and the


action holds good in the person of the other by another
writ.
Likewise a dilatory exception is allowed to a tenant , 1l.

: C : > . An excep-
against a claimant, although the entire action pertains to tion, that
him, on account of the authority of a superior, without ee oe
whose assent and authority he cannot claim, just as à such a
dean and chapter cannot transact nor bargain nor change Superior.
their status, just as no more can the rectors of a church
concerning the things of the church without the con-
sent of the bishop: and there are several other exceptions
which are available to a tenant against a claimant for


the reasons aforesaid, and which do not occur to the
memory for the moment.


: ies
De excep-
tionibus,
que com-
petunt
tenenti ex
persona
propria.


f, 430.


394 DE EXCEPTIONIBUS.


Cap, XXVI.


Dictum est supra de exceptionibus que competunt
tenenti ex persona petentis, nunc autem dicendum de
exceptionibus quz competunt ipsi tenenti ex psona
sua ppria. Competit quidem ei exceptio minoris etatis,
q ante setate non respondeat, non magis quàm petens
agere possit cotra eum ante zetate, secundü q superius
dictü est de minori setate, Et secundum hoe videri
poterit quid agendü sit hie. Item respondere no tene-
atur, quia non est in seysina nomine pprio sed nomine
alieno, et ideo non potest in judicium rem deducere.
Item copetit ei exceptio ex psona sua ppria sicut cotra
petentem ex statu dubio et dubio rei eventu ut supra.
Item eopetit ei exceptio ex persona sua ppria, quód sine
aliis respondere non potest, qui tantundem juris habent
in re quam tenet sicut et ille, vel ratione adjuncti,
vel ratione majoritatis ut supra. Sed ad hoe quód
exceptione habeat quoad actionem differendam et breve
posternendum, secundum quod participes nominandi
sunt in brevi vel non nominati, videndum erit an
partita sit inter cohseredes vel non coheredes pticipes
haereditas vel res comunis vel no. Si autem heereditas
non fuerit partita sed teneatur in comuni, quilibet
coheredu tantundé juris habet tenendi hereditate
quanti & alii: sed tamen non p se ante divisione, sed
p se in comuni cu aliis, et sie totu tenet et nihil tenet,
s. totu in comuni, & nihil sepatim p se. Ctm autem
tenens ita excipiat quód non teneatur sine pticipibus
respondere, videndu est inprimis si hzereditas partita


OF EXCEPTIONS. 395


CHAPTER XXVI.


We have spoken of exceptions which are available to __ !.
the tenant against the person of the claimant, now we s 2
must speak of exceptions which are available to the Which are
tenant upon his own proper person. There is available cae
to him an exception of minor age, that he should not pact va
answer before he is of full age, no more than the Aud per-
claimant can bring an action against him before he is °°"
of full age, according to what has been said above con-
cerning minority. And according to this it may be seen
what is to be done here. Likewise he is not bound to
answer, because he is not in seysine in his own name,
but in another’s name, and accordingly he cannot bring
the thing into judgment. Likewise an exception is
available to him upon his own person as against a  f.430.
claimant from his doubtful status and the doubtful
result of a matter as above. Likewise an exception is
available to him upon his own person, that he cannot
answer without others, who have as much right in the
thing which he holds as himself, either by reason of
being an adjoint, or by reason of majority as above.

But for the matter of his having an exception as regards
the deferring the action and the overthrowing the writ,
according as co-parceners are to be named in the writ or
are not named, it will have to be seen whether the in-
heritance has been parted amongst co-parceners who are
coheirs, or are not coheirs, or whether it is an estate
common amongst them or not. But if the inheritance
has not been parted amongst them, but is held in com-
mon, each of the coheirs has as much right to hold the
inheritance as the others, but not by himself before a
division, but by himself in common with the others,
and so he holds the whole and he holds nothing, to wit,
the whole in common and nothing separately by himself,
But when the tenant thus excepts that he is not bound
to answer without his coparceners, it is to be seen in the


396 DE EXCEPTIONIBUS.


sib vel non. Si aute partita sit, & tenens teneat rem
petitam sie partità & in pparte, non est necesse quód
omnes participes in brevi nominentur, quia si in bii
nominétur illi qui nihil tenent, cadit breve: ut pbatur
de termino S. M. an regis Hen? decimoquinto in com
Essex. Assisa utrum de J. psona de Messe et Radulpho
de Ardern et uxore sua et eoru pticipibus. Ad ide
faeit de comitissa Oxon & W. Blundo & uxore sua,
quia recessum est à comuni, sed tamen sine participi-
bus suis non tenet petenti respondere, et si sine eis
responderet et amitteret, regressum non haberet erga
partieipes ad damnum suum restaurandum in aliqua
contributione facienda, sed hoc sibi ipsi & negligentize
suse posset imputare. Sed licet non sunt nominati,
tamé oportet q vocentur cüm tenens sine illis respon-
dere non teneatur. Sumoniri igitur debet per hoc
breve. Rex vicecom salutem. Sumoneas p bonos sum-
monitores A. B. quód sint coram justic. &c. ad respon-
dendum C. simul cum D. de tanta terra cum perti-
nentiis in tali villa vel in tali com, vel de tanto terre
cum pertinentiis in alio com quam idem C. in curia
nostra &c. clamat ut jus suum versus predictum D.
et sine quibus preedictus D. no vult respondere eidem
C. cüm pdicti A. et B. sint participes ipsius D. de
pdieta terra &c. et quo casu si venerint, respondeant
cum ipso D. si voluerint, si autem non, nihilominus
peedat loquela. Et in hoc casu sive venerint sive non, et
tenens amiserit, p æqualibus portionibus facient tenenti


OF EXCEPTIONS. 397


first place if the inheritance has been parted or not. If
indeed it has been parted, and the tenant holds the estate
claimed so parted and in proportion to his part, it is not
necessary that all the co-parceners should be named in
the writ, because, if those who hold nothing should be
named in the writ, the writ abates, as is proved in St.
Michael’s term in the fifteenth year of king Henry in
the county of Essex. An assise utrum concerning J.
the parson of Messe and Ralph de Ardern and his wife
and their co-parceners. To the same effect is the case
concerning the countess of Oxford and William Blundus
and his wife, because they had withdrawn from the
common holding, but nevertheless one is not bound
without one’s co-parceners to answer to the claimant, and
if one should answer without them and lose, he would
not have a right of recourse against his co-parceners in
order that they should make good his loss by making a
certain contribution, but this he might impute to himself
and his own negligence. But although they are not
named, nevertheless it is incumbent that they should be
called, since the tenant is not bound to answer without
them. They ought therefore to be summoned by this
writ. The king to the viscount greeting. Summon by
good summoners A. and B. that they be present before
our justiciaries &c. to answer to C. together with D.
concerning so much land with its appurtenances in such
a vill or in such a county, or of so much land with its
appurtenances in another county, which the said C. in
our court &e. claims as his right against the aforesaid
D., and without whom the aforesaid D. is unwilling to
answer to the said C., since the aforesaid A. and B. are
co-parceners of the said D. in the said land &e., and in
which case if they have appeared, let them answer with
the said D. if they will, but if not, nevertheless let the
hearing proceed. And in this case whether they ap-
pear or not, and if the tenant has lost, let them in equal
portions make compensation to the tenant. And that


2.
Quod
oportet,
quod
omnes
nominen-
tur peten-
tes, licet
respondere
possunt
quod qui-
dam sunt
bastardi,
et quidam
villani, et
hujusmodi,


f. 430 b.


398 DE EXCEPTIONIBUS.


excambiü. Et q participes nd nominati ita sumoneri
debent, pbatur de termino S. Michaelis anno regni
regis H. nono incipiente decimo in com Eborum et
Lyne. de Adam Tusset.


Si auté hereditas commiunis partita non sit, oportet
de necessitate quód omnes nominentur in brevi, alio-
quin cadit breve ex toto. Si aute à petente ita fuerit
replicatum, q non est necesse omnes nominare rationi-
bus paulo antedictis, quia omnes illoru vel quida bas-
tardi sunt vel mortui cùm masculi sunt, vel si foemine,
quód dqdam bastarde et Gdam villanis maritate, &
quaedam villanee d non nominantur, item qusedam con-
tulerunt se religioni, breve in pendente erit & actio,
donee de veritate constiterit. Inprimis cùm dicatur,
quód absens sit bastardus, summoneatur per breve in
forma supradicta, quód sit cora justic. ad certos diem
& locü ad ostendedü quid juris clamat in tanto terre
cum ptinentiis in tali villa, quam talis clamat versus
talem ut jus suu, vel per assisam mortis antecessoris.
Et unde idem talis, s. petens dieit q bastardus est, et
quód nihil juris clamare potest in pdicta terra. Et de
hae materia inveniri poterit de termino S. Trinitatis
anno regni regis H. quarto in comitatu Somerset. Si
autem dubitetur an particeps non nominatus sit mortuus
vel non, detur alius dies, ut interim inquiratur veritas:
ut de itinere M. de Pateshull in comitatu Kane. anno
regni regis H. decimo tertio, de W. filio Roberti. Item
refert de tenente cüm tenuerit pro diviso faeta parti-
tione, et ille moriatur qui de re petita nihil tenet, an
cadat actio per mortem talis, ae si ille qui teneret rem
moreretur? Revera non cadit, non magis quàm si


OF EXCEPTIONS. 399


co-parceners not named ought to be thus summoned is
proved in St. Michael’s term in the ninth and tenth
years of the reign of king Henry in the counties of York
and Lincoln concerning Adam Tussel.


But if the common inheritance has not been parted, it
is incumbent of necessity that all should be named in


2.
That it is
incumbent


the writ, otherwise the writ abates altogether. If it has that all the


been so replied by the claimant that it is not necessary


claimants


be named


to name them all for the reasons stated shortly above, although


because all or some of them are bastards or are dead


?


they may
answer


when they are males, or if they are females that some that some


are bastards and some are married to villeins, and some
are villeims who are not named, likewise some have
betaken themselves to a religious profession, the writ
and the action will be hung up, until the truth has been
ascertained. In the first place when it is said that a
bastard is absent, let him be summoned in the form
above stated, that he should appear before the justi-
ciaries on a certain day and ai a certain place, to show
what right he claims in so much land with its appur-
tenances in such a vill, which so-and-so claims against
so-and-so as his right by an assise of mortdancester.
And whereupon the said so-and-so, the claimant, says
that he is a bastard, and that he can claim no right in
the said land. And on this matter a case will be found
in Holy Trinity term, in the fourth year of the reign
of king Henry, in the county of Somerset. But if it
be doubted whether a co-parcener who has not been
named is dead or not, let another day be given, that the
truth may be in the meantime inquired into: as in the
iter of Martin de Pateshull in the county of Kent, in
the thirteenth year of king Henry, concerning W. the
son of Robert. Likewise it matters for the tenant when
he holds a divided share, a partition having been made,
and he dies who holds nothing of the estate claimed,
whether the action abates on account of the death of
such person, as if he who held the estate should die?
In truth it does not abate, no more than if a warrantor


are bas-
tards, and
some
villeins and
such like.


f. 430 b.


400 DE EXCEPTIONIBUS.


warrantus vocatus moreretur, sed stat breve, & ibi in-
cipiendü. Si autem moriatur nominat?, cadit: sed si
idé qui non nominatur habeat talem heredem infra
eetaté, expectabitur heredis ætas. De hoc autem quod
dicitur de maritata villano, quód si talis non nominetur
cadit breve ut supra dictum est, et si nominetur tenet
et procedit placitū de aliis, illa tame ad tempus à
petitione exclusa est quousque villanus mortuus fuerit:
ut de itinere M. de P. in comitatu Lincolfi anno regni
regis H. decimo de Hugone de Hull Et ad hoc facit
de itinere Roberti de Vere comite Oxoii et M. de Pate-
shull anno regni regis H. quinto in comitatu Hertford,
assisa mortis antecessoris si W. de Ludwich. Et quód
cadat breve si non fuerit nominata, inveniri poterit
de eodem itinere in eode com, assisa mortis anteces-
soris de Matilda filia Godwini, & est ratio ibi assignata,
quia villanus mori potuit. Item de pticipe absente,
de quo replicatur q villanus est, sumoneatur q sit ad
ostendendum quid &e. Item de hoc q dicitur q parti-
ceps cotulit se religioni & ita mortuus seculo, constare
poterit per literas episcopi utrum redire possit ad
seculum vel non, secundum quod susceperit habitum
pbationis vel pfessionis. Et de hac materia inveniri
poterit de termino S. Trinitatis anno regis H. quarto
in com South. de Johanne de Brywes. Item esto q
partieeps in prisona detineatur quód venire non possit.
Item si tali infirmitate detentus vel ab hostibus captus
nihilominüs oportet eum nominare, & cüm nominatus
fuerit, supersedendum erit quousque venire possit. Si
aute imprisonatus fuerit particeps nominatus ppter
felonia, de qua sit in periculo vite vel membrorum,
remaneat loquela sine die quousque constiterit de ejus


OF EXCEPTIONS.. . 401


who had been vouched should die, but the writ stands,
and it must there commence. But if the person named
should die, it abates, but if the said person who is not
named has a certain heir under age, the full age of the
heir shall be awaited. But concerning that which is
said of a woman married to a villein, that if such a
person is not named the writ abates as above said, and
if such person be named the writ holds good and the
plea proceeds concerning the others, she, however, is for
a time excluded from claiming until the villein be dead :
as in the iter of Martin de Pateshull, in the fifth year of
the reign of king Henry, in the county of Hertford, an
assise of mortdancester, if W. de Ludwich. And that
the writ abates, if she be not named, may be found in
the same iter in the same county, an assise of mortdan-
cester concerning Matilda the daughter of Godwin, and
the reason there assigned is, that the villein might die.
Likewise concerning an absent coparcener, concerning
whom it is replied that he is a villein, Jet him be sum-
moned that he be present to show what, &c. Like-
wise concerning that which is said that a coparcener has
betaken himself to a religious profession and so is dead
to secular life, it may be ascertained through letters from
the bishop whether he can return to secular life or not,
according as he has put on the dress of probation or of
profession. And on this matter a case may be found in
Holy Trinity term, in the fourth year of king Henry, in
the county of Southampton, concerning John de Brywes.
Likewise let it be that a coparcener is detained in prison,
so that he cannot come. Likewise if detained by such
an infirmity or taken captive by enemies, nevertheless
it is incumbent to name him, and when his name has
been mentioned he may be dispensed with until he can
come. But if a coparcener who is named has been im-
prisoned for felony, for which he may be in danger of
life or members, let the hearing of the cause be stayed
without a day, until it has been settled concerning his
R 2657. GEO


3.
Si parti-
ceps sur-
dus fuerit


vel mutus.


f. 431.


4.
Si tenenti
competat


402 DE EXCEPTIONIBUS.


deliberatione vel damnatione: ut de itinere W. de
Ralegh in com Bed de Juliana de Nodarüs. Ita sus-
penditur bie et loquela, si unus ex pticipibus fuerit
infra setate, donec ad setate pvenerit.


Sed quid dicetur de pticipe qui naturaliter surdus
fuerit et mutus, videtur q talis omni tempore p non
herede & p non participe haberi debeat. Et ideo sive
nominetur sive non, non cadit actio nee breve. Sed
tenet tam in persona petentis quàm in persona tenen-
tis quantum ad omnes, Si autem à casu venerit sur-
ditas vel non venerit & q mutus fuerit, expectandum
erit p aliquod tempus, si spes habeatur de convale-
scentia. De adjuncto vero et superioris consensu,
qualiter fieri debeat in psona tenentis, ppendi poterit
p ea qua superius dicta sunt in persona petentis. Et
notandum quód licet non capaces haeredes nominentur,
vel forte penitus extranei non tame ppter hoc cadit
bre, sed stabit in psonis aliorü qui jus habent, quia
in hoe tali casu utile non vitiatur p inutile. Notan-
dum est etiam q plures participes petere possunt te-
nendi in comuni à pluribus qui separatim tenent, et
qui sese in nullo contingunt, et hic plures erunt actiones
ppter pluralitatem psonarum. Et vice versa plures
non partieipes quorum jura separata sunt, petere pos-
sunt versus plures coheredes & pticipes, & similiter
erunt hie actiones plures et diverse. Item possunt
plures coheredes & pticipes petere versus plures co-
heredes et pticipes, et hic erit unica actio ppter uni-
tatem juris. :


~


Si autem non sit exceptio q competat tenenti con-
tra petentem, nec ex persona petentis nec ex psona


OF EXCEPTIONS. 403


release or his condemnation, as in the iter of William de
Ralegh in the county of Bedford, concerning Juliana de
Nodariis. Likewise the writ and the hearing of the cause
are suspended, if one of the coparceners should be under
age, until he should have arrived at full age.

But what shall be said of a coparcener who is naturally 3.
deaf or dumb, it seems that such a person ought to be Tan
accounted at all times as not an heir and as not a copar- be deaf or
cener. And accordingly whether he be named or not, e
neither the action nor the writ abates. But it holds good
as well in the person of the claimant as in the person of
the tenant as regards all persons. But if the deafness
has arisen from accident or has not arisen and he is
dumb, they must wait some time, if hope can be enter-
tained of his convalescence. But concerning an adjoint
person and the consent of a superior, how it ought to be
dealt with in the person of a tenant, may be ascertained
through what has been said above in the person of a
claimant. And it is to be noted that although heirs not
capable be named, or by chance entire strangers, never- f, 431.
theless the writ does not abate for that reason, but it
shall stand in the person of the others who have right,
because in such a case as this the valid is not vitiated
by the worthless. It is to be noted also that several
coparceners may claim to hold in common from several
who hold separately, and who do not touch each other
in any respect, and here there will be several actions
on account of the plurality of persons. And con-
versely several persons not coparceners, whose rights
are separate, may claim against several coheirs and
coparceners, and in like manner there will be here
several and divers actions. Likewise several coheirs
and coparceners may claim against several coheirs and
coparceners, and here there will be a single action on
account of the unity of right.

If however there be no exception which is available to 4.
the tenant against the claimant, neither as regards the uias

ec 2


404 DE EXCEPTIONIBUS.


exceptio suo ppria, firmato sie judicio ex persona judicis, pe-


ex ipsa Te: tatis & tenentis, cùm judicium sit trinus actus trium
psonarum, videndum erit an sit aliqua que competat
tenenti ex ipsa re (j petitur, si corporalis fuerit &
imobilis sieut terra, tenementum, vel redditus qui pve-
niat ex tenemento.
5: Oportet igitur inprimis, quód petens rem designet
Oportet : 3.3: : R
quod pe. quam petit, videlicet qualitatem, ut sciatur utrum


tens desig- petatur terra vel redditus cum ptinentiis. Item quan-
cath pE titaté, utrum videlicet sit plus vel minus q petitur.
cum per- (ertam enim rem oportet deducere in judiciü, ne con-
tinentiis. . oye Ea $- :
tingat judicium esse delusoriü vel obscurum, quia de
re incerta in judicium deducta certa fieri non poterit
sententia, licet quandog de incerta re agatur. Judex sive
justic. (in quatum ei possibile fuerit) certum debet pferre
judicium. Specificare autem poterit sie, ut si dicat:
Peto versus talem tot maneria, quandoque cum ptinen-
tis, quandoq sine. Item tot feoda militum cum pti-
nentiis. Item tot carucatas terree, tot virgatas, tot acras,
tot selliones. Item tot libratas terre, tot solidatas, tot
bovatas secundum diversitate tenementorum, & secundü
qin brevibus de recto & de ingressu continetur, et ita
q narratio bri conveniat, à quo si discordet & brevi
non conveniat narratio, amittit petens, quia non ad-
mittitur variatio. Admittitur tamen variatio quan-
doque, dum tamen dicat simile, ut si cotineatur in
bii q petit duas carucatas, d p annum valent dece li-


OF EXCEPTIONS. 405


person of the claimant nor as regards his own proper regards the
person, the judgment being thus assured as regards the E: TEE
person of the judge, of the claimant and of the tenant, to the
since the judgment is a triple act of the three persons, TER
we must see if there is any exception available to the
tenant as regards the thing itself which is claimed, if it
be corporeal and immovable as land, a tenement, or a


rent which arises from a tenement,


It is incumbent in the first place that the claimant 5.
should designate the thing which he claims, to wit, the PN
quality of it, that it may be known whether land or a that the
rent with its appurtenances is claimed. Likewise the M
quantity of it, whether forsooth it be more or less than pw E
is claimed. For he ought to bring a thing certain into which he
judgment, lest it should happen that the judgment oa
should be illusory or obscure, because a certain sentence appurte-
cannot be passed upon a matter uncertain which is Dances.
brought into judgment, although sometimes an action is
brought concerning an uncertain thing. The judge or
the justiciary (as far as is possible for him) ought to
pronounce a certain judgment. But he will be able to
specify thus, as if he should say, I claim against such a
person so many manors, sometimes with the appurte-
nances, sometimes without them. Likewise so many
knights’ fees with the appurtenances. Likewise so many
carucates of land, so many virgates, so many acres, so
many ridges. Likewise so many pounds-worth of land,
so many shillings-worths of land, so many bovates of
land according to the diversity of tenements, and accord-
ing to what is contained in writs of right and of entry,
and that the declaration shall accord with the writ, from
which if it is in disaccord and the declaration does not
accord with the writ, the claimant loses, because a vari-
ation is not admitted. A variation however is some
times admitted, provided however it states something
similar, as if it be contained in the writ that he claims


two carucates of land which are worth annually ten


f. 431 b.


l.
Proposita
intentione
videre
poterit
tenens an
totam
teneat vel
non, et,
unde opor-
tet quod
visum ha-
beat vel
quod tan-
tundem
valeat.


Supra,
f. 179 b.


2.
Cum visum
habuerit,
quid
faciendum.


406 DE EXCEPTIONIBUS.


bratas, non ppter hoc recedit à brevi suo si dicat,
peto decem libratas terre, quia dicit q tantundem
valet, non enim refert utrum quid fiat vel suum
simile.


Car. XXVII.


Cum autem petens intentione suam sie formaverit,
estimare debet tenens an teneat totam terram peti-
tam vel ejus ptem vel omnino nihil: si totam teneat,
utrum ilam teneat nomine pprio vel nomine alieno.
Si aute nomine alieno ut si in custodia, ad vadium, ad
voluntatem, vel ad terminum annorum, cadit bie, quia
actio non competit cotra tale, sed contra illu cujus no-
mine fuerit in seysina. Si aute nomine pprio, tunc refert
utru ad termini vite, vel ut de feodo. Et quo casu
concedatur ei visus, si visum petierit, ut petens osten-
dat ei quanti terre petierit, et p quas metas, et hac
ratione dabitur ei dilatio, ut, inde habito visu, sciri po-
terit si terram petita integré teneat vel non, ut supra
in tractatu de visu faciendo. Et hee vera sunt, nisi
petens ineontinenti ostendere possit certitudine p qua
facere possit q tantundem valeat, ut si dicat: peto tan-
tam terram p tales metas, vel tantam terram unde ante-
cessor suus obiit seysitus ut de feodo, velsie: peto advo-
catione ecclesiz S. Petri, cùm duse fuerint ecclesie in
eadem civitate, videlieet S. Petri & S. Pauli, ut supra
plenius in tractatu de visu faciendo.


Cüm autem tenens visum habuerit vel quod tan-
tundé valet, scire poterit utrum petenti respondere
teneatur et ad breve suum vel non teneatur, secundü
quod tenuerit totam rem nomine pprio vel alieno, vel


OF EXCEPTIONS, 407


pounds worth, he does not recede from his writ, if he
says, I claim ten pounds worth of land, because he says
what is equivalent, for it does not matter whether a
thing or its like be done.


CHAPTER X XVII. f. 431 b.


But when the claimant has thus shaped his declaration, 1.
the tenant ought to estimate whether he holds all the Vd
land claimed, or a part of it, or none at all: if he holds the having
whole of the land, whether he holds it in his own name, U RG
or in another person’s name. Ifindeed in another person’s ae ae
name, as if in guardianship, as a security, at will, or for whether he
aterm of years, the writ abates, because an action does E eee
not lie against such a person, but against him in whose not, and
name he is in seysine. But if in his own name, then it bie Vr
matters whether he holds it for the term of his life, or as bent that
in fee. And in which case let a view be allowed to him, eee
if he claims a view, that the claimant may point out to or what is
him how much land he claims, and by what boundaries, canainn
and on this account an adjournment will be granted to
him, that, a view having been had thereof, it may be
known whether he holds the land claimed in its entirety
or not, as above in the treatise concerning the making of
a view. And these things are true, unless the claimant
can forthwith show a certainty through which he can
make out what is equivalent, as if he should say, I claim
so much land by such boundaries, or so much land
whereof my ancestor died seised as of fee, or thus; I
claim the advowson of the church of St. Peter, when
there are two churches in the same city, to wit, the
church of St. Peter, and the church of St. Paul, as above
more fully in the treatise on making a view.


But when the tenant has had a view or what is 2.
. ; When he
equivalent, he will be able to know whether he is bound has had a
to make answer to the claimant and to his writ, or. he is view. what


G : . . isto be
not so bound, according as he holds the entire thing in gone.


^
DM


Oportet
designare
que vel
qualis sit,
quam
petit, res


mobilis vel


immobilis,
et certa
designatio.


Supra,
f. 180.


408 DE EXCEPTIONIBUS,


nihil inde tenuerit, vel non nisi ejus partem: quia si
totam non tenuerit, amittere non potest quod, non
habet, et ita cadit breve, sed non actio, nisi ita sit
quód.petens ostendere possit quód tenens totam te-
neat in dominico et in servitio, nisi tenens docere
possit contrarium, quód nec in dominico nec in servi-
tio: & quo casu fieri possit jocus partitus, ‘si partes
consenserint sub tali periculo, vel quód tenens rem
petitam amittat, vel quód petens clamorem suum im-
perpetuat, sed hoc erit voluntarium & non judiciale.
Et notandum, quód cùm tenens semel talem excep-
tionem pposuerit, ulterius consimilem pponere non
possit, ne diutius ptrahatur negotium, et tenens ad
hoe poterit coarctari, quód ostendat quid in posses-
sione extiterit, ne iterum cadat breve p mendacium,
et etiam ad omnes exceptiones que faciunt ad breve
prosternendum.


In hae quidem actione p bře de recto, sicut in quali-
bet alia actione p quà petitur res corporalis, designare
oportet petente d & qualis sit res que petitur, ut si
sit res imobilis sieut tenementum, designare oportet
qualitatem et quantitatem, ut supradictu est. Si au-
tem res mobilis, sieut animal, vestis, vel aliud quod
consistit in pondere, numero, vel mensura, quia non
sufficit dicere, peto rem, nisi dicatur peto talem rem.
Item si tenementum, oportet designare utrum sit terra
vel redditus. ltem si redditus, utrü sit annuus pve-
niens ex tenemento, vel datus de camera, secüdu q
supra distinguitur in tractatu de nova disseysina. Ité
si res sit mobilis, oportet designare utrum petatur
animal vel vestis, si animal, utrum leo vel homo: si


OF EXCEPTIONS, 409


his own name or in another’s name, or holds nothing
thereof, or only a part thereof: because if he does not
hold it all, he cannat lose what he has not, and so the
writ abates, but not the action, unless it be that the
claimant shall be able to show, that the tenant holds the
whole in demesne and in service, unless the tenant can
show the contrary, that he holds it neither in demesne
nor in service: and in which case an alternative wager
may be made, if the parties have consented under such
a risk, either that the tenant shall lose the thing claimed,
or that the claimant shall perpetuate his claim, but this
will be voluntary and not judicial. And it is to be
noted, that when the tenant has once propounded such
an exception, he cannot propound a similar one after-
wards, lest the affair be protracted too long, and the
tenant may be constrained to this, that he should show
what has been in possession, lest the writ should again
abate through a lie, and likewise against all exceptions
which tend to overthrow the writ.


In this action indeed by a writ of right, as in any _ 3.
other action whereby a corporeal thing is claimed, it is iod
incumbent that the claimant should designate what and to desig-
of what quality is the thing which is claimed, as if it 22 yo
be an immovable thing as a tenement, it is incumbent Do
that he should designate the quality and the quantity, movable
as aforesaid. But if it be a movable thing as an animal, leri
a vestment, or something else which consists in weight, which px
number, or measure, because it is not sufficient to say P
I claim a thing, unless it be said, I claim such a thing. designa-
Likewise if it be a tenement it is incumbent to state "on.
whether it be land or a rent. Likewise if it be a rent,
whether ,it be annual derived from the tenement, or
granted from a chamber, according to what has been
distinguished above in the treatise of novel disseysine.
Likewise if the thing be movable, it is incumbent to
designate whether an animal or a vestment is claimed,


if an animal, whether it is a lion or a man ; but if it be


f. 432.


410 DE EXCEPTIONIBUS.


autem vestis, utrü bombicina, vel lana, vel de linio.! Si
auté petatur res ( in pondere consistat, sicut massa
rudis vel formata, tunc scire oportet cujus sit pon-
deris et cujus generis. Si autem petatur res q in
numero consistat sicut pecunia numerata, tune quot
libra, quot solidi, vel quot denarii. Si autem petatur
res que consistit in mensura, tunc utrum liquidum
aut solidum, ut si solidum, tune cujus generis, utrum
frumenti, hordei, vel alterius annone. Si autem liqui-
dum, tune utrum vinum, an oleum, vel hujusmodi, et
sic cujus generis. De numero autem constare opor-
tebit quot modia, vel quarteria, vel hujusmodi, & ita
perpendi poterit de qualitate & quantitate rei mobilis.
Si autem res fuerit immobilis sieut terra, eodem modo
oportet designare qualitatem et quantitatem, ut supra
dictum est. Item utrum tota petatur an ejus pars, et
ne plus petatur à petente quàm tenens teneat. ltem
utrum petatur corpus rei cum pertinentiis, vel sine.
Item utrum petatur unum corpus per se cum per-
tinentiis, vel plura corpora per se vel cum pertinen-
tis. Item si plura corpora cum pertinentiis vel sine,
tune utrum sese contingant et ita annexa sint quód
unum ab alio separari non possit, vel quód sese in
nullo contingant, et penitus sunt diversa. Item refert
utrum petatur ab uno vel pluribus, et eodem modo
utrum teneatur ab uno vel à pluribus, ut supra de
participibus. Item designatur res que petitur ex
nomine, ut si petam hominem, oportet designare nomen,
quia nomina hominum cognoscendorum gratia imposita
sunt. Eodem modo si petatur manerium, oportet quód
designetur ex nomine, vel si alia quævis res, vel alia


1 « de lana aut de lino," MS. Rawl. C. 160.


OF EXCEPTIONS. 411


a vestment, whether it be of silk, or of wool, or of linen.
But if a thing be claimed which consists of weight, as a
rude or a shaped mass, then it is incumbent to know of
what weight and of what kind it be. But if a thing be
claimed, which consists in number, as money counted
out, then how many pounds, how many shillings, or how
many pennies. But if a thing be claimed which con-
sists in measure, then whether it be liquid or solid, as if
solid, then of what kind, whether wheat, barley, or some
other produce. But if liquid, then whether wine or oil
or such like, and so of what kind. But as regards
number, it will be incumbent to establish how many
measures or quarters or such like, and so it may be
ascertained concerning the quality and quantity of a
movable thing. But if the thing be immovable as land,
in the same manner it will be incumbent to designate
the quality and the quantity, as above stated. Likewise
whether the whole be claimed or a part of it, and that
more be not claimed by the claimant than the tenant
holds. Likewise whether the body of the thing is claimed
with its appurtenances, or without them. Likewise
whether one body by itself is claimed with its appur-
tenances, or several bodies by themselves or with their
appurtenances. Likewise if several bodies with their
appurtenances or without them, whether they touch one
another and are so annexed that one cannot be separated
from another, or that they do not in any way touch one
another, and are entirely diverse. Likewise it is of
importance whether it be claimed by one or several, and
in the same manner whether it be held by one or several,
as above concerning co-parceners. Likewise the thing
which is claimed is designated by name, as if I claim
a man, it is incumbent to designate him by name, be-
cause names are imposed for the purpose of distinguish-
ing men. In the same manner if a manor be claimed,
it is incumbent that it should be designated by name,
or if any other thing, or anything which is equivalent,


f. 432.


4.
Exceptio,
quod nihil
tenet, et
pena que
sequitur si
inde con-
vineatur.


412 DE EXCEPTIONIBUS.


que tantundem valeat, ut supra de visu faciendo. Et
quemadmodum petuntur corpora, sie et quandoque
petuntur jura, sicut jus advocationis quod est de per-
tinentiis alicujus rei corporalis, quia jura sine corpori-
bus esse non possunt. Et petitur aliquando jus advo-
cationis per se et cum suis pertinentiis, & aliquando
cum corpore simul cum ipsa re, cùm sit de ipsius rei
pertinentiis.


Cüm autem dicat petens in intentione sua, peto
versus talem tantam terram cum pertinentiis &c. ex-
cipere poterit tenens contra intentionem suam, quód
ipse nihil inde tenet, nec unquam aliquid inde tenuit:
si petens hoc dedicere non possit, cadit breve simul
cum actione, eüm tenens verum confiteatur. Si autem
dieat se nihil tenere cùm revera totum teneat, & inde
se posuerit in inquisitionem, si tenens per inquisitionem
convincatur pro mendace, amittet rem qus petitur
propter mendacium. Et qualiter et per quod breve
fieri debet inquisitio inferius dicetur: nec erit hic lo-
cus joco partito, nisi in hoc consenserint partes ex
abundanti. Item si excipiat tenens hoe modo, & dicat
quód ipse nihil tenet sed alius, si in hoe mendacium
inveniatur, amittet quod tenet propter mendacium et
sine joco partito. ltem si cognoscat quód rem teneat
sed non totam, quia alius partem, sive de ipso corpore
sive de pertinentiis, si per inquisitionem de mendacio
convineatur, non tamen propter hoc amittet ipsam rem
totam, nec ejus partem, nec punietur mendacium ut
prius, sed procedit loquela versus tenentem ut de toto
respondeat, nisi aliud inducat ex communi assensu, ut
jocus partitus. Et quod dieitur de corpore dicatur de
pertinentiis, secundum ‘quod totum tenuerit vel non


. OF EXCEPTIONS. 418


as above concerning making a view. And as bodies are
claimed, so also sometimes rights are claimed, as the
right of advowson, which is concerning the appurte-
nances of a corporeal thing, because SNR cannot exist
without bodies. And sometimes the right of advowson
is claimed by itself and with its appurtenances, and
sometimes with the body together with the thing itself,
since it is of the appurtenances of the thing itself.


But when the claimant says in his declaration, I claim | 4.
against such "a person so much land with its appurte- i
nances, the tenant may except against his declaration he holds
that he holds nothing thereof, nor ever held anything and the
thereof: if the claimant cannot gainsay this, the writ pri
abates as well as the action, when the tenant confesses follows if
it to be true. But if he says that he holds nothing he ue
when in fact he holds the whole, and has put Busse TU
upon an inquest thereon, if the tenant be convicted by
the inquest as a liar, he shall lose the thing which is
claimed on aecount of the Be. And in what manner
and by what writ an inquest ought to be made will be
stated below: nor will there be here place for an alter-
native wager, unless the parties have over and above
consented. Likewise if the tenant excepts in this
manner, and says that he holds nothing, but another
does, if a lie be found out in this, he shall lose it on
account of the lie, and without an alternative wager.
Likewise if he acknowledges that he holds the thing,
but not the whole, because another holds a part, either
of the body itself or of its appurtenances, if he be con-
victed of a lie by an inquest, he shall not on that
account lose the entire thing itself, nor a part of it, nor
shall the lie be punished as before, but the hearing of
the case proceeds against the tenant that he shall answer
concerning the whole, unless he induces something else
by common assent, as an alternative wager. And what
is said of the body may be said of its appurtenances,
according as he may hold the whole or not hold it or a


f. 432 b.


414 DE EXCEPTIONIBUS.


tenuerit vel ejus partem. Item respondere poterit &
cognoscere quód aliquando tenuit rem petitam, sed
modo non tenet illam, quo casu videndum erit quan-
do desiit possidere. Desinere autem potest quis dolose
ne secum agatur, & quandod sine dolo, & unde viden-
dum an desiit possidere ante brevis impetrationem vel
post. Si autem ante, non tenetur ex dolo, cùm non
sit in arbitrio suo quin debeat respondere, licet sit in
arbitrio petentis quando velit agere. Item non tene-
tur ex dolo, licet post impetrationem alienaverit &
transtulerit ad alium rem petitam, quia bene potest
tenens ignorare impetrationem. Et petens poterit esse
negligens in psecutione. Item alienare poterit sine
dolo post impetrationem, et post summonitionem, ut si
ante impetrationem vel post impetrationem (dum ta-
men summonitione preventus non sit) se transtulerit
tenens ad partes transmarinas vel tam remotas, quód
de summonitione nihil sciverit & ibi alienaverit, non
punitur. Si autem fecerit contrarium in casibus su-
pradictis, haberi debet p possessore, & maxime si alie-
naverit post sumonitionem testatam & pbatam: ut de
termino S. Michaelis anno regis Henrici quarto incipi-
ente quinto. Item si post impetrationem facta fuit
alienatio pendente inquisitione, erit breve in pendenti
et secundum hoc teneat vel cadat: ut de termino
Sanct Trinitatis anno regis H. septimo in comitatu
Oxon de Joceto de Plungenay. Si autem summoni-
tione prevent? fuit q illam scivit vel scire debuit, p
possessore habebitur, sive donatorius possessionem ap-
prehenderit sive non. Item respondere poterit quód


OF EXCEPTIONS. 415


part ofit. Likewise he may answer and may acknow-
ledge that he some time ago held the thing claimed, but
now he does not hold it, in which case it will have to be
seen at what time he ceased to hold it. But a person
may cease deceitfully that he may not be subject to an
action, and sometimes without deceit, and hence it is to
be seen, whether he has ceased to possess before the suing
out of the writ or afterwards. But if before, he is not
liable for deceit, since it is not at his choice whether he
will answer or not, although it may be at the choice of
the claimant, when he will proceed. Likewise he is not
liable for deceit, although he may have alienated it after
the writ was sued out, and has transferred to another the
thing claimed, for the tenant may well be ignorant
of the suing out of the writ. And the claimant may
be negligent in the prosecution. Likewise he may
without deceit alienate after the suing out of the writ
and after the summons, as if before the suing out or
after the suing out of the writ (provided, however, he
has not been anticipated by the summons) the tenant
has transferred himself to parts beyond the sea or so
remote that he has heard nothing of the summons and
has there alienated, he is not punished. But if he has
done the contrary in the cases aforesaid, he ought to be
regarded as the possessor, and especially if he has
alienated after a summons attested and proved, as in
St. Michael’s term in the fourth and fifth years of king
Henry. Likewise if after the suing out of the writ
an alienation has been made pending an inquest, the
writ will become pending and according to this may
hold good or abate, as in Holy Trinity term in the
seventh year of king Henry in the county of Oxford,
concerning Jocetus de Plungenay. But if he has been
anticipated by a summons, so that he knew of it or
ought to have known of it, he shall be held to be the
possessor, whether the donatory has taken possession or
not. Likewise he may answer that he has not held the


f. 432 b.


416 DE EXCEPTIONIBUS.


totum corpus manerii non tenuerit, quia talis tenet
tantum de corpore, unde ipse nihil habet, sive manerium
petatur cum pertinentiis vel sine. Et unde nihil ha-
. bet nec in dñico, nec in servitio, nec in eleemosyna,
Fleta, v. nec in advocationibus. Et unde oportet petentem p
i inquisitionem docere contrarium. Item vel tempore
impetrationis vel summonitionis nihil tenuerit, dum
tamen postea possidere inceperit, respondebit. Item
cüm corpus manerii petatur in dominico, respondere
poterit tenens, quód nibil inde tenet in dominico sed
totum in servitio, et quo casu, si ita sit, cadit breve et
similiter actio, quia non potest tenens amittere id in
dominico, quod non tenet nisi in servitio. Item cûm
petens totum petat in dominico, tenens respondere po-
test et cognoscere q totum non tenet in dominico,
sed partim in dominico & partim in servitio, quo casu
videtur quód ex toto cadit breve, et actio tantum pro
ea parte quam non tenet in dominico: nisi ita sit
(secundum quosdam) quód petens possit intentionem
institutam in hoc mutare, quód petere possit in domi-
nico quod tenens tenet in dominico, et in servitio quod
tenens tenet in servitio. In electione vero petentis est
in hoe casu utrum velit quód breve stet vel cadat, se-
cundum quod se tenuerit ad petendum in dominico &
servitio versus tenentem, et sic stat breve: vel quód
totum petat versus tenentem in dominico, et quód sie
cadat breve.


5. Item dicere poterit et respondere (ut supra) quód


Exeeptio, nihil inde tenet omnino, nec in dominico, nec in servi-
quod tene-
mentum tio, nec in eleemosyna, nec in advocaria, & hoc pbato


non teneat cadit bre. Item si dicat tenens q totum non teneat,
quia alius


tenet de quia alius tenet de ptinentiis, vel de corpore manerii


pora tantum, sieut advocationem vel tantam terram, repli-


. OF EXCEPTIONS. 417


whole body of the manor, because so-and-so holds so
much of the body, whereof he has nothing, whether the
manor be claimed with its appurtenances or without
them. And whereof he has nothing neither in demesne,
nor in service, nor in alms, nor in advowsons. And
whereof it is incumbent that the claimant by an inquest
should show the contrary. Likewise either at the time
of suing out the writ or of the summons he held nothing,
provided however he began to possess afterwards, he
shall answer. Likewise when the body of a manor is
claimed in demesne, the tenant may answer that he
holds nothing of it in demesne, but the whole of it in
service, and in which case, if it be so, the writ abates
and likewise the action, because the tenant cannot lose
that in demesne, which he only holds in service. Like-
wise when the claimant claims the whole in demesne,
the tenant may reply and acknowledge that he does not
hold the whole in demesne, but partly in demesne and
partly in service, in which case it seems that the writ
abates altogether, and the action only for that part
which he does not hold in demesne, unless it be (accord-
ing to some) that the claimant may change his instituted
declaration in this matter, that he may claim in demesne
what the tenant holds in demesne, and in service what
the tenant holds in service. But it is at the election of
the claimant in this case whether he wishes the writ to
stand or fall, according as he has kept himself to the
claim in demesne and in service against the tenant, and
so the writ stands; or that he claims the whole against
the tenant in demesne, and so the writ falls.


Likewise he may say and answer (as above) that he 5.
holds nothing thereof at all, neither in demesne nor in Spon
service, nor in alms, nor in advowsonry, and upon this that he

i it falls. Likewise if the tenant says Ss not
being proved the writ falls. Likew SAYS hold the
that he does not hold the whole, because another holds nee

ecause
some of the appurtenances, or only the body of the another


manor, as the advowson or so much land, the claimant holds some
R 2657. DD


f. 433.


6.
Quod ali-
quando
fuit de
pertinen-
tiis, sed
postea
desiit esse,


418 DE EXCEPTIONIBUS.


care poterit petens q non habet necesse excipere ptem
illa, vel quia omnind no est de ptinentiis sed pertinet
ad alià tram & ad aliud feodü, & semper ptinuit, & unde
ipse idem nihil inde clamat, licet quandog esset de cor-
pore vel pertinentiis, capitalis suus dius qui eum inde
feoffavit ptem illà alienavit anteqm antecessorem suu
(cujus seysina ipse petit) feoffaret, & ipse nihil aliud
petit, nisi illud q antecessor suus habuit anno & die
quo feoffatus fuit, & post feoffamentu illud nihil de re
petita alienatum fuit vel translatum.


Item dicere poterit tenens quod, quando dominus
rex dedit manerium illud cum pertinentiis tali abbati,
qui eum inde feoffavit per charta suam, non fuit terra
ila de corpore manerii, nec de pertinentiis, quia prius
data per ipsum regem, etidem abbas illam dedit ante-
cessori suo per chartam suam in eodem statu, quo abbas
illam tenuit de dono domini regis, & sicut charta regis
testatur, scilicet in dominico, id quod abbas ante donum
suum habuit in dominico, & in servitio quod habuit
in servitio, eleemosyna, & in advocaria. Et unde dicere
possit q abbas à conquestu Anglie de rege in regem,
& semper se defendit per hoc quod dixit q tenuit
terram illam cum talibus pertinentiis in eleemosynam
de regibus: ut de itinere Martini de Pateshul de
loquela dq fuerit super judicium de diversis comitat
anno regis Henrici tertio in comitatu Kane. de W.
comite Mart seniore & Falcasio de Breyate. Ad hoc
autem facit de termino Sancte Trinitatis anno regis
Henrici quarto in comitatu Bedf. de W. comite Mari.
Facit etiam ad hoc manifeste de termino Hilarii et
Pasch; anno regni Henrici ut supra in principio, quia


OF EXCEPTIONS. 419


may reply that he does not hold it necessary to except of the
that part, either because it is not at all a part of the ap- ee
purtenances, but it appertains to another land and to kom
another fee and has always appertained to it, and
whereof he himself claims nothing thereof, although at
some time or other it may have been part of the body or

of the appurtenances, his chief lord, who enfeoffed him
with it, alienated that part before he enfeoffed his ances-

tor (whose seysine he himself claims), and he himself
claims nothing else, except which his ancestor had in the

year and on the day on which he was enfeoffed, and
after that enfeoffment nothing of the thing claimed was
alienated or transferred.


Likewise the tenant may say that, when the lord the — e.
king gave that manor with its appurtenances to such an du ide
abbot, who enfeoffed him with it by his charter, that land on a time
was not part of the body of the manor, nor of its appur- pecie


tenances, because it had been previously given by the tenances,
king himself, and the said abbot gave it to his ancestor adi
by his charter in the same state, in which the abbot held ceased to
it from the gift of the lord the king, and in like manner "^ ^
as the charter of the king testifies, to wit, in demesne
that which the abbot before his own gift held in demesne,
and in service that which he held in service, in alms and
in advowsonry. And hence he may say that the abbot
[held it] from the conquest of England from king to king,
and he always defends himself hereby that he says that
he has held that land with such appurtenances in alms
from kings: as in the iter of Martin de Pateshull, in the
argument which was upon a judgment concerning divers
counties, in the third year of king Henry, in the county
of Kent, concerning William Earl Marshall the elder
and Fulk de Breauté. To the same effect is the judg-
ment in Holy Trinity term'in the fourth year of king
Henry, in the county of Bedford, concerning William
Earl Marshall. To the same effect also manifestly is a
case in Hilary and Easter terms, in the year of king

DD 2


420 DE EXCEPTIONIBUS,


ibi dieitur, q sicut manerium dati fuit antecessori in
dominico & servitio &e. ita illam petit. Item si dicat
tenens q totam terram illam non teneat, quia comunis
est, & partibilis inter cohsredes et participes, et si
hoe negetur, inde fieri poterit inquisitio, utrü ita sit
vel non sit, ut supra de pticipibus. Et similiter de
term S. M. añ regis Henrici decimosexto incipiente
decimo septimo in fine. Item si petens plus petat qm
tenens teneat, ut si petens petat viginti quatuor acras
ire, cùm tenens nō teneat nisi viginti aut stat bře
aut cadit, & tüc fiat inquisitio p tale bie.


° - * D [2 D . z . —

3: Rex vic. salute. Precipim” tibi q asstptis tecu

Inquisitio quatuor vel sex, vel pluribus legalibus hominibus ex

totum ilis, qui visü fecerunt de terra qm talis petit versus
tenuerit,


velnon talë, & p eos et alios legales homines diligéter inquiras,
si pdictus talis tenens teneat xxiv. acras terre integrae,
quas talis clamat versus eunde talem necne, & unde
ide talis tenens dixit q no tenuit inde nisi tantü
viginti acras, & q talis petes inde tenuit quatuor acras,
& inquisitionem illam nobis mittas &e. T. &. Et de
hac materia inveniri poterit de term S. H. aii regis
H. quinto in com Eborum de Petro de Malo Lacu. Ité
si dicat tenes excipiendo q nihil teneat, ci aliàs in
com dixit se tenere totü, & cognovit, & à tali tenente,
versus qm nune petitur nisi ad terminü, et non alio
modo, cùm petens hoe dedixerit fiat inquisitio p hoe
bie.


8. Rex vie. salute. Precipimus tibi q in pleno com tuo


S1 tenens open : uo NS E = 4
ice iod recordari facias loquela d fuit in eodé com tuo, inter


OF EXCEPTIONS, 421


Henry as above in the beginning, because it is there
said that as a manor was granted to the ancestor in
demesne and in service &c., so he claims it. Likewise
if the tenant says that he does not hold all the land,
because it is common and partible between co-heirs and
co-parceners, and if this be denied, an inquest will have
to be held thereon, whether it be so or not, as above
concerning co-parceners. And in like manner in St.
Michael’s term in the sixteenth and seventeenth years
of king Henry, at the end. Likewise if the claimant
claims more than the tenant holds, as if the claimant
claims twenty-four acres of land, when the tenant holds
only twenty, the writ either stands or falls, and then let
an inquest be held by a writ of this kind.

The king to the viscount greeting. We enjoin you 7.
that having associated with yourself four or six or Ap inquest
more loyal men of those, who have made a view of he holds
the land which such a person claims against so-and-so, Reve og
and by them and other loyal men you diligently inquire,
if the aforesaid so-and-so the tenant holds twenty-four
acres of entire land, which the said person claims against
so-and-so, or not, and whereof the said so-and so the
tenant says that he does not hold more than twenty
acres, and that the said claimant held four acres thereof,
and send that inquest to us, &c. Witness, &c. And on
this matter a case can be found in St. Hilary’s term in
the fifth year of king Henry, in the county of York, con-
cerning Petrus de Malo Lacu. Likewise if the tenant
says in excepting that he holds nothing, when he has
said elsewhere in the county that he holds it all, and has
acknowledged it, and from such a tenant, against whom
it is now claimed, only for a term, and in no other way,
when the claimant has denied this let an inquest be
made through a writ of this kind.

The king to the viscount greeting. We enjoin you * X
that in your full county court you cause to be recorded aR AES
the cause which was heard in your said county court that he


422 DE EXCEPTIONIBUS.


nihil tenea tales de tanta tra cum ptinétiis &c. Et unde pdietus

f. 433b. talis versus quem &c. respondebit quód non tenuit

Rem terram illam nisi ad terminum, & ad voluntate talis,

quodtotum nec aliquod jus clamavit in eadem. Et recordum illud

teneat. — habeas &c. per quatuor &e. Teste &e. Idé dies datus
fuit partibus. De hac materia inveniri poterit de ter-
mino S. Michaelis anno regis Henrici nono incipiente
decimo in comitatu Bedford, de Richardo de Bavadum.
Ttem notandum q si quis terram petat cum pertinentiis
ab aliquo, & petat in dominico quod in dominico, &
in servitio quod in servitio, si tenens nihil tenuerit
in dominico, cadit breve. Et eodem modo licet ille, qui
tenet de tenente, tenere debeat de eo, si tamen tenens
implacitatus nihil perceperit de servitio, cadit breve
eodem modo ut supra: ut de termino S. Trinitatis
anno regis Henrici quarto in comitat Buck., assisa
mortis de Hugone de Gurnay.


9. Si autem tenens ita respondeat, quód totam non


Se )
rove, teneat in feodo, sed partem in feodo, et partem in


quod totum custodia, non cadit bře pro ea parte quam tenens
non tenu- . ee vs hes
ULM tenet in dominico: ut de itinere Martini de Pate-


feodo, sed shull in comitatu Kanc. anno regis Henrici duodecimo,


partem. È : = E . =
de Godefrido de Resiton!  Eode modo si quis p unt
bre plura petat maneria, vel terras, vel alia d sese non
contingunt, stare poterit bre pro una parte, & cadere
p alia pte: cüm placita sint omnino diversa.

110: Item si quis manerium petierit cum omnibus pti- .

xe tiis, ad quod pertineat advocatio ecclesia, & nihil

manerium PENİS, ad quod pertineat advocatio ecclesiz, & nihilo-


petat cum minus per aliud breve petat advocationem, una est


! * Resyntone," MS. Rawl. C. 160.


OF EXCEPTIONS. 423


between such and such persons concerning so much holds
land with its appurtenances, &c. And whereof the oming
aforesaid so-and-so against whom, &c. will answer that another
he did not hold that land except for a term, and at meti
the will of so-and-so, nor has he claimed any right in that he
it. And have that record, &c. by four, &e. Witness &c. aay
The same day was given to the parties. Upon this £. 433b.
matter a case may be found in St. Michaelmas term,
in the ninth and tenth years of king Henry, in the
county. of Bedford, concerning Richard de Bavadum.
Likewise it is to be noted that if any one claims a
land with its appurtenances from any one, and claims
in demesne what is in demesne, and in service what
is in service, if the tenant holds nothing in demesne,
the writ falls. And in the same way although he who
holds of the tenant, ought to hold of him, if the tenant
nevertheless when impleaded has derived nothing from
the servitude, the writ falls in the same manner as
above; as in Holy Trinity term, in the fourth year of
king Henry, in the county of Bucks, an assise of
mortdancester concerning Hugo de Gurnay.

But if the tenant answers thus, that he does not hold |, 9.

: 4 : f If he has
the whole in fee, but part in fee and part in guardian- acknow-
ship, the writ does not fall in respect of that part which es
the tenant holds in demesne: as in the iter of Martin not hold
de Pateshull in the county of Kent, in the twelfth PLE
year of king Henry, concerning Godfrey de Resiton. a part.
In the same manner if a person claims several manors
through one writ,or lands or other things which do
not touch one another, the writ may stand for one part
and fall for the other part, since the pleas are altogether


different.


i ise 1 rson claims a manor with all its 10.
Likewise if a perso Ap


appurtenances, to which appertains the advowson of a claims a
church, and nevertheless by another writ claims the 2d
advowson, it is one action, and the writ falls since it is purtenan-


omnibus
pertinen-
tiis, ad
quod per-
tineat ad-
vocatio.


inr
eplieatio
super hoc.


Do:
Si dieat
quod nihil
tenuerit


424 DE EXCEPTIONIBUS.


actio, sed breve cadit, cùm sit superfluum, quia petens
plus petit eo quôd bis petit idem, & est una petitio
nugatoria & inutilis, cùm alia sufficiat per se. Et
idem erit si per unum breve petat manerium cum
pertinentiis, et postea in narratione sua dicat sic: peto
tale manerium cum pertinentiis & cum advocatione
ecclesiæ, non tamen cadit propter hoc actio nec breve,
sed suspendatur adjectio illa quasi superflua, cûm
sufficiat manerium cum pertinentiis petere.


Item replicare poterit petens eo quód tenens dicit,
quód totum non teneat quia alius tenet advocationem,
replieari poterit quód advocatio non pertinet ad terram
petitam, sed ad aliam baroniam, & ad aliud feodum,
& ideo q non est necesse illam excipere, ut de placitis
qua sequuntur regem ani regni Henrici decimo nono
in comitatu Bedf, de Johanne de Traylie & Waltero
de Godardville. Et sic amittere poterit quis multiph-
citer propter plus petitionem. Plus autem peti potest
multis modis: re, eausa, loco, tempore, ut si quis dicat
vel petat plus quà tenens teneat, cadit breve, sed non
cadit actio, ut videri poterit de muliere petente dotem,
ut si plus petat quà ad ipsum ptineat nomine dotis,
no tame cadit à causa, dum tamen ptestata fuerit q
plus non petierit quam tertiam ptem unde vir suus
obiit seysitus ut de feodo: ut de term P. anno regis
H. septimo in com Sussex, de Nicholaa que fuit uxor
Thome de Casteneys.


Cùm auté tenens dicat (ut supradietü est) q nihil
teneat, cùm revera tenuerit mentiendo, & petens ante
inquisitionem inde factam se ipsum decipiendo se de


OF EXCEPTIONS. 495


superffuous, because a person claims too much, inasmuch ces to
he claims the same thing twice over, and one of the claims ate
is nugatory and useless, since the other suffices by itself. pertains.
And the same will result if by one writ he claims a
manor with its appurtenances and afterwards in his
declaration should say, I claim such a manor with its
appurtenances and with the advowson of a church,
neither the action nor the writ falls, but let that addi-

tion be suspended as superfluous, since it is sufficient

to claim the manor with the appurtenances.

Likewise the claimant may reply upon that which 11.’
the tenant says, that he does not hold the whole because ee
another person holds the advowson, it may be replied this.
that the advowson does not appertain to the land
claimed, but to another barony, and to another fee, and
accordingly it is not necessary to except it, as in the
pleas which follow the king in the nineteenth year of
the reign of Henry, in the county of Bedford, concern-
ing John de Traylie and Walter de Godardville. And
so a person may lose in manifold ways through a claim
for too much. But too much may be claimed in many
ways, in the thing, in the cause, in the place, in the
time; as if a person should say or claim more than the
tenant holds, the writ abates, while the action does not
abate, as may be seen concerning the woman claiming
dower, as if she claims more than belongs to her under
the name of dower, she does not, however, fall from her
cause, provided, however, that she has avowed that she
does not claim more than the third part of that whereof
her husband died seysed as of fee, as in Easter term in
the seventh year of king Henry, in the county of Sussex,
concerning Nicholaa who was the wife of Thomas de
Casteneys.

But when the tenant says (as afore stated) that he 12.
holds nothing, when he in fact holds it, saying what is Eos age
false, and the claimant before an inquest has been held that he


aes : : holds
thereupon deceiving himself has withdrawn from the nothing,


mentiendo,
sicut de
priore de
Weylocke
et W. de
Insula.

f. 434.


13.
Si tenens
dicat quod
totam ter-
ram non
teneat, et
petens
quod
totum, et
sic fit res
dubia per
negatio-
nem, aut
locus erit
joco par-
tito, aut
inde inqui-
sitio de ,
pertinen-
tiis, et
sunt per-
tinentiz
pertinenti-
arum.


426 DE EXCEPTIONIBUS.


brevi retraxerit, et agere inceperit versus alium, qui
à tenéte falsó dicebatur esse tenens, & qui dixerit se
non tenere, cùm re vera nihil teneat, & per hoc con-
stiterit per inquisitionem, ille: qui falsó negavit non
amittet propter mendacium eo quód petens de menda-
cio illum non convincit,sed minus cauté se retraxerit,
& sic non punitur mendacium propter suam negligen-
tiam, quod quidem fieret si negligens non fuisset.


Cam vero tenens excipiendo dicat quód totam terram
petitam non teneat, et petens dieat quód totam teneat,
quia per hoe si! res dubia, fiat inde inquisitio sub
perieulo amissionis per jocum partitum: ut de termino
Sancti Hilarii anno regis Henrici nono, de Rogero de
Drayton in. comitatu Derby. Si autem objiciatur à
petente, quód terra quse excipi deberet non sit de per-
tinétiis terree petitee, tune fiat inquisitio per hsec verba,
scilicet si tanta terra cum pertinentiis, quam talis tenet
in tali villa, sit de tot hidis vel de tanta terra, vel
de corpore talis manerii, vel de ejus pertinentiis, quam’
talis clamat versus talem, vel aliter: Si ille talis
teneat tales hidas, vel tot hidas terre, vel tantam
terram in eisdem villis, sive terram illam quam idem
talis clamat in predictis villis versus talem. Et de
hae materia inveniri poterit de termino Sancti Hilarii
anno regis Henrici nono in comitatu Wary de Roberto
de Cherleton. De hoc autem quod dicitur (quód talis
petit tantam terram cum pertinentiis), dictum est supra
de pertinentiis qus et quales sunt. Sunt enim per-


1 « fit," MS. Rawl. C. 160,


OF EXCEPTIONS, 427


writ, and has begun an action against another person, saying
who was stated falsely by the tenant to be the tenant, i pe
and who has stated that he was not the tenant, when in concerning
reality he held nothing, and this has been established a Wo
by an inquest,he who has falsely denied [that he was Eu. and
tenant] shall not lose on account of his falsehood, inas- Insula.
much as the claimant does not convict him of falsehood, f. 434.
but has incautiously withdrawn himself [from the suit],

and so the falsehood is not punished on account of his
negligence, which would take place, if he had not been


negligent.


But when the tenant in excepting says that he does i i "
not hold all the land claimed, and the claimant says that ant says
he does hold the whole, because thereby it becomes a et ne
doubtful matter, let there be thereon an inquest under hold the
the risk of losing it through an alternative wager, as in Whole land,
St. Hilary’s term in the ninth year of king Henry, con- claimant
cerning Roger de Drayton in the county of Derby. But pea je d
if it be objected by the claimant, that the land which the whole,
ought to be excepted is not amongst the appurtenances 374 "hus


of the land claimed, then let there be an inquest through aubious
these words: to wit, if so much land with its appur- through


tenances, which so-and-so holds in such a vill, be of so the denial,
: there will
many hides, or of so much land, or of the body of such pe piace
i i $ 2 laims for an
a manor, or of its appurtenances, which So and so claims ran ive
against such person: or otherwise, if the said so-and-so wager, or
holds such hides or so many hides of land, or so much diu
land in the said vills, or that land which the said so- be an
and-so claims in the aforesaid vills against such person. dicot
And on this matter a case will be found in St. Hilary’s the appur-
7 1 1 1 tenances
term in the ninth year of king Henry in the county of P thers
Warwick, concerning Robert de Cherleton. But con- ae appur-
£ D D enances
cerning this which is said (that so-and-so claims so much e AREE
land with its appurtenances), we have spoken above con- tenances.
cerning appurtenances what they are and of what kind,


For there are appurtenances and a body to which ap-


428 DE EXCEPTIONIBUS.


tinentiv, & corpus ad quod pertinent pertinentis, &
sunt pertinenti? pertinentiarum.


CAP. XXVIII.


it Item dicitur (etiam in tali villa) & si error sit in

ae ee nominibus villarum satis dictum est supra quid inde

habetis ex faciendum sit, sed si minus ibi dictum sit, fiat hic

nominibus repetitio ut addatur. Videndum igitur quid mansio,

villarum. quid villa, et quid manerium. Mansio auté esse poterit

de costructa, ex pluribus domibus, vel una d erit habitatio

quid man- una & sola sine vicino, etià etsi alia masio fuerit vici-
sio, quid = SH mec 5 3 . EHE

manerium, Nata nO erit villa, quia villa est ex pluribus mansionib?

vieinata, & collata ex plurib?^ vicinis. Maneriü auté fieri

Fleta, vi. poterit ex plurib? villis vel una, plures enim ville pos-

¢-51-$1- sunt esse in corpore manerii sicut et una, & ad unam

mansione ptinere poterunt plura tenementa. Et genera

tenementorü plurib? & diversis nominib? specificata,

q cum ad mansionem ptineant non poterant dici q sint

in tali villa specificata, denominatione masionis, sed

màsio et tehta simul esse possunt in aliqua villa, ex

plurib? mansionib? vieinata. Ite quandod est maneri-

um in villa, & ubi non fuerit nisi unica villa in manerio

denominari possunt uno nomine, & tefita tali manerio

adjacentia erut in tali villa & in tali manerio, quia

villa denominatur à manerio, & maneriü à villa è c-

trario. Item & secundum hoc plura possunt esse in pa-

f.434b. iria una & diversa maneria et diverse et plures ville:

et ideo tenementa et agri limitata ad unum manerium

vel unam villam non possunt dici quód sunt in alio


manerio sive alia villa, quia limitati sunt fines agro-


OF EXCEPTIONS. 499


pertain the appurtenances, and there are appurtenances
of appurtenances.


CHAPTER XXVIII.


Likewise it is said “also in such-a vill,” and if there 1.
. : . . the
be an error in the name of the vills, it has been suffi- "NUUS


ciently explained above what is thereupon to be done, which you

but if too little has been there said, let there be here a HOME

repetition that it may be added. It is to be seen there- the name

fore what is a mansion, what a vill, and what a manor. Ls es
? ewise

A mansion then may be constructed of several houses, e

or may be one, which shall be a single and sole habita- a mansion,

tion without a neighbour; and although another man- He

sion may be in the neighbourhood, it will not be a vill,

because a vill is made up of several adjoining mansions

and is composed of several neighbouring ones. But a

manor may be made up of several vills or be one only,

for several vills may be in the body of a manor equally

as one, and several tenements may belong to one man-

sion. And the kinds of tenements are specified by

severaland diverse names, which when they belong to

a mansion cannot be said to be specified in such a vill

under the denomination of a mansion, but the mansion

and the tenements may be together in a certain vill,

made up of several adjoining tenements. Likewise

sometimes there is a manor in a vill, and where there

has been only a single vill in a manor, they may be

described by one name, and the tenements will be ad-

joining to such a manor, in such a vill and in such a

manor, because the vill is named from the manor, and

the manor contrariwise from the vill. Likewise accord-

ing to this there may be several and diverse manors in f 434 b.

one county, and diverse and several vills, and accordingly

tenements and lands limited within one manor and one

vill cannot be said to be in another manor or in another


vill, because the boundaries of fields are limited. Like-


2.
Exceptio
ad hoc
quod dicit
jus meum,
et quod
diversa
sunt jura.


430 DE EXCEPTIONIBUS.


rum. Item si plures sint ville in uno manerio, poterit
res petita esse in una villa vel in diversis, & si in di-
versis, specificari poterit quantum vel quid petatur in
una vel in alia & tamé utraque erit in uno manerio
et corpore manerii, sed'non è contrario, q quiequid sit
in manerio sit in qualibet villa, quia villa non conti-
net manerium nec comprehendit, sed è contrario mane-
rium continet & cdprehendit omnes villas. Poterit
etiam esse, cüm plures sint ville in manerio, quód totü
manerium denominatur à nomine illius ville, licet totu
manerium cóprehendi no possit sub villa, et unde aliud
est dicere, in tali villa, aliud in tali manerio, quia spe-
cificato nomine manerii obscura erit petitio et nulla,
nisi specificatu fuerit nomen ville, in qua tenementum
petitum fuerit, si alia fuerit villa et diversa ab ea de
qua denominatur maneriu, cüm plures fuerint ville in
eodem manerio. Si autem tenementum fuerit in villa
de qua denominatur manerium, recte petitur si fiat
respectus ad denominationem qua specificatur villa, et
non qua specifieatur maneriu, licet villa illa sit in
eodem manerio, quia si haberetur respectus ad nomen
secundum quod est nomen manerii, ville esset specifi-
catio, cùm plures alie ville sint in eodem manerio.
Item habito respectu ad nomina villaru, non quiequid
est in una villa est in alia, licet quicquid sit in omni-
bus villis sit in uno et eode manerio.


Ite copetit exceptio tenenti ex hoe quód petens in
intentione sua dicit, peto versus talem tanta terram
cu pertinentiis in tali villa ut jus meum. Ad quod
notandum quód diversa sunt jura, unum videlicet pos-
sessionis & aliud pprietatis: possessionis, quoad liberum


. OF EXCEPTIONS. 431


wise if there be several vills in one manor, the thing
claimed may be in one vill or in diverse, and if in diverse
it can be specified how much and what is claimed in
one or in the other, and nevertheless both will be in
one manor and in the body of the manor, but not con-
trariwise, because whatever is in the manor is in one
or other vill, because a vill does not contain nor com-
prise the manor, but on the contrary the manor contains
and comprises all the vills. But it may well be, since
there are several vills in the manor, that the entire
manor is described by the name of one vill, although
the entire manor cannot be comprised under the vill, and
whence it is one thing to say in such a vill, and another
thing to say in such a manor, because by specifying only
the name of the manor the claim will be obscure and
null, unless the name of the vill has been specified in |
which is the tenement claimed, if there be another vill
different from that from which the manor has derived
its name, when there are several vills in the same manor.
But if the tenement is in the vill from which the manor
has derived its name, it is rightly claimed if regard be
had to the denomination by which the vill is specified,
and not to that by which the manor is specified, although
that vill should be in the same manor, because if respect
should be had to the name according to what is the
name of the manor, it would be a specification of the
vill, when there are several other vills in the same
-manor. Likewise respect being had to the names of the
vills, it does not follow that whatever is in one vill is
in another, although whatever is in all the vills is in


one and the same manor,


f 3 FM : 2.
Likewise an exception is available to a tenant out of COE


this, that a claimant in his declaration says, I claim tion upon
: : s this that
against such an one so much land with its appurtenan- y euet ;


ces in such a vill as my right. Upon which it is to i Du
. L e 1 t^
be remarked that there are diverse rights, one, to wit, tot there


of possession and another of property ; of possession as ges diverse
rights.


f. 435.


432 DE EXCEPTIONIBUS.


tenementum vel quoad feodum: quoad liberum tene-
mentum, ut si quis quaeunque ratione tenuerit ad
vitam suam: quoad feodum, ut si quis tenuerit ad
feodum sibi & heredibus suis. Est etiam jus pprieta-
tis, quod dieitur jus merum. Et quandoque conjun-
gitur in una persona jus possessionis & jus proprie-
tatis, seeundum quod dicitur: iste se ponit in assisam
de Dreyt dreyt, et ad quemcumque pertineat jus pro-
prietatis illum sequi debet possessio, quia possessio
semper sequitur proprietatem et non è converso. Et
quandoque dividitur jus proprietatis à possessione,
quia proprietas statim post mortem antecessoris de-
scendit hæredi propinquiori, presenti & absenti, scienti
& ignoranti, minori sicut majori, masculo & fcemine,
furioso et mente capto, stulto et fatuo, surdo & muto
naturaliter. Sed tamen non statim acquiritur talibus
possessio, quia alius ante aditionem hereditatis parens
vel extraneus medio tempore se ponere possit in sey-
sinam, et de seysina talis poterit jus possessionis de-
scendere ad heredes talium inferiores, per negligentiam
proprietarii: ut si cüm jus proprietatis descendat ad
antenatum propinquiorem, frater postnatus se ponat in
seysinam, et sic cüm post longum intervallum quód
sine brevi ejici non potest moriatur seysitus, transmit-
tit ad haeredes suos cum jure possessionis quod ipse
habuit quasi in feodo quoddam jus proprietatis cum
jure possessionis ilius, q sequi debeat primam pprie-
tatem, et sic de herede in heredem usq in infiniti,
et sic erunt ibi duo jura pprietatis per diversum de-
scensum et diversas personas et gradus. Sed unus
eorum majus jus pprietatis habebit ppter prioritatem,
sicut frater antenatus & ipsius heredes, et illi minus
jus qui descendunt de fratre postnato, sed semper


OF EXCEPTIONS. 433


regards the free tenement and as regards the fee. As
regards the free tenement, as if some one on any grounds
holds land for the term of his own life. As regards the
fee, as if a person holds it in fee for himself and his heirs.
There is likewise a right of property which is termed
mere right. And sometimes there is conjoined in one
person the right of possession and the right of property,
according to what is said, “This person puts himself
upon an assise of Right right :’ and to whomsoever ap-
pertains the right of property, possession ought to follow
him, because possession always follows property, but not
the converse. And sometimes the right of property is
divided from possession, because the property forthwith
after the death of an ancestor descends to the next heir,
present and absent, knowing and ignorant, a minor just
as a major, a male and a female, a madman and an in-
sane person, a fool and a silly person, a person deaf and
dumb from his birth. But nevertheless possession is not
forthwith acquired by such persons, because another
person, before an entrance into the inheritance, a relative
or & stranger, may in the meantime put himself into
seysine, and from the seysine of such a person a right of
possession may descend to the lower heirs of such per-
sons through the negligence of the proprietor; as if
when the right of property descends to an earlier-born
next of kin, a younger-born brother puts himself into
seysine ; and if after a long interval, so that he could not
be ejected without a writ, he dies seysed of it, he
transmits to his heirs with the right of possession, which
he himself had as it were in fee, a certain right of pro-
perty with the right of that possession, which ought to
follow the first property, and so from heir to heir to
infinity ; and so there will be two rights of property by
a different descent and different persons and degrees.
But one of them will have a greater right of property
on account of priority, as the elder-born brother and his
heirs ; and the others an inferior right who descend from
R 2657. EE


f. 435.


434 DE EXCEPTIONIBUS.


ferri debet possessio, donec hseredes descendentes de
fratre antenato jus pprietatis evicerint, et si cùm frater
postnatus plures habuerit filios, et postnatus se posuerit
in seysinam et sic seysitus obierit, ut pdictum est, ita
esse poterit ut pdietüu est.


3. Et sic de harede ad hzredem quód ad plures de-

x Oir scendere possit jus pprietatis per diversas psonas,

hereditas, gradus et lineas, q plura possunt esse jura pprietatis

e ids et plures possunt habere majus jus aliis, seeundum q

possunt jus fuerint priores vel posteriores. Et hoc locum habere

habere et poterit in psonis extraneorü, sicut in personis paren-

jus et alius tum, qualitereund se posuerint in seysinam. Poterit

mes autem quis dicere in intentione sua q jus habeat in

re petita, cùm omnino nihil juris habeat, quod perpendi

poterit per narrationem descensus. Item cüm aliquid

juris habuerit sicut cohzeres, sicut frater postnatus,

& hujusmodi, alius majus jus habet, sicut frater ante-

natus vel hæredes ex eo pvenientes. Item excipere

poterit tenens, q si petens jus habeat, tamen sunt

alii cohzredes et pticipes qui tantüdem juris habent,

sine quibus ipse nihil petere poterit, ut supradictu

est: vel quia res comunis est cum aliis pticipibus, licet

non coheredibus. Item excipere potest q adjunctum

habet, sieut uxor de cujus jure agitur, & sine qua

petere non poterit, ex quo nulla est facta mentio in

brevi de uxore. ltem excipere potest quód si petens

ius habeat, ille qui tenens est majus jus habet, quod

quidem expediri poterit per magnam assisam, si tenens
voluerit.


4 Item competere poterit tenenti exceptio, licet ante-


uod : : . 5 F
E eit cessor ita seysitus fuerit ut de feodo et in re sicut


Pup. petens pponit, ppter impedimentum descensus, ut si
descensus


OF EXCEPTIONS. 435


the younger brother ; but the possession ought always to
be preferred, until the heirs descending from the elder-
born brother have established the right of property ; and
if, when the younger-born brother has several sons, and
the younger-born has put himself into seysine, and has
died so seysed, as aforesaid, it may be so as aforesaid.

And so from heir to heir that the right may descend, 3.
to several through different persons, degrees, and lines, nir
so that there may be several rights of property, and DM
several persons may have more right than others, ac- by at
cording as they have been prior or posterior. And this "ht, amd
may take place in the persons of strangers, as in the persons
persons of relatives, in whatever manner they may have pede
put themselves into seysine. But a person may say in one more,
his declaration that he has a right in the thing claimed, "dar. —
when he has no right at all, which may be ascertained
through the declaration of the descent. Likewise when
he may have some right as a co-heir, as a later-born
brother, and such like, another person has a greater
right, as an elder-born brother or the heirs descending
from him. Likewise the tenant may except that, if the
claimant has a right, nevertheless there are other co-
heirs and coparceners who have as much right, without
whom he can claim nothing, as aforesaid, or because the
thing is in common with other coparceners, although
not co-heirs. Likewise he may except that he has an
adjoint,as a wife concerning whose right an action is
brought, and without whom he cannot claim, since no
mention has been made in the writ concerning the wife.
Likewise he may except, that if the claimant has a right,
he who is the tenant has a greater right, which may be
settled through a great assise, if the tenant wishes it.

Likewise an exception is available to the tenant, oe ti
although the ancestor may have been so seysed as of fee a
and in realty as the claimant propounds, on account of AEA
an impediment in the descent, as if some one of the TERRA ^

E E 2


per felo-
niam com-
missam
per ali-
quem ante-
cessorum.


D
Competit
exceptio
tenenti ex
ipsa edi-
tionis
actione,
si omnino
non, vel
obscure,


f. 435 b.


6.
Exceptio
ex varia-
tione nar-


436 DE EXCEPTIONIBUS.


aliquis antecessorum felonia fecerit de qua convictus
fuerit,ut si suspensus fuerit propter feloniam, vel ut-
lagatus rit? et secundü legem terre, ex causa justa vel
sine, ltem ex cognitione ppria, si feloniam cognoverit
quamceüd, & sie regnum abjuraverit. Item si aliquis an-
tecessorum suorum jus suum remiserit tenenti vel alicui
de quo ipse habet causam possidendi, et quietü clama-
verit, vel cognoverit & remiserit pro se et heeredibus
suis per finem factum in curia dñi regis.


Competit etiam exceptio tenenti ex ipsa intentione
& editione actionis, ut si, cùm proponere debet inten-
tionem, audito brevi nihil pponat vel nihil omnino
dieat, tenens erit absolvendus, quia nihil dicenti non
erit aliquid respondendu. Ite si intentionem suam
pponat obscure, vel minus plene, vel dubié, non erit
ei respondendum, quia non refert utrum quis omnino
intentionem suam pponat, vel obscure, vel non plené,
vel dubie. Item si ci intentionem suam pponat plene,
nee doceat quo jure petat, non erit audiendus, quia
si tantum dicat, Peto talem rem ut jus meum, non
sufficit nisi incotinenti de jure doceat, ut si dicat, et
unde talis antecessor &c. Ite si de jure doceat aut
fundat intentione suam, non valet, nisi incontinenti
pbationem habeat, sicut inferius dicetur; quia qui nihil
pbat cadit intetio ppter defectum pbationis, nec refert
utrum omnino nihil pbaverit vel minus sufficienter,
secundum q inferius dicetur de litis contestatione.


Ite datur exceptio tenenti ex variatione narrationis,


dicendo modo unum, modo aliud primo cotrarium vel


diversum, et si intentionem suà mutaverit, nisi in casu


OF EXCEPTIONS. 437


ancestors has committed a felony of which he has been felony
convicted, as if he has been hanged on account of a eee
felony, or outlawed duly and according to the law of the the ances-
land, from a just cause or without it. Likewise from oP

his own acknowledgment, if he has acknowledged a

felony of any kind, and so has abjured the realm. Like-

wise if any of his ancestors has released bis right to the

tenant or to any one from whom he has a just cause of
possessing, and has quitclaimed him, or has acknow-

` ledged and released for himself and his heirs through a

fine made in the court of the king.

An exception is also available to a tenant upon the | 5.
declaration itself and the edition of an action, as if, dr
when he ought to propound his declaration, upon the du.
writ having been read aloud he propounds nothing or upon the
states nothing at all, the tenant will have to be ab- M
solved, because to a person who states nothing an answer an action,
will not have to be made, because it does not matter iie
whether a person altogether propounds his declaration, null or
or obscurely, or not fully, or doubtfully. Likewise if 9b5cure.
when he propounds his declaration fully and does not
show by what right he claims, he will not have to be
listened to, because if he only says, I claim such a thing
as my right, it is not sufficient unless he forthwith
explains concerning his right, as if he says, and whereof
such an ancestor, &c. Likewise if he explains concern-
ing his right or supports his declaration, it does not avail >
unless he forthwith supplies a proof, as will be explained f. 435 b.
below. Because of him who proves nothing the decla-
ration falls on account of default of proof, nor does it
matter whether he has altogether proved nothing or
proved insufficiently, according to what will be said
below concerning the joining of the issue.

Likewise an exception is allowed to the tenant upon $3 d
a variation in the declaration, in saying at one time One tion upon
thing, at another time another thing contrary to or P rand
diverse from the first, and if he has changed his declara- declaration


438 DE EXCEPTIONIBUS.


rations, licito vel p narratione suam à brevi suo recesserit,

IURE ita q narratio non sit cdsona brevi, vel q non dicat

unum et. quod tatundé valeat. Irem si cùm semel intentione

Sirm: sua pposuerit et postea cadat breve ppter vitiu, &

trarium. cùm p aliud breve postmodu agere inceperit intentione
suam quam p primü bie pposuerit in toto mutaverit
vel in parte. Et multó fortius si p fraudem se retrax-
erit ab uno ut intentioné sua mutare possit in alio,
quàvis objici possit q res nova novà causa desiderat,
sed quavis mutetur bie, tamé mutari no debet actio
nec intentio pri? pposita, nec magis variari debet in
uno quam in diversis ppter pluralitate breviü cüm
pposita fuerit sub eadem actione.


n pes Ité copetit tenenti exceptio rei judicate, ut si ante-
em com- : a S d à

petit te- cessor petentis vel aliquis hæredū suorü rem petitam
nenti ex- MERE ERE : ^j i sj ona
ceptiorei AMiserit p judiciū in causa pprietatis, sicut p magnā


jndicate. assisā vel duellū, vel juratam aliqm in qm se posuerat ;
et talis exceptio pemptoria est, quia ex toto pimit
judiciū. Itē sip concordiam & fine į siniliter pemp-
toria est, quia dicitur finalis cocordia, & ideo finalis
quia imponit finé litibus, ut si tenes dicat q aliquado -
fuit placitü in curia regis de eade tra inter tale petété
& tale tenet vel eor antecessores, & loquela ita de-
ducta fuit vel tminata q tra remasit tenéti vel ejus
antecessori p magnam assisa vel p duellü, jurata, vel
inquisitione, vel p defalta post duellü vadiatü, vel
magnā assisam electà, p judiciü, p fine factü, & hujus-
modi de clameo no apposito, haec omnia pbari possunt
p rotulos et recorda justitiarii.


; OF EXCEPTIONS. 439
tion, except in a permissible case, or has receded from in saying
his writ by his declaration, so that the declaration is not mire
consonant to the writ, or that it does not state what is andat ~
equivalent. Likewise if when he has once propounded PM
his declaration, and afterwards the writ falls from faulti- ther thing


ness, and when by another writ he has commenced the fe —
another action, he has changed in its entirety or in part
the declaration which he had propounded through the
first writ. And much more if by fraud he has drawn
back from the one that he might change his declaration
in the other, although it may be objected that a new
thing requires a new reason, but although the writ be
changed, nevertheless neither the action nor the declara-
tion previously propounded ought to be changed, nor
ought to be varied in one more than in divers respects
on account of a plurality of writs, when it has been
propounded under the same action.


Likewise there is available to a tenant an exception RM
of a prior judgment, as if the ancestor of the claimant or there is
some of his heirs has lost the thing claimed by a judgment A er
in a cause of property, as by a great assise or by a duel, an excep-
or by a jury upon which he has put himself, and such moe
an exception is peremptory, for it altogether perempts a ment.
judgment. Likewise if by an accord and a fine, which
is in a similar way peremptory, because it is called a
final accord ; and for that reason final, because it puts an
end to litigation; as if the tenant should say that it was
once pleaded in the court of the king concerning the
same land between so-and-so the claimant and so-and-so
the tenant, or their ancestors, and the hearing was so
conducted and terminated that the land remained with
the tenant or his ancestor by a great assise or by a duel,

a jury, or an inquest, or by default after wager of battle,
or the choice of a great assise, by a judgment, by the
making of a fine, and such like concerning a claim not
advanced, all these matters may be proved through the


rolls and records of the justiciary.


ike
Exceptio
ex tacitur-
nitate,
quod cla-
meum non
apposu-
erit,


£ 436.


440 DE EXCEPTIONIBUS.


Cap. XXIX.


Competit etiam tenenti exceptio ex taciturnitate pe-
tentis vel alicujus antecessoris sui ut si quis tacuerit
cüm viderit de jure suo ligitare vel concordiam facere
clameum suum non apposuerit per judicium, sicut si
magna assisa adjudicata fuerit, vel duellum vadiatum,
vel jurata arramiata, vel cyrographum factum in curia,
ut de itinere W. de Ralegh in comitatu Lync. de W.
de Berningehurst. Et videndum quis & qualiter op-
poni debet clameus, & quando, & ubi & cui præju-
dicatur quod clameum non ‘apposuerit, & cui non.
Item quando quis excusatur quod clameum non appo-
suerit, & quando non. Quis? & sciendum quod quili-
bet cujus interfuerit, sicut ille qui jus habuerit in re
de qua contentio fuerit per seipsum vel per alium.
Qualiter? & sciendum quód sie dicere possit simplici-
ter, Appono clameü mei. Vel sic, si duellum vadiatü
fuerit dicere possit, q non ponit jus suum in clameu
petentis nec in defensum tenentis, sufficit quidem si
ipse vel antecessor suus faciat quod tantundem valeat,
ut si placitü moverit tenenti, et fecerit rem litigiosam,
quia sieut plus est facto appellare qm verbo, ita plus
est apponere clameü facto qm verbo. Et ad hoe facit
de termino S. Trinitatis anno regni regis H. xv. in
com Hunt de quadam Guldeburga, cui objectü fuit q
clameum non apposuit, etipsa respondit q fecit q tan-
tunde valet, quia tempore finis facti implacitavit
tenentem p aliud bře. Item si ipse, cui apponitur
quód clameü non apposuit, sufficit si antecessor cla-
meum apposuerit. Et ad hoc facit de termino $.
Trinitatis anno regis Henrici nono in comitatu Midd,


! * eui opponitur, quod clameum non opposuit," MS, Reg. 9, E. xv.


OF EXCEPTIONS. 44]


CHAPTER XXIX.


An exception is also available for the tenant on the — 1.
ground of the taciturnity of the claimant or of some one NU
of his ancestors, as if a person has been silent when he the ground
saw persons litigating about his right or making an dee
accord, and has not entered his claim in court; as if a that he

; : has not
great assise has been adjudged or battle wagered or a aavanced
jury instituted or a chirograph made in court; as in the ? claim.
iter of William de Ralegh in the county of Lincoln, con-
cerning W. de Berningehurst. And we must see who
and in what manner a claim ought to be opposed, and
when and where, and who is prejudieed by not having
entered a claim, and who not. Who? and it is to be
known that any one whose interest was concerned, as
he who had a right in a thing concerning which conten-
tionis made either through himself or through another.

In what manner? And it is to be known that a person
may say simply thus: I enter my claim. Or thus, if f.436.
battle has been wagered, he may say, that he does not
found his right on the claim of the demandant nor on
the defence of the tenant, it suffices indeed if he himself
or his ancestor does that which is equivalent, as if he
has commenced a plea against the tenant and has made
the thing litigious, because just as it is more to appeal
by an act than by a word, so it is more to advance a
claim by an act than by a word. This is supported by
a case in Holy Trinity term in the fifteenth year of
king Henry in the county of Huntingdon, concerning a
certain Guldeburga, against whom it was objected that
she had not entered a claim, and she answered that she
had done what was equivalent, because at the time when
a fine was made she had commenced a plea against the
tenant by another writ. Likewise the person to whom
it is objected that he had not entered a claim, it is suffi-
cient if his ancestor entered a claim. And this is sup-
ported by a case in Holy Trinity term in the ninth year
of king Henry in the county of Middlesex, ecncerning


442 DE EXCEPTIONIBUS.


de Henry de Haquebut, et ubi Henry amisit tenement,
quia pater suus clameum nō apposuit, cujus interfuerit
clameum apposuisse, & si clameum apposuisset, hoc
prodesset Henrico: et ibi ita responsum fuit petenti, q
finis fact? fuit de terra quæ petebatur in curia Henrici
avi regis dili regis Henrici, anno regni sui XXX., inter
Wilhelmum Deynis, avum Wilhelmi qui petiit, & Wale-
ranum tenentem, patrem cujusdam Johannis participis
sui; per quem finem terra illa remansit eidem Wal-
lerano! et heredibus suis, et inde pfert cyrographum
&e. Et postea alius finis factus fuit de eadem terra
inter Luciam matre predicti Johannis et ipsum Jo-
hannem, et inde ptulit cyrographum confectum anno
quarto regis J.. Et desicut Henr non apposuit cla-
meum suum nee antecessores sui, ideo noluit idem
Johannes ei respondere nisi curia consideraret. Ad
quod respondit Henricus quód primus finis et cyro-
graphum non potuerunt ei nocere, quia tunc fuit ipse
infra statem. Et de secundo fine dicit quód non
debuit ei nocere, quia fuit in servitio düi regis ultra
mare apud Windoü. Ad quod Johannes respondit q
tempore primi cyrographi et secundi fuit pater ipsius
Hent vivus & sanus et psens in curia ubi fines facti
fuerunt, et desieut ipse clamorem suü non apposuit,
petit judiciū si debuit ei respondere. Ad quód Henr
respondit quód re vera postquàm pater suus qui cruce
signatus pfectus fuit in Terram Sancta, et inde rever-
sus fuit quasi stultus, & amiserat memoriam, ita quód
nescivit terram regere, et se dimisit, de terra illa. Ad
q Johannes respondit & dixit q sanus fuit et incolumis,
et tempore interdieti se contulit religioni, & bona
memoria diu vixit postea in habitu religionis, et quia


1 « Walerino,” MS, Reg. 9, E. xv.


OF EXCEPTIONS. 443


Henry de Haquebut, and where Henry lost a tenement
because his father did not enter a claim when it was
his interest to have entered a claim, and if he had en-
tered a claim, this would have profited Henry ; and
there it was answered thus to the claimant, that a fine
had been made of the land which was claimed in the
court of king Henry the grandfather of our lord the
king Henry in the thirtieth year of his reign, between
William Deynis, the grandfather of William who claimed,
and Waleran the tenant, the father of a certain John his


- coparcener, by which fine that land was released to the


said Waleran and his heirs, and thereon he produces a
chirograph, &c. And afterwards another fine was made
of the said land between Lucy, the mother of the afore-
said John, and the said John, and thereupon he produces
a chirograph made in the fourth year of king John.
And since Henry did not enter his claim, nor his ances-
tors, for that reason the said John was unwilling to
make answer to him, unless the court should so resolve.
To which Henry made answer, that the first fine and
the chirograph could not harm him, because he was then
under age. And concerning the second fine he says
that it ought not to harm him, because he was in the
service of the king beyond the sea, at Windoiü. To
which John answered that at the time of the first and
of the second chirograph the father of the said Henry
was alive and well and present in the court when the
fines were made, and since he did not enter his claim,
he petitions for judgment, if he ought to answer. To
which Henry replied that in truth after his father, who
had vowed a crusade, set out for the Holy Land, and
returned therefrom as if he were foolish, and had lost
his memory, so that he could not manage his land, and
he had demised the said land. To which John rejoined
and said that he was sound in mind and well, and at
the time of the interdict entered into a religious order,
and lived a long time afterwards with a good memory


f. 436 b.


2


Cui præ-
judicatur
de clameo
non ap-
posito.

3.
Qualiter
fuerit excu-
satus qnis,
qui cla-
meum non
apposuerit.


444 DE EXCEPTIONIBUS.


Hen# non potuit hoc dedicere, Johannes inde quietus
recessit. Item quando? & sciendum g statim in ipso
placito et factione cyrographi, vel ante judicium si
psens fuerit in curia, vel si in patria vel in regno
infra quatuor maria, nec allegare poterit ignorantiam
nisi justum intervenerit impedimentü, nec ulterius
audiri debet (ut videtur) quia terminum habet ad
minus unius mésis (secundū cOmunem pvisioné regni)
infra quem venire potest comodé post placiti motu
ubieüi fuerit in regno infra quatuor maria, quia qui-
libet implacitatus debet habere summonitionem xv.
dierum ad minus, qua rationabilis dici poterit sum-
monitio nee conceditur alieui cyrographü primo die
litigii, sed habebit alium diem p spatium xv. dierum
ad minus ad capiendum cyrographü suum, ut infra
totum illud tempus possit qui jus habuerit apponere
clameum suum. Ite ubi? & sciendum est q in curia
düi regis in ipso judicio vel ante judicium.


Ité cui pjudicatur? & sciendum q ei, de cujus jure
agitur, & heeredibus suis in infinitum ab eo descenden-
tibus.!


Excusatur autem ille qui clameum non apposuerit
multis modis, ut si tempore, quo finis factus fuit &
cyrographü, fuit petens infra statem, vel antecessor
qui elameum apposuisse debuit. Et illud idem obser-
vari deberet de jure,(ut videtur per simile) si tunc
fuit furiosus, vel mente captus, & non sanw mentis,
quia in multis ad paria judieantur minor et furiosus,
vel multum non differunt, quia ratione carent. lllud
idem (ut videtur) observari deberet de jure & feodo


^


1 « Illud idem ut videtur obser- | * prejudieatur, cum fungatur vice
* vari deberet de jure et feodis | * minoris, non magis quam mi-
* ecclesia si rector clameum non nori, si custos clameum non ap-
* apposuerit, quod ecclesie non ! “ posuerit," MS. Reg. 9, E. xv.


^


ACTUM


OF EXCEPTIONS. 445


in the garb of a religious order; and because Henry
could not deny this, John withdrew therefrom acquitted.
Likewise when ? and it is to be known that immediately
in the plea itself and in the making of the chirograph,
or before the judgment, if he was present in court, or
if in the neighbourhood or in the realm within the four
seas; and he could not allege ignorance, unless a just
impediment intervened, and he ought not to be heard
further (as it seems) because he had a term at least of
one month (according to the common provision of the
realm), within which he might have come conveniently
after the plea had been commenced, wherever he might
have been in the realm within the four seas, because
every body who is impleaded ought to have a summons
of fifteen days at least, which may be termed a reason-
able summons, nor is à chirograph allowed to any person
on the first day of the lawsuit, but he shall have another
day with an interval of fifteen days at least to take his f. 436 v.
own chirograph, so that within all that time a person
who may have a right to enter a claim may do so.
Likewise where? and it is to be known in the court
of the lord the king during the very judgment or before


the judgment. A,
4 5 JE Sh sic Who is
Likewise who is prejudiced? and it is to be known prejudiced


. . . * . Å D A LI LI . from a
that he is prejudiced, whose right is in issue, and all his see


heirs to infinity who may be descended from him. ur
een en-


: á S . tered;
But he who has not entered his claim is excused in g
many ways, as if at the time when the fine and chiro- In si
: way he
graph were made, the claimant was under age, or the may pe -
ancestor who ought to have entered a claim. And the E
- . . who has
same practice ought to be observed of right (as it seems not en-
through its likeness), if he was then mad or his mind tay
was affected or his mind was unsound, for in many
respects a minor and a madman are judged on a level,
or do not much differ, because they are bereft of reason.
The same thing (as it seems) ought to be observed con-


a


4.
Excusatur,
$i in pri-
sona tunc
fuit.


ae
Item, si
infirmitate
detentus,
vel ultra
mare,


446 DE EXCEPTIONIBUS.


ecclesie, si rector clameum non apposuerit, q ecclesive
non Pjudicatur, cùm fungatur vice minoris, non magis
qm minori, si custos clameum non apposuerit. Quod
quidem dici possit de aliis sicut de ideotis, & natura-
liter surdis & mutis, et consimilibus. Sed videdum
utrü imperpetuü excusentur vel ad tempus, scilicet
quò minor effectus fuerit plenz statis, vel furiosus
sane métis, ut tune q in minori setate vel in furore
facere non potuerunt, postmodü facere teneantur, vel
si tacuerint ex hoc pjudiciu eis generetur, quia dicunt
quidam, q nisi minor infra annum postquam effectus
fuerit plenz setatis, clameum apposuerit, minor ætas
eum non excusabit: Sed revera excusatur imperpe-
tuum, quia tempore litigii, in ipso judicio, et ante ju-
dicium redditü pendente litigio, debet clameuü apponi
vel non apponi, quia post judicium, vel cyrographi
liberationem, non valet, licet fuerit appositum.


Excusatur auté quis q clameum suum non appo-
suerit, si tempore litigii in prisona detentus fuit ita
q venire non possit, nee mittere, quia nulli vertitur in
dubium, & ubi eadem ratio, et idem jus erit, ideo
videtur q excusari debeat quis si per vim majorem,
vel q fraudem, extra prisonam detentus fuerit, ita q
venire non possit nec mittere, dum tamen hoc per certa
judicia pbari possit.


Item excusari poterit (ut videtur) per similem, tan-
quàm prisonam, si quis tempore litigii tali infirmitate
detentus fuerit quód venire non possit, nee mittere,
quia non discernit factum. Item excusatur uxor quse
sub potestate viri supposita, quód clameü non appo-


OF EXCEPTIONS. 447


cerning a right or a fee of a church, if the rector has
not entered a claim, that the church should not be pre-
judiced, since it occupies the place of a minor, no more
than a minor should be prejudiced, if his guardian has
not entered a claim, which indeed may be said of idiots
and persons naturally deaf and dumb and similar per-
sons.. But it is to be seen whether they are to be ex-
cused in perpetuity or for a time, forsooth until the
minor has come of full age, or the madman has become
of sound mind, so that then what they could not do when
minors or when mad, they may afterwards be bound to
do, or if they have been silent prejudice may be created
against them, because some persons say, that unless a
‘minor within a year after he has come of full age has
entered a claim, his minority will not excuse him. But
in truth he is excused in perpetuity, because at the time
of the lawsuit in the judgment, or before judgment was
rendered pending the lawsuit, a claim ought to have
been entered or not entered, because after the judgment
or the delivery of a chirograph, it is of no validity
although entered.


But a person is excused who has not entered his 4.
claim, if at the time of the lawsuit he was detained Mere
in a prison, so that he could not come nor send, be- m
cause it is matter of doubt for no one, and where there prison,
is the same reason, there is also the same right, there-
fore it seems that a person ought to be excused if he has
been detained out of prison by vis major or by fraud,
so that he could not come nor send, provided however


that this can be proved by certain proofs.


Likewise a person may be excused through a similar A 5.
Bo ; oif T : ikewise
cause, as if it were a prison, as if a person at the time: dad


of the lawsuit was detained by such an illness, that he by ines
or beyon:

could not come, nor send, because he does not discern the xu

the act. Likewise a wife is excused who is under the

power of her husband, if she has not entered a claim,


Li


448 DE EXCEPTIONIBUS.
`

suerit, licet mittere possit: ut de termino Sanctæ
Trinitatis anno regni regis Henrici quarto in comi-
tatu Glocester de Roberto Cusin. Et sic videtur quòd
omnis impotentia excusat, sicut infirmitas, vis major,
& hujusmodi. Est enim bona ratio à similibus proce-
dere ad similia. Excusatur etiam quis quód clameum
non apposuerit, ut si toto tempore litigii fuit ultra
mare, quacunque occasione, ita qudd sit verisimile
quod de placito poterit ignorare, nec in aliquo preedic-
torum casuum habet quis necesse post judicium vel
cyrographum liberatum clameum apponere.


6 Excusatur etiam quis quód clameum non apposuerit,


Si finis ^ seilicet ubi finis ipso jure sit nullus, ut si factus fuit
contineat x R : dee c A
falsitatem de tenemento quòd alius tenuit, ut si ipse qui debuit


sicut dé, clameum apposuisse, vel antecessor suus, fuit in seysina
warrantia


charte, ubi de eadem re, quando finis factus fuit, & non ille vel
P e antecessor suus qui finem allegat, vel si finis factus
inseysina fuerit per dolum et fraude vel alio modo in alterius
fecic prejudicium, quód finis tenere non debeat. Et de
sinam tem- hac materia inveniri poterit de termino Sancti Mi-
prions  Chaelis anno regis Hent iii. incipiente 4. in comitatu
cirographi. Sussex, assisa mortis antecessoris si Matilda amita
1431. Rogeri de Batlegh. Item excusatur quis quód cla-

meum non apposuerit ubi cyrographum nullum, ut si

quis post disseysinam factam alium feoffaverit, quia


finis revocari poterit & adnihilari.


(t Excusatur etiam quis si tempore litigii nec ipse


Si tempore DEN : Meus eget Ego
placiti nee PEC antecessores sui aliquid juris clamare potuit in
ipse nee tenemento de quo agitur. Item excusatur quis de hoe


antecessor S ; : * :
suus jus (QUod antecessor clameum non apposuit, cùm hoe fuerit


habui objectum, eo quód ille qui antecessor dicitur non fuit


OF EXCEPTIONS. 449


although she could send, as in Holy Trinity term in the
fourth year of the reign of king Henry, in the county
of Gloucester, concerning Robert Cusin. And thus it
seems that every want of power excuses, such as illness,
vis major, and such like. For there is good reason to
proceed from like to like. A person is also excused for
not having entered a claim, as if, for instance, during
the whole time of the litigation he was beyond the sea,
on whatever occasion, so that it is likely that he might
be ignorant of the suit, nor in any of the above cases
is it necessary for a person to enter a claim immediately
after judgment or the delivery of a chirograph. A per-
son is also excused for not having entered a claim, to
wit, where the fine is of right null, as if it has been
made concerning a tenement which another person held,
as if the very person who ought to have entered a claim,
-or his ancestor, has been in seysine of the same thing
when the fine was made, and not he nor his ancestor
who alleges the fine, or if the fine has been made f. 437,
through deceit or fraud or in some other manner to
another person's prejudice, so that the fine ought not to
bind. And concerning this matter a case may be found
in St. Michael's term in the third and fourth years of
king Henry, in the county of Sussex, an assise of mort-
dancester, if Matilda the aunt of Roger de Barlegh.
Likewise a person is excused that he has not entered a
claim, where the chirograph is null, as if a person after
a disseysine has been made has enfeoffed another person,
because a fine may be revoked and nullified.


A person is also excused, if at the time of the litiga- " KA
3 ; A he: Š : at the
tion neither himself nor his ancestors could claim any time of
right in the tenement, concerning which the action is, E
Likewise a person is excused of this that his ancestor himself,
did not enter a claim, when this objection has been nor his
. , ancestor
taken, inasmuch as he who is called the ancestor was had any
not the ancestor of the person who now claims, so that right.


R 2657. ier


8.
Si finis
factus fuit
in oceulto
ante tem-
pus legiti-
mum, vel
si non
tenuerit
nisi ad
vitam.


9;
Item ex-
cusatur
quis, si
loquatur
de seysina
sua pro-
pria.


l.
In quibus
casibus
non ex-
cusatur.


450 DE EXCEPTIONIBUS.


antecessor ejus qui nune petit, quód aliquid juris ei
descendere posset per preedictum antecessorem.


Excusatur etiam quis qui clameum non apposuerit,
si ante legitimum tempus unius mensis ad minus fac-
tum fuit cyrographum & deliberatum per fraudem.
Et lieet prima facie in pluribus casibus revocari possit
finis & cyrographum ratione personarum que tene-
menta non tenent nisi ad vitam, ut mulieres que
tenent nomine dotis et hujusmodi, vel ratione per-
sonarum quæ villani sunt, & finem faciunt, & cyro-
graphum de villenagio dominorum, prajudicatur eis si
presentes fuerint, & excusari non possunt cüm cla-
meum non apposuerint. Et de hae materia inveniri
poterit de termino Sancte Trinitatis anno regis
Hent xiv. in comitatu Norff. de Richard Angod. Ex-
cusatur etiam quandoque quis quód clameum non ap-
posuerit per servitiü diii regis, cum nulli debeat esse
damnosum, dum tamen in taliservitio sit quód venire
non possit nec mittere, ut-si in regno obsessus fuit in
castro vel aliter impeditus.


Item exeusatur quis qui elameum non apposuerit, si
loquatur de seysina sua ppria ante finem factum post
disseysinam, & impetraverit ante finem per breve suum,
quia sie effecta est res litigiosa.


Cap. XXX.


Et notandum quod non excusatur quis de clameo
non apposito, si fuerit in regno infra iv. maria, &
venire possit vel mittere si voluerit. Et quód non
excusatur si mittere possit, inveniri poterit in rotulo
de termino Sancti Hilarii anno regis Henrici vii. in


OF EXCEPTIONS. 451


any right could descend to him through the aforesaid
ancestor.


A person is also excused who has not entered a claim, 8.
if a chirograph was made and delivered for the purpose Ea zA 3
of fraud before the lawful time of one month at least. in secret
And although at first sight in most cases a fine and Pefore the
chirograph may be revoked by reason of persons who time, or if
only held the tenement for life, as, for example, women E S
who hold in the name of dower and such like, or by
reason of persons who are villeins, and make a fine and
a chirograph concerning the villenage of their lords; it
is prejudicial to them if they have been present, and
they cannot be excused when they have not entered a
claim. And on this matter a case will be found in
Holy Trinity term in the fourteenth year of king Henry,
in the county of Norfolk, concerning Richard Angod.
A person is also sometimes excused for not having
entered a claim through the service of the king, since
it ought not to be hurtful to anybody, provided he was
in such a service that he could neither come nor send, as
if he had been besieged within the kingdom in a castle
or otherwise hindered.

Likewise a person is excused who shall not have ^. 9.
entered a claim, if he speaks of his own proper seysine tubis :
before the fine was made after the disseysine, and he has excused, if


: K : he speaks
sued out a writ for himself before the fine, because the jr NE ou
estate has thus been made litigious. seysine.


CHAPTER XXX.


And it is to be noted that a person is not excused for — 1.
not having entered a claim, if he has been in the realm pales ae
within the four seas, and could come or send if he not ex-
wished. And that he is not excused if he could come, cae?
may be found in the roll of the term of St. Hilary in
the seventh year of king Henry, in the re Lin-

FF


452 DE EXCEPTIONIBUS.


comitatu Lincol., de W. de Fountygne. Item non ex-

f.437 b. cusatur licet fuerit in languore, quia mittere potest,
ut in eodem rotulo in comitatu Lync. de Simone de
Hale,languor eum non excusavit, quia potuit misisse
hominem suum ad clamorem apponendum.


E: 2 Qui vero impedimentum  allegaverit, non. sufficit
1 quis . . . > ke

dixurit se dicere se esse impeditum, nisi hoc probet per sectam
e vel per patriam, ut si quis replicando dixerit se esse
1tum, hoe , á ue

probare, in partibus transmarinis, hoe probare debet: ut de
EUM termino Sancte Trinitatis anno regis Henrici iv. in
fuissein comitatu Middlesex, assisa mortis antecessoris, si


partibus. Robertus Cocus.
transmari-


nis vel in
prisona et


hujusmodi. tem competit tenenti exceptio finis facti contra

De A eS petentem. Dicere enim poterit tenens, quód aliquando

tione finis finis factus fuerit in curis regis de eadem terra inter

pai ipsum & petentem vel eorum antecessores, ita quòd
per finem illum recognovit idem petens vel aliquis
antecessorum suorum terram illam esse jus ipsius
tenentis vel alicujus antecessoris sui, & illam remisit
et quietum clamavit, &c. Et ad hoc probandum statim
proferat cyrographum & finem, ad quod statim re-
spondeat petens, statim replicando, et ostendat rationem
quare finis ei nocere non debeat, vel quòd finis ille
in nullo tangit personam suam, vel quòd ei nocere non
debeat, vel tenenti valere, supradictis rationibus, &
pluribus aliis inferius dicendis.


4. Excipere etiam poterit tenens contra petentem quòd


Exceptio : : : z : . : o
dà defect licet jus ei descenderit, sicut petens dicit, tamen non


probationis valet petitio sua nec actio pro defectu probationis


. OF EXCEPTIONS. 453


coln, concerning W. de Fountygne. Likewise he is not
exeused, although he may have had a lingering illness,
because he could send, as in the same roll in the county f. 437 b,
of Lincoln, concerning Simon de Hale, a lingering ill-
ness did not excuse him, because he might have sent his
man to enter a claim.
| 2.
: h coy If a per-

But for him who has alleged a hindrance, it is not son should
sufficient to say that he has been hindered, unless he recs
proves it by a sect or by the country, as if a person in was hin-

: hasch . "s b d dered, he
replying should say that he has been in parts beyon ought to
the sea, he ought to prove this, as in Holy Trinity Prov it,

. . as l e
term in the fourth year of king Henry, in the county has said
of Middlesex, an assise of mortdancester, if Robert eee
Cocus. beyond the

sea, or in
prison, or
such like.


Likewise an exception of a fine having been made is 3.
available to a tenant against a claimant. For the tenant ee
may say, that a fine was at some time made in the court - fine
of the king concerning the same land between himself jS ade.
and the claimant or their ancestors, so that by that fine

the said claimant or some of his ancestors acknowledged
that land to be the right of the said tenant or of some
ancestor of his, and released it, and quit claimed, &c.
And to prove this let him forthwith produce a chiro-
graph and a fine, to which let the claimant forth with
answer by immediately replying, and let him show a
reason why the fine should not harm him, either because
that fine in no respect touches his person, or because it
ought not to harm him or to avail the tenant for the
aforesaid reasons, and for many others to be stated below.


A tenant may also except against a claimant, that a 4.
n . n excep-
although the right should have descended to him, as the on from
claimant says, nevertheless neither his petition nor his defect of


roof
action avails by reason of a defect of proof on account?


454 DE EXCEPTIONIBUS.


per lapsum propter Japsum temporis, quia non est qui de seysina


temporis, oe : 3 as NA
quod tam @tecessoris petentis loqui possit, vel aliquid probare


longinquo de visu suo proprio, vel patris sui qui hoc ei injunxit,


tempore ; . : .
quod ex- quia seysina de qua petens loquitur omnem excedit
cedat ^ probationem, sicut de tempore Henrici regis senis &
memorias


hominum, Ulterius, & hujusmodi exceptio substantiam capit ex


vel propter tempore. Et hic est casus quód ille qui jus habet
immuta-


tionem, amittit imperpetuum & heredes sui, & ille qui nihil
juris habet & heredes sui imperpetuum retinebunt, &
hoe est pro defectu probationis.


5. Item competit tenenti exceptio dilatoria tantum.
rci Ut si tenens de eadem re à duobus implacitatus fuerit;
fuerita quia de una re. non potest quis nec debet duobus
duobus im- .; 3 : 3
placitatus, Simul & semel respondere. Et ideo refert utrum in-


quia nemo stitutæ sunt actiones utræque super jure proprietatis,


de duabus . 3 2 tom :
bus vel super ipsa possessione. ltem quis prius, quis pos-


e terius impetravit, & ad quem & ad cujus jurisdictionem,
spondere


potest, ut per hoc sciri possit quis alteri prsferri debeat &
quis non.
6: Item (ut supradietum est) poterit exceptio esse
Exceptio


] peremptoria contra petentem, quantum ad ipsum &
contra pe- 5 x C
tentem jus heeredes suos, & perpetua, ut si quis rem petat ut jus
breve de suum & in feodo, & tenens dicat se jus habere ut in
recto, ut si feodo sibi & heeredibus suis imperpetuum. Eodem
ipse tenens p E
teneat ad modo concedere potest tenens quod petens jus habeat
vitam qua- & feodum, tamen excipere potest tenens quód habet
cunque L .
ratione, liberum tenementum, ut quacunque ratione teneat ad

vitam sieut nomine dotis, vel ex causa donationis per


legem Anglie & hujusmodi.


d Ut si quis cum haereditatem habuerit vel non habu-
De tenente . Hs : :
SD erit uxorem duxerit habentem hereditatem vel mari-
Angle.  tagium, vel aliquam terram ex causa donationis, si


liberos inter se habuerint ex justis nuptiis procreatos


OF EXCEPTIONS. 455


of lapse of time, because there is not a person who can through
1 £ . lapse of
speak of the seysine of the ancestor of the claimant, or unc he
can prove anything from his own proper sight, or that itis at so
: Ge à ; distant
of his father, who enjoined him to speak of it, because onc nod
the seysine, concerning which the claimant Speaks, ex- it exceeds


k ; z the -
ceeds every proof, as in the time of Henry the old ries TRS


king and further, and an exception of this kind takes ead
its substance from the time. And this is a case that he change, E


who has the right and his heirs lose it for ever, and
that he who has no right and his heirs will retain it
for ever, and this arises from defect of proof.


Likewise an exception only dilatory is available for | 5.
. . . ex-
a claimant. As if a tenant has been impleaded by two ception, if
persons concerning the same thing, because a person eee
C as been
neither can nor ought to answer to two persons together impleaded


and at one time, And therefore it is material whether ey are

both the actions have been instituted upon the right of eie
property or the fact of possession. Likewise who first ao
and who latest sued out a writ, and to whom and to concerning
whose jurisdiction, that thereby it may be known who poe


ought to be preferred to the other, and who not. time.


Likewise (as has been said above) an exception may athe:
be peremptory against a claimant, as far as regards him- ception
self and his heirs, and perpetual, as if a person claims a nes as
thing as his right and in fee, and the tenant says that he claims the
has the right in the fee for himself and his heirs in per- bru ud
petuity. In the same manner the tenant may concede of right, as
that the claimant has the right and the fee, nevertheless !f the te-
the tenant may except that he has the free tenement, self holds


that on any grounds he may hold it for his life, for d Din
instance, in the name of dower, or by reason of donation manner.
according to the law of England, and such like.

As if a person, when he has or has not an inheritance, RR
has married a wife who has an inheritance or a marriage- ing a te.
portion, or some land by reason of donation, if they shall nant under


e law of
have children procreated by themselves from a lawful Englana.


Britton, ii.
ch. xii. § 3.
Fleta, 1.
vi. ch. 55.


f. 438.


8.
Quid re-
tinere pos-
Sit, si
tenuerit


456 DE EXCEPTIONIBUS.


si uxor premoriatur, remanebit viro hereditas, & terra
sua tota vita ipsius viri, sive superstites fuerint liberi
sive mortui, omnes, vel quidam: dum tamen semel aut
vocem aut clamorem dimiserint quod audiatur inter
quatuor parietes, si hoe probetur. Et quod dicitur de
primo viro dici poterit de secundo, si postmodum
nupserit secundo viro, sive de primo viro heredes
habuerit apparentes sive non, plenz setatis vel minoris
setatis, quod quidem injuriosum est secundum Stepha-
num de Segrave, maxim? cum de primo viro herede
habuerit, quod quidem sustinere possit, si nullos ha-
buerit, dicebat enim quód lex illa malè intellecta fuit,
& malé usittata, quia quod dieitur de lege Anglie,
intelligi debet de primo viro et eorum heredibus
communibus, et non de secundo, maxim? cùm heredes
apparentes extiterint de primo. Cùm igitur ille qui
sic tenuerit implacitatus fuerit ab aliquo, & exceperit
quód tenet per legem Anglie ad vitam suam ratione
pueri qui auditus fuit clamare inter quatuor parietes,
et responsum fuit ex adverso quód nullus talis pro-
creatus fuit nec vocem emisit, oportet tenentem probare
contrarium per sectam sufficientem, que audivit cla-
morem in propria persona, & non ex relatione aliorü
vel auditu, qui omnes bene examinentur tam de die
quàm de loco quàm de hora & de aliis circunstantiis,
vel quod tantundem valeat, quód vocem emiserit &
baptizatus fuerit et Christianus effectus, ut de itinere
M. de P. in com Leic. anno regis H. x., de Wilhelmo
filio Walteri, de Lyne. de terra de Grimesby.


Habebit etiam p legem Anglie quiequid accidere po-
test, videlicet in servitio & hujusmodi, et in custodiis
& in releviis tota vita sua. Si autem terra vel hære-


l Lex tamen ista ad secundos | Fleta, l. vi, ch. 55. The statute to
viros nullo modo extenditur, eo | which Fleta refers, is the statute
quod palam inhibetur per statutum. | 13 Edw. I. De Donis.


OF EXCEPTIONS. 457


marriage, if the wife should predecease her husband, the
inheritance will remain for him and her land during the f. 438.
entire life of the husband, whether the children have
survived or have died, all or some, provided however
that they have once uttered either a call or a cry which
might be heard within four walls, if this can be proved.
And what is said of the first husband may be said of the
second, if she has afterwards married a second husband,
whether she has had by her first husband heirs apparent
or not, of full age or in their minority, which is unjust
according to Stephen de Segrave, especially when she
has had heirs by her first husband, which he could sup-
port if she should have had none, for he said that that law
was ill understood and ill practised, because what is said
concerning the law of England, ought to be understood
of the first husband and his common heirs, and not of
the second, especially when there were heirs apparent
by the first husband. When therefore he who thus held
has been impleaded by any one, and has excepted that
he holds by the law of England for his life by reason of
a son, who was heard to ery within four walls, and it
was answered on the adverse side that no such son was
procreated nor uttered a cry, it is incumbent that the
tenant should prove the contrary by a sufficient sect
who heard the ery in their own persons and not from
the relation or narrative of others, who should be all
well examined as well concerning the day as concern-
ing the place and concerning the hour and other circum-
stances, or what is equivalent, that he uttered a cry
and was baptized and was made a Christian, as in the
iter of Martin de Pateshull in the county of Leicester
in the tenth year of king Henry, concerning William
the son of Walter of Lincoln, respecting a land at
Grimsby.


For he shall have by the law of England whatever _ 8.


$ É .: : :4 What he
may fall in, forsooth in service or such like, and in images


wardships and in reliefs for his entire life. But if the if he shall


per legem
Anglis.
Britton, ii,
Gigs
Fleta, 1. vi.
ch. 55.


OF
De partu
' supposito.


10.
De forma
et monstro.


458 DE EXCEPTIONIBUS.


ditas acciderit post mortem uxoris, hoc ptinebit ad
heeredes si fuerint plense etatis, & ad capitales domi-
nos custodes si infra setatem extiterint, & similiter
custodia, quia nihil amplius retinere potest p legem
istam nisi id quód in vita uxoris accedit; ut de
itinere W. de Ralegh in com Bed in fine rotuli. S. de
Segrave de consuetudine illa & lege malè intellecta &
usitata, Et ideo necesse est probare quód talis voce
emiserit, quia bene potest esse q voce emiserit, &
phatio deficere poterit, & bene poterit esse q nunqm
vocé emiserit, quia in utero mortu?, ita q nungm pcessit
ad lucé, vel in ipso ptu mortuus, ita q vocem nunqm
emiserit. Et ideo licet dieatur q baptizatus fuit &
sepultus ut Christianus, tamé nisi voeem emiserit &
hoe pbetur, non valet. Et licet ptus moriatur in ipso
ptu, vel vivus nascatur vel forte semimortu?, licet voce
non emiserit, solent obstetrices in fraudem veri hære-
des protestari ptum vivum nasci & legitimum, & ideo
necesse est voce pbare, & licet naturaliter mutus nas-
eatur et surd?, tame clamorem emittere debet sive
masculus sit sive foemina: nam dicunt E. vel A. quot-
quot nascuntur ab Eva. Non sufficit igitur tantum
baptizatus & sepultura.


Sed quid dicetur si uxor revera partum non peperit,
sed supponatur partus qui clamorem emiserit, hoc
pbato cadat exceptio.


Item si cüm partum ediderit, tamen partus declina-
verit ad monstrum, & cùm clamorem emittere deberet
emittit rugitum, & tunc videtur quód tenere non debet


1 The paragraph * S. de Segrave” | its way into the text. It has no
down to “usitata” has the appear- | place in MS. Reg. 9. E. xv., nor in
ance of a side-note, which has found | MS. Rawl. C. 160.


OF EXCEPTIONS. 459


land or the inheritance has fallen in after the death of hold by
the wife, this will appertain to the heirs, if they shall Toland
be of full age, and to the chief lords as guardians, if
they are under age, and in like manner the wardship,
for he can retain no more through that law except that
which accrued in the lifetime of the wife, asin the iter of
William de Ralegh in the county of Bedford, at the end
of the roll. Stephen de Segrave concerning that custom
and law ill understood and ill practised. And it is for
this reason necessary to prove that the said boy uttered
a cry; for it may well be that he uttered a cry, and the
proof may be wanting ; and it may well be that he never
uttered a cry, because he died in the womb, so that he
never came forth into the light, or he died in the act of
birth, so that he never uttered a cry. And therefore
although it may be said that he was baptized and buried
as a Christian, nevertheless unless he uttered a ery and
this is proved, it is of no avail. And although the off-
spring should die in the very birth, or be born alive or
perhaps half-dead, although he has not uttered a ery
the midwives are accustomed in fraud of the true heir
to protest that the offspring was born alive and legiti-
mate, and therefore it is necessary to prove a cry, and
although he may be born naturally dumb and deaf,
nevertheless he ought to utter a cry, whether he be a
male or a female. For they cry E or A as many as are
sprung from Eva. It is not sufficient therefore alone
that he has been baptized and buried.


But what shall be said if the wife in truth has not), ** r
brought forth a child, but a child has been substituted posititious
who has uttered a cry, upon this being proved the ex- offspring.
ception falls.

Likewise if when she has brought forth an offspring, ^ 10.
nevertheless the offspring turns out to be a monster, ended
and when it ought to utter a cry, it utters a roar, and y
thus it seems that the exception ought not to hold good, monster.


f. 438 b.


Britton, iii,
ch. ii. 8:19,


Mig s
Si inutilia
natura red-
didit mem-
bra, vel si
curvus
fuerit, vel
gibbosus,
vel mem-
bra tor-
tuosa
habuerit.!


460 DE EXCEPTIONIBUS.


exceptio, quia partus monstruosus est cùm non nascatur
ut homo. Sed non dico partum monstruosum, licet
natura membra minuerit vel ampliaverit : minuerit, ut
in defectu digitorü vel hujusmodi; ampliaverit, ut si
plures digitos vel artieulos, sicut sex vel plures, ubi
non debet habere nisi quinq; si inutilia natura reddi-
diderit mébra, ut si curvus fuerit, vel gibbosus, vel
membra tortuosa habuerit. Et notandum q exceptio
ista locum habet tam in causa possessionis, sicut in
assisa mortis antecessoris & novse disseysinz, quàm in
causa pprietatis per bre de ingressu vel per breve de
recto. Et replicari poterit contra exceptionem pmis-
sam quód omnino nullus ptus editus fuerit, nec clamor
auditus, licet partus editus, quia mortuus fuit in
utero vel in ipso partu. Item q nullus editus fuit
sed suppositus, licet clamor sit auditus. Item si
editus, non tame fuit formatus ut homo, sed ut mon-
strum. Item si editus, tamen convictus ad bastardum
quacunque ratione quód hæres esse non potuit pro-
pinquus vel remotus aliqua ratione.


Item q ille qui exceptionem opponit non fuit vir
illius mulieris legitimus, sed alius, cujus heredes cla-
mant hereditatem illam. Item si machinatus fuit in
mortem uxoris. Item licet partus editus & clamor
auditus, et ille tenens vir legitimus, terra tamen de
qua agitur nunquam accidit in vita uxoris & unde
pertinet ad veros heredes, vel ad dominum capitalem.
Item quia terra illa fuit heereditas primi viri vel primee
uxoris, vel quia uxor sua tenuit nomine dotis, &
non nomine successionis. Item quia uxor et mater
pueri non obiit seysita ut de feodo. Item quia terra


1 This side note is evidently out of its place, as it refers to matters
discussed in the previous section.


OF EXCEPTIONS, 461


because an offspring is monstrous, when it is not born
as a human being. But I do not call an offspring
monstrous, although nature may have diminished or f 438b.
amplified its members: diminished them, as in the de-
fect of fingers or such like; amplified them, as if it has
more fingers or joints, as six or more, when it ought
not to have more than five; if nature has rendered
the members useless, as if it has been crooked or hump-
backed or has had twisted limbs. And it is to be noted
that this exception has place as well in a cause of pos-
Session as in an assise of mortdancester or of novel
disseysine, as in a cause of property by a writ of entry
or by a writ of right. And it may be replied against
the aforesaid exception, that no child at all has been
brought forth, nor any cry heard, although a child was
brought forth, because it died in the womb or in the
birth. Likewise that none has been brought forth, but
one has been substituted, although a cry has been heard.
Likewise if brought forth, it was not formed as a human
being, but as a monster. Likewise if brought forth,
nevertheless it is convicted to be a bastard under any
circumstances so that it cannot be by any means a near
or a remote heir.


Likewise because he who raises the exception is not 1.
the lawful husband of that woman, but another person Ifvatue
whose heirs claim the inheritance. Likewise if he has dered its
contrived the death of his wife. Likewise although the ee pO
offspring was brought forth and a cry was heard, and is cuore
the said tenant was a lawful husband, nevertheless the YN ds
land respecting which the action is brought never des ie E
accrued in the lifetime of the wife, and thereupon it i
appertains to the true heirs or to the chief lord. Like-
wise because the said land was the inheritance of the
first husband or of the first wife, or because his wife
held it in the name of dower, and not in the name of a
succession. Likewise because the wife and mother of
the child did not die seysed as of fee. Likewise because


the land, respecting which the action is brought, was


12:
Si omnino
nullus
heeres
existat, et


tenens per


vim se
tenuerit


in seysina.


462 DE EXCEPTIONIBUS.


de qua agitur data fuit in maritagiü sub coditione
tacita vel expressa, videlicet si pueros non haberet vel
si haberet & deficerent, q terra data reverteretur ad
donatorem. Et quód omnino nulli vel si fuerint, de-
fecerint, terra data in maritagium reverti debet ad do-
natorem. Item si pueri editi sunt et pcreati, tamen
hzredes esse non poterunt propinqui vel remoti non
magis quàm bastardi, quia nihil clamare poterunt de
hereditate mulieris, quia hereditas illa sive maritagium
datum fuit tali viro in maritagium cum tali uxore &
heredibus de carne preedictorum procreatis, unde vir
talis hereditatem tenere non debet ad vitam suam per
legem Anglise.


Si autem nullus heres omnino extiterit, & post
mortem uxoris se teneat vir per vim in hereditate
mulieris contra verum heredem sub specie & colore
legis Anglis, consulitur heredi per tale breve per W.
de Ralegh formatum pro Radulpho de Dadescomb in
hac forma: Rex vicecomiti salutem. | Ostendit nobis
A. quód cùm B. de N. & C. uxor ejus tenuissent.
tantam terram cum pertinentiis in tali villa ut jus et
haereditatem ipsius C., que» nuper obiit sine heerede de
corpore suo pereato (ut dicitur) unde terra illa de-
scendere debuit ad predictum A. sicut ad propin-
quiorem hseredem ipsius C. quia preedicta ©. sine
herede de corpore suo pereato decessit. Idem B. post
mortem preedictee C. uxoris suee contra legem & con-
suetudinem regni nostri cum vi sua se tenet in eadem,
ita quód pdictus A. in pdictam terram ut in jus &
haereditatem suam ingressum habere non potest. Et
ideo tibi peipimus q si preedietus A. fecerit te &c.,


OF EXCEPTIONS. 463


given as a marriage- portion under a tacit or express
condition, to wit, if she should not have sons, or
if she should have them and they should fail, that
the land given should revert to the donor. And
that there are none at all, or if they have been born
they have failed, and the land given as a marriage-por-
tion ought to revert to the donor. Likewise if sons .
should have been born and procreated, nevertheless
they will not be able to be near or remote heirs no
more than bastards, because they could claim nothing
of the inheritance of the woman, inasmuch as that
inheritance or marriage-portion was given to the said
husband as a marriage-portion with his said wife and
to the heirs procreated of their flesh, wherefore the said
husband ought not to hold the inheritance for his life
by the law of England.


But if no heir at all exists and after the death of his "s AE.
wife the husband keeps himself by force in the inheri- atan exists,
tance of the wife against the true heir under species and zm. is
colour of the law of England, the heir is assisted by such j E Duns
a writ drawn up by William de Ralegh on behalf of E
Ralph de Dadescomb in this manner: The king to the seysine.
viscount greeting. A. has shown to us that ET B.
de N. and C., his wife have held so much land with the
appurtenances in such a vill as the right and inheritance
of the said C., who lately died without an heir procreated
from her body (as is said), whereby the said land ought
to descend to the aforesaid A. as the next heir of the said
C., because the said C. died without an heir procreated
from her body; the said B. after the death of the said
C. his wife, contrary to the law and custom of our realm,
with force of his own maintains himself in the same,
so that the aforesaid A. cannot have ingress into his
right and his inheritance. And therefore we enjoin you
that if the aforesaid A. has given you security &c., you
should thereupon summon &e. the aforesaid B. that he


f. 439.


I
Qualiter
proceden-
dum sit
contra
contu-
maces in
actione
personali,


2:
In actione
eriminali.


464 DE EXCEPTIONIBUS.


tune suimoneas &c. predictum B. quód sit coram jus-
ticiariis &e. ostensurus quare deforciat eidem A. præ-
dictam terram, & habeas ibi summonitores &c.


CAP. XXXI.


Redeamus igitur ad diem summonitionis. Dictum
est supra qualiter quis excusatur, si ad judicium non
venerit cùm legitimé summonitus fuerit, cum necesse
habeat venire in actione reali. Nunc autem dicendum
de contumacibus & ad judicium non venientibus, &
qualiter peedendum sit contra contumaces in personali
actione civili, & secundum quod fuerit ei contractum
vel delictum. Et inprimis qualiter contra contumaces
pcedi debeat in actione personali, secundum quod ac-
tio fuerit civilis vel criminalis. Civilis, ratione delicti
vel injuriz, vel super aliqua promissione vel conven-
tione non observata, vel finis facti in causa phibitionis,
vel quare impedit vel hujusmodi, ubi principaliter
agitur in rem, ad aliquam rem certam mobile vel
imobilé consequendam. Item civilis ppter delictum
vel injuriam, qua» quidem actio pvenit ex aliquo facto
& dicto peedente, & ubi non agitur ad aliquam rem
certam cosequendam, sed ad interesse quod incerta
est, donee ex discretione justiciariorü fuerit damnü &
injuria estimata, secundü quod fuerit majus vel minus,
& injuria atrox vel levis.


Item si eausa fuerit criminalis et civiliter agatur
eodem modo, quod quidem fieri potest, sed non è con-
trario. Poterit enim in causa criminali agi civiliter,
sed in civili eausa non criminaliter. Si autem psona-
lis causa fuerit criminalis, & maxima, scilicet de
crimine lese majestatis, nulla erit ibi solennitas


i


OF EXCEPTIONS. 465


present himself before our justiciaries &c. in order to
show why he deforees the aforesaid A. from the said
land, and do thou produce the summoners there.


CHAPTER XXXI.


Let us return to the day of summons. It has been 1.


stated above how a person is excused, if he has not come m ae


‘into court when he has been lawfully summoned, when are to be


he ougl 1 > acti 4 had against
ought to appear in a real action. Now we must parece


speak of contumacious persons not appearing in court, cious per-
and how proceedings are to be had against contumacious personal
persons in a personal civil action, and according as there action.
has been matter of contract or of delict. And in the
first place in what manner proceedings ought to be taken
against contumacious persons in a personal action, ac-
cording as the action shall be civil or criminal. Civil
by reason of a delict or injury, or upon the non-observ-
ance of some promise or convention, or by reason of a
fine made in a cause of prohibition or a Quare impedit or
such like, where the principal action is 4n rem, to obtain
a certain movable or immovable thing. Likewise a civil
action on account of a delict or an injury, which action
indeed arises upon some preceding act or word, and
where the action is not brought to obtain any certain
thing, but for an interest which is uncertain, until by
the discretion of the justiciaries the damage and the
injury has been estimated, according as it should be
more or less, and the injury severe or light.


«


Likewise if the cause should be criminal and the = ARE


action be civil in the same manner, which may take nal action.
place, but not the contrary. For civil proceedings may
be taken in a criminal cause, but not criminal proceed-
ings in a civil cause. But if a personal cause should be
criminal and of the highest degree, as concerning the
crime of high treason, there will there no solemnity of

R 2657, GG


Britton, i.
ch. xxxiii,


8 4.


f. 439 b.


466 DE EXCEPTIONIBUS.


attachiamentorum, sed statim capiatur per corpus, nec
erit per plegios dimittendus, sed plegii ejus sint (donec
se defenderit) carcer & gaola. Si autem majus sit
crimen quod tangat privatas personas & non regem,
sicut de morte hominis nequiter interfecti, de roberia,
de crimine falsi, & hujusmodi, ubi sequitur amissio
vite & membrorü, fiat eodem modo secundi quod
superius dietü est. Vix tamen aliquando retorque-
bitur à principe, quod tales majori crimine irretiti
per ballium dimittuntur. Si autem crimen minimum
sit, quód in se contineat interdictum vel exilium à
villa vel à provincia, tales solent aliquando attachiari
secundum quosdam. Cum autem delictum fuerit vel
transgressio vel injuria, licet contra pacem, ibi obser-
vari debet solennitas attachiamentorum sieut in aliis
casibus civilibus, & personalibus actionibus. Et quali-
tur procedi debeat in casibus criminalibus, satis ppendi


poterit ut supra in tractatu de placitis de corona.


Sunt autem inter alias actiones civiles & personales,
qua ex causa certa instantiam desiderant, & non
querunt dilationes, nec attachiamentorum solennitatem,
sed. maturitatem judicii, sieut videri poterit si res
tempore peritura fuerit, sicut in fructibus & aliis.
Item si periculum & jactura cause immineat per lap-
sum vi mensium, ne collatio ecclesie post tempus
devolvatur ad episcopum. Item atrocitas injurie, et
reverentia persone, sive privilegium contra qué illata
fuerit injuria contra pacé vel contra nobiles personas,
vel extraneas qui moram trahere non possunt longam,
sicut sunt mercatores & hujusmodi, et alie possunt
esse cause plures. Si autem sint actiones personales
& civiles quæ instantiam non desiderant, et sumo-
nitus legitime ad diem suionitionis non venerit, quia


OF EXCEPTIONS. 467


attachments, but he shall be forthwith apprehended bodily,
nor shall he be released on sureties, but let his sureties
be the prison and the gaol until he has defended himself.
But if his erime is of the greater kind, which touches
private persons and not the king, as concerning the
death of a man wickedly slain, concerning robbery, con-
cerning forgery and such like, where the loss of life or
of members follows, let it be done in the same manner
as said above. With difficulty however it will be some-
times extorted by a chief, that such persons who are
mixed up with a greater crime are released on bail. But
if the crime be of a very slight character, which contains
in itself an interdict or exile from a vill or a province,


such persons are accustomed sometimes to be attached .


according to some authorities. But when the delict has
been a trespass or an injury, although against the peace,
in such a case there ought to be observed the solemn
forms of attachment as in other civil cases and personal
actions. And in what manner proceedings ought to be
had in criminal cases may be sufficiently ascertained
above in the treatise concerning the pleas of the crown.
But there are amongst other civil and personal actions
some which for a certain cause require instance, and do
not admit of delays, nor the solemnity of attachments,
but an early judgment, as may be seen if the thing is
likely to perish in a short time, as in the case of crops and
other things. Likewise if risk and loss of the cause be
imminent through a lapse of six months, lest the colla-
tion to a church should after a time devolve upon the
bishop. Likewise the severity of the injury and the reve-
rence for the person, or the privilege against which the
injury has been inflicted against the peace or against noble
persons, or foreigners who cannot support a long delay,
such as merchants and such like, and there may be many
other causes. But if there be personal and civil actions
which do not requite instancy, and a party lawfully


summoned has not appeared on the day of summons,
GG 2


f. 439 b.


468 DE EXCEPTIONIBUS.


sine responsione sua procedi non possit ad judicium,
offerente se liti querente contra suimonitum primo die
litis, secundo, tertio, et quarto, ulterius non expecta-
bitur sumonitus, sed procedatur eontra ipsum q atta-
chietur per plegios, sive sumonitio testata fuerit sive
non, eüm non sit dedicta.


Ln Et fiat talis irrotulatio. A. optulit se quarto die
Das versus B. de placito tali vel tali, quare videlicet non
faltam. teneat ei conventionem vel finem factü vel hujusmodi.

Sic inseratur et irrotuletur breviter virtus actionis et
forma brevis, et tune dicatur. Et talis no venit &
sumonitus &e. Judiciü. Attachietur quód sit ad talem
diem respósurus de principali placito, et de defalta p
tale breve, q tota die variatur secundü diversitatem
actionum.

4. Rex vicecomiti, saluté. Pone p vadium et salvos
Breve de


atashi Dlegios B. q sit coram justiciariis nostris apud West.
andoet ad tale diem ad respondendum A. de placito quare
ANC non tenet ei conventionem inter eos factam vel finem
per vadium inter eos factum de tanta terra cum pertinentiis in
ot plegios tali villa, vel sic: de tali placito q warrantizat ei tan-
personali, tum terre cum pertinentiis in tali villa quod tenet, et
cum fecerit
defalam. de eo tenere clamat, et unde chartam suam habet, vel
chartas antecessorum suorum cujus hæres ipse est, ut
dicit, vel sic: de placito quare non facit ei consuetu-
dinem et certa servitia, quee facere ei debet de libero
tenemento suo quod de eo tenet in tali villa, vel de
tanto terre cum pertinentiis, vel de placito quod


reddat ei tantam pecunia quà ei debet et injuste deti-


OF EXCEPTIONS. 469


because without his answer proceedings cannot go on
to judgment, the plaintiff offering to join issue with the
party snmmoned in the first, second, third and fourth
. day of the suit, the party summoned shall not be further
awaited, but let proceedings be taken to attach him by
sureties, whether the summons has been testified or not,
since it is not denied.


And let an enrolment of this kind be made. A. pre- 3.
sented himself on the fourth day in answer to C. con- PL
cerning such and such a plea, wherefore he does not hold default.
good for him a convention or the making of a fine or
such like. Let the substance of the action and the form
of the writ be thus inserted and enrolled, and let it then
be said. And the said party did not come and having
been summoned, &c. Judgment. Let him be attached
that he be present on a certain day in order to make
answer in the principal plea, and concerning his default,
by such a writ, which is varied every day according to
the diversity of actions. >

The king to the viscount greeting. Put under bail 4.
and safe sureties B. that he should appear before our E
justiciaries at Westminster on such a day to make answer m bat E
to A. concerning a plea wherefore he does not hold good $55 eure
for him a convention made between them or a fine made ties a cer-
between them concerning so much land with its appur- e PUE
tenances in such a vill: or thus, concerning such a plea T
that he should warrant to him so müch land with its he nas
appurtenances in such a vill, which he holds and claims dens de-
to hold from him, and whereof he has his charter or the
charters of his ancestors, whose heir he is, as he says: or
thus, concerning a plea, wherefore he does not perform
for him a custom and certain services, which he ought to
perform for him concerning a free tenement which he
holds from him in such a vill, or concerning so much
land with its appurtenances, or concerning a plea that


he should render to him so much money which he owes


f. 440.


410 DE EXCEPTIONIBUS.


net, ut dicit. Item de placito. quare ide A. simul cum
aliis venit ad domü suam et ibi fecit talem injuriam
contra pace nostram, et ita fiet breve de attachia-
mento secundum diversitate actionum et querelarum,
sed hzc exempli causa sufficiant. Et in fine addatur
ei hzc clausula, ad ostendendum quare non fuit corà
eisdé justiciariis nostris apud West. ad talem diem
sicut sumonitus fuit, vel si ad alium diem essoniatus
fuit tune sie, & ad ostendendum quare non servavit
diem sibi datum per essoniatorem suum ad talem ter-
minum, et quo casu si ad primum attachiamentum
venerit, inprimis respondeat quare ad diem sumoni-
tionis, vel ad diem sibi datum per essoniatorem suum
non venerit, et si se excusare non possit antequam
respondeat de principali erit in misericordia pro de-
falta. Si autem ad primum  attachiamentum non
venerit, tune offerente se liti querente, attachietur pars
fugiens per meliores plegios, quód sit ad alium diem
responsurus, quod quidem dicitur aforciamentum ple-
giorum, et quod sit ad similitudinem districtionum
que fiunt pro servitiis et consuetudinibus, ubi primó
et ad primam districtionem capiuntur averia si tenens
ad diem summonitionis non venerit, & si ad alium
diem per talem distrietionem non venerit, capiuntur
plura, et retinentur prius capta pro afforciamento dis-
trictionis &c. ulterius ut infra, & ita fiat irrotulatio:
A. optulit se quarto die versus B. de tali placito ut
supra, et B. non venit et aliàs fecerit defaltam post-
quàm fuit summonitus, & ita quód attachiatus tune
fuit per C. et D. Judicium. Ponatur per meliores
plegios quód sit ad talem diem et primi &c. Forma
brevis talis est.


OF EXCEPTIONS. 471


to him and unjustly detains, as he says. Likewise con-
cerning a plea wherefore the said A. came together with
others to his house, and there did such an injury against
our peace ; and so the writ shall be drawn up concerning
the attachment according to the diversity of actions and
plaints, but let these suffice for the purpose of example.
And in the end let there be added to it this clause, in
order to show wherefore he was not present before our
justiciaries at Westminster on such a day as he was
summoned; or if he has been essoined to another day,
then thus: and in order to show wherefore he did not
observe the day appointed to him through his essoiner
at such a term ; and in which case, if he has come at the
first attachment, let him in the first place answer where-
fore he did not appear on the day of the summons or on
the day appointed to him through his essoiner, and if he
can excuse himself before he answers on the principal
plea, he will be amerciable for his default. But if he
has not come at the first attachment, then on the
plaintiff presenting himself to join issue, let the fugitive
party be attached by better sureties, that he be present
on another day in order to make answer, which is called
an enforcement of the sureties, and which is done after
the likeness of distresses which are made for services and
customs, where in the first place and on the first dis-
tress cattle are seized, if the tenant has not come on the
day of summons, and if he has not come on another day,
through such a distress, more cattle are seized, and the
first seized are detained for the enforcement of the dis-
tress &c., further as below, &c., and so let the enrolment
be made : A. presented himself on the fourth day against
B. on such a plea as above, and B. did not come, and
otherwise made default after he was summoned, and so
he was attached through C. and D. Judgment. Let
him be put under better sureties that he present himself
on a certain day, and let the first &e. The form of the
writ is of this kind.


f. 440.


Ds
Breve de
attachi-
ando per
meliores
plegios.


6.
Qualiter
et quando
plegii sint
amerci-
andi.


472 DE EXCEPTIONIBUS.


Rex vicecomiti salutem. Pone per vadium et me-
liores plegios B. de N. quod sit coram justiciariis
nostris &c. ad respondendum A. de placitis &e. secun-
dum formam brevis originalis, et ad ostendendum
quare non fuit coram eisdem justiciariis nostris &e.
tali die sicut attachiatus fuit. Et summoneas per
bonos summonitores C. &c. D. primos plegios ipsius
B. quód sint coram eisdem justic. ad prefatum ter-
minum audituri judicium suum de hoe, quód preedictum
B. in eadem curia nostra coram eisdem justiciariis
nostris non habuerint, sicut eum plegiaverint, et habeas
ibi nomina secundorum plegiorum et hoc breve.


Ad quem diem si reus non venerit, nec plegii ad
ostendendum quare predictum reum non habuerunt,
omnes plegii erunt in misericordia, et reus non ante-
quam comparuerit, vel quia plegii ei deficiunt, tunc
primo incipiunt omnes defalte in persona ejus ac si
plegios non invenisset, sicut videri poterit in fine
brevis subsequentis, ubi dicitur: quód sit ad audiendum
judicium suum de pluribus defaltis, & ex hoc die ces-
sabunt omnia afforciamenta plegiorum. Si autem post
secundum attachiamentum reus compareret, tunc solum-
modo amerciandi sunt primi plegii et non secundi,
nisi venirent et docerent quare eum ad primum
attachiamentum non haberent. Et quód omnes plegii
amerciandi sunt, si ad secundum attachiamentum non
venerint, nec reum habuerint, et ipse reus non, ante-
juam fuerit summonitus ad audiendum judicium suum
de pluribus defaltis, probatur in rotulo de termino
5. M. anno regis Henrici ix. incipiente x., in comitatu
Eborum, de Nicholao de Statevil Sed contra (ut
videtur), si quis plegios invenerit de prosequendo, et


OF EXCEPTIONS. 473


The king to the viscount greeting. Place under bail 5.
and better sureties B. de N., that he present himself RM s
before our justiciaries, &c., to answer to A. concerning der better
the pleas, &¢., according to the form of the original writ, °°"
and in order to show wherefore he was not present
before our said justiciaries, &c. on such a day, as he was
attached. And summon by good summoners C. and D.,
the first sureties of the said B., that they be present
before the said justiciaries at the aforesaid term, in order
to hear their judgment concerning this, that they did
not present the aforesaid B. in our said court before our
aforesaid justiciaries, according as they have been sureties
for him; and have there the names of the second sure-
ties and this writ.


. At which day, if the defendant has not appeared, nor &.
the sureties in order to show wherefore they have not bie
produced the defendant aforesaid, all the sureties will be ante
amerciable, and the defendant not before he has ap- are to be
peared, or because his sureties fail him, then for the amerced.
first time all the defaults in his person commence, as if
he had not found sureties, as may be seen at the con-
clusion of the subsequent writ, where it is said: that he
be present in order to hear his judgment for several
defaults, and from that day shall cease all enforcements
of the sureties. But if the defendant has appeared after
the second attachment, then the first sureties alone,
and not the second, are to be amerced, unless they should
come and should show wherefore they did not produce
him to the first attachment. And that all the sureties
are to be amerced, if they have not come to the second
attachment, nor have produced the defendant, and the
"defendant himself not, before he has been summoned

to hear his judgment for several defaults, is proved in
the roll for St. Michael's term in the ninth and tenth
years of king Henry, in the county of York, concerning
Nicholas de Statevil. But on the contrary (as it seems)
if any one has found sureties for prosecuting, and has


f. 440 b.


474 DE EXCEPTIONIBUS.


non fuerit prosecutus, omnes erunt in misericordia tam
plegii quàm principales, sed revera non est simile,
quia in hoc ultimo casu, omnes sunt in culpa, querens
scilicet quia non prosequitur, & plegii quia non est
prosecutus secundum quod eum plegiaverunt. Et quia
sunt plegii de faciendo, ad obligationem querentis, et
alii in superiori casu seipsos obligant tantum factum
alterius promittendo, et de habendo talem ad diem
summonitionis. Si autem fortè contingat quòd ad
primum diem summonitionis vel attachiamenti non
veniat summonitus sive attachiatus, nec querens, adhuc
non cadit breve, & continuari potest actio, et querens
sequi poterit quando voluerit, ex quo sumonitus sive
attachiat’ se liti non obtulit, nec sine die recessit. Et
unde si cùm ad aliu diem apparuerit et judiciu peti-
erit de defalta querentis ad primū diem, non valebit
ei facta compensatione defaltæ ad defaltam, quia paria
delicta mutua compésatione tolluntur ut supra. Cùm
autem attachiatus per meliores plegios ad diem suum
non venerit, nec infra quartū diem offerente se liti
qrente, fiat ita irrotulatio: A. optulit se quarto die
versus B., & B. non venit &c., & plures fecit defaltas,
ita quód primó attachiat? fuit p C. et D. et secüdó
per E. et F., et ideo omnes plegii in misericordia, &
est ratio, quia ulterius non sunt sumonendi quód sint
ostensuri quare eum non habuerunt sicut eum plegia-
verunt, et tune precipietur vicecomiti quód habeat
corpus ejus ad aliu diem per tale breve: Rex vic.
salute. Preecipimus tibi q habeas corà justic. nostris
&c. ad talem die corpus A. ad respondendü B. de


OF EXCEPTIONS. 475


not prosecuted, all will be amerciable, as well sureties as
principals; but in truth it is not alike, because in this
last case all are in fault, the plaintiff forsooth because he
does not prosecute, and the sureties because he has not
prosecuted according as they have pledged themselves
for him. And because they are sureties to perform ac-
cording to the obligation of the plaintiff, and others in
the above case oblige themselves as much by promising
the act of another and to produce the said party on the
day of summions. But if by chance it should happen
that on the first day of the summons or of the attach-
ment the party summoned or attached does not come,
nor the plaintiff, still the writ does not abate, and the
action may be continued, and the plaintiff may sue when
he may wish, since the party summoned or attached has
not presented himself to join issue, nor has withdrawn
without a day. And hence if he shall have appeared on
another day, and claimed judgment upon the default of
the plaintiff on the first day, it shall not avail him,
compensation for the default having been made by his
default, because like offences are taken away by mutual
compensation, as above. But when the party who has
been attached by better sureties has not come upon his
own day, nor within the fourth day, the plaintiff pre-
senting himself to join issue, let an enforcement of this
kind be made: A. presented himself on the fourth day
against B., and B. did not come, &c., and made several
defaults, so that he was at first attached through C. and
D., and secondly through E. and F., and accordingly all
the sureties are amerciable, and there is reason, because
they are not to be further summoned ‘in order to show
wherefore they have not produced him as they pledged
themselves to do; and then let it be enjoined to the
viscount that he produce his body on another day by a
writ of this kind: The king to the viscount greeting.
We enjoin you that you produce before our justiciaries,
&e. on such a day the body of A, to answer to B, con-


f. 440 b.


Jf;


476 DE EXCEPTIONIBUS.


placito tali (ut supra) secundi forma brevis originalis,
& in fine addatur hee clausula, ad audiendü judicit
sua de pluribus defaltis, et habeas ibi hoc bre. Teste
&e. Et ad dm die si venerit, inprimis si se salvare
nó possit de defaltis, ad die illū retrotrahutur omnes
defaltæ et p omnibus amerciabitur, et postea respon-
deat ad principale placitü. Si aute ad die illu no
venerit, sed malitiose se subtraxerit et latitaverit

corp? inveniri nō possit, vel forte se transtulerit extra
com, extra potestate vic. et vic. hoe mandaverit q
inveniri no possit in balliva sua, fiat talis irrotulatio:
A. optulit se quarto die versus B. talé de tali placito
&e. ut supra, et D. no venit, et plures fecit defaltas,
ita q peeptü fuit vie. q haberet corp? ej?, et vic.
madavit q nō fuit invent? in balliva sua, et ideo vic.


distringat eü p omnes fras et catalla, q sit ad tale


die p tale bie, et tune fiat simplex districtio ita q
ire et catalla simpliciter capiantur in mani dñi
regis. |


Rex vic. salute. Preecipimus tibi q distringas B. p


Brevequod tras et catalla in balliva tua q sit cora &e. ad talē


distringa-
tur quis
per terras
et catalla
et ulterius
per ordi-
nem,


dié ad respodendü A. de tali placito &e. Et in fine
addatur, et ad audiendü judiciu sui de pluribus de-
faltis. Et si ad die illü venerit, tuc fiat de defalta ut
supra, et si no venerit, adhuc aggravari debet dis-
trictio, S. q vic. distringat ipsum per tras et catalla q
sit securus habendi corpus ejus ad aliü diem. Et
si tuc non venerit, q vic. tunc distringat et p tras et
catalla ita q nec ipse nec aliquis p eo nec per ipsum


OF EXCEPTIONS. 477


cerning such a plea (as above), according to the form of
the original writ, and at the end is added this clause, in
order to hear his judgment concerning several defaults,
and produce there this writ. Witness, &c. And upon
which day if he shall have come, in the first place, if he
cannot save himself concerning the defaults, all the de-
faults are drawn back to that day, and he shall be amerced
for all, and afterwards let him answer for the principal
plea. But if he shall not have come on that day, but
shall have malieiously withdrawn himself and have lain
hid so that his body cannot be found, or by chance shall
have transported himself out of the county beyond the
power of the viscount, and the viscount shall have
reported that he cannot be found in his bailiwick, let an
enrolment of this kind be made : A. presented himself on
the fourth day in answer to B. so-and-so, concerning
such a plea, &c., as above, and. B. has not come, and has
made several defaults, so that it was enjoined to the
viscount to distrain him by all his lands and chattels,
that he should be present at such a day by such a writ,
and then let there be made a simple distress, so that the
lands and chattels be taken simply into the hand of the
lord the king.
The king to the viscount greeting. We enjoin you 5 7.

. > E 4 wnt,
that you distrain B. by his lands and chattels in your that a per-
baliwick that he present himself, &c., on such a day in ONCE 4
order to make answer to A. on such a plea, &c. ; by his
and at the end let there be added, and to hear his judg- Ee
ment concerning several defaults. And if he shall have further in
come on: that day, then let it be done concerning his order.
‘default as above; and if he should not have come, the
distress ought to be further aggrevated, to wit, that the
viscount should distrain him by his lands and chattels
that he may be secure of producing him on another day.

And if he shall not have then come, that the viscount
should then distrain him by his lands and chattels so
that neither he himself nor any one in his place nor


f. 441.


478 DE EXCEPTIONIBUS.


manü apponat in terris, tenementis, bladis nec in aliis
catallis, Et si tune non venerit, peipiatur vic. q ita
distringat eum p terras et p catalla q capiat omnes
iras et omnia catalla sua in mant dñi regis, & capta
in manu dii regis detineat, quousă dñus rex aliud
inde peeperit, et q de exitibus respondeat dino regi.
Et de hac materia inveniri poterit de term S. M. añ
regis H. iii. incipiente iv. circa finem rotuli. Ulterius
vero fieri non poterit aliqua districtio p terras et
catalla. Sed cùm quærens post tot et tantas dilationes
justitiam non fuerit cdsecutus, quid erit? durü est
enim q placitū suū deserat, et infecto negotio despe-
rat? recedat domu. Bonum esset igitur (ut videtur)
distinguere inter placita sive actiones civiles, utrü
videlicet actio esset personalis et pecuniaria descedens
ex cdtractu, quo casu bonü esset adjudicare quereti ab
initio seysinà catallorü secundü quantitatem debiti
petiti, et dare ei die et sumonere illa de quo que-
ritur. Et si ad dié sumonitionis veniret, extunc res-
tituerétur ei catalla, ita q super principali respon-
deret, si autem non, quód ulterius super catallis non
audiretur, sed querens extune verus possessorius effi-
ceretur. Si auem placitum esset civile descendens ex
delicto sicut actio injuriarum, quód tune per officium
justic. estimaretur injuria, et adhibita taxatione de
redditib? et catallis fugientis, caperetur in manü dii
regis ad valentiam p contumacia ipsius, & fieret eodem
modo sicut supra. Si aute cùm corpus non inveniatur,
nec terras habuerit nec catalla ille de quo queritur,
iniquum esset si justitia remaneret vel malitia esset


OF EXCEPTIONS. 479


through him should put his hand to his lands or tenements
or grain crops or other chattels. And if he shall then
not have come, let it be enjoined to the viscount, that he
should so distrain him by his lands and chattels that he
should take all his lands and chattels into the hand of
the lord the king, and keep them so taken in the hand
of the lord the king, until the lord the king shall have
otherwise enjoined, and that he shall answer to the king
for the outgoings. And on this matter a case may be
found in St. Michael’s term in the third and fourth
years of king Henry, about the end of the roll. Buta
distraint by lands and chattels cannot be made any
further. But when the claimant, after so many and
such great delays, has not obtained justice, what will
result ? for it is hard that he should give up his plea
and should return home in despair with his business
unfinished. It is good therefore (as it seems) to dis-
tinguish between pleas or civil actions; whether forsooth
the action be personal and pecuniary, founded on a con-
tract, in which case it will be good to adjudicate to the
plaintiff from the commencement the seysine of the
chattels according to the quantity of the debt claimed,
and to give him a day, and to summon the person con-
cerning whom he complains. And if he shall come on
the day of- summons, thereupon let there be restored to
him the chattels, so that he may be heard on the
principal question, but if not, that he may be not further
heard upon the chattels, but the plaintiff be thenceforth
constituted the true possessor. But if it be a civil plea
founded on a delict, as for instance an action for an
injury, that then through the office of the justiciary the
injury be estimated, and a taxation having been made of
the rents and chattels of the fugitive, let there be taken
into the hand of the king up to the value on account of
the contumacy of the said party, and let it be done in the
same way as above. But if when his body is not found
and he, of whom complaint is made, has no lands or
chattels, it would be inequitable if justice should be


f. 441,


it
De retur
nis vice-
comitis,
etsi vice-
comes
negligens
fuerit.


480 DE EXCEPTIONIBUS.


impunita. Et in utroij casa sive causa esset pecunia-
ria sive injuriarum, etiam quamvis non eriminalis,
quód talis de secta querentis interrogaretur de cofn
in coüi ppter contumacia & inobedientiam factam diio
regi, quia nullum majus crimen quàm contemptus et
inobedientia, omnes enim qui in regno sut obedientes
esse debent düo regi, & ad pacem suam, & cüm vocati
vel sumoniti per regem venire contempserint, facitit
seipsos exleges, & ideo utlagari deberent, non tamen ad
mortem vel membrorü truncationem si postea redierint,
vel intercepti fuerint, cùm causa utlagationis criminalis
non existat, sed ad perpetuam prisonam, vel regni ab-
jurationem, et à communione omnium aliorum qui sunt
ad pacem dbi regis; et sicut causa excomunicationis
facit excomunicationem ' minore et poenam, ita causa
* utlagationis facit utlagatione esse minorem & poenam,
* & facilius debet invenire gratia q taliter utlagatus
* restituatur ad pacé. Excomunicatio enim et utla-
gatio in multis ad paria judicantur.


CAP: NXX


Redeamus ad juditium districtionum et attachiamen-
torum, quia aliquando vicecom negligens sit in exe-
cutione præceptorum domini regis per fraudem,
aliquando illa exequi non possit propter impotentiam,
et unde nisi rationabilem prætendat excusationem, in
misericordia domini regis remanebit. Contingit ei
quandoque, quod cim breve domini regis suceperit de
attachiando aliquem post sumonitionem factam, quod


OF EXCEPTIONS, 481


stayed or malice be unpunished. And in either case,
whether the cause were for money or on account of injury,
even although not criminal, so that the said party upon
the pursuit of the complainant may be sought for
from county to county on account of his contumacy
and disobedience to the lord the king, for there is no
greater crime than contumacy and disobedience, for all
persons within the realm ought to be obedient to the
lord the king and within -his peace, and when having
been called or summoned by the king they have con-
tumaciously omitted to come they make themselves
outlaws, and accordingly ought to be outlawed, not,
however, to lead to death or loss of limbs if they have
afterwards returned or have been intercepted, since the
cause of their outlawry has not been criminal, but to
perpetual imprisonment or the abjuration of the realm,


or excommunication from all those who are within the `


peace of the lord the king; and as the cause of the
excommunication makes the excommunication and the
penalty of minor degree, so the cause of the outlawry
makes the outlawry and the penalty of minor degree,
and he ought more easily to find grace, that having
been outlawed under such circumstances he should be re-
stored to the peace [of the king]. For excommunication
and outlawry are in many respects judged alike.


CHAPTER XXXII.
Let us return to the judgment of distraints and attach-


1


Of the re-


ments, because sometimes the viscount is neglectful in turns of


the execution of the precepts of the lord the king


the vis-
count, and


through fraud, sometimes he cannot execute them from if the vis-


a x 1 ^ cou
powerlessness, and hence unless he can hold forth ONE


nt has


reasonable excuse, he will remain at the mercy of the lectful.


lord the king. It happens sometimes to him, that when

he has received a writ of the lord the king for attaching

a certain person after a summons has been made, that he

does not make an attachment against him, nor does he
R 2657. HH


2
Pone sieut
alias.


f. 441 De


3.
De fraude
vicecomi-
tis.


482 DE EXCEPTIONIBUS.


attachiamentum non facit, nec breve quod ei inde venit
remittit, quo casu (offerente se liti querente) fiat talis
irrotulatio: A. optulit se quarto die versus B. de tali
placito vel tali (secundum diversa genera placitorum
personalium), & B. non venit, & preceptum fuit vic. q
attachiaret eum q esset ad talem diem, et ipse vice-
comes inde nihil fecit, nec bře q ei inde venit misit,
et ideo preceptum est vic. sieut aliàs, quód attachi-
aret eum quód sit ad talem diem, & q ipse vic. tune
sit ibi auditurus judicium suum de hoe q praedictum
talem non attachiavit, nec breve quod ei inde venit
misit sicut ei preceptum fuit. Forma brevis talis
est.


Rex vieecom salutem. Preecipimus tibi sieut aliàs
tibi préeceperimus, q ponas per vadium et salvos ple-
gios A. q sit coram justic. &e. ad talem diem ad re-
spondendum &c. ut supra. Et in fine addatur hee
clausula, et tuipse tune sis ibi auditurus judieiü tuum
de hoe.q ipsum A. non attachiasti, nec bre nostrum
quod inde tibi venit justiciariis nostris non misisti,
sicut aliàs tibi preceptum fuit, & habeas, &e. Teste,
&c. Et ad quem diem si nihil inde fecerit magis
quàm prius fecit, nec se excusaverit, p voluntate diii
regis amerciabitur de contemptu, et tertió peipietur ei
q attachiet A. per tale bře: Preecipimus tibi sieut
sepius tibi peeperimus &e. ut supra.


Mittit quandoq vicecomi bre quód inde susceperit, et
fraudulenter rescribit et mandat q breve tam tarde
ceperit quód praeceptum díi regis exequi non potuit,
quo easu, si in contrarium testatum fuerit q illud


d:


OF EXCEPTIONS. 488


return the writ which came to him, in which case (when
the complainant appears to join issue) let an enrolment
of this kind be made: A. presented himself on the
fourth day in answer to B, concerning such a plea or
such (according to the different kinds of personal pleas),
and B. did not appear, and it was enjoined to the vis-
count that he should attach him that he should present
himself on such a day, and the said viscount has done
nothing thereon, nor has he sent the writ which came
to him, and accordingly it has been enjoined to the said
viscount as before, that he should attach him to be
present on a certain day, and that the viscount himself
should attend to hear his own judgment on this matter
that he has not attached the aforesaid so-and-so, nor has
returned the writ which came to him as it was enjoined
to bim. The form of the, writ is of this kind.


The king to the viscount greeting. We enjoin you as ^ Že
we have before enjoined you that you put A. under bail P ae
and safe sureties that he should present himself before
our justiciaries &c. on such a day to answer &c. as
above. And at the end let there be added this clause,
and do thou thyself be there in order to bear thy own f. 441b.
judgment for not having attached A., and for not having
returned to our justiciaries our writ which was sent to
thee, as was before enjoined to thee, and produce &ce.
Witness &c. And on which day if he has thereon done
nothing more than he did before; nor has excused himself,
he shall be amerced at the pleasure of the lord the king
for his contempt; and let him be enjoined for the third
time that he should attach A. by a writ of this tenor:

We enjoin you as we have repeatedly enjoined you We.
as above.

The viscount sometimes returns a writ which he has 3.
received, and fraudulently writes back and sends word ERAS,
that he has received the writ so late that he could not viscount.
execute the precept of the lord the king, in which case,
if it has been testified to the contrary that he received it

HH 2


4.
De impe-
ritia vice-
comitis,


484 DE EXCEPTIONIBUS.


tempestive recepisset, ita quòd potuit attachiasse talem
si vellet, vel quòd breve fuit ei liberatū in pleno com,
ubi ipse psens fuit qui attachiari debuit, et potuit
attachiari. Item si fraudulenter mandavit quód ille
qui attachiari debuit non fuit inventus in balliva sua,
quia manens fuit extra comitatü suum, et testatum sit
in contrarium q manens sit in com suo, et ibi habeat
reseantiam suam. Item si fraudulenter mandaverit q
ile qui attachiari debet itinerans est de loco in locum,
et de com in coñ vagans, nee certum- habet domici-
lium, nec quód sit de alicujus manupastu vel familia,
et testatü est in contrariti quód domiciliu habeat, et
reseantia apud talem locū certü, ubi quotidie inveniri
possit, vel quód. sit de manupastu vel familia talis.
Item cùm peeptü fuerit vic. quód distringeret talem
per terras et catalla, et falsó reseribat justic. et man-
dat quód talis non habet terras nec catalla per que
distringi possit vel attachiari in balliva sua, et testa-
tum fuerit in contrarium quód terras habeat et catalla
ad sufficientiam in balliva sua, tali loco et tali. Et
unde infiniti sunt casus de genere isto, ubi vic. per
fraudem rescribit et preetendit non causam ut causam


Item si p imperitiam suam erraverit in modo et
ordine attachiamentorum et districtiont, ut si preeceptu
sit el q ponat per vadium et salvos plegios, et ipse
mandavit q distrinxit per terras et catalla vel è
contrario. Item si preceptü sit ei quód habeat corpus,
et ipse mandaverit q attachiavit p plegios vel commisit
per ballivü vel hujusmodi, et unde sunt casus multi.
Et unde vicecom modo debito precept düi regis non
sit executus, de omnibus hujusmodi mandatis oporte-
bit in irrotulationibus et brevibus facere mentionem,
& fiat irrotulatio sic: A. optulit se quarto die versus


OF EXCEPTIONS. 485


in good time, so that he could have attached so-and-so if
he chose, or that the writ was delivered to him in a full
county court, where the said person who ought to have
been attached was present and might have been
attached. Likewise if he has fraudulently sent word that
the person who ought to have been attached was not
found within his bailiwick, because he was abiding out-
side his county, and it has been testified to the contrary
that he was abiding in his county, and had there his
residence. Likewise if he has fraudulently sent word that
he who ought to be attached is travelling from place to
place, and is wandering from county to county, and has
no certain domicile and that he is not of so-and-so’s
household or family. Likewise when it has been
enjoined to the viscount that he should distrain so-and-
so by his lands and chattels, and he falsely writes back
to the justiciaries and sends word that so-and-so has no
lands or chattels, whereby he could be distrained or
attached, within his bailiwick, and it has been testified
to the contrary, that he has sufficient lands and chattels
in his bailiwick, at such and sucha place. And whereof
there are an infinite number of cases of that kind, where
the viscount writes back fraudulently and pretends as
an excuse what is not an excuse.


Likewise if from inexperience he has erred in the
manner and order of attachments and distresses, as if it o
be enjoined that he should put under bail and safe pledges, of the
and he has sent word that he has distrained by lands *^?""t-
and chattels, or the contrary. Likewise if it has been
enjoined that he should produce his body, and he him-
self has returned that he has attached him by sureties or
has committed him by his bailiff or such like, and whereof
there are many cases, and wherever the viscount has not
executed the precept of the lord the king in due manner,
concerning all these returns it is incumbent to make
mention in the enrolments and in the writs, and let the
enrolment be made after this manner: A. has presented


486 DE EXCEPTIONIBUS.


B. de tali placito personali, & B. non venit, et vicecom
madavit q non attachiavit eum, quia recepit bre tam
tarde quód precept dili regis exequi non potuit. Et
testatü est q istud recepit satis tempestive vel in
comitatu ubi attachiandus presens fuit, & ideo (ut
prius) preecipiatur quód attachiet eum quód sit ad
talem diem &c., et vicec. tune sit ibi auditurus judicium
suü de hoe q eundé B. non attachiavit sicut ei pre-
ceptü fuit. Et in hae forma fiat irrotulatio in omni-
bus aliis mandatis vicecom supradictis. Forma brevis
talis est, quod sequitur talem irrotulationem. -


5. Rex vicecomiti salutem. Preecipimus tibi sicut aliàs
du dud tibi preeceperimus quód ponas per vadium et salvos
ando ulte- plegios A. quód sit ad talem diem, &c. ut supra, ad
x M respondendum tali de tali placito personali; vel aliter:
pluries, ubi precipimus tibi sicut aliàs tibi preeceperimus quód
EDU. distringas talem per omnes terras et catalla sua in
fuerit ^ balliva tua q sit coram justiciariis nostris ad talem

f.442. diem ad respondendü B. de tali placito personali, vel
tali, secundü formam. brevis originalis. Et unde man-
dasti prefatis justiciariis nostris apud talem locum,
quód breve nostri de attachiando predictu B. talem
adeo tardé tibi venit quód precepti nostrü exequi
non potuisti  & testatum est ibidem quód illud satis
tempestive ad horam recepisti; quod illud preceptü
nostrü exequi potuisti; vel sie: quód illud recepisti
in pleno comit ubi praedictus B. presens fuit, &e. ut
supra. Et tu ipse tunc sis ibi auditurus judiciü tuum
de hoe quod predictu B. non attachiasti quód esset


ad talem diem sieut tibi præceptū fuit, et habeas ibi


OF EXCEPTIONS. AST


- himgelf on the fourth day in answer to B. on such a per-
sonal plea, and B. has not appeared, and the viscount
has reported that he has not attached him, because he
received the writ so late that he could not execute the
order of the lord the king. And it has been testified
that he received it soon enough, or in the county court
where the party to be attached was present, and there-
fore (as before) let him be enjoined to attach him in order
that he should be present on a certain day, &c. ; and the
viscount himself should be there in order to hear his own
judgment on the matter that he did not attach the said
B. as he had been enjoined. And let the enrolment. be
after this form in all the other returns aforesaid of the
viscount. The form of the writ, which follows such an
enrolment, is of this kind.

The king to the viscount greeting. We enjoin you, as | 9.

e. : writ to

we have once before enjoined you, that you put under attach
bail and safe sureties A. that he should present himself e as
on such a day &e. as above, in order to answer so-and-so repeatedly
on such a personal plea ; or otherwise, we enjoin you, as p
we have once before enjoined you, that you should dis- viscount
train so-and-so by all his lands and chattels in your e
bailiwick, that he should present himself before our jus-  £ 442.
ticiaries on a certain day in order to answer to B. con-
cerning such or such a personal plea according to the
form of the original writ. And whereof you have sent
word to our aforesaid justiciaries at such a place that our
writ to attach the aforesaid B. has come to you so late
that you could not execute our precept, and it has been
testified there that you received it at so early an hour
that you could have executed that our precept; or thus:
that you received it in a full county court where the
aforesaid B. was present &c. as above. And do thou thy-
self be present in order to hear thine own judgment in
the matter, that thou didst not attach the aforesaid B.
that he should be present on such a day as had been to
thee enjoined, and produce there the names of the sureties


6.
De excusa-
tione vice
comitis.


488 DE EXCEPTIONIBUS.


nomina plegiorü & hoc breve. Teste, & Et ad
quem diem si non attachiaverit, nec se excusaverit, in
misericordia remanebit.


Excusatur vicecom multotiens ‘ppter libertatem, et
impotentiam quod libertates sine warranto ingredi non
possit, nisi per defectü eoru qui libertates iure et
returna brevium per vicecom. Et unde si preceptt
sit vicecomit quod attachiet talem qui manens sit
infra hujusmodi libertates, cüm vic. ingredi non possit,
faciat vicecom returna breviü ballivis prædictæ liber-
tatis, et præcipiat ballivis quód tale preceptü dii regis
exequantur, quo casu aut ipsi ballivi exequuntur præ-
ceptum domini regis, aut nihil inde faciunt; si autem
illud plen& fuerint executi, per hoe liberabitur vice-
comes; si autem nihil inde fecerint, sufficiat ad excu-
sationem vicecom q mandet justic. quód preeceptu sit
ballivis. Et quo casu, cùm ballivi nihil inde fecerint,
ppter defectu eorum  przcipietur vicecom quód non
omittat ppter libertatem talem quin attachiet talem
quód sit &c. Et sie poterit vicecomes libertates in-
gredi. cám warrantum habuerit, quod aliàs ei non
liceret, et fiat sic irrotulatio: A. optulit se quarto die
versus B. de tali placito, & B. non venit, et pracep-
tum fuit viceco quód attachiaret eum vel quód
haberet corpus suum, vel quod distringeret eum per
terras et catalla. Et vicecomes mandavit quód præ-
cepit ballivis talis libertatis et ipse nihil inde fecerunt,
et ideo preceptum est vicecofü q non omittat propter
libertatem talem quin ponat per vadium et . plegios
preedictum B., vel quin habeat corpus ejus, vel quin


OF EXCEPTIONS. 489


and this writ. Witness &e. And upon which day, if he
has not attached him nor excused himself, he shall be at
the mercy of the court.


The viscount is excused very often on account of a 6.
franchise and his powerlessness, because he cannot enter Cong of
a franchise without a warrant, except through the failure the vis-
of those who have franchises and the returns of writs ^""*
through the, viscount. And hence if it has been enjoined
upon the viscount that he should attach a certain person
who is abiding within franchises of this kind, when the
viscount cannot euter them, let the viscount make returns
of the writs to the bailiffs of the aforesaid franchise, and
let him enjoin upon the bailiffs that they should execute
the said precept of the lord the king, in which case either
the bailiffs themselves execute the precept of the lord the
king, or do nothing thereupon ; if however they have ex-
ecuted it fully, the viscount will be thereby discharged ;
but if they have done nothing thereof, let it suffice for
the excuse of the viscount that he should report to the
justiciaries, that he has issued a precept to the bailiffs.

And in which case, when the bailiffs have done nothing
thereon, on account of their default let it be enjoined
to the viscount, that he shall not omit on account of
the said franchise to attach the said person that he should
present himself &e. And thus the viscount may enter the
franchises when he has had a warrant, which otherwise
would not be allowable for him, and let the enrolment be
in this manner: A. has presented himself on the fourth
day in answer to B. concerning such a plea, and B. has
not appeared, and it has been enjoined upon the viscount
that he should attach him, or that he should produce his .
body, or that he should distrain him by his lands and
chattels. And the viscount has reported that he has en-
joined the bailiffs of the said franchise, and they have
done nothing thereupon, and accordingly it was enjoined
upon the viscount that he should not omit on account of
that franchise to put the said B. under bail and sureties


490 DE EXCEPTIONIBUS.


distringat eum per terras et catalla, vel quin capiat
in manum domini regis talem terram, vel aliud quid
faciat seeundü feeptü dii regis, et ballivus sumoneatur
per vicecom q sit responsurus quare preceptum domini
regis non fuit executus, s fiat breve in hac forma.


7. Rex vic. salutem. Preecipimus tibi quód no omittas
Pod propter talem libertatem talis quin ponas B. per va-
non omit- dium et salvos plegios quód sit &c. ad respondendum
Tq E &e.; vel aliter, secundum quod preceptum est We.

ut supra. Et unde mandasti justiciariis nostris We.
quód mandasti ballivo vel senescallo talis libertatis,
quód attachiet eum quód esset ad talem diem &e., et
unde nihil fecit, et sumoneatur per bonos summoni-
tores predictus ballivus vel senescallus, quód sit coram
prefatis justiclariis nostris ad predictum terminum
responsurus quare preceptum nostrum non fuerit exe-
cutus, vel quare predictum non attachiavit, vel quid
f.442 b. tale non fecit, sicut ei præceptū fuit, vel aliter. (secunda
quosda) q ballivus sit auditurus inde judicium suu de
hoc &. Et si forte cùm vic. ingredi voluerit hoc
non ei permittatur ppter potentiam ballivoru libertatis,
precipiatur (ut prius) vie. q non omittat ppter liber-
tate talem, quin attachiet tale in forma pdicta. Et si
aliqué invenerit resistente, assumptis secü (si op?
fuerit) militibus et liberis hominib? de com ad sufliei-
entià capiat corpora hominu resistentiu, et illos in
prisona salvo custodiat, donec dominus rex inde pce-
perit voluntatem suam. Et nihilominus dominus liber-
tatis attachietur q sit ad predietü diem ad defenden-


OF EXCEPTIONS. 491


or to produce him in person, or to distrain him by his
lands and chattels, or to take into the hand of the king
such a land, or to do some other thing of a like character
`- according to the precept of the lord the king, and let the
bailiff be summoned through the viscount that he should
be present in order to make answer wherefore he has not
executed the precept of the lord the king, and let the
writ be drawn up in this form.’


The king to the viscount greeting, We enjoin you 7.
that you Re not omit on account of a certain franchise of oraa
so-and-so to put B. under bail and safe sureties that he count
present himself &c. in order to make answer &c., or other- tenes
wise, according to what has been enjoined &c. as above. count of a
And whereon you have made a return to our justiciaries f'*nelise.
&e. that you have sent word to the bailiff or steward
that he should attach him that he should be present on
such a day &c., and whereof he has done nothing ; and let
the aforesaid bailiff or steward be summoned by good sum-
moners that he should present himself before our aforesaid
justiciaries at the aforesaid term, in order to answer where-
fore he has not executed our precept, or wherefore he has
not attached the person aforesaid, or has omitted to do
something of the same kind, as has been enjoined upon f£. 422 b.
him, or otherwise (according to some persons), that the
bailiff attend in order to hear his own judgment thereon
&c. And if by chance when the viscount wished to enter,
this was not permitted to him on account of the power of
the bailiff of the franchise, let it be enjoined (as before)
upon the viscount, that he should not omit on account of
that franchise to attach the said person in the form afore-
said. And if he should find any one resisting him, having
` associated with himself, if it should be necessary, knights
and freeholders of the county in sufficient number, let
him seize the bodies of the men who resist him, and keep
them safe in prison, until the lord the king shall have
intimated his pleasure thereon. And nevertheless let the
lord of the franchise be attached that he should present


8.
Si clericus
securita-
tem in-
venire
noluerit
propter
privile-
gium
ordinis.


492 DE EXCEPTIONIBUS.


dum se, si possit, de predicta transgressione. Et
quam quidem si advocaverit, vel defendere non possit,
capiatur illa libertas in mani domini regis, p voluntate
dii regis detinenda; quia libertatem meretur amittere,
qui -permissa sibi abutitur potestate. Et in primo
casu, licet vicecom ingredi possit cüm preceptti inde
habuerit, nihilominus si ballivus non venerit ad diem
suum pcedatur contra ipsum de defalta, s. q non
attachietur sed quod resumoneatur, et si ad resumoni-
tionem non venerit, tune amercietur graviter, ut de
term S. Trinitatis anno regni regis H. tertio.


Item excusari poterit vic. ppter privilegium clerico-
rum, ut si peeptum domini regis habuerit de attachi-
ando aliquem qui clericus sit, & qui plegios invenire
noluerit ppter privilegium clericale, nec laicum feodum
habuerit p quod possit distringi, nec debet dominus
rex manus in eos mittere, et cüm in eos coertionem
non habeat, maxime in delictis & transgressionibus
sicut in majoribus criminibus, nullum aliud supererit
remedium nisi quód ex parte dni regis mandetur
ordinariis loci qui baronias habent, sicut archiepiscopis,
episcopis, et alis in quorum diocesibus tales sunt
manentes qui attachiari debent, vel beneficia ecclesi-
astica habuerunt, et in quos dominus rex habet coer-
tionem propter baronias suas, quód faciant tales venire,
et sic fiat talis irrotulatio: A. optulit se quarto die
versus B. de placito tali &. Et B. non venit, &
praceptum fuit vicecof q attachiaret eum, et vicecom
mandavit q predictus B. clericus est, et quód noluit
plegios invenire, nee habet laicum feodum per quod
potuit distringi, et ideo mandatum est ordinario loci,


OF EXCEPTIONS, 493


himself on the day aforesaid to defend himself, if he can,
` for the aforesaid transgression. And which indeed if he
has avowed it or cannot defend himself, let his franchise
be taken into the hand of the king, to be detained at the
pleasure of the king, because he deserves to lose his fran-
chise, who abuses a power allowed to him. And in the
first case, although the viscount may enter, when he has
a precept thereon, nevertheless if the bailiff has not
appeared on the appointed day, let proceedings be had
against him for his default, to wit, not that he should be
attached, but that he should be resummoned, and if he
should not have come on his resummons, then let him
be heavily amerced, as in Holy Trinity term in the third
year of the reign of king Henry.


The viscount may also be excused on account of the , & .
privilege of clerics, as if he has received a precept from a cae
the lord the king to attach a person, who is a cleric, to find se-
and who has refused to find sureties, on account of his Mer
clerical privilege, and who has no lay fee by which he e qur
may be distrained, and the lord the king ought not to orden
lay hands upon them, and since he has no coercion
over them, especially in delicts and transgressions as in
greater crimes, there will remain no other remedy except
that on the part of the lord the king a mandate should
go to the ordinaries of the place, who have baronies,
as to archbishops, bishops, and others within whose
dioceses the persons to be attached are abiding, or have
ecclesiastical benefices, and against whom the king
has coercion on account of their baronies, that they
should cause such persons to appear, and let the enrol-
ment be after this form: A. has presented himself on
the fourth day in answer to B. on such a plea, &e., and
B. has not appeared, and it has been enjoined upon the
viscount that he should attach him, and the viscount
has sent word that the aforesaid B. is a cleric and has
refused to find sureties, and has no lay fee upon which
a distress could be levied, and therefore a mandate has


f. 443.


9.
Dreve ad
episcopum
vel alium,
quod faciat
venire
elerieum,
cum non


494 DE EXCEPTIONIBUS.


sicut archiepiscopo, episcopo, et hujusmodi, quód faciat
talem clericum venire ad talem diem, nisi ita sit q
forte testatum sit, quód talis clericus habeat laicum
feodum et catalla in’ laico feodo per que distringi
possit. Et vicecom per fraudem mandaverit quod
nihil habuerit, et quo casu, fiat ut supra de fraudibus
vieecofü. Sed quid si clericus preebendam habuerit,
laieum feodum seilicet, et noluerit plegios invenire,
queritur an vicecom eum distringere possit statim per
prebendam, vel si eüm preceptum habuerit de attachi-
ando retornum fecerit ordinario, an ordinarius distrin-
gere possit canonicum per prebendam suam, videtur
quód neuter, nee vicecom nec episcopus: vicecom non,
licet warrantum haberet ingrediendi libertatem sine
episcopo vel alio ordinario, eüm episcop? sit caput
ecclesiæ & canonici mébra. Ite nec episcopus p tale
retornu, sine Speciali precepto domini regis, cùm
canonicus adeo liberé teneat prebendam suam de
ecclesia sicut ipse episcopus baroniam suam, et: cano-
nici sunt quasi unü corpus per se in ecclesia: et
quavis episcopus sit caput ecclesie, tamen canonici
habent sua bona à bonis episcopi separata, & ideo
cim episcopus à dio rege speciale mandatum habuerit,
ex hoe incipit habere jurisdictionem, et coertione in
pbendis quasi ordine observato. Forma brevis tune
talis est.


H. Dei gratia &c., venerabili in Christo pairi B.
eade gratia episcopo London salute. Mandamus vobis
q venire faciatis coram justic. nostris &c. ad talem
diem tale archidiaconi, vel tale decanum vel canoni-
cum ad respondendu C. de tali placito &c. ut supra.
Et tune addatur hee clausula, Et unde vicecom noster


OF EXCEPTIONS. 495


been sent to the ordinary of the place, as for instance
to the archbishop, bishop and such like, that he should
cause the said cleric to appear on a certain day, unless
it should so be that by chance it has been testified that
the said clerie has a lay fee, and chattels im a lay fee,
through which he may be distrained. And the viscount
has fraudulently reported, that he has nothing, and in
which case, let proceedings be had as above stated con-
cerning the frauds of the viscounts. But what if the
cleric has a prebend, a lay fee for instance, and has re-
fused to find sureties, it is questioned whether the vis-
count can distrain him forthwith through his prebend,
or if when he has received a precept to attach him he has
made a return to the ordinary, whether the ordinary
may distrain a canon through his prebend, it seems that
neither can, neither the viscount nor the bishop: not
the viscount, although he may have a warrant to enter
the franchise without the bishop or other ordinary, since
the bishop is the head of the church, and the canons are
its members. Likewise not the bishop through such a
return, without a special precept from the lord the king,
since the canon holds his prebend as freely from the  f.443.
church as the bishop himself his barony, and the canons
are as it were one body by itself in the church. And
although the bishop is the head of the church, never-
theless the eanons hold their goods separated from the
goods of the bishop, and accordingly when the bishop
has received a special mandate from the lord the king,
from this time he begins to have jurisdietion and coer-
cion over the prebends, as it were with observance of
order. The form of the writ is then of this kind.


Henry by the grace of God, &e. to the SUN 9


father in Christ B. by the same grace bishop of London Du


greeting. We have commanded you that you cause to or other
appear before our justiciaries Ge. on such a day such an MANU


archdeacon, or such a dean or canon, to make answer to should

= : s £ d €
C. in such a plea &e. as above. And then let this clause Poe e *
2


habeat,
per quod
distringat.


496 DE EXCEPTIONIBUS.


Midd mandavit prefatis justiciariis niis, quód pdictus
archidiaconus, vel talis alius qui clerieus est, noluerit
plegios invenire, nec habet laicum feodü p q distringi
possit et habeatis ibi hoc bře. Teste &e. Si aute
episeopus nihil fecerit ad mandatum domini regis,
tune fiat irrotulatio sic: A. optulit se quarto die versus
B. de placito tali, et B. non venit, et aliàs peeptu
fuit vie. q attachiaret eum, & vic. mandavit q clericus
fuit &ec. ut supra, et ita q mandatum fuit episcopo
tali q faceret eum venire, et quód mitteret breve, et
ipse nihil inde fecit. Et ideo sumoneatur episcopus
quód sit ad talem diem, & ibi habeat fdictum talem
ad respondendum pdicto A. quare &c. secundu breve
originale, & ad ostendendü quare pdictum B. coram
pfatis justiciariis ad talem diem non habuit, sicut ei
mandatum fuit. Forma brevis talis est: Rex vice-
comiti salutem. Stimone p bonos summonitores F.
London episcopum quód sit coram justiciariis &c. ad
talem diem, & ibi habeat talem archidiaconum, vel
tale clericum, ad respondendü tali de placito quare
&c. ut supra. Et in fine, ad ostendendum quare non
fecit eum venire corà justiciariis ntis ad talem die,
sicut ei mandatum fuit, et quare non misit bie &e.
Ad quem diem aut facit eum venire aut non facit;
si aute non, tūc observabitur solennitas attachiamen-
torü, sieut in aliis distrietionibus, et statim distringa-
tur episcopus per baroniam suam q sit ad alium die,
et ibi habeat clericum pfatum ad respondendü &e. Et
sumoneat episcopü q tunc sit ibi auditurus judicium
suü de hoc, quód prafatu clerici non habuit ad talem


‘MS. Rawl. C. 160, breaks off | * per quod distringi possit. One
at the bottom of the second column | or more folios are missing, which
of p. 231 of the MS.,after the words | are preserved in other MSS.


n
OF EXCEPTIONS. 497


be added. And whereof our viscount of Middlesex has when he
sent word to our justiciaries aforesaid, that the arch- E rns
deacon aforesaid or a certain other person who is a cleric he can be
has refused to find sureties, and has no lay fee whereby ecu
he can be distrained, and produce there this writ. Wit-
ness &c. But if the bishop has done nothing upon the
mandate of the lord the king, then let the enrolment be
of this kind: A. has presented himself on the fourth day
to make answer to B. on such a plea, and B. has not
appeared, and it has been otherwise enjoined to the vis-
count to attach him, and the viscount has reported that
he is a cleric &e. as above, and so that a mandate was sent
to such a bishop to cause him to appear, and to return
the writ, and the bishop has done nothing thereupon.
And accordingly let the bishop be summoned that he be
present on a certain day and there produce the aforesaid
so-and-so to answer to the aforesaid A. wherefore &c.
according to the original writ, and to show cause where-
fore he has not produced the aforesaid B. before the
aforesaid justiciaries on such a day as he was commanded.
The form of the writ is of this kind: The king to the
viscount greeting. Summon by good summoners F. the
bishop of London that he present himself before our jus-
ticiaries &e. on such a day, and produce there archdeacon
so-and-so or the cleric so-and-so to answer to so-and-so -
concerning a plea wherefore &c. as above. And at the
end to show cause wherefore he has not caused him to
appear before our justiciaries on such a day as he was
commanded, and wherefore he has not returned the writ
&e. On which day he either causes him to come or he
does not; but if not, then the solemn order of attach-
ments shall be observed as in other distresses, and let
the bishop be forthwith distrained through his barony
that he present himself upon another day, and there
produce the aforesaid cleric to answer &c. And let him
‘summon the bishop that he be there present to hear his
own judgment on the matter that he did not present

R 2657. II


498 DE EXCEPTIONIBUS.


diem &c. sicut ei mandatum fuit, et fiat irrotulatio
sic: A. optulit se quarto die versus B. de tali placito
&c. ut supra. Et B. non venit, et aliàs mandatu fuit
episeopo quód faceret eum venire ad talem diem. Ad
quem diem non fecit eum venire, et ita q peeptu fuit
vicecom quód summoneret eum q esset ad hune diem,
et ibi haberet pdictum B. ad respondendum. Et simi-
liter quód ` episcopus esset ad ostendendu quare non
fecit eum venire ad aliü diem, sicut ei mandatu fuit.
Et episcopus non venit, nec habuit ipsum B., et ideo
distringatur per baroniam suam q sit ad talem diem,
et ibi habeat preedictum B. ad respondendum, &c. Et
ipse episcopus sit auditurus judicium suum de hoec
quód ipsum B. &e. Forma brevis talis est, &c.


10. Rex vicecomiti salutem. Preecipimus tibi quód dis-
Breve, si T ee 1 ^ 3
a tringas E London episcopum per terras suas - quas
velalius tenet in baronia in comitatu tuo, quod sit coram justi-
FEQ ciariis &c. ad talem diem, & ibi habeat talem cleri-
non habu- cum ad respondendum tali de tali placito &c., et simi-
ert cleri- 4; : VEO see
cumad iter ad audiendum judicium suum de hoc q prefatum
prinium clericum non habuit ad talem diem, sieut ei mandatum


diem, quo


(disp : - :
episcopus. tuit, et habeas, &c. Ad quem diem si non venerit


distringa-
tur.


episcopus nec clericus, procedatur contra ipsum cleri-
cum de cotemptu secundü considerationem curis, et
ne maleficia remaneant impunita, apponat rex manum
suam in defectu episcopi, ita quód clerieus arrestetur
et detineatur quous episcopus eum petierit ex officio
sux jurisdictionis ut ei liberetur, vel ex certa causa
detentus remaneat, nec ppter hoe vie. mee ballivi


OF EXCEPTIONS. 499


the aforesaid cleric on such a day &c. as he was com-
manded, and let the enrolment be in this manner: A.
has presented himself on the fourth day in answer to B.
on such a plea &c. as above. And B. has not come, and
it was before commanded to the bishop that he should
cause him to appear on such a day. Upon which day
he did not eause him to appear, and so that it was
enjoined upon the said viscount that he should summon
him to appear on this day and there produce the afore-
said B. to answer. And in like manner that the bishop
should be present to show cause wherefore he did not cause
him to appear on another day as he was commanded.
And the bishop has not appeared, nor has he produced
the said B.; and accordingly let him be distrained
through his barony that he be present on a certain
day, and there produce the aforesaid B. to answer &c.
And let the said bishop be present to hear judgment
against himself on this matter that the said B. &c. The
form of the writ is of this kind.


The king to the viscount greeting. We have enjoined x A if
that you Toad ‘distrain F. o of London by the the bishop
lands which he holds in his barony in your county that phus
he should present himself before our justiciaries &c on Fa IM
such a day and there produce such a cleric to answer to produced a
so-and-so on such a plea &c., and in like manner to hear Ed
judgment against himself on this matter that he has not day, that
produced the aforesaid cleric on such a day as he was ‘he bishop
commanded, and produce there &. On which day if distrained.
the bishop has not appeared nor the cleric, let proceed-
ings be had against the cleric for contempt according to
the resolution of the court, and that misdemeanors may
not remain unpunished, let the king apply his hand in
the default of the bishop, so that the cleric be arrested
and be detained until the bishop shall have claimed him
officially as being under his jurisdiction that he may be
delivered up to him, or remain detained for a certain
cause, nor on this account let the viscount or his bailiffs


E?


i
De rebus
communi-
bus inter
vieinos
dividendis.
Britton, iii.
ch. vii;
Fieta, v.
ch. 9, $ i-
4.


500 DE EXCEPTIONIBUS.


sui pcenam incurrant, cùm executio juris non habeat
injuriam. Episcopus autem et superiores possunt pro
injuria et pro crimine arrestari. Posset etiam epi-
scopus latronem fugientem ad ecclesiam impun? expel-
lere, et ita quód irregularis non teneretur, si latro
exire nollet et stare judicio regis et regni. Debet
enim gladius juvare gladium, et unde gladii sunt: duo,
spiritualis vz. et temporalis. Item cüm clericus non
venerit ad diem suum, episcopus venire possit vel
mittere et excusare se quód clericum habere non
poterit, dicere enim possit quàd clericus nullum habet
benefieium in diocesia sua per quod possit distringi.
Item etsi beneficium habuerit, quód scholaris sit et
vacans in scholis Parisiis ultra mare, et fecit quod
potuit & sequestravit eum per pbendam suam, & alia
beneficia sua, et nescivit ulterius quid facere posset,
et unde supersedendum erit (ut videtur) donec clericus
redierit q capi posset et coerceri. Et unde si episcopus
tune noluerit, hoc faciat vicecom im defectu episcopi
ratione supradicta.


Cap. XXXIII.


Est aute inter alias actiones actio mixta, d datur
tam in rem qm in personam, sicut actio de comuni
dividundo, ubi uteri actor uteri reus, & ubi sine
affinitate et parentela habēt aliquam extranez psonæ
potestatem ad rem aliquam dividendam que inter eos
jacet in comuni, sieut sunt vicini & omnino extranei.
Item est alia actio mixta que dieitur actio familiz
herciscundee, & locum habet inter eos qui comunem
habent hzreditatem dividédam: sed hse dus actiones


OF EXCEPTIONS. 501


incur any penalty, since the execution of right carries
with it no wrong. The bishop also and the superiors
may arrest for an injury anda crime. The bishop also
may expel with impunity a robber who has fled for
refuge to a church, and so that he should not be held to
be irregular, if the robber will not go forth and stand
the judgment of the king and of the realm. For sword
ought to aid sword, and whereof there are two swords,
the spiritual forsooth, and the temporal. Likewise when
a cleric has not appeared on the day appointed to him,
the bishop may come or send and excuse himself that he
cannot produce the cleric, for he may say that the cleric
has no benefice in his diocese, whereby he can be dis-
trained, Likewise, although he may have a benefice,
that he is a scholar and is employed in the schools of
Paris or elsewhere, and he has done what he could, and
has sequestrated his prebend, and his other benefices,
and he knows not what else he can do, and whereupon
proceedings are to be superseded, as it seems, until the
cleric has returned so that he may be apprehended and
coerced. And whereupon if the bishop be unwilling, let
the viscount do this in default of the bishop for the
reason above said.,


CHAPTER X XXIII.


There is also amongst other actions a mixed action, o ee
which is allowed against as well the thing as the person, ing com- `
as an action for dividing a common estate, where each s eds
party is plaintiff and each is defendant, and where with- neigh-
out affinity or relationship persons strangers in blood Low CTE
one another have some power to divide a certain estate
which lies between them in common, according as they
are neighbours and altogether strangers in blood. Like-
wise there is another mixed action, which is called acto
familie herciscunde, and it has a place between those
who have a common estate to be divided; but these two


Azonis
summa in
iii. librum
Codicis
Rubric
Familize
erciscun-
de, et
Finium
regundo-
rum.


f. 444.


Inst. Just.
DeA ctioni-
bus iv. 6.
$ 20.


9


Quod
solennitas


502 DE EXCEPTIONIBUS.


non statim nascuntur, cüm hereditas vel alia res in
comuni tenetur, sed ex eo tempore quo quis eorum velit
rem dividere: & locum habet (ut videtur) inter cohzere-
des ubi agitur de pparte sororum, vel inter alios ubi res
inter partes & cohseredes dividi debet, in pparte, sive
ratione personarum inter, quas res dividi debeat, sicut
sunt plures sorores que sunt quasi unus heeres, vel
inter plures fratres qui sunt quasi unus hæres ratione
rei que divisibilis est inter plures masculos, & ubi
quilibet eorum est actor et quilibet reus, et ideo dici-
tur hee actio mixta. Et hoc casu quilibet dicetur
actor qui primd pvocaverit ad judicium. Et in iis
casib?, si cùm pticipes vel coheredes partem suam
petierint rationabilem versus suos participes et cohæ-
redes, & ill defaltam fecerint, capienda erit terra in
manum díi regis de comuni hereditate p ea pte que
contingit petente, & ita erit districtio in hoc casu
realis & non personalis. Ite & est actio tertia de
finibus agrorum inter vicinos terminandis et definien-
dis, quee. dieitur actio finium regundorum, que idem
est quód rex preecipiat q rationabiles divise fiant inter.
vicinos, et hoe est valde subtilis inter alias, & ubi pro
defectu ejus qui non queritur debet pars illa de qua
cotentio est capi in manum dii regis, & sie erit dis-
trictio realis et non personalis. Sunt etiam aliquando
duse aetiones que eoprehenduntur sub uno brevi, et
quarü una modo utentium personalis est, et altera
realis, & si bene judicarentur quelibet earum frivola
esset et inutilis ut supra.


Non semper (ut paulo ante dietum est in parte)
observari debet solennitas attachiamentorum in actioni-


OF EXCEPTIONS, 503


actions do not arise forthwith when an inheritance or
other thing is held in common, but from that time when
any of them wishes to divide the estate: and it has a
place (as it seems) between coheirs where the action is for
a proportionate part of sisters, or between other persons
where an estate ought to be divided between parceners
and coheirs, in proportionate parts, or with reference to
the persons between whom the thing ought to be divided,
such as are several sisters who are as it were one heir,
or between several brothers who are as it were one heir
in respect of a thing which is divisible amongst several
males, and where each of them is a plaintiff and each is
a defendant, and there the action is called a mixed action.
And in these two cases, if when the parceners or coheirs
have claimed their reasonable part against their co-
parceners or coheirs, and the latter have made default,
land will have to be taken into the hand of the lord the f. 444.
king of the common inheritance in proportion to the
part which belongs to the claimant, and so there shall
be a real and not a personal distress in this case. Like-
wise there is a third action concerning the boundaries of
fields to be determined and defined between neighbours,
which is called an actio regundorum finium, which is
the same as when the king enjoins that reasonable
divisions be marked out between neighbours, and this is
very subtle amongst others, and where on account of the
default of him who is not a complainant the said part
concerning which there is a contention ought to be
taken into the hand of the lord the king, and so there
will be a real and not a personal distress. There are
also sometimes two actions which are comprised under
one writ, and of which one in the manner of those who
use it is personal and the other real, and if it were well
. judged each would be frivolous and unprofitable as
above.
The solemn order of attachments ought not to be 2


: That tl
observed (as partly stated a little above) in all personal M


attachia-
mentorum
non sit
ubique et
in omni
casu te-
nenda.


504 DE EXCEPTIONIBUS


bus personalibus, tum ppter privilegium & favorem
cruce signatorü, quorü negotia maturitatem desiderant
et instantiam. Item ppter privilegium & favore mer-
catorü eodé modo. Item ppter causam sive necessi-
tate, ut in assisa ultime psentationis, vel quare quis
impedit presentare, vel non permittit, propter lapsum
sex mensium & hujusmodi. ltem .ppter ipsam rem
que tempore peritura esset, sicut de fructibus maturi-
oribus & hujusmodi. Item in actione injuriarum, ppter
atrocitatem injurie que magna est, et contra pacem
dii regis. Item ppter personam contra quem injuria-
tum est, ut si injuriatum sit diio regi vel reginz, vel
eorum liberis, fratribus, vel sororibus, vel eorum pa-
rentibus, et ppinquis, in quibus casibus & cosimilibus
statim preecipiatur vic. q habeat corpora talium ad
respondendum talibus, secundu q de antedictis sumi
poterit exemplum. Et idem fieri debet si aliqua actio
incidens sit principali actioni, et ubi, quamvis in
actione principali observetur ordo attachiamentori,
tamen in incidenti non erit solennitas observanda, ut
si cotingat episcopum vel alii ordinarii sumoneri
quare no habet clericü &c. Et in quibus casib? oib?
cu peipiatur vicecom prima die q habeat corpora talit
ad die tale rationabile, si absetes sint extra com &
no in com nec in civitate nec in villa, no potest fieri
metio in fine bfis secundü solitt cursü attachiamen-
tori de clausula ista, vz. & ad audiendu judiciü sua
de plurib? defaltis, cà nulla defalta peesserit, sed loco
ilius elausule addatur in quolibet bii causa quare


OF EXCEPTIONS, 505


actions as well on account of the privilege and favour of order of
those who have vowed a crusade, whose affairs require a
readiness and instance. Likewise on account of the notto be
privilege and favour of merchants in the same manner. MERE:
Likewise on account of the cause or the necessity, as in Mere
an assise of last presentation or of quare impedit as re- case.
gards a presentation, or of quare non permittit, on account

of the lapse of six months and such like. Likewise on
account of the thing itself, which is perishable in time,

as concerning crops cver-ripe and such like. Likewise

in an action for an injury, on account of the atrocity

of the injury, which is great and against the peace of the

lord the king. Likewise on account of the persons
against whom the injury has been done, as if an injury

has been done to the lord the king or to the queen, or to

their children, brothers or sisters, or to their relatives or
connections, in which and in similar cases let a precept

go to the viscount that he should present the bodies of
so-and-so to answer to so-and-so, according to what may

be taken for an example from what has been above said.

And the same may be done if any action be incidental to

the principal action, and where, although the order of at-
tachments be observed in the principal action, nevertheless

in the incidental action the solemnity is not to be ob-
‘served, as if it should happen that a bishop or other
ordinary should be summoned for not producing a cleric

&e. And in all of which cases when it is enjoined upon

the viscount on the first day that he should produce the
bodies of such and such persons on a certain reasonable

day, if they be absent outside the county, and not in the
county nor in the city nor in the vill, mention cannot be

made at the end of the writ according to the usual course

of attachments concerning that clause, namely, “and in

* order to hear judgment against themselves concerning

* the repeated defaults," since no default has preceded,

but in the place of that clause let there be added in every


3.
Si statim
venire
debeat
reus prop-
ter privili-
gium
actoris.


506 DE EXCEPTIONIBUS.


tollitur dilatio, & solénitas attachiametorü: & fiat bre
sic.


Rex vic. salute. Preecipim? tibi q oni occasione &
dilatione postposita, ppter privilegiü et favore cruce
signatorü et mereatorü, quorü placitü instantia desi-
derat, habeas corà justic. niis ad tale die, corpus talis
ad respondendu tali cruce signato, vel mercatori, de
placito quare &c. vel q reddat ei &e. secundü forma
biis originalis, & in fine apponatur aliq coiminatoriu,
tale vz. Et ita te habeas in hoc negotio ne p defectu
iui ad te graviter capere debeam. Et ita fiat de
alis causis supradictis, & quo casu, licet bre de habe-
dis corporib? faciat mentione, tame nihilominus locü
habebit essoniü de malo veniendi, quavis hoc esse
videatur cotra solitü judieiü essoniorü, quia quavis
tollatur solennitas attachiamétorü, tame legitima dila-
tionem quam reus habet usque ad primü diem litigii,
semper sequetur éssonium de malo veniendi, ita quód
unicum habeat essonium antequam compareat. Item
in criminalibus causis ubi sequi debet capitale judi-
cium, vita videlicet vel. mutilatio membrorum, non
sequitur attachiamentum aliquod, sed corpus talis (qui-
cunque fuerit ille) ab omnibus arrestetur qui sunt ad
fidem domini regis, sive inde preceptum habuerit sive
non habuerit.


1 “preceptum habuerit sive | * domini Henrici de Bratton de
non." MS. Reg. 9. E. xv.; eui | * juribus et consuetudinibus Angli-
rubrica subjungitur, “ Explicit liber ! “ canis.”


FINIS.


OF EXCEPTIONS. 507


writ the cause wherefore the delay and solemnity of
attachments is not observed.


The king to the viscount greeting. We enjoin you,
that postponing all excuse and delay, on account of the i he de-
privilege and favour of parties who have vowed acrusade eughtite
and of merchants, whose plea requires urgency, you forthyith
should produce before our justiciaries on such a day the oe de ^nt
body of so-and-so, to answer to so-and-so who has vowed a privilege of
crusade, or who is a merchant, concerning a plea where- ds ping
fore &c., or that he render to him &c. according to the
form of the original writ; and at the end let there be
added a clause of commination, of this kind namely, “and
* so conduct yourself in this matter, that we may not have
“to deal severely with you on account of your default."
And so let it be done in the other causes aforesaid, and in
which case although the writ makes mention of producing
their bodies, nevertheless an essoin for illness in coming
shall have place, although this may seem to be against
the usual judgment of essoins, because, although the
solemnity of attachments is not observed, nevertheless an
essoin for illness in coming will always follow the legiti-
mate delay which a defendant has up to the first. day of
the law suit, so that he may have a single essoin before
he appears. Likewise in criminal causes where a capital
judgment ought to follow, namely life or mutilation of
members, there does not follow any attachment, but. the
body of the said party (whoever he may be) may be
arrested by every one who is of fealty to the king,
whether he have a precept thereon or not. .


THE END.


Ye
A.
we.
A
p
>;


cate pee à
DERE


X.


ILLS OLD ILS INPS OID


x


APPE


Ba
e


=
Z,


APPENDIX,


Placita apud WestM cora diüo rege in oct Sci
Michis anni regii ejusd xviiie.

Die Jovis pxima post festū Sci Dioni$ anh reg
Henr fit reg J. xviii? cora diio rege t subsiptis. Pro-
visum fuit t concessu a diio rege t a subsiptis omibz
t alis Gd deceto ca talis pasando obiciat® alicui in
cur dii reg gd nat? fuit añ mrionii contactū in?
prem suai t mrem suam mittatr Qs ad epm loci ad
inquirendu utr? tat nat? fuit añ pdéum matimoniü
vi post. Ita qd in inquisiéoe illa cesset omis appllaco
sicut in simplici bastardia de qua placitü trasmissi
erit ad cuf Xianitatis. Ita Gd nulla applla iñ fiat
ex? regnü. Et ïo deceto ita teneat tà de illis de
quib judiciü est faciendu in cuf dii reg qè de placitis
q nódum incipunt® ci talis bastardia obiciatr.


E. Cant Archieps.
R. Cicestr Dii Reg Cancel.
R. Dunelm Eps.
Eps Eliens.
Eps Norwic.
Eps Lond.
Eps Bathon.
Eps Exon.
Eps Kart.
Eps Heref.
Eps Roff.
Comites.
R. Com Cornub t Pict.
G. Com Marescall.
J. Com Liné.
W. Com Warenn.


APPENDIX. i 511


J. Comes Cestt.

W. Com de Ferrar.

Th. Coi Warrewié.

H. Com Kanë.

H. de Ver Com Oxoñ.

H. Com Hereford.

Sym de Monteforti.

Rad de Thony.

Philipp? de Albiniaco.

Rad fit Nichi.

Herb fit Mathi.

Joh Marescall.

Galfr de Lucy.

Rié de Argenteinn.

Hug Dispensator.

Wilt de Say.

Wilt Bardof,

Wilt de Cantilup senior.
. Wilt de Cantilup junior.

Rié Syward.

Godefr de Crawecub.

Almaric? de Sco Amando.

Bertem de Kuriol.

Engelard de Cygoiügny.

Rob de Muchegros.

Bald de Paunton.

Herb de Lucy.

Ré fit Hug.


The above record is contained in the Coram Rege Roll of
Henry III. formerly preserved in the Tower of London, but
now in the Public Record Office. From its heading it may
be presumed that it was made at Westminster in the cighteenth
year of the reign of Henry III. It is identical however in its
purport, and in the names of the members of the king’s council
subscribed to it as witnesses, with the record that is inserted
in Bracton’s Treatise on Exceptions, ch. xix. § 9, and which


512 APPENDIX.


is stated by him to be the record of a constitution made by the
king and his council on the Thursday next following the
feast of St. Denis in the twentieth year of king Henry III.
(supra, p. 290). Some further observations on this conflict of
dates will be found in the Introduction of the present volume.
There can be no doubt as to the authenticity of the Coram
Rege Roll. From entries in the Patent and Close Rolls of
18 Henry III. it appears that king Henry was at Westminster
on 7th, 8th, 9th (St. Denis’s day), 11th, and 12th of October
of that year, and so far they are adminicular to this entry
in the Coram Rege Roll.


Te


Abbot, or prior, subject to a distraint for a
forinsie service, 347.
Absolution relieves an excommunicated
person from legal disability, 371.
Actio familie ercescunde, 501.
Actio regundorum finium, 503.
Actio in rem, 465.
Action of quare impedit, ib.
Action :
mixed, 501.
between strangers in blood, for divid-
ing an estate in common between
them, 7b. |
new, not allowable, where the object
is to vary the declaration, 439.
may not be bequeathed by a testator,
213.
Actions, two, personal and real, under one
J writ, 503.
Advowson :
on what principle an extent is to be
made, 37.
inquest where it has been conveyed
to two different persons, 131.
inquest in the county court before the
viscount and the keepers of the pleas
of the crown, 133.
inquest as to gift to a prior and
canons in priority to an abbot and
convent, 132.
appurtenant to a manor, follows a
claim to the manor, 423.
Age, full :
less than twenty-one years in the case
of warranting a socage tenement, 93.
a sufficient proof may be made through
parents, 353.


ALLO


Age, full—cont.
may be presumed from the look of
the body, 353.
is to be proved by the country, if the
look of the body is uncertain, 355.
of a female, fourteen years and more,
ib.
presumed against a defendant who
has once held himself out to be of
full age, 357.
Agnes, the wife of John de Westwikham,
claim of dower in Hereford Iter,
11 H. 3; 325.
Albans, St., abbot of, Middlesex Iter,
14 H. 3; 301.
Aldermanbury, Gervase of, Essex Iter,
15 H. 3; 213.
Alfridus in Cottone, Devon Iter, 16 H. 3;
215.
Alicia de Warrenne, Middlesex Iter, 16
H. 3; 19.
Alien by birth, of fealty to the king of
France, not allowed to implead any
one in England, 375.
Alms, free, things given in, are dedicated
to God, 205.
Anglis conquestus, 14.
Anglice Lex :
where a stepfather holds the inherit-
ance of his deceased wife, 29.
& stepfather's possession of the in-
heritance of the mother, 41.
husband's tenancy for life, divers
opinions on the subject, 458.
does not apply to a conditional mar-
riage portion, if the wife dies with-
out a son, 463.
Angod, Richard, Norfolk Iter, 14 H. 3;
451.
KK 2


516


Appurtenances of appurtenances, 429.

Ardern, Ralph de, and his wife, 15 H. 3;
397.

Arrest of a cleric by the king in default of
the bishop to arrest him, 499.

Assise, a great :

when allowed to a warrantor against
a claimant, 109, 113.

when allowed to a tenant against a
claimant, 435.

Assise of novel disseysine :

may be brought against an ecclesias-
tical judge, if he intermeddles with
a lay feud, 205.

when admissible in substitution for a
writ of right, 359.

Assise of mortdancester does not lie be-
tween co-heirs or persons conjoint
in blood, but a writ of right lies,
261.

Assise of quare non permittit, 505.

Assise of quare impedit, 508.

Assise of utrum, between the parson of
Messe and Ralph de Ardern and
his wife, 15 H. 3; 397.

Aston, Adam de, 301.

Atramentum distinguished from incaustum,
142.

Attachment by sureties in civil cases, 467.

Attorney, must be reconstituted by the
claimant in a plea of warranty,
subsidiary to the principal plea, 11.

Augustine, St, abbot of, 3 & 4 H. 3;
229.


B.


Bail, release on, in cases of greater crime
sometimes allowed, 467.

Bailol, Hugo de, Trinity Term, 8. H. 3;
997

Barlegh, Roger de, his aunt Matilda, Sus-
sex Iter, 3 and 4 H. 3; 449.


INDEX.


Daronies :
of archbishops and of bishops, 493.
of bishops, 371.
Baronial court may not resume its juris-
diction, if it has once renounced it,
247.
Barons : y
; declaration of the, against any change
in the law of England as to bas-
tardy, 291
of the Cinque Ports can only be sued
at Shipway, 247.
of the city of London, i5.
Bastard :
may bequeathe and assign land con-
veyed to him as a donation, 255.
according to the law and custom of
England, 285.
Bastardy :
inquest of, how entertainable by the
ordinary, 193. ;
no appeal from the ecclesiastieal judge
to the pope, 315.
by reason of no espousals, cognisable
in the ecclesiastical forum, 311.
where the offspring is born of an
adulteress, cognisable by the eccle-
siastical forum, ib.
where the alleged father has had two
wives, ib.
claimant must refute an exception of,
by reason of ‘birth before espousals,
309.
by reason of birth too long after
death of a predecessor, 311.
inquest of, shall not be held, when
the tenant excepted against is a
minor, 303.
before matrimony decided by the
jurors in an assise of mortdancester,
ib.
no appeal allowed from the ecclesias-
tical court out of the kingdom, 293.
à peremptory exception against a
. claimant, 283.
plea of, must allege that the father
never espoused the mother of the
claimant, 287.


INDEX,


Bastardy—cont.
objection of, by reason of the claim-
ant’s birth prior to the marriage of
his parents, not cognisable in the
ecclesiastical court, if a marriage
is conceded, 287.
Bath :
bishop, of, his suit against the abbot
of Glastonbury, 267.
bishop of, his proceedings against the
abbot of Glastonbury before the
justiciaries of the bench, 379.
Bavadum, Richard de, Bedford Iter, 9 &
10 H. 3; 423.
Bench :
a warrantor summoned to appear at
the, 33.
a day given to a warrantor upon ap-
pearanee at the, 47.
Bendenger, Alicia de, Easter Term,16 H. 3;
POE
Bequests of tenements in cities and vills
; cognisable, as of chattels, by the
ecclesiastical court, 227. L
Bequest of house or land in a borough cog-
nisable in a lay court after the
execution of the will, 253.
Berneestre, prior of, Oxford Iter, 14 H. 3 ;
211.
Berningehurst, W. de, Lineoln Iter, 441.
Besacre, John de, York Iter, 10 H. 3; 11.
Biastos secundum, 228.
Bishop :
will not degrade a cleric at the man-
date of a secular judge without a
trial, 241.
the head of a prebendal church, 493.
may expel a robber who has sought
refuge in a church, 501.
may not be able to produce a clerie
in the king's court, zb.
Bishops, their letters to the king's chan-
cellor to imprison an excommuni-
cated person, 371.
Bishop's mandate :
to release from imprisonment a
person excommunicated for contu-
macy, b,


517


Bishop’s mandate—cont.
valid to relieve an excommunicated
person from imprisonment, 373.
Bishops :
the king has coercion over them by
reason of their baronies, 371.
subject to coercion from the king in
respect of their baronies, 493.
the, are opposed to the laws and cus-
toms of England as regards the
legitimacy of children born before
marriage, 289.
Bockland, sisterhood of, 283.
Bombieina distinguished from vestments of
wool or of linen, 410.
Bovates of land, 405.
Bradley, prior of, 15 Henry III, 91.
Breauté, Fulk de, his suit against. William,
Earl Marshall, the elder, 3 H. 3;
419.


. Brokenhed, Luke, and Alice, his wife, 337.


Brood, Hamo de, Middlesex Iter,4 H. 3;
265.

Bruere, William de, a warranty excepted
from all his charters of donation,
83.
Bruse, John de, how his full age was
proved by the country, 355.
Brywes, John de, Southampton Iter,
4 H. 3 ; 401.

Bully, Ralph de, assise of mortdancester,
10 H. 3; 301.

Buttyler, Thomas de, Devon Iter, 16 H. 3;
215.

Burdon, William, of Dereburgh, espoused
a woman who had been a nun,
329.


4


C.


Canons or monks have no perpetuity as
plaintiffs in an action, 393.
Canons :
hold their goods apart from the
bishop, 495.
one body in the church, apart from
the bishop, ib.


518


Canterbury :
Edmund, archbishop of, 289, 291.
prior of Holy Trinity, 3 & 4 H.3;
229.
Cape, a littie :
where the tenant has made default
and the warrantor is present, 57.
when it may be employed against .a
defaulting warrantor, 53.
Cape to take the land of a warrantor who
has made default, 49.
Cape, a great, to take land of a minor,
who is vouched as a warrantor,
39.
Carleton, W. de, his suit against R. de
Percy, 347.
Carucate :
of land, 35.
of land, worth five librates annually,
405.
Casteneys, Thomas de, and Nicolaa his
wife, 7 H. 3; 425.

Castle, besieged in a, within the kingdom
and in the kine's service, 451.
Chamber distinguished from a tenement,

409.

Chancellor of the king, may make an
erasure of law in a writ, 263.
Chandos, Randolph, Gloucester Iter, 5

H. 3; 81.
Charter of simple donation implies a war-
ranty, unless otherwise expressed,
69.
Charter of confirmation :
does not imply a warranty, unless it
contains a donation, ib.
validates an imperfect grant, 71.
Charter :
when claimant may have a day to
produce it, 73.
if lost by accident, the accident must
be proved, ib.
on what grounds it may be impeached
as false, 75.
donation by; invalid from donee never
having had seysine in lifetime of
donor, 77,


INDEX.


Charter—cont.
although genuine, may be objected to
on account of the donor’s incapa-
city, 77.
its genuineness may be proved by the
witnesses named in it, 2b. m
df it be lost by accident, the right
may be decided per patriam, 83.
produced against a warrantor, may
be impeached by him as insufficient
or false, 123.
valid, if witnesses were present at the
making of the note, though absent
when it was itself written and as-
signed, 141.
where the witnesses are dead or out
of the realm, recourse must be had
to the country, i6.
in an inquest as to its validity,
strangers must view the land, 129.
may be valid, but the donation with-
out subsequent seysine will be in-
operative, 139.
- of donation not valid, if never wit-
nessed, nor read in a county court
or in a hundred court, 139.
confirmation of it inoperative if the
making of it is not proved, 141.
may be proved by the comparison of
signatures (signorum), 142,
may be invalidated by an erasure in
a matter of fact, 143.
variation of writing may be explained,
ib.
may be proved by a comparison of
seals (sigillorum), 145.
where services are warranted in a,
ib.
ofliberty, a writ sued out against it,
271.
Magna, of king John, ib,
Cherleton, Robert de, Warwick Iter, 9
1805 Sa NY
Child's utterance of a ery, necessary to
prevent a fraud on the part of the
midwife, 459.
Child : ae
its baptistn not sufficient, unless it


INDEX,


Child —cont.
uttered a cry, under the Lex Au


glia, 459.

its ery within four walls, how proved,
457.

deaf and dumb, ought to utter a cry,
459.

Chirograph :

not allowed on first day of lawsuit,

445,


fraudulently made before |the lawful
time of one month, 451.

fraudulent, may prejudice parties who
are present and do not enter a
claim, čb.

Christianity, court of :

may not enquire into a question of
bastardy without a mandate from
the crown, 193.

Church :

may have common of pasture an-
nexed to it, 217.

Holy, the regal power ought to aid it,
373.

keys of the, 37, 373.

may have reasonable estovers in the
woods of the patron, 217.

land given to a, in the name of dower
at its dedication, 205.

is legally privileged as a minor if the
rector has not made a claim, 447.

mediety of a, 175.

Cinque Ports, Barons of the, privileged not
to answer to any plea except at
Shipway, 247.

Civil proceedings may be had recourse to
in a criminal case, 465.

Claim : .

from the time of the old king Henry,
not cognisable by reason of re-
moteness, 287.

advanced virtually by commencing a

_ plea, 441.

Claimant :

to land in virtue of a greater service
to the king is preferred to one who
claims in virtue of a less service,


277.


519


Claimant—cont.
may be excepted to, if he has put on
a religious habit, 279.
may be excepted against peremptorily
as being a bastard, 283.
must designate specifically the land,
&c., which he claims, 405, 409.
must recommence his principal plea
against the warrantor, who does
not disavow his liability, 167.
Cleric :
must sue in a lay forum for a debt,
which is not concerning a testa-
ment or a marriage, 165,
Clerics : :
arrested by the king in default of the
bishop to execute the king's writ,
495.
studying in the schools of Paris, 501.
are privileged against arrest by the
viscount, 493.
mandate from. the king commanding
bishop to arrest, ib.
Cleric :
who refuses to be conveyed before a
lay court, may be ordered to attend
before it by the ordinary of the
place, 165.
in a eriminal cause only amenable to
the ecclesiastical forum, 167.
Clerics :
are amenable to a secular form in
in proceedings which do not lead
to degradation from orders, 243.
amenable to the secular forum in civil
pleas, which appertain to the erown,
ib.
may sue in such pleas in the secular
forum, ib.
Cleric :
in a criminal cause may not renounce
the ecclesiastical forum, 241.
to be given up to the bishop if he
claims him from the king, ib,
Cleries :
criminal proceedings against, are cog-
nisable in the secular court, but the


E


520


Clerics—cont.
judgment must be executed by an
ecclesiastical judge, 207.


cannot be degraded by a secular
judge, ib.

Clerieal judge has no cognisance of a lay
feud, 227.


Clerical order, its privilege in matters of
jurisdiction, 247.
Coeus, Robert, Middlesex Iter, 4, IT. 3;
453. 3
Coheiresses, partition amongst, in case of
advowson, how to be made, 37.
Colum, prior of, 87. '
Conquest, the king is not the heir of the
kings who reigned before the, 78.
Consistory, a full, of ecclesiastical judges,
233.
Consultation in a case of prohibition be-
tween the ecclesiastical judge and
the king's justiciaries, 199.
Contraet :
between a clerk and a layman cog-
nisable in the secular court, 207.
place of, founds jurisdiction, 163.
Contumacy :
in a civil action, 461.
persistent, in a civil action on a tort,
entails adjudication to the king of
the chattels of the defendant up to
the value claimed, 479.
persistent, in a civil action on a tort
entails outlawry, where the defen-
has no chattels, 481.
persistent, in a civil action cn a con-
tract, entails adjudication of the


chattels of the defendant to the.


plaintiff, 479.
no greater crime against the king,
481.
Conventio vincit legem, 83.
Coparceners :
who are not coheirs, but occupants in
common, 391.
have no further interest in the com-
mon inheritance after they have
received their share; ib;


INDEX.


Coparcener.
female, coupled to a serf, cannot
inherit, whilst her husband is alive,
383, 385.
owing fealty to the king of France,
cannot inherit until he has sworn
fealty to the king of England, 383,
387.
of various descriptions, 381.
must be called, after he has with-
drawn from the common holding,
397.
doubt as to his death is good reason
for a further day to be given, 399.
cannot inherit if he has put on the
dress of a religious profession, 401.
may be dispensed with, as a party to
a suit, when a prisoner or a captive,
ib.
deaf and dumb may be ignored as a
party to a suit, 403.
disabled from sharing the inheritance,
his part remains with the chief
tenant or the chief lord, 387.
Corporations privileged not to answer to
any plea outside the county, 247.
Counties, judgment
3 H.3; 419.


County court, how the return is to be
made of an inquest, where the
keepers of the pleas of the crown
are associated with the viscount,
133.

Court of christianity :

has not cognisance of an offence con-
mitted by a clerk against a layman,
as long as the proceedings are of
a civil character, 207.

has. jurisdiction over lands given to
the church as dower at its dedication,
309.

has jurisdietion against sureties in a
case of tithes, 211.

has jurisdiction over acquisitions made
by a testator himself as if they were
his chattels, 215.

may not hold cognisance of debts not


concerning divers,


INDEX. HOT


Court of christianity—cont.
proved in the lifetime of a testator,
213,

cannot enforce a judgment against a
lay feud, as the viscount will not
put it into execution, 205.

may not hold cognisance of the suc-
cession to a lay feud, 207.

may not take cognisance of a contract
between a clerk and a layman, ib.

Court superior, may prohibit an inferior
court from proceeding in the same
matter, 247.

Courts of the king, the first suitor has
priority over all others in the same
cause of action, 274.

Crecure, W. de, mesne tenant of the
countess de lIsle, and mesne lord
of W. de Hony well, 349.

Criminal cause suspends the civil status of
the party accused, where there is
risk of life or members, 377.

Criminal causes of a capital character, the
parties accused may be arrested by
anyone who is of fealty to the king,
505. :

Crime, of greater kind, does not admit of
bail, 467.

Crusade, privilege of person under a vow,
505.

Cusin, Robert, Gloucester Iter, 4 H. 3;
449.

Custom of the realm, confirmed by the
apostolie see in questions of legiti-
macy, 193.

Customs in England as to successions
differ from the customs of the king-
dom of France, 297,

Custom of England for the king to impri-
son a person for contumacy towards
the bishop's court, 371.

Cyfrewast, Wilhelmus de, 15 H. 3; 93.

ygoiny, Engelard de, Southampton Iter,
16 H, 3; 213.


D.


Dadescomb, Ralph de, his claim as heir to
a man's wife who has died without
children, 463.

Damages in a civil action, when uncertain,
are to be determined by the justi-
ciaries, 465.

Danudseer, Roger de, and Matilda his
wife, 14 H. 3; 139.

Deaf and dumb persons :

by birth cannot acquire, because they
cannot consent, 223,

through the office of the judge have a
curator appointed to them, ib.

Dean and chapter cannot contract without
the authority of the bishop, 393.

Death of the husband puts an end to a
plea against him and his wife, 369.

Debts, when they are recognised amongst
the goods of a testator, and cog-
nisable in an ecclesiastical court,
218.

Declaration :

in a proceeding by writ of prohibition,
231.

receding from
elaim, 439.

ifit contains an addition to the claim
specified in the writ, it is not fatal
to the writ, 425.

Default, enrolment of a, 469.

Deformity of a child is not monstrosity,
461.

Delegation of jurisdiction, how superseded,
245.

Demesne, action for land in, abates, if it be
held in service, 417.

Denys, St., festival of, council of the realm,
A.D. 1234, 297.

Deposition, cause of, suspends the status
of a dignified person, 377.

Deynis v. Waleran, claim of a fine, 30
H. 2; 443.

Digest, question of a corrupt text, 236;


the writ, fatal to


522


Dignity, acceptance of a new, suspends
the status of a claimant until it has
been confirmed, 377.
Disease supervening does not take away
an inheritance, 325.
Disseysine, novel, treatise of, 409.
Distraint on a bishop through his barony,
497. ?
Distress :
of land and chattels to be made where
a defendant attached by better sure-
ties has not appeared, 477.
may be aggravated, where: ordinary
distress has failed, 479.
Diversity of opinion amongst the legal
` authorities, 387.
Domicile of the defendant founds jurisdic-
tion, 161.
Donation :
will be valid, if subsequent seysine 1s
proved, although no proof of hom-
age or of a charter is forthcoming,
139.
without subsequent seysine, inopera-
tive, ib.
Doneckswell, abbot of, Devon Iter, 7 H. 3;
ie ;
Doubtful right of minors to revoke an
alienation of land by a curator,
333.
Dower, claim of, against a minor shall
not be heard if it has been delayed
for a long time, 335.
Duel, where allowed to a warrantor against
a claimant, 109, 113.
Durham, bishop of, York Iter, 3 IT: 3;
115.
Drayton, Roger de, Derby Iter, 9 H. 3;
427. ;


E.


Ecclesiastical judge :
who intermeddles with lay feud is
lable to an action of novel dissey-
sine, 24].


INDEX.


Ecclesiastical judge—cont.
must defer to a prohibition until he
has consulted the king’s justiciaries,
251.
cannot execute his judgment if he
intermeddles with a lay feud, 241.
Ecclesiastical judges:
if they disobey a prohibition from the
crown, may be committed to gaol
and fined, 169.
how to be attached, if they disregard
the king’s prohibition, 225.
may defend themselves -before the
king’s justiciaries in a cause of pro-
hibition, 233.

Keclesiastical court, a party who wrong-
fully submits to it in a matter ap-
pertaining to the jurisdiction of a
secular court, may be punished
with a fine, 169.

Edition of an action, 437.

Edmund’s, St., abbot of, his suit against
the earl of Gloucester, 21.

Edmund, St.: - :

archbishop of Canterbury, 180.
as guardian of the bishopric of Ro-
chester, 183.
Elings, Richard de,Lincoln Iter, 16 H.3; 99.
England :
law of, may warrant the freehold for
life without the fee, 455.
land held from the conquest of, 419.
conquest of, 15.


‘Englishman by birth not allowed to im-


plead any one in France for lands
or tenements, 375.
Erasure :
in a narration of fact, not of law, may
invalidate a charter, 113.
in a suspicious place of a charter may
vitiate it, 75. $
Erasures :
in a writ of the king, made by the
clerk of a justiciary or of the vis-
count punishable, as falsifications
of it, 265.
in a writ of the king, when of im-
portance, and when not, 263.


INDEX.


Erdington, Egidius de, 13.
Essoin, a single, allowable to a warrantor
under a charter of donation, 147.
Eustachius, prior of Glastonbury, 267.
Fya, quotquot nascuntur ab Eva, 458.
Ewerin de la Lind, Cornwall Iter, 8 H. 3;
209. :
Exception :
to a claimant, that he has entered into
religion and afterwards returned to
the world, 327,
for felony of claimant or his ancestor,
peremptory, 327.
for villeinage, peremptory, if it has
been previously acknowledged, whe-
ther the claimant be actually free or
a serf, 325.
against a leper claiming an inherit-
ance, peremptory, ib.
of insanity, peremptory, 321.
of bastardy does not avail after the
death of the party, id.
against the jurisdiction of the judge,
159.
definition of an, 151.
dilatory and peremptory, b.
general and special, ib.
defendant must prove that he is en-
titled to it, 155.
Exceptions :
dilatory by reason of the interest of
third parties being involved, 379.
on the part of a tenant in respect of
his own person as being a minor,
or of doubtful status, 395.
agaiust the person of the claimant as
being a bastard, à. serf, a monk,
deaf and dumb, a leper, or a felon,
279;
may not be proved by members of
one’s household, 159.
nor by a sect, 2b.
nor by a single voice, ib.
peremptory, two or more are available
to atenant, like two or more cudgels
for defence, ib.
order of, must be observed, 157.


Oo
bo
Os


Exceptions—cont.
serve as shields to defendants against
the actions (swords) of the plain-
tiffs, 149.
when they are to be propounded, 153.
Excommunicated person :
is interdicted from every legal act, as
plaintiff, 367.
is hable to be convened as a defend-
ant, 369.
cannot be plaintiff in a civil suit, 281.
Excommunication :
after forty days’ contumacy entails
imprisonment by the king’s officer
upon the mandate of a bishop or
his official, 371.
for forty days leads to a writ of im-
prisonment, 219.
for contumacy fraudulently procured,
219,
of a minor degree, 481.
Exeter, bishop of, his writ to the crown
to imprison a party excommuni-
cated for contumacy, 219.
Extent to be made where the land to be
distrained is in two counties, 33.


F.


Faith pledged in a contract does not cause
the matter to be cognisable in an
ecclesiastical forum, 161.

False denial of claim, when not punishable,
427.

Fanborne, Roger de, and Agnes his us
York li 10 H. 3 ; 265.

Fealty double, how the obligation of it is
divided in ease of war, 377.

Felony :

of claimant or his ancestor a ground
of peremptory exception, 327.

of an ancestor may impede the descent
of an inheritance, 437.

of the husband does not stay a plea
against him and his wife, 369.


524


Feynes, M. de, an instance of double fealty
to France and to England, 375.
Fief military, may not be claimed by an
heir under a writ of right before he
has completed twenty-one years,
331. .
Fine :
ought not to bind if made through
deceit or fraud, 449.
. made in the king’s court, when it
entails a warranty, 71.
Fingers and toes, more than five, a defor-
mity, but not a monstrosity, 461.
Fitz-Peter, Herbert, renounced his inherit-
ance in favour of his
brother Reginald, 323.
Fitz-Ralph, William, Middlesex Iter, 14
H. 3; 301.

Fleta differs from Bracton as to a hus-
band's tenancy for life, 457.
Florentine text of the digest, unknown to

Bracton, 239.
Falsifying the seal of the king, a crime of
high treason, 265.


younger


Foreigners, an injury to, requires an early
judgment, 467.

Forum :

of the defendant, exceptions to the
rule that plaintiff must sue in it,
161. :

ecclesiastical, in what matter it has
jurisdiction, 165.

Fountygne, W. de, Lincoln Iter, 7 H. 3;
451. /

France, king of, fealty to the, disqualifies a
person from suing in the king’s
court until the two realms become
common again, 261.

Franchise :

lord of a, may be attached if his
bailiff resist the viscount, 491.

bailiffs of a, bound to execute a pre-
ceptof the king issued to a viscount,
489. ;

thelord of a, ordered by the king's
writ to summon à warrantor who is
resident within the franchise, 123.


INDEX.


Fraud :
of the viscount in not executing a
precipe of the king, 483.
may excuse a person from omitting to
appear in court, 447.
will vitiate a fine, 449.

Freehold, distinct from the right and the
fee, 455.

Free-woman, the son ofa, begotten in mar-
riage by a serf, incapable of in-
heriting, 383.

Frenchmen in France may be of fealty to
the king of England, equally as to
the king of France, 375.

Fulk, the son of W., Salop Iter, 15 H. 3;
327,


G.


Garba nova, when cognisable in the court
of Christianity, 199.

Gallows (furce), right of, transmissible to
heir, 351.

Gilbert, Godfrey, son of, 85.

Giseham Alande, and Juliana his wife, 337.

Glastonbury :

Michael, abbot of, his suit against
Roger, bishop of Bath, 267.
abbot of, impleaded by the bishop of

Bath before the justiciaries of the
bench, 379.

Glaxtoll, forest of, 273.

Gloucester, earl of, suit against abbot of
St. Edmunds, 21.

Goldingford, Robert de, his wife Rosia, 67.

Gregory, St., prior of, 3 & 4 H. 3; 229.

Grembale, William de, his judgment after
the war, 79.

Guerram post, Iter of justiciaries in divers
counties, 78.

Guldeburge, Huntingdon Iter, 15 H. 3;
441,

Gurnay, Hugo de, Bucks Iter, 4 H. 3;
423.

Gylbert, the parson of Denham, Bedford
Iter, 7 H. 3; 209;


INDEX.


H.


Haehard, Robert, claim of the lord to an
escheat by reason of bastardy,
12 H. 3; 301.

Hale, Simon de, Lincoln Iter, 7 H. 3; 453.

Hall, the, the Aula Regis, 75.

Hamelinus, son of Radulfus, Dorset Iter,
3 H.3; 325. ,

Haquebut, Henry de, Middlesex Iter,
9 H 3; 443.

Harang, Ralph, Hereford Iter, 4 & 5 H.3;
265.

Hayles, dedication of the abbey, A^? 1251,
21.

Heir succeeds to the legitimation of his
ancestor who has died; the inquest
may be returned into the king’s
court, 319.

Heiress, married to a villein, cannot claim
until the villein be dead, 401.

Henry, the son of John :

Kent Iter, third and fourth years, 229.
Kent Iter, third year, 419.

Henry the old king, beyond legal memory,
495.

Henry the grandfather of our lord king
Henry, 443.

Henry 2, case of Deynis v. Waleran, 30th
year, 443.

Henry 3:

Sarum Iter, inquest as to castle of
Sarum, 335.

Trinity term, third year, 493.

Dorset Iter, third year, 325.

York Iter, third year, 115.

Kent Iter, third year, 419.

Sussex Iter, third and fourth years,
353.

Sussex Iter, third and fourth years,
449. :

Somerset Iter, fourth year, 399.

Hilary and Easter terms, fourth year,
419.

Southampton Iter, fourth year, 401.


525


Henry 3—cont.
A Hilary and Easter terms, fourth year

107. d

Middlesex Iter, fourth year, 265.

Holy Trinity term, fourth year, case
of Isaae the Jew of Norwich, 57.

Middlesex Iter, fourth year, 453.

Gloucester Iter, fourth year, 449,

Bucks Iter, fourth year, 423.

Bedford Iter, fourth year, 419.

Hereford Iter, fourth and fifth years,
265.

St. Michaels term, fourth and fifth
years, 415,

Hertford Iter, fifth year, 401,

York Iter, fifth year, 421.

Gloucester Iter, fifth year, 81.

Norfolk Iter, sixth year, 213.

Warwick Iter, sixth year, 209.

Michaelmas term, sixth and seventh
years, 321.

Sussex Iter, seventh year, 425,

Lincoln Iter, seventh year, 451, 453.

Oxford Iter, seventh year, 415.

Bedford Iter, seventh year, 209.

Devon Iter, seventh year, 97.

Hilary term of Berkshire Iter, eighth
year, 55,

Hilary term, eighth year, 85.

Cornwall Iter, eighth year, 209.

Norfolk Iter, eighth year, 141.

Hereford Iter, eighth year, 269.

Trinity term, eighth year, 97.

Middlesex Iter, ninth year, 441.

Derby Iter, ninth year; 427.

Warwick Iter, ninth year, ib.

Middlesex Iter, ninth year, 79.

York Iter, ninth and tenth years, 347.

Kent Iter, ninth and tenth years, ib.

York Iter, ninth and tenth years, 211.

York Iter, ninth and tenth years, 473.

Bedford Iter, ninth and tenth years,
429.

York and Lincoln Iter, ninth and
tenth years, 399.

Kent Iter, ninth and tenth years, 67.

York Iter, tenth year, 265.

Northampton Iter, tenth year, 219.


526


Henry 3—cont.

Leicester Iter, tenth year, 457.

York Iter, tenth year, 301.

York Iter, tenth year, 11.

Hereford Iter, eleventh year, 325.

Kent Iter, eleventh year, 293.

Kent Iter, eleventh and twelfth years,
303.

Kent Itér, twelfth year, 423.

Berkshire Iter, twelfth year, 259.

Berks Iter, twelfth year, 301.

Berks Iter, twelfth year, 259.

Huntingdon Iter, twelfth year, 133.

Kent Iter, thirteenth year, 390.

Hertford Iter, thirteenth and four-
teenth years, 67.

Norfolk Iter, fourteenth year, 451.

Hilary term, fourteenth year, 139.

Sutrey Iter, fourteenth year, 275.

Oxford Iter, fourteenth year, 211.

Middlesex Iter, fourteenth year, 301.

Easter term, fourteenth year, 37.

Hilary term, fourteenth year, 85.

Suffolk Iter, fourteenth and fifteenth
years, 211,

Salop Iter, fifteenth year, 327.

Essex Iter, fifteenth, year, 213.

Essex Iter, fifteenth year, 397.

Huntingdon Iter, fifteenth year, 441.

Berks Iter, fifteenth year, 91.

Northampton Iter, fifteenth year,
343.

Essex Iter, fifteenth and sixteenth
years, 337.

Middlesex Iter, sixteenth year, 19.

Lincoln Iter, sixteenth year, 99.

Devon Iter, sixteenth year, 215.

Southampton Iter, sixteenth year,
213.

Kent Iter, sixteenth year, 97.

Suffolk Iter, sixteenth and seven-
teenth years, 337.

St. Michael's term, sixteenth and
seventeenth years, 421.

Court at Merton, twentieth year, 289.

Nottingham Iter, thirtieth year, 259.

pleas which follow the king, thirty-
first year, 267.


INDEX.


Henry 3—cont.

pleas which follow the king, thirty-
first year, 272.

Herst, Wiiliam de, Kent Iter, 11 & 12
H. 3; 308.

Heybote available to a church, 217.

High Treason. - See Treason.

Holy Land, ancestor’s return from, in-a
state of mental imbecility, 443.

Homage, when made to a chief lord, upon
refusal of a donor to receive it, en-
tails a warranty, 71.

Honywell, W. de, an immediate tenant of
W. de Crewe, tenant of countess
de l'Isle, 348.

Hospitallers privileged not to answer to
any plea except before the king or
his chief justiciary, 247.

Hospital prior of the, curator of the
sisterhood of Bockland, 283.
Housebote and heybote available to a

church, 217. 1
Husband :

must compensate his wife for donation
before marriage, if she be impleaded
and lose it, 9.

life tenancy under the Lex Anglia,
what it, extends to, 457.

cannot sue without his wife in a mat-
ter in which she has an interest
283.

his felony does not stay a plea against
him and his wife, 369.

his natural or civil death stays such
an action, 369.

constituted the attorney of his wife, 9.

the guardian of the estates of the
wife, 393.

and wife, one flesh and one blood,
ib.

a second, is not within the Lex An-
glie as to tenancy for life of wife's
property, 457.

title for life to his wife's freehold


after her death by the custom of


England, 457.


INDEX.


Incaustum :
applied to parchment, 278.
distinguished from atramentum, 142.
Induction of a donatory into a vacant pos-
session, 139.
Ink, black, as distinguished from a black
mordant, 143.
Inquest :
- in the county court before the keepers
of the pleas of the crown, 133.
how the return is to be made to the
king's justiciaries, ib.
of eight free-wardens to try the capa-
city of a donor of land or of an
advowson, 127.
may be varied: according to the
variety of the pleas, 137.
of bastardy, how tranferred to the
court of Christianity, 287.


Insane persons may have lucid intervals;


321.
Insula, comitissa de, 349.
W. de, 426.
. Interdiet : ;
time of the, what solemnity in the
face of the church equivalent to
matrimony, 513.
time of the, 443.
Injury, atrocious, a plea for more speedy
justice, 505.
Treland, a warrantor in, may be vouched
in an English court, 3.
Isaac, the Jew of Norwich, 4 H. 3; 57.


J.


Jew cannot have any preperty of his own,
91.

John, the king's father, his gift of a church,
challenged under letters from the
pope, 185. :

John, king, chirograph in his fourth year,
443.


Jocus partitus :
voluntary, not judicial, 408.
when allowed, 413.
when the risk may be incurred under
an inquest, 427,
Judge : 1
- may not put his reaping hook into
another's harvest, 165.
delegate, ought carefully to estimate
the extent of his jurisdiction, and
not put his reaping hook into
another's harvest, 251.
may of his office appoint a curator to
& person born deaf and dumb, who
is an heir, 325.
how to be excepted to, where a party
denies his jurisdiction, 243.
Judgment :
a triple aet of three persons, 405.
prior, a peremptory exception, 439.
an early, in what cases itis required,
467.
Julia Lex de adulteriis, 236.
Jurisdiction :
may be changed by a contract between
a cleric and a laie, 257.
may not be transferted from the king's
court to another court by the con-
sent of parties, 255.
over a clerk may be changed by a
contract, or by an offence where
the proceedings are civil, unless
status may be lost, 257.
may be changed upon the names of
the things being changed, 253.
of an inferior court superseded by pro-
ceedings in a superior court, 245.
of the king’s court cannot be re-
nounced to the prejudice of another
person, 215.
of a judge founded by the defendants
consent, 163.
of a*judge founded by voluntary act
of plaintiff, 2d.
unless a royal prohibition stays. pro-
ceedings, ib.
of the place where a crime has been
committed, 161.


528 INDEX,


Jurisdiction—cont.
in accessory matters follows the prin-
cipal matter, 161.
division of, ordinary or delegated, 25.
founded on the domicile of the defen-
dant, ib. j
Jury empanelled to prove the full age of
a person, 355.
Justiciary :
may not go beyond his special war-
rant, unless he has the general
warrant of a justiciary itinerant,
245.
ofthe king, his writ must be read in
court, 243.
except where he is mentioned in the
plaintiff's original writ, 2b.
/ musthave a warrant from the king,
ib.
his jurisdiction superseded by a subse-
quent delegation to another party,
245.
cannot delegate his authority, ib.
his jurisdiction may be refused, if he
is suspected for good cause, 249.
may be excepted against on personal
grounds, 2b.
what are sufficient grounds for refusal
of him, ib.
may not exceed his special delegation,
unless delegated to hear all pleas
as the justiciaries itinerant, 245.
when he must exhibit his writ of ap-
pointment to found his jurisdiction,
243.
must have a warrant from the king to
found his jurisdiction, ib.


Justiciaries, chief, have authority to hear
all pleas, 245.


K.


Keepers of the pleas of the crown asso-
ciated with the viscount in the
county court, 133.


King, the :

has ordinary jurisdiction in all
temporal matters within his realm,
249.

has no peer or equal within his realm,
ib.

cannot imprison a cleric when he can-
not judge him for a crime, 241.

his serviee, when an excuse for not
entering a claim, 451.

the pleasure of, to be awaited, where
he is vouched as a warrantor, 75.

not bound to warrant the donations
of the kings before the conquest,
75.

may be bound to warrant, but cannot
be vouched like a private person,
nr E

when he may be vouehed as a war-
rantor, 21.

an injury to him or his family re-
quires more speedy justice, 505.

King's, the, jurisdiction in private con-


tracts cannot be ousted by the con- -


sent of parties to another's juris-
diction, 255.


LE


Laie :
may not be convened before an ec-
clesiastical judge for any matter
appertaining to the crown's juris-
diction, 167.
he may subject himself to the court
by his own consent, 167.
Land held in desmesne from king to king
since the conquest of England, 419.
Lapse to the bishop, where there is risk
of,an early judgment is required,
467.
Law: D
waged with the twelfth hand, 235.
wager of, may be proved by any com-
purgators of good repute, 235.
wager of, the words are formed in
accordance with the record, 235.


AT


INDEX.


La w—cont.
failure in the proof of, entails the
. conviction of the defendant, 235.
suits to be restrained rather than re-
laxed, 101.

Layman may not renounce the secular
forum to the prejudice of the king’s
dignity, 241.

Lay feud in boroughs becomes in a testa-
mentary cause a spiritual thing ac-
cording to some persons, not so
however in truth, 253.

Legitimation, effect of, where proved in
the court of Christianity, 319.

Legitimacy :

| may be established according to the
statutes of the church, as regards
orders and dignities, but not as
regards succession to property ac-
cording to the laws and customs of

- England, 295.

if the answer of the court of Christi-
anity is obscure, an inquest may
be held in the court of the king,
ib.

suit concerning, cannot be entertained
in the court of Christianity without
a plea having been moved in the
king's court, 193.

proceedings to establish, must be
commenced in the king’s court,
191.

Leper cannot claim an inheritance, as
being separated from all communion

^ with mankind, 325.

` Leprosy of the soul, 367.

Lerlinge, Ralph de, 8 H. 3; 141.

Letters from the pope to legitimate the
sons of a person who has appeared
in court as the serving man of his
asserted wife, 191.

Lexinton, R. de, his judgment corrected
by Martin de Pateshull, 301.

Librates of land, 405.

Lie, a:

when it does not entail the loss of the
thing claimed, 413.


E 2657.


529
Lie, a—cont.
fatal to the defence against a claim,
418.
will abate a writ, 409.
Lincoln :
precentor of, Warwick Iter, 6 H. 3;
209.
Walter of, land at Grimsby, 10 H. 3;
457.


Lion or a man, the subject of a claim, 409
Lind, Ewerin, de le, 209.
Liquid, either wine or oil, 411.
London :
corporation of, privileged not to
answer to any plea outside the city,
247.
corporation of, have a privileged juris-
diction, čb.
city of, privileged as to bequests of
houses and buildings, 215.
bishop of, a writ from the king to
him, 495.
Lucid intervals admit of valid acts, 321.
Ludwich, W. de, Hertford Iter, 5 H. 3;
401.
Lungesper, William :
and Elena, his wife, inquest as to
castle of Sarum, claimed by the
king, 332.
plea of minority set up by Idonea,
his wife, 15 H. 3; 343.


M.


Mabilla, assise of novel disseysine before
Martin de Pateshull, 139.

Madman on a level with a minor, as re-
gards legal excuse, 445.

Malo Lacu, Peter de, and Isabella, his
wife, 11.

Magna Charta of king John, 271.

Magnates, their consent not always re-
quired for the issuing of a new form
of writ by the crown, 2b.

Man, claim for a, must designate his name
(nomen), 411.

LL


530


Manor :
must be designated by a name in a
claim, 411.
may be made up of several vills, or
may consist of one only, 429.
Mansion, what constitutes a, b.
Manu duodecima, 234.
Mapeldon, the parson of, York Iter, 9 & 1
1805 2i .
Maritage, promise of a, if it be a tenement,
not cognisable in an ecclesiastical
court, 211.
Mark, in value of an advowson, implies a
rent of twelve pennies or one shilling,
37.
Markets, right of, transmissible to heir,
351.
Marriage :
cognisance of the fact, appertains to
the ecclesiastical court, 287.
where there are two wives, the eccle-
siastical court must determine which
of the two is the legitimate wife,
ib.
conjunctio maris et’ femine indivi-
duam vite retinens consuetudinem,
315.
per verba de presenti, or per verba
de futuro, ib.
irregular in the time of the interdiet,
313.
"Marshall :
William the earl, was of fealty to the
king of France as well as to the
king of England, 375.
earl, William, the elder, 3 H. 3 ; 419;
also 4 H. 3; ib.
Matilda :
the daughter of Simon, Kent Iter,
3& 4H.3; 229.
daughter of Godwin, Hertford Iter,
5 H. 3; 401.
Matrimony :
where money has been promised as a
sequel,it may be revoked only by
the ecclesiastical judge, 165.
eauses of, belong to the ecclesiastical
jurisdiction, 161.


INDEX.


Merchants privileged to have justice with-


out delay, 505. \
Merk, Egidius de, Huntingdon Iter, 12 H.3;
139.


Merton, prior of, his suit against Nigel de
Mumbrey, 347.
Middlesex, viscount of, 497.
Minor :
. a, not obliged to warrant, until he is
of full age, 7.
if vouched to warrant, must appear
with his guardian, 29.
can only bring an action in a cause of
possession, 281.
if a tenant, shall not answer to an ex-
ception of bastardy before he is of
age, 303.
. Shall not answer in a cause of posses-
sion or of property to any writ, 331.
may claim whilst under age, by an
assise of novel disseysine or of
mortdancester, 2b.
cannot revoke the act of his guardian,
unless by an assise of novel disscy-
sine, 333.
shall answer in a case which touches
the king, 335.
shall answer to a woman in a case of-
dower, except in a special case, ib.
coparceners of a, are not bound to
answer until he is of full age, 341.
adjunet of a, as for instance a husband
in respect of his wife, not bound to
answer until she is of age, ib.
conversely not so, 348, ae 1-
his status cannot be changed as to
services and customs during a suit,
until he is of age, 345.
his status cannot be changed as to
rights or franchises, 349,
bound to answer to a writ of entry,
351.
must claim within a year after he is
of full age, according to some, 447.
Mortdancester, assise -of, may decide the
question of bastardy on account of.
birth before the marriage of the
parents, 293.


INDEX. 531


Montfort, Simon de, earl of Leicester, 297.
Money promised in view of matrimony,


cognisable „in an ecclesiastical
forum, 283.

Monitions, three, made fraudulently at
once, 219.


Monte-Caniso, Warinus de, 87.

Monte Caniso, Higo de, Suffolk Iter,
14 &.15 H. 5; 211.

Monumew, John de, suit of his heirs
against the king, 337.

Mordant, black or red, instead of black
ink, 143.

Mortdancester, assise of, how it may lead
to an inquest of bastardy, 193.

Mumbrey, Nigel de, his suit with the prior
of Merton, 347.

Munworth, William de, Warwick Iter,
question of legitimacy in an assise
of mortdancester, 297.

Muschet, Walter, suit concerning legiti-
macy, 191.

Muschet, William, case of, 193.


IN.


Nodariis, Juliana de, Bedford Iter, 493.

Non-user not fatal to the title of the last
owner, who died in seysine of a
thing, 341, 349. |

Norfolk, William of, 13.

Normandy, loss of, did not entail loss of
Freneh nationality by all British
subjects, 375.

New Place, prior of, Surrey Iter, 14 H. 3 ;
275.

Names given to men for the purpose of
distinguishing one from another,
411.


Name :
error in the, of one of the parties


summoned affects the whole body,


25.
error in the, of persons or of vills, a
valid exception on behalf of a war-


rantor, 73.


Nationality, defect of, precludes a person
from bringing a civil suit, 281.
Nun, married to a layman, 329.


O.


Octaves : :
of Easter at Westminster, 367.
of St. Hilary at Westminster, 7d.
Offence may change the jurisdiction, where
the proceedings are civil, 257.
Official, appeal from an, to the bishop,
317.
Offspring of a woman, when it is a monster,
459.
Olive, Richard, Northampton Iter, 10 H. 3;
219.
Ordinary :
outside the realm not obliged to obey
the king's writ, 307.
officer of the,in an inquest of bas-
tardy, 315.
may distrain a cleric through his pre-
bend, 495.
Outlawry :
by writ of the king against the order
of the law, 327.
through tbe law of the land, a per-
emptory exception against a claim-
ant, zb.
for eontumacy of a minor degree;
481.
Oxford, countess of, the suit against Wil-
^. Jiam Blundus and his wife, 397.


Es


Pamsore, Henry, Kent Iter, 11 IT. 3; 293.
Panfurere, Henry, Kent Iter, 11 & 12 H. 3;
303,
Paris, Matthew, council of Merton, A.D.
1236, 288.
Paris, schools of, 501.
LL 2


OK
vo
bo


Pateshull, Martin de :
his Iter in divers counties post guer-
ram, 79.
York tter 92H29 395 Wo:
Dorset Iter, 3 H. 3; 325.
Kent Iter, 3 H. 3; 419.
Gloucester Iter, 5 H. 3; 81.
Hertford Iter, 5 H. 3 ; 401.
Norfolk Iter, 8 H. 3; 141.
York Iter, 10H. 95 bk
York Iter, 10 H. 3; 265.
York Iter, 10 H. 3; 301.
Leicester Iter, 10 H. 3; 457.
Kent Iter, 11 H. 3; 293.
Kent Iter, 11 & 12 H. 3; 303.
Kent Iter, 12 H. 3; 423.
Kent Iter, 13 H. 3; 399.
Warwick Iter with abbot of Reading,
13.
Warwick Iter, assise of mortdancester,
88. :
Lincoln Iter, case of Thomas de Rasne,
371.
Norfolk Iter, 319,
his last Iter in the county of Suffolk,
65, 139.
writ of consultation where both parties
are ecclesiastics, 201.
revokes a judgment of R. de Lexing-
ton for transmitting a case of legi-
timacy to the court of Christianity,
301.
Sarum Iter, 335.
Patria, one, may contain several manors
and several vills, 429.
Paynel, Willium, Devon Iter, 7 H. 3; 97.
Paul, St., church of, 407.
Peer has no jurisdiction over peer, 251.
Penance not to be enjoined by secular
courts, 165.
Pergamenum, 278.
Perishable things may require an early
judgment, 467.
Percy, R. de, his suit with W. de Carleton,
347. ;
Perishable goods, a plea for speedy justice,
: 505.


Peter, St., church of, 407.


INDEX.


Petrus de Malo Lacu (Mauley), 5 H. 3;
421.
Pigon, John, tenant of William de Ralegh,
in respect of a certain prebend,
Si) eas
leaks
commencement of a, equivalent to
advancing a claim, 441.
against husband and wife is not
stayed by the supervenient felony
of the husband, 369.


Pleas of the crown, 133.


Plungenay, Jocetusde, Oxford Iter, 7 -


H.3; 415.
Pope, the :

may not indirectly hold eognisance of
a lay fee by an appeal in an inquest
of bastardy, 315.

and the priesthood, have no jurisdic-
tion over things that are temporal,
291.

has an ordinary jurisdiction over all
spiritual matters, 249.

Possession, right of, may be’ transmitted
through the seysine of a wrongful
heir, 433. `

Posthumous child, its legitimacy may be
decided by the king's sourt, 297.

Pounds, shillings, and pence, must be
specified in a claim consisting of
money, 411.

Prohibition :

may go to an ecclesiastical court,
notwithstanding a person has sub-


mitted himself to its jurisdiction, -


169.

to the court of Christianity, in what
cases it has properly place, 208.

to a court of Christianity in a
question of succession to a lay
feud, 207.

to an ecclesiastical court may not
issue where the cause is testa-
mentary, or matrimonial, or peni-
tentiary, 209.

does notlie in proceedings concern-
ing tithes, 209.


S
=


INDEX.


Prohibition—cont. -
where an executor sues in an
ecclesiastical court for a debt not
proved in the life time of the
testator, 213.
does not lie at the prayer of a person,
who has consented to the jurisdic-
tion of a court of Christianity, 217.
has no place, where a rent is promised
because of matrimony, 229.
judges of an ecclesiastical court may
defend themselves against a, 233.
to an inferior court, whcre procced-
ings are being had in a superior
court, 245.
to ecclesiastical judge supersedes his
proceedings until he has consulted
the king’s justiciaries, 251.
lies, if an ecclesiastical court holds
cognisance of the bequest of a lay
feud in a borough, 253.
mise of a marriage portion, if it be a
tenement, is not cognisable in an
ecclesiastical court, 211.
Proof :
legal, what lapse of time destroys,
455.
per patriam, where a charter is lost by
accident, 83.
Property :
greater right of, may be settled
through a great assise, if the
tenant wishes it, 435.
a superior and an inferior’s right of,
433.


Q.


‘ Queynt, Henry de, remitted default to a
warrantor for fifteen marks of
silver in, 8 H. 3; 55.
Quadruplication, available to a plaintiff,
157.


533


R.


Ralegh, William de :
Warwick Iter, warrant to assignees, 7.
Warwiek Iter, case of Sibilla, who
claimed dower from a termur, who
vouched a warrantor, 9.
Warwick Iter, suspension of a war-
ranty for dower by reason of felony
of warrantor, 25.
St. Michael’s term, his tenant, John
- Pigon, 55.
Bucks Iter, Alicia de Rupella, 79.
Warwick Iter, case of an escheat by
felony of warrantor, 103.
Warwick Iter, assise of mortdancester,
of William de Munworth, 297.
Bedford Iter, case, Juliana de
Nodariis, 403.
Lincoln Iter, case of W. de Berninge-
hurst, 441.
Bedford Iter, end of the roll, 459.
his writ to assist the heir, where the
husband wrongfully detains his
deceased wife’s property, 463.
Nottingham Iter, 30 H. 3 ; probable
error in the name, 259.
Ralph, the parson of Irclinbourghe, Nor-
folk Iter, 6 H. 3; 213.
Rasne, Thomas de, Lincoln Iter before
Martin de Pateshull, 371.
Reading, abbot of :
Warwick Iter with Martin de Pates-
hull, 13.
Gloucester Iter, 5 H. 3; 81.
Warwick Iter, assise of mortdancester,
83.
Rectors of a mediety of a church, 175.
Rector of a church cannot contract in
respect of the property of the
church without the consent of the
bishop, 393.
Religion, distinction between the habit of
probation and that of profession,
401.


534


Religious order, distinction between pro-
bation and profession as regards a
return to civil life, 327.

Religious habit, assumption of, entails
civil death, 329.

Religious house, brothers and sisters of a,


cannot sue without a curator, 283. :


Renge, Ricardus de, 19.

Rent granted from a chamber, 409.

Rentcharge on behalf of a clerk, cognisable

i in a secular court, 203.

Replications of a claimant to an exception,
155.
Resiton, Godfrey de, Kent Iter, 12 H. 3;
423. i
Richard, earl of Cornwall and of Poitiers,
297.

Richard, the son of Godfrey, Hereford
Iter, 8 H. 3; 269.

Richard the parson, cause of free alms,
15 H.3; 209.

Right Right, an assise of, 433.

Right mere, jus merum, 7b.

Rights cannot exist without bodies, 413.

Robert, William the son of, 13 H. 3;
399.

Rochester, prior and convent of, 183.

Rupella, Alicia de, validity of a donation
without a deed, 77.

Russel R., his wife B., 13 & 14 H. 3;
67.

Ryvall, abbot of, pleas which follow the
king, 31 H. 3; 272.

Russeworth, advowson of the church, 141.


S.


Sabaudia, Petrus de, 31 H. 3; 972.
Sanctimoniales, devout women or nuns,
283.
Seal of the king :
‘high treason to counterfeit it, 265.
the attaching it to a false writ is a
crime of high treason, i5.


INDEX.


Seals :
of the viscount and keepers of the
pleas of the crown, 133.
negligence of a donor, if he delivers
them to his steward or his wife,
127.

Sea, beyond the, an excuse for ignorance
of a suit pending, 449.

Seas, within the four, 445, 451.

Second delegation supersedes a prior one,
245.

Sect may be produced to prove an unlawful
excommunication on the part of an
ecclesiastical court, 233.

Secular judge cannot execute his judgment
against a clerie in a civil cause,
167.

Segrave, Stephen de :

his opinion as to the first husband's
tenancy for life under the Lex
Anglie, 455.

side note inserted into the text by
error, 459.

Selliones or ridges of land, 405.

Servus fructuarius, 392.

Serfs, life and death of, no longer in the
hand of the lord, 329.

Serf, escaping from the power of his lord,
is resuscitated to civil life, ib.
Serjeanty, cannot be divided except con-
ditionally, so as to secure sufficient

service to the king, 115.
Seysine :
given by a staff or a rod or a hasp,
139.
of an ancestor must be proved by the
sight of the witness or of his father,
455.
Shillingsworths of land :
may be a subject of claim, 405.
one hundred for a carucate, 35.


Shipway, privileged court of the barons of
the Cinque Ports, 247.

Siecario, Henrieus de, Berkshire Iter, 12
H. 3; 259.

Side note sometimes inserted into the text,
459.


INDEX.


Sigillum :

of a charter, 127.

- distinguished from signum, 142.
Signatures may be compared to prove à
chaxter to be false, 75.

Signata with a seal, 144.
Signum :

under the name of a person, 143.

of a charter, 123, 125.

Silk distinguished from wool or linen, 411.
Silly person may be incapable of acquiring,
when he cannot consent, 323.
Socage tenement may not be claimed by

an heir before the age of fourteen,
331.
Solandia, Petrus de, 272.
Solid, either wheat or barley or other pro-
duce, 411.
Statevil, Nieholas de, York Iter, 9 & 10
H.35 473.
Status :
uncertainty of, disables a person from
bringing a civil action, 281.
of a claimant may be doubtful in
many ways, 377.
Statute de donis, 13 Edw. 1, its object
(note), 457.
Stoke, Henry de la, Norfolk Iter, 319.
Stubbs, Select Charters, 271.
Substitution of a justiciary supersedes a
former one, 245.
Succession to a lay feud is not cognisable
by a court of Christianity, 207.
Summons :
lawful, of fifteen days, 31.
of fifteen days obligatory and reason-
able, 445.
Supposititious offspring :
substituted for the true heir, who has
died under guardianship, 299.
if once avowed by a person, cannot be
disavowed by him, 299.
Supposititious child, proved to be a bas-
tard, although its cry has been
heard, 459.
Sureties for the plaintiff to prosecute, 473.
Sword ought to assist sword, 371, 501.
Syngoy, Engelard de, 291. ea


Or
c5
Or


dta


Taswell-Langmead’s Constitutional His-
tory of England, 271.

Templars privileged not/to answer to any
plea except before the king or his
chief justiciary, 247.

Tenant :

may not convey to another, if he
knows that a writ has been sued
out against him, 415.

who has no warrantor, may propound
an exception against the claimant,
149,

may object to answer to a claimant
who has not made restitution in
accordance with a previous judg-
ment, 379.

if he answers without his co-parceners,
has no right of recourse against
them if he should lose, 397.

entitled to impose a view upon the
claimant, 407.

beyond the sea may alienate before a
summons, or after it if he has heard
nothing about it, 415.

not bound to answer the pleas of two
claimants at one and the same time,
455.

Tenements in cities and vills may be be-
queathed under the common law,
equally as chattels, 227.

Tenement rightly claimed under the name
of a vill without specifying the
manor, 431.

Tenths of the church cognisable by the
ecclesiastical judge, 165.

Testator cannot bequeath property left to
himself and his heirs, but may give
it in his lifetime, 215.

Territory of France may become again
common with that of England, 375,
385.

Thefford, prior of, 8 H. 3; 141.

Thurkelby, Roger de, Nottingham Iter,
30 H. 3 ; 259.


536


Thurfenne, Mathias de, his wife, her plea
of dower in Suffolk Iter, 65.
Tithes :
cognisable in the court of Christianity,
209.
may not be claimed in an ecclesias-
tical court after they have been
sold, 211. 4
when once they are made a lay feud,
are no longer cognisable by an ec-
clesiastical court, 229.
upon sale to a lay person become a
lay chattel, 253.
Titius filius meus exheeres esto, 22.
Treason :
crime of high, does not admit of re-
lease on bail, 465.
high, crimen lese majestatis, how
punished, 265.
Triplication available to a defendant, 157.
Trussell, William, Warwick Iter, assise- of
mortdancester, 83.
Tussel, Adam, York and Lincoln Iter, 9
& 10 H. 3; 399. :


: U.


Usufruct of a tenement reckoned amongst
the chattels of a testator, 215.
Utfangthef, case of, offender subject to the

local jurisdiction, 163.


is


Variation, when fatal to a warranty, 85.
Vavasour, Wilhelmus de, York Iter,
3 H. 3; 115.
View :
of the land claimed must be had
before an inquest of bastardy is
transmitted to the court of
Christianity, 307.
treatise on making a, 407.
may be claimed by the tenant, 153.


INDEX.


Vill : :
is made up of several mansions, 429.
does not comprise a. manor, but a

manor one or more vills, 431.
Villein husband disables a free woman
from inheriting, 401.

Villeinage, once acknowledged in the
court of the lord, fatal to any future
claim of inheritance, 325.

Vincent, St., the manor, 289.

Virgates, of land, 405.

Vis major, an excuse for a party not ap-

pearing in court to enter a claim,
447.
Viscount :
may preside over two counties, 269.
of Essex and of Hereford, 270,
his neglect with fraudulent intent,
483.
his neglect from inexperience, 485.
may not enter a franchise without a
special warrant, 489.
may enter, if the bailiff will not
execute a precept from the king,
ib.

if refused entry into a franchise may
summon the freeholders of the

county to assist him, 491.
may seize and imprison fugitives

within a franchise, ib.
will not execute the judgment of an
ecclesiastical judge, who inter-

meddles with a lay feud, 241.


W.


Wales :
distinct from the realm of Eng-
land, 3.
the marching of the army into, 367.
Wanton, Johannes de, Norfolk Iter, 8 H. 3;
141, ;


Warrant, obligation to, how created, 11.


INDEX. 537


Warrantor : Warrantor—cont.


>


liable to compensate from his own
estate a tenant, if the seysine of the
tenant is transferred to the claim-
ant, 5. 3

cannot be vouched in a penal ac-
tion, 7.

an heir may be vouched as a, without
being named, 23.

may be summoned by the viscount in
pursuance of a royal writ, 27.

within a franchise may be distrained
pursuant to a mandate to the lord
of the franchise, ib.

entitled to a single essoin, 31.

how summoned, if of divers counties,
41,

how a tenant shall recover compensa-
tion against him, if he does not
appear, 43.

if he has no land and has made de-
fault, may be imprisoned, whether
Jew or Christian, 51.

released from the writ, if claimant has
made default, 57.

if a Jew or Christian, and has no
land, must be presented by the
viscount in person, 57.

may contest the right of the claimant,
or may vouch a warrantor, 59.

intermediate liable, where the last
warrantor cannot make full com-
pensation, 65.

liable to make compensation from his
general estate, 67.

cannot claim a view, 73.

not liable to make a greater compen-
sation than the value of the land
warranted, 75.

how the king may be vouched to con-
firm his own aets, 75.

if he dies, his heir may be vouched
anew, 97.

if he dies, his heir must be summoned
anew, 99.

if he dies after judgment, execution
may be made against the goods of
the heir, 99.


if hanged or outlawed pending a war-
ranty, proceedings must be recom-
menced against the escheator of the
inheritance, 105.

may contest the right of a claimant
by a duel or by a great assise, 109.

may not claim a view, 111.

may avail himself of exceptions and
defences not available to the tenant,
113.

where there are several, each must
contribute his portion towards a
compensation, 117.

resident out of the realm, under the
power of the king of France or of
Germany, 119.

resident in Ireland or in Wales, 121,

resident in England, vouched by a
person sued in Ireland, 123.

resident within a privileged franchise,
must be summoned by the lord of
the franchise, 123.

under a charter may be attached by
bail and sureties, 147, i


Warranty :


charter of, 5.

assignees: may claim it from- remote
heirs, 7.

obligation of, through taking homage,
15.

obligation of, through a chirograph
and a fine, 17.

for dower, suspended by reason of the
felony of warrantor, 25.

stepfather may be summoned in addi-
tion to the heir, 29.

writ to the viscount in such a case, 31.

not by reason of homage, if condi-
tional, 81.

may be excepted from a charter o.
donation, 83.

when suspended for a time, 93.

by a minor in the case of a fine, ib.

when the full age of the minor is to
be expected, 95.

is suspended, if the heir is still in the
womb, 103.


`


538 INDEX.


Warranty—cont,
if the warrantor is under a charge of
felony, 103.
of services by a charter, 145.


Warrenne, Alicia de, 19.
Westminster :
proceedings in the court at, put off by-
reason of the Iter of the justiciaries,
367.
writ to attach a defaulter to appear
before the king’s justiciaries .at

à Westminster, 469.

Westwikam, John de, Hereford Iter, 11
H. 3; 825.

Weylocke, prior of, 426.

Wife of Roger de Fanborne, acquitted as
being’ under the rod of her husband,
when he was hanged for falsifying
the seal of the king, 265.

Wife :

cannot bring a civil suit without her
husband, 283.

excused for not appearing in court, as
being under the power of her hus-
band, 447.

Wife's inheritance falling in after her
death does not accrue to her hus-
band under the Lex Angliw, but to
her heirs, 459, 461.

Wife’s marriage portion conditional on her
having sons, reverts to the donor
upon her death, 463.

Windon, service of the king beyond the
sea at, 443.

Woman :

taken from the rib of the man, 9.

by marrying a minor shall not delay
judgment against her, 343.

nor by marrying a villein, 2d.

Writ :

to the viscount to summon a warran-
tor, 27.

to the viscount to summon a step-
father, where the heir is vouched to
warrant and the stepfather holds
the land for his life by the Lex
Anglie, 31.


Writ—cont. «


to make an extent by twelve free-
holders, 35, ;

for taking land into the hand of the
king for default of warrantor, 35.

to take land of the inheritance of a
woman as warrantor cf an advow-
son up to the value of twenty shil-
lings of rent, 37.

to take of the land of a minor, as a
warrantor of dower, 39.

to take land held by a stepfather per
legem Anglie, 41.

to give seysine of land recovered by
default of watrantor, 45.

for compensation to a tenant, where
he has lost from the default of a
warrantor, ib. i

to give seysine to claimant, where a
warrantor has made default, and to
make compensation to tenant from
land of warrantor, 55. ;

to give seysine, and to make com-
pensation, where a warrantor has
vouched a warrantor, who has made
default, 61.

against a further warrantor, who is
vouched by a warrantor, 109.

to several warrantors to contribute
each his portion towards a compen-
sation, 117.

to the king’s justiciaries in Ireland
to summon before them a person
vouched to warrant before the jus-
ticiaries at Westminster, 121.

for a jury of twelve freeholders to try
the validity of a eharter of war-
ranty, 125.


, an interlaced, to summon a jury of


eight freeholders of one county to
try with eight of another county
the validity of a charter of war-
ranty, 125.

as to the last presentation to a, church,
where the advowson has been con-
veyed to two different persons, 131.

an interlaced, to the viscounts of
Sussex and Surrey to cause wit-


INDEX.


Writ—cont.


nesses to appear at an inquest before
the viscount of Essex, 135.

for a warranty in accordance with a
charter of donation, 147.

of right against a lord, who is a war-
rantor under a charter and has
aggrieved his tenant, 149.

of right, claim of an inheritance must
be heard before the lord of the feud,
and if he be negligent, before the
viscount, 163.

to an ecclesiastical judge not to en-
tertain a plea concerning the patron-
age of a church, 171.

of prohibition to the court ofan ecclesi-
astical ordinary in a suit concerning
chattels which are not matrimonial
nor testamentary, ib.

of prohibition to an ecclesiastical court
taking cognisance of a lay feud by
authority of letters from the lord
the pope, ib.

of prohibition to an ecclesiastical judge
against entertaining suits between
patrons as to the tithes and oblations
of churches, 173.

to a party not to sue in an ecclesiastical
court concerning the patronage of a
church, čb.

of *Indieavit" to prohibit an ecclesi-
astical judge from proceeding under
letters from the pope concerning
the right of presentation to a church,
175.

of prohibition respecting the sixth
part of the patronage of a church, ib.

of prohibition against a clerk who
seeks to disturb a clerk, who has
been presented in virtue of a judg-
ment in a cause of patronage, 177.

of prohibition against a clerk who
seeks to disturb a clerk who has
been presented in pursuance of a
great assise, 179.

of prohibition, if an ecclesiastical judge
entertains a suit to disturb the judg-
ment of the king’s court, 181.


539


Writ—cont.


of prohibition, where a bishop has
admitted another fit person upon
the insufficiency of a party presented
by the patron, 185.

of prohibition, where a bishop has
claimed to take a clerk out of the
custody of a viscount, or mayor, or
provost of a vill, or bailliff of any
place, 187.

of prohibition, where a person claims
to hold for his life, under the Lex '
Anglie, the estate of his deceased
wife, and his sons are bastards, 189.

of prohibition to the court of Chris-
tianity against an inquest of bas-
tardy, 193.

of prohibition should be issued to the
party suing as well as to the judge,
195.

when it should issue to subdelegate
judges, 197.

of consultation in the case of a lay
feud, 199.

where both the parties are ecclesias-
ties, 201.

of * Ostendit nobis" to prohibit a
clerk under the authority of letters
from the pope from disturbing a
clerk rightfully presented, 179.

to the prior and eonvent of Rochester,
183.

for imprisoning a party excommuni-
cated for contumacy, 219.

where a party has been imprisoned on
a fraudulent representation of his
contumacy and excommunication,
221.

to set free a person excommunicated
for contumacy and imprisonment,
who is prepared to give satisfaction
to God and to the church, 223.

for attaching an ecclesiastical judge,
who has disregarded a writ of pro-
hibition, 225.

for attaching ecclesiastical judges, who
entertain a suit respecting a lay
feud under the pope’s letters, 227.


540


Writ—cont.


may be excepted against, 257.

of right, proceedings by a, when they
do not preclude proceedings by an
inferior plea, 259.

will abate, if wrong in form, al-
though the action does not abate,
ib.

liable to an objection if not of the
proper character, ib.

a small and close, should be sued out
in the demesne of the king, ib.

the nature of an original one, settled
by the common council of the realm,
261.

proceedings under one writ may de-
termine several actions under other
writs, ib. y

quare vi et armis raises a question as
to the quality, not the fact, of dis-
seysine, ib.

of law, drawn up by consent of the
common council of the realm, can-
not be varied, ib. ;

judicial and magisterial, may be varied,
263.

of the king, when an erasure abates it,
263.

of the king, must contain no falseness
nor error, nor defect, ib.

of the king may be altered by the
chancellor, ib.

ofthe king, its falsification is an act
of high treason, 265.

abates by the death of any of the
parties, who are co-heirs, but not
the action, 269.

and action abates with the death of
the plaintiff or of the defendant, ib.

when it may be corrected in case of
an error, ib.

of Preecipe in capite, 270.

abates when directed to the viscount
of the wrong county, 271.

may be of grace sued out beyond
right, but not contrary to right,
without the consent of the mag-
nates, ib.


INDEX.


Writ—cont.


abates where a claim is advanced be-.
yond the scope of it, 277.

to the court of Christianity to hold an
inquest of bastardy, 309.

of bastardy, where claimant is born of
an adulteress, 311.

for an inquest of bastardy, by reason
of no espousals, 313.

for a trial before the justiciaries after
an inquest of bastardy in the eccle-
siastical court, 317.


of prohibition to a suit of freehold
against a manor in a county court,
339.

to a suit of warranty against a minor,
ib.

to resume the hearing of a cause which
has been stayed on aecount of mi-
nority, 359.

for an inquest of waste against a chief
lord after the heir has come of age,
ib. :

to resume the hearing of a cause after
a question af bastardy has been
remitted to and decided by a court
of Christianity, 361.

to resume an inquest as to the right
of advowson, or the right of next
presentation, ib.

to resume an inquest of dower after
the question of lawful matrimony
has been transmitted to and decided
by the court of Christianity, 365.

to resume, &c. where the cause has
been stayed on account of the ser-
vice of the king, 363.

or on aecount of a journey to the
Holy Land, ib.


to resume the hearing of a cause


where it has been stayed on aecount
of the Iter of the justiciaries through
the counties, ib. :


from the king to imprison a person


excommunicated by a bishop for
manifest contumacy, 371.


to set free a person excommunicated


under the king’s writ, 373.
. to release a person falsely imprisoned
. for contumacy as an excommuni-
|. cated person, 379.


suit. for sharing an inheritance,
389.

 abates in the case of an estate which
has been parted, if the coparceners
. are named in the writ, 397.

. abates in the case of a common in-
heritance, if all the co-heirs are not
named, although some are disabled
by law from bu 399. i


: civil action, 469.


INDEX. i


for contumacy and imprisonment


to summon coparceners to attend in a


xd Be to attach Y ‘sureties a Eo ina |


«941


Writ—cont.
‘to attach a defaulter by better sureties,
if the first sureties have not pre-
.. sented him, 473.
to the viscount for neglecting to attach
ü person, 483. MES :
to a viscount who has been negligent,
487. 5
to a viscount to enter a franchise and
to attach parties within it, 491.
to a bishop to produce a clerie in the
king’s court, 495. -
to a viscount to distrain a bishop
through his barony, 499.
for more speedy proceedings in the
' case of plaintiffs, whose plea re-
quires urgency, 507.
Writs :
judicial and magisterial, may be ee
263.
limited within a certain time, 277.


|^ LONDON: EI
Printed d ianuae B. Eyre and i ee


For Her Majesty’s Stationery ( Office.
[5256.—750. m 2


fpi


^
MER
